■C'U;^ 




Ex LiBRIS 

The Pennsylvania 

Horticultural Society 

From the library of 
MARY HELEN VINGATE LLOYD 
given by her sons 



Digitized by tine Internet Archive 

in 2011 witii funding from 

LYRASIS IVIembers and Sloan Foundation 



http://www.archive.org/details/americangardener1851mmah 



THE 

AMERICAN GARDENER'S 
CALENDAR. 



THE 

AMERICAN GARDENER'S 

CALENDAR, 

ADAPTED TO THE 

CLIMATE AND SEASONS OF THE UNITED STATES 

CONTAINING 

A COMPLETE ACCOUNT OF AIL THE WORK NECESSARY TO BE DONE 



KITCHEN-GARDEN, PLEASURE-GROUND, 

FRUIT-GARDEN, FLOWER-GARDEN, 

ORCHARD, GREEN-HOUSE, 

VINEYARD, HOT-HOUSE, and 

NURSERY, FORCING-FRAMES, 

FOR EVERY MONTH IN THE YEAR ; 

WITH 

AMPLE PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR PERFORMING THE SAME. 

ALSO, 

General as well as minute Instructions for laying out or erecting- each and every of the 

above departments according to modern taste and the most apprived plans; the 

Ornamental Planting of Pleasure-Grounds, in the ancient and modern 

style ; the cultivation of Thorn Quicks and other plants 

suitable for Live Hedges, with the best methods 

of making them, &e. 

TO WHICH ARE ANNEXED 

Catalogues of Kitchen Garden Plants and Herbs ; Aromatic Pot and Stveet Herbs; 

Medicinal Plants ; and the most important G-rasses, Sfc, used in rural 

economy, with the soii'best adajJted to their cultivation ; 

TOGETHER WITH 

A COPIOUS INDEX TO THE BODY OF THE WORK. 
BY BERNARD M'MAHON. 

TENTH EDITION, GREATLY IMPROVED. 



PHILADELPHIA: 
LIPPINCOTT, GRAMBO AND CO, 

SUCCESSORS TO GRIGG, ELLIOT & CO., 

1851. 



ta 



Entered according to the Act of Congress, in the year 1851, by 

LIPPINCOTT, GRAMBO AND CO., 

m the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 



7700 1 



PREFACE. 



The general utility of Horticulture, or the art of improv- 
ing every kind of soil; of producing a plentiful supply oi 
wholesome vegetables and fruits, so necessary to health in all 
countries, especially in warm climates; of cultivating the 
various plants designed by infinite goodness to minister to 
the comforts of animal life, by correcting the divers maladies 
to which it is subject by nature, and still more so, in the human 
race, by intemperance; of raising many articles of luxury and 
commerce, as well as materials for ornamenting the whole face 
of the country — is too obvious to render any arguments neces- 
sary in favour of an attempt to facilitate the general acquisition 
of that useful branch of knowledge; but more especially, in a 
country which has not yet made that rapid progress in Gar- 
dening, ornamental planting, and fanciful rural designs, which 
might naturally be expected from an intelligent, happy and 
independent people, possessed so universally of landed property, 
unoppressed by taxation or tithes, and blessed with consequent 
comfort and affluence. 

The neglect in these respects is, no doubt, to be attributed 
to various causes, among the most prominent of which is the 
necessity of having reference for information on those subjects 
to works published in foreign countries, and adapted to climates 
by no means according with ours, either in the temperature or 
course of the seasons, and in numerous instances differing 
materially in modes of culture from those rendered necessary 
here by the peculiarities of our climates, soils and situations. 
And however excellent and useful these works are in the 
regions to which they are adapted, they tend to mislead and 
disappoint the young Jimerican Horticulturist, instead of 



yj_ PREFACE. 

affording him that correct, judicious and suitable instruction, 
the happy result of which would give impulse to his perse- 
verance. 

To obviate this necessity, as much as is in my power, and to 
contribute my mite to the welfare of my fellow citizens, and 
to the general improvement of the country, I have undertaken 
this work, and arranged the matter according to the seasons of 
the year, that the reader may have an easy reference to the 
particular business to be performed in every month. By this 
means the subject becomes a daily amusement and study, 
applicable at the moment, and consequently leaving a lasting 
impression on the memory; which, if attended to for a few 
years, may make any person who has a taste for admiring and 
enjoying the magnificence, beauties and bounties of Nature in 
its vegetable productions, a complete Master of the Art, and if 
he pleases, his own Gardener. 

In writing this treatise, I have had recourse to the best pub- 
lications, American, English, French and Latin, lest any useful 
suggestions or modern improvements in the art should escape 
my notice or recollection; still keeping in view, not only the 
difference of climate, season, and the necessary modes of cul- 
ture in foreign countries, but also in the extensive region of 
which the United States are composed. It is, however, prob- 
able, notwithstanding all my assiduity and care in collecting 
as much information as possible with respect to the most proper 
seaso7is for sowing particular kinds of seeds, &c. in the remote 
parts of the Union, that I have fallen into some mistakes; for 
these, as well as typographical errors, to which a work of this 
kind is unavoidably subject, I solicit the reader's excuse; and 
shall consider myself under serious obligations to those whose 
personal friendship or patriotism shall induce them to inform 
me of any horticultural errors which I may have committed 
or improvements that may be made, in order that the former 
be corrected, and the latter, if justified by experience, published 
in some future work, or edition of this. 

The culture and management of Grape-Vines, and all other 
kinds of fruit trees which can be cultivated with us to advan- 
tage, or even to indulge curiosity; the raising and planting of 
Thorn Quicks and other plants suitable for Live Hedges; the 



PREFACE. yii 

cultivation of Liquorice, Rhubarb, Dyer's Madder, Weld or 
Dyer's Weed, Fuller's Teasel, Sea Kale {Crambe maritima). 
Cork-tree, Manna, Ash, Tanner's Sumack (^Rhus Coriaria), 
Paper Mulberry, Mulberry-trees for feeding Silk-worms, (and 
care of the insects,) with every other plant, not already common, 
which appeared to me of sufficient importance, either in a 
commercial, manufacturing, or ornamental point of view, or as 
affording any of the luxuries or necessaries of life, have been 
treated of with due attention: and in order to accommodate the 
Agriculturist, I have given a classical catalogue of the most 
important and valuable grasses and other plants used in rural 
economy; and likewise pointed out the particular kind of soil, 
in which each plant cultivated as a grass, or exclusively on 
account of its foliage, has been found, upon repeated trials, to 
succeed best. 

From an experience which I have had of near thirty years 
in PRACTICAL GARDENING, on a general and extensive scale; 
the particular pains which I have taken, not only to designate 
the necessary work of every month, but also the best methods 
of performing it; the avoiding of all unnecessary repetitions, 
so frequent in works of the kind, in order to render it as full 
of important matter as possible; the assiduous endeavours to 
make it useful in every state of the Union, and to induce an 
association of the science of Botany with practical horticulture, 
without which the latter can never be so advantageously con- 
ducted; it is hoped that this will be found to be the most useful 
and valuable Gardener's Calendar hitherto published in 
any country, but more particularly so to the citizens of the 
United States, for whose use it has been written, and to whom 
it is respectfully inscribed by the Author. 

BERNARD M'MAHON. 

Philadelphia. 



THE 



AMERICAN GARDENER'S 
CALENDAR. 



JANUARY. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 



Preparations for Early Crops. 

In such parts of the Union where the ground is not at this time 
bound up with frost, continue to dig the waste quarters of your 
kitchen garden, first giving them such manure as thej require; lay- 
ing them in high sloping ridges, to sweeten and be improved by the 
frost, &c., more especially if the soil be of a stift" nature; by which 
method, its adhesion is destroyed, the pores are opened for the 
admission of air, frost, rain and dews, all of which abounding with 
nitrous salts, contribute, in a high degree, towards its melioration 
and fertility; and besides a great quantity of ground thus prepared, 
can be soon levelled in the spring for sowing or planting; which, if 
neglected, would require much time to dig in a proper manner, and 
that at a period when the throng of business requires every advan- 
tage of previous preparation. 

When the ground at this time is frozen so hard as not to be dug, 
which is generally the case in the middle and eastern states, you 
may carry manure into the different quarters and spread it, repair 
fences, rub out and clean your seeds, prepare shreds, nails and twigs, 
for the wall and espalier trees, which are to be pruned in this and 
the next month; get all the garden-tools in repair, and procure 
such as are wanting; provide from the woods a sufficient quantity 
of pea-rods, and poles for your Lima and other running beans; 
dress and point them, so as to be ready for use when wanted. 

Here it may be well to remark, that many people who neglect to 
provide themselves with pea-rods at this season, when it can be so 
conveniently done, are necessitated, when the hurry of business over- 
takes them in spring, to sow their peas and let them trail on the 
B 



IQ THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

ground^ in which situation they will never produce, especially the 
tall growing kinds, one third as many as if they were properly 
rodded. 

The various kinds of Early-Hotspur Peas will require I'ods from 
four to five feet high; the Marrowfat, Glory of England, White and 
Green Rouncival, Spanish Morotto, and other tall growing kinds, 
will require them to be from six to seven feet high, exclusive of 
the part to be inserted in the earth; they ought to be formed or 
dressed fan-fashion, the lower ends pointed, for the ease of pushing 
them into the earth, and laid by, either under some shed, or in any 
convenient place, till wanted; one set of rods will, with care, last for 
three years. The same kind of rods that the tall growing peas re- 
quire, will answer for the generality of running Kidney Beans; the 
Lima-Beans require strong poles from eight to nine feet high. 

If in this, and the next month, you neglect forwarding every thing 
that can possibly be done, in and for the garden, you will materially 
find the loss of such inattention, when the hurry and pressure of 
spring business overtake you. Every active and well inclined 
gardener will find abundant employment in the various departments 
of the garden at this season, and need not be idle, if disposed to be 
industrious, or to serve either himself or his employer. 

Fraining. 

Many will think that the instructions hereafter given for the 
raising of early Cucumbers and Melons, in frames, are too diffuse; 
especially in a country which abounds in these kinds of fruit, pro- 
duced in such quantities, in summer and autumn, without artificial 
heat, or very much trouble. 

The remark may be just, but the principal motive forgiving these 
lengthy instructions is, to exercise the young gardener in the art 
of managing Garden-Frames in general; an art absolutely essen- 
tial to every good Gardener, and which cannot be better exemplified 
than in the raising of early Cucumbers and Melons. And besides 
these fruits coming into use at an early season, will be much valued 
and esteemed. 

As several other kinds of kitchen-garden vegetables are desirable 
at an early season, such as cresses, rape, lettuce, mustard, radishes, 
&c., to cut while young; asparagus, radishes, peas, kidney beans, 
&c., to be forwarded in early perfection; cauliflower and cabbage 
plants, to succeed those sown in September, and to produce a prin- 
cipal crop for early summer use; you should now provide the ne- 
cessary supplies of hot stable dung, rich earth, and other requisites 
proper for their cultivation in hot beds, as explained for each, under 
its respective head. 

Hot-bed Frames and Lights. 

If not already provided with hot-bed frames and lights, you may 
get them made agreeably to the following instructions. Large 
frames ought to be made of inch and half, or rather two inch plank. 



Jan.] the kitchen garden. jj 

of the best yellow pine, nine feet two inches long, four feet ten inches 
wide, as high again in the back as in the front, to give the top a due 
slope to the sun and a proper declivity to carry off the wet when 
covered with glass lights, to move off and on occasionally; every 
joint ought to be tongued, the better to prevent the admission of 
cold air into, or emission of warm air out of the bed, but in such 
manner as the Gardener may think proper. The back and front 
are to be nailed to corner posts, so as to admit the ends to fit in 
neatly, which ends are to be made fast to the posts by iron bolts 
keyed in the inside, for the greater facility of taking the frame 
asunder when necessary; each end must be made one inch and a 
half higher than the back and front, so as that one half its thickness 
may be grooved out on the inside, for the sash to rest and slide on, 
and the other half left for its support on the outside; when finished 
give it two or three good coats of paint before you use it, and with 
a little care and an annual painting, it may last you twenty years. 

These frames will take three lights of three feet wide each, each 
light containing five rows of glass panes, six inches by four, over- 
lapping one another about half an inch, which of all other 
sizes is the most preferable, on account of their cheapness in the 
first place, the closeness of their lap, their general strength and 
trifling expense of repairs; however, each person will suit his own 
convenience as to the dimensions of glass. Where the sashes when 
laid on the frame meet, a piece of pine about three and a half inches 
broad and near two thick, should run from back to front, morticed 
into each, for their support, and for them to slide on; in the centre 
of which, as well as in the ends of the frame, it will be well to make 
a groove five-eighths of an inch wide and near a quarter of an inch 
deep, rounded at bottom to receive and carry off any wet which may 
work down between the sashes. 

But with respect to particular dimensions of frames, they are dif- 
ferent, according to the plants they are intended to protect, but ge- 
nerally from nine to twelve feet long, from four feet eight inches to 
five feet wide, from eighteen inches to three feet six inches high in 
the back, and from nine to eighteen inches in front, being for the 
most part twice as high in the back as in front, if not more. 

The common kitchen garden frames may be of three different 
sizes, that is, for one, two and three lights; the latter of which, how- 
ever, are the most material, and which are employed for general 
use: but it is necessary also to have one and two light frames, the 
former as seedling frames, and the latter as succession or nursery 
frames, to forward the young plants to a due size for the three-light 
frames, in which they are to fruit. 

Early Cucumbers and Melons. 

As it is generally the ambition of most gardeners to excel each 
other in the production of early cucumbers, &c.,all necessary pre- 
paration should be made this month for that purpose, by preparing 
dung for hot-beds, in which to raise the plants; for they, being of a 
tender quality, require the aid of artificial heat under shelter of 



J 2 THE KITCHEN GAilDEN. [Jan. 

frames and glasses, until the middle or latter end of May, especially 
in the middle and eastern states. 

But by the aid of hot-beds, defended with frames and glasses, we 
obtain early cucumbers, in young green fruit, fit to cut or gather in 
February, March and April, &c., and ripe melons in May and June. 
The proper sorts of cucumbers for the early crops are the early 
short prickly, and long green prickly; of which the first sort comes 
earliest; but the latter is considerably the finest fruit, and greatly 
preferable for general culture. 

And if early melons are also required, there are several varieties 
of the fruit: the Cantaleupe is one of the best for its handsome 
growth, good size, and superior flavour; and is in much estimation. 

The true Cantaleupe or Armenian warted Melon, is very scarce in 
the United States; its fruit is large, roundish and deeply ribbed, a 
little compressed at both ends, the surface full of warted protube- 
rances, like some species of squash, the flesh reddish, firm, and of 
a most delicious rich flavour; of which there are several varieties, 
dittering principally in colour, and commonly called black rock, 
golden rock, &c. 

This variety of melon derives the term Cantaleupe, from a place 
of that name near Rome, where it was first cultivated in Europe — 
brought thence from Armenia, a country of Asia, in which is situ- 
ated the famous Mount Ararat. 

But it may also be proper to raise some of the others for variety; 
the Romana is a great bearer, comes early, but the fruit much 
smaller, though well flavoured; the Polignac, Nutmeg and Minorca 
are also fine melons; but it may also be eligible to raise two, three, 
or more of the best approved different sorts. 

Observe, that in procuring these seeds for immediate sowing, both 
of cucumbers and melons, it is adviseable to have those of two, three 
or four years old, if possible, as the plants will generally show fruit 
sooner, as well as prove more fruitful than those of new seeds, which 
are apt to run vigorously to vine, often advancing in considerable 
length before they show a single fruit; but when seeds of this age 
cannot be procured, new seeds may be improved by carrying them 
a few weeks previous to sowing in your waistcoat or breeches 
pocket. 

In order to raise early cucumbers and melons, you must provide 
a quantity of fresh hot stable-dung, wherewith to make a small 
hot-bed for a seed-bed, in which to raise the plants to a proper 
growth for transplanting into larger hot-beds next month to remain 
to fruit; for this purpose a small bed for a one or two light frame 
may be sufficient, in which case two cartloads of hot dung will be 
enough for making a bed of proper dimensions for a one-light box, 
and so in proportion for a larger. 

Agreeably to these intimations, provide the requisite supply of 
good horse-stable-dung from the dung hills in stable-yards, &c., con- 
sisting of that formed of the moist stable litter and dunging of the 
horses together, choosing that which is moderately fresh, moist, and 
full of heat — always preferring that which is of some lively, warm, 
steamy quality; and of which take the long and short together as it 



Jan.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. J3 

occurs, in proper quantity as above. And being thus procured, 
proceed to making the hot-bed, or previously to forming it into a 
bed, if the dung is rank, it would be proper to prepare it a little to 
an improved state, more successful for that purpose, by forking the 
whole up into a heap, mixing it well together, and let it thus remain 
eight or ten days to ferment equally, and for the rank steam and 
fierce heat to transpire, or evaporate in some effectual degree; and 
by which time it will have acquired a proper temperament for 
making into a hot-bed, by which treatment the heat will be steady 
and lasting, and not so liable to become violent or burning, as 
when the dung is not previously prepared. 

Choose a place on which to make your hot-bed, in a sheltered dry 
part of the framing ground,* &c. open to the morning and south 
sun; and it maybe made either wholly on the surface of the ground, 
or in a shallow trench, of from six to twelve inches deep, and four 
or five feet wide, according to the frame; but if made entirely on 
the surface, which is generally the most eligible method at this early 
season, it affords the opportunity of lining the sides of the bed with 
fresh hot dung, quite down to the bottom, to augment the heat when 
it declines, and also prevents wet from settling about the bottom 
of the bed, as often happens when made in a trench, which chills 
the dung, and causes the heat soon to decay. 

Then according to the size of the frame, mark out the dimen- 
sions of the bed, either on the ground, or with four stakes, making 
an allowance for it to be about four or five inches wider than the 
frame each way; this done, begin to make the bed accordingly, ob- 
serving to shake and mix the dung well, as you lay it on the bed, 
and beat it down with the back of the fork as you go on: but I 
would not advise treading it, for a bed which is trodden hard 
will not work so kindly, and be more liable to burn that which 
is suffered to settle gradually of itself: in this manner proceed 
till the bed has arrived at the height of four feet, which will not 
be too much; making an allowance for its settling six or eight 
inches, or more, in a week or fortnight's time; and as soon as 
finished, let the frame and glass be put on: keep them close till 
the heat comes up, then raise the glass behind that the steam may 
pass away. 

The next thing to be observed, is about earthing the bed, in which 
to sow the seed; and for which occasion, should have a proper sup- 
ply of rich, light, dry earth, or compost, ready at this season, under 
some airy dry shed, or hovel, covered at top to keep out rain, that 
the earth may be properly dry; for if too moist or wet at this time, 
it would prove greatly detrimental both to the growth of the seed and 
young plants, as well as be very apt to cake and burn at bottom next 
the dung, by the strong heat of the bed: therefore, observing, that 
for early hot-beds of cucumbers and melons, should generally depo- 

* Framing Ground is a part of the Kitchen Garden, well defended from 
cutting winds, and well exposed to the sun; particularly intended for 
framing of all kinds, and generally enclosed with live or reed hedges, or 
board fences, the former being the most preferable. 



14 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

sit a necessary quantity of proper earth, under some cover as above, 
either the beginning of winter, or at least a fortnight or three or 
four weeks previous to making the hot-bed, in order to have it in 
the dry, mellow state above mentioned, ready for immediate use 
when wanted. 

Three or four days after the bed is made, prepare to earth itj 
previously observing, if it has settled unequally, to take off the 
frame and glasses, and level any inequalities^ make the surface 
smooth, put on the frame again, and then lay therein as much of 
the above mentioned earth as will cover the whole top surface of 
the bed, about three or four inches thick, then fill two, three, or 
more middling smallish garden-pots with more of the aforesaid rich 
earth, place them within the frame on the hot-bed, put on the glass 
or glasses, and continue them till the earth in the pots is warm; 
and when that is effected, sow the seeds in the pots, both of cucum- 
bers and melons, each separately, more or less in each pot, accord- 
ing to the quantity of plants required; but generally considerably 
more of cucumbers than of melons at this season, covering in the 
seeds near half an inch deep with the same earth. 

This done, place the pots towards the middle of the bed, plunging 
the bottom part a little into the earth, drawing some of the same up 
round each pot at the same time; or in two or three days after, may 
sow a few seeds in the earth of the bed, to have a chance both ways; 
but by sowing in pots, if the beds should heat too violently, as is 
sometimes unavoidably the case, the pots can be readily drawn up 
more or less, out of danger of burning the earth, &c. therein; and 
thus, the sowing in pots in a new made hot-bed in full heat may 
prove of greater advantage than sowing in the earth of the bed, with 
regard to more probable safety from burning. 

After sowing the seeds, put on the lights or glasses close; but 
when the steam from the heat of the bed rises copiously, give it 
vent by raising one corner of the upper ends of the lights, half an 
inch or an inch, which is also necessary in order to prevent any 
burning tendency from the great heat of the bed in its early state. 

Continue now to cover the glasses of the hot-bed every evening, 
about an hour before sun-setting, if mild weather, but earlier in pro- 
portion to its severity, with garden mats; and uncover them every 
morning, not sooner than between eight and nine o'clock, at this 
season; and observe, in covering up in the evening, that as the bed 
will at first have a strong heat and steam within the frame, it may 
be advisable to cover only a single mat thick for the first three or 
four nights, as a thicker covering in the early state of the bed might 
be apt to occasion a too violent internal heat and steam of a burn- 
ing nature; but as the great heat decreases, augment the covering, 
being careful not to suffer the ends of the mats to hang down con- 
siderably below the frame, over the sides of the bed, except in severe 
weather, which would draw up a hurtful strong steam from the 
dung, as well as confine the steam and heat too much, and keep the 
bed too stiflingly close from the external air, which would weaken 
the germination or sprouting of the seed, and the plants would come 
up weak and of a sickly yellowish hue: observe, therefore, these 



Jan.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 15 

and the following precautions, in order both to prevent too great a 
heat in the bed, and that the plants may rise with a proper degree 
of strength and healthful growth. 

Likewise observe, on the above considerations, that in covering 
up, or applying the night covering of mats over the glasses, during 
the time the strong heat and steam continue in the bed, it would 
be proper when the mats are put on in the afternoon to raise the 
upper ends of the glass or glasses, a quarter of an inch or a little 
more or less, occasionally, both to give vent to the internal rank 
steam, and to admit a moderate degree of fresh airj and in which 
may fasten one of the covering mats to hang down a little over the 
part where the lights are occasionally opened to prevent the cutting 
external air from rushing immediately into the frame, especially 
after the plants are advancing; but this, necessary as it is, cannot 
be done with safety in very severe weather. 

Great care is requisite that the earth in the pots have not too 
much heat, for the bed is yet very hot, and therefore let the degree 
of internal heat in the bed be daily examined; and, if any thing of 
burning should appear, you can conveniently raise the pots farther 
from the dung, from which the danger proceeds, without disturbing 
the seeds or plants, and thereby prevent all injury from too much 
heat, provided you examine the bed every day, and give proper vent 
to the rank steam within the frame, while of a burning quality. 

In two, three, or four days after the seed is sown, you may expect 
the plants to appear; when it will be proper to admit fresh air to 
them, by raising the upper end of the glass a little every day: and 
if the earth in the pots appears dry, refresh it moderately with a 
little water that has stood in the bed all night, just to take oft' the 
cold chill; applying it about eleven or twelve o'clock of the day, 
and principally only to the earth, about the roots, not over the tops 
of the plants; which done, shut down the glasses close for about half 
an hour or an hour, then opened again a little, and shut close to- 
wards the evening; when continue to cover the glass every night 
with garden mats. And at this time also, if the heat of the bed is 
strong and the weather not very severe, raise the glass a little behind 
with a prop, when you cover up in the evening, to give vent to the 
steam; and nail a mat to hang down over the ends of the glass that 
is raised, to break off the sharp edge of the external cold night air 
from the plants; but when the heat is more moderate, the glasses 
may be shut close every night, observing to uncover in proper time 
every morning, to admit the essential benefit of day-light, sun, and 
air, to the plants; being careful to continue the aclmission of fresh 
air at all proper opportunities in the day-time, to promote strength 
in the plants, otherwise they would run weak, and very long and 
feeble-shanked; raising the glass as before observed, and if Avindy 
or very sharp air, to hang a mat before the place as above. 

On the day that the plants appear, sow a little more seed in the 
same bed, in the manner before mentioned; for these tender plants 
being liable to suffer by different causes at this season, it is proper, 
therefore, to sow a little seed at three or four different times in the 



IQ THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

same bed, at short intervals; for if one sowing should miscarry, 
another may succeed. 

When the plants, however, both of the first and succeeding sow- 
ings, are two, three, or fou-r days old they should be planted in 
small pots, which pots must be placed also in the hot -bed, in the 
manner following: 

Observe to fill the pots, the day before you intend to remove the 
plants, with some rich, dry earth, and set them within the frame till 
the next day, when the earth in the pots will be warm; then pro- 
ceed to planting, take the plants carefully up in the seed-pots, 
raising them with your finger, &c. with all the roots as entire as 
possible, and with as much of the earth as will readily adhere about 
the fibres; and thus, the pots of earth being ready, and forming the 
earth thereof a little concavely hollow a small depth, place the 
plants in the hollowed part of the earth slopingly, with their roots 
towards the centre, and earth over their roots and stems near an inch 
thick; observing to plant three plants in each pot; and if the earth 
is quite dry, give a very little water just to the roots of the plants 
only; and directly plunge the pots into the earth on the bed, close 
to one another, filling up all the spaces between with earth; and let 
every part of the bed within the frame be covered with as much 
earth as will prevent the rising of the rank, steam immediately from 
the dung, which would destroy the plants. 

Be careful to examine the bed every day, to see that the roots of 
the plants do not receive too much heat; if any thing like that ap- 
pears, draw up the pots a little, or as far as you see necessary for 
the preservation of the plants, re-plunging them again to their rims 
when the danger is over. 

Two or three days after planting, if the bed is in good condition, 
the plants will have taken root; though that is eftected sometimes 
in twenty-four hours. 

When the plants are fairly rooted, if the earth appears dry, give 
them a little water in the warmest time of the day; and if the sun 
shines it will prove more beneficial: let the watering be occasion- 
ally repeated very moderately, according as the earth in the pots 
becomes dry, and appears in want of a little moisture: and for this 
purpose always have some soft water set within the frame a few 
hours, to be ready to water the plants as you shall see occasion; 
but always with very great cautious moderation at this season. 

If there is now a brisk growing heat in the bed, you should, in 
order to preserve it as long as possible, apply some outward pro- 
tection of long stable-litter, straw, waste hay, dried fern, or leaves 
of trees, round the sides of the bed, raising it by degrees round the 
outsides of the frame. 

This will defend the beds from cold piercing wind, heavy or 
driving rains and snow, if either should happen; for these, if suf- 
fered to come at the bed, would chill it, and cause a sudden decay 
of the heat, whereby the plants would certainly receive a great 
check. 

If a lively heat be kept up, you may admit air to the plants every 
day, to strengthen their growth, by tilting the glasses in proportion 



Jan.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 17 

to the heat of the bed, and temperature of the external air: gene- 
rally observing, in this case, that when there happens a sharp cold 
air, or cutting wind, it would still be advisable to nail a garden-mat 
to the upper end of the glasses, to hang down over the place where 
the air is admitted, supported a little hollow or detached under- 
neath, two or three inches from the frame; and it will thus break, 
oflfand prevent the cutting external air from entering immediately 
into the frame upon the plants, and at the same time admit a proper 
degree of mild fresh air to greater advantage: however, in calm, 
moderate weather, this precaution is not materially necessary. 

About a fortnight, or a little more or less time after the bed ia 
made, you will carefully examine the heat thereof, to see if it wants 
augmentation; and when the heat begins to decline considerably,, 
remove the temporary protection of straw, hay, fern, or leaves from 
the front and back of the bed, if any was laid round it as before add- 
ed; then apply a lining of fresh hot horse-dung, close to one or both 
sides, as it shall seem necessary, by the heat being less or more 
decreased; for a constant regular degree of internal heat must be 
supported, to resist the external cold, and continue the plants in a 
proper state of advancing growth; but if the heat is not greatly 
declined, it would be advisable to line only one side first, applying 
it to the back of the bed; and in a week or fortnight after, line the 
front, &c., forming the lining about fifteen or eighteen inches wide; 
but raise it very little higher than the dung of the bed, lest it throw 
in too much heat immediately to the earth and roots of the plants; 
covering the top with earth two inches thick, to preserve the heat, 
and prevent the rank steam of the new dung from coming up, and 
entering into the frame, where it would prove destructive to the 
plants; the lining will soon greatly revive the declining heat of the 
bed, and continue it in good condition a fortnight longer. 

Ten or twelve days after lining one side, proceed as before, re- 
moving the protection of straw-litter, &c., if any, from the other 
side, and applying a lining of hot dung as above, afterwards to 
both ends; — ^and these will again revive and augment the heat for 
another fortnight, or more. 

After performing the lining, if very cold, wet, or snowy weather 
prevail, it may be proper to lay a quantity of dry long litter all 
around the general lining, which will protect the whole from driv- 
ing cold rains and snow, and preserve the heat of the bed in a fine 
growing temperature. 

By applying these linings of hot dung in due time, and renewing 
them as there shall be occasion, you may preserve the bed in a pro- 
per temperature of heat, of sufficieut duration to continue the plants 
in a free growing state in the same bed, until of due size for ridging 
out into the larger hot-beds, finally to remain to produce their fruit. 

Observe, however, that where there is plenty of hot dung, and 
every proper convenience, you may, in order to forward the plants 
as much as possible, prepare a second hot-bed, by way of nursery, 
about a fortnight after making the seed-bed, in order to receive the 
plants therefrom in their pots, when the heat begins to decline, 
plunging the pots in the earth, as above directed; continuing to sup- 
C 



Ig THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

port the heat of this bed, as already explained, and in which the 
plants may be nursed and forwarded, till they acquire a proper 
size for transplanting finally into the fruiting hot-beds. — See next 
month. 

When the plants have advanced in growth with their two first 
rough leaves, about two or three inches broad, and have pushed 
their two first running buds in the centre, or are a little advanced 
in the formation of one or two short runners, they are then of a 
proper size for ridging out into the large hot-beds, where they are 
finally to remain, which perform in proper time, according to the 
directions given in February, under the article Cucumbers, 

But in order to strengthen the plants in a more firm stocky 
growth, and to promote a production of fruitful runners, each plant 
must be stopt (as the gardeners term it), or topped at the first or 
second joint j i. e. the top of the first advancing runner, when form- 
ed in the centre like a small bud, should be pinched or cutoff close 
to the joint, as directed in February (which see), where the method 
of performing it is more fully explained. 

Care of the various sorts of Lettuces. 

If you have lettuce plants in frames, or under hoop-arches de- 
fended with mats, let them enjoy the open air at all opportunities, 
by taking the glasses, or other shelters, entirely off, when the 
weather is mild and dryj but if the plants are frozen, let them, 
while in that state, be carefully protected from the hot sun, which 
would materially injure them. 

In very wet weather, and when sharp cutting winds prevail, keep 
the glasses over them, observing however, to raise the lights or 
glasses behind, two or three inches, in mild days, to admit air to the 
plants: for, if they are kept too close, they will be drawn up weak, 
and attain to but little perfection; but let the glasses be close shut 
every night. In severe frosty weather keep them close night and 
day, and cover the glasses with mats, or straw, &c., both of nights, 
and occasionally in the day-time, if the frost is rigorous,: also let 
the same care be observed to those under hoop-arches; but let them 
have the full air in mild open weather. 

Or where any lettuces are planted in a south border, close under 
a wall or board fence, &c., it would be advisable, in hard frost, to 
cover them as above. 

In the above lettuces, in general, pick off all decayed leaves 
when any appear, keep them always cleared from weeds, and de- 
stroy slugs, which often greatly annoy them; and in mild weather 
stir the surface of the earth between, which will much enliven the 
plants. 

Sowing Lettuces. 

When lettuces have not been sown in autumn for early spring 
use, you may now sow any of the cos or cabbage kinds, on a slight 
hot-bed under glasses, to be planted out in spring; the young plants 
may be greatly forwarded, if pricked into another fresh hot-bed 



Jan.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 19 

next mouth J and in the latter end of March, or beginning of April, 
thej will be strong, and fit for transplanting into warm borders; a 
sufficiency may be retained in the frame, to arrive at early per- 
fection. 

Forcing early JJsparagus. 

Hot-beds for forcing asparagus may be made with success any 
time this month, which will furnish young asparagus for the table 
in February and March. 

Observing, for this occasion, you must be furnished with plants 
that have been raised in the natural ground till of three or four years 
growth, of proper size and strength to produce eligible crops of 
good sized asparagus shoots, when planted in a hot-bed; and must 
be provided with plenty of good hot dung, wherewith to make sub- 
stantial hot-beds, from three to four feet high, and with proper 
large frames and glasses to place on the beds, and garden mats, for 
covering of nights, &c. 

But for general particulars of the plants, and the necessary quan- 
tity, as well as of the hot-bed, and other requisites — see the article 
Forcing Asparagus in February, which is equally applicable on the 
present occasion. 

Minty Tanseyy fyc. 

Make a small hot-bed for some mint, when it is required at an 
early season, in young green shoots, for sallads and mint-sauce, &c. 
A bed for a small or middling garden frame, of one or two lights, 
may be sufficient for supply of a moderate family; and in general 
about two feet thick of dung; set on the frame, and lay about four 
or five inches depth of earth on the bed, ready for planting. 

Then having some roots of common spear-mint, place them upon 
the surface, pretty thick, and cover them with earth about an inch 
and a half deep; or you may place the roots in drills, and draw the 
earth over them. 

The mint will appear in about a week or fortnight, and will be in 
fine order for mint sauce, &c., and either to use alone as a sallad, or 
to mix among other small herbs. 

By the same means you may obtain green tansey and tarragon. 

Small Sallading. 

Make a slight hot-bed, in which to sow the diiferent sorts of 
small sallading, such as cresses, mustard, radish, and rape, and 
likewise lettuce, to cut while young. 

The hot-bed for these seeds need not be more than about two 
feet thick of dung, and must be covered with a frame and glasses. 
The earth must be light and dry, and laid about four to five or six 
inches thick on the bed; then let small shallow flat drills be 
drawn from the back to the front of the bed; sow the seed therein, 
each sort separately, and very thick, covering them not more than 
a quarter of an inch deep with earth; or, if but just covered, is suffi- 
cient, and the plants will rise more expeditious and regular; or the 



20 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

seed may be sown thick all over the surface of the bed, each sort 
separate; smooth it down with the spade, then sift as much light 
earth over as will just cover it, as above observed, and directly put 
on the glasses; or in want of frames and lights, may use hand- 
glasses, observing in general to cover the glasses every night, and 
in severe frosty weather, with mats or straw litter, &c. 

As soon as the plants appear, give them as much air as the state of 
the weather will admit of, by raising the glasses on props; otherwise 
they will be apt to mould or fog, and spoil as fast as they come up. 

It must be remembered, that where a regular succession of these 
small herbs is required for sallad, should repeat the sowings, at 
least once a fortnight. 

If you have not hot dung to spare to make hot-beds for this pur- 
pose, may sow in a sloping bed of natural earth, under a shallow 
garden frame, covered with glasses: allotting for this occasion some 
warm compartments of rich earth in the full sun: preparing it in 
a sloping inanner fronting the south, a foot higher on the north 
side than in front. Set a frame thereon, sinking the back part, &c. 
so as to have the whole surface of the earth within six or eight inches 
of the glasses; sow the sallading, put on the glasses, cover them 
carefully with mats, &c., at night and in very severe weather, and 
you need not doubt of success; though, generally, a hot-bed will 
always prove the most eftectually successful on this occasion. 

Cauliflower Plants. 

Look over, in open weather, the cauliflower plants which were 
raised, and planted in frames last autumn for protection in winter, 
to plant out in spring, for an early summer crop; and where wi- 
thered or damaged leaves appear, let them be picked off; suffer no 
weeds to grow among them, and stir the surface gently between, 
which will enliven and cherish the plants. 

In open weather, let the plants have plenty of air every day, by 
raising the glasses, or by taking them entirely off when the weather 
is mild and dry; but generally continue the glasses over in rainy 
weather: keep them close down every night, and do not open them 
at all in severe frosty weather. 

In severe weather cover the glasses every night with mats, straw, 
or fern, &c., also, if there be occasion, in the day-time, in very ri- 
gorous frost; likewise, in such weather, lay some litter round the 
outsides of the frame, for this will be very serviceable in preventing 
the frost from entering at the sides. 

Cauliflowers under hand or bell-glasses must also have air every 
TYiild day, by raising the glasses two or three inches on the warmest 
side; in sharp weather keep them close; in severe frost lay some 
litter round, and straw or mats over each glass; this will protect the 
plants greatly; in 7nild dry weather the glasses may be taken 
off every day for a few hours; but they must be kept close every 
night. 

Sowing Cauliflower Seed. 

Sow cauliflower seed the beginning, middle, or any time this 
month, to raise plants to succeed those sown in autumn; or also, 



Jan.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 21 

in case none were sown at that time for an early summer crop, or 
that they have been killed by the severity of the winter; but in order 
to bring the plants up soon, and forward them in growth, it will be 
necessary to sow them in a slight hot-bed. Plants, sown at this 
season, if well managed, are to be more depended on for a general 
crop, than those which were sown in autumn, as they are not so apt 
to button, or run to seed, in April or May, as the others, and will 
produce their flowers, within ten days as early; though such of the 
autumn raised plants as do not button, generally produce larger 
flowers, and earlier. 

Make the bed as directed for cucumbers, in page 12, to about three 
feet high, which, when settled, will fall to about two feet six inches, 
and put a frame on; then lay four or five inches of rich earth over 
the bed, sow the seed on the surface, but not until the violent heat 
of the bed is over; cover it by sifting or otherwise, with light dry 
earth, about a quarter of an inch deep, and then put on the glasses. 

When the plants appear, let them have air every day that the 
weather will permit, by raising the upper ends of the lights an inch 
or two; and in very mild weather, the lights may be taken oft" en- 
tirely, for a few hours in the warm part of the day: the plants must 
not be kept too close, for that would draw them up so weak, as to 
render them of little value; therefore give them as much air as 
possible, consistent with their preservation and promotion of 
growth; but let them be covered carefully at night, and in very 
severe weather. 

Water them frequently, but sparingly, with water which has 
stood over night in the hot-bed; keep them free from weeds, and 
in one month they will be fit for transplanting into another hot- 
bed. — See February. 

Sowing Cabbage Seed. 

This is a proper time to sow a full crop of early cabbage seed, to 
raise plants to succeed those sown in September; the kinds most 
suitable, are the early Smyrna, early York, early dwarf Battersea, 
and early sugar-loaf; they are to be treated in every respect, as di- 
rected for the cauliflower plants, with this difterence, that as they 
are somewhat more hardy, a less degree of heat will be sufficient. 

Sow also some of the large late kinds of cabbage, such as the fiat- 
dutch, drum-head, &c., likewise some of the red pickling-cabbage; 
and plants from this sowing will be fit for use in July, August, &c., 
and will produce better and larger heads than if sown in April or 
May; and besides, they will immediately succeed the early summer 
kinds above mentioned. 

Sowing Carrots. 

In some families young carrots are required as early as possible, 
and they may be forwarded by sowing the seed in a moderate hot- 
bed, about the end of this month. 

Make the hot-bed about two feet thick of dung, and procure some 
light, rich, dry earth, which lay six inches thick on the bed. Sow 



22 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Jan. 

the seed thinly on the surface, and cover it with the same kind of 
earth a quarter of an inch deep. 

When the plants come up, let them enjoy the free air in mild 
weather, and cover them in cold nights, and also in very severe 
frost, whilst young; and when an inch or two high, thin them to 
about three inches asunder; and you will thus have young spring 
carrots for drawing in April and May. 

Sowing Radishes. 

In order to have radishes as early as possible, recourse must be 
had to the assistance of hot-beds; therefore, any time in this month, 
make a moderate hot-bed for one or more garden frames, only about 
two feet and a half depth of dung, sufficient just to promote the 
early germination of the seed, and forward the plants moderately 
without running them up long shanked, &c. When the bed is made, 
set on the frame, lay in about six inches depth of good light garden 
earth, then having some seed of the best early-frame, or short- 
topped radish, sow it evenly on the surface, press it into the earth 
with the back of a spade, cover it nearly half an inch deep with 
light mould, and put on the glasses. 

When the plants appear, give them a large share of air, either 
by taking the glasses, &c. entirely off, whenever it can be done with 
safety, even for half an hour at a time, or tilting them up high at 
one end, as the weather will permit, otherwise they will draw, or 
run up long shanked, and be spoiled; and after the plants have been 
up a few days, thin them regularly with your hand, where they 
stand too thick, and leave the strongest plants standing not less 
than an inch asunder. Support a gentle heat in the bed, when it 
declines, by applying a moderate lining of hot dung. 

Mushrooms. 

Mushroom-beds should be carefully attended to at this season. 
They should have sufficient covering to defend them effectually 
from the frost, rain, or snow; which should not be less than two 
feet thick; and if heavy rain or snow should have penetrated quite 
through the covering, this must be removed immediately, or your 
spawn will be in danger of perishing. Replace it with good cover- 
ing of clean and dry wheat or other straw; and in order to defend 
the bed more effectually from wet and cold, it is advisable to spread 
some large garden mats, or canvass cloths, over the straw, which will 
greatly preserve the beds. 

Artichokes. 

Artichokes, if not landed up before, should not be neglected any 
longer, except the severity of the frost prevents it: in which case, 
as these plants are liable to sufl"er greatly by rigorous frosts, it is 
advisable to give some temporary protection, first clearing away the 
decayed and large old leaves, then apply a good thick covering of 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 23 

long, dry, strawy dung, or mulchy litter, close about each plant: 
but, if open dry weather, it would be most expedient to land them 
up; observing, preparatory to this, to cut away all the large and 
decayed old leaves close to the ground; then dig between, and 
earth up the plants, as in November and December. 

But the work of landing up artichokes should always be per- 
formed in November or December; for which see the work of these 
months. It should never be omitted; for it is the most general 
eftective method of preserving the plants in severe winters. 

And after they are landed, if the frost should prove very severe, 
it will also be proper to lay light, dry, long litter over the rows: if 
the plants are of the true globe sort, too great care cannot be taken 
to preserve them; for sometimes a severe winter makes a great 
havoc among them; and, in spring, young sets to recruit the planta- 
tions may be very difficult to procure. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

In Georgia, South Carolina, and such parts of the other southern 
states as are not subject to winter frosts, you may sow carrots, 
parsneps, beets, spinach, lettuce, radish, celery, parsley, cabbage, 
cauliflower, borecole, brocoli, leeks, onions, &c., especially towards 
the latter end of the month. 

Sow peas and plant beans of various kinds, earth up such peas 
and beans as are advanced in growth, rod and stake such of them 
as require it; plant out cabbage and cauliflower plants, earth up 
late celery, and tie up endive for blanching: and, in short, do all 
the work directed to be done in the kitchen garden for the month 
of March, where you will find ample instructions for performing 
the same. 

In such of the southern or western states as frosts are prevalent 
in, at this season, the above work must be deferred till such period 
in next month, or even in March, as it can be done in, without 
danger from frost; with the exception of planting the windsor- 
bean, {Vicia Faba), and all the different varieties of that species, 
which ought to be planted as soon after the middle of January as 
it is possible to get the ground in a proper state of preparation to 
receive them: they are very hardy, are not subject to rot in the 
ground like kidney beans, provided it be dry; they thrive best in a 
heavy strong soil, and are seldom very productive in the United 
States, if not planted early. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Pruning. 

Where pruning was neglected in November or December, it 
can now be done; though the latter end of February is a prefer- 
able time in the middle states, and the beginning of March in the 



24 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

eastern; however, apple and pear trees being perfectly hardy, may 
be pruned at any time during the winter months with safety^ 
plums and cherries may also be pruned any time that the weather 
is tolerably mild: and as this month will answer extremely well in 
the southern states for pruning almost all kinds of fruit-trees, it 
maybe useful to give at this time general instructions for perform- 
ing the same, which may be referred to at any other period. 

Pruning Espalier and Wall Trees. 

As some people have not a sufficient idea of what is meant by 
espaliers, the following explanation, and instructions for forming 
them, &c., may not be unacceptable. 

Espaliers are hedges of fruit-trees, which are trained up regu- 
larly to a lattice or trellis of wood work, and are commonly arranged 
in a single row in the borders, round the boundaries of the princi- 
pal divisions of the kitchen-garden; there serving a double or treble 
purpose, both profitable, useful, and ornamental. They produce 
large fine fruit plentifully, without taking up much room, and being 
in a close range, hedge-like, they in some degree shelter the escu- 
lent crops in the quarters; and having borders immediately under 
them each side, aftbrd difterent aspects for difierent plants, and also 
they afford shelter in winter, forwardness to their south-border crops 
in spring, and shade in summer; and as to ornament and variety, 
what can be more delightful in spring, in the excursion of the walks, 
than the charming appearance which the trees make when covered 
with their showy bloom, differing in themselves, in those of differ- 
ent genera, species, and varieties; or in summer, to see the fruit 
of the different sorts advancing to perfection, and in autumn arrive 
successively to maturity.^ And as the trees are arranged all of an 
equal height, not exceeding six feet, closely furnished with branches, 
ranged horizontally at regular distances one above another, from 
the very ground upwards, the fruit hereby are exhibited to great 
advantage, and being low, and the branches fixed, are convenient 
to pull, and not liable to be blown down by wind. 

An espalier has this advantage over a wall tree, that as being 
wholly detached, the branches have liberty to form fruit spurs on 
both sides, which in the wall tree cannot be effected but on one; in 
fact, common fruit-walls are unnecessary in the United States, 
except in the eastern and some of the middle states, where they 
are useful in forwarding to due perfection, and flavour, some late 
kinds of superior peaches, grapes, and other late fruits; but when 
walls are built for other purposes, and are conveniently situated, 
advantage ought to be taken of them, for raising fruit, observing to 
suit the various kinds to the various aspects. 

Trellises are also used occasionally for wall trees, where the wall 
does not admit of nailing the branches immediately against it; also 
for training wall trees in forcing-houses and forcing-frames, and are 
formed according to different degrees of taste, for use and ornament, 
as well as of different dimensions, from four or five to six, or in 
forcing-houses, to seven, eight, or ten feet high. 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 25 

For common espalier fruit-trees in the open ground, a trellis is 
absolutely necessary, and may either be formed of common stakes 
or poles, or of regular joinery work, according to taste or fancy. 

The cheapest, the easiest, and soonest made trellis for common 
espalier trees, is, that formed with straight poles, being cut into 
proper lengths, and driving them into the ground, in a range, a 
foot distance, all of an equal height, and then railed along the top 
with the same kind of poles or slips of pine or other boards, nailed 
down to each stake, to preserve the whole straight and firm in a 
regular position; to which the branches of the espalier trees are to 
be fastened with small ozier-twigs, rope yarn, &c., and trained along 
horizontally from stake to stake, as directed for the difterent sorts 
under their proper heads. 

To render the above trellis still stronger, run tvvo or three hori- 
zontal ranges of rods or small poles along the back parts of the up- 
rights, a foot or eighteen inches asunder, fastening them to the 
upright stakes, either with pieces of strong wire twisted two or 
three times round, or by nailing them. 

But when more elegant and ornamental trellis's of joinery work 
are required in any of the departments, they are formed with re- 
gularly squared posts and rails, of good durable timber, neatly planed 
and framed together, fixing the main posts in the ground, ten or 
twelve feet asunder, with smaller ones between, ranging the hori- 
zontal railing from post to post, in three or more ranges; the first 
being placed about a foot from the bottom, a second at top, and one or 
two along the middle space, and if thought convenient, may range 
one between each of the intermediate spaces; then fix thin slips 
of lath, or the like, upright to the horizontal railing, ten inches or 
a foot asunder; and paint the whole with oil colour, to render it 
more ornamental and durable; and in training the trees, tie their 
branches both to the railing of the trellis, and to the upright laths, 
according as they extend in length on each side. 

In either of the above trellis's for a common espalier, five or six 
feet at most, is a sufficient height, as, if much higher, the winds, 
having great power, would be very apt to loosen and displace them. 

The permanent trellis's ought not to be made till the second or 
third year alter planting, except the trees have had as long a time 
of regular and judicious training; for while they are young, it will 
be suflicient to drive a few short stakes into the ground on each side 
of the trees, in a straight line, to which the branches should be fas- 
tened in a horizontal position, as they are produced, in order to train 
them properly for the espalier; these will be sufficient for the two 
or three first years, for should you make the regular espalier or 
trellis the first year the trees are planted, many of the stakes would 
rot before the espalier is covered. For directions respecting the 
planting espalier and wall-trees, see March and October. 

Pruning Apple and Fear Trees, in Espaliers, or trained to fValls 
or Board Fences. 

Apple and pear trees being of the spur-bearing kind, and their 
mode of bearing similar, one method of pruning answers for both; 



26 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

they producing their fruit upon short natural spurs from the sides 
and ends of the branches, and the same branches continue bearing 
for many years, increasing their quantity of fruit spurs as they 
gradually advance in length j let it therefore be remarked, that in the 
general course of pruning those trees, their branches and shoots are 
not to be shortened, but generally trained along horizontally to the 
espalier and wall, at their natural length, at least as far as there is 
scope of room to extend them; never shortened except on particu- 
lar occasions, below explained; and the whole trained four to five 
or six inches asunder. 

Keeping therefore this in mind, look over the general branches, 
in which observe, that in such advancing young trees as are still in 
training, requiring a further supply of young wood to form the head, 
be careful to select and retain a proper quantity of the best-placed 
last summer's shoots at full length, and generally a terminal shoot 
to each mother branch; and cut out all the superfluous and irregu- 
lar ones; but, in full-trained or old trees, still retaining the former 
trained or same individual bearing branches for many years, as long 
as they continue fruitful; and only examine any particular branches 
that appear worn out or decayed, or any that are too much crowded 
or very irregular, and let such be now pruned out; at the same 
time observe where any of the last summer's shoots are wanted to 
supply vacant spaces, and retain them accordingly; cutting out all 
the superfluous or over abundant, dose to the main branches; like- 
wise, let all foreright and other irregular-placed shoots be cut away, 
crefuUy retaining the leading shoot to all the main branches, where 
there is a scope to run them; so retaining the general branches and 
the necessary supply of young wood, about four to five or six inches 
asunder, to be trained to the trellis or wall, &c., all at their full 
length, as aforesaid; and, according as they advance in length, still 
continue extending them, or without shortening, at least as far as 
their limited space admits. 

In the course of this pruning, have particular care to preserve 
all the natural fruit-spurs; but cut away all those formed of the 
remaining stumps of shorted shoots, for these rarely produce any 
thing but a confusion of unnecessary wood-shoots every summer: 
and for v/hich reason be careful, in pruning out the superfluous and 
irregular shoots, always to cut them oif quite dose from whence 
they originate. 

Then train in, all the remaining proper branches and shoots at 
their full length, about from four to five or six inches asunder, as 
aforesaid, without reducing them in length either in the summer or 
winter pruning. 

By the above practice, the shoots of branches of these trees will, 
about the second or third year after they are laid in, begin to pro- 
duce short shoots or spurs (as they are generally termed) about an 
inch or two in length; some not above half an inch; and from these 
the fruit is produced. 

But if the branches of these trees were to be shortened, it would 
be cutting ofi'the very part where blossom buds or spurs first begin 
to appear; and instead of those fruitful parts, they would send forth 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 07 

a number of strong wood-shoots. This plainly shows that the 
shoots which were intended for fruit-bearing must not be generally 
shortened^ for if that is practised, the trees would constantly run 
to wood, and never produce any tolerable crop of fruit. 

If, indeed, there is a want of wood in any part of these trees, then 
the occasional shortening of some of the adjacent young shoots may 
be necessary, whereby to promote a production of laterals the ensu- 
ing summer to furnish the vacancy. 

For instance, if there is any vacant part in the tree, and two, 
three, or more shoots are requisi'te to furnish that vacancy, and 
only one shoot was produced in that part the preceding summer, 
that shoot, in such a case, being now shortened to four or five buds, 
it if strong, will produce three or four lateral shoots the summer 
following. 

Pruning Plums and Cherries. 

This is also a proper season to prune plums and cherries, either 
against walls or espaliers, especially where the weather is mild. 

Let it be observed, in the pruning of these trees against walls or 
espaliers, that, like the apples and pears, they being of the spur- 
bearing kind, producing the fruit upon short natural spurs or studs, 
emitted along the sides of the branches, or from two or three to 
many years old, so must accordingly retain the same branches many 
years for bearers, which must not be shortened in the course of 
pruning, but trained horizontally at their full length, about three or 
four to five or six inches asunder j also all young shoots of the last 
year's growth, as are now proper to be reserved in vacancies, to fur- 
nish the wall or espalier with bearing wood, must not be shortened; 
but every such shoot or branch must be left entire; and this should 
at all times be observed, which is the only certain method whereby 
to render the branches fruitful. 

In the operation of pruning these trees, observe, as advised for 
the apple and pear trees, to give proper attention both in any young 
trees still under training, and in the fully-trained older trees fur- 
nished with the requisite expansion of branches. 

Observing, in the former, i. e. the young trees under training, 
that where further supplies of branches are required in order to 
form a proper expansion of bearers trained in regularity, should be 
careful to leave some best well-placed young shoots for that purpose, 
and cut out the improper and unnecessary, such as fore-right and 
other irregular placed growths; or also any superfluous or over- 
abundant shoots, that may occur in particular parts of the trees, re- 
taining the reserved proper shoots mostly at their full length, for 
training as above; and they will thus, in from one to two or three 
year's growth, furnish natural fruit-spurs forbearing; butgenerally 
sooner in the cherries than the plums, as some sort of cherries will 
probably bear fruit the same year on the young shoots now train- 
ed in: the morella in particular bears mostly on the one-year old 
shoots. For observations thereon, see November. 

And in the full-trained trees of the above sorts, look carefully 
over the general expansion; and where any occasional supply of 



28 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

young wood appears necessary, select and retain some best-placed 
proper shoots of last summer accordingly, either to furnish any 
present vacancy, or to train in between the main branches where it 
may seem expedient, in order to be advancing to a bearing state, 
ready to supply any apparent future occasion; but in the morella 
particularly, above mentioned, retain always a general supply for 
principal bearers: (see November:) and prune out all irregular and 
superabundant shoots close to the mother branches; and if casual 
worn-out or decayed old unfruitful branches occur let them now be 
cut out, retaining young wood of proper growth, &c., to supply their 
place; preserving also, in all vacant spaces, a supply of the best 
young shoots at their natural length, as above advised, and a lead- 
ing one to each branch; being careful to preserve all the short natu- 
ral fruit spurs, and cut away close any remaining naked stumps 
of former shortened shoots: then, as soon as a tree is thus pruned, 
proceed to train in all the proper shoots and branches to the wall, 
or espalier, at their full length as aforesaid, at the above men- 
tioned distances: and all those thus treated will, in two or three 
years time, send out many short shoots, or fruit-spurs, about half an 
inch or an inch in length; and from these spurs the fruit is always 
produced. 

These spurs generally appear first toward the upper part, or 
that which was once the superior part of the one, two and three 
years old branches; and if shortening was to be practised, those 
parts would consequently be cut away where the blossom-buds 
would have otherwise first made their appearance. Therefore, in 
the course of pruning apple, pear, plum, and cherry trees, never 
shorten or top the young shoots that are left for a supply of bear- 
ing wood, nor any of the bearing branches, if there is room to extend 
them; and they will thus all gradually form themselves into a plen- 
tiful bearing state. 

But if shortening was generally practised to these kinds of fruit 
trees, as is the case with many pruners, it would prove their mani- 
fest destruction in regard to preventing their fruitfulness: for in 
the places where fruit-buds would otherwise naturally appear, there 
would advance nothing but strong wood shoots; so that the trees 
would be continually crowded with useless and unfruitful wood. 

When, however, there is at any time a supply of wood wanted, 
then shortening particular shoots may be proper, as observed above 
for the apples and pears. 

General Observations in Pruning all the above Trees. 

I observed above, that shortening the branches of apple, pear, 
plum and cherry trees, was not proper in the general course of 
pruning; it, however, in some particular cases, is most necessary; 
for which take the following hints: 

For example, when the trees, for walls and espaliers particularly, 
are about one year old from the budding or grafting, either in the 
nursery, or newly planted against walls or espaliers, with their first 
shoot immediately from the budding or grafting, at full length, it 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 29 

is proper to shorten or head down these shoots near the insertion 
of the bud or graft, to force out lateral branches, which is called 
heading down the trees; but this should not be done till February 
or March, cutting them down to four or five eyes; which will pro- 
cure a production of lateral shoots near the head of the stock from 
these remaining lower eyes or buds, the following summer, in 
order for training in accordingly, that the wall or espalier may be 
regularly furnished with branches from the bottom. After this, the 
branches are to be trained along at their full length, except it ap- 
pears necessary to shorten some or all of these lateral shoots, in 
order that each may throw out also two or three lateral branches to 
furnish that part of the tree more effectually; training tlie said la- 
teral shoots also at ther full length; but if there appear to be still 
more branches wanting, some of the most convenient of these last 
shoots may also be shortened, to promote their producing a farther 
supply of lateral branches, sufficient to give the tree its proper 
form; for the great article in this training-pruning is to encourage 
and assist young wall and espalier fruit-trees in their first two or 
three years' growth, to produce shoots in proper places, so as to 
cover the wall or espalier regularly with branches, from the bottom 
to the top. 

But when the trees have acquired branches enough to effect the 
first proper formation of the head, they will afterwards naturally 
furnish further supplies to cover the wall or espalier regularly every 
way, to the allotted extent, without any further shortening, except 
on particular occasions, when a vacancy happens in any part, ac- 
cording to the rule mentioned, in the article of apples and pears. 

There is one thing farther to be observed in pruning apple, pear, 
plum, and cherry trees; and that is, when the trees have acquired 
branches enough to cover the wall or espalier, at the distance above 
mentioned, then all those young shoots of the last summer's growth, 
that are not wanted in vacancies to form new bearers, must be cut 
0^ quite close to the place from whence they arise, leaving no spurs 
but the fruit-spurs that are naturally produced, which every branch 
will be plentifully furnished with, if the above rules are observed. 

Peaches, Nectarines, and Apricots. 

In the training and pruning of peaches, nectarines, and apricots, 
little or no difference is to be observed; they all produce their fruit 
principally upon the young shoots of the former summer, the fruit- 
blossoms rising directly from the eyes of the shoots; a plentiful 
supply of which, must be reserved annually in every part, to train 
in for bearing; they also sometimes bear on the small natural spurs 
arising on the two or three years' wood, which generally occur 
more frequently in the apricots; and all such spurs should be care- 
fully preserved, for they generally bear good fruit; keeping in 
mind, however, that the young yearling shoots are to be considered 
as the general bearers: observing, that as the general branches and 
bearing shoots are to be trained to the wall or espalier horizontally, 
about three to four or five inches distance, we must prune out annu- 



30 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

ally all superabundant shoots, or that are more than can be trained 
in with proper regularity, likewise a considerable part of the old, 
or two last years' bearers; and, observing, that as a general supply 
of the best of the last year's shoots must annually be left in a regu- 
lar manner in every part of the tree, to bear the fruit the succeed- 
ing summer, each of the said shoots must be shortened more or less, 
according to their strength, now in the winter pruning, as directed 
below, in order to encourage them to produce a more regular suc- 
cession of bearing wood in the ensuing summer. The wood, which 
is then produced, will bear fruit in the summer after that; and the 
same shoots both bear the fruit and a supply of successional shoots 
at the same time for future bearers, &c. 

Before you begin to prune, in these trees particularly, it is pro- 
per generally to unuail and unbind all the young shoots which were 
nailed or bound, in last summer, and great part of their respective 
mother branches; by which means you will have room to examine 
the shoots, and to use your knife properly. 

In the course of pruning these trees, be careful to select the most 
promising and best situated shoots at the above distances, in a regu- 
lar manner, advancing, as it were, one after another, in every part 
of the tree, making room for them, by cutting out all the other use- 
less or unnecessary shoots, together with a proportionable share of 
the former bearers, before intimated, and old naked branches not 
furnished with bearing wood. 

For example, you are to observe, that these young shoots are, as 
above hinted, produced principally upon those shoots, which were 
laid in last winter, and which produced the fruit last summer, and 
some casually on the older wood; but shall suppose many of the said 
shoots or branches, which were laid in last winter, to have produced 
each three shoots in summer, and that they now all remain, but that 
there may not be room to lay in more than one of the said shoots on 
each of the branches, it remains to be considered which of these 
three shoots on each branch is proper to be left; whether the up- 
permost, middle, or lower of the three: there is no general rule 
for this, but we will suppose the middlemost, in which case cut off 
the lower one quite close to the branch, and then that part of the 
branch which hath the upper shoot upon it must be pruned down 
to the middle one; so that there is only the middle shoot now re- 
maining, which terminates or makes the end of the branch; but, if 
it is thought most convenient to leave the uppermost of the three, 
the middle and lower are to be cut away close to the branch; or, 
on the contrary, if the lower shoot only is to be left, cut oft' the 
branch with the middle and upper shoot thereon, close to the lower 
one; and if thought most proper to leave in any place two out of 
the three shoots on a branch, then the upper and lower are appa- 
rently most proper, provided they are the best shoots, and so cut 
out the middle one; or if two lower shoots appear best for your pur- 
pose, cut off" the upper part of the branch with the top shoot close 
to the middle one; and, if to retain the two upper shoots, prune 
out the lowermost: there may not always happen to be just three 
young shoots on every year's branches, but I choose to mention 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 31 

that number, that I may be the better able in this small compass 
to explain and convey some idea of the method practised in pruning 
these sorts of trees. 

At the same time observe, in the above general pruning, to retain 
the most promising well-placed shoots of the best middling, or 
moderately strong growth, and which appear the most fruitful, 
or likely to furnish a proper supply of blossom-buds, rejecting very 
weakly slender shoots, and such as are very long-jointed, likewise 
uncommonly thick spongy growths, as also remarkably rank luxu- 
riants, cutting them all clean out; likewise the foreright and others 
ill placed, that could not be trained with proper regularity. And, 
as you proceed, cut out some considerable part of the past bearers 
of the last, or two or three preceding years, to make room for the 
above young supply, pruning them down to some eligible lateral 
shoots, or some occasionally to their origin, as it may seem expe- 
dient: also take out casual old naked branches, advanced of some 
considerable length, without being now furnished with lateral 
young bearers, or fruitful shoots, eligibly placed for training where 
wanted 5 pruning them either entirely out to make I'oom for the 
more fruitful wood, or pruned down, more or less, to any more 
prolific well -placed young branch proceeding therefrom, and that 
is furnished with young shoots for bearing. 

Next let it be remembered, that as you proceed in pruning these 
trees, most of those young shoots that are left to bear, must be 
shortened, especially the smaller and middling, and those of mode- 
rate growth, both to strengthen them in their future production, 
and to promote their producing more certainly a supply of succes- 
sional lateral shoots next summer, properly situated, so as to con- 
tinue every part of the tree always well furnished wdth bearers; for 
without this precaution of shortening the shoots, many of them are 
apt to run up, producing laterals only, mostly towards the upper 
part, leaving the bottom naked, whereby the tree in time becomes 
devoid of bearing shoots below, so that the shortening should be 
performed, more or less, according to their strength, and that of 
the tree in general. Though with standard trees of these kinds, 
shortening the shoots is not necessary, yet when trained to walls or 
espaliers, it certainly is, for the reasons above assigned. 

For instance, if a tree is weak, or but a moderate shooter, gene- 
rally leaving the shoots about five or six inches apart, for training 
in nearly at that distance, let them be shortened according to their 
strength; some of the weaker shoots to five, six, or eight inches; 
others of stronger growth to about ten or twelve, to fifteen or 
eighteen inches long; for the shortening should always be per- 
formed, more or less, according to the ditterent shoots, and, in 
some degree, according as the blossom-buds appear situated higher 
or lower on the respective shoots; never shorten below all the said 
buds, in those shoots designed principally for bearing. 

When a tree is in a moderate good condition, neither very vigo- 
rous nor weakly, but a middling strong shooter, the shoots may be 
left nearly about three to four or five inches asunder, and should 
be shortened rather less in proportion than the foregoing, but agree- 



32 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

able to the same rules in shoots of different growths; pruning some 
to about eight, ten, or twelve inches, others to fifteen or eighteen 
inches long, or more, according to their strength and situation in 
different parts of the tree, as well as in some cases the apparent 
situation of the blossom-buds, in being placed higher or lower on 
the respective shoots selected for bearers, as before observed. 

But when anj trees are of very vigorous growth in their general 
shoots, they must be shortened but moderately; or some shoots 
very little, in which some of the less vigorous may be cut to about 
twelve or fifteen inches; but in stronger shoots prune off" only about 
one-third or fourth of their length, or some of the most luxuriant 
left mostly at their full length; for if the strong shoots of a gene- 
rally vigorous tree were to be much shortened, it would occasion 
their shooting still more luxuriantly to rampant unfruitful wood; 
therefore the vigorous shoots should be very moderately shortened; 
and where they are general in a tree, it is advisable both to leave 
them closer and of much greater length than the shoots in mode- 
rate growing trees, that the exuberance of sap may be expended in 
the larger extent and expansion of wood, and the tree thereby in 
time become a more moderate shooter and a good bearer. 

Observe, however, in shortening the shoots in general, both in 
trees of moderate, middling, and strong growth, that in those shoots 
adapted for principal bearers the ensuing season, should be careful 
not to cut away too low, or below all or most of the blossom-buds, 
or parts where they are expected to advance, being generally dis- 
tinguishable from the leaf or shoot-buds by their round, plump, 
swelling appearance, the others being oblong, narrow, and flattish; 
and therefore should give proper attention to shorten accordingly 
in the shoots were the fruit-buds are apparent. 

Likewise observe, that in shortening the bearing shoots or others 
of those trees, they should generally, where practicable, be cut to 
an eye or wood-but that is likely to produce a shoot for a leader 
the ensuing season; the shoot-bud-eyes being distinguishable from 
the fruit or blossom-buds by their longer, flattish form; the others 
being roundish, swelling, and turgid, or may also, occasionally, 
prune to an eye having one or two blossom-buds, as frequently, 
from the same eye, shoot-buds are also formed on one side of the 
single or between the two twin blossom-buds aforesaid, and from 
which a good leading shoot will be most likely produced, which is 
necessary to the welfare of the fruit; for where a leading shoot is 
produced at or near the extremity of a bearing branch, it draws 
nourishment to the fruit more ett'ectually. 

After having pruned one tree, let it be directly nailed or bound 
as you go on, observing to lay in the branches and shoots horizon- 
tally, perfectly straight, and parallel to each other at the above 
mentioned distances, nailing them all .close to the wall, or tying 
them to the trellis in a neat manner. 

Prune Gooseberry and Currant Trees. 

Gooseberries and currants bear both on the young one or two 
3'ears' wood, and upon the several years' branches, generally upon 



Jan.] the fruit GARDEN. 33 

small spurs rising naturally all along the sides; and in each winter- 
pruning it will be required to cut out any casual worn out, decayed, 
and very irregular branches, and a proportionate supply of last sum- 
mer's young shoots retained, and the rest pruned out. 

In pruning gooseberries let them be always kept thin of branches, 
and these not permitted to grow ramblingly across one another, 
but all pruned to some regular order, so as the main bearers, or ge- 
neral branches and shoots, stand six or eight inches distance at the 
extremities; and generally, either keep the middle somewhat hol- 
low, or, if permitted to run up full in the heart, keep it thin of 
branches, as above advised; so that you will now prune out any 
irregularities, &c., such as casual crowding cross-placed wood, and 
any worn out or naked old branches, retaining young shoots, where 
necessary, to supply their place: and cut out all the superabundant 
lateral shoots of last summer, close to the old wood, only retaining 
here and there a good one in vacancies, or occasionally towards the 
lower parts, to be advancing to a proper state, to supply the place 
of casual worn out bearers; and generally leave, where practicable, 
a terminating or leading shoot to each main branch, either such as 
is placed naturally at or near the end of the branch; or, occasional- 
ly, where any branch is too long or rambling, prune it down to 
some convenient lateral shoot, &c., to remain for a terminal leader; 
and, in both cases, generally leave but one terminal to each branch; 
and all those shoots now retained, both lateral and terminal, should 
either be mostly left entire, and only shorten long stragglers, and 
very bending and reclining growths, occasionally; or, at least by no 
means shorten the shoots of these trees too much; for by cutting 
them very short, they are made to produce a deal of wood and but 
small fruit; and being so full of wood as to exclude the sun and 
free air in summer, the fruit cannot ripen well; and it likewise 
renders it troublesome to get at the fruit when lit to gather. Never 
clip the trees with garden shears, as is the practice of some ignorant 
persons. 

Currant bushes should likewise be kept thin and regular, not 
suffering the branches to run promiscuously across each other; for 
when suffered to grow so irregular and crowding, they produce but 
small fruit; and the great thicket of branches excluding the essen- 
tial benefit of the sun, the berries will not ripen freely and regu- 
lar, with a good flavour; observing therefore to keep the general 
branches thin, about six or eight inches asunder, in which, if any 
are too crowded or over-abundant, prune out the most irregular; 
also any cross-placed branches, and casual worn out old bearers, to- 
gether with all the irregular-placed and superabundant young shoots 
of last summer, preserving only occasional supplies of the most 
regular ones in vacancies, and a leading one at the termination of 
each branch, agreeable to the rules exhibited above in pruning the 
gooseberry bushes; and the general upper shoots may be mostly 
shortened more or less where required to keep the head to a mo- 
derate extent, and a compact handsome growth. 

Observe in pruning young gooseberry and currant bushes, let 
those designed for standards be pruned to a clean single stem, eight, 
E 



34 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

ten, or twelves inches; and being careful to retain a requisite supply 
of the best young shoots properly situated above, to form the head 
accordingly, cut out the irregular and ill-placed; and the retained 
proper shoots may in some be moderately shortened, especially 
such as run away straggling from the rest; and any proper shoots 
advancing below may be permitted to remain entire till advanced 
equal with the others above, &c., that the whole may come on as 
equally as possible, to form a regular head. 

Currants and gooseberries trained against walls, palings, trellises, 
&c., should also have a necessary pruning and regulation in the 
general branches, or as maybe required, cutting out the superabun- 
dant and irregular-placed shoots of last summer, or any casual too 
crowding and disorderly growing older branches, or such as appear 
unfruitful, or any of a worn out or decayed state, and all dead wood; 
retaining young shoots advancing from below, and in the most 
vacant parts, shortened more or less, or left entire, according to 
room for extending them; and train the general branches, &c., 
three or four, to five or six inches distance. For more particulars — 
see October. 

Fig Trees. 

Fig-tree pruning is advised to be deferred till March or April, 
where see the method explained. 

Protecting the Roots of new-planted Trees. 

If the weather should now prove severe, it will t)e proper to pro- 
tect the roots of new-planted fruit-trees from being hurt by the 
frost, by laying mulch, or long dung litter, on the surface of the 
ground; particularly the choicest of the stone-fruit kinds; as 
peaches, nectarines, apricots, and any principal sorts of cherries 
and plums. 

Raspberries. 

If you have neglected to afford the protection directed in Novem- 
ber to your Antwerp Raspberries, you should no longer omit it; 
especially in those parts of the Union where severe winter frosts 
prevail. As to pruning and planting the various kinds, when not 
done in October or November, it will be better to defer this busi- 
ness till the latter end of February, or beginning of March; except 
in such of the states as the severity of the frost does not interrupt 
the tillage of the ground during winter; in which you can perform 
this business now with safety, agreeably to the directions given in 
October. 

Forcing early Strawberries. 

Now is a proper time, about the latter end of this month, to 
begin to make a hot-bed to raise a few early strawberries: those 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 35 

which are planted now in a hot-bed will produce fruit fit to gather 
in March or April. 

About the middle or end of this month, provide for that purpose 
as much new horse-dung as will make a hot-bed about four feet 
high, for one or more three-light frames. 

Let the dung be thrown in a heap, and let it lie about eight or 
ten days: in that time it will be in good condition to make the 
hot-bed. 

But in this business, a tan-bark hot-bed, made in a bark-pit, de- 
fended with a proper frame and glasses, would generally be more 
successful in fruiting these plants early. 

But, previous to this, there should be a proper quantity of straw- 
berry-plants potted, ready to place on the said hot-bed, as directed 
in September. 

Having, however, prepared the dung for the hot-bed, make it for 
one or more frames, about three feet high, and directly set on the 
frame and lights, to protect it from wet, and draw up tlie heat soon- 
er; and when the violent heat is over, lay therein either some dry 
light earth, or some waste tanner's bark of a decayed bark-bed, four 
or five inches thick; then bring in the plants and plunge the pots 
into the earth or tan, up to the rims, and close together as can be, 
tilling up also all the interstices between with earth, &c. 

When all the pots are plunged, put on the glasses, and keep 
them close till the steam arises in the bed, when it will be necessary 
to raise them a little behind, to let the steam pass off". 

When the plants begin to push, let them have air at all opportu- 
nities, when the weather is favourable; for if kept too close, they 
will draw up weak, and not blossom well, and the blossoms would 
drop off", without being succeeded by fruit: you should frequently 
refresh them with a little water, and cover the glasses every night 
with mats, and support the heat of the bed by linings of hot 
dung. 

N. B. In forcing strawberries, the plants may be taken up out of 
the natural ground with balls of earth, if not prevented by too hard 
a frost, and placed immediately in the earth of the hot-bed without 
potting them. However, when it is intended to force strawberries, 
either in a common hot-bed, or in a hot-house, it would be the 
best method to plant some bearing plants in pots, in September or 
October, and so place the pots close together in a garden frame, 
till the time they are to be placed in the hot-bed. 

But where there is the convenience ofa pine-apple stove, or any 
kind of fruit forcing-house or hot-wall, &c,, may raise plenty of 
early strawberries in great perfection, with but very little trouble: 
having some bearing plants ready in pots, place them in the hot- 
house, any where near the glasses, giving frequent light waterings; 
they will fruit early in great abundance. 

Forcing Frames. 

The great convenience of forcing-frames, either to force fruits 
or flowers into early perfection, or to preserve during winter. 



36 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

various kinds of exotic plants, may induce persons of taste to go to 
the expense of erecting such; to whom the following descriptions 
may not be uninteresting. 

A forcing-frame is a sort of glass case, or light building, fronted 
with glass-frames, in which to force flowers and fruits to early per- 
fection, by aid of artificial heat, either of dung, tanner's bark, or 
actual fire. 

The general acceptation or meaning of forcing-frame is, a fixed 
erection full to the south sun; the length may be from ten to fifty 
or one hundred feet; the width from five to fifteen, and from five 
to ten feet high; having an upright back wall, of wood or brick; 
and a front of glass work, made sometimes in one continual range 
of slope, from near the ground in front to the top of the back wall; 
and sometimes with upright glass work, head high, ranging imme- 
diately along the front, and from the top of which a glass roof is 
carried to the top of the back or main wall; either of which may be 
for general use, for the reception of various sorts of flower-plants, 
small flowering shrubs, esculents, and dwarf fruit-trees, &c., occa- 
sionally, to force into bloom or fruit in winter, or early in spring 
and summer; whereby many sorts of the more curious flowers and 
fruits may be obtained some months before their natural season, 
which will be a great curiosity, and which is effected as aforesaid, 
by aid of dung, bark or fire heat; the first, (dung heat) both by ap- 
plying the dung principally against the outside of the back wall, and 
by forming it into a bed internally; the second, (bark heat) by form- 
ing it into a bed, in a pit withinside: and the third, (fire heat) by 
having several returns of flues against the inside of the back wall, 
and that of the front and both ends, for the heat to pass along; each 
of which are hereafter described; for these kind of frames are of 
different construction, according to the sorts of plants chiefly in- 
tended to be forced; and the materials of heat, as dung, bark, or 
fuel, most convenient to be obtained for forcing them; so that the 
construction of each kind of frame is separately explained. 

These frames may be employed to advantage in the vicinity of 
large towns for forcing various plants early for market, by the as- 
sistance of which yoa will have for sale, in February, March ' 
and April, various sorts of flowers, fruits and esculents that 
w^ould not in their natural state of growth have appeared till May, 
June or July. 

But, for private use, where there is a roomy pine-apple stove, it 
may also be used, occasionally, for forcing many sorts of plants, 
flowers, and some sorts of fruits, with equal success, suflacient for 
the supply of a family. 

However, where a considerable supply is required, a forcing- 
frame, distinct from the pine-stove, would be more convenient. 

In either of these departments may be introduced for forcing, 
pots of strawberries, kidney-beans, roses, honeysuckles, jasmines, 
and any other flowering shrubs; likewise carnations, pinks, sweet- 
williams, wall-flowers, stock-gilliflowers, narcissuses, jonquils and 
early dwarf tulips, and any other desirable flower-plants or roots 
that maybe required early for curiosity; also several kinds of curious 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 37 

annuals, and other rare plants. You maj likewise have several sorts 
of dwarf fruit-trees, as early May and May-duke cherries, peaches, 
nectarines, apricots, figs, grapes, gooseberries, currants, raspber- 
ries, &c. 

The general construction of each sort of these frames is explained 
under separate heads, according to the materials of heat used in 
forcing them, viz: by dung-heat, bark-bed-heat, and by fire-heat. 

By Dung-heat. — This is not only the most simple and cheapest 
kind of forcing-frame in its construction, but also considerably the 
cheapest in working, with respect to the article heat, as it may be 
forced effectually by substantial linings of hot dung against the 
back and ends. 

This frame is formed with an upright back and ends of pine 
planking, and a sloping front of movable glass-lights; the length 
may be ten, twenty, or thirty feet, or more; the width from three 
to live, and five or six high: the frame work should be of two inch 
pine planking, tongued, and closely joined, that no steam from the 
dung may penetrate into the frame, raised five, six, or seven feet 
high behind, and but ten or twelve inches high in front, raising 
both ends answerable to the front and back; the glass-work to 
range from the upright in front, sloping upward towards the back 
wall to about a foot width at top, there resting the ends upon pro- 
per frame work of wood; and bars or bearers, three inches width, 
must range sloping from the back to front, for the support of the 
lights, as in common hot-bed frames, and the top of all to be 
boarded wind and water tight; within-side may be two or three 
ranges of narrow shelves along the back and ends for pots of small 
plants, and the bottom levelled, on which to place pots of larger 
kinds; or you may have shelves rising one behind another, quite 
from the front half way up the back; so may place the lowest plants 
in front, the others in order behind them, rising gradually to the 
tallest in the back row. 

From the above general sketch you will easily form an idea of 
the proper construction of a dung-heat forcing-frame, which you 
may improve as you shall see convenient. 

This kind of frame may be used with good success where dung 
is plenty, and easily obtained; particularly for forcing roses or any 
other small flowering plants, whose flowers have merit in beauty 
or fragrance: — you may also try pots of dwarf-cherries, peaches, 
&c., also pots of gooseberries, currants, and strawberries, carna- 
tions, pinks, and the like; having all the sorts in pots separately, 
and in which they are to be placed in the frame. 

The season to begin to work this frame is January and February, 
and may be continued occasionally till May; but for any kind of 
fruit-trees, the beginning of February is time enough, though those 
plants of any kind that are designed to be forced may be placed 
in the frame a month or two before forcing time, to be occasionally 
protected with the glasses in hard frosts; but at other times let 
them enjoy the full air till you begin forcing. 

The method of working this frame is thus: after having placed 
the pots of plants in regular order, the tallest behind, and the lowest 



38 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

in front, &c., then put on the lights, and having sufficient qu^intity 
of fresh stable-dung, full of heat, prepared as for common dung 
hot-beds, let it be piled up close against the outside of the back 
and ends a yard wide at bottom, drawing it gradually into a foot 
width at the top of the frame, finishing it somewhat sloping, to 
throw oiF wetj observing, that according as the dung settles or 
sinks down, a fresh supply must be added at the top to maintain 
the lining to the full height of the frame. 

The lining will eftectually throw in a fine growing heat, and 
soon set all the plants in motion; observing to give air in the 
middle of fine days by sliding one or more of the lights a little 
down, especially when the plants begin to push; give also moderate 
watering occasionally in mild sunny weather, and cover the glasses 
in cold nights with mats. 

In three or four weeks, when the heat begins to decrease consi- 
derably, it must be renewed, either by entire fresh dung, or if new 
dung is scarce, by shaking up the old, taking the worst away, and 
mix the remainder with a due quantity of new, working the whole 
again in a pile close against the back and ends as before, which 
work must be repeated every three weeks or month, or as often as 
you shall see occasion, for the heat must be constantly preserved 
to a regular brisk temperature. 

A frame of the above construction may be appropriated entirely 
for fruit trees, planting them in a border prepared within the frame 
against the back part, and trained in tiie manner of wall-trees to a 
trellis, ranged five or six inches from the back erection, in which 
may be planted early dwarf-cherries, peaches, nectarines, apricots, 
grapes, figs, currants, &c., so maybe worked by dung-heat against 
the back of the frame as above directed; beginning in February, 
and continuing the glasses on, as well as support the dung-heat 
until May, and there is no doubt, with good management, but that 
the different sorts of fruit may be brought to perfection early. 

But a dung-heat forcing-frame may be constructed of more 
capacious dimensions, to admit of making a substantial hot-bed of 
dung internally, both to produce an increased degree of heat, and 
wherein to plunge pots of several sorts of flowering and esculent 
plants to bring them forward in growth, being assisted also with a 
lining of hot dung applied to the exterior of the back part of the 
frame, as explained in the foregoing; and for the internal hot-bed 
should form a bottom pit of proper width, length, and depth, making 
the bed therein a yard depth of good hot dung, covering the top 
with light dry earth, or old or new tan-bark, six or eight inches 
thick, in which to plunge the pots of flowers, or those of early 
esculents, such as kidney-beans, peas, strawberries, salading, &c. 

By Bark-bed -heat. — This kind of forcing-frame, or rather forcing- 
house, is worked by aid of a tanner's bark hot-bed, formed in a pit 
within-side the whole length. 

This frame may be formed either of wood or brick-work, and 
fronted, &c. with sashes of glass like the former; the length may 
be ten, twenty, or thirty feet, or more, eight or ten wide, and six 
or eight high; and maybe constructed either nearly like the dung- 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 39 

heat frame, six or eight feet high behind, and one in front, the ends 
conformable, and sloping frames of glass-work raised from the 
front, sloping either quite to the top of the back wall, or to incline 
only about one half towards that part, meeting a covered roof at 
top, half waj, which should be raised high enough in front to throw 
the water off behind, as well as to admit as much sun as possible 
to every part of the frame, or it may be constructed with an up- 
right front of glass, head high, and a sloping roof of glass-work, 
ranging from the upright front to the top of the back wall, which 
is rather the most eligible form, both for convenience and benefit 
of the plants^ either of which constructions may be erected de- 
tached, or against a south wall already built, which will serve for 
the back and save some expense; the ends may either be of wood 
or brick, and the glass-work in every part should be made to move 
on and off, as well as to slide backward and forward to give air, 
and to do other necessary work; and at one end, near the back 
wall, may be a door to enter occasionally, and within-side must be 
a pit for the bark-bed three feet deep, part sunk, and the greater 
part raised, continued the whole length and width, except about a 
foot and a half alley to go in to perform the necessary culture, as 
well as to view and gather the produce of the different plants. 

The pit within is to be filled with new tan any time in winter or 
spring you intend to begin forcing, though January is soon enough, 
and the beginning of February is not too late; the bark will support 
a growing heat three months, and if then stirred up to the bottom, 
will renew its heat, and continue it two months longer. 

In this frame may plunge in the bark-bed pots of roses, or any 
other choice flowering shrubs you would force into an early bloom; 
likewise may place pots of strawberries towards the front and top 
glasses; and pots of kidney-beans and early dwarf peas may be 
placed in any part of the frame; also pots of dwarf fruit-trees, 
before mentioned, pots of double pinks, carnations, and any other 
moderate-growing fibrous-rooted perennials, as well as any sorts of 
bulbous or tuberous-rooted flowers, as narcissuses, jonquils, tulips, 
anemones, ranunculuses, hyacinths, and various other sorts. 

The heat of the bark-bed will effectually warm the earth and 
internal air sufficiently to forward any sorts of hardy flowers and 
fruits to perfection at an early season; observing, that, although 
they do not always flower and fruit so abundantly as in the full 
ground, yet, if there are but a few of any sort, a month or two be- 
fore their natural season, they, if for sale, will sufficiently pay; and 
if for private use, they will always be acceptable as a rarity and 
curiosity in the family. 

Fresh air must be admitted in fine sunny days at all opportuni- 
ties, by sliding some of the glasses more or less open, keeping 
them close at night; and in very severe weather, the glasses must 
be covered with mats, or closed with sliding shutters made for that 
purpose, particularly at night, which trouble might be avoided if 
there was a fire-flue, by which heat could be introduced to counter- 
act the extreme rigour of the frost, when necessity required. 

When the heat of the bark declines considerably, do not omit 



40 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

forking it over to the bottom, which will revive the decaying heat 
six or eight weeks longer. 

A bark-heat forcing-frame, nearly of the above dimensions, might 
be contrived entirely for forcing fruit-trees, having a border within- 
side along the back wall three or four feet wide; there plant young 
bearing dwarf fruit-trees, of any sorts before mentioned, at six or 
eight feet distance, in the manner of wall or espalier trees, training 
them also in the same manner as directed for the respective sorts 
in their natural state of growth. The bark-pit should here be 
almost half sunk; and in the beginning of February fill the pit 
with new tan-bark, which will soon set the trees into bloom, and 
will ripen their fruit early. 

But the most eligible general forcing-frame for various sorts of 
plants, is one of the above mentioned construction, having also flues 
for fire-heat; the walls must be of brick-work, having two or three 
returns of flues formed of the same materials, running the whole 
length of the back w^all within, and one or two along the front and 
ends, by which to convey tire-heat occasionally in severe frosts, cold 
nights, and in all very cold and intemperate weather, which will 
be a great improvement in very early forcing, so that this kind of 
frame Avill be nearly of the plan of a stove or hot-house. 

In default, however, of any of the above kinds of bark -heat 
forcing-frames, one might be effected by a common bark-pit, made 
in any dry sheltered situation, with a brick wall, to any convenient 
size, and covered with glass-lights. This pit is to be principally 
above ground and filled with good fresh tan to the depth of four 
feet, in which you may plunge pots of roses, or any other shrubs, 
any sort of low herbaceous flowering plants, fibrous, or bulbous 
rooted; kidney-beans, strawberries, &c.; observing, however, that 
in severe frost, the wall of this pit must be protected by hot-dung, 
leaves, or straw, in order to prevent the frost penetrating into the 
bed, and it must be carefully covered with mats at night, and even 
in the day time in very severe weather. 

By Fire-heat. — This kind of forcing-frame is worked by actual 
fire, burned in a furnace behind, at one end or middle, from thence 
communicating the heat by internal flues or funnels, running the 
whole length of the back wall in three returns, one above another, 
and continued in a flue round the front, and the frame thus con- 
structed is often employed for ripening several of the more valu- 
able fruit-trees at an early season, or for forwarding such to 
perfection which do not ripen freely without artificial aid. 

This frame, or forcing-house, must be formed of brick-work, at 
least the back or main wall, for the convenience of having fire and 
flues, and the whole front, &c. must be glass, like the other sorts; 
the length may be from twenty to forty feet or more, though one 
fire will not warm more than that length; the width may be from 
five or six to twelve or fifteen feet, and height eight or ten. It may 
be contrived either of moderate width for one row of trees only, to 
range against the back wall, or may be capacious enough to have 
a range of trained wall-trees behind, as just mentioned, and some 
small half standards, ranging also from the back to the front. 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 4X 

If it is therefore intended to have a narrow frame for only a row 
of trained trees behind, the width from four to five or six feet is 
sufficient, having the back or main wall formed of brick or stone, 
as aforesaid, eight or ten feet high, with several flues withinside, 
returned over each other, running the whole length of the wallj 
in the front must be a low wall a foot high, on which to lay a plate 
of timber, and from which are ranged glass frames or lights in one 
continued slope to the top of the back wall, there received into pro- 
per frame workj but for the greater convenience, the lights may 
be in two tiers or ranges, an under and upper tier, the upper range 
made to slide up and down over the others, but so as all the glass- 
work can be moved away occasionally, to admit the full air to the 
trees after the work of forcing; the whole bottom -space within 
this frame must be of good loamy earth, or any good garden 
mould, two spades deep, which must be dug or trenched in the com- 
mon wayj then plant a range of trees behind, towards the wall, 
and two or three yards asunder, erecting a trellis behind them, 
upon which to train the branches as against a wall or espalier; be- 
sides these trees, there may be other inferior plants set in the bor- 
der or in pots, in front of the trees, as strawberries, dwarf kidney- 
beans, dwarf peas, &c., dwarf roses or the like, that will not rise 
high enough to shade the fruit trees in the back range. 

A frame of this construction, forty feet long, may be worked by 
one fire; but if longer, two furnaces for fires will be requisite. 

But to have a more capacious frame both for trained trees and 
low standards, it may be of any length from twenty to fifty feet or 
more, but must be ten or fifteen feet wide, having an upright back 
wall of brick ten feet high, with flues as above directed, and a low 
wall in front one or two feet high, on which is erected upright glass- 
work, four or five feet perpendicular; and from the top of these, a 
sloping roof of glass frame, continued to the top of the back wall, 
supported upon proper bearers three feet, or three feet six inches 
distance, having the top glasses in two ranges, an under and upper 
range, as before advised, both of which, and those of the upright in 
front, made to slide, and move away occasionally: in this frame 
there will be room to walk under the glass-work in any part, and 
there will be also due room for the trees, both dwarfs and low 
standards; and then having the whole ground space withinside of 
loamy, or other good earth, as in the other frame, you may plant 
your trees, some in one range against the back wall, as peaches, 
nectarines, apricots, grapes, figs, &c., six or eight feet asunder, 
erecting a trellis for training them upon; and in front of these may 
be planted rows of young cherries, both in small standards, half 
standards, and dwarfs; the full standards to have about five feet 
stems, the half standards three or four, and the dwarfs one or two 
feet stems; each sort, both trained trees and standards, to be planted 
when about from three to four or five years old, as soon as they 
acquire a bearing state, with regular heads of two or three feet 
extent at first planting. Having procured the trees and the ground 
ready for their reception, may then plant one range of the choicest 
F 



42 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jaw. 

sorts as before noticed, next the back wall, two or three yards asun- 
der, the others in rows from back to front, at six or eight feet dis- 
tance, the tallest behind and the lowest in front, at three or four feet 
distance in each row, making each row range against the intervals 
of the trained trees behind; or if they are all standards, and half 
standards, there will be more room for several sorts of smaller 
plants under them; and as their branches will be nearer the top 
glasses, it may be of particular advantage; and in the intervals may 
be planted some low currants, gooseberries, raspberries, straw- 
berries, dwarf-beans, kidney-beans, &c. But a frame of these 
dimensions is sometimes planted entirely with standards, more 
particularly cherries, as being more moderate shooters and soonest 
arrive to a bearing state, so as to bear any tolerable quantity of 
fruit; planting them five or six feet distance: sometimes standard 
pMms, apricots, peaches, and nectarines are also planted, and vines 
to train up under the glasses. 

A frame of these dimensions, twenty-five feet long, may be 
worked by one fire; but if more than thirty feet in length, two 
furnaces for fires, with each its set of flues, will be necessary. 

With respect to the age of trees for both the above kinds of 
fire-heat forcing-frames, they should be from three to four or five 
years old, with regular heads of branches, two or three feet extent, 
and just arrived at a tolerable bearing state; no very vigorous shoot- 
ers must be admitted, but such only as assume a moderate, regular 
growth, and are trained in the nursery until they have acquired a 
proper size, each as directed under its respective head, whether as 
wall trees or standards; they are to be transplanted into the frame 
in October or November to remain for forcing; but should be per- 
mitted to have a year or two's growth here before you begin forcing 
them, that they may be firmly rooted; during which time all the 
glasses should be entirely away, that the trees may have the full air 
till forcing time is nearly arrived; or may occasionally have trained 
bearing trees of small sizes in pots, if they have been in good 
growth for one season at least, and so removed in their said pots 
into the frame at the proper season as above. 

In both the above kinds of forcing-frames, you may also plant 
some grape-vines on the outside of the front glasses in the full 
ground, and their stems trained through holes, and conduct the 
shoots along up the inside towards the glass-work to a sort of slight 
trellis, keeping the branches quite thin; and they will ripen early 
fruit, in great perfection. 

The season for beginning to make the fires for forcing the trees 
in either of the above described fire-heat frames, is any time in 
January, though about the middle, or towards the latter end of that 
month, or beginning of February, is, for the general part, rather the 
most successful time to begin the general forcing to have a good 
crop; for if the trees are forced very early, there will be some 
danger of their miscarrying; as, if they should come into blossom 
when severe weather prevails, that air cannot be freely admitted 
at intervals, they seldom set any tolerable crop of fruit; therefore, 



Jan.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 43 

bj beginning to make the fires about the time above directed, the 
trees will be in blossom about the middle of February, when we 
may expect some fine sunny days for the admission of a moderate 
portion of fresh air, which is essentially necessary to promote the 
natural impregnation of the fruit, and improve its free growth; for 
if kept too close they are apt to drop oft* in their infant state. 

The fires are to be lighted in the furnace every afternoon about 
four or five o'clock, and if kept burning till ten or twelve it will 
sufficiently heat the flues to warm the internal air of the house till 
next morning, when, if very cold, frosty or cloudy damp weather, 
a moderate fire may also be made occasionally; and by no means 
force the trees too much, for a moderate warmth will prove the 
most successful ; and tlius continue the fires occasionally till towards 
the latter end of April, but less in proportion as the weather grows 
warmer. 

Fresh air must be occasionally admitted in fine days, by sliding 
some of the glasses a little open, and, as the trees advance to blos- 
som and fruit, the days grow longer, and the power of the sun 
greater, allow a greater proportion of air accordingly. Likewise 
give frequent waterings to the borders. 

Thus your trees will be in full blossom in February, and some 
will ripen fruit in April, particularly cherries and strawberries; 
you may also expect early apricots, peaches and nectarines in May, 
and plums and early grapes in June. 

After the fruit of the ditterent sorts are all gathered, the glasses 
should be taken entirely away, that the trees may have the full air 
during summer; and in December they should be placed upon the 
frame again ready for forcing in January. 

With respect to pruning the trained trees, that is those that are 
trained as wall trees against the trellis, &c., they are to be pruned 
and trained every summer and autumn, each sort according to its 
kind, as other wall trees, and as directed under all their respective 
articles; and as to the standards, their requisite pruning is prin- 
cipally in autumn, to cut out any irregular growth, and thinning 
out any crowding shoots, for the branches must be kept thin and 
regular, clear of each other, six or eight inches distance; and any 
stragglers which extend in length considerably, should be reduced 
to order; and as the branches in general become so long as to press 
against the glasses, or spread too much, they should also be reduced 
a little, to preserve them within due compass, observing always, 
when shortening the standards it is necessary to cut to a bud situ- 
ated on the outside of the shoot or branch, making the cut on the 
inside. 

Every autumn, after pruning the trees, the borders must be 
digged carefully one spade deep. 

It must be remarked that the trees in these frames or houses, 
if annually forced, are not so durable nor plentiful bearers as those 
in the full air; therefore, when you shall see any become weak, 
sickly or bad bearers, others should be ready in training, or pro- 
cured from the nurseries to plant in their stead; and in this no 
time should be lost. 



44 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Jan. 

But to continue the same trees more eflfectually in health, and in 
a bearing state, some have a double portion of v/alling and framing 
planted, but more particularly that of the first described fire-heat 
frame, which is sometimes contrived to move or slide along from 
one place to another, for one frame-work and glasses to serve two 
portions of walling, so that being alternately worked, one part one 
year, the other the year after, each portion of trees will have a 
year of rest in their natural growth, and will succeed each other 
in due order for forcing, whereby the health and vigour of the trees 
will be better supported, and each year a greater crop of fruit may 
be expected than if the same trees were successively forced every 
year. 

Hot Walls. 

Hot walls are ranges of brick or stone walling faced with glass, 
generally running due east and west, fronting the south and en- 
closing a space of several feet width, furnished with internal fire- 
flues, &c., wholly for forcing fruit trees to early production. But 
as hot walls and forcing-houses are nearly similar in their construc- 
tion, use, and general management, to forcing- frames, reference 
should be had to that article for their general explanation. 

Vineries. 

Various buildings have been contrived to effect the ripening of 
the more choice kinds of late grapes, which cannot be eft'ected in 
the open ground, as likewise to force the earlier sorts, so as to have 
them fit for the table in May, June and July. The constructions 
of these kinds of buildings are different, though all answering the 
same purpose: some are constructed with llues ranging within 
the wall where the vines are trained up; but as the vines would 
receive more heat at times by being closer to the wall than is pro- 
per, a lattice work is generally detached therefrom, to which the 
branches are trained, and the whole is covered with a range of 
sloping glass; but the more common method is to train them 
under the sloping glasses of the hot-house, or other similarly con- 
structed stoves or forcing-frames; in such places the vines are 
generally planted close to the outside, and introduced through 
holes contrived for the purpose in the upright timbers of the front- 
lights, as low down as can conveniently be done. 

In some vineries the vines are planted near the front, in the 
inside, and trained up to neat trellises made for that purpose close 
under the roof or sloping glasses. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

In the southern states, especially such of them as have not severe 
winter frosts, you may plant apple, pear, peach, nectarine, apricot, 
cherry and plum trees, both for espaliers and standards: plant 



jan^.] the orchard. 45 

also almonds, quinces, gooseberries, currants, raspberries, and 
every other kind of hardy fruit bearing trees and shrubs, which 
are usually planted either' in the fruit-garden or orchard. 

You may also prune each and every of the above kinds, according 
to the directions given in this month, March and October; and in 
the tvi'o last months you will find ample instructions, both for pre- 
paring the ground and planting the various kinds of fruit trees 
above mentioned. 



THE ORCHARD. 

The Orchard is a department consigned entirely to the growth of 
standard fruit trees for furnishing a large supply of the most useful 
kinds of fruity in which you may have as standards, apple, pear, 
plum, cherry, peach, apricot; quince, almond, and nectarine trees; 
also mulberries, filberts, medlars, and berberries; Spanish chestnuts 
and English walnuts; which two latter are more particularly appli- 
cable for the boundaries of large orchards, in which they will screen 
the other trees from impetuous winds and cold blasts, all of which 
are to be arranged in rows at the distances directed in March and 
October; in which months you will find ample directions for raising, 
propagating, and planting the various kinds of fruit trees necessary 
for all the departments. 

But sometimes orchards consist entirely of apple trees, particu- 
larly when apples are wanted in large quantities for cider or whis- 
key-making; and sometimes whole orchards of very considerable 
extent of peach trees, when the fruit is designed for distillation; 
likewise entire orchards of cherry trees, but particularly within a 
moderate distance of large cities and towns where sale can be 
obtained for the fruit; pear orchards are also extensive where 
people are in the habit of making perry. 

A general orchard, however, composed of all the before men- 
tioned fruit trees, should consist of a treble or more proportion of 
apple and peach trees, because they are considerably the most use- 
ful fruits, particularly the former, as they, exclusive of their use in 
distilling and cider-making, may be continued for table use, in the 
different sorts, the whole year round. 

The utility of a general orchard, or orchards, both for private 
use and profit, stored with the various sorts of fruit trees, must be 
very great, as well as aftbrd infinite pleasure from the delightful 
appearance it makes from early spring till late in autumn; in 
spring the various trees in blossom are highly ornamental; in 
summer the pleasure is heightened by observing the various fruits 
advancing to perfection; and as the season advances, the mature 
growth of the different sorts arriving to perfection in regular suc- 
cession, from May until the end of October, must aftbrd great de- 
light as well as profit. 



46 THE ORCHARD. [Jan. 

But the misfortune is, that too frequently after orchards are 
planted and fenced, they have seldom any more care bestowed 
upon them. Boughs are suffered to hang dangling to the ground, 
their heads are so loaded with wood as to be almost impervious to 
sun and air, and they are left to be exhausted by moss and injured 
by cattle, &c. 

By a redundancy of wood the roots are exhausted unprofitably, 
the bearing wood is robbed of part of its sustenance, and the natural 
life of the tree unnecessarily shortened, whilst the superfluous wood 
endangers the tree by giving the winds an additional power over it, 
and is injurious to the bearing wood by retaining the damps and 
preventing a due circulation of air. 

The outer branches only are able to produce fruit properlyj every 
inner and underling branch ought therefore to be removed. It is 
common to see fruit trees with two or three tiers of boughs pressing 
so hard upon one another, with their twigs so intimately interwoven, 
that a small bird can scarcely creep in among them. Trees thus 
neglected acquire, from want of due ventillation, a stinted habit, 
and the fruit becomes of a crude inferior quality. 

The trees are very often almost entirely subdued by moss, which 
kills many, and injures others so much that they are only an incum- 
brance to the ground and a disgrace to the country. This evil 
may easily be checked by scraping and rubbing oft' the moss at 
this season of the year, with a rounded iron scraper, &c., when 
men have little else to employ them, and only seek work in 
idle, expensive, and unprofitable amusements. Draining the land, 
if too retentive of moisture, will sometimes prevent or cure moss, 
or digging round the trees on the appi'oach of winter, or in spring, 
and bringing fresh mould, or the scouring of ponds and roads, or 
the rubbish of old walls, well prepared and pulverized, and laid 
round them. Whatever contributes to the health of the tree, will 
cure, or in some degree mitigate, this and other diseases. 

The above considerations ought to induce to an examination of 
your standard apple, pear, plum and cherry trees, &c., and where 
found necessary, to thin their branches, scrape and rub oft' moss, 
cut oft" all dead or irregularly placed limbs and branches, and also 
any luxuriant unfruitful shoots, and such branches as appear to be 
in a decaying or cankery state, all of which must be cut oft' close 
to where they were produced, or to some healthy leading branch 
or shoot;/or the bark cannot grow over a stump, because there is no 
power to draw the sap that way, for which reason always cut rather 
a little within the wood. 

Smooth the cut parts, and if the amputations are large, apply 
thereto a light covering of the medicated tar below mentioned, 
which is to be laid on with a painting brush; if under an inch in 
diameter, it is scarcely worth while to go to that trouble, for such, 
when well pruned, will heal and cover freely. 

Be particular to use a saw in taking offall tlielimbs and branches 
that are too large for the knife, and smooth the cut parts with either 
your pruning knife or a neat draw-knife, which answers better for 
large amputations. 



Jan.] the ORCHARD. 47 

The medicated tar is composed of half an ounce of corrosive 
sublimate, reduced to a fine powder, and then put into a three pint 
earthen pipkin, with about half a gill of gin, or other spirit, stirred 
well together, and the sublimate thus dissolved. The pipkin must 
then be filled by degrees with common tar, and constantly stirred 
till the mixture is intimately blended. This quantity will be suflB.- 
cient for two hundred trees. Being of a very poisonous nature, it 
should not be suffered to lie carelessly about the house. The sub- 
limate dissolves better when united with the same quantity of the 
spirit of hartshorn or of sal ammoniac. This mixture being apt to 
run, consistency may be given it by mixing it with either pounded 
chalk or whiting. 

The above composition will be found eminently useful, as no 
worm of any kind can live near its influence, and no evil whatever 
will arise to the trees from its poisonous quality^ it yields to the 
growth of the bark, and affords a complete protection to the parts 
against the influence of the weather. 

A solution of corrosive sublimate, made as directed under the 
head Orchard next month, will be found the most effectual wash 
that can be applied to peach and other trees for the destruction of 
the worm which so generally annoys them. 

Those who wish to apply Forsythe's or Barnes's compositions, 
will find instructions, both for making and applying them, under 
the head Orchard in March. 

When pruning is judiciously done, fruit-trees will come into 
bearing sooner, produce more abundantly, and continue in vigour 
for nearly double their common age. No branch of your orchard 
trees should ever be shortened unless for the figure of the tree or 
the reasons before mentioned, and then it should be taken off close, 
as before observed, to where it was produced, or to a leading shoot. 
The more the range of branches shoot circularly, a little inclining 
upwards, the more equally will the sap be distributed, and the 
better will the tree bear. The ranges of branches should not be too 
near each other, that the fruit and leaves should all have their full 
share of sun, and where it suits, the middle of the tree should be 
so free from wood that no branch crosses another, but all the 
extremities point upwards. 

If any of your particularly valuable fruit trees are partly decayed, 
or in a bad state of health, and you wish to attempt their re- 
storation by judicious pruning and the application of good com- 
position, you must defer it till March, or when the sap begins to 
ascend in spring, which will be manifest by the swelling of their 
budsj then prune them and apply the composition as directed in 
March. 

I am not an advocate for much doctoring with old decayed or 
sickly trees, but the reverse^ therefore recommend as the most 
preferable way to replace such with young healthy trees, so soon 
as they show strong symptoms of decay. Whenever you meet 
with a tree, the fruit of which you esteem, propagate it immediately 
whilst in health, by budding or grafting, &c.; and if it should after- 
wards get into a declined state, replace it with one of the same, or 



48 THE VINEYARD. [Jan. 

some other good kind. Never propagate from a sickly tree if you 
can well avoid it, for its disorder will be carried with the buds or 
grafts, and in all probability will ultimately work their destruction. 
For the method of propagating fruit trees, &c,, by budding or 
inoculation, see the Nursery in July. 



THE VINEYARD. 

An infant institution of such important national utility as the 
cultivation of the vine, merits the attention and support of every 
lover of his country. The practicability of producing Wine in the 
United States, cannot be doubted; the experiment has been made 
successfully in Pennsylvania, Kentucky, and South Carolina. 
Nothing is now wanting but the liberal and spirited exertions of 
the citizens to carry it to such perfection, especially in the middle 
and southern states, as in the course of a few years to produce a 
sufficient supply for home consumption, and, in time, a large 
quantity for exportation. 

fVork to he done in the Vineyard. 

In severe weather, when other work cannot be performed, pre- 
pare poles for the support of the vines; these, for sake of durability, 
ought to be made of red cedar, white oak, or chestnut, split and 
seasoned, and to be made one inch and a half or two inches square, 
and six and a half or seven feet long, pointed at the lower end; and 
if that part which is to be inserted in the ground, and about three 
inches above it, say fifteen inches, be dipped in boiling pitch, it 
will be of considerable advantage; if this is not convenient, let that 
part be slightly scorched in the fire, which will prevent their rot- 
ting so soon as they otherwise would. Round poles, such as are 
used for hoops, of about two inches diameter will do, but these soon 
rot, and will require to be replaced every two or three years, when 
the former would last, if made of the heart of well grown timber, ' 
fifteen or twenty years. Sticks of four or five feet long may also 
be made for the purpose of supporting young vines during the first 
and second years of their growth, after which they are to be taken 
away to answer a similar purpose, and replaced with the tall poles; 
those may be made once inch and a quarter square, pointed, and 
dipped in pitch as above. 

You may also at this season cart manure into the vineyard, and 
spread it as directed in February, repair old fences, and prepare 
posts and rails, or boards for new one^; examine your ploughs, 
harrows, spades, shovels, hoes, mattocks, and all your other tools, 
and have such as need it repaired; purchase any new tools that 
may be wanted, and have all your necessaries in readiness for the 
opening of the spring. 



Jan.] the NURSERY. 49 

In such of the southern states as have mild winters and early 
vegetation, vines may now be pruned, as directed under the head 
Viyieyard in February, but with them, November would be a much 
more eligible time for this work. In the middle states you must 
defer the pruning of vines to the last week or ten days in February, 
not later, except in extremely severe weather, but on no account 
later than the first week of March, for soon after that period the 
sap begins to ascend, after which, were you to prune them, they 
would bleed so copiously from where the wounds were inflicted, as 
to greatly exhaust and injure them, and even totally to destroy some. 
In the eastern states this work may be done between the first and 
tenth of March, according as the spring may be early or late, ob- 
serving that it is safer to prune too early than too late. 

Under the head Vineyardin March, you will find general instruc- 
tions for the different methods of propagating and cultivating the 
vi7%e, both as espaliers, and in the field way; likewise concise de- 
scriptions of the various kinds which have been generally cultivated, 
either for table use or making wine; and also, observations on the 
kinds most likely to succeed in the various parts of the Union. 



THE NURSERY. 

Though this is not a period in which much business can be 
done in the Nursery, especially in the middle and eastern states, 
it may be well to call attention to that eminently useful depart- 
ment; in order that those who have not yet attempted it, may have 
time to consider of its utility, and be determined, when the season 
arrives in which it can be commenced. 

The many advantages which every lover of improvement and 
planting may derive from having a nursery of his own, especially 
in such a country as this, where public nurseries are so scarce 
and frequently so remote, as to render it extremely inconvenient 
to procure such trees as may be wanted; the expenses of transporta- 
tion to a considerable distance: the length of time the trees have 
to be out of ground, and the consequent uncertainty of their growth; 
the hazard of procuring the intended or even good kinds — ex- 
cept the proprietors are men of experience, knowledge, and inte- 
grity — are strong inducements to the establishing small and con- 
venient nurseries, in which the owners may raise such kinds of 
fruit and forest trees, ornamental shrubs and other plants, as may 
be pleasing and profitable to themselves, useful to posterity, and or- 
namental to the country. 

The raising of thorn-quicks and other plants, suitable for making 
live hedges, ought also to command attention; especially in such 
parts of the Union as timber is getting scarce and dear in. The 
planting and establishing of such hedges must ultimately be resort- 
ed to, and the sooner it is commenced the better. 

G 



50 THE NURSERY. [Jan. 

Conscious of the great utility of such establishments, I shall in 
the course of this work give such ample and minute instructions, 
for the raising and propagation of fruit and forest trees, ornamental 
trees and shrubs, thorn-quicks, &c. &c. , as may lead the most in- 
experienced persons to a complete knowledge of the businessj 
which may be pursued upon a small or a more extensive scale, as 
it suits. 

In the Nursery may also be raised all sorts of hardy harbaceous 
plants, both fibrous, bulbous, and tuberous-rooted, for adorning the 
flower garden, pleasure-ground, and to plant for medical use, &c. 

Extent, Soil, Situation, ^c. 

With respect to the proper extent or dimensions of a Nursery, 
whether for private use or public supply, it must be according to 
the quantity of plants required, or the demand for sale: if for pri- 
vate use, from a quarter to half an acre or more may be sufficient, 
which must be regulated according to the extent of garden ground 
and plantations it is required to supplyj and if for a public nursery, 
for any general cultivation, not less than three or four acres of land 
will be worth occupying as such, and from that to fifteen or twenty 
acres or more may be requisite, according to the demand. 

With respect to soil for a nursery, the nature and quality of this 
requires particular attention. It ought to be naturally good for at 
least one full spade deep, or if more, the better; always prefer a 
loamy soil of a moderately light temperament, which cannot na- 
turally be too good, notwithstanding what some advance to the con- 
trary, even though the trees should afterwards be removed into a 
poorer soil. Reason teaches, that young trees growing vigorously 
and freely in a good soil, will form numerous and healthy roots, and 
when they come to be afterwards planted in worse land, they will be 
able, from the strength of their constitution and multiplicity of 
roots, to feed themselves freely with coarser food. On the con- 
trary, young trees raised upon poor land, by having their vessels 
contracted and their outward bark mossy and diseased, will be a long 
time, even after being removed into a rich soil, before they attain to 
a vigorous state. If the roots of the young plants have not a good 
soil, or sufficient room to strike in, there will be little hope of their 
furnishing themselves with that ample stock of roots and fibres 
which is necessary to a good plant, and with which every young 
tree ought to be well furnished, when removed for final transplanta- 
tion. 

Most of the authors who have written on the kind of soil most 
suitable for a nursery have differed in their opinions, even so far as 
to be almost quite contradictory to one another; and the common 
opinion is in favour of the soil being the same, nearly similar, or 
rather worse, than that into which the trees are to be inally plant- 
ed. But this is setting out upon a very wrong principle; for, were 
a nursery to be established on a poor gravel or stiff" clay, the plants 
raised on such would be poor, small, hide-bound, starved things, very 
unfit for planting in any land. 



Jan.] the nursery. 5^ 

If an animal was to be only half fed, from its first having life, for 
one year, I believe that such would never grow to be of a large size 
of its kind, if afterwards it was put into better keeping; but suppose 
it was put to harder fare, it would certainly make a poor figure. 
If this same animal had been moderately fed for one year, and then 
put into worse feeding, it would have made a better beast. 

Some will say that these observations are unnecessary, as the 
ground in which fruit trees are generally planted is for the most 
part good, being particularly selected for that purpose, and that a 
soil similar thereto will do very well j granted, provided the ground 
be naturally good; but if these people had a large extent of poor 
gravelly soil, or stiff clay, to plant with forest or ornamental trees, 
live hedges, &c., would they seek out a similar spot for a nursery, 
to raise plants for planting the same.'' If so, they would discover 
their mistake when too late. This is the error I wish to correct, 
being very desirous that every attempt towards this kind of im- 
provement should prove successful; and in order to effect this, it 
is necessary to set out on right principles. 

It is very wrong to enrich nurseries with dung, particularly 
until it is very old, and almost turned into earth; although many 
eminent nurserymen dung their ground very plentifully, yet they 
do it with great judgment, and never plant trees until it is well 
rooted and mixed with the mould, so as to be quite incorporated, 
and generally take a crop or two of vegetables before they plant 
trees therein. 

It is not absolutely necessary that the soil should be exceedingly 
rich, nor over carefully manured; a medium between the two 
extremes is best; such as any good substantial garden ground; or 
good mellow pasture land, having the sward trenched to the bot- 
tom, will do very well for the growth of trees. 

As to situation it ought to be somewhat low, but dry, fully 
exposed to the sun and free air, and, if possible, where there is 
the convenience of water for the occasional watering of young 
seedlings and newly planted trees, &c. 

As to a small nursery for private use, it may be formed out of 
part of the kitchen garden, if large enough, or some other conve- 
nient place; or it may be made somewhere convenient to the 
pleasure-ground, if any, and so contrived as to lead insensibly 
into it by winding walks, so as to appear to be part of the same. 

Fences, Preparing and Laying out the Ground. 

A fence round the whole ground is necessary: this may either 
be a hedge and ditch, or a paling; the former is the cheapest, and 
in the end most durable; though in some places where rabbits 
abound, paling fences- at first are eligible for preserving the nur- 
sery from the depredations of those animals which often do great 
mischief to the young plants by barking and cropping them: a 
good hedge and ditch fence, however, may be made very effectual 
against the inroads of both men and brutes; and the most eligible 



52 THE NURSERY. [Jan 

plant for this purpose is the hawthorn; but a paling, or other similar 
close fence, either in general or part, would be extremely useful, 
against which to train young wall-trees to a proper growth for 
garden or espalier plantations. 

The ground must then be all regularly trenched one or two 
spades deep, according as the natural depth of the soil will admit, 
for by no means dig deeper than the natural good soil, being either 
one spade, one and a half, or two spades deep. 

Then, having trenched the ground, proceed to divide it by walks 
into quarters and other compartments; a principal walk should 
lead directly through the middle or some principal part of the 
ground, which may be from five to eight or ten feet wide, according 
as it shall seem proper for use or ornament, having a broad border 
on each side: another walk should be carried all round next the 
outward boundary, four or five feet wide, leaving an eight or ten 
feet border next the fence all the way; then may divide the inter- 
nal part by smaller cross walks, so as to form the whole into 
four, six or eight principal divisions, which are commonly called 
quarters. 

One or more of the divisions must be allotted for a seminary, 
i. e., for the reception of all sorts of seeds for raising seedling plants 
to furnish the other parts; therefore divide this seminary-ground 
into four feet wide beds, with foot-wide alleys at least between bed 
and bed: in these beds should be sown seeds, &c. of all such trees, 
shrubs and herbaceous plants as are raised from seed; and which 
seeds consist both of the various sorts of kernels and stones of fruit, 
to raise stocks for grafting and budding; seeds of forest and 
ornamental trees, shrubs, &c., and seeds of numerous herbaceous 
perennials, both of the fibrous-rooted and bulbous-rooted tribes: the 
sowing season is both spring and autumn, according to the nature of 
the difierent sorts, which is fully illustrated in their proper places; 
and when the young tree and shrub seedling-plants so raised are 
one or two years old, they are to be planted out in nursery-rows into 
the other principal divisions; but many kinds of herbaceous plants 
require to be pricked out from the seed-beds, when but from two 
to three or four months old, as directed for each under their own 
respective heads. On the other hand, most kinds of bulbous seed- 
lings will not be fit for planting out in less than one or two years. 

Another part of the nursery -ground should be allotted for stools 
of various trees and shrubs for the propagation by layers, by which 
vast numbers of plants of different kinds are propagated. These 
stools are strong plants of trees and shrubs, planted in rows three 
or four feet distance every way, and such of them as naturally rise 
with tall stems, are, after being planted one year, to be headed 
down near the ground, to force out many lower shoots conveniently 
situated for laying. 

And as to cuttings, suckers, slips, ofF-sets, &c., those of hardy 
trees, shrubs and plants may be planted in any convenient com- 
partment, and in shady borders, &c., and for the more tender kinds 
should allot some warm sheltered situation. 



Jan.] the NURSERY. 53 

The other principal divisions, therefore, of the Nursery-ground, 
are for the reception of the various sorts of seedling plants from the 
above seminary-quarters, also for all others that are raised from 
suckers, layers, cuttings, &c., there to be planted in rows from one 
to two or three feet asunder, according to their natures of growth^ 
observing to allow the tree and shrub kinds treble the distance of 
herbaceous perennials. Of the tree and shrub kinds, some are to 
be planted for stocks to graft and bud the select sorts of fruit trees 
upon, and other choice plants, which are usually propagated by 
those methods; others are trained up entirely on their own roots 
without budding or grafting, as in most forest and other hardy tree 
kinds, as also almost all the sorts of shrubs. Here they are to 
remain to have two, three, or several years growth, according as 
they shall require, for the several purposes for which they are 
designed in their future situations in the garden and plantations, 
&c., which are directed in their respective cultures. 

In a complete nursery it is also proper to allot some dry warm 
sheltered situation in the full sun, on which to have occasional 
hot-beds of dung or tan for raising and forwarding many sorts of 
tender or curious exotics, by seed, cuttings, suckers, slips, &c., and 
for which purposes you should be furnished with eligible frames 
and lights, hand glasses, garden mats, and other relative requisites. 

General mode of arranging the Plants of this department. 

In the distribution of all the various sorts of plants in the nurse- 
ry, let each sort be separate; the fruit trees should generally 
occupy spaces by themselves; the forest trees, &c. should also be 
stationed together; all the shrub kind should be ranged in separate 
compartments; allot also a place for herbaceous perennials: a 
warm place should likewise be allotted for the tender plants, and 
defended with yew, juniper, or private hedges, or a reed hedge, 
&c., in which compartments you may station all such plants as are 
a little tender whilst young and require occasional shelter from 
frost, yet are not so tender as to require to be housed like green- 
house plants, &c., so that in such compartments there may also be 
frames of various sizes, either to be covered occasionally with 
glass-lights, or some with mats, to contain such of the more choice 
of the above tender kinds in pots, to be nursed up a year or two, 
or longer, with occasional shelter, till hardened gradually to bear 
the open air fully. 

The arrangement of all the sorts in the open ground must 
always be in lines or nursery-rows, as formerly observed, to stand 
till arrived at a proper growth for drawing off for the garden and 
plantations; placing the fruit tree stocks, &c. for grafting and bud- 
ding upon, in rows three feet asunder, if for dwarfs, but standards 
four feet, and a foot and a half or two feet in the lines; though after 
being grafted and budded, they then commencing fruit trees, &c. ; 
if the}^ are to stand to grow to any large size, they should be 
allowed the width of five feet between the rows. Forest trees 



54 THE NURSERY. [Jan. 

should also be placed in rows four feet asunder, and eighteen inches 
distance in the rows, varying the distance both ways according to 
the time they are to standj the shrub kind should likewise be 
arranged in rows about two feet asunder, and fifteen or eighteen 
inches distant in each line; and as to herbaceous plants, they should 
generally be disposed in four feet wide beds, or large borders, in 
rows, or distances from six to twelve or eighteen inches asunder, 
according to their nature of growth and the time they are to stand. 

By the above arrangement of the various sorts of hardy trees, 
shrubs and herbaceous plants, in rows at those small distances in 
the nursery, a great number of plants are contained within a nar- 
row compass, which is sufficient room, as they are only to remain 
a short time; and that by being thus stationed in a little compass 
they are more readily kept under a proper regulation for the time 
they are to remain in this department. 

But in the public nurseries they often plant many kinds of seed- 
ling trees and shrubs in much closer rows at first planting out than 
the distances above prescribed, not only in order to husband the 
ground to the best advantage, but by standing closer it encourages 
the stem to shoot more directly upward, and prevents them expand- 
ing themselves much any where but at top; as for instance, many 
sorts of evergreens that are but of slow growth the first year or 
two, such as the pine trees, firs, and several others, which the 
nursery gardeners often prick out from the seminary, first into four 
feet wide beds, in rows lengthways, six inches asunder; and after 
having two years' growth there, transplant them in rows a foot 
asunder; and in two years after give them another and final trans- 
plantation in the nursery, in rows three feet asunder, as observed 
above; and by these different transplantings it will encourage the 
roots to branch out into many horizontal fibres, and prepare them 
better for final transplantation, which is the more particularly 
necessary in several of the pine and fir kinds and several other 
evergreens. 

With respect to the different methods of planting the various 
sorts of nursery plants, after being raised either by seed, layers, 
cuttings, &c., it is performed in several ways to different sorts; 
some are pricked out by dibble, especially small seedlings, others 
are put in by the spade, either by trenches, slitting-in, trenching, 
or holing, and some are drilled in by a spade or hoe. 

As to most of the tree and shrub kind, sometimes the young 
seedling-trees and shrubs are pricked out from the seminary by 
dibble; sometimes they are put in by the spade in the following 
method: first, having set a line to plant by, strike the spade into 
the ground with its back close to the line, and give another stroke 
at right angles with it, then set a plant into the crevice made at the 
second stroke, bring it close up into the first made crevice even 
with the line, and press the mould close to it with the foot, then 
proceed to plant another in the same way, and so proceed till all 
are planted. A second method is for plants with rather larger roots; 
strike the spade down with its back close to the line, as aforesaid, 
and then with a spade cut out a narrow trench close along the line, 



Jan.] the NURSERY. 55 

making the side next the line perfectly upright; then placing the 
plants upright against the back of the trench close to the line, at 
the proper distances before mentioned; and as you go on, trim in 
the earth upon their rootsj when one row is thus planted, tread 
the earth gently all along close to the plants, and then proceed to 
plant another row. A third method of planting out small tree and 
shrub plants is, having set the line as above, then turning the spade 
edgeways to the line, cast out the earth of that spit, then a person 
being ready with plants, set one in the cavity close to the line, and 
directly taking another such spit, turn the earth in upon the roots 
of the plant, and then placing another plant into the second cut, 
cover its roots with the earth of a third spit, and so on to the end; 
but sometimes when the roots are considerably larger, holes are 
made along by the line wide enough to receive the roots freely 
every way, so covering them in, as above, as you go on, observing 
always to press the earth gently with the foot close to the roots, 
and close about the stems, to settle the plants firmly in their pro- 
per position. 

Herbaceous fibrous-rooted plants are, for the most part, planted 
with a dibble, except when the roots are large and spreading, or 
such as are removed with balls of earth, then they are more com- 
monly planted by holing them in with a garden trowel, or small 
spade. 

Bulbous and tuberous-rooted plants sometimes are planted with 
a dibble, but many sorts may also be planted in drills drawn with 
a hoe. These sorts are also sometimes planted as follows: rake 
or trim the earth from off the top of the beds from about three to 
four inches deep into the alleys, then place the roots in rows upon 
the surface, thrusting the bottom a little into the ground, and imme- 
diately cover them with the earth which was drawn off into the 
alleys for that purpose, spreading it evenly over every part, so as 
to bury all the roots an equal depth. 

But as to the tender kinds of exotic plaints that require occasional 
shelter whilst young, many of them should be potted, in order for 
moving to a warm situation in winter, or some into frames, &c., to 
have occasional shelter from frost, by glasses or mats, as they shall 
require; hardening them, however, by degrees, to bear the open air 
fully in the nursery the year round. 

And the most tender kinds that require the aid of a green-house 
or stove, must all be potted and placed among the respective plants 
of those conservatories. 

General culture of the Plants of this department. 

With respect to the management of the various hardy nursery 
plants: — 

Those designed as stocks for fruit trees should have their stems 
generally cleared from lateral shoots, so as to form a clean, straight 
stem, but never to shorten the leading shoot until it is decayed, or 
becomes very crooked, in which case it may be proper to cut it 
down low in spring, and it will shoot out again, training the main 



56 THE NURSERY. [Jan. 

shoot for a stem, with its top entire for the present, till grafted or 
budded. 

But in the above nursery culture of the fruit tree kind, some sorts 
designed for principal wall or espalier trees should, when of one 
years' growth from grafting and budding, be transplanted against 
some close fence in the nursery, either a wall, paling, or trellis, &c., 
and their first graft or bud-shoot headed down in the spring, to pro- 
mote an emission of lower lateral shoots and branches, in order to 
be regularly trained to the fence in a spreading manner for two 
years or more, or till wanted, whereby to form the head in a regu- 
lar spreading growth for the intended purpose of garden trees, 
which in the public nurseries in particular should always be ready 
in proper training to supply those who may wish to have their 
espaliers, &c., covered as soon as possible by means of such ready 
trained trees. 

A similar training, both for wall and espalier fruit trees, may be 
practised to some principal sorts in the nursery rows in the open 
quarters of ground by arranging their branches in a spreading 
manner, to stakes placed for that purpose. 

But for standard fruit trees, they should be trained with a clean 
single stem, five or six feet for full standards, by cutting oft' all 
lateral shoots arising below; half standards trained with a three or 
four feet stem, and dwarf standards in proportion, by the same 
means; and as to the heads of the standards, it may be proper in 
some to have the first immediate shoots from the graft or bud when 
a year old pruned short in spring to procure several laterals, in 
order to form a fuller spread of branches, proceeding regularly 
together from near the summit of the stem that the head may 
advance in a more regular branchy growth. 

Forest trees, in general, should be encouraged to form straight 
clean single stems, by occasional trimming of the largest lateral 
branches, which will also promote the leading top-shoot in aspiring 
straight and faster in height; always suffering that part of each tree 
to shoot at full length, that is, not to top it, unless, however, where 
the stem divides into foi-ks, to trim off" the weakest, and leave the 
straightest and strongest shoot or branch to shoot out at its proper 
length to form the aspiring top, as above. 

The different sorts of shrubs may either be suffered to branch 
out in their own natural way, except just regulating very disorderly 
growths, or some may be trained with single clean stems from 
about a foot to two or three high, according as you shall think 
proper with respect to the sorts or the purposes for which you de- 
sign them in the shrubbery; but many shrubs appear the most 
agreeable when permitted to shoot out laterally all the way, so as 
to be branchy or feathered to the bottom. 

Each species of fruit trees, as soon as grafted or budded, should 
have all its different varieties numbered, by placing large flat-sided 
sticks at the ends of the rows, for which purpose some nursery 
men use the spokes of old coach wheels, or any thing about that 
size of any durable wood, painting or marking the numbers thereon, 
1, 2, 3, &c. on different sticks, entering the numbers in the nursery 



Jan.] the NURSERY. 57 

bookj with the name of the varieties to which the number-sticks 
are placed; whereby you can at all times readily have recourse to 
the sorts wanted. 

The same method may be practised to any other trees, shrubs, 
or herbaceous plants, especially the varieties of particular species, 
when they are numerous, as in many of the flowery tribe, such 
as auriculas, carnations, tulips, anemones, ranunculuses, and the 
like. 

With respect to watering the nursery plants, this may be very 
requisite in dry hot weather in spring and summer to seed beds, 
and tender seedling plants while young, and when first planted out, 
till they have taken good root; also occasionally to new-layed 
layers, and newly planted cuttings in dry warm weather; but as 
to hardy trees and shrubs of all sorts, if planted out at the proper 
time, that is, not too late in spring, no great regard need be paid 
to watering, for they will generally succeed very well without any; 
indeed, where there are but a few, you may, if you please, water 
them occasionally, if it proves a very dry spring in April and May; 
but where there are great plantations, it would be an almost insup- 
portable fatigue, and a great expense. 

Every winter or spring the ground between the rows of all sorts 
of transplanted plants in the open nursery quarters must be digged; 
this is particularly necessary to all the tree and shrub kinds that 
stand wide enough in rows to admit the spade between; which work 
is by the nurserymen called turning-in; the most general season 
for this work is any time from October to the latter end of March; 
but the sooner it is done the more advantageous it will prove 
to the plants. The ground is to be digged one spade deep, pro- 
ceeding row by row, turning the top of each pit clean to the bot- 
tom, that all weeds on the top may be buried a proper depth to 
rot: this work of turning-in is a most necessary annual operation, 
both to destroy weeds and to increase the growth of the young 
nursery plants. 

In summer be remarkably attentive to keep all sorts clean from 
weeds; the seedlings growing close in the seminary beds must be 
hand-weeded; but among plants of all sorts that grow in rows 
wide enough to introduce a hoe, this will prove not only the most 
expeditious method of destroying weeds, but by loosening the top 
of the soil it will prove good culture in promoting the growth of 
all kinds of plants; always perform this work of hoeing in dry 
weather in due time, before the weeds grow large, and you may 
soon go over a great space of ground, either with a common 
drawing hoe, or occasionally with a scuffling hoe, as you shall find' 
the most convenient. 

According as any quarters or compartments of the nursery ground 
are cleared from plants, others must be substituted in their room 
from the seminary, &c., but the ground should previously be 
trenched and lie some time fallow to recruit or recover its former 
vigour; giving it also the addition of manure, if it shall seem proper; 
and after being trenched in ridges, and having the repose only of 
H 



58 THE NURSERY. [Jan. 

one winter or summer, or a year at most, it will sufficiently recover 
its vegetative force, and may be planted afresh. 

It will be of advantage to plant the ground with plants of a 
diff'erent kind from those which occupied it before. 

The tender or exotic plafnts of all kinds that require shelter only 
from frost, whilst young, as formerly mentioned, and by degrees 
become hardy enough to live in the open air; should such of them 
as are seedlings in the open ground, have the beds arched over with 
hoops or rods at the approach of winter, in order to be sheltered 
with mats in severe weather; and those which are in pots, either 
seedlings or transplanted plants, should be removed in October in 
their pots, to a warm sunny situation sheltered with hedges, &c., 
placing some close under the fences facing the sun, where they 
may have occasional covering with mats in frosty weather; others 
that are more tender may be placed in frames to have occasional 
covering either of glass lights or mats, &c., from frost; observing 
of all those sorts here alluded to, that they are gradually to be 
hardened to the open ground, and need only be covered in frosty 
weather; at all other times let them remain fully exposed, and by 
degrees, as they acquire age and strength, inure them to bear the 
open air fully; so as when they arrive at from two or three, to four 
or five years old, they may be turned out into the open ground. 
The sorts requiring this treatment are pointed out under their 
proper heads in the difterent months. 

The greenhouse kinds of all sorts, or such as require constant 
shelter in winter, are to be managed as directed under the article 

GREENHOUSE. 

And the hothouse or stove-plants, or such as require constant 
shelter all or the greater part of the year, together with the aid of 
artificial heat, are to be managed as exhibited under the article 

HOTHOUSE. 

PFork to be done in the Nursery. 

Young apple and pear trees may now be pruned agreeably to 
the rules laid down in March; though if your stock of these is not 
very numerous, and that you are desirous to have so much work 
done out of the way when the hurry of business comes on in spring, 
it will be quite as well to defer doing it till the end of February 
or beginning of March. 

Trim up the stems of forest and other hardy trees where they 
require it; this may be done when little else can in the nursery; 
for if it is performed in frosty weather the trees will receive no 
harm by the operation, especially the hardy deciduous kinds. 

Carry well-rotted dung or compost, and lay it on such parts of 
the nursery as require it. This may be necessary to such particu- 
lar quarters as have been lately cleared, and that are intended to 
be planted again with a fresh stock in autumn, taking oft" a summer 
crop of vegetables previous thereto; and when the frost permits, 
let it be trenched in regularly one full spade deep at least. If 



Jan.] the nursery. 59 

necessity requires it, this ground may be planted with young trees, 
&c., in spring. 

In severe weather, when out-work cannot be done, make label- 
sticksj and have them in readiness when wanted, to mark the 
various kinds and varieties of fruit and forest trees, shrubs, plants, 
&c. which you intend to plant or propagate in spring; the largest, 
to mark rows of fruit trees, &c., should be about the size of a coach- 
wheel spoke, and for sake of durability, made of white oak, or some 
other good durable wood, with the numbers marked or painted 
thereon; such will last you for several years: small kinds for 
labelling flowers, or the various sorts of small seeds which you 
intend to sow, may be made of old or new shingles, or pieces of 
good pine, cut and split to such lengths as you desire; form these 
neatly, and when you are going to use them, rub one side of the 
upper end for about two inches with white oil-colour paint; on 
which, while yet wet, write your number, or the name of the plant 
at full length with a black-lead pencil; this will endure any kind 
of weather for one year at least, and be legible for several years, 
when placed in pots, with greenhouse or hothouse plants. 

Care of tender and young seedling Trees. 

Take great care now of all the tender kinds of seedling trees, 
shrubs and other young plants of similar quality raised from seed, 
or by other means, last year or before; many kinds will, in hard 
frost, need shelter, particularly the young seedling plants of the 
cedar of Lebanon, &c., China arbor vitse, the tender kinds of pines 
and firs, and the seedling plants of cypress, and such like kinds of 
young seedling evergreens, which will all need occasional protec- 
tion in severe weather: and therefore, at the approach of the first 
hard'frost, the pots or boxes, &c., containing them should be re- 
moved into a garden fraine, or some other convenience of occasional 
shelter, and in the time of hard frosts the glasses and other cover- 
ing put on; but they must be kept constantly open in mild weather, 
when it can be done with safety to the plants. 

The tender seedling plants which are growing in beds, and 
require shelter in time of frost, should be covered at such time 
with mats; first erecting some hoops across the bed, and the mats 
to be drawn over them occasionally for defence of the plants. 

Likewise some of the more hardy kinds of young plants may be 
sheltered in bad weather by laying some straw, fern or long dry 
litter lightly over them; this will protect the tender tops and roots 
from the frost. 

But this covering must not be suffered to remain longer than 
necessary to defend the plants. 

Likewise any curious or tender young evergreens, &c., that are 
planted in pots, should be placed under shelter in severe frosts; such 
as arbutus or strawberry tree, magnolia grandiflora, cistuses, China 
arbor vitse, English and Portugal laurels, &c., placing them in a 
frame, or where they may be defended either with glasses, mats 
or other covering in rigorous weather. 



60 THE NURSERY. [Jan. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

Dig the ground, if open weather, between the continuing rows of 
young trees and shrubs of all sorts. 

But previous to performing this work, give any necessary prun- 
ing to the shrubs and trees, especially the deciduous kinds; then 
let the ground be digged one spade deep; as you go on trim oflF any 
straggling roots of the trees and shrubs; and in digging, give every 
spit a fair turn off the spade that the weeds on the surface may be 
buried properly. 

Transplanting of young forest and ornamental trees in the nur- 
sery, and where required, may be performed any time this month 
if the weather is open and the ground not too wet. 

Particularly deciduous forest trees, &c., of the hardy kinds, may 
be removed any time this month if mild weather; but this should 
not be generally practised to evergreens at this season, especially 
where smart frosts may be expected to follow. 

Prune honey-suckles and roses, and all other kinds of hardy deci- 
duous flowering shrubs that want it, training each with a single 
stem, and trimming their heads as you shall see occasion; that is, 
either to cut out or shorten all straggling shoots in such manner 
as you shall see necessary to keep their heads somewhat to a regu- 
lar form. 

In open and settled weather you may now transplant, where 
necessary, most sorts of hardy deciduous flowering shrubs, both 
in the nursery order, and for shrubbery plantations, &c., in a dry 
soil; but where the soil is apt to lodge wet there should not be any 
planted therein before February. 

Plantations of fruit tree stocks, for grafting and budding upon, 
may be made at any time 6f this month, if mild open weather. 
Many of those raised from seed, &c., last spring, or the year before, 
will be fit for this, digging them up out of the seed-bed, &c., with 
their full roots, and let them be planted in nursery-rows, three or 
four feet asunder, and fifteen or eighteen inches distant from each 
other in the rows; and when they have attained one or two years' 
growth in these rows, will be proper for budding and grafting. — 
See the Nursery in October for the method of planting; that of 
March for grafting, and July and August for budding. 

You may still make layers in open weather of many sorts of 
deciduous trees and shrubs that you desire to increase. 

This work of laying down the branches of shrubs and trees to 
propagate them, is very easily performed; and there are a great 
many kinds of trees and shrubs to be increased by this operation, 
in the manner following. 

In the first place it must be remarked, that the young branches 
that were produced last summer, are the most proper parts to be 
layed; for these will put out roots more freely than the branches 
that are a year or two older. Observing farther, that many of the 
shrub kinds branching out near the earth, aftbrd an opportunity of 
laying them with great facility, but such as run up with tall stems, 
and those of the tree kinds, require that some strong young plants. 



e^ 



Jan.] the NURSERY. Ql 

principally deciduous, with stems one, two, or three inches thick, 
be cut down near the ground a year or two before to form stools 
to furnish a supply of shoots near the earth, convenient for laying 
therein. The ground must be dug about the shrub or tree that is 
to be layed; and as you go on bring down the branches, and fasten 
them in the ground with hooked pegs, observing to lay down all 
the young wood on each branch into the earth, covering therewith 
the body of each layer three or four inches deep, and fastening 
each also with a peg if necessary, and raise the tops upright out of 
the earth. 

But in laying some hard-wooded trees and shrubs it is necessary 
to slit the layer by making a gash with a knife on the under-side, 
slitting it an inch or more upward, so laying that part in the earth, 
keeping the gash a little open, which will greatly assist the rooting 
by promoting the emission of fibres at the cut part. And this may 
also be performed to the same advantage in the laying of trees and 
shrubs in general. Or you may give the young shoot a t'"ist in 
that part which you intend laying in the earth, by which me^liod it 
will root more freely than if laid down without it. 

Those which are layed in this or next month will be tolerably 
well rooted by next autumn, and may then be separated from the 
tree, and planted in the nursery to get strength. 

Cuttings of many kinds of flowering shrubs and trees may also 
still be planted^ and there are vast numbers of plants that may be 
propagated by this method. There is hardly any tree or shrub but 
what may be increased either by this method, or by layers or 
suckers from the root. 

But the manner of propagating trees or shrubs by cuttings is 
this: the cuttings must be young shoots of the last year's growth, 
which must be cut with a sharp knife from the tree or shrub you 
desire to propagate; they must be from about six or eight to twelve 
or fifteen inches long, according to their strength and manner of 
growth; let them be planted in rows eighteen inches asunder, and 
from five to eight inches distance in the row, and every cutting 
inserted two thirds of its length into the ground. 

Propagate gooseberries and currants by cuttings, as directed in 
October^ and prune such of the old plants as require it, agreeably 
to the directions given in this and that month. 

In open weather, you should, as much as possible, forward the 
digging and trenching vacant compartments of ground, where 
young trees and shrubs are to be planted in this and next month. 

Now prepare some ground where it is not wet, for the reception 
of stones and kernels of hardy fruits, to raise a supply of stocks for 
the purpose of budding and grafting upon. 

These may be sown any time this month, observing to sow them 
in beds four feet wide; cover the stones an inch and a half deep 
with earth, and the kernels half an inch: the plants will appear in 
March, April, and May, when they must be kept clean from weeds, 
and moderate watering in dry weather will be serviceable when 
they arc newly come up. Some of them will be fit for transplant- 
ing in nursery rows next November. 



62 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

Sow the various kinds of hawthorn, hollj, red cedar, yew, meze- 
reon, juniper, sweet bay, English and Portugal laurel berries; 
likewise the seeds of hornbeam, ash, spindle-tree, bladder-nut, and 
all the other kinds of tree and shrub seeds which require a year's 
preparation previous to sowing, as noticed in February. The 
sooner now these kinds of seeds are sown the hQi\.QV , provided the 
ground be dry, and that it works loose and light. 

For particular instructions respecting the sowing of these seeds, 
&c. see February and March. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Ornamental Designs and Planting. 

The district commonly called the Pleasure, or Flower Garden, 
or pleasure-ground, may be said to comprehend all ornamental 
compartments or divisions of ground surrounding the mansion; 
consisting of lawns, plantations of trees and shrubs, flower com- 
partments, walks, pieces of water, &c., whether situated wholly 
within the space generally considered as the pleasure-garden, or 
extended to the adjacent fields, parks, or other out-grounds. 

In designs for a pleasure-ground, according to modern garden- 
ing, consulting rural disposition in imitation of nature, all too 
formal works being almost abolished, such as long straight walks, 
regular intersections, square grass-plats, corresponding parterres, 
quadrangular and angular spaces, and other uniformities, as in 
ancient designs; instead of which are now adopted rural open 
spaces of grass-ground, of various forms and dimensions, and 
winding walks, all bounded with plantations of trees, shrubs, and 
flowers, in various clumps; other compartments are exhibited in a 
variety of imitative rural forms, such as curves, projections, open- 
ings and closings in imitation of natural assemblage; having all the 
various plantations and borders open to the walks and lawns. 

For instance, a grand and spacious open lawn of grass-ground is 
generally first presented immediately to the front of the mansion, 
or main habitation; sometimes widely extended on both sides to 
admit of a greater prospect, &c., and sometimes more contracted 
towards the habitation; widening gradually outwards, and having 
each side embellished with plantations of shrubbery, clumps, 
thickets, &c. in sweeps, curves, and projections towards the lawn, 
with breaks or opens of grass-spaces at intervals between the dif- 
ferent plantations; together with serpentine gravel walks, winding 
under the shade of the trees: extended plantations ought also to be 
carried round next the outer boundary of the pleasure ground, 
when extensive; in various openings and closings, having gravel 
walks winding through them, for shady and private walking; and in 
the interior divisions of the ground, serpentine winding walks 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. . 63 

and elegant grass openings, ranged various ways, all bordered with 
shrubberies and other tree and shrub plantations, flower compart- 
ments, &c. disposed in a variety of different rural forms; in easy 
bendings, concaves and straight ranges, occasionally; with inter- 
vening breaks or opens of grass-ground, both to promote rural 
diversity and for communication and prospect to the different divi- 
sions; all the parts of the pleasure ground being so arranged, as 
gradually to discover new scenes, each furnishing fresh variety, 
both in the form of the design in different parts, as well as in the 
disposition of the various trees, shrubs and flowers, and other orna- 
ments and diversities. 

In designs for a pleasure-ground, according to modern taste, a 
tract of ground of any considerable extent, may have the prospect 
varied and diversified exceedingly, in a beautiful representation of 
art and nature, as that ia passing from one compartment to ano- 
ther, still new varieties present themselves in the most agreeable 
manner; and even if the figure of the ground is irregular, and the 
surface has many inequalities, the whole may be improved without 
any great trouble of squaring or levelling; for by humoring the 
natural form, you may cause even the very irregularities and natu- 
ral deformities to carry along with them an air of divei'sity and no- 
velty which fail not to please and entertain most observers. 

In these rural works, however, we should not abolish entirely the 
appearance of art and uniformity; for these, when properly applied, 
give an additional beauty and peculiar grace to all our natural pro- 
ductions, and set nature in the fairest and most beautiful point of 
view. 

But some modern pleasure-grounds, in which rural design is 
copied to an extreme, are often very barren of variety and entertain- 
ment, as they frequently consist only of a grass lawn, like a great 
field; having a running plantation of trees and shrubs all round it, 
just broad enough to admit a gravel walk winding through it, in 
the serpentine way, in many short twists and turns, and bordering 
at every turn alternately upon the outward fence and the lawn; which 
are continually obtruded upon the sight, exhibiting the same pro- 
spect over and over, without the least variation; so as that after hav- 
ing traversed the walks all around this sort of pleasure-ground, we 
find no more variety or entertainment than at our first entrance, the 
whole having presented itself at the first view. 

Therefore, in laying out pleasure-ground, the designer ought to 
take particular care that the whole extent be not taken in at one 
view; only exhibiting at first a large open lawn or other spacious 
open compartment, or grand walk, &c. terminated on each side 
with plantations of curious trees, shrubs, and flowers, exhibiting 
only some opens at intervals, and behind these have compartments 
of the like plantations, with grass openings, gravel walks, water, 
and other ornaments; so that a spectator will be agreeably sur- 
prised to find that what terminated his prospect only served as an 
introduction to new beauties and varieties. 

It is impossible to exhibit any regular direction for planning an 
extensive pleasure-ground, as the different figures and situations, 



64 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

&c. of the ground, may require different designs, therefore general 
hints only can be given. 

Sketch of the Design. 

The following general sketch may be varied according to the 
situation and extent of the ground, and may be useful to persons 
who are unexperienced in designs of the kind. 

With respect to situation, this must be immediately contiguous 
to the mansion house, whether high or low situated; remarking, 
however, that a somewhat elevated situation, or the side or summit 
of some moderate rising ground is always the most eligible on 
which to erect the chief habitation, arranging the pleasure-ground 
accordingly; such an exposure being the most desirable, both for 
the beauty of the prospect and healthfulness of the air: there are, 
however, some level situations, forming plains or flats, that possess 
great advantages, both of soil and prospect, and also the beauties 
of water, without too copious damps or moisture; there are also 
some large tracts of ground, consisting both of low and high situa- 
tions, as level plains, hollows, eminences, declivities, and other 
inequalities, which may be so improved as to make a most desirable 
pleasure garden, as the scene may be varied in the most beautiful 
manner. 

The extent of pleasure-ground may be varied according to that 
of the estate or premises, and the fortune of the owner; so may be 
from even a quarter or half an acre, to thirty, forty or more. 

The ground should be previously fenced, which may be occa- 
sionally a hedge, paling or wall, &c., as most convenient. 

With respect to the arrangement of the several divisions, the 
following general sketches are on a supposition of a considerable 
tract of ground; and if the piece of ground is small, greater sim- 
plicity of design must be observed in proportion. 

First an open lawn of grass-ground is extended on one of the 
principal fronts of the mansion or main house, widening gradually 
from the house outward, having, each side bounded by various 
plantations of trees, shrubs, and flowers, in clumps, thickets, &c. 
exhibited in a variety of rural forms in moderate concave and 
convex curves and projections, to prevent all appearance of a stiff 
uniformity; introducing between the plantations, at intervals, 
breaks or opens of grass-ground, communicating with the lawn 
and internal divisions, in some places widely spread, in others 
more contracted; leaving also tracts for serpentine gravel-walks, 
some winding under the shade of the plantations, so conducted- as 
to command views of the lawn and interior divisions occasionally, 
and at intervals of the most beautiful parts of the surrounding 
country. 

This ground must be more contracted as it approaches near the 
mansion, that company may the sooner arrive in the walks of the 
shrubbery, wilderness, &c., under the shade and shelter of trees; 
but the outward extension on each boundary should widen gradually 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. g5 

towards the extreme termination, to give an air of grandeur, and 
admit of a full prospect from and to the mansion. 

Each boundary must be planted with a choice variety of orna- 
mental trees and shrubs, deciduous, and evergreens, arranged prin- 
cipally in several clumps; some consisting of lofty trees, others 
being entirely of the shrub kinds, and some consisting of trees, 
shrubs, and herbaceous plants together; in all of which arrange the 
taller growing kinds backward, and the lower forward, according 
to their gradation of height, embellishing the front with the more 
curious low flowering shrubs and evergreens, interspersed with 
various herbaceous flowering perennials, all open to the lawn and 
walks. 

In the general arrangement, the great art is to vary the prospect 
of the difterent divisions so as they may variously present an air of 
novelty and source of convenience and entertainment. 

Around towards the outward boundary fence is generally ar- 
ranged a plantation of trees and shrubs, in varied easy sweeps, 
and broad enough to admit of a serpentine walk through the whole 
extent, under cover of these trees and shrubs, for private and shady 
walking; with breaks and openings here and there to admit of 
prospects, both to the lawn and surrounding country. 

In various parts of the pleasure-ground leave recesses and other 
places surrounded with clumps of trees and shrubs for the erection 
of garden edifices, such as temples, grottos, rural seats, statues, 
&c. ; and if water from some upper spring or head can be led in a 
winding course through the lower parts in gentle meanders, it will 
have a charming effect. 

Other internal divisions appear with an air of grandeur and 
magnificence when exhibiting a spacious opening of grass -ground, 
bounded by the noblest trees and shrubs in various elegant clumps, 
groves, groups, and straight ranges, and the opening terminated 
by some fine open prospect, grand piece of water, or ornamental 
building. 

Another part shall appear more gay and sprightly, displaying an 
elegant flower-ground or flower-garden, designed somewhat in the 
parterre way, in various beds, borders, and other divisions, fur- 
nished with the most curious flowers, and the boundary decorated 
with an arrangement of various clumps of the most beautiful flower- 
ing shrubs and lively evergreens; each clump also bordered with a 
variety of the herbaceous flowery tribe. 

Another division, sometimes to diversify the scenery, presents a 
wilderness in irregular partitions of plantations, having intervening 
spaces of grass-ground and gravel walks extended in various direc- 
tions; some by winding mazes or labyrinths into openings formed 
in difterent parts; the boundary plantation of this division being 
generally planted in close assemblage with serpentine walks be- 
tween; some leading in private meanders towards the interior 
parts, or breaking out sometimes into other walks that are open 
and spacious, both of grass and gravel occasionally, conducted in 
serpentine turns to cause the greater variety; some places being 
closely bordered with tall trees to effect a gloominess and perfect 



QQ THE PLEASURE, OR [Jak. 

shade; the different walks leading now and then into circular open- 
ings, each being surrounded with plantations as aforesaid, making 
the principal walks terminate in a grand opening in the centre of 
the wilderness, in which maj be some ornamental edifice or fine 
piece of water, &c. 

Straight ranges of the most stately trees are sometimes arranged 
on grass-ground in different parts, in contrast with irregular planta- 
tions, and produce a most agreeable effect, which, though prohi- 
bited in many modern designs, always exhibit an air of grandeur; 
being arranged sometimes in single rows, others double, or two 
ranges at certain distances, forming a grand walk; in other parts, 
several regular ranges of trees together, in the manner of groves; 
the whole combined, forming a diversity pleasing to the senses, 
and conducive to health by exciting to the salutary exercise of 
walking. 

In other parts are sometimes discovered eminences or rising 
grounds, as a high terrace, mount, steep declivity, or other emi- 
nence, ornamented with curious trees and shrubs, with walks lead- 
ing under the shade of trees, by easy ascents, to the summit, where 
is presented to the view an extensive prospect of the adjacent 
fields, buildings, hamlets, and country around, and likewise afford- 
ing a fresh and cooling air in summer. 

Regular compartments and figures, in various forms, are also 
sometimes introduced in some extensive grounds for variety, in 
contrast with the irregular works, and still to preserve some ap- 
pearance of the remains of ancient gardening; such as straight 
walks verged with borders of flowers, &c., regular parterres in 
flower borders, square spaces, circles and octagons, &c. enclosed 
with low clipped hedges, hedge-work formed into various devices, 
detached evergreens formed into pyramids and other regular 
figures, regular grass-slopes formed on the side of some declivity 
or rising ground, elevated terraces, clumps of trees surrounded 
with low evergreen hedges, straight avenues of trees in ranges, 
&c.; a little of each being judiciously disposed in different situa- 
tions, may prove an agreeable variety by diversifying the scene in 
contrast with the rural works before mentioned. 

Sometimes a bleak declivity, rocky ground, or rough vale is 
made to exhibit a wild and uncultivated scene, and tends to set off 
the improved parts to great advantage. 

Pieces of water are always, where possible, exhibited in the most 
conspicuous points contiguous to the termination of the main lawn 
or other spacious openings, representing sometimes a lake, basin, 
&c., and sometimes a natural river winding its course through 
different divisions, and its termination concealed by a curious 
turn, making it appear to lose itself in the adjacent plantations. 

With respect to the walks, some ought to be made of gravel and 
some of grass; the former for common walking and the latter for 
occasionally walking in the heat of summer, which, in dry hot 
weather, may be more agreeable than the gravel walks: therefore 
some of each sort is proper both for convenience and variety. 

Gravel walks, however, should lead all round the pleasure-ground 



Jan.] flower garden. 67 

and into the principal internal divisions, so as to have dry and firm 
walking- at all times of the year; for frequently, but particularly 
in winter and in wet weather, grass walks are very uncomfortable 
and even unhealthy to walk on. These walks should be of propor- 
tional width in diflerent parts, and larger and smaller in proportion 
to the extent of the ground. 

As to the distribution of gravel walks — first a magnificent one, 
from fifteen to twenty or thirty feet wide, should range immediately 
close and parallel to the front of the house, and be conducted di- 
rectly across the lawn into the nearest side shrubberies; from this 
main walk other smaller ones, from five to ten or fifteen feet wide, 
according to the extent of the ground, should branch oft" at proper 
intervals, directed in the serpentine way — some leading through 
the outer boundary plantations as already hinted — others into the 
internal divisions, and others carried along the boundary plantation 
of the main lawn; all of which walks being conducted through the 
difFent parts in order to attbrd the convenience of shade and retire- 
ment occasionally, as well as to enjoy the variety of the trees, 
shrubs and flowers, variously presenting themselves at different 
turnings: for the walks having various sweeps and windings dis- 
covering only a moderate length at once, every turning produces 
new varieties, and should likewise be so contrived as at proper 
intervals to discover openings for prospects into different principal 
divisions of the ground, having in some places the plantation of 
trees, shrubs and flowers bordering close upon the walks; in other 
parts have on one side of the walks considerable grass spaces run- 
ning into the plantation in one or more concave curves, to form the 
greater diversity. 

In some places the winding of walks should be gradual and 
moderate; in others, exhibit sudden turns and sweeps — some dis- 
playing magnificent projections in the plantation; others, spacious 
openings bordered with curious plants; in other parts a close thick- 
et, which sometimes may seem to terminate the walk, when by a 
sudden turn it breaks out all at once into some grand open division, 
spacious open walk, an avenue or elegant piece of water, open groves 
&c. ; and in other parts a walk suddenly divides into two or three 
divisions leading different ways in gradual sweeps, each separation 
being formed by a projecting clump of shrubbery work or group of 
trees, &c., and each division of the walk is conducted by such varied 
serpentine turns as soon to be concealed from the other by the inter- 
vening compartments. 

Sometimes, similar to the ancient designs, a spacious gravel walk 
is extended in a perpendicular line immediately from the front of 
the house dividing the lawn, or extended on both boundaries and 
in other directions, with a wide border on each side, either straight 
or sometimes a little serpentined, and planted with the most curious 
low flowering shrubs, evergreens and herbaceous flowering plants. 

All these gravel walks should be laid with the best gravel, six or 
eight inches deep at least, but if more the better. 

All the open grass spaces may be considered as grass walks, 
whether formed in the manner of walks, or as breaks or divisions 



(58 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

between the various plantations, all of which serving both for 
communication to different parts and to render the ground more 
rurally ornamental, and for occasional walking in dry weather in 
summer; but some tracts of considerable width and length formed 
into grass walks leading to different divisions, having each side 
bounded with clumps of trees, shrubs and flowers, gives an air of 
grandeur to the place, allotting smaller breaks or opens of grass 
branching off' between the plantation compartments, as formerly 
mentioned. 

The grass-ground may be formed either by sowing grass seed 
or by laying it with turf, cut from some common; but in extensive 
works turfing the whole would be an endless expense; therefore 
seed is the most eligible for the principle space in very large 
gardens. 

Water being so ornamental in all garden designs, no pains 
should be spared to introduce it where possible; but where it admits 
of a constant running stream from some adjacent upper spring, 
its beauties may be rendered admirably fine, as it may be con- 
ducted in meanders through the plantation, so as to effect a beautiful 
assemblage of verdure and water together; and if it should be 
continued to any considerable length, one or more ornamental 
Chinese bridges may be carried over it at convenient places, which 
will have a beautiful effect and serve for communication with the 
opposite divisions on each side of the rivulet. 

Cascades and other waterfalls have also a fine effect, where 
there is a constant plentiful stream and the situation proper to 
give the water a due fall from a higher to a lower part, upon a 
parcel of rugged stones, to increase the noise and break and dis- 
perse the water. 

In some grounds, by their natural situations, water may be ob- 
tained at a moderate expense; as sometimes a contiguous vale or 
meadow, bounded by rising ground, and with a brook or rivulet 
constantly running through it, may be easily thrown into the most 
agreeable form; and sometimes large springs issuing from an upper 
ground, and running down a moderate descent between two rising 
grounds to some vale below, may either form one entire lake, &c. 
or be contrived by making proper heads at distances to form seve- 
ral lakes strung together as it were, one above another, up to the 
beginning of the spring; each head may form a beautiful waterfall 
or cascade, having the rising grounds on each side embellished with 
plantation clumps. 

Lakes and artificial rivers may also be contrived in a flat or level 
ground, where there are any contiguous brooks that can be conducted 
to supply them with water. 

All pieces of water should generally be contrived in a natural 
imitation, as much as the situation will admit; and its boundary on 
all sides should be grass-ground.to some considerable width, sloped 
off" as easy as possible, corresponding with the other adjacent grass- 
ground, to admit of a prospect of the water at some distance. 

On the verges of large compartments of water, some Babylonian 
or Weeping Willows, disposed in particular situations, singly at 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. 69 

distances, sometimes in concave and projecting parts, terminations, 
&c., will have a very agreeable effect in their long, bending, arched 
branches, and numerous pendulous shoots, suspended over the 
vtater in a loose waving manner, sometimes sweeping the surface 
thereof; and when arrived to some considerable growth in their 
numerous low pendent branches suspended all round, display an 
air of peculiar solemn grandeur. 

The various compartments of ground intended for the different 
plantations should be digged or trenched for the reception of the 
plants, particularly for all plantations of shrubbery, and wilderness 
quarters, flower compartments, &c.; and the ground for clumps 
should, if not thought too expensive, be raised above the common 
level in a gentle swell; especially all detached compartments, such 
as shrubbery clumps, and flower partitions; and most other de- 
tached compartments of ground for any kind of ornamental plant- 
ing in gardens. These should generally be raised in a moderate 
rounding swell gradually from each side to the middle; or for any 
continued side plantation, it may be raised in a gentle slope; for 
the swelling and sloping figure always strikes the eye the most 
agreeably, as well as shows the plants to the best advantage. 

But where intended to have groves of stately trees, or any straight 
ranges of trees, either single or double lines, forming a walk or 
avenue, it is most in character to dispose them all on grass-ground, 
in which they will appear most rural and beautiful. 

Likewise elegant ornamental trees, both as single standards and 
in detached groups or clumps, appear the most beautiful when 
disposed on spacious openings of grass-ground. 

All the plantation compartments of shrubbery, wilderness, &c. 
should be planted with some considerable variety of different sorts 
of trees, shrubs and flowers, artfully disposed in various arrange- 
ments; the tallest behind, the lowest forward, and the different 
sorts so intermixed as to display a beautiful diversity of foliage 
and flowers, disposing the more curious kinds contiguous to the 
principal walks and lawns. 

Observing, that as trees and shrubs are of two different tribes, 
deciduous and evergreen kinds, those of each tribe should be 
mostly planted in separate clumps, in which they will effect the 
most agreeable variety; and in some places may exhibit clumps 
composed of both sorts to cause the greater diversity; and many 
of the most conspicuous deciduous compartments may be embel- 
lished towards the fronts with some showy evergreens, thinly dis- 
persed; which will appear ornamental and lively in winter, when 
the deciduous plants are destitute of leaves. 

In planting the several shrubbery clumps, &c., some may be 
entirely of trees, but the greater part an assemblage of trees and 
shrubs together; some entirely of the low shrub kind, in different 
situations, between and in front of the larger growths; likewise 
should intersperse most of the shrubbery and wilderness compart- 
ments with a variety of hardy herbaceous flowery plants of different 
growths, having also here and there clumps entirely of herbaceous 
perennials: the distribution or arrangement of the clumps and 



70 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

other divisions of the different kinds, both trees, shrubs and flowers, 
should be so diversified as to exhibit a proper contrast, and a curious 
variation of the general scene. 

And in the disposing the various trees, shrubs and other plants 
in their respective compartments, observe, for the most part, to 
place the tallest towards the middle or back part, and the lower 
forward towards the front, according to their natural stature of 
growthj observing also to intermix the different sorts in each 
clump, &c. in such order as to display a diversity of different 
foliage and flowers as aforesaid, as well as exhibit a conspicuous 
variety. Likewise placing the various sorts at such proportionable 
distances and dispositions according to their various growths, as 
each may have full scope to spread its head, and so as the prospect 
of one may be no interruption or impediment to the growth and 
appearance of another, but all so judiciously arranged as to set off 
each other and appear distinct, and to proper advantage from the 
contiguous lawns, walks and other divisions. 

In planting any continued or running plantation where shady 
walks are designed, particular care is requisite in arranging a due 
share of the taller trees and shrubs nearer the walks, and in such 
order as to produce the desired effect; particularly in the continued, 
plantation of shrubbery-work around the outward boundary and 
other running plantations. 

These plantations for shady walks are highly necessary to retire 
to occasionally for shelter from the various changes and injuries of 
the weather; they afford shade from the scorching rays of the 
summer's sun, shelter from tempestuous winds and cold blasts, and 
opportunity for private and contemplative walking, almost at all 
seasons of the year. 

But where very close and gloomy shade is required in any par- 
ticular parts for diversity, some trees and tall shrubs should be 
arranged nearer to the verge of the walks, backed and fronted with 
a variety of hardy shrubs, in such order as to produce the desired 
effect. 

The planting in groves and avenues should consist principally of 
the tree kind, and such as are of straight and handsome growth, 
with the most branchy, full, regular heads, and may be both of the 
deciduous and evergreen tribes, but generally arranged separately: 
groves and avenues should always be in some spacious open space, 
formed into grass-ground, either before or after planting the trees; 
and in planting the groves it is most eligible to arrange the trees in 
lines, in some places straight rows, others in gentle bendings, or 
easy sweeps, having the rows at some considerable distance, that 
the trees may have full scope to display their branchy heads regu- 
larly around; and in some places may have close groves to form a 
perfect shade. 

As to avenues and walks of trees, they may be formed either 
entirely of deciduous trees, or of evergreens; but the deciduous 
kinds are in most estimation for this purpose: however, avenues 
and grass walks, planted with tine evergreen trees, make a beauti- 
ful appearance, and will always command admiration. In both 



[J AS. FLOWER GARDEN. 71 

sorts the trees are most commonly disposed in rows, one on each 
side of the avenue, though sometimes grand walks of trees may be 
both in single straight lines and in double rows, to exhibit the 
greater varietyj planting the trees generally, both in avenues and 
walks, at proper distances, to have full scope to branch out regu- 
larly around and display their beautiful heads and foliage. 

Thickets may be composed of all sorts of hardy deciduous trees 
planted close and promiscuously, and with various common shrubs 
interspersed between them, as underwood, to make them more or 
less close in different parts, as the designer may think proper. 
They may also be of evergreen trees, particularly of the pine 
and fir kinds, interspersed with various low-growing evergreen 
shrubs. 

In some open spaces of grass-ground, such as spacious open 
lawns, or other considerable open fields, &c. you should dispose 
some of the most beautiful trees and elegant shrubs detached, both 
separately as standards or single objects, and in groups or assem- 
blages, from two or three, to five, ten, or more, in difterent groups 
or clumps, some irregularly, others in curves, straight lines, &c. 
forvarietyj arranging both single standards and groups a considera- 
ble distance asunder, not to obstruct the prospect, and at such 
varied distances as if they had grown there by chance. 

It very frequently happens that on the spot or tract which is de- 
signed for a pleasure-ground, are found large stately trees of con- 
siderable standing, properly situated to be introduced into the 
design; and sometimes numbers in suitable assemblages for consti- 
tuting groves or thickets, and some for single standing groups or 
clumps, &c. which will prove of considerable advantage; these 
should be preserved with the utmost care, as it would require many 
years to form the like with young plantations; and although the 
trees should stand ever so close, irregular, or straggling, with pro- 
per address in thinning and regulating them, where necessary, they 
may be made to become beautifully ornamental to the place, and to 
prevent a considerable expense. 

In some spacious pleasure-grounds various light ornamental 
buildings and erections are introduced as ornaments to particular 
departments; such as temples, bowers, banqueting-houses, alcoves, 
grottos, rural seats, cottages, fountains, obelisks, statues, and other 
edifices; these, and the like, are usually erected in the different 
parts, in openings between the divisions of the ground, and contigu- 
ous to the termination of grand walks, &c. 

Some of these kinds of ornaments, however, being very expen- 
sive, are rather sparingly introduced; sometimes a temple is pre- 
sented at the termination of a grand walk or opening, or sometimes 
a temple, banqueting-house, or bower is erected in the centre of 
some spacious opening or grass-ground in the internal divisions; 
other parts present alcoves, bowers, grottos, rural seats, &c. at the 
termination of different walks; and rural seats are placed in differ- 
ent parts by the sides of long walks, under the shade of trees, &c. 
for places of rest. 

Fountains and statues are generally introduced in the middle of 



72 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

spacious openingsj statues are also often placed at the terminations 
of particular walks, sometimes in woods, thickets, and recesses, 
upon mounts, terraces, and other stations, according to what thej 
are intended to represent. 

Sometimes, also, there are exhibited root-houses, rock and shell 
work, ruins, and other rustic devices, representing hermitages, 
caves, and the like; such being generally stationed in some retired 
or private situation; these kinds of buildings being commonly arch- 
ed or vaulted are, for the most part, covered with a coat of earth 
and turfed with grass, so as to appear like a sort of mount or hil- 
lock, and planted with some little clumps of shrubs, &c. having 
private walks leading to the entrance. 

Likewise in some parts are exhibited artificial rock-work, con- 
tiguous to some grotto, fountain, rural piece of water, &c. and 
planted with a variety of saxatile plants, or such as grow naturally 
on rocks and mountains. 

Ornamental bridges over artificial rivers, or any rural piece of 
water in some magnificent opening, so as to admit of a prospect 
thereof, at some distance from the habitation, have charming effects. 

Let it be particularly remarked, that although water, when ex- 
hibited with due taste and handsome design, adds considerable to 
the beauty of pleasure-grounds; yet, in districts subject to fluxes, 
intermittent fevers, or other diseases, occasioned by the effluvia 
arising from marshes and stagnant water, it ought to be cautiously 
introduced; a due regard to health will of course prevent its intro- 
duction, especially in large sheets, where likely to become stagnant. 
In fact, when such are admitted, they should always be situated in 
a clay or gravelly soil, and possess a sufficient head or stream to 
render the change of their contents frequent. 

A Foss or ha-ha, is often formed at the termination of a spacious 
lawn, grand walk, avenue, or other principal part of parts of the 
pleasure-ground, both to extend the prospect into the adjacent 
fields and country, and give these particular parts of the ground an 
air of larger extent than they really have; as at a distance nothing 
of this kind of fence is seen, so that the adjacent fields, planta- 
tions, &c. appear to be connected with, or but a continuation of 
the pleasure-ground. 

A Foss, or ha-ha, is a sunk fence, ditch-like, five or six feet deep, 
and ten, twenty, or more wide, and is made in different ways ac- 
cording to the nature of the ground. One sort is formed with a 
nearly upright side next the pleasure-ground, five, six, or seven feet 
deep, faced with a wall of brick, or stone, or strong post and plank- 
ing, &c.; the other side is made sloping outwai'd gradually from 
the bottom of said wall, till it terminates as near a level as possible. 

Another kind of foss is formed with both sides sloping and in per- 
pendicular depth from four to five or six feet, having a fence near 
that height arranged along the bottom, formed of strong paling or 
any kind of palisado-work; the sides may be sloped gradually from 
the bottom to ten or twenty feet width, or more at top; but sloped 
more to the field side than to the other. 

It being absolutely necessary to have the whole of the pleasure- 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. 73 

ground surrounded with a good fence of some kind, as a defence 
against cattle, &c., a foss being a kind of concealed fence, will 
answer that purpose where it can conveniently be made, without 
interrupting the view of such neighbouring parts as are beautified 
by art or nature, and at the same time effect an appearance that 
these are only a continuation of the pleasure-ground. Over the foss 
in various parts may be made Chinese and other curious artd fanci- 
ful bridges, which will have a romantic and pleasing effect. 

Of Ancient Designs. 

Designs in ancient gardening for a pleasure-ground, consulted 
uniformity in every part, exact levels, straight lines, parallels, 
squares, angles, circles, and other geometrical figures, &c., all cor- 
responding in the greatest regularity to effect an exact symmetry 
and proportion. 

Straight walks were every where observed, and all arranged 
parallel and crossing one another in regular intersections^ generally 
a grand one of gravel was extended in a straight line immediately 
from the front of the main house, having each side verged either 
with a regular straight border of earth, furnished with a variety of 
flowers, &c., and sometimes having a verge of grass three or four 
feet wide, then a border, embellished as above w^ith various plants; 
this main walk being often intersected by others at regular distances, 
so as sometimes to divide the spaces immediately in the front of the 
house into four, six, or more equal squares, some of which were 
sometimes formed into parterres, sometimes only naked grass-plats, 
or other uniform divisions; and often the whole garden was thus 
divided by straight, parallel, and intersecting walks, into many 
regular squares and angles without any variation. 

Grand parterres were very commonly presented immediately on 
the front of the main house, having a grand walk of grass or gravel 
directly from the house through the middle, or dividing the parterre 
ground into two divisions. 

A parterre is a spacious level spot of ground divided into many 
partitions, of different figures and dimensions, by means of edgings 
or lines of dwarf-box, &c., or by verges of grass-turf and tracks of 
sand, fine gravel, shell, and scroll-work, &c. 

These works were in great estimation in ancient gardening, and 
were commonly situated directly in front of the house, generally 
the whole width of the front, or sometimes more. 

The general figure of a parterre is an oblong or long square; 
because by the rules of Perspective, or the natural declension of the 
visual rays in optics, a long square sinks almost to a square, and 
an exact square appears much less so than it really is, when viewed 
at a distance; therefore parterres were generally made twice as 
long as broad. 

These were bounded by a long bed, or border of earth, and the 
internal space within divided into various little partitions or enclo- 
sures, artfully disposed into different figures corresponding with 
one another, such as long squares, triangles, circles, various scroll- 
works, flourishes of embroidery, and many other fanciful devices; 
K 



74 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

all of which figures were edged with dwarf-box, &c., with interven- 
ing alleys of turf, fine sand, shells, &c. 

The partitions or beds were planted with the choicest kinds of 
flowers, but no large plants to hide the difterent figures, for such 
were intended as a decoration for the whole place long after the 
season of the flowers was past. 

Though parterres in general are ndw become rather unfashion- 
able, a little of that kind of work might still be permitted for variety 
sake, though not immediately in front of the house as heretofore. 
A spacious lawn, bounded with rural shrubberies, is the most 
eligible situation for such; but a plain parterre of a moderate ex- 
tent, either formed with lines of box, or with turf, might be intro- 
duced in some of the more internal parts, and distributed either 
into plain or complex departments, or beds of earth for flowers, so 
as to answer the purpose of a flower-garden for the most curious 
sorts; it will have an agreeable effect in forming a contrast with 
the more rural scenes. 

In the more interior parts large tracts of ground were frequently 
divided by straight grass-walks into many square and angular 
divisions of wilderness, each division surrounded by regular hedges 
of various kinds of trees and shrubs, kept in uniform order by 
annual clippings; having the interior part of each quarter planted 
with trees and shrubs, which were in a manner concealed by the 
hedges from persons in the adjacent walks, so that hardly any thing 
but close hedges, the same thing over again, appeared to view on 
each side of the walks; and all the walks generally led into uniform 
openings of grass, particularly to a grand circle or octagon, forming 
some central part. 

Frequently there were partitions of regular hedge work, particu- 
larly of evergreens, surrounding large squares of grass-ground, 
designed as pieces of garden ornaments; the hedge-work being 
often formed into various uniform devices, such as pilasters, 
arcades or arches, porticoes, galleries, amphitheatres, pavilions, 
cabinets, bowers, pediments, niches, and cornices; likewise regular 
arbours, having the sides formed into arcades, and sometimes the 
top vaulted; and with various other formal imitations, all performed 
in hedge-work, which were often so arranged and trained, as to effect 
an air of grandeur and art. High hedges were also in great repute, 
as boundaries to grand walks and avenues, sometimes carried up 
from fifteen or twenty to thirty or forty feet high; sometimes trained, 
perfectly close from the very bottom to top; others open below a 
considerable way, and formed into regular arches, &c., all of which 
sometimes appeared magnificent and ornamental, but were trouble- 
some and expensive to keep in order, on account of their great 
height: however, all sorts of hedge- work was generally esteemed 
so ornamental in ancient gardening, that almost every division was 
surrounded with regular hedges of one sort or 'other, presenting 
themselves to view in every part, shutting out all other objects from 
sight; but in modern designs, such hedges are rarely admitted; 
every compartment of the plantation being left open to view from 
the walks and lawns, in order to afford a full prospect of the various 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. 75 

trees, shrubs and flowers, which consequently are more beautiful 
than continued ranges of close hedges; but for the sake of variety, 
a little ornamental hedge-work might still be introduced in some 
particular parts of the ground. 

Labyrinths or mazes of hedge-work, in the manner of a wilder- 
ness, also prevailed in many large gardens. 

A labyrinth is a maze or sort of intricate wilderness plantation, 
abounding with hedges and walks, formed into many windings and 
turnings, leading to one common centre, extremely difficult to find 
out, designed in large pleasure-grounds by way of amusement. 

It is generally formed with hedges, commonly in double rows, 
leading in various intricate turnings backward and forward, with 
intervening plantations and gravel walks alternately between hedge 
and hedge; the great aim is to have the walk contrived in so many 
mazy, intricate windings to and fro, that a person inay have much 
difficulty in finding out the centre, by meeting with as many stops 
and disappointments as possible; for he must not cross or break 
through the hedges; so that in a well contrived labyrinth a stranger 
will often entirely lose himself so as not to find his way to the 
centre nor out again. 

As to plans ol them, it is impossible to describe such by words, 
any further than the above hints, and their contrivance must prin- 
cipally depend on the ingenuity of the designer. 

But as to the hedges, walks, and trees, the hedges are usually 
made of hornbeam, beech, elm, or any other kind that can be kept 
neat by clipping. The walks should be five feet wide at least, laid 
with gravel, neatly rolled and kept clean; and the trees and shrubs 
to form a thicket of wood between the hedges, may be of any hardy 
kinds of the deciduous tribe, interspersed with some evergreens; 
and in the middle of the labyrinth should be a spacious opening, 
ornamented with some rural seats and shady bowers, &c. 

Sometimes small labyrinths are formed with box-edgings and 
borders for plants, with handsome narrow walks between, in imi- 
tation of the larger ones, which have a very pleasing and amusing 
effect in small gardens. 

Detached trained figures of evergreens, as yew, cypress, juniper, 
holly, box, and various other close-growing evergreen plants, were 
also very predominant in ancient designs, and generally disposed 
in regular ranges along the borders and other verges of grand 
walks; being trained by clipping into various formal shapes, as 
pyramids, obelisks, columns, &c., in a variety of forms, with other 
formal figures, all placed in the most exact arrangement. Some 
also were often placed singly in the midst of some circle, octagon, 
or other open space, and were all kept in order by clipping once or 
twice every summer, and were considered as great ornaments. 

Straight rows of the most beautiful trees, forming long avenues 
and grand walks, were in great estimation, considered as great 
ornaments, and no considerable estate and eminent pleasure- 
ground were without several of them. 

Regular grass slopes also greatly prevailed in most old gardens 
as ornaments to particular divisions; sometimes such were formed 



76 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

at the beginning of some rising ground, and sometimes at the ter- 
mination or lower part; frequently canals and other pieces of 
water were bounded by a range of them, and likewise the sides of 
terraces and other elevated places. Moderate grass slopes, also, 
often formed a boundary to some open spaces, such as bowling- 
greens, flower garden, &c., forming a sort of terrace all around, 
and frequently having a gravel walk at top; these slopes were 
always formed with the greatest regularity and exactness, which 
in some situations were very ornamental. 

Regular terraces, either on natural eminences or forced ground, 
were often introduced by way of ornament for the sake of pros- 
pect, and of enjoying the fresh air in summer; they were of various 
dimensions with respect to height, from two to ten, or twenty feet, 
according to the nature of the situation and purpose they were 
designed for; some being ranged singly, others double, treble, or 
several, one above another, on the side of some considerable rising 
ground in theatrical arrangement. 

The perpetual show of stifl' formality, displayed by this kind of 
fancy, has induced many to discontinue it; but some of these run 
into the contrary extreme by excluding all formal regularity and 
uniform appearance, and substituting various dissimilar arrange- 
ments in the formation of the different compartments, in fancied 
imitation of natural rurality as much as possible. 

However, for sake of diversity, some of the more elegant regular 
works ought still to be admitted, which would form a beautiful con- 
trast with the general rural improvements, and diversify the whole 
scene, so as to have a most enchanting effect. 

General Care and Culture. 

With respect to the general culture of the ground, neatness must 
ever be observed in every part; the walks, lawns, shrubbery, 
clumps, &c., and the several compartments of trees, shrubs, and 
flowers, kept duly furnished with a proper stock of the various 
plants. 

In the provision of plants, both of the tree and shrub kinds, let 
it be remarked, that when such are taken out of the woods or 
swamps, and planted in open exposures, they seldom succeed; there- 
fore the better way will be to propagate them in your nursery, 
either by cuttings (of such as grow that way) or by seed; and when 
arrived there at a proper size, they may be transplanted into the 
pleasure-ground or elsewhere with success. 

The gravel walks must always be kept free from weeds and all 
sorts of litter, and should be rolled at least once every week or ten 
days in summer, particularly the principal walks; previously trim- 
ming the edges, especially if verged with grass-ground, and sweep- 
ing off all loose litter. 

The rolling in summer should be occasionally performed imme- 
diately after showers of rain, particularly the first after any continu- 
ance of very dry weather, to settle all the loose parts compact and 
smooth; in winter the rolling should also be occasionally perform- 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. 77 

ed, observing that it is improper to break up the walks at that 
season in rough ridges, as often practised, to remain in that unsight- 
ly manner till spring, whereby they are rendered useless at a 
time when there is hardly any dry or safe walking upon grass or 
other parts; besides, they have a disagreeable and slovenly appear- 
ance. 

I would therefore advise to let the walks remain undisturbed, at 
least until spring, when, if the surface be foul or mossy, they may 
be broken up, the top turned to the bottom, and immediately raked 
and rolled, and rendered in a fit condition for walking on. 

All the principal grass walks and lawns within the limits of the 
pleasure-ground, especially such parts as are intended for walk- 
ing on, should also be kept perfectly neat by frequent mowing in 
summer to keep the grass short, close and fine; give also occa- 
sional rolling, both to clean up the scattering worm-casts and to 
render the surface smooth and firm. Always make choice of a 
dewy morning or moist weather for the work of mowing, as the 
short grass will cut much better then than when dry: be careful to 
have each mowing performed with an even hand, not to score, or 
leave the mark of the scythe at each stroke, which has a most dis- 
agreeable appearance, and directly after rake up all the swarths of 
grass into heaps and carry them away. 

Rolling the grass should be occasionally performed, between the 
times of mowing, in order to continue the surface always firm, 
even, and of a close, smooth appearance. 

In extensive pleasure-grounds, and large extended lawns, walks, 
&c., the rolling is sometimes done by horses, having a very large 
roller furnished with horse-shafts, and the horses' feet occasionally 
muffled, especially when the ground is rather soft, to prevent their 
cutting the surface of the grass in holes. 

Likewise keep all grass-ground clear from litter, such as fallen 
leaves of trees, &c., which may be expeditiously effected by a light 
broom or besom on a long handle. 

The edges of all principal grass walks and those of grass-ground 
next to gravel walks in particular, should always be kept close and 
even, and dressed once or twice a year at least, with an Edging- 
Iron, which ought to be made of the best steel, and kept very sharp: 
this instrument is made somewhat in the crescent form, and about 
nine inches in diameter, pretty much like a saddler's cutting-knife, 
rounded below at the edge part, and with a socket above, upright 
in the middle, in which to fix a straight handle of wood, about four 
feet long; with this instrument a man can dress as much grass- 
edging in a day as three men with spades, do it much neater, and 
without wasting the edges of the borders. 

The above dressings ought particularly to be given previous to 
turning the gravel-walks; at other times during the summer the 
edges may be trimmed occasionally as the grass grows rank, either 
with a pair of garden shears, or with shears made for that purpose, 
exactly in the form of sheep-shears, but a little larger and longer 
in the blades. 

The shrubbery plantations should generally be all suffered to take 



78 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan, 

their own natural growth, and branch out into full heads, only just 
giving a little occasional trimming to any very irregular growths, 
such as retrenching or reducing any very luxuriant rude shoots, 
or considerable ramblers running wildly from all the other branches. 
Cut out all dead wood and keep all tiie shrubs from entangling 
with one another, so as the head of each shrub may appear distinct, 
and show itself to proper advantage. 

The ground of the principal shrubbery plantations, in which the 
shrubs stand distant, not covering the surface, should be digged 
every year, late in autumn, or in spring, previously giving the 
shrubs any necessary pruning as above observed; this operation 
gives health and vigour to the plants, kills weeds, and gives the 
place an air of culture, and a lively neat appearance. 

After this general digging, the ground must be kept clean from 
weeds all summer, by occasional hoeing in dry weather, which with 
a scuffling- hoe may be expeditiously performed. 

Particular care must be taken of the flower borders, &c.; they 
must be neatly and carefully dug in autumn, and pointed and 
dressed afresh in spring, and according as the various plants grow 
up, let such as need support have sticks placed to preserve them 
upright: and as the herbaceous perennials and annuals have done 
flowering and their stalks decay, cut them down close, clearing oiF 
all decayed leaves and other rubbish. 

All kinds of hedge-work and detached trained figures of ever- 
greens should be clipped twice a year — that is to say, in June and 
in September, for without this, they will not have that neat, hand- 
some appearance that inspires admiration and does credit to the 
person under whose care they are. 

For further particulars, see the work under this head in the difter- 
ent months. 

The Flower Garden. 

A "commodious piece of good ground for a flower garden, situated 
in a convenient and v/ell-sheltered place, and well exposed to the 
sun and air, ought to be allotted for the culture of the more curious 
and valuable flowers. 

The form of this ground may be either square, oblong, or some- 
what circular, having the boundary embellished with a collection 
of the most curious flowering shrubs; the interior part should be 
divided into many narrow beds, either oblong, or in the manner of 
a parterre; but plain four feet wide beds arranged parallel, having 
two feet wide alleys between bed and bed will be found most con- 
venient, yet to some not the most fanciful. 

In either method a walk should be carried round the outward 
boundary, leaving a border to surround the whole ground, and with- 
in this, to have the various divisions or beds raising them generally 
in a gently rounding manner, edging such as you like with dwarf- 
box, some with trift, pinks, sisyrinchium, &c. by way of variety, 
laying the walks and alleys with the finest gravel. Some beds may 
be neatly edged with boards, especially such as are intended for 
the finer sort of bulbs, &c. 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. - 79 

In this division you may plant the finest hyacinths, tulips, poly- 
anthus-narcissus, double jonquils, anemones, ranunculuses, bul- 
bous-irises, tuberoses, scarlet and yellow amarylUses, colchicums, 
fritillaries, crown imperials, snow-drops, crocuses, lilies of various 
sorts, and all the different kinds of bulbous and tuberous-rooted 
flowers, which succeed in the open ground; each sort principally 
in separate beds, especially the more choice kinds, being necessary 
both for distinction sake and for the convenience of giving such as 
need it protection from inclement weather; but for particulars of 
their culture, see the respective articles in the various months. 

Likewise in this division should be planted a curious collection 
of carnations, pinks, polyanthuses, and many other beautiful sorts, 
arranging some of the most valuable in beds separately; others 
may be intermixed in different beds, forming an assemblage of 
various sorts. 

In other beds you may exhibit a variety of all sorts, both bulbous, 
tuberous, and fibrous-rooted kinds, to keep up a succession of bloom 
in the same beds during the whole season. 

Here I cannot avoid remarking that many flower gardens, &c. 
are almost destitute of bloom during a great part of the season; 
which could be easily avoided, and a blaze of flowers kept up, both 
in this department and in the borders of the pleasure-ground, 
from March to November, by introducing from our woods and 
fields the various beautiful ornaments with which nature has so 
profusely decorated them. Is it because they are indigenous that 
we should reject them? Ought we not rather to cultivate and im- 
prove them? What can be more beautiful than our Lobelias, 
Orchises, Asclepiases and Asters; Dracocephalums, Gerardias, 
Monardas and Ipomoeas; Liliums, Podalyrias, Rhexias, Solidagos 
and Hibiscuses; Phloxes, Gentianas, Spigelias, Chironias, and 
Sisyrinchiums, Cassias, Ophryses, Coreopsises and Cypripediums; 
Fumarias, Violas, Rudbeckias and Liatrises; with our charming 
Limodorum, fragrant Arethusa, and a thousand other lovely plants 
which, if introduced, would grace our plantations and delight our 
senses? 

In Europe plants are not rejected because they are indigenous; 
on the contrary, they are cultivated with due care; and yet here 
we cultivate many foreign trifles, and neglect the profusion of 
beauties so bountifully bestowed upon us by the hand of nature. 

Work to be done this Month. 

Prune such of your ornamental shrubs, &c. as need it, particu- 
larly the hardy deciduous kinds; all decayed, ill-placed and 
straggling branches ought to be cut off close to where they were 
produced, and such others shortened as are growing in a disorderly 
way, always taking great care to form the heads in a full and 
handsome manner, that they may appear well furnished and dis- 
play the beauty of their foliage and bloom in due season. 

Great care should be taken at this time of the choicest kinds 
of flowering plants and other tender kinds in pots — they should be 



80 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

carefully protected from severe frosts, by giving each sort suitable 
covering. 

Auriculas. 

The best auriculas in pots should be well protected from exces- 
sive rains, snow or sharp frosts; which will preserve them in 
strength to flower in great perfection. 

The choicest varieties of these plants should always be removed 
in their pots, about the beginning of November, and placed in 
frames, or in a bed arched over with hoops, in a warm dry situation 
in the full sun, where they can be occasionally covered when the 
weather is unfavourable; but let the covers be kept constantly off 
in the day time when the weather is mild and dry. 

Care of Carnations. 

Take great care to protect your fine carnations that are in pots 
from hard frosts, excessive rains and snow; for notwithstanding 
the plants being hardy enough to stand the winter in the open air, 
it is advisable to defend the choicer sorts in bad weather, to preserve 
them in good strength for flowering in the greatest perfection. 

These pots should be plunged in a raised bed of dry compost, in 
the beginning of winter, and the bed arched over low with pliant 
rods or hoops at that time; this will be of great advantage to the 
plants, if you are careful to draw mats over the arches when the 
weather is severe. 

But if the pots were to be placed in garden frames it would be 
still better, if you take care to put the glasses over them in rigor- 
ous weather and at night; but be careful to give them as much free 
air as possible by day, when the weather permits; either by taking 
the glasses totally off for a few hours, or tilting them up behind. 

Care of choice Hyacinths and Tulips. 

In severe frosty weather it would be of beneficial advantage if 
the beds, wherein you have deposited the choicest kinds of hya- 
cinths and tulips, or any other curious bulbous roots, be covered 
either with an awning of mats, or, in default thereof, with straw, 
fern, leaves of trees, or dry long litter; but it must be removed as 
soon as the severe weather is over. 

Old decayed fine tan is a good article to cover hyacinths, tulips, 
and other bulbs with; it may be laid on one inch, or one inch and 
a half deep, immediately previous to the commencement of the se- 
vere winter frost, and need not be removed, as it will keep down 
the weeds in spring, and protect the roots from intense heat and 
drought during their period of ripening. - 

Ranunculuses and Anemones. 

The beds or frames in which are planted your choice kinds of 
ranunculuses and anemones, should be carefully protected from 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. §1 

frost by laying tan, earth, or litter round the outside of the frames, 
and carefully covering them at nights and in severe vi^eather with 
glasses, or with boards laid lengthwise or across the frames, with 
mats or other covering on top, but carefully observing to give them 
plenty of air every day that the weather is tolerably mild, for if too 
much confined they will draw up and be good for nothing. 

Plant ranunculuses and anemones in mild, dry, open weather, if 
you have any now out of the ground, and the frost will admit 
of your working it; these now planted will succeed those which 
were put into the ground in October or November. 

For their reception choose a dry situation where the ground is 
of a light, rich nature. Let it be well digged, breaking the earth 
fine, and form it into beds of three feet and a half or four feet wide; 
rake the surface smooth, and then plant the roots. These roots, 
after planting, should be protected, as above, from severe frost and 
too much wet; either of which would, at this season, materially in- 
jure them. 

For the particular method of preparing the beds and planting the 
roots, see the work of October. 

In warm, dry, and well sheltered situations, in the middle states 
and generally in the southern states, these beautiful flowers maybe 
planted in the open borders in small patches with other kinds, and 
will there make a very agreeable appearance. You may plant four 
or five roots in a small circle of about six inches diameter, one in 
the middle and the rest round the extreme part of the circle; and 
let these patches or clumps be from two or three to five, ten, or 
twelve feet asunder, and the roots be covered from one to two 
inches deep, according to the lightness of the ground. 

The above practice, however, of planting those roots in patches 
about the borders is meant principally for the common sorts; for 
it is necessary to plant the fine varieties together in narrow beds or 
frames, as above, in order both to have the opportunity of protect- 
ing them occasionally in severe weather, and that when in flower 
they may display a spacious show together in their various colours, 
stripes, and tints, in the different varieties; and also in the spring, 
when the plants are in bloom, they can be more readily sheltered 
from great rains or too much sun, both of which would hasten the 
decay of the flowers; and as the pleasure of admiring the bloom is 
the only intention of cultivating these flowers, no pains should be 
spared to protect the more beautiful sorts. 

Planting Tulips. 

Tulips, if you have any out of the ground, should now be planted 
the first settled open weather, to blow late, and to succeed those 
planted late in autumn. 

Let this be done as soon as the weather will permit; for if these 

roots are kept much longer out of the ground, they will blow very 

poorly. If they are to be planted in beds, let them be made three 

or four feet wide, raised two or three inches, somewhat rounding, 

L 



82 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

that they may throw off' the redundant wet of heavy rains, and 
remain dry during winter. 

If intended to plant any of the inferior sorts in the borders, in 
assemblage with other flowers, they may either be planted in a 
single row towards the front, or some dotted singly, or by three 
together, to effect a greater variety; but these flowers, when planted 
in the borders, make the best appearance in little clumps; that is, 
in a circle of about six or eight inches, plant four or five roots, and 
about from three or four to five or ten feet farther, plant another 
such clump, and so proceed, in a varied order, towards the front and 
middle. 

Observe that hyacinths, tulips, and other hardy bulbs, which, to 
do them justice, ought to be planted in October, or early in No- 
vember, should have lighter or more shallow covering, in proportion 
to the length of time they are kept out (rf ground after that period; 
for instance, tulips, which ought to get four inches of light covering 
in October, will not be able to bear more than three in December, 
two and a half in January, two in February, and one and a half if 
kept up till March; for many of the bulbous kinds become so 
exhausted by keeping them too long out of the ground, that if 
planted at the usual depth they have not strength to bear up 
through it, and ultimately perish. However, this partial remedy 
ought by no means to induce to the keeping of bulbous roots out of 
ground after their proper season; but by attending to it, roots may 
be preserved that would otherwise perish, and which, by planting 
in due time the succeeding season, may produce tolerably good 
flowers, and an increase of their kinds. 

Be particular never at any season, nor under any circumstance, 
to give less covering to any kind of a bulbous or tuberous root 
when planted in the open ground than one inch over the crown or 
upper part. 

Fianling Crocuses and Snow Drops. 

Any sort of crocuses may still be planted if dry, mild weather; 
generally planting them along the edges of the flower borders, next 
the walks, and in flower beds, &c., commonly within five or six 
inches of the edge, either in a continued row, or dotted in little 
patches planted about one inch and a half deep: though those 
designed for the borders appear to greater advantage when dis- 
posed in small patches than in any other way. Draw a small 
circle with your finger, about four or five inches diameter; in the 
middle plant one root, and plant three or four round the edge of 
the circle; about eighteen inches or two or three feet farther make 
another circle, and plant the roots as above; and so proceed to the 
end of the border, &c., or may vary the patches in having some 
near the edge, and others more towards the middle; observing, if 
you have different kinds, to plant each sort separate; and if you 
plant the first patch with yellow crocuses, plant the next with blue, 
and so proceed with others of different sorts. 

Snow drops may also now be planted in the same manner as the 



Jan.] flower garden. §3 

crocuses; but neither of them, when planted so late, flower well 
the spring following — the former, in particular, will totally perish 
if kept much longer out of the ground. These kinds ought to have 
been planted in vSeptember, or early in October, for being flowers 
of early bloom, they do not agree with being kept up after their 
proper time of planting. 

When you desire a considerable increase of crocuses or snow 
drops, take up the roots but once in two years; if you let them 
remain longer, though the increase will be numerous, the roots 
become very small and produce but poor flowers. 

Planting various sorts of Bulbs. 

Jonquils, ornithogalums, narcissuses, hyacinths, bulbous irises, 
Persian irises, gladioluses, fritillaries, crown imperials, or any 
other kinds of hardy bulbous flower roots that yet remain above 
ground should now be planted as soon as the weather will permit. 
Mild dry weather ought to be chosen for planting these and all 
other kinds of bulbous roots, and see that the ground is not too wet. 

When it is intended to plant any of the common sorts of the 
above, or other kinds of bulbous roots in the borders, they may be 
planted in the manner mentioned above for the common tulips, &c. 
Observing particularly, that the longer you keep them out of the 
ground after October or November, the shallower they must be 
planted. 

Flowers to blow in the house. 

Several sorts of bulbous roots may be placed upon bulb-glasses 
of water for blowing in the apartments of the house, such as hya- 
cinths, narcissuses, jonquils, early dwarf tulips, bulbous irises, &c.; 
the glasses for this purpose are to be had at the seed and glass 
shops. Being made concave at the mouth, they contain each one 
root, and are to be filled with soft water, and one root placed in 
each glass with its bottom touching the water; placing the bottles 
upon a shelf or chimney-piece of some warm room, or in the inside 
of a warm window, and if where the sun comes, it will be an addi- 
tional advantage; but in severe frost remove them to the interior 
part of the room where a fire is kept; they will soon shoot their 
roots down into the water, which, when become very foul or foetid, 
should be renewed with fresh occasionally: they will thus blow 
very agreeably early in the spring, and may be greatly forwarded 
if placed in a hot-bed or hot-house. 

Likewise, may plant various sorts of bulbous and tuberous flower 
roots in pots for blowing in a house, such as hyacinths, narcissuses 
of all kinds, early tulips, crocuses, anemones, ranunculuses, or 
any other spring flowering kind; having small pots or boxes filled 
with light sandy earth, plant the roots therein just over their 
crowns, and place the pots near a window; when the roots begin to 
shoot, give occasional light waterings, and they will flower in good 
perfection at an early season. 



84 THE PLEASURE, OR [Jan. 

Blowing Flowers early in Hot-beds, Sfc. 

Many sorts of bulbous, tuberous, and fibrous-rooted perennial 
flowers, if planted in pots, and now placed in a hot-bed, hot-house, 
or any forcing department at work, will shoot and flower early 
without much trouble, only to give occasional watering. Pots of 
roses, dwarf almonds, double-blossom cherry, peach, &c. may also 
be placed in the forcing houses for early bloom. 

Care of ■perennial fibrous-rooted Plants in Pots. 

Double wall-flowers, double stocks, double sweet-williams, and 
any other of the choicer kinds of perennial plants in pots, should 
be well secured from severe frosts. If these plants in pots are 
placed in frames, let the glasses or other covering be kept over 
them at all times when the frost is keen, or occasionally in very 
wet weather; but in mild dry weather the plants must not be covered 
in the day time. 

Take care now, also, of all other choicer kinds of fibrous-rooted 
perennial plants in general, which are in pots, to secure them from 
frost; such as the double rose campion, double scarlet lychnis, 
double rocket, and all other like kinds. 

Those plants which are in pots should, where there is not the 
convenience of frames, be plunged to their rims in a dry and warm 
border, and at night and in severe weather be covered with gar- 
den-mats, supported on arched hoops placed low over such bed or 
border. 

Seedling Flowers. 

Boxes or pots of any tender or choice kinds of seedling flowers 
should be covered in frosty weather either with mats, long litter, 
fern or the like, which should be laid a good thickness over them, 
and close round the sides, or remove them under a garden-frame 
and glasses, &c., which will be the better way. 

Likewise beds of the more tender and curious sorts of seedling 
flowers, in the common ground, should also be covered in hard 
frosts with mats or long dry litter, but remove the covering when 
the weather is mild. 

Protecting Flowering- Shrubs. 

If you have hardy flowering-shrubs or evergreens in pots, you 
should, to protect their roots from the frost, plunge the pots to their 
rims in the ground (if omitted doing in November or December), 
and cover the pots with some tan, leaves of trees or dry litter; 
allotting them for this purpose a dry, warm situation, where water 
is not apt to stand. 

But any tenderer or more curious young evergreens, &c. in pots, 
should have the protection of frames or occasional covering of 
mats, &c. in severe weather. 



Jan.] flower GARDEN. §5 

Protect also the roots of the choicer kinds of new planted flower- 
ing shrubs and evergreens from frost. This is done by laying dry 
mulchy litter on the surface of the ground, close round the lower 
part of the stem of each, as far as their roots extend or rather farther. 

Likewise support such new-planted shrubs as require it with 
stakes, that they may not be displaced by the wind. 

Grass and Gravel ivalks. 

The grass and gravel walks should all be kept in decent order, 
especially in the principal parts of the garden and pleasure-ground: 
suffer no leaves of trees or other litter to remain thereon, for such 
would give them an unbecoming appearance. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

Where mild weather is now prevalent and the ground not bound 
up by frost, you may plant all kinds of hardy deciduous trees and 
shrubs; and towards the latter end of the month, especially where 
smart frosts are not expected to follow, you may plant the different 
kinds of hardy evergreen trees and shrubs. 

Plant cuttings and make layers of such kinds as you wish to 
propagate by these methods: plant dwarf-box for edgings, which is 
superior to every kind of plant for that purpose. Transplant suck- 
ers from the roots of roses and such other shrubs as produce them, 
and are worthy of cultivation. 

Hedges of the various kinds of hawthorn, hornbeam, beach, elm, 
privet, white mulberry, &c. may now be planted. Make and repair 
grass and gravel walks; keep such as are made in clean and neat 
order, and give them occasional rollings. 

Sow hardy annual and perennial flower seeds, and do the various 
other works directed to be done in the flower garden and pleasure- 
ground in March. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

A green-house is a garden building fronted with glass, serv- 
ing as a winter residence for tender plants from the warmer parts 
of the world, which require no more artificial heat than what is 
barely sufficient to keep oft' frost, and dispel such damps as may 
arise in the house, occasioned by the perspiration of the plants or a 
long continuance of moigt weather. 

A very considerable share of the vegetable creation, which in 
their respective native countries grow naturally in open fields, &c. 
in all seasons, require, when cultivated in less favourable climates, 
protection in winter; but observe, however, that those of the green- 
house department, being from the warmer parts of the world, 



86 THE GREEN-HOUSE. fjAN. 

require protection from frost only, not needing aid of artificial heat 
like stove plants, which are generally natives of the hottest regions, 
except in very severe weather; but the aid of a moderate fire, 
burned in a furnace contrived outside, either in the end or back 
wall, communicating the heat to the flues or funnels ranging along 
the inside, will be necessary not only in severe frosts, but also 
in moist foggy weather; a moderate fire now and then will 
dry up the damps, which would otherwise prove pernicious to 
several of the more tender kinds, especially to those of succulent 
habits. 

A green-house should generally stand in the pleasure ground,- 
and if possible, upon a somewhat elevated and dry spot fronting 
the south, and where the sun has full access from its rising to set- 
ting; the building ought to be of brick or stone, having the front 
almost wholly of glass work, ranging lengthwise east and west, 
and constructed upon an ornamental plan. 

As to its general dimensions, with respect to length, width and 
height, it may be from ten to fifty feet or more long, according to 
the number of plants which you intend it should contain, and its 
width in the clear, from ten or fifteen to twenty feet; though for a 
middle sized house fifteen or eighteen feet is sufficient; its height 
to the top of the upright front glasses equal to its width; as to erect- 
ing rooms over it, as is commonly directed, I disapprove of, such 
being not only an additional and unnecessary expense, but they 
give the building a heavy appearance; on the contrary all pieces 
of garden architecture ought to display a light, gay and sprightly 
taste. 

The walls of the back and ends should be carried up three bricks, 
or about two feet three inches thick, the more ettectually to keep 
out frost; a furnace ought to be erected outside, either in the back 
wall or one of the ends, as before observed, communicating with 
flues within, ranging in two or three returns along the back wall, 
with only a brick on edge, with the plastering between them and 
the inside; also one flue running along the front and end walls, 
raised wholly above the floor; and as to the front of the building it 
should have as much glass as possible, and a wide glass door should 
be in the middle, both for ornament and entrance, and for moving 
in and out the plants; a small door at the end for entrance in severe 
weather will be found of considerable utility. 

The width of the windows for the glass sashes may be five or 
six feet, and the piers between them may be either of timber, six, 
eight or ten inches wide, according to their height, or if of brick 
or stone, they must be about two feet wide, sloping both sides of 
each pier inward, that by taking oft" the angles a more free admis- 
sion may be given to the rays of the sun; the bottom sashes must 
reach within a foot or eighteen inches of the floor of the house, and 
their top reach within eight or ten inches of the ceiling; and if 
brick or stone piers two feet wide, folding shutters may be hung 
inside to fall back against each pier. 

In the modern construction of green-houses, in order to have as 
much glass as possible in front, the piers between the sashes are 



Jan.] the GREEN-HOUSE. §7 

commonly made of good timber from six to eight or ten inches 
thick, according to their height, so as to admit as great a portion 
of light and heat of the sun as may be; and, on the same account, 
one half or one third of the roof is formed of glass-work, made in 
the manner of hot-bed lights, the remainder being either covered 
with slate or shingles and tarpaulins. Or very strong canvass fixed 
on rollers, to be let down over the roof-glasses in very severe 
weather; you may also have large canvass cloths upon rollers to 
let down occasionally before the windows, or in default of such, 
you may nail up garden mats. 

Let one-third of the front side of the roof, for the whole length 
of the house, be formed of glass-work, and the back wall raised, so 
as that a horizontal ceiling may be carried from the upper part of 
these lights to it, which will cause the back half of the roof to be 
somewhat more flat than the front. Ornamental wood-work may 
be erected outside along the top of those lights to give a light 
appearance to the roof. Or, if the house be small, you may carry 
the entire roof with a gentle slope from the front to the back wall, 
which must be made of a proper height for that purpose; one-third 
or one-half of such roof may be made of glass-work, from the ter- 
mination of which carry the ceiling on a level to the back part of 
the house. 

The better to confine the air warmed by the sun in the day time, 
and to prevent the cold air from rushing in on the approach of 
night, when that within begins to cool, and consequently to con- 
tract in bulk, I would advise to have all the panes in the roof- 
lights neatly and closely puttied where they overlap one another; 
and to have either one, two or three of those lights, in proportion to 
the length of the house, so constructed, as to slide down and up a few 
feet by means of pulleys, in order to give vent to the foul air gene- 
rated in the house, which naturally ascends to the upper part. The 
sized glass, recommended in page 11, for hot-bed lights, is what I 
would particularly recommend for these roof lights, being not only 
the strongest but by much the cheapest. 

The windows or upright front-lights must be made with large 
panes of glass, &c. to admit the more light, as well as to give a 
handsome appearance to the house; the upper half of each window 
must be so contrived as to slide down, and the lower half up occa- 
sionally, to admit air to the plants when necessary. 

If a spacious and ornamental window be placed in each end, (if 
the house be detached) to receive the benefit of the rising and set- 
ting sun, it will be of considerable advantage; these particularly 
should have good close shutters either inside or outside, and be 
kept shut every night during the winter, and also in the day time 
in very severe weather, except while the sun immediately shines 
on them. If the front is so contrived that inside shutters to the 
windows cannot be conveniently hung, outside sliding shutters 
should be made to be used only when necessity requires. 

But let it be particularly observed, that all the lights, cases, 
doors, and wood-work of the house be made of good seasoned 
wood, and well painted, to prevent either their swelling by wet or 



88 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Jan. 

shrinking bj drought; that all parts be well jointed and fitted 
together, so as to be as nearly air tight as possible. 

A house constructed on this plan will verj seldom require the 
assistance of fire-heat, which ought always to be used with great 
caution in a green-house; it will admit light, collect heat, and give 
health, beauty, and vigour to all the plants. 

Some green-houses, for large collections of plants, have two 
wings of smaller dimensions added to the main building, one at 
each end, in a right line, separated sometimes from it by glass 
partitions and sliding sashes for communication, the front almost 
wholly of glass, and part glass roofs, as above observed; thus, by 
these additional wings, the green-house will consist of three divi- 
sions, whereby the difterent qualities and temperatures of the 
various plants can be more eligibly suited. The middle or main 
division may be for all the principal and more hardy, woody or 
shrubby kinds, which require protection from frost only; one of the 
wings may be appropriated for the succulent tribe, and the other 
for the more tender kinds that require occasional heat in winter, 
yet can live without the constant heat of a stove or hot-house. 

Many green-houses, as they are commonly built, serve more for 
ornament than use; their situation to receive the south sun being 
the only essential that seems to be regarded towards preserving 
the health of the plants which they are intended to protect. It is 
rare to find one that will keep plants in good health during the 
winter, either by reason of their situation in moist places, their 
want of a sufliciency of glasses to attract heat and admit a due 
quantity of light, or of the glasses not being constructed so as to 
slide up and down occasionally, as they ought — as well to suffer 
the foul air to be discharged as to admit fresh. Sometimes where 
a green-house has been well considered in these points, all is con- 
founded by the introduction of a mettle stove and pipes, which 
never can be managed so as to give, when necessary, that gradual 
and well regulated heat, which will protect the plants without 
injuring them; and, besides, both the stove and pipes unavoidably 
emit in the house a quantity of smoke, which seldom fails to annoy 
the plants. It does not unfrequently happen when such a house is 
entrusted to the care of an ignorant or negligent person, that the 
whole collection is destroyed in one night by excessive heat, or at 
least rendered of very little value; this is'an evil which ought to 
be carefully guarded against. 

For the particular method of erecting the furnace and flues, see 
the article Hot-House, for this month, with which it agrees in 
every respect, only that one range round the house and two along 
the back wall will be sufficient; and that the flues may or may not 
be erected close to the walls, at pleasure. 

On whatever plan the green-house is constructed, let the whole 
inside, both ceiling, walls and flues be neatly finished oft" with good 
plaster and white-wash, and all the wood work made with the most 
critical exactness of good seasoned timber, particularly the doors, 
sashes and sash frames — the whole to be painted white — and let 



Jan.] the GREEN-HOUSE. §9 

the bottom or floor be paved with large square paving tile», or some 
similar materials. 

The floor of the green-house should be raised at least twelve 
inches above the level of the ground, and higher in proportion as 
the situation is moist or springy — for damps sometimes arise dur- 
ing the winter months, which prove very pernicious to plants. 

In the green-house should be tressels, which may be moved in 
and out, upon which rows of plants should be fixed so as to place 
the pots or tubs of plants in regular rows one above another, where- 
by the heads of the plants may be so situated as not to interfere 
vyith each other. The lowest row of plants or those nearest to the 
window, should be placed about four feet from them, that there may 
be a convenient breadth left next the glasses to walk in front, and 
the rows of plants should rise gradually from the first, in such a 
manner that the heads of the second row should be entirely advanced 
above the first, the stems only being hid, and so on for the whole. 
At the back of the house there should be allowed a space of at least 
four feet for the conveniency of watering the plants, and particu- 
larly to admit a current of air around themj there may also be narrow 
temporary open stairs of boards erected at one end, leading to a 
platform erected at the back on a level with the highest part of the 
stage, which will be found very convenient for watering as well as 
for common access to the highest and most remote plantsj and 
also to place thereon near the back wall pots and tubs of deciduous 
plants, which would appear very unsightly in the front of the stage; 
observing that the boards of such platform be laid one inch at least 
asunder for the free admission of the circulating air. 

If two or three air-holes be made in the back wall a little above 
this platform, or even below it, about six inches square in the out- 
side and twelve inside, with close shutting doors towards the out- 
side and within, both opening inward, they will be found very use- 
ful in mild weather for ventilating the house and driving off any 
foul air from the back part; in these holes, between both doors, 
you may stuff in any kind of wadding to prevent air coming in that 
way but when wanted. 

Never crowd the plants, for when pent in too closely a stag- 
nant rancid vapour is generated which often occasions a mouldi- 
ness upon the tender shoots and leaves, very destructive to the 
plants; neither should too great a proportion of succulent plants 
ever be placed in this department. 

The Conservatory. 

The green-house and conservatory have been generally con- 
sidered as synonymous; their essential difference is this: in the 
green-house die trees and plants are either in tubs or pots, and 
are placed on stands or stages during the winter till they are 
removed into some suitable situation abroad in summer. In the 
conservatory the ground plan is laid out in beds and borders, 
made up of the best compositions of soil that can be procured, 
three or four feet deep. In these the trees or plants taken out of 
M 



90 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Jan. 

their tubs or pots are regularly planted in the same manner as 
hardy plants are in the open air. This house is roofed as well as 
fronted with glass work, and instead of taking out the plants in 
summer as in the green-house, the whole of the glass roof is taken 
off", and the plants are thus exposed to the open air, and at the 
approach of autumn frosts the lights are again put on, and remain 
so till the May following. 

This building being furnished with flues, &c. may be used as a 
green-house at discretion by introducing stages instead of beds, and 
in that case the glass roof may be permanently fixed. 

Work to be done in the Green-house. 

In mild days, when the weather externally is moderate and calm, 
let the windows be opened a little for the admission of fresh air 
about ten or eleven o'clock, and about two or three in the afternoon 
let them be shut close again. But the time of opening and the 
time they should be kept so, must always be determined by the 
weatherj for there are many changes sometimes in a few hours at 
this season. The upper lights may be let down a few inches for 
the admission of fresh air as well as to let out the foul air of the 
house, even when the under lights cannot be raised with safety. 

In frosty weather the windows must be kept constantly closed, 
and if very severe, let the window shutters be shut every night, and 
even occasionally in the daytime when the frost is extremely rigor- 
ous, and no sun; or, in default of shutters, on this occasion let gar- 
den-mats be nailed up against all the v/indows, or strong canvass 
hung on rollers be let down before them, and remove the small or 
more tender plants in front, as far from danger as possible. 

Keep the plants perfectly clear from decayed leaves, and as clean 
as possible from any considerable foulness, and every part of the 
bouse clean and free from litter of fallen leaves, &c., all of which 
is essential at this time for the prosperity of the plants in general. 
When the weather is foggy or very wet, it will be proper to keep 
the windows and doors close. 

Water must be given to such plants as you see require it, but let 
that be given in very moderate quantities, and always, if possible, 
take the opportunity of a mild day, and if sunny, the better: in the 
forenoon from eleven to twelve or one o'clock, is the proper time 
of the day for watering at this season, and generally prefer soft 
water for this occasion. 

But very little water must be given at this season of the year to 
any of the aloes, sedums, or any other of the succulent plants. 

Let it likewise be observed that such of the woody exotics, as 
oranges, myrtles, geraniums, &c., as you shall see necessary to 
water, should have but a very moderate quantity given them at any 
one time. 

In such green-houses where there is the convenience of flues for 
occasional fire-heat in very rigorous weather, you should in time of 
continued severe frost, make moderate fires in an evening and 
morning, just sufficient to warm the inclosed air enough to resist 



Jan.] the hot-house. 91 

the frost; also in very foggy or moist weather, may make a very 
moderate fire to expel the damp, which often proves pernicious to 
some of the more delicate exotics of this department. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Hot-houses or Stoves, are buildings erected for preserving such 
tender exotic plants, natives of the warmer and hottest regions, 
as will not live in the respective countries where they are introduced, 
without artificial warmth in winter. 

Though there are great varieties of these stoves, yet they are 
reducible to two, the dry stove and the bark stove. They are 
both comparatively of modern invention; the first, as far as 1 can 
learn, not having been in use more than one hundred and twenty- 
one years, being introduced by Mr. Watts, gardener at the apothe- 
caries' garden at Chelsea, near London, who in the year 1684, 
contrived flues under his green-house; the latter being much 
posterior, not having been brought into repute till about the year 
1720, when Mr. Le Cour, of Leyden, in Holland, discovered its 
utility for the propagation of the pine apple, which had never before 
been brought to good perfection in Europe. Before the use of 
bark-beds was introduced, all stoves or hot-houses were worked 
by fire-heat only, hence they obtained the name of stoves. 

These stove departments are generally constructed in an oblong 
manner, ranging in a straight line east and west with the glass 
front and roof fully exposed to the south sun, and in dimensions 
may be from fifteen or twenty to fifty or a hundred feet long, by 
twelve or fourteen to sixteen feet wide in the clear, and commonly 
from ten to fourteen feet high in the back wall, by five or six in 
front, including the wall and upright glasses together, and furnished 
with flues round the inside of the front and end walls and in several 
returns in the back wall for fires, and with the whole roof over- 
head sloping to the south entirely of glass work, supported on 
proper cross-bearers. 

Stoves of much more capacious dimensions are frequently erected 
by persons of fortune and curiosity, for the cultivation of the 
taller growing kinds of exotics, which shall be taken due notice 
of after the less expensive and more generally used kinds are 
described. 

The Bark Stove. 

The Bark Stove is so called, as being furnished with an internal 
pit for a bark bed, as well as with flues for fire-heat, and is the 
most universally used, as being the most eligible for the general 
culture of all kinds of the tenderest exotics, as well as for forcing 
several sorts of hardy plants, flowers and fruits to early perfection: 
the bark bed beina; designed to effect a constant moderate moist 



92 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan. 

heat all the year round, and the flues used occasionally for fire-heat 
in winter or during cold weather, to produce such an additional 
warmth in the internal air as may be requisite at that season; the 
bark, bed being formed as hereafter directed, is productive of a 
uniform moderate growing heat of long duration, peculiarly adapted 
for the reception and growth of the most tender exotics, which 
require to be kept constantly plunged in their pots in it, such as 
pine apple, &c., in order to enjoy the benefit of that durable, moist 
bottom heat about their roots, peculiar to bark beds only, whose 
heat also evaporates and warms the air of the stove at all times, 
that even the plants on the surrounding shelves are comforted by 
its influence; so that with the aid of fire-heat in winter, regulated 
by a well graduated botanical thermometer placed constantly in 
the stove distant from the fire place, and as much in the shade as 
possible, there are hardly any exotics from the hottest regions of 
the world, either woody, herbaceous, or succulent, but may be 
cultivated in it, by placing them in such difierent situations as 
their nature may require. 

In the arrangement of the plants in this stove, some require the 
bark-bed, others succeed in any part of the house, and others, such 
as the succulents, require the dryest situation near the flues: many 
of the more tender, herbaceous, and shrubby plants, natives of the 
hottest countries, generally succeed best when plunged in the 
bark bed, though many sorts, both herbaceous and woody, thrive 
tolerably well in any part of the bark stove. 

I shall now proceed to give a minutiae of its general structure, 
upon the most improved plan, the more especially as many persons 
who may be desirous of erecting such may probably not be able to 
procure workmen capable of constructing it, without minute and 
particular directions. 

Having determined on the size, as to length, width, &c., proceed 
to lay the foundation of the walls, allowing due thickness for the 
erection of the surrounding inside flues on the foundation wall, with 
an allowance for their being detached therefrom about two or three 
inches. 

Then set off the back or north wall at least two bricks or 
eighteen inches thick, and the front and end walls about thirteen, 
carrying up the back wall from ten to fourteen feet high, in propor- 
tion to the width of the house: but those of the front and ends, from 
two to three feet, as the circumstances hereafter noticed may re- 
quire, upon which to erect the upright timber framing for the per- 
pendicular lights; previously observing, in carrying up the walls, 
to allot a proper space for a door-way, at one or both ends towards 
the back part; setting out also the furnace or fire-place in the bot- 
tom foundation, towards one end of the back wall behind, formed 
also of brick work, and made so as to communicate with the lowest 
flue within, the inside top of the furnace being about a foot lower 
than said flue, the better to promote the draught of heat and smoke; 
though, if the stove be more than about thirty-five feet long, a fire- 
place near each end will be necessary; or, if more convenient, they 
may both be in the middle of the back wall^ each communicating 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. 93 

with a separate range of flues; in either case you may form them 
wholly on the outside, or part outside and part running through 
the wall. 

This furnace is to be made large or small according to the kind 
of fuel intended to be used, and the number of returns of the flues 
inside; for when there are but few returns, a greater quantity of fire 
will be necessary to keep a sufficient heat. If the returns are fre- 
quent, and wood is to be the fuel, the furnace is to be made only 
three feet deep, to receive wood two and a half feet long or better; 
but if the flues run only once round with no returns, the depth must 
be five feet to receive four feet wood, especially if the house be 
large; in either case the furnace is to be made eighteen inches 
wide at bottom, the sides sloping outward to the height of twenty 
inches, where it is to be twenty-two inches wide, covered from thence 
by an arch, the top of which is to be two feet from the grate, which 
is to be made of iron bars, and one half of the depth of the furnace; 
the brick for the furnace should be laid in good well-worked brick 
clay (not in mortar), which, when burned by the fire, will cement 
so as to become a solid mass; this must have an iron barred grate 
one-half of the depth of the furnace, as before observed, the re- 
mainder of the depth to be made solid with brick, having an ash- 
hole underneath, with a close-shutting door to it. The furnace must 
also have an iron door placed in an iron frame, which door must be 
furnished near the lower part with another small door, for the 
admission of air to the fires, both having latches, so as to shut close 
occasionally; observing that this door is not to be wider than what 
is necessary for the admission of the firewood. Having both your 
ash-hole and furnace thus provided with close shutting doors, you 
may manage your fires to great advantage, by closing them up 
occasionally from too great a current of air, especially when burned 
clear, which would carry oft" the heat through the flues tOo rapidly. 
If you intend to burn stone coal, the furnace need not be so large, 
but the grate must run the whole depth. 

Having finished the furnace, proceed to carry up the walls, ob- 
serving particularly to leave a scarcement a foot wide in both end 
walls, immediately opposite where the back wall flues are to be 
erected, from the level of the lowest flue to the top of the highest, 
by which means you can open the ends of the flues and clean them 
when necessary, either by running in scrapers on the ends of long 
poles, or hauling any kind of small brush wood through them, by 
means of a line, from one end to the other; these scarcements may 
either be made up with brick from time to time, or with sashes and 
shutters, which will be more convenient. Whenever there arc 
returned flues, one above the other, similar contrivances will be 
found useful; but where there is only one running flue, a top tile 
may be taken off at convenient distances, by which means it can 
be cleaned. 

When the walls are finished, then begin to erect the flues along 
the inside walls; but, as before mentioned, it would be advisable to 
have them detached therefrom two or three inches, that, by being 
thus apart, the whole heat may arise from both sides of the said 



94 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan. 

flues, which will afford an additional advantage in more efiectually 
diffusing the whole heat internally in the house, much of which 
would be lost in the back wall were the flues attached to it: the first 
range may be carried along the front and both ends, dipping under 
the end door-ways and rising the other side; if there is no return 
flue to be in front, which is not necessary in a house of moderate 
dimensions, let this flue be carried so that the covering tiles and 
plaster may be within three inches of the level of the front and 
end walls, upon which a board maybe supported with bricks, to be 
brought on an exact level with the front wall, for the convenience of 
placing thereon a number of pots of strawberries, for forcing, or any 
other small plants; and, moreover, the flue being carried near the 
glasses, the heat will be particularly efficacious in repelling the cold 
external air, frost, damps, &c., and also in distributing the heat more 
equally to all parts of the house: for the several returns in the 
back wall will counterbalance the strong heat discharged by this 
first range where most wanted. 

The first range being continued round the front and ends, must 
then be caried along the back wall in four or six returns, which 
will be sufficient to expend all the heat before its discharge into the 
chimney, which must be carried up immediately from the end of 
the uppermost or last flue, either in or outside of the back wall, so 
as not to appear in the inside of the house, and particularly in the 
opposite end of the fire-place. 

The under range of flues immediately communicating with the 
fire ought to be four bricks on edge deep, that they may not be too 
soon stopped with the soot, and all the flues eight inches in the clear 
and covered with broad tiles; the several returns may be made three 
bricks on edge deep; and in the beginning of the first bottom flue 
you may have a sliding iron regulator, to use occasionally in admit- 
ting more or less heat, as it may seem necessary; being very 
careful as you proceed that the brick work of each flue be care- 
fully jointed with the best mortar for that purpose, and well pointed 
within that no smoke can get out, having each return closely 
covered with broad tiles well bedded and jointed with mortar, cover- 
ing the uppermost flues also with broad thick tiles the whole width, 
all very closely laid and joined as above, and the said uppermost or 
last range of flues to terminate, as before observed, in a vent or 
chimney atone end of the back wall; or if two separate sets of 
flues, a chimney at each end in which you may contrive an iron 
slider near its communication with the last flue, to confine the heat 
more or less on particular occasions, or to prevent its passing off* 
too quickly, or becoming of too weakly a degree. 

In very wide stoves flues are continued immediately round the 
bark pit within an inch or two of the wall, to form a vacancy for 
the heat to come up more freely, and also to prevent its drying the 
tan of the bark-bed too much, which flues may be used occasionally 
or generally by the assistance of a sliding iron regulator, to admit 
or exclude the heat less or more as it may appear expedient. 

You should be very careful that neither the fire place nor flues 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. 95 

be carried too near any part of the wood-work, lest it should take 
fire. 

Proceed now to set out the cavity for the bark-pit, first allowing 
a space of eighteen inches, or rather two feet wide round the front 
and both ends, and also a walk of two feet or two and a half, along 
the back wall for the convenience of walking, watering and attend- 
ing the plants; then in the middle space is formed the pit for 
the bark bed six, seven or eight feet wide, or whatever it may 
allow, and the whole length of the house, the end walks excepted, 
which is to be three feet deep and surrounded with a nine inch 
brick wall, coping it all round with a timber plate framed and mor- 
ticed together, which effectually secures the brick work: sometimes 
a four inch wall is made to do, as by such more room is gained in 
the pit; this will answer very well, but is not so permanent. 

The top of this pit ought to be exactly on a level with the front 
wall, and the bottom free from any lodgment of water at any sea- 
son, for it would soak up through the bark, destroy its fermenta- 
tion, and vender it useless; therefore this must be taken into con- 
sideration at the time of building the outside walls, when, if any 
dampness is apprehended, the front wall must be raised three feet 
above the level of the floor; if not, two feet will be sufficient, and 
the pit may be sunk twelve inches, the bottom of which must be 
well paved with brick or stone to prevent the bark coming in con- 
tact with the earth, which would cause it to cool and rot suddenly. 

The walks round the pit must be neatly paved either with brick 
or cut stone, this being very necessary for the convenience of per- 
forming the occasional operations of culture, as well as to admit 
walking round to view the plants and gather the produce of such as 
yield any, as the pine apple and such other plants as are occasion- 
ally introduced for forcing their fruit to early perfection. 

The timber framing and glass work for enclosing the whole, 
will consist of a close continued range of glass sashes all along the 
front, both ends, or part of them, and the entire roof, quite up to 
the back wall; each sash, both for upright and roof lights being 
three feet six inches, or four feet wide; and for the support of 
which, a framing of timber is to be erected on the brick walling, 
conformable to the width and length of the sashes. 

For the reception of the perpendicular glasses in the front and 
ends, substantial timber plates are placed along the top of the walls, 
upon which is erected uprights, distant from one another the width 
of the sashes, framed into a plate or crown-piece above, of sufficient 
height to raise the whole front head high from the floor, both ends 
corresponding with the front and back; a plate of timber is also to 
be framed to the back wall above, to receive the sloping bars from 
the frame work in front; proper grooves being formed in the front 
plates below and above, to receive the ends of the perpendicular 
sashes, which are to be so contrived as to slide backward and for- 
ward, one beside the other, for the admitting of fresh air, «S:c. 

From the top of the upright framing in front, are to be carried 
substantial crossbars or bearers, sloping to the top of the back 
wall, where, being also a timber-plate, they are to be framed at both 



96 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan-. 

ends into these plates at regular distances, to receive and support 
the slope-glasses of the roof, placed close together upon these cross- 
bars or raftersi or these rafters may be formed so as to have a par- 
tition of one inch and half between the glasses, on tpp of which is 
to be placed a slip of board four inches wide, to prevent the rain 
working down along the edges of the sash frames: these rafters 
must be narrowed on the under side, the better to admit the rays 
of light and heat. 

The lights are to be laid on in two ranges or tiers, sliding one 
over the other, of sufficient length together to reach quite from 
the top of the upright framing in front to the top of the back wall: 
if these lights be placed close together, the rafters must be grooved 
lengthwise, above, to carry oft" the wet which may fall between 
them, making the upper end of the top tier shut close up to the 
wall-plate, running under a proper coping of wood or lead fixed 
along above close to the wall and lapped down with due width to 
cover and shoot off" the wet sufficiently from the upper termination 
of these sashes; likewise along the outer edge of the tojv^of crown- 
plate in front may be a small conductor of lead or wood to receive 
the water from the slope-glasses and convey it to one or both ends, 
without running down upon the upright sashes; being careful that 
the top part behind is well framed and secured, water-tight, and 
finish the top of the back wall a little higher than the glasses with 
a neat coping the whole length. 

In every part the wood-work must be made with the most criti- 
cal exactness, and all the sashes so fitted as to slide close and free; 
neat stays of iron may be placed on the under side of the roof 
lights, sunk into the wood and made fast by wood screws, in order 
to strengthen them; and the rafters or cross-bars are to be stayed 
with wood, at proper distances, to keep each firm in its place. In 
wide stoves it will also be necessary to place a neat upright, either 
of wood or iron, inside, under each of these rafters, to prevent their 
bending under the weight of the glasses, which are generally made 
to rest on the back wall of the bark pit. 

In glazing the roof-lights the panes are to lap over each other 
about half an inch; the vacancies where they overlap are by some 
closed up with putty, others leave them open, which is the better 
way when not too wide; in order both for the air to enter mode- 
rately, and for the rancid vapours arising from the fermentation of 
the bark-bed, &c. within thereby to be suffered to pass off"; and 
also that such as condense against the glasses may discharge itself 
at those places without dropping upon the plants: the glass for this 
purpose should be of a small size, and not more than from six to 
eight inches square; such would lap closer than larger sized glass, 
and form a much stronger roof. The great apertures occasioned 
by the crookedness of large panes admit the cold air so copiously 
in severe weather that incessant fires must be kept up to counteract 
it, which certainly is injurious to the plants; but of two evils you 
must take the least; and, besides, an extraordinary quantity of fuel 
is consumed this way which might be saved, and the plants kept in 
better health by adopting the smaller sized glass. Generally when 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. 97 

a large pane is pinned down, so as to form some kind of a close 
lap, it presses so hard on the other that one of them, and sometimes 
both crack, which permits the rain to run down frequently on 
plants that too much moisture in the winter season will absolutely 
destroy. As to the upright glasses, in the front and ends, they are 
to be glazed in the ordinary way of house sashes. 

The inside walls should all be well plasteredj the flues must 
also be finished off with the best plastering-mortar that can be 
made, in order to prevent any cracks through which the smoke 
might pass into the house, which cannot be too carefully guarded 
against, as it is extremely injurious to plants, causing them to drop 
their leaves, and if continued long in the house will totally destroy 
them. 

All the wood-work, both within and without, should be painted 
white in oil colour, for its preservation, and to give the whole a 
lively appearance^ and the inside walls and flues whitewashed, so 
as to reflect the rays of light in every direction, which will be of 
very considerable advantage to the plants. 

As to any necessary internal erections, there may be ranges of 
narrow shelves for pots of small plants erected where thought most 
convenient^ some behind over the flues, a single range near the top 
glasses towards the back part, supported either by brackets sus- 
pended from the cross-bars above, or by uprights erected on the 
wall of the bark-pit: a range or two of narrow shelves may also be 
placed occasionally along both ends and in front above the flues; 
all of which shelves will serve for holding pots of various sorts of 
small plants that do not require to be plunged in the bark -bed; 
also for pots of strawberries, flowers, &c., in winter and spring for 
forcing, which being placed near the glasses are generally the most 
prosperous and successful in their productions. 

Outside, at the back part of the stove, should be erected a neat 
shed the whole length of the house, completely walled in, to con- 
tain the fuel, garden pots, &c. &c., and for the convenience of 
attending the fires and keeping them regularly burning: this shed 
will answer to defend the back wall of the stove from the cold air 
and frosts, to stow all garden utensils and tools in when out of use, 
in order to preserve them from the injuries of the weather; and 
also to lay quantities of earth in occasionally, to have it dry and 
ready for use on the various occasions that may occur during winter 
and spring. 

Some stoves or hot-houses are furnished with top covers to 
defend the glasses when found necessary from frosts, heavy rains, 
or hail; sometimes by slight sliding shutters fitted to the width of 
the separate sashes; but these are inconvenient, and require con- 
siderable time and trouble in their application; others are formed 
by painted canvass or tarpaulins being rolled up on long wooden 
rollers, and fixed lengthways all along the top of the stove, just 
above the upper ends of the top-glasses, which, by means of lines 
and pulleys, are let down very quickly, and by the same means are 
rolled up again almost as expeditiously; these, however, are some- 
times liable to be moved and dashed about by violent winds, so as 
N 



98 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan. 

to break the glasses; but by using the small glass before recom- 
mended, the use of coverings, except upon very extraordinary 
occasions, may be totally obviated. Indeed it would be advisable 
in very severe frost, especially when accompanied with a piercing 
wind, to hang and make fast a tarpaulin in front of the upright 
sashesj it will be a great service, for then much less fire will pre- 
serve a due heat in the house; and the necessity of too much fire- 
heat ought to be avoided by every possible means. 

The above kind of stove is calculated not only as a pinery for 
the culture of the pine -apple, but for all sorts of tender exotics of 
similar quality; some requiring to be plunged in the bark-bed, 
others placed on top of the flues and shelves, and others nearer the 
glasses; the same stove serving to force fruits, flowers, &c., as 
before observed. 

Such stoves as are intended principally for pine apples, and for 
forcing flowers, strawberries, and some sorts of culinary esculents, 
&c. may be only ten or twelve feet high behind, which generally 
answers better for such than those of more lofty dimensions; or by 
raising the bark-pit within wholly above the surface, and sinking 
the front walk about a foot, the roof may be lower, and such plants 
by that means be brought nearer to the glass, which proves ex- 
tremely advantageous to their growth. 

When stoves are erected for cultivating and bringing to the 
greatest possible perfection the taller kinds of exotics, they are 
made from sixteen to twenty, or even to twenty-five feet high in 
the back wall, with width in proportion, by only six feet height in 
the front glasses, in order to suit low as well as high plants; and 
with the roof sloping quite from the top of the back wall to the 
front, and wholly of glass-work, having a capacious bark-pit within, 
formed towards the front; behind which is sometimes a pit of earth, 
either on a level with the bark-pit or with the back walk, to receive 
particular plants; in rear of this is a walk, between which and the 
back wall is formed a border of good earth, to receive the tallest 
growing plants which are intended to be cultivated. In this kind 
of stove you may cultivate exotics, &c. from the lowest to almost 
the highest stature, by placing those of the shortest growth forward, 
the tallest behind, and so on according to their several gradations 
of height. 

However, these very lofty and capacious stoves are not recom- 
mended for general use, they being both very expensive in erect- 
ing and in the consumption of a great quantity of fuel, and not so 
well calculated for the growth of the general run of exotics as 
stoves of a moderate height. 

Flues ought not to be erected along the back wall in such stoves 
as have plants trained thereto or growing immediately close to 
them; and one range round the front and ends will not be sufiicient 
to keep up a due warmth in such large houses in severe weather, 
without consuming an immense quantity of fuel, and at times rais- 
ing a scorching heat in the parts of the house next to this single 
range, by overheating it in order to force through it a heat suffi- 
cient to keep the entire of the house warm; this can never protect 



Jan.] the hot-house. 99 

and promote the growth and health of plants so well as that gradual 
glow of moderate warmth issuing from flues of several returns, 
carried under the walks or other convenient places, as well as 
round the front and end walls, either in double or single ranges, 
and especially under the back walk, over which broad planks may 
be laid, resting on loose bricks, for the convenience of walking during 
the winter season; from these the heat will be equally diftused 
through the whole house, and to produce which, half the fuel will 
not be necessary that must be consumed in keeping the house warm 
by a single range round the front and ends only. 

In the erection of stoves it will not be necessary to have the ends 
glazed more than half the width of the house, or at most, to within 
eighteen inches of the doors, leaving that much for piers between 
the doors and the upright end sashes; the remainder may be carried 
up with brick as high as the roof lights. 

In stoves that are so long as to require two fires, each with its 
respective ranges of flues, it will be proper to make a glass partition 
in the middle, and to have two tan-pits, that there may be two dif- 
ferent degrees of heat for plants from different countries; and were 
a range of stoves built all in one, and divided by glass partitions 
at least half the width of the house towards the front, it would be of 
great advantage to the collection, because they may have ditterent 
degrees of heat according to their diSerent natures, and likewise 
the air in each division may be shifted, by sliding the glasses of the 
partitions, or by opening the glass door which should be made be- 
tween each division, for the more easy passage from one to the 
other. 

In the warmest of these stoves or divisions, should be placed the 
most tender exotic trees and plants. These being natives of very 
warm countries, should be plunged in the bark-bed, and over the 
flues may be shelves on which to place the various species of Cac- 
tuses, Euphorbiums, Mesembryanthmeums, and other very tender 
succulent plants which require to be kept dry in winter. 

As in this stove are placed the plants of the hottest parts of the 
East and West Indies, the heat should be kept up equal to that 
marked Ananas upon the botanical thermometers, and should never 
be suffered to be more than eight or ten degrees cooler at most, nor 
should the spirit be raised above ten degrees higher in the thermo- 
meter during the winter season, both which extremes will be equally 
injurious to the plants. 

The roofs of some stoves are so made, that the glasses do not 
slide either up or down, which is an evil of great magnitude; for 
where the sun is so powerful in the months of April and May, as it 
is in every part of the United States, the superabundance of heat 
collected in the house on very hot days, cannot be discharged by the 
doors and sliding upright sashes in front, which forces the plants 
into an extreme state of vegetation, and renders them unfit to bear 
the open air towards the latter end of May, when otherwise the 
greater number of them might be brought out with safety, without 
receiving such a check by the transition, as many cannot recover 
during the summer, and causing many more to appear much less 



100 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan! 

beautiful than they otherwise would, where they gradually inured to 
the open air in the hot-house before their being brought out, by 
occasionally sliding open the roof as well as the front glasses, and 
never letting the heat arise in the house to too high a degree. 
Those destined to remain in the bark-bed during summer, such as 
the pine-apple, &c. are still worse off; for, if the root is kept on, 
they are rendered good for nothing, and if taken totally off, both 
them and the bark-bed are exposed to heavy rains, which destroy 
the heat of the one, and consequently injures the health, vigour, and 
fruit of the other: therefore all stoves ought to be constructed with 
sliding roof as well as front lights. 

Nursery and Succession Stoves. 

Besides the main bark stove already described, it is very con- 
venient to have one or two smaller, such as a nursery-pit and a 
succession stove, particularly where there are large collections, 
and more especially in the culture of pine apples; one serving as a 
nursery-pit, in which to strike and nurse the young offspring 
crowns, and suckers of the old pines for propagation; the other as 
a succession-house for receiving the year old plants from the 
nursery-pit, and forwarding them a year to a proper size for fruit- 
ing as succession plants, to furnish the main stove or fruiting- 
house every autumn, to succeed the old plants then done fruiting. 

These smaller stove departments prove materially useful in the 
culture of pines, particularly to raise and nurse the young plants, 
until arrived to a proper age and size to produce fruit, then moved 
into the main stove or fruiting-house, which being thus supplied 
from these smaller stoves, with a succession of fruiting plants 
annually, without being crowded or incommoded with the rearing 
of the said succession plants, proves a particular advantage, not only 
in the culture of the fruiting plants, as they often require a higher 
degree of heat than the succession plants at particular times, in 
order to forward and improve the growth of their fruit, but it is also 
making the best advantage of this main department, to have the 
bark bed instantly filled with fruiting plants only, producing a 
full crop of proper sized pine apples every year, which could not 
always be effected with such certainty and perfection without the 
aid of these succession stoves, because the pine plants in their 
infant state require sometimes different management from the 
fruiting plants, particularly in respect to the degree of fire-heat, 
which, in general, should be more moderate than for the fruiting 
plants, lest too much should force them into fruit in their minor 
growth, when incapable of producing such in any tolerable per- 
fection. 

Therefore, these smaller succession stoves may be erected as 
appendages to the main house, or may be detached at some little 
distances, as may be convenient; though if the situation admits, 
it may be both more convenient and ornamental to join them in a 
line with the main stove, one at each end, and nearly of the same 
construction, but smaller both in length, width, and height, if 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. JQl 

thought proper: these are sometimes formed in the manner of a 
common detached bark pit, without any upright glasses in front, 
having a wall all around, five or six feet high behind, gradually 
sloping at each end to about four feet in front, and with only sliding 
glasses at top, more pai'ticularly the nursery stove, commonly and 
simply called the pit, because the whole internal space in length 
and width is often allotted entirely as a pit for a bark bed without 
any walk within, or door for entrance, the necessary culture being 
performed by sliding open the glasses at top, and the flues for the 
fires being formed in the upper part of the back wall above the 
surface height of the bark bed: however, it may be more eligible 
to form the succession stove particularly, nearly like the main one, 
with erect glasses in front and sloping sashes at top, with a door for 
entrance, and an alley or walk nest the back wall at least, or more 
eligible if continued all round the bark pit. 

Observing, however, if these smaller stoves are joined to the end 
of the main one, they may be divided from it only by a sliding glass 
partition for communication with each other, particularly the suc- 
cession and main stove, but with separate furnaces and flues to each 
department, because the young pine plants do not at all times 
require the same degree of fire-heat as the older pines, especially 
those of proper size for fruiting, so that by having separate tires, 
the heat can be regulated accordingly. 

The nursery stove or pit maybe of smaller dimensions in respect 
to width and height than the succession house, if thought con- 
venient; and if designed wholly as a pit without any path or walk 
within, six or seven feet width may be sufficient, by five or six high 
in the back wall, and four in front, the whole internal space being 
filled with tan three feet deep to form the bark bed, serving chiefly 
as a nursery in which to strike and nurse the annual increase of 
crowns and suckers of the ananas orpine plants the first year; also 
to raise many tender plants from seeds, cuttings, &c., without in- 
cumbering the main stove; and when they are forwarded to such a 
state of growth as to require more room, they are removed to the 
succession house. 

But the succession house may be nearly on the plan of the main 
stove, though of smaller dimensions both in the width and height, 
and is intended to receive the year old pine plants from the pit or 
nursery stove. In order to plunge them at greater distances, suf- 
ficient to give the whole proper scope to take their full growth 
another year, when they will generally be arrived to a proper size 
for fruiting the year following, being previously removed in autumn 
to the main fruiting stove to succeed the old fruiting plants, 
which generally by September have all yielded their produce, are 
then removed away and their place supplied by a sufficient quan- 
tity of large plants from the succession house, being arrived to 
a proper state of growth to produce fruit next summer; the 
largest succession house is at the same time replenished with 
the plants from the nursery pit, which next autumn will probably 
be also arrived to a proper size for removing to the fruiting house 
to succeed the others, and the nursery-pit supplied with young 



1Q2 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan. 

crowns and suckers of the year, from the fruit and old plants, 
to strike and forward them in ready successions for the above 
occasions. 

Thus by having tiie different stove departments always furnished 
with pine plants of three different stages of growth, succeeding one 
another regularly, i. e. the nursery pit containing the yearly crowns 
and suckers, the succession pit the one and two years plants, and 
the main stove the fruiting plants, a constant succession is thereby 
annually obtained, for the same individual plants never produce 
fruit but once; they, however, produce a plentiful supply of crowns 
and suckers which commence proper plants, attaining a fruiting 
state in regular succession. 

However, in many places, the situation or convenience not ad- 
mitting but of one common stove to raise and forward the pines 
and other exotics in their different stages of growth, at least with 
probably the assistance only of a small detached bark-pit, or a bark 
and dung hot-bed under a large garden frame, to strike and nurse 
the yearling crowns and suckers of the pines, &c. of each year, 
until they are about a year old, then moved into the stove; where, 
with the proper requisite culture, are produced not only very good 
pine-apples, but also many curious exotics, flowers, other fruits, &c. 
at an early season. 

But having a main stove with two smaller ones adjoining nearly 
on the same plan as above hinted, you can always, with greater 
certainty, obtain a regular annual succession of fruiting pines in 
perfection. 

A private passage or small door, made from the back shed into 
the hot-house, close to one of the ends, or at any convenient place, 
will be found extremely useful in severe weather for entering into 
the house to examine the temperature of the heat, or to do the other 
necessary work, when it would be ineligible to open the outer doors. 

It would be an eligible way, for persons who have large collec- 
tions of exotics, to have the green-house in the middle, with a stove 
and glass case at each end; the stoves to be next the green-house, 
and the glass cases at the extremities, made exactly in the same 
manner as the bark stoves, and to range with them. 

These glass cases being furnished with flues, but no bark-pits, 
are in fact dry stoves; they may be kept of different temperatures 
of heat, and ought to be furnished with roof and front coverings of 
some kind to be used occasionally. The bark stoves may also be 
kept of different temperatures, so as to suit the various habits of 
the plants. 

Thus by contriving the green-house in the middle, and a stove 
and glass case at each end, there will be aconveniency for keeping 
plants from all parts of the world; which cannot be otherwise main- 
tained in good health, but by placing them in the different degrees 
of heat, corresponding with that of their native countries. 

The Dry-stove. 

This stove differs in no wise from the bark-stove, but in riot hav- 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. IQ3 

ing a bark-pit; it is furnished with flues as the other, and conse- 
quently produces a more dry heat; being intended principally for 
the culture of some very succulent tender exotics of parched soils 
that require to be kept always dry. Persons who have full collec- 
tions of exotics prefer this kind of stove, in order to deposit the 
most succulent kinds therein, separate from plants which perspire 
more freely, lest the damp occasioned by such perspiration, and the 
more frequent watering of these kinds, should be imbibed by the 
succulents and injure them. 

However, most of the tender succulent kinds are cultivated and 
preserved in the bark stove, placed on shelves, and in dry situations, 
with very good success. 

In this kind of stove are erected movable shelves or stands 
above one another, theatre ways, on which to place the pots of the 
various kinds of plants intended to be kept therein. 

Stoves have been constructed on various other plans, according to 
the fancy of the owners or their desire to try experiments; some 
circular, some crescent form, and others ranging north and south, 
with double roofs and upright sashes, all of glass work; but these 
not being found to answer as well as those described, it is unneces- 
sary to take further notice of them. 

For the various kinds oi forcing-frames, and their respective 
uses, see page 35. 

Pines. 

At this season the pinery hot-house requires good attendance, 
for some of the pines will now, towards the end of the month 
begin to show fruit; and your assistance is at no time more neces- 
sary than when the fruit first appears, especially in one particular, 
the supporting a proper bottom heat; for if the heat of the bark-bed 
is not kept up at that time, the young fruit will receive a check 
more than may be imagined; as, notwithstanding the air of the 
house can be sufficiently warmed by the flues, yet these plants also 
require always a moderately brisk growing heat to their roots, but 
especially when the fruit is young; and without that assistance, 
they will not advance freely in the first growth, and being checked 
therein, will be much inferior in size to what they otherwise would 
have been. 

Examine therefore carefully at this time the heat of the bark-bed 
in which the pots of pines are plunged; and if you find it very faint, 
take up all the pots, and let the bark be forked up to the bottom. 
But before you proceed to this, if the heat is found much decayed, 
or the bark considerably wasted, or become very small or earthy, 
it will be advisable to add at the same time some new tan, first 
removing away some of the wasted bark at top and sides, and then 
fill up with new bark, working the old and new well together. 
When that is done, let the pots be replunged again to their rims, in 
a regular manner. This will enliven the heat greatly; and, if done 
in proper time, the young fruit will grow freely. 

Let the fires be made very regularly every evening and morning. 



104 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Jan. 

and take care that they are not made too strong, for that would 
be of very bad consequence^ and to avoid this, have a thermometer 
placed in the hot-house, as a direction to regulate the degree of 
heat. 

Water should be given to the pine-apple plants once a week, or so 
often as it may seem necessary, and always very moderately; and 
let as little as possible fall into the heart or between the leaves at 
this season. 

For the conveniency of watering the pines and other plants that 
are plunged in the bark-bed, a long pipe, made of tin, would be 
eligible to use occasionally; this should be in three different joints, 
in order that it may be shortened or lengthened as you see it con- 
venient: one of these joints should have a funnel made at the 
largest end, that by pouring the water out of a handy watering-pot 
into the funnel, the water is conveyed to the pots in any part of the 
bed with greater exactness, without pouring it into the heart of the 
plants. 

All other tender exotic plants in the hot-house or stove should be 
supplied with water as they require it. 

The woody kinds will require it often, those of the succulent 
tribe but seldom; or at least but very little must be given them at 
a time. 

Be sure to have soft water for watering the different sorts of 
plants, for which purpose you may have a tub or cistern in some 
convenient part of the house to contain it, in which it is to remain 
till the cold chill is completely off. 

In the management of the plants in the bark-bed there must be a 
particular regard had to the temperature of the bark and the air of 
the house, that neither be too violent, as also to water them fre- 
quently but sparingly, especially the shrubby kinds, because, when 
they are in a continual warmth, which will cause them to perspire 
freely, if they have not a proper supply to answer their discharge, 
their leaves will decay and soon fall off. 

In very severe weather, when necessity requires strong fires to 
be kept up for any length of time, and that the internal air becomes 
thereby of a dry and parching nature, it will be well to sprinkle the 
flues occasionally with water, to raise a comforting steam in the 
house, and to restore the air to its true atmospheric quality, which 
is always most congenial to the health of plants. 

Every plant in the hot-house or stove should be kept perfectly 
clean from dust or any sort of foulness; if any thing of that nature 
appears on their leaves, let the large-leaved sorts be washed with 
a sponge, &c. the others by occasionally watering them all over the 
top. 

Kidney -beans raised in tke Hot-house. 

Those who have the conveniency of a hot-house may raise early 
kidney-beans with little trouble. The early cream-coloured dwarf, 
speckled-dwarf, and yellow-dwarf, are proper sorts for this pur- 
pose. 



Jan.] the HOT-HOUSE. 105 

The method is this: fill some large pots, or oblong narrow boxes, 
with rich dry earth, and place them on the top of the surrounding 
wall of the bark-bed, or upon any of the shelves near the glasses, 
observing to plant four or five beans in each about an inch deep, or 
if oblong boxes, of about two feet length, plant the beans triangular- 
ways along the middle, two or three inches asunder^ and thus 
the pots, &c. being placed as above, the beans will soon sprout and 
come up. 

"When the beans have sprouted, sprinkle the eai'th v»fith a little 
water, which will help the plants to risej when they are up, water 
them frequently. 

Let the plants be supplied with proper waterings two or three 
times a week, and they will grow freely, and produce plentiful 
crops of beans in March and April. 

Plant a successional crop in a fortnight or three weeks after, in 
small pots, ready for turning out with balls of earth into the larger 
pots, &c. 

Of Cucumbers in the Hot-house. 

Cucumbers are sometimes raised early, in tolerably good perfec- 
tion, in the hot-house. 

This is effected by sowing the seed, or planting young plants, in 
large pots, or oblong narrow boxes, which are to be placed in a con- 
venient situation in the hot-house near the glasses? the boxes for 
this purpose maybe the same length and depth as for kidney-beans: 
fill the pots or boxes with rich earth, and place them up near the 
top glasses, behind, or upon the top of the back or end flues, with 
the bottoms raised or detached two or three inches, that the heat of 
the flues may transpire freely, without injury to the plants. 

But the best situation in the hot-house for cucumber plants is to 
place them by means of supports within about fifteen or eighteea 
inches of the top glasses, nearly under or towards the upper ends 
of the superior tiers of lights, not to shade, &c. the other plants be- 
low. 

The seed may either be sown in small pots and placed in a dung 
hot-bed, or in the bark-bed in the hot-house to raise the plants, or 
may be sown at once in the pots or boxes, six or eight seeds in a 
small patch, or in a box of two or three feet long you may sow two 
such patches; and when the plants are up they should be thinned 
out, leaving two or three of the strongest plants in each place. 

Or if you raise the plants first in small pots plunged in the bark- 
bed, or in a dung hot-bed, let them be afterwards transplanted, 
with a ball of earth about their roots, into the boxes or larger pots. 

When the runners of the plants have advanced to the outside of 
the pots or boxes, you may fix up some laths to support the vines or 
runners, which should be fastened thereto. Let them have water 
frequently, for they will require a little every other day at least. 

Early Strawberries in the Hot-house. 

Strawberries may be brought to early perfection in the hot-house; 



106 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

and, if desired, this is the time to begin to introduce therein some 
pots of good bearing plants. 

The scarlet and alpine strawberries are the kinds that succeed 
the best for forcing; for this purpose they should be taken up and 
planted in proper sized pots, either in the months of September or 
October, as then directed, and protected in garden-frames, till want- 
ed for forcing; but, if the weather permits, you may take them up 
at any time, with balls of earth about their I'oots, planting one good 
plant in each pot; always observing to choose those of two or three 
years old and which are full of bearers. 

Place these pots towards the front of the hot-house, near the 
glasses, and let them have water frequently, especially when they 
are in blossom and setting young fruit; but observing at these 
times not to water too freely over the flowers, for fear of washing 
off" the impregnating farina, giving it chiefly to the earth in 
the pots. 

Of Flowering Plants in the Hot-house. 

You may now introduce into this department many kinds of 
flowering plants, to be forced into bloom at an early season; such 
as honey-suckles, African heaths, double-flowering dwarf almonds, 
and cherries, &c. ; also pots of pinks, carnations, daisies, double 
sweet-williams, rockets, wall and stock-gilly flowers, &c., and pots 
or glasses of any kind of bulbous roots, planted either in earth or 
water, may also be introduced, with a variety of curious annual 
flowers, which may be sown in pots, and forwarded there to early 
perfection. 



ff^twmn* 



DESIGNS FOR A KITCHEN GARDEN. 

The Kitchen Garden is a principal district of garden-ground 
allotted for the culture of all kinds of esculent herbs and roots for 
culinary purposes, &c. 

This may be said to be the most useful and consequential depart- 
ment of gardening, since its products plentifully supply our tables 
with the necessary support of life: for jt is allowed that health 
depends much on the use of a proper quantity of wholesome vege- 
tables; so that it is of the utmost importance for every person 
possessed of a due extent of ground, to have a good kitchen garden 
for the supply of his family. This garden is not only useful for 
raising all sorts of esculent plants and herbage, but also all the 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 1Q7 

choicer sorts of tree and shrub fruits, &c., both on espaliers and 
standards^ and the annual cultivation of the ground bj manuring, 
digging, hoeing, &c., necessary in the culture of the esculent 
herbage, greatly encourages all sorts of fruit trees, preserves them 
in health and vigour, so as always to produce large and fair fruit; 
for which reason, in the kitchen garden should always be planted 
the choicest sort of fruit trees, particularly for espaliers and walls; 
likewise some standards, if set a considerable way asunder, so as 
not to shade the under crops too much; and when the trees are 
judiciously disposed, there will be nearly the same room for the 
crops of herbaceous esculents as without them; so that this garden 
may be reckoned both as a kitchen and fruit garden. 

As to the situation of this garden, with respect to the other dis- 
tricts, if designed principally as a kitchen and fruit garden, distinct 
from the other parts, and there is room for choice of situation, 
it should generally be placed detached entirely from the pleasure- 
ground; also as much out of view of the front of the habitation as 
possible, at some reasonable distance, either behind it or towards 
either side thereof, so as its walls or other fences may not obstruct 
any desirable prospect either of the pleasure garden, fields, or the 
adjacent country; having regard, however, to place it, if possible, 
where the situation and soil is eligible, as hereafter illustrated; 
and if its situation is unavoidably such as to interfere with the 
pleasure gardens, so as its fences may be thought disagreeable to 
view, they may be shut out from sight by intervening plantations 
of shrubs and trees. 

But as in many places they are limited to a moderate compass of 
ground, and in others, though having scope enough, require but a 
small extent of garden, you may, in either case, have the kitchen, 
fruit, and pleasure garden all in one; having the principal walks 
spacious, and the borders next them of considerable breadth; the 
back part of them planted with a range of espalier fruit trees, sur- 
rounding the quarters; the front with flowers and small shrubs; 
and the inner quarters for the growth of the kitchen vegetables, &c. 

Situation, Soil, Water, Extent, fyc. 

As to situation, it can only be observed in general, that both high 
and low, if the soil be suitable, will produce good crops of esculent 
herbage and fruits, though a moderately low situation is the most 
preferable, as being less exposed to the influence of cold cutting 
winds in spring, and more retentive of moisture during the summer 
months, which are advantages worthy of attention botli on account 
of the early and of the other principal crops. A situation having 
a moderate slope is very eligible for this purpose, as in sucli a spot 
there will not be any danger of water standing, nor of being too 
wet at any season; and if it slopes toward the south, it is the more 
desirable, as it will not only be better defended from the cold 
north-westerly winds, but by its exposure or aspect inclining to the 
sun, you may always expect to have the earliest crops; or when the 
situation is in some parts a little elevated or gently sloping, and in 



108 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

others low and moist, it may be some advantage, as the highei* or 
sloping ground will suit some early crops, and serve for wintering 
several sorts of plants that are impatient of copious moisture in that 
season, such as artichokes, spinage, corn sallad, lettuce, &c.; and 
the low ground wilt be eligible for late summer crops, as beets, 
kidney-beans, cauliflowers, cabbages, lettuce, and several others. 
However, as to choice of situation and soil, this only is practicable 
in large estates; but where persons are limited to a moderate space, 
they must be content with such as nature aflbrds; observing in this 
case, that if the natural soil is of a proper temperament and depth, 
you need not be under any great anxiety about the situation if it is 
moderately dry, and not apt to be overflowed in winter; even in 
that case, it may be remedied or greatly helped, by digging two or 
three long narrow canals, and from these some under-ground hol- 
low drains, the earth from which will help to raise the contiguous 
ground higher, and the water in the canals will be convenient for 
watering the plants. Remarking that a situation too wet in winter 
should be guarded against as much as the nature of the place will 
admit; for in such land you can never have early nor good general 
crops, nor will the fruit trees be prosperous. 

With respect to soil, that for a kitchen garden of all others, re- 
c[uires to be naturally good, of depth enough for the growth of the 
large perpendicular esculent roots, as carrots, parsneps, red beet, 
horse-radish, &c. also for the growth of fruit trees, a very material 
article; so that the proper soil for these general purposes should, 
if possible, be from about a foot and a half to two feet deep, or 
more; but much less than a foot and a half depth will be a disad- 
vantage: so much depends upon the quality of the soil for a kitchen 
and fruit garden, that where there is scope of ground to choose 
from, we cannot be too cautious at first in fixing on a proper spot 
where the soil is good and deep enough, as above, before gravel, 
clay, or other bad soils are come at, which should always be more 
particularly attended to when designed to furnish the ground with 
a choice collection of fruit trees, either for walls, espaliers, or 
standards; for, without a due depth of good earth, these will neither 
bear well nor be of long duration. 

Different sorts of soils are met with in different parts, as loamy, 
clayey, sandy, &c. A loamy soil, either of a brown or black colour, 
is the best that can be for this purpose, more particularly a light 
sandy hazel loam, which always works pliable at all seasons, not 
apt to be too wet and cloggy at every shower of rain, nor bind in 
dry hot weather; this soil, however, although in many places it is 
the most general superficial earth, is not common to all parts. A 
clayey, strong, stubborn soil, is the worst of all earths, and must 
be mended by sandy materials, ashes, and other loosening light 
substances. A sandy soil is common in many places, which is of 
a very light sharp nature; this must be fertilized by plenty of rotten 
dung and strong earths, when they can be easily procured. 

It is observable that ground which constantly produces good 
crops of grain and grass, is also proper for the growth of all escu- 
lent herbs and fruit trees. 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. X09 

Choose, however, the best soil you can, according to the situation 
and extent of jour ground, and if it happens to prove unfavourable 
art must assist^ for if it is of a light sandy nature, it may easily 
be mended by adding a quantity of any kind of rotten or other good 
dung; and if of a very light, sharp, hungry temperament, earths of 
stronger substance, such as loam and the like, if it can be easily 
obtained, must be added occasionally, along with plenty of dung, 
working the whole with the natural soil of the garden; and should 
your garden be of a clayey, cold, damp nature, add light materials, 
both of rich composts and light sandy soils; nothing is more proper, 
where it can be had, than plenty of coal ashes,- &c. for opening and 
warming all tough, stubborn, cold soils. 

Water is a very essential article in a kitchen garden in summer, 
to water all new transplanted plants and others that cannot subsist 
without a due supply of moisture during the drought of that season; 
therefore, in large gardens, where practicable, one or more reser- 
voirs of water should be contrived in the most convenient part of 
the ground, either in basins or narrow canals, and supplied with 
water from some contiguous spring, river, brook, pond, well, &c. 

The necessary space of ground proper for a family kitchen gar- 
den, may be from about a quarter of an acre, or less, to sis or eight 
acres, or more, according to the appropriated limits of ground, the 
number and demand of the family, the consumption by sales, or the 
expense the proprietor would choose to bestow on the making and 
general culture. A kitchen garden of an acre will nearly employ 
one man, especially if it be furnished with espalier and other fruit 
trees, and so in proportion to a garden of smaller or larger extent: 
a garden of the above size will produce a very plentiful supply of 
esculent herbage and fruit sufficient at least for a family of ten or 
fifteen persons; but on large estates, and where the family is con- 
siderable in proportion, and not limited to space of ground three or 
four acres of kitchen garden may be necessary; and some very large 
families have them of six or eight acres extent. 

If the produce is intended for sale, the garden must be large in 
proportion to the demand. 

Fences for inclosing the Ground. 

With respect to fences for inclosing the ground, it is most neces- 
sary to have an effectual fence of some sort around the kitchen- 
garden, both for security of the produce and to defend tender and 
early crops from cutting winds. 

Previous to fencing the ground, the proper shape or form for the 
garden is to be considered; the most eligible form for a kitchen- 
garden is that either of a square or oblong square; but the figure 
may be varied as the necessity of the case may require; keeping, 
however, as near as possible to the square or oblong form, espe- 
cially if the ground is to be fenced with materials for training fruit 
trees; no other shape answers so well for that purpose; for trial 
having been made of circles, ovals, semicircles, angles, &c., none 
succeed near so well as the square form. 



no THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

Different sorts of fences are used for inclosing this ground, as 
walls, palings, and hedges, &c. 

Sometimes board fences or palings are used, both for protection 
and for training fruit trees to. When such are intended for trees, 
the boarding should be tongued and closely joined edge to edge, so 
as to form a plane or even surface for the commodious training the 
branches. 

In gardens where no wall trees are intended, a hedge, or bank 
and hedge is a very proper fence; which may be so trained as to 
form both an effectual fence against men and beasts, also to shelter 
particular parts of the ground for raising early crops: a hawthorn 
hedge is the most proper, though other sorts may be used. 

No fencing, however, for a kitchen garden where intended to 
have wall trees, especially in the more northerly parts of the Union, 
is equal to brick walls, which are considerably stronger, warmer, 
and more durable than paling fences; and their natural warmth, 
together with their reflection of the sun's heat, is the most effectual 
for the growth and ripening of the latest and more delicate kinds 
of fruit. 

Hot walls for forcing by fire heat, &c. are often erected in large 
kitchen gardens; for an account of which see page 44. 

Preparing and laying out the Ground. 

The whole ground should be regularly trenched two spades 
deep; observing if the soil is poor or of bad quality, and wants 
amendment, either of dung or any of the materials before men- 
tioned, such must previously be added, and then trenched in betwixt 
the bottom and top pits, so as next year when it comes to be digged 
again, and the compost being well meliorated, will be worked up 
and mixed with the natural soil. 

Do not omit enriching and improving the borders for the wall* 
and espalier trees, by adding a considerable portion of rotten dung; 
and if the natural soil is not good, add also, if possible, some good 
loamy earth from the surface of a field or pasture common, either 
to the whole, or rather than fail, a few barrowfulls at first to each 
place where a tree is to stand, and improve the rest afterwards by 
degrees at leisure. 

The ground must be divided into compartments for regularity 
and convenience. A border must be carried round close to the 
boundary walls or fences, not less than five, but if six or eight feet 
wide, the better, both for raising various early and other kitchen 
crops, and for the benefit of the wall trees, if any, that their roots 
may have full scope to run in search of nourishment; and moreover, 
the annual digging and stirring the ground for the culture of the 
herbaceous esculents, greatly encourages. the trees: hence the utility 
of having a broad border. Next to this border a walk should be 

* Observe that all trees planted against and trained to either paling or 
board fences, &c., producing fruit on one side only, are denominated wall 
trees, as well as if planted to actual brick or stone walls; in contradistinction 
to espalier trees, which produce fruit on both sides. 



feb.j the kitchen garden. m 

continued also all around the garden of proper width, as mentioned 
below^ then proceed to divide the interior parts into two, four or 
more principal divisions and walks, if its extent be large; first, if 
the ground is of some considerable width, a straight walk should run 
directly through the middle of the garden; and another, if thought 
necessary, may be directed across the ground, intersecting the first; 
and if the garden extends any considerable length, two or more such 
cross walks may be necessary; the width of the walks maybe from 
about five to ten or twelve feet, in proportion to the extent of the 
garden; and each of the quarters should be surrounded with a five 
or six feet wide border; and a range of espalier fruit trees may be 
planted along towards the back part of each border, so that every 
quarter will be inclosed with an espalier, which will be ornamental 
in growth, and profitable in the annual production of superior fruit 
of different kinds. 

I would not, however, by any means advise dividing small or 
moderate-sized gardens into too many walks and small quarters, 
especially if they are to be surrounded by espaliers, which would 
render them too confined for the proper growth of culinary herbage; 
besides, it would be wasting too much of the ground in walks. 

In one of the quarters a place should be allotted for the framing 
ground; that is, a place for making the hot-beds for raising early 
cucumbers, melons, and other tender plants; fixing on a spot for 
this purpose, full to the sun from rising to setting, sheltered as 
much as possible from the northerly winds, and conveniently situated 
for bringing in the dung for the hot-beds. 

This place, if not so situated as to be sheltered by the walls or 
other fences of the garden, it will be of much advantage to inclose 
it with a close fence of some kind, serving both to break off the 
winds, and by having a door to lock, will preserve your crops more 
secure; these fences may be six or seven feet high in the back or 
north side, with both the side fences sloping gradually to about five 
feet height in front, which should always be lowest to admit the 
sun freely. 

With regard to the borders and walks of this garden, the outer 
borders adjoining the walks should be neatly formed, the edges 
made firm and straight, and the walk gravelled or laid with other 
dry materials. 

The edges of the borders in small gardens are frequently planted 
with box, &c., especially in gardens where the kitchen and plea- 
sure-ground are all in one; sometimes part are edged with un- 
der shrubby aromatic herbs, as thyme, savory, hyssop, and the 
like, but unless these are kept low and neat they appear unsightly; 
some, however, use no pltyUed edgings at all in kitchen gardens, 
only have the edge of the border made up even, treading it firm 
that it may stand, then cut it straight by line; sometimes along the 
top of this edging is planted a row of strawberries, afoot or fifteen 
inches asunder; they will bear plentifully and have a good ettcct, 
observing to string them several times in summer to preserve them 
neat and within due compass. 

Sometimes grass walks are used, but these are rather improper 



X12 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

for general use in kitchen gardens, especially in such parts of the 
garden where wheel-barrows are obliged to come often, which 
would cut and greatly deface them; besides, they are apt to be 
wet and disagreeable in all wet weather and in winter; but if any 
are intended for summer's walking, they should be only in some 
dry part of the garden, and never let them be general, for besides 
the aforementioned inconveniences, they are apt to harbour slugs 
and other crawling vermin, to the detriment of the adjacent crops. 

The espaliers should be planted in one range round each main 
quarter, about four to five or six feet from the outer edge of the 
border, in proportion to its width, and from about fifteen to twenty 
feet asunder, according to the sorts of fruit trees you plant. 

Within the espaliersin the quarters, you may plant some standard 
and fruit trees of the choicer sorts, at fifty feet or more distance 
each way, especially the large growing standards, that they may 
not shade the ground too much. 

Likewise in the quarters may be planted the small kinds of fruit- 
shrubs, as gooseberries, currants, and raspberries in cross rows, 
so as to divide the quarters into breaks of twenty or thirty feet wide, 
or more; others in a single range along near the outward edges, 
or some in continued plantations, placing the bushes nine feet 
asunder in each row, and if kept somewhat fan-spreading the way 
of the rows, they will not encumber the ground and will bear very 
plentiful crops of large fruit; besides, between these rows you can 
have various early and late crops of vegetables. 

In many places, however, as formerly noticed, there is but a 
small compass of ground, or so limited as to be obliged to have the 
kitchen, fruit, and pleasure-gardens, all in one, or at least often all 
within the same general inclosure, in which case, if any distinct 
part of the ground is required for ornament, a portion of it next the 
house may be laid out in a lawn or grass-plat, bounded with a 
shrubbery, beyond which have the kitchen ground, separating it 
also from the other with shrubbery compartments: the kitchen 
garden may also be laid out with ornamental w^alks and borders, 
having a broad border all round, and next this, a walk from five or 
six to eight feet wide, carried all round the garden, in proportion 
to its size, and if the ground is of some considerable width, may 
have one of similar dimensions extended directly through the 
middle; and next the walks have a border of four or five to six or 
seven feet wide, carried round the quarters or principal divisions, 
which border, if raised a little sloping, from the front to the back 
part, will appear better than if quite flat; planting a range of 
espalier fruit trees along towards the back edge of the border, so 
as immediately to surround the quarters, allotting the outsides of 
the borders for small esculents or flowers, and small flowering 
shrubs, having the edges planted with box, &c., or some with 
strawberries and other edging-plants, and the walks neatly laid 
with gravel or other materials before mentioned; the inside, 
within the espaliers, to be the kitchen ground, dividing it, if 
thought necessary, by rows of gooseberry, currant, and raspberry 
plants. 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 113 

But when necessary to have the whole space of the kitchen gar- 
den employed for real use, no ground should be lost in ornamental 
borders and walks: have a border all around the boundary fence, 
five or six feet wide, except the south borders, which should be 
seven or eight feet broad, because of their great use for raising 
early crops; and have a walk around the garden, not more than a 
yard to live or six feet wide, allowing the same width for the mid- 
dle walks, or so as to admit of wheelbarrows passing to bring in 
the manure, &c., and may either have a four feet wide border all 
around each quarter next the walks, or not, as you shall think proper j 
laying the walks neatly with any gravelly materials, or with coal 
ashes, &c. , so as to have dry walking and wheeling with a barrow 
in all weathers. 

General Culture of the Ground. 

With respect to the general culture of the kitchen garden, it 
consists principally in a general annual digging, proper manuring, 
sowing and planting the crops properly, pricking out, planting, and 
transplanting various particular crops, keeping the ground clean 
from weeds, and watering the crops occasionally in summer. 

As to digging, a general digging must be performed annually in 
winter or spring, for the reception of the principal crops; also as 
often as any new crops are to be sown or planted at any season of 
the year, remarking that the general digging for the recpptlon of 
the main crops of principal esculents in spring, I should advise to 
be performed by trenching either one or two spades deep, besides 
the paring at top, though except for some deep rooting plants, as 
carrots, parsneps, &c., one good spade deep may be sufficient for 
common trenching, unless on particular occasions, to trench as 
deep as the good soil admits, to turn the exhausted earth to the 
bottom and the fresh to the top to renew the soil. However, you 
should be careful not to trench deeper than the proper soil; and 
the trenching only one spade deep, will much more effectually 
renew the soil than plain digging; and by paring the top of each 
trenching two or three inches deep into the bottom, all seeds of 
weeds on the surface are thereby buried so deep that they cannot 
grow; and I should likewise advise that the general digging be 
performed principally, especially in stift' ground, before the setting 
in of the winter frosts, or early in spring; but it would be better 
done if some considerable time before the season for putting in the 
crops, that the ground might have the advantage of fallow, to melio- 
rate and enrich it, and always let the ground be trenched in rough 
ridges, that it may receive all possible benefit from the sun, air, 
rains, frosts, &c., to fertilize and pulverize the soil before it is 
levelled down for the reception of seeds and plants; and this level- 
ling down will be an additional improvement in breaking, dividing, 
and meliorating the earth. Plain digging, however, may be suffi- 
cient for most of the slight crops, especially in summer or autumn, 
after the ground has been trench-digged in tlie general winter or 
spring digging. 
P 



114 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

As to manure — any kind of dung, or compost of dung and earth, 
is proper; and if this could be suited to the nature of the soil, it 
would be of greater advantage, that is, for ground of a strong, 
heavy, cold nature, have for manure a compost of well-rotted dung, 
ashes, or any sandy earths; and if light sandy ground have the 
moistest sort of dung and heavy earths; though any kind of well- 
rotted dung will suit as proper manure for almost every soil, but 
none better than the dung of old hot-beds, which is the most com- 
mon manure in kitchen gardens, being horse-stable dung, first 
used in hot-beds, where it becomes rotted to a soft, moist tempera- 
ment of an extremely enriching quality, and suits almost all kinds 
of soil and plants, or some of the same quality from dung-hills is 
equally eligible; but well-rotted neat's dung is also very good, par- 
ticularly for light grounds; or a compost of different kinds, as 
horse dung, neat's dung, hogs' dung, farm-yard dung, or mulch, 
ashes, lime-rubbish broken small, sawdust, rotten tan, having all 
lain together till well rotted, will make excellent compost manure. 

The manuring or dunging the ground may be necessary every 
year or two; for all crops being of an exhausting nature in every 
soil, the vegetative vigour of the soils must be supported accord- 
ingly by a proper application of manure; but once every two or 
three years, at farthest, the ground in general will want amend- 
ment; though, where there is plenty of dung, give it as far as it 
will go every year, especially for the principal crops, such as 
onions, cauliflowers, cabbages, &c. ; for as the different crops 
exhaust the soil, the addition of dung fertilizes and renews it, 
which when duly applied in proper quantities, the various crops 
will not only be much finer but arrive to earlier perfection than in 
poor starved ground. 

But for some particular crops, ground which has been well ma- 
nured the year before, will be more eligible than if immediately 
fresh dunged the same year; such as for some of the long fusiform- 
rooted kinds, as carrots and parsneps, &c., unless the dung is 
perfectly rotted, mellow and mouldy, that these long roots can 
readily make their way straight through in their perpendicular, 
downward growth; for when the dung manure is rank or lumpy, it 
is very apt to impede the young descending radicle, and occasion 
the main root to fork or grow crooked, more especially the carrots, 
which also in some fresh dunged ground are sometimes apt to 
canker. 

All manuring should generally be performed in winter or spring, 
to be dug in at the general annual digging, taking opportunity of 
frosty or very dry weather to wheel in the dung for the principal 
manuring, as it may then be performed more easy and clean with- 
out clogging or spoiling the walks, or tearing up the ground; 
laying it in heaps by barrowfuUs at equal distances; afterwards 
spread it evenly, and dig it in one spade deep or more. 

In regard to cropping the ground, the proper situation for, and 
method of raising the different plants, is fully explained in the 
different months under their respective heads; I will therefore 
only hint here, that it is eligible to allot the driest, warmest, and 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. J15 

most sunny situation for the early crops, and the other parts for 
the main crops. 

The south borders are proper for raising the earliest plants, as 
early peas, beans, radishes, spinage, lettuce, carrots, small salad- 
herbs, kidney-beans, Sac, the east and west borders for succession 
of early crops, and the north borders, which being shady and cool, 
serve for raising and pricking out many small plants, slips and 
cuttings in summer; though all these borders, in every exposure, 
may be made useful at all seasons. The borders next the espaliers 
are proper for crops of small plants at all seasons of the year, as 
lettuce, endive, spinage, small salad-herbs, strawberries, and seve- 
ral others, both to stand and for transplantation, according to the 
mode of culture of the different sorts; and by keeping all the bor- 
ders constantly well furnished with various esculents, disposed 
according to their different growths, they, besides their usefulness, 
etl'ect a delightful variety. 

In the internal parts, called the quarters, should always be raised 
the larger principal crops, such as cabbages, cauliflowers, broccoli, 
coleworts, peas, beans, kidney-beans, onions, leeks, carrots, pars- 
neps, beets, potatoes, turnips, artichokes, celery, general crops of 
lettuce, spinage, horse radish, &c. 

As many of the esculent plants succeed best in rows, such as 
peas, beans, cauliflowers, and all the cabbage kinds, transplanted 
lettuces, endive, potatoes, artichokes, Jerusalem artichokes, celery, 
and some others, particular regard is requisite that the rows are 
at proper distances for the plants to have full scope to grow, and 
would advise that all the tall-growing sorts, sown in drills, such as 
peas, beans, kidney-beans, &c. for early crops, have their rows 
ranging north and south, if possible, that the sun may shine on 
each side of the rows more effectually, as well as on the ground 
between the rows; both of which are of more advantage to early 
crops than may be generally imagined; for when the rows range 
east and west, one row shades another, so that when the plants 
grow up, they cannot all receive an equal benefit of the sun. 

The great art in cropping a kitchen garden, is to make the most 
of every part of the ground where necessary, by having each quar- 
ter well occupied with as many crops annually as possible, as 
practised by the experienced market gardeners and others, who 
have occasion to cultivate the whole kitchen ground to every pos- 
sible advantage, often having two or three different crops advancing 
in successive order together on the same compartment, especially 
where the principal crops are in wide rows, as in cauliflowers, 
cabbages, beans, &c. Other kinds are frequently inter-cropped, at 
proper periods, with those of peculiar growth in the respective 
sorts; not to impede each other nor the principal crops above inti- 
mated. Sometimes slight crops of quick growth are sown to come 
off soon, or by the time the others begin to advance considerably; 
or sometimes, in the advanced state of the main crops, they are 
inter-cropped with others of a more continuing and larger growth 
to be coming forward;^ ready, as the others are going off; fully 
occupying the same spot in a succession of crops in some advanced 



j]^5 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

growth, wherebj both time and ground are occasionally gained, 
though, where there is a plentiful scope of kitchen ground, espe- 
cially in private gardens, any considerable inter-cropping would be 
unnecessary, as generally each sort raised separately will, in some 
degree, be superior: however, on the other hand, as in many places 
the kitchen ground is much limited, it is incumbent on the occu- 
pier or cultivator to inter-crop occasionally where it can be done 
with a good prospect of success, agreeably to the above intima- 
tions. With regard to the different methods of sowing and plant- 
ing the different crops, these shall be designated in the course of 
the work. 

Destroying weeds is a most necessary culture in the kitchen 
garden, which must be very particularly attended to; for the suc- 
cess of the crops greatly depends thereon, and without a full 
determination to keep them clean, it is in vain to sow or plant any. 

The utmost attention is necessary never to suffer weeds to perfect 
their seeds in any part, whether in cropped or vacant quarters, or 
on dung-hills or compost heaps, as they would lay the foundation 
of several years' trouble to extirpate them; for, as in digging and 
hoeing the ground, some of the seed would be buried near the 
surface, and others much deeper, at every time of stirring the 
earth, a fresh crop of weeds would arise from the same stock of 
seeds, which versifies the saying, "one year's seeding makes seven 
years' weeding." 

Work to be done in this month. 

The various preparations for early crops, noticed last month, in 
page 9, &c., I would again recommend to your particular atten- 
tion, as you ought to "take time by the forelock" at this season, 
and have as much as possible in a state of forwardness, in order to 
ease the great press of business which will naturally come on next 
month. 

Cucumbers and Melons. 

Where the raising of early cucumbers and melons was not begun 
last mouth, it may now be commenced the beginning or middle of 
this, with a greater prospect of success; observing exactly the same 
method of making the seed hot-bed, sowing the seed, and the gene- 
ral management of the bed and plants, as directed under the head 
Cucumbers, &c. in the kitchen garden for January. 

Ridging out early Cucumbers and Melons. 

If the cucumber and melon plants which were raised last month, 
or the beginning of this, have not suffered by any of the accidents 
that are attendant on them at this season, the former are now, and 
the latter will, in the course of this month, be arrived to a proper 
growth for ridging out into a larger hot-bed, finally to remain. 

A new bed or beds, for one or more large frames, should there- 



Feb.] the kitchen garden. 227 

fore be prepared in due time for the reception of these plants, and 
made in the same manner as directed in January, pages 12 and 13; 
observing that such must be three feet and a half, or four feet 
high when finished; for a less depth of dung will not produce the 
necessary heat which these plants require at this inclement season; 
and, besides, if the beds were made of a more shallow depth their 
heat would be soon spent, and lining could not be applied to them 
with so much advantage: for the latter reason particularly, they 
must be made wholly above ground. 

The bed being finished, put on the frame or frame and lights, 
which will defend it from wet, and bring up the heat the sooner, 
tilting the upper ends of the lights a little that the steam may pass 
off. In a week after the bed is made, if it has settled unequally, 
take off the frame and make the bed level, then immediately put it 
on again for good. 

After this let the state of the bed be daily examined with good 
attention; and when you find the violent heat is over, lay in the 
earth, but be sure to let that first pass away. 

The earth for this purpose should be rich and tolerably dry; for 
that is a material article to be regarded at this season. The earth 
proper for cucumbers may be either any prepared compost of rich 
loam and rotten dung, or of the temperature of light rich kitchen 
garden soil; but to prepare for this you ought, about the latter end 
of September, or in October, (if the most convenient) to take from 
some quarter of the kitchen garden, which is naturally light and 
dry, and well enriched by manure, a sufficient quantity of earth, 
and throw it up in a heap ridge-ways, in some dry place, open to 
the sun and air; mixing therewith at the same time some good 
rotten dung, breaking and blending the whole well together: a due 
quantity of this compost-heap should be carried into some shed or 
other sheltered place, open in front to the sun or free air, a month 
or a fortnight at least before you want it, that it may be preserved 
perfectly dry for earthing the bed. 

Then, when the bed is in order, lay about half a bushel or rather 
more of earth under the middle of each light, rising each parcel of 
earth in a round hillock about ten inches high; let the spaces 
between the hills and quite to the sides of the frame be covered 
with the same sort of earth, only two or three inches thick at this 
time, while the bed is in strong heat for fear of burning, as explain- 
ed below; but which, when the heat is become moderate, is by de- 
grees to be augmented till raised as high as the top of the hills, as 
hereafter directed. 

The reason for laying the earth in little hills, and not earthing 
the bed fully at once, is by way of precaution in case of violent 
afterheat, in which case it will more readily pass off in steam be- 
tween the hills; and likewise, because we may venture to use the 
bed some days sooner than if it was earthed all over at once to the 
full thickness; for if the bed should burn after the plants are in, 
you can more readily prevent the earth and also the roots of the 
plants from being burnt thereby, by drawing the earth away from 



1X8 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

around the bottom of the hills if it burns, and supplying the places 
with more fresh mould. 

As soon as the bed is earthed as above, put on the glasses, and 
by the next day the hillocks of earth will be warm; if they are, level 
the top of each a little, so that they may be about eight or nine 
inches deep; then proceed to put in the plants, the cucumbers, and 
melons separately, in different hot-beds or distinct frames, &c. 

Previous to this observe, that as having last month directed the 
plants to be pricked into small pots, three in each separately, and 
as they are now to be turned out of these pots with the balls of 
earth entire, and planted, one pot of plants in each of the above hills, 
I would intimate, in this final transplanting, that two of the best 
cucumber plants and only one melon, would be sufficient to re- 
main, cutting the others away as soon after planting as you are 
able to distinguish which are most likely to do well; however, it is 
adviseable, previously to transplanting, that, in order to have the 
whole ball of earth adhere closely about the roots, to give the pots 
some water the day before; and the method of planting is this: 
having some pots of the strongest plants ready, place your hand on 
the surface of the pot, taking the stems of the plants carefully be- 
tween your fingers, then turn the mouth of the pot downwards, 
and strike the edge gently on the frame, the plants with the ball 
of earth to their roots will come out entire; then making a hole in 
the middle of each hill of earth, place one pot of plants with the 
ball entire in each hole, closing the earth well around it, and about 
an inch over the top, bringing the earth close around the stems 
of the plants; this done, shut down all the lights close for the pre- 
sent, till the steam rises again strong, then they must be tilted a 
little behind, in proportion, to give it vent. 

The plants being ridged out finally into the beds where they are 
to remain for fruiting, you must be careful to give them fresh air 
every day, by raising the glasses a little for its admission, and for 
the great steam to pass off; and it is necessary to cover the lights 
every night with mats, putting them on about half an hour before 
the time of sun-setting, or a little earlier or later as the weather 
happens to be either mild or severfe, and uncover them in the morn- 
ing as soon after the sun begins to shine on them, or after sun-rising, 
as the state of the weather will permit: in covering up, observe, 
that while the bed is very hot, and the steam copiously rising, 
never to let the ends of the mats hang down over the dung outside 
of the frame, which would draw up a hurtful steam, and stifle the 
plants. 

Air must be admitted to them every day when the weather is 
any way favourable, by raising the upper ends of the glasses from 
about half an inch to an inch or two, or in proportion to the sharp- 
ness or mildness of the outward air and internal heat and steam of 
the bed. 

In giving the plants air, it is a good method at this season, espe- 
cially in severe cutting weather, to fasten a mat across the ends of 
the lights where tilted, to hang down detachedly over the place 
where the air enters the frame; the mat will break the wind and 



Feb.] the kitchen garden. HQ 

sharp air before it reaches the plants, and yet there will be a due 
proportion admitted without exposing them directly to it, and there 
will also be full liberty to let the steam pass off'. 

Likewise, in covering the glasses on nights with mats, if there 
be a strong heat and great steam in the bed, let the lights be raised 
a little behind when you cover up: let them remain so all night, 
and use the mats as above mentioned, to hang down low before the 
place where the glasses are raised, but this must be done with cau- 
tion in very severe frost. 

One great article to be attended to now. is to support a constant 
temperate heat in the hot-bed, so as to keep the plants in a regular 
growing state. The first thing to be observed towards this is, that 
in six or eight days after ridging out the plants, provided the heat 
of the bed is become moderate, it will be very proper to give some 
outward protection of dry, long litter, waste hay, fern, straw, leaves 
of trees, &c., laying it close around the sides a foot thick, and as 
high as five or six inches up the sides of the frame; but this will 
be particularly serviceable in very wet weather, but more especial- 
ly in driving cold rains or snow, and also if there be cold piercing 
winds, all of which would chill the bed, and, without the above pre- 
caution, would sometimes occasion such a sudden and great decay of 
the heat as to prove the manifest destruction of the plants; whereas 
the above lining will defend the bed, and preserve a fine heat till 
the dung begins naturally to decline or decay of itself, which is 
generally in about three weeks or a month after the bed is made, 
when the warmth of it must be renewed by adding a lining of fresh 
hot dung close to its sides and ends. 

But for the first week or ten days after the plants are ridged out 
into this hot-bed, mind that their roots have not too much heat; for 
it sometimes happens that a bed after the mould and plants are in, 
(the earth confining the heat and steam below in the dung,) will 
begin afresh to heat so violently as to be in danger of burning the 
earth at the bottom of the hills; and without some precaution is 
taken, the burning will soon reach the roots of the plants; there- 
fore, for the first week or ten days, let the bottom of these hills be 
at times examined, by drawing away a little of the earth below; 
and, if any burning appears, remove the burnt earth, replace it with 
new, and by drawing some away quite around, let the hills be kept 
as narrow as they will just stand, so as to support the plants, and 
let them remain till the danger of burning is over, when you may 
replace it again. 

When the great heat abates, or the roots of the plants begin to 
appear through the sides of the hills, then add some fresh, light, 
rich earth all around them; about three days after you may lay 
some more; and in two or three days after that you may earth the 
bed all over to the full thickness. But before you lay the fresh 
earth to the sides of the hills, let it be first laid a few hours, or for 
one night in the frame, up towards the sides, that it may acquire 
an equal degree of warmth with that in the bed; then, being applied 
as above, it will not be in danger of chilling the roots of the plants. 

The next particular care is that of lining the hot-bed when the 



120 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

heat declines; therefore, when the heat of the bed begins to decrease 
much, let a lining of the best hot dung be applied in due time to 
the back or front of the bed, or to both if the heat is very much 
declined. The dung for this purpose should be prepared in the 
same manner as that for making the bed. Remember, that if there 
was a lining of dry litter laid around the sides of the bed, to defend 
it from wet, &c. as before directed, this must first be removed 
before you apply the lining; then line the sides of the bed about 
from twelve to fifteen or eighteen inches wide, according as the 
heat is less or more declined, which should be raised about four or 
five inches higher than the dung of the bed, to allow for settling: 
lay some earth on the top of the lining, to keep the rank steam of 
the fresh dung from coming up that way; which, if it did, would 
be apt to enter the frame at the place where the lights are raised 
to admit air, and prove of bad consequence to the plants. 

(Jf stopping or topping the above Plants. 

The young plants, both cucumbers and melons, should be stopped 
or topped, if not done before, at the first joint, by pruning oft' the 
top of the first runner-bud; which is necessary to promote a stocky 
growth, and cause them to put forth lateral shoots at the first and 
second joints, to form fruitful runners; and from these, others of 
the same nature will be produced. 

This operation should be performed when the plants have two 
rough leaves, and when the second is about an inch broad, having 
the first runner-bud rising at its base; the sooner this is detached 
the sooner the plants acquire strength, and put out fruitful runners. 

It is to be done in the following manner: 

You will see arising, in the centre of the plant, at the bottom of 
the second rough leaf, the end of the first runner, like a small bud; 
which bud or runner being the advancing top of the plant, is now 
to be taken off close, and may be done either with the point of a 
penknife or small scissors, or pinched off carefully with the finger 
and thumb; but which ever way you take it off, be careful not to go 
so close as to wound the joint from whence it proceeds. 

Having thus pruned or stopped the plants at the first joint, they 
will by that means very quickly get strength, as will plainly appear 
in a few days; and, in about a week, or ten or twelve days after being 
thus treated, will each begin to send forth two or three runners; 
which runners will probably show fruit at their first, second, or 
third joints; for if the main or first runner was not to be stopped 
as above, it would perhaps run half a yard or two feet in length, 
without putting out more runners to fill the frame, or probably 
without showing a single fruit; for it is upon these lateral shoots 
or runners, produced after stopping the plants, that you may expect 
fruit to appear in any tolerable time in the season: but let it be also 
observed, that when the said lateral shoots have three joints, and 
that if any of them do not then show fruit at either of these, it 
will be proper to pinch off the top of such shoots at the third 
joint, which will promote their putting forth a supply of two or 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. J2l 

three new shoots, some or all of which will most likelj be fruitful; 
and after this, according as thej advance in growth, train the run- 
ners along in regular order, cut out casual very weakly vines, and 
thin others where very irregularly crowded: thus, if the bed is well 
managed, and the plants are forward, those of the cucumbers will 
probably produce proper-sized fruit at the end of this month, or 
beginning or middle of the next; but the melons not so soon by 
six or eight weeks. — See next month. 

Of sowing Cucumber and Melon Seed. 

As there may be many persons who did not begin last month to 
so cucumbers for an early crop, it will here be proper to take 
notice that the beginning, middle, or any time of this month is 
still a good time to begin that work, making a hot-bed for sowing 
the seed as directed in January, pages 12 and 13. 

Those which are sown early in this month, will, with good 
management, produce fruit in the end of March, or beginning of 
April; and those sown in the middle or latter end of the month 
will have fruit in the end of April, and will bear plentifully in May. 

The beginning of this month is a very good time to sow melons 
for a full crop in the frames. 

The seed hot-bed which is to be made now, either for cucumbers 
or melons, must be of the same dimensions; and the seeds sown, 
and plants managed as directed last month. 

But observe, that to be well supplied with cucumber or melon 
plants, either to plant in new beds, or to have a reserve in case of 
accidents happening to any already planted out, it will be very 
proper to sow some seeds at three different times this month. 

These may be sown in such cucumber hot-beds as are already 
made and in cultivation, and when fit to prick out, plant them in 
small pots as directed last month, which may be plunged in the back 
part of the same bed, where they may be kept till wanted, either 
for new, or to supply any deficiency in the present beds. 

Forcing Asparagus. 

Hot-beds for forcing early asparagus may be made any time this 
month, for which purpose you must be provided with proper plants; 
these are previously raised in the natural ground from seed, as 
hereafter directed, which being transplanted from the seed-bed into 
others duly prepared for their reception, and having two or three 
years growth there, they then are of the proper size and strength 
for forcing. But observe that in those parts of the Union where 
the ground is subject at this season to be bound up by frost, pre- 
vious precaution will be necessary, in order to secure a supply of 
plants when wanted for this purpose; therefore, before the setting 
in of the severe winter frost, cover a sufficient number in the beds 
wherein they are growing, with as much dry litter or leaves of 
trees, &c. as will effectually keep the ground from being frozen, 
so that you can remove it, and take up the plants conveniently 
when wanted. 

Q 



122 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

Or you may on the approach of severe frosts, take up a sufficient 
quantity with as little injury to the roots as possible, which may be 
planted in sand or dry earth in a warm cellar, in the same manner 
as directed for planting them in the frame, covering their crowns 
about an inch, observing not to crowd the plants for fear of their 
becoming mouldy; and in mild weather ventilate the cellar as often 
as possible, to prevent any bad eft'ect to the roots from stagnant air: 
but when it can be done, it will be much better to take up the plants 
out of their beds according as you want them. 

The necessary quantity for a three light frame is from three to 
four hundred plants, and so in proportion for any number of frames; 
the plants in such beds ought to be set very close, in order that by 
having as many as possible in each frame, they may produce a pro- 
portionable supply to recompense sufficiently for the trouble and 
expense of forcing them. 

A bed for this purpose is to be made in like manner as those 
directed for cucumbers in pages 12 and 13, but very substantial; 
then put on the frame, and earth it all over six or seven inches deep, 
for the immediate reception of the plants. 

The bed being made and earthed as above, and a sufficient quantity 
of plants in readiness, proceed to planting by raising at one end a 
small ridge of earth about three or four inches high, against which 
place a row of plants close to one another, drawing some earth to 
the bottom of the roots, then place others against these in the 
same manner, and so continue until the frame is full, all having 
their tops or crowns upright and of an equal level. When the 
whole bed is thus planted, cover the crowns of the roots all over 
with light rich earth, about two inches deep, which concludes the 
work for the present. 

You may now put on the lights, which are to be kept open, 
raised high behind, or slided down every day, except in very severe 
weather, but at night let them be closed: give all the air possible so 
that you do not sutler the earth in the bed to be frozen or chilled, 
by rain or snow, till the buds begin to appear, when you are to give 
them another covering of three or four inches of the same kind of 
mould as before, so that the crowns may be covered in the whole 
about six inches deep. 

But it must be remarked that for the first week or fortnight 
after the bed is made and the asparagus planted, that the state of 
its warmth should be every day carefully examined; for that pur- 
pose thrust two or three sharp pointed sticks down betwixt the 
roots into the dung in different parts of the bed; when upon draw- 
ing up the sticks once or twice a day, and feeling the lower ends, 
you can readily judge of the degree of heat, which if found very 
violent, threatening to burn the earth and scorch the roots of the 
plants, it must be moderated by boring with a long thick stake 
several wide holes in the dung on each side of the bed, also in the 
earth just under the roots^ to admit the air, and to let the rank 
steam and burning quality of the dung pass off" more freely; but 
when the heat is become moderate, the holes must be closed again. 



Feb.] the kitchen GARDEN. 123 

Likewise observe when the heat is on the decline, it will be very 
proper to lay a quantity of dry long litter round the sides of the 
bed, which will preserve a fine kindly growing heat, and will defend 
the bed from being chilled by heavy rains, snow, &c. 

In the next place when you find the heat of the bed beginning to 
decline considerably, you should prepare to renew it as soon as pos- 
sible, which is to be done by applying a lining of hot dung to the 
sides as for cucumber and melon beds. 

Fresh air must be admitted in fine weather daily, especially if 
the heat of the bed is strong when the buds begin to appear through 
this last covering of earth; for fresh air is necessary both to give 
them colour and prevent their drawing up too fast and weak; there- 
fore in fine sunny days, either tilt the upper ends of the lights an 
inch or two, or shove them a little down, as may be convenient; 
but keep them close in cold or very bad weather, and always at 
night. 

Continue to cover the glasses every night, especially after the 
plants appear, with mats or straw. 

The bed, if made and managed as above directed, will begin to 
produce asparagus abundantly in four or five weeks, and provided 
the heat be kept up, will continue producing buds in great plenty 
for about three weeks. 

The method of gathering the asparagus in hot-beds is to thrust 
your finger down gently into the earth, and break the buds off close 
to the roots; but the cutting them with a knife, as practised in the 
natural ground would, by reason of the buds coming up so very 
thick, destroy as many or more than you gather. 

When it is intended to have a constant supply of asparagus in 
the winter and spring seasons, till that in the natural ground comes 
in, you should make a new hot-bed every three weeks or a month. 
A quantity of fresh plants must also be procured for every new 
bed; for those which have been forced in a hot-bed, are not fit for 
any use afterwards, either in the natural ground or elsewhere. 

When designed to raise asparagus plants for forcing, you should 
sow some seed every year in a bed of rich earth, as directed in 
March; observing when the plants are one year old, to transplant 
them into an open compartment, in rows, nine inches asunder, and 
about the same distance between the rows. When they have two or 
three summers' growth, they are then fit to take up for forcing; 
but if they stand three years before you take them up they will 
produce much larger buds. 

It is necessary to have three difterent pieces of ground always 
employed at the same time with asparagus plants for the above 
purpose; that is, one for the seed-bed with seedling plants, which 
should never stand longer than one year before transplanted; the 
other two pieces to be occupied with transplanted plants; one to 
be a year's growth from the time of planting before the other, by 
which method of sowing a quantity of plants every spring, you 
will, after the first three years, obtain a fresh supply of proper 
plants every year of eligible age and growth, as above, for forcing. 



X24 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

In those states where there is not severe frost to be encountered 
at this season, asparagus may be forced as directed above, without 
the assistance of a frame and lights; but in lieu thereof you must 
arch the bed over with hoops, and protect it from heavy rains and 
cold, with bass mats or other convenient covering, laid over these 
hoopsj and the earth on the beds must be confined, either with a 
shallow frame or with straw bands orVopes, three or four inches in 
diameter, fixed down neatly along the edge of the bed, with sharp 
pointed wooden pegs. 

Mushrooms. 

Take care that the mushroom beds are still well defended from 
heavy rains and frost, both of which would destroy the spawn. 

The covering of straw should not be less than fourteen or sixteen 
inches thick on every part of the bed 5 and at this season it would 
be proper to continue some large garden mats spread over the 
straw covering, to secure the bed more effectually from wet and 
cold 5 and observing, that if the wet at any time has penetrated 
quite through any part of the covering, the wet straw should be 
removed, and replaced with some that is clean and dry. 

If these beds are made under open sheds constructed for that 
purpose, it will be a great advantage, particularly in protecting 
them from too much wet, which is very injurious to them, espe- 
cially during the winter season. 

New mushroom beds may now be made where wantedj for the 
particular method, see October. 

Kidney Beans. 

Where early kidney-beans are wanted, you may, in the begin- 
ning, or any time this month, make a hot-bed for raising them; let 
this be made, as directed for cucumbers, to the height of three feet, 
and long enough for one or more frames, which, with their glasses, 
put on immediately; when the heat is come up, level the bed and 
cover the dung seven or eight inches deep with rich light earth, 
then draw drills from the back to the front a foot asunder, and au 
inch deep; drop the beans therein two or three inches apart, and 
smooth over the surface of the bed. 

Or you may sow the beans thick in a small hot-bed, or in pots 
therein to raise the plants about an inch in growth, then transplant 
them into a large hot-bed as above, to yield their produce. 

The best sorts for this purpose are the early cream-coloured 
dwarfs, early speckled, white and yellow dwarfs; because these 
kinds are of an early nature, and do not run so strong or rampant 
as the other sorts. 

When the plants begin to appear, raise the lights a little behind 
every mild day, to admit fresh air to strengthen their growth; give 
also occasional gentle waterings, continue the same care in their 
advancing state and support a proper heat in the bed; they will 
thus afford an early produce in April, &c. 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN, 125 

But where there is a hot-house you may raise early kidney or 
French beans, generally with much less trouble and more certain 
success than in hot-beds, as above. 

Small Salading. 

Continue to raise in hot-beds a regular supply of small salading, 
such as cresses, mustard, rape, radishes, lettuce, &c., as directed 
in January, pages 19 and 20, which must be sown every eight or 
ten days, in order to afford a proper succession j for at this season 
such are more acceptable, and to many persons more palatable, 
than at any other period of the year. 

Towards the latter end of the month, in the middle states, and 
in all parts to the southward, you may begin to sow lettuce, and 
the other different kinds of small salading on warm well sheltered 
south borders, especially if the great winter frosts have passed 
away. 

For this purpose dig the ground neatly, giving it an advantageous 
slope towards the sun, rake the surface fine, and draw shallow 
drills from north to south about three or four inches distant^ sow 
the seeds therein, each sort separate, very thick, and earth them 
over not more than a quarter of an inch deep. If the season 
proves favourable, you may expect tolerable success; but the more 
certain way would be to cover these beds with fram.es and glasses, 
which would not only forward them to perfection at an earlier 
period, but also protect them from the various accidents incident 
to such early crops in unfavourable seasons. 

When these plants, both under cover and in the open ground, 
begin to come up, they sometimes, by rising very thick, raise the 
earth in a kind of cake upon their tops, which consequently retards 
their growth; they may be assisted by whisking the surface lightly 
with your hands, &c. to separate the earth, after which, the plants 
will rise regularly. 

When those coming up in the open ground happen to be attack- 
ed with morning hoar frosts, and likely to be a sunny mild day, if 
before the sun rises full upon them you water them with fresh pump 
or well water poured out of a watering-pot, with the head on, to 
wash off the frosty rime, it will prevent their turning black and 
going off. 

Cauliflower Plants. 

The beginning of this month plant your autumn sown cauli- 
flowers in hot-beds, to flower in April and May; garden pits or 
frames constructed of stone is what is generally used and preferred 
now for forcing instead of the wooden frames directed in page 10: 
however, where stone cannot conveniently be had wood will answei- 
by being regularly lined with fresh dung, as directed in page 17. 
Stone pits are generally made larger than wood, say twenty- 
four feet long, (which will require six sashes, each four feet wide 
by five feet ten inches long,) six feet deep at the back, and four 



126 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

feet six inches in front: to be about two feet ten inches below the 
surface; the wall to be from one foot to eighteen inches thick. In 
these frames you can raise any kind of vegetables that are wanted 
early; or small flowers, such as roses, carnations, stock-gilly, 
wall flowers, mignonette, heliotrope, nerembergias, pseonies, or 
any low growing plants that you wish to bloom at an early season. 
By placing the pots at the back side, they will not interfere with 
cauliflowers, melons, or any other plants raised in a hot-bed, while 
they are small. In making the hot-bed, observe the directions in 
January, page IS, except that by having the bed below the surface 
you can use a foot or eighteen inches of old leaves or tan in the 
bottom; and then finish oft" as directed for cucumbers and melons. 
Plant the cauliflowers about two feet distant every Vay; and 
between the cauliflowers you may plant lettuce and sow radish 
or turnip seed; white turnip is the best for this purpose: these 
will be used before the cauliflowers bloom. It will be neces- 
sary to look over the cauliflowers to see if any show flowers 
before they attain their proper size, in which case, pull them up 
and plant others in their place. Those early autumnal sown 
plants which you have in frames, and that you are endeavouring to 
protect with a covering of boards and mats, &c. without the assist- 
ance of glass, should never have powerful sunshine admitted to 
them while in a frozen state; for its sudden action upon these 
tender plants, whilst in that condition, would prove their total 
destruction; therefore admit it only at intervals, when weak, until 
the plants and ground around them are completely thawed. 

The cauliflower plants which were raised from seed sown last 
month, should as soon in this as they may arrive at a sufficient 
size, which is about four or five inches, be transplanted into a new 
moderate hot-bed, which will greatly strengthen and forward their 
growth. 

Make the bed two feet and a half high and put a frame on, lay on 
six inches deep of rich earth, when this is warm prick the plants 
therein two or three inches apart, and give them a little water; as 
soon as they have taken i-oot give them plenty of air; and in mild 
warm days take the glasses totally off, but let them be carefully 
covered every night and the glasses only raised a little behind in 
cold weather. 

Plants thus treated will become strong and well rooted, bear 
transplanting much better than if left in the seed-bed, and produce 
larger and better heads; for, by transplanting, the tap roots are 
checked, and the plants push a number of lateral roots, which afford 
them nourishment and strength; they become short-stemmed and 
stout, and consequently more fit for a final and successful trans- 
plantation than if suffered to remain in the seed-bed. 

Were these to be transplanted again,> early in March, into an- 
other bed it would be an additional advantage; it is by the neglect 
of this necessary treatment that we have so few good flowers, for 
the plants, when continued in the seed-bed till finally transplanted, 
become long and spindling, tender and unfurnished with roots or 
fibres; when planted out, for want of a sufficiency of roots, they are 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 227 

not able immediately to extract the necessary supply of nourish- 
ment from the earth, consequently become stunted, and either but- 
ton, or grow so miserably as never to produce a good head. 

When transplanted and furnished as above, and the proper 
season arrives for planting them out in the open ground, they are 
to be taken up separately with a hollow trowel or transplanter, pre- 
serving as much earth as possible about the roots of each plant, and 
deposited where they are to flowerj thus treated they will scarcely 
be sensible of the removal, will continue in a constant and regular 
state of vegetation, and if protected for a few days with garden 
pots or other suitable coverings from too powerful a sun, and regu- 
larly at night, for ten or twelve days after planting, you may rea- 
sonably expect the desired success. 

As it is from these early sowings that the greatest success may 
be expected in the United States, every care should be taken to 
promote their early growth and strength, in order that they may 
arrive at due perfection before the commencement of the severe 
summer heat, which is found so injurious to all late cauliflowers. 

Continue to give a due quantity of air to your cauliflower plants 
at all favourable opportunities; for, as observed in January, it is an 
extremely essential article. 

Solving Cauliflower Seed. 

Sow some cauliflower seed in a hot-bed the beginning, middle, or 
at any time this month, but the earlier the better, to succeed those 
sown in January, or in case none were sown at that time; for the 
method of doing which, see page 20. 

If you have not the convenience of glass lights, these plants may 
be raised with good success in paper frames, or with particular 
attention you may succeed with coverings of mats, or boards and 
mats. 

Paper Frames. 

These frames are made either like the cover of a wagon or the 
roof of a house, and covered with oiled paper instead of glass. 
They have a frame of wood at the base, to which in the former 
broad hoops are fastened bent over circularly. The width of the 
frame should be near five feet, the length nine or ten; the distance 
between the hoops not more than a foot, and there should be seve- 
ral rows of strong pack thread or rope yarn running from hoop to 
hoop all over, distant from each other about eight inches, and other 
lines crossing and intersecting these between the hoops or ribs of 
the frame, which arrangements of lines are of essential service for 
the more effectual support of the paper when pasted on the frame, 
and to strengthen it against the power of winds and heavy rains. 

The other sort of frame may be made with slips of pine or neat 
laths, fastened to a roof-tree at the top, and to the base-frame at 
bottom. The pannels or lights ought to have hinges alternately at 
each side, to open outward for giving air occasionally on the side 



12S THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Fee. 

from the wind, or on both sides if the weather is mild, and also for 
performing other necessary culture. 

The paper for this purpose should be of the- larger strong print- 
ing or demi kindj which, previously to pasting on the frame, should 
be moderately damped with water, that it may not sink in hollows 
after being fixed; as soon as thus prepared proceed to paste it on, 
sheet by sheet, using for this purpose the very best kind of paste; 
and contrive to have whole ones along the ridge-rail above, extend- 
ing lengthways and across, to join regularly with the sheets below; 
pasting the whole in the most regular and secure manner to the 
frames, ribs, and pack-thread; and if, at the intersections of the 
latter, a small square or round bit of the same paper is pasted on 
the inside and to the large sheets over those parts, it will give ad- 
ditional strength against rain and winds. 

After the paper is thus pasted on and perfectly dry, then it must 
be oiled over with linseed oil, either raw or boiled; the latter I think 
is rather apt to harden the paper and cause it to crack, therefore 
would prefer the former. Having, however, the oil and a painter's 
soft brush, lay it on lightly, and brush the outside of the paper all 
over, equally in every part, which done, place the frame in some 
dry covered shed, there to remain till the whole is thoroughly dry, 
then it may be used when wanted, and will answer extremely well 
for various purposes. 

If the base frames are well painted with the following composi- 
tion they will last a long time. To every six pounds of melted 
pitch, add half a pint of linseed oil, and a pound of brick dust well 
pulverized, mix them all together and use them warm. This is 
the best pigment for all timber exposed to the weather, for no 
moisture can penetrate through it. 

You may also form lights of the above kind for yoiir common 
hot-bed frames when glass cannot be conveniently had, which will 
answer a very good purpose. 

These covers of oiled paper are used not only for early cauli- 
flower and cabbage plants, but also for early sallading, cucumbers, 
&c., and are excellent for covering cuttings of exotic and other 
plants, and for various other purposes. 

Cabbage Plants. 

Continue to protect your autumn-sown cabbage plants from the 
severity of the weather, agreeably to the general precautionary di- 
rections given in the month of October, which see. But be very 
particular that such as are in frames, and consequently under oc- 
casional protection, which renders them still more tender than those 
protected under the shade of bows, &c., and that have got frozen 
either in consequence of neglect in covering, or of the extreme 
severity of the weather, are not to be exposed to the influence of 
the sun whilst shining strongly, until they are gradually thawed, 
and also the earth in which they stand; but at intervals, when the 
rays are not too powerful, you may admit them to the plants, in 
order to accomplish this end the sooner; but it must be done with 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 129 

great precaution. This observation is not only applicable to cab- 
bage and cauliflower plants, but to all other plants under similar 
circumstances. 

The cabbage plants which were sown last month, should as soon 
in this as they have arrived to the height of three or four inches, 
or their leaves to the size of a quarter dollar, be transplanted into 
a new hot-bed, at the distance of three or four inches, plant from 
plant, every way: in order to promote their growth, give them 
strength, and the better to prepare them for planting out in the open 
ground, as soon as the season arrives for that purpose. 

Previous to transplanting either these or cauliflower plants, see 
that the earth of the new bed is arrived at a proper degree of 
warmth, so that the plants when planted therein, may receive no 
check, but strike out new roots and fibres immediately. Let them 
be constantly kept in a moderate state of growth, admitting plenty 
of air to them at every favourable opportunity; for if neglected in 
this very essential point, they will grow weakly and slender, and 
never turn out to good advantage; therefore, let air be given as 
often as it can be done with safety, but cover them carefully every 
night, and even in the day time, in extremely severe weather. 

Sowing Cabbage Seed. 

This is a good time to sow a full crop of cabbage seeds, such as 
the early Smyrna, early York, early dwarf Battersea, early sugur- 
loaf, &c.; these may be sown in a hot-bed, as directed for cauli- 
flowers, any time this mouth, but the earlier the better, especially 
if none were sown in January: these will come to perfection at 
an early and very acceptable time. 

Towards the latter end of the month, you may sow these kinds 
on a warm south border, to be covered with frames and glasses, or 
on slight hot-beds made in warm situations, and covered with 
paper frames, or with boards and mats occasionally. 

Oiled paper covers will do extremely well for this purpose, and 
may be used to much advantage where glass lights cannot be had. 

Sow also some red pickling-cabbage, Flat-Dutch, large drumhead 
Savoy, and other late cabbage seeds to succeed your early summer 
crops; these will produce larger heads and earlier, than if sown 
much later. Many people never think of sowing these late kinds 
at this time, which is an egregious omission, and ought not to be 
copied by any person who wishes to have a regular succession, and 
in the greatest perfection, of this invaluable vegetable. 

The method of sowing these seeds in hot-beds being so similar 
to that of cauliilowers, a repetition is unnecessary; therefore see 
pages 20 and 21. Always observe to give the plants plenty of 
air, in order to harden and strengthen them, and to prevent their 
spendling up in a weakly manner, more especially if you do not in- 
tend to transplant them into another hot-bed before their being 
finally planted in the open ground. 

But notwithstanding all this precaution, you must not omit to 
keep them constantly in a growing state, and dulv protected from 
R 



130 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

the inclemencies of the weather^ and when the beds wherein they 
are growing, become cold and destitute of that warmth so necessary 
for the above purpose, you must give them a slight lining of fresh 
horse-dung, to renew the slow temperate heat so congenial and ne- 
cessary to these plants at this season. 

Sowing Celery. 

Towards the end of this month if the weather permits, prepare 
a small bed of light rich earth in a warm border, to sow some celery 
seed therein for an early crop; the best kinds to sow are the solid 
and red celery, both of which are excellent. 

Break the earth very fine, and either sow the seed on the surface, 
and rake it in lightly, or rake the surface smooth, sow the seed 
thereon, and cover it with light earth, sifted over near a quarter of 
an inch deep; or the ground being formed into a three or four feet 
wide bed and the surface raked, then with the back of the rake 
trim the earth evenly off the surface about a quarter of an inch deep 
into the alley, sow the seed on the bed, and with a spade cast the 
earth over it evenly and rake the surface smooth. 

Though this seed may not come up for a length of time, there 
will be no danger of its perishing in the ground, and it will be in a 
state to receive the first advantage of the growing season: if a frame 
and lights or hand-glasses can be spared to put over it, they will 
greatly forward its growth; when raised in this way, though it 
will not be so early, it will not be so subject either to start to seed 
or to pipe, as if sown and forced in a hot-bed. 

But those who wish to have celery as early as possible, should 
sow the seed on a slight hot-bed, and cover it with a frame and 
lights, or with hand-glasses, or in default of these, cover at night 
and in bad weather with mats placed on hoops stuck archwise over 
the beds to support them, being careful in either method, when the 
plants are come up, to admit the free air every mild day. 

There should not be many of these early sown plants planted 
out for a continuing supply, only a few to come in before the gene- 
ral crop, for they will soon pipe and run to seed. 

Sowing Radish Seed. 

Towards the end of this month, if the weather is mild and the 
ground open, you may dig a warm border to sow therein some early- 
frame, short-top, and white turnip-rooted radish seeds, to draw for 
sallads in April and early in May. Dig another piece at. the same 
time for salmon-radish, which will succeed the former. 

Let them generally be sown broad-cast on the surface, either in 
a continued space, or in four or five feet wide beds, and rake them 
in with an even hand; or in sowing large crops in one continued 
space, if quite dry light ground, it is eligible, before raking in, to 
tread down the seed lightly, then rake it in regularly. 

You may sow among these crops of radishes, a sprinkling of 
spinage and lettuce seed; the spinage will come in after the radish, 
and the lettuce after the spinage. 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 131 

The radislies sown last month must be carefully protected by 
covering the glasses at night and in very severe weather with mats, 
&.C., and they must have plenty of air occasionally, otherwise they 
will not root well. 

In order to have radishes tolerably early, or to succeed those 
sown in January, let some of the early kinds above mentioned be 
now sowed on a slight hot-bed, as directed in page 22, and treated 
as there advisedj or you may sow them on such beds, under cover 
of oiled paper frames, or of matsj but radishes are not apt to root 
well under covering of mats, especially when necessity requires 
them to be kept on for any considerable length of time, unless you 
are extremely careful to give them as much air and light at every 
opportunity as possible, consistent with their safety. 

Spinage. 

Sow some prickly-seeded spinage, it being the hardiest kind, 
about the latter end of the month; let some dry warm ground be 
prepared for this purpose, and sow the seed thereon thin and regu- 
lar, either broad-cast and raked in, or in drills a foot asunder, or 
on four feet wide beds; being careful that in either case, the seed 
be not covered more than from an inch to half an inch deep, accord- 
ing to the lightness or stiftness of the ground. 

The smooth-seeded round leaved kind, is the best to sow during 
the remainder of the spring and early summer months; but for 
this early sowing, the prickly-seeded being more hardy, is pre- 
ferable. 

13°* I am well aware that in far the greater part of the eastern 
states, the ground is generally, during the whole of this month and 
a considerable part of March, so bound up with frost, as not to be 
dug or cultivated; but this not being the case in the middle states, 
except in very severe seasons, and not in all the southern states, 
I am induced to give these directions for the sowing of early crops, 
and where the state of the weather permits, they may be practised 
to advantage, and where not, the business must be deferred a little 
longer. 

Sowing Lettuce Seed. 

If the weather be mild and the ground in good condition, you 
may, about the latter end of this month, sow some lettuce seed on 
a south border, which ought to be well defended by a wall, hedge, 
or board fence, &c. The kinds most suitable to be sown at this 
time, are the early curled and common cabbage lettuces, if intended 
to be cut up for small sallading, in which case they are to be sown 
very thick on the surface, after the ground has been raked tolerably 
well, and then raked in; or they may be sown in beds or drills, 
according to fancy, observing that these seeds require but a very 
slight covering. 

You may also sow any other kinds of lettuce, such as the white, 
or green cos, Egyptian and spotted cos, which are excellent kinds; 



132 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

or if for cabbaging or heading, you may sow the white Silicia, 
grand admiral, large mogul, brown Dutch, or New Zealand lettuces, 
all of which form good hard heads; for this purpose, they must be 
sown very thin, and when arrived at a due size, be transplanted in 
rows into the different borders, &c., as directed in March, leaving 
a sufficient quantity to occupy the seed-bed, which will head earlier 
than those that shall have been transplanted. 

If these be covered at night and in very unfavourable weather, 
either with mats or boards, &c. , it will greatly forward their growth. 

But in order to have a few in a more advanced state for trans- 
planting, and also for early small sallading, you Tiiay sow any of 
the above kinds in a hot-bed, those for the latter purpose very thick, 
and for the fornier pretty thin; the cos lettuces, not growing fJat 
or in a spreading manner, are peculiarly adapted for sowing in 
hot-beds at this season; but either of the kinds may be sown, and 
with due care and proper thinning be brought to good and early 
perfection. 

Lettuces which have stood the winter closely planted in frames, 
should, about the end of this month, be thinned to about nine 
inches, or if expected to grow very large, a foot asunder; the 
plants which are drawn out may be planted into other frames, or 
into warm borders where they can be well protected vv'ith mats, or 
some suitable covering, till they are inured by degrees to bear the 
open air; but if the weather is unfavourable, and you have not 
a sufficiency of frames to receive the plants, it will be better to defer 
this work till next month, being particular to pick off all decayed 
leaves, and to stir the earth a little about the roots. 

Sowing Carrot Seed. 

When carrots are desired at an early season, some seed may be 
sown in a slight hot-bed in the beginning or middle of this month; 
make this bed two and a half feet high, put on the frame, and cover 
the bed with light dry earth six or eight inches deep; sow the 
seed thinly on the surface, and cover it about a quarter of an inch, 
with the same kind of earth; when the plants are up give them 
plenty of air, and thin them as they advance in growth; keep the 
glasses well covered at night, and in extremely severe weather, and 
in April you may expect handsome roots. 

This seed, if sown as above, towards the latter end of the month, 
will succeed very v/ell without the assistance of glass, if the bed 
is carefully covered at night, and occasionally, as the weather may 
happen to be severe, in the day time, with garden mats, &c.; you 
may also about the end of the month, sow a small quantity of car- 
rot seed, on a warm border of light, dry, rich earth, and, if the 
season proves favourable they will succeed tolerably well, and be 
fit for use at a very acceptable period: for the method of doing 
which, see March. 

Parsneps and Beets. 
Parsneps being very hardy plants, and the seeds remaining in the 



Feb.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. J33 

ground a long time before they vegetate, may be sown as early in 
this month as the ground can be got in a proper condition to receive 
the seed, which ought always to be a principal consideration; for 
nothing can be worse than to work ground whilst too wet. 1 would 
not, however, advise to sow more at this time than what may answer 
for a first early crop. 

Sow a small quantity of beet-seed on a warm border in drills for 
a first crop; but this ought not to be done till about the end of the 
month. 

Observe that seeds which are sown in the open ground at this 
time, cannot have much advantage, as to earliness, over those vvhich 
may be sown two weeks later; therefore would advise never to sow 
seeds till the ground is in a good dry state, and proper condition to 
receive them. 

Solving Peas. 

Towards the latter end of this month, prepare a dry and well 
situated piece of ground for an early crop of peas, the early-frame, 
early charleton and golden hotspurs, are the kinds most suitable 
for this crop, but more particularly the first, though the others are 
excellent, and will immediately succeed the early-frame. 

Sow each sort separate, and pretty thick, in rows or drills three 
feet asunder, covering them not more than about an inch and a half; 
or if the ground be very loose and light, too inches deep; but if it 
is of a stiff nature, one inch will be sufficient. 

But in order to give the first early crops a greater advantage, 
prepare a south border of dry light earth for their reception, and 
raise the earth into narrow sloping ridges, about a foot broad at the 
base, and nine inches high, and at the distance of three feet from 
each other; ranging these in a south-west direction from the north 
side of the border; then on the easterly sides af these ridges, 
about half their height, sow your drills of peas, giving them the 
same depth of covering as above directed. In this situation they 
will have all the advantage of the morning and mid-day sun, lie dry, 
and will consequently advance in vegetation much more rapidly 
than if sown in the ordinary way. 

Raising Peas in Hot-beds, ^c. 

Where a few peas are particularly required in the most early 
season, they may be obtained by sowing some of the early dwarf 
kinds in a hot-bed, to remain, or rather to be transplanted from that 
into another; either of which methods should be performed early 
in this month if neglected in last. These may be sown in a large 
hot-bed in rows from the back to the front of the bed, to remain: 
or it would be rather more eligible to sow them thick on a small 
hot-bed, to be transplanted into a larger when about an inch or 
two high: and if you have any in an advanced state you may now 
transplant them as above, to remain for bearing. But if you have 
the convenience of a hot-house or forcing-house of any kind, you 



J34 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Feb. 

may easily and expeditiously raise them therein, by either sowing 
the seeds or planting the plants, if in a state of forwardness, in 
large pots, and depositing these in convenient places in those 
houses. 

N. B. A large quantity of the fallen leaves of trees laid around all 
your hot-beds, as high as the upper parts of the frames, especially 
those which contain tender plants, will afford them a very necessary 
protection, by preventing the frost from penetrating through the 
sides and ends of the frames, and at the same time they will pro- 
duce a lasting and comforting heat in the beds. 

Planting Beans. 

By beans I mean the Vicia Faha of Linnaeus, and not the Pha- 
seolus vulgaris, or kidney-beans. 

A full crop of these should be planted as early in this or the next 
month as it is possible to get them into the ground j for it is from 
the early sown crops of these, that any tolerable produce may be 
expected in the United States, especially in the middle and south- 
ern parts. 

For this purpose, as soon as the weather will permit, dig an open 
quarter of good ground, observing that a strong heavy soil is the 
most suitable, but see that it is not too wet when you work it; in 
which plant a full crop of the early Mazagan, early Lisbon, long- 
podded, white-blossom, large Windsor, toker, Sandwich, and other 
kinds: by planting these different varieties at one time, they will 
come into bearing in regular succession, according to their differ- 
ent degrees of earliness. You need not be under any apprehension 
of their being injured by the weather, as they are of a hardy nature, 
and will not suffer by any frost which may overtake them, except 
in very extraordinary cases. 

Plant the small early kinds in drills three feet asunder, and the 
beans two or three inches distant in the rows, or they may be plant- 
ed two rows in each drill, four inches distant each way/, and covered 
two inches deep. 

The large kinds, such as the Windsor, toker, Sandwich and broad 
Spanish, should be planted at the distance of four feet, row from 
row, and somewhat thinner than the small kinds. These may also 
be planted occasionally by dibble, but drilling is the more expedi- 
tious and better way. 

You may continue planting these kinds once a week till the end 
of March, but those planted after that season will not be so pro- 
ductive. 

These kinds may be forced in like manner as peas if desired j for 
their further treatment, see following months. 

Sowing Parsley Seed. 

Sow some of the common and curled parsley seeds in drills, 
on some warm border, to produce an early supply; the seed will 
remain a long time in the ground before it comes up, but there is 
no danger of its perishing. 



fbb.] the fruit garden. 135 

Mushrooms. 

The same care that was directed last month in page 22, must be 
continued with due attention to jour mushroom beds; being par- 
ticular to preserve them effectually from frost and wet, either of 
which would destroy the spawn, and render your beds unpro- 
ductive. 

Artichokes. 

If the weather is extremely severe, and you have not attend- 
ed to it before, lay some dry long litter over the rows of your choice 
globe artichokes, which will tend greatly to their preservation. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

In Georgia, South Carolina, and other parts of the more southern 
states, this will be a very principal month with the inhabitants for 
making their kitchen gardens; for the method of doing which I can 
only refer them to the kitchen garden for March and April, the 
work recommended to be done in these months being quite appli- 
cable with them at this season. 

In the more northerly of the southern states, much work can be 
done in the kitchen garden this month; but the next will be their 
important period, to which I refer them. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Pruning Wall and Espalier Trees. 

Peaches, nectarines, and apricots, should, in the middle states, 
be pruned about the latter end of this month; the beginning of nest 
will be a good time in the eastern states. This must be duly at- 
tended to before the buds are much swelled, for then many of them 
would be unavoidably rubbed off in performing the work. 

Examine these trees well, and cut away all such parts as are 
useless, both in old and young wood, and leave a proper supply of 
the last year's shoots for next summer's bearing; all old wood that 
has advanced a considerable length, and produced no young shoots 
proper for bearing this year, nor support branches that do, are use- 
less, and should now be cut out to make room for better; observing 
that a general successional supply of young bearing wood, of the 
best well placed shoots of last summer, must now be retained in all 
parts of the tree at moderate distances, to bear the fruit to be 
expected the ensuing season, at the same time cut away all the 
ill-placed and superiluous shoots and very luxuriant growths, to- 
gether with part of the former year's bearers, &c., tomake room 
for the successional bearing shoots, as observed in January. 



136 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Feb. 

As you proceed, let the supply of reserved shoots be shortened, 
each according to its strength. Shoots of a vigorous growth should 
be shortened but a littlej that is, you may cut off' about one-fourth 
of the original length; those of a moderate growth should be 
shortened more in proportion by cutting off about one-third; for 
instance, a shoot of eighteen inches should be shortened to twelve 
or thereabouts, and observe the same proportion according to the 
different lengths of the shoots. 

But for the more particular method of pruning these trees, see 
the work of the fruit garden in January, page 29. 

Pruning of .Apples and Fears, 8fc. 

Prune apples, pears, plums and cherries, against walls or espa- 
liers; and, if possible, let the whole of them be finished this month. 

In pruning these trees, observe, as directed last month, that as 
the same branches or bearers remain many years in a proper fruit- 
ful state, continue them trained close and straight to the wall or 
espalier, not shortening their ends, but still continue training each 
at full length as far as the limited space admits, and laying them 
in about four, five, or six inches asunder. 

In the next place observe, that if the breaches be any where 
much crowded, that is, if the bearing or principal branches are 
closer than four, five, or six inches from one another, some should 
be pruned out: observing, in this case, to take off such as are 
badly situated, and particularly such as appear to be the most 
unlikely to bear, by being either worn out, or, at least, not well 
furnished with fruit-spurs, as mentioned last month. Likewise 
observe, that when necessary to make room in any particular part 
of the tree, to train more regularly any eligible branches which 
are evidently well adapted for bearing; room must be made for 
them by cutting out such barren branches as above described; and 
in any trees where the general branches are trained considerably 
too close, and crowding in a confused irregularity, let some of the 
most unserviceable and irregular growths be cut out in a thinning 
order, in different parts of such trees, to make room for training 
the other more useful and eligible branches, in a proper expansion, 
at regular distances. 

When any old or large branches are to be taken out, let them be 
cut off" close to the places from whence they arise, or to any eligible 
lateral branches which they support, and that you shall think con- 
venient to leave; in cutting off" either old or young branches never 
leave any stumps. 

After cutting out any large branches, let such as remain near 
that part be unnailed or unbound, in order to be brought higher or 
lower, as you shall see necessary, to train them all at equal dis- 
tances; or when there are several large branches to be taken out in 
different parts, the whole tree should be unnailed or unbound, 
then you can more readily train the general branches and bearers 
in exact order. 

Next, let it be observed, that where a supply of wood is wanted, 



Feb.] the FRUIT GARDEN. J 37 

leave some of the best situated of last summer's shoots, such as 
directed to be retained in the summer prunino;, to fill up the vacan- 
ciesj and generally leave a leading one at the end of each branch 
where you have room to train them. But all others of the last 
year's shoots, not Avanted for the above purpose, should every one 
be cut off close to the places from whence they proceed, leaving 
no spurs but what are naturally produced. The proper fruit-spurs 
are such as were described last month, being produced on the sides 
and ends of the branches, short, robust, and from about half an 
inch to an inch or two in length. 

Let these fruit-spurs be well attended to in pruning, carefully 
preserving all those of a fresh, plump, robust growth; but those of 
a worn out or rugged unsightly appearance, or that project consi- 
derably long and irregular from the front of the branches in a fore- 
right direction, should generally be displaced, in order to preserve 
the regularity of the trees, taking care to cut them off close, by 
which new ones will be encouraged in places contiguous. 

Having, in the course of pruning these trees, left most of the 
general shoots and branches at their natural length, as before ad- 
vised, in all places where there is full scope to extend them, let 
them be all trained regularly in that order, and nailed straight and 
close to the wall, or nailed or tied to the espalier about four, five, 
or six inches distant. — For the management of young trees of these 
sorts, see the work of the Fruit Garde^i in March, and for the 
methods of pruning and treating your standard fruit trees in this 
department, see the article Orchard in January,ipa.ge& 45, 46, and 
47, and also the same head, both in this month and March. 

Fig Trees. 

Except in the southern states, it will not be advisable to attempt 
pruning your fig trees till towards the end of next month, or 
beginning of April, to which I shall refer you for particular remarks 
and directions. 

Prune and Plant Gooseberry and Currant Trees. 

Gooseberries and currants should be pruned now, if omitted in 
the former months, both in the standard bushes and those against 
walls, fences, &c. 

In pruning the common standards, observe to cut away all cross- 
growing branches, and regulate such as advance in a straggling 
manner from the rest. Or where the branches in general stand so 
close as to interfere, let them be thinned properly, so that every 
branch may stand clear of the other, at a regular moderate dis- 
tance; and prune out the superabundant lateral and other unneces- 
sary shoots of last summer. — See the Fruit Garden of last month, 
page 32, and also October. 

Let these shrubs be always trained with a single stem, clear of 
branches, six or eight inches to a foot from the ground, as directed 
in the former month. 
S 



138 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Feb. 

Likewise to currants, &c. against walls, give a necessary pruning 
and regulation, as directed in January, &c. 

Gooseberry and currant trees may be planted towards the end 
of this month, if the weather permits, both in standards for the 
general plantation, at six to seven or eight feet distance, and some 
against walls, board fences, &c. for earlier fruit, but principally 
currants; and let these, for the most part, be of the best red and 
white sorts. 

You may occasionally plant a few of the best kinds of gooseber- 
ries to north walls, which is the most suitable situation for them in 
our climates; next to that, east or west walls; but plant only very 
few to those fronting the south, as in such a situation the sun would, 
in summer, be much too powerful for these shrubs. 

For the method of propagating and raising them, see the work of 
the Nursery in March and October. 

Raspberries. 

Raspberries may be pruned towards the latter end of this month, 
especially if the weather be tolerably mild; in doing of which, 
observe to clear away all the old decayed stems which bore fruit 
last season, and to leave three, four or five of the strongest of last 
year's shoots standing on each root, to bear next summer: all above 
that number on every root must be cut off close to the surface of 
the ground, and all straggling shoots between the main plants must 
also be taken away. 

Each of the shoots which are left should be shortened, observing 
to cut oil' about one-third or fourth of their original length. 

The shoots of each root when pruned, if considerably long and 
straggling, may be tied two or three together; for by that method 
they support one another so as not to be borne down in summer by 
the weight of heavy rains or violent winds. 

When you have finished pruning, or as soon after as possible, 
dig the ground between the plants, observing as you dig, to clear 
away all straggling growths in the intervals, leaving none but such 
as belongs to the shoots which are left to bear. 

New plantations of raspberries may be made aboutihe latter end 
of this month, where the severe winter frosts are over, and the 
ground in proper condition; but where this is not the case, that 
work must be deferred till next month, or until the soil is in a fit 
state for cultivation. — For the method of making these plantations, 
see i\\Q. fruit garden in March and October. 

The Antwerp raspberries which had on the approach of winter 
been laid down and covered with litter, &c. on account of their 
being somewhat more tender than the common kinds, ought not to 
be disturbed till the opening of good weather in March, unless 
their buds begin to swell too freely. 

Strawberries. 

Continue to force early strawberries as directed last month, in 
pages 34 and 105, which see. 



Feb.] the FRUIT GARDEN. J39 

Having two or three years old bearing plants in pots, as then 
directed, plunge them into the hot-beds, and manage them as there 
advised. 

Be careful to admit plenty of air to the plants at every favour- 
able opportunity, by setting up the glasses behind every mild day, 
and at intervals give gentle waterings to the earth in the pots 
around the plants, not pouring it over them, especially while they 
are in flower. 

When you find the heat of the beds to be on the decline, renew 
it by adding a lining of fresh horse-dung to the sides or ends, or to 
both, as necessity may require^ and be very particular in covering 
the glasses every night with mats or other covering. 

This is also a very successful time to place pots of strawberry 
plants in the hot-house, or in any forcing-house; they will in these 
places bear well, and in early perfection. 

Forcing early Fruit in Forcing-houses. 

The beginning of this month, if not done before, you may pro- 
ceed to forcing fruit trees in hot-walls, peach-houses, cherry-houses, 
&c. by aid of fire or other artificial heat; the proper sorts are 
peaches, nectarines, apricots, cherries, tigs, vines, plums, &c. ; hav- 
ing young trees for this purpose that are arrived to a bearing state, 
and planted a year or two before the borders, &c. of the forcing 
departments; or you may have some also in large pots or tubs, to 
remove therein at forcing time occasionally. The trees may be 
both as wall-trees and espaliers, training the branches to a trellis 
erected for that purpose, and some may be in dwarf standards; you 
may also have some cherries, both in small-headed standards, half 
standards and dwarfs; and vines trained up under the sloping 
glasses. — See Hot-house, December. 

Let moderate fires be made every afternoon and evening; and if 
there is a pit within the forcing-house, in which to have a bark or 
dung hot-bed, you may make the bed a week or ten days before 
you begin the tires; and if a bark-bed is intended, fill the pit with 
new tanner's bark; or if a dung hot-bed, make it with fresh hot 
horse-dung; and when it has settled down six or eight inches, lay 
that depth of tanner's bark at top. These beds will support a con- 
stant moderate warmth in which you may plant pots of dwarf-cher- 
ries and of scarlet and Alpine strawberries, which will have fruit 
very early, and in great perfection. Continue making fires every 
evening, and support them till ten or eleven o'clock to warm the air 
of the house till morning, when the fire may be renewed moderately, 
but not constantly the whole day, except in very severe weather, 
especially if there is the assistance of a bark hot-bed; unless it is 
required to forward the trees as much as possible. However, where 
there is no internal hot-bed you must continue a constant, regular, 
moderate fire heat. 

With this management the trees will soon begin to advance in 
blossom-buds, &c., when you must be careful to continue a regular 
moderate heat in the house. 



140 "^KE ORCHARD. [Fee. 

Admit fresh air to the trees every mild day when sunny, espe- 
cially after they begin to bud and shoot, either by sliding down 
some of the upper sloping glasses two or three inches, or drawing 
some of the uprights in front a little way open, shutting all close 
towards the afternoon, or as soon as the weather changes cold; 
giving air more fully as the warm season increases, and as the trees 
advance in blossom and shooting. 

Give also occasional waterings both to the borders and over the 
branches of the trees before they blossom j but when in flower and 
until the fruit is all fairly well set, desist from watering over the 
branches, lest it destroy the fecundating po//en of the anthera des- 
tined for the impregnation of the fruit. 

The fires maybe continued till towards May, being careful never 
to make them stronger than to raise the internal heat to about 60° 
o{ Fahrenheit^ thermometer, in peach and cherry-houses, and 70° 
in vine-houses; for in vineries, having only principally vines in 
forcing, the heat is generally continued stronger, as they bear it 
in a higher degree, whereby to forward the fruit to the earliest 
perfection. 

According as the fruit advances to full growth, continue assist- 
ing them by waterings, and give them free air every warm sunny 
day; and when advancing towards ripening, encourage a strong 
heat in the middle of the day, by admitting less or more air, in 
proportion to the power of the sun, to forward their maturity, and 
promote a rich flavour. 

Thus the fruits will ripen earlier by two months or more in 
some, than their natural time of perfection in the open ground and 
full air. 

In the above forcing departments you may also place pots of cur- 
rants, raspberries, and strawberries, &c. 



THE ORCHARD. 

The feelings of a lover of improvement can scarcely be expressed 
on observing the almost universal inattention paid to the greater 
number of our Orchards, and that people who go to a considerable 
expense in planting and establishing them, afterwards leave them 
to the rude hand of nature, as if the art and ingenuity of man 
availed nothing, or that they merited no further care; however, it 
is to be hoped that the good example and the consequent success of 
the careful and industrious, will stimulate others to pay the neces- 
sary attention to these departments, and thereby to serve them- 
selves as well as the community at large. 

At this season you can conveniently perform the very necessary 
and important works of pruning, of scraping and rubbing off moss 
and other parasitic plants, and of manuring the ground where 



Feb.] the ORCHARD. 141 

wanted^ and as much depends on these dressings, they should by 
no means be neglected, more especially as this is a very eligible 
time for performing them, and one with which other business does 
not frequently interfere. 

For the method of pruning these trees and other necessary ob- 
servations, I refer you to the article Orchard last month, page 45, &c. 

Where trees are much overrun with moss, it may be removed 
as directed in page 46, or a strong man with a good birch broom 
in a wet day would do great execution. The best method of 
destroying moss on young trees, is to rub all the branches aftected, 
in spring or autumn, or in both if necessary, with a hard scrubbing- 
brush and soap-suds. This will not only remove the moss, but 
tend considerably to prevent its sudden return. 

Canker in a great measure arises from animalcules, or small or 
very minute insects or worms, &c. of various kinds; where this is 
the case, cut out the whole of the cankered part, clean to the sound 
wood, wash the part well with the following solution, and also all 
other parts that seem to be in the least affected, then give it a light 
coat of the medicated tar prescribed in page 47. 

Dissolve a drachm of corrosive sublimate in a gill of gin or other 
spirit, and when thus dissolved incorporate it with four quarts of 
soft water. This solution will be found to be the most effectual 
remedy ever applied to trees, both for the destruction of worms of 
every species, and of the eggs of insects deposited in the bark. 
No danger to the trees is to be apprehended from its poisonous 
quality, which in respect to them is perfectly innocent. 

Peach trees which are annoyed by worms, should, towards the 
end of this month, particularly near and a little under the surface 
of the ground, be carefully examined, and where any are found 
they must be picked out with the point of a knife, and with as little 
injury to the bark as possible, for by lacerating the rind or bark in 
a careless manner, which is too frequently the case on these occa- 
sions, this vehicle, which nature has provided for carrying up the 
nourishment extracted by the roots, being destroyed, the trees must 
of course perish, or be weakened in proportion as it is injured. 

This being done, wash all the trunks or stems of the trees, as 
well as any other parts in which you suspect these vermin or their 
embryo eggs to be lodged, with the above solution, and also the 
wounded parts, after which apply with a brush a slight dressing of 
the medicated tar to each and every of the wounds inflicted by 
picking out the worms. This will preserve your trees in health 
and fruitful ness much longer than if left to the mercy of these 
destructive intruders. 

As to manure it is well known that where hogs and poultry are 
constantly running over the ground, the trees seldom fail of a crop, 
which is the best proof that manure is necessary. Any manure 
will suit an orchard, but the sweepings of cow-houses, hog-pens, 
slaughter-houses, poultry and pigeon-houses, emptying of drains, 
&c. ,are more disposed to facilitate the growth and promote the 
health of fruit trees, than stable manure. However, any kind of 
manure is better than none at all. 



142 THE ORCHARD. " [Feb.. 

On Root-pruning. 

When a tree has stood so long that the leading roots have enter- 
ed into the under strata, they are apt to draw a crude fluid, which 
the organs of the most delicate fruit trees cannot convert into such 
balsamic juices as to produce fine fruit. To prevent this evil, as 
soon as a valuable tree begins to show a sickly pinkiness upon the 
leaves, or the fruit inclining to ripeness before it has acquired its 
full growth, at the same time the bark becoming dry, hard, and 
disposed to crack, let the ground, as soon in the spring as the frost 
is out of it, be opened for three or four feet round the tree, and 
with a chisel cut close to the horizontal roots every one that you 
find in the least tending downward. Should there be any mouldy 
appearance or rottenness among the roots, cut such out effectually, 
and wash the others clean with a weak lye or soap suds. If the 
ground be wet place a few flat stones under the places where you 
cut off the descending roots, to prevent the young roots which may 
be produced again from about the cuts taking a perpendicular 
direction, and to give them a lateral inclination. 

As the roots invariably collect the sap from the extreme points, 
this cutting compels the horizontal ones to work and exert them- 
selves, and if there be any energy left, they will soon throw out 
fresh fibres, and thus collect a more congenial sap for the support 
of the tree and fruit. At the same time, in the filling in of the 
earth, add a quantity of good rotten manure, and cover the ground 
thinly over with the same, as far as the roots may be supposed to 
extend; wash the stem and branches with soap-suds, or if any 
worms are perceivable, with the mercurial or corrosive solution, 
and water the ground round the tree at intervals in very dry 
weather, till you perceive it pushing vigorously. 

There is not a more powerful agent for producing the canker and 
other disorders than these descending roots. Canker indeed may 
arise from an improper soil, a vitiated sap, animalculae, and the 
want of free circulation of the fluids: the last is often caused by in- 
judiciously shortening too many of the leading branches. The 
medication before recommended, will stop the progress of the evil 
on the parts to which it is applied; but the canker may again break 
out on the other parts of the same tree, and that arises very fre- 
quently from the roots striking into a cold and unfriendly soil. 

The fluids being once vitiated by any subterraneous cause, canker 
is not the only evil; insects are invited thereby to deposit their eggs 
in the bark, which in due time become crawling maggots; these 
feed on the sap of the trees, devouring the inner bark and rind as 
they proceed, until the period of their chrysalis; which having un- 
dergone, they take wing and fly off, and in their progress seldom 
fail to lay the foundation of similar mischief. 

From this may be inferred the necessity of making a judicious 
choice of proper ground for your fruit trees, and paying due atten- 
tion to their cultivation and health; for it is quite as presumable, if 
not more so, that the vitiated juices of the trees invite the worms, 
than that they are the original cause which produces it. 

When any of your fruit trees are growing extremely luxuriant, 



Feb.] the ORCHARD. 143 

and continue to produce no fruit, though having arrived at a pro- 
per age for that purpose, thej may be forced into a bearing state 
bj opening the ground around them and cutting through a few of 
their largest roots, but especially the descending ones; the depriva- 
tion which will arise from this, of their extraordinary resources, 
which was the cause of their running into such a lusuriancyof 
wood, will soon bring them into a bearing state; but be careful 
that you smooth with a chisel or other sharp instrument, the roots 
at the amputations, and not have them in a mangled state, which 
might bring on diseases that probably would destroy the trees. 

The following extracts taken from a communication made by that 
ingenious citizen. Doctor James Tilton, of Wilmington, Dela- 
ware, and published in the first American edition of the Domestic 
Encyclopaedia, by Messrs. Birch and Small, Philadelphia, are wor- 
thy of attention; and the laudable efforts of that gentleman, both 
in agricultural and horticultural pursuits, are highly meritorious 
and deserving of emulation. 

"Curculio, a genus of insects belonging to the Coleoptera or 
Beetle order. The species are said to be very numerous. The im- 
mense damage done by an insect of this tribe to the fruits of this 
country, of which there is no similar account in Europe, has given 
rise to a conjecture with some naturalists, that we have a peculiar 
and very destructive species in America. 

"The manner in which this insect injures and destroys our fruits, 
is by its mode of propagation. Early in the spring, about the time 
when the fruit trees are in blossom, the Curculiones ascend in swarms 
from the earth, crawl up the trees, and as the several fruits advance, 
they puncture the rind or skin with their pointed rostra, and de- 
posit their embryos in the wounds thus inflicted. The maggot thus 
bedded in the fruit, preys upon its pulp and juices, until in most 
instances the fruit perishes, falls to the ground, and the insect 
escaping from so unsafe a residence, makes a sure retreat into the 
earth; where, like other beetles, it remains in the form of a grub or 
worm during the winter, ready to be metamorphosed into a bug or 
beetle as the spring advances. Thus every tree furnishes its own 
enemy; for although these bugs have manifestly the capacity of 
flying, they appear very reluctant in the use of their wings; and 
perhaps never employ them but when necessity compels them to 
migrate. It is a fact, that two trees of the same kind may stand 
in the nearest possible neighbourhood, not to touch each other, that 
one shall have its fruit destroyed by the Curculio, and the other be 
uninjured, merely from contingent circumstances which prevent 
the insects from crawling up the one, while they are uninterrupted 
from climbing the other. 

"The Curculio delights most in the smooth skinned stone fruits, 
such as nectarines, plumbs, apricots, &c. when they abound on a 
farm: they nevertheless attack the rough skinned peach, the apple, 
pear, and quince. The instinctive sagacity of these creatures di- 
rects them especially to the fruits most adapted to their purpose. 
The stone fruits more certainly perish by the wounds made by these 
insects, so as to fall in due time to the ground and afford an oppor- 



144 "^HE ORCHARD. [Feb. 

tunitj to the young maggot to hide itself in the earth. Although 
multitudes of these fruits fall, yet many recover from the wounds, 
which heal up with deeply indented scars. This probably discon- 
certs the curculio in its intended course to the earth. Be this as 
it may, certain it is, that pears are less liable to fall, and are less 
injured by this insect than apples. Nectarines, plumbs, &c. in 
most districts of our country where the curculio has gained an 
establishment, are utterly destroyed, unless special means are em- 
ployed for their preservation. Cherries escape better on account 
of their rapid progress to maturity and their abundant crops: the 
curculio can only puncture a small part of them during the short 
time they hang upon the tree. These destructive insects continue 
their depredations from the first of May until autumn. Our fruits 
collectively estimated must thereby be depreciated more than half 
their value. 

"It is supposed the curculio is not only injurious above ground, 
but also in its retreat below the surface of the earth, by preying on 
the roots of our fruit trees. We know that beetles have, in some 
instances, abounded in such a manner as to endanger whole forests. 
Our fruit trees often die from manifest injuries done to the roots 
by insects, and by no insects more probably than the curculio. In 
districts where this insect abounds, cherry trees and apple trees, 
which disconcert it most above, appear to be the special objects of 
its vengeance below the surface of the earth. 

"These are serious evils to combat, which every scientific in- 
quirer is loudly called upon to exert his talents; every industrious 
farmer to double his diligence, and all benevolent characters to 
contribute their mite. 

"Naturalists have been accustomed to destroy vicious insects by 
employing their natural enemies to devour them. * 

"We are unacquainted with any tribe of insects able to destroy 
the curculio. All the domestic animals, however, if well directed, 
contribute to this purpose. Hogs, in a special manner, are qualified 
for the work of extermination. This voracious animal, if suffered 
to go at large in orchards, and among fruit trees, devours all the 
fruit that falls, and among others, the curculiones, in the maggot 
state, which may be contained in them. Being thus generally 
destroyed in the embryo state, there will be few or no bugs to 
ascend from the earth in the spring, to injure the fruit. Many 
experienced farmers have noted the advantage of hogs running in 
their orchards. Mr. Bordley, in his excellent 'Essays on Hus- 
bandry,^ takes particular notice of the great advantage of hogs to 
orchards; and although he attributes the benefits derived from the 
animals to the excellence of their manure, and their occasional 
rooting about the trees, his mistake in this trivial circumstance does 
by no means invalidate the general reniarks of this acute observer. 
The fact is, hogs render fruits of all kinds fair and unblemished, 
by destroying the curculio. 

"The ordinary fowls of a farm-yard are great devourers of beetles. 
Poultry in general are regarded as carnivorous in summer, and 
therefore cooped sometimes before they are eaten. Every body 



Feb.] the ORCHARD. J 45 

knows with what avidity ducks seize on the tumble-bug (Scara- 
bxus carnifex), and it is probable the curculio is regarded by all 
the fowls as an equally delicious morsel. Therefore it is, that the 
smooth stone fruits, particularly, succeed much better in lanes and 
yards, where the poultry run without restraint, than in gardens and 
other enclosures, where the fowls are excluded. 

"All the terebinthinate substances, with camphor and some 
others, are said to be very offensive to insects generally. Upon 
this principle. General T. Robinson, of Naaman's creek, suspends 
annually little bits of board, about the size of a case-knife, dipped 
in tar, on each of his plum trees. — From three to five of these 
strips are deemed enough, according to the size of the tree. The 
General commences his operations about the time or soon after the 
trees are in full bloom, and renews the application of the tar 
frecjuently while the fruit hangs on the tree. To this expedient, 
he attributes his never failing success. Other gentlemen allege, that 
common turpentine would be still better; being equally pungent 
and more permanent in its effects. Some have sown offensive 
articles, such as buckwheat, celery, &c. at the root of the tree, and 
have thought that great advantages followed. 

"Ahlaqueation, or digging round the trees, and making bare their 
roots in winter, is an old expedient of gardeners for killing insects, 
and may answer well enough for a solitary tree a year or two; but 
the curculio will soon recover from a disturbance of this sort, and 
stock the tree again. 

"In large orchards, care should be taken that the stock of hogs 
is sufficient to eat up all the early fruit which fall from May until 
August. This precaution will be more especially necessary in 
large peach orchards; for, otherwise, when the hogs become cloyed 
with the pulp of the peach, they will let it fall out of their mouths, 
and content themselves with the kernel, which they like better; and 
thus the curculio escaping from their jaws, may hide underground 
until next spring. 

"A young orchard should not be planted in the place of, or adja- 
cent to an old one, that it may not be immediately infested with 
the curculio. 

"It is also apparent from what has been said, that great advan- 
tages might result from an association or combination of whole 
neighbourhoods against this common enemy. Although an intelli- 
gent farmer may accomplish much, by due attention, within his 
own territory, the total extermination of the curculio can hardly 
be expected but by the concurrent efforts of whole districts.'' 

For further particulars respecting fruit trees, see the article 
Orchard in March. 



146 



THE VINEYARD. 

To the preparatory and other necessary work, recommended in 
January, to be done in the vineyard, page 48, I again call your 
particular attention^ if it is put off till March, you will then find 
the consequent embarrassment of such neglectj therefore let every 
preparation be made in this, as well as the last month, that the sea- 
son will admit of. 

The beginning of this month will be a good time to cart manure 
into the vineyard; laying it down in the most elevated places pos- 
sible for the ease of wheeling it on barrows down among the rows 
of vines; this ought to be perfectly rotted, and of a quality suited 
to the nature of the soil; well rotted cow dung is the best manure 
for ground of a very hot nature, but, if very cold or stiff, which 
ought to be as much avoided as possible in the planting of a vine- 
yard, it may be improved by well rotted horse dung or street dirt; 
when these cannot be had, any kind of well incorporated rich 
compost or other manure may be used. 

If the vineyard be on the declivity of a hill, and your vines 
are not more than one, two, or three years old, scatter a good 
shovelfuU or two of this manure principally on the upper side of 
each plant, observing that none of it reaches within six inches of 
the stem; for if placed close thereto slugs, worms, and the embryos 
of various insects, so frequently found in dung and other manure, 
would take shelter about the stock, penetrate down along its roots, 
and might materially injure it at a future period. But when these., 
are exposed, without the advantage of this pi'otection, to the 
severe frosts of the season, the greater number of them will be de- 
stroyed thereby. 

The manure so placed its nutritive parts will be washed down by 
rains, and the whole, by the necessary culture, will ultimately be 
brought to the roots of the plants. When the vineyard happens to 
be on level ground scatter the manure as above, equally around 
the plants. 

If your vines are four years old or more, let it be cast all over 
the ground, as by this time the roots will be extended to a considera- 
ble distance in every direction and prepared to receive nourishment 
at all points. 

Pruning of Vines in the Vineyard. 

In the middle states the last week of this month will be an ex- 
cellent time to prune vines, unless it should happen to be extreme- 
ly severe; in which case it will be better to defer the pruning for 
a few days longer, but on no account later than the first week in 
March, which latter period will be a good time to commence that 
business in the eastern states, allowing there the same latitude in 



Feb.] the VINEYARD. I47 

similar cases; but the more to the southward the earlier ought this 
to be done; for if deferred till the sap begins to ascend, serious 
evils will ensue to the plants, in consequence of bleeding too 
copiously from the wounds. Let it be observed that the sap begins 
to rise six weeks or more before the buds expand into leaves. 

Such plants as are but one year old from the cuttings must be 
cut down to one or two good buds each, according to their strength, 
always cutting about an inch above the bud in a sloping manner, 
and on the opposite side thereto, observing that tlie lowermost bud, 
next the old wood, is never reckoned among the good ones. 

Such of these young plants as have made more than one shoot 
last season must be deprived of all, by cutting them off as close as 
possible to the old wood, except the strongest and best placed; 
which prune as above directed, and cut off such part of the old 
wood, close to this shoot, as appears above it, in order that the 
bark may grow over it and the stem become whole and sound. 

Your two years old plants must be similarly treated, with this 
difference, that you may leave two good buds to each in order to 
form as many strong shoots for the next season. 

The three years old plants must be headed down to two good 
buds, leaving not more than two shoots to each plant, which will 
produce four for the ensuing season; and these, if the plants be in 
good health, will yield fruit very handsomely that year. 

The fourth year of a plant leave it three of the best shoots, head- 
ing them down to two good buds each; and observe to cut off the 
extra bi^anches dose to where they were produced, and in like man- 
ner any decayed wood, as well as the spurs or stumps occasioned 
by last year's pruning; by which treatment all the parts will get 
covered with bark, and the stock be continued in health and 
vigour. 

According as your vines increase in age and strength, you may 
leave from four to eight shoots on a plant, in proportion to its 
strength, each headed down from two to four or five good buds, 
always leaving the greatest number of buds on the most vigorous 
shoots. 

When a vine is extremely vigorous and well furnished, you may 
head one or two of its best shoots at the height of three or four feet, 
which will bear an abundance of fruit; but the others must be headed 
down to two or three buds each, in order that they may produce 
good wood for the ensuing year's bearing and not too much fruit; 
for those which you headed so high must be effectually cut out close 
to where they were produced in the next pruning. 

Having finished your pruning, see that each plant has a good firm 
stake to support the young shoots when produced and advancing in 
growth, and if it be vigorous and of many shoots, a second, or even 
a third, would be more eligible. 

Some inconsiderate persons may think that eight are too few for 
a full grown vine; but if they consider that the eight shoots so 
pruned may produce, on an average, twenty-four, and each of these 
bear three bunches of grapes, making in all seventy-two, they will 
probably view the matter in a different point, especially when they 



148 "^^E VINEYARD. [Feb. 

consider that the ground, occupied by this plant, is no more than 
about six feet square. However fond people may be to see their 
vines bear great quantities of fruit, the over-bearing of them, espe- 
cially vv'hile young, and indeed at any period, is allowed on all 
hands to injure them materially. 

You are particularly to observe that the young shoots of last 
summer's growth are the only bearing wood; that is, they produce 
new shoots which bear fruit the same season; therefore if you ex- 
pect a regular supply of grapes, you must manage your plants so as 
to have an annual succession of new wood, which you cannot ex- 
pect if the vines are suffered to overbear. 

The above being the method of managing vines in vineyards, the 
heads being formed near the ground, which is the present practice 
in most of the vine countries, I shall now proceed to give some 
directions for the pruning of such as are trained against walls, ti'el- 
lises or espaliers- 

Pruning of Vines against Walls, Trellises, and Espaliers. 

In order to have well formed espaliers and wall-vines, &c. you 
must train the two first good shoots, produced by the plant, horizon- 
tally, one to each side, within a foot or a little better of the ground, 
and continue them in that direction, from year to year, to whatever 
extent you may think desirable. 

The first year these must be deprived only of the decayed wood 
on the extremities, and of any secondary shoots proceeding from 
the axillas of the leaves, unless they have run to the de-sired extent: 
the second year they will produce shoots from the joints, which are 
to be trained either upright, serpentine form, or fan-fashion, accord- 
ing to fancy, at the distance of about eight inches from each other; 
the third year head each of these down to one good bud, and train 
them up as before directed; the fourth, and every succeeding year, 
make choice of the strongest shoots, say every third one, and head 
them down to from ten to twenty buds each, more or less, according 
to the strength of the mother plant, goodness of the ground, and 
roundness of the wood, but never leave wood that is not round, for 
such seldom bears fruit. The other shoots are to be headed down 
to one or two good buds each, which are to produce young wood for 
the next year's bearing, as those left to bear this season must be cut 
down next, in order to produce a succession of young wood; and 
so continue in their management from year to year. 

When you meet with old vines which have been neglected, and 
having a gr^at quantity of naked wood, as is generally the case, cut 
them down near to the ground, and they will not fail to produce you 
plenty of young wood, which you can train to your liking, but you 
will have no fruit for that year. Or you may cut out every other 
branch, leaving the old ones to produce fruit that season; but these 
must be cut down the next year in order to produce young wood, 
and a well furnished tree. 

When arbours are to be formed of grape-vines, the shade being 
as much an object as the fruit, you are to train them so as to cover 



Feb.] the NURSERY. ^49 

the place handsomely, and at the same time to produce as much and 
as good fruit as possible, by not permitting the leading branches or 
shoots to crowd together, but to spread evenly and thin over the 
whole place: this must be done by judicious pruning and careful 
training, always bearing in mind the preceding general directions. 
For the methods of propagating and planting grape-vines, and 
the various kinds thereof, see the Vineyard in March. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

This will be a principal time for propagating vines, by cuttings, 
layers, &c., and planting vineyards in most of the southern states: 
for the methods of doing which, see the Vineyard in March. 



THE NURSERY. 

ICF'The various instructions given in the course of this month, 
for the nursery, as far as they relate to work which is to be done 
in the open ground, are on the presumption that the severe winter 
frosts, have, towards the end of the month, disappeared, and that 
the ground at that time is in a fit state for cultivation; at least, 
sufficiently so for the reception of plants of a very hardy nature, 
and such as, if planted, could receive no injury whatever from any 
subsequent frost or severity of weather, and that will succeed better 
by taking the earliest possible advantage of the season: moreover, 
it is the better way to have as much of your business done at as 
early a period as possible, the better to enable you to meet the 
great pressure, which, with respect to planting, sowing, grafting, 
&c. &c. must be attended to in March. 

But when the weather in the latter end of this month is severe, 
or the ground bound up by frost, there is no alternative but to 
defer the business till the arrival of a more favourable period. 

Propagating by Cuttings, 8fc. 

Plant cuttings of gooseberries and currants according to the rules 
laid down in next month and in October; these will form tolerable 
branchy heads by the end of summer, and will produce fruit in a 
year or two after. 

Be careful to train these trees always with a single stem, six or 
eight to ten or twelve inches high before you form the head. 

Plant also cuttings of honey-suckles, and other hardy flowering 
shrubs and trees; as many different sorts may be propagated by that 
method. 

The cuttings must be shoots of the former year's growth: choose 
such as have strength, cutting them from the respective trees and 
shrubs in proper lengths; or long shoots may be divided into two 



150 THE NURSERY. [Feb. 

or more cuttings, which should not be shorter than eight inches, nor 
much longer than twelve. Plant them in rows two feet asunder, at 
six or eight inches distance in the row, putting each cutting two- 
thirds of its length into the earth. 

Most kinds which are thus planted now, will be well rooted by 
next October. 

Propagating by Suckers. 

Many kinds of trees and shrubby plants furnish abundance of 
suckers from the roots for propagation, particularly robinia's roses, 
lilacs, syringes, and many other hardy kinds: the suckers may 
now be separated from the parent plants, each with some roots, and 
planted either in nursery rows for a year or two, or the largest, at 
once, where they are to remain. 

Propagating by Layers. 

The latter end of this month, you may make layers of all such 
shrubs and trees as are increased by that method, though the best 
time to do this is between the first of October and end of Novem- 
ber, but, where it was omitted at that pei'iod it may now be done, 
and most kinds will still succeed. 

In making layers of any kinds of trees or shrubs, observe to dig 
round the plant that is to be layed, and as you go on, bring down 
the shoots or branches regulai'ly, and lay them along in the earth, 
with their tops above ground, fastening them securely there with 
hooked pegs, and then let all the young shoots on each branch be 
neatly layed, and cover them five or six inches deep with earth, 
leaving the top of each three or four to five or six inches out of the ■ 
ground. 

It may be of advantage in laying some of the more hard-wooded 
kinds, to gash or slit the layers an inch or better by an upward cut 
on the under side, as intimated in the Nursery, page 58. 

Most kinds of layers which are now layed, will be tolerably well 
rooted and fit to be transplanted by next autumn, some not till 
the second year; but for general instructions, see the Nursery in 
October. 

Transplanting Layers. 

Take off the layers of such hardy shrubs and trees as were layed 
down last year, and which still remain on the stolls. 

Let these layers as soon as they are taken off, be trimmed and 
planted in rows in an open situation, two feet or more asunder, 
according to the size of the plants, and the plants about twelve or 
fifteen inches distant in rows. 

Pruning, Sfc. 

Should the weather permit, you ought towards the latter end of 
the month to dig the ground between the rows of your nursery 



Feb.] the NURSERY. 151 

trees and shrubs, first giving them such necessary pruning as may 
be wanted; but if the ground is then bound up with frost, you may 
perform the latter and defer the former work, till the frost is away, 
which then must be done without delay, especially where the ground 
is tolerably dry. 

Trim up the stems of such young hardy fruit and forest trees as 
require it, especially the deciduous kinds, and also prune oft" all 
disorderly rambling shoots, so as to bring them into a neat and 
handsome form. 

Prune also the hardy flowering shrubs in nursery rows, whereby 
to regulate any disorderly growths, and to give them a becoming 
appearance. 

In doing this work, it would generally be proper to prune or train 
the young plants mostly to short single stems below; and where 
the heads of any shrubs are very irregular, or run out in rambling 
shoots, let them be reduced to some order and form, by cutting 
out or shortening such as may require any regulation, whereby 
to form a somewhat orderly shape in the general head. Likewise 
suckers arising from the roots should generally be cleared off", and 
if carefully detached with some roots to each, the best of them, if 
wanted, may be planted in nursery rows at proper distances; they 
will make good plants in two or three years time, and the mother 
plants being cleared therefrom, will be preserved in a more regular 
proper growth. 

After the above occasional pruning, let the ground be dug between 
the rows of the continuing shrubs, if not done before; digging it 
one spade deep in a neat regular manner, to remain in good culti- 
vated order all the spring and ensuing summer. 

Sowing Stones to raise Stock for Grafting, ^c. 

As early as possible this month sow the stones of plums, peaches, 
nectarines, apricots and cherries, &c., which were preserved in sand 
or earth from the time of the fruit being ripe till this period; for 
unless they were preserved in this way, few of them will grow; 
these may either be sown in drills, or broad cast in a bed, and 
covered from an inch to two inches deep, according to the lightness 
of the soil and the proportionate size of the stones. I am by no 
means an advocate for covering seeds of any kind too deep, never 
having had good success from such. If the above sorts are covered 
but lightly, they will easily grow through it, and when up you 
can refresh them by sifting fresh earth over them, if in beds, and if 
in drills, by drawing it to their stems. 

Sowing Haws for the raising of Thorn-quicks. 

Having collected a sufficiency of fruit of the various kinds of 
hawthorn which you desire to propagate, the autumn twelve nioutlis 
previous to the time of sowing, which is, as earh/ in spring as it is 
possible to get the ground in a good state of culture to receive them, 
proceed to sowing as hereafter directed. 



152 THE NURSERY. [Feb. 

When you collect these seeds in autumn, mix them with equal 
quantities of light sandy earth, and lay them in that state on the 
surface of a dry spot of ground in your best enclosed garden, where 
they cannot be disturbed by hogs, &c.| form this mixture into a nar- 
row sloping ridge, tapering to the top, and covering it with light 
loose earth two inches thick all over; the April following turn this 
ridge, mixing the whole together, and form it again in the same way, 
covering in like manner as before with two inches deep of light 
loose earthj repeat this again in the months of July and August, by 
which the seeds in every part will be equally prepared for vegeta- 
tion. A trench must be cut round this ridge to prevent any water 
from lodging about the seeds, for this would rot many and injure 
others, especially in the second winter, when the stones would be 
loosing their cementing quality, and begin to open; for until this is 
effected, the kernels cannot vegetate. Hence the necessity and 
great advantage of not burying the stones in the earth, as injudi- 
ciously practised by many; for if so treated, they would not have 
the advantage destined by nature for their due preparation, and 
would labour under may other disadvantages, as hereafter noticed. 

It is well known, that many kinds of seeds when buried in the 
earth below the power of vegetation, remain in an inactive state for 
several years, even those whose nature it is to vegetate the first 
season when properly exposed; bow much more so must it be with 
seeds of such tardy vegetation as haws, and many other sorts; but 
by being thus exposed to the influence of the sun and air, and fre- 
quently turned as before directed, all become equally and suffi- 
ciently prepared, and will not fail when sowed in due season and 
suitable soil to reward the judicious cultivator with an abundant 
crop. 

When those seeds are buried deep, and not mixed with a due 
quantity of earth as before observed, they are subject to ferment 
too powerfully, and also to be injured by too much wet, and will 
never be found, more especially when large quantities of them are 
together, to vegetate equally — those near the surface and sides of 
the pit doing tolerably well — some of the others not growing until 
a full year after being; sowed, and the greater number not at all. 

There is not the least danger to be apprehended from frost in- 
juring the seeds whilst so much exposed to it in those ridges; how- 
ever, it will not be amiss to strew a light covering of long litter 
over them on the approach of winter, which will keep them dry, 
and consequently in a better state for sowing when the season ar- 
rives. 

The above mode of preparation is the result of the Author's ex- 
perience for upwards of twenty years, being in the habit of raising 
several millions of thorn quicks annually. 

Your haws being prepared as above, make ready a piece of good 
rich ground, neither upon an elevated situation, nor too low; in the 
former, the summer drought would be unfriendly, and in the latter, 
they would be subject to mildew: this must be done as early in 
spring as you can get the ground to work freely and pulverize well; 
for the haws begin to throw out roots at a very early period, and 



Feb.] the NURSERY. 153 

if not sown at this time or before, a great number of those roots 
will be broken oft' in the act of sowing, and thereby totally lost; 
the others which escape this accident, having their radicles extend- 
ed on the surface, penetrate the earth at the extreme points of those 
roots, forming right angles with the parts already produced, by 
which means they can never drive up the seed-leaves with as much 
vigour as if the radicles descended immediately in a perpendicular 
direction from the stones of the fruit j hence the necessity of early 
sowing. 

The ground, however, must not be wrought while wet, or at least 
the seeds should not be covered with wet or heavy earth, nor too 
deep, for if the surface should cake or become stift"in consequence 
of dry weather ensuing, few of these young plants having broad 
seed-leaves could bear up through it; therefore you must be very 
cautious in that point; and if the earth of your bed is not light and 
dry enough for this purpose, you must carry as much as will cover 
the seeds from some dry compost heap, or some quarter of the gar- 
den where it can be found in a suitable condition. 

On examining your haws if you find the earth in which they are 
mixed any way clogged with too much moisture, so that the parts 
and seeds would not separate freely in the act of sowing, mix there- 
with a sufficient quantity of slack-lime or wood-ashes, to accom- 
plish that end. 

Having every thing in readiness, and your ground well dug, and 
raked effectually as you proceed in the digging, still presuming 
that it is in the best possible state of preparation, lay it out into 
four feet wide beds, leaving twelve or fourteen inches of an alley 
between each, and with the back of the rake push off into these 
alleys about three-quarters of an inch of the fine raked surface of 
the beds, one-half of each bed to the one side, and the other to the 
opposite; this done, sow your haws thereon, earth and all, as they 
had lain, so thick that you may expect a thousand plants at least 
after every reasonable allowance for faulty or imperfect seeds, 
(there being many of these,) on every three or four yards of your 
beds; (I have often had that number upon as many feet;) then, with a 
spade or shovel cast the earth out of the alleys evenly over the beds, 
covering the seeds not more than three-quarters of an inch deep, 
and not more than half an inch if the earth be any way stitt'; after 
which, rake the tops of the beds very lightly, taking care not to 
disturb the seeds, in order to take oft" the lumps and to give a neat 
appearance to the work. 

The business being thus finished for the present, should you at 
a future period perceive, especially when the plants are beginning 
to appear above ground, any stiffness on the surface occasioned by 
dry weather, give the beds frequent but gentle waterings, till all 
those innocent prisoners are released from their bondage, after 
which you will have pleasure and profit in their progress. 

But this is not all; the whole of your former trouble will be 

totally lost, unless you are particularly careful in keeping these 

beds effectually free from weeds from the moment the plants appear 

above ground, till they are fit to be planted in hedge-rows, and 

U 



154 THE NURSERY. [Feb. 

even then, until they have arrived at a sufficient size not to be 
injured by such. 

It was an old practice to sow these seeds as soon as ripe, cover- 
ing them about an inch deep; but the loss of the ground during the 
long period in which they lie dormant, the trouble and expense of 
weeding them all that time, the numbers pulled up and exposed to 
animals of various sorts, and I may say the exposure of the whole 
to mice, squirrels, &c. have very justly induced to the abandonment 
of that mode of culture. 

Indeed, they may be sown with considerable safety the Novem- 
ber twelve months after they are ripe, being previously prepared as 
before directed, there is no impediment in their way at that season, 
but their long exposure to the depredations of mice, &c. which are 
extremely fond of their kernels; as to frost they value it not. 
However, upon the whole, I prefer the early spring sowing, and 
have generally practised it with the best success. 

Many of these plants, and indeed the greater numbers, if the 
ground be good, will be fit for planting into the face of ditches 
the autumn or spring following, and the entire of them that time 
twelve months; but if they are intended for forming upright hedges, 
the strongest of the year old plants must, in the month of March, 
or very early in April, be drawn out of the seed beds, their long 
tap-roots cut oft", so as to shorten them to the length of five or six 
inches, and then planted into nursery rows about two feet asunder, 
and the plants to be about six inches distant in these rows; having 
there two or three years' growth, they will be in prime condition for 
that purpose; the remaining plants may be taken up the spring fol- 
lowing, and treated in the same way. 

It often happens that an after growth of young plants arises in the 
seed-bed the second year, particularly when the haws have not been 
well prepared; these seldom come to any thing: but if you pursue 
the method already prescribed, you may depend on a good and 
general crop the first year. 

The various kinds of hawthorns that, on account of their spini- 
ness might suit for live hedges, are the following; all being indige- 
nous in the United States, except the first, which is the kind 
principally used in Europe for that purpose. 

1. Cratsegus oxyacantha, or common European hawthorn, or 
whitethorn. Leaves obtuse suhtrifate serrate. 

With a robust trunk, branching from the bottom upwards to 
ten or fifteen feet high, the branches armed with spines; leaves 
obtuse, trifid and sawed, with numerous clusters of flowers from 
the sides and ends of the branches, succeeded by bunches of dark- 
red fruit, commonly called haws; flowers two-styled, sometimes 
three or four. 

£. Cratsegus coccinea, or great American hawthorn. Leaves 
cordate-ovate, gash-angled, smooth; petioles and calyxes glandu- 
lar; flowers jive- styled. 

This rises when detached to the height of near twenty feet, with 
a large upright trunk, dividing into many, strong, irregular, smooth 
branches, so as to form a large head. Leaves large and bending 



Feb.] the NURSERY. 155 

backwards; they are about four inches long, and three and a half 
broad, having five or six pair of strong nerves, and become of a 
brownish-red in autumn. The flowers come out from the sides of 
the branches in umbels or large clusters; they are large, make a 
noble show early in May, and are succeeded by large fruit of a 
bright scarlet colour, which ripens in August or September. The 
branches are marked with irregularly scattered dots; thorns axillary, 
stout, spreading very much from the rudiments of the branches. 
Peduncles pubescent, corymbed. 

3. Crataegus cms galli, or cockspur hawthorn. Leaves subses- 
sile, glittering,, coriaceous; calycine leaflets, lanceolate subserrate; 
floivers, two-styled. 

Stem strong, ten to fifteen feet high, bark of the stem rough, of 
the branches smooth and reddish. Leaves lanceolate, three inches 
long, and about one inch broad in the middle, serrate, of a lucid 
green, alternate; at many of the joints are smaller leaves in clus- 
ters; thorns axillary, very strong, two inches in length, and bending 
like a cock's-spur. Flowers axillary, in roundish clusters, gene- 
rally two together, petals white, with a blush of red; styles three; 
fruit globular, of a red colour. It flowers the latter end of May. 

3. Cratsegus tomentosa, or woolly leaved hawthorn. Leaves 
wedge-form-ovate, serrate, somewhat angular, villose underneath. 

This has a slender shrubby stem about six or seven feet high, 
sending out many irregular branches, armed with long slender 
thorns. The flowers are small, proceeding from the sides of the 
branches, sometimes single, and at other times two or three upon 
the same peduncle, having large leafy calyxes, and being succeeded 
by small roundish fruit. The flowers appear the latter end of May, 
and the fruit ripens in September. 

5. Crafa^g-Mscorrfa^a, or maple-leaved hawthorn. Leaves cordate- 
ovate, gash-angled, smooth, petioles and calyxes without glands; 
flowers five-styled. 

This rises with a strong woody stem about five or six feet high, 
sending out many spreading branches which incline to a horizontal 
position. Leaves different in form, some indented at the petiole, 
others not: they are generally about an inch and a half long, and 
nearly of the same breadth in the middle, ending in acute points, 
and their borders cut into several acute parts, which are sharply 
serrate; they are of a bright green, and stand on very slender 
petioles, about an inch in length. The branches are armed with a 
few pretty long slender spines. The flowers come out in small 
bunches from the sides of the branches; stamens eight: styles four; 
fruit round, containing two seeds. 

Branches spotted with white; leaves cut into three, five, or seven 
segments, accuminate, the size of birch-leaves. Petiole very slen- 
der, shorter than the leaves: corymb compound: bractes at the 
base of the peduncles, solitary, subulate, very small, deciduous: 
flowers somewhat smaller than the European hawthorn: teeth of 
the calyx very short, obtuse, falling oft' when the fruit is ripe: 
styles five: fruit an oblate spheroid, scarlet, the size of a red cur- 



X5(j THE NURSERY. [Feb. 

rant: the navel loose, naked: stones five, tops filling up the navel, 
and naked. It flowers the last of the genus. 

4. Cratsegus pyrifoHa, or pear-leaved hawthorn. Leaves ovate- 
diptie, gash-serrate, somewhat plaited and hirt, calyxes a little 
viltose, leaflets linear -lanceolate serrate, flowers three-styled. This 
species is sometimes unarmed. 

5. Cratsegus eliptica, or oval-leaved hawthorn. Leaves eliptic, 
unequally serrate smooth, petioles and calyxes glandular, fruit 
globular, five-seeded. 

6. Crataegus glandulosa, or hollow-leaved hawthorn. Leaves 
obovate-wedge-form, angular, smooth, glittering; petioles, stipules, 
and calyxes glandular; fruit oval; flve-seeded. 

This has very stout thorns. It flowers in May, and is a very 
beautiful shrub. 

7. Cratsegus flava, or yellow pear-berried hawthorn. Leaves 
ovate, wedge-form, angular, smooth, glittering; petioles, stipules, 
and calyxes glandular; fruit turbinate; four seeded. 

There are often small leaves on the thorns, which in this and the 
following species, are slender, and a little bent at the endsj it 
flowers in May. 

8. Cra/ffgMs^arui^ora, or gooseberry-leaved hawthorn. Leaves 
wedge-form-ovate gashed serrate; calycine leaflets gashed the length 
of the fruit; flowers five- styled. 

This is of humble growth, seldom rising more than five or six 
feet, sending out a great number of branches, which are interwoven 
and armed with very long slender spines. The leaves are scarcely 
an inch long, and some are not more than half an inch broad, but 
others are almost as broad as they are long; they are serrate, and, 
have very short foot-stalks. The flowers are produced at the ends 
of the branches, generally one coming out from between the leaves, 
but sometimes there are two or three, one below the other at the 
axils; they have large leafy calyxes, much longer than the petals; 
they are small, have twelve or more stamens, and four styles. 
The fruit is small, and of an herbaceous yellow colour when ripe. 

There are many other varieties of the hawthorn in the United 
States; but these being generally unfurnished with spines, are not 
so suitable for hedges as those described. Of the above, the first, 
second and third sorts, where they can conveniently be had, are 
the best kinds to cultivate; but either of them will answer that 
purpose very well. The cultivation of all the species is similar. 

For further particulars, and for the best methods of planting 
hedges, as well as the several kinds of trees and shrubs most suit- 
able for them, see the Nursery in March. 

Sowing various kinds of hardy Tree and Shrub Seeds, which 
require a previous Preparation. 

Ash, hornbean, red cedar, mezereon, juniper, holly, yew, spin- 
dle-tree, bladder-nut, and lauruses of various kinds, with many 
others, will require the same preparation as directed for haws; they 
must be sown at the same time, and covered only in proportion to 



Feb.] the NURSERY. I57 

the size of their seeds; that is, the smaller seeds will require not 
more than a quarter of an inch of covering, and the larger, from half 
to three-quarters of an inch, in proportion to the lightness of the 
soil. Always avoid, at this season particularly, sowing seeds of 
any kind too deep, especially if the ground is of a heavy binding 
nature, or too wet at the time of working it. 

Sowing Kernels of .Apples, Fears and Quinces. 

So soon as you find the ground in a good dry state, sow the ker- 
nels of apples, pears and quinces, to raise stocks for budding and 
grafting on; the sooner that this can be done the better. It will 
be necessary to have these kernels preserved, either in sand or 
earth, from the time they were taken out of the fruit, till the time 
of sowing; or to take them at that time immediately fresh out of 
the fruit; for when long exposed to the dry air they loose their 
vegetative quality. 

Cure of tender and young seedling Trees and Shrubs. 

In order to avoid repetitions, and make room for other important 
matter, I refer you for instructions on the above subjects to page 
59; observing that the same care and management recommended 
there, will be necessary during the whole of the winter months. 

By one night's neglect at this season, you might lose what cost 
you the labour of months; therefore diligent care and attention is 
particularly requisite during severe weather. 

Hot-beds for sowing Tree and Shrub Seeds in. 

Make hot-beds for sowing therein some of the more curious 
kinds of tree and shrub seeds. These are to be made as directed 
for cucumbers in page 12, and fully as substantial; sow the seeds 
either in pots or long narrow boxes, covering each kind with light 
dry earth in proportion to its size; then plunge these pots and boxes 
to their rims in the earth of the beds, but not till after the violent 
heat has passed away; sprinkle the earth in these pots frequently 
but very lightly with water till the plants are up, after which you 
may give it in proportion to their apparent necessity. 

Keep the beds carefully covered at nights, and in desperately 
severe weather; and when the heat declines renew it by adding a 
lining of fresh horse dung to the sides and ends occasionally. 

SOUTHERN STATKS. 

The various works recommended to be done in page 60, this 
month and March, in the Nursery, maybe now practised with good 
success in Georgia and South Carolina, and various other parts of 
the more southern states. This being their proper period for graft- 
ing, I refer them for general observations and instructions on that 
head to the work of the Nursery in March. 



158 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Hardy annual Flower- Seeds. 

About the latter end of this month, if the weather is mild and drj, 
you may sow many sorts of hardy annual flower seeds in borders, 
and other parts of the pleasure garden. 

The sorts proper to sow at this time are larkspur andflos Adonis, 
scarlet pea, sweet scented and Tangier peas, candy tuft, dwarf 
lychnis, Venus's looking-glass, Lobel's catch-fly, Venus's navel- 
wort, dwarf poppy, Nigella, annual sunflower, oriental mallow, 
lavatera, and hawk weed, with many other sorts. 

Some of these if sown now, particularly the Larkspur, flos 
Adonis, sweet and Tangier peas, will flower much better than if 
sown at a later period. 

All the above seeds must be sown in the places where you intend 
the plants to flower, in beds, borders, pots, &c. They must not be 
transplanted, for these sorts will not succeed so well by that practice. 
The following is the method: — 

The flower borders having been previously dug, dig with a trowel 
small patches therein, about six inches in width, at moderate dis- 
tances, breaking the earth well, and making the surface even; draw 
a little earth oft' the top to one side, then sow the seed therein, each, 
sort in separate patches, and cover it with the earth that was drawn 
off"; observing to cover the small seeds near a quarter of an inch 
deep, the larger in proportion to their size; but the pea kinds must 
be covered an inch deep at least. 

When the plants have been up some time, the larger grov/ing 
kinds should, where they stand too thick, be regularly thinned; 
observing; to allow every kind, according to its growth, proper room 
to grow. 

For instance, the sunflower to be left one in a place, the orien- 
tal mallow and lavatera, not more than three; the rest may be left 
thicker. — See May, &c. 

Plant hardy herbaceous fibrous-rooted flowering Perennials. 

Towards the end of the month, if the weather be mild and open 
and the ground dry, you may plant, where wanted, most sorts of 
hardy fibrous-rooted flowering plants, both of perennials and bien- 
nials, such as lobelias, Phloxes, Dracocephalums, polyanthuses, 
primroses, London-pride, violets, double camomile, thrift, gen- 
tianella, hepaticas, and saxifrage. 

Plant also rose-campion, rockets, catch-fly, scarlet-lychnis, 
double feverfew, carnations, pinks, sweet-williams, columbines, 
Canterburry-belis, monk's hood, Greek valarian, tree primrose, 
foxglove, golden rods, perennial asters, perennial sunflowers, holy 
hocks, French honeysuckles, and many others. 



Feb.] flower GARDEN. 159 

In planting the above, or any other sorts, particularly at this 
early period, observe to preserve balls of earth about their roots, 
to dispose thein regularly, and intermix the different kinds in such 
order as there may be a variety of colours, as well as a regular 
succession of flowers in every part during the flowering season. 

Auriculas. 

The choice kinds of auriculas in pots must now be treated with 
more than ordinary care, for their flower-buds will soon begin to 
advance; therefore the plants should be carefully defended from 
frost and cold heavy rains. 

This must be done by a good covering of glass and mats, but 
every mild and dry day the plants must be entirely uncovered. 

Any old decayed leaves should be picked off as they appear, the 
earth loosened at the top of the pots, some of it taken out and re- 
placed with .good fresh compost mould. This will encourage the 
pushing of young roots from immediately under the leaves, which 
will greatly strengthen the plants. 

Be very cautious however not to force those plants at this season, 
for that would prevent their flowering in any tolerable perfection; 
all they require, is to be protected from severe frost, snow, cutting 
winds and cold rains; they are to have no bottom heat whatever, 
nor are the glasses to be kept close in any kind of sunshine that 
might produce a strong heat in the frame; on the contrary, they 
must get as much air as possible, by taking the glasses ott' every 
sunny or mild day, and replacing them at night and in cold weather; 
and when you cannot take them totally oft', raise them a little 
behind, or slide them either up or down, at every favourable op- 
portunity. A little frost will not do them much injury, especially 
until their flower buds begin to appear, but after that, they must 
be carefully protected therefrom: cold heavy rains is their utter 
enemy at all times, against which you must carefully guard. 

Soio Jiuricula and Polyanthus Seeds. 

Auricula and polyanthus seed may be sown any time in this 
month; they will grow freely, and the plants from this sowing will 
rise well. The seeds may be sown in boxes, or large pots filled 
with light rich earth, and covered about the eighth of an inch deep; 
then place the pots or boxes in a hot-bed frame at work, give them 
frequent but light sprinklings of water, both before and after the 
plants appear, and a reasonable proportion of air at favourable op- 
portunities: by this means you will have a fine crop of seedlings, 
handsomely advanced towards the beginning of May; when, after 
all danger from frost is over, (for these being tenderly raised, would 
be subject to injury therefrom) take the pots or boxes out of the 
frame, and place them where they can have only the morning sun 
till ten o'clock, and that of the afternoon after five, during the 
remainder of the summer. The mid-day sun you must carefully 
guard against, for it would totally destroy your plants. 



160 " THE PLEASURE, OR [Feb, 

Snails and slugs being utter enemies to these plants, whilst in a 
seedling state, it will be necessary, so soon as you sow the seeds, 
and before placing the pots or boxes in a hot-bed, or under the pro- 
tection of glasses without bottom heat, for either method will do, 
to make lines of short, coarse, strong hair, about half an inch or 
better in diameter, to tie round each pot or box, immediately under 
the rim; the line being tied, trim the long loose hairs around it 
with a pair of scissors, to a quarter of an inch in length, which short 
prickly hairs will, as often as snails or the like approach it, in the 
act of ascending the sides of the pots or boxes, prick them, cause 
them to change their course, and thereby finally protect the young 
plants from enemies which would, in a few hours, totally eat up the 
finest crops, particularly the auriculas. 

Tulips, Hyacinths, Anemones and Ranunculuses. 

Defend the beds of the more curious or valuable tulips, hyacinths, 
anemones, and ranunculuses, from frost, snow, and cold or exces- 
sive rains; the plants will now begin to appear above ground, and 
the beds wherein the finest of these flower-roots are planted, should 
now, where intended, and if not done before, be arched over with 
hoops; and in frosty or extremely bad weather, let mats or canvass 
be drawn over them, in some measure to defend the advancing 
flower-buds. 

This, where it can be conveniently done, should not now be 
omitted to the choicer kinds, when required to have them blow 
in their utmost perfection; for although they are hardy enough, 
yet, being protected in their early flower-buds from inclement 
weather, both in this and the next month, the blow will be much 
finer than if fully exposed; however, this care is not necessary for 
the common kinds, either in beds or borders. 

The early anemones and ranunculuses which were planted in 
September or early in October, and are consequently in a consi- 
derable state of forwardness, will still require greater protection 
than such as were late planted; for the rudiments of their flowers 
being in a somewhat advanced state, would be greatly injured if 
too much exposed, especially to the great extremes of our mid-day 
sun, and the severe night frosts prevalent at this season; therefore 
by protecting them carefully from the rigour of the one, you do not 
expose them so much to the power of the other, but when both are 
suffered to act alternately with their full respective force upon these, 
as well as upon many other of the more tender kinds of flowers 
and esculents, a disorganization of their parts is the immediate 
consequence, and an untimely death their ultimate end. This is 
a "golden rule," which ought to be assiduously observed with re- 
spect to every plant that is not sufficiently hardy to bear the frosts 
of our rigorous winters. 

For the convenience of affording all the above choice kinds a 
suitable protection, they ought to be planted in beds of rich compost 
mould, surrounded with a hot-bed or other temporary frame, with 
tanner's bark or other protection drawn up on the outsides thereof, 



Feb.] flower GARDEN. jgj 

all around as high as the upper parts, which will prevent the 
frost from penetrating and injuring the plants next the frame. 
Over this frame you can lay a covering of boards and mats v^hen 
necessary, or if you have not mats, straw or other suitable covering 
may be used. Frost will enter the beds notwithstanding this kind 
of care, but not in sufiicient force to do much injury, for these 
plants are tolerably hardy, and require only to be protected from 
its too powerful influence, as well as that of the sun's. 

The plants must be exposed to the full air constantly, except 
while freezing sufficiently strong to bind up the earth, and at night 
or during the prevalence of cold heavy rains or snow. Such of the 
preceding and other hardy bulbs, &c. as yet remain out of ground, 
ought to be planted as soon as possible; observing the directions 
given in page 82, &c. Anemones and ranunculuses if carefully 
preserved, will yet succeed very well. 

Carnations and Finks. 

Your choice carnations and pinks which were planted in pots 
and plunged in beds under the protection of frames and coverings, 
ought, for the present, to be managed in every respect as above 
directed for the protection of anemones, ranunculuses, &c. By this 
treatment you may expect to be rewarded with a bloom of these 
charming flowers in the highest degree of perfection. 

Towards the end of this month, if the weather is mild, but not 
otherwise, you may transplant such as were raised last year from 
layers into large pots, or into the open borders, &c., where you in- 
tend them to blow; but this would have been better if done in 
autumn. Also such seedling plants as were raised last season, may, 
under similar circumstances, be transplanted into any beds or 
borders which are ready for their reception, always observing to 
remove them with balls of earth around their roots. For further 
particulars see next month. 

Tender Annuals. 

The latter end of this month will be a suitable period for prepar- 
ing to sow some of the more valuable and curious sorts of tender 
annuals; such as the fine kinds of double balsams, tricolours, me- 
sembryanthemums or ice plants, Browallia's sensitive plant Ipomoea 
Quamoclit, and many others. 

Therefore, provide some new horse-dung, and let it be thrown 
up in a heap, and in eight or ten days it will be in good condition 
to make the bed. Let this be made about three feet high of dung, 
levelling the top, and then set on the frame and glasses. When 
the burning heat is over lay on the earth, observing that, for this 
use, it must be rich, light, and perfectly dry, and broken pretty 
small by rubbing it between the hands; the depth of earth on the 
bed must be about five or six inches, making the surface level and 
smooth. 

The seed may either be sown on the surface, observing to sow 
V 



162 THE PLEASURE, OR [Feb. 

each sort separate, covering them about a quarter of an inch, or 
rather less, with light earth; or you may draw some shallow drills 
with yoFur finger from the back, to the front of the bed, sow the 
seeds therein, and cover as above; or you may sow them in pots 
and plunge these into the earth of the hot-bed. But if you intend 
sowing in pots, and you have the convenience of tanner's bark, 
lay on eight or nine inches, or a foot, deep of it all over the bed in 
place of the earth, to plunge your pots therein, in which case two 
and a half feet deep of dung will be sufficient. 

As soon as the plants appear, admit fresh air to them every day 
when the weather is any way mild, and let them have now and 
then gentle sprinklings of water. Mind to cover the glasses every 
night, and in bad weather with mats; or if boards are first laid on, 
and then covered with mats, they will aflbrd an additional protec- 
tion. 

But in raising the above annuals if it is required to be saving 
of hot dung and trouble, and there are cucumber or melon hot- 
beds at work, you may sow them in pots and place them in these 
beds to raise the plants: which may afterwards be transplanted or 
pricked into other pots in the same, or into a nursery hot-bed, to 
forward them to a proper size. For the further management of these 
plants, see March and Ji^ril. 

Sowing Ten-week Stock and Mignonette. 

The ten-week stock is a beautiful annual; none makes a more 
agreeable appearance in pots, and in the borders, &c. and it con- 
tinues a long time in bloom. The mignonette imparts a sweet and 
agreeable odour, for which purpose it is extremely worthy of culti- 
vation. 

When these plants are wanted in early perfection, the seeds of 
either may be sown, towards the end of this month, in a slight hot- 
bed, or in a very warm border, to be covered with a frame and 
glasses; but by sowing the seed in the former it will bring the 
plants on much sooner, though, in the latter, they will be tolerable 
early, and being raised in a more hardy manner maybe planted out 
into the borders with better success; yet, when they are wanted 
for an early blow in pots, the hot-bed is preferable. 

Sow the seeds either in pots or on the surface of the bed, cover- 
ing them with light dry earth about the eighth of an inch deep or a 
little more, and give them gentle occasional waterings and the 
necessary protection from the inclemencies of the weather, and 
plenty of air at proper opportunities. Towards the latter end of 
April these may be planted into the open borders, or wherever they 
are destined to remain, with good success. The mignonette being 
very impatient of transplanting ought to be taken up with as much 
earth as possible around the roots, and so transplanted with par- 
ticular care. 

But if your plants stand thick in the seed-bed, some of them, 
when they have been up about three or four weeks, or when about 
an inch high, maybe pricked out either into a slight hot-bed, which 



Feb.] flower GARDEN. 1^3 

will forward them considerably, and some into small pots to be 
placed therein, three plants in each; others may be planted on a 
warm border, three inches asunder, and covered with hand-glasses; 
after they have stood a month all those not potted should be planted 
where they are to remain. 

Stockgilly-flowers and Wall-flowers. 

The choice double and other stockgilly-flowers and wall-flowers 
which you have in pots, and under the protection of any kind of 
covering, should never be exposed to a strong sun whilst in a frozen 
state; they will stand the winter with very little protection from 
frost, but must be carefully guarded against the sun's influence at 
such times. 

Forcing early Flowers. 

Where early flowers are required, either for ornament or for 
sale, you must prepare for this business in October, and then plant 
in suitable sized pots the various kinds that you intend to force; 
such as carnations, pinks, sweet-williams, double daisies, and other 
fibrous rooted plants. The earliest kinds of hyacinths, van-thol, 
and other early tulips, anemones, ranunculuses, jonquils, narcis- 
susses of various sorts, dwarf Persian irises, crocuses in different 
varieties, and many other kinds of early flowering bulbs, having 
been protected in a suitable manner, as heretofore directed; you 
may, about the beginning of this month, plant these pots, or such of 
them as you wish to force for the earliest bloom, in any forcing de- 
partment now at work, such as hot-houses, forcing-houses of any 
kind, hot-beds, &c. By plunging the pots into the bark-pits or hot- 
beds, you will have them to flower the sooner, .^s the hyacinths, 
carnations, and pinks advance, tie their flower stems to neat sticks, 
or to pieces of painted wire stuck into the pots for that purpose. 

You may likewise force pots of roses, honey-suckles, jasmines, 
double flowering almonds, thorns, cherries, and peaches, and also 
any other early flowering and desirable plants by the same means. 

Either of the preceding kinds may be forced in board forcing- 
frames, with the assistance of hot dung applied to the back and 
ends thereof; these being constructed of strong inch and a half, or 
two inch plank, made eighteen inches high in front and five or six 
feet high in the back, the ends in proportion, and length at pleasure. 
The width to be five or six feet, and the whole covered with sloping 
glasses. 

Having such a frame in readiness, fill the inside thereof to a level 
with the front with fresh tanner's bark, into which plunge your pots; 
or, if you have not the convenience of bark, sink a pit into the 
earth about eighteen inches deep, whicii fill to the surface with 
fresh horse-dung; place the frame thereon, and add more dung till 
it reaches within six inches of the upper part of the frame in front; 
then fill the remainder to that level with good dry earth. 

In either case plunge the pots to their rims in the bark or earth. 



164 THE PLEASURE, OR [Fbb. 

and add a lining of good horse-dung to the back and ends of the 
frame to its entire height, which will produce a strong growing 
heat in the inside, sufficient for any purpose of forcing small plants. 
The glasses being placed on this kind of frame with a considerable 
degree of elevation, will receive the rays of the sun in a more direct 
manner than if not elevated so much, by which means more heat 
will be accumulated. 

Shelves may be erected in this kind of frame towards the back 
part, if the plants intended to be forced are not large, and the lining 
can be renewed as often as necessary. 

Dress and dig the Borders, Beds, 8,-c. 

When the weather permits, let the flower beds and borders, in 
general, be thoroughly cleared from weeds, and from every kind of 
litter; for neatness in those parts of the garden is agreeable at all 
times, but more particularly at this season. 

Therefore, let the surface of the beds and borders be lightly and 
carefully loosened with a hoe in a dry day, and let them be neatly 
raked, which w^ill give an air of liveliness to the surface, and the 
whole will appear neat and very pleasing to the eye, and well worth 
the labour. 

Likewise, if any borders, beds, &c. were not dug last autumn or 
winter, it should now be done, ready for the reception of flower 
plants, seeds, &c., that the whole may appear fresh and neat. 

Prune Flowering Shrubs. 

Finish pruning the hardy deciduous flovi^ering shrubs where, 
wanted. In doing this work, observe to cut out all dead wood; 
and where any of the branches are too long, or grow straggling, 
let them be shortened, or cut o3" close, as you shall see necessary; 
and likewise, where the branches of different shrubs interfere or 
run into each other, shorten them so that each may stand singly 
and clear of another, then all the different shrubs will show them- 
selves distinctly and to the best advantage. 

When the shrubs are pruned, let the cuttings be cleared away 
and the ground be neatly dug between and about all the plants, 
observing to take oft' all suckers arising from the roots. Nothing 
looks better in a shrubbery than to see the ground neat and fresh 
between the flowering shrubs, and evergreens, &c., especially in 
such clumps and other compartments where the shrubs stand 
distant. 

Bat as sometimes particular parts of a shrubbery are on some 
occasions required to form a close thicket, in that case very little 
pruning or digging, &c. is wanted. 

Care of Grass Walks and Lawns. 

Grass walks and lawns should be kept extremely clean; in dry 
weather, as soon as the greater winter frost is over, roll them with 
fi heavy roller to settle the earth which the frost had thrown up. 



Feb.] flower GARDEN. Ig5 

Gravel Walks. 

Keep the gravel walks perfectl}' clean and free from moss, weeds, 
or litter of any kind; let them be well rolled, to settle them after 
the winter frost, which will give them a fresh and neat appearance, 
and render them comfortable for walking on. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

This is a very proper period in the southern states to sow annual, 
biennial and perennial flower seeds, and to transplant the various 
kinds of fibrous-rooted herbaceous flowering plants; to plant out 
into the borders of the pleasure-grounds all kinds of deciduous 
trees, flowering and ornamental shrubs; and, in short, to perform 
all the other works directed to be done either in this or next 
month, in the pleasure or flower garden compartments, which are 
suitable to that climate. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Particular attention ought to be paid to the green-house plants 
at this season, in order to give them occasional waterings and 
fresh air, and if severe frost should prevail to give the necessary 
protection. 

In mild weather they will require refreshments of water now 
and then, and admission of external air whenever it can be given 
with safety, though all should enjoy an equal benefit of the latter; 
it is not so with respect to the former. 

Oranges, lemons, and myrtles, and most other of the woody 
plants will require water frequently, but never give them much at 
a time, and none but when absolutely necessary. 

The herbaceous kinds will also require occasional supplies of 
water, but less frequent, and in less quantities than the woody 
tribe. 

Let the succulent kinds, such as aloes, sedems, mesembryanthe- 
mums, cactuses, &c. have water but very sparingly, and only when 
the earth in the pots is very dry. 

Examine the tubs and pots separately to see which want water; 
let none be given but when necessary, and always very moderately; 
a little will be serviceable, but too much would be of bad conse- 
quence at this season. 

Air should be admitted to the plants at all times when the wea- 
ther is favourable, for that is a necessary article; they cannot thrive 
without it, nor continue a healthful lively appearance. Every day, 
when the weather is mild, let some of the windows be opened a 
little way for the admission of air, and take care that they are shut 
again in due time. 



156 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Feb. 

But be very particular not to admit sharp or cutting winds, or 
frosty air, into the green-house at this season | to avoid which, you 
must never be absent while the windows are more or less open : 
for the changes of weather are so sudden, that a few hours inatten- 
tion might do irreparable injury to your plants, especially to the 
more tender kinds. The safest method now of admitting air, is by 
sliding down the upper tier of your front windows, less or more, 
according to the weather, which will not only admit the fresh, but 
discharge any foul air which has been generated in the house. 

In frosty weather, keep your lights all close, and if very severe, 
defend the windows at night. If you have roof-lights, protect them 
as directed in January^ page 87. 

Fires may also occasionally be used, and indeed are indispensa- 
ble at times^ but these ought never to be resorted to except when 
absolutely necessary, either to keep out the frost or to dispel dampsj 
and even then you are to be very cautious not to create thereby too 
strong a heat in the house, never above 40 or 45° of Fahrenheit's 
thermometerj for this would cause your plants to push and get into 
a fresh state of vegetation, which would be extremely injurious to 
them during any of the winter months. 

Another thing to be regarded, is to keep the plants of all kinds 
free from casual decayed shoots and leaves, for those are not only 
hurtful to the plants while in the house, but appear very unsightly} 
therefore, whenever such appear, let them be constantly taken offj 
keep also the pots, &c. and green-house always neatly clean. 

The latter end of this, or any time next month, you ought to 
loosen the earth in the top of the pots or tubs of your oranges, 
lemons, and other plants in general, and take out about an inch deep 
or more, adding some fresh in its stead; this will prove very bene- 
ficial to the plants, and whoever will bestow this little dressing 
upon them, will see the advantage of it in a short time. 

Your pots of Cape bulbs, such as Ixias, Gladioluses, Lachenalias, 
Moreas, Watsonias, Lapeyrousias, Walchendorfias, Tritonias, An- 
tholizas, Cyanelias, and Oxalis versicolor — Babianas, Massonias, 
Geissorhizas, Melanthiums and Melasphserulas, &c., which are 
now in a state of vegetation, should be kept all towards the front 
of the house, and as near the glasses as possible, lest they should 
draw up weakly, and thereby produce but indifferent flowers. 

Hot-beds for raising Green-house Plants. 

Make hot-beds to sow tender exotic seeds in, observing to work 
the dung well, turning it over two or three times while it remains 
in the heap, at intervals of four or five days; make the beds as 
directed for cucumbers, page 12, to the height of three feet six 
inches; put on your frames, and lay eight or ten inches of good 
fresh tan even over the bed; if that cannot be conveniently had, 
lay on six inches of dry earth; when the bed comes to its heat, sow 
your seeds separately in pots, and plunge them into the tan or earth; 
some of these will not vegetate for a long time, and others frequently, 
lie in the ground a whole year. When the heat of the bed is on the 



Feb.] the HOT-HOUSE. 167 

decline, add a fresh lining of hot dung, as directed for cucumber and 
melon beds. Or these seeds may be sowed in pots, and plunged 
into the bark-bed in the stove. 

Plant cuttings of Geraniums, Fuschias, Myrtles, Hydrangeas, 
and other green-house plants in small pots, one or more in each, 
and plunge them into a hot-bed; they will now freely strike root 
and be fine early plants; these when they begin to grow must have 
plenty of air occasionally, and be carefully protected at night and 
in severe weather. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

As most hot-houses are frequently infested with various kinds 
of insects, which do very considerable injury to the plants, it may 
be of some importance to give a description of these, and also the 
most effectual methods of destroying them. 

Of the Species o/" Insects that infest the Pine- Apple Plants. 

1. The Brown Turtle Insect. Coccus hesperidum, of Linn. 
This species is not only found upon the pines and most other plants 
which grow in hot-houses, but also upon many plants which are in 
green-houses. These insects, after they are arrived at a certain age, 
fix themselves immovably to the leaves of the plant; but, before 
that time, though they generally appear motionless, yet on a close 
inspection, in a very warm day, many of them, and especially the 
smaller ones, may be perceived to move to different parts of the 
plant, being in appearance much like a turtle in miniature. 

A sweet glutinous matter issues from these insects, this soon turns 
mouldy, and in time becomes quite black, which causes the plants 
to appear very unsightly. But as these insects do not, in any other 
respect, injure the pine plants, I shall pass over them, and proceed 
to those of a more pernicious nature. 

2. The White Scaly Insect. This insect, as far as I can learn, 
has hitherto remained undescribed; neither Linnseus, Geoffrey, or 
Schtfffer, seem to have known it. 

This species is very nearly allied to the former, both of them 
being Cocci, and of the oviparous kind: it seems to be exactly simi- 
lar to it in its manner of breeding, the process of which, curious 
naturalists have observed to be nearly as follows: The eggs which 
are discharged from the female, are pushed forward between the 
skin of the belly and the leaf of the plant, to which the insect 
adheres; in consequence of this, the skin of the belly becomes less 
distended, which enables the insect to afford a large covering to the 
eggs already excluded. When the eggs are all discharged, the 
skin of the belly retreats close to the back of the parent insect, 
which then appears like a mere scale. If the insect in this state be 



168 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Feb. 

raised with the point of a needle from the leaf, a number of eggs 
may be perceived under it, of a pale red colour,^ and very transpa- 
rent, not unlike the roe (or eggs) of fishes; but with this difference, 
that they are not connected by a membrane, but loosely packed 
together. The mother, with a parent care, not only thus broods 
over her eggs till they are hatched, but continues to protect her 
young for a considerable time after, and either dies during the time 
she is performing this last office for them, or very soon after. 

The males of both the above species are much less than the 
females, and appear very different from them; the latter, except 
just in their infant state, never assuming any other form than that 
of a scale, as already described; whereas the males of both kinds, 
in their last state, become flies; but neither of them can probably 
do any injury to the pine plants whilst they are in that form: for 
the^ies of none of the coccus kind have been found, on the strictest 
examination by the most able naturalists, to have any organ by 
which they can take in nourishment. In that state, therefore, they 
can probably continue but a short time, the whole business of their 
lives being then destined to the impregnation of the females. 

I have hitherto only taken particular notice of the round scale, 
or female insect, which is the most conspicuous, being far larger 
than the male. But a careful observer will readily perceive, where 
these scales are numerous, another set of smaller ones intermixed 
with them, which, if he be unacquainted with the natural history 
of these insects, he will hardly suspect to belong to the same 
animal, as they put on so different an appearance. They are semi- 
tubular, and their length scarcely exceeds the diameter of one of 
the small round scales, and their breadth is not more than a third 
or fourth part of their length. These, however, contain the males 
in one of their last stages, under which they assume the form of 
nymphs, and become flies. In order to be satisfied of this, a person 
need only break open, with the point of a needle, a few of these 
scales, when they are arrived at maturity, and he will perceive con- 
tained within each of them a very beautiful, but small fly, with all 
the characters of the flies of the coccus kind. 

The length of this fly, from the head to the tail, exclusive of the 
wings, and those long hairs which are so characteristic of the flies 
of this kind, is about the thirtieth part of an inch; and the length, 
including the wings when folded one over the other, exclusive of 
the hairs before mentioned, is not more than the eighteenth part of 
an inch. 

The insects of this last mentioned species are of a very perni- 
cious nature. When the pines are infested with them, there will 
be much trouble and great expense in cleansing them, even to keep 
the insects under; and notwithstanding the greatest care, the plants 
will suffer much, and in time grow veryunsightly; their leaves will 
appear yellow and sickly, and generally a great number of yellow 
transparent spots may be seen all over them. 

On the least neglect in destroying them, they will increase innu- 
merably, and so beset the lower parts of the leaves next the stem of 
the plant (where they are most numerous) with scales, as nearly 



Feb.] the HOT-HOUSE. X59 

to touch each other. And as they pierce that part of the leaf imme- 
diately under the scale with their proboscis, they thereby not only 
draw out the nutricious juices themselves, but also destroy the tubes 
through which they flow. The upper parts of the leaves being thus 
deprived of their nourishment, consequently die. But these insects 
do not attack the roots, as has been frequently asserted. 

3. The white mealy crimson-tinged insect. This insect, as 
well as the former, I have not found to be noticed by naturalists. 

This species also has all the characters of a coccus, but in all 
probability belongs to another genus. For whereas the two former 
species are undoubtedly oviparous, this seems to be viviparous. 
It is most probable that the young ones remain some time in the 
mealy down of the mother till they have acquired strength, and 
are arrived at such a degree of perfection, as to enable them to 
support themselves v/hen they forsake the parent insect and dis- 
perse to different parts of the plant. 

When this species is first perceived on the leaves of the pine, it 
appears to be nothing more than small particles of meal or powder 
collected together; but in a few days it assumes the form of a louse 
or bug, thickly covered with a fine meal or down of an oval form 
on its upper, and very flat on its under side, from whence proceed 
its legs, which are six in number. These, as well as many other 
particulars in the above, and preceding descriptions, are not to be 
distinguished without the help of glasses. 

The last described species is of a more pernicious nature than 
the former; it attacks every part of the plant, from the top of its 
fruit even to the most extreme parts of its roots. These animals 
wedge themselves in between the protuberances of the fruit in a 
most surprising manner, so as not to be got out without difficulty, 
which not only makes the fruit appear very unsightly when it be- 
comes ripe, but by robbing it of its nutricious juices is the cause 
also of its wanting flavour and being ill tasted. 

But the bad effects of this species on the roots of the plants are 
yet of a far worse consequence; for there, even at the bottom of the 
pots, they increase with an uncommon degree of rapidity, so as 
to become very numerous, and in the end to destroy the principal 
roots of the plants. 

There have been various methods used for the extirpation of 
these insects, such as shifting the plants and washing their roots; 
decoctions from tobacco, wormwood, walnut leaves, henbane, and 
other herbs of a bitter or poisonous quality. Some have added to 
the above snuff', sulphur and pepper. These and many other reme- 
dies have been tried to very little purpose; at length, Mr. William 
Speechly, then gardener to the Duke of Portland, England, dis- 
covered and recommended in his excellent Treatise on the Culture 
of the Pine-apple, the following receipt, which he asserts "for the 
destruction of these insects, bad never failed him; its efficacy 
being confirmed by nine years' experience." 

THE receipt. 

Take one pound of quicksilver^ put it into a glazed vessel, and 
X 



170 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Feb. 

pour upon it one gallon of boiling water, which let stand till it be- 
comes cold', then pour off the water for use. Repeat this on the 
same quicksilver (for it ivill retain its powers) till a sufficient num- 
ber of gallons are provided to fill a vessel intended for the purpose. 
One in the form of a trough that will hold eight or ten gallons, is the 
most convenient, especially for thelarge-sized plants. 
• Then to every gallon of this mercurial water add six ounces of 
soft green soap, dissolved in a portion of the prepared water. Let 
the 'mixture stand till it becomes milk-warm, ivhich is the degree 
of warmth it must be kept to during the time of dipping. 

Before I proceed to the method of applying the above mixture 
to the plants, I cannot avoid calling in question, any virtue that 
may be attributed to a mercurial efficacy therein; first, as it is the 
opinion of the most experienced chemists, that crude mercury is 
not soluble, in any degree in pure water, whether poured on in a 
cold or boiling state; secondly, that if it contained any acid when 
put on, which might decompose a part of the mercury, the adding 
thereto of soap, would by virtue of its alkali, neutralize the acid, 
and thereby disengage and precipitate the mercury: therefore, it is 
at least very questionable, whether its efficacy is not exclusively 
attributable to the alkali of the soap. 

If in place of the quicksilver or crude mercury above recom- 
mended, you were to substitute corrosive sublimate, in the follow- 
ing or even in a greater proportion, there is no doubt of its effectu- 
ally answering the end, without doing the shadow of injury to the 
plants. 

Dissolve half an ounce of corrosive sublimate in a pint of gin or 
other spirits; when dissolved incorporate therewith four gallons of 
soft water, and it will be ready for u^e. 

The soft soap may be added thereto, in the proportion above 
mentioned, but its alkali acting on the acid of the sublimate, will 
convert it into a mild muriate of mercury, and consequently render 
it much less active than before. 

Previously let it be observed, that this dressing cannot be effiectu- 
ally applied with propriety to fruiting pines, either after they have 
started their fruit, or for two months before it, as disturbing their 
roots at that time would prevent their fruit growing to the full 
size; however, succession plants may be dressed at any period, but 
in the month of October that work can be done with the greatest 
success; and fruiting plants, if infested, may at any time be washed 
with the solution, which will destroy such insects as affect them 
above ground. 

Before the plants are taken out of their pots, I would advise the 
brushing off a few of the scaly insects (as in a common dressing) 
especially towards the bottom of the leaves, where they will some- 
times be so numerous as in appearance to lie one upon another, in 
which case the mixture might be prevented from penetrating to 
the bottom insects. I do not know that this business of brushing 
is absolutely necessary; but as the whole operation in a large 
hot-house may be performed in one day, the labour of a person or 



'Feb.] the HOT-HOUSE. 171 

two extraordinary, for this purpose, can amount to but a very incon- 
siderable expense. 

The leaves of the large sized plants should then be tied 
together," they will be more manageable in this form than with their 
leaves loose, and less liable to be damaged. The plants should 
then be taken out of the pots, and divested of their long loose roots, 
as also a few of the decayed leaves at the bottom, and the rest 
washed clean. 

The last species of insects (by gardeners most generally called 
pine bug) will sometimes conceal themselves in holes at the bottom 
of the stems of the plants, especially in large ones; and as the 
mixture might be prevented from penetrating into those holes, by 
the air contained in them, care should be taken to examine that 
part with great circumspection. 

It may not be amiss in this place to observe, that the earth which 
comes out of the pine pots, together with the leaves and roots taken 
from off" the plants, should be removed to a considerable distance 
from the hot-house. Also, that the pots out of which the pine 
plants were taken, should not be used again for that purpose, with- 
out first being put into boiling water. 

The pine plants being now ready, let them be put either into the 
mixture, or the corrosive solution, in which they should remain, 
with every part covered, for the space of six minutesj then take 
them out, first letting the tops decline for the mixture to drain out 
of their centres. The vessel should be immediately filled with 
fresh plants, and those taken out set to dry with their roots doivn- 
wards; for by placing them in that position the solution, &c. will 
descend and penetrate to the very bottom of the leaves in the 
centre of the plant, whereby the insects which are concealed there, 
will be totally destroyed. The mixture will change the plants to 
a sad green colour, which will give them the appearance of being 
spoiled; but, as they become dry, they will in a great measure 
resume their proper hue. 

During the operation it will be necessary to add a supply of hot 
mixture, in order to keep the whole to a proper degree of warmth, 
as also to make up the deficiency which must naturally happen. 

It will be proper to do this work in a fine day, and as soon in 
the forenoon as convenient, that the plants may have time to dry, 
which they will do in a few hours, and then they must undergo the 
same operation a second time. 

The process of the second operation being exactly the same as 
the first, a repetition thereof is unnecessary. 

After the second dipping, a sponge should be used to remove 
any unsightly matter on the leaves of the plants. They should 
then be set to dry with their tops downwards, that the mixture 
may drain from every part, for it is necessary that every part of 
the plant should be quite dry before it is planted. 

During the performance of the above operations, a sufficient 
number of labourers should be employed in getting the hot-house 
ready for the reception of the plants, (as changing the tan, and 
cleaning every part of the hot-house;) and if the inside of the roof 



J72 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Fee. 

were painted at the same time it would be better. Also, it might 
be serviceable, if a small fire was made in the pine pit with charcoal 
and sulphur, and the house shut up an hour or two to keep in the 
steam. But in case there are vines, or other plants, growing in 
the hot-house, this last operation must be omitted. 

If the above work cannot be done in one and the same day, the 
pine plants may with great safety be set in a dry airy place for a 
day or two, provided they are not put into heaps, which would 
greatly damage them in a short time. 

The mould intended for the pine plants at the first potting should 
be light and fine; and I would recommend that the pots be small 
in proportion to the size of the plant, that each plant may be what 
Gardeners term tjnderpottedj they will strike root both sooner 
and better than if put into larger pots, and at their next shifting 
they will go into proper-sized pots with their balls and roots 
entire. 

After the pine plants are replaced in the hot-house, it will be 
proper to shade the glasses in the middle of the day whenever the 
weather is warm and clear. The house should be constantly kept 
to a great degree of heat, which will be the means of making the 
plants strike sooner and stronger, it being evident that they cannot 
draw themselves weak while in an inactive state: however, as soon 
as the plants are perceived to grow, it will be necessary to give 
them by degrees a greater quantity of air. 

Great care should be taken to prevent the roots of the plants 
from being injured by an over-heat of the tan, which may be done 
by raising the pots in case the tan should heat violently. 

Other Insects found in Hot-houses, with the methods of destroying' 

them. 

Besides the different species of insects which are found so per- 
nicious to the pine-apple plants, there are other kinds that infest 
most stoves, which frequently prove very troublesome; and although 
they are not injurious to the pine-apple, are yet very prejudicial to 
most other plants kept there, either for use or ornament. 

1. The Aphis. This insect is of the order HemiptePvA. Cha- 
racters. Rostrum bent inwards. Antennae, setaceous and longer 
than the thorax. Wings, four on the males; females none. Feet 
six. They have generally two little horns or hairs placed on the 
hinder part of their abdomen. 

Roses and various other plants, are very subject to be overrun 
with these insects, and if no means are used to extirpate them, they 
will in a short time take such entire possession of the plants, that 
every part of the young wood will appear to be covered with them. 
They are commonly called lice. Many kinds of flowers and exotic 
plants which are kept in stoves are very subject to be annoyed with 
them. 

These are easily destroyed three ways. 1. By fumigating the 
house with tobacco. 2. By dusting the infected plants with fine 
snuff or tobacco dust. 3. By a decoction or infusion of tobacco. 



Pee.] the HOT-HOUSE. 173 

2. The Acarus, commonly called the Red Spider. This is of 
the order Aptera. Characters. Eyes placed on the sides of the 
head, remote from one another. Mouth or proboscis, formed by a 
small pointed rostrum inclosed in a sheath. Antennas, shorter than 
the proboscis. Feet eight. They are oviparous. 

This is a pest to almost every kind of plantsj for this insect is 
not only pernicious to most plants kept under glass, but also to 
many growing in the open air. 

In hot dry weather the increase of these insects is exceedingly 
rapid, and when they become numerous, they, by various means, 
commit great havoc on plants; for this insect with its proboscis, 
perpetually wounds the fine or capillary vessels of plants, and ex- 
tracts their nutricious juices. It also works a web about the leaves 
and over the tender buds and tops of the plants, in such a manner as 
nearly to suffocate them, and prevent their vegetation. 

This insect does not seem to be affected by fumigation made with 
any ingredients hitherto discovered; and it is probable that the ap- 
terous insects, or those without wings, are not so much aifected by 
fumigation as the winged tribe. 

However, the mixtures recommended for destroying the insects 
on the pine-apple, will have the same effect on this. Plants greatly 
infested, and growing in pots, when their tops are not very large, 
may with great facility be dipped in a convenient vessel filled with 
those mixtures: the top of the plant need only remain a short time 
therein, and it should then be placed in a shady place to prevent 
its drying too rapidly. 

These insects very frequently reside on the under side of the 
leaves, and, when very numerous, they work so thick a web there- 
on, that it sometimes prevents the mixture from entering into cer- 
tain hollow parts of the leaves, by which means a few escape un- 
hurt; in which case it will be proper for the plants to undergo the 
same operation the succeeding afternoon, which will most assuredly 
destroy all that escaped before. 

Large or climbing plants, when their leaves are large, as for in- 
stance the vine, must be dressed with the mixture by means of a 
sponge-, this has the appearance of a tedious operation; but in a 
dark day when the house is not very warm, a person will make 
considerable progress therein in the course of a few hours. 

The keeping of the house in a moist state, by watering the walks 
and flues late in the evening, and the frequent sprinkling of the 
plants with water, contributes to retard the progress of these insects, 
which are very impatient of much moisture. This reduces them to 
a temporary state of inaction, but will not destroy them. 

3. The Thrips. Order Hemiptera. Characters. Rostrum, 
small and obscure. Antennae, as long as the thorax. Body slender, 
of an equal thickness in its whole length. Abdomen reflexible, 
being generally bent upwards. Wings four, incumbent on the back 
of the insect, narrow in proportion to their length, and cross one 
another at some distance from their base. Feet six, the tarsus of 
each foot having only two articulations. 

This is also a very pernicious species of insect, and is very com- 



174 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Feb. 

mon in hot-houses, as well as upon plants in the open air; it is very 
minute, so much so as to be scarcely perceptible; generally conceal- 
ing itself along the veins of the leaves, from whence it skips with 
great agility on being touched. It is a great enemy to the vine 
while the leaves are young and tender, whether they grow in the 
open air or under glass. The Cape jasmine, as well as many other 
plants, often fall a prey to these minute insects. 

These may be destroyed by the same methods as the Jlphis. 

4. The Oniscus, or Wood-louse. This belongs to the order Ap- 
TERA. Characters. — Antennas, setaceous and bent-mouth, furnished 
with two palpi. Head, intimately joined with the thorax. Body, 
oval form, composed of several crustaceous plates. Feet fourteen. 
They change their skin like many other apterous insects. 

These are very common in the bark-pits, as well as in woods, 
houses, gardens, &c. but are seldom destructive except to young 
seedling plants on their first appearance above ground. This, how- 
ever, may be prevented by dusting the plants, whilst in that state, 
with fine snuft'or tobacco dust. 

5. Tpie Formica, or Jlnt. This insect is so universally known 
as to render a description unnecessary. 

These are often exceedingly numerous in hot-houses, and espe- 
cially where the Jlphides and Coccus hesperidmn abound; for there 
is a sweet glutinous matter which issues from these insects (being 
either their excrements, or produced by them from some other 
cause) that seems to be the principal incitement that draws the ant 
thither. 

The ant may be destroyed with great facility by setting pots con- 
taining honey and water, in the same manner as is practised for 
catching wasps, &c. 

6. The Coccus hesperidum, or Brown Turtle Insect, already 
described, is not only an enemy to the pine-apple plant, but also to 
many others both in the hot-house and green-house; therefore I am 
induced to take notice of it again. 

This insect may be destroyed, whilst young, by fumigation; 
therefore, where that operation is frequent, they are rarely to be 
met with. 

Of Fumigating the House. 

The house may be fumigated either by means of bellows invent- 
ed for that purpose, or by that of a smoking-pot. The most eligible 
seasons for this business are the spring and autumn, when, if ne- 
cessity requires, it should be repeated every eight or ten days, till 
the proper eflfect is produced. But it may be done at any period, 
except when there are ripe fruit in the house, as then it would give 
them a smoky flavour. 

Fumigation is best performed late in an afternoon or evening, 
and proves most efiicacious when the weather is moist and calm; 
for the smoke is retained much longer in the house when the air is 
still and the cavities of the roof, particularly those between the 
squares of glass, filled with moisture. 



Feb.] the HOT-HOUSE. 175 

The Aphides may be destroyed with a gentle fumigation^ but 
the Tlirijis and Coccus hesperidum require a smoke so strong, that 
a person cannot distinguish an object farther than at the distance 
of five feet. 

When a hot-house is greatly infested either with the Aphides or 
77irips, the fumigations should be repeated every third or fourth 
night, for three or four times successively. The reason and neces- 
sity of these repetitions proceed from a probability that the smoke 
cannot affect the insect in the egg, and perhaps it may not have 
sufficient power over them in other of their states^ therefore a fresh 
brood may naturally be expected in a few days. 

Care of the Pines. 

Many of the pine plants will now appear set for fruiting, which 
may be distinguished by the short leaves in their centres; from that 
time they should be moderately watered and the house kept pretty 
warm; for when plants are kept cold at the time of forming their 
fruit, it generally causes many of them to be crooked, imperfect 
and misshapen. Therefore, under such circumstances, never 
let the heat fall lower than 55° of Fahrenheit, nor rise higher, 
by fire-heat, than 62°; a little air should, however, be admitted 
whenever the weather permits, and especially on sunny warm days, 
when the heat rises to above seventy degrees. But in no case, nor 
under any circumstances, let the heat of the house fall below 5£°, 
if possible. 

As some persons may be furnished with Reaumur's and not with 
Fahrenheit's thermometer, it may be of use to give a comparative 
table of their scales, as well as the rules by which one can be con- 
verted into the other; observing that 32° of the latter, being the 
freezing point, is equal to (or zero) of the former. 



Reaumur's. 


Fahrenheit's 


Reaumur's. 


Fahi-enheit's. 


Degrees 16 


68 


Degrees 33 


106,2 


15 


65,8 


32 


104 


14 


63,5 


31 


101,7 


13 


61,2 


30 


99,5 


12 


59 


29 


97,2 


11 


56,8 


28 


95 


10 


54,8 


27 


92,7 


9 


52,5 


26 


90,5 


8 


50 


25 


88,2 


7 


47,7 


24 


86 


6 


45,5 


23 


83,8 


5 


• 43,3 


22 


81,5 


4 


41 


21 


79,2 


3 


38,6 


20 


77 


2 


36,5 


19 


74,7 


1 


34,2 


18 


72,5 





32 


17 


70,3 



176 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Feb. 

To convert the degrees of Reaumur into those of Fahrenheit: 
multiply the degrees of Reaumur bj 9, and divide the product bj 
45 to the quotient add 32, and the amount will be those of Fahren- 
heit. 

To convert the degrees of Fahrenheit into those of Reaumur: 
subtract 32 from the degrees of Fahrenheit; multiply the re- 
mainder by 4; divide the product by 9, and the quotient will be 
those of Reaumur. 

Your fires must be continued every evening and night, being 
careful in very severe weather to keep them burning and suffi- 
ciently supplied with fuel till so late a period that there can be no 
danger of the house becoming cold before morning. Indeed, unless 
your house is well constructed, there may be some severe weather 
in which it would be necessary to keep up the fires all night. 
There have been instances of careless persons entrusted with this 
work, who, in order to get to bed at an early hour, or to some idle 
frolic, have put down large and violent fires, which never fail to 
do injury to the plants, and sometimes to burst the flues: this prac- 
tice is to be carefully avoided, as a moderate and steady heat is 
what always will ensure the best success. 

The fires are to be renewed very early in the morning, and con- 
tinued until the heat of the sun is sufficient to promote a comforting 
warmth in the house; and in very cold and dark weather, it will 
be necessary to keep them burning all day. 

It is very advisable, and indeed indispensable, for the health of 
the plants, to sprinkle the flues and floor occasionally with water, 
in order to restore the parched air of the house to its atmospheric 
quality: this will not only render great service to the plants, but 
tend to weaken the power of destructive insects; for these do nof 
like a moist air, manifested by their greater increase in dry stoves, 
than in others. 

A proper degree of heat must now be preserved in the bark-bed, 
for nothing can contribute so much to the free growth of the young 
fruit, as a brisk bottom-heat: if the roots have not this advantage, 
it is impossible to make the fruits swell to any tolerable size. 

Therefore, where the bark-bed was not stirred up the former 
month, to renew the fermentation, and revive the declined heat, it 
should now be done, for the heat will consequently now begin to be 
very faint, and by stirring up the bark almost to the bottom, it will 
bring on a fresh fermentation therein; by which means the bed 
will again recover a lively growing heat, the good effect of which 
will soon appear both in the plants and fruit, provided it be done in 
due time; but if the heatis greatly decreased, and the bark decayed, 
you may augment it at the same time with about one-third or fourth 
part of new tan, otherwise defer it till next month, which see. * 

However, where the work of forking up the bark- bed appears 
necessary at this time, agreeable to the observations above mentioned, 
it should, if possible, be done in the first week in the month; for 
if it is delayed much longer, the plants and fruit will certainly, for 
want of a due proportion of heat, be much checked in their growth. 
Observe, in the first place, to take all the pots out of the bed; then 



Feb.] the HOT-HOUSE. I77 

begin at one end, and open a kind of trench, by taking out some of 
the bark and carrying it to the otherj this done, begin at said 
trench, and with a fork, dig and work up the bark quite to the 
bottom, taking care to break the cakes or lumps; mix all the parts 
well together, and fill up at last with that taken out of the first 
opening. Having finished, let the top be made level, and imme- 
diately plunge the pots again to their rims as before. This work 
is so very necessary that it should not on any consideration be 
omitted at the time above mentioned; that is to say, if the bark 
has much declined in its heat. 

The bed being thus treated, it will soon renew its heat, and 
retain the same well for six weeks or thereabouts. 

At the expiration of that period, or sometime in March or begin- 
ning of April, the bark will require to be stirred up again, and 
refreshed with about one-third, or at least one-fourth part of new 
tan; after this it will retain a proper degree of heat till the fruit 
is ripe. — See March and April. 

The bark-bed wherein the succession pine-plants are plunged, 
should also be examined now with good attention; and if the heat 
is found to be much decreased, the bed should be treated in the 
manner above directed. 

Watering the Pines. 

The fruiting pine-apple plants should now have moderate refresh- 
ments of water, provided there be a good heat in the bark-bed: and 
when there is a proper degree of that and moderate moisture 
together, it will make the young fruit swell very fast. 

But in watering these plants, be careful to give it moderately at 
each time. The rule is this: let the earth in the pots which contain 
the plants, be kept just a little moist in a middling degree; and if 
this is observed, the plants and fruit will thrive. 

The succession pine-plants, that is, those which are to fruit next 
year, must also be refreshed now and then with water; in watering 
these, let the same rule be observed as just mentioned above. 

Remember also to give water at times to the younger succession 
pines, consisting of the last year's crowns and suckers. 

In watering the pine-plants in general, you should still be cau- 
tious to let none of it, or but as little as possible, fall into the centre 
of the plants, where, being apt to lodge, it would prove detrimental, 
in some degree, to these exotics at this season. 

Of the Various kinds of Plants in the Hot-House. 

In some hot-houses there are kept many other sorts of curious 
exotics, besides the pines, both of the succulent and woody kinds, 
&c., and as they are all tender, being from the hottest parts of the 
world, the same degrees of heat as recommended for the pine, 
will, generally speaking, be suitable for them; however, there are 
some of those which, to do them the greatest possible justice, 
require a somewhat greater degree of heat than the pine-apple, and 



178 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Feb. 

others not quite so much; therefore, when there is the convenience 
of different apartments in a long range of hot-houses, all may be 
suited according to their respective necessities. 

Let it be observed, that all tender plants which are kept in pots, 
the succulent tribe excepted, thrive much better when plunged in 
the bark-bed; but the tallest-growing kinds must be planted in a 
border of suitable earth, near the back wall, to give them the 
greater scope for extending their heads. 

All these kinds of plants should be kept remarkably clean from 
dust, or any sort of filth that may gather upon their stems, shoots, 
or leaves; and such ought always to be washed off as soon as it 
appears. There is nothing more necessary than cleanliness to 
preserve the health of plants; and where foulness is permitted 
upon any of them, it will not only close up those small pores 
which are so necessary to the growth of all vegetables, but will 
also render the whole plant unhealthy, which seldom fails to invite 
insects, and to increase them prodigiously in the house. 

These plants must also be kept very free from decayed leaves; 
that is, when any such appear, let them be immediately taken off. 

Water should also be given to all these plants at times; some 
will require but very little and seldom, and others will need it 
pretty often. Therefore, let good care be taken that every plant, 
according to its nature, be properly supplied with that article; but 
be sure never to give any sort too much at a time; and in giving it 
always make a distinction between the succulent, the herbaceous, 
and the woody kinds. 

The latter will need water oftener, and more at a time, than 
either of the former; for some of those require very little moisture 
about their roots, and too much would rot the plants. 

Let the woody kinds in general be moderately watered not less 
than once or twice a week; and it will be serviceable to sprinkle 
water sometimes all over the head or branches of these plants, 
especially the coffee tree, the pimento, or allspice, and all the 
tender Mimosas. 

But the succulent kinds, such as the cactuses, mesembryanthe- 
mums, aloes. Euphorbias and the like, must not be watered oftener 
than once a week. 

In watering these kinds let care be taken to give but little at 
each time, just suflicient to reach the bottom roots. 

It will be an advantage to all these tender plants, both of the 
woody, succulent, and other kinds, when the surface-earth in the 
pflts casually crusts or binds, to stir and loosen it lightly a small 
depth. 

Mmit Air. 

Fresh air should now be admitted to the pines and other plants 
in the hot-house at all times when the weather will permit. 

But this, however, must only be done at this season, when the 
sun shines warm, and the air is quite calm and clear; then it will 
be proper to slide some of the glasses open a little way, in the 
warmest time of the day, particularly the roof-lights, shutting all 



Feb.] , THE HOT-HOUSE. I79 

close if the weather changes cold and cloudy, and always in proper 
time in the afternoon. 

The best time of the day for the admission of fresh air, is from 
about twelve to one, two, or three o'clockj but for the time of 
opening or shutting the glasses, let the weather be the guide. 

Of Kidney -beans in the Hot-house. 

Now plant some more kidney-beans of the early white, cream- 
coloured, yellow, or speckled dwarfs, &c. in pots or boxes, and 
place them in the hot-house to succeed those planted last month; 
or if none was then planted, this is a very successful time, supe- 
rior to the former month, for planting a good hot-house crop, and 
managed as directed in January, page 104. 

Do not forget to refresh with water those kidney-beans which 
were planted last month; they will require it two or three times a 
week: give also necessary waterings to the young beans advancing 
for successive crops. 

Of blowing Roses and other Plants early. 

You may now, in the beginning of this month, set pots of roses 
and honey-suckles, &c. in the hot-house; or pots of bulbous roots, 
carnations, pinks, and double sweet-williams, or of any other desir- 
able flowering plants, either of the shrub or herbaceous kinds, 
which you desire, by way of curiosity, to bring to an early bloom, 
supplying them, when in growth, with plenty of water. 

Likewise, about the middle and end of the month, you may 
introduce more of the same sort of flowering-plants to produce 
flowers in regular succession. 

You may also introduce pots sown with seeds of any desirable 
annuals, of moderate growth, to flower early, such as mignonette, 
balsams, ten weeks stock, &c. &c. 

Of Cucumbers in the Hot-house. 

Where it is desired to raise early cucumbers in the hot-house, 
some seed may be now sown as directed last month, or young plants 
planted therein from any common hot-bed. See Hot-house for 
January. ' 

Early Strawberries. 

You' may now introduce into the hot-house, pots of the scarlet 
and alpine strawberries, either to succeed those of last month, or as 
a first introduction. Let them be two years' old bearing plants; 
place them near the glasses, or plunge them in the bark-bed to 
forward them earlier, giving proper supplies of water. 

If some fresh plants are taken into the hot-house every three 
weeks, you may obtain a constant supply of early fruit till those in 
the open ground ripen. 

Or pots of strawberry plants kept in moderate dung hot-beds to 
forward them, may be removed in successive order into the hot- 
house; they will produce a supply of early fruit in regular succes- 
sion. 



180 



W^uvtf^. 



THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

The weather in this month, both in the middle and eastern states, 
is very unsettled; sometimes it proves dry and frosty, sometimes 
tolerably warm and comfortable, at other times cold and wet, with 
storms of strong winds, hail, snow and rain, which makes a dili- 
gent attendance on the hot-beds absolutely necessary; otherwise, 
they often miscarry, and all the preceding trouble and expense is 
lost. 

Let me here observe, that snow ought never to be suffered to re- 
main but as short a time as possible, either on the hot-bed lights, 
covers, or about the beds; for the cold produced thereby, often 
penetrates through a slight covering, especially if there is not a 
strong bottom heat, and produces a kind of hoar-frost in the inside 
of the frame, which seldom fails to do considerable injury; and 
likewise, when suff'ered to lodge round the beds, it causes a sudden 
decline of the heat. 

Care of Early Cucumbers and Melons. 

Examine the state of the cucumber and melon hot-beds, and see 
if they are of a proper degree of heat, so as to preserve the plants 
in a state of free growth. 

You must let the heat be lively, but moderate, by which means 
the ridged-out plants of good growth will show fruit plentifully, and 
these will swell freely and grow to a handsome size. 

If you find the heat declined, apply a lining of fresh horse-dung, 
as directed in January, page 17, to which I refer you for general 
instructions on this subject. 

Let the plants have fresh air every day, by raising the upper end 
of the glasses from about half an inch to one or two inches in 
height, in proportion to the heat of the bed and warmness of the 
weather; always more freely in sunny, calm, mild days, than when 
cloudy or a sharp external air; and when the weather changes 
colder, diminish the admission of air or shut down the glasses; and 
always shut close in proper time towards evening, about three or 
four o'clock, &c. according to the temperature of the weather. 

Refresh them now and then with water; let this be given very 
moderately, and in a mild sunny day; the best time for doing this 
is from ten to two o'clock. 

Cover the glasses with mats every afternoon as soon as the sun 
is off" them; or, if a dark day, and the weather is severe, at such 
period as you may think necessary, according to the degree of heat 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. IgJ 

or cold that may be prevalent at the time; and uncover in the 
morning, if a sunny day, so soon as it shines on the beds, or, if 
otherwise, as early as may be consistent with the safety of the 
plants; for their being too much debarred from the light, causes 
them to become discoloured and weakly. 

As the early plants raised last month will have now advanced 
considerably into fruitful runners, and show fruit abundantly, espe- 
cially cucumbers, let the runners or vines be trained out regularly 
along the surface of the bed at equal distances, and peg them down 
neatly with small hooked sticks. At this early season it will be of 
much utility to impregnate the young fruit of cucumbers with the 
farina of male blossoms. The flowers of cucumbers and melons 
are male and female, separate on the same plant, and the females 
produce the fruit; the males are often erroneously called false 
blossoms, and many persons in consequence of that notion pull 
them off; but they are so far from being false blossoms, that they 
are by nature designed to impregnate the female flowers to render 
them fruitful; for the antherse in the centre of the male blossom 
being furnished with a fine powder, which being dispersed on the 
stigma in the centre of the female, the fecundation is effected, and 
the fruit in a day or two after will begin to swell, and which in 
cucumbers, will generally, in about a fortnight, or wathin a few 
days under or over, according to the state of growth of the plants, 
be arrived to a proper size for cutting or gathering for the table, in 
young green fruit three or four, to five or six inches long or more; 
so that without the assistance of the male blossom, the females 
having the embryo fruit at their base wither and decay, and the 
infant fruit turns yellow and drops off". 

Therefore it is of importance to preserve a sufficiency of the male 
flowers, for the purpose of impregnating the females; and in the 
early culture of cucumbers, &c., it is eligible to carry some of the 
males to the female flowers; observing for this purpose to detach 
some new expanded male blossoms with the stalk to each, and 
holding the stalk between the finger and thumb, and pulling off" the 
petal or flower leaf surrounding the male organ, then with the re- 
maining antherae or central part, touch the stigma in the centre of 
the female, twirling it about so as some of the farina or male powder 
of the antherse may adhere thereto, a little of which being sufficient 
to effect the impregnation. 

This operation is essentially necessary to be performed by hand, 
to early plants that are shut up in frames, before the lights or 
glasses can be admitted sufficiently open to give free access to a 
large current of air, or flying insects, such as bees, &c., all of which 
assist in conveying the farina of the male blossoms to the females, 
as is evident in plants exposed to the open air. 

The above operation of fecundating, or as the gardeners term it, 
setting the fruit, sliould be performed the same day the flowers 
open and are fully expanded, which is the most essential period of 
their generative effect. 

The female or fruit-bearing flowers are readily distinguished at 
sight from the males; the former having always the embryo fruit 



i82 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

placed immediately under the base of the flower; or, in other words, 
the embryo fruit issues forth with the flower-bud on its top, visible 
from its first eruption from the stem of the plant; but the male 
blossom is placed immediately on the top of its foot-stalk without 
any appearance of fruit under its base. 

The same operation of impregnating or setting the fruit, as above, 
may also be practised on melons, which will have the same effect 
as in cucumbers; but as melons are only eatable when ripe, it will 
be five or six weeks longer before they attain full size and mature 
ripeness. 

Sow Cucumber and Melon Seed. 

Sow in the above, or any new-made hot-beds, the seeds of cucum- 
bers and melons, at the beginning, and also about the middle, 
and towards the latter end of this month, to have a supply of young 
plants in readiness, either to plant into new beds, or to supply the 
place of such plants as may fail. 

The sorts of cucumbers are the early short prickly, long green 
prickly, white prickly, long green Turkey, long white Turkey, 
the Smyrna, and the Roman. 

But the first two sorts are commonly cultivated for the early and 
general crop, the short prickly being the earliest, and is therefore 
often sown for the first crop in the frames; but the long green 
prickly is the best to sow for a main crop, either for the frames or 
hand-glasses, or in the natural ground; it being both a plentiful 
bearer in long continuance, and the fruit attains the most handsome 
regular growth, six or eight to ten or twelve inches in length. 

Making new Hot-beds to transplant Cucumbers, Sfc. 

Make hot-beds the beginning of this month to plant the cucum- 
ber or melon plants upon, which were sown the latter end of January, 
or any time in February; make the beds very substantial, fully 
three feet and a half or four feet high, having the dung previously 
prepared, as directed in January, page 13, which will prevent a 
violent heat taking place after its being made; let the cucumber or 
melon plants be planted therein, and managed as directed in that 
month and in February. 

There are many gardeners and others who cannot conveniently 
procure dung to begin to make hot-beds for cucumbers or melons 
at an early season. Where that is the case, it is not too late to 
begin now; and a hot-bed may be made the beginning or any time 
of the month, and the seeds of cucumbers and melons sown therein; 
the cucumbers from this sowing will be fit to cut towards the end 
of April, be in full bearing the beginning of May, and will continue 
fruiting a long time. The melons will come to perfection in June 
and July. 

Cucumbers and Melons for Bell or Hand-glasses. 
About the eighteenth or twentieth, or any time towards the end 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 183 

of this month, is the time to begin to sow the cucumbers and melons 
which are to be planted under hand or bell-glasses. 

They may be sown in any of the cucumber hot-beds now at 
work; or if not convenient, or there are no such beds made, make 
a hot-bed for that purpose, for a one, two or three light frame, 
according to the quantity of plants required; sow the seed, and 
manage the beds as directed in the two former months. The plants 
will be ready for ridging out by the middle or towards the end of 
next month; the cucumbers will be in bearing the latter end of May, 
and the melons in July. 

Cauliflowers. 

Where cauliflower plants were raised from seeds sown last 
month, they should as soon in this as they have arrived to the height 
of three or four inches, be pricked into a new slight hot-bed made 
for that purpose, at the distance of three inches every way, and 
managed as directed in February, page 125. 

By pricking out the plants on a little bottom heat, it will forward 
them considerably, and by thus transplanting, they will become 
strong and well furnished with roots, and consequently will succeed 
much better when planted out than if suflered to remain in the 
seed bed. 

The autumn sown plants, and those which you had transplanted 
last month, from the January sowing, must now have plenty of air, 
and this in proportion as the season advances, and the weather 
grows warm, in order to harden them for bearing the open air, when 
planted out where intended for flowering, which cannot be done 
with safety in the middle states before the last week in this month, 
or rather the first in April; nor in the eastern states before the 
second week or middle of that month, unless you have hand-glasses 
to cover them, in which case they may be planted out any time that 
the ground is in good condition, after the middle of March. 

The latter method I would recommend, provided the plants are 
large, the spring early, and that you have the convenience of hand- 
glasses, but not otherwise. 

Though at this early period the ground best adapted for produc- 
ing good cauliflowers is not always in a proper state for cultiva- 
tion, which ought to be a principal consideration, either in the 
planting or sowing of any crops whatever, and never departed from, 
should the season prove ever so late. 

Cauliflower seed may be sown the beginning of this month, as 
directed in January, page 20, which, if well attended to and judi- 
diciously managed, and the great summer heats should not set 
in at an early period, will head tolerably well; but if these cir- 
cumstances do not follow, a great number of them will not flower 
before late in autumn, and some not even then; such of these as do 
not flower before the setting in of the winter frosts, are to be treated 
as directed in the Kitchen garden for November, by which treat- 
ment they will produce tolerable good heads, and at a very accept- 
able period. 



184 *^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. (March. 

You must be very particular during this month, especially when 
the weather gets warm, to give your cauliflower plants plenty of 
air, otherwise they will draw up weakly, and be good for nothings 
but at the same time, do not let them be chilled, nor their vegetation 
checked, by exposing them too much in cold weather, or neglecting 
to cover them carefully at night; expose them fully to the air every 
mild and warm day, but not when the wind is sharp or cutting, and 
raise the glasses behind in more unfavourable weather. 

On the judicious treatment given to these plants during this 
month depends, in a great measure, their future success; therefore 
due and constant attention should be paid to them, agreeably to the 
rules already laid down. 

As the beginning or early part of next month will be the princi- 
pal period for planting out cauliflowers in the middle and eastern 
states, I am induced to defer the instructions for performing that 
part of the business till April; observing, however, that in every 
part of the Union it should be done as early in spring as the ground 
gets warm and into a good state of vegetation, not before; for, 
when that is not the case, the plants very frequently get chilled and 
stunted by the coldness of the earth and air, and seldom afterwards 
produce good heads. 

You may sow some cauliflower seed on a warm border towards 
the latter end of the month, to produce their flowers or heads in 
October, &c. 

Cabbage Plants. 

During the early part of this month the cabbage plants, which are 
in a considerable state of forwardness, must be well inured to the 
open air, the better to prepare them for planting out as soon after 
the middle of the month as the weather will permit. Those pro- 
duced from later sowings in hot-beds will, to do them justice, re- 
quire the same management as directed for cauliflower plants. 

Planting and Sowing Cabbages. 

As early in this month as you find the weather sufficiently 
favourable, which, in the middle states, is generally so about the 
fifteenth or twentieth, transplant cabbage plants of all kinds, par- 
ticularly the early sorts, where they are to remain for heading; 
this, in warm situations and dry ground, may be done at an earlier 
period, according to circumstances. 

Let them be planted in good ground enriched with dung, at two 
feet and a half distance for the early York, sugar-loaf, and other 
early kinds; but the large late cabbage plants should be set a yard 
asunder. 

The above distances are to be understood of such plants as are to 
remain to grow to their full size; but such of the forward kinds as 
are to be cut while young, may be planted closer; eighteen inches 
to two feet will be suflicient. 

Plant out also a general crop of red cabbage plants, to head in 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 1§5 

August, &c. and allow them three feet every way, plant from 
plant. 

Sow seeds of every kind of cabbage which you wish to cultivate; 
these may be sown in the open ground about the middle, or as early 
in the month as the weather permits. The early as well as the late 
kinds should be sown now, in order to have a regular succession, or 
as substitutes in default of early plants, or for a general summer 
crop. The early Symrna, early York, Battersea, and sugar-loaf, 
are best adapted for this purpose; the last kind, though not quite 
so early as the others, has a particular advantage over them, in 
not being liable to burst so soon after having arrived at perfec- 
tion, and consequently may be kept a long time, either for use or 
market. 

Sow also a full crop of the large flat Dutch, drum-head, large 
English, Savoy, and red pickling cabbages; the plants from this 
sowing will produce larger and better heads than if sown later. 

Should the season prove favourable, by which you can get these 
seeds sown early in the month, it will be very proper to sow some 
more of each kind, about the end, for succession plants. 

Some people never think of sowing Savoys till late in spring; 
this is a great mistake, for the early sown plants will always pro- 
duce larger and better cabbage heads than the late. 

In sowing the different sorts of cabbage-seeds, never let them be 
sown under the shade of trees, hedges, very high fences or build- 
ings; for in such situations the plants are drawn up weak and long 
shanked, and are more liable to be destroyed by vermin than in 
open exposures. 

Sowing Peas. 

As early in this month as possible sow a full crop of peas; the 
kinds most proper for this sowing are the early-frame and early 
golden and Charleton hot spurs; sow also, at the same time, some 
of the glory of England, large marrowfat, white rouncival, Spanish 
morrotto, or large imperial kinds; these, or any of the late sorts, 
being now sown will regularly succeed the early crops. 

Sow peas from this forward once a fortnight or three weeks, to 
keep up a regular supply for the table young and in good condition. 
Or it will be a good rule when the plants of a former sowing are up, 
to sow another crop of the same sort for succession. 

All the sorts of peas, except those which are intended for the first 
or early crops, which may be sown on south or warm borders, should 
be sowed in open situations, and by no means near low or spreading 
trees. 

At this season, and from hence forward, let the early kinds be 
planted in drills three feet and a half asunder; the larger growing 
sorts four feet, and the largest, such as the marrowfat, green, 
white, and grey rouncivals, &c. five feet, giving them rods or sticks, 
in proportion to their respective growths, by which means you will 
be certain of abundant crops. 

It will not be advisable to sow any of the above kinds while the 
Z ^ 



186 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

ground is tough and wet, always observing to have your ground in 
good working condition before you sow these or any other crops; 
for, if otherwise, they cannot receive much benefit, but may consi- 
derable injury; observing, at the same time, that peas do not thrive 
in a heavy or clay soil. 

The depth of covering which they require, is from one to two 
inches, according as the ground may be either of a light or heavy 
nature, or in a dry or wet state at the time of sowing. 

Earthing and Sticking Peas. 

Towards the latter end of the month, the early sown peas will be 
advancing in growth, and must have earth drawn to their stems as 
they progress, which will greatly strengthen them and encourage 
their growth. 

As to sticking peas, alway be careful to have this done when thej 
are about six inches high; for, if they fall to one side or the other, 
they with difficulty can recover their erect posture; and if they are 
double sticked the better; that is, place a range of sticks on the one 
side, all in a regular declining manner, and another on the other 
side of the row declining in an opposite direction to the former, by 
which, none can fall out on either side. I cannot too much impress 
the necessity of rodding well; for on this, in great measure, de- 
pends the abundance of your crops. 

Planting the large Windsor Beans, and other varieties of the 
same species. 

As early in this month as possible plant a full crop of Windsor 
beans, and also of any of the other varieties which you esteem; the 
Mazagan and Lisbon are the earliest, the white blossom bean is very 
delicious, and boils much greener than any other kind; but the 
green Genoa bears the heat of our climates better than either of the 
others, and therefore is the most suitable for late crops. The 
long-podded bean is very good, and bears well; but the Windsor, 
Sandwich, Toker, and broad Spanish kinds, on account of their 
great size and sweetness are more esteemed for blanching than 
any other. The dwarf-cluster bean is a great bearer, never grows 
above a foot or fourteen inches high, and may be planted in rows 
either in beds or borders; the rows to be about two feet asunder; 
and as this kind branches out considerably from the root, the beans 
must be planted in single rows, and six inches distant from one 
another. 

I have again to remark that it is from the early planted of these 
kinds, that much produce may be expected; for when overtaken bj 
the summer heat, whilst in blossom, these drop oft* prematurely; 
consequently the crops are poor and scanty. 

Continue planting these kinds once every ten days till the end of 
this month or beginning of next; and as the early crops advance, 
draw some earth up to their stems, as directed for peas. 

When beans are desired at as early a period as possible, you may 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. J §7 

force some of the early Mazagan kind, in any of your forcing depart- 
ments, observing, when the plants are in full blossom, to nip off 
their tops, which will cause their fruit to set and ripen sooner than 
if left to take their natural course. 

Or you may, about the beginning of the month, plant a quantity 
of them close together in a hot-bed, to be defended with a frame and 
glasses, or with mats, &c., and when thus forwarded for two or three 
weeks, plant them into the open groundj observing to give them 
plenty of air whilst in the hot-bed, and when they have one or two 
inches growth therein, to plant them into some warm border, in 
rows two feet and a half or a yard asunder. 

For further particulars, and the method of planting all the kinds, 
see February, page 134. 

Sowing and transplanting Lettuces. 

As early in this month as possible, prepare a warm south border, 
and sow thereon, very thick, some of the early curled and grand 
admiral lettuces; also some of the common cabbage lettuce, in 
order to have it fit for cutting, with other small sallading, at an 
early period, and to succeed such as you have forwarded in frames; 
let the ground be dry and light, and the seed either raked in or 
covered very slightly. 

Towards the middle of the month, if the weather be mild and 
settled, you may sow in borders, beds, or any open compartments 
of ground, ditferent sorts of lettuce-seed, such as the white, green, 
spotted, and Egyptian cos, grand admiral, white Silicia, India ten- 
nis-ball, New-Zealand, Mogul, white and brown Dutch, &c., these 
are all most excellent sorts for this sowing, where variety of supe- 
rior kinds are wanted. 

Every two weeks it will be necessary to sow other successional 
crops, so as to have a regular and constant supply either for market 
or family use. 

The different sorts should generally be sown separate, and in 
digging the ground, let the earth be well pulverized. Sow the seed 
on the surface, and rake them in lightly, taking care not to draw 
the earth in heaps. 

Or some of the cos kinds particularly, may be sown thinly among 
the crops of carrots, parsneps, leeks, &c.; some for transplanting, 
and others to remain for full growth. 

In sowing lettuce it is of much importance to have good sorts, 
and such as will not run to seed before they attain full growth; 
these are not commonly to be met with, and are worth procuring. 

As soon in this month as the weather gets mild and tolerably 
warm, transplant some of the lettuce plants from the beds or bor- 
ders, where they have stood all winter, provided they stand too 
ctose. In doing this, observe to draw the plants out regularly, and 
let the strongest remain for heading at about ten inches distance: 
then loosen the surtace of the earth between them, and clear away 
all decayed leaves and litter; after which, add a little fresh earth, 



188 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

which will give the plants new vigour, and considerably enlarge 
their growth. 

Previously to planting out into the open borders any plants 
raised in hot-beds from the early spring sowings, you must be very 
particular to inure them to the open air, so that when transplanted, 
they may not receive a great check by too sudden a transition. 

It will be of considerable service to these plants, when trans- 
planted into the borders at this season, to cover them at night with 
mats or other light coverings, which are to be taken ofi' early in the 
morning. 

Should it happen that you have no lettuce plants in a state of 
forwardness for early sallading, some may be now sown in a hot-bed, 
to forward for that purpose. 

Radishes. 

Sow more seed to raise a supply of radishes to succeed those 
sown last month. 

There should be some both of the salmon and short-top kinds 
sown at three different times this monthj that is, at the beginning, 
middle, and latter end, by which means there will be a due suc- 
cession of young radishes for the table. Let this seed be sown now 
in an open compartment, observing the same method as in February, 
page 130. 

Thin the early crops of radishes where the plants stand too closej 
pull up the worst and leave the others about two inches apartj clear 
them from weeds of all kinds, and as they advance in growth thin 
them by degrees by drawing them for the table. 

In dry open weather, let the early crops in frames, &c., be mode- 
rately watered at intervals, to forward them in a free swelling 
state, as well as to render them mild and crisp for eating. 

A thin sprinkling of radish-seed may be sown among other gene- 
ral crops at this season, which will grow freely, and being detach- 
ed, will form fine large crisp roots. 

Turnip-rooted Radishes. 

Now sow some turnip-rooted radish; there are two sorts, the 
white and the red, but the former is preferable to sow for the gene- 
ral supply: it grows like a young Dutch turnip, is very mild, 
agreeable to eat, and of early perfection. 

Let the seed of both sorts be sown separately in an open space 
of light ground, and rake them in evenly. 

When the plants have the first central rough leaves half an inch 
broad, thin them to about two inches apart. , 

Sowing Spinage. » 

Sow spinage every fortnight or three weeks to have a regular 
supply; for the plants of one sowing, in spring and summer, will 
not continue fit for use longer than that time before they run to 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 189 

seed. Let the seed be of the round-leaved or smooth-seeded kind; 
that being the most proper sort to sow at this season, its leaves 
being considerably thicker and larger than the pricklj-seeded 
spinage. 

This seed should be sown thinly either in beds or borders, and 
generally broad cast, in which method you may sow therewith a 
little radish-seed^ when the seed is sown in light dry ground, tread 
it over lightly, and then rake it in regularly, or you may sow it in 
drills a foot asunder, and about half an inch deep. 

Let it be observed, that spinage should not, at this season, be 
sown where the ground is much shaded with trees or bushesj for 
in such situations, the plants would be drawn up to seed before 
they arrive to half their growth. 

Hoe or hand-weed the early crops of spinage, thinning the plants 
at the same time, but particularly those sown broad cast, to three, 
four, or five inches distance. 

The crop of winter spinage, which was sown last autumn, will, 
towards the end of the month, be advancing in good perfection for 
use, and should be kept clear from weeds, and the earth between 
the plants stirred with a hoe; and in gathering the plants for use, 
if they stand close, should thin them out clean by the roots; but if 
they already stand at wide distance, only crop the large outer 
leaves as wanted, till they begin to run, then cut them clean up to 
the bottom. 

Carrots and Parsneps. 

Any time after the middle of this month that the ground is in 
good condition, you may sow carrots and parsneps for a full crop, 
particularly the latter; and also, a sufficient early crop of the 
former. 

A spot of light deem loam, inclining a little to sand, and in an 
open situation, should be chosen for these crops; for their roots 
will thrive best and grow largest in such. 

The ground should be trenched one good spade deep at least, 
observing in the digging to take but thin spits, and to break all the 
lumps, that the roots may have full liberty to run down long and 
straight; for if the earth is not well divided and separated, the 
roots are apt to grow both short and forked. Rake the ground well 
after you, as you proceed in the digging. 

Then form the ground into four feet wide beds, push the earth 
oft" the surface with the back of the rake, half an inch deep, or bet- 
ter, into the alleys; sow the seed evenly over the beds, and with a 
spade or shovel cast the loose earth from the alleys over them, 
about half an inch deep; after which, rake the surface lightly, and 
the work is finished. 

Previous to sowing carrot-seed, you should rub it well between 
your hands, mixed with some dry sand, to cause it to separate freely. 

Or these seeds may be sown thin in drills, distant from each 
other from eight to ten inches; when they are about three inches 



190 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

high, thin the parsneps to four and the carrots to three inches, plant 
from plant, in the rows. 

Some people sow the seeds broad cast in beds, tread them in, and 
then rake the ground; but this method should never be practised 
where the soil is stifi", inclinable to wet, or apt to bind. You may 
sow with these crops a few radish and lettuce seeds; of the latter 
any of the cos kinds are most suitable for this purpose, they not 
being subject to spread like the heading sorts. 

Small Salading. 

Small salading, such as cresses, mustard, radish, rape, and turnip, 
&c. should, when a constant supply is wanted, be sown once a week 
or fortnight, in a warm border, observing to draw some flat shallow 
drills three inches asunder; sow the seeds therein, each sort sepa- 
rate, and cover them lightly with fine earth. 

For the particular method of sowing and treating these seeds, 
see the work of last month, page 125. 

If these young herbs, or any other of your early advancing crops, 
such as peas, beans, &c. are attacked with a hoar frost appearing 
on them in the morning, and a sunny day is likely to follow, let 
them be watered before the sun shines on them with spring or 
pump water, to wash and melt it oft', which will prevent their turn- 
ing black and spoiling. 

Celery. 

If celery was not sown last month, let some seed be sown the 
beginning of this, to plant out in May, &c. for an early crop; sow 
some more of the same seed about the middle, or towards the latter 
end, for a succession crop. The seed should be sown in a bed or 
border of mellow rich earth, sowing it on the surface moderately 
thick, and cover it in lightly with fine mould not more than a 
quarter of an inch; or you may rake it in with a light and even 
hand. Water the bed frequently in dry weather. 

Let it be observed that there are two sorts of celery; one known 
by the name of Italian or upright celery; the other called celeriac, 
or turnip-rooted celery. The first is that which is commonly cul- 
tivated for the general crops, and of which there are several varie- 
ties, viz: common upright celery with hollow stalks, solid-stalked 
celery, red-stalked solid celery, &c., either of which being raised 
from "seed sown as above, is afterwards planted in trenches for 
blanching their stalks, which are the principal useful parts; but the 
celeriac is generally cultivated for its swelling bottom part; and 
being planted either on level ground, or in shallow drills, the roots 
of it swell like a turnip. See April, May, June, &c. 

Broccoli. 

Sow broccoli for early crops, &c. to come in for use in October, 
November, and December, Sic. 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 19J[ 

Choose seed of the early purple, and some of the cauliflower 
broccoli^ sow a little of each kind about the middle or latter end of 
the month in an open bed of rich earth, and rake them in: when the 
plants come up, manage them as directed in May, June, and July. 

Sowing Borecole, or curled Kale. 

Towards the end of this month you may sow a first crop of bore- 
cole for autumn service. 

There are two principal sorts, the green and the brown ^ both 
very hardy plants, with tall stems, and full heads of thick fimbriate 
curled leaves, not cabbaging, and are desirable open greens for 
winter, &c. 

Let this seed be sown in an open exposure, distant from trees 
and close fences, as in such situations they are apt to draw up too 
fast, with long weak stalks; sow it broad-cast, and rake it in evenly. 
For other particulars, see the succeeding months. 

Borecole is extremely valuable for winter and spring greens, 
where the winter frost is not too powerful for it, particularly in all 
the southern states: it is the most hardy of the cabbage tribe, and 
in mild winters will stand tolerably well in the middle states. In 
the eastern states it will require to be taken up before the winter 
frosts set in with much severity, planted in trenches up to the 
leaves, and covered occasionally with straw or other light covering; 
the heads may be cut oft" as wanted, and in spring the stems, if 
taken up and planted out, will produce an abundance of most deli- 
cious sprouts. 

Of forking and dressing the Asparagus Beds. 

This work should be begun about the latter end of the month: 
for the purpose of digging or forking these beds you should be 
provided with a proper fork, having three short tines, six to eight 
or nine inches long, perfectly flat, about an inch broad, and the 
ends of them rounded and blunt; however, in want of such, it may 
be performed with a small, short-pronged common dung-fork. 

In forking the beds be careful to loosen every part to a moderate 
depth, but taking great care not to go too deep to wound the crowns 
of the roots. 

The above work of forking these beds is most necessary to be 
done every spring to improve and loosen the ground, and to give 
free liberty for the buds to shoot up; also to give easy access to the 
sun, air, and showers of rain. 

The beds being forked, they must afterwards be raked even; 
observing, if you do not rake them immediately after they are 
forked, to defer it no longer than the first week in April, for by 
that time the buds will begin to advance. 

Before raking the above beds you may scatter thereon a few 
radish and lettuce seeds to pull up while young. 

As to the method of gathering or cutting asparagus when ad- 
»vanced to a proper growth for the table, it is generally most 



192 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

eligible to be furnished with an asparagus knife, having a straight, 
narrow, tapering blade, about six or eight inches long, and about an 
inch broad at the haft, narrovving to about half an inch at the point, 
which should be rounded off from the back.: observing, when the 
shoots are from about two to three or four inches high, they should 
be then cut, slipping the knife down perpendicularly, close to each 
shoot, and cut it off slantingly about three or four inches within the 
ground, taking care not to wound any young buds coming up from 
the same root, for there are always several shoots advancing there- 
from in different stages of growth. 

Planting Asparagus. 

New plantations of asparagus may now be made, this being the 
proper season to remove these plants^ it may be done any time in 
this month, when the weather is mild. 

In making plantations of these plants, one great article to be 
considered, is to make choice of a proper soil; choose the best the 
garden affords; it must not be wet nor too strong or stubborn, but 
such as is moderately light and pliable, so as it will readily fall to 
pieces in digging or raking, &c. and in a situation that enjoys the 
full sun. 

The ground where you intend to make new asparagus beds, 
should have a large supply of rotten or other good dung laid thereon 
several inches thick, and then regularly trenched two spades deep, 
and the dung buried equally in each trench, twelve or fifteen inches 
below the surface. 

When this trenching is done, lay on two or three inches of very 
short well-rotted manure all over the surface, and dig the ground 
over again eight or ten inches deep, mixing this top dressing, and 
incorporating it well with the earth. 

The ground being thus prepared and laid level, divide it into 
beds four feet and a half wide, with alleys two feet wide between 
each bed. 

At each corner of every bed, let a firm stake be driven into the 
ground, to serve as a mark for the alleys. 

Four rows of asparagus are to be planted in each bed, and ten or 
twelve inches distance to be allowed between plant and plant in the 
row, and let the outside rows of each bed be eight inches from the 
edge. 

Next, let it be observed that the plants for this plantation must 
not be more than two years old; but most good gardeners prefer 
those that are only one, which are what I would recommend and 
choose to plant, as from experience I have found they generally 
take root much freer, and succeed everyway better than the former. 

The following is the method of planting them: 

Strain your line along the bed eight inches from the edge, then 
with a spade cut out a small trench or drill close to the line, about 
six inches deep, making that side next the line nearly upright, and 
when one trench is opened, plant that before you open another, 
placing the plants upright ten or twelve inches distant in the row. 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. I93 

In planting these plants, observe that they must not be placed 
flat in the bottom of the trench, but nearly upright against the back 
of the trench or drill, and so that the crown of the plants may also 
stand upright, and two or three inches below the surface of the 
ground J let them be all placed an equal depth, spreading their roots 
somewhat regular, against the back, of the trench, and at the same 
time drawing a little earth up against them with the hand as you 
place them, just to fix the plants in their due position, till the row 
is planted; when one row is thus finished, immediately with a rake 
di*aw the earth into a drill over the plants, and then proceed to 
open another drill or trench, as before directed: plant it in the 
same manner, and cover in the plants as above, and so on till the 
whole is planted, then let the surface of the beds be raked smooth, 
and cleared from stones. 

When the plants come up, keep them always free from weeds; 
but in the mean time, be cautious not to sow any early crops what- 
ever among your young plantations, as is very injudiciously prac- 
tised by many, for these would smother them in their growth, and 
greatly retard their progress. 

Let it next be observed that it will be three years from the time 
of planting before the asparagus plants produce buds large enough 
to cut for use in any general gathering; though sometimes in rich, 
good ground, and a remarkably prosperous growth in the plants 
in the production of strong shoots, a few of the largest may be cut 
the second spring after planting, but I would advise not to cut 
many before the third year. 

A plantation of asparagus, if the beds are properly dressed every 
year, as directed in the spring and autumn months, will continue 
to produce good buds for ten or twelve years or more. 

In making new plantations, I have sometimes, instead of putting 
in young plants as above directed, sown the seed at once in the 
beds where the plants are to remain; and, as by that practice the 
plants are not disturbed by a removal, they consequently cannot 
fail of producing a regular crop. 

The beds being four feet and a half wide, and prepared as before 
directed for the plants, mark out four lines lengthways the beds; 
then along these lines, at the distance of every nine or ten inches, 
dot in a few seeds, covering them about an inch deep. When the 
plants have been come up some time, they must be thinned, leaving 
only one of the strongest in each place, and carefully clear them 
from weeds. 

A plantation of asparagus thus raised, will produce buds tit to 
cut the third spring after sowing, but will be very large and fine 
the fourth year. 

For forcing asparagus, see February page 121. 

Sowing Asparagus Seed. 

This seed may be sown aboukthe middle, or towards the latter 
end of the month, on four feet wide beds of rich earth. Sow it 
2 A 



194 "^H^ KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

tolerably thin on the surface, clap it in with the back, of a spade, 
cover it a little better than half an inch deep with earth out of the 
alleys, and then rake the beds smooth. 

Or it may be sown thinly in drills, six inches asunder, and cover- 
ed the same depth as above; give the beds, both before and after 
the plants are up, occasional waterings to strengthen them and for- 
ward their growth; and they must be kept very free from weeds, 
by a careful hand-weeding at different times during the summer. 

When a quantity of asparagus for forcing is annually required 
you must act as directed in February, page 123. 

Sowing Beet Seed. 

You may now sow some of the different sorts of beet; the red 
for its large root, and the green and white sorts for tlieir leaves in 
soups, stewing, &c. 

For this purpose make choice of a piece of rich deep ground; lay 
it out into four feet wide beds, push the loose earth into the alleys, 
then sow the seed tolerably thin and cover it with the earth out of 
these alleys to about three-quarters of an inch deep. Or let drills 
be drawn with a hoe, near an inch deep, and a foot or a little more 
asunder; drop the seeds thinly therein and cover them over the 
same depth as above. Or you may sow the seed on a piece of 
ground, rough after being dug, and rake it well in. 

Likewise you maynowsowthe Mangel Wurtzel, root of scarcity, 
or great German beet, for its large leaves to boil as spinage, its thick 
fleshy leaf-stalks to dress as asparagus, and its roots for boiling be- 
fore they become of a very large size. The leaves and roots are 
excellent food for cattle; producing, during summer, an uncommon 
abundance of foliage; the outside leaves, for thi? purpose, may be 
stripped oft" every eight days during the season. 

' Sowing Onion Seed. 

In ordei- to have onions in good perfection the first year from 
seed, which can certainly be effected in the middle, but more par- 
ticularly in the eastern states, you must be careful to fix upon a 
suitable soil, which is a strong, light, rich loam; always avoiding 
that which is subject to become parched or bound up by heat and 
drought; or that, in consequence of too large a proportion of sand, 
is likely to become violently hot in summer, for this is extremely 
injurious to those plants by causing them to come to an untimely 
maturity, manifested by the extraordinary perfection that onions 
arrive to in the moderate climates of Europe, where they have not 
to encounter a violent summer heat. 

If this ground had been strongly manured in November, and 
then thrown up into high sloping ridges, it would be much improved 
and meliorated by the frost, &c. and could now be easily and expe- 
ditiously levelled for sowing. 

When this is not the case you may now give such ground a good 
coat of well-rotted cow dung, or other good rotten manure, and dig 



March] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. J95 

it a full spade deep, incorporating the dung therewith and pulver- 
izing the earth as you proceed in the digging; this should not be 
attempted till the ground is sufficiently dry to pulverize well and 
fall to pieces under the rake; but the earlier you can get it in this 
state, and the seed sown, the larger and better onions will you 
have. 

There are various methods of sowing the seed; but first I will 
give you the one practised by the most judicious and careful gar- 
deners. 

As you proceed in digging the ground rake it well after you; 
that being done lay it out into three and a half, or four feet wide 
beds, with alleys between of about afoot wide; then with the back 
of a rake push oft' the light loose earth from the top of each bed into 
the alleys, one half to the one side, the other to the opposite; this 
done, and being provided with good seed, sow it thereon at the rate 
of one pound for every sixteen rods, and with a shovel east the 
earth out of the alleys over the beds, covering the seeds evenly 
about half an inch deep; then rake the beds lightly, drawing off all 
the lumps into the alleys. 

When the plants are up let them be kept very clean and free 
from weeds of any kind by a good careful hand-weeding, which is 
to be repeated, from time to time, as they require it; and where 
they grow too close thin them to about two inches, plant from plant, 
all over the beds; by these means you will have excellent onions 
for the table the first year. 

Others dig the ground, levelling the surface evenly after them as 
they proceed in digging without raking it, and lay it out in beds as 
before; then sow the seed thereon and rake it in; and if the earth 
is light and dry they frequently tread it in with the feet before 
raking. Or the beds may be prepared, as in the first instance, and 
the seeds sown very thinly in drills, either of which methods will 
do very well. 

But when they are raised upon an extensive scale the ground 
may be cultivated by the plough, and when harrowed very fine the 
seed may be sown in drills at any convenient distance, and the in- 
tervals between them kept clean by hoeing; the remainder must be 
carefully hand -wed. 

Sowing seed, to produce small seed onions, will answer better in 
^pril, which see. If sown in this month they would generally 
grow to too large a size for that purpose. 

Of the several varieties of onion the Strasburg is the best for a 
general crop; it is a handsome bulb, generally assuming a roundish 
oval shape, is of firm growth, and keeps well for winter service. 

The white Spanish and silver skinned onions are of a milder 
taste, but all the varieties generally turn out very profitable crops; 
the latter kinds rarely keep so well after January as the Strasburg. 

The Portugal and Madeira onions are extremely fine; but they 
rarely attain with us as large a size as in these countries. 

The red Spanish onion is highly esteemed for pickling on account 
of its deep blood-red colour, and much cultivated for that purpose: 



X96 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

it may also be used for any other purpose as well as the former 
kinds. 

Sowing Leeks. 

Leek seed may be sown, and treated in every respect for the 
present as directed for onion seed. 

Planting Seed Onions. 

By seed onions is meant the small bulbs produced from seed sown 
last season, which should be planted out as early in spring as it is 
possible to get the ground in a good state for tillage; the southern 
states in particular have to depend on such for a general crop, as 
the summer heat is too powerful in these, and indeed in the middle 
states, except the ground is peculiarly suitable for the bulbs arriv- 
ing at a sufficient size the first year from seed. 

Having prepared an open piece of strong ground, well dug and 
enriched with manure, you may proceed to plant these bulbs in 
rows, either by line and dibble, or by hoe; planting them not more 
than half an inch over the crowns: let the drills or rows be six 
inches asunder, and the onions three inches one from the other in 
the rows. 

But for expedition sake, especially when there are large quanti- 
ties to be planted, prepare an instrument, just in form of a com- 
mon hay-rake, having four round teeth or pegs, either of wood or 
iron, placed in the head, at the distance of six inches from each 
other, four inches long, and near an inch in diameter, close to the 
head, tapering to a blunt point: this being in readiness, proceed to 
mark out your ground into two feet wide beds, leaving a tv/elve inch 
alley between each; then pull this rake along each bed from one 
end to the other, pressing it down as you proceed, by which it v/ill 
make four regular drills in each, for the reception of the small 
onions, which you are to plant by hand in these drills, at the dis- 
tance above mentioned, and just so deep as that you can cover the 
crowns, by drawing a little earth over them with the hand as you 
proceed. 

By the same method you may plant these onions in beds of any 
dimensions you please, either lengthwise or across the beds. 

The .Allium canadense, or tree onion, merits culture both as a 
curiosity in producing the onions at the top of the stalk, as. well as 
for their value in domestic use, particularly for pickling, in which 
they are excellent, and superior in flavour to the common kinds; 
they may also be used for any other purposes that onions are. 

It is perennial, and propagated by planting the bulbs in spring 
or autumn, either the root-bulbs, or those produced on the top of 
the stalks; the latter if planted in spring as directed for the other 
kinds will produce very fine, handsome sized onions of excellent 
flavour. 

The root-bulbs increase greatly by offsets, and should be taken 
up once in every two or three years, when the stems decay in 
autumn, and replanted again to produce a supply of top-bulbs. 



MAftcH.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 197 

Garlick, Rocambole, and Shallots. 

Prepare some beds of good ground, four feet wide, in which to 
plant garlick, rocambole, and shallots; of which procure some best 
bulbs or roots; divide the garlick and rocambole into cloves, and 
the shallots into off-sets, as they admit; plant them in rows, length- 
wise the beds, eight or nine inches asunder, by six inches distance 
in each row, and two or three inches deep. 

They may be planted either with a dibble or in drills drawn 
with a hoe. 

Cives^ or Chives. 

Gives, a small species of onion, growing in large tufts, are use- 
ful in a family in the spring, &c. as a substitute for young onions, 
both in sallads and culinary purposes; they are propagated by slip- 
ping the roots, and this is a proper time to plant them; the method 
is to part or take off some slips from the old roots several small 
offsets together, and plant them in beds or borders about six to 
eight, or nine inches distance. 

In slipping or parting the above roots, observe to preserve eight, 
ten, or more of the small bulbs together in a cluster, and in that 
manner to plant them. 

They are to be planted with a dibble or trowel, making holes for 
them at the distance above mentioned, putting one cluster of roots, 
as above, in each hole, and closing the earth well about them. 
They will soon take root, and increase very fast into large bunches, 
of many years duration. 

Turnips. 

Sow turnips for a first early crop, about the middle, or towards 
the latter end of this month, in an open situation, and where the 
ground is light. 

The proper sort to sow now is principally the early Dutch tur- 
nip, it being the best sort to sow at this season in gardens, but 
especially for the first and second crops, or also occasionally for 
general summer crops, in garden culture. 

Scorzonera and Salsafy. 

The latter end of this month you may sow scorzonera and sal- 
safy; these plants are in some families much esteemed for their 
roots, which are the only parts that are eaten, except the salsafy, 
as explained below. 

The roots run pretty deep in the ground, in the manner of car- 
rots and parsneps, and are boiled or stewed, and eaten either alone 
or with flesh-meat, like young carrots, &c. 

But the salsafy is estimable both for its roots as above, and for 
the young shoots rising in the spring from the year-old plants, 
being gathered while green and tender, are good to boil and eat in 
the manner of asparagus. 



X98 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

Dig one or more beds for each of the above, in an open situation. 
Sow the seed either in shallow drills, six inches distant, and earthed 
over half an inch, or sow on the surface, covered from the alleys, 
and the beds then raked; they are all to remain where sown, and 
the plants thinned in May to from four to six inches distant. 

Large rooted Parsley. 

Sow the seeds of Hamburg, or large rooted parsley; this is cul- 
tivated for its large parsnep-like root: let the seeds be sown in an 
open situation, either in shallow drills, or on the surface, and raked 
in evenly; when the plants are two or three inches in growth, they 
must be thinned to six inches distant, that the roots may have 
room to swell. 

Skirrets. 

Skirret seed may be sown tolerably thin, on beds of good earth 
and raked in, or they may be propagated by parting their roots, and 
planting them at six or eight inches distant. The fleshy tubers 
of these roots are considered very delicious. 

Sowing Parsley. 

Parsley seed may be sown in a single drill along the edge of the 
quarters or borders of the garden; it will make a useful and also a 
neat edging, if not suttered to grow rank, especially the curled 
parsley; or if large supplies are wanted for market, it may be sown 
in continued rows nine inches asunder, or upon the general surface, 
trod down and raked in. 

Sowing Chervil and Coriander. 

Sow chervil and coriander for soups and salads, &c. ; draw shal- 
low drills for these seeds eight or nine inches asunder: sow each 
sort separate, and cover them about half an inch deep with earth. 

These herbs are all to remain where sown, and the chief culture 
they require is to be kept clear from weeds; but as the plants soon 
run up for seed, you should sow a small portion every month. 

Crambe Maritima, or Sea Kale. 

The Cramhe maritima, or Sea Kale, being yet very little known 
in the United States, though a most excellent garden vegetable, 
and highly deserving of cultivation, it may be of importance to the 
community to give some account of this plant, and the most ap- 
proved methods of cultivating it. 

This plant is found growing spontaneously, though locally, on 
the sea shore of the southern parts of England, as well as in simi- 
lar places in many other parts of Europe. 

It is of the same natural class as the cabbage, but differs from it 
and most of the Tetradynamus plants of Linnaeus, in having a round 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. J 99 

seed vessel, containing one seed only^ its root is perennial, running 
to a great depth, growing to great thickness, and branching out 
widely, but not creeping: its lull grown leaves are large, equalling 
in siz,e, when the plant grows luxuriantly, those of the largest cab- 
bage, of a glaucous or sea-green hue, and vpaved at the edges, 
thick and succalent in their wild state, dying away and disappear- 
ing entirely at the approach of winter. Seedling plants when raised 
in spring, produce the first year radical leaves only; the second 
spring most of them throw up a flowering stem, a foot or more in 
height, which, expanding into numerous branches, forms a magnifi- 
cent head of white or cream-coloured flowers, having a honey-like 
fragrance; these, if the season proves favourable, are followed by 
abundance of seed. 

As an article of food, the Crambe maritima appears to be better 
known in England than in any other part of Europe; it is in that 
country only that its value is rightly appreciated, and its culture 
carefully attended to. 

On many parts of the sea coast of England, especially of Devon- 
shire, Dorsetshire, and Sussex, the inhabitants from time imme- 
morial have been in the practice of procuring it for their tables, 
preferring it to all other greens: they seek for the plant in the 
spring where it grows spontaneously, and as soon as it appears 
above ground, they remove the pebbles or sand with which it is 
usually covered to the depth of several inches, and cut off the 
young and tender leaves and stalks, as yet unexpanded and in a 
blanched state, close to the crown of the root; it is then in its 
greatest perfection: when the leaves are fully grown they become 
hard and bitter, and the plant is not eatable. 

The more curious, desirous of having it at hand and in their 
immediate possession, have now, in many parts of the maritime 
counties of England, introduced it into their gardens; and in Devon- 
shire particularly, there is scarcely a good garden to be found 
without a plantation of it for the use of the table. It is also culti- 
vated for sale in various parts of England, particularly Bath, 
Chichester, &c. 

It is to be observed that the Seal Kale is delicate eating only 
when youn^, and that it is highly improved by being blanched: in 
the cultivation of this plant it becomes necessary to blanch it before 
it is fit for the table; to eftect this it must be covered in some way 
or other before the flowering stem, which constitutes the chief 
eatable part, and its attendant leaves show the least sign of emerging 
from the crown of the root. 

Cultivators have differed widely respecting the mode of treating 
this plant; many conceiving that stones, or gravel, and sea sand, 
are essential to its growth, have gone to the expense of providing it 
with such, not aware that it will grow much more luxuriantly on a 
rich sandy loam, where the roots can penetrate to a great depth 
without reaching the water, in which, if they are immersed, they 
are apt to rot: the plant will succeed almost in any soil, provided 
it be dry: its luxuriance will depend chiefly on the manure with 
which the soil is enriched; but, of all others, a deep, rich, sandy 
loam, is its favourite soil. 



200 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

The most usual mode of raising the Sea Kale is from seed: it may 
also be raised from cuttings of the root, and that with the greatest 
certainty, but seedlings make the finest plants. Some find a difii- 
culty in making the seeds vegetatej this may be attributed to their 
being old, buried too deep in the earth, or sown too late in the 
spring: the most proper time for sowing the seed is in October, or 
as early in the spring as the ground can be got in a fit condition to 
receive them, and an inch is the proper depth to cover them; they 
rarely vegetate in less than six weeks after being sown, even in the 
most favourable season, and some will remain in the ground for 
twelve months before they vegetatej should the season prove dry, 
it will be necessary to water the ground where the seeds are sown, 
and the plants after they appear, frequently. 

It is the best practice to raise young plants immediately from 
seed on the bed where they are intended to remain; by this means 
the plants receive no check in their growth. When you have 
formed your bed, which should be raised somewhat above the level 
of the ground, being previously trenched very deep and enriched 
with the best rotten manure, make each bed wide enough to hold 
two rows of plants, the space between each plant in the row, four- 
teen inches, and between each row, a foot and a half; sow about 
six or eight seeds, as before directed, on each spot where your plant 
is intended to remain; this number is directed in order to guard 
against accidents, as every seed may not vegetate, or at least not 
the first season, which would be a losing year, besides some of those 
that do, may be destroyed by worms or insects; should all of them 
succeed they are easily reduced to a single plant; this reduction, 
however, need not be made too hastily: during summer your bed 
of course must be kept perfectly clean from weeds. If, for the sake 
of a more certain crop, you are disposed to make your plantation 
of the cuttings of the roots, you may take such as are about half an 
inch or a little more in diameter, and cut them into pieces of about 
two inches in length, burying each in an upright position about 
three inches under ground, in the same kind of bed and at the same 
distances as you would have sown the seeds; the middle or latter 
end of this month will be a proper season in the middle states for 
doing this, earlier in the southern states, and somewhat later in the 
eastern. 

Or if, for the sake of forwarding your plantation and gaining time, 
you make use of plants instead of seeds or cuttings, presuming 
that it is possible for you to procure them, they should be those of 
a year old, and taken up with due care out of the seed bed; trim 
ott" the extreme part of the root, and let each plant be planted in a 
perpendicular manner so deep as that its crown will be one inch 
under the surface; the period before mentioned for planting cut- 
tings will be the proper time for transplanting these; if their flow- 
ering stalks be cut for food the same season, it will weaken the 
plants considerably, and hence even in point of time there is little 
gained by using such; for most of the seedling plants in your bed, 
if they have been properly managed, as well as your plants from 
cuttings, will flower, and of course be fit to cut the second year. 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 201 

In November cover your beds with a thick coat of rotten dung 
or leaves; this, at the same time that it protects your plants from 
frost, will bring them more forward, and add to their luxuriance; 
about the middle of March, in the middle states, it will be necessary 
to cover your plants for blanching; the most ready mode of doing 
which, is to draw the earth up with a hoe over the crown of the 
root, so that each plant shall be covered to the depth of ten or 
twelve inches; some blanch it by heaping on it sea sand, some 
common sand and pebbles, and others with large garden pots in- 
verted, and placed immediately over the plants, stopping up the 
holes at the bottoms; this last is the neatest and cleanest mode. 

The finest or at least the largest Sea Kale, is that which is pro- 
duced from seedling plants the first year of their flowering, as the 
great produce of the plant then centres in one flowering stem; after- 
wards the crown of the root ramifying into many heads, a greater 
number of stalks are produced, which are more slender but not less 
delicate. 

When your plants have been covered in either method, three, 
four, or five weeks, according to the early or late period of cover- 
ing, examine them, and if you find that the stalks have shot up 
three or four inches, you may begin cutting; should you wait till 
all the shoots are of a considerable length, your crop will come in 
too much at once, for in this plant there is not that succession of 
growth which there is in asparagus; you may continue cutting till 
you see the head of flowers begin to form, and if at this time you 
uncover it entirely, and let it proceed to that state in which Brocoli 
is usually cut, and use it as such, you will find it an excellent sub- 
stitute; and this greatly enhances the value of the plant, as Brocoli 
does not stand our winter frost, and can only be had when care- 
fully protected as directed in November, but this plant is sufficient- 
ly hardy to bear our severest frost without much injury. You are 
not to weaken the roots too much by over cutting, for in that case 
you would injure their next year's bearing; they are to be indulged 
as you do asparagus with several uncut shoots to grow up during 
summer, to carry on a proper vegetation, to strengthen and enlarge 
the roots. 

Such as are partial to this plant may force it in any of the winter 
or early spring months, nothing more being necessary than to place 
over each plant a large garden pot, as in one of the modes of blanch- 
ing already recommended, and cover the pots with a sufficient quan- 
tity of hot horse-dung; the heat of the dung brings forward the 
plant, while the pot keeps it from coming in contact therewith; 
and as the growth of the plant is by this means greatly accelerated, 
it is of course rendered more tender as well as sweeter. 

These plants may also be forced in frames as directed in January 
and February for asparagus, observing to take up such plants for 
this purpose as are sure to flower; trimming their side roots and 
shortening their long tap-roots to the length of nine or ten inches, 
or twelve in very large plants, and placing them in a frame on a 
hot-bed, and in a suitable depth of earth, at the distance of four to 
six inches asunder; as the plants used thus, will be rendered of 
2B 



202 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

little or no value; where this practice is used, it will be necessary 
to have a regular succession of plants for the purpose. 

In cutting the plants for the table, care must be taken not to 
injure the crowns of the roots by cutting the shoots too close to 
them. 

The sooner this delicious esculent is dressed, after it is cut, the 
better. Twenty minutes boiling, in general, is sufficient to make 
it tender: this process is the more to be attended to, as the good- 
ness of the article greatly depends on it; that which is young, 
recently cut or forced, will be done in less time; when properly 
boiled it is to be served up in the manner of asparagus; it dresses 
well by stewing, and makes an excellent pickle. 

As an esculent vegetable it is found to be very wholesome, and 
most people who have tried it prefer it to asparagus, to which it is 
related, in point of flavour. 

When the crop is sufficiently cut, level the earth all over the beds, 
keep them free from large weeds during the remainder of the sea- 
son, and cover them in November, as before directed. 

This plant will grow extremely well in such soils as suits aspara- 
gus, having it prepared in the same manner as for that, and would 
be very profitable to cultivate for sale near cities and large towns. 

Spring dressing of Artichokes. 

As soon in this month, as the very severe frosts are over, any 
long light litter with which your artichokes are covered must be 
raked off into the trenches; and when you perceive the young shoots 
beginning to appear above ground, or rather one or two inches up, 
not before, proceed to levelling down the beds into the alleys or 
trenches, rounding them in a neat manner, then dig and loosen all 
the ground around the plants; at the same time examine the number 
of shoots arising on each stool or root, selecting three of the strong- 
est and healthiest looking on every stool to remain; all above that 
number are to be slipped otF close to the root with your hand, 
except you want such to make new plantations with; in which case, 
any extra number for that purpose are to remain on the mother 
plants until they are about eight or ten inches high from their roots 
or junction with the old plants, when they are to be slipjjed off and 
planted as hereafter directed, leaving only three of the best shoots 
on each crown as before, closing the earth in again about the crowns 
of the roots, and drawing it a little up to the remaining suckers. 
Observe that in every part of the Union this dressing is to be given 
when the plants are in the above described state, whether that 
happens in February, March, or April, occasioned by the difference 
of climate, or the earliness or lateness of the spring. 

Planting Artichokes. 

In making new plantations of artichokes, select for that purpose 
a piece of deep, rich sandy loam that is not subject to retain too 
much wet in winter, nor to be parched up with drought in summer. 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 203 

having a gentle slope sufficient to carry oft" any moisture that 
might lodge in the trenches between the rows; for that is much 
more destructive to their roots in winter than the most severe frost; 
when both these enemies attack the plants with their combined 
powers, they seldom fail to accomplish the work of destruction; 
but from the frosts there is not much to be apprehended if the 
plants lie dry. 

Having fixed upon a proper soil and situation, lay on it a good 
quantity of rotten dung, and trench the ground one good spade or 
eighteen inches deep, incorporating the manure well therewith, and 
pulverizing the ground effectually in the digging; then proceed to 
take of the slips mentioned before in the dressing of artichokes, 
slipping them oft" the mother stools with all the roots or fibres which 
they may have thrown out, rejecting such as appear unhealthy, and 
closing the earth up after you to the remaining shoots. These 
being provided, pull ofFany loose hanging leaves, and trim the fibres; 
then plant them with a dibble, about four or live inches deep, in 
rows five feet asunder, and two feet plant from plant in the row, 
leaving part of their green tops above ground, and the hearts of the 
plants free from any earth over them, and give each plant a little 
water to settle the earth about its roots. 

Or, if you have seedling year old plants in a seed bed, you may 
take them up, and after shortening their tap-roots a little and dress- 
ing their leaves, plant them as above. 

Such young plantations, if kept clear from weeds, and now and 
then watered in dry weather, will yield good artichokes the follow- 
ing autumn, but will produce larger fruit, and more abundantly 
next year. You may sow a small crop of lettuce, radish, or spi- 
nage, &c. the first year between these rows, especially if you wish 
to make the most of your ground. 

A plantation of artichokes will continue to produce good heads 
for five or sis years, but it must be observed, that if you wish to 
have a succession of this fruit, you must make a small plantation 
every spring, for the young plants will not produce their heads in 
perfection till after the crops of the old standing ones are over. 

Sowing Artichoke Seed. 

There are two principal varieties of the garden artichoke; indeed 
Mr. Miller makes two species of them; the cynara scolymus, or 
French artichoke, and the cynara hortensis, or globe artichoke. 

The first being the sort which in former times was most com- 
monly cultivated in France, is generally known by the title of 
French artichoke. The leaves are terminated by short spines, the 
head is oval, and the scales do not turn inward at the top like those 
of the globe artichoke; the heads are of a green colour, the bottoms 
are not near so thick of flesh, and have a perfumed taste, which to 
many persons is very disagreeable, so that it is seldom cultivated 
where the globe kinds can be procured. 

Of the second, there are two varieties, the green and the red 
fruited, both extremely fine. The head is globular, a little com- 



204 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March." 

pressed at the top, the scales lie close over each other, and their 
ends turn inwards so as closely to cover the middle. 

The leaves of the globe artichoke are of a bluer cast, with more 
and deeper jags on the clifts than those of the French; they have 
small inert prickles like the latter but not so perceptible; the leaves 
of the French sort are larger, much wider, and of a paler colour. 
The great openness of the scales in the head of the French artichoke 
is a leading character; it also rather draws up to a point in the 
middle, whereas the globe kind is quite flat at top. The colour of 
the fruit, in the red variety of the globe artichoke, is a reddish- 
brown, or rather a dusky purple with a tinge of green. 

After the above descriptions it will be unnecessary to recommend 
which kind to sow; but being provided with good fresh seed of 
either sort that you desire to cultivate, prepare a piece of ground 
as directed for the young plantations, and at the distances there 
mentioned sow a few grains of seed in each spot where a plant 
might be set, covering them about three-quarters of an inch deep 
with light fine earth; when they appear keep them very clean and 
free from weeds during the whole summer and autumn, and in 
November you will find the method of their winter treatment, as 
well as that of the old plants. Any extra plants that may arise are 
to be transplanted into new beds the spring following. 

In the course of the season you may have crops of cauliflowers, 
cabbages, dwarf-kidney-beans, spinage, lettuces, &c. &c. between 
the rows; keeping them at a sufficient distance from the young arti- 
chokes, so as not to smother or cause them to draw up weakly. 

Or sow these seeds in a bed so thin as you may expect the plants 
to rise at the distance of six inches, allowing for imperfect seeds 
and accidents, cover them as above, and in the spring following 
transplant them as before directed. 

Cardoons. 

The cynara cardunculus, or cardoon artichoke, has been a long 
time used for culinary purposes, such as for salads, soups, stew- 
ing, &c. 

The stalks of the leaves being thick, fleshy, and crisp, are the 
eatable parts, being first blanched by landing them up like celery, 
to two or three feet high, to render them white, tender, and of an 
agreeable flavour, which otherwise would be rank and bitter; they 
are in perfection in autumn and winter. 

Sow the seeds towards the latter end of this month or beginning 
of next, broad-cast, in a bed of rich earth, and cover them about 
three-quarters of an inch deep; when the plants are three inches 
high thin them to four or five inches distant, that they may not be 
drawn up weak; keep them free from weeds, and towards the lat- 
ter end of May or beginning of June they will be fit to plant where 
they are intended to remain for perfection. For their further treat- 
ment see May, &c. 

Or, as these plants are rather impatient of transplanting, you 
may sow the seeds at the distances directed in May for the plants, 



Marcit,] the kitchen GARDEN. 205 

a few seeds in each spot, and as they advance thin them, leaving 
only the best plant in each of those squares. 

Alexanders , or Alesanders. 

The Smyrnium olusatrwrn, or common Alexanders are used for 
culinary purposes as the cardoons, and blanched in like manner. 
The whole plant is of a strong, v/arm, and aromatic nature, and the 
leaves and seed are sometimes used for medicine. 

The seed of this plant should be sov/n in autumn soon after it is 
ripe, for if kept out of the ground till spring, few of them will come 
up till that time twelve months; however, when you sow the seed 
in spring, let it be done as early as possible, and sown pretty thick 
in drills eighteen inches asunder, covering the seeds near an inch 
deepj when the plants are up thin them to six or eight inches dis- 
tant in the rows, and as they advance in growth draw the earth 
up to their stems as you do to celery, in order to blanch and whiten 
them, that they should be crisp and tender for autumn and winter 
use; in the spring following, such as remain will shoot out again 
vigorously, let the earth then be hoed up close to each plant, and in 
three or four weeks they will be blanched and in a fine condition 
for use. 

When these plants are desired I would recommend them to be 
sown where they are to remain, in any of the autumn months; in 
that case they will rise freely in spring, and become fine vigorous 
plants. 

Propagating various Pot and Medicinal Herbs. 

The latter end of this month will be a good time to plant cuttings 
or slips of hyssop, thyme, winter savory, rue, rosemary, lavender, 
wormwood, southern-wood, sage, and any other under-shrubby 
kinds; in taking off" the slips of any of these sorts give a preference 
to the suckers if any, that is, such as have a few fibres attached to 
them; from such as are 4iot furnished with these, take off slips or 
cuttings of the young healthy outward shoots produced last year, 
from about six to ten inches long, according as they occur, observ- 
ing to slip or cut them clean off close to the parts from whence they 
proceed. Let these be planted in a bed or border six inches apart, 
and inserted two-thirds of their lengths into the ground; they will 
take root freely by observing to water them in dry weather, and in 
September will be well rooted, and may either then, or in October, 
be transplanted wherever destined to remain; or the slips may, in 
the first instance, be planted in such places. 

Propagate tarragon, tansey, chamomile, common fennel, marsh- 
mallows, pot-marjoram, baum, burnet, horehound, spear-mint, pep- 
per-mint, feverfew, officinal scurvy -grass, cat-mint, celandine, pen- 
ny-royal, or mentha pulegium, angelica, lovage, gromwell,andany 
other perennial herbaceous plants, and also thyme, hyssop, and 
winter-savory, by parting their roots or by slips therefrom; the best 
time for separating the roots of each and every of the above kinds, 



206 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

is just when thej begin to advance a little in growth. All the above 
kinds may be planted in four feet wide beds, in any tolerably good 
ground, having twelve to eighteen inch alleys between, and placed 
in rows lengthwise in the beds, allowing proportionate distances 
according to their respective growths; or the small growing kinds 
may be planted in borders, or any other convenient places that are 
open and well exposed. 

The best time to gather any of the preceding kinds for distilla- 
tion, or to preserve in a dry state for medicinal purposes, &c. is 
when they are in the first stage of their flowering. 

You may towards the latter end of this month or any time in the 
next, sow seeds of either, or all of the above mentioned kinds, and 
also of the following annual plants, for medicinal and culinary pur- 
poses, viz: borage, sweet fennel, sweet marjoram, sweet basil, sum- 
mer savory, fenugreek, pot marigold, anise, and likewise cl^ry, 
carraway, smallage, and fox-glove, &c., the four last are biennials 
and do not flower till the second year, but their leaves may be used 
at any time when arrived at a sufficient size. All these seeds should 
be sown separately in beds of rich earth, and covered from the 
eighth of an inch to half an inch deep in proportion to their size, 
either in the broad-cast way or in drills, or the low growing kinds 
may be sown in single drills along the edges of borders, particu- 
larly thyme, hyssop, and winter savory, &c., and when the plants 
are arrived at a sufficient size, they may be thinned and trans- 
planted into any beds or quarters that can be spared for that pur- 
pose. 

DHL 

This plant is extremely valuable as an ingredient in pickles, to 
which it gives a most exquisite flavour: the seeds when ripe are 
frequently used for that purpose, but it is the more general practice 
when they are formed, and not yet perfect, to cut oft" the umbels or 
heads, and then use them as above. 

This seed should be sown in any of the autumn months after 
being ripe, and will come up the spring following, for when kept 
out of ground till the latter period, one-third of it and perhaps less, 
will' not vegetate till that time twelve months, but if sown very 
early in March, and tMck, you may expect a tolerable crop that 
season; sow it broad-cast on four feet wide beds, covering it, if 
sown in autumn, half an inch, and if in spring, a quarter of an inch 
deep; when the plants come up, thin them to six inches distant, 
and the same season they will perfect their seeds, which, if any are 
suffered to shed, will not fail to come up plentifully the. next year. 

FinochiOi or ^zorian Fennel. 

The Finochio has very short stalks, which swell just above the 
surface of the ground to three or four inches in breadth, and near 
two thick, being fleshy and tender; this is the part which is eaten 
when blanched with oil, vinegar and pepper as a cold salad. 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 207 

For the cultivation of this plant, make choice of a good spot of 
light rich earth, not dry nor very yvet, for in either extreme it will 
not thrive. Sow the seeds pretty thin in shallow drills about 
eighteen inches asunder, covering them half an inch deepj when 
they come up thin them, leaving the best plants six inches distant 
from one another: about the beginning of July your first crop, if 
sown in March, will be fit for blanching, at which time you are to 
earth it up as you do celery, and in three weeks after it will be in 
a good condition for use. To have a regular succession of this 
plant some seed must be sown every three weeks during the season, 
and your late crops may be preserved in winter as you do celery. 

Capsicums or Red-peppers, Tomatoes, and Egg-Flants. 

The different varieties of the capsicums, tomatoes, and egg- 
plants being in much estimation for culinary purposes, you should 
sow some of each kind now in pots, and forward them in your hot- 
beds, so as to have strong plants ready for planting out into the 
open ground as early in May as the night frosts shall have totally 
•disappeared. Each and every of these kinds bear transplanting 
extremely well, and from this sowing you may expect early and 
abundant crops. For further particulars see April, May, &c. 

Planting out Cabbages, Beets, Turnips, ^c.for Seeds. 

As early in this month as the weather gets open and tolerably 
mild, plant out such cabbages, beets, carrots, turnips, parsneps, &c. 
as you have preserved during the winter to raise seed from; the 
cabbages are to be planted in rows four feet asunder, on.e foot dis- 
tant from each other in the rows, and up to their heads in the earth; 
the others may be planted in four feet wide beds, at the distance 
of ten or twelve inches root from root, or in rows at pleasure; ob- 
serving to tie up the shoots to stakes placed for that purpose, as they 
advance for seeding, to prevent their being broken down by winds, 
heavy rains, &c. 

Planting Potatoes. 

Potatoes may now be planted for an early crop as soon as the 
weather opens, and the frost is entirely out of the ground; let the 
soil in which you plant them be moderately light, a little enriched 
with dung, and advantageously situated. 

Be careful to procure the earliest kinds, from which select a 
quantity of the best formed and soundest roots, and of a tolerable 
size; these are to be cut into sets, a week before planting, in order 
that the wounds should have time to form a dry crust; for if planted 
at this season immediately after being cut, they would imbibe too 
much moisture, many of them rot, and all would be greatly weak- 
ened thereby: cut each root into two, three, or more pieces, accord- 
ing to their size; minding particularly that each cut be furnished 
with one or two good eyes or buds, which is sufficient. They are 



208 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

then to be planted in rows two feet and a half asunder, the sets to 
be nine inches distant in the row, and three of four inches deep. 
Should severe frost ensue protect them by laying some long litter 
or wispj dung over the drills. 

Horse-Radish. 

This plant is cultivated by cuttings of the root, either cut from 
the top an inch or two long, or some old roots cut into pieces of 
that length, or by small offsets that arise from the sides of the main 
root, retaining the crowns or top shoots on as many as possible. 

Being furnished with these sets, choose in an open situation a 
light and rich soil, which trench regularly two spades deep, at the 
same time giving it a good dressing of manurei then beginning at 
one end of the ground, range a line, and with a large dibble make 
holes about ten inches deep, all of an equal depth and about six 
inches asunder, dropping as you go on, one set or cutting into each 
hole, with the crown upright, taking care to fill or close the holes 
up properly with the earth, and let the rows be two feet asunder. 
Or you may plant them as you advance in the digging or trench- 
ing of the ground, at the same depth and distances, covering each 
row when set in with the earth of the next course, and so proceed 
till all are planted. After this, level the surface of the ground 
even, observing to keep it free from weeds until the plants are 
so far advanced as to be strong enough to overbear and keep them 
down. 

. With this management the roots will be long, straight, and free 
from many small lateral offsets, and the second year after planting 
will be fit for use. It is true they may be taken up the first year, 
but then the roots will be slender; therefore it is the better way 
to let them remain till the second, when they will be in a fine con- 
dition; and if in taking up the roots you take care to leave some 
offsets still remaining you will have a successional supply for many 
years. • 

Liquorice. 

The glycyrrhiza glabra, or cultivated liquorice, is a plant that 
brings enormous profit to the industrious cultivator: it is of con- 
siderable importance in medicine, and consequently in great 
demand by the druggists and apothecaries; and also by porter 
brewers, being a very material ingredient in that article. Of 4000 
quintals, or nearly two hundred tons, annually exported from Spain, 
the far greater part is considered to be purchased by the porter 
brewers of London. About Pontefract in Yorkshire, England, 
where it is cultivated in great perfection, an acre of well grown 
liquorice is considered to be worth one hundred pounds sterling; 
therefore, due attention should be paid to its culture in the United 
States, where it will grow to the greatest possible perfection; 
thereby to prevent the necessity of importing large quantities of it 
annually from Europe, at a considerable expense, and in a much 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 209 

inferior condition to what it could be had, if cultivated at home. 
In hopes that this may be attempted by some spirited persons, who 
may have the welfare of their country, as well as their own at heart, 
I shall proceed to give the method of bringing this valuable plant to 
the utmost perfection. 

The liquorice delights in a light sandy rich soil, which should be 
three feet deep at least, for the goodness as well as the profits 
arising from the culture of this plant is proportionate to the size 
and length of its roots; the ground in which you intend to plant 
it, should be highly manured and well dug the autumn before, that 
the dung may be perfectly rotted and mixed with the earth| im- 
mediately previous to planting, trench the ground three spades deep, 
if the natural soil be good that depth, and lay it very light; when 
your ground is thus prepared, you should furnish yourself with 
fresh plants, taken from the sides or heads of the old roots, observ- 
ing that each has one or two good buds or eyes, otherwise they are 
subject to miscarry; these plants should be from six to ten inches 
long and perfectly sound. 

The best season for planting them in the middle states is the 
latter end of March, or just when their buds begin to show symp- 
toms of fresh vegetation, which must be done in the following 
manner, viz: first strain a line across the ground, then with a long 
dibble put in the roots so that the whole plant may be set straight 
in the ground, with the top about an inch under the surface, in a 
straight line, and about a foot or a little more asundftr, and two feet 
distance from row to row: you may then sow a thin ci'op of radishes, 
onions, lettuces or any other small growing crops, in drills, between 
the rows, keeping the whole clean, particularly the rising plants of 
liquorice, during the summer and autumn; in the November follow- 
ing, you should carefully hoe and clean the ground; the shoots and 
leaves being then decayed, cut them oft' and spread a little rotten 
dung on the surface, the virtue of which will be washed into the 
ground by the rains and the plants greatly improved thereby. 

In the March following you should slightly dig the ground 
between the rows, burying the remaining part of the dung, but in 
doing this you should be careful not to injure the roots. Let no- 
thing now be either sowed or planted between the rows, but keep 
them always clean, and in autumn when the stalks of the liquorice 
are decayed, cut them down close to the surface of the earth as 
before. 

The same work is to be repeated annually, till the plants are 
three years old, when they will be tit for taking up; that is, slightly 
stir the ground every spring and autumn, keeping down the weeds 
in summer by hoeing; but after the first or second year, the stalks 
will shoot so vigorously as soon to cover the ground and greatly 
retard the growth of weeds. 

The proper season for taking up the roots is November, for they 
should not be taken up until the stalks are fully decayed, nor de- 
ferred till the sap begins to circulate afresh in spring, for in either 
case the roots would be apt to shrivel and diminish in weight, 
2 C • 



210 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

which would be a loss to the cultivator, as it is by weight they are 
always sold. 

The method of taking up the roots is by trenching the ground, 
beginning at one side and opening a trench close to the first row, 
three spades deep, or to the depth of the roots, at which work three 
or four spadesmen are generally employed at a trench; one goes 
otl with the top spit, a second with the next, and another with the 
third, and the fourth commonly gets to the bottom of the roots, 
having a mattock to assist him occasionally to clear them; as he 
takes them up, he throws them on the top of the ground, and in this 
manner they proceed from row to row, till the whole plantation is 
taken up. 

The small side roots are then trimmed off"; the best divided into 
lengths for fresh sets, which are to be carefully preserved in earth 
till the time of planting, if not planted immediately, and the main 
roots are washed clean, dried and tied in bundles for sale. 

When liquorice is intended to be cultivated on a large scale, 
the rows may be planted three feet distant, and the labour of hoe- 
ing performed with a small plough. 

If not sold immediately after having been taken up, the culti- 
vator must be careful not to suffer them to be put together in large 
quantities, lest they should become mouldy, as this vegetable, 
unless preserved in a dry place, is very liable to such corruption. 

Rhubarb. 

There are several species of this plant, but the rheum palma- 
tum, or true officinal rhubarb, is that which merits particular atten- 
tion. It is a native of China and Russian Tartary, has braved the 
climate of St. Petersburgh, grows to good perfection in Scotland, as 
far north as Perthshire (lat. 56°); also in England, Turkey and 
various other parts of Europe; is an article of considerable con- 
sumption, consequently of national importance, and highly deserving 
of attention in the United States. It grows to the greatest possi- 
ble perfection among the Tartarian mountains, from Selin to Tibet, 
without any other culture than what is afforded by the scraping of 
the Marmots; and shall we despair of bringing it to perfection, 
where soil and climate is perfectly congenial, and nothing wanted 
but the enterprise of a few spirited individuals to make a com- 
mencement.^ There is no doubt that if the culture of this and li- 
quorice were duly attended to, but that the crops would more than 
amply repay the cultivators; and although a partiality to articles 
of customary culture is in the way, it is to be hoped that new and 
necessary plants will, from time to time, be introduced and culti- 
vated with advantage to the individuals, and the nation at large. 

The following is the mode of its culture: having procured a suffi- 
cient quantity of seed of the true kind, select a piece of light rich 
sandy loam, such as answers for asparagus, and after giving it a 
goot coat of manure, trench it two or three spades deep, if the good 
soil admits; after which, level the top neatly and lay it out byline 
into squares of four feet, at the angles or intersections'of which you 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 211 

are to form little circles with your finger about six or eight inches 
in diameter, and on each, scatter a few seeds, then cover them with 
light fine mould three-quarters of an inch deep. The seeds should 
be sown as early in spring as possible, or if this had been done ia 
November, they would vegetate in spring with more certainty; when 
the young plants appear, keep them free from weeds, and in dry 
weather give them frequently a little water, but not much at a time; 
and above all things, protect them from the mid-day sun till they get 
considerably strong, for if exposed fully to this, during their infant 
state, few of them would escape destruction thereby; were you to 
place a piece of board on end, about fifteen inches broad, and two 
feet and a half high, at the south side of each hill, leaning a little 
over the plants, this would answer the end effectually, without 
depriving them of the benefit of the circulating air. The first 
season is their critical period, having survived that, they have no- 
thing to fear afterwards. Onions, lettuces or any other low grow- 
ing crops may be either sown or planted in the intervals for the 
first year, so that they are kept at a proper distance from the young 
plants. The supernumerary plants, one being sufficient to be left 
in each of these places for ultimate perfection, may be transplanted 
the spring following into new plantations, similarly prepared and 
at the same distance. 

The November following, all the leaves being then decayed, 
cover the crowns of the plants two inches deep with earth from 
the intervals; and if there is danger of any wet lodging, throw up 
trenches, rounding the beds as is commonly done to asparagus, and 
for the first winter, lay some dry litter over the plants. In the 
March following, strip the covering till you just perceive the tops 
of the plants, give all the ground a slight digging and dress it 
neatly after you, observing to keep the beds well hoed, and always 
free from weeds. 

Thus proceed every autumn and spring, till the roots have four 
years growth, when some of them may be taken up for use; but it 
is generally admitted that their medicinal virtues increase until 
they are eight or ten years old. 

You must be very circumspect in the choice of ground; particu- 
larly, that it is not subject to lodge wet, for this plant by no means 
agrees with too much moisture, preferring a rich dry sandy loam 
to any other kind of soil. 

Rhubarb may also be propagated by offsets from the old roots, or 
by sowing the seed in seed -beds, and transplanting them when a 
year old into such beds and at the same distances as before directed 
for sowing the seed; but they always produce larger and better 
roots when sown where they are to remain. 

The proper time to take up the roots for use is in autumn, after 
the leaves and stalks are totally decayed; when taken up, wash them 
clean, trim off the small fibres, and lay them in an airy place to dry, 
for four days, then rasp off the outward skin, which greatly obstructs 
the quickness of drying, from the pores not being laid open for the 
herbaceous moisture to exhale; the mere stripping off the bark will 
not be sufficient, the rasping it off, and the lacerating of the out- 



212 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [March. 

ward part of the root adjoining it will be necessary; for the lateral 
pores must be opened to permit the confined watery fluid to exude 
freely. Then cut them in slices, which string on pack-thread so as 
not to touch, and hang them up in a stove-room, to be kept con- 
stantly warm till they are effectually dry. Should the season even 
prove hot enough for drying them in the sun, the former method 
would be preferable, for by exposing them so much to the sun and 
light, they would be greatly impaired in the colour, and perhaps 
some of their finer parts dissipated thereby; but culinary heat is 
free from that objection, and at the same time possesses all the 
advantages of quick drying. The drying of the roots, without 
suffering them to get mouldy, must be carefully attended to, as a 
neglect in this point would render all your former industry fruit- 
less, and it is considered among the cultivators as a difficult task. 

The marks of the goodness of rhubarb are, the liveliness of its 
colour when cut; its being firm and solid, but not flinty or hard; 
its being easily pulverable, and appearing when powered of a 
bright yellow colour; on being chewed, its imparting to the spittle 
a deep saffron tinge, and not proving slimy or mucilaginous in the 
mouth. 

The true officinal or pal mated rhubarb has numerous root-leaves, 
large, rough, of a roundish figure, deeply cut into lobes and irregu- 
larly pointed segments on long, smooth, round foot-stalks. Stem- 
leaves, one at each joint, issuing from a membranous sheath 
successively smaller upwards. Flowers surrounding the branches 
in numerous clusters, and forming a kind of spike. Corolla or 
flowers of a greenish- white. 

The species cannot be mistaken if you attend to its superior 
height, the ferruginous or reddish-brown colour of the stem branches 
and petioles or leaf-stalks, the particular palmate form of the leaves, 
and the elegant looseness of the little pannicles of flowers which 
display themselves on erect, round, hollow, jointed, slightly scored 
stems branching towards the top, and from six to eight feet high. 

The Rheum Rhaponticum, or Common Rhubarb. 

This has a large thick root, which divides into many strong fleshy 
fangs, running deep into the ground; the outside of a reddish-brown 
colour, and the inside yellow, from which arise several leaves, in 
number according to the size of the root; those come up folded in 
the spring, and afterwards expand themselves; they are smooth, of 
a roundish heart shape, having very thick foot-stalks of a reddish 
colour, which are a little channelled on their lower part, but flat at 
the top. When the plant grows on rich land, the foot-stalks of the 
leaves are near two feet long, and thicker than a man's thumb; the 
leaves also are often two feet long and as much in breadth, having 
several strong longitudinal veins running from the foot-stalk to the 
borders of a deep green, and waved on their edges, having an acid 
taste, but particularly the foot-stalks, which are very frequently 
used, and much esteemed for tarts and pies. The flower stalks 
grow from two to three feet high, and are terminated by thick close 



March.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 213 

spikes of white flowers. Its roots afford a gentle purge, but is of 
much inferior quality to the former, and may be cultivated the 
same way as directed for that. 

Tart Rhubarb {Rheum Rhaponticum). 

The seeds should be sown this month in a rich sandy soil; and if 
the plants come up too thick, thin them; a good method for doing so 
is to let them stand in stools four feet distant every way, two or 
three plants in each, as it is more convenient for blanching, which 
is very easily done in the following manner: clear the ground 
around them from the old leaves or stems, place a large size flower 
pot or small keg over each stool, and then cover it about two feet 
thick all around with good warm manure, and it will be finely 
blanched by the beginning of May. The plants for this purpose 
should be three years old. Many persons do not take this trouble, 
but it will more than repay, being much greater in quantity and 
better in quality than if suffered to grow naturally, and the stalks 
used without blanching. It is much more esteemed now for pies 
and tarts than formerly, and is considered very wholesome for chil- 
dren: in many parts of England it is stewed and used as apple 
butter is here. 

The Jerusalem Artichoke. 

The helianthus tuberosus, or tuberous-rooted sunflower, com- 
monly called the Jerusalem artichoke. "This root," says Parkin- 
son, an ancient English writer, "our ancestors boiled tender, and 
then being pealed, ate them sliced and stewed with butter, wine 
and spices — thus they were a dainty for a queen, being as pleasant 
as the bottom of an artichoke;" hence probably that name origi- 
nated, as they bear not the least resemblance in growth to an 
artichoke. 

The roots being the eatable part, are large fleshy tubers, much 
resembling a potato, are in perfection in autumn and all the winter, 
and are wholesome palatable food when properly dressed. 

They are raised by sets or cuttings of the root, preparing the 
sets and planting them as directed for potatoes, in rows three feet 
asunder, four or five inches deep, and eighteen inches distant from 
one another in the rows: they increase abundantly, will thrive in 
any tolerable soil, and cannot be easily got out of the ground again, 
for the least bit will grow. It is a native of Brazil, and a striking 
instance of how tropical productions may gradually and success- 
fully be introduced and naturalized in colder climates. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

This is a very principal month in the southern states for garden- 
ing; all manner of work hitherto directed, may now be performed 
there successfully. In South Carolina and Georgia they may now 
sow the seeds of melons, cucumbers, squashes, tomatos, egg-plants, 
okras, red peppers, &c., as directed in the kitchen garden for April 
and May. 



214 

THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Pruning Pears, Plums, Cherries, Apples, ^c. 

As early in this month as possible finish pruning your cherries 
and plums, also your apple and pear trees before the end thereof, 
whether as espaliers, standards, or wall trees. Peaches, nectarines, 
apricots, almonds, quinces, &c. should also be pruned early in the 
month, if not done before. For the particular method of pruning 
espalier and wall trees, see the Fruit Garden for January and 
February, pages 24 and 135; and for that of the standards, the 
Orchard, pages, 46, 142, &c. This should be particularly attended 
to, and the pruning of all kinds of fruit trees finished before their 
buds begin to push. 

Pruning and training young Apricot, Nectarine, and Peach 
Trees, ^c. for Espaliers and Walls. 

Now is the only proper time to head down young wall or espalier 
trees, &c. preparatory to their first training; such as apricot, peach, 
and nectarine trees planted against espaliers or walls any time 
since last October with their first shoots, from budding at full 
length, which, when a year old, should always be headed down 
low, to force out lower branches to furnish the wall or espalier 
properly, quite from the bottom. 

This should be done just as the trees begin to swell their buds; 
therefore watch the opportunity, and let them be headed accordingly 
at the proper time. 

The heads should be cut down to about five, six, or seven eyes 
or buds from the bottom; and if there are two shoots from the same 
stock let them both be cut down as above. 

By this practice the trees will produce some strong shoots rlear 
the ground, whereby they will be furnished equally with branches 
from the bottom to the top of the wall or espalier. But if the trees 
were not to be headed-down as above, they would run up with a 
stem like a standard-tree, and not furnish any branches below, 
within two or three feet of the bottom; whereby the use of such 
part of the espalier or wall would be lost. 

Such young apricot, peach, and nectarine trees as were headed- 
down a year ago, and having each produced three, four, or more 
shoots the last summer, should now have these shortened to such 
length as may encourage each shoot to produce two or three new 
ones the same season. 

The method is this: let each shoot be shortened generally in 
some degree of proportion to its strength; in some pruning off" about 
one-half or third of their original length; and in others a little more 
or less, according to circumstances of growth and situation of the 



March.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 225 

trees; as for instance, shoots of about two feet may be cut to ten, 
twelve, or fifteen inches, or a little longer in strong growths; for 
the strongest shoots should always be left the longest; and those 
about twelve to fifteen or eighteen inches pruned to six, eight, ten, 
or twelve inches in length; and so in proportion to the different 
lengths and degrees of strength, and particular situation of the 
respective shoots. See January, &c. 

By this practice each of these shoots will probably produce two, 
three, or four new shoots the succeeding summer, so that by Octo- 
ber each young tree, so treated, will be furnished with from twelve 
or fifteen to eighteen or twenty shoots, or more. 

The trees may then be pruned according to the method directed 
for the older trees of that sort, observing still to shorten the young 
shoots, but in such a manner as they may both produce fruit and 
a supply of young wood, as in the full bearing trees aforesaid; that 
is, generally to prune the weaker shoots about one-half, the stronger 
ones prune about a third or fourth of their length, according to 
strength and where situated, and the situation of the blossom and 
wood-buds on the respective shoots; then nail them straight and 
close to the walls, or tie them to the espalier with willow twigs, &c. 
three or four to five or six inches asunder. — See Fruit Garden in 
January^ &c. 

Pruning and training young Apple, Pear, Plum and Cherry Trees 
for Espaliers and Walls. 

Any young dwarf apples, pears, plums, and cherry trees, lately 
planted against walls or espaliers, &c. or still remaining in the 
nursery with their first shoots, of only a year or two old entire, 
should now be pruned down to a few eyes that they may put out 
some good shoots near the ground, to furnish the bottom of the 
wall or espalier therewith. 

If the heads of these trees are but one year's growth from the 
bud or graft, let them be shortened to four or five eyes; observing 
to do it just as they begin to form buds for shooting. 

Suppose they are two years from the bud or graft, and the first 
shoots were cut down, as above, last spring; let the shoots which 
were produced from them the last summer be also shortened now 
to six, eight, or ten inches. 

The same rule holds good with these at first training as men- 
tioned for the apricots and peaches; for it is on shortening properly 
the first and second year's shoots, from the budding and grafting, 
that the whole success depends for forming a useful and handsome 
tree: as when a young wall or espalier tree is well furnished with 
branches near the ground, these will readily supply you with more, 
in their turn, to furnish the wall or espalier upwards. 

But in the common course of pruning apples, pears, plums, and 
cherries, their shoots and branches are not to be shortened; for after 
the young trees are furnished with a proper supply of branches 
below, their shoots must then be trained to the wall at full length, 
only shortening particular shoots when more wood maybe required 



216 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [March. 

to furnish that part, or where they grow too crowded j as directed 
in page 25, &c. 

Pruning Fig Trees, 

Some prune fig trees the latter end of autumn, which is a very- 
wrong practice where severe winter frosts are prevalent^ as the 
young shoots, which are the only hearing wood, diV& liable to be kill- 
ed in hard winters. If they were pruned in that season, and no 
more left than what might then appear necessary, and severe frosts 
afterwards destroy many of them, you would have no resource left. 

Therefore the better way is to let the trees remain unpruned till 
this time, and if some have been killed by the severity of the win- 
ter, there will be a chance, from among the whole, to find a sufl&- 
ciency for your purpose that have escaped. Observing, however, 
that the sooner this work is done, after the severe frosts are over, 
the better; for if delayed too long the trees would bleed and be in- 
jured thereby; but in the southern states the late autumn pruning 
is preferable. 

Fig trees agree with, and in fact require, great heatj consequent- 
ly in the eastern and middle states they will thrive and bear better 
when planted against walls, board fences, or espaliers, in warm ex- 
posuresj therefore I shall give the method of pruning and training 
them to such. 

In those southern states where they grow in the open standard 
way, they need no other pruning than keeping each on a neat sin- 
gle stem, free from suckers, cutting out any dead or ill placed 
wood, thinning the young shoots where too crowded, but never top- 
ping any. 

In pruning fig-trees, you must leave a sufficient supply of the 
last summer's shoots from the bottom to the extremity every way, 
in all parts where possible; and prune out the ill-placed and super- 
fluous shoots thereof, with parts of the old bearers and long extend- 
ed naked old wood, to have due room to train the proper shoots, so 
that the tree may be equally furnished with a succession of young 
bearers at moderate distances; for these young shoots bear the figs 
the ensuing season; fig-trees always producing their fruit on the 
one year old wood only. 

Leave the branches and shoots in general about five to six or 
seven inches asunder, all at full length; being careful to prefer the 
best middling strong shoots to retain for general bearers, cutting 
out the improper, superabundant, and useless old wood, quite close; 
pruning out any very rampant young wood, excessive long-jointed 
shoots, or very slender infirm growths, leaving the most promising 
and firm to supply the general expansion. 

Take care always to train in every year some young shoots, at 
or near the bottom, that there may be a succession coming up regu- 
larly one after another, to supply the places of casual, long, old, 
naked branches, which -vv^ill occur every season in some part or 
other of the tree; for such long-extended naked old branches or 
others, not furnished properly with young wood, should now be cut 



March.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 217 

out, that there may be sufficient room to train the bearing shoots 
regularly and at proper distances. 

In cutting out useless large branches, either too long extended, 
or unfurnished with bearing wood, &c., let them be cut oft' close to 
the places from whence they proceed, to some convenient lower 
young shoots or branches, leaving no stumps. 

The young branches of fig-trees must not he shortened or topped, 
but leave each at full length; for if they were, it would not only 
cut away the part where fruit would have appeared, but also occa- 
sion them to run much to wood, and thereby never produce half a 
crop; so only cut oft' casual dead ends. 

The tree being pruned, let the general branches and bearers be 
directly trained in and nailed to the wall or fence, or made fast to 
the espalier in regular order, extending them horizontally, at equal 
distances, six or seven inches from each other. 

Planting and propagating Fig- Trees. 

Plant fiff-trees where wanted, this beino; rather the best month 
in the year for removing them; they will now take root in a very 
short time. 

In planting figs, you may either procure trained young trees that 
are arrived to a bearing state, and plant them at fifteen or twenty 
feet distance, or as they are propagated in general, either by the 
suckers which arise from the roots of the old trees, or by layers, or 
cuttings, young plants of these may be planted at once where they 
are to remain, that they may establish their roots more eff"ectually 
without being disturbed by removal: therefore in default of trained 
trees, some good plants or suckers of moderate growth, and such as 
are firm and well ripened, may be procured and planted at once 
where they are to remain; and others may be planted in the nurse- 
ry, for training a few years. 

To raise them by layers, select young branches of one or two 
years growth, laying them in the earth four or five inches deep, 
with the tops as erect as possible; they will be well rooted by next 
spring, when they should be separated from the old tree and plant- 
ed cither in the nursery or where they are to remain. 

To propagate them "by cuttings, make choice of the ripest and 
most perfect of the last year's shoots, from twelve to fifteen inches 
in length, cutting them olFwith an inch or two of the two years old 
wood at their base, leaving the tops entire and uncut. Plant these 
cuttings six or eight inches deep, in good soil, and in rows two feet 
and a half asunder, and a foot distant from one anotlier in the rows; 
here they may remain for two years when they will be in a fine 
condition for planting where wanted. 

They may also be propagated by sowing the seed in long narrow 
boxes the beginning of this month, placing them in a hot-bed to 
forward their growth; and about the middle of May, remove these 
boxes into the shade where they can have the morning sun till ten 
o'clock, and the afternoon sun from four; giving them water when 
necessary, and protecting them the winter following from frost, 
2D 



218 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [March. 

either by placing the boxes of plants in the green-house, or in gar- 
den frames. When a year old they may be planted out as directed 
for cuttings, and treated afterwards in the same way. This will 
be the best method to obtain new kinds; the seeds of the imported, 
figs will grow freely if properly treated; they are to be covered 
when sown only about the eighth of an inch deep. 

Layers or cuttings are preferable to suckers, as they are not so 
subject to produce suckers from their roots, after being finally 
planted, as the others. 

Fig-trees may be trained in half or whole standards, and plant- 
ed detached in sheltered sunny situations, keeping them free from 
suckers, permitting their heads to branch regularly around, and 
they will produce ripe fruit in good perfection: they produce more 
and better in a strong dry loamy soil than in a sandy parched one, 
(though in soil they are easily pleased, provided it does not lodge 
water;) for when planted in the latter, they are subject to cast their 
fruit in May and June, which, under such circumstances, in some 
measure, may be prevented by frequent waterings at that season: 
where they thrive well, they usually produce two crops in the sea- 
son; the first on the former year's wood, and the second on the 
young shoots of the present, which is generally the most abundant. 

The following are the varieties of this fruit that are generally 
considered as best worth cultivating, and are placed in the order 
of their ripening. 

1. The brown or chestnut coloured Ischia fig. The fruit is 
very large, globular, with a pretty large eye, pinched in near the 
foot-stalk, of a brown or chestnut colour on the outside, and 
purple within; the grains are large, and the pulp sweet and high 
flavoured. 

2. The black Genoa fig. This is a long fruit, which swells 
pretty large at the top, the lower part slender; the skin of a dark 
purple colour, almost black, has a purple farina over it like that 
on some plums; the inside is of a bright red, and the flesh is very 
highly flavoured. 

3. The small white early fig. This has a roundish fruit a little 
flatted at the crown, with a short foot-stalk; skin when ripe, of a 
pale yellowish colour, and thin; the inside white, flesh sweet, but 
not highly flavoured. 

4. The large white Genoa fig. This is a large globular fruit, a 
little lengthened towards the stalk; skin thin, of a yellowish colour 
when ripe, and flesh red. 

5. The black Ischia fig. Fruit short, middle sized, a little 
flatted at the crown; skin almost black when ripe; flesh of a deep 
red, and highly flavoured. 

6. The Mafta fig. Fruit small, compressed at the top; greatly 
pinched towards the foot-stalk; skin a pale brown colour; flesh 
the same, and very sweet. 

7. The Murrey or brown Naples fig. Fruit, large and globular, 
of a light brown colour, with some faint marks of a dirty white; 
flesh nearly of the same colour, and well flavoured; grains large. 

8. The green Ischia fi-g. Fruit oblong, almost globular at the 



March.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 219 

crown; skin thin, of a green colour, but when fully ripe it is 
stained through by the pulp to a brownish cast; flesh purple, well 
flavoured, and will stain linen or paper. 

9. The Madonna fig. Fruit long, pyramidal, and of a large sizej 
skin brown; flesh a lighter brown, coarse, and of little flavour. 

10. The common blue, or purple fig. Fruit purple, oblong, and 
small; the tree a great bearer and very hardy. 

11. The long brown Naples fig. Fruit long, somewhat com- 
pressed at the crown; foot-stalks pretty long; skin of a dark brown 
when fully ripe; grains large; flesh inclined to red, and well 
flavoured. The leaves of this tree are deeply divided. 

12. The yellow Ischia fig. Fruit large, of a pyramidal form; 
skin yellow when ripe; flesh purple, and well flavoured; leaves 
very large, and not much divided. 

13. The small brown Ischia fig. Fruit small, of a pyramidal 
form, with a very short foot-stalk; skin of a light brown; flesh 
inclining to purple, of a very high flavour; leaves less divided than 
any of the other sorts. 

14. The Gentile fig. Fruit middle sized, globular; skin, when 
ripe, of a yellow colour; grains large, and flesh well flavoured. 

The preceding are all the varieties of the Jicus carica or com- 
mon fig-tree. There are upwards of fifty other species of fig 
described by botanists, but these are generally cultivated either 
on account of their timber or as curiosities. 

I have been the more diffuse on this article, as the cultivation of 
the fig and its different varieties, are not as well known in the 
United States as other kinds of fruit trees, and as it may be culti- 
vated in the greatest perfection, particularly in the southern states. 

Heading doivn Fruit Trees. 

For the method of pruning and heading down the various kinds 
of fruit trees which have shown symptoms of decay, in order to 
attempt their restoration to health and bearing, see the Orchard 
this month. 

Preserving the Blossoms and young Fruit of Wall and Espalier 

Trees. 

It often happens, that at too early a period in spring, we have a 
forward and untimely vegetation, which throws our early blooming 
fruit trees, especially those in warm situations, into a full blow of 
blossoms, which, if afterwards attacked by frost, proves their 
destruction. In such cases some of the choicer kinds of wall and 
espalier trees should be defended therefrom with mats, &c. 

The mats for this purpose should be of the largest size: one end 
of them should be fastened with nails or hooks to the top of the 
wall, and let them hang down over the trees. The lower end of 
the mat should also be fastened down to prevent their being blown 
to and fro by the wind, which would beat the blossoms off. 

When the weather is mild the mats should be taken oft', for it is 



220 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [March. 

only at night, in sharp frosts and cutting frosty winds, that the 
blossoms require to be thus sheltered. 

Or, to preserve the blossoms and young fruit, you may occasion- 
ally stick the trees with the cuttings of hardy evergreen trees and 
shrubs, sticking them between the branches in a somewhat spread- 
ing manner, so as the leaves may aftbrd some protection to the 
blossom, and which I have found to be often very serviceable. 

This should also be done just when the trees are coming into 
blossom, having cuttings of the shoots and small branches of laurel, 
yew, pine, and some other hardy evergreens, preserving the leaves 
to them, and being placed between the branches in the manner 
before observed, so as to shelter those which are in blossom; they 
must be permitted to remain constantly till the fruit is fairly set 
as big as large peas. 

Planting Fruit Trees. 

Fruit trees of all kinds may be planted any time this month, 
when the weather is open, with success, but the sooner in the 
month the better, before they begin to shoot; they will now take 
root in a short time, and with the assistance of a litUe water in dry 
weather, will grow freely. 

Let every kind be planted at proper distances, both for espaliers 
and walls, and also in standards, that they may have room to grow 
without interfering with each other in the course of a few years; 
which is often the case in many gardens, more particularly with 
wall trees and espaliers. 

Peaches, nectarines, and apricots should never be planted nearer 
than fifteen feet asunder, against walls or espaliers; nor need they 
be planted more than eighteen or twenty feet distant. 

Apples and pears, for walls and espaliers, should be planted fifteen 
to eighteen or twenty feet asunder; but, in some cases, twenty-five 
feet is a more eligible distance, especially for some sorts of free- 
shooting pears; though it appears considerable at first, yet if graft- 
ed, &c. upon free stocks, they will readily fill that space, and bear 
considerably better than if confined so as to require to be often 
shortened to continue them within bounds; however, generally 
allow those on dwarf stocks not less than fifteen feet, the others 
eighteen or twenty feet distant. 

Plums and cherries designed for walls and espaliers should be 
planted from fifteen to eighteen or twenty feet distance. 

The above distances advised in planting the different sorts of 
wall and espalier trees, appear great when the trees are first plant- 
ed; but in a few years the advantage of allowing them proper room 
will be manifest: and it should be observed to allow trees planted 
against low walls a greater distance than for higher, in order 
that in default of height, there may be proper scope to extend them 
horizontally. 

For the particular soil and situation proper for the different kinds, 
isee the Fruit Garden in October and November; and also the 
Orchard in this month. 



March.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 221 

Having the ground previously well prepared, open a wide hole 
for every tree about a spade deep, or according to the size of the 
root, and loosen the bottom well. Then prune the roots of the tree, 
that is, cut off bruised or broken parts, and trim the ends a little of 
all the very long straggling roots in general, prune out irregular 
shoots of the head, then place the tree in the hole, break the earth 
well and throw it in equally about the roots, and when all is in 
tread the surface gently round the tree. 

New planted fruit trees should be well secured from the violence 
of the wind| if they are all standards in exposed situations, let 
them be supported with stakes, and if wall trees, &c. with large 
heads, planted against walls and espaliers, fasten their main 
branches thereto. 

iCi"' As the seasons for planting out fruit and other trees differ 
so much in the climates of the United States, and even in the same 
place in different seasons, the only sure guide is to plant all kinds 
of trees as soon as their buds begin to swell, or rather a little 
before. 

Gooseberries and Currants. 

Prune gooseberry and currant bushes, where they are not yet 
done; but let this work be finished the beginning of the month. 

Keep the branches thin and the middle of the trees open and 
clear of wood, so as to admit the sun and air freely, by which 
means the fruit will be large and well tasted. Observe the rules 
exhibited in January, page 32, February, page 137, and also in 
October. 

From the beginning to the middle of this month, is a good time 
to plant gooseberry or currant trees; the former particularly re- 
quire rich ground, plenty of manure, frequent culture about the 
plants, and to be kept on one stem. The best form for a well 
trained standard gooseberry, or currant, is that of a wine glass; if 
you expect good fruit, you must be particular to keep them free 
from suckers. 

Manure and dig the ground between the gooseberry and currant 
trees, which, as they are just advancing in bud, will now be of 
great service, in promoting a plentiful production of large good 
fruit. 

For the best methods of propagating gooseberries and currants, 
see the work of the Nursery for this month. 

Pruning and Planting Raspberries. 

Prune raspberries, when not done before, agreeably to the direc- 
tions given last month, page 138; let this be done as early in the 
month as possible. 

You may now make new plantations of raspberries, where wanted. 
Observe that the young shoots or suckers, which arise every sum- 
mer from the old roots, are to be chosen for this purpose. These 
should be planted in good ground, and in an open situation; if you 



222 "^HE FRUIT GARDEN. [March. 

dig in some rotten manure, it will be of considerable service to the 
plants, and promote a production of large fruit. 

In choosing the plants for this plantation, observe to select the 
outward young suckers of strong and robust growth, all of last 
summer's production, not less than two feet, but the more eligible 
if from three to five feet long, with strength in proportion — digging 
them up with full roots, preferring those with roots the most fibrous, 
for this is material in those plantsj and, as sometimes one, two, or 
more buds appear, formed on the root near the bottom of the stem, 
for next summer's shoots, such plants are particularly to be chosen, 
if to be had. 

Previous to planting shorten^ the shoots, cutting off about one 
fourth of their length, trim the roots and cut away any old stumps 
or hard woody parts annexed thereto, then plant them in rows four 
feet and a half asunder, and from two to three feet distant in the 
rows; they will produce some fruit next summer and more abun- 
dantly the second year, &c. 

Dig the ground between your old plantations of raspberries after 
pruning, taking out the suckers, &c. as directed last month. 

Digging the Fruit Tree Borders. 

Dig the fruit tree borders as early in this month as you find the 
ground to work freely, previously giving them a good dressing of 
well rotted manure. This will be serviceable to the trees, the bor- 
ders will appear neat, and be ready to receive any small crops, 
which may be proper to sow or plant therein. 

Straivberries. 

The strawberry plants will now begin to push, therefore the 
sooner they receive their spring dressing after the weather becomes 
tolerably favourable the better. 

Clear the beds from weeds, and the plants from decayed leaves 
and old runners: it is most adviseable to keep the plants in single 
bunches, clear of each other, so that there may be room to hoe be- 
tween, and occasionally to dig round them with a narrow spade or 
trowel, by which means they will fruit in much better perfection 
than if crowded together. 

The beds being cleared from litter, loosen the earth between the 
plants; and if you add a little fresh earth from the alleys, &c. to 
the beds, drawing it close to the plants, it will greatly strengthen 
them, and cause them to flower strong and bear plentifully. 

Strawberries may be planted about the middle or latter end of 
the month, but if planted in September, or early in October, they 
would bear fruit the summer following; not but those planted now 
will take root freely and bear some fruit, but they will be few in 
comparison to those of the autumn planting; however, next year 
they will bear abundantly. 

The proper sets for planting are the young offsets and runner- 
plants of the last summer, which procure of the strongest stocky 



March.] THE ORCHARD. 223 

growth from beds of good plants that are in full perfection for bear- 
ing, and not from worn-out stools, taking them up with good roots. 

Prepare for these plants a piece of good ground, either in the 
main quarters or in the borders; if loamy the better; and let some 
rotten dung be dug in. If in the main quarters, divide the ground 
into beds four feet wide, with alleys eighteen inches wide between 
them, or they may be planted in continued rows in the borders. 
Plant the strawberries of the scarlet kind fifteen inches asunder, 
and allow the same distance between plant and plant in the rows. 
But the large kinds, such as the hautboy and Chili, should be plant- 
ed eighteen inches distant every way. 

The Alpine or prolific strawberry, should likewise be planted 
fifteen or eighteen inches distant every way, that there may be 
room for their runners to spread and take root; this kind of straw- 
berry being different in its manner of bearing from the others, for 
the runners often yield the largest and fairest fruit; this kind con- 
tinues bearing ripe fruit from the latter end of May to October. 

A farther supply of bearing strawberry plants in pots may still 
be placed in hot-beds and hot-houses, &c. to produce a succession 
of early fruit, and to afford a sufficient supply till those in the open 
ground ripen. 

Forcing Fruit Trees. 

Continue the care of fruit trees now forwarding in hot-walls and 
forcing-houses; such as peaches, nectarines, cherries, vines, &c.; 
let the fires be made every cold afternoon and morning, but regu- 
larly at night; and as the season advances in heat, and the sun's 
power increases, diminish the fires and admit more air: occasional 
waterings will be very necessary to encourage the fruit to swell 
and grow freely; but be particular towards the latter end of the 
month, when the sun gets powerful, to admit air in proportion, 
and to manage the plants in every respect as directed in February, 
page 139. 



THE ORCHARD. 

Pruning. 

Finish pruning of all kinds of fruit trees as early in this month 
as possible, according to the rules laid down under the head Or- 
chard in January and February, to which I refer you for that, as 
well as other useful information. 

In those parts of the union where the winter is very severe and 
the weather changeable, autumnal pruning of fruit trees is not ad- 
viseable, particularly of stone fruit; for by pruning at that season, 
especially if many limbs are cut off, you are apt to bring on the 



224 THE ORCHARD. [Maech. 

canker. The exposure of the wounds, the almost dormant state of 
the sap, together with the additional check to its slow, but certain 
ascent to the extremities occasioned by the amputation of limbs, 
&c., predispose to mortification j whereas in early spring, when the 
sap may be expected soon to follow the knife, the lips will quickly 
grow and heal over. 

It is universally admitted, that the sap continues to flow, though 
slowly, in the milder parts of the winter days, and that it must 
rise continually during the winter months in ever-green trees, 
otherwise their foliage would witherj and also in deciduous trees 
(that is, such as shed their leaves in winter); because the branch of 
an ever-green tree will grow on a deciduous tree, and not loose its 
leaves in winter, as the Prunus Lauro-Cerasus, or European laurel, 
on a cherry; and the ever-green oak, on a common oak. 

When pruning is judiciously done, and at a proper time, if 
the branches are small, a fresh bark and fresh wood will, in one 
season, completely cover the wounds; but if large, a time propor- 
tionate to the size will be necessary for their covering and healing; 
this process, however, is much accelerated by the application of a 
proper composition, which excludes the air and wet, protects the 
wounds from the effects of the various changes of the weather, the 
surrounding bark from any injury by insects or worms, and yields 
to its growth: all these ends will be effectually answered by an 
application of the medicated tar prescribed in page 47; and applied 
as there directed. 

The following compositions have been much spoken of: I shall 
therefore publish them without any comments on their virtues, 
leaving the result to the experience of those who have, or shall have 
tried them; however, I must observe, that the methods of pruning 
old or decayed trees, recommended by Mr. Forsyth, and accom- 
panying his instructions for making the composition, are very judi- 
cious, and should be duly attended to, whatever composition ma^ 
be determined on for use afterwards. 

Royal Gardens, Kensington, May 11, 1791. 

Directions for making a composition for curing diseases, defects, 
and injuries in all kinds of fruit and forest trees, and the method 
of preparing the trees and laying on the composition, by Wil- 
liam Forsyth. 

"Take one bushel of fresh cow dung, half a bushel of lime 
rubbish of old buildings, (that from the ceilings of rooms is prefer- 
able,) half a bushel of wood ashes, and a sixteenth part of a bushef 
of pit or river sand: the three last articles are to be sifted fine 
before they are mixed; then work them well together with a spade, 
and afterwards with a wooden beater, until the stuff:' is very smooth, 
like fine plaster used for the ceilings of rooms. 

"The composition being thus made, care must be taken to pre- 
pare the tree properly for its application, by cutting away all the 
dead, decayed, and injured part till you come to the fresh sound 
wood, leaving the surface of the wood very smooth, and rounding 



March.] THE ORCHARD. 225 

off the edges of the bark with a drawknife, or other instrument, 
perfectly smooth, which must be particularly attended to^ then 
lay on the plaster about an eighth of an inch thick, all over the 
part where the wood or bark has been so cut away, finishing off the 
edges as thin as possible; then take a quantity of dry powder of 
wood-ashes mixed with a sixth part of the same quantity of the 
ashes of burnt bones, put it into a tin box, with holes in the top, 
and shake the powder on the surface of the plaster, till the whole 
is covered over with it, letting it remain for half an hour, to absorb 
the moisture; then apply more powder, rubbing it on gently with 
the hand, and repeating the application of the powder till the whole 
plaster becomes a dry smooth surface. 

"All trees cut down near the ground should have the surface 
made quite smooth, rounding it off in a small degree, as before 
mentioned; and the dry powder directed to be used afterwards 
should have an equal quantity of powder of alabaster mixed with 
it, in order the better to resist the dripping of trees and heavy rains. 

"If any of the composition be left for a future occasion, it should 
be kept in a tub or other vessel, and urine of any kind poured on it, 
so as to cover the surface; otherwise the atmosphere will greatly 
hurt the efficacy of the application. 

"Where lime rubbish of old buildings cannot be easily got, 
take pounded chalk, or common lime, after having been slacked a 
month at least. 

"As the growth of the tree will gradually affect the plaster, by 
raising up its edges next the bark, care should be taken, when that 
happens, to rub it over with the finger when occasion may require 
(which is best done when moistened by rain,) that the plaster may 
be kept whole, to prevent the air and wet from penetrating into the 
wound." 

Additional directions for making and using the composition. 

To the foregoing directions for making and applying the com- 
position, it is necessary to add the following: 

"As the best way of using the composition is found by experience 
to be in a liquid state, it must, therefore, be reduced to the con- 
sistence of pretty thick paint, by mixing it up with a sufficient 
quantity of urine and soap-suds, and laid on with a painter's brush. 
The powder of wood-ashes and burnt bones is to be applied as 
before directed, patting it down with the hand. 

"When trees are become hollow, you must scoop out all the rot- 
ten, loose and dead parts of the trunk till you come to the solid 
wood, leaving the surface smooth; then cover the hollow, and 
every part where the canker has been cut out, or branches lopped 
off, with the composition; and, as the edges grow, take care not to 
let the new wood come in contact with the dead, part of which it 
may be sometimes necessary to leave; but cut out the old dead 
wood as the new advances, keeping a hollow between them, to allow 
the new wood room to extend itself, and thereby fill up the cavity, 
which it will do in time, so as to make, as it were, a new tree. If 
2E 



226 THE ORCHARD. [March. 

the cavity be large, you may cut away as much at one operation as 
will be sufficient for three years. But in this you are to be guided 
by the size of the wound, and other circumstances. When the 
new wood, advancing from both sides of the wound, has almost met, 
cut oft" the bark from both the edges, that the solid wood may join, 
which, if properly managed, it will do, leaving only a slight seam 
in the bark. If the tree be very much decayed, do not cut away all 
the dead wood at once, which would weaken the tree too much, if 
a standard, and endanger its being blown down by the wind. It 
will therefore be necessary to leave part of the dead wood at first, 
to strengthen the tree, and to cut it out by degrees as the new wood 
is formed. If there be any canker, or gum-oozing, the infected 
parts must be pared oft", or cut out with a proper instrument. 

"Some months before the publication of the 'Observations on the 
Diseases, &c. in Fruit and Forest Trees,' I had tried the composi- 
tion in a liquid state, but did not think myself warranted to make 
it public until I had experienced its eft'ects through the winter. 
The success answered my most sanguine expectations; and I have 
used it in that way ever since. By using the composition in a 
liquid state, more than three-fourths of the time and labour is 
saved; and I find it is not so liable to be thrown off" as the lips 
grow, as when laid on in the consistence of plaster; it adheres 
firmly to the naked part of the wound, and yet easily gives way as 
the new wood and bark advances. 

♦'The first time that I tried the composition in a liquid form was 
upon an elm which had been planted about twenty years. It had 
been very much bruised by the roller, had several cavities in it, and 
was very much bark-bound besides. Having prepared the wounds, 
and applied the composition with a painter's brush, I took my 
knife and scarified the tree in four places; I also shaved oft", with 
a drawknife, all the cankery outer bark, and covered the whole 
tree with the composition, shaking the powder of wood-ashes and 
burnt bones all over it. A very heavy rain began in the evening 
and continued all night; yet, to my great surprise, in the morning, 
I found that only some of the powder, which had not had time to 
dry and incorporate with the composition, was washed oft*. I now 
repeated the powder, and without any thing more being done to 
the tree, the wounds healed up and the bark was restored so 
completely, that, three years ago, it could hardly be discerned 
where the wounds had been. The scarifications had also disap- 
peared. Some of the wounds were thirteen inches long, eight 
broad, and three deep. Since the time when it was scarified, the 
tree has increased ten inches more in circumference than a healthy 
tree planted at the same time with it about sixteen feet distant, 
which was not scarified," 

Barneses Composition. 

«'Melt together in a large earthen pipkin, two pound and a half 
of common pitch, and half a pound of common turpentine, then put 
in three quarters of an ounce of powder of aloes, stir them all 



March.] THE ORCHARD. 227 

together, and set the matter on fire; when it has flamed a moment, 
cover it up close and it will go out, then melt it well and fire it again 
in the same way; this must be repeated three times (in the open 
air(; after it has burned the last time melt it again, and put in 
three ounces of yellow wax, shred very thin; and six drachms of 
mastic in powder; let it all melt together till perfectly well mixed, 
then strain it through a coarse cloth, and set it by to cool. 

"When you use this composition, melt a small piece of it, and 
let it cool till it is just sufficiently soft to spread on the part where 
wanted, but it must not be laid on very hot." 

Whenany of your old fruit trees, which you particularly esteem, 
appear on the decline, and are grown thin of young wood, you may 
probably restore them by heading down such limbs as are in a 
bad state, to those parts where young shoots appear, and close to 
the most vigorous', but be careful not to do this generally the same 
season, for that would give too sudden a check to the sap, and 
in all probability destroy the tree totally. But if every other 
branch all over the tree were headed at proper lengths, each close 
to some young shoot, new healthy wood would be produced, which 
would soon come into bearing. The next spring after the first 
branches were headed, the remaining old branches may be cut out, 
as directed above; after which the head of the tree will be soon 
filled with bearing wood, which may afterwards be pruned as 
directed for other trees. This may be practised on either standard, 
wall, or espalier trees. 

Peaches and nectarines will require to be treated with more cau- 
tion than any other kinds; never head them lower down than you 
find young shoots or healthy branches, otherwise you will endanger 
their lives; and always cut close to the most vigorous of these, in 
order that the sap may be drawn that way, by which the wounds 
will heal and cover over. Indeed this caution will be generally 
useful, but more particularly with these. 

When any of the trunks of your trees become hollow, cut out all 
the loose rotten wood, and also examine the roots, cutting off' the 
injured, rotten, or decayed parts. 

As you proceed in pruning, apply to the wounds either of the 
preceding compositions which you prefer, in the manner directed; 
but if your trees are annoyed with worms, the medicated tar is 
decidedly preferable. 

Examine now your fruit trees, particularly the peaches; and if 
annoyed by worms, either in their trunks, branches, about the sur- 
face of the ground, and a little under, pick out as many as you can 
with a sharp pointed knife, and with as little injury to the bark as 
possible; scrape off clean all the gum that appears on the stem or 
branches, and wash all these parts, and any other that you suspect 
to be infested with these insects or their embryos, with the corro- 
sive solution described in page 141, which you may make twice or 
three times as strong as there directed, without the least fear of its 
injuring the tree; then dress the wounded parts with the medicated 
tar, as there directed. 

1 have at the present time (January, 1805,) and have had for 



228 THE ORCHARD. [March. 

several weeks, the roots of polyanthus-narcissuses, hyacinths, and 
other bulbs, growing in bulb-glasses, filled with a much stronger 
solution of the corrosive sublimate than that prescribed in page 
141, and apparently in more health and vigour than those which 
are growing in pure water; I have also washed the leaves, stems, 
branches, and various kinds of tender plants with it, and poured 
it on the earth about their roots in large quantities, without any 
other effect than the destruction of the earth worms, and those 
which annoyed the plants. 

Be very cautious not to leave any of the corrosive sublimate, or 
solution, in a careless manner in or about the house, for, with respect 
to animal life, it is a very active poison; so powerful that when 
administered medicinally, the quarter of a grain, being the two 
hundred and fortieth part of a drachm, is considered a sufficient 
dose for an adult person. 

Extent, Aspect, Situation, and Soil. 

The extent of an orchard should be in proportion to the quantity 
of fruit required either for family use, distillation, cider, &c. or for 
public supply; and may be from half an acre to a hundred acres, 
or more. 

As to aspect, that is not of as much importance as some people 
imagine, especially for apple, pear, and other hardy fruit trees; for 
you will find these growing and bearing fruit in the greatest perfec- 
tion in every aspect where the soil is suitable, and proper care 
taken of the trees; but the more tender and early flowering fruits, 
such as peaches and nectarines, &c. will require to be planted 
where they may have protection from the cold north and north- 
westerly winds; which, when accompanied by frost, often do con- 
siderable injury to their early bloom; and likewise, it will be 
necessary to give a warm exposure, especially in the eastern and 
middle states, to late ripening kinds, such as the heath-peach, &c. 
in order to bring their fruit to maturity in due season. 

In the southern states a north aspect will be the most eligible for 
apple trees, and perhaps for several other kinds. 

With respect to situation very thriving orchards are frequently 
found on high and low grounds, on declivities and plains, in various 
aspects and exposures; but this is in consequence of the natural 
soil being good; you should, however, avoid very low damp situa- 
tions, particularly such as lodge water; for in very wet soils, no 
fruit trees will prosper, nor will the fruit poduced in such places 
be good; but a moderately low situation, free from wet, may be 
more eligible than an elevated ground, as being less exposed to 
tempestuous winds; but if having a gentle declivity the more de- 
sirable. 

A proper soil being the grand and essential requisite, should be 
carefully selected, for on this depends much of your success; a 
good deep sandy loam, neither too dry nor wet, is the most suita- 
ble for all kinds of fruit trees, and whether this be on high or low 
situations it should be preferred to every other. In the heaviest 



March.] THE ORCHARD. 229 

part of this ground you may plant apples and pears; in the lighter, 
plums and cherries; and in the lightest, peach, nectarine, and apri- 
cots. Generally speaking ground that will produce good crops of 
natural grass, or kitchen garden vegetables, is suitable for an 
orchard; if of a loamy nature it will be a particular advantage; any 
soil, however, of a good quality, not too light and dry, nor too 
heavy, stubborn, or wet, and not less than one spade deep of good 
staple will be proper for this purpose. 

Where the soil is naturally defective, such may be assisted by 
the application of proper manures and composts; applying them to 
the whole ground if but of moderate extent, or, if extensive, to the 
place where each tree is to stand, for the space of eight or ten feet 
in diameter, working it up with the natural soil. 

This trouble, however, in extensive orchards would be very ex- 
pensive; therefore those who have choice of ground should be very 
careful to fix upon a proper soil, such as v/ould require but little 
assistance. 

Preparation of the Ground. 

The preparation of the ground, for the reception of fruit trees, 
is either by digging a spacious place for each tree, a general trench- 
ing of the ground, or by ploughing it. If the latter kind of prepa- 
ration is intended, and that the ground has been under pasture for 
some years, you should plough the green sward the spring before 
you plant the trees, and also two or three times in the course of the 
summer following, to rot the sward, pulverize the earth, and to 
prevent the growth of weeds. 

Early in October you should plough it again very deep, running 
the plough twice in each furrow, in order to make it deep and loose 
for the roots of the trees; which should be planted thex'ein in the 
course of the same or next month; but if the soil be moist, March 
will be a much better season. 

Or you may plough as above, eight or ten feet wide for each row 
of trees, leaving the remainder of the ground untouched. 

In planting orchards on a grass ground, in very good soil, you 
may dig a hole for each tree capacious enough for the easy recep- 
tion of all the roots, loosening the bottom well without disturbing 
any other part of the ground; but when it is trenched either wholly, 
or some considerable width along the place of each row of trees, it 
will consequently prove of disproportionate advantage. 

Your orchard should get a good dressing of manure, once in two 
or three years, whether under crops of grain, or grass; this will 
prove very serviceable to the trees, and also more than repay your 
expenses in the abundance of the succeeding crops. If the ground 
is suffered to be exhausted by successive crops of fruit and grass, or 
grain, without refreshing it occasionally by manure it will soon, if 
not extremely fertile, become unfit to produce either. 

Tillage is favourable to the growth of young trees; whereas in 
grass-ground their progress is comparatively slow for want of the 
earth being stirred about their roots, and being frequently injured 



230 THE ORCHARD. [March. 

by grazing stock. Where circumstances will allow it is best to 
plant fruit trees on newlj broken-up ground, and to cultivate the 
soil (refreshing it with manure as often as necessary), until the 
trees are well grown; then to lay it down to grass; for after that 
period the shade of the trees would do less injury to it than to any 
other crop; and besides, the pending boughs would render tillage 
inconvenient. 

Choice of Trees, ^c. 

If not provided with trees in your own nursery, you must apply 
to some public nursery-man of integrity, who will not deceive you 
in the varieties of the kinds wanted: observe in the first place that 
the trees are healthy and fresh looking, without any blemishes or 
appearance of canker or worms in the bark; that they have been 
raised at proper distances, and not drawn up spindling; that their 
heads are well formed and well furnished; that their stems are 
stout, proportionate to their heads, straight, clean, and from five to 
six feet high from the surface to the spreading of the branches; that 
they are not more than from two to four years old from the bud or 
graft, and that all have been worked, that is, budded or grafted, 
for otherwise, there would be no certainty of having good fruit, and 
besides, they would be much longer coming into bearing. 

These are important objects, and such as you cannot be deceived 
in. Never make choice of larger trees nor higher in the stems 
than six feet, especially for general plantations, for they never 
thrive as well as yoUng trees, and are subject to bedashed about by 
the wind after planting. 

The next object is to see them taken up with care, so as to pre- 
serve all their roots as entire as possible; when taken up, prune off 
any broken or bruised parts of the roots, shorten long stragglers, 
and top the ends of the principal roots in general with the knife; 
always observing to prune these roots on the under side, and slop- 
ing outwards. 

Let several varieties of each particular kind be chosen, such as 
ripen their fruit at different periods from the earliest to the latest, 
especially when they are wanted for the table; but by much a 
greater number of autumnal and late ripening kinds, than of the 
early sorts, particularly of the apples; for the early ripening fruits 
are of short duration, and only proper for temporary service. When 
you want apples or peaches for distillation, or cider-making, choose 
proper juicy kinds for that purpose, and quantities proportionate to 
your intentions. 

Method of Planting. 

If the trees have been already trained so as to have full branch- 
ing heads, they must be planted with those entire, only retrenching 
or shortening any irregular or ill-placed branches or shoots that 
take an awkward direction, or that grow across others or such as 
run considerably longer than the generality of the others, either 



March.] THE ORCHARD. 231 

cutting them clean off, close to the places from whence they pro- 
ceed, or to some young shoot or small leading branch, as may 
appear most eligible for giving the tree an open spreading form, 
leaving no stumps or spurs. 

Should you not be able to procure trees having furnished 
and well formed heads, and you are obliged to take such as are 
thin of wood and running up tall, plant them, having their roots 
dressed as before, but without touching their heads for the present. 
So soon after planting as their buds begin to push, head them down 
to within six, eight, or ten inches of the place where you wish them 
to branch out for forming their heads; they will then throw out 
young vigorous shoots, which you may afterwards train and thicken, 
or make thin at pleasure, by judicious pruning in the following 
years; or should any of these young shoots in the course of the 
succeeding months take too great a lead of the others, you may 
top them in July, which will stop their rampant growth, and cause 
them to throw out side shoots that will still enlarge a foundation 
for numerous branches, and not carry off too much of the sap from 
the others. 

Should it happen that any of your trees have large heads and 
but few or scanty roots, reduce their tops by a select and judicious 
pruning to a due proportion with their roots; for an ox fed only 
through a wren's quill, could not long exist. This will seldom 
happen, unless by accident or carelessness in the taking of them 
up, provided they are raised at proper distances in the nursery. 

The arrangement of the trees in the orchard should be in rows, 
each different kind of fruit separate, and at distances proportionate 
to the nature of their growths. Apple and pear trees may be 
planted at fifty feet distance every way; cherry and plum, at from 
thirty to forty; peach, nectarine, apricot, almonds, and quinces, 
at from twenty -five to thirty feet; and at still greater distances, if 
you are not limited in extent of suitable ground, and you intend 
to raise various crops between the trees. 

You should have great regard to the distance of planting the 
trees, which is what few people have rightly considered; for if you 
plant them too close, they will be liable to blights; the air being 
thereby pent in among them, will also cause the fruit to be ill-tast- 
ed; for a great quantity of damp vapours from the perspiration of 
the trees, and the exhalation from the earth mixed with it, will be 
imbibed by the fruit, and render their juices crude and unwhole- 
some; besides, it is the opinion of some well informed naturalists 
and orchardists, that these vapours and perspiration of the trees, 
collect the heat of the sun, and reflect it in streams, so as to cause 
what is called a fire-blast, which is extremely hurtful to fruit, and 
most frequent where the orchards are open to the south sun. 

Having your trees in readiness, proceed to stake or mark out the 
ground, according to the above or greater distances, placing a small 
stake or mark where each hole is to be made for the reception of 
the trees, which, if made to range every loay, will have a very 
agreeable effect, admit the currency of air and sun's influence more 
effectually, and make the orchard still more convenient for tillage. 



232 THE ORCHARD. [March. 

A wide circular hole must be dug for every tree, capacious enough 
to receive all the roots freely vv^ithout touching the sides, but by no 
means of a greater depth than the natural good soil: if you make 
a deep hole, basin like, into the clay bottom, or unfriendly sub-soil, 
which is too frequently done, and plant the roots therein, even fill- 
ing it round with good earth will not do, for as soon as it pushes its 
roots beyond this, they must enter into the bad and unfriendly soil, 
which will not fail to bring on the decay of the most healthy tree, 
and can never aiFord it suitable juices for perfecting delicious fruitj 
besides the lodgment of water about the roots in this confined basin 
in wet seasons, will cause the tree to become sickly, and to get 
overrun with moss, and full of canker. 

When the holes are all ready, proceed to planting, placing a tree 
in each, having its roots trimmed as before, one person holding the 
stem erect, whilst another casts in the earth, previously breaking it 
small; let it be settled in equally between all the roots, by gently 
and frequently shaking the tree a little up and down, which will 
cause the mould to settle in close about all the small roots and 
fibres; and also to raise the tree gradually up, that the crown of the 
roots may not be more than about three or four inches below the 
general surface even in the deepest soil. When the hole is filled 
up, tread it gently, fixs^ round the outside, then near the stem of 
the tree; forming the surface a little hollow, to admit of giving 
water, if found necessary, with more convenience; and if on the 
top of all is laid some inverted turf, to the width of the holes, form- 
ing it into a sort of circular bank, it will support the tree, and guard 
the roots from powerful heat, drought and parching winds; observ- 
ing that each tree stands perfectly upright, and that they range 
exactly in their proper rows. 

Should the earth be rather shallow, so that you cannot cover the 
roots a sufficient depth with good soil, you must have some hauled 
for that purpose to where each tree is to be planted, or collected to 
such places, from the general surface, and bank the roots around 
therewith; for there is no alternative between planting them in the 
good soil, where their roots can take a wide extended horizontal 
direction, and lie within the reach of the genial influence of heat, 
rain, dew and air, and that of an untimely end if planted too deep. 

When you desire to remove large trees of any kind, the best 
method will be to open trenches about their roots, immediately pre- 
vious to the setting in of the frosts, leaving as much earth around 
them as you think can be conveniently moved or carried with the 
trees, cutting at a proper distance the large wide spreading roots, 
and leaving only as many uncut as are sufficient to prevent their 
being blown down; when you find the earth sufficiently bound by 
the frost, work in under, and take them up with the balls, place 
them on a sled, and so carry them to their place of destination: 
previous to planting, smooth all the wounded parts, and prune or 
thin their tops in proportion to their loss of I'oots. 

W^hen a defect in an old orchard is to be supplied, it will be neces- 
sary to take away the earth where the old tree stood to a proper 
depth, and to the extent of a circle of ten feet in diameter, which 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 233 

fill up with fresh earth previous to planting; for it seldoni happens, 
without this management, that young trees thrive, when planted 
where old disordered ones stood. 

If the orchard is much exposed to winds, it will be proper to 
stake the new planted trees to support them in their proper posi- 
tions, and secure them from being rocked to and fro thereby, which 
would greatly retard their rootings — placing one or two strong tall 
stakes to each tree; but in large trees, the most effectual method 
is to have three stakes to each, placed in a triangle, meeting at top 
near the head of the tree, wrapping a hay-band around that part of 
the stem, to prevent its being barked by the stakes or tying; then 
tie the stakes at top close to the tree, with some proper bandage, 
bringing it close about the stem and stakes together, over the hay- 
wrapping, to secure the tree firmly in an erect posture. 

If your young orchard is laid down with grass, no cattle should 
be turned into it to graze at large; unless each tree is previously 
well secured with posts and railing, otherwise they will bark the 
trees, to their very great injury, and eat off" the tops of such of their 
young shoots as they can reach; nor should large cattle be turned 
into any orchards where the branches of the trees are yet low and 
within their reach. 

Where great quantities of fruit are wanted, large avenues of 
apple, pear, peach and cherry trees, &c. may be extended across 
neighbouring fields, which will render them pleasant, and produce 
abundance of fruit; or there may be single rows planted to surround 
fields, &c. which will be found extremely profitable, if in an honest 
neighbourhood. 

You may now plant the boundaries of large orchards with 
English walnuts and Spanish chestnuts; these will not only afford 
you an abundance of fruit, but protect the trees in general from 
the power of tempestuous winds. A small quarter of the orchard 
may be allotted to filberts, mulberries, medlars, berberries, &c., 
and this is a proper time for planting them. 

For the method of raising and propagating all kinds of fruit trees, 
&c., see the Nursery for this and the preceding month; and also 
Jidy. 



THE VINEYARD. 

The Vitis vinefera, or common wine-yielding Vine, is a native 
of the warmer regions of Asia: it is found to be most successful in 
the temperate climates, or between the 30th and 50th degrees of 
north and south latitudes. 

It is cultivated in the greatest perfection in the Island of Madeira, 

lat. 32° North; and in every part of Europe as far North as the 

fiftieth degree of latitude; also at the Cape of Good Hope, about lat. 

33° 50' South, as well as in every corresponding parallel in Asia and 

2F 



234 THE VINEYARD. [March. 

the civilized parts of Africa: yet there are people among us who 
seem to despair of its being possible to cultivate it successfully in the 
United States, and who by this kind of despondency publicly ex- 
pressed, discountenance its cultivation. We have similar climates 
and as suitable soil and situations as are to be found in any of the 
countries where this plant is cultivated, and what to attribute this 
infidelity to I am at a loss to know. What do they perceive insalu- 
brious in the air, or unfriendly to vegetable life in the soil of Ame- 
rica, any more than in trans-atlantic countries; or are they led 
astray by prejudiced European writers, whose envy, or want of 
knowledge, or perhaps both, had prompted them to assert, that 
neither animals nor vegetables arrive at as good or as great perfec- 
tion in America as in Europe? However, a little time and some 
industry will show that this prejudice is erroneous, and that the 
Vine can be cultivated in the far greater part of the Union, to 
immense national, as well as individual advantage. 

The vine was originally introduced into Europe from t^sia Minor; 
and even in the days of Lucullus, the Romans were seldom able to 
regale themselves with its juice, very little wine being made at that 
time within the compass of Italy; and the foreign wines which they 
imported from Jlsia were so dear, that they were rarely introduced 
at an entertainment, and when they were, each guest was indulged 
only with a single draught. But in the seventh century of Rome, 
as their conquests augmented the degree of their wealth, this 
luxury was sought after with avidity, and wines became the object 
of particular attention. In the progress of their conquests, the 
westerly parts of the European continent was at once subjected to 
the «rms and enriched with the vines of Italy; its cultivation went 
on but slowly for some time in these countries, where it has since 
become a staple article of great national importance, perhaps occa- 
sioned by the same kind of doubts, fears, prejudices, and appre- 
hensions that now operate against it in the United States; but these 
at length were surmounted by the industry of a few cultivators who 
had penetration enough to perceive its practicability, and who, no 
doubt, were amply remunerated, in consequence of being first in 
market with large quantities: others perceiving their fortunate suc- 
cess, copied their examples, in expectation of obtaining like profits. 
Similar to this will be its progress in America, and those who first 
commence the business by planting on an extensive scale, will 
assuredly reap the richest harvests. 

The culture of the vine will for some time be an experimental 
business with us; however, the first object is to obtain the kinds 
that will immediately, or soonest accommodate themselves to the 
different regions of the Union; perhaps those from Madeira, or the 
Cape of Good Hope, would best suit in the southern states, those 
from the south of Europe, in the middle, and those from Burgundy, 
Champagne, Switzerland, Bordeaux, or the banks of the Rhine, in 
the eastern states. Trials of this kind should be made, and the 
result carefully attended to; and, indeed, each and every of the 
states, should give a fair trial to the vines of every country, from 
whence they can be procured; by which means, and by which only. 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 935 

they can discover those best adapted to their respective soils and 
climates. 

There is not the least doubt but the vines of any temperate cli- 
mate can be naturalized in any state in the Union in a very short 
time: for there is an astonishing facility in plants to accommodate 
themselves to soil and climate, and in very few more than in the 
vine. The helianthus annuus, or common annual sunflower, is a 
native of Mexico and Peru; and yet we all know that it now grows 
in every part of the Union where introduced, as well as if it were 
indigenous. The helianthus tuberosus, or what is commonly called 
the Jerusalem artichoke, is a tropical plant, being a native of Brazil, 
and is become naturalized to our climates, as well as to those of 
Europe, as far north as St. Petersburg, and perhaps farther. The 
cherry tree, when first introduced into Italy hj Lucullus, a Roman 
general, from the city of Cerasus, in Pontus, whence its name 
Prunus Cerasus, was there treated as a tender exotic; by degrees 
it had crept into Britain, where it was treated for some time in like 
manner; and experience now proves that it thrives in America as 
well as in Italy, Britain, or Pontus itself. Thousands of other 
instances could be adduced of the wisdom and goodness of the 
Creator in furnishing plants with those accommodating powers; but 
the vine has manifested itself in so many, and so universally, that 
it is unnecessary to recapitulate them; yet we frequently meet with 
people who say "it will never succeed here 11" 

It may, however, be proper to remark, that where the peach 
tree perfects its fruit in open field culture, so will the vine; the 
latter is even capable of bearing greater degrees of heat, and of 
producing fruit in perfection in higher latitudes than the former, 
manifested by the quantity of wine made in many places in the 
south of England, from its productions in open vineyard culture; 
whilst there they could not have a single peach from a thousand 
trees cultivated in the same way, principally owing to the want of 
a sufficiency of summer heat to ripen the young wood; and mild as 
their winters are, in comparison to ours, they, under such circum- 
stances, generally destroy the pithy and unripened shoots of the 
peach, without doing near so much injury to those of the vine. On 
the other hand, it is well known that the grape vine will bear fruit 
abundantly, year after year, when forced in pine stoves, with pine 
apples, where, if a peach was introduced, it would scarcely survive 
one season; at least it would not produce a single'fruit worth eating 
the second. 

Before entering on the general culture, I shall give a short descrip- 
tion of tiie varieties of the grape hitherto cultivated in Europe, 
either for making wine, or for the table; many of which are now 
under trial at the Spring-Mill Vineyard, within fourteen miles of 
Philadelphia, the property of a company incorporated by the legis- 
lature of Pennsylvania, "for the promotion of the culture of the 
mne," and under the superintendence of Mr. Peter Legaux, an 
experienced vine-dresser, and a gentleman of worth and science. 

These I shall divide into three classes, in the order of their 
ripening. 1. Those which ripen earliest. 2. Those which succeed 



236 'THE VINEYARD. [March. 

them; and 3. The latest coming to maturity. Perhaps the first 
class might be best adapted for the more immediate culture in the 
eastern states; the second in the middle; and the third in the 
southern states. But, experiments on all the kinds that it is pos- 
sible to procure, should be tried in each state of the Union; giving, 
at the same time, suitable soil and situation to each class, accord- 
ing to their periods of ripening; that is, to give the latest kinds the 
warmest exposure, &c. 

First Class. 

1. The White Frontiaac, or Muscat Blanc, is a high flavoured 
grape, and has a peculiar rich juice when perfectly ripe; the bunches 
are large, and the berries, which are round, are very closely joined 
to each other, whereby some of them in wet seasons are apt to rot 
before they are ripe, which, in some measure, is owing to the thin- 
ness of their skins: those who wish to have them in the best perfec- 
tion, will thin them out when about the size of peas, whereby the 
air will have free admittance, and those which are left, will be 
larger and higher flavoured. 

2. The Blue, or Violet Frontinac, or Muscat Violet. This has a 
small black berry, powdered with a tine blue or violet bloom, and 
is of an exalted vinous flavour. The berries grow close upon the 
bunches, which are very small. 

3. The White Sweet Water. This is a very large round white 
grape. The berries grow close on the bunch, which is of a moderate 
size, and are replete with an agreeable juice. The skin and flesh 
of this grape are more delicate than of any other sort. The 
berries on the sides of the bunches next the sun, are clouded with 
spots of a russet colour. 

4. The Black Sweet Water. The berries of this variety are much 
smaller than the former; are black, roundish, grow in small, short, 
close bunches, and are replete with a very sweet juice. 

5. The Brick Grape. The berries of this kind are small, inclin- 
ing to an oval figure, and of a pale red or brick colour. This is a 
very sweet grape, though not much admired. 

6. The White Muscadine, or Chasselas Blanc. This is a round 
white berry, moderately large, with a thin skin and delicate juicy 
flesh. The bunch is well formed and of a pretty good size. This 
is an early grape and a great bearer. 

7. The Munier, or Miller^s Burgundy Grape. The berries are 
small, black, rather inclining to an oval figure, and grow close on 
the bunch, which is commonly short and small. The skin and flesh 
are delicate, possessing a sweet and pleasant juice. The leaves 
are distinguishable from most others by a hoary down, especially 
when young, being then almost white. This is an excellent bearer, 
and a principal grape to be cultivated for wine. 

8. The Small Black Cluster. The berries and bunches of this 
grape are little diflierent* from the former, but the leaves have less 
down, and are smaller. This is a delicate sweet fruit, and is some- 
times called the Burgundy grape. 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 237 

9. The Early Black July Grape, Morillon Noir, or Hatif Noir. 
This has a small black round berry, replete with a sugary juice; 
the bunches also are small and thin set, but it is also a prolific 
bearer, and comes to the table at an early period. 

10. The Early White Grape, from Teneriffe. The berries of 
this variety are round, white, and of a moderate size, with thin 
skins and delicate juicy flesh, of an extraordinary sweetness. The 
berries and bunches much resemble the common Muscadine, to 
which it appears to have a near affinity. 

11. The Auvernat Noir of 0^'leans, Pineau of Burgundy, or 
True Burgundy Grape, sometimes called the black morillon, is 
an indifferent truit for the table, but is esteemed one of the best 
for making wine. It is of a middle size, somewhat of an oval, 
and of a fine black colour; the bunches are longer than Miller's 
Burgundy. 

Second Class. 

12. The Aleppo Grape. This is a middle sized, roundish grape, 
with a thin skin and delicate juicy flesh, of an exquisite vinous 
flavour. The colour is commonly very various, some of the berries 
being white, others black, but the major part are curiously striped 
with black and white; but what appears most remarkable is, that 
the colours do not intermix, but are divided by straight lines as if 
painted. The leaves of this sort are in the autumn very curiously 
striped with red, green, and yellow, somewhat similar to the Aleppo 
lettuce. 

13. The Grizzly Frontinac. The berries of this grape are round, 
tolerably large, and their colour brown and red, intermixed with 
yellow. Both this and No. 1, possess a high, musky, perfumed 
flavour. 

14. The Black or Purple Frontinac, or Muscat Noir. The ber- 
ries of this variety are black when ripe, and covered with a kind of 
powder, which gives them a purple hue; are moderately large, 
round, and of a most exquisite flavour. They compose very long 
bunches. This has formerly been called the red Frontinac, and is 
one of the very best grapes. It is called at the Cape of Good 
Hope, the black Constantia. 

15. The Red Frontinac, or Muscat Rouge. This is a very fine 
grape and greatly esteemed. The berries are of a brick colour, 
thin skin, moderate size, and juicy delicate flesh. 

16. The Black Hamburg. The berries of this variety are large, 
inclining to an oval figure, and of a black colour. They hang 
loosely on the bunch, and compose well formed handsome bunches. 
The skin is thick, and the pulp hard; but, notwithstanding, it is a 
very valuable grape, being a good flavoured fruit and a plentiful 
bearer. 

17. The Red Hamburg. The berries of this sort are of a dark 
red, with thin skins and juicy delicate flesh. The size and figure 
of both the berry and bunch are nearly like the former. It is some- 
times called the Gibraltar grape. 



238 THE VINEYARD. [March. 

18. The Malvoise. The berries of this are small, rather inclin- 
ing to an oval figure, and of a brown colour. The skin is thin, 
and the flesh delicate, replete with a vinous juice. As the berries 
are powderd with a blue bloom, it is sometimes called the blue 
Tokaj. 

19. The Genuine Tokay. This is a white grape. The berries 
incline to an oval figure, and grow rather close on the bunch, which 
is of a moderate size. The skin is thin and flesh delicate, abound- 
ing with a very agreeable juice. This variety is very distinguisha- 
ble by the foliage, the under side of the leaf being covered with a 
fine soft down, having the appearance of satin. 

20. The Lomhardy Grape. This has a large berry inclining to 
an oval figure, of a beautiful flame colour. The bunches are regu- 
larly formed with shoulders, and frequently arrive to the weight of 
six or seven pounds. The leaves are much more divided than most 
other sorts, and the upper surface is of a deep green colour. This 
is by some called the Rhenish grape, and by others the flame- 
coloured Tokay. 

21. The Symrna Grape. This has a large red coloured berry of 
an oval figure, with thin skin and delicate juicy flesh. It forms long 
branches, with shoulders loosely connected. The leaves in autumn 
die with purple edges. 

22. The Alicant, or Black Spanish Grape. The berries of this 
variety incline to an oval shape, are moderately large and black, 
and form exceeding long unshouldered bunches. The flesh is soft, 
juicy, and of an agreeable flavour. The leaves in autumn are beau- 
tifully variegated with red, green, and yellow. This is a pretty 
good fruit, and is sometimes, though incorrectly, called the Lom- 
bardy grape. 

23. The Black Muscadine. The berries and bunches of this 
variety are somewhat smaller than those of No. 7. This is a very 
prolific grape, and makes a fine appearance on account of the black 
berries being powdered with a bluish bloom; but the flesh is not so 
delicate and juicy as the former. 

24. The Royal Muscadine, D'*Jlrhoyce, or Chasselas Blanc. This 
has a round white or amber-coloured berry, of a moderate size, a 
thin skin, and a juicy, soft flesh. The bunches are generally ex- 
ceeding large, sometimes arriving to six or seven pounds. This 
variety is very distinguishable by the wood and foliage, generally 
growing remarkably gross and strong, and is considered an excel- 
lent table grape. 

25. The Malmsey Muscadine. This seems nearly allied to the 
preceding, but the bunches and berries are somewhat smaller, and 
the juice of a higher flavour, being remarkably sweet. This is a 
good bearer, a very fine grape, and said to be one of those of which 
the Madeira wine is made. 

26. The Claret Grape. The berries>of this are small, black, and 
inclining to an oval figure; they grow close and form small bunches. 
The juice is of a blood-red colour, of a harsh taste, excepting the 
grapes are perfectly matured, and then it may be considered as an 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 339 

agreeable and delicate fruit. The leaves change from green to a 
russet-red early in summer, and die a deep red in autumn. 

.27. The Large Black Cluster, or Lisbon Grape. The berries are 
large and grow more oval than the two former varieties, which are 
black, and not so delicate, the juice being of a harsh and rough taste. 
The leaves in autumn, when on the decline, change to a beautiful 
bright scarlet. This is the grape of which the red port wine is 
made. 

28. The White Morillon. This has an oval white berry, of a 
moderate size, with thin skin and delicate juicy flesh. It grows 
close on the bunches, which are small. The leaves are soft, being 
greatly covered with down on the under side, somewhat similar to 
the genuine Tokay grape, to which it appears nearly allied. 

29. Cafs Grape. This has a small oval berry, of a greenish- 
white colour, with a thin skin and soft juicy flesh. The berries grow 
close, forming small bunches. The taste of this fruit before it is 
quite matured is disagreeable; but when perfectly ripe is very sweet 
and pleasing to some palates. 

30. The *S7. Feter^s Grape. This has a pretty large berry, in- 
clining to an oval form, and of a deep black colour when ripe; the 
skin is thin, and the flesh very delicate and juicy. This vine pro- 
duces large shouldered bunches, and the leaves are much more 
divided than those of most other sorts. 

31. The Black Grape from Palestine. This appears nearly 
similar to the preceding, but may probably be a distinct variety. 

32. The White parsley-leaved Grape, or Ciotat. This is a variety 
of the parsley-leaved grape. The berries are round, white, of a 
moderate size, with thin skins and delicate juicy flesh, which is 
very sweet but not of a vinous flavour. The branches are of a 
pretty good size, almost similar to the white Muscadine. The leaves 
are finely divided, differing from any other sort. There is a variety 
of the parsley-leaved grape which produces red berries. 

33. The Black Lisbon Grape. This has a large globular berry, 
black, thin skinned and juicy. It has also large shouldered bunches, 
which not a little resembles the black Hamburgh. This is a good 
grape. 

34. The Greek Grape. The berries of this variety are of a 
moderate size, rather inclining to an oval figure, of a bluish-white 
colour, and grow close, forming moderate sized handsome bunches. 
The leaves grow on very short foot stalks, and bear a resemblance 
to those of the Siveet-Water. It is a delicate and justly esteemed 
fruit. 

55. The White Corinth Grape. This has a white, round berry, 
rather small, with a thin skin and very delicate juicy flesh, of an 
agreeable flavour. The bunches too are rather small. The berries, 
when perfectly ripe, arc transparent, so that the seeds appear very 
distinctly. 

36. The WJiite Muscat of Lunel. The berries of this arc large 
and oval, and when perfectly ripe are of a fine amber colour, some- 
what clouded with brown or russet, especially on the side next the 
sun. The skin is thin and the flesh delicate, replete with a vinous 



240 THE VINEYARD. [March. 

juice. As this grape is a very plentiful bearer, and forms pretty 
large bunches, it may justly be deemed a valuable sort. 

37. The Red Chasselas, or Chasselas Rouge is very like the 
Chasselas Blanc, No. 6, in size and shape, but is of a dark red 
colour. It is a very good grape, but ripens later than the white. 

Third Class. 

38. The White Muscat of .Alexandria, or Alexandrian Frontinac, 
The berries of this are large and oval, the bunches long, and, when 
perfectly ripe, are of a fine amber colour; the skin thick, pulp firm, 
the juice rich and vinous, and of a high musky flavour; the berries 
hang loosely, ripen well, and are in great estimation. 

39. The Red Muscat of Mexandria. This resembles the former, 
only the berries are red; it is a most excellent grape, and highly 
worthy of cultivation. 

40. The Black Damascus. The berries of this are large, round, 
and of a fine black colour; the skin thin, the flesh juicy, and of an 
exquisite flavour. The same bunch commonly consists of different 
sizes; the small berries are without stones, and the large ones con- 
tain only one in each berry; this is an excellent sort. 

41. The Black Tripoli Grape. This grape seems nearly allied 
to the Black Damascus, but the bunches are always composed of 
large berries of an equal size, and with one stone in each. This 
circumstance of the berries being equal in size, renders the bunches 
of a more agreeable appearance; the foliage in both are exceedingly 
beautiful in the fall, assuming a reddish hue, and very similar: this 
is a very good grape. 

42. The Red Grape from Syracuse. This is a very large grape, 
of a red colour and oval figure, somewhat irregularly formed; the 
berries hang together loosely on the bunches, which are pretty 
large: this is a most excellent grape. 

43. Le Cceur Grape, or Morocco Grape. This produces large 
berries, in figure somewhat heart-shaped, and of a tawny grizzly 
colour. The bunches are often composed of unequally sized ber- 
ries, some of them exceedingly large; these never contain more 
than one stone each, and the lesser-sized berries are always with- 
out stones. The foot-stalks of the berries are short, and singularly 
large, differing from most other sorts. This is a much esteemed 
grape. 

44. The Golden Galician. The berries of this variety are large, 
and of an oval figure; the flesh hard, but of a tolerable flavour: 
these, together with the foot-stalks, are of a light yellow colour. 

45. The Black Muscadel. The berries of this are large, oval, 
and of a black colour; the skin thin, with a delicate juicy flesh. 
The same bunch contains berries of different sizes, some of them 
very large and long, but somewhat compressed at the ends: the 
leaves change in autumn to a beautiful scarlet. 

46. The Red Muscadel. The berries of this sort are large, oval, 
and of a beautiful red colour; the skin thick, and the flesh hard, 
something like the raisin grape. The bunches frequently arrive to 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 241 

five or six pounds, and are most elegantly formed of berries of an 
equal size. This is one of the largest grapes. The leaves change 
in autumn to a beautiful red and green. 

47. The White Grape from Mcohaca. This has a large oval, white 
berry with a thin skin and juicy flesh; the bunches are large and 
long, without shoulders. 

48. The White Hamburg. This has an oval berry, with a thick 
skin and hard flesh. As this variety is a plentiful bearer, and forms 
large bunches, it is much admired by some, but is not so valuable 
as either of the two preceding kinds. It is sometimes called the 
Portugal Grape. 

49. The Syrian Grape. The berries are white, large, and of an 
oval figure; the skin thick, and the flesh firm and hard; the bunches 
well formed, and enormously large. Though this is generally con- 
sidered as a coarse fruit, it has properties that ought to introduce it 
into every large collection. It is very prolific, and the bunches 
commonly grow very large, sometimes to upwards of twelve pounds, 
making a most beautiful appearance, and, when well perfected, may 
be called a very eatable fruit; they may without difficulty be kept 
many weeks longer than any other kind. This grape requires a 
very warm exposure. 

50. The Black Raisin Grape. The berries of this variety are 
oval and black, with a thick skin and a hard, firm flesh. It forms 
long handsome bunches. 

51. The White Raisin Grape. The properties of this grape are 
nearly similar to the preceding, but the berries are white. 

52. The Damsom Grape. The berries of this variety are very 
large, oval, and of a beautiful purple colour. They grow loose on 
the bunch, which is large. The leaves of this grape are large, and 
more thick and succulent than those of any other sort, and have 
something of the appearance of green leather. 

53. The Cornichon Grape. The berries of a remarkable shape, 
about an inch and a half long; their breadth not half an inch. 
They taper from the stalk, but not in a regular manner, and end 
in a blunt point, according to the French something like a horn; 
but its figure is more like the long- end of a small fish's bladder. 
The berries are white, with a thick skin and a firm, sweet flesh. 

54. The New Muscat of Jerusalem. This variety has large 
round berries of a red colour, nearly as large as middle sized goose- 
berries. 

53. The Black Prince. This has fine large black berries, and 
the bunches grow to a large size, frequently to a pound and a half. 

American Species of Vine. 

The following species of the vine are indigenous in America. 

1st. The Vitis sylvestris, or common bunch grape. 

2nd. The Vitis vulpina, of Bartram; V. Labrusca, of Linn., or 
fox -grape. 

3a. The Vitis taurina, of Bartram, or Vitis Vulpina of Linn.; 
commonly called the bull or bullet-grape. 
2 G 



242 THE VINEYARD. [March. 

4th. The Vitis serotina, or winter-grape, by some called the 
Bermudian grape. 

There are several varieties produced by the intermixtures of the 
above with one another, or with the varieties of the Vitis vinifera, 
which are called hybrids or mules; the most noted are, 1. Alex- 
ander's or Tasker's grape; 2. Bland's grape; 3. That called the 
racoon grape. From either of these hybrids, it is probable that 
good wine may be produced; but I shall leiave that to the expe- 
rience of those who have made, or wish to make the experiment. At 
the same time, I would suggest the idea of grafting some of the best 
European kinds on our most vigorous native vines, which, no 
doubt, would answer a very good purpose. 

Soil and Situation. 

The first and most important thing to be considered in planting 
a vineyard, is the choice of soil and situation; for on these depend 
much of the ultimate success. That best adapted for a vineyard, 
is a light, rich, deep loam; on a chalky, limestone, flinty, or gra- 
velly bottom; it should be naturally from one to two feet deep, of 
good mellow earth, or made so by art: a deeper soil is unnecessary 
for any tree or shrub whatever, that is not cultivated on account of 
its roots; and although vines may shoot more vigorously in such, 
and produce a greater quantity of fruit, which, by the bye, is very 
questionable, yet they ripen later, and their juice is more crude 
than that of those which draw their nourishment from earth within 
the influence of the sun, air, rains, dews, &c. 

The situation should be on an elevation inclining to the south, 
south-east, or south-west; and if having all these exposures, the 
better, as the various kinds could have different situations according 
to their natures and necessities. The ground should have a gra- 
dual descent, that the moisture may be drained off"; but if too rapid, 
it will be more difficult to labour, as the plough cannot then be used; 
and besides, it will be less retentive of manure, and consequently 
will require a greater quantity, and more frequently administered. 
If at a distance there are large hills, or elevated woods, to defend it 
from the north and north-westerly winds, the better. 

The immediate neighbourhood should be open; and, if hilly, 
towards the north and north-west, the better: it should be free 
from swamps, or widely extended woods; for, under such circum- 
stances, the air would frequently be replete with too great a quan- 
tity of moisture, occasioned by the perspiration of the trees, and 
the exhalations from the adjoining swamps, whereby both vines and 
fruit would be greatly subjected to what is called the mildew. It 
has been observed in the middle states, particularly by Mr. Peter 
Legaux, of Spring-Mill, near Philadelphia, that the more easterly 
the exposure, the more are the vines and fruit liable to become 
mildewed; and that, in a south-west exposure, they are less sub- 
ject to it than in any other. 

Those who wish to cultivate grapes for the table only, and that 
have not the advantage of the kind of soil above described, need not 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 243 

despair of having good fruit for that purpose, as vines will grow 
and bear well in any dry and tolerably rich ground; that is, neither 
sandy nor light to excess, nor too clayey or binding: for a tolerable 
stiff loam will do well enough with the assistance of good culture. 

Preparation of the Soil. 

Having made choice of soil and situation, the next thing to be 
done, is to prepare it for planting; in doing of which, the follow- 
ing method is to be observed. In the spring, if the soil is not 
naturally rich, give it a good coat of well rotted manure, or com- 
post; and immediately plough it in as deep as can be done, with 
four or six stout horses, or oxen, and a strong plough; after it has 
lain a month, cross harrow it, and cleanse it from stones and the 
roots of noxious weeds. About the middle of June, cross plough 
it again as deep as possible; in three weeks after, harrow it, and 
clear oft" all the roots of weeds and large stones. Towards the 
latter end of August, plough it again, and harrow as before. In 
November, give it another very deep ploughing, and let it lay so 
all winter without harrowing. As early in the month of March 
following as you find it sufficiently dry, and in good state for til- 
lage, but not before, plough it across the hill, and as deep as you 
can, running the plough twice in each score; then harrow it well, 
and you have it in a fine state for planting. 

In some ground, and very frequently in that extremely well 
adapted to the culture of the vine, the declivity is too great to cul- 
tivate it with the plough; in which case, it must be done with the 
spade, and other manual implements; and it would be well, if 
such land could be thrown, or banked up into terraces, each capa- 
ble of receiving one, two, or three rows of vines, the better to 
retain the necessary manure and moisture. 

Preparations for Planting, ^c. 

Being provided with a number of four feet stakes, in proportion 
to the quantity you intend planting, and made as directed in Janic- 
ary, page 48, "mark out your ground, in rows ranging north and 
south, as well as east and west, by placing those stakes at intervals 
of six feet distance every way, so as it maybe convenient to plough 
and harrow between the rows in these directions. This is meant 
for a south exposure: but in others they are generally arranged 
up and down hill, as well as across; though the former direction 
may be given to the rows in any situation, and perhaps with more 
advantage, as to ease of culture, and benefit of the sun. 

Six feet plant from plant, every way, will not be too great a dis- 
tance, however it may appear at first view; especially in a country 
where Providence has been very bountiful in blessing its inhabitants 
with abundance of ground, as well as with every thing else that 
tends to make an industrious man happy; for if planted too close, 
there will not be room for the sun and air to pass freely between 
the rows, to ripen the fruit and dry up the moisture and autumnal 



244 "^HE VINEYARD. [March. 

damps, which would otherwise be imbibed by the fruit, and render 
it crude and insipid; and more particularly so when their stocks 
grow large, and their branches proportionably extend themselves 
on each side. 

The next thing to be considered is the choice of proper sorts. 
It is worthy of particular notice, that the best grapes for eating are, 
for the most part, the worst for making wine. This is agreeable 
to the practice of cider-makers, who always prefer the rough, juicy, 
and austere kinds of apples to those that are considered best for 
the table, and also to that of the most skilful Vignerons of Europe, 
whoare very particular in selecting such kinds of grapes whose juice 
after being pressed and properly fermented, affords a vinous, rich 
liquor. 

The Jluvernat Noir, or true Burgundy grape, is the kind most 
preferred, and in the greatest repute in Burgundy, Champagne^ 
Orleans, and most of the wine countries in France. The Munier 
is also in great repute; but as far as I have yet observed, I have 
seen no kind more likely to answer for making good wine in 
America than the Constantia, or Cape of Good Hope grape,* and 
with either of these the claret grape, to heighten and enliven the 
colour, when red wine is intended to be made. 

But as this business is yet in its infancy here, and as the differ- 
ence of soil and climate is well known to make a material change 
in the produce of the same kind of grape, experiments must be 
made on the various sorts, in .order to ascertain which may best 
answer the purpose. 

I shall now proceed to the different methods of propagating the 
vine, and then to its planting. 

Propagation in general. 

The vine admits of being propagated various ways: first, by seeds; 
secondly, by layers; and thirdly, by cuttings. This tree can also 
be propagated by grafting, inoculation, and in arching. 

Propagation by seed is undoubtedly the way to raise w^w kinds, 
but is seldom practised, on account of the length of time and 
hazard of obtaining better, or even as good kinds, as the original 
grapes from whence the seeds were taken; but this should never 
deter, for superior kinds may be obtained, and a seedling vine, 
judiciously managed, will produce fruit in about seven years, or 
perhaps sooner. 

Propagation by Seed. 

When you raise vines from seed, always be sure to do it from 
the very best kinds. The grapes for seed should be permitted to 

* This grape was imported from the Cape of Good Hope some years 
^go? hy Mr. Legaux of Spring Mill, before mentioned, who for several years 
past has made wine from it, of a most excellent quality, and also from the 
Munier. 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 245 

remain on the plant until they are perfectly ripe. As soon as the 
seed is taken from the pulp, it should be laid in some airy, but 
shady place, to dry, and then carefully preserved in sand till spring. 
If, however, the seeds were immediately sown in pots, and preserv- 
ed in a hot-house, green-house, or under the protection of glasses, 
till spring, they would then more freely vegetate. Or, sow the 
seed in February or March, and plunge the pots into a temperate 
hot-bed; when the plants appear, they will require, from time to 
time, gentle sprinklings of water, and protection from frost and 
cold. When so far advanced as to have three or four joints each, 
they must be carefully shaked out, and planted each in a sepa- 
rate pot. 

The greatest care will be required in the performance of the 
above operation, as it will be beneficial to preserve as much of the 
earth to the roots as possible: then plunge the pots into a gentle 
hot-bed; give the plants a little water and occasional shade from 
a strong sun, till they have taken root; after which, give them 
plenty of air occasionally, so as to inure them to the open weather, 
and have them fit to turn out of the pots in July, with the balls of 
earth, wherever they are intended to remain; and from thence for- 
ward, they may be treated exactly in the same manner as recom- 
mended hereafter for plants raised from cuttings, only that they 
will require some slight protection from the frosts of the ensuing 
winter. 

Propagation by Layers. 

When the vine is intended to be propagated by layers, the best 
shoots of the preceding season that can be most conveniently 
brought to the earth, are to be chosen for that purpose. After 
making the ground light and fine with the spade, each shoot must 
be fastened with a hooked stick, about five or six inches below the 
surface, with the tops somewhat erect, and cut so as to leave but 
two buds above ground: this work may be done at any time 
when the weather permits, from the middle or beginning of October 
till the end of March, or rather until and at the time of spring prun- 
ing; for, if done much later, the top of the layer where cut, and 
even the parts bent in the operation, would bleed, which would 
injure it considerably. Some give them a slit where inserted into 
the earth, but they will root freely with or without such. 

During summer, if the w^eather proves dry, a little water occa- 
sionally would be of use to them, just so much as will keep the 
ground in a moist state. The autumn, or spring following, the 
layers may be taken otF from the mother plants, their tops pruned, 
the extreme ends of the stems beyond the young roots cut oft" close 
to them, and so planted where they are to remain; but I would 
prefer doing this early in March. 

This is a very useful and necessary operation, when any of your 
plants in the vineyard are bad kinds, or in an indifferent state of 
health, for you can extend the end of a long shoot from a neigh- 
bouring plant to where the bad plant was, or stands, entering it 



246 THE VINEYARD. [March. 

into the earth as before, where you wish it to grow, and the next 
season you will have a fine vigorous plant; observing then, to detach 
it from the mother vine, by cutting off the connection close to its 
new established roots; or you may lay it all the way in the earth 
from the mother plant to where you desire its top to grow, and in 
a year disconnect them near to the old plant; this will be the better 
way, provided you lay it in deeper than the ordinary culture, to 
secure it from being disturbed thereby. This the French call 
Provigner la vigne. 

Propagation by Cuttings. 

The method of propagating the vine by cuttings, is in more gene- 
ral practice than by that of layers, and very justly; for plants raised 
in the latter way are found to be much inferior to those raised by 
cuttings, both in point of vigour and durability. 

The particulars necessary to form a good cutting, are princi- 
pally these: 1st. The eye or bud should be large and prominent. 
2nd. The shoots moderately strong, round and short jointed. 3d. 
The texture of the wood should be close, solid, and compact; but 
the best criterion of its maturity is its solidity, and having very 
little pith: it is absurd to expect good success or prosperous 
plants from wood imperfectly ripened. 

Unskilful persons frequently choose remarkably strong shoots 
for cuttings: the extraordinary size is one of the least necessary 
requisites; indeed, exceeding strong shoots generally abound too 
much with pith, and are too long jointed to claim a preference. 

In the proper pruning season, which, in the middle states, I con- 
ceive to be the latter end of February, or first week in March, 
much earlier in the southern states, and very little later in the 
eastern — take your cuttings from the old vines, near to where they 
were produced; cut off the lower end of each in a sloping manner, 
half an inch below a bud, and the upper end, in like manner, an 
inch above one, having the slope on the opposite side of the bud, and 
leaving the cutting from twelve to sixteen inches long; but twelve 
is sufficient, if short-jointed, and furnished with at least four or five 
good buds. 

There can be but one prime cutting obtained from each shoot, 
though many persons cut these into several lengths, and plant them 
all, which should not be done except in cases of necessity, for the 
upper parts are never so well ripened as the lower, on account of 
these being produced at an earlier period, and having the advantage 
of the whole season to perfect their maturity. The upper parts 
being soft and spongy, admit the moisture too freely, which often 
prevents their growth, and even should they succeed, they will not 
produce fruit so soon, nor will they bear so abundantly for many 
years as those whose wood is close, compact, and already organized 
for fructification- 
Some people recommend taking off the cuttings with an inch or 
two of the two years' old wood annexed, but this is unnecessary, 
and even injurious, unless the species of plant which you are pro- 



March.] THE VINEYARD. 247 

pagating is extremely pithy and spongy, like the j&g; for the nearer 
we approach to nature's method, by having as little old wood as 
possible about the root of a young plant, the better. 

When the cuttings are thus prepared they should be laid in 
trenches close to each other, in some dry part of the vineyard, and 
covered with earth to within two inches of their tops, where they 
are to remain till you are ready to plant them; covering them in 
frosty or parching weather with some loose dry litter, which is to 
be taken oft' every mild day, that they may the more effectually be 
inured to the open air. This is the best method of preserving them, 
even during the entire winter. I do not approve of keeping cut- 
tings for any length of time in close, dark, unventilated cellars; 
for in such places they become weak, blanched, tender and sickly, 
and seldom succeed well when planted out; besides, they have 
nothing to imbibe whilst there but foul air, which vitiates their 
juices, and brings on diseases and bad health. 

Method of Planting. 

Having your ground prepared and marked out with stakes, as 
before directed, and your cuttings in readiness, so soon after the 
middle of this month as you find the soil dry and in good order, 
proceed to planting, in the following manner: — Take up a number 
of your cuttings carefully, without injuring the buds, and place 
them in a bucket of dung water about six inches deep, the bucket 
having a handle for the convenience of carrying it from place to 
place; then, at each stake, make a hole with a spade, about a foot 
deep, and as wide as you please, but it will be better to have all 
these holes made the day before you commence planting; into each 
put one strong cutting, placing it a little sloping, and so deep that 
the second bud from the top may be just on a level with the gene- 
ral surface; immediately fill the hole with earth, pressing it gently 
with your feet to the cutting, and drav/ing the loose earth around so 
as to cover the second bud, before noticed, half an inch deep, which 
bud so protected, will frequently make the most vigorous shoot, 
and often succeed when the top bud, exposed to the weather, will 
not; then drive down the stake, so as to make it firm, within three 
inches of the plant. 

If your cuttings are not extremely good and fresh, and such as 
may be depended on, it will be the more certain way to plant two in 
each hole, the tops within a few inches of each other, and the lower 
ends sloping in opposite directions for the greater convenience, if 
both should succeed, of removing one without disturbing the other; 
these extra plants may be made use of next season to fill up vacan- 
cies, or to form a new plantation. 

Cuttings are generally preferred for this purpose to rooted plants, 
as they are thought to establish themselves more effectually when 
not removed; however, when such are to be planted, keep their 
roots out of ground but as short a time as possible; and if immersed 
when taken up in a pap of earth and water, or dung and water, the 
better: plant them in the same manner as directed for the cuttings. 



248 THE NURSERY. [March. 

pruning their heads and observing to place their roots, after first 
shortening any long stragglers, in a spreading manner in the earth, 
and then cover them up as before. 

It is necessary that each particular kind of grape should be 
planted in separate quarters, that they may all be gathered when 
ripe without injuring othersj for when planted in a mixed, confused 
way, the going through the different quarters to pull the fruit of a 
vine here and there is very inconvenient, and often the later ripen- 
ing intervening kinds are injured thereby. 

If your ground is intended to be cultivated, after planting, with 
the plough, you must leave sufficient head lands for the horses to 
turn in. 

In the course of this month, as soon after pruning as the ground 
is dry and in good condition for tillage, plough and harrow between 
the rows of your former plantations of vines, previously giving 
such quarters as need it a dressing of well rotted manure? and dig, 
or give a deep hoeing to such places as cannot be come at with the 
plough. 



THE NURSERY. 

Grafting. 

It is too difficult a task to state the precise time of grafting the 
various kinds of fruit and other trees, in the different climates and 
states of the Union; but as I cannot do this with precision, and 
must confine myself, in this article, to the periods most suitable for 
performing that operation in the middle states, where I am best 
acquainted with the seasons, I will give such hints as will lead to 
a perfect knowledge of the true periods for grafting in every country 
and every place. 

The best time for grafting, in the middle states, is generally 
from the twentieth of March to the tenth of April, a few dajs 
earlier or later, as vegetation may happen to be in an advanced or 
retarded state, which sometimes makes a difference of ten or twelve 
days. 

Grafting is always most successful when done at the period that 
the buds of your stocks are swelled, so as to be nearly ready to 
burst into leaf; this is the time in which the greatest success may 
be expected, and should be very particularly attended to; however, 
if done a few days before, or even when the stocks display several 
expanded leaves, there may be a tolerably good hit, provided the 
operation is judiciously performed. 

Your scions or grafts must be taken off about a month or three 
weeks before this crisis, or so soon as you are able to perceive 
the least disposition in their buds to swell; for, if not cut off in pro- 



March.] THE NURSERY. 249 

per time, the grafts will not take kindly, nor will they shoot so 
vig;orously. 

The proper sorts to begin with, in respect to fruit trees, are 
cherries and plums, and, if you please, peaches, nectarines, and 
apricots; but the latter kinds are generally propagated by budding 
or inoculation. Pears, filberts, and apples may be grafted at the 
same time; but the latter may be deferred for ten days longer than 
either of the former, provided the cions were taken ott' in due time; 
pears will also agree with tolerable late grafting. 

Before I proceed to the methods of grafting it will first be neces- 
sary to mention what stocks are proper to graft the different kinds 
of fruit upon; for instance, apples should be grafted upon stocks 
raised from the kernels of the same kind of fruit; that is, any kind 
of apples; for the grafts or buds of these trees will not take well 
upon any other stocks. 

It should be observed that for dwarf apple trees for walls or 
espaliers, or for small standards, they should generally be grafted 
upon codlin apple stocks, raised either from suckers from the root, 
or by cuttings or layers; for the. stocks raised from these are never 
so luxuriant in growth as tliose of the larger growing apple trees; 
and consequently trees grafted upon such stocks will be slower in 
growth and can more easily be kept within due compass, and will 
answer the purpose for dwarfs or espaliers, &c. much better than 
those grafted on larger growing kinds. Or, if required to have 
them of still more dwarfish growth for small gardens, you may use 
stocks of the Dutch paradise apple and Siberian crab, &c. 

But for the general supply of apple stocks for common standards 
and large espalier trees, they are raised principally from the seed 
of any sort of apples or wild crabs. 

Pears are generally grafted or budded upon stocks raised also 
from kernels of any of their own kinds of fruits, or occasionally upon 
stocks raised from suckers; they likewise are very commonly graft- 
ed upon quince stocks, whereby to have trees of more moderate 
growths, to form dwarfs; and which are generally raised by seed, 
cuttings, layers, or suckers; and the pears grafted or budded upon 
these stocks are very proper for walls or espaliers, and occasionally 
for small standards. Sometimes also pears are grafted upon white 
thorn stocks; but this is improper for any general practice, not being 
so successful and never producing so good fruit, as if grafted on 
stocks of their own family. 

Cherries are propagated by grafting or budding them upon stocks 
raised .from the stones of the common black or red cherry, or upon 
stocks raised from the stones of any other kind of the same fruit; 
but the two first are most esteemed for that purpose, because they 
generally shoot much freer than any other. 

Plums are grafted or budded on stocks raised by sowing the seeds 
of any or either of the plum kinds; but those raised from the vigor- 
ous growing sorts are most preferable; they are also grafted on 
stocks raised from suckers, but such should not be used unless 
when seedling stocks jcannot be had. Plums will likewise take on 
the apricot, but then the trees arc not permanent. 
2 11 



250 THE NURSERY. [March. 

The apricot proves the most durable on stocks of the plum kind. 
It will also grow on its own, and on peach and almond stocks; but - 
on either of the two last it will not be durable. 

For peaches and nectarines, several sorts of stocks are occasion- 
ally used; such as plum, peach, almond, and apricot stocks, all 
raised from the stones of the fruit, and the first kind from layers 
and suckers also. If a plum could be procured of such vigorous 
growth as to keep pace with the peach, it would be an acquisition 
of infinite importance; for on such, the peach would be as perma- 
nent as the plum itself. In Europe, all their peach trees are work- 
ed on the plum; but with us, the growth of the peach is so rapid, 
as in a few years to overgrow the stock, when wrought on any of 
the kinds of plum which we have yet procured. The kind particu- 
larly selected for this purpose in Europe, is the muscle plum.. 

Almonds will take and grow on any stock which answers for the 
peach. 

Medlai'S will grow on either medlar, white-thorn, pear, or quince 
stocks; but those of its own genera are preferable. 

Filberts will succeed by budding or grafting on the common 
hazel-nut tree, raised either from the nuts or by suckers from the 
roots. 

The first thing to be done towards this work, is to select the 
grafts, in the choice of which, the following directions should be 
observed. 1st. That they are shoots of the former year; for, when 
they are older, they never succeed well. 2ndly. Always to take 
them from healthy fruitful trees; for, if the trees from which they 
are taken be sickly, the grafts very often partake so much of the 
distemper, as rarely to get the better of it, at least for some years; 
and when they are taken from young luxuriant trees whose ves- 
sels are generally large, they will continue to produce strong 
shoots, but will be a long time coming into bearing, and are seldom 
so productive, as those which are taken from fruitful trees whose 
shoots are more compact, joints closer together, and whose system 
is already organized for bearing. 3dly. You should prefer those 
grafts which are taken from the lateral or horiz,ontal branches, to 
those from the strong perpendicular shoots, for the reasons before 
given. 

When your grafts are cut oft", open shallow trenches in a dry 
sheltered situation, and place them thinly therein, with their cut 
ends down, drawing up the earth so as that they may be covered 
two-thirds of their length; then lay some light litter thinly over 
their tops to prevent their drying. If a small joint of the last year's 
wood be taken off" with the cion, it will preserve it the better; for 
the old wood being more compact than the new, will prevent its 
imbibing too much moisture from the earth whilst kept there, and 
that can be cut away when you take them up for grafting. If grafts 
are to be carried to any considerable distance, it will be proper to 
pack them up in earth, and surround them with damp moss, if but 
a small quantity, to prevent its drying too soon. 

Always prefer stocks which were raised in the nursery from 
seed; next to these; those raised from layers and cuttings; and, 



March.] THE NURSERY. 251 

last of all, such as were produced from suckers; for the last will 
continue to throw up suckers from their roots, much more abun- 
dantly than any of the former, to the great annoyance of the borders, 
garden, or orchard, which are not only unsightly, but they also 
take off a great part of the nourishment from the trees. 

When you intend to change the fruit of an old^espalier or wall- 
tree, always graft on fresh healthy branches, and as near the trunk 
as such are to be found; ten or a dozen grafts may be necessary to 
furnish the tree, the more immediately, with the kind or kinds de- 
sired. For a standard, six or eight cions will be sufficient to answer 
a similar purpose, always observing to cut out the far greater part, 
if not the whole, of the old branches, previous to grafting, and the 
remainder, as the young grafts advance in growth. 

For this purpose, you must be provided, I. With a strong knife 
to cut off the heads of the stocks previous to the insertion of the 
grafts. 2. With a neat small hand-saw, for occasional use, in cut- 
ting off the heads of some large stocks, for crown -grafting. S. 
With a grafting-chisel and small mallet, for clefting large stocks, 
for the reception of the cions in cleft -grafting. 4. With a neat and 
very sharp pruning-knife for cutting and shaping the grafts, and 
for sloping and forming the stocks for their reception; and 5. With 
a quantity of new bass strings; or, if bass cannot be had, with soft 
woollen yarn, to tie the parts close, secure the grafts, and thereby 
to promote their speedy union with the stocks. 

The next thing to be provided, is a quantity of grafting clay, 
which should be prepared at least ten days previous to its being 
wanted for use; to be applied closely around the grafts at the places 
of insertion into the stocks, and a little above, in order to prevent 
the air from exhausting the sap of the cions, before they could be 
supplied with a sufficiency from the stocks, and also to keep out 
wet, which would greatly obstruct the uniting of the parts: it is to 
be made in the following manner. 

Get a quantity of strong fat loam, in proportion to the number of 
trees to be grafted; then take about a fourth part of fresh horse- 
dung, free from litter, or a third part of cow-dung, it matters not 
which you make use of; or, if you please, you may use a propor- 
tionate quantity of each, mixing them, or either of them, well with 
the loam; add to it a small quantity of hay, cut very fine, and also 
some salt, which will prevent it from cracking or drying too fast in 
hot or parching weather; work the whole well together, and add 
as much water as necessary; after which, beat and incorporate the 
mass effectually, after the manner of mortar, and continue so to 
work it every other day, adding a little water as it becomes dry, till 
the time you want it for use. Be very particular during this period 
not to expose it to frost or drying winds; and the more effectually 
you incorporate it, the better will it answer your purpose. Some 
people use a composition of bees-wax, rosin, and turpentine, melted 
together, to put round the grafts in the manner of clay, but laid on 
warm and much thinner. This I conceive to be too expensive, and 
am certain, from experience, that it does not answer the end a whit 
better, nor even so well as the former, if properly made. 



252 THE NUkSERY. [March. 

Observe, that the stocks to be grafted, if intended for dwarf- 
trees, for espaliers or walls, must be headed down to within five or 
six inches of the ground^ but if for full standards, they may be 
headed and grafted at five or six feet high, or in fact, at any height 
you please, even at the surface of the ground, but more particularly 
apples and pears; for you can afterwards train the graft on a single 
clean stem, as high as you like, and then top it, to cause it to throw 
out side branches for forming a head; this is the best method to 
treat stunted or ill formed stocks, but is not necessary for those that 
are well thriven and straight, for by it you would lose a year of 
their growth, as you can immediately form the head from the graft 
when inserted at a proper height; for dwarf and half standards, you 
may head and graft at the height of two, three, or four feet. 

There are various methods of grafting in practice; such as whip- 
grafting, cleft-grafting, crown grafting, side-grafting, root-grafting 
and grafting by approach or inarching; but the two former are in 
more general use among experienced gardeners, particularly the 
first, as being every way preferable to any other, when the stocks 
are under an inch in diameter. 

First, by Whip- grafting. 

This kind of grafting is that most commonly practised in nur- 
series, as being both the most expeditious and successful, and may 
be performed upon smaller stocks than any other; for it is effected 
with the greatest success upon such as are from about half an inch 
or less, to near an inch in diameter: the method of performing the 
work is this: 

Having the cions or grafts, knife, bandages, and clay ready, 
then begin the work by cutting off the head of the stock at some 
clear smooth part thereof; generally performing this by one clean 
slanting cut upwards, so as to form a slope on one side about an 
inch and a half or two inches in length, and make a notch or small 
slit from near the upper part downwards, a little better than half an 
inch long, to receive the tongue of the cion; then prepare the cion 
by cutting it to five or six inches in length, preferring the lower 
or thick part, and cutting the bottom end on one side also, in a 
sloping manner, the length of, and to fit the slope of the stock, as if 
cut from the same place, that the rinds of both may join as nearly 
as possible in every part, as if you were splicing a fishing-rod; but 
when the stock is much larger than the cion, this cannot be done so 
exactly, unless you insert it on the opposite side of the stock to the 
slope; however, that will not be necessary, provided you join the 
rinds or bark of both, so as to fit neatly on either edge or side of the 
slope; then make a slit upwards in the slope of the cion, so as to 
form a sort of tongue to fit that made in the slope of the stock, 
which insert therein, so that the rinds of both may join together 
exactly, at least on one side, and immediately tie the parts together 
with a ligature of bass, &c. bringing it in a neat manner several 
times around the stock and graft, moderately tight, and fastened 
accordingly. 



March.] THE NURSERY. 253 

This done, clay the whole over near an inch thick on every side, 
from an inch below the bottom of the graft to the same above the 
top of the stock, finishing the coat of clay in a longish oval form, 
closing it effectually in every part, and tapering it up to the cion to 
prevent the wind, sun, or rain reaching the grafted parts till the 
union is effected; observing to examine it now and then; and if any 
part falls off", or cracks appear, such must be immediately repaired 
with fresh clay. 

Expert nursery-gardeners generally perform whip-grafting with 
four cuts; two in heading and slitting the stock, and the same in 
sloping and turning the graft, inserting it immediately, being fol- 
lowed by one or two persons to tie and clay them. 

This sort of grafting may also be performed, if necessary, upon 
strong young shoots of any bearing tree, if intended to alter the 
kind of fruit, or have more than one sort on the same tree. 

By the middle or latter end of May, the grafts will be well united 
with the stocks, as will be evident by their shooting; the clay may 
then be taken off", but suff'er the bandages to remain on till the 
united parts seem to swell, and be too much confined thereby. 

Second, by Cleft- Grafting. 

This is called cleft-grafting because the stock being too large 
for whip-grafting, is cleft or slit down the middle for the reception 
of the cion, and is performed upon stocks from about one to two 
inches diameter, and may be practised with success where the 
rind of the stock is not too thick, whereby the inner bark of the 
cion will be prevented from closely joining that of the stock, 
which junction is absolutely necessary to form a complete union 
of the parts. 

First, with a strong knife cut off" the head of the stock; or if the 
stock is very large it may be headed with a small saw. 

This done, fix upon a smooth part just below where headed, and 
on the opposite side to that cut away part of the stock, about an 
inch and a half, in a sloping manner upwards, so as the crown of the 
stock may not be more than about half an inch broad, which slope 
and crown are to be cut smooth and neat. Then prepare your grafts 
or cions in the following manner: observe to cut them into proper 
lengths of about six inches, with several eyes or buds to each: 
then take your sharpest knife, and pare away the bark and some 
of the wood at the lower end of the graft in a sloping manner, 
about an inch and a half or near two inches in length on opposite 
sides, making it have a wedge-like shape; but let that edge, which 
is to be placed outwards in the stock, be left thicker than the 
other, and with the rind continued thereon. The graft being pre- 
pared, take your strong knife or chisel, and place it on the middle 
of the stock, not across, but contrary ways, to the sloped part, and 
with a small mallet, strike the knil'c or chisel into the stock, 
observing to cleave it no farther than what is necessary to admit the 
graft readily; then place the knife, or some small instrument, a 
little way into the cleft, at the sloped part of the stock, to keep it 



254 ' THE NURSERY. [March. 

open for the reception of the graft, which directly introduce into 
the cleft on the top of the stock, at the back of the slope; inserting 
it with great exactness, as far as it is cut, with the thickest edge 
outwards, and so that the rind may meet exactly every way with 
that of the stock. The graft being placed, then remove the knife 
or wedge, taking care not to displace the cion; this done, let it be 
tied and well clayed in the manner directed above, in the work of 
whip or tongue-grafting. 

Or, if you choose to put in two grafts, it may be performed on 
large stocks, which must be twice cleft, parallel to each other, and 
so fix the cions as above, in opposite sides. 

This method of grafting may be performed occasionally on the 
upright branches of bearing trees when intended either to renew 
the wood or change the sort of fruit. 

When the grafts have shot five or six inches take off the clay 
and bandages, and cover the wounded parts of the stocks with fresh 
grafting clay, which will protect them from the influence of the 
weather and accelerate the growth of the bark over the wounds; 
let this claying remain on till it falls off of itself: this second clay- 
ing is more necessary to large than to small stocks, but will be 
very useful to either. 

Third, by Crown- grafting. 

The third kind of grafting is known by the name of crown- 
grafting, as sometimes three, four, or more grafts are inserted 
round the crown of the stock, in a circular order, introduced 
betwixt the bark and the wood. 

This way of grafting is commonly practised upon such stocks as 
are too large and stubborn to cleave, and is often performed upon 
the branches of apple and pear trees, &c. that already bear fruit, 
when it is intended to change the sorts or to renew the tree with 
fresh bearing wood. 

The manner of doing it is as follows: 

First, to cut oft' the head of the tree or stock level, or of any 
particular branch of a tree which you intend to graft, and pare the 
top perfectly smooth; then prepare your cions, which is done by 
cutting one side flat and sloping, about two inches in length, making 
a kind of shoulder at the top of the cut to rest on the head of the 
stock, and pare oft" a little of the bark towards each edge of the 
graft; then prepare to insert it, which, in this order of grafting, 
must be eftected by introducing the sloped part down betwixt the 
bark and wood of the stock; first slitting the bark or rind from the 
top downwards clean through to the firm wood two inches or two 
and a half in length; and having a small thin wedge of iron or 
wood, open therewith the rind of the stock a little at the top of the 
slit, by introducing it gently down betwixt the wood and rind, far 
enough to make way for admitting the graft, then drawing it out, 
insert the scion with the cut sloped side towards and close to the 
wood of the stock, slipping it neatly down the length of its cut 
part, resting the shoulder thereof, prepared as above, upon the top 



March.] THE NURSERY. 255 

of the stock; and in this manner you may put four, five, or more 
grafts as may seem convenient into each stock, and bind them 
round with strong bass. 

When the grafts are all thus fixed you must immediately apply 
a good quantity of well-wrought clay, bringing it close about the 
stock and grafts, observing to raise it at least an inch above the top 
of the stock in a rounding manner, so as to throw the wet quickly 
off, and prevent its lodging or getting into the work, which would 
ruin all. 

This method of grafting is sometimes called shoulder-grafting, 
and grafting in the rind, and was much more in practice formerly 
than at present; for although the grafts take freely they are liable 
to be blown out by strong winds after they have made large shoots, 
which has frequently happened after three or four years' growth, 
so that when this method is practised, the evil must be remedied 
by tying some firm sticks to the body of the stock or branch that 
is grafted, to which the young shoots must be tied, or they must be 
made fast to some convenient support that will answer the same 
end; or even tying them to one another, should the grafts take on 
opposite sides of the stock, will answer a good purpose. 

This kind of grafting may be performed a week or ten days 
later than the other methods; for it will prove most successful if 
done when the sap begins to be in active motion, as then the bark 
of the stock will separate from the wood more freely to admit the 
graft. 

When the scions are well taken, treat them as directed under 
the head Cleft-grafting. 

Fourth, by Side- grafting. 

This is done by inserting grafts into the sides of the branches 
without heading them down, and may be practised upon trees to 
fill up any vacancy, or for variety, to have several sorts of fruit on 
the same tree. 

It is performed thus: fix upon such parts of the branches where 
wood is wanting to furnish the head or any part of the tree; there 
slope off the bark and a little of the wood, and cut the lower end 
of the graft to fit the part as near as possible; then join it to the 
branch, first tongueing both as in whip-grafting, tie them with bass, 
and clay them over. 

Fifth, hy Root- grafting. 

This is done by whip-grafting scions upon pieces of root turned 
up about half an inch thick, either as the roots remain or separated, 
and immediately replanted. 

Here it will be well to observe that grafting is frequently done, 
and very often with good success, without the assistance of grafting- 
clay or any other prepared composition. The method is. this: head 
down your stocks near the surface of the ground, and graft them 
as low as you possibly pan; bind them neatly, as in other cases. 



256 THE NURSERY. [March. 

and draw the earth over the crowns of the stocks, so as to let one 
or two of the buds of each cion appear; look to them frequently, 
and if the earth sinks so as to expose the crowns of the stocks, 
cover them up again. 

When the cions are sufficiently taken, clear off the earth, un- 
bind the bandages, and then replace it as before. Trees grafted in 
this way, may afterwards be trained up, either for standards, half 
standards, espaliers or wall trees, at pleasure. 

It sometimes happens that persons are under the necessity in 
spring, of removing some stocks, when in the way of other busi- 
ness; in which case they are frequently taken into the house, and 
grafted in any method most convenient, then planted immediately: 
this is called by gardeners fire-side grafting, and often proves 
tolerably successful; but I would not recommend it, except in cases 
of necessity. 

Grafting by Approach, or Inarching. 

This method of grafting is performed only when the stock and 
the tree from which you mean to propagate, either grow, or can be 
placed so near each other, that the intended graft may be brought 
to approach and join the stock, forming therewith, when grafted, a 
kind of arch, and not to be separated from the mother plant till a 
perfect union is formed: hence its name. 

When intended to propagate any tree or shrub by this method, 
if of a hardy nature, and growing in the open ground, the requisite 
quantity of young plants for stocks should be planted around it, 
and when grown of a proper size or height, the work performed: 
or, if the branches of the tree designed to graft from, are too high 
for the stocks, these must be planted in pots, (if a year previous to 
the operation the better) and placed upon a temporary stage erected 
around the tree of sufficient height to answer the purpose. 

In performing this work, make choice of a smooth part of the 
stock, and with which the intended graft can be conveniently 
brought to meet, marking on each the place of junction; then cut 
away the bark and a part of the wootl, from two to^ihree inches in 
length, both of the stock and cion; after which, make a slit upwards 
in the cion, so as to form a tongue, and another downwards in the 
stock, as directed for whip-grafting, and insert the one into the 
other, making all parts fit in an exact manner, particularly the 
rinds or barks, and tie them closely together with bass; after 
which, cover the whole with a due quantity of grafting clay, as 
directed in the other methods. In this mode of grafting, the cion 
is not separated from the tree until it is firmly united with the 
stock, nor is the head of the latter generally cut oft' till this time, 
though it is sometimes performed with the head of the stock cut 
off", under the idea that its whole efforts would then be directed to 
the nourishment of the graft, which is not of as much advantage as 
might be imagined. 

If the plants which you inarch, are exposed to strong winds, it 
will be proper to make them fast, either to stakes stuck into the 



March.] THE NURSERY. 257 

ground for that purpose, or to some other more convenient support, 
to prevent their being displaced thereby. 

The stocks and grafts are to remain for three months, or upwards, 
before you unbind themj at the expiration of that time, take otF the 
clay and bandages, and if w^ell taken, separate the graft from the 
mother plant — ^being careful to do this with a perfectly sharp knife, 
cutting it oil' with a slope downwards to the stockj and if not done 
in grafting, the head of the stock must also be cut olT close to the 
graft, and afterwards the stem kept free from any under shoots. If 
at this time the graft and stock, particularly if not extremely well 
united, were tied again gently, as before, fresh clayed, and those 
suffered to remain on for a month or five weeks, it would be of con- 
siderable advantage. 

The walnut, fig, and mulberry, with many other trees, which 
do not succeed by the common methods of grafting, will take free- 
ly by this, and also various kinds of evergreens. It is in frequent 
use to ingraft a fruit-bearing branch upon a common stock of the 
same family, by which means you have a tree with much fruit, in a 
few months, that would take perhaps as many years when left to 
nature, before it would show a single one. This is frequently 
practised on orange trees and other green-house plants. 

This method of grafting is not to be performed so early in the 
season as the others, it being most successful when the sap is 
flowing; in the middle states, I would recommend doing it towards 
the latter end of April. But it is not to be practised where the 
other methods will succeed; for trees propagated in this way are 
always observed to grow more weakly, and never to the size of 
those which are propagated by budding, or the other modes of 
grafting. 

Grafting Peaches, Nectarines, and Apricots. 

Peaches, nectarines, and apricots, will succeed by grafting, but 
propagating them by inoculation is much preferable; however, if 
you graft them, let it be done early, always before they show flow- 
ers, having their cions taken oft" three weeks previous to the time 
of performing the operation, and deposited in the earth till that 
period, as before directed for those of other fruit trees, in the choice 
of which you must be very particular, so as to get the best ripened 
young wood, round, plump, and short jointed, and with very little 
pith; all these will take as freely on plump stocks as on their 
own kinds, and if intended for walls and espaliers, will be more 
permanent, as they are not so subject to be destroyed by worms. 
Grafting may be also performed, to any desirable extent, on most 
kinds of forest and ornamental trees, such as elm, asii, oak, holly, 
althea-frutex, &c. &c. whose cions are not soft-wooded, nor too 
full of pith. 

Management of Fruit Trees grafted and budded last year. 

Those fruit trees which were grafted last year, should now liave 
their shoots shortened, that they may send forth lateral branches to 
21 



258 THE NURSERY. [March. 

form regular heads; if they are intended for espaliers or wall- 
trees, observe the method recommended in page 215; if for stand- 
ards, the stems must be trained up to a proper height and then 
topped, or some of the shoots'shortened, so as to produce handsome 
well furnished heads. 

The stocks which were budded the last summer, and in which 
the buds still remain dormant, should now have their heads cut off 
a little above the budded parts; by which means the whole nourish- 
ment will go to the inoculations, which will soon begin to advance 
their first shoots. 

In proceeding to do this cut the head of the stock off sloping, behind 
the inoculated bud, either almost close thereto or about a hand's 
breadth above it; which part of the stock remaining above will serve 
for tying thereto the first shoot from the bud in summer, to secure 
it from the wind, but must be cut down close next spring. 

The stumps left last season, for a similar purpose, should now be 
cut off close to where the bud was inserted, cutting them effectually 
into the clean fresh wood, in order that the wounds may cover over 
and heal, which will be effected in one season, if no spotted or un- 
sound wood be left. 

Transplanting Stocks to Bud and Graft upon. 

Make new plantations of stocks to bud and graft the different 
kinds of choice fruit upon. 

Many of those raised from seeds, &c. last year, will now be ready 
for this purpose. 

Let these be planted out, as soon in the month as the weather will 
permit, in rows three or four feet asunder, and at least twelve inches 
distant from one another in the row. They should be planted by 
line, either dibbling in the small plants, or the large ones trenched 
or holed in with the spade; or you may cut out small trenches by 
line, placing the plants therein at the above distance, and turn the 
earth in upon their I'oots, treading it gently along. 

Sowing Stones to raise Stocks for Grafting. 

Where plum, peach, apricot, and cherry stones, &c. were neglect- 
ed, or could not in consequence of the weather be sown last month, 
let it be done as early in this as possible, agreeably to the rules laid 
down in page 151, which see. 

Sowing Kernels of Apples, Pears, and Quinces for Stocks. 

If the sowing of these were neglected, or impracticable, last 
month, let it be done as early in this as possible, sowing them tole- 
rably thick in beds, and covering them with light dry earth, a little 
better than half an inch deep. These will be fit to plant out in 
nursery rows next season; but they would succeed much better if 
sown in October or November, if not carefully preserved in sand or 



March.] THE NURSERY. 259 

earth, or unless they are, at the time of sowing, taken fresh out of 
the fruit. See page 157". 

Sowing Haws for raising Thorn-quicks. 

It will be necessary to sow your haws as early in this month as 
possible, if not done in the last, for the reasons assigned in the 
Nursery for February, page 151, &c. where you will find ample 
directions both for the preparation and sowing of the seeds, &c. 

You may any time this month, particularly after the middle, or 
towards the latter end, take up your one or two year old seedling- 
quicks, out of the beds where they were raised, and plant them into 
nursery rows, as directed in 154. Should it be your intention to 
let them remain in those rows to grow to a large size, the more im- 
mediately to make a fence, when planted out, set them at greater 
distances than there directed, but they always succeed best when 
planted young. 

During the continuance of the plants in those rows, they must be 
kept free from weeds, and each spring and autumn it will be neces- 
sary to dig between them to loosen the earth, which will greatly 
strengthen and invigorate their growth. 

Live Hedges. 

Live hedges are already become objects of serious importance, 
particularly in those parts of the Union in which timber has got 
scarce, and must inevitably become more so in a very rapid pro- 
gression; therefore the sooner the citizens turn their attention to 
the cultivation and planting of them, the greater portion of their 
benefits will they themselves enjoy, and the sooner will they lay 
the foundation of a rich inheritance for their children, and of an 
ornamental and useful establishment for their country. 

Our farmers not being accustomed to the making of live hedges, 
may for some time be very tardy in attempting it; those of greater 
penetration will not hesitate a moment but commence immediately; 
others will look on for years to see the result, which will be so 
much time, profit, and pleasure lost to themselves; and conse- 
quently a proportionate injury done to their posterity. Some will 
try the experiment; but in such a half-way, negligent, slovenly 
manner, as to insure disappointment; I would advise such to hold 
fast by the post and rail, and not to lose time in doing more harm 
than good. 

It has been asserted that any other than ground hedges, that is, 
such as are established on the plain surface without a ditch, are 
unnecessary in the United States; but why in the United States 
any more than in those countries, that ages of experience and 
necessity have taught to give a decided preference to the hedge and 
ditch.^ Such may succeed in very good ground, and with uncommon 
care; but it is an incontrovertible and well known fact that a hedge 
and ditch will make a more formidable fence, in three years, than a 
ground-hedge will in ten. 



260 THE NURSERY. [March. 

Having now given my decided and unequivocal opinion as to 
which is preferable, for outward fences, I shall proceed to give the 
best instructions in my power for the formation of both; the more 
especially as the ground-hedge is the neatest and most eligible for 
internal hedges in gardens and pleasure-grounds. 

The hawthorn, of all other kinds, is the most suitable for outward 
fences; and here I think it necessary to remark, that the common 
European white-thorn, or Cratsegiis Oxyamntha of Linnaeus, ap- 
pears to answer well in America, but is not of so rapid growth as 
our cockspur thorn, or Crataegus Cms galli; the former makes a 
closer and thicker hedge, but not more formidable, nor so imme- 
diately as the latter. We have many varieties of native hawthorns, 
as described in page 154, &c., either of which will answer very 
well, and convenience must be considered in respect to choice; but 
when choice can be made, a preference should be given to the cock- 
spur thorn, or rather to that kind which is observed to grow most 
luxuriantly in the neighbourhood in which it is intended to be 
planted. 

Tlie Hedge and Bitch. 

The months of October, November, and December, will be the 
most eligible periods in the southern states for making this kind of 
fence, particularly as their frosts can do no injury to the ditch, 
and the roots will have an early establishment, and consequently 
be the better prepared to encounter the summer heats. In the 
middle and eastern states, I would prefer doing this business in 
March, or early in April; as the ditch in that case would have one 
year's advantage of the frost, which, in some kinds of soil, would 
have a considerable effect, particularly in the first year, by swelling 
the earth in the face of the ditch, causing it to moulder down, and 
thereby expose the roots of the quicks; but this can be obviated 
by leaving a scarcement in the front, as hereafter directed. 

Strong year old quicks will answer very well for laying in the 
face of a ditch, but such as have had the advantage of two years' 
growth in nursery rows, after being transplanted when one year 
old from the seed-bed, will sooner form a good fence, or two year 
old plants from the seed-bed will answer a very good purpose. Be 
particular in the taking of them up not to injure their roots but as 
little as possible, and to sort them into three different lots, the 
smallest, larger, and largest, and also to plant each lot together: 
for the mixing of the small with the large, is very injudicious, as 
the former in a little time would be smothered and overgrown by 
the latter, and vacancies consequently formed in the hedge. 

Previous to planting, prune oft' the extremities of any long strag- 
gling and wounded roots, and also cut off' the heads of the plants 
about seven inches above the earth-mark where they stood in the 
ground, and likewise any side branches that remain; let no con- 
sideration prevent your doing this, for on it depends much of your 
success. 

Having your plants in readiness and dressed in this manner, lay 



March.] THE NURSERY. 261 

them by the heels in the earth, to be taken up as wanted, lest their 
roots should become dry and be injured thereby. Then proceed to 
form your ditch, which should be four feet wide at least at top, 
narrowing with a gentle slope on each side towards the bottom, to 
the perpendicular depth of two feet and a half, where it should be 
one foot wide. The more your ground is subject to slip by heavy 
rains, the greater slope must be given to the bank side. 

Begin by cutting the surface sod of the ditch into squares of con- 
venient size, and about three inches deep, having previously lined 
out and cut both sides with a spade, sloping inwards as above inti- 
mated, and lay a row of them with the grassy surface under, six 
inches inward from the edge on the bank side; lay on top of this 
row of sods, two inches of the loose and mellow earth, that is, the 
best the ditch aftbrds, and also a quantity of it behind them, for 
about eighteen inches or two feet, breaking it very fine with the 
spade: on this lay your quicks nearly in a horizontal manner, their 
tops being a little elevated, and at the distance of six inches one 
from the other, and so far in that three or four inches of their tops may 
remain uncovered when the ditch is finished. Spread the roots to 
advantage, and cover them well with the mouldy earth that drop- 
ped from the surface sod: this is necessary, in order to give their 
roots the advantage of the best soil, and should on no account be 
neglected. Then proceed to finish your ditch and bank, laying the 
remainder of the surface sods in front of the bank, as you had done 
■with the first row, giving it exactly a similar slope to that of the 
ditch, and the whole bank such a form, as if it was taken up at 
once out of the ditch and turned upside down. The scarcement 
left in front, throws the bank so far back, as not to bear heavily on 
the side of the ditch to crush it down, and it also will receive and 
retain a considerable portion of the rain that slides down along the 
face of the bank, by which means the earth in front will be kept in 
a more moist state than if no such thing was left. 

Were you to lay in two rows of quicks in the front, the second 
eight or nine inches above the first, and the plants in each row nine 
or ten distant, placing those of the upper opposite the intervals of 
the lower, it would be the most effectual method of making a better 
and more immediate fence. A very slight paling, on top of the 
bank, that will defend the quick for three years, will be sufficient; 
and if the land in front is not in cultivation, but under stock, a 
similar fence may be necessary to prevent their going into the ditch, 
and reaching the plants; but if you take particular care to keep 
them constantly wed, for the two first years, which is absolutely 
necessary or all is lost labour, they will have the less inducement 
to approach them. 

There are many other methods of making hedge and ditch fences; 
but having found, from ample experience, the above to be the most 
successful, I shall confine myself exclusively to it, lest too much 
speculation might lead people astray, and retard the progress of 
this important business. 



262 THE NURSERY. [March. 

Ground-Hedges. 

The best method of planting a hedge on a level, or without a 
ditch, is to plough a slip of ground on each side of the intended 
line of fence the preceding spring, and having previously dunged 
it, to plant it with potatoes, taking the ordinary care to keep it free 
from weeds during the period of their growth. In autumn, the 
potatoes being removed, the entire slip should be ploughed deep, 
gathering it up towards the centre, and in October or March, having 
your quicks previously raised in the nursery, as directed in that 
department in February, to the height of two or three feet, take up 
the plants carefully without injuring their roots, prune ott" the extre- 
mities of the roots and any long straggling shoots of their tops, then 
plant them in a trench made along the centre of this slip of ground 
for their reception, at the distance of from six to eight inches 
plant from plant, and settle the earth well into their rootS| observ- 
ing, previously to planting, to match the quicks, that is, to plant 
all the larger sized together, for it is improper, as before observed, 
to intermix the small and large, as the former would be smoother- 
ed by the latter, which would occasion injurious and unsightly 
breaches in the fence. 

If you have plenty of quicks, it will be of advantage to plant a 
double row at the distance of a foot from each other, in which case 
the plants maybe set ten inches apart in the rows, placing those of 
one row directly opposite the intervals of the other. This method 
I would prefer to the former. 

The quicks must afterwards be protected from cattle by palings 
or some kind of dead fences, till they arrive at a proper growth, 
not to be injured thereby; and for the two first years kept per- 
fectly free from weeds; for without these precautions it will be in 
vain to plant them. 

The quicks being tolerably close planted, will need no annual 
top clipping to thicken them; but it will be very proper to shorten 
occasionally any extraordinary vigorous top shoots, so as to keep 
them all pretty equal, and also such as branch out too much at the 
sides. However, it would be very advisable to give a slight dress- 
ing to the sides every October or March, for a few years, with a 
pair of hedge-shears, which may be done in a short time, narrow- 
ing the hedge a little towards the top to attbrd the benefit of the 
air, rain, and dews to the lower side shoots: this will encourage 
their growth, and cause the hedge to be well furnished from bot- 
tom to top. 

When a hedge of this kind is to be made, it might be the most 
convenient way to plant it within a few feet of some established post 
and rail fence, and erect another as many feet from it on the oppo- 
site side, each at such a distance as would be sufficient to keep off 
cattle; here it would be effectually protected until arrived at a 
proper height and strength, when both these ranges of palings might 
be taken away to answer similar purposes; but again and again 
would I suggest the necessity of keeping the plants free from the 



March.] THE NURSERY. 263 

annoyance of weeds during the first two or three years of their 
growth, after which they will be completely furnished and out of 
their power. 

The autumn or spring following after planting, examine your 
hedge, and if any of the plants have died, or seem to be in a very 
bad state of health, replace them with others from the nursery, 
placing some fresh earth to the i^oots of each. 

Crab and Jipple Hedges. 

The common wild thorny crab will make an excellent ground or 
ditch hedge, and will thrive in a poorer soil than the thornj and 
hedges raised from the pippins of apples do tolerably well and form 
strong fences^ the former is raised from the pippins, and the latter 
can be propagated in abundance by sowing the pumice very thick, 
immediately after being pressed for cider, on a bed of good ground 
properly prepared, and covering the whole with fine light earth 
near an inch deep; a few plants will appear soon after sowing, but 
a great crop will come up in spring, which may afterwards be used 
for stocks to graft on, and also for hedges, where more suitable 
kinds cannot be had. 

Hornbeam and Beach Hedges. 

Our indigenous kinds of hornbeam and beach will make admira- 
ble hedges; the seed of the former, which it produces here in great 
abundance, will require the same preparation and management in 
every respect as directed for haws in page 151, &c. 

In Westphalia and other parts of Germany the hornbeam is in 
great repute for hedges. The German husbandman throws up a 
parapet of earth, with a ditch on each side, and plants his sets, 
raised from layers, in such a manner that every two plants inter- 
sect each other; then he cuts off the bark and a little of the wood 
from each, and binds them close together with a hay-band. The 
plants unite and form a living palisado, which, being pruned or 
dressed annually with discretion, will, in a few years, make an 
impenetrable fence. Most other kinds may be treated in the 
same manner. 

The seeds or mast, as they are commonly called, of the beach, 
may be sown as soon as ripe, but as the ground-mice, squirrels, 
&c. are extremely fond of them, it will be the better way to pre- 
serve them in dry sand till March, to be then sown either in drills 
or broad-cast in beds, covering them not more than half an inch 
deep; for, as they rise with very broad seed-leaves, they could 
never work up through a thick covering. The beach vegetates the 
first spring after the perfection of its seed; the hornbeam not till 
the second. 

Honey-Locust and Elm Hedges. 

The Gleditsia triacanthos, or honey-locust, will make very good 
hedges; the seeds are to be sown in March, and covered half an 



264 THE NURSERY. [March. 

inch deepj they will come up freely, and when a year old may be 
transplanted into nursery rows till of sufficient size to plant. If to 
be planted in the face of ditches, they will in the second year be in 
prime condition for that purpose. 

The elm makes a good hedge, and is propagated by seed, suckers, 
or layers; when by seed it should be sown as soon as ripe, which, in 
the middle states, is between the 15th and 20th of May; it may be 
sought for and collected at that time, dried for four or five days, 
and then sown broad-cast on a bed of good earth, covering the seed 
not more than a quarter of an inch deep; they will vegetate imme- 
diately, and when up, must be kept very clean and free from weeds. 
All kinds of elm may be propagated freely from layers, in the 
manner directed under that article. 

Holly Hedges. 

Of all other plants there is none that makes a more durable, 
close and beautiful hedge than the holly, nor one that agrees better 
with the shears: it may be clipped and dressed to any form; the 
seeds do not vegetate till the second spring after their being ripe, 
and consequently must be treated as directed for haws, page 151, 
&c. They must remain two years in the seed-bed, and then 
should be planted either in the face of ditches, or into nursery 
rows, if intended for ground hedges; for which there is no equal 
as to beauty, shelter and closeness. The latter end of April is the 
best season to plant them: they never thrive well when taken out 
of the woods, but are very prosperous when cultivated by seed, 
though not of rapid growth for a few years. 

White Mulberry and Lombardy -Poplar Hedges. 

The white midberry makes a tolerably good hedge, and may be 
easily propagated by washing the seed out of the pulp when the 
fruit is ripe, drying and preserving it till the latter end of March, 
or beginning of April, when it may be sown on a bed of light rich 
earth, and covered about a quarter of an inch deep; the plants will 
appear towards the latter end of April, when they must be kept 
carefully wed, and when a year old some of them will be fit to plant 
into nursery rows; the small plants may remain in the seed-bed a 
second year, and then transplanted either into the face of ditches 
or nursery rows as above. They are also cultivated by layers and 
cuttings, but not so successfully by the latter as by either of the 
former methods. 

The Lombardy poplar is propagated by cuttings, which grow 
very freely; the most eligible size for these, though much larger 
are frequently used, are such as are from three-quarters of an inch 
to an inch in diameter, about twelve or fourteen inches long, and 
are to be planted two-thirds of their lengths into the earth. These 
and the mulberry bear clipping very well, but not being spiny, they 
never make formidable fences. 



Masch.] the nursery. 265 

Juniper and Red Cedar Hedges. 

Juniper and red cedar make good garden hedges, particularly the 
former, and are very proper for affording shelter to such quarters 
of the garden or nursery as are set apart for the raising of tender 
plants \n', both may be propagated abundantly from seeds, which 
do not vegetate till the second spring after ripening, consequently 
they must be prepared as directed for haws, and when sown, should 
not be covered more than a quarter of an inch deep; they may 
remain in the seed-bed for two years, if not too thick, and then 
planted into nursery rows; or the largest may be taken up when 
a year old, and planted therein, provided that they haVe grown 
freely. The juniper may be raised by cuttings, planted in a shady 
border towards the latter end of this month. 

Yew and Privet Hedges. 

Yew and privet make neat garden hedges; they are both raised 
from seeds and cuttings, the latter planted in March, and the seeds 
of each are to be treated as directed for haws, not vegetating the 
first spring after ripening. 

Pyracantha or Evergreen-Thorn Hedges. 

The Mespilis Pyracantha, or evergreen-thorn, will' make a tole- 
rably good hedge; it is propagated by seed, which will not vegetate 
till the second spring after ripening, and must be treated accord- 
ingly. 

Rose and Sweet-Briar Hedges. 

Wild roses and sweet-briar are sometimes used for hedges, and 
may either be propagated by suckers, layers or seeds. The best 
way to cultivate them for hedges is by seed, which must be gathered 
in autumn when ripe, and preserved as directed for haws, till the 
spring following twelve months, and then sown. 

Elder, Willow, and Jllder Hedges. 

The elder tree is sometimes used for hedges, especially when a 
fence is wanted as soon as possible, being of a more speedy growth 
than any other kind commonly used for that purpose, though not 
the most effectual nor beautiful. However, an immediate fence 
may be made of it, by planting large truncheons or cuttings of the 
straightest upright shoots and branches from two or three, to six 
feet long, planted either upright, a foot asunder, and wattled along 
the top to preserve them firm and even; or by planting them 
slanting across one another, chequerwise, forming a sort of lattice 
work, which is the most effectual method. In either way of plant- 
ing, do not point and drive them in, as is commonly done, but make 
holes for their reception, twelve or fifteen inches deep, with a crow- 
bar, then insert their ends, and make the earth fast about them: 
2K ' 



266 THE NURSERY. [March. 

when driven down by force, the bark is frequently stripped, which 
in a great measure prevents their rooting freely, and pushing as 
vigorously as if carefully planted. 

Various kinds of willow are found extremely useful to plant 
along the sides of watery ditches, brooks, rivulets or any marshy and 
moist situations^ and may be propagated by planting small cuttings, 
or large truncheons, as directed for the elder. Either of these you 
may treat the following, or any succeeding spring, as the West- 
phalians do the horn-beam, noticed in page 263. 

The alder is sometimes made use of as a fence in moist, swampy 
places^ it is propagated abundantly by suckers, layers, or seed. 
The seed, if sown in March, covered very lightly, and when up 
kept free from weeds, will grow prosperously. 

Black Thorn Hedges. 

The black thorn or sloe is a tolerable good shrub for a fence, but is 
subject to spread too much by suckers, by which it can be propa- 
gated; but the best plants are always produced from the stones of 
the fruit collected when ripe, and then sown, or preserved in sand 
or earth till early in March, when you are to sow and cover them 
near an inch deep. They will vegetate the first season. 

Plum-leaved Viburnum Hedges. 

The Viburnum prunifolium, or black haw, is an indigenous 
plant and well adapted for hedges. It may be propagated in abun- 
dance by collecting the berries in autumn, and managing them in 
every respect as directed for haws. 

Note. — When you have but small quantities of such seeds as 
require a year's preparation previous to sowing, you may mix them 
with light sandy earth, which mixture put into garden pots, first 
placing a hollow shell, or something similar, with the concave side 
under, over the hole in the bottom of each, the better to sufler any 
extra moisture to pass oft; then place the pots in some dry border 
up to their rims in the earth, but not deeper, observing to cast out 
the whole contents, rubbing and mixing it well together three or 
four times in the course of the following summer, and to sow the 
seed, as before directed, early in the second spring; or you may 
use shallow boxes not deeper than six or eight inches, having their 
bottoms perforated with several holes, and covered with shells, &c., 
but by no means sink them in the earth deeper than their edges, as 
you have nothing to fear from the frost; but if covered in summer 
with moss, or any thing that will keep the earth moderately moist 
the better; or, during that season, you may plant the pots or boxes 
in some shady border. 

Osage Apple, [Madura ^Aurantiaca.) 

The first of these plants introduced into this country was 
brought by Messrs. Lewis and Clark from the Rocky Mountains, 



March.] THE NURSERY. 2g7 

and presented to the author. It was esteemed by the Indians for 
making bows, and hence they called it bow-wood. It ought to be 
in the collection of every person having trees or shrubbery, as its 
foliage is extremely rich and beautiful, in which it bears a close 
resemblance to the orange. The fruit (which is said to be eaten 
by the Indians) is a large globular ball of a beautiful green colour, 
composed of a pulpy substance something similar to the orange. It 
is easily propagated by seed, layers or cuttings, and is now becoming 
very valuable for hedging, as it is of much more rapid growth than 
the thorns, and is quite as impenetrable; it is not affected by the 
drought in summer, and is every way preferable for hedges: they 
should be planted eighteen inches asunder, or planted as a stand- 
ard or ornamental tree; it will attain a large size in a short time, 
and the branches may be trained to form a very pretty summer 
house. Mr. Duke, of this city, has at his garden (formerly 
M'Mahon's) a tree under which thirty persons have dined. By 
recent discoveries in France it has been ascertained that the leaves 
are equally as good, if not preferable, for feeding the silk worm; 
and the silk is considered equal in quantity and stronger than that 
raised on the mulberry. 

Additional Observations on Hedges. 

It is very eligible to mix two or more kinds of plants in any 
hedge, for they seldom grow equally, and the more vigorous sort 
will destroy the other; nor is it proper, for the same reason, to 
plant trees intended for timber among either. 

Should you have a variety of the preceding kinds in forwardness 
for planting, it would be proper to observe, in the surrounding 
country, what soil and situation each kind thrives best when 
growing in a wild and uncultivated state, which will enable you to 
give to every one its favourite. This will be found of importance, 
and worthy of being attended to. 

The European white thorn does not thrive well in a dry gravel or 
sand, nor in a cold spuey clay; a good strong loam is its favourite. 

When young hedge plants of any kind become stunted and hide- 
bound in consequence of the poverty of the ground, &c., it will be 
proper to head them down to within two inches of the ground, 
either in the months of October or March, cutting them off clean 
and smooth; observing, however, that this is not to be done to one 
here and there, but to the whole row out of the face, as far as they 
are in that condition. The summer following they will produce 
vigorous and prosperous shoots. 

When you have crab hedges, which certainly forms very good 
and durable ones, you may encourage one vigorous straight shoot- 
ing plant, at every fifty feet distance, by pruning anil cleaning up 
their stems till out of the reach of cattle, retarding the ascending 
growth of the others by annual topping, then they may be grafted 
with any good kinds of cider apples, and in a few years will pro- 
duce fruit in abundance. 

Hedges raised from the pippins of apples may be treated in the 



268 THE NURSERY. [March. 

same way; but you may suffer some to stand ungrafted, for many 
will yield very good cider fruit, and perhaps some may produce 
new and superior kinds. You will be able to judge by leaf, shoot, 
and bud, which are most likely to produce the best fruit, and which 
not, and manage them accordingly. 

We have various other plants that might answer for live hedges, 
which due observation and a little experience will point out; but, 
upon the whole, I am of opinion, that the cockspur thorn will answer 
a better purpose with us for outward, strong, arid durable fences 
than any other. 

Flashing of Hedges. 

This is a very necessary operation, especially when hedges are 
grown old, or have been so neglected as that gaps are formed in 
several places; and indeed it is the practice in countries where the 
greatest attention is paid to them, either to plash, or cut them all 
clean down to within six inches of the ground every fourteen or 
fifteen years. To perform this business, you must be provided 
with a good sharp hedge-bill, handsaw, and a pair of strong leather 
gloves, that will reach up to your elbows, to protect your hands 
and arms from the spines or thorns; unless you are provided with 
these you will have a bloody job of it; but being so fortified it will 
be but a recreative amusement. 

Then select some of the main upright stems at distances in 
proportion to the general growth of the hedge, to serve for stakes, 
which are to be cut off with the saw at the height of three or four 
feet from the roots: other stakes are to be drove down in those 
vacancies where growing ones do not occur, between which, as well 
as the former, to plash and lay the general branches; observing 
that the shorter the shoots which are to be plashed, the closer the 
stakes should be to one another. The remainder of the hedge you 
are then to thin, leaving only a sufliciency of the best and longest 
middle-sized shoots, to lay down and work in between those stakes, 
cutting the others off in a sloping manner, within five or six inches 
of the ground, always preferring the saw to the bill, for this pur- 
pose, when it can be used conveniently. Proceed then to lay down 
the intended shoots, first lopping off the straggling side branches, 
and cutting or gashing occasionally such of the larger growths as 
are not pliant enough to yield and keep their intended stations, ob- 
serving to cut them no deeper than what is absolutely necessary; 
lay and weave them in between the stakes almost to a horizontal 
position, all leaning one way, and their top extremities terminating 
as much as possible on the ditch side, if any; if notj equally on 
both. When the hedge is thus plashed, finish the top all the way 
with some of the longest and?most pliant, but stout, of the shoots 
which were first cut out, previously divesting them of all their side 
branches, and working two together, lapping around and over one 
another between each stake, by which the whole plashing will be 
kept down to its proper birth; then with the hedge-bill or shears 



March.] THE NURSERY. 269 

dress and lop off any projecting or straggling branches at the sides 
to within six inches of the hedge, and the work is finished. 

Never lay your plashes too upright, but near to a level; by so 
doing, the sap will the better break out in several places, for the 
production and nourishment of a number of young side shoots, and 
not run so much to the ends, as it would if laid at a higher eleva- 
tion. Also avoid crowding your plashes too much, and never lay 
in more than can conveniently be wove between the stakes, by which 
the young productions will have the benefit of the air, and grow 
much stronger than otherwise. 

Old overgrown fences, which have been planted in the hedge 
and ditch way, may be all cut clean ofi" with the saw, within six 
inches of their roots, and the fallen earth in the bottom of the ditch 
dug up and laid at the back of them; they will shoot vigorously, 
and soon form a fine fresh hedge. 

Large ground hedges will be improved by cutting them down at 
intervals of ten or fifteen years, to the height of three, four, or five 
feet, and where vacancies occur, to fill them with plashing, always 
preferring, on these occasions, the saw to the bill, especially when 
the shoots are large. 

The Plane, Tulip, and Nettle Trees. 

The Platanus occidentalis, or plane-tree, commonly called the 
large buttonwood, and in some places, though very improperly, 
sycamore, is a valuable tree for shade and many other useful pur- 
poses. It may be propagated, either by cuttings, layers, or seed; 
but the last method is much preferable to either of the former, not 
only with respect to this, but to every other tree bearing seed, 
which may be cultivated for its timber; and although it may appear 
more tedious at first, it will in the end be found the most expedi- 
tious and profitable. They may be sown either in November, when 
ripe, or in March, first breaking the balls of seed, and separating 
them effectually, mixing them with some dry earth or sand, and 
then sowing them even on the surface of prepared four feet wide 
beds in the nursery, and covering thetn about a quarter of an inch 
deep, or a little more, if the earth is fine and light: too deep covering 
is injurious to all kinds of seed; for nature never designed more than 
a sufficiency to promote and give action to vegetation. They will 
come up the first season, and the next or succeeding year may be 
planted into nursery rows. 

The Liriodendron tulipifera, or tulip-tree, commonly, but very 
improperly called poplar, is best propagated by seed, which should 
be sown in November when ripe, or preserved in sand or earth till 
March, and then sown, covering them half an inch deep. Those 
sown in November will all grow the spring following; but, if kept 
out of the ground in a dry state till spring, a great number of them 
will not vegetate till the next year. 

The Cellis occidentalis, or nettle-tree, is propagated by seed, 
which, if sown in November when ripe, or preserved in earth or 
sand till March, and then sown, will generally vegetate the same. 



270 THE NURSERY. [March. 

season; but, if the berries are kept dry till spring, the greater 
number of them will not grow till the next year. They should be 
covered about an inch deep. 

Maples. 

The Acer argenteum, or silvery leaved, and ^cer ruhrum, or 
scarlet maples, perfect their seeds in May, and should be sown im- 
mediately after having been collected; they will vegetate directly, 
and produce fine plants the first season, if kept free from weeds. 
The seeds of the former do not keep well till spring, but those of 
the latter will. 

The sugar, Canada, ash-leaved, Pennsylvania, and mountain 
maples, and also the ^cer majus, or sycamore, maybe sown either 
in autumn or March, and will succeed well in either season: if 
sown in autumn, cover them about three quarters of an inch deep; 
if in spring, half an inch will be sufficient. When about a foot 
high in the seed beds, plant them early in spring into nursery rows, 
at proper distances. 

Catalpa, Sweet-gum, Papaw, and Persimmon. 

The Bignonia catalpa will grow freely from seed, which is to be 
preserved in the siliques or pods till March, and then sown; or it 
may be propagated either by layers or suckers. 

The Liquidamber styraclflua, or maple-leaved sweet-gum, grows 
freely from seed sown early in spring. 

The Jinnona triloba, or common papaw, is a hardy plant, and 
may be propagated by sowing the seed about an inch deep, either 
in October, November, or March. 

The Diospyros virginiana, persimmon, or American date plum, 
is best cultivated from seed sown in autumn, soon after ripe, or in 
March; if kept up till spring some of them will not vegetate till the 
second year after sowing. 

Chestnuts, Walnuts, Hickories, and Oaks. 

About the middle of this month plant the nuts of the European 
and American eatable chestnuts, also of the horse chestnut, and 
likewise of the different varieties of walnuts and hickories, which 
you wish to propagate. All the above kinds should be sown in 
drills, first throwing the nuts into a tub of water, and rejecting such 
of them as swim, covering them with light rich mould about two 
inches deep. The drills may be three feet asunder, and the nuts 
planted about six or eight inches from one another in the rows. 

The different varieties of oak succeed best when sown imme- 
diately after being ripe; but in that case they have to encounter the 
depredations of mice, squirrels, &c. to avoid which, they may be 
be kept in earth or sand till this time; but as most of them will be 
sprouted, you are to take them carefully up without breaking the 
radicles and plant them in drills two feet asunder, covering the 



March.] THE NURSERY. 271 

acorns not more than three-quarters, or at most, an inch deep, with 
light loose mould. 

The whole of the above kinds may remain in these seed drills for 
two years, keeping them at all times very free from weeds; and as 
they are generally, but more particularly the walnut kinds, subject 
to push down long tap-roots, and not to form many lateral ones, it 
will be proper, nay it will be necessary, in order to insure success 
in transplanting, when they have had one or two years' growth, to 
open, in the spring, a small trench close to each row, and then with 
a very sharp spade to cut the descending roots about six or eight 
inches under ground, casting back the earth when done. This 
will cause them to throw out a number of laterals, and the spring 
following you can transplant them with safety into nursery rows, 
at greater distances, to remain till wanted to plant out where final- 
ly intended. 

Eobinia, or Locust Tree. 

The Robinia pseudo -acacia, or common locust-tree, is said to be 
superior to any other kind of wood for ship tunnels, mill cogs, and 
fence posts, as well as for various other purposes. Its culture is 
very easy, as it maybe propagated in great abundance by collecting 
the seeds in autumn when ripe, preserving them dry till March, 
then sowing them in a bed of good sandy loam, which is their 
favourite soil, and covering them half an inch deep. They will 
come up in the course of the following month numerously, for no 
seeds grow more freely, notwithstanding what some unexperienced 
persons assert to the contrary. They require no preparation what- 
ever; sow them as above directed, and a good crop is certain. 
When a year old transplant them out of the seed-bed into nursery 
rows, four feet distant, and, plant from plant, one foot in the row. 
Having two or three years' growth in these rows they may be plant- 
ed successfully in any warm and tolerably rich sandy ground. 
They may also be propagated by suckers, which they throw up 
abundantly; especially if some of their wide extending roots be cut 
through with an axe, &c. 

The Robinia glutinosa is a charming plant; it produces in May 
numerous bunches of delightful flowers, grows to a good size, and 
is a great ornament in pleasure-grounds. It may be propagated by 
seed in like manner, or by grafting it on the former. 

The Robinia hispida, or rose acacia, is a most beautiful flower- 
ing shrub, of humble growth, and may be propagated by suckers, 
which it produces in great numbers, or by grafting it on either of 
the above species. 

Tlie Ash, Lime, and Sour-Gum. 

The various kinds of Fraximis, or ash, are propagated by seeds, 
which are to be prepared in the same manner as directed for haws, 
in page 151, &c. for they do not vegetate till the second spring after 



272 THE NURSERY. [March. 

the seeds are ripe. All the kinds take freely by grafting on one 
another. 

The Tilia americana, or American lime or Linden tree, together 
with every other species of the same genus, is easily propagated by 
layers, or by sowing the seeds in October or November, or in March, 
if preserved in dry sand till that time. Sow the seeds on an even 
surface, clap them in with the back of a spade, and cover them a 
little better than half an inch deep. 

The Nyssa integrifolia, or upland tupelo-tree, or sour-gum, is 
propagated by seed, suckers, layers, or cuttingsj if by seed sow 
them immediately when ripe, covering them an inch deep; some of 
them will come up the spring following, but many not till the second 
year. The better way would be to prepare them as directed for 
haws, and in the ensuing March examine themj if you then find 
many showing symptoms of vegetation, sow them; if not, let them 
remain till that time twelve months. 

Deciduous Cypress, White Cedar, and »^rbor Vitx. 

The Cupressus disticha, bald or deciduous cypress, grows to an 
enormous large size, the foliage of which is uncommonly beautiful 
during the summer months. It is propagated by sowing the seedjn 
March, in beds of good mellow earth, covering them half an inch 
deep; they must be kept very free from weeds, and when two years 
old transplant them from the seed-beds into nursery rows. 

The Cupressus thyoides, or white cedar, is propagated by sowing 
the seeds, which are very thin and flat when taken out of the cones, 
in boxes of light earth, taken from swampy ground, and covered 
about the aighth of an inch, or a little more, with loose, rich mould 
sifted evenly over them; they must have frequent sprinklings of 
water, and when up, and the heat increases, the boxes must be 
removed into the shade. You must keep them very free from weeds, 
as many of the seeds will not grow till the second year. When 
they are two years old transplant them into nursery rows, in moist 
light swampy ground. 

The Thuya occidentalism or American arbor-vitae, is propagated 
by layers and cuttings, or by sowing the seed as directed for the 
white cedar, with this difference, that it will not be necessary to 
procure swampy earth for it, as it thrives best in upland. 

The Thuya orientalis, or Chinese arbor-vitae, maybe propagated 
in like manner as the occidentalis. 

All the above kinds, if raised by seeds, will require some pro- 
tection during the two first years, from very rigorous frosts. 

Pines and Firs. 

The pines and firs, though ranked under the same genus, (Finns,) 
may be easily distinguished from one another, as the leaves of 
the former come out by two, three, or more, from the same sheath, 
and those of the latter singly. In the cedar of Lebanon and 
larch, they arise in bunches from the same bud, spreading out 
every way. 



March.] THE NURSERY. 273 

It is also to be remarked that all the pines have a tendency to 
drive down tap-roots, and therefore are more impatient of trans- 
planting; than the firs, whose roots generally take a lateral direc- 
tion. The larch is the only deciduous plant of the whole family. 
As all these kinds are not only very useful, but extremely orna- 
mental, and as none of them can be transplanted from the woods with 
good success, I shall be the more minute in giving the true methods 
of raising them, so as to insure thereby the growth and prosperity 
of the plants. 

The Pinus cedrus, or cedar of Lebanon, is rather too tender for 
those parts of the Union where the winter frosts are very rigorous; 
but will succeed tolerably well in warm exposures in the middle 
states, if protected from its violence for a few years, and be gradu- 
ally inured thereto. The seeds when procured are always in the 
cones, and are extremely difficult to be got out; the method is, 
bore the cone through with a small gimlet direct in the centre, 
entering it at the but-end and working out at top; then drive in a 
round iron or hard wooden pin and split the cones, after which, 
I'aise the scales one after another with a knife, and carefully pick 
out the seeds, which are very tender. 

Having your seeds ready, sow them in a box of good fresh earth, 
covering them near half an inch deep; in the middle states, the first 
week in April will be the best time to do this, but early in March 
will be preferable, if you have a green-house or hot-beds to place 
the box therein; give them a little sprinkling of water frequently, 
just what will be sufficient to keep the earth moist, for much would 
rot or burst the seeds. When up, do not expose them too much 
to the sun at any time during the season, nor keep them in too 
confined a place; and on the approach of winter remove them into 
the green-house, or place them under the protection of glasses, and 
so treat them for two years, without removing them out of the seed- 
box. Then, early in April, transplant them carefully into separate 
pots, treating them all this time, and for two or three years more, 
as you do green-house plants; after which, turn some of them with 
the earth out of the pots, and plant them in dry warm exposures. 

The Pinus pinea, or Italian stone pine, grows to a considerable 
height, and is cultivated chiefly for its nuts and the beauty of its 
foliage. In Italy and the southern parts of Europe, the kernels are 
frequently served up in desserts during the winter season, and are 
as sweet as almonds, but have a slight flavour of turpentine. The 
cones are generally four or five inches long, and when for some time 
exposed to the sun, they open and drop out the nuts, which should 
be sown towards the latter end of March in drills, and covered 
about half or three quarters of an inch deep; when they have had 
one or two years growth in these rows, cut their tap-roots as 
directed for walnuts in page 270, and the next year you may trans- 
plant them about the first week in April, either into nursery rows, 
at greater distances, or where they are to remain. 

The Pinus cimbra, or Siberian stone pine. There is a variety 
of this that grows in Switzerland, and higher up the Alps than any 
other pine, and is found on elevations where the larch will not 
2L 



274 ^^^ NURSERY. ■ [March. 

grow. The stones are shorter than those of the Italian pine, and 
full as thick. The wood is short, having scarcely any grain, and 
very fit for the carver. The peasants of the Tyrol, where this tree 
abounds, make various sorts of carved works with the wood, which 
they dispose of in Switzerland among the common people, who are 
fond of the resinous smell which it exhales. Both the varieties 
may be cultivated in the same manner as directed for the Italian 
stone pine. 

All the other species and varieties of pines and firs may be suc- 
cessfully raised in the following manner. 

Being provided with good fresh seeds, for on this every thing 
depends, prepare for their reception, as early in the spring &s your 
ground will work free and light, and pulverize finely in the working, 
beds three or four feet wide, of rich loamy ground, by no means 
subject to burn or become parched with the summer heatsi then 
sow the seeds on the surface so thick, as that you may expect after 
all reasonable allowances for defective seeds, &c. at least, a plant on 
every inch square of the ground, or at the rate of a pound of good 
seed to a bed three feet and a half wide and sixty long. The sowing 
of them so thick is indispensable, for unless they completely cover 
the surface, they will, if not carefully shaded, be destroyed in their 
infant state by the summer heatj early sowing is also necessary, 
for they have nothing to apprehend from subsequent frosts, that 
their roots may be established before the heat overtakes them. 
After the seeds are sown, sift over the smaller sized kinds about a 
quarter of an inch of fine, rich, light mould, and over the larger, 
nearly half an inch, then place over the beds nets made for that 
purpose, or any old small meshed fishing-nets, to keep off the birds, 
for all the kinds, when lightly covered, which is indispensable to 
their growth, generally carry up the seeds on their tops, and if 
attacked by birds, which are extremely fond of them, the far greater 
number will be destroyed. 

The beds must be kept completely free from weeds of any 
kind, from the moment the seeds are sown during the continuance 
of the plants therein; and if you perceive their leaves turn foxy in 
summer, by heat or drought, it will be necessary to give them occa- 
sional shade and water. In the month of June following, sift some 
fine, light, rich earth over the beds, so as to just come up to the 
foliage without covering it, which will protect their yet tender 
stems, prevent their being scalded by extraordinary heat, which 
often melts them away, so as to fall flat, whilst the foliage appears 
fresh; and besides, it will help to retain the moisture about their 
roots and fibres. 

The spring following, early in April, or as soon as you perceive 
an inclination in the buds to push, pull up the largest grown plants, 
of such kinds as have arrived at the height of three inches or up- 
wards, but not otherwise, and plant them in drills made with a hoe 
or spade for their reception, eighteen inches or two feet asunder, 
and eight inches plant from plant in the rows, just so deep as that 
the earth may come up to their foliage; close it well about the roots, 
and water them occasional Iv till sufficientlv taken with the eartli 



March.] THE NURSERY. 275 

and growing freely, and if repeated occasionally during the summer 
and early autumn, the better; always giving it about the setting or 
going down of the sun. The spring following, that is, when they 
have two years growth in the seed-beds, take them all up out of 
the face with a spade without injuring the roots or fibres, and 
plant them as above, without attempting to trim them, but laying 
them in a spreading and horizontal manner in the drills. If the 
ground is good and the season proves favourable, a great number 
of the larch in particular will have grown to a sufficient size for 
transplanting into nursery rows by the ensuing spring. 

When the plants have stood two or three years in these rows, 
they maybe planted in others at greater distances, or finally where 
they are intended to remain; observing however, that the fourth or 
fifth year of their growth are the most successful periods for a final 
transplanting, which ought always to be done, in the middle states, 
between the first and fifteenth of April, earlier in the southern, and 
not much later in the eastern states. 

MtJisia Frutcx, Laburnum, and Snowy Medlar. 

The Hibiscus syriacus, or althasa frutex, is propagated by sow- 
ing the seeds in March which grow very freely; all the varieties 
of it take well by grafting or budding on one another. 

The Cytissus laburnum, or common laburnum, grows freely 
by sowing the seed in spring, and covering it as well as the former, 
about half an inch deep. 

The Mesphilis canadensis, or snowy medlar, is a beautiful and 
early flowering shrub, rises to a good height, and is a great ornament 
to pleasure grounds. It is propagated abundantly by seeds, which 
should be preserved in sand from the time of their being ripe till 
March, and then sown and covered about half an inch deep. If kept 
in a dry state till spring, some will vegetate the first season and 
some not till the second. It will take by grafting or budding it on 
any kind of medlar, or on the white thorn, pear or quince. 

The Judas, Snowdrop, and Fringe Trees. 

The Cercis canadencis, or American Judas tree, is one of our 
most beautiful early flowering and ornamental plants; and may be 
propagated by sowing its seeds in March, as directed for the com- 
mon locust tree. 

The Halesia tetraptera, or snowdrop tree, is exceeded by very 
few shrubs for the beauty of its numerous white pendant flowers. 
It may be propagated by suckers or layers, or by sowing the seeds 
in November when ripe, or in March, and covering them near an 
inch deep with light rich mould. 

The Chionanthus virginicia, or fringe tree, is a very ornamental 
shrub, and may be cultivated by layers, suckers or seed. Sow 
the seeds when ripe in autumn, covering them an inch deep with 
very fine light mould, or preserve them in earth or sand till March, 
and then sow them as above; many will not rise till the second 



276 THE NURSERY. [March. 

spring, so that it will be necessary to keep the ground very free 
from weeds all the time. 

Magnolias. 

The seeds of the different kinds of magnolia should be sown 
immediately after being ripe, or be preserved in damp sand or earth 
till March; for if kept dry till that time, very few, if any, will vege- 
tate till the year following; and indeed may not until the second 
season, even if sown when ripe. They may also be propagated by 
layers and suckers, and by grafting and budding upon one another. 

Rhododendons, Kalmias, Azalias and Andromedas. 

Each and every species and variety of the above beautiful fami- 
lies of plants maybe propagated either by seeds, layers or suckers. 
The finest plants are always raised from seed, and although the 
process may be thought tedious, it is worth attending to; the more 
especially as they do not always succeed well when taken from the 
woods, and that thousands may be raised in this way, which may be 
successfully removed to any place where wanted. 

The capsules should be collected when the seeds are perfectly 
ripe, and if you intend to sow them immediately, which is certainly 
the better way, expose the capsules a few days to dry, but not to a 
powerful sun; they will then open, and the seeds will easily shake 
out; but if you do not intend sowing them till February or March, 
preserve them in the capsules till that time. To have a double 
chance sow some on shady borders of light, dry, loamy earth, and 
also in boxes, making the ground very fine and even on the surface, 
then sow the seeds thickly thereon, and cover them not more than 
the eighth of an inch deep, or rather so as barely to hide them. 
Immediately cover the beds or boxes with moss, in order to shade 
the surface and vegetating seed from the influence of the sun, or 
parching air; for when the small descending radicles are protruded, 
if the earth gets dry below them, all will be destroyed; and the 
seeds being so very minute, if covered deep, can never come up; 
therefore it will be necessary to give them shade and very fre- 
quently light sprinkles of water; the moss will prevent its washing 
the earth off the seeds, and will gently communicate the moisture 
to the surface thereof. When the plants begin to appear, thin the 
moss, and expose them but by slow degrees as they collect strength. 
If the boxes be placed in a green-house, or under the protection of 
garden frames and glasses, from the time of sowing the seeds till 
the middle of May, it will be a great advantage; obsisrving that 
the plants when up, must be carefully protected from the mid-day 
sun whilst in an infant state. Towards the middle of May remove 
the boxes to some comforting shade to remain there tiU the latter 
end of October, then place them in a warm exposure till the approach 
of severe frosts, when they may be put into a garden frame, and 
slightly protected during winter. Sufier the plants to remain in 
the seed boxes or beds till they have two years growth, being care- 



March.] THE NURSERY. 277 

ful to give them shade and water in summer, and some slight pro- 
tection in winter, and in the beginning of April plant them out into 
nursery rows as directed for firs and pines, in page 273, in a shady 
situation and a loamy soilj covering the ground about their roots 
with moss to keep it moist till the plants are established; observing 
to give them occasional watering during the first summer and 
autumn after being thus planted out. 

Note. — All other minute seeded shrubby plants, such as ericas, 
&c., when propagated by seed, should be treated in the above man- 
ner, with this difference, that they must have protection and heat in 
winter, in proportion to their necessities, and soil adapted to their 
respective natures. Such may also be raised under bell-glasses, 
without the assistance of moss, as these confine the evaporations 
from the earth, thereby preserving the moist atmosphere around the 
plant, which prevents a greater exhalation of sap from the tender 
leaves, than the small radicles are yet able to extract and supply, 
which is frequently the cause of the sudden death and disappear- 
ance of various other crops in warm climates. 

Calycanthus, Franklinia, and Gordonias. 

The Calycanthus floridus, or Carolina allspice, commonly called 
the sweet-scented shrub, is deserving of a place in every pleasure- 
garden, on account of the delightful odour of its flowers. It is 
easily propagated by layers or suckers; the most eligible time of 
laying it is in autumn, and by the spring following twelve months, 
they may be taken off and planted with good success. 

The Franklinia alatamaha, of Bartram, is a most charming plant, 
and very deservedly worthy of cultivation; it may be propagated in 
the same manner as the Calycanthus, as may also all the family of 
Gordonias, which are very ornamental shrubs. 

Elms or Sumach. 

The various kinds of Bhus or Sumach, may be propagated by 
suckers, layers, or seed. The seeds, if preserved in sand, and 
sown early in March, will rise freely the same season, and, when 
one or two years old, may be transplanted into nursery-rows, and 
having had there two years growth, may be planted where intended 
to remain. 

The Corlc-Tree. 

The Quercus Suber, or cork-tree, may be cultivated with good 
success in the southern states, and consequently deserves to be 
noticed among other articles of great national importance. It is a 
native of the south of Europe, and the northern parts of Africa. 
At present there are considerable woods of them between Rome 
and Naples, between Pisa and Leghorn, and also in Spain, Portu- 
gal, and the south of France. 

The uses of the cork are well known amongst us, by sea and land, 



278 THE NURSERY. [March, 

for its resisting both water and air: the fishermen who use nets, 
and all who deal in liquors, cannot do well without it. Some per- 
sons prefer it to leather for the soles of their shoes, being light, 
dry, and resisting moisture, whence the Germans name it Pan- 
toffel-holts, or slipper-wood j it was first applied to that purpose bj 
the Grecian ladies, whence they were called light-footed. The poor 
people in Spain, and other parts of the south of Europe, lay planks 
of it by their bed-side to tread on, as great persons use Turkey 
and Persian carpets^ they also employ it for bee-hives. For this 
last purpose, they roll the bark into a cylinder, or into a conical 
form, and it answers the end extremely well. It is also used for 
making cork jackets, which have been found eminently useful for 
mariners, passengers at sea, and for all those who resort to bathing 
places for the benefit of their health; as such will enable the most 
timorous to swim with perfect safety. 

Of the cork-tree there are two or three varieties, one with 
broad leaves, a second with narrow leaves, both evergreen, and one 
or two which cast their leaves in autumn; but the broad-leaved 
evergreen kind is the most common, and said to produce the best 
cork. The leaves of this are entire, about two inches long, and an 
inch and a quarter broad, with a little down on. their under sides, 
having very short foot-stalks; they continue green through the 
winter, and generally fall off just before the new leaves come out, 
so that the trees are often bare for a short time. The acorns are 
very like those of our common white oak. 

The exterior bark is the cork, which is taken from the tree every 
eight or ten years; but there is besides an interior bark which 
nourishes them, so that the stripping ott" the outer coat is so far 
from injuring the trees, that it is of real service; for when it is not 
taken off they seldom last longer than fifty or sixty years in 
health; whereas trees which are barked every eight or ten years 
will live one hundred and fifty, or more. The bark of a young 
tree is porous and good for little; however, it is useful to take it 
off when the trees are twelve or fifteen years old, for without this 
it will never be good.. After eight or ten years the bark will be fit 
to take off again; but the second peeling is of little use. At the 
third peeling it will be in perfection, and continue so for upwards 
of one hundred and fifty years — for the best cork is taken from old 
trees. The time for stripping is iu July, or early in August, or 
when the second sap flows plentifully: the operation is performed 
by slitting it down on one side, raising the edges, and then it will 
peel off readily. 

Having procured the acorns in good condition, they are to be 
treated in every respect as directed for other kinds of oak, in page 
271; but if they are planted at once where intended to remain for 
full growth, it will be much the best way; in which case, particu- 
lar care must be taken to keep them free from weeds during their 
infant state, and to protect them from the annoyance of cattle till 
grown out of their reach. The sooner the acorns are planted after 
having been procured the better, for when long kept in a dry state 
they loose their vegetating power, like every other kind of oak. 



M;iRCH.] THE NURSERY. 279 

Curse them! (exclaims the peevish planter,) I shall never live to 
cork a bottle with them. Have patience, good sir, you have no 
objection to throw by a few dollars in an iron chest for posterity, 
never to come in contact with the light of the sun during your 
existence, and which will always be depreciating in value as the 
circulation of paper currency increases, and from several other cir- 
cumstances; a few of which, if laid out on planting cork, trees, 
would be rapidly accumulating wealth for your children, and ren- 
dering a real service to your country; besides, every day you 
walked out you would have the pleasure of beholding your little 
family of trees prospering in health and beauty, humbling their 
boughs before you, and in their silent language returning you 
grateful thanks for your fostering care, and promising to reward 
your offspring for the friendly protection which you afforded them 
in their minor days. 

Tanner^s Sumach. 

The Rhus coriaria, or elm-leaved sumack, is a plant which should 
be introduced and cultivated, particularly in the southern states, 
where it will prosper in great perfection. It grows naturally in 
Italy, Spain, the south of France, the Levant, about Aleppo, Rama, 
and near Algiers, in Africa. The branches are used instead of 
oak bark for tanning leather; but the great and particular necessity 
of its introduction into the United States is, that without it our 
tanners, who are both numerous and industrious, cannot manufac- 
ture what is called Turkey or Morocco leather in good perfection; 
for it is with this plant exclusively that that valuable article is 
tanned in the eastern world; and a substitute for it has not yet 
been discovered in America. 

It has a strong woody stem, divided into many irregular branches, 
and rises to the height of eight or ten feet or more; the bark is 
hairy, and of an herbaceous brown colour when young. The leaves 
are composed of seven or eight pair of leaflets, terminated by an 
odd one: these leaflets are about two inches long, and half an inch 
wide in the middle, and are of a yellowish green colour. The 
flowers grow in loose pannicles at the ends of the branches, each 
pannicle being composed of several thick spikes of flowers sitting 
close to the foot-stalks: they are of a whitish herbaceous colour, and 
appear in June and July, and are followed by numerous roundish 
compressed seeds. - 

It may easily be propagated by seed, which, if sown soon after 
being ripe, or preserved in sand or earth till spring, will grow freely 
the first year; but if kept dry till spring, they do not generally 
vegetate till the next season. It can also be propagated by suckers, 
which it produces pretty freely, or by layers. It is tolerably hardy, 
and will thrive in warm exposures in the miildle states. 

Mulberry Trees and Silk Worms. 

The Morns alba, or white mulberry, is a native of China, Cochin- 
China and Japan, and according to Gmelin, of Persia. It grows 



280 '^H^ NURSERY. [March. 

well in the United States, and may be cultivated to great advan- 
tage for the feeding of silk worms, as well here as in France, 
Spain, or Italy. In Spain, Mr. Townsend informs us that in the 
province of Valencia they prefer the white mulberryj but in that 
of Grenada they give a preference to the black. The Persians 
generally make use of the latter; and it has been asserted upon 
very good authority, that worms fed with the black mulberry 
produce much better silk than those fed with the white. But the 
leaves of the black should never be given to the worms after they 
have eaten for some time of the white, lest they should burst. 

Sir George Staunton, in his embassy to China, says that the 
trees he observed in that country did not appear to differ from the 
common mulberry trees of Europe; that some of them were said to 
bear white, and some red or black fruit, but that often they bore 
none; and that the tender leaves growing on young shoots of the 
black mulberry are supposed to be the most succulent. 

About the year of Christ, 551, two Persian monks, employed as 
missionaries in some of the Christian churches established in India, 
penetrated into the country of Seres, or China. They there ob- 
served the labours of the silk worm, and became acquainted with 
the art of working up its productions into a variety of elegant 
fabrics. They explained to the Greek emperor at Constantinople 
these mysteries, hitherto unknown, or very imperfectly understood 
in Europe; and undertook to bring to the capital a sufficient num- 
ber of those wonderful insects. This they accomplished by con- 
veying the eggs of the silk worm in a hollow cane. They were 
hatched, and afterwards fed with the leaves of a wild mulberry 
tree, and multiplied and worked in the same manner as in those 
climates where they first became the objects of human attention 
and care. Vast numbers of these insects were soon reared in dif- 
ferents parts of Greece, particularly in the Peloponnesus. Sicily 
afterwards undertook to breed silk worms with equal success, and 
was imitated, from time to time, in several towns of Italy. In all 
these places extensive manufactures were established with silk of 
domestic production. 

From the reign of Justinian, it was mostly in Greece, and some of 
the adjacent islands that silk worms were reared. Soon after the 
conquest of Constantinople by the Venetians, in the year 1204, they 
attempted the establishment of the silk manufacture in their domi- 
nions; and in a short time the silk fabrics of Venice vied with those 
of Greece and Sicily. 

About the beginning of the fourteenth century, the Florentine 
manufactures of silk became very considerable. It was introduced 
much later into France; the manufacture of silk, though consider- 
ably encouraged by Henry IV. not having been fully established 
there till under Louis XIV. by Colbert. 

"It is an established and well known fact that both the white and 
black mulberry trees grow as well in almost every part of the 
United States, as in any country on earth; and also that silk has 
been raised and manufactured into a most excellent fabric, under 
the direction of that great and venerable patriot, and friend of 



March.] THE NURSERY. Ogl 

mankind, Dr. Benjamin Franklin. That so useful a pursuit 
should be sutt'ered to die away in a country as well adapted for it 
as any in the universe, is as extraordinary as it is unfortunate and 
injurious to the real interest of the nation." 

Trees which are designed to feed silk worms should never be 
sutt'ered to grow tall, but rather kept in a sort of hedge; and instead 
of pulling oft" the leaves singly, the young twigs should be cut oft' 
with them on, which is much sooner done, and not so injurious to 
the trees. This is the more interesting as the mulberry makes a 
tolerably good hedge, and can be used with advantage for both 
purposes. 

The raising and manufacture of silk, as well as every other new 
establishment, can only be brought to perfection, and consequently 
into repute, by the industry of some wealthy individuals, or by 
established companies whose united ettbrts will surmount the diffi- 
culties which always present themselves in new undertakings; for 
we every day see those that deal in small quantities in any way of 
life, or in any commodities whatever, generally unsuccessful, whilst 
at the same time, others possessed of wealth, or in established socie- 
ties, dealing largely in the same articles, acquire vast property and 
riches J merely from being able to attbrd constant and regular 
employment for the people engaged in the business, and having 
due attention paid to every department thereof. 

The vast wealth of Lyons, and of various other places, gained 
from the labours of this little insect, plainly show that where no 
accommodations or materials are wanted to employ a multitude of 
hands in a regular society or combination of undertakers, the silken 
manufacture must answer; and that people may grow rich thereby, 
as well in America, as in any other country, if similarly pursued, is 
too self evident to bear contradiction. 

With a view and expectation that this business maybe attempted 
successfully, I shall contribute my mite by giving the best informa- 
tion that I have been able to acquire on the subject; not in the least 
doubting but that better may be easily obtained, for the introduction 
of this important work. 

The first object is to raise a sufficient quantity of mulberry-trees, 
of both the white and black kinds, which are very easily propagated, 
as directed in page 264. The cultivating of both kinds I think the 
more necessary, from the different opinions entertained of their 
utility for this purpose, and the universal admission of either kind 
answering the end. 

The next is to procure the eggs, about the beginning of May, 
or when the mulberry begins to expand its leaves, to lay them 
on paper or flannels placed on shelves, in warm exposures, where 
they may have the heat of the sun to hatch them. In Sicily, boarded 
or frame houses are commonly erected for this purpose in the fields, 
among the mulberry trees, with a number of shelves rising one 
above another, and a large table in the middle of the room, on 
which, when they are hatched, to lay over them the young twigs 
bearing the leaves intended for their food, which must be removed 
and renewed as often as necessary; keeping them always clean 
2 M 



282 THE NURSERY. [March, 

from dead leaves, and their own dirt. A man and bojwill attend 
all the worms that come from six ounces of eggs, and those, one 
year with another, will spin twenty pounds weight of silk. 

The method of clearing off* their dirt is this; spread a net over 
the worms, on which lay fresh food; they will all crawl through the 
meshes to feed on the leaves, when they may be taken up without 
the least injury, and their shelves cleaned effectually: after which 
lay fresh twigs with leaves on the shelves; over these lay the nets 
and they will return to their former places, when the nets may be 
laid by till wanted again for a similar purpose. In some countries 
the worms are suffered to feed and work upon the trees, but their 
being subject, under such circumstances, to the ravages of birds, 
unfavourable changes of weather, &c. they are generally kept in 
houses or sheds erected for that purpose. 

In Turkey, the worms are fed in long barns, made, both walls 
and roofs, of reed or cane; when they are fed, and afterwards spin 
their clues upon these reeds. In Italy and Spain, they are kept to 
feed in the same rooms wherein the people live and do their other 
household affairs, feeding them on shelves and tables without more 
curiosity. 

It is observed, that the worms are commonly sick three or four 
times during their feeding, generally about ten days after they are 
hatched, and at weekly periods afterwards. Their best treatment, 
during these times, is to give them but little food while sick. The 
whole time of their feeding is about seven weeks; and as they get 
strength and grow bigger, it need hardly be said that you must give 
them more and oftener. The leaves should not be given to the 
worms whilst wet with the dew or rain. 

When they have fed their due time they begin to look clear, and 
a little of the yellowish cast, and to prepare for work; at every 
time, but at this more particularly, they should have plenty of air. 
Then small branches, divested of their leaves, are laid over them 
and in their way, upon which they mount and attach themselves, 
and in a few days each will cover itself all over with silk so as to 
be seen no more, till suffered to work its way out for the business 
of propagation. 

In about two weeks they commonly finish their balls, and soon 
after cut their way out, and couple for procreation; the balls so 
perforated are then good for nothing; but it is necessary to suffer a 
sufficient number to come out in this way, to produce a sufficiency 
of eggs for the next season's brood. The others, when they have done 
working, and before they begin to cut through, should be all put 
into an oven just sufficiently hot to kill the worms. 

The method of winding the silk oft' the balls, is first to find their 
ends, which is not difficult, and then put about a dozen or fifteen 
of them into a basin of hot water, wherein is dissolved a little gum 
tragacanth, commonly called gum dragon; and thus they will be 
easily wound. Sometimes the balls are gummy, in which case they 
should be thrown into a hot clean lye of wood ashes, and after that 
into scalding pure water, which will cause them to wind freely. 

"When the animal is protruded from the egg, it is a small blackish 



March.] THE NURSERY. 2g3 

worm, very active, and naturally crawls about in search of food; at 
this period it should be fed with the youngest and most tender 
leaves; in eight or ten days it will increase in size to about a quar- 
ter of an inch in length. It is then attacked with its first sickness, 
which is a kind of lethargic sleep, for about two or three days con- 
tinuance; during which time it changes its skin, preserving the 
same bulk. It undergoes similar sickness and changes three or 
four times, at intervals of about eight days, before it arrives at its 
full size; which is from an inch and a quarter to an inch and a half 
in length; and the intervals between these changes, and consequent- 
ly the periods of its arrival at maturity for work, are said to vary in 
different climates, which is very probable. 

After it has formed its cocoon or ball of silk, and undergone its 
change in the heart of it, it comes forth a heavy dull-looking moth 
with wings, but these it seldom uses for flying; it only flutters and 
crawls slowly about in quest of its mate; soon after copulation the 
female lays its eggs, and both die without tasting food in this stage 
of their existence. 

When in the worm or caterpillar state, they are of a blackish, or 
a milk or pearl colour; the former are esteemed the best. The body 
is divided into seven rings to each of which are joined two very short 
feet. It has a small point like a thorn exactly over the anus. 
There are a considerable variety of breeds, some of which possess 
qualities much superior to others. This is a particular of much 
importance to be adverted to at the time of beginning to breed; for 
it will make a great difference in the profit to the undertaker. The 
eggs, when obtained, should be kept in a cool, dry place, neither 
exposed to heat nor to excessive frosts, till wanted for hatching 
the ensuing season. 

The Morus nigra, or black mulberry, is more esteemed for its 
fruit than the white, and when cultivated for such, layers or cut- 
tings from good fruit-bearing trees ought to be preferred to raising 
them by seed; for monoecious trees, until arrived at a good age, 
bear male flowers chiefly and very little fruit. The cuttings if taken 
off" in March, rightly chosen, and skilfully managed, will do very 
well; though, in general, they do not take as freely in this way as 
many other trees; however, if placed under bell-glasses, they will 
strike with great certainty; but where there is no such conveniency, 
the ground about them should be covered with moss to prevent its 
drying; and where this is carefully done, they will want but little 
water, and will succeed much better than with having too much 
wet. 

The Morus rubra, or red American mulberry, is admired by 
some on account of the pleasing acidity of its fruit, and is said to 
answer the end of feeding silk-worms very well. It is cultivated 
like every other kind by layers, cuttings, and seed. 

The white mulberry prospers best in a moist rich loam, the black, 
in a dry sandy soil, and the red in a mean between both these 
kinds. 

The Morus muUicaulis. Since the preceding was written this new 
variety of the mulberry has been introduced to the attention of the 



284 THE NURSERY. [March. 

American public. Its introduction marks a new era in the silk 
history of the United States. It has already become so rapidly 
and extensively known that little more need be said upon it here 
than to remark that it differs from the other varieties, particularly 
from the white or Italian mulberry, in the luxuriance with which 
it sends up its "many stalks;" the increased size of the leaf, and 
the small portion qf refuse left by the worms in feeding. It also 
is distinguished by its foliage, furnishing food for the worms to 
considerable extent during the first season of its growth, and in 
great abundance after the second and third year. The product 
from the seed is so uncertain, and the propagation by layers or 
cuttings so easy that the preference is invariably given to the latter 
mode of cultivation. A good rich soil, aided by compost or well 
fermented manure, should be chosen when the planting is intended 
simply for multiplying the trees, though for feeding the worms the 
preference is decidedly in favour of a foliage grown on a dry, 
sandy or gravelly loam, the latter furnishing silk of a better quality, 
with less risk of endangering the life of the worm. As to the par- 
ticular mode of cultivation it is generally conceded to be as simple 
as that of corn. The ground should be ploughed in the fall, and 
again in the spring. 

The "Silk Worm," a valuable periodical, published by Mr. 
Thomas C. Clarke, of this city, and devoted to the advancement 
of this rapidly increasing business, furnishes the following direc- 
tions for planting, which we find corroborated by other writers on 
this subject, as well as by practical cultivators. 

"There are four methods of planting these trees. 1st, by budding 
under glass; 2nd, by cuttings laid out at the usual season; 3d, by 
layers of whole trees; and 4th, by layers of sections or parts of 
trees. 

"The cuttings should always be made at least with one bud, and 
that within a quarter to half an inch of the end intended to be next 
the surface. When they are budded, there should be a box made 
about two feet on the back and eighteen inches in front, covered 
with glass lids with hinges of iron or leather, so that they may be 
aired. This box should be filled two-thirds full with rich mould, 
or mould enriched with well rotted manure. The cuttings should 
be inserted in this in a sloping direction at an angle of 45°, the 
upper end towards the north, the bud below the surface half an 
inch, and the whole box towards the south. The cuttings should 
be from a quarter to half an inch apart, so that the mould may be 
all around each cutting. They should be placed in this position 
about the 1st of March, and let remain to the 15th or 20th of May. 
The late frosts should be all over when removed, and they should 
be placed in well prepared soil with a trowel dibble, the soil press- 
ed well around them, and well watered if the weather be not rainy. 
The planting of these should, if possible, be done in rainy or at 
least cloudy weather. 

"The cuttings of the second method should be inserted in the 
soil without dibble, the upper end to be about one inch under the 
soil, if the mould be loose, or even with the soil if the mould be 



March.] THE NURSERY. 285 

stubborn. When they come up an inch or two, let the hoe draw- 
carefully mould around them. 

"By the third method, the ground is prepared as for corn, well 
broken with the harrow, and if necessary, the roller; and let a cul- 
tivator be run with one horse, from three to four feet, in parallel 
lines, forming a furrow as for corn. 

"The trees are laid horizontally, the root of one to the top of an- 
other from one end of the row to another, the root laid deeper than 
the tree, and let the hoe cover them about one or one and a half 
inches. 

"The fourth method is by cutting a tree up into pieces of from 
twelve to fifteen inches, and laying them in the furrow, prepared as 
in the last method, so as to leave a space between each piece equal 
to the length of the cutting." 

The Paper Mulberry, and method of making Paper of its Bark. 

The Morus papyrifera, or paper mulberry. This tree makes 
very strong vigorous shoots, but seems not to be of tall growth; it 
drives up an abundance of suckers from the roots, by which it is 
easily propagated. The leaves are large, some of them entire, 
others cut into two, three, or four lobes, sporting themselves into 
various forms, and scarcely two to be found alike on the same tree, 
especially while young; they are of a dark green, and rough to the 
touch on the upper surface, but pale green and somewhat hairy on 
the under side, falling ott" on the first approach of frost in autumn. 
Their fruit is little larger than peas, surrounded with long purplish 
hairs, when ripe changing to a black purple colour, and full of 
sweet juice. 

It is a native of Japan and the South Sea Islands; and according 
to Mr. Miller, of China and South Carolina, whence he received 
the seeds. The inhabitants of Japan have, for ages, been in the habit 
of making paper from its bark: they cultivate the trees for this 
purpose, on the mountains, much in the same manner as we do 
osiers, cutting them all down for use every autumn after the leaves 
are fallen. 

The finest and whitest cloth worn by the principal people at 
Otaheite and in the Sandwich Islands, is made of the bark of this 
tree; which they frequently dye red. The bread fruit tree makes 
a cloth inferior in whiteness and softness, w^orn there chiefly by the 
common people. 

Paper making having a connection in this instance with objects 
of my attention, and the probable use it may be of to the community, 
induces me to give additional publicity to the following method of 
manufacturing it from the bark of the paper mulberry tree; the 
more especially as such has been attempted last year, and with good 
success, by the laudable exertions of Mr. William Young, proprie- 
tor of the Brandywine paper-mills, in the state of Delaware. It is 
extracted from Marty n's edition of Miller's Gardener's Dictionary, 
and quoted by him from Kaemfer. I am^not certain what kind of 
mulberry Mr. Young had used for that purpose, nor whether it was 



286 THE NURSERY. [March. 

the bark of the roots or branches he manufactured, but some of the 
paper I had seen printed on, and it promised well. It is very 
probable that either species might be manufactured into paper, but I 
am induced to think that the paper mulberry, from the vigorous 
growth of its young shoots, is more likly to answer the end than 
any other. 

"The young shoots being cut down in autumn after the leaves 
are fallen and divided into rods of three feet in length, or shorter, 
are gathered into bundles to be boiled. If the shoots are dry, they 
must be softened in water twenty-four hours. The bundles are 
bound very close together, and placed erect in a large copper, pro- 
perly closed: the boiling is continued till the separation of the bark 
displays the naked wood. Then the stalks are loosed out of the 
bundles and allowed to cool; after which, by a longitudinal inci- 
sion, the bark is stripped off and dried, the wood being rejected. 
When this bark is to be purified, it is put three or four hours in 
water, when being sufficiently softened, the cuticle, which is of a 
dark colour, together with the greenish surface of the inner bark, 
is pared off. At the same time the stronger bark is separated from 
the more tender, the former making the whitest and best paper; the 
latter a dark, weak and inferior kind. If any bark appears that is 
old, it is set aside for a thicker paper of worse quality. Into this 
last class they throw the knotty parts of the bark, and those which 
have any fault or blemish. 

"The bark is now boiled in a lye that is clear and strained; care 
being taken to stir the substance as soon as it begins to boil with a 
strong reed, and to pour in of the lye gradually as much as is ne- 
cessary for stopping the evaporation and restoring the liquor that 
is lost. 

"The boiling is to cease when the materials can be split by a 
slight touch of the finger into fibres and down. 

"Next it is to be washed, which is a thing of some moment; for 
if washed too short a time, the paper will be strong indeed, but too 
rough, and of an inferior quality; if too long, it will be whiter, but 
of a fat consistence, and less fit for writing. Being sufficiently 
washed, the materials are put upon a thick, smooth, wooden table, 
and stoutly beat by two or three men, with battons of hard wood, 
into a pulp, which being put in water, separates like grains of meal. 
Thus prepared, it is put into a narrow vat; an infusion of rice, and 
a mucous water of the infusion of the root of Manihot being added 
to it. These three are to be stirred with a clean slender reed, till 
reduced into a homogeneous liquor of a due consistence. The pre- 
pared liquor is now put into a larger vat, from whence the sheets 
are poured out one by one, and placed in heaps upon a table, 
covered with a double mat; a small thread of reed being placed 
between the sheets at the edge, and projecting a little, so that they 
may be taken up singly when wanted ; the heaps are covered with 
a plank of wood the size of the paper, upon which stones are put, 
at first of a light weight, but afterwards heavier, that all the wet 
may be pressed out by degrees. The following day, the weights 



March.] THE NURSERY. 287 

being removed, each sheet is taken up by itself, and the operation 
is finished." 

The preceding is the process employed by the Japanese, and 
whether we regard the expedition or labour, or the quantity and 
quality of the product, it seems to admit of much improvement. 

Instead of reducing the subject to a pulp by battons, in the man- 
ner above described, that might be done more effectually by grind- 
ing it, in the way practised with rags. 

The colour might be rendered as elegantly white as that of any 
other substance, by means of an immersion, first in oxygenated 
muriatic acid, afterwards in a solution of alkali, and finally, wash- 
ing it in pure water. By these means it is probable that the por- 
tions thrown aside for paper of inferior qualities, might be wrought 
into that of prime excellence. 

The decoction of rice and of the root of Manihot, can have no 
possible advantage over the size commonly used for giving to the 
paper the necessary firmness and texture. 

The Calabrian or Manna Jish. 

There are two particular species of ash, from which that useful 
drug called manna is collected in the kingdom of Naples, &c,,and 
which might be cultivated in the southern states to advantage^ 
therefore I am induced to give some account of them. 

1. The Fraxinus ornus, or flowering ash, which is the principal 
kind cultivated for manna. The leaflets are ovate-oblong, serrate, 
petioledj flowers with petals. 

2. The Fraxinus rotundifolia, or round-leaved ash, which also 
produces it, but not in as great quantities as the former. Leaflets 
roundish, acutish, doubly serrate, subsessile; flowers with petals. 
Both these kinds may be raised from seeds as directed in page 271, 
or by grafting or budding them on any other species of ash. They 
are natives of Italy, Sicily, and the southern parts of Europe. 

They also cultivate in Sicily the Fraxinus excelsior, or common 
European ash, for that purposej which induces me to think, that if 
the above kinds were grafted low, on any of our American species, 
it would not prevent their yielding as good manna as if established 
on their own roots. Doctor Cullen supposes "manna to be a part 
of the sugar so universally present in vegetables, and which exudes 
on the surface of a great number of them." The qualities of these 
exudations he thinks are ''very little, if any, different." The prin- 
cipal trees known to produce these mannas, in different climates 
and seasons, are the larch, orange, walnut, willow, mulberry, and 
some different kinds of oak; which latter are found growing between 
Merdin and Diarbecker, and also in Persia near Khounsar. 

In Sicily the three species above mentioned, with the view of ob- 
taining manna from them, but more particularly the first, are planted 
on the declivities of hills, having eastern aspects. After ten years 
growth the trees first begin to yield manna, but they require to be 
much older before they afford it in any considerable quantity. Al- 
though the manna exudes spontaneously from the trunks and 



288 THE NURSERY. [March. 

branches, yet in order to obtain it more copiously, incisions are 
made through the bark, by means of a sharp crooked instrument, 
a slice of which is taken oft", about three inches in length and two 
in breadth^ they leave the wounds open, and by degrees the manna 
runs out. The season thought to be most favourable for instituting 
this process, is a little before the dog-days commence, when the 
w^eather is dry and serene. The incisions are first made in the 
lower part of the trunk, and repeated at the distance of an inch or 
two from the former wound, still extending them upwards as far as 
the branches, and confining them to one side of the tree, the other 
side being reserved till the year following, when it undergoes the 
same treatment. On making these, a thick white juice immediate- 
ly begins to flow, which gradually hardens on the bark, and in the 
course of eight days acquires the consistence and appearance in 
which the manna is imported, when it is collected in baskets and 
afterwards packed in large chests. Sometimes the manna flovvs in 
such abundance from the incisions, that it runs upon the ground, 
by which it becomes mixed with various impurities, unless pre- 
vented, which is commonly attempted by interposing large concave 
leaves, stones, chips of wood, &c. The business of collecting it, 
generally terminates in those countries in September, when the 
rainy season sets in. 

That manna is got in quantities on the leaves of trees, is an 
opinion taken from the doctrine of the ancients, and received as in- 
contestible without consulting nature; for all those who are em- 
ployed in the gathering of it, know of none that comes from the 
leaves; therefore, that with which the Israelites were so peculiarly 
favoured, could only have been produced through miraculous 
means, and is consequently out of the province of the naturalist. 
The best manna is what exudes from the tree very slowly, and is 
collected clean; this is always more dry, transparent, and pure, 
for when it flows copiously it concretes into a coarse, brown, 
unctuous mass. 

Methods of propagating Trees and Shrubs by Layers. 

There are few trees or shrubs, if any, but may be increased in 
this way. The nursery gardeners who want to propagate large 
quantities of various hardy kinds, of which they cannot easily pro- 
cure seeds, and which by experience they do not find to grow 
freely by cuttings, establish what they call stools, of the different 
kinds intended to be propagated, particularly of the deciduous tribe, 
and also some evergreens. For this purpose they plant in different 
quarters, stout, healthy plants, at the distance of four or five feet 
from one another every way, and head them down; these throw 
out near the earth a number of young shoots, some of which may 
be laid in the autumn or spring following; these stools, as they are 
commonly called, continue for many years, always laying down 
the shoots of the last season, and every year successively they pro- 
duce abundance for the ensuing year's laying, still taking them off" 
either in autumn or spring as they become well I'ooted. The elm. 



March.] THE NURSERY. 289 

linden, mulberry, and maple, do extremely well in this way, but it 
is seldom practised on any of the pine family. The far greater 
number of kinds will be well rooted and fit to take off in one year 
after laying, some not till the second, and others not until the third 
yearj but the latter are very few. 

The ground in these quarters should always be kept free from 
weeds, be manured occasionally, and dug every autumn and spring, 
being careful not to disturb the layers. 

After the layers are taken up, the stools must have all the wound- 
ed parts taken away, and any old branches cut off pretty close to 
the stems, the next season these will produce new shoots, which 
may be laid the autumn or spring following. 

The best season for laying all the kinds that do not root freely, 
is autumn, and the young shoots of the preceding summer's growth, 
should be preferred j these should be tongued as hereafter directed. 
The free rooting kinds may be laid either in autumn or spring, as . 
convenient. 

Though branches may be laid at any time, yet the best season for 
laying hardy trees, that shed their leaves, is October or November; 
for such as are tender early in March; evergreens may either be 
laid at the latter period or in June or July. 

When the branches or twigs cannot be bent down into the ground 
lay them in boxes or pots, filled with good earth and elevated to 
the necessary places by blocks, tressels, or benches. Too much of 
the head of the layers must not be left on, and the smaller, the 
less should be left out of the ground, except they are twigs of the 
former year's growth, and intended for timber trees, in which case 
they should not be topped. 

Many trees and plants will not put out roots from old wood- 
branches; yet if the young shoots of the same year be laid in July, 
they will often root very freely; but as those shoots will be soft 
and pithy, they must not have too much wet, which would cause 
them to rot; cover, therefore, the surface of the ground with moss, 
which will prevent its drying too fast, and a little water will sufl&ce. 

In many kinds of the young shoots of the same year, if laid in 
June or July, they will be well rooted by the November or spring 
following, and may then be taken off'. 

When layers are to be made from green-house shrubs, or other 
plants in pots, the laying should be generally performed either in 
their own pots or in others placed convenient for that purpose. 

Sometimes the branches of trees are so inflexible as not to be 
easily brought down for laying, in which case they must be half 
cut through, as practised in plashing hedges, and by that means 
brought down; or when they are got too old for plashing, or the 
nature of the wood will not bear that operation, they may be thrown 
down on one side, by opening the earth and loosening or cutting 
the roots on the opposite. 

There are several methods of performing this operation. 

1. Having well dug the ground and made it very light, take some 
of the most tlexible and free growing shoots, and lay them into it 
about six inches deep, pegging them down with hooked sticks if 
2N 



290 THE NURSERY. [March. 

necessary, leaving the end of the layer a foot or a foot and a half, 
or more if the twig be young and healthy, out of the ground, with 
its head as erect as possible^ keep them moist during the summer 
season, and if of a free rooting kind, they will take root and be fit 
to be taken ofl' and removed in the autumn or spring following, if 
not, they must remain another season. 

2. Tie a piece of wire tight around the bark of the layer, at the 
place you intend to lay in the ground, and half an inch below a bud; 
twist the ends of the wire, so that they may not untie, as the shoot 
swells, prick the parts above and below the wire with an awl in 
several places, and then lay it in the ground as before directed. 
This method will succeed when the other fails. 

3. Slit the shoot underneath a joint or bud up the middle, and 
about an inch long, or a little better, according to the size and 
nature of the layer, forming a sort of tongue, nearly the same as 
directed for carnation layers; laying that part in the earth and 
raising the top upright, so as thereby to separate the tongue of the 
slit from the other part and keep it open; then apply the earth as 
before. This is the most universally practised and successful 
mode, when any preparation of the shoot is necessary to promote 
its rooting. 

4. Twist the part of the branch intended to be layed in the earth 
as you would a willow twig, this greatly facilitates the emission of 
fibres, and layers of numerous trees and shrubs may be forwarded 
exceedingly in rooting by this method. 

5. Cut the bark nearly all around, a little below a joint or bud, 
taking out small chips thereof in several places below the cut, and 
lay that part in the earth. Some sorts will root more freely by 
this than any other mode. 

6. Thrust an awl through a shoot at a joint in several places, 
laying that part in the earth, and it will emit fibres from the wounds. 

After laying, in either of the above methods, there is no particu- 
lar culture necessary, except in the heat of summer to give occa- 
sional waterings to keep the earth moist about the layers, which 
will greatly promote their rooting, and which if effected the first 
season, they should be taken off in the autumn or spring following. 

Additional Observations on Planting. 

Plants are always most prosperous when propagated by seed, 
which is nature's favourite method. 

Evergreen plants are best fit for transplanting from the seed- 
beds into nursery rows when they have attained the height of from 
four to six inches, and deciduous kinds, when from six to twelve 
inches high. 

Layers should not be suffered to remain on the mother plants 
longer than until sufficiently rooted, which will be effected by some 
in six or seven months, if laid in spring; by the far greater number 
in one year, and by others, not in less than two or three. 

Tonguing or twisting the layers, &c. is necessary for such kinds 
as do not strike freely, but not for those that do. 



March.] THE NURSERY. 291 

All kinds of seedlings should be transplanted in spring, the de- 
ciduous earlier than the evergreens. 

October or November is tlie best time for the ^naZ transplant- 
ing of all kinds of hardy deciduous trees, if the ground in which 
they are to be planted is dry, and not subject to become too wet in 
winter^ but early spring planting does best in moist soils. 

Evergreens of every kind succeed best when planted in spring, 
provided it be done to each respective kind immediately before its 
vegetation commences. 

Watering is very useful when given in small quantities and fre- 
quently: but the reverse when in large quantities, and but seldom. 

Every kind of tree, whether deciduous or evergreen, grows to a 
larger size when finally planted out at the age of four years, having 
remained one or two in the seed-bed, and two or three in the nur- 
sery-rows, than at any other subsequent period. 

Walnuts, oaks, and every other tree that has a tendency to drive 
down perpendicular or to tap roots, always grow to larger timber 
when the seeds are sown where intended to remain, and never 
transplanted. 

Propagation of Trees and Shrubs by Cuttings. 

Various trees and shrubs may be propagated by cuttings, and this 
month, especially in the middle states, is a good time for planting 
all the hardy deciduous and evergreen kinds that grow in that way, 
observing to plant the former in the early part of the month, and 
the latter towards the end of it. 

When you intend to propagate trees for timber, or for a tall 
stately growth, be very particular never to take the cuttings from 
horizontal branches, for they will never have an inclination to grow 
in a spreading manner; always make choice of perpendicular shoots, 
and particularly those that terminate the branches; these will most 
certainly produce the straightest and handsomest trees, and be little 
inferior to those raised from seed; of this I have had ample expe- 
rience, and found it uniformly to be the case. 

But when you intend the plants for hedges, wildernesses, or 
thickets, the same precaution is not necessary; though in propa- 
gating any kinds of erect growing shrubs for detached plants in 
the pleasure-garden, I would recommend it, as they will be less 
subject to spread and injure other herbaceous flowering plants 
growing near them. 

Large slioots cut into lengths, are often used, and will do tole- 
rably well, provided they are selected as above; but I would ever 
prefer what gardeners term cock-shoots, or those retaining the ter- 
minating buds. The soft and pithy sorts will succeed better with 
having an inch or two of the former year's wood annexed to the 
cuttings, but all the hard wooded kinds are much better without it. 

For this purpose dig one or more beds or shady borders, &c. 
where the ground is somewhat mellow and not wet; let the earth 
be well broken with the spade, and rake the surface smooth. 

Take off the cuttings with your knife from the trees or shrubs 



292 THE NURSERY. [March. 

that you want to increase; let them be of the last summer's shoots, 
cutting them oiF from about six or eight to ten or fifteen inches 
long, according as they may occur in> the different sorts of trees, 
&c.; plant them in rows, each cutting about half or two thirds of 
its length into the ground; close the earth well about them, and in 
dry weather let them be occasionally watered. 

The tacamahaca, white, black, trembling; Lombardy, Canada, 
Athenian, Carolina, heart-leaved, smooth-leaved, and various leaved 
poplars, and all the varieties of willow may be propagated in this 
way; also, the plane tree, tupelo tree, mulberry, and alder; with 
the sea buckthorn, elder, tamarisk, some kinds of solanum, honey- 
suckles, diervilla, privet, trumpet-flower, virgin's-bower, Carolina 
kidney-bean tree, passion flower, jasmine, periploca, jew, juniper, 
savin, arbor vitse, Portugal and English laurels, and an immense 
number of other trees and shrubs. 

Cuttings of all sorts planted a year ago, and that are well rooted, 
may now be transplanted or quartered out into open nursery rows, 
to advance in proper growth, and to have occasional training for 
the purposes intended. 

Grafting Forest Trees and Ornamental Shrubs. 

The latter end of this month will be a good time to graft the 
various kinds of forest trees and flowering and ornamental shrubs 
which you mean to propagate in that way; such as elms, ash, oaks, 
hollies of various kinds, robinias, double-flowering thorns, altheas 
and cherries, &c. There are very few hard wooded plants but 
will take in this way when grafted on stocks of their own families, 
and indeed there are many instances of plants taking on stocks of 
a different genus, as the pear on the white thorn, the peach on the 
plum, &c. &c. 

Transplanting young Trees and Shrubs. 

All hardy kinds of deciduous trees and shrubs may now be 
transplanted, either into nursery rows, or finally where intended 
to remain; always observing to do this in mild weather, and when 
the ground works freely and is in a good condition to receive them. 
In the middle, and particularly in the eastern states, the removal 
of evergreens should not be commenced before the beginning of 
April, and then finished towards the middle of that month, if the 
season proves favourable. Hollies are best removed towards the 
end of April. 

Weeding Seedling Trees and Shrubs. 

Look over the seed-beds of young trees and shrubs: if weeds 
appear on them, let them be carefully picked out by hand in time 
before they mix their roots with those of the plants. 



March.] THE NURSERY. 293 

Watering Seedling Trees, ^c. 

In dry, warm weather it will be proper to refresh the seed-beds 
of small young trees and shrubs with water nov/ and thenj a little 
at each time will doj let this be done early in the morning. 

Digging vacant Ground, 8rc. 

All requisite digging and trenching of vacant quarters of ground 
in the nursery, designed for plantations of young trees, shrubs, &c. 
this spring, should now be completed, as soon as possible, in due 
time for the reception of the respective plants intended, which, in 
the deciduous kinds particularly, should be mostly or generally 
finished by the middle or latter end of this month, and the ever- 
greens soon after that time. See Jlpril. 

Finish all digging between the rows of young trees, &c. in this 
month if possible; and also in all parts where planting is intended 
this spring, provided that the ground will work, freely. 

Propagating Gooseberries and Currants. 

The only proper method of propagating gooseberries and cur- 
rants is by cuttings; suckers should never be resorted to except in 
cases of necessity, for such will always produce others nume- 
rously from their roots, which carry off the nourishment that 
ought to go to the support of the fruit; and besides, they form such 
thickets as to smother and deprive them of the benefit of a free 
circulating air. 

The proper cuttings for planting are the shoots of the last sum- 
mer's production, of straight, clean growth; they should be taken 
from healthy trees, and such as are remarkable, according to their 
kinds, for bearing the finest fruit: let each be shortened from about 
ten to twelve or fifteen to eighteen inches long, according to its 
strength. 

Previous to planting, cut off every bud as close as possible to the 
shoot, except three, four, or five near the top, which are to be left 
to form the head of the plant. Some people imagine that the buds 
on those parts inserted in the earth grow into roots, which is by 
no means the case, nature never having designed for them such; 
the roots or fibres always strike out through the clean and smooth 
bark, but generally a little below a bud, and sometimes at the lower 
extremity of the cutting from between the bark and the wood. In 
some kinds these buds decay and die away, but in gooseberries and 
currants they always rise in suckers, and from these others innu- 
merably, which always rob the fruit, and often render even the best 
kinds not worth their room in the garden. 

Your cuttings being thus prepared, plant them in rows eighteen 
inches or two feet asunder, and about eight or nine inches apart in 
the rows, always inserting them at least six inches into the earth, 
and if the shoots are sufficienily long, eight or nine, leaving from 



294 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

four to ten inches, according to circumstances, of a clean stem be- 
tween the surface earth and lowest left bud, upon which to esta- 
blish the head. Having had one or two years growth in these rows, 
thej may be planted out either in autumn or early in spring, where 
intended for fruiting, but autumn is the most preferable season. 

Gooseberries, of all other fruit-trees, require the richest soil. 
The situation should neither be too high nor too low, nor the soil 
much inclined to gravel or sand, a deep rich loam is their favourite. 
Where this fruit is expected in the best perfection, the ground 
between and about the trees must be kept free from weeds, and 
dug every spring and autumn, and strongly manured once a year 
with old well rotted cow-dung: they must be judiciously pruned, 
and each tree kept to a single stem, without any suckers, which 
must be dug up or stripped ott' whenever such appear. But all 
the culture on earth will not produce good fruit unless you have 
good kinds, for there are crab gooseberries, as well as crab apples, 
and as great a variety of the one kind of fruit as of the other. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Hyacinths. 

The choice kinds of hyacinths should now be protected from 
severe frost, for if permitted to penetrate so far into the soil as to 
reach the bulbs, especially about the time that the plants begin to 
appear above ground, it will produce a singular effect, by causing 
some of them to shoot forth or discharge their stems or blossoms; 
but if at this time the roots become entirely frozen they are in dan- 
ger of being destroyed, or at least so weakened as to produce but 
indifferent flowers. 

Tulips. • 

When your choice tulips appear above ground, if on examina- 
tion any distemper or canker is discernible on the foliage, about 
this time, either above or a little below the surface of the soil, 
it should be carefully cut out, with a sharp knife, and the wound- 
ed part left exposed to the sun and air, which will presently heal 
it: a fine dry day should be made choice of for the foregoing 
operation. 

If the surface of the beds appear to be of too close and solid a 
texture, it should be carefully stirred up, about two inches deep, 
which will admit the air more freely to the stems, give vent to their 
exudations and encourage their growth. 

Should the weather prove extremely severe, a slight covering of 
mats placed on arched hoops over the beds, will be very serviceable 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 295 

to them. But this care or attention is not necessary for the com- 
mon kinds, growing promiscuously in the borders, &c. 

Ranunculuses and Anemones. 

Continue to protect your choice kinds of early planted ranuncu- 
luses and anemones as direct in page 160, they will now require 
particular attention, as the rudiments of their flowers will be ad- 
vancing, which would suffer greatly if too much exposed to nipping 
frosts. 

Finish planting the ranunculuses and anemones that are yet 
kept out of ground for a successional bloom, which is to be done 
agreeably to the directions given in October. 

Ranunculus roots will remain in the ground several days after 
planting, before they begin to vegetatej during this period they 
become very much swollen by imbibing the moisture of the soil, 
and are in this state extremely susceptible of injury from frost, 
much more so than when vegetation has actually taken place. 

As soon as the bed is planted, if hard frosts are likely to ensue, 
a sufficient quantity of dry straw should be placed near it, ready 
for covering when necessity requires, which should be kept on 
only during severe frosts, or such as would be likely to penetrate 
to the roots, as the effects of covering too long or too much, would 
be as destructive as the reverse, by causing the roots to become 
mouldy, than which nothing can be more prejudicial. 

Anemones are somewhat hardier than ranunculuses, and there- 
fore do not require so particular care, but if such is afforded them, 
it will cause them to blow in greater perfection. 

Planting Bulbs of various kinds. 

As early in this month as possible, finish planting all your hardy 
kinds of bulbous roots, such as hyacinths, tulips, polyanthus-nar- 
cissus, jonquils, star of Bethlehem, &c. &c., as they must be con- 
siderably weakened by being kept too long unplanted, observe the 
directions given in pages 80 and 81, under the article tulips. 

Auriculas. 

The first favourable weather that occurs in this month, divest the 
auricula plants of their exterior decayed leaves, and by the middle 
of the month, the operation of earthing up, as it is termed, should 
commence; that is to say, the surface earth of the pot should be 
taken away about one inch deep, and fresh compost, with the ad- 
dition of a little loam, should be substituted in its stead: this will 
contribute greatly to the strength of the plants and the vigour of 
their bloom; at the same time it will afford a favourable oppor- 
tunity to separate such offsets as shall appear possessed of a suffi- 
ciency of fibres to be taken off at this early season: these offsets 
when properly planted in small pots, should be placed in a frame, 
in some warm sheltered situation, till their roots are established. 



295 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

The fine auriculas should now be protected from very severe 
frost, cold cutting winds, or excessive rains, for these would injure 
them and prevent their blowing in good perfection; but they must 
have plenty of air in mild weather, and not be debarred from warm 
moderate showers of rain, which will now prove beneficial. 

When the weather proves very dry, let them be refreshed mo- 
derately with water, just to keep the earth a little moist about their 
roots, but too much would materially injure them. For their 
further treatment see next month, &c. 

Sowing Auricula and Polyanthus Seeds. 

If you have neglected last month to sow auricula and polyanthus 
seeds, to raise new varieties, sow them as early as possible in this, 
agreeably to the directions given in page 159. 

Carnations. 

Being provided with some of the finest and most valuable carna- 
tions, for with the common sorts it will not be worth while to take 
much pains, you should proceed to the potting of them between 
the middle and latter end of this month. 

The proper compost for these flowers is as follows, viz: 

One half fresh, sound, loamy earth, taken from the surface of a 
rich pasture ground, turf and all, and not more than four or five 
inches deep. 

One third, or a little more, of old horse-dung, such as had been 
a year previously used for hot-beds. 

One-sixth coarse sea or river sand. 

These ingredients ought to have been mixed together in autumn, 
laid in aheap about two feet thick, in an open exposure, and turned 
three or four times during winter, so as that all the parts maj be 
well incorporated and have the benefit of the frosts; early in March 
it should be gathered into a round conical heap to drain and become 
dry, and when suf&ciently so, and wanted for use, pass it through 
a coarse screen or sieve to reduce its parts, and take out stones or 
any other extraneous substance which it contains. 

The pots made use of for spring potting, should be ten inches 
wide at the top, five inches at the bottom, and eight inches deep in 
the side, with a hole in the centre of the bottom an inch in diameter. 

The pots are first to be nearly half filled with compost, previously 
placing an oyster-shell or such like, with its hollow side down- 
wards, over the hole in the bottom of each: the compost is to be 
higher at the sides than at the centre of the pots, and the plants 
intended for them, which are supposed to have been wintered in 
small pots containing three plants each, are to be carefully turned 
out with tlie earth adhering to them in a ball; and after rubbing oft' 
half an inch of the surface of the old mould around the plants, 
above their fibres, cleaning them and cutting off' the points of their 
decayed leaves, the ball is to be carefully placed in the centre of 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 297 

the pot, and the space between it and the sides filled up with the 
prepared compost. 

If your plants have been wintered one plant in each pot only, a 
size much smaller than the above will be sufficient to shift them 
into, but when three plants grow and flower together in a large 
pot, they appear to more advantage. 

This being done, give the plants a little water, and observe that 
the earth comes no higher up their stems than it did in the former 
pots, nor should the compost come nearer than within an inch of 
the top of the rim, after it has been gently shaken or struck against 
the ground in finishing; as an inconvenience will attend its being 
too full when the operation of laying comes to be performed, which 
requires some additional mould on the surface, for the layers to 
strike into. 

When the plants are thus potted oft" for bloom, they should be 
placed in an open airy part of the garden under an arch of hoops, 
that in case of cold drying winds, heavy rains, or cold frosty nights, 
mats may be thrown over, to preserve them from the effects of 
such unfavourable weather. In this situation they are to remain, 
always open to the air, except in the cases above mentioned, and 
be kept regularly watered with soft water, as often as appears ne- 
cessary, from a fine rosed watering-pot. For their further treat- 
see next month. May, &c. 

The plants which were planted in large pots last autumn, where 
they are to remain to flower, should now have the old mould taken 
out as near to their roots as possible, without disturbing them, and 
replaced with fresh compost, after which, treat them as above. 

The common carnations in beds, borders, &c., may be removed 
towards the latter end of this month and planted where desired. 

Pinks. 

The culture of pinks is much less difficult than that of carna- 
tions; they are hardier, more easily propagated, increase more 
abundantly, and are less liable to incidental casualties than the 
latter. 

A good fresh loamy soil, dug and well pulverized, about twelve 
or eighteen inches deep, and well manured and mixed with cow- 
dung, two years old, is all the preparation that is necessary for this 
charming flower. 

The plants designed for the principal bloom should be planted 
where intended to blow in September or early in October, as they 
do not flower quite so well if removed later in the season; they 
should be planted at about the distance of nine inches from each 
other, and the bed should be laid rather convex or rounding, to 
throw off" excess of rain; but will require only a slight covering or 
protection in case of frost; and this only for the superior kinds. 

The beds should be kept free from weeds, and the surface stirred 
up a little if it inclines to bind. 

They may also be propagated now freely, by slips from their 
20 



298 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

roots, or removed if necessary. If desired to have them in pots, 
you may pot a few of the finest kinds as directed for carnations. 

Polyanthuses. 

Your finest kinds of polyanthuses and double primroses may be 
treated in every respect as directed for auriculas, if desired in 
pots; if not, they may be removed at pleasure, between the middle 
and latter end of this month, and large roots divided for increase; 
but this should not be done to those which you intend to flower 
strono;ly, till their bloom is over, immediately after which, you 
may slip them or divide their roots. They are impatient of heat 
and drought, and love the reverse, shade and moisture: they are 
very hardy, and seldom perish except by the summer heats, which 
frequently destroy them, unless the necessary precautions are taken. 

Double Daisies. 

These beautiful little flowering plants may, about the end of 
this month, be taken from the winter repositories and planted for 
edgings in shady borders; for if planted in open exposures, the 
summer heat will totally destroy them, unless they are removed 
into the shade as soon as their first bloom is over. The roots may 
now be separated for increase, as every shoot of them, if slipped oft', 
will root freely. They may also be removed into pots with balls 
of earth adhering to their roots, where they will blow handsomely, 
but it would have been better if they were planted in these in Sep- 
tember or October. 

Giving fresh Earth to various Plants in Pots. 

Give some fresh earth to the pots of double wall-flowers, double 
stock July-flowers, double sweet-williams, rockets, rose-campions, 
catchfly, campanulas, scarlet lychnis, and such like plants, which 
were potted last autumn or before. 

In doing this, clear the plants first from decayed leaves, and 
take some of the earth out of the tops of the pots, but not too deep 
to disturb the roots of the plants; then fill up the pots again with 
fresh earth, and give some water; this will strengthen their roots, 
and the plants will shoot freely and produce large flowers. 

Pricking out early Annuals. 

If any tender annuals were sown last month, such as cockscombs, 
tricolours, Ipomoeas, sensitive plants, ice plants, balsams, &c., in 
order to have them in perfection at an earlier period than common, 
make a new hot-bed towards the middle or latter end of this, in 
which to prick them to forward their growth. Let the hot-bed be 
about thirty inches high, and make the top even; then set on the 
frame; and when the great heat is over, let the earth be put in; 
let it be light, rich, and perfectly dry, and lay it equally over the 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 299 

bed six inches thickj when warm, prick the plants therein at three 
or four inches distant each way, or some may also be pricked in 
small pots, one good plant in each, and plunged in the earth of the 
bedj giving the whole a little sprinkling of water; then let the 
glasses be put on, observing to raise them behind a little every day 
to admit air and let out the steam; shade the plants from the sun 
till they have taken fresh root. 

When they are rooted and begin to push, they should have fresh 
air every day; therefore let the upper ends of the glasses be raised 
an inch or two or three in height to admit it; but shut them down 
towards the evening, and cover them every night with mats; 
remember to sprinkle them with water occasionally, giving but a 
little at each time. 

Keep up the heat of the bed by occasionally lining with hot dung. 
Thus these tender annuals are to be continued forwarding in growth 
till May; then, when the frost is totally gone, finally transplanted 
into large pots, flower borders, &c. 

Sowing tender Annuals. 

A hot-bed may be made the beginning or any time this month, 
in which to sow the seeds of tender annual flowers, such as the 
ice plant, sensitive plant, browallias, &c. 

Make the bed and sow the seed as directed in last month. Or a 
few plants may be raised in pots in any cucumber or melon hot-bed 
now in cultivation, to a proper size for transplanting. See April. 

The plants raised from the above sowings will blow strong and 
beautiful in May, June, July, &c. 

Remember they are not to remain in the hot-bed where raised, 
but are to be transplanted, some into pots, and some into the bor- 
ders. See April and May. 

Sowing hardy Annual Floioers. 

Any time this month that the ground is in good condition, you 
may sow in the borders and other flower compartments, a variety of 
hardy annuals, such as large and dwarf annual sunflowers, sweet 
pea of every kind, larkspur, flos-adonis, persicaria, Tangier peas, 
Nigilla, Venus's looking-glass, Venus's navelwort, double dwarf 
poppy, Lobel's catchfly, dwarf-lychnis, snails, horns, hedgehogs, 
caterpillars, mignonette, china-aster, horse-shoes, belvidere, candy- 
tuft, honey-wort, convolvulus-minor, cyanus, china-hollyhock lava- 
tera, curled mallow, winged pea, china pink, ten weeks stock, and 
many other sorts, which will flower better if sown early than if 
delayed to a late period; though all of the above will succeed 
very well if sown in the beginning of next month. 

These should be sown, each kind separate, in patches in the dif- 
ferent borders and flower beds, &c. finally to remain where sown; 
or a few, when grown to a sufticient size, may be carefully trans- 
planted into such borders and places as you desire. For the me- 
thod of sowing them, see page 158. 



300 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

Sowing various kinds of fibrous-rooted perennial and biennial 

Plants. 

Perennial and biennal flower-seeds, of most kinds, maybe sown, 
in the middle and southern states, towards the latter end of the 
month; in the eastern states, the middle or latter end of April will 
be preferable. 

It is to be observed that these kinds do not flower the same year 
they are sown; but all the sorts of them will flower strong, and in 
good perfection the year after. 

As every one may not know the meaning of perennial and bien- 
nial plants, the perennials are those which continue on the same 
roots many years, producing new flower stems annually, such as 
everlasting sunflower, scarlet lychnis, perennial asters, &c. The 
biennials are only of two years' duration, being sown one year, 
flower and perfect their seeds the next, and soon after die, or be- 
come of a dwindling growth, such as honesty, tree-primrose, tree- 
mallow, &c. 

Many kinds are proper to be sown now, such as carnations, pinks, 
sweet-williams, wall -flowers, and stock July-flowers of all sorts; 
also rose-campion, scarlet lychnis, columbines, Greek valerian, 
polyanthus, auriculas, scabiouses, and Canterbury bells. 

The seeds of hollyhocks, French honeysuckles, rockets, honesty, 
or satin flower, tree-primrose, broad-leaved campanula, and fox- 
gloves; snap-dragon, bee-larkspur, with seeds of most other sorts 
of perennial and biennial plants, may now be sown. 

All the above, and other hardy perennial and biennial flower- 
seeds, are to be sown in beds of light earth in the open ground. 

For the method of sowing them, see the Flower Garden for next 
month. 

Dig the Borders, SfC 

Dig the borders and flower compartments, &c. and rake them 
smooth; they will then be ready to receive the seeds of annual 
flowers and plants of other kinds; besides they will appear fresh 
and neat. 

Transplanting perennial Plants. 

Where there are vacancies in any of the beds, borders, or other 
parts of the garden, they may now be tilled up with many different 
kinds of perennial and biennial flower plants, and will all blow the 
same year. 

Many principal sorts may now be planted, such as lychnises, 
rose-campions, rockets, catch-fly, campanulas, carnations, pinks, and 
sweet-williams, double feverfew, golden rod, perennial sun-flowers, 
perennial asters, and French honeysuckles; also columbines, Can- 
terbury bells, monk's-hood, fox-gloves, tree-primroses, scabiouses, 
snap-dragon, lobelias irises, bee-larkspur, double ragged robin, 
valerian, and most others of the like sorts. 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 301 

Plant also dwarf fibrous-rooted flowers in the borders, &c. they 
will take root freely in a short time; such as polyanthuses, double 
chamomile, London-pride, violets, hepaticas, thrift, primroses, 
saxifrage, gentianella, lily of the valley, &c. 

In planting the intended different kinds, dispose them variedly, 
the larger growing sorts more or less back; and the smaller forward 
towards the front and middle. 

Give water at first planting, and afterwards occasionally in dry 
weather, till the plants are fresh rooted; by which they will grow 
freely, and all flower the same year in their proper seasons. 

Hoe and rake the Borders. 

Loosen with a hoe or small spade, the surface of those beds or 
borders which were dug and planted with flowers of any kinds last 
autumn, or any time since. 

Let this be done in a dry day, hoeing, or lightly digging and 
stirring the earth carefully between the plants, taking care of the 
shoots of bulbous roots, &c. which are now just peeping through 
the surface; clearing away all decayed leaves of the plants, weeds, 
and every sort of rubbish, and then let the beds or borders be neatly 
raked even and smooth. 

By thus loosening the surface of the borders, the first growth of 
seed-weeds will be retarded, it will greatly promote the strength of 
the flowers, and the whole will appear clean and agreeable. 

Pruning Shrubs, and digging the Clumps in the Shrubbery. 

Finish pruning all sorts of flowering shrubs and evergreens which 
require it, observing the directions of the two former months. 

Dig the ground in the clumps or borders if not done in the former 
month, which will prove beneficial; the ground being turned up 
fresh will appear neat, and the plants will show themselves more 
agreeably. 

Planting deciduous Flowering Shrubs, ornamental and Forest 

Trees. 

Where deciduous flowering shrubs or trees are wanted in any of 
the pleasure-grounds, they may now be planted with good success, 
such as common and Persian lilacs, snow-drop tree, fringe tree, 
bladder nut, rose-acacia, bladder-senna, angelica-tree, Azalea, 
honey-suckles, Calycanthus, New Jersey tea, Judas tree, clethra, 
papaw, leather-wood, fern-leaved Comptonia, Amorpha, dog-wood, 
double flowering thorns, cherries and peaches, snowy-medlar, 
Euonymus in sorts, Fothergilla, althea-frutex, Franklinia, Gui- 
landinia, sassafras, swamp magnolia, Benjamin tree, witch-hazel, 
St. Peter's-wort, double altheas, of various colours, corchoras 
japonica, evergreen or sweet-scented China honey-suckle, purple 
magnolia, pyrus japonica, purple beech, copper beech, fern-leaved 
beach, Norway maple, sorbus hybrida, jasmine, rhus cotinus, or 



302 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

Venetian sumach, Dierville roses, and all kinds of hardy deciduous 
shrubsj and also the tulip-tree, lime-tree, poplars of every kind, 
catalpa, chestnuts of every sort, sour and sweet gum, elm, maple, 
walnut, hickory, plane-tree, hornbeam, beech, nettle-trees, ash, 
honey-locust, oak, poplar, &c. &c. 

In planting trees for timber allow them the proper distances for 
the purposes intended^ if for close plantations, or by way of coppices 
or underwood for gradual thinning and falling for poles and other 
small purposes every seven, eight, or ten years; you may plant 
them in close rows only four, five, or six feet distant; and when 
they have attained growths proper for the first thinning, select the 
handsomest plants at regular distances to stand for timber, and 
thin the rest; but when designed to have the whole to stand for a 
full plantation of large standards before they are thinned, plant 
them at from ten to fifteen or twenty feet distant. 

Directions for planting all sorts of Trees and Shrubs. 

All flowering and evergreen shrubs, ornamental trees, &c. de- 
signed for the shrubbery and other plantations, should be planted at 
such distances that they may not crowd each other as they grow 
up; for they always show themselves best when they stand separate 
at moderate distances. Shrubs of all kinds designed for detached 
clumps particularly, should be planted not less than three to four 
or five feet asunder, that the different kinds, according to their 
growths, may generally remain distinct; but where a thickety growth, 
is required in particular compartments, a closer plantation may be 
formed of different common shrubs. 

Let all the tree kinds be allowed proper room, proportionate 
to their respective growths, and according as they are designed 
for open or close plantations, or clumps, groves, avenues or 
thickets, &c. 

In planting shrubs and trees of every kind, let all convenient 
expedition be made in doing it, so that they may be planted as soon 
as possible after they are taken up, or brought from the nursery or 
elsewhere; that their roots may not be dried by the sun and 
wind; but when brought from any distance, and they cannot be 
immediately planted, untie the bundles, lay the roots in a trench, 
and cover them with earth to lie till the places allotted are ready 
to receive them. 

In preparing for planting, dig a round aperture for each shrub 
or tree from half a yard to two or more feet wide, according to the 
size of the roots, and a spade deep, capacious enough to receive 
them freely, and loosen the bottom well. Then having the shrubs, 
&c. ready, prune off broken or bruised roots, and any irregular 
productions of the heads, and place them in the holes upright, 
break the earth well, and throw it in equally about the roots, whicb 
cover a proper depth, shaking each plant gently as the earth is filled 
in to cause it to settle close between all the roots and fibres; tread 
it moderately to fix the plant firmly in an upright position, making 
the top of the earth a little hollow round each to hold water when 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 303 

given in dry weather; and if they are watered as soon as planted, 
it will settle the earth about all the roots more eftectually, and pro- 
mote their fresh rooting; it would be of advantage in general, but 
more particularly to any of the more tender or curious shrubs, &c., 
to lay some long litter on the surface to preserve the moisture about 
the roots in dry weather. 

Immediately after planting fix stakes to such tall plants as 
require support, and let them be fastened thereto. 

Planting Evergreens, 

Evergreen trees and shrubs may be planted with good success 
any time this month in most of the southern states, but in the mid- 
dle states that should not be attempted before the last week therein, 
nor in the eastern states before the beginning or middle of April: 
these kinds are always most successfully planted when done imme- 
diately before their respective vegetations commence; which is a 
rule that ought to be carefully observed. See the Nursery and 
Pleasure Garden for next month. 

Planting Roses. 

You may plant roses any time this month that the weather will 
permit; and indeed there is a particular advantage in planting 
some every ten days, even to the middle of May, for the flowering 
of them may be retarded in this way, and the bloom of those 
delightful shrubs continued for a much longer period than if all were 
planted at the same time; but such as are planted after the twentieth 
of April, should the season prove dry, will require shade and water 
until they have taken fresh root. The early planting, however, will 
be the most successful in growth, and flower in greater perfection 
than the others. 

Planting Box Edgings. 

Box, of all other plants, makes the neatest and most beautiful 
edgings, and this is a very successful time to plant it, particularly 
in the middle states; in the other states it should be planted on the 
spur of the earliest spring vegetation; for although it is an ever- 
green, its taking and growing freely by slips or cuttings, causes it 
to agree with early planting better than those kinds that do not 
easily propagate in that way; and, moreover, it is very hardy and 
seldom injured by winter frosts. 

To make neat edgings you should get some short bushy box, and 
let it be slipped or parted into moderately small slips of not more 
than from eight to ten inches long; if any of them have roots or 
fibres, the better, but the cuttings or slips will all grow if planted 
early, and kept moderately and occasionally watered. The long 
woody roots of such as have them must be trimmed, and all the 
plants, slips or cuttings, made pretty much of a length. 

The method of planting is this: stretch your line, if for a straight 



304 THE PLEASURE, OR [March. 

edging, along the edge of the bed or border, let that part be trodden 
lightly and evenly along to settle it moderately firm, and with the 
spade make it up full and even according to the line; then on the 
side of the line next the walk, let a small neat trench be cut out 
about six inches deep, making the side next the line perfectly up- 
right, turning the earth out towards the walk or alley. 

The box is to be planted in this trench close against the upright 
side next the line, placing the plants so near together as to form 
immediately a close compact edging, without being too thick and 
clumsy, and with the top of the plants as even as possible, all an 
equal height, not more than an inch or two above the surface of the 
ground; and as you proceed in planting, draw the earth up to the 
outside of the plants, which fixes them in their due position; and 
when you have planted the row out, then with your spade cast in the 
earth almost to the top of the plants, and tread it neatly and closely 
thereto: when the edging is planted, let any inequalities of the top 
be cut as even and neat as possible with a pair of shears. 

Where there are any gaps in the former planted edgings, let 
them now be made good; for when ragged and uneven they have a 
disagreeable appearance. 

Or where any old edgings of several years standing have been per- 
mitted to run up rude and spreading, nothing in a garden looks 
more unsightly; and should be taken up, slipped, trimmed, and 
replanted in a neat regular order. 

For an account of the various plants generally used for edgings 
and the methods of planting them, see the Flower Garden next 
month. They may all be planted towards the latter end of this, if 
the weather proves favourable. 

Plant Hedges. 

Finish planting all the kinds of deciduous hedges as early in the 
month as the weather permits, and if the season proves very favour- 
able, you may in the last week thereof, plant evergreen hedges. 
For the methods of doing which, see the Nursery for this month. 

China arbor-vitse forms a very ornamental hedge for a flower 
garden. 

Clean the Pleasure Garden. 

Every part of this garden should be now well cleaned and put into 
the best order. Give the flower borders, beds, &c. a general spring 
dressing, by digging, hoeing, and raking; let the edgings of box, &c. 
be regulated where disorderly, and the gravel-walks be well cleared 
from weeds and litter, and occasionally rolled. 

Keep the grass lawns, walks, &c. now well cleared from litter and 
worm-cast earth, which appears unsightly, and spoils the compact 
evenness of the sward : give them, therefore, occasional rollings with 
a heavy roller, whereby to preserve a clean, even, firm surface, 
neat to appearance, and that can be mowed close and regular with 
greater facility. 



March.] FLOWER GARDEN. 395 

The edges of all the grass walks and lawns should now be cut 
even with an edging-iron, (see page 78) which will add greatly to 
the general neatness. 

Making Grass- fValks and Lawns. 

The sooner in this month that you can make any grass-walks, 
lawns, or grass-plats, that may be necessary, the betterj as the 
roots will have time to establish themselves before the great 
droughts and heats commence. Turf, when it can conveniently be 
got, is always preferable to sowing grass-seed, but in extensive 
lawns, the latter, of necessity, must be resorted to. The best turf 
for those purposes, is that of a close-fed pasture or common, where 
the sward is tough, and the grass short and fine. 

If you have much to lay, you should be provided with a turfing 
iron. This instrument is formed with an iron plate for the cutter, 
six or seven inches wide, rounding at the edge, very sharp, and 
about a foot long, pretty much in the form of a spade; and at the 
tread, it is forged or connected to a long bent iron handle, the 
bending so formed as to admit of the plate or cutter resting flat on 
the ground, in the proper position for flaying the turf; the iron 
handle at top being either formed like the handle of a spade, or 
having a socket near the plate to place a crooked wooden and 
properly headed handle therein. With this instrument, turf can be 
taken oif with much more convenience and expedition than with 
a spade; but when it cannot be conveniently had, a spade may do 
very well. 

It will also be necessary in order to go completely about your 
work, to have a racer or sward-cutter. This should have a stout 
wooden handle, about four feet long and bent a little in the lower 
end, like a boy's common, having about four or five inches of the 
point end of an old scythe, placed transversely in the lower extre- 
mity, with the point downwards, projecting an inch and a half, with 
the edge forward and made fast in a slit in the handle with a cou- 
ple of rivets; so that when pushed before you, it may expeditiously 
cut the sward as you race it along. 

Having this instrument, strain a line tight, first lengthwise, then 
strike the racer into the sward close to the line, run it along, it will 
expeditiously cut its way and divide the turf to a proper depth; 
directly place the line a foot farther, and race it out as before, and 
so proceed to as many widths as may be wanted, then with the 
line placed crosswise, race out the sward in yard lengths. Being 
thus divided, the turf-cutter with his turfing iron proceeds to cut 
them up, about an inch and a half thick, which he can do with 
great expedition; and according as they are cut, each should be 
rolled up with the grass side inward, as close and firm as possible, 
for the more ready carrying and removing them without breaking. 

Let the ground where the turf is to be laid, be made as even as 

possible, that it may settle equally thereafter, and rake the surface 

smooth. In laying them, make the edges join close every way, and 

as soon as laid, the whole should be immediately well beaten, with 

2P 



306 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [March. 

a wooden beater, and afterwards rolled with a heavy stone, or iron 
roller. 

Gravel Walks. 

Now is the time to begin to turn gravel walks where the surface 
is dirty, &c., especially in the middle states, observing, that this is 
to be done where necessary in all parts of the Union as early as 
possible in spring. 

The gravel walks which display a dirty surface, or are annoyed 
with weeds, should be turned as early in this month as the weather 
gets dry and comfortable, in order to render them neat and conve- 
nient for walking on. For the method of doing which, as well as 
that of their general formation and treatment, see the Flower-gar- 
den for next month, to which I particularly refer you, and advise 
as much of that work to be done in this as the weather and hurry 
of businesg will permit. 

Such gravel walks as were broken up and laid in ridges the be- 
ginning of winter, which is a very bad practice as noticed in page 
77, should now be levelled down, formed, dressed, and rolled, as 
directed next month. 

The necessity of due attention being paid to all your walks, on 
the opening of spring, is so evident, that it is scarcely necessaV-y to 
urge it; the having them neat and newly dressed will give a gay 
and sprightly appearance to the whole garden. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

The green-house plants should now have plenty of air admitted 
to them at all favourable opportunities, particularly as the weather 
gets warm towards the latter end of the month, but due attention 
must be paid, in any sudden changes, which are very frequent at 
this season, to preserve them from cold, cutting, or frosty winds; 
during the prevalence of which, the windows, &c. should be kept 
close, for such weather would ruin some of the tender kinds, and 
would be of bad consequence to all. It need hardly be said that 
the windows and doors must be kept close every night, and should 
imperious necessity require it, in the early part of the month, the 
flues heated at night to counteract the power of severe frosts. 

Look over the tubs or pots every other day, and see where water 
is wanting, and let such as require it be supllied therewith, taking 
care to use moderation in that case. Water will be serviceable to 
most of the plants, but especially to all the woody kinds, which will 
now require more frequent refreshments, if fine mild weather, but 
always in moderate quantities; and be still careful, on the whole, not 
to give too much water at a time, for that would prove the destruc- 
tion of many kinds, and would be prejudicial to the plants in gene- 



March.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 307 

ral, especially if a cold season, and while they are confined in the 
green-house. 

Keep every plant in the house free from decayed leaves; that is, 
where such appear let them be immediately picked off; for these, 
if generally permitted to remain would injure the plants; besides, 
they appear disagreeable. 

Any decayed or mouldy shoots should be cut clean off to the firm 
live wood, and where dust, or any sort of filth, appears on the leaves 
of the plants, let them be cleared therefrom : if those of the oranges, 
lemons, and other large-leaved kinds, are foul, have a sponge dipped 
in water and clean them therewith, one by one, and let the small 
leaved sorts be cleaned by watering, out of a watering-pot, all over 
their heads. 

Oranges, Lemons, and Myrtles. 

Where any of the oranges, lemons, and myrtles, &c. have naked 
or irregular heads, you may now towards the latter end of the 
month, if mild fine weather, begin to reduce them to some regu- 
larity. The branches or head may either be cut close, or shortened 
less or more to the place where you desire shoots to rise, to form 
the head regular, for they will break out in the old wood. 

When any trees are thus headed down, it would also be an ad- 
vantage to shift them, especially such as are of a weekly growth, 
in order to add a little fresh earth about their roots; and the method 
is this: let the tree be taken out of its tub or pot, but preserve the 
ball of earth entire; then trim off with your knife any very matted 
roots, or dry fibres round the outside, and also some of the loose 
old earth from the bottom and sides of the ball; and, having fresh 
compost ready, put some into the bottom of the pot or tub; place 
the tree therein, till up around the ball with fresh earth, and give it 
a little water. 

But in heading down any of the green-house plants, if time will 
not permit, or that you think it not necessary to shift them as above, 
do not, however, fail to loosen the earth in the top of the tub or pots, 
and a little way down around the sides, and draw this loose earth 
out; then fill up the tub again with new compost, and give some 
water. 

But where any orange or lemon trees are in a very weak or 
sickly unprosperous growth, it would be adviseable about the latter 
end of this month, or beginning of next, to prune the heads and 
shift them into entire new earth, taking the plant clean out of the 
pot, all the old earth shaken entirely from its roots, and all mouldy 
and decayed roots cut off; then let the whole root be washed in 
water, and plant it again immediately in a tub or pot of new earth, 
taking care not to place it too deep, and give water moderately. 

After this shifting it would be a great advantage to the same 
plants if you had tiic convenience of a glass case, &c. in which 
previously to make a hot-bed of tan or dung, but tan is mucli pre- 
ferable; and if in this bed the trees are plunged, they will shoot 
sooner and more freely, both in root and top, to recover good 



308 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [March. 

strength, and a renewed head of branches of prosperous growth, 
earl J in the following summer. 

Heading down Myrtles, ^c. 

Where myrtles or other similar exotics have decayed branches, 
or their heads thin, straggling, and irregular, they may now also be 
headed down, more or less, as it shall seem proper, and either shift 
them into some fresh earth, as directed above for the oranges, or 
some of the top mould within the pots taken out, and a little around 
the sides, then fill up with fresh earth and water them. 

These trees with this management will shoot out again, and in 
four or five months time will be furnished with entire new heads. 
Supply them duly with water. 

Shifting Plants, that want it, into larger Pots. 

Any of the oranges, lemons, or myrtles, or other green-house 
plants that want larger pots, may be shifted therein, with some 
fresh earth, towards the end of this month, when the weather is mild. 

In performing this, let each plant intended for shifting be turned 
out of its present pot with the ball of earth entire; but let any 
thickly matted or dry mouldy roots on the outside of the ball be 
pared off with a sharp knife; then set them in their new pots, and 
fill up the spaces with fresh earth. 

Water them immediately after this, set them in their places in 
the green-house, and they will shoot freely both at the root and top. 

Care of Geraniums or Pelarganiums. 

Examine the geraniums and other plants of a similar growth; 
the young shoots being somewhat succulent, are more liable to 
injury from the effects of a severe winter, or great damps, than the 
harder wooded exotics, so as sometimes many of them decay or 
mould, and which, where they occur, should now be pruned away: 
likewise pick oiFall decayed leaves. 

Your geraniums will now show flowers, and it is necessary to 
give them plenty of water aud as much air as the weather will 
admit of. 

Giving fresh Earth to the Pots of Green-house Plants. 

The orange and green-house plants in general, which do not 
require shifting, should at this time have some fresh earth added 
to the tops of their pots or tubs; it will encourage the plants greatly, 
and it is soon done. 

First loosen the old earth in the tops of the tubs or pots, quite to 
the surface of the roots, but so as not to disturb them, and loosen 
it also down round the sides a little way, then take out the loose 
earth and fill up the pots with some that is new, and give them a 
moderate watering. 



March.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 309 

Sow Seeds of Green-house Plants, ^c. 

A hot-bed may be made the beginning of this month to sow the 
seeds of tender plants, either of the green-house or stove kinds. 
The bed should be made either of hot dung, or fresh tanner's bark, 
and covered with frames and glasses^ or if made of hot dung, lay 
eight, ten, or twelve inches of tan-bark at top, either new or old, 
botli in which to plunge the pots, &c. and to continue longer a 
regular heat. 

The seeds should be sown in pots of light earth, and these 
plunged to their rims in the tan, and moderately watered at times, 
as you see occasion. 

Where tan cannot be obtained readily, make the bed of hot dung, 
three feet high, set a frame on, and when the burning heat is over, 
lay on four or five inches depth of earth, then fill some middling 
small pots with fine light mould, sow the seeds therein, and cover 
them lightly with sifted earth, then plunge the pots in the earth on 
the bed, and put on the glasses. 

Let the pots in general be frequently sprinkled with water, and 
when the plants appear, give them fresh air, by raising the glasses 
behind a little way. Observe to keep up the heat of the bed, by 
applying a lining of fresh hot dung, when it declines much, and 
protect them occasionally from the too powerful influence of the 
mid-day sun. 

Sowing Kernels of Oranges for Stocks. 

Now is the time to sow the kernels of orainges and lemons, in 
order to raise stocks to bud any of those kinds of trees upon. 

The best method of sowing these kernels is this: fill some mid- 
dle-sized pots with very good earth, sow the kernels in the pots, 
and cover them half an inch deep with earth, then plunge the pots 
into a hot bed, and let them be frequently watered. See the Green- 
house, next month. 

Propagating by Cuttings, Layers, Sj-c. 

Propagate by cuttings and slips, various shrubby green-house 
plants, as myrtles, geraniums, fuschias, oleanders, hydrangeas, jas- 
mines, coronillas, justicias, &c. The young shoots planted in pots 
and placed in a hot-bed, will soon strike root and grow freelyj or 
where there is the convenience of bark-beds, either in a hot-house, 
or under any glass frames, &c. , these, and many other sorts, if 
plunged therein, may be struck very expeditiously; or, if at the 
same time, some are covered with a hand-glass, it will still more 
expedite their rooting, giving proper waterings. 

Likewise propagate shrubby kinds by layers, and also different 
sorts by suckers, &c. 



310 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Fruiting Pines. 

It is on a due proportion of air admitted into the hot-house that 
the goodness of the pine plants in a great measure depends. The 
want of it will cause them to grow with long leaves and weak 
stems, which plants never produce good fruit. 

On the other hand, air admitted in too great a quantity, or at 
improper times, will injure the plants, and cause them to grow 
yellow and sickly. 

In the depth of winter, during the time that the plants are nearly 
in a state of inaction, the hot-house will require but very little air; 
yet it will absolutely be necessary to take every favourable oppor- 
tunity to let out the foul air, and admit fresh, when it can be done 
with safety to the plants; the letting down the glasses a little way, 
even for a. few minutes, in the middle of the day, is of more impor- 
tance than inexperienced persons can conceive, especially when 
there is a little sun and a mild wind. But at this season, particu- 
larly in the advanced part of the month, to have regard to the words 
give air on the botanical thermometers, is not necessary, for a little 
may with much safety be given, although the spirits should not 
rise higher than 62° of Fahrenheit, or six or eight degrees above 
temperate. 

It will be necessary to continue a regular degree of heat in the 
house, as directed last month, by keeping up a fire-heat every even- 
ing, night, and morning, but more particularly in severe weather; 
and a constant heat in the bark-bed. As the heat of the weather 
increases, and the sun becomes powerful, the morning fires, in par- 
ticular, must be regulated accordingly. 

The fruiting-plants will now generally show fruit; they must 
therefore have very particular care, and not be suffered to want a 
sufficiency of bottom heat, air, or a reasonable portion of water. 

Examine the bark-bed, and see if there is a proper heat, for upon 
that depends the success of having handsome and full-sized fruit. 
The great article is to preserve a. free groivth in the fruit from their 
first appearance to the time of their maturity; this must be done 
by keeping the bark-bed to a proper degree of heat; that is, it 
should be quite lively, for a faint heat will not answer the purpose; 
therefore, on examining the bed, if you find it much decreased, let 
preparation be made for its revival as soon as possible. 

Provide for that purpose a quantity of new bark from the tan- 
ners the beginning of this month. The middle-sized bark is to be 
chosen, and such as has been at least a fortnight or three weeks 
out of the tan -vats. 

The quantity of fresh bark necessary to provide at this time, 
should be equal to near one-third of what the bark-pit will contain. 



March.] THE HOT-HOUSE. 31 X 

This, when brought home, if very full of moisture, and but little or 
no heat, should be thrown up in a heap to remain eight or ten days, 
to drain and prepare for fermentation. But if very wet, it should 
be first spread thin in an open sunny place for two or three days 
to dry, and be then thrown in a heap. 

When your bark is ready, and that the bark-pit is declined in 
heat, the latter end of this month, or earlier if necessary, proceed 
to fork up and renew it as directed in page 176, and immediately 
replunge the pots. The whole of this work should be begun and 
finished the same day if possible. 

The heat of the old bark, not being quite exhausted, will cause 
the new immediately to ferment, and if well proportioned and mix- 
ed, and it is done towards the end of the month, it will retain 
a kindly growing heat till the fruit is ripe. For further particulars 
see January and February. 

Succession Pines. 

As the length of the day and power of the sun increases, these 
plants will begin to grow freely, and from that time it will be ne- 
cessary to keep them in a regular growing statej for if young plants 
receive a check afterwards, it generally causes many of them to 
start fruit. From this time forward they will require a little water 
occasionally, just what is only sufficient to keep the earth in a 
moderate state of moisture, for too much would injure them. 

About the middle of the month or soon after, will be an eligible 
season for shifting them, in the doing of which, shake oft" the whole 
ball of earth, and cut oft' all the roots that are of a black colour, 
carefully preserving such only as are white and strong. Then put 
the plants that are intended to fruit next season, in pots of eight or 
nine inches diameter at the top, and seven deep, with fresh mould 
entire. 

The bed at this time should be renewed with a little fresh tan, 
and forked up in order to promote its heating, and the pots plunged 
therein immediately. The hot-house should be kept pretty warm 
till the heat of the tan begins to rise, as it will be the means of 
causing the plants to strike both sooner and stronger. 

As soon as the bed gets warm, give the plants a sprinkling of 
water over their leaves, and when you perceive them to grow, give 
water according as they require it, and as the weather increases in 
heat give air in proportion. 

Various Shrubby and Succulent Hot-House Plants. 

The various kinds of shrubby and succulent exotics will require 
the same treatment this month as directed in the last, page 177, 
&c., but particularly observing to give them air in proportion as 
the heat of the weather increases, and water according to their 
respective necessities, as noticed in February. 



312 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

Propagation of Exotic Trees, Shrubs and Plants. 

This is a very proper time to sow such seeds of rare plants as you 
are able to procure^ those that are in good condition, and whose 
nature it is to vegetate the first season, will rise freely, but many 
kinds will not grow for three, four, five, or six months after sow- 
ing, and others not for a yearj therefore, it will be necessary to 
have patience, and to take care all the time of the whole, as well 
the pots in which the plants do not rise, as those that do; if you 
have room to plunge them into the bark pit, or into hot-beds at 
work, or made for the purpose, it will greatly facilitate their 
growth. 

You may now propagate many kinds by suckers, cuttings, and 
layers, which should be duly attended to, particularly such as are 
scarce and difficult to be obtained. 

Raising early Flowers, Fruits, Sec. in the Hot-House. 

Pots of any desirable flowering plants may still be introduced to 
forward an early bloom, such as pinks, fuschias, hydrangeas, roses, 
carnations, and many others. See February, &c. 

Also pots of strawberries and vines, as in the two former months, 
to continue the supply of early fruit. 

Likewise, a few more kidney- beans, &c. See last month and 
January. 

In hot-houses where vines are trained in from plants growing on 
the outside, and conducted up under the glasses, &c., they will, 
towards the end of this month, or earlier, according to the degree 
of heat kept up, be well advanced in young shoots, having fruit, 
which shoots should be carefully trained along in regular order, 
and all the improper and superfluous growths cut away. 



THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Previous to entering upon the work of the kitchen garden, &c. 
for this month, it will be proper to observe that a great portion of 
the open ground culture and sowing necessary to be done in some 
places in April, have been fully treated of in March, in order to 
accommodate those citizens of the middle states, whose gardens, 
from the nature of soil and situation, admit of early sowing, as well 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 323 

as a desire in many to have their crops at as early a period as pos- 
sible, either for sale or family use; and also for the general accom- 
modation of the more southerly states, that month being their 
principal season for gardening. But, in the eastern states gene- 
rally, and in such parts of the middle states as the ground is 
naturally of a binding and heavy nature, this will be the most 
eligible period for sowing their general garden crops; always ob- 
serving to sow the hardy kinds as early in the month as the soil, 
season, and situation will admit of, in order that the young plants 
may be established before they are overtaken by the summer heat 
and drought; but never, nor on any account, should a stiff or moist 
ground be wrought till it gets so dry as to fall to pieces in the 
working, nor delayed till it binds and becomes hard. Let the spade 
not be applied till every particle of water, that is not in contact 
with the clay, is either drained away or drawn off by the air; nick 
that time and you will then find the earth to work freely, and not 
subject to bind afterwards; for if a clay is worked before this criti- 
cal period it kneads like dough, becomes more tough, and never 
fails to bind when drought follows, which not only prevents the 
seed to rise, but injures the plants materially in their subsequent 
growth by its becoming impervious to the moderate rains, dews, 
air, and influence of the sun, which are all necessary to the pro- 
motion of vegetation. 

On the other hand, a light sandy soil will be rather benefitted by 
working it when moist, as such will have a tendency to make it 
more compact, and consequently more retentive of moisture. 

The nearer the ground approaches to a sand the less retentive 
will it be of moisture; the more to a clay the longer will it retain 
it; and the finer the particles of which the clay is composed, the 
faster will it hold every small particle of water, and consequently 
be longer in drying, and become harder when dry; but earth of a 
consistence that will hold v/ater the longest, without becoming hard 
when dry, is that of all others the best adapted for raising the 
generality of plants in the greatest perfection. This last described 
is called loam, and is a medium earth between the extremes of 
clay and sand. 

The great art of improving sandy and clay soils, is to give to the 
former such dressings of clay, cow-dung, and other kinds of 
manure, as will have a tendency to bind and make it more compact, 
and consequently more retentive of moisture; and to the latter, 
coats of sandy earth, pond-mud, horse-dung, and such other com- 
posts as may tend to separate its particles and open its pores, there- 
by easily to discharge any superabundance of moisture, and cause 
it to approach as near as possible to a loam, which may be greatly 
assisted by summer and winter fallowing; for the winter frost, and 
summer heat, being the plough and spade of nature, have a power 
to separate the particles of earth, by the expansion of the particles 
of water lodged between, and in contact with them, more effectu- 
ally than the ploughs and spades made by the hand of man; but 
when art and nature act in co-operation, the business is more 
speedily accomplished. This is the foundation stone of horticulture 
2Q 



314 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April 

and agriculture, and merits the serious consideration of every per- 
son concerned. 

Let it not be understood that I am an advocate for late sowing 
or planting; I am the reverse, when it can be done under favour- 
able circumstances. 

The above remarks are applicable generally to all the other 
open ground departments, as well as to the Kitchen Garden.', but 
particularly inasmuch as they have relation to the sowing of seeds. 

Care of Cucumbers and Melons, fyc. 

Examine your cucumber and melon beds, and if any have de- 
clined in heat, especially in the early part of the month, line them 
with fresh dung, as directed in page 17": this will be necessary, in 
order to obtain plentiful crops of fruit. 

As the sun is now become very powerful, all kinds of plants 
which you have in hot-beds, will require abundance of air, and 
occasional shade, for if the beds were left close shut only for a few 
hours during the prevalence of a hot mid-day sun, the whole would 
be scorched to death: therefore you ought never to leave the garden 
at such times without first raising the glasses and giving, shade to 
the plants if thought necessary. 

Making new Hot-beds for Cucumbers and Melons. 

In order to have successional crops of cucumbers and melons, 
you may in the early part of this month make new hot-beds, either 
for the reception of plants or for sowing the seeds; observing the 
directions given in the former months, as well for these, as the due 
attention which fruiting and other plants require. 

Making Hot-bed Ridges for Cucumbers and Melons. 

Make hot-bed ridges about the middle of this month for the 
cucumber and melon plants raised last month, in order to be plant- 
ed under hand or bell-glasses. For this purpose make trenches 
three feet wide and two deep, in a warm dry part of the garden, 
and fill them to the surface with good fresh horse-dung, as directed 
in January for other hot-beds, then you may either earth them 
directly, or in two or three days after when the dung will be settled, 
and the heat risen to the top of the bed, laying from seven to nine 
inches thick of light rich earth over every part. 

When this is done and all the surface made smooth, lay on your 
hand or bell-glasses in the middle of the ridge four feet asunder, 
and keep them close down till the dung has thoroughly warmed the 
earth, then proceed to put in the plants. 

You may plant under each glass two strong melon plants, or three 
cucumbers; observing, if possible, to remove and plant them with 
balls of earth about their roots. 

As soon as they are planted, let them be moderately watered and 



Appil.J the kitchen GARDEN. 3^5 

directly set on the glasses; if sunny weather, and the sun power- 
ful, shade them a little with a mat over each glass, and repeat the 
waterings occasionally, once or twice a week, according to the 
degree of warmth in the bed, and temperature of the weather; but 
let moderation be always observed in performing this work, espe- 
cially when newly planted. 

When the plants are well taken with the ground and growing 
freely, give them plenty of air, by raising the glasses on one side, 
and when they have grown so large as to run out under the glasses, 
let these be raised on brickbats, stones, or pieces of wood, to give 
full liberty to the pknts, and do not take them off totally till 
towards the end of May. 

Cucumber and melon seeds may be sown about the middle of 
this month, on ridges made as above, and protected with glasses; 
these will be much earlier than if sown in the beginning of May 
in the open ground, and much more profitable to market-gardeners. 

Plunting Cauliflowers. 

In order to have cauliflowers in good perfection, you must be 
provided with stout early plants, such as are strong, and in the 
middle states, perfectly fit for planting out, early this month: being 
ftirnished with these, select a piece of very rich loam, rather inclin- 
ing to moisture, but by no means wet, and such as will not be 
subject either to burn or become stiff and bound by severe drought, 
always avoiding sand or clay, as much as possible; give it at least 
four or five inches deep of well rotted cow-dung, or if this cannot 
be had, other old manure; dig or trench it one good spade or 
eighteen inches deep, incorporating the manure effectually there- 
with, as you proceed in digging or trenching. 

Then in the first week of this month, take up your plants, which 
were managed as directed in the preceding month, with a trans- 
planter or hollow trowel, one by one, preserving as much earth as 
possible about their roots, and plant them down to their leaves in 
rov/s three feet asunder, and the same distance plant from plant, in 
the rows, forming a little hollow (basin like) about eight inches 
over, and two deep, round every plant to receive water occasionally, 
till fit for earthing up; and which, immef/tafe/?/ previous to landing 
the plants, should be filled with good compost earth, if convenient. 
Then give each a little water, which repeat at intervals of three 
or four days, till in a vigorous growing state, and afterwards occa- 
sionally. Or, after having first manured and dug the ground, you 
may make trenches as if Tor celery, in the direction of north and 
south; and in the bottom of each lay four inches deep of well rotted 
cow-dung, cast thereon five or six inches of earth, and point over 
the whole with a spade, mixing the earth and dung effectually: in 
these trenches plant your cauliflower plants at the above distances, 
and give occasional waterings as before. 

To attempt planting cauliflowers in poor ground would be 
labour in vain; they love, nay, they require a deep, very rich, and 



316 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

moist loam, and agree exceedingly well with large quantities of 
manure. 

You should be provided with hand-glasses, garden-pots, or covers 
made of two boards, each a foot long, and nailed together at right 
angles, to cover every plant at night and in very severe weather 
for two or three weeks after planting; observing to take them oft' 
early each morning, except the weather is desperate, and never to 
keep a dark covering over the plants longer than necessity requires. 

This occasional protection is necessary to keep them in a con- 
stant and uninterrupted state of vegetation, for if stunted, at this 
period, by frost or too much cold, many will button, and very few 
produce large flowers. 

The early cauliflower plants, under hand-glasses, should have 
earth drawn up to their stems. This will be of a great service in 
promoting a strong forward growth. 

The hand or bell-glasses may still be continued over these plants 
at night, and cold wet weather; but in warm days, and when there 
are mild rains, let them be exposed to the free air; when the plants 
are considerably advanced in growth, the glasses should be raised 
proportionably high on props; first drawing a border of earth, two 
or three inches high or more, round each plant; then place the 
props upon that, and set the glasses thereon; but towards the end 
of this month, or beginning of next, they should be taken entirely 
away. 

The above instructions will suit any part of the Union, except 
as to time of planting, which should, in every place, be on the eve 
of the first brisk spring vegetation, when no danger can be appre- 
hended from subsequent frosts; and where this can be done in De- 
cember, January, or February with safety, so much the better. 

Young cauliflower plants, raised from seed sown last month, 
should now be pricked out into nursery beds, or some in a hot-bed, 
to forward them for final transplanting. See page 183. 

Sowing Caulifloiver Seed. 

Cauliflower seed may be sown, any time this month, in the open 
ground, to raise plants for heading in October, &c. 
For the further treatment of cauliflowers, see May. 

Cabbages. 

As early in this month as possible plant out your general crops 
of cabbage plants, observing to set all the early heading kinds at the 
distance of two feet and a half every way, and all the late sorts at 
that of three feet. 

As to soil and preparation, the nearer you approach in both to 
that directed for cauliflowers, the larger cabbages you will have; 
but where they are desired very early, you must adapt the soil and 
situation to that purpose. 

Some of the cabbage and savoy plants which were sown in March, 
for a succession of young summer and autumn cabbages, and a for- 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 3^7 

ward autumn crop of savoys, should be thinned out and pricked 
into nursery -beds, to get strength before they are planted out for 
good. 

Let this be done when the plants have leaves one or two inches 
broad; prepare beds of good earth about three feet and a half wide, 
in an open situation, and let the largest plants be drawn out regu- 
larly from the seed-bed, and planted in those prepared for them, at 
four or five inches distance every way. Water them immediately, 
and repeat it occasionally in dry weather. 

The smaller plants which are left in the seed-beds, should be 
cleared from weeds; give them a good watering to settle the earth 
about their roots, loosened in drawing out the others; they will 
then grow strong, and in two or three weeks be in fine order for 
transplantation. 

Sowing Cabbage Seeds. 

Sow now a general assortment of cabbage seeds, such as early 
York, early sugar-loaf, and early Battersea, to succeed those sown 
in March, and large late Battersea, large late sugar-loaf, flat Dutch, 
drum head, large English, large Scotch, flat-sided, and Savoys, for 
autumn and winter use. Sow also the seed of the red pickling 
cabbage, to succeed those sown in the former months. The earlier 
you sow all these kinds, the larger and better cabbages will you 
have. 

Sow these seeds tolerably thin, in open beds or borders, and keep 
them free from weeds, till fit for planting out; or if they are trans- 
planted into other beds, when about four inches high, it will greatly 
strengthen them, and render them in a much better condition for 
final transplanting. 

Sowing Borecole, or Fringed Cabbage. 

The varieties of this are — 1. Green curled. 2. Red curled. 
3. Thick-leaved curled. 4. Finely fringed. 5. Siberian, or Scotch 
Kale. 

For the garden these may be treated in every respect as winter 
cabbages; they are extremely hardy, and never so delicious as 
%vhen rendered tender by smart frosts; they are very valuable 
plants to cultivate, particularly in the more southerly states, as they 
will there be in the greatest perfection during the winter months; 
they will also, if planted in a gravelly soil and in a sheltered warm 
situation, bear the winters of the middle states, and may be kept in 
great perfection in the eastern states if managed as directed in page 
191, which see. The deliciousness of their sprouts in spring, sur- 
passes every thing of the kind, which they produce in great abun- 
dance. The seeds of either sort may be sown any time this month, 
and treated in every particular as directed for cabbages. 

The green and red borecole, is also a very useful green food for 
sheep; because, it is not only hardy, but if sown in time, will grow 
three or four feet high, and may in deep snows be got at by these 
animals who frequently suffer much for want of food in such cases. 



318 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

Turnip-Cabbage, and Turnip-rooted Cabbage. 

The turnip-cabbage produces its bulb or protuberance, which 
approaches to roundness, on the stem above ground, immediately 
under the leaves. It is eatable when young, and about the size of 
a tolerably large garden turnip. The bulb or protuberance must 
be stripped of its thick fibrous rind, and then it may be treated and 
used as a turnip. Some of their bulbs grow to twenty-three inches 
in circumference and weigh upwards of twelve pounds. 

The seeds may now be sown and the plants afterwards treated 
as you do cabbage, only that in earthing up the plants when grown 
to a good size, you must be cautious not to cover the globular part, 
which is to be eaten. They are much more hardy than turnips, 
and in Europe are cultivated for the feeding of cows and sheep, as 
well as for table use; in either case they treat them as they do cab- 
bages, or sow them like turnips, and afterwards hoe them out to 
proper distances. 

The turnip-rooted cabbage has an oblong, thick root, pretty mucK 
of the form of the winter radish, but very large, and is a valuable 
article to cultivate for cattle, as it produces, with proper care, from 
twenty-five to thirty tons per acre. It is extremely hardy, and 
very seldom injured by frost, and would be found an excellent 
sheep food in April, where the frosts are not overly desperate. It 
merits attention from the farmer and is frequently used for culinary 
purposes, in the same manner as the turnip-cabbage. The tops 
and sprouts make delicious greens in spring. 

Brussels Sprouts and Jerusalem Kale. 

The Brussels sprouts is an open headed cabbage, grows very 
high, and is remarkable for producing a great quantity of excellent 
sprouts in spring. 

The Jerusalem kale is one of the most hardy plants of the cab- 
bage tribe: it never heads, but, the leaves after being pinched by a 
smart frost, make most delicious greens, and boil greener than any 
other of the cabbage kind; it bears a very severe winter, and affords 
a grateful supply when most other plants perish. 

Both these kinds afe cultivated in the same manner as cabbages; 
their seeds may now be sown; but let it be observed, that they 
stand the winter frosts better when planted in a gravelly soil than 
in any other. 

Broccoli. 

There are several varieties of the broccoli, which are all but late 
heading varieties of the cauliflower, such as the Roman or purple, 
the Neapolitan or white, the green and black broccoli, with some 
others; but the Roman and Neapolitan are in most estimation. The 
seeds should be sown in the early part of this month, if not before, 
and afterwards, when of due size, pricked out in beds at the dis- 
tance of four inches apart and watered, there to remain till arrived 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 3^9 

of sufficient strength for planting in the quarters where intended 
to produce their flowers or heads. 

The early purple broccoli, if sown early in this month and plant- 
ed as you do cabbage, in good rich ground, will produce fine head& 
in October or November, very little inferior to cauliflowers, and by 
many preferred to them; the white will not flower so early, and in 
the middle and eastern states must be taken up in November and 
managed as directed in that month, by which a supply of this very 
delicious vegetable may be had in great perfection during all the 
winter and. spring. 

In such of the southern states as their winters are not more 
severe than in England, they will stand in the open ground, and 
continue to produce their fine flowers from October to April. In 
the middle, and especially in the eastern states, if the seeds are 
sown early in March on a hot-bed, and forwarded as is done with 
cauliflowers and early cabbage plants, and planted out finally in 
April, it would be the most certain method of obtaining large and 
early flowers. All these kinds produce heads exactly like the 
cauliflower, only that some are of a purple colour, some green, 
some black, and the white kind so exactly resembles the true cau- 
liflower, as to be scarcely distinguished therefrom, either in colour 
or taste. 

If any plants were raised in the preceding months, let some of 
them be pricked out now into nursery beds, to get strength for 
planting out finally. 

Peas. 

Continue to sow successional crops of peas every ten or twelve 
days, as directed in pages 133 and 185, to which I refer you for 
instructions. 

You may now sow the dwarf-sugar and the dwarf Spanish-peas| 
they are both plentiful bearers, and do not require to be rodded, as 
they never rise more than from twelve to eighteen inches high. 
They are to be sown in drills two feet asunder, very thin, and 
covered about two inches deep. 

Leadman's dwarf pea is, perhaps, the most prolific and profitable 
of the whole family, it bears most abundantly, and is very delicious; 
it rises to the height of from two and a half to three feet, accord- 
ing to the soil, and may, or may not be rodded, but if having some 
support, the produce will be the greater. 

The tall crooked sugar pea is particularly worthy of cultivation, 
and should now be sown; its green pods, when young, are boiled 
like kidney -beans, and are uncommonly sweet and delicious; these 
grow to a considerable height, and require rods from seven to eight 
feet high, and to be sown in drills at least four {ttt asunder. 

If you sowed no peas in the preceding months, the early frame, 
early golden, and Charleton hotspur kinds should now be sown 
for first crops; and for succession, the glory of England, Spanish 
morotto, white, green, and grey rouncivals; or the tall marrowfat, 
imperial, sugar-poland and blue Prussian kinds. The nine last 



320 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

sorts should be planted in drills at the distance of four feet at 
least, and be rodded or sticked to the height of six feet or more, 
by which you may expect very abundant crops. Rods from four 
to five feet high will answer for the early frame and hotspur kinds, 
and also for the pearl peas and Essex-reading, all of which are very 
prolific bearers. 

Draw earth to such rows of peas as are up and advanced a little 
in height, which will strengthen the plants and forward them 
greatly in their growth. 

This earthing should always be performed, for the first time, 
when the plants are about three or four inches high. 

Be very particular to rod or place sticks to such rows of peas as 
have attained the height of five or six inches; if this is not timely 
attended to the crops will be greatly injured, for peas are never so 
productive as when rodded before they begin to fall to either one 
side or the other. For the method of doing which, see page 186. 

Planting and Earthing up Beans. 

In the early part of this month you may plant long-pod and 
Windsor beans, with every other variety of that species. These 
are always most productive when planted early; but if you are 
desirous of succession of this kind of bean as long as possible, your 
late crops must be of the early Mazagan, early Lisbon, or green 
Genoa kinds, but more particularly the latter, as it bears our 
summer heat better than any of the whole family. For particulars, 
see page 186. 

Such beans as are advanced in growth to the height of four or 
five inches must have some earth drawn up to their stems, which 
will greatly refresh and strengthen them. 

Lettuces. 

Transplant lettuces of every kind that require it, where they 
stand too close; both those of the winter standing, or such as were 
sown in any of the former months, and are now grown to a suffi- 
cient size. 

Choose a spot of good ground for these plants, and if moderately 
dunged it will prove beneficial to their growth: dig the ground 
evenly one spade deep, and rake the surface smooth, then plant 
the lettuces about ten or twelve inches distant each way; water 
them immediately, and repeat it occasionally in dry weather till 
they have taken good root. 

For the method of planting the kinds most deserving of cultiva- 
tion and other particulars, see page 187. 

Continue to sow a variety of the best kinds of lettuce once every 
two weeks, that there may be a regular succession. Dig a spot of 
rich ground for them in an open situation, sow the seed even, not 
too thick, and rake them in lightly. Scatter a few seeds among 
general crops, and they will grow large and fine. 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 321 

Small Salading. 

Sow small salading generally about once every week or fort- 
night; the sorts are lettuce, cresses, iBustard, rape, radish, &c. 

Dig a bed of light mellow earth for these seeds, and rake the 
surface fine. Draw some flat, shallow drills, sow the seeds therein, 
each kind separate, and cover them lightly with earth. 

Water them moderately if the weather should be dry, which 
will greatly promote their growth. 

For more particulars respecting small salading, see pages 125 
and 197. 

Radishes. 

Thin the general crops of radishes where they have arisen too 
thick, leaving the plants about two or three inches asunder, and 
clear them from weeds. 

Radish seed, both of the short-topped, salmon-coloured, and 
white Naples' sorts, should be sown at three different times this 
month, by which means a constant supply of young radishes may 
be obtained, allowing about twelve days between each time of 
sowing; choosing at this season an open situation for the seed; sow 
it evenly on the surface, cover, or rake it well in, and the plants 
will come up in a few days, and be of proper size for drawing in 
three or four weeks. 

The crops of early radishes in general should be often watered 
in dry weather; this will promote their swelling freely, and will 
prevent their growing hot and sticky. 

Sow a thin sprinkling of radish seed among other low growing 
crops; such will generally be found very good. 

Turnip-rooted radishes, of both the white and red kinds, should 
now be sown, and treated as directed in page 188. Thin such of 
them as were sown last month to two or three inches apart. You 
may, likewise, sow some of the white Spanish radishes; but the 
general time for sowing that, and the black winter kind, is June, 
July, and August. 

Sowing Spinage. 

Continue now to sow seed of the round-leaved spinage every ten 
or twelve days, agreeably to the directions given in page 188, which 
see. Hoe the spinage sowed in the former months, and thin the 
plants to three, four, or five inches distance. 

Carrots and Farsneps. 

Carrots may now be sown for a full crop; but in order to have 
tolerable sized roots, in some reasonable time in summer, let the 
seed be sown the beginning of the month. 

Where, however, a supply of young carrots are required, it is 
proper to perform three different sowings this month; the first in 
2R 



322 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

the beginning, the second about the middle, and the third towards 
the latter end. 

Parsneps may also be sown in the beginning or middle of this 
mouth; but if later, the crop will not succeed well, at least not to 
have large swelling roots in full perfection. 

For the method of sowing both carrots and parsneps, see page 189. 

Note. — There are several varieties of the garden carrot; differing 
in the colour of their roots; such as the orange, white, yellow, and 
dark red. These variations may be continued by taking care not 
to mix them together in the same garden. There is another variety 
called the horn-carrot, differing in the /orm of its root, the lower 
part terminating in a round, abrupt manner, and not tapering off 
gradually like the others; this is the earliest sort, is of an orange 
colour, and very delicious; and should always be sown for a first 
crop. The long orange carrot is the best for a principal crop. They 
all delight and thrive in a deep, rich, sandy loam. 

Celery. 

The young celery plants, arising from the seed sown in February 
or March for an early crop, will be tit to prick out now, some in 
the beginning, and others towards the middle or latter end of the 
month, into a nursery-bed of rich light earth, or in a hot-bed, to 
forward them still more. 

Prepare a spot of ground, form it into three or four feet wide 
beds, and rake the surface smooth; then thin out a quantity of the 
best plants from the seed-bed, and plant them into the above, at 
about three inches distance; or you may prick some of the earliest 
into a moderate hot-bed to forward them; give a gentle watering, 
and repeat it occasionally till the plants have taken fresh root. 

They should remain in these beds a month or five weeks, to get 
strength before they are planted out finally into the trenches. 

As these early sown plants, after they become fit for use, will 
not continue long before they run up for seed, there should not be 
more of them raised or planted out than are necessary for an early 
supply. 

Sow some celery seed in the first or second week of this month, 
to raise plants for a general crop, and to succeed those which were 
sown in March. 

Dig for this purpose a bed of rich light earth, and make the sur- 
face even; sow the seed thereon tolerably thick, and rake it in 
lightly; in dry weather give frequent moderate watering, both be- 
fore and after the plants come up, which being very essential should 
not be omitted. 

The best kinds to sow are the solid and red stalked celery, both 
of which are very fine and blanch delightfully. 

Those who have not the convenience of a hot-bed, to raise early 
plants, and wish to have celery as soon as possible, will find the 
following method of some importance. Make choice of a piece of 
very rich, light loam that lies well to the sun; give it a good coat 
of manure, and dig it carefully in, one spade deep at least; then at 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 323 

the distance of four feet form trenches, north and south, about ten 
inches deep, eight wide at bottom, and the edges sloping outward 
regularly towards the centre of the ridges, formed bj the earth 
thrown up, the better to admit the sun to the seeds and plantsj in 
the bottom of these trenches lay three inches of very old horse- 
dung; cast over this the same depth of earth, and with your spade 
dig and incorporate both well together; cover the whole with mould 
previously made fine with the rake, and draw a shallow drill with 
your finger in the centre of each trench, not more than a quarter of 
an inch deep, in which sow your seed very thin, and draw the 
earth lightly over it, just to cover the seed and no more. This 
should be done as early in this, or the preceding month, as the 
ground can be got to work freely. 

When the plants are up they must be kept free from weeds, 
and when grown a couple of inches, thinned to the distance of five 
from one another, always leaving the strongest and most promising. 

When about eight inches high draw to their roots, on each side, 
three inches deep of mould, and let them grow on till of sufiicient 
size to earth them up for blanching; then they are to be earthed 
in the general way. Plants thus treated will arrive at perfection 
three weeks earlier than those managed in the common method. 

.Asparagus. 

The forking, dressing, sowing, and planting of asparagus, if not 
done last month, should be performed the first week in this, par- 
ticularly the forking and dressing; for the shoots will be advancing 
rapidly, and if not done in time they will be greatly injured, either 
by omitting it altogether, or performing it at an untimely season. 
New plantations ought to be made in the early part of the month; 
the seed may be sown at any time therein, but the earlier the better. 
For the methods of doing the whole, see pages 192, 193, and 194. 

Sowing Beet Seed. 

Beets of every kind may now be sown with good success. For 
the kinds and methods of sowing them, see page 194. 

Sowing Onion and Leek Seed. 

Onion seed, if sown in the first week of this month, agreeably to 
the directions given in page 194, will arrive at a tolerable size for 
use the same season; but if sown for the purpose of raising seed 
onions, or small bulbs for planting next year, the middle of the 
month will be the proper time, or even towards the latter end. 
Seeds for the latter purpose should be sown pretty thick, and in 
poor gravelly ground; otherwise they will grow too large, or run to 
tops and not bulb well. 

You may now sow a principal crop of leeks, either in drills, or as 
directed for onions in page 194; if in drills, they may be landed. 



324 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

as you do celery, when arrived at full size; or if in beds, they 
should be transplanted in June or July, as then directed. 

Planting Seed Onions. 

All your seed onions ought to be planted, if not done in the pre- 
ceding months, as early in this as possible; for they never succeed 
so well as by early planting. See page 196. 

Garlick, Rocombole, Shallots and Chives. 

These useful culinary and medicinal plants, if not attended to in 
the former months, should now be planted as early as possible, 
and as directed in page 197. 

Turnips. 

You may sow any time this month, a full summer crop of the 
early Dutch, early stone, or early green turnip; they will succeed 
very well, and being of a quick growth, will arrive at good perfec- 
tion before they are overtaken by the violent summer heats. 

Sow the seeds in open quarters or beds, after the ground has 
been well dug and sufl&ciently manured, tolerably thin, and as 
evenly as possible; if the ground is dry, tread down the seed regu- 
larly, and rake it in with a light and even hand. 

Hoe and thin the turnips which were sown last month, leaving 
the plants six, seven or eight inches distant from each other, 
according to the richness of the soil. 

, Salsafy. 

Salsafy, or Tragopogon porrifolium, is a plant by some highly 
valued for its white eatable root, which grows a foot or more long, 
and in shape like a carrot or parsnip. Some have carried their 
fondness for it so far as to call it a vegetable oyster. Its method 
of cultivation, &c. you will find in page 197: the seed may be sown 
with good success any time this month. 

Scorzonera, or Viper^s- Grass. 

There are nineteen species of scorzonera described; but the 
Scorzonera hispanica is that principally cultivated in gardens, for 
its roots; which, if sown in this month in drills, and covered about 
half an inch deep, will produce fine eatable roots for autumn and 
winter use; they are boiled and eaten like carrots, &c., and are 
greatly esteemed by many. When the plants are up, they must 
be thinned to five or six inches apart, and be kept perfectly free 
from weeds. They may also be sown broad-cast, in three or four 
feet wide beds, and, when up, thin them to six or seven inches 
distance every way. 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 325 

Skirret. 

The Slum sisarum, or skirret, is greatly esteemed as a garden 
vegetable; its root is composed of several fleshy tubers, as large 
as a man's finoer, and joining together at top. They are eaten 
boiled, and stewed with butter, pepper and saltj or rolled in flour 
and fried; or else cold with oil and vinegar, being first boiled. 
They have much of the taste and flavour of a parsnep, but a great 
deal more palatable. 

This plant is cultivated two ways, first by seed; and second by 
slips from the roots: the former method I think the more eligible, 
because the roots which are raised from seeds generally grow larger 
than those raised by slips, and are less subject to be sticky. 

The seeds should be sown the latter end of March, or in the 
beginning of this month, either broad-cast or in drills; the ground 
should be light and moist, for in dry land the roots are generally 
small, unless the season proves wet. 

The seeds may be sown broad -cast, or in drills, and covered 
half an inch deep; they will rise in five or six weeks, when they 
must be carefully wed, and thinned to the distance of six inches 
asunder. In autumn, when the leaves begin to decay, the roots 
will be fit for use, and continue so till they begin to shoot in the 
spring. They may be taken up on the approach of winter, and 
preserved like carrots. 

To propagate this plant by offsets, dig up the old roots in spring, 
before they begin to shoot and slip off the side shoots, preserving 
an eye or bud to each; plant them in rows one foot asunder, and 
six inches distant in the rows; and in autumn, they will be fit for 
use as before. Or you may separate the roots that you have pre- 
served all winter, and plant them in the same manner. 

Sowing Common and Large-rooted or Hamburg Parsley, 

Sow a full crop of the common and curled parsley; and also of 
the large rooted parsley, as directed last month, in page 198. 

Sea Kale. 

If you have yet omitted sowing the Crambe maritima, or sea 
kale, it may be sown the beginning of this month. For its general 
culture, see page 198, &c. 

Coriander and Chervil. 

Coriander and chervil may yet be sown, as directed in page 198, 
which see. The latter particularly, is by many esteemed in salads 
and soups. 

Dressing, Planting, and Sowing Artichokes. 

In the early part of this month, if omitted in the last, you may 
give a spring dressing to your artichokes, and it will be a very pro- 



326 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

per time to make new plantations of that delicious vegetable, or to 
sow the seed of it. For full instructions, as to the performance of 
all the above, see pages 202, 203, &c. 

Cardoons and Alexanders. 

Cardoons and Alexanders maj yet be sown, as directed for the 
former in page 204, and for the latter, in page 205. For their fur- 
ther culture, see June and July. 

Propagating various Pot and Medicinal Herbs. 

For the various kinds of pot and medicinal herbs and the differ- 
ent methods of propagating them, either of which will answer ex- 
tremely well in this month, but more particularly that of sowing 
the seeds, see page 205, &c. 

Bill and Azorian Fennel. . 

For an account of, and the method of propagating Dill and Fino- 
chio or Azorian fennel, see page 206. 

Horse-Radish. 

Horse-radish may now be planted with good success, but the 
earlier in the month that it is done, the better. For the method of 
propagating it see page 208. 

Bhubarb. 

For the general culture of rhubarb, see page 210. The seed, if 
neglected to be sown in the former months, will still succeed, by 
sowing it in the early part of this, but the plants from late sowings 
particularly, will require to be shaded when up from too powerful 
sun-shine, till they have attained strength. 

In the first week of this month, it may be successfully propagat- 
ed by offsets from the root. 

Jerusalem Artichoke. 

Jerusalem artichokes may still be cultivated, as directed last 
month, in page 21 3. 

Potatoes. 

If omitted in the last month, plant potatoes in the beginning of 
this, as directed in page 207. 

Nasturtium. 

The Tropseolum majus, or large nasturtium, is very deserving of 
cultivation, as well on account of the beauty of its large and nume- 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 327 

rous ■ orange- coloured flowers, as their excellence in salads, and 
their use in garnishing dishes. The green berries or seeds of this 
plant, which it produces abundantly, make one of the nicest pickles 
that can possibly be conceived^ in the estimation of many, they are 
superior to capers. 

There are, of the nasturtium, a major and minor kind; the for- 
mer being of a large running growth, and the most productive, is 
the proper sort for the above purposes. 

A drill may be drawn for them as practised for peas, and the 
seeds dropped therein, at the distance of two or three inches from 
one another, and covered with earth near an inch deep. When the 
plants are grown about six inches, they should have sticks placed to 
them to run upon. Or they may be sown near hedges, fences, or 
palings of any kind, on which they can climb and have support, for 
they will always be more productive in this way than when suffered 
to trail on the ground. 

Liquorice. 

The early -part of this month is a very good season, in the middle 
states, for planting liquorice. For its general culture, see page 
208, &c. 

Sowing Okra. 

The Hibiscus esculenta, or okra. The green capsules of this 
plant is an admirable ingredient in soups, and its ripe seeds, if 
burned and ground like coffee, can scarcely be distinguished there- 
from. Numbers cultivate it for that purpose, and even say that it 
is much superior to foreign coffee, particularly as it does not affect 
the nervous system like the latter. 

Between the middle or latter end of this month, is a proper time 
to sow the seed in the middle states; and in the eastern states, the 
early part of May; or generally, it may be sown, with certainty 
of success, at the time that Indian corn is planted. Draw drills 
about an inch deep and four feet asunder, into which drop the 
seeds at the distance of eight inches from one another, or rather 
drop two or three in each place, lest the one should not grow, and 
cover them near an inch deep. As they advance in growth, earth 
them up two or three times as you do peas, and they will produce 
abundantly. Some plant or sow them much thinner in the rows; 
but by the above method you will have more in quantity and as 
good in quality. 

Capsicums or Red-Peppers. 

Sow capsicums towards the end of this month on a warm bor- 
der, to produce plants for planting out towards the latter end of 
May, or beginning of June; the large heart-shaped capsicum is 
in the greatest estimation for pickling, but the small upright kinds 
are the strongest for pepper: if they are desired at an early season. 



328 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

SOW them on a slight hot-bed the beginning of this month, and with 
due care they will be fit to transplant, where they are to remain, 
towards the middle of May. In the eastern states, the tenth of 
May will be soon enough to sow them in the open ground, but in 
the southern states they may be sown any time this month. 

Tomatoes or Love-apples. 

The Solarium lycopersicum, tomato, or love-apple, is much cul- 
tivated for its fruit, in soups and sauces, to which it imparts an 
agreeable acid flavour; and is also stewed and dressed in various 
ways and very much admired. 

The seeds may, towards the latter end of this month, be sown 
on a warm border, pretty thick, and about the end of May will be 
fit to plant out; or they may be sown where intended to remain for 
fruiting. They will require such support as directed for nastur- 
tiums, in page 326, and must be planted in rows five feet asunder, 
and a foot or fourteen inches distant, plant from plant, as they run 
greatly. Some lay various kinds of old branches in their way for 
them to run upon; however, the better they are supported, the 
more numerous will their fruit be. 

This fruit may be had much earlier by sowing the seeds in the 
first week of this month, if not done in March, on a slight hot-bed, 
and forwarding them in that way; they bear transplanting well, 
and may be set out finally about the middle of May. 

Hgg-Plant. 

The Solanum onelongena, or egg-plant. There are two varieties 
of this plant, the white fruited and the purple, cultivated for culi- 
nary purposes; the latter kind is preferable, and when sliced and 
nicely fried, approaches, both in taste and flavour, nearer to that 
of a very nice fried oyster than perhaps any other plant. 

This delicious vegetable may be propagated by sowing the seed 
on a slight hot-bed the beginning of this month, or in March; and 
towards the middle or latter part of May, they should be planted 
in a rich warm piece of ground, at the distance of two feet and a 
half asunder every way for the purple, or two feet for the white 
kind; and if kept clean, and a little earth drawn up to their stems, 
when about a foot high, they will produce plenty of fruit. Or, the 
seed may be sown about the end of this month on a warm border, 
and planted out finally in the beginning of June; but these will be 
rather late, and not produce fruit so abundantly in the middle or 
eastern states, as by the former method. If any were sown last 
month, let them be pricked out into a fresh hot-bed the middle of 
this, at the distance of four or five inches, to gather strength, and 
prepare them for planting out about the fifteenth or twentieth of 
May. 

Sowing Cucumbers, Squashes, Musk and Water Melons. 
In the middle states where the ground is light, dry, and warm, 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 329 

you may in the last. week of this month sow cucumbers, squashes, 
water-melons, and early musk-melons in the open ground, agree- 
ably to the directions given next month. If the weather proves 
favourable, and they are not attacked by frost after being up, they 
will succeed very wellj but if you have hand or bell glasses for 
their protection, there is no doubt of their success. 

It is generally observed, that cucumbers, squashes, and melons 
of every kind, may be sown in the open ground as early as Indian 
cornj but they are certainly somewhat more tender, and cannot be 
sown in the middle states with great certainty of success before 
the eighth of May. 

Kidney-Beahs. 

Towards the latter end of this month you may plant a first crop 
of kindey-beans in the open ground. Select a warm, dry, and 
favourably situated spot, and having dug and manured it properly, 
draw drills an inch deep, and two feet or thirty inches asunder; 
drop the beans therein two inches apart, and draw the earth equally 
over them,' do not cover them more than an inch deep, for at this 
early time they are liable to rot if cold or wet ensue. The kinds 
proper to be sown now, are the early cream-coloured, speckled, 
yellow, and white dwarfs. 

Endive. 

Those who are fond of endive as a salad, may now sow some of 
the seed, as directed in June, and blanch it when of sufficient size 
in the manner prescribed in August. But in the early summer 
months, lettuce has almost generally superseded the use of it. 

Sorrel. 

Sow now a sufficient supply of the broad-leaved garden sorrel, 
and also of the round-leaved or French sorrel j these, or either of 
them, may be sown on narrow beds or borders and covered lightly 
or raked in; when the plants are up keep them free from weeds, 
and in June you may transplant them either in rows along the bor- 
ders, or into three or four feet wide beds at the distance of nine 
inches, plant from plant, every way. 

Garden Orache. 

The Mriplcx hortensis, or garden orache, is cultivated for culi- 
nary purposes, being used as spinage, and is by some persons pre- 
ferred to it. The French particularly are very partial to this plant. 
There are three or four varieties of it differing only in colour; one 
is of a deep green, another of a dark purple, and a third with green 
leaves and purple borders. The green leaved variety, however, is 
that cultivated as an esculent herb, and is sown at the same time 
and treated in every respect like spinage. 



330 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [April. 

Caraway. 

The Carum carui, or common caraway, is a biennial plant: it 
produces its seed, which is highly aromatic and grateful to the 
stomach the second year after sowing, and then generally dies. 
It may now be soon on a bed, either broad-cast and raked in, or in 
drills, and covered half an inch deep; when up thin the plants to 
six inches distance, and in the June twelve months following, it 
•will produce its seed. Some of the plants that have not seeded 
abundantly will continue to bear the second season. Young plants 
rise in abundance where the seeds fall when ripe, and these will 
shoot and produce seed the following summer. 

Destroy Weeds. 

Weeds will now begin to appear plentifully from seed in every 
part of the garden. The utmost diligence should be used to destroy 
them, while they are young, before they get the start of the crops, 
especially tov/ards the middle and latter end of the month, when, 
if a forward season, they will be advancing in a rapid growth. 

Pay particular regard, at this time, to your small crops, as onions, 
carrots, parsneps, and the like; weeds grow much quicker than 
they do; and if they are not wed in time, either by small hoeing or 
hand-weeding, such will occasion much labour and trouble to clear 
them, and sometimes totally destroy the crops. 

Take the opportunity of dry weather, and hoe the ground between 
the rows of beans, peas, cabbages, cauliflowers, and other crops 
that stand wide to destroy the weeds. 

A large piece of ground may soon be gone over with a hoe when 
the weeds are small; but when they are permitted to grow large, it 
requires double labour to destroy them. 

Madder. 

The Ruhia tinctorurriy or dyer's madder, being an article of 
much importance in manufactures, &c., ought to command some 
attention in the United States, where it will grow to as good per- 
fection as in any country on earth. It is not wise in a nation to 
be under the necessity of importing articles of considerable con- 
sumption that might be cultivated at home to great advantage; and 
although it does not immediately come within the province of the 
gardener, I cannot let slip the opportunity of giving the best infor- 
mation in my power for bringing it to perfection. 

The plant has a perennial root and an unusual stalk. The root 
is composed of many long, thick, succulent fibres; these are joined 
at' the top in ahead like the roots of asparagus, and strike very 
deep into the ground, being sometimes more than three feet in 
length. From the upper part or head of the root come out many 
side roots, which extend just under the surface of the ground to a 
great distance, whereby it propagates very fast; for these send up 
a great number of shoots, which, if carefully taken off' in spring, 



April.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 33 j 

soon after they are above ground, and managed as hereafter di- 
rected, they become so many plants. These roots are of a dark 
colour on their outside, and have a yellowish red pith in the middle, 
which is tough and of a bitterish taste; from the root arises many 
large four-cornered, jointed stalks, which, in good land, will grow 
five or six feet high, and if supported, sometimes seven or eight; 
they are armed with short herbaceous prickles, and at each joint 
are placed five or six spear-shaped leaves, about three inches long, 
and near one broad in the middle, drawing to a point at each 
end; their upper surfaces are smooth, but their mid-ribs, on the 
under side, are armed with rough herbaceous spines; the leaves set 
close to the branches in whorls. From the joints of the stalk come 
out the branches which sustain the flowers; they are placed by 
pairs opposite, each pair crossing the other; these have few but 
small leaves towards the bottom, which are generally by threes, 
and upwards by pairs opposite; the branches are terminated by 
branching spikes of companulate yellow flowers, which are cut into 
four segments. These appear in June, and are followed by round- 
ish dark coloured seeds, compressed and indented on the side where 
joined to the pedicle or partial flower-stalk, and are about the size 
of asparagus seed. 

I am the more particular in the description, as there are seven 
different species of Rubin or madder, lest the wrong kind should 
be cultivated and produce a discouraging disappointment to the 
industrious and deserving cultivator. 

It is well known that madder is so essential to dyers and calico 
printers, that neither business can be carried on without it. The 
consumption of it is so great in England, that, upon a moderate 
computation, more than one hundred and eighty thousand pounds 
sterling is annually paid for what is imported from Holland, exclu- 
sive of their supplies from other parts; and as in a little time 
manufactures of these kinds must, of necessity, progress in Ame- 
rica, the sooner some attention is paid to this article the better. 
The profits arising from its culture would, at present, be very con- 
siderable, perhaps more so than when more generally attended to. 

The land best adapted for the cultare .of madder is a deep 
loamy substantial soil, not too stiff and heavy, nor overly light and 
sandy; this should be twice ploughed in autumn, and left rough 
during winter, that the frost may mellow and pulverize it, then 
ploughed again in April, immediately before planting, taking care 
every time to plough it as deep as possible. 

The time of planting is about the latter end of April, or imme- 
diately when the young buds begin to appear above ground, or as 
soon as possible after. The young shoots are then taken from the 
sides of the mother plants with as much root as possible, and are 
planted in rows three feet asunder, and plant from plant in the 
rows twelve inches distant; observing to plant each slip down to 
its top or crown. 

In the first year of planting madder, it is customary to plant kid- 
ney-beans, lettuces, or other low dwarf-growing crops, between the 
rows; but it is absolutely necessary to keep the ground clean from 



332 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Aprii,. 

weeds. In November the haulm being decayed, cut it off, and then 
draw three or four inches of earth over the crowns of the plants; 
this may be performed either with the plough or hoe, and let them 
remain so all winter. 

The second year in the beginning of April, the earth on the top 
of the rows should be scuffled over and raked, to destroy the young 
weeds, and make the surface smooth and mellow, as well as to 
permit the rising buds to shoot freely. 

The second summer the same care must be taken of the mad- 
der as the first, and nothing planted between the rows; and in 
November, the crowns of the roots are to be covered as in the 
preceding year. Some lay down the haulm, and cover it with 
earth, for the greater protection of the roots; but this is a very 
pernicious practice, for it in a little time becomes mouldy, and 
seldom fails to communicate this to the crowns, which materially 
injures them, and consequently the whole roots. 

The madder roots should never be taken up till they have had 
three summers' growth; and the culture of the third is the same 
as of the second year during the spring, summer and autumn. 

In the September or October of the third year, when the haulm 
is perfectly decayed, the roots are carefully taken up and dried, 
first for a few days in the air; they are afterwards put on a kiln, 
and dried eftectually with a slow heat; after which, it is pounded 
by stampers, kept in motion by a mill or wheel, which is turned 
by either water, wind or horses, then sifted and packed up in 
casks, as hard as possible. 

Madder may be cultivated from seeds by sowing them in rows, 
as directed for the plants; observing to sow three or four seeds 
where a plant might be expected, and cover them a little better 
than half an inch deep; when grown an inch or two, pull out the 
weakest, and leave the best to remain, at proper distances, for full 
growth. 

Those who are desirous of further information on this subject, 
may consult Martyn's edition of Miller's Gardener's Dictionary. 

Fullers Teasel. 

The Bipsucus fullonum , or Fuller's teasel, is cultivated in great 
quantities in the west of England, for raising the nap on woollen 
cloths, by means of the crooked awns upon the heads; which in the 
wild sort are not sufliciently hooked. For this purpose they are 
fixed around the circumference of a large broad wheel, which is 
made to turn around, and the cloth is held against them. The 
heads are collected in August, as soon as they begin to turn brown, 
and exposed daily to the sun till they become perfectly dry; care 
being taken to protect them from rain. 

This plant is propagated by sowing the seed either in March or 
April, upon a soil that has been well ploughed, and it is observed, 
that good wheat land is well adapted for the production of teasels. 
The ground being ploughed and made fine, from one peck to two of 
seed is generally sown upon an acre, and harrowed in with a light 



April.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 333 

harrow. When the plants are up, hoe them in the same manner 
as practised for turnips, cutting down all the weeds and singling 
out the plants to about six or eight inches distance; as they 
advance, and the weeds begin to grow again, hoe them a second 
time, cutting out the plants to about a foot asunder. Keep them 
free from weeds during the summer and autumn, and the second 
jear after sowing the plants will shoot up stalks with heads, which 
will be fit for collecting about the time before mentioned; observ- 
ing, that they are to be collected as they turn brown and ripen, and 
not all at once. 

They may also be cultivated by sowing the seeds in April, in a 
seed-bed, pretty thick, vvhere they are to be kept free from weeds, 
and in September or March following, planted into the ploughed 
field, being previously well harrowed and prepared, where they 
are to be set regularly in lines, at about a foot asunder every way. 
Soon after they will shoot up, and, the autumn following, produce 
their heads. This article is indispensable where manufactories of 
cloth are carried on. 

Woad, Weld, or Dyer''s Weed. 

The Reseda luteola, or dyer's-weed, is used for dyeing all sorts 
of bright yellows and lemon colours; and is a profitable article to 
cultivate lor the use of dyers. Its favourite soil is a tolerably rich, 
sandy ground, where it will grow to great perfection. The seed 
should be sown in April, at the rate of two quarts to an acre; when 
the plants are up they must be set out with a hoe, like turnips, 
to the distance of six inches, plant from plant, and kept free from 
weeds during the season. The May following they will shoot, and, 
if the soil be good, grow three feet high; and in June, when in full 
Jloiver, the plants are to be pulled up, and set in small handfuls to 
dry in the field; when dry enough they may be tied in bundles and 
housed, being careful to put them up loosely, that the air may pass 
between, to prevent fermentation. A small patch may be left for 
seed, which is not to be pulled up till perfectly ripe. Some people 
sow weld with oats and barley, as they do clover seed; and after 
these crops are off, weed them as well as possible, suffering no 
cattle to enter the field till the June twelve months after sowing, 
when the weld is pulled and dried as before. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Planting Fruit Trees. 

Sucii fruit trees as are not yet burst into leaf may be trans- 
planted in the early part of the month, but any that are either in 
leaf or flower will suffer considerably by such unseasonable remo- 



334 -THE FRUIT GARDEN. [April. 

val. However, when late planting is from some cause unavoidable, 
and having a previous knowledge thereof, it would, in that case, be 
highly proper to take up the trees some time before, to check 
their shooting, and lay them by the roots in a trench of earth till 
they can be planted. 

Where such planting is intended in the middle states, let it be 
done in the first week in the month, but in the eastern states it 
may be continued to the second, particularly with apples, pears, 
and plums, and even many other kinds should the season prove 
late. 

After planting, give each tree a plentiful watering, which will 
cause the earth to settle close about its roots, and prepare them for 
pushing fresh fibres; repeat it once every week or ten days till the 
new roots are established. For the method of planting, see the 
Fruit Garden and Orchard, in March. 

New planted trees in general, but particularly such as are 
planted late in the spring, should be frequently watered in dry 
weather, once a week or ten days will be sufficient. In doing this, 
give a copious watering to reach the roots effectually, and let their 
heads be sometimes watered as well as their roots. 

To preserve the earth moist about the roots of new planted 
trees, let some mulch or half rotted litter be spread on the surface 
of the ground; this will keep out the effects of the sun and wind, 
and the earth will retain a due moisture, with the assistance of a 
moderate watering now and then. 

Destroy Insects on Fruit Trees. 

Insects often do much damage to fruit trees if not prevented. 
This is the time they begin to breed on the buds, leaves, and new 
advancing shoots of young trees, and also frequently on those of 
older growth. Proper means should be used to destroy them in 
time, before they spread over the general branches. 

Where you perceive any of the leaves of these trees to have a 
crumpled, deformed, clammy appearance, &c., it is a certain sign 
of insects. Let the worst of these leaves be taken off' as soon as 
they appear; and if the ends of any of the young shoots are also 
attacked, prune av/ay such infected parts; and if furnished with a 
garden watering engine, it M'ould be greatly serviceable therewith 
to dash the branches with water in dry weather, which, and the 
above precautions, if proceeded to in time will do a great deal in 
preventing the mischief from spreading considerably. 

Or where wall trees are much infested, first pull oft' all the curled 
or crumpled leaves, then get some tobacco-dust, or fine snuff", and 
scatter some of it over all the branches, but most on those places 
where the insects are troublesome. This should be strewed over 
the trees in the morning when the twigs and leaves are wet, and 
let it remain. It will greatly diminish the vermin, and not injure 
the leaves or fruit. 

But fruit trees are also sometimes attacked by insects of the 
caterpillar tribe, contained numerously in a minute embryo state 



April] THE FRUIT GARDEN. ^ 335 

in small webs deposited on the branches, &c., animated bj the 
heat of the weather they soon overrun and devour the young leaves, 
whereby neither the trees nor fruit prosper in growth, and which 
should be attended to, especially in young trees, by picking off the 
webs, &c. before the insects animate considerably; and, if accom- 
modated with a watering engine, as above suggested, you might 
play the water strongly upon the trees, so as in the whole to 
diminish the increase and spreading depredations of the vermin as 
much as possible. 

Pruning. 

Pruning of all kinds of fruit trees should be finished in the first 
week of this month, if neglected so long, especially the forward 
blossoming kinds. See page 214. 

Protecting the Blossoms, 8fc. of Wall Trees from Frost. 

Your early kinds of fruit trees, particularly those planted against 
walls, may in forward seasons require protection for their blossoms 
and young setting fruit from night frosts; the doing of which will 
be found of importance. For the method, see page 219. 

"Where the sheltering of these trees is practised, it should be 
continued occasionally all this month; for although there are gene- 
rally some fine warm days and nights, yet the weather is so very 
uncertain at this season that we often have such severe hard frosts 
as to prove the destruction of the blossoms and young fruit on such 
of the above trees as are very forward and fully exposed. 

They may be protected with mats every cold night, and taken 
down in the morning: if cuttings of evergreens are used as devised 
last month, let them remain constantly till the fruit are past 



danger. 



General Spring treatment of Fruit Trees. 



For the general spring management of fruit trees, see the Fruit 
Garden and Orchard, last month. 

Grafting. 

For the various methods of grafting, &c. see the Nursery for last 
month, and also for this. 

Raspberries. 

New plantations of raspberries may be made in the first week of 
this month, but it would have been much better if that business had 
been performed in the last, except in the eastern states, where it 
may now be done with good success, as directed in page 221, which 
see. 



336 THE ORCHARD. [April. 

Strawberry Beds. 

Strawberry beds should now be kept perfectly free from weeds. 
The runners produced from the plants should be constantly cleared 
away as they advance. But where new plantations are wanted, let 
some of the strongest remain till June, to form young plants, then 
to be transplanted, as directed in that month. 

Water the beds of fruiting plants frequently in dry weather, 
when they begin to advance for bloomj for if they are not supplied 
with that article, in a dry time, the fruit will be smaller and of less 
abundant production; observing to give the water between the 
plants, and not over them. New plantations may be made in the 
first week of this month. For the method, see page 222. 

Early Fruits in Forcing. 

Let the same care be taken of the early fruits of all kinds now in 
forcing, as directed last month and February; but be very particu- 
lar to give air in proportion to the increasing heat of the weather. 



THE ORCHARD. 

The orchard has been so fully treated of in the last month, be- 
ginning at page 223, as well as in January and February, that 
there is little to be said respecting it in this; except to advise the 
completion of all that was directed to be done in the former, as 
early in this as possible. Late planting of deciduous trees, whether 
fruit or forest, seldom succeeds well, especially in warm climates; 
and to ensure the best possible success every thing should be 
attended to in due season, but more particularly planting; for 
"time waits for nobody." Apples and pears, however, may be 
planted, with tolerable success, in the middle states, but more par- 
ticularly in a backward season, any time before the middle of April; 
though it is necessity alone that could warrant their removal at so 
late a period. 

Let it be observed, as a general rule, always to plant or trans- 
plant your fruit trees before a leaf expands, or a blossom appears; 
it is true that some plant later, but never with equal success. 

The grafting of various kinds of fruit trees may be performed in 
the early part of this month, as directed in the Nursery for March, 
page 248, &c. 



337 



THE VINEYARD. 

Vine cuttings, preserved since the time of pruning, as directed 
in page 246, may yet be planted in the method pointed out in page 
247; and all the other work, directed to be done in the vineyard 
in March, should now be finished as early as possible. Rooted 
plants may also be planted out into rows at proper distances, but 
the earlier in the month the better. 

If neglected last month you must early in this, before the buds 
begin to shoot, either plough, dig, or deeply hoe the ground between 
the vines. This is indispensable; the surface must always be kept 
loose, clean, and free from weeds, or the consequence will be the 
having of few fruit, and these of a bad and insipid quality. Keep- 
ing the earth loose and pulverized, by frequent working, will cause 
it to attract the dews, imbibe the rains freely, when such occur, 
and consequently to be constantly stored with a sufficient supply 
of nourishment for the plants and fruit; and moreover the reflection 
of the sun, from the clean surface, will dry and dissipate the damps 
that would otherwise cause the fruit to become mildewed, and ren- 
der their quality crude and insipid. 

In looking over the vines, about the end of the month, observe 
to displace such young shoots or prominent buds as appear useless, 
or promise to be injurious to those intended for bearing fruit. Many 
small weakly shoots generally arise from the old stocks or branches, 
that seldom produce fruit, and are supernumerary; such should be 
rubbed off close, except in places where a supply of new v/ood or 
shoots for next year's bearing are wanted; in which case a suitable 
number should be carefully preserved. This operation ought, at 
this time, to be performed with the finger and thumb, nipping or 
rubbing them off close to where produced. 

Where two shoots arise from one bud, take the worst away, the 
remaining one will grow stronger, and its fruit be numerous and 
large in proportion. 

The vines should now have stakes placed to them, such as are 
directed to be made in page 48, and any old or decayed poles re- 
placed with new, if not done in the former months, in order to tie 
and train the young advancing shoots thereto. 

Any very long shoots of the last year, left upon strong and esta- 
blished stocks, for fruiting more abundantly, as directed in page 147, 
may, about the first of this month, when the sap has arisen, and the 
shoots become pliant, be bent round the stake, in the form of a 
hoop, and made fast thereto with a willow twig, &c., by this method 
it will break out into fruit more abundantly, and produce a less 
luxuriancyof wood, than if left in the ordinary way; but it must be 
bent gently, so as not to crack the bark, lest it should bleed and be 
weakened thereby, or become totally abortive. 
2T 



338 



THE NURSERY. 

A§ it is my plan to avoid repetitions as much as possible, in order 
to make room for more important matter, and having gone pretty 
extensively into the nursery business in March, I must refer you 
to that month for general instructions respecting the culture of trees 
and shrubs. You will tliere find the various methods and proper 
periods for grafting; the modes of raising, planting, and training 
all sorts of live hedges; the different ways of cultivating various 
kinds of shrubby plants, forest and fruit trees, by layers, suckers, 
cuttings, seeds, &c., a repetition of which, in this place, would only 
swell the book to no purpose. 

Let it, however, be observed, that the sowing of all kinds of tree 
and shrub seeds (except those that have had a year's previous pre- 
paration,) and also grafting, may successfully be practised in the 
middle states in the early part of this month, and in the eastern 
states till near the latter end thereof; and that the earlier in the 
month such can be done, provided the ground is in good condition, 
and the weather favourable, the better. Propagation by layers, 
suckers, and cuttings, may also be practised in the early part of 
this month, both in the middle and eastern states, and indeed in the 
latter, it is the most eligible season for the performance of that 
work. 

Transplanting. 

All hardy evergreen trees and shrubs, seedling and others, may 
be taken up and transplanted in the first week of this month, (ear- 
lier in the southern states, and not much later in the eastern,) with 
great certainty of success. 

Pines and firs of all kinds may now be removed. Likewise 
cedars, junipers, kalmias and rhododendrons; pyracanthas, hollies, 
evergreen oaks and yews; and also, alaternuses, phillyreas, arbor- 
vitaes and evergreen privet, with many others. 

The seedlings are to be planted as directed in March, the others 
as in page 301, and immediately after, they should have a good 
watering to settle the earth about their roots. Likewise, any de- 
ciduous shrubs and trees of the late shooting kinds may yet be trans- 
planted, if done early in the month. 

Care of new planted Trees and Shrubs. 

Water the new plantations of evergreens and flowering shrubs, 
&c., but in particular those which were' lately planted out from the 
seed-beds. Three times a week will be sufficient for these; and 
for those deciduous kinds that have been transplanted in autumn or 
early in spring, once a week will do; always observing, during this 
month, to give the water very early in the morning. 



April.] THE NURSERY. 339 

New Grafted Trees. 

Examine the new grafted trees, the claj is sometimes apt to fall 
off* or crack, so as to admit air and wet to the grafts. 

When that is the case, the old clay must be taken entirely oft", 
and immediately apply some more that is fresh and well wrought: 
let this be closed in every part, so that neither air nor wet can 
enter. 

Where there are any shoots produced from the stocks below the 
grafts, rub them oft" close; for these, if permitted to grow, would 
starve the young shoots: be careful also to eradicate all root suckers. 

Budded Trees. 

Budded trees should also be looked over about this time, for 
those that were worked last summer will now be making their first 
shoots, and therefore demand some attention. 

The first shoots from the inoculated buds are, in some seasons, 
apt to be attacked by insects or blights; and these, if not prevented, 
will injure them greatly, and sometimes entirely spoil them; but 
by timely attention, it may be, in a great measure, prevented: where 
the ends of the young shoots appear crumpled, and the leaves 
curled, let them be carefully taken off", for they are full of small 
insects. By this practice the vermin may be prevented from 
spreading farther. 

Likewise observe, that all shoots which put out from the stock, 
except the proper inserted bud, must be rubbed oft' constantly as 
they are produced, that its whole eftbrts may go to the support of 
the bud-shoots only. 

The Management of Seed-beds. 

Water occasionally the seed-beds of all kinds of trees and shrubs 
in dry weather: this must be practised both before and after the 
plants begin to appear. 

Observe at all times to water these beds with moderation; a 
little and often must be the rule. Likewise be very careful not to 
apply the water over hastily at any time, for that would be apt to 
wash the earth away from the seed, and also from the young plants 
now beginning to come up: be particularly careful as to the more 
tender and delicate sorts: generally let the refreshments of water 
be repeated moderately once every two days in warm dry weather, 
which will be of great service to all kinds of seedling plants. 

Shade will also prove very beneficial in the middle of hot sunny 
days, to many of the choice kinds of seedling-trees and shrubs, 
about the time of their first appearing, and for some time after. 

These young plants may be shaded from the sun occasionally, 
by fixing hoops across the beds, then let mats, canvass or the like, 
be drawn over the hoops as often as occasion requires. 

Where there are boxes, pots, or tubs of seedling plants, let them 
be placed in a shady situation, about the middle, or towards the 



340 THE NURSERY. [April. 

latter end of this month, where they may have the morning and 
afternoon sun only, carefully protecting them from its mid-day 
influence. 

All beds of seedling trees and shrubs whatever, must be kept 
perfectly clean from weeds. This should be carefully attended to, 
for the weeds are of much quicker growth than the young seedling 
plants, and would soon get the start of them if permitted to stand. 
Therefore, let such as soon as they appear in the beds be pricked 
out before they get to any great head, performing it by a very care- 
ful hand-weeding. 

Hoeing and IVeeding, 

Hoe and destroy weeds between the rows of young trees; they 
will now rise abundantly from seeds, but by applying the hoe to 
them while young, they may be very expeditiously destroyed. 
Choose dry weather, let the hoe be sharp, take advantage of the 
weeds while they are small, and cut them up clean within the 
ground. 

There is nothing like destroying weeds in due time, for when 
they are suffered to grow large, they are extremely hurtful to all 
young trees and shrubs, and in particular to those plants which are 
not far advanced in their growthj besides, if suffered to ripen and 
shed their seeds these lay the foundation of a world of trouble 
afterwards, which might be avoided by timely exertions and care. 

Grafting Hollies, fyc. 

Graft hollies with cuttings of the variegated kinds. The first 
fortnight in this month is the proper time to perform that work, in 
the middle states. 

The common green holly is the proper stock to graft the varie- 
gated kinds upon, and the stocks for this purpose must not be less 
than three or four years growth from the seed; but those of five or 
six answer perfectly well. 

Get some cuttings or grafts of the best variegated kinds; they 
must be shoots of the last summer's growth. Let them be grafted 
with exactness, according to the general method of whip-grafting. 
See page 252. 

Likewise graft any other curious varieties of trees, on stocks of 
their own kinds. 

But in most fruit trees and other deciduous kinds, where any 
grafting remains to be done, no time should be omitted in forward- 
ing it early in the month. 

Inarchingk • 

Inarching may be performed now on evergreens, and on any 
kinds of trees or shrubs that you desire to propagate that way. 
This method of grafting is principally intended for those kinds 



April,] FLOWER GARDEN. 341 

which are not easily raised by common grafting or budding, or by 
seeds, layers, or cuttings, or any of the other general methods. 

The evergreen kinds may be inarched towards the end of this 
month, but deciduous sorts generally succeed best when done about 
the middle of it. For the method see page 256. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Choice Hyacinths, 

The earlier sorts of hyacinths will begin to open and show colour 
in the beginning of this monthj it will be proper to screen the finer 
sorts from the too powerful effects of the sun, which, if not prevent- 
ed, would bleach and tarnish their colours, particularly the reds 
and deep blues, but if they are properly defended from it, their 
colours will be preserved, and they will, in some measure, be kept 
back so as to be in full bloom with the later sorts, especially if the 
roots of the early kinds have been planted about an inch deeper 
than the rest: it is a very desirable object in a grand display of this 
delightful flower to have a uniform bloom. 

It will be necessary to support the stems as they advance in 
height^ for this purpose small sticks or wires, painted green, should 
be forced into the ground immediately behind the bulbs, either in 
an erect position or leaning a little backwards, to which the stems 
are to be rather loosely tied with small pieces of green worsted as 
soon as they begin to bend, or are in danger of being borne down 
by the weight of their bellsj* this operation must be repeated as 
they advance in height, for it is impossible to do it at one time, 
so as to answer the purpose. When the greater part of the bed 
appears in colour, a covering or awning should be erected over it, 
and the walk to be in front: for the support of the awning, a strong 
frame of wood should be erected, ten feet high in the centre, and 
seven feet at each side, and covered with strong sheeting, which 
will keep out the rain and admit a tolerable degree of light; it 
should come down close to the bed on the north side, in order to 
preserve it from cold winds, which are prejudicial to the bloom. 

The covering ought to be so constructed by means of lines and 
puUies, as to be easily and expeditiously rolled up, or let down, as 
occasion requires, to afford the plants the full benefit of light and 
air at all favourable opportunities; that is to say, when the air is 
mild, and light clouds intervene, so as to blunt the sun's rays. 

A bed of hyacinths never require to be watered at any period; 
the rains that happen after planting, are generally more than suffi- 

* The Florist's usual name for the corolla of the hyacinth. 



342 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

cient both for the roots and bloom; and after the bloom is over, thej 
are rather prejudicial than otherwise, except when very moderate. 

Although covering in the manner described presents and exhibits 
the bloom to the greatest advantage, jet it evidently has a tendency 
to weaken and injure the bulbs, and ought not, therefore, to be con- 
tinued more than two or three weeks at most; but as soon as the 
general bloom declines, the bed should be immediately exposed to 
the open air, and the hoops replaced as before, that mats may be 
laid on occasionally for protecting the beds from heavy torrents 
of rain, which would prevent the bulbs from ripening well, and 
render them very subject to decay after having been taken up. 

The common hyacinths in open beds and borders, will require 
no other care at this time than to support their flower stems, as 
directed above, without which they will generally fall down, and 
much of their beauty be lost. 

A Description of the Properties of a Fine Double Hyacinth. 

The stem should be strong, tall, and erect, supporting numerous 
large bells, each suspended by a short and strong peduncle, or 
foot-stalk, in a horizontal position, so that the whole may have a 
compact pyramidal form with the crown, or uppermost bell, per- 
fectly erect. 

The bells should be large and very double; that is, well filled 
with broad bold petals, appearing to the eye rather convex than 
flat or hollow: they should occupy about one-half the length of the 
stem. 

The colours should be clear and bright, whether plain red, white^ 
or blue, or variously intermixed and diversified in the eye; the 
latter, it must be confessed, gives additional lustre and elegance to 
this beautiful flower. 

Strong bright colours are, in general, preferred to such as are 
pale; there are, however, many rose-coloured, pure white, and light 
blue hyacinths, in high estimation. 

Observations. Some sorts consist of petals of different colours, 
such as light reds, with deep red eyes; whites, with rosy, blue, 
purple, or yellow eyes; light blues, with deep blue or purple eyes; 
and yellow, with purple in the eye, &c. Others again have their 
petals striped or marked down the centre with a paler or deeper 
colour, which has a pleasing effect. 

It sometimes happens, and with some sorts more frequently than 
others, that two stems are produced from the same root, one is 
generally considerably taller than the other; when this is the case, 
the. weaker may be cut off near the ground soon after it makes its 
appearance or suffered to bloom, and its bells be intermixed with 
the lower ones of the taller stem, so dexterously as to appear like 
one regular pyramid of bells. 

Tulips. 

Towards the end of this month, some of your choice tulips will 
begin to show colour; they should, when the greater part of the 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 343 

blossoms begin to open, be shaded from the sun, in the same man- 
ner as directed for your elegant hyacinths; for, when its heat is 
considerable, it will cause the colours to run and intermix in such 
a manner as to destroy the elegance and beauty of the flowers; 
some sorts are more particularly liable to this than others, and will 
be spoiled in five minutes.' 

The awning should be always kept rolled up, or totally oft', ex- 
cept when the sun is powerful; for if kept too long, or too closely 
covered, the colours of the flowers would become faint and weak, 
and the grandeur of eftect would be lost or considerably lessened. 

Strong winds are extremely injurious to tulips when in flower, 
by dashing them against one another, and thereby bruising their 
petals, from the eft'ects of which they must be guarded by letting 
down tlie awning at such times quite to the ground on the windy 
side; a line of bass mats sewed together, and their upper edge 
nailed to the frame on that side, may answer the purpose, if the 
cloth is not of sufficient length. 

Tulips never require to be artificially watered in the hottest 
and driest seasons, at any period from planting to taking up the 
roots; nevertheless, moderate rains will be very beneficial to them 
in spring, and cause them to produce a strong bloom; after flower- 
ing, too much wet is very prejudicial to the roots. Immediately 
after the' flowers are on the decline, the bed must be fully exposed 
to the open air. 

Lines of small twine, painted green, should pass from one end 
of the bed to the other, corresponding with the rows of flowers, 
fastened at the ends and middle to nice painted stick's placed there- 
in for that purpose; to these the stems of the flowers are to be 
loosely tied with short pieces of green worsted, which will preserve 
a pleasing regularity of appearance, without stiffness and formality. 
The covering may be continued at the necessary intervals for three 
weeks with safety, but continuing it too long will injure them. 

When vacancies occur in the beds by the decay of some roots 
which might look awkward, you may immerse the lower end of the 
stems of flowers from other quarters, in phials filled with water, 
and sunk into the bed, so as not to appear above ground; these will 
continue in bloom, when shaded, for several days, and may be re- 
placed with others, which will fill those vacancies and make a tole- 
rable appearance. 

Common tulips will require no other care in the borders, &c. 
than keeping them free from weeds. 

A description of the properties of a fine Variegated Late Tulip. 

The stem should be strong, elastic and erect, and about thirty 
inches above the surface of the bed. 

The flower should be large and composed of six petals; these 
should proceed a little horiz,ontally at first, and then turn upwards, 
forming almost a perfect cup, with a round bottom, rather wider at 
the top. 

The three exterior petals should be somewhat larger than the 



344 "^HE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

three interior ones, and broader at their base: all the petals should 
have perfectly entire edges, free from notch or serrature; the top 
of each should be broad and well rounded; the* ground colour of 
the flower, at the bottom* of the cup, ought to be a clear white, or 
yellow; and the various rich coloured stripes which are the prin- 
cipal ornament of a fine tulip, should be regular, bold, and distinct 
on the margin, and terminate in fine broken points, elegantly 
feathered or pencilled. 

The centre of each leaf or petal should contain one or more bold 
blotches or stripes, intermixed with small portions of the original 
or breeder colour, abruptly broken into many irregular obtuse 
points. Some florists are of opinion that the central stripes, or 
blotches, do not contribute to the beauty and elegance of the tulip, 
unless confined to a narrow stripe exactly down the centre, and 
that they should be perfectly free from any remains of the original 
breeder colour: it is certain that such appear very beautiful and 
delicate, especially when they have a regular narrow feathering at 
the edge; but the greatest connoisseurs in this flower unanimously 
agree, that it denotes superiority when the tulip abounds with rich 
colouring, distributed in a distinct and regular manner throughout 
the flower, except in the bottom of the cup; which it cannot be 
disputed, should be clear, of a bright white or yellow, free from stain 
or tinge, in order to constitute what is considered a perfect flower. 

Tulips are divided into two classes, viz: early and late blowers. 
The late are infinitely the finest and most valuable, and are of course 
entitled to the principal attention of the curious. They are divided 
into six distinct families, or rather divisions of the same family, viz: 

1. Primo Baguets, which are tall; the colours, brown on white. 

2. Baguet Rigauts, these are not so tall; and have strong 
stems and large cups: the colours as before. 

3. Incomparable Verports. The characteristics of these are the 
form of the cups, which are very handsome; the colours a shining 
brown on white. 

4. Byhloemens. These have a white ground, with a variety of 
colours. 

5. Bizards. The colours of these are on a yellow ground, various, 
and consisting, in the whole, of three or more. 

6. The cherry and rose; the name denotes their colours, which 
are on a white ground. 

Breeders are self or plain coloured tulips, obtained by sowing 
the seed, which, in time, by being planted in a proper compost of 
lime rubbish and poor soil, accidentally break out into stripes and 
variegations, by which new varieties are annually obtained. 

I have been the more particular in my account of that glorious 
flower, the Tulipa gesneriana, or garden tulip, as it is now in more 
general estimation than any other flower whatever. 

Mr. Samuel Curtis, florist, of Walworth near London, had 
sent me last autumn, upwards of two hundred varieties of the most 
elegant sorts of tulips, and at the same time informed me that it 
is very common for him to receive from fifty to eighty pounds 



April] FLOWER GARDEN. 345 

sterling, for a single root of a new variety. Such is the present 
rage for tulips in England. 

For the most suitable soil, and best method of planting, see the 
Flower-garden for October. 

Ranunculuses. 

April showers, and frequent rains in May, are essentially neces- 
sary to the growth and vigour of ranunculuses: if these fail, soft 
water must be administered in sufficient quantities between the 
rows, by means of a common watering pot, with a long tube or 
spout held low, so as not to wash the earth into holes: for it is bet- 
ter to avoid watering the plants themselves, as it might chill them 
too much, and stagnate their juices. The consequences of omit- 
ting to water, when necessary, are these, viz: The plants will 
make little progress; the blossom buds of the strongest will be 
small, and the weaker plants will not bloom at all; the grass or 
foliage will put on a sickly yellowish appearance, from which it 
will not recover during the season; and lastly, the roots when taken 
up will be small and lean. 

But such kinds of watering, however necessary, are by no means 
so salutary to these, or any other flowers or plants, as fine warm, 
natural showers; as they can neither be so equally dispensed, nor 
are the plants naturally disposed to receive them when the atmo- 
sphere is dry; because their pores and fibres are contracted, and 
they are, as it were, in the expectancy of dry weather. 

Since it is evident that artificial waterings are, in all respects, so 
much inferior to natural, it is, therefore, better to wait a day or two, 
in hopes of a change of weather, than to be too hasty in affording 
these succours, although the plants may appear to suffer for the 
moment by the omission; for if such a change should fortunately 
take place, they will receive infinitely more benefit from it than 
when both themselves and the soil are already saturated or replen- 
ished with water, not so congenial to vegetation as that ordained 
by nature for the purpose. For their further treatment see the 
Flower- Garden in May. 

.Anemones. 

The beds of anemones, for the present, will require exactly the 
same treatment as the ranunculuses; therefore it is not necessary 
to say more in this place respecting them. 

Auriculas. 

The auriculas, towards the middle of this month, will be ad- 
vancing in their flower stems. If any plant is possessed of more 
than one or two principal stems, it is advisable to pinch off the 
pips or flower buds of the smallest and weakest, in order to render 
the blossoms of the remaining larger and more vigorous than they 
would be if this was omitted to be done in due time. 
2U 



346 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

When the pips become turgid, and begin to expand, they must 
be preserved from rain; nor should the early plants be suffered to 
remain in a situation exposed to cold winds; on the contrary, they 
ought to be selected from the rest, and removed to a shady corner, 
where they should have hand-glasses suspended over them, or 
placed on brick-bats or the like to admit air, and yet preserve the 
expanding bloom from rain. 

The farina or mealy dust which overspreads and ornaments the 
surface of those flowers, contributes exceedingly to their lustre 
and beauty; this must therefore be preserved upon them; the least 
shower of rain would easily wash it off; it is also liable to be blown 
away by the winds; and the sun,^ if permitted to shine freely on the 
flowers, would occasion them soon to fade. 

Therefore, where it is required to have the more curious or 
choice varieties to blow in the best perfection, the pots containing 
the plants should, according as the flowers begin to open, be imme- 
diately removed and placed on the shelves of the auricula stage or 
where the flowers may be protected occasionally from such wea- 
ther as would deface the bloom. The stand or stage should have 
from three to five ranges of shelves, in proportion to the number of 
pots, about six inches wide, rising theatre-like, one above another, 
iVom the front; having the back generally placed against a shady 
wall, pale, or other building; it must be constantly covered at top, 
water-tight, sloping to the back part; but the front and ends should 
only be covered occasionally by having some canvass or mats fas- 
tened thereto by way of curtain, so contrived that it may be readily 
let down and drawn up at pleasure; which, when the air is very 
sharp, or in high winds, or driving rains, must be let down to shel- 
ter the flowers; but vv^hen the weather is mild and calm, let the 
front and ends be constantly open. Or this may also be used 
occasionally to shade the flowers from the sun, where it has access 
in the heat of the day; observing, however, generally, not to let 
the screen remain longer than is necessary for the defence of the 
bloom. 

Regular waterings should be given during the time the plants 
are on the stage; examine them once every day to see where water 
is wanted, and let such pots as stand in need of that article be 
immediately supplied with it. In doing this sutler no water to fall 
on the flowers, for that would wash ofi"the afore-mentioned farina- 
ceous bloom, and greatly deface their beauty. 

The waterings should be moderate and frequent; for these 
plants being rather of a succulent nature cannot bear too much 
without material injury. 

Keep the surface of the pots perfectly neat, free from weeds and 
every sort of litter; suffer no decayed leaves to remain on the 
plants, but let such, as soon as they appear, be taken off'. 

By thus placing your auricula pots on a covered stage, it not 
only preserves the flowers much longer in beauty, but you also 
more readily view them, and they show themselves to much greater 
advantage than when placed on the ground. 

The shelves and back of the stage should be painted black, or of 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 347 

some dark colourj by way of contrast to the white eyes, &c. of the 
flowers^ and if a large looking-glass be placed at each end of the 
stage, the eflfect produced will be very pleasing, by apparently 
lengthening the stage each way as far as the eye can reach. 

A row of fine polyanthuses in pots may likewise be introduced 
on the auricula stagej it will add to the variety and form a pleasing 
contrast. 

The tallest flowering auriculas should stand on the most distant 
shelf, and the shortest in front; those stems which are weak and 
bend ought to be supported with small wires fixed in the earth 
behind them so as not to be easily discerned. If the root of the 
stage is covered with glass it will be an additional advantage to 
the plants. 

Ji description of the properties of a fine variegated Auricula. 

The stem should be strong, erect, and elastic, and of a proper 
height, that the bunch or truss of flowers may be above the foliage 
of the plant. 

The.peduncles or foot-stalks should also be strong and elastic, 
and of a proportional length to the size and quantity of the pips, 
which should not be less than seven in number, that the bunch may 
be rather round, close, and compact. 

The component parts of the pip, are the tube, with its stamens 
and anthers, the eye, and the exterior circle containing the 
ground colour, with its edge or margin; these three should be all 
well proportioned, which will be the case if the diameter of the 
tube be one part, the eye three, and the whole pip or flower six, or 
nearly so. 

All the admirers of this charming flower agree that the pips 
ought to be round; but this seldom happens, and we must be 
content if they are so nearly round as not to be what is called 
starry. 

The anthers or summits of the stamens ought to be large, bold, 
and fill the tube well, and the tube should terminate rather above 
the eye; the eye should be very white, smooth, and round, without 
any cracks, and distinct from the ground or self-colour. 

The ground colour should be bold and rich, and equal on every 
side of the eye, whether it be in one uniform circle, or in bright 
patches; it should be distinct at the eye, and only broken at the 
outward part, into the edging; a fine black purple, or coffee-colour, 
contrast best with the eye; a rich blue, or bright pink, is pleasing, 
but a glowing scarlet, or deep crimson, would be most desirable if 
well edged with a bright green, but this is very rare. 

The green edge or margin is the principal cause of the variegated 
appearance in the flower, and it should be in proportion to the 
ground colour, that is, about one half of each. 

The darker grounds are generally covered with a white powder, 
which constitutes much of the beauty of the flower. 



348 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

Compost for Auriculas. 

The compost proper for auriculas, should consist of the following 
ingredients in the annexed proportions, viz: 

One half rotten cow-dung, two years old. 

One sixth fresh sound earth of an open texture. 

One eighth earth of rotten leaves. 

One twelfth coarse sea or river sand. 

One twelfth nioory earth. 

One twenty-fourth ashes of burned vegetables. 
These ingredients should be well incorporated, and placed in an 
open situation, perfectly exposed to the action of the sun and airj 
it should be laid in a regular heap or mass from fifteen to eighteen 
inches thick and turned frequently: in this state it should remain 
a year or six months, turning it once every two months, and keep- 
ing it always free froin weeds: before it is used, it should be passed 
through a coarse screen .to free it from stones, &c. and to incorpo- 
rate it more effectually. 

New Potting Auriculas, and increasing them by Slips. 

The most adviseable time to transplant, or to slip auriculas, or 
as it is usually termed to pot them, is immediately, or very soon 
after their bloom is over; and this should be repeated annually, for 
it preserves the health and constitution of the plants, by affording 
them a fresh supply of nourishment, and affords an opportunity of 
curtailing the fibres if grown too long, or if any are decayed and 
mouldy; or of cutting off the lower part of the main root, if in a 
rotting or decayed state, which is frequently the case. By this 
treatment, the plants are brought into a state of action and fresh 
vegetation, which will cause a continued circulation of the juices 
during the summer. 

The pots should be hard baked, and for blooming plants ought 
to be seven inches in diameter at top, four and a half at bottom, and 
about seven deep; but smaller plants and offsets should have shal- 
lower pots, and of a proportionate size, and very large plants must 
have pots in proportion. These before being used, if new, shquld 
be immersed in water for five or six hours or more. 

In potting or transplanting auriculas, the plant ought to be care- 
fully turned out of the former pot, and the earth shaken from its 
fibres, which should be trimmed if found long and numerous, and 
also any part of the old main root that appears in a sickly or de- 
cayed state must be cut clean out, whether on the lower part, or 
side; and if near the leaves, a cement should be immediately ap- 
plied, consisting of bees wax and pitch, in equal quantities, melted 
together and laid on when soft, but not hot, to make it adhere more 
firmly. Place a hollow oyster shell, or the like, over the hole in 
the bottom of each pot, with the convex side upwards, and then 
more than half fill it with the compost; let it be higher in the mid- 
dle than at the sides: the plant is next to be placed thereon, with 
its fibres regularly distributed all around, and the pot filled up, 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 349 

adding a little coarse sand, close around the stem of the plant, on 
the surface; the bottom of the pot should then be gently struck two 
or three times against the ground, in order to close the earth about 
the roots, this will cause it to sink half an inch below the top of 
the pot, which will prevent the loss of water when administered. 

N. B. The true depth to plant an auricula is within about half 
an inch of the bottom of its lowest or outside leaves. 

Any offsets that have formed one or more fibres, of an inch or 
two in length, may be slipped otf the old plant, and replanted around 
the sides of large pots, or singly in small ones, filled with the same 
compost; and if hand-glasses are placed over them, such will cause 
their fibres to grow more rapidly; but they ought not to be long 
continued on, lest the plants should be drawn and weakened 
thereby. 

After potting, give each plant a little water, and place the pots 
in a shaded situation, where they may have the morning sun till 
ten o'clock, and the afternoon from four or five, but by no means 
under the drip of trees; there they are to remain till October, 
taking care to keep them regularly watered, and free from weeds. 
The pots may, or may not, be plunged in the earth, but in the lat- 
ter case they will require more attendance. 

Care of Seedling Auriculas. 

Seedling auriculas which were sown last autumn or this spring, 
now demand attention; these plants when newly come up, or while 
quite young, must be carefully protected from the full sun in the 
heat of the day, and frequently refreshed with water. 

The boxes or tubs in which they are growing should be removed 
to a shady border, toward the latter end of this month, or beginning 
of next: the place should be open to the morning sun till about nine 
o'clock, but shaded the rest of the day, and the plants watered 
frequently in dry weather. As soon as any of them appear with six 
leaves such should be carefully taken out from the rest, and planted 
in pots or boxes filled with compost, about two inches asunder; 
and if grown by the beginning of August, so large as to touch each 
other, they may then be transplanted into separate small pots, to 
remain all winter. 

Polyanthuses. 

Polyanthuses blow at the same time, and the fine kinds require 
nearly the same treatment as auriculas, both with respect to soil 
and situation; they are, like the latter, very impatient of heat and 
drought, and agree with a much greater portion of moisture; they 
are fond of shade, and will not succeed well when exposed to our 
summer heats, in a warm situation; at least so as to blow, even in 
tolerable perfection, the ensuing season. 

The fine kinds may be grown in the same sized pots and in the 
same compost as auriculas, with the addition of more loam; and 
the common or more indifterent sorts may be planted in cool shady 



350 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

beds or borders, being tolerably hardy, and having more to fear 
from the summer heats than the winter frosts. 

Their propagation is by slips and seed, at the same time and in 
the same manner as directed for auriculas. 

Ji Description of the Properties of a fine Polyanthus. 

Its properties are, in most respects, similar to those of a fine 
auricula; that is, the stem, peduncles, or foot-stalks, and formation 
of the bunch or truss; therefore, a description of its pips or corol- 
las only remains to be given in this place. 

The tube of the corolla above the calyx should be short, well 
filled with the anthers or summits of the stamens, and terminate 
fluted rather above the eye. 

The eye should be round, of a bright clear yellow, and distinct 
from the ground colour; the proportion as in the auricula throughout 
the flower. 

The ground colour is most admired when shaded with a light 
and dark rich crimson, resembling velvet, with one mark or stripe 
in the centre of each division of the rim, bold and distinct from the 
edging down to the eye, where it should terminate in a fine point. 

The pips should be large, quite flat, and as round as may be 
consistent with their beautiful figure, which is circular, excepting 
those small indentures between each division of the rim which 
divide it into several heart-like segments. 

The edging should resemble a bright gold lace, bold, clear, and 
distinct, and so nearly of the same colour of the eye and stripes as 
scarcely to be distinguished; in short, the polyanthus should pos- 
sess a graceful elegance of form, a richness of colouring and sym- 
metry of parts not to be found united in any other flower. 

Fine double primroses are cultivated by offsets in the same way 
and at the same time as polyanthuses, and require similar care and 
management in pots; they are somewhat more tender, and conse- 
quently must be treated accordingly. 

Carnations. 

If you have omitted the potting or transplanting of carnations 
last month where necessary, let it be done in this, as early as pos- 
sible, agreeably to the rules laid down in page 296. 

Keep the pots perfectly free from weeds, and the plants from 
decayed leaves, and let the earth on the surface be stirred if it 
binds hard, for this will encourage the plants to shoot, and will 
also give an air of neatness. Water the pots in warm weather, for 
they will require a little every second day, or oftener, if the season 
proves dry, which should not be omitted, otherwise the plants will 
shoot weakly, and produce but slender flower-stalks. 

When the flower-stalks have advanced, let them be supported as 
directed in May. 

Carnations may yet be finally planted into the borders or beds 
where intended to flower, but that should be done in the beginning 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 35][ 

of the month, removing them with balls, and watering them as soon 
as planted. 

Management of Pots of Perennial Plants in general. 

Give fresh earth to such pots of perennial plants as were not 
dressed and new earthed in March. For the method of doing 
which, see page 298. 

The plants will receive great benefit from this dressing; and 
where it was not done in that month, it should not be put oft* longer 
than the beginning of this. 

If you have plants of any kind in small pots that require to be 
shifted into larger, it may be performed early in the month; in 
doing of which, turn each plant out of the former pot with the ball 
of earth entire; trim the outside roots and pare away some of the 
old earth; having fresh mould or compost, replant it into a larger 
pot, filling the deficiency with new earth, and give some water 
immediately. 

Be very particular in dry weather to supply all your plants with 
a sufficiency of water; this is a material article and should not be 
omitted. Water should be always given as often as the earth 
begins to appear dry in the pots, as there is no other general rule 
by which it can be administered. 

Pinks. 

Pinks may yet be transplanted, slipped, and managed as directed 
in March, page 300 — but it will be necessary to do this as early in 
the month as possible. 

Tender dnnuals. 

Such tender annuals as you have in an advanced state are to be 
managed as directed in page 299; always observing to give them 
more and more air, in proportion to the increasing heat of the wea- 
ther, and shade to the young and weakly plants fi-om the mid-day 
sun, when too powerful. As they advance in growth, it will be 
necessary to raise the frames, in order to give them full liberty to 
shoot, closing the vacancy below if thought necessary. 

But where there is the convenience either of drawing frame or 
glass-case, for the purpose of drawing the tall growing tri-colours 
and other curious annual plants, it may be eft'ected to greater 
advantage. 

The drawing frame is either composed of two, three, or more dif- 
ferent frames, all of the same length and breadth, and each about 
nine or ten inches deep, except the upper glass-frame, which should 
be ten inches deep in front, and eighteen at the back; being all of 
equal dimensions in width and length, made in a very exact man- 
ner, to fit one on the top of another, appearing as but one frame 
when thus joined, and are to be made use of in the following manner: 

Begin first with the deepest frame; then, when the plants have 



352 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

reached the glasses, let the said frame be taken up, and in its place 
set one of the others, and immediately fix the deepest frame upon 
that, as above; and then, when they have filled that space, let an- 
other frame be added, observing, as above, to let the deepest or 
sloping frame be always placed uppermost in order to receive the 
glasses. 

The glass-cases for this purpose are generally made about six, 
seven, or eight feet wide, and as long as may be convenient; the 
height should be five or six feet in front, and seven or eight in the 
back. 

The front ought to be of glass-sashes, perfectly upright, and facing 
the south; the back may be either of wood or brick, and both ends 
of the same materials, but if of glass, the better; and the top must 
also be of glass-sashes, sloping from the back to the front. 

Within this, a hot-bed is to be made, for which a pit must be 
formed nearly the whole length, raised by brick-work or planking 
above the floor, having the whole about two feet and a half deep, 
and from four to five or six feet wide: this is to be filled with hot 
dung or tanner's bark, carrying it up a few inches higher than the 
top of the pit to allow for settling; and if a dung-bed, lay earth or 
tan-bark at top five or six inches thick. 

The pots are to be placed upon this, plunging them to their rims 
in earth, as before mentioned; but if the bed be made of tan, plunge 
them therein, having no occasion for earth upon such beds. 

In this frame or glass-case, let the plants have fresh air daily, 
and give sufficient supplies of water, and towards the latter end of 
May they will be advanced to a large size and may be removed in 
their pots into any principal compartment in the pleasure-ground, 
&c., or placed among the green-house plants. 

When tender or curious annuals have been omitted to be sown 
in the former months, a slight hot-bed may be made for them in the 
beginning of this, to forward them as much as possible. The seeds 
are to be sown as directed in page 161. 

^Sowing annual Flower Seeds. 

All the varieties of annual flower-seeds that are capable of bear- 
ing the open air and of arriving at perfection in our climates, may 
now be sown with good success. In the early part of the month, 
you may sow the following kinds with many others too tedious to 
mention in this place, viz: alkekengi, China asters, in sorts, Mol- 
davian-baum, belvidere or summer cypress, candy-tuft in sorts, 
LobePs-catchfly, cyanus in sorts, flos-adonis, bladder-ketmia, 
heart's-ease, convolvulus tricolor, larkspurs in sorts, lavatera in 
sorts, and lupins of every kind; dwarf lychnis, curled, oriental, 
and Peruvian mallows, nigellas, roma nettle, sweet, Tangier, and 
winged peas, annual and ten-week stocks, strawberry, spinage, 
persicaria, sunflower, and Venus's looking-glass; snails, horns, 
hedge-hogs, caterpillars and horse-shoes; Venus's navelwort, pur- 
ple and yellow hawkweed; Cassia chamsechrista, polygala san- 
guinea and silene in sorts, &c. &c. About the middle of the month 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 353 

you may sow sweet alyson, love lies bleeding, prince's feathers, 
mignonette, tree and spike amaranthus; cock's-combs, cape mari- 
gold, bastard sattron, and iioney-wort; sweet sultan, China-holly- 
hock, and China pinks; marvel of Peru, nolana, palma christi, 
annual snapdragon, zennia and xeranthetnum, &c.,and in the last 
ten days of the month, you may sow either of the preceding, and 
also the following kinds, viz: white, purple, and striped globe ama- 
ranthus, tricolor amaranthus, double balsams and martynia annua; 
browallia, scarlet ipomcea, capsicums in sorts, serpent cucumber 
and squirting cucumber, white and purple egg-plant; cleome, pur- 
ple, white, and dwarf dolichos, with many other kinds. The whole 
of the preceding sorts may be sown in small patches in the borders, 
interspersing the kinds, so as to form a well assorted variety and 
a long succession of bloom. If to be sown in patches, observe the 
directions given for sowing hardy annual floioer seeds, in page 158, 
&c. which will now be perfectly applicable to these. Such as you 
wish to sow in small beds for transplanting, let them be sown as 
directed for perennial and biennial flower seeds, in page 354, ob- 
serving always, to give each kind a depth of covering in proportion 
to the size of the seed. 

Let the beds or patches be frequently watered in dry weather, 
both before and after the plants appear; and when they have been 
up a few weeks, let all the large growing kinds be thinned where 
they have risen too thick; observing to transplant into other places 
where wanted, some of the best you pull up of the kinds that suc- 
ceed in that way: thin the others as directed in May, &c. 

Any of the smaller growing kinds, such as mignonette, ten-week 
stock, browallia, sensitive plant, ice plant, &c., may be sown in 
pots, and if duly watered and kept clean, will arrive at good per- 
fection; but the two last will require the protection of glasses for 
some time. 

Solving Carnation and Pink Seeds. 

Carnation and pink seeds may be sown any time this month. 
As it is from seed that all new varieties are obtained, you should 
sow some every year; and if you have but one good variety from 
each sowing, there can be no reason to complain, as this may after- 
wards be abundantly propagated by layers or slips. The fine 
double kinds seldom ripen seed, but semi-doubles do very plenti- 
fully: from the seeds of the latter, especially when growing near 
the finest varieties, you may expect some good, and, perhaps, valu- 
able flowers. For this purpose prepare a small bed of good rich 
ground, sow the seeds on the surface tolerably thick, each sort 
separate, and sift over them about a quarter of an inch of fine light 
earth. If the weather should prove dry, water the beds occasion- 
ally, the plants will soon rise, after which, it will be necessary to 
keep them free from weeds, and refresh them now and then with 
a little water. For their further management, see the work of the 
following months. 
2 V 



354 " THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

Sowing Perennial and Biennial Flower Seeds. 

You may now with good success, sow the seeds of most kinds 
of perennial and biennial fibrous rooted flowers, that prosper in the 
open ground, such as those mentioned last month, in page 300, 
together with monk's-hood, nettle leaved campanala, lobelias, 
phloxes, double soapwort, sneezewort, goat's-rue, and red garden 
valerian; crimson monarda, Chinese ixia, verbascums, night-smell- 
ing rocket, and aletris or star-root; asclepiases, of various sorts; 
calceolarias, Maryland cassia, cUnopodiums and coreopsises; dra- 
cocephalums, galega virginica, gerardias, cucubalis, hedysarums 
and huecheras; hibiscuses, liatrises, Oenotheras and podalyrias; 
penstemons rudbeckias, saxifragas, and silphiums; solidagoes, 
spigelias, spirseas, chelone, trilliums and veronicas, with many 
other kinds. 

These seeds may either be sown on borders, or on three or four 
feet wide beds of rich earth, and covered evenly with fine light 
earth; the largest not more than from half to three quarters of an 
inch deep, and the smallest from an eighth to a quarter of an inch. 

But in sowing these or any other kinds, you may draw shallow 
drills, proportioning the depth to the size of the seeds, and sow 
them therein, drawing the earth lightly over them, observing that 
it is much better to cover too light than too deep, for if covered 
shallow they will vegetate when moist weather ensues, but if over- 
ly deep, never. Or you may practise -the following method: first 
rake the surface of the bed smooth, and with the back of a rake, or 
a common trowel, draw or push oft' the fine top mould, either into 
the alleys, or the divisions intended to be left between each kind, 
and to a depth in proportion to the size of the seed intended to be 
sown in each space, then sow it on the surface, and cast the drawn 
oif earth evenly over it, after which, pick or rake away the lumps 
with a fine rake, and pat the surface lightly and smooth with the 
back of the trowel. 

Should dry weather ensue, it will be necessary to sprinkle the 
beds frequently with water, both before and after the plants appear, 
and to be very particular in keeping them free from weeds. Some 
of the more delicate kinds when up, may not be able to bear the 
midday sun whilst young, and will consequently appear in a de- 
clining state; these must be shaded and protected from its influence 
by occasional coverings of mats, until they have established their 
roots, and obtained sutiicient strength to withstand its force. 

Planting and Propagating Perennial Flowering Plants. 

In the early part of this month you may continue to remove and 
transplant most sorts of fibrous and tuberous rooted perennial flow- 
ering pl?jits, and to slip and increase many of them by offsets. 
The following, together with those mentioned in page 300, may 
yet be removed with good success, that is, such of them as have 
not previously begun to shoot flower stems, viz., dracocephalums 
of various kinds, but particularly the virginicum and dentatum. 



April] FLOWER GARDEN. 355 

which are very beautiful; penstemons, podalyrias, gentianas of 
sorts, hibiscuses in great varieties, cjpripedums and phloxes, 
monardas, coreopsises, sisyrinchiums and gerardias, aletrises, aco- 
nites, ranunculus, aconitifolius, dictaranuses and dodecatheon 
meadia, galega virginica, hedysarums, hemerocallises, napaea, 
paeonia, saponaria, silphiums and rhexias, with many others. A 
great number of the above kinds may now be taken up out of the 
woods and fields, and transplanted into the flower-borders and. 
pleasure-grounds, which will keep up a regular succession of bloom, 
during the whole summer and autumn. 

Let the plants be taken up carefully with balls of earth about 
their roots, and planted where necessary; then water them, and 
repeat it in dry weather, till they begin to grow freely: they will 
flower generally the same year, and those that are truly perennial 
will continue to reward your labours annually with a new display 
of their beauty as long as you deserve that compliment, by render- 
ing them a fostering care. 

Here again would I call attention to the necessity of introducing 
into our gardens and pleasure-grounds, a variety of our beautiful 
field flowers, and not to suffer those departments to appear deso- 
lated in the autumnal months, whilst nature displays a profusion of 
its glory in the fields, woods, meadows and swamps; but in doing 
this, let it be observed to give each kind a soil and situation as 
nearly similar to that in which it grew in its wild state as the 
nature and extent of your ground will admit. See page 78 and 79. 

Note. In page 62, &c. you will find general designs, both ancient 
and modern, for laying out pleasure-grounds, flower gardens, and 
all kinds of ornamental planting, to which I refer you. 

Double Daisies. 

Double daisies may now be propagated abundantly by dividing 
and slipping the roots; but these should be planted in shady borders, 
or rather in shallow frames, where they can be protected from the 
too powerful influence of the summer sun, which would absolutely 
destroy them if left to its mercy. These frames will also be con- 
venient for the laying of boards and mats over them, for the winter 
protection of the plants, without which most of them would perish. 
They may be either planted in small pots sunk in the earth, or in 
rows in the beds, ten inches asunder, and plant from plant six 
inches distant in the row. Water them immediately and give them 
shade for a few days. 

Planting deciduous Flowering and Ornamental Shrubs. 

Such deciduous kinds of trees and shrubs as are yet to be re- 
moved, should be transplanted in the first week or ten days of the 
month in the middle states, and not delayed longer in the eastern 
states than the fifteenth. For the various kinds and methods of 
planting them, see page 301. 



356 THE PLEASURE, OR [April 

Propagating Floioering Shrubs and Evergreens, 

For the methods of propagating all kinds of hardj flowering 
shrubs and evergreens, see the Nursery in March; and also the 
work of the Nursery in this month, June and July, &c. 

Planting Evergreens. 

Every kind of hardy evergreen trees and shrubs maybe removed 
in the beginning of this month, with the best possible success; but 
the earlier the better. See page 338. 

Neither the English broad-leaved laurel, Portugal laurel, sweet 
bay, laurustinus, arbutus or strawberry tree, nor the evergreen 
cypress can withstand the severity of the winter frosts in the mid- 
dle or eastern states, with very few exceptions, in the former; and, 
therefore, must in these places be treated as green-house plants. 
In most parts of the southern states they succeed extremely well; 
but all kinds of trees and shrubs will there require to be planted 
much earlier in the season. 

In transplanting large evergreens, if the plants can be conve- 
niently taken up, and brought with balls of earth about their roots, 
it should be done, placing them in the holes with the balls entire; 
or previously pour some water into each hole, and with your spade 
let it and the earth be worked up together, then plant the roots in 
the pap, and fill the earth in about them, tread it down gently 
around the stem, and form it in a little hollow at top, in order to 
retain about the roots any water that may afterwards be given when 
necessary. 

Such as are not treated in this way must have a plentiful water- 
ing immediately after being planted, to settle and close the earth 
about the roots; and if some mulch is laid on the surface around 
each plant it will be very serviceable in preventing the sun and 
wind from drying the earth too fast. 

Stakes should be immediately placed to such as require them, 
firmly fixed in the ground, and the plants tied thereto. 

Planting Roses. 

Roses of every sort may still be planted with great success. Kut 
for some remarks worthy of attention, see that article in page 303. 

Planting Edgings. 

There is no plant that makes so neat and permanent an edging 
as box; it may be planted, for that purpose, in the first week of this 
month, but if slips or cuttings are to be used, they will require very 
frequent waterings till they tlirow out and establish fibres or young 
roots. Rooted plants, however, or slips with the roots attached to 
them, will succeed well in the early part of the month, if watered 
occasionally. For the method of planting and forming box edgings, 
see page 303. 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 357 

Thyme, hysop, winter savory and lavender, are sometimes 
planted for edgings; but these grow rather out of compass, or get 
stubby and naked by close clipping. 

Pinks may likewise be occasionally planted for edgings; and 
will grow in tolerably close order for a year or two, and produce 
abundance of flowers. 

Thrift, if neatly planted, makes handsome edgings to borders, or 
flower-beds, both in its evergreen property and as a pretty flower- 
ing plant in summer. This may be planted either in a close edg- 
ing as directed for box, or with a dibble, setting the plants near 
enough to touch one another, so as at once to form a tolerable close 
row, or, however, not above two or three inches apart, giving occa- 
sional waterings for a week or two if necessary. 

London-pride, that is the Saxifraga umbrosa, will make a very 
neat edging, and is to be planted as directed for thrift. 

Double daisies are made use of in many parts of Europe for edg- 
ings, and form very neat ones, but they are not able to bear the 
heat of our summers, which seldom fail to destroy them, when fully 
exposed thereto; nor can they survive, without some slight protec- 
tion, the severe winters of the middle and eastern states. 

Any of our Sisyrinchiums, but particularly the mucronatum, will 
make beautiful edgings; they keep blowing a long time, look very 
gay, and may now be propagated by parting their roots, and plant- 
ing them as directed for thrift. They are indigenous, and bear our 
summers and winters well. 

Strawberries may be occasionally used to make edgings for large 
walks, and answer the double purpose of pleasure and profit. 

Where box-edgings want trimming, it should now be done, 
although this is not the general season for clipping them; but not- 
withstanding, when they appear in need of it, let them be hand- 
somely dressed with a pair of garden shears, which will add much 
to their neatness. 

The sisyrinchium will bear trimming extremely well, and con- 
tinue to produce flower-stems and flowers, notwithstanding. 

Where any of the above edgings have, for want of care, grown 
into rude disorder, they should be taken up, slipped, or divided, 
and replanted in a close regular manner. 

Tuberoses. 

The Polianthes tuberosa, or tuberose. It is said that this beau- 
tiful flower was first brought into Europe from the East Indies by 
Father Theophilus Minuti, and to have been cultivated by him at 
Boisgencier, near Toulon, in France, about the year 1590. The 
double flowering variety was obtained from the seed, by Monsieur 
Le Cour, of Leyden, in Holland; who, for many years, was so 
tenacious of the roots, even after he had propagated them in such 
plenty as to have more than he could plant, that he caused them 
to be cut in pieces, to have the vanity of boasting that he was the 
only person in Europe that possessed this flower. It appears from 



358 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

Evelyn's Kalendar, that it was cultivated in England in 1664, 
from whence, no doubt, it was imported into America. 

To have this fragrant flower in tolerable early perfection, you 
may about the first of this month, or any time in March, plant a 
few roots in pots of light rich mould, one in each, first stripping 
off the offsets, for if these are left on, they will draw away a con- 
siderable part of the nourishment, whereby the bloom will be greatly 
weakened. The upper part of the roots, when planted in pots, 
should only be covered about a quarter of an inch deep: imme- 
diately plunge the pots to their rims in a hot-bed, and give but 
very little water, if any, until the plants are up and growing freely, 
but afterwards they will require a good supply. As the weather 
gets warm, give them plenty of air, and also sufiicient head-room, 
till the middle of May, then place them where designed to flower, 
first tying the advancing stems to small green painted sticks to 
prevent their being dashed about by the winds. 

The time for planting these roots in the open ground is, in the 
southern states, between the first and twentieth of this month, the 
more northerly, the later; in the middle states, the last week in 
April, or first ten days of May; and in the eastern states, between 
the fifteenth and twentieth of May. 

Prepare for them beds of rich sandy loam, which, being well 
trenched or dug, divest the roots of all the larger offsets, or of the 
whole, if the flowers are the exclusive objects, and plant them in 
rows one foot asunder and eight inches distant from one another 
therein, making small drills for their reception, and covering their 
crowns or upper parts about an inch or an inch and a half deep, 
with fine loose earth; they will require no further care but to keep 
them free from weeds, and to support their flower stems till Novem- 
ber, when the roots are to be taken up and managed as then direct- 
ed, except to cut off the stems after the bloom is over. The offsets 
are to be planted in like manner, but somewhat closer, to produce 
blowing roots for the ensuing season, as the old ones seldom flower 
well the second year, though they will increase abundantly. 

Scarlet Amaryllis. 

The Amaryllis formo sis sima, scarlet amaryllis, or jacobsea lily, 
is a flower of extraordinary beauty. The flower-stems are frequent- 
ly produced towards the sides of the bulbs, generally not more than 
two, which rise successively, so that after the flower produced on 
one is decayed, another stalk arises nearly opposite to succeed it; 
but there is usually not more than one flower on the same stalk. 
The flowers are large, and of a very deep red; the under petals 
hang down, the upper curl up, and the whole flower stands nodding 
on one side of the stalk, making a mo^t beautiful and grand ap- 
pearance. Sometimes, but rarely, two flowers proceed from the 
same spathe. It is a native of South America. 

Its management and season of planting, is in every particular the 
same as directed for the tuberose: it flowers generally in about a 
month after its being planted, and its bulbs do not ripen sufliciently 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 359 

for taking up before November. It is increased by offsets from the 
roots, which are to be treated as those of the tuberose. In order 
to have a succession of the flowers, you may in the middle states 
plant some of their roots in the open ground, once a week, from the 
twentieth of April to the middle of June. And if the roots are 
strong and are preserved in saw dust or the like, they will keep 
good and blow well, even when planted at that late period. How- 
ever, the roots will not be so strong the ensuing season, nor the 
increase so numerous, as if they had been planted in due time. 

These can be made to flower during any of the winter months, 
by planting some of the strongest bulbs, which were taken up in 
November and kept dry till the time of planting, in pots of light 
good earth, and plunging them into the bark-pit in the hot-house, 
or into a good hot-bed: in a month or five weeks after, or sooner, 
if the heat be regular and brisk, they will produce their very ad- 
mirable flowers. 

Geraniums, Myrtles, Balm of Gilead, ^c. 

For the methods of cultivating the above, and other green-house 
plants, see the article green-house, in this month, and in March. 

Gravel fValks. 

New gravel walks may be made any time this month j in the making 
of which, be very particular in the choice of good and suitable 
gravel; as to colour, you must be governed by fancy and conve- 
nience, but as to quality, it should be coarse and lively, containing 
a due proportion of light sandy loam, to make it bind close and 
firm at all seasons; but not so redundant in loam or clay, as to stick 
to the feet in wet weather, nor so sandy, as to become open and 
loose in dry weather. As to the dimensions and distribution of 
gravel walks, see page 67, &c. Agreeably to the designs there 
laid down, or to any other fancy of your own, stake out the width 
of the walk, and proceed to level the boundary on each side, cor- 
responding to the adjacent ground, and form the cavity of the walk 
for the reception of the gravel, observing that the whole space to 
make a permanent and good walk, should be dug ten or twelve 
inches deep, to allow for a proper depth of gravel, both to prevent 
weeds rising from the ground below, and worms from casting up 
the earth therefrom; and also to allow a proper depth for turning 
the gravel occasionally, when the surface becomes foul: the earth 
dug out from the cavity of the walk, may be used to raise and level 
any hollow parts on each side, or contiguously situated, which, 
with the edgings, if of box, should always be completed before you 
begin to lay the gravel. 

The walks being thus laid out, you may first lay any stony rub- 
bish, such as brick-bats, small stones, &c. for several inches deep 
in the bottom, which will greatly obstruct worm-casts, drain off 
any extra moisture, and thereby prevent the surface from becoming 
mossy or foul: the proper gravel is then to be laid on six or eight 



360 THE PLEASURE, OR [April. 

inches thick; and as you proceed in laying, observe to rake off the 
coarse parts into the bottom and to raise the middle of the walk 
higher than the sides in a gradual rounding form, just as much and 
no more as is sufficient to carry ott' the wet to each side. The 
proportion to be observed is, a walk of four feet wide should be 
one inch and a half higher in the middle than at the sides, and for 
every foot after that such increases in width, add to this a quarter 
of an inch for the centre elevation. Rounding the walk too much 
would make it very uneasy to walk on, and of an unpleasing 
appearance. Never lay more in one day than you can finish off 
and roll effectually. 

Gravel-walks should now, if not done in March, be broken up 
and turned; for such turnings will not only destroy weeds and 
moss, but will render them much more agreeable to walk on; 
besides, the fresh and lively surface will be sightly and pleasing. 

Before you begin to turn the gravel, the edges of the walks, if of 
grass, should be first neatly dressed with an edging iron, such as 
described in page 77; or, if planted with box, they ought to be hand - 
somely trimmed with garden shears; any borders near the walks 
should be neatly dug, and the surface raked smooth; for when the 
edges and borders are put in proper order they add much to the 
general neatness. Proceed then to dig the walk five or six inches 
deep, or whatever depth the fine gravel will admit of, turning the 
surface clean to the bottom, and the fresh gravel below to the top, 
rounding and dressing the walk neatly after you, and rolling the 
whole effectually when done. 

In turning or laying down gravel-walks, always choose dry wea- 
ther, and let the work be done in the most complete order, as these 
contribute very materially to the beauty of the whole garden. 

Roll the walks once a week regularly after being either turned 
or new laid; such will render them firm and neat, and also greatly 
prevent the growth of weeds. It is a general rule among neat 
gardeners, who are allowed sufficient help, to roll and sweep the 
gravel-walks every Saturday. During the summer it is of much 
advantage to give a good rolling after rain, which will preserve a 
compact smooth surface. 

Grass-walks and Lawns. 

Grass-walks and lawns may yet be laid in the middle and eastern 
states, if done in the beginning of this month; but if delayed till 
the weather becomes dry, it will scorch the turf and render the 
surface disagreeable. For the method of laying and making them, 
see page 305. 

The grass-walks and lawns should be well rolled in the early 
part of the month; and afterwards, as the grass advances in growth, 
it should be mowed as often as the scythe can lay hold of it, for 
this is a season in which most people delight to walk out; conse- 
quently the walks ought to be kept in good order. Besides, were 
this neglected in spring, the grass would become coarse and rank, 
and be some time before it could be restored to its proper texture. 



April.] FLOWER GARDEN. 361 

Always mow this short grass when wet either by dew or rain, 
otherwise it will be impossible to cut it close or even. For the 
general care of grass-walks and lawns see page 76. 

The edges of all your lawns and grass-walks should now be 
neatly cut with an edging iron, if omitted in last month; but this 
should be particularly done to those edgings next to gravel -walks 
always before the gravel is turned or newly laid on, and afterwards 
occasionally. 

Sticking and trimming Flower Plants. 

Examine all the beds and borders, and place convenient sticks to 
such advancing plants as require support; tying them neatly 
thereto, which should be repeated occasionally as they progress in 
growth. Let them be made or cut in proportion to the usual height 
of each respective kind, for it is awkward to see a tall stick set for 
the support of a plant of humble growth. 

Weeds. 

Weeds of every kind, both from roots and seeds, will now make 
rapid progress; particular care must be taken to keep the beds and 
borders free from them, as on this, in a great measure, depends 
much of your success and the beauty of your improvements. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Giving Air to the Plants. 

Many of the green-house plants will now begin to shoot freely, 
therefore it will be necessary to give as much air as possible, con- 
sistent with their safety. Open the windows every morning when 
the weather is mild and calm, and let them continue so till the cold 
of the afternoon begins to increase, provided that the air continues 
moderately warm all the time. Too much confinement at this 
season, especially towards the end of the month, when the heat of 
the weather increases, would do infinite injury to the plants in 
general, but especially to the early shooting kinds; for if drawn up 
weakly in the house, they would not be in so good a condition to 
bear a removal into the open air in the early part of next month, 
as if their vegetation had been retarded by the admission of a due 
and salutary circulation of air in the house at all favourable oppor- 
tunities. 

fVatering. 

The plants will now require frequent waterings, giving only a 
little at a time; but especially the oranges, lemons, myrtles, olean- 
2X 



362 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Afhil. 

ders, African heaths, jasmins, coronillas, justicias, arbutus, laurus- 
tinus, and most of the woody kinds: and also the herbaceous green- 
house exotics will require to be occasionally refreshed with mode- 
rate waterings. 

Let all of the plants, in general, be often looked over, to see 
where water is wanted, and let such as need it be supplied there- 
with according to their respective necessities, for it is now an in- 
dispensable article. But moderation and discretion ought to be 
observed in the dispensing of it, especially while the plants are in 
the house, and particularly to the succulent tribe. The latter, 
such as aloes, agaves, euphorbias, cactuses, crassulas, stapelias, 
mesembryanthemums, &c. being naturally replete with moisture, 
do not require much water; to those and other plants of the same 
nature, it should be given only when the earth in the pots appears 
very dry, as too much would rot them. 

Shifting Plants into larger Pots and Tubs. 

Such of your plants as require to be shifted into larger pots or 
tubs may now be brought out in a mild warm day, and taken out of 
the pots or tubs in which they have stood, with the balls of earth 
entire about their roots; then cut away such roots on the outside 
as are matted or appear dry or decayed, and also some of the earth 
around the ball.' 

Having good sound fresh earth in readiness, put some into each 
new pot or tub, previously placing a hollow oyster shell or such 
like, with the concave side under, over each hole in the bottoms; 
then set each plant, with its ball of earth prepared and dressed as 
above, into the middle of the pot or tub, and fill it up with fresh 
compost, so as that the new earth may cover the crowns of the roots 
an inch deeper than before. 

According as the plants are thus potted, let them be immediately 
vi^atered and returned to their places in the green -house, adminis- 
tering the water occasionally afterwards, as their respective neces- 
sities may require. 

Fresh Earthing the Plants. 

Such of the plants as do not require shifting into larger pots, 
&c. should be refreshed with new earth, as directed in page 308; 
after which, give them a moderate watering and replace them in 
the green-house as before. 

Trimming and Cleaning the Plants. 

Where any decayed, straggling, or ill placed branches appear, 
either cut them off close, or prune theni, so as to give the plants a 
neat and becoming form. 

Pick off" all decayed leaves as they appear, and suff*er no weeds 
of any kind to grow in the pots; keep them free from moss, &c. by 
stirring the surface earth frequently; wash and clean the floor of 



April.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 353 

the green-house, and let every thing in and about it appear neat and 
lively. 

When any large leaved kinds have contracted foulness, wash 
them, one by one, with a sponge dipped in soft water; the small 
leaved sorts may be taken out of the house, in a warm day, and 
water poured over them out of a watering pot, which will not only 
wash off the dust but greatly refresh them; then replace them as 
before. 

Heading down Shrubby Plants. 

Myrtles, oranges, lemons, geraniums, and several other woody 
plants that have got into a bad state of health, may now be headed 
down; observing that any of the budded kinds should not be cut 
oft' below where they were worked, except in cases of absolute 
necessity, that is, when the wood is either dead so far, or in such a 
state that no hopes remain of its producing new shoots — under such 
circumstances you may head them down to the fresh wood. 

By this means they will put out plenty of strong shoots, near, 
or from the stems, and form full regular heads in two or three 
months. 

Shifting or fresh earthing the plants, as before directed, will be 
necessary upon this occasion. 

Inarching. 

Towards the latter part of this month you may inarch oranges, 
lemons, citrons, limes, shaddocks, pomegranates, and almost every 
other kind of shrubby plants, agreeably to the directions given in 
page 256. 

By way of curiosity, or as required, you may inarch a branch of 
an orange or lemon tree, that has young fruit on it, on one end of 
the common seedling stocks: it will be well united by the end of 
August, when it may be separated from the mother plant, in a full 
bearing state. 

Sowing Seeds of Green-House Plants, Sfc. 

As early in this month as possible, sow the seeds of geraniums, 
myrtles, oleanders, coronillas, lemons, oranges, balm of Gilead, 
aloes, cannas, buddleias and cactuses; callicarpa, caparis, celcias 
mimosas, mesembryanthemums, centaureas and chrysocomas; cine- 
rias, cistuses, coluteas, cyclamens, dolichoses, ericas and euphor- 
bias; ferrarias, gardenias, genistas, heliotropiums, indigoferas and 
lyceums; melias, melianthuses, oleas, passifloras, solanums, and 
proteas salvias, silenes, spartiums, teucriums, yuccas and xeran- 
themums, with many others. For the method of sowing them see 
page 309. Many kinds will not vegetate for two, three, four or six 
months, and some not sooner than twelve; therefore attend the 
pots carefully, and your patience and trouble will be ultimately 
rewarded. 



364 THE HOT-HOUSE. [April. 

Propagating Green-house Plants by Cuttings, Suckers and 
Layers, ^c. 

There are few shrubby plants but may be propagated by layers; 
these should be laid in the pots or tubs, agreeably to the methods 
directed in page 288. 

Suckers may now be taken off where they appear, and be planted 
in separate pots, or several small ones in the same pot. 

The tar greater number of all the green-house plants may now 
be plentifully propagated by cuttings or slips; such as laurusti- 
nus, myrtles, geraniums, balm of Gilead, and fuschia coccinea; 
jasmines, gardinias, hydrangeas, English and Portugal laurels; 
oleanders, passion-flowers, justicias, lagerstroemia, heiiotropiums, 
coronillas and melianthuses; acuba and Camilla japonica, budd- 
leias, solanums, teucriums, proteas and salvias, with almost every 
other kind, if planted in hot-beds, and carefully shaded and watered. 
Such as do not root freely should have bell-glasses placed over them 
in the hot-bed till rooted; thi\S is the most effectual way to insure 
the growth of many hard-wooded kinds. 

The roots of herbaceous kinds may now be separated and 
planted in different pots for increase; the succulent kinds may also 
be propagated by slips, cuttings and suckers, such as cactuses, 
stapelias, mesembryanthemums, &c. The succulent sorts should 
not be planted for a few days after having been taken off, that the 
wounds may heal; during which time, they may lie on a shelf in the 
green-house, and when fit, plant them in pots of good sandy earth. 

The young orange and lemon stocks, raised last year for bud- 
ding, should now, if not done before, be planted into separate and 
suitable sized pots; and if then plunged in a hot-bed till they have 
taken fresh root, it will greatly promote their growth. Some of 
the strongest will probably be of sufficient size to bud in August, 
and all of them at that time twelve months. 

Cape Bulbs. 

Many of the cape bulbs, mentioned in page 166, will be now in 
flower; they should all be kept in the front parts of the green- 
house, and "have plenty of air, without which they will spindle up 
and never show either strong or brilliant flowers; such as are in 
blow however, are, when the sun shines too powerfully on them, to 
be, for the moment, removed out of its rays, or it will facilitate 
their decline. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Pine Mpples. 
In this month it will be easy to distinguish which of the pines 



April.] THE HOT-HOUSE, 355 

are likely to produce the best fruit: this is not always common to 
the largest plants. A few of the most promising being marked, a 
small iron rod, made with a sharp angular point, may be thrust down 
the centre of each sucker arising therefrom, which being turned 
two or three times around, will drill out the heart and prevent its 
growth. Thus the plants being sufficiently supplied with water, 
and having nothing to support but the fruit, will sometimes grow 
amazingly large. But this method is not to be practised on too 
many plants, as it would be attended with the entire loss of all the 
suckers. 

Watering the Pines. 

In the West Indies, where pines grow in the greatest perfection, 
rains are very unfrequent during the period that this fruit is com- 
ing to maturity, but the dews are remarkably heavy; therefore it 
is principally supplied with moisture from the latter; in imitation 
of which, you should raise artificial dews, in the hot-house, by 
watering the walks and flues frequently in dry weather. This will 
be found extremely beneficial, not only to the pine-apple, but to all 
other plants which are natives of similar climates; and by this 
management they will require much less water than they other- 
wise would. However, regular waterings, taking care to give but 
a little at a time, just to keep the earth moderately moist, will be 
necessary. 

Top and Bottom Heat. 

Continue to support the requisite heat in the hot-house by aid 
of moderate evening fires, and a constant good heat in the bark-bed; 
the fruiting plants, in particular, will require this. If the bark was 
not turned and fresh tan added thereto, in March, it should be done 
in the first week of this month, as there directed. But if then 
attended to, there is no necessity for it now, as the pit will yet 
continue to be in excellent order. 

Admitting Jiir. 

Air should now be admitted in proportion to the increasing heat 
of the season; a great deal depends on this article; for without due 
attention to its utility and great influence on the plants, they may, 
if deprived of a sufficiency, be soon rendered of little value. 

Every warm, sunny day, when the wind is not cold, let some of 
the glasses or lights be opened a little way, and more in proportion 
to the heat of the day; but this should not be done before nine or 
ten o'clock in the morning, and they ought to be continued open 
longer than while the air in the house keeps up to a proper degree 
of warmth. 

Towards the end of the month you will find that a sufficiency of 
air cannot be admitted by the upright glasses; therefore it will be 
very necessary to have your roof lights constructed so as to slide 



366 THE HOT-HOUSE. [April: 

up and down by means of pulleys. Seventy or seventy -two degrees 
of Fahrenheit will be a good medium for sun-heat; but always 
when it rises above that give abundance of air, and in the early 
part of the month this is done with more safety by sliding open a 
sufficient number of the roof-lights. 

Succession Fines. 

The succession pines, especially those intended for fruiting next 
season, should be shifted as early in this month as possible, if not 
done in March. For the method of doing it, and the manner of 
treating them after, see page 311. 

The crowns and suckers of last season should now also be shifted 
into larger pots, and managed in like manner. 

Treatment of the other various Stove Plants. 

The general treatment directed for the pines may be given in 
common to most other stove plants. With respect to shifting or 
adding fresh earth to the pots, that should now be done in the same 
manner as directed for the green-house plants; after which, if 
there be room in the bark-bed, let the pots be immediately plunged 
to their rims therein; and by the assistance of the kindly heat the 
plants will root freely in the new earth, which will give them 
strength, promote their health, revive their colour, and prepare 
them the better for a removal into the open air towards the end of 
next month. 

The woody kinds will now require frequent and gentle water- 
ings, the herbaceous occasionally; but the succulent sorts should 
get only a little now and then, as the earth in the pots seems to 
stand in need of it. 

"When any of the stove plants have contracted much dust or 
other foulness, such must be cleaned off immediately; all decayed 
leaves should constantly be picked away, and the utmost cleanness 
preserved in all the house. 

Where insects appear on the pines, or on any of the other plants, 
immediate attention ought to be paid to the destruction of them; 
for, in a short time, if neglected, they would overrun the house, 
and ruin many of the plants. For the methods of extirpating them, 
see article Hot-house for February, page 169, &c. 

The paying of due attention to all the plants, giving them suita- 
ble care and culture, preserving them in good health, and keeping 
the house constantly clean, and the plants free from decayed leaves 
and filth, is the surest method of not being much troubled with 
insects. 

Propagating various Stove Exotics. 

You may now propagate by cuttings, layers, suckers, or seeds, 
the various plants of this department. Plant the cuttings in pots, 
plunge them in the bark-bed, and the kinds that grow by that 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 357 

method, which are very numerous, will strike root freely; and, 
indeed there are very few sorts but may be cultivated in this way, 
if covered close for some time with bell-glasses, to preserve a moist 
atmosphere around them till they establish themselves in the earth, 
and are able to draw therefrom a sufficient supply of juices to 
replace those which might be exhaled by the open dry air. 

You may, in like manner, strike cuttings of many sorts of green- 
house plants, and of any curious and valuable shrubs of the open 
ground departments. 

Sow seeds of all hot-house plants that you are able to procure 
and wish to cultivate; let them be sown in pots, and if room can 
be had plunge these in the bark-bed, give them occasional water- 
ing, and you may expect many kinds to come up shortly, and 
several others not for months. The laying of panes of glass over 
these pots will facilitate the growth of the seeds by opposing the 
ascending moisture, and retaining it about the surface of the earth; 
but bell-glasses would more eflfectually answer this end. 

Care of several Fruiting, Flowering, and Esculent Plants in the 

Stove. 

Pay due attention to the regular watering of the strawberries, 
kidney-beans, cucumbers, and flowers now forcing in the stove, 
and early in the month introduce others to succeed them. 

Continue to keep the grape-vines now fruiting free from all 
unnecessary shoots, and such as are produced from the axillas of 
the leaves, &c., and train the others close and regular. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Early Melons and Cucumbers. 

The eariy melons will now show fruit abundantly; they must 
have plenty of air, and protection from the mid-day sun; for a few 
hours sunshine at this season, if the glasses were close shut, would 
destroy the whole crop. The lights should be taken off', and the 
plants fully exposed to the open air, about the twentieth or towards 
the end of the month; therefore the plants ought to be previously 
and gradually inured thereto. Should the beds happen to be greatly 
declined in heat about the first of this month, a fresh lining of hot 



368 "THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

dung ought to be applied, for at this period of their fruiting a brisk 
bottonfi heat is necessary to the free swelling of the fruit. The ad- 
vantage of this will soon appear very evident. A slight covering 
ought to be kept over the glasses every night, till about the tenth 
of the month, after which they will need it no longerj these should 
be taken oft" early every morning, for light and plenty of air will 
now be absolutely necessary. 

According as the melons set, place a piece of board or shingle 
under each fruitj this will preserve them from the damp of the 
earth. 

About the middle of the month the frames may be raised by 
means of any kind of support at the corners, and the plants be suf- 
fered to run out under them, and by the end thereof you make take 
them totally away. 

A regular supply of water will be very necessaryj and although 
melons do not require as much of it as cucumbers, yet a sulficiency 
must be given. 

The early cucumbers will now be in full fruiting, and will re- 
quire plenty of air and water j they may be fully exposed to the 
open air in the middle states about the twentieth of the month, and 
in the eastern states about the end thereof. 

Making Hot-bed Ridges for Cucumbers and Melons. 

The cucumbers and melons which were sown last month, or late 
in March, may in the first week of this be planted in hot-bed 
ridges, as directed in page 314, or the seeds may be sown thereon 
in the following manner. 

The ridges being made and earthed as directed in April, page 
314, mark. out the holes for the seed, four feet asunder, and in form 
of a shallow basin, about an inch deep, and nine or ten inches wide. 
In the middle of each, sow eight or nine seeds, and then put on bell 
or hand-glasses. After the plants have been up ten or twelve 
days, they must be thinned, leaving only three of the strongest in 
each hole, drawing a little earth about their stems, and giving a 
light watering to settle it close to the roots. 

When the plants have two rough leaves, they must be stopped or 
topped, as directed in page 120, which see. This operation is very 
necessary to throw them into a fruiting state, before they run too 
much into vine. 

As the plants advance in growth, they must have gentle and fre- 
quent waterings, and plenty of air admitted, by the raising of the 
glasses on props, under which suflfer them to run out as they in- 
crease in growth. The glasses may be totally taken oft* about the 
end of the month. 

Sowing Melons and Cucumbers, in the open ground. 

About the tenth of this month will be a good time, in the middle 
states, to sow a general crop of melons in the open ground; from a 
week to a month earlier, to the southward, according to the respec- 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. ^69 

tive situations; and between the fifteenth and twentieth in the. 
eastern states. It is remarked that musk and water melons, cu- 
cumbers, pumpkins, squashes, gourds, and all the varieties of these 
families, may be sown at the periods in which people generally 
plant Indian corn; but in order to have them as early as possible 
in the open ground, a few patches may be sown ten days or more 
before the dates above mentioned, which, with good care, may suc- 
ceed very well, especially if the season proves favourable. 

For the varieties of the musk or cantaleupe melons, prepare a 
piece of rich sandy ground, well exposed to the sun; manure it and 
give it a good digging, then mark it out into squares of six feet 
every way; at the angle of every square, dig a hole twelve inches 
deep and eighteen over, into which put seven or eight inches deep 
of old hot-bed dung, or very rotten manure, throw thereon about 
four inches of earth, and mix the dung and earth well with the 
spade, after which, draw the remainder of the earth over the mix- 
ture so as to form a round hill, about a foot broad at top. Some 
people use hot stable dung, under an idea that its heat would promote 
the vegetation of the seed; this is a mistaken notion, as in a few 
hours it looses all it had for want of a sufficient quantity being 
together to promote fermentation, and becomes a dryish wisp, unfit, 
at least for the present, to afford either heat or nourishment to the 
plants. 

When your hills are all prepared as above, plant in each, towards 
the centre, eight or nine grains of good melon seed, distant two 
inches from one another, and cover them about half an inch deep. 

When the plants are up and in a state of forwardness, producing 
their rough leaves, they must be thinned to two or three in each 
hill; the extra number in some, may serve to fill up deficiencies in 
others: drav»' earth from time to time around the hills, and as high 
about the roots of the plants as the seed leaves; when fit, stop 
them as directed in page 120, after which, keep the ground, by fre- 
quent hoeings, perfectly free from weeds. 

Squashes. 

Squashes of every kind may be cultivated as directed for cucum- 
bers and melons, should be sown at the same time, and at similar 
distances, with this difference, that two plants of these will be 
plenty for each hill, and that they are easier pleased in soil and 
preparation than the others. 

Water Melons. 

In order to have water melons in good perfection, you must fix 
upon a piece of very light, rich, sandy soil; prepare, sow, and ma- 
nage it in every respect, as directed for cucumbers and melons, only 
let the hills be nine or ten feet distant every way. 

Pumpkins and Gourds. 

Pumpkins will require to be ten feet distant hill from hill, two 

2 Y 



370 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May 

or three plants will be suflBcieut in each; they are not so tenacious 
of a particular soil as either melons or cucumbers, but will grow 
freely in any dry and tolerably rich ground; they are to be sown 
at the same time as directed for sowing melons and cucumbers in 
the open ground, and should be kept constantly clean and free from 
weeds. 

The various kinds of gourds, which are more cultivated for orna- 
ment than use, may be sown where they can be trained to trellises, 
fences, walls, or to cover arbours. 

When you intend to cultivate either melons, cucumbers, squashes, 
pumpkins, or the like kinds, on a large or extensive scale, you can 
prepare the ground with a plough, which will save much labour; 
and also, afterwards, as the weeds advance, plough and harrow 
between the plants till they begin to run, after which, the hoe must 
be used* 

Sweet Potatoes, 

The Convolvulus batatas, or sweet potato, is a native of both 
Indies, also of China, Cochin-china, &c. But it is affirmed that it 
was unknown in the Philippine and Molucca islands before the 
Spaniards brought it there. In Amboina, Banda, Ternate, &c., the 
inhabitants add Castela to the name, as having received it from the 
Castilians or Spaniards. It was first brought into Spain from the 
West-Indies, or Spanish Main, and was there cultivated long be- 
fore the Solanum tuberosum, or common potato, was known in 
Europe. 

The sweet potato requires a Very light, sandy, and tolerably 
rich soil to bring it to good perfection. The time to plant it in 
the middle states is the first ten days in May, or more generally 
it is planted about the eighth or tenth of the month. It is remarked 
that the earlier and more forward crops are always most produc- 
tive and best for eating; and several people to accomplish this end, 
first sprout them in hot-beds, and then plant them out in the fol- 
lowing manner. 

The ground being first well pulverized by ploughing and har- 
rowing, &c. is afterwards laid out by the plough in squares of 
four or five feet each, and at the intersections of the scores or fur- 
rows, hills are made, in the manner directed for melons and cucum- 
bers, in page S68; into each of these, one or two good sets are 
planted, and covered about an inch deep, or a little better; as they 
advance in growth the hills are enlarged by drawing the earth up 
around them with a hoe; or, by first cross ploughing the ground, 
harrow it with a very narrow harrow, and then finishing and round- 
ing the hills with a broad hoe. They ought to be kept constantly 
free from weeds, and the frequent enlargement of the hills will 
encourage the growth and increase the number of roots. 

W^hen they are cultivated upon a small scale in gardens, all this 
work may be performed with a spade and hoe. 



Ma?.] the kitchen garden. 37 X 

Indian Corn. 

The Zea mays, or Indian corn, is frequently required from the 
gardener for early use. For this purpose, procure sonie seed of the 
earliest kind, and select a piece of dry, sandy, and tolerably rich 
ground, in a warm exposure. After preparing it as if for peas, &c. 
form shallow drills about two inches deep, at the distance of six 
feet from each other; drop the seed therein two feet and a half 
asunder, and two grains in each place; strew a little wood-ashes 
in the drills, then cover the seed as you would peas. As the plants 
advance in growth, earth them up two or three times. For an early 
crop, you may plant the seed, in the middle states, about the first 
of this month, or ten days earlier should the season prove very 
favourable. 

This method is exclusively intended for the garden culture of 
the small early kinds. 

Early Cauliflowers. 

The early cauliflower plants, as they advance in growth, should 
have the earth drawn up about their stems, antl in dry weather be 
occasionally watered, which will cause the heads to grow to a much 
greater size than they otherwise would. 

Towards the latter end of the month, the plants will begin to 
show their flowers, when they should frequently be looked over, 
and as these appear in an advanced growth, not before, let some of 
the largest leaves be broke down over them to defend them from 
sun and wet, whereby they will be preserved in their natural colour, 
firmness and beauty; for if left fully exposed to the weather, it 
would change their peculiar whiteness to a yellowish hue, and oc- 
casion them to open sooner than if treated in this manner. 

Planting Cauliflowers. 

The plants from the late spring sowings, should now, according 
as they arrive at a suflicient size, be planted out as directed in page 
315. Very few of these will produce flowers till October, but then 
you may expect some fine heads. 

Sowing Cauliflower Seed. 

You may now sow cauliflower seed for a late crop. Should the 
plants from this sowing not produce heads before November, they 
are then to be taken up and managed as directed in that month, 
by which means they will continue to produce fine flowers all 
winter, when such will be very acceptable. 

Cabbages. 

Draw earth about the stems of your early cabbages, and all othefs 
that are advanced in growth; this will strengthen them considera- 
bly, and cause them to produce fine large heads. 



372 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

The earliest will, towards the middle or latter part of this month, 
begin to form their heads, when thej may be greatly forwarded in 
their whitening by tying their leaves together. For this purpose, 
get some strong bass or small osier twigs, go over the plants row 
by row, and tie such as begin to turn their leaves inward for head- 
ing; first gathering all the leaves up regularly; do not, however, 
bind them too close, for that would occasion their rotting. 

This method may be practised with a few early plants, but by no 
means with the principal crop; as those treated in that way never 
produce such large and firm heads as they would if left to nature: 
ihowever, market gardeners may derive some advantage from it, as 
the early produce will always command the highest price. 

Continue to plant out your spring cabbage plants for autumn 
and winter use agreeably to the directions given in page 316. Plant 
also, at this time, a full crop of red pickling cabbage and savoys. 
All these will require an open situation; they never thrive or head 
well near trees, walls, or shade of any kind, and the richer your 
ground the larger sized heads will you have. You may plant some 
between rows of forward kidney-beans and other low growing crops, 
which will occupy the ground when those are off. 

Let all be planted out, if possible, in moist or cloudy weather, 
and immediately after give each a little water, unless the ground is 
already sufficiently saturated. 

Sow now some early York, sugar-loaf and other close quick- 
hearting kinds for summer and autumn use; likewise savoys, large 
drum-head, flat-dutch, and any other of the large late heading 
sorts for autumn and winter cabbages, and also some of the red 
pickling cabbage. Sow these seeds as directed in page 517, and 
transplant young advancing seedlings into beds as there directed, 
watering them immediately, and given them shade for a few days 
if necessary. 

Sowing Borecole. 

You may now sow a principal crop of green and red curled bore- 
cole for autumn, winter, and spring use; for an account of which 
see pages 191 and 317. 

By sowing the seed early you will have tall strong stems, and 
large bushy heads, sometimes growing to the height of four feet; 
but the largest are always obtained from the spring sowings; how- 
ever, it is usual to continue sowing successive crops of them to the 
end of July. 

The seed should be sown in beds of open ground tolerably thin 
and covered lightly or raked in regularly. In dry weather it will 
be of use to water the beds occasionally, both before and after the 
plants are up. When about three inches high, it will be proper to 
thin the seed-bed, and prick out a quantity therefrom at four inches 
distance, that the whole may obtain proper strength for final trans- 
planting. 

Towards the end of the month, those sown in April should be 
planted out into beds of rich sandy soil in the manner directed for 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 373 

cabbages, at three feet distance every way, and afterwards be kept 
free from weeds and the earth drawn to their stems as they advance 
in growth. Those intended for winter use should never be planted 
in a rich fat loam, as there they would become too succulent, and 
consequently could not bear the frost as well as if growing on a 
gravelly soil. Such as are designed for autumn use may be planted 
in any convenient open bed that is tolerably rich. 

Brussels^ Sprouts and Jerusalem Kale. 

The Brussels' sprouts and Jerusalem kale are both cultivated in 
the same manner, at the same time, and for similar purposes, as 
the borecole. They may be now sown and treated like the latter, 
with this difterence, that two feet, or rather two and a half, will be 
a sufficient distance for the final transplanting of the Jerusalem 
kale, as it never grows as tall as either of the other kinds. 

Turnip Cabbage and Turnip Booted Cabbage. 

For an account of both these varieties, see page 318. The seeds 
of the turnip cabbage may now be sown, and the plants afterwards 
treated as directed for cabbages; only observing not to earth them 
up above the swelling bulb on the stem. The turnip rooted kind 
should be sown on a bed of strong rich ground, as you would 
turnips, and treated like them in every respect; observing to thin 
the plants with the hoe, when advancing in growth, to the distance 
of about sixteen inches apart. Their roots will be much larger and 
better when treated in this way than if transplanted. 

The early sown plants of the former kind may now be planted 
out, and afterwards treated as above observed. 

Broccoli. 

The early sown broccoli plants should now be planted out into 
beds of good rich earth, in an open situation; the purple kind at 
two feet and a half distance every way, and the white at the dis- 
tance of three feet. 

Broccoli seeds of both these kinds, as well as of any other variety 
which you would wish to cultivate, should be sown early in this 
month for a second principal crop, for winter and spring use. Sow 
them in a bed or border of rich earth, in an open exposure, each 
kind separate, and rake them in regularly. 

In the middle and eastern states, where the frost is too power- 
ful for the standing out of these plants during winter, on its ap- 
proach they must be taken up and planted in earth up to their 
leaves, either in cellars or under sheds, where they can be pro- 
tected from wet and very rigorous frosts, and they will continue 
to produce their fine heads during all the winter months, which 
are equal to any cauliflowers. On the opening of spring, plant out 
the stalks of the purple kind, and they will produce abundance 



374 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

of the most delicious sprouts; the white do not answer for that 
purpose. 

These plants, even if hung up in a cellar, would shoot forth their 
flowers or heads pretty much about their usual time. For a more 
particular account of them, see page 318. 

Management of Beans in Blossom. 

The early Mazagan, long-podded, Windsor, and all the varieties 
of that species of bean, should be topped when arrived at full 
bloom and the lower pods begin to set; this will greatly promote 
the swelling of the pods, as well as their early maturity; for, 
having no advancing tops to nourish, their whole eftbrts must go to 
the support of the fruit. 

This should be performed on the beans in general, which are now 
in full blossom, observing to let the stems be first advanced to such 
a due height as to have a sufficient quantity of pods; the early 
Mazagan bean may be topped when about two feet high, and the 
larger sorts when from about two feet and a half or a yard, to three 
and a half high, according to the growth of the different varieties, 
and may be done with a finger and thumb. 

But with respect to the small early beans, if you would have 
them come in as soon as possible, you should top them when the 
blossoms at the bottom of the stalks begin to open. 

Be very particular to earth up the stems of your beans two or 
three times in the course of their growth, as this is absolutely 
necessary to their good success and plentiful production. 

Sowing Peas. 

To have a regular supply of peas, let some be sown at least 
twice in this month; but where a constant succession is wanted, 
three or four sowings will be necessary. 

The best sorts to sow now are the marrowfats, glory of England, 
Spanish morotto, green and white rouncivals, imperial and sugar 
Poland, these being the finest and largest sorts; likewise any of 
the hotspur kinds, Prussian blue, &c.; those that are sown any 
time this month will yield tolerably good crops. 

The earlier in the month, however, that those or any other kinds 
of peas are sown the more abundantly will they produce. 

You may now sow some of the tall sugar peas, as directed in 
page 319, to which, and its preceding page, 1 refer, you for more 
general instructions on this subject. 

Sow, early in the month, the dwarf sugar and dwarf Spanish peas, 
and also Leadman's dwarf, as directed in page 319. These are all 
very delicious, great bearers, and do not require sticks, particularly 
the two former; and when sown at this season, are generally more 
productive than the taller growing kinds. 

Hoe and earth up the peas which v/ere sown in April; this will 
greatly strengthen them and promote a plentiful bearing; and also 
pay due attention to the sticking or placing pea-rods to the young 



May,] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 375 

rising crops, as soon as they have attained the height of five or six 
inches. There is a great advantage in allowing sticks of a suitable 
height, to the various kinds, for the produce is, generally, not only 
much superior, but by far more abundant, often to more than double 
the quantity, produced by those that are permitted to trail on the 
ground. The sticks should not only be sufficiently tall, but also 
branchy, that the plants may readily take hold; and they should be 
prepared fan fashion, so as the side branches may extend only along 
the rows. 

They should be placed when in single rows on the sunny side of 
the drills, as the plants will naturally incline that way, and more 
readily lay hold of the sticks; or there may be double rows of 
sticks placed to them, as directed in page 185. 

Transplanting Letttuce. 

Take advantage of moist weather to transplant such of those 
sown in the two former months as are now fit for it. The ground 
should be fully exposed, not encumbered with trees, or near any 
kind of shade whatever, for these plants never form good heads in 
such situations, but start to seed immediately. 

Dig the ground neatly and rake the surface smooth, then dibble 
in the plants, in rows ten or twelve inches asunder, and near the 
same distance from one another in the rows; water them immediate- 
ly and repeat it occasionally till they have taken good root. 

Such as are intended to remain for heading, where sown, should 
now be thinned to about ten or twelve inches distance, every way, 
and those growing among other general crops ought not to be left 
nearer to each other than three feet. 

Sowing Lettuce Seeds. 

Lettuce seeds of various good kinds should be sown two or three 
times this month, that there may be a constant and regular supply 
of this very wholesome vegetable. The white Silicia, grand admi- 
ral, India, Aleppo, imperial, large royal and green Egyptian cos 
are very proper kinds to sow now; the Aleppo and Egyptian cos 
do not head like the other kinds, but if tied op as you do endive 
they will blanch beautifully, and are extremely crisp and delicious. 
The white and brown Dutch, Mogul, New-Zealand, and large cab- 
bage kinds are excellent sorts, and will succeed well if sown in 
the early part of this month. 

An open situation must be chosen in which to sow the seeds; the 
ground should be light and rich, and each sort sown separately and 
very thin; for if drawn up close in the seed bed, they will never 
head well. 

The beds wherein these are sown, should be frequently refreshed 
with water in dry weather, to promote the vegetation of the seeds 
and encourage the growth of the young plants. 

Tying up early Lettuces. 

The various kinds of cos or Roman lettuce which are now 



376 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

beginning to gather and whiten in the heart, should be tied up with 
strings gf bass, which will forward their whitening, and render 
them crisp and tender for eating; but this must be dene only by 
degrees, or as they are wanted, for it greatly promotes their shoot- 
ing to seed. 

Sowing small Sallading. 

Sow a variety of small sallading every week or ten days, for 
these, at this season, shoot on to seed very rapidly, such as cresses 
or pepper-grass, lettuce, rape, radish, mustard, &c. Sow the seeds 
in shallow drills on shady borders, cover them lightly, and give 
them occasional waterings. 

Kidney -Beans. 

A principal crop of kidney-beans should be planted in the first 
week of this month, and successional crops about the middle, and 
also towards the end thereof. 

Any of the dwarf kinds may now be planted; such as the black, 
brown, or red speckled, yellow, cream-coloured, negro, Canter- 
bury, white, Dutch, and Battersea dwarfs. The cream-coloured, 
brown, speckled, yellow, and white, are the earliest sorts, and 
should be particularly chosen for the first crop. 

Select for these a piece of light rich ground, for in such they 
will always be most productive. Let drills be made for them with 
a hoe, about two feet and a half asunder, and an inch and a half 
deep; drop the beans therein at the distance of two or three inches 
from one another, draw the earth evenly over them, and rake the 
surface lightly to give the bed a neat appearance. 

These, upon a more extensive scale, may be cultivated to great 
advantage and to the saving of much labour by the plough, in which 
culture the rows will require to be three or four feet asunder for 
the convenience of ploughing and harrowing between them, for the 
destruction of weeds, and also for the landing of them with that in- 
strument. 

The various kinds of running or climbing kidney-beans may 
also now be sown in drills made four or five feet asunder, and the 
seeds planted double the distance from one another of the dwarf 
sorts. The large white Dutch, common white, and cream-coloured 
runners are excellent sorts for this purpose, they are very produc- 
tive, boil well, and eat very tender. 

When the plants come up and begin to push their runners, then 
let some tall sticks or poles be placed to each row for them to climb 
upon. The runners will soon catch hold and twine themselves 
naturally around the sticks or poles, to the height of eight or ten 
feet or more; or if some are planted in a row close against a 
wall or any high fence or building, you may suspend strong pack- 
thread from above, six inches distant, fastened tight at both ends, 
the lower of which may be tied to the main stem of the beans, and 
the runners will readily ascend around the strings. 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 377 

The scarlet runner, though in Europe considered one of the best 
bearers, and very good for the table, is here neither productive nor 
esteemed, and is cultivated exclusively for the beauty of its flowers, 
and for covering arbours, &c. 

Carolina and Lima Beans. 

What is commonly called the Carolina bean, is only a small and 
early variety of the Lima bean: it may be planted in the first vi'eek 
of this month, or in the last of April, if a favourable season, and 
the ground sandy and dry; they may be cultivated in the same 
manner as above directed for the running kidney-beans; or, in hills, 
as they are called, at the distance of four feet every way, planting 
five or six good beans in each hill, a few inches apart, and covering 
them about an inch and a half deep. When the plants are up a 
few inches, or before, if mare convenient, place two or three tall 
poles to each hill for them to climb on, and as they advance in 
growth, draw the earth around the hills up to their stems. 

The Lima beans should not be sown in the middle states before 
the first week of this month, when vegetation is very brisk; for they 
are very subject to rot if planted in cold weather, especially if the 
ground be replete with much moisture. 

They delight in a light, sandy, and tolerably rich soil, and should 
be planted in hills, as directed for the Carolina beans, but at the 
distance of six feet or upwards, hill from hill, four or five beans in 
each, and the poles for their support ought to be strong and near 
ten feet high. They are very productive, will continue bearing 
till overtaken by the frbst, and are extremely delicious. 

Radishes. 

Hoe, weed, and thin the advancing crops of radishes, as directed 
in page 321; and continue to sow a fresh supply every two weeks, 
as at this time they soon shoot to seed after growing to any tole- 
rable size. 

The salmon-coloured, white Naples, and white turnip-rooted, are 
the best kinds to sow now; you may likewise sow some of the 
white Spanish radish, they bear the warm weather rather better 
than the other kinds, but are not so crisp and tender. The purple 
and short-top kinds will yet do very well. 

At this season these seeds must be sown in an open exposure, 
on beds of rich loose loamy earth, for if on a clay or gravelly soil 
they would become sticky and good for nothing; in order to have 
them crisp and nice they should be frequently watered in dry 
weather. 

Planting Radishes for Seed. 

Transplant radishes for seed when the roots are just in their 
prime; if showery weather, it will be a particular advantage. 
Choose for this purpose some of the best kinds, long, perfectly 
2Z 



378 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Mat. 

straight rooted, and with short tops^ having also regard to the 
colour of the root, that is, if of the purple, or short topped kind, 
those that are of a clear pale red are preferable, as they generally 
eat more crisp and mild than such as are of a darker colour. 

When intended to save seed of the salmon radish, always prefer 
the best and brightest coloured roots, to preserve the kind in its 
purity, and particularly those that have the shortest tops. 

The principal reason why radishes for seed are directed to be 
transplanted is, that, having drawn up a quantity for that purpose, 
you can the more readily judge of the goodness of the roots, taking 
only what are of the right sort, otherwise the transplanting of them 
would be unnecessary, and those not so treated would produce a 
much greater quantity of seed. 

Plant the roots by dibble in rows four feet asunder, in an open 
situation, one foot from each other in the row, and give them a 
good watering immediately after. 

Select, also, some of the best formed white and red turnip-rooted 
radishes of moderate growth, hoe the others out and let these re- 
main for seed; or if necessity requires, you n[iay transplant them; 
in that case, plant the bulbs or roots entirely in the earth, leaving 
the tops free and then water them. 

Spinage. 

When spinage is required in continuation, some of the round 
leaved sort may be sown in a cool moist loamy soil, every eight or 
ten days; for during the summer months it starts to seed imme- 
diately. 

Weed and thin the spinage sown last month, especially what had 
been sowed in the broad-cast way; and of your early crops, both 
of the round-leaved and prickly-seeded kinds, leave a sufficiency 
of the best plants for seed. 

New Zealand Spinage ( Tetragonia Expansa.) 

This is a delightful vegetable for greens: it has a large luxuriant 
leaf, which it produces in great quantities in the driest summers. 
Two or three dozen plants are sufficient for a family: the seeds 
require to be planted the beginning of this month, and covered 
about one inch deep. On the approach of frost if the plants are 
taken up and planted in a box and placed where they will be 
secure from it, and have light and air occasionally, they will con- 
tinue to yield plenty of leaves. 

Sowing Carrots. 

Carrots may yet be sown, especially in the eastern states, with 
a good prospect of success, if done in the first week of this month, 
and even in the middle states, if the season is any way backward. 
For the proper soil and method of sowing them, &c., see pages 189 
and 321. 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 379 

Cleaning and thinning Carrots and Farsneps. 

Carrots and parsneps will now be advancing fast in their growth, 
and should be properly encouraged^ clear them from weeds, and 
thin the plants out to due distances. 

This work may be done either by hand or hoej but for extensive 
crops particularly, small hoeing is the preferable method, as being 
the most expeditious, and by loosening the surface of the ground 
with the hoe it will greatly promote the free growth of the plants. 

Whatever method is pursued, it will be necessary to free tiie 
plants from weeds, and to thin them to proper distances, that they 
may have full liberty to grow and enlarge their roots. The gene- 
ral crops of carrots should be thinned to about six or seven inches, 
plant from plant, and the parsneps from eight to ten, in order that 
each kind should attain its utmost perfection. 

Such crops of carrots, however, as are intended to be drawn 
gradually for the table, while young, need not be thinned at first to 
more than four or five inches distance, as the frequent pulling up of 
some for table use, will, in a little time, afford the others sufficient 
room to grow large. But the main crops should be thinned at once 
to the proper distances. 

Pricking out and Planting Celery. 

Some of the early celery plants from the seed-beds should now 
be pricked out to obtain strength previous to a final planting in 
trenches; by this method those left in the beds will have room to 
grow strong and stout. They should be planted at the distance of 
three inches from one another, in beds of rich loose earth, watered 
immediately, and afterwards occasionally, till growing freely; when 
they have acquired sufficient strength in these beds, they are to be 
planted in trenches for full growth, as directed in June. 

Let those remaining in the seed-beds be watered to settle the 
earth about tlieir roots, which had been loosened in the act of pull- 
ing out the others. 

When of sufficient size and strength, plant out into trenches 
some of your earliest sown plants, as directed in the Kitchen Gar- 
den for June. 

For the best method of obtaining celery in early perfection, with- 
out the assistance of a hot-bed, see page 322. 

Sowing Celery Seed. 

Sow more celery seed for a principal later crop; let this be done 
as directed in page 322. In hot sunny weather the shading of the 
bed with mats, from ten to four o'clock, would greatly fiicilitate the 
growth of the seed; occasional waterings also will be very service- 
able, and in a dry season indispensable. 

Jlsparagus. 

Asparagus is in the best state for cutting when the shoots are 



380 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

from two to four inches above ground, and the top buds or heads 
remaining close and compact? soon after, they become open and 
of less estimation. For the proper method of cutting them, see 
page 192. 

Keep the asparagus beds perfectly free from weeds, and let it be 
remembered, to terminate the general cutting as soon as you per- 
ceive the coming up roots begin to appear small or weaker than 
usual; for if continued cutting too late in the season, it would 
greatly exhaust the roots, and the next and succeeding years' pro- 
duce would be diminished in proportion. 

Beets. 

Weed or hoe your early crops of beets, and thin them, if in beds, 
to one foot asunder, or if in drills, to eight or nine inches, plant 
from plant. Continue to sow more, especially of the red beet, for 
a succession crop, which will succeed very well if sown in the early 
part of the month. A full and abundant supply of this very excel- 
lent vegetable ought to be cultivated in every garden. For the 
methods of sowing, see page 194. 

Onions. 

The onions which were sown at an early season, with an expec- 
tation of their growing to a sufficient size for table use the first 
year from seed, should now be perfectly cleared from weeds, and 
the plants thinned to about three inches from one another, being 
careful to leave the largest and best; they should be thinned at an 
early period, and kept totally free of weeds from the moment of 
their appearance above ground to the period of their perfection. 

This work may either be performed by hand or with a small 
hoe; the latter is the quickest method, and the stirring the ground 
therewith will be of great service to the growth of the plants: have 
for this purpose a small one-hand hoe about two inches broad, or, 
in want of this, an old table-knife, bent a little at the end, about 
an inch, by heating in a fire, will answer very well for small or 
moderate crops. 

The plantations arising from seed onions should now be kept very 
clean, and also the late sown crops intended to produce small 
bulbs for next year's planting. 

Turnips. 

Hoe and thin your advancing crops of turnips, and sow some 
more of the early Dutch or early stone kinds for a succession: this 
sowing should be performed in the first week of the month, in 
order that the roots should have time to grow to a good size before 
their being overtaken by the great summer heat and drought, which 
are very inimical to them. In the doing of this, take advantage of 
moist or cloudy weather, or immediately after rain, and sow the 
seed on a bed of good mellow ground, thin and even; tread it down 
and rake it in regularly. 



May.] the kitchen GARDEN. 381 

Hamburg Parsley, Scorzonera, and Salsafy. 

The young crops of Hamburg, or large-rooted parsley, scorzo- 
nera and salsafy must now be carefully cleaned from weeds, and 
the plants should be thinned or hoed out to proper distances, that 
their roots may have room to swell, thinning them to about six 
inches asunder. 

Early in this month you may sow principal crops of salsafy and 
scorzonera for autumn and winter use; for those that are sown 
now will not be so subject to run to seed as those which were sown 
in the former months, and their roots will be in excellent order for 
the table during the entire autumn and winter. For a more par- 
ticular account of these plants, see pages 197, 198, and 324. 

Capsicums or Red Peppers. 

Early in this month you may sow in a warm exposure on a bed of 
rich earth seeds of the various kinds of capsicums which you desire 
to cultivate; the large heart-shaped kind is that which is more gene- 
rally used for pickling; the plants from this sowing may be planted 
out in rows about the first o( June. 

The early plants raised in hot-beds should, in the middle states, 
be planted out, finally, as soon after the twentieth of this month as 
moist or cloudy weather may occur; the rows must be two feet or 
a little better asunder, and the plants one foot distant from one 
another; when planted give each some water, and afterwards keep 
the ground free from weeds. 

You may, likewise, at this time, sow the seeds in drills at the 
above distance, covering them about a quarter of an inch deep; 
and when grown an inch or two, thin them to proper distances; but 
as they bear transplanting extremely well, it will be attended with 
less trouble to raise them in the seed-bed, and afterwards plant 
them out. 

Tomatoes. 

Sow the seeds of tomatoes in the first week of the month on a 
warm sandy soil, either to remain for fruiting or for transplanting, 
as directed in page 328. 

Plant out from the hot-beds about the middle of the month, or a 
little later, if the season is not favourable, those plants which are 
forwarded therein, and at the distances mentioned in page 328. 
Or they may be planted close to palings or fences of any kind to 
which they may be trained; but a support of some kind will be 
necessary in order to have them in the best perfection, and in 
abundant bearing. 

Egg-Plant. 

If omitted to sow the seed of the egg-plant last month, as there 
directed, some should be sown in the first week of this, on a rich 



382 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May. 

warm border, to raise plants for planting out when about three or 
four inches high, as directed in page 328. 

About the middle of this month, or soon after, according to the 
season, you should plant out for fruiting the early plants of this 
kind which were forwarded in hot-beds. A rich sandy soil is the 
most suitable for them: the purple kind will require to be two feet 
and a half asunder; and for the white, two feet will be sufficient. 
As they advance in growth, draw some earth to their stems in like 
manner as to cabbage plants; keep the ground about them clean, 
and you may expect fine fruit. 

Endive, 

Some endive may now be sown for an early crop; but at this 
season, it is very subject to run up to seed; however, when such 
is required, let it be sown on an open spot of rich ground, tolera- 
bly thick, taking care to cover it evenly, or to rake it in well. 

The white and green curled endive are the proper sorts to sow 
now; when the plants are about three inches high, they should be 
transplanted into beds, at the distance of ten or twelve inches from 
one another, and immediately watered, taking care to transplant 
them in cloudy or wet weather, if such should occur in due season. 

Towards the end of the month you may sow some more, to keep 
up a regular succession, and although it is very difficult to raise it 
in good perfection at this season, some families must have it at all 
events. 

Okra. 

The first week of this month is a very proper time to sow a full 
crop of okra; and another sowing may be made about the middle 
thereof, for a succession crop; the seeds will now vegetate freely 
and the plants advance apace. For the method of sowing them, 
&c., see page 327. 

Nasturtiums. 

The seed of the nasturtium may be sown in the first week of 
this month, as directed in page 326; but the early crops of this 
kind are generally most successful. 

Sorrel. 

Either the common garden broad-leaved, or the French round- 
leaved sorrel, may be sown in the first week of this month, as di- 
rected in page 329. Or, the old standing roots of either kind may 
be separated and planted for increase, in beds or borders, at the 
distance of ten or twelve inches asunder; this would have been 
better if done last month, but they will succeed any time in this 
if well watered immediately after planting, and repeated at intervals 
for a few days. When the plants shoot up to seed, cut them down 



May.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 383 

close, and a new crop of leaves will be produced: this may be re- 
peated from time to time during the summer and autumn. 

Sowing Fot-herbs, <^c. 

Common and curled parsley may now be sown where it had been 
omitted in the former months, as may also the seeds of chervil, 
sweet basil, coriander, pot-marigold, borage and burnet; thyme, 
summer and winter savory, sweet and pot marjoram, together with 
many other sorts of pot, aromatic, or medicinal herbsj observing 
the same method as directed in page 205, which see. All those, 
with every other kind necessary, should be sown as early in the 
month as possible. 

Propagating Aromatic, Pot, and Medicinal Plants, by Cuttings 
and Slips, <^c. 

You may yet, if attended to in the early part of this month, pro- 
pagate the various kinds of pot, physical and aromatic plants men- 
tioned in page 205, and in like manner as there directed; but they 
will now require to be frequently watered, and if shaded for some 
time after planting, the better. 

Supporting Plants for seed. 

Now support the stems or stalks of such plants as were planted 
for seed. The onions and leeks in particular will require this 
care, for the stalks of these will be run up to a good height, and if 
they are not secured in due time, the winds and heavy rains will 
break them down. 

The best method of supporting these plants is to drive some firm 
stakes into the ground along the rows, placing them about two or 
three yards asunder: then let some thin long poles, or strong lines, 
be fastened from stake to stake, close along each side of the seed- 
stalks. 

Let the advancing stems of the different kinds of cabbages and 
other tall growing plants, that are now shooting to seed, and are 
subject to be borne down by wind or wet, be likewise supported by 
placing stakes to them and tying them thereto securely, or by any 
other more convenient method. 

Cardoons. 

The cardoons which were sown in March or April, ought now to 
be thinned where they have risen too thick, that the plants may 
have room to grow and get strength by next month, when they 
should be planted where they are to remain for landing up to blanch. 

Thin them to about four or five inches distance, or some may be 
pricked six inches asunder on a nursery-bed, to remain till next 
month, when the whole should be transplanted finally. 

Give water immediately to those that you prick out, and if 
sunny weather, shade will be necessary for a few days. 



384 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [May/ 

Destroying Weeds. 

It is in vain to expect good crops, and folly to goto the expense 
of seed or labour, unless you keep them free from weeds, and par- 
ticularly while they are young; therefore, more than common care 
should now be taken to destroy weeds throughout the whole garden, 
but more especially among the young rising crops. It is now the 
most important work in the garden: the hoe should be applied be- 
tween all the rows of peas, beans, cabbages, and every other kind 
growing in drills, and the w^eeds which are close to the plants be 
pulled up by the hand. 

The onions, carrots, leeks, parsneps, and all other close and low 
growing crops, should be always kept free from weeds, from the 
moment they appear above ground till grown to their full size. 
A small hoe may be applied where it will answer, but where not, 
hand-weeding must be practised. 

Watering, 

Watering in dry weather is very necessary, but especially to the 
newly transplanted crops, whether young seedlings or plants of 
larger growth finally transplanted, such as cabbages, cauliflowers, 
lettuces, celery, &c. A plentiful watering should be given to each 
plant immediately after planting out, and repeated occasionally till 
all have taken root and begin to grow. Most of the young seed- 
ling plants will require it now and then, till they have established 
their roots, and extended them to a sufficient depth to be out of 
the power of drought. 

Water should generally be given late in the afternoon, or very 
early in the morning, but the former is preferable, that the plants 
may have as much benefit from it as possible before any part is ex- 
haled by the heat of the ensuing day. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Wall Trees. 

In the early part of this month look over your wall trees, and 
where you perceive a superabundance of young and unnecessary 
shoots appearing, either rub, nip, or cut them clean olF close to 
whence they were produced, being particular to leave a plentiful 
supply of such as are good and well placed; and when of due 
growth, train them in at full length, close and regular. The long 
fore right shoots, that is, such as project directly towards the front, 
ought generally to be displaced, except where some are wanted for 
laying in, to fill up vacant places; and likewise, any extraordinary 



May.] the fruit GARDEN. 335 

vigorous growths arising in the middle of the tree, unless where 
necessary to be preserved for similar purposes. 

Where any considerable opening appears, and that but one or 
two shoots otter in such place, you should, after these have grown 
about a foot long, shorten them to three or four eyes, and they will 
soon after shoot out again, probably one from each bud, to furnish 
the vacancy. 

Be very particular as to apples, pears, plums, and cherries, not 
to shorten or rub oft' such advancing buds as nature has intended 
for fruiting-spurs, which are very distinguishable by their short 
thick growth. 

Espaliers. 

All unnecessary, ill-placed, and fore-right shoots on espalier 
trees of every kind, should now be rubbed off" or cut away; they 
are only robbers, and should consequently be discarded; but, in 
doing this, discretion ought to be observed, and an abundant sup- 
ply left to furnish the trees, and to discharge such parts of the as- 
cending juices as are not convertible into wood or fruit. 

Apples, pears, plums and cherries, continue bearing many years 
on the same spurs or branches, and do not require such a general 
annual supply of young wood as peaches, nectarines, &c., which 
always, with very few exceptions, produce their fruit from the pre- 
ceding year's shoots; yet a sufficiency should be left to train in 
between the main branches, and a leading or terminal one to each 
branch, unless the tree has already extended as far as you desire; 
for it is essentially requisite to leave a sufficient number of the best 
placed shoots to choose from in the general winter pruning. The 
shoots now preserved, should be trained in regularly to the espalier 
at full length, for the reasons assigned in the winter pruning, see 
the Fruit Garden in January. 

Where there is any great vacancy, it is proper, towards the latter 
end of this month, to shorten some of the adjoining young shoots 
of the year, to three or four buds, to cause them to produce a sup- 
ply of lateral branches to fill the vacant places. 

Young wall and espalier trees that are advancing in a training 
state, shouTd also be attended to now, in their early shooting, to 
displace the improper and ill-placed growths, and retain all the 
well placed shoots, both for an additional supply of branches in the 
general formation of the trees, and to form future bearers for pro- 
duction of fruit. 

Thinning of Fruit. 

Apricot, peach, and nectarine trees, in favourable seasons, some- 
times set superabundant crops of fruit often in thick clusters, and 
in greater quantities than they can supply with a sufficiency of 
nourishment; and wiiich, if suffered to remain, would not only be 
poor and miserable, but would so exhaust the trees, as to render it 
impossible for them to produce good and sufficient shoots, capable 
3 A 



386 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Mat. 

of bearing any tolerable quantity of fruit the ensuing season, or 
perhaps ever after. 

Therefore let them now be thinned, leaving only a good, mode- 
rate, regular crop on each tree, and the sooner it is done the bet- 
ter, both for the trees and remaining fruitj always leaving the best 
placed and most promising. 

The young fruit that are thinned off are excellent for tarts, &c. 
particularly the apricots, but the others are also very good for that 
purpose. 

Some people will consider this a very disagreeable task, both on 
account of casting away so many fruit, which they might think 
would do very well, and also on account of the time spent in per- 
forming the workj but this is a mistake, as the loss in number will 
be more than repaid by the size, flavour, and excellence of the 
remaining fruit; and besides, the trees will be preserved in health 
and vigour for the production of future crops. 

This thinning should not be confined only to wall and espalier 
trees, but ought to be extended generally, and for the same reasons, 
to all your standard peach, nectarine and apricots, but more parti- 
cularly to such as are young. 

When trees are suifered to bear a superabundant crop, the extra- 
ordinary efforts made to support their too numerous offspring, often 
so exhaust them, as to bring on diseases, of which several do not 
recover, at least for two or three years. 

Protecting Cherries from Birds. 

As soon as your cherries begin to ripen, hang up nets before the 
wall trees, and cast some over the espaliers, supporting them with 
sticks or branches at a sufficient distance to prevent the birds from 
reachino; the fruit. Likewise, the castino; of laro;e nets over stand- 
ard cherry trees will prevent the depredations of birds. 

Cleaning the Fruit Tree Borders. 

The borders where wall and espalier trees grow should be kept 
remarkably clear from weeds, for these not only appear disagree- 
able and exhaust the nourishment, but afford harbour for snails, 
slugs, and other crawling insects, to the detriment of the fruit. 

Therefore, when weeds appear in these parts, and where there is 
room to admit of hoeing between any crops that are growing on the 
borders, let a sharp hoe be applied to them on a dry day, by which 
you may stop their progress, and as soon as hoed, rake oft' all the 
weeds and rubbish, leaving a clean smooth surface. 

Insects. 

At this season, insects will probably appear on some of your fruit 
trees, when that is the case, there should be immediate means used 
for their destruction, before they increase and become numerous. 
See page 334. 



May.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 3§>7 

Watering with common water proves very beneficial to trees in- 
fested with insects, especially if thrown against them with some 
force, by means of a small water-engine. This v/ill not only dis- 
place caterpillars and many other insects, but greatly refresh the 
trees, especially in dry weather, and if often repeated where insects 
appear, it will considerably diminish their number, and prevent 
their spreading. 

The most eligible engines are such as have the pump and dis- 
charging pipe fixed in the vessel for containing the water, of which 
some are of a moderate size for carrying about by the hand, but 
larger ones are fitted upon a low, light, three wheeled carriage, for 
the more convenient removal from place to place. 

This engine may be conveniently used for watering different 
parts of the garden in dry weather. 

Watering neio planted Trees. 

The new planted fruit trees will now be greatly benefitted by 
occasional watering, which should always be given in the morning, 
and frequently over the branches, as well as about their roots; this 
will be of great service in washing off any dust and filth which their 
leaves may have contracted, and in opening their pores for the re- 
ception of the atmospheric moisture. 

Straiuherries. 

Watering at this season will be extremely salutary to strawber- 
ries, by causing their fruit to set and swell freely; let it not be 
given over the plants, but between them, lest it should v/ash off the 
fecundating polen from the flowers, and thereby prevent their set- 
ting fruit. 

in those beds where the plants are kept apart from one another, 
and the fruit required in the greatest perfection, the young advanc- 
ing runners should be trimmed off, to encourage the bloom and en- 
large the fruit; but when a supply of those are wanted for forming 
'new plantations, a sufficiency must be left for that purpose. 

The edgings of strawberries, round beds or borders, &c. should 
be kept within due bounds, by occasionally cutting away their ad- 
vancing runners. 

Newly grafted and budded Trees. 

For the treatment of such trees as were grafted in the preceding 
months, or budded last summer or autumn, see i\\Q Nursery for this 
month. 



THE ORCHARD. 

You should now pay attention to the due formation of the heads 
of young or new planted trees; much may be done towards that by 



388 THE VINEYARD. [May. 

the timely displacing of irregular and unnecessary shoots, and by 
the shortening of luxuriant ones. 

The new planted trees will require to be frequently watered, 
giving it occasionally to the branches as well as the roots, and 
always about the hour of sun setting, or a short time before or after. 

Such of your peaches, nectarines and apricots, but more espe- 
cially the young trees that are over-burdened with fruit, must be 
deprived of any superabundance by a judicious thinning, and only 
as many left on as they have sufficient strength to support without 
injury to themselves. 

Take particular care to destroy caterpillars, &c. while yet in 
small clusters, before they overrun the trees, and where worms or 
canker appear in either stems or branches, let such parts be treated 
as directed in page 141. 



THE VINEYARD. 

The vines will now begin to shoot vigorously, and produce be- 
sides bearing and other useful shoots, numbers that are totally 
unnecessary, which ought to be carefully cleared away, for if left 
on, they would rob the fruit, and also crowd and impoverish those 
shoots intended for next year's bearing. But in doing this, you 
must be very particular not to break off, in going between the vines, 
such fruiting or other shoots as are necessary, for at this time they 
are very easily injured; nor to annoy in the least the blossom buds, 
which will early in the month be very prominent. Where suckers 
from the roots, or shoots from the under parts of the stems appear, 
let them be immediately stripped off. The principal part of this 
work, if attended to in due time, may be done with the finger and 
thumb, but where that will not answer, you may now use the knife 
with great safety, for although these plants bleed copiously in spring 
when destitute of leaves, yet afterwards the exhalation by the fo- 
liage becomes so great, that the absorbent roots do not supply a fluid 
so fast as it could be expended in the growth of the plant or dissi- 
pated into the air; hence the cause of the drooping of various kinds 
of plants in hot weather. 

All the shoots that have fruit on, and others that are strong, well 
placed, and suitable for next year's bearing, should, when grown to 
a sufficient length, be carefully and neatly tied up to the stakes, 
previously observing, as before directed, to clear away all unneces- 
sary young growths arising in places not wanted, and to leave a 
sufficiency of the best for a proper choice in the general winter 
pruning. 

It will not be proper at this time to cultivate the ground between 
the vines, as many accidents might happen thereby to the blossoms 
and young shootsj but towards the end of the months or when all 



May.] the nursery. 389 

the vines have had their first tying up, (for this must be repeated 
as thej advance in growth,) you should give the ground a general 
cleaning either by hoe or plough, &c. as most convenient. 



THE NURSERY. 

Destroy Weeds. 

There is nothing more important at this season, than the destruc- 
tion of weeds in all parts of the nursery, for if you let any of them 
perfect seeds, your ground will thereby be stocked for years; there- 
fore the hoe must be applied wherever you can use it, and always 
be careful to rake and carry away all you hoe or pull up, for if left 
lying on the surface or in the alleys, many of them would there 
ripen seed which would afterwards considerably increase your 
labour. Weeds should never be suffered to grow between the 
rovv's of trees, &c., for those rob them of a great portion of the 
necessary nourishment; nor should you, for the same reason, ever 
plant any kitchen vegetables between them, as is practised by some 
unskilful and covetous persons. 

The seed-beds of all young trees and shrubs should now, in par- 
ticular, be kept remarkably free from weeds, and this must always 
be done by a very careful hand-weeding. 

Watering the Seed-beds. 

If the weather should now prove dry, all the seed-beds, but par- 
ticularly the evergreens, such as pines and firs, &c. ought to be 
frequently watered, taking care not to administer it too hastily lest 
it should wash the earth from about the young roots and expose 
them too much to the sun, which would greatly retard their growth. 

Shading and Sifting Earth over Seedlings. 

All the slow growing and tender seedlings, especially the ever- 
greens, should, after having newly come up, be occasionally shaded 
from the too powerful influence of the midday sun, which would 
destroy a great number of them, particularly while their small 
stems are in a tender succulent state. 

There is nothing tiiat will be more beneficial to the young seed- 
lings at this period of their growth than to sift some fine, light 
earth over them, just as much and no more as will cover their 
stems up to the seed leaves; this will keep their roots cool and 
moist, and protect their stems from the power of the sun. The 
pines and firs in particular, are very subject to be cut off" when 
young at the very surface of the ground, by the burning heat 
thereof, melting away the yet soft and tender stems, while the 
leaves do not appear in the least injured. 



390 THE NURSERY. [May. 

fVatering new Plantations. 

Watering will be extremely necessary for all the new planta- 
tions of the more curious and valuable sorts of evergreens and 
flowering shrubs, and indeed for as much of the general young 
plantations as it can be extended to with any tolerable degree of 
convenience. It should be occasionally given to the leaves and 
branches as well as the roots, for it will not only wash off' any dirt 
or filth which they may have contracted, but open the pores of the 
plants, which, in dry weather, are many times almost closed, 
whereby the trees suffer greatly; nor is the water poured about the 
roots only capable of relieving them when in that condition; this is 
one reason why rain is much more effectual than artificial water- 
ing: these waterings should always be given in an evening after the 
heat of the day is over, that the water may have time to soak down 
to the roots, and the moisture be dried from the leaves by the 
morning sun; for if watered in the forenoon, and there should 
be a powerful sun soon after, the leaves are frequently scalded 
thereby, the spherical drops of water which remain on their surface, 
causing the rays to converge to a focus, and act upon them as a lens 
or burning-glass. 

But in watering, let it be observed not to give too much, as that, 
in some cases, would be injurious; a little, and often, ought to be 
the rule- 
Such plants as you have in pots should be treated as directed 
hereafter for those of the green-house department. 

Propagating Evergreens, ^-c. hy Layers. 

About the latter end of this month begin to propagate such ever- 
greens and other shrubs by layers of the young shoots of the pre- 
sent year as do not succeed well by layers of the old wood. 

When the young shoots are from eight to ten or twelve inches 
long, bring them down to the earth, and if strong, you may slit 
them as directed in page 288, or if weak, give them a gentle twist 
and lay them into the earth from two to six inches deep, according 
to their size, leaving about two or three inches of the tops out of 
ground; fasten them securely with hooked pegs and draw the earth 
over the parts laid. When done, give them a moderate watering, 
and repeat it occasionally, so as to keep the earth in a moist state, 
to encourage their rooting. 

Trees and shrubs in general root very freely by this method, 
which may be practised on the various kinds as they advance in 
growth, both evergreen and deciduous, from the middle of this 
month to the end of July. Many kinds will be well rooted by 
October, and may then be taken oft' and removed. Such as are not 
rooted by that time must be suff'ered to remain another year. 

Newly grafted and budded Trees. 
Examine all kinds of trees and shrubs which Avere grafted in the 



May.] the NURSERY. 391 

preceding months, and such as are well united, manifested by the 
free shooting of the grafts, the clay and bandages may be taken off, 
not, however, in most kinds, until the cions have grown five or sis 
inches long; the latter part of the month will, generally, be the 
proper time for this examination. 

Those that are not as well united as might be wished, should 
have the bandage slackened and fresh clay applied to them as in 
the first instance, or the clay may be applied without the bandage, 
which will preserve the wounds from the weather, and greatly pro- 
mote the growth of the bark over the headed parts of the stocks; 
this may be left on till it falls oft'. 

Sufter no shoots to remain that arise from the stocks below the 
grafts; all should be looked over once a week, and when such 
appear, let them be immediately rubbed ott", that the whole nourish- 
ment may go to the support of the cions. 

The trees which were budded last summer must also be care- 
fully and frequently looked over, and all improper shoots rubbed oft". 

As the shoots from the inoculations advance in growth, they 
should be tied gently to the spurs, left for that purpose at the 
time of heading the stocks, that they may not be broke oft' by winds 
or other accidents. 

Seedlings in Pots or Tubs. 

The pots and tubs of the more rare and delicate seedling plants 
should now be kept constantly in the shade where they may have 
only the morning sun till nine or ten o'clock, and that of the after- 
noon, after four; they must be frequently watered and kept free 
from weeds. A little earth sifted over them, as directed for other 
seedlings, will be of great service. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Dahlias, or Georgians. 

Of this beautiful plant there is an endless variety; they are ori- 
ginally a native of Mexico, where they grow in great quantities. 
They were introduced into England in 1806, and were cultivated 
for some time before any of the double varieties were obtained, 
which is done by raising from seed. They generally produce seed, 
which is sown and treated as other annuals, generally flowering the 
first season; but you cannot judge of the quality of a fine flower 
until the second year; sometimes those which produce single or 
semi -double flowers the first season will give five double ones the 
second. 

They are also propagated by dividing the roots, and by cuttings 
from the young shoots, which is the method employed to increase 



392 THE PLEASURE, OR [May. 

the double varieties. The proper time to plant the roots is the 
beginning of this month, and the plants about the twentieth; they 
will grow and thrive in any common garden soil. When you plant 
them it is necessary to place a good strong stake to each, and, as 
they advance in growth, tie them up to it, to prevent their being 
broken off by the wind. The dahlias vary in height from two to 
eight feet, so that when they are planted it is necessary to propor- 
tion the stake to the height of the plant, for it looks very awkward 
to see a low growing plant with a tall stake. Through the summer, 
should the weather prove dry, it will increase their flowers mate- 
rially to water your plants every evening. 

In October, when the leaves and stalks are killed with the frost, 
it is necessary to cut down the stalks to within sis inches of the 
ground, and let them remain so for a few days that the roots may 
be well refined, otherwise they are not so likely to keep during the 
winter or vegetate in spring. As you take them up label each 
plant separately with the name, colour, and height, as it will assist 
you to diversify the different varieties in planting. The better way 
to label them is to write the name on a small wooden tally, and tie 
it on the root with good twine, or fine wire is preferable. Keep 
them in winter secure from frost by putting them in dry sand or 
saw-dust, and placing them in a cellar. 

Hyacinths. 

Continue to defend the beds o.f the more curious hyacinths, yet 
in full blow, as directed last month, or they may be defended 
either by boards or by mats laid occasionally on hoops placed 
archwise over the beds for their support. These should be laid 
on every day, when the sun shines powerfully, about nine or ten 
o'clock in the iBorning, and taken off at four or five in the after- 
noon. 

When hyacinths are past flower, let thera always be fully exposed 
to the weather, except in very heavy torrents of rain, from which 
they should be carefully protected. 

It is the practice in Holland to take up the bulbs about a month 
after the bloom is completely over, in the following manner: as 
soon as the plants begin to put on a yellowish decayed appearance, 
they take up the roots and cut off the stem and foliage within an 
inch or half an inch of the bulb, but leave the fibres, &c. attached 
to it; they then place the bulbs again on the same bed, with their 
points towards the north, and cover them about an inch deep with 
dry earth or sand in form of a ridge, or in little cones over each 
bulb: in this state they remain about three weeks longer, and dry 
or ripen gradually; during which period the bed is preserved from 
heavy rains or too much sun, but at all other times exposed to the 
full air; at the expiration of this period, the bulbs are taken up, and 
their fibres, which are become dry and withered, cut or gently 
rubbed off; they are then placed in a dry room for two or three 
weeks, and are afterwards cleaned from any soil that adheres to 



May.] flower GARDEN. 393 

them, their loose skins taken off, with such offsets as may be easily 
separated. 

When this dressing is finished; the bulbs are wrapped up in se- 
parate pieces of paper, or buried in sand, made effectually dry for 
that purpose, where they remain till the return of the season for 
planting. 

Another, and less troublesome, mode of treatment after bloom, 
though perhaps more hazardous, is to suffer the roots to remain in 
the bed till the stems and foliage appear nearly dried up and con- 
sumed; this will seldom happen to be the case in less than two 
months after bloom; the bulbs are then to be taken up, cleaned 
from the fibres, soil, &c. and spread to dry and harden on the floor 
of an airy room, for about three weeks, then to be .preserved in sand 
or paper as before directed. Or they may be deposited in dry bar- 
ley chaff", saw-dust, or kept on open shelves out of the sun and wet; 
but too much exposure to the air often destroys many roots, and 
materially injures the whole. 

Others again take up the roots at the first mentioned period, 
cutting off' the flower stems but not the foliage, and prepare a bed 
of light earth, either where the hyacinths had grown, or in any 
other convenient place; forming it into a high sloping ridge, east 
and west; on the north side of which, they place the roots in rows, 
so as that the bulbs do not touch, and in a horizontal manner, co- 
vering the roots and fibres with the earth, and suffering the leaves 
to hang down the ridges; here they remain till the bulbs are suffi- 
ciently ripened, and then are taken up and treated as before. 

Tulips. 

Continue to protect the fine late tulips, yet in flowers, as directed 
last month in page 342, and treat them in every respect as there 
advised. 

As soon as the petals or flowers fall, the seed-vessel of each 
should be immediately broken off", or if suffered to remain and ri- 
pen seed, it would procrastinate the maturity of the roots, and con- 
siderably weaken them. 

Towards the end of the month, or rather when the grass or fo- 
liage becomes of a yellowish-brown, not before, which will happen 
sooner or later according to season, climate, soil and situation, and 
a few inches of the top or stem appears dry, purplish, and 
withered, you are to take up the roots of such as you particularly 
esteem; for this is the critical period for that work, because if 
done earlier, they would be weak and spongy, and deferred later, 
their juices would become gross; which would appear manifest at 
the succeeding bloom by too great a redundance of colorific matter 
in the petals, and the flowers would be what is generally termed 
foul. 

When the roots are taken up, they are to be laid in a dry shady 
place and gradually dried; observing to keep each variety of the 
superb kinds separate, that in planting, you may know how to di- 
versify the bed, according to fancy, either as to intermixture of 
3B 



394 THE PLEASURE, OR [May. 

colours, or the usual height and growth of the plants. About five or 
six weeks after the bulbs are taken up and properly dried, it is pro- 
per to take otf their loose skins, fibres, and oftsets; the last brown 
skin which is so intimately connected with the root, ought to be 
left on; after which they should be preserved, in dry sand, barley 
chaff, saw-dust, or rolled up in separate papers, till the time of 
planting, for the action of the air during our warm summers and 
autumns would greatly weaken and injure them, by drying up part 
of their juices. 

The smallest and weakest oftsets, particularly such as are not 
provided with a brown skin, ought to be replanted as soon as they 
are taken up, about an inch and a half deep, in a fresh sandy loam, 
and in a dry situation; or instead of replanting these offsets so early, 
they may be preserved from the drying influence of the air by 
burying them in dry sand till October, when they are to be planted 
as already mentioned. 

Common tulips, planted in the borders of the pleasure-ground, &c. 
need not be taken up oftener than once in two or three years, to 
separate the oftsets, and replant the bulbs in fresh earth. 

Ranunculuses. 

The weather in this month is generally very clear and hot; the 
ranuncluses ought to be shaded at such times from the mid-day 
sun, by means of lofty hoops and mats, or by some better contri- 
vance, that will admit light and air freely; a frame and cover, similar 
to that directed for hyacinths in page 341, would answer best, if 
expense and trouble were not to be considered: it will, however, 
be absolutely necessary to shade them, in some manner, during 
the period of bloom, otherwise they will continue but a short time, 
especially the dark rich coloured sorts; for, in proportion as their 
colours approach to black, is the injury they will receive from the 
rays of the sun, if it is permitted to shine upon them in full force; 
some of the very darkest cannot stand it a day without being en- 
tirely deprived of their beauty. The light coloured sorts will bear 
the sun's rays much better, reflecting them in proportion as they 
approach to white; green is the only colour that reflects and ab- 
sorbs the rays of light in equal proportion, and consequently, is 
more predominant in the vegetable kingdom than any other. 

During the continuance of the bloom, the earth around the roots 
must be occasionally watered as directed in page 345, but when 
that is over, they will require it but seldom, and not at all should 
gentle showers of rain occur now and then, but shading in the mid- 
dle of hot days will be very beneficial to the plants; it tends to 
prolong their vegetation, and the size and substance of the roots 
are thereby increased. For their further treatment, see i\vQ Flower 
Garden in June. 

A Description of the Properties of a Fine Double Ranunculus. 
The stem should be strong, straight, and from eight to twelve 



May.] flower GARDEN. 395 

inches high, supporting a large well-formed flower, at least two 
inches in diameter, consisting of numerous petals, the largest at the 
outside, and gradually diminishing in size as they approach the 
centre, which should be well filled up. 

The blossom should be of a hemispherical form, and its compo- 
nent petals imbricated in such a manner as neither to be too close 
and compact nor too widely separated, but have rather more of a 
perpendicular than of a horizontal direction, to display its colours 
with better effect. 

The petals should be broad, and have perfectly entire well round- 
ed edges; their colours should be dark, clear, rich, or brilliant, 
either consisting of one colour throughout, or be otherwise variously 
diversified on an ash, white, sulphur, or fire colour ground, or re- 
gularly striped, spotted, or mottled, in an elegant manner. 

There are more numerous varieties of beautiful double ranun- 
culuses than of any other flower. 

Anemones. 

Gentle and moderate waterings will be necessary for anemones, 
during their period of flowering, as well as for ranunculuses; the 
blossoms and petals of the former are of a more soft and flexible 
texture than those of the latter, and are consequently more liable 
to receive injury from high winds and heavy rains; their colours 
soon fade when exposed to a strong sun; it is, therefore, equally 
necessary to shade and shelter them whilst in bloom, in order to 
prolong the extreme beauty of their flowers. 

Anemones continue longer after bloom in a state of vegetation 
than ranunculuses, probably because of their greater degree of suc- 
culency; and even at the proper time to take them up, it will some- 
times happen, that part of their foliage will not be entirely divested 
of greenness and moisture; when it thus happens, which it does 
more frequently in rainy or wet seasons, much skill is necessary to 
ascertain the critical period to take up the roots; for if they are 
suffered to remain too long, especially if the season be moist, they 
will shoot afresh, and be thereby materially weakened and injuredj 
it is indeed better to take them up too early, than suffer them to 
vegetate in this manner, but the roots will not be so firm and solid 
as if done at the exact time. The safest and most effectual method 
to preserve them from these disagreeable consequences, is to keep 
off all heavy rains after the bloom is quite over, by means of mats 
and hoops, but on no account suffer the ground to become too dry; 
the roots will then regularly and gradually mature, and the foliage 
in due time will become brown and dry, whicli will point out the 
true time to take up the roots, and this will usually happen to be 
about a month after bloom. 

For their subsequent treatment, see the Flower Garden for next 
month. 

A Description of the Properties of a fine Double Anemone. 

The stem should be strong, elastic, and erect, not less than nine 
or ten inches high. 



396 THE PLEASURE, OR [May. 

The blossom or corolla, should be at least two inches and a half 
in diameter, consisting of an exterior row of large substantial well 
rounded petals or guard leaves, at first horizontally extended, and 
then turning a little upwards so as to form abroad shallow cup, the 
interior part of which should contain a great number of long nar- 
row petals imbricating each other, and rather reverting from the 
centre of the blossom; there are a great number of small slender 
stamens intermixed with these petals, but they are short, and not 
easily discernible. 

The colour should be clear and distinct when diversified in the 
same flower, or brilliant and striking if it consists only of one 
colour, as blue, crimson, or scarlet, &c., in which case the bottoms 
of the broad exterior petals are generally white; but the beauty and 
contrast is considerably increased when both the exterior and inte- 
rior petals are regularly marked with alternate blue and white, or 
pink and white stripes, &c. which in the broad petals should not 
extend quite to the margin. 

Early Flowering Bulbs. 

Any curious bulbs that are now in flower, may be much pro- 
longed in bloom and beauty by occasional shade from the sun. 

Spring crocuses, snow-drops, fritillaries, crown-imperials, dens 
canises, and all other early flowering bulbs that have done flower- 
ing, should, where intended, be taken up as soon as their leaves 
decay. 

This ought to be constantly practised with such as have stood 
unremoved two or three years, in order to separate the offsets, and 
to select the best roots for new planting, for without this care the 
bulbs would become numerous, and so small as to render the 
flowers very insignificant. The offsets, v/hen separated, may be 
immediately planted in beds or prepared borders, to increase the 
stock and enlarge their size; or they may be kept up as well as the 
largest of the roots till found convenient to plant them. 

All these kinds, when taken up, should be placed in the shade 
to dry, and when sufficiently so, preserved in dry sand or saw-dust, 
&c. till the time of planting, which, for these, should not be delayed 
later than October, nor even till then if not taken good care of, as 
they do not keep well out of ground, especially if exposed long to 
the air. 

Autumn Flowering Bulbs. 

The autumnal crocuses, amaryllises, and colchicums; should be 
taken up as soon as their leaves decay, the offsets separated, and 
all replanted again before the end of July: they are by no means to 
be kept longer out of the ground, as that would prevent their flower- 
ing in due perfection in autumn, which is their proper season. 

Care of Seedling Bulbs. 

The boxes of seedling tulips, hyacinths, narcissuses, and other 



May.] flower GARDEN. 397 

bulbous kinds, arising from the seeds sown last autumn, should be 
now placed in the shade, carefully preserved from the mid-day 
sun, and the plants refreshed now and then with a little water: a 
small portion of loose earth sifted over them would be of great 
benefit. 

Auriculas and Polyanthuses. 

The first week of this month, or immediately after your fine auri- 
culas and polyanthuses have done flowering, is a very proper time 
to repot and slip them, as directed in the Flower Garden for last 
months after which they must be treated during the summer and 
autumn, as there advised. See pages 348 and 349. 

Carnations. 

The fine carnations in pots should now have due care and good 
attendancej they should be watered according to their necessities, 
and as their flower stems advance, small neat sticks, for their sup- 
port, should be placed, one in each pot, to which they are to be 
tied; these ought to be at least three feet long, tapering a little 
from the bottom to top, and painted green; they should be substan- 
tial and straight, and their lower ends are to be forced into the 
earth in the centre of each pot, sufficiently deep and firm, not to be 
shaken loose by the wind. As the stems continue advancing in 
height, the tying is to be repeated at about every five or six inches. 

The pots may now be removed to the stage, and remain there 
till the time of bloom. 

If any small, green winged insects appear on the stems or foliage 
of the plants they must be effectually extirpated, either by washing 
the infested parts with a strong infusion of tobacco-water, or dust- 
ing some Scotch or fine snuff over them early in the morning, 
whilst yet wet with the dew of the night. 

The common carnations in the borders will require to be kept 
free from weeds, and as their stems advance they should be tied up 
neatly to sticks placed for that purpose. For the further treatment 
of carnations see the Floiver Garden next month. 

Pinks. 

Your choice pinks in pots will require due attention at this time; 
they must be kept free from weeds,— frequently watered, and not 
too much exposed to the mid-day sun in hot weather. For further 
particulars see next month. 

Tuberose and Scarlet Amaryllis. 

The first week of this month is, in the middle states, the best 
period for planting the roots of the tuberose and scarlet amaryllis; 
for the method see pages 357 and 358. 



398 THE PLEASURE, OR [May. 

Sowing annual Flower Seeds. 

Most kinds of annual flower seeds may yet be sown, if done in 
the early part of this month; but the first week thereof will be a 
very proper time to sow the seeds of the most tender kinds, such 
as the various sorts of flowering dolichos, tri-colours, mesembry- 
anthemums, ipomcea quamoclit, browallia, sensitive plant, and 
vinca rosea, &c.; the two last, however, though often considered 
as annuals from their flowering the same season in which they 
were sown, are not truly so, as they will continue for several years 
if preserved in a hot-house: to do them justice they should be sown 
in pots, and forwarded under frames and glasses, or else the sensi- 
tive plant will not display its sensibility so well, nor will the vinca 
rosea flower in due time: the dolichoses should be sown to cover 
arbours, &c. , as may also the ipomoea quamoclit, convolvulus pur- 
pureus, scarlet kidney-beans, &c. ; or they may be sowed in small 
patches, and neat poles placed for them to climb on. 

For the various kinds, &c. see page 352. 

Transplanting Annuals. 

You may now transplant various kinds of annuals from the early 
sowings into beds, borders, or pots, as you think proper, observing 
to give them shade and water till well rooted, or to transplant them 
in moist or cloudy weather. 

Sowing Perennial Flower- Seeds^ 8fc. 

The seeds of most kinds of perennial and biennial flower-seeds, 
may yet be sown as directed in page 354; but they will require 
occasional watering till up and well established in the earth. 

Propagating Double Scarlet Lychnis. 

This beautiful flowering plant may now be propagated by cut- 
tings of the stocks, as well as at an earlier period by slips from the 
root. Towards the latter end of the month, let some of the young 
flower-stalks be cut into lengths of six or seven inches, and planted 
in a shady border of rich light earth, leaving one or two joints of 
each cutting above ground; close the earth well about them, water 
them gently, and if bell or hand-glasses are placed over them, their 
rooting will be greatly facilitated thereby. 

The Hesperis matronalis, or Garden-Pocket. 

The double white, and double purple varieties of the garden 
rocket, are extremely beautiful and fragrant; I have not yet had 
the pleasure of seeing one of them in this country, nor have I been 
able to learn that such is to be found on this side the Atlantic; 
however, it is to be hoped we shall soon obtain that charming, 
showy, and delightful flower. It is perfectly hardy and may be 



May.] flower GARDEN. 399 

cultivated at this season, as above directed, for the double scarlet 
lychnis, or by slips or offsets from the root, taken off and planted 
either in spring or autumn; it does not prosper well except when 
annually slipped or propagated by offsets; for the old roots are 
very subject to decay, especially the double varieties; the single 
sorts are much more permanent and easy of culture. The ladies 
of Europe are extremely fond of it, whence it obtained the name of 
dame's-violet, or queen's gillyflower. 

Double Wall-flowers and Stock-gillyflowers. 

The fine double wall-flowers, and double stock-gillyflowers, may 
now be propagated by young slips of the present year: choose those 
of short and robust growths, from four to five, or six inches long, 
and let them be carefully slipped or cut with a knife from the mo- 
ther plants. Take the lower leaves off, so that there may be two, 
three, or four inches of a clean stem to each, and plant them in a 
shady border or in pots, inserting them into the earth up to their 
leaves; then give some water, and be particular to shade them from 
the mid-day sun till they have taken root. Water them occasion- 
ally during summer, and in September, such as are planted in bor- 
ders may be taken up with balls of earth and potted, in order to be 
placed in frames, &c. for protection from the winter frosts. 

The double varieties are accidentally produced from seed, and 
it is very rare to meet with such among seedling plants of the wall- 
flower, perhaps not one out of five hundred would prove double, 
but the gillyflowers produce numbers of double flowers from seed, 
especially if it is saved from semi-double varieties; the full double 
never producing any. The beginning of this month is a very proper 
time to sow the seed of either of these or of their varieties. 

Guernsey Lily. 

The Amaryllis sarniensis, or Guernsey lily. The leaves of this 
most beautiful flower will generally be decayed towards the end 
of this month, when the roots maybe taken up, and the offsets 
separated; they may be replanted in pots immediately, or if dried 
first in the shade, be preserved in dry sand, &c., and planted any 
time before the end of July, but are not to be kept up longer, as 
they flower in September or October. When the winter frost ap- 
proaches, the pots are to be removed into a garden-frame, where 
they may have occasional protection during the winter months, or 
they may be placed in the front windows of the green-house. Their 
roots do not increase numerously when removed oftener than every 
third year, and in the summer months they ought to be kept in the 
shade and gently watered now and then; but as their roots are in a 
dormant state during that time, too much water would totally de- 
stroy them. 

Transplanting Perennial and Biennial Seedlings. 
Many of the early sown perennial and biennial flower plants, 



400 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Ma?. 

will in the course of this month be fit to transplant into nursery 
beds, where they should be set at the distance of six inches from 
one another, there to remain to get strength till September or Oc- 
tober, when they should be removed with balls of earth and finally 
planted where intended to flower. 

Supporting Flower-Plants. 

Sticks must now be placed to such flowering-plants as want sup- 
port; in doing this, have regard to the natural size and height of 
each kind, and let the sticks be in proportion; fix them down firm 
on that side in which they can be least seen; for although the in- 
tent is to keep the plants upright and of neat appearance, yet the 
means should be concealed as much as possible, and similar care 
ought also to be observed in tying up the plants. 

Likewise, climbing and trailing plants of every kind should 
have timely support of sticks or stakes proportioned to their re- 
spective growths, and their stems or shoots conducted thereto in a 
proper manner. 

Weeds. 

More than ordinary care should now be taken, to keep all your 
beds and borders free from weeds, but more especially those in 
which small seedlings are growing. 

Grass and Gravel Walks. 

The grass-walks and lawns should now be duly mowed and roll- 
ed, otherwise the grass will soon grow rank and unsightly; and 
where plantain or any other kind of weeds are mixed therewith, 
they ought to be picked or grubbed out, or else many of their seeds 
will ripen, and thereby increase their species, which will overpower 
the grass and render the verdure less agreeable. 

The gravel-walks should also be kept in complete order, pre- 
serving them always free from weeds, and having them occasionally 
swept to clear away all loose litter, and likewise well rolled, gene- 
rally once a week, but particularly after heavy showers of rain, 
which will consolidate them, and render the surface smooth and 
even. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Air and Water. 

During the first ten days of this month, and in the middle states, 
the last week of April, the doors and windows ought to be kept open 



May.] the green-house. 401 

night and day, in order to harden and prepare the plants for a re- 
moval into the open air; an extraordinary change of weather, how- 
ever, may sometimes render it prudent to close them at night, but 
that should not be done at this season except in cases of necessity. 
Water must now be given to every plant according to its nature 
and in proportion to its necessity, as observed last month; the 
oranges, lemons, myrtles, and other woody kinds, will require it 
frequently; it is impossible to say how often; the state of the earth 
in which they grow will readily denote it; it should always be 
kept moist but not wet. The succulent tribe must yet get it but 
sparingly. 

Shifting. 

Such plants as were not removed into larger pots or tubs in the 
preceding months, and that still require it, may now be shifted as 
directed in page 362; but this must be done in the first week of 
the month, keeping them afterwards in the shade till they begin to 
grow freely. 

Loosen the earth in the top of the pots and tubs, and refresh with 
new compost such as had been neglected in April. 

Pruning and Heading. 

You may still prune, trim, and head such of your plants as are 
in need of that treatment; but let it be done early in the month, 
and as directed in pages 307, 308, and 363, which see. 

Propagating Green-House Plants. 

Continue to propagate most kinds of plants, by cuttings, suckers, 
seeds and layers, as directed in pages 309, and 364. The China 
and Otaheite roses, may now be increased abundantly by cuttings, 
they will strike root freely, and flower handsomely in autumn. 

Seedling Oranges and Lemons. 

The seedling oranges and lemons raised from the late sowings of 
last year should, early in this month, if not done before, be trans- 
planted into separate pots; they ought to be watered immediately, 
and shaded from the sun till newly rooted. If plunged into a hot- 
bed or bark-bed for two or three weeks, and carefully shaded fronr 
the mid-day sun, it will greatly facilitate their rooting, and pro- 
mote their growth. 

The early sown seedlings may, towards the latter end of the 
month, be planted separately into small pots, and treated in like 
manner. 

You may yet sow the seeds of oranges and lemons in pots or 
boxes, for stocks; they will rise freely without any artificial heat, 
and make tolerable progress during the season. 
3C 



402 THE GREEN-HOTJBE. [May. 

Inarching. 

Inarching may now be performed on oranges, lemons, and any 
other plants that you desire to propagate in that way, for the method 
see page 256. 

Bringing out the Green-House Plants^ 

About the tenth of this month, two or three days earlier or later, 
according to the season and situation, you may^ in the middle states, 
begin to bring out the more hardy kinds of green-house plants, such 
as the viburnum tinus, prunus lauro-cerasus, prunus lusitanica, 
nerium oleander, hydrangea hortensis, myrtles, pomegranates, 
oranges, lemons, magnolia grandiflora, lagerstroemia indica, daphne 
indicum, and all the other hardy kinds: the more tender, and ten- 
derest sorts, are to be brought out successively, so that the entire 
may be abroad by the twentieth of the month* 

In the eastern states this work must be delayed for a week or 
two longer, according to the respective climates, and not attempt- 
ed while there is any danger remaining from night frosts; but when 
this is over, the sooner the plants are taken out the better, espe- 
cially the more hardy kinds: by no means ought they to be con- 
tinued a day longer in the house than their preservation from frost 
and cold severe weather requires, as at this season the young shoots 
of many kinds will be growing freely, and if deprived of the bene- 
fit of the open air, they would become weak and sickly. 

Generally, when the plants are first brought out of the green- 
house, it would be advisable to place them in a warm situation 
where the wind can have but little poWerj about ten or twelve 
days after they will be somewhat hardened to the open air, and 
may then be removed to the places where they are to remain during 
the season. 

Every plant, as soon as brought out, should be cleared from all 
decayed leaves, dust and foulness of every kind, and the heads of 
the whole ought to be watered all over by means of a watering pot 
or a hand engine, which will greatly refresh and cause them to 
assume a lively appearance. 

If not done before, take out the earth from the tops of the pots 
or tubs, and fill them up with fresh compost; this will greatly 
encourage their flowering and promote a free growth; and if their 
stems, &c. had not been pruned afid dressed in the former months, 
it should now be done. 

It Would be vei'y advisable, immediately on bringing out, to place 
the pots of small growing plants on a stage, and the larger kinds on 
boards or planks, supported on bricks or pieces of timber, in order 
to prevent the earth worms from entering at their bottoms, which, 
if once admitted, never fail to destroy the texture of the soil, and 
render it like a honey-comb, consequently, it cannot long retain 
moisture, and becomes more pervious than necessary to wind and 
weather, to the great injury of the plants, and trouble of the gar- 



May.] the HOT-HOUSE. 4()3 

tlener; for the pots or tubs so perforated will require to be watered, 
double as often as those that are free from earth-worms. 

When pots are plunged in the earth there ought to be a piece of 
shingle, board, or slate placed immediately under the bottom of 
each to prevent the roots from working out through the holes into 
the surrounding earth; for although their rooting in this way will 
cause them to grow more vigorously, it, to many, when taken up, 
proves very injurious; therefore, to avoid this evil as much as pos- 
sible the pots should be turned around, at least once a week during 
the season, to break oft' the extending fibres that may have pushed 
through those apertures at bottom. 

The hard-wooded kinds are generally not so much injured by 
this as those of a more spongy texture, but it is ultimately of more 
injury than service to every plant, and therefore ought to be 
avoided as much as possible. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

FirB'heat should now be totally discontinued, except in the 
more northern parts of the eastern states, where a moderate fire at 
night, during the first week of the month, may in some seasons 
be necessary; but still continue for the pine-apples a constant 
moderate heat in the bark-bed agreeably to the intimations given 
last month, 

Pine Apples. 

The pine apple plants will now require frequent and moderate 
refreshments of water, which, during the summer season, should 
be given late in the afternoon; let this not be given in too great 
quantities at any one time, for such would not only damp the heat 
of the bark but also loosen the plants in the pots. 

As the weather increases in heat give air in proportion, both by 
the front and roof-lights; but especially when the thermometer 
rises above seventy degrees of Fahrenheit; for that is necessary in 
order to have large and good fruit. When the weather gets very 
hot the front lights must be kept open night and day, but the roof- 
lights should be closed every night, particularly in cloudy weather, 
to preserve the tan-pit from sudden rains, and ought to be opened 
again early in the morning, especially in warm weather. 

General care of all Exotics in the Hot-House. 

Continue also to give plenty of air to the plants in all the hot- 
house departments; supply them duly with proper waterings; and 
if any want shifting into larger pots let it be done now as soon as 
possible, keeping the wliole clear from decayed leaves, &:c. If 



404 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Mat. 

casual irregularities occur in the shoots or branches, prune or 
regulate them as may be required, and cut away any decayed 
parts; observing the same general directions as in the two pre- 
ceding months. 

Propagating the Plants. 

You may still continue to propagate such plants as you desire 
by cuttings, layers, suckers and seeds in the manner directed in 
March and April. 

Any time in this month you may plant cuttings or slips of cac- 
tuses, euphorbiums, aloes, agaves, sedums, mesembryanthemums, 
stapelias, and other succulent plants, laying them in a dry, shady 
place a week or tea days, according as they are more or less suc- 
culent, before they are planted, that the wounded parts may heal 
over, otherwise they are subject to imbibe too much moisture and 
rot. When they are planted they should be placed in the shade or 
plunged in the tan-pit till newly rooted, giving them a little water 
as necessity may require. The hardy sorts may be planted in a 
bed of light sandy earth, where, if they are screened with mats for 
some time, they will freely take root. 

Bringing out the Hot-House Plants. 

About the twenty-fifth of this month you may, in the middle 
states, begin to bring out the hardier sorts of hot-house plants; if 
they had been removed into the green-house eight or ten days pre- 
viously, it would be of service, as there they would gradually be 
prepared, hardened, and become in a good condition for a removal 
into the open air. The more tender kinds should not be brought 
out till the first week in June, but if previously removed into the 
green-house for a week or ten days it would be the better way; 
always observing, wherever they are, to give them abundance of 
air to harden and prepare them for the transition. 

In the eastern states the above work is to be deferred, in every 
instance, from one to two weeks later, according to climate and the 
local situation of the place; and to the southward of the middle 
states it may be done somewhat earlier. 

Should you have no pine-apples in your hot-house, and there 
are plants permanently growing in any beds or borders therein, 
the roof-lights should be totally taken off when the other plants are 
out, that these may receive the full benefit of the open air during 
the summer months, &c. 

As to the manner of placing and treating the pots when and after 
being brought out, I would advise the same as recommended for 
the green-house plants, which see. 

You must be very careful when you plunge any of your pots to 
make it a particular point to turn them around in their seats once a 
week, in order that such roots as run into the ground through the 
holes in the bottoms may be broken off; for though these would, 
for the moment, encourage the growth of the plants, when you 



June.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 405 

come to take them up for housing, the sudden deprivation of their 
usual supply of nourishment would give them such a check as seri- 
ously to injure them; and, besides, they would be but ill rooted in 
the pots, and badly prepared to extract the necessary nourishment 
durins; winter. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Early Melons and Cucumbers. 

About the first of this month all your melons and cucumbers 
that have been hitherto under the protection of glasses or paper- 
frames maybe fully exposed to the open air, having been previously 
and gradually inured thereto. A piece of shingle or board should 
be laid under each fruit of the early melons to preserve them from 
the damp of the earth, which would injure their flavour. Occa- 
sional refreshments of water will be necessary, but particularly to 
the cucumbers. 

Your principal or general crops of melons and cucumbers, in the 
open ground, shoukl now be kept totally free from weeds, the 
ground between the plants must be frequently hoed, and the earth 
drawn gently to the stems of the latest sown: the vines should be 
laid oft' in a neat and regular manner, and when any of them are 
too luxuriant, check them by nipping oft" the extremities of the 
runners. 

In the last week of this month sow general crops of cucumbers 
and melons for pickling, which is to be done in the same manner 
as directed in page 368. The long oval musk melon, and the long 
prickly cucumber, are in general estimation for this purpose; but 
the cluster cucumber, on account of its numerous bearing and 
small fruit, is by many preferred. 

Water Melons. 

If not done before, thin your water melons, leaving but three of 
the best plants in each hill, and draw the earth with a hoe up 
around the hills till the stems of the plants are covered up to the 
seed leaves; the ground between them must be kept perfectly free 
from weeds, either by hoeing, or (if cultivated on a large scale,) by 
ploughing and harrowing in the early part of the season. 



406 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [June. 

Squashes and Pumpkins. 

Squashes and pumpkins may be treated in the same way as 
directed for water melons; they are more hardy, and do not require 
so very particular attention; however, the ground must be kept 
loose and free from weeds, for it will be in vain otherwise to expect 
profitable crops. 

Sweet Potatoes. 

Your sweet potatoes must have earth drawn around the hills, to 
enlarge them and encourage the growth of the roots; lay off the 
vines regularly, and keep the ground very clean. 

Cauliflowers. 

The early cauliflowers, will now be producing their heads abun- 
dantly; care must be taken to break down the leaves to preserve 
the flowers from sun and rain, as directed in page 371. 

Those plants which are still advancing in growth, or part coming 
into flower, should, in very dry weather, be frequently well watered, 
which will greatly enlarge the size of the flowers. For this purpose, 
draw the earth around each plant, basin-formed, to retain the water 
till soaked down about the roots. This practice is absolutely 
necessary in dry seasons. 

The cauliflower plants from late sowing, should now be planted 
out finally, as directed in page 315; taking care, either to do it in 
moist or cloudy weather, or to give shade and water after planting: 
a large cabbage leaf laid over each plant will protect it considera- 
bly. • 

Cabbages and Savoys. 

Take opportunity of moist or cloudy weather, and plant out a full 
crop of cabbages and savoys, from the late spring sowings; also, of 
the red pickling cabbage, allowing each kind a sufficient distance 
according to the nature of its growth, as directed in the former 
months. 

But in gardens, where there is no ground vacant, from other 
crops, or where there is a necessity of making the most of every 
piece of kitchen ground, you may plant the savoy and cabbage 
plants between rows of forward beans, and early cauliflowers, or 
such crops as stand distant, and are soon to come off" the ground;, 
observing to give each plant a little water immediately after plant- 
ing, unless the ground is sufficiently saturated with moisture. 

You may now sow seeds of any of the early heading kinds of 
cabbage, such as the early Smyrna, York, Sugarloaf, or Battersea, 
to come in both for small hearts and hard cabbages in autumn. 

Borecole, Brussels sprouts, Jerusalem Kale, and Turnip Cabbage. 
The early plants of either of the above kinds may now be plants- 



June.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 407 

ed out, as directed in May; the late sown crops should be thinned, 
and those pulled out planted in nursery beds, four inches asunder, 
giving them a good watering when planted, and afterwards occa- 
sionally, till well established: here they are to remain till of suffi- 
cient strength for planting out finally. 

Bmccoli. 

Plant out finally such broccoli plants as are of sufficient size? 
choose for this purpose a bed of rich mellow earth, and let them 
be planted at the distances mentioned in page 373. 

Thin the late sown crops, and plant those pulled out into nurse- 
ry rows, to obtain strength, giving them a good watering immedi- 
ately after planting. 

Early in the month sow some more seed for a succession crop, 
to produce their heads in February, &c. For particulars see 
page 373. 

Celery. 

The celery plants that have arrived to a sufficient size, should 
now be finally planted out into trenches. 

Choose for this purpose a piece of rich ground, in an open expo- 
sure; mark out the trenches by line, ten or twelve inches wide, and 
allow the space of three feet between trench and trench, which will 
be sufficient for the early plantations. 

Dig each trench a moderate spade deep, laying the dug out earth 
equally on each side, between the trenches; lay three inches deep 
of very rotten dung in the bottom of each trench, then pare the sides 
and dig the dung and parings with an inch or two of the loose 
mould at bottom, incorporating all well together, and put in the 
plants. 

Previous to planting, trim the tops of the plants, by cutting off 
the long straggling leaves, and also the ends of their roots, leaving 
the former about six inches long, and the latter two. 

Let them be planted with a dibble, in single rows, along the mid- 
dle of each trench, allowing the distance of four or five inches be- 
tween plant and plant; as soon as planted, give them a plentiful 
watering, and let them be shaded until they strike root, and begin 
to grow. 

Small sticks may be placed across the trenches, and on these 
boards or pine planks laid lengthwise; or, pine or cedar boughs 
may be laid over the plants, which are to be taken off as soon as 
they begin to grow. 

The plants when grown to the height of eight or ten inches 
should have their first landing; this must be done in a dry day; the 
earth should be broken small and laid in gently to both sides of the 
plants, always taking care to leave the hearts and tops free; repeat- 
ing it every ten or twelve days till they are blanched of a sufficient 
length for use. 



408 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [June. 

Peas. 

Though peas sown at this time do not always succeed in bear- 
ing abundantly, yet a few, to keep up a regular succession, may be 
sown at two or three different times in the month, and if the sea- 
son should prove somewhat moist, there will be a chance of obtain- 
ing a handsome crop. The large marrowfat, glory of England and 
other large kinds, may now succeed tolerably well, and it will also 
be proper to sow a few of the best hotspur and dwarf kinds. 

If the weather and ground be very dry, it will be of some use to 
soak them a few hours in soft river or pond water previous to sow- 
ing, otherwise water the drills and then sow them. 

Let those crops, if convenient, be sown in moist ground, but not 
in a shady place; in such a situation, the plants would draw up and 
be good for nothing; observe to allow plenty of room between the 
rows, for at this season much depends on their having air and 
liberty to grow. 

Asparagus. 

The asparagus now running up to seed, should be cleared from 
weeds, and also your new plantations; likewise, the seedlings in- 
tended for next year's planting; for if suffered to be overrun with 
weeds, it would ruin them. 

Transplanting Leeks. 

Select a piece of good ground for this purpose, manure and dig 
it well, then draw from the seed-beds a sufficiency of the stoutest 
plants, trim the long fibres of the roots, and cut off the tops of the 
leaves; this done, plant them in rows a foot asunder, and six inches 
plant from plant in the rows, inserting their shanks into the earth 
up to their leaves; by this means they will grow very large, and the 
part inserted in the earth become white and tender. 

Lettuces. 

Transplant and sow lettuces as directed last month, in page 375. 
Let this be done in moist weather, particularly the transplanting; 
for if in a great drought, the plants will not succeed well : the place 
must be open and fully exposed, otherwise they will start to seed 
before they arrive at any tolerable perfection. If you are under 
the necessity of planting them in dry weather, let it be done late 
in the afternoon, and immediately give them a plentiful watering. 

Small Salading. 

Continue to sow cresses and other small salading once a week on 
a shady border. They should be often refreshed with water, in dry 
weather, and this ought to be repeated both before and after the 
plants appear. 



JiTNE.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 4Q9 

Kidney-Beans. 

Sow successive crops of kidney-beans in the beginning, middle, 
and towards the latter end of this month, as directed in page 376; 
either of the dwarf or running kinds may now be planted with good 
success. 

Should the ground happen to be very dry at the time of planting, 
the drills ought to be well watered previous to the beans being 
dropped therein; this should not be omitted in dry weather, as it 
will greatly promote the sprouting of the seeds, and the crops will 
rise sooner and be more regular. 

Land up the rows of kidney-beans planted last month, which 
will greatly strengthen and bring forward the plants, and place 
sticks or poles to the running kinds, which are now beginning to 
advance in growth. 

Carolina and Lima Beans. 

Hoe and clean the ground between your crops of Carolina and 
Lima beans; see that all are properly supported with sticks or 
poles, and draw up some earth around the stems of the plants. A 
few of the early Carolina kind may be planted about the first of 
this month, for a late crop; for the method of planting, &c. see 
page 377. 

Radishes. 

Although radishes do not generally succeed well at this season, 
yet a few of the salmon coloured may be sown at different times in 
the month: should the season prove moist, they may do tolerably 
well. Some of the short top and white turnip-rooted kinds may 
also now be sown, and toward the middle or end of the month you 
may sow a good crop of the white and black winter or Spanish'ra- 
dish, to draw early in autumn. 

Carrots, Parsneps, and Onions. 

The crops of carrots, parsneps and onions must now be kept 
clean and free from weeds; and if you observe that your onions in- 
cline more to tops and roots, you may with a long stick gently lay 
over their tops on one side, so as to bend them, and in a few days 
after, lay them back to the opposite side, which will check the as- 
cent of the juices and cause the bulbs to swell. 

Beets. 

The crops of beet should be kept very clean and the plants thin- 
ned to proper distances, that they may have room to swell and grow 
large. 

The seeds of these plants are generally sown in drills, or rows, 
a foot or more asunder; and where that method was practised, you 
3D 



410 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [June. 

can now more readily clear out the weeds and thin the plants; ob- 
serving to thin them to ten inches distance in the rows; also, where 
the seed was sown broad-cast, so as the plants stand promiscuous- 
ly, they must likewise be cut out to ten or twelve inches distance, 
plant from plant, and the roots will grow to a large size accordingly. 
You may now sow succession crops of red, green and white 
beet; and also of the Mangel wurtzel, or root of scarcity; they will 
all succeed well from this sowing, but the three last kinds are 
generally cultivated for their leaves, see page 194. 

Turnips. 

Sow some turnip seed early in the month, for although there is 
no great prospect at this time of obtaining good roots, some may 
be got to answer for soups, &c. 

Let the seed be sown in an open exposure, immediately after the 
earth is newly dug, and when raked in the ground should be roll- 
ed or clapped close with the back of the spade. There is nothing 
that protects crops of turnips, cabbages, &c. from the depredations 
of the fly so well as rolling; for, when the surface is rendered 
completely smooth, these insects are deprived of the harbour they 
would otherwise have under the clods and small lumps of earth, 
to which they generally resort for shelter, from such changes of 
weather as are disagreeable to them. 

This method will be found more effectual than soaking the seed 
in any preparation, or dusting the plants with any composition 
whatever. 

The advancing crops of turnips should be hoed and thinned to 
proper distances, and this ought always to be done at an early pe- 
riod of their growth. As they do not grow large at this season, six 
or seven inches apart will be sufficient. 

Scorzonera, Skirrets, Salsafy, and Hamburg Parsley. 

Thin and clear from weeds the crops of scorzonera, salsafy, skir- 
ret, and large rooted parsley, which perform either by hand or 
small-hoeing, thinning out the plants to six inches distance, and 
cutting up all the weeds. 

Endive. 

Transplant endive that is now of a sufficient size; for the me- 
thod, see page 382. 

Sow another crop of curled endive, to keep up a regular succes- 
sion when wanted; and also some of the broad Batavian kind; this 
grows very large, whitens well if tied up, and is very palatable. 
Sow more towards the end of the month. 

Okra, Tomatoes, and Egg- Plant. 
Earth up your advancing crops of okra; where too thick, thin 



June.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 41 ^ 

them to the distances mentioned in page 327, and keep the ground 
free from weeds. 

In the early part of this month, plant out a general crop of toma- 
toes and egg-plant, as directed in pages 328, 381 and 382. 

Cardoons. 

Plant out cardoons in a bed of good earth, at the distance of four 
feet from one another, every way: they may either be planted on 
the level, or in holes made basin-form, at the above distances, pre- 
viously laying some rotten manure in each hole, and mixing the 
earth therewith; one good plant is sufficient in a place, as they rise 
to the height of three or four feet and require a considerable quan- 
tity of earth to blanch them. Observe, before planting, to dress 
the tops and roots as directed for celery; and as they advance in 
growth, they are to be earthed up for blanching, keeping the leaves 
close together. 

These plants are a species of Cynara, or artichoke; the stalks of 
the leaves are used, when well blanched, in salads, soups, and for 
stewing, &c. 

Red Peppers, or Capsicums. 

In the early part of this month, you should plant out from the 
seed-beds full and general crops of the various kinds of capsicums, 
as directed in page 381. 

Plant Pot and other Herbs, ^c. 

Plant out from the seed-beds the young plants of thyme, hyssop, 
marjoram, winter savory, &c. &c.; let this be done, if possible, in 
moist or cloudy weather. Prepare for that purpose some beds, 
three and a half feet wide, rake the surface smooth, and put in the 
plants in straight rows, setting them sis or eight inches distant 
every way, and water them immediately. Many of these kinds 
may be planted occasionally, as edgings, along the sides of any 
particular beds or borders. 

All the large growing kinds of medicinal herbs, such as angelica, 
lovage, &c., ought to be planted a foot or eighteen inches asunder, 
in proportion to their usual growth. You may yet make slips or 
cuttings of lavender, rosemary, thyme, hyssop, &.c., and plant them 
in shady borders. 

Gathering Herbs. 

All kinds of herbs, such as mint, balm, lavender, clary, sage, 
rosemary, &c. that are gathered for drying, or for distillation and 
other purposes, should be cut off when just beginning to come into 
flower, and laid in the shade to dry gradually, which will render 
them much better for any purpose than if they were dried in the 
sun. 



412 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

PVall and Espalier Fruit Trees. 

Where the apricot, peach, nectarine, and other wall or espalier 
trees were neglected last month, or not carefully attended to, you 
may in the early part of this thin the fruit as then directed^ rub off' 
all fore-right or ill-placed shoots, and train others regularly at 
proper distances: be not too officious with the knife at this season, 
nor pull oft" any of the leaves from the branches, unless they are 
distempered: for the pulling off" the leaves will expose the fruit too 
much to the sun, and thereby greatly check their growth; besides 
it would greatly injure the buds which are formed at the foot-stalks 
of those leaves. For further particulars respecting fruit trees, see 
the Fruit Garden for May^ which are generally applicable in this 
month. 

Strawberries. 

The strawberry plants in general will, early in the month, be 
coming into full bearing, and if watered occasionally between the 
rows as directed in page 387, it will swell the fruit to a much larger 
size, and greatly encourage the bloom and setting of an abundant 
crop. 

Should the weather prove moist or cloudy, this will be a very 
proper season, to make new plantations of the various kinds of 
strawberries, observing the method directed in page 222. But it 
would be more adviseable at this time to plant some of the best 
runner-plants of this year's production into nursery beds in shady 
borders, six inches asunder, there to remain and get strength till 
September or October, and then to plant them with balls of earth 
where they are to stand for fruiting. Frequent waterings will now 
be very necessary for the young plantations. 

Be particular in selecting the best kinds, and of the stoutest and 
most vigorous growth; dress or trim their roots, and cut oft' all the 
strings or runners previous to planting. 

Though it is not common to propagate strawberries at this sea- 
son, yet if done, and duly watered till they are well rooted, the 
plants will be stronger, and bear much more abundantly next sea- 
son, than if deferred till September or October; but if the weather 
should not happen to be peculiarly favourable, I would advise them 
to be planted for the present in nursery beds, in a shady border, as 
before observed, taking good care to water them frequently till 
well rooted. 

You may, however, any time this month, plant out some of the 
young runner-plants of the Alpine or prolific strawberry, and if 
shaded and watered till they have taken fresh root, they will soon 
bear fruit on the present plants, and in August and September, on 
the runners produced in the intermediate time. 



4i: 



THE ORCHARD. 

At this time there is very little to be done in the orchard, but a 
repetition of what was recommended in page 388, to which I refer 
you. 

It would be very proper when you observe many of your young 
fruit punctured by insects, and consequently, in a declining state, 
gently to shake the trees and pick and carry away to the pigs such 
as fall to the ground, for the reasons assigned in page 143, &c., 
which see. 



THE VINEYARD. 

During the early part of this month, the vines will be in full 
bloom, which, in the middle states, generally happens about the 
first week thereof, a little earlier or later, according to the sea- 
son; and although the vines may now require some attendance, it 
is dangerous to administer it until the bloom is over, lest the blos- 
soms should be broken off' thereby or otherwise injured; but when 
that period arrives, let the young shoots as they advance be neatly 
and regularly tied up to the stakes, not too close, that they may 
enjoy the full benefit of the sun and air; at the same time displace 
all weakly and unnecessary growths, and any young side shoots 
growing out of the main ones should be nipped off" at their first 
appearance. 

Towards the end of the month, or when the bloom is over and 
the fruit is set, if the weeds have made much progress, they should 
be extirpated by the most convenient means. 

The young vines of one, two, or three years growth, should now 
be carefully tied to the poles placed for their support, and never 
suffered to trail about on the surface of the earth; the ground must 
be kept perfectly free from weeds, as these would rob the plants of 
a great portion of their nourishment, and exhaust the ground to no 
purpose. 



THE NURSERY. 

Weed, Shade, and Water. 



You must observe in this month, as directed in the former, to 
keep the ground between your rows of trees entirely free from 
weeds, for these are very injurious to the plants, and nothing can 



414 THE NURSERY. [June, 

have a worse appearance than a nursery overgrown with weeds; 
therefore, this caution cannot be too often repeated. Observe also, 
to keep the seed-beds in which the seeds of trees and shrubs were 
sown, perfectly clean, for these plants being young, are soon greatly 
injured, if not totally destroyed, when overrun with weeds. 

The beds of small young tender seedlings should now be shaded 
from the mid-day sun, particularly the pines, firs, and other ever- 
greens in general; and also the more delicate and rare deciduous 
trees, shrubs and herbaceous plants. They, however, must not be 
kept close nor shaded too long a time, for that would draw them 
up weak and tender; therefore, give but a slight shading from about 
ten to four or five o'clock, and that only when the sun is powerful 
and no clouds interrupt its rays. 

The more choice sorts of new planted trees, that is, such as were 
planted late in the spring should have occasional waterings; and 
observe to renew the mulch about their roots where it is decayed; 
for at this season the moisture of the earth will be soon exhaled 
and the young fibres dried up when this is neglected, besides it 
will save much trouble in watering. 

The seedling-beds of all kinds of trees and shrubs, but more 
especially the evergreens, will require frequent waterings in dry 
weather; let it always be given late in the afternoon, frequently 
and moderately, as observed in page 388. 

Transplanting Seedling Pines and Firs. 

It has been advised by some writers on gardening, of considera- 
ble celebrity, to plant out in this month pines, firs, &c. from the 
seed-beds; and asserted "that they would be much stronger and 
better prepared to live through the winter by this treatment than if 
suffered to remain in the seed-beds, as their roots would be fixed 
in the ground and their stems shorter." The reverse of this I 
have experienced in upwards of twenty years' practice, and there- 
fore have here noticed it, lest my readers should be led astray by 
such respectable authorities. The true method of treating these 
and such plants is, frequently during the summer months, as they 
advance in growth, to sift some loose earth over them in the seed- 
beds till it comes up to the seed leaves, by which the stems are 
protected, and, as it were, shortened without disturbing their roots 
or checking their growth; and, besides, it tends to keep the mois- 
ture confined to the earth by preventing its too sudden evaporation, 
and the loose sifted mould attracts the dews and imbibes the rains, 
when such fall, by which means the plants are kept cool, moist, and 
in a constant growing state. 

Propagating Evergreens and other Trees and Shrubs by Layers. 

Most kinds of evergreens and deciduous trees and shrubs may 
now be propagated by laying the present year's shoots; being soft 
and tender, they will emit roots much more freely than the older 
wood; and several sorts that would not root for two years if laid in 



June.] THE NURSERY. 4X5 

spring or autumn, by this method will be well rooted the autumn 
twelve months after laying, and many kinds before the ensuing 
winter. Virgin's bower, passion flowers, trumpet flowers, com- 
mon jasmine, and most of the climbing plants root immediately 
when laid in this way. For the various methods of performing this 
operation, see page 289. 

After these are laid you should observe to water them occasion- 
ally in dry weather, v^hich will greatly promote their rooting. But 
these waterings should not be too often repeated, nor too abun- 
dantly given at a time, for that would rot the tender fibres as they 
proceed from the layers; therefore the best method is to lay mulch on 
the surface of the ground, after the layers are put down, to prevent 
the sun from drying it too fast, then a little water will be suflicient, 
and the layers will more certainly take root. 

Trim up Evergreens. 

Evergreens should now be trimmed up according to the uses for 
which they are designed; for if you suffer them to grow rude in 
summer, they cannot be so easily reduced afterwards; besides, the 
ruder they grow the more naked they will be near the stems. 

Newly Grafted and Budded Trees. 

Take off the clay and loosen the bandages of your grafted trees, 
a,nd where any have made remarkably vigorous shoots and seem 
to need support to protect them from the power of violent winds, 
but more especially in exposed situations, let stakes be placed 
thereto, and the shoots bound to them with strings of bass or such 
like. 

The vigorous shoots from the buds inserted last season may, 
under like circumstances, require similar support, which ought to 
be given when deemed necessary. 

Be very particular to rub off such young shoots proceeding from 
the stocks as are independent of the grafts or the inserted bud- 
shoots; for those, if suffered to remain, would rob the grafts and 
budded shoots of a great portion of nourishment, and therefore 
ought to be displaced as often as they appear. 

Budding. 

Budding might now be practised on most kinds of trees and 
shrubs, but when done at this time, the inserted buds, generally, 
grow in the present year, and the shoots arising therefrom are much 
weaker, and worse prepared to withstand the winter frost than those 
produced in spring, from the buds inserted the preceding autumn; 
and, in fact, such seldom make but indifferent trees. Therefore, 
it will be much better not to attempt this work, except upon a few 
roses or other shrubs, until the latter end of July and the autumnal 
months, as hereafter directed. The method of performing the ope- 
ration you will find in the Nursery for July. 



416 

THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Hyacinths and Tulips. 

Most of your hyacinths and tulips will, in the course of this 
month, be fit for taking up, and then are to be treated as directed 
in pages 392 and 393. 

Raiiunculuses. 

When the foliage and flower stems of the ranunculuses appear 
brown and dry, vegetation has then ceased, and it is the exact time 
to take up the roots, because if they are suffered to remain in the 
ground till rainy weather ensues the roots will begin to shoot 
afresh, and thereby sustain a considerable injury. When the roots 
are taken up, their stems, &c. should be cut off close, and they 
should be placed in a shady, airy room, or situation to dry gradual- 
ly; but before this is perfectly accomplished, it will be proper to 
clean and separate them, because, when quite dried, they become 
hard and brittle, and there is great danger of breaking off their 
claws: some may be separated into many complete roots, although 
they are so closely connected, as on a superficial observation, to 
have the appearance of only one large root. 

Nothing remains to be done till the return of the planting season, 
except to stow the sorts separately in bags or boxes, for the sake of 
convenience, in a dry room; in which state they will retain their 
vegetative power for two years, but will be much weakened if kept 
out of the ground till the second. 

Anemones. 

The appearance that indicates the proper time of taking up the 
roots of anemones, and their subsequent treatment, are the same as 
for ranunculuses, with only the following caution, viz: that as the 
roots are exceedingly brittle, it is necessary to handle them very 
gently upon dressing or cleaning away their fibres and the soil that 
adheres to them; however, should only small pieces break off, such 
should not be thrown away, as each will, in the course of two 
years, become a blooming root. 

The constitution of anemones undergoes considerable changes 
with age, which perhaps is, in a greater or smaller degree, the case 
vi^ith all other vegetables. The anemone will not last more than 
twelve or fifteen years* without degenerating, unless it be fre- 

* The ranunculus will last about twenty or twenty-five years in perfec- 
tion; it afterwards degenerates and perishes. Tulips and many other kinds 
of flowers of vigorous constitutions, will continue for a very long time in 
strength and beauty so long as to render it difficult, if not impossible, to 
ascertain the period of their duration. . 



June.] FLOWER GARDEN. 4J7 

queutlj removed to a difterent soil and situation, nor will any 
removal protract or prolong its existence more than thirty or forty 
years; consequently, the collection should be renewed frequently 
by raising new varieties from seed. It blows, generally, in the 
greatest perfection from the fifth to the tenth or twelfth year, after 
which it becomes gradually smaller and weaker; and if the flower 
was originally very full and double with age, it loses that property 
and the petals diminish in number, become small and irregular, 
and finally the sort perishes. 

Taking up early Flowering Bulbs in general. 

All the difterent kinds of spring flowering bulbs, such as fritilla- 
ries, crown imperials, crocuses, snow-drops, &c., whose leaves are 
now decayed, may be taken up and treated as directed more par- 
ticularly in the Flower Garden for last month. 

Guernsey and Belladonna Amaryllises. 

The roots of the Guernsey and belladonna amaryllis may now, if 
their leaves are quite decayed, be taken up, their offsets separated, 
and all the roots treated as directed for the former in page 399, 
with this difference, that during the winter months the belladonna 
will require rather more care and protection than the Guernsey 
amaryllis; but both may be considered as hardy green-house plants. 
The roots ought to be replanted before the end of July, as both 
kinds flower late in autumn. The soil in which to plant them 
should be a good fresh loam, mixed with about a fourth part of fine 
sand, and the roots are not to be covered, when planted in pots, 
more than half an inch above their crowns. 

These plants commonly flower in October, and in some seasons 
not till November; but on taking in the green-house plants those 
should be removed with them, and placed in the windows, where 
they will display their beautiful flowers in great perfection. 

In such of the southern states as the winter frosts are not very 
severe, both these kinds may be planted in the open ground, and 
two or three inches of tan laid over the beds on the approach of 
frost, to protect the bulbs therefrom, or the beds may be covered 
at such times with mats laid on hoops, placed archwise over them, 
for that purpose. 

Hardy autumnal Flowering Bulbs. 

The beginning or middle of this month is still a proper time to 
take up your yellow amaryllises, colchicums, autumnal crocuses, 
and such other autumnal flowering bulbs as have their leaves 
decayed or in a declining state. 

These may be planted again immediately after separating their 

offsets, or kept up dry till July or early in August, and then 

planted where they are to flower in October, &c. The roots when 

taken up are to be carefully dried in the shade, as directed for 

3 E 



418 THE PLEASURE, OR [June. 

tulips, &c. ; and it will be well to plant them either in or before the 
last week of July or the first in August. By planting them at this 
time they will blow stronger than if kept too long out of the ground. 
All these sorts, in their Howering state, are generally unattended 
with leaves, which spring up after the flowers fade. 

It is not absolutely necessary to take up these bulbs every year, 
once in two or three years will do; but then it must be done, in 
order to separate the offsets for increase, and to plant the strong 
roots in fresh earth, which will cause them to shoot and flower 
much more luxuriantly. 

Cyclamens. 

There are five ditt'erent species of Cyclamen described, viz. 
the Cyclamen Coum, europseum, persicura, hedersefolium, and indi- 
cum; the first a native of the south of Europe, the second of Aus- 
tria, the third of Persia, the fourth of Italy, and the fifth of Ceylon; 
with several varieties arising from these species. They are all too 
tender to bear the winter frosts of the middle and eastern states, 
and consequently must be treated as green-house-plants; where they 
should be kept in the front windows, to have the benefit of as 
much light and air as possible. The leaves being generally de- 
cayed about this time, the roots may be taken up and replanted 
immediately into a composition of one half good loamy earth, one 
fourth sand, and one fourth light moory earth, or earth of rotten 
leaves, all being well incorporated together. They do not require 
to be taken up oftener than every second or third year, and then 
only to give them fresh earth, as they never increase by offsets, 
and are only propagated by seed, or by cutting the roots through 
across the crowns, which latter method is, generally, very unsuc- 
cessful. 

The first and second sorts flower in January and February, the 
third in March and April, and the others in September and October, 
they continue a long time in bloom, and display flowers of a curious 
structure and delicately beautiful. The pots containing these roots 
must be kept, during the summer months, where they will not be 
much exposed to the sun, and in that time should have but little 
water, as their roots are, generally, then in an inactive state, and 
would soon rot by too much moisture. 

All the sorts may be propagated by seed, which should be sown 
soon after being ripe, or early in spring, and covered near half an 
inch deep; they must always be protected from frost and also from 
the summer sun; the September following, you are to lay over the 
roots, not covering the leaves, half an inch or better of good loose 
sandy earth, and during the following winter and ensuing summer 
protect them as before. Any time in the summer of the second or 
third year that the leaves are decayed, take up the roots, and replant 
them in pots of fresh earth, covering them one inch deep; here they 
remain till they flower, which will generally be in the fourth and 
fifth years after sowing, but sometimes, when taken good care of. 



JtJNK.] FLOWER GARDEN. 4|9 

and treated with a suitable composition, some of the kinds will 
flower early in the third year from seed. 

Pinks. 

Your superb pinks, during the time of bloom, should be defended 
from the sun by an awning of some kind, and the soil ought to be 
kept regularly moist by soft water, administered between the plants, 
carefully avoiding to wet the blossoms. 

The most approved method of propagating pinks, is by piping 
them as directed for carnations,- they seldom fail to strike sufficient 
root in two or three weeks: when well rooted, they may be trans- 
planted into an open part of the garden, on a bed of common garden 
mould, fresh dug up, where it will in a few weeks be easily dis- 
cernible, which are the most proper to place on the best bed for 
bloom. The time to pipe pinks is immediately previous to, or during 
the bloom, or, indeed, as soon as the new shoots are grown of a 
sufficient length for that purpose. They may also be propagated, 
by slips, taken off" now, or in the spring or autumn. 

New sorts of pinks are produced from seed, but this should be 
gathered from such as have superior properties. 

A Description of the properties of a fine Double Pink. 

The stem should be strong,and erect, and not less than twelve 
inches high. The calyx rather smaller and shorter, but nearly 
similar in form and proportion to that of a carnation, as well as the 
formation of the flower, which should not be less than two inches 
and a half in diameter. 

The petals should be numerous, large, broad, and substantial, and. 
have very finely fringed or serrated edges, free from large coarse 
deep notches or indentures^ in short, they approach nearest to per- 
fection when the fringe on the edge is so fine as to be scarcely 
discernible; but it would be a very desirable object to obtain them 
perfectly rose-leaved, that is, without any fringe at all. 

The broadest part of the limina, or broad end of the petals, 
should be perfectly white and distinct from the eye, unless it be 
ornamented by a continuation of the colour of the eye round it,* 
bold, clean and distinct, leaving a considerable portion of white in 
the centre, perfectly free from any tinge or spot. 

The eye should consist of a bright, or dark rich crimson, or pur- 
ple, resembling velvet: but the nearer it approaches to black, the 
more it is esteemed; its proportion should be about equal to that of 
the white, that it may neither appear too large nor too small. 

Carnations. 

The calyx of many sorts of carnations contains a great number 
of petals, which, as they increase in bulk, will distend and burstit, 

■* When the corolln eonsi.sls of petals of this description, it is denominated a 
Laced Pinl^. 



420 THE PLEASURE; OR [June. 

if not timely prevented: this will generally happen a few days pre- 
vious to the proper time of the blossoms opening, and will, if ne- 
glected, by letting out the petals on one side, and thereby producing 
a loose irregular appearance, totally destroy that compact, graceful 
circular form, which a perfect flower ought to possess, and which is 
one of its greatest ornaments: but this disagreeable effect may be 
easily avoided by fastening a small narrow slip of bladder round 
the middle of the pod, where it is most swelled, and appears to 
have the greatest inclination to burst. The slip of bladder should 
be rather longer than is required to go once around, so that one end 
of it may lay over the other a little, which by the application of 
some strong gum water, will adhere firmly together, and answer the 
purpose completely. Small slips of wet bass may be substituted 
for those of bladder, and being tied with a single knot around the 
same part of the calyx, will answer the purpose. 

Others place upon the calyx thin pieces of card, cut circular, of 
a proper size to suit the blossom, with a hole in the centre adapted 
to the size of the pod, and cut quite through from thence to the 
periphery, in order to admit the stem, after which to draw them up 
around the calyx: these are to be placed close to the guard leaves 
or outside petals, to support them horizontally, and will, when ex- 
tended just as far as the extreme points of the petals, give the 
flower a neat and pleasing appearance; but these are apt to warp 
when long exposed to the weather, especially after being wet, and 
must, in such cases, be either taker* oft' entirely or replaced with 
new ones, as they will no longer answer the intended purpose. 

Either of the above methods may, and should be resorted to, in 
order to have the fine large bursting kinds of carnations and pinks 
to blow to the greatest advantage. 

When the major part of your elegant carnations are in bloom, an 
awning should be placed over the whole, so as to be drawn up or 
let down by means of pullies. The same frame that was used for 
tulips or hyacinths would answer this purpose extremely well. 

In order that the flowers should appear to the greatest advantage, 
it is necessary that the pots should stand upon a stage erected 
theatre-like; and it would be an additional advantage to have the 
flowers suspended from the sticks placed in the pots for their sup- 
port by small pieces of fine elastic wire of unequal lengths, to 
support them in a natural, easy, and graceful manner, neither too 
near together nor remote from each other; one end of the wire 
should be introduced into the stick by means of a small awl, and 
there fixed sufiiciently tight, to prevent its being drawn out by 
the weight of the flower; the other end of the wire should be form- 
ed into a small ring about a quarter of an inch in diameter, to in- 
close the stem below the calyx; this ring should be a little open on 
one side to admit the stem freely without bruising it, M'hich would 
materially injure the bloom. 

The pots must be kept regularly and constantly watered during 
the bloom, and no favourable opportunity should be neglected to 
allow them the full advantage of exposure to light and air; but no 
rain should be admitted to the blossoms at any period of their 
bloom. 



JuNEi] FLOWER GARDEN. 42X 

It is not adviseable to let every pod blow, because it would ren- 
der each blossom smaller than if only two or three were left on 
each plant: it is, therefore, proper in this case, to cut oft' or draw 
out the small lateral pods close to the main stem as soon as they 
appear, in order tliat the remainder may have time to reapdue 
benefit by it; but those sorts that have remarkably large short pods 
abounding witli petals, (commonly called bursters,) should be suf- 
fered to bloom them all or the greater part, although, in general, 
three or four pods are as many as ought to be suffered to blow on 
one plant. 

Modern florists divide the carnations into four classes. 

1. Flakes; of two colours only, and their stripes large, going quite 
through the leaves. 

2. Bizards; with flowers striped or variegated with three or four 
different colours in regular spots and stripes. 

3. Piquettes or Fiquettees; having a white ground, and spotted 
or pounced with scarlet, red, purple, or other colours. 

4. Painted Ladies; these have the petals of a red or purple co- 
lour on the upper side, and white underneath. 

A Description of the Properties of a fine Variegated Double 
Carnation. 

The stem should be strong, tall, and straight, not less than thirty, 
nor more than forty-five inches high. The flower should be at 
least three inches in diameter, and the petals well formed, neither 
so many as to appear crowded, nor so few as to appear thin. The 
lower or outer circle of petals, commonly called the guard leaves, 
should be particularly substantial; they should rise perpendicularly 
about half an inch above the calyx, and then turn oft' gracefully m 
a horizontal direction, supporting the interior petals, which should 
decrease gradually in size as they approach the centre, which should 
be well filled with them. All the petals should be regularly dis- 
posed and lie over each other in such a manner as that their re- 
spective and united beauties may meet the eye altogether; they 
should be nearly flat, or, at most, have but a small degree of inflec- 
tion at the broad end: their edges should be perfectly entire, (or 
what is called rose leaved) without notch, fringe, or indenture. 
The calyx should be at least an inch in length, sufficiently strong 
at the top to keep the base of the petals in a close and circular 
body. The colours should be distinct, and the stripes regular, nar- 
rowing gradually to the claws of the petal, and there ending in a 
fine point. Almost one half of each petal should be of a clear 
white and free from spots. 

Bizards, or such as contain two or more colours upon a white 
ground, are esteemed rather preferable to Flakes, which have but 
one, especially when their colours are remarkably rich and very 
regularly distributed. 

Scarlet, purple, and pink, are the three colours most predomi- 
nant in the carnation; the two first are seldom to be met with in 
the same flower, but the purple and pink very frequently. 



422 THE PLEASURE, OR [June. 

When the scarlet predominates, and is united with a paler colour, 
or, as it sometimes happens, with a very deep purple upon a white 
ground, it constitutes a scarlet bizard, of which there are many 
varieties, some richer and others paler in their colours, as is the 
case with all the rest. 

Pink bizards, are so called when the pink abounds. Purple 
bizards, when the purple abounds. Crimson bizards consist of a 
deep purple and rich pink. 

When the pink^aA'e is very high in colour it is distinguished by 
the appellation of the rose flake; but there are some so nearly in 
the medium between pink and scarlet that it can scarcely be 
defined to which class they belong. 

Propagating Carnations by Laying and Piping. 

When carnations, &c. are propagated in the open air by their 
shoots or layers connected wath the mother plant, the operation is 
called laying; but when they are propagated by cuttings taken 
from the original plant, and by the assistance of artificial means 
caused to strike root in a confined air, it is called piping them. 

The operation of laying or piping, is to commence as soon as the 
plants are in full bloom; nevertheless, those who are particularly 
desirous to preserve their bloom in the greatest perfection, may 
defer it till the flowers are on the decline; but others anxious to 
have their plants strong and well rooted early in autumn, with a 
view that the layers may be better prepared to endure the severi- 
ties of the ensuing winter, begin to lay at the commencement of 
the bloom; at which time, the plants being full of juices and 
vigour, the layers are the better nourished and supported, and 
soon strike root: but it must be allowed that the bloom is consider- 
ably impaired by the wounds inflicted in the operation, particu- 
larly so when performed in an early stage of it; the old plants 
seldom survive unless very strong and sound, or some of the upper 
young shoots be left, such as are too short to be laid with conve- 
nience; these will encourage and continue the circulation of the 
juices if suffered to remain. 

Previous to entering on the operation of laying you must be pro- 
vided with a suflicient number of wooden or other pegs, each to be 
about five or six inches long, and formed somewhat like the figure 
7, that is, with a short hooked end. The operator should, likewise, 
be provided with a table, on which to place the pots, for the greater 
convenience in the examination, dressing, and laying of the shoots, 
also with a sharp pen-knife, and some fresh compost earth. 

The layer may be supposed to have four or five joints, more or 
less; the lower leaves next the root are all to be cut or stripped off 
close to within two or three joints of the extremity of the layer, 
and its extreme points are to be shortened by cutting the tops off 
with the knife, so as to leave them only an inch and a half or two 
inches in length from the joint whence they proceed. 

All the layers in the pots are to be thus treated or prepared 
before any further procedure be made; the surface of the earth is 



June.] FLOWER GARDEN. 423 

then to be cleared of what has fallen on it, and should be stirred 
up about an inch deep: the pot is then to be filled up nearly level 
with some light rich compost, not of too tine a grain. 

The incision immediately follows: the knife should have a small, 
thin, and very sharp blade; it is to be introduced on that side the 
layer next the ground, in a sloping direction upwards, to commence 
a quarter of an inch below the second or third clean joint from the 
extremity, and continue through the middle of that joint, and half 
or three quarters of an inch above it, the small portion left under 
and connected witli the joint is to be cut off horizontally, quite 
close to the bottom of the joint, but not into it, as it is from the 
outer circle of the bottom of the joint that the fibres proceed, con- 
sequently, that part should not be injured. 

After the incision is made, which should be through the middle 
of the joint, &c. , and the lower part dressed as before directed, the 
layer is to be gently forced down to the earth with great care to 
avoid breaking it off, or even cracking it at the joint, which would 
prevent a due communication of the juices of the old plant, so 
necessary for the support of the layer, till it has formed sufficient 
root to support itself; it would likewise render it more likely to 
decay on the application of water. 

The layer is to be held down to the surface of the earth by one of 
the pegs before described, which is to be forced into the soil close 
behind the joint where the incision was made, observing at the 
same time to keep the slit a little open; and it is to be observed that 
the joint from whence the fibres are expected to proceed should be 
covered about an inch deep with good compost earth, and not 
deeper; for the influence of the air is necessary to the free rooting 
of the layer. The remainder of the stalk of the layer should lay, 
as much as possible, upon or above the surface of the pot, but must 
by no means be covered too deep. 

Carnations and pinks, growing in the open ground, in beds or 
borders, &c. , may be propagated by laying them in like manner as 
above, or either may be propagated by pipings, as follows: 

Piping Carnations and Pinks. 

For this purpose it is necessary to form a bed of fine light mould, 
or old compost earth, which should be moderately moistened and 
rendered rather compact than otherwise; then take a hand or bell- 
glass, and with it mark its dimensions on the surface of the soil, 
in order to know where to stick in the pipings, so as to lose no 
room, or endanger their being disturbed when the glass is placed 
over them. 

The cuttings intended to be piped are to have two complete 
joints, that is to say, they are to be cut q^ horizontally close under 
the second joint; the extremities or points of the leaves are like- 
wise to be shortened as for laying, which will leave the whole length 
of the piping about two inches: as soon as thus prepared they may 
be thrown into a basin of soft water for a few minutes to plump. 
They are then to be taken out of the basin singly, and forced into 



424 THE PLEASURE, OR [June. 

the earth in their wet state not more than an inch deep, and about 
two inches asunder every way. 

When a safiBcient number for the glass are thus placed regularly, 
they are to be very gently watered, in order that the earth may ad- 
here more closely to them, and thereby keep out the air; after this 
watering they are to remain open, but not exposed to the sun^ till 
their leaves become perfectly dry, after which the glass is to be 
placed over them carefully, in the same mark that was made by it 
on the surface of the soil before the insertion of the pipings. 

The bottom edges of the glass, or glasses, are to be forced a little 
into the earth to keep out the influence of the external air, and to 
preserve a moist atmosphere about the pipings, till their young 
radicles are established and begin to actj for if fully exposed to the 
air before that period, it would carry oft" from the leaves, &c. a 
greater portion of juices than the young plants could, for the pre- 
sent, extract from the earth, and consequently they must perish 
thereby. This is the particular reason why cuttings of every kind 
succeed better when thus treated than when left exposed to the 
influence of the weather. 

The pipings should have a little of the morning sun, but must be 
shaded from it when the heat increases; this will easily be effected 
by placing mats upon a slight frame of hoops or laths, erected over 
the bed, about two feet above it. 

The glasses should be occasionally taken off', for half an hour at 
a time, early in the morning, or late in the afternoon, to admit fresh 
airj if this material point is neglected, the consequence will be a 
green mossy appearance on the surface of the earth, and a uni- 
versal mouldiness amongst the plants which will destroy them. 

When the fibres are formed, which the additional verdure and 
growth of the plants will demonstrate, the glasses should be placed 
over them very lightly, in order that more air be admitted; and 
when they become tolerably well rooted, the glasses being no longer 
necessary, should be entirely taken away; continue to water them 
frequently, but moderately, as they progress in growth, and for 
their further treatment see the Jloiver garden for next month. 

Some sorts of carnations succeed much better by piping than 
laying, and make healthier plants: it requires attention and expe- 
rience to distinguish such sorts from the rest, which must depend 
wholly on the discernment of the cultivator. 

Planting Carnation and Fink Seedlings. 

The carnation and pink seedlings sown early in spring, may now 
be planted into nursery beds, in rows, eight or nine inches asunder, 
and plant from plant five or six inches, there to remain till Septem- 
ber or October, when they are to be planted at greater distances to 
remain for flowering. 

Persons who are fond of carnations and pinks, ought to sow some 
seed of each sort every year, for it is by this means that all the fine 
new varieties of these charming flowers are obtained. 

When new sorts are procured in this way, they are to be increased 



June.] FLOWER GARDEN. 425 

by layers or pipings, and will generally keep to their original colours j 
but when propagated by seed, very few will be found to possess the 
same colours and properties as the mother plant. 

Double Sweet-Wiliiam. 

The fine kinds of double sweet-william may now be propagated, 
either by slips or by laying the young shoots, as directed for car- 
nations; in either way, they will root freely, but if the slips are 
planted, they will require shade as well as occasional waterings for 
ten or twelve days after. 

Transplanting Annuals. 

You may now transplant into the borders and other places where 
wanted, all the different kinds of annual flowers that succeed in that 
way, and that stand too close where they had been sown; such as 
French and African marigolds, China asters, cocks-combs, chry- 
santhemums, China pinks, China hollyhocks, balsams, amaran- 
thuses of various sorts, gomphrena globosa, and many other kinds, 
observing to do this in moist or cloudy weather, if possible, and to 
give them shade and frequent refreshments of water till newly 
rooted: let them be taken up and transplanted with as much earth 
as possible about their roots, whether into flower-pots or elsewhere. 

Thinning and Supporting Flowering Plants, &i'C. 

Wherever you have sown annual flower seeds in patches, &c. 
and they have grown too thick, you must thin them to proper dis- 
tances, according to their respective habits of growth, so as to allow 
them full liberty to attain the utmost perfection. 

Place sticks for the support of the various kinds that require it, 
whether annual, perennial, biennial, or climbing plants, as directed 
in page 397", observing the method there recommended. 

Cut off, close to the ground, the decaying flower-stems of such 
perennial plants as are past flowering, and clear the roots from 
dead leaves; but where intended to save seed from any of the kinds, 
leave for that purpose some of the principal stems. 

Trim, dress, and tie up any disorderly growing plants, pick off' 
all withered leaves, and cut out decayed parts. 

Propagating Fibrous-rooted Plants by Cuttings. 

You may still continue to propagate the double scarlet-lychnis, 
double-rocket, lychnideas or phloxes, with many other like kinds, 
by cuttings of the flower-stalks, as directed for the scarlet-lychnis 
in page 397. 

Transplanting Seedling Perennials and Biennials. 

Transplant from the seed-beds the early sown perennial and 
3 F 



426 THE PLEASURE, OR [June. 

biennial seedling flower plants, that are grown to a sufficient size; 
such as sweet-williams, sweet scabious, Canterbury-bells, rose- 
campion and monk's-hood, soapwort, valerian, Chinese ixia, ascle- 
piases, asters and rhexias; coreopsis, hibiscuses, dracocephalums, 
&c. &c. &c. 

Prepare for these three or four feet wide beds of good earth, and 
plant them by line at six inches distance every way, water them 
immediately, and if the weather be very dry, give occasional shade 
and waterings till they have taken root and begin to grow. The 
plants are to remain in these beds until autumn or spring, and are 
then to be planted out finally into the beds or borders where they 
are intended to flower the ensuing year. 

Stock- Gillijlowers and Wall-flowers. 

The stock-gilliflowers and wall -flowers are not sufficiently hardy 
to bear the winter frosts of the middle or eastern states; therefore, 
it will be necessary to plant the seedlings of these kinds in some 
convenient place where a garden frame may be placed over them 
in winter, on which to lay boards or any slight covering for their 
protection, as directed in November. Or you may plant them now 
in the open borders to grow till September, then to be taken up and 
potted, and in November they are to be removed into their winter 
quarters: or, they may immediately be planted into small pots, 
which are to be plunged into some shady border, where you can 
give them water during the season according to their necessities. 

Trim Box Edgings. 

Take advantage of the first moist weather that happens after the 
middle of this month, in which to clip and dress your box edgingsj 
for if done in dry or parching weather they are apt to turn foxy, 
and consequently, lose much of their beauty. 

The edgings should be cut very neat, even at top and both sides, 
and ought not to be suffered to grow higher than two or three 
inches, nor broader than two. When the edgings of box are kept 
near that size, they look extremely neat, but if permitted to grow 
to the height of four, five, or six inches, and perhaps near as much 
in breadth, they then assume a clumsy and heavy appearance, and 
deprive the beds and borders of that apparent roundness so neces- 
sary to set them ofl" to advantage. 

Dressing the Flower-Borders and Shrubberies,- ^c. 

The flower-borders, beds, shrubbery-clumps, and all other orna- 
mental compartments, must now be kept remarkably clean and 
neat, and no weeds suffered to appear; or at least to grow to any 
considerable size in any of these places. The weeds must be ex- 
terminated immediately on their appearance either by hoe or hand, 
occasionally, and this should be performed in a dry day; if with the 



June.] FLOWER GARDEN. 427 

hoe, cutting them up within the ground and raking them oflf imme- 
diately. 

Examine the evergreens and flowering shrubs, and where any 
have made disorderly shoots, let such be cut clean out or shortened, 
as you may deem expedient, in order to preserve the heads in due 
form and of an elegant appearance. 

fVatering. 

Occasional waterings must be given to all your late planted 
shrubs and flowers, and particularly to the annual, perennial, and 
biennial flower plants newly planted out into nursery beds. 

Your entire stock of plants in pots and boxes, seedlings and 
others, must be watered as often as the earth about them becomes 
dry and unfriendly to vegetation? and your carnation and other 
layers must be duly attended to in this respect to preserve the earth 
about them moderately moist, and only so. 

For some useful observations in respect to watering, see page 390. 

Grass and Gravel-Walks. 

The grass and gravel-walks, &c., must be treated constantly 
during the summer and autumn, as directed in page 400. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

General care of the Green-House Plants, 

The plants being now out and fully exposed to the air, v/ill re^ 
quire a constant supply of water? it is impossible to say how often 
it ought to be administered, or how much should be given at a time, 
as the state of weather, the different constitutions and habits of the 
plants, and also the size of the pots or tubs as well as of the plants 
themselves, make a material difference in that respect. The only 
true guide is the state of the earth in the pots or tubs, which should 
always be kept moist and in a proper condition to promote and 
encourage vegetation. In very hot weather, the plants that are in 
small pots will require some water both morning and evening, at 
other times once a day will be sufiicient; but as the plants have no 
other nourishment but what they extract from the earth within the 
pots or tubs, it ought to be a general rule to keep it constantly 
moist, but not too wet. 

The best water for this purpose is such as is taken from rivers 
or ponds where it is fully exposed to the sun and air, so that if you 
have no other than spring or well water, it should always be ex- 
posed in cisterns, &c. to the sun and air at least twenty-four hours 
before it is used. 



428 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [June. 

You never should put sheep-dung, or any other, in the water, as 
is practised bj many persons to the great injury of their plants; for 
these strongly impregnated waters, instead of aftbrding nourish- 
ment, cause the leaves to change to a pale sickly colour, and ulti- 
mately bring on a general debility; they operate like hot liquors 
on human bodies, which, at first taking, seem to add new vigour, 
yet, after some time, leave the body weaker than before. 

If mowings of short grass, or some moss, be spread on the sur- 
face earth of the large tubs or pots of oranges, lemons, &c., it will 
preserve the moisture and defend the upper roots from the sun and 
drying air. 

Such of the pots with plants, as are plunged in the earth, must 
be turned fully around in their seats once a week to break off such 
fibres as extend through the holes at bottom into the surrounding: 
earth; for the reasons of doing this see pages 402 and 403. 

Some people thin what they consider the superabundant blos- 
soms of oranges and lemons; this I do not approve of, as it is 
probable that such as would set the best fruit might be plucked off 
as well as any other; therefore, it will be the better way to suffer 
the whole bloom to remain, and if too abundant a crop of fruit 
should happen to set to thin them soon after to a suflicient number. 
However, where some are wanted for making orange-flower water, 
the smallest may be picked off where they appear in clusters, 
leaving the largest and most promising. Any declining myrtles, 
or other hard-wooded plants, may be greatly restored to strength 
and vigour by turning them out of their pots, earth and all, and 
placing the balls in baskets made of peeled or dried willows, and 
plunging these in the open borders till September; when they are 
to be taken up, the extending roots trimmed off, the baskets cut 
away, and the plants with the entire balls replanted in suitable 
sized pots or tubs, after which they are to be placed in the shade 
till housed. 

Propagating the Plants. 

Myrtles may be propagated abundantly towards the middle or 
latter end of the month by slips or cuttings of the present year's 
wood, as may also hydrangeas, fuschias, China and Otaheite roses; 
coronillas, bupthalmum fruticosum, geraniums, jasmines, heliotro- 
piums, and almost every other kind of shrubby or under shrubby 
plants; observing when dressed and the under leaves taken off to, 
plant them three, four, or five inches deep, according to their 
respective lengths, in wide garden pans or pots filled with light 
rich earth, or into beds of similar earth, where they can have occa- 
sional shade and waterings till rooted. However, the covering of 
them with bell-glasses will greatly facilitate their rooting and pro- 
mote their growth, which, for the reasons assigned in page 423, is 
by fai- the most eligible method, but particularly for woody plants, 
and such others as are not of the succulent tribe. 

This is also a very proper time to propagate succulent plants of 



June.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 429 

most kinds, which are to be treated as directed in page 401, under 
the article Propagating the Plants. 

Transplanting Seedling Exotics. 

You should now transplant, separately, into small pots any 
advanced young seedling exotics, which were raised this year 
from seed; giving them shade and occasional waterings till newly 
rooted. 

Budding. 

Any time this month you may bud oranges, lemons, citrons and 
shaddocks; the buds are not to be taken from the shoots made this 
season, as they are not yet sufficiently ripe, but from those pro- 
duced last autumn, which will now take freely, and produce hand- 
some shoots in the present year. 

In about three weeks or a month the buds will be taken, when 
you are to untie the bandages, and soon after head down the stocks 
of such as are plump^ fresh, and well united, to within four inches 
of the buds, cutting off all side branches and suffering no other 
buds to grow but the inserted ones: as the shoots advance tie them 
to the spurs left for that purpose to prevent their being broken oflf 
by winds, or displaced by any other accidents. 

Budding, however, should not at this time be generally practised, 
for the buds now inserted will start in a few weeks, and the shoots 
produced thereby will not be as ripe, nor, consequently, in as good 
condition to stand the winter as those produced in the early part of 
the season from the buds inserted in August. For the method of 
budding see the Nursery in July. 

Cape and other Green-House Bulbs. 

The green-house bulbs and tuberous-rooted plants, natives of the 
Cape of Good Hope, &c., whose leaves are now decayed, such as 
gladioluses, ixias, watsonias, antholizas, ornithogalums, moreas, 
&c., may be taken up and immediately transplanted, or they may 
be kept up till September, and if carefully wrapped in dry moss, it 
will tend greatly to their preservation; but there are some kinds 
which will require to be planted into pots of fresh earth immedi- 
ately, such as cyclamens, &c., and all the autumnal flowering 
bulbs, such as the Guernsey and belladonna amaryllises, must not 
be kept longer out of the ground than the end of next month, as that 
would greatly weaken their bloom. 



430 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

The more tender kinds of exotics, which could not with safety 
be brought out into the open air the latter end of last month, should 
now be placed where intended to remain during summer. 

Their subsequent treatment whilst out, being exactly similar to 
that directed for the green-house plants, in this and the preceding 
month, induces me in order to avoid repetitions, to refer you to 
those articles. But let it be observed, that although most of the 
shrubby kinds will require abundance of water at this season, yet 
that article must be administered with rather a sparing hand to the 
succulent tribe. 

Pine-Jipples. 

The pine-apple plants must now have abundance of air night and 
day, by keeping all the upright front lights slid open, and also 
the roof-lights, except during heavy rains, when the roof-lights must 
be kept close to preserve the bark-pit from too much wet. The 
plants will likewise require frequent refreshments of water, but 
this should not be given too copiously at one time. 

Some of the most forward pine-apples will, about the end of the 
month, be advancing towards maturity^ be careful at that time to 
give such plants but little water, for too much would spoil the fla- 
vour of the fruit. 

The succession pines must likewise have abundance of air and 
a sufficiency of water, to keep them in a regular and constant state 
of vegetation. 

Propagating Hot-House Plants. 

Continue to propagate the various kinds of plants belonging to 
this department, by cuttings, layers, offsets, suckers and seeds, as 
directed in the preceding months. 

All the succulent tribe may now be easily propagated by suckers, 
slips, cuttings, &c., laying them when taken off in a shady place 
for a week or ten days, more or less, according to the degree of 
succulency before they are planted. 



431 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Clean and prepare the ground where your early crops of cauli- 
flowers and cabbages grow, and also any other vacant spots, in 
order to receive such seeds and plants as are proper to supply the 
table with good vegetable productions in autumn and winter. 

Melons and Cucumbers, <^c. 

Your crops of melons and cucumbers should now be kept very 
clean and free from weeds, the spaces between the hills must be 
carefully hoed in dry weather without injuring the vines j also, hoe 
and weed the crops of water-melons, squashes, pumpkins, &c., for 
unless they are kept perfectly clean, good fruit and numerous pro- 
ductions cannot be expected. 

Sowing Melons for Mangoes. 

The first week of this month is a very proper time in the middle 
states to sow a principal crop of melons for mangoesj they are to 
be sown and managed as directed in pages 368 and 405. The long, 
smooth musk melon, is generally sown for that purpose. 

Sowing Cucumbers for Pickling, 8fc. 

Sow in the first week or ten days of this month, a general crop 
of cucumbers for pickling, and treat them in every respect as di- 
rected for like crops in May and June. 

The long green Turkey cucumber is preferred by many for this 
purpose, but it is not very prolific; the long and short prickly, and 
particularly the green cluster cucumber being great bearers, will 
be more profitable, and are equally good for use. Some of the early 
frame or short prickly kinds may be sown in the middle or any 
time in the month for a late crop. 

Planting Cabbages, Savoys, Borecole, ^-c. 

Take advantage of moist or cloudy weather, and plant out your 
late crops of cabbages, savoys, borecole, broccoli, turnip-cabbage, 
Brussels sprouts, Jerusalem kale, and any other of the cabbage 
tribe that you wish to cultivate: let them be planted as directed in 
the former months, and immediately watered, which must be fre- 



432 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [July. 

quentlj repeated till they are newly rooted and in a free growing 
state. The laying of a fresh cabbage leaf over each plant when 
set, will afford protection from the sun for a few days, which will 
be of considerable service. Some seed of the green curled bore- 
cole may now be sown for a late crop. 

Transplanting and Sowing Endive. 

Plant out, to supply the table early in autumn, a sufficient quan- 
tity of the best and stoutest endivej it requires a good, strong, and 
(at this season) moist ground; if well dunged, it will be an addi- 
tional advantage. Put in the plants a foot asunder every way, and 
water them immediately, which repeat every evening till the plants 
have taken root. 

Sow endive seed in an open, cool, and moist situation, two or 
three times this month, for the greater certainty of procuring a re- 
gular supply; let it be of the curled kind, and sown tolerably thin, 
for when the plants grow too close in the seed-beds, they are more 
subject to start soon to seed than if they had been raised at mode- 
rate distances. Give occasional waterings to the seed-beds both 
before and after the plants appear, which will greatly encourage 
their free growth. 

Kidney-Beans. 

You may plant kidney-beans of the dwarf kinds any time this 
month; or, in order to have a regular succession, some may be 
planted in the beginning, middle, and end thereof. The running 
kinds will also succeed well if planted in the early part of the 
month. It will, however, be necessary at this time to water the 
drills, or lay the beans to soak in river or pond water about five or 
six hours previous to planting, or if both be done, it will be still 
better. 

Cauliflowers. 

The late sown cauliflowers intended for winter use may now be 
planted out finally if not done before. 

In planting this crop, it would be of essential advantage to take 
opportunity of showery or moist weather if such should happen in 
proper time; plant them in rows two feet and a half asunder, and 
the same distance in the row; let them be directly watered, and 
afterwards at times, till they have taken good root. 

Small Sallading. 

Continue to sow crops of small sallading every eight or ten days, 
as directed in the former months; but these must now be sown on 
shady borders, or else be shaded with mats, occasionally, from the 
mid-day sun, and frequently watered both before and after the 
plants appear above ground. 



July.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 433 

Carrots. 

Towards the end of this month you may sow some carrot seed 
to raise young roots for the table in autumn and winter. Choose 
an open situation and light ground, and let the seed be sown im- 
mediately while the earth is fresh after being dug. When the 
plants are up an inch or two, thin them to five or sis inches every 
way. 

Celery. 

This is a proper time to plant out into trenches a full crop of 
celery, for autumn and winter use; let this be performed, in every 
respect, as directed in page 407, which see. The red stalked celery 
is extremely valuable, blanches very white, and is by most people, 
who have had the opportunity of cultivating it, preferred to any 
other. 

The following method of planting out celery may also be prac- 
tised, which for the ease of preserving the plants in winter will be 
found extremely convenient; besides, a greater quantity can be 
raised on the same complement of land. Lay out the ground into 
four feet wide beds, with alleys between of three feet; dig the beds 
a spade deep, throwing the earth upon these alleys; when done, lay 
four or five inches of good, well-rotted hot-bed or other dung all 
over the bottom of the beds, dig and incorporate it with the loose 
earth remaining, and cover the whole with an inch or an inch and 
a half of the earth from the alleys; plant four rows in each bed at 
equal distances, and eight inches apart in the rows; after which, 
give them a plentiful watering, and stick down small branches of 
cedar, or of any kind of evergreen shrubs between the rows, to 
shade them from the sun till well rooted, when the branches are to 
be taken away. The plants must be kept free from weeds till 
grown of a sufficient size for earthing, which is done with the as- 
sistance of boards, by laying them along the rows to support the 
leaves while you are putting in the earth from the alleys, and re- 
moving them as you progress in the business. For the method of pre- 
serving the plants in winter see the Kitchen Garden'm November. 

Land or earth up your early crops of celery, first breaking the 
earth fine with the spade, and then laying it up neatly to both sides, 
always preserving the tops and hearts of the plants free, that they 
may continue in growth without any interruption; repeat this 
earthing at intervals of eight or ten days, till the plants are suffi- 
ciently blanched and of proper size for use. Sow a little more 
seed in the first week of the month to answer for a late crop, if 
such should be wanted. 

Turnips. 

Any time between the twentieth of this month and the middle of 
August, a principal crop of turnips may be sown for autumn and 
winter use; but the earlier they are sown in that period, the larger 
3G 



434 "TH^ KITCHEN GARDEN, [July. 

size will the roots attain to. It would be of much importance to 
take advantage of moist weather for this purpose, should such hap- 
pen in due season. 

As tlie cultivation of turnips upon an extensive scale, as well for 
the feeding of cattle during the winter months as for culinary pur- 
poses, may and ought to become an interesting object to the citi- 
zens of the United States, I deem it the more necessary to give 
some information respecting the field culture of that very valuable 
root. 

The turnip delights in a light, sandy loam; if a little moist the 
better, especially in warm climates. Upon new or fresh ground 
they are always sweeter than on an old or worn out soil. Though 
such is the kind of land best adapted to the raising of turnips, yet 
they are cultivated upon every sort of soil in use as arable land. 

Much of the sandy soil now laying waste in various parts of the 
Union, might, with the assistance of culture, and a small portion af 
manure, be profitably employed in producing turnips; for such 
ground, if dressed with a light coat of clay or loam, would yield 
excellent crops of this vegetable. 

The ground intended for the production of turnips in the ensu- 
ing season, ought to be deeply ploughed in October or November, 
and to be left in that rough state to receive the benefits of the win- 
ter frosts, &c. In the April following, when it is perfectly dry, 
harrow it and let it lie so till the middle of May, when it should 
have another deep ploughing across, or contrarywise to the former; 
the first week in June harrow it, and towards the end of that 
month give the field a light coat of well rotted manure, and im- 
mediately plough it in lightly; after which the soil and manure are 
to be well incorporated by harrowing the ground effectually with a 
weighty harrow. 

Ah ! says the farmer, this will never do, the crop will not be 
worth the expense. First, make one fair experiment, and I am 
confident 3'^ou will not give up the pursuit: you ought to take into 
consideration, that after the turnips are oft' the ground, it will be in 
a high state of preparation for several successive crops, of various 
kinds, and that without this, or similar tillage, it may remain during 
your life in an unproductive state. 

There are four principal varieties of the turnip which are culti- 
vated in the field way. 1. The white Norfolk. 2. The large pur- 
ple topped. 3. The large green, and 4. The pudding, or tankard- 
shaped turnip. The last is in shape so perfectly different from 
the other sorts, that it might be ranked as a distinct species. In- 
stead of spreading itself flat upon the ground, or burying itself par- 
tially in the surface mould, it rises in a cylindrical form, eight, ten, 
or twelves inches high; standing almost wholly out of the ground. 
In either contexture or quality, it resembles very much the large 
white Norfolk turnip, of which it is by much the most formidable 
rival. Indeed, for early sowing to be eaten off in autumn, this 
long rooted kind seems to gain a preference, as being earlier and 
more tender than any of the other sorts, but it will not keep as well 
in winter. 



July.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 435 

The time of sowing depends much on the application^ when 
turnips are intended tor early consumption, they may be sown soon 
after the middle of this month; the general mode, in the middle 
states, is, to begin to sow about the twentieth of July, and to con- 
tinue sowing, as convenient, from this time to the middle of August, 
or a few days after. 

If a farmer could insure his first crop, I would not advise him to 
sow till the last four days in this month, or even to the third or 
fourth day of August; but liable as the turnip crop is to numerous 
accidents and miscarriages, it is prudent to have a week or two in 
reserve for a second sowing, in case the first should fail. 

The quantity of seed sown on an acre by the great turnip farmers, 
is never less than one pound; more frequently a pound and a half, 
and by some two. If every grain was to come to perfection 
a quarter of a pound would be more than sufficient, but having 
to encounter so many accidents, a pound is the least quantity that 
ought to be sown on an acre. 

The period in which you intend to sow being arrived, plough 
your prepared turnip ground once more, lightly; j>;ive it one or two 
strokes of the harrow all over, and sow the seed immediately on the 
fresh surface. The method of sowing is generally by broad-cast, 
with a high and even hand; but some sow it in rows by means of a 
machine called a turnip -drill, which method is greatly approved of, 
particularly as by it much labour is saved in hoeing and thinning 
the plants. 

In the former method the seed is covered by drawing a light har- 
row backward, that is, wrong end foremost, to prevent the tines, 
which are generally set somewhat pointed forward, from tearing up 
the clods and burying the seed too deep. 

One of the most important parts of the treatment, due to the cul- 
tivation of the turnip, yet remains to be done; that is, to roll the 
field with a heavy roller immediately after harrowing in the seed, 
provided that the ground is sufficiently dry, or as soon after as it is 
in a tit condition. By this means all the clods are broken, and much 
of the seed that would otherwise be exposed to birds, &c. will be 
covered, the surface rendered smooth and compact thereby, and 
consequently, more retentive of moisture, which will greatly pro- 
mote the vegetation of the seed and growth of the plants. 

But the all important point is, that the rolling of the ground is 
experimentally found to be the most effectual method, hitherto dis- 
covered, for the preservation of the rising crop from the destructive 
depredations of the fly. The turnip fly is always found most nu- 
merous in rough worked ground, as there they can retreat and take 
shelter under the clods or lumps of earth, from such changes of 
weather as are disagreeable to them, or from the attacks of small 
birds and other animals. 

Experiments have been tried on coating the seed with sulphur, 
soot, &c. and of steeping it in train oil ancl in solutions of various 
kinds, as a security against the fly; but the result has not been such 
as to establish any practice of this nature. 

Hoeing the plants and setting them out, as it is called, comes 



436 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [July. 

next under consideration; the method of doing this dexterously is 
difficult to describe, nothing but practice can teach it. A boy in 
the turnip counties by the time he is the height of the hoe begins to 
make use of it, consequently every man who has been bred there 
to country business, is a turnip-hoer, yet not always, even with this 
advantage, an expert one. 

The operation, to be performed dexterously and well, requires a 
quickness of eye and a dexterity of hand that every man is not 
favoured vfith; while some men catch the proper plants to be 
singled, and set them out, with a rapidity and neatness of execu- 
tion very pleasing to the observer. 

The hoe is generally drawn around the plant with a long sweep- 
ing stroke, and when the plants are small, this is the only stroke 
that can be used with propriety; but when they are grown out of 
the danger of being buried, a short straight stroke is more expedi- 
tious. 

Upon the whole, it matters not which way the operation is per- 
formed, provided the ground be stirred, the weeds eradicated, and 
the plants set out singly and at proper distances. 

The due distance is from seven to twelve inches every way; this 
must be regulated according to the strength of the land, the time of 
sowing, and the kind of turnip cultivated; strong ground and early 
sowing always producing the largest roots. 

The width of the hoe should be in proportion to the medium dis- 
tance to be left between the plants, and this to their expected size. 

The critical time of the first hoeing is when the plants, as they 
lie spread upon the ground, are nearly the size of the palm of the 
hand; if, however, seed weeds be numerous and luxuriant, they 
ought to be checked before the turnip plants arrive at that size, 
lest being drawn up tall and slender they should acquire a weak, 
sickly habit. 

A second hoeing should be given when the leaves are grown to 
the height of eight or nine inches, in order to destroy weeds, loosen 
the earth, and finally to regulate the plants; a third, if found neces- 
sary, may be given at any subsequent period. 

Here again will the farmer exclaim against the expense and 
trouble of hoeing; but let him try one acre in this way, and leave 
another of the same quality to nature, as is too frequently done, 
and he will find that the extra produce of the hoed acre will more 
than six times compensate for the labour bestowed. 

In the kitchen garden, the early Dutch, early stone, green 
topped, red round, white round, and yellow turnips, are excellent 
kinds to cultivate for table use, and full crops of them ought to 
be sown between the twentieth of this month and the middle of 
August. 

Ruta Baga, or Sioedish Turnip. 

This variety of turnip is the most important of all, and deserves 
to be ranked in the first class of vegetable productions. Its quan- 
tity of produce, richness of flavour, and extreme hardiness, renders 



July.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 



437 



it of great importance and gives it a pre-eminence ovei every other 
kind. The best time for sowing is from the twentietl of June to 
the twentieth of July, according to the season. The gpund should 
be well prepared and manure scattered pretty thickly ofer it, which 
done, it should be laid off in ridges about three feet apirt, two fur- 
rows together with the plough, and the seed sown on tie top. By 
this method you have a double portion of the manure 3r each row 
of turnips and a better opportunity of attending to thiir after cul- 
ture. When they are of sufficient growth thin them to he distance 
of twelve inches apart in the row; they will continue ;rowing and 
increasing in size till late in autumn, when, if not ased before, 
they may be taken up and preserved through the winter, in like 
manner as other turnips, (or permitted to remain in the ground) 
than which they are more hardy, will keep better, and be as fresh 
in May as at Christmas. 

The flesh of the root is yellow, sweet, and firm, being nearly 
twice as heavy as a common turnip of the same size; when dressed 
for the table it is by most people preferred to the garden turnip, 
and as well as the tops is peculiarly grateful to most sorts of 
cattle. 

Lettuces. 

Thin and transplant such lettuces as were sown last month, 
water them immediately after, and repeat it as often as necessary 
till the plants are well rooted. 

Sow more lettuce seed in the beginning, middle, and particularly 
in the last week of the month, in order to have a regular and con- 
stant supply for the table. The white Silesia, brown Dutch, India, 
imperial, grand admiral, and Saxony cabbage lettuce, are all very 
good kinds to sow at this time. 

Spinage. 

In the last week of this month a good crop of spinage may be 
sown for autumn use; it will not then be so subject to run to seed 
as in the former months. The round seeded kind is always pre- 
ferable for summer and autumn service. 

Radishes. 

Radishes of every kind may be sown in the last week of this 
month with a good prospect of success; but particularly the white 
and black Spanish, or winter sorts, of which you ought to sow a 
full crop for autumn use. 

Sow, likewise, some of the short-top, salmon, and turnip-rooted 
radishes; should the season prove any way moist, they will succeed 
tolerably well. Let all these kinds be now sown on moist loamy 
ground. 



438 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [July. 

Sow Cabbage Seed. 

Sow som of the earlj York, Battersea, and sugar-loaf kinds of 
cabbage foi a supply of joung gree'ns during the autumn; the 
hearts of tlese are very delicious when grown to a tolerable size, 
and are, bj many, very much admired; when used in that state 
they are caled coleworts, having totally superseded the true cole- 
wort, whichwas formerly cultivated for boiled salads. Some savoy 
seed may aso be sown at this time for a late winter crop. 

Artichokes. 

If you desire to have large artichokes you must, in the first 
week of this nonth, if not done in June, in order to encourage the 
main head, cit off all the suckers or small heads which are pro- 
duced from tie sides of the stems, and these may now be dressed 
for the table. 

The maturity of a full grown artichoke is apparent by the open- 
ing of the scales; and it should always be cut ofl' before the flower 
appears in the centre. 

As soon as the head or heads are collected from any stem let it 
be immediately cut down close to the ground. This practice is too 
often disregarded, but such neglect is utterly wrong; for the stems, 
if permitted to remain, would greatly impoverish the roots, and 
injure them much more than is generally imagined. 

Where cardoons are in request, and they were not planted out 
last month, it should be done in the first week of this, as directed 
in page 411. 

Collecting Seeds. 

Collect all kinds of seeds that come to good maturity, cutting off 
or pulling up the stems with the seed thereon as they ripen; and 
spread them in some airy place where they can receive no wet, in 
order that the seeds may dry and harden gradually; observing to 
turn them now and then, and not to lay such a quantity together 
as might bring on a fermentation and hazard the loss of the whole. 
When they are sufficiently dry, beat out and clean the seeds, and 
put them by in boxes or bags till wanted. 

Leeks. 

You may still continue to transplant leeks, as directed in page 
408; by this method they will grow to a great size, and be much 
better for use than if suffered to remain in the seed-beds. 

Herbs. 

Gather herbs for drying and distilling as they come into flower, 
and dry them in the shade. 

Sage, hyssop, thyme, lavender, winter savory, and many other 



July.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 439 

kinds may still be propagated by slips of the present year growth, 
giving them shade and occasional waterings till roote, Plant 
them two-thirds of their length into the earth. 

Gather chamomile, marigold, and such other flowers t may be 
wanted and that are now in bloom: spread the flowers inie shade 
till sufficiently dry, and then put them up in paper bags,cc. 

Solving Peas. 

In the last week of the month, sow a crop of the ear frame, 
Charleston, or golden-hotspur peas. Water the drills ai let the 
peas be soaked in soft water five or six hours previous toowing. 
Should the season prove moist, you will have a tolerable op from 
these early in September. 

Egg-Plant, Red-Peppers and Tomatoes. 

In the first week of this month, if not done before, planut suf- 
ficient crops of egg-plants, red-peppers and tomatoes, asirected 
last month; if the weather be unfavourable give them sde and 
water till well taken with the ground, but on no account lay the 
final planting of the egg-plants longer; the red-peppernay be 
transplanted any time in the month, but the earlier the beir. 

Ordinary PFork. 

Diligently destroy weeds before they seed in every paof the 
ground, and immediately carry them away out of the gard* 

Give water to such plants and crops as require it, butkhisbe 
done always in an evening, that it may have time to soak wn to 
the roots before the sun appears to exhale it. 

Earth up your advancing crops of cabbages, and all otholants 
of that tribe; likewise, okra, peas, kidney-beans, &c., t will 
greatly refresh them and protect their roots and fibres m the 
powerful heat of the sun. 

Pull up the stalks of beans, cauliflowers, cabbages, and thaulm 
of peas and other plants, which have done bearing, that the-ound 
may be clear, for if tl;ese are suffered to remain, they will rbour 
vermin to the injury of the adjoining crops. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Wall and Espalier Trees. 

In the beginning of this month you must look carefu over 
your wall and espalier trees, rubbing oft' all fore-right sho, and 
training in all such regular growths as are designed toremiclose 



440 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 



[July, 



to the waj or espalier at regular distances, and in their due posi- 
tion. N^er pull ott'any leaves nor thin the branches in order to 
expose th fruit to the sun, as the sudden exposure would be ex- 
tremely ijurious to themj by it their skins would be hardened and 
contracte, and their growth greatly retarded. Though I am not 
fond of ing the knife too freely at this season, which is a very 
common nd pernicious practice, yet it will be proper to cut out 
irregulamd disorderly shoots, but this must be done judiciously, 
and an aindant supply of young wood left for the winter pruning, 
particulay on the peaches, nectarines, figs, apricots, and morella- 
cherriesyvhich generally bear their fruit on the preceding year's 
wood: tlapi'icot bears on fruiting-spurs likewise. 

Pick (' all punctured and decaying fruit and give them to the 
hogs; alssuch as have fallen in that state from the trees; for the 
worms tt are in these fruit, which have been the cause of their 
decline, ill soon arrive at their fly or winged state, and attack the 
remainii fruit. 

Lookirefully over the fruit trees which have been grafted last 
spring d)udded in the former season, and sufier no shoots from 
the stoc to remain, for these will rob the grafts of their nourish- 
ment. 

Budding or Inoculating. 

Budcg may be performed on some kinds of fruit trees about 
the mide of this month, but as that subject is fully treated of in 
the nurfy department, I refer you thereto for information. 

Destroy Wasps, Sj-c. 

Hanpp glass phials filled with honey or sugar water in dif- 
ferent [ts among the wall, espalier, and standard fruit trees, in 
order tiestroy wasps, ants, &c., which would otherwise infest and 
devoume choice fruit; by the sweetness of the water they are 
temptento the phials and frequently drowned; but these should 
be huniefore the fruit begins to ripen, for then the insects would 
be muGooner tempted to the water than after having tasted the 
fruit: ere a sufficient number of glasses are placed in time, pro- 
perly anded to, and the water occasionally renewed, very little 
damags done by these insects. 

Clean the Borders, Sfc. 

Hoed clean the ground about your espalier and wall trees, for 
if weeare permitted to grow at this season, they will rob the trees 
of a gt portion of their nourishment: cut oft" all suckers which 
arise fi the roots of the trees, as they are produced, for these are 
robbernd would injure them much if suffered to remain. 



441 



THE ORCHARD. 



Little remains to be done during this month in the orchard, but 
to feast on its delicious productions: however, it will be verj proper 
to pick and carry away all decayed and fallen fruit, for the reasons 
assigned in the fruit garden for this month. Should any of the trees 
show canker or much gum, you may now cut out the decayed part 
clean to the fresh wood, and give it a dressing of the medicated tar 
prescribed in page 47, giving this medication a due consistence as 
there directed, to prevent its melting away by the heat of the 
weatherj or you may apply Mr. Forsyth's composition, for w^hich 
see page 224. 

Where it can be done without injury, it would be of use to turn 
pigs into the orchard at this season to eat up the fallen, decayed 
fruit, and, consequently, to destroy the numerous brood of insects 
contained therein. 



THE VINEYARD. 

In the middle states the grapes are generally set or formed about 
the first week of this month; when all the loose hanging shoots are 
to be neatly tied up to the stakes, and the useless weak growths, 
as well as the suckers arising from the roots and lower parts of the 
stems, cleared or cut away; but by no means divest any of the 
branches of their leaves, as some unskilful persons too often prac- 
tise; for these are absolutely necessary to the growth and protec- 
tion of the fruit: the small side shoots growing on the main branches 
from the axillas of the leaves, should, if time permits, be nipped off 
as they are produced, which will tend considerably to strengthen 
the principal shoots. 

When the vines are suffered for some time to hang loose, and 
trail about upon the ground, all their leaves grow upward; which, 
on the shoots being afterwards bound in an upright position to the 
stakes, are turned upside down; and until these leaves resume their 
natural position, which they are commonly eight or ten days in 
effecting, the fruit is at a stand, and consequently loses the advan- 
tage of that length of time in the principal season of its growth. 

The ground should be kept constantly free from weeds, either 
by means of the plough and harrow or by hoe; for where there are 
other plants suffered to grow, they not only rob the roots of the 
vines of their nourishment, but also by perspiring, cause a damp in 
the air, and prevent the sun and wind from exhaling and carrying 
away the vapours arising from the earth, whereby the fruit would 
3H 



442 THE NURSERY. [July. 

be filled with crude nourishment, and rendered of much less value 
for making good wine, as well as unpalatable. 

Towards the latter end of the month, the extremities of the fruit- 
bearing shoots maj be nipped oft", to check the too great luxuriancj 
of their growth, and to attbrd the bunches of grapes a greater por- 
tion of nourishment? but this ought not to be done too close to the 
fruit, as it would check the free ascent of the juices into those 
branches, by depriving them of the means of discharging such a 
portion thereof as is not convertible into wood or fruit: and more- 
over, though the fruit might by this means be swelled to a greater 
size, it would be more replete with watery particles, and less with 
that refined saccharine juice so pleasing to the palate, and so neces- 
sary for the making of good wine. 

Such shoots as are intended to be cut down in the pruning season, 
for next yearns fruiting, are by no means to be topped, but should 
be suffered to grow at full length, taking care to keep them con- 
stantly divested of any side branches, which ought always to be 
rubbed off" as they appear. Were those to be topped at this season, 
it would force out at an untimely period, many of the flower-buds 
which nature had designed for the ensuing year, and, consequently, 
at that time render the vines barren and unproductive. 



THE NURSERY. 

Budding or Inoculating. 

The budding or inoculating of cherries and plums, and all such 
other trees and shrubs as are subject to become bark-bound in 
autumn, is generally commenced in the middle states about the 
fifteenth of this month, earlier or later, according to the season or 
the quantity to be budded; these and others of the like nature 
should now be attended to, as they seldom work freely after the 
twenty-fifth of July. But this you may always easily know by 
trying the buds, and when they readily part from the wood, and 
also the bark of the stock rises or separates freely, then the work 
may be done. 

But let it be particularly remarked, that every kind of tree or 
shrub that makes new autumn shoots, or that continues in a free 
growth, or flow of sap, should be budded either in August or before 
the twentieth of September, according as each kind is early or late 
in ripening its wood, that is, to bud each sort before it becomes 
bark-bound; and likewise observe that all those kinds which are 
likely to become bark-bound early in autumn ought to be budded 
in this month, while the juice flows freely in the stocks and buds. 

If trees or shrubs are inoculated in the early part of this month, 
whose nature it is to take a second growth in autumn, the buds 



JiTLT.] THE NURSERY. 443 

will then start, and the shoots produced therefrom not having a 
sufficient length of season to ripen the wood, will either be de- 
stroyed the ensuing winter, or so much injured as never to make 
good trees; therefore, budding ought to be performed on the respec- 
tive kinds at such periods as there will be no hazard of their 
growing before the ensuing spring, when they will have the advan- 
tage of the whole season for perfecting their wood, and of acquiring 
a sufficient strength and texture before winter. 

Apricots, if worked on plum stocks, or on those of its own kind, 
should be budded in this month, but if on peach or almond, August 
will be a preferable period. 

Pears may, likewise, be inoculated late in this month, but as to 
peaches, nectarines, almonds, and apples, if done now, the inserted 
buds would shoot in the course of the present season, and conse- 
quently be of little value. 

The stocks of cherries, plums and pears that were budded last 
summer, or grafted in spring, and that have miscarried, may now 
be inoculated with the same kinds of fruit, for those will succeed 
either by grafting or budding. 

Budding generally succeeds best when performed in cloudy 
weather, or in the morning or evening; for the great power of the 
mid-day sun is apt to dry and shrivel the cuttings and buds, and 
prevent the free union that might be expected immediately to take 
place in a favourable season; at all events let the operation be per^ 
formed on the north side of the stocks, which will give the buds 
every possible advantage of the sun. 

In performing this work it will be necessary to observe that 
where trees are intended for walls or espaliers, the buds must be 
inserted low in the stocks, that is, at the height of five or six inches 
from the ground; but if intended for standards, the stocks may be 
worked at the height of three, four, five, or even six feet; or, the 
low inserted buds may be trained up on single stems to a proper 
height for standards, or half standards, and then be headed for the 
production of lateral branches. 

Where there are wall or espalier trees that do not produce fruit 
of approved kinds, such may be budded with any favourite sorts; 
this may be performed either upon strong shoots of the present 
year, or on clean young branches of two years' growth or more; 
several buds may be inserted in each tree, in difterent parts, by 
which means they will be furnished with a sufficiency of new wood 
of the desired kinds; and in two or three years they will bear abun- 
dantly. 

Should it be found necessary to immerse the cuttings from which 
you take your buds in water, place therein only about an inch 
of their lower ends; the upper parts will be more congenially 
refreshed by that means than if the cuttings were entirely covered; 
and, moreover, the buds which are soaked for any considerable 
time in water will be so saturated with moisture as to prevent their 
imbibing the more congenial sap of the stocks, so that they often 
miscarry. For the proper stocks-to work the various kinds upon 
see page 248, &c. 



444 THE NURSERY. [July. 

When the stocks are from about half an inch, or a little less, to 
an inch or more in diameter in the places where the buds are to be 
inserted, thej are then of a proper size for working. 

In order to perform the operation you must be provided with a 
neat sharp budding-knife, having a flat thin haft to open the bark 
of the stock for the admission of the bud, and, likewise, with a 
quantity of new bass-strings, which is certainly the best of all 
bandages, or if such cannot be obtained, some soft woollen yarn to 
tie round it when inserted. 

Observe that the head of the stock is not to be cut oflf as in graft- 
ing; that the bud is to be inserted into the side, and the head 
suffered to remain until the spring following, when it is to be cut 
off" above the bud, as directed in page 258. 

Methods of Budding or Inoculating, 

1. Having your cuttings, knife, and bandages ready, fix upon a 
smooth part on the side of the stock at whatever height you intend 
to bud it; with your knife make a horizontal cut across the bark of 
the stock quite through to the firm wood; then from the middle of 
this cut make a slit downwards, perpendicularly, about an inch and 
a half long, going also quite through to the wood, so that the two 
cuts together may be in the form of the letter T; then with the 
point of your knife raise the bark a little at the angles formed by 
the two cuts, in order to make room for the flat part of the haft to 
enter and raise the bark. 

This done, proceed with all expedition to take off" a bud, having 
immediately previous to the commencement cut oft" all the leaves, 
leaving about an inch of the footstalk to each bud, and holding the 
cutting in one hand, with the thickest end outward; then enter the 
knife about half an inch, or rather more, below a bud, cutting nearly 
half way into the wood of the shoot, continuing it with one clean 
slanting cut about as much more above the bud, so deep as to take 
oft" part of the wood along with it, the whole from an inch and a 
quarter to an inch and a half long; directly take out the woody part 
remaining in the bud, which is easily done by placing the point of 
the knife between the bark and wood, at either end, but the upper 
is the more preferable, and with the assistance of the thumb, pull 
off' the wood from the bark, which ought, if in good condition, to 
part freely; tlien quickly examine the inside, to see if the root of 
the bud be left, and if there appears a small hole, the rudiment of 
the young tree is gone with the wood, the bud is rendered useless, 
and another must be prepared; but if there be no hole, the bud is 
good; then place the footstalk or back part of the bud between your 
lips, and with the flat haft of the knife, separate the bark from the 
stock on each side of the perpendicular cut, clear to the wood, for 
the admission of the bud, which, directly slip down close between 
the wood and bark, till the whole is inserted to within the eighth of 
an inch; let this part be cut through into the first transverse inci- 
sion made in the stalk, and the bud will fall neatly into its placej 



JuLy.J THE NURSERY. 445 

then draw the bud up gently so as to join the upper or cut end of 
it to the bark of the stalk, where it will most generally first unite. 

Let the parts be then bound with a ligature of bass previously 
immersed in water to render it pliable and tough, or in want of this, 
with woollen yarn; beginning below the bottom of the perpendicular 
slit, and proceeding upwards close around every part, except over 
the eye or bud, which is to be carefully preserved, and continue it 
a little above the horizontal cut, not binding it too tight but just 
sufficient to keep the parts close, exclude the air, sun, and wet, and 
thereby to promote the junction of the stalk and bud; finish by 
making the ligature fast. 

2. Although it is universally recommended by every author who 
has written on the art of gardening, to take the woody part out of 
the bud, before its insertion into the stalk, as above directed, I find 
such practice by no means necessary; for if the bud be taken off 
with a less portion of wood than in the former method, and imme- 
diately inserted as above directed, it will succeed full as well, if not 
better, and as to expedition, there is no comparison; certainly 
double the number can be inserted in the same period of time by 
this method as by the former. It will be found particularly con- 
venient for the budding of lemons and oranges, and may also be 
practised at periods in which the first method would be totally un- 
successful, that is, when the buds are not sufficiently ripe to exist 
without the young wood, or too much so for the bark to separate 
freely. This method may be practised when desired at a much 
earlier period than the former, and also as late in the season as the 
bark of the stalk will rise freely for the admission of the bud. 

In three weeks or a month after inoculation, you will see which 
of them have taken by their fresh and plump appearance, and at 
that time you should loosen the bandages, for if kept on too long 
they would pinch the stalks and greatly injure, if not destroy the 
buds. Those that appear shrivelled, black, or decayed, are good 
for nothing. 

In this dormant state the buds should remain till the March fol- 
lowing, when the stalks are to be headed down, as directed in the 
nursery for that month. 

Note. The cuttings should not be taken off the trees in the mid- 
dle of the day, if the weather be hot and dry, for at such times they 
will perspire so fast as soon to leave the buds destitute of moisture; 
but if you are obliged to fetch them from some distance, as it often 
happens, you should be provided with a tin case, about twelve 
inches long, and a cover to the top which must have five or six 
holes; in this case you should put as much water as will fill it 
about two inches high, and place your cuttings therein in an up- 
right position, so that the parts which were cut from the tree may 
be set in the water, and then fasten down the cover to keep out the 
air; the holes in the cover will be sufficient to let the perspiration 
of these branches pass off, which, if pent in, would be very hurtful 
to them; you must also be careful to carry it upright, that the water 
may not reach to the buds, which would so saturate theni as to de- 
prive them of any attractive force to imbibe the sap of the stalk. 



446 ' THE PLEASURE, OR [July. 

Inoculate and Lay curious Trees and Shrubs. 

Agreeably to the preceding directions and observations, inoculate 
roses, jasmines, and such other kinds as jou desire to propagate in 
that way. The moss rose, may, in particular, be increased by this 
means as it is not very free in producing suckers: this may be 
budded on stalks of any kinds of common roses that have been 
either raised from seed or suckers. 

The proper stalk to bud any of the more curious kinds of jas- 
mines on, is that of the common white jasmine. 

Continue also to propagate the various kinds of trees and shrubs 
by layers and cuttings, as directed last month. 

Ordinary Attendance. 

Weeding, shading, and watering, must now be particularly at- 
tended to as directed last month; without which, much injury will 
be sustained, especially by the seedlings, layers, and late trans- 
planted trees and shrubs. 

You should continue to train your evergreens for the purposes 
they are designed; and when any of your forest trees shoot too 
vigorously near the roots, those branches may be pruned off to en- 
courage their heads. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Bulbous and Tuberous Boots. 

Take up the bulbs of such late flowers as were not sufficiently 
ripe nor their leaves decayed last month, as ornithogalums, bul- 
bous, irises, martagon, and other lilies; transplant the roots of 
fritillaries, crown imperials, dens canis, and such other bulbous and 
tuberous rooted flowers as do not endure to be kept long out of 
ground; and this being the season in which their roots are not in 
action, is the most proper time for transplanting them, before they 
put forth new fibres, after which, it would be very improper to re- 
move them. 

Annual Floioers. 

You may still transplant any of the late sown balsams, cock's- 
combs, amaranthuses, China-asters, &c., intd the borders or flower- 
beds where wanted, taking them up with balls, or with as much 
earth as possible about their roots, and giving them a good water- 
ing when planted, which is to be occasionally repeated till they 
are well rooted; if some shade could be afforded them for a few 
days, it would the better insure their success. 



July.] FLOWER GARDEN. 447 

Carnations. 

The choice carnations now in flower should be taken care of and 
assisted in their blowing, as directed lastraonthj you may likewise 
assist those of inferior qualities and that have a tendency to burst, 
by slitting the pod or calyx a little way at top, on the opposite side 
to where it shows an inclination to burst in two or three difterent 
places, so as to promote the spreading of the flower regularly each 
way. This should be done just as the flower begins to break the pod 
with a pair of small narrow pointed scissors, or with a sharp pointed 
knife, taking care not to cut the calyx too deep, but rather to open 
it a little at each place, and to leave as much of the bottom of the 
cup entire as will be suflicient to keep the petals or flower-leaves 
regularly together. 

Some florists take great pains in the opening of the flowers to 
assist nature in spreading and displaying the petals, so as to enlarge 
the circumference and dispose the flower-leaves in such a manner 
as to show the stripes and variegations to the best possible advan- 
tage, and for this purpose make use of a small pair of wire nippers, 
the points of which are flattened and bound around with silk or 
thread to prevent injury. With these they extract such of the 
petals as do not please, and display the others so as to suit their 
fancy. 

Continue to propagate your choice carnations and pinks by layers 
and pipings, as directed in page 422, for the performance of which, 
the early part of this month is a very principal time. Give the 
necessary shade and water to the plants now in flower, and see that 
those layers which were laid last month are kept sufficiently moist 
to promote their free rooting. 

When the layers are properly rooted, which will be the case with 
most sorts in a month after laying, provided due care be taken to 
keep them regularly moist, and to shade them from the heat of the 
meridian sun; they are then to be taken off* from the old plant with 
about half an inch of the stalk which connects them to it, and be 
immediately planted in small pots, one, two, three or four in each. 
The pots should be filled with the compost recommended in page 
296, previously adding thereto a little more loam and coarse sand, 
and when the plants are neatly planted therein, the pots should be 
buried to their rims in a convenient airy place, and arches of hoops 
placed over the bed on which to lay mats to shade the plants from 
the sun till well rooted and growing freely; and these mats are to 
be afterwards laid on occasionally as necessity may require, to 
protect the plants from too powerful sunshine or heavy torrents of 
rain, which are both injurious to them. 

Here they are to remain till November, when they must be re- 
moved into their winter repository, as then directed; during this 
time they must have a sufficiency of water as often as it may ap- 
pear necessary, to keep theui in a constant growing state and good 
health. 

The layers of the common kinds of carnations should, when taken 
off", be planted in beds of rich earth, in rows about six inches asun- 



448 THE PLEASURE, OR ' [July. 

der, where they are to be watered and shaded until well taken with 
the ground and growing. They may remain in these beds till Sep- 
tember, October, or March, and are then to be taken up with balls 
of earth and planted where intended to flower. 

Pinks. 

The most valuable kinds of pinks should be treated in every re- 
spect as directed for carnations. 

Sensitive Plants. 

The sensitive plants which have been raised in hot-beds, may 
about the first of this month, if not done in June, be brought out 
into the open air and placed in a very warm situation, for they de- 
light in much heat; but some ought to be kept constantly under 
glasses, for when fully exposed to the weather, they lose much of 
their sensibility. 

The species I particularly allude to, is the Mimosa piidica, or 
humble and sensitive plant, which is thus characterized in the flow- 
ing poetry of Darwin: 

"Weak with nice sense the chaste Mimosa stands, 
From each rude touch withdraws her tender hands; 
Oft as light clouds o'erspread the summer glade, 
Alarm'd she trembles at the moving shade; 
And feels alive through all her tender form, 
The whisper'd murmurs of the gath'ring storm; 
Shuts her sweet eye-lids to approaching night, 
And hails with freshen'd charms the rising light." 

"Naturalists," says Dr. Darwin, "have not explained the imme- 
diate cause of the collapsing of the sensitive plant; the leaves meet 
and close in the night during the sleep of the plant, or when 
exposed to much cold in the daytime in the same manner as when 
they are aifected by external violence, folding their upper surfaces 
together, and in part over each other like scales or tiles; so as to 
expose as little of the upper surface as may be to the air; but do 
not indeed collapse quite so far: for when touched in the night 
during their sleep, they fall still farther, especially when touched 
on the footstalks between the stems and leaflets, which seems to 
be their most sensitive or irritable part. Now as their situation, 
after being exposed to external violence, resembles their sleep, but 
with a greater degree of collapse, may it not be owing to a numb- 
ness or paralysis consequent to too violent irritation, like the 
fainting of animals from pain or fatigue. A sensitive plant being 
kept in a dark room till some hours after day-break, its leaves and 
leaf-stalks were collapsed, as in its most profound sleep, and on 
exposing it to the light, above twenty, minutes passed, before the 
plant was thoroughly awake, and had quite expanded itself. During 
the night the upper or smoother surfaces of the leaves are appressed 
together; this would seem to show that the office of this surface of 



July.] FLOWER GARDEN. 449 

the leaf was to expose the fluids of the plant to the light as well as 
to the air." 

The sensibility of this plant is worthy of admiration, that, not 
only in the evening or towards night, but at all hours of the day, 
with the least touch or concussion of air, the leaves are just like a 
tree dying, droop and complicate themselves immediately, and 
presently after recover, resuming their former position; so that a 
person would be induced to think they were really endowed with 
the sense of feeling. 

The cause of this seemed so hard to be discovered, that a curious 
Malabarian philosopher, upon his observing the nature of this plant, 
without being able to discover the cause of its sensibility, ran mad, 
just as Aristotle is said to have flung himself headlong into the 
sea, because he could not comprehend the reason of its ebbing; and 
flowing. 

These plants are more or less susceptible of the touch, according 
to the warmth of the air in which they grow, being always more 
irritable in proportion to the heat thereof. 

The light is not the only cause of their expansion, nor the dark- 
ness of their contraction, for they are often closed in the afternoon 
two or three hours before the sun descends the horizon; and if the 
frames in which they are kept be, in the forepart of the day, covered 
for hours, so as to render the place completely dark, yet the leaves 
will continue their expansion. 

Those plants which are placed in the greatest warmth in winter, 
continue vigorous and retain their faculty of contracting on being 
touched; but those that are in a moderate warmth have little or no 
motion. 

There are eighty -four species of mimosa described; two, with 
simple leaves; six, with leaves simply pinnate; three, with bigemi- 
nate or tergeminate leaves; nine, with leaves conjugate, and at the 
same time pinnate; and sixty-four with doubly-pinnate leaves; 
several of the species are more or less sensitive, but the far greater 
number not at all. 

Venus^s Fly-Trap. 

The Bionsea musdpula, or Venus's fly-trap, is one of the most 
extraordinary productions of nature. In this plant there is an 
astonishing contrivance to prevent the depredations of insects: the 
leaves are numerous, generally bending downwards, or rather 
spreading upon tiie surface of the earth, and placed in a circular 
order; each leaf is divided, as it were, into two joints, the lower 
flat, longish, two edged, and inclining to heart-shaped; some con- 
sider this lower joint a winged petiole, similar to that on an orange 
leaf. The upper joint consists of two lobes, each semi-oval, the 
margins furnished with stift" hairs like the eye lashes, locking into 
each other when the lobes close, like the teeth of a rat-trap, to 
which the lobes, marginal hairs, and the manner of their closing, 
bear a particular resemblance. The interior of the lobes is very 
irritable, but more particularly so in warm weather, when, if an 
3 I 



450 THE PLEASURE, OR [July. 

unfortunate fly, or any other small animal happens to creep on it, 
the lobes immediately fold up and confine it: the greater efibrts 
the creature makes to disengage itself, the more it irritates the 
interior parts, and consequently is the more firmly secured: here it 
remains till crushed or starved to death; when the irritation having 
ceased, the lobes open as before, and the remains of the insect is 
either washed out by the rain, or carried away by the wind. The 
lobes will also close if the interior be touched with a straw, &c. 

This plant is a native of the Carolinas, where it grows in swamps: 
it produces in July and August bunches of handsome white flowers 
on stems of from six to eight inches high, and in the eastern and 
middle states must be treated as a hardy green-house plant. 

It is propagated both by seeds and suckers, requires a swampy 
soil, with a mixture of fine sand, and must be kept well watered 
and in the shade during the summer months. This is a very proper 
period to take off and plant the suckers: the seed should be sown 
early in spring, forwarded in a hot-bed, and during the summer 
months the seedlings ought to be carefully protected from the mid- 
day sun. 

The Tutsan-leaved Dogshane. 

The ^pocynum androssemifolium, or tutsan-leaved dogsbane, is 
not only interesting on account of its beauty and fragrance, but 
also on account of the curious structure of its flowers, and their 
singular method and property of catching flies. 

It is a hardy perennial, indigenous in various parts of the United 
States, grows in a wild uncultivated state in the neighbourhood of 
Philadelphia, and usually to the height of from two and a half to 
three feet, flowering from the beginning of July to September; it 
has a creeping root, whereby it increases greatly in light dry soils 
and warm situations, so as even to be troublesome; it will not thrive 
in wet soil. It is propagated by sowing the seeds in spring, which 
with us it produces abundantly, or by parting its roots in March or 
October. 

The flowers of this plant have a sweet honey -like fragrance which 
perfumes the air, and no doubt operates powerfully in attracting 
insects; when a plant of this sort is fully blown, one may always 
find flies caught in its blossoms, usually by the trunk, very rarely 
by the leg — sometimes four or even five, which is the greatest pos- 
sible number, are found in one flower, some dead, others endea- 
vouring to disentangle themselves, in which they are now and then 
so fortunate as to succeed. 

Previous to explaining the manner in which it appears that these 
flies are caught, it will be necessary to describe those parts of the 
flower which more particularly constitutes this fatal fly-trap. 

On looking into the flower there are perceivable five stamina, 
the antherae of which are large, of a yellow colour, and converge 
into a kind of cone; each of these antheras is arrow-shaped; towards 
the top of the cone their sides touch but do not adhere, below they 
separate a little so as to leave a very narrow opening or slit between 



JtTr.T.] FLOWER GARDEN. 45l 

eachj they are placed on very short filaments, which stand so far 
apart that a considerable opening is left between them,' at the bot- 
tom of, and in the very centre of the flower, there are perceivable 
two germina or seed-buds, the rudiments of future seed-vessels, 
surrounded by glandular substances, secreting a sweet liquid; on 
the summit of these germina, and betwixt the two, stands the stig- 
ma in the form of a little urn, the middle of which is encircled by 
a glandular ring which secretes a viscid honey-like substancej to 
this part of the stigma the anthera interiorly adhere most tena- 
ciously, so as to prevent their separation unless considerable force 
be applied: it is probable, that the sweet viscid substance thus 
secreted by the stigma within the antherse, is that whicli the fly 
endeavours to obtain, and to this end insinuates its trunk, first into 
the lowermost and widest part of the slit, betwixt two of the antherae 
above described, pushing it of necessity upwards: when gratified, 
not having the sense to place itself in the same position as that in 
which it stood when it inserted its trunk, and draw it out in the 
same direction downwards, unfortunately for it, it varies its posi- 
tion, and pulling its trunk upwards, draws it into the narrow part 
of the slit, where it becomes closely wedged in, and the more it 
pulls the more securely is it caught, and thus this heedless insect, 
as Thomson calls it, terminates its existence in captivity most 
miserable. 

Mr. R. W. Darwin, of Elston, in England, asserts that, "when 
a fly inserts its proboscis between these anthers to plunder the 
honey, they converge closer, and with such violence as to detain 
the fly." Mr. Curtis, author of the Flora Londinensis, &c., is of 
opinion, that the anthers do not converge, but that the flies are 
caught in the manner first described. This difterence of opinion 
between two respectable authorities, may afford curious observers 
the opportunity of spending some leisure hours in ascertaining to 
a certainty which is right. 

Transplanting Biennial and Perennial Flowering Plants. 

If not done in June, you should now transplant from the seed- 
beds the various kinds of perennial and biennial seedling flower- 
ing plants, as directed in page 425. 

Auriculas and Polyanthuses. 

Examine your auriculas and polyanthuses; when dead leaves at 
at any time appear upon the plants, let them be immediately pick- 
ed oft', and suffer no weeds to grow in the pots. 

Preserve those plants carefully from the mid-day sun, which at 
this season would destroy them, particularly the auriculas, and keep 
the earth in the pots always moderately moist. 

When any of them have furnished strong offsets, such may be 
taken off in the last week of this month, and planted in small pots; 
for about that time these plants begin to grow afresh, and advan- 
tage ought to be taken of that critical period. The offsets will re- 



452 THE PLEASURE GARDEN. [July. 

quire shade and water till newly rooted: the latter must be sparing- 
ly administered till the plants take and are in a growing state, 
before which too much water would cause the roots to rot; but, 
notwithstanding, the earth must still be kept a little moist. 

The auricula and polyanthus seedlings that were sown last au- 
tumn or early in spring, if having grown well and of sufficient size, 
should in the last week of this, or first in August, be transplanted 
into boxes or pots, as directed in page 349, and placed in the shade 
to grow on till the middle of October, when they may be rather 
more exposed to the sun, and early in November remove the pots 
or boxes into a warm situation, to remain till taken into their win- 
ter quarters. 

Grass and Gravel Walks. 

The same care and attention must now be paid to the grass and 
gravel-walks, and lawns, as directed in the preceding months. 

Box Edgings. 

Such box edgings as were not clipped in June, should now be 
dressed, observing the same directions in every particular as given 
in page 426. 

Clip Hedges. 

Hedges in general, of every kind, should be clipped in the early 
part of this month,; for that purpose, advantage ought to be taken 
of moist or cloudy weather to do the work in, as hedges always 
look better after being clipped in wet weather than in dry. 

Another dressing of the same kind towards the latter end of Sep- 
tember will keep them in a neat condition the year round. 

Ordinary Attendance. 

The principal flower-borders, beds, &c. must now have more 
than ordinary attention paid to the keeping of them clean, as well 
as the shrubbery-clumps and other similar compartments. Where 
any of the flowering-shrubs or evergreens have grown rude or dis- 
orderly, let such be trimmed or pruned into neat form; that is, if 
any have produced strong and rambling shoots, cut out, shorten, or 
reduce them to a pleasing regularity. 

Stake and tie up the stems of such flowering plants as stand in 
need of support, to prevent their being borne down by winds or 
heavy rains, &c. 

Cut down the stems of such "fibrous-rooted plants as are past 
bloom, except a few of the best, where the seeds are wanted. Those 
have always an unpleasing appearance, and ought to be removed as 
soon as possible; by which means the plants, though past flovver- 
iiig, will appear more lively and decent, and the advancing bloom 
of others will show to greater advantage. 



453 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Orange, lemon, citron, and shaddock trees, on which there are 
now set a superabundance of young fruit, should have them thinned 
to a reasonable number on each, in proportion to its strength: after 
which they may be divested of all flowers subsequently produced, 
especially when wanted for domestic purposes, such as to make 
orange-flower water, &c. 

It would be of considerable utility to those trees to have the 
earth in the top of the tubs or pots now taken out, for two or three 
inches deep, and replaced with fresh compostj this would greatly 
encourage their autumn growth. 

Propagating the Plants. 

Still continue to propagate the various kinds of green-house 
plants, which you wish to increase, by cuttings, layers, suckers, 
&c., as directed in the preceding monthsj most kinds will yet suc- 
ceed by cuttings of the present year's wood if carefully planted, 
duly shaded, and moderately watered j such as xeranthemums, 
salivias, geraniums, pelargoniums, and erodiums, hermannias, 
phlomises, ericas, cineraria lanata, camellia japonica and acuba 
japonica, cotyledon orbiculata, ononis natrix, polygala bracteolata, 
lavendulas, anthyllises, proteas, &c. &c. These kinds, with many 
others, will now take freely, in suitable earth, without the assist- 
ance of a hot-bed. Let the cuttings be taken from healthy plants; 
they should be from four to eight inches in length, and of a stout 
and robust growth. The leaves should be stripped off' more than 
half way up, and the cuttings planted about two-thirds of their 
length into pots, garden-))ans, or beds of earth, adopting for each 
kind its favourite soil: then give shade and water, as directed on 
former occasions. 

The ericas, anthyllises, and other kinds that do not root freely 
in this way, should have bell-glasses placed over them, which will 
greatly facilitate their rooting. 

Continue to propagate the various kinds of succulent plants 
belonging to this department as directed in page 404. 

Transplanting Seedlings and Cuttings. 

Such seedlings of green-house plants as were raised from the 
spring sowings, and that are now three inches high, or more, should 
be transplanted into small pots separately, or several into large 
pots, and immediately watered; they must be kept duly shaded till 
well taken with the earth, and in a growing state; and even then it 
will be proper to place them wliere they can avoid the mid-day 
sun for the remainder of the season. 



454 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Jdly. 

Many of the cuttings planted in spring will be well rooted by 
this time, and may now be taken up with as much earth as possible 
about their roots, planted separately in suitable sized pots, and 
shaded for eight or ten days from the mid-day sun; always ob- 
serving to keep the earth in the pots moderately moist. The 
geraniums in particular may be taken up when too thick, and 
transplanted at any time after the cuttings have grown four or five 
inches. 

Shifting into larger pots. 

You may now shift such of your plants as require larger pots or 
tubs; this is the best of the summer months for that purpose, as the 
greater number will have made their summer progress, and are 
now rather at a stand previous to the commencement of tbeir new 
autumnal vegetation. i 

The operation of shifting is to be performed in every respect as 
directed in page 362. 

Such plants as are now shifted must be immediately watered 
and removed into the shade, where they can have free air and pro- 
tection from the sun in the heat of the day; there to remain for 
two, three, or four weeks, according to the time the respective 
kinds may take to re-establish themselves, and get into a fresh 
state of growth, when they may be replaced among the general 
collection. 

Loosening and giving fresh earth. 

It will be very proper at this time to examine the pots and tubs 
in general, and where the earth is inclinable to bind let the surface 
be carefully loosened to a little depth, breaking the earth small with 
the hands, and at the same time add thereto, if not done in any of 
the preceding months, some fresh compost; then level the surface 
neatly. 

This dressing will do the plants more good than many people 
might imagine; but in particular to such as are in small pots. 

Gathering and Sowing Seeds. 

Collect all the different sorts of seeds as they ripen, spread them 
upon paper in a dry shady place, and when sufl&ciently hardened, 
let them be carefully preserved in their pods or husks, or in paper 
bags, till the proper season for sowing them. 

The seeds of geraniums, xeranthemums, and of any other quick 
growing kinds of green -house plants, may now be sown, and if 
properly attended to will attain to a neat size before winter. 



455 

THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Pine-.Mpples. 

The pine apples being now arriving at maturity, it may not be 
unacceptable to give some account of the different varieties. 

Of the bromelia there have been nine distinct species described, 
viz: the B. ananas, B. pinguin, B. karatas, B. lingulata, B. humi- 
lis, B. acanga, B. bracteata, B. nudicaulis, and the B. panicu- 
ligerai but as the first species is the only one cultivated on 
account of its fruit, I shall confine myself exclusively to it, at least 
for the present. 

From the Bromelia ananas, or pine-apple, as it is called, on 
account of the resemblance of the shape of its fruit to the cones of 
some species of pine tree, particularly to that of the Pinus pinea, 
or stone-pine, there arise six principal varieties which have been 
cultivated for their fruit, &c. 1. The variety ovata, or queen-pine. 
2. The pyramidalis, or sugar-loaf pine. 3. The lucida, or king- 
pine. 4. The glabra, or smooth-pine. 5. The serotina, or late 
pine; and 6. The viridis, or green pine. 

The queen-pine is the most commonly cultivated, but seems 
daily to decrease in esteem. Its flesh is of a fine yellow colour, 
but in the hot summer months it is very apt not to cut firm, is 
liable to crack in the middle, and often contains an insipid watery 
juice; but when it ripens late in the season it is not so subject to 
any of these defects. 

The sugar-loaf pine is easily distinguished from all the others by 
its leaves having purple stripes on their 'inside the whole length. 
The fruit is paler when ripe than the former, inclining to a straw- 
colour. This was brought from Brazil to Jamaica, where it is 
esteemed far beyond any other kind. But of this there are three 
varieties. 1. The brown-leaved. 2. The green-leaved, with purple 
stripes, and spines on the edges. 3. The green-leaved, with purple 
stripes and smooth edges. The fruit of these is of exquisite 
flavour, filled with a lively delicious juice, and the flesh of a 
yellow colour. 

The king-pine has grass-green smooth leaves, and produces a 
pretty large fruit; but as its flesh is hard, stringy, and sometimes 
not well flavoured, it is not much cultivated. 

The smooth pine is preserved by some persons for sake of varie- 
ty, but the fruit is of little value. 

The late pine is not of much importance for cultivating on 
account of its ripening at an untimely season, and therefore its 
description is considered unnecessary. 

The green pine is considered tolerably good. The fruit, if suf- 
fered to ripen well, is of an olive colour; to have it green, it must 
be cut before it is ripe, and suffered to lie by till fit for use. Plants 



456 THE HOT-HOUSE. [July. 

of this kind may be procured from Barbadoes and Montserrat; but 
the fruit of the sugar-loaf is much to be preferred to it, and indeed 
to any other kind yet introduced. 

There is, likewise, the Surinam, or silver-striped pine, which 
exceeds in beauty the whole tribe of variegated plants. The leaves 
are variously striped with a dark green and delicate white; and the 
whole is tinged with a lively red, which produces a contrast that 
gives the plant a gay and most beautiful appearance. Nor is there 
less beauty in its fruit, the protuberances of which swell large, 
and, when ripe, are variously marbled with red, green, yellow, 
and white; which, together with the variegated crown on the top 
of the fruit, add a singularity and elegance to the whole beyond 
the power of description. The fruit is tolerably good, and there- 
fore the plant is doubly worthy of cultivation. 

Many other varieties of this fruit have arisen from seed, such as 
the black or brown Antigua, or Ripley pine, which is a very good 
fruit. The Grenada pine, with marbled leaves and very large fruit. 
The bog-warp pine, with broad green leaves. The smooth, long, 
narrow leaved pine, and the Surinam pine with gold-striped leaves, 
and some assert that there are varieties with red-fleshed fruit. 

Compost proper for Pine Plants. 

You should, in the first place, twelve months previous to the time 
of its being wanted for use, pare off the sward or turf of a pasture 
not more than two inches deep, where the soil is a strong, rich 
loam, and carry it to some convenient place to be piled together 
for rotting; observing to turn it over once a month at least, spread- 
ing it so as to expose a considerable surface to the summer sun, as 
well as to the frosts in winter; but in wet weather it will be proper 
to gather it up into a high ridge to prevent its I'ich juices being 
dissolved and carried away by water. If a quantity of sheep dung 
could be collected fresh and mixed therewith, in the first instance, 
it would greatly improve it. 

1. Having the above prepared and made fine with the spade, but 
not screened; to three barrow fulls of it, add one of vegetable mould 
of decayed oak leaves, and half a barrow full of coarse sand, ob- 
serving, however, that if the soil, from which the turf had been 
taken, inclined any way to sand, that should be now omitted. This 
makes a proper compost for crowns, suckers, and young plants. 

2. To make a compost for fruiting plants use three barrows of 
the above reduced sward, two of the vegetable mould, one of coarse 
sand, and one-fourth of a barrow of soot. 

The above compost should be made some months before wanted, 
and very frequently turned during that time, that, the different 
mixtures may get well and uniformity incorporated. As to the 
quantity of sand to be added, you must be governed by the nature 
of the soil from whence the turf was taken; for too great a portion 
of sand would be injurious, and subject many of the young plants 
to go into fruit before the proper period. 

Where oak leaves are not used in hot-houses, or for hot-beds, 



July.] " THE HOT-HOUSE. 457 

&c. the vegetable mould may be made by laying a quantity of them 
together, as soon as they fall from the trees, in a heap sufficiently 
large to ferment. They should be covered at first for some time, 
to prevent the upper leaves from being blown away; the heap must 
afterwards be frequently turned, and kept clean from weeds; the 
leaves will be two years before they are sufficiently reduced to be 
fit for use. 

Keep the different heaps of compost at all times free from weeds, 
turn them frequently, and round them up in rainy seasons; but 
they should be spread out in continued frosts, and in fine weather. 

Raising the Pines by Crowns. 

The crown is perfected at the time when the pine apple is quite 
yellow; therefore the crowns of such fruit may be planted in two 
or three days after being taken off"; but if the fruit be tut green, as 
is practised by some persons with the queen-pine, or if only the 
top of the fruit be green when cut, as is the case frequently with 
the sugar loaf kinds, even when the principal part is thoroughly 
ripened, then it will be necessary to let the crowns of such fruit 
lie five, six, or seven days, after they are taken off', in a shady part 
of the hot-house, in order that the wounds should dry, and particu- 
larly to give them that degree of maturity to which nature was not 
allowed to conduct them. 

The crowns may then be planted in small pots and plunged into 
the tan-pit, where they will soon strike root, and get into a growing 
state. But before the crowns are planted their lower or bottom 
leaves should be cut off" close with a knife or pair of scissors, which 
will cause them to decay much sooner, and make room for the roots 
to be produced with the greater ease. 

The crowns will require but very little water till they have taken 
root, and are in a growing state; when it maybe administered more 
freely, but always with a sparing hand. 

Raising the Fine by Suckers. 

As the fruit of the pine apple is the principal object and sole 
reward of the great expense attendant on its management, few per- 
sons choose to permit the suckers to remain on the plants till they 
grow very large, as they would injure the fruit and prevent its 
swelling; they are, therefore, generally stopped in growth, or 
taken off as soon as it can be done with safety; but when a stock 
of plants is the object, the additional advantage which might be 
gained in the fruit is given up, or at least of as many as will pro- 
duce the number of suckers required, in order to encourage their 
growth, and are permitted to remain on the old stocks or plants 
even for some time after the fruit is cut. In this situation the 
suckers will grow very large, provided the stools are plentifully 
supplied with water. 

The suckers should not be taken from the plants till they are 
grown to the length of about twelve inches, when their bottoms 
3 K 



458 THE HOT-HOUSE. [July, 

will be hard, woody, and full of round knobs, which are the rudi- 
ments of the roots. 

In taking oft' each sucker, remove it two or three times backward 
and forward, in a side-way direction, and it will come out with its 
bottom entire, which should be cut smooth and deprived of any rag- 
gedness. 

Place these in a shady part of the hot-house for two or three days, 
and then plant them in small sized pots, just so deep as to keep 
them fast in the earth; after which they are to be treated as direct- 
ed for the crowns. The proper size of the pots to plant full grown 
crowns and suckers in, is six inches diameter in top, and five and 
a half deep. 

Care of the Fruiting Pines. 

The fruiting pines must now have abundance of air, which adds 
much to the flavour of the fruit; but though the heat of the day, at 
this season, is very intense, yet, when north-westerly winds pre- 
vail, the night sometimes happens, though not frequently, to be 
rather cold for the fruiting plants; in which case it may be prudent 
to close the lights at night, taking care to slide them open early in 
the morning; this however must be governed by circumstances and 
by the heat of the bark-pit, which, if any way brisk, will render it 
the more necessary to give plenty of air at all times. 

As the pine apples come to maturity, care should be taken to cut 
them off" when in due perfection and before they become too ripe; 
generally cutting them in a morning, each with several inches of 
the stalk, and with the crown of leaves at top, till served to the 
table. 

When the fruit is eaten, it will be proper to preserve the crowns 
and any young suckers growing round at the base,* particularly if 
wanted for increase. 

Shifting the Succession Pines. 

The pine plants which are to fruit in the ensuing season, should 
be shifted either in the last week of this month or the first in Au- 
gust, into full sized pots, of about eleven or twelve inches diameter 
at top, and ten deep; by doing this so early in the year they will 
have time to make good roots before spring, for otherwise they sel- 
dom produce very large fruit. 

Having the pots and new compost ready, take the plants out of 
the bark-bed, and shift them in the following method. 

First, place a shell in the bottom of the new pot, and put in two 
inches deep of fresh compost: then turn the plant out of the old 
pot with the ball entire, and place it immediately into the new, 

* The brown Antigua, the king, and the sugar-loaf kinds, commonly pro- 
duce suckers at the top of the stem, immediately under the fruit; but these 
are generally small, and of much less value than those produced about the 
surface of the earth. 



Jdly.] the hot-house. 459 

fill up around the ball with more of the compost, and let the top 
thereof be covered with it an inch deep. 

In this manner let the whole be shifted and immediately water- 
ed, then plunge them again into the bark-bed. 

Previous to plunging the pots, the bark-bed must first be stirred 
up to the bottom to revive the declining heat, observing at the same 
time to add about one-third or at least one-fourth of new tan 
thereto, if the old is much wasted, become earthy, or not likely to 
produce a suflicient degree of bottom heat to promote the fresh 
rooting and growth of the plants. 

Care of the various Hot-House Plants. 

The general care and propagation of the various exotics of the 
hot-house department, are the same now as directed in May and 
June, and therefore unnecessary to be repeated; but it would be 
very proper at this time to refresh the earth in the top of the pots 
or tubs, as directed in page 454, and also to shift such of the plants 
as require it. The hibiscus rosa sinensis, vinca rosea, plumeria 
rubra, allamanda cathartica, asclepias curassavica, lantanas, bego- 
nias, &c., may now be easily propagated by cuttings, and where 
an increase of the various kinds is wanted, that business ought not 
to be delayed to a later period, that the cuttings may have time to 
become well rooted before winter; nor should you despair of being 
able to propagate any kind of tree or shrub by cuttings; for with 
due care there are few but may be increased that way, especially 
with the assistance of bell-glasses and a suitable bottom heat. 

The Moving Plant, or Sensitive Hedysarum. 

The Hedysarum gyrans, or moving plant, that extraordinary 
phenomenon of the hot-house department, is peculiarly worthy the 
attention of every curious observer. Mr. Aitt)n in his Hortus 
Kewensis, describes it as a biennial plant, and Swartz, as an an- 
nual; but it has survived several years in that inestimable collec- 
tion, the property of William Hamilton, Esq., of the Woodlands, 
near Philadelphia, whose variety of rare plants surpass by far, any 
other on this side the Atlantic, and perhaps any private collection 
in Europe. 

The singular motion with which the lateral leaflets or appendi- 
cles of this plant are endued, is thus described in Linnseus's sup- 
plement. 

"This is a wonderful plant on account of its voluntary motion, 
which is not occasioned by any touch, irritation, or movement in 
the air, as in the mimosa, oxalis, and dionsea; nor is it so evanes- 
cent as in amorpha. No sooner had the plants raised from seed, 
acquired their ternatc leaves, than they begun to be in motion this 
way and that; this movement did not cease during the whole course 
of their vegetation, nor were they observant of any time, order or 
direction; one leaflet frequently revolved, whilst the other on the 
same petiole was quiescent; sometimes a few leaflets only were in 



460 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [July. 

motion, then almost all of them would be in movement at once: 
the whole plant was very seldom agitated, and that only during the 
first year. It continued to move in the stove during the second 
year of its growth, and was not at rest even in winter." 

It is difficult to account for this motion, which does not seem to 
depend on any external cause, and which we are not able to excite by 
any art. It is not the action of the sun's rays, for this plant is fond 
of shade, and the leaves revolve on rainy days as well as during 
the night: exposed to too much wind or sun, it is quiet. "Per- 
haps," says Linnseus, "there may be some part in vegetables, as in 
animals, where the cause of motion resides." 

This plant is a native of Bengal, near the Ganges, and is called 
there Chundali borrun. It grows luxuriantly in the gardens in 
Jamaica, and is easily propagated by sowing the seed in March, 
and forwarding it in a due temperature of heat. 

Dr. Darwin says, "its leaves are continually in spontaneous mo- 
tion, some rising and others falling, and others whirling circularly 
by twisting their stems; this spontaneous movement of the leaves 
when the air is quite still and very warm, seems to be necessary to 
the plant, as perpetual respiration is to animal life." 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Savoys, Coleworts, and Borecole. 

In the first week of this month finish planting your savoys; they 
will not, at this season, require a greater distance than two feet 
every way. This plantation will be tolerably well cabbaged in 
November, and may, with a little care, be preserved in fine condi- 
tion all winter. 

The early York, Battersea and sugar-loaf plants, arising from 
seed sown last month, should now be planted out for autumn cole- 
vi^orts, they will yet form nice heads; and some more of the same 
kinds should be sown in the first week of this month, from which 
you will have delicious hearts late in October, &c. In the southern 
states, where the plants can stand out all winter, this will be a very 
useful practice. Plant also your last crop of borecole. 

Spinage. 
Now prepare some ground and sow a good crop of spinage; that 



July.] THE KITCHEN GAUDEN, 46], 

sown in the first week of the month will be fit for use in Septem- 
ber, and what you sow in the second, will be in fine condition in 
October. 

In the last week of the month, you should sow a principal crop 
of the prickly seeded spinage for early spring use; this ought to be 
sown on dry gravelly ground, for on such it will stand the winter 
much better than on any other, A second sowing will, however, 
be necessary for the same purpose in the first week of September, 
as it will always be proper to have a double chance. With either 
or both of these sowings, you may throw in a thin scattering of 
brown Dutch or cabbage lettuce, and if the winter is any way mild, 
you will have good early plants in spring, which you are then to 
take up and transplant into beds for heading. 

Sowing Radishes. 

In the early part of this month you should sow a sufiicient sup- 
ply of short-top and salmon radishes; also, some of the white Na- 
ples and turnip-rooted kinds: these will be fit for the table in 
September. About the middle of the month, you ought to sow a 
second crop to come into use in October. 

A full crop of the black and white Spanish or winter radishes, 
may be sown at either, or both of the above periods, for fall and 
winter use. 

Asparagus. 

The plantations of asparagus should now be kept perfectly clear 
from weeds, but particularly those which were planted last spring, 
and likewise the seedling beds, but this must be done by a very 
careful hand weeding. 

Turnips. 

The first week in this month is a very principal time for sowing 
your general crop of turnips for autumn and winter use, whether 
in the field or garden; you may continue in the middle states to 
sow as opportunity offers, or as the season proves favourable till 
the middle of the month, after which, it will be too late to expect 
any tolerable produce. In the eastern states, the last sowing ought 
to be performed in the first week of this month, and the earlier in 
that the better. If any be sown after the above periods, it ought 
to be of the early Dutch kind; this will arrive at maturity at an 
earlier period than any other sort. In the southern states, turnips 
may be sown somewhat later. For general directions see page 
433, &c. 

Celery. 

Plant now a full crop of late celery; let this be done as early in 
the month as possible, and as directed in pages 407, and 432. 



462 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Ato. 

Continue to earth up your advancing crops of celery once every 
ten or fourteen days, observing to do this in a dry day, and pre- 
viously to break the earth fine with the spade; take care to gather 
up all the leaves neatly, and not to bury the hearts of the plants. 

Artichokes. 

The late spring plantations of artichokes should be now looked 
over and treated as directed for the older plants in page 438. 

Small Salading. 

Where a constant supply of small salading is wanted, such as 
lettuce, cresses, radish, rape and mustard, they should now be sown 
every eight or ten days on a shady border, and frequently watered 
both before and after coming up. 

Sowing Peas. 

You may any time between the first and fifteenth of this month, 
or at each period, sow a crop of the early-frame, golden, or Charl- 
ton hotspur peas; these, should the season prove favourable, will 
afford you tolerable crops in September. If the weather be dry, 
soak the peas and water the drills, as directed in page 439. 

Planting Kidney-Beans. 

At any time before the middle of the month you may plant a 
crop of the early-cream coloured, early yellow, or early speckled 
dwarf kidney-beans; they will yet succeed very well; but should 
the ground and weather be dry at the time, the drills ought to be 
watered, and the beans soaked in soft water four or five hours 
before planting. 

Sowing and Transplanting Lettuces. 

Early in the month sow a good supply of lettuces for fall use; 
the kinds proper to sow now are the grand admiral, brown Dutch, 
imperial, large royal, white cos, Mogul, and New Zealand let- 
tuces; all these kinds succeed well at this season. Sow them as 
directed in the former months. A succession crop should also be 
sown about the middle of the month. 

In the last week of the month sow some of the brown Dutch 
and hardy green cabbage lettuce, and also some of the ground 
admiral, to transplant into frames and on warm borders in October, 
for winter and spring use; for the method of protecting them from 
frost, see November. 

Transplant from the seed-beds such of your advancing young 
crops of lettuces as are grown to a sufficient size; let this be done 
as directed in the preceding months, and, if possible, in moist or 
cloudy weather; giving them a plentiful watering when planted, 



Aug.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 463 

and repeat it frequently if necessary. Be particular always to sow 
and plant your lettuces in an open situation, and not to suffer them 
to be drawn up, or to remain too long in the seed-beds, otherwise 
they will never form good heads. 

* Endive. 

Tie up your endive, which is full grown, or cover them with 
boards or tiles to blanch; this must be performed when the leaves 
are very dry, otherwise the plants will rot. Select the large and 
full-hearted plants, and with bass or other strings, or with small 
osier twigs, tie them a little above the middle, not too tight, pre- 
viously gathering up the leaves regularly in the hand. 

Transplant, agreeably to the directions given in page 432, such 
young endive as is now of a proper size, and water it immediately, 
which repeat, occasionally, till the plants begin to grow freely. 
These plants must be set in an open situation, and by no means 
near any kind of shade whatever. 

In the early part of the month sow a full crop of endive for late 
autumn and winter use; the green curled sort is by much the 
most preferable for this sowing, as being more hardy and keeping 
better than any other kind. It would be proper to sow some more 
of the same sort about the middle of the month; for these, provided 
they have time to grow to a proper size, will keep better than those 
which were sown earlier. 

Cardoons and Finochio. 

The cardoons, which were planted in June, will now be arrived 
at some considerable height, so that you may begin to tie up some 
for blanching; bind the stalks round, rather loosely, as practised 
with endive, and draw the earth up to the stems, as you would to 
celery: repeat this earthing, from time to time, as they advance in 
growth, till whitened to a sufficient height. 

Earth up finochio, which is full grown, in order to blanch, and 
render it fit for use. 

Melons and Cucumbers. 

Your crops of melons and cucumbers, whether in an advancing 
or fruiting state, should be kept very clean, which will much im- 
prove the flavour and encourage the growth of the fruit. If the 
weather proves very dry a gentle watering, now and then, given in 
the evening, will be of considerable service to the late crops, but 
more particularly to the cucumbers. 

Care of the general Crops. 

All your crops should be kept clear from weeds, using the hoe 
where it can be done with safety, and where not, they must be care- 
fully hand-wed. Earth up your advancing crops of cabbages, peas, 



464 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Aug. 

beans, and all others that require that treatment. Water all new 
plantations, and such young advancing seedlings as may be im- 
proved thereby. Pull up the haulm and stalks of peas, beans, and 
cabbages, &c. which have done bearing, and carry them out of the 
garden, as well as all weeds, hoed or picked up. 

Herhs. 

Cut such herbs as are now in flower to distil, or to dry for winter 
use, always observing to do it when they are dry, and spread them 
in a dry, shady places for if they are dried in the sun, they will 
shrink up, turn black, and be of little value. 

You may now, if omitted in spring, or in the preceding months, 
plants slips of sage, rue, lavender, mastich, thyme, hyssop, and 
winter savory, &c., but these will not be near so strong, nor so 
capable of resisting the severity of the winter as those planted at 
an earlier period. 

Cut down the decayed flower stems of any kinds that appear 
unsightly; and at the same time it will be proper to shorten all the 
straggling young branches in order to keep the plants in due com- 
pass, which will cause them to produce fresh shoots, and make the 
plants appear neat during the remainder of the season. This should 
be done, if possible, in moist or cloudy weather. 

Corn- Salad. 

The Valeriana locusta, variety olitoria, grows commonly in the 
cornfields in many parts of Europe; hence, it is called corn-salad; 
and from its being sufficiently hardy to stand the winter, and of 
early growth in spring, has acquired the appellation of lamb's-let- 
tuce, from its affording them an early pasturage. 

This is an annual plant, and is cultivated as an esculent herb in 
salads for winter and early spring use. It should be sown in the 
middle states in the last week of this month, or first in September, 
on a dry soil and open situation, and raked in; the plants will come 
up soon after, and should be thinned to two or three inches asun- 
der; they are used during the winter and early spring months in 
composition with lettuce and other salad herbs, and as a substitute 
for these where deficient. 

Winter Cresses. 

The Erysimum harharea, or winter cress, is used for the same 
purpose, sown at the same time, and treated in like manner as di- 
rected above for corn-salad. This plant is, by the market-garden- 
ers about Philadelphia, called scurvy-grass, to which it is by no 
means allied; the latter being the Cochlearia officinalis of Linn., 
which has rather a disagreeable smell, and a warm, bitter taste, by 
no means palatable as a salad. The winter cresses, if sown in the 
last week of this month, or first in September, on a dry soil and 
warm exposure, will afford an early salad in spring, very pleasing 



Aug.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 465 

to some palates, and perfectly resembling in taste and flavour, and 
somewhat in appearance, the Sisymbrium nasturtium, or water- 
cress. 

Lima and Carolina Beans. 

Hoe and clean between the hills or rows of Lima and Carolina 
beans, and cut oft" any runners that are found to trail on the surface 
of the ground, which only tend to rob the bearing vines. 

Southern States. 

In the southern states, particularly the Carolinas and Georgia, 
this month being the commencement of their rainy season, it is 
common to sow cauliflowers, cabbage, carrot, parsnep, onion, leek, 
and endive; and in short, the general variety of seeds that are sown 
in the middle states in the months of March and April. These 
kinds arrive there at a tolerable degree of perfection before their 
winter sets in, which is so very mild as scarcely to injure any of their 
esculent crops; and such of them as do not come to maturity before 
winter attain it early in spring. 

Dung-hills and Weed-heaps. 

The dung-hills should, during the summer months, be kept free 
from weeds, for if the seeds of such are permitted to ripen and fall, 
the dung when carried into the garden will poison the whole ground. 
The manure produced by the heaps of weeds taken out of the gar- 
den, should not be introduced therein again, until it is three or four 
years old, lest the seeds which happened to ripen should stock the 
ground afresh. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

The care of your wall and espalier fruit trees, &c., being the 
same in this month as directed in the former, page 439, 1 refer you 
thereto to avoid repetition. 

Should any of the shoots be displaced by winds or other acci- 
dents, let them be immediately made fast again in a secure and 
neat manner. 

Fig-Trees. 

The wall and espalier fig-trees will now be ripening their fruit; 
they should be kept neatly trained, but the knife must not be used 
except to the fore-right and other irregular productions, as it is 
from the young shoots of this season's growth that you are to ex- 



466 THE VINEYARD. [Aug 

pect fruit next year; and these bearing principally towards their 
extremities, ought not to be shortened. Lay in the shoots regu- 
larly, not across one another, and let them be well secured, for the 
wind and rain have great power over them on account of their 
broad leaves. 

Budding. 

For the budding necessary to be done in this month, see the 
nursery department. 



THE ORCHARD. 

Such of your standard peach and other trees as are overburthen- 
ed with fruit, and likely to break down, should be supported with 
substantial stakes, to which the pending branches ought to be bound 
by strong hay-bands, taking care to place part thereof between 
each stake and the branch lest the bark should be injured: these 
supports are to be taken away as soon as the fruit are off. Seethe 
article Orchard, in page 441; what is there directed is very appli- 
cable at this time. 



THE VINEYARD. 

Keep your vines in neat, regular order, trained up and tied to 
the poles, and suffer none to trail upon the ground; by this means 
the influence of the sun and free air will be admitted to the fruit, 
which are essentially necessary to its timely maturity. 

You should now be very particular in keeping the ground between 
the vines free from weeds; for at this time a clean surface answers, 
in a great degree, to reflect the sun's heat upon the vines and fruit, 
which will cause them to ripen soon, and acquire an improved rich- 
ness of taste and flavour: and besides, neither the vines nor fruit 
will be so subject to contract mildew, as if the vapours and damps 
were confined round them by weeds, or by their own branches 
laying trailing about. Some of the early sorts of grapes will begin 
to ripen about the end of this month, but the general vintage may 
be expected some time in September, early or late, according to 
the season. 

Continue to divest the main shoots of all young side productions, 
but be careful not to pull off or injure the leaves. Such fruit bear- 
ing branches as were topped, ought to be likewise divested of young 
shoots as they are produced, at least of the greater number. 



467 

THE NURSERY. 

Budding. 

This is the proper season for budding or inoculating peaches, 
nectarines, almonds, apples and pearsj also apricots on peach or 
almond stalks; but when the apricot is to be worked on the plum, 
it ought to be done in July. 

Cherries, plums, or any other fruit trees may also be budded in 
this month if the bark parts freely from the stalk. Pears ought to 
be inoculated in the early part of the month, or while the sap flows 
freely; but tlie peach, nectarine, almond and apple will succeed 
any time between the first of August and twentieth of September, 
provided that the stalks are young and vigorous. 

You may now inoculate all such curious trees and shrubs as you 
wish to propagate in that way; there are very few but will succeed 
at this time if worked on good and suitable stalks; but when you 
find the bark not to part or rise freely, it will be almost in vain to 
attempt the work. Many kinds now take a second growth, and 
when that is perceivable it will be a very proper time to inoculate 
them. For general instructions on this subject see page 442. 

Neio Budded Trees. 

You should now look carefully over the stalks which were bud- 
ded in July, and in three weeks, or at most a month after their 
being worked, loosen the bandages, lest the buds should be pinched 
thereby; and where there are any shoots produced below the buds, 
they should be rubbed oft". You ought, also, to examine the trees 
which were budded the former year, or grafted in the spring, and 
cut oft" all the shoots that are produced beneath the inoculations or 
grafts; for if these are permitted to grow they will starve the proper 
shoots. 

Preserving the Stones of Fruits. 

Preserve, peach, plum, cherry, and apricot stones, &c. to sow for 
raising stocks to bud and graft on. These may either be sown 
immediately or preserved till October or any of the following 
months, in common garden earth or moist sand; but it will be 
necessary to embrace the first opportunity in spring, if not before, 
to sow tliem before the stones open and the radicles begin to shoot, 
otherwise a great number of these would be injured in the act of 
sowing. You may mix the stones with either earth or sand, which 
put into garden pots or boxes, and plunge these to their edges, and 
no deeper, in some dry border, till the time of sowing. Every day 
that thej are kept out of the ground is an injury to them, and if 



46^ THE PLEASURE, OR [Ave. 

preserved in a dry state till spring, very few will vegetate for a 
year after, and the far greater number not at all. 

Weed and Water Seedlings, Sj-c. 

The seedling trees and shrubs of all kinds must now be kept 
perfectly clean from weeds; for these, if permitted to grow among 
the young plants, would totally ruin them. 

In dry weather you must be careful to give frequent waterings 
to the seedling plants, whether in beds, boxes, or pots, according 
to their respective necessities. 

Keep the ground between the rows of trees well hoed, and train 
up the various sorts of forest trees and shrubs for the several pur- 
poses they are designed; but do not trim the stems of standard 
trees too close, for it is necessary to leave some small shoots to 
detain the sap for the purpose of strengthening those parts. 

Preparing Ground for Autumn Planting. 

Towards the end of this month you should begin to clear and 
trench the vacant quarters in which you intend to plant fruit- 
stocks, or trees or shrubs of any kind, in October or November, 
&c. that the rain may soak and mellow the ground before the season 
of planting; and if the land be of a stift' nature the laying of it up 
in high sloping ridges, by exposing more surface to the sun, rain, 
and dews, will greatly improve it, and it can be the more expedi- 
tiously levelled down and rendered in a fit condition for planting, 
when necessary. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Carnations and Pinks. 

Transplant the layers and pipings of carnations and pinks that 
are suiRciently rooted, and treat them in every I'espect as directed 
in page 447, which see. You may yet lay pinks and carnations, if 
omitted in June and July, taking care to keep the earth moderately 
moist about them till well rooted; but it would be much better to 
have done this in the beginning of July, as in that case the layers 
would be strong and well established before winter. For the method, 
see page 422. 

Suriculas and Polyanthuses. 

The first week in this month is a very proper time to shift into 
fresh compost such of your choice auriculas as were not new pot- 
ted in April or May; for which compost, and the method of shifting, 



Aug.] flower GARDEN. 459 

see page 348, &c. You may at the same tim.e take off any strong 
slips that have fibres attached to them, and plant them as there 
directed; this fresh earth will strengthen the plants greatly, and 
improve their flowers the following spring. All your auriculas will 
require, at this season, is to be kept where they can be free from 
the mid-day sun, and enjoy that of the morning till nine or ten 
o'clock, and that of the afternoon after four or five. 

The choice polyanthuses, under similar circumstances, should be 
treated in every respect as recommended for the auriculas. 

Transplant auricula and polyanthus seedlings, as directed in 
pages 348 and 349, observing to give them proper shade and occa- 
sional waterings, and also to close the earth well about their roots, 
otherwise the worms will draw them out of the ground. 

Removing and Planting Bulbous Roots. 

In the first week of this month, if not done in July, you should 
plant all the autumn flowering bulbs which you have yet out of 
ground; such as crocuses, colchicums autumnal, narcissuses, amaryl- 
lises, &c. and likewise any spring flowering bulbs that do not agree 
with being kept too long in a dry state; as fritillaries, crown impe- 
rials, snow-drops, spring crocuses, martagons, red and white lilies, 
bulbous irises, &c. Any of the latter kinds may now be taken up 
and immediately transplanted; but this should be done early in the 
month, before they begin to push out new fibres; after which they 
would be considerably weakened by a removal. You may also at 
this time take up, separate, and transplant the roots of pasonias, 
flag irises, and any other hardy kinds of fleshy or tuberous-rooted 
flowers, whose leaves are now decayed. "When the roots are taken 
up the small offsets should be separated and planted in beds, to in- 
crease the kinds, and the large roots replanted in any beds or bor- 
ders where wanted for flowering. Each respective kind is to be 
covered from two to four inches deep, generally in proportion to 
the size and strength of the roots. 

Transplanting Seedling Perennials and Biennials. 

Transplant into nursery beds the seedlings of the various kinds 
of perennial and biennial flowers, that are now of a proper size, as 
directed in page 425; or such may now be planted finally where 
they are to flower next season. As the wall-flower and stock-gilly 
flower plants will, in the middle and eastern states, require some 
protection in winter, such should now be transplanted into pots, or 
into beds where frames may be placed over them, on the approach 
of severe frosts. 

Sowing Seeds of Bulbous-roofed Floivers. 

The seeds of tulips, hyacinths, narcissuses, irises, crown impe- 
rials, fritillaries and lilies, or of any other kinds of bulbs, whose 
.seeds are ripe, may now be sown, in order to obtain new varieties. 



470 THE PLEASURE, OR [Aug. 

These, if sown as soon after being ripe as they are sufficiently dry 
and hardened, will vegetate the ensuing spring; but if kept out of 
the ground till that period, very few of them will come up for a full 
year after. For the method of sowing the seeds, &c. see the Flower 
Garden for next month. 

Propagating Fibrous -rooted Perennial Plants. 

Most of the early flowering fibrous-rooted plants, whose flower- 
stems had been cut down in June or July will, some time in this 
month, have thrown up new suckers from the roots; then such may 
be carefully taken oft" and planted in nursery beds; or the whole 
roots may, towards the end of the month, be taken up and divided 
into many separate parts, taking care to do it in such a manner as 
that every plant or part, so separated, may be furnished with roots. 
Trim or cut oft* from each slip, or part, any long or bruised roots; 
pick oft" all decayed or declining leaves, and plant the sets or divi- 
sions in a shady border, or where they can be conveniently covered 
with mats or other covering till newly rooted. 

They should be watered immediately, and that repeated from 
time to time, till they are well taken with the ground, and in a free 
growing state. 

Pinks, sweet-william, rose-campion, scarlet-lychnis, gentianella, 
polyanthuses, primroses, double daisies, double chamomile, double 
perennial catchfly, double ragged-robin, perennial cyanus, mo- 
iiardas, penstemons, phloxes, violas, campanulas, dracocephalums, 
spirasa trifoliata, and various other kinds, may now be propagated 
in this way. 

Collecting Floivering Plants fro^m, the Woods, Fields, and Swamps. 

Many beautiful ornamental plants may now be collected from 
the woods, fields, and swamps, which would grace and embellish 
the flower garden and pleasure-grounds, if introduced thereinto: 
and that at a season when the general run of cultivated flowers are 
out of bloom; such as lobelias of various kinds, aletris farinosa, 
asclepiases, in sorts, asters, cassia marilanclica, chelones, cucubalus 
stellatus, cypripediums, dodecatheon meadia, dracocephalums, 
eupatoriums, euphorbias, and galega virginiana; gentianas, hardy 
herbaceous geraniums, gerardias, glycines, gnaphaliums, hedysa- 
rums, helianthuses and heucheras; hibiscuses, hypoxises, irises, lia- 
trises, lysimachias, melanthiums, nionardas, napseas and ophryses; 
orchises, oxalises, podalyrias, penstemons, phloxes, polygala senega, 
rhexias, rudbeckias, sarracenias and saxifragas; sylphiums, sisyrin- 
chiums, solidagoes, spigelia marilandica, trilliums, veratrums and 
veronicas; limadorum tuberosum, lilium superbum and canadense, 
erythronium americanum, together with an immense number of 
other delightful plants. 

All the above, and any other kinds you meet with, that are wor- 
thy of notice, may be taken up, whether in, or out of flower, with 
balls of earth, brought home, and planted immediately; on taking 



AcG.] FLOWER GARDEN. 471 

them up, cut off the flower stems, if any, and when planted give 
water and shade for a few days to the fibrous-rooted kinds; next year 
they will flower luxuriantly, after which, each sort may be propagat- 
ed in its proper season. Observe in planting, to give each re- 
spective kind a soil and situation as nearly similar as possible to 
that in which you found it in its wild state. 

Saxifrage. 

The double variety of the Saxifraga granulata, or white saxi- 
frage, is a most beautiful flowering plant, and extremely deserving 
of place among every fine collection of flowers; its root is composed 
of several little grains or knobs, attached to. a main fibre, and throw- 
ing out small fibres from their base: the stem is erect, round, 
branched, and panicled at top, usually from eight to ten inches 
high, producing in April and May beautiful bunches of double 
white flowers: its leaves are somewhat fleshy, lobed and cut; 
those next the root on long foot-stalks; those on the stem alternate, 
subsessile. 

It is commonly cultivated in pots, to adorn windows, rooms, &c. 
and affords one of the best specimens of what is called a granulous 
root. 

The foliage of this species is generally decayed about this time; 
therefore the roots may be taken up in little bunches attached to 
fibres, and planted immediately in pots of good fresh earth; they 
are not to be covered more than an inch deep; the pots must be 
placed in the shade, till October, and gently watered at intervals; 
late in autumn the foliage will begin to appear, and on the approach 
of winter, the pots should be placed in a garden frame, where they 
may have some slight protection from severe frosts. The plants 
are tolerably hardy, and in mild winters will survive in the open 
ground. 

The Suxifraga umbrosa, or London pride, may, towards the end 
of this month, be propagated by slips from the root. This makes 
a good edging for beds and borders, and is perfectly hardy. The 
flowers are produced in panicles, on stems of about a foot high; 
they are small but numerous, of a white or flesh-colour, spotted 
beautifully with yellow and red, having also red pistils. It is a 
native of Ireland, growing in a wild state near the lake of Killarney, 
on the mountains near Sligo, on Croagh Patrick, in the county of 
Mayo, and in various other parts; it is said, also, to be indigenous in 
England, and was such a favourite, for the beauty and elegance of 
its flowers, as to be generally called None-so-pretty, and also for its 
thriving in Loudon, better than most plants, was called London 
Pride. Its flowers are produced in May and June. 

The Saxifraga sarmentosa, China or strawberry saxifrage, has 
round variegated leaves, and strawberry-like runners, the uncom- 
mon magnitude of the two lowermost pendant petals, joined to the 
very conspicous glandular nectary in the centre of the flower, half 
surrounding the germen, render this species strikingly distinct, 



472 THE PLEASURE, OR , [Aug. 

and has created a doubt in the minds of Mr. Curtis and others, 
whether it ought not to be considered a distinct genus. 

It has been generally treated as a green-house plant, but with 
me, it survived the severe winter of 1804-5, in the open ground, 
and therefore I consider it perfectly hardy. It flowers in May and 
June, delights in a dry soil, and may now be propagated by its run- 
ners, which it produces in great abundance. 

The Saxifraga cotyledon, or pyramidal saxifrage. This species 
has a fibrous perennial root, crowned with cartilaginous sawed 
leaves in a cluster, like house-leek; the stems are generally about a 
foot or more high, and terminated with panicles of white flowers; 
the whole forming a beautiful pyramid. The flowers are produced 
in May and June, and when kept in the shade, and screened from 
wind and rain will continue in beauty a considerable time. The 
plant may now be propagated, by oii'sets, which it produces freely. 

Floivering Plants in Pots. 

Such annual and other flowering plants as are in pots must now 
be carefully supplied with water; some kinds requiring it twice a 
day in very dry weather, others once a day, and a few sorts not so 
often. As to the consumption of water, there is an astonishing dif- 
ference in the constitutions of plants, some absorbing and discharg- 
ing it so quickly as to excite surprise, and others but very slowly; 
therefore you must supply each respective kind, according to its 
habit and necessity. 

Ordinary Attendance. 

Give water as often as necessary to all the young plantations of 
herbaceous flower-roots; cut down the stems of such as are past 
bloom; loosen the earth in the tops of all your pots containing 
flowering-plants; clip hedges, if omitted in the last month; clip 
box edgings, and trim the various other kinds used for that pur- 
pose, into a neat and becoming form; but let this be done early in 
the month, and if possible in moist and cloudy weather. Mow 
grass-walks and lawns once a week or fortnight, according to the 
growth of the grass. Sweep, dress, and roll the gravel -walks once 
a week; hoe and clean the flower borders, beds, alleys, and shrub- 
bery compartments; and let the weeds be raked up and carried 
away immediately out of the garden, &c. Trim and tie up any 
loose growing or straggling plants; dress disorderly growing 
shrubs, and inoculate such kinds as you wish to propagate in that 
way. 

Gather flower-seeds as they ripen and preserve thern till the sea- 
son of sowing; most kinds will keep better and longer in their 
pods or husks than when rubbed out. 

Sowing Auricula, Polyanthus, Anemone, and Ranunculus Seeds. 
I find in almost every treatise on gardening that I have met with, 



Aug.] flower GARDEN. 473 

even in the celebrated works of Mr. Millar, directions for sowing 
the above seeds in this month and September: I have tried the ex- 
periment for many years, but was generally unsuccessful; princi- 
pally on account of the seeds vegetating on the approach of winter, 
and these minute plants always being destroyed, before spring, by 
earth-worms, slugs, snails, or by other accidents; therefore I have 
given up that practice as a bad one, and adopted sowing them in 
December, as there directed, or in January or February, from 
which sowings I have uniformily been successful. I have noticed 
this subject here in order to correct what I conceive to be an erro- 
neous practice, lest the pursuing of it would disappoint and, con- 
sequently, discourage those who have a taste for these elegant 
flowers. Even if preserved in a green-house these small plants 
are subject to the same accidents, or to be eaten by the Oniscus, or 
wood-louse, before the spring vegetation commences. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Shifting and giving fresh earth to the Plants. 

In the first week of this month, if not done before, you may shift 
into larger pots, &c. young oranges, lemons, citrons, and shad- 
docks, and also such other plants as are too much confined, and 
that have perfected their spring or summer shoots, previous to 
their beginning to push their autumn growths; such is the critical 
period in which plants ought to have a summer shifting, and 
should be particularly noticed in any climate or country where 
such practice is necessary. Let this operation be performed, as 
directed in page 362; after which treat the plants as recommended 
in page 453. 

Loosen the earth in the tops of such pots or tubs as it appears 
hard or stift' in, and add some fresh compost thereto, if not done 
last month; this and the picking oft" of any decayed leaves, together 
with the trimming of disorderly branches, will give a fresh and 
pleasing appearance to the collection, add to the beauty, and pro- 
mote the vigorous growth of the plants. 

Propagating the Plants. 

You may still continue to propagate various kinds of plants by 
cuttings, layers, and suckers, as directed in the former months. 

Budding Oranges and Lemons, «^c. 

Any time this month you may successfully bud oranges, lemons, 
citrons, limes, and shaddocks; beginning in the first week thereof 

3M 



474 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Aug. 

and continuing to the endj observing to work each tree as you 
perceive it to put forth its fresh autumn shoots^ some trees, even 
of the same species, will produce those earlier or later in the month, 
and so soon as you perceive a few of them grown to two or three 
inches in length, seize upon that time to perform the operation, as 
then the sap being in a fresh state of circulation, the bark of the 
stock will separate freely for the reception of the bud, and the 
necessary nourishment will be copiously supplied. 

Observe at this time to take the buds frori\ shoots produced in 
the early part of the present season. The proper stocks are those 
raised from the kernels of either of the species. For the methods 
of budding, and general observations on that subject, see page 442, 
&c. 

It will be very proper on budding those, or any other kinds of 
plants in pots, to place them in the shade for three or four weeks, 
after the operation is performed; or at least to turn the budded 
side of each plant to the north, in order to avoid the drying influence 
of the sun. 

Cut off" oranges, lemons, jasmins and other exotics, which were 
inarched in April or May, provided that you find them sufficiently 
united. For the method of doing this, see the article grafting by 
approach, or inarching, in page 256. 

Watering. 

Carefully attend to the watering of all the plants, giving it to 
each as often as necessary, and in proportion to its consumption; 
observing always to administer it sparingly to the succulent kinds. 

The pouring of water, occasionally, through the rose of a water- 
ing pot, over the branches of the shrubby kinds would greatly 
refresh them, and wash oft" the dust collected on the leaves; which 
would give them a clean and pleasing appearance: but this should 
be done late in the evening when the sun has lost its power for the 
day. 

Such pots as are plunged, must be turned full around in their 
seats at least once a week, to prevent the roots penetrating into 
the surrounding earth, through the holes in the bottoms of the pots. 

The Mexican Ferraria, or Tiger-flower. 

The Ferraria tigridia, of Curtis, or Tigridia pavonia, of Linn, 
and Willdenow, is of such exquisite beauty as to merit particular at- 
tention. It is of the Gynandria class, and order Triandria. Its root 
is a tunicated bulb, producing from one to four stems, from eighteen 
inches to two feet in height, composed of various joints, and 
bearing at each a plicated oblong lanceolate leaf, from a sheathing 
petiole the length of the internode, and at the summit an in- 
volucrum, apparently consisting of tv/o lanceolate, ancipital, con- 
duplicate, nearly equal valves, of which the exterior is in fact 
the common spathe or involucre, and embraces the interior with 
its contents; the interior valve, which is exactly opposed to the 



Aug.] the GREEN-HOUSE. 475 

outer one, is the proper spathe of the first flower and embraces it, 
together with the spathes and flowers that are to come in succes- 
sion; the spathe of the second flower is opposed to that of the first, 
and placed between it and the pedicle of the first flower; and so of 
the rest, every spathe being opposed to the one of the preceding 
flower and embraced bj it. These spathes are similar in shape, 
but diminish progressively and become more membranaceous. The 
corolla, or flower, is large and divided into six seo-ments, of which 
the three outer are urceolate at the base, expanded above, and re- 
flected at the point; the three inner ones smaller by half, biform- 
ed, singularly divided into a lower hastate and an upper ovate divi- 
sion, by a depressed intersection; the upper division is of the 
richest scarlet imaginable, variegated bv a bright golden yellow. 
Ihe filament \?, a cunicuiated or piped triquetral column. The 
anthers are sessile, erect, bearing their pollen on the outside, con- 
niving at the point, diverging below to admit the exit of the stig- 
mas. The germen is obtusely trigonal, three celled. Style, the 
length of the filamental column, through the hollow of which it 
passes. Stigmas, three, filiform, bifid. Capsule, oblong, obtusely 
trigonal, three celled. Seeds, in double rows in each cell and round. 

Hernandez, a Spanish physician, who was sent to Mexico by 
Philip II. King of Spain, informs us that it grew wild about that 
city, and was much cultivated for its excessive beauty, and for the 
medicinal virtues of its roots, being, as he terms it, a "frigefacient 
in fevers, and also a promoter of fecundity in women." 

This flower has no scent; but in splendid beauty, it has scarcely 
any competitor. It is born to display its glory but a few hours, 
and then literally melts away; but to compensate for this sudden 
decline, it continues to produce flowers for several weeks. The 
latter end of this month is generally the season of its bloom. 

It is properly a green-house plant, succeeds best in light mould, 
and is easily propagated by seed, from which the plants will flower 
the second year. The bulbs and offsets may be taken up in Octo- 
ber, when the leaves are decayed, and kept in dry sand, saw-dust 
or rolled up in dry moss till March; but they must be carefully pre- 
served from frost. Or they may be replanted immediately in pots 
of fresh earth, and replaced in the green-house; giving them but 
very little water, till they begin to vegetate in spring. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Pine-Apples. 

The care of the fruiting pines being the same in this month as in 
the last, is unnecessary to be repeated; as likewise the propagation 
of the plants by crowns and suckers, as well as the shifting of those 
succession pines which are expected to produce fruite next season. 



476 THE HOT-HOUSE. [Aug. 

Let this shifting, where neglected last month, be done, if possi- 
ble, in the first or second week of this, that the plants may have 
time to establish strong roots, and to be advanced in free and 
vigorous growth before winter. For the method of shifting, see 
page 458. 

Besides the watering of the pine plants in the common way, it 
will be of great service to them in very warm weather, to water 
the walks and flues of the hot-house occasionally; this should always 
be done late in the evening, and the glasses ought to be immediate- 
ly closed. The great heat of the house will exhale the moisture, 
and raise a kind of artificial dew, which will soon stand in drops 
on the glasses; the leaves of the pine being succulent, they will 
imbibe the watery particles and be greatly benefited thereby. 

Raising the Pine from Seed. 

New varieties of the pine may be obtained from seeds, and when 
such is found in the fruit, which is very uncommon, even in the 
West Indies, they should be carefully preserved in dry sand till 
March, when they will vegetate and succeed better than if sown at 
an earlier period. The pots for this purpose should be then filled, 
to within an inch of their rims, with light rich earth, and plunged 
into a warm part of the tan -bed for a day or two before sowing the 
seeds, which should be placed therein, about an inch apart, and 
covered not more than a quarter of an inch deep. Cover the pots 
immediately with pieces of glass that will fit the tops very close; 
this, by preventing the mould from drying and giving an additional 
heat to it near the surface, Vv^ill soon cause the seeds to vegetate. 
After the plants appear sprinkle them over with water occasionally; 
as they advance in size give them increased portions of air and 
water, and by the time they have five or six leaves, they will be 
able to withstand the general air of the hot-house. 

By the end of August these seedlings will be grown to a proper 
size for transplanting: when they should be put into small pots, 
filled with the same mould recommended for crowns and suckers 
in page 456; and from that time their treatment requires no diflfer- 
ence from that of those. 

Shifting the various Exotics, fyc. 

The beginning of this month is a very proper season for the shift- 
ing of aloes, sedums, cactuses, mesembryanthemums, and all other 
succulent exotics; they will now take fresh root sooner than at any 
other time of the year; you should at the same time take off any 
offsets that may be produced, and plant them into small pots filled 
with fresh sandy earth, placing them where they may havie only the 
morninjj; sun for ten or twelve days, and observing to refresh them, 
now and then, with a little water. 

The several kinds of tender exotics tljat require it, should now 
be shifted in order to establish strong and fresh roots before winter; 
observing to place them in the shade immediately after, till they 



Aug.] the HOT-HOUSE, 477 

shall have recovered the check occasioned by the removal. This 
work should be performed early in the month; for if they are shift- 
ed too late in the season, they do not recover before the cold comes 
on, which checks their growth, prevents their free rooting, and con- 
sequently renders them not so well prepared to maintain them- 
selves in winter, as if done at an early periud; and many kinds 
that have stood too long in the same pots without shifting, will have 
their roots so matted, as to grow mouldy in winter and decay; 
which has often been destructive to many choice plants. 

The other plants, which do not require shifting at this season, 
should have some of the earth taken out of the tops of the pots, if 
not done last month, and replaced with fresh compost; this will 
greatly encourage their autumn growth, and should not be neglected. 

The regular watering of the plants must now be duly attended 
to, for one day's neglect, at this season, might destroy many of your 
most valuable plants. Keep all the collection free from decayed 
leaves, and such pots as are plunged in the earth must be turned 
quite round in their seats once a week, for the reasons mentioned 
in the preceding months. 

Keep all the pots and tubs free from weeds, and continue to pro- 
pagate the various kinds by suckers, layers, or cuttings. 

Labelling the Plants. 

In large collections all the plants should be labelled, having the 
generic and specific name of the plant on each label. These may 
be made of small slips of pine or cedar, each from six to ten inches 
long, near an inch broad at top, tapering to a point at the lower 
end and about a quarter of an inch thick. When the sticks are 
ready, the parts to be written on should be rubbed lightly with 
white oil paint; then with a black lead pencil, ivhile yet wet, 
write the generic and specific name of the plant thereon, which will 
soon dry and become completely permanent; the label is then to 
be stuck into the pot near the rim, and so deep as to leave the 
writing easy to be seen. These labels will continue good for three 
years, or longer. 



478 



Sejittmtier* 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Some persons who write on gardening, content themselves by 
simply saying that such a thing should be sown in such a month} 
this gives a latitude in the present, of thirty days, so that an inex- 
perienced person may be led to think that he is within due bounds, 
if he sows on the 30th of September, what ought to haye been sown 
in the first week, perhaps about the first day thereof, whilst expe- 
rienced gardeners well know that a ditt'erence of three or four days, 
particularly in this month, makes a greater odds, in crops, than 
most people could imagine would be consequent on the ditt'erence 
of as many weeks. 

I am not an advocate for sowing seeds on a particular day of the 
week or month, nor in the full or wane of the moon, nor when the 
wind blows from the east, west, or any particular point of the com- 
pass; these ridiculous and superstitious notions have been long 
since 'deservedly banished out of the well-informed world; but in 
this month, above all others in the year, there is an absolute neces- 
sity of sowing certain crops within ^few days of particular periods, 
in order to ensure the best possible success, so that the plants may 
not become too strong before winter, and consequently be subject 
to start to seed early in spring, previously to their attaining due 
perfection, nor be too weakly to endure the severities of the ensu- 
ing winter. 

Spinage. 

Hoe and clean your advancing crops of spinage, and let the plants 
be thinned out to proper distances in order to afford sufficient room 
for the production of large succulent leaves. 

In the first week of this month prepare some good dry ground for 
a full crop of spinage for winter and spring use. In the eastern 
states, particularly, this work should not be delayed later, nor 
indeed in the middle states if it can be well avoided; but in a 
favourable season, and a warm soil and exposure, it may succeed 
very well in the middle states if sown so late as the fifteenth or 
even the twentieth of the month; the more to the southward the 
later it may be sown. 

The best sort to endure cold is the prickly seeded kind, which is 
what most people sow at this season, it being much hardier than 
the round seeded sort; of this there are two or three varieties, dif- 
fering only in the size of their leaves; but the largest and most 
profitable sort is what gardeners call the burdock-spinage. A thin 



Sept.] • THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 479 

sprinkling of the brown Dutch, Egyptian cos, and hardy cabbage 
lettuces may be sown among the spinage, and if the winter is any way 
favourable you may liave soinegood plants from these to transplant 
early in spring for heading. A few of the early short-top salmon 
and white turnip-rooted radishes may also be sown among the spi- 
nage for use in October and November. Sow the seed thinly in 
drills about eight inches distant from one another, or broad-cast, 
and tread it in, then rake the ground effectually so as to cover the 
seed well,' or if it be cultivated on a large scale it may be harrowed 
in with a light harrow, wrong end foremost. 

When the plants are up, and have got leaves an inch broad or a 
little better, they must be thinned either by hand or hoe to three or 
four inches asunder, and the weeds effectually cleared away from 
among them^ by this treatment the plants will get stalky, gather 
strength, and be the better able to stand the winter frosts. 

Lettuces. 

The various kinds of lettuces sown last month should be planted 
out as early in this as they have attained to a proper size for that 
purpose: let them be set in beds of good, well prepared ground, 
about ten inches asunder, and watered immediately, which should 
be frequently repeated if the weather proves dry. 

In the last week of the month prepare a dry, warm, well shel- 
tered south border, on which to plant the lettuces sown in the latter 
part of August, for standing over winter for spring use. Take up 
the best plants from the seed bed, pick off" the decayed leaves, trim 
the ends of their roots, and plant them in rows six inches asunder 
every wayj if the plants survive the winter every other one may be 
taken up in spring and planted in new beds, which will give the 
others abundance of room to grow to the best perfection. They 
are to be protected during winter as directed in November. Sow 
more lettuce seed in the first week of this month, to plant out in 
the beginning of October, for the same purpose. The kinds proper 
to be sown now are the brown Dutch, Hammersmith hardy green, 
Egyptian cos, and the hardy cabbage lettuce. Also, about the 
middle of the month sow another crop of the same kinds, to be 
planted in frames in October, for their winter preservation. 

To have lettuces in good perfection in November, December, 
and January, you should, about the latter end of this month, pre- 
pare one or more beds of rich earth, in a warm part of the garden, 
where the ground is dry and lies well to the sun. Make the bed 
or beds the length and width of one or more cucumber frames; 
plant therein some good plants of your best kinds of heading and 
cos lettuces, and give them water occasionally till well rooted and 
growing freely. 

Towards the middle of next month, when the nights begin to 
grow cold, place the frames and glasses on the beds; keep on the 
glasses every night; but let them be kept totally oft" in the day 
time till the November frosts commence; after which you must be 



480 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Sept. 

governed by circumstances, always admitting as much air every 
day as the safety and free growth of the plants will warrant. 

Sowing Radish Seed. 

In the first week of this month you should sow a good supply 
of the early short-top, white and red turnip-rooted and salmon 
radishes^ also, a sufiicient quantity of the black and white winter, 
or Spanish kinds; the latter, on the approach of frosts, must be 
taken up and preserved for winter use, as you do carrots or turnips. 

Endive. 

As early in the month as possible transplant a full crop of green 
curled endive for late autumn and winter use; let this be done as 
directed in page 432. Tie up the leaves of full grown endive for 
blanching as advised in page 463. 

Celery and Cardoons. 

Earth up celery as it advances in growth, but be careful to avoid 
covering the hearts of the plants; this work should always be done 
in a dry day; lay up the stalks neatly without injuring them, for if 
bruised they will become mouldy and be subject to rot. 

If your crops of celery be scanty, and you have got strong plants, 
you may about the first of this month plant them out in trenches. 
Should the season prove very favourable, this crop may succeed 
tolerably well. 

The cardoons will now be considerably advanced in growth, and 
consequently should be earthed up regularly for blanching; as 
these plants spread considerably, they must be tied up neatly with 
bass strings, hay-bands, or willow twigs, &c., but not too close, so 
that the hearts may freely advance in growth; then gather the earth 
up all around each plant, first breaking it fine, and as you lay it 
up, pat it with the back of the spade to make it keep its place and 
cast off the rain: as the plants progress in growth continue earthing 
them still higher till well whitened and fit for use; on the approach 
of frost they may be protected as directed in November for celery, 
if not made use of before that time. 

Winter Cresses, Corn- Salad and Chervil. 

Sow corn-salad and winter cresses the beginning of this month, 
if not done in August, for winter and early spring use; let these be 
sown as directed in page 464. Likewise, sow a supply of chervil 
for soups and salads; this may be sown in drills nine or ten inches 
asunder and covered about a quarter of an inch deep, or broad-cast 
and raked in, 

Small Salading. 

Continue to sow once every ten days the different kinds of small 



Sept.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 4gj[ 

salading as directed in the preceding months. The seeds may 
now be sown in an open situation where the earth is light and rich, 
but what jou sow towards the end of the month should have a warm 
exposure. 

Hoe, Turnips. 

As your crop of turnips advances in growth, hoe and thin the 
plants to proper distances^ let this be done in a dry day, cutting 
the weeds up clean with a sharp and middle sized hoe. For gene- 
ral directions see page 433. 

Sowing Cabbage Seed. 

The proper period for sowing cabbage seed in the middle states 
to produce earlt/ summer cabbages, is between the sixth and tenth 
of this month, if intended to be transplanted into frames in Octo- 
ber for winter protection, which is the most preferable method; but 
if they are designed for remaining in the seed-beds till spring, the 
period is between the fifteenth and twentieth. However, it will be 
very proper to make two or three sowings within that time, as it is 
impossible to say whether the fall may be favourable or otherwise, 
and therefore the better way is to be prepared in either case by 
successive crops. 

The consequence of having plants too forward or early is, that 
they are very subject to run to seed in the spring soon after being 
planted out; and if the seeds are sown too late, the plants do not 
acquire sufficient strength before winter to withstand its rigour 
without extraordinary care. But in either case there is a remedyj 
that is, if the plants are likely to become too luxuriant and strong, 
transplant them once or twice in October, and if too backward and 
weakly, make a slight hot-bed towards the latter end of that month, 
and prick them out of the seed-bed thereon; this will forward them 
considerably. 

At all events, I would advise, particularly in the middle states, 
the first sowing to be made about the tenth or before it, the second 
four days after, and the third on the eighteenth day of this month, 
or at any rate within two or three days of these periods; for the 
difference occasioned at this time by one or two days will in a few 
weeks be very perceivable and striking. In the eastern states, 
the first of the month will be a suitable period for sowing a princi- 
pal crop. 

The kinds proper to be sown now are the early Smyrna, early 
York, early Battersea, early Russia, and early sugar-loaf cabbages; 
it would also be very proper to sow at this time some of the large 
drum-head, flat Dutch, large English ^nd red pickling kinds, to 
succeed the other sorts, and to produce fine large heads in the early 
autumn months; but the seeds of these late kinds may be sown 
three or four days earlier than the former, as the plants are not so 
subject to run to seed in spring. 

Sow these seeds in beds of good garden mould, and either cover 
3 N 



482 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Sept. 

or rake them in so as that they may be lodged about a quarter of 
an inch deep; if the weather should prove dry, water the beds oc- 
casionally in the evening till the plants are up, and in about five 
weeks they will be fit for transplanting into their winter quarters, 
as directed in October. 

Many people are of opinion that it is time enough to sow the 
seeds of the various kinds of late cabbages in spring, but they may 
rest asured, that such as are sown at this time, will produce much 
larger and more solid heads than the spring sown plants^ besides, 
they will be fit for use immediately after the early cabbages are 
consumed, and keep up a regular and constant supply of that ex- 
cellent vegetable, whether for sale or private use, till the spring 
sown crops shall have attained to full perfection. 

Sowing Caulijiovjer Seed. 

The critical period, in the middle states, for sowing cauliflower 
seed is between the twentieth and twenty-eighth of this inonth; if 
sown earlier the plants would be very subject to button (as the 
gardeners term it) or flower in April or early in May, which 
flowers seldom exceed the size of a common button, and thereby 
the hopes and expectations of the cultivator are lost. 

I would recommend to sow the seed at three different periods, 
say the twentieth, twenty-fourth and twenty-eighth of this month; 
for each sowing let a small spot of rich ground be neatly dug, mark 
out the bed three and a half feet wide, and immediately sow the 
seed and rake it in carefully; or you may first rake the bed smooth, 
and with the back of the rake push the loose mould evenly off' the 
surface for near half an inch deep into the alleys, one half to each 
side, then sow the seed, and with a spade or shovel cast this shoved 
oft' loose earth over it about a quarter of an inch deep, or a little 
more, and finish by picking oft' the lumps or small stones with your 
hand, or drawing them off" neatly and lightly with the rake; or you 
may sow the seed on the smooth raked surface, and sift over it 
about a quarter of an inch of light earth. 

Should the weather prove dry, water the bed both before and 
after the plants are up, and in a month after sowing they must be 
transplanted into beds of good rich earth, covered with garden 
frames, at the distance of three inches from one another, there to 
remain during winter, and to be taken care of as directed in the 
following months. 

In the southern states the most forward of these may be finally 
planted out in November, as directed in page 315, and covered 
with bell or hand-glasses during winter; but in the middle or eastern 
states this practice will not succeed on account of the severity of 
the weather at that season. 

If the plants should happen to be late and of a weakly growth, 
when you are planting them into frames in the latter end of Octo- 
ber, let a trench be dug about ten inches deep in a dry, warm, and 
well sheltered situation, the breadth of a frame and the length of 
one, two, or more, according to the quantity of plants; then fill it 



Sept.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 4g3 

in with new horse dung to the height of eighteen inches from the 
bottom, and set on the frame; earth the bed over five or six inches 
deep with rich earth, and set the plants in rows three inches 
apart every way, immediately give them a moderate watering and 
place on the glasses; observing to leave them open about four or five 
inches at top that the steam may pass away. 

It will also be proper to lay a mat over the glasses in sunny wea- 
ther till the plants have taken fresh root; after which the lights must 
be totally taken off by day till the weather becomes too severe, 
and every advantage must subsequently be taken to give the plants 
as much air as possible, consistent with their preservation. 

The plants, with the assistance of this slight bottom heat, will 
soon take root and be greatly forwarded thereby, so as to acquire 
a due degree of strength before the setting in of very severe 
weather. 

Note. — Late sown cabbage plants would be greatly benefitted by 
treating them as directed above for cauliflowers. 

Late Cauliflowers and Broccoli. 

If the weather should prove dry give occasional waterings to the 
crops of late cauliflowers and broccoli which you expect to flower 
in October, &c. , otherwise the heads will be small, especially if the 
ground is naturally dry. 

Sowing Welsh Onion Seed. 

Sow some Welsh onion seed for early spring salad, &c. This 
kind never bulbs and is very hardy; for although the tops will 
sometimes die down in winter, yet the roots will continue sound, 
and push up new leaves on the eve of the first spring vegetation. 

It will be necessary to sow this seed in the first week of the 
month on beds of light rich ground, in a warm exposure, and after- 
wards to keep the rising plants perfectly free from weeds. 

Mushrooms. 

This is a proper time to prepare for making beds, in which to 
cultivate the Agaricus campestris, Champignon, or common mush- 
room. Of two hundred and thirteen species of agaricus, enume- 
rated by Dr. Withering, this is the only one selected for cultivating 
in gardens. The gills of this are loose, of a pinky red, changing 
to liver colour, in contact but not united with the stem; very thick 
set, some forked next the stem, some next the edge of the cap, 
some at both ends; and generally in that case excluding the inter- 
mediate smaller gills. Cap, white, changing to brown when old, 
and becoming scurfy, fleshy, and regularly convex, but with age 
flat, and liquifying in decay; Jlesh white; diameter commonly from 
one inch to three or sometimes four or more. Stem solid, one to 
three inches high, and about half an inch in diameter. 

I consider the description of this species the more necessary, as 
many of the others are poisonous. This is the most savoury of the 



484 "^HE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Sep^ 

genus, and is eaten fresh, either stewed or boiled; and preserved 
either as a pickle or in powder. The sauce commonly called 
catchup is made from its juice with salt and spices. Dr. Withering 
asserts that those gathered from fresh undunged pastures are more 
delicate than those which are raised in artificial beds. Mr. Miller 
is of a different opinion, probably because the cultivated ones are 
more sightly, and may be collected more easily in a proper state 
for eating. 

It will be necessary in the early part of this month to provide a 
quantity of fresh horse dung, and to throw it up in a heap to fer- 
ment; when it has lain two or three weeks turn it again, that all 
the parts may be equally fermented, and the violent heat passed 
away. In this state it should remain till about the first week of 
Octoberj when the bed is to be made as directed in that month, or 
the preparation may commence in August, and the beds be made 
any time this month at pleasure. 

The reason for the previous preparation of the dung, is to pre- 
vent a too violent fermentation when the bed is made, which would 
totally destroy the spawn; and moreover, by this management it 
will preserve a slow temperate warmth much longer than if put 
together when quite fresh. 

You must likewise provide a sufficiency of good mushroom spawn; 
this is frequently to be found in rich pasture fields, old mushroom 
beds, old cucumber beds, dung-hills or dungy composts, but that 
of the true kind from the pastures or old mushroom beds is to be 
preferred; it may also be found where horses are employed under 
sheds in turning mills, riding-houses, livery-stable yards, &c. 

The spawn is a white fibrous substance, running and spreading 
itself in the rich pasture-grounds and in lumps of dryish rotten 
dung, and if of the true sort, has the exact smell of the cultivated 
kind. 

Take up the earth or dung in which you find it in lumps, ob- 
serving to preserve these entire, and lay them in a dry shady place 
till wanted; you may cover them with straw or garden mats, for 
much wet would totally destroy the spawn. But if the pieces are 
wet or very damp when collected, they must be spread to dry 
gradually; the spawn is seldom, if ever, destroyed by drought, 
especially when mixed with earth or dung. For the method of 
making and spawning the bed, &c., see the Kitchen Garden for 
October. 

Gather Seeds. 

Gather all kinds of seeds as they ripen, which may be necessary 
in the ensuing season, and spread theni to dry on mats or cloths; 
when sufficiently hardened beat them out clean and put them up 
carefully till wanted for sowing. 

Perennial Herjb§. 
Towards the latter end of this month you may safely transplant 



Sept.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 485 

all kinds of hardy perennial pot, aromatic, and medicinal herbs, 
which will take fresh root and be well established before winterj 
but this should be done, if possible, in moist weather. 

Southern States. 

In the southern states, particularly where the winters are mild, 
you may sow at this time, carrots and onions for early spring use, 
as well as all the other articles recommended to be sown in this 
monthj and also plant out late crops of borecole, broccoli, celery, 
cabbages for winter, coleworts, endive, &c. &c. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Fruit Trees. 

Examine your wall and espalier trees, and where you find any 
long loose branches, train them in and make them firm in their 
proper places. 

The early kinds of fruit trees against the walls of your forcing- 
houses should, towards the end of this month, be pruned and train- 
ed close to the wall or trellis, that their buds may be preparing 
before the season for applying artificial heat. 

Gathering ripe Fruit. 

Gather apples and pears as they ripen, and treat them as direct- 
ed under the head Orchard, for next month. 

Prepare for Planting. 

Begin towards the end of this month to prepare the borders, &c. 
in which you intend to plant fruit trees, in October or November; 
it is of consequence to add a good supply of thoroughly rotten dung, 
and to trench the ground to the depth of eighteen inches or two feet, 
provided that the natural good soil admits thereof. 

Strawberries. 

Of the Fragaria vescu, or esculent strawberry, there are five 
principal varieties cultivated in gardens for their very delicious 
fruit. 1. F. virginiana, or scarlet strawberry. 2. F. vescapraten- 
sis, of Aiton, or hautboy strawberry. 3. F. Chiloensis, or Chili 
strawberry. 4. F. Jllpina, Alpine or monthly strawberry, and, 
5. F. Ananas, or pine-apple strawberry. There are besides these, 
the varieties sylvestris, or common wood strawberry, and caro- 



486 THE FRtJIT GARDEN. [Sepi-. 

liniana, or Carolina strawberry, with many others arising from 
these, diiFering principally in the colour of their fruit. 

The first, or scarlet strawberry, has dark green leaves and of a 
more even surface than the others; the flowering stems are shorter, 
and the fruit is frequently concealed among the leaves. It is the 
earliest in ripening its fruit, for which reason it merits esteem had 
it nothing else to recommend it; but the fruit is so good as to be 
generally preferred to most others. 

The second, or hautboy strawberry, has larger and thicker leaves 
than the scarlet, oval-lanceolate, and rough; the fruit is of a pale 
red, much larger than the scarlet, and of a musky flavour, of which 
there are several varieties differing in shape and colour, but that 
called the globe hautboy is the best and most improved fruit. 

The third, or Chili strawberry, has oval hairy leaves of a much 
thicker substance than any sort yet known, and stand upon very 
strong hairy foot-stalks; the runners from the plants are very large, 
hairy, and extend to a great length, putting out plants at several 
distances. The peduncles are very strong; the leaves of the calyx 
are long and hairy. The flowers are large and are often deformed, 
and when cultivated in strong loamy land, the plants produce plenty 
of large, firm, well flavoured fruit; in a light soil this kind is not 
generally very productive. 

The fourth, or Alpine strawberry, has small oval leaves, small 
flowers, and middle-sized, oblong, pointed fruit; the plants and 
fruit are considerably larger than the wood strawberry, and are 
particularly valuable for their continuing to bear fruit successively 
from June till the autumn frosts put a stop to them, but with the 
help of hot-beds, &c. they may be kept in a bearing state the whole 
year round. The reason of its long continuance in fruit is, that 
the runners which it throws out during the summer, shoot up into 
flowers and fruit the same year. Of this there are four varieties, 
the scarlet fruited, red fruited, white fruited and scarlet blossomed. 
This is said to be a native of the Alps, in Europe. 

The fifth, or pine-apple strawberry, has leaves which much re- 
semble those of the scarlet strawberry, but are larger, of a thicker 
substance, and the indentures of their edges are blunter: the run- 
ners are much larger and hairy: the peduncles are stronger, the 
flowers much larger, and the fruit approaches in size, shape, and 
colour, to the Chili strawberry. As this produces a great quantity 
of fruit when the plants are kept clear from runners (and the fruit 
is very large) it is well worthy of cultivation. The fruit of this 
variety has somewhat of the smell and taste of the pine-apple, from 
whence it takes its name. 

In the cultivation of strawberries, much depends upon the choice 
of plants; for if they are promiscuously taken from the beds with- 
out care, a great number of them will become barren; these are by 
the gardeners termed blind, which is when there are plenty of flow- 
ers but no fruit produced; if these flowers are well examined they 
will be found to want the female organs.of generation, most of them 
abounding with stamina, but there are few, if any styles; so that 
it frequently happens among these barren plants that some of them 



Sept.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 487 

have a part of an imperfect fruit formed which will sometimes 
ripen. The hautboy strawberry is more subject to this than any of 
the other kinds. The plants of either sort should never be taken from 
old neglected beds where the stools had been suffered to spread or 
run into a confused multitude of vines, nor from any plants which 
are not very fruitful; and those offsets which stand nearest to the 
old plants should always be preferred. 

Strawberries in general, love a strong loamy ground, in which 
they will thrive and bear fruit more abundantly than in a light soil. 
The ground should be somewhat moist, for if it is very dry, all the 
watering which is given to the plants in warm dry seasons, will not 
be sufficient to procure abundant crops; nor should the ground be 
made overly rich with dung, for that would cause the plants to run 
into suckers, grow too luxuriant, and render them less fruitful. 

Any time this month that the weather proves moist, you should 
take advantage of it for making your general plantations of straw- 
berries, but if dry and hot, it will be better to defer that work to 
the last week thereof, or first in October, not later if possible, as 
the plants will be greatly benefitted by having time to form good 
roots before winter. But should the weather then prove unfavour- 
able you should proceed to planting, after which, plentiful and fre- 
quent waterings must be given till the plants are well rooted. 

The sets proper for planting at this time, are those produced in 
the present year from the young runners, selecting them as before 
noticed, or such as were taken oft" in June and transplanted into 
nursery beds. When taken up, the roots should be trimmed, the 
decayed leaves picked oft", and also any small vines or runners 
issuing from the plants. 

The ground should be well dug and, if necessary, previously 
manured with a sufficiency of old well rotted dung, then laid out 
into four feet wide beds with alleys between, of eighteen or twenty 
inches, for the convenience of going in occasionally to weed and 
water the plants and to gather the fruit. Each bed is to contain 
four rows of plants, the large kinds eighteen inches distant in the 
rows, and the small sorts fifteen. Close the earth well about the 
roots of each plant, and when finished, water the whole plentifully 
should the weather happen to be dry at the time. 

The old strawberry beds will require to be kept clear from large 
overgrown weeds, and in October are to have their autumn dress- 
ing as there <lirected. 

N. B. If you intend to force strawberries in the winter or early 
spring months, this is the time to pot them for that purpose. The 
alpine and scarlet kinds are the best for forcing; they should be 
strong plants of two years old, and in a proper state for full bear- 
ing. Provide as many pots of about seven inches diameter at top, 
and made in proportion, as you think may be sufficient, and at the 
same time get some good loamy earth, made fine with a spade, 
place a few inches thereof into the bottom of each pot, previously 
laying a shell over each hole as directed on former occasions, then 
take up each plant with a ball of earth to its roots, pare the ball 
neatly round with the knife, clear the plant from decayed leaves 



488 THE VINEYARD. [Sept. 

and runners, place it in the pot and fill up the spaces around the 
sides and over the surface of the ball with fine earth. Water the 
whole when potted, and remove them to the shade for eight or ten 
days till newly rooted; then you may plunge them to their rims in 
any open part of the garden, there to remain, watering them occa- 
sionally till the approach of winter, when the pots are to be placed 
under the protection of frames and glasses till taken into the forcing 
departments. 

This practice is absolutely necessary, in the middle and eastern 
states, as during winter the earth is so hard frozen as to render it 
impracticable to take up the plants out of the open ground, when 
wanted, without injury; moreover, when they are potted at this 
season, their roots will be well established before the time of forc- 
ing commences, and consequently the plants will be much more 
productive of fruit. 



THE ORCHARD. 

Collecting ripe Fruit. 

Apples and pears that attain now to full maturity, rarely keep as 
well as those which ripen in the ensuing month; but when it is de- 
sirable to preserve them as long as possible, they must be treated 
as directed in October. 

When planting of fruit trees is intended in the months of Octo- 
ber or November, opportunity ought to be taken of any leisure time 
that may now occur for the preparation of the ground, as directed 
in March, under the head Orchard. 



THE VINEYARD. 



I am very happy in having it in my power to exhibit to my fellow 
citizens and the public, the annexed comparative and very interest- 
ing table of the progress of vegetation in Pennsylvania, Paris, the 
ci-devant Champagne and Burgundy; the more especially as it 
proves the decided advantage we possess, of a full month, in the 
season of our vintage, over those famous wine countries. It also 
exhibits the medium temperature of heat in Pennsylvania, the West 
Indies, Paris, Champagne, Lorrain, Arras, Brussels, and Stockholm, 
in Europe, Algiers in Africa, and Pondicherry in Asia, which, no 
doubt, will be very interesting to meteoTrologists and other men of 
science. But it is of peculiar importance, on account of its forming 



A TABLE, 

[To face page 488. 
Of the progress of Vegetation in Pennsylvania, compared with (hat of some of the famous Wine Countries of Europe; and also exhibiting the results of various Meteorological observations. 

ilT- The variety of Grape-vine particularly noticed herein is the Munier, commonly called Miller's Burgundy. It was cultivated at Spring-Mill, ll! miles in a direct line N W h,, M r .i, •. <■ di.-, j , . . 

country exposure; and, of course, later in every stage of iu /egetative progress than if growing i^ a shSlered and warmersituaUon^ " ^ Ph'ladelph.a, ,n an open 



e « 



Dcg.M. Deg. M. 



50 17 
50 51 
59 20 



36 49 
11 42 



77 33 E 



78 OE 

79 33 E 
93 18 E 

13 27 E 

77 26 E 
155 E 



1787 

1788 
1789 
1790 
1791 
1792 
1793 
1794 
1795 
1796 
1797 
1798 
1799 
1800 



Medium result at 
Spring-Mill. 
At Champagne, 
Lorraiu, 
Paris, and part 

of 
Burgundy. 
Arras, 
Brussels, 
Stockholm, 



GRAPE-VINES. 



WEEP 
Oil BLEED. 



C Planted 
\ the Vines. 

15 March. 

18 do. 

15 do. 

13 do. 
7 do. 

14 do. 
18 do. 
20 do. 
28 do. 
23 do. 
20 do. 



20 March, 



14 May. 
29 April. 
22 do. 
21 do. 
25 May. 

28 April. 

6 May. 

7 do. 
10 do. 

1 do. 

8 do. 
5 do. 

29 April. 

2 May. 



IN FLOWER. 



19 June. 
14 do. 

25 May. 
17 June. 
29 May. 

26 do. 

12 June. 
24 do. 

13 do. 
2 do. 



FRUIT 
FORMED. 



FRUIT 
RIPE. 



March. 16 May. 



16 June. 



6 July. 

1 do. 

18 do. 

2 do. 

19 June. 

19 do. 

7 July. 

20 do. 

5 do. 
27 do. 

6 do. 
30 June. 

4 July. 
10 July. 



3 Sept. 
25 Aug. 

15 do. 
2 Sept. 

16 Aug. 
20 do. 
10 Sept. 
14 do. 

6 do. 
1 do. 



do. 
Aue. 



1"^ 



Deg. 



TS- 



53 6 

51 8 

54 3 

53 8 

54 3 



54 
54 
53 
52 
51 



51 6 

52 



1 Sept. 



1 Oct. 



Guadaloupe, 

Algiers, 
Pondichcrrv, 



> Medium Temperature of the whole year, 48-j*y. 

do. do. 42.,^. 

^ E.xtreme heat, 99/^. E.xtreme of cold, 6.5^^-. 
^ temperature of the whole year, 84^'j^. 

Medium temperature of the whole year, 6.5-^^.. 
do. do. ' 78J,r- 



12 June. 

18 do. 

15 do. 

14 do. 

12 do. 
6 do. 
6 do. 
8 do. 

10 do. 

15 do. 

13 do. 
12 do. 



do. 
do. 



12 June. 



51 8 1 27 June. 



9 July. 
9 do. 

6 do. 
4 do. 
2 do. 
1 do. 

31 June. 
1 July. 
4 do. 
9 do. 
8 do. 

7 do. 



4 July. 



27 July. 



13 July. 

14 do. 

10 do. 

11 do. 
do. 
6 do. 

4 do. 

5 do. 
9 do. 

14 do. 

13 do. 

11 do. 



do. 
do. 



9 July. 



22 July. 

24 do. 

20 do. 

19 do. 

14 do. 

16 do. 

12 do. 

14 do. 

18 do. 

26 do. 

22 do. 

18 do. 



TEMPERATURE OF EACH YEAR. 



do. 
do. 



18 July. 



Pretty dry and very vegetative. 

Moist, variable and cold. 

Variable and tolerably warm. 

Sweet, agreeable and moist. 

Warm and variable. 

Warm and moist. 

Very hot, dry and abundant. 

Variable, moist and warm. 

Moist and warm. 

Variable and cold. 

Variable, cold and moist. 

Moderate, variable and moist. 

Moderate, dry and abundant. 

Agreeably warm, moist, abundant. 

C Variable, moist, tolerably pleasant and vege- 
\ tative. Prevalent wind, W. N. W. 

Cold & moist. Prevalent winds, N.E.& S. W. 



The most intense cold which we have had in Pennsylvania, between tiie first day of January, 1787, and 
the first of February, 1806, according to a regular series of observations made at Spring-Mill, every day 
at sunrise, and at two o'clock in the afternoon, the thermometer in the open air, sufficiently shaded, about 
five feet from the surface of the ground, and out of the way of any extra reflection of the sun's rays, 
occasioned by walls, pavements, &c. happened on the 2nd of February, 1789; the mercury having fallen 
that day, to 17/^^ degrees below zero or of Fahrenheit; and the greatest licat during that period was in 
July, 1793, when the mercury rose to 104^^^ degrees. July is, generally, our hottest month; and our greatest 
degree of heat, on an average of several years, may be estimated at about 99/5. January is, usually, our 
coldest month, in the course of which we may always expect a degree of cold equal to l-i below 0. Attentive observations at the above place, from the beginning of the year 1787 to the end of the year 1800, have 
given as a medium for one year, 4 days of Aurora Borealis, 16 of thunder, 7 of tempestuous weather, 16 of snow, 249 of fair settled weather, and 73 of rain; and the average quantity of water which had fallen 
annually, to be 39 inches, 9 lines, and \^ of a line, English measure. Our atmosphere is generally clear, and seldom so overcast as to obstruct the rays of the sun for four days successively. 

The most intense cold which we experienced in the year 1804 was on the 25th of January, being 14^*,^ below 0; the greatest heat, on the 4th of May and 9th of July, being on each of those days 95 degrees; and 
the medium temperature of the whole year, resulting from observations made on every day thereof, was 55^^. 

In the year 1805, on the 12th and 25th of January, the mercury fell to 2^^ below 0; on the 2nd and 22nd of August it rose to 100 J^; and the medium temperature of the whole year was 57,'^. It is observable 
that the medium heat of each of these two years was much greater than of any year from 1787 to 1800, inclusive. 

In Paris, the greatest summer heat is generally between 92-^5^ and 95 degrees: the most intense cold, between 9^,^ and 5; and the medium heat of the whole year, as established on the result of 70 years observations, 
51 /„. But in the year 1716 the mercury had fallen there to 3/^^ below 0; in the year 1720 it rose to 104, and in 1743 to OO/j. The coldest month at that place is January, and the hottest August. 
At Hoorn, in Holland, in the year 1763, the mercury had fallen to 8 degrees, which is marked on some of the Dutch thermometers as a remarkable degree of cold. 

Ice or snow mixed with kitchen salt, produces a degree of cold equal to zero or of Fahrenheit. The point at which still water begins to freeze is 32, and is consequently called the freezing point. Rivers or 
running waters freeze at 20^'j, cider and vinegar at llf'^, and unadulterated wine at 5 degrees. The medium temperature marked on Botanical thermometers, as best adapted for the Pine-Apple, is 73^*^, for 
Melon-beds OO-J,^, and for an Orangery 57^. 

The constiuit temperature of the cellar of the Observatory at Paris is 54-f'o, which is generally considered to bo the same, in every part of the globe, at the depth of about 400 feet beneath the surface. The most 
salutary temperature of the sick or patient's room, is thought to be 72^^^. The heat of the human blood, in the opinion of the Faculty of Medicine at Paris, is 99^^: on the English thermometers it is marked 98; 
and on several thermometers made in Holland and other places in the north of Europe, 96. Heat of Hen's incubation, IO6J5. Fever heat, 112. Rain or distilled water boils at 212 degrees, when the mercury m 
the barometer stands at 30 inches. 



Sept.] THE VINEYARD. 489 

a step towards the ascertaining of the relative degrees of heat and 
cold, &c. in the various climates of the United States, which in 
practical horticulture and agriculture, is of considerable moment, 
and the want of such information to me, in the writing of this trea- 
tise, is a loss which I greatly deplore- Without well authenticated 
information in this respect, there is no knovy^ing what allowance to 
make for the difference of season in one climate from that of an- 
other, and consequently the gardener or farmer, in a distant state 
of the Union, will not know how to avail himself of the practical 
experiments made in another, without running a hazard that may 
prove unsuccessful, and ultimately deter him from the further pur- 
suit of an object, perhaps, of the first importance, merely for want 
of a due knowledge of the proper allowance to be made for the dif- 
ference of season. Therefore it would be of serious advantage, 
were such observations to be made in every state of the Union, and 
confined principally to such perennial and permanent vegetable 
productions, as are common to all, or to the greater number. I 
would propose some of these, but as there are so many Agricultural 
Societies established, I am apprehensive that it might be deemed 
presumptive in an individual. However I shall make observations 
on various plants in the neighbourhood of Philadelphia, as to the 
progress of vegetation, and with pleasure communicate the result 
to those whom a desire for public utility, or a reciprocity of advan- 
tages, may stimulate to similar exertions. 

The annexed table is the result of many years experience at the 
observatory in Paris, and at other places, by the most correct me- 
teorologists. 

Protecting the Fruit. 

Your early varieties of grapes will now be ripening very fast, and 
will sometimes be subject to the annoyance of birds, which are 
more apt to attack the fruit a little before sun rising and about the 
time of its setting, than in any other part of the day; it will be, 
therefore, prudent to have boys with rattles to frighten them away, 
particularly about those hours. 

You should also destroy poke, wild cherries, and any other un- 
cultivated productions growing near the vineyard, the fruit of 
which might invite a resort of birds. Should you observe an ex- 
traordinary resort of wasps in any quarter, and that they are 
destructive to the fruit, hang up phials of honeyed or sugared water 
in such places, in which numbers of them will be caught and 
destroyed. 

The ground between your vines must now be kept perfectly 
free from weeds, and all the branches tied up neatly, in order to 
afford the fruit the full advantage of air and sun for its due perfec- 
tion. 

30 



^9Q THE VINEYARD. [Sept. 

The method of making White Wines. 

In the middle states, the general vintage will happen some time 
in this month, earlier or later according to the season; it will, 
therefore, be necessary to be provided with a sufficient number of 
clean, sweet casks, new, if for white wines, to prevent their colour- 
ing the liquor, but red wines may be put into any cask, without 
injury, provided they are sweet and clean. You must also be pro- 
vided with a vat for mashing the fruit in, and with a suitable con- 
trivance for pressing out the juice. 

Let it be observed that white wines are made from black as well as 
from white grapesj that the former generally makes the strongest 
and best wines, and that it is from the skin of the black grapes, when 
fermented with the juice and pulp, that the red tinge is obtained. 

When you perceive the grapes to be fit for gathering, which you 
may judge of by the eye and taste, for when perfectly fit for eating 
they are then in the best condition fur making wine; make choice 
of cloudy weather, if such should occur, and early in the morning, 
or very late in the afternoon, being provided with a sufficient 
number of careful people, each furnished with a basket to hold the 
fruit, and a crooked pointed knife or a pair of strong scissors to cut 
oft" the bunches, let them begin their work, collecting only such 
bunches as are open, ripe and perfectly sound, passing over all that 
are green, not matured, dry, rotten or bursted. The stalk of every 
bunch should be cut off" close to the fruit, and the bunches laid gently 
into the basket without bruising or pressing them together. 

The grapes which are not sufficiently ripe must be gathered at 
another time, and treated in like manner. 

As the grapes are collected, they must be immediately carried to 
the press or vat, for the sooner they are pressed after gathering 
the finer and whiter the wine will be, and not only that, but it will 
be more mellow, have a more exquisite flavour, and be greater in 
quantity. 

As your vat is filling, the grapes are to be trampled and mashed 
effiectually by men, having their legs and feet previously washed 
very clean; then let your machine for pressing fall down thereon, 
which will force out the liquor plentifully, having a cask conve- 
niently placed to receive it. 

When the liquor ceases to run from the press, raise it and cut up 
the cake to pieces with steel shovels, and press it again, together 
with all the loose grapes that happen to be scattered, and you will 
have another plentiful running of good liquor. 

This is called wine of the first cutting, which will be of a fine 
colour and flavour, little inferior to the other, having a stronger 
body and will keep longer than that of the first pressing. 

The cutting and pressing is to be repeated as often as you find 
the liquor to run, and that from the second and third cutting will be 
still good, of a sufficient body to keep for a length of time, and 
with age will acquire mellowness and an improved flavour. 

The liquor which first runs from the grapes without any other 



Sept.] THE VINEYARD. 49 j 

violence than the weight of the press, is called le vin de gout, and 
is fine, thin, and lively; of a pleasant flavour and relish, appears 
sparkling in the glass, but has not body enough to keep a longtime 
without being mixed; but when incorporated with that obtained 
from the first, second, and third cuttings, it makes then, what is 
called the best champaign. 

The different pressings being mixed as you think proper, should be 
immediately put into clean casks or hogsheads, placed in a warm 
room or dry cellar, and filled to within two inches of the bungholes, 
which should be covered with pieces of cloth, laid loosely on to 
prevent dirt from falling into the liquor. 

It is to be observed that the finest wines ferment the soonest, the 
rest in proportion to their goodness. The first cask that ferments, 
take some of the froth which works therefrom, and put a little of it 
into those casks which are backward in fermenting, which will 
greatly help their working. 

The fermentation may continue for eight, ten, or twelve days, or 
some time longer, according to the season, or quality of the must, 
but at whatever time you perceive it to cease, which you will see by 
the froth not rising as before, fill your casks within about an inch or 
two of the top and bung them up tight, at the same time making small 
vent-holes to carry off' what may be thrown up by the fermentation's 
not being quite ceased. 

Continue to fill up your casks every three or four days, as before, 
until the fermentation completely ceases, lest the foulness which 
should work through the vent-holes sink down for want of passage 
and foul the wines. When all appearance of fermentation is over 
fill the casks and stop the vent-holes; however, open the latter 
occasionally whilst there is any chance of the liquor continuing to 
work. Observation and discretion will best guide on these occa- 
sions. 

About the middle of December, or so soon as the wines have 
settled and become clear, draw them off" into new, well bound casks, 
previously well impregnated with salt and water, to extract the in- 
jurious bitterness of the wood; after which, rinse the casks with fair 
water, and an infusion of peach leaves or flowers, fill them quite 
full and bung them as tight as possible. Repeat this racking oft' in 
February, and likewise in the latter end of March; after which it 
may remain so till bottled, disposed of, or used. 

You must be particularly careful in racking off the wine to draw 
it as clear as possible from the lees, which will render it brisk, 
lively, and sparkling in the glass; while the contrary produces a 
muddy dreg, or sediment, which makes the wine thick, dull, and 
sometimes ropy; and besides, when drawn oft'foul, principles capa- 
ble of maintaining fermentation would be introduced into the hogs- 
head, which would be productive of the decomposition of the sac- 
charine part, and consequently, deprive the wine of its sweetness. 

The lees after the wine is racked oft', may be distilled for brandy, 
and .also the cakes of pulp and skins, after being pressed and then 
properly fermented. 



^92 "^HE VINEYARD. [Sept. 

Tlie method of making Red fVines. 

Red wines must always be made from black grapes, for besides 
the main pulp or core, which is white in these as well as the others, 
there sticks to the inside of the skin a considerable body of rich 
pulp of a deep red, more so in some kinds than others^ this gives 
the colour to the wine when extracted by a due process of fermen- 
tation. The colour of red wine is said to be heightened by gathering 
the grapes in the heat of the day, but this is productive of a con- 
siderable deficiency in the quantity, though the quality may be 
improved thereby. 

Taking these considerations into view, your grapes are to be 
collected with the same care as before directed in the making of 
white wines. Having a sufficient quantity gathered, put them into 
the vat, by degrees treading and mashing them effectually as you 
fill it, till quite full, and the liquor floating above them; then work 
the pulp and the liquor effectually together, leaving all the parts as 
loose as possible, and so let it remain to ferment. 

You ought to be provided with a cover for the top of the vat, 
perforated with holes, and made so as to easily slip down into it 
and sink a little under the superfices of the liquor, to keep the 
skins and pulpy parts from coming into contact with the air during 
the process of fermentation; for when this is exposed, and it tends 
to swim on the top, it very shortly becomes acid, and communi- 
cating this to the liquor greatly injures it. As the skins give the 
colour to the wine, nothing is better than the keeping of them 
down, without pressing, during this process, for to believe that 
these and other dregs floating on the top impede the evaporation 
of the spirit, is a thing improbable, since it requires a good cork 
to stop it. 

The moment of drawing off" the wine is of great importance, but 
generally, however, without rule. It would be impossible to pi'e- 
scribe a certain number of days for an operation liable to so many 
viscissitiides, as much through the qualities of the grapes as other 
circumstances. But as the great object of fermentation is the con- 
version of the must or expressed juice into wine, no drawing should 
take place until that it is effected. This moment, which might 
appear uncertain, may be ascertained with tolerable precision by 
means of a tin tube open at one end and perforated all over with 
holes of a small size, that the grains or stones of the fruit may not 
pass through when dipped into the vat; inside of this a small 
wooden cylinder must be placed, upheld at its bottom by a cork 
plate that can work up and down freely in the tube: this instru- 
ment is to be plunged into the vat and kept there, the liquor get- 
ting in through the holes of the tube will raise the cork to its 
surface, to which cork the wooden pin or cylinder is affixed. This 
latter must be marked in different heights, which will be seen to 
rise as the vinous fermentation increases. 

With this instrument, the precise moment in which the wine is 
to be drawn off", may be established with great exactness; this is 
generally done when the cylinder has attained to the highest and 



Sept.] THE VINEYARD. 493 

become stationary, the fermenting mass always swelling in bulk 
till the vinous fermentation is completely accomplished, becoming 
then stationary previous to the commencement of an acetous fer- 
mentation, and sinking with that, which if suffered without draw- 
ing off" the liquor, would ruin all. Eerthollet and other authors 
recommend not to draw oft" the wine till you are able to perceive 
the cylinder begin to lower a little. 

When the liquor is drawn oft' into clean sweet casks, place them 
in the cellar, fill them up within an inch or two of the top, and lay 
a piece of leather with a small weight on it over each bung-hole 
that may yield to a second fermentation, which generally takes 
place. When the wine has settled or ceased to ferment, bung the 
casks as close as possible, and the subsequent treatment is exactly 
the same as directed for white wines. 

In the making of red wines it is customary to mix with the fruit 
a small portion of what is called the claret grape, to heighten the 
colour, as the entire juice of this variety is of a deep red. 

It is also customary, and even necessary, with wine of a weak 
body, made from newly established vineyards, or from worn out 
old ones, to add two or three gallons of very nice brandy, and five 
or six of old strong wine of the same colour, and as near the intend- 
ed flavour as possible, to every hogshead of sixty or sixty-three 
gallons of the new winej this is usually done after the fermentation 
is over. 

In Spain and other parts of Europe, if the season proves wet, or 
if they think the must or expressed juice too replete with watery 
particles, they boil the whole or part thereof, to evaporate the 
superabundance; but this is done immediately after the juice is 
expressed before the least fermentation takes place. 

The evaporation ought not to be by an intense ebullition, and 
although the fire may be ardent, the ebullition may be prevented 
by pouring some cold must into the kettle every time you perceive 
it ready to boil. 

The acid contained in the must being capable of dissolving cop- 
per and converting it into verdigris, you must, therefore, be careful 
not to boil it in any kettle but such as is perfectly well tinned; 
and some people, after cleaning the inside effectually, rub it all 
over with a woollen rag dipped in sweet oil; if these precautions 
are neglected the dissolution of the copper will give a disagreeable 
brass taste to the wine, and perhaps render it pernicious to the 
health of those who drink it. 

The kettle should be large, wide in the mouth and flat in the 
bottom, which will produce a saving in the consumption of fuel 
and expedite the process. 

The whole of the must may be boiled, or if only a part thereof 
be so reduced, this should be mixed with the remainder, and if 
intended for wiiite wine, put into casks to undergo the process of 
vinous fermentation as before noticed. But if designed for red 
wine it must be poured into the vat, when of a temperate degree of 
heat, on the pulp and skins, there to undergo with them the neces- 
sary degree of fermentation to extract the colour and to form the 



4 94 THE VINEYARD. [Sept. 

wine; after which it is to be treated as before directed, observing 
to take similar pains in pressing the juice out of the pulp when, 
sufficiently fermented, as recommended under the article White 
Wines, but this will not be so diflicult. 

The antiquity of the practice of boiling the must maybe inferred 
from the following story related by Mutardi-Ben-Gasif, an Ara- 
bian author: 

"Noah being come out of the ark, he commanded each of his 
sons to build a house; they afterwards busied themselves in sowing 
and planting trees, for which they had found kernels and necessary 
fruits in the ark. Noah wanted the vine only, nor could he ever 
find it. Gabriel then gave him notice that it was the Devil who 
had stolen it away, because he had a right to it. Noah made him 
come forward immediately, and said to him: Oh! thou acctirsed! 
wherefore hast thou carried the vine away from me? Because it 
doth belong to me, quoth Satan. Share it betwixt you, replies 
Gabriel. I agree to that, continued Noah, and I'll let him have 
the one-fourth. That will not be sufl&cient for him, replied Gabriel. 
Well! I am willing, said Noah, to take one half, and he may have 
the other. That is not still enough, said Gabriel; he must have 
two-thirds of it, and thou only one, and thy must shall be boiled 
on the fire until it has consumed up the two-thirds, the use of the 
remainder shall be granted unto thee." 

What a pity! that Mutardi-Ben-Gasif did not inform us of the 
progress made by his Satanic majesty in the cultivation of the vine, 
to whom Gabriel's favours had been extended so very bountifully, 
even not to the injunction of boiling his m,ust. 

General Remarks. 

Ideal, as well as intrinsic qualities, cause one kind of wine to be 
preferred to another, so that one nation or country admires what 
another does not like, or perhaps despises; and even this ideal 
fancy is not uncommon among individuals of the same country, 
town, or place; consequently, it will be well to know how to vary 
the properties of wine according to fancy. 

If a taste of wine slightly acid, similar to that of the Rhenish, is 
desired, some tartarous acid may be added to the must. 

If the wine is required sweet, the must should be drained in such 
a manner that it may retain as little as possible of the lees, and let 
it afterwards ferment of itself. Some sugared matter might be 
joined with it. 

If the wine should be wanted delicate and of a light colour, the 
m.ust should not be suffered to have a long action on the lees, from 
which it takes principles that augment the fermentation, and dis- 
solve in consequence the mucilaginous parts, together with the 
colouring matter. 

Should a strong wine of good body be preferred, the must ought 
to be suffered to remain the longer on the dregs, in case the grapes 
do not afford it of sufficient strength. Or the boiling of the must, 
in the manner before observed, will accomplish this. 



Sept.] THE VINEYARD. 495 

If besides it be desired to have a headj or intoxicating wine, add 
some tartar and sugared matter to the must, which will produce' a 
greater portion of spirit. 

If the wine be required to have a great deal of body, add, after 
the ceasing of the fermentation, a fresh sugared matter, such as 
strong must deprived of its tartar. 

It has been suggested to me, that exposing the casks of weak 
wine to the winter frost till the watery particles contained in the 
liquor are converted into ice, and then drawing oft" the pure wine, 
would be the best method of giving it a sufficient body. If this 
answers the end, and it is very probable it may, as pure wine 
requires a much greater degree bf cold to freeze it than water, the 
middle and eastern states of the Union possess an advantage in that 
respect over most of the wine countries of Europe, as the cold of 
their winters is not sufficiently intense to answer that end. 

Should the wine be required with much, little, or no colour, let 
it be remembered that this quality resides exclusively in the skin 
of'the fruit, so that you may conduct the process according to your 
desire. 

Different flavours and fragrancies are communicated by the dif- 
ferent kinds of grapes, and also from other ingredients; the odour 
of Muscatel, for example, is given with the flowers of elder and 
other herbs; some use peach flowers, and consider them to com- 
municate an agreeable flavour to wine. 

The absolute and essential qualities in wine are to have.no 
defect, nor be liable easily to contract any, to be able to keep long, 
and bear transportation. 

An essential article in the preservation of wine is to keep the 
air totally excluded out of the vessels, for which purpose Davanzati 
advises to "take off' the rind of a piece of dried bacon, and leave a 
little fat adhering to it in the centre, after that make use of it in the 
manner of a bung, and cram it in with might, that the cask may be 
well stopped up: extend out the rind afterwards over the cask after 
having done it over with ashes; then cover it over again with very 
dry ashes; and that they may not fall off', nail a piece of stuff' over 
the same. The cask being then sufficiently shut up, the air will not 
penetrate into it, and the wine cannot change its nature." 

I mention this to show the necessity of the casks being kept air- 
tight and bunged eff"ectually, not doubting but many other methods 
may be used equally eff'ectual, perhaps much more so than that 
recommended by Davanzati. 

A wine cellar should be dry, so deep under ground as that the 
temperature of its heat maybe nearly the same winter and summer: 
it should be at a distance from streets, highways, workshops, sewers 
and necessaries; if arched over the better. 

Of all other methods wine is best preserved in bottles, well 
corked and sealed; but this should not be done till it is clear and 
fine, and all fermentation subsided. 

Tartar and the lees of wine are the principles of its destruction, 
and none but sweet wines can bear the existence of them; by often 
drawing it off in order to purge it of these, there is too great a 



496 THE VINEYARD. [Sept. 

superfices exposed to the action of the air, which greatly injures 
the wine. 

To obviate this evil, the people of Champagne and other wine 
countries, make use of the following expedient, viz. To a leather 
pipe from four to six feet in length and two inches in diameter are 
adapted, at each end, wooden pipes nine or ten inches in length, 
which decrease in diameter towards the ends, and are fastened to 
the leather pipes by means of a piece of twine. The bung of the 
cask intended to be filled is taken out and one of the pipes put 
into it. A good cock is fixed in the cask to be emptied; two or 
three inches from the bottom, and in this is inserted the extremity 
of the other pipe. A pair of bellows of two feet long, including the 
handles, and ten inches in diameter, with a wooden pipe, to the 
extremity of which is fixed a small leather valve to prevent the air 
from rushing out when the bellows are opened, is introduced 
through a hole made in the bung and fitted exactly thereto. When 
the bellows are worked, the pressure exercised on the wine, obliges 
it to issue from the cask and to ascend and pass through the leather 
pipe into the other cask. When the pipe is once filled, the wine 
will pass through without the application of any further force till 
each cask is half full, but then by working the bellows the artificial 
pressure of the air on the surface of the wine, will oblige the re- 
mainder to pass off, without any agitation or shaking. When a 
hissing is heard at the cock, it is a sign that all the wine has passed. 
This operation may be performed in another manner, without the 
assistance of a cock, by making one of the wooden pipes so long as 
to reach within five or six inches of the bottom, and introducing it 
through the bung, together with the pipe of the bellows, which when 
worked, will force up the liquor as before. 

Clarification of Wines. 

When wines have been racked oft' three or four times, in the 
preceding manner, they may be fined or clarified as follows. For 
white wines, mix a quart of new milk and about an ounce of salt 
with two or three quarts of wine and pour it into the cask, then 
with a strong lath or flat stick, stir the wine in the cask very well, 
observing not to put the stick to the bottom, least you disturb the 
lees or sediment. This will be sufiicient for sixty-three gallons. 

Some for this purpose use a solution of isinglass, about the 
quantity of an ounce to every fifty gallons of wine; but Chaptal 
observes, "the use of this substance is dreaded in warm climates, 
and its place is supplied by whites of eggs: ten or twelve are suf- 
ficient for half a muid, or seventy-two gallons English. They should 
be well beaten up, and mixed with a pint of new milk." 

For a hogshead of red wine, beat up effectually the whites often 
or twelve /resA eggs, and incorporate this well with three or four 
quarts of wine, which pour into the cask, stirring it as above direct- 
ed. In five or six days after, the wines .will be fit to draw off" for 
bottling, &c. 



Sept.] THE VINEYARD. 497 

Methods of curing Raisins. 

R. Twiss, Esq. says, in his travels through Portugal and Spain, 
page 334, "raisins are of two sorts; those which are called sun- 
raisins are made thus: when the grapes are almost ripe, the stalk 
is half cut through, so that the sap may not penetrate farther, but 
yet the bunch of grapes may remain suspended by the stalk; the 
sun by darting on them candies them, and when they are dry they 
are packed up in boxes. 

"The second sort is made after this manner; when the vines 
are produced the tendrils or claspers are preserved till the time of 
vintage, a great fire is made, when the tendrils are burned, and 
in the ley made of their ashes the newly gathered grapes are dipt, 
after which they are exposed to the sun to dry, which renders them 
tit for use." 

Mr. Swinburn in his travels through Spain informs us, that the 
raisins dried on the coast of Valencia are dipt in a ley of loine and 
ashes. 

Preserving Grapes fresh for winter use. 

Grapes may be kept fresh a long time by the following method: 
before the autumn frosts have killed the leaves, let the bunch with 
the shoot be carefully cut off' the vine; then let the lower end of 
the shoot be put into a bottle filled with water; which hang up with 
the shoot and branch in a warm room, or in a green-house. 

The bottle should be filled with fresh clear water every ten or 
twelve days, and at the same time a thin paring should be cut oft' 
the bottom of the shoot, whereby the pores will be made to imbibe 
the water with greater facility. 

By this method grapes may be kept fresh and good till the mid- 
dle of February. 

Or let the grapes hang on the vines as long as they will continue 
on with safety; the late ripening kinds will be best for this purpose, 
provided they are of good flavour and have attained full maturity. 
When the frosts begin to set in sharp then gather them. Where 
there are several bunches on one branch cut it off", leaving about six 
inches in length, or more, of the wood, according to the distance 
between the bunches, and a little on the outside of the fruit at each 
end; seal both ends of the branch with some common sealing wax, 
or with such as wine merchants use for sealing their bottles with; 
then hang them across a line in a dry room, which is to be kept 
perfectly free from frost, taking care to clip out with a pair of scis- 
sors any of the berries that begin to decay or become mouldy, which 
if left would taint the others. In this way grapes may be kept fresh 
a long time: if they are cut before the bunches are very ripe, they 
will keep longer, but their flavour will not be so fine. 

Having plenty of fresh grapes in winter makes a great addition 
to the table, and if properly kept they will be of a much superior 
flavour to the imported grapes. 

Grapes may also be kept in jars; every bunch when well aired 
3P 



498 THE NURSERY. [Sept. 

and perfectly dry, should be wrapped up loosely in soft white paper, 
laid in layers, and each layer covered with bran, which should be 
perfectly well dried before it is used: first lay a little of the dry 
bran in the bottom of the jar, then a layer of the wrapped up grapes, 
and so on, a layer of bran and a layer of grapes alternately, till you 
have filled the jar; then shake it gently and fill it to the top with 
bran; cover the top with paper, and over this a piece of bladder 
doubled, which tie firmly around to exclude the air; then put on 
the top or cover of the jar, observing that it fits as close as possi- 
ble. These jars should be kept in a room where they will not be 
exposed to damps, frosts, or too much heat. 

In order to preserve a few of your finest bunches for this pur- 
pose, from the depredations of birds and insects, let some small 
bags made of thin gauze or crape be drawn over them, or rather let 
the bunches be put into the bags; the sun and air will have free 
access through the crape, and when wet it will dry very soon. 



THE NURSERY. 

Budding or Inoculating. 

Continue to inoculate peaches, nectarines, almonds and apples; 
the three former will succeed very well if done any time before the 
middle of the month, and even later in some seasons, especially in 
the middle and eastern states; the budding of apples should be 
finished as early in the month as possible; but these or any other 
kinds may be inoculated as late as you find the bark to separate 
freely from the stock. 

Untie the bandages of such plants as have been budded three or 
four weeks; this must not be neglected, for the swelling growth of 
the stocks would cause the bandages to sink into the bark, which 
would injure both stocks and buds. 

Prepare ground for planting. 

If omitted in August, it will be very proper to embrace every 
leisure moment at this time, to dig and prepare all vacant quarters 
and borders in which you intend to plant fruit-tree stocks, or 
trees or shrubs of any kind in October or November; this will for- 
ward your business, and not only that, but the ground will be mel- 
lowed and moistened by the rain, which will be of much advantage 
in exciting the plants to produce new fibres before winter. 

Transplanting. 
When absolute necessity requires it, and only in that case, you 



Sept.] THE NURSERY. 499 

may in the last week of this mouth remove and transplant ever- 
greens and such deciduous trees and shrubs as are much declined 
in leaf, but should the season prove dry, these must be carefully 
and frequently watered for a month or five weeks after, not giving 
too much at a time, nor too frequently, lest an over quantity should 
rot the young fibres as they are produced. 

Propagating Trees and Shrubs by Cuttings and Layers, 

In the last week" of this month you may begin to propagate goose- 
berries, currants, honeysuckles, and several other hardy trees and 
shrubs by cuttings; but it will be necessary at this time to plant 
them in a shady border; however, I would not advise this to be done 
before October, except in cases of necessity; for wood imperfectly 
ripened, wheu cut off and planted in this month, seldom can bear 
the power of the sun in our climates, unless it is for some time after 
covered and protected therefrom. 

The general propagation by layers may, with great propriety, be 
commenced towards the latter end of this month. For the method 
see page 288. 

Fruit Stones. 

Peach, plum, and cherry stones, &c., may now be sown as di- 
rected in page 453, or they may be preserved as recommended in 
page 467, till October, November, or February; but in the southern 
states they should be sown in or before January if possible. 

Trimming Pines and Firs, 4*c. 

Where firs, pines, and other resinous trees are grown so rude as 
to require some of their branches to be cut off, this is the best time 
in the year for so doing; now they are not subject to weep as in 
the spring, and there will be time for their wounds to harden and 
partly heal before winter. Walnut trees and maples should also 
be trimmed at this season where necessary, for the same reason. 

General care of young Nursery Plants. 

Thoroughly clean from weeds all the seed-beds and young plan- 
tations of trees, shrubs, &c.; this must be done occasionally by 
hand and hoe, taking opportunity of dry days when you work with 
the hoe; and weeding will be easier performed when the ground is 
moist. 

Continue to give water in dry weather to all the plants in pots 
or boxes, and also to new plantations of flowers, &c. 

Towards the latter end of the month begin to pot off singly such 
young tender plants as were raised from seed this year, and that 
stand too close together were growing. These should be imme- 
diately placed in the shade for about three weeks till newly rooted, 



500 THE PLEASURE, OR [Sept. 

after which place them in a warm exposure till the approach of 
frost, when thej must be removed into the green-house or placed 
under the protection of frames and glasses, &c. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Carnations and Pinks. 

Your late carnation and pink layers must now be taken off as 
soon as they are well rooted, and be treated as directed in July and 
August; the earlier in the month that you can do this the better 
will the plants be rooted before winter. 

Towards the end of the month you may transplant from the 
nursery beds the seedling pinks and carnations into such beds and 
borders as you intend them to flower in; observing to take each 
plant up with a ball of earth, and to give it some water when newly 
planted. 

Jiuriculas. 

The auricula plants still require due attention, but particularly 
those shifted last month; they must yet be kept in the shade and 
moderately watered, as often as the earth appears rather dry, to 
promote a free growth and a good supply of new roots before 
winter. 

If the shifting had been neglected last montli it may yet be done, 
but the beginning of August is a more eligible period. 

Particular care must now be taken to keep the auricula seed- 
lings, as well as the old plants, free from decayed leaves and 
weeds of every kind, to keep the earth about them in a moderate 
state of moisture, that the plants may grow freely and obtain 
strength before winter. 

Sowing Seeds of Bulbous -rooted Flowers. 

This will be a very proper time to sow the seeds of tulips, hya- 
cinths, and of every other kind of bulbous-rooted flowers that have 
perfected seed in the preceding part of the season. These seeds 
should be sown separately in boxes filled with good sound garden 
mould, mixed with a small portion of sand or with hyacinth or 
tulip compost; sow the seeds pretty thick and cover them about 
half an inch deep. The depth of earth in each box should be at 
least one foot, the bottoms of the boxes should be perforated with 
holes, each about an inch in diameter, and covered with shells, in 
order that any extra moisture may drain off thereby. The boxes 
are then to be placed in a warm exposure, and will require no- 
water, or any other attention than the keeping of them perfectly 



Sept.] FLOWER GARDEN. 501 

free from weeds, and slightly protecting them from frost till the 
spring following, when the plants will appear. Early in May 
place the boxes in the shade, but not under the dropping or shade 
of trees J and in very dry weather give the plants a small portion 
of water J but this should be administered sparingly, lest it should 
rot the young bulbs. In June, when the leaves are decayed, sift 
half an inch of fresh earth over that in the boxes, and on the ap- 
proach of winter place them again in a warm exposure where you 
can give them some slight protection from severe frost. Continue 
the same treatment, winter and summer, till the month of June or 
July, in the third year; the roots may then be taken up, dried and 
treated in the same manner as directed for large bulbs or offsets in 
pages 392 and 393; a few of the strongest roots will flower the 
fourth year, about one half may be expected to flower the fifth, but 
the sixth year every healthy root will exhibit its bloom; and then 
the hopes and expectations of the cultivator will be realized or 
disappointed. He may, however, think himself fortunate if one 
half of the plants that first appeared are in existence at this period, 
and if he can at last find one tulip or hyacinth in five hundred 
deserving a name or a place in a good collection, he may rest per- 
fectly content. 

The tulips raised from seed will each consist of one plain colour 
on a white, dark, or yellow bottom; the period of their breaking 
into different stripes is very uncertain, so much so that it is not 
uncommon to wait ten or twenty years without the desired suc- 
cess, although it sometimes happens, fortunately, to take place the 
first, second, or third year after their blooming; where the collec- 
tion of breeders is numerous, (a name given to those self-coloured 
tulips,) there may be reasonable expectations of procuring one or 
two valuable flowers annually: a poor dry soil is most likely to 
produce these effects; and a single instance has occurred where 
forty breeders out of fifty became broken or variegated in one sea- 
son in a situation of this description. 

New sorts of breeders are procured from seed, but such only as 
have tall strong stems, with large well formed cups, and clear in 
the bottom, are worth cultivating. 

Note. — The various kinds of tender bulbous-rooted flowering 
plants may be propagated as above directed, but the boxes in 
which the seedlings grow must be placed in a green-house or hot- 
house in winter, according to the respective necessities of the 
various kinds. 

Transplant Perennial and Biennial Flower Roots. 

The latter end of this month is a very proper period for trans- 
planting the various kinds of seedlings, perennial and biennial flow- 
ers, out of the flower-nursery into the beds, borders, and pleasure 
grounds, where they are designed to bloom. You may likewise 
slip and plant out double catchily, pinks, London pride, lychnideas, 
dracocephalums, sweet-william, thrift,, scarlet-lychnis, virginian 
spiderwort, double rose-campion, double rocket, virginian lung- 



502 THE PLEASURE, OR [Sept. 

wort, creeping Greek valerian, and every other kind of hardy 
fibrous-rooted perennials that are past bloom. 

Cut down the stalks of such flowers as are decayed, and where 
they are not to be transplanted, dig the ground about them and add 
some rotten dung or fresh earth to the borders, which will greatly 
strengthen their roots. 

This will also be a very good time to collect from the fields, 
swamps, and woods some of the favourites of the Most-High, which 
he has decorated with such a profusion of lustre and beauty, that, 
"Solomon in all his glory" was not equal to. These are to be taken 
up and treated as directed in page 470. 

The various kinds of tuberous-rooted flowering-plants may now 
be propagated by slipping or parting their roots, such as pseonias, 
spirssa filipendula, flag-irises, Helleborus hyemalis or winter aconite, 
&c. This last should have its roots planted in small clusters; for 
small solitary flowers scattered about the borders, are scarcely seen 
at a distance, but when these, snowdrops, crocuses, and dwarf 
Persian irises, are alternately planted in bunches, they will have a 
very good effect, as they flower at the same time and are much of 
a size. You may also divide and transplant the roots of the Hel- 
leborus niger, or Christmas rose, Helleborus viridis, or green helle- 
bore, Helleborus ranunculinus, and Helleborus foetidus, stinking 
hellebore, or bear's-foot. The Helleborus lividus, purple, or great 
three flowered black hellebore, is a very desirable plant; it is usual 
to keep this in the green-house, where it will flower in February 
and continue a long time in bloom. It may now be propagated in 
like manner as the other species. 

The Fair Maids of France. 

The double flowering variety of the Ranunculus aconitifolius, 
aconite- leaved crowfoot, or Fair Maids of France, is greatly es- 
teemed for the delicate beauty of its numerous flowers. It is per- 
fectly hardy, and grows generally from a foot and a half to two 
feet high, the stalks branching out at top into several divisions, at 
each of which there is one leaf of the same shape of the root leaves, 
divided into five lanceolate lobes each; the four side-lobes are upon 
foot-stalks coming from the side of the principal stalk, and the 
middle one terminates it; they are deeply serrate, and have several 
longitudinal veins. The flowers are pure white, very double, each 
standing upon a single foot-stalk. The root is perennial and com- 
posed of many strong fleshy fibres, formed like that of the Ranun- 
culus asiaticus ov garden ranunculus, and increasing in the same 
manner. It is a native of the Alps of Europe, and is very scarce 
at present in America. 

This beautiful plant flowers generally in the latter end of May 
and June, and may be propagated by taking up the roots now or at 
any time after the stems decay, separating the oifsets, taking care 
at the same time to preserve the crown of each unhurt, and plant- 
ing them in any good garden earth. Their thick fibres are to be 
spread around, and the upper part of each root is to be covered 



Sept.] FLOWER GARDEN. 503 

about two inches deep if planted in beds or borders, but if in pots, 
one inch will be sufficient; raise the earth in the centre of the pot, 
place the root thereon, spreading the fibres around and downward, 
then fill in the earth and cover as above. The pots will require 
some protection and but very little water during winter, for no root 
or plant will bear as much frost when in pots as if planted in the 
open ground. This plant looks beautiful in rooms and windows 
when in flower, as well as in borders and beds. 

Ranunculuses and Anemones. 

In the last week or ten days of this month you should plant a few 
beds of ranunculuses and anemones for an early bloom, as directed 
in October; but I would not recommend the general planting of 
those roots sooner than next month; however, it will be proper at 
this time to begin to prepare the beds, &c. as there advised. 

Planting various kinds of Bulbous Roots. 

Spring crocuses, snowdrops, fritillaries, crov/n-imperials, dens- 
canises, dwarf Persian, English and Spanish bulbous irises, scarlet 
martagons, white, superb, Canada, and red lilies, and all other 
kinds of bulbs that do not agree with being kept long out of ground 
should now be planted if possible: for although these roots may be 
kept up much longer if preserved from the air, in dry sand, saw 
dust, dry chaff or the like, yet they would not flower near so well 
next season as if planted in due time. 

Common tulips, hyacinths, narcissus, &c., may now be planted 
in the borders of the pleasure-grounds, in small clumps of four or 
five in a place, covering the roots about four inches deep if the soil 
be dry and light; if stiff and heavy, three inches will be sufficient; 
but the latter kind of soil should not be chosen for this purpose if 
possible: where the borders are naturally inclined to clay, proper 
earth should be brought on barrows, and holes made in the spots 
where you intend planting about a foot in diameter, and at least 
the same in depth, which fill with the good soil and plant the roots 
therein, covering as above. 

Van Thol and other early tulips may now be planted in a warm 
soil and exposure for an early spring bloom. 

Flower Borders and Shrubberies. 

Towards the latter end of this month begin to dig the vacant 
beds and borders where the plants are mostly declined in their 
flowering, to prepare them for the reception of any plants or roots, 
to kill weeds, and to give a neat and becoming appearance to the 
whole; if they require it add some fresh earth or very rotten dung 
to them, and in the planting of flowers in borders along the princi- 
pal walks observe to dispose them in such a manner as that there 
maybe a regular succession of flowers throughout the season in the 



504 THE PLEASURE, OR [Sept. 

different parts, planting the low growing kinds in front and the 
taller more remote from the walks. 

Continue to keep the general flower borders, clumps, and other 
similar districts very clean, and in neat order, and go around all 
the beds, borders, and shrubbery compartments once a week to 
cut down decayed flower stems, for such detract much from the 
beauty of the plants in flower as well as from that of the general 
appearance. 

Regulate disorderly growths, tie up straggling branches, and 
pick off all decayed leavesj likewise prune or cut away any branches 
or twigs that appear in a mouldy or declining state on any of the 
flowering plants or shrubs. 

Box Edgings. 

Clip box edgings where it was omitted in the two former months, 
but let this be done as soon now as possible, that the box may have 
time to grow a little and put on a fresh appearance before winter; 
it will be best to do this in wet or cloudy weather, if such should 
happen in due time. 

In the last week of this month, should the season prove moist, 
you may begin to plant box edgings where wanted, as directed in 
page 303, but if the weather sets in dry and hot immediately after, 
it will be necessary to shade them with boards, &c. for a month; 
about that period they will be newly rooted, and appear neat all 
winter. However, should the weather not prove favourable in this 
month, it would be more advisable to defer that work till the early 
part of October. 

If you have low bunches of dwarf box, that the oft'sets are gene- 
rally rooted, you need be under no apprehension of their striking 
fresh root and growing freely at this time if kept regularly watered, 
but where you form edgings of box cuttings, these will require to 
be carefully shaded from the sun, at least for a month after, if 
planted at this season. 

Clip Hedges. 

Such hedges as have not been trimmed in the preceding month 
should be clipped in the early part of this, before the shoots get 
hard. 

In clipping hedges, always take particular care to have the 
shears in perfect good order, that you may be able to make neat 
and expeditious work. Let the sides of the full grown hedges be 
always clipped in nearly to the former year's cut, and as even and 
straight as possible; for it looks awkward and not workmanlike 
to see the sides of hedges, especially garden hedges, waved and 
uneven: and always observe to clip a hedge in such a way as to 
slope in a narrowing manner upwards, that the top may be a little 
narrower than the bottom, and at the same time as even and level 
as possible. 

In clipping young hedges under training be cautious not to cut 



Sept.] FLOWER GARDEN. 5Q5 

them too close above, but clip the top off regularly to retard the 
luxuriant shoots, and cause them to branch out and thicken the 
hedge, and also to give the moderate growths an equal advantage 
of air and room to advance as equally as possible; cut the sides 
with similar care but closer, and always sloping inwards or nar- 
rowing towards the top; for by thus exposing the sides and bottom 
of the hedge to the influence of the air, rain and dews, all parts are 
equally encouraged in growth, and the whole becomes close and 
well furnished, but when the top overhangs the bottom, the lower 
branches, for want of those advantages, decay, and the hedge be- 
comes thin below, and consequently much more unfit to answer the 
end than if judiciously trained. 

Grass and Gravel- Walks, and Lawns. 

Continue to treat your grass and gravel-walks and lawns as 
directed in page 400, and let the rough edges of all grass lawns, 
&c. adjoining gravel-walks and principal borders, be cut close and 
neat with a very sharp edging iron, &c., which will give an addi- 
tional neatness and becoming appearance to the whole. 

Preparing for Planting. 

Prepare now, at all leisure hours, the different beds, borders, 
and composts for your plantations of choice tulips, hyacinths, ane- 
mones, ranunculuses, and other flower roots which are to be 
planted next month; also for the various flowering shrubs, &c. that 
the hurry of business may not press upon you too much at once, 
and that you may be the better able to do every thing in its proper 
season. 

Transplanting Evergreens. ' 

In the last week of this month, should necessity require, you may 
transplant such evergreens as seem to have ceased growing, pro- 
vided you can remove them with balls of earth, or that they are to 
be planted in shaded places; but in either case it will be necessary 
to water them occasionally in dry weather for three or four weeks 
after planting; however, if the season proves hot and dry it will be 
better to defer that work till October. 

The Vallisneria Americana. 

Some account of the Vallisneria Americana may not prove un- 
acceptable to the curious, the more especially as it tends to cast 
some light on the "foues" and sexes of plants. 

This extraordinary vegetable production grows in the river Dela- 
ware, not far from Philadelphia, and may, with care, be introduced 
by means of seeds or roots, into rivers, ponds, and canals, &c. 
Another species, the Spiralis, is found in the East Indies, in Nor- 
3Q 



506 THE PLEASURE GARDEN. [Sept. 

way, and various parts of Italy. The American species flowers 
generally in the latter part of August or in September. 

The Vallisneria belongs to the class Dioecia, and order Diandria, 
bearing male and female flowers on separate plants. The female 
plant produces long, tubular, purple flowers, which stand singly oa 
the top of a stalk, curiously twisted in the form of a screw, which 
is common to both species', when the flowers are about to expand, 
this screw or spiral stalk relaxes more or less according to the depth 
of the water, and suffers the flowers to rise up to the surface, where 
they float in expectation of a visit from their husbands. 

The flowers of the male plant are very numerous, small, and of 
a white colour; they are contained within a spatha or sheath, which, 
stands on a short foot-stalk that never rises to the top of the water; 
the flowers being arrived at maturity and tired with love, they burst 
open the spatha in which they are contained, detach themselves 
from the receptacle to which they are fixed, and rise up to the sur- 
face of the water, where they float about as if in search of their 
mates, and suddenly, with a kind of elasticity, open themselves and 
discharge their pollen, which being conveyed to the female flowers 
growing near them, or scattered thereon, impregnates the seeds 
contained within the germen. 

The pollen being discharged on the stigma, the embryo seeds are 
impregnated, but how this impregnation is effected it is difl^icult to 
say; indeed, while the affair of impregnation in animals is involved 
in so much obscurity, we can scarcely expect to discover more of 
it in vegetables. 

It has been the opinion of some of the early writers on the sexes 
of plants, that the pollen in substance passed through the style, and 
so impregnated the seeds in the ovary; but this is a very irrational 
supposition, for it is not probable that the pollen, which is nothing 
more than a case for the true sperm, should pass through a part 
which has every appearance of being impervious to it. 

Whether the sperm itself be conveyed through the style is per- 
haps what never will with certainty be determined. 

The hint of there being different sexes in plants seems first to 
have been taken from the Dioecia class, or such as produce (male) 
flowers with stamina on one plant, and (female) flowers with pis- 
tilla on another. 

"If the dust of the branch of a male palm tree, (says Aristotle,) 
be suspended over the female, the fruit of the latter will quickly 
ripen; and if the male dust be carried along by the wind and dis- 
persed upon the female, the same effect will follow as if a branch 
of the male had been suspended over it." 

"Naturalists, (says Pliny,) admit of distinction of sex not only 
in trees but in herbs and all plants; yet this is no -where more ob- 
servable than in palms, the females of which never propagate but 
when they are fecundated by the dust of the male." 

JVote. Those who wish to become scientifically acquainted with 
the Linnsean, or sexual system of plants, will be greatly edified by 
consulting that very valuable work, the "Elements of Botany," 



Sept.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 507 

published in 1805, bj the late Benjamin Smith Barton, M. D., 
Professor of Materia Medica, Natural History and Botany in the 
University of Pennsylvania. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

In the eastern states between the fifteenth and latter end of this 
month, according to local situations, the nights will be getting cold, 
and consequently the more tender kinds of green-house plants must 
be taken in before they change their colour by too much cold, 
leaving the hardy sorts out as long as there is no danger of their 
being attacked by frost. 

Some people are desirous to keep out their plants as longaspos- 
siblej this is very right, but it ought not to be extended to too 
hazardous a period, for one night's frost would cause the leaves to 
lose their fine green colour, which perhaps might not be restored 
during the whole winter, and if any way severe, serious injury 
might be sustained. 

If the windows and doors are kept open day and night, as long 
as there is safety in so doing, the plants will be nearly as well off 
as if in the open air, and no danger is encountered: the mere dif- 
ference of five or six days in the taking in of the plants will insure 
safety; but on the other hand, it is not right to be" too precipitate 
in housing them before the common appearance of the weather indi- 
cates the necessity. 

For further particulars respecting the housing of the plants, see 
next month, which is the period for doing that business in the mid- 
dle states. 

In the middle and other states vvhere frosts do not frequently 
appear before the middle of October, the plants are to be taken care 
of as directed in the preceding months; observing to decrease the 
usual supply of water in proportion to the moistness and coldness 
of the weather, for the administering of it too copiously when there 
is not a necessity, would be very injurious. And let it be particu- 
larly observed, that as soon as the cold nights set in, which may be 
about the middle of this month or sooner, the water must be given 
to the plants in the morning, for if given late in the afternoon as in 
the preceding months, the chill occasioned by it and the coldness 
of the nights, would change the colour of the foliage from a fine 
green to a yellowish cast, whereby much of their beauty would be 
lost, as well as the plants themselves in some degree injured. 

If any are in want of larger pots or tubs, they may be shifted 
in the beginning of this month, but on no account defer it later, 
that the plants may have time to strike some fresh roots before winter. 
And if, in consequence of a bad state of health, any had been plant- 
ed in baskets in the borders as recommended in page 428, they 



508 THE GREEN-HOUSE; [Sept. 

must, early in this month, be taken up and re-potted; observing to 
take them up carefully, to trim oflf the wide extended roots, cut the 
baskets away, and plant them with the entire balls in the pots or 
tubs destined for their reception; after which give them water and 
place them in some shady warm situation, till the time for housing 
them. 

Any young green-house plants raised this or last year from 
seeds, slips, cuttings, or suckers, and that are growing too close 
together in pots, &c. should, if well rooted, be transplanted in the 
early part of this month into pots, singly, and be immediately 
watered and placed in the shade for a week or two; or of such as 
are very small, two, three, or more may be planted in a pot, and 
treated in like manner. But those that have been raised from slips 
or cuttings and that are not well rooted, and consequently not much 
advanced in top growth, should be suffered to remain in their pre- 
sent pots till spring or autumn next. 

Any green-house plants propagated in the open ground, or in 
beds, during the course of the summer, should be taken up in 
the first week of this month, with balls of earth, potted and treated 
as above. 

About the middle of this month you should plant your ixias, 
walchendorfias,oxalises, gladioluses, watsonias, cyanellas, babianas, 
tritonias, massonias, melasphgerulas, antholizas, moreas, lapeyrou- 
sias, lachenalias, melanthiums, geissorhizas, with all the other 
different kinds of the more tender bulbs, either obtained from the 
Cape of Good Hope or elsewhere; especially such of them as 
shew the least disposition to produce fibres from the roots; for if 
kept out of the ground much longer, after this appearance, they 
would be greatly injured thereby. 

The proper compost for the generality of the above kinds, is one 
half rich fresh loam, one half bog earth, or earth of rotteii leaves, 
and a small portion of drift or river sand. 

They are to be planted in pots, from one to five roots in each, 
a greater number if very small, and covered about an inch deep; the 
pots are then to be placed in the green-house windows and to get 
but Very little water till the foliage appear above ground, and even 
after, it is to be but sparingly administered, for too much moisture 
would infallibly rot the bulbs. 

Towards the end of the month take into the green-hoUse all your 
succulent and other tender plants, such as stapelias, cactuses, 
aloes, cycas revoluta, agaves, &c. and place them in front near 
the windows, where they can have the benefit of the sun and air. 
Collect your geraniums, at the same time, and all other plants 
that tend to succulency, and arrange them in front of the green- 
house, there to remain till it is found necessary to take them in. 
See next montlu 



509 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

Repairing the Lights and cleaning the House. 

If the roof-lights had in the course of the summer been taken 
off any of the hot-house departments, they should be replaced 
early in the month, and all the glass-work, of the entire house or 
houses put in the best possible repair. Examine the wood-work 
and see that all is tight and in good condition. If new painting of 
the timbers, sashes or any other part is necessary, and it has 
not been done in the preceding months, it should be no longer 
neglected. 

Indeed it would be of considerable advantage at this time, pre- 
vious to the taking in of the plants, to give a complete and thorough 
cleaning, painting, and white washing to the entire house; and if 
infested with insects, to fumigate it effectually; and also to wash 
the entire of the inside with a very strong solution of corrosive 
sublimate, and if thought necessary, to clean away every morsel 
of old bark out of the pits, carry it oiF to a considerable distance 
and replace it with fresh tan. Any plants remaining in this de- 
partment may be removed into the green-house while this work is 
going on, and these should be effectually washed and cleaned, if 
infested with insects, before their being replaced. 

This cleansing, fumigating, &c. will destroy most, if not all, of 
the lurking insects which have taken shelter in the various parts 
of the house, and which, by and by, if not destroyed, would sally 
forth and make a formidable and, perhaps, destructive attack upon 
your plants; every timely precaution ought to be taken to keep the 
house clean and sweet, and the plants free from vermin. 

Taking in the Plants. 

The more tender kinds of hot-house exotics which are arranged 
out of doors, should, in the middle states, be taken into the green- 
house about the tenth of this month, and the others successively, 
according to their respective degrees of tenderness, so that the 
whole collection may be in by the eighteenth or twentieth thereof, 
or a few days earlier should the weather happen to be cold. Here 
they are to remain, closing the windows at night and giving them 
all the air possible on warm and mild days, till towards the end of 
the month, or sooner if you have the bark-pit renewed, and the hot- 
house ready for their reception. 

When you have every thing in readiness dress the plants by 
picking off' all decayed leaves, and especially those which are an- 
noyed with insects, cut away all awkward and ill-placed branches, 
and give each pot a fresh top dressing of suitable compost, then 
plunge the whole to their rims in the bark-pit, placing the smallest 



510 ' THE HOT-HOUSE. [Sept. 

in front and the tallest behind. The succulent sorts, and such as 
you have not room for in the pit, may be set on shelves arranged 
over the flues, &c. 

Now the plants being in order and placed in their winter quar- 
ters, it will be of much importance to give them plenty of air every 
favourable day by sliding open the upright glasses, and also the 
roof-lights if necessary, in order to prevent their being drawn up 
too tender before winter, for the fresh bottom heat will give new 
action to the plants, and render abundance of air the more neces- 
sary; observe, however, to close the lights every evening when the 
house is tolerably warm, and to open them as early in the morning 
as you find the thermometer up to 60 degrees of Fahrenheit. 

It is scarcely necessary to mention that every plant must have a 
due supply of water, from time to time, according to its nature and 
necessity. 

Pine-Jipples. 

Succession pine plants which are expected to produce fruit next 
year may, in the first week of this month, if omitted in July and 
August, be shifted as directed; but on no account should this be 
delayed longer. Where it has been done in the preceding months, 
and at that time no fresh tan added, it will now be necessary to 
examine the heat of the bark-bed in the succession house, wherein 
the plants in general are plunged, and if you find it very weak 
fork up the tan to the bottom, and plunge in the pots again imme- 
diately to their rims. 

This will revive the heat of the bed, and continue it in a due tem- 
perature till next month, when the plants must be removed into 
the fruiting-house, and plunged in a bed made wholly of new tan. 

The younger succession pines intended to succeed those, if not 
lately done, should not be shifted into larger pots, the tan forked 
up, and the pots replunged immediately after having received a 
little water. 

Crowns and Suckers. 

The crowns and suckers of this year's production will require a 
brisk bottom heat to enable the plants to make good roots before 
vifinter, therefore examine the bed, and if it is declined in heat fork 
it up and replunge the pots immediately; but if these were placed 
on a dung hot-bed it may be necessary to renew the heat by a 
lining of fresh hot dung applied to the sides, or to the sides and 
ends; or if the bed is much sunk to work it up afresh, adding some 
new dung thereto, laying on the top, as before, several inches of 
light earth or tan in which to plunge the pots. After this it will 
be necessary to give a considerable portion of air to the plants, and 
to raise the glasses behind when you find the steam rising in the 
bed. When the nights begin to grow cold cover the glasses care- 
fully with mats, and be very cautious not to keep your lights close 
in sunny days. 



Sept.] THE HOT-HOUSE. 511 

All your succession pines should have plenty of air at this sea- 
son, which, with a moderate and steady bottom heat, will keep them 
in a growing and prosperous state, but by no means are they to be 
forced too much nor too much confined, as by such treatment some 
of the most forward might start into fruit at an untimely season, 
and all would be rendered more unfit to bear the vicissitudes of 
the winter season than if they were properly inured to the air and 
gradually hardened; but still there may be an excess in this as well 
as the other, both of which are equally to be avoided. 

Procuring fresh Tan. 

About the latter end of this month you should procure a quantity 
of fresh tan from the tan-yards for the purpose of making new beds 
in the next month for those plants which you expect to produce 
fruit in the ensuing year, and also for the succession pines. When 
the tan is brought home it will be proper to throw it up in a heap 
to drain and ferment for ten or twelve days before it is put into the 
pits. But if it is very wet, as is commonly the case when thrown 
up out of the tan-vats, it should be spread thinly for two or three 
days, that the sun and air may draw ott" or exhale the superabundant 
moisture; for if used too wet, it would be a long time before it 
would acquire a sufficient degree of heat. 

Prepare Composts. 

The composts proper for pines are described in page 456, and if 
you have not hitherto prepared such as may be wanted next season, 
that business should be delayed no longer. 

For most of the shrubby tribe and herbaceous plants of the hot- 
house prepare equal parts of good light garden earth and mellow 
surface loam from a rich pasture ground, with the turf; add to 
these a fourth of very rotten or old hot-bed dung, and let the 
whole be duly incorporated and exposed to the weather several 
months before it is used, turning the heap over every five or sis 
■weeks. 



512 



d^ttof^tv. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

Winter Spinage. 

Weed and thin your advancing crops of spinage; in doing this 
observe to leave the best plants, and at the distance of three, four, or 
five inches asunder, according to the progress in growth of the suc- 
cessive crops, leaving the greatest space between the most forward 
in growth; or the plants may only be moderately thinned now in 
order to admit of drawing some out by degrees for use. 

Some of the spinage sown in August will now be fit for the table, 
and if the plants were left too thick let them be thinned out regu- 
larly by pulling some up by the roots as they are wanted for use; 
but if the plants were properly thinned before, gather only the 
outside large leaves, and the others will advance for culinary pur- 
poses in regular succession. 

Let it be particularly observed that spinage will rot off wherever 
the weeds spread over it, and that consequently it is necessary to 
keep it very clean. 

Lettuces, 

In the first week of this month transplant from the seed beds 
into others, of light rich earth, in a warm exposure, and of such 
dimensions as to be covered with your frames on the approach of 
frost, the lettuce plants arising from the late August or early Sep- 
tember sowings. Plant them in rows five or six inches distant 
every way, so that every second plant may be taken up either for 
use or future planting, leaving the others sufficient room to grow 
and to head in the greatest perfection. 

Likewise plant some stout plants immediately in frames for use 
in the latter end of November, December, &c., covering them only 
at night till severe frosts in. 

Lettuces designed to remain where sown till spring should be 
duly thinned as they advance in growth, and always kept free from 
weeds. 

The various successive crops of lettuces should be transplanted 
where they are to remain during winter, whether on warm borders, 
in slight hot-beds, or under frames and glasses, as early in this 
month as they shall have attained to two or three inches in growth; 
and indeed a judicious gardener will always have a regular succes- 
sion of these plants to guard against every kind of disappointment, 
and the better to insure a constant supply. 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 513 

In the middle states, if the water is tolerably mild, but particu- 
larly in the southern states, lettuces will stand in warm south bor- 
ders of light sandy ground with a very slight protection, and afford 
an early supply in spring; in these beds or borders they may be 
planted at the distance of three or four inches every way, and the 
supernumerary plants may be taken up in March and planted either 
in hot-beds for forcing, or into other beds in warm exposures for 
heading in due season. 

The lettuces which you plant in warm borders in the open ground 
may, on the approach of winter, be protected by placing hoops over 
the beds, on which to lay mats or other covering in severe weather, 
or by placing a frame of boards around them, on which to lay others 
slightly covered with litter when necessity requires; or by sticking 
in small branches of pine or cedar between the rows, which will 
yield them considerable protection, especially if some long dry 
straw be laid over these in frosty or cutting weather. Or you may 
stick down forked sticks about a foot high, lay long poles from one 
fork to another, and on these boughs of pine or cedar pretty thick, 
and likewise around the edges of the beds; those branches being 
supported ten or twelve inches above the plants will admit a free 
circulation of air and prevent mouldiness. This protection is not to 
be given until the severe frosts commence, nor is it then to be taken 
entirely off, especially in sunshine, until after the general thaw 
takes place in spring; in very dry mild days, when the sun does 
not shine, or when it is not powerful, you may take off the covering 
for a few hours to air the plants; but you must as carefully guard 
against strong sunshine, especially towards the latter end of 
February, as against the most severe frosts; for after tender plants 
are severely pinched by frost, a too powerful sun literally dis- 
solves and destroys them; whereas, if they were protected from 
such till gradually recovered and the commencement of free vege- 
tation, there would not be the least danger of their success. This 
is not common to lettuces only, but to cabbage and cauliflower 
plants, stock-gilly flowers, wall flowers, and every other kind that 
can be in the least affected by frost. 

In the beginning of this month sow some of the brown Dutch 
hardy cabbage, Hammersmith hardy green, and green cos lettuces 
in a frame or frames, to be kept where sown, during winter, under 
the protection of glasses, &c., in order to afford a supply of young 
plants for forcing or planting out in the early spring months. 

Cabbage Plants. 

The young cabbage plants arising from the seeds sown last 
month, and intended for the production of early summer cabbages 
should, as soon in this month as they shall have attained a sufficient 
size, be planted into the beds in which they are to remain during 
winter. 

Let a bed or beds be prepared for them in a warm, well sheltered 
part of the garden, where the sun has the greater power; for although 
direct sunshine, when the plants are in a frozen state, is almost 
3R 



514 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct. 

certain destruction to them, yet its influence will prevent that 
intense frost so prevalent in colder aspects; and when the plants 
at such times are screened from the direct rays of the sun, its 
reflected heat comforts without injuring them. 

The beds should be made the width of your garden-frames, and 
the plants set therein up to their leaves in rows about three or four 
inches distant every way. When thus transplanted they will sur- 
vive the winter much better than in the seed-beds, for their long 
stems being buried into the earth, are protected thereby from alter- 
nate freezing and thawing and the effects of the various changes 
of weather, than which there is nothing more injurious to tender 
plants. The stems of these and cauliflower plants, are injured be- 
fore the foliage, and it is of importance to keep those tender parts 
in an equal temperature, by which they will be preserved much 
longer even if in a frozen state than if they were exposed to alter- 
nate frost and heat. 

Select good plants from the seed-beds and, when planted, give 
them a gentle watering to settle the earth about their roots, observ- 
ing not to apply it too hastily lest you wash the earth into their 
hearts. 

Put on the frames immediately, and also the lights, but the 
glasses are now to be continued on only four or five days till the 
plants have taken fresh root; observing during that period to shade 
the plants with mats or other protection from the mid-day sun; but 
when they have taken sufficient root the lights are to be taken 
totally oft" and the plants left fully exposed till the setting in of 
smart frosts, except in very cold nights or during the prevalence of 
cold heavy rains; for it is of considerable moment to have the plants 
tolerably hardy on the commencement of severe weather. 

But if they happen to be in a backward state you should keep on 
the glasses every night to encourage their growth. 

When you have not the convenience of glass, you may defend 
the plants sufficiently in winter by means of boards and mats. 

Or, in the middle and southern states, you may plant some in a 
warm border to be defended in like manner as before directed for ■ 
lettuces; and if the winter proves tolerably mild, they may happen 
to stand it pretty well. But if at any time, particularly towards 
the end of February or early in March, you expose the plants to a 
warm sun, while they or the earth in which they stand are in a 
frozen state, it will inevitably destroy them. 

You should in mild warm weather, when the sun is not powerful, 
give them an occasional airing, and the oftener this can be done, 
so that they are covered up again in due time, the better. 

Similar precautions are to be used with plants in frames that are 
frozen, but such as are not, will be improved by exposing them oc- 
casionally to as much air and sun as prudence may warrant till 
planted out finally in March, &c. 

By pursuing this method you will have much earlier and larger 
cabbages than can be expected from plants sown in the early spring 
months. 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 515 

Cauliflowers. 

The cauliflower plants are to be treated in every respect as di- 
rected for cabbage plants, with this difference, that as thej are 
somewhat more tender they will require the protection and advan- 
tage of glasses and a good substantial covering to defend them from 
severe frosts, though in mild winters thej, with due care, will sur- 
vive under the protection of garden frames covered with boards 
and mats. 

As the cauliflower plants advance in growth, it will be proper to 
strew between them some dry tan, saw-dust, orchaft*, so as to cover 
the stems completely up to the leaves; this will afford great protec- 
tion to those parts which are always found to be the most vulnerable 
to frost, &c. 

If you find that in consequence of an unfavourable season or of 
your not sowing the cauliflower seed in due time the plants to be 
rather backward, you should prick them from the seed-bed on a 
slight hot-bed to promote their growth, but in this case you must 
be particularly attentive to give them plenty of air, that the plants 
may be stout and hardy on the approach of severe weather. 

You should carefully protect the cauliflower plants from exces- 
sive heavy rains, especially when the nights get pretty cold, for 
such are very injurious to them and frequently cause their stems to 
turn black, which always proves destructive. 

In the southern states, where the winters are mild, and where it 
is diSicult to have good cauliflowers, except they can be obtained 
at an early season before the great summer heat sets in, which is 
very inimical to those plants, the only sure way of obtaining them 
in the best perfection is, to be provided with a sufficient number of 
bell or hand glasses, under which to plant them out finally about 
the latter end of this month. 

The ground for this early crop should be very rich, tolerably 
light, in a warm situation, and where water is not apt to stand in 
winter. The ground is to be previously well manured with old hot- 
bed or other well rotted dung, and then dug one good spade deep 
at least, breaking it effectually and incorporating the dung well 
therewith. 

Then lay it out into beds three feet wide, and allow alleys a foot 
wide between them, for the convenience of going in to take off", put 
on, or raise the glasses, &c., stretch your line along the middle of 
the bed from one end to the other, and at every three feet and a 
half mark the places for the glasses, and for each, put in three, 
four, or more plants, according to the size of the glasses, and within 
about six inches* of one another; close the earth well about their 
roots and stems, and give them a moderate watering. When the 
whole are planted set on your glasses, observing to place one over 
every patch of plants as above. 

The glasses are to be kept close down for about eight days till 
the plants have taken fresh root and begin to grow, when they are 
to be raised on one side and supported with pieces of wood, stone, 
or brick-bats, &c. about two or three inches thick, or they may be 



516 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct. 

supported with notched wooden pegs or forked sticks, placing them 
on the south side, one prop under each glass. In this manner they 
are to remain night and day until the frosts set in; but if the plants 
are much advanced in growth before that period, which will seldom 
be the case, except in the more southern states, it will be proper to 
set the glasses oft' in the middle of mild, dry days, but keep them 
always over the plants at night and in wet or frosty weather; in 
keeping the glasses over the plants to defend them from excessive 
or incessant rains, if open mild weather, they must be raised two or 
three inches on the warmest side, in the manner before observed, 
to admit a sufficiency of air. 

When the frost sets in, close down the glasses, and keep them 
so during its continuance; observing on a favourable change to give 
the plants a little air occasionally, and to pick oft' any mouldy or 
decayed leaves. As early in spring as it can be done with safety, 
plant out the extra plants into other beds similarly prepared, or 
rather as directed in April, leaving only one or two of the best 
under each glass; at the same time draw the earth up around the 
stems of those left, and raise the glasses on props as the plants 
advance in growth till they become too much confined; then take 
oft' the glasses totally, observing to earth them up occasionally, and 
finally to treat them as directed in May. 

In places where the winters are somewhat severe, mats or straw 
should be placed over and around each glass during the prevalence 
of hard frost. 

This method may be practised successively in warm soils and 
exposures in the middle states; but it will require more than ordi- 
nary care to preserve them in good perfection. 

The late spring sown cauliflowers will now begin to show their 
heads; therefore they must be diligently looked over two or three 
times a week, to break down some of the inner leaves upon the 
flowers, which will protect them from sun, frost, and wet, either of 
which would change their colour and cause them to be unsightly. 

Broccoli, Cabbages, S^c. 

Early in this month give a general hoeing and earthing up to all 
the late planted advancing crops of broccoli, cabbages, savoys and 
borecole, in order to forward and strengthen their growth as much 
as possible before winter; likewise to the late cauliflowers and every 
other of the cabbage tribe. 

Mushrooms. 

« 

Having the dung for the mushroom bed duly prepared, and the 
spawn in readiness, as advised in September, you should in the first 
week, or x-ather about the first day of this month, begin to make the 
bed. 

With respect to the situation in which to make the bed, it should 
be in an elevated part of the hot-bed yard, or in some dry and well 
sheltered place. The bed ought to be made entirely on the sur- 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 517 

face of the ground, rather than forming a shallow trench in which 
to make the bottom part as practised by some; for bj the former 
method it can be spawned quite to the bottom, and the lower part 
will not be chilled by standing water in cold or wet weather, and 
particularly as the part sunk, in the ground may be considered as 
totally useless. 

The width of the bed at bottom should be from three to four feet, 
and any length you please, in proportion to the quantity of mush- 
rooms required, or the quantity of spawn with which you are pro- 
vided. 

Being furnished with a three fined fork, begin to make the bed 
by shaking some of the longest of the prepared dung evenly all 
along the bottom four or five inches thick; then take the dung in 
general as it comes and work it into the bed, gradually narrowing 
it upwards, shaking and mixing the dung as you proceed and beat- 
ing it down with the fork layer by layer: proceed in this manner, 
still drawing in the sides of the bed till it terminates in a narrow 
ridge at top, so that the bed may be formed life the roof of a house: 
be careful that each end shall be sloped in like manner as the sides, 
and that «// parts is made/w// and^rm by beating it with the fork 
as you proceed, to preserve uniformity and to prevent its settling 
down too much in an unequal manner: it should be full three or 
three and a half feet perpendicular height when settled. 

When the bed is finished, it should be covered with long straw 
laid on neatly to keep out wet, and also to prevent its drying; in 
this state it is to remain about ten or twelve days, by which time it 
will be in a fit condition to be spawned; but to ascertain the state 
of the bed with the greater certainty, put in a few long sharp-point- 
ed sticks into several parts thereof, pull out and feel these occa- 
sionally, carefully attending to the progress of its fermentation, 
and when you find the heat on the decline, and temperate, that is 
the time to put in the spawn; for a violent heat as well as too much 
wet would inevitably destroy it. 

The bed being in a proper temperature, the covering of straw 
should be taken oft" and the sides made smooth and even; then lay 
all over the bed about an inch thick of light rich earth, not wet. In 
this the spawn is to be planted in rows six inches asunder along the 
sides and ends, making the first or lowest row six inches from the 
surface of the ground, and proceeding upwards row by row to the 
top, observing to place the pieces of spawn about six inches asunder, 
and so far in as to touch the surface of the dung. This done, 
lay on the top of the ridge part of the loose or scattered spawn 
and shake some all over the bed; then cover the whole about an 
inch and a half deep with light rich earth, smooth the surface 
neatly, and lay on a light covering of straw as before, just so thick 
as to keep out wet and prevent the bed from drying. 

As you find the bed decrease in heat and the'weathergrow cold, 
increase the covering lo a foot, eighteen inches, two feet, or, in 
severe frost, to such a thickness as may be effectually sufficient to 
prevent its reaching the bed. 

Two or three beds may be made parallel to each other in this 



518 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct. 

way, with wide alleys between them, and if the whole were to be 
covered with a shed, especially in the middle and eastern states, 
it would be found of considerable advantage in etfectually preserv- 
ing them from too much wet, which is as essentially necessary as 
their preservation from frost. 

If your bed is in a due temperature, the mushrooms will begin 
to appear in about four or five weeks after its being made, and 
with proper care will continue in bearing several months: when you 
find it ceasing to produce, in consequence of cold, lay a covering of 
hot stable dung seven or eight inches, or in hard frosts, near a foot 
thick all over the bed, observing to leave under this, between it and 
the bed, about three inches thick of dry straw, covering the hot 
dung over with the remainder of the straw or litter; this will 
revive the heat, give new action to the spawn, and should be repeated 
as often during winter as it may be found necessary, always observ- 
ing to preserve the bed from wet, cold and frost. 

Sometimes it happens that the beds do not produce any mush- 
rooms till they have lain five or six months, so that they should not 
be destroyed though they do not at first answer the expectation; for 
such frequently produce great quantities afterwards, and continue 
bearing a long time. 

A good bed may continue pi-oductive for three, four, five, or even 
twelve months; but by that time it is generally worn out; the dung 
then makes excellent manure, and the interior part sometimes fur- 
nishes very good spawn. 

The great skill of managing these beds is that of keeping them 
in a proper degree of warmth and moisture, never suffering them to 
receive much wet: during the summer season they may be un- 
covered occasionally to receive gentle showers of rain, when thought 
necessary, and in very dry seasons the beds should be now and then 
opened, gently watered, and covered up soon after; but the summer 
covering need be no thicker than what is necessary to preserve the 
bed from the drying influence of the weather. 

This method of propagating mushrooms by the spawn, or the 
white fibrous radicles, is the most common; but they may also be 
increased by seed. When the latter method is used, the gills are 
cut out and put into the beds: or else they are infused in water and 
the beds sprinkled with the infusion. 

When the bed is in full bearing, it should be examined two or 
three times a week, to gather the produce, turning off the straw 
carefully, and collecting the mushrooms white, and of a moderate 
size: taking care to detach them from the bottom, by a gentle twist, 
pulling the stems out clean, for if broke or cut off, the remaining 
parts would become putrid and full of maggots, and consequently 
infectious to the successional plants. 

Where mushrooms are greatly admired, and expense not consi- 
dered an object, they may be had with more certainty, in greater 
abundance, and in a regular succession, by making the beds as be- 
fore directed, under a range of glass framing, made in the manner 
of a hot-house, or the top sloped both waj'S like the roof of a house; 
in such a place, they could be effectually defended from excessive 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 519 

wet, cold, frost, and snow, and would consequently be very produc- 
tive. Likewise, if in this place there is a pit, like that in a hot-house, 
a bed of dung may be made therein, raised at top above the pit in 
a rounding manner, on which the spawn is placed, earthed over 
near two inches thick, and then covered well with straw. Or 
in such a pit you may, by mixing a quantity of strong horse dung, 
moist stable litter, and rich loamy earth together, have the spawn 
generated^ by filling the pit with this mixture, the dung predomi- 
nating so as to produce a slow and lasting fermentation, and cover- 
ing the whole over with about an inch deep of light earth and a good 
coat of straw, the spawn will be produced^ and from this, abundant 
crops of mushrooms, in regular succession for several months. 

You may likewise make beds in the common hot-bed way, place 
thereon frames and glasses, and when the violent heat is abated, 
spawn the top all over, cover it with an inch and a half or two inches 
of earth, then thickly with straw, and lay on the glasses to protect 
the beds from rain. 

Mushroom beds may be made in any month, when the weather is 
mild and dry, but those made in the beginning of this, is generally 
most productive, and besides, they retain more heat on the approach 
of winter than if made in September. However when a second bed 
is to be made it would be well to make one in each month. 

Endive. 

Continue every week to tie up some full grown endive for blanch- 
ing, as directed in page 463, tying no more at a time than in pro- 
portion to the demand or consumption; for if it is not used soon 
after being sufficiently blanched, it becomes tender, and is subject 
to rot, especially if the season proves wet. Some people blanch 
endive by laying boards or tiles flat on the plants; they will whiten 
tolerably well by this method, but their growth during the period 
of whitening is greatly checked thereby, which is certainly of some 
importance. 

Others draw earth around the endive plants after their being tied 
up in the usual manner; this may do very well in dry weather, but 
if rain ensues, many of the leaves will rot, and the entire be greatly 
injured. 

If you have stout endive plants, and neglected in September to 
set out a sufficient number, that work may be done in the first 
week of this m.onth, but it ought not to be deferred longer: these 
late plants will keep better, if the season should prove favourable 
that they may attain a tolerable size, than those of a more forward 
growth. 

Or to preserve late endive for winter use, as well from the 
effects of too much wet as frost, you may in the first week of this 
month prepare a sloping bank of light earth in a warm situation, 
the sloping side fronting the south, and the bed raised two feet 
higher behind than in front: on this plant, tolerably close, some 
stout middle sized plants, and on the approach of severe weather 
place a frame and glasses over the bed, and in hard frost fill 



520 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct. 

the inside immediately over the plants with dry straw, thus they 
will be protected from wet and frost and will whiten eflEectually 
under the covering of straw, which should be turned occasionally 
to prevent that part next the plants and earth from becoming 
mouldy. 

For further particulars respecting the preservation of endive see 
next month. 

Raising young Mint and Tarragon for use in Winter. 

Where young mint and tarragon is in request at all seasons, you 
may, towards the end of this month, make a slight hot-bed, and set 
the plants therein, as directed in page 19j this done, put on the 
glasses, and observe to raise them behind every day to admit air, 
and prevent the young rising shoots fron\ being scorched by the 
effects of a too powerful sun beaming on the lights whilst close 
shut. The young productions will be fit for use in about three 
weeks or a month, and afford a supply for a considerable time. 

Winter dressing of Asparagus Beds. 

-Towards the end of this month if the stalks of your asparagus 
turn yellow, which is a sign of their having finished their growth 
for the season, cut them down close to the earth and carry them oft' 
the groundj clear the beds carefully from weeds, eradicating them 
effectually and drawing them into the alleys. 

Asparagus beds in general will be greatly benefitted by an annual 
dressing of good manure, and nothing is better or more suitable for 
them than the dung of old hot-beds; but if that is not to be had, 
well rotted stable manure will answer; let it be laid equally over 
the beds one, two, or three inches deep, according to necessity, 
after which stretch a line, and with a spade mark out the alleys 
from about eighteen inches to two feet wide, agreeably to their 
original dimensions. 

Then dig the alleys one spade deep, and spread a considerable 
part of the earth evenly over the beds; and as you advance let the 
weeds which were raked off" into the alleys be dug into the bottom 
of the trenches and covered a proper depth with earth; observe to 
make the edges of the beds straight, full, and neat, and to finish 
your work in a becoming manner, giving a moderate rounding to 
the beds, especially if the ground be inclined to wet. 

In the southern states there may be planted in each alley a row 
of early cabbage plants; but in the middle and eastern states it 
would be well to fill them up with straw or old litter, well trampled 
down, which would in some measure prevent the frost from enter- 
ing that way to the asparagus roots. 

The seedling asparagus which was sown last spring should also 
now have a slight dressing, that is, to clear the bed from weeds, 
and then to spread an inch or two in depth of dry rotten dung over 
it to defend the crowns of the plants from frost. 

The asparagus which is intended for forcing, will likewise require 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 521 

to have the stalks cut down and the weeds drawn oft' into the alleys, 
which must be dug to bury them, and as you proceed spread a little 
of the earth over the beds, after which they are to be treated as 
noticed next month. 

I would not advise to attempt the forcing of asparagus sooner 
than November, as before that period the roots will not be com- 
pletely matured j however, you may, about the middle or towards 
the latter end of this month, begin to prepare hot-beds for the 
reception of the roots early in November. See the method in 
page 121. 

Celery and Cardoons. 

In dry weather continue to earth up celery and cardoons, to 
blanch them, as directed in page 480. For the method of preserving 
them in winter see next month. 

Aromatic and Medicinal Herbs, ^c. 

Cut down all the decayed flower stems and shoots of the various 
kinds of aromatic, pot, and medicinal herbs close to the heads of 
the plants, or to the surface of the ground, according to the nature 
or growth of the different sorts^ at the same time clear the beds 
very well from weeds and litter, and carry the whole off" the 
ground. 

Lavender, thyme, hyssop, winter savoury, southern wood, sage, 
rue, and the like undershrubby kinds will require only their tops 
or heads to bs neatly dressed; but pot marjoram, baum, burnet, 
tarragon, tansey, penny-royal, sorrel, chamomile, fennel, marsh 
mallows, horehound, mint of every kind, angelica, lovage, and 
every kind of herbaceous perennial herbs should be cut down pretty 
close to the ground. 

After this it will be proper in beds v.'here the plants stand 
distant from one another, to lightly dig and loosen the ground 
between them; or, in old beds it would be a great advantage to 
spread some very rotten dung equally over the surface, and with 
a small spade or trowel to dig it in lightly between the plants; 
if they are in beds with alleys between them, dig the alleys and 
spread a little of the loose earth over the beds, leaving the edges 
full and straight. 

But the bed§ of close growing running plants, such as mint, 
penny-royal, and the like creeping herbs will not well admit of 
digging; therefore, after the stalks are cut down and the beds 
cleared from weeds, dig the alleys and strew some of the loose 
earth evenly over the beds; and if the ground be rather poor, 
a light top dressing of very rotten dung will be of considerable 
service. 

This dressing will give proper culture and protection to the 
roots of the plants, a neat appearance to the whole, and in spring 
the shoots will rise with renewed vigour. 

Early in the month you may plant, where wanted, well rooted 

JO 



522 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct. 

young plants of thyme, hyssop, winter savory, lavender, or the 
like, into four feet wide beds, or in any warm borders, in rdws a 
foot asunder. You may also divide and plant roots of mint, 
chamomile, horehound, and likewise any of the preceding or other 
herbaceous perennial herbs that you are desirous of propagating. 
For further particulars see page 105. 

Small Salading. 

Where a constant succession of small salad herbs is required, 
continue to sow the seeds accordingly every ten or fourteen days, 
particularly cresses, radish, rape, mustard and lettuce, to cut while 
young. But in the middle and eastern states, these should be sov/n 
at this season, particularly towards the latter end of the month, in 
very warm borders, under the protection of frames and glasses, for 
the greater certainty of having a constant supply. The glasses 
should be kept totally off every warm day, and only put on at night 
or when the weather is very cold or excessively wet. 

In the middle states, when the season is favourable, small salad- 
ing will grow free enough any time this month in warm borders, 
but it will be proper to have frames and glasses to place over them 
if necessity should require it. 

Mecampane. 

The seeds of the hiula Helenium, or elecampane, should now be 
sown, for if kept up till spring few would vegetate till the year fol- 
lowing; but when sown either in this or the next mgnth, the plants 
will rise freely in spring and may be planted out the succeeding 
autumn. 

Most people propagate this plant by offsets, which, if carefully 
taken from the old roots with a bud or eye to each, will take root 
freely, and this is a very proper period for so doing. These should 
be planted in rows about a foot asunder, and the same distance 
plant from plant in the rows; during the ensuing spring and sum- 
mer the ground must be kept clean and free from weeds, and in 
autumn it should be slightly dug, which will promote the growth of 
the roots; they will be lit for use after two years growth, but will 
abide many years if permitted to stand; however, the young roots 
are preferable to those that are old and stringy. It loves a loamy 
soil, not too dry. • 

This plant is possessed of many medicinal virtues, on which ac- 
count it is very deserving of cultivation. An infusion of the fresh 
root, sweetened with honey, is said to be an excellent medicine in 
the hooping cough. 

Dill, .Alexanders, Skirrefs, Rhubarb, and Sea-Kale. 

The seeds of dill, alexanders, skirrets, rhubarb, and sea-kale 
should now be sown, for if kept out of the ground till spring, many 
of them would not vegetate for a year after; but when sown in this 



Oct.] the KITCHEN GARDEN. 523 

or the next month, if the seeds are fresh and perfect, good crops 
may be expected to rise therefrom in March or April. For the 
methods of sowing and treating them, see the Kitchen Garden for 
March. 

Shallots, Chives, Garlic, and Rocambole. 

This is a very proper season to plant roots of shallots, chives, 
garlic, and rocambolej for the method of planting them, see page 
19r. 

Planting large Onions for producing Seed. 

For this purpose make choice of a piece of good, rich, light 
ground, which dig a full spade deep, breaking- it fine as you pro- 
ceed; when ready, select a number proportionate to the quantity 
of seed you intend to save, of the firmest, largest, and best shaped 
onions, and of the most desirable kinds, observing that each variety 
is to be planted separately and remote from any other. 

The middle of October, or any time between that and the end of 
the month is the most eligible time for planting, as the bulbs will 
have time to establish roots or fibres which will greatly support 
them during winter, and render them less liable to injury from frost 
than if planted at a later period. 

Having your ground dug and the roots in readiness, lay it out 
into four feet wide beds with a fourteen inch alley between each; 
then strain a line about six inches within the side of a bed, and 
with a spade throw out an opening or drill about five inches deep 
the length of the bed, in which lay the onions, seated handsomely 
on their bottoms, about nine inches distant one from the other,- then 
with a rake draw the earth into the opening so as to cover the bulbs 
from three to four inches above their crownsj remove the line a foot 
farther back, plant another row as before, and so continue till the 
first bed is planted containing four rows; after which proceed with 
the others in the same way to the end; then with a spade or shovel 
cast over the beds a slight dressing from the alleys, and finish by 
raking them neatly, drawing off the stones and any large lumps of 
earth from the surface. 

In March the leaves will appear above ground, after which they 
are to be kept perfectly free from weeds; many of the roots will 
produce three or four stalks each, which towards the latter part of 
May will have grown to their full height, when you must be pro- 
vided with a sufficient number of stakes, about four feet long, to 
drive into the ground in the rows of onions, at the distance of from 
six to eight feet stake from stake in each and every row, to which 
are to be fastened double lines of pack-thread, rope-yarn, or small 
cord, to run on each side of the stems of the onions a little below 
their heads, to support and prevent them from breaking down by 
wind and rain, and if those are tied together at intervals between 
stake and stake, they will the more eftectually support the plants. 
This is the more necessai^, as when the seeds are formed, the 



524 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Oct, 

heads become very heavy, and often break dovi^n even by their own 
weight, where they are not well secured, in which case there will 
be a considerable loss both in the quantity and quality of the seed. 

When the seed is ripe, which is very perceivable by the capsules 
opening, and the seed turning black, the heads are to be cut off and 
spread thinly upon coarse cloths, in the sun, till quite dry, observing 
to keep them under shelter at night and in wet weatherj then beat 
or rub out the seed, fan it clean, expose it to the sun for a day or 
two after and put it up in bags till Wanted for sowing. 

Some people plant the onions which they intend to produce seed 
in spring, but when planted at that season they are never so pro- 
ductive of seed as those planted in October, and are much more 
subject to blite; however, when it is so determined, it should be 
done as soon after the middle of February as it is possible to get the 
ground in a fit condition to receive them, and should not be covered 
more than from two to three inches over their crowns; observing 
to select for that purpose such roots as have good properties and 
no growths from their tops. 

A slight covering of straw or light litter laid over the October 
planted beds, on the approach of hard frost, and raked clean off as 
soon as the leaves begin to appear in spring, would be of use, 
though it is not absolutely necessary to the preservation of the 
roots. 

Horse-RadisJi and Scurvy Grass. 

You may now plant roots of the Cochlearia armoracia, or horse- 
radish, in dry, rich ground, agreeably to the directions given in page 
208, but in moist soil; March will be a preferable time. 

This is a proper season to sow some seed of the Cochlearia officinalis 
or common officinal scurvy-grass; from this sowing the plants will 
rise freely in spring, and generally succeed better than if sown at 
that season. I do not mean what is commonly used for an early 
spring salad, and generally called scurvy-grass, for the sowing 
of which I have given directions in page 464, under the name of 
Winter Cresses. 

Ordinary work. 

Give a general hoeing and weeding to all your crops, and carry 
the weeds immediately out of the garden, lest they shed their seeds 
and lay the foundation of much trouble; likewise clean all vacant 
quarters from weeds, and from the decayed stalks of peas, beans, 
cabbages, &c. 

Such spaces of ground as are now vacant should be dunged and 
dug, or trenched, that it may have the true advantage of fallow in 
the winter season. 

If the ground is of a stiff or heavy nature, throw it up into high 
sloping ridges, for the reasons assigned jn page 9. 

Taking up the roofs of Carrots, Beets, Sj-c. 
About the latter end of the month you may begin to take up the 



Oct.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 525 

roots of full grown carrots, beets, parsneps, turnips, Jerusalem 
artichokes, &c. which are to be preserved as directed in November. 

Southern States. 

In Georgia, South Carolina, and the parts of North Carolina 
south of the 35th degree of latitude, you may now sow the seeds of 
carrot, parsnep, beet, onion, parsley, cresses, spinage, and several 
other kinds of hardy garden vegetables: plant out from the 
seed-beds cabbage and cauliflower plants: sow peas, and plant 
early Mazagan and Windsor beans, with every other variety of the 
Vicia Faba. 

In North Carolina, generally, Tennessee, and the southern parts 
of Virginia and Kentucky, you may sow peas, plant the above species 
of bean, sow carrot, parsnep, onion, parsley, and other hardy seeds; 
plant out cabbages, and also cauliflower plants^ but the cauliflowers, 
if the winter is any way severe, will require the protection of 
hand glasses, oiled-paper caps, frames, or the like, as directed in 
page 515. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Gathering Winter Pears and Apples. 

Gather your winter pears and apples as they ripenj but for 
particulars see the article Orchard for this month. 

Pruning. 

Towards the latter end of the month, you may begin to prune 
such trees as have completely shed their leaves, but by no means 
lay your knife to a tree, for a general pruning, till this is the case. 

In the middle states I would not recommend the pruning of 
peach, nectarine, almond, and apricot trees before the latter end of 
February, nor in the eastern states before the first week in March; 
but they should not be much longer neglected. In the southern 
states they may be pruned at any time between the periods in which 
tiiey shed their leaves and the latter end of January. 

Apples, pears, plums and cherries, being perfectly hardy, may 
be pruned, in any part of the United States, immediately after 
they drop their leaves, or in November, December, or January, 
&c. But were it not on account of performing work when it can 
most conveniently he done, I would prefer early spring pruning of 
all kinds of trees to any other, on account of the recent luounds 
healing and covering over with bark more immediately when vege- 
tation soon follows, than those anteriorly inflicted. 

For the method of pruning the various kinds of wall and espalier 
fruit-trees, &c. see page 23, &c. 



526 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Oct. 

Planting Fruit Trees. 

Towards the latter end of this month you may safely transplant 
most sorts of fruit trees, but particularly such kinds as shall have 
by that time shed their leaves. This maybe done to advantage 
during the entire of next month if the season continues open, pro- 
vided the ground in which you plant be dry and does not lodge 
water in the winter months; and likewise that sufficient pains be 
taken to make each tree fast in its place by nailing or binding it 
up in such a manner as not to be rocked about by the winds; 
otherwise spring planting, if done early in March, will be more 
successful, particularly for the peach, nectarine and almond. 

Note. — In the more southern states of the Union the planting of 
the more hardy kinds of fr,uit and other trees should be completed 
before the end of January, on account of the early vegetation in 
those regions. 

If the borders wherein trees are to be planted, either for the wall 
or espalier be new, they should be trenched at least two feet deep 
if the good soil admits thereof; but if not, they should be made of 
that depth by adding thereto a sufficiency of good mellow fertile 
soil, such as fresh surface loam, &c.; this should be worked to the 
depth of two feet, at least, with the soil of the border, and it would 
be of great advantage to add some good rotten dung previous to the 
trenching. But if a sufficient quantity of fresh soil cannot be con- 
veniently obtained for the whole, you may sink one, two, or three 
wheelbarrows full, together with some rotten dung in the place 
where each tree is to be planted. 

However, where the ground is already of a good quality, as that 
of a common kitchen garden, &c., the above assistance will not be 
necessary, as trees will prosper sufficiently well in any soil that is 
productive of good garden vegetables. 

As to aspect, your latest ripening fruits, particularly late peaches, 
should have a warm exposure, and also some of the earliest ripen- 
ing of the various kinds of fruit, on account of having them in per- 
fection at an early period. For the method of planting, and proper 
distances, &c. see page 220. 

Planting Gooseberries. 

Towards the latter end of this month, or early in November, is 
the best time in the year to plant trees of this delicious and very 
valuable fruit. 

You may plant them around the borders of the best quarters of 
your kitchen garden about two feet and a half or three feet from 
the walks, and from six to eight feet distant from one another. Or 
they mav be planted in continued plantations, the rows from eight 
to ten feet asunder, and the plants six or seven feet apart in the 
rows. In the latter case the ground between the rows may be 
occupied with winter spinage, corn salad, lettuces, and winter 
cresses; and in spring and summer with rows of salading of various 
kinds, dwarf peas and beans, or any other low growing crops; but 



Oct.] the FRUIT GARDEN. 527 

it must be particularly observed, always to keep the ground under 
and immediately contiguous to each bush, free from weeds or crops 
of any kind; for if damps and moisture are confined about the 
bushes in this way the fruit will mildew and become useless. 

It will be in vain to expect fine fruit unless you have good kinds, 
and give them the best ground possible, a plentiful supply of 
manure annually, frequent culture and regular pruning. 

The best time to plant them out finally is, when they have had 
one or two years' growth from cuttings; or indeed the cuttings 
may, with great propriety, be planted where they are to remain for 
fruiting. Old gooseberry bushes seldom bear large fruit after being- 
transplanted, unless they are carefully removed with large balls of 
earth around their roots. 

Previous to planting, each young tree should be pruned up to 
one clean stem of eight to ten or twelve inches before you form the 
head: for when they are suffered to branch away immediately from 
the bottom, they, by spreading out so near the ground, will impede 
the growth of any crops that grow near them, and in the occasional 
and very necessary business of manuring, digging, hoeing, weeding, 
&c. will be very troublesome to work between. 

For further observations on the planting of gooseberries see 
pages 137" and 293. 

Pruning and Propagating Gooseberries. 

The latter part of this month, and the entire of the next, will be 
a very suitable season for the pruning of gooseberries. It is a 
practice too common in pruning these trees to let them branch out 
with long naked stems, suffering them to remain in that state for 
many years. When that is already the case they should be cut 
down, or considerably shortened, to promote a free growth of 
healthy young shoots, which will bear fruit abundantly the second 
year. But for general instructions on this head see page 32. 

You may now plant cuttings of the various kinds of gooseberries 
which you wish to propagate; for the necessary instructions see 
page 293. 

Note. — New varieties of gooseberries may be obtained by sowing 
seeds of the best kinds you are able to procuye, either in this or 
any of the autumn months, in beds in the open ground, or in boxes 
of good earth. From these sowings tlie plants will rise freely in 
spring, and by the autumn or spring following may be planted in 
nursery rows to remain another season, after which they are to be 
finally planted out for fruiting; or they may remain where planted 
from the seed-bed till they show specimens of fruit; then those that 
are good are to be taken due care of; the others, which, by the bye, 
will be the far greater number, may be thrown away. 

If the seed is kept out of the ground till spring scarcely any of 
it will vegetate till that time twelve months; therefore it is neces- 
sary either to sow it in autumn, or to preserve it in damp earth or 
sand till February or March. If sown in autumn cover it near 
half an inch deep with loose, rich earth; but if in spring a quarter 
of an inch will be sufficient. 



528 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Oct. 

Planting Raspberries. 

There are many varieties of the Ruhus idaeus, or European 
raspberry, but the most preferable are the large common red, the 
large commoa white, the red Antwerp, and the white Antwerp 
raspberries. 

The smooth cane double-bearing raspberry is cultivated in some 
places, as it produces one crop of fruit in June, and another in 
October^ but the fruit are few and small, which has occasioned its 
being neglected. 

Of the Rubus occidentalis, or American raspberry, we have two 
varieties, the black fruited, and the red fruitedj the latter is pre- 
ferable in taste and flavour to the black variety. 

Raspberries do not thrive well under the shade of trees, nor in 
such situations are their fruit well flavoured^ therefore they should 
be planted in a detached airy piece of ground, naturally good, or 
artificially made so. As to the choice of plants and method of 
planting them, I refer you to page 221. 

Such as you plant between the middle and latter end of this 
month, will make new roots before winter, and produce some good 
fruit next season^ but in the year following they will bear plenti- 
fully. 

Dressing and Pruning Raspberries. 

When your new plantations are finished, and all the stout, strag- 
gling suckers taken away for that purpose, dig the ground of the 
old standing plantations carefully, clearing out by the roots the 
remaining useless and scattered suckers, leaving an ample supply 
of the best shoots for pruning. 

In the middle and eastern states, I would not recommend the 
pruning of raspberries before spring; for by deferring that work to 
the latter end of February or beginning of March, there will be a 
greater chance of the shoots not being injured by frost; and more- 
over, you can then make choice of such as received the least injury. 
But in the southern states they may be pruned now with safety; 
for the method see page 138. 

It is necessary to observe that the shoots which had borne fruit 
last summer, must be cut down to the ground either now or in the 
spring, as they will never bear again, and that it is from the shoots 
of the present season, immediately rising from the roots, that you 
are to expect fruit in the ensuing year. 

The Antwerp raspberries being somewhat more tender and sub- 
ject to be injured by frost than the common kinds, it will be of con- 
siderable advantage to protect them therefrom in the manner di- 
rected next month. 

Propagating Fruit Trees by Layers and Suckers. 
The young shoots of mulberries, figs, filberts, codlins, vines, &c. 



OcT.l THE ORCHARD. 539 

may now be laid in the earth, as directed in page 288, and they 
will be all well rooted by this time twelve months. 

Suckers may be taken oft" and planted from codlins, berberries, 
filberts, &c. digging them up with good roots to each, and planting 
the largest at once where they are to remain, and the rest into 
nursery-rows. 

Dressing the Stravjherry Beds, and making new Plantations. 

The old beds of strawberries should some time in this month 
have their winter dressing, in doing of which, they should be clean- 
ed from weeds, and the vines or runners taken off' close to the 
plants; then if there be room between the plants by having been 
kept to distinct heads or single bunches, which is certainly the most 
preferable method, loosen the earth to a moderate depth with a 
small spade or hoe, observing not to disturb the roots. And if the 
plants are in beds with alleys between, line out the alleys and let 
them be dug a moderate depth, breaking the earth very fine and 
spreading a sufficiency of it over the beds between and around the 
roots of the plants, being careful not to bury their tops. A slight 
top dressing of well rotted dung may sometimes be necessary. 
This dressing will prove very beneficial, and promote strength and 
a plentiful crop the ensuing season. 

When it was omitted last month, new plantations of strawberries 
may now be made, but the earlier in the month the better, that 
the plants may have time to establish new roots before winter. For 
full instructions on that head see page 485. 

Preserving Stones and Kernels of Fruits. 

Preserve in damp earth or sand, the stones of the various kinds 
of fruit you intend to sow for stocks, &c., and let apple, pear, and 
quince kernels, be preserved in dry sand till you wish to sow them. 
Observe not to place them in the way of mice, rats, or squirrels, 
which would immediately destroy them; and when sown, every 
precaution must be taken to preserve them from these animals. 



THE ORCHARD. 

Winter pears and apples should generally be gathered this month; 
some will be fit for pulling in the early part, others not before the 
middle or latter end thereof. 

To know when the fruits have had their full growth, you should 
try several of them in different parts of the trees, by turning them 
gently one way or the other; if they quit the tree easily, it is a sign 
of maturity and time to gather them. 
3 T 



530 THE ORCHARD. [Oct. 

But none of the more delicate eating pears should be suffered 
to remain on the trees till overtaken by frost, for if they are once 
touched with it, it will occasion many of them to rot in a very 
short time. Indeed, it would be needless, even wrong, to suffer 
either apples or pears to remain on the trees after the least appear- 
ance of ice upon the water, as they would be subject to much inju- 
ry, and receive no possible kind of benefit afterwards. 

Observe in gathering the principal keeping fruits, both pears and 
apples, to do it when the trees and fruit are perfectly dry, other- 
wise they will not keep so well; and that the sorts designed for 
long keeping be all carefully hand pulled, one by one, and laid 
gently into a basket, so as not to bruise one another. 

According as the fruits are gathered carry them into the fruitery 
or into some convenient dry, clean apartment, and lay them care- 
fully in heaps, each sort separate, for about ten days or two weeks, 
in order that the watery juices may transpire, which will make them 
keep longer, and render them much better for eating than if put 
up finally as soon as pulled. 

When they have lain in heaps that time wipe each fruity one 
after another, with a clean dry cloth, and if you have a very warm 
dry cellar where frost is by no means likely to enter, nor the place 
subject to much dampness, lay them singly upon shelves coated 
with dry straw, and cover them with a layer of the same. 

Or you may wrap some of the choice sorts, separately, in white 
paper, and pack them up in barrels, or in baskets, lined with the 
like material. Or, after being wiped dry, lay layer about of fruit 
and perfectly dry sand in barrels, and head them up as tight as 
possible. In default of sand you may use barley chaff, bran, or dry 
saw-dust. 

Another method, and a very good one, is to be provided with a 
number of large earthen jars, and a quantity of moss, in a perfectly 
dry state; and when the fruits are wiped dry as before directed, 
your jars being also dry, lay therein layer about of fruit and moss 
till the jars are near full, then cover with a layer of moss. 

Suffer them to remain in this state for eight or ten days, (hen 
examine a stratum or two at the top to see if the moss and fruits 
are perfectly dry; and if you find them in a good condition, stop 
the jars up with good cork plugs, and cover them with some melted 
rosin to keep out air. The pears and apples to be used this way 
should be of the latest and best keeping kinds, and such as are not 
generally tit for use till February, March or April. 

After the jars are sealed as above, place them in a warm, dry 
cellar or room, on a bed of perfectly dry sand, at least one foot 
thick; and about the middle of November, or sooner if there is any 
danger to be apprehended from frost, fill up between the jars with 
very dry sand until it is a foot thick around and over them. Thus 
you may preserve pears in the greatest perfection for eight or nine 
months, and apples twelve. 

Be particularly careful to examine every fruit as you wipe it, 
lest it is bruised, which would cause it soon to rot and communicate 
the infection, so that in a little time much injury might be sus- 



Oct.] the VINEYARD. 531 

tained in consequence of a trifling neglect in the first instance: 
but, above all things, place your fruit, whatever way they are pat 
up, completely out of the reach of frost. 

The common kinds, for more immediate use, after being sweated 
and wiped as before directed, may be packed in hampers or barrels, 
layer about of fruit and straw, and placed where they will neither 
be exposed to damps nor frost. 

Planting and Pruning Fruit Trees. 

What I have said under the article Fruit Garden for this month, 
is perfectly applicable, inasmuch as it has relation to the planting 
and pruning of orchards at this season. But for general instruc- 
tions on these heads, I refer you to the article Orchard, in January, 
page 46, February, page 140, and March, page 223, &c. After a 
careful perusal of what is there said, you will be perfectly able to 
judge, (taking into consideration the nature of your soil and local 
situation of the place) whether it is more prudent for you to plant 
and prune in the autumn, or to defer that business till the opening 
of spring. 

If any of your fruit trees are cracked and rough in the bark 
when the fruit is pulled, scrape ott' the loose parts, and, with a 
large painting brush apply a mixture of cow-dung and urine made 
to the consistence of a thick paint, covering the stem and any 
other parts so affected carefully over therewith. This will soften 
the old rough bark, which will peal oft' with it during the following 
winter and spring, leaving after it the smooth fresh bark only. 
Your trees being freed from that incumbrance and harbour for 
worms, insects, &c.will thrive much more luxuriantly than before. 



THE VINEYARD. 

Having given ample instructions last month for the making of 
wines, curing of raisins, and preserving the fruit fresh for a length 
of time, &c. it is unnecessary to touch upon those subjects in this 
place; therefore, I have only to refer you to the article Vineyard, in 
page 488, &c. for information respecting any thing yet remaining 
to be done of what was there recommended. 

In the southern states vineyards may now be planted, and vines 
propagated by cuttings, &.c., and indeed where the winters are mild 
and but little or no frost, this is the most suitable season for so 
doing, particularly towards the latter end of the month. But in the 
middle states the month of March, and in the eastern states the 
early part of April will be the most preferable periods in which 
to perform this business. 

The subject of planting and propagating the vine being treated 



532 THE VINEYARD. [Oct. 

of at full length in March, beginning at page 233, 1 refer you thereto 
for the necessary information. 

In the middle states, rooted vines may now be transplanted if 
necessity requires it, but in no other case would I recommend 
itj and these should be protected by laying litter around their roots, 
or some other suitable defence from the severity of the frosts. 
Layers, however, may now be made with good prospects of suc- 
cess; and if you find it more convenient to procure cuttings at this 
season than in spring, you may plant them; but observe that it will 
be necessary to cover them lightly with straw, fern, leaves of trees, 
or some other light covering during winter or many of them will 
miscarry. Though these plants are extremely hardy when once 
established, they are rather tender in their infancy, and every ad- 
vantage of season ought to be afforded them, especially in those 
parts of the Union where the winters are severe. 

As to the practice of pruning grape-vines in autumn, it is not 
advisable, except where the winters are very mild. In the southern 
states this may be done with great propriety as soon in this or the 
ensuing month as the foliage shall have been shed, but by no means 
before, as while the leaves remain on the vines will not have done 
growing, and consequently the wood will not be sufficiently ripe 
and hard. 

For further observations, together with the methods of pruning, 
see page 147, &c. See also the Vineyard for next month. 

Planting fVillows for tying up the Grape- Vines, ^c. 

In the latter end of this, or the early part of next month, you 
should make plantations of willows for the purpose of tying up the 
vines with the small flexible twigs thereof. 

Osiers or willows are also very useful in a garden for tying the 
branches of espalier trees to trellises, binding up lettuces, cabbages, 
endive, &c. for blanching, tying bundles of trees or shrubs, making 
garden baskets, &c., so that a small plantation or hedge-row of 
willows would be very useful in every garden department. 

The kinds most suitable for this purpose are the Salix viminalis , 
or true osier; S.Jissa, or basket osier; and S.vitillina, or golden 
willow. 

Willows of those kinds particularly, delight in low moist situa- 
tions, (though they grow to good perfection in a strong loam,) con- 
sequently, soil that is generally useless or of but little value, may 
be profitably occupied by them. Make choice of such ground and 
plough it deep if possible for the reception of the cuttings; if too 
wet for the plough, form it with a spade and shovel into four feet 
wide ridges with deep trenches between, casting up the earth out 
of the trenches to form the ridges high and rounding; in each ridge 
plant two rows of cuttings, each row a foot from the edge, and the 
sets two feet and a half distant from one another in the row. 

The cuttings or sets should be about two feet long;, made from 
strong shoots of two or three years' growth, and about two-thirds 
of each set planted or drove into the earth, leaving the rest out to 



Oct.] the NURSERY. 533 

form the stool; each of these will throw out several shoots, and if 
kept free from weeds for the ensuing season, they will provide for 
themselves afterwards. 

The year old shoots being what are generally used for the various 
purposes noticed, the whole produce must be cut down annually, 
either in autumn or spring, to promote such growths. However, a 
sufficiency may be suffered to grow for two or three years when 
sets are wanted for an additional plantation. 

If the ground can be ploughed, it will be attended with less 
trouble, and the rows may be planted three feet asunder: the dis- 
tance of the sets from one another in each row, should be about two 
feet and a half. 

I would advise to plant the cuttings with a dibble, in preference 
io forcing them in, as by the latter method the bark would be in- 
jured. 

This work may be done with equal propriety, and sometimes 
with more success in the early part of spring. Cuttings may also 
be planted at either season in the face of moist ditches, where they 
will succeed extremely well. 



THE NURSERY. 

Trenching and Dressing the Ground. 

In the beginning of this month continue to trench and prepare 
the several quarters in which you intend to plant stocks, to graft 
and bud the several sorts of fruit upon, and also for the various 
other planting and sowing that may be necessary. 

Carry dung into such parts of the nursery as it is wanted, and 
spread it upon the surface of the ground around the stems of young 
trees; this will contribute to the preservation of their roots from 
frost, the rains will wash in the salts to the roots of the trees, and 
in spring you may dig in the dung between the respective rows. 

Propagating Trees and Shrubs by Layers. 

Any time this month you may lay the various kinds of trees and 
shrubs that you wish to propagate in that way; for the methods of 
doing which, together with several useful observations, see page 
288, &c. 

Towards the latter end of the month take off such layers of the 
preceding year as are well rooted, trim their stems, and plant 
them in nursery-rows, or elsewhere as may be necessary. 

This is the best season to lay elms, limes, maples, and most kinds 
of hardy forest trees, and flowering-shrubs; for the moisture of the 
ground during winter will prepare them for pushing out roots early 
in the spring. 



534 THE NURSERY. [Oct. 

Propagating Trees and Shrubs by Cuttings. 

This a proper time to plant cuttings of all hardy trees and 
shrubs, that will grow by that method, especially in the southern 
states; but it will be necessary to plant them where water does not 
lodge in winter. Poplars, willows, plane-trees, honeysuckles, &c. 
will grow freely in this way; but for more particulars, see page 291. 

Cuttings of all sorts planted a year ago, or last spring, that are 
well rooted and have shot freely at top, may, towards the latter end 
of this month, be transplanted, if necessary, into open nursery-rows, 
to advance in growth and to have occasional training for the pur- 
poses intended. 

Sowing Haw and Holly Berries, Sfc. 

In the southern states you may any time in this, or the three 
ensuing months, if the ground is open, sow haw, holly yew, and 
mezerion berries, ash, hornbeam, and any other kind of seeds that 
require a year's previous preparation; but in the middle states, I 
would recommend to defer the sowing of these till the latter end 
of February, or very early in March, and in the eastern states, 
as soon in the latter month as possible. Indeed it would not be 
wrong to defer the sowing of them, even in the southern states, 
till January or February, according to the respective climates, 
always endeavouring to sow them before they begin to vegetate. 

Observe that each kind has undergone a full year's preparation, 
previous to sowing, as directed in the Nursery for February and 
March, where you will find ample instructions for the cultivation 
of these and many other kinds of trees and shrubs, and which I 
would particularly recommend to your perusal at this time. 

Sowing Oak Acorns, Chestnuts, fValnuts, Hickory-nuts, fyc. 

The best season in the year for sowing the acorns of every kind 
of oak, is immediately after they fall from the trees; for when kept 
up much longer, especially in a dry state, they loose their vegetative 
power. 

The only evils they have to encounter by sowing them at this 
season are, the depredations of mice, rats, and squirrels, &c.; if these 
animals can be caught, poisoned, or kept oft' by any means that 
may be devised, the seeds should be sown immediately; but if not, 
it will be better to preserve them till the early spring months, in 
sand or earth, or in moss, and although they will soon sprout, their 
progress in vegetation before the opening of spring will not be such 
as to do them any material injury, provided they are placed imme- 
diately in the coldest place possible till winter, and further, that you 
do not break the small radicles when planting them in spring. 

The acorns, if sown or planted at tliis time, should be laid within 
one inch of one another in drills about two feet apart, and covered 
about an inch deep: here they may remain till they shall have had 
two years growth, when they must be taken up and planted into 



Oct.] the NURSERY. 535 

nursery-rows at proper distances, there to acquire a sufficient growth 
and strength for a final transplanting, which will generally be the 
case in about two or three years. 

Chestnuts of every kind, walnuts, and hickory nuts, may be 
planted now, or immediately after being ripe; they have the same 
enemies to encounter as the acorns; but all these kinds will keep 
well till spring in dry sand, or even in bags or boxes, and if planted 
early in that season will vegetate freely. 

But if you find it more convenient to plant the nuts in autumn, 
let that be done, if possible, when they are perfectly ripe, and 
in their outward covers or husks, the extreme bitterness of which 
will be a good preservative against the attacks of vermin of every 
kind. 

When you desire to cultivate the Juglans regia, or European 
walnut, for its fruit, and likewise any of the other species, make 
choice of the best varieties of nuts, such as are large, thin shelled, 
and have the finest flavoured kernels; for although the best sorts 
will vary or degenerate, when raised from seeds, yet by planting the 
most valuable varieties, there will be the better chance of having 
good kinds continued. 

For the method of planting, and the subsequent treatment of 
chestnuts, walnuts, &c. see page 270. 

JVote. When oaks, chestnuts, or walnuts, &c. are planted exclu- 
sively on account of their timber, it will be the better way, when it 
can conveniently be done, to sow or plant the acorns and nuts where 
they are intended to remain for full and mature growth; for trees of 
either of these kinds seldom attain to as great magnitude after 
having been transplanted, as if suffered to remain undisturbed where 
the seeds were sown. 

Transplanting Stocks, to Bud and Graft upon. 

About the latter end of this month you may plant out into nur- 
sery-rows all the hardy kinds of seedling stocks, to bud and graft 
the different varieties of fruits upon. 

Let these be planted out in rows three feet asunder, and one foot 
or more distant from one another in the rows. 

Plant also for the purpose of stocks, suckers from the roots of 
plums, codlins, pears, quinces, &c., but seedlings are much more 
preferable if you are sufficiently supplied therewith. 

Transplant likewise from nursery beds and layer-stools all the 
well rooted cuttings and layers that were planted or layed a year 
ago, or in the last spring, for the purpose of raising stocks for 
fruit-trees; particularly quinces and codlins, to bud and graft dwarf 
pears and apples upon, in order to form dwarf trees for walls and 
espaliers, planting them in nursery-rows as above. 

Planting hardy deciduous Trees and Shnd)s. 

All manner of hardy deciduous trees and shrubs may be planted 
now into nursery rows, or finally where they are to remain, imme- 



536 THE NURSERY. [Oct. 

(liately after they have shed their leaves, or as soon as the general 
foliage is turned yellow^ and on the decline; but observe that plant- 
ing at this season should always be done in ground that lies dry in 
winter. When that is the case the trees, shrubs, &c. will establish 
new roots before they are overtaken by the heats of the ensuing 
summer, and will require but very little trouble in watering. 

Pruning. 

In the latter part of this month you may begin to prune and 
reduce into proper form most kinds of hardy forest and fruit trees, 
flowering shrubs, &c., clearing their stems from lateral shoots, 
eradicating suckers, and dressing their heads in a neat and be- 
coming manner. 

Planting hardy Evergreens. 

Between the middle and latter end of this month you may plant 
pines, firs, cedars, junipers, and every other kind of hardy ever- 
green trees and shrubs. However, I would not advise to plant 
small seedlings of any kind at this season, especially in the middle 
and eastern states, as many of them would be thrown out of the 
ground by the winter frosts, and most of them so loosened in the 
earth as to be subject to great injury from the parching winds in 
spring; consequently, March will be a more eligible season for this 
purpose. 

Sowing Stones of Fruit Trees. 

If you are not apprehensive of the ravages of mice, rats, squir- 
rels, &c. you may now sow the stones of plums, peaches, necta- 
rines, apricots, &c., or you may, if you think it more prudent, 
preserve them in sand, &c. as directed on former occasions, till 
February or March. 

These stones may now be sown pretty thick in drills two feet 
asunder, and covered from one to two inches deep, according to 
the size of the respective kinds and lightness of the soil; and at 
this time twelve months such of them as shall have attained to a 
good growth may be transplanted into nursery rows. 

Sowing Beech-Mast, Maples, ^c. 

Beech-mast, maple, and several other kinds may now be sown 
as directed in March, or they may be preserved in dry sand till 
that season. 

Note. — Many sorts of seeds may now be sown, but as I treated 
on the subject of the Nursery at considerable length in March, and 
there noticed what kinds might be sown with safety in autumn, I 
refer you thereto for particular information. 



OcT.l FLOWER GARDEN. 537 

Sowing ^pple, Crab, and Pear-Pumice. 

The pumice of apples, crabs and pears, after having been pressed 
for cider or perry, may be sown, kernels and all, in four feet wide 
beds, laid on very thick and covered about an inch deep with good 
light earth. In spring the plants will rise freely and produce you 
a good supply, either for stocks, or for making live hedges. See 
page 263. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Auriculas, Polyanthuses, and Primroses. 

The auriculas in pots must now be kept very clean, all decayed 
leaves picked off occasionally, and moderate waterings adminis- 
tered as often as necessary, that the plants may attain due strength 
before winter. 

The choice polyanthuses and double primroses are to be treated 
in every respect as the auriculas^ the common kinds may now be 
planted in beds and borders of good ground, where they will flower 
early in spring in tolerable perfection, especially if they have a 
slight covering of straw or light dry litter laid over them during 
severe frosts. 

The seedling plants of each of the above kinds must be kept free 
from weeds and filth of every sort, and receive regular but gentle 
waterings to promote their growth and strength as much as possi- 
ble before winter. 

For the methods of preserving the choice kinds of auriculas, 
polyanthuses, and primroses during winter, see the Flower Garden 
in November. 

Carnations. 

The carnation layers that were taken oft' in August or Septem- 
ber, and all other choice carnations in pots should now be kept 
clean and duly watered, and towards the latter end of the month 
be placed in a warm situation, there to remain until disposed of as 
directed in November. 

The seedlings and common kinds maybe transplanted into beds 
and borders where wanted. 

Pinks. 

Your choice double pinks in pots, will require the same treat- 
ment as the carnations; but as pinks are extremely hardy, they may 
be cultivated in great perfection in the open ground. 

3U 



538 THE PLEASURE, OR [Oct. 

A good fresh loamy soil trenched about two feet deep, well pul- 
verized, and manured with a stratum of cowdung two years old, 
mixed with an equal portion of sound good earth; this stratum to 
be about six inches thick, and placed about four inches below the 
surface, is all the preparation or compost that appears necessary for 
this flower. 

The bed should be raised three or four inches above the sur- 
rounding paths, and its sides may be supported with an edging of 
boards to come up even with, or one inch higher than its surfacej 
this last for the sake of neatness, more than any particular utility 
it will be of to the plants. 

The plants intended for the principal bloom should be planted 
in it in the first week of this month or in September, as they do 
not blow quite so strong if removed late in the season: they should 
be planted at the distance of nine inches from each other, and the 
bed should be laid rather convex or rounding, to throw off excess 
of rain, but it will require no other covering than a very slight one 
in case of severe frosts. 

The bed should be kept free from weeds, and its surface stirred 
up a little if it inclines to bind. 

Carnations will prosper very well if treated in the above manner. 

The more indifferent kinds of pinks may be planted in the com- 
mon borders, &c. 

Planting Superb Tulip Roots. 

The most proper season for planting tulip roots in general is 
from the middle to the latter end of this month, and indeed I should 
prefer the middle to any other period, for about that time you will 
perceive a circle around the lower end of each bulb, disposed to 
swell, preparatory to the emission of fibres, and also a disposition 
at the upper end of some to show foliage. 

By keeping the roots out of ground after this predisposition to 
vegetation, they would be greatly weakened thereby. 

The situation for the best bed oi superior tulips, should be in an 
open airy part of the garden, protected at the same time from north 
and west winds by some distant shelter; when that is fixed upon, the 
ground should be marked out agreeably to its intended dimensions, 
and the soil taken out twenty inches deep; the bottom is then to be 
filled up with sound fresh earth ten inches thick, upon which is to 
be placed a stratum of two years old rotten cow-dung and earth of 
the above description, one half of each, well mixed together and 
laid on twelve inches thick; upon this is to be placed another stratum 
of the same kind of earth as that of the bottom; this latter is only 
to be two inches thick at the sides, and three in the middle of the 
bed, which will give it a small degree of convexity. 

The bed should be thus prepared a week or ten days previous to 
planting the roots, in order to give it time to settle, so as to be about 
two inches higher than the circumjacent paths; but if heavy rains 
intervene betv/een this preparation of the bed and planting, it will 



Oct.] flower GARDEN. 539 

be proper to keep them off in order to preserve the earth from be- 
coming too compact by a redundancy of moisture, for the young 
fibres to pass freely through it. 

On the day made choice of for planting, rake the surface of the 
bed smooth, and level any inequalities, still preserving its convexity, 
and mark the exact situation for every root upon it. The proper 
distance between each root is seven inches every way. 

A bed consisting of seven rows makes the most grand appear- 
ance when it is of sufficient length, with a path around it about two 
and a half or three feet widej but where the number of roots is 
small, five rows may suffice, and the path in that case may either 
extend quite around the bed, or only on one side, at pleasure. 

If the bed consists of seven rows it should consequently be fifty 
inches wide, which will allow a space of four inches between the 
outside rows and the sides of the bed; but if the bed contains only 
five rows, it will only require to be three feet wide to give the roots 
similar distances. 

Having sprinkled a little clean sand where the roots are to be set, 
place them with great exactness, and add some very sandy earth, 
so as to completely envelope each root in a little cone of it; then 
cover the whole very carefully with strong, sound, fresh loam, about 
four inches thick or a little better, if the roots are strong, so as to 
allow the covering to be from three and a half to four inches thick, 
after the earth shall have settled, still observing to preserve the 
original convexity of the bed. 

The tallest growing kinds should be placed in the middle, and 
the lower towards the outsides. No tulip root, whatever may be 
its size or strength, should be planted more than four inches deep 
from the upper side of the root; nor should any blooming root be 
planted less than three inches deep, however small it may be. The 
soil made use of for covering the bulbs, should be frequently turned 
over and thoroughly exposed to the sun and air some time before 
it is made use of, that it may be rendered perfectly sweet and free 
from the acrid quality that most soils are subject to when taken 
considerably below the surface. 

If the bed is only to contain five rows, with a path in the front 
and not behind, then it will be proper to plant the smallest and 
lowest growing kinds in the front next the path, and so gradually 
to increase in the size to the fifth or last row, which should contain 
the strongest and tallest of all. Board edgings may be placed 
around the beds as high or an inch higher than the surface; this 
will not only keep the earth from crumbling down from the outside 
rows, but give a degree of neatness to the whole. 

"When the operation of planting is concluded, in order to pre- 
serve the bed from heavy rains or severe frosts, it should be arched 
over with hoops at convenient distances, on which to lay mats or 
canvass on such emergencies; but it will not be necessary to defend 
it from moderate rains or slight frosts: for too frequent and long 
covering will deprive the roots of the due action and influence of 
the air, which ought to be avoided as much as possible: it were even 



540 THE PLEASURE, OR [Oct. 

better not to cover at all than over do it to the certain detriment 
of the plants. 

Having procured roots of the Jinest sorts, and pursuing the pre- 
ceding instructions, you may depend on having those incomparaWe 
flowers in the greatest perfection possible. 

The common kinds of tulips, being of little value, may be planted 
in small patches of three, four, or five roots together around the 
borders of the garden or pleasure-ground, and covered the same 
depth as the others. 

Planting the best Hyacinth Boots. 

The roots of hyacinths may be planted with good expectation of 
success at any time from the beginning of this month to the middle 
of November; but 1 would prefer the middle of the present month 
as being the best period in which these roots can be planted; for 
about that time they will show a natural inclination to vegetate, 
manifested by a swelling of the circle from whence the fibres pro- 
ceed, which will be soon followed by an actual appearance of their 
points, together with that of the foliage at the other extremity of the 
root, in the form of a small cone of a greenish colour. 

The bed on which the finest sorts are to be planted should be 
situated in rather a dry and airy part of the garden: a southern 
aspect is to be preferred, sheltered on the north and north-west by 
walls, trees, or buildings, at a distance from it proportionate to 
their elevation; that is, the distance of the bed from either should 
be equal to the height of the wall, fence, or hedge, &c. 

"When the situation is determined on the dimensions of the bed 
should be marked out and the soil entirely taken away to the depth 
of at least two feet; the earth in the bottom should then be dug and 
well pulverized for about nine inches deep, and the space above 
filled with the following compost: 

One-third sea or river sand; one-third fresh sound earth; one- 
fourth rotten cow dung at least two years old; and one-twelfth of 
earth of decayed leaves. 

The fresh sound earth of the compost should be of the best 
quality that the garden or adjacent country affords, and entirely 
free from noxious vermin of every description. These ingredients 
should be well mixed and incorporated a considerable time before 
wanted, and about ten days previous to planting the bed should be 
filled up with the compost to about three inches above the level 
of the path on the south or front side, and seven inches on the 
north side, so as to form a regular slope or inclination towards 
the sun. 

On planting the roots the surface of the bed should be covered 
with fresh sandy earth about one inch thick, raked perfectly smooth 
and even, and have the exact situation for every bulb marked on it, 
as follows: 



Oct.] 



FLOWER GARDEN. 



541 



R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 




W 




R B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 


R 




B 


W 



This plan, on minute investigation, will appear superior to any 
other that can be devised for simplicity and an elegant and advan- 
tageous display of the colours; each bulb, those of the outside rows 
excepted, will be in the centre of a hexagon, and the whole at 
equal distances from each other. The width of the surface of the 
bed is to be four feet, the six rows along it eight inches asunder, 
and the outside rows, each four inches from the sides of the bed; 
consequently the space between the centre of each bulb will be 
about nine inches and a quarter. The letters R, B, W, denote 
the colour of the flower to be placed there, viz: Red, Blue, or 
White. Under these three heads all hyacinths may be compre- 
hended, except a few sorts of yellow, which may be classed with 
the whites. 

On planting the hyacinths a little clean sand should be placed 
underneath, and likewise upon the roots, to prevent the earth 
adhering too close to them; the whole are then to be covered with 
sound, fresh, sandy earth from three to four inches deep, according 
to the size of the bulbs; when this is completed the bed will be 
about six or seven inches above the level of the walk in front, or on 
the south side, and about ten or eleven inclies on the north side; it 
should be supported all around with a strong frame of thick boards 
or with brickwork; this frame should be six inches or more higher 
all around than the surface, and of course sloping towards the front 
to support such covering as may be necessary for the preservation 
of the roots from heavy rains and severe frosts. For their further 
treatment see the ensuing months. 

The extraordinary preparation and trouble above recommended, 
are only necessary to bring the finest kinds of hyacinths to the best 
possible perfection; but the nearer you can make it convenient to 
approach to said method, in the cultivation of all the other varie- 
ties, the greater perfection you may expect to have them in: this, 
however, must be governed by circumstances, and you need not 
despair of having very fine flowers in any o-oorf, rich kitchen garden 
soil that lies dry and inclines a little to sand; and even without 
any kind of protection during winter. 

The common sorts of hyacinths, of every species and variety, 
may be planted in open beds, or in small clumps round the borders, 



542 THE PLEASURE, OR [Oct. 

three, four, or five roots in a place, and covered from three to four 
inches deep, according to the strength of the roots and lightness of 
the soil. > 

Planting Ranunculuses. 

Ranunculus roots may either be planted before or after winter; 
if the soil and situation is remarkably cold and wet, it will be better 
to defer planting till the first opening of spring, but then the ear- 
liest opportunity of planting them should be embraced. 

In favourable situations, and where due attention can be paid to 
the protection of the roots from severe frosts, the early part of this 
month is the most preferable period and should be embraced, as 
the roots will have more time to vegetate, and form themselves, and 
will, of consequence, bloom stronger, and earlier, than those planted 
in spring. 

The ranunculuses are originally natives of a warm climate, 
where they blow in the winter, or more rainy season of the year: 
they are of course partial to coolness and moisture, exempt from 
wet and frost, which the more delicate sorts cannot bear, in any 
considerable degree, without injury. 

A fresh, strong, rich, loamy soil, is preferable to all others for 
ranunculuses. 

The bed should be dug from eighteen inches to two feet deep, 
and not raised more than four inches above the level of the walks, 
to preserve a moderate degree of moisture: at about five inches 
below the surface should be placed a stratum of two years old rotten 
cow dung, mixed with earth, six or eight inches thick; but the 
earth above this stratum where the roots are to be planted, must 
be free from dung, which would prove of more injury than benefit, 
if too near them. The fibres will draw sufficient nourishment from 
it at the depth above mentioned; but if the dung was placed deeper 
it would not receive so much advantage from the action of the air, 
which is an object of some importance. 

The surface of the bed should be raked perfectly even and flat, 
and the roots planted in rows at the distance of about five or six 
inches from one another. It is better to plant in shallow trenches, 
made nearly two inches deep, than to make holes for the reception 
of the roots: there should be a little clean sand sprinkled in the 
trench, and the roots placed with their claws downwards, each dis- 
tant from the other about three or four inches according to its size 
and strength: when the roots are thus laid in, fill the trenches up 
level, with the same earth that was taken out, so as to cover the 
roots exactly one inch and a half deep, which is the only true depth 
to produce a good bloom: it is pointed out by nature in a singular 
manner; for when these roots have been planted either too shal- 
low or too deep, in either case, a second root is generally formed 
at a proper depth, by which the plant is weakened to such a degree 
that it seldom survives a repetition of it. It will be of considerable 
service to have the bed framed around with boards, or brickwork, 
a few inches higher than its surface, in front, and rising gradually 



Oct.] flower garden. 543 

to the back part, in order to make it the more convenient to protect 
the roots from severe frosts, as directed in the following months. 

Planting Anemones. 

Anemones require nearly the same treatment as ranunculuses, 
are hardier, and consequently may be planted in the autumn with 
more safety; the most eligible period is between the first and 
fifteenth of this month, for if the winter sets in early and proves 
severe, late planted roots will not have time to vegetate before 
frosty weather takes place; in which case, there will be great danger 
of their perishing, as they are then replete with moisture, and in a 
state of inactivity, which renders not only them but all other roots 
more susceptible of injury from frost, and more subject to mouldi- 
ness, than after vegetation has commenced. To avoid which, as 
much as possible, a suitable covering or protection must be put on 
and taken off the beds, as often and in such proportion, as the exi- 
gency or circumstances of the case may require. 

The beds should consist of the same kind of soil, and be prepared 
in the same manner as for ranunculuses; the roots should be at 
nearly similar distances from each other, and be planted in the same 
manner, except that they require to be covered rather deeper; that 
is, they should be planted two inches deep. It requires some care 
and attention to distinguish which side of the root is to be placed 
uppermost, especially if the small thread-like fibres had been entire- 
ly cleaned oft', when the roots were taken up. 

The roots are in general rather flat, and their eyes, from whence 
the stems and flowers proceed, are easily distinguished on one side 
of the root, which of course should be planted uppermost. For 
their further treatment see the ensuing months. 

Planting various kinds of Bulbous-rooted Flowers. 

A good, sound, fresh soil, either of the black or loamy kind, (with 
the addition of a little coarse sea or river sand placed round the 
roots on planting) and manured with rotten cow-dung, two years 
old at least, if the soil and situation be dry and warm, or rotten horse- 
dung, if it be cold and moist, is all the compost or preparation required 
for the greater part of those flowers; observing that the dung should 
never come in contact with the bulbs, or be placed at so great 
a depth from the surface of the soil as to lose tiie advantage of the 
due action of the air upon it, which would render it poisonous 
instead of nutricious: in short it should never be placed more than 
eight or ten inches deep upon any occasion, where it can possibly 
be avoided. 

The polyanthus-narcissus consists of many varieties, each sort 
produces several flowers on one stalk, the roots may be planted any 
time this month, about three or four inches deep; they succeed 
best in rather a warm dry soil and situation; but if the soil happens 
to be the reverse, the bed should be raised seven or eight inches 
above the common level, and in either case it would be well to 



544 THE PLEASURE, OR [Oct. 

cover the bed with straw in case of severe frost, for the roots of 
these are more tender and subject to be injured by the severity of 
the winter, than either hyacinths or tulips. The bed should be 
formed rather rounding, to cast off the wet, for which a good fall or 
descent should be in some convenient direction. The roots may 
remain two or three years in the ground without being disturbed; 
but then it will be necessary to take thera up to separate their off- 
sets, which by being longer connected with the old roots, would 
cause them to blow small and weak. 

Double-narcissus (daffodils) consist of several varieties; they are 
hardier than the former, the Italian excepted, and may be treated 
in a similar manner, but are in less danger from the effects of 
frost. 

Jonquils, English, Spanish, and Persian bulbous iris: the three 
first consist of several varieties, they may be planted from two to 
three inches deep, according to the looseness of the soil and strength 
of the bulbs, and treated in the same manner as the polyanthus-nar- 
cissus: they are all hardy. 

Crown imperials, lilies, pseonias, and the ornithogalum pyra- 
midale, or star of Bethlehem, should be planted now, if not done 
before, and covered about four inches deep; these do not require to 
be taken up oftener than once in two or three years, and then only 
to separate their offsets. 

Martagons (lilies with revolute petals) consist of many species 
and varieties, and may be treated as other lilies; they however make 
the best appearance in beds by themselves, and will grow stronger 
if the ground is well manured and the roots planted from five to six 
inches deep. The lilies calleti martagons are, the Lilium chalce- 
donicum, or scarlet martagon lily, L. catesbaei, or Catesby's lily, 
X. pomponium, or pomponian lily, L. superbum, or superb lily, 
L. martagon, or purple martagon lily, L. canadense, or Canada 
martagon lily, and L. japonicum^ or Japan white lily, with their 
varieties; the latter obtained by sowing the seeds of the different 
species. 

If not done in the preceding months, you should no longer defer 
the planting of spring crocuses, snowdrops, hardy gladioluses, 
Persian fritillarias, erythroniums, pancratium maratimura, orchises, 
limadorum tuberosum, snake's-head iris, musk, feathered, grape, 
and other hyacinths; the scilla maritima, or oflicinal squill, scilla 
peruviana, or starry hyacinth, together with all the other kinds of 
hardy bulbous or tuberous-rooted flowers which you intend plant- 
ing before spring. These may be planted separately in beds, or 
along the borders of the flower garden and pleasure grounds, and 
covered from two to three or four inches deep over the crowns of 
the roots, according to their respective size and strength, and the 
lightness or stiffness of the soil. 

In planting any of the above or other sorts in borders, observe 
that the lowest growing kinds are to be planted next the walks, and 
the larger farther back, in proportion to their respective growths, 
that the whole may appear to advantage, and none be concealed 
from the view. Likewise observe to diversify the kinds and 



Oct.] flower GARDEN. 545 

colours, so as to display, when in bloom, the greatest possible variety 
of shades and contrasts. 

In assemblage with other flowers in the borders, these should be 
planted in small clumps of six, seven, or eight inches in diameter, 
three, four, five, or more roots in each, according to size and 
growth, and these at suitable distances from one another, say one, 
two, or three yards. Some of the common anemones and ranun- 
culuses may also be planted with those roots in the borders, either 
in rows towards the edges, or in small clumps or patches as above. 

As much elegance of taste and fancy is necessary, and may be 
displayed in setting oft'a border of intermixed flowers to advantage 
as perhaps in any other part of gardening. 

Sowing seeds of Bulbous-rooted flowers, Sfc. 

You may still continue to sow the seeds of bulbous and tuberous- 
rooted flowers, as directed in page 500. 

Transplant Perennial and Biennial Floioer Roots. 

The entire of this month is a very proper time to divide and 
transplant the various kinds of hardy perennial and biennial flower- 
roots, as noticed in page 501, which see. 

Observe to plant the different sorts in a diversified order, the 
low growing kinds next the walks, and the largest more remote 
therefrom, so that the whole may rise in a regular gradation as they 
advance in growth. 

Collect ornamental plants from the woods, fields, and swamps, 
as directed in page 470; this will be a very good time to procure 
the late flowering kinds, many of which are extremely beautiful. 

Double Daisies, ^-c. 

About the middle of this month, prepare a warm border in a 
south aspect, on which to plant the double daisies that you preserved 
in shaded situations during summer; the bed should be raised four 
or five inches above the common level, and if surrounded with a 
frame the better; take up the roots with balls of earth and plant 
them on this bed in rows, five or six inches plant from plant, every 
way; give them water immediately, and if shaded from the sun for 
a week or two, it would be of considerable service. 

Primroses, polyanthuses, and common auriculas, may be treated 
in this way. For their further management see the ensuing months. 

Stock- gillyflowers and fVallflowers. 

Any double stocks and wallflowers that you have growing in beds 
or borders, should be potted in the beginning of this month, if not 
done in September, and placed in the shade for about three weeks, 
then removed to a warm aspect, there to remain till it is found ne- 
cessary to house or place them in a frame. 
3 V 



546 THE PLEASURE, OR [Oct. 

Planting Bulbous Roots in Pols and Glasses for flowering early. 

In the beginning of this month you should plant some of the 
earliest kinds of tulips, hyacinths, polyanthus-narcissus, &c. in 
pots of light, rich, sandy earth, one, two, or three roots in each, 
and of difterent colours, in order to force them into an early bloom 
in winter. If the pots are large the roots may be covered one inch 
above their crowns, but if small the bare covering of the crowns 
will be sufficient, in order to give the fibres the more room to extend 
themselves. 

Ranunculuses, anemones, crocuses, snow-drops, dwarf Persian 
irises, and any other early blooming kinds, may be planted in pots 
for the same purpose, covering them generally about an inch deep 
over their crowns. 

When the roots are planted the pots are to be sunk to their rims 
in a good stout garden frame, on a bed of very light sandy earth, 
elevated above the common level of the ground, where they are to 
be kept gently moist and no morej but they must be carefully pro- 
tected from heavy torrents of rain, which would tend greatly to rot 
or weaken the bulbs. The glasses are to be kept otF, except in 
rainy weather, till the approach of frost, after which the bed must 
be defended therefrom as directed in the following months. 

In this month you should put the bulbs of tulips, hyacinths, jon- 
quils, narcissuses, &c. in bulb-glasses filled with water, to flower 
in rooms early in spring; the glasses should be then placed where 
they may have as much free air as possible while the weather con- 
tinues mild; if they are placed near the windows of a green-house, 
where they may have free air in favourable weather, and be pro- 
tected from cold and frost, they will produce fine, strong flowers, 
and at a very acceptable season. 

The water should be changed as often as it turns greenish, and 
the glasses well washed inside. Particular care must be taken not 
to suft'er the water to be frozen in winter, which would not only 
injure the roots but burst the glasses. 

Potting Roses, 8,'c.for Forcing. 

Pot roses, honey-suckles, double-flowering almonds, peaches, 
cherries, and thorns, and any other desirable shrubs, whether ever- 
green or deciduous, either for the convenience of afFordino- them 
protection in winter, decorating any compartments in spring or 
summer, or for placing some of them in the forcing departments in 
December or January, to force an early bloom. This must be done 
with care, not injuring the roots, and taking up as much earth with 
them as possible. When potted place them in the shade for ten or 
twelve days after, or until you find it necessary to house or other- 
wise protect them. 

Prune Flowering Shrubs. 
This is a very proper season to prune roses, lilacs, honey-suckles, 



Oct.] flower .iJARDEN. 547 

and indeed all kinds of hardj trees and shrubs, whether deciduous 
or evergreen. Let this be performed with a sharp knife, and not 
with garden shears, as sometimes practised. But to avoid repeti- 
tion, 1 refer you for further instructions on this head to page 164. 

All suckers which arise from the roots should now be taken clean 
away, for when suffered to remain they starve the old plants and 
prevent their flowering; many kinds of shrubs, for instance the lilac, 
will send forth great numbers of suckers from their roots, which, if 
not annually taken off', will spread over the ground to the great 
injury of your plants. These suckers, if wanted, may be planted 
in nursery rows for a year or two, and will then answer for renew- 
ing the old or for forming new plantations. 

Forming New Ornamental Plantations, fyc. 

This being a very proper season for laying out and planting plea- 
sure-grounds, I refer you for general information on these subjects 
to page 62, &c., which though given in a month not favourable for 
such work, in the middle or eastern states, I considered it a period 
in which there would be leisure time for contemplating the designs 
and making preparations for the carrying of them into execution 
on the opening of spring. 

All kinds of hardy deciduous trees and shrubs maybe planted as 
soon in this month as they shall have shed their leaves; the ever- 
green kinds may be planted towards the latter end thereof, always, 
but particularly for the latter, making choice of moist or cloudy 
weather, if such should occur in due season. 

In this place I think it proper to remark, that I always have had 
better success in the planting of evergreens in general, when done 
in the spring of the year immediately before their vegetation com- 
menced, than at any other season. 

The early part of next month will be an excellent time to plant 
all kinds of deciduous forest trees and flowering shrubs, &c, that 
shall not have shed their foliage before that time. 

For general directions respecting the best methods of planting 
trees and shrubs of every kind see page 302. 

Propagate Trees and Shrubs. 

Various kinds of trees and shrubs growing in the pleasure-ground, 
borders, &c. may now be propagated by suckers, layers, and cut- 
tings; but having described the methods of doing this in the nursery 
for March, a repetition is unnecessary in this place. 

Planting Box and other Edgings. 

Box edgings may be planted any time this month with good suc- 
cess, if some care be taken to give them shade and water for about 
a month, for the method see page 303. 

Many other kinds may now be planted for edgings, but particu- 
larly those mentioned in page 356, which see. 



548 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Oct. 

Plant Hedges. 

This is a fine season to plant all sorts of live hedges, whether for 
fences, shade, or ornament; especially ground hedges, or such as 
are to be established on the plain surface of the earth; but having 
treated on this subject at full length, in the Nursery for March, 
beginning at page 260, to which I refer you, it is unnecessary to 
repeat here what has been said before. 

It may, however, be proper to observe, that evergreen hedges 
are, generally, more successful when planted in spring than at this 
season; notwithstanding, in cases of necessity, I would not hesitate 
to plant them now. 

Clipping Hedges and Edgings. 

If any hedges or box edgings want trimming, let them be clipped 
early in this month, observing the directions given in page 504. 

Be very particular to finish the clipping of evergreen hedges as 
early in the month as possible, for if cut too late the cold will oc- 
casion the cut leaves, and others suddenly exposed thereto, to 
change to a rusty disagreeable colour, which they will not recover 
before the ensuing spring. 

Ordinary fVork. 

Mow grass-walks and lawns close and even, and roll them, in 
order that they should appear neat ail winter; clean and roll your 
gravel-walks once a week; hoe, weed, cut, rake, and carry away 
clean oiFthe ground, all weeds, decayed flower-stems, fallen leaves, 
&c. ; prepare ground by trenching, laying it up in ridges, &c. for 
spring planting, which will be of considerable advantage both in 
meliorating the ground and expeditingyour business at that season. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

Having in the preceding month, page 507, intimated the proper 
time for taking in the green-house plants, in the eastern states, I 
shall now notice the period for doing that business in the middle 
states. In the southern states, the plants may be left out a few 
days later than hereafter mentioned, say from four to ten, accord- 
ing to climate, season, and local situation. 

About the first day of this month, if not done before, take into 
the green-house all the more hardy species of cactuses, aloes, 
mesembryanthemums, sedums, stapelias, agaves, cotyledons, cycas 
revoluta, and other succulent and tender plants; place them infront 



Oct.] the GREENHOUSE. 549 

where thej can have plenty of air in mild weather, and give them 
water but sparingly. 

Let it be observed for the benefit and encouragement of those 
who have no hot-houses, that although all the above generas or 
families are commonly considered as hot-house plants, the far 
greater number of species thereunto belonging may be preserved 
in excellent perfection in a good green-house, and also many other 
plants hitherto considered as too tender to be preserved therein: 
experience is the true criterion, and where there are duplicates of 
doubtful plants, an ingenious gardener will make an experiment 
with one of each. Several kinds of plants commonly kept in hot- 
houses would thrive much better in a well constructed green- 
house. 

Between the sixth and tenth of this month, according to the sea- 
son, situation, and shelter of the place, you should take in your 
orange, lemon, citron, lime and shaddock trees, and also your 
geraniums, and every other sort of plant that slight frosts could 
injure or discolour the leaves thereof. Myrtles and the more hardy 
kinds will not be in much danger before the middle of the month, 
nor will the hardiest sorts, such as prunus lusitanica, or Portugal 
laurel, prunus lauro-cerasus, or levant laurel, viburnum tinus, or 
laurustinus, arbutus unedo, or strawberry-tree, lagerstroemia indica, 
daphne odora, fuchsia coccinea, cupressus sempervirens, hydrangea 
hortensis, &c., before the twentieth or twenty-fifth thereof: indeed 
in warm soils and situations, most of these would bear the winters 
of the middle states, in the open ground, if sheltered with mats or 
straw, &c. 

Before they are taken in, pick oft' all decayed leaves, prune any 
decayed, ill-formed, disorderly, or irregular shoots or branches, 
and stir the earth a little in the tops of the tubs or pots. Such as 
appear weakly, should have some of the old earth taken out and the 
vacancy tilled up with fresh compost. 

In placing the plants in the green-house, be particular to arrange 
them in regular order, the tallest behind, and the others according 
to their height, in regular gradation down to the lowest in front, 
being careful to dispose the different sorts in such varied order 
as that the foliage may effect a striking contrast and variety, by 
intermixing the broad and narrow leaved, the simple and com- 
pound leaved, the light and dark green, the silvery, &c., in order 
that the whole collection may exhibit a conspicuous and agreeable 
diversity. 

When all are thus arranged give their heads a good watering, 
which will wash oft' any dust they have contracted, refresh them 
considerably, and add lustre and beauty to their foliage; then wash 
clean and wipe dry all the stage, benches, floor, &c., after which 
the whole will assume a neat, gay, lively, and becoming appear- 
ance. 

The plants now should have as much free air as possible during 
the continuance of mild weather, for if kept too close the damps 
occasioned by a copious perspiration would cause many of their 
leaves to become mouldy and drop off, and, besides, they would be 



550 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Oct. 

less hardy on the approach of winter; therefore, on every warm or 
mild day keep the windows open; and even on mild dry nights, 
during the remainder of this month, you may slide down the upper 
front lights so as to admit a little air at top. But observe to keep 
the windows close shut in cold weather, frosty nights, and during 
the continuance of cold rains or fogs. 

It will still be necessary to water the plants frequently but 
moderately, especially the shrubby kinds; the succulent sorts will 
not require it so often. 

Pick off, from time to time, all decayed leaves, and keep every 
part of the house constantly clean and free from tilth of any kind. 

The deciduous green-house plants, such as the Lagerstrcemia 
indica, punica, granata, or double-flowering pomegranate, Croton 
sebiferum, or tallow-tree, &c. may be placed on a platform erected 
at the back of the stage, as noticed in page 90, or they may be pre- 
served very Vv'ell during the winter in a dry warm cellar that has 
windows to admit light, air, &c. as necessity may require. 

Preserving Green-House Plants in Garden Frames. 

There are but few green-house plants of a small size but may 
be preserved during winter, in great perfection, in garden frames 
of the following construction. 

The frame should be erected on a bed of earth in a remarkably 
dry and warm exposure; it should be made of strong planks, four, 
five, or six feet high in the back (according to the size of the plants) 
eight or nine inches high in front, and four or five feet wide, with 
the ends sloping accordingly. The length should be in proportion 
to the number of plants you have to winter, but at every nine or 
ten feet there should be partitions or stays in the inside for the 
support of the back. 

Around this frame you are to form another at the distance of two 
feet therefrom, made of any kind of rough boards, supported by 
pots, and of the same height. The vacancy between both frames 
is to be filled up to the top with tanner's bark, dry litter, leaves of 
trees, or any other substance that will keep the frost from pene- 
trating to the plants. 

Your frame being thus made, plunge the pots containing the 
plants to their rims in the inside, either in tan or light sandy earth, 
placing the lowest in front and the tallest behind, and cover the 
whole with well glazed and well fitted sashes. During the most 
severe winter the generality of green-house plants may be effectu- 
ally preserved in this or the like frame by laying on, as occasion 
requires, a sufficient quantity of mats over the glasses, and over 
these a covering of boards. 

The plants are to have light and air given to them at every 
favourable opportunity, and should be treated, generally, as directed 
for those in the green-house. 

Many other similar contrivances may be made, and with the 
desired effect, as nothing more is necessary for the preservation of 
these plants than light, air, a moderate share of moisture, and an 
effectual protection from the frost. 



551 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 



Fine-Apples. 

Ill the earlj part of this month the pine plants that are to pro- 
duce fruit next season should be removed out of ihe nursery stove, 
&c. into the fruiting-housej but previous to this you should take 
out of the pit all the old bark, and till it with new fresh tan, pre- 
viously prepared, as directed last month, page 510; observe not to 
put it into the pit in too wet a state, for in that case it would be a 
long time before it would come to a kindly heat, and sometimes not 
at all, so as to answer the end. 

Some people sift the old bark, and use the coarse part with new, 
about one half of each; but if you can conveniently procure a suffi- 
ciency of new tan to fill the pit entirely, it will answer much better 
for this purpose. 

When the bed begins to heat, and the warmth has reached the 
surface, bring in your fruiting-plants, and plunge them in the bark- 
bed to their rims; or if you are apprehensive of the new bark heat- 
ing too violently at first, plunge the pots only half-way for about a 
fortnight; if, however, you plunge them wholly at first, you must 
examine the bed frequently, and if you find the heat at any time 
violent, then draw the pots up half-way or quite out of the tan, as 
you see convenient, to prevent its burning the roots of the plants, 
and plunge them again as soon as it can be done with safety. 

The plants thus finally placed in the fruiting-house, are to get 
the usual and necessary attendance; air must be admitted every 
mild and warm day, and gentle waterings given when necessary. 

Towards the latter end of the month the nights will be growing 
very cold, and sometimes it may be found necessary to kindle a 
small fire in the evening; but you should never resort to this while 
the heat of the house keeps up at night to fifty-two degrees of Fah- 
renheit, which will generally be the case during the whole of this 
month if you take care to shut the house in the afternoon when 
pretty warm; but should cold, cloudy weather continue for a few 
days, it may render a little fire necessary notwithstanding. 

Succession Pines. 

The succession house should now be replenished from the pits, 
&c. with the pines next in growth to the fruiting plants taken 
out of it, also the younger successions in the next advancing stage 
should be placed in the pits, frames, or other winter departments. 

All these will now require to be renewed with a proper quantity 
of new tan, one half at least, so as to support a regular heat for a 
considerable time; the whole of the old tan must be sifted, and what 



552 THE HOT-IIOUSE. [Oct. 

goes through the screen, may be used for covering beds wherein 
are planted bulbous roots, &c. to protect them from frost: as much 
new tan, previously made sufficiently dry, must be added to the 
coarse part as will fill up the pits again a little above the top, 
mixing both well together as you proceed in the filling. This done 
plunge the pots as directed on other occasions. 

General Care. 

The pines and all the other exotics must have regular care and 
attendancei let water be given once or twice a week to some, oftener 
to others, as you see necessary, being careful not to give too much 
at a time, for that would not only injure many plants, but destroy 
the heat of the bark-bed. 

Admit fresh air into the house every calm or warm day, espe- 
cially when the sun shines, by sliding open some of the glasses from 
nine or ten o'clock till two, three or four, always observing to close 
the house in the afternoon while the air is warm, to supersede the 
necessity of fire as long as possible; and if you must have recourse 
to it towards the latter end of the month, use it but moderately at 
this season. 

The advantages of keeping the house as cool as may be consistent 
with the safety of the plants, during this and the next month, are 
very obvious; all the plants are gradually hardened and rendered 
thereby capable of bearing the vicissitudes of the winter season 
better than if they were drawn up tender and weakly by too much 
heat; but the pines in particular, if forced at this season, would, 
many of them, start to fruit at an untimely period, which would 
get stunted and misshapen before the commencement of the free 
spring vegetation, and would consequently be totally lost, or not 
worth their room in the house. 

When the leaves of any plants decay, they should be picked off', 
and the house kept constantly clear from fallen leaves, cobwebs, or 
any other filth, which not only renders the house neat, but is very 
necessary to preserve the plants in health. 

Wintering Hot-House plants in Garden- Frames. 

There are few tropical plants but may be preserved during win- 
ter, while in a small state, in garden-frames well constructed and 
attended, so that an ingenious and careful gardener may not despair 
of preserving the most rare plants in winter, without the aid of a 
hot-house; and even where there is one, and the stock of plants too 
numerous, such auxiliary convenience will be found of considerable 
utility. 

A frame for this purpose should be made about nine or ten feet 
long, four to five wide, three and a half high in front, and five in 
the back part, with sashes well glazed and fitted as close and neat 
as possible, so as to slide up and down freely. This frame should 
be placed in a dry well sheltered situation, exposed fully to the 
south, and where it can have the benefit of the sun during the whole 



Oct.] the HOT-HOUSE. 553 

day. It should be filled with fresh well prepared tan, to the depth, 
of three feet when settled, and the pots plunged therein to their 
rims, the smallest sized plants in front, the largest towards the 
back part. 

The frame should be entirely surrounded with a large quantity 
of the fallen leaves of trees to its full height, having still more in. 
reserve to add, as the others sink and contract in bulk, in conse- 
quence of fermentation and pressure, always keeping them full up 
to the top of the frame on every side; the leaves will soon heat and 
cause the tan to ferment, and between both a fine glow of warmth 
will be kept up in the frame during the whole winter; this, with the 
assistance of a suitable covering of mats, boards, &c. at night and 
in severe weather, will keep the most tender plants in health and 
good condition. 

Linings of hot horse-dung may be substituted in place of leaves, 
but the latter is preferable on account of its slow, steady and long 
continued heat. 

Oak Leaves used as a substitute for Tan. 

As oak leaves abound in almost every part of the United States, 
it is of some importance to know that they may be used in forcing 
pits of every kind, in place of tanner's bark, and with advantage, 
their heat being constant, regular, and continuing for a long time, 
often for an entire year; whereas bark generally turns cold soon 
after its violent heat is gone oif, which obliges the gardener to fork 
it up frequently in order to revive the heat. 

The Sooner the leaves are raked up after they fall from the trees 
the better, as the quality and fermenting substance will naturally 
decrease during the time they are exposed to the weather. 

When raked up they should be carried immediately into some 
open shed, and there thrown into a heap to settle and ferment. — 
In this place tread them well, and water them a little if you find 
they are rather dry. The heap should be at least six or seven feet 
in thickness, and covered with old mats, as well to promote a gene- 
ral fermentation as to prevent the upper leaves from being blown 
away by the wind. They should be suffered to remain in this state 
for four or five weeks, by which time they will be properly pre- 
pared for the pits, and will not settle down much after. In put- 
ting them into the pits, if they appear dry, water them a little and 
tread them in layers, exceedingly well, till the pits are quite full: 
then cover the whole with tan to the thickness of two inches, and 
tread it well till the surface becomes smooth and even. On this 
place your pots of pines or other tender plants in the manner they 
are to stand, filling up the spaces between them with tan as you 
proceed, row by row. 

After this, the leaves require no farther trouble the whole season 
through, as they will retain a constant and regular heat for twelve 
months, without either stirring or turning. 

Leaves mixed with stable dung make excellent hot-beds, which 
preserve their heat much longer than when made of dung only. 
3 X 



554 



^o^tmfier. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

As this is a period in which much may be done towards the 
laying out and preparing of new kitchen gardens for the ensuing 
season, &c. I refer you for general instructions on that subject to 
page 108, &c. 

Spinage, Corn- Salad, and Winter- Cresses. 

You should now be very attentive to the keeping of your winter 
spinage free from weeds, and to the thinning of the plants where 
they stand too close; otherwise they will not be sufficiently strong 
and firm to endure the severity of the approaching frosts. 

Corn-salad and winter-cresses, should be treated as directed for 
spinage, and for the same reason; but the distance of two or three 
inches, plant from plant, will be sufficient for these. This should 
be done early in the month, for it is not prudent either to thin or 
weed succulent plants of any kind immediately on the eve of a 
severe frost, as the sudden exposure of the shaded and tender parts 
to it would prove very destructive. 

Winter-dressing of Asparugus Beds. 

Where omitted last month, dress your asparagus beds as directed 
in page 520. Indeed there is no better season than the first or 
second week of this month for that business. 

Lettuces. 

The lettuces which were planted in frames last month should 
be still suffered to enjoy the free air every day while the weather 
continues mild and dry, by taking the glasses entirely off early in 
the morning; but let them be put on again in the evening, or when- 
ever the weather becomes cold or wet; for if these plants are kept 
too close, they will draw up and become weakly, tender, and of 
little value. 

When the weather is very wet or cold, keep the glasses on, and 
should the frost set in rather too severe towards the end of the 
month, you must give the necessary covering, so as to prevent the 
plants from getting frozen; but be careful to admit air to them at 
every favourable opportunity. 

In the first week of this month, you should plant into the frames, 



Nov.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 555 

if omitted in October, such lettuces as are designed to be wintered 
therein; this should on no account be delayed to a later period. 

On the approach of severe frost protect your lettuces on warm 
borders, &c. as directed in page 522. 

N. B. Lettuces make a most delicious boiled salad, which, in the 
estimation of most people who have tried it, is much superior to 
spinage. This observation escaped my recollection while writing 
the work of the summer months, where it might have been more 
appropriately inserted,* as then, thousands of heads start to seed and 
are totally lost, which might be profitably used in this way. They 
are generally in an excellent condition for this purpose, at anytime 
from the period of their having attained a sufficient size, till the 
hearts or centre stems have shot towards seeding six or eight 
inches high, so that when they are past use for a raw salad, they are 
yet good for a boiled one. 

Small Salading. 

Small salading of every kind will now require to be sown on a 
slight hot-bed, under the protection of frames and glasses; other- 
wise disappointment will ensue, especially if the cold sets in early. 
In mild weather admit plenty of air, to give strength to the plants. 

• ' Garlic, Rocambole, and Shallots. 

You may now plant garlic, rocambole, and shallots; the earlier 
in the month that this is done the better. When planted at this 
season in dry, light, rich ground, the roots will be much larger 
than if deferred till spring. The bulbs of the common garlic or 
Allium sativum, grow to a larger size than those of the rocambole, 
or Allium scorodoprasum, but some people conceive the latter to be 
of a better flavour. 

The true shallot, or Allium ascalonicum, is considered to possess 
the most agreeable flavour of any of that genus, and is, consequent- 
ly, highly deserving of cultivation. 

For the method of planting each of the above sorts see page 197; 
but in planting the bulbs produced on the tops of the garlic and 
rocambole stalks, observe to cover them only about two inches deep, 
as they are not so large or strong as the cloves of the roots. 

Cabbage and Cauliflower Plants. 

During the continuance of mild weather, give your cabbage and 
cauliflower plants every advantage of free air, to inure them by 
degrees to bear the cold, by taking the glasses oft' totally, in the 
warm part of the day, but be attentive to lay them on again at 
night and in wet or cold weather. On coldish days, except there 
is a cutting frosty wind, you may raise the glasses a little behind 
for the admission of air: however, if a severe frost should set in, 
in the course of the month, you must cover the beds carefully at 
night, and at other times when necessary, to protect the plants 



556 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Nov. 

therefrom. But having given general instructions for the methods 
of treating cabbage plants in page 513, and cauliflower plants in 
page 515, I now refer you thereto for further information. 

Observe that the cauliflower being much more tender than the 
cabbage plants, will require more care and covering to protect 
them from frost; and that either will be greatly injured by being 
deprived of light or air longer than their safety or preservation 
require. 

Preserving Cabbages and Borecole for Winter and Spring use. 

Immediately previous to the setting in of hard frost take up your 
cabbages and savoys, observing to do it in a dry day; turn their 
tops downward, and let them remain so for a few hours to drain off 
any water that may be lodged between the leaves; then make 
choice of a ridge of dry earth, in a well sheltered, warm exposure, 
and plant them down to their heads therein, close to one another, 
having previously taken oft' some of their loose hanging leaves. 
Immediately erect over them a low temporary shed, of any kind 
that will keep them perfectly free from wet, which is to be open at 
both ends to admit a current of air in mild dry weather. These 
ends are to be closed with straw when the weather is very severe. 
In this situation your cabbages will keep in a high state of preser- 
vation till spring; for being kept perfectly free from wet as well as 
from the action of the sun, the frost will have little or no effect 
upon them. In such a place the heads may be cut off as wanted, 
and, if frozen, soak them in spring, well, or pump water for a few 
hours previous to their being cooked, which will dissolve the frost 
and extract any disagreeable taste occasioned thereby. 

Some plant their cabbages, after being taken up and drained as 
above, in airy or well ventilated cellars, in earth or sand up to their 
heads, where they will keep tolerably well; but in close, warm, or 
damp cellars they soon decay. 

Others make a trench in dry sandy ground, and place the cab- 
bages therein, after being well drained and dry, and most of their 
outside loose green leaves pulled oft', roots upward, the heads con- 
tiguous to, but not touching each other; they then cover them with 
the dryest earth or sand that can be conveniently procured, and 
form a ridge of earth over them like the roof of a house; some apply 
dry straw immediately around the heads, but this is a bad practice, 
as the straw will soon become damp and mouldy, and will of course 
communicate the disorder to the cabbages. 

Upon the whole, the first method is, in my opinion, the most 
preferable, as there is no way in which cabbages will keep better if 
preserved from wet; and, besides, they can be conveniently ob- 
tained whenever they are wanted for use. 

The green and brown curled borecole being very hardy, will 
require but little protection; they may now be taken up and planted 
in a ridge tolerably close together, and during severe frost covered 
lightly with straw; this will preserve them sufficiently, and during 
winter the heads may be cut off as they are wanted for use; the 



Nov.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 557 

stems, if taken up and planted in rows, as early in March as the 
weather will admit, will produce abundance of the most delicious 
sprouts. 

In the southern states, and even in warm soils and exposures in 
the middle states, borecole will stand the winter in open beds with- 
out any covering whatever. 

Cauliflowers and Broccoli. 

Your late cauliflowers and broccoli will now be producing their 
heads; therefore it will be necessary to break down some of the 
largest leaves over the flowers to preserve them from the effects of 
sun, rain, and frost. 

Such plants of either sort as are not likely to flower before the 
commencement of severe frost should be taken up and planted as 
recommended in the first instance for cabbages, where, \{ well pro- 
tected from wet and frost, they will continue to produce fine flowers 
all winter. 

Or they may be planted in a dry, warm cellar, in the same man- 
ner as directed for cabbages, where they will also flower in winter: 
indeed I have had tolerably good flowers from strong plants hung 
up in a damp, warm cellar. 

Preserving Turnips, Carrots, Farsneps, Beets, Salsufy, fyc. 

Previous to the commencement of severe frost you should take 
up, with as little injury as possible, the roots of your turnips, car- 
rots, parsneps, beets, salsafy, scorzonera, Hamburg or large rooted 
parsley, skirrets, Jerusalem artichokes, turnip-rooted celery, and 
a sufliciency of horse-radish for the winter consumption,* cut off" 
their tops and expose the roots for a few hours till sufficiently dry. 
On the surface of a very dry spot of ground, in a well sheltered 
situation, lay a stratum of sand two inches thick, and on this a 
layer of roots of either sort, covering them with another layer of 
sand (the drier the better) and so continue layer about of sand and 
roots till all are laid in, giving the whole on every side a roof-like 
slope; then cover this heap or ridge all over with about two inches 
of sand, over which lay a good coat of drawn straw up and down, 
as if thatching a house, in order to carry off wet, and prevent its 
entering the roots; then dig a wide trench around the heap and 
cover the straw with the earth so dug up to a depth sufficient to 
preserve the roots effectually from frost. An opening may be made 
on the south side of this heap, and completely covered with bundles 
of straw, so as to have access to the roots at all times when wanted, 
either for sale or use. 

Some people lay straw or hay between the layers of roots and 
immediately on the top of them; this I do not approve of, as the 
straw or hay will become damp and mouldy, and very often occa- 
sion the roots to rot, while the sand would preserve them sweet 
and sound. 

All these roots may be preserved in like manner in a cellar; but 



558 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. Nov. 

in such a place they are subject to vegetate and become stringy 
earlier in spring. The only advantage of this method is, that in 
the cellar they may be had, when wanted, more conveniently during 
winter, than out of the field or garden heaps. 

Note. All the above roots will preserve better in sand than in 
common earth, but when the former cannot be had, the sandiest 
earth you can procure must be substituted. 

Celery, Endive, and Cardoons. 

Continue during the early part of this month to blanch your 
celery, endive and cardoons, as directed in the preceding monthsj 
but when the severe frosts approach, they must be preserved there- 
from, either in the following or some other more convenient and 
effectual manner. 

Every third row of the celery may be suffered to stand where 
growing, opening a trench on each side of every standing row, 
within six or eight inches thereof, for the reception of the plants 
of the other two rows, which are to be carefully taken up with as 
little injury as possible either to their tops or roots, and planted in 
those new trenches, in the same order as they formerly stood. 
The whole being thus planted, three rows together, they are to be 
earthed up near the extremities of their leaves, and as soon as the 
frost becomes pretty keen, in a very dry day cover the whole with 
straw, and over this a good coat of earth. 

When this plan is intended, the celery should in the first instance 
be planted in rows, east and west, so that when the whole is covered 
for winter use as above, the south side, especially if protected a 
little with straw, &c. may be easily opened to take out the plants 
when wanted for use. 

Or if you have the convenience of a deep garden-fi'ame, you 
may almost fill it with fresh sand, and then take up and plant there- 
in, so close as nearly to touch one another, a quantity of your best 
and largest celery, and so deep as to be covered within five or six 
inches of their tops'; place on your glasses immediately, and suffer 
neither rain nor water to reach the plants, except a very gentle 
shower, occasionally, in warm weather. 

When severe frosts set in, lay dung, tan, leaves of trees, or 
other litter around the sides and ends of the frame, and cover the 
glasses with mats, &c. so as to keep out the frost. By this means 
you can have celery during winter in the greatest perfection, and as 
convenient as you could desire. 

Or celery may now be taken up when dry, well aired, and plant- 
ed in sand in a dry cellar, in the same manner as directed for 
planting it in the frame; observing, in either case, to lay up the 
stalks and leaves neat and close, and to do as little injury to either 
as possible. 

The beds of celery which were planted as directed in page 4S3, 
should, in the early part of this month, be earthed up to within six 
or eight inches of the tops of the plants, and on the approach of 
hard frost, additionally earthed to the very extremities of their 



Nov.] THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 559 

leaves; then lay a covering of dry sandy earth on the top of each 
bed, the whole length,. so as to give it a rounding; on this, place a 
coat of dry straw, drawn and laid on advantageously to cast oft" the 
wet, and of a sufficient thickness to effectually resist the frost; after 
which cut a trench around the bed to carry off'and prevent any lodge- 
ment of water. Here you can have access to your celery, and it will 
continue in a high state of preservation during the whole winter and 
early spring months. 

Endive may be preserved in a frame, or cellar, as directed for 
celery, or as recommended in page 519. 

Cardoons may be preserved either in sand in a cellar, or by bank- 
ing up a sufficiency of earth to them where they grow, and covering 
the tops, &c. with straw or long litter. 

N. B. All the above work must be performed in dry weather, and 
when the plants are perfectly free from wet, otherwise they will be 
very subject to rot. 

Sowing Rhubarb, Sea-kale and other Seeds. 

You should now sow the seeds of rhubarb, sea-kale, skirrets, ale- 
sanders, dill, and any other kinds of seed that do not vegetate freely 
if kept out of the ground till spring; sow them as directed in March, 
and be not under the least apprehension of the frost doing them any 
injury. 

Mushrooms. 

The mushroom beds must be carefully protected from wet and 
frost, as directed in page 516, &c. 

Winter-dressing of Artichokes. 

The winter dressing of artichokes is an important operation, and 
on it depends much of their future success. This should not be 
given them as long as the weather continues mild, that they may 
have all the advantage possible of growth, and be gradually inured 
to the present increasing cold; but it should not be deferred till 
the setting in of hard frost, lest the entire work be prevented 
thereby. 

In the first place, cut all the large leaves close to the ground, 
leaving but the small ones which rise from the hearts of the plants; 
after this, line and mark out a trench in the middle between each 
row, from fourteen to sixteen inches wide, presuming that the 
rows are five feet apart, as directed under the article planting arti- 
chokes, in page 203. Then lightly dig the surface of the bed's from 
trench to trench, burying the weeds, and as you proceed, gather 
the earth round the crowns of the plants to the height of about six 
inches, placing it in gently between the young rising leaves with- 
out burying them entirely under it; this done dig the trenches one 
spade deep, and cast the earth thereof equally between and on each 
side the plants, so as to level the ridges, giving them at the same 



560 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. (Nov. 

time, a neat rounding form; finish by casting up with a shovel the 
loose earth out of the bottoms of the trenches evenl j over the ridges, 
in order that the water occasioned bj heavy rains, &c. may imme- 
diately run off: on which account the trenches ought to have a gen- 
tle declivity, as a lodgement of water about the roots in winter is 
the greatest evil and danger they have to encounter; even greater 
than the most severe frost of our climate. 

The beds are to remain so until there is an appearance of hard 
frost, when they should be covered with light dry litter, straw, 
leaves of trees, fern, peas-haulm or the like, the better to preserve 
the crowns and roots from its rigour. In this manner the roots will 
remain in perfect safety all winter, and in March they are to have 
their spring dressing as directed in page 203. 

When your artichoke plantation wants manure, lay on a coat of 
old rotten dung previous to the digging of the trenches, and cover 
it over with the earth as you throw it up; in the spring following 
dig it in. 

Forcing Asparagus. 

This is a very proper time to begin to force asparagus in hot- 
beds; for the method see page 121. 

You should now, previous to the setting in of hard frost, cover 
the asparagus-beds containing the plants which you intend to force 
during the ensuing months, with as much straw, or light litter of 
some kind, as will prevent the ground from becoming frozen, so 
that you can take up the roots with convenience and without injury 
when wanted. This method is preferable to taking them up and 
depositing them in a cellar, in sand or earth, which is practised by 
some gardeners. 

Onions. 

The young crops of Welsh onion, or Allium Jistulo sum, should 
be kept free from weeds; some may be thinned out for use in salads, 
&c., the remaining plants will stand the winter even if their foliage 
decay, and produce a plentiful supply early in spring. 

Dried onions should be occasionally examined, and such as show 
a tendency to rot carefully picked out. 

Patience Bock. 

The Rumex patientia, or patience dock, being a plant that affords 
an early spring salad for boiling, and being perennial in root, is de- 
serving of a place in the garden. The leaves are very large, long 
and succulent, and are produced in great abundance; the plant may 
be propagated by sowing the seed any time this month while the 
ground continues open, and the plants will rise freely in spring, or 
you may sow the seeds in March or early in April, but those sown 
at this time will make stronger and earlier plants; the seeds may 
be sown pretty thick in drills eighteen inches asunder, and covered 



Nov.] THE FRUIT GARDEN. 561 

about half an inch deep^ when the plants are about two inches high, 
thin them to the distance of eight inches from one another, and so 
let them remain, always keeping them free from weeds. It may 
also be propagated by offsets from the root taken off' in the spring 
or late autumn months, and planted in rows at the above distances, 
and by heading it down frequently during summer, as it starts to 
seed, you will increase the crops of foliage. 

Dung and Trench Ground. 

In the beginning of this month, dung and trench the ground that 
is intended for early crops, and lay it up in high narrow sloping 
ridges, particularly if it be any way stiff", or of a heavy nature, to 
receive the benefit of the winter frosts, &c. which will enrich, mel- 
low, refresh, and sweeten it; besides by getting as much of this 
work performed now, as can be conveniently done, it will greatly 
forward and assist youraffairs in spring, when hurried by a pressure 
of other business. 

Should the frost set in towards the latter end of the month, so as 
to bind up the ground, and prevent the operation of trenching, you 
may cart or wheel manure into the different quarters where want- 
ed, which will help to forward your business considerably. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

Transplant finally cabbage and cauliflower plants, but where 
the winter frosts are rather severe, the latter will want occasional 
protection of some sort; plant early Mazagan, Windsor, and long- 
pod beans, and sow a succession crop of early peas; earth up your 
advancing crops of the cabbage tribe, celery, and cardoons, blanch 
endive, sow spinage, radish, lettuce, and likewise small saladingof 
every kind on warm borders; th^ latter will require the protection 
of a frame and glasses in cold or frosty weather. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Planting Espalier and Wall Trees, ^"C. 

In the early part of this month, plant apple, pear, quince, plum, 
cherry, peach, nectarine, almond and apricot trees, either for espa- 
liers against walls, or for half or whole standards; observing that 
the ground in which you plant at this season lies perfectly dry 
during winter. For further particulars, see the Fruit Garden for 
last month, page 525, and also page 219. 
3 Y 



562 THE FRUIT GARDEN. [Nov. 

Gooseberries and Currants. 

This is a very suitable and proper season for the planting and 
pruning of gooseberries and currants; but for particulars I refer 
you to pages 526 and 527. 

Cuttings of either kind may now be planted as directed in page 
293, but they must be stout and pretty long, so as to be planted 
about ten inches deep, or the frost during winter will be very apt 
to throw them out of the ground. 

Gooseberry seed may now be sown as directed in page 527, 
with a view to obtain new varieties. Currants and raspberries 
may in like manner be raised from seed, and improved sorts ob- 
tained thereby. 

Raspberries. 

As long as the vi^eather continues open you may transplant and 
make new plantations of raspberries j but the earlier in the month 
that this can be done the better, especially if you have to trans- 
plant the Antwerp varieties. For further information on the subr 
ject of planting and pruning raspberries, see page 528, &c. 

The red and white Antwerp kinds are excellent fruit, and less 
hardy than the other varieties; consequently, it will be necessary, 
in the eastern and middle states, to lay down the young shoots of 
the present season immediately previous to the commencement of 
hard frost, first cutting off close to the ground the shoots which 
had borne fruit the preceding summer. The supernumerary weakly 
shoots may also be cut oft", and likewise the straggling tops of those 
you intend to lay down, or they may now have a general and final 
pruning as directed in page 138. 

This done, dig the earth between the rows, clearing out all use- 
less suckers and weeds, previously adding some very rotten manure, 
if the ground seems to need it, then, being provided with some 
hooked wooden pegs and a number of long, small hoop-poles, or 
the like, lay down each row of shoots gently on one side, on which 
lay the hoop-poles, lengthwise the rows, pegging them down with 
the hooked sticks, so as to keep the shoots close to the earth; after 
which cover all over with light litter, straw, hay, barley chaft", fern, 
leaves of trees, or any other light covering that will protect the 
plants from the effects of the various changes of the weather, which, 
and not the frost only, are the causes of their destruction. Here 
they will remain in safe and good condition till the beginning of 
March, when the litter is to be taken oft", the plants raised up, and 
the ground receive its spring dressing. 

Some lay the shoots into, and cover them with the earth; but 
although this has a clean appearance, and sometimes will answer 
very well, the buds will be more liable to receive injury in this 
way than when covered with light litter as above. 



Nov.] THE ORCHARD. 563 

Fig Trees. 

The more tender kinds of iig trees which are planted against 
walls or board fences should now be gone over, and all fruit found 
thereon, whether ripe or unripe, picked oR'; for these would rot in 
winter, and injure the young branches intended for next year's 
bearing. 

At the same time nail up close to the wall or fence all the prin- 
cipal shoots, the better to secure them from the frost and power of 
the windj and if bass-mats are likewise nailed up so as to cover the 
trees, an important protection will be afforded thereby to the young 
shoots. As to pruning, that should not be done either in the middle 
or eastern states till March. See page 216. 

Fig trees, growing in the espalier way, may also be protected 
from frost by laying bass-mats over them and making them fast, or 
by laying boughs of pine or cedar up to them. It would also be 
proper in a severe season to lay some long litter around the roots 
of the trees. 

Pruning of Fruit Trees. 

Having in the Fruit Garden for October expressed my opinion 
respecting the pruning of fruit trees at this season, it is unnecessary 
to repeat it in this place. See page 525. 



THE ORCHARD, 

Planting, <^c. 

This being an eligible period for planting of orchards on dry 
ground, and indeed they never should be planted on a cold, wet, 
or swampy soil, I refer you to the article Orchard in March, where 
you will find ample instructions respecting the extent, aspect, 
situation and soil, the preparation of the ground, the choice of 
trees and method of planting, &c., all of which are equally appli- 
cable in this month as in that, and a reference thereto will, at 
present, supersede the necessity of a repetition. 

Apples, pears, quinces, plums, cherries, peaches, nectarines, 
apricots, and almonds may now be planted; also, walnuts, chest- 
nuts, filberts, persimmons, berberries, medlars, and every other 
kind of hardy fruit trees, agreeably to the directions given in 
March. 

Pruning. 

As you may now commence the pruning of apple and pear trees, 
&c., I would strongly recommend to your perusal at this time the 



564 THE VINEYARD. [Nov. 

entire of the article Orchard in January, beginning at page 45, and 
also the same article in February, page 140, &c. 

Old fruit trees having scaly, rough bark, should in this month, 
if not done in the former, be brushed over with a mixture of cow- 
dang and urine, as directed in page 531. 



THE VINEYARD. 

Pruning of Vines. 

The pruning of grape-vines at this season, will answer extremely 
well in the southern states, and ought to be duly attended to; but 
the severity of the frosts in the middle and eastern states, renders 
it more prudent to defer this work to the latter end of February, or 
if the season proves late, the first week in March; but upon no ac- 
count should you delay it longer: indeed upon the whole, the late 
February pruning will be the safest. In the city and neighbourhood 
of Philadelphia, vines that were pruned on the first and second 
days of March, 1805, wept copiously a few days after, but some 
cold weather ensuing, they stopped bleeding; this shows the neces- 
sity of pruning in February, especially in warm situations or ex- 
posures. 

Those who prefer pruning their vines at this time, as well as 
those who from the temperateness of their climate ought to do it, 
will find the necessary instructions in page 146, &c. 

Winter dressing of Vines. 

You should now plough between the rows of vines in your vine- 
yard where practicable, having first tied up all the trailing runners 
to the stakes; observing to lay up the earth as much as possible to 
the stems of the vines: to eftect this the better, the ground must 
be cross-ploughed. The one and tivo year o/(/jo/awfs will particu- 
larly require this earthing; and after the ploughing is finished, the 
earth should be drawn up around them with a hoe, the better to 
preserve the lower parts of the stems with the buds from alternate 
freezing and thawing, which is much more injurious to them than a 
continued frost. In this state they are to remain till the proper 
time for pruning in spring, when the earth is to be drawn from 
around them, and the plants dressed as directed in page 147. 

When the ground does not admit of this culture with the plough, 
it should be given with the spade and hoe, as it is of considerable 
importance, not only ta protect the plants, but to destroy weeds, 
and meliorate the soil, by throwing it up loosely to the influence 
of the frost and weather. A dressing of manure, where wanted, 
should be given previous to the ploughing, &c. 

This is a very proper period to manure, trench, or plough the 



Nov.] THE NURSERY. 565 

ground which you intend to plant with grape-vines next spring, as 
observed in page 243, leaving it as rough and high as possible. 

In the southern states, vineyards may now be planted, vines 
pruned and propagated by layers and cuttings, and every thing else 
done in that way, as directed in March for the middle and eastern 
states. 



THE NURSERY. 

Transplanting. 

All the principal nursery transplanting should be finished as 
early in this month as possible, in order that the plants may have 
time to push out new fibres before the frosts set in; for when plant- 
ed at a late period, they seldom put out fibres before spring, and 
have to live principally on their own substance during winter, which 
greatly weakens them. However, where that cannot be conve- 
niently done, and that necessity requires it, you may continue to 
transplant all kinds of hardy trees and shrubs while the ground 
continues open. 

Protecting Seedlings and Tender Plants. 

In the early part of the month you should sift some dry, fresh 
earth over the seedling pines, arising from the seed sown last 
spring, so as to nearly reach the foliage, in order to protect their 
yet tender stems from the inclemency of the approaching season; 
and immediately on the setting in of hard frost, spread some dry 
straw, fern, leaves of trees, or other light covering, thinly over the 
beds, to aftbrd additional protection, and in some measure to pre- 
vent the frost from entering the ground as deep as it otherwise 
might; for, without the above care, many of the plants would be 
spewed up by the frost, and most of them be destroyed by the dry 
parching winds of the ensuing spring. Observe that the covering 
must be light, or that it be supported above the plants by some 
means, or a serious injury may accrue by its rotting the foliage, &c. 

The top covering is not necessary except when the winter frosts 
are severe; but sifting earth between and among the plants, so as 
nearly to come up to the leaves, will be of use in every climate and 
country; and not only to pine and fir seedlings, but to every other 
sort that are subject from their diminutive first year's growth to be 
thrown out of the earth by frost, or injured by drought. 

Any kind of seedlings that are rather tender should have hoop 
arches made over the beds, and on the approacli of severe frosts, 
thick mats, &c. laid on these for the protection of the plants. 

All hardy plants in pots should now be removed to where they 
can have sufficient protection in severe weather; for if left fully 



566 THE NURSERY, [Nov. 

exposed to the frost, the plants will not only be injured, but the pots 
burst bj the expansion of the earth and water. 

Pots containing tolerably large and hardy exotic plants may be 
plunged to their rims in a warm border, and covered six or eight 
inches deep over their edges with tanner's bark, leaves of trees, 
long litter, &c. which will considerably preserve the roots of the 
plants. But the more curious kinds of hardy evergreens and other 
plants in pots should now be removed into the green-house, or into 
garden-frames with glasses and other covering, the more effectually 
to protect them. 

Digging between the Nursery rows. 

You should now continue to dig the ground between all such 
trees and shrubs as are to remain another year in the nursery 
rows; this will destroy the weeds, improve the plants, and add 
neatness to the whole during winter and spring. 

Care of new -planted Trees, ^-c. 

Stake and tie up all new planted trees that are in open exposures, 
in order to prevent their being rocked about by the winds, than 
which there is nothing more injurious to them. 

Lay light litter of some kind, a good thickness, over the roots of 
the more tender and choice kinds of trees and shrubs, to protect 
them from frostj this will be of considerable service, and encourage 
them to shoot vigorously in spring. 

Pruning Trees and Shrubs. 

You may now reduce to proper form any hardy forest or orna- 
mental trees, flowering shrubs, &c., cutting out any disorderly or 
straggling branches, and trimming up the stems of such as require 
it. But the more tender sorts should not be pruned till spring. 

Preparations for making New Plantations. 

Continue to dig and trench the ground, or to plough it extremely 
deep, where you intend making new plantations in spring, by which 
it will be greatly improved, and your business then forwarded. 

Where dung is wanted, it should be given previous to the 
digging, &c. and advantage ought to be taken of dry weather to 
carry it in and spread it on the ground. It will be much better to 
give it at this season than immediately before planting, as it will 
have more time to incorporate with the earth, and to be deprived of 
its rancid qualities.^ 



567 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Planting Tulip, Hyacinth, Jinemone, and Ranunculus roots. 

This is still a very proper time to plant the roots of tulips, hya- 
cinths, anemones, and ranunculuses, but the earlier in the month 
it can be done the betterj for it is a fact well known to every expe- 
rienced florist, that bulbous and tuberous roots, which have time to 
emit and form fibres before winter, are much less liable to be injured 
by frost than those which are planted late, and consequently lie 
during that season in an inactive state. Havins in the Floiver Gar- 
den for October given ample instructions for the performance of this 
work, I refer you thereto, in order to avoid unnecessary repetition. 

Protecting Tulip, Hyacinth, Anemone, and Ranunculus roots. 

As it is not unfrequent in the eastern and middle states for hard 
frost to set in towards the latter end of this month, you should pre- 
vious thereto, lay a good lining of fresh tanner's bark, horse dung, 
leaves of trees, or dry straw, around the outsides of the beds contain- 
ing your choice hyacinths, anemones and ranunculuses; this should 
be quite as high as the upper parts of the surrounding frames, and 
of a sufficient body to keep the frost effectually from penetrating in 
at the sides, &c. Tulips will only require to lay a light covering of 
any kind over and around the beds, such as straw, fern, leaves, &c., 
for although the frost will not kill the roots, yet by slightly protect- 
ing them therefrom the flowers will blow much stronger and more 
perfect than they otherwise would. 

Hyacinths, though very hardy, will also be greatly improved in 
their flowers by protecting the balbs in winter from severe frosts, 
which may be effected by laying boards and mats over the frames in 
which the finest sorts are planted; but these should be taken off' every 
mild day, or when the sun is so powerful as to prevent an accumu- 
lation of frost in the beds. The less valuable and common sorts 
may be protected as directed for tulips; any kind of light covering 
will be of use, and indeed they often flower very well without it. 

Two inches deep of one or two years old tanner's bark, if laid over 
your beds of tulips, hyacinths, polyanthus-narcissuses, &c. in the 
open ground, will afford the roots considerable protection; but be cau- 
tious not to use for this purpose new or fresh tan from the vats, as the 
astringent juice thereof would work down to the roots, and do them 
much more injury than the entire omission of covering, or of afford- 
ing them any manner of protection. 

Ranunculuses and anemones being much more tender than tulips 
or hyacinths, will require in severe frost, a good effectual covering 
of glasses, mats, and boards; or in default of glasses, mats and 
boards only, or any other suitable protection. This covering is to 



568 THE PLEASURE, OR [Nov. 

be supported by the frames surrounding the beds wherein the roots 
are planted, and it must be taken oft' every mild day, while there is 
no danger of the beds accumulating frost, in order to ventilate and 
sufficiently air the plants that are up, so that they may neither be 
drawn too much, the foliage turn yellow, nor the roots become 
mouldy. But particular care must be taken to place the covering 
on again, as soon as the day becomes cold and before the beds begin 
to freeze. The ranunculuses are scmiewhat more tender than the 
anemones, and will require a proportional protection. 

Planting various kinds of Bulbous and Tuberous Flower roots. 

You may still continue to plant the various kinds of bulbous and 
tuberous flower-roots, as directed in page 543, but the earlier in the 
month that you can get this accomplished the better. 

Transplanting Perennial and Biennial Flower Roots. 

Where omitted in the preceding months you should as early in 
this as possible divide (where necessary) and transplant the vari- 
ous kinds of hardy perennial and biennial fibrous-rooted plants, 
agreeably to the directions given in pages 501 and 545. 

Auriculas, Polyanthuses, Carnations, Primroses, ^c. 

The pots containing your choice auriculas, polyanthuses, carna- 
tions and double primroses should, immediately previous to the 
setting in of hard frost, be plunged to their rims close together in a 
garden frame, and there defended from heavy rains and severe frost 
by putting on the glasses and a suitable covering of mats, &c. occa- 
sionally, according to the necessity of the case. But observe, that 
as all these kinds are of a hardy nature, they must be fully exposed 
to the weather every day that is tolerably mild and dry, and even 
at night until the frost becomes rather rigorous. However, it will 
be proper to line the outside of the frame, as directed in page 567, 
for ranunculuses and anemones, the better to keep out the most 
severe frosts of the winter; for when properly protected, and not 
drawn or forced too much, they always flower better than when cut 
up by severe weather. 

Where there is not the convenience of glasses, mats and boards 
may be laid over the frame; or, if no frame, the pots may be plunged 
close together in a raised bed of dry soil or tan in a warm situation, 
and low arches made of old cask hoops, or the like, erected over 
them, on which to lay thick mats in wet or frosty weather. But in 
February, and early in March, while the frost is in the ground, or 
the leaves in a frozen state, and especially if they had been covered 
with snow, you must be particular not to expose them to a hot sun, 
which would be almost certain death to them. 



Nov.] - FLOWER GARDEN. 569 

Double Daisies. 

The beds wherein were planted your double daisies, &c. as 
directed in October, page 545, should towards the latter end of 
this month, or when the frost is likely to become severe, be pro- 
tected occasionally therefrom by a covering of mats, or when very 
severe, boards and mats, but let them have the benefit of the air 
as long and as often as the weather is mild; observing always to 
defend them from heavy rains and snow, either of which would, 
have a tendency to rot and melt them away. 

Daisies will survive the winter in a warm border, covered with 
a light coat of clean straw, which should be taken off and laid on 
occasionally in mild weather to air and harden the plants; but 
these will not blow as well nor as early in spring as those taken 
better care of. 

The daisies which were potted in September or October with a 
view to force them in winter, should be particularly attended to 
during the whole of this month, in order to strengthen and en- 
courage their growth. But if the potting of them were omitted, it 
should be done in the beginning of this month; selecting for that 
purpose the largest and best plants, and carefully removing them 
with good balls of earth round their roots. 

Protecting Seedling Bulbs. 

You should now plunge the pots or boxes in which you sowed the 
seeds of bulbous-rooted flowering plants, and also those containing 
the one or two year old seedling bulbs, up to their rims or edges 
in a raised bank of light, dry earth, or you may set them on the 
bank and fill the spaces between them with tanner's bark, or leaves 
of trees well crammed in; then on the approach of severe frosts 
cover them all over with dry straw or peas-haulm, which is to be 
taken off occasionally in mild dry weathei-, and aired, in order to 
prevent its getting mouldy, and communicating the disorder to the 
seeds or roots. 

S to ckgilly -flowers and Wall-flowers. 

Your double stockgilly-flowers and wall-fiowers in pots should 
now be either taken into the green -house or warm close rooms, or 
plunged to their rims in a dry, warm exposure, surrounded with a 
deep garden frame, where they may be protected during winter. 
These plants being tolerably hardy, will keep well by a very slight 
protection of boards and mats, or boards covered with straw or 
other litter when the frost is severe: they will seldom be injured 
before February, but a warm sun about the end of that month, if 
suffered to shine on them whilst the leaves or stems are in a frozen 
state, would totally destroy them. 

It would be of additional advantage to lay three or four inches 
of old tanner's bark over the surface of the pots, the better to pre- 
serve the roots from the frost. The plants must be aired occasion- 
ally in mild weather, for if kept too closely covered they would 
3 Z 



570 THE PLEASURE, OR [Nov. 

become blanched, weak and tender, and lose their robust growth, 
so necessary to a good bloom of flowers. 

Planting Bulbous Boots in Pots and Glasses. 

You may continue to plant the various kinds of early flowering 
bulbs in pots, as directed in page 543, but the earlier in the month 
that this is done the sooner you may expect them to flower. The 
pots are then to be placed either in a warm room, where there is 
plenty of light, or in garden frames, and treated as directed last 
month. Some of them may be immediately placed in the hot-house, 
or in a forcing frame, to be forced into an early bloom for the deco- 
ration of rooms, windows, &c. and others placed in the green-house 
for a succession. 

The early part of this month is still a very proper time to set the 
bulbs of early tulips, hyacinths, polyanthus-narcissuses, jonquils, 
dwarf Persian iris, &c. in bulb-glasses filled with water, which 
should never be sufi'ered to come higher around the roots than 
about the eighth of an inch, replenishing the water occasionally as 
it evaporates, so that it may just touch the bottom of the bulbs. 
Some of the glasses may be immediately placed in the hot-house 
for an early bloom, the others to be treated as directed in page 546. 

Taking up and Preserving the roots of Tuberoses, and Scarlet 
Amaryllises, 8j-c. 

As soon in this month as you observe the frost to injure the fo- 
liage of your tuberoses and jacobsea lilies or scarlet amaryllises and 
other very tender bulbs, which generally lie dormant in winter, take 
up the roots and spread them in a warm room, where they will be per- 
fectly secure from frost, if in a stove-room the better; in the course 
of eight or ten days, divest them of the decayed foliage and root 
fibres, and continue them spread as before till well dried, always 
taking care to preserve them from frost; when sufficiently dry pack 
them up in small boxes, in very dry saw-dust, chaft', dry moss, or 
the like, and then place the boxes in some very warm room to re- 
main during winter, where they can be effectually secure from 
frost, the least touch of which would totally destroy the roots. 

Dressing the Beds and Borders, Sfc. 

The beds of young succession or other flower-bulbs which were 
not disturbed in the present year, should now be carefully wed, 
raked over, and if any moss appears thereon, it ought to be picked 
oft; after which lay an inch or two, as may be deemed necessary, 
of good light compost all over the beds, this will assist in defend- 
ing the roots from frost, and add much to their health and vigour 
in the ensuing spring. 

Clear the beds, borders, and other compartments from fallen 
leaves of trees, and the dead stalks of annual and other plants; 
pulling up the annuals by the roots, as they never flower again, and 



Nov.] FLOWER GARDEx\. 5'j'j 

cutting down the decayed perennials to the ground. After this, 
hoe and clear the ground from all manner of weeds, and where 
there are no bulbs planted, slightly dig the ground without injuring 
any plants growing therein, and rake the surface smooth and even. 
This will prepare l^he borders, &.c. for the reception of other plants, 
and give a neat and becoming appearance to the whole during winter. 
Dig and neatly rake all the shrubbery compartments, especially 
those contiguous to the principal walks, excepting such as are laid 
down with grass, or wilderness plantations, this will destroy weeds, 
enliven the prospect, and encourage the growth of the shrubs. 

Planting Forest Trees and Ornamental Trees and Shrubs. 

All kinds of hardy trees and shrubs, especially the deciduous 
sorts, may be planted in dry soil any time this month while the 
weather continues mild, but the earlier in it that this is done the 
better. For an account of the sorts, see page 301; for designs in 
ornamental planting, see page 62, &c., and for the method of plant- 
ing, see page 301. 

Transplanting Large Trees, ^c. 

It frequently happens that people are desirous of removing large 
favourite trees or shrubs from one place to another, and as this is 
the best time to prepare for that business, I refer you for the neces- 
sary information to page 231. 

PruneFlowering- Shrubs, 8,'C. 

You may now prune and reduce into due form any hardy flow- 
ering shrubs and forest-trees, whether evergreen or deciduous; but 
the more tender sorts ought not to be pruned till spring. For the 
method of doing which, see page 164. 

Planting and Plashing Hedges. 

Ground hedges of hawthorn, beech, hornbean, honey-locust or 
any other hardy kinds of deciduous plants, may be made any time 
in this month while the weather continues open. For ample in- 
structions on this subject, see page 259, &c. 

Old hedges which are overgrown and thin, may now be plashed 
or cut down, as directed in page 268. 

Ordinary Work. 

Rake and carry away out of the walks, borders, and lawns the 
fallen leaves of trees and other rubbish; stake and tie up any large 
nev/ planted trees, to prevent their being rocked about by the wind, 
and lay mulch, long litter, or leaves, around the roots of such as are 
rather tender, to protect them from frost. 

Place small stakes and bass-mats, or long-drawn straw, bound 



572 "^HE GREEN-HOUSE. [Nov. 

around such plants of the hydrangea hortensis, prunuslauro-ceras- 
sus, China and Otaheite roses, &c.as you have planted out in warm 
well -sheltered borders. Many plants that are commonly kept in 
green-houses would abide during winter in the open ground if thus 
protected; but this should not be done till the keen frosts are just 
commencing. 

Dress gravel-walks, and mow grass-walks and lawns, after which 
roll them with a heavy roller, which will render the surface firm, 
smooth and neat during winter. Observe to do this work in dry 
open weather. Some people break up their gravel walks at this 
season, and throw them in ridges to lie so all winter, under an idea 
of destroying weeds, &c., but as this renders walks unserviceable 
at a time when a foot can scarcely be set with pleasure on any other 
part of the ground, and that a turning in spring would answer the 
end proposed, this practice ought to be abandoned. 
. Lay roses and other shrubs for propagation, and in the early part 
of the month take oft' well rooted layers, and dig up suckers of de- 
sirable kinds, which plant immediately where wanted, or into nur- 
sery-rows, to obtain age and strength. 

Turn your compost heaps of every kind and spread them so thin 
that the frosts may penetrate to the very bottoms of themj let the 
lumps be well broken, and all parts properly mixed. 

Provide materials and make new composts, agreeably to the direc- 
tions given in the preceding part of this work, in order to have them 
ready for use in the ensuing year; for the longer they are in a state 
of preparation, and the more eftectually incorporated, the better 
will all sorts thrive which may be planted therein. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

In the beginning of this month, all the hardy exotic plants which 
have been permitted to remain abroad till this time, but which re- 
quire protection in winter, should be removed into the green- 
house, or into the other places destined for their preservation. In 
the middle states, the viburnum tinus, hydrangea hortensis, prunus 
lauro-cerassus, magnolia grandiflora, China and Otaheite roses, 
lagerstroemia indica, daphne odora, aucubajaponica, double flower- 
ing pomegranate, double stocks and wallflowers, cyclamen, bella- 
donna and Guernsey lilies, with several other shrubby and herba- 
ceous kinds, will seldom suffer by being left out before the middle 
of this month, but leaving them much longer unprotected would be 
imprudent, unless your stock is so numerous that you wish to try 
experiments on their hardness. 

In mild weather your green-house plants should have plenty of 
free air admitted to them every day, by opening the glasses, &c. 
always observing to close the house in due time in the afternoon, 



Nov.] THE GREEN-HOUSE. 573 

and in wet or frosty weather: even in very severe weather, 
you may happen to find an hour or two in the middle of the day in 
which to slide down the upper lights, to admit fresh air, and suffer 
the foul to pass out; this may be often done when it would be quite 
imprudent to raise the lower sashes. But if a very rigorous frost 
should set in towards the latter end of the month, it may be neces- 
sary to make a fire in the evening, to prevent its penetrating into 
the house; however, this should not be resorted to while you can, 
keep out the frost by means of good shutters or by fastening mats in 
front of the windows at night; for too much heat at any time, but 
particularly in the early part of the season, is of serious injury to 
the green-house plants, which require nothing more than merely to 
be kept from frost. 

Occasional, but gentle waterings, must now be given to all the 
plants; some will require to be watered three times a week, while 
others, particularly the succulent kinds, will not need it more than 
a little once a week; but as the state of the weather sometimes 
makes a very material ditt'erence in this, there is no saying how 
often, or how much at a time, ought to be administered; however 
it will be safer to give a little and often, than too much at a time, 
which should now be administered in the forenoon of fine days, that 
the damp may pass oft' before the windows are shut, lest the steam 
occasioned tliereby might create a mouldiness, and injure the plants. 

Pick off all decayed leaves from the plants, and throw them out 
of the house; for if they are sui!ered to remain in it, they will rot 
and infect the air, which foul efiiuvia being imbibed by the plants, 
will infect them also, and bring on disease and vermin. 

Examine the tubs and pots occasionally, and if the earth cakes or 
binds at top, loosen it to a moderate depth; and where decayed 
branches or shoots occur, prune them off as soon as observed, and 
cast them out of the house. 

The myrtles and other plants which are in frames, or pits, must 
now be duly attended to, in like manner as those in the green-house. 
The frames or pits, to the full height of the glasses, must be lined 
around with horse-dung, leaves, straw, fern or the like, to keep the 
frost from penetrating in at the sides and ends; the plants must have 
plenty of fresh air at all favourable opportunities, and be effectually 
protected at night and in frosty weather, by laying a sufficient 
covering of mats, straw, boards, &c. over the glasses, observing not 
to deprive them of the benefit of light but while absolute necessity 
requires it. 

Preserving tender Bulbs, ^-c. 

As some persons who have not the convenience of a hot-house 
may be desirous of having some tender exotic bulbous and tuberous 
rooted plants, such as crinums, pancratiums, arums, amomum 
zingiber, or true ginger, &c. These and such like roots may, in the 
beginning of this month, be taken up and carefully dried as you do 
tuberoses, and then packed up in very dry sand, or in extremely 
dry moss, observing to keep them during winter completely out of 



574' ' THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Nov. 

the reach of frost or moisture. About the beginning or middle of 
April, you may plant them in pots, which should be plunged in a 
temperate hot-bed, and give the roots but very little water till they' 
produce foliage and are growing freely: towards the latter end of 
May the pots maybe placed in the open air, to remain till the latter 
end of September, when they should be taken in, and placed in the 
green-house, or in the windows of some warm room till this time; 
then to be treated as above. Or you may keep up the roots till the 
middle of May, and then plant them even in the open ground; after 
■which they will grow considerably before autumn, but not flower 
quite as strong as if properly kept in a hot-house. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

It is to be presumed that your tan-pits have been renewed, and 
all your pots containing pine and other tender plants duly arranged 
in the course of the last and preceding month, as then directed; but 
should it happen by any disappointment, that this could not have 
been effected, it ought on no account to be omitted in the first week 
of this month. 

As the cold weather advances the fires in the stove should be 
increased proportionably, being careful not to overheat the air, lest 
thereby the plants shoot too freely, which would be a serious injury 
to them at this season, by rendering them more tender, and conse- 
quently less able to endure the vicissitudes of the ensuing winter; 
besides, the most forward of the pine-plants might start to fruit, 
which would ruin all your expectations; nor should the air be kept 
too cold, that is, the spirits in the thermometer of Fahrenheit suf- 
fered to get lower night or day than 52 or 54 degrees, lest the pines 
become stunted, and many of the curious exotics lose their leaves;- 
and perhaps their extreme parts decay for want of that degree of 
heat so necessary and so congenial to their constitutions. 

Give water occasionally to such plants as want it in moderate 
proportions, and not too much at a time, for they cannot now dis- 
charge it so freely as in summer; observing that it stands at least 
twenty-four hours in the stove before you use it, to acquire the same 
degree of heat as the air of the house. 

Fresh air must be admitted into the house every mild and warm 
day while the weather continues open, but especially when the ther- 
mometer is above 62 or 63 degrees; you must be attentive, how- 
ever, to close the house immediately on any sudden unfavourable 
change of weather, and always sufficiently early in the afternoon to 
retain a considerable warmth in the house during the night, which 
will, sometimes; in the early part of the month, supersede the 
necessity of fire, or at least of but very little. 

The art of managing tender exotic plants consists principally in 



Nov.] THE HOT-HOUSE. 575 

keeeping the air of the stove or hot-house in a proper and regular 
temperature of heat, in duly proportioning the quantity of water to 
the different natures and necessities of the various kinds of plants, 
in judiciously admitting a sufficiency of air at suitable opportuni- 
ties, and in keeping the bark-pits in a proper state of fermentation; 
all which must be duly attended to, or the desired success cannot 
be expected. 

Pick off' constantly all the decayed leaves from the plants, and 
throw them out of the house; clean their leaves and stems from 
.filth, which many kinds are subject to contract; wash off" and 
destroy all insects which infest any of them, frequently stir the 
surface earth in the pots to keep it from contracting moss, &c., and 
keep all the house clean, sweet, and in neat order. 

Care of Young Succession Pines and other Plants. 

The young pines or other plants in succession houses must have 
the same care as above; and those in bark-beds, under garden 
frames, are to be diligently attended to; the outside lining must be 
kept to the full height of the frame all around, and in a regular and 
constant state of warmth; the glasses must be carefully and suffi- 
ciently covered every night, and by day in a very severe frost, but 
the plants should have as much light as possible, and air whenever 
it can be given with safety: decayed leaves must constantly be 
picked off" and taken out of the frame, but watering will seldom be 
necessary at this season, as the steam arising from the bed will 
occasion a moist atmosphere about the plants. Observe that the 
more succulent kinds will not keep as well in such a place as in a 
dry stove, or on shelves in the hot-house. 

The garden pits erected with brick and furnished with flues, in 
which you have tender exotic plants, must also have a lining of 
hot dung placed around them to their full height, in order to prevent 
the frost from penetrating in through the wall; moderate fires must 
be made in the flues every evening, and in severe weather to keep 
up the internal heat when that of the pit is found not to be suffi- 
ciently strong: the glasses must be well covered with mats, &c. 
every night, and even by day when the weather is cloudy and the 
frost very severe. 



576 



MtttmMv. 



WORK TO BE DONE IN THE KITCHEN GARDEN. 

This is very frequently one of the most severe of our winter 
months, and every judicious gardener will be well provided against 
its rigour by having all his frames lined around as directed in No- 
vember, and being well supplied with the necessary mats and other 
covering. If this provision be neglected, he may be taken, as it 
were, by surprise, and in one or two nights lose a great number of 
valuable plants. 

Should the weather prove mild, and the ground continue open 
in the beginning of the month, which seldom happens in the middle 
or eastern states, you may complete any work recommended to be 
done in November, and then unavoidably omitted; such as dressing 
asparagus and artichoke beds, taking up and putting into a state of 
preservation, cabbages, turnips, parsneps, carrots, beets, celery, 
endive, cardoons, salsafy, scorzonera, &c. But the many chances 
that are against your being able to accomplish this work in Decem- 
ber, ought to induce you to double your diligence in November, 
and complete every thing in due season. 

Cauliflower and Cabbage Plants. 

Every mild day observe to uncover your cauliflower plants which 
are under frames and glasses, that they may enjoy the free air, 
otherwise they will draw up and become weak: constantly pick oft' 
all decayed leaves, which, if suftered to remain on, would be very 
injurious to the plants, especially if it should happen, as it fre- 
quently does in this month, that the weather should be so severe as 
to render it imprudent to uncover the beds for several days suc- 
cessively; for when these decayed leaves rot, they emit a rancid 
vapour, which, mixing with the confined air of the beds, renders it 
very unwholesome for the plants. 

When it is not safe to take off the lights entirely, in the middle 
of the day, let them be raised upon props two or three inches at 
the back of the frames, to let in fresh air to the plants. 

The glasses must be covered every night with mats, straw, fern, 
or some other long, dry litter, and even in the day time when the 
frost is very rigorous; but no opportunity ought to be missed to 
admit light to the plants, and to give them air when it can be done 
with safety. The frame containing them must be carefully lined 
all around the outside, as directed in November, to prevent the 
frost from penetrating in at the sides and ends thereof. 

Some will consider this rather troublesome, but it will be found 



Dec] the KITCHEN GARDEN, 577 

much less so than to sow the seed in January or February, and 
nurse, and once or twice transplant the young seedlings during the 
remainder of the winter and spring; besides, the autumn sown 
plants when taken proper care of, will produce much larger and 
better heads than those sown in winter or spring, and be earlier and 
more certain. 

The early Smyrna, York, sugar-loaf, and other tender kinds of 
cabbage plants, require exactly the same treatment as the cauli- 
flower, but being more hardy less covering will be necessary, and 
more air may with safety be admitted. There is nothing more in- 
jurious to either, than to be kept too closely covered; therefore na 
opportunity, if but for half an hour at a time, ought to be omitted 
to admit light and air, when it can be done with any tolerable de- 
gree of safety. 

The Savoy, flat Dutch, drum-head, and other late kinds, will 
keep when planted in warm borders with very little protection; 
arches made of old hoops, &c., should be erected over them on 
which to lay mats, straw, branches of evergreen trees, or shrubs, 
&c. For further particulars, see page 513. 

Care of Lettuce Plants. 

The care of lettuce plants being the same now as in the ensuing 
month, I refer you for the necessary instructions to page 18, and 
also to page 512. 

Small Salading. 

Where small salading, such as cresses, rape, mustard, lettuce^ 
radish, &c. is required at this season, these seeds must be sown in 
a hot-bed, protected with a good frame and glasses, and also sufii- 
cient covering of mats, &c., but care must be taken not to cover 
the seeds deeper with earth than what is barely sufficient to hide 
them. 

Keep the glasses constantly over them, and admit air to the 
plants every day when the weather is mild, by raising the lights a 
little behind, otherwise they will be apt to become mouldy and 
decay. It is almost unnecessary to say that the glasses must be 
kept well covered every night, and even in the day time during 
extremely severe weather. 

Mushrooms. 

Particular care must now be taken to preserve the mushroom 
beds from frost or wet, either of which would destroy the spawn, 
and render the beds unproductive. They must consequently be 
covered with a sufficient depth of dry straw, and over this mats: 
after heavy rains or snow they should be examined, and if you find 
the covering next the earth of the beds wet, take it totally away 
and immediately replace it with dry straw. Where the necessary 
and proper care is taken, there will be a constant supply of mush- 
4 A 



578 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Dec. 

rooms for the table even in the most rigorous seasons. Observe 
the general directions given in page 516, &c. 

Forcing Asparagus. 

Hot-beds may now be made for forcing asparagus, to supply the 
table about the latter end of January; for at this season it will be 
full six weeks from the time of making the beds before the aspa- 
ragus will be fit to cut, presuming the beds to be kept of a due 
temperature of heat. For the method of making and managing 
them see page 121, &c. 

Ordinary Work. 

If the weather continues open carry dung into the quarters of 
the kitchen garden, spread it, and trench the ground, laying it in 
high sloping ridges to be mellowed by the frost, &c. 

When the ground is frozen that it cannot be dug, cart or carry 
in manure, and lay it down in convenient places, to have it at hand 
when the frost goes off; repair the fences of the garden where ne- 
cessary; if you have any seeds remaining in their pods or capsules, 
beat or rub out and clean them so as to be ready for sowing when 
wanted; prepare all tools which may be necessary in spring, that 
there may be no delay when the season is favourable for commenc- 
ing your early cropping. 

Provide from the woods, &c. pea-sticks and bean-poles of every 
size; dress and point them, that they maybe in complete readiness 
when wanted; collect all your old sticks and poles which are yet 
fit for use, and lay them with the new ones under the protection of 
some shed to prevent their rotting by wet, &c. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

In such of the southern states as have but very slight frosts in 
winter, you may, in addition to other necessary work, sow on warm 
borders for early crops, small quantities of carrots, parsneps, onions, 
beets, radish, lettuce, spinage and parsley, &c.; earth up late celery 
and cardoons, tie up endive for blanching, and plant out in rows 
up to their heads such of the cabbage tribe as are intended for seed, 
covering their heads with straw if found necessary, to preserve 
them from frost or wet. Take care to set each kind apart by itself, 
and at a considerable distance from any other, for if contagious, the 
farina of the one when in blossom would impregnate the seeds in 
the ovaries of the other, whereby the whole would become bastard- 
ized, and you would have neither kind in its original purity. 

Plant early Mazagan, Lisbon, long-pod, and Windsor beans, and 
sow early-frame, golden, and Charleton hotspur peas; earth up the 
crops of peas and beans which were sowed in the preceding months, 
as they advance in growth, and if there is any danger to be appre- 
hended from frost, cover them at night and in severe weather with 



Dbc] the kitchen garden. 579 

long dry straw, which can be conveniently removed when a favour- 
able change takes place, and laid on again when found necessary. 

Plant out garlic, rocambole, and shallots, likewise large onions, 
for seed, and sow as directed in March the seeds of rhubarb, sea- 
kale, skerrets, alesanders, dill, and such other kinds of seeds as do 
not vegetate freely when kept out of the ground till spring. 



THE FRUIT GARDEN. 

Improving the Borders, 8fc. 

You may now carry well-rotted old dung, rich earth, or compost, 
and spread it on the borders in which are planted wall or espalier 
trees, this will protect the roots during winter; in spring, when dug 
in, it will add new vigour to the trees, and the advantage will be 
very evident in the ensuing crops. Standard fruit trees of every 
kind will be greatly improved by similar treatment, especially if 
the ground is become poor or any way exhausted. 

Protecting the roots of new -planted Trees. 

In the early part of this month, if omitted in November, you 
should lay wispy dung, straw, or long litter of some kind over the 
roots of those trees which were planted last spring or in the pre- 
ceding months, to prevent the frost from having too great an effect 
on their young and yet tender fibres; this in very rigorous seasons 
often does considerable injury to young trees, and sometimes lays 
the foundation of diseases which ultimately destroy them. 

Figs in particular will require this attention, and besides, the 
tops and stems of the tender kinds should be covered with mats, or 
other suitable protection where the frosts are extremely severe. 

Pruning Apples and Pears on Espaliers, <^c. 

Apples and pears being perfectly hardy, may now be pruned if 
the weather happens to be mild, agreeably to the directions given 
in page 25; but if this is not deemed necessary on account of dis- 
patching business when it can conveniently be done, it will be rather 
better to defer pruning till the latter end of February, unless you 
do it before the severe frosts set in. 

As to the pruning of stone fruit trees, I would not recommend 
it to be done in the middle or eastern states at this season, for the 
reasons assigned in page 223, &c., but in the southern states it may 
be now performed with the greatest safety. 

Gooseberries and currants being extremely hardy, may be pruned 
in any of the winter months; but where it is intended to propagate 
the best kinds from the cuttings, it will not be advisable to prune 



580 THE KITCHEN GARDEN. [Dec. 

or dress them when the ground is so frozen as to prevent your being 
able to plant the good cuttings taken off in pruning. 

Other necessary Work. 

You must be careful to keep the frost out of the apartments where 
the choice winter fruits are put up, for should any of them get fro- 
zen they would certainly decay soon after, and rot the others about 
them. Examine the fruit which you have on shelves in dry warm 
cellars, once every ten days, and take away any that you find taint- 
ed: continue over them near a foot thick of clean dry straw, and 
secure the windows and doors from the admission of frost. 

Take off all moss from your fruit trees, and when it is gathered, 
carry it quite out of the garden to prevent its multiplying by seed, 
which it is very apt to do. 

Nail or tie up the dangling shoots which are loose on walls or 
espaliers, to prevent their being dashed about by the winds, and 
consequently their bark injured. 

Repair all your decayed espaliers, or prepare stakes and other 
materials for so doing as soon as the frost gets out of the ground. 

Make or provide and paint such new frame-work trellises as you 
intend to erect next spring, and do every other work that may have 
a tendency to forward your business at that season. 

Prepare for Forcing Fruit Trees. 

Towards the latter end of this, or the beginning of next month, 
put on the glasses or lights on your fire-heat forcing-frames, such 
as are described in page 40, and immediately prune and nail up the 
trees in regular order, if not done before. 

By this method the trees will not be so sensible of the sudden 
transition from the depth of winter to spring, when you kindle fires, 
as they would if the lights were not now put on; and it will gradu- 
ally bring your trees to a state of vegetation, for the works of na- 
ture are performed by degrees, and not in a hurry. For general 
information respecting the constructing of forcing-fames and houses, 
of every kind, and the methods of working them, see the Fruit 
Garden for January, ^c. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

In such of the southern states as have not severe frost in winter, 
you may now prune apples, pears, plums, cherries, peaches, necta- 
rines and apricotsi quinces, raspberries, currants, gooseberries, and 
every other kind of fruit-tree, the orange family and the fig ex- 
cepted. You may also plant all the above, and any other sorts with 
great propriety at this season, excepting the orange family only. 
For the methods of pruning see January, and of planting, see March. 



581 



THE ORCHARD. 

Apples and pear-trees that are in good health, may now be 
pruned agreeably to the directions given in page 45, &c. to which 
I particularly refer you; but it will be better to defer the pruning 
of stone fruit trees to February, and of all trees that are in a bad 
state of health to the beginning of March, in which month, (page 
223, &c.) you will find the best methods of treating them for the 
restoration of their health and vigour. 

Rub and scrape off moss wherever it appears on your fruit-trees, 
it robs them of their nourishment, prevents their free perspiration, 
and is an enemy to them in every way. 

You may now cart manure into the orchard, and spread it over 
the whole ground, if necessary, or over the roots of such trees as 
you think are in most need of itj this will not only be of very con- 
siderable service to the trees, but also to any crops of grass or 
grain, &c. that you expect oft' the place the ensuing seasons. 

It will be of considerable advantage to new planted trees to lay 
long litter, &c. around their roots to protect them from frost, as 
directed in the Fndt Garden for this month. 

The hedges which enclose your orchard and other compartments, 
and that are grown tall, straggling, and thin, may now be cut down 
and plashed, as directed in page 268; you need be under no appre- 
hension of their suftering by frost, especially the white-thorns. 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

When the ground continues open in winter, or so much so as 
not to interrupt the operation of ploughing, you may manure your 
orchards, and plough such of them as you intend to lay down with 
clover, or grass of any kind, or to raise crops of grain or potatoes 
in. You may likewise continue to plant and prune all manner of 
hardy fruit-trees, but particularly those mentioned in the Fruit 
Garden for this month. Here I would recommend to your atten- 
tion, the perusal of the article Orchard in January, page 45, Febru- 
ary, page 140, and March, page 223. 



THE VINEYARD. 

In the middle and eastern states, little remains to be done in the 
vineyard at this season; indeed it sometimes happens in the former 
that the ground is open in the beginning of the month, in which 



582 THE NURSERY. [Dec. 

case you may plough between the young vines and earth them up, 
as directed in November, if then omitted. It will be of consider- 
able use to lay some litter around the roots and a little way up the 
stems of such tender kinds as were planted in the preceding spring 
and autumn, to protect them from very severe frost, till they are 
once fully established. For further particulars of what may be done 
in this month, in and for the vineyard, as well as in the ensuing, 
see page 48. 

In the southern states you may now prune vines, as directed in 
February; and south of the thirty-fifth degree of latitude, vineyards 
may be planted agreeably to the instructions given in March. 



THE NURSERY. 

New Planted Trees. 

Continue the care of the more curious and tender sorts of 
new-planted trees and shrubs; where there was no litter laid be- 
tween the rows in November, let it be no longer neglected, and 
bring it up close to their stems the better to protect all the roots 
from frost, should the winter prove so severe as to destroy their 
tops, which may also be protected as directed in page 590. The 
roots and lower parts of their stems being thus preserved they will 
generally shoot out freely in the ensuing spring from the near sur- 
face of the ground. ■ 

Seedling Trees. 

Seedlings which make but slow progress in growth the first 
year, such as pines, &c. must now be taken due care of, as directed 
in page 565. 

The beds of acorns, and of any other tree seeds that were sown 
in the preceding months, would be greatly benefitted by laying 
peas-straw, fern, leaves, straw, or other long litter over them 
during the continuance of hard frost; but this must be removed as 
soon as the frost is out of the ground in spring, otherwise it will 
invite a resort of mice, &c. to destroy the seeds. 

Protecting Trees and Shrubs, Sfc. in Pots. 

The tall growing plants in pots which are plunged in warm bor- 
ders, and the pots covered with tan as directed in page 565, may, 
if the kinds are rather tender, require an awning of mats or strong 
canvass over them to protect them from cutting winds, which are 
always very injurious to tender plants. The other tender plants, 
both shrubby and herbaceous, which you have in pots in frames, 
must be duly attended to, as directed in page 573. 



Dec] flower GARDEN. 583 

SOUTHERN STATES. 

Where the ground is open and in good condition for tvorklng, 
this is a very proper time to sov/ hawthoi'n, holly, yew, mezereon, 
red cedar, juniper and pyracantha berries, and all other seeds that 
require a year's previous preparation, such as stewartia malaco- 
dendron, ash, euonymus, hornbean, celastrus scandans, nyssa, and 
many other sorts. For the method of performing this work, see 
the Nursery for February. 

Continue to dig between the rows of young trees and shrubs, and 
forward the manuring and trenching of such pieces of ground as 
are to be planted with young trees in the ensuing months. 

You may still continue to make layers and plant cuttings of any 
kinds of trees and shrubs that succeed by these means, and also dig 
up and transplant suckers. Prune roses and other hardy shrubs, 
also forest and young fruit trees in training. Plant out into nursery 
rows the various kinds of hardy deciduous trees and shrubs, as 
directed in Marchj but let it be remembered that these instruc- 
tions are exclusively intended for such parts of the Union as have 
not frost during winter sufficient to prevent the ploughing of 
ground. 



THE PLEASURE, OR FLOWER GARDEN. 

Tulips, Hyacinths, Anemones, and Ranunculuses. 

Continue to protect your beds of choice tulips, hyacinths, ane- 
mones and ranunculuses as directed last month; this will be indis- 
pensable at present, as December is generally one of the most 
severe and cutting months in the year. It would be unnecessary 
in this place to repeat all the instructions given in November for 
that purpose, and therefore I refer you to page 567, &c. for infor- 
mation. 

Some of the Van Thol and other early tulips which were planted 
in pots in October, may, towards the end of this month, be placed 
in the hot-house, or in any other forcing department, to produce a 
winter bloom of flowers. Early hyacinths, spring crocuses, snow- 
drops, dwarf Persian iris, and polyanthus-narcissus may now be 
forced in like manner; but observe that you are to reserve a suffi- 
ciency of each sort for several successions, so as to have a con- 
stant supply of flowers until those in the open ground begin to 
blow. 

When the plants are just beginning to flower some of them may 
be taken in to decorate parlours and other rooms. 



584 THE PLEASURE, OR [Dec. 

Care of .Auriculas and Carnations. 

Your choice auriculas and carnations must now be defended from 
heavy rains, frost, and snowj but large portions of air must be 
admitted to them at every favourable opportunity, otherwise the 
auriculas will start to flower at an untimely season, and the carna- 
tions will draw, become weakly, and be good for nothing. Neither 
of them are very tender, and consequently should not be kept too 
closely shut up. 

Polyanthuses and Double Primroses. 

The fine polyanthuses and double primroses require exactly the 
same treatment as the auriculas and carnations, which need not be 
repeated J the common polyanthuses and primroses will succeed 
very well in the open borders, but will be the better of a slight 
covering of straw during the continuance of severe frost. 

Sowing Anemone and Ranunculus Seeds. 

The double varieties of the Anemone hortensis, or broad-leaved 
garden anemone, and Anemone coronaria, or narrow-leaved, as 
well as of the Ranunculus persica, or Persian ranunculus, being 
generally extremely beautiful, are peculiarly deserving of attention; 
as all those delightful flowers, displaying such a diversity of shades 
and colours, are only seminal varieties, and as the number of them 
may be annually increased, and superior varieties obtained, no good 
florist will neglect to sow seeds of each sort every year. 

The seeds of either kind should be procured from semi-double 
flowers, for the full double seldom bear any, and those produced 
by the single rarely give double flowers. Care should be taken to 
save the seeds from flowers possessed of good properties, that is, 
such as have tall strong stems, a considerable number of well- 
formed petals of rich, good and brilliant colours. 

The seed of the ranunculus should remain on the plant till it has 
lost its verdure and becomes brown and dry, it may then be cut off 
and spread upon paper in a dry room exposed to the air; when 
perfectly dry it should be put into a paper bag and kept free from 
all dampness till the time of sowing, otherwise it would be in 
danger of contracting a mouldiness that would infallibly destroy it. 
The anemone seed must be gathered from time to time as it opens; 
for being very downy and light, it will otherwise be blown away 
by the first breezes of wind, or fall to the ground and be lost. 

It would be found very difiicult to sow anemone seed in a regular 
manner: it is united with, and enveloped in a downy substance, 
that, upon being put together in quantity, adheres in such a manner 
as to render it necessary to rub it between the hands for a consi- 
derable time in dry sand previous to sowing; otherwise the young 
plants would rise in clusters, and not have space enough to form 
their roots. 



Dec] flower GARDEN. 585 

When you are ready to sow your ranunculus seed, take it out of 
the bag, and if the weather be damp, spread it thin upon a sheet of 
paper, before a moderate fire, till it is just warm, and no more; 
then rub it out and clean it perfectly from any pieces of the stalk, 
dried petals of the flower or other extraneous matter, which, if 
sown with it, would create a mouldiness of very destructive con- 
sequence. 

The last ten days of December, any time in January, or even the 
first week of February, the seeds may be sown, but when conve- 
nient, the early sowing is preferable. Each kind should be sown 
separately in shallow frames (of either one, two or three lights, 
according to the quantity) provided with glasses, similar to those 
made use of for cucumbers and melons; the soil should be taken 
out at least two feet deep, and replaced with good and suitable 
soil, such as is directed in page 542; out of which the earth-worms 
should be carefully picked, for these are extremely destructive to 
the young plant, which they draw from a considerable distance 
into their holes for nutriment. 

When the pit is filled, so as to reach about six inches up the 
sides and ends of the frame, it should be suffered to remain a few 
days to settle; then the surface should be made perfectly smooth 
and even, and the seed sown upon it with the utmost regularity, 
in such quantity as nearly to cover it, for accidents will befall 
many of them; the glasses should be placed on immediately, and 
the frame kept closely covered with them for two or three days, till 
the seeds begin to swell, observing to cover the glasses effectually 
at night and in severe weather, to keep out the frost, and also line 
the outside of the frame all around to its full height with tan, leaves, 
or horse-dung, for a similar purpose: a little light earth should 
then be sifted over the seed through a fine sieve, but not sufiicient 
to cover it, this should be repeated once or twice a week till the 
greater part of the seed disappears. It is proper to remark in this 
place that such seed as happens to be covered deeper than the 
thickness of a dollar will never vegetate, and must of course inevi- 
tably perish. 

Mr. Millar, in his Gardener's Dictionary, recommends the cover- 
ing of anemone and ranunculus seeds about a quarter of an inch 
deep; he is followed by Maw and Abercrombie, as well as several 
other writers; and although these authorities are very respectable, 
yet with me it is very questionable that either of them ever raised 
an anemone or ranunculus in their lives from seed covered to that 
depth, but more particularly the latter. 

It is necessary to keep the seed moderately moist by gentle 
occasional waterings with soft water that has been exposed to the 
sun or to fire heat till the cold chill is off; this should be given 
from the rose of a small watering pot, which rose should be of a 
hemispherical form, and perforated with very small holes that will 
discharge fine streams of water in a very distinct and regular man- 
ner; this should be made of copper, it being less liable to corrode 
than iron. 

But although it is necessary to the vegetation of the seed that it 
4 B 



586 THE PLEASURE, OR [Dec. 

be kept moderately moist, too great a degree of moisture is never- 
theless injurious, especially to the commencement of the spring 
heat, and indeed at any period. 

When the young plants begin to appear, which, if sown in De- 
cember or early in January, will generally happen about the latter 
end of February, earlier or later, according to the temperature of 
the weather and the care taken of the frame, refresh them occa- 
sionally with gentle waterings, and give them air at every favour- 
able opportunity; but be sure to keep the glasses close in very cold 
weather, and well covered at night; observing, also, as the sun gets 
powerful, to screen the plants from its mid-day influence, which 
sometimes would in one hour destroy the whole. 

As the spring advances more and more air must be admitted, 
and on fine days the plants totally exposed, except to a scorching 
sun, so as to have them by the latter end of April, or as soon as 
the smart night frosts are over, so hardened as to bear the open air 
night and day; observing to keep them regularly watered, and to 
give them the advantage of fine warm showers of rain, when such 
happen in due time. 

This kind of management is to be continued till the roots are 
matured, always taking care to protect the plants by a screen of 
hurdles or thin bass-mats laid over the frame from the too powerful 
influence of the sun, but never keeping this covering over them 
longer than necessary. Their maturity will be known by the 
foliage becoming brown, dry, and nearly consumed, which gene- 
rally happens in the middle states towards the latter end of June, 
or early in July. 

The speediest and safest method of taking up these small roots is 
to pare off' the earth three inches deep, having previously picked 
off" the dried leaves and any other extraneous matter that may be 
found on the bed. The earth and roots thus collected are to be 
thrown into a tine wire sieve that will not permit the smallest roots 
to pass through it, which is to be worked in a large vessel or tub 
of water nearly filled, the earthy parts will dissolve and wash away 
and the roots remain in the sieve, which maybe easily picked from 
the stones, &c. The upper rim of the sieve must at all times be 
held above the surface of the water, otherwise some of the small 
roots will float over and be lost. The roots are then to be dried 
and preserved, as directed for the large roots in page 416, till the 
latter end of September or early in October, when they are to be 
planted and managed as in pages 542 and 543; observing that they 
(being small) maybe planted somewhat closer than the large roots, 
and will not require to be covered quite so deep. 

The ensuing season several of the largest roots will flower, espe- 
cially the ranunculuses, and all of them the third year, at which 
time you should carefully mark such as are worthy of being pre- 
served, the others may be planted in small clumps in the warm 
borders of the garden and pleasure-grounds, there to take chance. 
The valuable kinds must be subsequently increased by offsets. 

Those who desire to raise these plants upon a small scale, may 
sow the seeds in boxes, large pots, or sarden pajiSj of good compost. 



Dec] flower GARDEN. 587 

observing to have the bottoms of the boxes, previous to their being 
filled, bored with several augur holes, which are to be covered with 
shells or the like, to suffer anj extra moisture to pass away freely. 
But the former method is much more preferable. 

Sowing Auricula, Polyanthus, and Cyclamen seeds. 

The surest and best method to obtain fine auriculas from seed, 
is as follows. In the first place the seed should be saved from 
young, healthy, strong plants, of capital high-coloured sorts, pos- 
sessing the first rate properties: these on the approach of bloom, 
should be detached from the rest, to some distant part of tbe gar- 
den, for fear of the farina of indifferent sorts contaminating them, 
and there exposed to the full air, the sun (except when too violent) 
and moderate rains; from an excess of which, the plants are to be 
protected by mats laid on hoops, or by small hand-glasses. In dry 
weather these plants must be regularly watered, as often as they 
appear to require it: much depends on a due attention to this par- 
ticular point. 

The seed will commonly ripen in June; it is advisable frequently 
to visit the plants at that season, and carefully to gather such pods 
or heads of seed as appear perfectly dry, brown, and begin to open; 
if all the pods on the same stem are ripe together they maybe cut 
off" with part of the stem to which they are connected; but if some 
of the pods are not sufficiently ripe, such as are, should be carefully 
picked from the rest as they become so. The seed thus collected, 
should remain in the pericarpiums or seed vessels, in a dry room, 
till the season of sowing. 

In the last week of December, any time in January, or in the 
early part of February, the seed may be sown with every prospect 
of success, provided you have the necessary conveniences. The 
early sown seeds, if well managed, will vegetate better, and the 
plants raise more numerously than the late: besides, it will be of 
serious importance to give the plants the advantage of a long spring 
vegetation, that they may be as strong as possible before the sum- 
mer heat sets in, which to seedling auriculas and polyanthuses is 
very destructive, and even to the full grown plants; but if there is 
not a suitable convenience, and an opportunity of paying the ne- 
cessary attention, it will be better to defer the sowing till February. 

A hot-bed must be prepared, as for early seedling cucumbers, 
and a good frame and glass-light set thereon, with five or six inches 
of fine earth laid all over the bed, to keep down the steam. Pro- 
vide a box or boxes about five or six inches deep, with several holes 
on the bottom; fill it with compost, and gently shake and strike it 
against the ground, till the earth settles a little; make the surface 
perfectly smooth and even, and sow the seed with the utmost regu- 
larity; then sift through a fine wired sieve a little compost or wil- 
low mould upon it, sufficient only to just cover the seed, and place 
the box in the frame on the surface of the bed; the glass must be 
set on immediately and the bed so managed as to preserve a mode- 



L 



588 THE PLEASURE, OR [Dec. 

rate and equal degree of warmth both day and night, but must be 
occasionally opened, or the light raised up at the higher end, to 
admit fresh air, and to suffer the exhalations from the bed to pass 
away, which is a very essential point. 

The earth must always be kept moderately moist, both before 
and after the plants appear, but never wetj the best method of 
watering it is by means of a hard clothes-brush, dipped into soft 
water, which has had its chill taken off" by standing for some time 
in the sun or in the frame; the hair side being quickly turned 
upwards, and the hand rubbed briskly over it, will cause the water 
to fly off' in particles almost as fine as dew; a sufficient watering 
may in this manner be given in a few minutes. If it is found 
impossible to preserve a due heat in the first bed till the seed has 
all vegetated, it will be proper to prepare a second into which to 
remove the box; but if there are cucumber frames, &c. at work, the 
box may be removed into any of them that supports a good tempe- 
rate heat. 

At the expiration of four or five weeks, if well managed, the 
young plants will have all made their appearance; it then becomes 
necessary to give them, very gradually, more air, in order to harden 
and render them fit, in due time, for an entire exposure to it. In 
the month of March the plants, if forward, should be fully exposed 
to the open air for a few hours in the middle of mild days, when 
the sun is not too powerful, but particularly to light warm rains. 
As to their subsequent treatment, see the Flower Garden for ^pril 
and the months following. 

If you are apprehensive of the young seedlings being attacked 
by snails, &c., which they are very subject to, place a hair band 
round the box when you sow the seed, as directed in page 159. 

Polyanthus seed and seedlings are to be treated exactly in the 
same manner as those of Auricula. 

Cyclamen seeds of every kind may be sown in boxes during any 
of the autumn or winter months, even to the middle of February, 
but when kept out of ground much later, most of them will not 
vegetate till the spring following; they may be treated generally 
as directed in page 418, observing always to protect them from 
frost. The Cyclamen indicum being a hot-house plant, its seed 
must be treated accordingly: this species differs from the others in 
not having the divisions of the corolla or flower reflexed or turned 
back, but hanging down, and in the whole corolla being much larger 
than either of the Persian or European kinds. The former kinds 
will require no bottom heat, but should be carefully protected by a 
good frame and glasses, well covered at night and in severe weather, 
so as to prevent the earth in the inside from becoming frozen, but 
more particularly after the plants appear; the latter kind must be 
sown in a box, which is to be placed in a good hot-b6d, as directed 
for anemone seed, and constantly treated as a hot-house plant, 
or it may be plunged in the bark-bed of any forcing department 
and there taken proper care of. 



Dec] flower GARDEN. 589 

Double Daisies. 

Continue to protect and treat your double daisies as directed in 
page 569. You may now place a few of the best plants which you 
have in pots, in some of the forcing apartments, to promote an early 
bloom. 

Planting Bulbous Boots. 

In the early part of this month, should the weather continue open, 
or that it is practicable to work the ground, you may plant hya- 
cinths, jonquils, tulips, double narcissus, star of Bethlehem, cro- 
cuses, snowdrops, or any other hardy kinds of bulbs that yet re- 
main out of ground; but it is wrong, if it can be avoided, to defer 
the planting of them to this time. However, it will be better at all 
events, to plant the above kinds now, should it be practicable, than 
to keep them up till spring; but it will be very proper, and indeed 
I may say necessary, to cover the newly-planted beds immediately 
with straw or other light covering, for such roots as have not pro- 
duced fibres before the setting in of frost, are much more vulnerable 
to it than those that have. 

Polyanthus-narcissus, anemones, or ranunculuses, should not be 
planted in the middle or eastern states at this season, unless they 
are effectually protected afterwards from rain, snow, and frost; I 
would rather advise to preserve them carefully in dry sand till the 
early part of March, or even the middle of that month. 

Protect Seedling Bulbs, <^c. 

The various kinds of seedling bulbs should now be carefully pro- 
tected as directed in page 569, otherwise many of them will be in- 
jured. The boxes in which were sowed, in the preceding months, 
the seeds of bulbous-rooted flowers, should be treated in like man- 



Protecting Stocks, Wall/lowers, ^c. 

Your double stock-gillyflowers, wallflowers, and other plants of 
similar constitutions, which are in frames, must have protection 
from rain, snow, and severe frost; and it will be necessary during 
winter, to give them the full benefit of the air for a few hours in 
the middle of mild days, but by no means to expose them or any 
other tender plants to a hot sun whilst in a frozen state. 

New-planted Shrubs and Trees. 

The more tender or choice kinds of shrubs and trees which were 
planted last spring, or in the preceding month, should now have 
their roots well protected from frost by laying some wispy dung, 
or long litter all around the plants. Some kinds may even require 
to have their tops matted around, or each to be completely enveloped 



k 



590 THE GREEN-HOUSE. [Dec. 

in a coat of long straw, reachin^rom the ground to the top of the 
plant, and terminating there in a point, the whole assuming the 
form of a sugarloaf. The straw is to be supported bj placing 
slender sticks in the earth around the shrub, the tops of which are to 
be tied together over it; a few willow twigs should be worked in 
between these sticks to prevent the straw from falling in, which, 
when laid on, is to be bound around by hay bands, willows, or the 
like. 

Hydrangea hortensis, China and Otaheite roses, prunus lauro- 
cerassus, and small plants of magnolia grandiflora, lagerstroeraia 
indica, double pomegranate and many other valuable shrubs may 
be preserved in good condition by this means, and ultimately inured 
to the winter frosts without much injury; observe that the covering 
is not to be disturbed before the middle of March in the middle 
states, or the beginning of April in the eastern states; and even 
then, it is to be taken off by piece-meal and not all at once, for too 
sudden an exposure might do them considerable injury should a 
hard frost or cutting winds ensue. 

Other Useful Work. 

Should the weather prove open in the early part of the month, 
you may continue to prune hardy shrubs and trees; spread your 
compost heaps if not done last month, and prepare more if neces- 
sary; rake off the fallen leaves of trees, and dig among your clumps 
and shrubbery plantations. 

In hard frosty weather, when little else can be done in the gar- 
den than the covering and uncovering of tender plants, &c., prepare 
label sticks to mark or number the various flowers and seeds when 
they are planted or sown, and prepare all the tools and every other 
necessary convenience for your spring operations. 



THE GREEN-HOUSE. 

It generally happens that the weather is extremely rigorous in 
this month; therefore, more than ordinary attention must be paid 
to the green-house plants. In cold or frosty weather keep the 
windows and doors closely shut, and close your window-shutters 
carefully every night, and also in extremely ri,gorous frosts, except 
while the sun shines on the windows. 

When green-houses are so constructed as to have no window- 
shutters, which is certainly wrong, large thick mats should be hung 
and nailed, or made fast by small hooks, in front of the lights, every 
cold night, and also in the day time when the weather is very 
severe, and no sun. It may sometimes be necessary, even when 
there are shutters, to hang and nail up mats in front of the windows, 



Dec] the HOT-HOUSE. 59 J, 

to check the piercing wind. If there are short roof- lights, they 
must be covered with mats, or with strong canvass, during the con- 
tinuance of severe weather; these may be so contrived as to roll up 
and fall down, by means of lines and puUies, at pleasure. 

During the continuance of severe frost, accompanied by piercing 
cutting winds, the windows must never be opened, that is, you must 
neither slide the lights up or down, but always keep them and the 
door or doors close; and any plants that are too near the glass must 
be removed into the interior of the house, especially at night and in 
cloudy dark weather. 

If you find the frost likely to reach your plants, notwithstanding 
all this care, you must heat the flues by gentle fires at night, and 
also in the day time when the frost is very piercing and the weather 
dark, and indeed without such a convenience it is almost useless 
to attempt the erection or trouble of a green-house either in the 
middle or eastern states, on account of their extremely rigorous 
winters. But you must be particular never to heat the air above 
40 or 45 degrees of Fahrenheit's thermometer; for all the heat that 
the plants require at this season, is only just as much as will pre- 
serve them effectually from frost. 

However, be very particular every day, when the weather is mild 
and the sun shining on the windows, to slide down the sashes, even 
if but half an hour, in the middle of the day, to admit fresh air and 
ventilate the house; for if the plants are kept too close they will 
become tender and weak, and besides, it will cause the leaves of 
some kinds to turn ofa yellowish sickly colour, and afterwards to get 
mouldy and drop off. 

N. B. The plants must never be deprived of light by keeping 
the shutters closed a moment longer than it is found absolutely ne- 
cessary for their preservation; and though I am not an advocate for 
much fire-heat in a green-house, yet I would prefer it to keeping 
the plants too long in darkness, which has an extremely bad effect 
upon them. 

For particulars respecting watering and other information, I 
would recommend to your perusal at this term, the entire of the 
article green-house, in January, and also in February, pages 85 
and 165; the general care during each of these months is nearly 
the same. 

The plants which you are wintering in garden-frames, must now 
be carefully attended, agreeably to the directions given in page 572. 



THE HOT-HOUSE. 

The frost generally sets in very severe in this month, and the 
winds are keen and cutting; therefore it will be necessary to keep 
up your fire heat in proportion to the severity of the weather, which 



592 - THE HOT-HOUSE. [Dec. 

must be regulated by a thermometer, never letting the air of the 
house be colder than 52 degrees of Fahrenheit, nor warmer, at this 
season, by fire heat, than 62 or thereabouts, for it is very injudicious 
to force the plants now into a fresh state of vegetation; all that they 
want at present is to be kept comfortably warm and rather in an 
inactive state; consequently as the heat of the day in sunny weather 
increases, you must slacken your fires or put them totally out, as 
the case may be, always renewing them in the afternoon or when- 
ever you find the due warmth on the decline. 

It will be generally necessary to attend the fires till eleven or 
twelve o'clock at night, when, if wanted, a sufficiency of fuel must 
be added to support a proper degree of heat till morning; and in 
extremely severe weather it may sometimes be necessary to sit up 
all night to guard against untoward consequences: at all events 
you must be up very early in the morning to renew the fires. 

If the hot-house is furnished with shutters or covering of any 
kind, as noticed in page 97, they will now be of considerable use, 
both for the preservation of the plants and the saving of fuel. It 
will, however, be very proper to hang thick mats every severe night 
in front of the upright sashes, which will prevent the wind from 
rushing in immediately on the plants, through any deficiencies that 
may be in the work. 

If the bark-bed was properly made or renewed in October, or in 
the beginning of November, it will yet be in a proper state of 
warmth, which is now essentially necessary; if, however, towards 
the end of the month it is found to be much declined in heat, it 
should be forked up to revive it, as directed in January, but more 
particularly so if it contains pines for fruiting next season, which 
must be now kept rather in a slow state of vegetation than dormant. 

Succession pines, or other plants in pits or in the succession- 
house, require the same care as above; observing not to force them 
by too much heat, lest the pines start to a fruiting state at an un- 
timely period. They are never fit to produce handsome sized fruit 
until they are two years old, at which age they, in October, should 
be placed in the fruiting-house for the ensuing year's bearing. 

The pines and other plants in the hot-house, &c. will still require 
to be watered occasionally; the former not oftener than once a 
week, the shrubby kinds in small pots perhaps twice a week, but 
the succulent sorts should at this season have but very little, and 
that only when you are able to perceive that they are in absolute 
want of it; and then let it be given round the edges of the pots, 
and not to the plants themselves, for if it should stagnate about 
the stems it would infallibly rot them. The varieties of Cactus 
Melocactus or Turk's Cap, with many others of the most succulent 
kinds, should at this season have no water given them, except in 
cases of great necessity. 

When there happens to come a fine sunny, calm day, it will be 
proper to admit some fresh air into the house by sliding some of 
the glasses, in the warmest part of the day, a little way open, even 
if but for half an hour; but be sure to close them again in due time, 
and especially if the weather changes to cold or cloudy. This is 



Dec] the HOT-HOUSE. 593 

best effected at this season, by sliding open a few of the roof -lights, 
if it can be done with convenience. 

Pick off such decayed leaves as you perceive on the various 
plants, keep them free from insects and tilth of every kind, and the 
whole house as sweet and clean as possible. 

Sprinkle your flues and walks occasionally with water to raise a 
comforting steam of moisture in the house; especially when you 
are obliged to burn fires constantly night and day. This will pre- 
serve the plants from the bad effects produced by the parching 
influence of a constant fire-heat, and also tend to prevent an 
increase of insects. 

You may, towards the latter end of this month, introduce into 
the hot-house pots of strawberries and flowering plants of various 
kinds; sow cucumber seed and plant kidney-beans as directed in 
January, in order to force them into early perfection. Pots or tubs 
of bearing grape-vines may also be now introduced for early fruit- 
ing if there are none trained in from the outside. Such vines as 
are planted in front of the house, and trained in under the lights, 
should have the parts of their stems, which are exposed to the 
weather, well wrapped around with hay or straw neatly tied on, 
also their roots covered sufficiently with long litter; for their juices 
being put into full circulation by the forcing heat, renders the 
exposed parts much more vulnerable to frost than if the entire 
plants stood inactive in the open air. 

Having now gone through the work of the several months, and 
endeavoured to adapt the whole to the seasons and local situations 
of the different parts of the Union, to explain and simplify the 
various operations, and to render the work of as much general 
utility as possible, it is offered to the public as the result of many 
years' experience, solely devoted to horticultural and botanical 
pursuits, without presuming to say that it is either infallible or 
incapable of improvement. 



4C 



i 



A CATALOGUE 



OF 



KITCHEN GARDEN ESCULENT PLANTS AND HERBS. 



COMMON NAMES. 

Artichoke, Garden 

1. Green Globe. 2. White Globe. 
3. French. 

Artichoke, Jerusalem 

Asparagus, the Garden 

1. Dutch. 2. Gravesend. 3. Bat- 
tersea. 4. Large Jersey. 

Bean, the common Garden 

1. Early Mazagan. 2. Early Lis- 
bon. 3. Long podded. 4. Com- 
mon field or horse. 5. Dwarf 
Cluster. 6. White Blossom. 7. 
Red Blossom. 8. Large Windsor. 
9. Large Toker. 10. Broad Span- 
ish. IL Mumford. 12. Green 
Nonpareil. 13. Turkey Long pod. 
14. Green Genoa, &c. 

Bean, the Dwarf Kidney 

1. Early Yellow Dwarf. 2. Early 
Cream-coloured do. 3. Early 
speckled do. 4. Early White do. 
5. Early Brown-speckled do. 6. 
Negro Dwarf. 7. Large White 
do. 8. Purpled-speckled do. 9. 
Black-eyed do. 10. Red-speckled 
do. 

Running Kinds. 
1. Corn beans. 2. Large White 
Runners. 3. Cream-coloured Run- 
ners. 4. Round White Runners, 
&c. 

Bean, Scarlet Runners 
Lima beans 
Carolina do. 

Beet, The Common 

1. Red Beet 

2. Long Red do. 

3. Turnip-rooted Beet 

4. Yellow-rooted do. 

5. Green or White do. 

6. Mangel-Wurtzel, or Root of) 

Scarcity \ 

Borage, Coinmon 
Borecole, Purpled-curled 

Green-curled 

Siberian or Scotch 

Brussels Sprouts 

Finely Fringed 



BOTANICAL NAMESJ 

Cynara Scolymus 



Helianthus tuberosus 
Asparagus officinalis 



Vicia Fcbba 



Phaseolus vulgaris, v. Pumila 



V. volubilis 



V. coccinea 
Phaseolus linensis 

V. 

Beta vulgaris 

V. rubra vulgaris 

V. rubra major 

V. rubra, radice rapce 

v. lutea major 

V. pallide virens major 

Cicla 

Borago officinalis 
Brassica oleracea laciniata, 

oleracea selenicea, 

oleracea sabellica. 



KITCHEN GARDEN ESCULENT PLANTS, &c. 595 



Broccoli, Italian 

1. Early Purple. 2. Early Green. 
3. Large Late Purple. 4. Large 
White. 
Cabbage, Heading 

1. Early Smyrna. 2. Early York. 
3. Early Heart-shaped. 4. Early 
Battersea. 5. Early Ant"fferp. 6. 
Early Dwarf. 7. Early Sugar-loaf. 
8. Large Late Sugar-loaf. 9. Large 
Scotch. 10. Large English. 11. 
Large Drum-Head. 12. Flat- 
Dutch. 13. Large Late Battersea. 
14. Red Pickling. 
Cabbage, Turnip 

Turnip-rooted 
Jerusalem Kale 
Cabbage, Savoy 

1. Green. 2. Yellow. 3. Milan. 
Calabash, or Bottle-gourd 
Cardoon, Spanish 
Carrot, Long Orange 

Early Horn do. 
Cauliflower, Early 

Late do. 
Celery, Italian upright 

1. Solid stalked. 2. North's Large. 
3. Patagonian. 4. Red-stalked 
Solid. 
Celeriac, Turnip-rooted Celery 
Chervil 

Chives or Cives 
Coriander 
Corn, Indian 
Corn-salad 
Cress, or Pepper-grass 

1. Narrow-leaved. 2. Broad-leav- 
ed. 3. Curled-leaved. 
Cress, Winter, or Salad Scurvy-grass 
Cress, Water 
Cucumber, Common 

1. Early Frame. 2. Early Prickly. 
3. Early Cluster. 4. Long Prickly. 
5. Long Green Turkey. 6. Long 
White Turkey. 7. Long Roman. 
8. White Spined. 
Cucumber, Round Prickly 
Egg-Piant 

1. Purple-fruited. 

2. White-fruited. 
Endive, Green-curled 

White-curled 
Broad-leaved 
Finochio 

Garlic, Cultivated 
Gourd-Squash 
Ground Nut 
Leek, Common 

Narrow-leaved 
Broad-leaved 
Lettuce, or Salad 

1. White Cos. 2. Green Cos. 3. 
Egyptian Cos. 4. Black Cos. 5. 
Aleppo. 6. India. 7. Brown 



Brassica oleracea italica 



Brassica oleracea capitata 



Brassica oleracea Napobrassica 
Napus sativa 

Brassica oleracea sabauda 

Cucurbita lagenaria 
Cynara Cardimculus 
Daucus Carota 

Brassica oleracea botrytis 

Apium graveolens dulce 



Apium graveolens rapaceum 
Sca,ndix Cerefolium 
Allium Schanoprasum 
Coriandrum sativum 
Zea Mays 

Valeriana Locusta olitoria 
Lepidium sativum 



Erisymum Barbarea 
Sisymbrium Nasturtium 
Cv£%imis sativus 



Cucumis Anguria 
Solanum Melongena 



Cichorium Endivia 



Anethum azoricum 
Allium sativum 
Cucurbita Melopepo 
Arachis hypogeaa 
Allium Par rum 



Lactuca sotiva 



596 



KITCHEN GARDEN ESCULENT PLANTS, &c. 



Dutch. 8. Common Cabbage. 
9. Imperial. 10. Grand Admiral. 

11. Hammersmith Hardy-green. 

12. Tennisball. 13. New Zealand, 
14. Large Royal. 15. Madeira. 
16. Saxony Cabbage, &c. 

Melon, Musk 

I. Early Romana. 2. Early Can- 
taleupe. 3. Early Small Zatte. 
4 Early Succado. 5. Black Por- 
tugal. 6. Golden Rock. 7. Large 
Mogul. 8. Minorca. 9. Large 
African. 10. Rock Cantaleupe. 

II. Netted Green-flesh. 12. Japan 
Rock. 13. Nutmeg, &c. 

Melon, Water 

1. Long Red-flesh. 2. Long Yel- 
low'-flesh. 3. Large Round Red- 
flesh. 4. Green-flesh do» 

Mushroom 

Mustard, White 
Black 

Nasturtium, Large 

Okra 

Onion, Common 

1. StrEisburg. 2. White Spanish. 

3. Silver-skinned. 4. Madeira. 
5. Long-keeping. 6. Blood-red. 

7. Welsh. 

8. Tree. 

Orach, or English Lamb's-quarter 
Large Green-leaved 
Red-leaved 
Parsley, Common 
Curled 

Hamburg, or Large-rooted 
Parsnep, Long Garden 
Patience Dock 
Pea, Garden 

1. Early Frame. 2. Early Golden 
Hotspur. 3. Early Charleton do. 

4. Spanish Dwarf. 5. Dwarf Su- 
gar. 6v Leadman's Dwarf. 7. 
Tall Sugar. 8. Sugar Poland. 9. 
Blue Prussian. 10. Green Impe- 
rial Marrow. 11. Dwarf Marrow- 
fat. 12. White Rouncival. 13. 
Large Green do. 14. Large 
Gray. 15. Spanish Morotto. 16. 
Common Field. 17. Pearl, or 
Nonesuch. 18. Essex Reading. 
19. Albany. 20. Glory of Eng- 
land. 21. Large Marrowfat. 22. 
Dutch Admiral. 

Pepper, Red or Guinea 

1. Long-podded 

2. Heart-shaped 

3. Bell 

4. Cherry, &c. 
Potato, Common 
Potato, Sweet 
Pumpkin, or Pompion 

Many varieties. 
Radish, Garden 



Cucumis Melo 



Cucurbita CitruUus 



Agaricus campestris 
Sinapis alha 

nigra 
Tropceolum majus 
Hibiscus esculentus 
Allium Cepa 



fistulosum 
canadense 
Atriplex hortensis 



Apium petroselinum satiimm 

crispu'fii 

laiifolium 
Pasiinaca saliva 
Rumex Patientia 
Pisum sativum 



Capsicum annuum 

V. longioribus siliquis 

V. cordiforme 

V. tetragonum 

V. cerasiforme 
Solanum tuberosum 
Convolvulus Batatas 
Cucurbita Pepo 

Raphanus sativus 



AROMATIC, POT, AND SWEET HERBS. 



597 



1. Early Frame. 2. Early Purple 
Short-top. 3. Salmon Short-top. 

4. Common salmon. 5. White 
Short-top. 6. White Turnip-root- 
ed. 7. Red Turnip-rooted. 8. 
White Winter Radish. 9. Black 
Winter do. 10. White Naples, 
&c. 

Radish, Horse 

Ruta Baga, or Swedish Turnip 
Rampion, Esculent 
Rape, or Cole-seed 
Rocambole 
Salsafy 
Scorzonera 
Sea-Kale, or Cabbage 
Shallot 
Skirret 

Sorrel, Broad-leaved 
Round-leaved 
Spinage, 1. Prickly-seeded 

2. Burdock. 3. Round-leaved 
Squash, Warted 

Many varieties. 
Tomatoes, or Love-apple 
Turnip, Cultivated 

1. Early Dutch. 2. Early Stone. 

3. Early Green. 4. Yellow Round. 

5. Large Red-topped. 6. White 
Round. 7. Tankard. 8. Large 
English Field. 9. Swedish, or 
Ruta Baga. 10. Long French. 



Cochlearia Armoracia 
Brassica Rapa 
Campanula Rapunculus 
Brassida Napus 
Allium Scorodoprasum 
Tragopogon porrifulium 
Scorzonera kispanica 
Crambe marilima 
Allium Ascalonicum 
Sium sisarum 
Rumex Acetosa 
scutatus 
Spinacia oleracea 

Cucurbita verrucosa 

Solanum Lycopersicum 
Brassica Rapa 



AROMATIC, POT, AND SWEET HERBS; 



Antse 
Basil, Sweet 

Bush 
Caraway 
Clary 
Coriander 
Chamomile 
Dill 
Fennel, Common 

Sweet 
Hyssop 
Lavender 
Lovage 
Marigold, pot 
Marjoram, Sweet 
Pot 

Winter Sweet 
Mint, Spear 

Pepper 

Pennyroyal 
Mint, Horse 
Rosemary 
Sage, Common 
Savory, Summer 
Winter 



Pimpinella Anisum 
Ocymum Basilicum medium 

minimum 
Carum, Carui 
Salvia sclarea 
Coriandrum sativum 
Anthemis nobilis 
Anethum graveolens 
Anethum Faniculum 

V. dulce 
Hyssopus officinalis 
Lavandula Spica 
Ligusticuvi Levisticum 
Calendula officinalis 
Origanum Majora.na 
Onites 

heracleoticum 
Mentha virides 
piperita 
Pulegium 
Monarda punctata 
Rosmarinus officinalis 
Salvia officinalis 
Satureia hortensis 

montane 



598 



MEDICINAL PLANTS. 



Smallage 
Tarragon 
Thyme, Common 
Lemon 



Apium graveolens 
Artemisia Dracunculus 
Thymus vulgaris 
serpyllum 



PLANTS CULTIVATED FOR MEDICINAL PURPOSES, &c. 



Ague-weed, Thoroughwort 

Angelica, Garden 

Betony, Wood 

Bugloss 

Carduus benedictus 

Celandine 

Comfrey, Common 

Cucumber, Bitter 

Elecampane 

Flax, Common 

Fenugreek 

Feverfew 

Foxglove 

Gromwell 

Hemlock 

Horehound 

Hound's -tongue 

Liquorice 

Madder, Dyer's 

Mallow, Marsh 

Mugwort, Common 

Nep, or Catmint 

Nettle, Stinging 

Palma Christi. or Castor-oil Nut 

Pimpernel 

Pink-root, Carolina 

Poppy, Opium 

Rue, Garden 

Rhubarb, True Turkey 

Common 
Scurvy-grass 
Snake-root, Virginia 
Southernwood 
Tansey 
Tobacco, Cultivated 

Common English 
Weld, Woad, or Dyer's-weed 
Winter Cherry 
Wormseed, Goosefoot 
Wormwood 
Yarrow 

Sweet or Milfoil 



Eupatorium perfoliatum 
Angelica Arc/iangelica 
Betonica ojflcinalis 
Anchusa officinalis 
Centaurea benedicta 
Chelidonum majus 
Symphytum ojjicinale 
Cucumis Colocinthus 
Inula Helenium 
Linum usitatissimum 
Trigonella Fanum Gr cecum 
Matricaria Parthenium 
Digitalis purpurea 
Lithospermum officinale 
Conium maculatum 
Marrubium vulgare 
Cynoglossom officinale 
Glycyrrhiza glabra 
Rubia tinctorum 
Althcea officinalis 
Artemisia vulgaris 
Nepeta Cataria 
Urtica lorens 
Ricinus communis 
Aitagalis urvensis 
Spigelia marilandica 
Pa-paver somniferum 
Ruta graveolens 
Rheum palmatum 

Rhaponticum 
Cochlea.ria officinalis 
Aristoluchia serpentaria 
Artemisia Abrotanum 
Tanaxetum vulgare 
Nicotiana Tabacum 
rusticuni 
Reseda Lmteola 
PhysaUs Alkekengi 
Chenepodium anthelminticum 
Artemisia Absinthium 
Achillea Millefolium 
Ageratum 



599 



GRASSES AND OTHER PLANTS USED IN FARMING. 

The following are selected as the most important and valuable 
plants used in rural economy; the grasses and other plants culti- 
vated for their foliage, are particularly such as have been found to 
merit attention; a knowledge of their true names is the first step 
towards obtaining them, and when obtained it is of serious import- 
ance to cultivate each sort in the soil and situation best adapted to 
its nature, which is carefully pointed out in the following list. 

The judicious cultivation of grasses, though the least expensive 
and most profitable part of husbandry (for on it every other part 
may be said to depend) has hitherto been too much neglected by the 
generality of our farmers, and in this they have been blind to their 
best interests. 

In order to be successful, a farmer should endeavour to procure 
and cultivate such grasses and other vegetable productions as are 
peculiarly adapted to the various soils of which his plantation is 
composed; so that every spot, from the dry est hill to the wettest 
swamp, may be employed in yielding him profitable productions. 

Those marked thus * are indigenous, or native plants of the 
United States; and such as are marked thus t, of the West Indies 
and warmer parts of America. 

GRASSES. 

*Brome, Purging 
Barnet, Field 
*Blue 

Canary. Reedy 
Clover, Red 

White 
Yellow 
♦Cock's-foot, Swamp 
^Canadian, Reedy 
Dog's-tail 
Fox-tail, Meadow 
Fiorin 
*Fescue, Flote 

*Tall 

*Meadow 
*Green 
tGuinea (a) 
*Herd 
Lucern 
Meadow, Rough stalked 

Soft 

Water 

♦Creeping 

*Smooth-stalked 

*Five nerved 
Medic, Yellow 

Hop 
Oat, Tall Meadow 

Yellow 
♦Orchard 



tPeruvian (h) 



Bromus purgans {wet soil) 
Potermni Sanguisorba {dry good soil) 
Poa covipressa (dry fields) 
Phalaris arundinacia {wet soil) 
Trifolium pratense {moderately dry) 
repens {rich d.ry soil) 
ochroleucum {dry ground) 
Dactylis Cynosuroides {stoamps) 
Cinna arimdinacea {moist soil) 
Cynosurus cristatus {dry ground) 
Alopecurus pratensis {moist soil) 
Agrostis stolonifera {wet or moist soil) 
Fesluca fiuitans {swamps) 

elatoir {moderatclii moist) 
pratensis {moderately dry) 
Poa viridis {rich- and tolerably moist) 
Panicum maximum {strong toarm soil) 
Agrostis stricta {wet or moist soil) 
Medicago sativa {a rich, dry sandy loam) 
Poa trivialis {moist soil) 
Holcus lanatus {moist soil) 
Poa aquatica {sivamp) 
Poa stolonifera {tvei) 
Poa praMnsis {dry soil) 
Poa nervata {wet) 
Medicago falcata. {dry soil) 

lupulhm 
Avena elatior {moderately dry) 

jlavcsccns {good dry ground) 
Dactylis glomcrala {orchards and mode- 
rately dry meadow) 
Paspalium stonoUfcrum 



(a)This grass isbymuch too tender to bear the winter frosts of the middle or eastern 
states, but succeeds well in Georgia, and in the warmest parts of South Carolina. 
(6) This is nearly as tender as the preceding, and therefore not answerable foi the 



500 GRASSES AND OTHER PLANTS USED IN FARMING, &c. 



Ray, English 
Saint-Foia , 

Sweet scented vernal 

Timothy 

Trefoil 



Lolium perervne (rich and tolerable moist) 
Hedysarum Onobrychis {dry deep soil, but 

ansvjers well on poor ground) 
Anthoxanthum odoratum{moderately dry) 
Phleum pratense (moist and upland) 
Medicago lupulina 



GRAINS, &c. 



Barley, Spring 
Winter 
Two-rowed 
Naked 
Buckwheat 
Corn, Indian 
Guinea 
Broom 
Millet, Large 
German 
Italian 
Oat, Cultivated 

Varieties, 1. White. 2. Black. 
3. Brown. 4. Potato. 5. Po- 
land. 6. Friezland, 7. Siberian. 
8. Tartarian. 
Oat, Naked 

Oriental 
Peas, Field 
Rye, Spring 
Winter 
Upland 
Rice, Common 
Tares, Common 
*Tobacco, Virginian 
Teasel, Fuller's 
Wheat, Spring 
Winter 
Eg]rptian 
Weld, Dyer's 
Woad, do. 
Liquorice, Common 



Hordeum vulgare 

hexastichon 
distichon 
v. nudum 

Polygonum Fagopyrura 

Zea Mays 

Holcus Sorghum 

saccharatus 

Panicum miliaceum 

Germanicum 
Italicum 

Avena Sativa 



Avena nuda 

orientalis 

Pisum sativum 

Secale cereale v. vernum, 
V. hybernum 
V. montanum 

Oryza sativa (c) 

Vicia sativa 

Nicotiana Tabacum 

Dipsaxhus fullonum 

Triticum csstivum 
hybernum 
compositum 

Resed^a luteola 

Isatis tinctoria 

Glycyrrhiza glabra 



ROOTS, &c. 



Potatoes, Common 

tSweet 
Scarcity Root 
Rhubarb, True 
Turnip, Common 

Swedish, or Ruta Baga, a 
variety 



Solanum tuberosum 
Convolvulus Batatas 
Mangel wurtzel 
Rheum Palmatwm, 
Brassica Rapa 



ARTICLES FOR MANUFACTURING. 



♦Cotton 

Flax 

Hemp 



Gossypium herbaceum 
Linum usitatissimum 
Cannabis saliva 



middle or eastern states. The Avena elatior or tall oat-grass, is, by mistake, called 
Peruvian and Andes grass in tlie county of Delaware, near Pliiladelphia, and in part 
of ihe state of Delaware, where it is cultivated; it is called meadow oats about Lan- 
caster, Pennsylvania. 

(c) There is a variety of this that grows well on diy lands, which is now cultivated 
near the Muskingum and in other parts of the United States, and is likely to become, 
of considerable importance. 



INDEX. 



Acacia, rose, 301 

Aconite, winter, 355, 502 

Agaves, 362, 404, 508, 548 

Alaternus, 338 

Alcoves, rural, 71 

Alder, 265, 292 

Alexanders, or Alesanders, 205, 326, 

522, 559 
Aletris, 354, 355, 470 
Alkekengi, 352 
Allamanda cathartica, 459 
Allspice, Carolina. See Calycanthus 

floridus 
Almond, fruit-bearing, 45, 214, 250, 

443, 467 

double-flowering dwarf, 106, 

163 

Aloes, 91, 165, 178, 362, 363, 404, 508, 

548 
Althaea Frutex, or Hibiscus syriacus, 

257, 275, 301 
Alyssum, sweet, 353 
Amaranthus tricolor, 161, 298, 351, 

353, 398. 425 

tree, 353, 425 

spike, 353, 425 

globe, 353, 425 

Amaryllis, scarlet, 79, 358, 397. 570 

yellow, 79, 417, 469 

Belladonna, 417, 429, 469, 572 

sarniensis, 399, 417, 429, 469, 

572 
Amorpha fruticosa, 301 
Andromedas, 276 
Anemone, general care and treatment 

of, 80, 160, 163, 295, 345, 395, 567 

description of a fine double, 395 

taking up the roots. 416 

method of planting the best 

sorts, 503, 543, 567 

sowing seed of, 582 



Angelica, garden. 205, 411, 521 

tree, 301 

Anise, 206 

Annual flowers, tender, 161,298, 351, 
352 398 

'- hardy, 158,299. 352, 398 

Antirrhinum, see Snapdragon 
Antholizas, 166, 429, 508 
Anthyllises,453 

Apocynum and roscemifolium, 450 
4D 



Apple-tree, 25, 136, 214, 215, 334, 525, 
563, 579 

sowing kernels of, 157, 258, 

537 

gathering and preserving the 

fruit of, 529 

Apricot, 29, 135, 214, 443 

Arbors, rural, 74 

Arbor Vita^a, common, 272, 292, 338 

Chinese, 59, 272, 292, 338 

Arbutus Unedo, or Strawberry-tree, 

59, 356, 362, 549 
Arcades, rural, 74 
Arethusa ophioglossoides, 79. 
Art of improving different soils, 313 
Artichokes, garden, common care of, 

22, 135, 438, 462 
spring dressing of, 202, 325 

making new plantations of, 

202, 325 

sowing seed of, 203, 325 

varieties of, 203 

winter dressing of, 559 



Artichoke, Jerusalem, 213, 326 

to preserve in winter, 557 

Ash, common kinds of, 148, 271, 302, 

534 

manna, 287 

round-leaved, 287 

Asclepias, hardy herbaceous kinds, 

79, 354, 426 

CLirassavica, 459, 470 

Asparagus, forcing, 19, 121, 560, 578 

spring dressing of, 191, 323 

making new plantations of, 

193 323 

'- sowing seed of, 193, 323 

method of cutting, 193 

ordinary care of, 323, 380, 408, 



461 



winter dressing of, 520, 554 



Asters, hardy herbaceous kinds, 79, 

158, 300, 352, 426 

China, 299, 352, 425 

Aucuba japonica, 364, 453 
Auriculas, common care of, 80, 159, 

295, 345, 397, 451, 468, 500, 537 

sowing seed of 159, 296, 587 

description of a fine double, 



347 



compost suitable for, 348 
new potting of, 348 397, 468 



602 INDEX. 



Auriculas, slipping for propagation, 
348, 397, 451, 468 

preparaiion for winter protec- 
tion of, 568, 584 

Avenues, 70 

Azaleas, or upright American Honey- 
suckles, 276, 301 

B. 

Babianas, 166, 508 
Balm, common, 205, 521 

Moldavian, 352 

ofGilead, 364 

Balsam, double striped, 161, 179, 299, 

353, 425 
Banqueting-house, rural, 71 
Bark-stove. 91 
Basil, sweet, 206, 326, 383 
Bay, sweet, 62, 356 
Beans, early Mazagan, Windsor, &c. 

134, 186, "320, 374 

to top when in blossom, 374 

Beans, kidney, to force, 104, 124, 179, 

593 
in the open ground, 329, 376, 

409, 432, 462 

Lima and Carolina, 377, 409, 



Budding, methods of, 443 

Buddleias, 363 

Bulb-glasses, 83 

Bulbs, planting various sorts of, 83, 

295, 446, 503, 543, 568, 589 
taking up early flowering, 396, 

417 

treatment of seedling, 396, 569, 

sowing seeds of, 469, 500, 545 

planting in glasses and pots, 83, 

546, 569 

observations on the late plant- 



465 

Bear's foot, 502 
Beech-tree, 75, 263, 301, 536 
Beet, red, 132, 194, 207, 223, 380, 409 

green and white, 194, 380 

to preserve in winter, 557 

Bignonias, 292, 414, 459 
Belladonna Lily, 417, 429, 469, 572 
Belvidere, or Summer Cypress, 352 
Benjamin-tree, 301 
Berberries, 45, 233, 529 
Blackthorn, or Sloe-tree, 266 
Bladder-nut, 148, 301 
Bladder-senna, 301. 
Bladder Ketmia, or Hibiscus Irionum. 

352 
Blossoms of early wall fruit-trees, to 

protect, 219, 335 
Board-edgings, 79 
Borage, 206, 383 
Borecole, or Scotch Kale, 191, 317, 

372, 406, 431, 460, 556 
Bowers, rural, 71, 74 
Box edgings, common care of, 79, 426, 

452 504 547 

planting, 303, 356, 504, 547 

clip or trim, 357, 426, 452, 504, 

548 
Bridges, ornamental, 68, 72 
Broccoli, Italian or Cauliflower, 190, 

318, 373, 407 

to preserve for winter use, 556 

Brawallia, 161, 353, 398 

Brussels sprouts, 318, 373, 406 

Buckthorn, sea, 292 

Budding or Inoculating, 415, 429, 440, 

442, 467, 473, 498 



589 



ing of, 82 
Bupthalmum fruticosum,428 
Burnet, garden, 205, 383, 521 



Cabbage, care of autumn sown plants, 

128, 184, 513, 555, 576 
sowing seed in winter, spring, 

and summer, 21, 129, 184, 317, 372, 

406, 438, 460 

planting out finally, 184, 317, 



373, 406, 431, 460 
— — planting large 



cabbages for 



seed, 207 

earthing up, 373 

tying up the leaves to whiten, 



373 



■ sowing seed in autumn to pro- 
duce early summer cabbages, 481 
preserving full grown heads 



for winter and spring use, 556 
Cabinets, rural, 74 
Cactuses, 165, 178, 362, 364, 404, 508, 

548 
Calceolarias, 354 
Callicarpa araericana, 363 
Calycanthus floridus, 277, 301 
Camellia japonica, 364, 453 
Campanulas, in sorts, 300 

nettle-leaved, 354 

Candytuft, 158, 299, 352 

Canker in trees, to prevent or cure, 

141, 142 
Canna indica, 363 
Canterbury-bells, 158, 300, 42fi 
Cape Bulbs, 166, 364, 429, 508 

compost for, 508 

Capparis, or Capre-shrub, 363 
Capsicums, 207, 327, 381, 411, 439 
Caraway, 206, 326, 330 
Cardoon, Spanish, 204, 326, 383, 411, 

438, 463, 480, 558 
Carnations, general care and culture 

of, 79, 80, 158, 161,. 163, 296, 300, 

350, 353, 397,419, 447, 468, 500, 537, 

568, 584 
description of a fine double, 

421 
' — to card or assist in blowing, 

419, 420, 447 
laying and piping, 422, 423 



IXDEX. 



Carnations, to force into early bloom, 

106, 179, 312 

compost for best kinds, 296 

Carrots, 21, 132, 189, 207, 321, 378, 

379, 409, 433 

to preserve for winter use, 557 

Cascades, 68 

Cassia, hardy sorts, 79 

chamaecrista, 352 

marilandica, 354, 470 

Catalogue of Kitchen Garden esculent 

plants and herbs, 594 

of aromatic, pot, and sweet 

herbs, 597 

• of plants cultivated for medi- 
cinal purposes, 598 

of grasses and other plants 

used in farming. 599 

Catalpa-tree, 270, 302 
Catchflv, perennial, 158, 300 

Lobel's, 299, 352 

double, 501 

Caterpillars on fruit trees, to destroy 

Caterpillar plant, 299, 352 

Cauliflowers, care of autumn sown 
plants, 20, 126, 183, 515, 555, 576 

sowing seed of, in winter and 

spring, and subsequent treatment of 
the plants, 20, 126, 127, 183, 316 

early planting of, under bell 



or hand-glasses, 183 

time and method of planting 



the principal crop, 315 

sowing seed for late or winter 

flowering, 316, 371 

defending the flowers from sun 



and wet, 371, 406 

plantmg late, 371, 406, 432 

the proper time in autumn to 



sow, 482 

winter preservation of full 



grown plants, 557 
best method of procuring ^ 



ood 

Cauliflowers in the southern states, 

515 
Caves, rural, 72 
Cedar, red, 149,265,338 

of Lebanon, 59, 273, 338 

white, 272, 338 

Celandine, 205 

Celeriac, or turnip-rooted celery, 190, 

557 
Celery, 130, 190, 322, 379, 407, 433, 

461, 480 
to raise early, in the open 

ground, 322 

to preserve for winter use, 557 



Celsias, 363 

Centaureas, 363 

Chamomile, double, 158, 205, 301, 

470, 521 
Chelone glabra, 354, 470 
Cherry-tree, 27, 136, 214. 215, 525, 563 
double flowering, 106, 163, 301 



&m 



Chervil, 198, 325, 383, 480 

Chestnut, Spanish, or sweet, 45, 233, 
270, 311, 535 

Chirouias, 79 

Chrysanthemum, 425 

Chrysocoma, 363 

Christmas-rose, 502 

Chives, 197, 324, 523 

Cineraria lanata, 453 

Cinerias, 363 

Cistuses, 59, 363 

Citron-tree, 473 

Clary, 206 

Cleome. 353 

ClethraiSOl 

Clinopodium, 354 

Clumps of trees and shrubs, 69 

Cock's-combs, 298, 363, 425 

Codlins, 528 

Colchicum, 79, 396, 417, 469 

Collecting seeds, 438 

plants, 79, 470 

Columbme, 158. 300 

Colutea, 363 

Composition, Forsyth's, 224 

Barnes's, 226 

Compost for Carnations and Pinks,296 

for Auriculas and Polyan- 
thuses, 348 

for Cyclamens, 418 

for Pine-apples, 456 

for Tulips, 538 

for Hyacinths, 540 

for Ranunculuses and Ane- 



mones, 542, 543 

for the generality of Green and 

Hot-House plants, 511 

Comptoniaasplenifolia,301 

Conservatory, 84 

Convolvuluses, 299, 352 

Coreopsis, 79, 354, 355, 426 

Coriander, 198, 325, 383 

Cork-tree, 378 

Corn, Indian, 371 

Corn sal ad, 464, 480, 554 

CoroniUa, 362, 363, 428 

Corrosive solution, 141 

Cottages, rural, 71 

Cotyledons, 548 

Crab and Apple-tree hedges, 566 

Crassulas, 359 

Crocuses, spring, 79,163,396,417,469, 
503, 544 

autumnal, 396, 417. 469 

Crown Imperials, 79, 396, 417, 445, 
469, 503, 544 

sowing seed of, 469 

Cucubalus stellatus, 354, 470 

Cucumbers, in hot-beds, 11, 14, 116, 
121, 180, 182, 314, 367 

seedling beds for, 12 

stopping or lopping, 120 

impregnating the female flow- 
ers of, 181 

in the Hot-House, 105, 170,593 



604 INDEX. 



CucumberSjUnder bell or hand-glasses, 
182 

in the open ground, 329, 368, 



431 



• for late pickling, 431, 463 

• serpent, 353 
■ squirting, 353 



Curculio, to prevent the ravages of, 

143 
Currants, pruning, 32, 137, 221, 527 

planting, 38, 221, 562 

propagating, 61, 150, 293, 562 

sowing seed of, 562 

Cuttings, topropagate trees and shrubs 

bv, 61,149, 291, 338, 499, 534, 547 
Cyanella, 166, 508 
Cyan us, 299, 352, 470 
Cycas revoluta, 508, 548 
Cyclamen, 363, 418, 429 

propagating by seed, 418, 588 

• indicum, 418, 587 

Cypress, deciduous, 272 

r- evergreen, 59, 356, 549 

Cypripediunjs, 79, 355, 470 

D. 

Daffodils, 544 

Daisies, double, 106, 163, 298, 355, 

545, 569, 589 
Daphne, odora, 549, 573 
Dens Canis, or Erythronium Dens 

Canis, 396, 446, 503, 544 
Dictamnus, or Fraxinella, 355 
Diervilla, 291, 302 
Dil],206, 326, 522, 559 
Dodecatheon Media, 355, 470 
Dog's-bane, tustan-leaved, 450 
Dogwood, 301 
Dolichos, purple, 353, 363 

white, 353, 363 

Dracocephalums, 79, 158, 354, 426, 

470, 502 
Draining of land, 46, 108 
Drawing-franxe for flowering plants, 

351 
Dry stove, 103 

E. 

Early crops, prepare for, 9 

Edging-iron, 77 

Edgings, methods and time of plant- 
ing, 303, 356, 547 

of boards, 78 

Egg-plant, or Solanum Melongena, 
328,381,410,439 

particular account of, 328 

Elder, 265, 292 

Elm-tree, 71, 263, 302, 534 

Elecampane, 522 

Endive, 329, 382, 410, 432, 463, 480, 
519 

to preserve for use in winter, 

558 

Engine, garden, for watering, 334 



Ericas, or Heaths, 106, 362, 453 

Erodiums, 453 

Erythronium americanum, 470, 544 

Dens Canis, 396, 446, 503, 544 

Espalier fruit trees, advantage of and 

method of forming, 24 
to train in the Nurserv while 

young, 56, 214, 215 
Euonymus, or Spindle-tree, 301 
Eupatoriums, 470 
Euphorbias, 178, 362, 363, 404, 470 
Evergreen trees and shrubs, planting, 

303, 338, 356, 498, 505, 536 
to trim in summer, 415, 499 

F. 

Pair Maids of France, 502 
Fennel, common, 205, 521 

sweet, 206 

Azorian, 207, 326, 463 

Fenugreek, 206 
Ferraria Tigridia, 474 

undulata, &c. 363 

Feverfew, 158, 205, 300 

Fig-trees, planting and propagating, 

217, 529 

pruning, 216 

the different varieties of, 218 

care of, 465, 563 

Filbert-tree, 45, 233, 250, 529 

to graft, 249, 250 

Pinoehio, 206, 326, 462 
Fir-trees. See Pines and Firs 
Flos Adonis, 158, 299, 352 
Flower-de-luce. See Iris 
Flower Garden, to lay out, 78 
worktobedonein, forJanuary, 

62. February, 158. March, 294. 

April, 341. May, 391. June, 416. 

July, 446. August, 468. September, 

500. October. 537. November, 567. 

December, 583 
Flowering-shrubs, to train, 57 
Forcing-frames for fruit-trees, &c. the 

construction and various kinds of, 

with the methods of working them, 

35 to 44 

for flowers, 36, 163 

Forcing early fruit-trees, 35, 42, 139, 

223, 312, 336, 580 
r- flowers, in the Hot- House, &e. 

83, 106, 163, 312, 583, 593 

flowers, in hot-beds, 83, 165, 



583 
Forest-trees and ornamental hardy 

shrubs, sowing seeds of, 156, 292, 

338 

training when young, 57 

planting, 60, 292, 301, 336, 355, 

535,.547, 565, 571 
Foss, 73 

Fothergilla alnifolia, 301 
Fountains, rural, 72 



INDEX. 



605 



Fowls, barn-door, their use in Or- 
chards, 141, 144 

Foxglove. 158, 300 

Framing, introduction to, 11 

Framing-ground, 13 

Franklinia, 277 

Fraxinella, 355 

French Honeysuckle, 158 

Marigold, 425 

Fringe-tree, 275, 301 

Fritillaries, 79, 396, 417, 446, 469, 503, 
544 

sowing seed of, 468, 499 

Fruit, thinning of, 385 

to preserve for winter keeping, 

529 

preserving the stones of, to 

plant, 467, 529 

preserving the kernels of, 529 

planting or sowing the stones 



of, 151, 258, 499, 536 

sowing the kernels of, 156, 258, 



263, 537 
Fruit-trees, newly grafted, care of, 

338, 390, 415, 440, 467 
grafted or budded the preceding 

year, care of, 257, 258, 390, 391 

budded in the present season, 



care of, 467, 498 

luxuriant and unfruitful, how 



to bring to a bearing state, 143 

to correct roughness in, and 



renew the bark of, 531 
Fuchsia cocciuea, 167, 312, 364, 428, 

549 
Fumigating the Hot-House, &c. 174, 

509 

G. 

Galega virginiana, 354, 355, 470 
Galleries, of hedge-work, 74 
Gardenias, 364 
Garlic, 197, 324, 523, 555 
Geissorhiza obtusala, 166, 508 
Genistas, 363 
Gentianas, 355, 470 
Gentianella, 158, 301, 470 
Geraniums, 94, 167, 364, 428, 453 
Gerardias, 79, 354. 355, 470 
Gladioluses, hardy, 83, 544 

tender, 166, 429, 508 

Glass most preferable for hot-bed 

lights, 11 

for hot-house roof-lights, 96 

Glass-case for flowering plants, 352 
Glycines, 470 
Gnaphaliums, 470 
Goat's-rue, 354 
Golden-rod, 158, 300 
Gooseberry-trees, pruning of, 32, 137, 

221,527,562 

planting, 137, 221, 526, .562 

propagating by cuttings, 293, 

527, 562 
propagating by seed, 527, 562 



Gooseberry-trees, soil most suitable 

for, 294 
Gordonias, 277 
Gourds, 369 

Grafting, the proper time for. 248 
preliminary instructions for, 

248 to 253 

stocks adapted for, 249 

when to take off the cions for. 



248 



choice of cions or grafts, 250 

cions not to be taken from 

sickly trees, 48 

tools used in, 251 

clay, how to prepare, 251 

the various methods of, 252 to 



257 



various kinds of trees and 
shrubs, 257, 290, 338, 340 

by approach or inarching, 256, 



340, 363 

forest-trees and ornamental 



shrubs, 292 

hollies, 340 



Grapes, the methods of preserving 

them fresh, 497 

• of curing them for raisins, 497 

Grape-vines. See Vines 
Grass-walks and lawns, general dis- 
position and care of, 64 to 78 
methods of making or laying 

down, 305 
Grass-slopes, 75 
Gravel-walks, general disposition of 

64 to 78 

methods of making, 359 

Green-House, to erect or construct, 85 
work to be done in for January, 

90. Februarv, 165. March, 306. 

April, 361. May, 400. June, 427. 

July, 453. August, 473. September, 

507. October, 548. November, 572. 

December, 590 
Green-House plants, shifting 308, 

362,401,453,473 
sowing seeds of, 166, 309, 363 

heading down, 307, 308, 363, 

401 

propagating by cuttings. &c. 

167, 309, 364, 428, 453 

when to bring out, 401 

when to take in, 507, 549 

to winter in garden-frames, 

550 

Gromwell, 205 

Grottoes, rural, 65, 72 

Groves, 70 

Guernsey Lily, 399, 417, 429, 469, 572 

Guilandiniadioica, 301 

Gum in fruit-trees, to remedy, 441 

H. 

Ha-ha, what, 72 

Hawk-weed, purple and yellow, 158, 
352 



606 



INDEX. 



Haws, how to prepare, for sowing, 151 
Ha wi horn, the various species of, 
best adapted for hedges, 154 

quicks or plants, how to raise, 



151,259 

■time of sowins 



States, 534 
hedges. 



in the Southern 



See Hedges 



Heading down declining fruit-trees, 

227 

budded stocks, 258 

Heart 's-ease, 352 

Heaths, African, &c. 106, 361, 453 

Hedges, live, the necessity and utility 

of 259 

. — how to m- ke, 2G0, 261 

plants suitable for, 154,263,266 

time of planting and making, 

260, 548. 571 

observations on, 267 

how to plash, 268, 571 

time of clipping, 262, 452, 504, 

548 
particular instructions for clip- 
ping, 504 
Hedge-hog plant, 299, 352 
Hedysarum gyrans, or moving plant, 

459 
Hedysarums, hardy, 354, 355, 470 
Helleborus hyemalis, 502 

uiger, 502 

virides, 502 

fcElidus, 502 

lividus, 502 

ranunculinus, 502 

Helianthuses, 470 

Heliotropium peruvianum, 364, 428 

Heraerocallis, 355 

Hepatica, 158, 301 

Herbs, gathering, 206, 438, 464 

Hermannias, 453 

Hermitages, 72 

Heuchera, 354, 470 

Hibiscuses, herbaceous perennial, 354, 

355, 426, 470 
Hibiscus Rosa sinensis, 558 
Hogs, their use in Orchards, 141, 144, 

145, 441 
Holly, 156, 264, 338, 534 

to graft curious kinds of, 340 

Hollyhock, common, 158, 299 

China, 229, 353, 425 

Honesty, or Satin -flower, 300 
Honev-suckles, 106, 149, 163, 292, 301 

-French, 158,300 

Honeyvvort, 229, 353 
Horehound, 205,521 
Hornbeam. 75, 263, 302, 534 
Horn-plant, 299, 352 
Horse-Chesnut, 270 
Horse-radish, 208. 326. 524 
Horse-shoe plant, 299, 352 
Hot-beds, method of making, 10 
for seedling cucumbers. «fec. 11 



Hot-beds, for sowing curious trees and 
-shrubs in, 157 

for raisin g Green-House plants 

166 

made of leaves, or leaves and 

dung, 553 

Hot-bed frames and lights, construc- 
tion of, 10 

ridges, to make, 314 

Hot-house or Stove, general instruc- 
tions respecting the construction of 
91 to 103 

work to be done in for January, 

103. February, 167. March, 310. 
April, 364. May, 403. June, 430. 
July, 455. August, 475. September, 
509. October, 551. November, 574. 
December, 591 

Hot-House plants, to propagate, 312 
367, 404, 430 

sowing seeds of, 312, 367 

to bring out, 404 

to take in, 509 

to winter in Garden-frames 

552 

Hot-walls, the construction and use 
of, 44 

Hyacinths, planting and care of 79, 
81, 160, 163, 294, 341, 392. 416, 567 

properties of a fine double, 342 

best method and time of plant- 
ing, 540, 567 

sowing seed of. 469, 500 

musk, 544 

feathered, 544 

starry, 544 

frape, 544 



Hydrangea hortensis, 167, 312, 364, 

"402. 428, 549, 572 
Hypoxis. 470 
Hyssop, 205, 411, 464, 521 

I&J. 

Jacobea Lily. See Amaryllis, scarlet 
Jasmines, 163, 292, 362, 364, 415, 428 

to bud, 446 

Ice-plant, 161, 298, 398 
Jerusalem Kale, 318, 406 

Artichoke, 213, 557 

Impregnating the female flowers of 

earlv cucumbers and melons, 181 
Inarchin?, 256, 340, 363, 402, 474 
Indigo, 363 
Insects which infest the Hot-House, 

descriptions of and methods of 

destroying, 167 to 175 
on fruit-trees, to destroy, 334 

386, 397 
Inoculating or Budding, methods of, 

442 
time of, &c. 415, 429, 440, 442, 

466, 473, 498 
Jonquils, 79, 83, 295, 544 
Ipomcea auamoclit, 79. 161, 298, 398 



INDEX. 



607 



Ipomcea, scarlet, 353 

Iris, Spanish and English bulbous, 

79, 446, 469, 503, 544 
dwarf Persian, 163, 446. 469, 

503, 5-44 

sowing seeds of, 469 

flag-leaved, in sorts, 300, 469, 



Layers, the several methods of makin§ 
288 

when to make, take off, plant, 



502 



snake's-head, 544 



Judas-tree, 275, 301 

Juniper, 147, 163, 265, 292, 337 

Justicias. 362, 364 

Ixias, bulbous, 166, 429, 508 

Chinese, 354, 426 

K. 
Kale, sea, 198, 325. 522, 559 

Jerusalem, 317, 406 

Scotch. See Borecole 

Kalmias, 276, 338 

Kernels of fruit-trees, to sow, 157, 

258, 263, 537 
Kidney-beans. See Beans 
Kidney-bean tree, Carolina. 292 
Kitchen-Garden, plans or designs for, 

106 
situation, soil, water, extent, 

&c. 107 

fences suitable for, 109 

preparing and laying out the 

ground, 110 
general culture and manuring 

of, 107 to 115 

work to be done in for January, 



&c. 61, 150, 338, 390, 499, 533, 547 
Leatherwood, 301 

Leaves, preparation of, to make hot- 
beds, &c. 553 
Leeks, to sow, 196, 322 

to transplant, 408, 438 

Lemon-trees, to shift, 308, 362, 454, 
472 

ordinary care of, 165, 307, 362, 

364, 401, 452, 549 

to prune or head down, 307, 



9. February. 116. March, 180. 
April, 312. May, 367. June 405. 
July, 431. August, 460. September, 
478. October, 512. November, 554. 
December, 576 



Label sticks, to make, 56, 59 

Labelling the plants, 477 

Laburnum, 275 

Labyrinths, 75 

Lachenalias, 166, 508 

Lagerstrcemia indica, 364, 549. 572 

Lantanas, 459 

Lapeyrousias, 166, 508 

Larch-tree, 272 

Large trees, how to remove, 233, 

571 
Larkspur, annual, 158, 352 

Bee, 299, 300 

Lavatera, 158, 299, 352 
Lavender, common, 205, 464, 521 
Lavendulas, tender, 453 
Laurel, Portugal, 60, 62, 292, 356, 

364 549 
English or Levant, 60, 62, 292, 356, 

364, 549, 572 
Laurustinus, or Viburnum Tinus, 

356, 362. 364, 402, 549, 572 
Lawns. See Grass-Lawns 



363 



to inoculate, 429, 473 

to inarch, 402 

Lettuces, 18. 131, 132, 187, 320, 375, 

408, 437, 462, 479, 512, 554, 577 
Liat rises, 354, 470 
Lilac, common purple and white, 301 

Persian, 301 

Lilies, sowing seeds of, 469 
Lilium superbum, 470, 503, 544 

canadense, 470, 503, 544 

Catesbaei, 544 

chalcedonicum, 470, 503, 544 

pomponium, 544 

japonicum, 544 

Martagon, 544 

Lily, white, 469, 503, 544 

red, 469, 503 

of the Valley, 301 

Lime or Linden-tree, 272, 289, 302, 
533 

Lime-tree, fruit-bearing. 472, 549 

Liraodorum tuberosum, 79, 470, 544 

Liquorice-root, its general culture, 
208 327 

Lobel'ias, 79, 158, 300, 354, 470 

Locust-tree, common, 271 

honey, or three-horned Acacia, 

263. 301 

London-pride, 158. 301, 502 

Loveage, 205, 411, 521 

Love-apple. See Tomatoes 

Love-lies-bleeding, 353 

Lungwort, Virginian, 501 

Lupins, 352 

Lyciums, 363 

Lychnadea. See Phlox 

Lychnis, dwarf, 1.58, 299, 352 

scarlet, 158, 300, 470. 501 

double scarlet, 84, 398, 425, 

501 

Lysimachias, 470 

M. 
Madder Dyer's, its general culture, 

330 
Magnolias, methods of propagating, 

276 

planting, 301 

Magnolia grandiflora, 59, 572 



608 



INDEX. 



Mallow marsh, 205, 521 

oriental, 158, 352 

Peruvian, 352 

curled, 299, 352, 353 

Mangel Wurtzel, 194 

Manna, officinal, to procure, 287 

Maples, of various kinds, 270, 289, 

301, 533, 536 
Marigold, pot, 206, 383 

Cape, 353 

French, 425 

African, 425 

Marjoram, pot, 205, 326, 383, 411, 

421 
sweet, or knotted, 206, 326, 

383 
Martagons, 446, 469, 503 
what lilies are properly called, 

544 
Martynia, annua or probosidea, 353 
Marvel of Peru, 353 
Massonias, 166, 508 
Mastich, 464 

Medicated tar, how to prepare, 46 
application and use of, 46, 47, 

141 
Medlars, 233, 250 

snowy, 275, 301 

Melanthiums, Cape, 166, 508 

American, 470 

Melasphaerulas, 166, 508 

Melias, 363 

Melianthuses, 363 

Melons, preparations for raising in 

hot-beds, 11, 116 
true Cantaleupe kinds describ- 
ed, 12 

age and preparation of seed, 12 

■ sowing the seed and general 

care of, 14, 116, 121, 182, 314, 368 
stopping or topping the plants. 



120 



ers of, 182 

raising in hot-bed ridges, 314 

sowing and care of. in the open 

ground, 228, 369, 405, 431, 463 

sowing for Mangoes, 431 

■ water, 328, 369, 405 



Mesembryanthemums, 161, 165, 178, 

362, 363, 398, 404, 548 
Mezereon, 156, 552 
Mignonette, 162, 179, 299, 353 
Mimosas, 363. See also Sensitive 

plant 
Mint, spear, forcing, 19, 520 

in the open ground, 205, 521 

pepper, 205, 521 

cat or Nep, 205, 521 

Monardas, 79. 354. 355, 470 
Monk's-hood,158,'300, 426 
Moreas, 166, 429, 508 
Moss, cleansing trees from, 46, 140, 

580 



Moving-plant, 459 

Mulberry trees, propagation of, &c. 
45, 264, 279, 289, 292, 528 

paper, the method of manufac- 
turing paper from the bark of, 285 

Mushrooms, care of, 22, 124, 135, 559, 
577 

descriptions of the cultivated 

kind, 483 

preparations for making new 



beds, 182 

to collect the spawn of, 484 

■ making and spawning the beds. 



516 



Mvrtles, 90, 165, 167, 307, 361, 363, 
364. 402, 428, 549 

to prune or head down, 307, 



366 



N. 



• impregnating the female flow- 53 



Napsea, 355, 470 

Narcissus, common kinds of, 163, 545 

polyanthus, 79, 295, 543 

autumnal, 469 

sowing seed of, 469 

Nasturtium, or Indian Cress, 326,382 

Nectarine-trees, pruning, 29, 135, 214 

budding, 442, 467, 498 

Nettle-tree, 269, 301 

Nettle, Roman, 352 

New- Jersey Tea, 301 

Newly grafted trees, care of, 339, 390, 
415, 439, 467 

budded trees, care of, 467, 498 

Nigella, 158, 299, 352 

Nolana prostrata, 353 

Nursery, the importance and advan- 
tage of, 49 

extent, soil, and situation, 50 

fencing, laying out, and pre- 
paring the ground, 51 

method of arranging the plants, 



58. 



general care and culture of, 55 
work to be done in for January, 
February. 149. March, 248. 

April, 337. May. 389. June, 413. 

July, 442. Augu.st, 467. September, 

498. October, 533. November, 565. 

December, 582 

O. 

Oak-leaves used for making hot-beds, 

553 
Oaks, propagation of, 270, 302, 534 

evergreen, 338 

Obelisks, rural, 71, 76 . 
Oenotheras, 358 
Oiled-paper frames, 127 
Okra, 327, 381, 410 
Olea, or Olive, 363 
Oleander, 361, 363, 402 
Onions, sowing seed of, 194, 323 
the several varieties of. 195 



INDEX. 



609 



Onions, planting and care of, 196, 324, 
379, 409 

tree, 196 

welsh, 483, 560 

planting large roots of, for pro- 
ducing seed, 523 

Ononis natrix, 453 

Ophryses, 79, 470 

Orach, garden, 329 

Orange-trees, general care and culture 
of, 165, 307, 308, 363, 401, 453, 549 

pruning of, 306, 362 

to shift, 307, 362, 454, 473 

to inoculate, 428, 473 

to inarch, 402 

Orchards, the utility of, 45 

extent, aspect, situation, and 

soil, 228 

preparation of the ground, 

229 



manure suitable for, 38, 141 

choice of young trees, 230 

times of planting, 229, 336, 

526, 531, 563 

method of planting, 230, 563 

observations on neglecting, 45, 



140 



when to prune and dress, 45, 

140, 223, 525, 531, 563, 581 

■ particular methods of pruning. 



45, 46, 47 

when to prune or head down 

unhealthy trees, 47, 223 

how to prune or head down 

unhealthy or old trees, 225, 228 

to prevent the ravages of in- 
sects, 143 

• how and when to remove large 



trees, 232, 571 
to refresh the bark of fruit- 



trees, 531 

to bring luxuriant and unfruit- 
ful trees into a bearing state, 142 

root-pruning of use to fruit- 
trees, 142 

to supply the places of decayed 

trees, 232 

Orchises, 80, 470, 544 

Ornamental planting and rural de- 
signs, 62 to 79 

Ornithogalums, tender, 429 

hardy, 83, 295, 446, 544 

Oxalis versicolor, 166, 508 

• violacea, 470 

P. 

Peeonia, or Peony, 355, 469, 502 

Palma Christi, 353 

Pancratium maritimum, 544 

Papaw-tree, 270, 301 

Paper-Mulberry-tree, 285 

Paper, method of making it from the 

bark of the Paper-Mulberry-tree, 

285 

4E 



Paper-frames, method of making, 128 
Parsley, common, 134, 198, 325, 383 
Hamburg or large-rooted 198 

325, 380, 410 
Parsnep, 132, 189, 207 321, 379, 409, 

557 
Parterre, 73 

Passion-flower, 292, 364, 415 
Patience Dock, 560 
Pavilions, rural, 74 
Peach-trees, pruning and training of, 

29, 135, 214 
budding or inoculating, 442, 

466, 498 

double flowering, 163, 301 



Pear-trees, pruning and training of, 
25, 214, 215, 335, 525. 563, 579 

grafting, 248, 249 

budding, 442, 466, 498 

gathering and preserving the 

fruit of, 529 

sowing the kernels of, for 



stocks, 157, 258, 537 
Pea-sticks, to provide and dress, 9 
Peas, garden, raising in hot-beds, 133 
raising in the open ground, 

133, 185, 186, 319, 374, 408, 439, 462 

sticking, best method of, 186 

Tangier, 158, 299, 352 

winged, 299,352 



Pelargoniums. See Geraniums 
Penny-royal, 205, 521 
Penstemons, 470 
Peppers, red. See Red Peppers 
Perennial and biennial flowers sow- 
ing seeds of, 300, 354, 398 
planting or transplanting 300 

354,399,451,469,545,568 
Periploca grseca, 292 
Persicaria, 299, 352 
Persimmon, *270, 354, 355, 470 
Phillyrea, 338 
Phlomises, 453 

Phloxes, 158, 354, 35^, 425, 470, 502 
Pine- Apples, general care and culture 

of. 103. 175, 310, 364, 403, 430, 455 

745, 510, 551, 574, 592 

various sorts of, 544 

compost for, 456 

propagation of, by crowns and 

suckers, 457 

propagation of, by seed, 476 

Pines and Firs, how to distinguish 

between, 272 

the various kinds of, 273, 274 

propagation of, by seeds, 273, 

274, 275, 338 

observations on transplanting 



seedlings of, in June, 414 

time of trimming or pruning. 



499 



Pinks, general care of, &c. See the 
Flower Garden for the several 
months 



610 



INDEX. 



Pink, properties of a fine double, 419 
method of piping, 423 

best time for and manner of 

planting, 297, 537 

China, 299, 353, 425 

Plane-tree, 269, 292, 302 
Planting fruit-trees of various kinds, 
220, 230, 333, 335, 526, 531, 561, 563 
Fig-trees, 217 

stocks to bud and graft on. 258, 

535, 565 

Gooseberries and Currants. 221, 

526, 562 

Raspberries, 221, 335, 528, 562 

all kinds of hardy deciduous trees 

and shrubs, 292, 302, 338, 355, 535, 

547, 565, 570 
hardy evergreen trees and shrubs, 

303, 337, 355, 498, 505, 536 
large grown trees, 232, 571 

seedlings of hardy deciduous 

trees and shrubs, 291 

seedlings of hardy evergreens, 

338 

general observations on, 288 

Pleasure-grounds, the laying out of, 

62 to 80 
Plum-trees, pruning and training of, 

27, 214, 215 

grafting, 250 

budding, 442, 467 

Plumeria rubra, 457 
Podalyrias, 79, 354, 355, 470 
Poles for Grape-vines, 48 

for Lima Beans, 10 

Polyanthus, 79, 158, 298, 300, 349, 

397, 451, 468, 470, 537, 568, 584, 

587 

description of a fine, 350 

to propagate by seed, 159, 296, 

587 

to propagate bv slips, 350, 397, 

451, 468 ' - 

Polyanthus-Narcissus. 79, 295, 543 
Polygala sanguinea, 352 

bracteolata, 453 

senega, 470 

Pomegranate, 402, 550, 572 

Poplars, 264, 292, 302 

Poppy, 158, 299 

Porticoes, of hedge-work, 74 

Pot, sweet, and physical herbs. 205, 

326, 383, 411 
Potatoes, common, 207, 326 

sweet, 370, 406 

Poultry, their use in Orchards, 141, 

144 
Primroses, 158, 409 

double, 298, 537, 568. .584 

Primrose-tree, 158, 300, 301 
Prince's-feather, 353 
Privet, common, 265, 293 

evergreen, 338 

Proteas, 364, 453 



Protecting roots of new planted trees 
and shrubs, 34, 579, 582, 588 

seedlings and tender plants, 565 

Pruning espalier and wall, apple and 
pear trees, 25, 135, 214,' 335, 525, 
563, 579 

plum and cherry-trees, 27, 136, 

214, 525, 563 

peach, nectarine, and apricot 

trees, 29, 135, 214 
gooseberry and currant trees, 32, 

137, 221. 527 

raspberries, 138, 221, 428 

fig-trees, 216 

Orchard or standard trees, 45 

46, 47, 140, 223, 531, 563 

young fruit-trees under training, 

55, 213, 215 
fruit-trees intended to be forced 

the ensuing season, 485 

summer pruning and dressing, 

439 

Nursery young trees, 55, 150 

hardy flowering shrubs, 151, 164, 

546, 571 
young forest-trees, 56, 151 

and restoring old or declining 

fruit and other trees, 225, 228 

Pumpkins, 370, 406 
Pyracantha, 265, 338 
Pyramids, rui^al, 76 

a. 

aueen's Gilliflower, 399 
Gluicks, thorn, for hedges, 151,260 
other sorts of, for the same pur- 
pose, 263 to 266 
auince-tree, 45, 157, 214 

R. 

Racer or turf-cutter, 305 

Radishes, 22, 130, 188, 321, 377, 409, 

437, 461, 480 
Ragged-robin, double, 300, 470 
P»,aisins, methods of curing, 497 
Ranunculus, Persian, general care of, 

&c. 79, 81, 160, 163, 295, 345, 394, 

503, 567 

properties of a iine double, 394 

taking up the roots of, 416 

best method of planting, 416 

preserving from frost, 566 

sowing seed of, 584 

aconitifolius, double, 3.55 

Rape, for salad. See small saladiug 
Raspberries, planting, 221, 335. 528, 

562 

■ pruning, 138, 221, 528 

■ protecting tender kinds of, from 

frost, 34, 562 
Recesses, rural, 65 
Red peppers, 208, 327, 381, 411, 439 
Rhexias, 79, 355, 426, 470 
Rhododendrons, 276, 338 



INDEX. 



611 



Rhubarb, the Turkey or officinal, its 

general culture, 210, 326, 522, 559 
English or common, 212, 326, 522. 

559 
Rocambole, 197, 324, 523, 555 
Rock and shell work, 72, 74 
Robinias, 150, 271 
Rocket, garden, double, 106, 158, 300. 

398, 425, 501 

particularly noticed, 398 

night smelling, 354 

Root-houses, rural, 72 

Root-pruning of trees, 142 

Roses, forcing into early bloom, 163, 

179 

to pot, for forcing, .546 

propagating by suckers, 150 

propagating by budding, 414, 445 

propagating by layers, 288 414, 

533 

■ ■ planting, 302, 303, 356, 547 

used for hedges, 265 

China, 401. 428, 572 

Otaheite, 401, 428, 572 

Rose-campion, 84, 158, 300, 426, 470, 

501 
Rosemary, 205 
Rue, 205, 464 
Rudbeckias, 364, 470 
Rural seats, 65, 72 
Rustic devices, 72 
Russia Turnip. See Ruta Baga 
Ruta Baga, 436 

S. 
Saffron, bastard, 353 
officinal or true. See Crocus, 

autumnal 
Sage, common, 205, 464, 521 
Saiading, small, 19, 125, 190, 321, 375, 

408, 432, 462, 480, 522, 555, 577 
Salsafy, 197, 324, 381, 410 

to preserve for winter use, 557 

Salvias, tender, 363, 453 

Saponaria, 354 

Sarracenias, 470 

Sassafras, 301 

Satin-flower, or Honesty, 300 

Savin, 292 

Savory, winter, 205, 326, 383, 411, 

464, 521 

summer, 206, 326, 3S3, 411 

Saxatile plants, 72 

Saxifragas, sowing seed of, 354 

collecting, 470 

Saxifrage, double Avhite, 158, 301, 

471 

strawberry, 471 

pyramidal, 472 

Scabious, sweet, 300, 426 
Scilla maritima, 544 

peruviana, 544 

Scorzonera, 197, 324, 381, 410 
preserving in winter, 557 



Scotch Kale. See Borecole 
Scurvy-grass, officinal, 205, 524 
Sea Kale, 198, 325, 522, 559 
Sedums, 90, 165, 404, 548 
Seedling trees and shrubs, summer 

care of, 339, 414 

winter care of, 59, 565 

Sensitive plant, 161, 298, 398, 448 

a particular account of, 448 

Shaddocks, 429, 453, 473, 549 

Shady walks, 70 

Shallots, 197, 324, 523, 555 

Shell-work, 72 

Shifting plants out of smaller into 

larger pots or tubs, best method of, 

308, 362 
Silenes, tender, 363 
Silk-worms, 279 
Silphiums, 354, 355, 470 
Sisyrinchiums, for edgings, &c. 78, 

355 470 
Skirrets, 198, 325, 410, 522, 559 

to preserve for winter use, 557 

Smallage, 206 
Snail-plant, 299, 353 
Snapdragon, 300, 353 
Sneezewort, double, 354 
Snowdrops, 79, 82, 396, 417. 469, 502, 

544 
Snow drop- tree, 275, 301 
Soapwort, double, 354, 426 
Solanums, hardy shrubby, 292 

tender, 364 

Solidagoes, 79, 354, 470 

Sorrel, broad-leaved garden, 329. 383 

521 
round-leaved or French, 329, 382, 

521 
Sour-gum or Tupelo-tree, 271, 292 
Southern States, seasons and culture 

in, particularly noticed, 23, 24, 44, 

49, 60, 135, 148, 157, 165, 213, 465, 

485, 525, 531, 534, 561, 564, 578, 580, 

581, 582, 583 
Southernwood, 205, 521 
Sowing stones and kernels of fruit. 

See Fruit 
haws, for raising thorn-quicks, 

151, 259, 534 
Spartiums, tender, 363 
Spiderwort, Virginian, 501 
Spigelia marilandica, 470 
Spinage, 131, 188, 321, 378, 437 

winter, 460, 478, 512, 554 

Spindle-tree, 148 

Spirseas, hardy herbaceous, 354 

Spiraea trifoliata, 470 

Filipendula, 502 

Squash, 328, 369 

St. Peter's-wort, 301 

Stage for auriculas, carnations, &c. 

346 
Staking new planted trees, best me- 
thod of, 232 



612 



INDEX. 



Standard, half-standard, and dwarf- 
standard trees, to train, 56 
Star of Bethlehem, 83, 295, 446, 544 
Statues, 65, 72 

Stock, annual or Mediterranean, 352 
Stock-gilliflowers, 84, 106, 163, 300, 

399, 426, 545, 569, 589 
Stocks, the proper kinds to bud and 

graft on, 250 
Stools, nursery, of trees and shrubs, 

52, 288, 289 
Stopping, or topping young cucumber 

and melon plants, 120 
Stoves or Hot-Houses, methods of 

erecting, 91 to 103 
Strawberries, forcing, 34, 105, 138, 

179, 312, 593 

spring dressing of, 222 

choice of plants, 222, 486 

the various kinds of, 485 

times and method of planting, 

222, 487, 529 

making nursery plantations of, 

412 

to pot for forcing, 487 

— — autumn dressing of, 529 

other necessary care of, 336, 387 

Strawberry-spinage, 352 
Strawberry-tree. See Arbutus Unedo 
Suckers, to propagate trees and shrubs 

by, 150, 338, 547 
Sumack, to propagate various kinds 

of, 279 

tanner's, 279 

Sun, its effects on frozen plants, 160 
Sunflower, annual, 158, 235, 300, 352 

perennial, 158, 300 

Sweet-briar, 265 
Sweet-gum. 270, 302 
Sweet-scented Peas, 158, 299 
Sweet-scented shrub. See Calycan- 

thus floridus 
Sweet-sultan, 353 
Sweet-william, 84, 106, 158, 300, 425, 

470, 501 
Sycamore, 270 
Syringas, 150 

T. 

Table of the progress of vegetation in 
the grape-vine, &c. 489 

Tacamahaca, 292 

Tamarisk, 292 

Tan, covering bulbs with, 81 

procuring fresh, for making hot- 
pits or beds, 511 

Tansey, 19, 205, 521 

Tarragon, 19,205,521 

Teasel, fuller's, 332 

Temples, rnral and ornamental, 65, 
72 

Ten-week stock, 162, 179, 299, 352 

Terraces, 66. 76 

Teucriums, 363, 364 



Thermometer, its use in gardening, 

&c. 175 
Thickets in rural and ornamental 

planting, 71 
Thorn-quicks. See Quicks 
Thorn, double flowering, 163, 301 
Thrift, 79, 158, 301, 501 
Thyme, 205, 382, 411, 464, 521 
Tiger-flower, 473 
Tomatoes, 207, 328, 381, 410, 439 
Trellises for fruit-trees, to erect, 24, 25 
Trenching and manuring, 9, 61, 113, 

468, 524, 561, 566 
Tricolors. See Amaranthus trico- 
lor 
Trilliums, 354, 470 
Tritonias, 166, .508 
Trumpet-flower, 292, 415 
Tuberoses, forcing, 357 

open-ground culture of, 358, 397 

taking up the roots, &c. 570 

Tulip-tree, (called Poplar,) 269, 302 
Tulips, common care of, &c. 71, 81. 

82, 160, 163, 294, 342, 416, 567, 583, 

589 
method of supporting the flowers, 

343 
description and properties of the 

best, 343 

the various classes of, 344 

to take up and preserve the roots, 

393 

when to take them up, 416 

to propagate by seed, 469, 500 

breeders, what, 344 

h ow and when to plant the valuable 

sorts, 538 

to protect them in winter, 567 

Turfing-iron, 305 

Tupelo-tree, 272, 292 

Turnips, garden culture of, 197, 207, 

324,380,410,461,481 

general field culture of, 433 

to preserve in winter, 557 

Swedish, 436 

Turnip-cabbage, 318, 373, 406 
Turnip-rooted cabbage, 318, 373 

V. 

Valerian, Greek, 158, 300, 426, 502 

red garden, 354 

creeping Greek, 502 

Vallisneria americana. 505 
Venus's fly-trap, 449 

looking-glass, 158, 299, 352 

navel-wort, 158, 299, 352 

Veratrums, 470 
Verbascums, 354 
Veronicas, 354, 470 
Viburnum prunifolium,266 
Vinca rosea, 398, 459 
Vines, grape, their history, 233 

descriptions and classification of 

the various kinds of, 236 



INDEX. 



613 



Vines, American species of, 241 

time and methods of pruning, 

146, 564 

time of planting, 243, 531, 565 

methods of planting and propa- 
gating, 243 to 248 

to protect the fruit from birds, 

insects, &c. 489 

winter dressing of, 564 

to malie wine of the fruit, 490 to 

496 
to preserve the fruit of, for win- 
ter use, 497 

to cure the fruit for Raisins, 497 

Vineries for forcing grapes, 44 
Vineyards, to manure, 48, 146 

to make poles for the vines, 48 

soil and situation fit for, 242 

preparation of the soil, 243 

preparations for, and methods of 

planting, 243, 248 
time of planting, 243, 531, 565 

time and methods of pruning, 

147, 564 

work to be done in for January, 

48. February, 146. March, 233. 
April, 337. May, 388. June, 413. 
July, 441. August, 466. September, 
488. October,^531. November, 564. 
December, 581. 

Violets, 158,301,470 

Virgin's-bower, 292, 415 

W. 

Walchendorfias, 166, 508 
Walks, shady, 70 

grass, to make, 305, 360 

gravel, to make, 3.59 

Wall-flowers, double, 84, 163, 399, 545, 

569, 589 
sowing seed of, 300 



Wall-flowers, transplanting seedling, 

425 
Wall-trees, the general meaning of, 

110 

to train when young, 56, 214, 215 

to prune. See pruning 

to summer prune, 439 

Walnut-tree, the English, 45, 233, 270, 

302, 534 
Wasps, to destroy, 440, 489 
Water-falls, 68 
Water-pieces, or sheets, 68 
Watsonias, 166, 429, 508 
Weld, or Dyer's-weed, 333 
Wilderness, 65 

Willow, weeping or drooping, 68 
hedges, 266 

various kinds of, to propagate, 

292, 532 

Wine, the method of making white, 

490 
making red, 492 

genei'al remarks on the making 

of, 494 

how to clarify, 496 

Winter-cress, 464, 480, 554 

Witch-hazel, 301 

Worms in fruit-trees, to destroy, 141, 

227 
Wormwood, 205 

X. 

Xeranthemum, hardy annual, 353 
tender sorts of, 363, 453 

Y. 

Yew-tree, 156, 265, 291, 338 
Yuccas, tender, 363 



Zennia, 353 



(EPHOR 






A e^.*^^^ 



/> 



/» 

~ t-^.-^ 



4 .. 2 



V^, 



7^'/.^ 



Rebacked in unbleached linen 
dyed to match old sides. 
Corners rebuilt & recovered 
with linen. Original end 
papers preserved. 

Carolyn Horton & Associates 
430 West 22 Street 
New York, NY 10011 

January 1973. 



