
HI 


■ 



i 




Ex LlBRIS 

The Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society 



ELSA FORT 

6123 Cedar Avenue 

Merchantville 8, New Jersey 




Digitized by the Internet Archive 

in 2011 with funding from 

LYRASIS Members and Sloan Foundation 



http://www.archive.org/details/americanflowerga1852buis 



AMERICAN 

FLOWER-GARDEN DIRECTORY : 

CONTAINING 

PRACTICAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE CULTURE OF PLANTS, 

IN 

THE FLOWER-GARDEN, HOT-HOUSE, GREEN-HOUSE, 
ROOMS, OR PARLOUR-WINDOWS, 

FOR EVERY MONTH IN THE YEAR. 

WITH 

A DESCRIPTION OF THE PLANTS MOST DESIRABLE IN EACH, THE NATURE 

OF THE SOIL AND SITUATION BEST ADAPTED TO THEIR GROWTH, 

THE PROPER SEASON FOR TRANSPLANTING, ETC. 

WITH 

INSTRUCTIONS FOR ERECTING 

% lat-lmi» ; tew-lmitt, niiu Xntjing rnit 

THE WHOLE 

ADAPTED TO EITHER LARGE OR SMALL GARDENS. 

WITH INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARING THE SOIL, PROPAGATING, 
PLANTING, PRUNING, TRAINING, AND FRUITING 

THE GRAPE VINE, 

WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF THE BEST SORTS FOR CULTIVATING 
IN THE OPEN AIR. 



ROBERT BUIST, 

NURSERYMAN AND SEED-GROWER. 

if If 1 1) ISliition, toftij jtfumetous gltiintfons. 



PHILADELPHIA: 
A. HART, late CAREY & HART. 

1852. 



Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1S51, 

BY A. HART, LATE CARET AND HART, 

In the Clerk's Office of the District Court for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. 



ffl<f 



\ l 



$ 



C. S H E K M A X, P R I N T E R. 



9984 
EEHom 



INTRODUCTION. 



V \ 



We are again called upon to present to the public the 
fifth edition of this popular work on the Culture of 
Flowers — a taste that is now widely disseminating itself; 
in fact, a knowledge of which is requisite before a refined 
education is completed. We boldly and fearlessly say that 
no country has made such rapid advancement in the art and 
science of Horticulture in so short a period as the United 
States. Wherever the taste prevails, it diffuses a peace and 
harmony among its participants without either symbol or 
mystery. In this edition, a feast of new materials has been 
served up ; entire lists have been cancelled and replaced with 
those of newer and finer forms and habits ; extraneous mat- 
ter and plants of indifferent character are dropped. The 
great and successful adaptation of Hot water to Horticultural 
purposes is explicitly described, and to those who wish to ex- 
amine the results, we say " Come and see." A new and dis- 
tinct list of hardy Evergreens has been added, and a new 
chapter on the ever-to-be-admired ROSE, and every im- 
provement in the art up to this present time introduced. 

True, we have not dilated on the wonderful effects of 
electricity upon vegetation, nor have we been extravagant 
in the results of guano in the growth of plants. With re- 
gard to the former, the capability of its reduction to general 
practice has yet to be proven — and the latter has to be 



IV INTRODUCTION. 

cautiously used, and even then its beneficial effects are not 
universal. However, it can in a liquid state be used to 
advantage on almost any plant, especially those of -strong 
habits, such as the Hose, Geranium, Fuchsia, Heliotrope, 
Chrysanthemum, &c. . To such, the following proportions 
will be very beneficial : 1 lb. of guano to 5 galls, of water ; 
after standing 12 or more hours, can be used in the routine 
of watering once a week or even once in two weeks ; but 
to plants that have more delicate and silky rootlets, such as 
Epacris, Erica, Azalea, &c, the liquid must be reduced one- 
half. 

Our descriptions of plants have been conveyed more with 
the view of giving an idea of their character to the general 
reader than an accurate botanical synopsis, which would 
have been known to the botanist alone. All that wc have 
described and recommended have, with a few exceptions, 
passed under our own observation, and are such as are 
worthy of cultivation, either for beauty of flower, foliage, or 
habit, together with those celebrated in arts and medicine. 
Many may, possibly, have passed unobserved, either from 
not being very generally known or difficult to obtain; but 
in no case has there been suppression, from business preju- 
dices. Where the words " our collections" occur, they are 
meant for those of the country generally. 

All our observations have been guided by dint of practice ; 
and, although others may differ, this is designedly and pro- 
fessedly given as the result of our own experience. The 
plan laid down is our own routine of culture ; the soils are 
those which we adopt; but, at the same time, conceding that 
every art and profession is subject to improvement, and none 
more so than American horticulture. The table of soils was 
originally constructed at the expense of much investigation 
and labour, and has, also, in this edition, undergone consider- 
able improvement. To every one that has but a single plant 



INTRODUCTION. V 

it will be found invaluable. Althougb the publications in 
Europe on Gardening and Floriculture are profuse, yet many 
of their directions, when practised in the United States, 
prove almost a dead letter. Not so with their architectural 
and horticultural designs. The estates of the wealthy are 
susceptible of great improvement ; they want more of the 
picturescpie, and (to use the words of the veteran pioneer of 
horticulture) gardenesque effect, to relieve their premises 
from the monotonous erections and improvements which 
seem to govern all. On culture, a work adapted to the cli- 
mate must (and no other can) be the guide in this country : 
on this account, a work like the present has been a deside- 
ratum to aid the very rapid advancement of the culture of 
flowers among the intelligent of our flourishing republic. 

ROBERT BUIST. 

Philadelphia, February, 1852. 



PREFACE 



TO THE FIKST EDITION. 



This volume owes its existence principally to the repeated 
requests of a number of our fair patrons and amateur sup- 
porters, whose inquiries and wishes for a practical manual 
on Floriculture at last induced us to prepare a work on the 
subject. That now offered is given unaffectedly and simply 
as a plain and easy treatise on this increasingly interesting 
subject. It will at once be perceived that there are no pre- 
tensions to literary claims — the directions are given in the 
simplest manner — the arrangement made as lucidly as was 
in our power — and the whole is presented with the single 
wish of its being practically useful. How far our object has 
been attained, of course our readers must judge. Nothing 
has been intentionally concealed ; and all that is asserted is 
the result of minute observation, close application, and an 
extended continuous experience from childhood. We pre- 
tend not to infallibility, and are not so sanguine as to declare 
our views the most perfect that can be attained. But we 
can so far say that the practice here recommended has been 
found very successful. 

Some, very probably, may be disappointed in not having 
the means of propagating as clearly delineated as those of 
culture ; but to have entered into all the minutiae connected 



Vlll PREFACE. 

therewith would have formed materials for two volumes 
larger than the present. We might have described that 
branch, as it has already been done in works published both 
on this continent and in Europe. In one of the former, it is 
said " You may now propagate many kinds {Exotic Plants) 
by suckers, cuttings, and layers, which should be duly at- 
tended to, particularly such as are scarce and difficult to be 
obtained." And the directions given in one of the most ex- 
tensive works in Europe on the propagation of an extensive 
genus varied in character and constitution, ran thus : " Cut- 
tings of most kinds will strike root. From the strongest- 
growing kinds, take off large cuttings at a joint, and plunge 
them in a pot of sand under a hand-glass in the bark bed. 
Of the smaller kinds, take younger kinds and put them 
under a bell-glass, also plunged in heat. The sooner the 
plants are potted off after they are rooted the better." 

Such instructions to the inexperienced are imperfect and 
unavailing, which, we flatter ourselves, is not the character 
that will attach to the present work. We are well aware 
that there are persons who, to show their own superior abili- 
ties, may cavil and say that there is nothing new. To such 
critics it may be answered, if arranging, simplifying, digest- 
ing and rendering Floriculture attainable by the humblest 
capacity, with useful lists and tables on a plan quite novel, 
as we believe, offer nothing new, it may at least be called 
an improvement. However, we submit all to a generous 
public, to whom we are already under many obligations. 

HIBBERT & BUIST. 

Philadelphia, April 18th, 1832. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Flower-garden, laying out a 



PAGE 

13 



JANUARY. 



Of framing, 
Of pruning, 



17 

18 



FEBRUARY. 



Of pruning, . 

Of planting shrubs, 

Of hyacinths, &c, 



19 
21 
24 



MARCH. 

Of framing, 

List of choice annuals for hot-bed, 
List of choice hardy annuals, 
Box-edgings, 
Grass and other edgings, 
List of hardy biennials, 
List of hardy perennials, 
Bulbous roots, 

Carnations, pinks, primroses, &c, 
Auriculas, 

Ranunculus and anemone, 
Roses, 
Roses, climbing, 

Deciduous, ornamental flowering shrubs, 
Grass-plats and walks, . 
Gravel-walks, 

Of grafting, .... 

1 



25 
26 
29 
31 
32 
33 
35 
47 
47 
48 
49 
49 
53 
53 
54 
50 
56 



CONTENTS. 



APRIL. 



Annuals, 

Biennials and perennials, . 

Roses, . 

Hybrid Chinese roses, 

Select list of Chinese roses, 

Hybrid roses, striped, spotted, or marbled 

Perpetual roses, 

Hybrid perpetual roses 

Grafting roses, 

Bourbon roses, 

Bengal roses, . 

Tea rose, . 

Noisette roses, 

Musk roses, 

Climbing roses, 

Microphylla roses, 

Climbing plants, 

Deciduous shrubs, 

Of planting evergreen shrubs, 

Care of choice bulbs, 

Anemones and ranunculus, 

Character of a fine ranunculus 

Auriculas, 

Character of a fine auricula, 

Carnations, pinks, &c, 

Character of a polyanthus, 

Heart's ease or pansy, 

Gladiolus or sword lily, 

Jacoboea lily, . 

Tiger flower, 

Walks, 

Evergreen hedges, 

Box-edgings, 

General care of plants coming into flower, 



PAGE 

58 
58 
59 
59 
59 
61 
61 
63 
64 
65 
66 
69 
72 
74 
75 
78 
80 
83 
84 
85 
87 
87 



89 
90 
92 
92 
93 
93 
94 
95 
90 



MAY. 

Dahlia, propagation of, by cuttings, 

grafting, 

Dahlias, list of, 
Dahlia, character of, 
Annuals, hardy and tender, 
Care of hyacinths and tulip, 
Anemones and ranunculus, 
Tuberose and amaryllis, . 



97 
98 
100 
103 
104 
105 
105 
105 



CONTENTS. 



Auriculas, polyanthus, and primrose, 
Double wallflower, 
General observations, 



TAOK 

106 
106 
106 



JUNE AND JULY. 



Holland bulbs, . 

autumn flowering bulbs, . 

Carnations and pinks, . 

laving of, 

Budding roses, . 
Of watering, 



107 
107 
108 
109 
110 
112 



AUGUST. 



Evergreen hedges, 
Carnations and pinks, 
Bulbous roots, . 
Sowing seeds of bulbous roots, 



112 
113 
113 
114 



SEPTEMBER. 



Of dahlias, 

General care of plants in pots, 
Beds for bulbous roots, 
General observations, 
Sowing and saving seeds, 



114 
115 

115 

115 
116 



OCTOBER. 

Of planting bulbous and tuberous roots, 
Of planting and transplanting, 
Grass and gravel-walks, 
Planting evergreens, 
General observations, 



116 
121 
121 
122 
122 



NOVEMBER. 

Dahlias, ..... 

Tuberoses, tigridias, and amaryllis, 
Erythrinas, ..... 

Primrose, polyanthus, and daisies, 

Choice carnations, pinks, pansies, and auriculas, 

Of protecting plants in the garden, 

Protection of seedling bulbs, . . 

Of planting deciduous trees and shrubs, . 

General observations, .... 



. 122 


123 


. 123 


124 


. 124 


125 


. 125 


125 


. 126 



Xll CONTENTS. 



DECEMBER. 

PAGE 

General observations, ..... 126 



HOT-HOUSE. 

CO'STRrCTIOX OF A HOT-HOUSE,' .... 127 

JANUARY. 

Of firing and fuel, . ..... 134 

Of watering the plants, . . . . .135 

Of insects — their destruction, .... 136 

Of cleansing plants, house, &c, . ... . 139 

FEBRUARY. 

Of insects, &c, ...... 141 

Of repotting plants, . . . . . .142 

Of cleansing plants, house, &c, .... 143 

MARCH. 
Of repotting plants, ...... 144 

APRIL. 

Repotting cacti, &c, ..... 145 

MAY. 

Of repotting plants, &c, . 146 

Of bringing out the hot-house plants, . . . 174 

Succulent plants, as cacti, &c, . . . .175 

JUNE AND JULY. 

General observations, ..... 176 

AUGUST. 

Repotting, ....... 177 

Of painting, repairing, aud cleansing the house, . 177 

SEPTEMBER. 

Dressing the plants, ...... 177 

Of taking in the plants, ..... 178 

General observations, . . . . . .178 



CONTENTS. 



Xlll 



General observations, 



OCTOBER. 



PAGE 

179 



Of air and water, 
General observations, 



NOVEMBER. 



180 
181 



Of shutters, 
Of bulbous roots, 
General observations, . 
Epiphyte, or air plants, 



DECEMBER. 



181 
182 
182 
183 



GREEN-HOUSE. 



Construction of gkeex-house, 



185 



JANUARY. 



Of watering, 

Camellia japonica, 

Of oranges, lemons, &c, . 

Of cape bulbs, . 

Of hyacinths and other bulbs, 



187 
187 
188 
188 
189 



F E B R U A R Y. 



Of oranges and lemons, 
Of cape bulbs, 
Camellia japonica, 
Of shifting, 
Of cleansing, &c, 



190 
190 
191 
192 
193 



MARC FT. 

Of watering, 

Of oranges, lemons, &c, 

Myrtles, oleanders, &c, 

Geraniums, .... 

Herbaceous plants, 

Of cape bulbs, &c, 

Repotting, .... 

Of enarching, or grafting by approach, 



194 
194 
195 
195 
196 
196 
196 
259 



CONTENTS. 



APRIL. 



Watering, ....... 261 

Oranges and lemons, ...... 262 

Myrtles and oleanders, ..... 263 

Geraniums, . • . . . . . . 263 

Flowering plants, ...... 264 

Insects, ....... 264 

Flowering stocks, ...... 265 

m a y. 

Watering, . . . . . .266 

Of bringing out the green-house plants, . . . 266 

Repotting plants, ...... 267 

Camellias, ....... 269 

Cape bulbs, . . . . . .269 

JUNE AND JULY. 

General observations, ..... 269 

AUGUST. 

Geraniums, . . . . . . .270 

Oranges and lemons, ..... 271 

Pruning oranges and lemons, ..... 272 

Repotting plants, ...... 273 

General observations, . . . . . .275 

SEPTEMBER. 

Of watering, . . . . . . 276 

Preparing for taking in the plants, .... 276 

Stocks and wallflowers, ..... 276 

Chrysanthemums, ...... 277 

Cape and Holland bulbs, ..... 277 

OCTOBER. 

Of taking in and arranging the plants, . . . 283 

Of repotting, ...... 2S4 

Camellias, ....... 2S1 

Sowing camellia seed, ..... 280 

NOVEMBE It. 

Of air and water, . . . . . .284 

Of tender bulbs, ...... 285 

General observations, ...... 285 



CONTENTS. XV 

DECEMBER. 

PAGE 

Bulbous roots, ...... 28G 



ROOMS. 

Treatment of plants in rooms, .... 287 

J A N D A R Y. 

Watering, ....... 289 

Of camellia japonica, ..... 290 

Of insects, fee., . . . . . . 290 

Of bulbous roots in general, .... 291 

FEBRUARY. 
General observations, ..... 292 

MARCH. 
Flowering plants, ...... 294 

APRIL. 

Directions for plants brought from the green-house, . . 295 

Flowering plants, ..... 296 

Bringing plants out of the cellar, .... 296 

MAY. 

Cape bulbs, ...... 298 

Repotting, ....... 298 

JUNE AND JULY. 
General observations, ..... 298 

AUGUST. 
General observations, ...... 299 

SEPTEMBER. 
General observations, ..... 300 

OCTOBER. 

Of bulbous roots, . . . . . .301 

General observations, ..... 302 



XVI CONTENTS. 



NOVEMBER. 

PAGE 

General observations, ...... 302 

DECEMBER. 

Roses, ....... 303 

Camellias, ....... 304 



CULTURE OF THE GRAPE VINE. 

Aspect, ....... 308 

On soil, ....... 308 

On the propagation of vines, .... 311 

On erections for the support and protection of the vines in 

out-door culture, . . . . . 314 

Of transplanting the vine, . . . . 316 

On pruning, . . . . ... . 318 

On manure, . . . . . • . 819 

Descriptive catalogue of grapes most suitable for open air 

culture, . . . . . .320 



Table of soils, ...... 332 



LISTS. 



Hardy evergreens, ...... 325 

deciduous trees and shrubs, . . . 328 



THE 



AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

The Flower-Garden is chiefly devoted to the cultivation of 
showy flowering plants, shrubs, and trees, either natives of 
this country or those of a foreign clime : it is a refined ap- 
pendage to a country seat, " suburban" villa, or city resi- 
dence ; every age has had its principles of taste, and every 
country its system of gardening. Our limits do not permit 
us to enter minutely into the details of any of these sys- 
tems; but a few hints may not be out of place to those whose 
design is the laying out or improvement of the garden. 
The Italian style is characterized by broad terraces and pa- 
rallel walks, having the delightful shade and agreeable fra- 
grance of the orange and the myrtle. Terraces may be ad- 
vantageously adopted to surmount steep declivities ; and, if 
judiciously laid out, would convert a sterile bank into a 
beautiful promenade, or choice flower-garden. 

The French partially adopt the above system, interspers- 
ing it with parterres and figures of statuary work of every 
character and description. When such is well designed and 
neatly executed, it has a lively and interesting efiect; but 
now the refined taste says these vagaries are too fantastic, 
and entirely out of place. A late writer says of Dutch gar- 
dening, that it " is rectangular formality :" they take great 
pride in trimming their trees of yew, holly, and other ever- 



11 ON LAYING OCT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

greens, into every variety of form, such as mops, moons, hal- 
berds, chairs, &c. In such a system, it is indispensable to 
order that the compartments correspond in formality, nothing 
being more offensive to the eye than incongruous mixtm-es 
of character. 

The beauty of English gardening consists in an artful 
imitation of nature, and is consequently much dependent on 
aspect and locality. It is a desideratum, where wood and 
water can be combined with the flower-garden, and the prac- 
tical eye can dispose of an object to advantage by interspers- 
ing shrubbery and walks, that the combined objects form an 
agreeable whole. They are not to be disposed with a view 
to their appearance in a picture, but to the use and enjoy- 
ment of them in real life. 

We will now endeavour to give an explicit exposition of a 
system adapted to our variable climate of extreme heat and 
excessive cold. Where choice of aspects can be obtained, 
preference should be given to a southeast or east; but if 
not, south or southwest, and, if possible, sheltered by ris- 
ing ground or fall-grown woods from the northwest and 
north. But to lay down directions for a flower-garden is not 
a little difficult, seeing that there cannot be any given area 
or any description of local circumstances applicable to all 
situations. A good soil is the sure foundation on which to 
rear the grand floral superstructure, and the most genial is a 
sandy loam : I mean by sandy loam a soil which contains 
from one-sixth to one-tenth of sand ; and if on a gravelly or 
sandy bottom, so much the better. Where the general sur- 
face is gently undulating, it will greatly add to the beauty of 
arrangement ; if access to a spring can be obtained, it will 
prove a desideratum in completing the whole : it can be 
available for a fish-pond or an aquarium, or can be convert- 
ed into a swamp for the cultivation of many of our most 
beautiful and interesting native plants, such as Habanaria, 
Lilium, Sarracenia, Dionea, &c, and on the margin of which 
(if partially shaded) can be planted the beautiful varieties of 
Azaleas, and the splendid flowering Rhododendron, which, 
by the by, are almost entirely neglected in all our floral deco- 
rations. With many, the arrangement of a flower-garden 
is rather a matter for the exercise of fancy, than one calling 
for the application of refined taste : true, it may be said 
there is no mathematical law to guide the designer, so that 



ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 15 

if be avoid incongruity of arrangement the end is accom- 
plished. But, in commencing these operations, a design 
should be kept in view that will tend to expand, improve, 
and beautify the situation ; not, as we too frequently see it, 
the parterre and borders with narrow walks up to the very 
household entrauce : such is decidedly bad taste, unless com- 
pelled for want of room. For perspicuity, admit that the 
area to be enclosed should be from one to three acres, a cir- 
cumambient walk should be traced at some distance within 
the fence, by which the whole is enclosed; the inferior walks 
should partly circumscribe and intersect the general surface 
in an easy, serpentine, and sweeping manner, and at such 
distances as would allow an agreeable view of the flowers 
when walking for exercise. Walks may be in breadth from 
three to twenty feet, although from four to ten feet is gene- 
rally adopted ; and, to have these dry and pennanent, those 
that are to be much used should have six to eight inches of 
the bottom soil dug out in a concave manner, and in the 
centre of the concave dig out a trench of about nine inches 
square, to form a drain, which may be made with brick or 
filled with rough stone, and the concave may be filled with 
refuse of buildings or broken stone within three inches of 
the desired height, which should be covered with gravel, and 
then firmly rolled with a heavy roller. Where the gravel 
cannot be obtained, sand may be used, mixed with a few 
small stones to bind it, but such needs very repeated rolling. 
Walks, such as described, when completely finished, will last 
for ages ; but many will not be disposed to go to such ex- 
pense; to those we say use tanner's bark, which is very 
cheap, and accessible to all. The outer margin of the gar- 
den should be planted with the largest trees and shrubs ; the 
interior arrangement may be in detached groups of shrub- 
bery and parterres. In order that the whole should not 
partake of a uniform and graduated character, it should be 
broken and diversified by single trees planted in the turf, or 
arising in scattered groups from a base of shrubs. In some 
secluded spot, rock-work or a fountain, or both, may be 
erected; the foundation of the former should consist of 
mounds of earth, which will answer the purpose of more 
solid erections, and will make the stones go farther : rocks 
of the same kind and colour should be placed together, and 
the greatest possible variety of character, size, and form 



16 ON LAYING OUT A FLOWER-GARDEN. 

should be studied, the whole showing an evident and well- 
defined connection. These erections generally are stiff, arti- 
ficial, disjointed masses, and often decorated with plants 
having no affinity to their arid location. The undertaking, 
when well completed, will present a field of varied and in- 
teresting study, and more than compensate for the labour 
and expense bestowed upon it. If it is desired that the flower- 
garden should be a botanical study, there should be some 
botanical arrangement adopted. 

The Linneean system is the most easily acquired. A 
small compartment, laid out in beds, might contain plants of 
all the twenty-four classes, and a few of all the hardy orders, 
which do not exceed one hundred. Or, to have their natu- 
ral characters more assimilated, the Jussieuean system could 
be carried into effect by laying down a grass-plat to any 
extent above one quarter of an acre, and cut therein small 
figures to contain the natural families, which, of hardy plants, 
we do not suppose would exceed one hundred and fifty. The 
difficulties of this arrangement are, that many of the cha- 
racters are imperfectly known, even to the most scientific. 
(See Professor Lindley's Introduction to Botany.) All the 
large divisions should be intersected by small alleys, or paths, 
about one and a half or two feet wide. When there is not 
a green-house attached to the flower-garden, there should be, 
at least, a few sashes of framing, or a forcing pit, to bring 
forward early annuals, &c, for early blooming. These 
should be situate in some spot detached from the garden by 
a fence of Roses, trained to trellises. Chinese Arbor vitae, 
Privet, or even Madura, make excellent fences, and, when 
properly trimmed, are very ornamental : they require to be 
neatly and carefully clipped with shears every September. 
In the Southern States, Noisette, Bourbon, and China Boses, 
with a profusion of Swcetbriar, would make the most beauti- 
ful of all fences, and could be very easily obtained : a fence 
three hundred feet long would only cost about one hundred 
and twenty dollars. Frames for forcing should be made of 
plank two inches thick, and well put together ; the sash 
should be from five to seven feet long, and from three to four 
feet wide, and filled with six by eight glass. In the framing- 
ground should be kept the various soils required for plants, 
and also various characters of manure at all times ready 
for use, the whole in regular heaps, and kept free from 



Jan.'] OF FRAMING, ETC. 17 

weeds. — Having given these brief outlines of a flower-garden, 
we now proceed to give monthly directions for planting and 
keeping the same in order. 



JANUARY. 

If the covering of the beds of choice bulbs, herbaceous 
plants, or tender shrubs, has been neglected last month, let 
it be done forthwith. The season is now precarious, and 
delays are dangerous. For pai'ticular directions, see Decem- 
ber. Any bulbous roots that have been kept out of the 
ground, should be planted immediately, according to direc- 
tions in October. Some writers have recommended keeping 
some of the bulbs until this month, in order to have a con- 
tinued succession. Experience will prove the inefficiency of 
the plan, and will satisfactorily show that the difference is 
almost imperceptible, while the flowers are very inferior, 
and much degenerated; and, in place of having "a long-con- 
tinued succession of bloom/' there appear, along with your 
finest specimens, very imperfect flowers, calculated to discou- 
rage the admirers of these "gaudy" decoratives of our flower- 
gardens. Whereas, every art employed should be to the 
advancement and perfection of nature. 



OF FRAMING, ETC. 

The plants and roots that are in frames, should be protect- 
ed with straw, mats, and boards, and the frame surrounded 
with litter, or leaves, or, what is more advisable, banked 
with turf — the former being a harbour for mice and other 
vermin. For full directions, see December. Under this 
head, the plants, such as Auriculas, Polyanthus, Daisies, 
Carnations, Pinks, Pentstemons, Campanula pyramidalis, 
Double rochet, Double stock, or Stockgillys, Double Wall- 
jloxcer, Anemone, Ranunculus, &c, as previously enumerated 
as frame plants, will require very little water, and be sure 
to give none while they are in a frozen state. If snow 

2* 



18 OF pruning. [Jan. 

should cover them, the plants will keep in a fine state under 
it ; so never remove snow from covering cold frames, even 
suppose it should lie for weeks — nature will operate here 
herself. But when framing cannot be obtained, they will, 
in this latitude, keep tolerably, if gently covered with leaves 
or litter, using means to secure them from being blown over 
the garden. 



OF PRUNING. 

It is not advisable to carry on a general system of pruning 
in this month, in whatever state the weather may be. The 
severest frosts, generally, are yet to come, and too frequently 
what is done now in this operation has to be repeated in the 
spring, causing, at that time, work to a disadvantage ; 
because, if pruning, when done just now, is accomplished 
judiciously, whatever more is requisite to be done in the 
spring on the same bush will be injudicious. Hence, it is 
far preferable to delay it till the frost is nearly over, when 
all can be done to advantage. There are, undoubtedly, hardy 
trees and some shrubs, that may be pruned and thinned out 
at any time from the first of November to the first of March; 
such as Crataegus, Sorbus, Spirea, and even Althea, in the 
Middle States ; (the Double white Althea is very tender, 
and requires to be covered.) The tying together the loose 
branches of Juniper, Cedar, and Arbor vita? should be 
particularly attended to, as heavy snow frequently destroys 
the shape of those handsome shrubs by breaking down the 
branches, &c. — When the snow is heavy," the precaution of 
shaking it off should be resorted to. In many seasons, the 
beginning of this month is open, and admits of the operation 
of digging in open quarters, which if not done, as advised 
last month, ought not to be delayed. The fruits of it will 
appear in the mellowed state of your soil in spring. 

If there is any spare time, tallies, straight sticks, or stakes, 
may be prepared for summer use. Tie them up in neat 
bundles, which will be of great service during the hurried 
period of the year. An opportunity of this kind should 
always be laid hold of; the beneficial results will, in season, 
be displayed. 



Feb.] OF PRUNING, ETC. 19 



FEBRUARY. 

When the borders and various compartments were dug in 
the autumn, and compost, or a thin coating of well-decom- 
posed manure given, the advantage will now, in part, be ex- 
perienced. If the weather is open about the end of the 
month, the pruuing should be done with the utmost dis- 
patch, that all may be prepared for a general dressing next 
month, and let nothing be delayed which can now properly 
be accomplished, under the idea that there is time enough. 



OF PRUNING, ETC. 

Generally, about the end of the month, the very severe 
frosts are over, and when none need be apprehended that 
would materially injure hardy shrubs, they may be freely 
pruned, and the points cut of such shoots as may have been 
damaged by the winter. Most of shrubs require nothing 
more than to be thinned of straggling, irregular, and injured 
branches, or of suckers, that rise round the root, observing 
that they do not intermingle with each other. Never trim 
them up in a formal manner ; regular shearing of shrubs, 
and topiary work, have been expelled as unworthy a taste 
the least improved by reflections on beauty, simplicity, and 
grandeur of nature. 

In fact, the pruning of deciduous, hardy shrubs should be 
done in such a manner as not to be observable when the 
plants are covered with verdure. It may frequently be ob- 
served in flower-gardens, that roses and shrubs of every de- 
scription are indiscriminately cut with the shears, the Amor- 
phas, Viburnums, and Altheas sharing the same fate. 

Robinia^ Coluteas, Cytisus, Rhiis, Genistas, with several 
of the Viburnums, and many others, bear their flowers on 
the wood of last year, and, when thus sheared, afford no 
gratification in flowering. And those shrubs that thus flower 
on the shoots of last year are perhaps worse to keep in regu- 
lar order than those to which the knife can be freely applied ; 
but good management, while young, will insure handsome, 
free, flowering plants. 



20 OF PRUNING, ETC. [Feb. 

Climbing shrubs, and others that are trained against out- 
buildings, walls, or such as are sheltered thereby, and not 
now in danger of suffering by frost, may be pruned and 
dressed. These should be neatly trimmed, and the branches 
moderately thinned out, tying in all the shoots straight and 
regular". Avoid, at all times, the crossing of any shoots. 

There is not a shrub in the garden that agrees so well 
with close cutting as the AWtea, and all its varieties. These 
can be made either bushes or trees, and kept at any desired 
height. Where the wood of last year is cut to about two or 
three inches from the wood of the former year, the young 
shoots of the coming season will produce the largest and 
finest flowers, and likewise more profusely. When they have 
attained the desired height, let them be kept in the most 
natural and handsome shape that the taste of the operator 
can suggest. They will bear cutting to any degree. 

Honeysuckles, of every description, may, with all free- 
dom, be trimmed, providing the frost is not very severe. 
These are very frecpiently allowed to become too crowded 
with wood, and then superficially sheared or cut. The flowers 
would be much finer, and the bush handsomer, if they 
were regularly thinned out, divesting them of all naked and 
superfluous shoots. Of those that remain, shorten the shoots 
of last year. Where any of the honeysuckle kind has be- 
come naked at the bottom, and flowering only at the top of 
the trellis, or extremities of the shoots, one-half of the bush 
should be cut to within four inches of the ground. It will 
throw out plenty of fine, young wood, which give room for, 
and train them straight, and to the full extent, during sum- 
mer. These shoots will flower profusely the following sea- 
son, and in like manner, when thought proper, the other 
half can be cut. 

Roses of the hardy kinds (termed garden roses) that were 
not attended to in November, should, if the weather permit, 
be dressed and pruned forthwith. In small gardens, where 
these are generally attached to the walls and fences, neatness 
should be a very particular object. If any of such bushes 
have got strong and irregular, the most proper method to 
bring them to order will be to cut down each alternate shoot 
of the bush to within a few inches of the surface, thereby 
renovating it, and, in part, preserving the flowers. Those 
that are cut down will put out several luxuriant shoots, 



Feb.'] OF PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. 21 

which must be regularly tacked in, spreading them in a fan 
shape. These, in another year, will flower well, when the 
others may go through the same operation. Thus, in two or 
three years, the bushes will have resumed a different and 
more agreeable aspect. By the above treatment, these orna- 
ments of the garden will always have a neat and healthful 
appearance, and the roses will be much finer. Where they 
are intended for the borders, they should never be allowed 
to get too high. In a border from four to sis feet, they 
ought never to exceed four feet at the back of the border, 
and in front one foot, after being pruned ; they can be kept 
down by the above method. It is not advisable to cut down 
rose bushes all at once, unless no regard is paid to flowering. 
The roses that are in grass-plats, and interspersed through 
the garden, would have a superior appearance in every 
respect, if they were kept and trimmed like small trees. 
They may be of different sizes and heights, according to the 
distance they are from the walk. A single stem may arise 
from six inches to six feet, with a head in proportion to the 
height of the stem. Where it is necessary to have them above 
two feet, and likewise to carry a good head, inoculation must 
be resorted to, which, in the months of July and August, will 
be fully treated of. All under two feet (except the weak 
growing kinds) will do on their own stems, taking care not 
to allow shoots to arise from the bottom during the summer. 
For directions for pruning climbing roses, see March and 
Api-il. 



OJT PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. 

As soon as the frost is out of the ground, these should be 
planted, if the soil is not too wet. Where soil is binding, 
upon no consideration plant it while wet; rather defer it until 
the end of March. 

Trees and shrubs, if they are well arranged, are the chief 
ornaments, give the most pleasure, and afford the greatest 
delight that we enjoy in our gardens. Although they give 
no sort of nourishment, nor produce any edible fruits, yet 
they are particularly grateful, and conducive to our enjoy- 
ments. Our walks in summer would be oppressive, but for 
their agreeable shade ; in the fall and winter, we would be 



22 OF PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. [Feb. 

left exposed to the chilling winds, but for the shelter they 
afford. 

Likewise, they produce a great variety of flowers, a varied 
foliage, and are standing ornaments that give no great trouble. 
In the character of screens, they are particularly useful, 
whether to hide disagreeable objects, or as a guard against 
the weather ; or, if they are planted in masses at a distance, 
they soon become agreeable objects, frequently very much 
improve the scenery of the place, become objects of utility as 
well as ornament, and, in such case, afford the highest satis- 
faction. When formed so as to exclude offices from the view 
of the house, or for sheltering the latter, or for connecting the 
house with the garden, orchard, or any similar purpose, shrubs 
are both useful and interesting. 

Where many shrubs are to be planted, the disposing of 
them properly is a matter of considerable importance to the 
future welfare of the whole ; and, whether deciduous or ever- 
greens be mixed or grouped, that is, indiscriminately planted 
together, or the evergreens planted by themselves, as is fre- 
quently done, a regular and natural arrangement is indis- 
pensable for establishing ornament. 

Arranging, no doubt, depends very much on fancy; still, 
there ought always to be plenty of evergreens planted, that 
the whole may be more cheerful in winter. 

If shrubberies were made to a great extent, the scenery 
would be much more varied and characteristic by grouping 
judiciously than by indiscriminately planting. 

However, in small flower-gardens and shrubberies, the 
latter has to be adopted. In such places, tall-growing kinds 
should never be introduced, unless merely as a screen from 
some disagreeable object, for they crowd and confuse the 
whole. The dwarf and more bushy sorts should be placed 
nearest to the eye, in order that they may conceal the naked 
stems of the others. Generally, when shrubs are planted, 
they are small ; therefore, to have a good effect from the be- 
ginning, they should be planted closer than they are intended 
to stand. When they have grown a few years, and interfere 
with each other, they can be lifted, and such as have died, 
or become sickly, replaced, and the remainder can be planted 
in some other direction. Keep them always distinct, one 
from another, in order that tiny may be the better shown 
off. But, if it is not desired that they should be more 



Feb.'] OF PLANTING SHRUBS, ETC. 23 

thickly planted than it is intended to let them remain, the 
small-growing kinds may be six or eight feet apart ; the larger, 
or taller sorts, ten to twenty feet, according to the condition 
of the soil. 

Thick masses of shrubbery, called thickets, are sometimes 
wanted. In these, there should be plenty of evergreens. A 
mass of deciduous shrubs has no imposing effect during 
winter; and, as this is not the proper season for planting- 
evergreens (April, and the end of September, or first of 
October being best), small stakes can be placed in the des- 
tined spot. Planting in rows, or in any plan of a formal 
character, should, at all times, be avoided. 

In planting at this season, observe that the roots are not 
much exposed to the air, especially if the wind be high and 
sharp ; but it is always better, if possible, to defer the busi- 
ness until good, mild weather. According to directions in 
November, the ground will be well prepared, and only re- 
quires a hole dug for the reception of the roots, which must 
be considerably larger, that the roots may not be in the least 
confined. Break the earth well at bottom, put in as much 
as will receive the plant from one to two inches (according 
to its size) lower than it has previously been in the Nursery. 
If any of the roots are bruised or broken, cut them off; 
then place the plant in the centre of the hole, breaking fine 
all the soil that is put in, at the same time shaking the stem 
a little, that the earth may mix with the roots ; when full 
up, press all the soil down with the foot, that it may, in some 
degree, consolidate about the roots, and support the plant. 
Tall plants should have a good stake for support, and place 
a small bandage between the stake and stem of the shrub or 
tree, where the tie is made, to prevent the bark from suffer- 
ing by friction. Observe, always, before planting, if the 
soil is not suitable, to supply that which is congenial to the 
nature of the intended plant. When shrubs or trees are to 
be carried to any distance, the roots should be carefully kept 
from air, by tying damp moss, straw, or mats about them, as 
circumstances will admit : the success, in part, depends on 
due attention being paid to prevent the roots drying before 
planting. Although we have given the above directions for 
planting in this month, it will frequently occur that they 
can only be put into practice during the next, as this month 
is often the severest of the season. 



24 OF HYACINTH AND OTHER BULBS. [March. 



OF HYACINTH AND OTHER BULBS. 

Towards the end of the month, if the weather proves 
favourable, the covering should be partially taken off from the 
Hyacinths, Tulips, and other bulbous roots. It sometimes 
occurs that, by careless planting in the autumn, they are 
thrown above ground by the frost, especially if the ground 
is inclined to moisture, and they not being deep enough 
planted ; if such is the case, cover them with decayed leaves, 
old tan, or soil, whichever is most convenient ; if not done, 
the sun and air will overpower the bulbs, and although the 
fibres have hold of the ground, the flowers will be miserably 
weak. 



MARCH. 



As soon as the frost is entirely gone, uncover all plants 
or shrubs that have been protected, preserving carefully such 
of the materials as will answer the same purpose next sea- 
son. Cut off all decayed shoots, or such as have been hurt 
by the frost. The Lagerstroemias will flower in greater per- 
fection, if they are pruned closely ; that is, cut the shoots 
of last year to within two or three eyes of the wood of the 
previous year, at the same time having regard to the regular 
and natural shape of the bush. Cut off the injured foliage 
of any of the evergreens that have suffered by the severity 
of the winter, but leave every green part which is essential 
to the support of this kind of plants. It is expected that 
all pruning of the shrubbery is finished ; if not, get all ex- 
peditiously done according to directions given in the preced- 
ing months. All work that can be done in this mouth 
should not be delayed, such as hoeing, digging, raking, and 
clearing away all leaves and litter of every description that 
have been brought or blown into the garden during autumn 
or winter. 



March.'] OF FRAMING. 25 



OF FRAMING. 

Where it is desired to have the more showy annuals early 
in bloom, it is necessary to prepare a hot-bed frame, for the 
purpose of bringing them forward. It is time, about the 
first of the month, to collect and prepare manure for the de- 
sired hot-bed ; and, as that operation, in many instances, is 
very imperfectly performed, a few observations on the subject 
may be useful. 

Take three parts of fresh, hot stable manure, with one 
part of fresh oak leaves. Have a sufficient quantity to make 
the intended bed, or beds, from three to four feet high. 
Shake and mix up both together in a compact, conical heap, 
in order to encourage fermentation. If the weather is cold 
and windy, cover it with straw or leaves and boards, which 
is necessary to produce the desired effect. If fermentation 
soon takes place, it will need to be thoroughly turned over 
in eight or ten days. If any of it has become dry and musty 
from excessive heat, as you proceed, water the affected parts, 
pile all up neatly, and leave it protected in part as before. 
In five or six days more, it will have to be turned again, re- 
peating it until the first extreme heat has been over. In 
neglect of this, the heat, after making up the bed, will be 
vehement for a week or two, frequently destroying the vege- 
tative purity of the soil, and proving destructive to the seeds. 

Allowing the manure to come to a lively heat, having no 
unpleasant, rancid smell, proceed to mark off your intended 
bed, running it east and west, as nearly as possible, measure 
your frame, and allow the site of the bed eight inches, each 
way, larger than the frame : at the corners, place a stick or 
rod perpendicularly. The ground ought to be higher than 
that around it, to prevent water from getting into the bed, 
which, if low, must be filled up ; or, if supposed that water 
may lodge there, a little brushwood might be put under the 
manure, which would keep it from being inundated. The 
manure must be built up square and level, shaking, mixing 
and beating it regularly with the back of the fork. When 
you have it to the desired height (from two to three feet 
will be sufficient for annuals), leave the centre of the bed a 
little higher than the sides, thus allowing it more to subside. 
When finished, put on the frame and sash, or sashes, keep 

3 



26 LIST OF CHOICE ANNUALS, ETC. [March. 

them close until the heat arises, covering them at night with 
mats or shutters. As soon as you feel the heat increased, 
give air by tilting the sashes a few inches, to let off the 
steam and stagnated air, observing to close in the afternoon, 
and cover at night. If the heat is violent, about half an 
inch of air might be left during the night. In about three 
days, if all has been properly attended to, the bed will be 
what is termed sweet. Then put in about six inches of fine 
garden soil ; if heavy, mix a little sand with it. Spread it 
level, and, when the soil is heated through, sow in small 
drills, from one-eighth to an inch deep, according to the size 
of the seeds ; cover with very fine sifted soil. Some very 
small kinds do best when sown upon the surface. When 
sown, give gentle sprinklings of water until they come up, 
when it will be necessary to give air freely during the day, 
to prevent them from being weak, or damping oiF, which 
many of them will do if they have not air regularly admitted. 



A LI. T OF CHOICE FLOWERING ANNUALS ADAPTED FOR 
SOWING ON A HOT-BED. 

Alyssum calycina, white, fragrant. 
Argenttum Mexicauum, blue-flowered Argeratum. 
Asclepias curassaviea, swallow wort, orange and red-flowered. 
Aster Chineusis, China Aster, or Queen Margarets, in great 

variety. The late imported German and Italian Asters 

are of extraordinary beauty. 
Balsamina hortensis, Balsam, commonly called Ladies' 

Slipper. 
Browallia alata, upright blue and white Browallia. 
Cacalia coccinea, scarlet Cacalia, or Venus' Paint Brush. 

sonchifolia, orange Cacalia. 

Calandrinia discolor, rosy purple, very pretty. 

Celosia cristata, Coxcomb, two varieties, red and yellow. 

Centaurea Americana, American Sultan. 

suaveolens, yellow and sweet Sultan. 

Clarkia elegans, elegant rose-coloured Clarkia. 

pulchella, showy purple Clarkia. 

alba, white-flowered Clarkia. 

Cleome grandiflora, large lilac-flowering spider-plant. 
Clintonia elegans, elegant blue Clintonia. 



March.'] LIST OF CHOICE ANNUALS, ETC. 27 

Collinsia tricolor, two-coloured Collinsia. 

heterophylla, lilac and white. 

Commelina coelestis, blue-flowering Commelina. 

Diantkus Chinensis, China pink, many fine double varieties. 

Gompkreua globosa, red and wkite globe Amarantkus. 

Hibiscus manikot, large yellow Hibiscus. 

Africanus major, buff witk black centre. 

Helickrysum bracteatum, ). •„■ „ , ,. 

v J , 7 z-? r xellow everiastin 2;. 

JLerantlicmum cucuunn, j ° 

T 1 1 (' Rose-coloured flowers like tke 

Dophospermum erubescens, \ ^. ., ,. ~ ,. , ^ 

11 , ; < Digitalis, a nne climber tor 

scanaens, I P 

7 (_ arbours. 

T 1 + v S O ran g e rc d, an interesting, climbing plant, 

LiOasa latent 1a, -s it . ., , , .1 

' ( blooming tkrougkout tke season. 

Malope alba, wkite-flowering Malope. 

■ grandiflora, large red-flowering Malope. 

Matkiola annua, all the varieties of ten week stocks skould 

be industriously cultivated, and seed sown also in 

April and May for autumn blooming. 
Maurandia Barclayana, blue-flowering, ~) Climbing plants 

semperflorens, pink-flowering, > for pillars, trel- 

alba, wkite, ) lises or arbours. 

Mesembryantkemum. 

crystallinum, Ice plant. 

Mimosa pudica, Sensitive plant, 
Mimulus Wkeelerii, Monkey flower, yel- 
low and crimson, 

Smitkii, Smitk's yellow and red, 

roseus, rose-coloured, 

Petunias of variety, a beautiful genus of plants, of every 

variety of colour, from deep purple to pure wkite, 

blooming from June till frost; tke seeds are small, 

and require to be very lightly covered. 
Phlox Drummondii, and its varieties of crimson, rose, lilac, 

and white. 
Portulaca splendens, splendid purple-flowered Purslane. 

Thorburnii, yellow. 

alba, white. 

elegans, crimson. 

Thellusonii, red-flowered. 

Salpiglossis picta, atropurpurea, &c, delight in a cool situa- 
tion. 



Will grow best 
in wet places. 



28 LIST OF CHOICE ANNUALS, ETC. [March. 

Schizanthus retusus, orange-coloured "") 

Schizanthus, | Like a rick soil, and 

pinnatus, calico Sckizan- V a cool and partially 

tkus, skaded situation. 

And a few otker varieties, 

Shortia Californica, yellow Shortia, very profuse flowering. 

Tagetes, Marigold, tke new varieties of tke Frenck are 
very pretty — tkey like rick soil and plenty of mois- 
ture. 

Tropreolum aduncum, Canary bird flower, a beautiful climber. 

atrosunguineum, crimson Nastur- ^ 

tium, ! Climbing 

Tkunbergia alata, buff witk black centre, J plants. 

alba, wkite-flowered, J 

aurantiaca, fine orange. 

Verbena Defiance, Robertson's, bright scar- "1 . , , ~ ., 
i , , A lovely family 

r^ ' i •, of pretty and 

■ Queen, pure white, £ £ 

t5 ' r , . i, profuse flower- 

±Jeauty, supreme bright rose, r 1 

Perfection, pale-blue, with wkite, I b X ' - '° 

T) ,, •• i if i i erally of a pro- 

l J olkn, dark crimson purine, -r . , \-, 

m • ' , . • r j: j cum bent habit. 

Inumphant, crimson, J 

Seeds may be obtained from tke above, although tkey can- 
not be relied upon to produce tke same colours. 
A'inca rosea, Madagascar Periwinkle,") Thrive best in a warm, 

alba, wkite-flowered Pe- y dry situation, witk 

riwinkle, ) rick soil. 

Zinnia elegans, splendid Zinnia, ^ Very skowy plants, and 

coccinea, scarlet, I do best wken tkey 

alba, wkite, [ are well supplied with 

pauciflora, yellow, J water. 

Tkougk tke above will bloom muck earlier by being sown 
on a bot-bed, yet wkere tkat convenience cannot be obtained, 
tkey will all succeed treated as hardy annuals. 

After sowing, if the weatker be clear, the sun acting on 
the glass will produce a too rapid evaporation of the mois- 
ture of tke soil, and may otkerwise affect seeds but tkinly 
covered, wkick must be guarded against by skading with 
mats for a few kours during bright sunshine. In giving 
water, it ought always to be about milk-warm, and passed 



March.'] HARDY ANNUALS. 29 

through a fine rose, to prevent the stems being broken or 
bruised. Weeds must be drawn out as soon as they ap- 
pear. 



HARDY ANNUALS. 

Many annual plants, though of short duration, are pos- 
sessed of much beauty of hue and elegance of form : they 
are farther valuable from their adaptation in filling up va- 
cant spots through the flower-garden or parterre. They arc, 
besides, of easy culture, many requiring nothing more than 
to have the seeds sown in the spot where they are to grow. 
The first sowing may take place about the end of the month, 
when the ground is prepared and the weather fine ; but avoid 
it at all times when the ground will not pulverize properly. 
The neatest and most expeditious method is to take a rod 
about one foot long and one inch in diameter, rounding at 
the end, with which draw a circle from four to nine inches 
in diameter, and from one-eighth of an inch to an inch deep, 
according to the size of the seeds. Many very small seeds 
will grow best, if sown on the surface of fine mould. When 
sown, cover with fine mould, placing a small twig or tally, 
with the name, in the centre of the circle, to prevent mistakes 
either in sowing, planting, or hoeing. When they have 
grown from one to two inches, the first moist day should be 
taken to remove such as are too crowded, which can be gene- 
rally transplanted to some other situation ; taking care to 
shade them a few days, with flower-pots, or some other 
substitute. A few kinds do best with removing, such as 
Balsams, China Asters, Marigold, ten week stocks, Hibis- 
cus, Zinnias, and several others of a free-growing and 
strong-wooded nature. Annuals are such plants as grow 
from seed, flower and perfect their productions, and then die 
within one year. The following sorts are well deserving of 
culture : — 

Adonis miniata, Flos Adonis or Pheasant's eye, red. 
Amaranthus caudatus, Love lies Bleeding, red and yellow 
variety. 

hypochondriacus, Prince's Feather, red. 

3* 



30 HARDY ANNUALS. [March. 

Amaranthus tricolor; three-coloured Amaranthus should be 
sowu on rather poor soil — on rich soil it has little 
beauty. 

Brachycome iberidifolia, fine dark blue. 

Brugmansia Waymeria, double-flowered, large, and showy. 

Centaurea moschata, purple sweet Sultan. 

cretica, white sweet Sultan. 

suaveolens, yellow sweet Sultan. 

Collinsia grandiflora, blue Collins' flower. 

Convolvulus, minor, dwarf blue Bindweed. 

Calliopsis bicolor, formerly Coreopsis tinctoria, or Fair Eye; 
a very gay plant, and flowers best when sown in 
October. 

Drummondii, yellow calliopsis. 

Crepis rubra, red Hawkweed. 

aurea, golden Hawkweed. 

Delphinium ajacis, Rocket Lockspur, many varieties, all su- 
perb, and do best to be sown in rich ground 
in October. 

consolida, branching Larkspur, various colours. 

Euphorbia variegata, variegated Euphorbia. 

Eschscholtzia crocea, Orange. (Now chri/seis.^) 

Californica, yellow. 

Erysimum Perowffskyanuui, bright orange. 

Gilia tricolor, three-coloured Gilia, ~\ 

capitata, blue-coloured, v Bloom all summer. 

Achillajfolia, large blue, J 

Heliophila Araboides, blue sun love, very pretty. 

Hieracium meutabilis, changeable Hawkweed. 

Helianthus Californicus, superb double dwarf sunflower. 

Iberis amara, white Candytuft. 

umbcllata, purple Candytuft. 

violacea, violet Caudytuft. 

odorata, white sweet-scented Candytuft. 

Ipomoea quamoclit, Cypress vine, the seed will grow freely, 
. if soaked two or three hours in hot water. 

alba, white. 

Lathyrus odoratus, sweet Pea, of many varieties. 

Leptosiphon densiflorus, dense-flowered Leptosiphon. 

Loasa lateritia, orange-coloured Loasa, a climbing plant. 

Lupinus, many varieties; they require to be partially shaded 
from hot suns. 



March. 1 ] box edgings. 31 

Malope grandiflova, scarlet Malope. 

alba, white. 

Mirabilis jalapa, marvel of Peru, many varieties. If the 
roots of this plant are lifted in October, and placed 
in a dry cellar, free from frost, and planted out next 
April, they will bloom much finer. 

Nemophila insignis, or blue Grove Love, a pretty dwarf 
plant, requiring rich soil and a half-shaded 
situation. 

atomaria, white with black spots. 

maculata, spotted, beautiful. 

Nigella Damacene, Love in a mist. 

Hispanica, Spanish, blue and brown. 

Oenothera, or tree Primrose ; many varieties of the annual 
species produce their flowers in much greater perfec- 
tion, if planted or sown in poor soil. To this, ansi- 
loba, sinuata, and tetraptcra are exceptions, as they 
flower the finest in a rich, light loam. 

Papaver Marseillii, double white poppy, edged with red. 

gigantea, large Dutch poppy. 

Phlox Drummondii, many colours ; a superb article, and 
blooms from May till October. In dry situations, it 
is apt to die off unless partially shaded. 

Reseda odorata, Mignonette; to have it in perfection the 
whole season, there should be a sowing in May and 
July. It delights in a rich, loamy soil. 

Tournefortia heliotropoides, summer Heliotrope. 

Viscaria oculata, violet viscaria. 

Viola tricolor, Pansy or Heart' s-easc, require very rich soil, 
and should be shaded from hot sun ; if sown early in 
the season, they will flower profusely in the autumn. 

For other varieties of Annuals, see list adapted for hot-bed 
sowing. We have omitted many not agreeing with our cli- 
mate, or those very common; for such, we refer our readers 
to the lists published annually by respectable seedsmen. 



BOX EDGINGS 

May be planted any time this month, or beginning of 
next, which in most seasons will be preferable. We will 



32 GRASS AND OTHER EDOINGS. [March. 

give a few simple directions how to accomplish the work. 
In the first place, dig over the ground deeply where the 
edging is intended to be planted, breaking the soil fine, and 
keeping it to a proper height, namely, about one inch higher 
than the side of the walk ; but the taste of the operator will 
best decide, according to the situation. Rake the surface 
even, and tread it down with the feet, or beat it with the 
spade. Where it gives most, continue to add, keeping the 
surface at the desired height. If the edging is to be in a 
direct line, either on a level or inclined plane, you may be 
correctly and simply regulated by making the desired level 
at each end of the line. Take three rods, about four feet 
long each, having a piece of one foot to cross at one end, two 
of these pieces painted black, the other white. Have a black 
one at each end of the line on the level ; take the white one for 
the centre, going along the line, and, about every twenty feet, 
level a spot to the exact height, which will be seen by look- 
ing over the top of the rods from one end. Having found 
the level, drive in a peg to it, so that no mistake may occur ; 
beat and level between them, leaving a smooth surface. 
This being done, strain the line, and with the spade proceed 
to cut out the trench perpendicularly on the side next the 
walk, six, eight, ten, or twelve inches deep, according to the 
length of the plants. Afterwards take the plants, and cut 
the tops even, with the knife or shears, at the same time 
shortening the roots. Then with the left hand next the line, 
plant forward, keeping the tops of the plants level, and from 
one to two inches above ground, keeping the plants close, 
according to the required thickness. Put in the earth as you 
proceed, and tread it firm, then rake the surface even, and 
with the spade beat it smooth. If the weather sets in very 
dry, the box will be the better of a few waterings. Some- 
times boxwood is planted without roots, but it seldom gives 
satisfaction, not growing equally. 



GRASS AND OTHER EDGINGS. 

Grass verges for walks and borders, although frequently 
used, are by no means desirable, except where variety is re- 
quired ; they are the most laborious to keep in order, and 
at best arc inelegant, and the only object in their favour is 



March.'] HARDY biennials. 33 

their being everywhere accessible. Iris humilis, Viola tri- 
color, thyme, Sea Pink (Stattice Armaria), Mignonette, 
Phlox subulata, and Plox procumbens, all make tolerable 
edgings. In the Southern States, Euonymus Japonica, kept 
closely sheared, will make a very handsome green edging. 



HARDY BIENNIALS. 

Biennial plants are such as are of two years' duration. 
Being sown this year, they flower, seed, or fruit next year, 
and soon after decay : the seeds should be sown about the 
end of this month or beginning of next, either in the spot 
where they are to remain or a compartment by themselves, 
regularly marked, and to be transplanted in May or Septem- 
ber. When they appear above ground, thin them out dis- 
tinctly, that, when they are to be removed, a little earth may 
adhere to them : and if sown where they are to stand, leave 
only three or four plants in each patch. The following list 
are a few of the free-blooming and more elegant sorts : — 

Agrostemma coronaria, Rose Campion, blooms all summer. 
Althea rosea, Hollyhock, and all its varieties, very showy in 

July and August. When any very desirable variety 

is procured, it can be multiplied by dividing the root. 
Antirrhinum majus, Snap-dragon, and its varieties, recpiire 

to be protected during winter with a few leaves or 

litter. 
Cantua coronopifolia, flowers in August and September, 

beautiful scarlet, delights in dry, gravelly soil. 

Ipomopsis elegans. 
Campanula media, dark blue Canterbury 

bell, 
Campanula media, semi-pleno, half double I Bloom in June 

Canterbury bell, ( and July. 

Campanula media, alba, white Canterbury 

bell, 
Campanula thyrsoides. 
Cheiranthus cheiri, Wall-flower, should be protected by leaves 

or boards during winter. 
Digitalis purpurea, purple Foxglove. 
alba, white Foxglove. 



3-t perennials. [March. 

Digitalis guttata, spotted Foxglove. 

Dianthus barbatus, Sweet "William, pink. 

■ coccineus, crimson pink. 

fl. pi. double-flowered; the double sorts 

can be propagated by laying, same as 
carnations. 

Gerardia purpurea, purple G-erardia, ~\ Natives of 

flava, yellow Gerardia, V- tbis coun- 

quercifolia, spotted-flowered Gerardia, ) try. 

Hcdysarium coronariuin, red-flowered Frencb Honeysuckle. 

Humea elegans, scarlet Humea, flowers in June and Sep- 
tember. 

Lunai'ia biennis, Honesty, various colours; not beautiful, but 
curious in seed. 

OEnotbera corymbosa, dwarf Evening Primrose. 

Papaver nudicaule, naked-stemmed yellow Poppy. 

Scabiosa atropurpurea, musk-scented Scabious. 

Silene multiflora, many-flowered Catcb-fly. 

Tbere migbt be many otber beautiful biennial plants enu- 
merated, wbicb are justly considered worthy of attention; 
but most of tbem do not withstand the severity of our win- 
ters, although very much prized in England. 



PERENNIALS. 

In every flower-garden, there ought to be a good selection 
of these plants. They are lasting ornaments; and, when 
judiciously selected, will give yearly gratification. In mak- 
ing a choice, a view should be to have those that flower 
abundantly, are of free growth, beauty, and continuation of 
bloom. It would go beyond our limits to give an extensive 
description of any, but a few remarks on some of the finest, 
with their names, are indispensable. 

Adonis vernal is is a fine border-flower, and will grow in 
any common soil ; flowers large, yellow-rayed, having in the 
rays about twelve petals; leaves much divided; blooms in 
April and May. 

Anemdne, Wind-flower. Several fine species, with flowers 
from one to three inches in diameter, very celebrated in Eu- 
rope, though succeeding poorly with us except in cool lati- 



March.'] perennials. 35 







tudes. A. alpina, large white. A. japonica, rosy purple. 
A. palmdta fibre-pleno, yellow; A; stclldta versicolor, various 
coloured; A. pavewina flbre-plbn&) scarlet; A. narcissi-flora, 
white. Any of these are very desirable. 

Antirrhinums, Snap-dragon. All the varieties of A. 
tn&jus are esteemed in the flower-borders ; the pure white, 
bright red, rich crimson, and variegated, are very showy. 
A few of the species, A. mdlle and A. siculum, where there 
is variety required, deserve a situation. The flowers are all 
large, and similar to the snout of an animal. 

Anthericum lilidstrujn, St. Burnos Lily, is an excellent 
liliaceous plant, with orange-yellow flowers, blooming in 
June, July, and August, and will grow in any common gar- 
den soil. 

Asclepias. The finest of this genus are native plants, 
and are highly esteemed in Europe, but frequently rejected 
with us, because " they are wild plants. " A. tuberbsa has 
beautiful orange flowers, and delights in dry situations. A. 
rubra, A. nevia, A. purpurdscens, and A. incarndta are 
the finest of the family. It is best to plant A. tuberbsa in 
October. 

Acomtums, Wolfsbane, one hundred and twenty-eight 
distinct species, with several varieties. Many of them are 
of consequence and beauty ; the flower-stems rise from one 
and a half to six feet upright, and strong, furnished with 
many palmate and digitate leaves, terminated by spikes of 
blue, yellow, or white flowers, similar to a hood ; hence the 
name of Monk's Hood is often applied to them. They are 
scarce in collections; but, in a few years, we have no doubt 
but many of them will be plentiful. The finest species 
are A. speciomm, A. sieboldii, large dark blue, A. pyre- 
naiacum, branching blue, A. napellus, A. veniistum, A. 
pyramiddle, A. lycdtonum, A. versicolor, or variajatum, and 
^i. (jruudljlorum. They flower from May to September, and 
will grow in any common garden soil. The roots of A. 
napellus are like small turnips, and are poisonous. They 
like a little shade and rich soil. 

Bellis perennis liortensis, Daisy. We might almost say 
with another, "Every one knows the Daisy. " It is named 
from being pretty, and is perfectly hardy, though generally 
kept under cover. They delight to have a shaded situation 
during summer, to protect them from the sun, which, as it 



36 perennials. [March. 

were, scorches the roots. There are many double varieties 
in the gardens, which flower early. The one called Crown 
or Carnation Daisy is twice the size of the common varie- 
ties,* and has white and red petals alternately and very 
double. Loamy soil, inclined to moisture, is best adapted to 
their growth. 

Campanula. This genus affords very many ornamental 
plants for the Flower-garden and Shrubbery, and they flower 
superbly during the summer, agreeing better with our cli- 
mate than with that of Europe. Many have two successions 
of flowers, O. joerswifblia alba plena ; C. per sic i/olia coer idea 
plena; C. urtic i/olia, white. Of this last there is also a 
double variety. C. speciosa ; C. glomerata ; C. versicolor, 
with several others, are worthy of a situation in every garden. 
Their roots are strong, fleshy, and fibrous. They are easy of 
culture, and will retain their situation in the severest of our 
winters. C. grandifiora is now Wahlenbergia grand iflbra. 
It has superb large blue flowers, stems are slender, and should 
be supported as soon as they grow. 

Cheirdnthus Cheiri vulgaris is the common garden Wall- 
flower. There are about ten varieties of it, all admired for 
their various colours and agreeable odour. The common 
variety survives the mildest of our winters. The most 
esteemed variety is hcemdnthus, Double bloody. They should 
all be protected by a frame. C. mutdbilis is a beautiful 
species; it has many shades of colour, from lilac to dark 
purple. The flowers are on extending racemose spikes, 
blooming from April to June ; it requires a light rich soil ; 
is a half-shrubby evergreen plant. 

Chelone. This genus belongs entirely to this continent, 
and possesses many fine species. It is a matter of astonish- 
ment that they are not more cultivated and sought for in our 
collections. C. glabra; C. obi i qua ; C. barbdfa ; C. atro- 
puipilrea ; C. pulcliella ; and C. speciosa ; are all handsome, 
and flower from May to September; corolla large, ringent, 
ventricose ; flowers in spikes or panicles. 

Chrys&nihemwrm: There are few of this genus of any 
consequence as herbaceous plants, except the varieties of 
C. siuense, of which there are about ninety, all desirable ; 
but in small gardens, where there is a deficiency in room, 
the following are select in colour and quality : Admiration, 
yellow; Celestial, pale blush; Coronet, white; Defiance, 



March.] PERENNIALS. 37 

lemon yellow ; King, pale rose ; Perfection, lilac ; Queen, 
blush ; Triumphant, buff and white ; Wm. Penn, large 
creamy white, yellow and red; Indica rubra, very dwarf, 
early red ; Angelina, rose ; Beauty, lilac ; Empress, pink ; 
Napoleon, crimson ; Mrs. Cope, crimson purple ; Mrs. Cam- 
erson, bronze. To grow these in perfection, they require rich 
light soil ; and about the end of this month the roots should 
be lifted, divided, and planted into fresh soil, either by giving 
them a new situation, or changing the earth they were in. 
Two or three stems together are quite sufficient. The 
flowers, by the above treatment, will be much larger, more 
double, and finer in colour; where they are wanted to grow 
low and bushy, top them in June, but not later than the 
first of July. Where the soil is rich, and the plant having 
only one stem, by topping it, makes a beautiful bush. They 
are in flower from the first of October until severe frost; 
thus beautifying our gardens at a season when they would 
be destitute of one single attraction. If the season be dry, 
to water them with liquid manure will add to their vigour. 
They are all natives of China, and greatly esteemed by the 
Chinese, who only allow a few blooms to come out on the 
top of each stem, thereby having the flowers much finer. 

Within these few years, hundreds of varieties of this 
winter flower have been produced from seed in Europe ; 
many of them very superb, having more luxuriant foliage 
and greater diversity of colour. 

Clematis, Virgin's-bower. A few species are good herba- 
ceous plants, of upright growth and blue flowers, C. integri- 
fblia; C. angusti folia ; and C. erecta ; they grow best in 
light soil. 

Coreopsis, chiefly native plants, and free-flowering; colour 
principally yellow; flowers rayed. C. tenui folia, C. verti- 
cilfdta, C. discolor, and C. tripteris, are the finest of the genus, 
and will grow in any common garden soil. 

Delphiniums. There are some showy border flowers of 
these, of strong growth. The leaves are much divided; the 
flowers in terminal spikes ; colour blue, purple, pink, white 
and yellow, with various shades. D. grandijibrum, and its 
varieties, are the best of the genus. D. intermedium, and 
its varieties, D. eldfum, Bee Larkspur, from the ringent 
part of the flower being very like a bee, and D. montd- 
num, are good varieties, and easily cultivated. When the 

4 



38 PERENNIALS. [March. 

plants become large, they ought to be divided , and planted in 
fresh soil. They are in bloom from May to September. 

Didnthus. Some of the species of this genus are tbe most 
prominent of the flower-garden, not only for their beauty, 
but also their fragrance, which is peculiarly grateful, especially 
in the well-known and cerebrated Pink and Carnation, with 
the Sweet William, which was esteemed in tbe days of old 
"for its beauty to deck up the bosoms of the beautiful, and 
garlands and crowns for pleasure." The finest species are 
D. barbdtus and D. barbdtus pleno, Sweet William ; D. 
discolor; D. chinensis ; D. aljiinns ; D. sujierbus ; D. 
caryophyllus, from which have originated the Picotee and 
the Carnation; D. plumdrius, from wbich originated the 
Double Pink. Several of these, although they will stand 
the severest cold, have to be protected in frames during 
winter, to have them in the perfection of beauty. For the 
character of a Pink and Carnation, see May. 

Dictdmnus. Two species of this genus, D. fraxlnella and 
D. dlbus, have been cultivated and esteemed upwards of two 
hundred and forty years. A plant of the first of these spe- 
cies, when gently rubbed, emits an odour like that of lemon- 
peel; and when bruised emits a balsamic scent, which is 
strongest in the pedicles of the flowers. They have glands 
of a rusty colour, that exude a viscid juice, or resin, which 
exhales in vapour, and in a dark place may be seen to take 
fire. Its flowers are red, those of the other white, in loose 
terminal spikes; the flower has five petals, clawed and 
unequal, with glandular dots ; in bloom from May to July ; 
delights in sandy loam. 

Dodecdtheon. This is a native genus, and commonly 
called American cowslip. The generic term, a name of the 
Romans, signifying twelve gods or divinities, is applied with 
great absurdity to a plant, a native of a world the Romans 
never saw nor had any idea of; neither resembling in any par- 
ticular the poetical fancy of their writers. The most admired 
species is I). mhh'a ; the flowers are in umbels, on a pedicle, 
from six to twelve inches high ; the corolla is rotata reflexa ; 
colour light purple, bottom of petals lake and yellow ; bloom- 
ing in May. The white variety is very much esteemed, and 
surpasses the preceding. The ground is pure white, the 
bottom of the petals the same as the other. There is also 
a spotted variety found on the banks of the Missouri. They 



March.'] PERENNIALS. 39 

delight in brown loam, a half shady situation, inclining to 
moisture. The foliage soon decays after flowering. 

Dracorephaliun, Dragon's Head, about twenty species, 
mostly ornamental. D. virginicum is a profuse blooming 
plant, with bluish-pink flowers, and grows about four feet 
high. D. argunSnse is a superb dwarf, with large dark blue 
flowers. 

Eupator iums. These generally are native plants, not 
worthy of notice here, except for two species. E. coelesti- 
num has syngenesious flowers in flattened panicles, colour 
fine light blue, blooming from September to November; 
desirable for its beauty at that season. E. aromdticum may 
be cultivated for its spicy odour ; flowers white, in loose 
terminal panicles; blooming from August to October. Either 
of them will grow in common soil. 

Eunkia, Japan Day Lily, three species, all beautiful. F. 
cceridca, with blue flowers. E. japonica, pure white, and 
F. variegata, with striped leaves and flowers. F. laurifo- 
lia, early blue. This genus has been separated from Ileme- 
rocdllis. 

Gentidnas, a genus of very showy plants, and flower in 
great abundance. The flowers are tubular and inflated ; 
colour generally blue. A few species are yellow, and 
some white ; flowers in whorls, terminal or solitary. They 
grow best in a light rich soil. G. hUea, G. purpurea, G. 
septemfida. G. acaulis is a pretty dwarf-growing species, 
the flower dark and light blue j interior of the corolla spot- 
ted ; has a succession of flowers from April to June. These 
are fine exotics, but may give place to our native species, 
such as G. Gatcsbsei ; G. orhroleuca ; G. inrarnata ; with 
several others, and G. crindta, which is a biennial, and finely 
fringed; colour light blue. 

Geum. There are only four species that are worth culti- 
vation, namely, G. quellyon, once G. coc&neum; G. splen- 
dens, G. Wicea, and G. hyhridum. G. xirbdnum is somo»- 
times cultivated for its roots, which, when- chewed, sweeten 
the breath. They arc all of easy culture. G. quellyon and 
splendens flower from May to October, and are very desirable 
plants for the borders, and much esteemed in Europe. 

JBemerocdUis, Day Lily ; three species, //. /diva, H. gra- 
in inea, and //. SicbolfUi, flower well, and are remarkable 
among the border flowers for their large yellow or copper- 



40 PERENNIALS. [March. 

coloured corollas, some of them about six inches in diameter; 
bloom from May to July, and will grow in almost any soil. 
There is a plant known in our gardens as H. ccerulea, which 
is Funkia coeridca, and has a campanulate corolla, with a 
cylindrical tube ; flowers in spikes ; leaves ovate, acumi- 
nate. 

Hibiscus. There are several herbaceous species very 
showy and handsome, H. gaMstris ; II rbseus ; H. militd- 
ris; H. specibsus; H. grandiflbrus ; and II. pungens. They 
grow best in moist situations, and where these are not to be 
had, give them plenty of water, and plant in sandy soil 
enriched with decayed leaves. The flowers are about six 
inches in diameter, flowering up the stem, either solitary or 
in small bunches. II. sjiecibsus is the most splendid, and 
deserves a situation in every garden. The roots in winter 
ought to be covered with litter, tan, or saw-dust ; but a 
better method is to lift them, and put them in the cellar, 
covered with dry earth, and kept from the frost. All the 
above-mentioned species are improved by being protected 
during winter. 

Iris, Flower-de-lis, has many fine species of various shades 
and colours, I. subijlora, I. nepaUnsis, I. Palldsii, I. pallida, 
I. cristdta, I. arendria, I. furedta, I. germdncia, I. floreii- 
t\na, I. vema, and I. susidna. The last is the finest of the 
herbaceous species; the flowers are very large and curiously 
spotted with brown ; it stands the severest of our winters 
unprotected. The root of I. Jlorenttna is the orris root of 
the druggists. They are all of easy culture in any loamy 
soil inclining to moisture. The bulbous species will be 
treated of in September or October. Corolla six-petaled, 
three erect and three reclined alternately ; jjroeeeding from 
spathes or sheaths with flowers in succession. 

Liatris is a genus of native plants, containing several fine 
species,//, squarrbsa, large purple heads of beautiful flowers; 
L. elegans ; L.paniciddta. L. macrdstachi/a, now L. spiedta, 
is a fine large-growing species. They have syngencsious 
purple flowers in long close spikes, differing from other 
spiked-flowering genera by blooming first at the extremity. 
They grow best in strong heavy soil. 

Lychnis. Three species are very desirable in the flower 
borders. L. chakeddnica has bright scarlet-crowned flowers; 
the double scarlet variety is splendid ; there is also a double 



March.] perennials. 41 

white variety ; L. fidgens and L. flos-jbvis. They ought to 
be frequently lifted and planted afresh, or they will dwindle 
to nothing. The best time is when they begin to grow. 
There is a plant known in our collections as Lychnis flos- 
cuculi, ragged Robin or French Pink, which is now Agros- 
temma flos-cuculi ; it is a fine and showy border plant with 
double red flowers ; a double white variety of it has been 
recently introduced, of the same character, with the additional 
quality of blooming the whole season. They delight in a 
light rich soil. 

Lythrums. A few species flower well, and have small pink 
blossoms in great profusion, L. alatam, L. virgdtum, L. 
diffusion, L. roseum, and L. lanccoldtum. They will grow in 
any common garden soil if not too much shaded; and flower 
from June to September. 

JL'rnit/i's, Monkey-flower. A few species may be culti- 
vated. They will grow in any soil or situation. 31. liiteus 
and 31. ricidaris are the best. 31. moschdtus has a very 
strong musk scent, to many agreeable. The former two have 
large gaping flowers, of a golden yellow, and beautifully 
spotted with purple in the interior; they all grow in moist 
situations. 

Mondrdas, a fine native genus, and showy. The foliage of 
several of the species is aromatic, and resembles mint. 31. 
didyma has long scarlet ringlet flowers, in headed whorls ; 
31. kalmiana, flowers very long, and a beautiful crimson, 
with fragrant leaves. 31. Russcllia-na has red and white 
flowers; curious and handsome. 31. punctata has yellow 
and red flowers ; they grow in any common soil. 

31athiola is the generic of the Stock-gilly. Xone of them 
will survive severe winters in this latitude; yet many of 
them are indispensable in the flower-garden. 31. simjrfi- 
ciulis, Brompton-stock and its varieties, with 31. incdna, 
Queen-stock, and its varieties, require the protection of a 
good frame in winter ; and about the end of this month, or 
beginning of next, plant them in good, light, rich soil to 
flower, which they will do all summer, if attended to with 
frequent supplies of water. 31. annua has about forty varie- 
ties, valuable for flowering the first year from seed, and 
are all annuals. They ought to be sown on a gentle hot-bed 
about the first of this month, and carefully pricked out so as 
they may be ready to transplant about the end of April or 

4* 



42 perennials. [March. 

the first of May. Plant them in light, rich soil, and they 
will flower profusely through the season; if it is very dry, 
they must be watered to keep them growing. The scarlet, 
white, and purple varieties are the finest; hut there are 
many intermediate sorts, all handsome. M. glabra is the 
Wall-flower leaved stock, and recmires the same treatment 
as the former two. There are about twenty varieties of this, 
all various in colour. In planting any of these into the open 
ground, choose cloudy weather, except they have been in pots; 
in such case, plant at any time in beds, or detached groups, 
through the borders, keeping each kind separate. 

(Enotheras. The most of them are indigenous, and in 
Europe they afford a continual ornament to the flower-garden 
from April to November; but in our gardens they are entirely 
neglected. By rejecting these and many others, our flower- 
gardens are deprived both of much beauty and interest they 
might easily possess. The herbaceous sorts delight in light, 
rich soil. (E. odorata, sweet-scented ; (E. macrocdrpa ; (E. 
media; (E. lati flora ; (E. Frazeri ; (E.specibsa;GE.misson- 
riensis, and (E. pallida ; are all fine, native, herbaceous 
plants, mostly with large yellow, four-petaled corollas; in 
bloom from May to September. 

Phlox, another American genus, and one of the most 
handsome in cultivation. It consists of elegant border flow- 
ers, valuable for flowering early, and during the whole sea 
son, even till frost. While the majority of plants blooming 
late in the season are generally syngenesious, with yellow 
flowers, these delight us with their lively colours of purple, 
red, white, and striped. A collection of them, properly 
attended to, would of themselves constitute a beautiful flower- 
garden. It will be difficult to state which are the finest ; but 
the following are select varieties : P. alba kertnosine, white 
rose-eye; blanc de Neuilly, pure white; captivatiorij dark 
rose; Charles, blush; dicarirata, blue; loinjijiora, white; 
odordta, fragrant red; pi'ostrdta, creeping; Princess Mari- 
anne, striped; specibsa, dark crimson; speciosissima, rosy 
lilac; subidata, dwarf pink; Van llouttii, striped. In the 
spring of 1831, an eminent British collector* exclaimed, on 
seeing a patch of P. subulata in one of the pine barrens of 
New Jersey, "The beauty of that alone is worth coming to 

* Mr. Drummond. 



March.'] TERENNIALS. 43 

America to see ; it is so splendid." Most of the species de- 
light in a rich, light, sandy loam. When the plants become 
large, they ought to be divided, and planted in fresh ground. 

Primulas, Primrose. To this genus belong the celebrated 
Cowslip, Oxslip, Primrose, and the esteemed Auricula. 
The double varieties of Primrose have originated from P. 
ritlt/dris. These are such as carry their flowers on separate 
pedicles, rising from the root on a small stem. The double 
varieties are desirable for their beauty, but require the pro- 
tection of a frame during winter. They are in colour red, 
white, yellow, lilac, purple, and crimson. P. elation is the 
Oxslip, from which all the Polyanthuses have been grown. 
They are in variety innumerable, and are those whose flowers 
are in umbels, on a scape or flower-stalk, rising from three 
to nine inches. The rules for judging of their merits are 
wholly artificial, agreed on from time to time by florists. 
The one that is the leading beauty this j^ear would, in a few 
years, be fur in the rear. The principal character is that 
the corolla is not notched or fringed ; the colours pure and 
distinct, not running into one another ; the tube small ; the 
eye round, and a little prominent. Being surrounded with 
white, and the ground purple, is a fine character. P. auri- 
cula. Prom this the highly esteemed varieties have ori- 
ginated. The cultivated auricula has many admirers, both 
for its exquisite beauty and fragrance. For the criterion of 
a fine flower, see April. There are several other species 
worthy of a situation, such as P. cortusoides, P. dentijlbra, 
P. suaveolens, P. decora, with P. scotica and P. farinbsa, 
both small, neat species. A shady situation agrees best with 
them; and they require loamy soil, free from any kind of 
manure, except it be fully decomposed. The leaves of P. 
veris have been recommended for feeding silk-worms. 

Plumbago Latpantca, Lady Larpants, Lead-wort, dark- 
blue, flowering from July till frost ; a very great acquisition 
to the flower-garden; will require to be covered in winter in 
the Eastern and Northern States. 

Potcntillas are similar to the strawberry in habit and ap- 
pearance. P. nepalensis, or formbsa, has rose-coloured 
flowers; P. atropurpiirca ; P. Russelliclna, scarlet; P. Bbp- 
woodiana, buff and scarlet; and P. sjjlendens, yellow, with 
superb leaves. These are the finest of the genus, and flower 
from May to September. It will be well to protect them with a 



44 terennials. {March. 

few leaves or litter during the severity of winter; they de- 
light in light soil. 

tSaponaria officinalis, and S. o. plena, are fine free-flower- 
ing, dwarf plants ; the colour is pink in both double and 
single varieties. The roots run under ground, and care 
should be taken to keep them within bounds ; they flower 
from June to October. S. coespitbsa is a neat growing spe- 
cies, of a rose colour. They will grow in any soil. 

Silene. Several of this genus are popular annuals, but 
the herbaceous species are very indifferent. S. viscdsa and 
S. viscdsa /lore-plena are frequently cultivated for their 
beauty ; they will grow well if not too much shaded. 

Saxifraga, above one hundred species. Many of them 
are beautiful plants for rock-work. They are regardless of 
cold, but will not generally withstand much moisture. A 
few of them are highly deserving a situation in any garden. 
S. kirsulum and S. crassifblia are used in some countries 
for tanning. S. granuldta multiplex has fine, double, white 
flowers, and is desirable. S. umbrbsa, London-pride, makes 
a beautiful edging for a flower border; the flowers are small, 
but, on close examination, its colours are unrivalled. It is 
sometimes called "none so pretty." S. sarmentbsa is kept 
in the green-house, but is perfectly hardy, and makes a fine 
plant in a shaded situation, and will grow where grass and 
other plants generally die. We have no doubt that it would 
make a good fancy edging. S. pulchiUa and S. pyramidalis 
require protection ; these are easily cultivated, and flower in 
spikes from May to July. 

Spiraeas. A few species are showy plants, and continue 
flowering from May to September. S. ulmdria multiplex, 
Meadow-sweet, has sweet-scented, white flowers, in long 
dense spikes. S. filipendula multiplex, Drop-wort, double 
white. S. lobdta is a native, and has fine rose-coloured 
flowers, and blooms in June and July; JS. japonica, beautiful 
dwarf white ; these are the finest of the herbaceous species, 
and will grow in any common garden soil. 

Stdticc, Thrift. A genus containing many fine herba- 
ceous plants ; only a few of them arc common in collections. 
The finest of them are scarce, and said to be " bad to culti- 
vate." S. vulgaris, once Armeria vulgaris, is a valuable 
plant for an edging, and does well in our climate, flowering 
in great profusion from May to July. When done flower- 



March.'] PERENNIALS. 45 

ing, the stems should be cut off. The foliage is an agreea- 
ble evergreen ; the plant increases rapidly, and in a few 
years may be planted to a great extent. $. specibsa has red 
flowers, crowded in spreading panicles. S. tartar ica has 
also very showy flowers, and is now given to the genus Tax- 
dnthema. S. latifblia and S. marit\ma are the finest. T. 
latifblia and T. conspicua deserve attention. They should 
be lifted every alternate year, and sunk deeper into the soil, 
because they incline to grow out, and are sometimes during 
summer killed by the drought. Hence they are said to be 
" bad to cultivate." 

Veronica, Speed-well. This genus consists of about one 
hundred and twenty species of herbaceous plants, besides 
several varieties. The flowers are in long, close spikes, white, 
flesh-coloured, or blue ; they are generally of the latter 
colour. Above sixty species are equally fine, and, being ge- 
nerally of the same character, the catalogue at the end of this 
work will contain the best selection that we can make. Very 
few of them are in the collections of the country, although 
they are very showy, and flower from May to August. They 
will grow in any soil, but will not flourish where they are 
much shaded. V. officinal is has been used in Germany and 
Sweden as a substitute for tea. Some prefer V. chamsedrys 
for the same purpose. 

Valerianas. Several species are showy border plants, with 
small flowers in large close flattened panicles. V. dioica 
is remarkable for having the stamens and pistils in separate 
flowers, situated on different plants; the flowers are of a 
blush colour. V. plui, a large-growing species with white 
flowers, and V. rubra, with its varieties which bloom all the 
season, are the finest of the genus. They are now given to 
Centrdnthus. They are all easy of culture in common garden 
earth, but preferring moist, shady situations. In flower from 
May to September. 

Viola, a genus consisting of upwards of eighty species of 
low pretty plants, of great diversity of colour and foliage. 
Many of them* are natives, and well worth a situation in our 
gardens. They mostly delight in sandy loam, and a little 
shade. A few of the species grow in moist situations. The 
most esteemed varieties for fragrance are, V. odordta pur- 
purea plena, double purple, V. odordta alba plena, double 
white, the double Neapolitan and the monthly Double purple. 



46 perennials. [March. 

They flower very early, and make good edgings, where they 
are kept in order ; flowering profusely from April to June, 
and again in autumn. 

Yucca, Adam's needle. This is a very showy and orna- 
mental genus ; their character forming a picturesque contrast 
in the flower-garden ; foliage long, narrow, lanceolate, and 
stiff; with white campanulate flowers, about two inches in 
diameter, in conical spikes from two to four feet long, arising 
from the centre of the plant, containing frequently from two 
to four hundred florets. They are principally native plants. 
Y. stricfa, Y. sv/perba, Y. aloifolia, Y. angustifblia, Y. glo- 
riosa, Y. recurvifoh'a, and Y. Jilamcntdsa, are all fine species, 
and will grow in any common soil. When in flower, if pro- 
tected from the sun by an awning, they will be of considera- 
ble duration. There are variegated varieties of stricta and 
aloifblia, which look very handsome in foliage, but are at 
present very rare, and it will be a number of years before 
they are plentiful. There ought, at least, to be one specimen 
of each in every garden. 

We have given the names and characters of a few her- 
baceous plants, all, or most of them, easily obtained, many 
of them extremely handsome, and such as agree best with 
transplanting at this season of the year; for several others, 
such as Psebnias, or any other strong tubei*ous or bulbous 
sorts, see October. Where they are in pots, they can be 
planted at any time, the weather permitting, provided the 
ball of earth is not broken. But where they are only to be 
removed, the best time is in October or November, or just 
as vegetation commences in the spring. That herbaceous 
plants may look to the best advantage, and flower well, they 
must not be allowed to get into large stools ; but, as soon 
as they are above one foot in diameter, they should be di- 
vided. 

Very frequently, those who perform this operation take 
the spade, and cut a piece off all round, which, to a degree, 
improves the look of the plant; but this is only half justice. 
It should be lifted entirely, fresh soil given, or removed a 
few feet, and planted a little deeper than it was before, as 
the plant tends apparently to grow out of the soil when al- 
lowed to stand long. If the weather becomes dry shortly 
after transplanting, give them a few waterings, until they 
have taken fresh roots, which will be within two weeks. 



March.] carnations and pinks. 47 

Colour should be diversified through the garden as much as 
practicable, and the highest -growing sorts planted farthest 
from the walk, so as all may appear in view. At all times, 
avoid crowding plants together. 



BULBOUS ROOTS^ 

About the middle of this month, let the covering of tan, 
sawdust, or decayed leaves be cleared from the beds of such 
as were directed to be covered in November; afterwards 
carefully stirring the surface among them with a kind of 
wooden spatula, or wedge, breaking the surface fine ; then 
dress all the alleys smooth and neat with the hoe and rake, 
clearing away every particle of litter. When the leaves of 
Tulips are expanding, they frequently become entangled so 
much that the force of growth breaks the foliage ; if there 
are any appearances of this at any time, they should be set 
right with the hand. In early seasons, these roots will be far 
advanced, and perhaps one night of frost, unexpectedly, 
might materially injure them. When there is any suspi- 
cion of cold weather, hoops should be spanned across the 
beds, so that the necessary mats or canvass could in a few 
minutes be placed over them, to ward off danger. Protect 
the finest sorts from heavy drenching rains, and give them 
small neat rods for support as they grow up. If the rods 
and tyings are painted green, the effect will be improved. 
These directions equally apply to Narcissus, Jonquils, Iris, 
and all Holland Bulbs. 



CARNATIONS, PINKS, PRIMROSES, ETC., 

Which have been protected by frames through the winter, 
must have, at all favourable opportunities, plenty of air ad- 
mitted to them by lifting the sashes, and in fine mild clays 
and nights, the sashes may be taken entirely off. Divest 
them of all decayed leaves, and stir up the earth on the sur- 
face of the pots ; those that are intended to be planted in 
the garden may be set to one side, while those that are to be 
kept in pots must be more strictly attended to. Of these 
the Pinks and Carnations should be repotted about the first 



48 AURICULAS. [March. 

of the month. Those that have been kept in four inch pots 
should be put into pots of seven inches, and those that are 
in five inch pots may be put into eight inch. Give a gentle 
watering after repotting. Pinks do not require the pots so 
large, but the same treatment in every other respect. Where 
the extremities of the leaves are decayed, cut them off, with 
any other decayed l|aves ; the pots must be well drained 
with shivers or fine gravel. Give them plenty of air, other- 
wise they will be weak in growth. 

Primroses and Daisies may be planted out in shady situa- 
tions : the sun destroys them during summer, if exposed. 



AURICULAS. 

These beautiful and highly interesting plants are, to a 
great degree, neglected in our collections. It cannot be from 
want of beauty or fragrance that they have not attracted our 
attention, for they are exquisite in both. We are rather in- 
clined to think that those who have them do not give them 
the treatment they require yearly to perfect their bloom. 
They should now have the surface earth taken off about half 
an inch down, and fresh soil added, which will cause them to 
put on fresh fibres about the upper part of the roots, and 
greatly increase their growth. The frame in which they are 
placed should now face the east, as the sun will be too strong 
for them ; and about the end of the month turn it to the 
north. The glass of the frame may be white-washed, which 
will partially shade them from the sun, that being their de- 
light. Give them water sparingly until they begin to grow, 
and never water them over the foliage previous to flowering, 
as water injures that fine mealy-like substance found on many 
of the sorts, and which so greatly improves their beauty. 
Defend them, therefore, from rain and high winds. To have 
them flower strongly, only one flower-stem should be allowed 
to grow. The first one that shows is generally the best. 
At all events, leave the strongest, and cut off all the others, 
or only nip off the flower pips, which answers the same end. 
Never keep the sash off during the night, in case it rain 
before morning. 



March.'] ranunculus and anemone — roses. 49 



RANUNCULUS AND ANEMONE. 

The frames of Ranunculus and Anemone must have plenty 
of air, and give frequent sprinklings of water. The sashes 
or shutters should be taken entirely off every mild day, and 
in fine nights leave them exposed to the dew. Stir the earth 
among them, breaking it fine, and making all neat and clean. 
They require liberal supplies of water after they begin to 
grow. 

ROSES. 

This is the most favourable month for planting all kinds 
of garden roses, which must be done as soon as the weather 
opens, and the ground in a proper state. The earlier they 
are planted the more perfect they will flower. Never delay 
planting when there is an opportunity ; for, if delayed until 
the leaves are expanded, the bloom will be much weakened, 
and the probability is there will be no flowers, and the plants 
meet with a premature death. It has been said, " There is 
a particular advantage in planting some every ten days, even 
to the middle of May ; for the flowering of them may be re- 
tarded in this way, and the bloom of these delightful shrubs 
continue for a much longer period." One moment's reflec- 
tion will convince us that nature, while in her own element, 
will not be retarded, suppose there was no danger of instan- 
taneous death to the plants. The artificial means that might 
be judiciously adopted, with which we are acquainted, to 
keep back the blooming of hardy plants, is to lift them as 
soon in spring as is practicable, put them in boxes of earth, 
and then place them in the driest part of an ice-house, until 
the desired time of planting, which may be delayed as long 
as the required time of flowering. This will be found a true 
method of retarding the flowering of roses especially, and not 
going counter to the rules and principles of nature. There 
are many beautiful varieties of the garden rose in cultivation, 
the names of the finest of which we will give in the following 
catalogue : — 

African black, very dark crimson, compact and very double. 
Belle amabile, fine dark red, large and double. 



50 roses. [March. 

Baron de Stael, bright cherry colour, globular, large and 

double. 
Belle Hebe, large purplish red, cupped, double and fine. 
rouennaise, a very superb rose, with red centre and 

blush edge. 
Belgic or Dutch Provins, red, with very large flowers, cupped 

and extra double. 

Bouquet de Lisle, spotted. 

ri it. ■ -n - ( Fine rose, very large, globu- 

Cabbage Provins, or \ , \ i i \ t 

Ce^folia of the French, j ^^^ "^ estreme1 ^ 

Delicious, rosy colour, large compact and double. 

Don Solo, shaded and spotted. 

Edinberger, violet purple, very compact and most perfectly 

double. 
Grandis royal, deep pink, large, expanded and double. 
Harrisoni,* bright yellow, cupped, small and semi-double. 
Helen, light pink, very large, cupped and double. 
Imperial blush, delicate blush, expanded, large and double. 
Isabella, blush pink, very profuse, cupped and double. 
King of Rome, deep red, very large, compact and exquisitely 

double. 
La Belle Augusta, shaded blush and white, expanded and 

double. 
— ville de Bruxelles, bright rose. 

Leonore, purplish red, very compact, imbricated, and double. 
Madam Hardy, pure white, large, globular and exquisitely 

double. 

Plantier, pure white, very profuse. 

Moss rose,'f' delicate rose, globular and perfectly double. 

Compte di Montmorency, pale blush. 

white, old white, expanded and double. 

white bath, or Clifton, white moss, fine white, cupped 

and double. 

* This Rose, with a "Florist's privilege," has been sold for the 
yellow sweetbrier. It is also called Hogg's Yellow Hose. 

f It has long been questioned -whether the Moss Rose was a dis- 
tinct species, or merely a seminal variety of the Provins Hose. I 
perfectly agree with the latter opinion — for in June, 1836, I saw in 
my nursery a plant of the Moss rose with a large shoot that had 
sported back to the Provins Rose, and entirely destitute of moss on 
either shoots or buds. We have no faith in black and yellow Moss 
Roses ; all we have seen for such have proved false to their character. 






March.] roses. 51 

Moss crimson or Damask, very bright rose, expanded and 
double, and very mossy. 

( This is not properly a moss rose, 

crested, moss or but has a curiously mossy calyx 

crested Provins, 1 ■ that envelopes the bud — pink, 
[ globular, and double. 

Luxemburg, bright red, compact and double. 

panache, frequently striped. 

perpetual red. 

white, blooming in clusters. 

unique de Provence, white. 



Negritina, pink, very compact, imbricated and double. 
Nonpareil, rosy red, compact and perfectly double. 
Oillet parfait, striped like a carnation. 
Perlet des panaches, striped rose and white. 

red, see red Provins. 

white, see white Provins. 

Prince de Joinville, bright rose, large, expanded and finely 

double. 
Prolific blu.-h, changeable blush, expanded and double. 
Provins cabbage, see Cabbage Provins. 

Queen of violets, violet colour, compact, cupped and very 
double. 

of Roses, beautiful rosy purple, imbricated and double. 

Caroline, fine changeable red, cupped and double. 

Sweetbrier, single pink. 

■ celestial, blush, fine double flowered. 

Swiss Rose, large pink, expanded, and profusely double. 
Unique or white Provins, pure white, very large globular, 

and double, superb. 
Unique striped, often is perfectly white, and merely a sport 

from the former. 
Vandal carmine, compact, imbricated, and double. 
Village Maid, or Belle Rubine, striped. 
Violatum, violet purple, expanded and double. 
Yellow Persian, the finest yellow rose grown. 

"We mention these as fine; but, among several thousand 
cultivated varieties of the garden rose, there must be many 
of equal, if not surpassing beauty; of Rosa spinosissima, 
there are about five hundred varieties; Rosa gallica, two 
hundred; R. centifolia, one hundred and fifty; R. damas- 



52 ROSES. [March. 

chie, above one hundred ; H. alba, fifty ; JR. rubigindsa, 
thirty ; and of various sorts above eleven hundred. In seve- 
ral individual collections of Europe, there are cultivated 
above fifteen hundred species, sub-species, and varieties. 

When planted, they are too frequently crowded indiscri- 
minately among other shrubs, which prevents them having 
the effect they would have if planted singly or grouped. 
They vary in size, in different sorts, from one to ten feet. 
When planted in the latter method, they should be assimi- 
lated in size of leaves and manner of growth, with the great- 
est variation of flower ; or, if planted in small patches, each 
distinct in colour, will have a very picturesque effect. Another 
desirable and fanciful method is to plant them in figures, 
with edgings of wire, willow, or any other substitute, in 
imitation of basket-work, which is called " baskets of roses/' 
the ground enclosed in the basket margin to be made convex, 
which will present a greater surface to the eye ; the strong 
shoots to be layered, or kept down by pegs in the ground, 
having the points of the shoots only to appear above the soil, 
which should be covered with moss. With this treatment, 
in a few years the whole surface of the basket will be covered 
with rose-buds and leaves, of one or various sorts. If two 
or three of the larger-growing sorts are taken, such as Moss 
or JProvins, they may be trained so as to cover a surface of 
several square yards. 

A modern invention in the cultivation of the rose is to 
grow them in shape of trees, by budding on strong-grow- 
ing kinds at different heights from the ground, according to 
taste, and the purposes intended. If budded on Rosa ca- 
nt na, or Dog Rose, they are much more valuable : it is a last- 
ing and strong-growing stock ; and the worst of all stocks is 
the Boursalt rose, and it is too frequently resorted to, being 
easy of propagation. They will form in a few years hand- 
some round heads, which will flower more freely than by 
layers, or trained on their own stalk. They are particularly 
desirable among low shrubs. When planted, they should be 
well supported by strong rods, to prevent the wind from de- 
stroying them. If any of the roots have been bruised in 
lifting, cut off the bruised part with the knife, and likewise 
shorten the young shoots j breaking the earth well about 
their roots when planting. The rose has been an esteemed 
shrub among all civilized nations. The flowers arc double, 



March.'] ORNAMENTAL FLOWERING SHRUBS. 53 

semi-double, and single ; the colours are pink, red, purple, 
white, yellow, and striped, with almost every shade and mix- 
ture; the odour universally grateful. This plant is cultivat- 
ed in every garden, from the humblest cottager to the loftiest 
prince, and by commercial gardeners in Europe extensively, 
for distilling rose-water, and making the essential oil of roses. 
They delight in a rich loamy soil, and require plenty of 
moisture while in a growing state. Those sorts which throw 
up numerous suckers should be lifted every three or four 
years, reduced, and then transplanted. When thus removing 
them, avoid, as much as possible, exposing their roots ; and 
when newly planted, mulching is of considerable advantage ; 
that is, putting half-rotten stable-manure on the surface of 
the ground round their roots, which prevents evaporation, 
and keeps up a constant moisture. If this were done in 
general to our roses in dry seasons, it would greatly improve 
their flowering. For Chinese and other roses, see next month. 



CLIMBING ROSES. 

This is the best time to prune ever-blooming climbing 
roses, such as Chamjmcy, Noisette, &c. Many of these, 
when allowed to grow year after year without pruning, be- 
come unsightly ; they never bear flowers on the old wood, 
that is, wood of three or four years. Having a tendency to 
throw out young shoots from the bottom of the stem, the old 
wood should be cut out, thus encouraging the young wood, 
which the second year bears the most and finest flowers. 
In severe winters, the extremities of the shoots are frequent- 
ly killed, and we have often seen all the wood black or brown, 
and apparently dead. When that is the case, it is best to 
leave it until they begin to grow, which will show what is 
dead or alive, when they can be pruned to better advantage. 



DECIDUOUS ORNAMENTAL FLOWERING SHRUBS. 

The earlier the planting of these shrubs is attended to in 
this month, the more will their growth and flowering be pro- 
moted, having all finished before the buds begin to expand. 

5* 



54 GRASS-rLATS AND WALKS. [March. 

(For kinds recommended, see list, end of the volume.) They 
should never be planted too thick ; but leave space for them 
to grow as they respectively require, and according as they 
are designed for open or close shrubberies, clumps, or thick- 
ets. Have all in readiness, that it may be done with as 
much expedition as possible, to prevent their roots from 
being dried by the sun and wind in time of planting. 
Make the holes intended for their reception round, capacious, 
and deep enough to hold their roots, without confining them 
in the least, and loosen well the bottom, putting new and 
fresh soil under their roots, breaking and pulverizing it dur- 
ing the operation, and frequently shaking the plant as you 
progress in filling up. When done, make all firm with the 
foot, leaving a circular cavity to hold the water they will 
require during dry weather. Give rods, and tie with bands 
all that need that support, before they are left, lest they 
should be neglected. Cut off" any of the bruised roots or 
irregular growths of the branches. 



GRASS-PLATS AND WALKS. 

A most wonderful renovator of grass-plats may be found 
in Guano. Take at the rate of one pound to twelve square 
yards, mix it with double the quantity of sand, and before 
rain in April or May, sow the mixture over the grass ; in a 
few days its effects will be seen. Where grass lawns are 
poor, and of a pale yellow colour, about four hundred weight 
to the acre, mixed with sand, plaster, or dry earth, will effec- 
tually restore them to a luxuriant verdure. 

Rake and sweep off from these all litter, and worm-east 
earth, and give an occasional rolling to settle the ground, 
and render the surface smooth where the scythe is to be used. 
The grass will likewise grow better by rolling it where the 
frost has partially thrown it out, and add greatly to its beau- 
ty. Cut the edgings with an edging-iron or spade, so that 
the whole will have a finished appearance. If any new turf 
is required to be laid down, this is a very good time to do it, 
before vegetation is strong ; as the turf that is now laid will 
have taken root before the dry season commences. Where 
a great extent is' to be done, sowing might be adopted ; but 
it will not have the effect of turf under three years, and dur- 



March.'] GRASS-PLATS AND WALKS. 55 

ing that time must be carefully cut, after the first season, 
every three weeks, while growing ; nor must it be too fre- 
quently walked upon. White clover and true perennial rye- 
grass are the seeds most proper for sowing. The ground 
must, in the first place, be all equally made up, and levelled 
with the spade and rake ; not " cart-loads of soil laid down 
and levelled," which would finally become very uneven, and 
would need to be lifted and relaid nest year. The best turf 
is that of a close-growing pasture or common, free from all 
kinds of weeds or strong roots, and the grass short. To cut 
it expeditiously, be provided with a turfing-iron ; but if that 
cannot be conveniently had, a spade may do very well. Strain 
a line tight, cutting the turf lengthwise, at equal distances, 
from twelve to eighteen inches. Next draw the line across, 
cutting from one and a half to two feet ; then cut them up 
with the spade, about one and a half inch thick. In laying, 
join them close and alternately; when done, beat them firm 
with a level wooden beater, and roll with a heavy roller. 

Grass-walks, in the last century, were very popular ; but 
time having put them to the test, they are found unfit for 
walking among or using in any manner, almost for one-half 
of the year ; therefore, not answering the purposes intended. 
They require great attention to keep them in order ; and if 
not always neat and clean, they are a disagreeable object in a 
garden ; but, when they are well dressed, their effect is very 
enlivening. Where they are desired, prepare the ground as 
above directed ; making the walk a little higher than the 
adjoining borders, to prevent the earth from being washed on 
it by the rain. Allowing the walks to be six feet wide, make 
the centre five inches higher than the sides, or about seven- 
eighths of an inch to the foot, whatever the breadth may be, 
which will form a gentle declivity to throw off the rain. 
When laid, beat and roll it well ; cutting the edge neat and 
even. Water frequently, if the weather sets in dry. To 
keep grass-walks or plats in order, they should be mown once 
every three or four weeks from May to September, and the 
grass each time swept clean off. When the grass is allowed 
to get long before being cut, the roots become tender, and 
die when exposed to the sun ; at last the grass is all in spots, 
and in another year requires to be relaid. 



56 GRAVEL WALKS — OF GRAFTING. [JIarch. 



GRAVEL WALKS. 

A practice once existed of turning these into heaps, or 
ridges, during winter, to destroy weeds, &c. But this has 
almost been given up as unnecessary, unsightly, inconvenient, 
and not doing any material service. 

Where the surface of these has become foul, irregular, or 
mossy, they had better be turned over four or five inches 
deep, where the gravel will admit of it ; but if not, hoe and 
rake them perfectly clean, give a new coat of gravel, and 
pick up any stones that you think too large ; then give them 
a good rolling, applying it frequently after showers of rain. 
"When they are well attended to just now, they will look well 
all the season ; but if neglected, they take more labour, and 
are never in such good condition. 

Fancy-edgings of Thyme, Thrift, Lavender, and Violets — 
(Daisies may be used if the situation is shaded). The whole 
of these may be planted by the line with the dibber except 
Thyme, which lay as directed for Box. See this month, 
under that head. Any time in this or beginning of next 
month will answer to make edgings of these ; and if dry 
weather occurs befoi«e they begin to grow after planting, they 
must have frequent waterings until they have taken fresh 
root. Thyme requires to be dressed twice during the season, 
to keep it in order. 



OF GRAFTING. 

There are four methods of grafting. It can be applied to 
all kinds of shrubbery, choosing a common species from the 
same genus that the sort belongs to, which is intended to be 
multiplied. The one we will describe is ichip or tongue 
grafting, which is the preferable and most expeditious plan 
with all deciduous shrubs or trees. The stock upon which 
it is performed must be slender, from two-thirds of an inch to 
any diameter suitable to the thickness of the graft. Having 
headed the stock at a clear, smooth part, slope it on one side 
with a sharp knife at a very acute angle, make a slit on the 
lower side of the slope about an inch downward, to receive 
the tongue or wedge of the graft or scion. Secondly, having 



April."] REMARKS ON GARDENING. 57 

the prepared scions cut into lengths of three, four or five 
eyes, take one which matches the stock in size, and slope 
the bottom of it so as to fit the stock, that the rinds of both 
may correspond exactly, especially on one side and at bottom ; 
make also a slit upward in the graft, like that in the slope of 
the stock, so that the one may be inserted in the other as 
evenly and completely as possible. Let the graft be carefully 
held in its due position, while a bandage is applied. Take 
strands of Russian mat, and bind them in a neat manner 
several times round the stock and graft. Lastly, cover the 
joint with well-worked clay; coat from half an inch below 
the bottom of the graft to an inch above the top of the stock, 
and to the thickness of half an inch all round; finish it in 
an oblong globular form, taking care to work it close, that 
no air may penetrate. If the clay is covered with moss, it 
will partially prevent it from cracking. 

The grafts will have taken when they begin to grow freely : 
then the clay may be broken off, and the bandage loosened, 
and put on again, but not so tight as formerly ; give the 
grafts a stake for support, tying them thereto to prevent 
accidents from the wind. Allow no shoots to arise from the 
stock. 



APRIL. 



The ambition of every amateur and gardener, during this 
month, is to be at the head of every department, and over 
every spot. The operator's activity, in this month, almost 
regulates the whole season. Every weed ought to be cut 
clown as soon as it appears, and the proverbial saying will be 
realized, "A garden that is well kept is easily kept;" one 
hour of laborious industry now will save two in the heat of 
summer. A wet clay need cause no loss of time : prepare 
rods, bands, and tallies, to be in readiness when required. 
Many, in the height of bustle, never finish properly as they 
proceed, which is the worst of practices. Every operation 
ought to be completely and properly finished before another 



58 BIENNIALS AND PERENNIALS. [April. 

is taken in hand, which will ultimately prove the quickest 
and best method to work upon. 

Let digging, hoeing, and raking be done as expeditiously 
as strength will allow, that the time may be devoted, for a 
few weeks, to the beautifying of the garden and parterre, by 
sowing and planting. 



ANNUALS. 

Those that are tender and were sown last month, according 
to directions, will be ready to prick out into another glass" 
frame. Keep them a few inches apart to let the air circu- 
late. Give them frequent sprinklings with water, and shade 
them with a mat for a few days, until they have taken fresh 
root ; then give them plenty of air, and by the first of nest 
month, expose them, night and day, to harden the plants for 
the open ground. A few of the annual seeds, of every de- 
scription, and of every country and climate, may be sown any 
time after the middle of the month. If the season prove 
favourable, they will do well; but reserving a part to sow 
about the 15th of May, will guard against every extreme. 



BIENNIALS AND PERENNIALS. 

Any biennials that are intended to be removed, and not 
done last month, must not be delayed longer. The roots of 
many of them will be very strong, and, if possible, a cloudy 
day should be chosen for the operation. Give one or two 
copious waterings, and, if necessary, shade them from the 
sun till they begin to grow. 

Perennials. — For a limited description of several genera 
and species, see last month. Where dividing the root or 
replanting is required, let it be done forthwith. If the wea- 
ther is dry, they must be carefully watered and shaded for a 
few days. 



April.'] HYBRID CHINESE ROSES. 59 



ROSES. 

The subject of garden roses was touched upon last month, 
as far as our limits would admit. We will now give short 
descriptions of the other varieties of Roses that are of more 
delicate character — and, for distinction and perspicuity, we 
will give them under the various divisions to which they 
belong. 



HYBRID CHINESE ROSES. 

All the varieties of this fine division of Roses owe their 
origin to the Chinese tea-scented, Noisette and Bourbon 
Roses, impregnated with the French Provins, and other 
garden Roses. The seeds of such fertilized flowers produce 
hybrid Chinese Roses. These have, in many instances, re- 
sulted from accident ; but latterly, from the regular impreg- 
nating process. The superb varieties of this fine division 
give a combination of all that is grand and beautiful in roses. 
Their flowers are of the most elegant forms and richest 
colours; their foliage of great luxuriance, and their branches 
flexible and vigorous. Many of them are of first rate im- 
portance for covering pillars and trellises, their shoots fre- 
quently growing from six to ten feet in one season ; these 
shoots may be thinned out year after year, but never short- 
ened. They require very rich soil, and do best on their 
own bottom, except elegans, Bizarre de la Chine, Welling- 
ton, and other dwarf-growing sorts, which do well as stand- 
ards. If they only possessed the property of ever blooming, 
they would be decidedly the finest division of the tribe; 
however, their general beauty and richness of colour greatly 
make up for the deficiency. Many of them are also delight- 
fully fragrant. The following are select sorts : — 

Belle Marie, bright pink, a fine dwarf. 

parabere, shaded crimson, a strong grower. 

Theresa, very dark crimson. 

Blanchefleur, white, a free grower. 

Bon Grinneure, bright red, very early. 

Bouquet blanc, white expanded, large and very double. 



60 IIYBRID CHINESE ROSES. [April. 

Brennus or Brutus, of some French collections, vivid red or 
nearly scarlet, and, as a pillar rose, is one of the 
finest objects I have ever witnessed; flowers extremely 
large, and of the most exquisite form ; cupped, and 
perfectly double. 

Catel, dark crimson, globular shape and very double. 

Coup de Hebe, delicate pink. 

Dandigne, violet purple. 

Duke of Devonshire, rosy lilac faintly striped with white, 
imbricated and perfect in its shape. 

Egerie, brilliant red, a free grower. 

Fabvier, very large, changeable pink and red. 

Fulgens or Milton, unique in brilliancy, appx-oaching bright 
scarlet, with large globular flowers, and of vigorous 
growth, and foliage finely tinted with red. 

General Lamarque, very dark crimson, of luxuriant growth, 
and very distinct. 

George the Fourth (Rivers'), most beautiful crimson, very 
large and exquisitely double, and of globular form. 
If in good rich soil, the shoots will grow eight feet 
in one season ; foliage of a shining dark reddish 
green, and is unquestionably one of the finest of the 
family. 

Georgiana, deep pink, cupped, large and finely double. 

Grillony, slaty rose colour. 

L'ingenue, shaded violet crimson. 

Lady Stuart, flesh colour, the form of the flowers before ex- 
pansion is perfectly spherical, and of exceeding beauty. 

Louis Philippe, very splendid dark rose, a strong grower, 
superb. 

Parny or La tourterdh, lilac or dove colour, cupped and 
very double, requires to grow to a large bush before 
its beauty of form and profusion of bloom can be 
seen. 

Princess, delicate rose, globular and perfectly double, and 
makes an excellent standard of itself, not being very 
subject to make shoots from the root. 

Prolifere, dark rosy crimson, cbanging-to violet, very perfect 
form, a dwarf. 

Triomphe de Laffay, rosy white, large and very beautiful. 

Victor Hugo, changeable rosy violet. 



April.] PERPETUAL ROSES. 61 

Violet cle Belgique, dark violet crimson, very profuse and 
perfect. 

Watts' Celestial, Celestial Wells' Cahbage China, Flora per- 
fecta, &c. (it is known under all these names), delicate 
rose, petals finely cupped, flower rather flat, is a free 
grower, and very profuse of bloom. 

Wellington (Lee's), rich purple crimson, flower beautifully 
formed ; globular and very double. The first view of 
it is similar to Bizarre cle la Chine; but it is very 
distinct in growth, and the colour fades much sooner 
than in the latter rose, and, indeed, is never so bright. 

William the Fourth, blush red, extremely large, very perfect 
form, and is unquestionably a hybrid from the Cab- 
bage Provins, and makes an excellent standard or 
tea rose. 



HYBRID ROSES THAT ARE STRIPED, SPOTTED, OR 
MARBLED. 

Abbe Berleso, beautiful crimson, spotted with violet, and of 
the most perfect form. 

Camaieu, delicate rose, with lilac stripes, large and double. 

Prince de Chimay, entirely new, crimson purple, beautifully 
marbled with rose, large, and very perfect. 

Sandeur, ftandcur Fanachee, of the French, and King of 
Hybrids of the English, bright rose colour, beautifully 
spotted and striped with white, very double, and of 
perfect form — luxuriant in growth, and the shoots 
must never be shortened — we have seen it several 
years in perfect bloom. 



PERPETUAL ROSES. 

This once admired division of the Rose is now nearly 
superseded by the Hybrid Perpetual, a tribe that originated 
between it and the Bourbon. It was not known in Europe 
till about 1817, except in the red and white four seasons, 
roses, which have, no doubt, contributed a large portion of 
their*" sweet assistance;" for in many of them the powerful 
and agreeable fragrance of these two old roses is very evident. 

6 



62 perpetual roses. [ApriL 

Unfortunately, there are two-thirds of these roses received 
both from France and England under the head of Per- 
petuals, which only bloom once in our arid and hot climate ; 
of course, they will not make a second or third blooming, 
unless they, at the same time, grow freely and make strong 
shoots ; consequently, they require very rich and deep soil, 
strongly manured, and repeated manurings given every year; 
also, very frequent waterings during the summer season, with 
liquid manure. Without such nourishment, the best of per- 
petual roses will only flower but once a year. It is a pecu- 
liar feature in this tribe of roses, that they are nearly all 
reluctant in rooting from layers; therefore, it will be difficult 
to procure them on their own bottoms. However, they grow 
admirably, grafted on, or budded into, any of our strong- 
growing native roses ; although the French Eglantine and 
Marietta are most generally preferred. When grown in a 
luxuriant and well-cultivated state, they require twice pruning. 
First, in November, when the beds are dressed, cut off every 
shoot of the preceding summer's growth about two-thirds, and 
if they are crowded, displace some of them entirely. If 
this autumnal pruning be properly attended to, they w x ill, 
early in the following June, throw out a great number of 
luxuriant shoots, each having one or more flowers. When a 
little sacrifice must be made to have a fine autumnal bloom, 
therefore, leave only about half the number of shoots to bring 
forth flowers, the remainder shorten to less than half their 
lengths. Each shortened branch will soon put forth buds, 
and in July and August the plants will again be covered 
with flowers. Our fine-growing fall months will greatly 
assist the plants without farther aid in bringing forth their 
third blooming, which will be in September and October; 
and Rose du Hoi will even continue in mild seasons to bloom 
till November. It is necessary, at all times, as soon as the 
flower begins to fade, to cut it off, which greatly assists the 
■ vigour of the plants. Although in colour many of them ap- 
proximate each other, yet the following sorts will prove suffi- 
ciently distinct : — 

Antinous, light crimson, beautifully formed, and perfectly 

double. 
Billiard, rose colour, very neat form, exceedingly sweet, and 

perfectly double. 



April.'] HYBRID PERPETUAL ROSES. 63 

D' Angers, delicate rose, large size, compact and double. 

Du Iloi, or Lee's crimson perpetual, bright red, cupped shape, 

perfectly double, and exquisitely scented : in warm 

dry weather, this rose is apt to become much lighter 

in colour. 
Grande et Belle, or Monst reuse rose, very large, cupped and 

perfectly double. 
Jean Hachette (of the English), delicate pink, extremely 

large, cupped, and extra double. 
Magadore, very dark crimson, perfect form. 
Oliver de Serres, dark rose with a blush edge, very distinct. 
Palmyra, rosy pink. 
Queen of Perpetuals, or Palotte picotee, pale blush, cupped 

and perfectly double. 
Scotch Perpetual, pale blush, a profuse and constant bloomer. 
Stanwell, perpetual blush, expanded and very double; it has 

much the habit of a Scotch Rose : when budded, it is 

a constant and free bloomer. 
Four seasons, pale rose, cupped and double. 
White four seasons, nearly white, expanded and double; but 

rarely blooms oftener than once in the season. 
Perpetual white moss, white, blooms in large clusters, and 

when in bud is very handsome ; but the flower of 

itself is miserably indifferent, and, moreover, it is not 

a true perpetual. It is one of those floricultural 

misnomers expressing what the public would wish it 
to be, and not what it actually is. 



HYBRID PERPETUAL ROSES. 

It is but, comparatively, yesterday since this tribe was 
brought into existence ; it is now the leading family of 
hardy Roses, and will continue to be for ages to come. We 
may expect in it every variety of colour, from pure white to 
velvet crimson, and with a mixture of spotted, striped, and, 
may be, a touch of yellow. What we have said on the cul- 
ture of Perpetual Roses will equally apply here, this tribe 
having the advantage of rapidity of growth — more diversity 
of colour — a greater profusion of bloom, and is propagated 
with considerable facility by layers, or cuttings, or the com- 



64 GRAFTING ROSES. [ApriL 

mon process of budding and grafting. The following sorts 
are all perfectly distinct : — 

Aubernon, dark rosy red, cupped and very double. 
Baron Prevost, dark rose, very large, strong growing. 
Blanche, pure white, cupped, very profuse. 
Conitesse Duchatel, dark rosy red, large and perfect. 
Duchess de Nemours, pale rose colour, very double. 
Duchess of Praslin, pale blush, very profuse. 
Due d'Aumale, rosy crimson, perfect form. 
Edward Jesse, pale red, a very constant bloomer. 
General Taylor, bright crimson scarlet, fine. 
Lane, bright carmine, fine form, and a constant bloomer. 
La Heine, rosy lilac, very large. 
Marquis Boccella, pale pink, a profuse bloomer. 
Prince Albert, rich crimson, large and very double. 
Youlande d'Arragon, pale rose, large and very constant in 
bloom ; one of the best light-coloured sorts. 

There are fifty other sorts could be added to the above, 
without decidedly varying the colour. 



GRAFTING ROSES. 

The operation of grafting, from the pithy nature of the 
stems of the rose, is more troublesome, and seldom succeeds 
so well as budding, though when the buds inserted the pre- 
vious summer fail, it is worth while to have recourse to graft- 
ing, which may succeed, and thus make up for the failure. 
The cleft-grafting is much practised, especially on the conti- 
nent of Europe, and is the most successful method. It is 
necessary that the scion (or young shoot that is intended to 
be multiplied) should be cut from the bush before vegetation 
commences, and placed in some shaded situation till the time 
of operation, which will be after the buds begin to swell on 
the stock, when the head of the stock may be cut horizon- 
tally to its desired height, and a slit made in its crown down- 
ward one and a half or two inches. The scion should be cut 
into lengths of two and a half or three inches, and then, 
cutting its lower end into a wedge-like sh.npe, inserting it 
into the slit of the stock, keeping the back of the stock and 



April.] l'isle de bourbon roses. 65 

scion in contact, which must be held firmly and bound with 
ligatures of soft bast-mat or worsted, and, in order to render 
it water-proof, cover it with a paste made of pitch and bees- 
wax, or clay mixed with old slaked lime ; if the latter is 
used, it will sometimes crack, which must be carefully filled 
up. In August or September, the ligatures may be cut on 
one side, allowing the clay or wax to be displaced with the 
natural growth of the plant. Should the graft fail, you have 
still the resource of budding in August on the young shoots 
that will grow from the stock. It must be observed that 
grafting leaves a worse wound to heal over than budding, 
unless the stock and scion be nearly of the same size. Every 
bud which appears below the graft should be carefully rub- 
bed off, except one or two nearest the crown, to encourage 
the sap upwards to the grafts ; and as soon as the latter begin 
to throw out leaves, the shoots from the stock should be 
shortened, and in one or two weeks more entirely taken off, 
if the scion has fairly grown. For wht'p-yrofting, see page 59. 



L ISLE DE BOURBON ROSES. 

This group of Roses is one of the finest in the whole 
family of the "Queen of Flowers." They are generally 
perfectly hardy, of luxuriant growth, and will grow almost in 
any soil. They are profuse in blooming from June to 
October, and many of them delightful in fragrance. They 
are flowering ornaments of the garden, either as standards, 
climbers, or bushes ; their foliage is large, exuberant and 
agreeable, and when the plants are established and well nur- 
tured, they produce their flowers in immense clusters. There 
are now many varieties; the talent and ingenuity of the 
French in rose culture and reproduction will soon give the 
floral world a farther supply of some fine varieties, and many 
finer names. I can cheerfully recommend the following sorts, 
which require pruning similar to hybrid Ptoses: — 

Acidalie, rose white, large and perfect. 

Anne Beluze, waxy blush, very perfect in form. 

Boucpuet de Flore, bright rose, large flower, and a profuse 

bloomer. 
Desgaches, pale waxy rose, flat form, very distinct. 

6* 



66 ROSA IN DIC A, ETC. [April. 

Doctor Boques, dark crimson. 

Due de Chartres, large, rosy pink. 

Duval, bright scarlet crimson, changeable. 

Dupetit Thouars, bright crimson. 

Desfosses, waxy pink, very double. 

Enfant d'Ajaccio, very bright scarlet; makes an excellent 

pillar rose. 
Henry Clay (Boll), carmine, very large. 
Hermosa, bright rose, most perfect cupped form, a profuse 

bloomer, and highly esteemed. During the summer 

months it loses much of its colour ; but in autumn 

it is truly charming. 
Leveson Gower, dark rosy red, large cupped, flower profuse 

and distinct. 
Madam Angelina, creamy waxy white, cupped flower. 

Nerard, waxy pink, expanded and very double. 

Nerangot, dark rosy red, in clusters. 

Neuman, or Monthly cabbage, bright rose, very large 

and fragrant. 
Desprez, dark rose, globular, and perfectly double, 

blooms in large clusters, and approaches more the 

Noisette tribe than any other of the Bourbon Boses. 
Paul Joseph, brilliant crimson, very double and perfect, 

though not so large a flower as many others. 
Queen of the Bourbons, beautiful waxy blush, perfect in 

form, profuse of flower. 
Souvenir de la Malmaison, pale blush, very large, the Prince 

of Bourbons. 
Triomph de la Duchere, rosy blush, a rapid grower, and 

makes an excellent pillar plant. 

There might be several others added to the above, though 
we consider these the best and most distinct in colour and 
character. 



ROSA INDICA OR (BENGAL OF TIIE FRENCH) CHINESE EVER- 
BLOOMING ROSES. 

Perhaps no Rose has been so universally distributed and 
industriously cultivated as Bosa indica (common Chinese or 
daily Bose), and Bosa Sempcrflorens (crimson or sanguinea 



April.'] ROSA INDICA, ETC. 67 

Rose). It has been a favourite from the cottage to the man- 
sion, and is truly a floral pioneer. They will almost with- 
stand every vicissitude of treatment; but will not well survive 
the winters in the open air, north of this latitude, and even 
here they require some simple protection with straw, mats, 
litter, or other dry material during winter. 

They require a very rich, loamy soil, well pulverized, and 
from fifteen to twenty inches in depth. 

The best season of the year for pruning them is about the 
first of this month. In doing so, it is not advisable to 
shorten any of the young shoots, except in cutting off the 
injured parts, that being the wood most productive of bloom ; 
but where there is old stinted wood, it should be cut out as 
close to the surface of the ground as the other parts of the 
bush will permit, with any other of the oldest wood that is 
too crowded. Dig every season in among their roots a good 
supply of well-decomposed manure, and stir and hoe them 
frequently during the summer. The following are very de- 
sirable : — 

Abbe Mioland, cupped, dark rosy crimson. 

Agrippina, or Cramoisi Superieur, brilliant crimson, cup 
form, large and finely double. 

Bengal triumphant, La Superbe, Grande et Belle. This, 
like many fine roses, has its several names, but the 
former is the name under which I first knew it. It 
is a strong grower, with very large well-formed flowers 
of a rich purple crimson, which are extremely double, 
and always open well. 

Beau carmine, dark crimson, of a very distinct habit and 
colour, is an excellent bloomer and finely formed. 

Belle Isidore is also a changeable rose ; it will open a light 
pink colour, and before evening will be a rich crimson ; 
is a regular and very double large rose, of strong 
growth and easy culture, and when known will be 
generally cultivated. 

Cels, or Bengal Cels, flesh colour, of the most perfect form, 
extremely double and always opens perfect; is a very 
profuse bloomer, and of a strong growing habit; it 
has much the appearance of a superb tea rose. 

Comble de Grloir, rich reddish crimson, a free bloomer, and 
possesses considerable fragrance. 



68 ROSA INDICA, ETC. [April. 

Gros Charles, shaded rose, extremely large and fine. 

Hortensia, flesh colour, very double, and an excellent rose. 

Indica, or common daily, dark blush or rose colour — it is the 
prototype of the family, and is a free-growing and 
profuse blooming plant, and can withstand every va- 
riety of treatment. The flower is about three' inches 
in diameter, and in our descriptions, where the word 
large, is used, it signifies that the flower is larger than 
the present variety, and very large means still larger, 
say four inches ; extremely large, between four and 
five inches. We have even seen roses in favourable 
soils and cloudy weather six inches in diameter, and 
would not be alarmed to see a hybrid Rose twenty- 
one inches in circumference. 

alba, white daily or sarmeleuse of some, pure white, 

perfectly double, free-growing, and profuse in flower- 
ing ; it is much more tender than the former, but 
does tolerably well when protected during winter. 
In the Southern States, it is a great and growing fa- 
vourite. Thousands of this rose have been grown and 
sold in Philadelphia within these five years. 

minor var, ftawrencia flore pleno, delicate rose, a per- 
fect rose in perfect miniature. 

Jacksonia,* hundred-leaved daily, or crimson daily, bright 
red, large and most perfectly double, of luxuriant 
growth, and more prickly (spines) than any other 
rose of the sort we have seen. 

Jacques Plantier, shaded crimson, expanded. 

L'Etna, bright light crimson, very double, globular, and very 
distinct, is of a strong-growing habit. 

Lady Warreuder, pure white, large cup form, very double, 
and a great bloomer. 

La Caemens, rosy shaded crimson, very perfect form. 

Louis Philippe, dark crimson, very compact, globular, and 
extremely double. 

Madam Breon, large bright rose. 

Hersant, bright rose, very large, showy and double. 

Marjolin, large, dark crimson, a very strong grower — -fine. 

Mrs. Bosanquet, beautiful creamy blush, very large, perfectly 
formed — quite distinct. 

* In compliment to the late President Jackson. 



April.'] ROSA ODORATA OR TEA ROSE. 69 

Prince Eugene, very bright red, perfectly double cup form, 
and a profuse bloomer. 

Roi de Cramoisis or Eugene Beauharnais, bright crimson, fine 
cup form — -fragrant. 

Rubens, dark rosy violet. 

Vesuvius, very dark crimson, perfectly double, and quite 
sweet scented. 

Queen of Lombardy, Reine de Lombardie, brilliant cherry 
red, cupped, perfectly double, a strong grower, and 
will be a great favourite — superb. 

Semperflorens, Crimson Chinese or Sanguinea, the type of 
all the scarlet and crimson varieties of this division ; 
it is perfectly double, of a rich crimson colour, and 
is everywhere cultivated, and will not be easily dis- 
placed from the window of the cottage, or the veranda 
of the palace. 

Virginal, pale waxy blush, very distinct. 



ROSA ODORATA OR TEA ROSE. 

The original Rosa odorata or tea rose has been and will be 
a lasting favourite. It is supposed to have been imported 
from China so kite as 1810, and is the leading parent of all 
the fine varieties we now possess. As this very popular and 
interesting group of Roses require more care in their culture 
than any yet described, I will endeavour to give the most ex- 
plicit directions I am able, so as to insure, at least, a great 
ehai se of success. They delight to grow in a rich soil with 
a dy bottom, and in rather an elevated situation, and a 
southern aspect. Select a spot of the dimensions requisite 
for a quantity of plants to be planted, and dig therefrom soil 
to the depth of at least eighteen inches ; six inches of the 
bottom may be filled with pieces of bricks, stone, or lime — 
rubbish of any sort ; on this, place a layer of compost (at 
least fifteen inches thick, to allow for its settling), half turf, 
or good garden mould, and half well-rotted manure, with 
about an eighth of sand, all completely mixed together. A 
few weeks after the bed is thus prepared — say about the first 
of 31 ay — the roses may be planted about two feet apart. In 
this latitude, during the severity of winter, the} 7 should be 
protected by a temporary frame: if covered with glass, so 



70 ROSA ODORATA OR TEA ROSE. [April. 

much the better ; hut hoards will serve where glass frames 
are not at hand. With this treatment, they will never receive 
the least injury from our severest winters, and they will bloom 
in the greatest perfection the whole season. The only prun- 
ing they require is merely to remove any old shoots to give 
room for those of younger growth, and to occasionally shorten 
any of extra length. However, where there are only solitary 
plants, they will do very well covered with branches of cedar, 
or a box or barrel perforated in several places to allow the 
moisture to evaporate. Those that are grafted or budded 
will not generally stand the winters of our Eastern or Mid- 
dle States, and should be lifted and put in a back shed, or 
tied close to the ground and covered with earth. About the 
first of the month, they can be raised up and pruned of any 
dead or superfluous wood, when they will bloom nearly as 
perfect as those that have received finer treatment. In the 
Southern States they enjoy the great luxury of this rose in 
its utmost perfection ; there they grow in "wild luxuriance," 
displaying their varied beauties, and perfuming the air with 
their delightful fragrance. Every flower-garden in mild lati- 
tudes should have a full and perfect collection of such 
" pleasing flowers." Among the many distinct varieties 
known to be worth culture, are 

Adam, very large, bright pink, cupped form. 

Apricote, pale apricot colour. 

Antherose, pale pinkish white, large and compact. 

Barbot, deep pink inclining to creamy blush, very large. 

Bougere, rosy lilac, extremely large, a strong grower, cup- 
shaped. 

Belle Marguerite, pale rose, changing to dark pink in the 
centre, large and extremely double. 

Caroline, bright rosy pink, very large, beautifully formed — 
pendulous and highly esteemed. 

Clara Sylvain, pure white, most perfectly double, a strong 
grower, and abundant in bloom, very sweet and highly 
esteemed. 

Devoniensis or Magnolia rose, yellowish white with pink cen- 
tre, very large, always perfect, finely cupped — delight- 
fully fragrant. If I were confined to cultivate only 
twelve roses, this magnificent variety would be one of 
the number. 



April] ROSA ODORATA OR TEA ROSE. 71 

Elisa Sauvage, Canary yellow, fading to creamy white, very 
large and double. 

Etienie, pure white, cupped form. 

Elvira, creamy blush, tinted with rose. 

Fragoletta, large, rosy blush shaded with pink. 

Flavescens, lutea or yelloio tea, pale straw colour, cupped pe- 
tals, very large, and though only semi-double, has not 
a rival of its colour; it was introduced into England 
from China by Mr. Parkes, in 1824 j is a strong 
grower, but more tender than any other tea rose of its 
habit. 

Floralie, beautiful blush, bloomy in clusters, very fragrant, 
and as yet quite rare. 

Goubault, rosy blush with yellow centre, very large. 

Hippolyte, yellowish white, large and double, a strong grower 
and profuse bloomer. 

Hymenee, white, with cream centre, globular, large, and 
very double. 

Julia Mansais, yellowish white. 

La Sylphide, rosy buff changing to creamy white, very per- 
fect, and always beautiful. 

Lyonnais, very large, pale pink inclining to deep blush. 

Madame Desprez, or Bengal Madame Desprez, pure white, 
cupped, large and finely double ; is a beautiful rose, 
and is rarely excelled in delicacy of fragrance. 

Mansais, buff, very lurge, finely double, and highly fragrant. 

Marechal Bugeaud, bright waxy rose. 

Melville, flesh colour, a strong grower. 

Moire, rose and blush, beautifully cup-formed, very perfect, 
and proves to be a fine grower. 

Nephitos, pure white, very large, quite distinct. 

Odorata, or common tea rose, fine blush, very large cupped 
petals, delightfully scented, and everywhere admired, 
and is the foundation of this sweet-scented family. 

Princess Marie, flesh colour, a most superb rose of first-rate 
merit, perfectly double, and finely scented ; when well 
grown, will have flowers about five inches in diameter. 

Safrano, when the bud first opens it is of a fine saffron 
colour, very pretty. 

Strombio, creamy white, perfectly double, large and globular. 

Triomphe du Luxembourg, yellow flesh or copper colour, ex- 



72 NOISETTE ROSES. [AptU. 

tremely large and perfectly double; is a rampant 
grower, has a most splendid bud. 
Victorie modesta, blush, cupped, very large and double. 



NOISETTE ROSES. 

It is a remarkable fact, that the original of this famous 
group of roses originated in Charleston, South Carolina, 
with Mr. Noisette, about 1815, who sent it to his brother, 
the well-known nurseryman, at Paris (France). It was sup- 
posed to be produced between the white musk, cluster, and 
the common China rose, and created a very great excitement 
among the Parisian florists and amateurs; but, since its in- 
troduction to France, thousands of seedlings have been raised 
from it, 'and so many of these are evidently hybrids, of the 
tea-scented and other roses, that some of the roses, called 
"Noisettes," have almost lost every character of the division. 
They are generally hardy plants, requiring rich soil and a 
routine of treatment similar to the " Isle de Bourbon Roses." 
They will amply repay for extra attention to their culture. 
The great profusion and perpetual succession of flowers from 
June till November, of immense clusters, frequently from 
fifty to one hundred in each, make them truly ornamental 
objects, and are well calculated for covering fences, pillars, 
or trellis-work. Although they are hardy, they will be bene- 
fitted by a light covering of mats or litter : south of this, 
nothing of the kind is required. It must be kept in mind 
that pillar-roses can scarcely have too much manure when 
planting, and they also require a regular annual dressing of 
some enriching material. We consider the annexed list in- 
dispensable to a flower-garden. The flower of a Noisette 
Hose varies from one to four inches in diameter in the follow- 
ing descriptions ; we take two inches as our standard : — 

Alba, white, a beautiful dwarf with small flowers ; but in the 
greatest profusion, and the whole bush is frequently 
like one bouquet. 

Aimec Vibert, unique or Rosa nevia, showy white, very com- 
pact and perfectly double, and, if well treated, is one 
of the finest white dwarf Noisette Hoses, and is a 
profuse autumnal bloomer. 



April'] NOISETTE ROSES. 73 

Bologne, dark crimson, compact form, dwarf habit. 

Bengal Lee, Noisette Lee, Blush perpetual China, coelestis, 
grandiflora, monstrosa, and Triomphe des Noisettes, 
are all one and the same rose, blush or creamy white, 
very double, of strong growth, and flowers in large 
clusters ; it is a good old rose, and fortunate in new 
names. 

Conque de Venus, creamy white, with darker centre, very 
compact and double ; blooms in large clusters, and is 
delightfully scented, a regular good article. 

Champneyana or Champney's pink cluster, light pink, a ram- 
pant grower, profuse bloomer, and universally culti- 
vated. 

Charles the Tenth, rosy purple, very double, and in dry 
weather blooms well, but in moist weather its buds 
do not open ; is an excellent rose in a southern lati- 
tude. 

Coeurjaune and Cceur sonfre are like yellowish-white, a hardy 
rose of strong growth, and profusion of flowers. 

Cloth of Gold, or chromatella — deep sulphur yellow, very 
large flower, cupped and fine — fragrant. 

Cora L. Barton, fine rosy pink, very large flower, a profuse 
bloomer, fragrant. 

Euphrosyne, rosy buff, inclining to yellow, very fragrant — a 
very profuse blooming variety of medium growth. 

Fellenberg, bright crimson, double, a strong grower, profuse 
in bloom, and a decided, distinct, and excellent rose. 

Jaune Desprez, or French yellow Noisette, rosy buff, large, 
and perfectly double, flowers in large clusters ; is a 
strong grower and delightfully fragrant, very hardy, 
and well calculated for a pillar rose. 

Joan d' Arc, yellowish-white, of strong growth. 

La Nymphe, delicate pink, blooms profusely, dwarf habit. 

Laniarque, greenish-white, extremely large, profuse in bloom, 
perfectly double, and agreeably scented — closely ap- 
proaches the tea rose in its size and fragrance ; it 
makes a splendid pillar rose, frequently growing ten 
feet in one season. 

Lady Byron, pink, very compact, and perfectly double, and 
is a good pillar rose. 

Lutea or Smithii, pale yellow, large double flowers, but does 
not open well in moist weather ; it is a superb article 
7 



74 MUSK-SCENTED ROSES, ETC. {April. 

■when perfect, and is quite a dwarf, having very little 
of the Noisette character, but delightfully scented. 

Luxembourg, fine rosy purple, very perfect, a free grower 
and fragrant. 

Maria, dark rose, perfect form, rapid grower. 

Ophire, orange yellow tinged with red, very double, a free 
grower, fragrant, very distinct. 

Orlofif, bright pink, large and showy, though not very dou- 
ble — a profuse bloomer when well established — is a 
very strong grower, and excellent for covering arbours 
or trellises. 

Phaloe, rosy pink, large, fully cupped flower. 

Solfatare, sulphur yellow, large and perfectly double, a strong 
grower, very fragrant, when well established blooming 
profusely. 

Superba, delicate pink, an old rose, perfectly double, blooms 
in large clusters ; is of strong habit, and flowers pro- 
fusely. This, with Noisette Lee, are our two best 
old Noisette Hoses. 

Vitellina, pure white, cupped form, very double. 

Washington, pure white, a strong grower. 



MUSK-SCENTED ROSES (ROSA MOSCHATA). 

The white musk-scented cluster rose is one of the oldest 
inhabitants of the rose garden, and is known all over the 
earth, where the rose has been cultivated, or its name been 
heard. It is supposed that it is the famed rose of the Per- 
sian poets. Although there are several varieties under this 
head, very few of them, indeed, have that peculiar fragrance 
which the genuine old species possesses. They require simi- 
lar treatment to the Bourbon and Noisette Roses, and, in 
fact, fanciers have been, if possible, too minute to sepa- 
rate this group from the Noisette Hoses, merely because they 
are, in some degree, musk-scented. 

Old musk cluster, yellowish white, expanded and semi-double, 
blooms in immense clusters and finely scented. 

Herbemonte, pure white, very large flower in fine clusters. 

Princess de Nassau, creamy white, perfectly double, very 
fragrant, and blooms in large clusters. 



April.'] CLIMBING ROSES, ETC. 75 

Ranunculus, musk cluster, pure white, very double ; flowers 
in very large clusters. 



CLIMBING ROSES THAT BLOOM ONLY ONCE IN THE 
SEASON. 

Under this head, we will have to place several roses from 
very different countries, but all agreeing in habit and flower- 
ing disposition. Our readers will now be fully impressed 
with the knowledge that all roses of luxuriant growth require 
copious nourishment. Such is the case with many of those 
we are now about to describe ; but others of them will grow 
and bloom most beautifully perfect even on the poorest of 
soil, and are very capable of covering rock-work, a sterile 
bank, or naked wall, or any disagreeable object, where it is 
not convenient to excavate for the purpose of introducing 
nutritious soils ; and several of them are of such a hardy 
nature that they will withstand the utmost severity of our 
Northern States ; others are more delicate, and can only bear 
the mild winters of a southern climate, whei'e they richly 
display both flowers and foliage, and even retain their foliage 
during winter, and are evergreens for screening disagree- 
able objects or covering arbours. The best of the united 
groups are 

(r)* Ayrshire tea-scented, or Rosa Ruga, delicate blush, 
flowers very compact and perfectly double ; it is a free- 
grower and an excellent pillar rose, with a delightful 
fragrance. There are several others of the Ayrshire 
Rose, under very tempting names, such as Double 
Crimson, Mottled, Eclipse, Ayrshire Queen, Elegans, 
&c. These may do for those who wish a multiplicity 
of names; but will not take with our floral public, 
who wish every plant to have some merit as well as 
a name to recommend it. 

Roursalt, white, Rose dc Lisle, Boursalt Florida, Calypso, 
Pompone Florida, and Bengal Florida, &c, for it is 
known by all these names, and I have imported it 
four times, under different names; it is a blush white, 

* Those marked thus (/■) will do admirably for rock-work. 



76 CLIMBINO ROSES, ETC. [April. 

and frequently exceedingly large and handsome, and 
is a pillar rose ) its very double delicate flowers have 
a fine effect. 
Boursalt elegans, Purple Boursalt, Purple Noisette, &c, 
flowers of a vivid purple crimson, with an occasional 
stripe of white, nearly double, and an early and pro- 
fuse bloomer; is an excellent rose for an arbour. 

Inermis, very large, bright pink, a little fragrant, 

grows and blooms freely. 

Banksia alba, white, with pink centre, very small, but per- 
fectly double ; has an agreeable violet perfume, and is 
a profuse bloomer, but is entirely too delicate to with- 
stand our winters. This and the following are natives 
of China : 

lutea, yellow, inclining to buff, in every other cha- 
racter similar to the former. They are elegant ever- 
greens in the gardens of our Southern States, and 
are very highly esteemed ; frequently known under 
the name of White Evergreen Multiflora, and Yellow 
Evergreen Multiflora. 

(V)Felicite de perpetua, Noisette florabunda, Abelard sem- 
pervirens, Noisette compacta, Mademoiselle Euphrasie, 
and perhaps many other high-sounding names ; it is 
a beautiful cream-white, with perfect shaped flowers, 
and makes a lovely rock-work or pillar rose ; but is 
rather delicate for our severe winters. 

Graulhie, pure white, cup form in large clusters, very double, 
a strong grower and free bloomer. 

Grevillia, or seven sisters, is a very curious rose, flowered the 
first time with us in June, 1830. It is of the Mul- 
tiflora variety, and is a native of China ; growth free 
and luxuriant ; leaves large and deeply nerved ; 
flowers in large clusters, almost every eye of the 
wood of last year producing one cluster, having on it 
from eight to twenty roses, according to the state of 
the plant, each rose expanding differently in colo'ur or 
shade. Many suppose that they expand all of the 
same colour, and change afterwards. This is not the 
case. We have seen them white, pink, red, purple, 
and various other shades when the bloom expanded ; 
and on two clusters we have observed twenty-two dis- 
tinct shades of colour. In fact, it is a complete non- 



April.'] CLIMBING ROSES, ETC. 77 

descript, having roses single, semi-double, and double, 
large and small, and every colour between white and 
purple, forming, in every garden where it is planted, 
a wonder of the vegetable world. 

Multiflora, beautiful pink, very compact and double ; it is 
rather tender for this latitude. Celebrated as being 
the first climbing rose that was planted in or about 
Philadelphia, and was so much admired that twenty 
dollars were frequently given for a single plant. 

alba, similar to the former, but lighter in colour, 

though not a pure white. 

Laure de Voust, changeable pale blush, pink or 



white, very compact, of the most perfect form, and a 
profuse bloomer, of rampant growth, and more hardy 
than the two preceding ; it is one of the most beauti- 
ful and elegant of climbing roses, with rather large 
flowers and luxuriant foliage. 

Prairie Rose ; a few elegant sorts have been grown from this 
single-flowered native rose : all are of rapid growth 
and partaking of the parent in blooming later than 
roses generally that flower only once in the season ; 
they are admirably adapted for covering arbours, rock- 
work, or out-buildings of any kind, being of the most 
hardy nature, and standing the severest of our winters 
even in the most Northern States. 

Beauty of Prairies, or Queen of Prairies, dark rose, cup form, 
very large, and frequently striped with white ; it is 
highly esteemed, and a strong grower. 

Prairie Baltimore Belle, nearly white, very perfect form, 
quite double, blooming in clusters. 

Superba, blush, a very profuse bloomer in rich clus- 
ters, perfectly double. 

Purpurea, rosy purple, imbricated, very double ; said 

to bloom again in the autumn. 

Anne Maria, pale rose, large and double. 

Mrs. Hovey, blush white. 

Mrs. Pierce, fine pink, perfect form. 

Pride of Washington, rosy violet, beautiful. 

Russelliana, Cottage Rose, and Scarlet Grevillia : this is a 

distinct article in growth from any other of this 
group ; it is perfectly hardy, and does not climb so 
7* 



78 ROSA MICROPHYLLA, ETC. [April. 

freely ; still it makes a lovely pillar rose with large 
clusters of bright crimson shaded flowers. 
Triumphant, bright cherry red, very distinct and perfectly 
double. 



ROSA MICROPHYLLA (OR SMALL-LEAVED ROSE). 

This pretty little rose was originally from China, and 
since it has been introduced, several additions have been 
made by cultivation ; although we have not yet seen any to 
excel the original Rose microphjlla. They delight in light 
rich dry soils, and form very fine bushes for grass-plats or 
small lawns, and generally flower the whole summer, produc- 
ing their blooms from short young shoots produced from the 
wood of two or three years' growth. The plants should all 
have a little protection the first winter after planting, and in 
pruning, the shoots should only be thinned out, or any dead 
piece cut off; we have had several roses Under very enticing 
names added to this group, such as striped microphylla, crim- 
son microphylla, scarlet microphylla, all deceptive; and even 
the first plant that came out as double white proved to be 
entirely single; but there is now a genuine double white, 
though not properly a microphylla. The following few are 
all we have seen worth cultivating : — 

Microphylla. This rose is unique in every character. The 
foliage is very small and neat, and the calyx thick 
and bristly. The flowers are produced at the extremity 
of the young shoots in twos and threes, according to 
the strength of the plant ; they are large and double ; 
the exterior petals large and full ; those of the inte- 
rior are very short and thick-set; the colour in the 
centre is dark, shading lighter towards the exterior; 
the spines are in pairs on each side of the compound 
leaves. It is perfectly hardy, and greatly esteemed, 
and not so subject to be attacked by insects as other 
roses. 

rubra, dark red, having every character of the 

preceding. They are frequently called " The Burr 
Rose," from the appearance of the bud. 

violace, reddish violet ; in habit very similar to 



April.'] ROSA MICROPHYLLA, ETC. 79 

the former, but much darker in colour, and is a true 
microphylla. 

Microphylla odorata alba, yellowish-white, perfectly double, 
and finely scented ; is a strong grower and very con- 
stant bloomer. 

Maria Leonida, white, centre tinged with pink ; is very 
sweet-scented — blooms all the season — but has more 
the habit of a Macartney than Microphylla Rose. 

We have now concluded our few descriptions of the beau- 
tiful family of Roses; informing our readers, if they should 
think it brief, we can assure them it is candid, and as far as 
we know, in every respect impartial. No doubt we could 
have given many beautiful details of "things" we never saw 
and probably never will ; and we also promise that a few of 
our descriptions will, in some situations and peculiar seasons, 
"come short," or perhaps "overshoot the mark;" for it is 
well known to the cultivator that double roses will occa- 
sionally come single, and red roses become blush, and blush 
roses frequently bloom entirely white, and vice versd. We 
have also seen a moss rose bush have roses and shoots en- 
tirely without their " mossy coat." We have also avoided a 
few of high standing in character ; but not being entirely 
known to us in their intrinsic worth, a description of them 
would have been too hazardous, knowing that much exagge- 
ration exists. 

The Roses and all their allies, described in this month, 
should be planted from the first to the middle of the month ; 
and we would again enforce upon our rose amateurs the ac- 
tual necessity of giving soil of enriching qualities to all their 
roses; they will be amply repaid for their trouble. Nearly 
all the failures of roses giving a grateful and even universal 
satisfaction, can be traced to bad and shallow soils, more es- 
pecially in our city gardens, where cheapness of workman- 
ship is the best recommendation ; consequently, there are a 
few inches of tolerable-looking clay thrown over brickbats 
and lime rubbish, and, when finished, is considered a "fine 
job," because it is done cheap; the result is, that often the 
very next season the whole has to be gone over and done 
in a permanent manner ; not less than sixteen or eighteen 
inches of the best dark loam should be in every garden, and 
that well incorporated with manure at least one year old, and 



80 CLIMBING PLANTS. [April. 

also have a portion of sand or fine rotten rock thoroughly 
mixed with it ; and then, and not till then, the propretior 
may. expect satisfaction. 



CLLMBIXG PLANTS. 

As shade is much required in this country, and plants 
suitable for covering arbours, &c, eagerly sought for, we will 
make a few remarks on those which are preferred for their 
beauty, growth, hardiness, &c. 

Aristolochia sipho Birthwort, or Dutchman's pipe, is a very 
curious blooming plant, with extraordinary large foli- 
age, and makes an excellent arbour-twiner, affording 
a dense and cooling shade. 

Calystegia pubescens, flower double, of a blush white colour, 
of rather free growth ; dies down in winter and grows 
up again in spring ; blooms from June to August. 

Clematis viticella pulche/la, or double virgin's bower, is an 
esteemed climbing plant, of rapid growth, with large 
flowers in great profusion from June to September. 
There are several varieties of the above, two of them 
single, and it is said that there is likewise a double 
red. 

coeridea, C. ccerulea grandiflora, and C. ensured gran- 
diflora. This beautiful and entirely new climber is 
already distinguished by three distinct names, and 
has been several times figured, each time with more 
or less flattery. I must confess the first representa- 
tion I saw of it, truly enchanted me ; the brilliancy 
of its blue surpassing every flower I had ever beheld ; 
and named G. azurea grandiflora. The flowers are 
frecpiently four or five inches in diameter, of a fine 
bluish violet colour, blooming freely, and perfectly 
hardy, the most magnificent of the family. 

G. Sieboldii, or bicolour. This is another of Dr. Van Sie- 
bold's Japan additions, and is nearly related to C. 
florida. The leaves and branches, however, are rather 
more downy, and the petals suffused with violet 
spots ; the anthers are also of a violet colour, which 
has given it the name of bicolour; it is of graceful 



April.'] CLIMBING PLANTS. 31 

habit, and the size and beauty of its blossoms render 
it an attractive inhabitant of the flower-garden. 

C. fldmmula, sweet-scented virgin's bower, is of very rapid 
growth. Established plants will grow from twenty 
to forty feet in one season, producing at the axils of 
the young shoots, large panicles of small white flowers 
of exquisite fragrance ; the leaves are compound pin- 
nate ; in bloom from July to November, but in Au- 
gust, September, and October, the flowers are in great 
profusion, perfuming the whole garden. This is one 
of the best climbing hardy plants, and ought to have 
a situation in every garden. 

C. montana, mountain virgin-bower, flowers in large clusters, 
very pure white, a strong and rapid grower. 

C. Virgin iCina is of rapid growth, and well adapted for ar- 
bours; flowers, small white in axillary panicles, dioe- 
cious, leaves ternate, segments cordate, acute, coarse- 
ly toothed and lobed, in bloom from June to August. 
A native, and a little fragrant. 

C. crispa, or Bell Clematis, is a native plant of free growth ; 
flowers of a pink colour, in clusters, bell-shaped, the 
points of the petals folding backwards — a little fra- 
grant. There is also a variety having purple flowers. 

C. jibrida plenb is a fine free-flowering plant ; though gene- 
rally considered a shrub, is more herbaceous than 
shrubby ; the flowers are large double white ; in 
growth will not exceed ten feet in one season. 

Glycine frutescens, a beautiful native climbing shrub, known 
in our gardens under that name, but is properly Wis- 
teria frutescens. It has large pendulous branches of 
blue leguminose (pea-like) flowers, blooming from 
May to August; pinnated leaves with nine ovate 
downy leaflets ; grows freely. 

chinensis is given to Wisteria, and is the finest 

climbing shrub of the phaseolius tribe. The flowers 
are light blue, in long nodding, many-flowered, race- 
mose spikes, blooming from May to August, pro- 
fusely ; leaves pinnated, with eleven ovate lanceolate 
silky leaflets, and is of a very rapid growth. It is 
perfectly hardy, withstanding the severity of our win- 
ters without protection. 

Bignbnia crucigera is an evergreen which is very desirable in 



82 CLIMBING PLANTS. [April. 

many situations, being likewise of luxuriant growth. 
It will cover in a few years an area of fifty feet; 
flowers of an orange scarlet colour, blooming from 
May to August. 

B. grandijlbra, now given to Tecdma, has large orange- 
coloured flowers, blooming from June to August, and 
grows very fast. It is perfectly hardy, and a most 
magnificent plant. 

B. rddicans is likewise given to Tecdma, and is a native 
plant. When in flower it is highly ornamental, but 
it requires great attention to keep it in regular order, 
being of a strong rough nature ; in bloom from June 
to August. 

Peripldca grseca, silk vine, is a climber of extraordinary 
growth. Well established plants grow thirty or forty 
feet in one season ; flowers in clusters from May to 
July, of a brownish-yellow colour, and hairy iuside ; 
leaves smooth, ovate lanceolate, wood slender, twin- 
ing, and elastic. 

Hedera Helix, Irish Ivy, is a valuable evergreen for cover- 
ing naked walls, or any other unsightly object. The 
foliage is of a lively green, leaves from three to five 
angled. There are several varieties of it, all valua- 
ble for growing in confined shady situations where 
no other plant will thrive. 

Ampelbpsis hederdcea. This plant is commonly employed for 
covering walls, for which the rapidity of its growth 
and the largeness of the leaves render it extremely 
appropriate. There are several species of the genus, 
all resembling the Vine in habit and in flower. 

Jasmimtm officinale, garden Jasmine. This delightful climb- 
ing shrub has been in common use all over Europe 
for covering arbours from time immemorial ; its white, 
delicate, and lovely fragrant flowers render it a great 
acquisition. Unfortunately, with us, it is rather deli- 
cate for our winters, unless well protected by a south 
wall or other building, and even then, when in a 
young state, must be protected; but, in the South, 
this plant and also the yellow Jasmfmm, : revolMttm 
grow luxuriantly and bloom profusely, and even •/. 
grand ijidrum is a hardy shrub in South Carolina and 
Georgia. 



April.'] DECIDUOUS SHRUBS. 83 

Lonicero, or more properly Caprifolium. The Honeysuckle. 
This genus of flowering odoriferous climbing shrubs 
are principally natives of this country : they are all 
equally beautiful ; but where there is not space in 
our city gardens to cultivate the whole family, it is 
indispensable to have C.flexudsum, the Chinese sweet- 
scented or evergreen ; it blooms in May and Septem- 
ber, and is a very rapid grower. 0. Behjica is also a - 
charming species ; it blooms the whole summer, and 
is very odorous. Our native C. semperiircas, or 
Coral Honeysuckle, is not easily surpassed; its pro- 
fuse and brilliant scarlet flowers render it the most 
attractive object in all our country gardens. G. Japo- 
nicum is also an excellent Chinese species, with deli- 
cate orange-coloured flowers of agreeable sweetness; 
but will not bear our winters north of the southern 
part of Virginia. 

Passiflora, or Passion vine. There are several hardy species 
for this latitude; but the only very beautiful one is 
P. incarnata, which, although it dies to the ground 
every winter, yet will, during the summer, put forth 
shoots from twenty to forty feet long, all covered with 
a profusion of beautiful purple flowers. 
There are several other climbing plants, both curious and 

ornamental ; but our limits will not admit of farther detail. 



DECIDUOUS SHRUBS. 

Finish planting all deciduous shrubs in the early part of 
the month. These plants are generally delayed too long; 
the leaves in many instances are beginning to expand, thereby 
giving a check to the ascending sap, which we may safely 
assert causes the death of one-third, of the plants, when per- 
haps the operator or some individual more distantly concerned 
is blamed. 

These shrubs, if properly removed and planted at the exact 
starting of vegetation, pressing the earth close to their roots 
when planting (previously taking care that the small fibres 
have not become dry, by exposure), there will not one out of 
fifty fail by these simple attentions. Those that are late 
planted should have frequent w r aterings, and, if large, firmly 



84 OF PLANTING EVERGREEN SHRUBS. [April. 

supported, that the wind may Lave no effect in disturbing the 
young and tender fibrous roots. 



OP PLANTING EVERGREEN SHRUBS. 

Now is the season to plant all kinds of evergreen trees and 
shrubs. In most seasons, the middle of the month is the 
most proper time, the weather then being mild and moist; 
or if a late season, defer it to the end of the month. When 
planted earlier, they will remain dormant until this time, 
and their tender fibrous roots in that case frequently perish 
from their liability to injury from frost or frosty winds, being 
more susceptible of such injury than fibres of deciduous 
plants. They now begin to vegetate, which is the grand 
criterion for transplanting any plant. The buds begin to 
swell, the roots to push, and if they can be quickly lifted 
and replanted, they will hardly receive a check. At all 
events, care must be taken that they are not long out of the 
ground and exposed to the air, which greatly assists the suc- 
cess in planting. It may be observed that evergreens in 
general succeed the better the smaller they are, although we 
have seen plants, trees and evergreens upward of thirteen 
feet high, and fifteen in diameter, successfully lifted, and 
carried several miles.* By the second year there was no 
appearance that such operation had taken place. In prepar- 
ing a hole for the reception of these plants, make it larger 
than the roots, breaking the bottom thereof fine, and putting 
in some fresh soil. Place the plant upright in the centre, 
putting in the earth and breaking it fine, and give the plant 
a few gentle shakes. When the roots are more than half 
covered, put in a pot or pailful of water, allowing it to sub- 
side ; then cover all the roots, give a second or third pailful, 
and when subsided, the earth will be close to all the roots. 
Cover with more earth, pressing all firm with the foot. Put 
more soil loosely on, which will give it a finished appearance, 
and prevent it from becoming dry, and not require mulching, 
which has an unsightly appearance. All that the wind will 
have any hurtful effect upon must be firmly supported espe- 

* See Mr. M'Nab's rich pamphlet treatise on removing ever- 
greens, &c. 



April.} CARE OF CHOICE BULBS. 85 

cially large plants. If the weather sets in dry and hot, they 
should be watered as often as necessity shall direct. 

Those that are established, it will be necessary to go over 
them (if not already done) to cut off all wood killed in 
winter, and also to thin them if too thick and crowded. 

When the above is done, let every part of the shrubbery 
be dressed off as directed in March. Shrubs of all kinds 
will now begin to look gay and lively, which may be very 
much heightened or depreciated, according to the state in 
which the ground and contiguous walks are kept. Always 
keep in view that weeds are no objects of beauty. 



CARE OF CHOICE BULBS. 

Hyacinths of the earliest sorts will begin to expand and 
show their colours ; of which we can boast of a few as fine 
sorts in the vicinity of Philadelphia as in any garden of 
Europe ; but even these very superior sorts, when in bloom, 
are too frequently neglected, being allowed to stand without 
rods, stakes, or any means of support, likewise equally ex- 
posed to drenching rains and scorching suns ; and the finest 
collections may be seen after heavy rains prostrate on the 
ground, whereas a few hours' trouble would give them the 
requisite support, thereby preserving their beauty much 
longer, and giving more gratification. As soon as the stems 
advance to any height, they should be supported by wires, 
rods, &c., and tied slightly thereto with threads of matting, 
or any other substitute ; repeat the tying as they advance, 
avoid tying among the florets, because they grow by exten- 
sion, and are liable to be broken off by so doing. The sun 
deteriorates the colours very much, especially the red, blue, 
and yellow sorts ; whereas, if they were simply protected 
from the sun by an awning of thin canvass, the colours would 
be preserved and the beauty protracted. If there are stakes 
drove into the ground on each side of the beds, about three 
feet high, with others in the centre about eight feet, having 
laths or hoops from the side to the centre, formed similar to 
the roof of a house, so that people may walk or sit under it, 
the canvass or awning being thin, to admit of the light freely, 
the effect in the time of sunshine, from the brilliancy of the 
colours, is peculiarly gratifying. Where an awnina; is thus 

8 



86 CARE OF CHOICE BULBS. [April. 

erected, it requires to be kept on only from nine to three 
o'clock in sunshiny days, and during nights or time of rain, 
allowing the awning on the most northern side to come close 
to the ground, when necessary, to shelter them from cold, 
cutting winds. 

The properties of a good Hyacinth are, namely — the stem 
strong and erect, the florets or bells occupying one-half of 
the stem, each floret suspended by a short strong footstalk, 
longest at the bottom ; the uppermost floret quite erect, so 
that the whole may form a pyramid. Each floret well filled 
with petals rising toward the centre, that it may appear to 
the eye a little convex. Regarding colour, fancy does not 
agree, and the most scrupulous cultivators differ materially. 
However, the more pure and bright the finer, or a white 
with a pink centre, or the centre of the petals with a paler 
or deeper colour appearing striped, which is considered to 
have a good effect. 

Tulips in every respect should have the same care and 
protection, never neglecting to have the beds with a smooth 
clean surface, and the stems neatly tied up, although they 
are not in so much danger as Hyacinths. 

The characters of a good Tulip are — the stem strong, 
elastic, and erect, about two feet high ; the flower large and 
composed of six petals, proceeding a little horizontally at 
first, and then turning upward, forming a flat-bottomed cup, 
rather widest at the top ; the three exterior petals should be 
larger than the three interior ones, and broader at their 
base; the edges of the petals entire, free from notch or rug- 
gedness ; the top of each well rounded. The colour of the 
flower at the bottom of the cup ought to be pure white, or 
yellow, and the rich-coloured stripes, which are the principal 
ornament, should be pure, bold, regular, and distinct on the 
margin, and terminate in fine points elegantly pencilled. 
The centre of each petal should have one bold stripe, or 
blotch, of rich colouring. The ground colours that are most 
esteemed are white, the purer- the finer ; or, on the other 
hand, the dark grounds, and of course the darker the better; 
but these vary in estimation, according to the prevailing taste 
of amateurs. 



April.'] CHARACTER OF A FINE RANUNCULUS. 87 



ANEMONES AND RANUNCULUS. 

Moist weather and frequent showers are highly essential 
to the perfecting of these flowers ; and if these should fail at 
this season of the year, artificial means must be used to sup- 
ply the deficiency. Take a watering-pot without the rose, 
and run the water (river or rain water is best) gently between 
the rows, taking care not to make holes in the ground. 
When they have got a good watering at root, take the 
syringe and give them a gentle sprinkling in fine evenings, 
observing not to use force, for fear of breaking the flower- 
stems. In dry weather, the result of a deficiency of water 
would be, that the stems and flowers of the strongest roots 
will be weak and make no progress, and many of them will 
not bloom; the foliage of a sickly, yellow appearance, from 
which they would not recover; and the roots, when taken 
up, are of little use for farther transplanting. 

A good plan in dry seasons is to cover the ground between 
the rows with cow manure, which will prevent the moisture 
from evaporating ; and the rain or water passing through it 
greatly enriches the soil and strengthens the roots. 



CHARACTER OF A FINE • RANUNCULUS. 

" It is indispensable for a good ranunculus to have a stem 
about eight or twelve inches high, strong enough to support 
the flower, and quite upright. The form of the flower should 
be hemispherical, not less than two inches in diameter, con- 
sisting of numerous petals, gradually diminishing in size to 
the centre, lying over each other, so as neither to be too 
close nor too much separated, but having more of a perpen- 
dicular than a horizontal direction, in order to display the 
colours with better effect. The petals should be broad, with 
entire well-rounded edges, their colours dark, clear, rich, or 
brilliant, either of one colour or variously diversified, on a 
ground of cinereous white, primrose, yellow, or flame colour, 
or diversified with elegant stripes, spots, or niottlings." 



AURICULAS — CARNATIONS, PINKS, ETC. [April. 



AURICULAS. 



Having under this head last month given ample directions 
for the treatment of these plants previous to flowering, we 
refer to that head to avoid repetition. 



CHARACTER OF A FINE AURICULA. 

The pips should be large, flat, and round, with ground 
colour equal on every side of the eye, which should be quite 
circular, as well as the edge. The tube a bright lemon-yel- 
low, perfectly round, well filled with the anthers or thrum, 
the eye round and large, the body colour black or violet, the 
meal fine; the colour, in green-edged flowers, should be a 
whole one, not a shaded green. The stem strong, and suffi- 
ciently long to bear the truss above the foliage — the truss 
to consist of not less than five full-blown pips ; only one stem 
allowed. 



CARNATIONS, PINKS, ETC. 

If any of these were omitted to be shifted last month, or 
planted out according to directions therein given, let it be 
done forthwith. Where they are still protected with frames, 
give them plenty of air, keeping the sashes entirely off during 
the day, keep the pots perfectly free from weeds, and give 
the foliage frequent sprinklings with water. 

Polyanthus and Primroses will be exhibiting their beauti- 
ful flowers. They require the same treatment, and delight 
in moisture and a shaded situation. Do not sprinkle them 
while in flower, and keep them clear of weeds or decayed 
leaves, never exposing them to the sun. They are very 
hardy, and, where required, may be planted in very shudy 
situations, for they will suffer more from the influence of the 
sun's rays than from frost. Those plants in pots in general 
that have been protected in frames, and are destined tor the 
borders, should now as soon as possible be planted in their 
destined situations, having nothing to fear from chilling 
winds or frosts after the middle of this month, except in un- 



April.'] POLIANTHES TUBEROSA FLORE PLENO. 89 

common seasons. Those that are to be kept in pots, if not 
repotted, do it immediately, and give regular supplies of water. 



CHARACTER OF A POLYANTHUS. 

The pips large, flat, and round, with small indentures 
between each division of the limb, dividing the pip into 
heart-like segments edged with bright yellow; the edge and 
the eye ought to be of the same colour, the truss to consist of 
not less than five full-blown pips, supported on a strong stem, 
standing well above the foliage. 



POLIANTHES TUBEROSA FLORE PLENO. 

This very popular bulb, generally known as Tuberose, has 
been cultivated in England upwards of two centuries, whence 
we, no doubt, have received it, and now can return those of 
our production to supply their demand. The flowers are 
man}' and highly odoriferous, and of the purest white, and 
on a flower-stem from three to five feet high. To have them 
in the greatest perfection, they should be planted in a lively 
hot-bed, about the first of this month, in six inch pots filled 
with light rich earth, giving very little water until they 
begin to grow, when they ought to be liberally supplied with 
plenty of air, and about the end of next, month they may ba 
planted in the borders, providing a spot for them that is or 
has been well worked, and enriched with well-decomposed 
manure. Secure their flower-stems to proper rods. Pre- 
vious to planting the roots, all the off-sets should be taken off 
and planted separately ; keep the crown of the bulb level 
with the surface of the pot, and when they are replanted in 
the open ground, put them two inches deeper. 

But when the convenience of a hot-bed cannot be obtained, 
they will succeed very well if planted about the end of this 
month or first of next in the garden, in a bed of earth pre- 
pared for their reception. Let it be dug deep, and make 
the soil light and rich, by giving it a good supply of manure 
two years old, well broken and incorporated with the earth, 
adding a little sand where the soil is heavy. The black earth 
from the woods, produced from decayed leaves, is equally as 

8* 



90 heart's-ease or pansy. [April. 

good without sand. Having the ground in proper order, draw 
drills about four inches deep and eighteen inches apart; plant 
the bulbs (after divesting thein of their oif-sets) nine inches 
apart in a row, covering the crown of the bulb about an 
inch and a half. When done, carefully rake and finish off 
the beds. When they shoot up their flower-stems, give them 
neat rods for their support. Plant the off-sets in closer rows 
to produce flowering-roots for next year, because they seldom 
flower the second time. 



ON THE CULTURE OF THE HEART S-EASE OR PANSY 
(VIOLA TRICOLOR). 

The simplicity and striking beauty of this lovely little 
flower have attracted notice from the earliest floral times, but 
it is only within these few years that it has come into high 
estimation as a florist's flower. Indeed, when the figures and 
descriptive characters of these " little gems " came first from 
England to this country, we were almost induced to believe 
they were exaggerated " pictures of fancy," till we actually 
cultivated them within these last two years, in our own 
parterre, upwards of two inches in diameter. 

They delight in a situation partially shaded from the hot 
rays of the sun, either fully exposed to the morning rays till 
ten o'clock, or the afternoon sun from three o'clock ; a soil 
composed of four parts good loam and one part thoroughly 
rotted manure, or three parts loam and one part decayed 
leaves, not less than one foot deep : the soil must not be 
more elevated than the surrounding surface, as they like a 
good supply of moisture. If they are to be cultivated from 
seeds, they should be thinly sown about the first of the month, 
or about the end of August or first of September, and very 
lightly covered with tine soil, giving them very frequent 
waterings in dry weather. Those sown now will bloom in 
July, and very profusely in the autumn ; but those sown in 
the latter period will not bloom till early the following spring. 
When any very esteemed variety is raised, it should be pro- 
pagated, which is very easily done, either by layers or cut- 
tings, and sometimes by division of the root, but the two 
former methods are preferable. The best time for laying is 
about the first of September : an inch or two of the soil may 



April] heabt's-ease or pansy. 91 

be removed all round the plant, the shoots laid down in the 
hollow, and covered over with light rich compost. The 
shoots will root more freely if they get a gentle twist when 
laying them down. The best period for propagating by 
cuttings is about the middle of this month or September. 
Cuttings should be chosen from young shoots, about two or 
three inches long ; for when shoots are woody or hollow they 
will either not strike at all or produce unhealthy plants. A 
shaded but airy situation is preferable, and if the soil is of a 
light sandy nature, the better success will attend the opera- 
tion : the cuttings should be firmly inserted from one to two 
inches deep in the ground, and covered with a glass, or where 
that convenience is not at hand, they may be shaded during 
the day with oiled paper, or any similar substitutes. In pre- 
paring the cuttings, care ought to be taken to cut close to a 
joint, a rule which should be strictly attended to in making 
cuttings of every description. When they have fairly rooted 
and taken a growth, they can be removed in cloudy, moist 
weather, to their proper allotments. Seeds ought to be care- 
fully collected from the finer sorts, and sown as soon there- 
after as convenience will allow, as they deteriorate by long 
keeping. Many hundreds of named varieties are carefully 
cultivated in England. A select list sent contains only three 
hundred and seventy-four names. To attempt a general or 
even brief description of them in this work, would be consi- 
dered by many of our friends prolix and unnecessary; but 
the following criteria of a fine Pansy has just passed a select 
committee of the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society : — 

" The chief object to be desired is symmetry of the flower. 
The petals should be large, broad, and flat, lying upon each 
other so as to form a circle, and pi-event anything like angles 
or intersections of this circular outline. The petals should 
be as nearly of a size as possible, the two top ones being the 
largest, but so covered with the two side ones as not to 
appear disproportioned. The top petals should not wave or 
bend back. The bottom petal should be broad and two- 
lobed, flat, and not curving inward; above an inch in breadth 
is a good size ; the colours should be clear, brilliant, and not 
changing. The eye should not be too large, and it is 
accounted finest when the pencilling is so arranged as to form 
a dark angular spot. 

" The flower-stalk should be long and stiff, rather than 
slender." 



92 JACOBEA LILY. [April. 



GLADIOLUS, OR SWORD LILY. 

It is now a well-ascertained fact that the whole of this 
beautiful family will succeed well with a treatment similar 
to the tuberose, requiring to be two or three weeks earlier 
planted: indeed, G. communis and its varieties are perfectly 
hardy; but the splendid G. psittactnus, with large yellow, 
red, and green flowers; G. cardinalis, scarlet and white; G. 
blandus, rose and white; G. Jlorabundus, shaded rose; G. 
formosissimus, magnificent scarlet ; G. Gandavensis, large 
and superb orange, scarlet and yellow ; G. ramosus, delicate 
waxy pink, of strong growth ; G. Buistii, bright scarlet 
shaded with orange and yellow, splendid ; and several others 
are worthy of the greatest care and attention. Their large 
spikes of showy flowers will well compensate for an extra 
degree of care in preparation of soil, &c. 



AMARYLLIS FORMOSISSIMA, OR JACOBEA LILY. 

About the end of this or beginning of next month is the 
most proper time for planting out these bulbs. This flower 
is of the most beautiful and rich crimson velvet colour. The 
bulb generally produces two stems, the one after the other, 
about the end of May or first of June. The stem is from 
nine inches to one foot high, surmounted by a single flower, 
composed of six petals, three banging down, three erect and 
recurved ; the stamens droop on the centre of the under 
petals. The flower thus appears nodding on one side of the 
stem, and has a most graceful and charming appearance. If 
planted in a bed, prepare the ground as before directed for 
Tuberoses. Keep the rows one foot asunder, and the bulbs 
six inches apart in the rows, covering them two inches over 
their crowns. This plant is now called Spreikblia formosls- 
si7na, and we think properly, too, for its character and habit 
differ from Amaryllis. 

We have not tbe smallest doubt that, in a few years, not 
only this superb South American bulb will adorn our flower- 
gardens, but many of the rich bulbs of Brazil and South 
America generally will yearly exhibit to us the beauty of 
their colours, and the beautiful construction of their flowers 



April.'] TIGER-FLOWER — WALKS. 93 

and foliage, of which we are now generally deprived, perhaps 
because we have not the conveniency of a proper hot-house 
for their protection during winter. But it will be found, in 
many instances, that these bulbs will do perfectly well to be 
kept dry in a warm room from October to May, when the 
heat of our summer is sufficient for the perfection of their 
flowers, and many species will ripen their seeds. The bulb 
that is known as Amaryllis Belladonna, now called Bella- 
donna purpurdscens, is hardy. 



TIGER-FLOWER. 

Tigridia, a genus of Mexican bulbs belonging to Mona- 
delphia Tridndria, producing the most beautiful flowers of 
the natural order of Iridcse. T. pavbnia is of the brightest 
scarlet, tinged and spotted with pure yellow. T. conchijlora, 
colour rich yellow, tinged and spotted with bright crimson; 
flower larger than the former. The colours are very rich, and 
purely contrasted. The corolla is about four inches in 
diameter, composed of six petals; the outer are reflcxed. The 
flower, though splendid in beauty, exists only one day ; but, 
to compensate for that, a plant will produce flowers for 
several weeks; and where a bed of them can be collected, 
they will bloom in profusion from July to September. They 
like a light, rich, free soil, from twelve to eighteen inches 
deep. Lift the bulbs in October, and preserve them as di- 
rected in that month for Tuberoses. Be sure that they be 
kept dry and secure from frost. A bed of these should be 
in every garden. A writer says, "It is the most beautiful 
flower that is cultivated." Plant them about the end of this 
or first of next month ; if in beds, keep them six inches apart 
in the row, and one foot apart from row to row. 



WALKS. 

The walks in general should be put in the neatest order 
during this month. Little requires to be added to the ob- 
servations of last month; but if these have not been executed, 
fail not to have them done the first opportunity, choosing dry 
weather for the operation of turning the old or adding new 



94 EVERGREEN HEDGES. [April. 

gravel to them, levelling, raking, and rolling neatly as you 
proceed. Always after rain give the whole of the gravel 
walks a good rolling. This being frequently done during 
the early part of the season, will be a saving of much labour 
and time through the summer. The walks having a firm 
surface, the growth of weeds will be retarded, and the heavy 
rains will not be so apt to injure them. Where there are 
any pretensions to keeping these in order, they ought to be 
picked of weeds and litter once a week, and gone over with 
the roller at least once every two weeks during the season. 

Sweep and divest the grass walks or plats of all worm- 
casts, litter, &c, cutting the edgings neatly. Mow the grass 
every two or three weeks from this time to October, sweep- 
ing off the grass clean each time, and give frequent rollings 
to keep the surface smooth. If any require to be laid with 
turf, delay it no longer. For direction, see last month. The 
above observations on walks in general will apply through 
the season ; therefore, we will not repeat this subject until 
October. 



EVERGREEN HEDGES. 

We have previously observed, under the head Evergreens, 
that this is the best season for their replanting. We cannot 
pass over the observations of this month without having 
reference to evergreen hedges, so much neglected among us, 
and yet so important to the diversity of aspect, and especially 
to soften a little the gloomy appearance of our winters. 
There are three indigenous shrubs, and at least three exotics, 
that are well adapted for the purpose, viz., Finns Canadensis, 
Hemlock-spruce; T/iiija occident&lis, American arbor-vitas ; 
Thuja orientdlis, Chinese arbor-vitas; and Juniperis Yinji- 
nidna, Red-cedar. Where there is to be a hedge of any of 
these planted, select plants about two feet high ; lift them 
carefully, preserving the roots as much as possible. Dig a 
trench from one and a half to two feet wide, and from one 
to one foot and a half deep. This will admit the soil to be 
well broken about the roots, which must be done in planting. 
Keep the plants in the centre of the trench, mixing the 
shortest and the tallest, that it may be of one height, putting 
the earth close about their roots as you proceed, and make it 



April.'] BOX EDGINGS. 95 

firm with the foot ; fill up, and water as directed for ever- 
greens in this month. If the season is very dry, give it fre- 
quent copious waterings. 

None of them should be topped for a few seasons, except 
such as are much above the others in height, keeping the 
sides regular and even by clipping or shearing once a year, 
either in this month or at the end of August. It is better 
to keep the top (when they have got to the desired height) 
pointed than broad. The latter method retains a heavy 
weight of snow, which frequently breaks down, or otherwise 
deforms, that which has cost much labour to put into shape. 

Euonymus joponira, bright green foliage of free growth 
and quite hardy. There is also the variegated variety, very 
excellent for hedges south of this latitude. 



BOX EDGINGS. 

Where these have not been laid, this month is the proper 
time. Do not delay the planting of such any later. For 
ample directions, see March, under this head. Clipping of 
these should be done about the middle of this month. 
There will then be no danger of frosts to brown the leaves, 
and the young foliage will not be expanded. To keep these 
edgings in order, they must be cut once a year, and never be 
allowed to get above four inches high and two inches wide. 
What we consider the neatest edging is three inches high, 
two inches wide at the bottom, tapering to a thin edge at the 
top. It is very unsightly to see large bushy edgings, espe- 
cially to narrow walks. 

The use of edgings is to keep the soil from the gravel, and 
the larger they are allowed to grow, the more ineffectual they 
become; growing more open below as they advance in height. 
The operation may be done very expeditiously by clipping 
the tops level, going longitudinally along with shears for the 
purpose, called " box shears." Strain a line along the centre 
of the edgings, cutting perpendicularly from the line to the 
bottom on each side, leaving only the breadth of the line at 
top. Edgings cut in this manner, every spring, will always 
look well, and the trouble, comparatively, is a mere trifle. 



96 DAHLIAS. [May. 



GENERAL CARE OF PLANTS COMING INTO FLOWER. 

Every part of the flower-ground should be put into neat 
order, giving such plants about the borders as are shooting 
up their flower-stems, and are tender, and in danger of being 
hurt or broken by the wind, proper sticks or rods for their 
support. In doing this, endeavour to conceal the rods, &c, 
as much as possible, by dressing the stems and leaves in a 
natural-looking manner over them. Let the stakes be in 
proportion to the height and growth of the plants. It looks 
very unsightly to see strong stakes to short and weak-growing 
plants. The tyings likewise should be proportionate. 

Examine all the beds and patches of seedling flowers now 
coming up, and let them be refreshed with water as it may 
be necessary, and pick out the weeds as they appear. 

We cannot leave this department at this season of the year 
without enforcing the benefit and beauty that will result 
from keeping the weeds down during this and the next 
month. Therefore strictly observe that there are none run- 
ning to seed in any part of the garden ; in fact, they ought 
not to be allowed to rear their heads one day in sight. 



MAY. 



As the season for planting out the Dahlia is now ap- 
proaching, we will endeavour to give our readers the whole 
subject of their management, so as to insure a good bloom 
of this the most fashionable and popular ornamental plant of 
the present day. As very many are entirely unacquainted 
with the nature and even the habits of the plant, a brief 
synopsis of its history will assist in giving a key to its cul- 
ture. The plant was first discovered by Humboldt, in 
Mexico, growing in sandy plains, three thousand feet above 
the level of the sea. The date is not precisely known, but 
supposed to be about 1785-G. Indisputable authority, how- 
ever, speaks of its being introduced iuto England in 1789 ; 
but was lost and again introduced in 1803, from Madrid, by 






May.~] PROPAGATION BY CUTTINGS. 97 

Lady Holland; from which period till 1830 it had but little 
notice in cultivation. Indeed, it seems to have been reserved 
for the intelligent growers of the last few years to bring it 
into general notice ; and if we take a retrospective view of 
the rapid progress of Dahlia culture within these last five 
years, we will be led to exclaim, " Where will all this termi- 
nate V But time alone can solve the question ; at present it 
is impossible to come to any satisfactory conclusions. Only 
a few years ago, and who would have conceived the idea of 
having tipped, striped, and spotted Dahlias of almost every 
hue and colour; and although historical writers on the genus 
alluded to the improbability of a blue flower ever being pro- 
duced, yet it is not unreasonable to imagine that ere long we 
will have flowers beautifully and distinctly striped with black 
and white, and even combining the gaudy colours of the tulip, 
or the choicest hues of the carnation ; perhaps the criteria of 
character may change to those of huge globular forms or 
balls — nay, even the odour of the Rose or the Jasmine may 
be imparted, and what then ? Only let amateurs and culti- 
vators persevere with the spirit they have done during the 
last few years, and we think all we have advanced will be 
realized. 

Propagation. — This operation may be performed in vari- 
ous ways, either by division of the root, by cutting off the 
young shoots, or by grafting. For general planting, division 
of the root will be sufficient ; about the first of the month the 
old root, entire, should be planted in some warm and shel- 
tered spot of the garden, covering it with sand, vegetable 
mould, or any light soil ; in about two weeks the eyes or 
young shoots will have sprouted : then it will be properly 
seen how they can be most carefully divided ; the root should 
be carefully cut into as many pieces as there are eyes or 
sprouts, leaving only one tuber to each, when they can be 
planted into the situation appropriated for their blooming. 

Propagation by Cuttings. — Prepare a hot-bed in March, 
as therein described, and place a frame and lights of the 
required size upon it ; scatter over the surface of the bed four 
or five inches of sand, old bark, or any light soil ; after four 
or five days, the fresh steam will have subsided, when the 
roots may be laid thereon, covering them (but not over the 
crowns) with light sandy soil; but where large pots can be 
obtained, I prefer planting them in the pots ; by this means 

9 



98 PROPAGATION BY GRAFTING. [^'J/- 

the plants are kept distinct, and can be taken out at any 
time and examined. They should be frequently sprinkled 
with water that is partially warm ; and if, after they are thus 
placed in the bed, a rank and dense steam should arise, the 
lights should be slightly raised both night and day, till it 
subsides ; and if the nights are cold, cover the lights with 
mats or shutters. This gentle bottom-heat will speedily in- 
duce the eyes to grow, and when the shoots have attained the 
height of three or four inches, they should be cut off close to 
the base, which makes the best plant. After the cuttings 
are taken off, pot them singly into very small pots filled with 
light sandy loam, containing a good portion of black earth 
from the woods, and placed in another moderate hot-bed, and 
give a gentle supply of water. Particular care must be paid 
to shading them from the violent rays of the sun, for if they 
are once exposed, they seldom recover : in this state they 
should continue till they have formed their roots, which, in 
a temperature of from sixty to seventy degrees, will be in 
from two to three weeks. Where a great stock of any par- 
ticular sort is wanted, the cuttings should be taken off just 
below a joint, leaving two or three eyes at the base of the 
shoot, which will again speedily produce new shoots, that can 
be again removed in a similar manner. 

When the plants are rooted, they may then be considered 
established, and all that is necessary is, to shift them into 
larger pots as they require ; and gradually inure them to a 
lower temperature, till they can endure the open air, which 
will not be before the middle of May. 

Propagation by Grafting. — Where only a few plants are 
wanted, this is a very successful method, as an operation can 
be conducted in the office or parlour window. The cutting 
intended for the graft should have about three joints ; when 
obtained, select a good tuber without eyes from any common 
sort, and with a sharp knife cut a slice from the upper part 
of the root downward about two inches in length, and about 
half an inch in depth, and then cut it off horizontally, leav- 
ing a ledge whereon to rest the graft-; next cut the graft 
sloping to fit, and cut it so that an eye or joint may be at 
the bottom of it to rest on the aforesaid ledge. After the 
graft has been firmly tied, a piece of clay should be put 
round it ; pot the root in fine soil, in a pot that will bury the 
graft half way in the mould, and cover it with a glass (a 



May.'] SOIL ARRANGEMENT. 99 

large tumbler will do), and in two weeks it will have taken 
root; the glass may then be removed, and the plant gradually 
inured to the open air. 

Soil. — As far as my observations enable me to judge, the 
soil best adapted for the Dahlia is a sandy loam, not reten- 
tive of moisture, and not too rich, as they will grow to leaves 
and branches, producing few flowers, and even then imper- 
fect : not too poor, as in such they will be very indifferent, 
meagre in size and general appearance. Where soils are 
rich and heavy, a portion of sand or gravel should be mixed 
in the soil where they are planted : but if poor, incorporate 
with the sand well-decomposed manure; and when the plants 
are planted, a stick in proportion to the plant should be put 
with it, and at least eighteen inches in the ground, and not 
less than two inches in diameter, to which they must be care- 
fully tied as they grow, never allowing more than one stem 
to each plant; and the side branches should be cut off from 
one to three feet from the ground, according to the height of 
the plant. Emperor de 3faroc, the most favourite crimson 
Dahlia, tipped with white, comes invariably true to its 
character in sandy soil, whereas, in rich heavy soil, it is fre- 
quently only crimson. The worst of all soils for the Dahlia 
is a rich loam, retentive of moisture ; in such they grow to 
wood and foliage, producing few and very imperfect flowers. 

The best disposition or arrangement in planting the 
Dahlia, I think, is in groups; each group should be com- 
posed of a different section of colour : this affords a close 
comparison, and gives greater diversity of landscape than 
combining the colours ; the tallest-growing sorts should be 
carefully planted in the centre or at the back of each group. 
The roots should be planted from three to four feet from 
each other every way. But where they are planted in rows 
along walks or avenues, two or three feet will be a sufficient 
distance from 'plant to plant. Individual plants look ex- 
tremely well if they are of a dwarf habit. To have a con- 
tinued succession of bloom, there should be two plantings; 
the first about the fifteenth of the month, and the latest 
about the end of June ; it is the June planting that gene- 
rally produces the finest flowers ; this fact (though lately 
discovered) is now well understood by some cultivators, and 
is easily accounted for. AVhen plants are forced and planted 
early, they are in a flowering state much earlier, to be sure, 



100 ARRANGEMENT. \_May. 

but they are overtaken with, perhaps, a hot dry summer, 
which "blights" the buds, and are more subject to the dis- 
ease called " curl ;" the young leaves, as they expand, are per- 
forated with numerous holes; the margins become brownish, 
as if burnt; they then become curled, placid, and the whole 
plant unhealthy and dwarfish. The principal stem ceases to 
grow, and numerous suckers and stems arise from below, 
forming a dense bush. The flowers of such plant, as might 
be expected, are small and irregular; and however excellent 
the variety may be, they yield nothing but disappointment 
to the anxiously expectant cultivator. This disease is caused 
by an insect, Cymix Chloroterus, or green bug. It inhabits 
the extremities of the Dahlia, and grows and feeds on the 
under surface of the young leaves, and in its destruction is 
aided by our frequently hot and arid months of July and 
August. Hence, the reason that the late planting gives 
most satisfaction, they are in these months in a rapid grow- 
ing state, and if attacked outgrow the effects, and push at 
once into bloom in the more moist and cooling month of 
September. The only remedy that is known for the above 
evil is, to look over the plants cautiously in the morning 
when the .first attacks are perceptible, and pick off the in- 
sects; it has to be approached with caution, as it instinctively 
throws itself down among the leaves if disturbed ; and if it 
escapes, it again climbs up, and commences its depredations. 
It is admitted that there are exceeding one thousand distinct 
named varieties now in cultivation, and it may be desirable 
to some that a select list of the choicest named sorts now in 
cultivation should be given : but such is the almost endless 
multiplicity of kinds, and such the numerous additions every 
year made, that in a few years those I may mention now as 
being fine will then most probably be considered wholly 
useless. However, for immediate profit and benefit, I re- 
commend the following : — 



PURE WHITE. 

Antagonist, Indispensable, 

Cheltenham Queen, Miss Pcreival, 

Mount Blanc, Princess Alice. 



May.~] ARRANGEMENT. 101 



WHITE OR BLESH, SHADED OR EDGED WITH PINK OR RED. 

Acantha, Gem, 

Mrs. Rushton, Favourite, 

Miss Vyse, Bridal Ring, 

Lady of the Lake, Star. 
Princess Radzivill, 



LILAC. 

Princess Royal, "Win. Penn. 

Victorina, 



ROSE OR PINK. 

Hero of Tippecanoe, Helen, 

Joshua Longstreth, Queen (Widnall's), 

Madam Dresser, Dowager Lady Cowper. 



PURE YELLOW. 

Apollo, Argo, 

Yellow Victory, California, 

Croceus, Florence Dombey. 



YELLOW OR BUFF, STRIPED OR TIPPED WITH RED. 

Desdemona, Unique, 

Madam Zahler, Pactolus, 

Victor, Nell G-wynne. 



ORANGE. 

Tison d'Or, Orange Superb. 

9* 



102 



ARRANGEMENT. 



\_May. 



RED OR ROSY RED. 



Perfection (McKenzie's), War Eagle, 

Cardinal Ferettii, Glory of Altenberg. 



SCARLET. 



Bloomsbury (Lee's), 
Fire Column, 
Scarlet Gem, 



Fire King, 

Fulwood, 

Scarlet Perfection. 



ROSY CRIMSON. 



Caleb Cope, 
Victory of Sussex, 



Thomas Clarkson. 



CRIMSON. 



Compactum, 
Richard Cobden, 
Warrior, 



Louis Philippe, 

Orb, 

Westbury Rival. 



DARK MAROON AND VERY DARK. 



Admiral Stopford, 
Hero of Stonehenge, 
Standard of Perfection, 
Othello, 



Vesuvius, 
Col. Baker, 
Essex Triumph, 
Rio des Pontille. 



CRIMSON PERMANENTLY TirPED WITH WHITE. 



Oakley's Surprise, 
Josephine, 
Emperor of Morocco, 



Miss Shaw Lefcvre, 
Miss Blackmore. 



May.'] CHARACTER OF A FINE DAHLIA. 103 

STRIPED. 

Striata forniosissima, Multicolor. 

YELLOW TIPPED WITH WHITE. 

Mimosa, The Baron. 

Andromeda, 

The above are the choicest in cultivation at the present 
time, and for farther description in regard to colour, height 
and price, we beg to refer our readers to the periodical cata- 
logues of our respectable nurserymen that are issued every 
spring, and contain many other sorts of eminence ; and not 
a few equally desirable with the above, though the descrip- 
tions of some that are annually received from England are 
more tempting than the article. Whether there are some 
sorts that do produce more perfect and beautiful flowers in 
their humid climate than they do when transferred to ours, 
we cannot practically decide, but presume that it is the fact, 
for we are confident, and every season does more fully con- 
firm it, that the seedlings grown in this country from seed 
sowed here do grow better, and flower finer, than the gene- 
rality of those imported ; and, to prevent us adopting inferior 
sorts, and giving them dashing names, we subjoin the follow- 
ing rules for judging : — 

CHARACTER OF A FINE DAHLIA. 

" The best judges distinguish Dahlias by the three criteria 
of form, colour, and size. 

" 1. Form. — The front view of the blossom should be 
perfectly circular, without notches or inequalities, caused by 
the petals being pointed, and not, as they should be, rounded; 
smooth at the edges, and slightly concave, but not so much 
as to show any of the back. One of the most perfect 
flowers, in this respect, is the Springfield Rival. When the 
petals are pointed, notched, fringed, piped, quilled, concave, 
convex, or flat, the perfectness of the circle is broken, and 
one indispensable beauty in the eye of the florist is deficient. 



104 ANNUALS, HARDY AND TENDER. [3fay. 

" When the eye or disk is shown in the full-blown flower, 
it is also a striking defect. 

" The side view of a first-rate flower should he that of a 
perfect hemisphere. 

" There is, perhaps, no example of this perfection of form 
without some slight deficiency. The Countess of Liverpool 
is one of the nearest to a perfect flower in this respect. 

"2. Colour. — This is looked upon by florists as an inferior 
consideration to form, though it is usually the first to attract 
the notice of common observers. 

" In flowers of one colour, or selfs, the colour ought to be 
bright and distinct, without any breaking or blotching. 
When there are stripes, mottlings, shadings, or edgings, 
these should be clear and uniformly marked, the colours dis- 
tinct without clouding or running. 

"8. Size. — Although large flowers with superior form 
and clear distinct colours are esteemed superior to small 
flowers with the same properties, yet size alone is looked 
upon by florists as nothing when form and colour are defec- 
tive." 

Particular care should be taken with seeds, especially such 
as are saved from fine sorts. If they are sown, about the 
first of April, on a gentle hot-bed, or in a green-house in 
plots, filled with light rich earth, cover the seeds about 
three-eighths of an inch, and when they have made leaves, 
pot them off singly into small pots, till time for planting out, 
or where a quantity is grown, three plants may be put into 
one pot, and thus planted, and when they bloom the bad can 
be pulled up, leaving those of good character to stand for 
farther trial : none should be kept but such as come up to 
the above rules ; and if they do not do so the first year, there 
is little hope of their being more perfect the second. 



ANNUALS, HARDY AND TENDER. 

By the first of the month, finish sowing all hardy Annuals 
and Biennials; and about the middle of the month all those 
that are tropical. The weather being now warm, they will 
vegetate in a few days or weeks. Attend to thinning of those 
that are too thick, giving gentle watering to such as are 
weak in dry weather. Those that have been protected in 



May.~\ TUBEROSES AND AMARYLLIS. 105 

frames should be fully exposed therein night and day; take 
the first opportunity of damp cloudy days to have them trans- 
planted into the boi'ders or beds, lifting them out of the frame 
with as much earth as will adhere to their roots. 



CARE OF HYACINTHS, TULIPS, ETC. 

For the treatment of these, while in bloom, see last month. 
The best time to take them out of the ground is about five 
weeks after they are done flowering, or when the stem ap- 
pears what may be termed half decayed. The best method 
to dry them is to place the roots in rows, with bulb to bulb, 
the stems lying north and south, or east and west. Give the 
bulbs a very thin covering of earth, merely to exclude the 
sun, so that they may not dry too rapidly, being thereby 
liable to become soft. When they have thoroughly dried in 
this situation, which will be in eight or ten days in dry 
weather (and if it rains, cover them with boards), take them 
to an airy dry loft or shade, clearing off the fibres or stems, 
and in a few weeks put them in close drawers, or cover them 
with sand perfectly dry, until the time of planting, for which 
see October. 

It is not advisable to allow any of the bulbs of either 
Hyacinths or Tulips to seed, as it retards their ripening and 
weakens the root, except where there are a few desired for 
new varieties. The small off-sets must be carefully kept in 
dry sand, or immediately planted. 



ANEMONES AND RANUNCULUS. 

These, while in bloom, should be carefully shaded from 
the sun by hoops and thin canvass, or an erect temporary 
awning; and as soon as they are done flowering, they must 
be fully exposed and the waterings given up. 



TUBEROSES AND AMARYLLIS, 

That are not planted, should now be done. For full di- 
rections, see last month. In many seasons, any time be- 



106 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. [-Vfl^. 

fore the twelfth is quite soon enough ; but nothing ought to 
be delayed when the season will permit it to be done. It is 
necessary to have them properly labelled. 



AURICULAS, POLYANTHUS, AND PRIMROSES 

"Will now be done flowering, but still must be carefully 
kept in a cool, shady situation, and all decayed leaves cut 
off" as soon as they appear. Examine them carefully and 
frequently, in case slugs of any description be preying upon 
them. A dusting of hot lime will kill them, or they may be 
otherwise destroyed. Some have recommended to repot and 
slip those plants when done flowering, "or they will contract 
a destructive disease ;" which disease is a loss of verdure, and 
is induced by too much heat and drought, and a few other 
causes from inattention ; but if attended to as above, until 
September, when they should be fresh potted, they will have 
time to be sufficiently established before winter, which is the 
most judicious time to take off slips, for two reasons, namely, 
they do not want so much nursing through the most preca- 
rious season of the year (summer) for these plants, and they 
begin to grow, and will root afresh sooner. 



DOUBLE WALL-FLOWERS. 

As these are very seldom grown from seed, and are semi- 
biennials, art has to be used to preserve or renew them. 
About the end of this month, take shoots of this year about 
three inches long, cutting them carefully off, and smoothing 
the cut end with a sharp knife : from this, cut the lower 
leaves off about one inch and a half, and then put it in the 
ground; choose a very shady spot, mixing the soil with a 
little sand and earth, or decayed leaves. Sprinkle them 
three times a day until they have taken root, which will be 
in a few weeks. Keep the cuttings about four inches apart. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

We do not consider that it is essential every month to re- 
peat the necessity of tying up plants, cutting down weeds, 



June, July.~\ AUTUMN FLOWERING BULBS. 107 

raking, &&, with many other similar observations. We have 
already been full on these subjects, and expect these to be 
remembered through the season. Particular care, however, 
is required to carnations, pinks, or any plants that have 
heavy heads and slender stems. If carnations are desired to 
flower strongly, cut off all the buds except three, leaving the 
uppermost and any other two of the largest. All climbing 
plants should have timely support, and tied securely every 
week while they are growing. 



JUNE AND JULY. 

HOLLAND BULBS. 

The lifting of these will be general in June. For direc- 
tions, see Mai/. It is not advisable to take up Jonquils, 
Fritilldria, Crocus, and Iris, oftener than every alternate 
year. Jonquils may stand three years. Anemones and 
Ranunculus should be carefully lifted after their leaves be- 
gin to fade. Do not expose them to the sun, but cover 
slightly with earth or sand until they are perfectly dry, when 
they may be sifted out of the earth, and put into drawers 
carefully labelled. Some recommend to soak these roots in 
soap-suds, to destroy a worm with which they are frequently 
attacked. We know not how far this may be carried, nor 
the good or bad effects, never having practised it. 



AUTUMN FLOWERING BULBS. 

These are Amaryllis lidea, now called Stemhergia lidea ; 
A. Belladonna, now Belladonna purpurdscens ; Crocus sat\- 
vus, C. Palldsii, C. serotinus, and C. nudijiorus, and all the 
species of Cdlchicum, with species of several other genera not 
introduced into the country. They should all be lifted as 
soon as the foliage is decayed, and kept only a few weeks out 
of the ground, and then again replanted in fresh soil. The 
economy of the genus Cdlchicum in regard to its bulbs, 



108 CARNATIONS AND PINKS. [June, July. 

flowers, and seeds, is altogether singular, and may be termed 
an anomaly of nature. In producing the new bulbs or off- 
sets, in a very curious manner the old one perishes. The 
flowers, which arise with long slender tubes from the root, 
die off in October, without leaving any external appearance 
of seeds. These lie buried all the winter within the bulb ; 
in spring they throw up a fruit-stalk, and are ripe about the 
first of June. How beautiful and admirable is this provision ! 
The plant blooming so late in the year would not have time 
to mature its seeds before winter; and is, therefore, so con- 
trived that it may be performed out of the reach of the usual 
effects of frost, and they are brought above the surface when 
perfected, and at a proper season for sowing. 



CARNATIONS AND PINKS. 

In order to make the former flower well, if the weather is 
dry, give them frequent waterings at the root, and tie them 
up neatly to their rods. The criterion of a fine Carnation 
is — The stem strong and straight, from thirty to forty inches 
high; the corolla three inches in diameter, consisting of 
large, round, well-formed petals, but not so many as to crowd 
it, nor so few as to make it appear thin or empty ; the out- 
side petals should rise above the calyx about half an inch, 
and then turn off in a horizontal direction, to support the 
interior petals, they forming nearly a hemispherical corolla. 
The interior petals should decrease in size toward the centre, 
all regularly disposed on every side ; they should have a small 
degree of concavity at the lamina or broad end, the edges 
perfectly entire. The calyx above one inch in length, with 
strong broad points in a close and circular body. The colours 
must be perfectly distinct, disposed in regular long stripes, 
broadest at the edge of the lamina, and gradually becoming 
narrower as they approach the unguis or base of the petal, 
there terminating in a fine point. Those that contain two 
colours upon a white ground arc esteemed the finest. 

The criterion of a double pink. — The stem about twelve 
inches, the calyx smaller, but similar to a carnation ; the 
flower two inches and a half in diameter; petals rose edges; 
colour white and pure purple, or rich crimson; the nearer it 
approaches to black the more is it esteemed; proportions 



June, July.] LAYING CARNATIONS AND PINKS. 109 

equal as in carnation. Those that are very tasteful with 
these flowers are attentive to the manner of their opening. 
Where the calyx is deficient in regular expansion, to display 
the petals ; that is, where there is a tendency to hurst open 
on one side more than on the other, the opposite side in two 
or three different indentations should be slit a little, at 
several times, with the point of a small sharp knife, taking 
care not to cut the petals, and about the centre of the calyx 
tie a thread three or four times round to prevent any further 
irregularity. Some florists and connoisseurs place cards on 
them. This is done when the calyx is small. Take a piece 
of thin pasteboard, about the size of a dollar, cut a small 
aperture in its centre to admit the bud to pass through. 
When on, tie it tight to the rod, to prevent the wind from 
blowing it about; and when the flower is expanded, draw up 
the card to about the middle of the calyx, and spread the 
petals one over the other regularly upon it. When these 
plants are in flower, their beauty may be prolonged by giving 
them a little shade from the mid-day sun by an awning of 
any simple description. Where they are in pots, they can 
be removed to a cool shady situation (but not directly under 
trees). 



OF LAYING CARNATIONS AND PINKS. 

This is a necessary and yearly operation to keep a supply 
of plants, and likewise to have them always in perfection. 
As the process of laying, though simple, may not be known 
to all who are desirous of cultivating these plants, we will 
give an outline of the mode of operation. Provide first a 
quantity of small hooked twigs (pieces of Asparagus stems 
are very suitable), about three inches long, for pegging the 
layers down in the earth. Select the outward, strongest and 
lowest shoots that are round the plant; trim off a few of the 
under leaves, and shorten the top ones even with the knife, 
and then applying it at a joint about the middle of the under 
side of the shoot, cut about half through in a slanting direc- 
tion, making an upward slit toward the next joint, near an 
inch in extent; and loosening the earth, make a small oblong 
cavity one or two inches deep, putting a little fresh light 
earth therein. Lay the stem part where the slit is made 

10 



110 of budding, etc. [June, July. 

into the earth, keeping the cut part open, and the head of 
the layer upright one or two inches out of the earth ; and in 
that position peg down the layer with one of the hooked 
twigs, and cover the inserted part to the depth of one inch 
with some of the fresh earth, pressing it gently down. In 
this manner proceed to lay all the proper shoots of each 
plant. Keep the earth a little full around the plant, to 
retain longer the water that may be applied. Give imme- 
diately a moderate watering, with a rose watering-pot, and 
in dry weather give light waterings every evening. Choose 
a cloudy day for the above operation. In about two months 
they will be well rooted. 



OF BUDDING OR INOCULATION OF ROSES. 

According to what we have previously hinted in regard 
to having roses as standards, where such are desired, the 
month of July or August is a proper time for the operation 
of budding. The kinds to be taken for stocks should be of 
a strong, free growth; such as Manitta, Maiden's blush, R. 
canina, and frequently the French Eglantine are taken. Be 
provided with a proper budding-knife, which has a sharp, 
thin blade, adapted to prepare the bud, with a tapering ivory 
haft, made thin at the end, for raising the bark of the stock. 
For tyings, use bass strings from Russian mats, which should 
be soaked in water to make them more pliable. The height 
of the stock or stem at which the bud is to be inserted, is to 
be determined by the intended destination of the tree (as it 
may be properly called). Choose a smooth part of the stem, 
from one to three years old. Having marked the place, 
prune away all the lateral shoots about and underneath it. 
With the knife directed horizontally, make an incision about 
half an inch long in the bark of the stock, cutting to the 
wood, but not deeper; then applying the point of the knife 
to the middle of this line, make a perpendicular incision 
under the first, extending from it between one and two inches. 
Having a healthy shoot of the growth of this year provided 
of the kind that is desired, begin at the lower end of this 
shoot, cut away all the leaves, leaving the footstalk of each. 
Being fixed on a promising bud, insert the knife about half 
an inch above the eye, slanting it downward, and about half 



June, July.~\ OF BUDDING, ETC. Ill 

through the shoot. Draw it out about an inch below the 
eye, so as to bring away the bud unimpaired with the bark, 
and part of the wood adhering to it ; the wood now must be 
carefully detached from the bark. To do this, insert the 
point of the knife between the bark and wood at one end, 
and, holding tbe bark tenderly, strip off the woody part, 
which will readily part from the bark, if the shoot from 
which the piece is taken has been properly imbued with 
sap.* Look at the inner rind of the separated bark, to see 
if that be entire ; if there be a hole in it the eye of the bud 
has been pulled away with the wood, rendering the bud use- 
less, which throw away ; if there be no hole, return to the 
stock, and with the haft of the knife gently raise the bark 
on each side of the perpendicular incision, opening the lips 
wide enough to admit the prepared slip with the eye. If the 
slip is longer than the upright incision in the stock, reduce 
the largest end. Stock and bud being ready, keep the latter 
in its natural position ; introduce it between the bark and 
wood of the stock, pushing it gently downward until it 
reaches the bottom of the perpendicular incision. Let the 
eye of the bud project through the centre of the lips; lay 
the slip with the bud as smooth as possible, and press down 
the raised bark of the stock. The bud being deposited, bind 
that part of the stock moderately tight with bass, beginning 
a little below the incision, proceeding upward so as to keep 
the eye uncovered, finishing above the incision. In a month 
after the operation, examine whether the bud has united 
with the stock. If it has succeeded, the bud will be full 
and fresh ; if not, it will be brown and contracted. When 
it has taken, untie the bandage, that the bud may swell, and 
in a few daj-s afterwards cut the head of the stock off about 
six inches above the inoculation, and prevent all shoots from 
growing by pinching them off. This will forward the bud, 
which will push and ripen wood this season ; but it must be 
carefully tied, as it grows, to the remaining head of the stock. 
Some do not head down the stock until the following spring, 

* We once budded three eyes of the white moss rose, after they 
had, by mistake, been carried in the pocket of a coat three days. 
The shoot was soaked six hours in water, and two of the buds grew. 
From this we infer that shoots, if properly wrapped up, may be 
carried very great distances, and grow successfully. 



112 EVERGREEN IIEDGES. [August. 

thereby not encouraging the bud to grow, which, if winter 
sets in early, is the safest method. 



OF WATERING. 

If the season be dry, look over the lately planted shrubs, 
and give them frequent copious waterings ; and a few of the 
finest annuals that are wanted to flower perfectly should be 
attended to. We do confess that we used to be advocates 
for giving plenty of water to the Dahlia, but the sevei'e 
drought of 1838 put our science to the test, and the result 
was, that of ahout one hundred plants of our most choice 
hinds, which we regularly watered three times a-week, for 
nine weeks, during which period we had not a drop of rain, 
the plants grew luxuriantly, but many of them never pro- 
duced a perfect bloom ; and those that had no attention 
whatever paid to them, except a little manure or litter laid 
on the surface over the roots, flowered almost as well as in our 
more moist seasons. Hence we infer that an occasional water- 
ing may be of service, but continued and repeated artificial 
waterings are injurious. 



AUGUST. 

EVERGREEN HEDGES. 

These always make two growths in the season, and the 
best time to perform the operation of clipping or dressing 
them is before the plants begin their second growth. Choose, 
if possible, dull and cloudy days, as in such weather they 
will not be so liable to get brown or bruised by shearing. 
The general practice in forming these is to have the sides 
even and the top level, forming a right angle on each side. 
However neat in appearance this may be considered, it 
certainly is stiff and formal. We never approve of clipping 
where it can be avoided, and, when adopted, nature ought to 



August.] BULBOUS ROOTS. 113 

be imitated. Therefore, have all hedges and edgings taper- 
ing toward the top. 



CARNATIONS AND PINKS, 

If laid about the end of June, and have been properly 
attended, will, by the end of this month, be well rotted and 
fit for transplanting. Clear away the earth lightly, and cut 
them clean off from the parent plant, nearer the stool than 
the original slit. Kaise them neatly out of the earth, with 
as many of the root-fibres as possible ; cut off the naked part 
of the stem close to the fibrous roots, and trim away the 
straggling leaves. Plant the finest sorts in four-inch pots, 
and those more common, three plants in five-inch pots, in 
the form of a triangle, which can be separated in spring to 
plant in the garden. Any of the principal stools should be 
(if in the ground) lifted and put into seven-inch pots to be 
preserved : the others may be allowed to stand through the 
winter, covering them with a few dry leaves. Keep them in 
the shade a few weeks, when they may be fully exposed. 
Give gentle and frequent sprinklings of water until they 
have taken fresh root ; or, if in want of pots, mark out a bed 
that can be covered with a frame, preparing the soil therein 
properly. Plant them from four to six inches apart. Shade 
them from the sun until they begin to grow, giving sprink- 
lings of water over the foliage every evening. 



BULBOUS ROOTS. 

Look over the bulbs that are out of the ground, and exa- 
mine those that require planting. Of Fritillaria there are 
about twenty species, but few of them generally cultivated, 
except F. imperiCdis, Crown Imperial, and F. p&r&ica. Of 
the former there are many very splendid varieties, such as 
Crown upon crown, Lutca Maxima, Striped leaved, Double 
flowered, &c. These will require planting, and ought not to 
be lifted oftener than every third year. They require a deep, 
rich, loamy soil, and, if in beds, plant them from five to 
seven inches deep, and one foot apart. They will grow un- 
der the shade of trees, or in any situation where the soil is 

10* 



114 DAHLIAS. [September. 

adapted for them. No imbricated or scaly bulb ought to be 
retained long out of the ground. When any of these are 
lifted, and the young bulbs taken off, they should be planted 
at once. See particularly, on bulbous roots in general, next 
month. 



SOWING SEEDS OF BULBOUS ROOTS. 

Where any seeds of these are saved, with the intention of 
sowing, let it be done this month. Procure boxes about 
seven inches deep, and, in size, proportioned to the quantity 
to be sown. Put five inches of light, sandy soil in the box, 
level it smoothly, and sow the seeds separately and thickly ; 
cover with half an inch of light sandy loam, with a portion 
of earth from the woods. Keep the box or boxes in a shel- 
tered situation, giving frequent sprinklings of water, to keep 
the earth damp, which must be protected with a frame, or 
covered with leaves during winter. The plants will appear 
in the spring, and must be watered and kept in the shade. 
When the leaves decay in June, put one inch more soil upon 
them, and the second year they can be planted with the 
small offsets in the garden, and treated as other bulbs. They 
must be carefully marked every year. Tulips require several 
years of trial before their qualities are known ; and a poor 
soil is best suited to produce their characters after the first 
bloom. 



SEPTEMBER. 

OF DAHLIAS. 



See that all these plants are supported with proper stakes, 
rods, &c, that the wind may have no effect in breaking down 
or otherwise destroying the flower-stems. Strictly observe 
their respective heights and colours, that they may be duly 
disposed and interspersed next year, if not done so this. At- 
tend particularly to the merits of those grown from seed. 



September.] GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 115 



GENERAL CARE OP PLANTS IN POTS. 

All the flowers that are in pots, and intended to be kept in 
frames during winter, should have a top-dressing and a gene- 
ral preparation for their winter quarters, by tying up, &c. 
The carnation and pink layers that were lifted and potted 
last month must be brought from the shade as soon as they 
begin to grow 5 and those that are not lifted, have them done 
forthwith, that they may be rooted afresh before the frost 
sets in. All Wall-flowers and Stocks should be lifted about 
the end of this month, and planted in five to seven-inch pots, 
and treated as directed for carnation layers last month until 
they begin to grow, when they must be fully exposed. 



PREPARING BEDS AND BORDERS FOR BULBOUS ROOTS. 

Bulbous roots of every character delight in deep free soil ; 
consequently, wherever they are desired to be planted, due 
attention must be paid to put the soil in proper order, to 
have them in perfection. Where there is a quantity in- 
tended to be planted, to have them in beds is the general 
and preferable method. These ought to be dug from" 
eighteen inches to two feet deep, at the bottom of which 
place three or four inches of decayed manure. Where the 
soil is poor, it should be enriched with well-decoruposed 
manure and earth from the woods, incorporating both well 
with the soil, breaking it all fine. This being done, allow it 
to stand until the middle of nest month, which see for 
farther directions. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

Tie up carefully all the Chrysanthemums, Tuberoses, &c. 
Clear away the stems or haum of any decayed annuals or 
herbaceous plants, that nothing unsightly may appear. Pro- 
pagate the Pansy by layers, &c. See page 90. 



116 OF PLANTING, ETC. [October. 



SOWING AND SAVING SEEDS. 

About the end of this month or beginning of next is an 
advisable period to sow seed of Delphinium Ajdcis Jidre 
plhio, or Double Rocket Larkspur. This plant does not 
flower in perfection unless sown in autumn, and grown a 
little above ground before winter ; when a few leaves can be 
lightly thrown among them, but not to cover them entirely, 
or a few branches thickly laid on will answer as well. There 
are several other annuals that bloom more early and much 
finer by being sown about this period : such as Erysimum, 
Gilia, Coreopsis, Ventaurea, Cldrkia, Collinsia, &c. Be 
attentive in collecting and saving all kinds of seeds, and have 
them correctly named, with the year in which they were 
grown. 

The finer kinds of Pansy seeds that may have been collect- 
ed during the season, should now be sown in a rich, free, 
loamy soil, and in a situation where they can be covered dur- 
ing winter with a temporary frame of boards ; although they 
are perfectly hardy, yet they will bloom earlier and more 
superb in the spring by having a slight protection. 



OCTOBER. 

OF PLANTING VARIOUS BULBOUS AND TUBEROUS ROOTS. 

From the first of October to the middle of November is 
the best period for a general planting of bulbs, conns, and 
tubers, which, if the ground has been prepared, as formerly 
directed, will now be in readiness. We will give the names 
and descriptions of a few of the leading sorts. 

Anemone hortensis. — The cultivation of this tuber has 
been attended with less satisfaction than any other floral 
plant that has been introduced into this country. The gene- 
ral failure may, in part, be attributed to the very inferior 
roots annually sent from Holland, which rarely arrive in 
good order; and those that do grow are very discouraging, 



October.'} CROCUS — HYACINTHS. 117 

never making a tuber sufficient for another year's planting. 
Several hundred varieties are cultivated in England with 
great care and complete success. They are planted in a 
deep rich soil, using a considerable portion of cow manure 
and decomposed leaves, covering the crowns of the roots 
about two inches. The tubes are flat, but the eye from 
whence the flower-stem arises is apparent on one of the 
sides, which must be laid uppermost. During the severity 
of winter they should be protected by a frame, and have a 
sprinkling of very dry leaves strewn among them. 

Crocus. — There are upwards of one hundred varieties of 
this vernal flower in cultivation, attended with universal suc- 
cess. They delight in rich soils, and may either be planted 
in beds or rows, at least two inches deep, and six inches 
from row to row — they seldom require removal; every three 
or four years will be sufficient. They can be purchased at 
from seventy-five cents to two dollars per hundred, according 
to quality. When they are done blooming, the foliage 
should not be removed till perfectly decayed. 

Fritilldriii, or Crown Imperial. See last month. 

Hyacinths. — The ground that was prepared for these last 
month should all be divided into beds four feet wide, leaving 
between each alleys of twenty inches. Skim off four or 
five inches of the surface of the former into the latter, level 
the bed smoothly with the rake, and mark it off in rows 
eight inches apart. Plant the roots in the row eight inches 
asunder. Thus they will be in squares, and by planting the 
different colours, alternately, the bed will be beautifully di- 
versified. Cover each bulb with sand, when it can be pro- 
cured. Put about four inches of earth over the crowns, 
which will make the beds from two to three inches higher 
than the alleys. The beds before and after planting should 
be gently rounded from the middle to each side, to let the 
rain pass off. Finish all by raking evenly, straighten the 
edgings with the line, and clear out the alleys or pathways. 

We have grown Hyacinths in great perfection, when, in 
addition to the above, we covered them with two to three 
inches of cow manure. The Dutch florists name nearly two 
thousand varieties of this flower, and have large fields de- 
voted to their culture. When the double varieties were first 
brought into notice, they sold at from one to two thousand 
guilders a root (about from four to eight hundred dollars). 



118 tjeonias. [October. 

The finer kinds can be purchased at from two to four dollars 
per dozen. 

Iris, or Fleur de luce. — The English and Parisian Irises 
are coming into repute as showy garden-flowers. They will 
grow in any well-prepared soil, and require to be planted in 
the same manner as the tulip. 

Jonquils. — Double and single. Plant these in the same 
soil as Tulips, six inches apart, and cover three inches deep. 
They do not flower so well the first year as in the second and 
third, therefore should only be lifted every third year. 

Lilium. — The family of Lilies are all splendid, very inte- 
resting, and easy of culture, requiring merely a good deep 
loamy soil — nowise inclined to moisture. They are all 
hardy, except L. japonicum and L. longiflbrum, which we 
lift in November, and again plant them about the first of 
March, keeping them through the winter in dry sand, in a 
cellar free from frost. The hardy kinds, deserving most 
attention, are L. Cdndidum (the double variety of it is not 
worth growing), L. Chalceddnicum and its varieties, L. Ti- 
gr\num, L. Cdncolor, and L. Mdrta;jon ; these, with the 
species indigenous to this country, are all very beautiful. 
They should be planted from three to five inches deep, ac- 
cording to the size of the bulb, and need not be taken up 
oftener than once in every three or four years. None of the 
species can be transplanted after they have grown, without 
injuring their flowering. 

Narcissus require treatment similar to the Lily, except the 
soil, which must be richer, and even then they do not bloom 
so finely in a few years as they do when first imported ; but 
they are cheap, and can annually be procured. 

Psebnias are all magnificent in flower, and, for display, 
are not surpassed by any spring-blooming plant; and we do 
cheerfully urge our readers to cultivate the choice sorts, which 
can scarcely be said to have a rival. Such are — 

P. Moutdn Bdnlcsii, common double blush tree Paconia. 
P. Moutdn papa ce rdcea , single white tree Pjeonia, with pur- 
ple centre. 
P. Moutdn rosea, large rose, semi-double tree Pseonia. 
P. Moutdn odordtd, sweet-scented, rose-coloured tree Pseonia. 
P. Moutdn alb Ida pic no, double white tree Ptuonia. 



October.'] TULirs. 119 

The following are Herbaceous P^eonias : — 

P. edulis albijlbra, single white. 

P. edulis whidiji, superb double white. 

P. edulis Iliiniei, very large double rose. 

Pi edulis fray t-ans, double red, sweet-scented. 

P. edulis Reevesiana, Chinese double purple crimson. 

P. edulis Pvttsii, double blush, very distinct. 

P. odofdta, double lilac. 

P. mutabilis, double rose, changing to blush. 

P. anemoncfora, double dark crimson, very distinct. 

P. officinalis rubra, common double. 

P. officinalis atropurpufea, very dark crimson. 

P. officinalis albicans, changeable white rose, or blush. 

There are several other splendid double varieties in our 
collections, which have not yet bloomed in this country. 
There are also a few very choice single kinds that are desira- 
ble for growing to raise new sorts from ; for it is from the 
single species that the Chinese have been so successful in 
procuring the magnificent double varieties, which are so anx- 
iously and perseveringly sought for. The seeds mature well 
in this country, aud should be sown as soon as ripe ; they 
will vegetate the following spring, and in three years may be 
expected to bloom. ■ The Pasony will grow in any rich, 
loamy soil, which should be at least fifteen inches deep. An 
eastern situation or aspect is best adapted for them in this 
latitude ; but in the more Southern States, they will display 
their flowers better on a northern aspect, or where they will 
be shaded from the sun, but not under the dripping of trees. 
The most suitable time for planting them is in September, 
October, or November. Spring-planted roots never succeed 
well the first year. Paeony moutan and its varieties are all 
of a shrubby nature, and will grow into large bushes, pro- 
ducing from fifty to one hundred blooms of not less than 
fifteen inches in circumference ; they can be propagated by 
division of the root, or by layers. 

Tulips. — As this flower will soon be a decided favourite 
over this mighty country, we will give a minute description 
of the soil most genial to it, at the same time remarking that 
it will grow in almost any soil or situation, though less per- 
fect. Many of the kinds are of the most splendid colours and 



120 tulips. [Ocfo&er. 

strong in growth, frequently growing over three feet in 
height, with cups sufficiently large to satisfy the greatest 
Bacchus. All writers agree that Tulip beds should be 
" four feet wide ;" though I think three and a half will be 
found more convenient, and, in length, according to the 
number of roots to be planted. The soil should consist of 
good fresh loam, mixed with a small portion of well-rotted 
stable-manure, at least two years old. The whole should be 
incorporated together four months pi-evious to using. The 
common soil should be taken out sixteen inches deep, and 
filled with the above compost. Raise the beds not less than 
three inches above the paths at the outside, and about six or 
eight inches in the middle ; this convexity will assist in 
throwing off the water in times of heavy and continued rains. 
The bed thus formed, plant the bulbs in rows, lengthwise on 
the bed, about six inches from bulb to bulb, and seven inches 
from row to row. The bed may be marked out by straining 
a line very tight, lengthwise on the bed, and beating it with 
the back of the spade, leaving a lined groove along the ground. 
Then, with a lath four feet long, let the bed be marked across 
at six inches distance, so as to leave distinct impressions at 
each crossing of the ground-lines ; for these will form the 
spots where the bulbs are to be planted, by means of a dibber, 
made larger than the largest bulb, and flattened at the end. 
The holes are to be made four inches deep, and about half an 
inch of sharp sand ought to be dropped in each. The centre 
line ought to be planted with the tallest kinds, and the out- 
side of the bed with the lowest. In severe frosts they should 
be protected by boards or branches. Tulips have ever been 
held in the highest estimation. As early as 1037 history 
records one hundred and twenty Tulips being sold at public 
auction for no less a sum than nine thousand guilders, equal to 
thirty-six hundred dollars; and in England, at the present 
day, a good collection is valued at five thousand dollars. 
Florists generally divide them into three classes, viz., first, 
Byftloemens, such as have a white ground, variegated with 
purple, as Bienfait, or WasMnyton, so., secondly, Bizarres, 
having a j^ellow ground variegated with scarlet, purple, rose, 
or velvet, as Trafalgar, Due dc Savoie, ,&c. j and, thirdly, 
lioses with white ground, variegated with rose, scarlet, or 
crimson, as La Tcndrvsse, Rose miynonne, &c. 



October.] grass and gravel- walks. 121 

• The superb kinds are often very expensive ; even fifty 
pounds sterling is frequently given for a single bulb; and 
we doubt much if these high-priced hinds are finer than 
Washington, Jlilo, or Trafalgar, which, with many others, 
can be procured for less than one dollar each. 



planting and transplanting. 

This is a very proper period to plant the beautiful and 
early flowering Pyrus japonica, now called Cyddnia ja/pff- 

nica. The blossoms are of a rich scarlet colour. It is the 
earliest flowering shrub of the garden, and deciduous, though 
said by some to be "an evergreen." The plant is bushy, 
and well adapted for single plants in grass-plats, or forming 
low ornamental hedges. There is likewise C. j. dlba, a fine 
blush variety of the same habit, and both are of the hardiest 
nature. 

Double Primroses, Polyanthus, Daisies, &c. — Any of 
these that were planted in shaded situations in spring, and 
have been preserved through the summer, should have for 
their farther protection a bed well sheltered from the north- 
west, in which they should be planted four inches apart. 
Give them a few sprinklings of water in the morning, and 
have a temporary frame of rough boards put together to 
place over them during the severity of winter. The frame 
may be covered with the same in place of glass, which must 
be kept over them while they are in a frozen state. 

Any other plants that are in the ground, which are intend- 
ed, to be protected with frames through the winter, ought 
to be imniediately lifted and potted, and treated as directed 
for all new-potted plants. 



GRASS AND GRAVEL-WALKS. 

The former should be trimly cut and well rolled this 
month, that they may appear neat all winter. Never allow 
decayed leaves to lie any time upon them, as they are apt to 
rot out the grass. The latter should be divested of every 
weed, and receive a firm rolling. Clear them at all times of 
leaves and other litter. These, if on a declivity, and have 

11 



122 dahlias. [November. 

not a firm substantial bottom, will be subject to be cut up 
with every heavy rain. A break should be put in every 
twenty, forty, or eighty feet, to throw off the water. A 
strong plank will answer perfectly well, but in such situa- 
tions we would prefer grass-walks. 



PLANTING EVERGREENS. 

This month is the best period in autumn to plant these 
shrubs ; and where there is a great extent to be planted, it 
would be advisable to do a part of it now ; but we give the 
preference to April, which see for directions. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

When the plantings of bulbs, &c, are finished, every part 
of the garden should have a thorough cleaning. All annual 
flowers will have passed the season of their beauty ; there- 
fore, remove the decayed flower-stems or haum, and trim 
off the borders. Dig all vacant ground, especially that in- 
tended to be planted with shrubs in the ensuing spring, 
which ought to be dug from one to two feet deep. 



NOVEMBER. 

DAHLIAS. 

It is not advisable to delay lifting the roots of the Dahlia 
after the first of the month, as frequently severe frosts set 
in about this period, and would totally destroy them. Choose 
a dry day for the purpose, and with a spade carefully lift 
every root, divesting it of any earth that may adhere there- 
to, but not to shake it off, as thereby the neck of the tubers 
would be bruised, and probably entirely destroy the vitality of 
the plant for the coming season. With us, the frost generally 
destroys the foliage and stems of the plants from about the 



■November.] erythrinas. 123 

middle of October to the beginning of tbe present month. 
The stems should then be cut to within a few inches of the 
ground, when the roots should be lifted directly thereafter, 
and the labels properly secured to them with metallic wire. 
Many opinions are given for the best method of securing 
them during winter from the effects of frost, which is their 
certain destruction. In this country, a dry close cellar, that 
will retain a temperature of not less than thirty-five degrees, 
and not over forty-five, will be the most proper place : if the 
tubers are small, they should be covered with dry sand or 
earth. The method we have adopted with our finest kinds, 
which has resulted in complete success, is to lay dry boards 
on the cellar-floor, and place the roots closely thereon, cover- 
ing them to the stem with dry sand, laying mats over all : 
in this manner they preserve till spring in the most perfect 
order. They can also be kept in a cool green-house; but 
must be protected from drippings of water falling upon 
them. 



TUBEROSES, TIGRIDIAS, AND AMARYLLIS. 

These tubers and bulbs, as soon as the frost has partly in- 
jured the foliage, should be taken up, and dried thoroughly 
in the sun, taking care, at all times, to keep them clear from 
frost. When they are dry, divest them of their foliage and 
fibres, and pack them in boxes with dry sand or moss. Store 
these away for the winter, either in a room or a dry cellar, 
where they will at all times be exempt from frost, the least 
touch of which would destroy them. We have kept them 
completely secure in the cellar. 



ERYTHRINAS. 

Where there are any plants of E. herbdcea, E. laurifblia, 
and E. cri&ta-gdUa, which are intended to be lifted, they 
should be carefully done and preserved in half-dry earth, and 
kept beside the Dahlias. They are magnificent ornaments 
in the flower-garden. 



124 CHOICE CARNATIONS, ETC. [November, 



PRIMROSES, POLYANTHUS, AND DAISIES 



That were planted in a sheltered spot, as directed last 
month, should have a frame placed over them, and their 
covering in readiness for the approach of winter; giving the 
plants a light covering of leaves, which will preserve their 
foliage from the effects of frost. 



CHOICE CARNATIONS, PINKS, PANSIES, AND AURICULAS, 

That are in pots, should be placed in the frame intended 
for their abode during winter. If the pots are plunged to 
the rims in dry leaves or sawdust, it will greatly protect their 
roots from the severe effects of frost. Where glass is used 
for these frames, they should have besides a covering of 
boards or straw mats ; those that are in beds may be covered 
as above directed for Primroses, &c. 

They ought not to be uncovered while in a frozen state. 
It is not altogether the intensity of cold that destroys these 
plants so much as the alternate thawing and freezing. 

All half-hardy plants, such as Wallflower^ German 
stocks, Sweet-bay, tender roses, with several others, should 
be protected as above directed for Carnations. Earth or tan 
should be put round the outside of these frames, which will 
be a partial shelter from the changing state of the atmo- 
sphere. Oak leaves answer the purpose very well, but they 
are a harbour for all kinds of vermin, especially rats and 
mice, which would destroy everything. It may be useful 
to say a few words on the nature of tan or tanners' bark. 
Many suppose that the smallest quantity will produce heat. 
If three or four cart-loads of it are put into one heap, and 
protected from the rain, it will ferment ; and when the first 
fermentation is abated, by mixing it with leaves, a substan- 
tial hot-bed may be made, or put it by itself into a pit; and 
when there is no pit, boards may be substituted to keep it 
together : either of these methods will produce a lasting 
heat. But in small quantities, and exposed to rain, &c, no 
heat will be produced, but rather the contrary. It is excel- 
lent, when dry, in keeping out frost from any plants; being 
a body not easily penetrated, similar to dry sand, sawdust, 



November.] of planting, etc. 125 

or dry leaves. Frequently the same opinion is held in re- 
gard to stable manure, small portions of which will never 
produce heat. 



OF PROTECTING PLANTS IN THE GARDEN. 

During this or next month, according to the state of the 
season, protect all the plants that are in the ground, which 
are not completely hardy. The coverings may be straw, 
Russia mats, canvass, boxes or barrels. The latter two must 
be perforated in the top, to let the damp air pass off, or the 
plant would become musty and decay. Those covered with 
straw or mats should have small stakes placed round the 
plans, and covering tied tbereto, and remain so until the 
month of March or first of April. Herbaceous plants that 
are tender may be covered with three or four inches of tan, 
sawdust, or half-decayed leaves, which will tend greatly to 
preserve their roots. These coverings must be carefully re- 
moved on the first opening of spring. The shrubs that are 
otherwise covered would be greatly benefitted by having their 
roots protected in a similar manner, as directed for herbace- 
ous plants. 



PROTECTION OF SEEDLING BULBS. 

If any seeds of Hyacinths, Tulijps, or Frit'dbira, were 
sown in pots or boxes, let them be removed to a dry, shel- 
tered situation, and plunged level with the ground; or fill 
the spaces between them with dry leaves or tanners' bark, 
and cover the whole with new-fallen leaves, laying over all 
a few boards to prevent the wind blowing them off. These 
form better coverings than straw or haum, which is liable 
to become musty, and communicate the effect to the roots. 
The above covering is not required until the approach of 
severe frost. 



OF PLANTING DECIDUOUS TREES AND SHRUBS. 

It is not recommendable to make a general planting of 
these at this period of the year ; the success entirely depend- 



126 GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. \_Dcccmher. 

ing on the nature of the season and the state of the soil. 
If any are planted, let them be those of the hardiest nature, 
and in light and absorbent soil, not subject to be stagnated 
or over-flooded during winter. When this and next month 
are mild, autumn plantings are very frequently as sure as 
those of the spring. But the precarious state of the season 
is not to be depended upon, therefore avoid large plantings 
of any kind, and more especially of delicate roses, the roots 
of which are apt to rot off, except they have been previous- 
ly grown in pots. Nothing can be more injurious to a plant, 
at this season particularly, than to bed its roots in mortar, 
by which the tender fibres either perish or are cramped ever 
afterward. The soil at the time of planting should be 
so friable as not to adhere to the spade, which is a good rule 
in planting at any season, or in any soil. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

Carry out of the garden all decayed leaves and litter of 
every description, cutting down any weeds that remain. 
Collect all the stakes and rods that have been supporting 
plants, tie them up in bundles for the use of next year, and 
put them under cover. Look over every part of the garden, 
and see that nothing has been omitted in the way of cover- 
ing or other protection. The sashes that are to be used on 
the frames should be perfectly whole, every interstice in the 
glass puttied, and all ready for use when occasion may re- 
quire. Attend to all plants ill pots, and give them gentle 
waterings as they stand in need; but never during the time 
the soil is frozen about the roots. 



DECEMBEK. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 



Having in the preceding months under this head given 
details for the protection of plants of a delicate nature, and 



December.'] GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 127 

the forwarding of necessary work, only a few remarks remain 
to be added. If there is any part therein described omitted, 
have it done forthwith : every day increases the danger of 
severe weather. If there are doubts of any plants or shrubs 
not standing without some light covering, it is best to err on 
the side of safety. Valuable plants on walls, and in danger of 
being destroyed, it is advisable to be at the expense of having 
a frame made to surround them, and cover the same with 
oil-cloth. The frame thus covered should be taken off in 
mild weather, and replaced again when necessary, causing very 
little trouble ; and, if properly taken care of, will last many 
years. Coverings of any construction, and of the same ma- 
terial, would answer for any part of the garden, and are the 
best in our opinion that could be adopted. 



THE 



AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



HOT-HOUSE. 

ON THE CONSTRUCTION OP A HOT- HOUSE. 

There Lave been many plans devised and visionary pro- 
jects offered to the public as the best for a well-regulated 
hot-house. As we intend forming one for practical purposes, 
we shall adopt a convenient size, have flues for the convey- 
ance of heat, and coal or wood for fuel. 

Site, and Aspect. — The house should stand on a situation 
naturally dry, and, if possible, sheltered from the northwest, 
and clear from all shade on the south, east and west, so that 
the sun may at all times act effectually upon the house. The 
standard principle, as to aspect, is to set the front directly to 
the south. Any deviation from that point should incline to 
the east. 

Dimensions. — The length may be from ten feet upward ; but, 
if beyond forty feet, the number of fires and flues are multi- 
plied. The medium width is from twelve to sixteen feet. 
Our directions will apply to the two extreme points, viz., 
forty feet by sixteen, and in height at back, from twelve to 
eighteen feet ; the height in front six feet, including about 
three feet in brick basement, to support the front glass, 
which will be two and a half feet, allowing six inches for 
framework. 



130 nOT-HOUSE. 

Furnace and Flues. — It is of great importance to have 
these erected in such a manner as will effectually heat the 
house. The greatest difficulty is to have the furnace to draw 
well. As workmen are not generally conversant on the sub- 
ject, nor yet understand the effect or distribution of heat in 
these departments, we will give minute details on their con- 
struction. The furnace should be outside of the house, 
either at the back or end ; the former is preferable, circum- 
stances not always allowing it on the other plan. Dig out the 
furnace-hole, or what is termed stock-hole, about five feet deep. 
Let the door of the furnace be in the back wall of the house, 
thereby having all the heated building inside, that no heat 
may be lost. The brick-work round the furnace should be 
nine inches thick, laying the inside with fire-brick. Around 
the outside leave a vacuum two or three inches wide, to allow 
the heat to arise from around the furnace into the interior of 
the house, thereby saving the whole heat of the fuel. The 
furnace will require to be two and a half feet long, ten inches 
wide, and one foot high, before the spring of the arch and 
clear of the bars ; leave one foot for an ash-pit, then lay the 
hars. They should be sixteen inches long, one inch broad 
on the upper side, two inches deep, and two-eighths broad on 
the lower side, and, with the door and frame, should be cast 
iron. Half an inch between each bar will be sufficient. The 
flue should rise from the furnace by a steep declivity of from 
twenty inches to two feet, and pass the door of the house 
(without a dip), when it must be elevated above the level of 
the floor of the house along the front, and at the opposite 
end of the house must dip to pass the door. The dip must 
not be lower than the bottom of the flue at the neck of the 
furnace. Lead it along the back to enter the wall over the 
furnace. When thus taken round the house, the heat will 
be expanded before it enters the chimney. The inside of 
the flues should be from six to ten inches wide, and eight 
inches deep ; plaster the bottom of it, but no other part, as 
plaster is partially a non-conductor. The above description 
is for burning anthracite coal ; but where wood is to be the 
fuel, the furnace must be one-half larger. We have been 
particular in the description of furnace bars, as those gene- 
rally used are miserable substitutes. Circumstances may 
cause the furnace to be placed at the end or front of the 
house. In either case, the stock-hole will not rcrpuire to be 



HOT-HOUSE. 131 

so deep ; or where there is only one door in the house, a 
stock-hole three and a half feet deep will be enough, which 
should be built like a cellar, to keep out any under water. 
In all instances, pass the first flue to the front of the house, 
over which have a close table, covered with two inches of 
sand, and, by keeping it moist, will afford a very congenial 
heat to young and valuable plants. Likewise over the fur- 
nace have a frame in the same manner, which will be found 
useful for propagating. Any part of the furnace or flue that 
is under the floor of the house should have a vacuity on both 
sides to let the heat pass upward. 

Furnaces and flues on the above construction are the most 
simple in arrangement, and the easiest to manage at all times. 
But where capital, taste, and practical science can be united, 
the more elegant disposition of heating by hot water is now 
universally adopted in extensive glass structures, and will 
soon be generally adopted in the dwellings of the better 
class. We have used it in every variety of form and struc- 
ture for the past twelve years, and have now five green- 
houses, each over one hundred feet long, heated by it, using 
every variety of pipe and form of boiler ; have also used 
wooden and cement tanks. Sand beds heated by it for pro- 
pagating upon. It cannot be economically used in green- 
houses under sevent3 T -five feet long, and sixteen to thirty 
feet wide. In all erections for plant or grape culture, at, or 
over that extent, the best and cheapest method of applying 
artificial heat is by the diffusion of hot water through cast 
iron or copper pipes, of three or four inches in diameter. The 
boiler may be of any size, from five to fifteen gallons — of 
any shape, from a pancake to a puncheon ; though that best 
adapted to the exposing the greatest surface to the fire is to 
be preferred. We use what is termed the saddle boiler, and 
also the double cylinder boiler, preferring the latter, which 
holds about ten gallons, and will supply heat enough for two 
green-houses, each one hundred feet long, or will supply a 
green-house of one hundred feet in length, and a hot-house 
fifty feet, and from sixteen to twenty feet wide, using four 
inch pipe, at a cost of about 8250, including labour and 
materials. Its erection is perfectly simple, and can be done 
by any good bricklayer and handy labourer : build the boiler 
in the centre of the furnace, with its bottom about twelve or 
fourteen inches above the fire bars ; allow the heat to have 



132 HOT-HOUSE. 

full play all round the boiler, carrying the flue about forty 
or fifty feet through the house, that no heat may be lost; 
attach two pipes to the surface or top of the boiler, if it is to 
heat right and left, but only one pipe if the heat is to be 
carried in one direction ; distribute the pipe wherever re- 
quired, giving it an ascent of not less than sis inches to the 
fifty feet, more if it can be done — return the pipe, entering 
it into the lowest part of the boiler ; the greater the ascent 
and descent, the more rapid the circulation. The joints of 
the pipe are closed by soft hemp rope, firmly rammed up and 
closed by a mixture of white and red lead made to the con- 
sistency of putty. These joints are preferable to those of lead, 
which expand and contract by strong heat, requiring to be 
hammered up frequently during the season — they can also 
be very readily taken apart, when removal or alteration is 
required. It must be observed that air tubes have to be in- 
serted into the highest part of the pipes at each extremity, 
and also one over, or near the boiler, for the conveuiency of 
supplying water. If the pipes diverge from the boiler to two 
extremes, each extremity must be on a level, which other- 
wise will cause an unequal diffusion of heat. 

EXAMPLE. — If a house to the right of the boiler one hun- 
dred feet long has the extreme end of the pipe elevated one 
foot above the level of the boiler, a house fifty feet long to the 
left must have the same elevation, otherwise the heat will be 
the greatest where the pipe is liiglicst. 

This we consider the most economical method of heating by 
hot water, and it is by far the most simple — simple indeed 
in every part, though volumes have been written on the sub- 
ject. 

Bark Pit. — We consider such an erection in the centre 
of a hot-house a nuisance, and prefer a stage, which may be 
constructed according to taste. It should be made of the 
best Carolina pine, leaving a passage all round, to cause a 
free circulation of air. The back and end paths may be 
about two feet wide, and the front three feet. The angle of 
the stage should be parallel with the glass, having the steps 
from six inches to one foot apart. 

Where there are some large plants, they may stand on 
the floor behind the stage, or on tressels, according to their 
heicht. 



January.'] hot-house. 133 

Angle of the glazed Roof. — The pitch of the roof is usually 
varied to agree with the design of the house, and the size 
of the plants to be grown therein. Where pleasure and orna- 
ment are the principal objects, the angle should be about 33° 
from the level line ; but a few degrees of inclination either 
way is of minor importance. 

Materials for glazing Sashes. — Carolina pine is the best 
material for the wood-work, as it is not so subject to decay 
from moisture and heat as the other kinds of pine wood. 
The frames or sashes can be of any convenient length, not 
exceeding ten feet, and about three and a half or four feet 
wide, and made from plank two inches thick, divided so as 
they can be glazed with glass six inches wide. 

Of Glazing. — The pieces of glass should not exceed six 
inches by eight, though six by six is preferable ; the lappings 
about one quarter of an inch. The frames ought to have 
two coats of paint previous to glazing, and the glass bedded 
in putty. Some prefer the lappings to be puttied also. It 
is our opinion that in a hot-house these should not be puttied, 
but, in the green-house, the closer they can be made the 
better. 

Of Shutters. — These should be made of three-quarters of 
an inch white pine, and bound on both ends and sides, having 
a cross-piece in the middle of the same. They ought to be 
painted at least once in three years. 



HOT-HOUSE. 

JANUAKY. 

At all times, be very careful of the temperature of this 
department, and more especially at this season of the year, 
as a few minutes' neglect might materially injure many of 
the delicate plants. The thermometer ought to range 
between 55° and 65°. In fine sunshiny days admit a 
little air by having some of the top sashes let down one, 



134 HOT-HOUSE. [January. 

two, or three inches, according to the weather, and let it 
always be done from eleven to one o'clock ; but by no means 
in such a manner as to cause a draft in the interior of 
the house, which would be very prejudicial. Therefore, be 
always cautious during cold weather in administering that 
necessary element to vegetation, which is so conducive to 
health. 



OF FIRING AND FUEL. 

The hot-house ought never to be left entirely to inexpe- 
rienced persons, because they are not aware what might be 
the result of inattention even for an hour. Attention 
to the following observations will obviate every difficulty : 
About this season of the year, frost generally sets in very 
severe in the Middle States. Suppose the day may have all 
the clemency of spring, the night may be directly the re- 
verse. Every precaution is necessary to guard against 
extremes. The shutters are put on every night at sun- 
down, and, in severe weather, as soon as the sun goes off 
the glass. If the shutters are omitted till late in severe 
frost, it will so reduce the heat of the house that you can- 
not overcome it by fire until near midnight ; and when 
done, the fire or fires have been made more powerful than 
they ought to be, proving ungenial to the plants that are 
near the flues. The air, as above directed, having been 
taken off the house at one o'clock, as soon as the mercury 
begins to fall in the thermometer, kindle the fire, and, sup- 
posing it is anthracite coal, in twenty minutes, with a good 
drawing furnace, the heat will operate in the house. If a 
coal fire, kindled about four o'clock, it will require an addi- 
tion about six, and then may be made up again about nine 
or ten, which will suffice until morning. The quantity 
must be regulated by the weather. If the fuel is wood, it 
must be attended to three or four times during the evening; 
and, when the mornings are intensely cold, a fire may be 
requisite. When there are bad-drawing furnaces, the fires 
must be made much earlier, perhaps by two or three o'clock, 
which will be easily observed by the time the fire takes 
effect upon the air of the house. The temperature ought 
never to be under fifty degrees of Fahrenheit. 



January.'] HOT-HOUSE. 135 



OF WATERING THE PLANTS. 

To do this judiciously, is so necessary to vegetation, and 
so requisite to understand, and yet the knowledge so diffi- 
cult to couvey to others (being entirely acquired by prac- 
tice), that if the power were in man to impart to his fellow- 
men, he would • possess the power of perfecting a gardener 
by diction. However, the hints on this important point of 
floriculture will be as clear and expressive as can at present 
be elicited. All plants in this work that are aquatic shall 
be specified as such ; and those that are arid shall be duly 
mentioned. All others will come in the medium. 

All the plants must be looked over every day, and those 
watered that appear to be getting dry on the top. It must 
be strictly observed not to give water to any but such as 
strictly require it, and let it be given moderately at this 
season. There is not so much liability to err, at present, 
in giving too little, as in administering too much. Vege- 
tation among the stove or hot-house plants will soon begin 
to show, and the soil will become sour if it is impregnated 
with stagnant moisture. Small plants should always be 
watered with a pot having what is termed a rose upon it.- 
The surface of the rose, that is, where it is perforated with 
small apertures, ought to be level, or a little concave, which 
would convey the water more to a centre, and make neater 
work, by preventing any water from being unnecessarily 
spilt in the house. The size of the pot will be regulated 
by the person, to suit the conveniences of the place. Water, 
when applied either to the roots or foliage of the plants, 
should be about the medium temperature of the house. 
Where there are no cisterns, a tank or barrel might be in 
the house, in which the water could stand for one night or 
more, as is most suitable. When water is given without 
being thus aired, it chills the roots, prevents a luxuriant 
growth, injures the fresh and healthful appearance of the 
foliage, and too frequently gives to all the plants a sickly 
hue. 



136 HOT-HOUSE. [January. 



OP INSECTS, THEIR DESTRUCTION, ETC. 

In this department, insects begin to increase by hundreds, 
and too frequently their ravages are very obvious before their 
progress is arrested. We will treat of those which are most 
common, under their respective heads, with their nature and 
cure, as far as has come under our observation. 

Aphis rosw, of the natural order of Hemiptera, or what 
is commonly known by Green Fly, Green Lice, &c, infect 
plants in general, and are particularly destructive in the 
hot-house to Hibiscus 7-dsa-si>iensis, Asclepi(ts, Crdssulu toc- 
cinea, Lantdna, &c, and many other plants of a free-growing 
nature. They attack the young and tender shoots at the 
point, leaving a dark filthy appearance on the foliage. 
Many remedies for their destruction have been offered to 
the public by various writers, each equally secure in his own 
opinion. Extensive practice alone can show the most easy 
and effectual cure. Fumigating with tobacco is decidedly 
the most efficacious, and in the power of any to perform. 
Take a small circular furnace, made of sheet iron, diameter 
at top twelve inches, and at bottom eight; depth one foot, 
having a grating in it to reach within three inches of the 
bottom, which will leave space for the air to pass, and where 
the ashes will fall and be kept in safety, having a handle 
like a pail to carry it with. This, or anything similar, being 
ready, put in it a few embers of charcoal, ignited to redness; 
take it into the centre of the house, and put therein a quan- 
tity of moist tobacco. If it attempts to burn or flame, 
sprinkle a little water thereon ; and, as it consumes, continue 
to add tobacco until the house is entirely full of smoke, 
observing always to do it in still, cloudy weather, or in the 
evening. If it is windy, the smoke is carried off without 
having half the effect, and requires more tobacco. The 
house must be closely shut up. There are several plants 
whose foliage is of a soft downy nature, such as lMitrojiiiims, 
Callacdipus, Salvias, and many of the Lantdiias, Vincas, 
with several others that cannot stand strong fumigation 
without danger. These should be put down in the house, 
or under the stage. These fumigations will have to be 
repeated frequently, the time for which will easily be per- 
ceived; and, when required, ought not to be delayed. 






January.] HOT-HOUSE — INSECTS, ETC. 137 

Several species and varieties of the same genus, Aphis, can 
be destroyed in the like manner. 

Acaris tellurius, or red spider, is caused by a dry atmo- 
sphere, and its havoc generally is obvious before it is arrested. 
With its proboscis it wounds the fine capillary vessels of the 
leaves. If they progress in their destructive work, the 
leaves will prematurely decay. On this appearance turn up 
the leaf, and you will see them running about with incredi- 
ble swiftness. Their body is of a blood colour, and their feet 
light red. When very numerous, they work thick webs on 
the underside of the leaf, and frequently all over it, forming 
a mass of half-dead plants, decayed leaves, and thousands of 
spiders. The most effectual remedy is a thorough syringing 
with water, and profusely under the foliage. This being 
done every evening, will subdue and eventually banish them. 
Had the house been syringed two or three times per week, 
these intruders would not have appeared. It is said by 
some writers that watering only reduces them to a temporary 
state of inaction, and will not destroy them. Laying aside 
the many prescribed nostrums, we assert that the pure ele- 
ment is the most effectual cure, as well as the most easy to 
be obtained.* 

Tit rips, order H< miptera, are insects so minute as 
scarcely to be perceptible to the naked eye. They generally 
lurk close to the veins of the leaves of plants, and frequently 
attack esculents. When viewed through a glass they are 
seen, when touched, to skip with great agility. The larva is 
. of a high brown or reddish colour. The thrip has four wings, 
and walks with its body turned upward. It frequently attacks 
the extremities of tender shoots or young leaves, which be- 
come shrivelled, brown, and will rub to dust easily between 
the thumb and finger. When any leaves or shoots are per- 
ceived to be so, if you do not observe the green fly, expect 
the thrips. They may be destroyed by a fumigation of 
tobacco, in the same manner as the green fly. By the 
simple and expeditious method of fumigation, these insects 
and several others may be destroyed effectually at any time 
they appear. 

Cocus hesperidus, or mealy bug, has appeared in the hot- 

* Fumes of sulphur is instant death to them ; hut it has to be used 
with great caution and experience. 

12* 



138 HOT-HOUSE — INSECTS, ETC. [January. 

houses about Philadelphia within these few years, and, if not 
instantly destroyed, increases rapidly. It is of a white dusty 
colour ; when broken, of a brownish red, generally covered 
with down, under which it deposits its eggs ; and they, in a 
few months, come forth in great numbers. The cocus gene- 
rally is of a dormant nature, but in warm weather they may 
be seen moving rapidly up the stems of the plants. Fumi- 
gating has no observable effect on these insects ; therefore, 
as soon as they appear, recourse must be had to other means. 
The liquid made from the following receipt is death to any 
of the Cocus tribe : Take two pounds of strong soap, one 
pound of flour of sulphur, one pound of leaf tobacco, one 
and a half ounce of nux vomica, with a tablespoonful of 
turpentine, which boil in four gallons of river water to three; 
then set aside to cool. "When boiling, stir it well with a 
stick, continuing to do so until it is reduced as above. In 
this liquor immerse the whole plant, drawing it to and fro 
gently, that the liquor may penetrate everywhere. This 
done, lay the plant on its side, until it begins to dry, then 
syringe well with clean water, aud put it in its respective sta- 
tion. Where a collection of plants is free from any insects 
of the kind, every plant that is introduced ought to be mi- 
nutely scrutinized, that the unclean may be kept from the 
clean : the above insects will feed almost on any plant, but 
indulges on Grdsulas, any of the bristly Cactus, Gardenias, 
and in fact whatever is in the way. 

Corns , or brown scaly insect, is frequently 

found on many plants, but we never could perceive that it 
does any other material injury than soiling them. We have 
always observed, that it is found in winter to abound in 
those situations which are most excluded from air; therefore 
is of less importance than the other species, which eat and 
corrode the leaves of tender plants. A washing with strong 
soapsuds will destroy them, or the above liquid will do it 
more effectually. Tie a piece of sponge on the end of a small 
stick, and scrub every leaf, stem and crevice. Fumigating 
destroys the larva? of this species. 

Cocus , or small white scaly insect, which 

generally infests Cyras, A'crium, Oleas, and Acacias, <v.c, 
may be destroyed by washing as above with a sponge, and 
a strong decoction of tobacco, using the liquid about the 
warmth of 100°. Being thus heated, it irritates the insect, 



January.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF CLEANSING, ETC. 139 

when, by easing itself from its bed, the fluid passes under 
it, and causes immediate death. If it is not thus irritated, 
it adheres so closely to the foliage that it will keep you at 
defiance. The under or dark side of the leaves is its resi- 
dence j and we have observed a plant in a house where there 
was only light on one side, with the dark side literally 
covered, while the light side was clean. So much for having 
houses with plenty of light. The effects of this insect are 
of a corroding nature, extracting all the juice from the leaf; 
and where they have got to the extremity, the foliage is 
completely yellow, and of a decayed appearance. 

Corns , or turtle insect. We have never ob- 
served this insect arrive to any extent. It is the largest of 
any known among us, and very like a turtle in minia- 
ture. On lifting it from the wood, to which it generally 
adheres, there appear to be hundreds of eggs under it, but 
fumigating completely destroys the larvge. In our opinion, 
this turtle insect is no other than the old female of the 
brown scaly insect, which swells to a large size befoi-e de- 
positing its eggs. We have frequently observed the insect 
dead in this enlarged state, and question if this be not the 
last stage of its transmigration. The male insect is winged, 
and very active in its movements. 

Where bulbous roots, such as Hyacinths, Jonquils, Ixias, 
Lachendllas, &c, are required to be early in flower, they 
may, during this month, be put in the front of the hot- 
house and watered freely till they bloom, when they may be 
taken to the green-house or parlour. 

Azaleas, Rhododendron Roses, and some other plants, do 
admirably to force ; and where there is a large stock, a few 
should be brought into early bloom with the heat of this 
department. 



OF CLEANSING PLANTS, HOUSE, ETC. 

This subject ought to be kept constantly in view. How- 
ever correctly everything else may be executed, without 
that adorning beauty, cleanliness, all will appear only half 
done. Therefore let all the dead leaves be picked off every 
day, the dust and other litter swept out of the house, and, 
when necessary, the house washed, which will be at least 



140 HOT-HOUSE. [February. 

once a week. That the foliage of the plants may always 
appear fresh, syringe them every morning, when there is the 
appearance of sun. At present, this will in a great measure 
keep down the insects, and will prove a bane to the red 
spider. 

Tie up neatly with stakes and threads of Russia mat all 
the straggling growing plants • let the stakes be proportion- 
ate to the plants, and never longer, except they are climbing 
sorts. Do not tie the branches in bundles, but singly and 
neatly, imitating nature as much as possible. If any of the 
plants are affected with the Oocus insect, let them be cleansed 
according to the plan already mentioned, taking particular 
care also in washing the stakes to which they had been pre- 
viously tied, and burning all the old tyings, which contain 
the larvae of the insect in many instances, especially of 
Cocks hesperichts. It is premised^ when any of these things 
are done, that they will be well done, and not half doing, 
and always doing. Cleanliness, in every respect, promotes 
a pure air, which is congenial to vegetation, and will, with 
other attentions, always assume a healthful and vigorous ap- 
pearance in the house. 



FEBRUARY. 

In the early part of this month, the weather generally is 
very cold and changeable in the Middle States, and strict 
attention, with the greatest caution, will require to be paid 
to the management of the hot-house. Most of the tropical 
plants commence an active state of vegetation ; and, if 
checked by temperature or otherwise, they will not recover 
until midsummer. The thermometer may be kept two or 
three degrees higher with fire heat than last month : the sun 
will be more powerful, and this will, in a great degree, in- 
crease the vigour of the plants. Air may be admitted when 
the thermometer rises to 75° or 80°, not allowing it to rise 
higher than the latter. In giving air, let it be done by the 
top sashes. It is improper to give it in any way to cause a 
current, for the external air is yet very cold, although the 



February.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF INSECTS, ETC. 141 

sun is more powerful. An inch or two on a few of the sashes, 
as has been previously observed, will be effectual in keeping 
the temperature low enough. 

With regard to firing, what was said last month may 
suffice for this. Always recollect that it is nioro preferable to 
keep out the cold than to put it out. It will frequently 
happen in the time of intense frost that the weather is dull. 
In such cases, fire in a small degree is requisite all day. 

Heavy snows ought never to be allowed to remain on the 
shutters while they are on the house. If the snow lies on 
the sashes one day, the internal heat will dissolve some of it; 
night coming on, will freeze it to the wood-work, when it 
will become a solid mass, and frequently cannot be separated 
without much damage. If allowed to remain on for two days, 
the plants are very much weakened and the foliage discoloured. 
Therefore, let the snow be cleared off instantly, that no incon- 
venience may take place. 

It will be observed that plants absorb more water this 
month than last. The quantity given will require to be in- 
creased, according to the increase of vegetation and the ad- 
vancement of the season ; but never give it uutil the soil 
begins to dry, and then in such proportion as will reach the 
bottom of the pot. The best time to water is after the sun 
has got on the house in the morning, observing all the di- 
rections given in January. 



OP INSECTS, ETC. 

Perhaps sufficient observations were given under this head 
last month ; but the importance of keeping the disagreea- 
ble visiters out of the house constrains us to make a few 
more remarks. Man cannot be too frequently guarded 
against his foes, more especially when they are summoning 
all their forces, and no profession has more than that of the 
Horticulturist. Let a strict examination be made about the 
end of the month for the red spider ; they will be in operation 
some weeks before their depredations are observed on the 
foliage. The under side of the leaf is their resort in the first 
instance, and on such plants as have been already mentioned. 

Observe daily the young shoots, in case the green fly be- 



142 hot-house — of repotting PLANTS. [February* 

comes numerous. They give the foliage a very disagreeable 
appearance, and it is too often intolerable, before their career 
is arrested. It also takes a stronger fumigation,, which has 
frequently to be repeated the following day to the same de- 
gree, much to the injury of many of the plants, and adding 
to the disagreeableness of the continued vapour in the house. 



of repotting plants. 

About the end of the month, some of the plants of Cur- 
cuma Araomum Kxmpftrut, Alpina, Pltrynium, C'dnna, 
Zingiber, Hcdycliium, and others that are on the dry shelf, 
will be offering to grow. Let them be taken out of their pots, 
some of their weakest shoots or tubers taken off, and the 
strong ones repotted : give gentle waterings until they grow 
freely, then give in abundance. (Soil No. 17.) 

Dion sea mucijnda, or Venus's fly-trap, grows best in the 
hot-house, and will, about the end of the month, stand in 
need of being repotted. This plant is very seldom grown in 
any degree of perfection, having been always considered a 
delicate plant in collections. Take it out of the pot just be- 
fore beginning to grow afresh, and divested of all the soil, 
leaving only a few of the young roots (it is a bulb, and will 
receive no injury by so doing), put it in new soil; when 
potted, place the pot in a saucer with one inch of water in it; 
giving a fresh supply every other day ; this being repeated 
every year, it will grow, flower and seed in perfection. (Soil 
No. 5.) 

Gesnerias, if in small pots, give larger as they advance in 
growth. This genus requires to have plenty of pot-room to 
make them flower well. G. oblongata, G. Zebrina, and G. 
Sellburii ought to have a situation in every hot-house. They 
are remarkable for their many brilliant crimson flowers, and 
continue in flower for a length of time. "When the bulbs 
begin to push, shake them out of the earth, and repot them 
into smaller pots; and, as soon as the roots reach the side of 
the earth, which will be in about one month, put them in 
larger pots, and continue to do so until flowering, which will 
be about the first of June, observing always to keep the ball 
of earth entire. G. Doiajldsii, G. r id ilia, G. acaitlis, and 
some others, are all well worth attention. (Soil No. 11.) 



February.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF CLEANSING, ETC. 143 

Gloridsas must be repotted in the beginning of this month ; 
G. sv/pirba is the most beautiful and curious. The crown 
of the roots ought to be planted one and a half inch deep, 
taking care not to break them. Do not water much until 
they begin to grow. The earth must not have much water. 
As the plants grow, they will require a more liberal supply ; 
yet it is necessary, at all times, to be moderate in giving it. 
If well treated, the superb flowers will appear in June or 
July. (Soil No. 12.) 

Gloxinias are beautiful herbaceous plants, with large showy 
flowers, requiring soil and treatment similar to (Gesneria). 
G. speciosa, dark blue, G. specidsa-pdlltda, pale lilac ; G. 
Candida, pure white, G. grandiflora, very large light blue, 
rubra, red; Cerina, pink and white; maxima, lilac and 
white, Lennigii, rose and white; and Teuderii, rose, white 
and violet, are 'the finest, although several of the other spe- 
cies are very interesting. 



OF CLEANSING PLANTS, HOUSE, ETC. 

With regard to cleaning the plants, sprinkling or syring- 
ing is at all times, to a greater or less degree, necessary. 
The plants will, in this compartment, be in their first stage 
of growth, and, if dust or foulness be permitted to lodge on 
their foliage, the pores will be obstructed, the plants will 
become unhealthy, and the growth of insects increased. 

Let all moss, litter, decayed leaves or weeds, be cleared 
out of the house, the earth in the pots stirred up with a round 
pointed stick, and fresh earth given where required, that the 
air may operate therein freely. 

The house ought always to be sprinkled before being 
swept, to prevent the dust rising. 

Attend to tl» bulbous roots as directed last month, such 
as Hi/acinths, Narcissus, &c. 



144 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [March. 



MARCH. 

If this department has heen regularly attended to, the 
plants will be in a fresh healthy state. Where there is any 
sickly appearance, heat has been deficient, or insects of a de- 
structive character are preying upon the plants. Too much 
water at the root frequently causes the foliage to become 
yellow. Regular syringing must be continued in the morn- 
ing, and it is highly necessary that the water that is used 
should be of the same temperature as the house ; and at all 
times, whatever water is given to the roots, the same must 
be observed. For airing, see last month, observing, as the 
season advances, to increase the quantity. 

Continue to fumigate when any of the Green-fly appears 
(see January for directions), and where there are any of the 
plants infected with the white scaly insect, clean them as 
there directed. If overlooked for a few months, they will 
be increased tenfold. Very frequently, where there are only 
a few, they are neglected until the plant is overrun with them, 
and then it may be said it is impossible to dislodge them 
entirely. Clear off all decayed leaves from the plants which 
will have made fresh shoots, for the decayed leaves very 
much disfigure the whole collection. We would not have 
repeated this observation if it was not an essential point, and 
one which is so frequently neglected. 



OF REPOTTING PLANTS. 

Many of the young plants that are growing freely, and 
where they may be desired to grow to a large size, should be 
frequently repotted to encourage their growth. Gesneria, 
Gloxinia, and others previously mentioned, i^Bst have larger 
pots, as they require it. Flowering bulbs of A man// 7 is may 
be brought into the heat to make them bloom early; before 
they begin to grow, divest them of the old soil, and put 
them into fresh : this is particularly necessary, when the 
bulbs are already in large pots. By thus renewing the soil, 
the pots can be used much smaller : they require plenty of 
drainage in the pot, and agree best with soil No. 12. 



April] HOT-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 145 

Where plants of the dwarf Musas are intended to be 
grown for fruiting, they must have particular attention in 
repotting as they grow; about the first of the month will be 
a proper time to begin : copious waterings are daily required 
when they are in a growing state. Their soil is No. 12, with 
one portion more manure. For farther detail, see May. 



APRIL. 



Where the hot-house has been properly conducted, the 
plants generally will have a vigorous and healthful aspect. 
An error frequently arises in the conducting of these de- 
partments, by inexperienced operators, being ambitious of 
outstripping their competitors. They keep the house in a 
very high temperature, and admit little or no air. Where 
such a mode has been pursued, the plants will have got over 
their first growth, and the foliage looks yellow and decaying ; 
thus throwing the plants into a state of inactivity, when na- 
ture herself commences her most active movements. The 
temperature should not be under 55° in the night, nor much 
above 75° during the day, without admitting a little air by 
the top-lights. It will not do yet to give air by the front 
sashes, the wind being cool, and a current in the house 
would be hurtful. The sun is not so powerful, but the heat 
can be kept down by the air given from above. 

Hot-house or tropical plants will not materially suffer with 
100° of sun-heat, provided they are not very near the glass; 
but such an extreme would be injurious to practise. 



REPOTTING. 

Where there is a general assortment of the Cactae tribe, 
and kept in this department, now is the proper period to 
give them a general repotting. Of all the tropical floral 
productions, there is not a family more curious, grotesque, 
interesting, and beautiful than this ; and, what still more 
enhances their real value, they are in this country of the 

13 



146 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

easiest culture ; it is with pleasure that we recommend a 
few of the grand and the novel, which are faithfully de- 
scribed in the general list given next month. The bottom of 
every pot must be covered with an inch of pot-shreds, or 
rough gravel for drainage. 



MAY, 



Very few directions for this department remain to be 
given ; except for shifting plants, and a few observations on 
those that are most desirable for the hot-house ; which we 
will do in this month, considering May and June the best 
months of the year for that operation. 

The days and nights will be very mild by this time, and 
the sashes in every favourable day should be opened, both in 
front and top, so that the plants may be inured to the open 
air, which they will be exposed to by the end of the month. 
Leave in the beginning of the month the top sashes a little 
open every mild night, and gradually, as the heat increases, 
leave the front sashes and doors open. Continue to syringe 
them at least every alternate night, and, if possible, every 
night ; and give them all, according to their respective wants, 
liberal supplies of water every day. Absorption among hot- 
house plants is as great during this month as in any period 
of the year. 



OF RErOTTING PLANTS, ETC. 

It is our candid opinion that this and next month arc the 
best periods for shifting or repotting all or most of hot-house 
plants; the end of August being the time always adopted 
around Philadelphia for that operation (and then they are 
done indiscriminately). "We will assign a few reasons for our 
practice. 

First, that it is not congenial to the nature of these plants 
to have their roots surrounded with fresh soil when they are 
becoming inactive ; secondly, that there is not a sufficiency 



May.] hot-house — op repotting, etc. 147 

of heat naturally to quicken them to an active state when 
they are encouraged ; and, thirdly, being thus in new soil 
while dormant, they have a yellow and sickly aspect until 
they begin to grow ; and the foliage, thus deprived of its 
natural vigour, will not appear so healthful again : whereas, 
if they are shifted or repotted in this or next month, at 
which season they are between two stages of growth, 
they immediately, on receiving fresh assistance, and by the 
increasing heat of the summer, make new growths, are 
perfectly ripened before the approach of winter, and never 
lose that vernal appearance they have attained. These are 
our reasons, acquired from a close practice and observation, 
and are not influenced by the doings of others which are so 
much aside. No practical operator especially, nor, in fact, 
any individual, ought to be governed by custom in regard 
to the treatment of planrs, without having any idea as to why 
and wherefore, founded on the principles of nature, and 
governed by her unerring results. 

As many are desirous of having a knowledge of plants 
before they order them, and likewise which are the finest 
flowerers and their general character, especially those who 
are at a great distance, and seldom have the privilege of 
seeing what is most desirable, our descriptions will be limit- 
ed, but still will convey some accurate idea of the article 
described. 

Acacias. — Several of these are desirable in the hot-house 
for the grandeur of their foliage, beauty of flower, and a few 
of them as specimens of valuable medicinal plants. A. 
Houstoni, now Anncsleia Houstoni, is one of the most 
magnificent of the Mimosa tribe, blooming from August to 
November in large terminal spikes of a crimson colour, 
stamens very long and beautiful, leaves bipinnated in pairs. 
A. grandifldra, likewise given to Anncsleia, and similar to 
the former in colour, has very large compound bipinnate 
leaves, with from twenty to forty pairs. A. Catechu, flowers 
yellow, wood spiny, leaves bipinnated, about ten pairs. The 
inner wood of this tree is of a brown colour, from which the 
Catechu used in medicine is prepared. It is disputed 
whether A. vera or A. ardbica produces the gum Arabic. 
We are inclined to think it is the latter, which grows prin- 
cipally on the Atlas mountains. The gum exudes spon- 
taneously from the bark of the tree in a soft half fluid state. 



148 HOT-HOUSE — OP KEPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

There are many others of this genus belonging to the hot- 
house, but being shy in flowering, are not generally esteemed. 
Most of the flowers have the appearance of yellow balls of 
down, and are hermaphrodite. The pots should all be well 
drained. (Soil No. 1.)* 

JBschynanthus, about four species, among which jE. 
ffrandijiorus, JE. Boscanus, dark velvet purple and bright 
scarlet, and JE. parasiticus are very deserving of culture ; 
they have thick fleshy foliage, are of slender growth, pro- 
ducing orange-coloured tubular flowers in clusters, and require 
treatment similar to the wax-plant. (Soil No. 2.) 

Ardisias, about eighteen species. Plants highly esteemed 
for the beauty of their foliage, flowers, and berries. The 
most popular in our collections is A. crenuldta. It has rose- 
coloured star-like flowers, in terminal panicles, and produces 
beautiful small red berries, which continue until other ber- 
ries are produced the following year; and frequently there 
may be seen on one plant the berries of three successive 
years, thus being a very ornamental plant and very desira- 
ble. It is vulgarly called the dwarf ever-bearing cherry. It 
will keep in a good green-house, but not grow freely. A. 
solanacca has large oblong leaves, narrowed at each end, and 
bears purple berries ; A. elegans has entire, oblong, shiniug 
leaves; A. umbellata, once A. littordlis, is also a fine plant 
for an abundance of flower and beauty of foliage. The 
flowers are pink, in large decompound panicles. 

AUamanda, a family of half climbing plants, a little as- 
similated to the oleander, with large chrome-yellow blossoms, 
requiring plenty of pot-room and good culture to flower well. 
A. cathartica and A. schottii we consider the finest. (Use 
soil No. 13.) 

Aphelanda cristata, a new plant with a brilliant spike of 
crested flowers about six inches long crowning the plant. 
(Use soil No. 9.) 

Areca, Cabbage-tree, ten species. They are a kind of 
palms, with large pinnated leaves, or properly fronds. In 
their indigenous state they are from six to forty feet high, 
but in the hot-house they seldom exceed twenty feet. A. 
catechu is used in medicine. A. olerdcea is cultivated cxten- 

* These numbers refer to the table of soils at the end of the 
work. 



May.~\ noT-HousE — of repotting, etc. 149 

sively in the West Indies, and the tender part of the top 
is eaten by the natives. A montand is most frequent in 
collections. There is no particular beauty in the flowers. 
They are all easily grown, if plenty of heat be given. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Aristoldchias, Birth-wort. There are several of these be- 
longing to the hot-house, but none of them deserving 
particular observation, except A. Iccbibsa and A. brasiliensis. 
The leaves are reniform, roundish, cordate, and amplexicaule; 
the flower or corolla is of a curious construction, being in- 
curved, and at the base swelled or saccate, with a large lip, 
and all beautifully spotted ; colour greenish brown. They 
are climbing plants, and require a strong heat. (Soil No. 9.) 

Astrapa-as, three species. A. Wallichii is a celebrated 
plant in Europe, and is frequently met with in our collec- 
tions. It has a profusion of scarlet unibellated flowers, with 
an involucre ; has twenty-five stamens united into a tube, 
bearing the corolla with five petals ; leaves roundish, cordate, 
acuminate, very large, with persistent, ovate wavy stipules. 
The plant is of easy culture, and grows freely, wood very 
strong. (Soil No. 12.) 

Bambiims, Bamboo-cane, two species. Plants of very 
strong growth, and are used in the East Indies, where they 
are indigenous, for every purpose in the construction of huts, 
for furniture both domestic and rural, for fences, boats, boxes, 
paper, &c. It is frequently used as pipes to convey water. 
The species thus useful is B. arundindcea, which grows to 
a great height. We do not mention it as interesting in 
beauty, but as a valuable plant for the many useful purposes 
to which it is applied. It requires to be kept wet. (Soil 
No. 15.) 

Banisterias, a genus of about fourteen climbing evergreen 
plants. Three of them are esteemed, B. fulijeus, yellow 
flowers in racemose spikes, leaves subovate and downy be- 
neath. B. ckrisophylla has beautiful foliage, as if covered 
with a shining gold-coloured dust ; leaves large, oblong, acute. 
B. spl&ndens, flowers in spikes of a yellow colour; foliage 
large and silvery -like ; the pots should be well drained. (Soil 
No. 9.) 

Barrintjtbnias, two species. B. specibsa has produced a 
great excitement among cultivators, and is one of the hand- 
somest plants produced within the tropics. The leaves are 

13* 



150 HOT-HOUSE — OF KEPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

large, oblong, acute, shining, with fleshy nerves, tinged with 
red ; the flowers are large, full of stamens with four petals, 
opens in the evening and fades at sunrise • colour purple and 
white; grows freely in strong heat. (Soil No. 9.) 

Beaumdntias are strong-growing, climbing plants, with 
large foliage. B. grandljiura is said to have beautiful large 
white flowers approaching the Oleander. (Soil No. 1*2.) 

B/efias, a genus of about eight species, all beautiful flow- 
ering plants. B. TankcrviUke is most superb, a small plant, 
now (Jan.) in bloom, has upward of fifty full-blown flowers, 
besides many buds — they are brown, white, and purple, and 
about two inches in diameter. When out of flower, and the 
roots become dormant, place the pots in a shady situation ; 
allow the soil to become dry, until the roots begin to grow : 
as soon as this is observed, repot the plants and expose them 
fully to the sun, giving plenty of water while growing. B. 
Shepherdii is a fine pink, and requires similar treatment. 
(Soil No. 13.) 

Biijnonla, a very beautiful family of climbing plants, some 
of them gorgeously covered with bloom half of the year. B. 
venusta has large clusters of bright orange-coloured flowers in 
great profusion from December to May. B. picta, violet 
and lilac-coloured striped flowers. B. chamberlana, yellow 
flowers with rich foliage. 

They should be planted into large pots or tubs, of if prac- 
ticable, into the ground, in the interior of the house, giving 
them plenty of space to climb, using Soil No. 9. 

Brunfelsias, very fine, free-flowering plants, with white, 
yellowish, or purple flowers. B. grandijlbva blooms freely, 
and is finely scented — a plant before me now (28th of Jan.) 
only one foot high, has six full expanded flowers upon it, 
each fully two inches in diameter. (Soil No. 9.) 

Buonapartea jiincea, a very curious low-growing plant, 
with long narrow, recurved, round leaves ; with spikes of 
small green flowers. There does appear to be three distinct 
varieties in cultivation, but are rarely attainable. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Buddlea inadagascariemis blooms profusely during win- 
ter in spikes of orange-coloured flowers, of a kind of honey 
fragrance — the plant is strong-growing, and of the easiest 
culture. (Soil No. 11.) 

Ca/at/tea zcbrina, frequently known as mardnta zcbrina ; 



Map.} HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. 151 

it is a plant unique in appearance, having large elongated 
ovate leaves, beautifully striped with green and dark 
purple, and called the Zebra plant. It has light blue flowers 
in ovate spikes, about the size of large pine cones. It is 
an herbaceous plant ; but in the warmest part of the hot- 
house retains its splendid foliage ; requires a very liberal 
supply of water, and ought to be in every collection. (Soil 
No. 11.) 

Cdnnas, about thirty species, several of them deserving 
cultivation both for flower and foliage ; they are principally 
natives of the West Indies, and might all be easily obtained. 
The finest are C. giydntea, has large leaves and orange flow- 
ers ; C. limbdta, flowers scarlet and yellow ; C. discolor, has 
large cordate, acuminate leaves of a crimson colour, the flowers 
are scarlet; C. tridijfbra, has large crimson nodding flowers, 
very different from any of the others, and the finest of the 
genus. They all, while in a growing state, require a liberal 
supply of water ; and being herbaceous plants, watering ought 
to be given up about the first of November, and renewed in 
February, thus giving them a cessation which they require to 
flower freely; but when water is constantly given, which is 
the general plan in our collections, they continue to push 
weak shoots and few flowers. (Soil No. 12.) 

Cactus. — This extensive genus is interesting, and varied 
in character and habit ; it is now divided into seven distinct 
genera, according to their natural appearance and disposition. 
We will describe a few of each genus, none of which going 
under the name of Cactus, we will give them the six follow- 
ing, premising that the time is not far distant when this 
family will be successfully cultivated in every parlour-window, 
and the whole tribe will be sought for with more avidity than 
any other class of plants that have ever been brought to 
notice, not even excepting the Rose. They require a dry 
heat, and will grow either in town or country, and are com- 
pletely adapted for the denizen amateur, and will afford more 
beauty and interesting display than can be imagined until 
witnessed. 

Mamill arias, about seventy species, and are those which 
are covered with roundish bearded tubercles, and with small 
red and white flowers. M. coccinea, M. simplex, M. pusiUa, 
31. cdnica, 31. stellata, and M. acanthbphlegma, are good 



152 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

species, and will do well with water once a week during sum- 
mer. (Soil No. 15.) 

Melocdctus, seven species, and are those that are roundish 
with deep and many angles, with spines in clusters on the 
top of the angle. M. communis is the Turk's cap, named 
from having an ovate conate crown upon the top, from which 
proceed the small red flowers. M. tnacrdnthus has large 
spines; M. pyramiddlis is a conical growing species. These 
require the same treatment as the last. (Soil No. 15.) 

Echinocdctus, a great number of species ; are those that 
have many deep angles, and have a remarkable swelling with 
each parcel of spines ; E. gibbdsus, E. crisjxltus, E. recurvus, 
E. roddnthia, and E. scopct, are curious in appearance, with 
small white and purple flowers. These three genera in most 
collections are not well known specifically, but it is easy to 
discriminate with which genus they are connected. (Soil 
No. 15.) 

Cereus. — This is the most magnificent genus with regard 
to the magnitude and beauty of the flowers, but not so 
closely allied in character. It takes in all those of a trail- 
ing or erect growing habit, having spines in clusters, solitary, 
or spineless. C. semh's is the celebrated monkey cactus. C. 
peruvtdnus and C. heptagbtvas grow very erect, and to the 
height of thirty or forty feet in Peru and Mexico, where 
they plant them close together as fences, and they are in a 
few years impenetrable. C. fiagelliformis is a well-known 
creeping flowering species, has ten angles ; will keep in a good 
green-house, and produce in May and June a great number 
of blooms. The petals are of a fine pink and red colour ; the 
tube of the flower is long, and will stand a few days in per- 
fection, when others come out successively for the space of 
two months, and during their continuance make a brilliant 
appearance. G. grand ijivr us is the celebrated " Night- 
blooming Cereus." The flowers are very large, beautiful 
and sweet-scented. They begin to open about sundown, and 
are fully expanded about eleven o'clock. The corolla, or 
rather calyx, is from seven to ten inches in diameter, the 
outside of which is a brown, and the inside a fine straw yel- 
low colour ; the petals are of the purest white, with the stamens 
surrounding the stile in the centre of the flower, which add 
to its lustre, and make it appear like a bright star. Its scent 
is agreeable, and perfumes the air to a considerable distance ; 



May.~] HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. 153 

but these beauties are of momentary duration. By sunrise 
they fade, and hang down quite decayed, and never open 
again.* One of these ought to be in every collection, and, 
if trained up a naked wall, will not occupy much room, and 
grow and flower profusely. C. Mdllisoni and G Scottii are 
nearly alike, and have beautiful scarlet flowers : it has been 
gratuitously (to say the least of it) called "The Scarlet 
Night-blooming Cereus." G. sjieciossissimus has most beau- 
tiful large flowers, about six inches in diameter ; the outside 
petals are a bright scarlet, those of the inside a fine light 
purple. One flower lasts a few days, and a large plant will 
produce every year from ten to fifty flowers, and blooming 
from May to August. G. Maynardii has very large orange- 
scarlet flowers, about nine inches in diameter, blooming dur- 
ing the day. G. Fielderii is of a brilliant bluish violet 
colour, even more of the peculiarly blue tints so greatly ad- 
mired in speciossissimus. G triangiddris has the largest 
flower of the Gactese family ; the bloom is of a cream colour, 
and about one foot in diameter. In its indigenous state it 
produces a fine fruit called " Strawberry Pear," and is much 
esteemed in the West Indies as being slightly acid, and, at 
the same time, sweet, pleasant, and cooling. 

Epiphyllums are those species of the Cacteae family which 
have flat shoots, or leaves without spines; from the edges 
of those leaves the flowers are produced. They are exten- 
sively cultivated for their profusion of bloom, and are 
frequently grafted on Cereus triangularis and jPereskia, 
which greatly promotes their growth, and prevents them 
from so easily damping off by over-watering. The original 
species are E. speciosum, pink; E. phylantho\des or Hook- 
erii, white; E. aldtum, white; E. tmncdtum, scarlet; 
flowers tubular, from two to three inches in diameter. The 
plant is of a very dwarf growth, and much branched ; when 
in bloom, it is quite a picture, and rendered more beautiful 
when grafted. There are three varieties of truncdtum, dif- 
fering from it in colour, or rather shades of colour : Alten- 
steinii, rosy red; violacea, very beautiful violet and white; 

* They may be preserved if cut off when in perfection, and put in 
spirits of wine, in a glass vase, made air tight. A plant flowered 
in our collection in May, 1830, at 12 o'clock at noon — the only in- 
stance of the kind we ever heard of. 



154 HOT-HOUSE — OP REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

rubevs, bright red. E. Achermania has a magnificent large 
crimson flower. Besides these, there are many superb 
hybrid varieties, vieing with any of the originals. Among 
them are the following: E. crinitum, large brilliant crim- 
son, quite new, of fine habit ; E.fuhjens, large violet crimson 
firmly formed flowers, very desirable ; E. Grahamii, very 
distinct, of a brilliant rose colour ; E. specibsa major, large 
delicate rose. E. Hibbertii, E. Hobdii, E. Boydii, E. De 
vduxiij E. quill arditt it, E. Eeastii, E. Vdndesii, E. Mayfly, 
E. elegantissima, and E. Naiphrii, and no doubt many 
other varieties and sub-varieties, will be continually making 
their appearance. All the Epiphyllum tribe require a very 
rich open soil, not of too sandy a nature, as they thereby 
grow to wood, and bloom but sparingly — give plenty of 
drainage. (Soil No. 18.) 

Opiintias, upwards of fifty "species, and are those whose 
branches are in thick joints, flat, oblong, or ovate ; spines 
solitary or in clusters. Some of the plants are very desirable 
for their singular appearance, and some of them, particularly 
0. cochin ill if era, are valuable for feeding the Cochineal 
insect. 0. microdasys, O. ferdx, 0. lacte-xpina, 0. sericcd, 
and some others, are beautiful plants, and will grow in any 
kind of soil, but No 2 will suit them best. 

Pereskias. — About four species, and those that arc of a 
shrubby nature, producing leaves ; P. aadcdta bears a fruit 
called " Barbadoes gooseberry." The flowers are very small 
and simple, spines about half an inch long, leaves fleshy and 
elliptical. (Soil No. 2.) 

The whole of the plants in the family of Gactece require 
very little water in winter, and delight in a dry, warm situa- 
tion. They do not agree with very frequent repotting ; once 
a year to young plants, and in two or three to those that are 
established, with the exception of the large, free-flowering 
species, which should be repotted once in two years, and 
never be allowed to shrink for want of moisture. 

The operation of grafting is very simple, merely requir- 
ing an incision to be made, and fitting in it a fresh cutting 
of another kind, holding the cutting stationary in the inci- 
sion half a minute, till the juices of the two adhere together, 
when it may be said the union is effected, and, in a few 
weeks, the new branches will grow freely. We have seen 



MayJ] hot-house — op repotting, etc. 155 

the Mammillaria tribe growing neatly upon the triangularis, 
and other species of the cereus. 

Ceropegia elegdns is the only species of any merit : it is 
a thin-growing climbing plant, producing a great profusion 
of very curious flowers of a greenish colour, spotted with 
brown ; the interior and tips of the corolla are set with hairs 
— it is of very easy culture. (Soil No. 7.) 

Caryota. — A genus of palms. C. tiretis is an admired 
species, pi'oduces flowers in long pendulous spikes, which 
are succeeded by strings of succulent globular berries. In 
its native state it produces a sweet liquor in large quantities, 
and no stronger than water. (Soil No. 12.) 

Caryophyllus aromdticus is the clove tree of commerce. 
The whole plant is aromatic, and closely allied to Myrtus; 
the flowers are in loose panicles, the leaves oblong, acumi- 
nate, entire. It is a fine evergreen. Pots must be well 
drained. (Soil No. 9.) 

Centradenia rosea. — A unique-looking plant, with a fine 
reddish purple foliage, which in the winter season is pro- 
fusely covered with delicate rosy pink flowers. The plant 
is of dwarf habit, and of the easiest culture. Use soil 
No. 2. 

Cerberas. — About twelve species of strong-growing trees, 
full of poisonous juice. C. thevetia is an elegant plant, 
with acuminate leaves, and large, nodding, yellow, solitary, 
fragrant flowers, proceeding from the axil ; O. ahouai, pro- 
duces a nut which is deadly poison. C. oddllam, once C. 
mdnghas, has large star-like flowers, white, shaded with red. 
They are principally East India plants, and require great 
heat. (Soil No. 17.) 

Chrodendrum. — This genus contains some very beautiful 
and fragrant plants. C frdgrans Jiore pleno has a very 
beautiful head of double Avhite sweet-scented flowers, and 
does very well as a green-house plant. C. squamdtum has 
very showy scarlet flowers. C. spec iosissi mum, the plant so 
glaringly figured in some of the English periodicals, is the 
same as C. squamdtum, a plant which has been grown in this 
vicinity fifteen or twenty years. (Soil No. 2.) 

Goffha Ardbka. — It produces the celebrated coffee, and 
is a plant universally known in our collections, and of easy 
culture. The leaves are opposite, oblong, wavy and shin- 



156 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

ing, the flowers white, of a grateful odour, but of short 
duration. (Soil No. 17.) 

C»mbretums. — Nine species of beautiful flowering climb- 
ing plants, standing in very high estimation. The leaves 
of the principal part of them are ovate, acute, flowers small, 
but on large branches, the flowers all coming out on one 
side of the branch. They have a magnificent effect. C. 
elegans, red; C. furmbsum, red and yellow; C. ptstchil&wni, 
scarlet; C. combsum, have crimson flowers in tufts; C. pur- 
pureum is the most splendid of the genus. It was first 
cultivated in 1818, and so much admired that the whole of 
the species, as soon as introduced, was extravagantly bought 
up ; and none of them has retained their character, except 
C purpiireum, which is now called Poivrea coccinea. The 
flowers are bright scarlet, in large branches, blooming pro- 
fusely from April to September, and flower best in a pot. 
When planted in the ground, it grows too much to wood, 
carrying a few flowers. This plant ought to be in every hot- 
house. (Soil No. 13.) 

Cdryphas (Large fan Palm), five species of the most 
noble and magnificent of palms. C. ambrai-uliff.ru, the 
fronds or leaves are palmate. In Ceylon, where the tree is 
indigenous, they are frequently found fifteen feet wide and 
twenty feet long. Knox says they will cover from fifteen 
to twenty men, and, when dried, will fold up in the shape 
of a rod, and can be easily carried about, and serve to protect 
them from the scorching sun. C. taftera, now Taftera 
BenyaUnsis, being stronger, is of great utility for covering 
houses. They do not grow to such immense extent in 
artificial cultivation, but require large houses to grow them. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

Crinums, about one hundred species, chiefly stove bulbs, 
many of them beautiful. Those that are of great celebrity 
are C. embesceiis, pink; 0% scdbrum, crimson and white; 
C. amdbile, purple and white; the neck of the bulb of the 
latter is long, is easily distinguished by its purplish colour, 
and is unquestionably the finest of the genus. Several 
specimens of it are in our collections. Their flowers are in 
umbels, on a stalk about three feet high ; corolla funnel- 
shaped; petals recurved; nearly fifty flowers on each stem, 
and a good plant will produce three stems in one year. 
They require large pots to make them flower well, and, 



Hay.} hot-house — or repotting, etc. 157 

when growing, should he liberally supplied with water. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

Grotons. — About twenty-eight species, few of them de- 
serving cultivation ; but the genus is celebrated for its 
beautiful G. pictus, leaves oblong-lanceolate, variegated with 
yellow, and stained with red, flowers small green, or axillary 
spikes. C. variegatus, variety latifblia, is finer than the 
original variegatus ; the nerves in the leaves are yellow, and 
the leaves lanceolate, entire, and smooth. To make them 
grow freely, give them the warmest part of the hot-house, 
and drain the pots well. (Soil No. 13.) 

Cycas, four species, generally called Sago palm, as an 
English name. The plant from which Sago is extracted, 
belongs to another genus, (see Sdgns.) C. revoluta is a 
well-known palm, and will keep perfectly well in the green- 
house. We have seen a beautiful specimen of it which is 
kept every winter in the cellar; but those that are kept so 
cool in winter only grow every alternate year, while those 
that are kept in the hot-house grow every year, which shows 
that heat is their element. C. circindlis is a large-growing 
species; the fronds are much longer, but not so close and 
thick. C. glaiica is a fine species : the foliage is slightly 
glaucous. They require plenty of pot-room, are much in- 
fested with the small white scaly insect, and ought to be 
frequently examined and carefully washed as prescribed in 
January. (Soil No. 12.) 

Gyprftpidivm insigne is a very beautiful nepal species of 
this curious Ladies' Slipper plant. The flowers have a waxy 
appearance, and very much in the shape of an Indian shoe ; 
the colours are green and purple ; it likes a moist, half- 
shaded situation. (Soil No. 16.) 

Gyrtocercas reflexus, or Soya coriacea, a new dwarf wax- 
plant of magnificent appearance, either for foliage or bloom, 
which it produces in great profusion from the axils of almost 
every leaf; it is a native of Manilla; it grows freely in Soil 
No. 18. 

Dracaenas, Dragon-tree, about twelve species of Asiatic 
plants varied in character. D. Ferrea is plentiful in our 
collections, and will keep in the green-house ; but the foliage 
is not so well retained as when kept in the hot-house; the 
leaves are lanceolate, acute, of a dark crimson colour. D. 
termindlis, striped-leaved; D. fragrans, when in bloom, 

14 



158 HOT-HOUSE — OP REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

will scent the air for a considerable distance, leaves green 
and lanceolate. D. margindta is rare, yet it is to be seen 
in a few of our collections. D. striata is now Charlwobd'uc- 
stricta, flowers blush, and in loose panicles. D. Draco is ad- 
mired, and the most conspicuous of the genus. (Soil No. 11.) 

Erdntliemums, about ten species. E. pulchettum and E. 
bicolor are the finest of the genus ; the former is in our col- 
lections. Plenty of heat is indispensable to make it flower 
in perfection ; therefore it should have the warmest part of 
the house, and it will produce flowers of a fine blue colour 
from December to April. The flowers of the latter are 
white and dark purple, with a few brown spots in the white : 
blooms from April to August. Drain the pots well, and give 
the plants little sun during summer. (Soil No. 11.) 

Eugenias, about thirty species, esteemed for their hand- 
some evergreen foliage. This genus once contained a few 
celebrated species, which have been divided. (See Jam- 
bosa.) The Allspice tree, known as Myrfus Pimenta, is 
now E. Pimenta ; the leaves are ovate, lanceolate, and, when 
broken, have an agreeable scent. There are several varie- 
ties, all of the same spicy fragrance. The plant is in very 
few of our collections. E. fragrant is sweet-scented; the 
flowers are on axillary peduncles; leaves ovate, obtuse. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Euphorbia (spurge), a genus of plants disseminated over 
every quarter of the globe ; a few are beautiful, many gro- 
tescpie, and several of the most worthless weeds on the earth. 
There are about two hundred species, and from all of them, 
when probed, a thick milky fluid exudes. Those of the 
tropics are the most curious, and very similar in appearance 
to Cactus, but easily detected by the above perforation. 
There is a magnificent species in our collections, which was 
lately introduced from Mexico — (see Poinsetiiai). E. splen- 
dens flowers freely from December to May, and is of easy 
culture. E. fulgens, same as jaquiniifldra, is a plant of a 
slender willow-looking habit, but produces a profusion of 
flowers from the axil of each leaf, which renders it very 
showy. The flowers of the whole genus are apetalous, and 
the beauty of those descrihed is in a brilliant scarlet bractea, 

* In honour of Mr. Char] wood, an extensive seedsman of London, 
■who has made several botanical excursions on this continent. 



May.'] hot-house — or repotting, etc. 159 

which is very persistent. They must have plenty of pot- 
room. (Soil No. 9.) 

ErytJu-inas (Coral tree), a genus containing about thirty 
species of leguminose, scarlet-flowering plants. Several 
species are greatly esteemed for their beauty and profusion 
of flowers, which, in well-established plants, are produced 
in long spikes. E. coraUodendrum blooms magnificently 
in the "West Indies, but in our collections has never flowered. 
Perhaps if it were kept dry during its dormant season, which 
is from November to January, and when growing greatly 
encouraged, it might produce flowers. E. specibsa is a splen- 
did flower, leaves large, ternated, and prickly beneath ; 
stem prickly. E. pufasc&ns is valued for its large, peculiar 
brown pubescent leaves. E. princeps is quite a new species, 
and is represented as being the finest of all the Erythrinas, 
and exhibits its rich crimson flowers in great profusion ; to 
make them grow well and bloom freely, they require plenty 
of pot-room-; indeed, while in a growing state, they should 
be repotted every month. In regard to E. herhdcea, which 
is a native of the Carolinas, and frequently treated as a hot- 
house plant, it is our opinion that it would be more perfectly 
grown if planted about the first of the month in the garden ; 
and, when growing, if well supplied with water, it would 
flower from July to September. About the first of Novem- 
ber lift the roots and preserve them in half dry earth. E. 
laurifblia and E. cristagdlli are likewise often treated as 
hot-house plants, and in such situations they cast prema- 
turely their first flowers by the confined state of the air. 
They will keep in perfect preservation during winter in a 
dry cellar, half covered with earth, or entirely covered with 
half dry earth ; consequently, the best and easiest method 
of treatment is to plant them in the garden about the first 
of May, and, when growing, if the ground becomes dry, 
give them frequent waterings. They will flower profusely 
three or four times in the course of the summer. 

We freely recommend the last species to all our patrons, 
confident that it will give ample satisfaction, both in profu- 
sion of flower and beauty of colour. The soil they are to be 
planted into should be rich and well pulverized ; or, if they 
are kept in pots, they must be enlarged three or four times, 
when they are in a growing state, to make them flower per- 
fectly; otherwise they will be diminutive. (Soil No. 13.) 



160 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

Ficus, Fig-tree, a genus containing about fifty hot-house 
species, besides several that belong to the green-house : greatly 
admired for the beauty of their foliage. A few of them are 
deciduous, and all of the easiest culture. We have seen plants 
of F. eldstica hung in the back of the hot-house, without 
the smallest particle of earth, their only support being 
sprinklings of water every day. F. hrdssi and F. macro- 
phylla are the finest-looking species that have come under 
our observation ; the leaves of both are very large and shad- 
ing, occupying considerable space. In small collections, F. 
ind\ca and F. nit\da are desirable; F. reports is a climbing 
plant. (Soil No. 13.) 

Franc\scea , a new genus of plants from South America, 
containing about four species of profuse-blooming plants. 
F. Hopeana and F. lati folia are generally known ; the latter 
possesses all the combined fragrance of the jasmine and 
jonquil; the flowers are one inch in diameter, of a rich 
purple, fading to pure white, and blooms the whole winter. 
(Soil No. 9.) 

Gardenias, a genus containing about seventeen species, 
several of them very popular in our collections, going under 
the name of Cape Jasmine, which do well in the green- 
house (see May). The species requiring this department, 
and deserving attention, are G. campanuldta, of a soft woody 
nature, with ovate, acuminate leaves ; flowers of a straw 
colour, and solitary; G. amecna, the flowers are white, tinged 
with crimson, terminal and solitary, but seldom bloom ; G. 
costdta, admired for its beautiful ribbed foliage ; G. lUcida 
has a handsome, ovate, acuminate, shining foliage, flowers 
white and solitary; G. Sherbournii has large spotted flow- 
ers. G. Stanlcyana, flowers of a greenish white colour, nine 
inches long, spotted with brown ; they require to have the 
pots well drained. (Soil No. 13.) 

Geissomeria longijiora. This is a new genus, and closely 
allied to Rncllia. The species alluded to is a free flower, 
blooming from January to May, in close spikes of a scarlet 
colour, leaves opposite, ovate, elongate and shining ; the 
plants must be well drained, and in summer kept from the 
direct influence of the sun. (Soil No. 2.) 

Helicdnia braziliensis. This very splendid plant is nearly 
related to Strclitzia, and in splendour surpasses it. The 
brilliant scarlet sheath that envelops the flowers contrasts 
most admirably with its rich green leaves. Give plenty of 



Mai/.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. 161 

drainage to the pots, and, when the plants are growing, give 
a liberal stipply of water. (Soil No. 17.) 

Heliotrbpiums, about twelve species, of little merit, except 
H. peruvianum, H. intermedia, H. valitariana, pale bluish 
white ; H. ficur de Liege, represented as yellow, but is only 
a very dull white, with a faint yellow eye ; these are all 
very agreeably scented, especially the two former, which are 
universal favourites. (Soil No. 3.) 

Hibiscus. — This genus affords many fine species and varie- 
ties of plants for the hot-house, besides others for every de- 
partment of the garden. The most popular in our collec- 
tions of the hot-house is H. rbsa sinensis, with its varieties, 
which are magnificent, and flower profusely from February 
to September. The single or original species is also beauti- 
ful ; the varieties are H. rbsa sinensis riibro plenus, double 
red; H. r. s. cornea plenus, double salmon; H. r. s. varie- 
gatus, double striped; striped on the back of the outside 
petals ; H. r. s. flava plenus, or earned, double buff; H. r. 
s. liitea plenus, double yellow, or rather sulphur. The plants 
grow freely, and produce their flowers three or four inches 
in diameter, from the young wood ; the leaves are ovate, 
acuminate, smooth, entire at the base, and coarsely teethed 
at the end. All the varieties are of the same character, and 
highly deserving of a situation in every collection. There 
is said to be a double white variety, which we doubt. If. 
mvtabilis fibre pleno is a splendid plant, of strong growth, 
and will, when well established, flower abundantly, if the 
wood of last year is cut to within a few eyes of the wood of 
the previous year; the flowers are produced on the young 
wood, and come out a pale colour, and change to bright red, 
and about the size of a garden Provins rose ; leaves downy, 
cordate, angular, five-lobed, acuminate, and slightly in- 
dented. H. lillii-fibrus is a new highly esteemed species; 
the flowers are various in colour, being pink, blush, red, and 
purple. The leaves vary in character, but are generally 
cordate, crenate, acuminate ; the petioles are brown, and the 
whole slightly hirsute ; is deciduous, and requires to be kept 
in the warmest part of the house. (Soil No. 9.) 

Hoyas, wax-plant, twelve species. All of them are climb- 
ing succulents, requiring plenty of heat and little water. H. 
carnbsa is a fine flowering species, and known in our collec- 
tions as the wax-plant; the leaves are green and fleshy; 

14* 



162 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

the flowers are mellifluous, five-parted, and in pendulous 
bunches, slightly bearded, and have every appeartmce of a 
composition of the finest wax ; of a blush colour. H. cras- 
sifblia, H. grandiflora, brown flowered, H. bella, variegated, 
H. Cunningham ii and IT. imperialis are all well worthy of 
cultivation. (Soil No. 2.) 

Ipomseas, a genus of tropical climbing plants, nearly allied 
to Convolvulus, but of greater beauty. I. Jdlcepa is the 
true jalap of the druggists, but not worthy of any other re- 
mark. I. Horsfdllia has brilliant rosy crimson flowers, 
which it is almost entirely covered with from December to 
May. I. rugosa has a profusion of large rosy lilac flowers. 
I. multiflbra, blush and lilac. I. Learii produces a profu- 
sion of large blue flowers; they are all very showy and 
beautiful ornaments for either the hot-house or the flower- 
garden. (Soil No. 13.) 

Ismene amdncaes, or Panaritium amdncaes. This pro- 
fuse yellow-flowering bulb is richly deserving of cultivation, 
and should be kept in the house all summer, repotting it as 
often as the roots touch the interior side of the pot, giving it 
plenty of water when in a growing state ; but when dormant, 
it must be kept dry till it offers to grow : when well treated, 
it will bloom repeatedly during summer. (Soil No. 12.) 

Ixbras, a genus of fine flowering plants, and does extremely 
well in our collections in comparison to the state they are 
grown in England. The genus specifically is much confused 
among us, either from error originating with those who 
packed them for this country, or after they have arrived. I. 
purpurea, leaves oblong, ovate, blunt; flowers crimson: I. 
crocdta, leaves oval, lanceolate, narrowing toward the stem, 
smooth underside of the leaf; the nerves are very percep- 
tible ; flowers saffron-coloured, and very profuse. I. rosea, 
leaves large, regular oblong, a little acute, very distant on 
the wood, central nerve strong; flowers rose-coloured in large 
corymbs, branching finely; 1. bandhiica, leaves very close to 
the stem, ovate, acuminate ; nerves straight, middle nerve 
stronger than any other of the genus; flowers scarlet. I. 
bldnda, leaves small, lanceolate, ovate ; flowers red, cymes 
branching in three. I. dichotbna, leaves largest of the genus, 
ovate, acuminate, undulate footstalk three-eighths of an 
inch long ; whereas, none of the leaves of the other species 
have footstalks of any length; it is now called /. unduldta; 



May.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. 163 

flowers are white, leaves ovate, elongate, sessile ; flowers 
scarlet, in crowded round corymbs ; is called I. coccinea in 
the Botanical Magazine, by which it is known in our collec- 
tions, and we think is the same as I. stricta. I. fldmmea 
and I. specibsa. I. Pavetta, the flowers are white and sweet- 
scented, the leaves of all the species are opposite ; there are 
a few other species that we are not thoroughly acquainted 
with, but have been thus explicit to prevent error as far as 
possible in this beautiful genus. They are all evergreen, 
low-growing shrubs ; the plants grow best in Jersey black 
sandy earth, but flower most abundantly with Soil No. 10. 

Jambosas, about twelve species, which have been princi- 
pally taken from Eugenia, and contains its finest plants, and 
is a splendid genus of evergreen shrubs. E. Jdmbos is 
now Jambbsa vulgaris, which flowers and fruits freely in our 
hot-houses. The fruit is about an inch in diameter, eatable, 
and smelling like a rose, hence called " Rose Apple." The 
petals of all the species are simple, and may rather be con- 
sidered the calyx ; the beauty of the flowers is in the many 
erect spreading stamens, either straw, white, rose, or green 
colour. J. malacceiisis, Malay Apple, is greatly esteemed 
for the delightful fragrance of its fruit. We frequently see J. 
pit rpurdscens, which is a native of the West Indies, going 
under J. m., which is an Asiatic species, with white flowers 
and entire oblong leaves ; whereas, the leaves of J. p. are 
small, ovate, acuminate ; the young shoots and leaves are 
purple. J. macrophylla, white, and J. amp>lexicaidis, green, 
have very long oblong, lanceolate leaves, and are of a strong, 
woody habit. They are all easy of culture. (Soil No. 11.) 

Jasmhium, Jasmine, is a favourite genus of shrubs for the 
exquisite fragrance of its flowers, of which none are more 
delightful than J. sdmbac or Arabian Jasmine. There are 
two other varieties of it, J. s. multiplex, perfectly double ; 
and J. s. trifoliatum, double Tuscan Jasmine or Grand 
Duke ; J. s. Maid of Orleans, large, very double, like a very 
perfect white rose, and exquisitely fragrant. There is also 
a semi-double variety in cultivation. J. multi/tdnim is a 
profusely flowering and beautiful species. There are seve- 
ral others, all with white flowers, and generally easy of cul- 
ture. (Soil No. 11.) 

Jdtropha, Physic-nut, is a genus of six strong-growing 
shrubs, natives of the West Indies. J. multifida and J. 



164 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

pandursefblia have the handsomest foliage, and both have 
scarlet flowers : the appearance of the foliage of this genus 
is the only object; the flowers are small, in coarse disfigured 
panicles, and several of the species have not been known to 
flower in artificial cultivation. The seeds of J. ciircas are 
often received from the West Indies ; the leaves are cordate, 
angular and smooth. J. mant'hot, now Manihot cannab\na, 
is the Cassada root, the juice of which, when expressed, is 
a strong poison. Tbey are all easy of culture ; want of 
strong heat in winter will make them cast their leaves, but 
does them no other injury. (Soil No. 17.) 

Justicia. A few species of this genus are fine showy hot- 
house plants. J. eamea, flesh-colour flowers in large spikes, 
very fine, blooming nearly the whole season. J. coccinea 
has large terminal spikes of scarlet flowers, blooming from 
December to March, and is a very desirable plant, of easy 
culture, and should be in every collection ; it is apt to 
grow spindly, if not kept near the glass. /. picta, with its 
varieties, I. lucida, and /. calyctricha , are fine shrubby spe- 
cies. I. specibsa is a beautiful profuse, purple flowering 
plant. (Soil No. 11.) 

La ii tan a, a genus of twenty species, all free-flowering 
shrubs ; the flowers are small, in round heads blooming from 
the axils, in yellow, orange, pink, white and changeable colours; 
principally of a rough, straggling growth, and are not es- 
teemed. However, L. scl/bi, light purple ; L. mutdbilis, 
yellow, orange, and pink; L. bicolor, wbitc and pink, and L. 
fardta (or Donylasii of some), lilac and white; L. rosea, 
white, changing to rose; L. Mexicana, very rich orange, one 
of the finest. These are very handsome growing plants, 
and will even keep in a good green-house ; but in such case 
will only bloom in summer. They will not bear a strong 
fumigation ; therefore, when the hot-house is under that ope- 
ration, they must be set down in the pathway, or other low 
part in the house. (Soil No. 9.) 

Lasiandra, a genus related to melastoma, of which there 
are several very handsome species. L. splendem with 
hirsute rich crimson foliage and brilliant purple flowers, 
blooming from January to May. L. Bentliamiana with very 
elegant foliage and rich bluish purple flowers, grows freely 
in Soil No. 1. 

Latdnias. This genus contains three species of handsome 



May.~] HOT-HOUSE — OP REPOTTING, ETC. 165 

palms. L. harbbnica is one of the finest of the Palmse, not 
growing to great magnitude ; the leaves or fronds are plaited 
flabelliforrn, leaflets smooth at the edge, footstalk spiny, and 
the plant spreading. L. rubra, fronds same as the former, 
but leaflets more divided and serrulate ; footstalk unarmed : 
foliage reddish. L. glaucophylla same as L. rubra, only the 
foliage glaucous. They are all valuable plants, and are ob- 
tained by seed from the East Indies. They require plenty of 
pot-room. (Soil No. 12.) 

Laurus. — This genus, though of no beauty in flower, is 
generally admired in collections for its fine evergreen foli- 
age, and aromatic or spicy flavour, and several trees are 
important in medicine. The most esteemed are given to a 
genus named Cinnamomum, as has been observed in the 
green-house (see Marcli). L. Chloroxylon is the Cogwood 
of Jamaica. L. persea, is now Persea gratissima, Alliga- 
tor-pear, a fruit about the size of a large pear, and greatly 
esteemed in the West Indies ; the plant is generally known 
in our collections. C. verum is the true Cinnamon of com- 
merce. 

The part taken is the inside of the bark when the tree is 
from five to eighteen years old. The leaves are three- 
nerved, ovate, oblong; nerves vanishing towards the point, 
bright green above, pale beneath, with whitish veins. This 
plant ought to be kept in the warmest part of the hot-house. 
C. cassia is frequently given under the former name, but 
when compared, may be easily detected by the leaves being 
more lanceolate and a little pubescent. They both make 
handsome plants, but require great heat. Drain the pots well 
of the delicate sorts. (Soil No. 13.) 

Mangxfera, Mango tree. There are two species. M. 
indlca is in our collections, and bears a fruit which is so 
highly esteemed in the East Indies as to be considered 
preferable to any other, except very fine pine-apples. The 
leaves are lanceolate, and from sis to eight inches long, and 
two or more broad. The flowers are produced in loose 
bunches at the end of the branches, but of no beauty, and 
have to be artificially impregnated, or it will scarcely pro- 
duce fruit. The shell is kidney-shaped, and of a leathery 
crustaceous substance. They contain one seed, and in 
their indigenous state are more juicy than an apple. 
Drain the pots well, as the roots are apt to get sodden from 



166 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

moisture. .The other species goes under the name of oppo- 
siti/dlia, but we question if it is not only a variety, for 
it has every character of the one just described. (Soil No. 

'Malpighia (Barhadoes-cherry), about eighteen species,' all 
beautiful evergreen trees or shrubs. They are easily dis- 
tinguished by having bristles on the underside of the leaves. 
These bristles are fixed by the centre, so that either end 
of it will sting. We are not aware of any other plant being 
defended in this manner. 31. iircns has oblong, ovate 
leaves, with decumbent stiff bristles ; flowers pink. 31. aqui- 
fblia has lanceolate, stiff, spiny leaves, and we think the 
most beautiful foliage of the genus. 31. fuccita has elliptical 
shining leaves, with lilac flowers. M. glabra, leaves ovate, 
entire, smooth ; flowers purple. They all have five rounded 
clawed petals. The last species is cultivated in the West 
Indies for its fruit. The pots must be well drained. (Soil 
No. 17.) 

Merica, a genus of hot-house plants, closely allied to Iris, 
between which there is no distinction in the leaves. The 
flowers of 31. cceridea are beautifully spotted with light and 
dark blue, the scape many-flowered. 31. Sabini has flowers 
similar, but not so dark in colour. 31. Nortkiana has splen- 
did white and brown-spotted flowers, spathe two-flowered. 
These plants, when growing, require a liberal supply of 
water, and should be greatly encouraged by frequent potting 
to flower well. (Soil No. 12.) 

Melastoma was once an extensive genus, on which the 
natural order Mdastomacese is founded ; but is now much 
divided into other genera contained in the natural tribe 
31icomese. There are about thirteen species remaining in 
the genus. They now display great unity of character, and 
many of them may be considered very ornamental. The 
finest are 31. heteromaUa, bluish purple, and an abundant 
bloomer ; 31. ma/abdthrica, rose-coloured ; 31. samjitinea, 
lilac ; 31. splendens, large violet ; and 31. aspera, rose. 
There is a plant in several of our collections known as 31. 
2)urj)iirea and 31. tetraydno, which is Osssea purpurascens ; 
leaves ovate, lanceolate, acuminate, five-nerved, pilose ; the 
footstalk and nerves underside of the leaf covered with 
brown hairs ; stem four-sided ; flowers purple. All the 



May.~\ hot-house — or repotting, etc. 167 

species are easy of culture. M. nepalensis is a green-house 
plant. (Soil No. 1.) 

Mandevilla Suaveblens, or Chili Jasmine : this beautiful 
climber is a native of South America; the flowers are in 
clusters and nearly bell-shaped, white, and of exquisite 
fragrance ; the bloom is produced on the extremity of the 
shoots. After the flowering season, the plants should be 
pruned back to within a few eyes of the preceding year's 
wood. (Soil No. 13.) 

Jliisa (Plantain tree), contains eight species, and is 
greatly esteemed in the East and West Indies for the 
luscious sweet flavour of its fruit, which can be •converted 
into every delicacy in the domestic cookery of the country. 
M. paradis\ara is the true plantain tree, has a soft herba- 
ceous stalk, fifteen or twenty feet high, with leaves from five 
to seven feet long, and about two feet wide. M. sapientum 
is the true banana tree; habit and character same as the 
former, except it has a spotted stem, and the male flowers 
are deciduous. The pulp of the fruit is softer, and the 
taste more luscious. M. rosacea, M. coccinea, and M. chi- 
nensis, are more esteemed in artificial cultivation for their 
flowers, and for being smaller in growth. A". Cavendiskii 
produces immense clusters of ripe and well-flavoured fruit, 
plants only four feet and a half high ; will yearly produce 
about eighty pounds. 21. ddcca is another dwarf species, 
and in 183S ripened a cluster of fruit in the Royal Botanic 
Gardens of Edinburgh which weighed fifty pounds. These 
dwarf bananas are now being cultivated in Europe expressly 
for their fruit, which is very delicious when perfectly ripened. 
They are Chinese plants, and will soon be introduced into 
the \Yest India Islands, where they will entirely supplant the 
large varieties. 

Mt/rtus Pimenta, or, more properly, Pimenta Vulgaris, is 
the Jamaica pepper or allspice ; there is no beauty in the 
flowers — the leaves are highly aromatic, and it is a handsome 
evergreen. (Soil No. 9.) 

Nepenthes (Pitcher-plant). There are two species of 
this plant. A r . digtillatbria is an esteemed and valuable 
plant in European collections, and we are not aware of 
there being any in this country, except in Philadelphia. 
The leaves are lanceolate and sessile ; from their extremity 
there is a spiral, attached to which are long inflated ap- 



168 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

pendages that are generally half full of water, which appears 
to be confined within them by a lid with which the ap- 
pendages are surmounted ; hence the name of pitcher-plant. 
AVe have never observed the lids close again when once 
open. Writers have called it an herbaceous plant, but it 
is properly a climbing shrub. The pot in which it grows 
should be covered with moss, and the roots liberally sup- 
plied with water every day. It delights to be in a moist 
state. The flowers are small, and in long spikes. The 
plant is of easy culture, and even rapid in growth : a plant 
with us only nineteen months old is now five feet high. 
(Soil No.«5.) 

Pancratium is a genus of hot-house bulbs, and now only 
contains five species. They are all free-flowering. Several 
of them are handsome and fragrant. P. maritimum and 
P. vereciindum are the finest; the flowers are white, in 
large umbels ; petals long, recurved, and undulate. P. lit- 
tordlis, P. specidmm, and P. caribseum, are now given to the 
genus HymcnocdlUt, and are fine flowering species. Care 
must be taken not to give them water while dormant. The 
soil ought at that time to be in a half dry state. They are 
in flower from May to August. (Soil No. 12.) 

Panddntis, Screw Pine. There are about twenty species 
in this genus, several of them very interesting, but none so 
greatly admired as P. odoratissimus. The leaves in estab- 
lished plants are from four to six feet long, on the back 
and edges spiny; are spreading, imbricated, and embracing 
the stem, and placed in three spiral rows upon it. The 
top soon becomes heavy, when the plant throws out prongs 
one, two, or three feet up the stem in an oblique descending 
direction, which take root in the ground, and thus become 
perfectly supported. It is cultivated in Japan for its de- 
lightful fragrance, and it is said, " of all the perfumes, it is 
by far the richest and most powerful." P. litilis, red- 
spined. We question this species, and are inclined to 
believe that it is the former, only when the plants are newly 
raised from seed the spines and leaves are red, changing 
to green as they become advanced in age. The plants are 
easy of culture, and will grow almost in any soil. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Pass/flora, "Passion-flower, so named on account of its 



Mai/.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. 169 

being supposed to represent in the appendages of its flower 
the Passion of Jesus Christ." There are about fifty species, 
all climbing plants, that belong to the hot-house. Many are 
of no ordinary beauty; a few species are odoriferous; others 
bear edible fruits, though not rich in flavour. P. alata is 
in our collections, and greatly admired ; the flowers are red, 
blue, and white, beautifully contrasted, and flower profusely 
in pots. P. racemosa, red flower. P. ccertileo-racemosa, 
purple. P. quadr'angiddris has beautiful red and white 
flowers. The plant is in several collections, but has seldom 
flowered ) it requires to be planted in the ground to make it 
flower freely, and it will also produce fruit. P. picturdta is 
a scarce and beautiful various-coloured species. P. kerme- 
sina, bright rosy crimson, and, beyond all question, the most 
profuse flowering species now in cultivation, and will do well 
in a good green-house. P. Loudonii, bright crimson. P. 
edi'dis is cultivated for its fruit. There are many other fine 
species, but these are the most esteemed sorts ; and, when 
well established, will flower profusely from May to August. 
They are desirable in every collection, and will take only a 
small space to hold them, by training the vines up the rafters 
of the hot-house. (Soil No. 13.) 

Phoenix, Date-palm, about eight species, principally Asi- 
atic plants. The foliage is not so attractive as many others 
of the palm family, but it is rendered interesting by producing 
a well-known fruit called Date. P. dactylifera will do very 
well in a common green-house. In Arabia, Upper Egypt, and 
Barbary, it is much used in domestic economy. P. palu- 
ddsa has the most beautiful foliage, and the best habit. The 
flowers are dioecious. (Soil No. 12.) 

Plumbago rosea is a pretty free-blooming plant, with con- 
tinued profusion of red flowers; it requires plenty of heat and 
a good drainage. (Soil No. 11.) 

Plumerias, above twenty species. Plants of a slow growth, 
robust nature, and are deciduous. The foliage is greatly ad- 
mired. The plants are shy to flower, but are brilliant in 
colour. P. acuminata has lanceolate, acute leaves, flowers 
corymbose and terminal. P. tricolor has oblong, acute, 
veiny leaves ; corolla red, yellow, and white. This and P. 
rubra are the finest of the genus. They ought not to get any 
water while not in a growing state. (Soil No. 11.) 

15 



170 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [May. 

Poinsettia* pulcTierrima. When well cultivated, this is 
truly the most magnificent of all the tropical plants we have 
ever seen ; from December to April it is crowned with 
flowers, surrounding which are bright scarlet whorls of brac- 
teae, frequently measuring twenty-two inches in diameter. 
To grow it to such perfection, we treat it as follows : in April 
we cut the young wood down to within two inches of the wood 
of the preceding year, and reduce the ball of earth, putting it 
into a smaller pot. About the end of May we plant it in the 
open ground, in light rich soil, giving it one or two waterings 
after planting. During summer it will grow three or four feet ; 
about the end of September, it is carefully lifted and potted 
into a large-sized pot, and put into the hot-house, carefully 
shading it for a few days — when it requires no more attention 
except a regular supply of water, and to be kept in a tempe- 
rature of from 55° to 75°. There is also a pale yellow, brac- 
teced variety j but we are not aware of its being for sale in 
this country. When the plant is grown in pots during sum- 
mer, it must be repotted every month to encourage its rapid 
growth. (Soil No. 18.) 

Poli/spora axillaris, once called Camellia axillaris, though 
in appearance it has no characteristic of a Camellia, and has 
been frequently killed in the green-house by being too cold 
for its nature ; leaves oblong, obovate, toward the extremity 
serrulate. The leaves on the young wood are entire. Flowers 
white j petals a little notched. It is worthy of a situation in 
every collection. (Soil No. 11.) 

Pterospermum, five species of plants that have very 
curiously-constructed flowers, of a white colour, and fragrant,; 
the foliage is of a brown rusty nature, and, before expansion, 
silvery-like. P. suberifblium is in several of our collections, 
and esteemed. P. semisai/i/tdtmn has fringed bracteae ; 
leaves oblong, acuminate, entire, saggitate on one side. (Soil 
No. 11.) 

Rliapis, a genus of palms that will grow very freely with 
heat and room at the roots. P. fiabdlifurmis is an erect 

* Named by Professor Graham, of Edinburgh, in compliment to 
the Hon. J. R. Poinsett (late Secretary of War), who introduced the 
plant in 1828 to this country from Mexico, while he was Minister 
Plenipotentiary to that Republic. He also, at the same time, intro- 
duced a rich and valuable collection of Cactte. 



May.] hot-house — of repotting, etc. 171 

growing palin, with a spreading head. It is a native of 
China. (Soil No. 12.) 

RondeUtia specidsa is a new and rare plant, in every re- 
spect equal, if not superior, to Ixbra cdccinea ; its large 
corymbs of orange-red flowers have a very striking appear- 
ance, and it is easily cultivated in soil No. 1. It should 
have frequent repottings when growing. 

Ruellia. There are a few species, very pretty flowering 
plants, of easy culture. R. formosa, flowers long, of a fine 
scarlet colour; plant half shrubby. R. fulgida has bright 
searlet flowers on axillary long-stalked fascicles. R. persi- 
cifolia, with unequal leaves and light blue flowers, is now 
called R. anisopliylla. (Soil No. 10.) 

Russelia juncea, a slender plant of an upright habit, pro- 
ducing, when well grown, a profusion of scarlet tubular 
flowers, about one inch long each : it is of the easiest cul- 
ture in soil No. 19. 

Sdgtis, Sago palm. We are of opinion that the true palm 
from which the sago of the shops is produced has not been 
introduced into our collections. It is very rare in the most 
extensive collections of Europe, but it is not so fine a plant 
as the one we have under the Sago, which is placed in the 
natural order of Cycadece ; and Sagus is in that of Palmse. 
The finest of this genus is *$'. vinifera and S. Riimphii. 
They grow to a great height ; even in artificial cultivation 
they may be seen from ten to twenty-five feet. We have not 
introduced them here for their beauty, but to prevent error. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

Soldndra, a genus of four species, remarkable for the ex- 
traordinary size of their flowers, and are considered beautiful. 
S. grandlflbra and S. virid flora are the best two. The 
plants will bloom well if they are restricted in pot-room, and 
are only introduced as being worthy of cultivation. If they 
are repotted once in two or three years, it is sufficient, except 
where the plants are small and want encouragement. (Soil 
No. 13.) 

Strelitzia, a splendid genus of noble-looking plants, all of 
which do perfectly well in the green-house, except S. augiis- 
ta, the flowers of which are pure white ; the leaves are very 
large, being nearly six feet long and eighteen inches wide, 
and assume the appearance of the Banana tree : it requires 
great space for its roots. (Soil No. 12.) 



172 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [J/ay. 

Stephanotus fiorabundus, a new and splendid evergreen 
climber, with dark green thick leaves like a luxuriant wax 
plant, producing large bunches of pure white fragrant flow- 
ers; of easy culture in soil No. 13. 

Swieienia (Mahogany tree), the wood of which is celebra- 
ted in cabinet work. S. mahdgoni, common. This tree 
varies much in general appearance, according to soil and 
situation. The leaves are pinnated in four pairs; leaflets 
ovate, lanceolate; flowers small, white, in axillary panicles. 
JS. fubri/uga, leaves pinnated, in four pairs ; leaflets ellipti- 
cal ; flowers white, in terminal panicles. The wood of the 
last is the most durable of any in the East Indies. They are 
fine plants, and require heat and pot-room to produce flowers. 
(Soil No. 15.) 

Taber ■neemontuna , a genus of little beauty, except for one 
or two species. A plant known in some collections as 
Nerium coronarium, is now, and properly, T. coronarin. 
The variety fibre pleno is the one most deserving of culture, 
and will flower profusely from May to August ; the flowers 
are double, white, fragrant and divaricating. The plant will 
lose its foliage if not kept in a strong heat ; therefore place 
it in the warmest part of the hot-house. T. densifibra is a 
fine species, but very rare. Drain all the plants well, and 
keep them in the shade divring summer. 

Tecbma, a genus of plants closely allied to Bignbnia, and 
are free -flowering ; several of them much esteemed. T. 
mollis, T. diijitdta, and T. splendlda, are the most beautiful 
of those that belong to the hot.-house. They have large 
orange-coloured, tubular, inflated, ringent flowers, in loose 
panicles. There is a plant known in our collections as Big- 
nbnia stans, which is now T. stdns ; has pinnated leaves, with 
oblong, lanceolate, serrated leaflets ; flowers in simple termi- 
nal raceme, and of a yellow colour, and sometimes known by 
Ash-lcaved Bignbnia. It will always have a sickly aspect, if 
not well encouraged in light rich soil. Drain the pots well, 
as much moisture disfigures the foliage. (Soil No. 10.) 

Thrinax jxirrfibra is a fine dwarf palm of the West 
Indies, with palmated fronds, plaited with stiff, lanceolate 
segments. The plant is of easy cultivation, and will grow in 
any soil. (Soil No. 12.) 

Thunbergia, a genus containing six climbing plants of a 
half shrubby nature. Some of them have a fragrant odour. 



May.~\ HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTIXG, ETC. 173 

T. coccinea, red ; T. grandiflbra, blue ; T. frdgrans, white 
sweet-scented; T. aldta has pretty buff and purple flowers, 
which are in great profusion. If sown in May, they will 
bloom from July until killed by frost. T. ckrysops, beauti- 
ful blue, with a dark brown eye, a plant of dwarf habit re- 
quiring partial shade. This makes a very pretty annual in 
the flower-garden, with its beautiful white variety, forming an 
elegant contrast. (Soil Xo. 13.) 

Torenia Asidtica, an exquisite tropical, soft-wooded plant, 
producing a profusion of waxy, porcelain blue flowers, tipped 
with rich violet purple. [A plant now before us has been 
covered with flowers the past twelve months.] Requires 
partial shade ; admirably adapted for parlour culture, and 
does well out of doors in summer where it is moist. 

Tradescdntia discolor. Purple-leaved spider wort. This 
is an herbaceous plant, and is only cultivated for its beauti- 
ful purple foliage. It has curious small white flowers. (Soil 
No. 10.) 

Cranio, specidsa, a gigantic-looking plant closely connect- 
ed to JIusa, from which it differs in habit by the large leaves 
being more erect : to grow it luxuriantly, give it plenty of 
heat, water, and pot-room. (Soil Xo. 12.) 

Zdmio, a genus of plants in the natural order of Cyca- 
dese. Several species of them are admired. Z. media, Z. 
furfurdcen, Z. tenuis, Z. integrifblia, are the most showy 
that belong to the hot-house. The whole genus is frequently 
kept in this department. They are all plants of a slow 
growth, and the beauty is entirely in the pinnated fronds, 
with from ten to forty pairs of leaflets. The pots must be 
well drained. (Soil Xo. 11.) 

Those genera of plants which we have enumerated under 
the head of repotting in this or next month, are composed 
of the finest hot-house plants that have come under our obser- 
vation. There are perhaps a few of them that are not to 
be found in the United States, or even on our continent ; 
but the great object in a choice collection of plants, is to 
have the finest from all parts of the known world. There 
are many plants whose nature does not require much support 
from soil, which is frequently observed in those that are 
mentioned. And there are many hundreds of plants desir- 
able for beauty, ornament, and curiosity, which would take 
volumes to specify and describe. In fact, every year brings 

15* 



174 HOT-HOUSE — OF BRINGING OUT, ETC. [May. 

many new things, and frequently both new and splendid, 
either in flower, fruit, or foliage. 

We have previously observed, that plants ought not to be 
flooded with water when newly potted, as it saturates the 
soil before the roots have taken hold of it ; and that the best 
draining for pots is small gravel or pot-shreds broken fine. 
We wish it to be understood that, when plants are repotted, 
any irregular branch or shoot should be lopped off that can- 
not be tied to advantage. And repotting may take place 
either before or after the plants are exposed to the open air, 
according to convenience. 

OF BRINGING OUT THE HOT-HOUSE PLANTS. 

When the hot-house is very crowded with plants, the best 
method to have them exposed without danger is to take out 
those of the hardiest nature first, that have no tender shoots 
upon them, thereby thinning the house gradually. This 
may be done from the sixteenth to the twentieth of the month, 
which will admit of a free circulation of air among those 
that remain. All may be exposed from the twenty -fourth 
to the twenty-eighth of the month. This is a general rule, 
though in some seasons there may be exceptions. Having 
previously given all the air possible to the house, that no 
sudden transition take place, which would make the foliage 
brown and otherwise materially injure the plants, choose 
calm days for the removing of them. 

There are few plants while in pots that agree with the full 
sun upon them ; or, if the plants receive the sun, the pots 
and roots ought not. The best situation for them is on the 
north side of a fence, wall, house, or other building, where 
they are excluded from the mid-day sun, and they should 
stand on boards or gravel, with the tallest at the back, firmly 
tied to a rail, or some other security, to prevent them from 
being overturned by high winds. Make a fanciful bed, and 
cover it with sand or coal ashes, for the reception of the 
smaller plants, and setting them thinly and regularly thereon 
is preferable to crowding them with the taller sorts. And 
it may be desired to have some of the plants plunged in the 
garden through the flower borders. Of these that are so 
treated, the pots must be plunged to the brim, and regularly 
turned round every two weeks, to prevent the roots from 



May.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF SUCCULENTS, ETC. 175 

running into the earth. If the roots were allowed to do so, 
it might for the present strengthen the plant, but ultimately 
would prove injurious. 

Where a sufficiency of shade cannot he obtained, it would 
be advisable to go to the expense of a very thin awning, 
that would not exclude the light, but merely the powerful 
rays of the sun, attending to roll it up every evening. Plants 
will keep in beautiful order by the above method, which 
amply repays for the trouble or expense. Avoid putting 
plants under trees ; comparatively few thrive in such situa- 
tions. 

When they are thus exposed to the open air, it will be 
very little trouble to give them a gentle syringing every 
evening when there is no rain, and continue your usual ex- 
aminations for insects; when they appear, resort to the pre- 
scribed remedies. Green-Jly will not affect them, but the 
thrips may. Give regular supplies of water every evening, 
and again in the morning to all that require it, carefully 
examining those that are in small pots. 

SUCCULENTS, OR THE CACT.EA TRIBE. 

The Cereus Mammilldria, and Opuntia. Divisions of 
this family are, in their indigenous state, exposed on rocks, 
hilly lands, and arid situations, being at all times fully ex- 
posed to the sun : still, with us, we find that they thrive 
best with a partial shade, though we have frequently seen 
them doing well when fully exposed to the influence of the 
sun ; but where they are to be kept out of doors all the 
season, be careful in choosing for them an airy situation, and 
never allow the pots to become saturated with moisture. 

The habits of the EpiphyMum tribe are entirely different ; 
they are generally parasites, growing on the branches and 
about the roots of decayed trees ; consequently, they are 
often much shaded, and they evidently show it, for they still 
delight to be shaded from the direct rays of a noonday sun. 
If they are kept in the house through the summer months, 
take some whiting, and make a thin white-wash, and put it 
on the inside of the glass, which will be found an agreeable 
and effectual shade ; but where time and means are at hand, 
a thin awning, of gauze or muslin, is preferable, provided it 
is regularly rolled up when the sun is not powerful. 



176 HOT-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING, ETC. [August. 



JUNE AND JULY. 

As the plants of the hot-house are all exposed to the open 
air, the directions will include both months. If the repot- 
ting is over, as recommended last month, all the attention 
they will require until the end of August is, the administer- 
ing of water at the roots, and by the syringe overhead. It will 
be impossible to say how great are their wants, these depend- 
ing entirely upon the nature of the plant, the situation, and 
the season ; but never neglect to look over them every even- 
ing, and after dry nights they will need a fresh supply in 
the morning, observing to give to none except they are be- 
coming a little dry. Make weekly examinations for insects 
of any description, and when they appear, have them instantly 
destroyed. 

Always after heavy rains look over the pots, in case water 
should be standing in them, which would injure the roots. 
Where any is found, turn the pot on its side, and, in a few 
hours, examine the draining which is defective; small pots in 
continued rains should be turned likewise. 

Tie up all plants and shoots to prevent them from being 
destroyed by the wind, and be attentive to pick all weeds 
from the 'pots. Turn round all the plants occasionally, to 
prevent them from being drawn to one side by the sun or 
light. 



AUGUST. 



The plants of the hot-house that were repotted in May 
and June, according to the directions therein given, will, at 
present be in an excellent state of health, provided they 
have got at all times the requisite supplies of watering. 
And as we already have been very explicit on that subject, 
more remarks now would be merely repetition. 



September.'] HOT-HOUSE — OF DRESSING PLANTS, ETC. 177 



REPOTTING. 

If any of the repottings were neglected during May or 
June, let it be done about the first of this month. Let 
young plants that are growing freely, where the roots have 
filled the pots, and the plants required to grow, have pots 
one size larger. In turning out the ball of earth, keep it 
entire, not disturbing any of the roots. 



OF PAINTING, REPAIRING, AND CLEANSING THE HOUSE. 

The necessary repairs of the hot-house are too often put 
off to the last day or week ; and then with hurry are super- 
ficially attended to. Previous to the first of September, 
have all the wood-work painted (which ought to have one 
coat every two years), and the glass all neatly repaired. 
Have the flues and furnace examined ; plaster over all rents, 
and make good every deficiency. Give the flue a thick coat 
of lime white-wash. Have the walls, shelves, and staging 
properly painted. If there is a tan-bed, have that renewed ; 
take out what is most decayed, using two-thirds new tan, 
which must be dried at least three days in the sun before it 
is housed, and carefully protect it from rains. 



SEPTEMBEE. 

DRESSING THE PLANTS. 

Having last month put the house in complete order, all 
that remains necessary to be attended to is the state of the 
plants and pots, which should be regularly examined; and 
of those where the roots fill the soil, a little may be taken 
off the top, supplying its place with fresh earth, thereby 
giving what is called a top-dressing. Give each that re- 
quires it a sufficient rod, tying the plant neatly thereto; mi- 
nutely scrutinize each for insects, and where they are de- 
tected, have them eradicated. 



178 hot-house — observations. [September. 

Finally, wash all contracted foulness from off the pots, at 
the same time pick off any decayed leaves ; thus all will be 
in perfect order to take into the house. If any plants have 
been kept in the hot-house during summer, they must like- 
wise go through the same operation. 



OF taking in the plants. 

From the 16th to the 24th, according to the season, is 
the proper time to take in the hot-house plants. It is pre- 
ferable to have them what might be deemed a few days too 
early, than have them in the slightest degree affected by 
cold. 

Commence by housing the largest first, and those that 
stand farthest in the house, observing to place the most ten- 
der sorts nearest the heat or warmest part of the house. 
For observations on them, see May. In regard to arrange- 
ment, that must be according to the taste of the operator. 
We may observe, that in a small collection it is better to 
have them in a regular than in a picturesque form. A dry 
shelf is indispensable in this department for placing on it 
all herbaceous plants, such as Cdnna, Hedychium, Zingiber, 
Ksempferia, &c, the watering of which by this time should 
be gradually suspended, that they may have their required 
cessation to make them flower well. This shelf may be in 
any situation ; one in darkness, where other plants will not 
grow, will answer perfectly well. If there is a bark bed, 
do not until the end of December, plunge any of the pots 
therein: If any plants of the Poinsettla are in the ground, 
have them carefully lifted and shaded from the sun. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

The plants being now all under protection, they must 
have as much air as possible admitted to them every day, by 
opening the doors, front and top sashes, closing only at night. 
The syringings must be continued, and care taken that plants 
of a deciduous or herbaceous nature are not over-watered. 
The tuberous species might be kept almost dry. Some prac- 
tical men of sound science repot these plants in this month 



October. .] hot-house. 179 

into fresh soil, and allow them to stand till January almost 
without water. We have never adopted this method with 
any description of plants, but do not doubt of its success with 
that genus. 

See that the ropes and pulleys of the sashes are in good 
order, and fit to stand all winter. 



OCTOBER. 

Very few directions remain to be given to the department 
of the hot-house. The supplies of water for this and the 
two succeeding months are, according to "the state and na- 
ture of tropical plants, more limited than at any other period 
of the year. This is the first month of what may be called 
their dormant state. Observe the herbaceous plants, that 
they are set aside as soon as their foliage decays, in case of 
being too liberally supplied with water. Airing is highly 
essential about this period, that the plants may be gradually 
hardened; but guard against injuring them. The tempera- 
ture should never be under fifty degrees : when the days are 
cool, and the wind chilling, airing is not necessary ; and, 
when air is admitted, always close up early in the afternoon, 
while the atmosphere is warm, to supersede the necessity of 
fire as long as possible. If, at any time, you have recourse 
to it in this month, use it with great caution. 

Examine all the shutters and fastenings, and see that they 
are in good substantial order; and, where deficient, repair 
them instantly, that they may be in readiness. Remove all 
leaves, and give syringings in the morning of sunshine days, 
twice a week. Clear off, sweep out, and wash clean, that 
every part may be in the neatest order. 

The succulent tribe will not require water more than once 
a week, or once in two weeks. If any of them have ripened 
seeds during summer, wash such carefully from the pulp, 
and lay them past till the first of January, when they may 
be sown on the surface of sandy soil, and gently pressed 
down. Water them very carefully as they require ; cover 
the pot with a piece or pane of glass, which will greatly 



180 hot-house. {November. 

assist their vegetating. In a few weeks they will make 
their appearance ; and when they are one quarter of an inch 
high, plant them out into other pots and fresh soil. In a 
few months they will make wonderful progress in growth, 
and in the following year, will require to be potted singly, 
and treated as recommended for established plants. 



NOVEMBER. 

The essential points to be attended to in the hot-house 
during this month are, fire, air, and icater. The former 
must be applied according to the weather, observing not to 
allow the temperature to be under fifty degrees ; and it ought 
not to continue long at that degree, fifty-two degrees being 
preferable. The shutters should be on every night when 
there is any appearance of frost, and taken off early in the 
morning. Admit air in small portions every day that the 
sun has any effect and the atmosphere mild, observing that 
the temperature of the house be above sixty degrees pre- 
vious to admission. Shut all close early in the afternoon, 
or when any sudden changes occur. 



OF A CISTERN AND WATER. 

In watering, it is important to have the water of the 
same temperature in this department as the roots of the 
plants. To have this, there are two kinds of cisterns or 
tanks that might be adopted ; one may be sunk in the house 
under ground, either closely plastered, or lined with lead, 
and neatly covered up, having a small perpendicular pump 
therein, or placed so that the water could be lifted by hand. 
The other might where convenience will admit, be placed 
over the furnace, either in the back shed, or inside of the 
house, and the water could be drawn off this by a stop-cock. 
These can be supplied, in part, with rain water, by having 
spouts round the house to lead into the cisterns, supplying 
any deficiency from the pump. Thus water of a congenial 



T)eecmher.~] HOT-HOUSE — OF SHUTTERS. 181 

temperature may be always at hand, which is of great im- 
portance to the healthful constitution of the plants. The 
water must now he given in moderate portions, examining 
the plants every day. Be careful in watering bulbs, as the 
smallest supply is sufficient for them at present. Succu- 
lents will require a little every two weeks, except they are 
over the flues, when they may have some every week. 

Constantly clear off all decayed leaves, and carry them 
out of the house, which sweep and wash clean, and keep 
all in the neatest order. 



DECEMBER. 

The uncertainty of the weather in this month requires 
the operator to be constantly on guard, to ward off danger, 
either from frost, snow, or cutting winds. The tempe- 
rature observed last month must be continued, but not ex- 
ceeded, which would cause premature vegetation, of which 
the result and effects have already been observed. Always 
kindle the fires in time, to prevent the heat from being 
lower than what has been mentioned, lest a severe frost 
should take place, as then a considerable lapse ensues 
before the fire has any effect ; and if the wind blows high, 
the result might be injurious, unless the house be very 
close. 



OF SHUTTERS. 

The benefit of these in severe weather is of material 
service, for the preservation of an even temperature in the 
house during the night, when changes are not observed; 
but they ought never to remain on through the day, when 
the fire can be properly attended to. If the front and the 
lowest sash of the roof are covered with these, it is gene- 
rally sufficient. They should be made of three-quarter 
inch boards, closely grooved together, having a cross-bar in 
the centre, and one at each end and each side, which will 

16 



182 HOT-HOUSE — OBSERVATIONS. [December? 

make thern substantial. If they are frequently painted 
with care, they will last many years. Snow ought not to 
be allowed to lay on these while they are on the glass, for 
reasons that we have assigned. See January and February. 

Some adopt double panes of glass to supersede the use of 
shutters, which they think are attended with considerable 
labour (at the most only fifteen minutes a day, while in use). 

The sash frame is made a little deeper, so as to allow half 
an inch between the panes of glass. The one is glazed from 
the out and the other from the inside. It appears to answer 
the purpose tolerably well, but the glass must be both fine 
and even on the surface, lest a lens should be produced, 
which would scourge the plants. We are almost confident 
that we have seen this effect in some instances. There must 
be a small hole about an eighth of an inch in both ends 
of each row of glass, to allow a current to dry up the 
moisture that may arise. Double sashes during the severe 
months are frequently used ; but shutters are preferable to 
either. 



OP PLACING BULBS, ETC., IN THE HOT-HOUSE. 

If any Hyacinths or other Dutch roots are wanted to 
flower early, a few of them may be put in the hot-house 
near the front glass, which will greatly tend to forward 
their time of flowering. By having some brought in 
every two weeks, a continued succession of bloom will be 
kept up. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

If there is a tan-bed in the house, and it was renewed in 
September, the pots should now be half pluuged therein. 
The violent heat will partly be over, and the plants are not 
so liable to suffer at root in this as last month. It will in 
part prevent the plants from being affected by sudden changes 
of temperature. Be attentive in keeping all insects com- 
pletely under. This is the period that these are most 
neglected, but by attending to the modes of their destruction, 
as already given, no species of them will either be hurtful 
or unsightly. Syringe the plants about twice a week, and 



December.'] IIOT-HOUSE — AIR PLANTS. 183 

always remember that decayed leaves or litter of any descrip- 
tion, do not beautify healthy plants, neither do they form a 
part of a well-kept hot-house. 



ORCHIDEOUS EPIPHYTES OR AIR PLANTS. 

Before we close the hot-house subject, it may be interest- 
ing to some of our readers to know the nature and character 
of a few of the most desirable of those tropical parasites that 
have within these few years caused so much excitement in 
Europe. In several instances, houses upward of two hundred 
feet long have been erected for their exclusive culture, and 
unless they do thus have an apartment adapted to their 
nature, no success will attend their cultivation. They grow 
only in a very humid atmosphere, kept at a temperature of 
from 70° to 100°, and also in a partially shaded situation : 
it is only under such treatment that we have had any pros- 
perity in blooming these peculiarly beautiful and interesting 
plants. Annexed are the names of a few that are of the 
easiest culture and most profuse of flower : — 

Brdssia maculata, greenish yellow, spotted with purple. 

Catasetum (rifidtim, greenish yellow, spotted with dark 
brown. 

Cdttlcyo criqvt, white and purple, and is considered a superb 
plant. 

Cdtdeya labia fa, rose and rich purple, striped and spotted 
with carmine. 

Cdttleya Forbesii, yellow, white, green, and rose-coloured, 
fine. 

Dendrbbium cucid/atum, rose and pale yellow. 

Dendrbbium speciosiim, pale yellow flowers, in great profu- 
sion. 

Epidendrum cucidlatum , dark brown, with yellow, is a very 
constant bloomer. 

Gongora atropurpurea, dark purple ; the plant must be sus- 
pended in a pot or small box. 

Gongora speciom, yellow, with black spots. 

Maxilldria Loddgesii, orange flowers in long racemes. 

MaxiUdria picta, yellow, beautifully spotted with red and 



184 HOT-HOUSE — AIR PLANTS. [December. 

crimson ; it is in the mornings only delightfully 

fragrant. 
Onc\dium dtispum, brownish copper colour, and profuse 

flowering. 
Onculium jxqnlio, bright yellow, spotted with rich brown. 
Oncidium luridum, flowers of a brownish -green. 
Rendnthera coccinca, a very superb scarlet flowering plant, 

but does not bloom very freely; it grows in moss, 

and must be suspended in a pot or tied to a piece of 

stick. 
Stanhbjria grandijlbra, has delicate, white, sweet-scented 

flowers. 
Stanlwpia insVjnis, yellow and white, spotted with purple, 

and delightfully fragrant. 
Vanda Roxburgh!!, flowers pale yellow. 
Zyyopetalums, all very beautiful flowering, generally of a 

yellowish green colour, spotted with brown. They 

require to be kept in a hot dry atmosphere. 

Orcliideous epiphytes generally grow upon trees, in the 
recesses of damp tropical forests, establishing themselves in 
the forks of the branches, and even upon rocks, stones, or 
decayed trees. Shade, therefore, is essential to their wel- 
fare ; consequently, never permit them to be exposed to 
violent sunshine. They require but little water at the roots, 
provided the atmosphere they grow in is very humid. The 
best soil for . them is a sandy, turfy peat, containing a large 
portion of fibrous matter ; mix with this pieces of pot-shreds 
or cork, and be careful not to place the plant deep in the 
pot j they will also grow on blocks or sticks of wood. 
Although we use and prefer small boxes (about six inches 
square) made of cork, in which they grow finely and bloom 
profusely. With some of the strong-growing kinds, we use, 
in addition to the above soil, a little leaf-mould, using always 
plenty of drainage. The house we cultivate them in has an 
eastern aspect. Shade can easily be given to them by having 
creepers trained up the rafters of the house, or an occasional 
large plant, placed in such a situation as will afford most 
shade during mid-day ; and it must be observed, that, 
although the plants are fond of moisture, they never thrive, 
except the water has a free passage from their roots. 



THE 

AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



GREEN-HOUSE. 

ON THE CONSTRUCTION OF A GREEN-HOUSE. 

In many respects, the construction of the Green-house 
will be the same as the Hot-house, but might be made much 
more an ornamental object, and could be erected contiguous 
to the mansion-house, with large folding-doors to open at 
pleasure, and be connected with the drawing-room or parlour. 
The extent may vary according £o the collection to be culti- 
vated. 

It was formerly the practice to build these houses with 
glass only in front, and even to introduce between the win- 
dows strong piers of brick or stone ; but this is now abolished, 
and has given way to a more light and ornamental style, by 
which cheerfulness and the desired utility are better con- 
sulted. There should be conveniences for the admission of 
air in the highest part of the house, that a free current may 
be obtained whenever desired, which is an essential point. 



16* 



186 GREEN-HOUSE. [January. 



GREEN-HOUSE. 



JANUARY. 

Tins compartment requires particular attention, in order 
to preserve the plants in good health, and carry them through 
this precarious season of the year. A little air must be ad- 
mitted at all convenient times. An hour or two at mid-day 
will be of the utmost importance in drying up damp and 
clearing off stagnated air, which is a harbour for every corrup- 
tion. The top sashes being let down or turned a few inches, 
in mild days (that is, when there are not high and cutting 
winds), from ten or eleven o'clock to two or three, according 
to the intensity of the frost, will renovate the interior air of 
the house and harden the plants. When the weather will 
permit, let the front sashes be opened about one inch or 
more. An assiduous, experienced hand will never omit an 
opportunity. 

With regard to fire heat, the temperature must be regu- 
lated to suit the nature of the plants in a general sense ; so 
let the mercury, or spirits of wine, of Fahrenheit's thermo- 
meter, be from 35° to 50° f if it begins to fall, give a little 
fire heat. No doubt we have seen the thermometer much 
lower in the green-house than the above, even as low as 24° 
without any immediate injury; but it was in an extensive 
collection, where the most hardy of the plants were selected 
into one house. Many boast how little tire they give their 
green-house, and how cold it is kept, not observing the 
miserable state of their plants — inexperience causing them to 
think that the least fire heat will make them grow, and 
would rather look on naked stems than healthy plants. The 
above temperature will not, in exotics, cause premature vege- 
tation, but will cause the plants to retain the foliage requisite 
to vegetative nature. A high temperature is not necessary 
for the generality of green-house plants; on the contrary, it 
might very much injure them. 



January.] green-house — camellia japonica. 187 



OF WATERING. 

In this month very little is requisite, and must be given 
with great caution. Few plants will require much and some 
hardly any ; but all must be attended to, and have their 
wants supplied. Some will need it twice, some once a-week, 
and some in two weeks, according to their shrubby and woody 
nature. Herbaceous and deciduous plants will seldom need 
water. Perhaps, from the shedding of the foliage to the 
commencement of vegetation, three or four times will be 
sufficient. Particular attention should be paid to the state 
of health and of growth, in which the plants respectively 
are, in the application of water : otherwise much mischief 
may be done, and many entirely ruined. 

Green-house plants being now in an absolutely inactive 
state, require little more water than merely to keep the earth 
about their roots from becoming perfectly dry, by occasion- 
ally applying a very small quantity at the root ; and, if done 
with a watering-pot, as described under this head in the 
hot-house of this month, very little will be spilt in the house 
to increase dampness, which, if it does appear, by any of the 
leaves of the plants becoming musty, they must be instantly 
picked off; and, if it increases, give a little fire and air. 
Succulent plants will not need any water during this month, 
unless omitted in December. 



CAMELLIA JAPONICA. 

This magnificent and attractive flower, with all its splendid 
varieties, will, about this time, begin to open its beautiful 
flowers. But for this admired genus of plants, our green- 
houses at this season would be void of allurement. It is, in 
this country, subject to the red spider, and more especially 
in this city, which appears to be from the nature of the air. 
The effects of the spider on these plants, if not prevented, 
would prove fatal ; as, from appearances, many have died by 
it in several collections. If it has reached a great extent, 
the leaves are brownish, having the appearance of being de- 
cayed or scorched with the sun. In taking hold of the leaf, 



188 GREEN-HOUSE — OP CAPE BULBS, ETC. [January. 

it feels soft, and altogether seems to have lost its nutritive 
substance ; and when the young foliage expands, it becomes 
covered with dark brown spots, and finally very much dis- 
figured; and when in this state the red spider is severe, and, 
ultimately, death ensues. 

If any of the plants are affected as above described, take 
a sponge, and wash every leaf minutely with soft water, and 
syringe them with water three or four times a week, which 
will clean them. All the young foliage will be healthy, and 
that which has been affected will fall off; however, preven- 
tion is better than cure ; and if the Camellias are properly 
syringed every evening during summer, and once or twice a 
week during winter, they will never be subject to the ravages 
of that destructive insect. 

Tie up any of the flowers that are expanded, to stakes, in 
case of accident ; and, in syringing, observe not to let any 
water fall on the flowers, as it causes premature decay and 
change of colour. 



OF ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC. 

As there will perhaps be more leisure in the green-house 
this month than in any other during the winter, it is pre- 
sumed that there will not be a moment lost. If any of the 
trees are infested with insects, these, being now in their in- 
active state, may be more easily destroyed than at any ether 
time. It is the brown scaly insect that generally infests 
them. For treatment, see Hot-house, January. The plant 
or tree after being washed, before it becomes dry, will re- 
quire to be syringed with water, otherwise the dust will ad- 
here to the glutinous particles of the soap. Set the plant in 
an airy situation to dry, in case of damp. There are several 
others subject to this insect, such as Myrtles, Oleas, Olean- 
ders, &c, which treat in the same manner. Be careful that 
these trees are not over-watered ; if the soil is moist, it is 
sufficient. 



OF CAPE BULBS, ETC. 

If there are any out of the ground, it is time that the 
whole were potted, such as Lachendlia, Wachrndorfia, 



February^ GREEN-HOUSE. 189 

Eiuomis, Ixia, Gladiolus, with several others. Keep them 
in the shade until they begin to grow; then put them on 
shelves near the light. Those that are growing must be kept 
in front of the house, to prevent them being weak. Wachen- 
clorfia has a beautiful large red tuberous root, and requires a 
pot about six or seven inches deep. 



OF HYACINTHS AND OTHER BULBOUS ROOTS. 

All these roots must be carefully examined. In case slugs 
or snails are preying upon the embryo of the flower, some of 
those that are farthest advanced may be put for a few weeks 
in the hot-house. It will greatly accelerate their flowering; 
but they must be brought out again before the florets expand, 
and carefully tied up, leaving room for the increase and 
extension of the flower-stem. Give them plenty of water, 
and if saucers can be placed under them to retain it, it will 
be of advantage. Change the water every week on those 
that are in glasses, and keep all the growing bulbs near the 
light. Xarcissus, Jonquils, &c, may be similarly treated. 



FEBRUARY. 

The directions given last month respecting the airing and 
temperature of the house, may still be followed, differing only 
in admitting air more freely as the season advances, and, 
according to the power the sun has on the glass, which now 
begins to be considerable. 

If the weather is tolerably mild, air may be admitted in 
time of sunshine, so as to keep the mercury as low as 50°, 
but be cautious in cold, cloudy, frosty weather. It is a 
practice with many in such weather to keep the shutters on 
the house night and day for the space of a week, and 
sometimes more, never entering it; and, when the weather 
has induced them to look in, they find that the frost and 
damp have made many lifeless subjects; whereas, had the 



190 GREEN-HOUSE — OF CAPE BULBS, ETC. [February. 

house and plants been attended to, in taking off the shutters, 
and giving a little fire when requisite, all would have been 
in safety, and many plants, that cannot be replaced, still in 
the collection. • 

When watering, strictly adhere to the direction of last 
month, except with Geranhims, and other soft-wooded plants, 
which require a little more water towards the end of the 
month. If the days are mild and sunny about eight or nine 
o'clock in the morning, all the plants would be benefited by 
a gentle syringing, which retards the progress of insects, and 
accelerates vegetation. 

Succulents, such as Cactus, Mescmurydnthemum, Aloes, 
Furcrceas, Crdssulas, Cotyledon*, &c, will very seldom need 
water ; at the same time keep them from getting as dry as 
powder. 



OF ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC. 

Similar treatment to that recommended last month will 
do for this. Where the soil in the tubs or pots requires to 
be enriched, take of bone-dust or shavings, and fresh sheep 
dung, equal quantities ; put the mixture into a large tub or 
barrel, until one-third full ; and fill it up with water. Stir 
it well two or three times every day till it ferments, then 
give each tree one good watering with the compound. Con- 
tinue to mix up afresh, and let it stand another week, and 
so on until all the trees requiring it arc watered. This 
watering will greatly enrich the soil and invigorate the 
roots. 



OF CAPE BULBS, ETC. 

The bulbs of Ferrar'ia undulata, and F. antherbsa, that 
were taken out of the pots in October, will now require to 
be planted. Five-inch pots will be large enough for good 
roots. The grand criterion for planting bulbs is when there 
is a protuberant appearance about the bottom, or root part 
of the bulb, showing by a principle of nature the true time 
for transplanting. When bulbous roots of any description 
appear above ground, they ought to be placed in an airy 



February.] green-house — camellia japoxica. 191 

situation. They are very frequently placed under other 
plants by the inexperienced, until they show their flowers, 
and then brought to the light, having weak flowers, and 
comparatively of momentary existence. 

Hyacinths, Xarcissus, Gladiolus, I.cia, &c., having flower- 
stems, ought to have support, to prevent accident, espe- 
cially the two former; keep them nigh the glass, and water 
freely. Change the water regularly once or twice a-week 
in the bulb glasses, observing that their roots are never 
allowed to become matted with fetid water. Any of the 
above plants that are in flower might, if desired, be taken 
into the drawing-room or parlour, washing the pots clean, 
and putting saucers under them, keeping therein a little 
water. Twice a-week the decayed ones can be taken out, 
and supplanted with those that are coming into bloom. 



CAMELLIA JAPOXICA 

Will, in this month, show a profusion of flowers; and, 
where there is a variety, they have truly a magnificent ap- 
pearance. From a good selection, endless varieties, by seed, 
of exquisite beauty, might be obtained by attention to the 
following rule : The best to select for bearing seed are, Car- 
ried, Donkelaari, Rubricaulis, Tricolour, King, and Wara- 
tah, and, in many instances, the pistil, or pistillum of Varie- 
gata, liegalis, Alexina, and Miss Percival are perfect, with 
several others. When any of the above are newly expanded 
( Waratah is most perfect about one day before full expansion), 
take a fine camel-hair pencil, and put it gently on the farina 
or pollen, from the double sorts, which is a yellow substance 
on the anthers, and, when ripe, appears in thousands of 
small particles. Then, with this on the pencil, dust it lightly 
on the stile of those intended to carry seed. Between the 
hours of ten and twelve in the forenoon is the most proper 
time for the operation ; the seed will be ripe in September 
or October, which will be taken notice of, and directions 
given. For other particulars on cleaning and syringing, see 
January under this head. 



192 GREEN-HOUSE — OF ■ SHIFTING, ETC [February. 



OF SHIFTING, ETC. 

The best time to re-pot Camellias is in September or 
October. The most general time in shifting Camellias is in 
August, indiscriminately with other plants ; and, if then 
not very gently handled, bad roots eventually are produced. 
Frequently very fine plants have been killed by probing, 
and breaking the young fibrous roots, thus causing mortifica- 
tion. 

In the process, do not, by any means, break or bruise any 
of the roots ; and do not give large pots, with the idea of 
making them grow fast ; it acts on most plants diametrically 
opposite to what is intended. A pot one or two inches 
wider and deeper than the one they have been in previously, 
is sufficient. Healthy plants, under five feet, will not re- 
quire shifting oftener than once in two years ; from five feet 
upward, in three or four years, according to the health of 
the plants. This treatment, in the opinion of some, will 
appear insufficient for their support : it will be found enough 
with a top-dressing every year to keep them in a healthy 
flowering condition, the soil being according to our de- 
scription. 

On turning the plant out of the pot, it may easily be ob- 
served if the soil has, in any degree, been congenial to it ; 
for, if so, the roots will be growing all round the ball ; if 
otherwise, no roots will appear. 

Therefore, with a blunt-pointed stick, probe away all the 
bad earth until you come to the roots ; then put the plant 
in a pot about one inch in diameter larger than the com- 
bined roots, previously putting a few small pieces of broken 
pots, or clean gravel, to drain off the superabundant moist- 
ure, and give light waterings, as the roots in this case will 
grow but slowly. 

Top-dress all that do not require shifting, probe out the 
soil down to the roots, and by the side of the pot, taking 
care not to break the fibres ; then fill up with fresh earth, 
watering gently with a rose on the watering-pot to settle it. 



March.] GREEN-IIOUSE. 193 



OF CLEANING, ETC. 

If any of the plants require cleaning, either by fumigation 
or otherwise, let it be done before the young foliage appears, 
according to the directions heretofore given. Likewise tie 
neatly all that require it, clean and top-dress those that will 
not be shifted, having every plant, and all in the green- 
house, in perfect order before the throng of spring com- 
mences. The weather will now admit, in very fine mornings, 
of the plants being syringed, which may be done between 
seven and eight o'clock ; and the path or pavement should 
be washed out once a-week, which is a great improvement to 
the appearance of the whole interior. 

In winter, when any glass is broken it should be imme- 
diately mended. Broken glass in cold nights causes a very 
destructive current of air. It should always be made water- 
tight, for if the drops fall into the pots upon the roots, they 
will frequently prove fatal to the plants; therefore care ought 
to be taken during rain to remove those that stand in any 
manner exposed. 



MARCH. 



The plants in this compartment will begin to assume a 
different aspect, and air must be admitted every day if practi- 
cable, giving large portions in sunshine by the sashes regu- 
larly over all the house, opening those of the front a little, 
and likewise the doors in fine mild days. To perform this 
judiciously, give a little about eight or nine o'clock, more at 
ten, and the whole from eleven till twelve o'clock, shutting 
again by degrees. 

Eire heat will now be dispensed with, but in frosty nights 
have the shutters on about sundown. The sun is now power- 
ful, and the house can be early shut up in the afternoon, and 
will gain as much natural heat as will keep up the required 
temperature, viz., 36° to 45°. Perhaps there may be un- 

17 



194 GREEN-HOUSE — OF ORANGES, ETC. [March. 

commonly cold weather : at such times he attentive to ward 
off danger hy applying artificial heat. 



OF WATERING. 

Look over the pots and tubs at least every alternate day, 
to see where water is wanted. In watering, too much 
caution cannot he used, especially during winter and the 
commencement of spring. It was observed last month what 
would be the effect of too much water. It may be remarked, 
that if the exterior of the pot is very damp, the soil inside is 
too wet, and in that state, is uncongenial to vegetation, which 
now begins to start, and ought, by all possible means, to be 
encouraged, which we do very effectually with Guano water 
once a-week, for a few weeks, using about one pound to five 
gallons of water, allowing it to stand twenty-four hours, and 
stir it up before using. If you are troubled with worms in 
the pots, give one or two waterings with lime-water, one 
pound of lime in four gallons of water; allow it to stand 
twelve hours to settle, pour the clear water into another 
vessel, and use it only. People may be frequently observed 
watering all plants indiscriminately, not taking the trouble 
to look into or feel the state of the soil in the pots or tubs, 
and thus, by going over them three or four times in this 
manner, will be sufficient to put the plants in such a state 
that they will not be recruited for some months. Hence the 
reason of so many sickly plants. 

Camellias, where there are collections, will continue to 
flower. Treat them according to the directions given last 
month. 



OF ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC. 

Be sure they are not too wet, as too much humidity as 
well as aridity causes their foliage to have a yellow appear- 
ance, with this difference, that in the former case the foliage 
is the same to the touch as when green ; but in the latter, it 
is soft and dry. We have observed trees in tubs and half 
barrels, with holes all round their sides. This is a ludicrous 
idea, having the appearance of keeping the water from reach- 



March!\ GREEN-HOUSE — GERANIUMS. 195 

ing the bottom of the tub or barrel. For the best kind of 
tub for large trees, see August under this head. If any of 
the trees have stunted, straggling, or irregular heads about 
the end of this month or beginning of next, head or cut them 
down to the shape desired. The old wood will push fresh 
shoots. You may cut close, or shorten less or more, accord- 
ing as you desire young shoots to arise ; at the same time 
observe that you do not cut below the graft or inoculation. 
Trees thus headed down should be kept until May, and then 
planted in the garden (see May), or, if that cannot be done, 
turn it out, and reduce the ball of earth by probing with a 
pointed stick all round the sides and bottom of the ball, 
cutting off any very matted roots. If any of the roots are 
decayed, cut them into the sound wood. By being thus re- 
duced, it will go into the same pot or tub, if not a less one. 
Having a good supply of fresh earth ready, put a few inches 
in the bottom of the pot or tub, place the tree therein, and 
fill all around, at the same time pressing it down with the 
hand or a stick. Give very little water until there are signs 
of vegetation. 



MYRTLES, OLEANDERS, ETC. 

These, with similar exotics, may be treated as above. If 
any of them have been infected with the scaly insect, after 
heading down, &c, scrub the remaining stems with a strong 
decoction of tobacco, heated to about 100°. Afterward clean 
with soap and water. 



GERANIUMS. 

These will be growing freely. Keep them in airy situa- 
tions, so that they may not grow too weak, and flower im- 
perfectly. To flower these plants strong and of good colour, 
they must not be crowded together, neither far from the 
light, and have plenty of air admitted to them when the 
weather is favourable. Keep them free from the green-fly, by 
fumigating frequently. 



196 green-house — repotting. [March. 



HERBACEOUS PLANTS. 



Plants of this character will, by the first of the month, 
begin to grow. The best time to divide and fresh-pot them 
is when the young shoots are about one inch above ground. 
See under the head Shifting in this month. 



OP CAPE BULBS, ETC. 

Cape Bulbs, such as Lachencdias, Oxtdis, I.rias, Gladi- 
olus, Watsonias, Babidnas, &c, will, in many of the species, 
be showing flower. Keep all of them near the glass, to 
prevent them from being weak and unsightly. 

Hyacinths, Tulips, Narcissxis, &c. — Those that have been 
kept in the green-house during winter will be in great per- 
fection. Have all the flower-stems tied up neatly to small 
stakes (which, if painted green, will look much better), and 
keep them from the direct rays of the sun. The front of 
the house, perhaps, will be the best situation. They must 
be freely watered while in flower. Where there is conveni- 
ence, it will be essential to keep the pots in saucers contain- 
ing water : it will strengthen both stems and flowers, and 
likewise preserve them longer in perfection. Those that are 
blooming should be put aside, and watered sparingly until 
the foliage begins to decay, when the pots may be laid on 
their sides to ripen the bulbs. 



REPOTTING. 

Wc have always considered that this month is the best 
period for repotting the generality of Cape and New Holland 
plants, and more especially those that you are desirous of 
encouraging. Large plants of the Citrus, Mi/rtus, and 
Oleander tribes may be deferred till August : these are of a 
strong, robust habit, and will not be affected at that period; 
ami they will then be out of doors, and more room can be 
had for the operation, but by no means defer repotting your 
Acacias, Ericas, Leptdspermum, Epacris, &c.j and, for the 
guidance of our more iuexperienced friends, we give a de- 



March."] green-house — repotting. 197 

scriptive list of many of the finest, with a faint outline of 
their characters and general treatment, which will prove a 
desideratum for those who are inexperienced, and strangers 
to the beauties, pleasures, and arts of exotic flora culture. 
Therefore, if you have any of the following plants that you 
are desirous of encouraging, they should be repotted this or 
next month at the latest. Large plants will not require it, 
if they were done in August. Pots one size larger than those 
that they are in are sufficient. 

Acacias and Mvmbms being now united into one genus, 
there are above two hundred species. About one hundred 
and thirty belong to the green-house. Among such a beau- 
tiful family, both for elegance of flower and beauty of foliage, 
it will be difficult to specify the most handsome and desirable 
for this department. A. dealbdta, A. y/aucescens, A. vcrti- 
i-iUdfa, A. Jiorabiinda, A. diffusa, A. armdta, A. decipiens, 
A. fragrans, A pidcliella, A. lophdntha, A. deciirrens, A. 
piibescens, A. myrtifulia, A. conspictia, A. linearis, kc. 
These will afford a great variety of foliage, and are very de- 
sirable, flowering principally in winter, or early in spring. 
The flowers of those belonging to the gi'een-house are of a 
yellow or straw colour ; the most of those that are red or pur- 
ple, with the celebrated medicinal species, belong to the 
hot-house, for which see May. There are some of the species 
very subject to the white scaly insect, which must be attended 
to, that they may not get to any extent. (Soil No. 1.) 

Agapdntlms, three species. A. vmhdldtus, with bright 
blue flowers, is very celebrated, and well known in the col- 
lections of the country. There is a variegated variety of it 
highly desirable, the foliage being white striped, and fre- 
quently the flower stem and the flower A. dlbidus has pale 
white flowers, and as yet rather scarce. They have very 
strong roots, and require plenty of freedom. Plants are 
always large before they flower, and when the pots, by fre- 
quent shifting, become inconvenient, the plant should be 
divested of all the earth, and, if too large, divide it, cutting 
off the strongest of the fibres ; then they will admit of being 
put into smaller pots. If the above operation is performed 
in August or September, it will not retard their flowering, 
which, when well grown, is very handsome, the flower-stem 
arising about three feet, and crowned with twenty or thirty 
blossoms, continuing to bloom successively. (Soil No. 12.) 

17* 



198 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

Acliimenes — about sixteen species. The type of this new 
genus has been long known in our collections under the 
name of Trevirania coccinea, now A. coccinea, flowers bright 
scaidet; A. lonyiflora, large blue; A. yiandijiora, fine rose; 
A. hirsuta, bright rosy purple; A. rosea, profuse flowering, 
and A. picta, the foliage of which is beautifully variegated 
and striped; A. peduncalata, spotted; A. elrgans, purple; 
A. pi/ropa ; A patens ; with a host of other new and worth- 
less sorts ; all inferior to the above, though some of them 
cost us half a guinea each. They have all scaly tuberous 
roots requiring the pots to be kept entirely dry during winter ; 
in this month they should be taken from the old soil and 
planted into fresh, giving gentle waterings till the} r begin to 
grow. They delight in a warm close moist atmosphere, and 
will bloom freely from July to October. (Soil No. 10.) 

Aloe. Nearly a hundred species of grotesque-looking 
succulent plants, and are principally natives of the Cape of 
Good Hope, and, consequently, will do well in the warmest 
part of the green-house, although, when convenient, they 
frequently get a situation in the hot-house. A* nth/aris 
kown as ^1. barbadensis, has orange-yellow flowers; A. 
obi (qua, now called Gastkria obliqua; A. diclwtoma, and A. 
variegdta, which is perhaps the finest of the genus : the 
leaves are beautifully striped, and commonly known as the 
partridge-breast Aloe ; flowers scarlet and green. They ought 
to have very little water, once a month is sufficient. They 
would grow without it, and several of them would also grow 
by being suspended in the house, without earth or any sub- 
stitute about their roots, by being frequently sprinkled with 
water. Few of them are admired for the beauty of their 
flowers, but the whole are considered curious. They flower 
from May to September. (Soil No. 9.) 

Alonsdas, five species, all soft-wooded, small, shrubby 
plants, with scarlet flowers. A. incisifolia is known among 
us under the name of Hemimeris urticifolia, and A. linearis 
as H. linearis. If well treated, they form very handsome 
plants, and flower freely. They will not bear strong fumi- 
gation ; and, when the house is under that operation, they 
must be put on the floor of the green-house, where they will 
not be so much affected. They flower from April to August. 
(Soil No. 9.) 

Aloi/sa cilrioddra, known in our collections as verbena 



March.'] green-house — repotting. 199 

triphyUa. The flowers are small, in long spikes of a pale 
lilac colour ; the celebrity of the plant is in the delightful 
odour of its foliage, which is linear, lanceolate, and ternate. 
It is of very easy culture, and has been known to survive 
winter in the open air in Philadelphia. Where large plants 
are desired, they should be planted in the ground during 
summer, and lifted in November, and put in a dry cellar or 
under the stage in the green-house. Before they begin to 
grow in the spring, trim the plants into a neat shape. 
(Soil No. 9.) 

Ahiroemerias, about sixteen species, all exceedingly de- 
sirable, and many of them particularly beautiful ; such are 
A. durea, golden-flowered; A. bicolor, salmon and orange; 
A. carminata, carmine-coloured; A. Sbokerii, rose-coloured; 
A. pelegrina, elegantly spotted; A. pukhella, red-flowered, 
and will grow six feet high, having its shoots crowned with 
a profusion of flowers; A. psittaclna, red, yellow and green; 
A. tricolor, black, white and yellow ; very beautiful. They 
have, generally, tuberous roots, and should be potted into 
fresh soil as soon as they show symptoms of growth, and 
they will require repotting about every month previous to 
flowering, taking care never to break the ball of earth while 
they are in a growing state. (Soil No. 10.) 

Amaryllis. This is a genus of splendid flowering bulbs, 
containing about eighty species and one hundred and forty 
varieties. They are natives of South America, but more 
than one-half of them are hybrids grown from seed by cul- 
tivators. They are generally kept in the hot-house, but in 
our climate will do perfectly well in the green-house ; and 
we have no doubt that in a few years many of them will be 
so acclimated as to keep as garden bulbs, planting about 
the end of April, and lifting them in October. As the 
beauty of these plants is in the flowers, it will be proper to 
give a small description of a few of them. A. Leila, pure 
white striped with rose ; A. Bartonii, creamy white striped 
with pink ; A. Buistii, large pure white, striped with cherry 
colour; A. ignescens, bright red, with white at the base of 
the petals. A; Jolinsbni, the flowers are a deep scarlet, 
with a white streak in the centre of each petal, four bloom 
on a stem of about two feet, each flower about six inches in 
diameter; a bulb well established has two stems. A. reglna, 
Mexican Lily, has large scarlet pendent flowers, tube of the 



200 green-house — repotting. [March. 

flower fringed-like, with three or four on the stem. A. 
vittata is an admired species with scarlet flowers, striped 
with pure white ; there are two or three varieties of it ; 
corolla canipanulate, three or four on the stem, about three 
inches in diameter; petals a little undulate. A. filhpda , 
flower scarlet, large, tube striped, petals acute, two flowers 
on the stem. A. dulica is magnificent, has from two to 
four flowers about seven inches in diameter, erect on a stem 
about two and a half feet high ; six petals, strongly united 
to the capsule, bottom of the petals green, connected with 
spots of dark crimson, which spread into fine transparent 
red, covered with rich tints, nerves very perceptible, anthers 
bold; it is called Crowned Amaryllis. A. jisiddcina, 
Parrot Amaryllis, is scarlet striped with green, two or more 
flowers on the stem, each about five inches in diameter. 
A. longifolia, is perfectly hardy ; flowers pink, inclining to 
white, in large umbels, leaves long, glaucous, and is a de- 
sirable garden bulb. A. lowjiflbra striata has pure white 
flowers with bright pink stripes, and each flower is about 
seven inches long; it was introduced from South America 
by Mrs. R. Alsop, and is a most superb flowering bulb. A. 
solandrijidra, large red ; A. elegdns, red and green, and 
many other superb kinds, especially the hybrid sorts; from 
Johnsbni there are above twenty cultivated varieties; from 
formbsa about twelve; and from Grijjini about ten, all of 
them esteemed. Where they have been kept in the earth in 
which they were grown last year, the ball ought at this 
repotting to be reduced ; when the bulbs are in a growing 
state, they ought to have plenty of water, and be fully 
exposed to the sun, so that the foliage may have its full 
influence, and as the roots grow to the outside of the earth, 
give them another and larger pot. They must have plenty 
of drainage, and be kept from heavy rains. We prefer 
growing them in the green-house all summer, or into frames 
under glass; about the end of October the watering must be 
gradually withheld, and by the middle of November put the 
bulbs where they will be kept dry till February or March 
next, when they must be again potted (in soil No. 12). 

Araia-aria. — This noble genus contains four species, which 
are without exception the most noble plants we are acquainted 
with, for the beauty of their foliage and symmetry of their 
growth, that belong to the green-house. A. exce/sa, Norfolk 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 201 

Island Pine, has leaves closely imbricated as if with a coat of 
mail, and are imperishable. A. imbricuta, Chile Pine, is 
one of the grandest of trees, and is the hardiest of the genus, 
grows in the open air with me ; the leaves are also closely 
imbricated. A. bruzih'ensis is more tender and more rapid 
in growth. The foliage of either of the species will adhere 
to the wood many years after the plant is dead. They are 
all highly valued ; the pots must be well drained ; for if the 
plants get much water while dormant, the foliage becomes 
yellow, and never attains its beautiful green colour again ; 
otherwise they are easily grown. (Soil No. 11.) 

Arbutus, ten exotic species and six varieties. They are 
generally hardy in England; but we question if they stand 
out in the Middle States. A. unldo rubra has the finest 
crimson flowers; A. serratifolia the largest panicles; and A. 
andvdchne the finest foliage; and very profuse of bloom. 
They flower in nodding panicles. A. candriensis has very 
neat pink flowers. They bear a pretty fruit similar to a 
strawberry; hence it is called strawberry tree, and the fruit 
will remain on the bush a long time. They are very fine 
evergreens, and if any of them become acclimated, the}* will 
be a great acquisition to our gardens. In the Southern States 
they make lovely evergreen shrubs. (Soil No. 9.) 

A.ster argophyllus, or musk plant, has no beauty in its 
flowers, but is esteemed by some for its musky odour when the 
leaves are gently rubbed. Leaves ovate, lanceolate, and silky 
beneath ; the plant is of strong growth. (Soil No. 9.) 

Aiicuba japonica is the only species. The flowers are 
small and almost insignificant, colour purple ; but the foliage 
is a desirable object, being yellow, spotted, or blotched. It is 
tolerably hardy, and withstands our winters. It prefers shade, 
and, if the situation were such when planted out, it would 
grow more freely. The hot rays of the sun are very preju- 
dicial to its growth. It is an evergreen shrub, and very de- 
sirable. (Soil No. 2.) 

Azdhas. The Chinese varieties of Azalea indica are 
almost without an end ; we might properly say that they are 
without end ; but the finest we have seen are those we shall 
enumerate. The one that has been longest known in the 
collections of this country is Indt'ca, a most splendid shrub, 
with red flowers and dark spots. Indica alba, the flowers of 
the purest white, rather larger than the former. Indica pur- 



202 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

piirea pleno, double purple. This variety is not so fine as 
many of the others. Properly it is not purple, or if it may 
be termed so, the colour is very light, and the flower irregular. 
Indica phoenicea, rich purple and a free grower. Indica 
smithii of the French, and Indica purpurea of the English, 
are alike, pale lilac and very profuse of flower. Indica coc- 
cinea, bright scarlet, a superb variety, and extremely abun- 
dant of bloom. Indica fiore variegdta flowers beautifully 
variegated, pink and white. Lateritia, salmon colour, fine. 
Williamsii, bright, rich crimson. Powleii, rosy purple. 
Prince Albert, very large, bright rosy crimson, of strong 
growth. Maitlandii, pure white, striped with pink, dwarf 
habit. Copeii, bright rose. Daniehiana, bright red. In- 
dica cdrnea, delicate, flesh colour. Indica nova blanv, white, 
with a greenish-yellow spot on the upper petals. Rubro plow, 
double red, of very erect growth. Spectabilis, rose and violet. 
Indica elegdns, bright rosy purple, a very profuse flowerer 
and of a neat habit. Indica Gillinyluonia, very large lilac, 
and of a strong habit. Striata formosissima, white striped 
rose. Harticiij, very bright crimson. Azalea sinensis [does 
not belong to the \ndica tribe ; it is of a hard woody nature, 
flowers of a golden yellow, in large clusters ; it no doubt will 
prove a hardy species. The varieties and sub-varieties of in- 
dica will, in a few years, be so numerous that the greatest dif- 
ficulty will be to keep clear of those that are not decidedly 
distinct; to obtain this object our own feeble exertious will 
be industriously applied. We might have named a few other 
varieties, but they so nearly approach some of the above, that 
it is better to avoid them. A choice selection of the Chinese 
Azalea ought to be in every green-house j they arc all easy of 
culture, and bloom freely from February to May. The pots 
must be well drained and shaded from the sun during summer, 
though the tops of the plants do best to have the full rays, to 
which we have them fully exposed, and find that by such 
treatment they are every year completely covered with their 
flowers and grow more stiff in habit than when the whole 
plant is shaded. They should be repotted as soon as done 
flowering in soil No. G when they are flowering plants, and in 
soil No. 5 when young plants. 

Bdnksias. There are about thirty-two species, all curious 
in flower, and handsome and various in foliage ; flowers in 
large heads of cone shape, anthers mostly green, and continue 
a considerable time in flower ; produces a cone in shape of a 



March."] green-house — repotting. 203 

pine, but not imbricate. The substance is as hard as bone, 
and contains many seeds. A cone of B. grdndis in our pos- 
session weighs one pound and twelve ounces, and contains 
about one hundred and seven seeds. Those most admired for 
the foliage are, B. dentdta, B. semiila, B. serrdto, B. latifolia, 
B. grdndis, which is the largest. B. speciosa has the longest 
foliage. B. Cunninglidmii, B. spinulose, B. palludosa, and 
B. repens, these will afford a good variety. B. verticilldta 
is entirely different in appearance from the others. 

They must be well drained, and placed in an airy part of 
the green-house. Great care should be taken that they do 
not get too dry, for they seldom recover if allowed to flag for 
want of water. This genus is named in honour of Sir Joseph 
Banks, a distinguished promoter of the study of natural his- 
tory. (Soil No. 6.) 

Baroxmas, above ten species of pretty plants, separated 
from Diosma. B. serrati/olia, white; JB, pulcJiella, purple ' } 
B. fcctidXssima, blush; B. odordta, white; and B. dioica, 
pink, are the finest. (Soil No. 8.) 

Beaufdrtias, only two species. B. dccussdta is splendid; 
the flowers come out of the wood with stamens in fine parcels, 
colour bright scarlet, foliage decussate, oval, and many-nerved, 
bloom persistent, and much esteemed. B. spdrsa, in flower 
similar to the other; colour light pink, foliage scattered, both 
of easy culture, and flower abundantly. (Soil No. 8.) 

Begonias, a few species, are desirable for the green-house 
especially. B./uchsioidcs, scarlet; B. incarndta, flesh-colour, 
and blooms during winter; B. zehrina, zebra-like, very pretty; 
they are of a soft woody nature, and should be kept in the 
warmest part of the green-house. (Soil No. 9.) 

B< uthdmia fragiftra. This beautiful new plant will make 
a splendid hardy evergreen for the Southern States, where it 
will produce its pale white flowers in July, and an abundance 
of fruit very much like strawberries, of a slight acid taste : 
but we are doubtful if it will fruit in our green-houses unless 
greatly encouraged. (Soil No. 9.) 

Bleiia hyacintluna is the only species belonging to the 
green-house, once known as Cymbidium JiyacintJunum. It 
is herbaceous, and before it begins to grow, divide the root, 
putting the best into sis-inch pots. The spike of flowers are 
hyacinth-like, and of a beautiful purple, flowering from April 
to July. (Soil No. 9.) 



204 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [JIarch. 

Bouvdrdlas, three, species. B. flava, yellow; B. pallida, 
pale red ; B. trvphylla is "well known among us, has brilliant 
scarlet flowers, and, when well grown, will flower beautifully 
from May till September. To keep the plants, they should 
be frequently renewed ; otherwise they are liable to grow 
Straggling and become subject to the small white scaly insect. 
(Soil No. 3.) 

Boronla is a beautiful genus of New Holland plants, con- 
tains about nine species ; most of them have been universally 
admired ; the flowers are star-like, rose-coloured, and some of 
them sweet-scented. B. pinnata grows and flowers freely. 
B. semddta, foliage serrated and very crowded, bearing the 
flowers on the extremity of the shoot, and does extremely well 
in this country ; the flowers are bright rose and sweet-scented. 
B. aldta has a fine appearance, and grows handsomely. The 
foliage is winged and pinnate, strong-scented ; of a hardy 
nature, and easy culture. They are in flower about April 
and May, and continue a considerable time ; are subject to 
mildew if not frequently syringed : drain the pots well. 
(Soil No. 8.) 

Brachyshnas, two species, both evergreen climbers. B. 
latifbllum has the best foliage, and large purple leguminose 
flowers. B. undulatum, flowers yellow, and more plentiful 
than the former, continuing in long succession. The pots 
require to be well drained ; very few plants of either in the 
country. (Soil No. 6.) 

Brugmanslm, four species of strong, coarse-growing plants, 
requiring great nourishment to flower them well. B. sauve- 
olens has very large white flowers, about five inches in dia- 
meter, and sweet-scented. B. sanguined has flowers with a 
green thorax ; the brim of the corolla is of a dark orange 
colour. B. Knight li, large half-double flowers of snowy white- 
ness, does well when planted in the open ground. B. Jlora- 
bunda, orange-coloured. They must have very frequent re- 
pottings, and be liberally supplied with water while growing. 
(Soil No. 18.) 

BrimiaSj about ten species; have heath-like foliage, very 
fine; generally, on close observation, found to be three-cor- 
nered. The flowers arc white and globular, the plant.*, when 
young, are very handsome ; the finest are, B. nodljlura, B. 
lanuginosa, B. combsa, B. abrotanoides, and B. formosa. 
They require an airy situation, and, in summer, to be pro- 



March.] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 205 

tected from the powerful rays of the sun. Drain the pots 
well. (Soil Xo. 6.) 

Bruasvigias are all large bulbs from the Cape of Good 
Hope, and will keep in the green-house during winter, but 
are better where they can obtain a situation in the hot-house. 
It is a splendid genus, containing about ten species. Some 
of the bulbs grow to an enormous size, and all of them, while 
growing, require a liberal supply of water ; but when dor- 
mant, it must be wholly withheld, and they should have large 
pots, to make them grow and flower in perfection. B. mid- 
ti flora, flowers scarlet and green ; the leaves lay on the sur- 
face of the pot. B. laticbma, flowers pale purple. B. Jose- 
phince has splendid rose-coloured flowers, and the most ad- 
mired species of the genus ; the foliage spreading, half-erect, 
and glaucous; flowers numerous, and in large umbels, on a 
stem two feet high, blooming successively : there is a variety 
that has striped flowers. 

Several other species have been given to different genera. 
B. falcata is now Ammdcharis falcata ; B. margindta, now 
Imhdfia ; and B. cilidris is now Buphone cilidris. They all 
flower in umbels, on stems from six inches to two feet ; flow- 
ers lily-like, with six petals. (Soil No. 12.) 

Burchellias, two species. B. capensis is a beautiful dwarf 
evergreen shrub, with tubular orange-coloured flowers, in large 
terminal clusters ; when well treated, grows and flowers freely, 
and highly deserving of attention. B. parviflora. differs from 
the above in the flowers being smaller and paler, and the 
foliage more pointed. (Soil Xo. 10.) 

Cactus : for descriptions of, see hot-house in May. 

Calceolaria. This genus of plants has undergone a com- 
plete revolution. Within these few years, hundreds of su- 
perb hybrid varieties have been brought to notice, many of 
them truly splendid. With us the herbaceous kinds are very 
delicate duriDg summer; they are generally all cut off by our 
intense heat, or severe droughts. The shrubby varieties 
appear to withstand the vicissitudes of our climate better, 
though, as yet, we confess we are not even altogether success- 
ful in their summer culture. However, a few of them have 
done well, and are C. angustlfblia, bright yellow, and in 
great profusion ; C. Jupiter, brown and yellow; C. marjo- 
ria.ua superha, nearly scarlet; C. sm\thii,Ted and yellow; C. 
ignea, bright crimson ; C. meteor, dark crimson ; C. Vulcan, 

18 



206 green-house — repottixg. [March. 

dark red ; C maculata, superbly marked with red or crimson. 
There are many others of very great merit of the shrubby 
kinds cultivated in Europe, such as whites of different shades, 
dark crimsons, with white capes, and others blending into 
almost every description of colour and character. Any quan- 
tity of new sorts may be obtained by cross impregnation be- 
tween any two of very different colours ; the seeds will ripen 
in July, when they may be sown on light soil, and they will 
flower the following season. Flowering plants require to be 
greatly encouraged, and must be shaded during summer from 
the violent noonday sun. (Soil No. 10.) 

C'alofhamnus, four species. This genus is named in allu- 
sion to the splendid appearance of the branches, covered with 
scarlet flowers, of curious construction, which come out of the 
old wood. All the species are of easy culture, and very like 
dwarf pines. 0. quadinffida has the largest flowers ; ( '. dn- 
vata the most abundant. They are all evergreens, and flower 
from April to November, and are very desirable in a collec- 
tion. (Soil No. 6.) 

Callieoma serratifblia, the only species, and remarkable 
for tufted yellow heads of flowers, which come out at the 
axils, and continue from May to July. The foliage is ovate, 
lanceolate, deeply serrated and opposite. (Soil No. 6.) 

Camellias. There are about eight distinct species of 
this plant known in our collections ; and the varieties of 
japonica approach to one thousand, to which many are 
yearly added ; but, unfortunately, their merits are not fully 
scrutinized before they are sent forth to the floral world, 
under names representing and expressing every quality 
that is grand or beautiful in floral imagination. Such has 
been the rapid increase of varieties in Europe, and even in 
this country, that, in many instances, three or four distinct 
plants have come out under the same name ; consequently, 
a great confusion of names has been the result, which has 
caused much difficulty in attaining the best of the names. 
The collections of this country were kept comparatively 
pure till within the last few years, when the anxiety of our 
cultivators to obtain variety caused them to import from the 
French and German markets, which has thrown the no- 
menclature into an almost impenetrable chaos. But still 
we can unite in saying, "What species of plant is there 
which better merits the intelligent and vigilant care of the 



March.~\ GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 207 

amateur and horticulturist?" The elegance of its form, the 
beautiful verdure of its foliage, and the pure and brilliant 
colours of the large and elegant flowers, suificiently justify 
the admiration of all. In fact, we may say, there is not a 
green-house in which this lovely plant has not found a place, 
where it stands in the first rank of floral population. To 
give a full description of all the varieties we know would 
occupy this volume. However, we will give lucid details of 
nearly one hundred of the finest we have seen in cultivation. 
But, in regard to the shades and spots of colour, we must 
throw ourselves on the charity of our readers ; for many 
sorts are very capricious in that particular ; though styled 
self-coloured, they may come spotted, and even those that are 
generally spotted sometimes show themselves of one colour. 

Camellia euryoides, flowers small, single white, and a little 
fragrant ; plant of a slender growth. 

0. oleiferia is cultivated principally in China for the oil 
which is expressed from its seeds, which is much used in the 
domestic cookery of the country ; flower single white. 

C. Sesanqua, Lady Banks's. The foliage of this species 
is very small, and paler, and the green not so fine as any of 
the others. It seeds freely, and is often used as the female 
parent in producing new varieties ; flowers small, white, and 
single, with many anthers. There are a semi-double and 
double variety of it of the same colour. 

C. sesanqua rosea, or malliflbra of some, double pink, 
small flowers, but in very great profusion ; the plant is of a 
free, upright growth. The flowers are of about four weeks' 
duration ; it is very much esteemed. 

C. kissi. Small single white; the only species that is a 
native of Nepaul. 

O. reticulata was brought from China by Capt. Rawes in 
1822. The foliage is very characteristic, being stiff and flat, 
distinctly serrated, nerves deeply sunken ; flowers bright-rose, 
of a loose form, and above six inches in diameter, semi- 
double. From present appearance, it will never be so plenty 
as many of the others, being tardy of propagation ; only a 
few eyes on the extremity of each shoot make young wood, 
and if these are cut off", the plant does not seem to push 
afresh. Magnificent. 

G. Japonica, small, single, red. It is supposed that this 
is the type of all the garden-cultivated varieties of the Ca- 



208 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

viellia, though some are inclined to think that it is a varie- 
gated or striped species, not yet introduced, that has been 
the origin of so many beautiful Chinese sorts. 

The following are supposed to be its varieties : — 

C. alba-plena, common, double white, is admired by the 
most casual observer, and is generally considered a very 
superior flower, from the purity of its whiteness and the 
abundance of its large flowers, which are closely and regu- 
larly set with round petals. The foliage is large, and the 
plant grows freely ; we have seen one shoot grow two feet in 
one summer. It was imported into Europe from China, 
among the first of the varieties, about eighty years ago. 
Magnificent. 

C. simplex* alba, single white. It is mentioned some- 
where as being very sweet-scented, though not very percep- 
tible to us. The foliage and wood are very strong, the fine- 
striped sorts have been raised from it; consequently, it is 
particularly desirable as a stock to grow new varieties from. 
Its flowers are large and abundant. Good. 

C. althsefiora, hollyhock-flowered, is a great beauty, with 
large, double, dark-red flowers ; the veins are very prominent, 
petals frequently irregular; foliage large, smooth, and very 
dark green, and is much esteemed. Fine. 

C. anemonefibra, or Waratah (from the centre petals, 
having the appearance of the Waratah plant, Telopxa speci- 
osissima). This variety is very characteristic, both in flower 
and foliage. The flower is dark-crimson, with five regular, 
large, outside petals; those of the centre are very small and 
neatly plaited, with the style (female organ) prominent; the 
foliage is large and oblong, nerves very smooth, and the wood 
strong, bark light. Had this kind not been found, Ave would 
have been deprived of many most splendid varieties which 
have originated from it, and we have no doubt they may be- 
come as diversified as the roses of the garden ; this variety, 
in a collection, for that alone is invaluable. It seeds freely, 
and the pollen of any of the others applied to the style of 
this will produce a new variety, which seldom fails of being 

* We have now, 1839, in flower, a single white, very similar to 
this, which we have raised from the seed of Dahliajlura, a good, 
double red variety ; it, therefore, appears impossible to predict their 
character from the parent that produced the seed. 



March."] green-house — repotting. 209 

double, provided the pollen is from a double variety. It 
must be applied the first day that the flower is expanded, for 
the bloom is only of a few days' duration. Those that are 
not acquainted with the buds of this Camellia, will take them 
to be dead, because, before expansion, they are very dark 
brown, and have a dried appearance. Superb. 

G. amabilc. This exceedingly perfect flower was raised 
from seed by J. 13. Smith, Esq., of this city; it is regularly 
imbricated, the extreme petals are bright rose, shading to 
delicate pink, and then again shading in the centre to light 
red. The plant is full of foliage and of excellent habit, 
flower about three and half inches in diameter. Magnificent. 

G. atrorhbens, Loddiges' red, is a good variety; colour dark 
red, outside petals large, inside small and irregular, forming 
a very distinct character ; foliage stiff ; grows freely and 
flowers well ; and of long duration. We have seen a flower 
stand fresh on the plant two months ; however, that cannot 
be a rule, as it depends on the situation. Good. 

G. americana, blush, medium size, finely cupped form, 
generally spotted with rose, an American seedling by Mr. 
Dunlap, of N. Y. Magnificent. 

G. Alexina, rose white, spotted and striped, dark rose, im- 
bricated, and fully double foliage, dark green, cordate, a 
plant of neat habit. Stqierb. 

C. albicans, pure white, perfectly double, in shape, growth, 
and form, very like myrtifolia alba. Superb. 

G. Binneyii, rosy crimson, very perfect form, luxuriant 
foliage, of free growth and bloom. Superb. 

C. Bealiana, or Leana Sujjcrba, dark crimson, very large, 
superbly double, cup form. Magnificent. 

G. candidissima, purest white flowers, very large, four 
inches or more in diameter, full and most regularly imbri- 
cated, and resemble very much the old double white, though 
more perfect in form — leaves rather small, of an elongated 
form, smooth, and pale green, often spotted with yellow. 
The plant is of vigorous growth, and a Japan variety. Mag- 
nificent. 

G. cdmea, frequently known as Middlemist's blush. 
Double pink, one of the original varieties, and frequently 
produces seeds, from which many very fine varieties have 
been obtained ; grows freely. Good. 

G. chalmerii perfecta, delicate waxy rose, perfectly imbri- 
18* 



210 GREEN-IIOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

catecl form, flower medium size, very persistent, foliage pale 
green, plant of regular pyramidal growth. Magnificent. An 
American seedling in the possession of Mr. William Chalmers, 
gardener to the late Geo. Pepper, Esq. 

G. chandlerii or versicolor, perfectly double, colour vivid 
red, with occasional splashes of pure white ; the flowers vary, 
and are often only red — they are of long duration, from six 
to eight weeks; foliage large and dark glossy green. Maijni- 
ficent. 

C. colvillea, pale blush, with rose spots and pink stripes, 
is partially anemone-formed ; but very compact and of free 
growth ; leaves cordate. Superb. 

G. concinna, deep cherry red, a very perfectly imbricated 
double flower, about three and a half inches in diameter ; 
foliage generally a little undulated, wood slender. Super/). 

O. conspicua (Loddiges), a shrub of strong handsome 
growth, with large dark-green foliage ; flower very double ; 
five inches in diameter ; bright orange red, hemispherical 
shape ; petals erect, and appear as if three or four flowers 
were united ; it is profuse of bloom and very conspicuous. 
Magn ijicent. 

i '. coquette, rosy crimson, frequently blush, imbricated 
with large petals of a rather coarse texture ; foliage large 
cordate, pale green. Good. 

C. Gomtesse Nencini, pure white, beautifully striped with 
rose, of perfect formation ; foliage cordate acuminate, of good 
habit. Magnificent. 

G. Donkeldri, bright red, variegated and sprinkled with 
pure white, three rows of large petals about one inch broad 
and two inches long; centre full of stamens, flower fully four 
inches in diameter ; leaves about two inches broad and four 
inches long ; this will be an elegant variety to seed from, 
and is of Chinese origin. Magnificent. 

G. delectkssima, white, profusely striped with rose, exte- 
rior petals large and round ; those of the interior are closely 
get; flowers nearly four inches in diameter; leaves very large, 
ovate, acuminate. Superb. 

C. Duchess of Orleans, rose white, beautifully spotted or 
striped with rose, perfect form, large, a free bloomer. Mag- 
it ijicent. 

('. dorsettia or parthonidna, of the Belgians; leaves flat 
and closely set, of a dark shining green; flower very large, 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 211 

nearly five inches in diameter, of a pale red, mixed with rose 
and white ; petals closely imbricated, irregular, and numerous; 
those of the centre small. Magnificent. 

O. eclipse or Pressi, of the English, or imperialis of the 
French ; flower pure white, with rose stripes, four inches in 
diameter ; irregular, full, and double, with a few stamens 
appearing among the petals ; the whole flower forms an arched 
centre, almost hemispherical ; leaves long and pointed, of a 
clear rich green : we have seen flowers of this plant entirely 
rose. Magnificent. 

C. elegans (Chandler's), flower rosy red, fading to nearly 
white in the centre ; three and a half inches in diameter ; 
exterior petals large and rounded ; those of the interior very 
numerous, and beautifully harmonize ; forming, as it were, a 
depressed sphere ; a profuse bloomer, and of a neat habit. 
Magnificent. 

(J. eldta, violet crimson, spotted with white, flower three 
and a half inches in diameter, perfectly imbricated to the 
very centre, and of the most perfect double ; foliage dark 
green; plant of a good habit. Magnificent. 

C. elphinystbnia, red spotted with white, frequently four 
inches in diameter ; exterior petals very large, regularly gra- 
duating to the centre, which cover a few hidden stamens ; 
foliage dark green ; plant of a fine habit. Magnificent. 

C. Davy Crockett, rosy crimson, exceedingly large, fully 
five inches in diameter ; round petals fully double and very 
showy. Magnificent. 

C. De la Reine, white, frequently striped with dark rosy 
violet, very double ; a magnificent flower, but a plant with very 
indifferent foliage. 

0. Dunlops tvhite, pure white, perfectly imbricated : a free 
grower. Magnificent. 

C. cx\mia (Chandler's), flowers bright crimson, four 
inches in diameter, of a perfect double imbricated form ; 
foliage light green and deeply serrated ; nerves smooth ; it 
is of free growth, but with us does not bloom freely. Mag- 
nificent. 

G. Emily, an exceedingly large irregular flower; blush 
white, striped and spotted with rose ; foliage shining green ; 
plant of strong growth. Magnificent. 

C. Fultonii, pale waxy rose ; regular flower of medium 
size ; a profuse bloomer. Magnificent. 



212 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. \_Marc7i. 

C. Fdirlea, foliage large, ovate, acuminate ; of a smooth, 
shining dark green ; flowers nearly four inches in diameter, 
of a rich crimson, marked with pure white ; very double. 
Superb. 

C. Feastii, pure white, with a few spots of rose, fully 
double, imbricated, very distinct ; foliage dark green ; of free 
growth. Magnificent. A seedling by Mr. Feast, of Balti- 
more. 

C. fimbridta : fringed white. The size, shape, and set of 
the flower same as alba-plena, and the white as pure, with 
the edges of the petals deeply serrated, or rather fringed ; is 
equally as free in flowering, though not so strong in growth. 
It is universally admired, and in great demand. Magnifi- 
cent. 

C. fiavescens, or incdrnata. Lady Hume's blush, and by 
some called buff. It is a very double flower, beautifully 
regular and imbricated, and frequently hexangular, or star- 
like ; the bottom of the petals is most delicately tinged with 
blush ; on looking into it, it shows more like a blush-vapour 
than nature, and is a great favourite, and deservedly so : 
flowers and grows freely; foliage rhomboid, elongate, nerves 
very visible, surface smooth and pale-green, distinctly serrate; 
growth strong and erect. Magnificent. 

C. fiorida. Flower clear cherry-red, large, frequently 
above four inches in diameter; very persistent; exterior 
petals large and well-rounded ; the interior small and closely 
set, rising in the centre ; it is a profuse bloomer ; foliage 
dark green. The plant is of a neat and regular habit. Mag- 
nificent. 

C. Floyii, one of the most noble of the Camellias, both in 
flower and foliage ; leaves three inches wide and nearly five 
long ; smooth, dark-green plant of strong growth ; flower five 
inches in diameter, of a perfectly double form; the extremity 
is cherry-red, diverging to a pale-rose in the centre; the ex- 
terior petals are bold, round, and elegant, of a cup-shape 
when newly opened. It is frequently sold in Europe under 
the imposing name of Frederick the Great, though grown 
from seed by Mr. Floy, of New York, who has been very 
successful in producing several other esteemed sorts. Mag- 
nificent. 

C. Fordii, a free-growing plant, with lively, green foliage 
and graceful habit; flower dark-rose, three inches and a 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING- 213 

half in diameter, perfectly double, and regularly imbricated, 
forming a symmetrical bloom. Magnificent. 

C. formoscij foliage very dark green ; flower fully four 
inches in diameter, of a dark rose colour, regularly double, 
petals large and erect ; interior shortened, covering a few sta- 
mens. Superb. 

C. franhofortensis, or Wellingtoni, a plant of a very com- 
pact habit ; flower three inches and a half in diameter, beau- 
tiful rose, occasionally spotted with white. Magnificent. 

C. fidgens, flower three inches and a half in diameter, and 
very bright, double crimson, approaching to C. atrorubens, 
but more brilliant; petals regularly decreasing to the centre; 
foliage a lucid green, very smooth ; young wood and wood- 
buds have a red appearance. We have no doubt but it will 
occasionally seed ; if so, it will be a first-rate breeder. Su- 
perb. 

C. Gdesii, or Nancy Daicson. The leaves are large, 
ovate, oblong, and pointed; flowers above four inches in 
diameter, of a fine dark-red colour, often striped with white, 
and is " distinguished for fragrance as well as beauty." 
Magn ificent. 

C. grunella, foliage oval and acute, of a deep, glossy 
green, flower white, three inches and a half; rather irregular, 
but perfectly double, a profuse bloomer, and of good habit. 
Superb. 

C. Hendersdni, raised by the celebrated camellia-grower, 
Mr. Henderson, of "Woodhall, Scotland. It is a large flower, 
four inches and a half in diameter, beautifully imbricated, 
and perfectly double, of a bright rose-colour; foliage round, 
ovate, and distinctly serrated. Magnificent. 

C. Sampsteadii, large, rosy-crimson, quite double, with 
bold petals; foliage dark-green, heart-shaped, a free grower. 
An American seedling sent out by Messrs. Ritchie and 
Dick. 

C. Henri Favre, a beautiful rose-colour, of French origin, 
perfectly double, being similar to Landrethi. A free bloomer, 
foliage pale-green. Magnificent. 

G. Hosdckia, large, dark-crimson, nearly five inches in 
diameter ; flower rather flat, petals numerous, regularly 
decreasing to the centre, which has an occasional speck of 
white. It does seed, and will prove a first-rate variety for 



214 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

that purpose ; foliage long and pointed, rather drooping ; is 
of a free growth and bloom. Superb. 

G. imbriedta, foliage very large, three inches wide, and 
four and a half long, of a pale-green, often marked with 
white ; flowers rich crimson, almost invariably marked more 
or less with white ; they are full four inches in diameter ; 
the petals are round, and regularly disposed, and imbricated 
on each other, gradually decreasing to the centre, forming 
a most perfect flower. The plant grows freely, and blooms 
profusely; no collection can be perfect without it. Magnifi- 
cent. 

G. intermedia , is a sport from S. pseoniflbra ; it is a very 
large blush, beautifully suffused with rose. Magnificent. 

G. invincible, or pimctdta, flower three inches'and a half 
in diameter, rose-ground, marked and striped with cherry- 
red ; the circumference petals are broad and convex ; those of 
the centre small and erect. This Camellia sometimes pro- 
duces flowers entirely red or rose-coloured; it is of free 
growth ; leaves round, acuminate, and of a dark-green. Su- 
perb. 

C. Jeffersonii, rosy-crimson, perfectly imbricated to the 
centre ; flower of medium size ; foliage shining-green, three 
to four inches long, and two wide. A seedling by Dr. J. S. 
Gunnell, of Washington City. Magnificent. 

G. imbricata (Dunlop's), flowers rosy-crimson, most per- 
fectly formed, marked with white shading to blush ; foliage 
large, recurved, of a pale-green colour. Magnificent. 

C. Landrethii, or Jacksbnia, very beautiful pink, fading 
to the centre, a perfectly-double and finely-imbricated flower, 
about four inches in diameter, a free bloomer, and a plant of 
good habit; leaves ovate, acuminate, pale-green. We have 
seen the flower profusely spotted with white. This elegant 
Camellia was grown from seed by D. and C. Landreth, and 
bloomed first in the spring of 1829. Magnificent. 

C. latifdlia, leaves three inches wide, and four inches and 
a half long, point recurved, a fine glossy-green ; flower cherry 
red, cup-form, interior petals irregular, festooned, and curled, 
those of the exterior bold and round, about three inches and 
a half in diameter. Superb. 

C. Loivii, very dark crimson, imbricated flower; fine, bold 
petals; foliage cordate, palc-grecn. Magnificent. 

Mrs. Fetters, large, dark-red, shading to rose in the centre, 



March."] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 215 

perfectly imbricated ; fine round petals, very regularly dis- 
posed; foliage dark green. One of the best of its colour. 
Magnificent. 

C. mutdbilis fraversii, foliage very large and almost cor- 
date ; plant of an elegant and free growth ; leaves rather 
reflexed, and of a lively green, nerves very conspicuous ; 
flower four inches and a half in diameter, regular, and very 
double ; it opens a delicate rose, and soon changes to a violet 
purple, shaded with a faint line of white ; a unique plant 
and flower. Magnificent. 

C. myrtifolia, known in our collections as involuta. 
There are two varieties of it, major and minor; the former 
is certainly the best, and has a very handsome, large, and 
regular red flower ; the centre frequently is pink and purple ; 
it is much the shape of double white, only the petals are 
more cupped. The flower is of considerable duration. The 
foliage, though small, is much larger than that of any of 
our common myrtles, which might make many mistake its 
character ; and another prominent feature is, the leaves are 
much recurved and shining ; plant pendulous, of a pale 
green. Magnificent. 

C. Madonna, very pure white, delicately striped with 
bright rose ; perfectly imbricated, and above medium size ; 
foliage dark shining green. Magnificent. 

C. Mis. Abby Wilder, white striped with pink; a regu- 
larly imbricated flower of fine formation ; foliage large, coarse, 
sickly green. Magnificent. 

C Miss Perclval, large flower, pure white, very fine when 
in bud, not fully double ; foliage dark shining green. Good. 
When we has T e the pleasure of giving a Camellia this name, 
it will be, in our estimation at least, without a fault. 

C. pazonlflbra : bright pink, large flower, fully four inches 
in diameter, two rows of circumference petals ; those of the 
centre numerous, very close, erect, and in the form of a 
sphere ; plant of a slender growth ; leaves two inches broad 
and three inches long, of a delicate green; Superb. 

C. Palmer's perfection, dark crimson, inclining to purple, 
very large, perfectly double, and of handsome form ; a free 
bloomer. Magnificent. 

C. Phlladelphlca (Smith's), flowers four and a half to 
five inches in diameter ; the circumference petals large and 
round ; those of the interior smaller with a little convexity, 



216 green-house — repotting. '[March. 

perfectly double, colour changeable, bright crimson, spotted 
with white; dark rose, fading to the centre, or all crimson; 
even the same plant producing all the variety ; plant of an 
upright branching habit ; leaves ovate, acuminate, of me- 
dium size, and a very dull dark green ; bloomed first in 
1834, when only two years from the seed, and the flower 
was then four and three-quarter inches in diameter. Magni- 
ficent. 

C. picturdta ; leaves three and a half inches wide, and 
four and a half inches long, of a bright green ; flower four 
inches in diameter; spherical and extremely double ; petals 
of the centre irregular and closely folded : those of the peri- 
phery or circumference round and entire, of a pure white, 
occasionally striped with red — a few hidden stamens — plant 
of an elegant habit. Magnificent. 

C. ppmponia, or Kew blush, flowers over four inches in 
diameter ; white, with a tinge of blush at the bottom of the 
petals, which has a good effect in setting off the flower. 
They frequently bloom all blush, having one or two rows 
of guard or outside petals ; those of the inside are short, 
stubby, and generally irregular ; continues long in flower ; 
yellow anthers among the short petals, and seeds when the 
female organ is perfect; foliage similar to pazonijlora ; a very 
fast grower, and flowers freely. Superb. 

C. Pratt ii ;* flower bright rose, full four inches in diame- 
ter, frequently every petal having a white stripe from the 
apex to the base, very closely and regularly imbricated to 
the very centre : in every respect equally as well-formed as 
C. imbricata ; leaves two and a half inches wide and four 
inches long, of a rich smooth green — is a plant of free 
growth and profuse flowering; bloomed first in 1836. With 
pleasure, we say it is our first seedling of merit. Magnifi- 
cent. 

C. punctata, see Invincible. 

C. Prince Albert, pale rose, striped with bright red, very 
distinct; a Chinese variety, perfectly double, a large flower; 
petals rather short in the centre. Jfagnificcnt. 

C. Queen of England, dark rosy crimson, with an occa- 
sional spot of white; large, imbricated, and fully double. 
Magnificent. 

* In compliment to our late and esteemed patron, II. Fratt, Esq., 
of Lemon Hill. 



March.} GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 217 

C. Queen Victoria (Priestley's), crimson, occasionally 
marked with white; flower large, perfectly imbricated; fo- 
liage strong, dark green. Magnificent. 

C. rosd sinensis, a large, double flower, four inches in dia- 
meter ; colour bright, rosy pink, petals long and full, closely 
imbricated to the centre : a very distinct variety, with beau- 
tiful dark-green, shining foliage, two inches wide and three 
and a half long ; grows and flowers freely. Magnificent. 

C. rosea (China), petals regularly and perfectly imbri- 
cated, flower frequently star-shaped, like Hume's blush, about 
three inches in diameter ; colour bright rose, changing to 
rosy purple ; foliage pale green ; leaves one and a half inches 
wide and three inches long ; plant of slender habit, though 
well-formed, and a profuse bloomer. Magnificent. 

C. riibra-pleno, or Greavill's double red, is a strong-grow- 
ing and free-flowering variety. The flowers" are large, irre- 
gular, and very double, and are of long duration ; foliage of 
a yellowish-green, leaves two inches wide and three inches 
long ; plant of a stiff habit. Superb. 

C. Saccoi, bright rose, imbricated form, very perfect, 
fading to a pale rose ; a free bloomer. Magnificent. 

C. Saccoi de nova and Magnifii are the same, very 
similar to the former, merely a shade paler in colour ; foliage 
more distinctly nerved and serrated. Magnificent. 

C. Sarah Frost, rich crimson, of perfectly imbricated 
form, very full, a profuse bloomer, growing freely, of upright 
habit. Magnificent. 

C. Sherwoodii, rosy crimson, frequently spotted with pure 
white ; very double ; petals reflexed when fully open ; a free 
grower and profuse bloomer. Magnificent. A seedling by 
Mr. Sherwood, of Laurel Hill. 

C. sesdnqua rosea. See among the species. 

C. specibsa is a most splendid variety, has been called 
Chinese-striped Waratah. The guard-petals are large, round, 
and bold; colour crimson, with stripes of white; the centre is 
full of irregular, small petals, and spotted ; the foliage three 
inches wide and four inches long, and more heart-shaped 
than any of the others ; grows freely, flower persistent, four 
inches in diameter, and highly esteemed, and considered one 
of the finest of the coloured Camellias. Magnificent. 

C. splendens ; rosy red, flower full and bold, nearly four 
inches in diameter; petals few, but very large and round, 

19 



218 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

lying gently over each other, showing a few stamens in the 
centre — is very attractive and conspicuous in a collection ; 
foliage dark-green, ovate, acuminate. Superb. 

C. spqfforthiana ; foliage deep, plain-green, acutely ser- 
rated, plant handsome and vigorous ; flower three and a half 
inches in diameter, of a pure white, with an occasional red 
stripe ; petals rather irregular, full and double, though show- 
ing a few stamens. Superb. 

C. spofforthiaiia cdrnea ; flower larger than the former, 
otherwise very similar. Superb. 

C. Siceetia vera ; leaves three inches long and four inches 
wide, distinctly serrate, of a fine, shining green, plant of an 
upright, free-growing habit ; flower nearly four inches in 
diameter, with three rows of circumference petals — rose 
white, sprinkled with bright red ; those of the centre small 
and erect, concealing a few, sterile stamens. Magnificent. 
There is a spurious plant out under this name, which is very 
inferior. 

C. tricolor; foliage pale-green, two inches wide and three 
and a half inches long, distinctly serrated, with the nerves 
very prominent; flower full four inches in diameter — semi- 
double ; petals large and round — very beautifully set ; colour 
white, shaded with various shades of red, rose, &c. A superb 
variety to produce seeds, having the female organ very per- 
fect, and was introduced from China by Dr. Siebold. Su- 
perb. 

C. triumpJuois; foliage dark-green; leaves roundish-oval, 
slightly pointed with nerves, and serratures very distinct ; 
flower nearly four inches in diameter, of a bright-cherry red, 
shaded with rose; petals regular, round, aud large, a little 
recurved at the extremity, and gracefully imbricated to the 
centre, which is occasionally striped with white; the plant is 
of a good habit, and free growth. Magnifia nt. 

C. variabilis; this is a sportive variety of O. paoni flora, 
with flower and foliage of same character ; frequently bloom- 
ing rose-striped, or marked with pink, blush, &q. Magni- 
ficent. 

C. variegdta is one of the old standard varieties, and very 
much esteemed. It is striped with red and white ; some- 
times the ground is red, with white streaks or blotches, and 
vice versa; nearly four inches in diameter, petals large and 
round, rather loose, centre showing a number of stamens ; 



MarchJ] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 219 

foliage very fine dark green ; three inches wide and four 
inches long. We have had seed from it. Plant of a good 
habit and a profuse bloomer. Superb. 

C. teutonia, an imbricated flower, of perfect form, rosy 
crimson, frequently inclining to pale rose. Magnificent. 

0. Walbankiana ; foliage pale green, two inches broad 
and nearly four inches long ; plant of rather loose habit ; 
flower greenish-white, full four inches in diameter; petals 
large and oval, irregularly tufted, showing a number of sta- 
mens, though very double. "We are inclined to believe that 
this is the lutca alba of some catalogues. Superb. 

C. Wardiij very dark green foliage; leaves rather cor- 
date and undulate, of a coriaceous texture ; plant of a branch- 
ing stiff habit; flower full three inches in diameter, very 
persistent — circumference petals large and round ; those of 
the interior small, round, and closely set, rather flattened, 
colour vivid crimson. This fine variety is another by Mr. 
Floy, of Xew York. Superb. 

(J. Washington (Gunnell's) ; dark rosy crimson, of exqui- 
site form, imbricated to the centre ; a plant of neat habit, 
an abundant bloomer/ always opening perfect. Mnjnificent. 

C. Wilder ii ; very bright rose; perfectly imbricated ; pe- 
tals regular to the centre ; almost a fac simile of the C. For- 
di>, except the foliage, which is more heart-shaped. Magni- 
ficent. 

C. Wdodsii ; foliage light green; leaves two inches wide 
and four inches long; plant of a rapid growth and regular 
shape ; flower four and a half inches in diameter, of a bright 
rose colour ; petals large and rounding in the periphery ; 
those of the centre rather irregular — perfectly double, and 
blooms with difficulty. We have observed it to bloom finest 
when a gentle heat was applied, or when the plant flowered 
in 3Iarch or April. Magnificent. (Soil No. 11 for the whole 
family.) 

We beg to observe that, in giving descriptions of the 
camellia, we have invariably, as far as known, described the 
best variety, where there were several varieties under one 
name. The new varieties in this beautiful family of plants 
are increasing with astonishing rapidity. The seedlings of 
this country alone would of themselves form a collection of 
every shade and colour, though many of them are almost 
alike, especially among the whites and reds — nearly fac- 



220 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. \MdUr6h. 

similes except in foliage. The description of such we have 
carefully avoided. Indeed, we boldly assert, though an ex- 
tensive cultivator of over two hundred varieties, that there 
are not more than one hundred varieties known worthy of a 
passing remark, except for their deformed character. 

Carmichcdia australis, the only species; has very curious 
foliage, which the lilac leguminous flowers come out of, and 
continue from April to June. (Soil No. 6.) 

Ceanothus azureus is the only species of the genus worth 
cultivating ; it blooms profusely from May to July, and has 
considerable attraction with its brilliant blue spikes of small 
flowers. (Soil No. 6.) 

Oestrum; a genus of about ten species; some of them 
very popular under the name of Niyht-hlooming Jasmine ; 
which are 0. nocturnum and jyarquii with long greenish- 
white flowers ; 0. diurnam, pearly white, the centre of the 
flower sparkling like a diamond ; C. aurantiacum, dark 
orange flowers in large clusters, very handsome, blooming in 
winter. (Soil No. 12.) 

Ohorizhnas, about ten species, foliage very variable ; flow- 
ers small and papilionaceous, often very profuse ; colour red 
and yellow; though small, they are very neat. C. nana 
and C. iUcifblia are pretty ; but nothing of the kind can 
exceed 0. ovata and C. varium, with their beautiful scarlet 
and orange blossoms, which are in great profusion ; if grown 
from seed, they will flower freely the second year; drain the 
pots well. (Soil No. 6.) 

Cinerarias, Cape aster, about twelve belong to the green- 
house. They are herbaceous, or half shrubby, soft wooded 
plants. O. sjjeciosa, O. ainelldides (now called Agathsea 
ccelestus), O. purpurea, and C. lanafa, are among the finest 
of the species ; flowers blue or yellow ; the latter is consi- 
dered the handsomest of the genus. The exterior petals are 
bright purple, and the interior ones white, and, with A. cce- 
lestus, flowers most of the year; flowers syngenesious and 
star-like. The herbaceous species must be treated as pre- 
viously mentioned for that kind of plant. The new hybrids 
of this genus are rivalling the species, both for beauty of 
colour and size of flower ; among these are 0. Kingii, C. 
triumphant, C. Scottii, C. Queen, C. Perfection, and C. 
Beauty. (Soil No. 12.) 

( 7 itttamomum camjphdra is the camphor tree of commerce; 



March."] green-house — repotting. 221 

is an excellent evergreen, but has no beauty in its flower. 
The foliage, when bruised, has a camphorated odour. (Soil 
No. 10.) 

Oistus, or Rock rose. There are above thirty species, 
principally natives of Europe, consequently hardy there, and 
form a great ornament to their gardens, being very abundant 
and various in flower ; but with us they will not stand the 
rigour of winter. We have no doubt, however, but, through 
time, some kinds may be grown that will withstand the great- 
est cold of the Middle States ; they are low shrubby plants, 
of easy cultivation. O. ladanifevus, 0. salignus, Qpopulifo- 
iius, C. undulatus, and C. formosvs, are perhaps the best; 
the flowers are of short duration, frequently only for one 
day ; but the quantity makes up this deficiency, being con- 
stantly in flower in May and June, and sometimes flower 
again in autumn. C. creticus is most productive of the gum 
laudanum, which is secreted about its leaves and branches. 
The flowers are generally five-petaled, and some of them 
large and showy; centre full of stamens. (Soil No. 3.) 

Citrus. This genus contains the most grand and noble of 
fruit-bearing trees ; Loudon says, " The golden apples of the 
heathens, and forbidden fruit of the Jews, are supposed to 
allude to this family." They are all handsome evergreen 
shrubs or trees, bearing highly odoriferous flowers, and beau- 
tiful golden fruit. In cultivation, the orange fruit is dry 
and more insipid than in the tropics, but the lemon is far 
superior in its quality. The varieties of orange are exten- 
sive, nearly eighty kinds being cultivated in Italy ; but, with 
us, the sweet, sour, and rough-skinned are the principal 
sorts, and more recently we cultivate the mandarin, Otahei- 
tan, and other beautiful dwarf Chinese varieties ; also, the 
striped-leaved varieties of Bergamotte. The lemon are nearly 
as numerous, though not so apparently distinct ; it is very 
valuable as a cultivated fruit, and should be in every green- 
house or conservatory. The lime and the shaddock should 
not be overlooked, as they are very ornamental, especially 
the latter when it arrives at a fruit-bearing state. (Soil No. 
18, when young plants, and when fruit-bearing keep from it 
the portion of sand.) 

Clematis, Virgin's Bower. There are only six of these 
belonging to the green-house, all climbing plants. C. aris- 
tdta } and C. brachiata are the best; flowers in racemose 

19* 



222 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

clusters, pure white ; foliage small ; and natives of the Cape 
of Good Hope. The foliage of C. an'sfata is cordate and 
blotched. Some of the hardy species and varieties make 
beautiful plants for the green-house, such as Jldrida, Sleboldll, 
and ccerulea ; they are profuse bloomers, and fine growers. 
(Soil No. 3.) 

Clerodeiidron fragrans multiplex, double white, frequently 
known under the name of Volkamenia Japonica, which is a 
very different plant, and not supposed to be in this country. 
It keeps in a good green-house, and flowers well, frequently 
blooming during winter, and, if planted in the garden during 
summer, will flower superbly. The flowers have a delicious 
fragrance ; if the foliage is rubbed with the hand the smell 
is not so pleasant. The leaves are large, round, ovate, and 
tomentose ; flowers corymbose, compact, and terminal. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Clethra arhdrea, and C. arborea varlegata, are both fine 
shrubs ; the latter is preferable ; leaves are oblong, acumi- 
nate, and serrated, having a gold-coloured edge ; flowers 
white, downy, in large branching racemose spikes, and sweet- 
scented ; grows freely. (Soil No. 2.) 

Olidnthus punicens, or Glory flower. This magnificent 
plant produced great excitement among European cultiva- 
tors, which consequently reached this country. The plant 
sold at extravagant prices, and cost the writer upwards of 
fifty dollars to introduce a living plant of it, which was done 
nine years ago. The plant has been cultivated in pots, and 
has not yet given general satisfaction ; the leaves are smooth, 
pinnated, of a delicate green, consisting of eight pairs; the 
stem is of a soft woody nature ; the splendid large scarlet, 
leguminose, pea-like flowers grow in clusters, hanging down 
from the axils of the leaves on the lateral branches ; each 
flower is about two inches long. It is a native of New 
Zealand, and is tolerably hardy. We have not been able to 
grow a solitary good specimen of it, and the only handsome 
plant we have seen was in the collection of Gen. R. Patter- 
son ; where it was planted out in the conservatory in Soil 
No. 10. 

(Ticra nob II lx, a tuberous herbaceous plant, closely allied 
to Brunsvigia. The flowers are said to be very splendid ; 
colour scarlet and green : although it has been in the coun- 



March.~\ GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 223 

try several years, we are not aware of its ever having bloomed. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Cobsea scdndens, the only species. It is a climber of 
very rapid growth ; has been known to grow above two hun- 
dred feet in one summer; large bell-shaped flowers; when 
they are newly expanded, they are of a pale green colour, and 
change to dark purple : will grow in the garden during sum- 
mer, bearing a continual profusion of flowers, but will not 
stand frost. When this plant becomes too large in the house, 
do not cut it close to the root, except there is a young shoot 
arisiug to carry off the superabundant sap, for the old wood 
will not push, which will soon cause a mortification. 

The best method to adopt in such a case is, to turn back 
a shoot, and lay it in the ground to root, when it will be- 
come a young plant, which should always be done as soon 
as it appears unsightly. It does best to be planted in the 
ground, but will not give any satisfaction as to flowering in 
a pot. It will flower as an annual if sown in pots this 
month, and placed in a warm room or hot-bed, and planted 
into the garden about the middle of May ; it seeds freely. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

CoroniUa, a very few are fine species in the green-house. 
('. (jlailca is a celebrated plant among us, as a free and early 
flowering shrub. 0. valentiana, and C. vwmidlis, are equally 
so ; flower from April to June, colour yellow ; papilionaceous 
flowers in clusters; agree best in summer with partial shade. 
Drain the pots well. (Soil No. 12.) 

Corrla, five species and several varieties, all very pretty 
dwarf shrubs, and flower profusely-; foliage ovate, cordate, 
and either rusty or downy beneath. G. alba, and G. riifa, 
have both white flowers a little tubular. G. pvlchilla is 
a very handsome, erect-growing plant ; flowers large and 
tubular, of a bright red colour, and grows freely. G. specidsa 
has been long admired as a splendid free-flowering plant; 
flowers same shape as G. pulchella, but more elongated; 
colour red and yellowish-green. G. virens is a very free 
grower, flowers same shape as the last two, colour entirely 
green; G. multiflora, red — C. bicolor, green and white — 
G. Harrisii, spotted. They are abundant flowerers, when the 
plants are well established; having a continued succession 
from November to June, possessing the valuable requisite 
of flowering through the winter, and ought to be in every 



224 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [MarcJl. 

collection. They require an airy situation, and the pots to 
be well drained. The plants in summer must not be fully 
exposed to the sun. (Soil No. 6.) 

Ordssula. This genus has now no plant in it attractive 
in beauty. Several beautiful plants in our collections be- 
long to Rochea and Kalosdnthus. There is a strong-grow- 
ing succulent plant, known in our collections as C. 'falcata, 
which is R. falcata. It seldom flowers ; the minor variety 
blooms profusely every year from May to August, and has 
showy scarlet flowers in terminal panicles. The plants known 
as G. coccinea, and C. versicolor, are now given to the genus 
Kalosdnthus. The flowers of the former are scarlet, wax-like, 
terminal, and sessile ; those of the latter are rose and white, 
also wax-like, and are both desirable plants, requiring very 
little water during winter. (Soil No. 18.) 

Cuphsca, a genus of rather unattractive plants were it not 
for the very brilliant C. platycintcra, which is continually in 
bloom with its profusion of tubular, waxy, scarlet-coloured 
flowers edged with white and tipped with black : the plant is 
of dwarf habit, and does well in almost any locality. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Crataegus. There are none of these belonging to the 
green-house ; but there is a plant in the collections, known 
as C. glabra, which is Photim'a semdata, a native of China,, 
and is a very handsome plant ; has long foliage, deeply ser- 
rated, very shining. P. arbutifblia, a native of California, 
and is the finest of the genus ; flowers in large dense panicles, 
foliage larger than the former, and not so deeply serrated ; 
they arc both comparatively hardy, and we soon expect to see 
them acclimated. (Soil No. 11.) 

Crinum, several species do well in the green-house, espe- 
cially (J. Mexicdnum, C. capense, and ('. hsedtica: they require 
considerable pot-room to make them do well. (Soil No. 12.) 

Orbwea saligna is among one of the finest plants of New 
South Wales. It flowers at the axils of the leaves, colour 
pink, with five petals, connected by entangled hairs; in 
flower from April to December, and frequently through the 
winter; foliage lanceolate, and a fine green. The plant 
grows neat, and requires an airy situation : drain the pots 
well. (Soil No. 1.) 

Cinibnia cajx'iisis, the only species, and a handsome shrub, 
with large pinnated shining leaves, beautifully contrasted by 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 225 

numerous dense, elongated branches of small, white flowers, 
and twigs of a red colour, having more the habit of a tropical 
than of a Cape of Good Hope plant. (Soil No. 2.) 

Gupressus may be desired in collections, as erect and hand- 
some-growing evergreen shrubs. G. lusitdnica, the famed 
cedar of Goa; C. pendula and G. juniper vides are the most 
desirable ; the flowers are insignificant and yellowish ; we 
have no doubt they may prove hardy. G. lusitdnica is the 
handsomest tree of the genus. Its abundant, very long 
dichotomous branchlets distinguish it from all the evergreens 
of the coniferous tribe. (Soil No. 11.) 

Gyrfdnfhus, a genus of Cape bulbs, containing nine species, 
and will do very well in the green-house ; but we find the 
assistance of the hot-house a great advantage. They are 
closely allied to Grvnum. The tubes of the flowers are long 
and round, with various shades of orange, yellow, red, and 
green. CL odurus, G striding, C. obliquus, and G. vittdtus, 
are the finest. When the bulbs are dormant, which will be 
from October to January, they should not get any water; 
before they begin to grow, turn the bulbs out of the old 
earth, repotting it immediately. At this time they should 
be potted with the bulbs of earth entire, which will cause 
them to flower stronger. (Soil No. 12.) 

Dampieras, four species. The genus is named in honour 
of Captain W. Dampier, a famous voyager : has Lobelia-like 
flowers, either blue or purple. G. purpurea, G unduldta, 
and G. stricta, are the finest ; the former two are shrubby ; 
the latter is herbaceous; they all flower freely. (Soil No. 6.) 

Daviesias, above ten species, principally natives of New 
South Wales, all yellow papilionaceous flowers. D. ulicina, 
D. latifdlia, D. aciculdris, and D. incrassdta, are very fine 
species, flower and grow freely, and require to be well drained : 
bloom from April to August. (Soil No. 6.) 

Dillwynias, above twelve species, and plants very little 
known. D. cincrescens, D. jlorihimda, D. teretifolia, and 
D. phylicoides, are desirable plants ; flowers small, papilio- 
naceous, and colour yellow and red. They are very liable to 
suffer from too much wet; while dormant, therefore, the pots 
must be effectually drained. (Soil No. 6.) 

Diosmas. This pretty genus of heath-looking plants has 
recently been very much divided by botanical professors. 
The genera that they have been given to are Adendndra, 



226 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

Acmddenia, Agatlwsma, and Barosma. However, we incline 
to adhere to the original name, and recommend D. capitdta, 
D. oppositifblia, D. rubra, D. alba, D. fragrans, D. iinijlora, 
D. scrratifblia, D. specidsa, and D. pulrhclla. They are all 
profuse blooming plants, with generally small flowers of a 
white lilac or pink colour. It is supposed that the dried 
leaves of pulchclla are used by the Hottentots as powder to 
mix with the grease with which they anoint their bodies. 
Some travellers assert that it gives them so rank an odour 
that they sometimes could not bear the smell of those who 
were their guides. In fact, the foliage of all, if rubbed by 
the hand while on tbe plant, has a very strong smell, some 
of them very agreeable, oth,ers disagreeable. They are all 
evergreen, small, neat-growing shrubs. They require, while 
growing luxuriantly, to have their young shoots topped to 
make them bushy; drain all the pots well and keep them in 
airy situations, and not crowded with other plants, or they 
will become slender and unsightly. (Soil No. 6.) 

Dipldcus puniceus. This shrubby (mimidus) plant was 
introduced by Mr. Nuttall, from California, by seeds, in 1836, 
and sent by us to England, in 1837. The flowers are of a 
scarlet orange, about one inch and a half long, and produce 
in pairs, from the axils of the leaves, or young wood; the 
plant requires considerable nourishment, for the more rapid 
it grows, the more profuse are its flowers, which bloom from 
May to September, and are rather showy. In the Southern 
States it will prove a hardy shrub, blooming nearly the whole 
year. (Soil No. 12.) 

Dracaena, or Dragon tree. The D. aust rails and D. ferrea 
will keep in the green-house, and are attractive plants for 
their foliage, especially the latter, which is of a purple crim- 
son, and very unique; the flowers are on large terminal spikes. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Dori/dnthus exeelsa, a T»cra-looking plant belonging to 
the natural order of Amaryllidea ; the leaves arise from the 
root, and are about three inches wide and three feet long ; the 
flowers are bright crimson, surmounted on a stem about 
twenty feet high. The plant does not bloom till it is of con- 
siderable size. (Soil No. 10.) 

Urydndras. This genus is closely allied in character and 
habits to Banksia, and contains above sixteen species. D. 
nivea has most beautiful foliage, very long and deeply in- 



March."] green-house — repotting. 227 

dented. D. formbsa has a scent like the fruit of an apricot. 
D. nervosa, D. florlbxlnda, D. armdta, D. plumbsa, D. Bax- 
ter i, D. nervosa, and D.falcdta are the most conspicuous, and 
all highly desirable plants in collections. They are very 
delicate of importation ; flowers are straw and orange-coloured, 
and thistle-like. Seeds in small cones. Treat them the 
same as directed for Banlcsias. (Soil No. 6.) 

Dyck\as, two species of very curious growing plants, of a 
dwarf habit, with bright orange flowers ; they may be culti- 
vated with the aloe tribe, to which they have a similarity. 
D. rarijlbra and D. ramotlfibra ; the latter is in the country. 
(Soil No. 18.) 

Echeveria, a genus of succulent plants chiefly from Mexico 
and California. E. grandlflbra, flowers green and red. E. 
pulverulenta , flowers red. The foliage of this species is deli- 
cately covered with powder, which gives it a very beautiful 
appearance. E. bicblor is also a pretty species : they require 
to be kept vfcy dry during winter. (Soil No. 10.) 

Edwdrdsias,- about four species, very beautiful foliaged 
plants, and have very curious yellow flowers, but do not 
flower until the plant becomes large. E. grandifibrd, E. 
chrysbphylla, and E. mlcrbphylla, are the best, and are tole- 
rably hardy, though doubtful of ever being acclimated. The 
flowers are leguminose, foliage ovate, pinnate, from eight to 
forty on one footstalk, and appear to be covered with gold 
dust. The hardier they are grown, the more visible it will 
appear. (Soil No. 11.) 

Ellclwysums. This genus is now extinct, and two splendid 
species of it given to others. E. prol\ferum is now Pliazna- 
coma prolifera, and has beautiful purple-rayed flowers, and 
highly esteemed: the -foliage small, round, ovate, smooth, 
and closely imbricated. E. spectdbile is now Aphelexis hum ills, 
has pine-like foliage, and large light purple flowers. Care 
must be taken that they are not over-watered ; drain the 
pots well. (Soil No. 6.) 

Enlcldntltns, only two species, both very fine. E. qulnqitc- 
Jlorus has large ovate, acuminate foliage, flowers pink and 
pendulous ; very handsome. E. retlculdtus, the foliage is 
netted, and the flowers blush : they are liable, when dormant, 
to suffer from wet. Be sure to drain the pots well, and be 
sparing in water while in that state. (Soil No. 11.) 

Epdrrls, above twelve species, and all very ornamental. 



228 green-house — repotting. [March. 

E. grandiflbra has been celebrated ever since it was 
known; the foliage is small, flat, and acuminate; flowers 
tubular and pendulous ; bright crimson, with a tinge of 
white, and very abundant; in flower from January to June. 
E. pidchella is likewise a most beautiful plant ; foliage very 
small and closely set, flowers pure white, and in long spikes, 
sweet-scented. E. impressa, foliage impressed, and flowers 
of a rose colour. E. jmluddsa, flowers white, grows aud 
flowers very handsomely, and is very fragrant. E. purpu- 
rdscens rubra is a variety, with good bright red flowers. E. 
pallida, rose-coloured, long tubular flowers. E. nivalis, rosy 
white. E. Toicnii, beautiful rosy blush colour. These, with 
several others, are very desirable. They are mostly erect- 
growing plants ; flower from January till August, and a rough, 
turfy, sandy soil is found most congenial. They are natives 
of the mountainous districts of New South Wales. The pots 
must be well drained ; the roots will run with avidity among 
the potshreds. (Soil No. 6.) * 

Ericas, heath. There are in cultivation in Europe above 
five hundred and fifty species and varieties of this magnificent 
genus. About sixty years ago it consisted only of a few 
humble British plants, with the heath of Spain, E. Mediter- 
ranea, which is at present most common in our collections, 
though in a few years we may expect to see it supplanted by 
others more splendid. 

In their native countries they are adapted to a great many 
useful purposes. In the north of Britain the poorer inhabit- 
ants cover their cabins or huts with heath, and build the walls 
with alternate layers of it and a kind of cement made with 
straw and clay. They likewise brew ale and distil spirits from 
the tender shoots ; and it has been known to be used in dyeing, 
tanning, and many other useful domestic purposes. Enco- 
7nium on their beauty is not requisite ; they are almost as 
diversified in colour as colour itself. Many are graceful and 
elegant ; hundreds are pretty ; a few noble and splendid ; 
others grotesque, curious, and odoriferous. To cultivate and 
propagate them is considered one of the most delicate branches 
of floriculture. Nevertheless, it has been said by a scientific 
writer, that "those who complain of the difficulty of grow- 
ing the heath, are ignorant people, who have never had a 
heath to grow/' The most splendid collection in Europe is 
under the care of Mr. M'Nab, of the Boyal Botanic Garden, 



Mavch.~\ 



GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 



229 



Edinburgh, where there are two large houses devoted to their 
culture; and through the whole year a continued profusion 
of bloom is kept up. Some of the plants are eight feet in 
diameter and fourteen feet high. The soil used is a coarse 
sandy peat. Pots drained with potshreds, and pieces of free- 
stone are put down the sides of the large pots and tubs ; where 
these can be had they are essential to the culture of moun- 
tainous plants, preventing them from being saturated with 
moisture, or from becoming dry, thus keeping the roots in a 
medium state ; for if once the roots are allowed to get tho- 
roughly dried, no art of the gardener can recover them. This 
may be the true reason why they are said to be difficult of 
cultivation. 

In the summer season, the pots must be kept out of the 
violent sun, for in a few hours the pot would become heated, 
dry the roots, and cause death, or a brownness of foliage 
which would never again become natural. In winter, too, 
much fire heat will also hurt them. They only require to 
be kept free from frost, need a great deal of air, and plenty 
of light ; consequently, should be placed near the glass, that 
they may have the benefit of all the air that is admitted. 
Their flowers are as varied in shape as variety or colour, but 
they all partake of a wax-like nature, and are very persistent. 
(Soil No. 5 for young plants : when older, No. 6 will do 
better.) 

The finest and most select varieties that appear to withstand 
the severity of the summer are the following : 



WHITE FLOWERS. 



YELLOW FLOWERS. 



RED FLOWERS. 



Arbovea, 

Boioiedna, 

Cdffva, 

Confevta, 

Jesminajlbra, 

Mavgaritdcea, 

Odovdta, 

Pellucida, 

Phylicbides. 



Gapitdta, 

Epistoma, 
Grandljiura. 



SCARLET FLOWERS. 



Bella, 

Canaliculata, 

Ourvifldra vulva, 

Gvdcilis, 

Ignescens, 

PluJcenetii, 

Pinea, 

Meditevrdnea. 



Ardens, 
Coccinea, 

" gvandijlbva, PURPLE FLOWERS. 
Vevnlx coccinea, 
Vestita coccinea. Amsena, 
20 



230 GREEN-IIOUSE REPOTTING. [JIareh. 

Dcntkulata, VARIOUS COLOURS. 

Fascicularis, 

Hispidula, ( 'nienta sup>erba, 

Mammdsa, Abctina, Rubida, 

Pubescens, Bdccans, Tubiflbra, 

Tenella. Cerinthbides, Ventricvsa superba. 

Eriabotrya japonica, Loquat, or Mespilus japonica, is a 
fine plant with large lanceolate, distinctly serrated leaves, 
white underneath ; small white flowers on a racemose spike, 
and produces a fruit about the size of a walnut, of a fine 
yellow blush colour, and of tartish flavour. If it flowers in 
the autumn, it will require the heat of a hot-house to ripen 
the fruit. It is of very easy culture, and its noble aspect 
is never passed unobserved. It is perfectly hardy in the 
Southern States, and forms a handsome evergreen. (Soil 
No. 11.) 

Erodiums, Heron's bill. There are about thirty species, 
all of a geranium character, and there are among them some 
very pretty flowering, soft-wooded, shrubby, herbaceous, 
and annual plants. Only a few of them belong to the 
green-house, of which E. incur ndtum, E. crassifbh'um, and 
E. lacinidtum are the finest; culture similar to Geranium. 
The flowers of these are scarlet, pentapetalous and veiny. 
(Soil No. 10.) 

Erytluina cristdgdlli, or Coral plant. If this magnificent 
scarlet flowering plant is desired to be kept in a pot or tub, 
it must have a repotting every month till September : to 
keep it in fine blooming condition, it is worthy of extra care, 
as it will bloom three times during the season, if well treated. 
(Soil No. 18.) For other methods, see Flower-Garden for 
April, May, and November. 

Esccdlonla, a shrubby genus, of about ten species, of rather 
neat blooming plants, of a strong shrubby habit. They 
require great encouragement to flower them well, if kept in 
pots : the best mode of treatment would be to plant them in 
pits with other half hardy shrubs. E. rubra, red flowering ; 
E. glandidosa, white; and E. bifida, pink, are the finest. 
(Soil No. 12.) They are perfectly hardy south of Virginia, 
and we are not certain but they may become acclimated here. 

Eucalyptus, above fifty species of them, and the tallest 
growing trees of New Holland ; foliage very diversified, 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 231 

generally of a hard glaucous texture. From their rapid 
growth, they soon grow higher than the loftiest house. The 
most conspicuous are, E. corddta, E. rostrdta, E. radiata, 
E. pidvigcra, E. glbbifera, E. pulveridenta, and E. resinifera. 
In Van Diemen's Land, a manufactory has been established, 
where a tannin is extracted from many of the species. The 
last-mentioned produces gum like that which the druggists 
call Kino. They ought not to be too much fostered, as it 
would in some degree retard their growth. They are of a 
very hardy nature. When large, the plants will flower freely, 
and are similar in flower to Myrtle; many stamina, proceed- 
ing from a hard nut-like capsule. (Soil No. 6.) 

Eaonymus, a few of this genus have been recently intro- 
duced from China and Japan. Such as E. japonica,* with 
its burnished green foliage, and its variety with silver-edged 
foliage — E. fimbriate/., large dark-green foliage. They all 
produce scarlet berries in winter, and are highly ornamental in 
the South for hedges, lawns, or edgings. They are green-house 
plants in the Eastern and Northern States. (Soil No. 11.) 

Eupatbrium. There is only one species deserving of culti- 
vation in the green-house ; flowers syngenesious, white, and 
in large flattened panicles ; very sweet-scented. The plant, 
when growing freely, in the beginning of summer, should be 
topped, which would make it more bushy ; if not, it is apt to 
grow straggling. Known in our collections as E. elegdns. 
(Soil No. 3.) 

Eutaxias, two species. E. myrtifblia is a most beautiful 
free-flowering evergreen shrub ; foliage small, but very neat ; 
flowers leguminose, small and very many ; colour yellow and 
red; grows freely. The young plants should be frequently 
topped, or they will grow naked and unsightly. E. pimgens, 
similar to the other except in foliage. They flower from 
March to June, and ought to have a place in every green- 
house. Culture very easy. (Soil No. 6.) 

Eiciis, a few species, ai - e good plants for this department, 
especially F. eldstica ; leaves smooth, shining green, fre- 
quently six inches wide and twelve long : this is the plant 
that produces the gum elastic, or Indian rubber. F. aus- 
trdlis is also an excellent evergreen, with elliptic dull-green 

* This plant is in some collections as a variegated-leaved camel- 
lia, and is perfectly hardy with us. Does well in the shade. 



232 green-house — repotting. [March. 

foliage ; very rusty underneath ; they grow almost too freely. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Fuchsia, or Ladies' Ear-drop. There is an endless va- 
riety of this lovely genus of deciduous small shrubs now 
cultivated, but there are only a few to surpass the common 
and celebrated Cdccinea : true, many have been, and are, 
represented as far surpassing it, but when brought to the 
test, they are, in some particular, found wanting. How- 
ever, among the many, F. Caroline, F. Fxoniensis, F. Gi<ja it- 
tea, F. Robusta, and F. Coccinea rosea. These are very 
superb varieties ; some of the flowers are two and a half 
inches long and two inches in diameter. The following arc 
light-coloured varieties, indeed nearly white, with a purple 
or pink centre, forming a beautiful contrast with the deep 
crimson and purple sorts ; F. Napoleon, F. One in the Ring, 
F. Magnificent^ F. Acantha, F. delicata, F. Snow-drop, and 
F. jiavescens. To grow these in perfection, they require to 
be very frequently shifted, as they advance in growth, till you 
have them in pots ten inches wide. Just now, I have plants 
only six months from the cutting that are four feet high 
and sixteen feet in circumference, loaded with thousands 
of flowers, and are the admiration of every beholder. They 
require liberal supplies of water. F. fulgens is a distinct 
species ; the foliage is very different from any other sort ; 
leaves of a well-grown plant are four inches wide and five 
inches and a half long : the flowers are from two inches and 
a half to three inches long, of a pink and scarlet colour, and 
the plant is nearly tuberous. We would recommend our 
readers to grow them from seeds when obtained : it is well 
known they will produce variety, and it is even supposed by 
some that the seeds of F. coccinea have produced by hy- 
bridizing nearly all the varieties of the present day, which 
exceed one hundred : most of the flowers are a bright scarlet, 
the stamens are encircled with a petal of bright purple, and 
are of very curious construction ; they bear a dark purple 
berry, and are of the easiest cultivation ; but during gammer 
the pots must be carefully kept from the sun, although the 
plants will not be affected by it. If the plants are young 
and growing freely, we find that a deluge of rain, and after- 
wards a hot day, is their instant death. Some of them do 
tolerably well when planted in the flower-garden early in 
May. (Soil No. 10.) 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 233 

Fabidna, a genus of new plants that will prove entirely 
hardy in the Southern States ; they are upright-growing 
shrubs, with delicate foliage. F. imbricata is the most popu- 
lar, producing a profusion of white tubular flowers about an 
inch long, of easy culture in soil No. 12. 

GardoqiCia Hooker!, a very pretty dwarf plant — native of 
the Floridas ; it blooms profusely from June to October ; 
flowers are about one inch and a half long, of a tubular 
labiate form, of a bright orange colour; it is easy of culture 
in soil No. 1. 

Gelsemium nitidum, Carolina jasmine, a most beautiful 
climbing evergreen, flowering shrub. In the months of April 
and May it produces many large yellow trumpet-like blossoms 
of delicious fragrance. If much encouraged in growth, it 
will not flower so freely. (Soil No. 6.) 

Genista : a few of these are very pretty, free-flowering 
shrubs. G. ramosus, G. canariensis, G. tricuspiddta, G. 
cuspidosa, and G. umbeUdta, are the finest green-house spe- 
cies. All of them have yellow leguminose flowers in great 
abundance; leaves small, lanceolate. (Soil No. 1.) 

Geranium, Cranes-bill, a distinct family from the Pelargo- 
nium, though adapted to the same culture and even more, 
extensively as border or bedding-out plants that ornament the 
parterre from May to November with their dazzling scarlet 
and bright pink flowers, very generally known as Fish or 
Horse-shoe geraniums. In pots, they bloom in the green- 
house the whole winter ; and where that convenience is not at 
hand, they do very well in a dry cellar, free from frost, from 
whence take them in April, cut them well down, and plant 
them into the garden in rich soil ; the cuttings, after being 
allowed to dry a few days, may be planted, and will by mid- 
summer bloom profusely ; when frost approaches, place them 
in their winter cpuarters. The best are, Brighton Hero, Com- 
pactum, Queen, Shrubland, General Tom Thumb, all scarlet; 
Lucey Rosea, and Lucey Major are pink-coloured, and make 
an elegant contrast with the others. 

Gnaplialium, everlasting. There are above ten species, 
most of them very splendid, persistent flowers. G. eximia, 
has brilliant red flowers. G. spiralis, G. speciosissima, G. 
fritticans, G. oriantdlum, and G. imbricdtum, are all very 
fine ; pots must be well drained. (Soil No. 8.) 

Gnidias, about ten species of pretty green-house shrubs. 
20* 



234 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

G. simplex, G. sericea, G. imberbis, and G. pini/Clia, flower 
the most freely ; flowers straw colour, tubular, and corym- 
bose. G. simplex is sweet-scented, leaves small; the pots 
must be well drained, and care taken that they do not get 
either too wet or too dry, for the roots are very delicate. The 
plants must be kept near the glass, or they will be drawn 
weak. (Soil No. 6.) 

Gorteria persondta is the only species that belongs to this 
genus, and is an annual. There are several plants in our 
collections known as Gorterias, but which properly are Ga~d- 
nia, of which there are five species. G. ringens, when the 
flowers are fully expanded, (which will only be while exposed 
to the sun, closing at night, and opening again with the in- 
fluence of the sun's rays) is a great beauty. The rays of 
the flowers are bright orange, and the centre dark purple 
G. pavbnia has handsome foliage ; flower similar to G. rin- 
gens, except the centre of the flower being spotted, and is 
thought to be the finest, but does not flower so freely. G. 
lieteropliylla is of the same character, except the foliage, 
which is variable, the colour orange and vermilion. They 
are dwarf-growing plants, and during the months of July, 
August, and September, are liable to damp off at the surface 
of the earth, from the action of heat and too much water. 
Pots must be well drained, and the plants kept partially in 
the shade. Their flowers are syngenesious, and about two 
inches in diameter. (Soil No. 9.) 

Greiilleas, about thirty species. A few of them very 
handsome in flower and foliage, among which are G. jnoti- 
cea; G. acanthi/alia (beautiful foliage); G. concinna, very 
pretty straw and rose-coloured flowers; G. Junipcrinu, green 
and stra.w-coloured ; G. linearis, white flowers. The flowers 
of the whole are curious, though not very attractive. Some 
carry their flowers in racemose spikes, others on flowering 
branches, which are recurved ; the petals are very small and 
rugged ; the stile longer than the appendage. They grow 
freely, flower, and ripen seeds; all evergreen dwarf shrubs. 
(Soil No. 1.) 

Ilithranthus, about ten species of small South American 
bulbs, nearly allied to Amaryllis. II Andcrsonii, II. versi- 
color, II Candida, and 77. robusta, arc fine; they are in 
colour yellow, blue, white, and lilac. We have very little 
doubt but these bulbs will do to plant out in the garden in 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 285 

April, and be lifted in October. Keep them from frost. 
Thus treated, they are very desirable. (Soil No. 12.) 

Helychrysums, above forty species, chiefly belonging to the 
green-house — all everlasting flowers. H. grandljidrum, H. 
arboreum, H. frdgrans, H. adoratisslmum, U. frlitlcans, 
and H. fdlgidum, are all very esteemed species, mostly with 
soft downy foliage. The pots should be well drained, and 
the plants kept in an airy situation, as they suffer from the 
least damp. If the flowers are cut off before they fade, they 
will retain for many years all the splendour of their beauty; 
but if allowed to decay on the plant, they will soon become 
musty, and all their colour fade. (Soil No. 6.) 

Illbbertlas, about ten species. Three of them are known 
to be fine climbing evergreen shrubs, namely, H. glosmlar- 
ivefolia; H. dentata ; H. volubllls, if closely approached, has 
a disagreeable smell; H. fascicxdata, H. Saligna, and H. 
pedunadata, .are evergreen shrubs; they have pure yellow 
flowers of five petals, blooming from May to September. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

Hbveas, about eight species, pretty plants of New South 
Wales, blue pea-flowering evergreen shrubs ; the finest are 
H. panosa, H. atropurpurea, H. linearis, II. rosmarlnlfblla, 
II. longifblia, and II. Oelsll, which is the most superb, and 
flowers in abundance. They grow and flower freely; the pots 
should be drained. (Soil No. 6.) 

Hypericums, St. John's wort, about twenty species. A few 
of them are very showy, and with few exceptions have yellow 
flowers. II. muiiOgymnn, H. balearicum, H. florlbundum, 
H. canarlense, H. ccgyptiacum and II. cochlii-chlnense, which 
has scarlet flowers, are among the best, and all of them flower 
freely; five petals, filaments many in three or five parcels. 
They are all of very easy cultivation, and bloom generally 
from April to September. (Soil No. 11.) 

Hydrangea hortensls is a well-known plant, and much 
esteemed for its great profusion of very elegant, though mon- 
strous flowers. They are naturally of a pink colour, but 
under certain circumstances of culture they become blue. If 
grown in brown loam with a little sand, they will preserve 
their original colour ; but if grown in swamp earth with a 
little mould of decayed leaves, they will become blue.* 

* Mix the iron sparks from the blacksmith's shop with any kind 
of soil, and they will be a beautiful blue. One and a half quarts to 
a bushel will do. 



236 green-house — repotting. [March, 

The swamp earth and vegetable mould being more combined 
with aluminous salt than brown loam, is the cause of the 
change : and, when first found out (which was merely by 
chance), was thought a great wonder. It must have a very 
plentiful supply of water when in flower, which is produced on 
the shoots of the previous year. They will neither grow nor 
flower well if they are not kept constantly in the shade. 
When kept in the sun, the foliage is very brown ; and by 
being neglected in watering, we have seen the flowers com- 
pletely scourged. IT. japonica, a new variety with pink 
flowers, and the same disposition to change colour, a little 
fragrant. Being tolerably hardy, when the winters are mild, 
by a little protection in the open air, they will flower pro- 
fusely ; the flowers will be very large, and in bloom from June 
to October. They are deciduous, soft-wooded shrubs. 

Ilex, Holly, of I. aqui/dlium. There are above one hun- 
dred of them in cultivation in Europe, differing in variegation, 
margin shape, and size of the leaves : some are only prickly 
on the margin of the foliage, others prickly over all the sur- 
face. In Europe they are all hardy, but with us few or none 
of the varieties are so. If they become acclimated, they will 
be a great ornament to our gardens, being all low evergreen 
shrubs. The most common and conspicuous varieties are 
the hedge-hog, striped hedge-hog, white hedge, gold edged, and 
painted; the flowers are white and small, berries yellow or red ; 
they do not agree with exposure to the sun. /. Gasslne and 
/. vomitbria have very bitter leaves, and, though natives of 
Carolina, we have to give them the protection of a green-house. 
It is said that at certain seasons of the year the Indians make 
a strong decoction of the leaves, which makes them vomit 
freely, and after drinking and vomiting for a few days they 
consider themselves sufficiently purified. (Soil No. 15.) 

Illiciums, Anise-seed tree, three species. I. florid Ccnum has 
very sweet-scented, double purple flowers, and the plant grows 
freely and systematically if properly treated, and deserves 
particular attention. /. parvijibruvi has small yellow flowers ; 
/. anisatum is so very like I. parvijlbrum in every respect as 
to make us conclude they are the same, were I. anisatum not 
a native of China, and the other two natives of Florida. 
When the leaves and capsules of either of them are rubbed, 
they have a very strong smell of anise ; they grow very freely. 
(Soil No. 1.) 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 237 

Indigbfera ; Indigo tree, about twenty species, belong to 
tbe green-house, and are chiefly pretty free-flowering shrubs. 
I. denuddta, I. amsena, I. austrdlis, I. miguldfa, I. cdndi- 
cans, and I. filifblia, are very fine ; flowers papilionaceous, in 
long panicles; colour various, red, blue, yellow and pink. 
(Soil No. 6.) 

Jachsonias, a genus consisting of five species. The foliage 
is varied, and all natives of New South Wales. J. scojjdria, 
J. liorrida, and J. reticulata, are the finest; the small flowers 
come out of the young shoots, are yellow and papilionaceous ; 
the pots should be well drained. (Soil No. 6.) • 

Jambdsa vulgaris, or Eugenia jdmhos is a splendid ever- 
green tree, producing a fruit of an agreeable odour and called 
rose apple. J. austrdlis has a very neat habit, and produces 
purple fruit; they are of the earliest culture in soil No. 12. 

Jasmlnum, Jasmine. A few species of this genus are 
celebrated either for the green-house or rooms. J. odoratis- 
simum, Azorian, has very sweet-scented yellow flowers, 
blooming from April to November. J. revoliitum is the 
earliest flowering one, and of the same colour ; it is apt to 
grow straggling, and should be close pruned as soon as done 
blooming, which will be in May. J. jmbigerum is also yel- 
low. J. grandiflbrum is frequently called Catalonian, and 
should be pruned early in spring to make it bloom well, 
especially old plants. J. multijibmm, profuse flowering white. 
J. nudifiorum, a beautiful winter blooming species, recently 
from Japan. These plants are all perfectly hardy in the 
Southern States. J. officinale is a hardy climbing plant for 
arbours, walls, &c. There are several varieties of it. (Soil 
No. 3.) 

Justicias. Only a few of these belong to the green-house. 
J. cornea is the most splendid, being crowned with its bright 
rosy pink spikes of flowers nearly the whole year. Give it 
good large pots, well drained. J. adhdtoda, Malabar-nut. 
These are the only ones that are worth observation, and are 
very easily cultivated in any soil. 

Kennedias, about twelve species, all beautiful evergreen 
climbers of the easiest culture, and flower abundantly. K. 
moncrphylla, blue-flowered, and K. rubiciinda, crimson-flow- 
ered, are common in our collections. K. prostr.dta, one- 
flowered scarlet, and K. cocctnea, many-flowered scarlet, are 
very pretty. K. Comptonidna has splendid purple flowers, 
K. nigricans, black flowers, and K. splendens and K. marry- 



238 green-house — repotting. [March. 

dtta are thought the most superb. They have bright crimson 
flowers, and are yet rare in our collections. The pots should 
be well drained; flowers are either in racemose spikes or 
solitary, which is rather too much distinction for the same 
genus. (Soil No. 6.) 

Lasiopctalums, only two species. There were a few more, 
but they are now Thomashts, plants of no merit whatever 
in regard to flower ;. foliage three-lobed, small, rough, and 
rusty-like. Thomdsia solandcca and T. querci folia are the 
best species ; foliage of the former is large, cordate, and 
deeply indented ; they are all of the easiest culture. (Soil 
No. 1.) 

Laiirus. A few species are green-house plants. This 
genus has been divided to Cinnambmum; still there are a 
few celebrated plants in the original. L. nbbilis, sweet bay, 
though hardy, is kept under protection. It will bear the 
winter with a little straw covering; notwithstanding, there 
should be a plant kept in the house in case of accident by 
frost or otherwise ; there is a variegated variety of it. L. 
indica,, royal bay, L. fastens, L. aggregdta and L. glauca, 
are favourites. There is a species known in our collections 
as L. sedbra. The Camphor tree, known as L. camphbra, 
is Ginnamomum camphora ; the wood, leaves, and roots of 
this tree have a very strong odour of camphor. It is ob- 
tained by distillation from the roots and small branches, which 
are cut into chips, and put into a net suspended within an 
iron pot, the bottom of which is covered with water, having 
an earthen head fitted in it; heat is then applied, and the 
steam of the boiling water acting upon the contents of the 
net, elevates the camphor into the capital, where it concretes ' 
on the staws, with which this part of the apparatus is lined. 
They are all fine evergreens (which the name denotes), and 
easily cultivated. (Soil No. 10.) 

Lavdndulas, Lavender. About seven species belong to 
the green-house, and a few of them very pretty soft-wooded, 
half shrubby plants, and, if touched, are highly scented. L. 
dentdta has narrow serrated foliage, very neat; L. formosa, 
and L. phuiata are desirable; blue flowers on a long spike; 
should be kept near to the glass ; they are of the easiest cul- 
ture. (Soil No. 7.) 

Lcclicnaidtia ; four species of pretty dwarf blooming plants. 
L. formosa is almost always a picture with its bright scarlet 
flowers and heath-like foliage, and ought to be in every col- 



Marcll.~\ GREEX-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 239 

lection; L. bildba and L. Drvmmdndii axe both blue, though 
very rarely seen in bloom ; fine plants two years old with us 
have not yet shown a flower ; they must have an airy situa- 
tion, and near the front glass; otherwise they will be weak 
and spindling. (Soil Xo. 19.) 

Leonbtis, Lion's-ear, four species. They have very fine 
scarlet tubular flowers, orifice-toothed. They come out in 
large whorls, and look elegant ; but neither plant nor foliage 
has an agreeable appearance. They are of the easiest culture. 
L. intermedia and L. Leoniirus are the best flowering species. 
(Soil Xo. 7.) 

Leptospermums, about thirty species, all pretty Xew Hol- 
land evergreen dwarf shrubs, with small white flowers. L. 
bacedtum, L. pendulum, L. grnivperinum, L. ovdtum, L. 
stelldtum, L. grandiflbrum, and L. scopdrium, are the best 
of the species. The latter was used as tea by the crew of 
Captain Cook's ship. It is an agreeable bitter, with a pleasant 
flavour when fresh. When young plants are growing, they 
ought to be frequently topped to make them bushy, and kept 
in an airy situation, or they will be drawn and unsightly. 
They are of very easy culture. (Soil Xo. 1.) 

Leacadendrons, Silver tree, above forty species, all natives 
of the Cape of Good Hope. They are evergreens, with 
handsome silvery-like foliage. L. argenteum (once Prbtas 
argentea) is a great beauty ; foliage white, lanceolate and 
silky. It is a plant that has been long in cultivation, greatly 
admired, and much sought for, and is the finest of the genus. 
L. squarrbsum, L. stelldtum (once Protect stellar is), L. tortum, 
L. serviceum, L. marginatum, and L. plumdsum (once P. 
parviflora^) are all fine species. The pots must be well 
drained and the plants never over-watered. They are very 
desirable in collections for their beauty of foliage. (Soil 
Xo. 9.) 

Leucospermums, about eighteen species of Proteacous plants, 
chiefly low-growing, and are mostly downy or hairy ; flowers 
yellow, in terminal heads. L. formosum, L. grandifibrum, 
L. tomentdsum , and L. candicans, rose-scented. These are 
fine species. For treatment, see Proteas. (Soil Xo. 9.) 

Linums, flax, two or^ree species are very fine, and flower 
freely. L. trigynum has large yellow flowers in clusters, and 
L. aseyrifolium, whose flowers are large, blue and white, and 
[\i long spikes. They bloom in February ; the shape of them 



240 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

is very like the flower vulgarly called Morning-glory. (Soil 
No. 4.) 

Lipavias, about five species, much esteemed for their beauty 
of foliage ; leaves ovate, lanceolate, downy or woolly ; flowers 
yellow, leguminose and capitate. L. sphseriea, L. tomentdsa, 
L. villdsa and L. sericea are the finest. L. vistlta and L. 
viUosa are the same, although put in many catalogues as 
different species. None of them ought to be much watered 
over the foliage, as it adheres to the down, and causes the 
young shoots to damp off. Drain the pots well, and keep the 
plants in an airy situation. (Soil No. 6.) 

Lobllias. Several of them, when well treated, form pretty 
flowering plants ; they are principally herbaceous. The genus 
consists of about eighty species ; seventy of them are exotics ; 
many of them natives of the Cape of Good Hope, with little 
flowers of brilliant colours. L. cserulea, L. Thunbe/yfi, L. 
cori/mbbsa, L. pyramidalis, L. erines, and L. illic\fblia, are 
very fine species, of weak growth, but flower freely. (Soil 
No. 4.) 

Lonicera japdnica. There is a plant in our collections 
known by that name, which is now Nintoda longijiora ; flowers 
of a straw-colour, but come out white. It has been known 
to withstand the winter, but does not flower, and is fre- 
quently killed entirely ; is a fine climber, and much esteemed 
in the South for its fragrance. (Soil No. 3.) 

Lojihospermxim scdndens. This is a magnificent climbing 
soft-wooded shrub, with rosy purple, campanulate flowers, 
which are produced from the axils on the young wood ; they 
bloom from May to September; leaves large, cordate, and 
tomentose ; grows rapidly, and flowers abundantly. (Soil 
No. 3.) 

Lychnis coronata is an esteemed Chinese plant ; flowers 
in abundance, pentapetalous, large, and a little indented at 
the edges; colour a red-like orange; flowers terminal and 
axillary. A good method of treatment is to divide the roots, 
and plant some of them in the garden; they will flower well, 
and could be lifted in the fall, and put under protection. If 
not done so, plant them in four-inch pots, and repot them 
into those of six-inch in May. Do not expose them while in 
flower to the mid-day sun, for it will deteriorate the fine 
orange-colour. (Soil No. 9.) 

Lysinhnas, four species, closely allied to Epdcrls. In 



March.'] green-iiouse — repotting. 241 

every respect treatment the same. L. pentapttalum, L. con- 
spicum, and L. rbscum, are the best ; the flowers of the former 
two are white. (Soil No. 6.) 

Magnolias. There are four species that require the pro- 
tection of our green-houses; all the others are hardy. M. 
fuscdta and 31. annoncefblia are very similar in foliage and 
flower; the young branches and leaves of M. fuscdta are 
covered with a brown, rusty-like down; the other by some 
is considered merely a variety ; flowers small, brown, and 
very sweet-scented. 31. pumila is very dwarf-growing; leaves 
large and netted ; flowers semi-double, white, pendent, and 
exceedingly fragrant. They are natives of China. We have 
several others from the East, but being deciduous are perfectly 
hardy. M. odoratissima , now Talauma Condolii, is a native 
of the Island of Java, and considered odoriferous, but it is 
very rare even in Europe; said to have a straw-coloured 
flower. (Soil No. 9.) 

Mahernia ; a genus of dwarf plants, with yellow, orange, 
or pink flowers. M. odorata -is extensively cultivated for the 
fragrance of its bell-shaped blossoms, that hang in great pro- 
fusion early in spring. Foliage small, erenulated, and heart- 
shaped. (Soil No. 17.) 

Manettia; a genus of pretty climbing plants, producing a 
profusion of scarlet flowers, especially 31. glabra (of Don), 
or cordifblia (of Paxton), which is a complete mass of flowers 
from July to October, and is a lovely object when turned into 
the borders during the summer. 31. bicdlor, red and yellow, 
blooms through the winter, and is a charming climber in that 
dull period of flowers ; they are of the easiest culture in soil 
No. 17. 

3fe/aleucas, above thirty species, and a beautiful genus of 
New Holland plants, of easy culture ; flowers come out of the 
wood-like fringes. 31. elliptica, 31. fuJgens, scarlet, 31. de- 
cussdta, 31. hyper Lcifblia, 31. squarrosa, 31. linari/dlia, 31. 
incdna, 31. tetragonia, 31. thymifolia, are all very fine species, 
and flower freely if they have been grown from cuttings ; the 
singularity of flower and diversity of foliage make them gene- 
rally admired. (Soil No. 1.) 

3Ieldstoma nepalensis is a good green-house species, flower- 
ing freely during winter, of a pale blush colour, and is of the 
easiest culture. As soon as done blooming, the plant should 
be well cut in to keep it into shape. (Soil No. 1.) 

21 



242 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

Mespilus. See Eryabotrya. 

Metrosidtros, about fifteen species. Many have been added 
to Callistemon. 31. florida, 31. umbclldta, and 31. angusti- 
fblia, C salignum, 0. lanccoldtum, C. scmperjlbrens, C. 
glaiicum, once M. specibsa, and C. formbsum ; these are all 
beautiful plants, with scarlet flowers. Other two beautiful 
species with white flowers have been given to Angophdra. 
A. cordi/blia, once 31. hispida, and A. lanceoldta, once 31. 
costata ; these genera are very easily distinguished from any 
other Australasian shrubs, by the peculiar character of having 
both sides of the leaves alike. The flowers consist of stamens, 
stiles, and anthers, coming in hundreds out of the young 
wood for the length of three or four inches, forming a dense 
cone crowned with a small twig; hence frequently called 
"bottle-brush plant;" leaving capsules in the wood, which 
will keep their seeds perfect for a great number of years. 
They grow freely, and the pots should be well drained. 
(Soil No. 1.) 

Myrsines, Cape Myrtle, dwarf Cape evergreen shrubs covered 
with small flowers from March to May. 31. retiisa has purple 
flowers; M. rotundifblia, flowers white and purple. They 
will grow in any situation, and are of easy culture. (Soil 
No. 1.) 

3/yrtus, Myrtle, is a well-known and popular shrub, espe- 
cially the common varieties, and was a great favourite (even 
to adoration) among the ancients. It was the mark of autho- 
rity for Athenian rulers, and is among the moderns an 
emblem of pre-eminence. They are elegant evergreen shrubs 
with an agreeable odour. 31. communis multiplex, double 
flowering, is a very neat shrub, and flowers abundantly. M. 
communis, feucocdrpa, white-fruited myrtle. 31. itdlica vari- 
egdta, striped-leaved ; 31. itdlica maculdta, blotch-leaved, arc 
very fine shrubs; and 31. tomentbsa, Chinese myrtle, is a 
magnificent erect-growing shrub, with a white down over the 
foliage ; the flowei - s are the largest of the genus. When they 
first expand they are purple, and afterwards change to white, 
so that there are beautiful flowers of several shades of colour 
on the plant. We have not the smallest doubt but this species 
will become, in many instances, as plentiful as the common 
myrtle. It is more easily grown, but cannot stand much ex- 
posure to the sun in summer. 31. tenuifblia is a very fine 
plant, and a native of New South Wales. Myrtles in general 



3farch.'] green-house — repotting. 243 

should be sprinkled with water in the evening, to keep off the 
red spider. (Soil No. 11.) 

Xandina domestica, a very hardy species, and a popular 
shrub in the gardens of Japan, where it is called Nandin. 
It has supra-decompound leaves, with entire lanceolate leaf- 
lets, a kind of foliage that is very rare; the flowers are small, 
whitish-green, in panicles, succeeded by berries of the size of 
a pea; drain the pots well. (Soil No. 1.) 

Nerium (Oleander) is a genus of beautiful erect-growing 
evergreen shrubs, of the easiest culture, and abundant in 
flower. N. oleander is the common rose-coloured single flower- 
ing species, from which many varieties have originated. At 
present the most popular is JSf. oleander splendens, which 
has a double rose-coloured flower, iV. o. striata fl. pi. has 
doubled striped flowers. N. macrophyllum has very large 
double pink flowers. N. o. ragindt or tangle, has deep crim- 
son flowers striped with white, though they are frequently 
of a pink colour. N. o. purpurea, dark red. There is one 
that has got into our collections as double white, which is 
only semi-double. N. oleander elcgantissimum, a most beau- 
tiful plant with deep silver-edged foliage ; and the young 
wood is striped white and green. There are likewise single" 
yellow, single white, and single blotched varieties of N. olean- 
der. They are subject to the small white scaly insect, and 
should be frequently washed, as has been directed, to keep it 
off. (Soil No. 12.) 

Oleas, Olive, about twelve species and varieties. 0. Eu- 
ropsea longifblia is the species that is cultivated to such an 
extent in the south of France, and Italy. 0. Europcea 
latifblia is chiefly cultivated in Spain. The fruit is larger 
than that of Italy, but the oil is not so pleasant, which is 
obtained by crushing the fruit to a paste, and pressing it 
through a woollen bag, adding hot water as long as any oil 
is yielded. The oil is then skimmed off the water, and put 
into barrels, bottles, &c, for use. The tree seldom exceeds 
thirty feet, and is a branchy, glaucous evergreen, and is said 
to be of great longevity. Some plantations at Turin, in 
Italy, are supposed to have existed from the time of Pliny. 
It frequently flowers in our collections, but seldom carries 
fruit ; flowers white, in small racemose axillary spikes. 0. 
capensis has thick, large, oblong foliage ; flowers white in large 
terminal panicles. 0. verrucosa, foliage flat, lanceolate, and 



244 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

white beneath, branches curiously warted. O./ragrdns blooms 
in winter ; foliage and blossoms are both highly odoriferous ; 
the plant is much esteemed in China, and is said to be used 
to adulterate and flavour teas. Leaves are elliptic, lanceo- 
late, and a little serrated; flowers white in lateral bunches. 
It is subject to the small white scaly insect, and ought to be 
carefully kept from them by washing. 0. rosea has pink 
flowers. 0. paniculata is also a fine species. They are all 
very easily cultivated. (Soil No. 11.) 

Oxylbbiums, seven species, plants very similar to CaUista- 
ehys, with ovate, cordate, light-coloured, pubescent foliage, 
with papilionaceous flowers. 0. obtusifdlium has scarlet 
flowers; 0. rctfimm, orange flowers; and 0. cllipticum, yel- 
low flowers. They grow freely, and should be well drained ; 
flower from May to August. (Soil No. 6.) 

Passijidra ; a celebrated genus of climbing plants, called in 
common " Passion Vine." Those belonging to the green- 
house, flower during summer. Several of them are both 
beautiful and profuse in bloom, especially P. Kermdsine, P. 
princeps, P. hybncio, P. fragrans, P. Newmannia, P. Lemo- 
clientziana, and are very distinct species; the former is of a 
beautiful rosy crimson colour. (Soil No. 13.) 

Pelargoniums, Stork's Bill. This genus, so universally 
known among us as Geranium, from which it was separated 
many years ago, is a family of great extent and variety, for 
which we are principally indebted to the Cape of Good Hope. 
There are many hundred species, with upwards of twelve 
hundred beautiful and well-marked varieties, which have been 
obtained from seed. They are of every character, colour, and 
shade, of the most vivid description. The easy cultivation 
of the Pelargonium tribe, or Geraniums, as they are com- 
monly called, has rendered them very popular; also the 
agreeableness of scent and fragrance, of which many of them 
are possessed, makes them favourites. 

Their flowering season is also of considerable duration, espe- 
cially the bright scarlet and crimson varieties, which bloom 
from March till August, rendering them quite indispensable 
in collections. Some growers complain of their straggling 
habits ; but it is only those that do not know how to prune 
them : even some of the choice kinds of the present day 
could not be made to grow irregularly — such as Perfection, 
King, Mary, Margaret, and others; indeed, within these few 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 245 

years, the habits and beauties of the plant are improved a 
hundred-fold, and those who are only acquainted with the 
old sorts would be transported with a view of the dazzling 
and beauteous colony of the new kinds that have been pro- 
cured by hybridizing those of good habit and character. 

The best method to adopt in impregnating these is to 
choose the female, one that has large flowers, of easy culti- 
vation, and as nearly allied in character and other habits as 
possible. When a flower of the intended female is newly 
expanded, take a pair of very fine-pointed scissors, and cut 
off the anthers before the pollen expands ; then, as soon as 
the summit of the style divides, apply the pollen taken 
from the anthers of the intended male plant on a very fine 
camel hair-pencil, or cut out the stigma entirely, and place 
the anther on the summit of the style, which, if correctly 
done, will have the desired effect. As soon as the seed is 
ripe, sow it in light sandy soil ; and when it has come up, 
take care not to over-water the soil, which would cause them 
to damp off. When they are about one inch high, put them 
into small pots, and treat as the other varieties. Have them 
all distinctly marked until they flower, which will be in the 
second year from the time of sowing. 

The tuberous and fleshy stemmed species are very interest- 
ing to the discriminating inquirer. Their habit and constitu- 
tion are so peculiar that we have frequently wondered that 
they have not been separated into distinct genera. The cul- 
tivation of them is more difficult, water being very prejudi- 
cial to them when they are inactive. If they are well 
managed, they flower beautifully, and the colours are very 
superior and peculiar, having frequently bright green and 
purple in the same flower. 

The following list comprehends the most desirable varieties 
that we have seen : — 



21* 



246 



GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 



[March. 



PURE WHITE, 

MARKED OR STRIPED WITH 
RED, PURPLE, OR CRIMSON. 

Alexandrina, 
Desdeinone, 
Cecilia, 
Lord Warden, 
Pearl, 

White Flag, 
Queen of Scots, 
Witch. 

BLUSH, 

MARKED OR STRIPED WITH 
RED, ETC. 

Acme, 

Bell of Ware, 

Cyrus Superb, 

Juliette, 

Miss Percival, 

Queen of Fairies, 

Miss Holford. 

PINK, 

MARKED OR COLOURED WITH 
RED OR CRIMSON. 

Admiration, 
Bella, 

Blood Royal, 
Captivation. 

Hebe's Lip, 
Matilda, 

Nestor. 

ROSE, 

WITH STRIPES OR SPOTS. 



Celestial, 
Gigantea, 
Hebe, 



Hector, 
Mrs. Brooks, 
Mark Antony, 
Rosy circle, 
South Western. 

RED OR SCARLET, 

WITH STRIPES OR SPOTS. 

Aurora, 

Agrippina, 

Brutus, 

Chieftain, 

Duke of Cornwall, 

Emperor, 

Forget-me-not, 

Lady Napier, 

King, 

Perfection, 

Orion, 

Shield of Achilles, 

Star of the West. 

FANCY COLOURS 

OF VARIOUS SHADES. 

Anais, 

Madam Meilez, 
Ytolmshii. 

VERY DARK CRIMSON, 
OR PURPLE, 

MARKED WITH BLACK. 

Ajax (purple), 

Arabian, 

Lady Macbeth, 

Mustii, 

Negress, 

Seline, 

Sir Walter Raleigh, 

Sir Henry Smith, 

Salamander. 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 247 

VARIOUS, CURIOUS, AND FIXE Maculatuin, 

sorts. Sanguineum, 

Bipinnatifidum, Tricolor, 

Comptonianurn, Tricolor major. 
Echinatum, 

There are several others very recently introduced, which 
have not bloomed so as to allow us to judge of their merits ; 
but their foreign characters are highly flattering. The re- 
potting of the geranium tribe should be done as early in the 
month as possible, or even about the end of last month would 
be advisable in some seasons. (Soil No. 12, with a little 
more manure.) 

Phdrmium tenax, New Zealand flax lily, the only species ; 
foliage resembling an Iris, and very thready. In New Zea- 
land and Norfolk Island the natives manufacture from this 
plant a kind of stuff like coarse linen, cordage, &c. ; the 
plant is very hardy, and we would be nowise surprised to see 
it stand the severity of our winters. It bears exposure to 
the open air in Europe in the fifty-sixth degree of north 
latitude. The flowers are said to be yellow and lily-like ; of 
the easiest culture. (Soil No. 7.) 

Pht/licas, above twenty-five species. Several of them are 
very pretty-growing evergreen shrubs, and of easy culture. 
P. horizontdlis, P. squarrdsu, P. imhricdta, P. myrtifolia, P. 
callosa, P. hicolor, and P. ericoides, are all neat-growing; 
flowers small white, in heads : drain the pots well, and keep 
them in an airy situation. The foliage of several of the 
species is downy. (Soil No. 6.) 

Phascdlus caracdlla, or snail flower, is a very curious 
blooming plant, with flowers of a greenish yellow, all spirally 
twisted, in great profusion when the plant is well grown. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

Phoenix dactylifera, common date palm ; a plant that 
attains a large size and of rather a rugged appearance ; it's 
fruit is the common well-known date. (Soil No. 12.) 

Pimilcas, about fourteen species. Most of them are highly 
esteemed, and are not often seen in our collections. P. 
decussdta is the finest of the genus, both in foliage and 
flowers, which are red, and in large terminal clusters. P. his- 
jpula, P. rosea, P. Unifulia, P. spicdta, and P. spcctdbi/is, 
are all fine species. The latter has very beautiful lanceo- 



248 green-house — repotting. [March. 

late foliage and of an elegant habit. They should be well 
drained. They are very small evergreen shrubs, with white, 
red, or pink flowers. (Soil No. 6.) 

Pisidcias, seven species of trees, principally of the south 
of Europe. There is nothing particular in their appearance, 
except their productions in their native country. P. terebin- 
thus is deciduous, and produces the Cyprus turpentine. P. 
lentiscus is the true mastich tree, which is obtained by cut- 
ting transverse incisions in the bark. P. vera, P. reticulata 
are good species ; leaves pinnated ; leaflets ovate, lanceolate ; 
easily cultivated. (Soil No. 2.) 

Pittoqwrums, about nine species, with, handsome foliage, 
and small white flowers in clusters, which are fragrant. P. 
tobira is a native of China, and nearly hardy ; leaves lucid, 
obovate, obtuse, and smooth ; there is a beautiful variegated 
variety of it. P. undiddtum, P. coridecum, P. revolatwm, 
P. fiilvum, and P. ferrvgineum are very ornamental ever- 
greens, and will grow with the most simple treatment. 
(Soil No. 13.) 

Platylbbiums, Flat Pea, four species of fine free-flowering 
plants, flowers leguminose ; colour yellow. P. formbsum, 
P. ovdtum and P. trianguldre are the best ; the foliage of 
the former two is cordate ovate ; the latter hastate, with 
spiny angles. (Soil No. G.) 

Plumbagos, Lead-wort. The two most beautiful species 
for green-house culture are P. capensis, of a beautiful light 
blue, flowering in spikes from June to December ; foliage 
pale green, oblong, entire, and glaucous — P. Larpanta, Lady 
Larpant's Leadwort, is of a very dwarf habit, small dark green- 
ish-brown foliage, crowned with flowers of the finest azure blue, 
and is tolerably hardy in the open ground ; in fact, they are 
both perfectly hardy in the Southern States. (Soil No. 1.) 

Podalyrias, about fourteen species of pretty Cape shrubs ; 
foliage oblong, obovate, and silky-like ; the flowers legumi- 
nose ; colour blue or pink. P. sericea, P. sty rac if alia, P. 
coruscans, P. argentea, P. liparioides, and P. subijlura, are 
the finest and most distinct species, and flower abundantl}'. 
(Soil No. G.) 

Prbteas, about forty-four species. The foliage of this 
genus is very diversified ; flowers very large, terminal ; stamens 
protected by an involucrum, many-leaved and imbricated; 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 249 

which is very persistent. P. cynaroides has the largest 
flower, which is purple, green, and red. P. speciosa, P. 
umbondlis, once P. hmgifdUa, P. melaleiica, P. grand iflbra, 
P. coccinea, P. cenocdrpa, P. pollens, P. formbsa, P. mag- 
nified, P. speciosa rubra, and P. mellifcra, will afford a very 
good variety. It is almost impossible to describe their true 
colour, it being so various ; red, white, straw, brown, green, 
and purple, are most predominant, and frequently to be seen 
in the same flower. The plants must be well drained ; and 
during warm weather be careful that they are not neglected 
in water, for if they are suffered to droop, they seldom re- 
cover. For this reason the pots ought not to stand in the 
strong sun ; the plants can bear it, but to the roots it is 
injurious. (Soil No. 9.) 

Pultnseas, about forty species, pretty little dwarf-growing 
shrubs of New South Wales ; flowers, small,- leguminose, all 
yellow with a little red outside of the petals. P. subumbcl- 
Idta, P. villosa, P. obcorddta, P. argentea, P. plumbsa, P. 
flexilis, shining-leaved, fragrant; P. Candida, and P. str\cta, 
are all fine species, and esteemed in collections. The leaves 
are all small ; they require an airy exposure, and the pots 
drained. (Soil No. G.) 

Rhodochiton volubile, or Lop>lwrspermum rhodocliiton : this 
is a very fine climbing plant, with large tubular dark brown 
flowers, blooming from July to October ; it is of rapid growth, 
and is an excellent plant for the flower-garden. The plant 
must have frequent repotting to make it grow rapidly, for the 
finer it grows the more profusely it flowers. (Soil No. 12.) 

Rhododendrons (Rose tree), a magnificent genus, and 
contains some of the most superb and gigantic plants that 
adorn the green-house. At present the most admired is R. 
arbbreum, with its varieties. It has deep crimson flowers, 
with dark spots and flakes campanulated, and in large 
clusters ; leaves lanceolate, acute, rough and silvery beneath. 
R. arbbreum alhum is very rare. R. arbbreum superbum, 
flowers same shape as arbbreum, colour bright rosy scarlet; 
foliage one-third larger, but not silvery beneath ; grows freely, 
and generally thought the finest variety. R. arbbrea alta- 
Clarence is also very superb. R. arbbrea Russelidnum, 
pictum, vcniUtum, guttdtum, tigrinum, noblednum, grandi- 
flbrum, spectdbile, are all very distinct; but there are so 
many other varieties from seed that they will soon be so 



250 green-house — repotting. [March. 

much amalgamated that the named sorts will not be distin- 
guished. A green-house without some of the choice varieties 
of this plant is deficient of a flower whose beauty and gran- 
deur are beyond the highest imagination. It is a native of 
Nepaul, in India, and when found by Dr. Wallach, awakened 
the ambition of every cultivator and connoisseur in Europe.* 
There are several other species lately brought from that 
country, which are highly valued : the species are R. cam- 
panulatum, R. anthopogon, and R. cinnamomum. They are 
rarely seen in our collections, but a few years will make them 
more plentiful. Their beauty of flower is beyond description. 
The pots should be well drained, and if they are large, put 
several pieces of sandy stone or potshreds around the side, 
for the fine fibres delight to twine about such, being moun- 
tainous plants. When growing, give copious waterings at 
the root. For young plants, soil No. G. And for blooming- 
plants, use one portion of leaf mould. 

Roellas, pretty leafy shrubs, with blue terminal funnel- 
shaped flowers, lip-spreading j R. ciliata, R. spicata, and R. 
pcdunculata are the finest of the genus. The pots must be 
well drained, and care taken that they are not over-watered. 
(Soil No. 6.) 

Salvia (Sage) is an extensive genus of soft-wooded, shrub- 
by, or herbaceous plants ; very few of them do well in the 
green-house, and many of them are very trifling, having no 
other attraction than the flower ; and those of the tender 
species, when compared with S. fidgens, crimson, S. splen- 
dens, scarlet, S. angustifolia, pale blue, S.pmtens, dark blue, 
S. involucrata, pink (which in artificial climates constitute 
the standard of the genus), are not worth cultivation. The 
best method to adopt with the summer flowering kinds is to 
plant them in the garden in May : they will grow strong and 
flower abundantly, and in the fall they can be lifted, and 
preserved during winter in pots. They neither grow nor 
flower so well as when planted out, and even a slip planted 
in the ground in moist weather will root in a few days, grow, 
and flower in a few weeks. S. splendens is the best to select 
for the purpose. All will grow easily with encouragement. 
(Soil No. 12.) 

* Mr. Hogg, the eminent horticulturist of New York, raised the 
first plant of arboreum from seed in England. 



March.'] green-house — repotting. 251 

Scbttias, three species of valuable plants; S. dentdta, with 
rosy leguininose blossoms ; leaves opposite, ovate, acuminate, 
serrate ; S. angustifolia has brown flowers ; S. trapezifbr- 
mvs, leaves ovate, acute, serrulate. We do not know the 
colour of its flowers ; the pots must be well drained, and the 
plants kept in the warmest part of the green-house, and near 
the light. (Soil No. 6.) 

Senecios. Some species of this genus are pestiferous weeds 
all over the world. They are even found near the limits of 
perpetual snow, where neither tree nor shrub is able to rear its 
head, and yet there are a few species that are neat little 
plants, and are worthy of a situation, namely, S. grandifld- 
rus, S. venilstus, and S. cinerasccns, with the double white, 
purple, and red variety of S. elegans. The last three varie- 
ties are free flowering, but if allowed to grow several years, 
they become unsightly. Being very easily propagated, a few 
cuttings of them should be put in in September, and in two 
weeks they will strike root, when they may be put in pots 
to keep through the winter, and then planted in the garden, 
continuing to renew them. The other mentioned species 
should be frequently done the same way. Do not keep them 
clamp during winter, or they will rot off. Give them an airy 
exposure. (Soil No. 12.) 

Sollya heterophf/Ua : a good climbing plant, with bright 
blue clusters of drooping flowers ; it is a native of New Hol- 
land, and will prove a hardy plant south of latitude 36°. 
(Soil No. 4.) 

Sparrmdnnias are strong-growing green-house shrubs. -S. 
Africana is a plant very common in our collections, with 
large three-lobed cordate leaves, hairs on both sides; flowers 
from March to July. S. ritgom. The leaves are rugged ; 
flowers of both are white, in a kind of corymb, supported by 
a long footstalk ; buds drooping, flowers erect. There is a 
plant known in our collections as the free flowering jSparr- 
mdnnia (which is Entelia arbor escens), and is easily distin- 
guished from Sparrmdnnia by the leaves being cordate, acu- 
minate, and otherwise, by all its filaments being fertile, and 
the flowers more branching, and blooming from November to 
June, profusely; very easily cultivated, and desirable. (Soil 
No. 12.) 

Splicurolbbiums, only two species of leafless plants, with 
yellow and red leguminose flowers, which proceed from the 



252 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

young shoots. S. vimineum and S. medium. They flower 
freely, and are easily cultivated. The old wood should be 
frequently cut out where it is practicable. Drain the pots. 
(Soil No. 60 

SprciKjelia incamdta, the only species, a very pretty 
plant, allied to Epacris; foliage acuminate, embracing the 
stem ; flowers small, pink, bearded, and in close spikes ; grows 
freely. The pots must be well drained, and the plants, when 
dormant, watered sparingly ; for if they get sodden about the 
roots, they very seldom recover. (Soil No. 6.) 

Strelitzia, or cpueen plant : a genus of fine plants belonging 
to the natural order of Musacea. S. regina, S. ovdta, and 
S. Immilis are the most free and beautiful flowering species, 
and are very similar, except in habit. The flower-stalk is 
from one to two feet long, producing about five flowers of a 
bright yellow, having a large blue stigma, which forms a dis- 
tinct contrast. S. jiincea and S. parviflbranxe, also desirable 
species, but are more rare than the former, which ought to be 
in every green-house. (Soil No. 19.) 

Streptoearpm rhSxvi, a free-blooming dwarf plant, of easy 
culture in soil No. 4. 

Styltdium, six species of pretty little plants, with small 
linear leaves, and remarkable for the singular elasticity of the 
style or column, which, when the flower is newly expanded, 
lays to one side, and, on being touched with a pin, starts with 
violence to the opposite side. S. graminifblium, S. fniticb- 
sum, S. lancifbUum, and S. aduatum, are all free-flowering; 
flowers in spikes, very small; colour light and dark pink; 
blooms from April to July. S. adndtum is half herbaceous, 
and should, when growing, be kept nigh the glass, or it will 
be drawn, and the flowers become of a pale colour. They are 
all of easy cultivation. (Soil No. 10.) 

Styplielias, seven species of very showy flowers, with mu- 
cronate leaves; corolla in long tubular form, having several 
bundles of hairs in it; segments reflex and bearded. S. 
tubijlbra, crimson; S. trijlbra, crimson and green; S. adscen- 
dens, and >S'. hrngtUbra, are beautiful species. They grow 
freely, and should be well drained, as too much water is very 
hurtful to them. In summer, they ought not to be much ex- 
posed to the hot sun, or the foliage will become brown. (Soil 
No. 6.) 



March.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 253 

Sutherland ia frutescens, very similar to Swainsonia ; 
flowers fine scarlet. (Soil No. 2.) 

Swainsbnias, four species of free-flowering, soft-wooded 
shrubs, natives of New South Wales. S. galegifblia, S. 
coronillxfblia, and S. astragali/alia, are red, purple, and 
white ; leguminose flowers in spikes from the axils, are of 
easy culture and deserving of a situation ; the foliage is pin- 
nate ; leaflets ovate, acute. (Soil No. 2.) 

Tecbma is a genus of beautiful flowering plants, separated 
from Bignbnia. They are of easy culture, and desirable in 
all collections. T. capensis has bright orange flowers in large 
clusters, and very profuse on large plants. T. austrdlis, 
known as Bignbnia pandora, has white and pink flowers in 
great profusion. T.jasminoides is quite a new plant, producing 
very large clusters of white flowers, with a bright pink centre ; 
it is a charming plant for climbing, and the foliage is of a 
very agreeable shining green. The plants recpiire encourage- 
ment. (Soil No. 10.) 

Telopea sjieciosissimus is the only species, and was once 
called Embbthrium speciosissimns. It is now called Telopea, 
in allusion to the brilliant crimson flowers, which from their 
large size are seen at a great distance, and which render it 
one of the most conspicuous productions of New South Wales. 
The leaves are oblong, deeply toothed, veiny, and smooth ; 
wood strong ; flower ovate, connate, and terminal, and of 
considerable duration. There ought to be a specimen of it 
in every collection. The pots must be well drained, and the 
plant in the extreme heat ofi» summer not too much exposed 
to the sun. Very scarce. (Soil No. 19.) 

Testudinaria, Elephant's foot, or Hottentot's bread, two 
species remarkable for their appearance. The root or bulb, 
if it may be so called, is of a conical shape, and divided into 
transverse sections. Those of one foot diameter are com- 
puted to be one hundred and fifty years of age. It is a 
climbing herbaceous plant, with entire reniform leaves of no 
beauty; flowers small; colour green. The pots must be well 
drained, for when the plant is inactive, it is in danger of 
suffering from moisture, and ought not to get any water. T. 
elephantipes and T. montana are the species, natives of the 
Cape of Good Hope, and recpiire the warmest part of the 
house. (Soil No. 10.) 

Thea : a genus celebrated over the known world as fur- 
22 



254 green-house — repotting. [March. 

nisliing the domestic drug called Tea. T. viridis, and T. 
hoi tea are said to be the species which supply the tea. Some 
have asserted that there is only one shrub used, but by ex- 
amination it may be easily perceived that there are leaves of 
various shape and texture, some of them similar to Camellia 
sesanqua. Dr. Abel gives an explicit detail of the growing 
and manufacturing process of tea, from which, in compliment 
to our fair patrons, we give a few extracts : 

"The tea districts of China extend from the twenty- 
seventh to the thirty-first degree of north latitude. It seems 
to succeed best on the sides of mountains. The soil from which 
I collected the best specimens consisted chiefly of sandstone, 
schistus, or granite. The plants are raised from seeds sown 
where they are to remain. Three or more are dropped into 
a hole four or five inches deep; these come up without farther 
trouble, and require little culture, except that of removing 
weeds, till the plants are three years old. The more careful 
stir the soil, and some manure it, but the latter practice is 
seldom adopted. The third year the leaves are gathered, at 
three successive gatherings, in February, April, and June, and 
so on until the bushes become stunted or slow in their growth, 
which generally happens in from six to ten years. They are 
then cut in to encourage the production of fresh roots. 

" The gathering of the leaves is performed with care and 
selection. The leaves are plucked off one by one ; at the first 
gathering only the unexpanded and tender are taken ; at the 
second those that are of full growth ; and at the third the 
coarsest. The first forms, what is called in Europe, imperial 
tea ; but, as to the other names by which tea is known, the 
Chinese know nothing; and the compounds and names are 
supposed to be made and given by the merchants at Canton, 
who, from the great number of varieties brought to them, have 
an ample opportunity of doing so. Formerly it was thought 
that green tea was gathered exclusively from T. viridis ; but 
that now is doubtful, though it is certain that there is what 
is called the green tea district and black tea district; and the 
varieties grown in the one district differ from those of the 
other. I was told by competent persons that either of the 
two plants will afford the black or green tea of the shops, but 
that the broad thin-leaved plant ( T. viridis) is preferred for 
making the green tea. 

"The tea leaves being gathered, are cured in houses which 



March.] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. 255 

contain from five to twenty small furnaces, about three feet 
high each, having at top a large flat iron pan. There is also 
a long low table covered with mats, on which the leaves are 
laid, and rolled by workmen, who sit around it : the iron pan 
being heated to a certain degree, by a little fire made in the 
furnace underneath, a few pounds of the fresh-gathered leaves 
are put upon the pan ; the fresh and juicy leaves crack when 
they touch the pan, and it is the business of the operator to 
shift them as quickly as possible, with his bare hands, till they 
cannot be easily endured. At this instant he takes off the 
leaves with a kind of shovel resembling a fan, and pours them 
on the mats before the rollers, who, taking small quantities at 
a time, roll them in the palms of their hands in one direction, 
while others are fanning them, that they may cool the more 
speedily, and retain their curl the longer. This process is 
repeated two or three times, or oftener, before the tea is put 
into the stores, in order that all the moisture of the leaves may 
be thoroughly dissipated, and their curl more completely pre- 
served. On every repetition the pan is less heated, aud the 
operation performed more closely and cautiously. The tea is 
then separated into the different kinds, and deposited in the 
store for domestic use or exportation. 

" The different sorts of black and green arise not merely 
from soil, situation, or the age of the leaf; but after win- 
nowing the tea, the leaves are taken up in succession as they 
fall ; those nearest the machine, being the heaviest, are the 
gunpowder tea; the light dust the worst, being chiefly used 
by the lower classes. That which is brought down to Canton 
then undergoes a second roasting, winnowing, packing, &c, 
and many hundred women are employed for these purposes." 

Kamipfer asserts that a species of Camellia as well as Olea 
Fiai/rans is used to give it a high flavour. 

Tacsdriia. a genus of plants much resembling Passifloras 
both in flower aud habits. T. pinnatistipulata and T. mollis, 
when planted into the ground and trained up the rafters of 
the green-house, make a pretty appearance with their profu- 
sion of rosy blush-coloured flowers. (Soil No. 13.) 

Tropeeolum, a genus of generally delicate-growing plants, 
principally from South America. They require nicety of 
treatment to bloom them well, unless a large bulb can be 
procured, when it may be planted in a sev^n-inch pot, and 
will then flower without farther care by training their deli- 
cate shoots on a wire trellis, or small twigs of branches stuck 



256 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

in the pots. T. tricolorum, T. tricolorum superbum, and T. 
pentaphylhnn have beautiful scarlet flowers marked with yel- 
low and black, and are superb and lovely when in bloom. T. 
brachyseras has yellow flowers. (Soil No. 10.) 

Verbena. The beauty of the green-house in spring and 
the flower-garden in summer is greatly augmented by the 
late introduction of this lovely family of perpetual flowering 
plants. There are among them every shade of colour, from 
the richest scarlet to the purest white, and, in addition to 
the beauty and profusion of their flowers, several of them are 
exquisitely scented. V. chamsedry folia, or melindres, was 
the first scarlet species introduced, and it is yet pretty. V. 
bicolor grandijiora, scarlet crimson eye ; V. Beauty, rose ; 
V. Beauty supreme, beautiful large rose; V. Polkii, very 
dark purple crimson; V. Nymph, beautiful pink; V. Tri- 
umph, very dark crimson ; V. Eclipse, striped; V. Heroine, 
blue, dark centre ; V. la Gracious, clouded blue and lilac ; 
V. Queen of the Bay, white, deep crimson edge; V. Star of 
the West, scarlet, pale eye ; V. St. Marguerite, shaded scarlet 
crimson ; V. Iphogcne, lilac, marbled with blue and purple ; 
V. Wonderful, rose-white, pink eye; V. White Perfection, 
pure white. 

Robeson's Defiance, the best scarlet; Buist's Perfection, 
the best sweet-scented lilac. 

These are principally new varieties, of perfect formation ; 
the flowers in many are as large as a clime, far outvieing 
those cultivated a few years ago. It is only twelve years 
since I grew the first white, pink and crimson verbena, from 
seed received from Buenos Ayres. They created a very great 
excitement in the floral world, both in this country and 
Europe. Now there are thousands produced from seed an- 
nually. In England, they bear the titled name of Ladies, 
Marquesses and Queens, commanding a very high price ; but 
with all their titles, none of them excel a few of those named 
above. They require very little water during winter, and 
should be kept on a dry airy shelf till February, when the 
pots may be enlarged except those intended for the garden, 
which can be planted out about the middle of April. Cut- 
tings of the young shoots, placed in sandy soil and covered 
with a glass, will root in a few weeks. The whole family 
should be industriously collected and cultivated ; for truly we 
arc not acquainted with a tribe of plants that will give as much 
satisfaction with as little cost and trouble : they naturally 



March."] green-house — repotting. 257 

grow on hills and elevated plains, so that they must not be 
kept wet. (Soil No. 9.) 

Veronica, an extensive genus of plants that are cultivated 
largely as ornaments for the flower-garden. Within these 
few years some very beautiful species have been discovered 
in New Zealand. Among them is V. specidsa, a picture of a 
plant with foliage equal to a Camellia, producing spikes about 
three inches long, of bright purple flowers, fading to a pale 
blush. V. Lintlleyana, with ovate lanceolate leaves, and 
spikes of delicate blush flowers ; blooming in winter. They 
are of the simplest culture — growing freely and symmetrically 
in soil No. 9. 

Viminaria denvddta, the only species. This plant is re- 
markable for its twiggy appearance, but it has no foliage, 
except when growing from seed. It has at the extremity of 
the twigs or shoots an ovate, lanceolate leaf, disappearing 
when the plant grows old ; the flowers are small, yellow, 
coming out of the young shoots, to the astonishment of the 
beholder. It grows freely. (Soil No. 6.) 

Viuiimums. A few of these are very ornamental evergreen 
shrubs, and almost hardy. V. thins is the well-known Lau- 
restine (or what is commonly called Laurestinus), is of the 
easiest cultui-e; flowers small, white, and in large flattened 
panicles ; blooming from February to May, and universally 
esteemed. It will stand the winter by a little protection, but 
the flower-buds being formed in the fall, the intense frost 
destroys them ; consequently, it will not flower finely, except 
it be protected from severe frost. V. lucidum is a good 
species, and superior in flower and foliage to the former, but 
does not flower so freely when the plants are small. When 
they grow large, they flower profusely. There is a desirable 
variegated variety. V. odoratissimum has smooth, ever- 
green, oblong elliptic, distinctly toothed leaves, and frequently 
a stripe in them, is sweet-scented, but not a free-flowerer. 
V. hirsiitum has flowers similar to the above ; foliage ovate, 
with rough brown hairs on both sides, and very characteristic. 
V. striatum variegdtum is a very fine variety, and upright 
growing. These plants are all very desirable, blooming early 
in spring, and continuing for several months; all easily culti- 
vated. (Soil No. 17.) 

Westringias, a genus of four species, very like the common 
Rosemary. W. rosmariniformn, leaves lanceolate, and sil- 



258 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING. [March. 

very beneath. W. longifolia is similar ; both have small sil- 
very-white flowers, and are easily cultivated. (Soil No. 2.) 

Witsenias, four species. 11'. corymbbsa is a plant that has 
stood in high estimation ever since it was known, but, unfor- 
tunately, there is a very inferior plant. Aristea cyanea got 
into our collections under that name. The panicles of W. 
corymbbsa are quite smooth ; those of Aristea are hairy, 
which is itself sufficient to detect them ; but otherwise the 
appearance of W. corymbbsa is much stronger and more erect 
growing, not inclining to push at the roots so much as Aris- 
tea. The foliage is lanceolate and amplexicaule, the leaves 
having much the nature and appearance of Iris. The plant 
is of easy culture, and blooms from July to November; colour 
line blue. W. ramosq is a very fine species, similar to the above ; 
flowers yellow and blue; plant branching. (Soil No. 8.) 

Yucca aloefdlia, and its beautiful variety varicgafa, are de- 
sirable plants. They do not bloom till they have grown to 
considerable size ; but still they make a decided contrast 
among other plants ; the flowers are white and produced on 
terminal spikes. (Soil No. 11.) 

Zamias, about twenty species, eight of which belong to 
this compartment. The foliage is greatly admired, and is in 
large fronds, with oblique, lanceolate leaflets. Several of 
them glaucous. They bear heads of flowers of a brown co- 
lour in the centre of the plants, very like large pine cones. 
Z. hbrrida, the finest ; Z. piingens, Z. spiralis, and Z. 
latifbUa, are the most conspicuous. They must be kept in 
the warmest part of the green-house ; and give them large 
well-drained pots, watering sparingly during winter. They 
are imported from the Cape of Good Hope. (Soil No. 11.) 

All the plants herein named requiring to be drained, in pre- 
paring the pots, place first a piece of broken pot, oyster- 
shell, or any similar substitute, with the convex side on the 
hole of the pot, and then put in a few, or a handful (accord- 
ing to the size of the pot) of shivers of broken pots, or 
round gravel about the size of garden beans. Those that 
we have mentioned in this Repotting, as to be done in this 
or beginning of next month, is not intended to apply to 
plants in general, large and small, but to those that are 
young, and require encouragement, or to those that were not 
shifted last autumn. The roots must not be disturbed, but 
the ball turned out entire ; and put as much earth as will 



MarehJ] green-house — ox enarching, etc. 259 

raise the ball within about half an inch of the rim of the 
pot. Press the earth down around it with a thin narrow 
piece of wood, called a potting stick, frequently shaking it 
that no vacancy may be left. If the roots are rotten, or 
otherwise injured, take all such off. If this be the case, the 
plant will be sickly. Give it a new pot of a smaller size, 
administering water moderately until there are visible signs 
of fresh growth. The plants must not be disturbed while 
flowering; let the repotting be done afterward. Plants are, 
at certain stages, if in good health, in a state that no one 
can err in shifting them when desirous to hasten their growth. 
Those plants that make two or more growths during the sum- 
mer may be repotted in the interim of any of these growths, 
and all others just before they begin to push in the spring; 
that is, when the wood buds are perceptibly swelled. Never 
saturate with water fresh-potted plants. There are many 
kinds that, without injury, can be repotted when growing. 
When done potting, tie all up neatly with stakes rather 
higher than the plant, that the new shoots may be tied thereto 
during the summer, to prevent them from being destroyed by 
the wind. There may be many that do not require repot- 
ting, but would be benefited by a top-dressing. This should 
be done by probing off all the surface earth down to the roots, 
replacing it with fresh compost, suitable to the nature of the 
plant. 

"When the above is done, arrange all the plants in proper 
order, and syringe them clean ; but if there are any of the 
green-fly, they must be fumigated previous to syringing. The 
pavement of the house should be cleanly and neatly swept 
every day, and washed at least once a week. Thus, every 
part of the house will be in order before the hurry of the garden 
commences. 



OF ENARCHING, OR GRAFTING BY APPROACH. 

In this method of grafting, the scion is not separated from 
the parent plant until it is firmly united with the stock; con- 
sequently, they must stand contiguously. We intend the 
following method to apply directly to Camellias, as they are 
the principal plants in the green-house that are thus worked. 
The criterion for the operation is about the first of March or 



260 GREEN-HOUSE — DIRECTIONS. [April. 

June. Place the stock contiguous to the plant where the 
graft or enarch is to be taken from. If the branches, where 
the intended union is to take place, do not grow at equal 
heights, a slight stage nia} r be erected to elevate the lower 
pot. Take the branch that is to be "enarched (the wood of 
last year is the most proper), and bring it in contact with the 
stock ; mark the parts where they are to unite, so as to form 
a pointed arch. In that part of the branch which is to rest 
against the stock, pare off the bark and part of the wood 
to about two or three inches in length, and in the side of the 
stock which is to receive the graft do the same, that the in- 
side rind of each may be exactly opposite, which is the first 
part where a union will take place. Bind them firmly and 
neatly together with strands of Russia matting, and protect 
the joint from the air by a coat of close composition; clay 
of the consistency of thick paint, turpentine, or wax, will 
equally answer. Finish by fastening the grafted branch to 
the head of the stock or a rod. Many practitiouers make a 
slit or tongue into the enarch and stock, but we find it unne- 
cessary, more tedious, and likewise more danger in breaking. 
Camellias are also grafted and budded, but these two opera- 
tions require great experience and continued attention, and 
seldom prove so successful as enarching. When they have 
perfectly taken, which will be in from three to four months, 
begin to separate them by cutting the scion a little at three 
different periods, about a week apart, separating it at the 
third time. If the head is intended to be taken off the stock, 
do it in like manner. By the above method, many kinds can 
be grown on the same stock. The same plan applies to all 
evergreens. 



APRIL. 



Regarding the shifting or repotting of plants, the direc- 
tions given last month may be followed. If the plants that 
require it are not shifted, get them done as soon as possible. 
Those that were repotted last month will have taken fresh 
root in the new soil, and the advantage will soon be per- 



April.] GREEN-HOUSE WATERING. 261 

ceptible. In order to strengthen the plants, and keep 
them from becoming drawn and spindly, admit large por- 
tions of air every mild day. Indeed, there will be very 
few days in this month that a little air may not be given, 
always observing to divide the quantity regularly over the 
house, in cool nights closing in time. About the end of 
the month an abundance of air is indispensable, leaving 
the sashes and doors open every mild night, that the plants 
may be inured to the open exposure they will have in a few 
weeks. 



WATERING. 

As the season advances and vegetation increases, the 
waterings will require to be more copious and more fre- 
quent. Look over all plants minutely every day, and with 
judicious care supply their wants. Those that are of a 
soft shrubby nature, and in a free-growing state, will require 
a larger portion at one time than those of a hard texture, 
which may only want it every two or three days. The 
weather and situation, in some instances, may require a 
modification of these directions. Plants in general will not 
suffer so soon from being a little dry as from being over- 
watered. The health and beauty of the foliage of the plants 
may be much improved by syringing them freely three 
evenings in the week, except in moist weather, when it 
ought not to be done. The ravages of many insects also 
will be retarded, especially mildew and red spider, which 
will be entirely destroyed. If the red spider is on any of 
the plants particularly, take them aside evening and morn- 
ing, and give them a good dashing with water through the 
syringe. Where there is mildew, after syringing the plant, 
dust it on the affected parts with flower of sulphur, and set 
them for a few days where they will be sheltered from the 
wind, after which wash off the sulphur. If the cure is not 
complete renew the dose. Always sweep out and dry up 
the water in the house when any is spilt. The succulent 
plants will be in want of a little water about once a week, 
but do not over-water them, as there is not heat enough to 
absorb much moisture. If the soil is damp, it is quite suf- 
ficient. 



262 GREEN-HOUSE — ORANGES, ETC. [April. 

I 



ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC., 

Will, in many instances, about the end of this mouth, be 
showing flowers or flower-buds. They must, under these 
circumstances, have plenty of air to prevent them from 
falling off when entirely exposed. The reason that we see 
so much fine blossom falling to the ground where the trees 
are brought out of the house in May, is from the confine- 
ment they have had. Where there is a convenience of 
giving air from the back of the green-house, it should always 
be given in mild days, especially in those houses that have 
a recess back from the top of the sashes, for even if the 
sashes are let down every day, still the house will not be 
properly ventilated. Any plants that are sickly and in- 
tended to be planted in the garden next month to renovate 
their growth, may be cut back (if not already done) as far 
as is required to give the tree a handsome form, taking care 
not to cut below the graft of inoculation. Let the operation 
be done with a fine saw and sharp knife, smoothing the 
amputations that are made by the saw; and if they are 
large, put a little well-made clay over the wound, to prevent 
the air from injuring it. Beeswax and turpentine are 
preferable to clay, not being subject to crack or fall off by 
the weather. 

If there are any Lagerstrocmias, Pomegranate, or Hy- 
drangeas in the cellar, they should be brought out about 
the first of the month, and planted in their respective situa- 
tions. Give the Hydrangea a very shady spot. It does 
not require much sun, provided it has plenty of air, and do 
not plant it into soil that has been lately manured. A large 
plant must have great supplies of water in dry weather. If 
the plant is very thick, the oldest branches may be thinned 
out, but do not cut out any of the young shoots, as they 
contain the embryo of the flower. Lagcrstrccmias will 
flower abundantly without pruning, but, to have fine large 
spikes of flowers, cut in the wood of last year to about three 
eyes from the wood of the preceding year ; by this they will 
be much finer. Pomegranates will only require a little of 
the superfluous wood cut out. Perhaps some of them may 
be desired to flower in pot or tubs during summer ; the balls 
will admit of being much reduced, and by this a pot or tub 



April.] GREEN-HOUSE — GERANIUMS. 263 

very little larger will do for them. Do not give much water 
until they begin to grow. 



MYRTLES AND OLEANDERS. 

If any of these have grown irregularly, and are not headed 
down or otherwise pruned, as directed last month, it should 
now be done. Oleanders are very subject to the white 
scaly insect, and, before the heat of summer begins, they 
should be completely cleansed. This insect is likewise 
found on Myrtles, which are worse to clean, and ought to 
be minutely examined twice every year. We have observed 
the red spider on these shrubs, which makes the foliage 
brown and unsightly. If it is detected in time, syringing 
is an effectual remedy. 



GERANIUMS. 

These will now begin to flower, and the sun will greatly 
deteriorate their rich colours where they are near the glass 
with a southern aspect. The glass should be whitewashed 
or covered with thin muslin, which will cast a light shade 
over them, and prolong tbe duration of the bloom ; but if 
they are above five feet from the glass, shading is not re- 
quisite. The strong kinds will be growing very luxuriantly, 
and require liberal supplies of water. When syringing, do 
not sprinkle the flowers, as it would make the colours inter- 
mingle with each other, and cause them to decay prema- 
turely. If they have been properly attended to in that 
respect, it may be dispensed with after they have come in 
flower. 

Cape Bulbs. Those that flowered late in autumn, as 
soon as the foliage begins to decay, may be set aside, and 
the water withheld by degrees. When the foliage is en- 
tirely gone, and the roots dry, clear them from the earth, 
and after laying exposed in the shade for a few days to dry, 
pack them up in dry moss, with their respective names 
attached, until August, when they may be again potted. 
Treat those that are in flower the same as directed in last 
month. 



264 GREEN-HOUSE — INSECTS. [April. 

Dutch Roots. All the species and varieties of these that 
have been kept in the green-house during the winter will 
now be done flowering ; the water should be withdrawn 
gradually from them ; and then the pots turned on their 
sides to ripen the bulbs. Or, a superior method is, where 
there is the convenience of a garden, to select a bed not 
much exposed. Turn the balls out of the pots and plant 
them ; the roots will ripen better this way than any other. 
Have them correctly marked, that no error may take place. 
They can be lifted with the other garden bulbs. 



FLOWERING PLANTS. 

The best situation for most plants, while in flower, is 
where they are shaded from the sun, and fully exposed to 
the air. Primroses, both European and Chinese, flower 
best, and the colours are finest, where the plants are in the 
front of the house and entirely shaded. The Chinese Azaleas 
and Rhododendrons require, while in flower, a similar situa- 
tion. Have all the shoots tied naturally to neat rods, and 
keep them clear from others by elevating them on empty 
pots, or any other substitute. See that there are no insects 
upon them; for they make a miserable contrast with flowers. 
The Cdlla AEtMopica should stand in water when in bloom, 
and even before flowering they will be much strengthened 
by it. 

INSECTS. 

Insects will, on some plants, be very perplexing. The 
weather may admit of those that are infected to be taker 
out of doors, and put into a frame in any way that is most 
convenient. Fumigating them about fifteen minutes, if the 
day is calm, will be sufficient; but if windy, they will take 
half an hour. When done, syringe them well, and put 
them in their respective situations. By the above method, 
the house will not be made disagreeable with the fumes of 
tobacco. 

Tie up neatly all the climbing plants. Keep those that 
are running up the rafters of the house close to the longi- 



April.'] GREEN-HOUSE — FLOWERING STOCKS. 265 

tudinal wires. As previously observed, running plants 
should not be taken across the house, except in some in- 
stances where it can be done over the pathway, otherwise 
it shades the house too much. Clear off all decayed leaves 
and all contracted foulness, that the house and plants may 
in this month have an enlivening aspect, as it is undoubt- 
edly one of the most interesting seasons of the year in the 
green-house. 



FLOWERING STOCKS. 

Those that have been kept in the green-house, or in 
framed, should be planted into beds or the borders, where 
they will seed better than if kept in the pots. The method 
generally adopted is, to select the plants that are intended 
for seed ; plant the different kinds distinctly and separately ; 
then take a few double-flowering plants of each kind, which 
plant round their respective single varieties that are to be 
kept for seed. Whenever any of the colours sport, that is, 
become spotted or striped with other colours, plant such by 
themselves, for they will soon degenerate the whole, and 
ought never to be seen in collections that have any preten- 
sions to purity. Many have been the plans recommended 
as the best for saving and growing from seed the double 
varieties of German stock. In every method we have 
tried we have been successful and unsuccessful; although 
we generally practise planting the double kinds beside the 
single, where they are intended for seed. We have no 
scientific reason for it; not seeing what influence these 
monsters of flowers can have over a flower where the male 
and female organs are perfect; which in these are wanting. 
Some say that the semi-double sorts are best; we have like- 
wise found them both abortive and fruitful in the desired 
results. 



23 



266 GREEN-HOUSE — WATERING, ETC. [^'y- 



MAY. 

About the first of the month all the small half-hardy plants 
may be taken out of the green-house, and those that are left 
will be more benefited by a freer circulation of air, which 
will inure them to exposure. The Geraniums ought to stand 
perfectly clear of other plants, while in flower and growing, 
or they will be much drawn and spindly. 



WATERING. 

We have advanced so much on this subject, another obser- 
vation is not necessary ; except as to succulents, which are 
frequently over-watered about this period. Before they begin 
to grow, once a week is sufficient. 



OF BRINGING OUT THE GREEN-HOUSE PLANTS. 

Those trees or plants of Orange, Lemon, Myrtle, Nerium, 
&c, that were headed down with the intention of planting 
them into the garden, to renovate their growth, should be 
brought out and planted in the situations intended for them. 
A good light rich soil will do for either, and the balls of earth 
might be a little reduced, that when they are lifted, they 
might go into the same pot or tub, or perhaps a less one. 
This being done, the plants, generally in a calm day from 
the 12th to the 18th of the month, should be taken out, 
carrying them directly to a situation partially shaded from 
the sun, and protected from the wind. In regard to a situa- 
tion best adapted for them during summer, see Hot-house this 
month, which will ecpually apply to green-house plants. All 
Primroses and Polyanthus delight in shade. The reason of 
so many plants of the D. oddra* dying, is from the effects 

* On examining these plants, when the first appearance of decay 
affected them, the decayed part was without exception at the surface 
of the soil, which was completely mortified, while the top and roots 
were apparently fresh. This led us to conclude that the cause was 
the effect of sun and water on the stem. We have since kept the 



May.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING PLANTS. 267 

of the sun and water. We keep them always in the green- 
house. 

The large trees may be fancifully set either in a spot for 
the purpose, or through the garden. Put bricks or pieces 
of wood under the tubs to prevent them from rotting, and 
strew a little litter of any description over the surface of the 
soil to prevent evaporation, or about one inch of well-decayed 
manure, which will, from the waterings help to enrich the 
soil. A liberal supply of water two or three times a week 
is sufficient. A large tree will take at one time from two to 
four gallons. We make this observation, for many trees evi- 
dently have too limited a supply. Continue to syringe the 
plants through the dry season every evening, or at least three 
times per week. All the tall plants must be tied to some firm 
support, because the squalls of wind frequently overturn 
them, and do much harm by breaking, &c. Keep those that 
are in flower as much in shade as will preserve them from the 
direct influence of the sun. 



REPOTTING PLANTS. 

After the following-mentioned plants, or any assimilated to 
them, are brought out of the house, and before they are put 
in their respective stations, repot them where they are re- 
quired to grow well. — Aloes. These plants, so varied in cha- 
racter, have been divided into several genera. These are, 
Gasteria, Pachidendron, Piphidodendron, Hoivdrthia, and 
Apicra : of these there are about two hundred species and 
varieties ; to enter into any specific detail would be beyond 
our limits, especially with a tribe of plants that as yet have 
but a few patrons. (Soil No. 10.) 

Chamserops. There are about seven species of these palms; 
four of them belong to this department, and are the finest of 
those that will keep in the green-house. They all have large 
palmated fronds, and require large pots or tubs to make them 
grow freely, and are tenacious of life if kept from frost. 

Gardenia. This is an esteemed genus of plants, especially 

earth in a conical form round the stem, thereby throwing the water 
to the sides of the pot, and kept them in the shade. Previously to 
doing this, great numbers perished every year, and now no plants 
thus treated die with us. 



268 GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING PLANTS. [il/ay. 

for the double flowering varieties, which are highly odorife- 
rous, and have an evergreen shining foliage. G '■. flbrida , florc 
pleno, Cape Jasmine, is a plant universally known in our col- 
lections, and trees of it are frequently seen about seven feet 
high, and five feet in diameter, blooming from June to Oc- 
tober. G. rddicans, dwarf Cape Jasmine, G. longifblia, G. 
multijlbra, G. latifblia, G. Fortunii, and G. camellia flora, 
are also in several collections, but not so generally known ; 
the flowers are double, and all equally fragrant. We are in- 
clined to think they are only varieties of G. flbrida, of which 
camelliaflora is one of the finest. Any of the above will keep 
in the coldest part of the green-house, and even under the 
front of the stage is a good situation for them, where the 
house is otherwise crowded during winter. They must be 
sparingly watered from November to March. Much water, 
while they are dormant, gives the foliage a sickly tinge, a 
state in which they are too frequently seen. G. rothmannia 
and G. Thunbirgia are fine plants, but seldom flower; the 
flowers of the former are spotted, and are most fragrant during 
night. (Soil No. 10.) 

Mesembrydntliemum, a very extensive genus, containing 
upward of four hundred and fifty species and varieties, with 
few exceptions, natives of the Cape of Good Hope. They 
are all singular, many of them beautiful, and some splendid ; 
yet they have never been popular plants in our collections. 
The leaves are almost of every shape and form; their habits 
vary in appeai-ance. Some of them are straggling, others 
are insignificant, and a few grotesque. When they are well 
grown, they flower in great profusion ; the colours are bril- 
liant and of every shade ; yellow and white are most prevalent. 
Each species continues a considerable time in flower. The 
flowers are either solitary, axillary, extra-axillary, but most 
frequently terminal ; leaves mostly opposite, thick, or succu- 
lent, and of various forms. They are sometimes kept in the 
hot-house, but undoubtedly the green-house is the best situa- 
tion for them. They must not get water above twice a month 
during winter, but while they are in flower, and through the 
summer they require a more liberal supply, and they seldom 
need to be repotted; once a year is sufficient. (Soil No. 18.) 



June, July.'] GREEX-HOUSE — OBSERVATIONS. 269 



CAMELLIAS. 

These plants, •when they are brought from the green-house 
(which should be about the end of June), ought to be set in 
a situation by themselves, that they may be the more strictly 
attended to in watering and syringing. An airy situation, 
where the sun has little effect upon them, is the best. They 
should be syringed every evening when there has been no 
rain through the day. After heavy rains examine the pots, 
and where water is found, turn the plant on its side for a 
few hours to let the water pass off, and then examine the 
draining in the bottom of the pots, which must be defective. 



CAPE BULBS. 

As soon as these are done flowering, and the foliage begins 
to decay, cease watering, and turn the pots on their sides, 
until the soil is perfectly dry ; then take out the bulbs, and 
preserve them dry until the time of planting, which will be 
about the end of August or first of September. 



JUNE AXD JULY. 

The plants being out of the house, there need be little 
added under this head. Their treatment is in the general, 
and the required attention is in giving water according to 
their different constitutions and habits. Where there is no 
rain nor river water, it should stand at least one day in butts 
or cisterns, to take the chilly air from it, and become softened 
by the surrounding atmosphere. This is more essential to 
the health of the plants than is generally supposed. The 
small plants in dry weather will need water evening and 
morning. Continue regular syringings as directed last month. 
There are frequently rains continuing for several days, 
which will materially injure many plants if they are not 
turned on their sides, or defended by sash or shutters, until 

23* 



270 GREEN-HOUSE — GERANIUMS. [August* 

the rain is over, especially small plants. The syringings 
should never be done till after the waterings at the roots, 
and they should never be more seldom than every alternate 
evening. Turn all the plants frequently, to prevent them 
from being drawn to one side by the sun or light. Carefully 
look over them at these turnings to detect any insects ; and 
observe that the tuberous-rooted or deciduous geraniums, such 
as Ardens, Bicdlor, Comptonia, Echinatum, Tristum, &c, 
are not getting too much water, they being now dormant. 



AUGUST. 

Any of the Myrtles, Oranges, Lemons, Oleanders, &c, 
that were headed down in April or May, will be pushing many 
young shoots. The plant must be carefully examined, to 
observe which of the shoots ought to be left to form the tree. 

Having determined on this, cut out all the others close to 
the stem with a small sharp knife ; and if the remaining 
shoots are above one foot long, pinch off the tops to make 
them branch out. 

The trees that were entirely headed down, should not have 
above six shoots left, which will, by being topped, make a 
sufficient quantity to form the bush or tree. 



geraniums. 

These plants, about the first of the month, require a com- 
plete dressing. In the first place collect them all together, 
and, with a sharp knife, cut off the wood of this year to 
within a few eyes of the wood of last year. Citrioddrum 
and its varieties do not need pruning. The plants grown 
from cuttings during the season that have flowered, cut them 
to about three inches from the pot. This being done, have 
the earth all prepared, and potshreds or fine gravel at hand, 
for draining the delicate kinds. Choose a cloudy day for 
the operation, and turn the plants progressively out of the 
pots they are in, reducing the balls of earth so that the same 



August.} GREEN-HOUSE — ORANGES, ETC. 271 

pots may contain thein again, and allow from half an inch to 
two inches, according to the size of the pot, of fresh soil 
around the ball, carefully pressing it with the potting-stick. 
Finish by leveling all neatly with the hand. Give very gentle 
waterings from a pot with a rose mouth, for a few weeks, until 
they have begun to grow. The tuberous-rooted and deci- 
duous species must be very moderately supplied. Be careful, 
when watering, that the new soil does not become saturated 
with water, for, though allowed to dry again, it will not be 
so pure. When they grow afresh, expose them fully to the 
sun, turn them regularly every two weeks, to prevent them 
growing to one side. 



ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC. 

As it is frequently very inconvenient to shift these trees 
into larger tubs in the months of March and April, this 
month is a period that is suitable, both from the growth of 
the trees and their being in the open air. It would be im- 
proper to state the day or the week, that depending entirely 
on the season. The criterion is easily observed, which is when 
the first growth is over, these trees making another growth in 
autumn. When they are large, they require great exertion, 
and are frequently attended with inconvenience to get them 
shifted. Where there is a quantity of them, the best plan 
that we have tried or seen adopted is as follows : Have a 
strong double and a single block trimmed with a sufficiency 
of rope ; make it fast to the limb of a large tree, or anything 
that projects and will bear the weight, and as high as will 
admit of the plant being raised a few feet under it. Take a 
soft bandage and put around the stem, to prevent the bark 
from being bruised ; make a rope fast to it, in which hook 
the single block. Raise the plant the height of the tub, put 
a spar across the tub, and strike on the spar with a mallet, 
which will separate the tub from the ball. Then with a 
strong pointed stick probe a little of the earth from among 
the roots, observing to cut away any that are affected by dry 
rot, damp, or mildew, with any very matted roots. Having 
all dressed, place a potshreds over the hole or holes in the 
bottom of the tub ; measure exactly the depth of the ball 
that remains around the plant, and fill up with earth, press- 



272 GREEN-HOUSE — OE PRUNING, ETC. [August. 

ing it well with the hand, until it will hold the ball one inch 
under the edge of the tub. If there is from two to four inches 
of earth under it, it is quite enough. Fill all around the ball, 
and press it down with a stick, finishing neatly off with the 
hand. Observe that the stem of the tree is exactly in the 
centre. This being done, carry the tree to where it is intended 
to stand, and give it water with a rose on the pot. The earth 
will subside about two inches, thus leaving three inches, 
which will, at any time, hold enough of water for the tree. 
Trees thus treated will not require to be shifted again within 
four or five years, having in the interim got a few rich top- 
dressings. 

Frequently, in attempting to take out of the tubs those 
that are in a sickly state, all the soil falls from their roots, 
having no fibres attached. When there are any such, after 
replanting, put them in the green-house, and shut it almost 
close up ; there give shade to the tree, and frequent sprinklings 
of water, until it begins to grow, when admit more air gra- 
dually until it becomes hardened. Sickly trees should be 
put in very small tubs, and a little sand added to the soil. 
Give very moderate supplies of water, merely keeping the soil 
moist. Tubs generally give way at the bottom when they 
begin to decay, and in the visual method of coopering after 
this failure they are useless, the ledging being rotten, and 
will not admit of another bottom. The staves should be 
made without any groove, and have four brackets nailed on 
the inside, having the bottom in a piece by itself, that it can 
be placed on these brackets, and there is no necessity of it 
being water tight. Then when it fails, it can be replaced 
again at a trifling expense. A tub made in this way will out- 
last three or four bottoms, and is in every respect the cheap- 
est, and should be more wide than deep. When made in this 
manner they are easier shifted ; you have only to set the tub 
on a high block of wood, and drive the tub off with a mallet, 
when the tree can be easily replaced into another tub. Large 
Myrtles and Oleanders may be treated in the same manner as 
directed for the above. 



OF PRUNING ORANGES, LEMONS, ETC. 

These trees will grow very irregularly, especially the 
Lemon, if not frequently dressed or pruned. Any time this 



August.'] GREEN-HOUSE — REPOTTING, ETC. 273 

month look over them all minutely, and cut away any of the 
small naked wood where it is too crowded, and cut all young 
strong straggling shoots to the bounds of the tree, giving it 
a round regular head. It is sometimes necessary to cut out 
a small limb, but large amputations should be avoided. 
Cover all large wounds with clay, turpentine, or beeswax, to 
prevent the bad effects of the air. 



OF REPOTTING PLANTS. 

Any of the plants enumerated in March under this head 
may be now done according to directions therein given, and 
which apply to all sizes. This is the proper period for repot- 
ting the following : 

Calla, a genus of four species. None of them in our col- 
lections, and in fact not worth cultivation, except G. jEtlii- 
opica, Ethiopian Lily, which is admired for the purity and 
singularity of its large white flowers, or rather spatha, which is 
cucullate, leaves sagittate. It is now called Richard ia JEthi- 
opica. The roots, which are tubers, should be entirely 
divested of the soil they have been grown in, breaking off any 
small offsets, and potting them wholly in fresh earth. When 
growing, they cannot get too much water. The plant will 
grow in a pond of water, and withstand our severest winters, 
provided the roots are kept at the bottom of the water. 

Cyclamen. There are eight species and six varieties of 
this genus, which consists of humble plants with very beau- 
tiful flowers. The bulbs are round, flattened, and solid, and 
are peculiarly adapted for pots and the decorating of rooms. 
G. cbum, leaves almost round ; flowers light red ; in bloom 
from January to April. C. persicum, with its four varieties, 
flower from January to April ; colour white, and some white 
and purple. G. heeler aefolium, Ivy-leaved ; colour lilac ; 
there is a white variety ; flowers from September to De- 
cember. G. Europaeum, colour lilac, in bloom from August 
to October. G. NeapoUtanum, flowers red ; in bloom from 
July to September. These are all desirable plants. When 
the foliage begins to decay, withhold the accustomed sup- 
plies of water, keeping them in a half dry state ; and, when 
growing, they must not be over-watered, as they are apt- to 



274 GREEN-HOUSE REPOTTING, ETC. [August. 

rot from moisture. Keep them during the summer months 
in partial shade. The best time for potting either of the 
sorts is when the crown of the bulb begins to protrude. If 
the pots are becoming large, every alternate year they may 
be cleared from the old soil, and put in smaller pots with 
the crown entirely above the ground. When the flowers 
fade, the pedicles twist up like a screw, enclosing the germ 
in the centre, lying close to the ground until the seeds ripen, 
from which plants can be grown, and will flower the third 
year. 

Lacliendlla, a genus of about forty species of bulbs, all 
natives of the Cape of Good Hope, and grow well in our 
collections. The most common is L. tricolor. L. qrutdri- 
color and its varieties are all fine ; the colours yellow, scarlet, 
orange and green, very pure and distinct; L. rubida, L. 
punctdta, L. orchaides, and L. nervosa are all fine species. 
The flowers are on a stem from half to one foot high, and 
much in the character of a hyacinth. The end of the month 
is about the time of planting. Five-inch pots are large 
enough, and they must get very little water till they begin 
to grow. 

Oxcilis, above one hundred species of Cape bulbs, and, 
like all other bulbs of that country, they do exceedingly well 
in our collections, in which there are only comparatively a few 
species, not exceeding twenty. 0. hirta, branching, of a ver- 
milion colour; 0. flabilifbUa, yellow; 0. elonguta, striped; 
and amsena, are those that require potting this month. The 
first of September is the most proper period for the others. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

This genus of plants is so varied in the construction of its 
roots that the same treatment will not do for all. The root 
is commonly bulbous, and these will keep a few weeks or 
months out of the soil, according to their size. Several are 
only thick and fleshy ; these ought not to be taken out of the 
pots, but kept in them, while dormant; and about the end of 
this month give them gentle waterings. When they begin 
to grow, take the earth from the roots, and put them in fresh 
soil. In a few months the bulbs are curiously produced, the 
original bulb near the surface striking a radical fibre down- 
right from its base, at the extremity of which is produced a 
new bulb for the next year's plant, the old one perishing. 

Ornitliogcdum, Star of Bethlehem, about sixty species of 



September.'] green-house — observations. 275 

bulbs, principally from the Cape of Good Hope. Many of 
them have but little attraction. The most beautiful that we 
have seen are 0. lacteum, which has a spike about one foot 
long, of fine white flowers, 0. Peruviana, blue flowered, and 
0. aureum, flowers of a golden colour, in contracted racemose 
corymbs. These three are magnificent. 0. maritimum is 
the officinal squill. The bulb is frequently as large as a 
human head, pear-shaped, and tunicated like the onion. From 
the centre of the root arise several shining glaucous leaves a 
foot long, two inches broad at base, and narrowing to a point. 
They are green during winter, and decay in the spring ; then 
the flower-stalk comes out, rising two feet, naked half way, 
and terminated by a pyramidal thyrse of white flowers. The 
bulb ought to be kept dry from the end of June till now, or 
it will not flower freely. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

Watering, and other practical care of the plants, to be 
done as heretofore described. Frequently the weather at the 
end of this month becomes cool and heavy. Dew falling 
through the night will, in part, supply the syringing opera- 
tion, but it must not be suspended altogether. Once or twice 
a week will suffice. Any of the plants that are plunged 
should be turned every week. In wet weather, observe that 
none are suffering from moisture. 



SEPTEMBER. 

During this mouth, every part of the green-house should 
have a thorough cleansing, which is too frequently neglected, 
and many hundreds of insects left unmolested. To preserve 
the wood-work in good order, give it one coat of paint every 
year. Repair all broken glass, whitewash the whole interior, 
giving the flues two or three coats, and cover the stages with 
hot lime, whitewash, or oil-paint; examine ropes, pulleys, and 
weights, finishing by washing the pavement perfectly clean. 



276 green-house — stocks, etc. [September. 

If there have been any plants in the house during summer, 
be sure after this cleansing that they are clean also, before 
they are returned to their respective situations. 



OP WATERING. 

The intensity of the heat being over for the season, the 
heavy dews during night will prevent so much absorption 
among the plants. They will, in general, especially by the 
end of the month, require limited supplies of water compa- 
ratively to their wants in the summer months. Be careful 
among the Geraniums that were repotted in August, not to 
water them until the new soil about their roots is becoming 
dry. Syringing in this month may be suspended in time of 
heavy dews, but in dry nights resort to it again. 

The herbaceous plants and those of a succulent nature 
must be sparingly supplied. The large trees that were put 
in new earth will require a supply only once a week, but in 
such quantity as will go to the bottom of the tubs. 



PREPARING FOR TAKING IN THE PLANTS. 

About the end of the month, all the plants should be exa- 
mined and cleaned in like manner as directed for those of the 
hot-house, last month, which see. From the first to the eighth 
of October is the most proper time to take them into the 
green-house, except those of a half-hardy nature, which may 
stand out until the appearance of frost. Always endeavour 
to have Geranium plants short and bushy, for they are 
unsightly otherwise, except where a very few large specimens 
are desired for show. All Myrtles and Oleanders that were 
headed down, if the young shoots are too crowded, continue 
to thin them out, and give regular turnings, that all the heads 
may grow regularly. 



STOCKS AND WALL-FLOWERS, 

That are wanted to flower in the green-house (where they 
do remarkably well), and are in the ground, have them care- 



September.'] GREEN-HOUSE — CAPE BULBS. 277 

fully lifted before the end of the month, and planted in six 
or seven inch pots, with light loamy soil. Place them in the 
shade till they take fresh root, and give them frequent sprink- 
lings of water. As soon as the foliage becomes ei - ect, expose 
them to the full sun, and treat as green-house plants. 



CHRYSANTHEMUMS. 

These very ornamental plants blooming so late, and at a 
period when there are few others in flower, one of each variety 
(or two of some of the finest) should be lifted and put in 
eight-inch pots, in light loamy soil, and treated as above 
directed for stocks, &c. These will flower beautifully from 
October to December; and, when done blooming, the pots 
may be plunged in the garden, or covered with any kind of 
litter until spring, when they can be divided, and planted 
out. 

CAPE AND HOLLAND BULBS. 

About the end of this month is the period for all of these 
that are intended for the green-house to be potted. We 
specified some of the former last month, and will here enume- 
rate a few others. 

Anemoihica cruenta, a sparkling little gem of a bulb, produc- 
ing a mass of scarlet flowers spotted with orange and brown. 

BaMqna, a genus of small bulbs, with pretty blue, white, 
red, and yellow flowers. B. distica, pale blue flowers in two 
ranks. B. stricta, flowers blue and white. B. tubijlbra, 
beautiful bright blue. B. plicata has sweet-scented pale 
blue flowers. B. villosa, red ; B. sulphured, sulphur-colour; 
B. rubro-cyanea, dark purple with crimson centre. There 
are about twenty species of them, and they grow from six to 
twelve inches high. Five-inch pots are sufficient for them. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Gladiolus, corn-flag, a genus of above fifty species. There 
are several very showy plants among them, and a few very 
superb. G. fioribundus, large pink and white flowers. G. 
cardinalLs, flowers superb scarlet, spotted with white. G. 
byzantlnus, purple. G. bldndus, flowers of a blush rose 
colour, and handsome. G. cuspidatus, flowers white and 

24 



278 green-house — Holland bulbs. [September. 

purple. G. raccmdsits, flowers beautiful rose and white. G. 
psittdcinus } the flowers are striped with green, yellow, and 
scarlet, about four inches in diameter, in great profusion, on 
a stem about two feet high. G. formosiasimus, beautiful 
bright scarlet, the three upper petals having a spot of white, 
a very profuse bloomer. G. Queen Victoria, G. Lafayette, 
and several others are of very similar character. G. ganda- 
vensis, very superb orange and yellow. G. Buistii, large 
bright scarlet, perhaps the finest of the whole family. They 
all do perfectly when kept dry all winter, and planted in the 
open ground early in March. The beauty of this genus is all 
centered in the flowers. (Soil No. 10.) 

Ixia, a genus containing about twenty-five species of very 
free-flowering bulbs. I. monadelpha, flowers blush and green. 
I. leucdnfha, flowers large white. I. capatdta, flowers in 
heads, of a white and almost black colour. I. cbniea, flowers 
orange and velvet. /. columelbris is a beautiful shaded rosy 
purple. I: kcrmosina, a fine vermilion colour. I. squal- 
I i< la, shaded rosy lilac; I. viridiflbra, green; I. lougijibra, 
buff. The flower stems are from six to twenty-four inches 
high. (Soil No. 11.) 

Lilium. The Chinese species of this emblem of purity 
is everywhere esteemed, and the fine Chinese sorts are very 
splendid, such as L. longifbra, L. longiflora suaveolens, and 
L. japonicum, are all pure white; L. lancifblium, white 
petals reflexed ; L. lancifblium punctatum, white, spotted 
with rose; L. lancifblium speciosum, rose, spotted with 
crimson. L. lancifblium and its varieties, are all delight- 
fully scented with the odour of vanilla; noble specimens of 
the family from Japan, growing from four to six feet high ; 
a full-grown bulb producing from ten to twenty flowers, and 
perfectly hardy south of Philadelphia. They should be 
potted in seven or eight inch pots, and kept in a cool part of 
the green-house ; give the pots at least one inch of drainage. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Oxdlis. All the varieties and species may now be potted ; 
the whole are pretty spring flowers, requiring to be kept 
near the glass : among the many the following are very 
deserving of attention : 0. luxulus, or rosacea, bright rose. 
0. Bbwii, bright rose red, a large and profuse bloomer, and 
one of the finest. 0. florahimda , pink ; a pretty free-flow- 
ering tuberous species. O. luxula alba, blush, white ; 0. 



September.} GREEN-HOUSE — HOLLAND BULBS. 279 

multiflbra, profuse flowering, white. 0. versicolor, striped. 
0. dippii, lilac, which blooms in summer. 0. caparina, 
yellow ; there is also a double yellow variety, though not 
pretty ; for a few others see last month. There should be 
three or four bulbs planted in a five-inch pot, giving very 
little water till they begin to grow. They will all keep in 
good pits, as well as in the green-house. (Soil No. 11.) 

Spardxis. We are enraptured with this beautiful genus 
of small bulbs, closely allied to Ixia, but more varied in 
colour. S. grandiflbra striata is striped with purple and 
white. S. versicolor, colours crimson, dark purple, and yel- 
low. S. tricolor, yellow, black, and scarlet. S. allida, 
large white, with black spots. S. coelestis, bluish purple. S. 
sulphibrea, yellow. S. purpurascens, purple. Treat as Oxdlis. 
(Soil No. 11.) 

Tritbnia, a genus of about twenty-five species. Few of 
them deserve culture in regard to their beauty. T. croedta, 
is in our collections as I. croedta, which is among the finest, 
and T. zantkospila has white flowers, curiously spotted with 
yellow. (Soil No. 11.) 

Watsbnia, a genus containing several species of showy 
flowers, several of which are in our collections under the 
genus Gladiolus, but the most of the species may be dis- 
tinguished from it by their flat shell-formed bulbs. W. iridi- 
fblia is the largest of the genus, and has flowers of a flesh 
colour. W. rosea is large growing, the flowers are pink, and 
on the stem in a pyramidal form. W. humilis is a pretty 
red-flowering species. W. ful<jida, once Antholyza fuhjens, 
has fine bright scarlet flowers. W. rubens is an esteemed 
red-flowering species, but scarce. (Soil No. 11.) 

These genera of bulbous plants are in general cultivation. 
There are, no doubt, some splendid species that have not 
come under our observation, and others which may be ob- 
tained from the Cape of Good Hope and China that are not 
known in any collection, all of which would be perfectly 
hardy in our Southern States. Bulbs generally require very 
little water until they begin to grow ; then supply mode- 
rately, and keep them near the light. Of the Holland or 
Dutch bulbs, the Hyacinth is the favourite to bloom in the 
green-house. A few of the Tulip, Narcissus, Iris and Crocus, 
may, for variety, be also planted with any other that curiosity 
may dictate. When these are grown in pots, the soil should 



280 GREEN-HOUSE — OF TAKING IN, ETC. {October. 

be four-eighths loam, two-eighths leaf mould, one-eighth de- 
composed manure, one-eighth sand, well compounded ; plant 
in pots from five to seven inches, keep the crown of the bulb 
above the surface of the soil, except of the tulip, which 
should be covered two inches. When these roots are potted, 
plunge them in the garden about three inches under ground ; 
mark out a space sufficient to contain them ; throw out the 
earth about four inches deep, place the pots therein, covering 
them with earth to the above depth, making it in the form 
of a bed. Leave a trench all round to carry off the rain. 
By so doing, the bulbs will root strongly, the soil will be 
kept in a congenial state about them, and they will prove 
far superior than if done in the common method. Lift them 
from this bed on the approach of frost, or not later than the 
second week of December ; wash the pots and take them into 
the green-house. 



OCTOBER. 

OF TAKING IN AND ARRANGING THE PLANTS. 

As observed in the previous month, let the housing of 
green-house plants now be attended to. Have all in before 
the eighth of the month, except a few of the half-hardy sorts, 
which may stand until convenient. Begin by taking in all 
the tallest first, such as Oranges, Lemons, Myrtles, Oleanders, 
&c. Limes ought to be kept in the warmest part of the 
house, otherwise they will throw their foliage. In arrange- 
ment, order is necessary to have a good effect ; and in small 
houses it ought to be neat and regular, placing the tallest 
behind, and according to their size graduating the others 
down to the lowest in front. Dispose the different sorts in 
varied order over the house, making the contrast as striking 
as possible. Having the surface of the whole as even as 
practicable, with a few of the most conspicuous for shape and 
beauty protruding above the mass, which will much improve 
the general appearance, and greatly add to the effect. All 
succulents should be put together. In winter they will do 



October.'] GREEN-HOUSE — OF REPOTTING. 281 

in a dark part of the house, where other plants will not 
grow, studying to have the most tender kinds in the warmest 
part, and giving gentle waterings every three or four weeks. 
When all are arranged, give them a proper syringing, after 
which wipe clean all the stages, benches, &c, sweeping out 
all litter, and wash clean the pavement, which will give to all 
a neat and becoming appearance. 

Let the waterings now be done in the mornings, as often 
and in such cpuantitics as will supply their respective wants, 
examining the plants every day. 

During the continuance of mild weather, the circulation 
of air must be as free as possible, opening the doors and front 
and top sashes regularly over the house. But observe in 
frosty nights to keep all closely shut. Be attentive in clear- 
ing off decayed leaves and insects. 

Any plants of Lagerstroemia, Stercidia, Hydrangea, Pome- 
grandte, and others equally hardy, that are deciduous, 
may be kept perfectly in a dry, light, airy cellar : give fre- 
quent admissions of air, and one or two waterings during 
winter. 



OF REPOTTING. 

Anemones. "Where ^4. nemorbsa fiore plena and A. tha- 
lictroides fibre pleno are kept in pots in the green-house, 
they should be turned out of the old earth, and planted in 
fresh soil. They are both pretty, low-growing, double white 
flowering plants, and require a shaded situation. The latter 
is now called Thalictrum a nemo neo ides. (Soil No. 11.) 

Daphne is a genus of diminutive shrubs, mostly ever- 
greens of great beauty and fragrance. Very few species of 
them are in our collections. D. odora, frequently called D. 
indicu, is an esteemed plant for the delightful odour of its 
flowers, and valuable for the period of its flowering, being 
from December to March, according to the situation ; leaves 
scattered, oblong, lanceolate and smooth ; flowers small white, 
in many flowered terminal heads ; there is a variety equally 
as fine with marginated foliage. D. odora rubra, the buds 
are red, and the flowers rose white, of a delightful spicy fra- 
grance. D. hybrida is a species in high estimation art pre- 
sent in Europe, but little known here, being only in a few 

24* 



282 GREEN-HOUSE — OP REPOTTING. [ October. 

collections, flowers rosy purple, in terminal heads, and late- 
ral bunches in great profusion ; blooms from January to 
May, and is of a peculiar fragrance. D. oleoides is what 
maybe termed "ever-blooming:" flowers of a lilac colour; 
leaves elliptic, lanceolate, smooth. D. laureola, Spurge lau- 
rel; D. pdntica, D. alpina, and D. Cncdrttm, are all fine 
species, and in Europe are esteemed ornaments in the shrub- 
bery, but they are not hardy in our vicinity. (Soil No. 15.) 

Primula. There are a few fine species and varieties in 
this genus, adapted either for the green-house or rooms. All 
the species and varieties will keep perfectly well in a frame, 
except the China sorts. Having previously observed a few 
of the other species and varieties, we will observe the treat- 
ment of these. P. sinensis, now prsenitens, known commonly 
as China primrose; flowers pink, and in large proliferous 
umbels, flowering almost through the whole }'ear, but most 
profusely from January to May. There is a double white 
and a double purple variety that will always be scarce, from 
the slow method of their propagation. Keep them in the 
shade, and be careful that they are not over-watered during 
summer. As the stems of the plant become naked, at this 
repotting a few inches should be taken off the bottom of the 
ball, and placing them in a larger pot will allow the stems 
to be covered up to the leaves. P. p. albijiora, colour pure 
white and beautiful. P. p. Jcntijiora ; there is also a 
white variety of this, both similar to the former two, only the 
flower indented or fringed. All these require the same treat- 
ment. As they live only a few years, many individuals, to 
propagate them, divide the stems, which in most cases will 
utterly destroy them. The best, and we may say the only 
method to increase them is from seed, which the}- produce 
every year. (Soil No. 2.) 

Psednio mdutcot : this magnificent plant and its varieties 
are quite hardy with us, but most of them require the green- 
house in northern latitudes. These are P. moutan, Tree 
Paxmy; the flower is about five inches in diameter, of a 
blush colour, and semi-double. P. M. Banksii, is the common 
Tree P;rony, and called in our collection P. moutan ; it has 
a very large double blush flower, and is much admired. P. 
M. papaveracea is a most magnificent variety; has large 
single white flowers, with purple centres. P. M. rosea is a 
splendid rose-coloured double variety, and is scarce; there arc 



October.'] GREEN-HOUSE — CAMELLIAS. 283 

also in China several other varieties, such as purple, scarlet, 
and crimson, which have been introduced into cultivation, 
and within these few years, many varieties have originated 
in Europe, said to be very magnificent. These plants ought 
not to be exposed to the sun while in flower, as the colours 
become degenerated, and premature decay follows. 

If the Dutch bulbs intended for flowering during winter 
are net potted, have them all done as soon as possible, accord- 
ing to directions given last month. 



CAMELLIAS. 

These plants ought to have a thorough examination, and 
those that were omitted in repotting before they commenced 
growing, may be done in the early part of this month ; but 
it is not advisable, except the roots are all round the ball of 
earth, which should be turned out entire. Examine all the 
pots, stir up the surface of the earth, and take it out to the 
roots, suppl} T ing its place with fresh soil. Destroy any 
worms that may be in the pots, as they are very destructive 
to the fibres. Look over the foliage, and, with a sponge 
and water, clear it of all dust, &c. Frequently the buds are 
too crowded on these plants, especially the Double white and 
Variegated. In such case pick off the weakest, and where 
there are two together, be careful in cutting, so that the 
remaining bud may not be injured. 

This is the best period of the year to make selections of 
these, as the} 7 now can be transported hundreds of miles 
without any material injury, if they are judiciously packed 
in close boxes. In making a choice of these, keep in view 
to have distinctly marked varieties, including a few of those 
that are esteemed as stocks for producing new kinds, which 
are undoubtedly indispensable, and will reward the culti- 
vator in a few years with new sorts. Besides, it will afford 
unbounded gratification to behold any of these universally 
admired ornaments of the green-house improving by our 
assistance and under our immediate observation. There is 
nothing to prevent any individual from producing splendid 
varieties in a few years. Mr. Hogg correctly observes, " It 
is very probable in a few years we shall have as great a 
variety of Camellias as there are of Tulips, Hyacinths, Car- 



284 GREEN-HOUSE — OF AIR AND WATER. [November. 

nations, Auriculas," &c. This shrewd remark is likely to be 
verified much earlier than we anticipated. 

It has been often said that these plants are difficult of 
cultivation. This is unfounded ; indeed, they are the reverse 
if put in a soil congenial to their nature. When highly 
manured soils are given, which are poisonous to the plants, 
sickness or death will inevitably ensue ; but this cannot be 
attributed to the delicacy of their nature. We can unhe- 
sitatingly say there is no green-house plant more hardy or 
easier of cultivation, provided they are kept at an even 
temperature, say from 40° to 45° during night, and 45° to 
50° during day, and they are equally so in the parlour, if 
not kept confined in a room where there is a continuance of 
drying fire heat, their constitution not agreeing with an arid 
atmosphere. 



SOWING CAMELLIA SEED. 

These seeds ripen generally during September and October, 
and must be sown as soon as ripe ; plant them about one 
inch under ground into pots filled with leaf mould, loam, and 
white sand, in equal portions ; if the pots after sowing can 
be placed in a hot-house, they will vegetate in about six 
weeks, and be ready to pot into single pots in February. 
Many of them will bloom in the second year; but if heat 
is not accessible, keep the pots in the warmest part of the 
green-house, and give an occasional watering, and the plants 
will appear some time in May and June : they will be ready 
to pot into single pots in September, and after doing so put 
them into a close frame, and shade them from the sun for a few 
weeks ; use at this potting only about one-fifth of sand. 



NOVEMBER. 

OF AIR AND WATER. 



Airing the house should be strictly attended to. Every 
day that there is no frost it may be admitted largely, and 



December.~\ GREEN-HOUSE — OBSERVATIONS. 285 

in time of slight frosts in smaller portions, never keeping it 
altogether close when the sun has any effect on the interior 
temperature of the house, which should not be allowed to be 
higher than fifty degrees. 

Water must be given in a very sparing manner. None of 
the plants are in an active state of vegetation, consequently 
it will be found that looking over tbem thrice a week and 
supplying their wants will be sufficient. Succulents will need 
a little once in three weeks or a month. Give very moderate 
supplies to the Amaryllis that are dormant, and keep all these 
bulbs in the warmest part of the house. 



OF TENDER BULBS. 

Where there are tropical bulbs in the collection, and there 
is not the convenience of a hot-house, they may be very well 
preserved by shaking them clear of the soil. Dry them pro- 
perly, and place them in a box of very dry sand or moss, and 
put them in a situation near the furnace, where they will be 
free from damp. These can be potted about the first of April. 
Give no water till they begin to grow, then plant them in 
the garden about the middle of May, where they will flower 
during the summer season, if they are mature. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

If there are any of the half-hardy plants exposed, have 
them taken into the house or under the requisite protection, 
in frames, pits, cellars, &c. The autumn flowering Cape 
bulbs should be placed near the glass, and free from the shade 
of other plants. Cleanliness through the whole house and 
among the plants ought at all times to be attended to. 



DECEMBER. 

The weather may probably be now severe, and it is at 
all times advisable to keep the temperature as steady and 



286 GREEN-HOUSE — BULBOUS ROOTS. [Deceniber. 

regular as possible. The thermometer should be kept in the 
centre of the house, and free from the effects of reflection. 
As noticed last month, sun heat may be as high as 50° in 
the house, and would not be hurtful, but it should not con- 
tinue so for any considerable time without admission of air. 
The fire heat should not exceed 45°, and never below 35°. 
It ought not to continue at that point — 36° is the lowest for 
a continuation that with safety can be practised ; and where a 
collection of Cactii are kept, 40° should be the lowest. So 
that no error may occur, the temperature ought to be known 
in the coolest and warmest parts of the house, and the varia- 
tion remembered ; then whatever part of the house the ther- 
mometer is placed, a true calculation of the heat of the whole 
interior can be made. We would recommend to the inexperi- 
enced to keep the thermometer in the coldest part of the 
house. A green-house compactly and closely built, and the 
lowest row of top sash all covered with shutters (which no 
house ought to be constructed without), will seldom require 
artificial heat; but by being long kept close, the damp will 
increase. In such case give a little fire heat, and admit air 
to purify the house. In fresh mild weather, give liberal por- 
tions of air all over the house : and though there is a little 
frost, while mild, and the sun shining, the plants will be 
benefited by a small portion of air for the space of an hour, 
or even for half of that time. 

Whatever state the weather may be through the winter, 
never keep the house long shut up. Thirty-six hours should 
be the longest time at once ; rather give a little fire heat. 

We are no advocates for keeping plants in the dark, and 
never think that our plants are receiving justice if kept longer 
in darkness than one night. 

BULBOUS ROOTS. 

Those that were plunged in the garden, if not lifted and 
brought under cover, this should now be done without delay. 
Clean the pots, and stir up the surface of the soil. Hya- 
cinths grow neatest by being kept very close to the top glass; 
the flower-stems are thereby stronger and shorter. Water 
moderately until they begin to grow freely. 



THE 



AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



ROOMS. 

PLANTS IN ROOMS. 

To treat on the proper management of plants in win- 
dows is a subject of considerable difficulty; every genus re- 
quiring some variation both in soil, water, and general treat- 
ment. However, a great part of the labour will be abridged 
by referring to these subjects in the green-house culture, 
which is quite applicable to the parlour, green-room, or ve- 
randa. If the room where the plants are kept is dark and 
close, but few will ever thrive ; if, on the contrary, it is light 
and airy, with the windows in a suitable aspect to receive the 
sun, plants will do nearly as well, and, in some instances, 
better, than in a green-house. This is a well-known fact, 
and may be observed every day. We have seen as line 
plants of Cactus, Daphne, Roses, Geraniums, Callas, Lau- 
restinus, Carnations, Azaleas, and Myrtles, grown in a window, 
from year to year, as ever could be grown in a green-house. 
Indeed, when there is a failure, it can be traced to one of the 
following three causes : 

1st. Want of proper light and pure air is, perhaps, the 
most essential point of any to be considered; for, however 
well all other requisites are attended to, a deficiency in either 
of these will cause the plants to grow weak, yellow, and 



288 ROOMS — PLANTS IN ROOMS. 

sickly. Therefore, have them always placed as near the 
light as possible, and receive as much air as can be admitted, 
when the weather will allow, and occasionally, in fine days, 
carry them out of doors, and give them a sprinkling of water 
all over. 

2d. Injurious watering does more injury to plants in rooms 
that many persons imagine ; and it is very often to be ob- 
served that some individuals destroy all with too much, and 
others kill all with too little of that nourisher of health. To 
prevent the soil ever having a dry appearance is an object 
of great importance in the estimation of many : they, there- 
fore, water to such an excess that the soil becomes sodden, 
and the roots consequently perish. Others, as we have said, 
run to the opposite extreme, and do not give sufficient to 
sustain life, and this is a more common practice than that of 
too much. The best plan is, always to allow the mould in the 
pot to have the appearance of dryness, but never sufficient to 
make the plant droop before a supply of water is given, 
which should then be copious and thoroughly going to the 
bottom of the pot; but always empty it out of the saucer 
or pan in which the pot stands : the water used should 
always be of about the same temperature as that in which 
the plants grow ; avoid using it fresh from the pump. 

3d. Being over-potted in unsuitable soil. This is also a 
crying evil, and large pots invariably given to weak plants, 
with the view of causing them to grow ; but such practi- 
tioners are like the unskilful physician who gluts the weakly 
stomach of his patient, only hastening on what they are trying 
to prevent. With weak plants the very reverse should be 
practised, giving small pots to encourage their roots outward : 
whereas, the earth in a large pot to a small plant, with fre- 
quent waterings, soon becomes sour and stagnated, and utterly 
obnoxious to the roots of even the strongest growing plants. 
If the directions and table of soils, in this work, are properly 
followed up, unsuitable soils will rarely occur, especially when 
each genus is separately treated. 

In fact, we have yet to be convinced why all plants, with 
the exception of a few tropical, and those belonging to Eri- 
cese and Epacridese, will not grow and bloom well in rooms 
and windows. With the following monthly instructions, 
and executing them properly, failure will seldom occur; but 
where failure should occur, we would call particular attention 






January.'] rooms — watering, etc. 289 

to the tribe of Cactii, which are varied, beautiful, and truly 
interesting, and grow admirably in dry rooms, with or without 
full exposure to the sun, and in any temperature from 45° 
to 85°, requiring only small portions of water once a week in 
winter, and twice or thrice a week during summer : they 
also only require fresh soil once a year, or even once in 
two years for large plants will be found sufficient. The 
variety now cultivated is truly astonishing, and we doubt not 
but in a few years large horticultural buildings will be 
erected for their express culture ; and, to the inexperienced 
amateur, there is not a family of plants that will give more 
satisfaction, or, when properly studied, will afford greater 
interest and amusement. 



JANUARY. 

Plants that are kept in rooms generally are such as re- 
quire a medium temperature, say from 40° to 60°. Sitting- 
rooms or parlours, about this season, are, for the most part, 
heated from 60° to 70°, and very seldom has the air any 
admittance into these apartments ; thus keeping the tempera- 
ture from 10° to 15° higher than the nature of the plants 
requires, and excluding that fresh air which is requisite to 
support a vegetative principle. Therefore, as far as practica- 
ble, let the plants be kept in a room adjoining to one where 
there is fire heat, and the intervening door can be opened 
when desirable. They will admit sometimes of being as low 
as 38°. 

If they be constantly kept where there is fire, let the 
window be open some inches, once a day, for a few minutes, 
thereby making the air of the apartment more congenial, both 
for animal and vegetable nature. 



WATERING, ETC. 

All that is necessary is merely to keep the soil in a moist 
state, that is, do not let it get so dry that you can divide the 
particles of earth, nor so wet that they could be beat to clay. 

25 



290 rooms — OP insects, etc. [January. 

The frequency of watering can be best regulated by the 
person doing it, as it depends entirely upon the size of the 
pot or jar in proportion to the plant, whether it is too small 
or too large, and the situation it stands in, whether moist or 
arid. Never allow any quantity of water to stand in the 
flats or saucers. This is too frequently practised with plants 
in general. Such as Cdlla jEthibpica, or African Lily, will 
do well, as water is its element (like Sagittdria in this 
country) ; the Hydrangea and Hyacinths, when in a growing 
state, will do admirably under such treatment. Many plants 
may do well for some time, but it being so contrary to their 
nature, causes premature decay ; a fetid stagnation takes place 
at the root, the foliage becomes yellow, the plant stunted, and 
death follows. 



OF CAMELLIA JAPONICA. 

In rooms, the buds of Camellias will be well swelled, and 
on the double white and double variegated sorts perhaps they 
will be full-blown. While in that state the temperature 
should not be below 40° ; if lower, they will not expand so 
well, and the expanded petals will soon become yellow and 
decay. If they are where there is fire heat, they must have 
plenty of air admitted to them every favourable opportunity, 
and water freely given, or the consequence will be that all 
the buds will turn dark brown, and fall off. It is generally 
the case, in the treatment of these beautiful plants in rooms, 
that, through too much intended care, they are entirely 
destroyed. They do not agree with confined air, and to 
sponge frequently will greatly promote the health of the 
plants and add to the beauty of their foliage, as it prevents 
the attacks of the red spider. 

When the flowers are expanded, and droop, tie them up 
neatly, so that the flower may be shown to every advantage. 

OF INSECTS, ETC. 

Insects of various kinds will be appearing on your plants. 
For method of destruction, see Hot-house, January. It will 
not be agreeable to fumigate the room or rooms, or even to 
have the smell of tobacco near the house from this cause. 






January.'] ROOMS — OF BULBOUS ROOTS, ETC. 291 

Take a tub of soft water (if the day is frosty it had better 
be done in the house), invert the plant, holding the hand, 
or tying a piece of cloth, or anything of the kind, over the 
soil in the pot, put all the branches in the water, keeping 
the pot in the hand, drawing it to and fro a few times ; take 
it out and shake it. If any insects remain, take a small 
fine brush, and brush them off, giving another dip, which 
will clean them for the present. As soon as they appear 
again, repeat the process — for nothing that we have found 
out, or heard of, can totally extirpate them. 



OP BULBOUS ROOTS IN GENERAL. 

If you have retained any of the Gape bulbs from the last 
planting, let them be put in in the early part of the month. 
For method, see September. Those that are growing must 
be kept very near the light, that is, close to the window, or 
they will not flourish to your satisfaction. The fall-flowering 
Oxalis may be kept on the stage, or any other place, to give 
room to those that are to flower. 

Hyacinths, Jonquils, Narcissus, Tulips, &c, will keep 
very well in a room where fire heat is constantly kept, pro- 
vided that they are close to the window. A succession of 
these, as before observed, may beautify the drawing-room 
from February to April, by having a reserved stock, in a cold 
situation, and taking a few of them every week into the 
warmest apartment. 

Wherever any of the bulbs are growing, and in the inte- 
rior of the room, remove them close to the light, observing 
to turn the pots or glasses frequently to prevent them from 
growing to one side, and giving them support as soon as the 
stems droop, or the head becomes pendent. The saucers 
under the Hyacinth and Narcissus may stand with water, 
and observe to change the water in the glasses once or twice 
a week. 

Every one that has any taste or refinement in their floral 
undertakings, will delight in seeing the plants in perfection ; 
to have them so, they must be divested of every leaf that 
has the appearance of decaying — let this always be attended 
to. 



292 ROOMS — CAMELLIAS. [February. 



FEBRUARY. 

At this season, the plants call for the most assiduous at- 
tention. If the stage has been made according to our de- 
scription in September, in very cold nights it should be 
drawn to the centre of the room, or at least withdrawn from 
the window, observing every night to close the window tight 
by shutters, or some substitute equally as good. And, if the 
temperature begins to fall below 40°, means should be 
adopted to prevent it from lowering, either by putting a fire 
in the room, or opening any adjoining apartment where fire 
is constantly kept. This latter method is the best, where it is 
practicable, and ought to be studied to be made so. 

Some very injudiciously, in extreme frosts, put into the 
room, where there is no chimney, among the plants, a fur- 
nace of charcoal, in order to heat the room. The effect is, 
that the foliage becomes dark brown and hardened like, and 
many of the plants die, the rest not recovering until 
summer. 

Watering may be attended to according to the directions 
of January, only observing that those that begin to grow 
will absorb a little more than those that are dormant. 

Roses, especially the daily, if kept in the house, will be- 
gin to show flower. Use means to kill the green-fly that 
may attack them. 

Hyacinths and other bulbs must have regular attendance 
in tying up, &c. Take care not to tie them too tightly, 
leaving sufficiency of space for the stem to expand. Give 
those in the glasses their necessary supplies, and keep 
them all near the light. Never keep bulbous roots, while 
growing, under the shade of any other plant. 

Camellias, with all their varied beauties, will, in this 
month, make a splendid show. Adhere to the directions 
given in the previous month, and so that new varieties may 
be obtained (see Green-house, February, under the head of 
Camellia), which directions are equally applicable here. 
When the flowers are full-blown, and kept in a temperature 
between 40° and 50°, they will be perfect for the space of 
four, five, and frequently six weeks, and a good selection of 



March."] rooms — repotting. 293 

healthy plants will continue to flower from December till 
April. 

Be sure that there is a little air admitted at all favourable 
opportunities. 



MARCH. 

If the plants in these situations have been properly at- 
tended to by admitting air at all favourable times, and when 
the apartment was below 40°, a little fire heat applied to 
counteract the cold, keeping the heat above that degree, your 
attention will be rewarded by the healthy appearance of your 
plants. The weather by this time has generally become 
milder, so that air may be more freely admitted, espe- 
cially from ten to three o'clock. They will require a more 
liberal supply of water, but always avoid keeping them wet. 
Pick off all decayed leaves, and tie up any straggling shoots ; 
give the pots a top-dressing with fresh soil, which will greatly 
invigorate the plants, and will allow the fresh air to act upon 
the roots, which is one of the principal assistants in vegeta- 
tion. For those that require shifting or repotting, see Green- 
house, March ; the plants enumerated there equally apply 
here, if they are in the collection, with this difference, 
that well-kept rooms are about two or three weeks earlier 
than the green-house. After the end of this month, where 
there is a convenience, plants will do better in windows that 
look to the east, in which the direct rays of a hot sun are 
prevented from falling upon them, and the morning sun is 
more congenial for plants in this country than the afternoon 
sun. Where there is any dust on the leaves of any of them, 
take a sponge and water, and make the whole clean; like- 
wise divest them of ali insects. The green-fly is perhaps on 
the roses ; if there are no conveniences for fumigating, wash 
them off as previously directed. Where there are only a 
few plants, these pests could be very easily kept off by exa- 
mining the plants every clay. For the scaly insect, see Ja- 
nuary. If they have not been cleared off, get it done di- 

25* 



294 ROOMS — FLOWERING PLANTS. [March. 

rectly ; for by the heat of the weather they will increase 
tenfold. 



FLOWERING PLANTS. 

Hyacinths, Tulips, Narcissus, Jonquils, and Crocus, will 
be generally in flower. The former require plenty of water, 
and the saucers under the pots should be constantly full, 
until they are done blooming. The others need only be libe- 
rally supplied at the surface of the pot. Give them neat 
green-painted rods to support their flower-stems, and keep 
them all near the light. The spring flowering Oxalis will 
not open except it is exposed to the full rays of the sun. 
The Lachenaiia is greatly improved in colour with exposure 
to the sun, though when in flower its beauties are preserved 
by keeping it a little in the shade. 

Primulas, or Primrose, both Chinese and European, de- 
light in an airy exposure ; but the sun destroys the beauty of 
their flowers by making the colours fade. 

Camellias. Many of them will be in perfection. See 
green-house this month for a description of the finest varie- 
ties. Do not let the sun shine upon the blooms. Those 
that are done flowering will, in small pots, require to be 
repotted. 

The Hyacinths that are in glasses must be regularly sup- 
plied with water. The roots will be very much reduced by 
this method ; therefore, when the bloom is over, if possible, 
plant them in the garden, or Tmry them in pots of earth, to 
ripen and strengthen the bulbs. They cannot satisfactorily 
be again flowered in glasses, and, properly they ought not to 
be allowed to bloom in the garden next year. Those that are 
done flowering in pots can be set aside, and the usual water- 
ings gradually withdrawn. Treat all other Dutch bulbs in a 
similar manner. 



April.'] ROOMS — DIRECTIONS, ETC. 295 



APRIL. 

We remarked last month that, about this season, where it 
is convenient, an eastern window is more congenial to plants 
than a southern. The sun becomes too powerful, and the 
morning sun is preferable to that of the afternoon. West is 
also preferable to south. Some keep their flowering plants 
in excellent order at a north window. But the weather is 
so mild after this that there is no difficulty in protecting and 
growing plants in rooms. They generally suffer most from 
want of air and water : the window must be up a few inches, 
or altogether, according to the mildness of the day. And 
as plants are liable to get covered with dust in these apart- 
ments, and not so convenient to be syringed or otherwise 
cleaned, take the first opportunity of a mild day to carry 
them to a shady situation, and syringe well with water such 
as are not in flower; or, for want of a syringe, take a 
watering-pot with a rose upon it; allowing them to stand 
until they drip, when they may be put into their respective 
situations; or expose them to a shower of rain, but avoid 
allowing them to be deluged, which would be very inju- 
rious. 



DIRECTIONS FOR PLANTS BROUGHT FROM THE GREEN- 
HOUSE. 

Any plants that are brought from the green-house during 
the spring months ought to be as little exposed to the direct 
rays of the sun as possible. Keep them in airy situations, 
with plenty of light, giving frequent and liberal supplies of 
water. Plants may be often observed through our city du- 
ring this month fully exposed in the outside of a south win- 
dow, with the blaze of a mid-day sun upon them, and these, 
too, just come from the temperate and damp atmosphere of 
a well-regulated green-house. Being thus placed in an arid 
situation, scorched between the glass and the sun, whose 
heat is too powerful for them to withstand, the transition is 
so sudden, that, however great their beauties may have ap- 
peared, they in a few days become brown, the flowers tar- 



296 ROOMS — BRINOING PLANTS OUT, ETC. [April. 

nisk or decay, and the failure is generally attributed to in- 
dividuals not at all concerned. From this and similar 
causes many have drawn the unjust conclusion, viz., that 
" plants from green-houses are of too delicate a nature to be 
exposed in rooms or windows at this early season." But 
every year gives more and more proof to the contrary. 
There are ladies in Philadelphia, and those not a few, whose 
rooms and windows at this period vie with the finest of our 
green-houses, with respect to the health, beauty and order 
of their plants, and we might almost say in variety. Some 
of them have got above twenty kinds of Camellias in their 
collections, which afford a continual beauty through the 
winter, with many other desirable and equally valuable plants. 
The plants generally are now growing pretty freely, and are 
not so liable to suffer from liberal supplies of water, observ- 
ing never to give it until the soil in the pot is inclining to 
become dry, and administering it in the evenings or morn- 
ings. 



FLOWERING PLANTS. 

Our directions last month under this head will equally ap- 
ply now. The Chinese roses and geraniums that are now 
coming plentifully into flower should be kept near the light, 
and in airy exposures, to brighten their colours, otherwise 
they will be very pale and sickly. 



BRINGING PLANTS OUT OF THE CELLAR, ETC. 

All or most of the plants that have been in the cellar 
during winter, such as Pomegranates, Lagerstrsemias, Hy- 
drangeas, Oleanders, Sweet-bay, &c, may be brought out to 
the open air at any time about the middle of the month. If 
any of them stand in need of larger pots or tubs, have them 
turned out, the balls reduced, and put them in others a little 
larger j or, where convenient, they may be planted in the 
ground. Be sure to keep the Hydrangeas in shady situa- 
tions. It will not be advisable to expose entirely the orange 
and lemon trees until the end of this or first of next month. 
Where there is any scale or foulness of any kind collected 



May.'] ROOMS — OBSERVATIONS. 297 

on the foliage or wood, have it cleaned directly before the 
heat increases the one, and to get clear of the disagreeable 
appearance of the other. 



MAY. 



All the plants will be able to withstand exposure, in the 
general state of the seasons, about the tenth of the month. 
Begin about the first to take out the hardiest, such as Lau- 
restinus, Hydrangeas, Roses, Primroses, Polyanthus, &c, and 
thus allow the others to stand more free and become hard- 
ened to exposure. The reason that plants are so often seen 
brown, stunted, and almost half dead during summer, is from 
the exposed situation they are placed in, with the direct sun 
upon them, and too frequently from being so sparingly wa- 
tered. There are no shrubby plants cultivated in pots that 
are benefited by full exposure to the hot sun from this pe- 
riod to September. A northeastern aspect is the best for 
every plant except Cactus, Aloe, Mesembryanthemiim, and 
such as go under the name of succulents, which may be fully 
exposed to the sun, but not to long and continued rains. 
Where there are only a few plants, they should be conve- 
niently placed, to allow water from a pot with a rose mouth 
to be poured frequently over them, which is the best substi- 
tute for the syringe. Daphne, Coronilla, Fuchsia, Camel- 
lia, Primrose, and Polyanthus, do not agree with bright sun 
through the summer. There has been a general question 
what is the cause of the death of so many of the Daphne 
odora. It may be observed that the first place that shows 
symptoms of decay is at the surface of the soil, and this 
takes place a few weeks before there are evident effects of it. 
The cause is from the effect of heat or sun and water, act- 
ing on the stem at least. If the soil is drawn in the form 
of a cone round the stem, to throw off the water to the 
edges of the pot, that the stem may be dry above the roots, 
mortification does not take place, neither do they die prema- 
turely when thus treated. For further remarks, see Green- 
house this month. 



298 rooms — repotting. [June, July. 



CAPE BULBS. 



Any of these that are done flowering, such as Ixia, Oxa- 
lis, Lachendlia, &c, as soon as the foliage begins to decay, 
turn the pots on their sides, which will ripen the roots, and, 
when perfectly dry, clear them from the soil, wrap them up 
in paper, with their names attached, and put them carefully 
aside until the time of planting. 



REPOTTING. 



Where it is required, repot Cactus, Aloe, Mescmhryanthc- 
mums, and all other succulents, with any of the Amaryllis 
that are required to be kept in pots; also, Cape Jasmines. 
For description of the above, see Hot-house and Green-house 
of this month, under the same head. 



JUNE AND JULY. 

The only attention requisite to these plants is in giving 
water, keeping them from being much exposed to either sun 
or high winds, and preventing the attack of insects. Water 
must be regularly given every evening, when there has not 
been rain during the day. Where they arc in a growing 
state, they are not liable at this season of the year to suffer 
from too much water, except in a few instances, such as the 
Lemon-scented Geranium, and those kinds that are tuberous- 
rooted, as Ardens, Bkblor, Tristum, &c, which should have 
moderate supplies. 

All the plants ought to be turned round every few weeks 
to prevent them from growing to one side, by the one being 
more dark than the other, and keep those of a straggling 
growth tied neatly to rods. Wherever insects of any descrip- 
tion appear, wash them off directly. Give regular syring- 
ings or sprinklings from the rose of a watering-pot. Be par- 



August."] ROOMS — OBSERVATIONS. 299 

ticularly attentive in this respect, to the Camellias, which 
will keep the foliage in a healthy state. 

If the foliage of Lilium longiflorum, or Japonicum, has 
decayed, do not water them while dormant, as they are easily 
injured by such treatment. 



AUGUST. 

For the kinds of plants that require potting, we refer to 
the Green-house for this month. All that are therein speci- 
fied are peculiarly adapted for rooms, and we would call at- 
tention to the genus Cyclamen, which has not been gene- 
rally introduced into the collections of our ladies ; as, from 
the character and beauty of the flowers, they are very at- 
tracting and highly deserving of culture. Attend to the 
Geraniums as there directed, and be particular in having 
them cut down and repotted, as there fully described. The 
Oranges, Lemons, Oleanders, and Myrtles that are kept in 
cellars or rooms, should have the same attention in this 
month as directed in the green-house, which to repeat here 
would be occupying space unnecessarily. 

Reseda odorata, or Mignonette, is one of the most fra- 
grant annuals. To have it in perfection during winter, the 
seed should be sown about the end of this month, or the be- 
ginning of next, into pots of fine light earth, and sprinkled 
with water frequently. When it comes up, the plants must 
be thinned out or transplanted : the former method is pre- 
ferable. Keep them from frost during winter, and always 
near the light. 

This will equally apply to the green-house. 

Cape bulbs, such as Sparaxis, Ixia, Oxalis, and Lacke- 
nalia, should now be planted. For method and sorts, see 
Green-house in August and September. 



300 ROOMS — GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. [September. 



SEPTEMBER. 

Where there is a quantity of plants to be kept in these 
apartments, they should be disposed of to the best effect, and, 
at the same time, in such a manner as will be most effectual 
to their preservation. A stage of some description is better 
than a table, and, of whatever shape or form, it ought to be 
on castors, that it may, in severe nights of frost, be drawn to 
the centre of the room. The shape may be either concave, 
a half circle, or one square side. The bottom step or table 
should be six inches wide and five inches deep, keeping each 
successive step one inch farther apart, to the desired height, 
which may be about six feet. Allowing the first step to be 
about two feet from the floor, there will be five or six steps, 
which will hold about fifty pots of a common size. A stage 
in the form of half a circle will hold more, look the hand- 
somest, and be most convenient. We have seen them circular, 
and, when filled, appeared like a pyramid. These do very 
well, but they must be turned every day, or the plants will 
not grow regularly. With this attention, it is decidedly the 
best. Green is the most suitable colour to paint them. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

The directions given for the green-house this month are 
equally applicable here. The late blooming Chrysanthe- 
mums are particularly adapted for rooms, the colours are so 
varied : and many of them are .dwarf-growing, and even neat 
in their habit, especially the new hybrid sorts. 



OCTOBER. 



Have a stage or stages, as described last month, in the 
situations where they are intended to remain all winter ; 
place the plants on them from the first to the eighth of this 



October.'] ROOMS — OF BULBOUS ROOTS. 301 

month, beginning with the tallest on the top, graduating to 
the bottom. It is desirable to place flats or saucers under 
each to prevent the water from falling to the floor, and the 
water should be emptied from the flats of all except those of 
( 'alia and Hydrangea. The latter while dormant should be 
kept only a little moist. 

Previous to taking in the plants, they should be divested 
of every decayed leaf, insects, and all contracted dust, having 
their shoots neatly tied up, and every one in correct order. 
Every leaf of the Camellias ought to be sponged, and the 
plants placed in an airy exposure, and from this period till 
they begin to grow have them exposed to the sun. If the 
flower-buds are too crowded, picking ofF the weakest will 
preserve the remainder in greater perfection, and prevent 
them in part from falling off. Do not on any occasion keep 
them in a room where there is much fluctuating fire heat, as 
the flower-buds will not expand, except they are kept in an 
even temperature. See Green-house, this month, more largely 
on this subject. 



OF BULBOUS ROOTS. 

Those that are intended to flower in glasses should be 
placed therein this month, and kept in a cool room. After 
the fibres begin to push a few shoots, the glasses may be 
taken to the warmest apartments to cause them to flower 
early. Bring a few from the coldest to the warmest every 
two weeks, and thus a succession of bloom may be kept up 
from January to March. Hyacinths and other Dutch bulbs 
should now be planted in pots. See Green-house for full 
directions. 

( 'ape Bulbs. — All that are unplanted and offering to grow 
should be put in pots forthwith. Ample directions are given 
for the planting of these in the two preceding months. 

Report. Rubus rossefollus, or Bramble-rose. They should 
have pots one size larger than those they are now in. To 
make them flower profusely, when done blooming in May, 
divide them and put only a few stems in one pot, and repot 
them in this month, as above directed. 

26 



302 ROOMS — GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. \_Novcmhcr. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 

Any herbaceous plants in the collection ought to be set 
aside, and the water in part withheld. When the stems and 
foliage are decayed, the plants may be put in a cool cellar, 
where they will not be in danger of frost, and be permitted 
to remain there until they begin to grow ; then bring them 
to the light, and treat as directed for these kinds of plants. 
Deciduous plants may be treated in a similar mariner. 



NOVEMBER. 



GENERAL OBSERVATIONS. 



The remarks and instructions that are given last month 
for these apartments will equally answer here. Where the 
Dutch bulbs were omitted to be placed in glasses, they ought 
not to be longer delayed. 

Oxalis. — The autumn-flowering species will now be in 
bloom, and must be kept in the sun to make them expand 
freely. The neglect of this is the principal reason that these 
do not flower perfectly in rooms. 

('a me!! ins. — These plants, where there is a collection, 
flower from this period till April ; and the general desire to 
be fully acquainted with the method of their culture has 
induced us to be liberal in our observations on every point 
and period through the various stages of their growth and 
flowering. We will here only remind the inquirer that a 
pure air and plenty of water, giving the plants frequent 
sprinklings, are the present necessities, which only are con- 
ducive to their perfection. 

Attend to the turning of Geraniums and other rapidly 
growing plants, that all sides of them may have an equal 
share of light. 



December.'] ROOMS. 303 



DECEMBER. 

As the trying season is now approaching for all plants 
that are kept in rooms, especially those that are desired to 
have a flourishing aspect through the winter, a few general 
instructions (although they may have been previously ad- 
vanced) will perhaps be desirable to all those who are 
engaged in this interesting occupation, which forms a luxury 
through the retired hours of a winter season, and with very 
little attention many are the beauties of vegetative nature 
that will be developed to the gratification of every reflecting 
mind. The following is a routine of every-day culture : — 

Do not at any time admit air (except for a few moments) 
while the thermometer is below 35°, exposed in the shade. 

In time of very severe frosts the plants ought to be with- 
drawn from the window to the centre of the room during 
night. 

Never give water until the soil in the pots is inclining to 
become dry, except for Hyacinths and other Dutch bulbs 
that are in a growing state, which must be liberally sup- 
plied. 

Destroy all insects as soon as they appear : for the means 
of destruction, see next month. 

Give a little air every favourable opportunity (that is, 
when the thermometer is above 35°, exposed in the shade),' 
by putting up the window one, two, or three inches, accord- 
ing to the state of the weather. 

Clean the foliage with sponge and water frequently to 
remove all dust, &c. The water thus used must not exceed 
80°, but 60° is preferable. 

Turn the plants frequently to prevent them growing to 
one side. 

Roses of the daily sort may be obtained early by having 
them in a warm room that has a south window, and as soon 
as they begin to grow admit air in small portions about noon 
every day that the sun has any effect. Such must be well 
supplied with water. 

Bulbs in glasses must be supplied with fresh water at least 
once a-week, in which period they will inhale all the nutri- 



304: ROOMS — CAMELLIAS. [December. 

tive gas that they derive from that element, if they are in a 
growing state. 

Camellias, when in bud and flower should never be 
allowed to become the least dry, neither confined from fresh 
air. The effects would be that the buds would become stint- 
ed, dry, and drop off. Therefore, to have these in perfec- 
tion, attend strictly to watering. G-ive frequent airings, and 
wash the leaves occasionally with water. Never keep them 
in a room where there is a strong coal fire. The most of 
Camellias will bear 3° of frost without the smallest injury, 
so that they are easier kept than Geraniums, except when 
they are in bloom. In that state frost will destroy the 
flowers. The air of a close cellar is also destructive to the 
buds. 

The reason that the Camellia does not bloom perfectly in 
parlours or other heated rooms is owing to their being too 
warm and arid, destroying the vital vegetative principle of 
the plant, and it soon perishes. There is one way in which 
these plants can be kept perfect even in such dry places when 
the recess in the windows is of sufficient depth as to allow 
plants to stand within it, enclosing them from the apartment 
by another sash : in such a situation, water could be placed, 
which would keep the atmosphere between the windows per- 
fectly moist. The verdure would be rich and the flowers 
brilliant; and- they would be completely protected from dust 
— the whole would have a very pleasing effect. Attention 
will be requisite to give them air during the mild part of the 
day. There are several Camellias not proper for room cul- 
ture; those which have dry brown scaly buds are to be 
avoided, such as anemonejiora, egertonia, deviana, fulgens, 
atrorubens ; also avoid icoodsii, chandlerii and dorsetia, 
as being difficult of expanding — they are so very full 
of petals. Those most proper for room culture are double 
white, eclipse, fimbriate/, imbricata, malijh>ra, pceomflora } 
Lanclrethii, Sacco, Sarah Frost, Washington, Madonna punc- 
tata, speciosa, variegata and incarnata. Such will be found 
to bloom freely and fully : many others might be added, but 
these will give an idea of those sorts that agree best with 
room culture. We cannot conclude our subject without 
giving our readers some hints on the effect of plants in 
household apartments. It has been proved that the leaves 
of plants absorb carbonic acid gas by their upper surfaces, 



December.'] ROOMS — CAMELLIAS. 305 

and give out oxygen by their under ones, thereby tending to 
purify the air, in as far as animal life is concerned, because 
carbonic acid gas is pernicious to animals, and oxygen is 
what that life requires. It is in the light, however, that 
these operations are carried on, for in the dark, plants give 
out carbonic. It does not appear that any of the scentless 
products given out by plants are injurious to human beings, 
because those who live among accumulated plants are not 
less healthy than others, but rather enjoy more uninterrupted 
health, which, of itself, is a sufficient recommendation for 
all to spend their leisure moments in so healthful and rational 
an employment. 



THE 



AMERICAN FLOWER-GARDEN 
DIRECTORY. 



ON THE CULTURE OF THE GRAPE. 

We are not aware of any vegetable production that is 
more conducive to the luxurious gratifications and pleasures 
of man than the vine. In fact, there is no fruit so delicious, 
applicable to so many purposes, nor any that is so agreeable 
to all palates : from the remotest ages the vine has been cele- 
brated as the emblem of plenty and the " symbol of happi- 
ness." Its cpuickness of growth, its great fertility, and 
astonishing vegetative powers, with its unknown age, has ren- 
dered it one of the most fruitful blessings bestowed by 
Providence ; a blessing which almost every inhabitant of this 
Union may enjoy, and we see no occasion to doubt but that 
thousands of acres of our fertile uplands will be converted 
into vineyards, producing the finest fruits and richest wines 
in the world. Indeed, with very little care and attention, 
our unsightly post and rail-fences may be converted into 
grape espaliers, and fine wines produced at as little cost as 
spruce beer; every square foot of surface might be made to 
produce a pound of grapes, and every post, at least, round 
our gardens afford ample space for one vine, which would 
yearly produce from three to nine pounds of fruit, fit either 
for the table or the wine-press. But the small space allotted 
in this volume will not allow us to dilate on this fruitful 
subject. Our object is to give a few hints on the aspect, 



308 ON SOIL. 

soil, propagation, and culture of the vine, so as to produce 
an extra crop in the smallest given space. We will then con- 
sider, first, the 



ASPECT. 

As our climate gives us plenty of heat for the maturation 
of the vine, we have, therefore, more scope in aspect than 
any other country. However, the most preferable is one 
from south to east, or west. Shelter from high and often- 
recurring winds is a prime consideration. Our western and 
southwestern gusts of wind are very destructive to the vine 
when it is in the full vigour of growth ; it dissipates all the 
accumulated secretions of the foliage, and closes its pores, 
thereby totally deranging the vital functions of the plant, 
which (although in the height of the growing season) has 
been known to be suspended for weeks. There are fre- 
quently many local circumstances affecting the -shelter of 
walls and other buildings, which, where they exist, must de- 
termine the best aspect for training the vine. But if there 
be no such local circumstances, we have no hesitation in stat- 
ing that an eastern aspect is the best. On such the sun 
shines with full force during the morning, at which time there 
is something highly favourable to vegetation in his rays, which 
seems to stimulate the energies of plants in an extraordinary 
degree, and to excite them to a vigorous exertion of all the 
functions appertaining to vegetable life. 



ON SOIL. 

The soil most congenial to the growth of the vine and the 
maturity of its fruit is a rich, sandy, turfy loam, about two 
feet deep, on a dry, gravelly, rocky, or sandy bottom ; the 
roots run with avidity into such sub-soils, lying secure from 
the excess of moisture, which always accumulates in clayey 
or compact soils. The excrementitious matter discharged 
from the roots of a vine is very great, and if this be given 
out in close and retentive soils, they quickly become delete- 
rious, and a languid and diseased vegetation ensues ; this is 
the great reason that so many failures exist. It may hence be 



ON SOIL. 309 

inferred that vines will not thrive in a cold wet soil, nor 
composed of stiff clay, which is easily accounted for from 
the fact that they delight only in soils easily rendered dry 
by evaporation, and free from excess of moisture, and are 
always more warm, which is so genial to the growth of this 
plant. To elucidate this, we can record an instance that 
occurred a few years ago in this vicinity : A vine border 
was dug out to the depth of three feet and a half, in a cold 
retentive clay soil; twenty inches of stone, brick, and lime- 
rubbish were put in the bottom, and the remainder filled 
up with good compost for the vines, in which they were 
planted, and grew well for two years, and produced some 
fruit; finally, they languished, and almost died, and it was 
at once pronounced that fine, foreign grapes would not do in 
this country. But, on examining the roots of the plants, 
it was discovered that they were rotten from the excess of 
moisture which was retained in this pit; for though it had 
been partially filled with a dry bottom, no provision was 
made to carry off the water, therefore it proved to be a com- 
plete water-pail : a drain was necessarily dug to the full 
depth to carry off the water, and the soil generally renewed ; 
the vines were cut to within two feet of the ground ; they 
now (four years after the operation) grow luxuriantly, and 
produce abundant crops every year. Therefore, if the sub- 
soil is not naturally dry, it must be made so by draining, 
which is the basis of the work, filling up the bottom with a 
sufficient quantity of dry materials, such as stones broken 
moderately small, brickbats, lumps of lime-rubbish, oyster- 
shells, &c, which will keep them dry and warm by the free 
admission of air and solar heat, and to admit of heavy rains 
passing quickly through without being retained sufficiently 
long to saturate the roots or injure the tender extremities; 
having thus furnished a dry bottom, cover to the desired 
height with turf taken about three inches deep from a rich 
pasture ; and to every four loads of turf add one load of 
thoroughly decomposed manure, at least one year old, inter- 
spersing it with bones of any description, oyster-shells, or 
any other enriching material that undergoes slow decomposi- 
tion : the whole must be repeatedly turned, and allowed to 
settle before the vines are planted. Extreme caution has to 
be exercised in administering bone-dust, slaughter-house offal, 
and other over-rich manures, especially if the vines are to be 



310 ON SOIL. 

planted the same or even the following season. Soils glutted 
with instant enriching manures are destructive to the vine. 
The surface of the border should have a gentle descent from 
the wall or fence : never crop your vine borders, and be 
careful of treading much upon them ; a board trellis should 
be laid for walking upon when the operation of pruning, 
tying;, &c, takes place, which is almost daily during summer. 
The border, after it has been once made, ought never to be 
stirred, except at intervals, to keep it from becoming hard 
and impervious to heat or moisture ; and, when necessary, it 
should only be forked up about two inches deep, at all times 
taking care not to injure the roots. 

In dry sandy soils all that is wanted for the full perfection 
of the grape is to take out about one foot of the poorest of 
the ground, and replace it by turf from a meadow, adding 
thereto a portion of well-decomposed manure. Sweepings 
from turnpike roads, where there is much travel, is an ex- 
cellent article for incorporating with such soils ; it is of an 
enriching quality, its component parts consisting chiefly of 
sand, pulverized stones, dung, and urine, which is of a more 
lasting nature than can be found in almost any other com- 
post; it ought to be thoroughly incorporated with the other 
soil soon after it has been collected from the road, as all its 
valuable qualities will then be entirely preserved. The fore- 
going remarks in the preparation of soil, if followed, will 
insure the luxuriant growth of vines and the yearly produc- 
tion of fine crops of grapes, and, when circumstances will 
permit, should be practically adopted at all times. But it 
must not be supposed that vines will not grow and mature 
fine crops unless thus encouraged in extra prepared soils. 
Such is not the fact, for vines will do well in any soil that 
is not adhesive and has a dry bottom ; but they grow finer, 
and bear greater crops of fruit within a given space of time, 
when planted in ground that has been properly prepared for 
their reception. For instance, if two cuttings be planted, 
the one in a soil fully prepared, and the other in that of the 
latter description, it will be found at the end of three years 
that the vine in the former - soil is double the size of the 
latter; consequently, the strong vine will produce two-thirds 
more fruit, and of a better quality, than the weak vine. 
This difference occurring every year, and even greater as 
the age increases, is sufficient to amply repay for all the 






ON THE PROPAGATION OP VINES. 311 

trouble and expense incurred in making a suitable compost. 
However, the disadvantage of a poor soil may in part be 
compensated for by planting the vines closer together. If, 
indeed, vines could not be planted with any prospect of suc- 
cess, except in borders purposely prepared, only a very small 
quantity of grapes would be grown, compared with what this 
rich and fertile country is capable of producing. 

Many instances occur in towns and cities, around dwell- 
ings and other descriptions of brick and stone erections, 
which present very favourable situations for the training of 
vines, but, which, nevertheless, are so situated as to admit 
of little or no soil being placed at their roots. In such 
cases, if an opening can be made, twenty inches deep, and 
as many wide, it will be sufficient to admit of the roots of 
a young vine, which will support it till its rambling roots 
have found their way under the pavement, or along the walls 
to some more distant nourishment ; if a wider space can be 
made, it will, of course, be better : loosen the sides and 
bottom as much as possible, and fill up with compost, as 
previously directed, and therein plant the vine. The surface 
covering, whether of brick or stone, may be replaced after 
the soil has fully settled, leaving a hole about six inches 
square to allow the stem of the plant to swell in its future 
growth. The roots soon find their way under the paving or 
along the foundation walls, and, indeed, in every direction, 
in search after food, and will extract nourishment from 
sources apparently barren. The fact is, that the roots of 
the vine possess an astonishing power of adapting them- 
selves to any situation in which they may be planted, pro- 
vided it be a dry one. 



ON THE PROPAGATION OP VINES. 

Vines are generally propagated in the open ground by 
cuttings and layers. 

By cuttings. At the general prunings, provide cuttings of 
the preceding summer's growth ; choose such as are of a 
medium size, well-ripened, and short-jointed, cut them into 
lengths of about eighteen inches each, leaving at the ends 
not less than two inches of wood to protect the eye ; place 
these temporary cuttings about three-fourths of their length 



812 OX THE PROPAGATION OP VINES. 

in the ground, in a warm and sheltered situation, where they 
can be protected with a little litter from the severity of frost 
during winter. The best time for planting them is about 
the 25th of March in this latitude, earlier or later if more 
south or north : if intended to plant the cutting where the 
plant is to remain, which is the most preferable method, 
prepare them in the following manner : 

By cutting them into lengths of tree-buds each, and let- 
ting the uppermost bud have an inch of blank wood re- 
maining to protect it, the extremity of which must be cut in 
a slanting manner, and the slanting side opposite to the buds, 
to throw off the moisture : the end that is to be inserted in 
the ground cut transversely just under the bud, and the cut- 
ting will be complete : the cuttings being thus prepared, 
plant them forthwith ; if intended to remain, place two in 
each space, inserting them in the ground so as the second 
eye may be about half an inch under the soil, which must 
be pressed close, when it will, most frequently, be found 
that the eye thus placed will grow first and strongest, when 
the upper eye can be displaced ; if both the cuttings grow, 
cut off the weakest. During May, June, and July, care 
must be taken to keep the cuttings constantly moist ; soap- 
suds or drainings of the dung-hill can be used for the pur- 
pose once a week, but not oftener, using rain or river water 
for general waterings. If the soil should sink down, and 
leave the buds higher than above-mentioned, more must be 
added to keep them as directed. To prevent the ground 
from becoming hard by repeated waterings, and also to re- 
tain a regular moisture about the cutting, cover the soil with 
shells, litter, or any such substitute, which will greatly pro- 
mote the vegetating powers of the scion. As soon as they 
have made shoots six inches long, water may be more spar- 
ingly applied, and the shoots must be carefully tied to some 
support, and their tendrils and lateral shoots should be cut 
off, the latter to within one eye of the main stem : about the 
first of November, cut every plant down to within two eyes 
of the cutting. But if the plants are intended to be re- 
moved, they should be planted in such a situation as to be 
shaded from the mid-day sun ; from four to six hours a day 
of sun is quite sufficient. A spot sheltered from severe 
winds is also most desirable. When transplanted, be careful 



ON THE PROPAGATION OF VINES. 313 

of their small roots, and choose a mild day (about the first of 
April, or earlier, is a good season), for the operation. 

By layers. This is a very expeditious mode of growing 
young vines, provided the shoots be laid in pots ; but vines 
raised from shoots laid down in the open ground should be 
avoided as the worst of all plants : they make but few roots, 
and, when removed, these nearly all die off from being cut 
at the extremities in lifting, and the second year of such a 
plant is not much in advance of a good cutting. To grow 
vines by laying the shoots in pots, the following directions, 
if followed, will insure success : For each intended layer 
procure a seven-inch pot, or a small box of a similar, or even 
larger size ; prepare some fine rich sandy mould, containing 
a great portion of decayed leaves, then take the shoot and 
run it through the hole in the bottom of the pot till you 
come to the last three buds ; close up the aperture round 
the shoot with moss, cotton, or any elastic substance, and 
then fill up the pot or box to within half an inch of the top 
with the prepared soil, having previously secured it in a safe 
and level position : and, where it can be conveniently wa- 
tered during the season ; this must be attended to at least 
once a-day. When there is not time for this attendance, the 
pot or box should be plunged under ground, and the layer 
placed thereon, and firmly secured, so that its own force will 
not raise it up ; then cover up the shoots at least three inches, 
leaving space for occasionally holding some liquid nourish- 
ment. Shoots may be thus laid any time from the first of 
March to the first of April. It must be clearly understood 
that the success of the operation depends entirely on keep- 
ing the mould in the pots moist, treating it as directed for 
watering-cuttings. The plant may be separated from the 
vine about the first of September, and instantly planted into 
its desired locality, or put into a larger vessel, and there re- 
main till planting season ; the following year displace the 
tendrils and laterals as directed for cuttings, and in pruning 
cut it down to within three eyes of the ground. We may 
safely assert that it is a species of strangling to a vine in the 
first three years of its growth to be sparing of the knife, al- 
lowing, at once, small weak shoots to be laid in to form in a 
day (comparatively) a plant that is expected to withstand 
the vicissitude of ages, and produce yearly its quantum of 
fruit ; but more of this when treating of pruning. 

27 



314 ERECTIONS, ETC. 

By eyes. This is our most favourite method of propagating 
plants of this most valuable fruit. Early in the month of 
March we cut the shoots into eyes, leaving about an inch of 
wood on each extremity, and plant those with their eyes up- 
permost into pots, and place them in a hot or cold frame, 
prepared for the purpose ; plants from a single eye may 
easily be made to grow twelve feet in one season, by constant 
repotting and nourishing. The plants thus growing are de- 
cidedly the best rooted, forming more capillary fibres ; con- 
sequently more nutritious support to the vine is absorbed in 
the same given period of time; they also form shorter joints, 
and are capable of producing more fruit on a plant of the 
same size. We are aware that some start at this idea, and 
say that in a few years it is not observed. It reminds us 
very much of the son of the "Isle of the Ocean," when 
asked how old his brother was, replied he was so much, but 
in two years he would be " the same age." Nevertheless, 
this method of propagating may not be generally accessible, 
the former two plans being at the command of every one. 



ON ERECTIONS FOR THE SUPPORT AND PROTECTION OF 
THE VINE IN OUT-DOOR CULTURE. 

To limit the proper height for training grapes would be a 
preposterous idea, for they can be perfectly cultivated in this 
country on any height from four to forty feet : indeed, on a wall 
of the former, we have thirty sorts of grapes growing luxu- 
riantly, and fruiting in the most profuse manner. Some of 
the vines, four years old, which have produced from six to 
nine bunches of fine fruit, which only occupy, after pruning, 
a space of about eighteen inches square. 

Walls of brick are decidedly the most preferable for the 
perfection of the grape; and if they be built for the express 
purpose, the most judicious distribution of materials would 
be in the erection of several low walls, not more than seven 
feet high. For the purpose of pruning, training, &c, walls 
of this height are far preferable to those of a greater ; and if 
built to run directly south or north, the entire surface of 
both sides may be judiciously covered. The eastern aspect 
would render a sure and abundant early crop ; those on the 
western Bide would not be so productive, and more liable to 



ERECTIONS, ETC. 315 

be affected by our frequent severe westerly gales. When in 
bloom, or when the fruit is ripening, would be the period 
that they would be most liable to suffer. However, as they 
would frequently produce a full crop, an astonishing quantity 
of fruit may be produced on a very small space of ground 
by erecting walls of this description, built parallel to, and 
not far distant from, each other — say, at the nearest, from 
twenty to twenty-five feet. If from local causes bricks can- 
not be had, a good substitute will be found in strong ranges 
of plank fencing made of well-seasoned wood, and closely 
jointed, having three or four good coats of oil paint. Grapes 
raised in this way will be nowise inferior to those produced 
on walls : indeed, we would prefer such to any wall of stone 
that could be erected, it being of a more even surface and 
more convenient for training, and not giving harbour for in- 
sects, &c. A very great advantage will be derived by having 
a coping on the wall or fence, projecting eight or ten inches, 
turning on a pivot, so as it can be used in time of heavy 
dashing rains while the vines are in bloom, or when the fruit 
is ripening, which are the only periods that it will be of ac- 
tual service, for all dews and light rains are indispensable to 
the health and maturity of the vine ; and if the fence is 
north and south, the light and heat excluded by it would be 
a serious drawback on the ripening of the fruit. We say, 
therefore, if it is not on a pivot, the plants will be better 
without it, unless it have only one or two inches of a pro- 
jection, the dripping from the coping will fall on the foliage, 
and that will cany it entirely free from the fruit ; but we 
urge the great utility and even necessity for movable coping. 
Espaliers or trelises are in common use for the training of 
the vine, also arbours ; the former suit admirably in small 
gardens where it is not desirable to go to expense, but the 
latter should be avoided as the worst possible construction 
for growing grapes ; the interior is always filled with a cur- 
rent of cold air highly prejudicial to the maturity of fine 
fruits ; but for coarse grapes it is a matter of little conse- 
quence, as they are at best only fit for producing shade. Up- 
right trellises in city gardens may be made eight feet high, 
with the spars not more than six inches apart ; and these 
.should be made of the very best materials, and supported 
every three feet by uprights. Strong wire makes an elegant 
substitute for the cross slats, which, if kept well painted, 



316 ON TRANSPLANTING THE VINE. 

will not suffer by corrosion. We have seen an elegant new 
erection by a tasteful grape amateur, and think it will answer 
a very good purpose ; it consists of an upright double trellis, 
about one foot wide at the bottom, tapering to one bar at the 
top, running north and south, which is about eight feet high ; 
from which, on each side, there is fixed a small projecting 
sash, at an angle of about 48°, which keeps the vines per- 
fectly secure from deluging rains, and even concentrates more 
solar heat for their maturity. The whole has a light and ra- 
ther imposing effect ; its practical utility remains to be tried, 
as it is but lately finished; there is no apparent doubt but 
it will prove very beneficial in its results. 



ON TRANSPLANTING THE VINE. 

The best period of the year for transplanting is during the 
months of October or March. The longer its removal is 
postponed after these periods the more injurious will be the 
effects of transplanting. Admitting the ground has been pre- 
pared according to directions formerly given, dig a hole about 
twenty inches deep, and as wide as will admit of the roots, 
if possible, to their full extension, without crippling in any 
manner. If any of them are injured in lifting, they must be 
cut back to soundness ; fill up the hole to within twelve 
inches of the top, set the vine in the hole thus made, with 
its stem about six inches from the wall or fence, and let the 
plant be cut even with the ground ; or, where there is plenty 
of space, and the plant two or more feet long, plant the root 
at a distance from where the stem of the vine is desired, and 
then disbud the young shoot, except the uppermost three ; lay 
it down its full length, bringing the terminal buds to where 
the plant is wanted ; by this method the whole extent of the 
shoot will make roots, and be of infinite service for the far- 
ther growth and support of the plant. When the eyes thus 
left grow, displace the weakest two, leaving the strongest for 
the permanent plants. We have seen old vines laid down in 
this manner for the distance of thirty feet, and, in two years, 
formed plants of the most astonishing vigour and production. 
If the vine has been grown in a pot, shake the ball of earth 
from the roots, among which place, with care, new and fresh 
soil, taking the plant and giving it several shakes to settle it 



ON PRUNING. 317 

well about the roots, which will encourage the plant to put 
forth new roots for its farther support. Transplanting should 
always be done in dry and mild weather, and when the soil 
is mellow and free. During the removal the roots must be 
carefully kept from exposure ; the atmosphere would dry up 
their tender extremities, and cause much injury; and, when 
vines are brought from a distance, this precaution ought to 
be carefully put in practice. Its first season's growth should 
be confined to one stem only, carefully cutting off all lateral 
shoots within one eye of the main shoot, as directed on the 
subject of propagation. 



ON PRUNING. 

The first year's growth of a transplanted vine should, in 
November, be cut down within four inches of the ground, and, 
on the appearance, cover the plant with about three inches of 
stable litter, allowing it to remain in this state till the middle 
of March. The plant will now push strongly, and two of the 
best shoots should be trained their full length during summer, 
carefully nipping off tendrils and laterals, and, at all times, 
securing the shoots from the effects of high winds. If walls 
are used for training, there should be slats fixed about one 
inch from the wall, to tie the shoots thereto, using soft mate- 
rial for the purpose of tying ; if the vines should show fruit, 
cut it off. 

Having the previous season retained two well-grown shoots 
from near the surface of the ground, you will now, in Novem- 
ber, tie these in a horizontal position, about six or eight 
inches above the surface, cutting them at nearly two feet dis- 
tance from the main stem. In the following month, February, 
when the weather is mild, displace every alternate bud, ob- 
serving that it is those on the under side of the shoot. If 
everything has been attended to in soil, planting, and pruning 
that we have advanced, there may be expected to arise four 
shoots from each of these horizontal branches, which, if any 
show fruit, it must be cut off; these young shoots must be 
trained upright during summer, being careful to displace every 
other as they appear. Some approve of training these young 
upright shoots in a serpentine form, which, in our opinion at 
present, is of little consequence; but top them about the end 



ol8 ON PRUNING. 

of August, or earlier if they are to the desired height. Iu 
November of the third summer's growth, you may now prune 
for fruit as above stated. Your horizontal branches will have 
fully matured four luxuriant upright shoots. Cut two of 
these alternately within one eye of the horizontal shoot, 
which will produce wood to be fruited the following year, and 
lay in the other two, in a serpentine form for fruit, to about 
three feet in length. The vine has now assumed the form 
in which it is permanently to remain, and it may be con- 
sidered as the foundation of a system of alternately fruiting 
four shoots, and training four out their full length every year, 
which method may be continued every year without any 
alteration. After several years, if it is thought proper, the 
arms may be lengthened by the training in of a shoot at 
their extremities, and managing it in the same manner as 
when the arms were first formed; but it is not advisable that 
the branches should be far extended, which would ultimately 
prove injurious to those branches arising from the bosom of 
the vine. This system of pruning and training the vine we 
do not advocate as something new or original, but one which 
we have seen in full and successful practice twenty years ago. 
By procuring well-grown plants in pots, one year may be 
gained on the above calculation ; for you can prune, and at 
once take two shoots to prepare for laying the foundation of 
3 7 our future plant; but more than this cannot be accomplished. 
We are aware that many of our readers are already startled 
at this tedious method of fruiting vines, and have almost con- 
cluded to have fruit the first year or none. Such are too 
frequently the conclusions of many; but, as sure as they 
practise it, they as invariably meet with a failure, and that 
in a very few years. The practise of training vines to get 
them up to the top of arbours, etc., cannot be done with fine 
vines without risk. As we have already said, it may and will 
do with our native kinds, but no other. The general system 
of spur-pruning has many advantages in in-door culture, but 
does not at all agree with growing grapes in the open air. 
Our limits do not admit of giving in detail our reasons for so 
saying, but those who doubt may go on in the old way, giving 
the system herein advised a trial with one plant only, and we 
guarantee that in less than five years their old vines arc 
luadcd clown to the stump, to begin on a system that yearly 
renews itself, and can be perpetuated for ages on the same 



ON MANURE. • 319 

vine, which may he said to " renew its youth every year." 
In fact, it recommends itself by simplicity — by the small 
number of wounds annually made — by the clear and hand- 
some appearance of the vine, and by the great ease with which 
it is managed — its occupying but a small space. We there- 
fore conclude this subject with the following few general rules : 
Use a knife of the best description, and let it be perfectly 
sharp ; cut always upward and in a sloping direction ; always 
leave about an inch of blank wood beyond a terminal bud, 
and let the cut be on the opposite side of the bud. In pruning 
out an old branch, cut it even with the parent limb, that the 
wound may quickly heal. Never prune in frosty weather, 
nor in the months of March, April, or May. Let the general 
fall pruning take place about the end of October or first of 
November ; after which, stir up the ground, and let a good 
coating of fresh stable manure be laid thereon, which will both 
protect the roots that are near the surface, and also enrich 
the soil ; but if stable manure cannot be procured, leaves from 
the woods are an excellent substitute, which, after decompo- 
sition, form a vegetable manure very enriching, and one very 
congenial to the vine ; this being done, nothing more is re- 
quired till the first of March, when the roughest must be 
removed, and the decomposed particles forked into the borders. 
It may be proper to state that in more northern latitudes and 
greater altitudes than Philadelphia, it will be necessary to lay 
down the vines after pruning during winter, and give them 
a light covering of litter, straw, leaves, or mats, which will 
completely protect them from the severest frost ; although it 
is not altogether the severity that destroys, but the alternate 
frost and sun acting on the plant every twenty-four hours, 
which overcomes the vitality of the plant; and another fell 
destroyer is when we have a mild February and a severe 
March. When such occurs, which is but rarely, the vines 
must all be protected by mats while there is danger. 



ON MANURE. 

This subject has been very recently indulged in to a de- 
structive extent. We could record instances of soils strongly 
impregnated with very enriching manures being almost death 
to the plant ; very rich soils are adhesive and retentive of 



320 DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE, ETC. 

moisture, which is destruction to the roots of the vine. The 
celebrated Brassin, conductor of the royal vinery of France, 
used to practise enriching his vine borders with exciting ma- 
nures : he now finds that cleansing of ditches, grass-turf, and 
road sweepings, mixed well together and allowed to ferment 
for a year, is far preferable. He now uses it entirely as an 
annual dressing; but, in our opinion, this cannot be con- 
tinued for any length of time unless the border is also yearly 
reduced; consequently, manures that are of slow decomposi- 
tion are preferable, and nothing that we are acquainted with 
excels bones of every description ; but these are not always 
at hand in quantity. When to be obtained, they should al- 
ways be put to a good purpose ; an annual winter top-dressing 
of manure of a few inches, and the roughest removed in the 
spring, digging in the remainder not over four inches deep, 
which will encourage the roots to the surface, where they 
will be greatly benefited by solar heat and air. Liquid 
manures are highly valuable where immediate effect is re- 
quired : they contain all the soluble parts of manure in such 
a state as to admit of being taken up by the plant as soon 
as applied. These are urine, which may be used pure any 
time from the first of November to February, when the ground 
is not frozen ; but if used at any other period, must be di- 
luted with its equal quantity of water. Drainings of ma- 
nure heajis and soap-suds can be used at all times, but not 
too frequently. Soot dissolved in water, in the proportion 
of one to twelve, is an exceedingly strong manure, and very 
stimulating. Guano dissolved in water at the rate of 20 lbs. 
to 100 gallons is a first rate manure. Where great growth is 
required, they may be safely watered once a week, during 
the growing season, with the enriched liquid ; but all these 
exciting manures must be cautiously applied, as excess is 
very injurious to the fertility of the vine; and although 
one of the grossest feeders in nature, even possessing the 
appetite of a glutton, it can be satiated and destroyed. 



DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE OP GRAPES MOST SUITABLE FOR 
OPEN AIR CULTURE. 

Golden Chasselas, Chasselas de Fontainbleau , D'Arbot/ce, 
or Royal Muscadine. Bunches medium size, with very small 



DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE, ETC. 321 

shoulders, berries of a moderate size, round when ripe, turn- 
ing to a bright amber colour, having a thin skin, a soft flesh, 
and a rich juice. This is an exceedingly fine grape, a free 
bearer, is very hardy, and ripens early ; it may be considered 
one of the best white grapes for out-door culture. 

White Chasselas or White Muscadine. Bunches medium 
size, shouldered, and well formed. Berries round and of a 
good size, juicy, rich, and well flavoured; it ripens about the 
middle or toward the end of September, and is an excellent 
hardy grape, and fully equal to the former. We consider 
this grape the same as the Malmsey Muscadine. 

White Sweet Water (early). Bunches rather large; ber- 
ries of a good size, round, of a white colour, and, when per- 
fectly ripe, especially when exposed, they are shaded with a 
light russet colour; they grow close on the bunches, and 
when desired to have large berries, the bunches must be 
well thinned, the juice very saccharine and luscious. We 
consider this the very best white grape for walls; it is an 
excellent bearer, makes good short-jointed wood, and is very 
early. We have had it perfectly ripe on a south wall the 
first day of September. 

White Muscat of Alexandria, Jerusalem Muscat, Mcdaga. 
Bunches large, but short and well shouldered; berries large, 
oval, and, when perfectly ripe (which will not be till October), 
are of a pale amber colour, often without stones, skin rather 
thick, the flesh firm, juice not plentiful, but of a sweet, 
highly musky, delicious and peculiar flavour. It is an extra 
fine grape, and requires a warm situation. It does not bear 
so freely as the former two. 

White Frontignac or Frontignan. Bunches long and 
narrow, without shoulders, rather closely set, of a dull white 
or greenish-yellow, and covered with a powdering bloom; 
juice very sugary and rich, with a delightful spicy flavour. 
It ripens in September, and delights in a dry soil. 

White Hamburg, White Lisbon, White Portugal. Bunches 
very large, short and loosely formed; berries large and oval, 
skin thick, of a greenish-white colour, flesh firm, juice sweet, 
slightly mixed with acid; one of our latest white grapes. 
The plant is of a strong robust habit, and an excellent bearer. 

Austrian Muscat. Bunches large and tapering : berries 
round, of a russet-white colour, skin thin, juice rich and 



d22 DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE, ETC. ' 

musky, and of excellent flavour. It ripens about the second 
week of September, and is an excellent bearer. 

Black Frontignac, Violet Frontignac, Muscat Xoir. 
Buncbes small and sbort : berries round, and grow close in 
bunches; skin black, covered witb a fine light bloom, flesb 
tender and juicy, of a rich vinous spicy flavour. 

Blade Hamburg. Buncbes tolerably large, witb sbort 
compact sboulders, tapering to a point ; berries large, of an 
oval form, skin ratber tbick, very nearly black, and covered 
witb a blue bloom ; flesb tender, sweet, and of a rich vinous 
flavour ; ripens about the first of October, but will bang on 
the vine till frost. This is, in every respect, one of the 
finest black grapes that can be grown in the open air : it is 
also a constant bearer. The leaves in the fall are mottled 
with green and yellow. 

Black Prince. Bunches rather long, and generally shoul- 
dered : berries oval, and of a good size, skin rather thick, 
of a dark purple, and covered with a thick bloom : flesh 
white, sweet, juicy, and well flavoured : ripe about the first of 
October. 

Black Lomhardy, West's St. Peter's. Bunches long and 
well shouldered : berries large, round, and of a regular size ; 
skin thin and very black, juice plentiful, and of a very high 
flavour ; is perfectly ripe about the middle of October, and 
will keep on the vines till frost. 

Black Muscadine, Black Chasselas, Violet Chasselas. 
Bunches about the size and shape of the Golden Chasselas : 
berries perfectly round, and covered with a blue bloom : flesh 
juicy, and of a very rich flavour: ripens about the first of 
October. 

Frankendcde. Bunches large, with small shoulders, and 
rather longer than the Black Hamburg : berries round and 
closely set; skin deep purple, approaching to black, covered 
with a thin blue bloom ; flesh tender, sweet, rich, and of a 
luscious flavour : it is a great bearer, and fully ripe about 
the end of September or first of October. 

Grizzly Frontignac, Muscat Gris. Bunches of a medium 
size, with small shoulders : berries round, of a light brown 
colour, intermixed with red and yellow ; the juice is exceed- 
ingly rich, and possessing a high spic} r flavour : it ripens about 
the middle of September. 



DESCRIPTIVE CATALOGUE, ETC. 823 

Hanstcretio. Bunches large and well formed : berries also 
large and perfectly round, of a jet-black colour when perfectly 
ripe; flesh rather juicy, and of a rich flavour; leaves deeply 
lobed, and a little downy underneath. An excellent hardy 
grape, but inferior in quality to the Black Hamburg : ripe 
about the first of October. 



LIST OF HARDY EVERGREEN TREES AND 
SHRUBS. 

The heights given are approximations to what is supposed 
the plants will attain in this country, to serve as some 
guide in planting them out. 



Abies excelsa, Norway spruce . 

alba, white spruce 

Canadensis, hemlock spruce 

Douglasii, Douglas spruce 

nigra, black spruce . 

rubra, red spruce 

Smithiana 

Araucaria imbricata, Chili pine 
Aiicuba Japdnica, Japan gold tree 
Berberis dulcis, sweet berberry 
Buxus arborescens, tree box 

argentea, silver edged do. 

aurea, golden do. do. 

latifolia, broad leaved do. 

Cedrus Deodara, Deodar cedar . 

Libani, cedar of Lebanon . 

Cotoneaster microphylla, small leaved 

thymifolia, Thyme leaved 

Crataegus Pyracantha, Pyracanth 
Cryptomeria japdnica, Japan weeping cedar 
Cupressus torulosa, twisted Cyprus 

Australis, Australian Cyprus 

pyramidalis, pyramidal do. 

Eleagnus argentea, silver tree 
Eriobotrya Japdnica, loquat 
Escallonia rubra, red flowered 
Eudnymus Japdnica, Japan spindle tree 

28 



100 

50 

100 

150 

80 

50 

50 

100 

5 

4 

20 

15 

15 

15 

100 

100 

4 

3 

10 

50 

15 

20 

25 

12 

10 

8 

10 



326 



LIST OF HARDY EVERGREEN TREES, ETC 



Euonymus argentea, silver edged do. . 

fiinbriatus, fringed spindle tree . 

Hedera helix creeper, Irish ivy 
Ilex opaca, American holly 

aquifolium, European do. 

variegatum, variegated do. 

Jasminum fruticans, dwarf Jasmine 

pubigerum, Japan do. 

Juniperus Chinensis, Chinese juniper 

excelsa, giant do. . 

phcenicea, Phoenician do. 

suecica, Swedish do. . 

Sabina, savin do. 

— : Virginiana, Virginian do. . 

Kiilmia latifolia, broad-leaved sheep laurel 
Magnolia grandiflora, tree laurel 
Mahonia fascicularis, evergreen berberry 

aquifolia, holly leaved do. 

Picea balsarnea, balm of Gilead fir 

pectinata, silver do. 

Pinus Austriaca, Austrian do. 
excelsa, Bhotan pine 

Laricio, Oorsican do. . 

strobus, white or Weymouth pine 

sylvestris, Scotch do. . 

iuops, Jersey do. 

Prinos glaber, evergreen prinos 
Rhododendron Catawbiensie, Carolina rosebay 

maximum, mountain laurel 

pdnticum, European rosebay 

Rosmarinus officinalis, rosemary 
Spartium jiiuccum, broom 
Taxddium sempervirens, California spruce 
Taxus baccata, English yew 

adpressa, appressed . 

Canadensis, Canadian yew 

Chinensis, Chinese do. . 

Hibernica, Irish do. . 

pyramidale, pyramidal . 

Povastoniana, weeping yew 

Thuja filifdrmis, weeping arborvitae 



LEST OP HARDY EVERGREEN TREES, ETC. 



127 



Thuja occidentals, American arborvitae 

orientalis, Chinese do. 

plicata, tan leaved do. 

pyrainidalis, pyrainidale do. . 

Torreya taxifolia, Florida yew tree 
Ulex Europea, European furze or whin 
Yucca filamentosa, Adam's needle 

gloriosa, do. do. 

recurvifdlia recurved do. 



20 


. 15 


10 


. 15 


50 


. 10 


o 


O 


4 


5 



328 



LIST OF SELECT HARDY DECIDUOUS TREES 
AND SHRUBS. 

The heights given are approximations to what it is supposed 
the plants will attain in this country, in order to serve as 
some guide in planting them out. 

Acacia Julibrissin, 20 feet — Julibrissin tree, or purple Acacia ; 

very handsome. 
Acer platanoides, 60 feet — maple. 

campestre, 20 feet — English maple. 

laciniatuni, 20 feet — cut-leaved maple. 

saccharinum, GO feet — sugar maple. 

Nigrum, 50 feet — black maple. 

JEsculus Hippocastaneum, 60 feet — horse-chestnut. 

fldre pleno — double-flowered. 

rubiciincla — red flowered. 

Amorpha fructicosa, 10 feet — bastard indigo. 

Ampeldpsis quincpiefolia, Virginia creeper; very fine for 

covering walls or trees. 
Amygdalis nana, 3 feet — dwarf-flowering almond. 

communis flore pleno, 15 feet — double-flowered 

peach. 

pendula, 10 feet — weeping peach. 

Andromeda polifdlia, 2 feet — powdered andromeda. 

grandiflora, 2 feet — large-flowered andromeda. 

Aralia japdnica, 12 feet — Japan aralia. 

Aristoldchia sipho — Dutchman's pipe, a splendid climber. 

Azaleas, 3 feet — hardy sorts, all beautiful. 

Berberis vulgaris, 6 feet — Barberry. 

alba, 4 feet — white fruited. 

aristata, 6 feet — very distinct. 

purpureus, 4 feet — purple leaved. 

Betula alba, 50 feet — white birch. 

pendula, 20 feet — weeping birch. 

laciniata, 40 feet — cut-leaved birch. 

Biiddlea Lindleyana, 3 feet — Lindley's buddlea. 



LIST OF SELECT HARDY DECIDUOUS TREES, ETC. 329 

Biiddlea globosa, 4 feet — globe-flowered. 
Calycanthus floridus, 6 feet — flowering shrub. 

fragrans, 4 feet — Chinese allspice. 

Castanea lutea, 40 feet — yellow-flowered chestnut. 

puniila, G feet — dwarf chestnut. 

Catalpa syringtefolia, 80 feet — flowering catalpa. 
Cerasus vulgaris fl. pi., 40 feet — double-flowering cherry. 

pendula, G feet — weeping cherry. 

Cercis Canadensis, 20 feet — Judas tree or red-bud. 
Chionanthus Virginica, 20 feet — white fring tree. 
Clethra alnifolias, 5 feet — white fragrant cletbra. 
Cdrnus sanguinea, 8 feet — red dogwood. 

Florida, 20 feet — white-flowering dogwood. 

Cdrylus Avellana, 10 feet — common filbert. 

purpurea, 8 feet — purple-leaved filbert. 

Crataegus edulis, 20 feet — edible-fruited hawthorn. 

splendens, 20 feet — splendid do. 

albapleno, 15 feet — double white do. 

rubra pleno, 15 feet — double red do. 

Cupressus disticha, TO feet — deciduous cypress. 
Cydonia Japonica, 6 feet — red pyrus. 

alba, 6 feet — white do. 

sinensis, 10 feet — pink flowering. 

Cytisus laburnum, 20 feet — golden chain. 

odoratus, 10 feet — sweet-scented chain. 

alfiuus pendulus, 10 feet — weeping labur- 
num. 
eloncrutus, 3 feet — dwarf do. 



Deutzia scabra, 6 feet — garland deutzia. 

stamineae, G feet — large white-flowered deutyia. 

Euonymus Americanus, 10 feet — spindle tree, or burning 
bush. 

Europeus, 10 feet — European, do. 

albus, 10 feet — white fruited, do. 

Fagus sylvatica purpurea, 30 feet — purple beech. 

asplenifolia, 20 feet — fern-leaved beech. 

pendula, 16 feet — weeping do. 

Forsythia viridissima, 4 feet — yellow flowered, large and 

showy 
Fraxinus excelsior pendula, 30 feet — weeping ash. 

aiirea, 20 feet — golden ash. 

Fraxinus excelsior argentea, 20 feet — silver-edged ash. 

28* 



330 LIST OF SELECT HARDY DECIDUOUS TREES, ETC. 

Fraxinus excelsior argentea salicifolia — willow-leaved ash. 
Gyrnnddadus Canadensis, 70 feet — Kentucky coffee tree. 
Halesia diptera, 15 feet — silver-bell tree. 

tetraptera, 15 feet — snow-drop tree, beautiful. 

Hibiscus syriacus, all very beautiful, 6 feet — Althaeas, make 

very ornamental hedges. 
Hypericum kalmianum, 4 feet — St. Johns-wort. 
Juglans regia, 30 feet — English or Madeira walnut. 
Kerria Japdnica, 6 feet — or yellow corchorus. 
Kolreuteria paniculata, 20 feet — yellow flowered, beautiful. 
Larix Americana — American larch. 

Europsea — European do. 

pendula — weeping larch. 

Lavandula spica, 3 feet — lavender. 

Ligustrum vulgtire, 8 feet — prim or privet, fine for fancy 

hedges. 
Liriodendron tulipifera, 80 feet — tulip tree. 
Lonicera tartaricas, 6 feet — Tartarian honeysuckle. 

rubra, 6 feet — red flowered, do. 



Ledeboiirii, 4 feet — Ledebours do. 

xyldsteum, 6 feet — fly do. 

Madura aurantiaca, 30 feet — Osage orange. 
Magnolia conspicua, 20 feet — Chinese, or early white mag- 
nolia. 

cordate, 60 feet — heart-leaved magnolia. 

glaiica, 15 feet — swamp laurel, or magnolia. 

macrophylla, 40 feet — broad-leaved do. 

purpurea, 8 feet — purple-flowered do. 

rubra, 8 feet — red-flowered do. 

soulaugiana, 20 feet — Chinese striped do. 

tripetala, 70 feet — cucumber tree. 



Mespilus Germanica, 10 feet — Dutch medlar. 

Oxycdccus macrocarpus, 10 feet — mountain cranberry. 

P?eonia arborea fl. pi., 3 feet — tree pceonia, double ") 

flowered. I n> 

o n , ] n Kequire 
papavcraceo?, o teet — single nower- > , J , 

di .. i snaue. 

, white. 

rosea, 3 feet — rose-coloured. J 

Pauldwnia irnperialis, 30 feet — Chinese imperial tree, fragrant. 

Philadelphus coronarius, 8 feet — mock orange. 

flore pleno, 4 feet — double flowered. 

grandiflorus, 12 feet — large white 

flowered. 



LIST OF SELECT HARDY DECIDUOUS TREES, ETC. 331 

Platanus orientalis, 80 feet — Chinese buttonwood. 
Populus trernula pendula, 20 feet — weeping poplar. 

alba, 30 feet — tree d'Abele, or silver poplar. 

Btelea trifoliata, 15 feet — bop tree. 
Pyrus nivalis, 15 feet — snowy pyrus. 

Americana, 20 feet — American rowan tree. 

Aueuparia, 20 feet — European do. 

vestita, 20 feet — waving do. 

malus flore pleno, 15 feet — double flowering apple. 

Quercus, 20 to 80 feet. The oak, though a common tree, 

should not be discarded in planting; it is both beautiful 

and valuable. 
Rhus cdtinus, 12 feet — mist tree. 
Ribes aureuni, 7 feet — yellow flowering currant. 
sangiiineum, 4 feet — red flowered, though a native, 

does not do well in this latitude. 
Robinia hispida, 4 feet — rose acacia. 

viscosa, 20 feet — white flowered. 

Salisburia adiantif olia, 60 feet — Ginko, or maiden-hair tree. 
Salix babyldnica, 40 feet — weeping willow. 

crispa, 30 feet — ringlet willow. 



Americana pendula, 15 feet — New weeping willow. 

Shepherdia argentea, 30 feet — buffalo berry. 
Sophora Japdnica, 20 feet — Japan Sophora. 

pendula, 15 feet — weeping do. 

Spiraea — all very beautiful dwarf-growing shrubs, with white 

or pink flowers, exceedingly ornamental. 
Syringa vulgaris, 10 feet — purple lilac. 

alba, 10 feet — white do. 

The red and white Persian, G feet — Charles the 10th and 

other sorts, are indispensable when planting shrubbery. 
Tamarix Germanica, 10 feet — tamarisk tree, singular. 
Tilia Europaea, 40 feet — European linden. 

Americana, 60 feet — American do. 

Ulmus Americana, 80 feet — American elm. 

campestris, 50 feet — English do. 

montana, 60 feet — mountain do. 

pendula — weeping do. 



Viburnum opulus, 10 feet — guelder rose. 

oxycdccus, 12 feet — tree cranberry. 

Vitex Agnus castus, 8 feet — chase tree. 

Weigelea rosea, 4 feet — rose coloured, elegant, unique. 

Xanthoxylum fraxineum, 10 feet — toothache tree. 



332 



TABLE OF SOILS. 



The following compounds of soils are adapted to the nature of the 
Plants contained in this work : — 



Number. 


Savanna 


1 


2 


2 


- 


3 


- 


4 


- 


5 


all 


6" 


3 


7 


- 


8 


4 


9 


- 


10 


1 


11 


- 


12 


- 


13 


2 


14 


- 


15 


- 


16 


4 


17 


- 


18 


- 


19 


1 



;oam. 


Leaf. 


1 


- 


3 


2 


4 


. 


o 


1 


1 


. 


3 


1 


1 


- 


2 


2 


1 


1 


3 


2 


3 


1 


2 


1 


4 


. 


4 


2 


- 


1 


5 


1 


1 


1 


1 


- 



Sand. 



Manure. 

1 



REMARKS ON THE NATURE OF SOILS USED IN THE ABOVE TABLE. 

Feat or Savanna soil is of a dark colour, with a large portion of white 
sand incorporated with it. and is found frequently in New Jersey. A 
mixture of two-thirds black earth from the woods and one-third of 
pure white sand will be similar to it, and may be used as a substitute, 
but it is not exactly of the same nature. 

Loam is of a light-brown colour, and is that from the top of old pastures 
or commons, which should lie one year, and be frequently turned 
before using. It ought not to be from a clay bottom, and merely three 
inches of the turf taken. 

Leaf mould is that which is to be found on the surface of the ground in 
woods, and is the decomposed leaves. It may be termed nearly of 
first rate importance in vegetation. 

Sand is a substance that is generally known, and that which is found on 
the surface is decidedly the best. If it is from a pit, it must be spread 
out and frequently turned, that it may assimilate with the atmosphere 
before using ; four months will be sufficient. 

Manure, before using, must be decomposed to very fine particles. It 
will require two years, during which time it must be often turned, and 
the longer it lays it will be the finer and more congenial. 



GENERAL INDEX. 



Acacia, 147, 196, 197 

Acbimenes, 198 

Acmadenia, 226 

Aconitum, 35 

Adam's needle, 46 

Adenandra, 225 

Adonis, 29. 34 

iEschynanthus, 148 

^Ethiopian lily, 273 

Agapanthus, 197 

Agathosma, 226 

Ageratum, 26 

Agrostemma, 41 

Air plants, 184 

Allspice tree, 167 

Aliamanda, 148 

Alligator pear, 165 

Aloe, 190, 198, 267 

Alonsoa, 198 

Aloysia, 198 

Alpinia, 142 

Alstrcemeria, 199 

Althaea, 19, 20, 33 

Amaryllis, 92, 105, 107, 144, 199 

Amaranthus, 29 

American cowslip, 38 

sultan, 26 

Ammocharis, 205 
Amomum, 142 
Amorpha, 19 
Ampelopsis, 82 

Anemone, 17, 34, 49, 87, 105, 107, 
281 

of planting, 116 

Aniseed tree, 236 

Annesleia, 147 

Annuals, list of, for hot-bed, f 26 

hardy, 29 

Anomatheca, 277 
Anthericum, 35 
Antirrhinum, 35 



Aphelandra, 148 
Aphelexis, 227 
Apicra, 267 
Araucaria, 200 
Arbor vitae, 94 
Arbutus, 201 
Ardisia, 148 
Areca, 148 
Aristolochia, 80, 149 
Asclepias, 35 
Aster, 26, 201 
Astrapea, 149 
Aucuba, 201 
Auricula, 17, 43, 48, 106 

— character of a fine, 88 



Azalea, 201 
Azorian jasmine, 337 

Babiana, 196, 277 
Balsamina, 26 
Bamboo cane, 149 
Bambusa, 149 
Banana tree, 167 
Banisteria, 149 
Banksia, 201 
Barbadoes cherry, 166 

gooseberry, 154 

Barosma, 203, 226 
Barringtonia, 149 
Beaufortia, 203 
Beaumontia, 150 
Begonia, 203 
Bell clematis, 81 
Belladonna, 93, 107 
Bellis, 35 
Benthamia, 203 
Bergamotte, 221 
Bignonia, 81, 150 
Bindweed, 30 
Birthwort, 80, 149 
Bletia, 150, 203 



334 



INDEX. 



Bonapartea, 150 
Boronia, 204 
Bouvardia, 204 
Brachysema, 204 
Brachycome, 30 
Bramble rose, 301 
Braseia, 183 
Brompton stock, 41 
Browallia, 26 
Brunsfelsia, 150 
Brunsvigia, 205 
Brugmansia, 204 
Brunia, 204 
Budding roses, 110 
Buddlea, 150 
Buphone, 205 
Burchellia, 205 

Cabbage tree, 148 

Cacalia, 26 

Cactus, 145, 151, 190 

grafting of, 154 

Calathea, 150 
Calandrinia, 26 
Calceolaria, 205 
Calla, 264, 273 
Callicoma, 206 
Calliopsis, 37, 30 
Calothamnus. 206, 242 
Calystegia, 80 
Camellias, list of, 207 

187, 191, 192, 206 

in rooms, 304 

Campanula, 17, 36 
Camphor tree, 238 
Canary-bird flower, 28 
Candytuft, 30 
Canna, 142, 151 
Cantua, 33 
Cape myrtle, 242 

jasmine, 160, 268 

Aster, 220 

Caprifohum, 83 
Carmichelia, 220 

Carnation, 17, 38. 47, 8S, 108, IK 

on laying, 109 

character of a, 108 

Carolina jasmine, 233 
Carryota. 155 
Caryophyllus, 155 
Cassava, 164 
Catasetum, 183 
Catalonian jasmine, 237 
Catchfly, 34 
Cattleya, 183 



Ceanothus, 220 
Celosia, 26 
Centradenia, 155 
Centranthus, 45 
Centaurea, 26 
Cerbera, 155 
Cereus, 152, 175 
Ceropegia, 155 
Cestrum, 220 
Chamaerops, 267 
Charhvoodia, 158 
Cheiranthus, 36 
Chelone, 36 
Chili jasmine, 167 

pine, 201 

Chinese hybrid roses, 59 

primrose, 282 

pink, 27 

arbor vitae, 94 

Chorozemia, 220 

Chrysanthemum, 36, 115 

Chryseis, 30 

Cineraria, 220 

Cinnamomum, 165, 220, 238 

Cistus, 221 

Citrus, 196, 221 

Clarkia, 26 

Clematis, 37, 80, 221 

Cleome, 26 

Clerodendrun, 155, 222 

Clethra, 222 

Clianthus, 222 

Clivea, 222 

Clintonia, 26 

Clove tree, 155 

Cobasa, 223 

Coffee, 155 

Coffee tree, 155 

Colchicum, 107 

Collinsia, 27 

Colutea, 19 

Combretum, 156 

Commelina, 27 

Convolvulus, 30 

Coreopsis, 30, 37 

Coral plant, 159,230 

honeysuckle, 83 

Corn flag, 277 
Coronilla, 223 
Correa, 223 
Corypha, 156 
Cotyledon. 190 
Cowslip, 43 
Crane's biill, 233 
Crassula, 190, 224 



INDEX. 



335 



Crataegus, 224 
Crinum, 156, 224 
Crocus, 107, 117 
Croton, 157 
Crowea, 224 
Cunonia, 224 
Cuphea, 224 
Cupressus, 225 
Curcuma, 142 
Cyeas, 157 
Cyclamen, 273 
Cvdonia, 12] 
Cymbidium, 203 
Cypripedium, 157 
Cypress vine, 30 
Cyrtanthus, 225 
Cyrtoceras, 157 
Cytisus, 19 

Dahlia, history of, 96 

character of, 103 

list of, 100 

on lifting the, 122 

propagation of, 97 

Daisy, 17, 35, 48 
Dampiera, 225 
Daphne, 281 

Date palm, 169, 247 
Daviesia, 225 
Day lily, 39 
Delphinium, 37 
Dendrobium, 183 
Dianthus, 38, 27 
Dictamnus, 38 
Digitalis, 33 
Dillwynia, 225 
Dionaea, 142 
Diosma, 225 
Displacus, 226 
Dodecatheon, 38 
Double rocket, 17 

larkspur, 116 

wallflower, 17, 106 

Doryanthes, 226 
Dracaena, 157, 226 
Dracocephalum, 39 
Dragon's head, 39 
Dragon tree, 157, 226 
Dropwort, 44 
Dryandra, 226 
Dutchman's pipe, 80 
Dyckia, 227 

Echeveria, 227 
Echinocactus, 152 



Edgings of various plants, 56 
Edwardsia, 227 
Elephant's foot, 253 
Elichrysum, 227 
Embothrium, 253 
Enkianthus, 227 
Entelea, 251 
Epacris, 196, 227 
Epidendrum, 183 
Epiphyllum, 153, 175 
Epiphytes, 184 
Eranthemum, 158 
Erica, 196, 228 

list of, 229 

Eriobotrya, 230 

Erodium, 230 

Erythrina, 123, 159, 230 

Erysimum, 30 

Escallonia, 230 

Eschscholtzia, 30 

Eucalyptus, 230 

Eucomis, 189 

Eugenia, 158, 237 

Euonymus, 95, 231 

Eupatorium, 39, 231 

Euphorbia, 158 

Eutaxia,231 

Evergreen shrubs, of planting, 84 

Evening primrose, 31, 42 

Everlasting, 233 



Fabiana, 233 
Fair eye, 30 
Fan palm, 164 
Ferraria, 190 
Ficus, 159, 231 
Fig tree, 159 
Flos Adonis, 29 
Flax, 239 

Flower-garden, on laving out a, 13 
de luce, 40, 118 



Flues, on constructing, 130 
Fourcroya, 190 
Foxglove, 33 
Franciscea, 160 
Fraxinella, 38 
French honeysuckle, 34 

eglantine rose for stock, 



110 
Fritillaria, 107, 113, 125 

framing of, 17, 25 

Fuchsia, 232 

Funkia, 39, 40 

Furnace, on constructing, 130 






INDEX. 



Gardenia, 160, 267 

Gardoquia. 233 

Gasteria, 267 

Geissomeria, 160 

Gelsemium, 233 

Genista, 19,233 

Gentiana, 39 

Geranium, 233 

Gerardia, 34 

German stocks, 124 

Gesneria. 142, 144 

Geum, 39 

Gilia, 30 

Gladiolus, 92, 189, 191, 196, 277 

Gloriosa, 143 

Glory flower, 222 

Gloxinia, 143, 144 

Glycine, 81 

Gnaphalium, 233 

Gnidia, 233 

Gongora, 183 

Gomphrena, 27 

Gorteria, 234 

Grafting, 56 

Grape vine, culture of, 307 

pruning of, 317 

manure of, 319 

descriptive catalogue of, 

320 

Grass and other edgings, 32 

Greenhouse, on erecting a, 185 

Grevillea, 234 

Grove love, 31 

Guano, introduction and p. 54 

Gum-elastic tree, 231 

Habranthus, 234 
Hawkweed, 30 
Haworthia, 267 
Heart's-ease, 31, 90 

culture of, 90 

character of, 91 

Heath, 196, 228 
Hedera, 82 
Hedychium, 142 
Hedysarum, 34 
Heli'anthus, 30 
Helichrysum, 234 
Heliconia, 160 
Heliophila, 30 
Heliotropium, 161 
Hemerocallis, 39 
Hemimeris, 198 
Hemlock spruce, 94 
Heron's bill, 230 



Hibbertia, 235 
Hibiscus, 40, 161 
Hieracium, 30 
Holly, 236 
Hollvhock, 33 
Honeysuckle, 20, 83 
Hottentot's bread, 253 
Hovea, 235 
Hoya, 161 
Humea, 34 

Hyacinth, 85, 105, 117, 125, 191, 
196 

character of a, 86 



Hybrid roses, 59 
Hydrangea, 235, 262 
Hypericum, 235 

Iberis, 30 

Ice plant, 27 

Ilex, 236 

Ulicium, 236 

Imhofia, 205 

Indigofera, 237 

Indigo tree, 237 

Insects, destruction of, 136 

Ipomcea, 30, 162 

Ipomopsis, 33 

Iris, 40, 47, 107, 118 

Irish ivy, 82 

Ismene, 162 

Ixia, 139, 189,191, 196, 277 

Ixora, 162 

Jacksonia, 237 
Jacobaea lily, 92 
Jambosa, 163, 237 
Japan day lily, 39 
Jasmine, 82, 237 
Jasminum, 82, 163, 237 
Jatropha, 163 
Jonquil, 47, 107, US 
Juniperus, 94 
Justicia, 164,237 

Kaempferia, 142 
Kalosanthes, 224 
Kennedia, 237 

Lachenalia, 139, 188, 196, 274 
Ladies' slipper, 26 

plant, 157 

Lagerstraemia, 262 
Lantana, 164 
Larkspur, 37 
Lasiopetalum, 238 



INDEX. 



337 



Lasiandra, 164 
Latania, 164 
Lathyrus, 30 
Laurus, 165, 238 
Laurustinus, 257 
Lavandula, 238 
Lavender, 56, 238 
Leschenaultia, 238 
Leadwort, 43, 248 
Leonotis, 239 
Leptospermum, 239 
Leptosiphon, 196 
Leucadendron, 239 
Leucospermum, 239 
Liatris, 40 
Lilium, 118, 278 
Lily, 118,278 
Linum, 239 
Lion's ear, 239 
Liparia, 240 
Loasa, 30 
Lobelia, 240 
London pride, 44 
Lonicera, 83, 240 
Lophosperrnum, 240, 249 
Love lies bleeding, 29 
Loquat, 230 
Lunaria, 34 
Lupinus, 30 
Lychnis, 40, 240 
Lysinema, 240 
Lythrum, 41 

Magnolia, 241 
Mahernia, 241 
Mahogany tree, 173 
Malabar nut, 237 
Malay apple, 163 
Malope, 31 
Malpighia, 166 
Mammillaria, 151, 175 
Mandevillia, 167 
Manettia, 241 
Manetti rose for stock, 110 
Mangifera, 165 
Mango tree, 165 
Manihot, 164 
Marica, 166 
Marigold, 28 
Marvel of Peru, 31 
Mastich tree, 248 
Matthiola, 41 
Maurandia, 27 
Maxillaria, 183 
Meadow sweet, 44 



Melaleuca, 241 

Melastoma, 166, 241 

Melocactus, 152 

Mesembryanthemum, 27, 190, 268 

Mespilus, 242, 230 

Metrosideros, 242 

Mexican lily, 199 

Mignionette, 31 

Mimosa, 27, 197 

Mirabilis, 31 

Mimulus, 41 

Monarda, 41 

Monkey flower, 41 

Monk's hood, 35 

Musa, 145, 167 

Musk scabious, 34 

Myrsine, 242 

Myrtle, 167, 196, 242 

Myrtus, 167, 196,242 

Nandina, 243 

Narcissus, 47, 118, 191, 196 
Neapolitan violet, 45 
Nemophila, 31 
Nepenthes, 167 
Nerium, 243 
New Zealand flax, 247 
Norfolk Island pine, 200 
Night-blooming cereus, 152 
jasmine, 220 



Nintooa, 240 

CEnothera, 42 
Olea, 243 

Oleander, 196, 243 
Olive, 243 
Oncidium, 184 
Opuntia, 154, 175 
Orchideous plants, 183 
Ornithogalum, 274 
Osscea, 166 
Oxalis, 196,274, 278 
Oxlip, 43 
Oxylobium, 244 

Pachidendron, 267 
Paeonia, 282 
Paeonias, list of, 118 
Pancratium, 162, 16S 
Pandanus, 168 
Pansy, 31 
Papaver, 31 
Passiflora, 83, 168, 244 
Passion vine, 83, 168, 244 
' Pelargonium, 244 
29 



INDEX. 



Pelargonium, list of, 246 

Pentstemon, 17 

Pereskia, 154 

Periploca, 82 

Periwinkle, 28 

Persea, 165 

Petunia, 27 

Phaseolus, 247 

Phlox, 27, 42 

Phoenix, 169,247 

Phormium, 247 

Photinia, 224 

Phrynium, 142 

Phylica, 247 

Physic nut, 163 

Pimelea,247 

Pimenta, 167 

Pinks, 17, 38, 47, 88, 108, 109 

Pinus, 94 

Pistachia,248 

Pitcher plant, 167 

Pittosporum, 248 

Plantain tree, 167 

Platylobium, 248 

Plumbago, 43, 169, 248 

Plumeria, 169 

Podalyria, 248 

Poinsettia, 170 

Poivrea, 156 

Polianthes tuberosa, 89 

Polyanthus, 17, 88, 106 

character of a, 89 

Polyspora, 170 
Pomegranate, 262 
Potentilla, 43 
Portulaca, 27 
Primrose, 43, 48, 88, 106 
Primula, 43, 282 
Prince's feather, 29 
Protea, 239, 248 
Pruning, 18, 19 
Pterospermum, 170 
Pultenea, 249 
Pyrus, 121. 

Queen Margaret, 26 

plant, 171, 252 

stock, 41 

Ragged Robin, 41 
Ranunculus, 17, 49,87, 105, 107 

character of a, 87 

Red cedar, 94, 

spider, 137 

Renanthera, 184 



Reseda, 31 

Rhapis, 170 

Rhododendron, 249 

Rhodochiton, 249 

Rhus, 19 

Richardia, 273 

Rhipidodendron, 267 

Robinia, 19 

Rochea, 224 

Rocket larkspur, 30 

Rock rose, 221 

Roella, 250 

Rondeletia, 171 

Rooms, treatment of plants in, 287 

Rose campion, 33 

tree, 249 

Roses, budding, 110 
Chinese or Bengal, ever- 
blooming, 66 

climbing, 53, 75 

daily, 66 

hardy garden, list of, 49 

hybrid Chinese, list of, 59 

hybrid, perpetual, 63 

l'lsle de Bourbon, 65 

microphylla, 78 

musk-scented, 74 

noisette, 72 

odorata or tea, 69 

of grafting, 64 

perpetual, 61 



striped, list of, 61 

Rubus, 301 
Ruellia, 171 
Russelia, 171 

Sage, 250 
Sago palm, 171 
Sagus, 171 
Salpiglossis, 27 
Salvia, 250 
Saponaria, 44 
Saxifraga, 44 
Scabiosa, 34 
Schizanthus, 28 
Scottia, 251 
Screw pine, 168 
Senecio, 251 
Sensitive plant, 27 
Shrubs, of planting, 21 
Shortia, 28 
Silene, 44 
Silk vine, 82 
Silver tree, 239 
Snail flower, 247 



INDEX. 



339 



Snapdragon, 35 
Solandra, 171 
Sollya, 251 
Sparaxis, 279 
Sparmannia, 251 
Speedwell, 45 
Spherolobium, 251 
Spiderwort, 173 
Spirasa, 44 
Spurge, 158 

laurel, 282 

Spreikelia, 92 
Sprengelia, 252 
Stanhopea, 184 
Star of Bethlehem, 274 
St. Barnos lily, 35 
St. Johnswort, 235 
Statice, 44 
Sterculia, 281 
Sternbergia, 107 
Stephanotis, 172 
Stock gilly. 17, 41 
Stork's bill, 244 
Strelitzia, 171, 252 
Strawberry tree, 201 

pear, 153 

Streptocarpus, 252 
Stylidium, 252 
Styphelia, 252 
Summer heliotrope, 31 
Sutherlandia, 253 
Swainsonia, 253 
Sweet William, 38 

bay, 124 

pea, 30 

sultan, 26 

Swietenia, 172 
Sword lily, 92 

Tabemcemontana, 172 
Tacsonia, 255 
Tagetes, 28 
Talauma, 241 
Taliera, 156 
Tea plant, 253 
Tecoma, 82, 172, 253 
Telopea, 208, 253 
Testudinaria, 253 
Thea, 253 
Thomasia, 238 
Thrift, 44, 56 
Thrinax, 172 



Thuja, 94 

Thunbergia, 28, 172 
Thyme, 56 
Tiger flower, 93 
Tigridia, 93 
Tournefortia, 31 
Tradescantia, 173 
Tree primrose, 31 

poeony, 282 

Tritonia, 279 
Tropaeolum, 28, 255 
Tuberose, 89, 105, 115 
Tulip, of planting the, 119 

character of a good, 86 

Tulips, 47, 86, 105, 125, 196 
Turk's cap, 152 

Urania, 173 

Valeriana, 45 
Variegated Euphorbia, 30 
Vanda, 184 

Venus' paint-brush, 27 
fly-trap, 142 



Verbena, 28, 256 
Veronica, 45, 257 
Viburnum, 19, 257 
Viminaria, 257 
Vinca, 28 
Viola, 45, 90 

Virgin's bower, 37, 80, 221 
Volkameria, 222 

Wachendorfia, 188 
Wahlenbergia, 36 
Wallflower, 36, 106, 121 
Warratah, 208 
Watsonia, 196, 279 
Wax plant, 161 
Westringia, 257 
Wind flower, 34 
Wistaria, 81 
Witsenia, 258 
Wolf's-bane, 35 

Yucca, 46, 258 

Zamia, 173, 258 
Zebra plant, 150 
Zingiber, 142 
Zinnia, 28 
Zygopetalum, 184 



THE END. 



EPHqk 



R. BUIST, 

NURSERYMAN AND SEED-GROWER, 

Cultivates and Las for sale an extensive Stock of 

FRUIT 

AND 

ORNAMENTAL TREES, 

FJLOWERS, SHRUBS, ROSES, &c. 
Also, an extensive grower of 

GARDEN SEEDS. 

WHOLESALE AND RETAIL 



NURSERY AND SEED FARM, 

DARBY ROAD. 

SEED WAREHOUSE, 

97 CHESTNUT STREET. 

Green-houses, to the extent of 20,000 feet of Glass, at the 
ROSEDALE NURSERIES, 

PHILADELPHIA. 

Priced Catalogues on application. 
N. B. — Every article warranted as represented. 



THE ROSE MANUAL; 

CONTAINING ACCURATE DESCRIPTIONS OF 

ALL THE FINEST VARIETIES OF ROSES, 

PROPERLT CLASSED IN THEIR RESPECTIVE FAMILIES, 
THEIR CHARACTER, AND MODE OF CULTURE; 

WITH 

DIRECTIONS FOR THEIR PROPAGATION, 

AND THE DESTRUCTION OF INSECTS. 
WITH ENGRAVINGS. 

THIRD EDITION, WITH ADDITIONS. 
BY ROBERT BUIST, 

NURSERYMAN, SEEDSMAN, AND FLORIST, 

Author of "The American Flower-Garden Directory," "Family 
Kitchen Gardener," &c. 

In one volume, IJmo., cloth, gilt, price 75 cents* 



FAMILY KITCHEN GARDENER; 

CONTAINING TLAIN AND ACCURATE DESCRIPTIONS OF ALL THE 
DIFFERENT SPECIES AND VARIETIES OF 

CULINARY VEGETABLES, 

WITH THEIR BOTANICAL, ENGLISH, FRENCH, AND GERMAN NAMES, 
ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED, AND THE BEST MODE OF CUL- 
TIVATING THEM, IN THE GARDEN OR UNDER GLASS ; 

WITH DESCRIPTIONS OF 

IMPLEMENTS AND MEDICINAL HERBS IN GENERAL USE. 

ALSO, DESCRIPTIONS AND CHARACTERS OF THE MOST 

frlrrt .ifntib, 

THEIR MANAGEMENT, PROPAGATION, AND CULTURE. 

ILLUSTRATED WITH TWENTY-FIVE ENGRAVINGS. 

BY ROBERT BUIST, 

AUTHOR OF "THE AMERICAN FI.OWER-C, \RDEN DIRECTORY," "ROSE MANUAL," ETC. 

In one volume, I '2 mo., cloth, tjiKt price 75 cents* 



MISS LESLIE'S 

LADIES' RECEIPT BOOK. 

A useful companion for large or small families — being a sequel to 
her work on Cookery — comprising new and improved directions for 
preparing — 

Soups, Fish, Meats, Vegetables., Poultry, Game, Pies, Puddings, 
Cakes, Confectionery, Jellies, Breakfast and Tea Cakes, Em- 
broidery, Crochet-work, Braiding, Needle-work, Cleaning Furs, 
Merinos, &c., Washing Laces, Destroying Ants, Bugs, and Mice, 
Cleaning Silver, Preparing Colours, Making Artificial Flowers. 

A NEW AND ENLARGED EDITION, 

WITH 120 ADDITIONAL RECEIPTS FOE PREPARING 

FARINA, INDIAN MEAL, PASTRY, MARMALADES, AND ICE CREAMS. 
In one vol., 500 pages, full bound. $1 00. 

"A handsome volume, prepared by Miss Leslie, containing receipts for all the 
goodies, comforts, ordinary and extraordinary eatables required in families. When 
Miss Leslie prepared her Cook-Book, we recommended that it should be hung up 
midway between parlour and kitchen, for the convenient reference of the inmates of 
both departments. Let there be another nail driven into the wall, and the Keceipt 
Book hung at the fide of its predecessor. — U. S. Gazette. 

'•The work which Miss Leslie has here given them, might be studied half a year 
with great benefit, even though the lady never had occasion to exercise her know- 
ledge. * * * * Miss Leslie takes the student by the hand and leads her over her 
home that is to be, explains the use and benefit of each apartment — the proper 
mode of caring for it — gives directions for furniture with "curtains to match." — 

Southern Literary Gazette. 



MISS LESLIE'S HOUSE-BOOK. 



CONTAINING 



The most complete Directions for Housekeeping, and a useful 
Guide to Newly Married Ladies; being a Companion to "Miss 
Leslie's Ladies' New Receipt Book." Twelfth edition, greatly en- 
larged and improved. 480 pages, cloth extra, gilt backs. Trice 

S! no. 



A TREATISE 

ON THE 

MANUFACTURE AND WORKING OF STEEL; 

Being a Hand-book for the Blacksmith, Die Sinker, Hardware 
Manufacturer, &c, &c. 

BY F. OVERMAN; AUTHOR OF A TREATISE ON IRON, 

WITH 28 ENGRAVINQS ON WOOD, CLOTH, GILT, 75 CENTS. 



A TREATISE ON MOULDING AND CASTING ; 

BEING! A HAND-BOOK FOR MOULDERS IN SAND, CEMENT, AND METAL FORMS; 

For Founders of Iron, Brass, Copper, Tin, Zinc, and other metals. 
WITH 42 WOOD ENGRAVINGS. 

BY FREDERICK OVERMAN. 

Cloth, gilt, 88 cents. 

" Moulder and Iron Founder's Guide. — This is the title of a neat volume by Fre- 
derick Overman, mining engineer, and author of several excellent works, and pub- 
lished by A. Hart, Philadelphia, a gentleman who has published and does publish 
some of the best seientific works in Ameriea. We believe this is the first work on 
the same subject, published in America. It embraces a description of the different 
kinds of moulding and the materials, such as Green Sand, Open Sand, &c. The art 
of moulding is described in detail : the melting of metals, the qualities of the iron, 
the art of managing the moulds, &c , are all described. Receipts for alloys, bronzing, 
tinning, &c are appended. It is illustrated with numerous engravings. As mould- 
ing is very extensively practised in our country, this work will no doubt, as it should, 
have a very extensive sale, for it is an able and useful work." — Scientific American. 



THE AMERICAN 

COMPLETE COTTON SPINNER, 
AND MANAGER'S AND CARDER'S GUIDE. 

BY THE LATE ROBERT II. BAIRD. 

IMPROVED AND BROUGHT DOWN TO THE PRESENT TIME, BY A " PRACTICAL MANAGER." 

Cloth, gilt, SI 00. 

"This is a neat book, got up in a creditable style, by A. Hart: it is compiled from 
the papers of the late Robert II. Baird. It is not illustrated, but it gives the dimen- 
sions and speed of machinery, draught and twist calculations, Ac, together with rules 
and examples for making changes in the size, and numbers of roving and yarn. Mr. 
Baird was widely known as an expert cotton spinner, but additions are made to his 
papers so as to bring the subject up to the preseuttime. It embraces the arrangement 
of the different kinds of machinery, manner of conducting a factory, remarks on cotton, 
and the cleaning of it, and some very useful remarks about water wheels. The whole 
of the calculations are made in simple arithmetical numbers, plain, and clear, with 
no design to show learning: thereby showing the most of it, with every intention to 
instruct, and none to mislead by false formula 1 . It is a book for which Mr. Hart has 
our sincere thanks, as a work capable of doing a great deal of good." — Scientific 
American. 



NEW AND ENTERTAINING BOOKS 

RECENTLY PUBLISHED BY 

A. HART, LATE CAREY AND HART, 

No. 126 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia. 



MEMOIRS OF THE COURT OF MARIE ANTOINETTE, 

Queen of France; by Madame Campan, First Lady of the Bed-Chamber to the Queen ; 
uniform in size and style with "Secret Memoirs of the Empress Josephine," in 2 
vols., with a Portrait. A new Edition, with three additional chapters, post 8vo., 
Cloth, extra gilt. $2 00. 

"As a picture of manners during the latter years of Louis XT., and the entire 
reign of his successor, it has no superior: it is at once more decent and more vera- 
cious than the 'Life of Dubarry,' and the thousand other garbled memoirs of that 
period. A large number of notes, explanatory and otherwise, accompany the volume, 
and add materially to its value. Mr. Hart has published the book in a style of 
great elegance, and illustrated it with portraits, on steel, of Marie Antoinette and 
Madame Elizabeth. It is a book that should find a place on every lady's centre- 
table." — Saturday Gazette. 

MEMOIRS OF THE HOUSE OF ORLEANS ; 

Including Sketches and Anecdotes of the most distinguished characters in France 
during the 17th and ISth Centuries, by W. Cooke Taylor, author of "Romantic 
Biography of the Age of Elizabeth," &c, with Portraits, 2 vols., 760 pages, cloth, 
extra gilt. $2 50. 

"Then, too, we have, to complete the picture, Henrietta, sister of Charles the 
Second, and her daughter Maria Louisa, Queen of Spain, both of whom died by 
poison; Elizabeth of Bavaria, the coarse, plain-spoken, but witty successor of Henri- 
etta; the infamous Berri, daughter of the Kegent; the chaste wife of the fifth duke; 
and many more. In a word, the Memoirs abound with all the interest of the 
highest wrought romance, and that without departing from the strictest veracity ; 
they form, indeed, a moving panorama of the principal personages of France, of 
both sexes, for the last two centuries."— Keal's Gazette. 

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE OF ANNE BOLE YN, 

Queen of Henry VIII., by Miss Benger, from the third London Edition, uniform 
with "Secret Memoirs of the Empress Josephine," 1 vol. post. 8vo., cloth, ex. gilt. 
$1 25. 

"There is no more romantic chronicle in history than the story of Anne Boleyn, 
aa we trace her progress up to the throne and then down to the scaffold. We know 
no work which gives us a better view of private ami domestic life in England in 
that day, and can confidently recommend it as a delightful piece of biography, 
valuable fur the information it imparts, and narrating adventures which keep up 
the interest to the end." — Albany lieyister. 

SECRET AND HISTORICAL MEMOIRS OF THE EMPRESS JOSEPHINE, 

First wife of Napoleon ; a new edition, two vols, post 8vo., 670 pages, cloth, extra 
gilt. $2 00. 

" This ts une of the most interesting works of the day, containing a multiplicity 
of incidents in the life of Josephine and her renowned husband, which have o 

I n in print. -.V. O. Times. 






ELSA FORT 

6123 Cedar " "-"'e 

Merchantvi' ° vsey 





