
AMPHIPACIFICA 


JoiunaJ of Aquatic Systematic Biology' 


Volume 3 


Number 3 


Contents 


Nov- 15, 2m 


The tahlroidcan amphjpod genus Hyale Rathke, 1837, sens, str iji the 
North Atlantic and Mediterranean regions. 


L Krapp'Schickel & E. L. Bousfield 


Corrections; to Amphipacitica.Volmnc 3, Numbers 1 & 2 15 


Feature Article 


The taJitioideaii amphipod family Hyalidae revised, with emphasis 
on the North Pacific fauna: systemalics and distributional ecology. 


E. L. Bousfield & E. A. Ilendrycks 17 


National Library of Canada 


ISSN No. 1189-9905 




AMPHIPACIFICA is an international jour- 
nal of aquatic systematic bio logy aimed primarily 
at publication of monograpliEC studies that are 
overiy large (25-50^ printed pages) for traditional 
taxonomic Journals. The journal has featured 
studies on crustaceans of the faunistically rich and 
palaeobiologically ancient North American Pa* 
ciffc coastal marine regiorn However, the geo- 
graphic scope extends to other marine regions, and 
to adjacent fresh watersK Faunisticallyt it encom- 
passes other free living and parasitic invertebrate 
taxa, and aspects of aquatic vertebrate animals that 
may involve systematics, ecology and behaviour. 

AMPHIPACIFICA is scheduled to appear 
approximately quarterly, with a run of 250-300 
copies per issue* each of about 125 pages, and a 
total volEime pagination of approximately 500. 
The printed page size is 8.5 X II inches (22 X 27.5 
cm). Paper quality accomiriodates line cuts and 
halftones at300-6(KI d.p.i., and a limited number 
of colour plates at author cost, Manuscripts are to 
be submitted in “camera-ready"' computerized for- 
mat (IBM- or M AC-compatible diskettes), and 
also in hard copy, that have previously been ref- 
ereed (name to be supplied) and text-edited at the 
author's instigation. Suitability of manuscripts, 
based on content and adherence to submission 
regulations, will be decided by the Advisory Board 
of the journal. 

The cost of printing and mailing of each issue 
is defrayed by institutional and Individual sub- 
scri ptions to the Journal of S5() (CAN) or $40 (US) 
per volume, and by page charges to the authors of 
$25.00 per primed page (including line illustra- 
tions). For other instructions and a subscription 
form, please see the inside back cover. Further 
information may be supplied On request 

AMPHIPACIFICA is published by Amphi- 
pacitlca Research Publications under the Ontario 
Business Program License No. 1(X)0 13820. Janu* 
ary. 2000. 


Editorial Board. 

Dr. E. L. Bousfield, Managing Editor, Ottawa, 
Dr. D. G. Cook, Technical Editor, Greely, ON. 

Advisory Board. 

D. R. Calder. Royal Ontario .Museum, Toronto, ON, 
Canada. 

F. R. Couk, North Augusta, ON, Canada. 

C. Q. Gmchy. North Gower, ON, Canada. 

P, H. Lc Blond, Gallano I.. BC, Canada. 

Z. Kabata, Nanaimo, BC, Canada. 

G. G. E. Scudder, University of British Columbia 

Vancouver, BC, Canada. 

C--L Shih, Taiwan Fisheries Research InstiuLc, 
Keelung, Taiwan; Canadian Museum of Nature, 
Otmsva, ON, Canada. 

C. P. Slaude* Friday Harbor Laboratories, Friday 
Harbor, WA, USA. 

TransLution Services, 

M. A. Bousfield, MSc, Wolfe Island, ON, Canada. 
Sponsoring Agencies. 

Canadian Musetimof Nature, Ottawa, ON, Canada; 
Friday Harbor Laboratories, University of Wash- 
ington, Friday Harbor, WA. 

Royal British Columbia Museum, Victoria, BC, 
Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada, 

OfFices. 

(IJ Subscriptions and Correspondence: Dr. E, L. 
Bousfield, Managing Editor, Ottawa, ON, K2B 8E3. 
12) Mailing: Canadian Museum of Nature, Research 
Division, Ottawa, ON, Canada, K I P 6P4. 

Registration. 

The journal AMPHIPACIFICA is registered at the 
National Library of Canada. Legal Deposit Office, 395 
Wellington St.. Ottawa, Canada, as ISSN Number 
1189-9905, 

Printing. Him Printing Incorporated, 2 SO Albert St., 
Ottawa, ON. Canada. 


POSTMASTER: Please send changes of address to: Amphipacifica, att: Dr, E. L. Bousfield, 
Managing Editor, 1710- 1275 Richmond Rd., Ottawa, ON, Canada K2B 8E3, 


AMPHIPACIFICA 


JOURNAL OF AQ,UATIC SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY 


Volume 3, Number 3 
Nov. 15, 2002 


AMPHIPACIFICA, Journal of Aquatic Systematic Biology (ISSN No. 1 189'9905) is published 
quarterly by Amphipacifica Research Publications, 1710-1275 Richmond Rd.,Od:awa, Ontario.^ 
Canada, K2B 8E3. Annual subscription rates are $40, US or $50. Canadian funds. 


DEDICATION 


The Journal AMPHIPACIFTCA is dedicated to the promotion of systematic biology and 
to the conservation of Earth’s natural resources* 


This issue is dedicated to the memory of W. E. Ricker 190R - 2001 
distinguished Canadian tnologistand fisheries scientist. 


Cover design: Adapted from the title page of S. J. Holmes ( 1 904)* “Amp hi pod 

Crustaceans of the Expedition.” 

Karri man Alaska Expedition, pages 233-244* 


AMPHIPAGHCA VOL 3 No. X Nov, \5. 2002 


I 


THE TALITROIDEAN AMPHIPCTO GENUS fO'ALF RATHKE, 1837, SENS. STR. 
IN THE NORTH ATLANTIC AND MEDITERRANEAN REGIONS 

T Krapp-Schiokel ^ & E. L. tioiisfield^ 


^ES^^tAC^ 

The gejius iiyale Ralhkc, is here resirielcd lo aqiiatSc, nnn-salMlori hyalid amphipod species of the North 
Atlantic and .Vlcditemtnean regions, Hyaie pontka Rathke, 1837 ft>pe species) and //. htbbcfckiami Bate, I8."i7 are 
redescribed and M michelim n, sp. (Saniiiriia) and fiyale specces (Bcrmada) ant: newly described. This conn pies, of 
species is diistingulshed by unique features of gnathopod i tmalej and preamplexing notch of peracon segment 2 
ffemale), pttsterior marginal cusps of coxae 2 (Sl 3, and a strong striated ciasping spine disia]1> on the propod of 
peraeopods 3-7. 


Introduction 

During the course of study of hyalid amphipods of 
the North American Fadfic coast. Bousficid & 
Hendry cks (2002) encaunlercd a number of characters 
and character states on the basis of which generic 
subdivision of Hyaie Raihket scns. iat. ) seemed ad vis - 
ab] e. Some of these had not hi the rto bs?en treated i n the 
generic type species Hyaie pom lea Rathke, 1837. As 
material of the type .species w as not avalEable to them, 
E, L, Bousfield contacted the first author of the present 
paper who had recendy published comprehensively on 
the Medi ternmean hyaiid fauna and was able to re- 
examine extensive collections of H. paniica and simi- 
lar species 1 n the m useum at Y erona, Ital y , and els w here , 
7 hese species were soon discovered to form a closely 
related clade, very distincl from other assemblages 
(e.g„ ''grandicornis'' group) within the generic com- 
plex tiyate Rathke ( sens, lat. ). Since members of this 
complex are apparently confined to the North Atlantic 
and Mediterranean regions, and enrirdy cxtralimital to 
the North PaciEc, a separate publication for this group 
was deemed advisable. 

The type species Hyate pomlea Raihke, 3 837, was 
described origi nally from the coast of the Krym (Crim- 
ean) peninsula, Black Sea. Since that time, workers 
who found a 2/>Yi/e-Jike animal with characterise call j 
strong, robust, striated spine on the distal end of per- 
aeopodai propods, were convinced they were dealing 
with this same species, be it from the Mediterranean or 
the eastern North Atlantic Ocean. As in many other 
similar cases, a striking and ea.sily visible character 
often leads to a quick identifl cation, without careful 
further examination and, in a second step, to being 
I abel led as a "cosnwpol i tan " s peci es. A second species 
of this group had been been descril>edfrom the British 


of the "cosmopolitan syndrome”, this species fiad been 
sy nonymized with Hyale pontica Rathke by many sub- 
sequent workers (e.g., Slcbbing 1906; Chevreux & 
Fage 1925;Gurjanova 1951 ; Bulycheva 1957; Lincoln 
1979; Barnard & Karaman 1991; and Krapp-Schickd 
1993). G.O. Sars (1890) was a notable exception, 
maintaining separate identity of 7/. iuhbockkma based 
on material from Norxvay. Further taxonomic dispari- 
ties w ere more recently noted in material at hand from 
the Mediterranean region and Bermuda, 

The purpose of this study is to unravel the true 
identity of the various s|3ecies within the Hyak pomica 
complex, and describe new forms, based on character 
states both newly discovered and previously utilized. 
HyaJid amphipod collections in the Verona Museum 
contain a beautiful mating pair of animals from the 
Bosphonis {entrance to the Black Sea). Thus, character 
states of the true Hyale pomica Rathke could be estab- 
lished and differences with other material worked out. 

Ackno w led grnenu 

The authors are grateful to: Wim Vader and col- 
leagues at the Tr 0 mso Museum who checked fresh 
material of Hyale lubbockiana from Norwegian shore 
localities; Eric Laso-Wasem, Vale Peabody Museum, 
and Kathryn T'oates, Bermuda Biotegieal Station, ftn- 
assisting in identification of B. M. KunkePs original 
material of 'Hyale pomka" ( 1 910); and Aldo Michel in 
for many years of collabcimtion at the MuseoCivjcodi 
Sloria Natural e Verona. Sandro Ruffo generously 
provided laboratory' facililes for part of the work, and 
gave his knowledgeable encouragement to the study. 
We sincerely thank Ed Hendrycks and Judith Price, 
Canadian LMuseum of Nature, and research assistant 
Pierre Mancoux, for their help in preparing, catalogu- 
ing, and illustrating some of the material. Floy E. 


hies as Gaianilm hibb<K kiunu by Bate, 1 856. Because 

L Museum A. Koenigs A dvnaueml lee 160, D-53 1 13 Bonn, German) , 

2. Resliareh assix^iate. Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 2C6. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 No. 3. Nov. 15, 2002 2 

Zitten, Cupertino, California, assisted with illustration 
of material from Bermuda. Marjorie BousfieW, Wolfe 
[si and, ON, provided translations of the Russian litera- 
ture. 


Methods 

Abbreviatioris of Agency collections used: 
CMN - Canadian Museum of Nature. Ottawa 
MSNV - Verona Museum, Italy 
ROM - Royal Ontario Mu-seum, Toronto 
Y PM -Yale Peabody Museum, New Haven , CO, 


Abbreviations used in the text: 
AC2 - antennae C 2 

8R SET - brOKXl seta 


CL 

EPI-3 - 
FLAG - 
GDN - 
GN 1,2 - 

HD 

IP 

LFT 

[X 

MD 

MXI,2 - 
MXPD - 
OP 

P-AMP - 

NTCH 

P3-7 - 

PLP 

RT 

SP 

UI-3 - 
UL 

UROS - 


clasping 

epimeral plates 1,2,3 
flagellum 

guiding 

gnathopods 1 , 2 
head 

inner plate 
left 

lower lip 
mandible 
maxillae 
maxilliped 
outer plate 

preamplexing notch on peraeon 2 

peraeopods 

palp 

righl 

spine 

uropods 1,2,3 
upper lip 

urosome 


T - tel son 


Systeinatics: 

Rathke (1837) established the genus Hya/e after 
having described his type species H. ponftca from the 
Black Sea. Shortly afterwards. Bate ( 1 857) described, 
under several different generic names, a similar spe- 
cies, from the British Isles. It seems that 

Stebbing must have seen material of liMoc^iana and 
thought it Identical with ffya/e pcmliCci Rathke as well 
as W. iublfockiartij Bale. He synonymized them, 
keeping the older name of course. In 1893 Della Valle 
offered draw ings of and "pomka’', but 

he mixed material of nilssa/ti as well as MicropyMa 


ranna/a, and the drawings are not pertinent to the 
Atlantic species f/. /Mochtuia. 

In 1 906 Stebbi n g redescri bed the femal e of ' r/W', 
Chevreux& Page (1925) cite*‘pOrtifcfl"'from the Atlan- 
tic and from the Mediterranean coast of France, in a 
paper on Mediterranean (Marseilles) species of 
Giovaniiini (1965) prov ided detailed drawings (the text 
has some errors) of ?p(vikca that may be the most 
clearly executed until now. Mateus & Mateus (1966) 
stressed the necessity of a revision of all genera of 
families HyaJidae and Hyalellidae before the abundant 
material of the Calypso expedition could be worked up. 
Thus, in Lincoln's ( 1 979) figures of'poitr/ca'" from the 
British Islands, palmar corners are very weak in 
gnathopods 1 , 2 ( 9 ) and peraeopods, while there is a 
clear comer in those of Chevreux & Page's table (C? 
6mm). FinalEy, Krapp-Schickel (1993) fully treated 
material ofpori/ica from the Mediterranean Sea, 


Family Hyalidae Bulycheva 1957, revised Bousfleld 
& Hendrycks 2002 

Subfamily Hyalinae Bousfleld St Hendrycks, 2002 
Hyak Rathke sens. str. 

Rathke, 1837: 377, 

My^jk (part): Stebbing 1906: 559;— Chevreux & Page 
1925: 280; -Gurjanova 195 L 8 16;- Bulycheva 1957: 
83; — Lincoln 1979; 230;— Krapp-Schickel 1993: 
728;— Barnard & Karaman 1991: 367, 
nun A'Vcca Nicolet 1 849 (type species V. /wcuii NieJ 

Type species: Wvu/c pofikea Rathke, 1837, present de- 
signation. 

Species: poftr/ca Rathke, 1 837 (p, 3); 

boc/ckjmi Bate, 1856 (p, 6);//. fnic/ie/kii n. sp. (p. 9); 
f/ya/e species (Bermuda) (p. 1 I ). 

Diagnosis: Body smooth, or segments weakly imbri- 
cated or weakly mid -dorsal ly carinate. Rostrum incon- 
spicuous; anterior head lobe subtiuncate. Eye subovate. 
Antennae short, slender, subequal. Antenna I, ped- 
uncular segment 2 > segment 3. Antenna 2. peduncle 
not incrassate: flageflum not elongate. 

U pper and 1 ower I i ps regul ar, M andi bl e, Left laci n ia 
5-51/2 dentate, spine row with 3-5 blades. Maxilla I , 
palp I -segmented; outer plate, apical spine -teeth tall. 
Maxiiliped, inner plate tail; palp noonal, segment 3 
short, medium thick; dactyl .small, not falcate, unguis 
regular to elongate. 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL 3 No. Nov. 15, 2003 


3 


Coxae 2 and 3 wEth promineiu fjharp posterior mar- 
ginal cusp, lacking in coxae 1 and 4. Coxa 5 markedly 
anterolobate; 6 7 posterolobate. Coxal gilts me- 

dium. rounded, sac-like, largest on peraeopod 5. 

Onathopods sexually dimorphic. GnathopcxJ I (C?), 
propodal palm short, variously overhung by simple 
dactyl; carpal lobe narrow; propod with mediofacial 
guiding (bracing) spine; dactyl simple. Gnathopod 2 
(cf), basis with strong ante rod istal lobe (= hydrody- 
namic lobe of Bousfteld & Kendrycks 2003); carpal 
lobe lacking; propid large, narrowing distal Jy, palm 
with slight hinge tooth. 

Peraeopods short, stout; bases expanded, posterior 
margins crenulate, hind margins of t>eraeopods 5 and 6 
with weak surge seta and notch. Peraeopod 5, segment 
4 short, broad; segment 5 often short; segment 6 with 
single large striated subierminal anierodistal clasping 
(locking) spine, and 1-2 small accessory spines; dactyl 
large, smooth, anterior marginal seta small. 

Epi meral plates I -3 regular. 3 not produced, Pleopods 
regular, natatory. Uropods I and 3, peduncle and raini 
short, thick. Uropod I , disud peduncular spines short, 
un special! zed; rami with medium apical and marginal 
spines. LIropod 3 short thick, uni famous; ramus 
shorter than peduncle, with apical spines only. 

Tel son brcsad. lobes slightly longer than broad, mar- 
gins weakly setose. 

Female: Gnathopods normal, subsimilar; carpal lobes 
shallow. Gnathopod 2 the larger; basis with stronger 
hydrodynamic lobe. Brood plates broadly subovate. 
apices rounded: marginal setae medium-long, hook- 
ti pped . Peraeon 2, pream pi exi ng notch large, rectan - 
gular, lacking unguisial grcjove, with small locking slit 
above anterior margin of notch. 

DJstribution<il Ecology: Open surf coasts of the Medt* 


eluding Great Britain, and Norway, also Bermuda; 
clinging to algae and other substrata at I.W level and 
subtidally to 50 m. 

Remarks: Species of Hyak sens, str, differ markedly 
from those of (Bousfield &. Hendry cks, 2002) 

in being mainly aquatic and subtidal. They occur 
mostly in strongly lotic waters of open surf coasts, and 
saltate (hop) in air weakly or not at all (see Sars 1 890), 
Mature females of Hyak possess regularly rounded 
brood plates with longish marginal hooked setae, 
whereas those Apohyale have very broad, a pi cal ly 
acute brood plates with nun^rous short marginal hook- 
tipj>ed setae. 

Species of Hyak are apparently uniquely adapted to 
a lifestyle in strongly lotic waters such as the surt zone 
of open coasts. Thus, the lip of the large propodal 
median facial guiding spine (d') appears to fit into a 
locking slit on peraeon 2 (9), thereby enhancing the 
grip of the gnathopod w^hen the dactyl closes on the 
preamplesing notch. In apparent homoplasious man- 
ner. the preainplexing mechanism within genus Hyak 
rcsembl es that of some s pec! es w i thin genus AUorchestes 
(e.g., .4. angas!a Stebbmg)(family Hyalellidae)- 

H\ak poMca Rathke. 1837 
(Figs. 1.3,3) 

Hyak pontica Rathke, 1 837: 378, pi, 5, fig. 20-28;— 
Bulycheva l957:90-92.fig.30;— Rrapp-Schickei 1993: 
735-736, fig. 503. 

HyakpimHca (jjan): Stabbing 3906: 568;— Barnard & 
Karaman 1991: 369. 

non H\ak ptJmrtYj Kunkel 1910: 69, fig. 26;— Chevieux 
& Page 1925, fig. 294;-Linco]n. 1979; 236, tigs. 309 


e-j. 

terranean and Black Seas; northeastern Atlantic, in- 

Key to species of Hyak Rathke, 1 S37 sens. Str. 


1 . Antenna 3 (C?), llageilar segments with groups of dense setae; peraeopods 5-7. large claspi ng spine i nserted 

diagonally proximad; pcnienpod 5, sc^gmenL 5 not wider than long ................ ff. ptmilcii Rathke (p. 4) 

Antenna 2 (c?), flagellar segments w ith single setae; peraeopods 5-7, large clasping spire Inserted nearly per- 
pendicular to axis of segment 6; pcracopfjd .5, segment 5 shart, wider than Long 2. 

2. Peraeopods 5-7, clasping and distal siipernumary spine sepatated by cluster of 3-5 setae Hyak sp, (p. II) 

Perdeop«.ids 5-7, clasping and distal supemumary spine separated by I -2 setae 3. 

T Gnalhoptid I (cf), carpal lobe small, rtot surpassing meriis, distal margin with short comb setae: maxilla I , inner 
plate, apical plumose setae surpassing base of apical spines of outer plate; maxtlliped palp segment 4 (dactyl), 

unguis with elongate nail H, mkheUni n. sp, (p. 9) 

Gnathopod !(<?), carpsit lobe large, extending beyond nnerus, distal margin with 6-7 comb setae: maxilla I, inner 
plate, apical plonnose setae not exceeding base of apical spires of outer plate; maxillaped palp, unguis normal, 
shorter than body of dactyl H. iubboi^kima (Bate) (p. 6) 


AMPHIPACJF[CA VOl.. 3 No, 3, Nov, 15, 2mi 


4 



Fig. I» Hyale ponrica Rathke, 1937, Male (S,5mm); female ov (6,0mm). Bosphorus. 
(Telsoii ot male specimen from Genova, after Krapp-Schickel, 1991 ). 


Type locality: Krym (Crimea, Black Sea), 

MatcHaL examined; 

Cala Dra^onara, N W Sardinia, stiff Cyjte!Ei?/rcn: brown alga), 
0m-9(5„5 mm), 2 juv,,MCSN slltk 3 901; Cal a Dragonara, 
NWSardinia, 0 m, - d'(6mm), MCSN slide 1902. 
Bosphorus. Turkey - d* (8,5 mm) slide: 9 ov. (6 ttud) (alc). 

Diagnosis: Male (9 mm). Eyes round, dark, Aniennal, 
flagellum 10- I I -segmented* middle segments with 
aesthetascs in small clusters. ,Antenna 2, peduncular 
segment 5 > segment 4; flagellum l2-l4-segmented, 
posteroproximaliy with dusters of shoii dense setae. 

Mandibular left Iadnia5'dentate. Maxilla I, strong 
ciliated setae on inner plate much surpassing end of 
outer plate. Maxi 1 1 a 2, strong ciliated seta of i nner pi ate 


surpassing inner end of inner plate. Maxilliped palp, 
daciyl with slender elongate unguis; propod and carpus 
subequal in length, width about 2:3; carpus on inner 
side with many long setae; meriis sboiX, as wide as 
carpus, but half as long; basis not much shorter than 
ischium. 

Coxae I -4, lower margin moderately crenulated ; 
Coxa I subrectangular, smooth behind. Co.xae 2 & 3 
with low but distinct posterior marginal cusps, lower 
margins gently convex. Coxa 4, hind margin exca- 
vated pro.ximally, w ith median weak cusp , Coxa 5 
moderately anterolobate. Coxa 6 weakly posterolobate, 

Gnathopod I, basis and ischium with very weak 
hydrodynamic lobes; carpus with small posterior lobe, 
not extending beyond merus, lower margin with -4 
comb setae; propod with strong mediofacial guiding 


AMPHIFACinCA VOL 3 No, X Nov, T5, 2002 


5 



Frg. 2. Hyale ponfica Rathke, 1937, Male min); female ov (6.0 mm). Bpsphoms. 


spine sJanted slightly diagonally proximad, palmar 
locking spine stout, spade-shaped, slightly exceeded 
by tip of basal ly thickened dactyl Gnathopod 2, 
hydrodynamic lobe very large and broadly rounded on 
basis, medium large on ischium; carpus short, lacking 
posterior lobe; propod subrectangular, slightly narrov\- 
ing distally, hind margin vvith 1-2 short spines, palm 
convex, nearly transverse, lined with dense fine setae, 
and paired posterodistal short spines; dactyl stout, 
smooth, regular. 

Peraeopods 3-4, segment 5 medium short; segment 
6 with 2 proximal I y positioned posterior marginal 
spines and characteristic distal large cylindrical stri- 
ated spine; dactyls stout, with minute inner marginal 
seta. Peraeopods 5-7 stout; basis widened, rounded, 
with clearly developed postero-distal lobe, hind mar- 
gin with posterior notch and surge seta; segment 4 
slightly w idening distally; segment 5 not broader than 
long; segment 6 (propod), anterior (inner) margin with 


2 proximal spines and distal stout striated clasping 
spine and supemumary shorter spine separated from it 
by a seta, w ith veiy' short, distal 'palm” set at 45^ angle 
to axis of propod. 

Epimeral plate 1 rounded behind; plates 2 and 3, 
posterodistal corner nearly right-angled. Uropod I, 
peduncle slightly longer than rami, margins with 1 -2 
short robust spines. Uropod 2. rami short, subequal to 
peduncle, with ] -2 marginal spines. Uropod 3, pedun- 
cle with strong posterodistal spine; ramus -2/3 length 
of peduncle, oblique apex w ith one strong robust spine, 
and two smaller ones. 

Tel son lobes broader than long, outer margin proxi- 
mally with shon setules and subapically with small 
spine. 

Female ov (6 mm). Gnathpods I & 2 subsimilar, 
Gathopud 2 slightly the larger, with small hydrody- 
namic lobe on basis; propod subovate, pJm oblique, 
posterodistal spines unequal, separated; hind margin 


AMPHFPACIHCA VOL. 3 No, 3, Nov. 15, 2002 


6 



Fig, 3. Preamplexing mechanism in Hyak spp. A. Hyale luhhockiana Bate (female modified from 
G. O, Sars (1890); male gnathopod 1 in preamplexing position; B, Hyale ponfica Rathke, 

C. Hyale sp. Bermuda; D, Hyale michetini n, sp (modified from Giovaninni 1965). 


with 2 spines; dactyl slender slightly overlapparig 
palm. Brood pi ates broadly subovate* rounded apical Ey, 
Preamplex i ng notch sq uared, with shal low postered isial 
lobe and small locking slit near distal margin of ant- 
erior lobe into which fits the guiding spine of gnatho- 
pod I (d^). 

Distributional Ecology^: Exposed rocky coasts of the 
Mediterranean, Bosphorus, and Black Seas: among 
algae, littoral to Infralittoral; not common. Not con- 
firmed from the open Atlantic coa,st where it appears to 
be replaced by H. labbtyckiutta. 

Remarks; H. poniica has not been found in the North- 
ern ,Adriatic Sea, despite careful sampling by several 
authors. Some Mediterranean endemics apparendy 
live exclusively in the Adriatic Sea, whereas other 
endemics live everywhere else but there. 

Previous treatments of H ponrica lequire clarifica- 
tion. Thus, Krapp-Schickel (1993 p. 735, fig. 503) 
illustrates gnathopod 2 of an obviously penultimate cf. 
The other gnathopod 2 (same specimen) showed a 
much more transverse palm, well defined by a short 
robust spine on the palmar comer. Gnathopod I (C? ) 
bears a stout ''guiding spine^^ on the medial surface of 


the propod (not figured). 

Bulycheva (1957, pp, 90-92, fig. 30) illustrates a 
inaKill i ped apparently of quite different form. The dif- 
ference may be attributable to the position of the max- 
illiped within the buccal mass. Thus, the terminal 
segments of the palp may be tumetl or twisted ai a right 
angle to the vertical basal plates on the slide, and their 
size in the illustration would depend on the amount of 
pressure on the cover slip during preparation. On the 
other hand. Bulycheva's material (not examined in this 
study) may represent a different taxon. Her specimens 
apparently have less stout peraeopods, and tlie male 
gnathopod is of rather different form than material 
from the Mediterranean and Bosphorus regions. 

Hyale lubhockiana (Bale) 

(Figs. 3, 4. .5) 

Galjifithis lubhockiatta Bale, 3 856: 57 1. I7f, — Bale 
]857:I36;-Bate, 1862: 51, fig, VIII/3, 
jVict?a luhbockiana Bale & Westwood J 863: 47, 
Hyak hthbockkma G O. Sars 1890: 27. pi. I l.fig. 2;— 
Bousfidd & Hendrycks 2002: 100, figs. 46, 47 
Hyale pomica Lincoln 1979; 237, figs. I09e-j. 


AMFHIPAOKICA VOL 3 No. 3, Nov. Li, 2002 


7 



Fig. 4. Hyak lubbockiam Bate, I S-56, Male (6.6 mm). Lofoten Ids., Norway, 


Type locality: Falmouth, Com wall, Great Britain, 

Materiat examined: 

Norway: Lofoten Islands, 0 iti, W‘. VadercolJ..- 2 <S<S (6.0 
and 6,6mm), 2 9 9 ov (5.0 in m). Treimso Museum coN ns. 

Great Britain: Port Erin, Isle of Man, in algae at LW, D.I, 
Witliamson coll., March, 1955 - <S 0.5 mm); 9ov. (4..i 
mm): CMN collecuons. 

Diagnosis: Male (8 mm). Eyes round -ovate, pale- red. 
Antenna I, flagelium 8-10 segmented. Antenna 2, 
flagcl I urn E 2 - E 4 segmented, each with short single seta. 

Mandibular left lacinia 5i/2^dentate, Maxilla 1, 
strong ciliated setae on inner plate short, not surpassing 
base of spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 2, inner 
marginal ciliated seta short, not reaching apex of plates. 
Maxsiliped palp, unguis not attenutated, shorter than 
body of dactyl: propod and carpus relatively sioul. 

Coxa 1, lower margin strongly rounded and mark- 
edly crenulated. Coxae 2 & 3 with rounded hind 


marginal cusps. Coxa4 postcroproximal margin wiih 
distinct median cusp. 

Gnathopod I , hydrodynamic lobe on basis and isch- 
ium very weak; carpal lobe relatively large, extending 
beyond menis, distally with -6 comb setae; propod 
.subrectanguiar, mediofacial guiding spine per- 
pendicular or angled slightly distad. Gnathopod 2, 
hydrody namic lobe of basis medium large, of ischium 
medium; propod deeply subovate, palm slightly ob- 
lique, with shallow rounded hinge tooth, beset w ith 
short setae, paired posterodistal spines short; pro|X)d 
hind margin distally w ith pair of fine seme; dactyl 
basally stout, hind margin lined with fine setules. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 prominent, regular; segment 5 
short; segment 6 tvith one posterior marginal spine 
proximal to stout striated clasping spine that is sepa- 
rated from a short distal supernumerary spine by a 
single short seta; dactyl strong, moderately curved. 

Peraeopods 5-7 strongly deve3o|x:d, hind margin of 
basis scalloped or crenulated, each with medium notch 


AMPHIPACinCA VOL. 3 No. 3, Nov. 15, 2002 


8 



Fag. 5. Hyale lubbocklana Bate, 1 856. Mak (6.6 mm); female ov (6,0 mm). Ix^foten IsJands, Nonvay. 


and surge seta; bases of peraeopods 5 6 with deep 

rou aided posterodistal lobe; segment 6 with single 
proximal spine anddistaJly with large striated clasping 
spine set at right angles to the axis of segment 6. 
Peraeopod 5, segment 5 short, w ider than long. 

Epi moral plate I , posterior margin rounded; platen 2 
and 3, hind corner slightly obtuse-angled. Uropod ] , 
peduncle deep, outer margin with several short spines; 
rami shorter than peduncle, with 2-3 short marginal 
spines and long and short apical spines. Uropod 2, 
peduncle short, deep; rami subcqual to peduncle, each 
with 2 marginal spines and short and long apical spines. 
Uropod 3, peduncle with single stout posterodistal 


spine; ramus slightly shorter than peduncle, apex with 
one strong prominent spine and 2-3 shorter spines, 

Telson lobes subtriang ularj on ger than wide, mar- 
gins smooth, apex sharply rounded. 

Female ov (6 mm): Gnalhopods I 2 subfiimltar, 2 
somewhat larger. Gnat.hopod 1 . hydrodynainic lobe 
small on basis and ischium; carpus short, pcjsterior lobe 
small; propod subovaLe, palm short; dactyl short, thick. 
Gnathopnd 2, hydrodynamic lobe medium large on 
basis, lacking on ischium: carpal lobe small, narrow; 
propod, hind margin medially with 3-4 short setae* 
Brood plate (gnathopod 2) elongate, medium broad, 
apical ly rounded; marginal brood setae longer than half 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL, 3 No, 3, Nov, 15, 2002 


9 



Fig. 6. Hyok michelini n. sp. Immature (3.5 mm). Capo Caccia. Satxlinia { Mediterranean). 


width of plate. Preamplexing notched squared; small 
locking slit on anterior lobe, above ventral margin. 
Colour: brownish -green (Lincoln, 1979 p. 236). 

Distributional Eccdogj': Along exposed coasts of the 
temperate North Atlantic region, western France and 
the Irish Sea to northern Norway, amongst algae in rock 
pools in the lower half of the intertidaL from MSL to 
MLWS, to depth of about 50m (Lincoln, 1979; 
Vader;197l), All collections (H. poniica =H. lub- 
hocklafiu) are from exposed rocky shores among inter- 
tidal algae, chiefly Comllifiaofficinaiis L. 

Remarks; Bate & Westwood ( I86K p, 4S) desenbed 
pecul tar T-3 ike marks on the integument, SEM pictures 
mi g ht clarify them bu E are not avai lable. H. kbhockfam 
differs from H. pontica in its weakly setose antenna 2 
(C?), normally unmexJified condition of the dactyl of ihe 
maxilliped palp, and the vertical position of the large 
mediofacial spine of the propod of gnatho^xxi I (d*). In 
addition, segment 5 of peraeopods 5-6 is short (width 
nearly equal to length), and the apical margins of the 
tel son lobes are unarmed. 

Hyaie micheiinl n. sp. 

(Figs. 3, 6, 7) 

Hyaie pondca Chevieux & Page 1 925: 2S3,fi g, 294;— 
Giovajmini 1965: 288-290, figs. 5-7. 


Type locality: Capo Caeda, North Sardinia, 

Material Examined: 

Sardinia: Capo Caccia, 25 m, Haiimeda, June 3, J974 - 
iai mature (3 nun) HoJolype; CapoCaccia, 0- 1 m, interstitial 
and incrustation of dafam^ - 2 icnm (2.5-3nirini} Paratypes: 
Capo Caceia, ] .5 m, Posidonia, June 3, 1974 - 3 imm (2.5-,3 
mm; Capt> Ferraio, 10-22 m, among mixed algae, Schiocke 
coll., June 7, 1974 - I spec. (3 mm), MSNV collections. 

Diagnosis: Male (5-6 fnm)(after Giovannini, 1965). 
Eyes round, dark. Antenna I, flagellum 9-IO-seg- 
mented. Antenna 2, flagellum 13-14-segmentcd, seg- 
ments each with single seta. 

Mandible, left laciniaSVi-dentate; spine row w ith 3- 
4 blades. Maxilla 1 , apical pi umose setae of inner plate 
exceeding base of spines of outer plate; palp slightly 
exceed! ng base of spi ne-teeth of outer plate. Maxi 1 1 i ped 
palp, unguis slender, longer than lx>dy of dactyl. 

Coxae 1-4 with rounded, crenulated lower margin. 
Coxa 1 sLibrectangular, smooth behind. Coxae 2 and 
3, each with prominent posterior marginal cusp. Coxa 
4 little deeper than 3, strongly rounded below, margin 
of posteroproximaJ excavation wltli weak median cusp. 
Coxa 5 markedly anterolobate. Coxae 6 & 7 postero- 
lobate, 

Gnathopod I, basis and Ischium with medium hy- 
drodynamic lobe; carpal lobe small, with ^^4 lovver 
marginal setae; proped subovate, posterior margin with 
single median spine, mediofacial guiding spine un- 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 No. 3, Nov. 15, 20Q2 


10 



Fig, 7. Hyitk michelini ii, sp. Male (5-6 mm); female ov (4,5 mm) Amung algae, LW. 
Marseilles, France, (modified from R. Giovannini 1%5) 


known; daclyl stout, tip slightly exceeding short, con- 
vex palm. Gnathopod 2, hydrodynamic lobe of basis 
medium sttwig. rounded, of ischium medium; carpus 
shorter than merus; propod deeply subrectangular, 
slightly narrowing distally, lower margin with 1-2 
small spines, palm short, nearly vertical, lined with 
slender spines; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3-7 stout, heavy. Peraeopods 3 4, 

segment 6, posterior margin w ith single projiimal spine 
and stout striated clasping spine separated from its 
distal shorter supemumerary spine by 1-2 short setae; 
dactyl stout medium strongly curved, Peraeopods 5-7, 
bases unevenly widened, hind margins scalloped, with 
notch and surf seta, posterodistal lobes broadly rounded; 
segment 5 of peraeopod 5 short, broader than long. 

EpimemI plate I , postered istal comer rounded; plates 
2 & 3, hind corners nearly right-angled, Uropod 1 
peduncle short, w ith a few short outer marginal spines; 
rami subequaJ to peduncles, with 1-2 short marginal 
spines, and long and short apical spines, Uropod 2, 
peduncle stout; rami slightly shorter, each with 1-2 
marginal spines and unequal apical spines. Uropod 3 
small; peduncle with single posterodistaJ spine; ramus 
short, length about half peduncle, with 2 apical spines. 

Telson lobes broadly triangular, apices nearly right- 
angled, margins smooth. 

Female o v . {4-5 mm). Gnathopod 1 , basi s and i sc h- 
ium each with weak hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe 


short; pmpod subovate, palm oblique, hind margin 
medially with setae cluster; dactyl slightly exceeding 
palm. Gnathopod 2, basis w ith medium large hydrody- 
namic lobe; carpal lobe short, narrow; propod some- 
what narrowly subovate, palm oblique, hind margin 
with single median cluster of short setae; dactyl slightly 
exceed! ng pal m. Brood plates and preamplexj rig notch 
not described. 

Colour: green-yellow, eyes whitish-pink (Chevreux 
& Page 1925). 

Immature specimens (3.5 mm). Immature material 
collected off Capo Caccia^ Sardina, by TK-S, is not 
referable to Hyale poniia^ from the Bosphorus region 
(Fig. 6). It diffeoi in the less distal and more perpen- 
dicular position of the main clasping spine on segment 
6 of peraeopods 3-7 and the less elongate dactyl and 
unguis of the maxilliped palp. These character .states 
are more similar to mature specimens from this general 
region figured as '"Hyale pontica** by Giovaninni 
{ l%5) (Fig. 7) and by Chevreux & Page (1925) from 
Port Vend res on the Mediterranean coast 

In addition to regular aJlometric growth differences 
in numbers of antennal flagel lar segments, fewer n umber 
of spines and setae on appendages, and undeveloped 
secondary sexual character states of the gnathopods 
and peraeon 2, tlie immature differs i n the undeveloped 
or partially developed hydrodynamic lobes of the 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL ^ No. 1^, Nov. 15, 2002 


I I 


and peraeon 2, the immature differs in the undeveloped 
or partially developed hydrodynamic lobes of the 
gnathopods, and unusually large apical spines of 
uropods ] & 2. 

Distributional Ecology : Western Mediterranean re- 
gion; apparently living interstitial ly in coarse sand, 
from 0 to 25m depth. 

Etymology: The authors are especially grateful to 
Aldo Michelini , for creative solutions to virtually every 
problem concerning transport, human connections, 
shrewdness^ and for his always w ide and open heart. 
We are pleased to name this species in hts honour. 

Remarks: Description of a new species based mainly 
on immature material at hand involves some taxonomic 
risk. Relatively small differences distinguish Hyale 
pontfca and H. lnbbockiana. We noted also that bona 
fide specimens of H. pontica co-occur at the same 
locality (Capo Caccia, Sardinia), but were collected in 
short, stiff brown algae of the suri' zone, whereas the 
presently descril>ed material occurred mainly in the 
interstitiumoron epiphytes and Baic^wwjspp. to depths 
of 25m. Separate taxonomic status of H. mfcheiiiii 
would seem justified. 

Illustrations of "'fiyaU pontica" provided by 
G io vann i n i ( 1 965 ) are very detai led. I n aJ I si gni f leant 
taxonomic respects they correspond to our material. 
The long and slender propeds of gnathopods I and 2 of 
ovigerous females appear to be diagnostic character 
states of Hyale michelini. 

Descriptions and drawings by Chevreux &. Page 
( 1 925) do not entirely fit atiy of our st>ecies. as there 
are several differences which might have been omitted 
or actually lacking (e.g., cusps on posterior margins of 
coxal plates, clasping spine on gnathopod I (d’), only 
one group of spines on peimeopods 3-7 (inner margin of 
segment 6) or simplification of sha|)e of coxae 5 and 7. 
1 he shape of antenna 2 (c?) (groups of dense setae) or 
sharply angled propodal palm of peraeopod 7 would 
suggest Hyale pontica , but only one group of spines on 
the inner margin of the propod is figured. The shape 
of gnathopod 2 (d) is similar to H. iitbbockiatia or/f. 
tnichelini^ and the body length applies to all of them. 

Hyale sp, 

( Figs, 3, 8) 

Hyale sp. (MS name, CMN collections) 
non: Hyale pontica Kunkel, 1910: 69, fig. 26. 


Matt^rLal llxailimed: 

St. Georges, Bermuda, LW surf, A. W. Cameron coll,, April, 
1955:- male (7 mm) HoLotype (slide mount); female ov (6 
mm) a]]ot>'pe (slide mouni:); CMN col Ice Lions, 

Note - partial illustrations made in 1982; spectmcns and slide 
mounts not rckx.'aled. 

Partiat Diagnosis: Male (7. 0 mm). With the charac- 
te ri sti cs ot the gen us, B ody smooth , not i m bricated. 

Maxilla I , outer plate, apical armaLure encompasses 
an outer group of 6 stout distally pectinate spine teeth> 
and an inner group of three slender pectinate spines. 
Both the palp, and apical plumose setae exceed the base 
of the spine teeth of the outer plate. 

Coxal plates 2 & 3 with posteiior marginal cusp, 

Gnathopod 1 (d*), carpus with large posterior lobe, 
exceeding merus, distal margin lined with 6-7 comb 
setae: propod evenly subrectangular, posterior margin 
with 2-3 distal ctusters of short setae, mediofaciaJ spine 
perpendicular or angled slightly distad, palm short, 
nearly straight, with stout posterodistal locking spine, 
slightly exceeded by tip of short stout dactyl 

Peraeopods with single stout gnooved anterior mar- 
ginal clasping (locking) spines, separated from distal 
supernumerary short spine by cluster of several short 
setae, palm scarcely distinguishable at steep angle to 
long asis of segment 6; dactyl gently curved. 

Female: Undescribed. Gnathopods, brood plates 
and preamplcxing notch characteristic of genus Hyale. 

Distributfoti: Clinging to algae and other substrate in 
lotic waters of the surf zone^ in the vicittlty of St, 
Georges, Bermuda. 

Remarks, On character states of gnathopod 1 and 
peraeopod segment 6, this species is dearly a member 
of the pontica group of h valid amphiprxis. Full descrip- 
tion and formal naming of the species awaits acquisi- 
tion of additional material. 

S. E. Johnson (1986) has synonymized Kunkel's 
material with Far hyale hawaiensU (Dana, 1853). Ma- 
terial of the latter species from beach drift at Flungi^ 
Bay, Bermuda, has been carefully figured by Slock 
(1987) and bears a remarkable similarity to "Hyale 
pontica" of Kiinkel (loc. cit., fig, 26). Furthermore, 
photographs of Kunkel's figured male specimen and 
appendages , kindly provided by Dr. Eric Lazo- Wasem 
(Y PM), leave little doubt that Par hyale, and not Hyale, 
is the genus in question. 

In addition to Par hyale hawaiensis, widely distrib- 
uted in tide pool drift debris (Johnson 1986; Stock 
1 987), and Hyale sp, from lotic water habitats at LW 


AMPHlPACrFlCA VOl. 1 No. X Nov. J5. im 


12 



Fig. S. Hyaie sp. St Georges, Bermuda, surf zone, LW. 


level near St. George's, two additional hyalid species 
have been Identified in CM IV collections from Ber- 
muda: 

( 1 ) A species of Protohyak, erroneously attributed to 
Hvak pomlca by ELB, having stout distal peraeopodal 
clasping spines, elongate antenna 2, and uropod disto- 
lateral spine, occurs in LW pools at Outer Castle Island. 

(2) A small saltating species of kpokyk occurs com- 
monly in supi^ittoraJ tide pools at Devonshire Bay. 

Di^ussion 

Comparison of principal taxonomic character states 
within genus Hyak Rathke sens. str. (Table 1) suggests 
that the four known species may be divided into two 
principal subgroups; (i) ponnea subgoup, and (it) 
htbbockiana subgroup. 

The former consists of the singJc relatively ad- 
vanced generic type species, H. pomica. The latter 
encompasses the three more primitive species, M mick 
eiini n. sp., H, iiibk'xkmm^ and Hyaie sp.,of which M 
hibbocklana entrains the greatest number of plesio- 
morphic character states. 

As noted in the key and in Table I, Hyaie pontka is 
especially distinctive in character states of gnathopod 
J (c?); distal position and oblique angle of clasping 
spine and angled "palmar" margin of peraeopods 3-7; 
and strongly setose flagellum of antenna 2 (<S). It 
shares relatively few character states with H. iubbock- 
iatm which, in view of previous confusion of the two 
species by several authors, is a somewhat surprising 
revelation of this study. 


Bottsfield & Hendrycks (2002, p. 124) have per- 
formed a semiphyletic cluster analysis of 1 1 of the 12 
known genera within family Hyalidae. In balance of 
character states, the genus Hyaie is relatively advanced 
but quite distinct from all other genera, ll is perhaps 
least remote from the Apea/tyde complex, but is special- 
ized for a life style in open lotic waters. Such features 
include the unique form of guiding and locking spines 
on the propod of gnathopod !(<?), and corresponding 
preamplexing notch and locking slit of peraeon 2 (9); 
well -developed hydrodynamic lobes of gnathopod 2; 
strong dactyls and strong clasping spines of pemeopods 
3-7; and rounded form of epimeral plate 1 . 

The ancestry^ of genus Hyaie remains moot. Al- 
though component species are "swimmers", the bal- 
ance of character states suggests a relatively close 
relationship with genus Apohyak, especially with the 
subgroup of A, prevosii (nifssoni) in which hydrody- 
namic lobes of the gnathopods are strongly devetoped* 
and distal spines on the peduncle of uropod I are not 
strongly developed. On a somew hat broader phyletic 
basis, the form of the sw i mmi n g s peci es withi n H y al i dae, 
of which the life styles of genera Hyaie, Frotohyak and 
Parallorchesref! aie esprecially representative, reflects 
the basic hydnxlynamicform of pri m iti ve " Natanti a"(see 
also Bousfield and Hendrycks 2002). 

On the other hand, the genus Hyaie and especially 
species pofiiica, evinces similarities with the special- 
ized hyalid subfamily Kuriinae. As noted in Bousfield 
& Hendrycks (2002, p. 1 1 9) character state similarities 
include su bean nation and/or imbrication of body seg- 
ments; cren Illation of coxal and basal plate margins; 


AMPHIPAanCA VOL. 3 No. 3, Nov, 15, 2002 


13 


Table L Comparative Character States of Hyale species. 


Character 

State 

H. pofitica 

H. lubbockiam 

H. mchelini 

HyaJe sp. 
(Bermuda) 

Length (c?,9) 

6-9 mm 

6-8 iTiTin 

4-6 mm 

5-7 mm 

A2 {Cf), flag, setae 

groups of many 
dense setae 

few single setae 

few single setae 

few single setae 

Mxpd palp, nail 

> I'Hxly of dactyl 

< body of dactyl 

>bod> of dactyl 

7 

Mxl , IF setae 

surpa-ssing OP spines 

not surpassing OP spines 

surpassing OP spines 

surpassing OP spines 

Mx2, IP seta 

surpa.ssing OP 

not surpas^singOP 

not surpassing OP 

7 

GnI carpal lobe 

smalL few setae 

targe, 6+ setae 

small 4 setae 

lange> 6+ setae 

Gill propod (c?) 
medlofacial spine 

slanted proxitnad 

perpendicular 

perpendicular? 

perpendicular 

P3-7, palmar comer 

-45'°/ vertical 

1 5°/verLical 

] 5°/verticaJ 

1 5“^ /verdcat 

P3-7, inner marginal 

2 groups proximal 

1 group proximal 

1 group proximal 

1 gmup proximal 

spines 

to clasping spine 

to cla.sping spine 

to clasping spine 

to clasping spine 

P5-7, dactyl curv- 
ature 

weak 

strong 

weak 


U3 ratio; length 
peduncle: ram us 

3:2 

,3:2 

2:1 

7 

Dislribulion 

Black Sea, Central 
Medlterranear 

N. E Atlantic 

W. Mediteranean 

Bermuda 


presence of posterior mEirginai cusps on coxae 2 & 3 
only, and specialized form of the maxilliped palp. 
Hyale ponHca also overlaps geographically with 
Micropythia and abuts the more southerly range of 
Kuria hngirTianns. 

The four known species of genus Hyale exhibit a 
relati vel y restri cted geographi cal di stri b u tion. Speci es 
are confined to high salinity outer coast I otic water 
sw^ash zones of temperate and subtropical NE Atlantic 
and Mediien^nean regions. However, these habitats 
are relatively poorly collected and studied. Further 
records might be anticipated from open ocean coasts of 
Spain. Portugal, and island archipelagos off the coast of 
North Africa, including the Canaries and the Azores, 

Myers' (1991) analysis of family groups within 
corophioidean and melitoidean amphipods of the Ha- 
waiian Archipelago underscores the need to consider 
phyletic age of a taxonomic group as a facttsr in devel- 
op! ng hypothetical dispersal patterns and biogeo- 
graphic fau nal rel ati ons hi ps. Character state anal ysi s 
suggests that within family Hyalidae, members of 
genus Hyale are a relative recently evolved group of 


species. Their present confinement within the eastern 
North Atlantic and Mediterranean regions seemingly 
conforms with a relatively recent geotecEonic origin of 
those basi ns duri n g Cretaceous ti mes ( Ho wraith 1981). 

REFERENCES 

Barnard, J. L. 1979, Liuoral Gammaridean Amphi- 
poda from the Gulf of California and the Galapa^ 
gos Islands. Smiths. Contr. 271: 1-149, 74 figs. 
Barnard^ J. L. & G. S. Karaman 1991. The families and 
genera of marine gaminaridean .Amphipoda (except 
marine gammaroids). Part 2. Rec. Australian Mus. 
SuppE. 13 (Parts I & 2): 866 pp., 1 33 figs. 

Bate C. S, 1856. On the British Edriophthal ma. Rept. 

Brit. Assoc, Adv, Sci for 1855: 18-62, pis. 12-22. 
Bate, C. S., 1857. British Edriophthalma. Ann. Mag. 

Nat. Hist., scr. 2, 20: 524-525, 

Bate, C. S. 1862. Catalogue of the specimens of am- 
phipodous Crustacea in the collections of the Brit- 
ish Museum, iv + 399 , pis. 1, I A: 2-58, British 
Museum Nat. London. 

Bate C. S. & J. O. Westwood, 1863, A History of the 


AMPHIPACJFICA VOL. 3 No. 3, Nov, 15, 2002 


14 


British Sessile-eyed Crustacea. 1 : 507 pp. , +yh- 
numbered figs. London, John van Voorst. 

BoLLsfield, E. L. E. A. Hendrycks. 2002- The tali- 
troidean am phi ped family Hyalidae revised, with 
emphasis on the North PaeiHe fauna: systematics 
and distributional ecology. Amphipacifica 3C3): 17- 
135, 65 figs. 

Bulycheva, A. N. 1957. The Sea fleas of the USSR and 
adjacent waters (Amphipoda: Talitroidea). Keys to 
the Fauna of the USSR. Acad. Sci. USSR 65: I ^ 1 85^ 
66 figs, (in Russian). 

Che vreux, t. 1925. Voyager de la god I eite Mehta 
aux Canaries et au Senegal, I S89-] 890, Amphi- 
podes, L Ciammariens,cont, Bull, Soc. Zool. France, 
20: 365-398. 

Chevreux, E. & L. Page, 1925. Amphipodes. 
Faune de France: 4^8 pp,, 438 figs. 

Dana. ,1 D, 1853. Crustacea, Part I L United Slates 
Expiortng Expedition 14; 689- 1618, atlas of 9t pis. 

DclJa-Valle, A. 1893, Gammarini del Golfodi Napoli, 
Fauna und Flora des Golfes von Neapel und der 
angnenzenden Meeres-Abschnitte, Monogr, 20: 948, 

Giovaninni, R. 1965, Revision des especes benthiques 
Mediterraneennes du genre Hyale. Rec. Trav. Stat, 
Mar. d'Endoume, Bull, 37(53): 277-340, 23 figs. 

Gurjanova, E. F. 1951, Bokoplavy moreii SSSR i 
sopredel'nykh vod (Amphi poda-Gammar idea), 
Akad. Nauk SSSR,Opred. Faune SSSR41: 1029 
pp., 705 figs. 

Howarth, M. K. I981i , Palaeogeography of the Meso- 
zoic, pp, 193-220. in P. \1 Greenwood (ed.). The 
Evolving Earth, Cambridge Uni v. Press. 264 pp. 

Johnson, S. E, 1986. Order .Amphi poda, pp. 372-381, 
[q Sterrer, W,, Marine Fauna and Rora of Bermuda, 
John Wiley & Sons, 742 pp, 

K rapp- Sch ic kcl , G . 1 974, Cam i 1 1 Uel le rs SammI u ng 
adiiati&cher Amphi poden - 1 866 und heute, Ann, 
Naturh. Mus, Wien 78: 319-379, 1-28 pis. 


K rapp-Sc hi ckel , G , 1 993 , Fa mi ly T al i tri dae , pp.72 8- 
768. in S. Ruffo (ed.). The Amphip<3daof the Med- 
iteiranean. Part 3, Gammaridca, (Melphidippidae to 
Talitridae), Ingolfiellidea, Caprellidea, Mem, Inst. 
Oceanograph. (Monaco) 13: 577-813, 

Kunkel, B. W. 1910. The Amphipodaof Sermuda. 
Trans. Conn, Acad. Arts. Sci. 16 : 1-1 16, 43 figs. 

IJncoln, R,J, 1979. British Marine A mpliipoda: Gam- 
maridea, 658 pp, 280 figs,, 3 pis, London: British 
Museum (Natural Ffistoiy). 

Mate us A, & E. Maieus 1966. Amphipodes litloreaux 
de Princi pe et de Sao T onie, Campagne de la 
Calypso. Ann. Inst. Oceanogr. 44: 1 73- 198, 1 3 figs, 

Myers, A. 1991. Mow did Hawaii accumulate its biota? 
A testfrorn the Amphipoda. Global Bcol. & Siogeogr, 
Letters 1 : 24-29, 2 tigs. 

Nicolet, H, 1849. Crustaceos In: Historiafisicay pol- 
itica de Chile,, publ. por Claudio Gay, Zoologia, 3: 
1 15-31 8, 4 pL Paris: C. Gay; Santiago: Museo de 
historia natural. 

Rathke, H. 1837, Zur Fauna der Krym. Ein Beitrag. 
Mem. Pres. Acad. lm|>sr Sci. SL Peters bourg. 3: 2- 
9^54, pis. 30. 

Sai s, G, O. 1 890, Amphipoda. .An account of the 
Crustaceaof Norway 1: 71 1 pp.,240 pis., SsuppLpIs, 

Smith, S. 1. 1874. A synopsis of the higher freshwater 
Crustacea of the northern United States. Appendix 
F, Natural History. U. S. Commission of Fish & 
Fisheries. 2: 637-661,3 pis,, atlas (61 pis,), 

Stebbing, T, R, R. 1906. Amphipoda I. Gammaridea, 
[>as Tierreich: 1-806, tigs. 1-127. 

Stock,]. K. 1987. Sty gofauna of the Canary islands, 
5, A hypogcan population of (Amphipoda) 

in the James del agua l-ava T unnel (Lanzarote), a 
supposed case of recent evolution. Stygologia 3(2): 
167-184, 7 figs. 

Vader, W. 1971. Additions to the Amphipoda of north- 
ern Norway. Astatte4, 1971:47-51, tig. I. 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL 3 No. 3, Nov. 15.2002 


15 


Ocean Voice International — is alive and well and carrying on with the 
work and legacy of its Founder the late Dn Donald £. McAllister. 



OVl's new addres.^: 

1604 Michael Street. Ottawa, Kl B 3T7 

Td: 613-721-4541 

H Y PERLINK '‘http://w w w ,ov j.ca” 

WWW'hOvE.C 

OV I 's objectives are to: 

- conserve the diversity of marine life; 

- protect and restore marine ecosystems and ecological 
services they render; 

- enhance the quality of life and equity of benefits for 
coastal fisher coniniunities; and 

- promote the ecologically sustainable harvest of ma 
rine resources. 


OVI attempts to reach these goaJs through: 

- prodLietion and dissemination of educational material 

- partnerships with other NGOfs 

- engaging and sharing of scientific research and indi- 
genous know-ledge 

- fostering the participation of marine harvesters in 
decision making, managenient and co^^pe^at^on, ajid 

' writing, soliciting, publishing and communicating 
relevant articles, periodicals, manuals and books. 


Printing Corrections 
I. Amphipacificfit Voh 3^ No* 1* 

&i>usfLeJd, E L. 2001 . An updated comm ent^irv- on phyictic 
classification of the am phi pod Crustacea and Its apphcaiion 
10 the North American fauna, Amphipadfica 3(1); 49- Eli. 

Page 104; The foElowiiig new names were attributed to a 
descriptive taxonomic paper referenced as Bousfieid (1981) 
that was not published, and the names were therefore ta\- 
oromically unavailable; 

Hyak' oculaut: Lepfohyate hngipatpa ; Furalhrchs^k-f aimfr- 
icana, P, brevimrnii. P. minifnii, P. minor. P. nuda, P, oed- 
denkiiis, P. spifioxa. P. subcannata. P. sapracartmiki, P. 
triipinosa: Proiohyak intermedia. P. odairi. P. seuconiis, 
and P. sphiosa. Prowhyate /agume MS name was incor- 
rectly attributed to the authorship of Stout, 19 1 3. .All are 
fu! ly treated i n the fol low] ng paper ( Bousficl d and Hendix cks 
2002). Paroihrcbe.stes minor, P. ocddentalis, P. sirpra- 
carimua, and Protohyale spinosa^iLK fully described under 
new taxonomic names. 

Page 1 1 1; corrected spelling - Family Artesiidae. 


II. Amphlpaciricu^ VoL 3^ No, 2. 

Wang, D, & J. R. Holsinger 2001. Syslematlcs of the 
subterranean amphi ptxJ gen \A^5fygobromu^ (Cmngonyctidae) 
in western North America, with emphasis on the hnbbsi 
group. Ampkipacipco 3(.2y. 39-147. 

Page 39: postal code in a til hors" address should be 23.S29, 
Page 1 20; charge “form''’ to “from "in .3rd line from bottom 
of page, 

Page 127: change male GNl to GN2 in Figure 54, 

Page 132: the branch leading to rail us and saltuarison the 
taxon-area cladcjgram in figure 62 on page 144 should be 
added to the taxon cladograni in figure 56 on page 132. 
Page 141; Hubbsi should be huhhsi In line 2 of caption for 
figure 59. 

Page 143; iubbsi should be hahhd In Jane 2 of caption for 
figure 61. 


AMPHIPACinCA VOL. 3 No. 3, Nov. IS, 2002 


16 


The Canadian Field-Naturalist: 122 years of northern biodiversity publication 

TheCanadicin Field -Natural I St publishes articles and notes on original research and observations on nattiraJ 
history a'levanl to Canada (therefore on northern portions of both Nearcticand PaJaearclic regions; including 
distribution, faunal analyses., taxonomy, ecology, and behaviour^ and items of news, comment, tributes, review 
papers, book reviews and new titles. The official publication of The Ottawa Reid- Naturalists’ Clubjt prints 
minutes of the annual meeting and awards presented by the Club. Recentspecial have featured such diverse 
topics as the history of botanicaJ investigation of Canada, St, Pierre et Miquelon, and Gr^nland; a biography 
of the Canadian ornithologist Percy A. Taverner, a history of the Canadian Wildlife Service, and an analysis 
of the Orchids of the Ottawa district as well as many individual papers and collections on species at risk in 
Canada. 

The Ottawa Held- Naturalists' Gubwasfomiedin I879b> scientists from embiyonic federal departments, 
including the Geological Survey and the Dominion Ex peri mental Farm, together with leading amateurs of the 
time; a similar mix remainsas its strength to this day. The Club quickly emphasized publication, and for seven 
years beginning in 3 R80, it aninually issued the T ransactions of the Ottawa Field -Naturalists' Cl ub. With 
volume 3 in 1 887, the Transactions became a subtitle for Volume I ofTheOttawaNatunijisFa new monthly 
puHicaiion, With Volume3 ofTheOttaw^a Naturalist in 1SS9 emphasis shifted from largely local members' 
reports to national ones and in 19 1 9 the journal was renamed The Glanadian Field-Naturaiisi (starting with 
Volume 33 which was Volume 35 of the T ransactions, although this subtitle was soon omitted). The issues 
per year w ere gradual 1 y red uccd from 1 2 to 9 to 6 and , eventual I y , to 4; the 1 alter begi n n i ng w i th V ol ume 67 
in 1 953, but the individual issLie size increased. The annual pages published reached a record of 794 in ] 988 
(volume 1 02) and 1 994 (volume 1 12). The largest single issue 254 pages was, however, published in 1996 
as 1 1 0( I ). Since 1 %7. the Club has separately published a local (Ottawaarea) natural history journal, T rail 
Sir Landscape, now also issued 4 times a year. 

Submissions to The Canadian Field-Naturalist and its predecessors have been peer reviewed since its 
inception, first through a “Publishing Committee''’, later "Sub-editors", and then ‘"Assistant Editors" until die 
present designation "‘Associate Editors" was adopted in 1 885, Currently, most submissions also go to at least 
one (often more) additional reviewers). Associate Editors are 1 isted in every issue and, since 1 982, additional 
review^ers been acknowledged indi vidually in the Editors Report annually. A formal publication policy was 
published in The Canadian Field -Naturalist 97(2 ): 23 1 -234, '"Advice to Contributors" is published i n one or 
more i ss ues an nuaJ J y gi vi ng format and charges . The Ottawa Field-Natural i sts' Club at the begi nni ng of 2002 
had 978 members and The Canadian Field-NaluniJist an additional 255 individual and 474 institutional 
subscribers in Canada, the United States, and 22 other countries world-wride, fora totai distribution of 1 707 
copies per issue. The journal i s enti rel y su pported through 40% of cl ub mem bershipfees 1 00% of su bscri ptions, 
80% of the annual interest on Club in vestment funds Including the Tom Manning Bequest, plus publication 
charges for reprints, figures, tables, and a portion of page costs (although the latter may sometimes be wai ved 
for authors who lack institutional or other funds la support their work). 

The current annual subscription rate is S28 for individuals and $45 for institutions. Membership in The 
Ottawa Field-Naturaiists’ Club (which includes receipt of The Canadtaji Field-Naturalist) is $28 fbrindi vid- 
ua! s and S30f or fami 1 i es. Postage outside Canada i s $5,00additi onal . The Joumid is not aval I able on the i ntemet, 
but tables of contents for each issue are posted on The Ottawa Field-Naturalists Club website hitp// 
www,achlllcs.neu'of nc.dndex.htm. Subscriptions should be sent loThe Canadian Field- Naturalist, Box 35069 
Westgate P.O., Ottawa, Ontario, Canada KI21A2, Manuscripts for consideration (three copies) should be 
mailed to Dn Francis R. Cook, Editor, Canadian Reld-NaturaJist, RR 3, North Augusta. OEttario KOG I RO, 
Canada. 


F. R. Cook, Eiditgr. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002, 


17 


THE TALITROIDEAN AMPHIPOD FAMILY HYALIDAE RE\TSED, WITH EMPHASIS 
ON THE NORTH PACIFIC FAUNA: SYSTEM ATICS AND DISTRIBUTIONAL ECOLOGY. 

E. L. fiousfieJd^ and E. A. Hendrycks^ 


ABSTRACT 

Analysis ill hyalid species of cmsiaJ waters of ihe North Fiieinc Basin ha^d on newly recognized charecier^ 
(e i., hydrcxly nanniic Ittbesof gnathopexts, surge setaand notch of ihe posterior margin of the bases of pemeopods 
5-7), and lhi>se recently utilized elsewhere (e.g., prc-annple\jn.g notch of peraeon 2 female, posterior marginal cusps 
of coxae I -4, and form of brcsxl lamellae and marginal selae), necessitaied esiablishmcnl of new- generic concepts 
and family recon siitution on a world wide basis. Hyalidae here encompasses subfamilies Hyallnae Raihke (new 
status) based on Hyaie Rathke sens, str .: Kurilnae J, L. Barnard (new status), based on Kuria tongimana Scott ^ 
Walker and Micropyihici Krapp-SehitkeH; and llyaebeliinae new subfamily, ba.scd on HyacheHa torlugae J. L. 
Barnard. Subfamily Hyalinae encompasses two morphological -beliaviouraJ groups of genera: ( 1) a reigiively 
primitive naiator group, hydrodynamically specialized for swimming, that includes Paraliorckeit&s Shoemaker, 
Pt&t&hyale n, g., Leiehutt J. L. Barnard, Hvaie Rathke sens, sir. , and the enigmatic genus Neobuk Hsiswe]] 
{Frotohyate encom passes n, subg., Diptohyale n, subg,. Leptohyalen. subg., and Promhyaie^ nominate 

subgen ns: and (2) a relatively advanced maLnly intertidal saltaior gmup (special i/cd for jurri ping or springing in air) 
that encompass^ Farhyate Stebbing, Ptiiohyale n. g,, Apohyak n. g., Rujfohytdt n. g., and H^rejuhyak n. g. 
Newly described from the Pacific coast of North America are: Parailorchestes almke mis n. sp.. F. asritmta n 
sp., P. n. sp., F. kahstai n. sp.., F. kbiondi n. .sp., P. minima n. .sp., P. nuda n. sp., /*. subcaiinam n, sp., 

and F* irhpinosa n, sp. Also redescribed arc P, (nmriema Bousfield. and three wesiem N. PaciRc species: P. 
asiaiica T zvet kov a. P. ochoiensis ( B rEmdt ) and P. zitdUna { Derzha-i in). Protohyak encinnpasses within subgcn us 
Boreohyak the fejl lowing N. American Pacific species; F. fB.) kiwaturii n. sp., F. (B.Ji jarrettae n. sp.,/*. (if.) 
iamh^rti n. sp-i P^ (Bd nMonon^mis n. sp., P. fB.) oclaih n, sp., P. fB.) ocakt/a u, sp., jP. (B,Ji s^ticon\is n. sp., 
and within the monoiypic subgenus Lept&hyak^ F. {L> iongipaipa, n. sp. Species within subgenus Protohyuk 
tHJCur in soulhcm (.'alifomiaand BajaCaliforTiia (Mexieo), including F. (P.J camika (Barnard), P. iP.frequens 
(Stout), R fP. ) ffiofin n. sp,, and P. iP.) yaqui (Barnard). North .American Pacific saltaling hvalids include 
Apohyol^ Qficeps (Barnard), A. caUfomka fBarnard), A. (f)ana) and Ptilohyak piumuiosa (Stimpson). 

Key s, jlliLsirations, and numerical taxonumical and distributional analy se.-i are alstr pro\ ided, I'he cold-tempcmU; 
hyalids of eastern and western Nonh Pacific hyaJids are not closely related, and the warm- temperate hyalids of the 
western Pacific have closer affinities with ihiise of the central Pacific (Hawaiian) archipelago. 


INTRODliCnON 

Species of Hy alidae occur mainly intertidaJ ly and in 
shallow lIttoraJ marine waters. Although not usually 
conspicuous because of their relatively small size and 
somewhat concealed life style, these aquatic 
talitroideans were nonetheless among the earliest 
am phi pod species recorded and described from the 
coasts of Eurasia {e,g., Rathke 1 R37; Kroyer 1 845: Bate 
1 856) and newly colonized Pacific continental coasts 
during the i9th century (e,g-, Dana 1853: Stimpson 
I S57). N i neteenth centu ry records were su mmari zed 
by Stebbing ( 1 9i}6) and early 20th century records by 
Holmes ( I Stout (1913), and Thorsieinsoti (1^1 ), 

The authors are enonnously indebted to the late J. L. 
(Jerry) Barnard whose publications on the littoral ma- 
rine amphipods of California. Baja. Hawaii, and Galap- 
agos regions (1970, 1974,1979), and earlier studies 
(1952, 1954, 1955, 1962, 1965, 1969b, 1975) liiid a 
solid foundadon for the present Investigaihon. Popular- 


i zed com pendia i ncl ud i n g tliose of Hi cketts and Cal v i n 
(1948), Smith 8c Carlton (1975), Austin. (1985) and 
Staude ( ] 987) provide regional lists and keys to species 
of the northwestern Pacific coast. 

Essential elements of the present study of the North 
Pacific hyalids were first summarized by Bousfield 
( 1981 ). As this summary w as to be accompanied by 
full taxonomic treatment of neiv taxa elsewhere* the 
Ulustrations were small, unaccompanied by formal 
diagnoses* or identification of type specimens and type 
locaJiries. Regrettably, the intended pubticarion series 
I Bulletin of the National Museum of Natural Sciences* 
Canada) w as discontinued shortly thereafter. The in- 
tended treatise (Bousfield MS)* bearing essentially the 
same tide as the present, did not appear, thus rendering 
die present paper in effect an ’'interrupted publication" 
(ICZN 1985, article 23). Consequently, the names 
(1981 ) that were apparently considered unavailable 
(nomina nudaf by most subsequent authors, including 


' Research Associate, Royal Ontario Museum, Toronto, ON, CAN MSS 2C6; 

- Research Division, Canadian Museum of Nature, Oltawa, ON, CAN K I F 6P4 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2001 


18 


definitive gammaridean amph(|X)d treatments (e.g*, 
Barnard & Karaman 1991; jshimarxi 1994) are herein 
val i dated bj' tbrmaJ descri ption ( iCZN ) . T he pi^scnt 
study is intended, therefore, to complete formal de- 
scription of these new taxa under new names, and 
expand die work into a preliminary world-w ide review 
of the entire family Hyalidae. 

Taxonomic knowledge of the family has increased 
rapidly elsewhere. Thtts, during the past 35 years the 
family has increased from 60 described species (Barnard 
1969a) to the present -110 species in 12 genera and 
three subfamilies. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

For assistance with field work the authors are greatly 
indebted to regional marine laboratories, nouibJy the 
Pacific Biological Statiom Nanaimo, B. C., the PaciHc 
Environmental hmitute. West Vancouver, B. C the 
Bamfteld Marine Station, B. C.. and the Friday Harbor 
Laboratories, WA. Much of the detail has been ac- 
knowledged in previous station lists (below). Drs. 
Craig P. Staudeand Colin B. Levings, and the late Dra. 
Josephine F. L, Hart, and Daniel B. Quayle were 
especially helpful with the field work. 

The authors are grateful to Drs. Peter Slattery and 
Charles E. O'Clair for providing valuable study mate- 
rial from the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands regions. 
Dr, Nina Tzvetkova, Zoological Museum, St Peters- 
burg, provided helpful commentary and Joan of valu- 
able western North Pticific material. We much value 
the careful research assistance tind commentaryof Drs. 
Shin-ishi Ishimaru, A. Hirayama, and Takehito Hi w atari 
whose publications have been instrumental in develop- 
ing know ledge of western Pacific regional amphltx>d 
faunas. Dr, TraudI K rap p- Schickel has helped espe- 
daliy in clari Tying the Taxonomic status of genus Hyaie. 
Drs. Cristiana Serejoand Yoko Wakabara have pro- 
vided most helpful material , commentaiy , and usage of 
their publications in clarifying taxonomic and morpho- 
logical aspects of tropical .Atlantic genera. We are 
especially grateful to Dr. Dale R. Calder, Royal Ontario 
Museum, Toronto, for his advice on implementation of 
ICZN rules vis-a-vis previously unavailable taxonomic 
names. Mr.Thurlow ArbuckJe, Ottawa, directed the 
senior author to sources of information on hydrody- 
namic features of hull design in powered ocean vessels, 
and thelf probable applicability to the overall stream- 
lined form of coxal and basal plates and anierodistal 
lobes of basal and ischial segments of the gnathopods 
of the am phi pod crustacean. 


Taxonomic work on CMN am phi pod collections 
was performed initially by BLB as a staff member of the 
National Museum of Natural Sciences at the Holly 
Lane Laboratory , Ottawa, during the period 1979- 
] 985 , and more recently as a vi si Li n g scientist. Ori gi naJ 
line illustrations were prepared with the capable assist- 
ance of artist Roy E. Zfttin, Capeitlno, California- The 
authors are indebted to Marjorie Bousfield for transla- 
tions of the Russian literature. 

The work was carried out mainly in research labora- 
tories of the Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa. The 
authors are especially grateful to assistant collections 
manager Judith C Price in retriev ing, cataloguing, and 
labeling of CMN amphipod material , and to Mr. Noel 
AlfonsOt CMN, for assistance in computerized map 
preparation. Mr. Pierre Marcoux provided most valu- 
able curatorial, research, and artistic assistance that 
measureably improved the scope of the study. 


Table 1. Abbreviations used in figures and tables: 
A 1-2 - antenna L 2 

BAS - basis 


BR SET 

CARP 

CLSP 

CX 

ixm. 

EPI-3 

GN 1-2 

HD 

rSCH 

LFT 

LI. 

MD 
MER 
MX L2 
MXPD 
P3-7 

P-AMP hfTCH 

Pt^PD 

PLP 

PRPD 

RET 

R1 

SGSET 

SP 

T 

UE-.1 

lit. 

t.lROS 

X 

em 


hroexi setale) 
carpus 

ololhes-pin spine 
coxal plate 
dactyl 

abdonvln. side plates ],.2.3 

gnalhop(,)ds I T 2 

head 

ischium 

left 

lower lip (labium) 

mandible 

merus 

maxilla 1. 2 

maxilliped 

peraeopods 3, 4, 6. 7 

preamplexing notch 

picopod 

palp 

propod 

retinacula 

right 

surge seta 

spine 

iclson 

uropod 1 , 2, 3 
upper lip tlahrum) 
urosome 
enlarged 
immature 


jiiv - juvenile 

- subadulL 


AMPHlPACinCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15. 20&2, 


19 


MATERIALS AND METHODS. 

Station lists pertinent to field mLiterial utilized in this 
study are provided in Boysfidd (1958, 1963, 1968); 
Bousfceld i& McAllister (1962); and Bousfield &Jameil 
(198!). N umbers of spet irraens colkcied at each sta- 
tion are given in parentlieses. 

Analyses of possible phyletjc relationships of hyalid 
genera and species utilize a semi-phyletic modification 
of the UPGMA system of Sneath and Sokal (1973). 
Characters and character states are illustrated mainly in 
Figures 1-4. These are ordered phyleiically by values 
of 0, 1 , and 2 for plesiomorphic, intermediate, and apo- 
morphic states, respectively. The phyletic placement 
of a given taxon is represented by a numerical sum of 
character state values temred the Plesio-Apomorphic 
(P.-A.) Index of ^'hich the maximum value is twice the 
number of characters utilized. 

SYSTEMATICS 

HYALID AE Bulycheva 

Hyalidae Bulycheva, 1957: 76;— BousBeld 1982; 269; 
-Bousfieid 2001a: 104;-Serejo 2001; 480, 
Hyalidae (part): Barnard Jk Karaman 1991: 366;— 
Bousfieid Sl Shih 1994: 1 29;-I.shimam 1994: 67;- 
Lowry & Springthorpe 2002. 

Hyalinae (Tat itridae) (part) Barnard 1972: 167;— Grif- 
fiths 1976: 76, 

Talitridae(|.>art)Stebhing 1906: 523;— Gurjanova 1951; 
813. 

Talitroidea (part) Barnard 1969a: 463;— Barnard & 
Barnard 1983: 16L 

Subfamilies: Hyalinae RathkeT 837, restricted status; 
Hyachelnnae n. subfam.; Kuriinae Barnard, 1964, 
new status. 

Diagnosis; Body smooth or posteriorly middorsally 
toothed. Antennae well developed; Antenna I longer 
than peduncle of antenna 2; gland cone small. 

Mandible, left lacinia 5-S dentate. Maxilla I , palp 
slender,! -2 segmented, Maxilla 2, inner plate with I 
(2) pi umose inner marginal seta(e). MaxilJ i ped, plates 
well developed, palp large, occasionally sexually di- 
morphic (dactyl often with apical whip flagellum in 
male). 

Coxal plates 1^ normal, medium deep: posterior 
marginal shelf and cusp variously developed, reduced, 
or lacking. Coxae 5 slightly anterolobate. Coxal gills 
medium to large, plated ike or sac-like. 


Gnathopod 1 small, regularly subchelate, propod 
and/or dactyl variously sexually dimorphic; basis often 
with anterodistal hydrodynamic lobe; dactyl simple, 
occasional ly bidentate or bifid (male). Gnathopod 2 
usually strongly sexually dimorphic; basis & ischium 
often with hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe developed 
(female) or mostly lacking (male); propod and dactyl 
strongly developed (male). 

Peraeopods 3-7 regularly ambulator) 7' perching" or 
prehensile (Hyacheliinae). Peraeopesds 5-7 essential ly 
homopodous; bases broad, hind margin variously 
crenulated, usually with submedian notch and ‘^surge 
seta”; proptxt often with anterior marginal clasping 
spinc(s); dactyl strong and simple, or relatively short, 
with strong inner marginal seta. 

Hpimeral plates regular, w'eakly armed. Pleopod 
rami normally developed, natatory . Uropod I, pedun- 
cle and rami subequat in length; peduncle often with 
strong distal spine{s): rami linear, marginally spinose. 
Uropod 2 similar, smaller, outer ramus often shorter. 
Uropod 3 short, spino.se, essentially uniramous, or with 
inner ramus reduced to a small lobe. 

Telson short, fully bilobate, lobes subtri angular. 

Mature Female: Gnathopod s regularly subchelate, 
subsimilar. Brood lamellae variously subovate, 
sublunate, or subrhomboidal in outline, maigins lined 
with numeorus hook-tipped setae. Peraeon segment 2 
anterO' distal margin usually with pre-amplexlng notch. 

Habitatr Mari nc I i itoral , f rce s w i m m i n g or i nteni dal 
and saltatory, often associated with algae and marine 
grasses: nearly cosmopolitan (except polar region.^), 
along temperate to tropicaf mainly rocky, surf -ex- 
|X>sed, hjgh"Salinity shores; a few species are estuarine 
and brackish -water, and members of one genus are 
hypogean in coastal freshwaters. 

Remarks: Implementation of names of taxa, newly 
utilized In previous publications but taxonomically 
unavailable, here conform with rulings set forth in the 
1 CZN Code ( 1 985 and 1 999) , Sect. 1 8 , A rt. 2 3, .A p|>ar- 
entl y for the reason of taxonom ic una vai I abi 1 ity , Bamaixl 
& Karaman (1991) and Ishimaru ( 1 994) did not oracl ude 
i^ew species names proposed by Bousfieid ( 1981 ) for 
North American Pacific species of Hyaie Rathke sens, 
lat. and PamUorchestes S hoemaker. A Ithough most of 
these species were again listed, and four new generic 
names added by Bousfieid (2(X)la), all but one name 
remal ned tec hnl cal I y as tuymhta n ada . T he except! on 
was Paraihrehest^i afmricana Bousfieid, 19RL re- 
wgnized and validated through detailed comparison of 


AMPHIPACJFICA VOU 3 N0.3 Nov, 15. 2002. 


20 


its character states with those of the western Pacific 
Species, P. miatlm JzvcXkovA. 1990. [n foO owing the 
provisions of ICZN ruhngs ( above J, the authors have 
here fuJty described and figured, and hence taxonom- 
ieally validated, many of the original names; in some 
instances, however, alternate new names have been 
proposed, as detailed in the following descriptive ac- 
counts of hyaJid subfamilie.s, genera and species. 

Almost uniquely among malacostraean crustaceans, 
the basic amphipod body form is designed for sustained 
rapid forward swfrnmingfBoudnas 1991 ). Mysidaceans 
also propel themselves forward, but since the body and 
appendages are streamlined, the forward motion is 
short, jerky, and unsustained (personal observations on 
spcci mens of Pmmus flexuostii in acfnaria ) , A I thou gh 
synchroflELsh, cinephoiographic evidence is not yet 
available, a primary function of the subsimilar, large- 
plated peraeopods, overlapping forwards and back- 
wards from the "shoulder" or” beam'' segment (peracon 
5). would appear to be streamlining of the lateral body 
surfaces during swimming. The large a^unded basal 
plates of peraeopods 5-7 may also serve in rudder-] ike 
steering and/or "braking" action by means of an alters 
nate, or simultaneous, conlmlled outward e.xtension of 
their trailing edges. The lobes of the bilobate telson 
may also serve in steering and/or elevation during 
swimming. Such presumably adapts members of fam- 
ily Hyabdaefor swimming and benthic "perching’' (of 
Steele 1988) in the strongly lotic conditions of surf- 
exposed coastal marine littoral and sublitloraf habitats. 

By contrast- described members of closely related 
family Hyalellidac Bulycheva (see Hendrycks 
Bousfceld 2001 ) are ambulatory, algal-dwelling, and 
semi-fossorlal, mainly in temperate and tropical ma- 
rt ne and f resh w atcr sedi men tarv' bottoms. I n al I hyal e! I id 
species, the basal and ischial segments of gnathopnds 
I & 2 (both sexes) totally lack anterodi.stal hydrody- 
namic lobes: the basal segments of peraeojxxls 5*7 lack 
po.sterior jnarginal notch and "surge seta"; the disto- 
laterat and disiomedial peduncular spines of uropod ! 
are not enlarged; and the telson lobes have become 
basal ly fused fe.g,, in Ailorchejites) or totally fused as 
a solid plate (e.g., in Hyaieiia, P/4rhyaieIki), and of 
possibly different primary function. Freshwater mem- 
bers of family Hyalellidae possess stemaJ gills, and 
often processjferous body segments, but less robust 
peraeopods and urop<xls. 

The website version of Hyaiidae by Lo^vry (1999), 
and l-owry and Sprmgthorpe (2001 ) follows that pro- 
posed by Barnard & Karaman (1991). The version was 
apparently not subject to numerical analysis of charac- 


ter states then considered significant. More recenliy, 
alphabet caJ compendia have increasingly been super- 
seded by phyletically oriented generic- and famiJy- 
Eeve! revisions in which new and important character 
smtes have been recognized and the results supported 
by numerical analysis. Since 1986. these studies, 
including the present, have increased the world total by 
-20% more species and -30% more genera. We hope 
therefore, that the present comprehensive analysis of 
family Hyaiidae will more concisely define its diagnos- 
tic character states and generic inclusions, and under- 
line its morphological. distributional-ecoiogicaJ, and 
behaviour^iJ differences from other families within 
supertamily Talitroidea. 


Subfamily Hyalin ae restricted jjtatus 

Hyalinae (part) Barnard 1972: 1 67; -Griffiths 1976; 
76. 

Type genus: Hyaic Rathke, 1 837. 

Genera: Apohyale n. g. (p, 104); Hyak Rathke. 1 837 
(p. 9); Leiehna Barnard, 1970 (p, 92); Neobiile Hasvvell , 
1 880 (not treated); Paralhrchestes Shoemaker, 1941 
(p. 36); Farhyak Stebbing 1 899 fp 96); Frot&hyaie n. 
g. Cp. 62) \B&teohyale n. subg.; Diplohyate n, subg,. 
l.epmmhyaie n. subg.; Protohyak nom. subg.|; Pn'to- 
ftyak rt. g. (p. 98); Ru/f^hytik n. g. (p. 1 16); Serejo- 
Ijyak n. g. (p, 114), 

Diagnosis: Small to medium large, free-living, mor- 
phologically and bchaviourally basic members of the 
Talitroidean Reptantia. Combinational diagnostic 
character states include: Antenna 2 medium to elon- 
gate. 

Coxal plates 1-4. posterior marginal "shelf and/or 
cusp often strongly developed. Coxal gills large, plate- 
like or sac-1 ike, S ternal gi ] 1 s J ack i n g . 

Gnathopods I & 2 subchelate, strongly differing in 
fonn and size (male), subsimilarffemale): gnathopod 
1 weakJy. and gnathopod 2 usually strongly sexually 
dimorphic. Hydrodynamic lobes of basis and ischium 
of gnathopods variously developed (both sexes) 
Peraeopods 5-7; basis broad, hind margin often 
crenulated, with single notch and "surge seta", 
Pleopods sleiider, with reduced retinacula, but fully 
developed plumose -setose rami. Uropods I & 2, rami 
stout, marginally irregularly spinose (not slender, seri- 
ally spinose and natatory). Uropod 3 uniramous or 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 NO,3 Nov, 15. 2002, 


21 


weakly biramotis, Tel son short, fully bilobate. Brood 
lamellae large, broad, variously subovate to 
subrhomboidal, Preainpleining notch present. 

Remarks: Subfamily HyaJinae encompasses al] but 
three described species of family Hyalidae, assigned to 
subfamiJies Kuiiinae and the Hyacheliinac, Within 
Hyalinae, the stout strongly spinose distal segments of 
the |>eraeopods would appear specially adapted to 
grasping or perching upon algae and other bottom 
substrata located in strongly lode waters such as the 
surf 7om of rocky beaches of tropical and temperate 
marine regions. 

Barnard ( 1 972) and Griffiths ( 1 974, 1 976) departed 
from the original falitroldeantlassifi calory concepts of 
Bulycheva (1957) in relegating members of families 
Hyalidae and HyalelSidae to subfamily status (as 
Hyalinae) within family Talitridae, However, evi- 
dence revealed by the present study provides greater 
support for continued recognition of the orginal con- 
cepts of Bulycheva (loc. cit ). 

Characters and Character states 

The main characters and their possible states within 
the Hyalinae (Figs, I -3) inquire little clarification here, 
unlike the five characters discussed below. 

L Hydrodynamic (h.-d.) lobes of the grtathopuds. 

The design of the body and appendages of amphipod 
crustaceans is imique within malacostracan crusta- 
ceans in maximizing sustained forward swimming 
speed. H y drody nam i c effi ciency is faci I i tated throu g h 
a forward-thrusting abdominal propulsion unit (3 pains 
of picopods and tail-fan of 3 pairs of uropods and 
telson), and the stream! ined form and position of body 
plates and apfjendages. Such i ncl udes, in all amphipod 
custaceans. the forward-overiapping of coxal plates I - 
4, forward of ''beam"' peraeon segment 5 (widest body 
segment), and the backwards overlapping of basal, 
coxal, and epimertd plates posteriorly from that seg- 
ment. Coxa 5 (at the "beam"), universally within the 
Amphipoda, overlaps neighbouring plates both for- 
wards and backwards. In addition, body spines and 
carinations of swimming amphi pods are located mainly 
behind pemeon segment 5 and point posteriorly. 

By contrast, within caridean and most decapod 
shrimps (e.g., HofTuinis amerfcamts), the ’'beam" is at 
abdominal segment 2. The epimeral plate of that 
segment overlaps adjacent plates forward and backards 
and facilitates rapid backwards propulsion ("escape 
reaction") by the tail fan, Body and rostral spines of 


swimming decapods are located mainly on the 
cephalothorax and point anteriorly. 

A review of limited information and theoretical con- 
siderations concerning the hydrodynamics of garti- 
maridean amphi pods* especially of members of 
superfamily Lysianassoidea, is provided by Boudrias 
(1991). Supplemental i nformation on stream] ining of 
body and appendages in hyperiid amphipods (e,g„ 
with in superfamily Platysceloidea) is provided by Bow- 
man and Gruner (1973), and on swimming speeds by 
Takeuchi & Wamnabe (1998), Sainte-Marie (1986), 
and theoretical consideration herein. 

Broadly across genera of subfamily Hyalinae, the 
basis and ischium of gnathopods I ^ 2 are v ariously 
mtidified into large rounded lobes on the anterodistal 
segmental margins (nasiform lobe of Barnard 1979), 
These overlap on the adjacent segments hydrodynam- 
icaJ I y forw aids { Fi g. 4). The i r margi ns are rou nded, 
presumably to facilitate flexing of the segments and 
maintain streamlined form at norma! angles of flexure. 
The lobe of the basis is positionally anterodistolateral 
whereas the lobe of the ischium is mainly anterolateral. 

The purpose of the lobe has not yet been tested 
e X peri menta I [y , H owe v er , rnorphologi cal and beha v- 
ioural evidence indicates to us that iLs princi|>al func- 
tion is to streamline margins of appendages that are 
folded during swimming (see also Rgs. 5- 7). The 
appellation "hydrodynamic " or "h.-d.^lobe is used 
henceforth in this study. 

The distribution and strength of development of the 
hydrodynamic lobe on the basal and ischial segments 
of gnathopodis I & 2 is outlined graphically in fag. 4, 
Lobes are most strongly developed w- ithin the natatory 
genus Profohyaie, and intermediate or least strong in 
members of saltatory genera such as Piihhy ale. Apo- 
hyaie and Parhyaie. Lobes are generally less w^ell 
developed in the smaller gnathopods of females than in 
the larger gnathopods of males. Thus, even within 
Proiohyale, the Ischial lobe is not w^ell developed in 
gnathopod 2 of the female, ischial lobes are weakly 
developed In males of Parhyale and PfHohyaie, and 
apparently lacking In females of l^iehua and Hyale. 

Leite and Wakabara (1989) studied devcIopmeniaJ 
changes in the form and armature of gnathopod 2 of 
males and females of Protohyaie (P.} media (Dana). 
Although these authors beautifully illustrated carpus, 
propod and dactyl, they did not treat the significance of 
corresponding changes in the anterodistal (hydrody- 
namic) lobes of the basis and ischium. For this purpose^ 
pertinent parts of their figures are reproduced here 
(Figs, 5 & 6), In the male (Ftg, 5), the h.-d lobe of 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 NO,3 Nov. 15, 2002, 


22 


Pleslomorphic 




Intermedkate 


Apomorphic 



Rg, I. Characters and Character States of Hyalmae. A. Eye shape and antenna 2: semion; 
B, Mandibular left lacinia: dentation C. Maxilla I: segmentation of palp; 

D. Maxilliped palp: form of dactyl (<S ). E> Coxa I . posterior marginal shelf & cusp. 


basis and ischium are in early development stages 
d u ri ng the 6Lh to 4th I ast i nstars. They attai n f ul ! y 1 obale 
and overlapping form in ihc final three instars, coinci- 
dent with complete fusion of the unguis to the body of 
the dactyi, and presumably full sex ual maturity. In the 
female (fig. 6), the h.-d. lobe of the basis follows a 
similar progression, and atiains fully lol>eate conditon 
1 n the final two insiars, Tiiat of the ischium attains only 
very small size by the final instar. Such evidence might 


suggest that presence Of large hydrodynamic lobes of 
the gnathopods is an advanced character state in hyalid 
amph ipod s. .As thei r dev elopment to smal I si ze onl y in 
intertidal sai taring species might result fromneotenic 
loss, the phyletic significance of tliis character state 
remains moot. Corresponding studies on developmen- 
tal stages of gnat hoptxj 1 (male), and the preamplexing 
notch of peraeon 2 (female) may prove instructive in 
clarifying this point. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL, 3 NO, 3 Nov. \5 , 2002. 


23 


4 . 


PlesiomorDhic 



Intermediate 



Apomorphic 



R 








Fig. 2. CKaracters and Character Stares of Hyaiinae. A. Coxa 4: pusteror marginal cusp; 

B. Gnathopod 1 (c?); preampiexmg spines of propod; C. Gnathopod 2 (eT): size of carpal lobe; 

D. Peraeopods 5-6: size of clasping spine; E. Dactyl of peraeopods 5-7: size of inner marginal seta; 
F Peraeopods 5-7: degree of broadening of segment 4 (Literature sources). 


The presence of hydrodyitamic lobes in the Hyalinae 
(and Hyacheiinae) is here considered a secondaiy hut 
plesiomorphic character state. Its strong e-xpression in 
mainly free-swimming genera of Hyalinae (Fig. 4) 
especially in warm -temperate and tropical groups such 
as Protohyafe, tends to support the present concept of 
hydrodynamic functionality. Thus, streamlining of 
gnathopods in the swimming or "tuck" position pre- 
sumably facilitates a rapid escape reaction from fast- 
swim mi n a predators or quick movement from iotic surf 


waters or tidal cnirents into suitable benthic niches for 
food and shelter. 

Elsewhere within theTalitroidea, well -developed hy- 
drodynamic lobes have been detected on die basal and 
ischial segments of gnathopod 2 of mature males of 
most palustral genera of famil> Talitridae |see fig,7 , 
and Bousfidd 1973, I984|, In these species that are 
submerged for part or most of a tidal cycle (e.g.. in 
Porches tia, Proiorchesda, Uhlorhejsria) or that occur 
in freshwater (e.g., ChHtonorchestiaP the lobes occur 


AMPHrPACinCA VOL. 3 NO, 3 Nov. !5, 2002. 


24 


PJ(^siomorphic 


Intermediate Apdmofplric 



Rg. 3, Characters and character states of Hyalinae, 

A, Uropod K peduncular distal spine(s); B. Uropod 3, number of rami; 

C, Telson, form and armatare; D, Brood plate (peraeopod 2, 9), form and margiua] setation. 


anterodlstolateraOy on the basis, and both antem-later- 
al ty and anteromedialJy on the ischial segment (fig. 7). 
The lobes are generally less strongly developed in 
bcachfiea genera (e.g., Or chest In ^ Tethorchestia, 
Piatorchestia, and a few primitive terrestrial genera 
(e,g., Cerrorchesria spp., Orchesiieila neambukws) 
(see Lindeman 1991; Friend 1987), They arc weakly 
developed or lackijig in sandhopper genera (e.g., 
Americorchesiia, Megalorchestia, Sinorchestia^ (see 
BousHeld 1982, 1992; Merino 1972). Hydrodynaniic 
lobes are weakly developed on the basis and ischi um of 
males within subfamily Chiltoniinae (Hyalellidae), but 
apparently not developed (secondarily lost?) in other 
families and subfamilies ofTaJitroidea. 

Hydrodynamic lobes of gnathopods are known else- 
where within gammaridean arnphipods, but m eshaus- 
tfve review of their occurrence is bey ond the scope of 
this study. A few samples may 11 lustrate the phenom- 
enon. Thus, within the advanced tube-building super- 
family Corophioidea, well developed lobes of similar 
type have been illustrated in the powerfully subchelate 
gnat hoped 2 of males of family Ampithoidae (e.g.^ 
Ampithoe mlida. Peramphithoeplea)Jjim\\y Ischyro- 
ceridae (Ischyrocerus oahu, Parajassa angufarls), and 
in some Isaeidae (e.g,, P holts kapapa}, and in gnathO' 


pod I of family Aoridae (e.g., Aarordes) but not in 
familyDulichiidaelsecBousfield, 1973; Barnard 5970a: 
Barnard & Karaman, 1991 1. Within more primitive 
benthic superfamilies (e,g., Ljeucothoidea),pai red ischial 
lobes are present in the pow-erfully subchelate gnath- 
opods I & 2 of both sexes within family Pteustidae 
(e.g., Pleusies fuberculalus, Thorlataonius bofeaii:^) 
[see Bousfield & Hendrycks 19941, family Amph- 
ilochidae (e,g., Apolochits lilomlis, Hemrstonius vU- 
ordes), and in males within superfamily Stenothoidea 
(e.g., Stenoihoe marifta, Metope iln cingusta)r The 
anterior basal lobes of gnadiopcxl 2 w ithin the Cy amida 
(e.g., Cyamm^ Scidocyamus) may be considered hy- 
drodynamic lobes, even though the animal itself re- 
mains stationary (Mareoiis et al 2000). The lobes 
presumably facilitate smooth lannnar flow' of strong 
water currents resulting from rapid forward swimming 
of the host cetacean, currents that might otherwise 
dislodge the amphipod form its flattened ectoparasidc 
position on the whale's skin 

By contrast, basal and ischial lobes are apparently 
lithe develo|}ed within the mainly marine superfamily 
Hadzioidea, or in the mainly freshwater superfamilies 
Gammaroideaand Crangonyctoidea, even in free-swim- 
ming species that possess powerfully subchelate male 


AMPHIPAORCA VOL. 3 NO,3 Nov. 15. 2002. 


25 


BASIS AND 
ISCHIUM 

GNATHOPOO 1 
A. Male 


B. Female 


Plesiomorphic 

Lobes large 



R (Proiohyaie) 


intermediate 
Lobes medium 



Laptohya}e 


A pom Orphic 

Lobes small 
or lacking 



y 

Parhyaie 


GNATHOPOO 2 
C. Male 



R (PTotohyaie) 



PUIohyale 




Parhys^ 


Ptiiohyate 



D. Female 


P. (Protohyaie) 


L&ptohyate 


Fig. 4 Hydnxlynamic lobes of basal and ischial segments of gnathpods 1 & 2 (lateral view) 
in mature male and female hyalid am phi pods: character states. 


gnathopods. often of preamplexing function, Hydro- 
dynamic lobes are also not well developed within most 
superfamtlics of the "Natantia " taxonomic category^ 
except in a few instances where gnathopodsare power- 
fully developed and shott-wristed (e g., Eusiroide^i 
diplonyx Barn ard 1 970). 

The balance of morphological evidence, mainly 
within supertamily Talitroidea. indicates that basal and 
ischial lobes are best developed in powerfully subchelate 
gnathopods which fold tightly into a streamlined (hy- 
drodynamic) swimming position, presumably during 
preamplexing "carrying'' of the female. Exceptions to 
such generaJi^ed obseiwations. especially among non- 
tali troi dean amphipods, suggest that full solution to 
their functionality may require rigorous observations 
and high-speed photography of swimming amphipods 
under controlled laboratory conditions. 

2. The posterior marginal cusp of coxae 1-4 

The posterior margin of coxal plates 1^ frequently 
bears a median short shaiply rounded thumb-like proc- 
ess or acclivity (Barnard 1979), here termed the post- 
erior marginal cusp (figs. 1 E, 2F). The cusp occurs on 


all four coxal plates of species of advanced saltatory 
genera (e.g., Apokyaie, Fiilohyaie) within family 
Hy aJ idae and most speci es of fam i I y Tal i iridac (except 
some sandhoppers). The cusps are limited to fewer 
coxae, or none, in mainly aquatic hyaltds and are absent 
from other families within the Tali troidea. 

The function of the cusp has not been determined 
precisely. Its presence mainly in saltatory species sug- 
gests that, during a jumping or springing action, the 
cusp prevents hyperspreading of the plates beyond 
mechanically safe limits and thus ensures that adjacent 
plates return to their properly overlapped deflexed 
positions on termination of saltation. 

Jn some primitive saltatory groups {e.g„ Parhyak)^ 
a distinct cusp may be lacking but a postero-distal shelf 
is usually present. The shelf may be sharply rounded 
or shallow and nearly straight or imperceptible, espe- 
cially on coxa I (e.g., in Hyak spp., Fig. 46). In Par- 
hyak, short blunt cusps are usually present on the broad 
posterior shelf of coxae 2 &. 3. but coxa I bears a narrow 
shelf only. Also in Parhyale^ and some species of 
Protohyate, the proximal posterior margin typically 
bears a broadly obtuse cusp about mid point, 


AMPHIPAORCA VOL 3 NO, 3 Nov. 15, 20fl2. 26 






Fig. 5. Final 6 stages (Nos. 8- 1 3) of development of gnathopod 2 in the male of 
Frowhyale (F.) media (Dana) (medial view) (modified from Leite & Wakabara 1989). 



11 . 





Fig, 6. Final 6 stages (nos. S-I3) of development of gnathopod 2 in the female of 
Protohyale (P.) media (Dana) (medial view) (modified from Leite & Wakabara I9S9). 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL, 3 NO, 3 Noi. 15, 2002, 


27 



Fig, 7, Hydrodynamic lobes of basis and ischiuni of gnathopod 2 (male) in genera of palustra] Talitridae, 

A. Froiorchesna sp. male (S-Omm)^ Heathcote, New Zealand. B. ParorchesHa recdpaima (K. H. Bamand); 
male (9.0 mni). Port St, John. S. Afi'ica. C, Parorchesiia tenuis (Dana >; male (8,6 mm); South Islands New 
Zealand. D, Uhlorchexna Meri (Shoemaker); male (10.0 mm); Suwanee estuary, Florida. E. CkiUorwrchestia 
sp. male ( 1 5,0 mm); west of PaJta. New Caledonia. (Lateral view ilkistrations, ba.sed on material and slide mounts 
in crustacean collections of the Canadian Museum of Nature, Ottawa). 


3. The peraeopodal notch and "surge seta'^ 

Taxonomic illustrations of the |X)sterior margin of 
the broadly e,itp£mded bases of peracopods 5-7 of hyalid 
amphipods frequently include a single small but dis- 
tinct indentation or ''notch" in which sits a short thick 
distal ly tufted seta ( e g.. Hurley 1957; Barnard 1974, 
1979). In hyalid material from the Ryukyu .Archi- 
pelago, Hirayama ( 1 980) described the posterior basal 
margins of peraeopods 5-7 as "having small concavity 
with one plumose seta^', but little detail is provided 
there or previously. This seta may protrude slightiy 
further than the regular marginal setae (Fig, 8). The 
fl esi ble setal seal k i ncreases si i ghtly i n th Ickness di stal I >\ 
and its length is about 5-6X its average w idth. Its apical 
crown of 6- 1 0 tendri l-likc filaments provides an overall 
superficial ressembkince to a miniature Hydra. The 
seta and notch occur mainly on margins that are cren- 
ulated, and are usually weak or lacking on those that are 
smooth or weakly denticulate (Figs. 9,10). 

The function of this single specialized seta has not 
been determined experimentally, and is presently enig- 
matical. The posteriorly overlapping and broadened 
bases of petaeopods 5-7 form, in effect, a hydrody- 


namic continuation of the anteriorly overlapping broad- 
ened coxae ] -4 that ’'streamline*' the sides of the body 
for fonvard s wi mm i ng ( B oudri as 1991). The special- 
i?.ed seta, about midpoint along the trailing edge of the 
basal plate, would seem wei I positioned for sensing the 
speed and direction of laminar water flow over the body 
surface. The present appel lation '*suige .seta'' is there- 
fore possibly functionally descriptive. 

ill species that are mainly intertidal in vertical 
station and/or saltatory in behaviour(e,g.Jn PTihhyak, 
Apohyak), or liypogean (e.g., mRu ffdhyale\ the surge 
seta may be weakly developed, present in one or two 
peraeopods only, or entirely lacking. The surge seta is 
weak in genus Parhyah and absent in freshwater 
species (e.g., in Hyahtla of family Hyalellidae), 

In males, the notch appears deeper and the seta is 
slightly stronger, with more apical lilments, than in 
females (Fig. 9 ), The setal notch lends to be deeper, 
and the seta more strongly developed, with more apical 
filaments, in natatory genera (e.g., Protohyak, Fig. 8) 
than in saltatoiy genera {fi.g..^Priiohyak3Ln(lApohyak, 
Rg.9& 10). 


AMPH1PAC[F1CA VOL, 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


28 







Fig. 8, Fortiori of the posterior margin of the bases of peraeopods 5-7 showing notch and surge seta, 
Frotohyale sp. (= P. ciallfusl Hiwatari) Ozuski, Japan* Male {5,5 mm); female qv (4.5 mm?) (X40). 
Note: [nsets showing portions of representative peraeopods 5-7 after Hirayama (i980). 


4. The InterJockitig brood plate. 

Virtually unique among gammaridean amphipods 
are the interlocking female brood plates of several 
tahtroidean families (Figs 1 L 12). Although the four 
brood lamellae are very seldom illustrated in taxo- 
nomic accounts , that of peraeopod 2 (gnatho|x>d 2) is 
the most frequently shown and is therefore utilized in 
group comparisons here. 

1 n fully aq uati c ( pri m i ti ve) s peci es of Hyal tdae (e, g, 
in Paraihrehi'sm and Prorohyifk (sens. I at), the brood 
lamellae are typically broadly ovate in outSine, narrow* 
ing gradually distal ly and bluntly or broadly rounded 
apically (Figs. 1 1 A-D; 12 E-F). The numerous (60- 
100+) dose-sei marginal setae are nearly uniformly 
elongate, mostly greatenhan half the width of the plate. 
The setal tips are invariably hook- or cTOok-shaped 
(Fig. 12+ inset)+ although some published illustrations 
do not show that detail , Duri ng gestation of eggs and 
protection of newly hatched young in the brood pouch 
each seta apparently interlocks with a counterpart seta 
of an adjacent brood plate. All brood plates (pemeopods 


2-5) are similarly subovate or elongate ovate, with 
rounded apices and elongate marginal setae (Figs. 12 R, 
F). The interlocking setae presumably function in 
preventing separation of the plates and spilling of the 
brood contents during rigorous tumbling action of 
highly loti c aquatic environ men is such as the surf zone 
and/or during active saltation by intertidal species in 
the air medi um. In aquatic species, the copious spaces 
between the interlocking setae presumabJy facilitate 
direct interchange (flushing) of brood pouch fluids 
w ith the s u rrou nding sal t ■ water medi urn , Y et u nk now n 
is a mechanism by which the setae "’iinlock" to permit 
spreading of the plates and egress of the newly hatched 
young, and also return of those early in stars to the 
temporary protection of the pouch (Rg, 130)"^. 

In somew hat more advanced 'intermediate'' hyal id 
genem such as Hyale and Ru/fohyak and some species 
within subgenus Protohyale (Figs. 1 1 F), the plate itself 
becomes longerand the apex nnore sharply rounded, the 
individual setae are shorter, and the pouch presumably 


AMPHlPAanCA VOL. 3 NO,3 Ntjv. 15, 2002. 


29 




Fig, 9. Portion oF the posterior margin of the bases of peraeopods 5-1 showing notch and surge seta, 
Piihhyate harbicornis Hiwatari & Kajibara.I9Sl b. A. Mate (9 mm); B. female ov (5.0 mmjTokyo Bay, 



A. ^ P7 B, P5 9 PS P7 

Fig. JO. Portion of the posterior margin of the bases of peraeopods 5-7 showing notch and surge seta. 
A. Apohyale honoluiuemis (Schell.). Male (6.0 mm), Asari, (ndia, B, Apohyale punciaia Hiwatari & 
Kasihara, 198[b. Male (9.0 mm). Natsushima, Japan, 







more tightly closed to interchange with the external 
medium. 

In the most advanced genera (e.g,, Pdlohyak, 
Apohyale, and Serejohyale), component species exist 
partly or entirely inlenidally. With increasing terrest- 
riality of the species, the brood plates tend to show a 
corresponding increase in overall size (in length and'or 
width), a more sharply acute apex, and the Individual 
marginal setae tend to be very short, closely set, and 
presumably very tightly interlocking (Fig. 12C). The 
primitive oval shape of the P2 and P5 plates becomes 
secondarily broadly triangular, and that of P3 and P4 
middle plates subneciangularorrhomboidal (Fig3.12E, 


F). Such trends may also be noted in corresponding 
brood plates within the closely related family 
HyaleElidae, and its offshoot fossorial family Dogieli- 
noiidae, endemic to the North Pacific region (Figs. 
12B. D; I3A-D). Such conforms with a large brood 
pouch that is tightly closed to interchange with the 
external medium (Fig. 1 3D). In intertidal species, 
lightly closed brood pouches presumably protect the 
developing eggs from sudden osmotic changes caused 
by exposed to the freshwater of rain and stream flow. 
The similarly ‘'tight" brood pouchesof freshwater Hya- 
lellidac (esp, the Chilton linae) presumably maintal n an 
osmotically stable osmotic environment for the devel- 


AMPHfPACinCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


30 



A, Pataliorc^esMs jamttM n. ip. PsraHorcMst&s aywanin. sp. PsraPorpfmsma zi!?aifina(0er7fi) 



D. P. {PratofJaia} tagunae n. sp. P. (Protahafa} grtnftm (Clil*tPn) R {Pratohafa) marotfbraa ^S^h.) 



Hyaia pantica R«lhke 



fiyala iaPbockitna Puftchyale miiioti ■( Ruff oj^ 



P, (Pn>tQhyaSe) ptjmfh Protohyoie 7 schmkiti Bu\ych G* Mtcropythia catinata{&a^} 

HImiaIiii^ a KA4fhllFA J 


Rg, I L Brood [amellae of representative primitive and intennediate genera of t^yalinae^subfarnH) Kurii nae and 
a pal ustral species of Tali tridae, A. Paralhrchesre^iB. Proiohyaf4fi6or€ohyale}\C,P. {Lepiohyaiep^D. F. 
( Fnnohyale); E . PaJ u straJ Tal i iridae; F. b lermedi ale genera of H y al i nae; G. K uri i nae. 1 1 1 ustmtion mcxJifi ed from 
A. Derzhavin ( 1 937); D. Hurley ( ] 957);B„ Richardson el aJ. (2001 )+ F. Hi wataii & Kajiham ( 198 ! a)^ Bulycheva 
(1957), Ruffo (1958). Krapp-Schickel (1993). Other illuslraltons original in this paper. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2003, 


31 


oping eggs> perhaps aided by the osmonegulatoiy^ stemaJ 
gills (Figs- 13A-n). The close similarity of brood 
plates of Auslrachiltonia with those of Hyalelki (Fig. 
] 2D)»and dissimtlarily with those ofCe/flti and Tahaipe 
(Figs. 13 £,F) further supports recent classification of 
the Chiltoniinae within family Hyalellidae rather than 
family Cetnidae (f^ousfield 1996; Hendry cks and 
Bousfield 2(X)I ). 

Extreme attenuation and ''distortion^' of out! i ne have 
been described in all four brood tamellae of Hyachelia 
tor{ugi^€ (Hyacheliinaehepi parasitic in the buccal cav- 
ity of marine turtles (Fig. 1 2 G , Barnard 1967). Specu- 
lation on pathways and timing of its evolution, possibly 
from an Apohyale qt Serejohyale-Viks progenitor, in 
concert with the morphological evolution, and deveh 
opment of migration patterns of the Atlantic host turtle 
species, remains moot, 

Consideration of hyalid brood plate morphology 
may shed light on possible evolutionary pathways that 
gave rise to semi -terrestrial and temestrial am phi pods 
now classified within family Talitridae, Talitrids dif- 
fei from hyalids mainly in the reduced size of antennae, 
mouthparL palps, and coxa I, in fusion of the telson 
lobes, and in the specialized "mitten''-like form of 
gnathood 2 of all female talitrids, perhaps the most 
significant in terms of effect on life style and behaviour. 
Because of mostly relatively slight morphological d\f- 
ferences.the saltaiing terrestrial talitrid amphipod may 
have evd ved from a semi -te rrespi al (a ntertida! ) saltati ng 
hyalid (Duncan 1985). Modem aquatic hyai ids might 
also be secondarily derived from intertidal hyalids. 

However, Richardson et aL (2001) noted that in- 
creasing terrestrial ity in the Tal itridae was marked by 
decrease En size of brood lamellae, reduction in cxtenE 
of marginal setae, loss of terminal ho<:»ks on the setae, 
and general "'openi n g " of the brood plates . Morphol gical 
difference may be at least partly aLtribulable to the 
relatively large dutch sizes and small size of eggs of 
intertidal hyalids, versus the relatively small clutch 
sizes and relatively large eggs of palustral and inter- 
tidal talitrids. The brood lamellae of those primitive 
semiaquatic and presumed ancestral Tal itridae (e,g., 
Eor chest ia rupestris, Fig, HE) are brottdly ovate, with 
rounded apices and long hook-tipped setae, little differ- 
ent in appearance from those of aquatic hyalids (e.g., 
Faraiiorchesfes irnd Protohyaie}{F\g, 1 I A-D). They 
contrast sharply with the elongate, broadly spade- 
shaped, brood lamellae lined with numerous, closely 
set, short setae in the advanced saltatory intertidal 
* superficially simtlar hixjk- lipped brood setae i>ccur in 
females of some menibers of corophioldean family 
Amplthoidae. 


hyalids (Fig, 12 E,F). The latter would seem an un- 
I Ikely ancestral condition for either aquatic members of 
Hyalidae or for primiti vely aquatic members of family 
Tal i tridae. Thus, on the basis of brood plate 
morphology, the ancestral talitrid was more likely to 
have been an aquatic rather tlian semi-terreslriai hyalid. 

Paradoxically, increasing size and 'tightness'’ of the 
brood pouch in semtterrestrial hyalid amphipods (e.g,, 
Apohyak pitgenemis) more closely parallels that of 
oni SCO! dean isopods, the terrestrial females of which 
carry large numbers of relatively small eggs in the 
thoracic brood pouch (Heeley 1941). The young (first 
two instans) of Farallorchestes ochotensh may seek 
extended postnatal protection from predation in the 
female brood pouch (Kobayashl etaf 2002). While in 
the pcauch the young arc able to feed on seaweed closely 
pressed to the underside by the mother animal, i^nd also 
moult during this period. However, egress and return 
to die hrciod pouch has been observed under artificial 
laboratory conditions, apparently unimpeded by me- 
chanical interEoeking of the relatively elongate and 
flexible brood setae. 

Within modern saltating Intertidal hyalid genera 
(e.g., Ptlhhyale, Apohyale.imd Serejohyale) the spe- 
cialized form of brood lamellae may represent, at least 
in part, a morphological -behavioural adaptation to en- 
suring safe retention of large numbers of relalively 
smai I eggs vv 1 Lhi n the brood pouch. T hel r newl y emerged 
instars may be banred from leady return to the shelter of 
such a pouch (e.g.. In Apohyale piigettetmi) but alter- 
natively rake shelter under the shells of intertidal lim- 
pets (,lohnson l%8). Such action may also protect the 
juveniles from potentially lethal osmotic changes dur- 
ing heavy rainfall al ebbtide, 

5, The preamptexing notch'*' 

Observations on precopulatory and mating behav- 
iour in talitroidean amphipods were pioneered by 
Bo row sky (19&4), furthered by Con I an (1991), and 
Bousfield and Shih (1994). During preeopulatoiy 
behaviour of hyalellld amphipods , the male "rides" or 
''carries'' the female in dorsal position. The dactyl of 
gnathopod 1 ts inserted in a morphological indentation 
or ''notch'' in the anterodistal margin of peraeon seg- 
ment 2 of the receptive mature female. The morphol- 
ogy of the preamplexing (precopulatory) notch has 
been described and figured En several genera and spe- 
cies within talltroidean family Hyalellidae (Hendrycks 
& Bousfield 2001 ). The notch is here found nearly 

*SEM Cnliirgmcnls an; ngl yet available, SO the uHrastnicture 
of the notch is unknown). 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NO,3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


32 


A. 



ParttYBi* (wawrf SApflm 




Ptftehyato Uttoftih ( PfMfl*rato jqtfWw (CwHi) 


D. 


E, 


F. 







AtforefivtiM fluMsoki* (SMMng) 


kvA*fpl«yf $hP4in 


Hy9i*ti9 ^r9C9 (^unuro) 


SET 


BR 

SET 

X 


4* {HlMUHi) 


4. «»p. (a«o*rd) ^ «.«*(«««, b™^ 


(Dona) 


G» 




S^nfoitytlP yevAOi (Sm^j 


HyvcMU* toftug^ Q*rttart 

Fig. !2v Brood lamellae of representative genera of Hyalellidae, Dogielinotidae, Hyacheliinae, and 
advanced genera within subfamily Hyallnae. A. Farhyaie: B, Dogielinotidae; C. Piilohyale; D. Hyatell- 
idae: E Apnhyale; F. Serejohyale, G, Hyacheliinae. illustrations modified from: A, Bulycheva 1957, 
Shoemaker 1956; B. Bousfield & Tzvetkova 19S2; C. Bousfield 1973, Krapp-Schackel 1993; D. 
Hendrycks & Bousfield 200 1 ; E. Hiwatari Sl Kajihara 198 la; F* Serejo 2001 ; G. Barnard 1%7. 

Other l 1 lustrations original in this paper. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL, 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


33 



Fig. 13. FemaJe brood lamellae and interlocking brood setae of aquatic and intertidal talitroidean 
amphipods. A, 6, C: Hyalellidae D. E: Ceinidae egregia, Tahiiipe kiirori). A, B:Hyalella azteca, 
British Columbta; C. Australchiltoma sp. 2, Hatfield R., Tasmania. Lateral view reconstruction of brood 
lamellae forming bmod pouch (Figs. A-C drawn from CMN material and slide mounts: D, E,. modifed 
from Barnard 1972). 


universally within sexually mature and/or egg- bearing 
females of family Hyalidae (Figs. 14, 15) including 
Hyacheliu tortugaer ectoparasitic on marine turtles, 
and m all genera and species of the North Pacific family 
Dogi el i noli dae ( FI g. 1 4D). How ever, the notch has not 
been found In males nor in subadult females and 
immature stages of the above families and genera. The 
notch has not yet been found in mature females of other 
talitroidean families including Talitridae (e.g., Eorch- 
estia, Protorchestia)^ Najnidae, Phlianlidae, Temno- 
ph I i anti dae, Cei n idae , or subfam i ly Chi I toni i nae w ilhin 
Hyalellidae (e.g„ m A/rochilmnia). 

Within family Hy alidae, the notch appears to follow 
a phy let ic pane m ( H g. 1 4A ) that paral lei s the phy logeny 
of other phylclically significant characters states, in- 
cluding those of the gnathopods, coxat plates, uropeds, 
andtelson (Figs. 1,2.3), Thusin relativdy primidve 
genera (e.g.^ ParcUlorchestes^ Farhyaie) the notch is 
usually a shallow indentation in a slightly ventrally 


extended anterior lower lobe of peraeon segment 2 of 
the female. In a more advanced condition, as in Apo- 
hyale and S^rejahyctie, the notch is deeper and sharp! y 
rounded, and the lower peraeonal lobe deeper. In the 
most advanced family condition, as in Frotohyaie and 
FfUohyale, the notch is deeply indented and the inner 
angle is narrowly produced inwards as a long slender 
groove, usually at an angle to the body axis+ termed the 
ungui sial groove ( Hendiy cks & B ousfi el d , 200 1 ). The 
posterior peraeonal lobe is usually deep, with rounded 
anterior margin. In the most advanced genus (Hyale) 
an accessory' "locking slU" is located immediately 
above the lower margin of the anterior peraeonal lobe, 
pr^umably into which fits the propodal "guiding spine" 
of the male gnathopod L Simi larly, in some species of 
Alhrchesfe^ (within family Hyalellidae), the facia] 
locking spine of the propod of gnathopod 1 (cf) presum- 
ably fits into a secondaiy facial groove of peraeon 2 of 
the female, termed the locking slit 


AMPHIPACiFrCA VOL. 3 m3 Nov, 15, 2002, 


54 











C- AUorcheuftim d . {}afiitiifiQtid£ic 


Fig, 14. Fornii of the prc-amplexing notch of mature females within genera of families and subfam- 
ilies of superfamily Talitroidea. A. Hyalinae B. Hyaclielinae C. Hyalellidae D. DogieMnotidae. 



Fig. 15. The preamplexing notch in western North Pacific species of Hyalidae: Terminology. 
A. Paraliorchesies ziheHma (Derzhavin, 1937); B. Proiohyale (P.) pseudopifftiila (Hiwarari 
& Kajihara, 198 la); C, Frotohyale (P, ) honoluluensis (Schelienberg, 1938); D. PtHohyale 
barbicornis (Hiwatari & Kajihara, 1981b). (illustrated from CMN collections). 


AMPHJPACIHCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. I5. 2002. 


35 


KEY TO world genera OF HYALlNAE (excluding HnsweU* ) 

(Figure symbols; a = apomorphic; i = intermediate-; p = plesiomorphic 

L Peraeopods 3-7, daclyis medium to large ( f/4-|/2 prOfXHl), inner marshal Seta of daelyl ver>‘ small or lacking 
(Hg, 2Ep); clasping spine of segment 6 usually strong (fig. 2Da): coxa I lacking cusp or shelf (Fig. lEp). . , 2. 
PcracOpi>ds .3-7, dactyls snnall (< 1/4 propod), inner marginal seta distinct; clasping spSue of segment 6 small 
or tacking; coxa I with posterior marginal cusp or shelf 7, 

2. Coxae land 3 with posterior marginal cusp (Fig, I Ea); uropod L peduncle with weak distal spires (Rg, 3Aa); 

gnalhopod I (Cf), propc.»d w-ith stout medio facial guiding spine (fig. 2Ba) Hycife Rathke (p. 93) 

Coxa 2 and 3 lacking posterior marginal cusp; uropod i, peduncle with stout distolateral spine; gnalhopod I 

«?): pn.'jpod lacking stout medio facial guiding spine 3. 

3. Gnathopud 2 (cf>, carpal lobe prominent (Rg 2Cp); uropod 3 bl famous (inner ramus small, distinct (Fig. 3 Bp;) 

telson lobes each with apical spine (s) (Fig, 3Cp); maxilla I palp 2-segmented, proximal segment short (Fig. 

I Cp) Paraihtchestes Shoemaker (p. .36) 

Onathopod 2 (c?), carpal lobe lacking or vestigial; uropod 3 uniramous for inner ramus fused to peduncle); 
telson lobes, apical margin smcxith, unarmed; maxiCia U palp 1 -segmented or w>ith median constriction 4. 

4. Gnalhopod I (cf), dactyl strongly bidentate (Rg, IBp); maxilliped palp (cf), unguis normal (Fig. I Dp) 

... Frotohyaie {Dipotohyak ) n, g,. n. suhg. (p, 90) 

Gnathopod 1 (t?), dactyl simplefunguis rarly bifid); maxiniped piilp (c?), unguis often elongate, whip- 1 ike. . 5. 

,S. PeraecspCKls S and 6^ segment 4 strongly broadened (width > length)( Rg. 2Fa) Barnard (p. 92) 

Pemeopods ."j and 6, segment 4 normal or slightly broadened (length >w idth) 6, 

6. Antenna I peduncle 1 .short, little longer than 3; gnalhopod 1 (male), basal and ischial lQhydiri.xlynamic lobes 

.strongly developed Frotpkyate iFrotfthyak) n.g., nom. subg. (p 79} 

Antenna I, peduncle 2 distinctly longer than 3; gnathopod I, basal and Ischial lobes weakly or not developed 
in mates and females - Pivtohyuk iB&teohyak) n. g., n. subg. (p. 61 ) 

7, LfroptKl I, peduncle with strong distolaterai and/or distomedial spines Fig, 3Ap) 

Uropod L distal spines of peduncle small, weak t [. 

5. Antenna l, flagellum and peduncular segment ^ strongly plumose-setose (both sexes) (Fig. .3Aa); uropod I , 

peduncle with strong distomedial spine only (Fig. 2Dp); gnathopod 2 (Cf), carpal lobe usually present, small 

(Rg. 2R); inner ramus of uropod 3 variousty fused to peduncle (Fig. 3B]) PUtohyak n, g, (p, 98) 

Antenna 2, llagellum and peduncuEar segment 5 unarmed, xveakly sewse, or setae also present on peduncular 
segment 4; uropod I , peduncle with strong dislolateral and distomedial spines, ordislolatcrai spine only; 
gnathopt.Hl 2 (cf), carpal lobe usually lacking or ve.stigial; inner ramus of un>pod 3 either distinct, or lacking 
touiliy 9, 

9. Urtipod 1, peduncle with stout disioiateral and distomedia! spines (Rg. 3 Al); coxae! and 3 with strong post- 
erior marginal cusps (Fig. I Ea) ^ ^ n ^ Strejohyale n. g. (p. 1 14) 

Uropod L peduncle iviih distallaieral spine only; coxae 2 and 3 with shelf but lacking cusp It). 

to. Uropod 3 biramous, inner ramus very small (Rg. 3Bp); coxa4 whth broad cusp on posterior excavatlona I mar 

gin (Fig. 2.Aa); mandible, left I acini a 5-dcrtale Fdg. I Bp); maxilliped palp (c?) normal (Rg. I Dp) 

Parhyak Stebbing (p. 96) 

Uropod 3 uniramous; coxa 4 lacking po.sierior marginal cusp; mandible, lefi lacinia 7-demate; maxilliped palp 
(Cf), dactyl elongate Proiahyak {Leptahyak} n. g., n. subg. ( p. 88) 

1 1. Pigmented eyes lacking; brood plate (peraeopt^d 2) apically rounded, marginal hcxiked setae medium long 

(Fig. 3Di); in hypogean fresh waters Ruffokyak n. g. (p. 116) 

’ Rgmented eyes present, usually large (fig. I Aa); bncjod plate (penaeopod 2) large, broad, ape.x acute, marg- 
inal setae short, numerous(Flg. 3Da}; marine imertidal Apohyuk n. g. fp^ 104) 


*^Neobuk HaswelF most characters and character states are imptecisely known (see Barnard & Karaman 1991) 


AMPMlPACrFICA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


36 


Faralhrche^tes Shoe maker 

Faraiiorche^ies Shoemaker, I94U ] S3;— Barnard 
1952: 23;- Barnard 1962; l60;-eamard 1979: 119;- 
Bonstleld 19S I ; 75;— Barnard Sl Kamnian E 99 1 ; 370; 
— Ishimam 1994: 69. 

Farhyaie (paEi) Ourjanova 1931: SI 3: — Bulycheva 
3957 : 78; -Stock, 1987: 167. 

Type Species: Aliorcheste^ ochoienst^ Brandt^ 1851, 
original designation. 

Species: Pamltorchestes alaskensia n, ap.; P, 
iimerieana Bonyfidd, i9H}, P. carinata n. sp.; R 
cowani n. sp,; P. kabaii n. sp.; P. leblondi n. sp.; P. 
mituma n. sp.; P* mbcarinatii n, sp.: P. nuda n. sp. P. 
trispim&a n. sp. 

Western N. Pacific 

P. ochoiemh (Brandt, 1851), (Bering & Okhotsk Seas); 
P. Tzvetkova, 1990 (Russian Pacific coast); 

P. zihdlim (Derzhavin, 1 937) ( IN , Sea of Japan) 

Diagnosis; Male. Body generally stout, medium to 
large. Peraeonal and ahdomtna] segments often 
posteriorly ridged or mid-dorsal ly carinate. Eyes 
medium, sub-ovate. Antennae medium, subequal 
(antenna 1 slightly shorter, exceeding peduncle of 
antenna 2); peduncles stout, flagella and peduncles 
often posteriorly setose, 

Upper lip, epistome large. Lower lip regular. 
Mandible, left lacinia 5 (6) dentate; spine row with 2- 
3 btade.s. Maxilla I , palp 2-segmented, proximal seg- 
ment very short. Ma.xilla 2, inner plate with inner 
marginal plumose stout setae, Maxiliiped regular; palp 
stout, dactyl large, lacking whip seta in male. 

Coxal plates 1^ regularly broad, deep; posterior 
marginal shelf weak or lacking, cusps lacking. Coxal 
plates 5 variably aequilobate, occasionally aequi- or 
anterolobale; co>ta 6 and 7 posterolobate. Coxal gills 
large, plate-like, on peraeopods 2-6, 

Gnathopod I ordinary, weakly sexually dimorphic; 
basis propod with 1-2 posierodlsial spines, neither 
modifed as a mediofacial guiding spine; palm smooth, 
not excavate; dactyl rarely bifid, overlapping posteno- 
dislal angle. Gnathopod 2 strongly sexually dimor- 
phic; hydrodynamic lobe of basis and ischium moder- 
ately to strongly developed, overlapping (except in 
carinated and ridged speciesj; carpal lobe small but 
distinct; propod large, paJm regular; dactyl simple, 
stout. 


Peraeopods 3-4 stout, spinose. segment 6 often with 
inner distal marginal kxking spine. Peraeopods 5-7 
stout, homopodous; bases broad, posterior margin with 
well -developed notch and surge seta. Peraeopod 5 
shortest; segment 4 often widened; segment 5 short; 
segment 6 often v^ith stout anterodistal subterminal 
clasping spine; dactyls large, simple, inner marginal 
seta small or lacking, Peraeopod 7, basis mediod is tally 
sharply incised, 

Epimeml plates regular, 2 deepest, hind corners 
squared. Pleopods regular, natator>% rami longer than 
slender peduncles. Uropods I and 2, rami longer than 
peduncle, with marginal and apical spines; peduncle 
with distolateral spine. Uropod 3 biiamous, inner 
ramus small, rounded, with apical seta; outer ramus 
longer than peduncle, with marginal and apical spines, 

Telson, lobes short, wide, sepiiraied to base, apical 
margin whth spine(s) and setae. 

Female: Gnathopod ] , hydrodynamic lobe weak or 
lack! n g on basi s, and/or I acki ng on i schi um . G nathopod 
2 regular, similar to but larger than gnathopod I ; carpal 
lobe well developed. Brood lamellae large, a^unded 
apically; marginal setae numerous, long, hook-tipped, 
Preamplexing notch simple, shal low, lacking unguisial 
groove. 

Distribution] Actively swimming among or clinging 
to algae in the low- intertidal and littoral zone, along 
cold temperate, surf-exposed rocky coasts of the North 
F^iciflc, from Bering Sea south to the northern Sea of 
Japan, and central California. 

Remarks: Barnard & Karaman (1991) did not necog- 
nize most of the new species names proposed by 
Bousfield (1981), New- patronyms are provided be- 
low. The genus here encompasses 7 phenetic-phyletic 
subgroups, distinguishable at or below the 75% level of 
morphological si mi larity , but ap|>ear relati vely closely 
related, above the 50% level of similarity (phenogram, 
Fig, 62, p. 1 26). 

Stock (19S7) minimized character state differ- 
ences between PaniUorcheste^ Shoemaker and 
Parhyale Stebbing. He suppoited the opinions of 
Gurjanova ( 1 9.5 1 ) and Bulycheva ( 1 957) that only one 
genus, Parhyak, is needed. Barnard { 1 979) also did 
not separate the two genera in his artificial key to 
known species of Faraltorchestes and Farhyaie. 

The present analysis confirms the generically com- 
prehensi ve significance of the following differences as 
outlined in Table IL, 


AMPHlPAaFICA VOL. 3 N0,3 Nov. 1^. 2002. 


37 


Table II. Character state differences between Parhyak 
Stebbing, 1897 and P^raihrehestes Shiicm^kcT, 1941. 


Character 

Character State 
ParaUorckestes Parhyaie 

Body cari nation 

ptislcrtsdorsal 

lacking 

Antennae 

gmssly subequal 
(A2 sl,>AI) 

unequal 
fA2 »A!) 

Maxilla 1, palp 

2 -segmented 

1 -segmented 

MD, [eft lac] Ilia 

5 (6) dentate 

5-dentaie 

GNl & 2 (cQ, basis, 
hydrodynamiclobe 

large, rounded 

small, subacute 

GN2 (mature cf), 
carpal lobe 

present 

lacking 

Coxae 1-4 

shelf weak. 

shelf present, 
weak Cusp 

Coxa 4, cusp on 
poster! or cxcav at! on 

lacking 

prominent 

PtracopcMs 3-7, 

large, ant.marg. 

small, ant. marg. 

dactyl type 

setae minute 

seta large 

P5-7, basiSt surge 
seta & nc3tch 

present, strong 

lacking 

Uropod 2, 
tenith of rLuni 

unequal 

Subequal 

Tel SOI Lobes, 
apical margin 

apical spinefs) 

& setae 


Bnxjd setae, length 

elongate, setae 

short, setae 

relative to brood 
plate width 

>1/2 plate width 

<1/2 plate width 

Distribution 

boreal Nonh 

t^cific 

trop] cal -warm - 
temperate 


Pat^allorcftesies ochorensis (Brandt) 
(Fig. 16) 


Alhrcfiesies ochotensts BrancfL 1 85 1: 143, pi, 6, fig. 
27a-f.;- Holmes 1904: 233, ftg. 1 1 8. 
/yya/i-oc/io/ffljfjStebbing 1888: 247;— Stebbing 1906: 
561. 

Parhyak kitrUensis Iwasa, 1934: I, PL l-lLfig. I; — 
Iwasa 1939 284. 

Parhyate ochoiemis Gyijanova, 1951: 8 14, fig. 568;— 

Bulycheva 1957: 82, fig. 28. 


Paraliarchestes ochot€fisis Shoemaker 1941: 184 
(part);— Sousfi eld 1981: 75-77, figs. 7, 8;— Ishimaru 
1994: 69;- Bousfidd 2001a: 104. 
non: Paraiiorchestes ochotensis Barnard 1962: 160, 
fig, 23;- Barnard 1979: 119. 

Material Sea of Okhotsk. Dutkert coll., Aug. S, 

1923 - I C? (22 mmXsilde mount), 3 9 ov (22 mm)(s]iide 
mount) + 2 cf^J, I 9, ZooL Mus. No. 5/29540 (Bulycheva 
det), Japan Sea, AkkesJii, Hokkaido, T, Hiwatari coll, Dec. 
23, 1979. - 1 Cf (21 mm), I 9ov (21 mm) Coll. Nos. IZ-1983- 
19, 

DiagnpsLs: Male (to 27 mm). Body large, weakly 
carinate mid -dorsal I y on per aeon segments 6^7, and 
modenitely strongly oti pleon segmetits I -3 and urosome 
segment 1 . Antennae relatively long, slender, pedun- 
cles well developed. Antenna 1 , peduncles posteriorly 
smooth or nearly so; flagellum 20-22 segmented. .An- 
tenna 2, peduncles smooth; flagellum slender, 20-25 
segmented, 

Mandible, left lacinia 5 -dentate; spine row with 2 
slender blades. Ma.it] II l[>ed, inner and outer plates 
aplcally subtruncate; palp stouf segment 2 distally 
truncate, dactyl conical, nail short 

Cojtal plates 1 -3 subquadrate, 2 & 3 w ith weak hind 
marginal shelf; coxa 4 broader than deep. Coxa 5 med- 
i um dee p, aequi lobate , Coxa 6 shal lo wl y posterolobatc, 
anterior lobe small. Coxal gills large, broadly heart- 
shaped, L-shaped and largest posteriorly. 

Gnathopod I medium; hydrodynamic lobe on basis 
and ischium small; carpal lobe relatively narrow, marg- 
in w ith 6-8 comb setae; propod subrectangular, slightly 
broadening distally; dactyl stout, overlapping gently 
convex, oblique palm. Gnathopod 2, basis with me- 
dium hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe skndermoi ex- 
tending beyond rnerus; propod subrectangular,pa]m 
short, oblique, gently convex; dactyl stout , 

Pemeopods 3 & 4 medium slender; segment 6 with 
2-3 weak posterior marginal and distal clasping spines; 
dactyls medium strong, inner marginal seta minute. 
Peraeopods 5-7 medium, bases slighLiy hetenopodous, 
hind margins very weakly crenulated, each with small 
notch and surge seta; anterior margins with medium 
spines, Peraeoped 5, segment 4 slightly broadened; 
segmeni 5 short, subequal to [/2seg]nent6, Peraeopods 
6 & 7, segment 4 J ittle broadened, subequal in length to 
segment 6. 

Epimeral plates 2 & 3, hind comers slightly acumi- 
nate, lower margins bare, Uropod I , peduncle si ightly 
shorter than rami» margins with 5-6 spines and short 


AMPHIFAOFICA VOL. 3 N0,3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


38 


Kcv to Nortik American Pacific Species of Puraliopchestes Shoemaker 


1. Hody large (1^30 nim at matcrity); posterior peracon and abdominal segments mlJ^dorially caririated (except 

F. cow£itit ')\ antennae elongate A2 nagellurn 3 5+ segments. 2. 

Body small to medium (7- ] 3 mm); poste-rior peracoii and abdominaJ segments not (or Tainily ) earinaied; antenna 
short A2 flagell urn < 1 2 segments 6. 

2. Peraeon segments 6 & 7 variously cariiiaied 3, 

Peraeon segments 6 & 7 not carinaled 4. 

3. Peraeon ssogment li-5 not carinated: posieritirearinatiorLS acute: peraeopods 5-7 slender, segment 6 with weak 

anterior marginal spines - P- ochoiensia (Brandt) (p. 37) 

Peraeon segment 3 *4 conspicooLsly carinated; posterior carinatiems rounded; peraeopods 5-7 short, stout, 
anterior marginal (clasping) spines sinm^ F. enrinata n. sp. (p. 40) 

4. Abdominal cari nations low, distinct; uropivd L outer ramus mulEispinose; mandibular left lac ini a b-dentate . 5- 
.Abdominal carinatioTis indistiict; uropod 3, outer ramus w-ith 5-6 marginal spines^; mandibular left lacinia 5- 

dentate - c&watti n. sp. (p. 44) 

5. Antemia I , pcduncuiar .segment I w ith 2-3 short posterior marginal spines: peraeopod .5, basis longer than wide; 

.segment 4 short, wide P. submrinata , n, sp, (p. 41) 

Antenna I , peduncular segment I with 0-1 posterior marginal spines; peraeopod 5, basis broad, wider than long; 
segmeiil 4 regular, longer than wide P, alaxkcnsts n. sp. (p. 42) 

6. Body segments each conspicuously ridged or ribbed at posterior margin; penieoptni 5. segment 5 short, wider 

than long; animals .small (7-10 mm) 7. 

Body segments not or inetmspicuously ribbed at posterior margin; peraeoptni 5, segment 4 regular, longer than 
wide; animals medium-sized (11-14 mm) 8. 

7. Antenna I, peduncular segment 2 ver>- short, little longer than segment 3; ante.nna I, segments nearly hare; 

uropod 3, outer ramus with m arganal s.pinc group P. americana BousReld (p. 58) 

Antenna ] . peduncular segment 2 distinctly longer than segment 3; antenna I . segments of peduncle and Hag- 
eltum setose posteriorly; tiropod 3, minus lacking margin spines P. Tzvetkova (p. 54) 

8. Pcracoptxls 5-7, segment 6 with 3 stout anterior marginal clasping spines; un>pxxl 3, outer ramus long, with 3 

groups of marginal spines . P. trispiriosa n, sp. (p. 60) 

PeraeH>pi>ds 5-7, segment 6 anterior margin with w-eak spires or 2 groups of stout spines; urf}pi;td .3, ramus 
subequal to peduncle, w-ith 0-2 groups of marginal spines. 9, 

9. Antenna I peduncle & tlageilum, posterior margins conspicuously setose; peraeopods 5-7 anterior margin 

of segment 6 with 2 stout clasping spines - 10. 

Antenna 1, posicrior margins of segments bare or slightly setose; peraeopods 5-7. anterior margin of seg- 
ment 6 with 3 (or more) weak spines II. 

10. Uropod I . outer ramus with 4 marginal spines; urtrptKJ 3, outer ramus margin bare, ..................... 

. , P, zjbeiii/id (Deri^hin) (p. 52) 

LIropod I, outer ramus with 1-2 marginal spines; uropod 3, Outer ramus with 1-2 marginal spines 

P. kabatai ii. sp. (p. 53) 

i 1. Ariitennal distinctty shorter than antetirsa 2; uropod K outer ramus with 5-6 marginal spines 

P, lebhudi n. sp. (p, 48) 


Antenna t, length subcqual to antenriia 2; uropod L outer ramus with 3 marginal spires ....... ....... 12. 

1.3. Antenna 1 , peduncular .setae .sironig; mature animals small (7 mm) F. minima n. sp. (p. 49) 

Antenna 1 , peduncle bare; animals medium (12-13 mm) P. nuda n, sp, (p. 50) 


AMPHIPAQFICA VOL. 3 NO.:^ Nov. 2002. 


39 



Rg. 16- Paraliorcfiexies ochoiettsis (Brandt, 185 ! ). Male (22 mm); female br. [I ( 22 mm). Okhotsk Sea, 


distolateral spine; inner ramus with 3^ marginaJ spines; 
outer ramus with 8- It) closely set marginal spines and 
short apical spines. IJropod 2, rami each with 3-4 
marginal spines, outer ramus distinctly the shoner 
Uropod 3 medi urn, peduncle with 2 posterodistal spines; 
outer ramus slightly longer than peduncle, with short 
apical spines and single subapical spine; inner ramus 
very short, apex with small spine, 

Telson lobes short, slightly broader than tong, each 
with single apical spine and 3^ subapical marginal 


setae. 

Female, br It. (22 mm). Gnathopod I, basal and 
ischial lobes very weak; carpal lobe short; propod 
similar in form but weaker than that of male. Gnathopod 
2, basal lobe weak rounded; carpal lobe slender, short; 
propod subrectangular, broadening distal By. Fully de- 
veloped brood lamellae not described (pne.5umably 
su bo vale with rounded ape.x and long hook-tipped 
marginal setae). Preamplexing lobe not developed in 
material available. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


40 


Distributional £to!og>i Recorded from the Okholsk 
Sea and northern Sea of japan^ USSR, and Sakhalin I, 
Also Dutch Harbour, Alaska, by Holmes and 

present material. 

Remarks: The naming of this species has undergone a 
regionally long and checkered history (synonymies 
above), fn North America, J. L. Barnard (1954- 1969) 
has described material from Alaska to southern Cali- 
fornia under the name Paralhrchestes ochotensis. 
However, except for the relatively short antenna 2, his 
figures and descriptive commentary suggest that the 
material from Oregon southwards appears mainly ref- 
erable to Parallorchestes cowani n. sp. fp. 44). 

The relatively primitive P. ochotensis subgroup en- 
compasses P. sttbcarifiata and P, alaskenxis of the 
Bering Sea region, and the closely related P. cowani 
from SE Alaska to S. California. Component species 
are typically large, variously can nated, with elongate 
antennae, weaky crenuiated peraeopod bases, and very 
weakly or undeveloped preamplexing notch tn the 
female, 

Paraliorchestes carinata sp. 

(Fig, 17) 

Paratlarchestes supracarifiata Bousfield, 1981: 78 
(nomen nudum); Bousfield 2001a: 104. 

Material Examiueil^ 

Alaska, Aleutians Islands; AmchUka I. (51^29'N, 
1 79W'W), C E O'Clair Stn t A-2, plot 36, Aug, 7, 1972 - 9 
br. 11 (15.3 mm) Holotjpe (slide mount), CMNC 2002- 
0083; 9 br. II (13 mm) Paratype, CMNC 2002 0084; 
Amchltka I.* 400 metres south of Kirilof Pt., Consiantiite 
Hbr., subiidal aJgac, P. .Slattery coll., Oct. 31, 1971 - 2 99 
subadult. 

Bering Sea; St. Paul L, Zolotoi Bay (57^^ 07-N, J 70^^17 W) 
in subtidal agae, P. Slatierv- eoU., Jure 25, 1983 - 1 cf (15 
mm) Allotype (slide mount), CMNC 2002-0085; 10 C?Cf, 2 
99, I juv. Paratypes. CMNC 2002-0086. 

Diagnosis; Female, br. IL (15.3 mm). Body medium, 
robust. Peraeon segment 3-7, pleosome segments 1 -3, 
and urosome segment I bearing strong, rounded, 
posterodorsal cari nations. Antennae medium long, 
relatively stout, peduncles well developed. .Antenna i , 
peduncles I & 2 each with small posterior marginal 
spine cluster: Oagellum -15-segmented, Antenna 2, 
peduncles 4 & 5 w'ith median clusters of short setae; 
flagellum slender, 20-22-segmented, 

Mandible, left lacinia 5-deniate; spine row with 2- 


3 slender blades. Maxifiiped, inner and outer plates 
apically rounded; palp medium stout; segment 3 broad; 
dactyl short, conical. 

Coxal plates 1-3 broad, rounded below, lacking 
hind marginal shelf. Coxa 5 aequilobate. Coxa 6 
strongly posterolobate; anterior lobe small, rounded. 
Coxal gills broadly lobate, slightly largest posteriorly. 

Gnathopod 1 , basis with small antero-distal lobe; 
carpal lobe short; propod subrectangular, palm short, 
shallow^ly oblique, convex; dactyl closing on paired 
posterodistal spines. Gnathopod 2, tosis and ischium 
with overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe 
medium short; propod subrectangular, palm short, veiy 
oblique, gently convex, merging with setose posterior 
margin, 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 short, stout; hind margin of seg- 
ment 6 with 3 striated spines increasi ng in size distal ly, 
and sjnal I clasping spi ne at base of dactyl . Peraeopod s 
5-7 short, stout; hind mai^in of basis weakly crenulate, 
each with notch and surge seta; anterior marginal 
spines of segment 6 as in posterior marginal spines of 
peraeopods 3 & 4. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 short, 
broadest distaHy ; segment 5 shorter than 1 /2 segment 6, 
Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 4 broadened, shorter than 
segment 6. 

Epimerat plates 2 & 3, hind comers weakly acumi- 
nate, lower margins spinulose. PleopHuds slender, regu- 
lar. Uropod I, peduncle and mmi subqijail in length, 
outer margin of peduncle with 6-7 stout spines and 
medium posterodistal spine; outer ramus tapering 
distal ly, with '10 closely set marginal spines and short 
apical spine. Uropod 2, outer ramus slightly the shorter, 
each with ,3-4 marginal spines. Uropod 3 short; outer 
ramus stout, slightly longer than peduncle, with 1 -2 
clusters of marginal spines, and several short spines 
lining blunt apex; inner ramus short, apex with minute 
seta. 

Telson lobes evenly broad; apices each w ith single 
inner distal spine and 3-4 apical marginal setae. 

t^^mplexing notch a slight shallow- indentation on 
the anterodistal margin of peraeon 2. 

Male (15 mm). Gnathopod I, hydrodynamic lobe 
medl um on stout, short basis, w eak on Ischium; carpal 
lobe weakly setose; propod short, deep, palm oblique; 
dactyl stout Gnathopod 2, h.-d. lobe large on basis and 
ischium; carpal lobe very small, weakly setose; propod 
large, subquadratc, palm oblique; dactyl regular. Uro- 
pod I , outer ramus with 5 short distal marginal spines. 
Uropod 3, outer ramus slightly shorter than peduncle. 

Etymology^: The Latin root name "carinatus" alludes 
to the strongly keel -shaped ridges of the body. 


AMPHEPACIFJCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


41 



Fig, 17. Parallorchest€s carinaia n. sp* Female (br. ]I) (153 mm). Amchitka, Aleutians Islands., 
Alaska, Male (15,0 rnmX Zolotoi Bay, St. Paul [,* Bering Sea, 


Distributional Ecolt^” Known only from the type 
locality, among algae on rocky shores, LW level. 

Remarksr In the type specimen of P, cannata, the 
outer ramus of the left uropod 3 bears no marginal 
spines. 

Parallorchestes subcatinata n. sp. 

(Fig. IS) 

Paralhrchestes subcarlnata Bousfield, 1981: 7S 
(nomen nudum); Bousfield 200 i a: 1 04. 


Material Examined: 

Alaska, Aieutiait Islands; St. Makarius Bay, Amchitka I,, 
C. E. O'Clair coil, (5l« 22^48"NJ7^I3' 30"W), Box 5. 
J2 m, in Hedophyitum, Sept. 2f3, i96S - cf f]6.0 min) 
Holotype (slide mount), CMNC 2002-(K>70: 9 br. II n.5,0 
mm) Allntype (slide mount), CMNC 2(X>2-005?; 9 br. IJ 
(13.,^ mm) Paratyjic. 

Diagnosis: Male (16.0 mm). Bcdy large and robust. 
Pleon segments 1 3 and urosome I with low mid^orsaJ 
ridge, highest posteriorly. Antennae medium long^ 
stoLil, peduncles well developed. Antenna 1 , peduncle 
I with 3-4, and peduncle 2 with single, posterior mar- 


AMPHIPAOPICA VOL 3 NO, 3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


42 


gina] spines; flagellum 1 8-20-segmented. Antenna 2, 
peduncular segments 4 & 5 with submedian lateral 
clusters of short spines; flagellum slender, 18-25-seg‘ 
mented. 

Mandible, left Eadnia 5 -dentate; spine row with 3 
slender blades. Maj^llliped, inner plate subtnincate; 
outer plates with inner rounded cutting edge: palp 
medium; segment 3 subtruncate distally; dactyl coni- 
cal, unguis short. 

Coxal plates 1^ subquadrate, gently rounded be- 
low; coxae 2 & 3 with ver>' weak posterior marginal 
shelf. Coxa 5 shal low, aequilobate. Coxa 6 strongly 
posterolobate, anterior lobe small, rounded. Coxa! 
gills broadly heart-shaped, largest posteriorly. 

Gnathopod 1 medium; basis with weak hydrody- 
namic lobe; carpal lobe small; propod medium strong, 
broadening distally, j>alm distinct, oblique, subequal to 
hind margin; dactyl simple, slightly overlapping pai red 
posterodistal spines, Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium 
with overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe 
thin, shallow ; propod subovate, narrowing slightly dis- 
tally, palm short, oblique, nearly straight; dactyl short. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 relatively slender; segment 6 with 
5*6 posterior marginal spines increasing distally, and 
smaller distal clasping spine; dactyls regular. Per- 
aeopods 5-7 medium stout; bases, hind margins weakly 
crenulate, each with dtstfna notch and surge seta; 
marginal spines of segment 6 as in peraeopods 3 & 4. 
Peraeopod 5 distinctly shortest; segment 4 slightly 
broadened. Peraeopod 6, segment 5 slightly longer than 
1/2 segment 6. Peraeopods 6 & 7, segonent 4 Eitile 
broadened, subequal in length to segment 6. 

Epimeral plates 2 & 3, hind corners very slightly 
acuminate, lower margins spinulose. Uropxl I, pedun- 
cle slightly shorter than rami, margins with 3-5 spines 
and short posterodistal spine; inner ramus with 3-4 
marginat spines: outer ramus with 8*10 closely set 
marginal spines, and short apicaJi spines. Uropod 2, 
rami each with 3-4 marginal spines, outer ramus very 
slightly the shorter. Uropod 3 medium; outer ramus 
slightly longer than peduncle, with apical spines and I- 
2 groups of marginal spines; inner ramus rounded, with 
small apical spine: 

Telson lobes short, broad, each with 2-3 apical 
spines and 3-4 subapical marginal setae. 

Female ov. (15.0 mm): Antenna 2, flagellunn less 
robust and less setose than in male. Gnathopod 1 , basis 
with weak hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe small; propod 
relatively slender, palm shorter than posterior margin. 
Gnathopod 2 subsimilar but propod larger and slightly 
broaden] ng distally. Brood lamellae not mature, Pre- 
ampJexmg notch not distinct. 


Etymology: From the Latin root names ’^sub’^ and 
"carinatus", with reference to the low mid-dorsal 
call nations on the abdominal segments. 

Distributional Ecology: Low intertidal, Aleutian Is- 
lands (Amchitka L) .south to Kruzof I, Southeastern 
Alaska. 

Parallorchestes alaskensis n. sp. 

{Fig. 19) 

Parallorchestes cretiuUita Bousfield, 198 L 78 (nomen 
nudum) 

Material Examined: 

Alaska, .Aleutian fslamhi; IV1as.sacre Bay, Attn I,, LW level, 
C. R. O'Clair coh,, June 23, 3972 - 9 (br. II) f 16 0 mm) 
Holotype (slide mount), C’MNC 1983-1512; 9 (br. M ) 
Paratype^CMNC 1983-1.51.3. 

Dlagno^s; Female, br, II (E6.0 mm). Bcdy medium 
large, robust. Peraeon segments 6 & 7 and pteosome 
segments 1-3 each with low* rounded posterodorsal 
carl nation. Eyes relatively large, short-ovate, Anten- 
nae medium long, slender, peduncles well developed. 
Antenna I , peduncular segments 1 & 2 each with single 
posterior mid-marginal spine; flagellum 17-l8-seg- 
menied. Antenna 2, peduncles 4 & 5 with short median 
posterior spine; flageilum slender, 20-22-segmented. 

Mandible, left lacinia 6-dentate; spine row with 2 
unequal slender blades. Maxillipcd, inner plate apically 
subtnincate, outer plate distomedlally squared. 

Coxal plates 1-3 gently rounded, lacking hi.nd mar- 
ginal cusps; coxa distinctly rounded below. Coxa 5 
posterolobate. 

Gnathopod I medium slender; propod slender, length 
twice depth, palm distinct, oblique, dactyl tip closing 
on pai red postered i stat spi nes. G nathopod 2 si m i lar but 
larger; basis with distinct hydrodynamic lobe; propod 
subreciangular, narrowing .slightly, palm distinct, ob- 
lique, nearly straight; carpal lobe medium, longer and 
narrower than in gnathojxxl I . 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium; segment 6 distinctly 
longest, clasping spine weak to medium; dactyls slen- 
der. Peraeopods 5-7 medium stout, bases with vari- 
ously rounded weakly crenulate hind margins; clasping 
spines of segment 6 medium. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 
short, broad; segment 5 about equal to 1/2 segment 6 
Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 4 somewhat broadened, 
shorter than segment 6, 

Epimeral plates 2 & 3, hind comers nearly squared, 
lower margins nearly bare. U roped I , pod uncle su bequal 
in length to rami, margins with 4-6 stout spines and 


AMPHIPAaFlCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15. 2002. 


43 



Fig. 18. Famtlorch€St0S subcannala n. sp. Male ( 1 6 mm); female bn il ( 15 in in). 


in length to rami, marginsi with 4-6 stout spines and 
short posterodistal spine; rami slightly tapering, 
isubequal, outer ramus with -10 dosely set marginal 
spines and short apical spine, Uropod 2^ rami each with 
4-5 marginal spines, outer ramus slightly the shorter. 
Uropod 3, inner ramus short, bare {?); outer ramus not 
longer than peduncJe, with short apical spines and 
marginal spines, 

T el son lobes broad, each with single apical spine and 
3-5 subapical marginal setae. 

Brood plates in developmental stage Tl; preamp] exing 
notch not distinct in female specimens examined , 
Male unknown. 


Etymolc^yi The name alludes to ihe species type 
locality in the Aleutian island chain of Alaska, 

Distributional Ecolog 3 V Kocky shores, among algae, 
LW level. Known only from the type locality, Attu 1,, 
Aleutian Islands. Alaska, 

Remarks: ParaMorchestesalask^nsis ha. member of 
the ochotensLs group of large, stout-bodied posteriorly 
carinated species. This species is distinguished by its 
low rounded posterior carinations, short broad segment 
4 of peraeopod 5, slender pemeopod dactyls, and short 
outer ramus of uropod 3. 


AMFHLPACIFICA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


44 



Fig. ]9. Pamll&rchestes aiaakensLs a. sp. Female 


Paraliorchesus cowani n. sp. 

(Fig. 20) 

Paraliorcheste^ ochoiensis Bamiircl 1 952 r 23, p3, 5, fig, 
I;— Barnard 1954: 24 (Gape Arago, ORE);— Barnard 
1 964: 1 1 S ; — B amard 1 969b: 1 4 ! ( Canrie] ) ; — B amard 
Sl Karaman 1 991 : 37 1 (part), 

Paraliorchest^s spinosa Bousfield, 1981: 78 (nometi 
nudum;— Bousfidd 2001a: 104. 


(br 11) (16.0 mm) Auu 1.^ Aleutians Ids., Alaska. 

Material ExaIIlilled^-^97^)^pet:lmenfi3n 1 10 lots, SE Alaska 
to central California. ELB Station refererces: Bousfield 
f 1 958. 1963, 1%8); Bousfidd & McAl lister ( 1 %2); Bousfield 
&JaTrdl(l 9 S]). 

ALASKA 

Aleutian Islands; Plot ^1, Cyril Cove, Amcliitka 1., C. E. 
O^CIaircolL, ]%9- I cf, 1 9: (2 lots). Stn. lA-I, Amchitka 
I, C E. OXldr coll. 1 972 - 1974- 1 (6 tots) 

Southeastefn Alaska; ELB Sms. t96l: A3 (2), A6(l), A7 
(few), A 18 (6), A 1 9 (S2), A22 (SS), A23 (61 ), A25 (6), A42 



AMPH[PAC[F]CA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov, 15. 2002. 


45 



Fig. 20. P&mlhrchesm cowmi n, sp. Male (13.0 mm); female ov (14.0 mm). Brady Beach, V. I, 


(2),A4g(13).A57(21).A71(4), A75 (61), A80 (16), A121 
(4), A 1 47 (33), A ] 59 ( 0, A 1 64 (67) A ] 68 ( I ) , A 1 7 1 (3). 
AI75(1)AI77(1). 

ELB StTis, mO: S20B6 (I pholo^d), SISBI (I CTJ ?). 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Queen Charlotte lidands: ELB Stns, 1957: E14a ( 1 7), E21 
(9). E25 (3); H2 ( 1 3); W I (4), W2 (14), W4 (20), W8 ( 1 7), 
Wl I (1 7), W 12 (5). WI4a (6), W14b (1), WI7 (1). 

North Central Coast: ELB Stns, 1964; H ! ( 15), H7(4). H 10 
(43), H 16(7), H23 (2), H29 (6). H32 (2), H33 (27), H35 (75), 
H39(96X H48 (1), H57 (10), H65 (3). 


South Central coast: ELB Stn, 1955: M2 (3J. 

Northern Vancouver Island; ELB Stns, 1959; Nl (1), N5 
(7), N6 (31), N16 (30); 01 (3), 01 1 (1), 013 (1), 015 (1); 
V4b(7),Vn (9),VIH(6). 

Southern Vancouver Island; ELB Stns, 1955; FI (12), F2a 
(7). F3 (3), F4 (3), FS (3), F5b (4); G2 (5), G 1 1 (8); P4 (7), 
F7{3). 

El-B Stns, 1964: H40 (51), H43 (14), H44 ( 180), 

ELB Stns. 1970; F703 (54), P7] 1(5), P7] 5 (16), P716( 19), 
P719(28),P2I (II). 

ELB Stns, ] 975: Bb (1), P20a (529 males, females), F20b 
(73),P21a(l)B28 (5). 


AMPHlPACrFlCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov, 15. 2002. 


46 


ELB Stns. 1976: B3 (26), B5 (75), BI2b (3), Rl3 (32). 
ELB Stns, 1977: B 1 ( I ) Brady Beacb, V. I .(4SO49'08"N, 
I25^W03‘’W) - <f (13,0 mm) Holotype (slide iriouniK 
CMNC 2002-0054; Quv (l40mm) AJloljpc (slide uiourtl). 
CMNC 2002-007S. 

Additional British Columbia material: J, F. L Hart Stas: 
Breniwood Boy, 1928 - J 9: Gonzales Bay. 1934 - 1 9. 

R. K. LeeSins:blaeierPL. 1969 - hcfc?, 799. 2 ]m; Botany 
Beath, 1971 - 36 rm; Whiffen spil, 1973-1 9- 
D, Klule Stns: No, .36, S. Pender I. OO Im; No, 59B, Ang- 
uilar Pi, - 2 ]m; No. 337, Cable Beach - 2 im: No. 757, Snaall 
|972-4lm. 

C, L. Lobbaa Sins, 1971: CL 1 01 L Rocky R., Wickan- 
innlsh Bay - I im; CL 1032^ Broken Group - 1 1 99, 7 
30 im. 

W ASHINGTON -OREGON 

EJ.B Sms. July Aug., 3966: W5 (6), W30 (319), W34 (93, 
W35 (26), W36 (60), W57 (24), W60 (86). Ragle Cove. San 
Juanl . R M.OT7tairSm7400l, 1 974 - 8 d'ef, 9 99. 

Diagnosis: Male (to 14.0 mm). Body mediiam large, 
robust. Peraeon, pleon and urosome segment I seg- 
ments dorsal ly smcxjth or posteriorly with very low 
mid-dorsat ridge. Antennae medium long, slender, 
peduncles strong. Anicnna I , peduncle I with small 
posterior marginal spines; flagellum '20-segmenied. 
Antenna 2, peduncular segments 4 and 5 with a few 
mediolaleral clusters of short spines and setae and 
posteromedial selal cluster; flagellum slender, nearly 
bare, ~25 segmented. 

Mandible, left lacinia 5-denlale; spine row with 2 
slender blades. Ma^iiJIipedi. inner and outer plates 
apical I y rounded; palp medium; segment 3 broad; 
dactyl relatively long, curved 

Coxal plates L3 subrectangular. slightly convex 
below', 2 & 3 with slight hind marginal shelf. Coxa 5 
aequjiobate. Coxa 6 strongly posterolobate. anterior 
lobe small. Coxal gills broadly lobate. subequal in size 
and form, 

Gnalhopod 1 small; basis with weak hydrodynamic 
lobe; carpal lobe small; propod slender, slightly broad- 
ening distally, palm short, oblique; dactyl simple, 
slightly overdapping paired posterodistal spines. 
Gnathopod 2. basis and ischium with sharply rounded 
and overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal Eobe nar- 
row, short; propod subrectangular. narrowing slightly 
dismily, palm short, oblique, gently convex, 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium stout; segment 4 short; 
segment 6 wiih 4-5 posterior marginal spines, enlarg- 
ing disially; dactyls relatively slender. Peraeopods 5- 
7 medium stout; bases, hind miugins weakly crenul ate, 
each w ith distinct notch and surge seta; segment 6 with 
3-4 medi um strong anteri or marginal spines, Peraeopod 


5, segment 4 slightly broadened distally; segment 5 
short, slightly longer than 1/2 segment 6. Peraeopods 
6 & 7, segment 4 little broadened, subequal in length to 
segment 6, 

Epimcml plates 2 3, hind comers slightly acumi- 

nate, lower margins sparsely spinulose. Uropod 1. 
peduncle slightly shorter than rami, outer margin wath 
4-5 spines and short (<I/3 ramus) posterodistal spine; 
rami with 3-4 marginal spines and short apical spines, 
Uropod 2, outer ramus slightly Ehc shorter, each with 2 
marginal spines. Lhopod 3 medium short; outer ramus 
slightly longer than peduncle, with short apical spines 
and 1-2 clusters of posterior marginal spines; inner 
ramus small, with minute apical seta. 

Telson lobes tapering to bl unt apex, each with single 
apical spine and 3 A subapical marginal setae. 

Female ov. (14.0 mm), Antenna 2, peduncular 
segments 4 & 5 slightly more spi nose -setose than in 
male. Gnathopod ! similar to, but slightly smaller than 
that of male; baiiis virtually jacking anterodislal lobe. 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with prominent 
anterodistal lobes; carpal lobe full; propod broader aird 
larger than in gnathopod 1 , lower margin with distal 
setal clusters. Brood plate (gnathopod 2) relatively 
naITOw^ elongate, tapering and sharply rounded distally, 
with 50-60 long, numerous curl -lipped marginal setae 
on each side. I^eamplexing notch a shallow indenta- 
tion on the antemdistal margin of peraeon segment 2. 

Etymology: The patronym recognizes the outstanding 
career contributions of Dr, Ian McTaggart-Cowan. 
former Dean of Science, University of British Colum- 
bia, in the development, teaching, and dissemination of 
knowledge of the Canadian coastal marine fauna. 

Di^rtributional Ecology : From the Aleutian Islands, 
southeastern Alaska, and British Columbia, south 
through Washington and Oregon tocentml Califomia. 
sporadical ly south to l.aguna Beach; free-sw immi ng or 
clinging to brown algae & PhyihsfmiU at LW level, 
along exposed and semi -protected rocky shores. 

Remarks: Parallorchesies cowani is the most fre- 
quently encountered species on the North American 
Pacific coast, previously referred to by other N. Ameri- 
can authors as 'P. acHoiensis*', Illustrations and 
descriptions of J, L. Barnard (1952, 1954, 1969b), 
pertaining to both mature and immature specimens 
from Oregon and central California, appear referable to 
this species. However, the unillustrated malerial re- 
corded from Bahia de St. Quentin . Baja California, by 
Barnard (1964) is here considered problematical. 


AMPHJPACIRCA VOL 3 NO,3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


47 



Fig, 2L Parallorchestes leblomUn.^p. MaJe (1 1.0 mm)- femaJeov (iLOmm), 
ELB Stn. P715, Gonzales Bay, Victoria, B. Q 


AMPHrPACiHCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


48 


Parailorchestes kMondi n. sp. 

(Fig, 21) 

Paralhrchesres brevicomis Boiisfidd f 98 1 : 77 (nomen 
nudum); — Bousfield 2001a; 104. 

Material examined^ ^150 fipccirriens in 14 lots. Southern 
Brill. till Co iu 111 bla to Oregon.. ELB Station references; 
Bousfield{ 1958. 1963. 1 968), RoiJsJlcltl& MeA]lister( 3 962); 
Bousneld & Jarreti (1981). 

BRITISH COLUMBTA 

Southern Vancouver L; 1955, ELB Sin; P6a, Wickaninni$h 
Ba\ at Moraes Beach, sand near rocks, LW level - 1 d" (slide 
fnount>;4cfcf, 499- 

1959, ELB Sin: 017, Midway RtX'ks, Wickaninnisli Bay, 
expssed MW rock pools - 4 iin. 

1970, ELB Stns; P707. Pachena Hay (48° 47.5^ N, 125°* 07' 
W), sari' expcised sand, boulder, PAy/^6isp£i£f,!',!r at LW,July 16 
(4 lots) - 17 dc?, n 99ov. 20 im; P7I5, Gonzales Bay. 
Victoria (48''^25’N. 123^ 20' W), among algae on fine sand 
over pebbles at L W, July 29 - d Holoty pe ( I LO mm) fstide 
mount), CMNC 20()2.(X)55; 9 o\ (11,0 min) Alloty pe (slide 
mount), CMNC 2002-0056, 

l976.F;LBSin.s; H3(l), B6(1);BI2(2 lots) ]4dd, 1599, 
1 5 im; 1 977, ELB Stns. B4a ( 1 ); B J 9b ( I im), 

WASH, OREGON 

1 %6, LLB Stns: W^22 [ 1 ); W24 (3 lots )(2 males, 5 females, 

2 Im); W50 f9); W53 (8); W57 (2), 

Dia^osis: Male { I LO mm). Body dorsal I y smooth or 
nearly so. Peraeon segments with slight posterior mar- 
ginal thlckenlrtg. Antennae relatively long, slender^ 
peduncles very well dieveloped!, Amenna I , peduncular 
segments I & 2 with small posterior iriarginal spines; 2 
& 3 with posterodistal clusters of setae; flagellum of 
about 20 posteriorly weakly setose segments. Antenna 
2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 nearly bare; flagellum 
slender^ 17-18 segmented. 

Mandible, left laclnia 5-dentate; spine row with 2 
slender blades. Maxillipedt inner and outer plates 
apical I y rounded; palp medium stout; dactyl strongs 
unguis relatively tong. 

Coxal plates 1-3 large^ deep rectangular, each with 
blunt hind marginal shelf. Coxa 5 aequilobate. Coxa 
b strongly posterolohate, anterior lobe small Coxal 
gills large, broadly lobate, slightly largest on peraeo- 
pod 6. 

Gnathopod 1 medium; basis w^lth stnall hydrody- 
namic lobe; carpal lobe short; propod shorl-rcctangu- 
lar, lower margin distaiJy with short setae, palm short, 


oblique; dactyl simple, slouU distinctly overlapping 
paired posterodistal spines. Gnathopod 2, basis and 
ischium wnth strong overt applng hydrodynamic lobes; 
carpal lobe very slender; propxl subrectangular. nar- 
rowing slightly distally. palm short, oblique, nearly 
straight 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium stout; segment 6 with 
relatively weak posterior margi nal spines; dactyls regu- 
lar, peraeopods 5'7 medium stout; bases, hi nd margins 
weakly crenul ate, each mth distinct notch and surge 
seta; clasping spines of segment 6 medium strong. 
Peraeopod 5, segment 4 slightly broadened; segment 5 
slightly longer than I f2 segment 6. Peraeopods 6 & 7, 
segment 4 little broadened, slightly shorter than seg- 
ment 6. 

Epimeral plates 2 & 3, hind comers slightly acumi- 
nate, IJroiXKi 1 , peduncle slightly shorter than rami, 
margins with 3 4 spines and short distolatera! spine; 
inner ramus with 2 marginal spines, outer ramus with 6- 
7 shorter, close-set marginal spines ajid 2-3 short apical 
spines. Uropod 2, outer ramus slightly the shorter, each 
with 2 marginal spines. Uropod 3 medium; outer 
ramus slightly longer than peduncle, with apical spines 
arid 1-2 clusters of posterior marginal spines. 

Telson lobes short, broadly rounding to obtuse apex; 
with single apical spineand4subapicai marginal setae. 

Female ov. ( 11.0 mm). Antenna 2+ peduncular seg- 
ments facially and marginally iriore setose than in male. 
Gnathopod 1 similar to that of male, but dactyl more 
slender. Gnathopod 2. bais and ischium w ith distinct 
hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe small: propod larger 
and deeper than in gnadiopod I . Brood plate (gnathopod 
2) teally broad, tapering and sharply rounded distally, 
marginal setae relati vely short, Preamplexing notch 
shallow; posterior distal lobe deep, w idth -4/5 that of 
peraeon 2. 

EtymolpgV'; The species is named in honour of Dr. Paul 
H, LeBlond, retired Professor of Oceanography, Uni- 
versity of British Columbia, for his leadership in the 
research and teaching of ocean sciences- 

nistributlnnal ecology : Exposed sandy and rock 
beaches, at LW level, from central wesi coast of Van- 
couver L, B. C., south to Oregon. 

Remarks: Faraliorchesres leblofidi exhibits an unique 
combination of character states that, in balance, is 
intermediate between those of the primitive ochotensts 
group and the more advanced zibeliina group (p. 52). 


AMPHJPACIFICA VOL 3 N03 Nov, 15, 2002. 


49 



Fig, 22. Farailorckestes minima n. sp. Male (7.0 mm); female (4.5 mm). 
Stn. V4, Roller Bay, Vancouver 1., B, C. 


Piiraflorciiestes minima n. sp. 

(Fig. 22) 

Parallorcheste.^ minhna Bou&fleld^ 1981: 78 (nomen 
nudum); — Bousfield 200 la: 104. 

Material Examined: 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Northern Vancouver L: ELB Stn, 1959: V4b> Roller Bay, 
Hope I. (50^ 5'N, 127*^ 56' W), zmongPhylhspiidix and 
brown algae, over boulders and coarse sand^ LW, July 22 - 
(7.0 mm) Holotype (slide mounl). CMNC 2002-0057; 9 
ov (4.5 mm) Allotype (slide mount), CMNC 2002-0058 ; I 
jm Pai^type. 


Diagnosis: Male (7,0 mm). Body smooth, segments 
lacking posterior ridges or can nation. Eye broadly 
ovate. Antennae and peduncles medi urn strong. An- 
tenna 1 , peduncular segments ! -3 each with posterodistal 
cluster of setae; segment I with 2 small posterior mar- 
ginal spine groups; flagellum -14-seg merited, seg- 
ments with small posterodistal setal dusters. Antenna 
2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 relati vely short, extend- 
ing little beyond peduncle of antenna 1 . each with mid- 
dorsolateral and posterodistal setal clusters; flagellum 
12-J4-segmemed. 

Mandible: lacinia 5-segmentcd; spine row with 2 
slender blades. Maxilliped, inner plate apical ly 



AMPHJPACIFICA VOL 3 NQ.3 Nov. 15, 2002, 


50 


subtruncate; outer plate with sharply rounded inner 
distal cutting edge; palp segmenL 2 broad, distally 
truncate; segment 3 slender; dactyl strong, ungnis dis- 
tinct. 

Cosae 2-3 large, broad, with distinct rounded hind 
marginal cusps, lower margins near straight. Coxa 5 
aequilobate, Co?ia 6, strongly posterolobate, anterior 
lobe small, shalkmiy rounded below. Coxal gills me- 
dium, relatively slender, especially on peraeopod 6. 

Gnathopod I medium; basis and Ischium with 
distinct overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe 
setose; propod slender, subrectanguiar, pafrn short, 
oblique; dactyl simple, slightly overlapping paired 
postero-distal spines. Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium 
with strong hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe relatively 
thick; propod SLibovate, palm short, very oblique, nearly 
straighl; dactyl regular. 

Peraepods 3 & 4 medium stout; segment 6 with 3 
short posterior marginal spines. Peraeopods 5-7 
medium stout, bases very broad, hind marge ns crenu late, 
dactyls medium. Pemeopod 5, segment 4 not broader 
than long, little longer than segment 5, and about 1/2 
length of segment 6. Peraeopods 6 Sc 7, segment 4 
slightly broadened, longer than 1/2 segment 6, clasping 
spines very weak. 

Epimeral plates 2 A. 3, hind comers very^ slightly 
acuminate, lower and hind margins weakly spinose. 
Llropod I , peduncle shorter Lhan rami, outer margin 
with 3'4 short spines and medium strong distolaierai 
spine; rami with 2-3 marginal spines and short apical 
spines. U roped 2, outer rami distinctly shorter than 
inner ramus, each with 2 marginal spines. Uropod 3 
medium, outer ramus longer than peduncle, w itli apical 
and single postenomargirsal clusters of medium spines; 
Inner ramus small, with small subapical seta 

Tel son lobes short, apex rounded, each with single 
apical spines and 3 short subapical marginal setae. 

Female ov (6.5 mm). Gnathopod I similar to that of 
male. Gnathopod similar to male, but propod smaller, 
Brood plates large broad, tapering distal ly, marginal 
setae very long. PreampleJting notch indiscernible; 
small lunate depression on surface of peraeon 2, near 
hind border with peraeon segment 1 . 

Etymology: From the Latin ’'minimus" - least with 
reference to the small size of the adult stage. 

Distributional Ecolt^'; Known only from the type 
locality on NorthVancouver k, B. C., among Phydo- 
spadte and kelp, over bedrock and boulders^ LW level. 


Remarks: The species is .similar to P. nuda but differs 
in having the antennae subequal m length, and outer 
ramus of uropod 1 with 3 marginal spines only. 

Paralhtchesies nuda n. sp. 

(Fig. 23) 

Paraliorchestes nuda Sousfidd, 1981: 78 (nomen 
n udum) ; — Bousf ield 200 la; 104. 

Materia] Examined: 

BRITISH COLEMBIA 

Southern Vancouver 1 .; ELB Sin P6a. Moraes Beach, 
Wickaninnish Bay, sand at LW level, Aug. 2, 1955 - 1 2.0 
mm) Albtype (slide mount) CMNC 2002-0050; 9 ov { 1 3.0 
mm) Holutypc (slidtis mouri), CMNC 20Ci2'0059. Ogden 
R., Victoria, coll. J.F.L, Hart & G. C. Carl, July 1 8. 1 955 - Cf 
(7.0 mm). 

Din^ofiis: Female ov. (1 3.0 mm). Body smooth, seg- 
ments Lacking posterior ridges. Antennae and pedun- 
cles medium short. Antenna 1 , peduncular segments 
1-3 each with posterodistal cluster of short setae; seg- 
mcm 2 with small posteromarginal spine group; flag- 
ellum -20- segmented, segments with small postero- 
distal seta! dusters. Antenna 2, peduncular segments 4 
.shorter than 5, each with mid -dorsolateral setal c! aster; 
fl age] 1 um - 1 5 - segme nted . 

Mandible: iacinia .5-segmenied; spine row with 2 
unequal slender blades. Maxilliped, inner plate apical I y 
subtruncate; outer plate with squarish inner distal cut- 
ting edge; palp segment 2 broad, deep, distally sub^ 
truncate; dactyl curved, longer than segment 3. 

Coxae 2-3 large, broad, with weak hind marginal 
shelf, lower margins nearly straighl. Coxa 5 disti nctly 
anterolobate. Coxa 6, shallowly posterolobate, ante- 
rior lobe small, shallowly rounded below. Coxal gills 
medium, relatively slender, especially on peraeopod 6. 

Gnathopod 1 medium; basis with medium strong 
hydrodynamic lobe; ; propod slender, subrectangular, 
hind margin with 1-2 seud groups, palm short, oblique; 
dactyl simple, slightly overlapping paired postero- 
distal spines. Gnathopod 2, hydrodynamic lobes of 
basis and ischium very weak or lacking; carpal lobe 
medi ujn; propod subrectangular, much stronger than in 
gnathopod I; palm short, oblique; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium stout; segment 6 with 
short posterior marginal spines; dactyls medium. 
Peraeopods 5-7 medium stout; t^es very broad, hind 
margins crenulate,each with weak notch and surge 
seta; dactyls medium. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 broad- 


AMPHIPACFRCA VOL, 3 NOJ Nov. li, 2003, 


5] 



Fig. 23. Parallorchestes nuda n. sp. Male (12,0 mm); femaJe ov ( 1 3.0 mm), 
Stn. P6, Wickaninnish Bay, Vancouver L, B. C, 


ened distally; segment 5 short, segment 6 longer than 
segment 5, Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 4 slightly 
broadened, length nearly equal to segment 6, anterior 
marginal spines weak to medium. 

Epimeral plates 2 3, hind comers slightly acumi- 

nate, margins nearly bare. Uropod I , peduncle slightly 
shorter than rami, outer margin with 3*4 short spines 
and ordinary distal spine; rami each with 2-3 marginal 
spines and short apical spines. Uropod 2, outer ramus 
distinctly the shorter, each with 3 marginal spines. 
Uropod 3 medium; outer mmus longer than peduncle, 


With 2 posteromarginal clusters, and apical group of 
medium spines; inner ramus with small suhapical seta. 

Telson [obe.s shoit, apex rounded, each with single 
apical spines and 3 short suhapical marginal setae. 

Brood plate (gnathopod 2), suhovate, broadest me- 
dially, marginal setae relatively short (-1,^2 width of 
plate), Preamplexing notch a shallow obtuse indenta-' 
tion on anterior margin of the lower lobe of peraeon 2. 

Male (12.0 mm). Gnathopod 1, basis with medium 
strong hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe large, margin 
with nutnerous Jong comb setae; propod subrectangular; 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NQ.^ Nov. 15, 2002. 


52 


dactyl simpie, atoul. Gnaihopod 2, basis with medium 
srong hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe regular distinct: 
pjiopod retatively small^ subovate.palm short, oblique, 
gently convex. 

Btymology: From the Latin 'nudus'' meaning bare, with 
reference to the weakly setose antennae. 

Distributional Ecology : Known only from the type 
locality at Moraes beach, Wlckaninnish Bay, Vancou- 
ver !.> B. C; in surf -exposed sand at low water level. 

Remarks: FaraHorchestesnifiki differs frotr\ P. minima 
in its nearly bare peduncular segments of antenna I , and 
in its significantly larger si 7 e (to 1 3 mm). 

Parailorchestes zfheliina (Derzhavin) 

(Fig. 24) 

Parhyaie zfteiiifm Derzhavin, 1937: 92, Plate IV, fig. 
I ; — G u rjanova 1 95 1: S f 5, 11 g. 569; — B ulycheva 1 957: 
78, figs. 27a, b. 

ParallorcheJiieji zihellma Boustleld 19S k 7S,flg 7; — 
Barnard & Karaman !99k 37i. 

Material Exaititned: 

Sea of Japan. r>erzhavEri coll., 1 92ft * 2 cfcf { J 0 mm) (slide 
mouni), I 9ov (9.0 miJin),2ool. Inst. No. 8/2956ft: lbid . 2 cfcf, 
3 99, Zoologicti! Museum No. 29.'>ft6. 

Diagnosis: Male (10 mm). Body medium large, dors- 
al I y smooth or nearly so. Peraeon segments with Indist- 
inct posterior and ventral marginal thickening. Eye 
medium, obliquely Siibovaie. Antennae of medium 
length, Antenna 1 , peduncle medium, segments each 
with 3-4 posterior marginal clusters of setae: flagellum 
9- 10- segmented, segments posteriorly spinose-setose. 
Antenna 2, peduncles 3-5 with 1-2 anterolateral mar- 
ginal clusters of short spines and single posterodisEal 
seta] clusters; flagellum l2-l3-segmented, segments 
short setose. 

Mandible, left lacinia 5 ! /2-dentate; spine row with 
2 medi urn blades. Maxilliped, inner plate, apex obtuse; 
outer plate with broadly acute inner distal cutting edge; 
dactyl basal ly thick, narrowing distally. 

Coxal plates I -4 rounded below; cosae 2-3, hind 
margins with weak shelf, lack! ng cusp. Coxa 5 aequi- 
1 obate. Cox a 5 shal 1 ow I y posterol obate , anted or lobe 
sharply rounded below. Coxal gills broadly lobate, 
largest on peraeopods 5 & 6, 

Gnathopod 1 medium strong; basts with small hy- 
drodynamic lobe; carpal lobe medium; propod subovate. 


bfoadeni n g di stall y ; pal m short, oblique , nearly strai ght, 
not shaq^ly demarcated from convex lower margin; 
dactyl simple, tip closing on paired posterodistal spines. 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with medium hydro- 
dynamic lobes; carpal lobe narrow; pro|XJd large, 
broadly subovate, palm oblique, nearly straight; dactyl 
heavy. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium, not shortened; segment 
4 short; segment 6, posterior margirt with 2 stout 
median spines and short distal clasping spine; dactyls 
med i u m strong . Peraeopods 5 -7 not shortened , stout ; 
bases relatively narrow, hind margins moderately 
crenulate, each with small notch and surge seta; seg- 
ment 6 w ilh 2 stout anterior marginal spines and short 
distal clasping spine. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 soine- 
what broadened distally; segment 5, length -1/2 seg- 
ment 6. Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 4 not shortened, as 
in peraeopod 5, slightly shorter than segment 6. 

Eplmeral plates 2 & 3, hind corners weakly acumi- 
nate, lower margins nearly bare. Uropod L peduncle 
and rami subequal in length, outer margin with 4-5 
spines and medium disiolateral spine; rami with 3^ 
marginal spines and short apical spines. Uropod 2, 
peduncle short; rami each with 2-3 marginal spines, 
outer ramus slightly the shorter. Uropod 3 short; ped- 
uncle with 2 posterodistal spines; outer ramus not lon- 
ger than peduncle^ with 4-5 medium apical (but no mar- 
ginal) spines; inner ramus short, apex rounded, smooth. 

Felson lobes broad, narrow ing distal ly, each with 
single apical spine and 4-5 subapkal marginal setae. 

Female ov (9.0 mm). Antenna 2, peduncular seg- 
ments more strongly setose than in male. Gnaihopod I , 
basis and ischi urn with very weak hydrodynamic lobes; 
carpal lobe short; propod slender, pal m oblique, weakly 
separated from posterior margin by paired slender 
spines. Gnaihopod 2, basis and ischium with weak 
hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe short, nelaLively broad; 
propod subovate, larger and dee|>er than in gnathopod 
I , Brood lamella (gnaihopod 2) relati vely short, slightly 
broadening and rounding distally, marginal setae elon- 
gate, Pre-amplexing notch a very shal low indentation 
on the anterodistal margin of peraeon 2, 

Distributional Ecol(^‘ : N orthem Sea of J apan , south- 
ern Sakhalin Ids. and Sea of Okhotsk, to Kurile Ids., 
among algae and Zostera. LW level to 7 m depth (see 
Bulycheva 1957, p. 82). 

Remarks: Parailorchestes ziheliina is apparently re- 
placed along the North Amertcan Pacific coast, from 
the Aleutian Islands to Vancouver Island, by a counter- 
part species, P, kahatai n. sp. (below). 


AMPHJPAaFICA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


.53 



Fig. 24. Parallorchestes zihelllna (Derzhavin^ 1937). Male (10.0 mm); FemaCe ov (9.0 mm), 

Peter-the-Great Bay, Sea of Japan. 


Parallorchems kuhmat n, sp* 

(Fig. 25) 

Paruthrcke^tes occidentitih BousfieJd I9SI: 78 (iro^ 
men nudum):— Bousfidd 2001: 104. 

M»lerial Examined; 

ALASICA 

Aleutian IsJands: AmchitkaJ,, C EO CtairStn 3 A-] July, 
1 973 - ] 9- Izenhack I agood, LI ni mak I L W , N. A . Pbwel I 
colLJuly, 1969- I 9 ov (10 mm) (slide rnount). 
Southeastern Alaska: ELB Sm, 1961: A171, Puffin Bay, 
Baranof 1.(56'^^ 1 6' N 1.34° 48’ W). LW. aaiong algae on 
boulder beach, Jul> 25 - d" ( 10 mm) HoUrty pe (slittc mouni) 
CMNC 2002-0061 ; 9 im (5.0 mm) Allotype [slide mount). 


CMNC 2002^0062; 9 dd J 0 im, Paraty pes, CMNC 2002* 
0063. 

FI .B Sm, 1980: S IB8, NW end of Hogan L, Chichigof L 
(57°43'N 136°15.5'W), on rocks under open stones, MW- 
LW, July 28 - I d (9.5 mm) (slide mount), sev. dd, 99. 

BRITISH COLLiMBIA 

S. Vancouver Island; Bordelais Islet, Vancouver I., LW, 
Ian Lawn colL, July, 1976-9 dd, ] 4 99, 5.5 im. 

Diagnosis;; Male (10 mm). Body medium, dorsally 
smooth or nearly so, with strikingly variegated colour 
pattern. Peraeon segments with slight posterior and 
ventral marginal thickening. Eye medium, broadly ov- 
ate, Antennae relatively shon, subequal, peduncles 


AMPHrPACJRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002 


54 


medium. Antenna I, peduncles J & 2 with 2-3, and 
peduncle 3 with I posterior marginal dusters of setae; 
flagellum « 12 ' 5 egmented, segments posteriorly set- 
ose. Antenna 2, peduncles 3-5 with ] =2 anterior mar’ 
ginal spine clusters and single posierodistal setal clus- 
ters; flagellum 13-1 4-segmented, segments short’Setose. 

Mandible, left lacinia 5-dentate; spine row with 2 
medium blades. Maxilla 2 Jnner plate with 2 pectinate 
blades among the apical masticatory setae. Maxilliped, 
inner plate, apex obtuse; outer plate w ith broadly acute 
inner distal cutting edge; dactyl thick. 

Coxal plates 2*3 subquadrate, lower margins gently 
convex, hind margins not cuspate. Coxa 5 ae^^uilobate. 
Coxa 6 strongly postcrolobate, anterior lobe sharply 
rounded below. Coxal gills broad, largest posteriorly. 

Gnathopod I medium; basis with smali hydrody- 
namic lobe; carpal lobe small, propod slightly broad- 
ening distally, palm short, oblique, nearly straight; 
dactyl simple, tip closing on paired posterodistal spinesn 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with medium hydro- 
dynamic overlapping lobes; carpal lobe narrow; propod 
medium, subcsvate, narrowing distaJly* palm veiy ob- 
lique, nearly Straight; dactyl short. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium stout; segment 4 short, 
< I /2 segment 6; segment 6, posterior margin with stout 
proximal spine and larger distal medium clasping spine; 
dacty I s med i um, Peraa^pods 5 -7 rei ati vely short, stout ; 
bases broad, hind margins weakly crenulate, each with 
pronounced notch and surge seta; median clasping 
spine of segment 6 strong. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 
broadened distally; segment 5 short (<1 /2 segment 6). 
Peraeopods 6 Sl 7, segment 4 short, broadened distally, 
shorter than segment 6. 

Epimeral plates 2 & 3, hind comers acuminate, 
lower margins weakly s pi nose. Uropod I, peduncle 
and rami subequaE in length, outer margin with 2-3 
spines and medium longdistolaieml spine; rami with I- 
2 marginal spines and short apical spines. Uropod 2, 
outer ramus slightly the shorter, rami each with 2 
marginal spines. Uropod 3 medium, relatively slen- 
der; outer ramus tapering distally, slightly longer than 
peduncle, with medium apical spines and 1 -2 clusters 
of posteromarginal spines. 

Telson lobes broad, rounding distally. each with 
single apical spine and 4 subapical marginal setae. 

Female ov ( 1 0 mm), Gnatho^xxl 1 similar to that of 
male but more slender; basis with small rounded hydro- 
dynamic lobe, Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with 
small hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe slender; propod 
subriectangular, deeper than in gnathopod 1 and slightly 
broadening distally. Brood lamellae regular. 
Preamplexlng notch undeveloped in present material. 


Elymology; The patronym recognizes the fundamen- 
tal contributions of Dr. Zbigniew (Bob) Kabaia, Pacific 
Biological Station, Nanaimo, B.C., to development of 
know ledge of the sysiematics and biology of marine 
cmstactsuis. 

Distributional Ecology; Aleutian Islands, Alaska, 
through SE, Alaska to Barkley Sound, Vancouver 1.; 
among algae at LW level, along semi -protected cold- 
water rocky coasts. 

Remarks; Paraiiorchcsies kahatai differs from west- 
ern counterpart P. ziheilma in its less setose antennae, 
smaller gnathopods, less strong spi nation of the uropods, 
and relatively short and more robu.st peraeopods, 

Pamliorchei^tes asiatka Tzvetkova 
(Fig. 26) 

Faraliorchesies asiaticus T zvetkova, 1 990; 47-53, rigs. 
7-10. 

Material EKandncd by Tzvetkova. 

Gulf of ICronotsk, Olga Bay, 4 m depth, rock btiLtom, sampler 
frame, 0- 1 m, A. N. Golikov coll., 16 .Aug., 1 975 - cf { 10 mm) 
(lloJotype), 2 99 (10, 1 1 rnmj (Paratypes), No. 1^82164: 
Ihid. - Ic? (7,5 mTTi.).No.2^2l65; Ibid -bouldeirs with sand, 
0. 1 m, V. G. Averintsev coEL, 16 Aug,, 1 975 - 2 sped mens, 
NO..VS2I66 

Diagnosis. Male( lOmm); Fostericirmarginsof peraeon 
segments 1-7 and pleon segments I & 2 with strongly 
expressed tran.sver.se spindle-shaped thickening. An- 
tennae regular; antenna I, pec] uncular segment 2 longer 
Ihan 3, both with small median poslerior marginal seta 
and posterodistal sctal cluster; flagellum 9-segmentod. 
Antennae 2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 laterally with 
scattered short spines; flagetiunm 1 2-segniented. 

Upper lip slightly notched distally. Mandible, [eft 
lacinia 5'detitate,spine row with 2 3 blades. Maxilla I 
reguylar, Maxilla2,plates relatively narrow, Maxilliped 
palp well -developed, segments slender* 

Coxa 1 broadly rounded anterodistaily. Coxa 2 nearly 
square, lower comers rounded. Coxae 3 with trace of 
posterior marginal shelf. Coxa 5 slightly posterolobate, 
hind margin crenulate. Coxal gills medium, sac-like. 

Gnathopod I, basis and ischium with mediunl hy- 
drodynamic lobes; segment 6 subrectatioular-, palm 
evenly oblique, sharply demarcated from the posterior 
margin by two long, pointed locking spines: dactyl 
thick, slightly exceeding palmar margin, witli several 
short setae on the inner margin, unguis short, Gnathopod 


AMPHrPACfHCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15. 2002, 


55 



Fig. 25, Parallorchestes kalf&tai n. sp* Male ( lO.O mm); female im. (5. 0 mm). 
ELB Stn. AI71 , Puffin Bay, Barancjf L, Southeastern Alaska. 


2, basis and ischium each with mediiim stnong hydro* 
dynamic lobe; carpal lobe small . narrow; propod short- 
rectangular^ with nearly parallel anterior and posterior 
margins and evenly sloped palmar margin, sharply 
defined from the posterior margin by a pair of thick 
locking spines; dactyl mcdiun strong, slightly shorter 
than the palmar mtirgin, inner margin lined with short 
setules, unguis small. 


Pemeopods 3 & 4 regular; segment 5 short; segment 
6, hind margin with short striated clasping spines. 
Peraeopods 5-7 short, stout; postenor margins of bases 
crenulated, each with distinct notch and surge seta; 
segment 4 si ightly broadened distally; segments short, 
[itde longer than wide; segment 6 with 2-3 strong 
striated anterior marginal spines; dactyl stout* strongly 
curved, with small subapical seta. 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL 3 TO.3 Nov, 15. 2002. 


56 



Fig, 26, Paralhrcheyfes a.’iiatlva T zvetkova^ 1990^ Male ( IQ.O mm); female ov ■( J 1 ,0 mm). 
Kronoikot, Kamchatka {modified from Tzvetkova 1990). 


Fpimcral plated 2 & 3, hind corners acuminaie, 
posterior margins gently sinuous, lower margins weakly 
spinose. Plenpods regular. IJropod 1, peduncular 
distolateral spine strong, extending nearly half length 
of outer ramus; inner and outer ramus with 3 shoii 
marginal spines and a few medium apical spines. Uropod 

2, rami subequal. each with 2-3 marginal spines, Uroptxl 

3, peduncle thicks with 2-3 posierodistal spines; outer 
ramus about equal in length to peduncle* with 6-7 apical 
spines; inner ramus very' small, with 1 small seta on 
inner margin. 

Tel son lobes apieally acute* bearing [-2 slender 
apical spines (or spine- 1 ike setae) and a few lateral 
spinules. 

Female ov (1 0-1 1 mm): Gnathopod 1* hydrody' 
namic lobe medium on basis, evanescent on ischium; 


carpal lobe small; propod slightly broadening distally,i 
lower margin with 2 clusters of setae. Gnathopod 2, 
basis and ischium with medium hydrodynamic lobes; 
carpal lobe relatively long; propod relatively large* 
subrectanguiar, posterior margin with 2-3 clusters of 
setae. Brood plates typical of the genus (sec P. 
antericatui, fig. 28). l^amplexing notch of peraeon 2 
not described, 

Distributional EcoloRy. Known only from Olga Bay, 
Gulf of Kronotsk* Bering Sea coast of Kamchatka; on 
sediments and sand at shallow suhcidal depths of 4-6 m. 

Remarks; The presence of the transverse spindled ike 
thicken! ngs on the posterior pan of the thoracic and I st 
abdominal segments might suggest a close reJationship 


AMPHIPACIFICA voi.- 3 NOJ Nov, 15 , 2002. 


57 



Fig. 27. Parailorchestes americana Boiisfield, 198J, Male (7,5 mm); female ov (lO.O mm). 
ELB Stn A 17] -72, 1961, Puffm Bay, Baranof I., southeastern Alaska. 


AMPHIPAQFJCA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002, 


58 


between Paraihrchestes asic^ticG anJ P. miencana 
However, P. asiatka differs markedly in the shape and 
armature of the leison; iheslenderform of the maxittiped 
palp; the distally narrowing mandibular Jobes of the 
low er lip (broadened in P. umericma)\ and absence of 
marginaJ spi nes on the relati vely short outer ramus of 
uropod 3. P, asiatica differs aJso in the distally broad- 
ened pro|xxi of gnathopod 1 , especially in the female; 
the steeply oblique propodal palmar margin of 
gnathopod s I & 2, and strong demarcation from the 
posterior margin; the longer peduncular segment 2 of 
antenna I (longer than 3); and in the more strongly 
armed inner margin of the propod (segment 6) of the 
peraeopods. 

Parallorchestea amcricana Bousfietd 
(Fig. 27) 

ParaUorch^stes americarui Bousfield 19SL7S, fig.7 
(nomen mid um);— Tsvetkova 1990: 52;— Boiisfield 
2001a: IM. 

Material Fxiunined: 

Southeastern Alaska; Kl 0 Stns, Jiine-Julv, l9bL A75t 
Kayak, Winghain I. - 2 cTcT; A 3 5 1 , Islet east of Johnstone Pt. 
- l! <S: A 1:62, mouth Portk>glt Harbor, Hill I., bedrock 
tidepool, LW, July 22 - 2 im; A 1 7 1-72, Puffin Bay, Baranot 
I. (56^1 6’N, 1 34^4S'W} among alg 3 e on bedrock and 6x>ul- 
der>. LW^ July 25 - cf (7.5 mm) HoJotype (slide mount), 
CMNC 20023 1X564; 9 ov (10 mim) Allotype (slide mount), 
CMNC 2002-0065: 1 2 cfcf^ 299, 1 6 suhadnlt Faratypes, 
CMNC 2002-{X>66; A- 172, small island, mouth of Puffin 
Bay, vertical rock face at I.W - 1 C?, 2 99. 

BRITISH COLOMBIA 

Vancouver I. ELP Stn, J959; 017, Midway Rocks, 
Wickaninnish Bay (49" 03'N, ]250i4'W), MW pools on 
exposed vock faces, Aug. 13-15 - I imm, 

U^hban Stns, J 97 f : CL- 1030, N.of Quiskis R., Wlckamnnish 
Bay - 33 males, 24 99 and subadults. 

JFL Hart Stn 541, 3 932, Ross Islets, Deer Group, V.L - 2 
males. 7 99, 6 suhadults. 

Ian L^wri SLn_ 1976, off Bordetais Islet, LW, June 26-2 cfcf, 
4 99, 28 subadults. 

WASH.-ORKGON 

EI-B Stns, July- Aug., 1 966: W24 , Kalah^ch Beach, south of 
creek mouth - 2 99: VV58 (1 95: W6MI cf); W63 (Icf, I 
tmm). 

CALIFORNIA 

Monterey peninsula, P, Glynn co3L. 1959 - I 9- 

Diagnosls: Male (7^,5 mm), Body small to medium. 
Peraeon segmenLs 1-7 and abdominal segments 1-3 
each with posterior- raised ridge. Antenna I , peduncular 


segment 2 short, little longer than 3; flagellum 12-14 
segmented. Antenna 2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 
short, with posterodistal setal cluster; flagellum 12-14- 
segmented. 

Mandible: left Jacinia 6-dentate; spine row with 2- 3 
slender blades. Masilliped, inner plate nanwing.apex 
subtruncate; outer plate inner distal margin obtusely 
rounded; palp segment 2 short, broad, distally sub- 
tmneate; dactyl stout, nail medium. 

Coxae Irrelatively shallow’, broad, gently rounded 
below, hind margins lacking posterior shelf. Coxa 5 
slightly anterolobate. Coxal gills heart-shaped, small- 
est on peraeopod 2, largest on peraeopod 6. 

Gnathopod 1 small; basis and ischium with strong 
overlapping hydrtxlynamic lobes; carpal lobe small; 
propod suhovate. palm shallowly oblique, weakly de- 
flned, merging imperceptibly w-ith posterior margin: 
dactyl barely overlapping paired postered istal spines. 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with strong overlap- 
ping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe small, narrow; 
propod subovate, palm oblique, gently convex, 

I’feraeopods 3 & 4 stout; .segment 4 short; segment 6 
with strong median clasping spine Banked by smaller 
proximal and distal spine, Peraeopods 5-7 short, stout; 
bases medium broad, hind margins crenulate, each with 
small notch and surge seta; segment 6, anterior margin 
with stout median clasping spine and smaller flanking 
spines: dactyls large, stout. Peraeopod 5. segment 4 
short, broad: segment 5 very short, « 1/2 segment 6. 

Hpimeral plates 2 & 3 regular, hind comers slightly 
acuminate. Uropixl L peduncle and rami subequal in 
length, outer margin of peduncle with 3-4 short spines 
and strong distolateral spine: rami with 2-3 marginal 
spines and short apical spi nes. Uropod 2, outer ramus 
distinctly the longer, each with 2-3 short marginal and 
apical spi nes. U ropod 3 medi u m ; outer ramus longer 
than peduncle, with apical and single cluster of poste- 
rior marginal spines: inner ramus short, nearly bare. 

Telson lobes each w ith single apical spines and 4^5 
short .subapicaJ marginal setae. 

Female ov (10.0 mm), Gnathopod I similar to but 
more slender than that of male. Gnathopod 2, propod 
relatively large powerfuL similar to but smaller than 
male , B rood plates 1 arge , broad, taperi n g distal ly and 
sharply rounded apical ly ; marginal setae long (> 1/2 
plate width. Preamplexing notch a shallow indenta- 
tion of the anterior margin of the lower lobe of peraeon 
segment 2. 

Etymolt^'t The lema "americaria", not derived in the 
initial reference to the name, alludes to the North 
American F*acific distribution of the species. 


AMPH[PAanCA VOL, 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


S9 



Fig, 28, PafiaUorchest€stnspinos£ta.&p. Male (12.0 mm); female br II (11.0 mm). 
JFL Hart Stn 2231-14, Estevan Pt., Vancouver L, B, C. 


AMPHIPACIFICA V0I..3 N0.3 Nov, 15. 2002. 


60 


Dl^ibutiunal Ecologj : Freely swimming among lit- 
toral marine algae and Phyilospadix, along sarf-ex- 
posed coasts, from fYincc William Sound, southeastern 
Alaska, to Oregon and central California. 

Remarks: Pamiiorchest^s americma differs from Its 
western Pacific counterpart, P. asmtica, in character 
states detailed by Tzvetkova (1990). and summarized 
in the key (p. 38). 

Pamllorchestes trispinosa n. sp. 

(Fig, 28) 

Paraliorchestes tfiapinosa Bousfield, 1981: 78, tig 7 
(nomen nudum); — Bousfieid 200 1 ; 1 04. 

Material Examined: 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

SipOuthcni Vancouver 1 .: JFL Hsirt Stn 2231-14. Estevan 
Pt., Clnyoquot I, (49° 2T48 " N. 126'* 34’IS” W), May 14, 
1934 - (12 mm) Holutype (slide mount), CMNC 2002- 

0067: 9 (br. It) (I I mm) Allotype fslidc mouTit), CMNC 
2002-0068; cf Paratype, CMNC 2(H)2 0069. 

Diagnosis; Male (12.0 mm). Body medium large, 
dorsal I y smooth or nearly so. Antennae medium long, 
peduncles well develof>ed, lacking posterior marginal 
spines. Antenna 1, flagellum 3 8-20-segmented. An- 
tenna 2, peduncles 4 & 5 smooth; flagellum relatively 
short, 1548 segmented. 

Mandible, left lacinia 6-dentate; spine row with 2-3 
slender blades. Maxi Hi ped. apex of inner plate gently 
rounded ; outer p3 ate, cutli n g i nner distal mar gi n squared : 
palp segment 2 broad, distal ly truncate; dactyl stout, 

Coxal plates 1 -A large, broad, rounded below, lack- 
ing trace of posterior marginal shelf, Coxa 5 relatively 
large, slightly anterolobate. Coxa 6 shallowly 
posterolobate. Coxal gills broadly lobaie, somewhat 
reverse L-shaped, largest on peraeopod 5. 

Gnaihopod I relatively small; basis with small antero- 
distal lobe, lacking on ischium; carpal lobe short; pro- 
pod subrectangular; t>alm short, very oblique, convex, 
weakly demarcated from posterior margin; dactyl, hind 
margin lined with fine setules, lynguts unequally bifid 
at apex, closing on stout paired posterodl&ta) spines. 
Gnathopod 2 large, powerful; basis and ischium with 
strongly Overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; carpal lobe 
small, ciyptic; propod veiy large, subovate, narrowing 
slightly distal ]y. palm short, oblique, con vex near hinge; 
dactyl relatively short, narrowing distally. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 stout; segment 6. posterior margin 
with 3 stout distally enlarging spines; dactyls large. 
Peraeopods 5-7 stout; bases broad with weakly crenulate 


convex hind margins, each with distinct notch and 
surge seta, segment 5 short, length about 1/2 segment 
6 propod with 3*4 stout, anterior marginal spines, pen- 
ultimate spine strongest, Peraeopod 5, segment 4 
slightly broadened, nearly as long as segment 6. Per- 
aeopods 6 & 7, segment 4 little broadened, subequal in 
length to segment 6; dacty ls stout, strongly curved, 
Epimeial plates 2 hind corners nearly square, 
lower margins bare. Uropod 3, peduncle slightly 
shorter than rami, outer margin with 5-6 spines and 
medium posterodistal spine; inner ramus with 3-4 
marginal spines; outer ramus with 4-5 closely set 
marginal spines and short apical spines, Uropod 2, 
rami distinctly longer than peduncle, outer ramus very 
slightly the shorter, each with 3^ marginai spines. 
Uropod 3, outer ramus nearly twice length of short 
peduncle, with 3 clusters of posterior (upper) marginal 
spines and short spines on rounded apex; inner ramus 
very small, rounded, with minute apical seta, 

Tel son lobes narrowing, each with single apical 
spine and 5-6 subaptcal marginal setae. 

Female, br. II, (HO mm). Gnathopod 1. hydrody- 
namic lobe of basis medium strong, lacking on ischium; 
carpal lobe short, propod al palm convex, shallowly 
oblique, weakly demarcated from posterior margin. 
Gnathopod 2. hydrodynamic lobe of basis weak, lack- 
ing in ischium; carpal lobe narrow, deep; propod larger 
and paired palmar spines stronger tfian in gnathopod I. 
Brood lamellae plate- 1 ike, broadening distally. Pne- 
aniplexing notch medium deep, slightly obtuse; poste- 
rior lobe about two-thi rds w idth of peiaeon segment 2. 

Elynioiogy; From " tri " + the Latin root ''spinosus", 
w ith reterence to the three groups of postenor marginal 
spines of the ramus of uropod 3. 

Distributional Ecology: Known only from the type 
locality, a surf- exposed headland of Vancouver bland. 

Remarks: Distinctive character states include a bifid 
unguis of gnaihopod 1 (Cf). a strong striated clasping 
spine on the propod of pemeopds 3-7, and an elongate 
margj nal I y spi n ose outer ram us of u ropod 3 , The t1 rst 
is si milar to that of advanced species within the genus 
(Hyalellidae) and the second to that within 
gen us Hyale (sens. str. ). Si nee A Uorchestex and Hyaie 
differ from Famlhrchestes in several generic charac- 
ter states (e,g,, I -segmented pal pof maxi Ha 1, uni ramous 
uropod 3, unarmed tel son lobes), commonahly of bifid 
gnathopod unguis and stout pereopodal clasping spine 
may be instances of homoplaslous convergence in 
phyletically unrelated hyalids of similar life styles. 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. ]5, 2002. 


61 


Protohyak n*g* 

//ya/ff(part): Stebbing 3906: 559;— StOJLit 1913: 650;— 
Bulycheva 1957: S3.— BamanJ 1979: 98, key;— Bous- 
field ]9SI: 76, figs, 9, 10;-Krapp-Schickd 1993:738, 
key:— Barnard & Karaman 1991 : 367, 

Talitroidea (part) Barnard 1969a: 469, 

Protohyale Bousfteld 2001a: H.H, 

Type species; Hyak freqaens Stout, 1913: 650. 

Stibgenera; Protohyak nominate subgenus (p. 79); 
Boreotiyak n. subg.(p. 61); Lept&kyak n. subg. {p. 
SS); Diphhyale n. subg, (p, 90). 

Diagnosis: Body medium to small, smooth. Eyes 
round, lateral, small to medium, Antenna 1, peduncle 
and flagellum short. Antenna 2, peduncle short; 
flagellum usually elongate, 25+ segmented, proximal 
segments often with very short setae. 

Mandibular left iacinia mostly 5 (6)-dentate; spine 
row with 3 -6 blades. Maxilla 3 palp long, ^segmented, 
extending beyond base of apical spines of outer plate. 
Maxilla 2. inner marginal plumose setae short. Mas- 
ill iped, inner plate subrectangular; outer plate distal iy 
rounded; palp regular, segment 3 not broader than long; 
dactyl finely pectinate, with medial marginal setae, 
rarely sexually dimorphic (terminal whip seta (c?)). 

Coxae 1-3 with weak posterior shelf. Coxal not (or 
slightly) distall y broadened Coxa 4, margin of poste- 
rior excavation may have weak obtuse cusp.. Coxa 5 
aequilobate (weakly ariterolobate to weakly postero- 
lobate. Coxae 6£knd 7 shallowly posterolobale. Coxal 
gills subovate, largest posteriorly, 

Gnathopod I {&) larger than, but mostly similar in 
form to 9, occasionally dimorphic; hydrodynamic lobes 
of basis and ischium often well developed; carpal lobe 
distinct, relatively ba’tad; propod subrectanglar, usu- 
ally with 2-3 prominent anterodistal spiiie<s), posterior 
margin variously setose; palm distinct, oblique, dactyl 
simple-tipped, Gnathopod 2(^1 powerfully subchelate, 
regular, hydrodynamic lobe of basis and ischium well 
developed; carpal lobe lacking; propod subrectangular 
to subovate, narrowing distally, palm short, oblique. 

Peraeopods 3-7, various, usually not stout; bases 
medium broad, rounded hind margin not strongly 
crenulated, usually with notch and surge seta; clasping 
spinets) distinct, not conspicuously enlarged; dactyls 
medium strong, inner marginal seta weak or lacking, 

Epmieral plates weakly armed, hind comer pro- 

duced, plate 2 deepest Pleopods well developed, rami 

normal, Uropod I , peduncle shorter than ramit with 


strong dislolateral spine; rami marginal setae or 
lacking. Uropod 2 rami unequal, marginal spines few. 
Uropod 3 short, lacking iruier ramus; ramus shorter 
than peduncle, with apical spines only, 

Telson lobes triangular, usually longer than wide, 
apical margins smooth. 

Female: Gnathopod 2 usually similar to, but larger 
than gnathopod I . Brood lamellae rounded to narrowly 
ovate, marginal setae long, hook-tipped, Preainplexing 
notch pronounced, w^ith unguisial groove. 

Etymology: From the Greek yroim" meaning first, or 
earliest fonn of, and alluding to several ples- 

iomorphic character states of component species, 

Distribytional Ecology: Component species are 
mainly free-swimming in the swash zone, low inter- 
tidal to shallow subiidal, in temperate to warm-temper- 
ate marine waters world wide. 

Remarks: Genus Proiohyak h clearly separable from 
genus Hyak by character states utilized in the key to 
genera (p. 36). Species of both genera are sw immers, 
but those of Hya(e possess the more advanced character 
states of posterior marginal cusps on coxae 2 & 3, and 
loss of peduncular distolateral spine of uropod I , 

P. (JSoreohyak) n, sttbg. 

Type species: P. (Boreohyak) lamberti n. sp. 

Species: P. (Boreohyak) kiwaiam n. sp*;/'. (B.)Jar^ 
rettae ti, sp,; P. (B*) iomberti n, sp.(+ varieties );/*, (B^) 
neorionensis n, sp,; P* (BJ ovUuri n. sp*; P. oculatan. 
sp.; P. (B4 seticomk n. spu 

Extralimital species: Froiohyak (Boreohyak) cmnpi- 
tfHyjc(Hdler,] 866); P. (Chilton, 19 37): P. 

(B.) ioorea Barnard, 1 974; P. (B.)fnaroiibrae (Stebbing, 
1899); P. (B.)piimila (Hivvatari & Kajihara, 1 98 1 a); A 
(fi. ) rubra (Thomson, I879)(see Hurley 1957, fig. 3); 
P. iB\) wilari (Barnard, 1974); P. (Boreohyale) sp, (= 
Hyak schmidd Iwasa 1939); P. (Boreohyak) sp. (= 
Hyak dolifusi Bulycheva 1957). 

Diagitexsts: Antenna I, peduncular segment 2 not re- 
duced, longer than peduncular segment 3. 

Mandibular left Iacinia 5-6 dentate; right Iacinia 
tricusjmte. Max i 1 1 a 2 , i nner pi ate w i ih 6- 1 0 strongl y 
pectinate apical setae. Maxilliped palp not sexually 
dimorphic. 


AMPHIPACinCA V01-. 3 N03 Nov. 15 , 2002, 


62 


Coxae I -4. posterior marginal shelf weak or lacking; 
Coxa 4, margin of posterior excavation lacking median 
cusp. Coxal gills large, sac-like. 

Gnathopod I, basis and ischium, hydrodynamic 
(anterodistal) lobe usually lacking or evanescent (both 
sexes); dactyl normal. 

Peraeopods 3-7, segment 6^ inner margin variably 
spinose, clasping spine (when present) singie or stri- 
ated. Peraeopods 5-7, bases broadly rounded, each 
with posterior marginal notch and surge seta. 

Epimeron I , hind comer not smoothly rounded. 
Uropod L distolateral peduncular spine short, length 
less than one-third length of outer ramus Uropod 3, 
peduncle usually with two posterodistal spines. 

Female: B rood pi ate { gnathopod 2) , ape x rounded to 
subacute. Preampkxing notch distinct, with short, 
narrow, oblique or curved unguisiat notch, 

Protohyale (Boreohyale) iamberti n. sp. 
(Fig. 29) 

jreqiisns. Barnard 1954: 23 (Oregon); — Bous- 
fteld 1981: tig. 10;- Austin 19S5: 594;-Staude 19S7: 
379, fig. 18.34; 

Hyak freqiam (part) Barnard & Kamman 1991: 370;— 
Bousfield 2001a; 104. 

Hyak rubra pequens Barnard, 1969b: 139 (part?) 
not Hvak freqimts (Stout, 191 3): 650 (Laguna Beach) 
not Hyak pequens Barnard ]%2 (S. Califomia)\ 

Material Examined: -1440 spec f mens in S2 lots, St 
Alaska to Oregon. ELB Station nekrcrices' Bousfield (1958, 
[963, 1968); Bousfield & McAllister (1962); Bousfteld 
Jarren(l98l), 

ALASKA 

Southeastern Alaska: ELB Stns, 1961: A6 fZh A22 (8), 
A57(8),A80f30).AI29(IhAI47(l),A|64(l4XA[7] (6). 
EI.B Stns, 1980: S4B4 (1 9), S4B5 (4 sptns); S5B7 (1 cf, 
399 ). 


BRITISH COLUMBI A 

Queen Charlotte Islands: ELB Stns, 1957: E2(l I); W! (6), 
WS { 17), W 1 1(2), W 1 2 ( 1 6), W15 (4). 

North Central Coast: ELB Stns., [964: H2 (U. H 12 (8), 
H32 (5), H33 ( IS), K35 (4), H50 (6), H53 (56), H57 (9). 
South Central Coast: ELB Stns., J955: MM (I), 
Northern Vancouver Island: F:LB Slos, 1959: Nl (27); Ol 
(3), 02 ( I ), 05 (19), 0 1 1 (28). Ol 2 (8), Ol 7 (2t ): V4b ( 1 2), 
V5(y),V6f3), vi()(]), VI7(2). 

Southern Vancouver Island; ELB Sins., 1955: FI (62), F2 
(5). F5 ( n ); P4 (7). P5b ( 1 2), P6 (S), P7 (4 1 ), P9 (7); G 1 1 
(7). 

ELB Stns, 1 964: H43 (7). H44 (96), 

EL B Stns.. I970: P70.3 (2). r7lO(52), P7I L Bnidy Htsach, 
bedroc k, algae, LW, July 20 - 3 ePd* (7.8 inm)( 1 slide mount) 
.CMNCI983-l533;l9ov;P7l2U),r7[4(22>,P735{65), 
P7|9(85). 

ELB Stns., [975: P3a,b (11), P5a,d ( 1 2), P17( 1 32), P20 (22), 
P2la(9), 

ELB Stns. 1976: Bl ]b(l), B28 (15). 

ELB Stns. 1977: B5 (2), B6a, Trial L Point, Victoria, bed- 
rt^^k, algae, LW, May IS - cf (9.0 mm) Holotype (slide 
mount). CMNC 2(X)2-0073;9ov (7..5 mm) Allotype (slide 
mount), CMNC 2002-0(174- 22cfd'99Paratjpcs,CMNC 
2(X)2-0075; B 1 1 b (1), B 12 (9), B 1 9:3,6 (59). 

Additional British Columbia ntaterlal: Ucluelet, C. S. 
Young & W. Spread borough^ aummer, 1 909 - 6 spms; Qon- 
lales Ft., J. F. L. Hart, 1941 - I cf, 2 99 nv; Botany Bcaeh. 
PV>rt Renfrew, V. 1., R, K. Lee, 1971- 1 9., 1 im; Whiffen 
Spiu Sooke Hbr„ R. K. Lee colt., 1973 - I 9ov 

W.ASH-ORECON 

ELB Sins. July- Aug., 1966: W34(I 3), W.35 (6>, W36{IS), 
W40 (23). W42 ( ] 5), W57 (5). W60 (7), W63 ( I ). 

Eagle Cove. San liian L. R, M. O’Clair. Sin. 74 (:k) 1 1, 1974- 
icf ,2 99. 

KEConianStn, Sunset Bay. ORE, 1986 - l84spm^(ineL P. 
iedcornis). 

Diagnosis: Male (9,0mm): Eyes medium to medium 
large, circular. Antenna I , peduncular segment. 2 
distinctly longer than 3; flagellum with 13-15 Seg- 


Key to subgenera Pnytokyale n, g. 


1 . Gnathopod I (Cf ), dactyl bifid or double pronged Diplokyale (p. 90) 

Gnathopod 1 (d*), dactyl regular not double pronged 2^ 

2. Maxilliped palp slender and strongly sexually dimorphic ..... Leptohyah (p, 38) 

Maxilliped palp normaf if sexually dimorphic, male unguis a whip seta 3. 

3. Antenna I , peduncular segment 2 short, little longer than segment 3; gnathopod 1 >vith hydrodynamic 

lobes of basis and ischium strong (C?) Protokyaie (p. 79) 

Antenna I , peduncular segment 2 longer than segment 3; gnathopod I , hydrodynamic lobes of basis 
and ischium weak or lacking (cTJ B^reohytUe (p, 61 ) 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL NOJ Nov. 15, 2(K12, 


63 



Fig. 29. P. {Bor€ohy<d^) lambi^rU n. sp. cf (9.0 mm); 9 ov (7.5 mm)* 
ELB Sm. B6a, Trial L Point, Victoria, B. C. 



AMPHEPAQFICA VOL 5 N03 Nov. 15, 200Z 


64 


Key to North Pacific species of subgen iis Barei>hyuk 


L Un?pod L outer ramus w\(h 0-2 margl/iul spines 2, 

Ufopod I . outer ramus with 3-5 margirral spines .................. 4, 

2- Bye large, antenna 2, flagellum short (<20 segments): uropod 3, ramus short, length iot> 1/2 peduncle ...... 

P. (fi,) O^iiia/a n, sp, (p, 70) 

Bye medium; antenna 2, flagellum elongate (>25 segments): uropod 3, length of ranrnjs>l/2 peduncle 


3, GnathoptxJ J (cf) . pniptjd slender rectangular* peraeopods 6 and 7* dactyls short . P. iB.^ oclmH n. sp (p. 71) 
Gnathopod f {(f) prapod deep rectangular; pcracopod daciy Is long strong . .. PJHJ putmia (H. & K.) <p, 77> 


4, Peraeopod 5. segment .5 .short. (W=L); , 5 , 

PcnuxrpcKl 5* segment .5 regular (L> W) 6. 


5. , Antenna 2, flagellLifn 30+ segmented, segments hare; peraeopods 5-7 regular, slender, anted or miir gins weakly^ 

sptnuse P. (B.) tamberti n. sp. (p. 62) 

Antenna 2 flagellum ^25-segmented, basal segments short-setose; peraeopod 5-7, segmertts stout, anterior 
margins spinose (B.) tte&tioneaiix n. sp. (p. 76) 

6, Gnaihopcxj I (dP)> palm shallow, continuous with posterior margin; telsim lobes short, not longer than wide . , . 

X , X , X X . . . . . X , , {Boreohy'ak) sp. Bulycheva (p. 79) 

GnathoptxJ 3 and telst^n not so , , , 7, 


7. Peraeopttds 6'7slcnder, distinctly longer than 3-5, segment 4 slender (length > 2X w idth) ^ . 

P, f£fx) jarrettae it. sp. (p. 65) 

Peraeopods 6-7 relalively stout little Eonger than segment 4 broadened (length <2X width) 8, 

8. Antenna I, flagellum with short setae; peraeopi.xEs 5-7 heavily spinose . . . . , . fflx| hi^'oUirii ti. sp. (p. 74) 

Articrina 1 , flagellar segmenLs with long setae; peraecjpods 5-7 regularly spinose 


menis, each bear! ng 2 aesthetascs . Antenna 2 med I urn* 
more than tw ice length of antenna 1 : flagellum with 30- 
33 segments, setal brushes very* weak* inconspicuous. 

Upper and lower Sips regular. Mandible, left lactnia 
5-dentace; spine row with 2-3 accessory blades. Max- 
illa U palp elongate, tip reaching nearly one-half length 
of apical spine teeth of outer plate, Mas ilia 2, inner 
plate with inner row of -9 pcctiriate setae. Ma.xi!]iped 
palp medium broad; dacty l slightly shorter than seg- 
ment 3, unguis short 

Coxae I -4, posterior marginal cusp lacking, poste- 
rior marginal shelf weak on coxa I, stronger on coxae 
2 and 3, low er margi ns rounded regul ar. Coxa 5 aeq ui - 
lobate. Coxal gi 1 Is sac ! ike, largest on peraeopod 5. 

Gnathopod I , anterodistal lobe weakly rounded on 
basis; very weak on ischium; ciirpus lobe medium* with 
^10 marginal comb setae; propod subreclangulafxWith 
2 aiUerodistal spines, palm short, oblique, posterior 
angle defined by a pirof short spines, distal portion of 
posterior margin with single group of setae; dactyl 
stout, with minute posterior marginal sctules,ungms 
slightly overlapping palm. Gnathopod 2, basis and 


.................. f. (B.) seticomis n. sp. (p. 67) 

ischium each with strong, slightly overlapping, hydro- 
dynamic lobes; menis w'eakly extended posterodlstally; 
carpal lobe lacking; propod subrectangular* anterior 
margin with 1-2 proximal spines* lower margin nearly 
hare, palm oblique* W'^ith slight hinge tcx5th, shorter than 
smooth posterior margin; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopod s 3-4* segment 5 short; segment 6, poste- 
rior margin with 3 -4 weak spines* increasing distally; 
dactyl relatively slender. Peraeopods 5-7, basis vari- 
ously broadened, hind margins crenulatc* rounded, 
with notch and surge seta; segment 4 slightly broads 
cned; segment 5 short (^1/2 segment 6); segment 6 
(propod) w ith 4 w eak* anterior marginal spines, clasp- 
ing (lcx;king) spine w^eak. 

EpimeraJ plates I -3, hind comers weakly acutnln- 
ate. Pleopods 1-3 regular Uropod I, peduncle with 3- 
4 outer marginal spines; distolateral spine stout, -1/3 
length of outer ramus; ramus with 3^ marginal and 
weak apical spines. Uropod 2* rami unequal* each with 
2 marginal spines* Uropod 3* peduncle slightly longer 
than ram us, with 1-2 posterodistal short spines; ramus 
tapering, apex blunt, with 3-4 short spines. 


AMPHIFACJHCA VOL 3 NQJ Nov. 2002. 


65 


Tel son* laiemJ margin of each lobe with small setae. 

h'emaJe o%f (7.5 mm.): Gnathopocl I , hydrody nani jc 
lobe on basis weak, sharply roundedjacking m ischium; 
carpal lobe medium, with -8 marginal comb spines: 
propcxi subrectangLilaPt palm shorty oblique; dactyl 
si ightty over! appi n g pal red pal mar spl nes . G nathopod 
2 similar to gnathopod I but hydrodynamic lobe of 
basis slighily larger; propod slightly larger, with 2 
groups of posterior marginal setae; daeiyi not overlap- 
ping palm. Brood plate (gnalhopcNd 2) broadly sub- 
triangular^distally sharply rounded, margins with 10O+ 
hooked setae of medium length (<l/2 brood plate 
width)^ Pre-amplexiiig notch short, sharply incised; 
unguisial groove narrow , short, nearly siraighttperaconal 
posterodistal lobe broad, smoothly rounding anterioHy. 

Etymology : The species is named in recognition of 
Philip M- Lambert, Royal British Columbia Museum, 
Victoria, for his dedicated career contribution to the 
teaching, display, communication and research in ma- 
rine systematics and ecology. 

Distributional Ecology; Southeastern Alaska and 
northern British Columbia to Oregon to Central Cali* 
fornia, associated with marine algae (Barnard 1969b) 
£>om inant among seaweed at the low water level. 

Remarks: P. iatnherd, type species of subgctius Bor- 
eohyalt^, differs consistently from the type species 
Jrequetts of subgenus Protohyale (p. 79) in characters 
of the subgeneric key (p. 64)* especially its stronger 
peduncular segments of antenna I , hydrodynamic lobes 
of gnathopotl I that are weak or lacking in both males 
and females, and squared posterior epimeral plate I . 

Some morphological variatEon w as noted in tnatcrial 
from locaiities in British Columbia, Thus, mature 
males at Brady Beach and Trial L showed slight differ- 
ences in degree of brush sctaiion and length of flagellum 
of antenna 2* in spi nation and seiation of peraeopods 5- 
7, and in relative length of the ramus of uropod 3, These 
are not considered of species level signiflcancc. 

Protohyale (Boreohyttie) jarrettae n* sp* 
(Fig.' 30) 

Hyaie iniermedia Boiisfleld, i 98 1 : SO (non>en nudurn); 
Protohyale intermedia Bonsfield 2001: 104. 

Material Exaitiiaed: -750 specitnens in 42 lots. SE Alaska 
to Washington 5 Lute. ELB staLcon references: Bousfield 
( 1 958* 1 963* I ^568), 8^ 1 iLsfield «St Me Al lister ( 1 962); Bousileld 
&JajTCtE(l98l), 


ALASICA 

Southeastern Alaska: ELB Stns, 1961: A.l (I), A67 fl), 
Al]5(l). 

ELB Srn, 1980: S4B4 ^ I 9 (photo'd). 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Queen Charlotte Islandis: ELB Sins. 1957: E5 (2). Hi 4e 
(l),E24(6), 

North Central Ci>ast:ELB Stns, 1964: HJ (I02j, H5{2), 
H 1 0 ( I ), H 1 3 (4) , H 1 6 (18), B23 (4), H29 (W), m3 (43), 
H35 ( 1 98). H48 1 1 ), H50 { 1 ), H65 (6). 

Northern Vancouver islaitd; ELB Stnii, 19.59; C>l (6); V4A 
(4), 

Southern Vaneouver Island: ELB Sins, 1955: F2 (2). 

HL B Stns, 3964: H44 ( 1 ). 

ELB Sms, 1970: TO3( lU.FZKKIb). P7I I.Bmdv Beach, 
Trevor Channel (48'^48'48"N.125'^09'30"Wh LW, July 20, 
1970 - Cf (7.5 mm) Holotype (slide mogni), CMNC 1983- 
1 509 , 9 ov (7.0 mnn) Allotype (.slide mount), CMNC 1 983* 
1 5 10; 5 1 spms Paraty pes, CMNC 1 983- 1 5 M : P7 1 5 ( 3 ). 
ELB Stn* 1975: P]7c(2). 

RLBStJi. 1977: 84(19). 

Additional British Columbia material: Wouwer I.* Barkley 
Sound. P. I jsroben coll.. 1973 - 1 9, 2 imms. lbjd. .Gibrallar 
I.- I cf. 

WASH OREGON 

KLH .Sins. July*Aug„ 1 966; W,5 (26). WS ( 1 ), W3.5 (3), W36 
( 1 ), W40 (2), W42 (5 ), W57 (2), W60 ( I ); Limestone Pt., San 
Juar, R. I. Smith coll.* 1955 - 4 spms.: Ibid .. Kanaka Ba>, 
* I spm. 

Dm gnosis; Male (7 .5 mm. ): Eyes med 1 urn , s ubci rcular. 
Antenna I , peduncular segment 2 distinctly longer than 
3; flagdium with 14-15 segments, each slightly setose 
and bearing 2 aesthetascs. Antenna 2 medium*about 
twnce length of antenna 1; flagdium with 26-27 seg- 
ments, prosimally w ith fine setal brushes. 

Upper and lower lips regular. Mandible, left lacinia 
5 -den late; spine row w ith 2*3 accessory blades* Max- 
illa I, palp elongate, lip reaching about 1/3 length of 
apical spine teeth of outer plate. Max i Ha 2, i nner pi ate 
w'Uh inner row of pectinate setae. Maxilliped palp 
relatively slender; dactyl as long as segment 3, unguis 
medium. 

Coxae 1-4. posterior marginal cusp lacking, poste- 
rior margi nal she! f weak on coxae 1-3,1 o wer margi ns 
rounded a^gu lar. Coxa 5 aequ i lobate. Cox al gi 1 1 s sac - 
like* largest on peraeopod 5. 

Gnathopod ! * anterodistaJ lobe weak but broadly 
rounded on basis; virtually lacking On ischium; carpus 
lobe medium broad, with ^15 marginal comb setae; 
propod short, subrectangular^w iih 2 anierodlstal spineSi 
palm short, convex, oblique, posterior angle defined by 


AMPHEPACTFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2J0O1 


66 



Fig- 30, P. (Boreohyate) jarrettae ti. sp, Male ( 7.5 mm>; female ov (7.0mm) 
Brady Beach, Trevor Channel, B. C. 


AMPHIPACfF[CA VOL 3 N0,3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


67 


a pi r of short spintis. distaJ port] on of posterior margin 
with singie group of setae: dactyl stout, v^ith minute 
posterior marginal setuies, unguis notoverlapping palm. 
GnathopcNd 2, basis and ischium each with strong, 
overlapping, hydrodynamic lobes; merus weakly ex- 
tended posterodistally; carpal lobe minute; propod 
subovate, anterior margin with 2 proximal spines, 
[Qwer margin with a few minute setae, palm oblique, 
sJightly convex, shorter than posterior margin; dactyl 
regular. 

Pemeopods 3^, segments regular; segment 6, pos- 
terior margin w ith 3 A uniformly weak spines; dactyl 
relatively slender. Peraeopods 5-7, basis variously 
broadened, hind margins crenuiate, rounded, with we<ik 
notch and surge seta; segment 4 regular, not broad- 
ened, hind comers with cluster of 3^ simple spines: 
segment 5 regular; segment 6 slender with 4-5 weak 
anterior marginaJ spines, clasping (locking) spine weak, 

Epimeral plates 1-3, hind corners acuminate, 
Pleopods 1-3 regular. Uropod I , peduncle with 3-4 
outer marginal spines; distolateral spine stout, --1/3 
length of outer namus; ramus with 4-5 marginal and 
weak apical spines. Uropod 2, rami unequal, each with 
3-4 marginal spines, Uropod 3, peduncle distinctly 
longer than short ramus, with 1 -2 short posterodistal 
spines; ramus blunt, with 3 A short apical spines. 

Teison, narrowly triangular, lateral margins bare. 

Female ov (7.0 mm.): Gnathopod I, hydrodynamic 
lobe on basis weak, rounded, lacking on ischium; 
carpal lobe short, broad, with ^-10 marginal comb 
spines, anterodEStaJ setae numerous; propqd short sub- 
rectangular, palm short, oblique; dactyl slightly over- 
lapping paired palmar spines. Gnathopod 2 similar to 
gnathopod I but hydrodynamic lobe of basis slightly 
larger; propod slightly longer, with 2-3 groups of 
posterior marginal setae; dactyl not overlapping palm, 

Brood plate (gnathopod 2) broadly sub- triangular, 
distally sharply rounded, margins with -'lOO hooked 
setae of medi um length ( 1 /2 brood plate width). Pre- 
ampiexing notch medium, sharply incised; unguistal 
groove narrow, short, nearly straight;peraeonal 
posterodistal lobe broad, sharply rounding anteriorly. 

Etymologj'; The authors are pleased to name this 
species in honour of the late Norma E, Jarreti, Ottawa, 
in recognition of her dedicated work on the systematics 
of am phi pods of the North American Pacific coast. 

Distributional Ecology; Southeastern Alaska and 
northern British Columnia to Washington State and 
Oregon, Dominant among seaweed at the low' water 
level 


Remarks; P. jarrenae is a member of the seticornis 
group, w^ith short setae on the flagellum of antenna 1, 
and seta! brushes on the proximal flagellar segments of 
antenna 2 

R {Boreohyak) setic<^rms n* sp. 

(Fig. 31) 

Hyale seticornis Bousfield, 1981: 80 (nomen nudum) 
Prowhyaie .mkorms Bousneld 200 1 a: 104, 

Material Examined: --S05 specimens in 1 07 lots, 5 1 Alaska 
to Oregon and Central California EL 6 Station references: 
Bousfieldt 1 958, l%3, 1968); Rousfleld&McAl^ 

BousfteLd & Jarrett (1981). 

ALASKA 

Southeastern Alaska: ELB Sins, 1961, A6 (20 inel. cP, 9 
ov), A16 (]), A IS (4), A E9 (5), A20 (2), A22 (7), A2:^ (2), 
A57(]5).A75(2),A80(3),AI2M:13),AI29(S),A]47(10), 
AI59(]),A164{R4XA168(5).A171(]5). 

ELBStns, 19^0; SI IB I (2), SI IB2 (3), 5 19R I (1), 

BRl riSH COLUMBIA 

Qveen Charlotte Islantbi: El .R Sms, 1957; El4a U 5); H2 

(I), H]4a(l);WHl), W8(4),W3 1 (3), WI2i7). 

North Central Coast: HJ.B Suis,, I%4:H1 (2), HS(1),HM) 

( U), HI 2 (I I). H23 (6), H32 (1), H35 (6), H.19 (AS), H50 
(14), H57 (3), H5fi (2). 

South Central Coast: ELB Stn, 1955; M2 (36) 

Northern V aneouver Island: ELB Stns, 1959: N I (5), N4 
(I), N6 (18), N16 (3); 01 (20), 05 (30), 07b (2), 032 (2), 
015(22),017(I);V5(20). 

Southern Vancouver Island: ELB Sins., 1955; F4 (]), F5 
(6), F5b (4), F7 (8); P4 (36), P6a (cf ,9) P7 (S). 

EI.BStns 1964: H40(I),H41 (IXH44(I), 

ELB Stns., 1970; P7E)2 (7), P703 (7), F7 1 0 (I ), 3 1 { 19), 

P712, Haines I., Trevor Channel, Berkley Sound (48WN, 
125^25'W), kelp, eelgrass, bedrock, boulders, LW, Jnl^ 2 1 
- Cf (6.5 mm) Kolotype (slide mount), CMNC 1 983- ] 535; 9 
ov (5 5 mm) .Allotype (slide mount), CMNC 1983-15.36:2 
spurns Paratypes, CMNC 1983-1537; P7I4 (5), P715 (I), 
P7]9(25). 

Bl.B Stns, 1975; P5a (3), P20 (L5), P29(\), P32{\\ 

ELB Sms, 1976: B3 (4), B5 (2), B13 (6), B2S (5). 

ELB Stns. 1 977; B 1 9b (11), 

Additional; British Columbia malerlak CMN col lections: 
Ucluelet.C. S Young & W. Spread borough colls., summer, 
1909 - 6 spms; Queen Charlotte IsJand.s, Stewart Houston 
coll., 1955 - 3 spms; Gonzales Pt,, G, C. Carl coll, 1943 - 3 
spms; G. C. Cari Stn 3242-5, 195.5 - .35 spms; Glacier Bay, 
ft. K. Lee. 1971-12 spms; Botany Bay, R. K. Lee coll, 1971 
~ 1 spm: Cable Beach, Mills perLin.sula, V. L, Stewart Hou- 
ston coll. - ] spm: D, Kittle Stns 319, 342, !972- 2 d'd', 5 
9$; Quisitis R,, Wickaninnisli Bay, C. L. Lobban coll,. 


AMPHrPAClFlCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. ]5, imi. 


68 


1971-4 99, 1 im; Haines L, Vancouver I. » L. Daniels col 3. , 
Aug. 8, 1976 - I cT. 1 9 (slide mounts); Descansa Bay, 
Oabriota I., R. M. O’ClairStn. 760025, 1976 - 1 C?; Barnard 
Hbr., Princess Royal [„ 1971 - 1 CT (978-263). 

Berkley SciUEid, P. Lambert colL, 1973, CM N a>l lections: 
Wouvver I. - 30 cfcf, 33 99 ov. 3 im, + 1 2 c?cr, 2499, 6 im; 
Pi got Isliets - 29 cTtf, 27 99, 6 Inn; Camblain I, rock - 8 cTd', 
499, 2 im; southeastern Howell Id. - I 99. 

WASH^OREGON 

ELB Stns, July'Aug., 1966: W2 (2), W22 f 1), W24{l), 
W34 (7), W35 (10). W36 ( I), W40 (3 ), W50(4), W57 (7), 
W58 (4), W60 ( I), W61 (6), W63 (9). 

Eagle Cove, San Juan I., R. M. O'Ctair Stn 74001 3. 1974 - 
3 spins; Limestone F*t., San Juan, R. L Smith coll., 1955 - 
I spm. 

CALIFORNIA 

Albion Cove Rocks, Mendocino Co, {39^14'I2"N, 123^ 
45 'W), associated with AmmotkaUn future ukita, 20ni., T, 
ChesscolL June 29, 1 978 - I spm.; Ibid, 2 spms, (ident. K. 
E, Conlan), CMN Ace No. IZ 1986-057. 

Diagnosis:, Male (9.0 mm,): EyesmediuTn,subciTicular. 
Antenna I, peduncLilar segments strongs 2 distinctly 
larger than 3; flagellum with 16- 18 segments, each 
bearing 2-3 medium strong setae and 2 aesthetascs. 
Antenna 2 medium shoit, less than twice length of 
antenna r,flagcjlum with 30-33 segments, setal brushes 
conspicuous on proxi trial segments. 

Upper and lower lips lightly pilose aptcally. Mandi- 
ble, left lacinia 5 'dentate: spine row with 2-3 accessory 
blades . Ma.\j l I a I , pal p el ongate, ti p reachi n g about 
I /3 length of apical spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 
2, inner plate with inner row of B-9 pectinate setae, 
MaxiOiped palp medium sout; dactyl as long as seg- 
ment 3, unguis medium. 

Coxae 1-4 large, posterior marginal cusp lacking, 
posterior marginal shelf very^ weak on coxae 1-3, lower 
margins nearly straight. Coxa 5 aequilobate. Coxal 
gills sae-like. largest on peraeopods 4 and 5. 

Gnathopod I, hydrodynamic lobe medium and 
broadly rounded on basis; virtually lacking on ischi um; 
carpus lobe medium broad, with -15 marginal comb 
setae; propod short, subovatc, with 2-3 anierodistal 
spines, palm very short, oblique^ posterior angle de- 
fined by a pair of slightly sepiirated short spines, distal 
portion of posterior margin with single linearly spread 
cluster of setae; dactyl stoiil, with minute posterior 
marginal setules, unguis not overlapping palm. 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium each with strong, 
overlapping, hydrodynamic iobes; merus weakly ex- 
tended post*erodistalty ; propod subovate, anterior mar- 
gin with 2-3 proximal spines Jower margin with a few 


mi n iite setae , pal m oN ique, nearly strai ghq about eq ual 
to posterior margin; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3-4. segment 5 regular, shorter on per- 
aeopod 4, regular, segment 6. posterior margin with 4- 
5 spines strengthening distally: dactyl regular, 
Peraeopods 5-7, basis variously broad, hind margins 
slightly crenulate, rounded, with distinct notch and 
surge seta; segment 4 si igli Ely broadened, hind comers 
with cluster of 3-4 simple spines; segment 5 stout; 
segment 6 stout, with 4-5 medium anterior marginal 
spines, clasping (locking) spine small. 

Epimeral plates 1-3, hind comers weakly acuminate. 
Pleopods 1-3 regular. Uropod t, peduncle with 2-3 
outer marginal spines; distolateral spine regular, outer 
ramus having 3^ marginal and a few weak apical 
spines. Uropod 2 relatively large, rami unequaL each 
with 3 marginal spines, Uropod 3, peduncle distinctly 
longer than short blunt ramus, with 3 short posterodistaJ 
spines; ramus with 4-5 short apical spines. 

Telson lobes subtriangular, curved, lateral margins 
bare. 

Female ov (7.0 mm.): Gnathopod 1 , hydrodynamic 
lobe on basis weak, sharply rounded, lac king on ischium: 
carpal lobe short, broad, with -10 marginal comb 
spines, anierodistal setae few; propod short 
subrectangular, palm shorl, oblique; dactyl slightly 
overlapping paired palmar spines, posterior margin 
with nearly continuous row^ of short setae. Gnathopod 
2 similar to gnathopod 1 but hydrodynamic lobe of 
basis slightly larger; carpai lobe narrow ; propod slightly 
longer and deeper, with 2 sejiarated groups of posterior 
marginal setae; dactyl not overlapping palm. 

Brood plate (gnathopod 2) broadly sub-triangular, 
distally more braodly rounded, margins with -90 
hooked setae of medium length (<l/2 brood plate 
width), Preiimplcxing notch medium, sharply incised; 
unguisial groove narrow, very^ short, strai ghLperaeonal 
posterodistaJ lobe broad, evenly rounded anteriorly. 

EtymologV'. From the Latin ^'jem 'and '*conni" (horn), 
with reference to the posteriorly strongly setose ped- 
uncular segments of antenna 1. 

Distributional Ecology: Promhyale sericfyrnis is a 
common intertidal and subtidal species of rocky shores, 
of the north w^eslem Pacific region, from 3Quthea.stem 
Alaska to central California. 

Remarks.: The seiicornis group is characterized by a 
setose flagel lum of antenna 1 , and setal brushes on the 
proximal flagellar segments of antenna 2. 


AMPHJPACIUCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002 


69 



Fig. 3 L P. (Boreohyate) seticornis n, sp* Male (6.5 mnl); female ov (5.5 mm). 
ELB Stn P712, David 1. .Barkley Sound. B. C 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov, 15. 2001 


70 


P4Boreohyak}seticorms i s close to htwatarii 

(p. 76) but is distinguished from the latter in the 
following features, eye size is medium to small (vs. 
large); antenna 1 : strongly setose; antenna 2: peduncular 
segments and tlagehum have setal brushes on inner 
margin anteriorly (vs. posterior margin), and the flagella 
segment numlier 23 (vs. 15); uropod 3, pedunck with 
4 apicodorsal spines (vs. 2 ). 

P. settcornls also resembles P. jarrenae^ but differs 
from it by characters of the key (p. 64) and the follow- 
ing features: antenna 2. t:«duncular segments and flag- 
ell urn have setal brushes on inner margin anteriorly (vs, 
setal brushes on anterior and (xisterior margins), number 
of flagellar segments is 23 (vs. I4);and maxilliped,^ 
dactyl of palp i s slightly longer than segment 3 (vs.eqiial 
to segment 3). 

The species name ^eticornk was not included 
within genus Hyaie in Ramand & Karaman ( 1 991). but 
is here made taxonomtcalliy available within the new 
genus name Protohyale, 

Protohyale {Boreohyuk} ocutata n. sp. 

(Fig, 32) 

Hyak ocukta Bousfield 2001a: 104 f nomen nudum) 

Material Ekamined: 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

.Southern Vancouver Island: ELB Stn P715. Gonzales Bay, 
VIciona (4S^ 2.5'N, 1 23^20' W). kelp over bedrock, LW, 
July 29, 1 970 - d* (7,5 mm) Hcilntype (slide mount) CM MC 
1983-1508. 

WASH-ORECON 

Eagle Cove, San Juan L, WA, R, M. OXIaircolL, June 21 , 
1974- J 9ov (5.3 mm) Allotj'pe (slide mount). 

Diagnosis:. Male (7.5 mm.): Eyes large, broadly al- 
mond-shaped. Antenna I short, peduncular segments 
strong; flagellum short, with 6-S lightly setose seg- 
ments. Antenna 2 short, scarcely twice length of 
antenna 1 ; flagellum shore with about 15 weakly setose 
segments, 

Upper and lower lips regular. Mandible, left lacinia 
5 -dentate; spine row with 2-3 accessory- blades. Max- 
illa I, palp relatively short, tip reaching little beyond 
base of apical spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 2, 
inner plate with inner row of 8-9 pectinate setae. 
Maxilliped palp relatively slender; dactyl as long as 
segment 3^ setose medially, unguis slender. 

Coxae 1 -4 large, strongly rounded below, posterior 
marginal cusp lacking, posterior marginal shelf veS' 
tigiaL Coxa 5 slightly posierolobate. Coxal gills 


piatelike, largest on peraeopods 4 and 5. 

Gnathopod 1 , hydrodynamic lobe virtually lacking 
on basis and ischium; carpus lobe narrow, with --12 
marginal comb setae; propod relatively large, subovate, 
with 3 anterodistal spines, palm very short, oblique, 
posterior angle defined by a pai r of short spines, distal 
portion of posterior margin slightly convex, w ith linear 
row of 7-S setae; dactyl stouU with minute [x>stenor 
marginal setules, slightly overlapping palm. Gnathopod 
2, basis and ischium each with strong, overfappirig, 
hydrodynamic lobes; merus weakly extended post- 
enodistally; propod subquadrate, anterior margin with 
2 proximal spines, lower margin virtually bare, palm 
oblique, slightly convex, slightly shorter than posterior 
margin; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3^ regular; segment 6, posterior rnargin 
with 4-5 spines strengthening distally: dactyl relati vely 
short. Peraeopods 5-7, basis broadly rounded, hind 
margins crenulated, with distinct notch and surge seta; 
segment 4 slightly broadened distally, hind corners 
each with duster of 3-4 simple spine.s; segment 5 
shorter than 4; segment 6 regular, with 3-4 medium 
anterior marginal spines, clasping (locking) spine me- 
dium. 

EpimeraJ plates 2-3, hind comers distinctly acumi- 
nate. Pi eopods 1-3 regular. Uropod L peduncle with 
2 outer marginal spines, distolateral spine regular, 
outer ramus with 2 distal marginal and a few' weak 
apical spines. Uropod 2 relatively large; rami unequaL 
stout, tapering, longer than peduncle, each w ith 2 mar- 
ginal spines, Uropod 3, peduncle stout, sith single 
posterodistal spine;iamus short, tapering subacute apex 
with a few' vety^ short .spines. 

Telson lobes longer than wide, apical I y subacute. 

Female (5.3 mm): Character stales similar to those of 
P. (fl.) ockiri (p. 71 ), 

Etymology^ The st>ecific name refers relatively large 
darkly pigmented eye, that occupies about 1/4 lateral 
area of the head. 

Distributional Ecology: Know n only from the Juan de 
Fuca and Puget Sound region of southern British Co 
lumbia and northern Washington state; among algae at 
the LVV level of rocky shores. 

Remarks: Ptoiohyak is close to P. ociairi (p. 

74) among the primitive North Pacific subgroup. It is 
distinguished from ociairi by its relative short antenna 
2, shorter dactyl of the maxilliped palp, short ramus of 
uropod 3, and much larger eye. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. [% 2002. 


71 



Fig. 31 P, (Boreohyaie) oculata n. sp. Male (7.5 mm). ELB Stn P715, GonzaJes Bay, Victoria, B, C. 


Protohyaie iBoreohyale) ockiiH n, sp. 

(Rg, 33) 

Bousfield, I9SI (unpiibi, MS naine) 
Protohyaie oclairi Bousfidd 2001a: 104 { nomen 
nudum). 

MuterinL Examined: -175 specimens at 24 stations, from 
SE Alaska to Washington State. ELB station references: 
Bousfield(195S, 1963, l968),BiXisi'bdd&:McAinsterCI962); 
Bousfi e] d & Jarrett < 1 9S I ). 


ALASKA 

S+E* Alaska. ELB Stns., 1963: A6, Prince of Wales 1., east 
of Pt- Marsh - 2 males. 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Queen Charlotte Islands: ELB Stn, 3 957; W] ] (3). 
North Central Coast: ELB Sin, 1964; H53{l). 

South Central Coast: ELB Sin, 1955: M2 (1), 

Northern Vancouver Island: ELB Stn, 1959: N16(3). 
Southern Vancouver Island: ELB Stns, 3 955; F3 (2). F4a 
(1),E5(13);F5(2),P7{]2I). 


AMPHJPACrFlCA VOL. 3 N0.5 Nov. }5, 2002. 


72 


ELB Sin, f970:P7]5 (l). 

EI.B Stn, 1975: P5f (2), 

WASH*OREGC>N 

ELB Sins. July-Aug,, 1966: W34 (2). W60 ( 10). W66 (3). 
Eagle C:ove, San Juan WA (48 '^2T42"ISf, 1 23O0 1 "54 "W), 
R. M. O'Clair coll, June 21, 1974- C? (7,1 mm) Hototype 
(slide mount) CMNC 1 983-1 5 J 4; 9 o% (5.3 mtn) Allotype 
(slide mount), CMNC 1983-1515; 2 6 99, 12 im 

Paratypes,CMNC 1983-1516. 

.Additional Material (CMN collections) 

Brilisli Columbia: Victoria Hbr, R. Long coll, 1977 - 3 
specimens: Glacier Pt., Knight InleU K. K. Lee, 1972 - 5 
specimens; Barks I., Broken Group, Barkley Sound, Ch L. 
Lobhan ct>3L- I 9: Gibraitar L, Barkley Sound, F. Lambert 
coll. 1973 - 1 cT: B. Westerherg, #33, 10-mile pt, Victoria, 
1964- Itf. 

DiagnosLst Male (7, 1 mm.). Eye relatively small, sub- 
ovate. Antenna I short, peduncular segments strong; 
flagellum medium, with -12 posteriorly setose seg- 
ments. Antenna 2 medium, about twice length of 
antenna I : peduncular segments 4 & 5 strong; flagelium 
with about 30 short-setose segments. 

Upper and lower lips regular. Mandible, left lacinia 
5-dentate; spine row with 2-3 accessory blades. Man- 
illa U palp relatively short, tip reaching little beyond 
base of apical spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 2, 
inner plate with inner row- of 8-9 pectinate setae. 
MaxilEiped palp relatively slender; dactyl as long as 
segment 3, setose distally; unguis slender. 

Coxae 1-3 medium, rounded below, posterior miar- 
ginal cusp lacking, posterior marginal shelf shallow. 
Coxa 4 broadest. Coxa 5 slightly anlerolobate. Coxal 
gills slender, sad ike, broadest on peraeopod 4. 

Gnathopod I, hydrodynamic lobe virtually lacking 
on basis and ischium; carpal lobe medium, short, with 
9-10 marginal comb setae; propod slender, elongate- 
ovate, with 2 antemdistal spines, palm very short, 
oblique, posterior angle defined by a pair of separated 
spines, distal portion of posterior margin with a small 
proximal and distal larger clu.ster of 6-7setae; dactyl 
stout, with minute posterior marginal setules, unguis 
overlapping palm, Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium 
each with broadly rounded, overlapping, hydrody- 
namic lobes; merus weakly extended postered istally; 
carpal lobe vestigial; propod deeply subovate, anterior 
margin w ith 2 proximal spines, lower margin bare, 
palm short, oblique, lined with spines, convex near 
hinge; dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3^ relatively slender; segment 6, poste- 
rior margin with 4 spines strengthening distal ly; dactyl 
relatively short. Pieraeopods 5-7, basis broadly rounded. 


hind margins weakly crenulated, each with distinct 
notch and surge seta; segment 4 slightly broadened 
distally, hind comers each with cluster of 4-.5 promi- 
nent simple spines: segment 5 slightly shorter than 4; 
segment 6 regular, with 4-5 medium anterior marginal 
spines, clasping (locking) spine medium. 

Epimeral plates 2-3, hind comers acuminate. Pleo- 
pods regular. U ropod 1 , ped uncle w i th 3 -4 outer marg- 
inal spines, distolateral spine short; outer ramus with 2 
distal marginal acid a few weak apical spines. U ropod 
2, rami unequal, tapering, longer than peduncle, each 
with 2 marginal spines. Uropod 3, peduncle stout, with 
pair of posterodistal spines; ramus slightly shorter than 
peduncle, tapering distally, apes blunt, armed with 4- 
5 short spines. 

Tel son lobes subacute, weakly fused basal ly, 

Femaleov (5.3 mm.): Gnathopod 1 , basis and ischium 
lacking hydrodymanic lobes; carpal lobe medium, with 
10-12 marginal comb spines, anterodistal setae few; 
propod subrectangular, slightly arched, palm short, 
oblique; dactyl slightly overlapping paired palmar 
spines, posterior margin with cluster of short setae. 
Gnathopod 2 similar to but slightly larger than gnatho- 
pod I and basis with small hydrodynamic lobe; carpal 
lobe narrow; propod, posterior marginal small prosi- 
mal and larger distal group of short setae; dactyl not 
overlapping palm, 

Brood plate of gnathopod 2 relatively short, broadly 
rounded distally margins with about 90 relatively long 
hooked setae (length > I /2 width of brood plate). Pre- 
amp] ex ing notch w'ith deep oblique unguisial groove, 

Etymologj^ The species is named in honour of Dr. 
Charles E. O'Clair, in recognition of his development 
of knowledge of coastal mari ne fauna.? of the Aleutian 
Islands and souiheasient Alaska 

Distribution a J Ecology; Among algae at the lower 
intertidal level, southeastern Alaska to Oregon, 

Remarks; P. (Boreohyale) oclairi is a relatively un- 
common species of the primitive cool -temperate sub- 
group of Frotohyak, Superficially similar to F. (fi.) 
pumUa Hiwfitari Sc Kajahari, 198 la (p. 80), P, (B.) 
oclairi is distinguished from it in the following fea- 
tures: size small to medium (vs. medium large); an- 
tenna 2, peduncular segments and flagellum with setal 
brushes anteriorly on inner margin (vs, posterior mar- 
gin); gnathopod I (c?), propod subrectangular (vs. deep 
Ey broadened distally): and brood plate (gnathopod 2) 
narrowing distally (vs. broadly subovate and rounded 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. 2002. 


73 



Fig* 33* P, (Boreohyale) oclairi n* sp* Male (7*] mm); female ov (5.3 mm). 
Eagle Cove, San Juan 1*, WA 




AMPHIPACIRCA VOL S N0.3 Nov/l5, 2002. 


74 


distally). Eastern North Pacific species of fioreohyak 
appear not closely related to those cf the western North 
Pacific. 

Frotohyale Boreohyale) hiwatarii n. sp. 

(Fig. 34) 

Hyale splaosa Bousfield, 1981 (unpubln MS naaie) 
ProHthyak spino^a Bousfieid, 2001a: 104 (nonten 
nudurn). 

Material Exantiiied 63peci mens at 3 stations, southeastern 
Alaska to northern Washington state. 

ALASKA 

SouUieasterii AJaska; ELB Stn, 1961 ; A59, Thistle Cove^. 
r>ixon Harbor, green ling stomach content - ] 9 ov. 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Southern VaAeouver Island: SatiimaI.,from floating kelp 
fronds, L McT Cowan coil,, 1954 - I C? (slide mount). 

wash-oregon 

Friday Harbon(48^32 N, |23<^2'W), kelpaLL^^^ ELB coll., 
Aug. 24, 1959“ d* (I I mm) Holotype (slide mount), CM NC 
] 9&3- 1 5(J6: 9 ov (9.0 mm) Allotype {slide mount), CMNC 
I yS3' 1 505; 24 spms. Paratypes, CMNC 1 9S3- 1 507. 

Diagnosis: Male ( f 1,0 mm]i: Eyes medium, broadly 
almond-shaped. Antenna 1, peduncular segmenl 2 
distinctly larger than segment 3; flagellum with '-1 6 
segments, each bearing 2 aesthetascs and a few short 
setae. Antenna 2 medium, about Iwke length of 
antenna 1; flagellum with 30-35 segments, short setal 
brushes on proximal segments. 

Upper and lower lips lightly pi lose apical ly. Mandi- 
ble, left lacinia 5-dentate, spine row^ with 2-3 accessory 
blades. Maxilla I , palp elongate, tip reaching about 
1 /3 length of apical spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 
2, inner plate with inner row of 8-9 pectinate setae. 
MaxiJIiped palp slender: dactyl as long as segment 3. 
inner margin w ith row of Jong setae^ unguis short. 

Coxae 1-4 targe» lower margins rounded; posterior 
marginal cusp lacking, posterior marginal shelf very 
weak on coxae 1-3. Coxa 5 aequilobate. Coxal gills 
largCt laminar, largest on t>eraeopods 4 & 5. 

Gnathopod I , hydrodynamic lobe of basis w eak, 
shallow , virtually lacking on ischium; carpal lobe me- 
dium broad, with 10-12 marginal comb setae; propod 
short con vex ly subrectangular, with 1 stout and I slen- 
derantenodislal spine, palm short, oblique, posterodistat 
angle with pair of slightly displaced spines, distal por- 
tion of posterior margin wath broken row of setae: 


dactyl stouU with minute posterior marginal setules, 
unguis slightly overlapping palm. Gnathopod 2„ basis 
and ischium each with broadly rounded overlapping, 
hydrodynamic lobes; mem s acutely extended posteno- 
distally; propod deeply subovate, anterior margin with 
2 proximal spines, lower margin distally with small 
seta, palm short, oblique, nearly stmighl, lined with 
stout spines; dactyl regular, 

Peraeopcxls 3-4, segment 5 regular, shorter on per- 
aeopod 4; segment 6, posterior margin wath 4-5 spines 
strengthening distally; dactyl shorter than in peraeopods 
5-7. Peraeopods 5-7 stout, basis relatively narrow, hind 
margins slightly crenulale; segment 4 somewhat broad- 
ened, hind corners with cluster of 3-4 simple spines; 
segment 5 short; segment 6 stout, with 4-5 pairs of 
anterior marginal spines, clasping (locking) spine me- 
dium strong. 

Epimeral plates 2-J, hind corners acuminate, 
Pkopods regular. U roped J . pedu3icle w^ith 4-5 outer 
marginal spines; distolatera I spine short, outer ranrius 
having 3-4 marginal and a few weak apical spines. 
Uropod 2, rami unequal longer than short peduncle, 
each with 2-3 marginal spines. Uropod 3, peduncle 
short, stout.wiih 3 short posterodistaJ spines; ramus 
short, blunt, with 3-4 short apical spines. 

Td son lobes subtriangular, little longer than w ide, 
curved lateral margins bare. 

Female ov (R.O mm.): Gnathopod L carpal lobe 
small, with 8 marginal comb spines, anterodistal setae 
few ; propod subrectangular; palm short, oblique; dactyl 
slightly overlapping paired palmar spines, posterior 
margin proximal ly with nearly continuous row of 
di stal ty I engtheiii n g setae, G nathopod 2 very si mi I ar 
to gnathopod I but hy drody manic lobe of liasis slightly 
larger; carpal lobe narrow; propod slightly longer and 
deeper, with single small group of posterior marginal 
setae; dactyl not overlapping plm, 

Brood plate (gnathopod 2) short, very broad, distally 
founded, margiiis with -SO relatively long hooked 
setae (length >1/2 brood plate width). Preamplexing 
notch shallow, with deep oblique unguisial grove; 
posterodistal lobe of pemeon 2 shallow, anterior mar- 
gin sharply rounded. 

Etymology. The patronym recognizes Dr. Hiwatari's 
significant and continuing contributions to knowledge 
of amphipod systematics in the western North f’aciflc 
region. 

Distributional Ecology: A relatively rare species, 
taken only among seaweed in the lower intertidal zone, 
mainly in the southern part of the Strait of Georgia. 


AMPHJPAORCA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov, 15, 2001 


75 



Fig. 34. P. (Boreohyale) hiwatarii n. sp. Male (1 l.O mm); female ov. (9.0 mm), 

Friday Harbor, W.A, USA 


Remurics: P. (Boreokynle) hiwamrii is distinguished have seta! bmshes on inner anterior margin (vs. poste- 
from P. (BJ ptmila (Hiwatari & Kajiiara, 1981a) in rior margin), and the number of flagellar segments is 23 
the following features: eyes medium to small (vs, (vs. 15). In P. pu/rw4j) , the propod of griaihopcxl 
large), antenna 2 peduncular segments and flagellum I (d*) is much deeper, with a posterodistal protrusion. 


AMPHlPACinCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15. imi. 


76 


Protohyate (Boreohyate) tie&rionensis q. sp. 

(Fig. 35) 

Myale brevicornis Bousfielci, £981 (urtpubl. MS> 

Material Examined: 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Southern Vancouver Island: LLB Sin. 1955: t-5^ Vicloria 
Dallas breakwater 123^^23'W). LW. Aug, 20 - cT 

{T5 men) HoJoiype (sEide mtmni). 1983-1517: 9 w (5.0 
mm> .Allotype (slide mount), CMNC £983-1518. 

Diagnosts. Male ( 7.5 mm,): Eyos medium, broadty 
almond-shaped. Antenna 1 , peduncular segment 3 not 
exceeding distal end of peduncle 4 of antenna 2; 
flagellum 12- segmented each bearing 2 aesthetascs 
and 3 few short setae. A n tenna 2 rclati vel y short, about 
twice length of antenna I ; inner margin of peduncular 
segments 4, 5 and proximal 1 0 articles of 23-segmenLed 
flagellum bearing short setae anteromedial ly. 

Upper and lower lips regular. Mandibk, left lacinia 
5 l/2-dentaie+ with 2-3 accessory^ hlade.s. MaxOla t, 
palp slender, reaching just beyond base of apical spine 
teeth on outer plate. Maxilla 2 regular; inner margin of 
inner plate with pectinate setae. Ma.dttiped poJp slen- 
der; dactyl with row of reiad vely long inner distal setae, 
length equal to segment 3t unguis short. 

Coxae 1-3 * posterior marginal shelf shallow, cusp 
lacking, lower margins shallowly convex, not 
crenulated. Coxa 4 with simple posleroproximal 
excavation, median cusp slight. Coxal gills 2-6 large, 
plated ike largest on peraeopod 5 

Gnaihopod I , hydrodynamic lobe of basis medium, 
sharply rounded; merus slightly produced; carpal lobe 
short bean ng £ 0- 1 2 comb : propod short subovate, with 
single stout anlerodistal spine, palm short, oblique, 
pasterior angle defined by a pair of short spines, distal 
Ix>rtion of posterior margin with two small clusters of 
short setae; dactyl stout, with minute posterior mar- 
ginal selulcs, unguis not overlapping palm. Gnathopod 
2, basis and ischium each w ith broadly rounded over- 
lapping, hydrodynamic lobes; merus aculcly extended 
posterodistally; propod deeply subovate, anterior mar- 
gin with 2 proximaJ spines, lower margin distally with 
small seta. paJm short oblique, nearly straight; dactyl 
regular. 

Peraeopod s 3-4, segment 5 regular, shorter on per- 
aeopod 4; segment 6, posterior margin with 4-5 spines 
strengthening distaJly ; dactyl shorter than in peracopods 
5-7. Peracopods 5-7 stout, basis relatively narrow , hind 
margins slightly crenulate; segment 4 somewhat broad- 
ened. hind comers with cluster of 3-4 simple spines; 


segment 5 short; segment 6 stout, with 4-5 pairs of 
anterior marginal spines, clasping (locking) spine me- 
dium strong. 

Epimeral plates 2-3, hind corners acuminate. 
Pteopods regular. Uropod I , peduncle with 4-5 outer 
marginal spines; distolateral spine short, outer ramus 
having 3-4 marginal and a few weak apical spines. 
Uropod 2. rami unequal, longer than short peduncle, 
each with 2-3 marginal spines. Uropod 3. peduncle 
short, siout.witli 2 short posterodistal spines; ramus 
short, blunt, with 3-4 short apical spines, 

Telson lobes suhtriangular, Itttle longer than wide: 
curved lateral margins bare. 

Female ov (5,0 mm.J: Gnathopod I , hydrodynamic 
loi>e on basis very small: carpal lobe short, with 8 
marginal comb spines, anlerodistal setae few-; propod 
subrectangular; plm short, oblique; dactyl slightly 
overlapping paired palmar spines, posterior margin 
proximally with nearly continuous row of distally 
lengthening setae, Gnathopod 2 similar ; merus more 
sharply produced; propod subrectangular, palm ol> 
llque. simple, defined by a pair of heavily striated 
spines, distal half of posterior margin with 2 groups of 
short setae; dactyl not overlapping pa I mar spines. Brood 
plate on gnathopod 2 short, very broadly submangular. 
distally somew hat sharply rounded, margins with '-80 
relatively long hooked setae (length >1/2 brood plate 
width). Preamplexing notch sharply incised, with 
medium deep, slightly curved unguisiaJ groove; lower 
hind lobe smoothly rounded anteriorly. 

Etymology* From the Greek root name "fteorion" 
meaning ’’harbour", with reference to the dockard In- 
side the Victoria outer harbour breakwater w here the 
species was initially collected. 

Distributional Ecology Among seaweed of surf -ex- 
posed rocky shores, southern Vancouver I,, B. C, 

Remarks: Protohyale tworionefinffs is a rare species, 
know' n onl y from the type 1 ocal i ty in southern V ancou ver 
Island. It is taxonoraically closest to Pnxohyak 
kimbeni but differs in its shorter, more setose antennae, 
more slender maxilliped palp, stouter, more spinose 
peracopods, and somewhat smaller size, 

Western Pacific Species of subgenus Horeahyuk, 

Although dominant in the boreal ea-stem North Pa- 
cific region, the subgenus Bon^ohyah is apparently 
represented by a few species in the western North 
Pacific. As Dr. Hiwatart is now in the process of 
revising the Hyalidae of Japan (pers. comm.), these 


AMPHIPACJHCA VOL 3 NO, 3 Nov, 15, 2002 


77 



Fig. 35. r, (Bareohyaie) neorionensl^ n. sp. Male (7.5 mm); femak ov (5.0 mm) 
ELB StTi. F5, Victoria breakwater, B, 


species are included here from the standpoint of 
sy sternal Lcs and biogeography of su bgen us Boreohyale 
in the overall North Pacific Basin (Table 111, p. 129). 
None of the three was recorded from Soviet shores of 
the J apan Sea by E>erzhav in ( 1 937) or Q urjanova (1951). 

P, ( Boreohyaie ) pumlta ( H i w atari (St Kaj i hara ) 
{Fig. 36) 

Hyate pumila Hiwatari & Kajihara, 198 1 a: 35, figs. 3- 
4;— Ishimani 1994:68. 


Remarks; This species was described from intertidal 
habitats around Honshu, including Tokyo Bay, north to 
Hokkaido. Selected figures are reproduced here for 
comparison (Fig. 36). Pltrticularly significant is the 
unreduced peduncular segment 2 of antenna 1, stout 
maxil I iped palp, fully separated lobes of the telson, and 
lack of hyrodynamic lobes on the female gnathopods. 
The preamp! ex tng notch has not been described. The 
elongate flagellum of antenna 2, and short deep pmpod 
of gnathopod 1 {d')are similar to those of the schmidti- 
doUjk^i complex of the European Mediterranean re- 



AMPHIPACIFJCA V0U3 N0.3 Nov. J5, 2002. 


78 



Fig. 36. P. (Boreohyale) pumtia (Hiwatari Bl Kajihara, 19S1 ). Male ( 1 1*6 mm); female ov ( 9.5 mm). 

(modifed fmm Hiwatari & Kajihara 1981a) 


gion. The short, hroad, di stall y rounded brood plate of 
gnathopod 2 (9)t the 5-dentate left lacinia, and triaingu- 
Jar lobes of the telson are also characteristics of eastern 
Pacific species of Boreohyale. 

Protohyale ?( Boreohyale} sp. 1* 

Hyale schmidtl Iwasajl939r 278, pL 17, fig. 17; — 
Bulycheva 1957: 96, fig. 34 -Kagata 1965: 307? 
non Hyale Jichmidti (Heller* 1 866). 
non Hvaie punula Hiwatari & Kajihara 1981a: 35, figs. 

M. 

Remarks: 1 wasa's ori gi nal mated al of " Hyale schnidtP 
was recorded from Hokkaido* and subsequently from 


Straits of Korea (Bulycheva 1 957; Nagata I %5). Buly* 
cheva accepted Iwasa’s identification and reproduced 
his figures. However* Hi watari & Kajihara ( 1 98 1 b) 
included Jwasa's "Hyale schmidtr in the synonymy of 
P. {B.} pumtla (above). 

In our view, [ wasa's species is not only distinct from 
the European species Hyale schmidti (Heller, 1866) 
bu i al so from P.fPJ pumlla (above) * , I wasa's material 
differs in the distally narrowing pmpod of gnathopod 1 
(male); in the elongate and sharply rounded brood plate 
of gnathopod 2 (female) Jn its much more slender and 
elongate maxil liped palp, and in the rather broader and 
shorter lobes of thetelson. The unusually elongate and 
distal Ey subacute brood plate is a character state not 
typical of genus Prowhyale. 


AMPHIPACinCA VOL 3 NO, 3 Nov, \5, 2002. 


79 


ProTohyaie ?{Boreohyaie} sp, 2 

Hyale doH/usi Bulycheva 1957: 105, fig 38, 

Hyale doltfusil 1939: 280, 1 8 fig. 18;— Steph- 
ensen: 3944: 69^ fig. 24;— Ishimam 1994; 68. 
non: Hyak doiljusi Chevreu , 19 1 1 ■ 238, 1. 1 6, fig, 13; 
-Chevreux & Page 1925: 287, fig, 298, 
non: Hvale ^chtnkli'f Krapp-Schickel 1 993:736, fig. 504. 

Remarks: Bulycheva (K)£i£iL) recorded and figured a 
hyalid species from an unspecified locaiity as "'Hyak 
doilfifsf Chcvreux, 1911, However, her material differs 
from European material of that species, as illustrated 
by Chevreux & Page (1 925) and Krapp-Schickei ( 1 993), 
who may have incorrectly synonym! zed P, f fi, J doUfusi 
With F.iB). schmidtL 

Bulycheva^s species is distinguished by relatively 
short tlagellae of antennae I & 2, pnoximally broad 
basis of peraeopod 6, and strongly produced hind 
comer of epimertil plate 3, Her species is similar to 
Iwasa's P. ''seknidtr in the elongate and sharply rounded 
brood plate on gnathopod 2, and relatively short lobes 
of the tel son. However, the deep form of the propod 
of gnathopod 1 fc?), form ofthe brood pi ate of gnathopod 
2(9),iindoverai3 size range tend to support Bulycheva's 
initial decision to assign the wcslen Pacific material to 
P. (B.) dollfiisi of the MedilerTaneun region, 

Protohyale {Protohyate) nominate subgenus 

Hyak (part) Barnard 1 979 {rubra Jrequens subgroup); 
Barnard & Kamman 199J: 367, 

Type species: A Uorcheitejn frequ^^ns S tout , 1913, 

Species: Proiohyak (Protoftyak) ajfinis (C^hevreux, 
1907); ?R (PJ campbeilica (FilholJ 885) (Hurley, 
1957); P^PJ canalifia (Barnard, ! 979); P. {PJ cora!- 
linaaola (Hirayama, 1980); P. (P.) dollfusi (Chevreux, 
19] (); P- (PJ fieqttens (Stout, 1913); P. (Pd grirfiaidU 
(Chevreux, 1891); P. {PJ (Ledoyer,1978, 

1979a); P. (P.) mohn q. sp. (p. 84); P. (Pj laie (Bam- 
ardt 1970); P. { P.}ontata{Reid, 1951); 7P. ( P.jsaldaffha 
(Chilton, 1912); R (PJ schmidti (Heller, 3 866), ?P. 
(P.) thorn soni (Hurley, 1957); P. (PJ woiffi (Reid, 
195 1 ); P, (^*,) darmm (Barnard, 1979); P.(Pd yaqui 
(Barnard, 1979): P, (R) (Barnard, 1979), 

MacrDdactyla subgroup: P. (F.) chevreuxi (K, H. 
Barnard, 1916), P. (P.) horwluhiensis (Schellenberg, 
!93K); P. (Pd fnacrodacryla (Stebbing, 1899): F. (Fd 
guamve (Barnard, 1979). 


Diagnos^i.s: Small to medium hyalid species, Eyes 
round to subovate. Antenna I , peduncular segment 2 
reduced, little or not longer than segment 3, 

Mandibular left iacinia 6-7 dentate; right lacinia 
bifid, may have accessory tooth, Maxilliped palp 
occasionally sexually dimorphic: unguis may be an 
elongate seta (male). 

Coxae 1-3 with weak posterior marginal shelf, lack- 
ing cusps. Coxa 4, posterior margin smooth or with 
weak (vestigial?) cusp. Coxal gills sac-like. 

Gnathopod i, basaJ and ischial segments with well 
developed anterodisUil (hydrodynamic) lobes in male, 
variously present (or lacking) in females: dactyl nor- 
mal, not bifid or compound. Onatho^jod 2 with large 
basal and ischial lobes (male), weak or lacking in 
females, 

Peraeopods 3-7, segment 6, opposing margins spin- 
ose, with paired, often striated, distal clasping spines: 
dactyls simple, strong. 

Eplmeral plate 1 rounded behind. Pleopods well 
developed. Lhopod 1, distolateral peduncular spine 
strong. Uropod 2, rami unequal. Llropod 3, pedunde 
with 2-5 poslerodistal spines. 

Teison lobes typically longer than wide, subtriang- 
ular, apically acute. 

Female: Bnoocf plate of gnathopod 2 broad, dislally 
rounded or subacute, marginal hooked setae medium to 
long (> ] .2/ plate width). Preamplexing notch sharply 
incised, unguisial groove typically deep, broad, ob- 
lique. 

Distribution: Cosmopolitan alotig tropical and warm- 
temperate marine shores, in algae at LW and shallow 
subtidal levels. 

Remarks: The nominate subgenus Protohyak is dis- 
tinguished mainly by the short peduncular segment 2 of 
antenna 1 , the 6-7 dentate mandibuJar left Iacinia, well 
developed hydrodynamic lobes of gnathopods ! & 2 
(males), and posteriorly rounded epimeral plate 1. 

Frorohyak (Frotohyukd frequens (Stout) 

(Fig. 37) 

Aiion'hesiesjrequens Stout, 1913: 650 
Shoemaker 1942: 16. 

Hyaie frequens (part) Barnard & Karaman 1991: 370. 
Hyak nigra Barnard 1%2: 153. figs. 19, 20 
Hyak rubra Jrequetts Barnard 1 969b: 139-141 (part ?). 
Promhyak jrequens Boti^field 2001a: 104 (part). 


AMPHIPACJHCA VOU 3 N0.3 Nov, kS, 2tW2. 


80 


Taxonomic clarifications: P, ( Prorohyak) frequent 
(Slout, 1 9 1 3) is noi conspccific with the following taxa: 
/, Hyak rubra (Thomson) ( Hurte> and'or Barnard figs, 
of material from Australia, N. Zealand and S, America), 

2, Hyak frequens Barnard 1952:23 (Central Califor- 
nia); Barnard, 1954: 23 (Oregon), Both appear refer- 
able mainly to P. { Boreohyale) lamherd n, sp. (p. 62), 

3, Hyaie rubra ftequ^ris Barnard 1964: 109, fig. 21 A 
(Bahia de San Quintin, Baja California);— Barnard, 
!969a: 212 (Bahia de Los Angeles, Baja Califoinia). 
The material was redescribed as Hyak canalma Bar- 
nard,] 979» and treated here (p,84) as P, {Promhyak) 
can^7///J^ (Barnard, 1979), 

4, Hyaie uiger (Has well, 1879) (Austraiia). 

Material Examined; CMN col lections, including mat- 
erial on loan, contain no material of P. jrequens (Stout, 
1913) sens. str. 

Diagnosis: Male (9,0 mm,): Anterior head margin 
oblique, nearly straight. Eyes medium, irregularly round 
Antenna I. peduncular article 2 short, subequal to 3; 
segment 3 not esoeeding distal end of peduncle 4 of 
anten na 2; flagel 1 ar segments each beaii ng 2 aesthetascs. 
Antenna 2 medium long, more than twice length of 
antenna I ; peduncular segments 4, 5 with posterodistal 
clusters of setae; flagellum 33-&egmenled, 2,3 times as 
long as peduncle. 

Upper and tower lips regular. Mandible, left lacinia 
6-dentaie, with 3 accessory blades. Right mandible 
^ith 2 accessory blades. Maxilla I , palp extending 
beyond base of api cal spi ne leetli on outer plate. Max - 
i I la 2 , i nner plate api cally w ith i nner marginal peel i nate 
setae, proximal plumose seta elongate. Maxiiliped, 
palp medium stout; dactyl not longer than segment 3, 
unguis short. 

Coxae 3-3, posterior marginal shelf shallow but 
distinct, lower margins shallowly convex, not crenul- 
aied. Coxa 4, posteroproximal excavation lacking 
median cusp. CoxaSaequilobate. Coxal gills sac-like, 

Gnathopod Lh.^d. lobe of basis medium, rounded, 
lobe of ischium weakly developed; carpjal lobe me- 
dium, lower margin bearing 6-8 comb setae; propod 
subrectangular, upper and lower margins slightly con- 
vex, but lacki ng stout anterodistal spine, palm shallowly 
oblique, slightly convex; posterodistal spines short, 
slightly separated, distal portion of posterior margin 
with single group of short setae; dactyl with minute 
po.sterlor marginal seiulcs, slightly overlapping palm. 
Gnathopod 2, basis and ischium with broadly rounded 
overlapping hydrodynamic lobes; merus acutely pro- 


duced; carpal lobe lacking; propod deeply subovaie, 
slightly narrowhng distal ly, anterior margin proximally 
with two short spines, palm oblique, slightly convex, 
with weak hinge tooth, slightly shorter than posterior 
margin having two very short sctal groups; dactyl stout, 
wdth slight posterior marginal bulge near hinge. 

Peraeopods 3-4 ordinary; segments short; segment 

6, posterior margin with 6-7 short spines; dactyls slen- 
der, curved, slightly small than those of peraeopods 5- 

7. Peraeopods 5-7, hind margin of basis rounded, 
crenulate, rounded, with slight notch and surge seta; 
segment 4 of peraeopod 5 short, little longer than 
segment 5; in peraeopods 6 & 7,^ segment 5 is distinctly 
shorter and segment 4; segment 6 with 4-5 singly 
inserted or paired anterior marginal short spines and 
distal Ey a pair of clasping (locking) spines, 

Epimeral plates 2 and 3, hind corners weakly acumi- 
nate. Urojxid I, peduncle with 3-4 outer marginal 
spines, and prominent distolateral spine; outer ramus 
with 3 marginal spines. Uropod 2, outer ramus with 2- 
3 margi naf spines. Uropod 3, peduncle stout, with 2 
posterodistal spines; ramus slender, tapering, shorter 
than peduncle, apex vvilh 2-3 short spines, 

Tel son lobes longer than wide, each tapering to acute 
apex, margins unarmed. 

Female ov (7.0 mm): Gnathopod I, hydredynamic 
lobe prominent, rounded on basis, weakly developed 
on ischium; carpal lobe small, withfew-^ marginal comb 
setae; propod slender subrectangular, palm short, ob- 
lique, distal half of posterior margin writh single group 
of short setae; dactyl slightly overlapping palm. Gnatho- 
pod 2 very similar to gnathopod 1 Brood plates and 
preamplexing notch originally undcscribed, but prob- 
ably similar to those of P. (f.) mohri (p. SI ). 

Distributional Ecology: Barnard (]969b) gives the 
range of P. (P.) frequens as Cannel to La Jolla and 
Laguna Beach, California, dominant among seaw eed 
at the low water level. How^ever, material listed from 
the central California region (north of 1^, Conception) 
and Oregon, not re-examined in this study, is probably 
synonymous with the superficially similar hyalid spe- 
cies P, (Boreohyale^ lamberti n. sp, that occurs com- 
monly in CMN col lections from northem California to 
Southeastern Alaska (p. 62). 

Remarks: Protohyak Jrequens (Stout) is the type 
species of the more advanced subgenus Protohyak 
that on the North American Pacific coast occurs mainly 
south of Pt. Conception, including Baja California and 
the Gulf of California. Species are characterized by 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


SI 


KEY TO NORTH PACIFIC SPECIES OF PROTOHYALE {FROTOMYALE^ 

Cexc] jding P. mbm f<de Bamird, and Froiohyale sp, 2 Hirayama or Promhyak. spp. N, America) 


] , Oii^thopod 2 (<?), anterior margin of proptxl proiimaMy with 1-4 short spines ^ ^ ^ ^ _ S- 

Gnalhopc-icl 2 (cf), anterior margin of propod lacking short spines 2. 

2. (.inathopiid 1 (mature <f), propodal palm elongate, veiy- oblique; dactyl elongate, lip closing at level of merus; 

gnathop^xl I propod deep ^ h h 3. 

Gnaihop(.xl 2 (Cf), pmpixl paJm shorty regularly oblique, dactyl not elongate: gnaihopod I (c?), propod reg- 
ularly elongate, sub rectangular 4. 

3. Fpimeral plates 2 and 3, hind comers aciitety produced {Hawaii). P. iP.} honohdifensis (Barnard) 

Eptmeral corner 3 weakly acute (Central American mainland). , iP.}gmisavt^ (Barnard) {p. S6) 

4. Antenna 2, flagellum short {<20 segments), proximal segments setose; uropod !. outer ramus lacking marg- 

inal spines; telson lobes short* not longer than wide P.iP.} zuaqui (Barnard) (p, 86) 

Antenna 2, flagellum long (>25 segments), proximal segmenls smooth; uropod I , outer ramus with 2 marg- 
inal spines; telson lobes longer than wide P. iP.^coraPinacakf (Hirayama) (p. 86) 

5. Antenna 2, flagclluni short (<20 segments); gnathopod 2 (C?), propodal palmar texMh large* acute; gnalho- 

pCNd I {(^), proptxi as deep as long ........ Z'. (P.) Hoe (Barnard) 

Antenna 2, flagellum long (> 25 segments); gnathopod 2 (<?) propodal hinge UMth weak or lacking; gnaiho- 
pixl I (C?), propod regularly elongate subrectangular 6. 

6. IJroptxl L peduncular distolateral spine short (1/4 outer ramus); uropi>t3 3^ ramus long (> 2/3 peduncle) 

P. (P.j prequm-s (Stout) (p. 79) 

Combination not so; distoluleral spine elongate {> 1.3 length of outer ramus). 7. 

7. Gnathopod 2 (d*)* profiod w ith 1 anterior marginal spines; palmar margin smwth; uropod .3* ramus short. 

length ^ 1/2 peduncle P^ iPA yaqul (Barnard) (p, S.5) 

Gnathop<->d 2 (cf), propod with 3 anterior marginal spines; prs^podal palm with weak rounded hinge tooth; 
uropod 3* ramus long (-‘2/3 peduncle) P-iP4 dcirwmi (Barnard) 

8. Llropod 3, peduncle w ith 4-5 posterikjlstal spines; mandibular left laclnia 6-dentate; maxillipcdi palp segment 

4 (dactyl) lacking apical setae P. fP.) mohri n. sp. (p. 8 1 ) 

Uropod 3, pedun le with 2 posieriHlistal spines; mandibular left lacinla .51/2 dentate; maxilliped palp, dactyl 
w4th sin.>rtg spical setae R fP.) camtim (Barnard) (p. 84) 


relatively short antennae and strongly developed hy- 
drc>dynamic anterodistaJ lobes of the bases and ischium 
of the gnathopods of males and often on the bases of 
gnathopods of females. In these respects the species is 
markedly differer^t from its northern counierpart PAR ) 
iamberti (p, 63). 

Some variation in gnathopods 1 & 2 in material from 
central California was noted and Illustrated by Barnard 
(1962)* reproduced here. As the illustrations are unac- 
companied by other corresponding diagnostic charac- 
ter states, these variations are difficult to assign tax- 
onomically. Thus* some appear similar to gnathopod 
character states of various species of subgen us Bvreo- 
hyaie (e.g., P, (PJ jarrettae, P. (BJ seticornk) that 
range southward from British Columbia into southern 
Oregon and northern Cal ifomia. Confi itnati on of thei r 


identification awaits reexamination of Barnard's origi- 
nal material and possibly other, yet unnamed Califor- 
nian species of that subgenus. 

Protohyaie frequens is related also to F. rubra 
(Thomson, 18 SO) from .Australia (see Barnard 1962, 
1969b, 1979). However, North .American material 
may be distinguished from species of the southern 
hemisphere by character states outlined and illustrated 
by Barnard (loc. cit.) and in the present keys (p. S2). 

Protohyaie (Pmtohyale) mohri n. sp. 

(Fig. 38) 

Froiohyalt (Stout, 1913) (eTTon«ou& attribute 

in Bousfield 2001a: 104) 


AMPHII^ACIFfCA VOL J N0.3 Nov. 15. 2002. 


82 



Fig. 37. P. (Protohyale) frequens (Stout, 1913). Male (9.0 mm); female ov (7.0 mm). 
Carmel to La Jolla, California (modified from Barnard 1962). 


Material IC»Lan»tied: 

CALirORNIA. 

i.agiina Beach. North in slender eeE grays (Phylhipitdtjc}, 

J. L. Mohr col 1.,, Jan, 24, 1 94^. C? (5,5 min) Holotype (slide 
mount); 9 ov (4.5 mm) (Allotype) (slide mount), 5 9 

99t f? im. (Parity pcs), USNM Iwn No. 180284, 

Diagnosis: Male (5.5 mm.) Body small to niedium. 
Eyes smal I , s Libc i rcu lar. A ntenna I , ped unc uiar seg- 
ment 2 short, little longer than 3; segment 3 not exceed- 
ing distal end of peduncle 4 of antenna 2; flagellum 1 2- 


1 3 se gmented , each bear! ng 2 aesthetascs , ,A nten ita 2 
relatively about twice length of antenna I ; peduncular 
segments 4 5 bare; flagellum of 25-27 smooth seg- 

ments. 

Upper and lower lips sparsely pilose distaliy. Man- 
dible, left laeinia 6-den tate, spine row with 3 accessory 
blades; right mandible w ith 2 accessory blades. Max- 
ilia I , palp slender, tip extending beyond base of apical 
spi ne teeth of outer p3 ate. Max c 1 1 a 2 regul ar; i n ner plate 
w iih inner apical row of pectinate setae, Maxilliped, 
outer plate short, rounded distal iy; palp stout; dactyl 


AMPHrPAClRCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 3002. 


S3 



Fig. 3S, P. (Protohyaie) mohri ti. sp. Male (5.5 mm); female av (4,5 mm). 
North Reef, Laguna Beach, California. 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOi. 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


84 


slightly longer than segment 3. inner margin setose, 
unguis not elongate. 

Coxae 1-3, posterior marginal shelf very weak or 
lacking, tower margins slightly convex, not crenulated. 
Coxa 4 with simple posteroprosimal excavation, lack- 
ing median cusp. Coxal gills relatively small, sac-like, 
coxa 6 smallest 

Gnathopod I , hydrodynamic lobe of basis distinct; 
weakly developed on ischium; merus rounded posl- 
erodistaily; carpal lobe broad, shallow, bearing 10- 12 
comb setae; propod subrectangular, lacking strong 
anterodistal spine, palm oblique, striiight,posteroclistal 
spines short, close set, distal portion of peraterior mar- 
gin with continuous row of -8 short setae; dactyl 
simple, stout, with 6 minute posterior marginal sctules. 
Gnathopod 2, hydrodynamic lobe of basis large, 
rounded; virtualiy lacking on bchturn; mems normally 
extended; carpal lobe lacking; pmpod deeply subovate, 
narrowing slightly distally, anterior margin with 2 
spines, palm oblique, shorter than posterior 
margin,nearly straight, with weak hinge tooth; dactyl 
with slight inner marginal bulge near hinge. 

Peraeopods 3-4 slender, segment 5 short; segment 
6, posterior marginaJ spines increasing distal ly to paired 
weakly striated locking spines. Peraeopods 5-7, hind 
margin of basis rounded, crenu]ate,each with notch and 
surge seta; segment 5 shorter than 4, little broadened 
distal iy; segment 6 with 4-6 medium strong single or 
doubly inserted anterior marginal spines; dactyls stitrng. 

Eptmeral plates 2 & 3, hind corners acuminate. 
Pleopods regular, natatory. Uropod ] , peduncle with 
(3-4) outer marginal spines; distolatcrai spine one-thi rd 
length of outer ramus having 3 marginal spines, Uropod 
2, outer ramus with 2 marginal spines. Uropod 3, 
peduncle stout, with .5-6 postered islal spines; ramus 
short, apex blunt, %vith 6 spines, 

Telson, lobes slightly longer than broad, margins 
smooth. 

Femaleov (4.5 mm ); Gnathopod 1 , basis with small 
hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe shallow, broad, with 
--8 long comb setae; propod slender, subrectangular, 
slightly curved; palm short, oblique, distal half of 
posterior margin with 2 small groups of short setae; 
dactyl si i g htl y o veil appi n g palmar spi nes. Gnathopod 
2 very similar to gnathopod I , except carpal lobe smal- 
ler, with fewer comb setae, 

Brood plate of gnathopod 2 short, subovate, broadly 
rounded apical Iy, margins with *-70 long hooked setae, 
Pne-amplexing notch of peraeon segment 2 strongly 


incised: unguislal groove broad, straight, oblique; 
po.stertxlistal Eobe shallow, sharply rounded anteriorly. 

Etymulo^, The species is named in honour of Dr. 
John L. Mohr, University of Southern California, and 
Allan Hancock Foundation, collector of the tyj^e mate- 
rial. 

DistnbutiemaJ Ecology: Known only from the North 
reef at l^aguna Reach, southern California; in slender 
eel grass at LW level. 

Retnarks: The type lot contains an original identifica- 
tion label of C. R. Shoemaker as ''Hyaie Jrequefis ', that 
contributed in part to the enoneous authorship attribute 
of Bousfield (2001a) as Protokyaie lagitnue (Stout, 
1913). The species is clearly a member of the advanced 
subgenus Froiohyale that occur mainly south of Pi. 
Conception along the Coasts of Baja California, and In 
the Gulf of California. In P. (PJ frequens, hydrody- 
namic lobes of the ischium of gnathopods I and 2 of the 
female are not developed, 

Froiohyale i Pro^ohyale^ canalinn (Barnard) 

( Fig. 39) 

Hyale J. L. Barnard, 1979: 102, fig. 56 (part) 

Hyale rubra rubra Barnard 1 969b: 1 38. 

Frofobyak canalina Bousfield 2001 a: 104. 

Diagnosis: Male (6,3 mm). Eyes medium. Antenna I , 
peduncle 2 short, flagellum medium, 14-15 segmented, 
with 1 -2 aesthetascs per segment. Antenna 2, peduncle 
and flagellum nearly bare, flagellum 2S-segmented. 

Mandibular left lacinia not described; right lacinia 
evenly bifrd, with accessory side tooth; spine row^ with 
3 blades , Maxi 11 i ped pal p slender, i n ner I obe narrow, 
setose distally; dactyl slender, elongate, unguis short, 
w^ith tuft of long apical setae. 

Coxal plates 1-3 lacking posterior marginal cusps. 
Coxa 4, posterior excavation with weak marginal cusp. 
Coxal gills not described. 

Gnathopod I , basis with strong anlerodistal hydro- 
dynamic lobe, weakly developed on ischium; carpal 
lobe sharply rounded, margin with 10-12 comb setae; 
propod narrowing distally, posterior margin with proxi- 
ntal TOW of 4 short setae and distally uneven row of five 
longer setae; palm short, convex, overhung by strongly 
curved minutely ridged dactyl Gnathopod 2. basis 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL NOJ Nov. 15. 2002. 


85 



Fig. 39. F. iProtohyule) canalina (J. L. Barnard, 1979). Male ( 6.3 mm). Santa Catalina 1. to Isla Cedros. 
Baja California, (modified from Barnard 1%4, J969b, 1979). 


with 4 posterior marginal stiff setae, and vcr> large and 
broadly rounded anterodistal lobe; ischial lobe strong, 
sharply rounded; propod large, relatively short and 
deep, with 1*2 spines proximal ly on anterior margin, 
posterior margin gently convex, pim obi ique. straight, 
with low hinge tooth, lined with with stiff setae; dactyl 
slender, with weak proximal inner marginal hump. 

Peraeopods medium strong, regular, segment 6 with 
paired short straight striated locking spines distally 
near base of dactyl; dactyl medium large, inner margin 
castellate proximatly and with small seta distally. 

Epimeron I rounded behind, 2 & 3 with weakly 
acuminate hind corners. Uropod 1 with strong 
di.stotateral potiunciilar spine; rami of uropods 1 & 2 
regularly marginally spincse. Lfropod 3, peduncle with 
2 posterodistal spines; ramus short, with 5 apical spines. 

Tel son lobes ordinary (presumably apEcaJty acute, 
length and width subequal). 

Female; gnathopods, broods plates, and pre- 
amplexing lobe undescribed but presumably similar to 
P. yaqid (see below). 

Distributional Ecology ^ Santa Catalina 1. and off- 
shore CaEifomian archipelago, to Lsla Cedros, Baja 
California, Mexico, in FhyiiospadLt m^x.^, lower inter- 
tidal. 

Remarks: In addition to i Ls overall similarity to F. (FJ 
jrequens and F, (F, J mohri from the open coast of 
soulhem Calitbmia, F, fFJ canadna is closely related 
to two other species from Baja California and the Gulf 


of California. All have well developed hydrodynamic 
lobes on basis and i.schium of gnathopods 1 and 2 
especially in the c? (see Barnard ( 1 979) and key, p. S I ): 
( 3 ) F. {P.jmqiii Barnard, 1 979, has i.^en recorded from 
Bahia San Quintin (open coast below the southern Cali- 
fornia border), and w idely in the Gulf of California at 
Estero dePunta Banda, Bahia de Los .Angeles, and 
Puerto Penasco (type locality). The species name was 
required to accommodate "Hyate nigra'' (bay form) of 
Barnard ( t %4), and "Hyaie rubra frtquem'’ of Barnard 
( ] 967). Some aspects of the female of F. ( F.) yaqid had 
not l^een i tlustraled and described by Barnard ( 1 979); a 
female specimen (6.0 mm) from Bahia San Quindn 
(CNM coileetjons) was examined and some additional 
features included in a reorganized plate of the original 
excellent outlines of Barnard (1979) (fig. 41). The 
examination confirmed well deve]o|>ed hydrodynamic 
lobes of the basis and ischium of griathoptxJ I and basis 
of gnathopod 2 in both male.s and fennales, the slight 
Ijosterior tTiarginal cusp of coxa 4, and the strongly 
developed distolateraJ peduncular spine of uropod 1. 
The inner plate of maxilla 2 w as armed distally with 9 
pectinate setae and -12 simple setae, in addition to the 
large stout proximal marginal plumose seta. Also 
present w ere large subovate brood plates with elongate 
mar gi n aJ hook-ti pped setae. The pream pie x i n g notch 
of pemeon segment 2 of the female of F. (FJ yaqui was 
rnaiked by a deep oblique unguisiiil groove, and a post- 
erior lobe with sharply rounded antercxlistal margin, 
similar to that in F. (F.) mohri (fig, 38). and other 
species witbin the subgenas Protohyitle. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


86 


I 



Fig. 40. F. iFroiohyaie) yaqul Barnard, 1979. Male (6.2 mm) Puerto Penasco^Gulf of California. 
Female ov <42 mm), Puerto Penasco, and Bahia (modified from Barnard 1 979); female ov. (6.0 mm) 
Bahia de San Qnimin, B. C, (maxilla 2 enlargement, and pre-amplexing notch from CMN collections)^ 


{2) P. (P.) zunque- Barnard, 1979, has been recorded 
intertidal I y from near Cabo San Lucas, Baja California. 
The species differs from P.yaqui and F.cattalim in its 
shorter, lightly setose antenna 2, stronger inner mar- 
ginal shelf on maxilliped palp segment 3. and more 
elongate distolateral peduncular spine of uropod L 
.Also recorded from the Cabo San Lucas region is P, 
fP.) (Barnard, 1979) (Fig. 40). However, in 

the elongate distal ly narrowing setose form of the male 
gnathopod, and the relatively large deep propod of 
gnathopod 1 , this species more closely ressembles the 
Hawaian P. (P.) honohduensis Schellenberg, 1938, P. 
(PJ mermh (Ledoyer, 1979a) and other species of the 
"macrodactyta'' subgroup of Stebbing ( 1 899). Other 
Haw aiian species more typical of the P. (P.) Jrequens 
group inci ude P, { P.) aydt (Barnard, 1955). and possi- 
bly F. {Fdiijfinls (Chevreux, 1908), partly illustrated 
by Barnard ( 1 955), and P. (P). tale (Barnard, 1 970). P. 


( P.) dar^^ln i ( Barnard , 1 979), from the G al apagos I ds. , 
also appears to be a member of ihc frequens subgroup 
within subgenus Proiohyak, 

in the western Pacific region only one named spe- 
cies of subgenus Protokyale has yet been fully de- 
scribed. Several new forms are currently in preparation 
(Hiwaiari, pers. comm.). Most clearly referable to the 
subgenus is P. iProtohyak) coraliinacoia (Hirayama, 
1980) from Ishigaki 1. in the East China Sea (Fig, 42). 
Samples of males of this small species are present in 
CMN collections, all having well developed hydrody- 
namic lobes , especially on the basis of gnathopods 1 
tuid 2, but females are lacking. Consequently the form 
of the female gnathopods, brood plates, and 
preamplexing notch of peraeon segment 2 arc yet 
unknown. These character states arc also unknown for 
two unnamed species of subgenus Frotohyaie, de- 
scribed from the same region by Dr. Hirayama ( 1 980). 



AMPHrPACIHCA VQl. 3 N0.3 Nov. J5, 2flOZ 


S7 





Fig, 41 . f\ (Protohyale) gucisave (Barnard, 1 979) Male (4.8 mm); female ov (4,0 mm). 



Fig. 42. F. f Priftahyaie) cora/lm4icoia (Hirayama, 1 980). Male (4.2 mm). Ishigaki 1., Ry ukukn Ids,, Japan, 



AMPHlPACfHCA VOL 5 N03 Nov, 15. 2002. 


88 


Protohyale (Lepiohyate) ii. subg. 

Tj'pe species: Prvtohyale {l^ptohymle^ lottgipalpa, n, 
sp. (moiTOiypy). 

Diagnosis^ Small to medium prolohyalids with moder- 
ate development of hydrodynamic Jobes, specialized 
elongate maxiiliped palp in male, and unequal dactyls 
of peraeopods 3^ and 5-7, 

Body smooth, small to medium i n size, Eyes smal [, 
round Jaleral, Antenna 1 short, peduncular segments 
short, flagellum short. Antenna 2, peduncular segment 

4 distinctly shorter than 5; flagellum elongate, 25+ 
segmented, unarmed. 

Lfpperand lower lips regular. Mandible: left I acini a 
7-8 dentate, incisor 8-dentaie, spine row with 2-3 
slender blades Maxilla 1, inner plate short, with single 
apical plumose seta; palp relatively short, ! -segmented, 
reaching base of apical spines of outer plate. Maxilla 
2, inner plate with apical pectinate setae, Maxilliped 
strongly sexually dimorphic, palp (male), segment 2 
longer than broad; dactyl elongate. 

Coxae 1-4, lower margins rounded, posterior mar- 
ginal shelf shallow'. Coxa 4 broad, deep, rounded 
below, posterior excavation lacking median cusp, Coxa 

5 weakly anterolobate. Coxae 6 shallowly posiero- 
lobaie. Coxal g i 1 1 s rel ati v el y smal I , mosti y sac! i ke . 

Gnathopods 1 & 2 sexually dimorphic, Gnathopod 
I (male) dissimilar in size and form to female; basis 
with medium hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe strong; 
propod subovate (subrectangular in female), laeking^ 
anterodistal spinet's), palm short: dactyl regular. 
Gnathopod 2 (male) large, powerfully subchelate; ba- 
sis and Lschi um with large rounded overlapping hydro- 
dynamic lobes; carpal lobe minute; propod, palm and 
dactyl each with low hinge tooth, Gnathopod 2 
(female) similar in size and form to gnathopod I , basis 
with hydrodynamic lobe, 

Peraeopods 3-4 slender; segment 5 not shortened; 
dactyls relatively small. Peraeopods 5-7 slender , bases 
unequally broadened, rounded hind margin weakly 
crenulated, with small notch and surge seta; segments 
4 & .5 regular; segment 6, clasping spines paired but not 
enlarged; dactyls medium, distinctly larger than those 
of peraeopods 3 Sc 4, inner marginal seta weak or lack- 
itig, 

Epimeral plates 1 -3. hind comers weakly acuminate, 
I o wer margi ns ii narmed. PI eopods regular. U ropod I , 
peduncle and rami slender, subequal in length; pedun- 
cle w ith distolateral spine; rami with marginal spines, 
Unopod 2, rami unequal, with marginal spines. Uropod 
peduncle with 2 posterodistal spines; ramus slender, 


with apical spines only. 

Telson lobes little longer than wide, margins smooth. 
Female: Gnathopods I and 2, basis with hydro- 
dynamoic lobe. Brood lamellae broadly subovate, 
apically rounded; marginal setae medium, hook-tipped. 
Pre-amplexing lobe with distinct unguisial groove. 

Etymologj': From the Greek lepios (thin) + fiyaie^ 
alluding to the slender elongate distal segments of the 
maxilliped palp in the male. 

Distributional Ecology: Known only from localities 
on the outer coast of southeastern Alaska and British 
Columbia, sparingly south to Oregon. 

Remarks: The subgenus appears closest to P. 
(Protohyak) but show's a number of apomorphic char- 
acters states including the 8 -dentate mandibular left 
lacinia, strongly sexually dimoqihic gnathopods and 
maxilliped palp, and short broad telson lobes. 

Protohyak (Lepiohy&k) hngipalpa^ n. sp. 

(Fig. 43) 

Lepiohyak iongipaipa Bousfield, 1 98 1 (unpubi, MS); 
— Bousfi el d 200 la: 1 04 ( nomen n udum ) 

Material examiited: 

ALASKA 

ELB Sins, lyfil: Ar75, west of Pt. Ejgeuia. San Juan Bat- 
ista I ., Alexander A rchi pe I ag^i, J uEy 26 - tf (8.0 mm ) Holoty pe 
(slide nnount), CMNC 1 983- 1 528. 

ELB Stns, 1980: S 1 1 B E (6d'c?, 20 99 , 3 im); S20B2 (6 cf^^, 
5 99); S20B5 ( t cf, 7 99. 1 imm). 

BRITISH COLLMBIA 

North Central Coast; ELB StnS l%4. H53, St. John 
Harbour. Athlone I ^ I 3m. 

Southern Vancouver L; ELB Stn , I ^0: P7] 8, Bceher Bay, 

4d’cf,499. 

ELBStn, 1976: B7(l ef) 

ELB Sin, ]977: B6a. Trial L, Victoria 1 cT, 6 99- 
Other B. C. material: H. Aston. Stn 612-IO-L Hecate 
Strait, 1992 - I 9ov (6.0 mni),(sl3de mount). NMCCAec. 
A199] .002.3. E. Black Stn, I9S0: Deer Island, kelp bed, 
Aug. 20-1 9 ov (6,0 mm) Allotype (slide mount), CMNC 
1983-1529; Apr. 2, I9S0 - d* (8.5 mm); Bear Cove, 
Sepi. 25 - 9ov (4,0 mm), I im; North of Nanaimo, A. 
Schueler coll., summer, 1977 - 1 9 ov, NMCC Acc. No. 
1978-144. 

WASM-ORECON 

ELB Stns. 1966: W6(3, Otter RiOcLai Marine Gardens, ORL 
1 c?, 13 99, 18 im. 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


89 



Fig. 43. Protohyale (Leptohyale) loitgipalpa n. subg., d. sp. Male (R.5 mm). Sail Juan Batista I„ 

Southeastern Alaska. Female ov (6.0 mm). Deer 1., B. C. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002, 


90 


Diagnosis : Male (8,5 miri ) . A lUeivna I , flagel 1 urn - 1 5 - 
segmented: peduncle glrort, not extending past pedun- 
cle 4 of antenna 2\ flagellar segments with posterior 
mariginat aestheUiSCS. Antenna 2, peduncular segments 
4 and 5 Stout; flagellum -25 -segmented, margins nearly 
bare. 

Upper and lower lips with dense distal fine piiosity. 
Mandibles relatively small slender. Maxilla K outer 
plate, apical spine teeth slender Maxillipwd palp, 
facial surfaces of dactyl finely pectinate, with strong 
medial and apical setae. 

Coxae I -4 deeper than w ide, lower margins strongly 
rounded. Coxal gills largest on peraeopod 6. 

Gnathopod I relatively small; carpus, dorsal margin 
shorter than propod, armed with 1-2 stiff setae, poste- 
rior lobe rounded below, margin armed with 8-10 
strong comb setae; propod subovate, narrowing distal I y, 
palm very short, oblique; dactyl short, tip simple, 
closing beyond stout posterodistal spines of propod; 
dactyl with distinct posterior marginal rounded tooth or 
swelling near hinge , Gnathopod 2, propod very large 
deeply subquadraie, anierior margin proximally with 4 
short spines, lower margin with 1-2 short setae. 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 slender, segment 5 slightly shorter 
than 6. Peraeopods 5-7, bases unequally broadened (6 
narrowest); segment 5 slightly shorter dian segments 4 
& 6 , 

Uropod 1, peduncle with 2-3 outer marginal spines 
and short distal spine; ictmi each with 3 short marginal 
spines. Uropod 2, rami longer than peduncle each with 
2-3 marginal short spines. Uropcxl 3, peduncle with 2- 
3 postercMdlstat spines; ramus tapering, about equal in 
length to peduncle, with 4 5 apical spines, 

Telson lobes slightly nairowing to smooth, broadly 
rounded apices. 

Female ov (6,0 mm): Maxillipcd palp, dactyl regu- 
lar, not elongate. Gnathopods I & 2 subsimilar; hydro- 
dynamic lobe medium on basis, lacking on ischium; 
carpal lobe shaHow; propod slender, subrectangular, 
palm short, oblique, hind margin with single distal row 
of 3-4 close-set setae; dactyl not overlapping palm. 
Broexi plate (peraeopod 2) longer than basis, margin 
lined with -150 relatively short hook-tipped setae 
{-one-third plate width). Preamp I exing notch large, 
squared; unguisial groove short, wide, slightly arch^; 
posterodistal peraeonal lobe shallow, anterior margin 
evenly rounded. Peraeopods 3-7 are relatively short, 
with more broadly expanded segments 4 & 5 of 
peraeopods 5-7. Some morphologtcai variation was 
noted but is not considered of species significance, 


Ety mologj^: The species name alludes to the elongated 
palp of the masilliped of the male. 

Distributionai Ecology : From southeastern Alaska 
sparsely through British Columbia to Washington and 
Oregon; among algae, LW to immediately subtidal. 

Protohyale (Diplohyaie) n* subg. 

Hyak complex Barnard 4^ Karaman 1 99 1 (part): 367. 

Type species: Hyale dfiplodactyla Stebbtng, I S99 
(present designation). 

Species: Dlplohyale bidetitata (Ledoyer, 1 984; 97, fig. 
47); D defiiifera (Chevneux, 1907, I90S)(J. L. Barnard, 
1965); D. dtd^nductyh (Hirayama, 1980; 13 L rigs. I- 
3); D, diplodactyia (Stebb]ng,i899: 403, L 3tC). 
(Stebbing 1906; 562, fig. 95), (Sivaprakasam 1969) 
(Ledoyer 1979b). 

Dia^tMiis: Like P. ( Frofohyaie) except dactyl of gnatho- 
pod I (mature male) with a strong tooth on the post- 
erodistal margin (bi dentate) (fig. 44). 

Body small (3-5 mm), smooth. Eyes medium, broad, 
ovate, lateral. Antenna 1 short, peduncular segments 2 
and 3 short; flagellum short (<10 segments). Antenna 
2, peduncle 4 short; flagellum variable in length, proxi- 
mal segments may have very^ short posterior marginal 
setae ^ 

Mandible, left lacinta 6-den tale, spine row with 3 
blades. Maxilla 1 , palp relatively long, 1 -segmented, 
extending beyond base of outer plate apical spines. 
Maxilla 2, inner plate with single short inner marginal 
plumose setae. Maxilliped, inner plate subiectangular; 
outer plate distally rounded; palp stout, segments Zand 
3 broad; dactyl regular, unguis short. 

Coxae 1-3 lacking posterior marginal cusps. Coxa 
4, margin of posterior excavation with weak medial 
cusp. Coxa5anteiTolobate. Coxae bandTpostetolobale^ 
Coxal gills subovate, largest posteriorly. 

Gnathopod I (male) larger than, and dissimilar in 
form to female; hydrodynamic lobe of basis small or 
tacking; carpal lobe distirict; propod broadening distal ly; 
palm distinct, oblique; dactyl strongly bidenlale, distal 
tooth dosing between anterodistal palmar spines. 
Gnathopod 2 (male) powerfully subcheiate, regular; 
basis and ischium with regular hydrodynamic lobes; 
carpal lobe lacking; propod subovate, palm various, 
oblique, with weak hinge tooth; dactyl regular. 


AMPHIFACIRCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


91 



Fig. 44. Proiohyaie (Dipiohyale) bidentata (Ledoyer, 1984), Male (3.0 mm): female { 3.0 inm). 

New Caledonia (after Ledoyer ]9B4). 


Feraeopods 3-7, various but not stout; bases medium 
broad, rounded hind margin slightly crenulated, notch 
and surge seta weak; segment 4 of peraeopod 5 slightly 
broadened; segment 6, clasping spine distinct but not 
enlarged or striated; dactyls medium, inner marginal 
seta very weak or lacking. 

Epimeral plates smooih below, hind comers acumi- 
nate to slightly produced; plate 2 deepest. Pleopods 
wed developed, rami normal. Uropod I, peduncle 
shorter than rami, with strong disloJateral spine; rami, 
marginal spines few^ or lacking, apical spines strong. 
Uropod 2, outer ramus shorter, marginal spines few, 
Uropod 3 uniramous (inner ramus a trace fused to 
peduncle); ramus usually shorter than peduncle, with 


strong apical spines. 

Tel son lobes triangular, usually longer than wide, 
apical margins smooih, 

Female: Gnathopod 2 somewhat dissimilar in size 
and form to gnathopod 1 , Brood lamellae and pre- 
amplexing notch not described. 

Etymology: From the Greek diptoos - tw ofoid + hyak, 
alluding to the touble-toothed form of the daayl of 
gnathopod 1 (male), 

Oistributioiial ecology: Mainly at LW and subtidal 
levels of surf coasts of the Caribbean, western Pacific 
(Japan), and Indo-Pacific(New Caledonia to Moluccas). 


AMPH[PACinCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


92 


P. (D/pIohytile) Meftrara (U^tloyer) 

(Fig- 44) 

Hyaiebii:fenram Ledoyer, 1984: 97. fig, 47; Barnard & 
Karaman i99l: 369, 

This small species shows a tuimber ot‘ character 
states that link the genus Pro^o/Iyrl/e to other hyaiid 
genera. Thus, a weak posterior marginal cusp is 
present on coxa 4 (as in Parkyi^i^), segment 4 of per- 
aeopods 5-7 is somew hat broadened (as in Lekhud), 
and in uropod 3, the remnant of an inner ramus is fused 
to the pedttneie (as in Farhyafe and Frilohyale). 

Unfortunately, little can be deduced from published 
species accounts concerning the form of the coxal gills 
and brood plates. Nothl ng is know n of the form of the 
preamplexing notch, l^ratype material of Hirayama 
and Hiwatari in CMN collections contains only males, 

J. L. Barnard 

Nyaie (Lelehifd ) J. L Barnard, 1970; 264, 

Lelehtta Barnard 1 974: 58; — Baraard & Karaman 1991; 
370. 

Type species: Leiektta warned BamaTid. 1970, origi- 
nal designation. 

Species: Lelehua ishigakiensh flErayama, 1980: 179. 
figs 7-9; L. kandari Barnard, 1974: 55, figs. 36, 37; L 
malevua Myers, 1985: L inermis Ledoyer, 1978: 317, 
fig43. 

Diagnosis: Body small (3-5 rnm), smooth. Eyes 
rounded, lateral, medium. Antenna I short, peduncular 
segments 2 & 3 short, flagellum short (<10 segments). 
Antenna 2, peduncle short; flagellum medium short 
(<20 segments), smooth. 

Mandible, left lacinia S dentate, spine row with 2- 
3 blades. Maxilla 1 ptilp 1 -segmented, long, extending 
beyond base of outer plate apical spines. Maxilla 2, 
inner plate with single inner margina] plumose seta, 
Maxilliped, outer plate dismily subacute; palp, seg- 
ment 2 longer than broad; dactyl usually sexually 
dimorphic (unguis (Cf)elongate, forming a "whip seta"). 

Coxae 1-3, posterior marginal cusps lacking. Co.xa 
4, posterior excavation lacking distinct cusp. Coxa 5 
aequilobate. Coxae 6 & 7 posterolobate. Coxal gills 
not described, 

Gnaihopod \ (Cf) larger and slightly different in form 
to female; carpal lobe disdneU relatively broad, shal- 


low; propod slightly broadening distally (more elon- 
gate in fema]e)^ppaTiently tacking median facial guid- 
ing spine; palm short but distinct, oblique; dactyl sim- 
ple (or unguis slightly bifid). Gnathopod 2 (<?) power- 
fully subchelate, often with hinge moth; basis with 
medium hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe lacking; pro- 
pod subrectangular to broadly subovate, palm strongly 
oblique, variously incised medially; dactyl stout, with 
inner marginal swelling or low tooth, 

Peraeopods 3-7 usually stout: bases medium broad, 
rounded hind margin w^eakly crenulatcd, with notch 
and surge seta ; segment 4 broadly expanded, wider 
than long; segment 5 short to medium; clasping spine 
(segment 6) distinct but not enlarged; dactyl medium 
large, inner marginal seta small. 

Epi metal plate.'? smooth below, hind comer weakly 
acuminate; plate 2 deepest Pleopods w ell developed, 
rami normal. Uropod 1 , peduncle shorter than rami, 
with strong distolateral spine, marginal spines of outer 
ramus few or lacking,^ apical spines strong. Uropod 2 
rami unequal, marginal and apical spines few but 
relatively strong. Uropod 3 short, uniramous; ramus 
shorter than |>eduncle, wath apical spines only. 

Tel son lobes triangular, medium to long, apical mar- 
gins smooth. 

Female : Gnathopod 2 regular, similar to but larger 
than gnathopod 1. Brood lamellae and preamplexing 
notch not described. 

DistrlbutionaJ EcoLog>: Warm -temperate and tropi- 
cal waters of the western North Pacific to Japtui & the 
I ndo Pacific region; mainly along exposed coastlines, 
from LW level to depths of 30 m, on Foccihpt?ra sp., 
(Barnard 1970). 

Remarks: The original generic distinction was based 
on the sex m\ ly di morphi c pal p of the maxill i ped which 
Barnard (1970, p. 268) correctly predicted might be 
found in other species of Hyate ( sens, lat) . Four 
additional species are recognized here, all described 
subsequent to Dr Barnard’s original diagnosis of the 
type species (1970). L ishigakfetisis Hirayama (Rg. 
45) is strikingly similar to L. waimea of the Hawaiian 
Island archipelago^ with which it is considered a count- 
erpart species (Table IV). 

The genus f^iehud also show s some characier slate 
similarities with Mkropyfhia and Hyale sens, str ., 
including the oval eye, short antennae, markedly broad- 
ened segment 4 of peraeopods 5-7, and subtidaJ habitat 
However, Lelehua differs in its strongly sexually di- 
morphic maxilliped; strongly excavate palm of gnatho- 


AMPHrPACIRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


93 



Fig, 45, Leiehua ishigakiensis (Hirayama, 1980). Male {4.0 mm). Ishigaki 1, Okinawa, Japan, 


pod 2 (cf ); strong distal peduncular spine of uriopod I ; 
elongate telson lobes; and lack of distinctive posterior 
marginal cusps on coxae 1-3, 

ffyale Rathke sens- str. 

Hyaie Rathke, 1837: 377. 

Hyale (pairt):Stebbing 1906: 559;— Chevreux & Page 
1 925: 2S0; — Ciurjanova 195 1 : S 1 6;— Bulycheva 1 957: 
83;- Lincoln 1979: 230:-Krapp-Schickel 1993: 


72S-— Barnard & Karaman 1991: 367, 
non Nicea Nicolet, j 849. 

Type species: Hyaie pontica Rathke 1 837, present de- 
signation. 

Species: Hyale pontica Rathke, 1837; Krapp-Schickd 
& BousLicld 2002: 3, figs, 1 , 2; H. lubbockiana Bate, 
1856; Krapp-Schickel & BousfieJd 2002: 7, figs. 3,4^5 
H, tfticheiini Krapp-Schickel Sc BousLield* 2002:10, 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL.l N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002, 


94 


figs. 6, 7; Hyak species Krapp-Schickel Sl Boustleld, 
2002: 12,% 8 (Bermuda). 

Diagnosis: Body smooth, or segments rrtay be weakiy 
imbricated or weakly mid-dorsiiily caritiate. Eye ovate. 
Antennae short, slender, subequal. Auienna 2, pedun- 
cle not incrassate; flagellum not elongate. 

Mandible, left laclnia 5-5 1/2 dentate, spine row 
with 3-5 blades. Maxilla 1, palp 1 -segmented; outer 
plate, apical spine-teeth tall. Maxtlhped. inner plate 
tall; palp normal, segment 3 short, medium thick; 
dactyl small, not falcate, unguis regular to elongate. 

Coxae 2 and .3 with prominent sharp posterior 
margi nal cusp, I acki ng in coxae 1 and 4 Cox a 5 aniero- 
lobaie, 

Gnathopods sex uidly dimorphic. Gnathopod 1 (C?), 
propodal palm short, variously overhung by simple 
dactyl; carpal lobe narrow^; propod with mediufacial 
guiding ( bracing) spine; dactyl simple, Gnathopod 2 
C<? J, basis with strong hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe 
lacking; propod large, narrowing distal ly. palm with 
slight hinge tooth. Gnathopuds (9) normal; carpal 
lobes shallow; gnathopod 2 similar to gnathopod I but 
larger, with stronger basal hydaidynamlc lobe. 

Peraeopods shon, stout; bases expanded, posterior 
margins crcnulaie, hind rriiargjns of peraeopods 5 and 6 
with weak surge seta and notch. Peraeopod 5, segment 
4 short, broad; segment 5 often short; segment 6 with 
single large striated SLibierminal anterodistal clasping 
(locking) spine, and I -2 small accessory spines; dactyl 
large, smooth, anterior marginal seta small. 

Epimeral plates 1-3 regular, 3 not produced, 
Pleopods regular, natatory , lln:)po<is I and 2, peduncle 
and rami short, thick. Uropod 1 lacking distal peduncular 
spines; rami with medium apical and marginal spines. 
Uropod 3 short, thick, uniramous; ramus shorter than 
peduncle, with apical spines only. 

Telson broad, lobes slightly longer than broad, 
margins weakly setose. 

Coxal gills small, rounded, largest on peraeopod 5. 
Female: Brood plates moderately broadened, apices 
rounded; marginal setae mediumdong, curl-tipped, 
Peraeon 2, preamplexing notch large, rectangular^ lack- 
ing unguisial groove, with small locking slit above 
anterior margin of notch, 

Distributional Ecologj^: Open suif coasts of the Med I - 
terranean and Black Seas, and the Northeastern Atlan- 
tic, including Great Britain and Norway; also Ber- 
muda; dinging to algae and other substrata, LW level 
and subtidally to 50 m. 


Remarks: Species of Hyate sens, sir* differ consider- 
ably from those of Apohyale n, g. (p, 1 04) I n character 
states of morphology, behaviour, and ecology. Ac- 
cording to Sars f 1 890), M Uibhockiami does not saJtate 
in air, unlike .4, nihmni and other species of genus 
Apohyak. Mature females of Hyate possess regularly 
rounded brood plates with longish marginal hooked 
setae (Fig. 1 1 w hereas those of Apohyak have very 
broad, apically acute brood plates with numerous short 
marginal hook -tipped setae f Fig, I 2E). 

Species of Hyak euc apparently uniquely adapted 
to a life style in strongly lotic vvalers such as the surf 
zone of open coasts. Thus, the tip of the large propodal 
median facial guiding spine (o') appears to fit into a 
locking slit on peraeon 2 (9). thereby enhancing the 
grip of the gnathopod when the dactyl closes on the 
preamplexing notch. In apparent homoplasious man- 
ner, the preamplesing mechanism within genus Hyak 
resemblesthaf of some species within the North Pacific 
genus Allorehesies (e.g., A. hdiahetia Barnard, family 
HyalellidaeJ. 

Hmk pimtica bears some similarity to Micropyihia 
carinata (Bate, 1 8^2) in form of mouth parts (esp. weak 
distal palp segments and elongate unguis), cusps on 
posterior mar gins of coxae 2 &3. tacking on coxae I 
and 4; peraeopods 5-7 with strongly crenulate hind 
margins of bases, and short broad segments 4 & 5, short 
uropod 3, and form of brood piates. 

Hyak lubhockiana (Bate) 

(Figs. 46, 47) 

Hyak fubbaekiana Bale, 1856: 57, t. I7» fig. 7; Sars, 
1890; 27. pi. 1 1, fig. 2;-Kmpp-Schickel & Bousfield 
2002; 7, figs. 3, 4, 5. 

Hyakpomica Lincoln 1979: 236, figs, 1 09c -j;— Barn- 
ard & Kara man, 1991: 370, 

Material Examined: 

Port Erin, Isle of Man, in alga at LW, l>.l. ’WilliEjinson coll. 
March. 1955 - cf (7.5 mm) (slide mount) ffig'd.), CMNC 
I9834.5ZS: 9 ov- (4.5 mm) (slide mounU (fig'd.): CMN 
col led ions. 

Diagnosis: Like Hyak ponfka in havi ng slightly setose 
flagellum of antenna 2. strongly pointed cusp on the 
posterior margin of coxae 2 and 3, large hydrodynamic 
lobe on the basis of gnathopod 2 (<?), strongly crenulate 
hind margins of bases of peraeopods 5-7, single large 
clasping spine on the distal margin of segment 6 of 
peraeojxxls 3-7, and a short blunt uroptxl .3 that lacks 


AMPHIPAQRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 3U€2, 


95 



Fig. 46. Hyaie iubbocklana (Bate, 1856). Male (7.5 mnn); female ov (4.5 mm). 

Port Erin, Isle of Man, Irish Sea. 


AMmiPACIFIC’A VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. 15 , 2002. 96 








Fig. 47, f^iycife iuhhocUma Bate, 1 856. Male (7.5 mm); female ov (6,0 mm). 
Port Erin, Isle of Man. Irish Sea. 



pronounced distal spines on the peduncle of tiropod I , 

Hynie hMockiafta. differs from H. poruka in the 
normally unmodified condition of the dactyl of the 
maxilliped palp, and the vertical position of the large 
medto-facial spine of the pro|xid of gnathopod I (C?). 
I n addition, segment 5 of peraeopods 5-6 is short (width 
nearly equal to length), and the apical margins of the 
tel son lol>es are unarmed. 

Distribuilunal Ecology: Along exposed coasts of the 
temperate North Atlantic region, western France and 
the Irish Sea,Eo northern Norway, among algae a( LW. 

Remarks: This species has been recorded previously 
only from open coasts of the north eastern Atlantic 
region. Although the genus //ya/cRathke sens, strdoes 
not occur in the North Pacific region, the present CMN 
material from the Irish Sea ill ustrates character states 
of the type genus required for comparison with the 
several new genera proposed herein. The figures also 
compare closely with those of H. tuhhockiami from 
northern Norway figured by Krapp-Schickei & 
Bousfield (2002). They are less closely similar, how = 
ever, to those of Sars ( 1 890) in which a preampiexi ng 
notch is lacking (mature 9), or to those of Lincoln 
(1979) in which the propod of gnathopod I (mature d") 
lacks a mediO'facial guiding spine, and the mouthparts 
are not detailed. 

Material from the Mediterranean, referred to H. 
pofitka, but with character states similar to those of H, 
iubboi kiafia (e.g., Chevreux Sc Page, 1 925; Giovanni ni. 


1965) are described elsew here as H. mkheiini Krapp- 
Schicke! & Bousfield, 2002, 

Parhyale Stebbing 

Parhyaie Stebbing, 1897: 27;— Stebbing 1906: 556;— 
Shoemaker 1956: 345. 

Parhyaie (part) Bulycheva 1 957: 78 Kiapp- Schickel 
1974: 326;- Barnard 1979: i 20 {key);-Arresti 1989: 
1 1 2;- Krapp-Schickei 1993: 754;- 1 sh imam 1 994: 69. 
/A'ci S' Schell enbeig, 1939: 126. 

Ty pe species: Parhyakfascif^^r S lebbi n gd mono- 

typy. 

Species: Parhyale aguilina (Costa, 1853) (see also 
Chevreux & Page 1 925 {as Afiorche.^tes); P. fmsrensi^ 
Salman, 1986; P. Krapp-Schickei, 1974 (also 

Knapp- Schickel 1993); Stebbing, IS97 

(also Shoemaker 1956); P. f Dana, 1853)(= 

Aiiorchesres chehfikes Oliveira, 1953: fide Young, 
1998); P. Inyackii K. H. Barnard, 191 6 (Griffiths 1973; 
Barnard 1979); P. Shoemaker, 1956 (-Hyak 

gracilk Iwasa. 1939); P, multispinosa Stock, 1987; P, 
per}fciltata Shoemaker, 1956 (Krapp-Schickel 1974; J. 
L. Barnard \ 979); P.plufTiicortiia (HeWcT, 1 866)(Krapp- 
Schickel 1974). 

Diagnosis: Body smooth, small to medium. Eye me- 
dium, vertically lenticular or almond-shaped. Antenna 
1 , peduncular segments regular, not shortened. An- 


AMPHIPACinCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 1 5, 2002. 




tenna 2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 strong; flagelJum 
elongate, usually bare; if setose (<?), setae also on 
peduncular segment 4 and 5. 

Mandible, left lac inia .^-dentate. Maxilla I, palp L 
segmented (often with middle constriction and appear- 
ing subequally 2 -segmented), outer segment little ex- 
ceeding base of apical spi nes of outer plate. Maxilla 2, 
inner plate slender, witJi ] -2 proximal masrginaJ plumose 
seta; inner plate with pectinate apical setae. Maxilliped 
palp medium thick, falciform; segment 2 inner margin 
straight; dactyl slender, curved, nail short- 

Coxae 1-4 with distinct posterior marginal shelf, 
cusp variously developed. Coxa 1 broadened disiady, 
Coxa 4 with cusp in middle of posterior marginal 
excavation Xox a 5 aeq ui -or si i gh tJy anterolobate. Coxal 
gills sachke, slightly largest on peraeopod 6, 

Gnathopod I (d*) basis and ischium lacking hydro- 
dynamic lobe; carpal lobe broad; propod short, deep, 
with lower marginal setal cluster; paired spines at 
posterodistal angle unequal, separated; dactyl simple, 
i nilated to aq ui 1 j ne. G nathopod 2 { (?) , basis w i th small 
acute hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe weak or lacking; 
propod subrect -angular, palm smooth, oblique; dactyl 
stout, 

Peraeopods 3-7 slender, weakly spinose; segments 
not shortened; dactyls short, curved, with inner mar- 
ginal seta. Peraeopods 5-7, hind margin of basis with 
notch and surge seta , Peraeopod 6. basis narrower than 
5 and 7. 

Epimerat plates regular , not produced. Pleopods 
regular, strong. Uropod I, rami weakly spinose, pe- 
duncle typically with distolateral spine; uropsods 1 and 
2, rami typically subequal, with marginal spines. 
Uropod 3 biramous, outer ramus with apical spines 
only; inner ramus small, usually distinct , occa.sionally 
partly fused to peduncle outer ramus short, apically 
spinose. 

Telson lobes not elongate, margins smooth or with 
small apical seta, 

Female: Gnathopods I and 2 slightly diffeting in size 
and form; basis with small subacute hydrodynamic 
lobe. Brood lamellae medium broad, elongate, wnth 
medium length marginal setae and sharply rounded 
apex . Prea m pie xi ng notch a si mple anterodi sta! mar- 
ginal excavation, lacking unguisiaJ groove. 

Distributional Ideology: Co.smopn]itan-tropical and 
warm -temperate; intertidal and littoral marine. Al- 
though two species occur in the w^arm -temperate and 
tropical western andeentraJ North Pacific, none has yet 
been recorded from the eastern North Pacific. 


Remark Parhyale iwami Shoemaker, 1956, was 
on gi nal !y descri bed and fl gured as Hyaie g racUk I wasa, 
1939. I wasa made no menti on of a mi n ute i nner ram us 
on uropod 3, diagnostic of genus Parhyaie, The 
authore agree with the conclusions of Shoemaker( 1956), 
Bulycheva ( 1 957), Barnard & Karaman (1991). Thus, 
despite Iwasa's orginal descriptive oversight, on the 
basis of all other generic level character states, espe- 
cial ty the process on the posterior marginal excavation 
of coxa 4, the species is now correctly assigned. 

Parhyale hawaiiensis 18.53) 

(Fig, 48) 

Remarks; The species occurs in the southern and 
western peripheries of the North Pacific study region as 
well as widespread along tropica! oceanic coastlines 
world -wide. Taxonomic features are illustrated hero 
(Rg. 48) for direct comparison with species of the north 
Pacific genus Panilhrchestes (Table 11) with which it 
has been sy nonomtzed by several authors (e g.. Siebbing 
1 906; Bulycheva 1 957; Stock 1 987), 

Especially dislinctiveof Pafhyak are the following 
character states: (I) maxilla 1 , palp I -segmented; (2) 
gnathopods I and 2 (Iwth sexes) bases with small 
hydrodynamic lobes; (3) gnathopod I (male), dactyl 
aquiline in form: (4) gnathopod 2 (male), carpal lobe 
very small or lacking; (5) peraeopod 3-7, dactyls small, 
each with distinct anterior marginal seta; (6) coxa 4 
with broad posterior marginal casp; and (7) peraeon 2 
(mature female) with weakly incised preamplexing 
notch, lacking unguisial groove. 


Pai'hyaie fitscigera Stebbing 

Parhyale fascigera Siebbing, IS97: 26-28, pi. 6; — 
Shoemaker 1956; 346-350, figs. I, 2a4;— Barnard 
1979: 123. 

Remarks: The figures of Shoemaker ( 1 956) demon- 
strate some variation in form and armature of gnathopod 
] and peraeo)XKi7 of mature malei^of Parhyalefiascigera 
Stebbing from the eastern Caribbean region. Thus, in 
material from St, Croix, the medial facial spine of the 
propod was distinctly enlarged and displaced from the 
posterodistal angle, relative to the condition in similar 
sized males from Martinique. However, Bant and 
(1979), who re-examined the original! material on de- 
posit in the USNM, was satisfied of their overall 
conspecificity. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002, 


98 


Key to World Species of Parky ah Stebbing 

L Anienna 2 , flagelluiTi short ( 12-22 segments); aropod 1, peduncular disiolateral spine weak, liule larger than 

adjacent spines; umpod 3, ouLer ramus short, cc pedurele 2, 

Antenna 2. flagelSunn long {>25 segments); nropod I, peduncular dtsioluteral spine strong, pramineni; uroptjd 3, 
ramus medium to long, length snhequai (o peduncle — 3, 

2. Antenna 2, llagelliim 20-22 segmented ignathopod 2 (d) dactyl inflated (aquiiinaied); cpimcral plate 3, hind comer 


acute: iiropod 2, outer ramus 1-2 marginal spines P. aqtiiihja (Costa) 

Chardeter slates otherwise ehurm^a tKrap|>Schjckel) 


3. Antenna 2 (C?), peduncular segments 4 & 5 setose; gnathopod 2, carpal lobe strong ... . A. 

Antenna 2 {dh peduncular segments 4 ik 5 bare; gnaihopod 2, carpal lobe weak or lacking 5 

4. Peraeopod 7, segment 6, atiterior margin with .5 spine groups; epimcral plate 3, hind comer acute 

^ P. plmriiCitrniJt (Heller) 

Peraeopod 7, segment 6. anterior margin with 2-3 spine groups; epimeral plate 3, hind comer squared 

_ .P. pemaUata .Shoemaker 


5. Gnathopod 2 (mature cf). carpal lobe present, small; gnathopod I , medial spirte at posterodistal angle of propod 

distinctly enlarged and displaced; dactyl strongly inflated P.fasdgera Stebbing (p, 91) 

Gnathopod 2 (mature c?), carpal lobe lacking; gnathopod G medial spine Jitile enlarged or displaced from 
other posterodistal pnipodal spine; dactyl slightly inflated - b. 

6. Unjpod G outer ramus with single marginal spine; umpod 2, outer ramus lacking marginal spines; peraeofXKl 

7, segment 6, anterior margin with 1-2 spines Shoemaker 

Uropod 1, outer ramus with 2A marginal spines; urop<‘5d 2, outer ramus with 3-3 marginal spines; peraeopK^^d 7, 
segmeju 6 with marginal spines * 7, 

7. Mavilliped palp(c?'3, segment 3 with strong distal setal dusLer; uropod 3, ramus strs.ing, with many distal and 

marginal spines , f'. myticfij:i K. H. Rarrard 

Maxilllped palp (c?) segment 3 with regular distal sctalion; uropod 3, ramus ordinary 8. 


8. Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 6, posterior margin with 6-7 spine groups: uropod 1 , outer ramus with 6 spine 

groups - P. mullispifiasa Stock 

Peraeopods 6 & 7, segment 6, posterior margin with 34 spine groups; uropod I , outer ramus with 2 .3 spine groups 

P. hawaiemis (Dana) (p. 97) 

PtUohyah n. g. 


Other species of Parky ah. 

CMN collections contain moderately extensive 
tnarerial of males and females of genus Parhyale, from 
widely scattered localities, mainly in the Indo Pacific 
region, but also from the North Atlantic, including 
Bermuda. D upl icate niateri al of B . M, K un kel ( 1 9 1 0), 
then identified as "Hyale pomlca'\ permiLs diagnosis of 
character states of females including the brood plates 
and preamptexing notch. All liyal id species described 
and attributed to genus Hyale by Kunkel ( loc. cit.) have 
proven i denti cal w i th Parhyale hawaliensis ( Dana)( Fig, 
4S), an intertidal species of that oceanic island (Johnson 
1986; Krapp-Schickel & Bousfieldl 2002). 

Dr, Takehiko Hiwaiari is currently describing mark- 
edly differing species of Parhyale from Japan and the 
Philippine Islands. However^the phyletic significance of 
character stale differences t\as not yet been determined.. 


Hyale ipaii) Barnard 1 969a: 469;— Barnard 1 979: 98;— 
Barnard & Karaman 199]; 367;— Ishimaru 1994; 67, 
(part) Stebbing 1906: 559;— Krapp^Schickel 
1993: 754. 

Alhrchestes (part) Bulycheva 1957:1 1 1 . 
non Parhyale Stock 1 987; 1 67. 

Type Species; Alhrchestes plamuiosa Stimpson,l857 
(present designation) 

Si>ecies; 

Hiwatari & Kajihara, 1981a (= 
H plurnicornls: identifications of Iwasa 1939; Nagata 
1965); P, tTtiS 5 icrtritc (Has well, 1 879), (Chilton 1885) 
(J. L> Barnard 1 974) H. coogensis Chilton, 1 885); P. 


AMPHlPACrFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 





Fig. 4S. Parhyale hawaitensis (Dajia, \S53). Male ( 1 2 mm), Tortugas, Florida, 
(after Shoemaker 1956). Female ov (--7 mm). Mauritius. (CMN col lections). 


ebiirnea{Knipp-Schickd, 1974), 1993;/^. exphrmor 
(Arresti, 1989); P. hleiL L- Barnard J 970); 

(Stimpsoti, 1 853); F.ptumicomis (Heller, 1 866) (Krapp- 
Schickei 1974); P. plumidosG (Stimpson, 1857); F. 
ptiloceros (Eterzhavin, 1 937); 7F. triskmemis (Macnae, 
1953); P. barnardi ChevTCLix, E925); Ptihhyaie sp. 
Griffiths, 1976 (not = P. plmndosa Stimpson, 1857), 

Diagnosis^ Body medium, smooth. Eyes lenticular, 
vertical, medium. Antenna I medium, peduncular 
segments not shortened, flagellum slender. Antenna 2, 
peduncle 4 short; flagellum short to medium fc2CL 
segmented), posteromedial margin of tlagellum and 

peduncularsegment 5 Strongly plumose- setose. 

Mandibular left laclnia 5-dentale (rarely 6), spine 
row with 3-6 blades. Maxilla 1, palp stout, I -seg- 


mented, reaching base of apical spines of outer plate. 
Maxilla 2, inner plate with I -2 inner marginal plumose 
setae. Maxilliped, inner plate relatively short; outer 
plate distal ly obtuse; palp, segment 2 not broader than 
long; dactyl slender, unguis short 

Coxae 1 4 rounded below, with posterior marginal 
cusps. Coxa I slightly distally broadened. Coxa 5 
anterolobate; coxae 6 and 7 posierolobate. Coxal gills 
sknder-subovate, .sac-llke, largest on coxa 6, 

Gnathop<xl I ((?) larger and slightly different in form 
to female; basis lacking hydrodynamic lobe; carpal 
lobe distinct, relatively broad; propod hachet-shaped 
broadening di stal I y, lackingmediofacial guiding spine; 
palm distinct oblique, dactyl simple. Gnathop^xl 2 (cf) 
powerfully subchelale, regular; basis with medium 
hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe small, thin, evanes- 


AMPHIPACiHCA VOL. 3 NO.:i Nov. 15. 2001 


100 


c^nt; propod subriectangular to subovatc, narrowing 
diaiall), palm short, oblique, not incised or toothed; 
dactyl regular. 

Peraeopods 3-7 slender, regular; dactyls small, with 
distinct but weak inner marginal seta. Peraeopods 5-7, 
bases medium broad, rounded hind margin not strongly 
ere nu I ate, lacking surge seta and notch; segments 4-6 
slender, not broadened; marginal spines weak, not 
striated, clasping spine weak or lacking. 

Epimeral plates relatively broad, margins weakly 
armed, hind comer not produced. Pleopods w ell devel 
oped, rami normal. Urofxjd I , peduncle longer than 
rami, with strong distomedial spine; rami with mar- 
gi naJ s pi nes. and med i urn apical spi nes , U roped 2, mm t 
subequal, with marginal spines. Uropod 3 short, 
peduncle with lateral seiat row and postero-dstal spine; 
inner ramus variously fused to peduncle; outer ramus 
subequal to peduncle, with stout apical spines . 

Tel son lobes triangular, longer than wade, margins 
smooth. 

Female: Onathopr^d 2 , propod similar to, but larger 
and deeper than in gnathopod 1 . Brood plate large, 
medium broad, apical ly acute; marginal setae short, 
hook-tipped, numerous. Preamplesing notch shallow , 
with short to medium unguisial groove; postero ventral 
lobe of peraeon 2 large, anterior margin convex. 

DistrLbuliuna] Ecology: Low intertidal of estuaries, 
and subti dally on Poccihpara sp,, to depths of 3D m. 
(Barnard 1970); Allantic-Mediierranean region; North 
and central Pacific to Japan, south to Australia,. 

Etyrnology: From the Greek root "piilo*' meaning 
downy plumage + Myale^ alluding to the downy or 
finely setose posterior margin of antena 2 in males and 
most females. 

Remarks: The Piflohyaie generic group is remote 
from Hyaie, ty pe ge nus of family HyaJ i dae. Especi al ty 
distinctive character states are: (1) heavily plumose 
(finely bmsh-setose) antenna 2 (both sexes); (2) lack of 
a guiding spine on the medial face of the propod of 
gnathopod I (cf); (3) variously devel oped carpal lobe of 
gnathopod 2 (d*); {4) distomedial spine on the peduncle 
of uropod a ; (5) inner ramus of uropod 3 variously 
fused to the ped u ncl e. Speci es of Fnlohyale are mai niy 
brackish and estuarine, whereas those of Hyaie fre- 
quent high salinity surf-coast waters. 

A number of undescribed species of Pdhhyale from 
New Zealand and South America (Cape Horn region) 
have been noted in CMN collections. 


PHlohvale plitmulosa (Stimpson) 

(Fig. 49) 

All^yrchestes piitmiftosa Stlmpson, IS 57; .5 !9;— Steb- 
bing 1906:555, 

Hyak plamidosus Thorsieinson 1941; 55, pi. I. figs, 
]6^15; 

Hyale phtmuiosa Bavumd l%9b; 138;— Barnard 1979; 
114;- Austin 1985: 595;-Staude 1987: 379;- 
Bamard & Karaman 1991: 370. 

Ptumiihhyale plimulosa Bousfield 1981: 80, fig.9;— 
Bousfleld 2001a: 104. 

non : Hmie piitmniosa Bousfield 1973: 3 55,P3, XLIV, 
fig. 2.{Atlantic); Griffiths 1976: 76, fig. 51 B (S. Af- 
rica). 

Material Exammed: 69 lots comaining '360 spedmi^ns, 
from .SE Alaska to Oregon S, California. (Numbers of 
speci mens at each station In parentheses. Stations data 
provided in Bousfield 19.58, 1963. 1968: Bousfield & 
McAllisLer 1962; Bousfield & Jarretl 1981). 

ALASKA 

Soiitheastern AJaskai ELB Sin, 1961: A 1 64. NW side 
Hogan i., imperial Passage, LW-HWtide pools, - i Cf J im. 
ELB Sms, 1980; SI9B2 ( Ic? , 2 99): S20BI (6cfcf. I 9), 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Queen Charlotte Islands; ELB Stns, 1 957: E8 ( 1 0), E9 (3). 
WI4a([0),E24(6), W5a(h) 

North Central Coast: ELB Sms., 1 964: H2 (2), H4 (3), H6 
(D.HI I (.T}.H16(2),H33(5I),H46(]0), H48{2), H5 1 (10). 
South Central Coast: ELB Sms, 1955: Mia (I), M2 {26), 
M3 (64), M5 (]), Ml I (5). 

ELB Stns. 1976: B9(]). 

North Vancouver Island: ELB Sms, 19.59: N 13 (I), N23 
{6). V-ki(S),V2(Kl). 

Southern %^aiieouver Island; 1955, ELB Stns: Ft (8). G2 
(6),GM ([3),G2I (5).P2(10). 

1964, ELBSm: H44 (5) 

1 970, ELB Stns: P708 (2), P7 1 0 (2), P7 1 2 (4), 1^ 1 9 ( 1 8). 

1975, ELB Sms: P6 ( L5), P7 (1 ), P16 (24) PI 9 (3) 

1976, ELB Sms: B3a* Diana I,, Trevor Charnel beach, S. 
side (48’^.50’12'’N, 1 25° 1 1 ' W, under stones, LW, June 26- 
Neotype specimen; I CT (8.5 mm) (slide mount) (flg’d), 
CMNC 1983-1527; Voucher specimens: 1 9 ov (7.0 
nnm)(slide mount) (ni^d), 5 Cf'd'. 7 $9 ov,, CMNC 2002' 
0076; B 13(14), B28(20). 

1977, ELB Sms: B4 (3), B 12 (5). 

Additional B. C. Localities (CMN col Ins.): Hecate Strait, 
from stomach contents of sole. J. Madid, 1983 - I Spm.; 
Swanson Bay, C. D. Levings coll., 1973 ^ I spm; Rocky 1^., 
C, Lobbancoll.^ 1971 - 1 CT; Sahspring I., R. Long coll., 
1977-2 spms,: Anthony L, Q. C. L, G C Ciari coll., 1 95B - I 
Cf ; Ttable 1., D. V. Ellis coll., 1 975 - 3 spms. 


AMPHIPACinCA VOL 3 NO,3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


101 



Fig. 49. Ptilohycile pli^muiasa (Stimpson, 1857). MaJe (8.0 mm); ELB Stn.B3, Diiiiui L, 
Trevor Channel, B-C.; female ov (7.5 mm). ELB Stn. B4, PipePs Lagoon,Vancouver I, B. C, 


WASHINGTON-OREGON 

ELB Stn J 95.^: Ml I (8). 

ELB Stns, Jiily-Aug,, 1906: W3 (2), W5 ( i), W8 (1), W9 
(20), \V|? (9). W29(1 ]), W5l (4), W36 ( I), W40 (8). 
W47 (4), W53 (7), W&5 ([[), 

CALIFORNIA 

ELB Sin., 1939; C3, Eureka, CA, LW - 18 spedmens, 
Oihcr Miilcrial (CMN collns.) : Mission Bay, San Diego, 
C. D. Clark coll, lOSO- 1 specimen, 


MEXICO 

Tartle Bay, Baja California, W. L. Klawe coll., [956 - 26 
specimens, 

DmgnasLs; Male (ILO mm): Body medium large, 
smooth. Eye broadly reniform. Antenna I , peduncular 
segment not shortened; flagellum 10-12 segmented. 
Antenna 2, flagellum 12-13 segmented, pra\ima! 10 
segments and peduncular segment 5 with dense poster- 
ior marginal tufts of medium long plumose seta. 


AMPH[PACinCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2001 


102 


KEY TO NORTH PACIFIC & WORLD SPECIES OF PTILOHYALE 


1. l Jrt>ptjd 1 , Outer ramus ivtth 4-5 msrgirial sphcs; uropod 2, rami unequal in length; uropod ramus with 7-8 

apical spines - F. exphraior 

Urtspod L outer ramus with 3 (2) marginal spines; unopod 2, rami snbequa! in length; uropod 3* rannus with 5- 
6 apical spines ^ 2. 

2. Coxa 5. posterior lobe distinctly smaller than anterior lobe; gnathopodi (male), basis lacking distinct antero- 

distai [obe; peraeopod 5> basis narrow F. fittorafis (Stitnpson) (p. 103) 

Coxa 5, lobes subcquai or hind lolx^ slightly smaller; On 1, basis lobale: peraeopod .5, basis broadly rounded as 


in pcracopods 6 & 7. ^ ^ . , , . . — ^ .3. 

3. Peraeopod 5 basis broad: uropod 3, ramus with .5 apical spines .4. 

Peraeopod 5, basis namwer than in P6 & &; uropod 3, ramus with 6 apical spines 5, 


4. .Antenna 2 (<f), tlageilarsegmenis densely setose; gnathopod 2. carpal lobe evanescent; telson lobes acute , . . 

F. crassicorne Haswel I 

Antenna 2(d'5, flagellar segments norcnatly setose; gnathopod 2, carpal lobe present; telson lobes aplcally 
rounded F. piumuiosa Sttmpson (p. lOO) 


5, Antenna 2 (Cf), llagcllar segments l-S densely setose P, iok (Barnard) 

Anteitna 2 flagellar segments moderately setose .6. 

6. Gnathopods t &. 2 (9), propods slender (Russian coast) F. /jr/^r^cerrA7{IX'r/.havtn> 

Cmathopcjds I & 2 (9). propods broadening distaily; (Japan) P. btirbicornis (Hiw-atari & Kajiliara) (p, 104) 


Mtmdibule. spine row with 4 blades. Maxilla I , palp 
narrowing, barely reaching base of outer plate spines, 
Maxilliped, dactyl nearly straight, not longer than 
segment 3. 

Coxae L4, hind marginal cusps bluntly rounded. 
Coxa 5. lolxs siibequal or hind lobe slightly smaller. 
Coxal gills relatively large, broadly sac-ilke. 

Gnaihopcd I , basis weakly lobate;cari:>al lobe short, 
broad, lower margin with 12-14 comb satae; propod 
slightly broadening distaily, palm straighbnearly verti- 
cai, hind margin distaily lined with short setae; dactyl 
not overlapping palm. Gnathopt>d 2 with medium h.- 
d. lobe; carpal lobe vestigial; propod large, subrect- 
angular, palm oblique gently convex, evenly lined with 
short spines, 

Peraeopods 3-4 relatively slender, margins weakly 
s pi nose, dactyls short, inner margin very weakly 
castellate. I^nteopods 5-7 increasing in length, bases 
broadly rounded; segment 5 slender, not shortened. 

Epimerai plates 1-3 hind corners nearly square. 
Uroptxl I , pedunculardistomcdial spine elongate, length 
1/2 irmer ramus; rami slender, longer than peduncle 
with 1-3 marginal spines. Uropod 2, outer ramus 
slightly the shorter. Uropod 3 short; inner ram us fused 
to peduncle; outer ramus, apex oblique, with 5-6 apical 
spi nes . Tel son lo bes s! i ghtl y 1 onger than w ide, api ces 
rounded. 

Female ov (8.0 mm)* Antenna 2. proximal 4-5 


flagellar segments and posterodistal margin of 
peduncular segment 5 with clusters of short plumose 
setae. GnathopcKi I distinctly larger than 2, propods 
broadening distaily. Brood plate (gnathopod 2) rela- 
tively short, broad, apex acute, marginal setae medium. 
Fte-amplexing notch shallow, obtuse; unguisial groove 
.short or lacking. 

Distributional Ecology" From southeastern Alaska 
and British Columbia to southeni California and Baja 
CaMfornia; mainly estuarine, among Enferornorpha, 
other algae, and Zetstera, and under cobbles, LW level 
to shallow subtidal. 

Remarks; Although Ptihhyale piumuiosa {Siimpson) 
and P. linoraiis (Stimpson) had been synonymized bj' 
Bousfietd (1973), the Pacific and Atlantic species dif- 
fer in character states outlined in the key (above). 
Similarly, the S. African species keyed and figured by 
Griffiths (1976) differs from ^Hyak piumuiosa'* 
Stimpson and may be an undesciibed species. 

North .American Atlantic species of Ptihhyale. 

Because of previous confusion i n species identity 
of North American Pacific and Atlantic material here 
assigned to genus Ftilohyale (e.g., Bousfield 1975; 
Barnard Karaman 11991), the name PrHohyale 
(Stimpson, 1853) is resurrected to encompass 


AMPHIPACIRCA VQU 3 NOJ Nov. \ 5 , 2(X)2, 


J03 



Fig. 50. Ptihhyaie iinorali s {Slimp^on, 1853), Male {1 1 mm). Nybska Pt,, Woods Hole, MA 
(after Bousfield ,1973); female ov (S mm), neotype. Pt. Judith, RJ. 


die Atlantic species. As the origina] material of that 
species cannot be tocated (lost with many otlierSlimpson 
types in the Chicago fire of 1 871 ?), ncotype material 
from the New England region is designated herewith, 

P/iiohyale Ilmmlh (Stimpson) 

(Fig 30) 

Aliorchesies Hiioralis Stimpson, 1853: 49. 1 3, fig. 36; 
-Smith 1873: 556;-Stebbing 3906: 595;-Miner 
1950: 462. pJ. 148. 

Hyale iinoraiis Hol rnes 1 905 : 472 , PI . 3, fi g. 2 Barnard 
&Karaman 1991:369. 

Hyak prevosti (part) Della Valie 1893: 5 39. 

(Stimpson) Bousfleld 1973: 155, pi 
XLIV. 2;— Pollock 1998: 241, fig. 15.120. 
PhmuhhyaleplumifiosuiS^^p^ijii) Bousfleld 2001a: 
3Ck4. 


Material Examined; 

El.B Stn W3, Nobska Woods Hole. Mpss., under cob- 
bles, MW'-LW, Sept. I, 196,3 - Neotype material; cf (3 1.0 
mmKslide mount)(fig'd),CMNC2(K>24K>7 3 .Voucher speci- 
mens: 9 ov. (83) mmXshde moufit}(fjg'd>, 5 additional 
speclincos, CMNC 2002-0077. 

Lewes, Delaware, csuaiy , July 32, 1977, ELB & clasji coll. 
99.CMNcoltns. 

DmgnasLs: Male: (1 1 .0 mm) Antenna I , peduncular 
segments relatively long, thin. Antenna 2 short, 
flagellum 13-15 segmented; peduncular segment 5 and 
basal flagellar segments lined posteriorly with rela- 
tively slion, plumose setae. 

Left ladnia 5-dentate, spine rxjw with 3 blades, 
Maxilla 3 regular. Masiiliped palp stout; dactyl longer 
than segment 3. 

Coxae M, rounded below, hind margins with dis- 


AMPHIPACIFICA VQL ^ NOJ Nov. ]5, 2002. 


104 


tinct cusp. Coxa 5 anterolobace, posterior lobe dis- 
ti nelly smaller than anterior lobe. Coxal gills relatively 
small, sac-like. 

Gnathopod 1^ basis and ischium lacking distinct 
hydrodynamic lobe. Gnathopod 2 regular, basis with 
small hydrodynamic lobe; carpal lobe small, not pro- 
Lruding; propod large, slightly broadening distally. 

Peraeopods 3-7 slender, segments not shortened; 
dactyls very short; bases broad, hind margins with 
weak notch and surge seta, 

Uropod I, outer ramus with 3 (2) marginal spines, 
Uropod 2, rami subequal in length. Uropod 3, ramus 
with 5-6 apical spines. 

Telson lobes medium, apex subacme, margins 
smooth. 

Female ov, (S,0 mmj. Gnathopods similar in form. 
Gnathopod 2, basis with small hydrodynamic lobe; 
propod distinctly larger than in gnathopod 1. Srood 
plate (gnathopod 2) large, elongate, narrowing to acute 
apex, marginal setae relatively short, Preamplexing 
notch short, squared; unguisial grove medium, oblique; 
posterodistal lobe of peraeon segment 2 relatively 
broad and deep, with truncate anterior margin . 

Remarks^ Bousfield (1973) had synonymized this 
species with Hyale plitntulos<2 (Stimpson, IS57) on 
superficial morphological similarities. Although the 
ecology^ and tile styles of F. riUoraiis and P, plumtdosa 
are similar, taxonomic differences are significant (see 
key, p. 102) including the greater degree of develop- 
ment of the posterior marginal cusps of coxae 1 -3, the 
much larger and more distally acute form of the brood 
lamellae, and smaller size of the marginal setae. 

Central and Western Pacific Species of Ptilohyale 

The first species of the genus recorded from the 
western North Pacific was Allorchesteji ptiloceros 
Derzhavin, 1937 (see Gurjanova 1951; 823; fjg. 576). 
Bulycheva (1957) synonymized it with the superfi- 
cially similar Mediterranean species Alhrchesies 
pluffikornis HeUerJSbb. However, the Russian Pa- 
cific species is proving distinct from the European 
species as w ell as from Piilohyale fmrhicomis HI w atari 
& Kajihara, 1981. of Japanese coastal waters, 

Ptilohyale piumidosa (Stimpson) resembles P. 
piUoceros but Derzhavin (1937) does not treat the 
brood plates, preamplexing notch ( 9) or other critical 
details. Distinctive character stales of P, ptiloceroji 
include: (1) gnathopod 2 (mature cf), carpal lobe thin 
but visible; (2) peraeopods 5-7, bases relatively slen- 
der; and (3) uropod 3, outer ramus elongate, the inner 
ramus partly fused to the peduncle. 


Piilohyale barbkornis (Hiwataii & Kajihara) 

(Fig. 51) 

Hyale harbicornfs HiwaLari & Kasihara, 1981 b: 21, 
figs. 1-3;— Barnard & Kamman 1991: 369;— Ishimaru 
1994. 67, 

Alhrchesies plumicontis Iwasa 1939: 289, pi. 22, figs. 
25-26. 

Material examined: Near Tokyo, Japan; among mus- 
sels along shore, Hiwatari coll. - c? (1 1 .6 mm); 9 ov 
(9.2 mm), (CMN collections). 

Remarks: Although lacking the female preamplexing 
notch, the excellent figures of P, harbicornis provided 
by Hrwatari and Kasihara (1981b) exhibit nearly all 
major characteristic states ot genus Prihhyale. These 
include the coxal gills and sexually dimorphic features 
of antennae and gnathopods not shown in jllustrations 
of North American, Hawaiian, and other world species. 

Ptifohyale barbicornis appears si m ilar to F. priheeros 
( Derzhavin, 1 937). However, in a forthcoming paper. 
Dr. HiwaLari (pers. comm.) expects to demonstrate the 
taxonomic distinctiveness of F. ptiloceros and P. 
harhkorfits. 

Apohyale n. g. 

Hyale (part) Stebbing 1906: 559;— Gurjanova 1951: 
816;— Bulycheva 1957; 83; — Barnard 1974: 66;— 
Barnard 1979: 98; — Barnard Si. Karaman, 1991: 367, 
Hyale grandicornis fiovaezealandiae group Hurley 
1957: 904;-Boiisfie!d 1981: 76, 

/■/. complex Barnard 1969b: 136;— Barn- 

ard 1979: 1 14. 

Apohyate Bousfield 2001a: 104 (nomen nudum). 

Type species: APorchestes pugeitensis Dana, 1 853 (au- 
thor selecbon). 

Species: *Ap<yhyale anceps (Barnard, 1969b); A. ayeli 
(J, L. Barnard, 1 955); *A.^5argw/( Derzhavin, 1937); 

bishopae (J. L. Barnard, 1955); caltformco (J. 
L, Barnard, 1969b); A. crcp^sipes (Heller, IS66)(=A. 
gaihenkiani (Mateus & Mateus, 1962; Ibid, !%5); A.? 
dkistoma{K. H. Barnard, 1916); A.Jurcala (Reid, 195 1 ); 
A. grafidicornis (Kroyer, 1845); *A. hirtipalma (Dana, 
1853); A. humboldtiiJ. L. Barnard, 1979); A. media 
(Dana, 1853); A. mPtor (Chevreux & Page, 1925); A. 

(Thomson, IS79); A./?^rier/(LiJcas, 
1 846); A. prevostii (Milne Edwards, 1 830) |= A. nibsoni 
(Rathke, 1 843) j; (Dana, J %S^)*A.punct- 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2002, 


105 



Fig. 5 1 . Ffjfohyaie harbicornis Hivvatari & Kajihara, 1 98 lb, Male { 1 [ .6 mm); Teinale ov (9.2 mm). 
Shore nearTykyo, lapaii (modified from Hiwatari Kajiharal9S I b+ CMN collections). 


(HiwaUiri & Kajihara^ 1981a); A. siebbingf (Chev- 
reu\, 1888); ?Apohyaie tristaneniji (Macme, 1953); 
^A. uragensis ( Hirayama, 1 980); A. Witiictharai? (Sercjo> 
j 999),- Apobyalc sp. ( =Myate media of H Lu ley 1 957 J. 

Diai^nosi^: Body medium to large, robust, smocsth .often 
strikingly pigmented- Eyes medium large, usually 
broadly renifonn, nearly meeting mid-dorsally. An- 
tennae short. Antenna 2, peduncular segments 4 & 5 
stout, nearly bare; flagellum short (<20 segments), 
weakly (or not) setose posteriorly 

Mandible, left lacinia 5- 6-dentate. Maxilla I . )>al p 
] -segmented, short to medium, not extending beyond 
base of apical spi nes of outer plate. Maxilla 2, plates 
slender, inner plate with single inner marginal seta. 


Maxilliped palp stout, segment 2 broader than long, 
dactyl normal, not sexually dimorphic (lacking apical 
w-'hip seta in male), 

Co.xa I broadened distal ly, smooth; coxae I -4 vvith 
distinct hind marginal cusp in both sexes. Coxa 5 
mos U y antero- to aeq ui I obate. Coxae 6 and 7 postero- 
lobflte. Coxal gills plate-like, largest posteriorly, 

Gnathopod I normal, slightly sexually dimorphic; 
bases, hydrodynamic lobe weak or lacki ng; carpal lobe 
distinct, broad; propexi slightly broadening di,stally, 
lacking mediofacial guiding spine (CT); dactyl simple, 
Gnathoped 2 strongly sexually dimorphic; basis (male) 
w Lth weak to medium hydrodynamic lobe; nirpus short, 
posterior lobe usually lacking (often very thin, short); 
pTX)pod large, variable. 


AMPHrPACIFrCA VOL 3 NO,3 Nov, 15. 2002. 


106 


Peraeopods 3-7 stoul, dactyls short, with distinct 
inner marginal seta. Peraeopods 5-7^ bases broad, 
margin nearly smtxsth. notch and surge seta variously 
developed; segment 4 relatively short and broad; seg- 
ment 6, inner distal locking spine various ty developed, 
rarely striated. 

Epimeral plates 2-3 smooth below, hind corners 
acuminate. PI eopods normal. UropexJ I , peduncular 
distomedial and lateral spines typtcally short, weak; 
rami with marginal and strong apical spines. Uropod 
2, outer ramus the shorter, with few marginal spines. 
Uropod 3 uniramous; ramus short, blunt, not longer 
than peduncle, with apical, and occasaonally postero- 
dorsal, marginal spine(s). 

Telson lobes sublri angular, usually short, apical 
margins unarmed. 

Female: Gnathopod 3 , hydrodynamic lobes lacking; 
propod deep Gnathopod 2 always larger, often strong; 
basis with weak hydrodynamic lobe. Brood plate (Gn2) 
very large, proximal ty broad, narrowing distaEly to 
acute apex; marginal setae very- short, numerous. Pre- 
amplexmg notch simple, sliallowv, obtuse; unguisial 
groove lacking or very short; peraeon 2, posteroventral 
lobe medium to large, 

Etyrtiology: From the Greek root“u^<?*" meaning ^‘ad- 
vanced", and the Greek root name “Hyale'\ in refer- 
ence to the advanced nature of several character states 
of component species. 

Distributiorial Ecology" This genus is widespread 
around boreal and temperate rocky coastlines of North 
and South Pacific oceans, less freejuent in the tropics. 
Species are strictly intertidal, mainly on rocky shores, 
ranging often into brackish (occasiomdly hypersaJine) 
spray pCHols of the supra! ittoral zone. All are sal tutors 
in air, some (c.g.. A.. apparently as capably 

as some members of the Talitridae. 

Remarks; The largest and most advanced species 
occur highest in the tidal zone, and tolerate wide 
extremes of temperature and salinity . Thus. Apohyale 
prevosti (M-E.) f= H. nilssoni) lives well up into 
winter-iced regions of the North Atlantic such as Ice- 
land, I.abrador, and the upper St. lawrence estuary. 

Apohyaie ptf^enensia and A. califoniica share ad- 
vattced character states with western Pacific counter- 
part species A. hasM^rgitii and A punctaia, and to lesser 
extent with the central Pacific (Hawaiian) A. bishopae. 
By contrast, the less terrestrial A. anceps evinces rela- 


tively plesiomorphic character states. Members of 
genus Apohyale (e.g. A. crassipea ) have high diploid 
chromosome numbers (-50) and high karyotype for- 
mula (10). in the same mnge as Parhyale (48 and 24 
resp.) (see Li bertini and Krapp-Schickel 2001) 

The old generic name, \Wicea Nicolet, 1 849, origi- 
nally applied to a Peruvian intertidal species ( probably 
a member of the grafidia^rnis group and jiart of genus 
Apohyale) is now invalid because of ICZN 50-year 
non-usage rule). 

The commensal relationships of Hyale g raff dicornis 
(fide J. L. Barnard) to acmaeid limpets, occurring in 
lower to upper tidal levels along rocky shores of central 
Caiifomia. has been studied by Johnson ( 1968). The 
mottled immature hyalid ajuphiptxls ( I -6 mm in length) 
apparently actively seek the moist protection of the 
nuchal cavity and partial groove of the underside of 
larger shells (>8 mm in length) of 5 species of Acmaea 
and Loiiia gigantm. The hyaiids apparently feed on 
algae growing on the surface of the limpet shells. 

The identity of this hyalid species remains moot. 
Adult atii mals were never found with the young hy alids, 
Apohyale aaii/ornka (J, L. Bamard, 1969b) is acx^m- 
mon hyalid species at MW-LW levels in the Monterey 
Bay region. However, the sentoraulhor(ELB) hasalso 
collected adult specimens of A. pugeitefisis in JHW 
pools of the Monterey peninsula (p. 3 12). The external 
body pattern of f emal es ajid i ramatunes of A . pngetten- 
jrA Is often mottled, whereas adult males are often 
marked by a large mid-dorsal whitish area, giving the 
larger animals a '^saddl e-back ' appearance. Since 
adults of A. piigeUensis are frequent inhabitants of H W 
spray pools where conditions of temperature, salinity, 
and desiccation may become extreme and unsuitable 
for grow th, immature animals may therefore frequent 
less rigorous intertidal niches. Piesumably these occur 
at somewhat lower intertidal levels, in this instance 
provided by ever-present living specimens of Acmaea, 
Further study of the complete life cycle of this 
commensal hyalid amphipod species is indicated. 

Apohyale anceps (J. L. Barnard) 

(Figs. 52, 53) 

Alhchf^sres anceps Bamard, 3969b: 130, fi gs 25. 26. 

Bamard 1974:42;— Bamard 1979: 1 14;— 
Barnard & Karaman 1991 : 369. 

Apohyale attcepx Bousfield 1981: SO; — Bousfield 
lOOIaj 104. 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL. 5 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


UY7 

KEY TO NORTH PACIFIC AND SELECTED WORLD SPECIES OF AFOHYAIJ^ 

North Pacific Species) 


L Antenna 2, Imsai flags! Jar segments setose; uropod 3, peduncJe with 2 posDtnKtista] spines; peracop<H3s 5-7, 

dactyls with small inner marginal setae 2, 

Anicrtha 2, basal flagellar segments esse riti ally bare; iiropod 3, pedum;! e with single postemdistal spine; 
peraeopods 5-7, dactyls with medium stout Inner marginal seta 4, 

2. Uropods. t & 2, outer ramus lacking marginal spines, uropt:id I , pedunciplar disiolatcral spine large f> 1/3 outer 

ramus); Hawai ] (Barnard) 

Uropods I & 2, outer ramus with 1-2 marginal spines; uropod i, peduncular spine short , , 3. 

3. Gnathopod 2 (malurec?) carpal lobe present; penieopods 5*7, locking spine of segment 6 small, simple; man- 

dibular left laclnia 5-dentate *A. a^tceps (Barnard) (p, I Of?) 

Gnathopod 2 (cT), carpal lobe lacking; peraeopods 5-7, liickEng spine large, striated mandibular left laclnla 6- 
dentate; N,Z ...... A, media (Dana) 

4. Gnathi>ptxJ 2{c?), basis w ith large rounded an terodistal lobe, panly masking ischium; uropiKbi [ & 2, outer ramus 

with 0-1 marginal spines; JSI. Altantic. - A. prevossii (IVl.-E) 

GnaLht>fx.id 2 (cf), basis w-iih small anterodlstal lobe not masking ischium; uropods I & 2, outer ramus with 2-4 
marginal spines 5 , 

5. Gnathopod 2 (9)t propod distinctly larger and of differing form than In gnathopod I ; large species 6. 

Grath{?p{xls I & 2 (9), propods differing little in size and form: small species S. 

b. Uriopc.>d 2, outer ramus wdih 3^ marginal spines; urop<xl 3„ ramus slender longer than peduncle, with 2 marginal 

spines - .A. grandkorms novaezeakiadkie Thomson 

Uropod 2, outer ramus with 2 marginal spines; uropod 3, ramus short, thick with 0-1 marginal spines 7. 

7. Eyes large; uropod 3, ramus with 1 marginal spine A. pugettefisis (Dana)(p. I lO) 

Ryes small; uropod 3, ramus lacking marginal spines A. btissargini (Derzhavin) (p. 112) 

H. Antenna 2, eiagellum. medium 3ong (15-segmented:); uropr.>ds I Sc 2, outer ramus with 4 spLne^s; mandibular 

left lacinia 6-dentate (Japan) *A. uragsmis (Hirayama) 

Antenna 2, flagellum short ( 10- 1 4 segmented); uropods 1 & 2..outer ramus with 1-3 marginal spines; mandibular 
left lacinia 5-denrate 9. 

9, Peraeopod 6, basis uniformly rounded behind as in peracopods 5 & 7 10. 

PeraeofK-Ml 6 , ba.sis relatively narrow, not rounded behiand as iu [jeraeopods 5 & 7 

. A. Ciiiiforiiica (Byrnardlfp, I 1 3) 

Itl. Antenna 2, llagdlum I -t- segmented; eplmeral plate 2, hind corner pntduced 11. 

Antenna 2, flagellum 10-13 segmented!; epi[neral plate 1, hind corner acute, not produced tZ. 

{ L Uropod 3 ramus > peduncle; gnathopod 2 (cf) palm strongly oblique, elongate, length > 2X p^tsierior margin 

of pnopod A. humboldfl (Barnard) 

Uropod 3, ramus < peduncle; gnaihopiKJ 2 (cf), palm regularly oblique, length 1 .5 X posterior margin . , . . 
4. (Seiejo) 

] 2, A ntenna 2, flagell um I O-segmented; uropod' 2, on te r ram us about eq ua! ini ength to inner ram us ; u ropod 3, ram us 

with I marginal spine , *A. bixhrj'pae (Barnard) 

Antenna 2, flagellum l2-[3-segmented; uropod 2, outer ramus disLlncily stioner than inner; uropod 3, ramus 
lacking marginal spine A. puncma (Hiwratari &. Kajihara) (p. 114) 


AMPHlPACinCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov, 15, 2002. 


m 


Milter i3) Examined: 

ALASKA 

Aleutian lislands: Banjo Pt. Amchilka LX, E. O'Clair Sui 
B-2 ,1973 I Cf ( 13 mm)C$lLCle mount), 1 9 ov (1 1 mm) (slide 
mount) (fig'd): Ibid, Sim IA-2, 3972 -1 Cf. 

Southeastern Alaska: ELB Stn, I9SU: Si8R2(] 9). 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

North Central coast: E I B Stn H65, ChrisUe Pass, July, 
1964- I C?. 

Southern Vaiieouvcr I.; ELB Sin. P4, July 5, 1955 - I C? 
(9.5 inm)Cslidc mount) (fig’d). CMNC2002-0095; 1 9 ov 
(8.5 mmXslide monniXfig'd); + 3 99 ov (to 7 mm). 

C. Lobban Sms-. 1971: CL 1004 (Rocky Pt-.Wjckajiinmsh 
Ba>-4C?C?, 7 99, 13im;CL 1006 - 27 im; CL 1 028 1C?. 
699 , 2 im.: CL 1032 - 2 99, 4 imnt. 

WASH.-ORE 

Sunsei Bay, Oregon^ K. ConJati .Sin 06-5, 1 9S6 - 7 99, 

CALIFORNIA 

Monterey Bay. ir Eniociddia^ LW, P. Glyniii co!L. 1959 - 
6 lots containing 9 d’cf, SO 99> 47 im. CMN Acc. No. 61-37, 

Diagnosis: Male (9.5 mm): Eyes tried ium subovaie, 
dorsolaterally positioned. Antenna I, podimcular seg- 
ment 2 & 3 short; flagellum 8-10 segmented. Antenna 
2 short, ped unclear segments 4 & 5 with postered istal 
tufrs of setae; flagellum short, 10-12 segmented, seg- 
ments with postero- and anterodistal setal tufts, 
Buccal mas.s slightly prognathous. Mandible, left 
ladrtia 5-dentate, spine row vvith 2-3 accessory^ blades, 
Maxilla I, palp slender, extending beyond base of 
apical spines of outer plate. Maxilliped palp segments 
short, stout; dactyl conicaJ, nail small. 

Coxa 1-3 slightly broader than deep, lower margins 
rounded, each with posterior shelf and weak cusp. 
Coxa 4 broader than deep, with small posterior cusp 
and small proximoposterior excavation. Coxa 5 
shallowly anteroiobate, anterior lobe larger than poste- 
rior lobe. Coxa 6 posteralobate. Coxa 7 deep, broadly 
rounded below. Coxal gills narrowly sac-like, 

Gnathopod 2, hydrodynamic lobes on basis and 
ischium very small; carpus stout, lobe relatively broad 
and deep, lower margin with 6-8 short comb setae; 
propod medium, broadening distally, palmar margin 
gently conve.!\. UEieveniy spinose, shorter than poste- 
rior margin having small distal seta! cluster; dactyl 
stout, slightly overlapping palm, Gnathopod 2 large; 
hydrodynamic lobe on basis nyedium, rounded, lacking 
on Lschium; mems postered! stallly acute; carpal lobe 
thin, extending below merus^ lower margin with a few 


comb setae; propod smoothly and deeply subovate, 
palm oblique, slightly convex, shorter than smooth 
posterior margin; dactyl regular, fitting palm, 

Peraeopods 3 & 4 medium, segment .5 strong, seg- 
ment 4 shorter than 5 Sc 6, clasping spine small; dactyls 
short. Peraeopods 5-7, bases broad, regularly rounded 
behind, hind margins each with notch and surge seta; 
segment 5 shorter than segments 4 & 6^ anterior margin 
of segment 6 with 3-4 weak spines; dactyls medium 
short, inner margin distally with medium seta and 
minute castellations. 

Epimeral plate 1, hind corner obtusely rounded, 
plates 2 & 3, hind comers squared, hind margin with 
minute setae. Pleopods regular. Unopod 1 , peduncle, 
outer margin with 3-4 spines of unequal length; outer 
ramus slightly shorter than inner ramus, with 2 short 
marginal and a few' longer apical spines. IJropod 2, 
rami subequal, inner ramus with 1 -2 short marginal 
spines. Uropod .3 short, peduncle w'ith 2 unequal posl- 
erodistal spines; ramus stout, slightly shorter than pe- 
duncle, with 3-5 unequal apical spines. 

Tel son lobes short, apices bluntly rounded, weakly 
sctulose. 

Female ov (8,5 mm); Gnathopod 1 , basis with weak 
hydrodynamic lobe; lacking in Iscliium; carpal lobe 
small: propod subrectangular, not broadening distally, 
palm short, oblique. Gnathopod 2 similar to gnatho- 
pod I but basaJ hydrodynamic lobe more prominent, 
carpal lobe larger, and propod distinctly larger, with 
gentl y con ve x lower margi n . Brood lamel I a 2 broadl y 
heart-shaped, narrowing to subacute apex; margins 
w ith numerous (>J 50) medium short, bixyk-tipped brood 
setae. Preamplexing notch squared or slightly obtuse; 
unguisial groove elongate, shallowly oblique; 
posterodistal lobe of peraeon segment 2 shallow, ex- 
tending far forward, anterioi margin nearly vertical. 

Distributional EcoJogy: Among algae on rocky shores. 
LW to immediate subtidal, Aleutian Islands and south- 
eastern Alaska to Oregon, sporadically south to central 
California. 

Remarks: 

Apohyate anceps is a relatively primitive and more 
aquatic member of the genus, not closely related to A 
cal^brnica and A. pugettensls with which it overlaps 
throughout its range. Its affinities are closer to .4. ayeii 
(Hawaii) and a few other species with weakly devel- 
oped carpal lobe of gnathopod 2 (male). 

A- mceps exhibits .some character states that are 
more typical of genus Ptihhyak. These include the 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL. 3 NOJ Kov. 15. 2002, 


J09 



Fig. 52. Apohyale anceps (Barnard, 1969). Vlale (9.5 mm); female ov (8,5 mm), 
ELB Stn P4 . KW end Wickaninnish Vancouver I B. C. 

B, Female ov (1 1 mm). Amchitka 1. Aleutian Islands. 


AMPHJPACIRCA VOL 3 N0.3 Noi. 15, 2002. 


MO 



Fig 53. Apohyale aricep*; (Barnard, 1969b) Male (8.0 mm). Hazard Canyon Reef California. 

(modified from Barnard 1969b). 


moderately setose ba.saL flagellar segments and ped- 
uncular segment 5 of antenna 2 (male); the slightly 
elongate distorttedial spine of the peduncle of uropod 1 
and , i n the f emal e, the more strongly i mpressed un gu is! al 
groove of the preamplexing notch (Figs. 14 & 52). 

The species exhibits a north-south geographical 
cltne In some character states. Populations in the 
Aleutians tend to he larger than those in centra! and 
southern regions {males 1 3 mm vs 8 mm), the antennae 
are more strongly setose, and the inner margins of the 
peracopod dactyls tend to be more strongly pectinate. 
However* most character stales, ineluding the pre- 
amplexing notches of females, are virtually identical 
(Hg.5.3). 

Apohyale pu^ettensi^ (Dana) 

(Fig. 54) 

Adorchestes pugettensis Dana, 1 R.53: 901 , t. 61 , figs. 
6a-d, 

Hvaie pijg€tfensis Bulycheva I9.S7; II 1;— Bousficid 
1981 :79,figs. 9,10;- Austin 1985: 595;- Staude 1987: 
379;— Barnard & Karaman, 1991: 370. 

Apohyale pttgenensis Bousfield 2(K)Ia: 104. 
non: Hyaie sp. (Ricketts & Calvin 1948: #15.1) 

Material Examined: 

'7^0 specimens in 85 lots, Aleulliirs Ki Oregon and central 
California. hLB Matron refenjnees; BousHeld {195S, 1963, 


I96K), Bousne]d& McAllister (1962); BonsHeld & Jarretl 
(198!). 

ALASKA 

Aleutian Islands: Amchitka 1.* C. L O'Clatr Stn. IA-2* 
1971-74, 17 collns- - 46 speciinens; Stn lA-3* 1972-73* 2 
collns. - .5 specimens. Unimak I. , C. E. O^Ctalr Stn. IA-2, 
197;^ I im specimen. 

.SimtheiL^tern Ala.ska: ELB Stns, J963; A5(l), A !9({lh 
A22 (1 )* A23 (5), A57 (7), A [62 ( [3). 

EI.B Sirs 1980: S7B2 f9<?cf, 6 99j. 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

Queen Charlotte E^laiuLs : Kl B Sirs, 1 9.57: El 4a E2i (7+^2); 
HI4(44), H15M53: W6(IS), WI6(I). 

North Central Coast ELB Sirs, 1964; H24, Cox Pl.^Trutch 
f (53%8'N , 1 29^X5' W>, HW level - 1 c? ( 1 8.0 mm) Ncotype 
(slide mm,), CMNC 1983-1534* H48 (2). H.5.3(l), H.57(n. 
South Central Cciast: ELB Sin M2 f Emmond's Beach) - 4 
d'dT, H 99 - 

Northern Vancouver Island: ELB Sirs, 1 959: N I { 1 7);01 
(5 )* 02 (4)* 05 ( 1 1 ), 0 1 1 { 1), O L5 (4), 0 1 7 (2 1 ); V4a (20). 
V19(4), 

Southern Vancouver Inland: BLB Stns, 1955: F5 (8); P4 
(7), P5, NW erd of Lorg Beach, Wickana finish Bay, rock 
pools at and above MW levet, Aug. 2 - Im. ( 18 mm) (slide 
moum)(riR'd): I Q ov ( 1 2 mtnHslid!; mouni) (fig'iJ). C 1 35 
cfcf, 99;P6(7). 

ELB Stn. l964;H44fl2) 

ELB Sirs, 1 970: PTO! (5), P702 { 1 4), F7Q4 ( 2 1 ), V7m { 1 3), 
P7| I (I j, P7I2 (2), P7]4(l.5n), P7]9(5). 

ELB Sins, 1 975: P3h { I P5e (5). Pi 6a (7). 

ELB Sms. 1976: B28 «S), NIO (1 1 ). 


AMFHrPAQFlCA VOL. 3 IVOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


Ill 



Ftg. 54, Apohyale pugeiiensh (Dana), Male (18.0 mm); female ov (f2.0 mm). 
MW end Long Beach^ Vancouver L, 0, C 


ELB Stm. ] 977r Bfjb (6). B 10 f ] ), B 1 1 ( I ), B 1 2 ( 1 0). 

WASH-OREGON 

ELB Sms. JuEy-Auig., I966r W22 (2 fcm), W29 (6), W35 
(22), W.^6 C 16) W4Q (4), W45 f I). W52 (5). W57 (22), 
W5S(] im>. 

CALIFORNIA 

Momere> Bay, HW pcsoh, HLB coll. July, 1959 - 19. 


Additional Material 

British CoLumbia: Long Beach, V. I.. M. L, FJorian coJL, 
1 963 - 3 99, 9 iin; Rock 1 . Wouvver I., C. 1 obban col], 1 973: 
sev. spcns; VtcLoria. HW pools, R, Long coll.. May, 1 977 - cf 
( 1 3 mm) (slide naount), 9 (7 mm) (slide mount); Pori Alice, 
C. Cross colL* 1979 - I spm; Wouwer L, C. Levongs colL - 
several spins; Gregory [., G. C. Carl colL, 1958 - several CTC?, 
99. 

Northwestern USA. T. Sachanck oolL, 1976-77: Tatoosh I. 


AMPHIPACIKICA VOL 3 N0..1 Nov. 15, 2002. 


112 


Olympic peninsula ( 1 0), San Juan L ( 1 8), all ; Sai Juan 
L,C Staude uoll., 1^??- i suhad. C CV.5 mm)(slLde mount); 
San Juan I., R. M, O'Clair, Aug./7<i - suhad. mm) 

moiinL). 

Diagnosis; Male (to 1 8 mm). Body large, brightly 
pigmented in "saddle^back" pattern. Eyes medium 
large, lenticular, doreol ate rally positioned. Antenna 1 , 
peduncular segments 2 & 3 not shortened; flagellum 
10-12 segmented. Antenna 2 short (< 2X antenna 1 }, 
peduncular segments 4 & 5 stout, smooth, subequal; 
flagellum smooth, 10-12 segmented. 

Upper and lower lips regular, apical ly weakly 
pilose. Mandible, left Jacinia 5-deTiitate, spine row 
with 4 accessory blades; right iacinia bifid, with 3 
blades. Maxilla L palp slender, medium, tip slightly 
exceeding base of spine teeth of outer plate. Maxilla 2, 
distal setae of plates retricted to apical region. Max- 
iliipcd. palp segment 3 very short broad; unguis 
subconical, curved, shorter than palp segment 3, unguis 
small. 

Coxae I -3 as broad as deep, lower margins broadly 
rounded, hind marginal cusps prominent, Coxa 4 not 
broader than deep, rounded below, posterior excava- 
tion normal. Coxa 5 shallowly anterolobate. Coxa 6 
shallowly posterolohate. Coxa 7 broader than deep. 
CoxaJ gills narrowly sac- 1 ike. 

Gnathopod 1 basis and ischium virtually lacking 
hydrodynamic lobes; can>al lobe short, posterior lobe 
medium, lower margin with -15 short comb seme; 
prop>od deep^ slightly broadening distaily, Gnathopod 
2, propod short, deep, palmar margin gently convex, 
tmeveiily spinose, much longer than smooth convex 
posterior margin, 

Peraeopods 3 & 4, distal segments weakly spinose, 
cl as pi ng s pi n e vest i g ial , Peraeopods 5 6, bases broad , 
regularly rounded behind; segment 4 broadened, short, 
segment 5 short, 

Uropt^d L peduncle with 2-3 short outer marginal 
spines; outer ramus with 2 short marginal spines. Uro- 
pod 2, outer ramus with 1 -2 short marginal spines, 
Uropod 3 peduncle with 1 posterodistal spine; ramus 
tapering, slightly shorter, with 1 posterodistal marginal 
and 2-3 apical spines, 

Telson lobes short, apices bluntly rounded. 

Female ov (12,0 mm): Gnaiho|X>ds markedly dis- 
similar in form and size. Carpal lobe of gnathopod 2 
slender, deep. Brood lamella 2 short, very broad 
narrow ing to acute apex; marginal setae very short. 
Preamplexing notch sharply incised; unguisial groove 
short, arched; posterodistal lobe ot‘ peraeon 2 relatively 


shallow, broad, smoothly rounded anteriorly. 

DistribuEiema] ecuJogy: Frequently occurring in spray 
pools often nearly fresh to the tasieurt and above KW 
level along bedrock shores, from southern Alaska to 
central California. 

Remarks: Character states of the present extensive 
material closely match those of the original illustra- 
tions of Dana (IS53. figs. 6a -d), including the left 
mandible. The species is closely related to A. califarn- 
kv, A. hhhopae of the Hawaiian islands and A. ptmefata 
and A. habnargini of Japanese and Russian shores. 

The type material of Dana ( 1 853) appears no longer 
available. Accordingly, neotype specimens from the 
coast of British Columbia are designated above. 

Apohyak banargmi {E>erzhavin, 1937) 

Hyale Derzhavin, 1937: 93, pi. 4.2;— Gurj- 

anova 1951: 817, fig. 572. 

Hyaie tiovaezealandiae Bulycheva 1957: 100, fig. 36, 

Remarks: Dr. Takeheko Hiwatari (pers. comm,) is in 
the processor redeserbing this large intertidal counter- 
part species of A. pugettensis that ranges along both 
coasts of die Sea of Japan to the west coast ofthe .south 
Sakhalin I., Russia (Bulcheva 1957). Regrettably, 
diagnostic feauires of the gnathopods, brtxid plates, 
and preamplexing notch have not yet been described, 
These, as well as saltation ability, may be similar to 
tliose of Apohyale pugeuensts, 

Apohyak bussargifii differs from A, ptfgettemii by 
character slates of the key, and the following features: 

(1) in fKreopods 3-7, the paired locking spines are 
similar in size (vs. distal most spine slightly the larger); 

(2) in uropod 3, the ramus is short and broad, and 
subequaJ to the peduncle (vs. ramus slender and slightly 
ionger than peduncle), (3) in the telson. the lateral 
margin of each lobe has 4 small plumose setulcs(vs. tip 
of each lobe has a single seta). 

Apohyak califomica (Barnard) 

(Fig. 55) 

Hyak grandicortus caiifornica Barnard, !969b: 133, 
figs, 27-28, 

Wvtfic cfl/iybrmcfl Barnard 1979: 1 J6;— Bousfleld 1981; 
84, fig. 10;— Barnard & Karaman 1991: 369. 
Apohyak catijbrnica Bousfieid 200 1 ; 104, 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL. 3 NOJ Nov. 2002. 


J13 



Fig, 55Apohyaiecalifornica(B^rnmd, I%%), Male (8.0m[n);fema[eov(6.0mm). Monterej' Bay CA 


(Vlati^rial ^Kumin^d: 

BRITISH COLUMBIA 

South Cenlr^l i;oavt: Kl.B Sins ]9.^.V M2, Hnunond's 
Beach - 4 cfcT, ] 1 99- 

Northern Vancouver I.: hLR Sins, 1959: 01 LHcsquiaLal 
Matlakaw Pi. - I 9. 

Southern Vancouver J»: Long Beach, M. L. Plorian colL, 
196.^^ 99,9imm. 

WASH.-OREGON 

ELB Stns, l!966; W22, h. Grenv ille, south side Gray's Hbr.. 
WA -2 99: W36 Clallam Bay. WA -S 99, 12 irTi;W.>S,Seal 
Rocks, ORE - 1 Era. 

CALIFORNIA 

Monlcrcv Bay, P. Gly nn coll.. May 25/59 Id* (S.O mm) 
(slide raounl)(fiR'il), f'MNC 2002-0094 : 1 9 (6.0 ram) (slide 
mounl)(fig'dX NMCC 1961 -^7: Ibid , in Eftdo cfadt(iA960- 
IC?, ?99. 

San Diego. W. L. Klaive colL 1956 - 5 dd.7 99: 


MEXICO 

T iinte Bay, W, L. Klaue 1958 (2 lots) - 2 dd, 6 ira,, 
NMCCAcc. No 6174. 

Dtagtio5;is: Male (S O rnm): Eyes large, broadly al- 
mond-shaped, nearly meeting mEd-dorsaJIy. Anteima 
I, peduncular segment 2 distinctly longer than d, 
nagelluTiii 9-10 segmented. Antenna 2 short (<2X 
antenna I ), peduncular segments 4 sS: 5 Subequal in 
length: flagellum smooth, 30- 1 2-segmented. 

Mandible, left lacinla 5-dentate, spine row with 4 
accessory blades; right mandible with 3 blades. Max- 
illa i. palp short, lip barely reaching base of spine teeth 
of outer plate. Maxiiliped, paip segments stout; dactyl 
curved, shorter than palp segment 3. 

Coxae 1-3 slightly broader than deep, low er margins 
gently convex, hind margins with prominent cusp. 
Coxa 4 broader than deep, posterior excavation 


AMPHIPACIFiCA VOL. 3 NO,3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


]]4 


regular. Coxa 5 anterolobate, anterior tobe larger than 
psiieri or b be , Coxa 6 shal 1 ow I y pos terolotrate. Coxa I 
gills sac-like, large on peraeopod 6, 

GnathopfOd I , hydrodynarriic lobe of basis weak^ 
lacking on ischium; carpal tobe medium broad, margin 
with about 15 corT>b setae; pro pod subrectangular, 
slightly arched, palm nearly vcrticaL lower margin 
with distal group of short setae; dactyl regular. 
Gnathopod 2, hydrodynamic lobe small; carpal lobe 
minute; propod large, subovate, narrowing distal ly, 
palm oblique, with slight hinge tooth, slightly longer 
than smooth convex posterior margin: dactyl, tip barely 
reaching paired palmar spines. 

Peraeopods 3 ■& 4 stout, segment 6 posterior mar- 
ginal spines few, weak; dactyls shoii. Peraeopods 5-7 
.stout; bases broadly expanded, rounded posterior mar- 
gins weakly crenulate, each with small notch and surge 
seta. Peraeopod 5, segment 4 broad, segment 5 short, 
with strong postcrodistal clusters of short spines. 
PeraeopK.^ds 5 & 7, segment 6 slightly longesL with 
weak anterior marginal spines; dactyls short. 

Epimeral plates 2-& 3, hind comers finely acumi^ 
nate. Pleopods regular, Uropod 1 , peduncle with 2-3 
short outer marginal spines; rami with 1-2 short mar- 
ginal spine.s. Mropod 2, rami with 2 short maj'ginal 
spines, Uroixxl 3 peduncle with single postcrodistal 
spine; ra mu s tape ring, slightly shorter, with 1 postero 
distal marginal and 2-3 apical spines. 

Telson lobes short, broad apices bluntly rounded. 

Female ov (6,5 mm) Gnalhopixl i vjitually lacking 
basal and ischial hydrodynamic lobes; propod 
suB rectangular, similar to that of male. Cmathopcd 3, 
basis with medium lobe; carpus short, posterior lofie 
relatively long and narrow’; propod similar to, but 
heavier than in gnathopod I. Brood lamella on 
peraeopod 2 broiidly heart-shaped, nitnow'-Jy to bmadly 
acute apex. Preamplexing notch sharply incised; 
unguLsial groove .short, curved; postcrodistal Jobe of 
pcaron segment 2 large, smoothly rounded anteriorly. 

Distributional Ecology : Washington to R. Concep- 
tion, California, south to La Jolla, and northern Mex- 
ico [Barnard 1979), algal tuii\ MW~LW level. 

Remarks; .As noted in the key to species (p, J 07j 
Apahvak caJifbrnka is less closely related to A. attceps 
than Lo A. pngeni^fisis wdLh which it overlaps 
distribiitionafly and ecologically in the northern part of 
its range. 


Apohyaie punctata (Hlwatari & Kajihara) 

(Fig, 56) 

Siyak punctata Ki watari 8i Kajihara, 1981a: 26, figs. 
4-6; - Barnard & Karaman 1991: 370 ; — Ishimaru 
1994; 68, 

Remarks; Selected characters of Apohyak pmetaia 
illustrate character state of coxal plates, coxal gills, 
and sexual dimorphism typical of genus Apohyale, but 
not as clearly shown in illustrations of North American 
species. 

A.punctatu is allied with A. uragen'fi'i Hirayama, A. 
caiifonika Barnard, and other w ami-temperate and 
tropical species of the genus. Their character slates 
include relatively small size, and pro pods of the female 
gnathopods I Sl 2 that differ Mrtle in size (see key, 
p. 1 07). Apa/iyak ancept exhibits the primiti vc char- 
acter states that overlap to some degree w j th those of 
genus Pti7ohyak. These include a partially setose 
flagellum of antenna 2, a per-si stent carpal lobe in 
gnathopod 2 of the adult male, a pneamplexing notch 
with distinct unguisial groove, and a low intertidal, 
semi-aquatic life style, 

SereJ&kyale ii. g* 

Hyak .vpinldactyk complex Serejo, 200 1 : 479. Table 
I. fig. 8, and key. 

Type species: /-fyak spin/t/acty/a Chevreux^ 1926 
(present designation) 

Species: Screjafiyak splmyacn’/a (Clievreux, 1926: 
366. figs 1 3, 1 4);- Reid. 1 951 : 245, fig. 39);- Arresti 
1996: 79. figs. 2-8;-Serejo 2001: 480, figs. 1-2; 5'. 

na/hoi (Reid, 19,^9: 29, figs, I -2),S, spinr/actyhictes 
(Schellenberg. 1939; 130, figs, 17-22); S. youngi 
(Serejo, 2001 : 484, figs. 3-7). 

Diagnosis: Body smooth, medium in size. Antennae 
medium, unequal . Antenna t . peduncular segments not 
shortened. Antenna 2, peduncle 4 and flagellar seg- 
ments not (or little) plumose-setose posteriorly. Eyes 
large, subreetangular to subovate. 

Mandible, left lacinia 6-9 dentate; blades of spine 
row* 24>:5). Maxilla 1 , palp 1 -segmented, short. Max- 
illa 2, plates slender, inner plate with 2 unequal proxi- 
mal inner marginal plumose seta. Maxilliped palp, 
base of outer plate large; dactyl short, unguis short. 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL .1 N03 Nov, fS, 2002. 


\\5 



Fig. 56. Apohy{ile puncktra (Hiwateri & Kajihara, I9S I ). Male (3 2.0 mm); female ov (R.5 mm). 
K)'ushu, Japan: inijertidaJ. (after Hi w atari & Kajihara l9Sla). 


Coxae L4 shaMow, broader than deep, with poste- 
rior marginal cusp. Coxae 5 markedly anterolobate. 
Coxae 6 & 7 poster oiobate. Coxal gills appearing 
shorr, sac-like. 

Gnathop<id 1 normaU slightly sexually dimorphic; 
basis, anterodistal lobe medium; carpal lobe distinct 
broad; propod slightly broadening distady, lacking 
medial faciai guiding spine (male); dactyl simple. 
Gnathopod 2 strongly sexually dimorphic; basis (male) 
with medium to strong anierodistal lobe; ischium lo* 
bate: carpus lacking posterior lobe; propod subo%ate^ 
pai m elongate, strongly oblique, with weak hi nge toothy 
dactyl elongate, with hinge tooth. 

Peraeopcxls 3-7, dactyls inner margin striate, with 
stout striated median seta. Peraeopods 5-7, basis regU' 
larly bn>adcned, hind margin of peraeopod 5 with uotch 
and surge seta; segments 4 & 5 slender, not shortened; 
segment 6, distal locking spine small to medium. 

Hpimeral plates 2-3 smooth below, hind comers 
subreciangLilar to rounded. Pleopods regular. Uropod 
I , peduncle with strong posteromedial and postero- 
laieraJ spines; rami longer than pedtincies.each anned 
with marginal and one or more long strong apical 
spines. Uropod 2, outer ramus the shorter, with strong 
marginal and apical spines. Uropod 3 uni ramous, ramus 


subequal to peduncle, both with strong apical and 
occasional posterior marginal spine (s). 

Tel son lobes short, broad, margins unarmed. 

Female: Gnathopods 1 & 2 subsimilar, regular, 2 
slightly larger; basal hydrodynamic lobes medium. 
PreampSexing notch regular, lacking unguisia! groove 
or locking slit, but having very narrow anterior ape r- 
t u re : i ower poster l obe of peraeon 2 large . B rood pi ate 
2 medium large, spade-shaped, acute, margins with 
numerous very short, hook-tipped setae. 

Etymology: The patronym honours the perceptive 
primary work of Dr. Qistiana Serejo, Museo NactonaJ 
de Brasil, in defining this hyalid species complex, and 
her continuing significant contributions to knowledge 
of the Brazilian amphlpod fauna. 

Distributional ecology: Composite species are re- 
corded from surf beaches of the coast of Brazil and 
tropical and warm -temperate eastern N. & S. .Atlantic 
shores, from the coast of Africa and offshore islands, 
including Madeira, north to the Biisque coast of Spain 
& Bay of Biscay (Serejo 2001). Among green algal 
masses^ from mid to low tide levels; not recorded from 
the MediterraneaTi or Caribbean Seas. 


AMPHIFACIFICA VQL .1^ N0.3 Nov. ]5, 2001 


Remarks. The Serejohyale group is endemic to rocky 
surf beaches of the North and South Atlantic. The 
meda um-si z,ed iuii mal s are closest to spoci es of Apahyak 
but are distinguished mairtily by shallow coxal plates, a 
veiy large^ irregularly palmate gnalhopod 2 (male) and 
strong distomedial and distolateral spines on the pe- 
duncle of uropod I. Thefonnofthepropodofgnathopod 
2 (male) with its e^tcavate palm and elongate dactyl, 
appears grossly si mi far to that of the tal itrid Orchestki 
kosswl^i Ruffo, 195 J . A comparative table of charac- 
ter sUtles of component species of S^rejohyak is pro- 
vided by Senejo (2001 1 p. 491), 

Rujfohyaie n. g. 

Hyale Rathke 1S37 (part);-Ruffo 195K: 50;- Bar- 
nard &- Barnard 1983: 162;— Barnard & Karaman 
1991: 367. 

Type species: Hyak millon Ruffo. 3958 (present des- 
ignation) (see fig. 57, p. 120), 

Species: Ruffohyak incertu (Chevreux, 1913); R. 
jeanneii (Chevreux, 1913); H. milioti (Ruffo, 1958). 

Diagnasls: Body small to medium^ smooth. Pigmented 
eyes lacking. Antennae medium, slender, subequai in 
length, Antenna I , peduncular segments 2 and 3 not 
shortened; flagellum slender. Antenna 2, peduncular 
segment 4 and 5 subequai, medium stout flagellum 
short, segments may have tufts of fine setae. 

Upper and lower lips regular. Mandible, leftlacinia 
6-dentate, spine row with blades. Maxilla 1, inner 
plate short, apical setae long; |>alp mediuin short. 1- 
segmented. Maxilla 2. inner plate with single marginal 
plumose setae. Maxilliped regular, inner plate narrow; 
palp segments 1-3 stout, segment I relatively large; 
dactyl regular, unguis short. 

Coxal plates M regular. Coxa I slightly broadened, 
with weak posterior marginal cusp. Coxae 2^4 with 
small posterior marginal cusps. Coxa 5 shallowly 
acquilobate. Coxae 6 and 7 shallowly postenolobate. 

Gnathopod 1 I ittle or not sexual I y dimorphic; hydn> 
dynamic lobe of l>asis small; carpus elongate, with 
broad shallow lobe; propod (cf) deep, shorter than 
carpus, lacking mediofacial guiding spine; dactyl sim- 
ple, not exceeding palm. Gnalhopod 2, basts with med- 
ium hydrodynamic lobe; carpus lacking posterior lobe; 
propod large deep, palm regular^ obhque; dactyl short, 

l^raeopod 3-7 slender, dactyls very short with weak 
inner marginal seta; bases regularly broad, hind mar- 
gins rounded, lacking notch and surge seta; segnKnts 4 


and 5 slender, segment 6 lacking inner marginai clasp’ 
ing spine. 

Epimeral plates 2 and 3 subrectangular, hind comer 
squared. Uropod 1 . peduncle longer than rami, disto- 
lateral and distomedial spines small; rami with short to 
medium marginal! and apical spines. Uropod 2 short, 
stout, peduncle and rami regularly spinose, outer ramus 
the shorter. Urojxxt 3. peduncle short, very deep, lack- 
ing distal spinets); ramus very shoit, 

Tel son lobes elongate triangular, margins smooth. 

Female: Gnathopod 1 similar in form to that of the 
mate, but weaker, with relatively short carpus^ and hind 
margin of the coxa with shelf, but lacking a distinct 
posterior marginal cusp, Gnathopod 2 strong: propod 
may be large and powerful as in the male (R. jeanneii). 

Brood lamellae elongate, medium broad, apex 
rounded; brood setae medium long, with curled tips. 
Preamptexing notch shallow, obtuse, wdth short 
unguisial groove and anterior accessory slit; 
posteroventral lobe of peraeon 2 shadow, anterior 
margin slightly convex {R Jeannek fig. 58). 

Etymology: The genus is named in honour of Dr. 
Sandro Ruffo who first suggested ( 1 9.58. p. 50} that this 
morphologically distinctive complex of anophthalmic 
fresh water species of might '‘Justificr la separation 
,,,. en tin genre diffdrent'h It aJso recognizes Dr, 
Ruffe’s outstanding lifetime contributions to advance- 
ment of systematic knowledge of the Arnphipoda. 

Distributional Ecology: Ail species of this group are 
anophthalmic and occur in phreatic or subterranean 
parts of freshwater streams in near-Af rican continental 
islands of the western Pacific Ocean. Rnffohyaie milioii 
was collected in mos.s on rocks and under stones in 
waterfalls at 400 m a.s.l. on the island of Moheli, in the 
ComorCvS Islands, off Madagascar. H. jeanneii and H. 
incerta were taken in wells (Shimoni Grotto) and small 
lakes of Zanzi bar. 

Remarks: The mouthptirts f?. w ere not actually 
described or figured in Dr, Ruffo's original treati.se 
( 1 95 8 , p. 47) . An apparent lack of di agnostic character 
states of mouth parts of the type species might lessen the 
reliability of generic diagnosis based on other character 
states alone. However, the mouthparts of the closely 
similar species. R.jeamieli . w ere figured and described 
by Chevreux (1913) (Fig. 58), to which those of R. 
millori conformed “parfainnent" (Ruffo, toe, cit.). Ac- 
cordingly. character states of the mouthparts of R. 
jeaneiii are liere incorporated in the generic diagnosis 
of Ruffohyale. 


AMPHIPACFHCA VOL, 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


117 



Fig. 57. Riiffohyale milioU (Ruffo, 1958). Male (4.5 mm); female ov (3.5 mm). 
Madagascar, (modified from Ruffo, 1958). 



Hg, 58, Riiffohyale Jeannell (Ch^vTcux^ 1913). Female ov (9.0 mm). 
Subterranean lake, Kufde, Zanzibar ( CMN collections). 


AMPHiPACIFlCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov. \5, imi. 


ii8 


The close moq:>hological similanty of Ruffahy^te to 
&alt£iLor> subgroups of Hyale sens. laL suggests that 
these freshwater forms may have evolved from local 
seashore species ancestral to genus Apohyale, perhaps 
daring the late Cretaceous, before Madagascar split off 
from the African continent {BousfieJd 1984). Possibly 
near-contemporaneous !y, members of the freshwater 
neotmpica! genus Hyalelln may have evolved from 
ancestral marine members of an an- 

cestor within the family Hyalellidae (Bousfield 1996). 

Ritffohvale Jeanneli (Chevreux ) 

(Fig. 58) 

Hyak jearmeli Chevreux, 1913: 1 8, fig, 3;— Barnard & 
Barnard 1983: 716;— Barnard & Karaman 1991:369, 

IVlateriat examined: 

Subterranean lake, K utile, Zanzibar, J. Omer-Coopercoll,, 
Sept, 2, 1955 - 5 CPCf, 3 , CMNC 2(}02-(X>72. 

Diagnosis: Male (to 14 mm). Antennae medium long, 
subequal. Antenna U flagellum 18-segmcnted. Man- 
dibular left lactnia 6 1/2 dentate, Gnaihopod 2, propod 
large, palm oblique, lined with fine spines, dactyl 
slender, Uropod I , peduncle and outer ramus with 5^ 
marginal spines. Uropod 3 , peduncle stout, ramus 
very short. 

Female ov. (to 9.0 mm), Gnafhopod 2 powerfully 
subchelate, as in male, Preamplexing notch shaJlowly 
obtuse; unguis tal groove very short. 

Subfamily Kurltnae new status 

Kuriidae Barnard, 1964: 66, Barnard & Karaman 
199 1:403. 

Type Genus: Kuri^ Walker & Scott, 1903: 228. 

Genera: Krapp-Schickel, 1974, 

Diagnosis: Body small, mid-dorsal ly carinated; sur- 
faces finely pilose. Urosomc segments may be fused. 
Antennae short, subequal. 

Mandible regular, lacinia 4-5 dentate. Maxilla U 
palp I -segmented, medium, Maxilliped, paip slender, 
reduced; dactyl short, unguis attenuated. 

Coxal plate.? deep; coxae 2 and 3 each with sharp 
posterior marginal cusp, lower margins weakly cnen- 
ulate. 

Gnathopods slender, not sexually dimorphic; basal 
and ischial segments lacking hydrodynamic lobes (both 


sexes) (fig. 59); carpus and pnopod shallow, elongate; 
dactyl distinctly overlapping palm, 

Peraeopods 5 -7, bases broads hind margin strongly 
convex, crenulate; segment 4 strongly broadened and 
lobate posteriorly; segment 5 short; dactyls strongs 

Uropods 1 Sl 2^ peduncle, distolateral and disto- 
medial spines weak, Uropod 3 uniramous, ramus 
shorter than peduncle, with apical spines only, Tel son 
lobes medium, triangular, with apical seEa(e). 

Female: Brood plates distally rounded, marginal 
setae long, Pieamplexing notch utidescribed, presum- 
ably lacking. 

Remarks^ The genus Micropythia is unique among 
h y aJ id am phi pods in i acki ng sexual I y di morphic gnatho- 
pods. However, M. carinata Bate has several chaiac- 
ter states in common with Hyale ponticu Ralhke, 1 837, 
type species of family Hyalidae (sec Bulycheva 1957: 
90-9 J , fig, 30, These include (Fig. 59a, b): ( I ) body 
slightly or moderately mid-dorsally carinate; (2) mas- 
ill iped palp, distal segments weak, dactyl small, with 
slender elongate unguis; (3) gnathopod I , dacty l over- 
hangs .short palm; (4) coxal plates I md4 lack posterior 
marginal cusp; (5) peraeopods 5-7, hind margins of 
bases scalloped or crenulated; segment 4 broadened 
posterodistaJly; segment 5 short: dactyl large, simple; 
(6) uropod I lacking distal peduncular spines, rami 
each with long terminal spine; (7) uropod 3, ramus 
shorter than peduncle: (8) brocsd plate {gnathopod 2\ 
ovate/with longish marginal setae. 

In our opinion, resemblance of Kurin loft^immtu^ to 
Micropyihia carinata, and to Hyale poniica^ Type of 
family Hyalidae, is suffiently strong in most of these 
character states as to preclude convergence or homo- 
plasioLis similarity (Rg. 59). Family Kuriidae Barnard 
is apparently based on one species, K. /wij^wMwzcv.that 
can be included within the previously descrihed family 
concept of Hyalidae. its single unique character state 
(fused iiTOSome segments) is not generally considered 
to be of family level significance and cannot therefore 
stand alone. With the concurrence of Dr. Krapp- 
Schickei we hereby relegate Barnard's initial concept 
to subfamily status within family Hyalidae. This action 
recognizes both taxonomic similarities and disti ncti ve • 
ness of Kuria and MicropyTliin to other genera within 
the family. 

The original description and figures of Kuria len^i- 
did not include infonnation on pfeopods, brood 
plates, coxal gills, preamplexing notch, and some 
mouth parts. Moreover, the overlapping of coxal and 
basal plates appears incorrect (previously noted by 
Barnard 1969a) and posterior marginal cusps on some 


AMPHIPAC[FICA VOL. NOJ Nov. 15. 2002. 


]\9 



Fig. 59. Morphological comparison between hyalid subfamilies HyaJinae and Kurjinae: 

A. ffyale poniica: B. Micrapyihia caritiam; C. Kuria iongimanus. {modified from A. Krapp- 
Schickel & Bousfield 2002; B, Krapp-SchickeJ 1993; C. Walker & Scott 1903). 


AMPH[PACJHCA VOL 3 N0.3 Nov, 15, 2002. 


120 


Key to geaera of subfamily Kuriinae 

1. Urosome segments fused; gnmhopods 1 Sc 2, carpus and propcKis elongate, (engthof each > 3X depth; 

telson lobes narrowly triangular, longer than wide Kitria Walker and Scott. 

Urosome segments separate, regular; gnathopods 1 & 2, propod and carpus slender, length of each 
< 3X depth; tel son lobes short, broadly triangular Micropytfita Krapp-Schickel. 


anterior coxal plates may have been omitted. Cogni- 
zant ot these descriptive limitations, and that the mate- 
rial of Walker & Scott (1903) cannot be located [’or 
redescription (Krapp-Schickel , pers. comni,)t the pres- 
ent conclusions are tentative, pending acquisition of 
fresh material of Kuria kmgifrumus. Thus X^icropythia 
carbiata appears similar to Kurki, but uni ike all mem- 
bers of subfamilies Hyalinaeand Hyachelinae. in lack- 
ing sexually dimorphic gnathopods. and preamplexing 
notch on peraeon 2 (female). 

Structure of the coxal plates within subfamily Kuri- 
inae is also morpinologically distinct. Krapp-Schickel 
( 1 993: p. 741 , f tg, 507 ) noted in Micropyrhia that coxa 
2 is marked by a blunt rounded prolongation antero- 
proxi mail) along the insertion line. This coxal "hump’' 
occurs in both sexes but is stronger in mature females 
and reaches halfway along the insertion margin of coxa 
I. In addition, coxae 2 and 3 exhibit similar sharp 
posterior marginal prolongations or cusps. Krapp- 
Schickel (pers. comm.) suggests that coxae 2+3+4 may 
thereby act in concert as one plate. Moreover, the coxae 
are unusually large, masking most of the legs, and are 
inserted only half or less of their breadth at the body, the 
anterior half of eachcoxa being free. In the illustration 
of Krapp Schickel <1993, fig, 507), coxae I -3 (male) 
also bear an anteroproximal lobe tliat apparently sli ps 
under the anterior ponion of the peraeon segment 
proper and presumably provides further rigidity to the 
plate assembly, 

Hyachcliinae n. subtam. 

Type genus: Hyackdia Barnard, 1967. 

Diagnosis; Sexually dimorphic: ectoparasitic in the 
buccal cavity of marine tortoises, Body smooth, uncar- 
inated. Eye large, lenticular, black. Antennae short, 
flagellum 8^9 segmented. Antenna 2, peduncular gland 
cone small, segments 4 and 5 swollen (male). 

Mandibular left ladnia 4-5 dentate? Maxilla I |jalp 
very reduced (as in Hyalcllidae). Maxtlliped palp, 
plates slender; dactyl short, nail very small. 

Coxae 1-4 large, deep, smoothly overlapping, hind 
margins lacking posterior marginal shelf and cusp. 
Coxae 5 anterolobate: coxae 6 & 7 posterolobate. 


Coxal gills sac’like, broadly cros^-pleated, 

Gnathopods strongly sexually dimorphic, typically 
hyalid in form. Hydrodynamic lobe of basal and 
ischial segments weak or lacking in gnathopod I , 
weakly present in gnathopod 2 (lxH.h sexes). Carpus of 
gnathopod 2 (male) lacking posterior lobe, 

Peraeopods very smooth, lacking marginal arma- 
ture, distally weakly subchelifonii, palm with short 
cuved spines; dactyl stout, .striated. 

Pleopods strongly natatory, rami elongate, fully 
plumose'Setosc. Uropods I and 2 strong; rami vari- 
ously marginally setose, iiatatoiy ; IJropod 3 minute, 
peduncle subtriangular, lacking rami, Tclson fully 
bilobete. margins smooth. 

Female: Gnathopods I and 2 subsimtlar in size and 
form; carpal lobe slender; dactyl overlapping short 
palm. Brood plates elongate triangular, brood setae 
medium long, curl-tipped. Peraeon 2 with distinct 
subquadrate preampiesing notch, lacking unguislaJ 
groove; postero ventral lobe of peraeon 2 shon. small 
rounded. 

Distribution: Galapagos Islands. Eastern tropical Pa- 
cific; south of Dakar, eastern tropical Atlantic; on 
Chelonia, 

Remarks: Uropods 1 and 2 appear to have become 
secondarily modied to form a powerful forward thrust- 
ing tail fan in which the bilobate telson remains as a 
possible steering mechanism. The coxal and basal 
plates of the peraeopods remain large, uniform, and 
smoothly overlapping, presumably hydrodynamically. 
and facilitating rapid swimming, as between host tur- 
tles, The pleopods are also exceptionally strongly 
natatory. 

The peraeopeds are unusually smooth, perhaps 
lessening irraiion of host buccal tissues. Am phi pod 
ectojiarasites of fishes within primitive supcrfamilies 
Lysianassoidea (e g,. Opisidac, Trischizostomatidae) 
and Pardaliscoidea (e g., Haitcd^ have a similarly 
laterally compressed natator>' body form. In the more 
advanced Iphimedioidea (e.g., Lafystiidae), the body 
form is more dorso ventral ly depressed, and less strongly 
natatory. In the highly advanced Caprellidea (family 
Cyamidae) that are ectoparasitic on marine mammals. 


AMPHIPACrnCA VOL 3 NQJ Nov. 15, 2002. 


123 



Fig. 60, Hyackella iortugae Barnard, 1967. Male ( 7.1 mm); female ov { 6.9 mm). Dr)' Tortugas. 
(modified from Barnard, 1967; preamplexing notch courtesy C. Serejo) 


the body form is highly depressed doreoventrally and 
nonmatatory. However, limb segments are secondarily 
hydrodynamically lobale presumably to streamline the 
surfaces exposed to strong water currents induced by 
the rapidly swimming host, Hyachelia, Apohyaie, and 
Serejohyaie may have diverged from an immediate 
common shore-dwelling ancestor. Vacating of inter- 
tidal habitats for a epiparasitic life style on marine 
turtles may have coincided with eariy stages of broad- 
ening of the Tethyan- Allan tic ocean. 


Hyach^Ua Barnard 

Hyacheiia}, L Barnard, 1967; 1 20 figs 1^. 

T^pc species: Hyacheiia tonugae Barnard, ] %7, origi- 
nal designation and monotypy. 

Species: Hyacheiki iortugae Barnard, I %7: 1 20, figs. I - 
4;— Ruffo 1975: 482;— Barnard 8l Karaman, i99l: 
123, 


AMPHIPACIFJCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov, 15. 2002, 


122 


see Barnard ^ Karaman 1991: 122. and 

Fig. 60, p. 124, 

Remarks: This aberranE ecEoparasitie hyalid has been 
placed within the Ceinidae by Barnard &. Karatnan 
(1991). How ever Hyachelia tortugae bears little or no 
resemblance to Ceina egtegia (ChiltonJ R83),the type 
st^ecies of family Ceinidae Barnard, 1972. 

Morphological similarities with the genus Hyale aie 
much more prcnoimccd, especially in uropod 3 and 
tel son. Major differences with Hyale^ howe% er^ lie in 
unopods ] and 2. the rami of which are large, flattened, 
each with inner margin of one ramus serially spincee. 

HycicheUa is here treated as a unique subfamily 
memto within family Hyalidae. 

Drs. Krapp-Schickel and Serejo very recently found 
a prcamplesing notch in mature female specimens of 
Hyachetia torwgae (Fig, 60), strengthening the present 
decision to remove the genus from family Ceinidae and 
erect for i t a new su bfami ly w i Lhi n fam i ty Hy aJ idae . 1 1 
apparently occurs also in families Hyalellidae and 
Dogielinotidae and, in modified form, in family NaJ- 
nidae. However, the preamp] ex ing notch has not yet 
been found even within the most primitive "palustrar 
genera of family Taliiridae (e,g., Eorchestla, Prot- 
orchesda}. It would appear, therefore, that this feature 
occurs in talilroidean groups that preamplex aquatically 
and not terrestrially. 

DISCUSSION 

Systematic Reorganization of family Hyalidae. 

The recent i ncrea^e i n know ledge of the sy sternal - 
ics of hyalid am phi pods, now numbering - 1 10 de- 
scribed species, necessitated further reorganization at 
subfamily and genus levels. In brief rev lew, Bulycheva 
(1957) had regrouped species formerly assigned to 
family Talitridae sens.Jat ., within family Talitridae 
Raflnesque, 1815. and two new families, Hyalidae and 
Hyalellidae. This complex was combined with sevej-al 
related but some w hat aberrant family- level taxa, within 
her new ly proposed superfamily concept, Talitroidea 
At that time, family Hyalidae encompi^ssed about 35 
species, almost entirely littoral marine, in 5 genera 
{Hyaie Rathke, 1837 sens. Jah : Parhyale Stebbing, 
1899; AllorchesK^s Dana, 1849; Ceina Della Valle, 
1893; and Najna Derzhavin, 1937). The semi- 
terrestrial and leirestrial species, by far the largest 
number of species, were retained within family 
Talitridae (Bousfietd 1984). 

Subsequent growth of family Hyalidae has been 
rapid, summarized in part by Barnard Karaman 


(1991). Ceina had been transferred to family Ceinidae 
and Najna to family Najnidae by Barnard ( 1 972), and 
Aihrehestes to Hyalellidae by Hendrycks &. Bousfield 
(2001), However, Hyalidae now included l^Iehita 
Barnard, 1 970, Has well, 3 879, Mlcropythla 

Krapp-Schi ckel , 1 976, and Parallorchesies S hoemak er, 
1941 was separated from rar/?yfl/cStebbing, 1899. As 
noted elsewhere in this study, three littoral marine 
genera {AHorchesies, Parhyalelia, and In^^nia) had 
been more suitably transferred to family Hyalellidae. 

Recognition of broader diversity within hyalids of 
the Canadian Pacific coast of North America had been 
initiated by Bousfield (1981), Numerous regional 
species, mostly new to science, could be assigned to 
Paralhrcheste^i Shoemaker, or to the unw ieldy genus 
Hyuk' Rathke sens. lat . Rheneti c cl uste r analysi s y iel ded 
several species groups that, especially within Hyafe, 
could be recognized informally at new- generic and 
subgeneric levels. Several species names that were 
intended to be given full taxonomic treatment in a 
companion study, were illustrated more or less fully. 
However, the new taxa were not then fully described, 
nor type material and type localities designated be* 
cause of the abrupt discontinuance of the intended 
taxonomic outlet- Some names, newly proposed but 
not formally described at that time, remained 
taxonomicaily unavailable {nomina nnda}. Some have 
been replaced in this study, but ail are now validated by 
the present full descriptive accounts (ICZN 1985). 

Hxtension of preliminary analysis of the N. Ameri- 
can Pacific groupings to the far more extensive world- 
wide hyalid fauna, has here revealed a broad consist- 
ency of applicability and thus legitimacy of character 
states selected (Figs. 1 - i 5). Thus, as j ndicated in the 
phonogram of 20 generic character state similarities 
(Fig. 61 ), the present world fauna of -110 described 
hyalid species can be separated broadly into two major 
groupings: (I } to the left, is a cluster of four relatively 
primitive (P.A, indices of 4 to 14), mainly low -inter- 
tidal and subti dal, natatory genera (including ProtahyaJe 
w ith 4 subgenera); (2) to the right, is a groupi ng of fi ve 
generally more advitneed genera fP. A. Indices of 10 to 
20) that arc more intertidal in vertical station, and 
saltatory in locomotory behaviour. The genus Hyaie 
Rathke sens, scr. . as noted above (p. ii 00), is somew^hat 
intermediate between the two in possessing character 
slates that are mainly natatory and pJesiomorphic, but 
also a few that appear saltatory and apomorphic, and 
one (unique among hyalid genera) that is apparently 
specialized for prcamplexus in a highly lotic environ^ 
ment. 


AMPHLPAQFICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2O0L 123 


Id 

£ 


2 

£ 


5! 

I 

I 





I 

I 

4; 



(Q 

I 

01 


0) 

I 

£ 


% 

£ 


I 

I 

q: 


to 

I 

I 


-SJ 

£ 

o 

Q. 




I 



Fig. 61 . Phenogram of morphological similarities and possible phyletic relationships 
within world genera of Hyalinae (excluding enigmatic genus Neohule). 


Species of the natatory group tend to have well 
developed hydrodynamic lobes on the basis and/or 
ischium of gnathopods 1 Sc 2 (especially in the male), 
a strongly developed distolateral peduncular spine on 
uropod J. and large su bo vale distally rounded brood 
plates with elongate marginal setae, but the posterior 
margins of coxae 1-4 are generally tion-cuspate. In 
peraeopods 5-7, the posterior margins of the bases tend 
to be crenulated, with conspicuous notch and surge 
seta^ one or two clasping spines are present distal ly on 
segment 6, and dactyls are relatively large and simple 
with small interior marginal seta. This relative primi- 
tive natatory group encompasses slightly more than 
half the described species of Hyalidae* and species of 
all but Farallorchesies Anil subgctuis Boreohyale tend 
to be small in size and tropical -warm-temperate in 
distribution^ In the most primitive genus 
Parallorcfiestes (P. A. Index - 4), the palp of maxilla 
I is uniquely 2-segmented:, the inner ramus of uropod 
3 is distinct, and the telson is splnose apicaliy. 


The five genem to the right (Fig. 61 ) are relatively 
advanced. All but Ruffokyale are more or less inter- 
tidal, amphibious, and capable of saltation in air. They 
have posteriorly cuspate coxal plates, and the brood 
plate of gnathopod 2 is large and elongate, often spade- 
shaped, and the margins lined with very numerous,shoft, 
hook-tipped setae. Conversely they are characterized 
by weakly developed gnathopodalhydrodynatnic lobes, 
peraeopodal notch and surge setae, distal clasping 
spine, small dactyls, and small distolateral spine of 
uropod 1 . Of these five genera, the more primitive 
Parhyaie and Ptilohyale have a small inner ramus on 
uropod 3, distinct or variously fused to the peduncle. 
ParhyaJ^ is also distinguished by a stroiigly developed 
cusp on the posterior medial margin of coxa 4, and 
rarely by setaeonpeduncleTofantenna 2. both lacking 
in Piiiohyak, The advanced genera Apohyak and 
Rttffohyisk lack pronounced distal peduncular spines 
both of which are strongly developed in Serejohyal^, 
SaJiaioty ability is marked in Ptilohyale and especially 


AMPHIPACIRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. :5, 2002. 


124 


(0 

I 

I 


<4 

I 

I 




I 



I 



8 


I 


I 


ea 


0.0, CICL 



Fig. 62. Phenogram of morphological similarities and suggested phyletic relationships within 

North Pacific species of Parallorchesies. 


strong En Apofiyale and Serejohyak. 

As indicated in the phenogram of 20 generic charac- 
ter state similarities (Rg. 62), the 13 described species 
of Parailorchestes can be assigned broadly into two 
major groupings and ? minor components. The 
ocfioti^n^!^ group ( I ), on the left ^ encompasses 4 rel- 
atively primitive (P. A. indices of 10‘I2) carinated 
subarctic species, tn the centre is a loosely reiated 
g]X)up of sis species of which (3) (P, minima and P. 
nuda) and (5) (P. kabatai and P. zibelUna} appear to 
fonn natural species pairs. 

On [he extreme right (7) is the advanced species pair 
P, asiatica and P. ameficana (P. A, indices of 2S.29), 
whose similari ties were detailed by Tzvetkova (1990). 
In advanced species P. trispinosa (6), the dactyl dpsd" 
gnathopod I (cf) are bifid (cf. Mlorchesm), and the 
ramus of uropod 3 has three marginaJ spine groups. 

Results of phenetic cluster analysis of subgeneric 
and species com|x»nents of genus Proihohyaie, based 
on 17 paired generic charticler states, are graphed in fig. 
63 (characters and states as outlined in Figs, 1-3, etc.). 

Species of subgenus Boreohyale cluster in [wo main 
subgroups on the left. The seven regional species ex- 


hibit an unreduced peduncular segment 2 of antenna I , 
the basal hydrodynamic bbe of gnathopod 1 is littie 
developed or lacking (males), and well developed on 
the basis of gnathopod 2 in males only. Antennal 
flagella tend to be elongate and the mandibular left 
[acini a is typically .5 -dentate. Component species are 
mainly cold-temperate in distribution (Table III). 

Species of the nominate subgenus Protohyaie clus- 
ter in one main subgroup of six species to the right. The 
subgenus, exemplified by the type species P. (PJ fre- 
(Stout), shows reduction of peduncular segment 
2 of antenna 1 , and development of hydrodynamic 
lobes on the basis of gnathopods i & 2 of females, as 
w ell as strong development on both basis and ischium 
of males. To the extreme right is a somew hat aberrent 
member of the subgenus, P. iP.) guasave, a member of 
the advanced P, macrodactyla subgroup, having a 
relatively high P.-A, index of 23. This sub-group is 
distinguished by the specialized form of gnathopods I 
&2(d') (Fig. 41). Counterpartspecies of this subgroup 
occur in Hawaii and Japan (Table IV). Component 
species are tropical and wann-temperate in distribution 
(Table HI). 


AMPHIPACIHICA VOL, 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


125 


Subgenus 

Bofooffvale 


Subganus 

Laptohyafe 

n r 


Submenus 

Protohyala 


■Q 

I . 

^ 4i 


I 



s 

i 

o> 


"jr 


c 


I 




Fig, 63, Phenogram of morphological similarities and possible phyletac relationships 
within genera and subgenera of genus Pnnohyaie on the North American Pacific coast. 


Ck:cupy]ng a central position on the graph is the 
monotypic subgenus L^prohyaie^ the sole sjiecies of 
which (L. hfigipaipa} has a low to intermediate R-A. 
j ndex of 1 5 . The species differs fmm other protohyaJ i ds 
in a small eye, 7-S dentate leftlacinia, strongly sexually 
dimorphic maxilliped palp (distal segments elongate in 
males), and markedly differing size and stoutness of 
peraeopods 3^ vs. peraeopods 5-7, This subgenus is 
apparently endemic to the North American Pacific re- 
gion wherein its single species occurs infrequently and 
discontinuously (Fig. 64C) 

Detailed distribution of species representative of 
genera and subgenera on the Pacific coast of North 
America are portrayed in Fig, 64. Wide-ranging spe- 
cies (occurring in 4 or more biogeographic sub^ones of 
Table III) are actually in the minority { 1 1/29 species). 
A few are species of the n at at or group (e.g., 
Paraihrehestes cyw-twii and F, (Boreokyale^ seticorms 
(Fig. 64 A,B). Several natator species including Far- 
aUorchestes aiaskensis, F. niida. F, rrispfnosa, F.{8or- 
eohyah) hiwatarii and! P. {B}. octmn are restricted to 
one or two zonejj, even where field collecting has been 
rel ati vel y i ntensi ve. Leptohyak longipaipa i s somC’ 


W'hat intermediate; it mnges narrowly from part of one 
boreal zone, through two zones, to the middle part of 
a fourth boreal zone (Fig. 64C). 

By contrast^ within the saltator genera all four North 
.American species of genus PtUohyak and Api^hyaie 
occur across five or more biogeographic subzones. The 
less aquatic and higher level intertidal species are 
presumably exposed to greater ranges and more rapid 
changes of physical factors than aquatic species. Spe- 
ci es of fami I y TaJ itridae (e . g. Jraskorchestin traskiana)^ 
living at and above the HW level, exhibit even wider 
reg! onal d i stri bution s ( Bo usfi eld 1 9S2) , Ptilohyak 
pitimulosa occurs in brackish pools and estuaries that 
are moderately warm in summer and free of heavy 
winter icing but may undergo relatively rapid diurnal 
changes, Apohyak pu git lens is apparently thrives in 
spray pools, at and above the HW level, that are 
exposed to short- and long-term extreme changes of 
temperature and salinity, Thus, greater ecological 
'hardiness" is a probable factor contributing to the gen- 
erally wider ranges of saltatory versus natatory hyaiid 
species. 


AMPKIPACIKICA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002, 


126 



Fig. 64. Distribution of representative species of hyalid genera on the North American Pacific coast. 
A, ParaHorchesres cowani n* sp; B. P. (Boreohyaie) ^enconus n. sp; C* P^Leptohyaie) 
l&n^Hpaipa n,sp. D* (Stimpson); EL (Dana), 


Biogeograph i cal Analysis. 

The disiribution of 41 described species of family 
Hyalidae in the North Pacific Basin (excluding the cen- 
tral Hawaiian archipelago) is represented in Table III. 
Some 30 species of primitive natators (swimmers) are 
encompassed within 3 genera and 3 subgenera, and 1 1 
species of advanced saltators (jiimpers) are contained 
in only 3 genera , The number of described species in 
the eastern N, Pacific is now 29, about twice the num- 
ber (14) known from the western N. Pacific. These 
ratios may soon change since Dr. Hiwatari is currently 
describing a number of new, mainly naiatoiy taxa from 
Japanese coastal waters. The eastern Pacific total 
combines 25 natators and 4 saltatorss in the western 
Faille, 7 natators and 7 saltators. In balance, therefote, 
the eastern I^cific has a higher proportion of primitive 
natators whereas the western Pacific has relatively 


more advanced saltators, 

A more detailed examination of natators reveals that 
24 species (in 2 genera and 3 subgenera) occur in the 
east, but only 7 species in 3 genera and 2 subgenera are 
known from the western N Pacific. The numbers for 
east and west lota! more than 30 because a single 
species (Paraliorchestes ochotensh) has been recorded 
from both regions. Within Paralhrche.^tes, all 13 
sjiecies are subarctic and boreaU extending south to the 
northem Sea of Japan Sea in the west, and central 
California in the east. None occur in subtropical 
Hawaii. Similarly within subgenus Boreohyaie, all 
species are coid-temperate and range south to the Sea 
of Japan in the west, and from .Alaska to central Califor- 
nia in the east. .Again, none occur in Hawaii. In the 
east, several species of natators (e.g,. Parailorchestes 
ricMrchoni, P. (Boreohyaie) oclairae) show^ quite re- 


AMPHIPACIfiCA VOL. 3 N03 Wov, 15. 2002. 


!27 


Table 111. Distribution of subfamily Hyalinae in the North F^cific coastal continental region. 
(Exclusive of Hawaiian and central North Pacific islands). 


TAXON 



BJOGEOGRAPHIC ZONES 





1 

2 

3 

4 

s 


7 


9 

10 

FaraihrrMstes Shoemaker 











(Brandt) 


X 

X 

X 







zlbeUini (Derzhavin) 


X 

X 








aiikitica Tzvetkova 



X 








aidskemi^ n. sp. 



X 








carinata n. sp. 



X 

X 







cowuni n. sp. 



X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

7 


americuna BrJUSHeliJ 



X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 



kubatai n. sp. 



X 

X 

X 

X 

s? 




mimma n, sp. 





X 






subcarittsta ri. sp. 





X 

X 





nuda n. sp. 






X 





trixpinoia n. sp. 






X 





iebiondi n, sp. 






X 

X 




FrotohyaU n, g. 

F. (Boreohyale) n. subg. 











pumiUi (Hiwtiiari & Kajihara) 


X 









sp.] {=schnudti hvasa) 
tamberti n. sp. 


X 



X 

X 

X 

X 



jarrettae n. sp. 





X 

X 

X 

X 



seUcorms n. sp. 





X 

X 

X 

X 



hi'^atam n, sp. 







X 




neorionemis n. sp. 







X 




ocuhita n. sp. 







X 

X 



ociairi n. sp. 







X 

X 



P, iL^Ftohyak) tonglpdlpa n. sp. 

P. iFmlohydle} n. sabg. 





X 

X 

X 

X 



corailinicoia fHirayamia) 
Jn^quens (Stoat) 

X 








X 

7 

mohfi n, sp. 









X 


yaqiii (Barnard) 









X 

X 

camdbta (Barnard) 









X 

X 

gUiiyjtve (Barnard) 

Lelehim J. L. Barnard 










X 

iihigaki (Hlrayama) 

X 










Finhyate J^iebbing 











itawaiens\5 (i^na) 

X 










iwiisai (Shoemaker) 

Ptilohyale n, g. 

X 










pfdoceros (Derzhav in) 


X 









btirbicormi (HHwat. & Kajih.) 
pbwmlosa (Shrnpson) 


X 



X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

Apohyale n. g. 











baisargini (Derzhavin) 


X 









puficiatu (HLwatari & Kajihara.) 


X 









unigensis (Hiwat. & Kajih.) 
ancepx (J. L. Barnard) 


X 


X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X? 


pagettensis (Dana) 




X 

X 

x 

X 

X 

? 


caUfornica (J. L. Barnard) 






X 

X 

X 

X 

X 


Biugeugrapiiic Zones; 1. S. China Sea; 2. Sea of Japan; X Sea of Okhotsk & W. Bering Sea; 4* E. Bering sea & Aleui- 
ians; 5. SiiulhcasLcm Alaska; d. Nonhem B. C; 7. Soathern B. C.: 8. Wash ingion -Oregon to Central California: 
9. Soulhern Canfornta; Ifl* Baja California. (Natator species ane above, saJfcatcir species below, the dOLblc line). 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOL 3 NO, 3 Nov, \5, 2002, 


m 


T able IV, Genera and subgenera of Hyalidae and iheir counterpart species 
\n Eastern, Cenira], and Western North Pacific Regions. 


Pacific North America 

Hawaiian .Archipelago 

Japan & Russia 

A. Natatory (n on-cuspate) spp. 
Faratiorchestes cawani n. sp 

— 

Forolhrchesfes ochotensh ( Brandt ) 

P. amertcaft^i Bousfield 

- 

P, asiaucaTj.v^xkova.. 

P. kabatai n, sp. 

- 

P. zihhelifia {DsTzhaviT]) 

Protofiyale (Boreohyale^ kimberti 

n, sp. 

P, ( Frotohyale) frequen^i f Stout, , 
1913) 

se V eral spp, ( B aja Cal i forn ia ) 

P. (ProTohyaie) uffinis (Chevreu’i^) 
(Barnard 1965, 1970) 

F. (Prowhyale^sp (c A. rubra} 

{ Barnard, 1970), 

P, (Borecfhyak) putniia (H. & K.) 
P, (Boreohyak} sp. (Hivvalari, i.p.) 
P. tPoreohyale) sp, (- P, doUfusi 
Bulycheva) 

P (Prc/tohyak} (Chevreux) 

P, tProiohyak) corailimcola (Hir- 
ayama); several other small spp, 
(Hiwatari, i, p.) 


F. (Protohyaie) iaie Barnards 1 970) 


macrodacryia subgroup 

F. (Prorohyaie) zuaifue (J. L. 
Barnard, 1979) 

macrodactyla subgroup 

P (Pr(?loltyaie} honolitlHensis 
{ Schel 1 en berg) ; ( Barnard , 1 979b) 

nicfcrodactyla subgroup 

F. ( Pratohyale } ho n o! hue ns is 
(Schel lenberg^ I93S) 

- 


P. (Diplohyale} didendacfyta 
(Hirayama) 

- 

Lekhua vvaitnea (Barnard) 

Leiehua ishigokknsis (Hirayama) 

B. Saltatory {cuspate) species 

Farhyak hawaietiJil^ (Dana) 

F. myacka K, H, Barnard 

Parhyak ha^'aiensis {D^A) 
Parhyak iwasai Shoemaker 

Ftihhyafe plumuhsa (Stimpsoii) 

Ftihhyak hie (Barnard) 

Pdlohyak i?arbicomis (H.& KJ 
Pdioh. ptiioceros (Derzhavin) 

Apohyale anceps (Barnard) 

A. pugeuensts (Dana) 

A. cali/orfitca { Barnard) 

Apohyak hishopae (Barnard) 

A. bassarpm (Derzhavin) 

A. punctata (Hiwatari & Kajihara) 
A. uragensis (Hirayama) 


stricted ranges, mostly in southern British Columbia 
and northern Washington state. Limitations in collect- 
ing methodology may have contributed to these nar- 
row ranges. Subgeims Lepiohyak is endemic to the 
eastern Pacific, The range of its single known species 
is boreal , s i mi 3 ar to that of wider- nangi ng species w it hi n 
subgen us B/:>reohyale. 


By contrasty all species of subgenus Protofiyale are 
warm temperate and subtropical ranging north to south- 
ern Japan in the west, and north from Baja California to 
southern California in the eastern Pacific. At least two 
s pecies of the s ubgen us occur i n Hawai i . Genus Ijtlehifa 
occurs only in subtropical Japan in the western Pacific, 
but two related species ane also knowm from Hawaii. 


AMFHIPAQRCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Kov. 15, 2002, 


129 


A similariaxcnomicexatnination of Ihe saltators re- 
veals that two species of genus Parhyak are known 
from subtropical and warm-terTiipcrAte waters of Japan; 
but none has yet been recorded from wann-temperdte 
Baja California in the eastern Pacific. Two species are 
also known from the Hawaiian archipelago. Two 
species of genus PtUohyaie are know ti from the teni' 
perate^ warm -temperate w^atersof the western Pacific, 
one froiti the eastern Pacific , and Ptilohyale iole is also 
known from Hawaii. Within the most cnteriidal and 
advanced genus Apohyaie, four species occur in temp- 
erate to tropical waters of the western Pacific, only one 
of which (A. bassargmi) ranges north to Hokkaido. Of 
the three species in the eastern Pacific, only one {A. 
callfomica) is warm-temperate , and the mast primitive 
and least terrestrial species^ A. ancepy, ranges into sub- 
arctic waters of Alaska and the .Aleutians. 

Bingeographictil counterpart taxa of the casLern, 
centraf and western Paeifie reg;ions. 

The present study indicates that, based on numbers 
of described species, diversity within North Pacific 
hyalids is highest along the North Amencan coast (29 
spp.)Jowerin the western North Pacific (Japan, Korea. 
Russia) ( Ii4 spp.), and is lowest in the central Hawaiian 
archipelago (9 spp.) fl ^ble IV). Paradoxically, the 
diversity of hyalids at generic, subgeneric and sub' 
group level is highest in the western Pacific (8), and 
lowest along shores of the central (6) and eastern Pac- 
ific (6). Also, the number of shared genera and 
subgroups is equally high betwtsen western and centra] 
(6) and western and eastern regions (6), and least be- 
tw een ceniraJ and eastern regions (4). 

Thus, the modern hyalid amphipod fauna of the 
western North Pacific (Japan) and the Hawaiian archi- 
pelago exhibits a relatively high degree of similarity, 
whereas that of the Hawaiian archipelago and the 
eastern Pacific is relatively low , The differences may 
be partly attributable to greater extent of subtropical 
and warm-temperate marine regimes in Hawaii and the 
western Pacific. The latter includes southern Japan and 
the eastern East China Sea, and Sea of Japan (Table 111, 
zones I and 2), The extent of w ami- water regimes of 
Baja and Southern California on the Pacific CMSt of 
North Americ’a is much le&s (Table III, zones 9 and 10), 

Although regional hyalid species inventories are not 
yet complete, particularly for the western Pacific 
(Hiwatari, pers. comm.), ihe present results at generic 
and higher group levels wititin family Hyalidae seem 
unlikely to be altered significantly by further species 
descriptions. 

The present result for hyalid amphipods contrasts 


with that of Myers (1991) who compared selected 
oorophioidean amphipod faunas of the Hawaiian archi- 
pelago with those of adjacent Pacific subregions. 
Corophioidean species group similarity was found 
highest between Hawaii and the tropical Eastern Pa- 
cific, less strong with Indo-Pacific regions, and virtu- 
ally non-existent between Hawaii and the western 
North Pacific, including Japan. 

Plausible accounting for the differing results re- 
mains speculative. Indirect evidence suggests that 
antiquity of the Hyalidae and other talilroidean 
amphipod fatnilie^sis nmrkedly greater (extending wdJ 
back into the Mesozoic), tiian that of the relatively 
modem superfamily Corophioidea and its family sub- 
groups (Bousfield 1982, 200 la, 200 lb; Bousfield & 
Shih 1 994). The "hoi spot" origin and geological his- 
tory of tlie Hawaiian- Emperor island chain, c-onnected 
the "’proto" Hawaiian Archipelago with western Pacific 
continental shores initially 40+ m. y. previously (Gra- 
hain 1981). Perhaps , therefore, a n al 1 opatr i c model of 
speciation might reasonably accrount for current taxo- 
nomic similarities, at both ends of the chain but origi- 
nating ai the westem end, in amphipod groups that 
experienced similarly lengthy evolutionary hi.'stories. 

REFERENCES 

Arnesti, A. 1989. Parhyak ejephraTor, a new species 
of talitroid amphiptxl from the bay of .Arcachon, 
France. Bull, Mus. Nat'l Hist, uatur. Paris, 4e ser. 
I U Sect. A,no hlOl-Ho. 

Arresti, .A. 1996. Descripcion del anfipodo marl no 
Hyah spinidacryia Chevreux, 1 926 (Crustacea, Am- 
phi peda, G ammaridea) en el Pai s V asoo , M i sc. Zool , 
l9(2):79-9l,Rflg&. 

.Austin, W. C. 1985. An annotated checklist of marine 
invertebrates in the cold temperate Northeast Paci- 
fic Amphipoda. Khoyatan Mar. l-ab 3: 5S8-623. 
Barnard, J. L. 1952. Some Amphipoda from central 
Caiifornia. Wasmann J. Biol, 10 : 9-36, 9 pis. 
Barnard, J, L. 1954. Marine Amphipoda of Oregon. 

Oregon State Monogr., Studies Zool. 8: 9-36, 9 pis. 
Barnard J. L, 1 955. Gammaridean Amphi poda (Crust- 
acea) in the collections of the Bishop Museum, 
Bernice P. Bishop Museum Bull , 21 S: 1 -46 , 20 pis. 
Barnard, J. L. 1962. Benthic Marine .Amphipoda of 
southern California. Families Amphilocbidae, L.eu- 
coihoidae.Stenothoidae, Argissidae, Hyalidae. Paci- 
fic Naturaiist3: 3 16-163, 23 figs. 

Barnard J. L. 1964 Revision of some famjUe.s, genera, 
and species of gammaridean Amphipoda. Crust- 
aceana?: 49-74, 2 tables, 

Barnard, J. L 1965. Marine Amphipoda of Atofis in 


AMPHlPAaFlCA VOL. 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002. 


BO 


Micranesia. Pp3C. U, S. Natl Mus. 117: 459-552^ 35 
tigs. 

Bama]id J. L 1 967. A new genus of gaJapaganajnphipocl 
inhabiting the buccaJ cavity of the sea turtle Cfteionia 
mydas. Proc. Symp. Cru^taceaat EmakuJum, Jndia 
I: 1 19-125, 4 figs. 

Barnard. J, 1 969a. The families and genera of marine 

gammaridean Amphipoda. Buff LI, S. Natl. Mus. 
271: !-535, 1 73 figs. 

Barnard, J. L, 1 969b. Gammaridean Amphipoda of the 
Rocky Inlertidat of Califomia: Monterey Bay to La 
JolEa. U.S, Nat l Mus. Bull. 2SB. 230 pp„ 62 figs. 

BarnardBi L. 1970. Subliitoral Gammaridea (Amphi- 
poda) of the Hawaiian Islands Smths. Conlr, Zool. 
34: ) 286, 3 80 figs. 

Barnard, J, L. 1972. The marine fauna of New Zeal and: 
Algae living littoral Gammaridea (Crustacea Amphi- 
poda). Mem. New Zealand Oceanogr. Inst. 62; 7- 
21 6,109 figs. 

Barnard, L L. 1974. Gammaridean Amphipoda of 
Australia, Part IL Smiths. Contr. Zool. 139: 1-148, 
S3 figs. 

Barnard,! L. 1975. Amphipoda: Gammaridea, pp. 
313-366, pis. 70^8.5 In R. t. Smith Sl J T Cariton 
(eds). Light's Manual: Intenidal Invertebrates of the 
Central California Coast, 3rd ed, Univ. California 
Press: 716 pp. 

Barnard,!. L 1979. Littoral Gammaridean .Amphipoda 
from the Gulf of Califoraia and the Galapagos Is 
lands. Smiths. Contr. 271: 1-149, 74 figs, 

Barnard, J. L. & C. M. Barnard, 1 883. Freshwater 
amphipods of the World. Vols, 1 & 2: 830 pp., 50 
figs. 7 graphs, 98 maps, 1 2 tables. Mt. Vernon, V A, 
Hay field Associates. 

Barnard, J, L. & G. S. Karaman 1 99 L The families and 
genera of marine gammaridean Amphipoda (except 
marine gammaroids). Part 2. Rec, Australian .Mus. 
SuppL 13 (Parts I & 2): 866 pp., 1 33 figs, 

Barnard, K. H, 1916. Contributions to Uie crustacean 
fauna of South Afric“a. 5. The Amphipoda, Ann, S. 
Afr, Mus. IS: 105 302, pis 26 28. 

Bate, C, S. 1 S56. On the British Edriophthalma. Rept. 
Brit. Assoc. Adv. Sd for 1855; 18-62, pis, 12-22. 

Bate, C,S. I S62, Catalogue of the specimens of amphi- 
podous Crusliicea in the collection of the British 
Museum, London, British Museum: 399 pp., I- la 
+ 2-58 pi. 

Boro w sky, B. 1984. The use of the males' gnathopods 
during precopula in some gammaridean Amphipoda. 
Crustaceana 47(3): 245-250. 

Boudrias, M, A. 1991. Methods for the study of 
am phi pod swimming; behavior^ morphology* and 


fluid dynamics. Hydrobiologia, 221: 11-25, 

Bousfield, E. L, 1958, Ecological Investigations on 
shore invertebrates of the Pacific coast of Canada, 
Nafl Mus. Can. Bull. 147; 1 04- 11 5. 

Bousfield, E. L. 1963. Investigations on sea shore 
invertebrates of the Pacific coast of Canada, 1957 
and 1959, 1. Station List. Nat 'I MusXan. Bull, 185: 
72-89. 

Bousfield, E. L. 1968. Studies on littoral marine Enver 
tebrates of the Pacific coast of Canada, 1 964. I. 
Station List. Nat" I. Mus. Can. Bull. 223: 49-57. 

Bousfield, E. L. 1973, Shallow- water Gammaridean 
Amphipxls of New* England. Cornell Lfniversity 
Press, Ithaca, N. Y, 302 pp,, 69 pJs. 

Bousfield, E. L, I98L Evolution in North Pacific 
Marine Amphipod Crustaceans . in G.Ci.E. Scudder 
Sl j. L. Reveal (eds.). Evolution Today. Proc. 2nd 
Intemat, Congr. Syst. Evol. Biol.: 69-89. 1 8 figs. 

Bousfield, E. L, 1982. Amphipoda: Gammaridea. pp. 
254-285. In Synopsis and Classification of Living 
Organisms, S. B. Parker (ed.). McGraw-Hill, New 
York, Vol. 2: 254-285; 293-294. 

Bousfield, E. L.1984, Recent advances in the system - 
atics and biogeography of landhoppers (Amphi poda: 
T a1 i tri dae) of the I ndo -Paci f i c regi on : pp, 171-210. 
In F, J, Radovsky, P. H. Raven, & S. H. Sohmer 
(eds ). Prc3c, Symp. Pacif. Biogeogr,, Bishop Mus. 
Honolulu, May 26, 1982, 

Bousfield, E. L, 1992. New sandhoppers (Crustacea: 
Amphipoda) from the Gulf coast of the United 
Slates. Gulf Res, Reportds 8 (3); 271-283, 7 figs. 

Bousfield, 1996. A ceniribution to the reclassification 
of Neotropical freshwater hy^ell id amphipods 
(Crustacea; Gammaridea, Talitroidea). Boll. Mus, 
civ. St. nat. Verona 20; 197-224, 17 figs. 

Bousfield, E, L. 2001a, Phyletic classification as ap- 
plied to amphipod crustaceans of North America 
.Amphipcifica 3(1): 49-1 19, 

Bousfield, E, L. 2001b, Biogeographical analysis of 
gammtddean amphipod fauna based on their phyletic 
classification. Polsk. Arch. Hydrob. 47 (3-4): 335- 
351. 

Bousfield* E. L. & E. A. Hendrycks 1994. The am- 
phipod superfamily Leucothoidea on the Pacific 
coast of North America. Family PIcustidae: Sub- 
family Pleastinae. Systernatics and Biogeography, 
Amphipacifica I (2): 3-69, 38 figs, 

Bousfield. E, L, & N, E. Jamett 1981. Station lists of 
marine biological expeditions of the National Mus- 
eum of Natural Sciences in the North American 
Pacific cmstal region, 1 966 to 1980. Syllogeus34: 
1 - 66 . 


AMPHrPAanCA VOL, 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 31HI2. 


131 


Bousfield, E. L., & D, E. McAllister 1962, Station list 
of the National Museum marine biological ejtf>ecli 
lion to southeastern Alaska and Prince William 
Sound, Nat" I M us. Canada Bulb 1 S3: 76-103. 

Bousfield, E. C & Shih, C -t (9^. The phyletic 
classification of amphipoci crustaceans: problems in 
resot ut ion. AmphiiMicifica 1 (3): 76-134. 

Bousfield, E. L,, & N. L. Tzvetkova 1982 Studies on 
EJogielinotidae (Amphipoda, Talltroidea) from the 
shallow waters of the North Pacific region. Marine 
Invertebrates of Coastal Biocenoses of the Arctic 
Ocean and the Pacific Ocean. Explorations of the 
Fauna of the Seas 9: 76-94, 7 figs. 

Bow man, T. E., & H. E. Gruner 1 973, The families and 
genera of Hyperiidea. Smiths. Conlr. Zool. 146: i- 
64,81 figs, 

Brandt, F. 1851. Krebse. in Dr, A. Th. v, Middendorff's 
Reise in den aussersten Norden undOsten Sibifiens 
sen 2, ZooL 1: 77^ 148, pis. 5, 6. 

Bulycheva, AN.] 957, The Sea fleas of the USSR and 
adjacent waters (Amphipoda: Talitroidea). Keys to 
the Fauna of the USSR- Acad, Sci. USSR 65: 1-185, 
66 figs, (in Russian). 

Chevneux, E,, 1888. Troisieme campagne del'Kiron- 
del le , 1 8 87, S ur q uel q ues crustaces amphi pode.s d u 
littorale de Acores. Bull. Soc. Zool. de France 13: 
31-35. 

Chevreux, E. 1891, Quatrienie campagne de I Hiron- 
delle. 1 888 . H}*ak grinuitdi and Stenothoe doifusi 
Bull. Soc, Zool. France 16: 257-262, 10 figs, 

Cherxreux, E, 1907. Diagnoses d 'amphi podes nouveaux 
recueillis dans les possess! onsfrancaises de I’Oceathe 
par M. L, Serrated irecteurdu laboratoirederecherches 
biologiques de Rikitea, Bull. Mus. Hisl. Naiur. 
1907:412-417. 

ChevreuXjE, 1908. Diagnosesd "amphi podes nouveaux 
provenantdes campagnes de la Princess-Alice dans 
r.^dantique nord. Bull Inst. Oceanogi. Monaco, 
122: i-B, 

Chevneux E. 1911. Campagnes de ta Meika. Les Am- 
phi podes d'Algerie et de Tunisie, Mem. Soc, Zool , 
France 23: 145-285, pis, 6-20. 

Chevreux, E. 1913. Amphipoda. Crustaces II. Voy- 
agede 07h. Alluaud et R. Jeaniuei en AfriqueOrieiitaJe 
(1911-1912). Resultats Scientifiques: 1 1-22, 6 figs, 

Chevreux, E. 1925. Amphipodes I. Gammariens, Voy- 
age de la Goelette MelUa aux Canaries et au Senegal 
(\ 889- 1 890). Bull Soc. Zool. France 50; 278 ■ 3 1 U 
12 figs, 

Chevreux, E. 1926. .Amphipodes I. Gamanariens 
(suite). Voyage de la goellette Meika aux Canaries 
et au Senegal IS89- I890. Bull. Soc. ZooL France 


30: 365-398, figs, 13-35. 

Chevneux E. & L, Fage 3925. .Amphipodes. Faune 
de France 9: 488 pp., 4.38 figs. 

Chilton, 1883. Further additions to our knowledge of 
the New Zealand Crustacea, T rans. & Proc, New 
Zealand Inst. 15: 69-86, 3 ph, 

Chilton, C, 1885. Notes on a few Australian Eridrio- 
phthalma. Proc. Linn. Soc, N, S, Wales 9: 1035- 
1044, pis. 46-47. 

Chilton, C. ] 91 3. The Amphipoda of the Scottish 
National Antarctic Expedition. Trans, Roy. Soc. 
F^inburgh 48: 455-520 , 2 pis. 

Chilton. C. 1917, Further notes on the New Zealand 
amphipod Hyale grenfeUi Chilton, Ann, Mag. Nat. 
Hist.,ser. 8, 19: 273-276, 3 figs. 

Conlajit K. E. 199] . Preoopulatory mating behaviour 
and sexual dimorphism in the amphi pod Crustacea. 
Hydrobiologia 223: 255-282. 

Costa, A, 1853. Relazione sulla meinoria del Dottor 
Achille Cofite, di ricerche su’ crostacei amfipodi 
del regno di Napoli. Rend. Soc. Reale Borbonica, 
Accad. Sci. n,s, 2: 167- 178. 

Dana J. D. 1849, Synopsis ofthe genera of Gammaiacea. 
.Amer. J. Sci. Sl Arts. ser. 2, 8: 135- 140. 

Dana, J. D. 1 853. Crustacea. Part H. United States 
Exploring Expedition 14; 689- 1 61 8* atlas of 96 pis, 

Della Valle. A, 1893. Ganimaritii del Golfodi Napoli. 
Faune uiid Rona des Golfes von Neapel und der 
angrenzenden Meeres-Abschnitte. Monogr. 20: 948 
pp; atlas of 61 pis. 

Derzhavin, A. N. 1937. Taiitridae of the Soviet coast 
ofthe Japan Sea. Issled. Morei SSSR. 3: 87-1 12. 6 
pi, (Russian with English summary ). 

Duncan, K. W, 1 985. Cuticular micros tructure of terrest- 
rial Amphipoda (Crustacea, family Taiitridae). Zool, 
Anz.215: 140-146, 

Filhol, M, H. 1885, Description de noveilesespecesde 
crustaces de genie Al hrchestes. Bull, Soc , Ph 1 1 om, 
Paris ser. 7, 9: 54. 

Friend, A. J. 1987. The terrestrial amphipods (Amphi- 
poda: Taiitridae) of Tasmania: Systematic?: and Zoo- 
geography. Rec. Austral. Mus.. Suppf. 7: 85pp„75 
figs, 

Giovaninrii, R, 1965, Revision des especes benthiques 
Mediteiraneennes du genre Hyaie* Rec. T rav. Stat. 
Mar. d'Endoume, Bull, 37 (54): 277-340, 23 figs, 

Graham , A . L. 1 98 1 . FT ate T ecton ics, pp. - 1 77. in_ P, M ^ 
Greenw'ood (ed.). The Evolving Earth, Cambridge 
U n i V . Press, 264 pp. ,111 ustr. 

Griffiths, C. L. 1973. The Amphipoda of southern 
Africa. Pan L The Gammaridea and Caprellidea of 
the Cape Province west of Gape Agulhas. Ann. S. 


AMPH[PACIRCA VOL 3 NOJ Nov. 15, 2002, 


]32 


Afr. Mus. 67: 9] -1 8], 21 figs. 

OriffithSi.C L 1994, The Amphtpoda of southern 
A r ri ca. Part 4. The G am mari dea and Caprel 1 idea of 
the Cape Province east of Cape Agalhas, Ann. S, 
Afr, Mus, 65 (9): 25 1 -336 J 8 figs, 

G ri ff i ths, C, L. 1 976, Some new and notable A mph i poda 
from soulhem Africa. Ann, S, Afr. Mus, 73; 93-104, 
6 figs, 

Gurjanova, E, F, (951, Bokoplavy moTTeii SSSR i sop- 
nedeJ’nykh vod (Amphipoda-Gammaridea). Akad. 
Nauk SSSR, Oprod, po Faune SSSR 41: 1029 pp„ 
705 figs, 

Haswell, W, A, 1 879, On Austraiian Amphipoda, Proc. 
Linn, Soc, N, S, Wales 4; 245-379, pis. T-tl. 

HasvvelL W, A, 1 880. On some new amphipodsfrom 
Australia and Tasmania, Proc. LinnSoc, N.S.Waks 
5; 97-105, pis, -7. 

Heeley , W. 1941, Observations on the life histories of 
some terrestrial isopods. Proc, Zool, Soc. Lend, 
111:79-149. 

Heller, C, 3 866, Beitrag ?:ur naheren Kenntniss der 
Amphipotles des adriatisehen Meeres. Denkschr. 
Kaiseri. Akad. SVissensch, Marhem. Naturiv, Classe 
Wien 26 (2): 62 pp, 4 pis, 

Hendrycks, E, A„ & E. L. Bou,sfield 200L The am- 
phipod genus Aflorchestes in the North Pacific re- 
gion. systemalics and distribulionaJ ecology^ Amphi- 
pacifica 3(2): 3-37, 1 8 figs. 

Hirayama, A. 1980, Gammaridean Amphipoda of the 
intertidaJ reef flatof Ishigaki Island, Ryukyu Archi- 
pelago. Part I. Genus fiyale. Pubk Selo Mar, Biol, 
Ub.,25(l/4): n 1-156, 17 figs, 

Hiwatari T, & T. Kajihara, 1 981 a. Taxonomy of the 
family Hyalidae ( Amphiptxla, Crustacea) inJapan. 
J. Three new species of the genus Hyak. Fioc, Jap. 
Soc, Syst. Zool, 20; 21-34, 10 figs. 

Hiwatari, T. & T, Kajihara, 1981b, Ibid . A new species 
of the genus Hy^k. I bid , 20: 35-40, 4 figs. 

Holmes, S, J. 1904, .Amphipod crusLiceans of the ex- 
pedition, Harriman Alaska Expedition; 233-246, 
figs. 1 18-128. 

Holmes, S, J, 3 905, The amphipods of southern New 
England, Bull. L?. S. Bur, Fish. 24: 459-529, unnum- 
bered figSt 13 pis. 

Hurley. D, E, 1957, Studies on the New Zealand A mphi- 
podan Fauna, No. 14. The genera7/y£*f^and Af/(?r- 
c/icitci- (Family Tali tridae). Trans, Roy. Soc. New 
Zealand 84 (4): 903-933. 9 figs, 

ICZN. 3985. international Code of Zoological Nomen- 
dalure. 3rd Edition, IntematicnaJ Trust for Zoolog- 
ical nomenclature, London. 

ICZN, 1999. International Code of Zoological Nomen- 


cl aiu re , 4th Edi tl on . F n temational T nist for Zoolog- 
ical nomenclature, London, 

Ishimarn, S, 1994, A catalogue of gammaridean and 
ingolfiellidean Amphipoda recorded from the vicin- 
ity of Japan, Repl, Sado Mar. Biol. Sta, 24: 1 -86. 
Kvasa, M, 1934, A new amphipod {Parhyak kuriiensis 
n, sp4from Urup, Jour. Fac, Scl. Hokkaido Imp, 
Univ,^ Zool,,^ ser, 6 (3); 1-7, I fig, 2 pis, 

Iwasa, M. 1939, Japane.se Talitridae, J. Fac. Set. Hok- 
kaido Imp, Univ., ser, 6, (Zool,) 6(4): 28.5-288, 3pls, 
9-22. 

Johnson, S, E. 1968, Occurrence and behaviour of 
Hyak grandicornis^ a gammarid amphipod com- 
mensal in the genus Acmaeu, Veliger. suppl. 2: 56- 
60, 4 figs,, pl;S, 2-3, 

Johnson. S, E,. 1986, QrderAmphipc3da,pp, 372-381. 
in Sterrer. W., Marine Fauna and Flora of Bermuda. 
John Wiley & Son,s, 742 pp. 

Kobayashi. T. S,, S. Wada, & Fi, Mukai 2002. Ext- 
ended niiaTernal care observed in ParaHorchesies 
ochotensfs (Amphipoda, Gammaridea, Talitroidea^ 
Hyalidae), J. Crust, Biol. 22(1): 135-342, 
Krapp-Schickel, G, 1974, Camill Hdlers Samlung 
adriatischer Amphipoden - 1866 und Heute, Ann, 
Naiurh. Mus, Wien 78: 319-379, L28 pis. 
Krapp-Schiekel,G, 1976, Marine am phi pods from 
Pantelleria and Catania (Sicily). Biili, Zool, Mus. 
Univ, Amsterdam 5: 31-45, 9 figs, 
Krapp’SchickeLG, 1993 Family Talitridae: 728-768, 
figs, 495-525, In S, Ruffo (ed,). The Amphi|x>da of 
the Mediterranean. Part 3. Gammaridea, (Melpht- 
dippidae to Talitridae),! ngoffl ell idea, Caprcllcdea. 
.Mem. Inst. Oceatiogr, (Monaco) 13: 577-813. 
Krapp-Schickel, T, & E, L. Bousfield 2002, The 
talitmi dean amphipod genus Rathke^&ens.str,, 

in the North Atlantic and Mediterranean regions, 
.Amphipacifica 3 (3): 1-14, 5 figs. 

Kioyer, H, 1845. Carcinologiske bidrag. Naturh. tidskr, 
(N.R.) 1 : 283-345, 3 pis; 403, 453-638, 2 pis, 
Kunkd, B, W. 1910, The Amphipoda of Bermuda, 
Trans. Conn. Acad. Arts. Sci. 16; 1-1 1 figs. 
Ledoyer, M, 1978, AmphipC5des gammariens (Crust- 
acea) des biotopes cavitaires organogenes recifaux 
de file Maurice (Ocean Indien), Bull, Mauritius 
ln,st. 8: 1 97-332. 43 figs. 

Ledoyer, M, 1 979a. Les Gammariens de la pente exteme 
du Grande Recif de T ulear (Madagascar) (Crustacea 
Amphipoda), Mem, Mus, Civ, Stor. nat. Verona 
(ser. II) 1979: 149 pp., 91 figs, 

Ledoyer, M. 1979b, Expedition Rhumphius II (1975) 
Crustaces prasites, communeaux, etc, VF, Crustaces 
Amphipodes Gammariens, Bull, Mus. Nain, Hist, 


AMPHIPACIFICA VOl^ 3 N0.3 Nov. 15, 2002 


133 


naFser.4. I, i079, Seel A (U: 137-18], 19 figs. 

I edoyen M 1984. Les Gammariens (Crustacea Am^ 
phipoda) dies herbiers des phenrogams inarine de 
N ou vel le Ca I edoi m e (region de Noumea) , Mem . 
Mus. Nal Hist., naL n.s, ser, A 7jOoI. 129: 1 13 pp., 4S 
figs., 4 tables, 

l eile, F. P. P,, Sc Y, Wakabara 1989, .Aspects of post 
marsupial deveiopmenlof Hyaie fiwciia ( Dana, 1853) 
(llyaltdae. Amphipoda), Bull. Mar. Sei, 45{ 1): 85 
97, 50 figs. 

Libertiiii, A. s&T. KrapP'Schlckei 2001 ; Clirumosouie 
number and conventional karyotype in eight marine 
am phi pod species, PoL Archiv, Hydrobi 01^47 (3- 
4y 465-471, 

Lowr>,J. K. & R.T, Springthorpe 2002. Am phipoda: 
Families and Subfamilies. Hyalidae Bulycheva, 
1957, http: /./Crustacea meF - 
Lincoln, R.J- 1979. British Mari ite Am phipoda: Gam- 
ma ridca ,658 pp. 280llgs, 3 pis. London: British 
Musuem (Natural History), 

Lindemann, D, FI. 1991. Ne^ leiTestrial amphlpods 
(Crustacea: Amphipoda: Talilridae) from Mexico 
and Central Americii. Can, J. Zool. 6Ki 2323-2337, 
l.ucas, FI. 1846. Les aAmphipodes. Hisioire naturelle 
des animaux anicules, premiere partie crustaces, 
arachnides, myriapodes et hexapodes. E.xpl oration 
scierHifique de I'Algerif pendant des annees 1840, 
1841, 1842:51-56, pL 5, Paris, 

Macnae,W, 1953. On a small collection of am phi penis 
from T ristan da Cun ha. Proc, Zoo, Soc, London 
122: 1025-1033, 1 fig. 

Margolis, L.,T. t. McDonald, & E. L. Boustleid 2000. 
The Whale-Lice (Amphipoda: Cyamidae) of the 
Northeastern Pacific region Amphipacinca 2(4): 
63- N7. 

Matcus A., Sc E. deO. Maieus 1962. Une nouvelle 
especc 6'Hyak (Amphipoda) de lit Medilerranee. 
Vie et Milieu. 12: 595-603. 5 figs. 

Mateus A., & E. de O. Mateus 1965, La validite de 
I'espece Hyale gufbaniani ( Amphipoda). FAibl, Inst, 
ZooL Facul. Sci. do Porto 95: 9*23. 2 figs., 2 pis, 
Milne Edwards, H. 1830, Exirail de lecherches pour 
senn r a I ‘hi stoi re naturel le des cmstaces amphi]:»ixles. 
Ann. Sci, Nat. 21): 353-399, pis. 10, M. 

Miner, R. W., 1950. Field book of seashore life. Put- 
nam & Sons , New York , 890 pp., 25 1 pis, 
Mortno, H. 1972. Studieson thcTahtridae (Amphipoda 
CrusLacea) in Japan. L Taxonomy of Tahreh^siia 
and Orchestoidea, PubL Seto Mar. Biol. Ijib .21(1); 
53-63, 5 figs. 

Myers, A. A. 1985, Shallow-watert coral reef and 


mangrove Amphipoda (Gammaridea) of Fiji. Rec. 
Austral. Mus, Suppl, 5; 144 pp,+ 1 09 figs. 

Myers, A. 1991 . 1 low did Hawaii accumulate its biota? 
.A teslfrom the Amphipoda, Globa. E:cf>l.& Bioget>gr. 
Letters 1: 24-29.2 figs. 

Nagata. K. 1965. Studies on Marine Giimmaridean 
Amphipoda of the Seto Inland Sea^ ML Publ. Seto 
Mar. Biof. Ub. 13(4): 291 -326, 44 Hgs. 

NicoleL H. 1 849. Hisioria ftsica > politica de Chile 
Begun dtjcumcntos adquiridos en esta repubhea dur- 
ante dace anos de residcncia cn el la y puhl icado bajo 
los auspicios del supremo gobiemo por Claudio 
Gay.- Zoologia 3; 1: 1 5-3 1 8. 

Pollock, L, W, 1998. A praciical guide to the marine 
animals of northeastern North America. Rutgers U. 
Press, 367 pp., illuslr, 

Ralmesque, C S, 1 8 1 5. Analyse de la Nature outableau 
de rnniversDtet des corps organises pat C. S, Rafin- 
esque. Ralenne. (see Siebbing, T. R. R.1S88: 88), 
Rathke, H. 1837 Zur Fauna der Krym. Ein Beiirag. 
Mem, Pres. Acad. Imper, Sci. St. PetersLxJurg. 3: 29- 
454. pis. 10. 

Ratlike. H. 1843 Beiirage zur Fauna Nonvegens 
Verhandl.. Kaiserlixchen. Leopoldinisch-Carolin- 
Ischen Akad, Narurf. 20 (1): I -264. PL, 112. 

Reid, D. M. 3939, Hyafe rulmitihoi sp. n., Crustacea, 
Amphipoda) ,Ann. Mag. Nat, Hist. scr. I I 3: 29-32, 
2 figs, 

Reid, D. M. 195 L Report on the Amphipoda (Gam- 
ntaridea and Caprellidea) of the coasl of tropical 
W^eslAfnca. Allantcde Report!: 189-291 . 58 figs. 
Richardson, A. M. M., E. T. Chester, St R. Swain 2001. 
BnocKl plate morphology and its implications for 
brooding in an ecological series of lalitrid antphipods. 
Pols. Arch. Hydrc^biol, 47(3-4): 63 1 -642. 

Ricketts , F. F. J. Calvin, 1948. Between Pacific 
Tides (fourth edition, l%S).edJ .Wf Hedgpclh. 614 
pp,, jllustr^ Stanford U. Press. 

Ruffo, S. 195L Stiidi siii Crostacei Anfipodi, XXV. 
Notesulla species meditenxinec del genere Otrhesda 
(Amphip. Talitridae). Att. Accad. Agric. Sci. L-et. 
Verona(6) L H9, I map. 

Ruffo* S. 1958. Arnphjpodes terrestres et des eiiux 
continenlales de Madagascar* de Comores et de la 
Reunion. Mem, Inst. ScL Madagascar Ser, A , XII: 
3.54^n9figs, 

Ruffo, S. 1975- Hyachelia torwgae L L. Barnard 
(Amphipoda, Hyalidae) nell'oceanico Atlantieo. 
Boll, Mus, Gv. Stor. Natui. Verona 2: 482. 
Satnte-Marie, B. 1986. Feeding and swimming of 
lysianassid amphipods in a shallow cold-water 


AMPHIPACIHCA VOL 3 N03 Nov. 15* 20t)2. 


154 


hay. .Mar. Biol., 91: 219-229. 

Salman, S. D. 1986. Parhwle hasrtums, a new spe 
ties of talitrici amphiprxl Irom I he Shutt Al-Arab 
region, Iraq. Crustaceana 50(3): 287-294, 

Sars, G, O. 1 890 Amphipoda. An accounl of the 
Crusiacca of Norway, I ; 7 1 1 pp, 240 p]s„ 8 sup. pis, 

Schellenberg, A. 1938. Lilorale Amphipodcn des 
iropischen PaziOks. Kungl. S\enk. Vcicnskap. 
Handl. str. 3, 16(6); 1-105. 

Schellenberg. A. 1 939. Amphipoden des Gongo-Mund- 
ungsgebieies. Rev. Zool. & Bot. .Afritaines 32: 1 22 
138,29 figs. 

Scrcjo, C. S. I W). Taxonomy and distribution of the 
family Hyalidac (Amphiptxla. Taliiraidca) on the 
Brazilian coa.si, pp. .591-616. Jn Schram F, R. & 
Vaupel Klein J. C. von (eds,>. Crustaceans and the 
Biodiversity Cnsis. iToc. Founh Ini. Crust. Congr. 
Amsterdam. July 20-24, 1998, Vol. I, Brill, Leiden. 

Serejo, C,S. 2(K)] . A new species of aniphijxjJ from the 
Brazilian coast, with redcscriplion of Hyate spini- 
dactyla Chevreux, 1925 1 Crustacea. Amphi|X)da. 
Hyalidae). Zrxxsystema 23(3): 470-492, 8 figs. 

Shoemaker. C. R. 1941. A new genus and a new 
species of Amphipoda from the PaciHc coast of 
North .America, Proc. Biol. .Soc. Wash. 54; 183-1 86, 

Shoemaker. R. 1942. Am phi pod crustaceans col- 
lected on the Presidential Cruise of 1938. Smiths. 
Misc.Coll. lOK M ); 52pp„ 17 figs. 

Shoemaker. C. R., 19.S6. Observations of the arnphi- 
pod genus Parhyak. Proc. Ij. S, Nai'l, Mus. H)6 
(3372): 345-358, 4 figs. 

Sivapraka-sani, J. L. I %9. .Amphipoda from the east 
coast of India - 2 Gammaridea and Capielhdea. J, 
Bombay Nat. Hist. Sex:. 66; 297-309, 4 figs. 

Smith. S. I. 1873, Crustacea ex Isopoda. p. 556. Jn 
A. B. Verrill, Rc|xii1 iiixin the invertebrate animal.s 
of Vineyard Sound kept. L S. Fish, Com. 1: 295- 
778. 4 figs.* 38 pis. 

Smifh R, I., &J,T, Carlton I975{edsj. Light's Manual. 
Intertidal Invertebrates of the Central California 
Coast. 3rd ed. Lniv. Cal lYess. Berkeley: 716 pp. 

Sneath, P. I I. A., & R. R. Sokal 1973. Numerical Tax- 
onomy. W. IT Freeman, San Francisco: 573 pp. 

Staude.C. P, I987. Amphi poda Gammaridea. pp. 346- 
39 1 . In Kozloff, A.(ed.), Marine invertebrates of 
the Pacific Northwest. Hniv, Wash. Press; 5 1 I pp. 

Stebbing.’l R.R. I888. Report on the scientific nesulls 
of the voyage of M. M. S. Challenger during the years 
1 873- 1 876, Zoology 29; 1 7 1 3 pp„ 2 1 0 pl.s. I .ondon. 

Stebbing. T. R, R. 1 897. Amphipoda from the Copen 
hagen Museum and other sources. Trans- Linn, 


Soc. London, ser. 2(zool,) 7: 25-45, pis. 6- 1 4. 

Stebbing, T. R. R. 1 899. Amphipoda from the Copen 
hagen Museum and other sources Part 1 1. Trans. 
Linn. Soc. London 2. (Zool) 8: 395-432, pis. 30-35. 

Stebbing.T, R. R, 1 90f), Amphlpcnia I. Gammaridea. 
DasTierrejeh 21; 806 pp. figs. 1-1 2'7. 

Stebbing. f. R, R, 1917. South AfricanTalitridae. Ann, 
Mag. Nat, Hist, 8: 4.35. 

Sieele, D. E, 1988. What is the aiiiphipod lifestyle? 
Studies on Amphipoda. Cnistaccana SuppL 13: 134^ 
142, 

Slephensen, K. 1944. Some Japanese ant phi ptxls, 
Viden.sk. Medcl. Dansk Natiirh. Foren. I21t 14): 25- 
88, 33 figs. 

Stimpson, W. 1853. Synopsis of the marl ncinvertebraia 
of Grand Man an.* or the region about the mouth of 
the Bay of Fiindy. .Smiths. Contr. KnowT 6(5); 5 66, 
3 pis, 

Stimpson, W, 1 857. The Crustacea and Echinodennala 
of the Pacific shores of North America. J. Boston 
Soc. Nat. Hist. 6: I 92. pis. 18-23. 

Stock, J, If 1987. Stygofauna of thge Canary is;lands. 
5 A hypocan tKilulalion of Parhyiiie (Amphipoda) 
in the .lameos del agua Uav a Tunnel ( Lanzarote) a 
supix>sed case of recent evolution. Siy gologia 3(2); 
1 67- 184 7 figs. 

Stout, V. R, 1913. Studies in Laguna Amphipoda. 
Zool. Jahrb. System. 34: 633-659, 3 figs. 

Takeuchi, I. and W'auinabe, K. 1998. Respiration rale 
and swimming s|xcd of the necrophagous amphi pod 
Ettrythtnea f^ryllus from Antarctic deep waters. 
Mar, EcoL Progi . Sei„ 163: 285-288 

Thomson. G. M. 1879. New Zealand Crustacea, w ilh 
descriptions of new species. Trans. Proc.N.Z. Inst., 
11:2.30-248, pi, 10. 

Thomson, G. M. 1 880, A new species of Crustacea 
iVom New Zealand- Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., scr. 5,6; 
I -6, pi 1. 

Thorsieinson,E D, 1941. New or noteworthy ainphi- 
pods from the north Racil'ic Coast. Liniv. Wash. 
Publ. Oceanogr. 4: 50-96, 8 pis. 

Tzvetkova, N. L. 1990. An Addition to the fauna of 
ainphiixds from the shalh wv waters of bast Kam- 
chatka. lYoc. Zool. Inst. Leningrad 1990, 218: 40- 
33,10 figs, (in Russhn]). 

Walker, A. O. & A. Scott 1903. IL Decapoda and 
sessile-eyed crustacean.^ from A Ixi-el Kun . Nat, Flist, 
Sokotraand Abd-cl-Kuri: 216-232, pis. I4A, B. 

Y oiing, P. S. 1 998. Catalogue of Cnislacea of Brazil, 
Mus. Nac. Brasil, ser, Eivr 6: 717 pp. 



INSTRUCTIONS TO AUTHORS 

Manuscript suhmissiDn. Mainiiscript^fiLibtnitied for puNi^ 
c^lion ^h(?ixld represent originai cor tri billions that have itol 
been pubiishwl dsdvi here, The test should be v^ritLen in 
bftglish or iTcnch. u-uh Abstract ir eilher language. The 
Abstract sbc:juld be suUr^ble for separate publication in an 
alostraci Journai. ManuscripLs must be submiited primaiily 
on 3 I /2 inch high density dislcetles, utilizing either IBM- or 
MAC-compaliblc compiiierizcd publishing systems (e.g. 
Aldus Pagemaker, Quark Xpress), prcJcrably in 2-column 
fonii. Diskettes must be accompanied by one S.5 X 1 1 -inch 
(22 X 2'9cni) hard copy (printed maruscripij, with l-iri. text 

margins. Papers must 
have pteviously been 
rLTcrced and le^il-ed- 
ited. The name of 
the referee must in- 
clude hisfher address 
(ard/or lelephone 
number). Accept- 
ance of the paper is 
also contingent on prior ptty mert of pfi nting charges of S30. 
(CA N ) or $20. ( C JS) [icr page, A pp) ieations for page su b- 

sidics. from authors lacking supporting insliiutions, will be 
consEdentd. Diskeites must be submitted in publishable form 
since editorial (mecharlcal) services are not usually per- 
formed ort them here or by ihe Printing House, and f>age 
proof is not sent. A uilvors each rece I vc 5 free repri nl s of l he 
complete issue but, regretiahly, no reprints. 



Test* The publication style of most standard international 
lasonomic journals will Iw acceptable, with the folios lug 
provisiis. Genus and 
species names musL 
in Italics, and Boid^ 

/ffcf italics w hen 
utilized a.s head- 
ings. Titles of sec 
[ions and suhsec- 
tlonsmustbein Bold- 
face Romam The tesL, tables, and 
figures combined (with rare e^iceptions.) must not 
total less than 40, and not more than ah^>ui 1 f)f), printed pages. 
Prime recommended type font Is "Times" ]0-fX>int, as in this 
copy, hut other recomrneded fonts are "New York", 
"Helvetica", and "Courier" . 

Figures and Tallies. A 1 1 Hgures tnid tables must be clearly 
numbered and referred lo in (he test. Line ill ust rations and 
or half-tone photographs musl meet acceptable standards of 
clarity and quality: the former should he accompanied by 
PM Ts of publishable si /jc (maii, 8.5 X 6,5 inche.s (2H X 1 6,5 
ent), and the latter by glossy prints and/or negaiives. T-axu- 
nomic papers are expected lo include illustrations. 

tteferencts* Works should be C|Uotcd and listed iJi a form 
utilized by standard ( refereed) inleniationai laximomic jour- 
nals. Standard abbreviations for the journals' name.^ .should 
he ustnj. 



Dlsiribution. Mailings of this journal reach more than 100 
libraries of museums, biological laboratories, and other 
re.search institutions world-wide, in addition to individual 
subscribers 


Pleasa enter my subscription to 
AMPHIPACiFICAr 

Name 

Agency * * . * . * 

Address 



0 VOLUME Nk (4 issues) 2000-2001 (may be 
renewed on an annual basis) at $ SO CAN 
FUNDS [=$40. (US)] (ind. surface postage). 

0 VOLUME llj No. 4, Sepu 30, 2000, same rate 

0 Back Issues (VOL @ $10.00 (US) 


0 Cheque/money order enclosed $*....** 

Please address all correspondence to 

Dr. E, U Bousfield, Managing Edilor, Amphipadfica Research Publicaiions, I7i(kl275 RICHMOND RD., 
OTTAWA, ON CANADA K2B SE3. TelcphoiieM6l3) 726-7S03: e-Jiiaih elbousf@magTna.ca 




