



1 NVINOSHliyMs'^Sa 1 d Vbl a n^LI B RAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NC 
Z \ y\ ^ ^ _ CO 


(O 



LlI 


z ■■''^' -j z _ ^ 

5 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIXnXilSNi NVINOSHlIl/MS SaidVdaiT LI 



z 

o 


/^:-J /.'^ ^ 1:5: t _. _. ^ 

O! 

}— 

CO t: (/) \ ^ CO 

II NviNosHims saidVHan libraries Smithsonian institution N( 

:z CO z .CO z 




o 

CO 
X 

— X tl 

2 '^ > '*'' > 

CO -«i: CO *Z co*' Z 

S SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHIIIAIS S3ldVdan LI 
CO CO z: co 




ivO - , . 

IK Wx 

o DC^ " X^^UjlstiX o ^2 O 

I'^'NVINOSHillNS said Vd an LIBRARI ES^SMITHSONIAN“^mSTITUTION^N( 
r* V Z r- z ^ z 

%x S z 2 

^ t; :o tr ;o 




00 
:c3 
> 

;d 

m ~ m m 

CO ± CO E CO 

> SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHlItMS SBldVdaiT L« 
2: CO z ^ E 

CO CO ^ ife g X 


CO 




X 
CO 

0 

1 NVINOSHimS^Sa I d Vd a l I^LI B R AR l ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NC 

^ \ ^ CO ~ CO 



CO 



o ^ o -z o 

Z -J 2 _l Z 

5 SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIinillSNl NVINOSHlIkMS S3 1dVdan LI 



rn ^ Z ^ 

U NVINOSHimS S3ldVdan~LIBRARIES^SMITHS0NIAN”lNSTITUTl0N Ni 

Z CO Z .. CO z _ ^ 




3Nl_NVINOSHillAIS^S3 I dVH 8 ll^LI BRAR I ES^SMITHSONIAN ^INSTITUTION ^ 
z V 5 </5 = <0 

CO ^ uj uj 



ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlinillSNI NVINOSHillNS SBIdVaan 

° v5 i i >,03 




i\ ^ 
o > 

1 / 73 

3NI NVINOSHIIWS S3 lava an L!B R ARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 



s i 2 .^. w 

y A.."'S H I ^ 

I /f^^l i 

O 

2 > --?8r' s I i > 

ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIlDillSNI NVIN0SHilWS*^S3 I a Va 8 IT^ 
^ Z 5 .V w 2 





CO 


— 

q: 

< 

o '-iaLES-^ “ o o 

>NI^NVIN0SHillNS^S3 I ava a n~‘LI B RAR I es^smithsonian“‘institution^ 

[_ > Z r- z f” 2: 

\ ro ~ ° 



^ z m 'ii f7i 

^ — CO 5 CO 

ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlifliliSNI NVINOSHilWS SBiavaaiT 

^ " i i ’ g ^ 

JNI_NVIN0SHillAIS^S3 I BV8 8 I T^LI B RAR 1 ES^SMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION ^ 

z \ ^ ^ CO =: CO 




ES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOIlflXIlSNl NVINOSHIIIAIS S3l8Vdan 



m 

3NI NVINOSHillNS S3 I a Va 8 n“L 1 B R A R I E s'^SMITHSONIAN -INSTITUTION*^ 
.1 S i .3^ g ^ ■ 





M 


.'4 

I 









I 




I 

I 


i 

i 

I 

! 



QL 

76 

Ajtf" 


Keepers' 

Forum 


January 1992 



Dedicated to Professional Animal Care 


ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 


January 1992 
Volume Nineteen 
Number One 


Editor-in-Chief: Susan Chan 
Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 


Animal Keepers' Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual pubhcation costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster; 
Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 
Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 
Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Adanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 
Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112 
Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROTECT HEADS 


President 
Vice President 
Immediate Past President 


Awards Committge 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

IlQQk--JR e Yiew Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 
Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 
Staff ■■ Exchange 
Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 
AAZK History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
Keeper Accommodations List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 

An Approach to Zookecping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 
Zqq Infant....D£.Y£lnpment Project 
Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 

Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings Island 

Membership Directory 


Keeper Training-A-Education 

{includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials)L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal. Data .Transfer-Eorm 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 

AAZK Liaison to AAZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 

Diet Notebook 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 

By-Laws. Review 

VACANCY 

Zoo/Unive rsitv List 
Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 

Keeper Correspondent 

VACANCY 


Publications... funding.. C.o.mmitt££ 

Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo 

Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, The Virginia Zoo and Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 

International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) 


Conservation. Preservation. Restoration (CPRJ Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for Rhinos *92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 


Keeper Training Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 


Liaison and Information Network for Keeners (LINK) 
Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 


printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors.. 1 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt 2-3 

Births & Hatchings 4-6 

From the President 7 

AAZK Announces New Members 8 

Conference Proceedings Order Form 10 

Bowling for Rhinos ’92 Proposal 11 

A Presidential Message on Bowling for Rhinos 11 

Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary Update from Anna Merz 12-13 

Enrichment Options (rhinos, penguins, reptiles, orangutans, food dispensers) 14-15 

Endangered Species Act Faces Challenge 16-17 

Information Please (African lions, primate puzzle feeder, thrush in eland) 17 

Black-footed Ferrets Released to Wild 18 

Zoo Infant Development Project.... 18 

1992 AAZPA Regional Conference Listing 18 

Recycling: Just Do It... 19 

T-Shirt/Sweatshirt Survey 19 

International News 20-21 

Publications Available 21 

Chapter News 22-24 

Book Review (Encyclopedia of Animal Ecology) 26 

Opportunity Knocks 26 

1991 Index for AKF 27-40 

Regional Coordinator List.... 40 

Information for Contributors 


Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for No commitment is made to the author, but 

an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLINE FOR EACH EDITION IS THE 15TH 

■QF THE PRECEDING MONTH 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers* Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 1 


This month's cover features a Great White Egret or Common Egret (Casmerodius albus) 
with her nest of chicks. It inhabits both the Old and New Worlds; its best known breeding 
area in Central Europe is at Lake Neusiedel in Austria. In Europe this species breeds in 
reed beds, but in other areas it nests in trees. Numbers of this species were decimated in the 
early 1900's when their breeding season plumes sold for twice the price of gold. This 
month’s artist is Gregg J. Wanciak, an Associate Member from New Orleans, LA. 
Thanks, Gregg! 


Scoops 


and 


Scuttlebutt 


Articles SoUcited for Upcoming AKF Issues 

As mentioned in last month’s From the Editor message, the staff is planning on publishing 
at least two issues of the journal dedicated to specific topics in the coming months. We are 
now soliciting articles on the following topics: Hoofstock (all aspects), Hand-rearing 
( techniques, case histories, etc.) and Enrichment (all aspects). We encourage authors to 
submit black and white photos with their manuscripts. We would like to be able to run the 
first dedicated issue in April or May, so we ask that papers be submitted by 1 March 1992. 
This plan will, of course, be dependent on the response we receive from you, the 
membership. Members are, of course, encouraged to submit articles on any topics 
relevant to zoos and zookeeping at any time. The backlog of articles we have experienced 
over the past couple of years has been thinned out considerably with publication of larger 
issues of AKF so we are again in need of material for the journal. 

You will note that this month we have initiated a column entitled Enrichment Options. 
This column is designed to include behavioral and environmental enrichment ideas for 
all species held in zoos. We encourage you to submit your enrichment suggestions and 
ideas for inclusion in this column. We are also currently working on reformatting the 
Births & Hatchings column and a letter with the new guidelines will be going out to those 
individuals who regularly contribute material for this column. If you wish to submit B&H 
information and are not sure of the format, contact the editor. 

Once again, our sincere thanks to Pam Talbot, a volunteer at the Woodland Park Zoo, 
Seattle, WA, for her efforts in putting together the 1991 index for AKF . You will notice that 
this year all animal listings are placed under categories such as Birds, Mammals, etc. for 
easy reference. 

FINAL REMINDER - this is the last issue in which an order form for the 1991 National 
Conference Proceedings will appear. If you want to purchase a copy, you will need to send 
in your completed order form and payment by 10 February 1992. Order Form on Page 10 • 


Anna Merz Rhino Book Now Available 

’’What Joy Adamson was to lions, Dian Fossey was to gorillas, and Jane Goodall is to 
chimpanzees, Anna Merz is to rhinos...! can promise you that, after finishing this book, 
you will never see rhinos in quite the same light again.” These are the words of Desmond 
Morris in his forward to the recently published book RHINO At the Brink of Extinction by 
Anna Merz, founder and patron of the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary in Kenya. She tells 
how she established the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary at the foot of Mt. Kenya and all she 
has learned about rhinos through her daily observations - revealing them to be 
unexpectedly intelligent and gentle animals with distinctively individual personalities. 
The book may be ordered through Rafiki Books, 45 Rawson Ave., Camden, ME 04843. It is 
hardback, 220 pages, and sells for $25.95 plus $3.00 shipping. 


2 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt. Continued 
APT Forms Available Upon Request 


Animal Data Transfer Forms for zoos and aquariums are available free of charge upon 
request. This is a professional service provided by AAZK. Contact: Bernie Feldman, 
Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Drive, Syracuse, NY 13204. If your facility is not 
already using the ADT form, please encourage your administration to implement its use 
whenever an animal is shipped. 


WANT A CHALLENGE? Produce a Keeper Training Videotape!! 

With only a scant 2 training videotapes in the AAZK collection (Feeds & Feeding and 
Keeper Safety), there is a plethora of subjects to choose from and tackle. These videotapes 
are an invaluable teaching aid, especially for those in the animal care field not fortunate 
enough to have a keeper training program at their facility. Once the videotape is 
completed, you’ll feel rewarded knowing your project will benefit keepers around the globe 
and will generate badly needed revenue for our national body’s treasury from the sales of 
this tape. Don’t hedge, here’s a wonderful chance to display hidden talents, talents you 
weren’t aware you had. Please contact Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo or Anna 
Michael, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR. We can give you information to help you 
get started. And remember, funds are available from the Videotape Project account to 
assist in your production. 

The following tapes are available in VHS format for $25.00 each from AAZK 
Administrative Offices in Topeka: “Keeper Safety: An Attitude Adjustment” and “An 
Introduction to Feeds and Feeding”. Contact Barbara Manspeaker at 1-800-242-4519 for 
ordering information. 


Please Note; 

Individuals needing to contact Pat Sammarco are asked to do so at her home address - 6726 
NW 18th Ave., Gainesville, FL 32605 or call (904) 332-0846. Pat is no longer associated 
with Santa Fe Community College Teaching Zoo. 

In the August 1991 issue of AKF , an article entitled “California Condor - Coming Back 
from the Brink” was submitted by L.A Chapter Liaison Lois Carwile and published under 
the authorship of Susie Kasielke, L.A Zoo Curatorial Assistant. In a recent phone call, 
Susie noted that her article was really more or less a fact sheet on the condor program and 
not intended as an article written specifically for AKF . Susie said that had she known it 
was going to AKF she would have written it a little differently. On behalf of AKF readers, 
we enjoyed the article, found it informative and look forward to updates on the Condor 
Recovery program from Susie. 


Two More Chapters Donate to HLstorv Book Proiect 

Rachel Rogers, Chair of the AAZK History Committee, along with the AAZK Board of 
Directors would like to thank two Chapters that recently sent in donations to help in 
covering the costs of publishing AAZK 25th Anniversary Book. Thanks go out to the 
Western New York AAZK Chapter (Buffalo Zoological Gardens, Buffalo, NY) and the 
Puget Sound Chapter (Woodland Park Zoological Gardens, Seattle, WA). 


AAZK Grants Available 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. announces the availability of two 
$750 research grants in the field of zoo biology. Interested applicants should direct 
their inquiries to Sue Barnard, Chairperson, AAZK Research/Grants Committee, 
Zoo Atlanta, Department of Herpetology, 800 Cherokee Ave. SE., Atlanta, GA 30315. 
The deadline for submission is 31 March 1992. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


3 


Births & Hatchings 



Milwaukee County Zoo ...on 17 December 1990 a 0.1 birth of a Pygmy chimpanzee {Pan 
paniscus) brought the total U.S. zoo population of Bon oho s to 41. Only 80 are in captivity 
world-wide, with an estimated 15,000-100,000 in the wild population. The infant, named 
Eliya, was born to 19-year-old Maringa and was sired by 18-year-old Lodi. Maringa has 
had five offspring, with three surviving. The paiPs seven-year-old son Lomako is housed 
with them. The MCZ also has Bonobo out on loan to Yerkes. 



Shown above is 0.1 ELIYA^ a Pygmy Chimpanzee bom at the Milwaukee County Zoo. That 
facility houses the infant‘s seven-year-old brother, Lomako, along with parents Maringa 
(19) and Lodi (18). There are only 80 Bonobo held in captivity world-wide. ( ©1990 
Milwaukee County Zoo Photo. Photographer: M.A. Nepper) 


4 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Births & H atchings. Continued 

Other Mammal births have included: 1.1 Greater kudu (Tragelaphus strepsiceros 
strepsice), a species seldom seen in zoos. MCZ has had 61 of this species born since 
November 1966. Twin (1.1) Asiatic black bear (Selenarctos thibetanus) births represent the 
first mother-reared cubs of this species at this facility. Twin (1.1) Snow leopard (Panthera 
uncia) births were the first successful litter for these parents. The male was removed when 
the female was determined to be pregnant. The first cub was seen by staff five weeks after 
the birth; the second cub at six weeks. They were weighed at eight weeks, at 7.2 lbs. A 0.1 
Bongo {Tragelaphus eurycerus isaaci) was bom at the end of April 1991. Captive births are 
not common for this species. A Reticulated giraffe {Giraffa Camelopardalis reticulata) 
represents the second successful mother-raised giraffe at MCZ in many years. Both were 
from the same mother. 

The Small Mammals Dept, reports the following significant births: Four Vampire bats 
(Desmodus rotundas) - the MCZ is one of the few zoos that have been successful in 
continuously breeding this species of bat. This breeding colony has a history of 51 births. 
The Ruwenzori long-haired fruit bat {Rousettus lanosus) colony has had seven births this 
past year. MCZ is the only U.S. zoo housing this type of mountain fruit bat. Our Straw 
colored fruit bat {Eidolon heluum) colony had three births. MCZ is the only zoo that has 
been successful with mother-raised babies of this species. 

Birds - between 1 December 1990 and 19 June 1991, MCZ had eight births of the 
Humboldt penguin {Spheniscus humholdti). We have two separate breeding colonies on 
exhibit. The Humboldt penguin, an SSP species, is endangered with less that 30,000 
estimated to be left in the wild. 

Aquarium/Reptile - has reported the following: one Green and Black poison arrow 
frog {Dendrobates auratus) - first for this species at MCZ since the 1970s. Also reported is 
one Chuckwalla {Sauromalus obesus) - a first for MCZ after having this species on display 
for 14 years. The department also received the larvae of the Puerto Rican crested toad 
{Peltophryne lemur) from the Cincinnati Zoo in 1991. The larva was metamorphosed and 
the 60-70 toads will be released to the wild in 1992. This species is endangered due to habitat 
loss and is an SSP species, submitted by Wayne J. Hazlett, Chapter Liaison, Milwaukee 
County zoo AAZK chapter, Milwaukee, WI. 

Ccystal. GardeaiyifitQria. B.Ci. Canadab-»the Aviary department would like to announce 
the raising of five Hyacinth macaw {Anodorhynchus hyacinthinus ) babies in 1991. Also 
twin Slow loris {Mycticebus pygmacus) babies were born on 9 November 1991. submitted by 
Reta Lowry, Curator, Crystal Garden, Victoria, B.C., Canada. 


Philadelphia Zoological Gardens ...reports the following from June-October 1991: 

Re ptiles - the collection has increased in size due to the department) s participation 
in the annual meeting of The Society for the study of Amphibians and Reptiles (SSAR). Out 
of a possible 68 species of native Pennsylvanian amphibians and reptiles, 56 were exhibited 
at the meeting. Many of the animals have been incorporated into the zoo's collection. 

Birds - this department has had a couple of exciting hatchings during this time; 
0.0.2 West African crowned cranes {Balearica pavonina pavonina) hatched in August and 
are being hand-raised by zoo staff This is the first successful breeding of this species at 
PZG since 1956. 0.1 Trumpeter swan {Cygnus cygnus buccinator) hatched here and was 
sent to Michigan's Department of Natural Resources for their reintroduction program. 
0.0.3 Caribbean flamingos {Phoenicopterus ruber) hatched this summer bringing our flock 
up to 27 animals. 0.0.2 Micronesian kingfisher {Halcyon cinnamomina) hatched this 
summer. They are the 9th and 10th chicks to survive since PZG began working with this 
species in 1984. 0.0.2 Sunbittern {Eurypyga helias) hatched and are the 4th and 5th viable 
chicks PZG has produced over the last two years. We also received 1.0 Shoebill stork 
{Balaeniceps rex) in august. We are the only zoo on the East Coast to display this species. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


5 


Births & Hatchings . Continued 



Shown at left is one of two West African 
Crowned Crane chicks hatched at the 
Philadelphia Zoological Gardens. The 
chicks are being hand-reared by the zoo 
staff. 


Mammals - significant births during the five month period include: 1.0 Mongoose 
lemur {Lemur mongoz mongoz) was born; the third offspring of this pair. 0.1 Western 
lowland gorilla {Gorilla gorilla) was born on 4 July to our female, Snickers - this is her 
first daughter. The baby was named “ Uhuru” which means freedom in Swahili. This is 
the name given to Kenya’s Independence Day. 1.0 Indian Rhinoceros {Rhinoceros 
unicornis) was born in July to our pair held at PZG. This same pair have produced four 
offspring with three surviving. 0.1 Matschie’s tree kangaroo {Dendrolagus matschiei), 
who we estimate was born in late January 1991, finally showed his face in June. He’s now 
out of the pouch and doing well. This is the second offspring from the pair; unfortunately 
the first DNS. 0.1 Malayan tapir {Tapirus indicus) was born to our female. She has had 
three other offspring but this is the first fathered by our current male. 0.1 Spectacled langur 
{Presbytis obscura) was born in October; the third offspring of this female. Our group now 
has eight animals. 

Some significant acquisitions are 4.5 Rodriguez fruit bats {Pteropus rodricensis) 
that came from the London Zoo and Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust and are part of an 
international conservation/breeding program for the species. We received 1.1 
Klipspringers {Oreotragus oreotragus) from the Chipangali Wildlife Trust in Bulawayo, 
Zimbabwe. We acquired 0.1 Six-banded armadillo {Euphractus sexcintus) on loan from 
the Tulsa Zoo to be paired with our single male. This now gives us two breeding pairs. 

This summer a member of our staff went to Kenya to collect more Naked mole rats 
{Hetercephalus glaber). We acquired 234 specimens in eight different colonies. So far a 
colony has been sent to each of the following zoos: Roger Williams Park Zoo, National Zoo,, 
Phoenix Zoo and the Toledo Zoo. -submitted by Beth Schwenk, Chapter Liaison, 
Philadelphia Zoo AAZK Chapter, Philadelphia, PA. 


6 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


From the President 


On behalf of the newly elected and incumbent members of the AAZK Board of Directors, I 
would like to welcome you to 1992, the 25th anniversary year of our Association. During the 
past 25 years, AAZK has contributed to raising the standards of quality animal care in all 
aspects of our profession. Whether you have been a member for 20 years or just 1 year, you 
should take pride in the accomplishments of AAZK 

This year shall bring many challenges to the membership of AAZK - the most important of 
which is a quest for financial stability. For many years, AAZK has operated on the edge of 
breaking even. We have not been able to realize a comfort zone financially that will let 
AAZK evolve progressively in the 1990s. Many members have asked why this has happened 
and the answer is very simple. While operating costs have increased 3-10% per year, for the 
past five years, membership has stagnated. We have not had a significant increase in 
membership, in any category, in a number of years. Encourage your fellow professionals 
to join our Association and get involved. 

It has been gratifying to see that some of our Chapters have recognized the value and 
importance of supporting the parent organization and have sent unsolicited donations to 
help meet general operating expenses. Our thanks go to the North Carolina AAZK Chapter 
and The Virginia Chapter AAZK, whose letters follow my column, for their generous 
support. 

Oliver Clafifey, outgoing president of AAZK, in his inaugural address to the membership 
called the 1990s “The Deciding Decade”. The AAZK membership has chosen to support 
conservation issues and causes with monumental efforts over the past few years. In just two 
years, ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ has raised close to $300 thousand. Since its inception, the 
Ecosystem Survival Plan has raised approximately $200 thousand. Keepers have asked me 
for a number of years, “So what does AAZK do?” You have contributed a half a million 
dollars for species and habitat conservation in just a few years. Take pride in your efforts - 
wear them like a badge of accomplishment. 

In 1992, membership will also see a change in the communication practice of the AAZK 
President and Board of Directors. In an effort to keep the Animal Keepers’ Forum just that - 
a Forum for the exchange of animal-related information, I will be addressing Association 
issues in detail directly to Chapters in quarterly updates. LINK updates will also be coming 
in these same packets. Members of our Association who do not belong to Chapter will 
receive the same information in synopsis through AKF . I firmly believe in open 
communication and I encourage you to contact me directly with comments, concerns and 
suggestions regarding our Association. 

In conclusion, I would like to thank outgoing Board Members Oliver Claffey, Frank Kohn 
and Bob Debets for time and effort dedicated to our Association. Their contributions are far 
too numerous to list. What is unique about these outgoing officers is that they each started 
their participation in AAZK at the Committee or Conference Chair level, and worked their 
way up to Board election. At the current time we have openings for Committee Chairs and I 
ask you to consider this avenue if you wish to make an impact on your profession. 

I am looking forward to a productive and positive year with open communication between 
the AAZK Board and the membership, culminating in a professional celebration of our 25th 
Anniversary at the National Conference in San Diego. 



Ed Hansen, AAZK President 
Reid Park Zoo 
1100 S. Randolph Way 
Tucson, AZ 85716 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


1 


From the President. Continued 
October 24, 1991 
Dear Sirs: 

Enclosed is a check for $116.46. We have been selling ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ T-shirts during 
the past few months, and we wanted to give a percentage of the profits to AAZK National. 
(The majority of the profits went to Ngare Sergoi Support Group.) 

We are a small group, with only about five active members, but we want to show our support 
to our national organization. We know you will put it to good use. 

Sincerely yours, 

Betty Jean Schmitt, Treasurer 
The Virginia Chapter AAZK 
Norfolk, VA 


November 9, 1991 
Dear AAZK, 

Enclosed is a check in the amount of $200.00 from the North Carolina Chapter AAZK. It is 
being sent to show our support of the National Organization, and can be used any way you 
deem necessary. 

Thanks for the support your office offers us throughout the year. 

Sincerely, 

Lucy Segerson, President 
North Carolina Chapter AAZK 
Asheboro, NC 



AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Martha Valleriani, Metro Boston Zoo (MA) 

Lori Collins, Silver Springs Attraction (MD) 
Jody Hackman, Busch Gardens (FL) 

Tiffani Thompson, Sea World of Florida (FL) 
Steven O. Norris, Nashville Zoo (TN) 

Anne Marie Moorman, Jackson Zool. Prk (MS) 
John H.P Ward, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 

Faye Krumm, Tulsa Zoo (OK) 

Joseph Roccotagliata, Sea World of Texas (TX) 


Kitty Dolan, Bronx Zoo (NY) 

Virginia Stamos, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Betty Mickler, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Denise Hansbury, Lowry Park Zoo (FL) 
Kelly Hixon, Jackson Zool. Prk. (MS) 
Nancy C. Smith, Jackson Zool. Prk. (MS) 
Heidi Hellmuth, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 
Chris Pfefferkorn, San Antonio Zoo (TX) 
Kelly Casale, Coyote Point Museum (CA) 


Renewing Contributing Members 

Dickerson Park Zoo, Springfield, MO 
Gerald W. Murrie, San Diego, CA 


8 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


e 



SraCTRUM 


Quality exotic 
animal diets 


Nutritionally balanced 

Fixed formulation • Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRASKA BRAND 


h \ 



SreCTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 


Banana flavored primate, 15% protein dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Floofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


GENTLE TOUCH^*' bedding 


One call does It all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69103-0721 


1991 Conference Proceedings Order Form 


If you are interested in obtaining a copy of the Proceedings containing the papers presented 
at the 17th National AAZK Conference held in Toledo, OH, you will need to fill out and 



Funds Only. AUow 4-6 weeks following deadline for receipt of publication. Prices are as 
follows: 


AAZK Member 
Non-Member 


$10.00 

$15.00 


Postage for U.S. orders is included. Canadian and overseas orders should add $3.00 for 
Air Mail postage to Canada and Surface postage elsewhere. Overseas orders wishing Air 
Mail service should add $10.00. Make checks payable to AAZK, Inc. 

Note: Individuals who presented papers at the Conference and submitted a manuscript for 
inclusion in these Proceedings will receive a gratis copy. If a manuscript was not 
submitted, a gratis copy will not be sent, and those individuals will need to order a copy. 

The following papers are included in these Proceedings: Sustaining Captive Primate 
‘Natural’ Behavior Via Psychological Enrichment On the Ground Conservation That 
Really Works: Preakness Clean-up 1991 ~ Cano Palma Biological Station ^ Keepers 

Helping Keepers Across the World - The Evolving Role of the Zoo Keeper ~ The Evolution 
of Conservation in Zoos and Aquariums: The Ecosystem Survival Plan ~ Breeding & 
Handraising the Blue and Gold Macaw in Northern Climates -- The Role of Zookeepers in 
Wildlife Conservation ~ The Keeper - The Resource or Toad on the Road, the First, and so 
far only. Amphibious Rock Hit Single - Hand Rearing Maned Wolves at the Louisville 
Zoo Treating Periodontal Disease in the Lesser Bushbaby ~ An Inexpensive Mechanical 
Restraint Device at the Milwaukee County Zoo ~ The Pancake Tortoise and Its Eggs 
Introduction of the Indianapolis Japanese Macaque Troop ~ Behavioral Training of a 
Llama Herd ~ The Red-bellied Lemur in Captivity ~ A Video ADT Goes to Sacramento ~ 
Use of Fecal Steroid Analysis in Sex Determination of Cranes and Psittacines ~ 
Management and Behavior of the Rodrigues Fruit Bat ~ Environmental Enrichment 
Methods: A Workshop for the Primate Keeper ^ The Evolving Role of the Zoo Keeper ~ 
Project Puffin. 


Proceedings Order Form 


(PLEASE TYPE OR PRINT) 

I wish to order copy(s) of the 1991 Conference Proceedings. 


I have enclosed $. 


plus $. 


for additional postage (if applicable) 


Name 


Address 


City 


State/Province 


Country 


Zip/Postal Code 


ORDERS MUST BE RECEIVED BY 10 FEBRUARY 1992 


During the 1991 National AAZK Conference in Toledo, a ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ (BFR) 
Workshop was held. Conference delegates attending the Workshop represented 23 of the 42 
Chapters that participated in the successful 1991 event. A major topic of discussion at the 
meeting was whether BFR should continue to support the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Project. A 
vote taken regarding continued support for the rhino project was ratified unanimously by 
the attending delegates. In addition to pledging their continued support, members also 
voted to send 100% of all BFR monies raised to the Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. for 
distribution to AAZK approved projects. 

Andy Lodge, coordinator for the Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc., submitted the following 
proposal to the AAZK Conservation, Preservation and Restoration Committee (CPR) and 
the membership for 1992. 

In 1991, AAZK membership voted to fence a portion of land called the Ngare Ndare Forest 
Preserve. This solar powered fence has been extremely successful -in separating wildlife 
from encroaching farmlands and poachers. The 1992 Proposal seeks funding for a fence to 
completely enclose Lewa Downs, expanding the protected sanctuary from 10,000 acres to 
110,000 acres. An expansion is necessary due to territorial overcrowding of breeding age 
males and to combat drought conditions which have now reached the critical point. The 
sanctuary of Lewa Downs contains forest reserve and natural swamps. Fencing this area 
will afford security and badly needed water in times of drought for many species in the 
habitat, especially rhino. 

The CPR Committee is proud to announce that Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo, is 
Coordinator for BFR this year. The committee hopes to raise the $225,000 needed for the 
fencing project.. The time frame for the 1992 BFR will be from March to July. Chapter 
participation is critical to the project and it is hoped that even more Chapters will hold an 
event in 1992. 

The Ngare Sergoi Support group, Inc. has again this year graciously provided prizes for the 
two top fundraising bowlers. The prizes consist of two trips to Lewa downs, all expenses 
paid from New York City. 

Should you require any further information, please contact: Patty Pearthree, P.O. Box 
199026, Indianapolis, IN 46219-9026. Phone: (312) 322-8723 OR Bob Debets, Assiniboine 
Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3P OR5 (204) 837-1635 

(home). 


A Presidential Message on Bowling for Rhinos 

In March of 1992, chapters again will be called on to support the conservation of African 
flora and fauna through our own ‘Bowling for Rhinos’, through your efforts over the past 
two years, $300,000 has gone directly to Ngare Sergoi for on-site species conservation. 

As always, 100% of monies raised in the name of BFR and transferred to AAZK, will be 
sent to Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. and forwarded to Africa, to be applied directly to in- 
country species conservation. AAZK is proud to be able to make the statement that 100% of 
monies earned go directly to our membership-supported projects and documentation is 
available on request from AAZKs CPR Committee. 

I have personally bowled quite terribly during the past two years in the name of BFR. I 
encourage all AAZK Chapters to get involved in this important cause. Prizes provided by 
the NSSG will let you see firsthand how much of an impact our money is making on 
conservation in Africa. The AAZK Board of Directors and the AAZK CPR Committee 
support this project 100% and we hope to have 100% support from our chapters. No effort in 
the name of conservation goes without notice. Hansen, AAZK President 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 



Ngare Sergoi Rhino 


Sanctuary Update 


from Anna Merz 
Founder I Patron 


Dear AAZK Members, 

Sadly I must report to you all that this year has been a year of catastrophe for us as well as 
for the Persian Gulf. The rains failed in April, we had only one-half inch and now in the 
middle of November, it looks as if they will fail again. We have also suffered a series of 
disasters with our rhinos. Some drought-related and some possibly so; at least all can be 
described as due to natural causes and not to the negligence of our security forces whose 
standard of training is being continuously updated. 

The first disaster occurred last Christmas Day. Instead of accepting an invitation to 
lunch, I was driving round the sanctuary and happened upon Makora having a major 
battle with the three-year-old white male recently purchased by Halvar. It was a most 
terrifying site with the young male quite literally being hurled up into the air and then 
knelt on by Makora; the noises they were making were every bit as dramatic as the sight. 
After certain dramas I did manage to separate them with the Susuki, shots being fired into 
the air by our rangers had no effect at all on the enraged Makora. Luckily after Fd 
rammed them apart, Cypriano heard my cries for help over the radio and managed to drive 
Makora in one direction while I drove off the young male in another. Dieter came up from 
Nairobi the next day and we captured the young male and did what we could for him, but 
sadly he died from a perforated stomach on the 28th. This has not been a good year for 
Makora who has lived up to his Swahili name of “trouble” - in May he had a battle with 
Gororika which I once more separated with my battered Susuki, no damage done this time; 
and in June he killed my mare Tosca for reasons unknown. 

In January we made a serious attempt to catch the rhino on the mountain between Kora and 
Meru that both we and the Eden Trust had paid guards to try and protect. The mountain is 
heavily forested and very steep. Sadly we failed and a few months later, it was killed. In 
February Gororika gave birth to a lovely male calf and we were all very excited. In April 
the rains failed. Daily we placed lucerne hay near her-she would play with it, sit on it, 
everything but eat it. Oct. 14th the calf died, the postmortem revealed dry grass in its 
stomach but no milk. The other two white cows with older calves are thin but still strong. 
From the end of April until October, we have lived in an ever increasing cloud of dust 
seemingly composed of our own dust, dust from the Phillipine volcano and smoke from 
Kuwait. We have never experienced weather like this before and most of us have suffered 
from sore eyes. On the 9th of May, two of our black males, Osupat and Kikwar seemingly 
had a dispute during the course of which Kikwar ran over a cliff and broke his back on 
landing. Osupat apparently landed on top of him and died a few hours later of massive 
internal injuries. 

On the 28th of May, we opened 400 yards of line fence near the east gate. While our entire 
labor force was working on the fence line, all our trackers were busy rounding up every 
giraffe they could find. When about 150 animals were reasonably assembled, Ted Goss, 
with the Eden Trust helicopter, drove them out through the gap, a most incredible and 
beautiful sight. By evening the fence was back in place and fully operational. Twenty to 
thirty giraffe remain in the sanctuary which has relieved the pressure on our trees, but has 
not helped the situation on Lewa Downs. To date, Ian has succeeded in translocating some 
60 giraffe off Lewa, he hopes to move at least another 300, if not more, if funds allow. This 
has been made possible thanks to the 4WD Mercedes lorry purchased by Andy Lodge and 
the NSSG from funds raised in ‘Bowing for Rhinos’; thanks to Ted Goss and the Eden 
Trust helicopter (as it proved impossible to round up giraffes and get them into the holding 
boma with horses); and thanks for funds raised by Dr. Eva Metzger, Richard Scholl, Fritz 
Bucher, the Animal Welfare Society of Switzerland, and Melinda Atwood. The bright 


12 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary Update. Continued 

orange lorry with its huge superstructure and its cargo of bright chestnut and white giraffes 
peering over the top provides a most amazing sight and a wonderful film of part of the 
translocation has been made by a French TV company. 

August was for us a fairly dramatic month. Two big male rhinos were having a series of 
battles up at the new 01 Pejeta rhino sanctuary. It was feared that one or both would be 
seriously injured or killed if they continued to battle it out, so, despite drought, it was 
decided to move one of them here. In order to prevent complications at this end, it was 
decided that Kelele should be captured and dehorned (with the consent of KWS) and we 
would see if we could keep him safely outside the sanctuary. Kelele‘s capture by Dieter 
provided us with some dramatic moments, but was successful as has been his subsequent 
release outside the sanctuary. At the same time it was decided to send Shaba's five-year- 
old son, Jupiter, up to 01 Pejeta. His capture caused even more dramas and at one stage the 
helicopter had to come to the rescue of my Susuki as I tried to get Dieter in range of Jupiter. 
Shaba did not agree and then there was the incredible moment when Shaba reared up and 
tried to attack the helicopter. Eventually the darted Jupiter went down in the Simba lugga 
where there was no hope of getting the lorry or crate to him. Dieter gave him some of the 
recovery drug, enough to get him on his feet and we proceeded to lead him to the lorry with a 
rope around his nose. By the time we had got him out of the lugga and near the crate, he was 
pretty much recovered and we had a fairly lively time getting him in. He has since settled 
down well at 01 Pejeta which has had good rains. 

Alas for Zero, the 01 Pejeta male who came here-the biggest rhino I have ever seen. On the 
13th of October he was looking as if he were trying to vomit; this I know in a horse means 
disaster and we all presumed it was equally bad for a rhino. Francis flew to Nairobi but it 
was Sunday and no vets were available. The postmortem showed something none of us had 
ever seen before. His esophagus from the throat down to the stomach was packed solid. The 
stomach was empty. Apparently the sphincter muscle at the opening to the stomach was 
paralyzed. Was this drought-related? There is a similar, but very rare disease in cattle 
which is drought-related. 

In September I went to England to help launch my book “Rhino at the Brink of Extinction” 
published in London by Harper Collins. That was for me an interesting, if rather 
frightening, experience. At least I saw bits of England I have never seen before and came 
away with a surprising respect for British Railways which enabled me to do day trips from 
London to as far afield as Liverpool. The book can be be bought in America from Jim 
McLarty, Rafiki Books, 45 Rawson Ave., Camden, ME 04843. I am hoping a paperback can 
be brought out in America later for the Support Group. I must at this stage apologize for a 
serious omission on P. 7 of the hardback edition where thanks to Andy Lodge and the 
Support Group was left out due only to my carelessness. My sincere apologies to Andy and 
you all. 

When I returned here after three weeks it was to learn of another disaster. Poor old 
Rongai had overbalanced and fallen to her death down a GOfoot cliff into the river. Her 3 
1/2 year old calf, Julali seems to be doing all right and much of her time is spent with Juno 
and her calf of the same age. So we have had 6 deaths this year and the only good news is 
the birth of a female calf to Sarnia's mother, Solia, in August. Sarnia herself continues to 
make good progress but is at present coming home regularly to have her diet supplemented 
by me in the form of dairy cubes, lucerne and the thorn bushes in the garden, carefully 
watered for her benefit. 

Because disasters have arrived thick and fast this year, it does not mean we are going to 
give up. We cannot increase the erratic rainfall to which this place is subject, but we can 
and MUST increase the size of the sanctuary. And this time we do not propose just to double 
it, but with the blessing of the ever-generous Craig family, to increase it six fold. We will 
turn the whole of Lewa Downs into a rhino sanctuary plus the Ngare Ndare Forest Reserve 
fenced in this year with a huge thank you to Andy, the Support Group and AAZK. Half of 
Lewa Downs is already fenced; 34 kms remain. We will have a Project proposal out early 
in the New Year which will be sent on request. Please help us and a very happy Christmas 
and ‘92 to you all. _ ^ 

-Jlnna Merz 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


13 




^Behavioral Enrichmentjt^ 
Activity Manipulation*^ 
Occupational Husbandry 

’A 




The AKF editorial staff is pleased to initiate this behavioral enrichment column which we 
hope will become a regular feature each month. But we need your help to keep it full of ideas, 
suggestions, etc. which will assist your fellow keepers in providing enrichment options for 
the animals in their care. We will also plan to incorporate ideas from other sources we find 
on the topic. Special thanks to Bruce Clark, Toledo Zoo, for providing us with the 
Enrichment Options logo for this column. Bruce has also offered his assistance to those who 
want to submit a drawing of an enrichment tool, toy, etc. but who do not like to draw-he will 
clean-up and put some finishing touches on your sketch before publication. We want to hear 
enrichment ideas for any and all species housed in zoos, so let us hear from you soon! Send 
your ideas to Associate Editors Gretchen Ziegler and Kayla Grams, Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. 
Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 


RHINOCEROS - Providing a water pool and mud pool (possibly only drenched 

sand/gravel) creates an activity of water and mud bathing for the animal. 

A loose tree trunk (heavy) chained in the enclosure will allow the rhinos 
to push, try their strength against an artificial ‘sparring’ partner. The 
animals can also use the tree trunk to rub their horns on. 


PENGUINS - Sand or open ground as well as tussocks creates the possibility of digging 
and grubbing behavior. 

REPTILES - Move heating places/shade during the day. This makes the animals move 
with the heat/avoid shade (shuttling reptiles) or change position in the heat 
source (posturing reptiles). Bottom heat alone results in unnatural behavior 
as bottom heat constantly keeps the place warm, whereas sun heat disappears 
when the animal has been lying in the same spot for some time. 


-the above taken from Behavioural Enrichment - a catalogue of ideas 
produced as a cooperative effort of seven Scandinavian zoos, Oct. 1990. 


ORANGUTANS - Providing old scrub brushes. Our animals have been observed using 
scrub brushes for long periods of time - scrubbing the walls, floors, and 
furniture in their enclosures. 

-from Kayla Grams, Keeper, Topeka Zoo, Topeka, KS 


14 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Eimchment Options. Continued 

Below are two food dispensers for use with primates. Thanks to Bruce Clark, Toledo Zoo, for 
this submission. 



mcrta 5 es 
L/ ^ r e c/ 1’ ct oAi 1 1 i +• 


y 




Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


15 


Endangered Species Act 
Faces Challenge 


reprinted with permission from FOCUS, a publication of 
World Wildlife Fund, 1250 Twenty-Fourth Street NW, 

Washington, DC 20037 

The U.S. Endangered Species Act (ESA) - the principal U.S. law governing the protection of 
endangered species - must be reauthorized by Congress this year. Debate over 
reauthorization, historically a lengthy and difficult process, will soon begin in the Senate 
and House of Representatives. 

“Protection of biological diversity is central to WWF’s mission,” said James P. Leape, 
WWF senior vice president. “WWF will take an active role in protecting the ESA during 
the reauthorization debate.” 

WWF anticipates fierce opposition from special interest groups that believe the ESA has 
hurt the industries or other constituencies they represent. Opponents of the ESA have 
already been actively lobbying Congress on a number of issues. Shrimp fishermen 
continue their vehement opposition to the federally mandated use of turtle excluder devices 
(TEDs) on their nets to save endangered sea turtles. Logging companies are fighting 
reduction in timber harvests in federal forests. Harvest reductions in the Pacific 
Northwest are designed to protect the Northern Spotted Owl and in the Southwest to protect the 
endangered Red Cockaded Woodpecker. Real estate and water resource developers have 
opposed the protection of numerous species around the country. 

“There can be no doubt that these groups will, individually and collectively, seek 
amendments to the ESA that will significantly weaken its provisions,” said Don Barry, 
WWF’s vice president for land and wildlife. “Many of these groups have already joined 
forces to weaken the nation’s wetlands conservation laws. This same coalition is now 
turning its attention to the ESA reauthorization,” Barry pointed out. “It is critical that 
conservationists begin now to voice their support for the ESA to members of Congress.” 

Barry has worked on ESA-related issues for 16 years, as chief counsel for the U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service (FWS) and more recently as a counsel for the House of Representatives 
commttee with jurisdiction over the ESA. Top on his agenda now is to lead WWF’s efforts 
to demonstrate to Congress and the public that the Endangered Species Act is needed, that it 
works, and that it balances economic and wildlife needs. 

The Endangered Species Act, originally passed in 1973, directs the federal government to 
determine whether species of plants and animals are in danger of extinction and 
generally prohibits any actions that would harm these species. As defined by ESA, an 
endangered species is any species in danger of extinction throughout all or much of its 
range. The ESA also charges the FWS with developing plans to restore these species’ 
depleted populations. 

The ESA also encourages states to promote the conservation of listed species of plants and 
animals through special cooperative agreements with the FWS, agreements that now exist 
in every state. Many states fund their endangered species programs through creative 
funding mechanisms, such as state income tax check-off programs. All of these state 
programs are a direct and important legacy of the ESA. 

“By expanding federal protection beyond traditional game species to all plant and animal 
life jeopardized by human activity, the Endangered Species Act revolutionized U.S. 
thinking about wildlife conservation,” Barry said. “Not surprisingly, the Act has created 
controversy over the years.” 

Most of the controversy - the furor over the Northern Spotted Owl in the Pacific Northwest is 
the most recent example - has centered around Section 7 of the Act. This provision requires 


16 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Endangered Species Act Reauthorization. Continued 


every federal agency to ensure that its activities are “not likely to jeopardize the continued 
existence of any endangered species or threatened species.” 

Contrary to what its opponents contend, the ESA allows a great deal of flexibility when 
conflicts arise between development and conservation of endangered species. The vast 
majority of development projects reviewed by federal agencies for possible impacts on 
endangered species have, with a few modifications, been allowed to move forward. 

Historically, the American public’s concern for endangered species has led Congress to 
resist efforts to weaken the Act. Indeed, amendments over the years have chiefly 
strengthened its effectiveness. The Act now, however, may face its toughest fight in more 
than a decade. 

‘The greatest legislative challenge conservationists now face will be simply to preserve the 
provisions already adopted,” Barry said. 


You Can Help Ensure the ESA’s Reauthoiization 

By making one phone call, AAZK members can join with World Wildlife 
Fimd members nationwide to make a difference. WWF has generously 
agreed to allow AAZK members to participate in encouraging the passage of the 
ESA reauthorization by making available their special 900 number. It’s easy 
to use. Just call 1-900-786-5300. An operator will make sure a message in your 
name will get to your representatives in Congress. The message wiU read in 
part, T urge you to support reauthorization of the Endangered Species Act The 
ESA has a track record of protecting endangered species and habitats. It’s 
needed and it works.” The $4.95 cost of this special caU which will appear on 
your phone bill covers the cost of sending letters to your representatives in 
Congress. Share the number with your friends and family and urge them to 
make a ^11 to help protect the Endangered Species Act 


Information Please 

I am seeking information from institutions housing African lions (Panthera leo) in their 
collections. I would like information on the following: 1) sex and age ratio of the pride; 2) 
management techniques regarding pregnant females and young, i.e. are they separated 
from the pride before giving birth? At what age are cubs introduced to the group and how are 
the introductions carried out?; 3) what problems arise from reintroduction of adults when 
they have been separated for prolonged periods?; and 4) would especially like to hear from 
those institutions that have a short separation period. Please send information to: Colette 
Howell, Animal Care, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario, Canada MIE 4R5. 

I would appreciate any information on puzzle feeders for use with primates. Sketches, 
dimensions, fabrication suggestions, materials used, etc. would be most helpful. Send to: 
Bryan Sepp, Fort Worth Zoo, 2722 Zoological Park Drive, Fort Worth, TX 76110. 


Our adult male eland (Taurotragus orys) has been diagnosed as having thrush in several 
of bis feet. Since he has a history of overgrown hoofs, he is immobilized several times a 
year for trimming. ANY information about thrush would be greatly appreciated i.e., your 
methods of treatment, evaluation of treatments, etc. Please send information ASAP to B. 
Niemackl, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606-2066. THANK YOU! 

Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 1 7 




Endangered Black-footed Ferrets Beat the Odds - 
Are Released Back into the Wild 


More than 50 Black-footed ferrets (Mustela nigripes), once thought to be extinct, have been 
returned to the wild in what has been called a testament to the success of the Endangered 
Species Act. Once at home in 13 states, the ferret population declined following the loss of 
prairie dogs, its main food source. About 325 are now in captivity, bred and reared at 
cooperating zoos. 

Born in one of the nation’s most successful captive breeding programs, the ferrets were 
released during September in Wyoming under a special provision of the Act designating 
them as a “nonessential experimental” population. This designation provides greater 
flexibility in managing the ferrets and alleviates fears that landowners will be hamstrung 
by the Act's perceived restrictions. 


The animals are released when they are about four and a half months old, “when they're 
large enough to adapt to a new environment,” said Tom Thome, a Wyoming state 
veterinarian, who supervised the captive breeding. The animals are tracked by radio. 
“One of them has been moving like a rocket. He’s gone 12 miles so far. And they think he's 
killed a prairie dog, but they’re not sure,” said Harry Harju, a biologist with the Wyoming 
Game division. This is a crucial skill, of course, with winter setting in. 


^xyp iNHW pfcriEGrr 


This Year Dare 
To Give The Gift 
That Keeps on Giving.. 


INFORMATION!! 



AAZA 


1992 will be the final year to submit 
information for the mammal section 
of the Zoo Infant Development Project. 

Send forms rnd requests to: 

Harmony Frazier-Taylor, 
Woodland Park Zoo, 

5500 Phinney Ave. N., 

Seattle, WA 98103. 

(206) 684-4866 
FAX (206) 684-4873 

SO, GIVE A GIFT, SHARE 


1992 AAZPA Regional Conferences 

Northeastern Remonal - March 15-17, 1992. For more information contact: Bob 
Jenkins, National Aquarium in Baltimore, Pier 3, 501 E, Pratt St., Baltimore, MD 
21202 (301) 659-4233. 

Western Regional - March 29-31, 1992. For more information contact: Mike Flint, 
Reid Park Zoo, 1100 South Randolph Way, Tucson, AZ 85716 (602) 791-3204. 
Southern Regional - April 12-14, 1992. For more information contact: Randy 
Rockwell, Jacksonville Zoological Park, 8605 Zoo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32218 
(904) 757-4463. 

Central Regional - April 26-28, 1992. For more information contact: Dawn 
McDonough, Dallas Zoo, 621 E. Clarendon Dr., Dallas, TX 75203 (214) 670-6825. 
Great Lakes Regional - May 3-5, 1992. For more information contact: Ann Silveri 
or Andy Odum, Toledo Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4010, Powell, OH 43609 (419) 
385-5721. 


18 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 



Recycling: Just Do It 

By 

Marie Schmude, Keeper 
Little Rock Zoo, Little Rock, AR 



As zoo keepers dedicated to professional animal care, we consider environmental issues to 
be extremely important. With the problems that we each face on a daily basis, recycling 
may seem to be an overwhelming task. However, the Little Rock AAZK Chapter and the 
Little Rock Zoo staff are committed to the recycling effort. 

Being a medium-sized zoo of 40 acres and having 21 keepers, we wondered if our efforts 
would be noticed. Instead, we forged ahead knowing that no matter how small the effort, we 
could make a difference. Until recently, the “Chapter” has always recycled aluminum 
cans from our pop machine resulting in over 500 pounds annually. After recent 
fundraising events for the “Adopt-an-Acre” and ‘Bowling for Rhinos’, many of us began to 
feel hypocritical. How could we ask for donations to help rainforests when we were 
throwing away tons of cardboard and paper? We then sought management’s approval to set 
up collections bins for several new items. Plastic, cardboard and glass are now a part of 
our recycling program. 

Since March of 1991, the Little Rock Zoo has recycled over 4 tons of cardboard and paper. 
Although only two categories of recycled items receive monetary reward, money is not the 
main reason that we recycle. We recycle because it’s the right thing to do. Any money 
received is used to purchase items for animal behavioral enrichment. 

By using feed sacks to make posters, we inform the public of our efforts. We also urge the 
public to do their part and offer information on various recycling businesses. We involve 
visitors by placing special containers within the zoo for recyclable items. What may seem 
to be an overwhelming task can become second nature when implemented into a daily 
routine. Remember “recycling pays” in more ways than one and anyone can make a 
difference. 

(3 

Attention AAZK Membership: 

The Little Rock Chapter is considering several changes in sweatshirts and t-shirts. Since 
you (the membership) are the buyers, we have decided to ask you for your opinion. Please 
fill out the survey and return by 1 March 1992. to: AAZK Little Rock Chapter, Attn: Survey, 
#1 Jonesboro Dr,, Little Rock, AR 72205. All responses are final after this date and you 
will be informed ASAP of the survey results. I thank you in advance. 

Marie Schmude 


SWEATSHIRTS (since grey is a good selling color we will continue to offer it, but you can 
decide on the other color. PLEASE CHECK ONE ONLY) 

Maroon Navy blue Forest green 


T-SHIRTS (light blue, tan and brown are the three colors that we offer at present. With 
brown being very difficult to obtain, we will no longer offer this color after it is sold pout. It 
is up to you, you can keep light blue and tan or you can choose from the following, PLEASE 
CHOOSE THREE COLORS ONLY !) 

Li^tblue Navy blue Forest green 


Tan 


White 


Black 


Maroon 


Grey 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


19 


.1 nternational 


-Compiled by Pam MacDougall and Mona Keith 
AAZK International Affairs Coordinators 

The government of Belize has increased the size of the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife 
Sanctuary by thirty times its original size to 100,000 acres. This area represents the only 
jaguar sanctuary. “What is good for the jaguar is also good for the people of Belize”. 

-James V. Hyde, Belize's ambassador to the United States 
Wildlife Conservation, March ! April, 1991 

Chimpanzee skulls, reportedly from Zaire, are being mounted on wooden carvings of 
human figures. They sell for $700 each in Kenya. The skulls are likely as a result of the 
capture of young chimps for the pet and pharmaceutical trades. Shipments go through 
Customs labeled as “wood carvings”. 

-Oryx, July 1991 

Two new Zoo Associations have been formed: the Pan American Association of Zoological 
Gardens, Aquaria & Botanic Gardens (PAAZAB) - members from South Africa, 
Bophutaswan, KaNgwane, Zimbabwe, the Ivory Coast and Zaire; and the Association of 
South East Asian Zoos. 



News 


- Zoo’s Print. April 1991 

A shipment of Indian birds (Red-headed buntings and Grey-headed goldfinches) was 
stopped in the Netherlands when Dutch authorities discovered it was illegally moved. After 
some discussion between Dutch & Indian authorities, the birds were sent back to India for 
rehabilitation back to their natural habitat. 

- Zoo’s Print. April 1991 

Despite a ban on feeding of animals by visitors, the following list of items given to 
Rotterdam Zoo’s Indian elephants was obtained during a one-day observation: 1706 
peanuts, 1330 sweets, 811 biscuits, 198 slices of bread, 17 apples, 13 pieces of paper, 5 ice 
lollies, 3 paper bags, 2 ice cream comes, 1 sausage, 1 shoelace and 1 white leather lady’s 
handbag! 

- International Zoo News. June 1991 

Keepers at Arignar Anna Zoological Park in India have started filling out Daily Keeper 
Reports to help improve management in the zoo. The categories listed include: health of 
animals, animal behavior, reproductive behavior, food and enclosure particulars. This 
gives the keepers added responsibility. Congratulations to the management staff for this 
step forward! 


Two of our sponsored keepers, Mr. Pundareeka Rao and Dr. S. Paulraj made the news, too. 
Mr. Rao, sponsored by the Zoo Atlanta Chapter has completed the training program at Jersey 
and Marwell! Dr. Paulraj, sponsored by the Brookfield Chapter has been transferred to a 
new position as Wildlife Warden of Srivilliputhur Grizzled Squirrel Sanctuary. 
Congratulations to both of them and thanks again to the sponsors for your support! 

- Zoo’s Print February 1991 


20 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Tntemational Zoo 'News^ Continued 


Staff from the London Zoo are helping at the Kuwait Zoo. Any other offers of assistance? 
Contact: Alexandra Dixon, Zoological Society of London, Regent’s Park, London NWl 
4RY, U.S. Telephone 071.722.3333; FAX 071.483.4436. 

- International Zoo News, June 1991 

ABWAK (Association of British Wild Animal Keepers) has produced a husbandry book, 
“Management Guidelines for Exotic Cats”, written by experts in the field. It has over 150 
pages of pictures for identification, distribution, and gestation along with details on 
housing, hand-rearing, genetics, behavioural enrichment and veterinary aspects 
pertaining to feline husbandry, etc. Overseas orders are £13.20 Sterling. Checks should be 
made payable to ‘ABWAK’. Send orders to: 

Cat Guidelines (ABWAK) 

12 Tackley Road 
Eastville 
Bristol BS5 6UQ 
United Kingdom 


ABWAK also has “Parrots in Captivity” Symposium Proceedings available for £6. The 
Reptiles and Amphibians Symposium will hopefully be published later this year. 

- Ratel , June 1991 

An updated listing of all articles which have appeared in Thylacinua and all papers which 
have been published in ASZK (Australasian Society of Zoo Keepers) Conference 
Proceedings since 1976 is now available, free-of-charge (plus overseas postage) from: 


The Editor 
ASZK 
P.O. Box 74 

Parkville, Victoria 3052 
Australia 

Publications Available 



Two new avian identification guides are now available in paperback from the Houghton 
Mifflin Company. The first is SHOREBIRDS: An Identification Guide by John Marchant 
and Tony Prater; illustrations by Peter Hayman with a forward by Roger Tory Peterson. 
Shorebirds are among the most popular birds in the world, and because of their widespread 
migration, a rare species can turn up almost anywhere. This authoritative, meticulously 
research guide covers all 214 species to be found throughout the world. Its 88 color plates 
show every species in various plumages and postures - 1600 individual birds in all. Each 
plate is cross-referenced to the detailed description in the text. In addition, four-color range 
maps clearly show breeding, nonbreeding and migratory distribution, while 50 line 
drawings highlight select details. 

The second companion volume is SEABIRDS: An Identification Guide by Peter Harrison 
with a forward by Roger Tory Peterson. This is the definitive book on the seabirds of the 
world, covering virtually all the known species, including sea ducks, loons, and grebes. 
Each of the 312 species is beautifully illustrated in the 88 full-color plates, showing over 1600 
birds. The clearly written descriptions include every detail needed for precise 
identification. Breeding, nonbreeding and migratory distribution is displayed on 324 full- 
color range maps, while 50 line drawings amplify points made in the text and in the color 
illustrations. 

Both books are priced at $24.95 each and should be available through your local bookstore or 
my contacting Houghton Mifflin Company, 215 Park avenue South, New York, NY 10003. 

Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 2 1 


Chapter 

News 

■GainesviUe Area Chapter AAZK 

This newly chartered Chapter of the 
Association includes members at the 
following institutions: Lubee 
Foundation, Silver Springs, Santa Fe 
Teaching Zoo and The University of 
Florida. For the time being, they are 
using a modified form of the national 
AAZK logo (see below) as their Chapter 
logo. Upon payment of local dues, each 
Chapter member receives a button 
featuring this logo. 



In November the Chapter set up a table 
at the Santa Fe Zoo’s Open House and in 
addition to promoting zoo keeping 
(AAZK), they also sold animal buttons 
and raffle tickets for two free meals at 
Cuco’s, a local restaurant, and also for 
a framed animal photo taken by one of 
our members, Linda Weaver. 

In the future we plan to take monthly 
field trips to private zoos in the area and 
have a expert speaker at each of our 
meetings for lectures and discussions. 
We are off to a good start. 

-Alycin Hayes, President 

The San Diego AAZK Chanter 

The Chapter is pleased to announce the 
following new members on the Board of 
Directors: 

Stephen Coate, Senior Mammal Keeper, 
Wild Animal Park; Chris Hamlin, 
Mammal Keeper, San Diego Zoo; 
Deanne Herfel, Senior Keeper, WAP; 
Phoenix Lundgren, Monorail and 
Photocaravan Guide, WAP. 


November Program: Ron Garrison, 
Photographic Services Supervisor of the 
San Diego Zoo/Wild Animal Park, 
gave an interesting and beautiful slide 
presentation on his September ’91 trip to 
Askania Nova, Russia (just three 
weeks after the attempted coup was 
overthrown), Ron’s job was to 
photodocument the Przewalski horse’s 
reintroduction project in the Askania 
Nove Reserve; 109 P. horses were 
processed as the ’team’ took blood and 
skin tissue samples, temperatures, 
branded/tatooed for ID’s and hoof- 
trimmed. 

Other slides included exquisite shots of 
Red Square and the Moscow Zoo. In 
closing, Mr. Garrison spoke proudly of 
the camaraderie between the Ukranian 
and San Diegan Team’. 

Chapter Soccer Team: Last summer the 
Chapter sponsofed a girl’s soccer team 
called the AAZK Blue Bears, This 
sponsorship promoted an increased 
awareness of zookeeping as a 
profession within the community. 
“AAZK” was printed on team uniforms 
and schedules. At season’s end the 
team was treated to a memorable 
Photocaravan tour at the WAP. Board 
members Lance Aubrey and Vickie 
Steele led the tour for the girls and their 
parents as they discussed the duties of a 
zookeeper. 

The Board will be exploring more ways 
to educate the public about AAZK 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 


Milwaukee County Zqq/AAZK 

The year 1991 was a busy one for the 
Milwaukee Chapter. Besides our 
monthly meetings, we actively 
supported or conducted a number of 
various projects. We were under the 
able direction of Craig Berg, our 
Chapter President. 

On 14 February we held our annual 
Valentine’s Day Bake Sale. With the 
support of our Chapter’s bakers, as well 
as the Zoo Pride Volunteers and Zoo 
staff, who both baked and bought the 
excellent items available, this was 
another successful event. 


22 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Chapter. News, Continued 

May 16th came around with ‘Bowling 
for Rhinos’. In 1991 we again bowled 
with the Lincoln Park Zoo-sponsored 
event in Chicago. Our Chapter sent ten 
participants to the fundraiser. Some- 
time in the future, we plan to sponsor 
our own event. Andy Lodge and the 
Ngare Sergoi Support group are well 
respected at the Milwaukee County Zoo. 
Because of this, many people have 
requested that we hold our own 
‘Bowling for Rhinos’ event. 

On 9 June we held our Rhino Walk with 
Michael Werikhe. Our chapter 
assisted by manning information 
tables, registering participants, and 
leading the walk around the zoo 
grounds. 

Our summer months were spent 
planning and preparing for our 
Annual Spaghetti Dinner. On 14 
September, our biggest Chapter event 
was held in the new Zoofari Conference 
Center. A good time was had by all. 
The money raised is used for Chapter 
approved assistance to worthwhile 
animal-related projects. We have 
several requests from Central 
American and South American zoos for 
equipment that they can not obtain with 
their limited budgets. Some requests 
are under study with prices being 
obtained, etc. 

Three of our Chapter members attended 
the pre-conference meeting in 
Columbus and the National Conference 
in Toledo in 1991. Our Chapter grants a 
Conference Assistance stipend which is 
available upon written request. This 
has been available for several years. 
In 1991, a stipend was instituted for zoo 
staff members who present a paper at 
any conference that is zoo-related. 

On 21 October we were happy to have 
Pallet Young from Belize, in Central 
America, as a Chapter speaker. Mr. 
Young presented an overview of the 
Community Baboon Sanctuary in 
Belize. Dr. Robert H. Horwich of Gay 
Mills, WI was also in attendance. Dr. 
Horwich founded the sanctuary in 
February of 1985 to prevent the 
destruction of habitat and to preserve 
the Black howler monkey {Alouatta 
pigra) populaton. The sanctuary is 


under the direction of the Belize 
Audubon Society. The Zoological 
Society of Milwaukee County is one of 
the supporters of this project. 

Blue bird nest boxes have been installed 
on the zoo grounds by the Milwaukee 
Chapter. We are now working on 
having wood duck nest boxes made 
and installed. This is a long-term 
commitment by the Chapter to the zoo. 
Boxes will have to be checked, cleaned 
and maintained on a regular basis. 

-Wayne J. Hazlett, Chapter Liaison 


AAZK 



MILWAUKEE CHAPTEP 


Brookfield Zoo Chanter 

Our aluminum recycling money 
continues to allow our Chapter to help 
support various conservation efforts. 
Five hundred dollars was donated to the 
Rhino Walk fundraiser. Money has 
also been used to support a research 
project with our African elephants. The 
project focuses on elephant 
communication. Money was also used 
to purchase 12 containers which were 
distributed throughout the zoo for 
aluminum can recycling. 

This summer, primate keeper Kathy 
Snyder presented a slide program on 
her involvement with an ongoing 
baboon research project in Kenya. This 
fall our second annual picnic was held 
and everyone had a great time. 

Following the Conference in Toledo, 
Fallet Young from the Community 
Baboon Sanctuary spent a couple of 
days in the Chicago area, giving his 
presentation for our noon lecture. 

Our fourth annual silent auction was 
held at the beginning of December. As 
in the past, the auction proved to be a 
very successful fundraiser. A portion 
of the proceeds will be given to a 
conservation effort which is 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


23 


Continued 

undetermined at the time of this 
writing. 

-Karen L. Anderson, Chapter Liaison 

Philadelphia AAZK Chapter 

Our Chapter finally has a new logo. A 
member of our Chapter, Julie Unger, 
came up with the original design and 
after many discussions and revisions 
we all agreed on the final design. Julie 
was also the artist who drew it for us. 
(See insert) 



From June through October we have 
held three “Meet the Keeper” evenings 
and one “Keeping Up with the Keeper” 
Morning. 

We sent two keepers, Maggie Liguori 
and Jean Joseph, to the National 
Conference this year. Maggie, along 
with another member, Teri Maas, 
presented a paper. 

The behavioral enrichment group that 
some of our members are a part of 
continues to meet monthly. We discuss 
what is being done for enrichment and 
what other possibilities there are. 

Our Chapter gave money to member 
Denise Robinson to help defray costs for 
her to attend the Chimpanzee 
symposium in Chicago in December. 

We are continuing aid to the Minerva 
Zoo. The La Aurora Zoo, also in 
Guatemala, has asked for our help as 
well. We are now aiding in 
redevelopment plans for the zoo. 


Los Ange les AAZK Chanter 

At the December meeting, members 
were entertained with a slide show 
entitled “The Phantom Wore Plaid” 
with the accompanying musical score 
from a similar, well-known 
extravaganza. It featured keepers and 
their animals from past years to the 
present. Kathy Nevins, reptile keeper, 
and the L.A. Zoo’s version of Cecil B. 
DeMill, did a super job of producing the 
show with able assistance from Carole 
Adams, Tad Motoyama and fellow 
keepers. This annual event draws a 
good attendance. Thank you, Kathy, 
for an idea that draws members 
together for some good laughs and an 
overview of the zoo’s population. 

Election of officers for this year was 
concluded with a slate of unopposed 
nominees. Officers for 1992 will be: 

President Marilyn Fackler-Gray 

Vice Pres Lois Johannes 

Secretary Carole Carniaux 

Treasurer Bruce Rawitz 

Newsletter Ruth Yukushiji 

Chapter Liaison Shirley Richardson 

-Lois Carwile, Chapter Liaison 

Rocky M ountain Chanter AAZK 

We are anxiously awaiting our 
Conservation Parking Meter which 
will be installed immediately and 
unveiled this Spring. Cate Werner, our 
ESP Coordinator, reported we will 
receive it soon. 

The management at the Denver Zoo has 
approved our request to put in a bid for 
the 1995 National AAZK Conference. A 
written bid has been sent to the Board 
for approval. 

Karen Stern and Suzanne Chacon are 
the ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ co- 
coordinators for 1992. Plans are 
already underway for the popular 
annual event. 

Rainforest Crunch sales are up due to 
the holidays and we’ve sold 120 boxes 
and 16 tins. This had been a good 
money maker for our Chapter. 

And we continued to sponsor Mr. 
Moktan from India. Happy New Year! 

-Suzanne Chacon, Chapter Liaison 


-Beth Schwenk, Chapter Liaison 


24 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Book 


Review 


The Encyclopedia of Animal Ecology 

Edited by Dr, Peter D. Moore 
Equinox, Oxford, England 1987 
Facts on File, New York, NY 
144 pages Hardback Price: $24.95 

Review by Lynne Hardie Baptista 
Public Information & Education 
Specialist ! World Wildlife Fund 

As part of a four-part series on different aspects of animal life. The Encyclopedia of 
Animal Ecology sets out to investigate and explain how species interact with their 
environment. Ecology is a relatively young discipline that takes the entire plant or 
animal and studies it in relation to its environment— ecology integrates the discoveries of 
biology with the observations of natural history. 

The book is divided into three sections. The first, “The Themes of Ecology”, describes the 
principles of ecology, explains how plants and animals relate to one another, and 
examines the ways in which an ecosystem develops and changes over time. Particularly 
interesting is the chapter, “Energy and Nutrient Relations”, which explains the complex 
process by which plants and animals get the energy they need to exist and how they make 
use of this energy. 

The second section entitled “Regions of the World” demonstrates how the principles 
described in the first section apply in nature. The first chapter looks at zoogeography, a 
discipline that attempts to understand how individual species came into existence in a 
particular region of the world. Other chapters in this section describe the major climatic 
zones of the world along with their resident flora and fauna. Each chapter provides 
examples of how species endemic to an area interact with their physical environment to 
form an ecosystem. Both terrestrial and aquatic habitats are discussed; for example, 
deserts, intertidal marine, and islands are among the world's geographic regions 
highlighted in this section. 

The final section of the book entitled “Man and Nature” discusses human beings in 
relation to the global ecosystem, considering our species as a component of nature rather 
than independent from it. It is clear that human beings have drastically affected certain 
regions of the world through agriculture, pest control, and pollution and it is also clear that 
whenever we harm our environment we are ultimately hurting ourselves. 

The Encvclonedia of Animal Ecology is a valuable addition to any conservation library. It 
is a carefully crafted book, well written with little technical language, and is perhaps the 
only introduction of the science of ecology. This volume is beautifully illustrated with over 
100 stunning photographs. Complicated principles are well explained with helpful 
diagrams and concise artwork. A team of thirteen authors contributed their expertise to 
this volume, and it is edited by Dr. Peter D. Moore, Reader of Ecology at King's College, 
London. 

Other books available in this series are The Encyclopedia of Animal Behavior . The 
Encyclopedia of Animal Biology , and The Encyclopedia of Animal Evolution. 




Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


25 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks I AKE, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 

The following two (2) positions are open at the Primate Foundation of Arizona. All 
applicants must have a negative TJB. skin test, negative hepatitis B surface antigen test, 
and evidence of a measles booster or natural disease prior to employment and as a 
condition of employment. Equal Opportunity Employer. Excellent benefits. Salary 
negotiable. Send letter of interest (with requested salary), resume, and three letters of 
reference to: Jo Fritz, Director, Primate Foundation of Arizona, P.O. Box 86, Tempe, AZ 
85280. 

REGISTRAR ...ma\nia.\n and develop computer record systems to account for inventory 
and health status of a chimpanzee breeding colony. Works directly with Staff 
veterinarian. Must be proficient in Lotus 1-2-3, WordPerfect, and type a minimum of 40 
WPM. Must have good communication skills. Experience in a veterinarian practice 
preferred. Must be willing to sign a three-year contract. Position open until filled. 

CHIMPANZEE CAREGIVER ...re(:\vdres BA/BS in Zoology, Biology, Anthropology or 
related fields of study and ability to work well with peers. Primate or Zoo experience 
preferred. Assist in the responsibility for maintaining and caring for approximately 87 
chimpanzees {Pan troglodytes). Must be willing to sign a two-year contract. Position open 
until filled. 

HEAD ZOOKEEPER. Sequoia Park Zoo. City ofEurkea. CA ...$1814-$2205/month + City- 
paid PERS and excellent benefits. Supervises, assigns, reviews, and participates in the 
work of animal care staff. Supervises or participates in a variety of aspects of the operation 
of a small municipal zoo, including animal management, exhibit repair and construction, 
volunteer and seasonal programs, and recordkeeping. Desirable qualifications include a 
combination of four years of increasingly responsible experience in zoo operations/animal 
care, including two years of lead supervisory responsibility, and the equivalent of an AA 
degree from an acredited college or university with major course work in zoology, biology, 
or a related field. A BA/BS with major course work in related field is preferred. 
Applicants must possess or be able to obtain a, valid California driver’s license by date of 
hire. Applicant? _mpst, CQniplete an Qfficial City apBlkation„with..§ppple.m.fintaL..que§ti9n§. 

Applications and additional information may be obtained from City of Eureka Personnel, 
531 K. Street, Room 102, Eureka, CA 95501, (707) 443-3850, FAX (707) 442-3989. Final Filing 
Date; 14 February 1992. Postmarks will not be accepted, but FAXES are OK if received by 
final filing date. EOE. 

COLLECTIONS BOTONISTISENIOR GARDNER ...Tesxionsih\e for zoo’s plant records, 
inventory, and collection labeling. Also requires hands-on horticultural maintenance 
and supervision of employees and volunteers. Four -year horticultural degree with two 
years’ experience including inventory preparation required. Computer experience helpful. 
Must be team oriented with interpersonal skills. Resumes only to; Richard M. Hurst, 
Indianapolis Zoo, 1200 W. Washington St., Indianapolis, IN 46222 by 30 January 1992, 

ANIMAL KEEPER ...the opening of a new RainForest Exhibit in the fall of 1992 will create 
approximately eight new animal keeper positions at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo. Because of 
internal transfers, the new positions may be in any area of the Zoo. We anticipate we will 
begin hiring in spring of 1992. Salary range; $10.69 - $12.19 per hour with excellent 
benefits. If you are interested, please submit a resume to Cleveland Metroparks Personnel 
Dept., 4101 Fulton Parkway, Cleveland, OH 44144. 

HEAD ZOO KEEPER ...pre^eT degree in biology, zoology or related field and 1-2 years 
supervisory experience in a zoological facility. High school diploma and ability to obtain 
Kansas driver’s license required. The successful applicant will be directly responsible for 
coordinating and participating in the daily care of the animal collection as well as 
assisting the zoo curator with animal management duties. Salary $19,427-$24,294 DOQ. 
Send resume and/or submit application to; Personnel Director, Dept, of Human Resources, 
City of Manhattan, 11th & Poyntz, Manhattan, KS 55402 by 15 January 1992. EOE, M/F/H. 


26 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


1991 INDEX 

Volume 18, Numbers 1-12 

Animal Keeners’ Forum 

(c) indicates a correction 
(?) indicates information please 
(K) indicates a keeper alert 
(p) indicates a photograph 


SDBJECT 

PAGE 

AMPHIBIANS 

278,333,334, 


365-6 

FROG 

277,338 

African clawed 

320 

goliath 

325 

Solofflon Island Leaf 

397 

TOAD 

338 

Puerto Rican crested 

311,312 

BIRDS 

267,275,277, 


318 

ALBATROSS 

136 

ANTBIRD 

362 

ARACARI, green Pteroglossus viridis, hat. 

no 

BIRD, bare-faced, hatching 

290 

BIRD OF PARADISE 


lesser Paradisea minor, hatching 

182 

red Pardisaea ruba, hatching 

86,182 

BLUEBIRD, fairy Irena puella, hatching 

218 

BOBOLINK 

227 

BROADBILL, lesser green Calyptoma viridis (?)404 

BUFFLEHEAD Sucephala aJbeoIa, hatching 

292 

BUSTARD, black Afrotis atra, hatching 

142 

CANARY 

96,338 

CARDINAL, red-crested Paroaria coronata, hat. 290 

CHICKEN, brood hen 

88 

COCKATIEL 

97 

COCKATOO, ( white )uiibrella Cacatua alba, hat.371 

CONDOR, Andean yultur gqphus 

101,258,292, 


381 

acquired 

111 

hatching 

292 

California Gymogyps californianus 

111,258-62, 


(P)259,292, 


400 

hatching 

182 

CONGO PEAFOIL Mropavo congenesis 

338 

hatching 

182,292,308, 


308,373 

CONURE, golden Aratinga guarouba 

238 

painted Pyrrhura p. picta, hatching 249,308 

sun Aratinga solstitialis, hatching 249 

COOT 

382 

CORDON-BLEU, blue-capped 


Uraeginthus cyanocephala, hatching 

290 

CRAKE, black Limocorax flavirostra, hat. 

308 

CRANE 

97,377 

crowned 


East African Balerica regulorm, hat. 

292 

Nest African Balearica p. pavonina, hat. 373 


demoiselle Anthroppides virgo, hatching 

249 

Manchurian Grus japonenis, acquisition 

251 

sandhill Grus canadensis, acq. 

111 

sarus Grus antigone, hatching 

292 

wattled Bugeranus carunculatus, hatchinc 

} 292 

white-naped Grus vipio, hatching 

250,292 

CROW 

338 

CUCKOO 

(?)211 

Guira G. guira, hatching 

374 

CURRASOW, greater Crax ruba, hatching 

88 

Grey's, hatching 

290 

helmeted Crax pauxi, hatching 

88,290 

nocturnal Mhocrax urumtuM, hat. 290 

DOVE 

African collared 

290 

Jamaican mountain witch 

Geotqgon versicolor, hat. 

84 

superb fruit Ptilinopus superbus 

275 

DUCK 

324,337 

mandarin Aix galericulata, hatching 

292 

ioscovy 

362 

pintail, Bahama Anas bahainensis 

382 

hatching 

249,371 

N. American Anas a. acuta, hat. 

371 

ruddy, Argentine Oxyura vittata, hatching 308 

N. Am. Oxyura jamicensis, hat. 

110,249,292, 

309 

South American 

382 

scoter, common 

337 

whistling (tree) 

lesser Javan dendrocygna javanica, hat. 250, 308-9 

plumed (Eyton's) Mdrocyona eytoni, hat.249 

white-faced Dendrocygnus vidvata, hat. 

309,371 

wood, white-winged Cairina scutulata, hat. 309 

yellowbilled. Anas undulata, hat. 

371 

EAGLE 

334 

African fish Haliaeetus vocifer 

337 

hatching 

111 

bald Haliaeetus leucocephalus, hat. 

46 

golden 

381 

EGRET, cattle Ardeola ibis, hatching 

251 

EMU Dromaius novaehollandiae 

337 

acquisition 

251 

hatching 

218 

FALCON 

381 

African pygmy Polihierax semitorquatus 

hatching 

216,290,292 

FINCH, Gouldran 

98 

FLAMINGO 

American Phoenicopterus ruber, hat. 

292,371 

Andean 

382 

Chilean Phoenicopterus chilensis 

312,382 

acquisition 

7 

hatching 

88,290,308, 

342,374 

FOE 

338 

FROfflOUTH, tawny Podargus strigoides, hat. 

142,292,371 

GNATCATCHER 

(?)211 

GO-AWAY, white-bellied 

Corytbaixoides leucogaster, hat. 290 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


27 


BIRDS (continued) 




LAPWING 

338 

GOLDENEYE, comion (American) 


crowned Vanellus coronatus, hatching 

6,290 

flucephala claiigula, hatching 

292 

LORIEET, Goldies Tricboglossus goeldiei 

275 

GOOSE 

337 

hatching 

88,290 

Andean 

382 

LORY, eclectus 

338 

Australian lagpie Anseranas seaipalmtd 

(?)404 

MACAW 

362 

GOOSE, cackling Canada 


blue and yellow Ara ararauna 

377 

flranta canadensis Minima, hatching 

290 

hatching 

111 

Egyptian Alopochen aegyptiacus, hatching 

251 

red-fronted Ara rubrogenys, hatching 

no 

Magellan, lesser Cbleophaga p. picta, hat. 85 

scarlet Ara macao, acquisition 

111 

Ne-Ne Sesochen(=Branta) sandivcensis, hat. 110, 290, 309, 

MAGPIE, azure-winged Cyanopica cyana, hat. 

371 


371 

MERGANZER 


Orinoco 

362 

coiuion ffergus merganser, hat. 

292 

red-breasted Branta ruficollis, hat. 

46,371 

hooded flergu$(=Lopbodytes) cucullatus, hat. 292, 308 

snow, lesser Anser c. caenlescens, hat. 

251 

MOTMOT 

362 

white-fronted, lesser Anser erythropus,hat.251 

blue-crowned Homotus momota, hat. 

84 

GREBE 

382 

MOUSEBIRD, white-backed C. colius, hatching 216 

GROSBEAK, rose-breasted 

227 

MURRE, comon Uria aalge, hatching 

371 

GROUSE, black 

338 

MYNAH 

98 

GUINEAFOWL 


Bali Leucopsar rothschildi 

203-6 

Kenya crested Guttera pucherani, hatching 249 

acquisition 

251 

GULL 

338,382 

hatching 

218,308 

HAWK, broad-winged 

227 

gold-crested Mpeliceps coronatus, hat. 

292 

red-tailed 

86 

ORIOLE, Northern (Baltimore) 

227 

HERON 

362 

OROPENDOLA 

362 

boat-billed 

311,362 

OSTRICH 

97,300,337 

HOATZIN OpisthocoEUS hoazin 

362 

OE 

97 

hatching 

250 

burrowing Athene cunicularia, hatching 

46 

HORNBILL 

97 

great horned Bubo virginianus 

141 

Asian 

397 

pypy 

338 

great Indian (greater) Buceros bicornis 

273,341 

snowy Hyctea scandiaca, acquisition 

111 

hatching 

290 

hatching 

6 

island( Celebes) Aceros cassidix, hatching 371 

spectacled Pulsatrii perspicillata, hat. 

111 

pied, hatching 

292 

PARAKEET, Derbyan Psittacula derbiana, hat. 216 

rhino Buceros rhinoceros, hatching 

371 

PARROT 

97,332,335,; 

von der Decken's Tockus deckeni 

84 

African grey 

96 

wrinkled Aceros corrugatus, hatching 

371 

blue-crowned Loriculus galgulus, hatching 216 

writhe-billed Aceros 1. leucocephalus 

270-6, (P)271, 

Eastern ringneck Barnardius barnardi, hat. 182 


(P)272 

hooded 


HUMMINGBIRD, ruby-throated 

227 

Psepbotus cbrysopterygius dissimilis, hat. 182 

IBIS 

382 

old night (Kakapo) 

323 

Aiierican(white) Eudocimus albus, hatching 218 

PARTRIDGE 

97,338 

bald Geronticus calm 

256 

crested wood Rollulus roulroul, hatching 

249,308 

sacred Threskiornis aethiopicus, hatching 110,249,308, 

PENGUIN 

1,97,98,330 


308,371 

black-footed ( jackass )Spbeniscus demersus 

245 

scarlet Eudociius ruber, hatching 

249,308,309 

hatching 

292,342 

Waldrapp (henit) Geronticus ereisita, hat.85,250 

emperor 

327 

JACANA 

320 

Galapagos 

325 

JACKDAW 

338 

gentoo Pygoscelis papua, hatching 

309 

JAY 

338 

Humboldt Spheniscus bumboldti, acq. 

217 

Beecheys Cissilopha beecbeii, hatching 

88 

hatching 

250 

plush crested Cyanocorai chrysops, hat. 

88,290 

king Aptenodytes patagonicus 

327-30 

JUNGLEFOWL Callus varius, hatching 

249,308 

hatching 

309,371 

KESTREL 

337 

rockhopper Eudyptes crestatus 

330 

KINGFISHER 

334 

hatching 

309 

Micronesian Halcyon cinnamomna, hat. 

216,250,250, 

PHEASANT 

97,336,338 


290,371 

argus, Malayan Aigusianus argus, hatching 250 

KINGLET 

(?)211 

blood Itbaginis cruentus, hatching 

250 

KOOKABURRA 

(?)285 

golden Cbrysolopbus picus, hatching 

290 

hatching 

182,292,308 

Lady Amherst Cbrysolopbus amherstiae, hat. 290 

2 8 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 



BIRDS (continued) PHEASANT (cont.) 


peacock 


Malay Polyplectron m. malacense, acq. i 

!6 

hat. ’ 

7,249 

Palawan Polyplectron eaphanuE, hat. : 

111,249,373 

peacock, Rothschild's P, inopinatuHf acq 

7,86 

wattled, Bulwer's Lophura bulweri, hat. 

249 

PIGEON 

322,338 

bleeding heart Gallicoluaba luzonica, hat 

.182 

bronzewing Phaps chalcoptera, hatching 

371 

crested, Australian Ocyphaps lophotes, hat 

.291 

crowned Goura cristata, hatching 

249 

Victoria Goura victoria j hatching 

88,290,371 

green, African, hatching 

291 

hornbill, writhe-billed 

271,272 

pheasant, hatching 

290 

pink Mauritus Columba myeri, hatching 

88,290 

pink-necked Treron vernans, hat. 

373 

white-crowned Columba leucocephala, hat. 

290 

wood 

336,338 

PLANTAIN-EATER, violet Husophaga vioIacea,hat 

.290,292 

PLOVER, crowned, hatching 

290 

golden 

338 

spur-winged Vanellus spinosus, hat. 

251 

POCHARD, red crested Netta rufina, hatching 

309 

PRAIRIE CHICKEN Tympanucbus cupido, hat. 

46 

PSITTACINES 

97,98,240,377 

PUFFIN, comon Fratercula arctica, hatching 

371 

tufted Lunda cirrfiata, hatching 

309 

QUAIL 

97 

QUETZAL, golden-headed 


Pbaromacbrus a. auriceps, hat. 

290 

RAIL, Guai Rallus ovstoni, hatching 

7,85,182,250, 


371,374 

RAPTORS 

97,333-4 

RHEA, comon Rhea americanus, hatching 

299 

greater Rhea amricana albescens, hat. 

250 

ROADRUNNER Geococcyx calif orniana, hatching 

249 

ROBIN, lagpie Copsychus saularis, hatching 

373 

ROLLER, lilac breasted Coracias caudata,hat 

.308 

ROOK 

336,338 

ROUL ROUL listed as PARTRIDGE, crested wood 

SCREAMER, horned 

362 

SHELDUCK, European T. tadorna, hatching 

371 

SHOVELER, Argentinean 

382 

SHRIK, Barbary Laniarius barbarus, hat. 

216,290 

SKIMMER 

362 

SMEW Mergus albellus, hatching 

292 

softbills 

97,98 

SPARROW 

336,338 

dusky seaside 

237 

SPOONBILL 

362 

roseate Ajaia ajaja, hatching 

307,308 

STARLING 

336,338 

superb Spreo superbus, hatching 

308 

violet-backed (Vereaux's aiethyst) 


Cinnyricincius leucogaster, hat. 

374 

STORK 

97 

white-bellied (Abdii's) Ciconia abdimii 


aquisition 

no 

hatching 

371 


liiky 

256 

SUNBITTERN Eurypyga helias, hatching 

6,88,290,291 

SWAN 

337 

black-necked Cygnus melanocoryphus,hat. 

299,371 

trimpeter C. cygnus buccinator, hatching 

6,46,251,292 

TANAGER, scarlet 

in 

silver beaked Ramphocelus carbo, hat 

.308 

turquoise Tangara mexicana, hat. 

6 

TEAL 


blue-winged Anas discors, hatching 

292 

Brazilian, hatching 

308 

Cape Anas capensis, hatching 

371 

chestnut Anas castanea, hatching 

371 

garganey Anas querquedula, hatching 

371 

hottentot Anas punctata, hatching 

308,371 

Laysan, hatching 

88,309 

marbled Marmronetta anguistirostris, hat 

.371 

ringed Callonetta leucophrys, hat. 

249 

silver(versicolor) Anas versicolor, hat. 

371 

TERN 

362 

Inca Larosterna inca, hatching 

6 

THRUSH 

338 

wood 

111 

TINAMOU, sMll-billed 


Crypturellus panirostris, hat. 

249 

TIRAMAN 

97 

TOUCAN 

362 

red breasted 

312 

Toco Ramphastos toco 

(P)372 

hatching 

308,372-3 

TRAGOPAN, Blyth's Tragopan blythi, hatching 

250 

TRUMPETER 

362 

comon Psophia crepitans, hat. 

6,373 

TURACO (TOURACO) 


Gold Coast Touraco p. persa, hatching 

46 

green 

96 

Lady Ross', hatching 

290 

violaceous, hatching 

88 

TURKEY 

338 

VIREO 

(?)211 

VULTURE 


black Coragyps atratus 

258 

cinereous (European black) 


Aegypius mnachus, hatching 

214 

greater 

258 

king Sarcorhamphus papa 

258 

hatching 

182 

lappet-faced Torgos tracbeliotus, hat. 

292 

turkey Cathartes aura 

258 

yellow-headed Cathartes burrovianus 

258 

WARBLER 

227 

blackpoll 

227 

wood 

(?)211 

WATERFOWL 

97 

WIGEON, Chiloe Anas sibilatrix, hatching 

371 

FISH i MARINE INVERTEBRATES 

97,196,321,322 

Batoids 

97 

Carp 

338 

Catfish, spiney 

362 

Chitons, giant 

(?)370 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


29 


FISH k MARINE INVERTEBRATES fcontinuedl 


HAMLS (continued) 


Cichlid, Lake Victoria 

304,397 

ALPACA Lama glam pacos 

382 

hatching 

299 

birth 

182,308 

Clown Mphiprion claiki, hatching 

142 

ANTEATER 


Crabs, henit 

(?)370 

giant Hyrmecophaga tridactyla 

135-6, (K)285 

Cuttlefish 

320 

birth 

85 

Damselfish, sargent-major 

136 

taiandua Tamndua tetradactyla 

234 

freshwater 

111 

ANTELOPE, sable Sippotragus niger 

291 

Goby 

322 

birth 

216,291,308 

fire 

136 

APES 

364,373 

Halibut 

338 

ARMADILLO 


Killifish, Western banded 


LaPlata three-banded 


Fundulus diaphanus lenona 

299 

Tolypeutes mtacns, birth 

216,249 

Lungfish 

351-55 

nine-banded Dasypus noveacinctus, birth 

290 

marine invertebrates 

97,(?)370 

ASS 

337 

Mollie, sailfin Poecilia latipina 

194 

AYE-AYE 

323 

Mosquitofish Gambusia affinis 

194 

BABIRDSA Babyrousa babyrussa, acqu. 

218 

Hudskippers Periophthalms schlosseri 

351-5, (P)352 

BABOON 

91,97,337 

Nautilus, chambered 

397 

Gelada Theropithecus gelada, birth 

7,111 

Piranha 

361 

Guinea 

337 

Piraruca 

322 

Hamadryas 

48,337 

Pupfish 


Mandrill Papio sphinx 

97,235 

Cyprinodon bovims 

195,196 

birth 

6 

desert Cyprinodon mcularius 

194-6,311 

Savannah 

92 

Devil's hole Cyprinodon diabolis 

194,400 

BADGER 

336,337 

Quahog 

320 

Eurasian 

337 

Ray 

362 

BANDICOOT 

277 

Sawfish 

97 

BANTENG 

300 

Sea stars 

{?)370 

BARASINGHA Cervus d. duvauceli 

94 

Sea urchin 

(?)370 

birth 

371 

Shark 

97,98,322 

BAT 

277,278,361 

epaulette Semiscylliuiii ocellatw, hat. 

371 

fruit (flying fox) 

239,337 

Stonefish 

226 

Egyptian Rousettus aegyptiacus 

182 

Sunfish, African 

320 

birth 

87-8 

Tiliapia species 

194 

grey-headed Pteropus poliocephalus 

233,278 

red and black 

97 

Jamaican Mibeus jamaicensis, birth 

87,142 

Wrasse 

322 

Rodriguez Pteropus rodricensis 

377 



birth 

6,7,250,324, 

INSECTS & lAND INVERTEBRATES 



373 

Ant, army 

362 

short-tailed Carollia perspicillata, bir.85,308 

leaf-cutter 

362 

straw-colored Eidolon helm 

233 

Bee, killer 

226 

insectivorous 

(K)69 

sweat 

362 

vampire Desmdus rotundus, birth 

291,308,373 

Beetle, Dor 

336 

BEAR 

334,337,381 

Butterfly 

96 

grizzly 

404 

fflorpho 

341,362 

barren-ground Ursus arctos sp. , birth 

46 

Preying Hantid, Chinese 


polar Ursus maritiims, birth 

7,142,251 

lenodera ardifolia sinensis 

77 

sloth Ursus (=Melursus) uisinus 

234 

Scorpion 

226 

birth 

216 

emperor Pandinus emperator, hatching 

7 

spectacled Tremarctos onatus, birth 

46,162,291 

Spider 

96,226 

sun, Malayan Ursus i=Helarctos) mlayanus 

234 

Wasp 

362 

BEAVER 

337 

Worm 

336 

BETTONG, brush-tailed 




Bettongia penicillata, birth 

371 

MAMMALS 

97,98,277 

BINTURONG Arctictis binturong, birth 

249 

AARDVARK Orycteropus afer 

209 

BISON 

337 

birth 

217 

wood B. bison athabasce, birth 

371 

AARDWOLF Proteles cristatus 

221 

BLESBOK Damliscus dorcas phillipsi, birth 

217,290 

ADDAX Mdax nasomculatus, birth 

291 

BONGO Tragelaphus eurycerus isaaci 

349 

AGOUTI 

337,361 

birth 

111,216,299 


30 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


ffiHNALS f continued] 

BONOBO listed under CHIMPANZEE, pygmy 
BUFFALO 97,198 

caps 224 

forest 349 

dwarf Syncerus offer nanus, birth 291 

water 337 

BOSHBAB! see GALAGO 

BUSfflOCK 96 

CAMEL 337 

Bactrian Camlus bictrims, birth 84 

dromedary Caielus dromedmus 17 

CAPUCHIN see under MONKEY 
CAPYBARA 337 

CAEACAL Felis carcal, acquisition 6 

birth . 249 

CARNOTS 333-4 

CAT 97,337 

civet 96 

fishing Felis viverrims, birth 6,110 

pallas Felis mul, birth 250 

CATTLE Bos tarns 278,336,337 

ankole, birth 290 

brown Swiss, birth 308 

CM, Patagonian Micbotis patagonm 234 

CEETAH idaonyi jubatus 97,337 

acquisition 7,217 

birth 86,371 

CHIMPANZEE Pm troglodytes 48,97,159-61, 

230,301-2,337, 

364 

birth 251 

pypy (bonobo) Pan pmiscus 95,110 

cnNCHILLA Chinchilla langier 234 

COATIHDIII 337,362 

white-nosed Sasua nasua(=narica), birth 217 
COMDO see PORCUPINE, prehensile-tailed 
roLOBDS 198,302 

black S white Colobus guereu 234 

birth 6 

Colotus guereM kikoyeusis 164-71, (P)170, 

234,346-7 

birth 88,142,308,342 

COUGAR see PUMA 

DEER 300,335,337 

brocket mazam sp. 362 

birtii 111 

red Mazana amricana 235 

fallow emus dma 221,335,337 

lule 337 

Fere David's Elapbus davidiams, birth 216,250 
red 335,336,337 

roe 336,337 

sika Cerras nippn 337 

birth 371 

tarula (hueiel) 381 

water, Chinese Hydroptes ineriis, birth 291 
DESM, Pyrenean 325 

DIK-DIK 

Guenther's Madoqua guentheri smthi, bir 217,290,308 
Kirk's Madogua kirki, birth 110 


DOG 

335,336,337 

wild Lycaon pictus 

97,256 

DOLPHIN 

97,98,188,196 

321 

■Baiji (Yangtze River) 

323 

bottle-nosed Tursiops truncatus 

70,331 

birth 

7,371 

DOUROUCOULI (01, MONKEY) Mus trivirgatus 

48,234,362 

birth 

86,110,250 

DOIKER 

96 

bay Cephalophus dorsalis, birth 

182 

cape 

337 

ECHIDNA 

short-nosed Tachyglossus aculeatus, bir 

217 

ELAND 

198,224,300 

giant Taurtragus derbianus, birth 

308 

ELEPHANT 

66,96,193,198 

224,263,264, 

278,314-7 

African 

148-53,156, 

194,256,318, 

337,403 

forest 

96,349-50 

Asian Elepbas aaxims 

95,109,163, 

(P)276,311, 

337,397 

Ceylonese Elephas n. mims, birth 

46 

ivory 

256,349 

ELK 

206,337 

FELINE, papillae research & suney 

72-3 

FERRET 

335,336,337 

black-footed Mustela nigripes 

392 

birth 

249 

FOX 

337 

bat-eared Otocyon mgalotis, acq. 

250 

fennec Fenecus zerda, birth 

85 

silver 

336,337 

swift Fulpes veloK, birth 

46 

GALAGO (BDSHBABY) 

grand 

48 

greater Galago crassicaudatus 

234 

lesser Galago senegalensis 

234,305,377 

acquisition 

7 

birth 

88 

GAZELLE 

(?)108 

Addra Gazella dama mficollis, birth 

308 

Dorcas Gazella dorous, birth 

291 

slender-horned Gazella leptoceros, birth 

110,249,308 

Speke's Gazella spkei, birth 

111,291,373 

tapson's Gazella tboMpsoni, birth 

no 

GEHSBOK Oryx g. gazella 

235 

birth 

110 

GERENDK Litocranius valleri, birth 

111,182,291, 

308,373 

GIBBON 

98,333,337 

agile 

48 

Siamang Sylobates syndactylus birth 

6 

white-cheeked Hylobates mcolor, birth 

7,291,308 

white-handed Hylobates lar 

234 

(?)45,(P)45, 


Animal Keepers' Forum, VoL 19, No. 1 1992 


31 


JRMMALS (continued) 

GIBBON 


white-handed Sylobates lar 


birth 

48,364 

45,87 

GIRAFFE Giraffa camlopardalis 

96,98, (?)161, 

Masai G. c. tippelskirche, birth 

263,264,300, 

337 

371,373 

reticulated G. c. reticulata 

94,235 

birth 

6,46,86,217, 

GLIDER 

249 

111 

GOAT 

337 

pypy Capra aegagns 

281 

GORILLA 

(P)215,230, 

birth 

337,364 

86,214-5,256 

lowland G. g. gorilla 

217,225,401, 

birth 

402 

6,85,110,216, 

lountain 

250,371 

23,323,402 

GUANACO L. glaiia guanicoe 

235,381,382 

GUENON Cercopithecus sp. 

91,296 

DeBrazza C. neglectus 

91,92,234 

birth 

371,373 

Diana C. diana 

296 

fire-bellied (Wolfs) C. volfi pyrogaster 

birth 

no 

GUINEA PIG 

337 

HAHPSTER, golden 

337 

striped 

337 

HARE, brown 

337 

HEDGEHOG 

337 

African Atelerh albiventris 

birth 

110,292 

tenrec(pygiiy, Madagascar) Echinops telfairi 

250 

birth 

7,216 

HIPPOPATOMUS 

97,(?)161 

pygny Choeropsis liberiensis 

99-100, (P)IOO 

HOOFSTOCK 

266 

HORSE 

335,336,337 

Przewalski Eguus przevalskii 

24 

birth 

46,216,371 

HYAENA, spotted C. croaita 

401 

HYRAX, tree Dendrohydrax arboreus 

235 

IBEX, Nubian Capra ibex nubiana, birth 

7,110,182,291 

Siberian Capra ibex sibirica, birth 

6 

IKPALA kepyceros mlaipus 

224 

birth 

290,308 

Kenya kepyceros mlaMpus rendilis 

94 

JACKAL Canis sesomelas, acq. 

6 

JAGUAR 

337,341 

JAGUARUNDI Felis yagouaroundi, birth 

216 

KANGAROO 

59,98,277,337 

grey, black-faced (Western) 

Hacropus fuliginosus selanops, birth 

6,251 

Eastern Macropus giganteus, birth 

291 

rat 

337 


tree 


Dendrolagus scottae 

223 

Hatschie's Mdrolagus mtschiei 

233,281,392 

birth 

85,251 

KINKAJOU Potos flams, birth 

no 

KOALA 

98,277 

Southern Pbascolarctos cinereus victor, bir 111 

KUDU 

337 

lesser Tragelaphus imberbis, birth 

87 

greater Tragelaphus strepsiceros 

224 

birth 

6,110,308,373 

LANGUR, Francios' 

397 

silver Presbytis cristatus, birth 

86,182 

spectacled Presbytis obscurus, bir. 290 

LECHWE, Nile Kobus mgaceros, birth 

110,291 

LEMUR 

305,337 

black Ism mcaco, birth 

218,371 

fat-tailed Cheirogaleus aedius, birth 

6 

mouse, lesser Microcebus minus 

7,233 

birth 

250 

red-bellied 

377 

ring-tailed Lem catta 

48,96,233 

acquisition 

182 

birth 

88,291 

LEOPARD 

126,198 

Amur Panthera pardus orientalis, birth 

217 

clouded Pantbera(=fleofelis) nebulosa, acq. 6 

bir.llO 

snow Unica(=Panthera) unica 

235 

birth 

250,371 

LION 

193,198,235, 

336,337 

African Panthera leo, birth 

86,88,291,371 

LLAMA Llama glam 

382 

birth 

84,292 

LORIS 

305 

lesser slow Sycticebus pygmeus, birth 

6,217 

slender Loris tardigradus, birth 

218 

slow Sycticebus coucang 

(7)108,234,305 

MACAQUE see also MONKEY 

91,337 

Barbary Macaca sylvanus 

91,337 

Black Ape (Tonkeana) M. nigra tonkeana, bir. 6 

celebes-crested Macaca nigra 

95-6 

birth 

373 

crab-eating 

48,337 

Japanese Macaca fuscata 

48,234,377 

birth 

371 

Javan 

337 

pig-tailed 

48 

rhesus 

48,92,337 

Toque 

337 

HACROPODS 

278,312 

Handrearing Orphan 

59-64,267 

marine 

277 

MANATEE, West Indian Trichecus mnatus 
MARMOSET 

331 

black-eared Callithrix penicillata 

373 

common Callithrix jacchus 

48,337 

birth 

371 

cotton-topped 

48 


32 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


¥M\l& (continued) 


titi, dusky 

362 

HAIOSET 


vervet 

91,92,96,337 

Goeldi's CallMco goeldi, birth 

6,86,249 

woolly 

182,361,362 

Kuhl's Callithrix kubli, birth 

373 

MOOSE A. aloes aiericana 

337 

pygiiy Callithrix=Cebuelh pygmea 

362 

aquisition 

86 

birth 

88,249,291 

HOUSE 

336,337,(7)404 

silvery Callithrh argentata, birth 

250 

MULE 

337 

survey, self-injurious behavior 

359 

MUNTJAC, Reeve's Hmtiacus reeves! 

235 

MARMOT, lountain 

136 

birth 

110,291 

MARSUPIALS 

277 

MUSK OX Ovibus wschatus 

200 

MEERKAT 

364 

birth 

371 

slender-tailed S. suricatta, birth 

6 

NUMBAT 

96,98,98,325 

HIM 

336,337 

OCELOT 

362 

MOLE 

337 

OKAPI Okapia Johnston! 

94-5 

MOLE-RAT, naJced Eeterocephalus glaber, bir 

6,85,217,249- 

OPOSUUH see POSSUM 



250 

ORANGUTAN 

96,230-2,300, 

Palestine Spalax ehrenbergi, acq 

85 


319,364,404 

MONGOOSE 

337 

Bornean Pongo pygmeus, birth 

84 

dwarf Eelogale pamla, birth 

84 

Sumatran Pongo pygmaus albeU, birth 

46,216,371-2 

MONKEY see also MACAQUE 

337,361,362 

ORYX 


Assam 

48 

Arabian Oryx leiicoryx 

236 

blue 

92 

birth 

111,182,291, 

bonnet 

48 


308 

capuchin, blackcapped 

362 

scimitar-horned Oryx damah, birth 

216,251,342 

hooded Cebus apella, birth 

87 

OTTER 

96 

tufted 

48 

Asian small-clawed 


whitefronted 

362 

Aonyx dnerea, birth 

45 

CBbids 

296 

river 

(?)161 

Colobus see under COLOBUS 


giant 

239,361 

Formosan 

48 

N. American Lontra(=Mra) canadens!s 

331 

Goeldi's see under MARMOSET 


acquisition 

86 

green 

92 

birth 

249 

howler 

341,361,404 

southern sea 

400 

black Alouatta caraya 

312 

PANDA, giant 

202 

birth 

lll,(c)182,308 

lesser Mims fulgens 

177,234 

red 

362 

PECCARY 

132,362 

mangabey 


Chacoan (Tagua) Catagonus wagneri 

129-32, (P)130, 

agile (golden-bellied) 


PINNIPEDS 

311 

Cerocebus galeritus chrysooaster, bir 

249 

PORCUPINE 

337 

crowned 

96 

African crested Bystrix crlstata 

234 

sooty(red-crowned) 


birth 

85 

Cercocebus t. torquatus, birth 

373 

prehensile-tailed (coendu) Coendou sp. 

234 

owl see DOUROUCOULI 


C. prehensUlSi acquisition 

86 

Patas 

48,91,92,337 

Mexican C. mxacanls, birth 

291 

birth 

371 

PORPOISE 

321 

probiscis Easalis lanatus, birth 

182 

POSSUM Trlchosms vulpeaila 

277,337 

Saki, pale-headed (white-faced) 


PRAIRIE DOG, black-tailed 

(?)161 

P. pitheda, birth 

64,87,111 

PRIMATES 

97,98,312,332- 

Savannah 

48 


333,335 

Savannah x Patas 

48 

PRONGHORN Mllocapra amrkana 

235 

spider 

48,361,362 

birth 

291 

black-handed AteJes geoffroyi, bir. 

no 

PUDU P. pudu, acquisition 

216 

long-haired 

48 

birth 

373 

squirrel, common Saimn sdureus 

48 



birth 

249,308 

PUMA (COUGAR) Fells concolor 

(7)3,126,334, 

HOMEY, stump-tailed 

48 


381 

swamp, Allen's 

92 

QUOLL 

96 

Sulawesi 

48 

tiger Basyms isacnlatus, birth 

216 

Sykes 

92 

RABBIT 

335,336,337 

Talapoin 

92 

RACCOON Procyon lotor 

(?)161 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


33 


MAMMALS f continued) 


RAT 

336 

brown 

337 

LoBpoc kangaroo 

Dipodomys heermnni arenas, birth 216 

slender-tailed cloud Phjoeoays cujsingi 
birth 

250,374 

REINDEER Eangifer tarandus, birth 

371 

RHINOCEROS 

96,224,300,337 

black Diceros bicornis 

41,263,311,318 

birth 

45,87 

Indian Rhinoceros unicornis 

256 

Suiatran 

Rider mcerus { =Dicerorhinus j sumtrensis 

373 

irtiite, Northern 

323 

Southern Ceratotberiuis s. sima 

235,263 

birth 

308 

RODENTS 

277,336 

SAIGA, Russian 

397 

SEAL 

97,98,337 

harbor Pboca vitulina 

(?)161 

birth 

371 

SEA LION 

188 

California Zalophus calif ornianus, birth 

7,291 

SERVAL Felis senal 

334 

birth 

216 

SHEEP 

278,337 

Cotswald Ovis aries 

235 

Duflon Ovis msinon, birth 

291 

SHREW 

337 

short-eared elephant 

Hacroscelides proboscideus, birth 

85,217 

tree, comon Tupaia glis 

48 

birth 

216 

lesser Tupaia minor, birth 

216 

large (long-nosed) Tupaia tana, bir.216 

SITATUNGA 

264,349 

SKUNK, striped M. mephitis 

(?)3 

SLOTH, Hoffman's two-toed Choloepus hoffmani 234 

birth 

291 

SPRINGHAAS Pedetes capensis 

234 

birth 

6,85,250 

SQUIRREL 

362 

ground 

337 

African, birth 

292 

Malayan giant Ratufa bicolor 

348 

Plantain Callosciuns notatus, birth 

217 

Prevost's Callosciuns prevosti, birth 

249,374 

rope Funisciurus sp. , birth 

292 

SUNI Sesotragus moschatus akeleyi, birth 

84 

SWINE 

97 

boar, European wild 

401 

hog, giant forest 

349 

red river Potamchoerus porcus 

236,(P)236 

pig 

335,336,337 

Hampshire 

401 

spotted 

401 

Vietnamese pot-bellied 

401 

wild 

337 

Yorkshire 

401 


TAGDA see PECCARY, Chacoan 

TAM, Nilgiri flemitragus hylocrius, birth 

85 

TAMANDDA listed under ANTEATBR 

TAHARIN 

296 

cotton-top Saguinas oedipus, birth 

87 

emperor Saguinus iiperator, birth 

182,308 

golden-headed lion 

Leontideus rosalia chrysomlas, birth 

308 

golden lion Leontideus r. rosalea, acq. 

lll,(c)182 

red-handed (Geoffrey) 

238 

Saguinus (geoffroyi^jmidas, birth 

182,292 

saddle-backed 

362 

survey, self-injurious behavior 

359 

TAPIR 

221,300,337 

Baird's Tapirus bairdi, birth 

291,299 

Brazilian Tapiris terrestris 

94 

birth 

110 

Malayan Tapirus indicus, birth 

86 

mountain 

361 

TARSIER 

305 

Western Tarsius bancanus, birth 

216 

TENREC see HEDGEHOG, pygmy 

TIGER 

278,334 

Siberian Panthera tirgis altaica 

234,235 

acquisition 

218 

TOPI Ramliscus lunatus jimela, birth 

249 

UAKARI Cacajao calvus rubicundus, birth 

291 

VICUNA 

361,381,382 

VIZCAHCA 

382 

VOLE 

335 

WALLABY 

59,98,337 

Bennett's Macropus nfogriseus frutica 

59-64, (P)60, 
{P)61 

King's Island Macropus rufogriseus, birth 142,292,342 

Parma Macropus parma, birth 

84 

red-necked 

233 

WALLAROO Macropus robustus 

59,233 

WALRUS, Pacific Odobenus rosaarus, acqu. 

250 

WARTHOG Pbacochoerus aethiopicus 

198,224 

acquisition 

218 

birth 

85,198,291,299 

WATERBUCK Kotos ellipsiprymus 

109,198,224 

birth 

84 

WHALE 

188,196,322, 

323 

Beluga 

70 

humpback 

102 

killer 

356 

sperm, dwarf Kogia simus 

331 

pypy Kogia breviceps 

331 

WISENT 

320 

WOLF, maned 

377 

red Canis ruf us, birth 

216 

WOLF, timber 

312 

WOMBAT 

277 

southern hairy nosed Lasiorhinus latifrons 

acquisition 

250 

WOODRAT, Allegheny Neotoaa floridana mgister 

birth 

292 


3 4 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


MpALS fcontinuedl 


REPTILES (continued) 


ZEBRA 

97,98, (?)140, 

python 



337 

African 

338 

Chapiaan's (Dram) 

(?)140 

rock 

97 

Egans bwchelli aBtiquom, birth 

308 

Australian 

98 

coMon Equus burcbelli boM, birth 

6 

Boelen's, acquisition 

no 

Grevy's Egans grevyi, birth 

182,182,291 

green tree Chondropython viridis, hat. 

216 



reticulated Python reticulatus, hat. 

371 

REPTILES 

267,277,278, 

rat 



333,334 

Mandarin Elapbe mdarina, hatching 

88 

ALLIGATOR 

321 

red-tailed green Gonyosom oiycephah 


Aierican (white) illigator Eissippiensis 

217 

hatching 

292 

CAIMAN 

338,361,362 

rattlesnake 

226,269,338 

dwarf Paleosucbus palpebrosus, hatching 

216 

sidewinder, Mojave desert 


CROCODILE 

97,98,321 

Crotalus c. cerastes, hat. 

371 

LIZARD 

97 

Dracoan Crotalus vegrandis, hatching 

182 

dragon, Asian water 


Urutu Bothrops altermtns, hatching 

182 

Phfsigmtks cocincims, hat. 

7 

rough green Opheodrys aestim, hatching 

308,373 

Koiodo 

323 

viper 

97 

gecko 

98 

horned Bitis caudalis, hatching 

88 

African fat-tailed 


pall 

269 

Hemtheconyx caudidnctus, hat. 

249 

Rowlys Botbriebi roMleyi, hatching 

88 

day, Madagascar 


vine Oxybelis sp. , hatching 

85 

Pbelsum sad^ascmensis sp. hat. 85 

wood, Panaianian Ongaliophis panmnsis 


Standing's PMsma standing! ^ hat. 249 

hatching 

88,371 

leopard Eublepbaris Macular ius, hat. 

7 

TERRAPIN 

338 

Naiib sand Chondrodactylas ajigulifer,hat.249,308 

TORTOISE 

97,98 

rough scaled Pachydactylus sp. , hat. 

249 

Galapagos Geochelone elephantopbus porter! 

gila nonster Eeloderm suspectim, hat. 

46 

hatching 

7 

Iguana, Fiji 

397 

Geochelone sp. 

238 

Meiican beaded Eeloderm horridM, hat. 

142 

pancake Mlacochersus tornieri 

377 

Nile 

97 

hatching 

110,142 

slink, Solofflon Island (pre-hensile tailed) 


South African speckled of Padloper 


Corucia zebrata, birth 

85,142,217, 

Boaopus signatus, hatching 

87 


249,292,308 

spurred, African Geochelone sulcata, hat. 

290 

SNfflE 

97,338 

TURTLE 

97 

adder, puff 

338 

loggerhead C. caretta 

299 

boa 

97,98 

mud, African Pelusios subniger, hat. 

292 

Brazilian rainbow Epicrates c. cenchria 


Plyrouth red-bellied, hatching 

84 

birth 

371 

fracbeisysf-PseudeMys) rubriventris bangs! 

84 

eierald tree Coral Jus cminus, birth 

84,216 

Podocneai sp. 

238 

Guitaialen dwarf 


pond, Bornean Orlitia bornensis, hat. 

251 

UngaliopMs contimntalis, birth 

88 

river 

239 

Madagascar ground 


Malaysian (painted Batagu) 


Acrantopks mdagascariensis, birth 

308 

Callagur borneosensis, hatching292 

Madagascar tree 


sea (marine) 

97,157, (?)285, 

Saminia sadagascmemis, birth 

371 


341 

cat-eyed, black-headed (red) 


olive Ridley 

157 

Boiga nicriceps, hatching 

85,217 

side-naked, Amazon red-headed 


cobra 

97 

Podocnems erytbrocepbala, hatching 

182 

forest 

311 

snake-necked 


Coluber grass 

338 

broad-shelled Chelonia expansa, hat 

7 

false coral, hat. 

292 

New Guinea Cklodina novaeguina 

7 

SNAKE, hogiose 


snake-necked, Siebenrock's 


Sestern Heterodon nasticus, hatching 

46 

Ctelodina siebenrocki, hatching 

292 

Madagascan Lioheterodon Mdagascariensis 

soft-shell, Florida 


hatching 

292 

A^one(=Trionyx} feroi, hatching 

371 

laiba 

97 

spiny, Malayan, hatching 

307,(P)307 


lilksnake, Pueblan 

Impropeltls trisnguM mpMli, hat. 249 

Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 3 5 


AAZK 


Administrative Offices 

10-11,69,90, 

111,158,251, 

347,384-5,404 

Advisory Council 

80,145,388 

Animal Keepers' Forum (AKF) 

385-7 

Associate Editor 

281 

message 

211 

Editor message 

112,263-5,342, 

376 

letters to editor 

114,252,346-7 

survey 

77,109,177, 

209,254-5,286- 

288 

Board 1992-1995 

245,370 

By-Laws with 1990 Revisions 

41,192insert 

Meeting Overview, 1990 

10-22 

1991 

384-97 

Proposals 

21-22,380 

Open Board Meetings 

80,283-5 

President's message 

3,80,114,145, 

180-1,283-5, 

370 

Census/Survey Update 

184 

Chapters 

Conservation Materials free 

157 

Fundraisers (pages may have multiple 

1-2,23,66,101, 

listings) 

102,122,123, 

see also ESP, Bowling for Rhinos, 

162,163,225, 

and Save Our Rhino Walk 

300,318,357, 

401,402,404 

Group Exemption Letter 

41 

Keepers helping Keepers around world 

403 

News 

23-24,66-7, 

101-3,122-4, 

162-3,198-200, 

223-5,268-9, 

300,304,318-9, 

356-8,401-4 

rechartering 

379 

Committees 

Ad Hoc Ethics 

388 

Animal Data Transfer Forms 

19,394-5 

Annual Conferences 

393 

Approach to Zoo Keeping 

12,388 

Archives 

176,178 

Awards 

1,17,391 

Biological Values for Selected Mammals 

12,387 

Book Review 

11,12,141,192, 

305,326,387 

By-Laws Review 

15,390 

Chapter Projects/Products 

20-1,395-6 

Conference Book 

393-4 

Conservation, Presenation & Restoration 15-16,121,197, 

390 

Diet Notebook 

13,387 

Exhibit Design Form Project 

19-20,288+ 
insert, 395 

History 

14,77,109,298- 

299,389 

25th Anniversary Book 

109,369 


AAZK (continued) Comittees (cont.) 


International Affairs 

14,257,389 

Keeper Accomodations List (KAL) 

2,18,178,392 

Keeper Training & Education 

18,392 

Keeper Training Materials Identification 

1 17,78,246 

Keeper Training Videotape 

19,120,141, 

394 

Keepers helping Keepers 

403 

Legislative Advisor 

11,17-18,392 

Liaison to AAZPA li IZE 

17,391 

LINK (Liaison & Inf. Net. for Keepers) 

13-14,25,42, 

43,74,105,109, 

116,138,141, 

175,207,219- 

21,242,279, 

303,339,367, 

379-80,388-9, 

407 

regional coordinators 

379 

Manual of Resources 

14,388 

Membership Directory 

12,387 

National Conferences/Conference Book 

18-19 

Nominations and Elections 

13,41,245,388 

Projects/Products 

395-6 

Public Education 

16,390-1 

Public Relations 

16-17,391 

Reference Search 

344 

Research/Grants 

17,281,391-2 

Slide Library Project 

65,146 

Staff Exchange 

18,392 

Zoo Infant Development Project 

12,214,233-5, 

309,374,387 

Zoonotic Diseases Handbook 

13 

Zoo/University Project 

19,141,394 

Members 

2,42,90,124, 

144,189,210, 

248,282,312, 

350,406 

Membership General Meeting 

22,396-7 

Preference Poll 

181 

Project Proposal Form 

Accessories 

220-1 

AAZK auto decals and stickers 

67,103,358 

AAZK bumper stickers 

67,103,317,358 

AAZK buttons - "Keepers Care" 

163,200,358 

AAZK coffee mugs 

67,103,163,200 

AAZK frisbies 

319,358 

AAZK keychain with thermometer 

297,331,358 

AAZK mesh shopping bags 

67,103,200, 

225,358 

AAZK safety signs, mapetic 

67,103,163, 

200,357 

pins 

225 

The Patch 

268 

poster - bowling for rhinos 

403 

T-shirs, AAZK 

67,103,163, 

200,357 

1990 Conference 

124 

bowling for rhinos 

403 

ISEC 

224 

Ngare Sergoi 

225 


36 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


African Wildlife Foundation 

Aniial Data Transfer Foms (ADT) 

Association of Avian Vetenarians 

Audio Review 

Backyard Bird Song 

Binding by Ear 

Narada Wilderness Collection 

Australasian 

Dendrolagus scottae 

Awards S Grants 

AAZK 

AAZPA 

National Wildlife Rehabilitators Assoc. 
Nixon Griffis 

Senior Biology & Conservation Award 1991 
World Wildlife Fund Conservation Award 
Births & Hatchings 

Book Review 

Alliaators and Crocodiles 

Alliaators to ZooDlankton:A Dictionarv 

157 

78,177-8,281 

98 

229 

229 

229 

222-3 

4,50,78,82-3, 

117,281,310- 

12,369 

397 

172 

221 

172 

208,229,246 

6-7,45-6,84-8, 

110-1,142,182, 

214-8,249-51, 

290-2,299,307- 

9,342,371-4 

320-1 

of Water Babies 

320 

Bio Red Barn 

324 

Bioloov of Aiohibians 

365-6 

Bites k Stinos. World of Venomous Animals 

226 

Care k Handlino of Australian Native 


Aniaals-Emeroencv Care k Caotive Hanaoe. 277-8 

The ChiiiDanzees of Gombe: Patterns of 


Behavior 

301-2 

Comoarative Behavior of African Honkevs 

91-2 

Conservation BiolooviThe Science of 


Scarcity k Diversity 

56-9 

Dinosaurs, Dinosaurs 

324-5 

Do Fishes Get Thristv?Ouestions Answered 


bv the Staff of the New Enaland Aouarium 322 

Dolnhins and Porooises 

320-1 

Ducks Don't Get Wet 

324 

The End of the Game 

193-4 

Exnlorina Zoos: A Guide to Wild Animals 


in Caotivity 

125 

Feathers Like a Rainbow:An Amazon Indian 


Mi 322-3 

Last Chance to See 

323-4 

National Wildlife Federation :Book of 


Endanaered Soecies 

325 

Natural History of the Primates 

173 

Pioeons 

322 

Pomona: The Birth of a Penouin 

320 

Rain Forest:A ouide to Research k Tourist 


Facilities Central k South America 

405-6 

The Red Sea 

321 

A Reef comes to Life:Creatino an 


Undersea Exhibit 

321 

Smithsonian's New Zoo 

193 

Wiales 

323 

Zoo: The Modern Ark 

278 


"Bowling for Rhinos" see also under 

01,44,79,121, 

AAZK Chapter Fundraising 

145,197,198, 

199,218,224, 

225,269,300, 

304 

Bulletin Board 

398 

Conferences\Spposiums\Workshops 

AAZK 1990 Proceedings 

78 

AAZK 1991 - 17th 

52-54,143,179, 

190-1,212,247, 

283-5,293-5 

proceedings 

209,377 

AAZK 1992 

9,128,393,399 

AAZK 1993 

393 

AAZK 1994 

177,246,397 

AAZPA 1991 

143,179,212, 

247,356 

regional 

24,71,77,103, 

343 

1992 

305 

Schools for Management Development 

343 

Applying Behavioral Research to Zoo 

Animal Management 

81,113,143 

Chimpanzees: diversity k suvival 

144,179,211, 

248,306,343 

Coral reefs. Sharks k Reef Fishes 

81,113 

Elephant Workshop, 12th Inti' 

245,247,282 

Gorilla Workshop, 2nd 

245,341 

Lungfish Breeding, Inti. Australian 

81,113 

Marine Animal Trainers - 19th 

143,179,211, 

247,282,306 

Holluscan Conservation, Intn'l 

248,306 

Nondomestic neonatal, proceedings 

93-6,266-8 

Nutrition, Dr. Scholl - 9th 

144,179,211, 

248,282,306, 

343 

Primatologists, Int. 13th congress 

46-9 

Rhinoceros Biology & Cons Inti. 

71,81,113 

Zoo Veterinarian, 1991 annual 

81,113,143, 

179,212,247 

Zoo Veterinary Technicians, 11th annual 

247,306 

Zoological Horticulture Conference 

247 

Conservation Biology 

56-9 

Conservation Materials (free) 

157 

Contest: Boomer Ball 

375 

Defenders of Wildlife: Exotic Bird Pet Trade (K)127 

Developing Nations: Husbandry Health 

Considerations 

237-41 

ESP (Ecosystem Survival Plan) 

118-9, (P)119, 
142,145,185-6, 
(P)185, 186-7, 
(P)187,210, 
225,305,402 

Fauna 

browse study 

296-7 

cactus, Lee pincushion 

400 

Illustrations S Cover Art 

Aardvark 

July 

Bear, polar 

309 

Colobus 

171,309 

Oiiipanzee 

159,160 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 3 7 


Illustrations S Cover Art (cont.) 


Goat, pygiy 

September 

Hornbill, great Indian 

November 

Loris, slow 

October 

Macropods 

64,309 

Hantid, Chinese Preying 

March 

Mynah, Bali 

203 

Orangutan 

232 

Oryx 

309 

Owl 

269 

great horned 

May 

Panda, lesser 

June 

Penguin 

January 

black-footed (jackass) 

August 

rainforest animals 

December 

Rhinoceros 

February, 264 

Seal 

309 

Tapir 

235 

Waterbuck 

April 

Information Please 


Antelope - horn loss 

108 

Birds - Northeast mixed exhibit 

211 

Broadbills, lesser green - breeding 

404 

Callitrichids self-injuries survery 

359 

Cougar, digestion 

3 

education outreach with live animals 

108 

feline papillae research 

72-3 

fly control 

211 

Gibbon, white-handed - fraternal twins 

45 

Giraffee with mixed species 

161 

Goose, Australian magpie - breeding 

404 

Hippopatamus introduction 

161 

Invertebrates, marine public education 

370 

Keeper Training Program 

285 

Kookaburra - aggression 

285 

Loris, slow - furnishings 

108 

marine invertebrates, touch tank 

370 

mice, house 

404 

Otter, river - squeeze cage 

161 

Prairie Dog hair loss 

161 

public feeding policy 

140,202 

Racoon - stereotypic pacing 

161 

retiring Keepers 

178 

Seal, harbor - squeeze cage 

161 

Skunk, striped - exhibit design 

3 

Turtle, sea 

285 

two-way radio use 

108 

Zebra - male introduction 

140 

International News 

256-7 

Intern '1 Society for Endangered Cats (ISEC) 

101-2, (K)280 

Keeper Alert 


Bat book-Haintenance of Insect. Bats in Cap69 

Bulletin Board 

398 

Defenders of wildlife exotic pet campaign 

127 

egg blowing 

69,114 

foreign keeper correspondence 

96-8 

gristle around tongue, giant Anteater 

285 

History Committee needs input 

77 

ISEC seeking articles 

280 

Racetrack fundraiser video 

1 

Retiring Keepers 

178 


self-injurious behav. Callitrichids surv. 

359 

zoo boot 

355 

Zoo Conservation Outreach assistance 

158 

Keeper Education 


articles for ISEC 

280 

Cano Palma biological station 

341 

correspond with foreign keepers 

96-8 

Keeper Training Program 

(?)285 

Keeper Training Program - San Diego 

133-4 

Safety Manual 

66 

Wildlife Preservation Trust 

55 

Legislative Outlook 

70-1,156-7, 


201-2,227-8 

Obituary 


Dr. Paul Chaffee 

8 

Michael Lavelle 

8 

Pamela Orsi 

109,163,357 

Photographs 


Colobus 

170 

Condor, California 

259 

Elephant, Asian with Mammoth 

276 

ESP Parking Meter 

119,185,187 

Gibbon, white-handed 

45 

Hippopotamus, pypy 

100 

Hog, Red River 

236 

Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary 

265 

Peccary, Tagua 

130 j 

Toucan, Toco 

372 

Turtle, Malayan Spiny 

307 i 

Wallaby, Bennett's 

60,61 1 

Primate Talk 

210 ! 

Publications 

1 

AAZK Conference Proceedings, 1990 

78 

AAZK Conference Proceedings, 1991 

209 

AAZK Diet Notebook, Mammals Vol.l 

76,137,155, ! 


338,363,383 j 

Animal Rights/Aniial Welfare 

400 

The Butterfly Garden 

104 1 

Cofflolete Cataloa of Crueltv-Free and Eco- 


friendly Products 

174 ' 

Earth Voices :Trackina Environmental News 

174 ' 

Earth Work 

174 1 

Exotic Animals as Pets 

101 ! 

Federal & State Endanaered Snecies 

( 

Expenditures 

262 1: 

Field Guide to Endanoered Wildlife 

325 i' 

Field Guide to Tooical Forests 

325 

Fish and Wildlife '90 

262 

Great Ape Enrichment Pamphlet 

364 'i 

Green Index, 1991-1992 

312 :: 

Growino and Prooaoatina Wildflowers 

104 i 

The Humminabird Book 

104 1 

Inti. Entoioloov Resource Guide f3rd edi 

88 

Landscanino for Wildlife 

104 i; 

The Lesser Aoes: Evolutionary and 


Behavioural Bioloov 

174 i 

Life Histories of North American Birds; 

|i 

Cuckoos, Goatsuckers and Humminobirds 

104 


Maintenance of Insectivorous Bats in 

Captivity 69,228 


38 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


Publications (cont.) 


Hanageient Guidelines for Exotic Cats 

341 

National Wildlife Refuae System 

262 

Neonatal and Medical Care Conference 

266-8 

Outwittina Souirrels 

104 

Personal Care with Princiole: A cniide to 


choosina crueltv-free cosmetics & 


products from iiaior manufacturers 

174 

Peterson Field Guides 

228 

Pocket Guide to the Humane Control of 


Wildlife in Cities S Towns 

174 

Pocket Guide to Humane Control of Wildlife 

in Cities & Towns 

174 

Primatologists, 13th congress abstract 

49 

Puzzle Feeder for Great Apes 

364 

Recommended List of Books & Other Resources 

for Zoo & Aquarium Libraries 

369 

Research & Exoloration 

228 

Reptiles & Amohibians: Eastern & Central 


North America 

104 

Runnina With the Fox 

104 

Safety Manual for Zookeepers 

66 

State of the Ark 

104 

Tree Kangaroo Husbandry Notebook 

80,136,171 

USFWA Endangered & Threatened Species 


Recovery Program 

400 

The Welfare of Pet Parrots 

366 

Who Killed Alaska? 

174 

Woodworkina for Wildlife 

104 

Zoo Stories Book 

200,358 

Zoonotic Diseases, 2nd Edition 

76,139,155, 


338,363,383 

Zookeeping as a Career 

16 

Reproduction 


artificial insemination 

278 

Camel, dromedary - pregnancy detection 

17 

deer, fallow - reversible contraception 

220 

gorilla 

402 

hippopotamus, pygmy birth & calf protocol 

99-100 

Hornbill, writhe-billed 

270-6 

Kangaroo, Hatschie's tree 

281 

vas plugs - reversible male contraception 

221 

Save Our Rhino Walk 

21,162,163, 


198,199,304, 


356,402,403 

Television Programing 


Mysterious Elephant of the Congo 

349-50 

Veterinary 


Anteater, gristle wrapped around tongue 

(K)285 

Cougar, digestion 

(?)3 

Galago, lesser - periodontal disease 

377 

Giraffee, premature 

94 

immobilization A3080 

224 

Impala, diet for hand-reared 

94 

IV catherization in neonates 

93 

Neonate immune system 

93 

Non-domestic Neonatal Spposium 

93-6,266-8 

Okapi, surgical correction of bilateral 


valgus carpal deformities 

94-5 

Orangutan skin problem 

319 

Prairie Dog hair loss 

(?)161 


Tapir, equine plasia transfusions 94 


tranquilizer dart puller 

126-7 

tuberculosis in domestic 5 zoo animals 

335-8 

Videos i Reviews 

Environment Enrichment: Advancing Animal 

Care 

154-5 

Keeper Training - Safety & Feeding 

120,394 

Keeper's Role in Zoo Animal Health 

394 

Racetrack Trash fundraiser (Preakness) 

1-2,364 

Rhino Capture/Giraffe Relocation 

341,398 

VIEWPOINT 

188-9 

Worldwide Research Expeditions 

136 

Zoo Conservation Outreach Group (ZCOG) 

102,158 

Zoo Outreach Group 

252 

ZOOS & SANCTUARIES 

Animal Rehabilitation Center 

206 

Burnet Park Zoo:Hudskippers 

351-5 

Cano Palma Biological Station 

341 

Chimfunshi 

159-61 

Columbus Zoo: Study of the Colobus Monkey 

164-71 

Dreher Park Zoo: Visitor Survey for Browse 

Study 

296-7 

England: Puzzle Feeder for Orangutans 

230-2 

Tuberculosis in Animals 

335-8 

Exotic Feline Breeding Center: 

A Tanquilizer Dart Puller 

126-7 

Chapter Shows Its Support 

380 

Greater Baton Rouge: Pygmy Hippo Birth & 

New Calf Protocol 

99-100 

Japan 

International Primatologists 13th Congress 46-9 

Kuwait Zoo 

112,141-2,] 

Los Angeles Zoo: 

California Condor-Coming Back From Brink 

258-62 

Giant Anteater Enrichment 

135-6 

Red River Hogs 

236 

Lowry Park Zoo:King Penguin rearing 

327-30 

Miami Hetrozoo: Breeding the Writhe-Billed 

Hornbill 

270-6 

National Aquarium in Baltimore: Conservation 

Parking Meters 

185-6 

Netherlands Zoo:De Harpij 

348-9 

New England Science Center ZOO: Another Day 

at the Zoo 

241 

ZOOS & SANCTUARIES (continued) 

Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sancturary 

68-9,79,198, 

199,263-5, 

(P)265,341, 

398,402 

Philadelphia Zool Soc.:Reflections on Peru 

360-3,381-3 

Possum Walk Station: Handrearing Orphan 

59-64 

Macropods 

St. Louis Zoo 

Captive Care of the Desert Pupfish 

194-6 

Hand-rearing the Bali Mynah 

203-6 

Sanctuary 3000 

206 

San Diego Zoo: Keeper Training Program 

133-4 

Progress of AAZK History Committee 298-9 

Santa Fe Community College Teaching Zoo: 

Remedies for Aberrant Behavior 

332-4 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


39 


Sea World of Florida! Beached Aniial Rescue 


Wildlife Preservation Trust 

55 

& Rehabilitation Progran 

331 

Woodland Park Zoo:Update Infant 


Toledo Zoo: Elephant Manage. Survey Results 

148-53 

Developient Project 

233-5 

Topeka Zool. Park:Keepers,Kids & Rainforests 

186-7 

Zoological Society of San Diego: 


Tulsa Zool. Park: Correspond with a foreign 


Captive Kanageient of Tagua in Paraguay 

129-32 

keeper 

96-8 

Elephant Manageient - Part 1 

314-7 


Regional Coordinators 


ALABAMA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 | 

ALASKA - Vacancy ] 

ARIZONA - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 85716 
ARKANSAS - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher, Little Rock Zoological Gardens, 

#1 Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205 | 

CALIFORNIA- Vacancy ! 

COLORADO - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 ji 

CONNECTICUT- Jeanette Nadeau, Roger Williams Park Zoo, Providence, RI 02905 i| 

DELEWARE - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
FLORIDA - Rick Smith, 11707, #5 Park, Orchard Circle, Tampa, FL 33612 j 

GEORGIA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 3031 5 
HAWAII - Michelle Suenishi, Hilton Hawaiian Village, 2950 Ena Rd., Honolulu, HI 96815 
IDAHO - Mark Konop, Zoo Montana, P.O. Box 955, Billings, MT 59103 
ILLINOIS - Pat Swieca, 5710 W. Cullom Ave., Chicago, IL 60634 

INDIANA - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 i' 

IOWA - Carla Wieser, Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo, 10th St. & Deer Park Blvd., Omaha, NE 68107 
KANSAS - Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

KENTUCKY - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 | 

LOUISIANA - Michelle Asselin, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 70115 
MAINE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) i 

MARYLAND - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
MASSACHUSETTS - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MICHIGAN - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 

MINNESOTA - Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens, 13000 Zoo Blvd., Apple Valley, MN 55124 ji 

MISSISSIPPI - Jeannie Frazier, Jackson Zoological Park, 2918 W. Capitol, Jackson, MS 39209 
MISSOURI - Vacancy 

MONTANA- Mark Konop, Zoo Montana, P.O. Box 955, Billings, MT 59103 

NEBRASKA -Carla Wieser (see address under Iowa) ! 

NEVADA - Vacancy 

NEW HAMPSHIRE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

NEW JERSEY - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 . 

NEW MEXICO - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 857716 
EAST NEW YORK - Mark Hofling, Bronx Zoo, 185th & Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460 (212) 220-7115 [w] j 
WEST NEW YORK - Alan Baker, Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Dr., Syracuse, NY 13204 
NORTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 / 

NORTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada R3P 0R5 (204) 986-4040 [w] 

OHIO - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 ! 

OKLAHOMA - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher (see addresses under AR) 

OREGON - Anna Michel, Washington Park Zoo, 4001 SW Canyon Rd., Portland, OR 97221 
PENNSYLVANIA- Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
RHODE ISLAND - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

SOUTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
SOUTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

TENNESSEE - Gail Karr or Cindy Pinger, Memphis Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 
TEXAS - Ann Marie Greco, San Antonio Zoo, 3903 N. St. Mary's St., San Antonio, TX 78212 
UTAH - John Turner, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 

VERMONT - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) j 

VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 

WASHINGTON - Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N, Seattle, WA 98103 

WEST VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 

WISCONSIN -Wayne Hazlett, 3768 S. 89th St., Milwaukee, WI 53228 

WYOMING- Mark Konop, Zoo Montana, P.O. Box 955, Billings, MT 591 03 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - Theresa Maas (see address under PA) 

Province of Ontario - Neil Porter, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario MlE 4R5 Canada 
Provinces of Manitoba & Saskatchewan - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

Province of Quebec - Chantal Routhier, Granby Zoo, 347 Rue Bourget, Granby, Quebec, Canada J2G lE 8 
Provinces of Alberta & British Columbia - Grant Tkachuk, 10139 157th St., #206, Edmonton, Alberta T5P 2T9 


40 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 1 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 

City — — State/Province 23p 


Telephone 


(home) 


(work) 


U.S. Members Mgmbgr§ 


I i $30.00 Professional/U.S. 

Full-time Keepers 

r~l $25.00 A£fiHateAJ.S. 

Other staff & volunteers 

d] $25.00 AssociateAJ.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


□ $35.00 Professional/Canada 

Full-time Keepers 

□ $30.00 Affiliate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


EZ] $50.00 or up Contributmg/U.S. 
Individuals 

I I $50.00 or up Institutional/U.S. 

Organizations ! Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


□ 

□ 


$55.00 or up Contributing/Canada 
Individuals 

$55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 
Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


IntematAQn^ Mgmfogrs 


library Only 


I I $40.00 Intemational 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


□ $20.00 Libraiy 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 

Zoo Address 

Title 

Work Area 

Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S. A. 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.SJV. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 



Si! 

•y 

TtZ: 

fxi 

r-.i 

fX' 

Ul 

”0 

ri“ 

ZT 


1 - 1 . 

t-.. 


O 

3 

r" 

13 

t.a 


0.1 

ri“ 

O" 

1 

O 

”5 


3 

tu 



-5 

r-.i 



O 


o 


I 

CO 

CO 

0 

1 

n 

a 

§ 

w 

CD 

C 

O 

(ft 

S' 


•d 

(p 

P 

w 

Oi 

a:> 

o 

o 


CO HJ 

oi N 

O ® 




o 

W 


Wi 2 

h- ' 'D 

< O 

• 09 


ES 

o 


•;.v;» 


-Cl 




ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 


February 1992 
Volume Nineteen 
NiunberTwo . 


Editor-in-Chief: Susan Chan 
Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 

Animal Keepers' Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual publication costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster: 
Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 President 

Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 Vice President 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Immediate Past President 

Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112 

Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 


COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROTECT HEADS 


A w ards. C Qmmitte£ 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

Book Review Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 

Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 

Staff Exchange 

Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 

AAZ K History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
Keeper Accommodations List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 

An Appiflach to ZQQk££p.ing 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 
Zqq Infant Development Project 
Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 

Nom inations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings Island 

M e rnktr^hip Directory 


Keener Tr aining & Education 

^includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
MateriaIs)L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal-Data Transfer Form 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 

AAZK Liaison to A AZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 
Diet Notebook 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 

Dy-Laws Review 

VACANCY 

Zoo/University List 

Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 


Keeper Correspondent 

VACANCY 

Publications Funding . Committee 

Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo 

Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, The Virginia Zoo and Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 

International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) 


Conservation. Preservation. Restoration (CPRl Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for Rhinos ‘92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 

Keeper Training. Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 

Liaison and Information Network for Keepers (LINK) 

Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors............... ....41 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt.... 42-43 

From the President/AAZK Announces New Members.... ............44 

Coming Events...................... ...45-46 

P. Horse Reintroduction/Information Please (Caribbean flamingos, ocelots) 46 

Births & Hatchings .....48-49 

Publications Available... 49 

Cross Genera Fostering at the Milwaukee County Zoo 50-51 

Guidelines for Communication/Information Content in LINK System. ..52 

AAZK Award Nominations Sought (Excellence in Exhibit Renovation)....... 53-54 

Conference ’92 - First Call for Papers 55 

Looking Back................ 56-57 

Help for Endangered Species - H.R. 4045 57-58 

Book Review (International Wildlife Trade: Whose Business Is It?) ....59-60 

CITES Delegates To Meet Next Month 60 

A Research Keeper Training Program at the Franklin Park Zoo .61 

Enrichment Options (small cats, kangaroos/wallabies/lions/otters/ feeders).. 62-63 

Letters to the Editor/Keeper’s Alert.... 64 

Zoo Infant Development Project Update 65 

Who Did You Use for the Demo Today? Consistent Elephant Management 66-69 

Nixon Griffis Fund Recipients 69 

Chapter News..... 70-74 

Regional Coordinators List 75 

Opportunity Knocks 76 

Infonnation for Contributors 


Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for AKF . No commitment is made to the author, but 
an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLINE FOR EACH EDITION IS THE ISTH 

DEJHE PRECEDI NG MO NL H 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers^ Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 41 


This month's cover features a male Bornean orangutan (Pongo pygmaeus). Some of you 
keepers may recognize this particular orangutan, “Jonathan”, who has quite a reputation 
as an escape artist and an avid mouse hunter. He has been at various institutions and 
currently resides at the Topeka Zoo. These endangered and highly intelligent primates 
face extinction due to deforestation and the trade in exotic wildlife in their native habitats 
of Borneo and Sumatra. The artist is Geoff C reswell, a retired keeper from the Topeka Zoo. 
Thanks, Geoff! 

Scoops 

2in6./ 

Scuttlebutt 


AAZK History Book Donors Thanked 

The AAZK Board of Directors and History Committee Chair Rachel Rogers wish to extend 
their thanks to the following Chapters and/or individuals who have donated funds towards 
the publication costs of the AAZK 25th Anniversary Book; Gerald W. Murrie, San Diego 
Zoo; Kathy Kelly, National Zoo; and the Tucson AAZK Chapter. We are very grateful for 
their support. Chapters or individuals wishing to show their support for this project should 
send their contributions to: Rachel Watkins Rogers, Mammal Dept., San Diego Zoo, P.O. 
Box 551, San Diego, CA 92112. 

Two Chapters Show Support for National with Donations 

Special thanks go out to the members of the Topeka Zoo and Tulsa Zoo AAZK Chapters, both 
of whom recently sent in donations of $100.00 to help with the operating costs of the 
Association. The Board of Directors and the AO staff sincerely appreciate these Chapters’ 
generosity and concern for the welfare of AAZK. 

Position Papers Availablp to Members 

During the past year, the AAZK Board of Directors have drafted position or viewpoint 
papers on several topics relevant to our profession. These topics include: Proposed 
Viewpoint on Animal Rights, Proposed Viewpoint on Minimum Job Requirements for Zoo 
Keepers, and Proposed Criteria for Organizational/Institutional Membership in AAZK. 
They have also drafted a Code of Professional Ethics. These drafts have been sent to all 
Chapters to have their review and input. The Board is seeking this input before making 
final revisions in the statements which will be presented to the membership in San Diego. 
If any member would like copies of these statements to review, they may receive them by 
sending a self-addressed, stamped legal sized envelope. The envelope must have 52 cents 
postage on it. Canadian members wishing these copies will need to send $1 (U.S.) to cover 
cost of postage and an envelope. 

Friends University Offers Zoo Studies Prosfram 

Friends University, 2100 University, Wichita, KS 67213 offers fully-accredited degree 
programs including a unique Bachelor of Science in Zoo Science and a flexible, 21-month 
Master of Science in Environmental Studies, with concentrations in Zoo Management, Zoo 
Education, and Zoo Science. Both are offered jointly with the Sedgwick County Zoo. For 
more information on these programs, you may contact Dr. Alan D. Maccarone. 

H qw to cQntect Dg Hm>\i 

Anyone wishing to contact the Dutch Association of Zoo Keepers should write to: Koen 
Brouwer, Editor/International Liaison, Fagelstraat 20 - III, 1052 GC Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. An article on this Association was published in AKF i n November 1991, pp. 
348-49. Koen can also give you information about KAL in his country. 


4 2 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt Continued 

Reminder of Deadline for Dedicated Issues/New Cover A3i;_arit£ria 


We would like to remind all members that the deadline for submission of articles for the 
dedicated issues of AKF is 1 March 1992. As stated in last month’s Scoops and Scuttlebutt, 
the editorial staff would like to solicit papers on the following topics: Hoofstock (all 
aspects), Hand-rearing (techniques, case histories, etc.), and Enrichment (all aspects). 
As of this writing, we have received no material, but several inquiries, so we are hopeful 
they will become a reality. If you would like to submit a paper in one of the categories, but 
will be unable to meet the suggested deadline, please contact the editor and special 
arrangements may be able to be made. 

We hope to have the new Births & Hatching format in place no later than May. A letter 
explaining the new guidelines has been sent to all those individuals who regularly submit 
material, but we know that it will take several months for everyone to get on line with the 
new formatting procedures so we ask for your patience. We want to try and make this 
column useful to our readers and have been struggling over the years with a format which 
would do just that. We hope the new format will be the ticket. 

Another area the editorial staff would like to improve upon is the quality of the cover art 
used on AKF. In consultation with a local artist we have come up with some new 
guidelines which we hope will help us achieve both consistent quality and quantity of cover 
art material. All those who have or are interested in submitting cover art for consideration 
in the future should note the following: 

1. All artists should keep in mind the size and format of the AKF cover and try to produce 
their artwork to fit the cover’s format (i.e. give consideration to the masthead, placement of 
date/year, etc. when determining how your artwork will fit on the cover.) 

2. Artists are encouraged to use black pen and ink as this reproduces much better than any 
other medium. Use of blue ink, ball-point pens or pencil sketches are discouraged as the 
reproduction quality is not always acceptable. 

3. Do not send original artwork , but rather have a best quality copy made or after your 
artwork has been accepted for publication, have a negative of the drawing made (at actual 
size) at a print shop . If you have questions about this, contact the editor. 

4. Accuracy, detail and composition are very important and adherence to these will 
increase your chances of having your artwork selected. 

5. All artists are requested to submit with their artwork a brief statement about the natural 
history of the species featured, along with their name, title, and zoo. See past issues of AKF 
for examples of this which can be found just preceding the Scoops column each month. 

We realize that these criteria may be limiting for some artists, but the recently-completed 
AKF survey showed that the majority of the membership like the use of keeper cover art but 
would like the quality to be improved. We hope these guidelines will help do just that. 


AAZK Grants Available 

Tfie American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. announces the availability of two 
$750 research grants in the field of zoo biology. Interested applicants should direct 
their inquiries to Sue Barnard, Chairperson, AAZK Research/Grants Committee, 
Zoo Atlanta, Department of Herpetology, 800 Cherokee Ave. SJE., Atlanta, GA 30315. 
The deadline for submission is 31 March 1992. 


43 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


From the President 


This Association holds many diverse committees and activities that allow any member to 
participate on any level they desire. From Committee Chair to Committee Members, there 
are ways to contribute to our Association. The Association currently has a Committee 
Chair vacancy for By-laws, the guidelines that govern this Association. By-laws, while 
somewhat complex, are an excellent background for any individual who wishes to run for 
an AAZK Board election. Any individual who wishes to apply for this vacancy may apply 
directly to Administrative Offices and include a brief resume with your letter of interest. 
Committee Chairs are selected by the AAZK Board. 

We also have several Committees with vacancies, including the newly formed 
Publications Funding Committee, which seeks to find advertisers and underwriters for the 
Animal Keepers’ Forum and other AAZK publications such as Diet Notebook. Please 
contact AO for a list of committee vacancies. 

Please make a strong effort to file your Chapter Financial Statement by the required 
deadline (15 February 1992). A reminder: if your Chapter has been fortunate enough to 
generate $25,000 or more in gross receipts (yes, there are some Chapters that have) during 
the past year, then your Chapter is mandated by the IRS to file a Form 990. Failure to file 
this Form places the tax exempt status of our Association in jeopardy. If your Chapter 
receives any type of form from the IRS and you are uncertain as to how to proceed, contact 
AO immediately. 


Speaking of the IRS, AAZK still is awaiting tax exempt status for each Chapter. Chapters 
are not considered tax-exempt or non-profit until AAZK, Inc. receives a Group Exemption 
Letter from the IRS . On receipt of this Group Exemption Letter, each Chapter will be 
notified by AO. As of the writing of this message (January 15), we have not received the 
Group Exemption Letter, but we anticipate its receipt very soon. 



Ed Hansen 
AAZK President 
Reid Park Zoo 


AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Krissie Breck, Acadia Zoo (ME) 

Laura V. Campbell, Baltimore Zoo (MD) 

Peter A. Davis, Zoo Atlanta (GA) 

Penny E. Parker, Jacksonville Zool. Soc. (FL) 
Paula McMillan, Tiger’s Eye Production (FL) 
Joe deGraauw, Nashville Zoo (TN) 

Silvia Logsdon, Louisville Zoo (KY) 

Veronica Nelson, Rusk Co. Wildlife Rehab (WI) 
Carl Patrick, Niabi Zoo (IL) 

Mark Bauman, Dallas Zoo (TX) 

Mark Marciniak, Denver Zoo (CO) 


Brian McCampbell, Philadelphia Zoo (PA) 
Cat Monger, Pet Farm Park (VA) 

Robert Myler, Chehaw Animal Prk. (GA) 
Becky Speer, no zoo listed - Naples, FL 
Renee Gainer, Montgomery Zoo (AL) 

John C. Leon, Kamper Prk. Zoo (MS) 
Barbara Ray, Columbus Zoo (OH) 

Leslie Heartman, Lake Superior Zoo (MN) 
Gary J. Pettit, Henry Doorly Zoo (NE) 
Brent McRoberts, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Rod deWolde, Metro Toronto Zoo (Ontario) 


Renewing Contributing Members 


National Zoological Park Library, Washington, DC 
Miller Park Zoo, Bloomington, IL 

Bette Martin, Executive Director, Friends of the Topeka Zoo, Topeka, KS 
Gordon Henley, Director, Ellen Trout Zoo, Lufkin, TX 
Jardin Zoologique du Quebec, Charlesbourg, Quebec, Canada 





4 4 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Coming Events 


1992 AAZPA Regional Conferences 


Northeastern Regional - March 15-17, 1992. For more information contact: Bob Jenkins, 
National Aquarium, Pier 3, 501 E. Pratt St., Baltimore, MD 21202 (301) 659-4233. 

Western Regional - March 29-31, 1992. For more information contact: Mike Flint, Reid 
Park Zoo, 1100 South Randolph Way, Tucson, AZ 85716 (602) 791-3204. 

Southern Regional - April 12-14, 1992. For more information contact: Randy Rockwell, 
Jacksonville Zoological Park, 8605 Zoo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32218 (904) 757-4463. 

Central Regional - April 26-28, 1992. For more information contact: Dawn McDonough, 
Dallas Zoo, 621 E. Clarendon Dr., Dallas, TX 75203 (214) 670-6825. 

Great Lakes Regional - May 3-5, 1992. For more information contact: Ann Silveri or Andy 
Odum, Toledo Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4010, Powell, OH 43609 (419) 385-5721. 

Third International Wildlife Ranching Symposium 


October 27-30, 1992 Pretoria, South Africa 

For more information contact: Wildlife Symposium C. 153, CSIR Conference Services, 

P.O. Box 395, Pretoria, South Africa 0001 

Conservation Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: 

Acase.stttdY.Qf the Cichlid Fauna of Lake Yictoria 

October 30-November 3, 1992 Columbus, OH 

The objective of the symposium is to bring together diverse workers from academic, 
zoo/aquarium, governmental, and private sectors to discuss the genetic conservation of 
endangered fish communities using the Haplochromine cichlids of Lake Victoria as a case 
study. The meeting will include international speakers dealing with topics of taxonomy of 
Lake Victoria and African cichlids, the endangered state of the members of the 
Haplochromine fauna, ecology of various endangered aquatic taxa, progress of ecological 
stabilization, status of in situ and captive breeding programs, captive breeding husbandry, 
development of long-term captive management strategies, and future prospects for 
environmental restoration and species reintroduction. Also planned are sessions which 
involve consideration of the more general aspects of the captive genetic conservation of 
fish. Will also tour cichlid breeding facility at Columbus Zoo. For more information 
contact: Doug Warmolts, Curator, Johnson Aquatic Complex, Columbus Zoo, 9990 Riverside 
Dr., Box 400, Powell, OH 43065-0400 (6114) 645-3446 (phone); (614) 645-3465 (FAX). 

Joint Meeting of the American Assodation of Zk?Q Veterinarians 

and the American Association of Wildlife Veterinarians 

November 15-19, 1992 Oakland, CA 

To be held at the Parc Oakland Hotel, the joint conference program sections include: 
management of populations in limited habitats; immobilization, anesthesia and 
monitoring; diseases of concern for translocation and reintroduction of wildlife; political 
realities of wildlife management; methods of capture, collection, transport; reduction of 
surplus animals and euthanasia; international zoo and wildlife conservation projects; 
and presentations on medical/surgical problems of various vertebrate groups. 
Additionally there will be a student paper competition, workshops and a poster session. 
Individuals interested in submitting a manuscript or participating in the program should 
contact: Janis Joslin, DVM (AAZV), Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N., Seattle, 
WA 98103 (Phone 206-684-4873), or David Jessup, DVM (AAWV), International Wildlife 
Veterinary Service, Inc., P.O. Box 1413, Orangeville, CA 95622 (Phone 916-355-0124). The 
deadline for selection of participants is 20 April 1992 and manuscripts are due by 18 May 
1992. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


45 


Coming Events. Continued 

The Role of Zoos in Global Conservation 
The Sixth World Conference on Breeding Endangered Species 

May 4-6, 1992 Jersey, Channel Islands 

Co-sponsored by the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, The Fauna and Flora 
Preservation Society and The Zoological Society of London. Between 400-500 delegates are 
expected to attend the three-day meeting, and the Conference Proceedings will include 42 
specialist papers addressing how the captive breeding community relates to the wild, what 
is being done to help species and habitats survive and how to contribute to the future. 
Professor David Bellamy will present the Keynote Address on The Role of Zoos in Global 
Conservation and Dr. George Rabb, Chairman of the Species Survival Commission of The 
World Conservation Union (lUCN) will present the conference summary. Poster sessions 
and a visit to the Jersey Zoological Park will be included in the program. A meeting of the 
Captive Breeding Specialist Group SSC/IUCN is scheduled to immediately follow this 
conference on 7 May. All program inquiries to: Jeremy J.C. Mallinson, Conference Co- 
ordinator, JWPT, Les Augres Manor, Trinity, Jersey, JE3 5BF, Channel Islands. 
Registration inquiries should be directed to: Conference Secretariat, Incentive and 
Conference Specialists (C.I.) Lts., 7 David Place, St. Helier, Jersey, Channel Islands. 

Przewalski Horse May Soon Return to the Wild 

Dr. Oliver Ryder, a leader in the Przewalski’s horse reintroduction movement, recently 
returned from the Mongolian People’s Republic with exciting news. An acceptable release 
site has been found in a national park within a larger protected area in the Gobi Desert. 
This gravel desert is dotted with oases sporting beautiful pastures for the horses. “It is the 
most remote and wild place that I’ve been,” recalls Dr. Ryder. 

Protecting this habitat for the horses will benefit many other species in the area such as 
sand gazelle, wolf, fox, steppe eagle, various owls, and the dzeggatai or Mongolian wild 
ass. The local economy will also benefit from the employment that the national park will 
create. Currently, vegetation, climate and environmental impact surveys are being 
conducted by the Mongolian Academy of Sciences. As early as 1993, Przewalski’s horses 
from around the world will arrive at the release site. Ultimately, the Przewalski’s horse, 
currently extinct in the wild, will be reestablished in free-ranging populations in its native 
ecosystem, -from CRES report, the Center for Reproduction of Endangered Species, 
Zoological Society of San Diego, San Diego, CA, Winter 199111992. 

Information Please 


The Columbus Zoo Avian Department is seeking information from any institution housing 
Caribbean Flamingos regarding their age while in the collection or age at death. We are 
interested in obtaining longevity records on these flamingos. Please send any 
information to: Yvonne Clippinger, Head Keeper/Birds, Columbus Zoological Gardens, 
P.O. Box 400, Powell, OH 43065-0400 FAX# (614) 645-3465. 


The Dallas Zoo is seeking published and unpublished reports on the husbandry, 
management and behavior of Ocelots (Felis pardalis). The information will be used to help 
design upcoming research and management programs for this species. Send reports and 
bibliographic materials to: Ken Kaemmerer, Curator of Primates & Carnivores, Dallas 
Zoo, 621 Clarendon, Dallas, TX 75203. 



46 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 



SraCTRUM 


Quality exotic 
animal diets 


Nutritionally balanced 

Fixed formulation • Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRASKA BRAND 


S \ 



SPECTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 


Banana flavored primate, 15% protein dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 

Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Hoofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


GENTLE T0UCH^“ bedding 


One call does It all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69103-0721 


Births & Hatchings 



Greater San Francisco Bav Area AAZK...on 31 August 1991, a male Hamlyn’s guenon 
(Cercopithecus hamlyni) was born at the San Francisco Zoological Gardens Primate 
Center. This was our first Hamlyn birth and only the second in the U.S. that we know of. 
The infant was born at midday on exhibit without complications. Mating was observed six 
months prior to birth. At the time of birth our group consisted of two adult males, one adult 
female, and one subadult female. The males have since had to be separated. 

We were surprised to see the infant’s striking yellow coat, which contrasts sharply with the 
olive coloration of the adults. The face of the infant was light at first but has darkened, 
though it still lacks the distinctive white nose stripe of subspecies Hamlyni. AKF readers 
wishing further information on this birth or group of guenons should contact David Bocian 
or Tom Turowski at the San Francisco Zoological Gardens, One Zoo Road, San Francisco, 
CA94132 (415) 753-7080. 



Male Hamlyn’s Guenon bom 31 August 1991 at the San Pranciso) Zoo 
Primate Center. Photo by Rick Mannshardt. 


48 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Births & Hatchings. Continued 

Calgary Zoo ...reports the following B&H for 1991: 


Reptiles .. .0.0.7 Western hognose snake {Heterodon nasicus) 

Birds . ..0.1 Blue and gold macaw (Ara ararauna), 0.0.2 Greater prairie chicken 
(Tympanuchus cupido), 0.0.4 Red breasted geese (Branta ruficollis), 0.0.1 Gold Coast 
touraco {Touraco persa persa). 

Mammals . ..0.4 Rocky mountain goat {Oreamnos americanus), 2.1.1 Muskox 
(Ovibos moschatus), 0.0.6 Bighorn sheep (Ovis canadensis), 0.1.1 Dali sheep (Ovis dalli), 
1.1.2 Pronghorn antelope {Antilocapra americana), 0.0.6 Swift fox (Vulpes velox). 

We are sad to announce the passing of our 17-year-old Ceylonese elephant (Elephas 
maximus maximus) “Bandara” on 24 November 1991. He sired “Chanda”, the first male 
Ceylonese elephant in North America. Our 31-year-old male Western lowland gorilla 
{Gorilla g. gorilla) “Tufty” also passed away in November and will be sadly missed by all 
of us. submitted by William Blayney, Calgary Zoo AAZK Chapter, Calgary, Alberta, 
Canada. 


Greenville Zoo AAZK ChaDter ...reports the following B&H for 1991 at their facility: 1.0 

Colobus monkey (Colubus guereza kikuyensis) born 31 May (DNS); and 1.0 Siamang 
(Hylobates syndactylus) born 16 August. Both of these primates were first birth of their 
species at our facility, submitted by Janie Baxter, Chapter President. 


Publications Available 


The 1991 edition of THE MAINTENANCE OF BATS IN CAPTIVITY has been expanded to 

include the captive care of not only insectivorous bats, but also fruit-eating species and 
vampires. The text details successful methods for hand-raising infants, aspects of 
rehabilitation, environment and housing, nutrition, transporting, medical and necropsy 
considerations, plus many other topics. 

The only manual of its kind, it is intended for all animal-care professionals interested in 
maintaining bats in captivity. The information presented in the manual draws upon 
nearly a decade of the author’s experience in caring for bats, as well as methods obtained 
through personal communications and published sources. 

THE MAINTENANCE OF BATS IN CAPTIVITY is revised annually. This edition 
comprises 104 pages with 84 illustrations. The following prices are quoted in U.S. dollars 
and include postage and handling: U.S. $7.95; Canada and Mexico $8.75 surface rate or 
$9.50 air mail; other countries $11 surface rate or $15 air mail. The publication is available 
from Susan M. Barnard, 6146 Fieldcrest Drive, Morow, GA 30260, U.S.A. 


“Being Kind to Animal Pests: a no-nonsense guide to humane animal control with cage 
traps” by Steve Meyer. Contains 140 pages & 135 illustrations covering everything from A 
to Z about cage traps. Specific details and helpful hints about using cage traps for all 
common nuisance animals are given. Chapters of the book provide information on 
animal habits, cage trap types, features and use, helpful hints for trapping particular 
animal pests, ethical use of cage traps, sources of cage traps and how to build cage traps. 
Cost of the book is $12.95 (U.S.) postpaid from: Meyer Publications, Box 247, Garrison, lA 
52229. Allow 3-4 weeks for delivery. 

Animal Keepers Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1 992 4 9 


Cross Genera Fostering at 
the Milwaukee County Zoo 

By 

Wayne Hazlett, Chapter Liaison 
Milwaukee County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Milwaukee County Zoo, Milwaukee, WI 

On 6 July 1991, the Primate Building at the Milwaukee County Zoo welcomed the birth of a 
Black-handed spider monkey (Ateles geoffroyi geoffroyi). Since his mother was young, 
only seven years old, she lacked the experience necessary for mother-rearing. After the 
birth she didn’t seem to know what was required of her. If the baby fell off while feeding, 
she would not pick him up. After repeated failed attempts by the keepers to assist her in 
taking care of the baby, an answer to the problems had to be found. 

The baby was taken from its mother and kept in the zoo hospital in an incubator for 
approximately one month while the staff searched for the best solution to the problem. 

Primate Keeper, Gervis Myles, came up with the answer. After conferring with the other 
keepers, the Area Supervisor, the Curator of Primates, and the Zoo Veterinarian, it was 
decided to try a surrogate mother as suggested by Myles. 

Suzy, a 37-year-old Siamang {Hylobates syndactylus) who had been living alone since her 
mate, Unk, was euthanized for medical reasons in 1989, was the surrogate mother of choice. 
Suzy is the oldest known living Siamang in captivity. She is also well known as the mother 
of Mark, the first Siamang born and mother-raised in captivity an)wv^here in the world (10 
July 1962). Suzy has given birth to eleven offspring, four of which lived to adulthood. She 
came to the Milwaukee County Zoo on 31 March 1960 after having been the pet of Morgan 
Barry, an elephant handler from Seattle, WA. 

On 5 August 1991, the Spider monkey baby was" introduced to Suzy. The Zoo Veterinarian, 
Dr. Andrew Teare, supervised the introduction process. Even though it was not expected, 
Suzy reached out and took the baby. An Animal Watch was conducted by Zoo Pride 
volunteers for the first 48 hours. Since this period was an uneventful one, the staff decided 
that the watch would be discontinued. 

The Spider monkey is a New World monkey, native to southern Central America and 
northern South America. Suzy, on the other hand, is an Old World ape, native to Sumatra 
and Malaysia. This combination is very unusual, since they are not of the same species, or 
even members of the same biological family. 

Zoo keepers entered the enclosure and fed the baby starting with six times per day. The 
bottle feeding times decreased monthly as the baby increased solid food consumption. 
During the feeding process, Suzy was stroked on her head and back to keep her calm. She 
was also offered various food items, including milk. The baby was bottle-fed a milk 
formula and was weaned on 12 December 1991. 

Suzy has been a good foster mother to the Spider monkey. She, of course, has a long record of 
being a good mother. From her first birth on 10 July, 1962 up until her last birth on 8 August, 
1981, she has shown a remarkable maternal instinct. 

Since Suzy lost her mate, the keepers have given her much attention. Siamangs are 
monogamous, bonding for life. Suzy and her mate, Unk, were never fir apart. After he 
was euthanized, a toy stuffed animal was given to Suzy to keep her company. Even though 
she knew that the stuffed toys were not alive, she sometimes carried them as she would a 
baby. A sign on her enclosure explained the purpose of the stuffed toys to the general public. 
A new sign now explains the cross genera fostering. 


50 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Cross Genera Foster ing at the Milwaukee Countv Zoo. Continued 

This experiment has been a complete success. Not only is the Spider monkey well taken 
care of, but the Siamang has a chance to once again show her maternal instincts. Her 
interest in the long, prehensile tail of the foster son is evident. She examines the tail in 
wonderment, since Siamangs have no tails. With the foster baby and the surrogate mother 
both doing well and apparently happy, this experience is just another first for the 
Milwaukee County Zoo. The baby monkey’s transition from a surrogate mother back to 
Spider monkeys is felt to be better than if he had been hand-raised, which was another 
option. 


My thanks to the dedicated primate keepers. Area Supervisor San LaMalfa, and the Curator 
of Primates Jan Rafert. 



0.1 Siamang “Suzy*’ has successfully fostered the 1.0 Black-handed spider monkey shown 
above with her at tiie Milwaukee County Zoo. This cross genera fostering negated the need 
for hand-rearing by the zoo staff. ©1991 Milwaukee County Zoo Photo. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


51 


Guidelines for Communication/Information 
Content for Distribution by L.I.N.K. System 

1. All information must be pertinent to, and support the goals and purposes of the AAZK, 
Inc., as set out or defined by the approved actions and desires of its Board of Directors, 
Administrative Offices, Committees, Chapters, or appropriate individual member request. 

2. All information to be distributed nationally through the use of the LINK system must 
have LINK Coordinator consideration and Board of Directors of AAZK, Inc. approval. 

3. Specific regional information (e.g. advertisement of meeting, program, event, etc.) may 
be distributed through the local network with consideration and, if necessary, 
advertisement/approval from the Regional Coordinator. 

4. Best judgment should be used in assessing information to be distributed using the LINK 
system. 

APPROPRIATE TYPES OF INFORMATION 

All documents/reports/correspondence required for the function of and assistance of 
Chapters, Committees, Special Projects, Administering and Executive needs. 

General and routine correspondence that assists in the essential business, monitoring and 
communication aspects of the organization in relation to the definitions and descriptions 
provided for LINK personnel (Chapter Liaison, Institutional Liaison, Regional 
Coordinator, Assistant Coordinator, LINK Coordinator). 


Examples: 


- Semi-Annual Chapter Reports 

- Semi-Annual RC Reports 

- Chapter Recharter Information 

- Chapter Formation Information 


- Chapter Fimction and Assistance Information 

- Specific Surveys 

- Committee, Administrative Office or Board 
Information or Requests 

- Other Approved Information or Requests 


CONTENT THAT IS NOT APPROPRIATE OR AIXOWABI FOR THE LINK SYSTEM 


Any information, statement, or documentation (pamphlet, brochure, leaflet, etc.) that is 
considered unlawful, unethical, prejudicial, or that may be detrimental to the AAZK, Inc. 
or its membership in accordance with the AAZK, Inc. Statement of Purpose and By-laws 
(revised 1991) and the Code of Professional Ethics Mandatory Standards (pending). 

Any statement or information that would result in willful personal advantage or gain to a 
member, in accordance with Item 1 of the Guidelines for Communication/Information 
Content LINK System and AAZK, Inc. By-laws (1991), Art. II, Sec. 8d. 

UNACCEPTABLE TYPES QF INFQfiMATIQN/USE 

Any of the following areas/uses, or semblance of: 

a) Any item or particular of a political natPre or suggestion; any endorsement, 
sponsorship, support or presentment of a National or local party or organization. 

b) Any item or particular of a union or union-oriented nature or suggestion; any 
endorsement, sponsorship, support or presentment of such; example: union notices of 
meetings, elections, issues. 

c) Any solicitation, endorsement, sponsorship or support of any business interests 
(professional, industrial, commerce, trade, or associated field) or private group or 
organization that has not had the approval of AAZK, Inc. 

d) Any use of the LINK system that would result in personal gain or advantage to a 
member; personal communication of non-AAZK business or issues; use of stationary or 
budgets of LINK system or AAZK, Inc. for non-AAZK business. 



52 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 12 1992 


AAZK Award Nominations Are Now Being Accepted for 1992! 


The AAZK Awards Committee would like to begin accepting nominations for the 
Certificate of Excellence in Exhibit Renovation (CEER) to be presented at the 1992 AAZK 
Conference in San Diego. The deadline for all award nominations is 1 June 1992. All 
award nominations received after 1 June will be reviewed for 1993, so please keep this in 
mind when submitting your nominations. 

All awards given by the AAZK do not have a minimum or maximum number offered 
each year. Also, if the nominees do not meet the qualifications and nominators do not 
follow the nomination procedures, they will not receive the award for which they were 
nominated. Please include scientific names of animals when they are included in the 
nomination of a special or outstanding breeding acknowledgment. 

Please submit all nominations to; Janet McCoy, AAZK Awards Chair 

Washington Park Zoo 
4001 S.W. Canyon Rd. 

Portland, OR 97221 

CERTIFICATE OF EXCELLENCE IN EXHIBIT RENOVATION (CEER) 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. (AAZK) is the administering organization 
of the Certificate of Excellence in Exhibit Renovation (CEER) presented by the AAZK 
Awards Committee. The purpose of the award is to recognize institutions or organizations 
in the zoological community for the design and renovation of existing animal facilities 
which involved active keeper participation in the process. 

The character of the award includes; a certificate, letter of notification to the institution's 
director and national recognition by professional journals. Such journals include: the 
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) and the Canadian 
Association of Zoological Parks and Aquarium (CAZPA) Newsletters. Animal Keeners' 
Forum (AAZK) . Awards. Honors and Prizes : Volume 1; United States and Canada. The 
latter being published by Gale Research Company based in Wheaton, MD and found in 
medium to large sized libraries across the U.S. and Canada. 

The CEER was established by Janet McCoy, 1990 CHAIR. Bill Whittaker proposed the 
award to the AAZK Board of Directors. The award is presented at the annual AAZK 
National Conference. 


Qualifications; 

1. Any North American zoological institution or organization is eligible, 

2. The renovated exhibit must be in full operation for at least two years. 

3. The exhibit must be nominated by a keeper at that same institution or 

organization. Supporting nominations may be submitted by management 
personnel from the same institution. 

Nominatio n Procedure ; 

1. List institution or organization's name, address, phone and Director. 

2. Document local awards or commendations for exhibit, drawings, 8X10 

color photos - no slides (2 before and 8 after), and renovated exhibit 
type:single or multispecies, and size. 

3. Document keeper participation in the design and why the existing facility 
was renovated. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


53 


CEER Award Criteria. Continued 

4. Document interface with other zoo divisions; and maintenance of exhibit 
after completion. 

5. The deadline for nominations is JUNE 1st of each year. 

NOTE: Materials will not be returned, but forwarded to the Exhibit Design Committee. 

Selection Frocedure; 

The Awards Committee, consisting of five (5) keepers, will independently review each 
nominee. 

Nominee Evaluation: 

The evaluation of each nomination is broken down into four categories based on the 
general guidelines outlined for the award. The four categories are: Keeper Involvement, 
Exhibit Functionality, Exhibit Management and Visitor Point of View/ Other Information. 
Items the committee is looking for are the following: 

A . KEEPER INVOLVEMENT: 

a) degree of keeper involvement with conceptual development of exhibit 

b) degree of keeper involvement with facilitation of completion of exhibit, 
(fund raising, promotion, assist with construction) 

c) contribution to educational experience (graphics, conservation message) 

d) originality - is it something new and different, or has it been tried before 

B. EXHIBIT FUNCTIONALITY: 

a) versatility - indoor/outdoor, four seasons, protection from elements 

b) accommodates and encourages animal's natural behavior - climbing 
structures, land area, height, water 

c) hard (gunite, concrete) vs soft (grass, dirt) environments - as to animal 
needs 

d) sight lines valuable to animal as well as visitor - important to some 

animals (polar bear, chimps) 

e) physical and visual barriers for animal's use, animal safety 

f) flexible entrance/exits (hoofstock - more than one entrance) 

g) ability to exhibit natural social grouping 

h) breeding success 

C. EXHIBIT MANAGEMENT: 

a) how management of exhibit interfaces with other zoo divisions 
(grounds, maintenance - simple repair, paint) 

b) keeper serviceability, overall maintenance of exhibit and surroundings 

c) adequate drains and properly located 

d) quality and versatility of holding area - ease of separating animals, 
moving, breeding, sick 

e) keeper sight lines - can you see animal when they come into holding or 
when shifting them between areas, keeper safety 

D ease of providing time change items (browse, logs, feed, novel objects) 
g) environmental control (ease of seasonal adjustments - ventilation, heat) 

D . VISITOR POINT OF VIEW/OTHER INFORMATION: 

a) educational experience (conservation message) 

b) immediate and sustained viewer interest 

c) sight lines - not see doors, drains, fencing - does it have esthetics 

d) bonus point - local awards, commendation, "wow" factor 

e) include anything else pertinent to the renovated exhibit that you think is 
important 


9 


54 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Conference '92 

First Call for Papers and Workshops 


"Enriching Today" is the theme for paper sessions and workshops at the 1992 AAZK 
National Conference. Any topic related to the care of captive exotic animals will be 
considered, however, those that involve new animal care techniques, significant 
achievements and special projects, technological innovations, and fresh approaches 
toward captive animal management may be given priority. 


The Papers and Workshops Committee for the San Diego Conference is expecting a 
record number of abstract submissions, so early contact with the Papers and Workshops 
Committee is critical. Abstracts will be accepted for review until July 31, 
1992. 


Abstracts should be limited to one or two paragraphs, should describe in detail the 
significance of the presentation topic, and should briefly list the results, conclusions, or 
benefits of the work described. Because the abstracts will be printed in the conference 
program, it is essential that submissions be well-organized and clearly-written. Abstracts 
that are poorly written, that do not contain proper submission information, or that do not 
otherwise meet submission criteria will be returned with a letter rejecting the abstract 
outright or else suggesting the corrections or alterations required for acceptance. 


Upon acceptance of a paper or workshop abstract, a letter of notification will be mailed to 
the presenter along with a copy of the article "Guidelines for Typing Papers for AAZK 
Conference Proce^ings." A typed draft of each paper is due at the time of presentation 
for publication in the Conference Proceedings. A refund of $25.00 off the registration 
fee will be awarded to each presenter only after they have turned in their paper to the 
session moderator. 


Abstracts must include the following information: 

Name of Presenter and Co-authors 
Zoological Affiliation 
Position/Title 

Title of Paper/Title of Workshop 
A/V Equipment Needs 


Send to: 

Terri Peterson, Chairperson 
Papers and Workshops Committee 
do AAZK San Diego Chapter 
P.O. Box 551 

San Diego, CA 92112-0551 


The Papers and Workshops Committee is eager to assist anyone who has an idea for any 
kind of presentation: formal paper, workshop, poster presentation, panel discussion, etc. 
Additional information and advice on the design and development of presentation ideas 
can be obtained by contacting the Committee Chairperson. 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


55 



L(S)<S)kimg Emsk 

{Editor’s note: in the next several issues of AKF we are going to be reprinting articles which 
appeared early on in the Association’s history. The old saying ’’the more things change, the 
more they stay the same” seems to hold true with these articles which, while dated by 20-plus 
years, are as relevant today as the day they were written. Special thanks to member Judie 
Steenberg, Woodland Park Zoo, for submitting the first two in this series of Looking Back 
articles. SC) 


The following article appeared in The AAZK Newsletter . Vol. 1, No. 4, August 1968. 


NOW IS THE TIME 

By 

Perry N. Alexander, Senior Keeper, Fresno, CA 


July 1st means a new budget and money to finance the operation of your zoo. This money is 
necessary and a mandate by the tax payers and visitors in appreciation of your past years 
of service. It is to be used wisely in the interest of the total safety, performance and display 
of the specimens in your charge. There are several places to look to at this time to insure the 
security of your charges - the welcome public (in most cases), fellow keepers and the 
grounds and area for which you are responsible. Probably the most important is the tack 
room: 


(Hard) Lasso type-Do they need replacing and oiling? 

(Soft) Restraining - Short and Long sections in good condition. Ropes can 
be one of your most important allies and need some positive attention and 
replacement each year. 

Very helpful on smaller canines and felines. Is the snare wire of the 
plastic-coated type (twist-proof) and most important, is the snare shaft 
covered with a section of rubber or plastic hose to protect the teeth of your 
animal if he bites it? Could you use a larger or smaller size? 

Many animals and birds are best suited to netting. All nets should be 
checked for rotting, mildew and holes, as this will affect the successful 
restraint without additional stress to animal or bird by the necessity of a 
second or third attempt. Can you use some larger or smaller nets? 

(Small holding) Do they need any repairs or modifications based on 
past experience? 

(Squeeze type) Very important to check for repairs or modifications 
to fit use. 

(Display cages) Canine and feline. Have you recently checked for 
deterioration of wire or bars at visual spots of urination by animal? 

WEAPONS: (Emergency) For the safety of mixed groups of animals, the viewing 
public and your fellow keepers. Are your guns and ammo regularly 
and properly cleaned and serviced by adequately trained members of 
your staff? Three incidents in the past year have proved the value 
of this program in compensation for the undesirable ignorance 
of our viewing public. 

PROTECTIVE BOARDS: Do you have several sheets of 1/2 inch exterior plywood 48 x 48 
inch with handles attached to one side to aid you in shifting smaller or 
docile animals? It makes a good shield and psychological bluff* on 
many medium sized animals. 


ROPES: 


SNARES: 


NETS: 


CAGES: 


56 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Looking Back. Continued 


PROTECTIVE WEARING APPAREL: (Keeper) Foul weather - Our work must be done 
rain, snow, or shine. 

Foot - (Standard) Waterproof footgear or boots. 

(Haystring) Steel toes to protect pinkies from hooves. 

Hands - Light gloves for routine work if desired. 

Heavy goulant gloves for capture work (primates, smaller 
cats, dogs). 

CHAIN: Long (12-30 ft) light and heavy 

Short (12-20 in.) light and heavy. Sometimes very necessary for emergency 
repairs to a gate or broken fence. 

EMERGENCY TOOL KIT: (Emergency and standard) This is a kit to which any number 
of items could be added, so I will only make a few suggestions: 

Hammer - 12 oz. - 3# or 4# single jack 
Nails - 6 sizes and 3 sizes staples 

Pliers - Needle nose, standard, wire cutter, 1 set bolt cutters 

Screw Drivers - 4 sizes 

Crescent wrench -6-12 and 16 inch sizes 

Pipe wrench - 12 and 18 inch sizes 

Bolts and matching nuts - 4 each sizes 1/8 to 1/2 inch (suitable for chains) 
Wire- 3 each 10-ft roll - light, medium and heavy 
Spare locks - To replace defective ones 

Tapered redwood plugs - temporary repairs to broken water pipes. 

KNOWLEDGE AND TRAINING: Find location of all water and power sources and 

shutoffs to your section. In case of emergency you may be of invaluable 
service in minimizing hazards to your animals and the public. Be 
thoroughly familiar with fire, storm, earthquake and emergency 
procedures in your operation. 

Help, for Endangered Species 

Bill would Strengthen Endangered Species Act 



The majestic bald eagle and the graceful gray whale are two examples of species saved 
from the brink of extinction, thanks in part to the Endangered Species Act. But other 
species, such as the Snake River sockeye salmon, still face imminent extinction due to 
widespread habitat destruction. 

First enacted in 1973, the Endangered Species Act is up for reauthorization in 1991, giving 
lawmakers the perfect opportunity to polish up the crown jewel of environmental 
legislation. In November, Representative Gerry Studds (D-MA) took the first important 
step. He and 20 co-sponsors introduced H.R. 4045, the Endangered Species Act Amendment 
of 1992, which would strengthen as well as reauthorize the Endangered Species Act. 

The Studds ’Bill would: 


give federal officials a deadline to develop and implement recovery plans for ecosystems 
containing threatened, endangered and candidate species; 

encourage officials to develop conservation plans for whole ecosystems instead of single 
species, thus helping prevent future declines in species not yet listed as threatened or 
endangered; 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


57 


Help for Endangered Species. Continued 


expand citizens’ right to file lawsuits against violators of the Endangered Species Act in 
emergency situations, by allowing citizens to file suit immediately if an endangered 
species faces serious harm or extinction; 

❖ 

increase funding levels for chronically underfunded federal endangered species 
programs; and 

❖ 

initiate a revolving fund to help communities create plans to balance local development 
needs with habitat protection for endangered species. 

Opponents, including real estate developers, the timber industry and the Farm Bureau, are 
organizing a well-funded misinformation campaign to kill the Endangered Species Act. 
Calling themselves such names as the National Endangered Species Act Reform Coalition, 
they want nothing less than to sentence the Endangered Species Act to extinction. 

“This will be the fight of the century,” says Robert Irvin, counsel for the National Wildlife 
Federation’s Fisheries and Wildlife Division. “The environmental community must be 
organized and united in its commitment to defending and strengthening the Endangered 
Species Act.” 

—Robyn Roberts 

National Wildlife EnviroAction 
Vol. 9, No. 9 December 1991 



(NOTE: to keep informed about the status of this or other environmental legislation, you 
may write National Wildlife Federation, Office of Legislative Affairs, 1400 16th St., NW, 
Washington, DC 20036-2266 or call the Legislative Hotline at (202) 797-6655.) 



58 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 



Book 

Review 


International Wildlife Trade: Whose Business Is It? 

By Sarah Fitzgerald 

World Wildlife Fund, P.O. Box 4866, Hampden Post Office 
Baltimore, MD 21211 
459 pp. Paperback $25.00 

Review by Rick Emmer 
Aquatics Department 
Cleveland Metroparks Zoo 
Cleveland, OH 

This book is depressing. It is filled with ugly facts and figures; every year, up to 2 million 
crocodile and alligator skins are converted into handbags, belts and shoes; the United 
States imports a quarter of a million wild parrots for the exotic pet trade, and 40% of these 
birds die during shipping and quarantine; thousands of rare and legally protected wild 
cactuses are smuggled into nurseries and private collections; and commercial logging 
destroys 12 million acres of tropical forest. Why is this happening? Who is to blame? 
What can be done to curb this onslaught against nature? The purpose of this book is to 
answer these questions and explore the often controversial issues dealing with 
international wildlife trade. 

In International Wildlife Trade: Whose Business Is It? , author Sarah Fitzgerald, a World 
Wildlife Fund consultant, does an excellent job of describing and analyzing the current 
state of wildlife trade. Part I of the book is a two-chapter Overview which briefly describes 
the negative impact of over-exploitation of wildlife, not only from an ecological perspective, 
but also as it affects the world economy, industry, medicine and research. Fitzgerald 
promotes sustainable use of wildlife (the harvesting of plants and animals at a replaceable 
rate) as the long-term solution to the wildlife exploitation problem. She briefly describes 
how this can be achieved through captive propagation and controlled hunting/collection of 
species in demand. The Overview ends with a short description of the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES), a 
multinational agreement which establishes regulations controlling international 
commerce of plants and animals in a manner consistent with sound wildlife management 
and conservation. 

The bulk of the remainder of the book (Parts II-VII) details the current status of, and further 
prospects for, various types of endangered wildlife: land mammals (Part II, Chpts. 3-11); 
aquatic mammals (Part III, Chpts. 12-15); other animals, including amphibians, fishes 
and invertebrates (Part VI, Chapts. 23-27); and plants (Part VIII, Chapts. 28-29). Each 
chapter provides numerous examples of species that are being hard hit by both legal and 
illegal international trade. Fitzgerald describes how these species are being (over) 
exploited, how CITES is trying to provide effective guidelines for safe, suitable utilization of 
these species, and how most participating CITES members are trying to meet the challenge 
of implementing these regulations. Most of these chapters contain an interesting boxed 
“KEEP IN MIND” feature which advises the reader how to avoid purchasing wild-caught 
endangered plants and animals or their products (skins, furs, etc.) 

The book contains numerous valuable appendices, including a detailed description of what 
CITES is and does; a list of countries belonging to CITES, current to 1989; and a list of 
wildlife species belonging to CITES Appendices I, II and III, current to 1987. 

When you stop to consider just how many millions of rare and endangered plants and 
animals are removed from nature every year only to end up as shoes, lamp shades, exotic 
pets or potted greenhouse plants, it’s more than a little depressing. And yet, all may not be 
lost. As Fitzgerald points out, sustainable use of wildlife offers hope to many presently 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


59 



Rook 'Rjeview . Continued 


endangered species (captive propagation of valuable species is becoming more and more 
common, for everything from cactuses to crocodiles); slowly but surely, CITES is growing 
in size and influence; and enforcement of trade laws is improving. Perhaps the biggest 
challenge of all in the fight to save wildlife is to educate the public, the consumer, about the 
plight of the world’s flora and fauna: everyone with a pocketbook or a wallet (whether or not 
it is made of crocodile skin) should be required to read Sarah Fitzgerald’s International 
W i l dlife-Tradg; Whoso Bpgin . e .5s U .hZ 


CITES Delegates to Meet Next Month 

African Elephants/Exotic Bird Trade to be Discussed 


The fate of Africa’s elephants is coming up for negotiations once again. Next month 
delegates from the 112 nations which are party to the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species (CITES) will consider proposals to ease the worldwide ban they 
imposed on the commercial trade in elephant ivory two years ago. 

African elephants have enjoyed protection from poachers - and the chance to recover their 
once-dwindling numbers - since October 1989. At that time, CITES delegates voted to place 
the elephant on Appendix I which listed them as endangered and outlawed trading in their 
products worldwide. As markets dried up and ivory prices bottomed out after the CITES 
decision, the desired effect set in - the poaching of elephants dropped dramatically in many 
African countries. 

However, some southern African countries with high numbers of elephants are pressing for 
the transfer of their elephants back to Appendix II which would allow limited trade in ivory 
and other elephant by-products. African Wildlife Federation President Paul Schindler, 
who will lead an AWF delegation to the CITES conference in Kyoto, Japan said “The 
countries that have large, well-managed healthy herds understandably want to keep the 
size of their elephant populations in check as well as earn revenue from them. But AWF’s 
position is that reviving the trade in ivory, even with limitations, is not acceptable at this 
time.” 

The fear is that reopening trade will lead to a resumption of poaching in all elephant- 
owning African states. “Despite the best efforts at controlling the system, ” AWF Executive 
Vice President Diana McMeekin said, “it would be impossible to keep out illegal ivory.” 

The CITES delegates will face numerous other issues concerning the survival of creatures, 
and plants, large and small. High on the list is how to deal with the burgeoning 
international market for “exotic” birds caught in the wild. Many species of birds, 
especially in the band of tropical forests circling the earth, have vanished or been badly 
depleted. It is estimated that for each bird taken for the pet trade, 25-30 are killed either 
during capture or in transport. 

Another issue before CITES has less to do with flora and fauna and more to do with the 
organization’s mandate. Founded in 1973 to protect natural resources by regulating the 
expanding and potentially ruinous trade in wildlife products, CITES now monitors 
commercial trade in plants and animals around the world. Questions have been raised as 
to whether CITES can be both the guardian of each member^country’s resources as well as 
the policymaker on trade issues. “CITES does not meet every country’s needs,” McMeekin 
explained, “and that may not be possible with the existing structure. It may have to be 
decided if CITES is the owner of the fox, the owner of the chickens, or both.” 

-excerpted in part from Wildlife News. Vol. 27, No. 1, Winter 1992 - a publication of 
the African Wildlife Foundation, 1717 Massachusetts Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20036. 

9 


60 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


A Research Keeper Training Program 
at The Frankhn Park Zoo 


Material for this article was taken from Keeper News, the 
newsletter of the Metro Boston Chapter AAZK. The original article was written 
by Donna M. Fernandez, Research Coordinator, Franklin Park Zoo, Boston, MA 


The Research Department at Franklin Park Zoo received a $10,000 Conservation Project 
Support Grant from the Institute of Museum Services and the grant money is being used to 
support a Research Keeper Training Program. 

The 15-week training program, which will be limited to 12 keepers each year, will consist 
of an intensive course of instruction on nearly all aspects of animal behavior research, 
emphasizing methods and techniques appropriate to a zoo setting. The first four lectures 
provide an overview of the various disciplines involved in the study of behavior, including 
ethology, sociobiology and comparative psychology. The second part focuses on research 
methods and includes such topics as formulating a research question, designing a well- 
balanced study and choosing the best sampling method. This second portion of the course 
also involves several hands-on sessions including (1) the use of lap-top computers as event 
recorders, (2) the use of video equipment for observer training and reliability assessment, 
and (3) the use of on-line computer services for performing literature searches. The final 
portion of the course focuses on data analysis and presentation. Lectures are geared toward 
providing keepers with a solid foundation in the appropriate uses of statistics and their 
underlying assumptions. Hands-on training in the use of several software packages for 
graphical and statistical analysis is also included in the course’s program. 

Initial training began in January 1992 with once a week, two-hour evening sessions. 
These 15 lectures will be followed by monthly workshops which will focus on ongoing 
research at the zoo. These workshops will serve as an open forum for keepers to exchange 
knowledge, techniques and constructive criticism of each other’s research. 

Keepers interested in participating in the program had to agree to attend the 30 hours of 
lectures, do the readings and assignments, and attend the monthly research workshops. 
Keepers satisfying these requirements will be accorded the status of research keeper and 
given a certain amount of time set aside from their normal work schedule for research (the 
amount of time is project-dependent and determined by the Research Committee and 
Curatorial staff). In addition, participating keepers will have access to video equipment, 
event recorders, timers, lap-top computers, and statistical softwear. Research keepers are 
expected to remain actively involved in research activities and strongly encouraged to 
communicate their findings through publication in professional journals and/or 
presentation at professional conferences. 


{Editor’s Note: If you would like more information about this program you may contact 
Donna Fernandez at Franklin Park Zoo, Pierpoint Road, Boston, MA 02121. Donna has 
agreed to send in an occasional update to AKF on how the program is going. It is really 
great to see a zoo encouraging keepers to become involved in research. SC) 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


61 





TION 



^Behavioral Enrichmeny|J^ 
Activity Manipulation 
Occupational Husbandry 

’A 




Since initiating this enrichment column in last month’s AKF. feedback from the 
membership has been minimal. We realize that new columns need to run awhile before 
readers begin to think about submitting. So we have stockpiled ideas from a few booklets, 
and have a few ideas that we use at the Topeka Zoo, which should supply us with enough 
pieces to last a few more months. However, utilizing the same resources each month will 
soon grow mundane, so if you have any ideas - no matter how simple - please submit them! 
We are also eager to hear your comments and suggestions regarding Enrichment Options. 


SMALL CATS - Many zoos feed all their carnivores once a day, with one or two fast days 
per week. Smaller cats, however, can benefit from several feedings per day, as it 
breaks up the routine and may reduce pacing, since they don’t have to wait all day to 
be fed. Unlike larger cats who gorge and feast in the wild, multiple feedings more 
closely parallel the natural behavior of smaller cats. 

-adapted from RA^TEL, Vol. 17, 1990 pp. 103-105 


KANGAROOSAVALLABIES - Woodchips as a substrate for all or part of an enclosure 
provides material for grubbing and nibbling. Spreading seeds in the woodchips 
that will sprout tasty shoots, such as oats, wheat or milo, will encourage foraging 
behavior. 

-the above taken from Behavioural Enrichment - a catalosue of ideas 
produced as a cooperative effort of seven Scandinavian zoos, Oct. 1990 

LIONS - Occasionally I spread fresh herbivore dung from our regularly wormed hoofstock 
in various places in the lion exhibit. Our pride of five lions go crazier over the dung 
than house cats do over catnip. They lay in it, roll in it, defend it from others, and 
even ingest some of it. This frenzied activity will last anywhere from 20 minutes to 
several hours, on and off, depending on the frequency with which it is provided. 

They will return to the same spot day after day until the scent finally wears off. 
Another advantage is that this is a naturally occurring behavior, and can be 
explained to the public as such. Their dung preference leans toward elephant, but 
zebra and horse manure seems to have its qualities too. 

-Gretchen Ziegler, Lead Keeper, Topeka Zoo, 

OTTERS - We provide several different sizes and shapes of rocks for manipulation as well 
as hollow logs both on land and in the water. Dog food, crayfish and insects are hidden in 
rocks or in logs throughout the exhibit, 

-Fawn Prevost, Keeper, Topeka Zoo 


62 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Enrinhment Options. Continued 

ELEPHANTS - Hang empty beer kegs by a chain from an outside tree branch or inside 
ceiling beam and put some food treats such as primate or omnivore biscuits inside. The 
elephants will enjoy shaking and throwing the kegs around to get the food treats out. They 
will also play with the kegs even when they are empty. 

-Dale Brownlow, Elephant Keeper, Topeka Zoo 


Below are drawings of a Cricket Dispenser and a Mealworm Dispenser. Thanks to Bruce 
Clark, Toledo Zoo, for this submission. 


Clear 

Top 



Cricket Dispenser: holes allow animals to actively capture 
insects. Bedding and insect food keep bugs long-term. 



Mealworm Dispensen bedding, food, bugs inside plastic 
pipe with holes for worm migration. 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


63 


Leffers fo fhe Ediior 



AKF Editor 


Letters to the Editor are welcome at any time. 
Readers are invited to comment on articles 
appearing in AKF. offer suggestions about 
the journal, etc. Let us hear from you. 


Dear Editor: 


I would like to comment on the recent editorial exchange between David Ackerman and 
Cathi Lehn (Forum Vol. 18, No. 11, 1991 pp. 346-347) in regards to Colobus (Colobus guereza) 
tail coloration and the determination of sex in that species. 

Regardless of whether a paper is written from a “scientific research” or 
“husbandry/observational” point of view, the author should utilize every available source of 
information while developing his or her work. It is particularly important to avoid the 
spread of inaccurate information. The fact that Ms. Lehn was not utilized as a source of 
knowledge regarding Colobus is unfortunate. Studbook keepers are ideal sources of 
information for the species with which they work. The data Mr. Ackerman would have 
obtained from Ms. Lehn might have allowed for a more thorough, accurate paper that would 
have been of greater benefit to fellow keepers. 

Mr. Ackerman’s belief that “the Forum is primarily for keepers” and should be used to 
dispense knowledge and ideas is one that is shared by most keepers. Zookeeping is a 
scientific profession, and we should strive to produce reliable publications. The review 
board being formed by the Forum staff is clearly a step in the right direction. With its 
assistance, we can all work to make the Forum a more beneficial resource. 


Mark S. Myers 

Bird Keeper/Giant Kingfisher Studbook Keeper 
Audubon Park & Zoological Garden 
New Orelans, LA 


Keepers Alert 


Susan M. Barnard has 4.6.1 Vampire bats (Desmodus rotundus) of which 2 females are 
hand-raised. About 60% of the group are captive born. Any zoo that may wish to display this 
colony may contact her for additional information at 6146 Fieldcre&t Dr., Morrow, GA 
30260; Tel. (404) 624-5618; FAX (404) 627-7514. 


Deborah Dorsey works as a zookeeper in Nashville, TN and writes that they have a 
number of single animals for which they would like to find mates. These include: 1.0 
Bennett wallaby, 0.1 Two-toed sloth, 0.1 semi-tame Paca, 0.1 Leopard tortoise, 0.1 Muntjac 
and 20-30 Crollia perspicallata bats. Any readers who have or know of a reliable source for 
finding mates (preferably on trade or on breeding loans) please contact her at Animal 
Dept./Opryland, U.S.A., 2802 Opryland Dr., Nashville, TN 37214 Phone: (615) 889-6600 Ext. 
7600 [days]; (615) 865-2941 [evenings]. Deborah is also interested in corresponding with 
anyone who works with Carollia perspicallata, i.e. breeding, husbandry info exchange. 


64 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Thmiks to a Number of People 
Who Have Dared To Share’ 

The following people have sent in data 
collection forms to the ZIDP since the last list 
of participants in AKF in July 1991. Thank 
you to the following: 

Wendy Marshall, Erie Zoological Gardens; 

Pete Hawthorne and James Blankenship, 

Denver Zoo; Carol Prima, National Zoo; 

Shirley Williams, Kansas City Zoo; 

Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo; Debbie Baker, 

Folsom Children’s Zoo; Lance Aubery and 
Vickie Steele, San Diego Wild Animal Park; 

Jeff Polcen and Rhonda Kesek, Cleveland 
Metroparks Zoo; John H. Drake, Duke 
University Primate Center; and Silvia 
Logsdon, Louisville Zoo. 

Also thanks to the following individuals for very recently received forms: Beth Pohl of the 
Columbus Zoo gathered forms from a number of keepers at her zoo including Dianna 
Frisch, Charlene Jeadry, Carl Gyarmaty, Pat Currie, V. Kunter, Dusty Lombardi and 
Lynn Kester. Thanks, Columbus Zoo! And a special thanks goes to Gloria Kendal of the 
San Diego Wild Animal Park who sent an incredibly complete form on Okapi, our first 
form on this species! 

Thanks to all of you for caring enough to share information. 

Many others also signed up at the National Conference in Toledo and promised to submit 
information. So we are doing well for OUR FINAL YEAR of collection. The local AAZK 
Chapter has also agreed to become involved in a big way this year and will assist in 
collecting information both within our zoo as well as nationally and internationally. So if 
you are thinking about participating, please do! Let’s work together to make this an 
incredibly comprehensive notebook on zoo infant development. 

Two other ways you can help: 

1. Send infant weights from all parent-reared mammals. This is very easy for anyone 
using ARKS/MEDARKS computer systems. I need common name, genus and species, 
weight (prefer it in grams), date and age at weighing, your name, zoo and release form. 
These weights will also be listed in the notebook, 

2 . Send any articles you come across that note infant development and/or group 
interaction. Just make sure if it isn’t already listed on the article that you note the source. I 
plan to add a “Further Reading” section to the notebook and will list articles as well as a 
brief note on article content. 

So please, take the time to share this year because next year will be too late 

Thanks again to all new as well as past participants! 



Sincerely, 




Harmony Frazier-Taylor 
ZIPD Coordinator 
Woodland Park Zoo, Seattle, WA 
(206) 684-4866 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


65 


Who Did You Use for the Demo Today? 
Training for a Consistent Elephant 
Management Program 

By 

Laurie Task, Elephant Keeper 
San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 

In January of 1991, the Elephant Department at the San Diego Zoo experienced a change. 
The Zoological Society encouraged the renewed sense of responsibility for the one African 
and three Asian female elephants. With the help of the Society’s Elephant Program 
Manager, Alan Roocroft, plans were developed to establish a better overall program for 
training the keepers and the elephants. A team of four keepers was formulated and 
introduced into the herd. This group of keepers consisted of one old friend and long-time 
elephant keeper. Red Thomas, and three newcomers with animal training, but limited or 
no elephant training experience. This brought a fresh feeling of enthusiasm into the barn. 
A new direction with greater potential was established for the zoo’s Elephant Management 
Program. 

As part of the new program, we have improved our informal daily public demonstrations. 
In this demonstration we present elephant history, natural behavior and differences 
between the two species. Such demonstrations help visitors better understand our daily 
management of the elephants. We explain the importance of training, using one elephant 
for this “keeper interaction”. The keeper demonstrates foot inspections, the “walk around” 
(overall physical inspection), and “lie down” just as we do each morning. As we say in our 
demo, these behaviors are important for general health inspection and serve as insurance 
so that we can maintain control in the event of a medical problem. For instance, if the 
animal must be anesthetized, it can be asked to lie down calmly, before the drug takes 
effect. 

Liz, our 27-year-old, 10,000-pound Asian was not trained enough to participate in the 
demonstration until September of 1991. To an experienced elephant trainer, this is no great 
feat, but it has been to us. Liz is big, boastful, and likes to bluff. She has always been the 
joker of the herd and likes to create mischief. Characteristic of her attitude, if she could 
talk, she might say regarding training, “make me do it”. Although we had seen her lying 
down on her own and knew that she was comfortable doing so, she was never trained to lie 
down on command. In order to further our caregiving capabilities and give Liz the 
opportunity to show off (when we ask her to), it was decided that our primary goal was to 
train her to lie down. 

Liz’s training began in mid-March with our asking her to lie down only once each day as 
part of the barn routine. After one month, despite unexpected broken ropes and come-a- 
longs due to her strength, she would reliably move into the “half right” position (resting on 
her chest) to be brushed off. To some elephant trainers it may have taken too long to 
accomplish this behavior, but because of footwork, our demos and other animals under our 
care, we had little time for training during the day. We had no constraints of weeks or 
months for completion. We were not forceful, but instead, made training a positive 
experience for the animal. Instead of using the traditional “casting” method of pulling an 
elephant down, ropes merely guided the elephant calmly into position. Avoiding pressure 
from the secure rope, the elephant would stay in position until the release command was 
delivered. Remember that Liz had never been trained, was larger than most, and had an 
uncooperative attitude. We were pleased with her responses and progress, as well as the 
education the keepers received from the training process. Under the direction of 
experienced keepers, less experienced individuals were able to learn by participating, not 
just watching. 

A short time after our new program was initiated, a keeper was transferred from the crew 
leaving us short-handed for several months. Without enough manpower to continue 
training, we had to make use of our time just to reinforce the behavior we had established. 
Three months later we started the next step, and the need for a rope to coax Liz all the way 


66 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Training for a Consistent Elephant Management Program. Continued 
down was eliminated after only ten days. With the progress of our training, and a new 
keeper brought into the program, our enthusiasm was again high. After another ten days 
we asked her to lie down, off chains, in the yard. Liz became a reliable part of our 
demonstration after six months of training. Now Liz might boast, “Look, I can do it”! 

Our demonstration enhances the visitor’s awareness as well as creates “occupational 
therapy” for the elephants, giving them something to do in addition to searching for food 
and trouble all day. They seem to enjoy the increased keeper interaction since the 
program’s beginning. Liz, especially, has become a more responsive animal. The 
increased activity and exercise has promoted increased muscle tone and beneficial weight 
loss. She seems to be more at ease with the keepers, and we can now inspect the skin on the 
top of her back daily to look for potential medical problems. We now have a choice of which 
elephant to use in the demonstration. By giving Liz a part in the demo, she does not have to 
stand around while the others “work”. This has made it easier for her to be a “good” 
elephant because she has activities other than mischief to keep her occupied. 



“Tailing up” is a behavior which allows the elephant to focus on something other than 
mischief while walking with another elephant. In training Liz, we found that this 
behavior took special work because she rejected all contact with her trunk. We progressed 
from teaching her to take a stick, to holding a rope. She would then hold the rope while 
walking behind another elephant. At this point, we could see she was determined to hold the 
rope while walking. Now fully trained, this behavior has allowed us more freedom and 
control when releasing and bringing the elephants into the barn at night. We no longer 
have to walk directly by her side. 


Since she did not like having 
her trunk touched, Liz was 
initially taught to “tail up” 
using a piece of rope. 


The “tailing up” behavior 
makes it easier for keepers to 
walk the elephants to and 
from the night barn since 
each elephant does not need a 
keeper at its side. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


67 


Training for a Consistent Elephant Management Program. Continued 

Another of our projects, as part of the program, was to train Sumithi, our 24-year-old Asian, 
to lie all the way down. For years she was asked to come down only to the “half right” 
position. Sumithi is a very timid elephant who is submissive to the other animals, but 
tends to test new keepers more than the others. She has earned a reputation that requires 
keepers to be especially cautious around her. Very recently a minor medical problem 
proved how important and prudent it was to train this behavior. By having her lie 
completely on her side, we were able to treat her more comfortably and efficiently. During 
a visit from the veterinarians, we were proud to hear them confirm that this procedure could 
never have been accomplished six months earlier. 


We use this journal to share what might be of interest to others, and to boast proudly about 
our accomplishments. I am certainly proud of what we have done with the elephants at the 
San Diego Zoo. Our elephant keeper staff includes Red Thomas, Martin Ramirez, Ron 
Ringer and myself. We faced the pitfalls of revising a program with a less experienced 
staff, and we set challenging training goals. The progress of our program was put on hold 
when we lost a keeper, were short staffed, then started a new keeper late in our developing 
program. Despite all of these factors, enthusiasm, determination, and most of all, team 
work enabled the program to flourish. 



The author works with 24- 
year-old Asian elephant 
“Sumithi” as she is taught 
to lie down. 


This behavior is not only 
demonstrated during the 
daily public shows, but is 
also very important to 
allow veterinary work 
when needed. 



68 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Training for a Consistent Elephant Management Program. Continued 


I would like to thank the Society’s Administration for their commitment to the elephants 
and for giving us the chance to improve the program. This has allowed more time to 
introduce new activities for the animals and to train more new and necessary husbandry 
behaviors. All of the animals can now participate in our demonstrations which are so 
important for the visitor experience. There is no doubt that our animals’ physical welfare 
has improved as we hope that all species in the collection will continually improve. As Liz 
might say, “Look what we have done, and we are not finished yet!” 

Nixon Griffis Fund Announces 
Grant Recipients 

The Nixon Griffis Fund for Zoological Research (NGFZR), established in 1984 by New 
York Zoological Society Trustee Nixon Griffis, awarded six research grants on 10 
December 1991, The recipients were: 


Cheryl Asa, PhD, St. Louis Zoo and Cynthia Westerheide, St. Louis University 
“Urinary and Fecal Hormones of the Grevy’s Zebra Throughout the 
Ovulatory Cycle and Around the Time of Parturition” 

E. Jean Brennan, University of Tennessee 
“Genetic Survey of the Mitochondrial DNA of Gaur (Bos gaurua)” 

Julian Duval, Indianapolis City Zoo, Scott Davis, PhD, and 
Edward Louis, Jr., Texas A&M University 
“Subspecies Identification of the Grand Cayman Iguana (Cyclura nubila lewisi)” 

Gary Fergerson, PhD, Texas Christian University, Richard Hudson and 
Stephen Hammack, Ft. Worth Zoological Park 
“Effects of Varying Vitamin/Mineral Supplementation on the Growth, 

Adult Size, and Reproduction of the Panther Chameleon, (Fucifer (Chamaeleo) paradalis)” 

James Jacobson, PhD, University of Houston, Joseph Flanagan, DVM, 

Denton A. Cooley Animal Hospital, Houston Zoo, and Stanley Mays, Houston Zoo 
Determine Sperm Retention and Parentage of African Spurred Tortoises 
{Geochelone sulcata), Using DNA Fingerprinting” 

Randall Junge, DVM, St. Louis Zoological Park 
“Medical Management Survey and Manual for 
Black Lemurs {Lemur macaco macaco)” 


Nixon Griffis Fund for Zoological Research grants are available to members of the zoo and 
aquarium community. Fund recipients may be keepers, curators, veterinarians, or 
research and consulting biologists. Grants, not to exceed $3000, are awarded semi- 
annually. Closing periods are 1 January and 1 July of each year. For information about 
the Fund and grant application procedures, contact John Behler, Coordinator, Nixon 
Griffis Fund for Zoological Research, c/o New York Zoological Society, Bronx Zoo, Bronx, 
NY 10460. 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


69 


Chapter 

News 

Tulsa ZoQ AAZK Qiaptfir 

In September our Chapter lost its 
President, Sarah Leeg, when she 
resigned to move to California. We all 
miss her and her hard work. She was 
responsible for getting the approval and 
organizing our zoo’s own “Keeping up 
with Keepers” program, an idea 
originated by the Philadelphia Zoo 
AAZK Chapter. Our Chapter has 
successfully completed five KUWKs 
since September. 

We will once again be adopting a whale 
this year. His name is Stub. We have a 
FYI display case in one of our public 
areas with our adopted whale’s picture 
as well as information about him and 
other Chapter projects. We are active in 
the “Adopt a Highway” program - four 
times a year we clean a two-mile 
section of the expressway. 

Our Chapter has its own pop machine 
with the lowest price in the zoo. We are 
doing well enough with the profits from 
this to renew our membership dues to 
Zoo Conservation Outreach Group 
(ZCOG). We are currently working on 
gathering items to help fill a wish list 
for the Edgard Lang Sacasa Zoo in 
Managua, Nicaragua. 

Another project our Chapter voted to 
support was The Wolf Fund, a project 
supporting the reintroduction of the wolf 
into Yellowstone National Park. 

We had a very full and rewarding 1991 
and look forward to a great year for our 
Chapter in 1992. 

--Faye Krumm, President 

Rocky Mountain AAZ K Chanter 

Newly elected officers for 1992 are: 

President Karen Stern 

Vice Pres Ann Zobrist 

Secretary Mark Marciniak 

Treasurer Cindy Bickel 

Chapter Liaison Suzanne Chacon 

AAZK/Liaison Volunteer 

Donna Ames 

(appointed by the Volunteer Board) 


Our Conservation Parking Meter has 
generated $400 in the last month. We 
have plenty of snow here in Denver this 
year, so it’s a good start. Our official 
unveiling will be this spring. 

We voted on our official Chapter logo, a 
design by Cate Werner (see insert). We 
are going to get stationary made with 
our logo on it. 



Our ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ will be held 1 
March 1992. T-shirts and Posters are 
still available through our mail order 
service. For information call (303) 331- 
4120 and leave a message. 

-Suzanne Chacon, Chapter Liaison 

Exotic Feline Breeding Comt^ound 

The Chapter participated in EFBC’s first 
Twilight Tour (Sept. ’91) fundraiser 
which resulted in over $2500.00 for the 
Compound and over $110 from the 
Chapter bake sale. The high point was 
the dedication of EFBC’s latest Natural 
Habitat Exhibit built on proceeds from 
the first ‘Fabulous Feline Follies’ 
banquet last November. 

A $300 Silver Sponsorship was donated 
by our Chapter to The Fabulous Feline 
Follies 1991 ‘A Celebration of Gigant’ - 
to raise funds for the construction of a 
Natural Habitat Exhibit for EFBC’s 
young Amur leopard. Most Chapter 
members were an invaluable help on 
the night of the event (Nov. 23) working 
even though they were paying guests, 
too. This event raised $22,000 and 
secured our goal! We cannot thank 
them enough. 


70 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 

The Follies theme for 1992 is “Our 
Native American: The Cougar”, set for 
November 14 for which we are seeking 
sponsorship at every level. 

The Chapter has become a member of 
AMAZOO, part of the Zoo Conservation 
Outreach Group, and sent a $50 donation 
to the Seub Nakhasathien Foundation to 
support the establishment of a Wildlife 
Sanctuary in Thailand. This is in an 
area inhabited by wild felines and is 
under pressure from loggers. 

Thanks to AKF (Aug issues) for 
advertising ‘The Patch’ for which we 
received many orders (Still a few left!) 
$4.50 to AAZK/EFBC, HCR 1, Box 84, 
Rosamond, CA 93560. 

--Julie Abraham, President 

EFBC Addendum 

We are pleased to announce that our 
Chapter has decided to donate 10% of 
every fund-raiser we will be holding 
this year to the National AAZK. We are 
still discussing the potential for holding 
a special event devoted to the National 
concern. Being an entirely volunteer 
organization, the demand on our 
resources is great. Our secretary, 
Annie Neilson, will be conducting an 
AAZK membership drive over the next 
month. Hopefully, we will have a large 
interest and can plan other fundraisers 
and events. 

Our next fundraiser will be a bake sale 
that will be held at the EFBC's Twilight 
Tour in April for the opening of a new 
Environmental Exhibit. 

—Johnny Merk, Chapter Liaison 


Paling 7 ^ Chaptf y 

Last year was a great one for our 
Chapter. In May we raised over $3000 
for Bowling for Rhinos. We were very 
pleased to have the support of personnel 
from all branches of the zoo and a good 
time was had by all. 

For the past two years our Chapter has 
been collecting aluminum cans and 
glass for recycling. This year we 
donated money made from recycling to 


AMAZOO, an organization that 
supports the training of Central 
American zoo personnel. 

Our Chapter has developed an AAZK 
product. We are selling acrylic 
keychain/thermometers with the AAZK 
logo on the front and a wind chill chart 
on the back. So far, sales have been 
great. 

It is with some sadness that we bid a 
fond farewell to our 1991 president, 
Marcelle Guidry. She has left our zoo to 
become the General Curator of the Zoo of 
Acadiana in Louisiana. We thank 
Marcelle for her strong efforts in 
reorganizing our Chapter and for her 
work in keeping it going. We wish her 
all the best of luck in her new job. 

Our 1992 elections results are: 

President Sara Weller 

Vice President Anne Knapp 

Sec/Treas Ann Stevens 


Calgary Zoo AAZK Chanter 

Our second annual Zoolympics was a 
great success, bringing in more than 
$450.00. Proceeds from the event and 
bake sale went towards the purchase of 
two electronic digital scales. 

Sponsorship of foreign keeper Dr. 
Prakash Amte continues with financial 
support, husbandry and restraint 
techniques for rehabilitated animals. 
Our Chapter received our first 
correspondence from Dr. Amte, 
detailing some of the animals under his 
care. 

Financial support for rainforests and 
the Zoo Histories Project were made on 
behalf of our Chapter. We hope in 1992 a 
fund can be generated in memory of 
“Tuffy”, our silverback Lowland gorilla, 
with proceeds toward occupational items 
for section animals. 

-William Blayney, Chapter Liaison 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


71 


Chapter News. Continued 

San Diego AAZK .CliaBta: 

AAZK Christmas Party - a Christmas 
gathering at Sea World’s Penguin 
Encounter on 11 Dec. was quite a festive 
event, and a huge success. Close to 100 
Chapter members, family and friends 
enjoyed a turkey feast with all the 
trimmings. 

Penguin Encounter staff led a 
spectacular behind-the-scenes tour 
which included glimpses of the latest 
Emperior, King and Humboldt’s 
chicks; and tube feeding 
demonstrations with the first two 
Chinstrap chicks hatched in captivity. 
Impressive! 

A series of slide shows about life at Sea 
World’s Penguin Encounter exhibit 
entitled “Cold Encounters of the Bird 
Kind” was presented by Doug Kres. 
Doug certainly put his heart and soul 
into that presentation. 

Sea World’s Penguin Encounter is the 
largest exhibit of its kind in the world, 
housing the Emperor, King, Adellie, 
Macaroni, Gentoo and Chinstrap 
Penguin. The Southern Giant Petrel 
and Kelp Gull share the exhibit as well, 
where lighting simulates Antarctic 
seasons. 

Some San Diegans celebrated a snowy 
Christmas after all - for one night 
anyway, at Sea World’s Penguin 
Encounter! 

The Chapter is pleased to announce the 
following new officers on the Board of 
Directors: 

President Vickie Steele 

Vice Pres Deanna Herfel 

Secretary Phoenix Lindgren 

Treasurer Annie Weaver 

Chapter Liaison. ..Mary Dural 

Stepping down are Steve Castillo, Lance 
Aubery and Andrew Johnson who have 
done a dynamic job. 

Farewell. ..Andrew Johnson has left 
Sea World for a position at the 
Vancouver Public Aquarium. He is 
now Curator of Marine Mammals. 
Congratulations! Andrew served 
diligently on the Board of Directors 


since 1989. In 1990 he became President 
and was Editor of the Chapter’s 
newsletter The Keener . He was also 
involved in the planning of the 
upcoming National Conference hosted 
by the San Diego Chapter this 
September. 

Canada’s extremely lucky. Talent, 
dedication and sensitivity are but a few 
of Andrew’s qualities. The Chapter 
wishes him the best always. 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 


The Philadelphia AAZK Chanter 

The Philadelphia Chapter of AAZK 
mourns the loss of our friend and 
President of the Philadelphia Zoo, Bill 
Donaldson. Bill is credited with 
turning the zoo into the success it is 
today. He provided the animals with 
more natural settings and eliminated 
many of the older confined exhibit 
cages. He was a great supporter of 
zookeepers. He valued their input and 
treated them like professionals. His 
presence will be sorely missed. 

-Members of the Philadelphia 
Zoo AAZK Chapter 


Topeka Chapter AAZK 

Recently elected officers are: 

President Kayla Grams 

Vice Pres/Liaison. ..Gretchen Ziegler 

Secretary Warren Waters 

Treasurer Kathy Waters 

This fall and winter have been fairly 
slow for our Chapter. We are still 
struggling to maintain our small group 
and try to increase membership. In 
spite of our small size, however, we were 
able to accomplish some things. We 
fulfilled our requirement of picking up 
trash along two miles of “Adopted 
Highway”, even though we had 
difficulty remembering why we thought 
the idea was such a good one as we 
stooped and shuffled along in the 
blazing 90 degree weather. But 
recycling the trash, and having our 
name posted along the highway is 
rewarding (if anyone ever slows down 
enough to read it). 


72 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 

Our spiral wishing well still proves to 
be quite profitable - this season we 
created an educational display about 
gorillas and split profits with various 
gorilla conservation organizations (a 
total of over $400). This summer we 
donated nearly $400 to the Ngare Sergoi 
Support Group. We are now in the 
process of redoing the showcase 
featuring Cheyenne Bottoms, an 
endangered wetland in central Kansas 
which is an extremely important 
stopover for many migrating species of 
waterfowl and shorebirds. 

In November our Chapter hosted a 
presentation by Lee Boyd, a specialist in 
Przewalski horse behavior, who did 
much of her doctorate work studying our 
herd here in Topeka. Lee accompanied 
the team of vets, keepers and other 
specialists to Russia where they did 
physiological studies of over 100 P. 
horses at the Askania Nove Reserve. 
Her slides and videos of the Moscow Zoo 
and the horse procedures were 
wonderfully entertaining and 
interesting. Of particular interest to us 
was the video of a stallion fight she was 
able to film during the events. 

Next month. Chapter member Geoff 
Creswell will be giving a slide show on 
his year working for the Jane Goodall 
Institute establishing a chimp 
sanctuary in Burundi, East Africa. 

We finally got our Chapter T-shirts 
made featuring our new binturong logo. 
And in December our Chapter voted to 
contribute $100 to national AAZK 
headquarters for operating expenses 
since- the financial outlook for our 
association is sP bleak. This winter we 
will attempt to come up with a brilliant 
fundraiser to help national further. 

-Gretchen Ziegler, Chapter Liaison 

Greenville Zoo AAZK Chanter 

We held our Bowling for Rhinos 
fundraiser for the Ngare Ndare Forest 
Preserve on 4 May 1991. $934.16 was 
raised. 

Lecture about bats: the guest lecturer 
was Ms. Mary Strayer from the non 
-game division of Fish and Wildlife 
Department and manager of the 


Heritage Wildlife Trust. Her 
department actively conducts bat counts 
and charts the different species and 
their habitat range in the South 
Carolina area. 

Our Assistant Director, Richard 
Farinato, spoke to our group about his 
trip to Guatemala. He had applied and 
was chosen to teach a two-week course 
in the “Biology and Management of 
Wildlife in Captivity” at the zoo in 
Guatemala City. 


-Janie Raxter, President 



ATTENTION 
All Chapters Involved in 

*92 Bowling for Rhino.s 

It would be greatly appreciated if any 
Chapter or facility producing an item 
especially for Bowling for Rhinos 
(i.e. patch, pin, T shirt, poster, etc.) 
would please send one to Administra- 
tive Offices for the AAZK Historical 
Archives. If it is not possible to send 
the item gratis, please advise AO of 
the cost. If an item is no longer avail- 
able, please send a photograph if pos- 
sible. We would really like to have 
as complete a record of this important 
AAZK event as possible. We would 
also like to have snapshots of your 
event and copies of any publicity you 
receive in zoo or local media. Thanks 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


73 


Chapter News. Continued 

Where To Purchase Chapter Products 

AAZK Magnetic Keeper Safety Signs - 
Flint Hills AAZK Chapter, Sunset Zoo, 
11th & Poyntz, Manhattan, KS 66502. 
$10.85 each plus $1.00 P&H. 

AAZK Logo T-Shirts - ($8.50) available 
in tan, blue and brown in S,M,L,XL., 
Sweatshirts ($18.00) available in grey or 
maroon with black logo in sizes 
M,L,XL. Both are 50/50 poly/cotton; and 
Colder Holders ($3.50) - Little Rock 
Chapter AAZK, Little Rock Zoo, #1 
Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205. 

AAZK Logo Auto Decals and Stickers - 
Mill Mountain AAZK Chapter, Mill 
Mountain Zoo, Inc., P. 0. Box 13484, 
Roanoke, VA 24034. Decals - $2.50 each; 
Stickers $1.50 lg/$0.75 small. 

AAZK Logo Mesh Shopping Bags - 
Philadelphia AAZK Chapter, 
Philadelphia Zoo, 34th St. & Girard 
Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104. These 
16" X 19" white nylon mesh bags have 
the AAZK logo printed on the navy 
canvas top. They are reuseable, strong 
and have a squared bottom for easier 
filling. Each bag is $5.00 which 
includes postage. 

AAZK Logo Keychain - Dallas Zoo 
AAZK Chapter, 621 E. Clarendon, 
Dallas, TX 75203 attn: Sara Weller. 
This keychain has a thermometer and 
the AAZK logo on the front and a wind 
chill chart on the back. Thermometer is 
encased in durable acrylic and is 
approximately 1" x 2" in size. Price 
each is $4.00 which includes postage. 



AAZK Logo Bumper Sticker - The 

Jacksonville, FL Chapter offers this 
silk-screened 3" x 9" bumper sticker 
with kelly green lettering, black 
border/center line and the nationally 
recognized AAZK logo on a white 
background. The imprinted message 
reads “Zoo Parks - Modern Arks”. 
These bumper stickers are $2.00 each 
for 1-49 and $1.55 each for 50 or more. 
The postage is an additional $.30 per 
each 5 bumper stickers ordered. If you 
would be interested in purchasing 
these for your fundraisers or to be used 
as a sales item in your gift shop - an 
item that promotes both Zoos and 
AAZK, please contact either Micki 
Corcoran or Ann Hinton at this 
address: Jacksonville AAZK Chapter, 
8605 Zoo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32218. 



AAZK Logo Flyng Saucers (Frisbees) - 
made from recycled plastic, these 
flying saucers are emblazoned with 
the AAZK logo in black on bright 
green. Available from the Beardsley 
Zoo AAZK Chapter for $5.00 by 
contacting Chapter Vice President Rob 
Thomas, c/o Beardsley Zoo, 1875 Noble 
Ave., Bridgeport, CT 06610. 

Zoo Stories Book - this book consists of 
nearly 150 items submitted by keepers 
across the country such as: anecdotes 
about keepers, animals and visitors, 
mispronounced or misidentified 
animals, clever animal names, off- 
the-wall phone calls, etc. Cost is $3.50 
plus 70 cents for postage. Make checks 
payable to Brookfield Zoo Chapter and 
send to: Brookfield Zoo Chapter, 3300 
Golf Road, Brookfield, IL 60513. 

AAZK “Keepers Care” Buttons - are 
once again available from the Lincoln 
Park Zoo AAZK Chapter, 2200 N. 
Cannon Dr., Chicago, IL 60614. Attn: 
Susan Moy. Cost is $5.00 for 5 buttons 
(minimum order of five please). 


74 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


L.IJV.K. 

(liaison and Information Network for Keepers) 

Coordinator for the LINK System; Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon 
Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3P OR5. (204) 837-2916 [h). 

I^ gipnal CkK >rtii|^ te?5 

ALABAMA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
ALASKA - Vacancy 

ARIZONA - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 85716 
ARKANSAS - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher, Little Rock Zoological Gardens, 

#1 Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205 
CALIFORNIA- Vacancy 

COLORADO - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
CONNECTICUT- Jeanette Nadeau, Roger Williams Park Zoo, Providence, RI 02905 
DELEWARE - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
FLORIDA - Rick Smith, 11707, #5 Park, Orchard Circle, Tampa, FL 33612 
GEORGIA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
HAWAII - Michelle Suenishi, Hilton Hawaiian Village, 2950 Ena Rd., Honolulu, HI 96815 
IDAHO -Vacancy 

ILLINOIS - Pat Swieca, 5710 W. Cullom Ave., Chicago, IL 60634 

INDIANA - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 

IOWA - Carla Wieser, Omaha's Heniy Doorly Zoo, 10th St. & Deer Park Blvd., Omaha, NE 68107 

KANSAS - Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

KENTUCKY - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 

LOUISIANA - Michelle Asselin, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 70115 
MAINE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MARYLAND - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
MASSACHUSETTS - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MICHIGAN - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 
MINNESOTA - Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens, 13000 Zoo Blvd., Apple Valley, MN 55124 
MISSISSIPPI - Jeannie Frazier, Jackson Zoological Park, 2918 W. Capitol, Jackson, MS 39209 
MISSOURI - Vacancy 
MONTANA - Vacancy 

NEBRASKA -Carla Wieser (see address under Iowa) 

NEVADA - Vacancy 

NEW HAMPSHIRE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

NEW JERSEY - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
NEW MEXICO - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 857716 
EAST NEW YORK - Mark Hofling, Bronx Zoo, 185th & Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460 (212) 220-7115 [w] 
WEST NEW YORK - Alan Baker, Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Dr., S 3 Tacuse, NY 13204 
NORTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
NORTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada R3P 0R5 (204) 986-4040 [w] 

OHIO - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 
OKLAHOMA - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher (see addresses under AR) 

OREGON - Anna Michel, Washington Park Zoo, 4001 SW Canyon Rd., Portland, OR 97221 
PENNSYLVANIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
RHODE ISLAND - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

SOUTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
SOUTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

TENNESSEE - Gail Karr or Cindy Finger, Memphis Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 
TEXAS - Ann Marie Greco, San Antonio Zoo, 3903 N. St. Mary’s St., San Antonio, TX 78212 
UTAH - John Turner, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
VERMONT - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WASHINGTON - Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N, Seattle, WA 98103 
WEST VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WISCONSIN -Wayne Hazlett, 3768 S. 89th St., Milwaukee, WI 53228 
WYOMING - Vacancy 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - Theresa Maas (see address under PA) 

Province of Ontario - Neil Porter, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario MlE 4R5 Canada 
Provinces of Manitoba & Saskatchewan - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

Province of Quebec - Chantal Routhier, Granby Zoo, 347 Rue Bourget, Granby, Quebec, Canada J2G lE 8 
Provinces of Alberta & British Columbia - Grant Tkachuk, 10139 157th St., #206, Edmonton, Alberta T5P 2T9 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


75 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks l AKF. 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 


ZOOKEEPERS (4 positions)...strong husbandry background in the field of primates with 
one year’s paid experience working with at least 2 species of marmosets and/or tamarins. 
Duties include, but not limited to, daily care, feeding, enclosure cleaning and 
maintenance and recordkeeping. Salary $6.00 per hour. Resumes accepted until positions 
are closed. Send to: Lubee Foundation, Inc. 18401 N.W. County Rd. 231, Gainesville, FL 
32609. 

ZOOKEEPER ...ney/ zoo to open this spring. Responsibilities include daily animal care, 
behavior observation, diet preparation, exhibit maintenance, recordkeeping, and 
interaction with the public. Starting salary $6.00 per hour. Send references and resume to: 
Marcelle Guidry, Zoo of Acadiana, 116 Lakeview Dr., Broussard, LA 70518 or call (318) 837- 
5989 for more information. Position open until filled. 

SUMMER INTERNSHIPS AVAILABLE . ..For college students with a strong interest in the 
life sciences, wildlife management, education, rehabilitation or veterinary medicine. 
Wage and college credit available for positions from 5 June through 5 September 1992. Send 
cover letter and resume to: Education Director, Wildlife Safari, P.O. Box 1600, Winston, 
OR 97496. (No phone calls please). Applications accepted no later than 15 April 1992. 

ZOOKEEPER . ..Teqaires high school diploma; appropriate degree and some experience 
preferred. Responsible for daily care of mixed collection, exhibit maintenance, behavioral 
observation and recording, and interaction with public. Salary $12,000 plus benefits. Send 
resume by 28 February 1992 to: Ross Park Zoo, 185 Park Ave., Binghamton, NY 13903. 

SEASONAL ZOOKEEPER-GUIDES ...Xios.\t\ons available May through October 1992. Good 
opportunity for paid zoo experience. Requires high school diploma, some experience in 
caring for small and large mammals desirable. Good communications skills, outgoing 
personality, and neat appearance essential. Must be willing to handle non-venomous 
reptiles. Salary— $175.00 per week: lodging, utilities and uniforms furnished. Send 
resume to: Soco Gardens Zoo, Rt. 1, Box 355, Maggie Valley, NC 28751, Attn: Jim Miller. 
For more details, call (704) 926-1746. Resume accepted until 15 April 1992. 

EDUCATION COORDINATOR . ..regnires background in wildlife and ecology 
presentation. Will supervise the development and coordination of an off-site, as well as on- 
site educational show, using a variety of exotic animals. Position requires excellent 
leadership, presentation and communication skills. Good driving record a must. Send 
resume to: Six Flags Magic Mountain, Animal Department, P.O. Box 5500, Valencia, CA 
91385 or call (805) 255-4770 for more information. 


The September 1991 issue of BBC Wildlife reported that 16 major airlines have stopped 
transportation of wild-caught birds in response to recommendations by the Environment 
Committee of the European Parliment. In the U.S. bills have been introduced aimed at 
stopping the wild-bird trade. North America and Europe account for an estimated two 
million birds shipped annually; shipping bans are expected to drastically reduce that 
number. Ten U.S. dealers account for 80 percent of the birds shipped in the U.S., according 
to BBC Wildlife , and are raising objections to an immediate ban. They want a five-year 
phase-out program instead. The Wild Bird Protection Act, currently before Congress, 
places an immediate ban on importation of wild-caught birds and requires banding of 
captive birds to prevent poaching. - BBC Wildlife magazine, Vol. 9, No. 9, September 1991. 

m 

7 6 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 2 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 


City 


State/Province 


Zjp 


Telephone 


Qiome) 


(work) 


U.S. Members 

I I $30.00 Professional/U.S. 
Full-time Keepers 

I I $25.00 Affiliate/U.S, 

Other staff & volunteers 

I 1 $25.00 Associate/U.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


Canadian Members 

□ $35.00 Professional/Canada 

Full-time Keepers 

□ $30.00 Affiliate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

I I $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


□ $50.00 or up ContributingTJ.S. 
Individuals 

I I $50.00 or up Institutional/U.S. 
Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


□ 

□ 


$55.00 or up Contributing^Canada 
Individuals 

$55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 
Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


International Members 


library Only 


□ $40.00 International 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


□ $20.00 Library 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 

Zoo Address 

Title 

Work Area 

Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S. A. 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.SA. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 



t 

m 

m 

a 

§ 


w 

(t> 

►o 

C 

n> 


S’ 


o 

P 


a 

CO 

Ol 


w 


O 

p 


N 

© 

O 

w 

© 


05 

05 

05 

O 

05 


W5 

h- » T5 
< © 
Ou ^ 

^ 05 


S 

o 




- e? 


f-H 


sh: 

sr s: 

ill 

f--.! Ju 

i.ri 

TJ rh 

zr 

i-t. 


a 


1 — 3 

'i3 

1—. SU 

i~h 

cr — ■ 

O 

3 

3 

0.1 

■"3 r'.4 


■< O 



•M 


DC 

O 

'3 


n 


Ol 





o* 

o* 

-a 

ill 

ca 

3. 


IL.J 

'•O 

CO 



March 1992 



eepers 

orum 




ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 March 1992 

Volume Nineteen 

Editor-in-Chief: Susan Chan Number Three 

Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 

Animal Keepers' Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual publication costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster: 
Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 President 

Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 Vice President 

Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 921 12 

Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Immediate Past President 

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROJECT HEADS. 


Awards Committee 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

Book Revigw.. .Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 

Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 

Staff Exchange 

Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 

AAZK History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 

Public Education Committee 

Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
Keeper Accommodations List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 
An Approach to Zookeeping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 

ZoQ Iafant...D£YClQpmcnt. .Project 

Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 

AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 
Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings Island 

Membership DirectQr.Y 


Keener Training & Education 

{includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal Data Transfer Form 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 
AAZK Liaison to AAZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 

DieL.Kate.bnuk 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 

B.Y-La\YS ■ Revic-w 

VACANCY 

Zoo/lJniversitv List 
Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 


Keeper Correspondent 

VACANCY 

Publications Funding . Committee 

Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo 

Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, Roger Williams Zoo / Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 

International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) 


ConserYationu-Pieser.Yation. Restoration (CPR) Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for. Rhinos ‘92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 

Keeper Training Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 


Liaison and Information Network for Keeners (LINK) 
Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors,.... 77 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt.................... ...................................78 - 79 

Coming Events....... 80 

From the President/Presidential Bulletin 81 

Zoo Infant Development Project/AAZK Announces New Members....................... 82 

Births & Hatchings .83 - 84 

An Exciting Arrival on Christmas Eve - A Baby Indian Rhino 84 

AAZK Award Nominations Sought (Excellence in Zookeeping)................. ............86- 87 

Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust Enrollment Information 87 

Viewpoint (Marine Mammal Capture and the Conservation Alternative). 88 - 89 

University Research Expeditions Program ‘92....... 89 

Proposals Submitted for 1992 CITES Conference 91 

African Nations Seek Downlisting of Elephant Populations............. .....................91 

Primate Topical Bibliographies Published by PIC Jan. 1991 -Jan. 1992... ......92 

Looking Back 93 

Information Please (primate housing heating, Yellow Wagtail, feeding flowers) 94 

Book Review (Pandas)...., 95 - 96 

Chapter News...,. 97 - 101 

Enrichment Options (soflbill birds, fruit bats, wolves, perches, aerial feeder)... ..102 - 103 

Publication Available (enrichment publication) 103 

Hearing in the Bam Owl 104 - 106 

Regional Coordinators List 107 

Opportunity Knocks/ Info Request (breedng Macaws) 108 


1992 AAZK Conference (Registration Form, Hotel Form, Early Bird Tours) - Center Insert 

Information for Contributors 

Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month -year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for AKF . No commitment is made to the author, but 
an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLI NE F OR E A CH EDITI ON IS T HE ISTS. 

DEJm PRECED ING MO NTO 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers' Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers' Forum. Vol. 19. No. 3 1992 77 


This month’s cover features a Northern Saw-whet Owl (Aegolius acadicus), one of 1000 owls 
of approximately a dozen species that have been cared for in the Washington Park Zoo’s 
Owl Rehabilitation Program. The Program, which has been in existence for over 10 years, 
cares for between 100-150 owls per year. Owls coming to the program have either been 
injured or are often youngsters who have fallen from their nests. The Washington Park 
Zoo AAZK Chapter collects owl pellets from the project and sells them to schools, using the 
proceeds to purchase books, memberships in rehabilitation organizations and supplement 
funding for keepers to attend related conferences. The artist for this month’s cover is 
Elayne Barclay of the WPZ Animal Care Center. She also works in the Owl Rehabilitation 
Program. Thanks, Elayne! 


Scoops 


and 


Scuttlebutt 


Two More Chapters Send Donations to AAZK 

The AAZK Board of Directors and the staff at Administrative Offices wish to thank the 
members of the Roger Williams Park Zoo AAZK Chapter and the Philadelphia Chapter 
AAZK for their generous donations to the Association’s operating budget. Each Chapter 
sent in a check for $300, the Philadelphia Chapter’s donation coming from the proceeds of 
one of their highly successful “Keeping Up With The Keepers” programs. Many thanks. 

Exhibit Design Form Update 

The Exhibit Design Form is complete and in need of assistance. We are looking for 
interested individuals to complete the Form using single species mammal exhibits. 
Anyone interested should contact; John Brangan 

Roger Williams Park Zoo 
Elmwood Avenue 
Providence, RI 02905 
(401) 785-3510 Ext. 325 

PongoQuest Seeks Information on Captive Oransfutans 

PongoQuest . the newsletter of The Orangutan Foundation International, will now include 
information on captive orangutans as well as continuing to inform readers on current 
issues concerning the wild population of this endangered species. The News and Notes 
column, edited by Melanie Bond, a great ape keeper at the National Zoo, will be a 
compilation of birth announcements, translocations, exhibit openings, environmental 
enrichment tips, research opportunities and anything else of interest to those concerned 
with the captive orangutan population. To contribute information, ideas, or articles 
contact: Melanie Bond, Primate Unit, National Zoo, 3000 Connecticut Ave., N.W., 
Washington, DC 20008. For information on obtaining the newsletter or membership in the 
Foundation contact: Gary Shapiro, Ph.D., The Orangutan Foundation, 822 S. Wellesley 
Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90049 (213) 207-1655. 


AAZK Grants Available 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. announces tihe availability of two 
$750 research ginnts in the field of zoo biology. Interested applicants should direct 
their inquiries to Sue Barnard, Chairperson, AAZK Research/Grants Committee, 
Zoo Atlanta, Department of Herpetology, 800 Cherokee Ave. SJE., Atlanta, GA 30315. 
The deadline for submission is 31 March 1992. 


78 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19. No. 3 1992 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt. Continued 

Gorilla Workshop Seeks Sponsorships for Foreififp Keepers Participation 


The 1992 Gorilla Workshop committee is currently seeking sponsorship for zookeepers 
and other individuals from overseas who would not be able to attend the Gorilla Workshop 
without financial assistance. They have accepted 7 applications from zookeepers in 7 
countries which include the following information; a current Curriculum Vitae, a 
statement addressing their need for assistance, and a brief summary of their paper or 
poster, if they intend to present one. 

If your AAZK Chapter is interested in making a donation toward the registration fees for 
the applicants please contact: Jan Rafert, Milwaukee County Zoo at (414) 771-3040 for more 
information. The Committee feels that participation of these individuals at the Gorilla 
Workshop will be of great benefit to all participants by increasing the lines of 
communication between their zoos, thereby, idealistically improving the lives of the 
gorillas they work with as well. Thank you for your support. 

^92 Bowling for Rhinos Again Offers Top Fundraisers African Trip 

The Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. has again this year generously provided prizes for 
the two top fundraising bowlers. The prizes consist of two trips to Lewa Downs, all expenses 
paid from New York City. Please note, however, that due to limited housing facilities at the 
Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary, the winners will not be able to bring spouses and/or guests. 
If you have any further questions concerning this year’s Bowling for Rhinos event, please 
contact this year’s Chairperson Patty Pearthree at P. 0. Box 199026, Indianapolis, IN 46219- 
9026, (317) 322-8723. Please note the phone number, as when it was previously listed in AKF . 
the wrong area code was given. 

1991 Conference Proceedings in the Mail 

Those individuals who ordered the 1991 Conference Proceedings from the National 
Conference held in Toledo, OH should be receiving their copies this month. Copies were 
only sent to those who ordered them from the order form in the December 1991 and January 
1992 issues of AKF and to those speakers who turned in a manuscript for inclusion in the 
publication. 

While copies of the published proceedings are no longer available, those interested may 
order photocopies of individual papers. The papers included are listed below. To order 
send your name, complete mailing address, titles of the papers of which you would like 
copies and a check or money order made out to AAZK, Inc. Cost for copies is $3.00 per paper. 

Copies of the following papers are available: Sustaining Captive Primate ‘Natural’ 
Behavior Via Psychological Enrichment On the Ground Conservation That Really 
Works: Preakness Clean-up 1991 ~ Cano Palma Biological Station ~ Keepers Helping 
Keepers Across the World ~ The Role of the Zoo and Aquarium Keepers in Conservation ~ 
The Evolution of Conservation in Zoos and Aquariums: The Ecosystem Survival Plan ~ 
Breeding & Handraising the Blue and Gold Macaw in Northern Climates ~ The Role of 
Zookeepers in Wildlife Conservation ~ The Keeper - The Resource or Toad on the Road, the 
First, and so far only, Amphibious Rock Hit Single ~ Hand Rearing Maned Wolves at the 
Louisville Zoo ~ Treating Periodontal Disease in the Lesser Bushbaby An Inexpensive 
Mechanical Restraint Device at the Milwaukee County Zoo ~ The Pancake Tortoise and 
Its Eggs ~ Introduction of the Indianapolis Japanese Macaque Troop ~ Behavioral 
Training of a Llama Herd The Redbellied Lemur in Captivity ~ A Video ADT Goes to 
Sacramento ~ Use of Fecal Steroid Analysis in Sex Determination of Cranes and 
Psittacines ~ Management and Behavior of the Rodrigues Fruit Bat ~ Environmental 
Enrichment Methods: A Workshop for the Primate Keeper ~ Project Puffin ~ A 
Certification Program for the Technical Professional in the Animal Care Field 
Infant Development Project: Bird Section Update 

Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 



Coming Events 


Remaining 1992 AAZPA Regional Conferences 


Southern Regional - April 12-14, 1992. For more information contact: Randy Rockwell, 
Jacksonville Zoological Park, 8605 Zoo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32218 (904) 757-4463. 

Central Regional - April 26-28, 1992. For more information contact: Dawn McDonough, Dallas 
Zoo, 621 E. Clarendon Dr., Dallas, TX 75203 (214) 670-6825. 

Great Lakes Regional - May 3-5, 1992. For more information contact: Ann Silveri or Andy Odum, 
Toledo Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4010, Powell, OH 43609 (419) 385-5721. 


Conservation Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: 

A case study of the Cichlid Fauna of Lake Victoria 


October 30-November 3, 1992 


Columbus, OH 


For more information contact: Doug Warmolts, Curator, Johnson Aquatic Complex, Columbus 
Zoo, 9990 Riverside Dr., Box 400, Powell, OH 43065-0400 (6114) 645-3446 (phone); (614) 645- 
3465 (FAX). 


Joint Meeting of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians 

and the American Association of Wildlife Veterinarians 

November 15-19, 1992 Oakland. CA 

To be held at the Parc Oakland Hotel, the joint conference program sections include: 
management of populations in limited habitats: immobilization, anesthesia and monitoring; 
diseases of concern for translocation and reintroduction of wildlife; political realities of wildlife 
management; methods of capture, collection, transport, reduction of surplus animals and 
euthanasia; international zoo and wildlife conservation projects; and presentations on 
medical/surgical problems of various vertebrate groups. Additionally there will be a student paper 
competition, workshops and a poster session. Individuals interested in submitting a manuscript or 
participating in the program should contact: Janis Joslin, DVM (AAZV), Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 
Phinney Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98103 (Phone 206-684-4873), or David Jessup, DVM (AAWV), 
International Wildlife Veterinary Service. Inc., P.O. Box 1413, Orangeville, CA 95622 (Phone 916- 
355-0124). The deadline for selection of participants is 20 April 1992 and manuscripts are due 
by 18 May 1992 


The Role of Zoos in Global Conservation 
The Sixth World Conference on Breeding Endangered Species 


Jersey, Channel Islands 


May 4-6, 1992 


Co-sponsored by the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, The Fauna and Flora Preservation 
Society and The Zoological Society of London. Between 400-500 delegates are expected to 
attend the three-day meeting, and the Conference Proceedings will include 42 specialist papers 
addressing how the captive breeding community relates to the wild, what is being done to help 
species and habitats survive and how to contribute to the future. Professor David Bellamy will 
present the Keynote Address on The Role of Zoos in Global Conservation and Dr. George Rabb, 
Chairman of the Species Survival Commission of The World Conservation Union (lUCN) will 
present the conference summary. Poster sessions and a visit to the Jersey Zoological Park will be 
included in the program. A meeting of the Captive Breeding Specialist Group SSC/IUCN is 
scheduled to immediately follow this conference on 7 May. All program inquiries to: Jeremy J C. 
Mallinson, Conference Co-ordinator, JWPT, Les Augres Manor, Trinity, Jersey, JE3 5BF. Channel 
Islands. Registration inquiries should be directed to: Conference Secretariat, Incentive and 
Conference Specialists (C.l.) Lts., 7 David Place, St. Helier, Jersey, Channel Islands. 



80 


Animal Keepers' Forum, VoL 19. No. 3 1992 


From the President 


Your Board of Directors are convening the AAZK Mid-Year meeting in Topeka, KS on 2 
April 1992. All committee activities and the state of the Association will be discussed. If 
you or your Chapter have anything that you feel should be brought to the attention of the 
Board, now is the time to make those concerns known. I will need to receive these items, in 
writing, before 20 March in order for them to be considered at this meeting. As I have stated 
before, please remember that this Association conducts business year-round, and not just 
during National Conference time. Please take this opportunity to communicate concerns to 
your Board of Directors at any time. 

A mid-year report regarding the Association will be forthcoming after the conclusion of the 
meeting and will be published in the May issue of the Animal Keepers’ Forum . Chapters 
will receive a detailed report in their July update from myself. 

AAZK has just received recognition of our subordinates (Chapters) as tax exempt. This 
long-awaited Group Exemption Letter is the final step in allowing Chapters to operate under 
the same tax exempt status as the National Association. With the final approval for exempt 
status comes the need to act responsibly and professionally in our accounting practices. 
Full details and an instructional letter pertaining to tax exempt status for Chapters will be 
sent to the Chapters this month. Information on Chapter projects and some financial 
information will be included in your 2nd quarter report from the President, which will be 
mailed 1 April 1992. 

The AAZK Diet Notebook, Mammals Volume I, is currently being reprinted due to the 
exhaustion of the first edition. The price for this comprehensive publication will remain 
$40.00 and is a worthwhile addition to any library, whether in your zoo or on your shelf. 
AAZK is also proud to announce the forthcoming publication of Biological Values for 
Selected Mammals III. This Third Edition of Bio Values contains information on over 450 
mammal species and gives a broader spectrum of information not available in previous 
editions. Watch your AKF for order blanks for both these publications. 



AAZK President 
Reid Park Zoo 


Presidential Bulletin 

Zoologico Guadalajara, in conjunction with the Association of MesoAmerican Zoos 
(AMAZOO) and the Zoo Conservation Out-Reach Group is holding a training course for zoo 
keepers from June 8-13, 1992, in Guadalajara, Mexico, 

As you might be aware, and as stated in the letter I have received from the Chief of the 
Educational Department of the Guadalajara Zoo, zoos in Mexico have little or no financing 
available for the training and education of the keeper. 

If your Chapter wishes to help our sister zoos in Mexico train keepers in a responsible 
manner by sponsoring their participation at the conference, then please contact me for 
documentation regarding the project and a list of their financial needs. 

Ed Hansen 
(602) 791-3204 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No, 3 1992 


■ppp 

ysoo iMBwr VBMcmmrr 



AAZA 

iWBWCJW A^^^CVmoW (JP^t»fc|SEPH»?^ 


PLEASE, KEEP YOUR 
DATA AND QUESTIONS 
COMING. ! 

The recent response to the ZWD 
fixjm keepers around the country 
has been wonderful Tmvery 
pleased with the progress the 
project is making because YOU 
‘Dared to Care”. 


Send data or requests to: Thank you and keep up the 


Harmony Frazier-Taylor 
Animal Health Department 
Woodland Park Zoo 
5500 Phinney Ave. N. 
Seattle, WA 98103 
(206)684-4866 


good work! 




AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Curtis Robbins, Pittsburgh Aviary (PA) 

Mark Grunwald, Philadelphia Zoo (PA) 

Brina Mauro, no zoo listed, Greenville, SC 
Pamela Murphy, Montgomery Zoo (AL) 

Dianne Frisch, Columbus Zoo (OH) 

Marian Powers, Ft. Wayne Children’s Zoo (IN) 
Marcie Campbell, Hedricks Ed. Petting Zoo (KS) 
Tammy J, IGrk, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Christina Smith, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Sheila Phillips, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Judith McAuliffe, Primate Found, of Arizona 


Sheila Sykes, Philadelphia Zoo (PA) 

Karen Stahr, no zoo listed, Woodsboro, MD 
Glenn Goodman, Zoo Atlanta (GA) 

Claire Akin, Jackson Zoo (MS) 

Ann Fargione, Columbian Prk Zoo (IN) 
Darrin Webb, Miller Prk. Zoo (IL) 

Kenneth Wilkins, Oklahoma City Zoo (OK) 
Judith Kinsman, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Joanie Belk, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Kim Shotola, Houston Zoo (TX) 

Ray M. Rooney, Gorilla Foundation (CA) 


New Contributing Members . 

Jonathan D. Rubins, Lund’s Fisheries, Inc., Cape May, NJ 


Renewing Contributing Members 

Richard Buthe, Philadelphia Zoo, Philadelphia, PA 
Virginia Zoological Society, Inc., Virginia Zoo, Norfolk, VA 
Jan Griffin, Executive Director, Friends of the Zoo, Greenville Zoo, Greenville, SC 


82 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Births & Hatchings 



New B&H Format Announced .. .one of the things the AKF editorial staff learned from the 
survey conducted last year was that many members did not like the way B&H was 
formatted-they felt it took up too much space overall, and that it was difficult to extract 
basic data found in the narrative-type structure. Therefore, we are trying a new format for 
B&H beginning this month. We have already notified all those individuals who 
regularly submit B&H material, so hopefully everyone will be adjusted to the new change 
and will be submitting their information in the suggested format in the very near future. 
We have created four categories which we hope will streamline information. The 
categories are as follows: 

1. Endangered (E); Covered by SSP (E/SSP) 

2. Threatened (T) 

3. Uncommon in Captivity (U) 

4. Significant to institution 

a. (first time birth) 

b. (first time birth from pair) 

c. (diet change) 

d. (husbandry change) 

e. (exhibit change) 

f. (other) 

When submitting your list, please limit the animals you include to these categories only, 
and indicate which category each falls under. Each animal listed should include 
common name, scientific name and should then be followed by appropriate codes. 
Descriptions under the “significant to institution” category should be kept brief. We hope 
that those people who wish to expand further on the circumstances surrounding a 
significant birth or hatch will consider writing an article for AKF. Such articles need not 
be lengthy, but will allow for more details on significant B&H. We would also encourage 
the submission of black and white photographs to accompany either B&H submissions or 
separate articles. 

Finally, the deadl me . fo r su bmissi o n Qf B&H rn at eria] bas b e en cha nged- All material for 
B&H column must be submitted no later than the 10th of every month. We thank you in 
advance for your cooperation and we would like to hear your comments on how you like the 
new format. 


Milwaukee Countv Z oo AAZK. Milwaukee. WI ...Qctober-December 1991 B&H: 

Mammals .. .0.2 Siberian tiger {Panthera tigris altaicd) (E/SSP, parent-raised); 
4.1.1 Ruwenzori long-haired fruit bat (Rousettus lanosus) (U); 0.0.2 Straw colored fruit bat 
{Eidolon helvum) (mother-reared); 0.0.2 Vampire bat {Desmodus rotundas) (MCZ history 
of breeding success), submitted by Wayne J. Hazlett, Chapter Liaison. 


Bergen Countv Zoological Park. Paramus. NJ ...announces the following B&H: 

Mammals .. .1.0 Ocelot {Felis pardalis) (E); 0.0.1 Black-handed spider monkey 

{Ateles geoffroyi) (E). 

Birds ...Q.0.2 Snowy egret {Egretta thula) (first time birth); 0.0.2 White ibis 
{Eudocimus alba) (first time birth), submitted by Susan Nolan, V.P. ISeFy Bergen County 
AAZK Chapter. 


Animal Keepers' Forum. Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


83 


Births & Hatchings . Continued 

Los Angeles Zoo. Los Angeles. CA ...announces the following B&H: 


Mammals .. .0.1 Red-flanked duiker {Cephalophus rufilatus) (U); 0.1 Spekes 
gazelle (Gazella spekei) (E) (19th born at L.A.); 0.1 Bactrian camel (Camelus bactrianus) 
(E); 0.1 Gerenuk (Litocranius walleri sclaleri) (U); 0.0.1 Gelada baboon {Theropithecus 
gelada) (U). 

Birds . ..0.0.1 Cape Griffon vulture (Gyps coprotheres) (U) (second hatching in U.S.); 2 eggs 
currently being incubated for California condor {Gymnogyps californianus) (E) (Also four 
eggs currently being incubated at San Diego), submitted by Debbie Levy, Chapter Liaison, 
L.A. Zoo AAZK Chapter. 


Metro Toronto ZoQ ...announces the birth of 0.1 Great Indian rhinoceros (Rhinoceros 
unicornis) (E/SSP) on Christmas morning. (See related story below.) 
submitted by Ariel Shamir, Chapter Liaison, Metro Toronto Zoo AAZK Chapter. 

An Exciting Arrival on Christmas Eve 
A Baby Indian Rhino 

By Karen Goodrowe, Astrid Bellam and Margery Hay 
Reproductive Physiology Staff, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 

(Editor's note: this article was submitted by Ariel Shamir, Chapter Liaison for the Metro 
Toronto Zoo AAZK Chapter and first appeared in the Zoo’s newsletter Browse .) 

On Christmas Day keepers arrived to find that the baby rhino that had been hoped for since 
30 August had finally arrived. This birth was the result of a combination of science and 
husbandry. 

To begin at the beginning, keepers were aware for some time that Indira, the Indian rhino 
(Rhinoceros unicornis) was in need of a mate. Patrick arrived from the Bronx Zoo and the 
scene was set for the big romance. By measuring hormone levels in the urine, the 
Reproductive Physiology lab used science to confirm the keepers’ observation that Indira 
was cycling. Using both behavior changes and urine hormone levels, the time for the first 
encounter between Indira and Patrick was arranged. After some interesting courting, 
Indira lost her virginity during the wee small hours of the morning. Ollie Claffey was 
there to see it, and Dr. Graham Crawshaw confirmed the deed. 



Then came the time of waiting. With urine hormone monitoring procedures the 
Reproductive Physiology lab was happy to be able to confirm the pregnancy within 3 months 
- yes, the encounter was successful, Indira was pregnant. 


The keepers gave Indira the special attention she deserved and the Repro Lab kept a close 
watch on the hormonal changes during pregnancy. As the due date approached, an 
informal pool was organized to guess the date of the new arrival. No one chose the correct 
date although Valerie Bowler and Charles Gutherie were both out by 24 hours and were the 
closest. They share in half the money raised. The other half of the money ($60.00) will be 
sent to Michael Werike’s fundraising effort for rhinos. 

This offspring is a particularly important birth for the Indian rhino SSP captive breeding 
program. Both Indira and Patrick are from under-represented lines in the captive 
population family tree, and there are no other offspring from this genetic base. In other 
words, this is the first baby for either Patrick or Indira. Latest information is that the 
youngster, a female, is nursing well and appears to be thriving. 


At the National Zoo in Washington, D.C., information from our studies during Indira’s 
pregnancy will help in a cooperative project to monitor a possible pregnancy in one of their 
Indian rhinos. When science and nature combine, it is wonderful what can be achieved. 


84 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


9 



Quality exotic 
animal diets 


SPECTRUM Fixed formyli 


balanced 
formylation • Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRIiSKA BRAND 


h 1 



SPECTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 


Banana flavored primate, 15% protein dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Hoofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


GENTLE TOUCH™ bedding 


One call does It all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69103^0721 


AAZK Award Nominations Are Now Being Accepted for 1992! 


The AAZK Awards Committee would like to begin accepting nominations for the Jean C. 

Hromadka Excellence in Zookceping (EZ) Award to be presented at the 1992 aazk 
C onference in San Diego. The deadline for all award nominations is 1 June 1992. All 
award nominations received after 1 June will be reviewed for 1993, so please keep this in 
mind when submitting your nominations. 

All awards given by the AAZK do not have a minimum or maximum number offered 
each year. Also, if the nominees do not meet the qualifications and nominators do not 
follow the nomination procedures, they will not receive the award for which they were 
nominated. Please include scientific names of animals when they are included in the 
nomination of a special or outstanding breeding acknowledgment. 

Please submit all nominations to: Janet McCoy, AAZK Awards Chair 

Washington Park Zoo 
4001 S.W. Canyon Rd. 

Portland, OR 97221 


Jean C» Hromadka AAZK Excellence in Zookeeping GSZ) Award 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. (AAZK) is the administering organization 
of the Jean C. Hromadka Excellence in Zookeeping Award presented by the AAZK Awards 
Committee. The purpose of the award is to recognize achievement and determination of an 
individual in the zookeeping field and in fostering professionalism. Zookeeping is a 
science combining zoology, biology, animal management, behavioral observation and 
daily record keeping on the collection of species in their care. This is essential knowledge 
for maintaining a species effectively in captivity. The excellent zookeeper must excel in 
one or more of these areas, but not be lacking in any of them. 

The character of the award includes: a plaque, letter of notification to the institution's 
director and national recognition by professional journals. Such journals include; the 
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) and the Canadian 
Association of Zoological Parks and Aquarium (CAZPA) Newsletters, Animal Keepers' 
Forum (AAZK), Awards, Honors and Prizes: Volume 1; United States and Canada. The 
latter is published by Gale Research Company based in Wheaton, MD and found in 
medium to large sized libraries across the U.S. and Canada. 

The Excellence in Zookeeping Award was founded by John Siegel, 1974-1975 CHAIR, in 
1974. The original name of the award was the Marlin Perkins Award, named after the 
famed zoologist who started his career as a zookeeper. The name was changed in 1978 to the 
EZ award. In 1990, the name was changed to the Jean C. Hromadka Excellence in 
Zookeeping Award in memory of her outstanding contributions to the furtherance of AAZK 
through committee work and as President. The award is presented at the annual AAZK 
National Conference. 


Qualifications; 

1. The nominee must be a full-time animal keeper, employed in any North American 
zoological institution, aquarium or related facility. 

2. The nominee must have been employed at least two years on permanent status at a 
zoo, aquarium or related facility. 

3. The nominee must be nominated by his or her peers who have also been employed at 
that same zoo, aquarium or related fecility. Supporting nominations may be submitted 
by management persormel from the same institution. 


86 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Excellence in Zookeepingf Award. Continued 

Nomination Procedure: 


1. List name, position, institution’s name, address, phone and Director, years of service 
in the field and the recommendation of peers or colleagues. 

2. List and document outstanding achievements: exhibits, breeding, education, etc. 

3. List any extra activities outside of zoo, aquarium or related facility work: working 
with conservation groups, youth, wildlife officials, etc. 

4. Deadline for nominations is JUNE 1st of each year. 

Selegtion-Erocedurei 

The Awards Committee, consisting of five keepers, will independently review each 
nominee. 



International Training Center for the Captive 

Breeding of Endangered Snecies 


Purpose: to train individuals in the techniques of captive breeding of a variety of 
endangered species so that they can advance the cause of wildlife preservation in their 

respective countries. 

Background: The Wildlife Preservation Trust is an international nonprofit 
organization dedicated to the support of captive breeding of endangered species. It supports 
projects in captive breeding, field surveys, reintroduction, research and education. The 
zoological facility for the Trust's work is located on the island of Jersey, Channel Islands, 
British Isles. This facility is both a zoo and breeding-research facility for endangered 
species, and has a collection of over 100 species of birds, mammals and reptiles. The 
International Training Center is an educational facility for training in captive breeding 
and species conservation; it combines dormitory, classroom and research facilities for 
students, staff and visiting scientists. 

Program: the training program consists of six, ten or sixteen weeks of intensive work in 
all divisions of the zoo. Trainees work in close contact with zoo staff in all phases of 
animal keeping and breeding. Each trainee spends two weeks in each section and a final 
two weeks on an independent project. Daily duties are supplemented with weekly 
seminars on a variety of topics. The program is flexible in terms of length and focus. . 

Eligibility: the program is designed for individuals with previous practical experience 
with animals: zoo and animal center staff and postgraduates in conservation-related 


fields. 


Application: applications may be obtained from the address below. Selection is made in 
August of each year. Applications should be submitted by 1 July for training beginning 
the following year. 

Location: Jersey, Channel Islands, British Isles Dates: starting date by arrangement 

Fees: Tuition is £100 (approximately $198). Full room and board costs are £91 
(approximately $180) per week. Trainees are responsible for air fare to and from Jersey, 

Channel Islands, as well as personal expenses. 

For application and ftirfher information write or call: 


Training Program, Wildlife Preservation Trust International, 
3400 West Girard Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19104 U.S.A. 
(21 5) 222-3636 - telephone (21 5) 222-21 91 - FAX. 


***Deadline for application for 1993 positions is 1 July 1992.*** 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 8 7 


Marine Mammal Capture and 
The Conservation Alternative 


An independent paper by 
David Reames, Marine Mammal Keeper 
Sepulveda, CA 

When the Marine Mammal Protection Act was written in the early 70’s, it defined the word 
“capture” the same way it defined the word ‘Tcill”. Both activities were considered a “take” 
or the removal of a marine mammal from the wild. 

This is an important legal analogy in that, from the wild population’s standpoint, 
capturing is the same as killing. When a marine mammal is removed from the wild, it is 
removed from its population and the marine ecosystem forever. The captured animal can 
no longer breed, socially interact with the group it was taken from, or play out its complex 
biological role in the interconnection of all life forms. Ecologically speaking, the captured 
animal is as good as dead. 

After some twenty years of experimental captive breeding, the marine mammal display 
industry has been successful at developing self-sufficient populations for only a few 
marine mammal species. As a result of this failure, the industry continues to replenish 
their old stock by putting an unnecessary strain on wild populations. The majority of all 
land animals, on the other hand, are replaced through captive breeding, and most zoos have 
abandoned the obsolete policy of obtaining animals from the wild years ago. Either the 
industry’s failure with marine mammals is due to a lack of trying, or marine mammals 
simply do not breed well in captivity. Whatever the case may be, the industry should not be 
consumers of wildlife, but should be producers of wildlife instead. 

Often the industry captures animals from areas where the wild populations have been 
extremely depleted from disease or from the indiscriminate slaughter of the animals 
themselves. In some cases, the industry may be in violation of the Marine Mammal 
Protection Act by economically subsidizing the whaling industry through the purchase of 
whales from the same companies that are killing them. Almost always the industry has 
captured animals from areas where valid, current population studies have never been 
conducted. These practices are simply irresponsible. 

No impartial studies have ever been done on the affects captures have on the social 
dynamics of wild populations. And from the information we currently know about marine 
mammals, there is no reason not to assume that the trauma of capture has a profound effect 
on the social structure of a group. This destruction of the social framework would in turn 
cause a reduction in the reproductive success of the wild population. 

Some individuals in the industry have even gone as far as to capture in known calving 
grounds for the species. Surprisingly, even the whaling industry no longer stoops as low as 
to prey on animals where pregnant females and mothers with newborn calves are known to 
frequent. Such policies are not only inhumane, but they are also counter-productive to the 
management and exploitation of a wild population. 

The process of capturing marine mammals and their ensuing adjustment to captivity can 
often cause death or injury to the animal. In fact, a large number of captive marine 
mammal deaths occur during the first few days after capture or during the first two years of 
their adjustment to captivity. This is probably due to the physiological stress associated 
with the restraint of the animal and subsequent weakening of their immune systems which 
leaves them vulnerable to infectious disease. 

The industry could easily improve their survival rate of marine mammals by simply 
discontinuing their capture and breeding them collectively in captivity. Most present 
captive marine mammal populations consist of enough individuals representing 
numerous different genetic wild populations to maintain a healthy genetic diversity for 
many years to come. This genetic diversity could be further complemented by providing 


88 


Animal Keepers' lonim. Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Continued 

refuge for sick and injured stranded animals that are unable to be rehabilitated back to the 
wild. 

The World Conservation Union, United National Environment Programme, and the 
World Wide Fund for Nature have recommended that, “Reintroduction to the wild should 
be the ultimate objective of all captive breeding programmes.” A cooperative breeding 
program would not only end the need to capture animals from the wild, but could also allow 
for animals to eventually be released from captivity. 

The take of marine mammals from the wild must be reduced to zero. Some members of the 
marine mammal display industry would have us believe that capture is ethical because 
they only remove a few animals from the wild, while the fisheries industry kills 
thousands. With this kind of logic, only mass murder would be against the law, and 
single victim murders would be legal. 

Besides, there is no reason why conservationists cannot fight to reduce both the killing of 
marine mammals and their capture as well. After all, that was the original intention of 
the Marine Mammal Protection Act. 


AAZK Administrative Offices 
1-800-242-4519 (U.S. Only) 
1-800-468-1966 (Canada) 

FAX 913-272-2539 



University Research Expeditions Program ’92 

Twenty-two expeditions, ranging from environmental studies to social studies, are being 
offered this summer by the University Research Expeditions Program (UREP). No 
experience is necessary; all participants need is a spirit of adventure and the desire to join 
others in a memorable experience. Each program is led by University of California 
researchers, with groups ranging in size from 6-10 people. Tax-deductible contributions, 
ranging from $890 to $1,995, cover the cost of lodging, meals and ground transportation. 
These contributions help support field and research expenses. Transportation to the site is 
not included in base cost. Student and teacher scholarships are available. Expeditions run 
May-September and range in length from 2-3 weeks. 

Eight of UREFs programs are part of “SHARE” (Science Serving Humanity and Research 
for the Environment), in which University of California scientists work with scientists 
from developing nations to preserve the earth’s resources. For those who want to stay close 
to home, participants can study the survival tactics used by the Fremont, prehistoric Native 
Americans, on an archaeological project in Nevada’s Great Basin National Park. 

Participants on the Kenyan expedition will join scientists and traditional Kenyan 
herbalists to collect plant samples and learn about their potential pharmaceutical value in 
combating AIDS. For people interested in rainforest preservation, a two-week expedition 
into the Ecuadorian rainforest will study tropical plant species in order to assist in the 
development of future land management planning. 

For more information and a free catalog of other 1992 program opportunities write or call: 
University Research Expeditions Program, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 
(510) 642-6586. 


Animal Keepers' Fonuu. VoL /V. No. IW2 


89 


Proposals Submitted for 
1992 CITES Conference 


The Interior Department’s U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service recently submitted the following 
species listing proposals and implementation resolutions to the CITES Secretariat in 
Switzerland in preparation for the biennial meeting of CITES countries to be held this 
month in Kyoto, Japan, (see related story in February 1992 AKF , pg. 60) 

For the upcoming session, the U.S. is proposing several plants and animals for inclusion 
on Appendices I & II. Appendix I contains species threatened with extinction that either are 
or may be affected by trade. Commercial trade in wild specimens of these species is 
prohibited. Species listed on Appendix II are considered in danger of becoming threatened 
unless trade controls are practiced. 

Among the species proposed are: 

Appendix I - the Coffin’s cockatoo, the blue-streaked lory, and the bog turtle were proposed 
because these animals are considered threatened with extinction due to restricted habitat 
and their popularity as pets. The blue-fronted Amazon parrot was proposed because the 
large number being exported is contributing to population decline. Also proposed was the 
paddlefish whose roe (eggs) represent the main source of exported American caviar. 

Appendix n - American mahogany, queen conch, the wood turtle, the Venus flytrap, and the 
eastern Caribbean population of the rough-barked lignum vitae (a small tree) have been 
proposed for Appendix II because trade may be contributing to population losses. The Venus 
flytraps commonly offered for retail sale grow in the wild and are collected primarily in 
North Carolina. The proposed listing is to protect this population from depletion due to high 
demand abroad. In the case of the conch shells, negative impacts due to collecting are a 
factor. A listing on this Appendix will require exporting countries to ensure that the species 
are being properly managed. 

The African Goliath frog, the world’s largest species of frog, was proposed for Appendix II 
because it is rare, has a very restricted range, and is collected for use in frog jumping 
contests. 

The U.S. has also proposed moving the Mexican bobcat from Appendix I to Appendix II and 
removing completely from CITES Appendices the Northern elephant seal, harlequin quail 
and the U.S. population of pronghorn antelope. 

The second portion of the U.S.’s submission deals with resolutions. These resolutions deal 
with the interpretation of the CITES Convention and are important in helping countries 
better carry out the Convention. Resolutions also provide a forum for a biennial evaluation 
of critical wildlife trade issues. Key resolutions proposed by the U.S. for the upcoming 
session include two concerning trade in birds and one seeking a universal identification 
tagging system for crocodilian skins. 

There is a serious concern worldwide that international trade in wild-caught birds is 
contributing to a decline among some species. However, in order to determine which 
species are being harmed by trade, more scientific information must be gathered. The U.S. 
has submitted a resolution to suspend commerce in heavily traded wild bird species while 
member nations conduct scientific studies and implement measures to ensure that any 
future trade in those species will be sustainable. 

In addition, because many bird species suffer high mortality due to transport, the U.S. has 
put forth a resolution to suspend commercial trade in the most adversely affected species 
and to limit the number of birds per shipment of other impacted species. 

Another U.S. resolution focuses attention on the large-scale illegal trade in crocodilian 
skins (alligators, crocodiles, caimans, etc.) worldwide. Each year hundreds of thousands 


90 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


1992 CITES Proposals. Continued 

of illegal skins are traded internationally which threatens many populations and 
seriously affects efforts by some countries to manage these species on a sustainable basis. 
Australia has joined the U.S. in a submission requesting the current U.S. system of 
requiring tags on all American alligator skins be extended to the marking of all 
crocodilian skins in international trade. 

-Department of the Interior News Release 
December 1991 


I qt^rna ti.Qnal Black B^ar I^^gwlatipn-S-Changlng 

Effective last September, new requirements established under CITES require hunters 
taking black bear in Canada to obtain an export permit. This action applies to both the 
export of the animal from Canada and its import into the U.S. By requiring this permit, 
Canada is hoping to prevent exploitation of the black bear in the illegal wildlife market. 
Much of the illegal trade involving the black bear is focused in Eastern Asia— providing 
bear gall bladders and paws to lucrative markets in China, Korea, and Japan, where these 
parts are thought to have medicinal properties. Asiatic bears cannot be traded at all, so 
according to USFWS law enforcement officials, illegal traders attempt to mask their 
sources by describing the parts they sell as being from unlisted species, namely the 
American black bear. 

As a result of this recent listing, a CITES export permit will be required when exporting a 
black bear or its parts from Canada. The skull and/or a skin with claws attached are 
exempt from this permit requirement. The new export permit, restrictions for which vary 
from province to province, must be presented at Canadian Customs for validation prior to 
leaving Canada, and must be presented to U.S. Customs before it can be imported. 

-Department of the Interior News Release 
December 1991 


Aftican Nations Seek Downlisting of Elephant Populations 


Six African countries - South Africa, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Zambia, Malawi, 
and Namibia - have nronosed that their elephant populations be downlisted to 
CITES Appendix II status (threatened, not endangered) at the meeting this 
month in Kyoto, Japan. If you disagree with this proposal and would like to 
express your opinion you are encouraged to write to the names and addresses 
listed below: 


His Excellency Mr. Harry H. Schwarz 
Ambassador of South Africa 
South African Embassy 
3051 Massachusetts Ave. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 

His Excellency Mr. T, Kalomoh 
Ambassador of Namibia 
Namibian Embassy 
1605 New Hampshire Ave. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 

The Hon. Botsweigse Kingsley Sebele 
Ambassador of Botswana 
Embassy of Botswana 
3400 International Drive, N.W. 

Suite 7M 

Washington, DC 20008 


His Excellency Dr. Paul J.F. Lusaka 
Ambassador of Zambia 
Zambian Embassy 
2419 Massachusetts Ave. N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 

His Excellency Mr. Robert Mbaya 
Ambassador of Malawi 
Malawian Embassy 
2408 Massachusetts Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20008 

The Hon. S.G. Chigwedere 
Ambassador of Zimbabwe 
Embassy of Zimbabwe 
1608 New Hampshire Ave., N.W. 
Washington, DC 20009 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Primate Topical BibMograpMes Pidblshed by 
Primate Information Center from Jan* 1991 - Jan, 1^2 


The following bibliographies are now available. Prices listed include shipping. You may 
charge on VISA or MASTERCARD. There will be a $1.50 charge if we bill you. To place 
orders, call, FAX or write to: 

Frimate Information Center 

Regional Primate Res Ctr, SJ-50 

University of Washington, Seattie, WA 98195, USA. 

Phonei (206) 5434376 FAX (206) ^-0305. 


Field Study Techniques: A Bibliography, 1970-1991. Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. 

(380 citations, primate & geographic indexes) Stock # 91-001 Price: $10.00 

Behavioral Observations of Feral Marmosets and Tamarins (Callitrichidae): A Bibliography, 1980-91 
Compiled by Jean Balch Williams (168 citations) Stock #91-002 Price: $6.50 

Behavioral Observations of Feral and Free-Ranging Japanese Monkeys (Macacafuscata); A Bibliography, 
1983-1991. Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. (168 citations) Stock # 91-003 Price: $6.50 

Behavioral Observations of Feral and Free-Ranging Prosimians: A Bibliography, 1983-1991. Compiled 
by Jean Balch Williams. (163 citations, species index) Slock $ 91-004 Price $6.50 

Behavioral Observations of Feral Gorillas: A Bibliography. 3rd ed. Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. 

(233 citations, species index) Stock # 91-005 Price $6.50 

Primate Welfare, Well-Being and Enrichment Studies and Legislation: 1990-1991 Update. Compiled by 
Jackie Lee Pritchard. (146 citations, primate index) Stock # 91-006 Price: $6.50 

Simian and Human Retroviruses in Nonhuman Primates: Infection, Disease and Animal Model Studies: 
1990-1991 Annual Update. Compiled by Cathy Johnson-Delaney. (378 citations, primate and species index) 
Stock #91-007 Price: $10.00 

Topics of Clinical Interest in Nonhuman Primates, Update Bibliographies: Herpes B Virus (1989-91), The 
Filoviridae (1990-91), Simian Hemorrhagic Fever (1990-91), & Tuberculosis (1990-91). Compiled by 
Cathy Johnson-Delaney. (53, 34, 10 & 5 citations, subject and primate indexes) Stock # 91-008 

Price $6.50 

Infanticide in Nonhuman Primates: A Bibliography. 2nd ed. Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. 

(245 citations, primate index) Stock # 91-009 Price: $6.50 

Pan paniscus Bibliography: Anatomy, Behavior, Colony Management, Conservationj^cology, Field 
Studies, Genetics and Taxonomy. A Selected Bibliography, 1970-1991. Compiled by Jackie Lee Pritchard. 
(463 citations, subject index) Slock # 91-010 Price: $10.00 

Hepatitis Research in Nonhuman Primates, 1990-1991 Update. Compiled by Steward Cohen. 

(94 citations, primate & subject indexes) Stock #91-011 Mce $6.50 

Behavioral Observations of Feral and Free-Ranging Orang Utans {Pongo pygmaeus): A Bibliography. 

2nd. ed. Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. (137 citations) Stock # 91-012 Price: $6.50 

Handedness, Cerebral Dominance and Brain Asymmetry in Nonhuman Primates: A Bibliography, 1985- 
1991 Compiled by Steward Cohen. (180 citations, primate index) Stock # 92-001 Price: $6.50 

Ages Primate Learning and Behavior. A Bibliography, 1940-1991, Compiled by Jean Balch Williams. 

(203 citations, primate index) Stock # 92-002 Price: $6.50 


92 


Animal Keepers' Forum, VoL 19, No. 3 1992 


L(S)(Bkmg Mm€k 

(Editor's note: in the next several issues ofAKF we are going to be reprinting articles which 
appeared early on in the Association’s history. The old saying ’’the more things change, the 
more they stay the same” seems to hold true with these articles which, while dated by 20-plus 
years, are as relevant today as the day they were written. Special thanks to member Judie 
Steenberg, Woodland Park Zoo, for submitting the first two in this series of Looking Back 
articles. SC) 

The following article first appeared in The Keeper , a one-time publication of AAZK back in 
July ! August 1973. An updated post script has been added by Phil Pennock, also a keeper at 
Woodland Park Zoo.) 


Shocking Business of Electricity 

By 

Ron Kaufman, Senior Keeper 
Topeka Zoological Park, Topeka, KS 


Electricity - on the outside, it's that wonderful, tingly stuff that enables the nation’s zoo 
keepers to perform many of their variety of tasks. It feeds the blenders, stoves and hot 
plates, refrigerators, can openers^ and sharpeners found in the diet kitchens. It drives the 
saws, juices the drills and stimulates the sanders. It's the kindling force in the lights, 
heaters, lamps and pumps. 

But, flick off those lights and look at the darker side. Electricity is an intensely powerful 
dynamo that can transform a careless keeper into a carefree keeper. If it does not kill, its 
tingly tentacles can burn, paralyze or render a keeper unconscious. Under certain 
circumstances, as little as 60 milliamperes of current can be fatal. That's about as much 
current as is required by an ordinary 7 1/2 watt Christmas tree bulb. Less than 1 second of 
exposure can do it. 

On the brighter side, several of your co-workers may attest to having survived a much 
higher ampere exposure. The reasons behind such occurrences lie in the quality of 
exposure. The two most dangerous electric shock paths are those that pass through the chest 
from one arm to the other or from an arm to a foot. Should the connection at either end be the 
slightest bit faulty, the effect of a maximum dose of electricity will not be fully realized. 
Under such conditions, death may not result, but temporary unconsciousness or burns 
might. 

How can keepers protect themselves? That old saying “an ounce of prevention is worth a 
pound of cure” is a keeper's guide to personal safety. Here, it can mean the difference 
between life and death. The greatest dangers occur in the dark, damp recesses of the older 
buildings that seem to characterize many zoos; heat, humidity, fungus, mice and rats serve 
to hasten the deterioration of insulation surrounding hot wires. 

1. Check insulation on wiring on tools, lamps, pumps, heaters frequently. 

REPLACE any that are cracked, frayed or otherwise damaged. A drop of 
water on seemingly harmless frayed insulation can mean a literal hotbed. 

2. Inspect wiring in stoves, refrigerators, hot plates and other appliances. Many 

accidents are caused by bad wiring or insulation leaking electricity to the metal 
frame or housing in appliances. 

3. Properly ground equipment. Although this won't insure against accidents, it 
can help lessen shock. 


9 3 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. .■? 1992 


Looking Back. Continued 

• 4. Keep water puddles cleaned up. Avoid hosing around open heaters, heat lamps 

or unprotected outlets. 

5. Use only UL approved appliances and equipment. 

The preceding tips are only a few of the many precautions that can be taken to reduce the 
chance of an electrical accident occurring. Electricity can be a valuable tool and a 
dangerous menace. Use care when working around it and help take some of the shock out 
of it. 

Post Script: Whenever possible, use a GFCI (Ground Fault Circuit Interrupter) protected 
device or circuit. GFCI’s, now fairly inexpensive, are a great improvement over simply 
having an electrical device grounded. They monitor activity in a circuit and shut it off if a 
problem is detected. However, they will not prevent all accidents, and may not be suitable 
for all locations. They are often required for any new construction but can easily be retro- 
fitted into existing systems. Consult an electrician. 

m 

Information Please 

Located in Florida our zoo is blessed with warm winters. It can get down to freezing though 
which is too cold for our small primates. We currently warm their night boxes with heat 
lamps but we would like to change to a safer, more efficient and economical heating 
system. Any suggestions or successful methods used in your zoo would be greatly 
appreciated. I will share the results with all who participate. Please send information to: 
Alycin Hayes, Santa Fe Community College Teaching Zoo, 3000 N.W. 83rd St., 
Gainesville, FI 32606. 


Recently a Yellow Wagtail (Motacilla flava) was reported in the vicinity of Starkville, 
MS. As this is an Alaskan and Russian bird and never seen this far south, it was thought to 
be an exhibit bird that escaped from a zoo or private breeder. If anyone has any information 
about an escaped bird please let me know. Knox Martin, Raptor Rehabilitation, Memphis 
Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 


I am interested in hearing from anyone who has given flowers as treats to primates. 
Please include any varieties given and they way they were cultivated. I am especially 
interested in any given to Colobus, Diana or Spot nose monkeys. Any information will be 
appreciated. Send to: Michelle Federspiel, Fort Wayne Children’s Zoo, 3144 Sherman 
Blvd., Fort Wayne, IN 46808. 




Everglades Losing Florida Panthers 

The recent deaths of the last two female Florida panthers in Everglades National Park 
means the cats are now functionally extinct in the Everglades, which had supported nearly 
a quarter of the entire Florida panther population for more than a decade. 

Two males remain in the area but are expected to leave the protection of the park soon in 
search of other females, says Dennis Jordon, panther recovery coordinator for the USFWS 
in Gainesville, FL. Discovery of high levels of mercury in the tissues of the dead panthers 
raises the question of whether the Everglades habitat is safe enough for scientists to try to 
establish another population there, Jordon says. Only an estimated 30-50 Florida panthers 
remain in the wild throughout the state. WiMh/e Digest, National Wildlife Federation 
Magazine, November 1991. 


94 


Animal Keepers' Forum, VoL 19, No. 3 1992 


Book 


Review 


Pandas 

By Chris Catton, 1990 

Facts on File Publications, Inc. 

460 Park Ave. S., New York, NY 
Hardback Price: $22.95 

Review by Mike Seidman, 
Keeper III, Phoenix Zoo, 
Phoenix, AZ 



Of all the “charismatic megafauna” that are supposed to galvanize people's latent 
sympathies for the plight of endangered wildlife, the giant panda is perhaps the most 
popular; its demise, should it come, will demoralize conservationists, as it would seem to 
darken the prospects for survival of all those animals (most animals) for whom people have 
neither interest nor affection. 

This book. Pandas , written by writer/photographer Chris Catton is a clear, if 
unimpassioned, summary of what is known about pandas in and out of the wild: why they 
are in trouble, what is being done and what should be done to save' them from extinction. 
Because their ranges overlap and both are in danger, and because of the long controversy 
surrounding their taxonomic relationships, the author includes matching information 
about red pandas. But it is the giant panda that dominates the book. 

The first chapter is un-natural history, recounting the responses of Westerners to the 
discovery of the giant panda. Almost as soon as we heard of it, we “had to have one!”. And 
so the exploitation began, first to hunt them (if you were rich and/or famous), then to “bring 
them back alive” and, most recently, to borrow them for public display in zoos. (It is 
encouraging, however, that we ourselves, the exploiters, initiated the eventual halting of 
this latest phase of exploitation. Perhaps the panda has become such a symbol of 
vulnerability to us that it no longer seems appropriate to treat it as a commodity, available to 
the highest bidder.) 

In any case, no ethical or symbolic considerations deter Chinese farmers from pushing 
ever higher up the mountains that comprise the pandas' last stronghold; nor do trappers 
have qualms when a single panda skin can be sold in Japan for $200,000.00. 

Most biologists today believe that, despite the number of traits they share, giant pandas are 
related to bears and red pandas to raccoons. Both are highly specialized animals 
subsisting almost entirely on a diet of bamboo. The adaptation of a carnivore's anatomy to 
a diet of fibrous vegetation seems to account for everything about pandas, their appearance 
and behavior, their popularity and their vulnerability to extinction. In the past there was 
one great advantage to their specialized life-style: it guaranteed them a food supply 
virtually free of competition. But those days are gone. 

Once widely distributed throughout China, the range of the panda has been shrinking 
steadily over the past 2000 years, primarily as a result of the clear-cutting of their habitat for 
human agriculture. Inadvertent trapping (by musk deer hunters) and deliberate poaching 
(a relatively new threat) compound the problem. 

Giant pandas are now literally “up against the wall”, restricted to the mountains of western 
China, along the eastern edge of the Tibetan plateau, living on misty forested slopes and 
high alpine meadows. The valleys have become over-populated with human farmers who 
now covet even the marginal lands of mountain slopes, felling trees and grazing cattle as 
they climb. Throughout their large range, red pandas are subject to the same pressures. 


Animal Keepers' Fonirn, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


95 



Book Review. Continued 


As a result of fragmentation of their habitat, pandas now face extinction from demographic 
factors alone. In 1985, Catton claims 600-700 pandas were divided into 35 isolated 
populations; more than half the total was on 12 Reserves. (According to a recent ’’Species”, 
the Newsletter of the Species Survival commission of the lUCN, the current figures are; 
about 1000 individuals scattered in “six semi-isolated populations”). The author provides a 
nice concise summary of all the factors that make small, isolated populations so 
vulnerable to extinction. 


The attempt to increase giant panda numbers (and to maintain genetic diversity) through 
captive breeding has been disappointing. At present about 80 pandas are estimated to reside 
in Chinese zoos. In the West, despite many highly publicized pairings, breeding programs 
have been beset by problems. Much of the failure has been due to ignorance of basics such as 
sex identification and the proper timing of male-female introductions. But there are other 
problems: few males seem capable of breeding in captivity, infant mortality has been high 
and hand-rearing has not been successful. Outside of China four females have raised 15 
cubs, of which six are still alive. 

Catton is surely right to believe that “the only certain hope of a secure future lies in 
ensuring adequate protection of the wild population”. To do this will require: extending the 
Reserve system, revegetating to create corridors between Reserves,' removing people from 
important habitats, public education, hiring more guards to fight poachers, and doing more 
research on the genetics and captive propagation of pandas. 

In a country of a billion people, however, setting land aside solely for animals seems an 
unlikely prospect. Meanwhile, panda habitat continues to be lost, even from, the Reserves. 
Trees, essential to pandas for shelter and dens, are illegally cut for firewood, a growing 
tourist industry is demanding development around remaining forests and trappers, 
despite the real threat of capital punishment, continue to be lured by staggering profits. 


The heart of this book, for me, was the author's detailed discussion of the co-evolution of 
pandas and bamboo. Pandas have lived through the cycle of bamboo flowering and dying 
for thousands of years. When a mass flowering and die-back of their most heavily used 
bamboo species occurred a few years ago, it was not poor adaptation that resulted in the mass 
starvation of pandas. The low altitude bamboo species that formerly sustained them at such 
times had been eliminated by the clearing of the forested valleys for human agriculture 


Outlook Bleak for 
Pandas in the Wild 

Unless poaching and habitat loss are checked 
soon, the Giant panda has little chance of 
surviving much longer In the wild, according to 
wildlife experts. About 700 to 1000 pandas now 
remain. Although at least 40 percent of the 
pandas habitat has been destroyed in the past 
15-20 years, poaching is the most serious 
immediate problem, says George Schaller, 
Director of Science at Wildlife Conservation 
International, a division of the New York 
Zoological Society. Panda pelts are so prized in 
Taiwan and Japan that even China’s death 
penalty for poachers has done little to deter 
panda poachers, who can earn several years' 
income by trading a few pelts. Pandas are also 
victims of bureaucratic wrangling, 
mismanagement of Chinese preserves and lack 
of cooperation among researchers, all of which 
have stymied captive breeding efforts. Wildlife 
Digest. National Wildlife Federation Magazine, 
November 1991 







96 


Animal Keepers' loriim, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Chapter News 


Bergen County Regional 

MZK Chapter 

As we close out our first year as an 
established AAZK chapter, we are 
happy to announce several 
accomplishments. In May 1991, we 
sponsored a ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ 
evening and raised $1779.00. We 
were very pleased with our first 
attempt at a Chapter event. Within the 
zoo itself, the staff proudly opened to 
the public two new exhibits, a newly 
renovated Mountain Lion exhibit and 
a brand new Tamarin/Macaw 
exhibit. We hosted our first guest 
speaker. Dr. Curt Boren, our zoo’s 
consulting veterinarian. He spoke to 
a full audience about zoo medicine in 
general and the response was so good, 
we may have him back to speak on 
more specific topics. 

As the year came to a close we had two 
Chapter members attending the 
conference in Toledo and held 
elections for 1992 officers. Our 
Chapter’s officers are as follows: 

President.. ...Cindy Ambrosio 
Vice Pres/Sec’y..,. .Susan Nolan 

Treasurer Marianne Vella 

Chapter Liaison. ...Barbara Andriani 

-Barbara Andriani, Chapter Liaison 


Zqq Atlanta AAZK Chanter 

The Chapter is pleased to announce the 
following new Chapter officers for 
1992: 

President Emma Cusson 

Vice Pres.. ...Charles Horton 

Secretary Barbara Webb 

Co-Tresurers Gary Roesinger & 

Brian Kiepper 

Chapter Liaison. .Michelle Schireman 

Our Conference Chairperson for the 
1993 National AAZK Conference is 
Ellen Bradfield. We have been very 
busy fundraising for this event with 
bake sales, auctions, and our wishing 
well income. Things are looking 
good for ’93 with hotel negotiations and 
committee meetings ongoing. 


‘Bowling for Rhinos’ planning is also 
underway with newly volunteered Co- 
Chairpersons Pete Davis and Michelle 
Schireman. 

During the year 1991 our Chapter was 
represented at the National AAZK 
Conference by five members and at the 
National AZVT Conference by one 
member. 

New members joining in ‘91 are: 
Robin Brocket!, Pete Davis, Cindy 
Thorstad, and Mike Leonard. 
Welcome aboard! 

Chapter member Alicia Wade has 
returned from a four-week study of 
lemurs in Madagascar. We’re 
looking forward to the lecture/slide 
show she will be presenting this 
month. 

The Elephant Managers Association’s 
annual workshop will take place at 
Zoo Atlanta in late Fall of 1992. 
Chapter member James Black is 
actively working on all the details for 
this event. 

Monies raised in our Chapter’s 
wishing well from the month of 
August allowed us to donate $1000.00 to 
Michael Werikhe and the Rhino 
Walk last year. 

In 1992 we will be continuing the 
planning and fundraising activities 
involved with our upcoming 
conferences and conservation 
projects. 

-Michelle Schireman 
Chapter Liaison 


Beardsley Chapter AAZK 

At a recent meeting the Beardsley 
Chapter (Bridgeport, CT)) elected the 
following officers for 1992; 

President.. ...Robert Tomas 

Vice Pres Linda Oltra 

Treasurer Susan Spencer 

Secretary Arlene Domkowski 

Chapter Liaison. .April Fornabaio 


Animal Keepers' Fonim, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


97 


Chanter News. Continued 

Central Honda Chapter 

The Chapter held its first meeting of 
1992 at Sea World and Rick Smith, 
Regional Coordinator for the LINK 
System, was their guest speaker. 

In February Debbie Zombeck, Sea 
World of Florida, gave a presentation 
on Project Puffin, a research project in 
which she was involved. 

This month and next the Chapter will 
be viewing a National Geographic 
Black Rhino video, slides and a video 
on the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary 
and making plans for their ‘Bowling 
for Rhinos’ event. 

In May the Chapter will hear Tom 
Williams, Education Curator of 
Central Florida Zoo, speak on 
Florida’s endangered species and 
what can be done to preserve these 
species. 

In June the Chapter plans to hold a 
fundraising event to benefit National 
AAZK‘s general operating budget. 

In July Dr. Dan Odell, Research 
Biologist at Sea World will give a 
presentation on manatees and 
dugongs. They plan a catered 
reception and will be extending 
invitations to all AAZK members 
statewide. 

-Chapter ’92 Calendar of Events 


Gainesville Area Chapter AAZK 

In January the Chapter had Robert 
Blonde, a marine biologist with the 
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service as a 
guest speaker. He spoke on the 
Conservation of the Florida Manatee. 

In February, Richard Smith, a 
zookeeper from Lowry Park and 
AAZK Regional Coordinator, spoke on 
the incubation and rearing of 
penguins. 


The Chapter holds its regular 
meetings the second Thursday of each 
month at Santa Fe Community 
College. 

--Alycin Hayes, President 


Milwaukee Countv Zoo AAZK Chanter 

Dr. Robert H. Horwich of Gay Mills, 
WI was our guest speaker in 
December. His talk on the animals of 
Belize in Central America focused on 
the Black howler monkey {Alouatta 
pigra) (T) and the West Indian 
manatee {Trichechus manatus) (E). 
We hope to have him back again in the 
spring. 

Chapter member Clay Ecklund, who is 
now attending The Santa Fe 
Community College Teaching Zoo in 
Gainesville, FL, had a going away 
party combined with our annual 
Christmas Party. The party was 
hosted by members Sue Simon and 
Lois Kessler. Clay was an active 
Chapter member and his input will be 
missed. 

Sandra J. Vojik, Chairperson for the 
1992 Gorilla Workshop Committee 
addressed the membership in 
January. The committee is making 
an appeal for financial aid to allow 
keepers from foreign countries to 
attend the workshop. Financial 
requests had been received from 
Czechoslovakia, Nigeria, Japan, and 
the United Kingdom. The general 
consensus was that the captive gorilla 
population could benefit by the 
knowledge brought to the workshop by 
these primate keepers. 

Regional Coordinator Wayne Hazlett 
attended the Great Lakes Regional 
Council meeting at the Indianapolis 
Zoo on 15 January. Even though a 
blizzard raged all day, ten people were 
in attendance. They represented five 
zoos in four states (Ohio, Indiana, 
Michigan and Wisconsin). Facility 
and beat reports were given and a lot of 
pizza and pepsi were consumed. The 
council meeting was hosted by David 
Hagan and the Indianapolis AAZK 
Chapter, Because of the weather the zoo 
had to be closed on the following day 
(minus ten degrees and snow 
removal). 


-Wayne Hazlett, Chapter Liaison 


98 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 
FFRC AAZK Chapter 

Newly elected officers for the Exotic 
Feline Breeding Center AAZK Chapter 
in Rosamond, CA are; 

President Julie Abraham 

Vice Pres Louisa Chabot 

Secretary. ....Laurel Christ 
Treasurer.. ...Annie Neilson 
Chapter Liaison. ..Johnny Merk 

Metro Toro nto Zoo AAZK Chanter 

Newly elected officers for 1992 are: 

President... ..Luisa Steinsky 

1st Vice Pres Heidi Manicki 

2nd Vice Pres.. ...Dan Pearson 

Treasurer Neil Porter 

Chapter Liaison. ....Ariel Shamir 
Conservation Officer/Monica Wrobel 

We started the year with a guest 
speaker from the Jersey Wildlife 
Preservation Trust (JWPT). Dr. 
David Waugh, Training Officer at 
JWPT, addressed our staff and 
management in regards to the 
training program at JWPT and 
discussed our own training program 
at MTZ. Dr. Waugh’s visit was 
funded by the M.T.Z. AAZK Chapter. 

Our ‘Bowling for Rhinos’ will take 
place in April and preparations are on 
their way. We are also working on a 
T-shirt for the M.T.A. Chapter. Our 
Chapter is also looking at getting 
involved in Keeper Exchanges and 
providing used, but valuable 
equipment from boots to books to the 
Lima Zoo in Peru. 

-Ariel Shamir, Chapter Liaison 


Cypress. Coast Chapter 

The Cypress Coast AAZK Chapter in 
West Palm Beach, FL is in the midst of 
its comeback. We have a new slate of 
officers as well as thirteen new 
national AAZK members. 

Some goals for 1992 are to raise funds 
to increase our bank account and to 
possibly do one fundraiser for 
National AAZK. 


The following are our new officers: 

President Sally Lieb 

Vice Pres. ....Susan Schenk 
Treasurer.... .Lauren Parker 
Secretary/Chapter Liaison.... 

Jay D’Amico 

-Jay DAmico, Chapter Liaison 


North Carolina Chapter AAZK 

Officers elected for 1992 are: 

President.. ...Kathy Trogdon 

Vice Pres Gisela Wiggins 

Treasurer.. ...Hannah Decker 
Secretary/Chapter Liaison.... 

Lucy Segerson 

The past year proved to be one of our 
best. We had our first ‘Bowling for 
Rhinos’ and raised approximately 
$2200. Plans are underway now for 
BFR 1992 and we hope to raise even 
more. 

Six of our Chapter members plus 
another keeper from an institution in 
our area, attended the AAZK National 
Conference in Toledo. Four members 
presented papers at the conference. 
We found the conference to be 
interesting, stimulating and fun! 

The Chapter decided to support the 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) in 
1991. Early in the year we participated 
in the Adopt-An-Acre program and 
late in the year began to pursue setting 
up a Conservation Parking Me^r at 
the North Carolina Zoological Park. 
We have also received much 
encouragement and support from 
Robert Fry, Director of the Zoo, and 
Russell Williams, director of the 
North Carolina Zoological Society. 
The Society generously donated funds 
for the fee to obtain the meter and the 
Memorandum of Agreement was 
signed. We expect to receive the meter 
any day now and hope to have a 
dedication ceremony in the spring. 

Other activities in 1991 included 
assisting the North Carolina 
Zoological Society with the annual Zoo 
Run; participating in “Earth Day” 
activities; sponsoring a foreign 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


99 


Chapter News. Continued 

keeper fromMadagascar; purchasing 
and donating AAZK’s most recent 
edition of Zoonotic Diseases to the three 
participating institutions of Chapter 
members; updating our constitution 
and by-laws; and participating in the 
“Fall Festival” in Asheboro, our 
annual fundraising event, 

-Lucy Segerson, Chapter Liaison 

Puget Sound Chanter AAZK 

Officers for 1992 are: 

President., ...Mike Teller 
Vice Pres. ....Tina Mullett 
Secretary... ..Marilyn Martinez 
Treasurer. ....Margaret Girtch 
AAZK Liaison to the Woodland Park 
Zoological Society.. .Russ Roach 


Florida Suncoast Chapter 

The Florida Suncoast Chapter, which 
includes members from the Lowry 
Park Zoo and Busch Gardens in 
Tampa, FL recently adopted a Chapter 
logo. It is shown below: 



Omaha AAZK Chapter 

The year 1991 proved to be a 
tremendous success for the Omaha 
AAZK In March of 1991 an overnight 
campout for advanced high school 
biology students was held in the zoo’s 
Wild Kingdom Pavilion. Mini- 
workshops were held on animal 
medicine, animal nutrition, 
incubation of eggs, flight and zoo 
careers. A tour of the Lied Jungle and 


a scavenger hunt made for a fun 
evening. One hundred-sixty-five 
dollars was raised and used to buy 
items from the “Keepers’ Wish List” 
for the various areas. 

In May we again participated in 
‘Bowling for Rhinos’. A total of 40 
people bowled and $1,100 was raised 
for Ngare Sergoi & Ngare Ndare. 
Two Rhino bowling balls were 
donated by Steve Kelly of Kelly’s 
North Bowl, where the event was held. 
Mr. Kelly was very gracious to our 
group and provided us with great 
hospitality. We hope to hold the ’92 
‘Bowling for Rhinos’ at his place 
again. 

The Henry Doorly Zoo donated the 
contents of its beehive to the Chapter! 
Diane Callaway arranged for the 
processing and bottling of the honey - 
$120 was raised from this endeavor 
and the honey sold out in a matter of 
days. This year there will be several 
more beehives and we will again 
sponsor a honey sale. 

Four Chapter members made it to the 
National Conference in Toledo. It 
was here that the Omaha AAZK bid for 
and was selected to host the 1994 
National Conference. Plans to make 
the conference one of the best are 
already underway with the entire 
Chapter and Zoo looking forward to 
hosting everyone who attends. You all 
will not be disappointed! 

Elections were held in December 1991 
for ‘92: 

President..,.. Diane Callaway 
Vice Pres. ....Paul Dulany 
Sec-Treas..,..Jay Tetzloff 

Conference Co-Chai^persons are 
Diane Callaway and Lisa Cuevas. 

We would also like to say good-bye 
and good luck to Steve Carter, 
formerly of the HDZ and former 
Chapter Secretary/Treasurer. Steve 
has accepted a position at the Audubon 
Zoo in New Orleans. He served our 
Chapter well and he will be missed. 
Good luck, Steve! 

-Lisa Cuevas, Chapter Liaison 


1 00 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 
TjOS Angeles Chanter AAZK 

The Los Angeles AAZK welcomes 
back senior animal keeper Fran 
Woods. Fran recently returned from 
a leave of absence during which time 
she served as technical advisor to Parc 
Tsimbazaza for the Madagascar 
Fauna Group. Fran gave a 
fascinating lecture on her experiences 
in Madagascar at our January 
meeting, and with money raised from 
our monthly raffle and matching 
funds from the L.A. AAZK, we were 
able to send $400.00 to Parc 
Tsimbazaza. The money will be used 
for capitol improvements. 

We also welcome a new zoo director, 
Dr. Mark Goldstein. Dr. Goldstein 
assumes the position which was left 
vacant after the resignation of Dr. 
Warren Thomas a year ago. The 
L.A, AAZK looks forward to having a 
close working relationship with our 
new director. 

-Debbie Levy, Chapter Liaison 


San Diego AAZK Chapter 

The Chapter was pleased to have S.D, 
Zoo Elephant Keeper Laurie Task 
speak at the general meeting held 22 
January. Laurie discussed topics 
from the 12th International Elephant 
Workshop held last October at the 
Burnet Park Zoo, Syracuse, NY. 

Laurie was quick to remind the 
audience of the critically endangered 
status of the Asian elephant, with less 
than 35,000 left in the world. “Tundi”, 
the bull calf born 10 July 1991, was the 
Burnet Park Zoo’s first contribution to 
the species’ preservation effort. He 
was the first Asian elephant to be born 
at the zoo and only the 65th calf bom in 
captivity. 

Laurie also touched on Species 
Survival Plan (SSP) and Elephant 
Managers Association (EMA) reports, 
and elephant restraint chutes during 
her slide presentation. She stressed 
the importance of joining the Elephant 
Managers Association (E.M.A. c/o 
John Lehnhardt, National Zoo, 
Washington, DC 20008) and had 


plenty of membership forms 
available. Laurie ended the lecture 
with an invitation to attend an open 
house at the S.D. Zoo Elephant Barn 
which was held 30 January. 

With the departure of Andrew 
Johnson, a new editor for the Chapter’s 
newsletter was needed. Phoenix 
Lindgren, the Chapter Secretary, 
volunteered. Andrew Johnson was 
unanimously elected to receive 
Lifetime Membership in the San Diego 
AAZK Chapter. Thanks again for all 
your hard work, Andy! Hope all’s 
going well in Vancouver. 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 



ATTENTION 
All Chapters Involved in 

*92 Bowling for Rhinos 

It would be greatly appreciated if any 
Chapter or facility producing an item 
especially for Bowling for Rhinos 
(i.e. patch, pin, T-shirt, poster, etc.) 
would please send one to Administra- 
tive Offices for the AAZK Historical 
Archives. If it is not possible to send 
the item gratis, please advise AO of 
the cost. If an item is no longer avail 
able, please send a photograph if pos- 
sible. We would really like to have 
as complete a record of this important 
AAZK event as possible. We would 
also like to have snapshots of your 
event and copies of any publicity you 
receive in zoo or local media. Thanks 




Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


101 



\-\fw 


/t# ^Behavioral Enrichmentjt^ 
^ (i^ Activity Manipulation ^ 


Occupational Husbandry 





We are pleased to include in this month’s column our very first unsolicited enrichment 
idea submitted from the membership. This is precisely the kind of response we are looking 
for, and we hope this will encourage the rest of you to take a few minutes to jot down an idea 
and send it in. We know there are lots of great ideas out there, so let’s hear them! Send 
them to: Gretchen Ziegler or Kayla Grams, Association Editors AKF, 635 S.W. Gage 
Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 

BIRDS (Softbills) - Vines made into a swing can be hung from any type of enclosure and 
are well used by toucans of all sizes, mynahs, and especially kookaburras. 

Promotes extra activity and are an added attraction in a display enclosure. 

-Alice Orr, Keeper 
Central Florida Zoo, Lake Monroe, FL 


Below is a drawing of an Aerial Feeder. Thanks to Bruce Clark, Toledo Zoo, for this 
submission. 



Example of an aerial feeding arrangement for use 
in outdoor habitats. Pulley worked firom ground level 


102 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


Enrichinent Options. Continued 

FRTTTT RATS - Feeding several times a day in small portions spreads foraging activities 
over a longer period of time. Since competition is increased when smaller 
quantities of food are presented, it is important to use several feeding stations to 
allow all individuals to get adequate food. 


WOLVES - Feeding with unskinned animals (whole carcasses). Presenting food in this 
manner makes the animals work for their food (skinning and tearing apart), 
moreover it invites social interactions. 

-the above two items taken from 

Behavioral Enrichment - a catalogue of ideas . (Oct. 1990) 
produced as a cooperative effort of seven Scandinavian zoos 

Below is a drawing of a perching arrangement. Thanks to Bruce Clark, Toledo Zoo, for 



An example of a perching arrangement for holding 
areas. Easy to install and allows movement and 
versatility. 


Publications Available 


Newly available: 

Applying Ecological Principles to Captive Primate Environments: Needs and 

Environmental Design for Colony Management 

by Bruce Clark, M.S., Senior Keeper, Toledo Zoo 

Topics cover nonhuman primate perception, communication, sociality, reproduction and 
ecology as it pertains to captive husbandry and design. A review of enclosure design 
fundamentals and an illustrated prototype display are included and validated by previous 
text. This resource document is sold at cost and intended to augment current colony 
management practices. 210 pages, 850 citations, $15.50 (includes postage and handling - 
U.S. orders only). Orders outside U.S. should send $17.00 money order in U.S. funds only. 
Available from: Bruce Clark, 1958 Brame Place, Toledo, OH 43613-4515. Please allow 3-4 
weeks for delivery in U.S, by surface mail. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, ,\'o. .? 1992 |03 




Hearing in the Bam Owl 

(Tyto Alba) 


By 

Carol Sharp 
Salt Lake City, UT 


Silence, Hearing and Ears 


For the Barn owl (Tyto alba) life depends on hearing. It is 
probably the most strictly nocturnal of all of our owl species. At 
dusk or in the faint light of early darkness, hearing is at least as 
important as sight; therefore, nocturnal owls have special 
adaptations for registering the most minute sounds and zeroing 
in on their sources. The classic study of an owl's hearing ability 
was made using the Barn owl (Roger Payne, 1962). 


In addition to the owl's spectacular hearing, it has amazing night vision also. Thanks to a 
chemical called visual purple, the owl can discern images in light so low that it is 
impossible for humans to see. Both the hearing and vision allow the Barn owl to find 
various rodents and small birds. Even though the owl's sight in low light is superb, its 
hearing acuity is really remarkable. 


Ninety-five percent of the Barn owl's prey are small mammals,- mainly field mice. Field 
mice are difficult to see even in broad daylight because their coloring blends with that of 
their surroundings. In addition, the mice tend to travel through tunnels in grass and snow. 
By night when mice forage they are essentially invisible even to the keen eyes of the Barn 
owl. Because mice are so difficult to see, the Barn owl’s special adaptations for hearing are 
critical to its hunting. 


In total darkness a Barn owl can catch prey using only sound as a clue, once the position of 
the mouse has been located. When hunting, the owl will often depend upon a combination 
of visual, auditory and tactile cues. 

Silent Flight 


Acute hearing has another counterpart in specialized owl modifications: silence. If an 
owl's flight were accompanied by the whir and flutter of wings, most of the value of its 
hearing would be lost. Silence allows the owl to approach closely while the mouse runs 
through leaves or grass making noises that direct the owl even in complete darkness. The 
Bam owl would not be able to hear a mouse if its own wings were constantly making noise. 
It is the unexpected presence of an owl, before the prey has time to freeze or hide, that makes 
its attack so effective. Owls are slow flyers and lack the bullet-like approach of many 
hawks and falcons, so they need silence as well as darkness to cover their attack. 


The first adjustment towards silent flight comes from the degree of wing loading. Owls 
have extremely large wings for their body weight, making them buoyant and able to fly 
deliberately and with a very slow flapping rate. They are slow moving, very efficient, 
methodical hunters with a hit ratio of 80%. Lucky is the farmer who has a pair of Barn 
owls, because they are considered to be superb living mouse traps. 


Next, their feathers are soft-plumed, with many small filaments, and the barbs of the 
primaries are recurved at the tips forming a series of soft booklets. These lax connections 
between feather parts in conjunction with flutings on the leading edge of the wing explain 
the perfectly silent flight of owls. Its flight is absolutely noiseless, more so than the flight of 
a moth. 


104 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 



Bam Owl Hearing: Continued 


The Skull 

The most striking anatomical feature of the Barn owl, and the one that plays the most 
important role in its location of prey, is the skull. The skull is relatively narrow and 
small and shows asymetrical or off-set outer ears. The right ear opening is above the 
horizontal plane and angled upwards to catch sounds from above. The left ear opening is 
below the horizontal plane and angled downward to catch sounds from below. (For details, 
see Kelso, 1940). Barn owls are not the only owls to have these asymmetrical external ears, 
but were the only ones used in the study. 

The actual openings of the owl's ears are below and behind the eyes, and are hidden under 
the auricular feathers and aurical flaps; two flaps of skin that project to the side, next to the 
eyes. These flaps are muscularly controlled and can be moved independently of each 
other. 



Left ear 
opening 


Bam Owls SkuU showing asymmetrical ear openings. 


The highly modified skull accomodates the differential adjustment of ears for maximum 
reception of sound from prey. When the source of sound is towards one side of the head, the 
sound waves reach one ear before the other. The breadth of the owl's head facilitates this 
since the ear openings are far enough apart to create a sufficient time-difference between 
the arrival of sound in each ear. When the sound is directly in front of the bird, there is no 
difference in the arrival time at the two ears. Furthermore, when this happens the bird is 
facing its prey and its position is oriented for a straight line of attack towards its prey. The 
head orientation towards the source of sound is a quick flicking movement that is 
completed generally before the sound is finished. 

Like predators that hunt on the ground, the Barn owl must be able to locate its prey quickly 
and precisely in the horizontal plane. And when hunting from the air it must also 
determine its angle of elevation above the animal it is hunting. The owl's facial structure 
and ear sensitivity allow it to solve this problem successfully. 

It can locate sounds in azimuth, the horizontal dimension, by using clues from primarily 
low frequency sounds. The reason low frequency sounds are used in the azimuth is that the 
acuity of each ear is the same in this range, and the normal stereo effect is sufficient for 
location, as explained above. 

Elevation, the vertical dimension, is located with some accuracy using high frequency 
sounds. This is because hearing is not symmetric in the higher frequency range, which 
allows the differences in perceived loudness in each ear as the head moves vertically to be 
used to detect elevation. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


OS 


Bam Owl Hearing. Continued 


Although the owl's hearing is sensitive to a broad range of frequencies from 100 hertz 
(cycles per second) to 12,000 hertz, it can locate accurately only sounds with frequencies 
between 3,000 and 9,000 hertz. The Barn owl’s strikes are accurate to within one or two 
.degrees. The arrangement of its talons into a square position called semi-zygotactyl will 
cover any small margin of error. 


The Facial Ruff 

The face is made up primarily of layers of stiff, dense feathers arranged in tightly packed 
rows. The feathered structure called the Facial Ruff forms a surface that is a very efficient 
reflector of high frequency sounds. Two troughs run under the ruff from forehead to lower 
jaw, to collect and amplify the sounds from a large volume of space and to funnel them into 
the ear canals. The two troughs join below the beak but are separated above by a thick ridge 
of feathers. The entire elaborate facial structure is hidden under a layer of particularly 
fine feathers that are acoustically transparent. 



When the feathers of the Facial Ruff are cut away, The owl is able to 
locate the azimuth of a soimd quite well but cannot identify its vertical 
location. Notice also the trough, and the unevenness of the feather 
structure on the fece due to the offset external ears. 

The acoustic properties of the facial ruff are closely associated with the bird’s method of 
locating sound. The feathers of the ruff on the left side are directed slightly downward, and 
on the right directed slightly upward. These are directly over and corresponding with the 
external ear openings spoken of earlier. 

Even the bristle feathers extending over the beak assist the owl in orienting its beak to a 
position where it can close in on the prey. The far-sighted owl cannot focus distinctly on 
near objects so these tactile hairs are indispensable for employment of the beak while 
feeding on or subduing prey. 


Bibliography 

Owls bv Day and Night . Hamilton A. Taylor and Don Phillips 
“The Hearing of the Barn Owl” Scientific American . Eric T. Knudsen 



1 06 Animal Keepers' Forum. Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


(liaison and Information Network for Keepers) 

Coordinator for the LINK System: Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon 
^Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba', Canada R3P OR5. (204) 837-2916 (h). 

Regional Coordinators 

ALABAMA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S=E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
ALASKA - Vacancy 

ARIZONA - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 85716 
ARKANSAS - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher, Little Rock Zoological Gardens, 

#1 Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205 
CALIFORNIA- Vacancy 

COLORADO - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
CONNECTICUT- Jeanette Nadeau, Roger Williams Park Zoo, Providence, RI 02905 
DELEWARE - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
FLORIDA - Rick Smith, 11707, #5 Park, Orchard Qrcle, Tampa, FL 33612 
GEORGIA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
HAWAII - Michelle Suenishi, Hilton Hawaiian Village, 2950 Ena Rd., Honolulu, HI 96815 
IDAHO -Vacancy 

ILLINOIS - Pat Swieca, 5710 W. Cullom Ave., Chicago, IL 60634 

INDIANA - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 

IOWA - Carla Wieser, Omaha's Heniy Doorly Zoo, 10th St. & Deer Park Blvd., Omaha, NE 68107 

KANSAS - Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

KENTUCKY - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 

LOUISIANA - Michelle Asselin, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 70115 
MAINE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses^under CT) 

MARYLAND - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
MASSACHUSETTS - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MICHIGAN - Dan Powell, Potapwatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 
MINNESOTA - Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens, 13000 Zoo Blvd., Apple Valley, MN 55124 
MISSISSIPPI - Jeannie Frazier, Jackson Zoological Park, 2918 W. Capitol, Jackson, MS 39209 
MISSOURI - Vacancy 
MONTANA - Vacancy 

NEBRASKA -Carla Wieser (see address under Iowa) 

NEVADA - Vacancy 

NEW HAMPSHIRE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

NEW JERSEY - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
NEW MEXICO - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 857716 
EAST NEW YORK - Mark Hofling, Bronx Zoo, 185th & Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460 (212) 220-7115 [w] 
WEST hJEW YORK - Alan Baker, Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Dr., Syracuse, NY 13204 
NORTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
NORTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Coiydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada R3P 0R5 (204) 986-4040 [w] 

OHIO - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 
OKLAHOMA - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher (see addresses under AR) 

OREGON - Anna Michel, Washington Park Zoo, 4001 SW Canyon Rd., Portland, OR 97221 
PENNSYLVANIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
RHODE ISLAND - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

SOUTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
SOUTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

TENNESSEE - Gail Karr or Cindy Pinger, Memphis Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 
TEXAS - Ann Marie Greco, San Antonio Zoo, 3903 N. St. Maiy's St., San Antonio, TX 78212 
UTAH - John Turner, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
VERMONT - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WASHINGTON - Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N, Seattle, WA 98103 
WEST VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphiai, PA 19104 
WISCONSIN -Wayne Hazlett, 3768 S. 89th St., Milwaukee, WI 53228 
WYOMING - Vacancy 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - Theresa Maas (see address under PA) 

Province of Ontario - Neil Porter, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario MlE 4R5 Canada 
Provinces of Manitoba & Saskatchewan - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

Province of Quebec - Chantal Routhier, Granby Zoo, 347 Rue Bourget, Granby, Quebec, Canada J2G lE 8 
Provinces of Alberta & British Columbia - Grant Tkachuk, 10139 157th St., #206, Edmonton, Alberta T5P 2T9 


Animal Keepers' Fonim, Vol. 19. No. 3 1992 


107 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks I AKE, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 

INTERNSHIPS (Keepers/2 positions) . ..ten-week internships, during summer of 1992, 
(dates flexible). Stipend of $1,000 provided by the Friends of the Salisbury Zoo. Will work 
under the supervision of the General Curator or Lead Keeper 40 hours weekly. Written 
inquiries only. Apply in own handwriting regarding personal background, interest and 
future goals; supply three references. Closing date: 1 April 1992. Apply to: Donald D. 
Bridgewater, Director, Salisbury Zoological Park, P.O. Box 3163, Salisbury, MD 21802. 

VETERINARIAN . ..Drive Thru Safari requires a D.V.M. with 4+ years experience in 
exotic animal medicine. Full spectrum of responsibilities, preventative medicine 
program and medicine/surgical treatment. Must apply for and/or possess a valid New 
Jersey license. Salary commensurate with experience plus comprehensive benefit 
package. For immediate consideration submit resume inclusive of salary history by 20 
March 1992 to: Personnel Manager, Six Flags Great Adventure, P.O, Box 120, Jackson, NJ 
08527. EOE/MFHV. 

ZOOKEEPER INTERNSHIP ...non-revmraerative positions available to qualified college 
students pursuing degrees in zoology, biology or related fields. College recognized 
program with credit awarded by some cooperating institutions. Eight to ten week program 
offered during the summer of 1992. Will receive training in animal care, veterinary 
practices, education, public relations and support aspects of a zoo operation. Please send 
cover letter, resume and references to: Kimberly Davidson, General Curator, Utica Zoo, 99 
Steele Hill Road, Utica, NY 13501. 

TRAINER/SH O W PERSON ...oosition requires background in mammal training (large 
carnivores a plus) and presentation skills for daily animal show. Hourly rate - $7.50-$9.50 
plus benefits. Send resume to: Dave Nix, Rare & Wild Presentations, Inc., P.O. Box 987, 
Valley Center, CA 92082. Position open until filled. 

WILD ANIMAL KEEPER ...{he scheduled opening of the newly renovated Queens Zoo has 
created employment opportunities at the Queens, Bronx and Central Park Zoos. Candidates 
should have at least two years of college and/or one year experience in the care of captive 
wild animals. Starting salary $24,413 with excellent benefits. Send resume to: Personnel 
Department, Box A, New York Zoological Society, 185th St. and Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 
10460. EOE. 


BIRD KEEPER ...(he Ellen Trout Zoo is seeking an experienced individual to work with a 
bird collection of approximately 200 specimens. Duties include daily care, exhibit upkeep, 
breeding programs and record keeping. Excellent opportunity for personal development 
for motivated, hardworking individual. Starting salary $6.85 per hour plus excellent 
benefits. Requires high school diploma; or equivalent, and valid Texas drivers license. 
Successful applicant required to pass physical examination and drug screen. Contact: 
Gordon Henley, Zoo Director, Ellen Trout Zoo, 402 Zoo Circle, Lufkin, TX 75901 by 31 March 
1992. The City of Lufkin is an Equal Opportunity Employer. 


Information Please 

Lisa Tate of Soaring Dreams Aviary requests information on artificial stimulation in the 
breeding of Macaw Parrots. Please include proven and unproven techniques/success and 
failure. Information is needed for a grant project dealing with breeding Macaws in 
captivity. Please send information to: Lisa Tate, P.O. Box 8563, Boise, ID 83707. 


108 Animal Keepers' lorum, Vol. 19, No. 3 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 

City State/Province 7kg 


Telephone 


(home) 


(worit) 


US. Members 


I I $30.00 Professional/U.S. 
Full-time Keepers 

□ $25.00 A£filiate/U.S. 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $25.00 Associate/U.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


□ $35.00 Professional/Canada 

Full-time Keepers 

□ $30.00 Affiliate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


EH $50.00 or up Contributmg/U.S. 

Individuals 

I I $50.00 or up Institutional/U.S. 

Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


□ 

□ 


$55.00 or up Contributing/Canada 

Individuals 

$55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 

Organizations ! Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


International Members 


library Only 


I I $40.00 Intemational 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


EZl $20.00 Libraiy 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 

Zoo Address 

Title 

Work Area 


Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W, Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S.A. 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.S A. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 



rn 

<1 

x? 

« 


x 


fXi 

a. 

x: 

n 

~3 

a» 

o 

ro 

"3 

n- 

2: 

rf 

,-+• 


-K 



O 

C.O 


~3 

Q- 

“3 

ro 

in 

n- 

3: 

£U 

b_*. 

3 

r*j 



— i 





1^ 



NJ 




03 


-O 

ro 


f 

m 

0 

1 

o 

a 

o 

3 

W 

0 

C 

0 

m 

e~t 

o 

a- 




Jiimal Keepers’ 
Forum 


April 1992 



; Dedicated to 
ofessional Animal Care 


ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 


April 1992 
Volume Nineteen 
Number Four 


Editor-In-Chief: Susan Chan 
Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 


(ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual publication costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster: 
Please send address changes to: 


American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 


BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 President 

Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 Vice President 

Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 921 12 

Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Immediate Past President 

.COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROJECT HEADS 


Awards Committee 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

Book Review Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 

Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 

Staff E xchange 

Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 

A A ZK -Commil t ee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 

.K.£€per„Acc(mimQdatiQJi^ .. List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 

An Approach to Zookecping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 

Zqq Infant. DeYClQproent Project 

Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 
Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings’ Island 

Membership Directory. 


K £ eper.. T ra.in i .ng-&. -Education 

Hncludes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal D ata Tr ansfer-Form 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 
AAZK Liaison to AAZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Yalues/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 
Piet Notebook 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 
By-Laws Review 

VACANCY 

Zoo/UniYersit.Y List 

Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 

K eepe jL-CorrespondeQt 


VACANCY 

Publications Funding Committee 


Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo 

Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, Roger Williams Zoo / Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 

International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) 


Conservation. Preservation. Restoration (CPR) Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for Rhinos ‘92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 

Keener Training Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Meu-o Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Disu-ibution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 


Liaison and Information Network for Keeners (LINK) 

Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 




printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors 109 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt 1 1 0 - 111 

Coming Events 1 12 

From the President/ 1991 Revenues and Expenses 1 13 - 114 

New Members Announced/Keeper's Alert 1 1 5 

Encouraging Word (Florida Panthers) 1 15 - 116 

Notices from Recent IPL Newsletter/Information Please 1 16 

Births & Hatchings 1 17 - 118 

ZIPD Update 118 

Certificate of Merit for Zookeeper Education Award Nominees Sought 120 - 121 

Ecosystem Survival Plan Update 121 

Evaluating Reproductive Status in the Female Dromedary Camel 122 - 128 

Book Reviews (The Restless Kingdom and Game Wars) 129 - 130 

Enrichment Options (hoofstock) 131 

Looking Back (Evaluating Forage) 133 - 134 

Bowling for Rhinos ‘92 Update 135 - 137 

Ngare Sergoi Support Group Membership Information 138 

Safe Spots, Safe Places, and Behavior Consistent Routines 139 - 142 

Sample Hoofstock Bibliography 143 

Chapter News 144 - 146 

Opportunity Knocks 148 


Information for Contributors 

Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for AKF . No commitment is made to the author, but 
an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLINE FOR EACH EDITION IS THE 15TH 

OF THE PRECEDING MONTH 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers' Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing m 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 109 


This month’s cover art features a male waterbuck (Kobus ellipsiprymnus), one of the 24 
species of grazing antelope. This species is common in many parts of south, east, and 
central Africa, inhabiting woodlands and savannah near permanent water. They are 
large and shaggy, with a white ellipse on the rump. They feed on short grasses, reeds, and 
aquatic vegetation. There are two different types of waterbuck - the Common waterbuck, 
and the Defassa waterbuck, whose populations are separated by the rift valley. This 
month’s artist is Randell Herren, an animal keeper at the San Diego Zoo , CA. Thanks, 
Randell! 



AAZK History Book Donors Thankpd 

The AAZK Board of Directors and History Committee Chair Rachel Rogers wish to extend 
their thanks to the following Chapters and individuals who have donated funds towards 
the publication costs of the AAZK 25th Anniversary Book: Brookfield Zoo AAZK, Memphis 
AAZK Chapter, Columbus Chapter-AAZK, National Zoological Park AAZK Chapter, Burnet j 
Park Zoo AAZK Chapter, Greater Kansas City AAZK Chapter, Exotic Feline Breeding 
Compound (EFBC) AAZK Chapter, and Yoshi Yonetani, international member from Kobe, 
Japan. The total donated as of this writing was $1211.34. The Book will be available by the 
AAZK Conference in San Diego in September. Rachel and AKF editor Susan Chan spent i 
several days doing final writing and editing on the text following the mid-year Board | 

meeting held early this month in Topeka. Donations to assist in the publication of this 
historic publication may be sent to Rachel Rogers at the San Diego Zoo. I 

APT Form Project Receives Support Donatioii/Fonn Revision Noted 

The Burnet Park Zoo AAZK Chapter, Syracuse, NY has donated $200.00 to the operating I 

expenses of the Animal Data Transfer Form Project. The AAZK Board wishes to thank the [ 

Chapter for their generous support of this important Association project. Bernie Feldman, j 

project Chair of ADT, is also a keeper at Burnet Park Zoo. ' 

Bernie recently advised AO of the following: ’’The ADT Form has recently gone through a j 

revision in its format. The additional section (which is optional) is a reply which the * 

receiving keeper could return to the sending keeper to inform them on how the shipment | 

went, the animal’s condition upon arrival, etc. Please use it at your discretion.” 

Animal Data Transfer Forms for zoos and aquariums are available free of charge upon 
request. This is a professional service provided by AAZK. Contact: Bernie Feldman, 
Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Drive, Syracuse, NY 13204. If your facility is not 
already using the ADT form, please encourage your administration to implement its use i 
whenever an animal is shipped. j 

Chapters Continue to Show Outstanding Supiwrt for National Association 

Special thanks go out to the members of the Tucson Chapter AAZK, the Caldwell Zoo AAZK 
Chapter, and the Los Angeles AAZK Chapter for their generous donations towards the 
operating costs of the Association. The Chapters donated $50, $300, and $500 respectively. 

The Board of Directors and the AO staff sincerely appreciate these Chapters’ generosity I 
and concern for the welfare of AAZK. Many items are included in the operating expenses 
of AAZK from smaller items such as purchase of office supplies to larger expenses such as 
the printing of Animal Keepers’Forum . A break-down of expenses can be found under this 
month’s Message from the President. Any and all donations are put to good use in keeping 
the Association’s programs and projects operating. Many thanks. 

110 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt. Continued 


Compilation of Gorilla Ethograms Available 

The Gorilla Behavior Advisory Group (GBAG), affiliated with the Gorilla SSP, has 
compiled approximately 50 gorilla ethograms for behavioral research, from both published 
and non-published sources. The compilation is available either in computer disk or text 
form. 

Copies on Macintosh disks or in text form may be obtained by writing Ken Gold, 
Conservation and Research Dept., Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. SE, Atlanta, GA 30315. 
Cost of copies on Mac disk will be $3.00 with disk and mailer provided by requestor. Cost 
for text copies and Mac disk copies without disk provided will be $10.00. Checks should be 
made payable to the Atlanta/Fulton County Zoo, Inc. 

Copies on IBM disk may be obtained at no cost through the Consortium for Aquariums, 
Universities and Zoos (C.A.U.Z.), by sending a formatted, double-sided, double-density 
IBM 5 1/4" disk with pre-addressed disk mailer to: Donna FitzRoy Hardy, Ph.D., Network 
Coordinator, C.A.U.Z., Department of Psychology, California State University, 
Northridge, 1811 Nordhoff St., Northridge,CA 91330. Please note that you are requesting 
the gorilla ethogram compilation. C.A.U.Z. is dedicated to increasing communication 
between university, zoo and aquarium professionals who share interests in research and 
education. For more information, including information on receiving the C.A.U.Z. 
directory, please contact Donna Hardy at the above address, submitted by Jacqueline 
Ogden and Donna Fernandes, Co-Chairs, Gorilla Behavior Advisory Group. 


Nyiinjl^^r pf CQnfgrgngg Ayailablg 

Due to an unanticipated overrun at the printers we have a limited number of copies of the 
1991 Conference Proceedings (Toledo, OH) still available. Copies were mailed last month 
to those who previously ordered copies and those who presented papers at Toledo. If you are 
still interested in receiving a copy of the full Proceedings, you are urged to act promptly 
because once these limited extra copies are sold, no more will be available. The cost is 
$10.00 for members and $15.00 for non-members. Canadian and overseas orders should 
add $3.00 for postage. Members may also order copies of individual papers from the 
Proceedings at $3.00 each. A list of the papers included appeared in the January AKF p. 10 
and the March issue on p. 79, or a list is available from the editor if you send a SASE. All 
orders should be sent to AAZK Proceedings, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Make 
checks or money orders (U.S. funds only) payable to AAZK, Inc. 


Fipm Thg E ^ ^tprial gto ff .. . 

One suggestion we received at the Toledo National AAZK Conference last October was to 
dedicate a few entire issues of Animal Keeners’ Forum to specific topics of interest to our 
readers. This month we are happy to present our first effort towards this goal, with April’s 
edition being dedicated to hoofstock subjects. We appreciate those of you who responded to 
our requests for articles for the dedicated issues - the success of this idea depends on 
members like you. 

The Associate Editors would like to notify the membership of the death of AKF Editor 
Susan Chan’s daughter Rachael in late March. As Susan was unable to finish working 
on this issue, we took over the final editing tasks that were left, and got it to the printers a 
few days past the deadline. This is the first time we have soloed without Susan on even a 
part of the editorial duties, so we apologize for the delay and for any mistakes we may have 
made in the formatting of this issue. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


11 


Coming Events 


Remaining 1992 AAZPA Regional Conferences 


Southern Regional - April 12-14, 1992. For more information contact: Randy Rockwell, 
Jacksonville Zoological Park, 8605 Zoo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32218 (904) 757-4463. 

Central Regional - April 26-28, 1992. For more information contact: Dawn McDonough, Dallas 
Zoo, 621 E. Clarendon Dr., Dallas, TX 75203 (214) 670-6825. 

Great Lakes Regional - May 3-5, 1992. For more information contact: Ann Silveri or Andy Odum, 
Toledo Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4010, Powell, OH 43609 (419) 385-5721. 


Conservation Genetics and Evolutionary Ecology: 

A case study of the Cichlid Fauna of Lake Victoria 

October 30-November 3, 1992 Columbus, OH 

For more information contact: Doug Warmolts, Curator, Johnson Aquatic Complex, Columbus 
Zoo, 9990 Riverside Dr., Box 400, Powell, OH 43065-0400 (6114) 645-3446 (phone); (614) 645- 
3465 (FAX). 


Joint Meeting of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians 

and the American Association of Wildlife Veterinarians 


November 15-19, 1992 Oakland, CA 

To be held at the Parc Oakland Hotel, the joint conference program sections include: 
management of populations in limited habitats; immobilization, anesthesia and monitoring; 
diseases of concern for translocation and reintroduction of wildlife; political realities of wildlife 
management; methods of capture, collection, transport, reduction of surplus animals and 
euthanasia; international zoo and wildlife conservation projects; and presentations on 
medical/surgical problems of various vertebrate groups. Additionally there will be a student paper 
competition, workshops and a poster session. Individuals interested in submitting a manuscript or 
participating in the program should contact: Janis Joslin, DVM (AAZV), Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 
Phinney Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98103 (Phone 206-684-4873), or David Jessup, DVM (AAWV), 
International Wildlife Veterinary Service, Inc., P.O. Box 1413. Orangeville, CA 95622 (Phone 916- 
355-0124). The deadline for selection of participants is 20 April 1992 and manuscripts are due 
by 18 May 1992 


The Role of Zoos in Global Conservation 
The Sixth World Conference on Breeding Endangered Species 

May 4-6, 1992 Jersey, Channel Islands 

Co-sponsored by the Jersey Wildlife Preservation Trust, The Fauna and Flora Preservation 
Society and The Zoological Society of London. Between 400-500 delegates are expected to 
attend the three-day meeting, and the Conference Proceedings will include 42 specialist papers 
addressing how the captive breeding community relates to the wild, what is being done to help 
species and habitats survive and how to contribute to the future. Professor David Bellamy will 
present the Keynote Address on The Role of Zoos in Global Conservation and Dr. George Rabb, 
Chairman of the Species Survival Commission of The World Conservation Union (lUCN) will 
present the conference summary. Poster sessions and a visit to the Jersey Zoological Park will be 
included in the program. A meeting of the Captive Breeding Specialist Group SSC/IUCN is 
scheduled to immediately follow this conference on 7 May. All program inquiries to: Jeremy J.C. 
Mallinson, Conference Co-ordinator, JWPT, Les Augres Manor, Trinity, Jersey, JE3 5BF, Channel 
Islands. Registration inquiries should be directed to: Conference Secretariat, Incentive and 
Conference Specialists (C.l.) Lts., 7 David Place, St. Helier, Jersey, Channel Islands. _ 


112 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4*1992 


From the President. 


As members of the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., each individual should have 
the opportunity to see how their membership dollars are being spent. What is reflected in 
the charts below are the income and expenses for your Association. It is charted on a 
percentage basis so that you can see where every dollar is spent. 


Revenues 1991 

American Association of Zoo Keepers^ Inc. 


Misc. 13% (4) 


Sales 10% (2) 


National (3) 
Conference 3% 



Membership 74% (1) 


(1) MEMBERSHIP - includes membership fees from all categories 

(2) SALES - includes sales of patches, pins, charms, membership directories, AKFs, 

Career Brochures, Conference Proceedings, AKF advertising sales, sales of 
Diet Notebook and Zoonotic Diseases Handbool^ Keeper Training Videotapes, 
60% split from Chapter Logo Products 

(3) NATIONAL CONFERENCES - represents 50% split of profit from an annua l 

conference received by AAZK Administrative Offices (New Orleans Conference) 

(4) MISC. - includes Chapter charter and renewal fees, expense reimbursement, 

donations, interest income, postage, etc. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


113 


Expenses 1991 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 


Office 24% 


Taxes 4% (4) 


Misc. 11% (7) 



AKF 38% (1) 


Committees/Fhxijects 7% (6) 


Postage 10% (3) 
Printing 6% (5) 


(1) AKF - includes costs of printing, mailing service, postage and AKF misc. 

Also includes Editor’s salary. 

(2) OFFICE - includes office supplies, photocopying, telephone, 800 munber expenses, FAX 

charges, equipment purchase, rental & maintenance, legal and accoimting fees, 
and Administrative Secretary’s salary. 

(3) POSTAGE - includes aU postage costs, including the ix)stage meter and scale rental. 

Excludes AKF postage. 

(4) TAXES - includes aU applicable taxes (salary, sales, etc.) 

(5) PRINTING - all printing costs incurred with the exception of AKF. Includes cost for 

printing letterhead, career brochures, membership brochimes, by-laws, envelopes, 
membership cards, etc. 

(6) COMMITTEE/PROJECT EXPENSES 

(7) MISC. - includes conference costs. Board mid-year meeting, reorder of accessories, 

insurance, interest and depreciation expenses on computer equipment 


Chapters will be receiving a detailed budget report in their second quarter report from the 
President. Included in this review will be a line item breakdown of expenses and income, 
along with projected income and expenses for 1992. If you are not a Chapter member, but 
would still like to receive a copy of the package, please contact me directly. I believe it to be 
very important that members know exactly where our money is being spent. 



Ed Hansen 
AAZK President 
Reid Park Zoo 
1100 S. Randolph Way 
Tucson, AZ 85716 



114 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Martha Turnbull, Roger Williams Prk Zoo (RI) 
James Knox, Bergen County Zool. Prk (NJ) 
Sherry Hargraves, NIH/NIAID (MD) 

Carol Scherbak, Central Florida Zoo (FL) 

Mike Worwietz, Dreher Park Zoo (FL) 

Mariane Lorenzo, Dreher Park Zoo (FL) 

Frances Reid, Kamper Park Zoo (MS) 

Terry Polk, Indianapolis Zoo (IN) 

Patrick J. Smyth, Detroit Zoo (MI) 

Michael R. Brown, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 

John E. Brown III, Audubon Park Zoo (LA) 
Sandra Rider, Caldwell Zoo (TX) 

Abbie Poskey, Caldwell Zoo (TX) 

Julie Kelleher, Sea World of Texas (TX) 

Claudia P. Newman, El Paso Zoo (TX) 

Larry Pope, Alameda Park Zoo (NM) 

Carolyn Gasper, Coyote Point Museum (CA) 
Marian Kanoho, Hilton Hawaiian Village (HI) 


Theresa Tomas, Beardsley Zool. Gdns. (CT) 
Veronica Stefano, Seneca Park Zoo (NY) 
Jeanne Minor, National Zoo (DC) 

Connie Dallas, Discovery Island (FL) 

Tina Price, Dreher Park Zoo (FL) 

Wendy Jo Joyce, Dreher Park Zoo (FL) 
Cathie Kreager, The Wilds (OH) 

William Pasanen, Detroit Zoo (MI) 

Judith Thompson, Minn. Zool. Gdns. (MN) 
David A. Hudson, Henry Doorly Zoo (NE) 
Chris Smith, Oklahoma City Zoo (OK) 
Jeannie R. Wood, Caldwell Zoo (TX) 

Brenda Ray-Tahtinen, Houston Zoo (TX) 
Yvonne F. Carbis, El Paso Zoo (TX) 

Gina Phillips, Hogle Zoo (UT) 

Melissa Glasser, Santa Barbara Zoo (CA) 
Crystal Kim Han, no zoo listed (HI) 

Torsten Eide, West Edmonton Mall (ALBT) 


New Contributing Members 

White Oak Conservation Center, Yulee, Florida 
Minnesota Zoological Garden, Apple Valley, Minnesota 

Renewing Contributing Members 


David G. Westbrook, Director, Little Rock Zoo, Little Rock, AR 


Keepers’ Alert 


Deborah Dorsey works as a zookeeper in Nashville, TN and writes that they have a number 
of single animals for which they would like to find mates. They are looking for 1.0 
Bennett wallaby, 0.1 Two-toed sloth, 1 semi-tame female Paca, 0.1 Leopard tortoise, and 0.1 
Muntjac. Any readers who have or know of a reliable source for finding mates (preferably 
on trade or on breeding loan) please contact her at Animal Dept./Opryland, USA, 2802 
Opiyland Dr., Nashville, TN 37214. Phone; (615) 889-6600 ext. 7600 (days); (615) 865-2941 
(evenings). Deborah is also interested in corresponding with anyone who works with 
Carollia perspicallata bats, i.e. breeding, husbandry info exchange. 


An Encouraging Word 

The 10 February birth of a cougar at Octogon Wildlife Sanctuary near Ft. Myers, FL may 
provide the breakthrough in efforts to save the Florida panther ( Felis concolor coryi ). The 
kitten represents the first cougar ever produced using laparoscopic insemination, and only 
the second ever produced using artificial means. The birth was the result of a collaborative 
effort involving the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Dept, the Florida Game and Fresh Water Fish 
Commission, Gilman Paper Co.’s White Oak Plantation, and the National Zoo in 
Washington, DC. 

Ten female cougars (six at the Octogon Wildlife Sanctuary, Rehabilitation, Learning 
Center and Conservancy near Ft. Myers; three at the Wildlife Retirement Village near 
Waldo, FL; and one at the Commission’s Wildlife Research Laboratory at Gainesville, 
FL) were artificially inseminated by a team of scientists, veterinarians and reproductive 
specialists. Of the ten females, only one of the cougars at Octogon Wildlife Sanctuary 
became pregnant. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


115 


Currently, experiments are in progress to perfect the laparoscopic technique in cougars for 
eventual use with the critically endangered Florida panther. In 1991, Dr. JoGayle Howard 
used this artificial breeding strategy to produce pregnancies in the cheetah, leopard cat and 
black-footed ferret using either fresh or frozen-thawed semen. The development of this 
insemination method is part of a long-term effort to apply reproductive biotechnology to 
enhance the breeding of endangered species. 

Dr. Melody Roelke, Florida Game and Fish Commission veterinarian, said the team 
intends to continue laparoscopic insemination experiments this spring and that this year’s 
efforts will include an attempt to inseminate a four-year-old Florida panther housed at 
White Oak Plantation. 


■Thanks to John D. Mossier, Port Charlotte, FL for submitting this piece of news from the 
Boca Beacon . March 6, 1992. 


Notices from Recent IPL Newsletter 




• The Woolly Monkey Preservation Foundation, Inc. has been established as a nonprofit 
organization dedicated to the conservation of Woolly monkeys {Lagothrix lagotricha). 
The foundation accepts tax-exempt donations and awards grants for conservation projects, 
educational activities, and research efforts that contribute to the preservation of Woolly 
monkeys and their habitat. For additional information write to: Brent C. White, Woolly 
Monkey Foundation, 411 Harding St., Danville, KY 40422. 


• The Primate Specialist Group, Special Survival Commission, lUCN - The World 
Conservation Union, and Conservation International jointly publish a newsletter entitled 
Asian Primates. For subscriptions and/or materials for submission contact: Ardith A. 
Eudey, Regional Coordinator for Asia lUCN/SSC Primate Specialist Group and/or Editor 
Asian Primates, 164 Dayton St., Upland, CA 91786. 


• The Wisconsin Regional Primate Research Center (WRPRC) at the University of 
Wisconsin-Madison, announces the availability of a new electronic mail listserver 
called PRIMATE-TALK. PRIMATE-TALK is an open forum for the discussion of 
primatology and related subjects. This forum is open to electronic mail users world-wide 
with an interest in primatology. Subject matter may include, but is not limited to: news 
items, meeting announcements, research issues, information requests, 
veterinary/husbandry topics, job notices, animal exchange information, and book 
reviews. People with Internet, BITNET or UUCP addresses can communicate with 
PRIMATE-TALK. Users of other networks should contact WRPRC. If you are interested 
in joining PRIMATE-TALK, send a message to PRIMATE-TALK REQUEST c/o 
PRIMATE. WISC.EDU. stating that you would like to sign on. If you have questions about 
electronic access to the list, you may call Larry Jacobsen, Head of Library Services at the 
WRPRC Library at (609) 263-3512, or FAX at (608) 263-4031. You may also write to the 
WRPRC Library, 1220 Capitol Court, Madison, WI 53715-1299. 


-excerpted from the IPS NEWS, December 1991 



Information Please 

Seeking information from zoos that have kept Laughing Kookaburras (aka Giant 
Kingfisher) [Dacelo novaeguineae] in cooperative breeding family groups (i.e. where 
offspring have remained with their parents and assisted in incubating and/or rearing of 
subsequent offspring). I am trying to establish whether this helping behavior has been 
observed in captivity for this species. Please contact: Mark S. Myers, Giant Kingfisher 
Studbook Keeper, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 
70178. (504) 861-2537 Ext. 370. 


Hogle Zoo is currently working on an exhibit featuring a variety of arthropods and 
arachnids. We are loking for information on maintaining an exhibit with Jerusalem 
Crickets (stenopelmatus sp. ). .Tips on husbandry and exhibit photos are most appreciated. 
Please send suggestions to: Mary Wykstra-Ross, Hogle Zoo Exhibits, P.O. Box 58475, Salt 
Lake City, UT 84108. 


116 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Births & Hatchings 



Cy press Coast AAZK Chapter (West Palm Beach. FD ... announces the following 
significant births and hatchings for Aug.-Dee. 1991 at Dreher Park Zoo: 

Mammals - 0.1 Pygmy zebu (Bos primigenius indicus) [zoo’s first], 1.0 Goeldi’s 
monkey {Callimico goeldii) [E], 1.0 European hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) [zoo’s first]. 

Birds - 0.0.2 Eastern brown pelican {Pelecanus occidentalis carolinensis) [T-FL] 
[zoo’s first] (0.0.1 DNS). 

Reptiles - 0.0.9 Peninsular kingsnake (Lampropeltis getulus getulus x. floridana), 

0.0.1 Everglades rat snake (Elaphe g. rossalini), 0.0.11 Cuban boa (Epicrates angulifer), 
0.0.1 Ball python {Python regius), and 0.0.10 Yellow-footed tortoise {Geochelone 
denticulata). submitted by James D'Amico, Chapter Liaison, Cypress Coast AAZK 
Chapter, West Palm Beach, FL. 


Virginia Zoological Park (Norfolk. VA) ...announce the following significant births and 
hatchings for 1991: 

Mammals - 1.0 Douroucouli {Aotus trivirgatus) [first birth for pair and for zoo], 1.0 
Baird’s tapir (Tapirus bairdii) [E/SSP] [first birth for pair and for zoo]. 

Reptiles - 0.0.6 California mountain kingsnakes (Lampropeltis zonata) [first 
hatching for pair and zoo], submitted by Betty Jean Schmitt, zookeeper, Virginia Zoological 
Park, Norfolk, VA. 

New B&H Format Announced .. .one of the things the AKF editorial staff learned from the 
survey conducted last year was that many members did not like the way B&H was 
formatted— they felt it took up too much space overall, and that it was difficult to extract 
basic data found in the narrative-type structure. Therefore, we are trying a new format for 
B&H. We have already notified all those individuals who regularly submit B&H 
material, so hopefully everyone will be adjusted to the new change and will be submitted 
their information in the suggested format in the very near future. We have created four 
categories which we hope will streamline information. The categories are as follows: 

1. Endangered (E); Covered by SSP (E/SSP) 

2. Threatened (T) 

3. Uncommon in Captivity (U) 

4. Significant to institution 

a. (first time birth) 

b. (first time birth from pair) 

c. (diet change) 

d. (husbandry change) 

e. (exhibit change) 

f. (other) 

When submitting your list, please limit the animals you include to these categories only , 
and indicate which category each falls under. Each animal listed should include 
common name, scientific name and should then be followed by appropriate codes. 
Descriptions under the “significant to institution” category should be kept brief. We hope 
that those people who wish to expand further on the circumstances surrounding a 
significant birth or hatch will consider writing an article for AKF. Such articles need not 
be lengthy, but will allow for more details on significant B&H. We would also encourage 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


117 


Births & Hatchings. Continued 

the submission of black and white photographs to accompany either B&H submissions or 
separate articles. 


Finally, the deadline for submission of B&H material has been chang ed. All material for 
B&H column must be submitted no later than the 10th of every month. We thank you in 
advance for your cooperation and we would like to hear your comments on how you like the 
new format. 



ZIDP GOES INTERNATIONAL, 
FIRST STOP -- 

“DOWN UNDER” 

Fm pleased to announce that the 
Zoo Infant Development Project 
win be presented at the upcoming 
ARAZPA/ASZK Conference in 
Currumbin, Australia by AAZK 
member JudieSteenberg! Plans 
are also underway to send ZIDP 
materials to International ZooYearbook as well as a number of 
other countries through our own AAZK International Affairs 
Coordinators. Spring is on the way! Plan now to ’’ Share Data 
With The World”! 

(1992 Olympic Committee, sort of. ) 

Send data or requests to: 



Harmony Frazier-Taylor 
Animal Health Department 
Woodland Park Zoo 
5500 Phinney Ave. N. 
Seattle, WA 98103 
(206)684-4866 


/TO IMBW VBMcmmV PfepEcrr 



JiAUc 


118 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 



Quality exotic 
animal diets 


C.dtrir^Trd imi Nutritionally balanced 
OTjUulI%Urrl Fixed formulation • E 


Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRASKA BRANO 

h \ 



SPECTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 

Banana flavored psittacine/primate, 20% protein, dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Hoofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


One call does it all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69101-0721 


AAZK Award Nominations Are Now Being Accepted for 1992! 

The AAZK Awards Committee would like to begin accepting nominations for the 
Certificate of Merit for Zookeeper Education (CMZE) Award to be presented at the 1992 
AAZK Conference in San Diego. The deadline for all award nominations is 1 June 1992. 
All award nominations received after 1 June will be reviewed for 1993, so please keep this 
in mind when submitting your nominations. 

All awards given by the AAZK do not have a minimum or maximum number offered 
each year. Also, if the nominees do not meet the qualifications and nominators do not 
follow the nomination procedures, they will not receive the award for which they were 
nominated. Please include scientific names of animals when they are included in the 
nomination of a special or outstanding breeding acknowledgment. 

Please submit all nominations to: Janet McCoy, AAZK Awards Chair 

Washington Park Zoo 
4001 S.W. Canyon Rd. 

Portland, OR 97221 


CERTIFICATE OF MERIT FOR ZOOKEEPER EDUCATION 
(CMZE) AWARD 


The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. (AAZK) is the administering organization 
of the Certificate of Merit for Zookeeper Education (CMZE) presented by the AAZK Awards 
Committee. The purpose of the award is to recognize individuals, institutions and 
organizations in the zoological community most actively promoting educational programs 
for zookeepers. Examples of such support are: reimbursements for formal education, 
keeper training courses and staff seminars. 

The character of the award includes: a certificate, letter of notification to the institution's 
director and national recognition by professional journals. Such journals include: the 
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) and the Canadian 
Association of Zoological Parks and Aquarium (CAZPA) Newsletters, Animal Keepers' 
Forum (AAZK), Awards, Honors and Prizes: Volume 1; United States and Canada. The 
latter is published by Gale Research Company based in Wheaton, MD and found in 
medium to large sized libraries across the U.S. and Canada. 

The CMZE was founded by Jeff Roberts, 1976-1978 CHAIR, in 1978, to compliment the work 
of the AAZK Education Committee that had been formed at that time. The award is 
presented at the annual AAZK National Conference. 


Qualification g; 

1. Any staff individual, institution or organization from a North American 
zoo, aquarium or related facility is eligible. 

2. The keeper training program must have been in existence for at least one 
year. 


Nominati on Procedure; 

1 . If you feel that your institution, organization or a staff individual merits 
such an award, please submit a letter of nomination which mentions 
specifically the educational programs that are offered. 

2. Claims made should be backed up with documentation for the committee to 
review. 


2 0 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


AAZK Awards. Continued 


3. List the institution or organization’s name, address, phone and Director. 

4. The deadline for nominations is JUNE 1st of each year. 

Selection Erwedwes 

The Awards Committee, consisting of five keepers, will independently review each 
nominee. 


Ecosystem Survival Plan Update 

“Timeless Change” 

submitted by Norman Gershenz, ESP Coordinator 


The Ecosystem Survival Plan conservation program, with its interactive Conservation 
Parking Meter ® and public-action Adopt An Acre® program has gone absolutely wild! 
The success of the Conservation Parking Meter has a timeless quality and has prompted 25 
other zoos and aquariums around the country and Canada to order Conservation Meters. 
Meters have already been shipped to the National Aquarium in Baltimore, San Francisco 
Zoological Gardens, Cincinnati Zoo, Philadelphia Zoo, Denver Zoo, North Carolina Zoo, 
Riverbanks Zoo (SC), Folsom Children’s Zoo in Lincoln, NE, Dickerson Park Zoo in 
Springfield, MO, Micke Grove Zoo in Lodi, CA, Point Defiance Zoo in Tacoma, WA, Hogle 
Zoo in Salt Lake City, UT, and to the Assiniboine Park Zoo in Winnipeg, Manitoba, 
Canada! Orders for meters have recently arrived from the Houston Zoo, Buffalo Zoological 
Gardens, Tulsa Zoo, Columbus Zoo, Chaffee Zoo, Como Zoo, Bergen County Zoo, and the 
Metro Toronto Zoo. An additional 30 zoos have expressed keen interest in the ESP program, 
either in acquiring a Conservation Meter or participating in the Adopt an Acre program. 
This means that the conservation program has the potential to reach over 52 zoos, that in 
turn have conservation outreach to over more than 45 million people. 

The Ecosystem Survival Plan is creating that important link to the wild— it is saving 
endangered species like jaguars, spider monkeys, harpy eagles, butterflies, and orchids 
and preserving critically important habitat forever through the purchase of tropical 
rainforest. ESP has preserved close to 5000 acres of lush tropical habitat in Costa Rica and 
Belize and has assisted in the preservation and the development of national parks that 
cover over a half-million acres of land in the tropics. The program has raised over $200,000 
with over $45,000 coming from the Conservation Meters project in the first year. The next 
time you watch the jaguar with his majestic beauty in his enclosure, remember that you are 
now saving his home in the wild and preserving his biological heritage for your children 
by participating in Ecosystem Survival Plan’s Adopt an Acre program and the 
Conservation Parking Meter project. 

—It all starts with twenty-five cents and a dream. 


The Ecosystem Survival Plants conservation programs are a cooperative effort of the 
American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., the Greater San Francisco Bay Area Chapter of 
AAZK, and The Nature Conservancy. If you have questions about the ESP, contact Norman 
at San Francisco Zoo, 1 Zoo Road, San Francisco, CA 94132-1098. 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


12 


Evaluating Reproductive Status in the 
Female Dromedary Camel 
(Camelus dromedarius) 

By 

Wendy Marshall, Animal Keeper 
Erie Zoological Gardens, Erie, PA 


As keepers, we strive to give the best possible care to our charges. We spend countless hours 
planning breeding schedules, calculating gestation length, monitoring dams’ 
development during gestation, assisting at parturition (if necessary) and caring for the 
offspring. By being able to detect pregnancy, without observed breeding dates, we could 
more accurately predict the date of parturition. The more precise this estimate is, the less 
time will be spent watching a very pregnant camel chew her cud all night long - or, the 
equally attractive alternative of driving in to check on her at 2 or 3 a.m. and being 
mistaken for an intruder by an overly zealous security guard. Many keepers can attest to 
these and other trials associated with breeding animals and search for ways to make 
things a little easier. 

I started looking for a less stressful way to predict early pregnancy in camels. I focused on 
the possibility of quantifying urinary hormone concentrations to use as an indicator. By 
examining the literature I found successful studies had been conducted based on this 
concept. Unfortunately, I neither had the equipment nor the expertise to conduct the cited 
procedures. Progress appeared to be at a dead end until I presented my findings to a 
university biochemist. Dr. Craig Van Bell offered to establish protocols, teach me the 
complicated assays and showed great persistence when things didn’t work right the first 
(second or third) time. This proved to be a unique opportunity for Erie Zoological Gardens 
to be involved in a collaborative research project with Edinboro University of 
Pennsylvania. 

After getting permission to start the project, we began writing grant proposals to secure the 
necessary funds. Now, after 16 months of sampling and additional months spent 
analyzing and interpreting results, the project has been completed. Upon the suggestion of 
the Animal Keepers' Forum review committee. Dr. Van Bell and I decided to submit the 
formal manuscript to a scientific journal for future publication. We felt a synopsis of the 
results should, however, be made available to zoo keepers. The following is a brief review 
of camel reproduction, the assays used, and our results. 

The female Dromedary camel {Camelus dromedarius) is a seasonally polyestrus animal 
(Novoa, 1970). A series of follicular phases occurs during the breeding season without the 
development of a corpus luteum (Musa & Abusineina, 1978a; Newar et al., 1978; Elwishy, 
1988). Camels require the stimulation of copulation to trigger ovulation and are therefore 
identified as induced ovulators (Musa & Abusineina, 1978a; Marie & Anouassi, 1987; 
Homeida et al., 1988). Following fertilization, the corpus luteum is maintained throughout 
pregnancy, and the serum progesterone level rises. Successful mating could be recognized 
by rectal palpation of the ovaries (Marie & Anouassi, 1987), elevated serum progesterone 
levels (Eltohamy et al., 1986; Agarwal et al., 1987; Marie & Anouassi, 1987; Cristofori et 
al., 1989), or via the detection of the progesterone metabolite pregnanediol-3-glucuronide 
(PdG) in the urine. 

The latter technique has several advantages over conventional pregnancy detection 
methods. The reduced stress associated with collection, high frequency of collection, and 
safety of handlers are the biggest benefits. This technique has been used by other 
researchers to evaluate reproductive status of the Black rhinoceros {Diceros bicornis ), 
Indian rhinoceros {Rhinoceros unicornis ), White rhinoceros (Ceratherium simum). 
Okapi {Okapi johnstoni ), Western lowland gorilla {Gorilla gorilla gorilla), Olive baboon 
{Papio anubis). Llama {Llama glama), etc. (Loskutoff et al., 1982; Hodges et al., 1986; 
Ramsey et al, 1987; Hodges & Green, 1989; Paul-Murphy et al., 1991). 


2 2 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary CameL Continued 




TABLE 1 





Female 

Status 

Sampling 

Time 


[Cr] 

[PdG]/[Cr] 

Seneca Park A 

access 

11/30/90 

0800 

h 

2.98 

112 


to male 

12/7/90 1 
12/14/90^ 

0800 

h 

2.63 

136 





2.84 

111 



12/21/90 

0800 

h 

3.21 

57 






(2.92±0.24) 

(104+33) 

Seneca Park B 

access 

11/30/90 

0800 

h 

2.78 

97 


to male 

12/7/90 

0800 

h 

3.15 

125 



12/14/90 

0800 

h 

5.24 

60 



12/21/90 

0800 

h 

3.63 

67 





(3.70+1.08) 

(87+30) 


H. Vilas 

Park A 

not mated 

2/1/91 

1400 

h 

1.21 

250 




2/8/91 

1015 

h 

2.39 

175 




2/15/91 

1030 

h 

0.89 

330 




2/22/91 

0830 

h 

1.63 

171 







(1.53+0.65) 

(232+75) 

H. Vilas 

Park B 

not mated 

2/1/91 

1215 

h 

0.67 

550 




2/8/91 

1040 

h 

2.04 

526 




2/15/91 

1015 

h 

0.20 

1598 




2/22/91 

0845 

h 

1.62 

182 






(1.13+0.85) 

(714+613) 


H. Vilas Park C calved 

2/1/91 

1200 

h 

2.67 

160 

1/1/91; 

2/8/91 

1210 

h 

3.41 

242 

no access 

2/15/91 

1100 

h 

4.19 

88 

to male 

2/22/91 

0900 

h 

3.14 

(3.29+0.64) 

120 

(153+67) 


H. Vilas Park D calved 

2/1/91 

1100 

h 

2.44 

196 

11/27/90; 

2/8/91 

1145 

h 

1.94 

294 

no access 

2/15/91 

1045 

h 

1.53 

313 

to male 

2/22/91 

0850 

h 

2.04 

190 





(1.99+0.37) 

(248+64) 

^Orine sas collected at 0800 and 1000 

li and pooled. 






Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 123 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary Camel Continued 


The reliability of enzyme immunoassay technology to quantify urinary pregnanediol-3- 
glucuronide (PdG) to diagnose pregnancy in some mammals has been verified. The 
objective of this study was to correlate the pregnanediol-3-glucuronide concentration 
excreted with the reproductive cycle in a sexually mature female camel. In this paper, a 
urinary PdG profile of a female camel is shown including 9 pre-pregnancy samples, 66 
samples taken during pregnancy, and 10 postpartum samples. In addition, we report the 
PdG concentrations of 24 urine samples supplied by the Seneca Park and Henry Vilas 
Park zoos. 

Urine samples were collected once a week for 14 months, then every other day for the last 
month of gestation and postpartum. Collections were made midstream to avoid 
contamination. Prior to initiating collection, the female camel was acclimated to the 
apparatus and techniques used. The hardest part was trying to synchronize my hectic 
keeper schedule with her optimal collection time. Many times I found myself making a 
dash for her pen because she decided to go a little earlier than usual. All of these samples 
were frozen, without preservatives, until analysis. The system appeared to work fine until 
another variable entered the picture. ..the male camel in rut. The male was introduced for 
breeding in March 1990 (-406 days) and removed the following January. Like the female, 
he had to be trained to accept the collections. A verbal restraint command was used to keep 
the male separate from her until collection was complete. Once a sample was obtained, a 
release command was given, and the male was permitted access to the female. 

Samples from Henry Vilas Zoo and Seneca Park Zoo were shipped to us frozen. Data sheets 
for each of the females was completed. This information and the results of our analysis 
are listed in Table 1. 

The enzyme immunoassay for PdG was similar to that used by Hodges & Green (1989). 
Urine samples were diluted 1:150 and 1:500 in a buffer solution. The urine samples were 
assayed in triplicates in microtitre plates. A sequence of reactions were conducted in these 
plates over a specific time frame. Each plate was run with a series of wells designated as a 
standard curve. The standard curve was formed by assaying a range of known quantities 
of PdG. At the conclusion of the assay the absorbance of each well was measured at 405nm 
on a microplate reader. Once the standard curve (showing absorbance vs. known PdG 
concentration) was completed, the unknown concentration of PdG in the urine samples 
could be determined. The results of the PdG assays (ng PdG/ml urine) are shown on 
Figure 2. All figures depict day 0 as date of parturition. 

Creatinine (Cr) content is generally used to index hormone concentrations. The Cr level 
serves to compensate for variations in fluid output by the animal. The techniques for Cr 
determination were essentially as described by Montfort et al. (1990). As with PdG 
determination, Cr assays were run in triplicate to ensure accuracy. A standard curve, 
using technique similar to that in PdG, was also utilized to yield Cr content. The results of 
the Cr assays are shown in Figure 1. 

Figure 3 shows the PdG concentrations indexed with Cr. This ratio is the basis for 
comparison to verify pregnancy. The sample plots are somewhat scattered on the figures, 
so the curves were generated by an algorithm designed by Cleveland (1979). This 
technique is also described by Efron & Tibshirani (1991). 

As shown in Figure 1, urinary creatinine concentration fluctuated over time. All values 
were within the range noted by Yagil & Berlyne (1977) in their study on renal function in 
the camel. The levels did tend to rise gradually over the gestation period, and this is most 
likely due to changes in renal physiology and/or Cr production. Unfortunately, this 
increased Cr excretion during pregnancy renders Cr a less than ideal compound with 
which to index (Erb et ah, 1970); however, in the absence of a better one, Cr must still be 
used. 

The concentration of PdG (ng/ml) is shown in Figure 2 . A range of 400-1500ng/ml was 
noted, with the peak concentration during mid-gestation. When PdG is properly indexed 
([PdG]/[Cr]) a slightly different picture is apparent. At day -406, when the male was 


124 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary Camel. Continued 


Figure 1 

8.0 ■ [Creatinine] (Mg/Ml) vs. 

Tine (days froM birthl 


6.0 


4.0 


2.0 



-480 -360 


-240 -120 


+60 




Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


1 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary CameL Continued 

introduced, the ratio rose rapidly and remained high throughout the first third of gestation. 
There was also a noticeable dip a few weeks prior to parturition. Unfortunately, individual 
samples showed some deviation from the generated curve. 

The [PdGMCr] trends we observe (Figure 3) are similar to those noted in serum 
progesterone studies where the level rises in response to induced ovulation (Cristofori et 
al., 1989; Marie & Anouassi, 1987). The serum progesterone level rises rapidly during 
gestation, peaks during the first 6 months, then gradually declines (Agarwal et al., 1987; 
Elias et al., 1984; Eltohamy et al., 1986). We feel that by using the concentration of urinary 
PdG/Cr, an accurate evaluation of reproductive status can be made. 

Although our data were limited to extensive sampling of one animal and one gestation 
period, we feel this was a reliable pregnancy test. We suggest that a [PdGMCr) ratio of 
300/ng/ml should be used as an indicator of pregnancy. It should be noted, however, that 
several consecutive samples should be assayed to compensate for variation and/or 
inaccuracy. As mentioned previously, the ideal level is maintained for the first third of 
gestation then gradually declines. So we feel the test is best as an indicator of pregnancy in 
its early stages. 

In addition to obtaining samples from our female, we received urine samples from 6 
females housed at Seneca Park Zoo and Henry Vilas Park Zoo. The information on each 
female and the results of our analysis are listed in Table 1. Seneca Park Zoo’s females 
were housed with the male, but the [PdGMCr] ratios indicate that neither one was pregnant 
at the time of sampling. The Henry Vilas Park Zoo’s females had either just calved, or 
were not permitted access to the male. There were two instances where the [PdGMCr] ratio 
exceeded the 300 ng/ml threshold. This elevated number was only seen in one sample from 
two different females. This reinforces the idea that more than one individual sample 
should be used to indicate pregnancy. The cause of these fluctuations in unknown. One of 
the females (B) was very unusual. The [Cr] level was extremely low and resulted in a high 
[PdGMCr] ratio. Based on the interpretation of other studies, and our own observations, we 
feel her data should be disregarded as atypical. 

In conclusion, we feel that evaluating reproductive status of female Dromedary camels 
based on the urinary [PdGMCr] is not only feasible, but reliable and safer for staff and 
animals involved. 


Acknowledgments 

I am deeply indebted to Dr. Craig Van Bell for his seemingly endless persistence and 
support, without whom this project would not have been possible. 

This study was supported by grants from the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
and Edinboro University Faculty Research Committee. 

We are grateful to James Rhea, Director of Erie Zoological Gardens and General Curator 
Cynthia Kreider for their approval of this project. 

We also thank Susan Barnard, AAZK Research/Grants Chairperson, for her advice and 
encouragement. 

We wish to recognize the participation of Dr. David Hall (Director, Henry Vilas Park Zoo) 
and Dr. Garrell (Veterinarian, Seneca Park Zoo) and their keeper staffs. 

j 

We also appreciate the input and suggestions from Dr. Debra Forthman, Coordinator of 
Scientific Programs, Zoo Atlanta; and Alan Shoemaker, Curator of Mammals, 
Riverbanks Zoological Park, members of the AKF technical review committee. 


12 6 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary CameL Continued 


References 

Agarwal SP, Khanna ND, Agarwal VK & Dwaraknath PK. 1987. Circulating levels of 
estrogen and progesterone in female camel (Camelus dromedarius) during 
pregnancy. Theriogenology 28: 849-858. 

Cleveland WS. 1979. Robust locally weighted regression and smoothing scatterplots. 

J. Amer. Statistical Assoc. 74: 829-836. 

Cristofori F, Aria G, Vincenti L, Callegari S, Aaden AS & Gheddi AM. 1989. 

Mating-dependent endocrinological variations in female Camelus dromedarius.. 
Animal Reprod. Sci. 21: 73-77. 

Davison JM & Hytten FE. 1974. Glomerular filtration during and after pregnancy. 

J. Obst. Gynecol. Br. Comm. 81:588-595. 

Efron B & Tibshirani R. 1991. Statistical data analysis in the computer age. 

Science 253: 390-395. 

Elias E, Bedrak E & Yagil R. 1984. Peripheral blood levels of progesterone in female 

camels during various reproductive stages. Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 53: 235-240. 

Eltohamy MM, Salama A & Yousef AA. 1986. Blood constituents in relation to the 
reproductive state in she-camel {Camelus dromedarius). 

Beitrage Trop. Landwirtsch. Veterinarmed. 24: 430-435 

Elwishy AB. 1988. A study of the genital organs of the female dromedary {Camelus 
dromedarius). J. Reprod. Fert. 82: 587-593. 

Erb RE, Tillson SA, Hodgen GD & Plotka ED. 1970. Urinary creatinine as an index 
compound for estimating rate of excretion of steroids in the domestic sow. 

J. Animal Sci. 30: 79-85. 

Hodges JK & Green DI. 1989. The development of an enzyme-immunoassay for urinary 
pregnanediol-3-glucuronide and its application in reproductive assessment in 
exotic mammals. J. Zook, London 219: 89-99. 

Hodges, JK, Tarara R, Hearn JP & Else JG. 1986. The detection of ovulation and early 
pregnancy in the baboon by .direct measurement of conjugated steroids in urine. 
Am. J. Primatology 10:329-338. 

Homeida AM, Khalil MGR, Taha AAM. 1988. Plasma concentrations of progesterone, 
oestrogens, testosterone and LH-like activity during the oestrus cycle of the 
camel {Camelus dromedarius). J. Reprod. Fert. 83: 593-598. 

Larsson L-I. 1988. Immunocvtochemistrv: Theory and Practice . CRC Press. 

Lindheimer MD & Katz AI. 1971. Kidney function in the pregnant rat. 

J. Lab. Clin., Med. 78:633-641. 

LoskutoffNM, Ott JE & Lasley BL. 1982. Urinary steroid evaluations to monitor ovarian 
function in exotic ungulates: I. Pregnanediol-3-glucuronide immunoreactivity 
in the okapi {Okapi johnstoni). Zoo Biol. 1: 45-53. 

Marie M & Anouassi A. 1987. Induction of luteal activity and progesterone secretion in 
the nonpregnant one-humped camel {Camelus dromedarius). 

J. Reprod. Fert. 80: 183-192. 

Montfort SL, Wemmer C, Kepler TH, Bush M, Brown JL & Wildt DE. 1990. 

Monitoring ovarian function and pregnancy in Eld’s deer {Cervus eldi thamin) 
by evaluating urinary steroid metabolite excretion. J. Reprod. Fert. 88: 271-281. 

Musa BE & Abusineina ME. 1978a. The oestrus cycle of the camel (Came/ws 
dromedarius). Vet. Rec. 103: 556-557. 

Musa BE & Abusineina ME. 1978b. Clinical pregnancy diagnosis in the camel and 
a comparison with bovine pregnancy. Vet. Rec. 102: 7-10. 

Nawar SMA, Abul-Fadle WS & Mahmoud SA. 1978. Studies on the ovarian activity of the 
dromedary {Camelus dromedarius) Z. Mikrosk.-anat. Forsch., Leipzig 92:385-408. 

Novoa C. 1970. Reproduction in Camelidae. J. Reprod. Fert. 22:3-20. 

Paul-Murphy J, Tell LA, Bravo W, Fowler ME & Lasley BL. 1991. Urinary steroid 

evaluations to monitor ovarian function in exotic ungulates: VHI. Correspondence 
of urinary and plasma steroids in the llama {llama glama ) during nonconceptive 
and conceptive cycles. Zoo Biol. 10: 224-236. 

Ramsey EC, Kasman LH & Lasley BL. 1987. Urinary steroid evaluations to monitor 

ovarian function in exotic ungulates: V. Estrogen and pregnanediol-3-glucuronide 
excretion in the black rhinoceros {Diceros bicornis). Zoo Biol. 6:275-282. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


111 


Reproductive Assessment of the Female Dromedary CameL Continued 


Sauer MJ, Foulkes JA, Worsfold A & Morris BA. 1986. Use of progesterone 

11-glucuronide-alkaline phosphatase conjugate in a sensitive microtitre-plate 
enzymeimmunoassay of progesterone in milk and its application to pregnancy 
testing in dairy cattle. J. Reprod. Fert. 76: 375-391. 

Yagil R & Berlyne GM. 1977. Renal handling of creatinine in various stages of 
hydration in the camel. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 56A: 15-18. 


CflQS gar y Qf Kgy Tg i^ S 

SEASONALLY POLYESTRUS = seasonally dependent changes in reproductive cycle 
in which there are two or more estrus cycles per mating season. 

FOLLICULAR PHASE = final stages of ovarian follicular growth in preparation for 
ovulation. 

CORPUS LUTEUM = small, yellow body that develops within a ruptured ovarian 
follicle and secretes progesterone. 

CREATININE = normal, alkaline constituent that is the end product of creatine 
metabolism. It is formed in the muscle, passes in the blood and is excreted in the urine. 

PROGESTERONE = steroid hormone obtained from the corpus luteum and placenta that 
is responsible for changes in uterine endometrium. Reduces and/or redirects the uterine 
cells in such a way as to produce an appropriate uterine environment for implantation and 
pregnancy. 

PREGNANEDIOL -3 -GLUCURONIDE = end product of progesterone metabolism 
excreted in the urine. 

ALGORITHM = set of rules designed to solve a problem by proceeding through a series of 
steps. 

ENZYME IMMUNOASSAY = (enzyme-linked immunoabsorbant assay = ELISA) = 
an assay in which an antibody or antigen can be coupled to an enzyme and the resulting 
complex is quite specific. It can be sensitive enough to detect presence of minute quantities, 
and to react to form color change. 

MICROPLATE READER = (spectophotometer) = automated reader that passes light (at 
particular wave length) through the solution contained in wells and measures the amount 
of light absorbed. 

MICROTITRE PLATES = 8 X 12 matrix of small-volume wells in which the assays are 
performed. 


128 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 


1992 


Conference '92 
Second Call for Papers and 
Workshops 


"Enriching Today" is the theme for paper sessions and workshops at the 1992 AAZK 
National Conference. Any topic related to the care of captive exotic animals will be 
considered, however, those that involve new animal care techniques, significant 
achievements and special projects, technological innovations, and fresh approaches 
toward captive animal management may be given priority. 

The Papers and Workshops Committee for the San Diego Conference is expecting a 
record number of abstract submissions, so early contact with the Papers and Workshops 
Committee is critical. Abstracts will be accepted for review until July 31, 
1992. 

Abstracts should be limited to one or two paragraphs, should describe in detail the 
significance of the presentation topic, and should briefly list the results, conclusions, or 
benefits of the work described. Because the abstracts will be printed In the conference 
program, it is essential that submissions be well-organized and clearly- written. Abstracts 
that are poorly-written, that do not contain proper submission information, or that do not 
otherwise meet submission criteria will be returned with a letter rejecting the abstract 
outright or else suggesting the corrections or alterations required for acceptance. 

Upon acceptance of a paper or workshop abstract, a letter of notification will be mailed to 
the presenter along with a copy of the article "Guidelines for Typing Papers for AAZK 
Conference Proceedings." A typed draft of each paper is due at the time of presentation 
for publication in the Conference Proceedings. A refund of $25.00 off the registration 
fee will be awarded to each presenter only after they have turned in their paper to the 
session moderator. Formal paper presentations will be limited to 15 minutes. 

Abstracts must include the following i: 


Name of Presenter and Co-authors 
Zoological Affiliation 
PositionyTitle 

Title of Paper/Title of Workshop 
Ai/V Equipment Needs 

Send to: 

Terri Peterson, Chairperson 
Papers and Workshops Committee 
c/o AAZK San Diego Chapter 
P.O. Box 551 

San Diego, CA 92112-0551 

The Papers and Workshops Committee is eager to assist anyone who has an idea for any 
kind of presentation: formal paper, workshop, poster presentation, panel discussion, etc. 
Additional information and advice on the design and development of presentation ideas 
can be obtained by contacting the Committee Chairperson. 


iformation: 



FOR THE EARLY BIRD 


As an incentive for early registration, we are offering delegates "limited" behind-the- 
scenes tours on a first come, first served basis. These exclusive tours will provide the 
"early birds" with learning and photo opportunities in areas of special interest. Please 
specify on the Conference Registration Form your 1st, 2nd and 3rd choices, using the 
letters corresponding to the tours described below. Tour recipients will be notified in their 
confirmation packet. Some tours may be subject to cancellation without notice. 


ZOO 

A SEA LION SHOW: This 30-minute tour will get you up close to the Zoo's 
trained sea lions and introduce you to their training program, and how it is beneficial for 
the animals. Also included will be a visit to the new filtration plant. 

B ANIMALS IN ACTION SHOW: This 30-minute tour will visit the Zoo’s 
newest show area where you will interact with trainers and their animals, which are native 
to rainforests throughout the world. 

C ANIMAL CHIT CHAT SHOW: This 20-minute tour will get you up close 
and in person with the Zoo's most notorious "odd couple", a golden retriever and a 
cheetah, and more unusual educational animal show stars, hke the cuscus. Bring a camera 
and your best smile! 

D CHILDREN'S ZOO: In this 30-minute tour Children Zoo keepers will guide 
you around the highly successful hoofed stock and primate nurseries, and introduce you to 
other areas where animals are used for educational purposes. 

E TIGER RIVER TREK: This 20-minute backstage visit into the tiger holding 
area will introduce you to one of the Zoo's state-of-the-art bioclimatic zones, the Asian 
rainforest, including the tiger and tapir bedrooms. 

F SUN BEAR FOREST: This 30-minute tour takes you behind the scenes to the 
lion-tailed macaque and sun bear bedrooms and kitchen facilities. Keepers will give you a 
brief history and evolution of this bioclimatic theme, including management and 
husbandry techniques, and the team concept for these low-maintenance exhibits. 

G HEART OF THE ZOO GORILLA TROPICS: This 15-minute tour of the 
Zoo's premiere gorilla exhibit will literally give you a rooftop overview of the newest 
bioclimatic zone recently added to the Heart of the Zoo. 

H HEART OF THE ZOO BIRDS AND PLANTS: In this 1-hour tour a 
keeper and a horticulturist will take you through the holding facilities, explain how 
introductions and species are mixed, how birds are captured out of the aviaries, and how 
the sound/rain system functions. Also included are the latest techniques used to 
incorporate African tropicals or their closest related species as natural browse in the gorilla 
exhibit. 


I REPTILES: This 20-minute tour of the main Reptile House will feature off- 
viewing areas, including breeding colonies of such rare species as the Figi iguana and the 
black-headed python, and a chance to ask keepers about reptile management at the Zoo. 

J BIRDYARD: This 20-minute tour will take you into the kitchen area where 
keepers will explain how they can economically provide diets for a large and diverse 
collection of birds, maintaining close attention to food presentation. 


K AVIAN PROPAGATION CENTER AND ARTIFICIAL 
INCUBATION WORKSHOP: This combination tour and workshop will introduce 
you to the risk takers who can boast that 35% of the bird collection is hand-reared. The 
tour of the Center will include the set-up, brooders and incubators used on both altricial 
and precocial species. The workshop will cover artificial incubation, egg breakouts, 
causes of mortality and determination of the condition of embryos. 

L KOALAS: This short tour will give delegates access to a non-public area to see 
the koala bedrooms and talk to keepers about koala management. 


WILD ANIMAL PARK 

M EAST AFRICAN AND ASIAN PLAINS PHOTO CARAVAN: This 
exclusive opportunity will take you out in the field where you will be face-to-face with 
Baringo giraffe, Indian rhino and over 300 other animals in these mixed-species exhibits. 

N SOUTH AFRICA AND ASIAN SWAMPS PHOTO CARAVAN: This 
exclusive opportunity will take you out in the field where you will be face-to-face with 
Reticulated giraffe. Southern white rhino and over 300 other animals in these mixed- 
species exhibits. 

O OKAPI BEDROOMS AND EXHIBITS: This tour will visit the exhibits and 
night quarters for the Wild Animal Park's 10 (at this writing) okapi, including the newest 
additions. Keepers will be available to answer questions about okapi management. 

P TIGER BEDROOMS: Visit the Wild Animal Park's Sumatran tiger bedroom 
quarters and chat with their keepers. 

Q HOSPITAL: Delegates will be provided with a tour of the facility that provides 
the latest in veterinary care techniques for the Park's 3,000-1- animals. 

R CENTER FOR THE REPRODUCTION OF ENDANGERED SPECIES 
(CRES) CHEETAHS AND LION-TAILED MACAQUES: This visit to CRES’s 
off-exhibit breeding facility will include the cheetah complex, maternity houses, video 
monitor equipment and the rare king cheetah. Nearby are two 3/4-acre corrals — one 
housing a completely matriarchal troop of lion-tailed macaques, donated by the Royal 
Family of Monaco. 

SEA WORLD OF CALIFORNIA 

S PENGUIN ENCOUNTER: This exclusive tour will take 10 delegates inside 
this frozen Antarctic exhibit to wander amongst the several species of penguin successfully 
management by the expert staff at Sea World. 


AIRLINE DISCOUNTS 


To take advantage of substantial airline discounts for Conference '92 on American 
and Delta Airlines, contact: 


Sundance Travel, Inc. 

19800 MacArthur Blvd., Suite 100 
Irvine, CA 92715 

1 (714) 752-5456 or 1 (800) 434-3434 extension 195 


PRE-CONFERENCE DETOURS 


To satisfy the child in every delegate, one-day excursions to Disneyland and 
Knott's Berry Farm will be offered Saturday, September 26th. For those interested in an 
international shopping spree, on Sunday, September 27th, a morning trip to Tijuana, 
Mexico will be available. All trips include round trip transportation aboard a chartered 
bus. For more information, contact: 


Brian Robinson 

Smith-Charles Meeting Planners 
3505 Camino del Rio South, Suite 220 
San Diego, CA 92108 
1 (619) 281-6681 or 1 (800) 544-7889 


POST-CONFERENCE 

ADVENTURES 


Just in case you still have some energy (and money) left after the best AAZK 
conference you have ever attended, we offer not one, but two post-conference 
"adventures". 


ADVENTURE #1: LAS VEGAS 

* Three days, two nights 

* Departure on Saturday, October 3rd with return on Monday, October 5th 
* Round trip airfare on Southwest Airlines from San Diego 

* Round trip ground transportation 

* Deluxe Accommodations (Strip or Downtown Flotel) 

* All applicable taxes and gratuities 

* Fun Value Book ($200 worth of valuable coupons for food, shows and merchandise) 

$165 - $195 per person based on double occupancy 


ADVENTURE #2: CABO SAN LUCAS, MEXICO 

* Four days, three nights 

* Departures on Saturday, October 3rd with return on Tuesday, October 6th 

* Round trip airfare from San Diego 

* Welcome cocktails 

* Deluxe accommodations 

* All applicable taxes and gratuities 

$325 - $425 per person based on double occupancy 

NOTE: All space is subject to availability. Final prices will be available in June. The San 
Diego Chapter of AAZK cannot be held responsible for last minute changes, bad weather 
or cancellations. 

This is our preliminary post-conference announcement. Please look for more 
information to come via the AKF. For further information, contact Terri Peterson through 
the San Diego Chapter AAZK Hotline at (619) 231-1515 extension 4672. 










11 

ill 





Book 

Review 


The Restless Kingdom: A Study of Animal Locomotion 

By John Cooke 1991 

Facts on File, Inc., 460 Park Ave. S., NY, NY 10016 

Hardbound dps. 198 Price $39.95 


Review by Marilyn Cole 
Metro Toronto Zoo 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada 


This is a specialized book full of interesting facts detailing how and why animals are able 
to move as they do, relating this information to the Darwinian theory of natural selection. 
Utilizing 170 color photos and 24 line drawings, the author covers the locomotion and/or 
flight capabilities of invertebrates, birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians and fish. For 
example, we learn that a shield bug vibrates its wings before take-off to raise its body 
temperature because its flight muscles cannot work efficiently when cold. 

Although some language is technical, there is a handy glossary of terminology at the back 
of the book, thus making it accessible to those who have not studied biology. At the same 
time, biologists will find the book useful as well. As the author explains in his preface: ”If a 
topic could be talked about enthusiastically at a social gathering without generating 
widespread suspicions of paranoia, idiocy and inebriation, it was a candidate for 
inclusion”. 

The diversity of the locomotory powers of creatures ranges from fish louse to owls to snails 
to giraffes. 

Rather than separate by Family and Phylum, Cooke has chosen to open with a chapter 
detailing basic biological principles behind locomotion, replete with many examples, to 
lead the reader through the complex process. 

The next chapter describes the mechanics of locomotion, discussing the science behind 
flight and movement, which helped me to understand a mystery I always asked myself 
whenever I fly. How do airplanes manage to take off and actually stay in the air? 

The next three chapters are divided into locomotion in water, land and air, again filled 
with numerous examples of photos of wildlife to illustrate the points made in the text, such as 
the echolocation ability of bats. 

Although this is not the sort of book that I personally would sit down in the evening to read 
from cover to cover, it is filled with fascinating facts about the animals we work with, and 
hence is a valuable and recommended addition to a keeper’s library. 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


129 




Game Wars - The Undercover Pursuit of Wildlife Poachers 

By Marc Reisner 

Viking Penguin, a division of Penguin Books USA, Inc. 

375 Hudson Street, New York, NY 10014 
1991.294 pgs. $19.95 

Review By Terry Lincoln 
Director, Dakota Zoo 
Bismarck, ND 


Marc ReisnePs Game Wars - The Undercover Pursuit of Wildlife Poachers is a 
fascinating, educational and sometimes depressing book about the extent of poaching in the 
United States and the means to which game wardens must resort in an attempt to control it. 
The text provides an enlightening, sometimes ‘under the table’ look at how both sides of the 
“war” operate. The text is divided into four parts: Alligators (pgs. 1-76), Ivory (pgs. 77-168), 
Sacalait (pgs. 169-252) and Loss (pgs. 253-294). 

Part I (Alligators) serves to introduce Dave Hall, a “Mississippi bar fighter turned wildlife 
biologist and fierce conservationist” who for nearly thirty years has rubbed elbows with 
poachers and put the sting on many of the toughest and most devious poachers in the 

U.S sometimes even converting them into devout conservationists! After a thorough 

introduction to our undercover hero, the story centers on the overabundance, mega- 
poaching, eventual decline, near extinction, and finally protection and recovery of the 
American Alligator in the southeast section of the U.S. Mr. Hall, using several aliases 
and undercover help from other wardens, helps to ease the pressure on the alligator from the 
more than 25,000 poachers who were said to be in operation in 1969. Most of these poachers 
were selling their booty to “hide brokers” who sold the hides overseas by the thousands. 
Once these brokers were brought into control, the alligator was allowed to come from being 
a rare sighting in most southeastern states to a common one. 

Part H (Ivory) primarily focuses on Walrus ivory and the decimation which has occurred 
as a result of man’s greed. Dave Hall travels to Alaska and several other states in search 
of the ivory dealers who create the desire for the ivory in the first place. His mission brings 
him through many interesting places and offers a look at just how devious our game 
wardens can be when on the track of a greedy poacher or broker. This section also 
introduces the reader to the way in which elephant ivory is smuggled in and marketed in 
the U.S. It also brings home the point that poachers will go to any length and sell any 
product (mammoth tusks) to make a buck. 

Part III (Sacalait) takes us to Mississippi where poachers nightly are hauling in tons of 
Sacalait - “bag of milk”, more commonly called crappie. These poachers, under the 
protection of crooked policemen, sheriffs and even judges, make runs in pickup trucks, 
station wagons, and vans piled full of unrefrigerated fish to cities as far away as Chicago 
in order to cash-in on this readily available crop. 

Part IV (Loss) serves as a lesson in history about man's use and abuse of the animal 
resources at his disposal. This section reviews the decline of many animals in the United 
States, including beaver, penguin, heath hen, Carolina parakeet, passenger pigeon, bison 
and others, all of which were once described as “in endless supply and too numerous to 
count” and who are today extinct or at least threatened. On a more positive note, this section 
also serves to inform us of some of the success stories with animals that have been managed 
and allowed to increase in numbers. 

Throughout the book the reader is allowed to experience a behind-the-scenes look at just how 
relentless and blood-thirsty some of the poachers in our country really are. We are also 
allowed to share in the excitement and good feeling of shutting down a poaching or 
brokering operation, especially when the culprit has a change of heart and joins the 
conservation effort. The “tell it like it is” style of writing by Reisner serves to bring the 
reader closer to the problem that still faces this country and others today. It also serves to 
deepen our respect and support of our wildlife protection personnel when we see what they 
sometimes are forced to deal with to do their job. This book is a “must read” for anyone with 
an interest in animals and their welfare. 


130 Animal Keepers' Foriun, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 




I) 

^Behavioral Enrichment^n,^ 
Activity Manipulation*^ 
Occupational Husbandry 

'lA 




In keeping with the theme this month, we will devote this column to items dealing 
exclusively with hoofstock. Ungulates can be a real challenge when it comes to 
enrichment. They don’t seem as curious as carnivores or primates about stimuli, and 
some tend to become easily agitated upon confronting something unfamiliar. But with 
some creative thinking, especially about imitating situations in the wild, it is possible to 
enhance more natural behaviors. In the meantime, here are a few ideas to help you get 
started! We greatly appreciate those who have submitted items this month, and as always, 
keep those ideas coming! 

SITATUNGA - small bushes hung from trees for “sparring partners” 

LLAMAS - mound of soil or other substrate to stand on or play “king of the mountain” on 
PIGS - small logs, hollow logs, round stones, wooden dumbbells, beer kegs to push around 
DOMESTIC COWS - a barrel, or Boomer Ball® for pushing 
SICTTJAN DONKEYS - bucket to carry around, or to have “tug-of-war” with 

-Betty Jean Schmitt, Keeper 

Virginia Zoological Park, Norfolk, VA 


GIRAFFES -placing vertical tree trunks in the enclosure allows for natural fur care. 
Giraffes will rub their heads and necks against the large trees. 

-water placed on the ground, in a way so as not to be soiled by the animals, forces 
them to use a normal drinking behavior. 

-the above items taken from 

B eha vio ur Enrichme nt catalogue, of i deas. (Oct. 1990) 
produced as a cooperative effort of seven Scandinavian zoos 


Remember, we are always needing more ideas to include in this enrichment column. 
Send your suggestions, ideas, etc. to: Gretchen Ziegler and Kayla Grams, AKF, 635 Gage 
Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. We are counting on you to help us continue to fill this column with 
ideas that will make life better for our captive charges. Make it a Chapter project to gather 
ideas already in use or come up with new ones to try. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


131 


Boomer Ball® 


WOULD LIKE TO THANK 

ALL OF THE ZOOS AND PRIVATE EXOTIC FACILITIES 
WHO ORDERED OUR PRODUCTS DURING OUR PROMOTION 

"TOYS FOR THE ANIMALS" 

Unfortunately, only a few photo entries were received in the"free balls 
for clear photos of your unusual exotic playing with his Boomer Ball/' 

THEREFORE ALL OF THE ENTRIES RECEIVED ARE WINNERS 

Cindy Stone, Gladys Porter Zoo, Brownsville. TX 

Usiku, a dwarf Nigerian Goat -- 10" Challenger 
Mouyo, a Chimpanzee -- 20" Jungle Ball 
Martha, a Lowland Gorilla --6" Boomer Ball 


David Sheperdson, Metro Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 

News release photo of Tiger swimming with his Boomer Ball, and 
Christmas promotion idea: donors purchase Boomer Balls for the 
animals, and "used-up" ball is returned to donor for conversation piece. 

Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens. Apple Valley. MN 


Szechaun Takin -- 20" Jungle Ball 


Dale Brownlow. Topeka Zoological Park. Topeka. KS 


Sunda, an Asian Elephant -- 20" Jungle Ball 


MANY THANKS FOR YOUR ORDERS AND ENTRIES - 
WE WILL RUN ANOTHER CONTEST DURING OCTOBER AND NOVEMBER, 
AND WILL HOPE THAT MORE PHOTO ENTRIES WILL BE RECEIVED I 


O 

m 


o 


♦ 



L(E)(S)kimM Mmsk 


{Editor’s note: in the next several issues of AKF we will continue to reprint articles which 
appeared earlier in the Association’s history. The old saying ’’the more things change, the 
more they stay the same” seems to hold true with these articles which are as relevant today 
as the day they were written. This month’s installment dates back to 1987, but its theme was 
completely appropriate to this issue dedicated to hoofstock. SC) 

The following article appeared in the Animal Keeners’ Forum (Vol. 14, No. 4 ) April 1987. 


Evaluatiiig Forage Fed to Exotic Animals 

By 

Charlotte Kirk, Animal Health Technician 
Kansas City Zoological Gardens, Kansas City, MO 


Making sure that the food we feed our captive animals is of good quality is part of our job as 
zoo keepers. Admittedly, it is not so difficult to determine when milk is sour, fruit is rotten, 
or meat is spoiled; but it can be difficult to determine the quality of the hay we feed. 

Since hay makes up approximately 75% of our hoofstock’s total diet, it’s important that it be 
of good quality. It has been documented that East African herbivores spend the majority of 
the day foraging. The giraffe spend 68% of its day feeding (Leuthold, 1978), the elephant 
74% (Van Soest, 1982), and the rhino 50% (Owen-Smith, 1973). Most other exotic ruminants 
spend 50-70% of the day foraging in their natural habitat. In captivity these animals 
depend on hay as their major source of energy. If that source is not of good quality, 
problems may be encountered. 

Certainly we have all had to deal with poor quality hay at one time or another. Often times 
it’s difficult to assess the quality of hay. So to make life easier, here are a few tips that may 
strengthen your ability to tell a good bale of hay from a bad one. 

Both legume and grass havs should have fine stems and plenty of leaves . If legume hay 
looks more like a pile of sticks, due to lack of leaves, it was probably put up too late. Leaf 
loss means major nutrient loss. As forage matures, quality declines due to increased stem 
to leaf ratios, increased fiborousness, translocation of nutrients, and weathering (Gesshe 
& Walton, 1981). Nutrient value declines since stems are more fibrous, are 8% less 
digestible, and contain 6% less protein than leaf tissue (McCullum, 1983). 

Check for weeds and foreign objects in the hav . More of these mean less desirable forage 
material. Many weeds can be toxic to the animals we feed. Cocklebur (Xanthium spp.), 
ergots {Claviceps spp.), morning glories {Ipomoea spp.), and mustard weeds {Thlaspi 
arvense) are just a few of the weeds that are toxic to most animals, especially swine. 
Jimsonweed {Datura spp.) and nightshades {Solanum spp.) are weeds commonly found in 
hay that produce powerful toxins (Kirk, 1983). Familiarizing yourself with toxic plants can 
help you to recognize these potential health hazards. Foreign objects to look for can include 
anything from pieces of baling wire and nails to insects. The insect most famous for 
causing problems in equines is the blister beetle. This small striped insect is commonly 
found in alfalfa hay. The toxicity of blister beetles is due to the cantharidin found in their 
body fluid (Oehme, 1983). Cantharidin is a severe irritant that produces vesicles (or 
blisters) in the digestive tract when ingested. When this material is absorbed, it is rapidly 
excreted through the kidneys, causing damage to the urinary system. Depending on the 
number of beetles consumed, the equid may show mild to severe signs of toxicity which may 
even lead to death. 

Note the color of your hav . Although a bright green color is often a sign of good hay, it is not 
the most accurate sign of quality. Sometimes a bale of hay may be sun-bleached on one side 
but full of nutrients when it’s opened. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


133 


ILamMmg IBrncsIk - Evaluating Forage. Continued 

You can sniff out mold and dust . Temperature and moisture are the factors that most affect 
the growth of mold. Approximately fifteen species of Penicillium and Aspergillus thrive 
in hay stored between 25-35°C (77-95°F) and 75-90% relative humidity. This can be a severe 
problem in the warmer summer months in many parts of the country. Young animals of 
all species are most susceptible to mold toxins (Berrier, 1977). If there is a blue-gray cloud 
of dust when you separate a flake of hay, and you come away gasping and sneezing, you 
can bet that hay is full of mold that could easily cause respiratory and circulatory 
disturbances in the animal you are feeding. 

Texture is also important in assessing the quality of hay . Good hay is soft and springy. 
Bristled and clumped hay is usually of poor quality. 

Lift the bale , if it feels like a ton of bricks, it is more than likely a block of mold. Heavy 
bales can also mean wet bales which besides being excellent growth medias for mold, 
usually are lacking in digestible energy. 

Obviously no hay dealer is going to allow you to be turned loose opening every bale, but it is 
wise to crack open at least two or three. Look for the obvious factors that determine quality; 
leafiness, color, texture, moisture, and presence of foreign objects. Of course, we can’t 
predict the quality of our hay, but we can control what we feed by careful and serious 
inspection on a daily basis. 

Bibliography 

Berrier, H., 1977. Animal Sanitation and Disease Prevention , p. 68. 

Gesshe, R. and Walton, A. 1981. J. of Range Mgmt.. 34:42. 

Kirk, R. 1983. Current Veterinary Therapy VIII . pp. 473-474. 

Leuthold, W. and Leuthold, B. 1978. African Ungulates , pp. 21-26. 

McCullum, T., 1983. Oklahoma State University Ag. Exp. Sta., No. 2657. 

Oehme, F. 1983. Current Therapy in Equine Medicine , pp. 588-590. 

Owen-Smith, N. 1980. Dynamic Changes in Savanna Ecosystems . 

Walker and Huntley (Eds.) CSIF, Pretoria. 

Van Soest, P.J. 1982. Nutritional Ecology of the Ruminan t, pp. 325-336. 



134 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Bowling for Rhinos ’92 
Update 

As .of March 8th, 50 AAZK Chapters have committed to 
holding a bowling event. We have already received 
some money from the National Zoo, Mt.Tahoma and 
Metro Boston Zoo Chapters that held fundraisers other 
than a bowling event. The first Chapter that bowled was 
the Rocky Mountain Chapter in Denver, Co and they 
raised in excess of $4,000.00. 

Bowling events may be held between March and July this year but preferably before July. 
Several Chapters have chosen the weekend of April 25th (Earth Day). If your Chapter is still 
interested in bowling but you haven’t notified me, please do so ASAP so I can get sponsor 
sheets to your Chapter. If your Chapter has never held a bowl-a-thon, call me and I can get 
you started. It is very simple to start out with a small event and you can make it bigger and 
better every year — plus it’s a lot of fun! 

Please have all checks written to your Chapter so they can be deposited into your Chapter’s 
account and then write one chapter check to AAZK, Inc. Send the check and sponsor forms 
and Financial Statement to me. I will check the sponsor forms to be sure they balance. It is 
very important that the Financial Statements are sent with your check and sponsor forms. 
Please DO NOT send cash in the mail! 

Good luck to everyone and don’t hesitate to call me at (617) 322-8723 if you have questions. 
Yes, there is again going to be a free trip to the Ngare Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary in Kenya for 
the top two money raisers! This trip is provided by the Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. 




March 10, 1992 


Dear AAZK Members, 

Wow! How can I describe the most exhilarating experience of my life? As a zoo keeper, it 
is a dream-come-true to conserve wildlife both in captivity and in the wild. Thanks to 
Andy Lodge and AAZK’s Bowling for Rhinos for fulfilling this dream for me and many 
others. This terrific sanctuary (Ngare Sergoi), with its professional conservationists and 
abundant wildlife, became our home for two weeks this past February. No words can truly 
give the experience justice. 

We left my house at 10 a.m., Friday, 7 February and arrived in Nairobi, Kenya at 2 a.m. 
Sunday. After a few hours of sleep in the Intercontinental Hotel (thanks, Andy!) we woke 
to a first day of shopping in the Market in Nairobi. Around noon, Ian Craig (owner of Lewa 
Downs) hosted us to a beautiful, hour-long flight from Nairobi to Lewa Downs in the 
foothills of Mt. Kenya. 

We were able to spend a few nights with each of the project managers and their families. 
This allowed us the opportunity to see each section of the project and how each part fits 
together for the same common goal. I believe Ngare Sergoi is successful because of the 
people who run it. They work together as closely as family. Each makes a living through 
cattle ranching at Lewa Downs, yet each spends much of their time with the conservation of 
wildlife. When a security alarm goes off at the fence line, everyone pulls together to solve 
the problem. Peter Jenkins (Maru Park Founder) and Rob Bret (Kenya Wildlife Service) 
are only two of the many people we met who told us that Ngare Sergoi was the best run 
sanctuary in Kenya. We were seeing the ‘Toest of the best” in action! 

One of my most thrilling memories was standing next to Anna Merz, the “Jane Goodall of 
Rhinos”, as we watched a four-day-old Black rhino calf nurse from its mother. Another 
was standing only a few yards away from four bull elephants who were feeding from a tree 
that we had just watched them knock down. Within our first two hours at Lewa Downs, we 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


135 


Bowling for Rhinos *92 Update. Continued 

saw more animals than we thought we would see during our entire stay! It wasn’t like a 
regular safari where you have to stay in a vehicle and watch lions that are bored with 
people. We walked for hours through Ngare Ndare Forest Reserve amongst animals that 
rarely see*humans. 

I saw at least 50 kinds of birds, bushbabies, vervet monkeys, baboons, warthogs, cape 
buffalo, impalas, gazelles, gerenuk, zebras, waterbucks, kudus, elands, giraffe, elephants, 
hyraxes, mongoose, leopards, hyenas and lizards galore. We watched herds of 50 
elephants as they fed amongst the nearby trees. We even rode horses next to the wildlife 
and became just another animal to the zebras and genenuks. Snow-covered Mt. Kenya 
could always be seen in the distance (even in the shower) which made for some outstanding 
sunsets! 

We were able to walk along the fence line and talk with the native farmers whose crops are 
now safe from elephant raids due to the “Bowling for Rhinos’Tence. One elderly woman 
said this is the first time in 20 years that she won’t have to worry about her children 
starving. She can now “watch the elephants in the Sanctuary and admire them for their 
beauty rather than flee in fright and anger.” Before Ngare Sergoi and “Bowling for 
Rhinos”, she never even heard of any farmers receiving any help from money designated 
for them and can’t believe the generosity of Americans from so far away. Because 100% of 

“Bowling for Rhinos” money goes directly to the Sanctuary rather than to administrative 
costs, the natives see the benefits. 

It was an incredible feeling sitting outside Ian Craig^s veranda as the sun set, overlooking 
the entire project knowing that I am helping to save it by being a part of AAZK and 
“Bowling for Rhinos”. It’s great to know that we can make a difference when we all pull 
together. 

Missing Africa Already, 

I O. ^ 

Patty Pearthree 


(Editor’s Note: The following letter was received by Andy Lodge and forwarded on to our 
office for publication. It is from one of the African farmers who lives along the fence line 
paid for by money raised in the AAZK Bowling for Rhinos project. It is printed here exactly 
as it was received. His testimony reinforces the importance of the work being done at the 
Sanctuary and Forest Reserve, not only for the animal inhabitants, but for the neighboring 
people as well.) 


Jacob Margte Karanga 
Farm No. 554, Kenya 

Dear Mr. Lodge, 

First is much congratulations for the installation of the fence. This thanks will go to the 
engineers of the work and the workers who were involved. Actually the workers who were 
installing the fence were friendly to the residents and I thank them so much for their 
amiability. Also the persons should receive congratulations for the work which has been 
done. Therefore the following are some of the abundances which I as a resident on the 
forest line. 

1. Stray animals from the forest which have been destroying crops are now prevented. 

2. There will be conservation of wildlife in the forest which will ensure rapid growth of 

tourism industry. 

3. As a part of environmental conservation in the country this part will ensure natural 

habitat since there will be proper control of the forest. 


136 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Bowling" for Rhinos *92 Update. Continued 


4. The fence will act as an incentive to each individual to plant trees which will ensure 

rainfall and environmental conservation. 

5. Now that no stray animals the residents walk during the night without fear. 

6. No more contamination of wild animals parasites to some sick ones since they will be 

all grazing in the forest, 

7. There will be higher income in the area due to high production of crops. 

8. The electric fence is again going to ensure security in the area in the case of cattle 

thieves. 

9. The purpose of the installation of the electric fence has surely been met since from now 

on receipts for the collection of firewood will be issued to stop those who go unlawfully 
to collect firewood. 

10. Government revenue will increase due to the buying of firewood and posts by the 

residents. 

In the case of disadvantages, the residents should be warned about the dangers of 
electricity. Also residents should be warned about the act of entering unlawfully in the 
forest and gullies. 


Yours Faithfully 
Jacob Margte Karanga 


ATTENTION 
All Chapters Involved in 

*92 Bowling for Rhinos 

It would be greatly appreciated if any 
Chapter or facility producing an item 
especially for Bowling for Rhinos 
(i.e. patch, pin, T-shirt, poster, etc.) 
would please send one to Administra- 
tive Offices for the AAZK Historical 
Archives. If it is not possible to send 
the item gratis, please advise AO of 
the cost. If an item is no longer avail- 
able, please send a photograph if pos- 
sible. We would really like to have 
as complete a record of this important 
AAZK event as possible. We would 
also like to have snapshots of your 
event and copies of any publicity you 
receive in zoo or local media. Thanks 



for 


RHIM^S 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


37 


H.aR.N. 


■^Thc Official. Newsletter of the Ngare Sergoi Support Group 


The Ngare Sergoi Support Group would like to thank all the | 
keepers for their support through Bowling for Rhinos. As a means to ! 
promote the rhino sanctuary and expand awareness of conservation 
issues, memberships in NSSG are available. As a member you will: 

Receive a year's subscription to H.O.R.N. Newsletter. 

Quarterly updates on the Sanctuary, future plans at Lewa 
Downs, black rhino information, a children's column, and 
a variety of conservation articles appear in each issue. 

Obtain a 10% discoxmt on all Ngare Sergoi Support Group 
products. 

Have the satisfation of knowing that your dollars continue 
to support and enhance this important and successful 
wildlife conservation effort. 

Your membership dues will help protect the Black Rhinos at the Ngare 
Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary, Basic membership (in one of the categories listed 
below) entitles you to the quarterly newsletter, which includes updates on the 
Sanctuary, and 10% discount on all Ngare Sergoi products. 

I I New Q Renewal 


I I General Membership $15.00 

I I National members, American 

Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc $10.00 

I I Student membership $10.00 

I I AAZK Chapters, Corporations $25.00 

I I Other -- Contribution $ 


Name 

Address 

City State Zip 


Ngare Sergoi Support Group is a 501(c)(3) non-profit and 
tax-exempt organization. Your donation is fully 
tax-deductible to the full extent allowed by law. 


Safe Spots, Safe Places, and 
Behavior Consistent Routines 

(Techniques for working with flighty ungulates) 


By 

James Bousquet, Elephant Supervisor 
El Paso Zoo, El Paso, TX 


I was happy to see \ha.tAKF was soliciting articles about hoofed stock. I would like to share 
some techniques I have developed for working with hoofed animals that have a well- 
developed flight response. I have been very fortunate to work with some incredibly unique 
and interesting hoofed stock species. Many of these were very nervous species and had a 
flight response with a very low threshold. In order to lessen the chance of injury to these 
animals and enhance the keeper/animal relationship, I developed several techniques 
which worked very well. I call these methods: Safe Spots, Safe Places and Behavior 
Consistent Routines. 

A Safe Spot is a secluded area or corner in a yard or barn where an animal feels secure 
during cleaning or routine maintenance. It’s best to have several of them so the animal (s) 
can move from one to the other as cleaning progresses. 

A Safe Place differs from a Safe Spot in that once the animals are in the Safe Place, they 
are left alone. This is usually a special area in a barn or holding pen that was prepared 
ahead of time and then the animals are coaxed to enter. You must have at least one shift pen 
in the barn or yard for them to function properly. Once animals are secured in the Safe 
Place, work can continue in the area as usual. The animals remain calm knowing they 
will not be bothered. This knowledge on their part also makes it easier to get them into their 
Safe Place. 

A Behavior Consistent Routine implies the development of a work routine which animals 
can easily recognize, respond to appropriately, and remain calm. It communicates to the 
animals precisely why we are there, what we are going to do, and what we expect of them. 
This kind of communication, which is readily and gladly accepted by the animals, 
actually releases more normal behavior because it frees them of fear and apprehension. 
For example, I use my Clean The Yard Behavior when cleaning the pen - the animals know 
and recognize the behavior immediately and calmly respond accordingly. 

Safe Spots, Safe Places, and Behavior Consistent Routines work well for many mammals, 
but I found that they worked especially well on Okapi {Okapi johnstoni), Speke’s gazelle 
{Gazella spekei), Slender-horned gazelle (Gazella leptoceros), Sable antelope (Hippotragus 
niger), and Yellow-backed duikers (Cephalophus syluicultor). Some of these animals 
were very aggressive. I found my routine helpful when working in close quarters with 
them as well. I believe these techniques are applicable even in large pens and barns with 
shift stalls. In small yards and barns without shift pens I found them invaluable. Once a 
flight response is set off it’s too late, so Safe Spots, Safe Places, and Behavior Consistent 
Routines really reduce the chance of this happening. 

All innate behavior should be taken into account in developing a routine, but the Flight 
Response must be at the top of the list when working with jumpy ungulates. For that reason I 
prepare individual personality and behavioral profiles of all my animals. In addition to 
the animal’s tendency towards flight, it covers aggressiveness, likes and dislikes, 
responsiveness, adaptation to routine, food preferences and the like (these profiles are 
especially useful to relief people, if they use them). For example, I found vast personality 
differences in five Okapi I cared for on my route. Some were friendly, some fearful, others 
aggressive or wary. All had highly developed flight responses, but each individual had 
differences as far as how and when they were set off. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 1 39 


Safe Spots. Safe Places, and Behavioral Consistent Routines. Continued 

They also had a well-developed Startle Response. This was released by an unexpected' 
touch or noise. Their reactions included violent head thrashing or lighting-fast kicks. 
Okapis are very single minded. If I were well into my cleaning routine they might forget I 
was there and then rediscover me with a start. Therefore, I always kept talking while I 
was in the stall with them. These things are important to remember and they are very 
important to pass on to relief people. 

In small, confining displays I found Safe Spots worked very well, providing a consistency 
of routine that was calming to jumpy hoofed animals. My Safe Spot routine in this situation 
goes as follows: I always give my animals ample warning before I enter their enclosure. 

All my tools are assembled so I won’t have to backtrack or leave the enclosure 
unexpectedly. When I am developing a routine I always watch where the animals settle 
once I enter the pen. This is the first Safe Spot and it dictates where and how I will start my 
routine. They usually move to a corner or sheltered area, but if not, proceed in a clockwise 
direction with your raking and see where they go. If they settle in a spot and seem 
comfortable, try to use this as your first Safe Spot. I like to go clockwise if I can, because it 
soon becomes second nature to me and it reduces my mistakes. The animals will learn to 
move clockwise too. 

Until the animals are used to the Safe Spot routine I rake slowly until I reach their" 
Discomfort Zone. I then move my arm slowly in a sweeping motion in the direction I wish 
them to go and say “Let’s go”. Soon they learn what I want and they bound to the next Safe 
Spot. If I continue raking and moving the animals, I will eventually be back where I 
started. Going back to pick up piles of feces can proceed in the same way. After a short time i 

the animals will anticipate what you want and eagerly move as you near them. jj 

Safe Spots are especially useful when working in tight quarters in a stall with the animals 
present. Cleaning can continue as usual using the Safe Spot method (there are exceptions if 
the animals are new, aggressive, or neurotic). Our Okapis and Yellow-backed duikers, 
for example, had no shift pens and all the stables were occupied during bad weather. In this 
circumstance I used the following technique. After I warned my animals of my presence ^ 
and gathered all my tools, I entered the stall slowly. I waited for the animals to settle in a 
corner (Safe Spot), then I began to rake and sweep. Each animal seemed to have a favorite 
corner. Most moved to the farthest corner from me, either to my right or to my left. There 
they would stay with their heads in the corner and their rumps facing me. I always moved 
in a clockwise direction just for the sake of consistency. After raking the entire stall and 
piling it by the door, I let the animals know it was time to move. “Let’s go”. By raking the 
entire stall except where the animals were standing, they had to move only once. 

Rather than bed the entire stall down with straw I put a bed down only in the animals’ , 
favorite resting place. I could keep things much cleaner that way. 

During the washdown phase I use the same method, except I have to make the animals move 
more than once. As usual I let them know I am coming and then slowly open the stall door. 

To alert them that water is coming I turn on the hose and let it splash on the service aisle 
floor before I start washing in the stall. Once they have settled in a Safe Spot, I begin by 
washing the floor. If an animal starts to look worried, stop washing or crimp the hose to stop 
the flow of water. Once they calm down start washing again. Wash as close to the animals 
as possible, then say “Let’s go”. Allow them to move to the next Safe Spot (corner). Wash the 
corner vacated by the animals and then move to the next corner and repeat the process. 
Soon you will be back where you started. I had to be very careful when working in the barn 
with the Okapis because they became so accustomed to the routine they would eventually be 
walking behind me. One very friendly Okapi would lick the back of my neck as I washed 
the floor. With more untrustworthy animals I had to be careful not to back into them and get 
kicked. 

Safe Places, as I mentioned before, are areas where the animals are not bothered once they 
are confined. These areas work great if you need to secure animals in case of an 
emergency or if an animal requires observation or treatment. Two things are very 


k 


4 0 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Safe Spots. Safe Places, and Behavioral Co nsistent Routines. Coiuinued 

important if the Safe Place is to work properly. It must be prepared in advance and it must 
be a shift pen or stall. A separate stall for a Safe Place allows you to continue working in 
and around the barn without disturbing the animals. Once bad weather passes just open the 
Safe Place door and let the animals run out of the barn into the yard. I like to have all of my 
animals accustomed to using the Safe Place long before bad weather or an emergency hits. 
It saves time, reduces stress and the chance of an injury. 

Here are some examples of how I use the Safe Place on 1.2 Speke’s gazelles. If severe 
weather (tornados or winter storms) are predicted I use my Go Into The Bam Behavior (see 
Behavior Consistent Routine explanation) and they know immediately that I want them to 
run into the barn and into their Safe Place. I communicate this to them by carefully 
entering the outside enclosure and walking to a wall or fence farthest from the barn 
entrance. Stretching my arms, I slowly walked toward the bam saying, “(jro into the barn”. 
At first they may mn past me so I am careful to walk down the center of the display and not 
chase them. I just start over and remain calm. Once they enter the barn, I slowly follow 
them in, being sure they won’t try to rush by me again. I stop in the doorway and give them 
time and space to go into the Safe Place, then walk slowly up to the door and carefully close 
it. 

I use Safe Places with expectant mothers as well. It is especially useful if I feel the female 
will have a delivery problem. The Safe Place method keeps the mother in better condition 
and it means less time away from the herd. I let her become accustomed to the Safe Place a 
couple of weeks before the due date so she won’t hesitate to go in. Each night I cut her out of 
the herd and put her in the Safe Place. Each morning I check her to see if she has calved. If 
not, out she goes with the herd. If a birth occurs I leave her in the Safe Place for observation. 
Containing her in the Safe Place allows me to observe mother and baby for bonding, 
parental, and nursing behaviors. If the baby is healthy we capture it for weighing, navel 
treatment and injection of Vitamin E and selenium. Then mother and baby are allowed to 
go back with the herd. (Many times a prolonged absence from the herd creates 
reintroduction problems.) If there are delivery or postpartum problems, the animal is 
already isolated. 

I remember a good example of how valuable a Safe Place can be when I knew an eight-year- 
old Slender-horned gazelle was due to calf in a few days. She had never produced offspring 
before, so I expected some difficulties at birth. I had already acclimated her to the Safe 
Place so she could use it at any time. One afternoon she started going into labor. I notified 
the Zoo veterinarian so she could stand by. After several hours of labor there was no 
dilation and contractions were becoming weaker. I cut her from the herd and ran her into 
the Safe Place. The veterinarian came to the barn and I was instructed to catch her for an 
examination. It was determined that she couldn’t deliver her calf normally. We delivered 
the calf by cesarean section. It was a normal healthy male. 

The method works very well for our Speke’s gazelles too. The expectant females were 
formerly locked in the barn many weeks before birth. They lost condition and became 
depressed. This, at least in part, resulted in low birth weight. The Safe Place method lets 
them go out with the herd daily, and when births do occur, it keeps the mother and baby 
away from the herd for only one or two days. 

We all would like to maintain a positive keeper/animal relationship. However, cleaning 
enclosures can sometimes compromise this relationship. Many animals fear water 
squirting from a hose or they are apprehensive when keepers enter their enclosures. Surely 
they think “what is going to happen -capture, restraint, cleaning, observation?” Until they 
are sure what we are up to, they are wary and nervous. Therefore a great part of my routine 
includes communicating my intentions to my animals. I call this communication 
Behavior Consistent Routine. The Behavior Consistent Routine communicates to the 
animals exactly why I am there, what I am going to do, and what I expect them to do. For 
example, I develop a routine which has specific and repeatable behavior for enclosure 
cleaning, putting the animals into the barn or observation (i.e.. Enclosure Cleaning 
Behavior, Go Into The Barn Behavior and Observe the Animal Behavior). Once the 
animals learn these behaviors they remain calm and act more normally. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


41 


Safe Soots. Safe Places, aad Behavioral Consistent Routines. Continued I 

I believe many animals are keen observers of behavior. Otherwise they wouldn’t last long. 
This is especially true of the prey species. I am sure you all have seen wildlife films of 
gazelles watching lions or hyenas. They can easily tell whether the lion or the hyena is | 
exhibiting hunting behavior or not. Other species have sentinels that keep watch for 
predators while others search for food. The point I am trying to make is that zoo animals ' 
observe and react to what we do. So why not make it easier on them by communicating our 
intentions and communicating what it is we want of them? I am sure you will be surprised j 
at the changes you may see in your animals. I call them “Breakthroughs”, but that’s 
another story. 

AAZK Publications Available 


AAZK Diet Notebook. Mammals. Vol. 1 - contains approximately 325 diets 
representing 213 species and subspecies from fourteen participating institutions. The 
diets are arranged by taxonomic order using ISIS numbers in a durable and attractive 
three-ringbinder.Each Diet Response Form included in Volume 1 contains the following 
information; common name, scientific name, ISIS number, the contributing individual, 
their institution and its address, how long the diet has been used, whether the animals 
have bred while on the diet, the diet ingredients, instructions for preparation, notes and 
remarks, special considerations and nutritional analysis (if available). Cost is as follows: 
1 ) AAZKMembers $40.00; 2) Non-members $55.00; 3) Institutions $70.00. These prices 
represent prepaid order prices and include postage for the U.S. and Canada. Those 
placing orders from overseas should contact AAZK Administrative Offices for additional 
postage charges. Please allow 4-6 weeks for delivery. Make checks payable to “AAZK 


Diet Notebook” (U.S. FUNDS ONLY). 


Zoonotic Diseases. 2nd Edition ^this 40-page reference work details the most || 

common zoonotic diseases, offers guidelines for preventive control and covers personal j- 

hygiene and disinfection procedures. Information on each disease is presented in a text || 

format which includes Fthiologic Agent, Means of Transmission to Man, Global Dis- 
tribution, Alternate or Intermediate Hosts, Human Incubation and Human Symptoms. 

Editor of this volume is Bruce Clark of the Toledo Zoo. Prices are: 1) Professional I 

Members $5.00; 2) Other AAZK Membership Categories $6.50; 3) Non-members $8.50. 

These prices include shipping and handling within North America. Orders outside of the 
U.S. and Canada should add $3.00 for foreign postage by Air Mail. Make checks payable 
to “AAZK” in U.S. FUNDS ONLY. Please allow 3-4 weeks for delivery. 


For either publication send complete mailing address and check or money 
order for correct amount to: AAZK, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S A. 
ALL ORDERS MUST BE PRE-PATD 



142 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Sample Hoofstock Bibliography 

Available bx)m AAZK Reference Search 


1. Oryx ( Oryx gazella ) - available in 1977-78 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 122 

American Association of Zoological Parks & Aquariums, Wheeling, WV. 

2. Sable Antelope (Hippotragus) - available in 1979 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 80; 

1984 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 353; 1985 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, 
p. 65. American Association of Zoological Parks & Aquariums, Wheeling, WV. 

3. Bongo (Tragelaphus) - available in 1981 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 345 

American Association of Zoological Parks & Aquariums, Wheeling, WV. 

4. Addax (Addax nasomaculatus ) - available in 1985 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 

462 , American Association of Zoological Parks & Aquariums, Wheeling, WV. 

5. Pronghorn {Antilocapra americana) - available in 1982 AAZPA Regional Proceedings. 

p. 35; 1985 AAZPA Regional Proceedings, p. 145.American Association of 
Zoological Parks &Aquariums, Wheeling, WV. 

6. Blackbuck {Antelope cervicapra) - available in Animal Keepers* Forum . 1990 p. 243 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 

7. Black Rhinoceros (Diceros bicornis) Nutrition - available in Animal Keeners’ Forum . 

1990 pp.401-406. American Association of Zoo Keepers’ Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., 
Topeka, KS 66606. 

8. Talking About Sichuan Takins (Budorcas taxicolor tihetana) at the San Diego Zoo, 

available in the Proceedings of the 16th National Conference of the American 
Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. pp. 60-64, 

9. Giraffes and Okapis - a Bibliography. Compiled by Kay Kenyon, National Zoo. 1985. 

available from LSIG, Suzanne K. Braun, Librarian, Indianapolis Zoo Library, 
1200 W. Washington St., Indianapolis, IN 46222. 

10. Tapirs (Tapiridae): A Bibliography. Compiled by Kay Kenyon, National Zoo. 1988 

updated Jan. 1990. available from LSIG, Suzanne K. Braun, Librarian, 
Indianapolis Zoo Library, 1200 W. Washington St., Indianapolis, IN 46222. 

11. Bibliography of the Rhinoceros. Compiled by L.C. Rookmaaker. A book-length 

analysis of the literature on the recent rhinoceroses in culture, history & biology, 
available from A.A. Balkema c/o IPS, P.O. Box 230, Accord, MA 020018. For 
current price & shipping charges contact seller directly. 

12. Pygmy Hippo {Chooeropsis liberiensis) at the Greater Baton Rouge Zoo; Observations 

of a Birth and New Calf Protocol. Available in Animal Keeners’ Forum March 
1991, pp. 99-100. American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc, 635 Gage Blvd., 
Topeka, KS 66606. 

The AAZK Reference Search is a computerized database established to provide information 
on where to obtain sources of literature on specific topics of interest to zoo personneL This 
reference search provides you with as complete a search as possible, and we are continuing 
to add to the database on a ongoing basis. This service is provided by the American 
Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. as part of their Keeper Training and Education 
Committee, and is available to anyone in the zoo commimity for a nominal fee of 25 cents 
per page of print-out. The minimum charge is $2.00 and you will be billed once the order 
has been placed. Marilyn Cole, Metro Toronto Zoo, is the Reference Search project head. If 
you would like an order form to request a reference search, send a stamped, self-addressed 
envelope to: Reference Search Form, AAZK, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


143 


Chapter 

News 

Cpymty Z qq AAZK Cha pt er 

Newly elected officers are; 

President Craig Berg 

Vice Pres... ..Karin Newman 
Secretary. ....Sue Simon 

Treasurer Cyd Mayer 

Chapter Liaison. ....Wayne Hazlett 

-Wayne Hazlett, Chapter Liaison 


Birmingham Zoo Chapter AAZK 

Chapter officers for 1992 are: 

President Marcia Riedmiller 

Vice Pres Mark Bowen 

Secretary.. ...Donna Clark Bowen 

Treasurer Mike Waren 

Chapter Liaison.. ...Karen Leichter 

The Chapter is planning to participate in 
the “Bowling for Rhinos” fundraiser for 
our first Chapter project. We are 
currently working on a fundraiser 
selling T-shirts with “actual” animal 
foorprints on them. We would like to 
thank the management staff for making 
this project possible. 

Numerous goals for 1992 have been set 
and with the enthusiasm and dedication 
of our members we look forward to our 
first full year of being a chartered 
Chapter - a successful one. 

-Marcia Riedmiller, President 


Tucson Chapter AAZK 

Howdy AAZK. Our little Chapter is 
amazingly still alive. We recently 
elected new officers although they are the 
same as last year. A new addition though 
is our newest member as Vice President. 
Officers are: 

President Gale London 

Vice Pres.....Gilda Eneboe 

Secretary Bruce Eneboe 

Treasurer Dee Nelson 

Chapter Liaison. ....Rusty Agte 


This year was slow but for the well- 
received and awe-inspiring African- 
and-Latest-Zoo-Trip slide show by 
George Montgomery and Ed Hansen. 
Preparations are underway for the next 
“Bowling for Rhinos”. We are 
determined to put one on despite our 
small group. We continue to sponsor our 
foreign keeper, Babubhai in India. And 
finally, Dee Nelson continues her 
diligence in our recycling efforts, profits 
are use to buy books for the Reid Zoo 
Library. 

-Rusty Agte, Chapter Liaison 

Florida Sung oa gt Cha pter 

Last month we published a drawing of the 
Chapter’s newly adopted logo. Since then 
we have received some additional 
information about the logo, so we are 
printing this information along with the 
logo again this month. 



The Florida Suncoast Chapter conducted 
a contest among its members in the fall of 
1991 to design a logo. The winner was 
Linda Hobbs, an employee in the Visitor 
Services Dept, at the Lowry Park Zoo. 
The animals featured in the logo 
represent the two institutions that make 
up the Chapter - Lowry Park Zoo and 
Busch Gardens. The Manatee and 
Spoonbill are associated with Lowry Park 
while the Elephant and Greater kudu are 
associated with Busch Gardens. The logo 
was officially adopted in April of 1991. 

-Virginia Stamos, Secretary 


Indianapolis Zoo MZK Chapter 

Greetings from Indianapolis! Our 
chapter had a very successful fundraiser 
at our zoo’s Christmas celebration. We 
sold hot chocolate and cookies. The sale 


144 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 

of Rain Forest Crunch® has been going 
well for us also. With a portion of this 
money we purchased one acre of 
rainforest as a Christmas gift to our zoo. 
Recently we began the sale of “Please 
don’t feed the zoo animals” buttons which 
is off to a great start as well. 

Just like many other chapters we are busy 
preparing for the 1992 “Bowling for 
Rhinos”. Our Chapter President Patty 
Pearthree is especially busy since she is 
the National Coordinator for this year’s 
event. Last year Patty was the top 
individual fundraiser for BFR, raising 
$4,817.00 and won a trip to Kenya to see 
Ngare Sergoi and Lewa Downs. She took 
this trip during February and you can 
read her recollections of the trip under the 
“Bowling for Rhinos” Update elsewhere 
in this month’s AKF . 

The Indianapolis Zoo AAZK Chapter has 
also adopted a new logo in 1992. It was 
designed by Chapter member Mark Booth 
and is shown below: 

New officers for 1992 are: 

President Patty Pearthree 

Vice Pres David Hagan 

Secretary Cara Lance 

Treasurer Julie Routt 

Chapter Liaison Marie McManus 

-Marie McManus, Chapter Liaison 

San PiegQ AAZK Chapter 

In February the Chapter was honored to 
have Red Thomas, Senior Animal 
Trainer at the San Diego Zoo, speak on 
“The Early Years of AAZK”. As one of 
the founding fathers. Red discussed 
AAZK’s beginning in 1967; and most 
importantly, AAZK’s purpose. A 30-year 
veteran of the San Diego Zoo, Red is the 
only AAZK founding member still in the 
zoo field. 

Red stressed how AAZK has done away 
with trade secrets. Keepers are 
collectively a solid unit. In Red’s words, 
“Keep pushing forward, keep promoting 
professionalism. Sharing of 

information - that’s what zookeeping is 
all about.” 

In addition to the officers announced in 
the February Chapter News, the 
following individuals serve on the Board 


of Directors of the San Diego Zoo AAZK 
Chapter: 

Steve Coate, Mammals (WAP), Chris 
Hamlin, Mammals (ZOO), Neil Ferrier, 
Lifetime Chapter member, and Cindy 
Woodward, Mammals (Zoo). 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 


Columbus Chapter AAZK 

The Columbus AAZK Chapter is 
sponsoring an AAZK membership for an 
organization named ARCAS, a non- 
governmental agency in Guatemala. 
This stands for Association for the 
Rescue and Conservation of Wildlife. 
ARCAS works with native wildlife that 
have been injured and/or confiscated 
with the ultimate goal being 
rehabilitation and re-release in the wild. 

The Columbus Zoo staff and volunteers, 
through Project Cope, have also donated 
educational materials, veterinary 
supplies, a vehicle and many hours of 
service to assist ARCAS. Project Cope 
also supports the work of ICR (Integrated 
Conservation Research) headed by Dr. 
Illar Muul in Malaysia. ICR 

emphasizes positive strategies based on 
ecologically sound, sustainable 
economic development that provide 
income for local people while preserving 
the tropical rainforests. 

If you would like more information about 
Project Cope, you may contact Beth 
Armstrong or Rebecca Rose at the 
Columbus Zoo, P.O. Box 1256, Powell, OH 
43065-1256. 

-Lori Monska-Wright, President 

Correction: in last month Chapter News 
we misspelled the name of Annie 
Nielsen, Treasurer of the Exotic Feline 
Breeding Compound AAZK Chapter in 
Rosamond, CA. Sorry, Annie! 

Oklahoma City Zoo AAZK Chanter 

New officers for 1992 are: 

President Janet Wiard 

Vice Pres Ken Wilkins 

Sec/Treas Robin Gilchrist 

Our Chapter raised $65 at our annual 
Christmas Craft and Bake Sale to go 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


145 


Chapter News. Continued 


Rocky Mountain Chapter 


towards the purchase of land for the Adopt 
An Acre® project. We also set up a booth 
on Conservation Day that showed 
endangered plants and animals and 
different ways to protect them. We 
finally have a Chapter logo. It was 
designed by John Buethner who works in 
the Graphics Dept at OKC Zoo. Officially 
adopted as our Chapter’s logo in the 
Spring of 1991, it features a gorilla that 
signifies our Great EscApe, scheduled to 
open in the Fall of 1993. (see insert) 


--Janet Wiard, President 



OKLAHOMA CITY 


Central Florida AAZK Chapter 

New officers for 1992 are: 

President Mike Cothran 

Vice Pres Debbie Zombek 

Treasurer Bonnie Breitbeil 

Chapter Liaison. ..Sandy Wieprzkowski 

The Chapter consists of members from 
Sea World of Florida, the Central Florida 
Zoo, Alligatorland Safari Zoo and 
Discovery Island. They meet the first 
Monday of each month at Sea World. 

-Sandy Wieprzkowski, Chapter Liaison 


We continue to donate literature to the 
National Zoo Chapter for thier “Keepers 
Helping Keepers Across the World” 
outreach program. 

Our Conservation Parking Meter has 
raised over $1000.00 since December. 

Due to the slow season and minor 
breakdowns, we are looking forward to 
earning more this spring. The public 
reaction to the meter has been very 
positive. 

We are planning a fundraiser to benefit 
Administrative Offices due to our 
concern for the financial status of the 
parent organization. 

On 1 March we had our 3rd annual 
“Bowling for Rhinos” event. Fifty-six 
bowlers participated this year. We raised 
over $4,000.00 and the money is still 
coming in. We had new T-shirts made 
which are available for $12.00 (including 
postage). The shirts are turquoise, 100% 
cotton, and available in M, L and X-Lg. 

We still have a few grey 50/50 Large 
shirts from last year available for $10.00. 
Posters are also available for $4.50. Call , 
(303) 3312-4120, FAX (303) 331-4125 or ' 
write us at 2900 E. 23rd Ave., Denver, CO 
80205. Please address Karen Steen or 
Suzanne Chacon for assistance. Include 
the date of your BFR event to insure 
proper timing. 

-Suzanne Chacon, President 


ATTENTION CHAPTERS 

If you have questions or need 
information, please contact 
AAZK Administrative Offices in 
Topeka, KS. Our toll-free 
numbers are listed below: 

1-800-242-4519 (U.S. Only) 

1-800-468-1966 (Canada) 

Our office hours are generally 
between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. CST 
weekdays. 


146 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


L.I.N.K. 

(liaison and Information Network for Keepers) 


Coordinator for the LINK System: Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon 
Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3P OR5. (204) 837-2916 (h). 

Regional Coordinators 


ALABAMA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
ALASKA - Vacancy 

ARIZONA ■ Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 85716 
ARKANSAS - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher, Little Rock Zoological Gardens, 

#1 Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205 
CALIFORNIA- Vacancy 

COLORADO - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
CONNECTICUT- Jeanette Nadeau, Roger Williams Park Zoo, Providence, RI 02905 
DELEWARE - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
FLORIDA - Rick Smith, 11707, #5 Park, Orchard Circle, Tampa, FL 33612 
GEORGIA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
HAWAII - Michelle Suenishi, Hilton Hawaiian Village, 2950 Ena Rd., Honolulu, HI 96815 
IDAHO -Vacancy 

ILLINOIS - Pat Swieca, 5710 W. Cullom Ave., Chicago, IL 60634 

INDIANA - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 

IOWA - Carla Wieser, Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo, 10th St. & Deer Park Blvd., Omaha, NE 68107 

KANSAS - Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

KENTUCKY - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 

LOUISIANA - Michelle Asselin, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 70115 
MAINE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MARYLAND - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
MASSACHUSETTS - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MICHIGAN - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 
MINNESOTA - Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens, 13000 Zoo Blvd., Apple Valley, MN 55124 
MISSISSIPPI - Jeannie Frazier, Jackson Zoological Park, 2918 W. Capitol, Jackson, MS 39209 
MISSOURI - Vacancy 
MONTANA - Vacancy 

NEBRASKA -Carla Wieser (see address under Iowa) 

NEVADA - Vacancy 

NEW HAMPSHIRE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

NEW JERSEY - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
NEW MEXICO - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 857716 
EAST NEW YORK - Mark Hofling, Bronx Zoo, 185th & Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460 (212) 220-7115 [w] 
WEST NEW YORK - Alan Baker, Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Dr., Syracuse, NY 13204 
NORTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
NORTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada R3P 0R5 (204) 986-4040 [w] 

OHIO - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 
OKLAHOMA - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher (see addresses under AR) 

OREGON - Anna Michel, Washington Park Zoo, 4001 SW Canyon Rd., Portland, OR 97221 
PENNSYLVANIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
RHODE ISLAND - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

SOUTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
SOUTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

TENNESSEE - Gail Karr or Cindy Pinger, Memphis Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 
TEXAS - Ann Marie Greco, San Antonio Zoo, 3903 N, St. Mary's St., San Antonio, TX 78212 
UTAH - John Turner, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 800205 
VERMONT - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WASHINGTON - Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N, Seattle, WA 98103 
WEST VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WISCONSIN -Wayne Hazlett, 3768 S. 89th St., Milwaukee, WI 53228 
WYOMING - Vacancy 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - Theresa Maas (see address under PA) 

Province of Ontario - Neil Porter, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario MlE 4R5 Canada 
Provinces of Manitoba & Saskatchewan - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

Province of Quebec - Chantal Routhier, Granby Zoo, 347 Rue Bourget, Granby, Quebec, Canada J2G IE 8 
Provinces of Alberta & British Columbia - Grant Tkachuk, 10139 157th St., #206, Edmonton, Alberta T5P 2T9 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


147 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks I AKK, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 


ZOOKEEPER . ..high school diploma required; related college degree, aviary and/or 
reptile experience preferred. Starting salary $5. 00/hr. for 6 months trial period, then 
$6. 00/hr. Responsibilities include daily care of mixed collection, record keeping, exhibit 
and grounds maintenance, and public interaction. Applications accepted until position 
filled. Send resume to: Pueblo Zoo Curator, 3455 Nuckolls Ave., Pueblo, CO 81005. 

ANIMAL KEEPER ...the opening of a new RainForest Exhibit in the fall of 1992 will create 
approximately eight new animal keeper positions at Cleveland Metroparks Zoo. Because of 
internal transfers, the new positions may be in any area of the Zoo. We anticipate we will 
begin hiring in spring 1992. Salary range: $10.69 - $12.19 per hour with excellent benefits. 
If you are interested, please submit a resume to: Cleveland Metroparks Personnel Dept., 
4101 Fulton Parkway, Cleveland,OH 44144. Deadline is 24 April 1992. 

HEAD KEEPER ANIMAL ENCOUNTERS BIOME ... the Indianapolis Zoo is seeking a 
motivated and team-oriented supervisor for their domestic animal area. Requires 2 years’ 
paid keeper experience, highly developed interpersonal skills and a degree in biology- 
related field. Will be working with a variety of domestics, parrots and raptors. Salary 
$21,000 plus benefits. Send resume by 25 April 1992 to: Richard Hurst, Director of Human 
Resources, Indianapolis Zoo, 1200 W. Washington St., Indianapolis, IN 46222. 

KEEPER . ..a unique opportunity exists at the Wild Animal Park to be involved on the 
ground-floor of a new system for managing elephants. The San Diego Zoo and Wild 
Animal Park collectively manage one of the largest elephant herds in North America. We 
are currently undergoing transition in the management of our elephants moving away 
from the traditional free-contact system towards protective contact. We are looking for 
innovative individuals with a background in operant training with either marine or 
terrestrial animals. Elephant experience is preferred but not necessary. Hourly rate 
$11.21. Benefit package included. Send resume to: Human Resources, San Diego Wild 
Animal Park, 15500 San Pasqual Valley Road, Escondico, CA 92027-9614. (619) 738-5045. 
Filing deadline is 1 May 1992 at 4 pan. 

REPTILE fCFEPE/g . .requires high school diploma/equivalent and two years’ 
demonstrated experience with reptiles. Must succssfully complete venomous snake- 
handling program within one year of employment. Salary low $20’s, plus benefits. Send 
resume to: Human Resources, Philadelphia Zoo, 3400 W. Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
1 91 04-1 1 94. Closing date 20 April 1992. EOE. 

KEEPER BIRD DEPT*. . ..accepting applications to fill future vacancies. Requires two 
years’ college training and one year’s experience with the care of birds. Experience with 
softbills prefered. Salary $17,399.00. Send resume to: Jon Seitz, Curator of Birds, Sedgwick 
County Zoo, 5555 Zoo Blvd., Wichita, KS 67212. 



148 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 4 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 

City State/Province iSp 


Telephone Giome) (worii) 


U.S. Members 

I I $30.00 Professional/U.S. 

Full-time Keepers 

□ $25.00 AffiliateAJ.S. 

Other staff & volunteers 

LZ] $25.00 Associate/U.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 

□ $50.00 or up Contributing/U.S. 

Individuals 

I I $50.00 or up Institutional/U.S. 

Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


International Members 

I I $40.00 International 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


Can a ^ an Mgml ^g rs 

I I $35.00 Professional/Canada 

Full-time Keepers 

CH $30.00 AfifiUate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 

I I $55.00 or up Contributing/Canada 

Individuals 

□ $55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 

Organizations I Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


Library Only 

□ $20.00 Library 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 

Zoo Address 

Title 

Work Area 

Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S. A. 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.SA. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 



se: 



CM 

f-4 

'll 

i.n 

"D 

r-J- 

3" 


i.j. 

i-.i. 


O 

3 

r" 

(~t. 



5' 

,••+• 

cr 

— ■ 

O 

•Ti 


3 

CM 



Ti 

r-..i 


•< 

O 



O 




r;t 


O 

u3 


t..4. 



ri 

1.. ■! 


CM_^ 



.‘•^1 

ai‘ 

I'XI 




JIttIXTjrT 



Dedicated to Professional Animal Care 


ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM . 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

Editor-In-Chief: Susan Chan 
Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 

Animal Keepers' Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual publication costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster: 

Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BQARP OF D IRE CTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 President 

Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 Vice President 

Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 
Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 921 12 
Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Immediate Past President 

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROTECT HEAPS 

Awards Co m m i ttge 
Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 
Mok Review Coordinators 
Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 
Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 
Staff Exchapge 
Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 
AAZK History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
■toper. .Accommodations List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 
An Approach to Zookeeping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 
Zoo Infant Pcvelopmc n t Pro ject 

Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 
Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings’ Island 
Membership Directory 
Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ 
Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, Roger Williams Zoo / Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs j 
International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (wcst)j 

Conservation. Preservation. Restoration (CPR) Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo j 
Bowling for Rhinos ‘92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo j 

Ecosystem Survival Plan (ESP) National Coordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo i 

Keeper Training Videotape ! 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada | 

Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka j 

Liaison and Information Network for Keeners (LINK) 

Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

printed on recycled paper I 


Keeper Training & Education 

(includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Research/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 
Animal Data Transfer Form 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 
AAZK L iaiso n to AAZ PA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter { 

Diet Notebook ' 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. ! 
By-Laws Review 1 

VACANCY ' 

Zoo/U n iversit y . L ist 

Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 

Keeper Correspondent ; 

VACANCY j 

Publications Funding Committee ! 

Joe Rindler, Columbus Zoo ^ 


May 1992 
Volume Nineteen 
Number Five 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors ....149 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt... 

New Members Announced 151 

Coming Events 

From the President/Mid Year Board Meeting ............153 

Births & Hatchings .....154 - 155 

Meritorious Achievement Award Nominees Sought 156 - 157 

Info Sought on Proposal to Reclassify Some African Elephants 157 

Zoo Infant Development Project Update 158 

Biological Values for Selected Mammals, Third Edition Order Form 160 

Enrichment Options (cats, bears, pinnipeds, tapirs, snakes, spider monkey).............. 161 - 162 

Letters to the Eklitor 1^^ 

Looking Back (BS., MS. and Ph. D.) 163 - 164 

Information Please..... 165 

Conference ’92— Call for Posters/ Airline Discounts 166 

Gorilla Workshop Wristwatch Ad.............. 167 

Endangered Species Act 1992 168- 169 

Chapter News 169- 171 

Down Under Support for Silvery Gibbon 172 

Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management & Research Tool 173 - 181 

Book Reviews (Neotropical Rainforest Mammals: A Field Guide/In the Rainforest).... 182-183 
Opportunity Knocks....... 184 


Infonnation for Contributors 

Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 


Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for AKF . No commitment is made to the author, but 
an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 


DEADLI NE FOR EACH EPmQM IS..THE 15XH. 

OF THE PRECEDING MONTH 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers' Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 149 


This month’s cover features a mother Trumpeter Swan (Cygnus buccinator) and her 
young. Incubation of the eggs is from 33 to 37 days and is normally carried out by the 
female of the pair. The male closely watches the nest when the female leaves and defends 
the pair’s nesting territory. The cygnets feed on a diet that is high in invertebrates and 
fledge at between 100 and 120 days of age. The artwork was done by Cherie Langlois, a 
Keeper at Northwest Trek Wildlife Park in Eatonville, WA. Thanks, Cherie! 



Scoops 


Scuttlebutt 


From the Editor 

My family and I would like to express our appreciation for the many cards and letters of 
sympathy received following the death of my daughter, Rachael. I wish to especially 
express my gratitude to Associate Editors Gretchen Ziegler and Kayla Grams along with 
Jim, Pat and Cindy of TK Printing, Inc. for getting the April issue of AKF out to the 
membership on time. Special thanks also to Barbara Manspeaker for not only keeping the 
office running in my absence, but for being such a good and loyal friend during this most 
difficult time. --Susan Chan 


From the Nominations and Elections Committee 

It is time again to begin thinking about Board of Directors election. Members of the 
Nominations and Elections Committee are; Mike Light, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings 
Island, OH; Kim Miller, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, Cleveland, OH; and Cherie 
Langlois, Northwest Trek Wildlife Park, Eatonville, WA. 

The Committee is responsible for reviewing and suggesting revisions to the AAZK By- 
laws pertaining to elections, revising and improving the election process, and soliciting 
nominations for upcoming elections. A lot of work has gone into improving our election 
process and the committee is open to suggestions from the membership and encourages 
your input. Please send all suggestions as soon as possible. 

Nomination forms for the 1993 Board of Directors election will appear in the June issue of 
AKF . The nomination forms will contain a summary of the duties and qualifications for 
the Board of Directors and the nomination procedures. There will be two positions up for 
election in 1993, those held by Ed Hansen and Janet McCoy. The term of office will be 1 
January 1994 through 31 December 1997. 

This is an excellent opportunity for you to become more involved in AAZK and help to 
make a difference. If you would like more information or have any questions, please 
contact: Mike Light, NEC Chairman, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings Island, OH 45034 or 
call (513) 398-5600 ext. 346 [work] or (513) 489-4016 [home]. 


Thanks Go to Rocky Mountain Chapter 

The AAZK Board of Directors and the AO staff wish to thank the Rocky Mountain Chapter 
(Denver Zoo, Denver, CO) for their generous donation of $200 to the operating budget of the 
Association. Their willingness to support their parent organization is much appreciated. 
Such assistance from Chapters is helping AAZK to begin to overcome its financial 
difficulties. 


/ 


150 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Sc!CX)PS & Scuttlebutt . Continued 

History Book Project Receives Further Donations 

The AAZK Board of Directors and History Committee Chair Rachel Rogers wish to extend 
their thanks to the following individuals and Chapters who have donated funding towards 
the publication of the 25th Anniversary History Book: Lee J. Miller, National Zoological 
Park, Washington, DC; Bruce and Phyl Wojcik, Grandville, MI; The Virginia Chapter 
AAZK (Virginia ZooWirginia Living Museum) , Norfolk, VA; the Central Florida 
Chapter AAZK (Sea World, Cypress Gardens, Discovery Island, Central Florida Zoo, 
Alligatorland Zoo) Florida; Metro Toronto Zoo AAZK Chapter, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
the Chinook Chapter AAZK, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; the Florida Suncoast Chapter 
(Lowry Park/Busch Gardens) Tampa, FL; and Assiniboine Park Zoo Keepers Association, 
Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada. 

Fmal Call for Chapter Logos for History Book 

This is the final call for submission of Chapter logos to appear in the 25th Anniversary 
History Book. As of this writing we do not have logos from the following Chapters: Bergen 
County, Binghamton, Central Florida, Birmingham, Memphis, Louisville, Fort Wayne, 
Mesker Park, Kansas City, Sedgwick County, Platte River, Tulsa, Dallas, Houston, San 
Antonio and Puget Sound. If you have a Chapter logo and want it included in the book, 
please send ASAP to Susan Chan at AO in Topeka. Please include who designed the logo, 
when it was adopted and if there is any particular significance to the design, animal 
depicted etc. We would really like to be able to include every Chapter’s logo, so if you have 
one and have not submitted it, please do so soon! 


AAZK Aimounces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Dennis Markham, Aqua Circus of Cape Cod (MA) 
David Brigham, Buffalo Zoo (NY) 

Shonda Jones, Catoctin Mt. Zool. Prk. (MD) 

Elna Brofifman, National Zoo (DC) 

Joan McMurray, Bittersweet Wildlife Haven (NC) 
Scott Daniels, Santa Fe CC Teaching Zoo (FL) 
Walter DuPree, Miami Metro Zoo (FL) 

Patricia Currie, Columbus Zoo (OH) 

Irv Kempf, Indianapolis Zoo (IN) 

Jennifer Webb, Detroit Zoo (MI) 

Carolyn Swanson, Rimrock Ranch Wildlife (WI) 
Mimi Briney, Lincoln Park Zoo (IL) 

John A. Hensch, Henry Doorly Zoo (NE) 

Barbara Howard, Dallas Zoo (TX) 

Bruce Sorenson, El Paso Zoo (TX) 

Mike Maxcy, Los Angeles Zoo (CA) 

Jennine Antrim, San Diego Zoo (CA) 

Colleen McConechy, Kamloops Wildlife Prk.(BC) 


Scott Race, Utica Zoo (NY) 

Steve Cepregi, Philadelphia Zoo (PA) 

Cynthia Dalton, National Zoo (DC) 

Sandra Peck, Jacksonville Zoo (FL) 

Sabra Schwartz, Sea World of Florida 
Sherri Hohenbrink, SFCC Teaching Zoo (FL) 
Jo Ann Jennier, Busch Gardens (FL) 

Deborah Loebker, Cincinnati Zoo (OH) 

Cara R. Lance, Indianapolis Zoo (IN) 
Rebecca Loehe, Milwaukee Co. Zoo (WI) 

Anne Oiler, Brookfield Zoo (IL) 

Mara Gonzalez, Sedgwick Co. Zoo (KS) 

Brian Aden, Folsom Children’s Zoo (NE) 
Rebecca Davy, Dallas Zoo (TX) 

John Heston, Playboy Mansion Zoo (CA) 
Karen Reininga, Six Flags Magic Mtn. (CA) 
Ben Van Buskirk, San Diego Zoo (CA) 

Dawn Roberts, Calgary Zoo (ALBT) 


New Contributing Members 

Stacey Johnson, General Curator, Zoo World, Panama City Beach, FL 


Renewing Contributing Members 


Dr. William C. Sadler, Purina Mills, Inc., St. Louis, MO 
Lloyd W. Woodburn, Topeka, KS 
Wayne G. Honman, General Curator, The Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, 
California Living Museum, Bakersfield, CA 


AZ 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


151 


Coming Events 


American Federation of Aviailtttre 

18th Animal Convention 


August 2-6, 1992 Miami, FL 

Headquartered at the Fountainbleu Hotel, this conference will feature five full days of 
seminars and workshops with talks by a host of international speakers in the aviculture 
field. Presentations will cover such topics as conservation, husbandry, breeding, and 
genetics. The new “Veterinary Aspects Day” will cover proper use of disinfectants, avian 
first aid, nutrition, virology and anatomy. For more information contact: AFA, P.O. Box 
56218, Phoenix, AZ 85079-6218 Phone: (602) 484-0931. 


3rd Intemational Symposium on the 

Use of Qzcnc in Aquatic Systems 


Sept. 8-11, 1992 Greenwich, CT 

Will focus on the holding, rearing and maintenance of marine and freshwater animals or 
plants in life support systems utilizing ozone. Sponsored by the International Ozone 
Association, the New York Aquarium and Osborn Laboratories of Marine Sciences. For 
additional information and to register please contact: International Ozone Association, 83 
Oakwood Ave., Norwalk, CT 06850 Phone (203) 847-8169. 


■Ccnsc i rati ch Gchc ti c s ang EvQ l u tiQn a i y Eg ftlpg y, 

A case study of the Cichlid Faiina of Lake Victoria 

October 30-November 3, 1992 Columbus, OH 

For more information contact: Doug Warmolts, Curator, Johnson Aquatic Complex, 
Columbus Zoo, 9990 Riverside Dr., Box 400, Powell, OH 43065-0400 (6114) 645-3446 (phone); 
(614) 645-3465 (FAX). 

IntcmatiQnal Marine Animal Trainer? AsgQgiatipn 

20th Annual Conference 


November 1-6, 1992 Freeport, The Bahamas 

Has issued a FIRST CALL FOR PAPERS. There are three categories for presentations: 
Formal presentation. Poster presentation, or Discussion groups. Abstracts need to be 
submitted for the first two categories by 15 August 1992. For a packet containing further 
registration information, including travel, car rental, hotel, etc. please contact: Vic 
Charfauros, Vice Pres/IMATA, c/o San Diego Zoo, P.O. Box 551, San Diego, CA 92112 USA. 


Joint Meeting of the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians 

and the American Association of Wildlife Veteriaariam 

November 15-19, 1992 Oakland, CA 

For more information contact: Janis Joslin, DVM (AAZV), Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 
Phinney Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98103 (Phone 206-684-4873), or David Jessup, DVM (AAWV), 
International Wildlife Veterinary Service, Inc., P.O. Box 1413, Orangeville, CA 95622 
(Phone 916-355-0124). 


152 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


From the President 


The Board of Directors have concluded our annual mid-year meeting regarding the state of 
the Association. The minutes of the meeting, along with a full report to Chapters will be 
included in my third quarter report. Non-Chapter members wishing to review the minutes 
of the meeting may contact the Administrative Office of the Association for a copy of the 
report after 1 June. 

I am pleased to report that with many generous Chapter donations and through Chapter 
Recharter fees, the Association continues to rebound financially. However, we have yet to 
reach the comfort zone. Please continue to support the Association on a Chapter level. The 
Administrative Office has identified the need for a FAX machine to better serve the 
Association. I am asking a Chapter or Chapters to underwrite the purchase of a reasonably 
priced machine and possibly a service contract to go with it. If your Chapter would like to 
pursue this, I urge you to contact AO directly. 

After much discussion, and with the addition of Chapter input and suggestions, the Position 
Statements reflecting the viewpoints of our Association have been ratified by the Board of 
Directors/AAZK. These statements are available to anyone upon request from AO (please 
send a SASE). I have tried to discuss each Chapter’s input on the viewpoints directly with 
them, explaining the philosophy of this AAZK Board. I am always open to further 
discussion as the viewpoints should not be carved in stone, and they should continue to 
evolve with our Association. 

Finally, the nomination window for many awards that our Association offers to the 
membership is now open. Please review the criteria for these awards and if you feel a 
fellow keeper should be recognized for their efforts, please contact the Awards Committee 
Chair for the appropriate nomination forms. Also please do not forget the category 
regarding exhibit renovations. This is the opportunity for your zoo to receive national 
recognition for a particular exhibit renovation in which your Chapter participated. 
(Nomination procedures for the Certificate of Excellence in Exhibit Renovation [CEER], the 
Jean C. Hromadka Excellence in Zookeeping [EZ] Award, the Certificate of Merit for 
Zookeeper Education [CMZR] and the Meritorious Achievement Award [MA] may be found 
in the Feb., March, April and May 1992 AKF issues respectively.) 



Reid Park Zoo 
Tucson, AZ 



Aiieniion Sbufferbugs ! 


If any of you out there have good, clear photos of events, people, etc. dealing with any 
aspect of AAZK’s history, we would love to have copies. We plan on trying to use a 
number of photos inthe 25th Anniversary Book and our “official” photo file is a bit 
slim to say the least. 

We would appreciate receiving photos of conference events including paper sessions, 
auctions, banquets, zoolympics, etc.; photos of Chapter projects and/or programs, etc. 

If you send in any photos, please include as much information as possible - year taken, 
location, people shown etc. We need photos no later than 1 July 1992. 

Send all photos to: AAZK History Pix, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. THANKS ! 

< ^ 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, VoL 19, No. 5 1992 


153 


Births & Hatchings 



Buffalo Zoological Gardens. Buffalo. NY ... the Western New York Chapter of AAZK 

announces the following B&H for 1991 at their facility: 

Mammals - 2.0.1 Spectacled bear {Tremarctos ornatus) (E) [first. successful birth 
from pair - triplets]; 3.2 Clouded leopard (Panthera nehulosa) (E/SSP) [first time birth from 
one pair]; 2.0 Western ]owland gori]]a {Gorilla g. gorilla) (E) [first time birth from one 
femaie]; 1.1 Lesser panda {Ailurus fulgens) [first successful birth from pair]; 0.5 Roan 
antelope {Hippotragus equinus cottini) (T); 2.1 Addax {Addax nasomaculatus) (E/SSP) 
[first time births for institution]; 1.0 Gaur (Bos gaurus) (E/SSP); 3.2.1 Cotton top tamarin 
{Saguinus oedipus) (E); 1.1.6 Chinchilla {Chinchilla laniger) (E); 8.3 Markhor {Capra 
falconeri cashmiriensis) (E). 

Birds - 0.0.1 White-naped crane {Grus vipio) (E/SSP) [first time hatch for pair and 
institution - DNS]; 0.0.3 Aleutian Canada goose {Branta canadensis leucopareia) (E); 1.0 
Cinereous vulture {Aegypius monachus) (T); 0.1 Andean condor {Vultur gryphus) 
(E/SSP); 1.1 Lady Ross’ Touraco {Musophaga rossi) (U); 1.1.2 White-crested touraco 
{Tauraco leucolophus) (U); 1.1 Scarlet macaw {Ara macao) (T) [first time hatch for pair 
and institution]; 0.0.1 Golden eagle /Aquila chrysaetos) (T) [release program]. Submitted 
by Sherry Doherty, Chapter Liaison. Any questions or comments may be sent to her at the 
Buffalo Zoo. 


CY Pr^?g Cqagt AAZK Chapter. P alm B ^ach. FL.. .announces the following B&H for 

Dreher Park Zoo: % 

Mammals - 0.0.2 Cotton-top tamarin {Saguinus oedipus) (E) [25th birth to female - 8 
sets of twins and 3 sets of triplets]; 0.0.1 Bennett’s wallaby {Macropus rufogriseus frutiua) 
[2nd birth for zoo]. 

Birds - 0.0.1 Diamond dove {Geopelia cuneata) [1st birth for zoo]. 

ReDti]e - 0.0.6 Cuban boa {Epicrates angulifer) and 0.0.3 Yellow-footed tortoise 
{Geochelone denticulata). submitted by Jay DAmico, Chapter Liaison. 


Lion Country Safari. West Palm Beach. FL ...announces the birth of a 50-pound male 
White rhinoceros {Ceratotherium simum) on 23 March 1992. Named Axel, the male is the 
offspring of Lyssa, also bom at LCS, and Buck. This was Lyssa’s first birth and represents 
the 15th birth of white rhinoceros at LCS. Mother and son are doing well and on exhibit with 
the rest of the rhino herd in the Wankie National Park section of the facility. News 
Release 

Los Angeles Zoo ... announces the following significant B&H for the facility: 

Mammals - 0.0.1 Verreaux sifaka {Propithiceres verreauxi verreauxi) born 18 
February to parents Caesar and Calpurnia [only pair in captivity outside of Madagascar]. 
(E/U). The pair came to L.A. from the Duke Primate Center. This is a first birth for L.A. 

Birds - 0.0.2 California condor {Gymnogyps californianus) (E). 

-submitted by Debbie Levy, Chapter Liaison, L.A. AAZK Chapter 


154 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Births & Hatchings. Continued 

Df^t.roit Zoological Park ...reports B&H from Sept. 1991 through March 1992: 


Mammals - 1.0 White-handed gibbon {Hylobates lar) (E/SSP); 0.0.1 Ring-tailed 
lemur {Lemur catta) (E); 0.0.1 Spectacled bear {Tremarctos ornatus) at Belle Isle Zoo 
(E/SSP). 

Birds - 0.0.1 Bali mynah (Leucopsar rothchildi) (E/SSP). 

Fish - Belle Isle Aquarium - 0.0.10 Dwarf freshwater stingrays {Potamotrygon 
magdalenae) and 0.0.2 Ocellated freshwater stingrays {Potamotrygon motoro). 

-submitted by Doris Applebaum and Beth Johnson, Chapter Secretary 
Detroit AAZK Chapter, Detroit, MI 

New B&H Format Announced ... one of the things the AKF editorial staff learned from the 
survey conducted last year was that many members did not like the way B&H was 
formatted- -they felt it took up too much space overall, and that it was difficult to extract 
basic data found in the narrative-type structure. Therefore, we have been trying a new 
format for B&H. Not all those submitting data have totally complied with the new format, 
but it gets more consistent each month. To recap - we have created four categories which we 
hope will streamline information. The categories are as follows: 

1. Endangered (E); Covered by SSP (E/SSP) 

2. Threatened (T) 

3. Uncommon in Captivity (U) 

4. Significant to institution 

a. (first time birth) b. (first time birth from pair) 

c. (diet change) d. (husbandry change) 

e. (exhibit change) f. (other) 

When submitting your list, please limit the animals you include to these categories only , 
and indicate which category each falls under. Each animal listed should include 
common name, scientific name and should then be followed by appropriate codes. 
Descriptions under the “significant to institution” category should be kept brief. We hope 
that those people who wish to expand further on the circumstances surrounding a 
significant birth or hatch will consider writing an article for AKF. Such articles need not 
be lengthy, but will allow for more details on significant B&H. We would also encourage 
the submission of black and white photographs to accompany either B&H submissions or 
separate articles. 

Finally, the deadline for submission of B&H material has been chang ed. AH material for 
B&H column must be submitted no later than the 10th of every month. We thank you in 
advance for your cooperation and we would like to hear your comments on how you like the 
new format. 

HysbiirjdlfY Hiimt 

We find that our Johnston’s Chemeleons {Chamaeleo damarana) can be very fussy eaters. 
They tire quickly of the standard store bought insects such as mealworms and crickets. 
This problem can be lessened by ordering a variety of invertebrates, but due to budget 
restraints, and availability, we don’t always have that much on hand. In the summer and 
fall, we supplement their diets with wild invertebrates which we collect outside. During 
winter we use a different solution due to the cold Massachusetts winter. Our seemingly 
endless supply of cockroaches which infect our building are put to good use. The 
chameleons gobble them up and, so far, we have not noticed any ill effects. Usually we 
remove four of the six legs before feeding to slow them down. This probably also kills the 
roach if it should escape the chameleon’s sticky tongue, submitted by Tom Aversa, 
Franklin Park Zoo, Boston, MA. 

Do you have a short husbandry hint that will help your fellow keepers do their jobs better or 
more efficiently? If so, please send them in to AKF . If we get a good enough response we 
may be able to start up a Husbandry Hints column similar to Enrichment Options. In the 
meantime, we will run these short items as space permits. We know everyone has their 
“special tricks of the trade” which make their job go more smoothly. Why not share now! 

Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 155 




AAZK Award Nominations Are Now Being Accepted for 1992! 


The AAZK Awards Committee would like to begin accepting nominations for the 
Meritorious Achievement (MA) Award to be presented at the 1992 AAZK Conference in 
San Diego. The deadline for all award nominations is 1 June 1992. All award 
nominations received after 1 June will be reviewed for 1993, so please keep this in mind 
when submitting your nominations. 

All awards given by the AAZK do not have a minimum or maximum number offered 
each year. Also, if the nominees do not meet the qualifications and nominators do not 
follow the nomination procedures, they will not receive the award for which they were 
nominated. Please include scientific names of animals when they are included in the 
nomination of a special or outstanding breeding acknowledgment. 

Please submit all nominations to: Janet McCoy, AAZK Awards Chair 

Washington Park Zoo 
4001 S.W. Canyon Rd. 

Portland, OR 97221 


MERITORIOUS ACHIEVEMENT (MA) AWARD 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. (AAZK) is the administering organization 
of the Meritorious Achievement (MA) Award presented by the AAZK Awards Committee. 
The purpose of the award is to recognize professional members of AAZK and AAZK 
Chapters, in good standing in the Association, for their extra work performed outside the 
keeper level of performance. This includes keeper participation in AAZPA Bean Award 
projects, dedicating time to other zoo related projects (conservation, wildlife education and 
individual breeding projects) and educating others in such programs as Scout Patch 
Programs. 

The character of the award includes; a certificate, letter of notification to the institution’s 
director and national recognition by professional journals. Such journals include: the 
American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums (AAZPA) and the Canadian 
Association of Zoological Parks and Aquarium (CAZPA) Newsletters, Animal Keepers' 
Forum (AAZK), Awards, Honors and Prizes: Volume 1; United States and Canada. The 
latter being published by Gale Research Company based in Wheaton, MD and found in 
medium to large sized libraries across the U.S. and Canada. 

The MA was established in 1982, by Mike Crocker, 1980-1985 CHAIR, as a means of 
recognizing work done outside of the scope of the Excellence in Zookeeping award. It is the 
only award presented by the awards committee that you have to be a member of the 
Association to receive. The award is presented at the annual AAZK National Conference. 

Qualifications: 

1 . The nominee must be a full-time keeper and professional AAZK member 
employed in any North American zoo, aquarium, or related facility, In the 
case of an AAZK Chapter, it must be 'in good standing' having an up-to-date 
charter with the AAZK. 

2. The nominee must have been employed at least one year on a permanent 
basis at a zoo, aquarium or related facility. In the case of an AAZK Chapter, 
it must have been active for at least one year, 

3. The nominee must be nominated by his/her peers or colleagues, while 
supporting nominations may be submitted by other zoo, aquarium or related 
facility personnel. The nominators need not be from the same institution. 


156 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


AAZK Award Nominations - Meritorions Achievement Continued 
Nomination Procedure: 

1. List name, position, institution's name, address, phone and Director, years 
of service in the field and the recommendation of a peer or colleague. 

2. List and document the outstanding achievements: AAZPA Bean Award 
project participation, exhibits, breeding, conservation, etc. 

3. The deadline for nominations is JUNE 1st of each year. 

Selection Procedure: 

The Awards Committee, consisting of five keepers, will independently review each 

nominee. 



Information Sought on Proposal to Reclassify 
Some African Elephant Populations 

The Department of the Interior’s U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has reopened the public 
comment period on a 1991 proposal to reclassify some populations of the African elephant 
from threatened to endangered. The deadline for the final decision has been extended until 

18 September 1992. 

USFWS Director John Turner said his agency is seeking more information on its March 
1991 proposal to reclassify the status of African elephants from threatened to endangered 
under the U.S. Endangered Species Act, except for populations in Botswana, South Africa 
and Zimbabwe. The Service’s proposal does not include these three countries because 
elephant populations there are managed under effective conservation programs and their 
numbers are stable or increasing. All African elephant populations are currently listed as 
threatened under the Act. 

The additional comment period allows the USFWS to consider new information, including 
a special report presented by a panel of international elephant experts during the recent 
CITES meeting in Kyoto, Japan. The status of the African elephant was a major topic of 
discussion during the conference, as delegates from the 113-member nations debated 
proposals to ease restrictions on commerce in elephant hides and meat while retaining the 
ban on ivory trade. The proposals, put forth by the southern African countries with healthy 
elephant populations, were eventually withdrawn. The African elephant remains a CITES 
Appendix I species, which eliminates all commercial trade. 

Important new, and sometimes conflicting, information on elephant biology and 
management was presented at the CITES conference. Experts from countries with elephant 
populations and non-governmental organizations offered differing opinions on threats 
facing elephants. This uncertainty led the USFWS to extend the deadline for a decision on 
the reclassification proposal. Under the proposal for endangered populations, permits 
would be available only for scientific purposes and/or to enhance the propagation or 
survival of the species. For threatened populations, permits would additionally be available 
for zoological exhibition, and for educational or certain other purposes consistent with the 
Endangered Species Act, including importation of sport-hunted trophies under carefully 
controlled conditions. The current ban on importation of African elephant ivory would 
continue. 

Comments on the proposed reclassification should be directed to the Office of Scientific 
Authority, USFWS, 4401 N, Fairfax Dr., Room 725, Arlington, VA 22203. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 1 57 


John Ball Zoo Grabs The Ball and Runs 
With It! like Columbus Zoo did a few 
months back, the John Ball Zookeepers 
turned in a stack of ZIDP data coUect- 

. _ ion forms hx)m a wide variety of specie. 

Keepers who participated are: Phyl 

NUson Wojcik, Joan Ryskamp, Dana 
LeBlanc, and Bruce Wojcik 

THANK YOU JOHN BALL ZOO ! 

And there were even more participants 
recently. Thanks also goes to: Kristine 
Manceaux, The Audubon Institute - 
Tina Mullett, Woodland Park Zoo - Dr. 
Michelle W. Frahm, Gladys Porter Zoo* - 
Joyce Ford, Little R^k Zoo - Jane 
Patricia Carney, Panaewa Rainforest 

Zoo - Jane Anne Ciccarelli, Louisville Zoo - Jo Roach, Woodland Park Zoo - 
Lance Aubery, San Diego Wild Animal Park - Carol Sharp, Hogle Zoo - Patty 
Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo - and Pam Talbot, Woodland Park Zoo Volimteer 
continues to collect data hx>m our keeper records and has done a fentastic job. 

THANKS to YOU ALL ! *Dr. Frahm sent weight data from their MEDARKS record system. 
This is a great way to participate, just copy off weight data by species and highlight any 
weights that were taken from parent-reared mammals, any species. MEDARKS already lists 
age and date at time weight was taken, scientific name and common name, etc. It’s really 
helpful information to the project and easy to do if your zoo has MEDARIffi. 






WHERE DO YOU GET YOUR INFORMATION ? 


ZIDP also is in need of articles on infant development and/ or group interaction, on all parent- 
reared mammal species. These will be kept on file at WPZ and a bibliography will be 
included in the final ZIDP notebook So if you have any articles that have been helpful to you, 
or were written by you, please send a copy to me (make sure it lists source, etc. on it). 

We have a few articles on the following families but we need more. We especially need 
informatiQn pn ^11 fgmily groups NQT li§t?<l b?lQW. 


Macropodidae 

Megachiroptera (sub O.) 

Lemuridae 

Lorisidae 

Cebidae 

Callithricidae 

Cercopithecidae 

Pongidae 

Myrmecophagidae 


Pedetidae 

Canidae 

Ursidae 

Procyonidae 

Mustelidae 

Felidae 

Rhinocerotidae 

Camelidae 

Cervidae 


Erethizontidae 

Hystricidae 

Chinchillidae 

Caviidae 

Giraffidae 

Antilocapridae 

Bovidae 


Please help any way you can ! Thanhs again. 


Harmony Frazier-Taylor, ZIDP Coordinator, Woodland Park Zoo, Seattle, WA 


- 4 ' 




15 8 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 



Quality exotic 
animal diets 


CdPTin *rDI THJI Nu**'***o*i**l*y balanced 
Ollulu 1 I%UJyi Fixed formulation • E 


Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEBRASKA BRAND 

S \ 



SPECTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 

Banana flavored psittacine/primate, 20% protein, dry 

Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Hoofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


One call does It all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69101-0721 


NowAvattable 

Biological Values for 
Selected Mammals 
Third Edition - 1992 

AAZK, Inc. is pleased to announce the availability of Biologfical Values for Selected 
Mammals. Third Edition . This important reference work is a project of the Greater San 
Francisco Bay Area Chapter of AAZK and was the result of thousands of hoirrs of volunteer 
time spent in collecting data, doing computer entry, editing, proofreading, etc. Project 
Coordinator and Editor was Toni Danzig of San Francisco. 

This Third Edition differs in a number of respects from the previous two editions. This 
1992 edition is published in an 8 1/2 by 11 inch format and is comb-bound. It contains 
information on 457 species of mammals and covers values ranging from geographic range 
and habitat to Circadian cycle, size/measurements, reproductive data, life expectancy, body 
temperature, rearing information and status in the wild to name a few. About half of the 
species listings also include habitat range maps. Every attempt has been made to use only 
the most widely accepted scientific resources for data gathering. The volume contains a 
complete bibliography of references utilized. 

Biological Values for Selected Mammals - Third Edition may now be ordered tlmough the 
AAZK Administrative Offices. Please fill in the form below and return with yom* check or 
money order (U.S.FUNDS ONLY) to: BV III, AAZK, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Make checks payable to “AAZK, Inc. ” 

WW Him ©irdloT IFcDiPim 



Please send copy(s) of BV III to: 

Name: 

Address: 

City: State/Province: 

ZlP/Postal Code: Country: 

AAZK Member Non-Member 


PRICES 

AAZK Member Prices Domestic - $26.50 (includes postage) 

Canadian - $32.50 (includes air postage) 
Overseas - $32.50 (includes surface postage) 

Non-Member Prices Domestic - $35.00 (includes postage) 

Canadian - $45.00 (includes air postage) 
Overseas - $45.00 (includes surface postage) 


TOTAL Enclosed $ 


60 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 





f 



/'’^Behavioral Enrichmentjc^ 

D ijx Activity Manipulation'^ 

Ji^ Occupational Husbandry 

'lA 

^i.V. 


In the animal keeping profession, one of the most dangerous pitfalls is to sink into the same 
old routine and stop thinking of new ideas for our animals. If we just take the time to stop 
and think creatively about new ways to stimulate an animal’s environment, it can be 
surprising what one can come up with. Use your imagination and don’t be afraid to try new 
things. Thanks to all who have submitted so far - the ideas have been fantastic! Keep them 
coming! 

CATS - The enrichment program at Central Florida Zoological Park includes the offering 
of dried palm fronds and pine cones to all our cats. The cougars, for example, will bat a 
pine cone around for hours. Many of the cats “kill” the palm frond, acting out predatory 
behavior, before shredding it. They often ingest a little of it in the same way that they will 
eat grass. This has not resulted in any problems because they either regurgitate it or pass it 
through just like grass. 

BEARS - The black bears also seem to enjoy palm fronds. For them we add food on, in and 
under the frond to stimulate foraging behaviors. Items that work well are mealworms, 
nuts, peanut butter, raisins and any of their favorite produce cut into small pieces. They 
will spend hours working with the palm fronds. Activities include shredding them as well 
as picking them up and shaking them to get every last bit of food. Any portion of the frond 
that remains intact will be dragged around for days. This sometimes makes cleaning a bit 
more challenging, but it is well worth it to see this high level of activity from the bears. 

We have tried freshly cut palm fronds with both the cats and bears but they all seem to prefer 
the dried ones; and fresh ones cause many cuts in both keepers and animals. 

-Kristine Swartchick 

Central Florida Zoological Park, Lake Monroe, FL 


PINNIPEDS - Freeze a couple of fish in a metal pan full of water and create a fish-circle 
(kidney pans from a hospital work very well). Our seal and sea lions push and bump them 
all over their pool. Set up a sprinkler to spray into the pool so the animals can swim and 
splash around in it. Water jets and streams also work well. Rings to play with are easy to 
make with a 1-2 foot piece of hose and a 2-3 inch piece of wooden dowel. Connect the ends of 
the hose by placing them over the ends of the dowel and seal with duct tape. 

-Rae Alexander, Keeper 
Micki Grove Zoo, Lodi, CA 


lAFIRS - Produce is thrown in pool (“bobbing for apples”); stimulates feeding activity. 


SNAKES - “Root balls” from small bushes; mounds of substrate to plow through added to 
enclosures. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


61 


Eimchment Options . Continued 


SPIDER MONKEYS - Boxes, bags, infant toys (tied inside rooms, off-exhibit), 

blankets/towels, straw mats, mirrors, hidden food all used for occupational/ 
environmental enrichment. 

BAFTORS - Increase plants for cover near the bottom of enclosures. 

-Betty Jean Schmitt, Keeper 

Virginia Zoological Park, Norfolk, VA 


Remember, we are always needing more ideas to include in this enrichment column. 
Send your suggestions, ideas, etc. to: Gretchen Ziegler and Kayla Grams, AKF, 635 Gage 
Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. We are coimting on you to help us continue to fill this column with 
ideas that will make life better for our captive charges. Make it a Chapter project to gather 
ideas already in use or come up with new ones to try. 




Leifers fo the Edifor 


Letters to the Editor commenting on articles 
which appear in AKF or letters commenting 
on AAZK are always welcome. AKF reserves 
the right to include a response from the staff, 
the AAZK Board or a manuscript author. 


Dear Editor; 

Kangaroos/Wallabies - This is a response to the information on using woodchips as a 
substrate for all, or part of an enclosure, to provide material for grubbing and nibbling, as 
reported in the February 1992 issue of AKF (Enrichment Options, page 62). I think a word of 
caution is needed here regarding the problems attendant with macropods eating their 
bedding, or substrate. Over the past ten years, the only time Woodland Park Zoo had a 
parasite problem with the wallaroo mob, which required worming them, was when we used 
alfalfa to “enhance” the appearance of the wallaroo stall and provide something to “nibble” 
on. This was done during the winter months when the grass in the exhibit was very short. 

We normally use straw for bedding, which works well. Another concern about using 
woodchips is the dust and small particles of wood associated with woodchips. 

Judie Steenberg, Keeper 
Woodland Park Zoological Gardens 
Seattle, WA 



162 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


L(S)<S)kim^ Emsk 


{Editor's note: in the next several issues of AKF we will continue to reprint articles which 
appeared earlier in the Association's history. The old saying "the more things change, the 
more they stay the same" seems to hold true with these articles which are as relevant today 
as the day they were written. This month’s installment was published in a column 
entitled 'Veterinarians and Keeners which appeared in a ’‘monster-sized’’ AKF issue of 20 
pages in 1978.) 

The following article appeared in Animal Keepers’ Forum (Vol. 5, No. 3) March 1978. 


B.S.,M^.andPhJ3, 


By 

Joseph T. Bielitski, M.S., DVM 
Staff Veterinarian, Topeka Zoo, Topeka, KS 

Feces is a wonderful indicator of overall function of several organ systems. ..the pancreas, 
the stomach, intestines, colon, rectum, anus and the liver. While the liver seems somewhat 
removed from the digestive system it is responsible for bile production. Bile salts are 
involved in the emulsification of fat in the duodenum, thus making fat more easily 
absorbed. Lack of bile causes feces to contain fat droplets and to be grey in color. That nice 
brown color seen in feces is due to the conversion of bile salts to inactive relatives. Bile duct 
occlusion or poor production of bile by the liver can be seen in the stool. 

Occasionally an animal repeatedly produces a stool that is bright red in color. The stool is 
normal in all respects except the color. Frequently, by looking at the food one can 
determine the problem; some commercial foods contain a red dye that is not degraded or 
absorbed on its trip through the gut, so the feces, like the food, is dyed red. 

Feces starts out as food in the mouth of the animal and after enzymatic, bacterial, protozoal 
and chemical actions have occurred, it shows up at the rectum. If an animal goes off feed 
for several days, then' one can expect similar reduction in stool. The time sequence after 
an animal stops eating and then stops defecating depends on the animal. It can range from 
four hours for some of the small birds to a week for larger reptiles. 

Fecal examinations are often done in zoos, but what happens to the feces after it leaves the 
keeper's hands (no bad pun intended)? Well, the first thing that happens is that somebody 
in the lab looks at it grossly. After this, one of several specific tests can be performed, the 
most frequent of which is for parasite ova. This test can be run in several ways; the most 
common is by flotation. With this technique feces is mixed with a solution of high specific 
gravity and ova float to the top where they adhere to a microscope cover slip and then are 
evaluated microscopically. Another technique is used for ova which generally sink 
regardless of specific gravity. With this technique feces is mixed in a slurry with saline 
and placed in a funnel. The ova settle out first and are found in the first few drops of fluid 
removed from the funnel tip. Lastly, direct smears can be done by spreading a small 
amount of feces on a slide with a drop or two of saline. The direct smear technique works 
only for protozoa or with high egg counts; the former two techniques are both concentrating 
procedures, so a higher number of positives are found. 

The direct smear technique or wet mount works best for detecting intestinal protozoa. 
When looking for protozoa an iodine stain is frequently used for better visualization and 
easier identification of the parasite based on morphological characteristics. High power is 
frequently required for the identification of protozoal parasites. 

Fecal cultures are taken in newly acquired animals during quarantine and when a 
pathogenic bacteria is suspected. The two most frequently searched for are Salmonella and 
Shigella; both of which are zoonotic bacteria and extremely pathogenic. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


163 


ILdDdDlkim^ IB(B(Slk ° B.S.. M.S. and Ph.D.. Continued 


In culturing stools, a small piece of feces can be placed in nutrient broth and then a sample 
of this is streaked on agar for identification. Or, a streak can be made using feces. Agars 
contain different nutrients and since bacteria have different requirements for growth, in 
two or three days a suitable number of different agar plates can be utilized to identify the 
bacteria. 

The Scotch® tape test is a very specialized test. It is used to look for the ova of Enterobius 
vermicular is, the pinworm of primates (another zoonotic condition). Scotch® tape is 
applied around the anus then removed and applied to a microscope slide for examination. 
These ova have a sticky outer coating and adhere to the skin, doors, just about anything. So 
be cautious if you or a member of your family have pinworms that they are not spread to the 
primate collection (or vice-versa). 


Feces is a most interesting material, so next time you are looking at a dump truck load of 
it, don’t be discouraged - lean back a second and marvel at what it really is, where it has 
been, and what varied things it can tell you about your animals. 


International Association for 
Bear Research & Management 
Seeks Articles for Newsletter 



International Bear News is the quarterly newsletter of the International Association for 
Bear Research and Management, a 25-year-old, non-profit organization of people 
interested in the biology and conservation of all bear species worldwide. 


We are seeking articles for our newsletter about captive management of bears and other 
bear projects in which zoos are involved. Information for publication should be sent to: 
Teresa DeLorenzo, Editor, International Bear News, Northwest Ecological Research 
Institute, 10907 NW Copeland St., Portland, OR 97229 Phone: (503) 643-4008. 


We would like to hear from zoos that would be interested in cooperating with research 
projects, for example, collecting blood for DNA studies. The organization can also provide 
assistance for zoos needing information about bears. Also available are copies of 
proceedings from international bear conferences and United States meetings. 

Membership in the International Association for Bear Research and Management is $7.00 
per year and includes a subscription to the newsletter. Requests for membership or a 
complimentary copy of the newsletter should be addressed to: Sterling Miller, 
Secretary/Treasurer, International Association for Bear Research and Management, State 
of Alaska, Department of Fish and Game, 333 Raspberry Road, Anchorage, AK 99518-1599. 


A $3.2 million project has begun to create a chain of national parks along Central 
American rain forests, wetlands and coral reefs. Named the Panther Path for the animal’s 
historic migration route, the parks would use ecotourism to support research. The corridor, 
also used by hundreds of species of North American birds as a migration path, would 
include the Peten region of Guatemala, Belize barrier reef. Bay Islands and coastal forest of 
Honduras, San Juan River in Nicaragua and Costa Rica, and parts of Panama. The U.S. 
Agency of International Development has contributed $1.6 million to the project, --from 
The Ark, newsletter of the Lincoln Park Zoo Docents, Lincoln Park Zoo, Chicago, IL. 
submitted by Marcia Schnedler. 


64 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Information Please 


I am seeking information from facilities that raise neonatal hoofstock concerning their 
use of colostrum and/or colostrum substitutes. Please answer the following questions about 
your facility, and return the information by 1 August 1992 (by mail or FAX) to: 

Susan Euing Quakenbush FAX: 619-747-3168 

Wild Animal Park, Veterinary Services Dept. 

15500 San Pasqual Valley Road 
Escondido, CA 92027-9614 
Phone: 619-738-5067 

1. Does your facility use colostrum? If yes, from what source? 

2. Is the colostrum processed (heat-treated, pasteurized, other method)? If it is processed, 
is it done in-house or outside your facility? 

3. Does your facility use colostrum-substitute? If yes, which one(s)? 

4. How long is colostrum/colostrum-substitute fed to neonates? 

5. How is colostrum/colostrum substitute fed to neonate during first 24 hours? 

(orally in bottle, by stomach tube, other method)? 

6. Please send your name, institution, address and phone number. 

Thank you very much for taking the time to answer these questions. The information will 
be used for a neonatal workshop at a future conference. 


The Virginia Zoo presently houses 1.2 Struthio camelus. We have encountered persistent 
‘feather-plucking’ behavior with all three birds. Anyone with any information pertaining 
to this problem in Ostrich please contact: Vicki Hulett, Virginia Zoological Park, 3500 
Granby St., Norfolk, VA 23504. 


I am interested in hearing from anyone who has any information regarding the treatment 
of “scratches” or “greasy heel” in domestic horses, most specifically Clydesdales or any 
draft breed with feathering on the feet. At the present time I am washing the affected areas 
with a medicated soap, drying with towels, and applying Panalog® cream. The feathering 
in these areas has been shaved. The horse is kept on pine shavings over rubber matting. 
Any alternative treatments or “cures” would be appreciated. Send to: Marcia Campbell, 
6118 S. Monitor, Chicago, IL 60638. 



MOVING? 
NEW NAME? 


LIXX LABLEZ comes to the rescue! 
Our 56 page catalogue features over 1 50 
wildlife designs for address labels and 
bookplates. Emblazon your precious 
stuff with our precious stuff! 

Send for our catalogue by mailing $4 
(now part, refund.) to: LIXX LABELZ, 
P.O. Box 32055A, 2619 14 St., S.W.. 
Calgary, Alta., Canada T2T 5X0 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


165 


Conference ’92 
for Posters 

The Papers and Workshops Committee invites AAZK 
members to consider this format for their presentations at 
National Conference in San Diego (27 September through 2 
October). 

Posters will generally be accessible while other conference 
activities are underway, allowing them to be viewed at leisure 
during breaks. Whenever possible, poster authors can make 
themselves available to discuss their work informally. 

Why do a poster? 

This Style of presentation fosters direct exchange of information between conference 
participants, and provides further opportunities for professional colleagues to meet each 
other. Your fellow AAZK members may find it easier to ask detailed questions without 
the inhibitory effects of a larger audience or a strict schedule. More time also allows those 
who are most interested in the material to study it in depth and take careful notes. These 
factors allow presenters and their audience to achieve a level of communication not 
attainable in other formats. 

Some subjects are simply better suited for posters than for other methods of presentation, 
particularly if they involve concepts which may be difficult to describe concisely but are 
easily conveyed in diagrams and photographs, or if most of the useful information 
consists of numbers in tabular form. 

You may find that other more personal considerations influence your choice of format. 
Many people are not comfortable speaking to a large audience, but are completely at ease 
in one-on-one discussions. Doing a poster is an excellent way to test the waters, 
especially if this is your first conference and obtaining travel expenses is contingent on 
making a presentation. 

Whatever your reasons for preferring a poster, a well-designed and carefully assembled 
presentation makes a positive and lasting impression. 

To request inclusion in the Poster Session: 

Submit an abstract according to the instructions in the Febmary 1992 AKF (p. 55). Under 
“AW Equipment Needs” in the submission information list, write “Poster Presentation.” 
Please note that the same deadline (July 31, 1992) applies. 

Set aside enough time for assembly of your poster. Starting early allows for unexpected 
pitfalls, particularly if your graphic-arts skills are rusty. 

Just as for papers and workshops, letters of notification will be sent for all abstracts 
accepted. A package of information on producing a poster, including many useful 
suggestions for layout and construction, will accompany the acceptance letter. 

AIRLINE DISCOUNTS 




To take advantage of substantial airline discounts for Conference '92 on American and 
Delta Airlines, call 1 (714) 752-5456 or 1 (800) 434-3434 extension 195. 


166 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 

SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 
SEPTEMBER 27 THROUGH OCTOBER 2, 1992 


CONFERENCE RF.GTSTR ATTON FORM 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY STATE/PROVINCE 

ZIP CODE PHONE ( ) 

ZOO AFFILIATION 

POSITION/TITLE 

AAZK CHAPTER 

NUMBER OF AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCES ATTENDED 
AAZK COMMITTEE MEMBER? 


PRESENTING A PAPER? YES NO 

CONDUCTING A WORKSHOP? YES NO 

PARTICIPATING IN ZOOLYMPICS? YES NO 

BRINGING AN AUCTION ITEM? YES NO 


VEGETARIAN? 

YES 

NO 

TYPE 




T-SHIRT? 

YES 

NO 

SIZE SM 

MED 

LG 

XLG 


ARRIVAL DATE AND TIME 


EARLY REGISTRATION INCENTIVE TOUR:' 1ST CHOICE 

2ND CHOICE 
3RD CHOICE 

CONFERENCE FEES* 

AAZK MEMBER OR SPOUSE $95.00 

NON-MEMBER $105.00 

LATE FEE (AFTER AUGUST 21, 1992) $10.00 

TOTAL FEE ENCLOSED $ 


♦FEES INCLUDE A $15.00 CONTRIBUTION TO AAZK NATIONAL. 


PLEASE CONTACT THE AAZK CONFERENCE HOTLINE FOR ADDITIONAL 
CONFERENCE INFORMATION: (619) 231-1515 EXT. 4672, 

PLEASE MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO: AAZK CONFERENCE '92 


RETURN THIS FORM AND ALL FEES TO: 
1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 
AAZK SAN DIEGO CHAPTER 
P.O. BOX 551 

SAN DIEGO, CA 92112-0551 



FOR THE EARLY BIRD 


As an incentive for early registration, we are offering delegates "limited" behind-the- 
scenes tours on a first come, first served basis. These exclusive tours will provide the 
"early birds" with learning and photo opportunities in areas of special interest. Please 
specify on the Conference Registration Form your 1st, 2nd and 3rd choices, using the 
letters corresponding to the tours described below. Tour recipients will be notified in their 
confirmation packet. Some tours may be subject to cancellation without notice. 


ZOO 

A SEA LION SHOW: This 30-minute tour will get you up close to the Zoo's 
trained sea lions and introduce you to their training program, and how it is beneficial for 
the animals. Also included will be a visit to the new filtration plant. 

B ANIMALS IN ACTION SHOW: This 30-minute tour will visit the Zoo's 
newest show area where you will interact with trainers and their animals^ which are native 
to rainforests throughout the world. 

C ANIMAL CHIT CHAT SHOW: This 20-minute tour will get you up close 
and in person with the Zoo's most notorious "odd couple", a golden retriever and a 
cheetah, and more unusual educational animal show stars, like the cuscus. Bring a camera 
and your best smile! 

D CHILDREN'S ZOO: In this 30-minute tour Children Zoo keepers will guide 
you around the highly successful hoofed stock and primate nurseries, and introduce you to 
other areas where animals are used for educational purposes. 

E TIGER RIVER TREK: This 20-minute backstage visit into the tiger holding 
area will introduce you to one of the Zoo's state-of-the-art bioclimatic zones, the Asian 
rainforest, including the tiger and tapir bedrooms. NOTE: This tour has been 
converted to an open house format. Applicants who selected this tour as 
their first choice prior to this announcement will have their second choice 
considered first. 

F SUN BEAR FOREST: This 30-minute tour takes you behind the scenes to the 
lion-tailed macaque and sun bear bedrooms and kitchen facilities. Keepers will give you a 
brief history and evolution of this bioclimatic theme, including management and 
husbandry techniques, and the team concept for these low-maintenance exhibits. 

G HEART OF THE ZOO GORILLA TROPICS: This 15-minute tour of the 
Zoo's premiere gorilla exhibit will literally give you a rooftop overview of the newest 
bioclimatic zone recently added to the Heart of the Zoo. 

H HEART OF THE ZOO BIRDS AND PLANTS: In this 1-hour tour a 
keeper and a horticulturist will take you through the holding facilities, explain how 
introductions and species are mixed, how birds are captured out of the aviaries, and how 
the sound/rain system functions. Also included are the latest techniques used to 
incorporate African tropicals or their closest related species as natural browse in the gorilla 
exhibit. 

I REPTILES: This 20-minute tour of the main Reptile House will feature off- 
viewing areas, including breeding colonies of such rare species as the Figijguana and the 
black-headed python, and a chance to ask keepers about reptile management at the Zoo. 


J BIRD YARD: This 20-minute tour will take you into the kitchen area where 
keepers will explain how they can economically provide diets for a large and diverse 
collection of birds, maintaining close attention to food presentation. 

K AVIAN PROPAGATION CENTER AND ARTIFICIAL 
INCUBATION WORKSHOP: This combination tour and workshop will introduce 
you to the risk takers who can boast that 35% of the bird collection is hand-reared. The 
tour of the Center will include the set-up, brooders and incubators used on both altricial 
and precocial species. The workshop will cover artificial incubation, egg breakouts, 
causes of mortality and determination of the condition of embryos. 

L KOALAS: This short tour will give delegates access to a non -public area to see 
the koala bedrooms and talk to keepers about koala management. 


WILD ANIMAL PARK 

M EAST AFRICAN AND ASIAN PLAINS PHOTO CARAVAN: This 
exclusive opportunity will take you out in the field where you will be face-to-face with 
Baringo giraffe, Indian rhino and over 300 other animals in these mixed-species exhibits. 

N SOUTH AFRICA AND ASIAN SWAMPS PHOTO CARAVAN: This 
exclusive opportunity will take you out in the field where you will be face-to-face with 
Reticulated giraffe. Southern white rhino and over 300 other animals in these mixed- 
species exhibits. 

O OKAPI BEDROOMS AND EXHIBITS: This tour will visit the exhibits and 
night quarters for the Wild Animal Park's 10 (at this writing) okapi, including the newest 
additions. Keepers will be available to answer questions about okapi management. 

P TIGER BEDROOMS: Visit the Wild Animal Park's Sumatran tiger bedroom 
quarters and chat with their keepers. 

Q HOSPITAL: Delegates will be provided with a tour of the facility that provides 
the latest in veterinary care techniques for the Park's 3,000+ animals. 

R CENTER FOR THE REPRODUCTION OF ENDANGERED SPECIES 
(CRES) CHEETAHS AND LION-TAILED MACAQUES: this visit to CRES's 
off-exhibit breeding facility will include the cheetah complex, maternity houses, video 
monitor equipment and the rare king cheetah. Nearby are two 3/4-acre corrals — one 
housing a completely matriarchal troop of lion-tailed macaques, donated by the Royal 
Family of Monaco. 

SEA WORLD OF CALIFORNIA 

S PENGUIN ENCOUNTER: This exclusive tour will take 10 delegates inside 
this frozen Antarctic exhibit to wander amongst the several species of penguin successfully 
management by the expert staff at Sea World. 


AVIS DISCOUNTS 


Look for special convention savings with Avis Rent a Car in your confirmation packet. 


1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 

SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 
SEPTEMBER 27 THROUGH OCTOBER 2, 1992 

Catamaran 

RESORT HOTEL 

HOTEL REGISTRATION FORM 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY 

ZIP CODE 

ARRIVAL DATE 


I WILL BE PAYING BY: CHECK CREDIT CARD 

(First night's deposit or credit card guarantee is required). 

ROOM GUARANTEED BY: VISA MC AMEX 

CREDIT CARD NUMBER - - - 

NAME AS IT APPEARS ON CARD 

EXPIRATION DATE 

*** CONFERENCE ROOM RATE Oncluding 9% room tax): 

$98.10 per night 1 to 4 people per room 

Rooms for the AAZK Conference are being held until August 21st. Any reservations 
made after that date will be on a space available basis only. 

A 24-hour cancellation notice is required for deposit refunds. 

Check-in time is 4:00 p.m. Check-out time is 12:00 noon. 

To make reservations by phone, dial 1-800-288-0770. 

Most rooms have two double beds, sleeper sofa, and kitchenette. King-size rooms are 
available on a request basis only. 

Parking at the Catamaran is free for those registered at the hotel. For those not 
staying at the hotel, there is a $4.00 per day parking fee. 


STATE/PROVINCE 
PHONE ( ) 

CHECK-OUT DATE 


Please return this form to: 

CATAMARAN RESORT HOTEL 
RESERVATIONS 

AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF ZOO KEEPERS 
3999 MISSION BOULEVARD 
SAN DIEGO, CA 92109 


A VERY SPECIAL GORILLA WATCH 


In conjunction with the opening of our new “Apes 
of Africa” complex and the 2nd Gorilla Workshop, 
we are offering a unique quartz watch with the 
1992 Gorilla Workshop logo, original design by- 
Sam LaMalfa, Primate Area Supervisor, Milwaukee 
County Zoo. Natural colored bamboo and leaves, 
designed by Jim Curtis, Zoo Pride Volunteer, 
encircle a gorilla family. Jay Jocham, Assistant / 

Director/Illustrator, Zoological Society, is the i 
artistic consultant for the design. 

The watch is goldtone with a black leather band, 
water & shock resistant with a stainless steel back. 

Battery and a limited warranty included. The cost 
of each watch is $35.00. AH proceeds from the 
watch sales will assist the Gorilla Workshop. 

CHECKS/MONEY ORDERS ONLY PLEASE, MADE PAYABLE TO: 

ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY/GORILLA WORKSHOP 

(Sorry, any checks/money orders received for the improper amount or not 
made payable to the above will be returned.) 

Mail Orders to: 



Zcx)logical Society/Gorilla Workshop 
Attn: Jean Gleisner 
10005 W. Bluemoimd Road 
Milwaukee, WI 53226 


DEADLINE FOR ORDERS IS 30 JUNE, 1992. 

SORRY U.S.A. ORDERS ONLY. 

Please allow approximately 6-8 weeks after deadline date (6/30/92) for 
delivery. Please retain this portion for your records. Photocopies of this 
form will be accepted. 


Gorilla Watch Order Form 


Ship to: Name 

Address 

City County __________ 

State - ZIP 

Number of watches at $35.00 each 

Add $2.00 for shipping, insurance & handling each 

SUBTOTAL 

Residents of Wisconsin counties with a county tax add $2.04 
Residents of Wisconsin counties without a county tax add $1.84 each 

Total for mail delivery 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


167 


Endangered Species Act 1992 

By 

Kathy Ruffino, Avian Keeper 
National Zoo, Washington, DC 


In 1973 the United States responded to the great need for protection of endangered plants and 
animals when it passed into law the Endangered Species Act (ESA). This was a direct 
response to accelerated disappearance of species in the world around us. The U.S. 
Congress realized that we were losing ground in protecting diverse species and that 
mankind was responsible for accelerating the loss of life on our planet. This law stated to 
the world that we recognized that we had to take responsibility to protect the diversity of the 
world around us. 

This year the ESA is up for reauthorization and it faces the hardest battle ever in Congress. 
Special interest groups and major economic pressures are seeking the elimination of the 
Act altogether, or, at the very least, instituting major revisions to weaken it. We must show 
solidarity to see that ESA not only passes but is strengthened. Since 1973 we have all become 
more aware of our relationship with the environment. There are recycling programs 
starting up in major cities and small rural areas. We are cleaning up streams, parks, 
beaches and highways. We are seeing our children take active parts in environmental 
issues because they are worried about the survival of plant and animal life nationally and 
globally. 

What is troubling is that the Act could actually face major revisions or, even more 
worrisome, not pass at all. A package of amendments that could strengthen the ESA has 
been introduced into the House by Rep. Gerry Studds (D-MA). This package differs from 
the existing Act in that it would protect all endangered species in an ecosystem, not just 
those listed officially . The current ESA list has more than 600 species, of which about half 
are plants. There are more than 3,000 species that are candidates for listing, and at least 
600 of them need immediate attention. The cost of researching each species runs about 
$60,000, so the cost for 600 cases alone would run about $36 million. The entire budget for the 
ESA in 1991 was $55 million, not including the money that States spent. One fourth of last 
year’s budget was spent on studying the Spotted Owl alone. Unfortunately, more money is 
spent on maintaining the Woodrow Wilson Bridge in one year than is spent on the 
national ESA. 

It is time to revise the Act to preserve entire ecosystems. This will provide the ability to 
protect not just one species but many. Economically speaking this provides more bang for 
the buck. We must move away from short-term economic growth to long-term protection. If 
we do not take action now, where will jobs come from once we have cut down the last 
remaining old growth forest? Do we have the right not to consider the future generations of 
Americans? 

The Studds Bill, H.R. 4045, makes the scope of the Act more a preventative measure rather 
than a last minute response. Under current law, species receive protection only after they 
are listed as endangered. It would make more sense to offer protection before a species is 
pushed to the edge, where perhaps only a miracle can save it. This Bill sets deadlines for 
recovery plans because more than one third of all listed species have none under the current 
Act. Citizens would be allowed to file suit immediately for violations of the Act, rather then 
the current sixty-day waiting period. Additionally the Bill would authorize the federal 
agencies to enforce the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
(CITES), which prohibits illegal trading of imperiled species. 

Biologists believe that there are 5 to 30 million species inhabiting the Earth, yet we have 
only identified 1.4 million of them. Twenty-five percent of the world’s species will be 
extinct by the year 2050. If we continue on the same path, we will immediately lose 50 to 150 
species in the tropics every day, yet we have only screened one percent for medicinal drug 
use. In five years the U.S. could lose 254 plant species and who knows what we will lose 


168 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Species Act 1992. Continued 

with them. We have lost at least 500 species and subspecies in North America since 1620, 
and the loss has greatly accelerated in this century due to mankind’s activities. In North 
America alone we now have officially 617 species facing major problems. 

We as concerned citizens can help the passage of H.R. 4045 by writing our Representatives. 
A few lines stating your position can have a powerful impact. Our heritage includes the 
wildlife and the ecosystems in which they and we live. We are fighting a battle that needs 
our attention, so please contact your Representative and do your part. 


(Editor’s Note: Below are the addresses to which you may send letters in support of the 
strengthening of the Endangered Species Act to your Representatives or Senators .) 


The Honorable 

U.S. Senate 
Washington, DC 20510 


The Honorable 

U.S. House of Representatives 
Washington, DC 20515 



Chapter 

News 

AAZK Suncoast Chanter 

The AAZK Suncoast Chapter in 
Tampa, FL will be holding their 
“Bowling for Rhinos” Bowl-a-thon on 
6 June, 1992 at the Florida Lanes in 
Tampa. We wish to invite all 
neighboring Florida AAZK members 
who would like to participate. Please 
contact Denise or Rick at (813) 973- 
7387 for more information. 

--Denise Hansbury 

’92 Chairperson BFRfTampa 

San Diego AAZK Chanter 

March Program. ..Matt Stampler (Zoo 
Transportation) gave an informative 
“Everything You Want To Know 
About CITES” chat on 26 March. It’s 
disturbing to know that the U.S. is the 
largest consumer in the world of 
wildlife products. Matt involved the 
audience in a discussion on what 
could be done to lower the demand for 
animal products, limit the pet trade, 
and the role of Keepers/Zoos. He 
stressed the importance of zoos 
educating the public, and thereby 
reducing demand. Matt’s been 
researching and writing a paper on 
CITES for his Master’s Degree in 
International Relations in Pacific 
Studies. 


Also that evening, Marina Proutkina 
(Curator’s Secretary) discussed the 
plight of the Moscow Zoo. News was 
not good. Due to the situation over 
there, inflation, and low attendance, the 
zoo can’t generate any money right 
now. Conditions for the animals are 
poor. The Chapter is looking to raise 
funds to help the Moscow Zoo, the 
official sister zoo of San Diego. 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 

Los Angeles AAZK Chanter 

The Los Angeles AAZK is planning a 
night of frivolity and festivities 
Saturday, 9 May. It is our first (and 
maybe our last) “Rhino Revelry” at 
which we are hoping to raise funds 
for various rhino conservation 
organizations. 

Although, for legal reasons, we had to 
eliminate the Naked Twister 
competition, we will have a number of 
carnival-themed games. Rhino Bingo 
and Animal Trivial Pursuit with 
great prizes for the winners. There 
will also be an auction and a raffle. 

We have received generous donations 
from Rhino Records, Rhino Bowling 
Balls and Rhino Chasers Beer and we 
will be selling a limited edition 
Sumatran Rhino T-shirt. We hope it 
will be a fun and profitable evening 
for all! 

-Debbie Levy, Chapter Liaison 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


169 


Chapter News. Continued 


Indianapol is Zoo AAZK Chapter 

As we are sure many of you may have 
noticed in the April Chapter News, we 
made mention of the new logo adopted 
by the Indianapolis Chapter, but failed 
to include it. We apologize for this 
oversight and here present the new 
logo for the Indianapolis AAZK. It 
was designed by Chapter member 
Brad Booth with additional artistic 
refinement by Herb Pearthree. 

-The Editors 



Officers for 1992 are: 

President Lori Monska-Wright 

1st Vice Pres Joe Rindler 

2nd Vice Pres Richey Placek 

Secretary Pat Currie 

Treasurer.. ...Beth Pohl 
Chapter Liaison Carrie Babbitt 

To make things easier this year a 
calendar of events is being developed. 
This lists meeting dates and some 
special events we have planned. 

Opr recycling project produced 150,823 
pounds of glass, cans and cardboard 
in 1991. We donated the $6,900 raised 
to 13 different conservation 
organizations. 

Anyone needing to contact our Chapter 
should remember to use our new 
address: Columbus Chapter AAZK, 
P.O. Box 1256, Powell, OH 43065-1256. 

Also, if any Chapters would like a copy 
of our newsletter, please let us know. 

-Lori Monska-Wright 
President 


National Zoo AAZK Chapter 

In November, Eric Krussman gave a 
slide presentation on his and 
Rosemary’s trip to Africa. 

The NZP Chapter, as well as a few 
individual Chapter members, have 
sent funding support for the AAZK 25th 
Anniversary History Book. 

The proceeds from our annual 
Christmas bake sale ($140) was again 
donated to “Bowling for Rhinos”. 

We had a guest speaker at our 
February Chapter meeting. Charley 
Pickett (ZOO) gave a slide 
presentation on zoos in Third World 
countries and discussed some of the 
conservation ideas that he and Chris 
Wemmer (CRC) have tried to teach at 
these foreign zoos. 

Our NZP/AAZK outreach program is 
still going strong. In 14 months time 
we have mailed a total of 122 issues of 
AAZPA’ Communique, 569 AKFs . 303 
books, 505 journals, 405 scientific 
articles and 2,480 wildlife magazines 
which have been divided among 17 
■foreign institutions. “Thanks” to 
everyone contributing to this ongoing 
project, including the Denver Zoo 
Rocky Mountain AAZK Chapter for the 
two packages of donations they have 
sent. 

-Kathy Kelly, Chapter Liaison 


ML T ah^ m a Cha p l gr M ZK 

This Chapter, located at the Point 
Defiance Zoo in Tacoma, WA, 
recently installed an ESP 
Conservation Parking Meter and 
report that it has proven very 
successful thus far. 

The Chapter has made plans to sell 
compost bins and bin kits at their book 
on Conservation Day, June 6. They 
hope to eventually be able to work into 
having monthly workshops for the 
public on effective composting 
methods, etc. 

-Chapter Meeting Minutes 


70 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 

Little Rock Chapter AAZK 

Yes, 1991 did end a few months ago, 
but we had such a busy year we want to 
tell you about it. Here is a summary 
of what the Little Rock Chapter 
accomplished in 1991. 

As our main conservation focus for the 
year, we chose the Ecosystem Survival 
Plan. Through a one-day “Easter 
Bunny Photo Session” at the Zoo 
amidst the blooming azaleas and 
daffodils, and two separate garage 
sales, we raised $1,885. This was used 
to purchase 10 acres of rainforest in 
Belize and 4 1/2 acres in Costa Rica 
through ESP. 

The Chapter participated in “Bowling 
for Rhinos” for the first time in 1991. 
We made it a small, fun event for 
Chapter members and interested staff. 
Eleven bowlers raised $762.30. 

The 9th Annual Easter Beer Hunt for 
staff and Docents, sponsored by the 
Chapter, was a great social success. 
Our own “Sherlock Holmes”, Marie 
Schmude, concocts outrageous clues 
for participants, who then must figure 
out their personalized clue, then find 
their egg before partaking of 
refreshments. 

We participated in Zoo Special Events 
such as Earth Day Weekend, Senior’s 
Day, Warthog Wild Weekend, Zoo 
Days Weekend, etc. with exhibits 
spotlighting various AAZK activities 
and with spot talks. 

The Chapter sponsors soda and coffee 
vending machines in the keeper 
breakroom. The proceeds from these 
services go into our Keeper Education 
Fund which in 1991 provided grants 
for members to attend the Southern 
and Central Regional AAZPA 
Conferences, the Dr. Scholl’s 
Nutrition Conference, and the 
national AAZK Conference, where 
Chapter members presented “A Video 
ADT Goes to Sacramento”. 

For many years the Chapter has 
recycled aluminum cans from the 
breakroom and from anyone wishing 
to bring theirs in. In 1991 we 


expanded our recycling efforts to 
include cardboard, feed bags, glass, 
plastic, and office paper (see January 
’92 AKF). 

New Officers elected in December are: 

President..... Janet Meade Cooper 
Vice Pres. ....Rebecca Burns 
Secretary. ....Ann Rademacher 
Treasurer. ....Marie Schmude 



This year is already shaping up to be 
an equally busy one. Our 
conservation efforts this year will be 
directed to fundraising for the Duke 
University Primate Center’s 
Malagasy Project. 

At our February meeting. Keeper Mike 
Thennes spoke to the Chapter about 
native Arkansas plants and their 
many uses. We had nowhere near 
enough time to take advantage of his 
knowledge and hope to have him 
return. 

We just finished off the 10th Annual 
Easter Beer Hunt, which was an even 
bigger success than last year. 

The Chapter will be sponsoring more 
guest speakers this year as well as 
participating in several fun and 
fundraising activities. Chapter 
meetings are always open to interested 
people. We meet the first Wednesday 
of each month at 6:30 p.m. Location 
varies with the season, so call the Zoo 
to find out where we are. Tail come! 

-Janet Meade Cooper 
President 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


171 


‘DownUnder’ Support 


Silvery Gibbon 

Submitted by Dianne Gates, Editor 
Perth Zoo Docent News 
Perth, Australia 


A strong feeling of fellowship and common 
goal was evident at Perth Zoo over the last 
six months of 1991. 

Primate keepers, inspired by Roland Wirth, 
keynote speaker at the 1990 Adelaide con- 
ference of the Australasian Primate Society, 
launched the Silvery Gibbon Project in June 
1991. Our target was A$1 2,000, the money to 
fund an lUCN based survey of Central Java with special focus on the Silvery Gibbon 
(Hylobates moloch ). The wild population of this gibbon is estimated to be less than 5000 
animals. Two species of primate, three species of small carnivore and three species of bird 
will be surveyed under the project. 

Perth Zoo has kept Silvery Gibbons for many years, with two male offspring born in 1980 
and 1983, but breeding halted in 1984 with the death of the adult male. Arrangements are in 
progress to import two males and one female establishing two new pairs. 

We enlisted the help and generosity of our team of Docents (Zoo volunteers) and staff and 
management of the Zoo have given great support to the project. Activities to raise the money 
have been many and varied - Quiz nights, guest speakers, cake stalls, raffles, sale of 
Silvery Gibbon T-shirts, windcheaters and notepads, craft tables - all events generated lots 
of fun as well as the needed dollars. We published a monthly newsheet to keep folks 
inspired and informed and were able to announce in December the achievement of our 
goal A$14,250 in the bank. 

I write this report to Animal Keeners' Forum in the hope that it will encourage other keepers 
to adopt a similar project. We found the experience very rewarding and satisfying, an 
opportunity to compliment our captive management work with practical conservation of a 
wild population and its habitat. We will be happy to furnish other keepers with any 
information and encouragement to start another project. You may write at: Perth 
Zoological Gardens, Labouchere Road, S Perth, WA 6151, Australia. 

Artwork by Martin Thompson 

m 




Fires set during Africa’s dry season to clear farmland or cattle preserves and flush out 
game cause more pollution in the Southern Hemisphere than the massive burning of the 
Amazon rain forest, a 10-year study by NASA has found. Satellites tracked ozone, carbon 
monoxide, and methane that could not be attributed to natural causes and found them over 
Africa, Australia, and Antarctica, much as industrial pollutants girdle the Northern 
Hemisphere, --from The Ark, newsletter of the Lincoln Park Zoo Docents, Lincoln Park 
Zoo, Chicago, IL. 


7 2 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Regular Weight Monitoring as a 
Management and Research Tool 


By 

Frank B. Kohn, Biological Technician 
Dept, of Zoological Research 
National Zoological Park, Washington, DC 


Zoo management techniques advocate closely watching an animal’s condition throughout 
its captive life and maintaining carefully detailed records of the animal's health and 
behavior. One of the simplest methods of monitoring an animal’s condition is by regularly 
weighing it. This produces a baseline of values against which subsequent changes in the 
animal’s condition may be compared. Weight changes can reflect normal seasonal 
variations on one hand or pregnancy or medical condition on the other which can then be 
appropriately dealt with. 

Usually an animal is weighed only when it receives medical attention or during its 
annual physical exam. These values may or may not be normal for that individual and 
provide little information for the manager. Consistent weights are needed to build up a 
unique pattern of each animal. Comparisons between individuals must be based on 
standardized profiles or deviations from a population pattern. 

Some weight change patterns, such as those occurring during pregnancy and lactation, are 
highly predictive and if properly used offer the manager an opportunity to make timely and 
crucial husbandry adjustments before the “crisis” is at hand. Data so obtained can also be 
used to make “within and among individual” comparisons as well as “between species” 
comparisons of weight dynamic patterns. 

Pooling data for individuals of a species can establish a statistically useful data set from 
which population (i.e. species) parameters such as means, standard deviations, etc. can be 
drawn. Having average weight values from animals of known ages could help to more 
accurately predict birthdates of wild-caught animals simply by weighing the animal. 
Additionally, an animal’s health can be determined based on the predetermined weight 
calculated for its age from the species population. 

Regular weighing obviously requires handling the animal. On one hand, regular 
manipulation of zoo animals may be discouraged because it may lead to tameness or 
alteration of some of its wild behavior. On the other hand, it serves to reduce stress when 
physical restraint becomes necessary for medical treatment and it may even allow 
treatment to occur without chemical immobilization. Regular weighing of a variety of 
species at the department of zoological research over the last twenty years gives no 
indication that regular handling has been detrimental in any way to the expression of 
normal behavior, reproduction, etc. 

In this paper I will demonstrate the usefulness of regularly weighing small mammals. I 
describe a model showing how regular weighing quantifies an animal's condition 
throughout its life and illustrate how weights of a particular species may be applied to 
determine parameters of growth. I also discuss the implications of this as a management 
tool and then describe three medical cases in which regular weight monitoring was a major 
diagnostic tool. 

All animals in this study are from the National Zoo’s department of zoological research. 

In order to derive “normal” values we examined pooled data over several years of regular 
weighing. We assumed that weight would increase with size up to physical maturity at 
which point it could fluctuate depending upon amount of food fed or other conditions such as 
pregnancy, illness, etc. Databases thus created will aid in determining aspects about the 
collection species. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


73 


Refifular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research Tool. Cont'd, 

Weights were obtained using an Ohaus-Dial-a-Gram® basket balance or an Ohaus digital 
scale model C3001 modified with a plexiglass platform. All weights were measured in 
grams. Animals were weighed at approximately equal intervals and at approximately the 
same time of day. 

The model of weight dynamics was derived from measurements of 15.24 punares 
{Thrichomys apereoides). All animals were physically mature, seven months old or 
greater (Roberts, et ah, 1986), non-pregnant and at least one month post partum. 

Sexes were analyzed separately. Weights used in this model were taken at regular 
monthly intervals as recorded on individual animal record cards. These values were used 
to calculate the mean weight (X) of each animal through its adult life, standard 
deviation(s), and the coefficient of variation (s/x x 100). Values were derived from 
individuals as well as the entire population. These derived values established a range of 
measurements of variation which could account for the variability of weight of an 
individual throughout its life and for the captive population. 

Standard deviations and coefficient of variation were calculated for each individual and 
plotted around each animal's weights. Similar values were calculated for the entire 
population and plotted around population means. 

Values falling outside the range, if large enough might suggest a change in an animal's 
health or reproductive state. 

Growth weights of two juvenile females, one pregnant and the other non-pregnant, were 
analyzed to determine whether pregnancy or other changes in condition could be quantified 
and predicted during early growth using a regression analysis. 

Three medical case studies are then presented to illustrate the usefulness of regular 
weighing as a diagnostic tool. The animals used as case studies were 0.1 golden-headed 
lion tamarin (Leontopithicus rosalia chyrsomelas), 1.0 kowari (Dasyuroides byrnei) and 
0.1 water opossum or yapok {Chironectes minimus). 

Results - Male Thrichomys: 

When a range of variation is established around an individual animal's mean weight 
most of the values fall within that range (Fig. 1). A few weights fall outside the individual 
coefficient of variation (CV). 

When the CV for the population is plotted around an individual animal's mean weight all 
values fall within the range of variation for one animal (Fig. 1, upper graph). A second 
animal's plotted weights shows only three weights falling just outside both the individual's 
and the population's CV. 

When mean weights of individual animals are plotted against the population coefficient of 
variation many weights fall outside the population range of variation. In this case values 
derived from the population were not accurate in revealing population variability (Fig. 2). 

Female Thrichomys: 

Weights of females were analyzed using non-pregnant weights. To graphically illustrate 
the effectiveness of using these weights, pregnant weights were included in the graphs. 
Two females, one with a single litter (Fig. 3) and one having had four litters (Fig. 4) show 
mean weights falling within the ranges of variations except for those weights just prior to 
birth. The first post partum weights fall within the expected range of variation. 

As with males, individual mean female weights do not fall within the range of variation of 
weights calculated from the population mean (Fig. 5). 


174 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research Tool. Cont’d. 

Adult Weights of Two lnd« Punares 



O M#89 Mean wt«»360.a Month + m^ 196 Mean wt=282.5 


FIGURE 1 - Monthly weights of mature male punares. Middle solid line for each animal equals mean 
weight of the indi\ idua! animal. Solid lines abo\ e and below mean equals range of weight \ ariation lor each 
indi\ idual. Dotted lines are range of \ ariations of male population. X-axis represents time but is not 
chronological from week one. 

Mean Weights Adult Male Punares 


Mean Wt.*^ 426 groms Mean CV— 6.18 



FIGURE 2 - Mean weights of individual male punares. Center line equals mean weight of population. 
Lmes abov e and below mean are range of vanaiion of population. X-axis represents individual ID numbers 
of animals. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19. No. 5 1992 


75 


Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research Tool. Cont'd. 

Weight fluctuation Pregnant Punare 


Female # 153 



FIGURES 3 & 4 - Monthly weights of adult female punares. Center line equals mean non-pregnant 
weights. Line abo\ e and below mean are range of \ ariation ol' non-pregnant weights. B - lirst post partum 
weight. X-axis represents time but is not chronological from month one. 


Weight fluctuation Pregnant Punare 

Fomala #173 

a lU , 

500 - 

490 -J 

480 - 

470 - 

460 - 

450 - 

440 - 

430 - 

420 - 

410 - 

400 - 

390 - 

380 - 

370 “ 

□ 

. ° 

□ 

□ 

□ CD 

□ 

□ 

□ 

L 

a- 

T" 0 ^ 

□ 

«3DU 

350 - 

340 - 

330 - 

c 

□ 

1 

1 

1 r — 1 1 1~ — 1 r~ — I 1 r"~T r“~i i i i i 

1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 


Month 


176 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research TooL Cont’d. 


Mean Weights Adult Female Punares 

Mean Wt.« 329.7 grams Mean CV® 6.89 

460 

440 
420 
400 
380 
360 
340 

2 320 

o 

» 

300 
280 
260 
240 
220 
200 
180 

0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 

animal 

FIGURE 5 - Mean weights of individual non-pregnant female punares. Middle line and lines above and 
below as in Figure 2. X-axis is individual ID number for each animal. 

Pregnant and non — pregnant weight gain 


Punare Female #182 and #183 



FIGURE 6 - Growth curves of pregnant and non-pregnant juvenile female punares. 

X-axis is chronological age. 

Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 1 77 



Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research TooL Cont'd. 

For the final analysis of growth in two juvenile females, the pregnant female started off 
weighing less than the non-pregnant female (Fig. 6) but soon surpassed the non-pregnant 
female’s weight. The non-pregnant female shows an almost 1:1 relationship between age 
and weight gain. The pregnant female differs significantly from the non-pregnant 
female's growth curve (p<.05, F=2.72, df=18; Student's t-test Zar, 1974). Confidence 
intervals would reveal areas where values falling above and below would indicate 
pregnancy or obesity or illness or malnutrition, respectively. 

Weight Monitoring as a Medical Management Tool 

Case 1 

A female golden-headed lion tamarin born in captivity in October 1984 was received in 
April 1986 weighing 470 grams. Routine survey radiographs revealed a narrowed pelvis 
presumably due to a prior metabolic bone disease. In April she was introduced to a male 
and was trained to sit on a platform digital scale. The weighing procedure took less than 
five minutes and allowed us to closely examine her with no physical restraint. 

After introduction to the male her weight fluctuated slightly from the initial 470 grams and 
then increased over 30% of her initial weight in the next twelve weeks (Fig. 7). Roundness 
and enlargement of the abdomen and slight mammary gland development became more 
noticeable confirming that she was pregnant. 


Golden-Headed Lion Tamarin 


Pregnancy Weight Gain 



Start 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 

W«sok 


FIGURE 7 - Weight increase of pregnant golden-headed lion tamarin. X-axis represents time. Week 1 is 
weight when animal was received into collection. A = cesarean section. 

B = reintroduction of male. Breaks in graph indicate weights taken more than one w eek apart. 


178 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Regular Weight Momtoringf as a Management and Research TooL Cont'd. 


On 25 September the animal appeared lethargic and somewhat unresponsive. Because of 
her narrowed pelvic canal and the likelihood of her giving birth to a single, oversized 
young, she was radiographed. The infant was close to full term and its head was too large to 
pass through the mother's pelvic canal necessitating a cesarean section. The live infant 
delivered weighed within the normal weight range established for a newborn golden lion 
tamarin singleton's weight (Hoage, 1982), but unfortunately it died approximately an hour 
following delivery from respiratory failure. 

The weekly weighing allowed us to acclimate the animal and closely examine her. The 
weights obtained also gave us weight dynamics of a species for which no basic life history 
measurements exist, and allowed us to monitor pregnancy and alert the medical staff when 
birth appeared imminent. Weighing alone was not the sole cue to the animal's condition, 
but it provided a valuable supplemental measure. 

In other species, such as the punare described earlier, where such close examination is not 
always feasible without restraint of the animal, or where pregnancy is not as easily 
observable, regular weights provide valuable measures of the rapid growth typical of the 
third trimester of pregnancy. 


Case2 

A mature male kowari (crest-tailed marsupial rat), 3 years, 7 months of age showed a 
steady gradual gain of 35% of its normal weight over a twelve week period (Fig. 8). The 
animal was weighed in a basket in the same way as the punares. 


Kowari Weight Record 



FIGURE 8 - Weight of kowari with bleeding tumor. X-axis represents time from onset of condition. 
Week 1 weight is average weight prior to illness. A = weight immediately prior to first treatment. 

B = weight immediately following first treatment. C = weight at euthanasia. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


179 


Regular Weigfht Monitoring as a Management and Research TooL Cont'd. 

The animal's abdomen appeared rounder than normal but the animal had been active, 
eating well and behaving normally. Since the diet had not been increased the steady 
weight gain prompted a physical examination. The animal was anesthetized and a fluid- 
filled abdomen was discovered from which 50 ml of bloody fluid was withdrawn. After the 
procedure the animal's weight decreased by 50 grams to 100 grams. His behavior was 
normal following the procedure; he was awake and eating within 30 minutes after 
anesthesia. Within one week, however, the animal showed a 35 gram increase in weight. 

Exploratory abdominal surgery revealed a tumor covering all organs of the abdomen. 
Because the animal was aged and was afflicted with an inoperable condition the only 
alternative was euthanasia. Histopathology of the tissue revealed a mesothelioma which 
invaded the spleen causing blood leakage into the peritoneal cavity. 

The increase in weight, suggesting growth, actually masked a deteriorating condition 
which became apparent only after the fluid had been removed and the animal closely 
examined. Subsequent rapid filling of the peritoneal cavity indicated a chronic, 
progressive condition. 


Case3 

A wild-caught female water opossum believed to be about one year of age and maintaining a 
steady weight between 880 and 920 grams suddenly stopped eating and defecating and lost 
10% of her regular body weight (Fig. 9). Examination revealed a palpable abdominal 
mass. A gastrointestinal barium series revealed an obstruction of the gastric pylorus and 
proximal duodenum. She was treated with oral laxatives. After the first treatment the 
animal vomited a hairball and began eating small amounts of fish. After several days she 
passed feces containing hair masses. Within twenty days of the treatment the animal had 
regained its normal weight. 

YAPOK WEIGHT LOSS AND RECOVERY 



FIGURE 9 - Weight changes of female water opossum with hair mass. X-axis represents time following 
onset of illness. Day 1 = average weight prior to illness. A = first day observed not eating. B = taken to 
hospital. C = vomited hairball. Breaks in graph indicate weights taken more than one week apart. 


180 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Regular Weight Monitoring as a Management and Research Tool. Cont'd. 


The yapoks were initially fed prepared meat and fish alternated with freshly killed mice. 
All portions were weighed before and after feeding to determine intake. The hairball 
prompted a change in management in which all mice were skinned. It is possible that their 
digestive system does not digest hair masses well. 


Discussion 

These observations demonstrate the usefulness of weighing animals at regular intervals. 
It is used: 1) to allow a regular close inspection of the animal; 2) to establish a normal range 
of quantitative and objective condition measures for an individual animal; and 3) to create 
a database for a species. 

Although only a few individuals were used in the examples, more extensive data sets may 
provide information about variation within the population. Variations of one animal can 
be used to determine if an animal differs significantly from its average weight to suggest 
illness, pregnancy, or some other change in its condition. 

Normal steady growth curves can also be used to assess normal patterns of development. 

For all three medical cases, regular weighing of the animal allowed a quantitative and 
objective comparison between the animal in an affected condition and that of it in a normal 
condition rather than using a strictly observational and sometimes subjective assessment. 
In all cases a regular baseline of the animal's individual weight served as a reference 
point from which to gauge the animal's condition. 

In summary, regular weighing is a simple but useful tool for quantifying and defining an 
individual's condition more exactly. Such precise measures contribute to a more scientific 
foundation of animal management. 


Acknowledgments 

I thank Miles Roberts for data analysis and for critically reviewing several versions of 
this manuscript. Steve Beissinger's comments were invaluable. I also thank Dr. Roberta 
Wallace for reviewing the medical aspects of this report. 


References 

Hoage, R.J. 1982. Social and physical maturation in captive lion tamarin 
(Leontopothicus rosalia rosalia) (Primates: Callitrichidae). 

Smithsonian Institution Press. Washington, DC. 

Roberts, M.R., Thompson, K.V., & Cranford, J.A. In press. Reproduction 

and growth in the punare {Thrichoys apereoides Rodentia: Echimyidae)) 
of the Brazilian Caatinga with reference to the reproductive strategies of 
the echimyidae. 

Zar, J. 1974. Biostatistical analysis. Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 

a 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


181 


Book 



Review 


Neotropical Rainforest Mammals: A Field Guide 

By Louise H. Emmons 

The University of Chicago Press, 1990 

Chicago, IL 60637 

Paperback 281 pages $19.95 ^ 

Graduate Research Assistant 
Texas A & M Agricultural 
Research ! Extension Center 
Overton, TX 

Through Neotropical Rainforest Mammals: A Field Guide . Louise Emmons explores the 
great wealth of mammalian diversity found in the lowland rainforests of Central and 
South America. Two hundred ninety-six species are described and many of the species 
accounts are further enhanced through illustrations by Francois Feer. This field guide is 
well-organized and provides the reader with extensive information which may be of 
interest to keepers, researchers and tourists alike. While this is a field guide and not 
necessarily a book to be read from cover to cover, Emmons does provide interesting 
discussions concerning the classification, study, biogeography and conservation of 
neotropical rainforest mammals. 

The field guide begins with information concerning how species were selected for 
classification in the text, and how species accounts may be interpreted. Many of the species 
found in this book were described using mammals found in related museum collections 
from around the world. Each species account contains the species’ common name and 
scientific name, with measurements, color patterns and body descriptions for field 
identification, along with an account of similar species which may be found in the same 
geographic location. Also included are the natural history, geographic range and status of 
the species in the wild. Maps are provided to show, as completely as possible, a species’ 
range and status of the species in the wild. Local names, from several countries, are given 
along with references which provide outlets for further investigation into a species or 
genus. Colorful plate illustrations accompany many of the species accounts. The 
illustrations are well done and show the great diversity which exists in the neotropics. 

Six appendices follow the species accounts. They include a glossary of terms, a key to the 
families and genera of rainforest mammals and excellent discussions concerning the 
classification of organisms, speciation, scientific nomenclature, biogeography and 
conservation in the neotropics. Also included are illustrated tracks of large neotropical 
mammals, general references for further study and an index of scientific names. 

With the large number of species described within this book (from rodents and lagomorphs 
to cetaceans and cervids) there will obviously be critics and nomenclature ‘nitpickers’. 
However, this book will provide tourists, researchers, keepers and interested individuals 
with an excellent field resource from which neotropical mammals may be identified and 
understood. Emmons states that, “A field guide is a product not only of its authors but of all 
scientists and explorers who first discovered the species and described them, the many 
others who followed and collected the mass of information needed to draw each range map, 
and the ecologists, ethologists and other biologists who studied their natural history? 

Field guides such as this may prove to be invaluable by providing a simplified source of 
data presented in a form more readily available to a larger audience. With the rainforests 

disappearing at a rate of 75 - 92,000 Km2 annually (AKF . Feb., 1991, pp. 56-59), this book 
becomes a reminder of the vast array of species which may be lost in the years to come. I 
would highly recommend this book to mammal keepers, curators and neotropical travelers, 
as well as the curious individual with an appreciation for the diversity of life on earth. 


8 2 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 



Book Review ■ In the Rainforest. Continued 


In the Rainforest 

By Catherine Caulfield 
University of Chicago Press, 1984, 1991 
5801 South Elliss Ave., Chicago, IL 60637 
310 pages Softcover $11.95 

Review by Arlyn Christopherson 
Education Director, Oakland Zoo 
Oakland, CA 


You have read quotes or information from this book many times, in almost every popular 
article on rainforests. But, here is clearly the place to start if you have serious interests in 
the general question of rainforest use and destruction, or if you are contemplating a trip to 
any of the world’s rainforests. 

Originally published in 1984, this paperback re-release is still burningly relevant. It is 
updated with a brief Afterward dated September 1990. 

Ms. Caulfield presents the results of her research and travels in a strong, clear prose. She 
has visited many of the areas she writes about, talking with factory owners, scientists, 
conservationists, government agencies and local people. Generalized facts are followed 
and illuminated by vivid case histories. She says in her Afterward: 

There is. ..no such thing as ‘the tropical rainforest’: there are many different forests, each 
with its own climate, its own peculiar ecological balance, its own history, its own 
indigenous population, and its own pressures for development. There is no one problem 
and there is no one solution.” 

Two chapters vividly describe the richness in biodiversity of these ancient ecosystems, 
including the cultural diversity among the long-term human occupants of rainforests. 
None of these forests is pristine in the sense that no people live there, rather there are very 
different use patterns between indigenous peoples and “new-comers”, especially in the 
various “translocation” schemes tried in Brazil, Indonesia and other places. Caulfield 
points out the differences between traditional “shifting cultivation” that supports small 
groups and allows regeneration of forests, and the “slash-and-burn agriculture” used by 
large groups of new farmers that destroys the land beyond repair. She contests the notion 
that overpopulation is the main cause of rainforest destruction; instead, it is the grossly 
unequal distribution of land, where only a few percent of landowners own the vast majority 
of the farmland. “The effect of most rainforest exploitation is to redistribute wealth 
upward.” 

Among the most interesting chapters are two that deal with both early and ongoing 
discoveries of rainforest plants useful in medicine, like quinine, “discovered” by the 
Western world in the forests of South America hundreds of years before it came into 
general use as an anti-malarial drug, and the importance of wild chichona trees today, 
when so many varieties of malaria are becoming drug resistant. 

The many notes and references are grouped at the end of the text. Reference numbers are 
not printed in the text, but the interested reader can ferret them out. The index is complete 
and useful. With her last words, Caulfield reminds us that: 

“While we are agitating for the preservation of tropical rainforests in developing 
countries, we should insist that our government protect the small remnants of tropical 
rainforests that remain in our country - in Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and American Samoa. 
And we should demand the end of the senseless destruction of the great ancient forests of 
North America. Our forests too are a global resource, and we have less reason than any 
country to destroy them.” 

183 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks l AKF. 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 

CUR AT OR . ..the Wildlife Discovery Program (a Houston I.S.D. Magnet School) is now 
taking applications for the 1992-93 school year. The Curator position vacancy will become 
available mid-August 1992, and continue until June 1993 (10 month contract with benefits). 
The duties of this position include planning and experiential instruction in an outdoor 
setting at the Houston Zoo to 3rd grade students. Requirements are two or more of the 
following; 1) high school diploma [required]; 2) education experience; 3) wildlife biology 
background; 4) environmental/outdoor education experience; and 5) summer camp 
counselor experience. Salary $1 030.00/Month for 10 months with benefits. Applications 
will be accepted until 15 July 1992. Please send inquiries and a resume to: Ms. Karyl 
Watz, Coordinator, Wildlife Discovery Program, 1513 North Macgregor Way, Houston, 
TX 77030. 

FARMIANIMAL CARETAKER ...(AA7iPA Related Organization: Private Zoological 
Breeding Farm). Duties include, but not limited to; daily feeding of mammal/bird 
collection, enclosure cleaning and maintenance, new exhibit construction and grounds 
maintenance. Animal collection includes hoofstock, marsupials, and birds. Experience 
with these animals (from hand-raising to veterinary procedures) preferred. Must be 
physically able to handle both animals and farm equipment. Salary $14,000/Yr. Send 
resume including 3 references to: Nelson’s Twin Oaks Farm, 13305 Bethany Rd., 
Alpharetta, GA 30201. 

ELEPHANT KEEPER (Specialist Keeper Grade 1 or Grade 2) ...Perth Zoo is seeking an 
experienced Elephant Keeper. The Zoo has one mature female Asian elephant and will 
soon be receiving calves from Malaysia. The Elephant Keeper will assist the Elephant 
Trainer with husbandry and training of the elephants, with implementing safe work 
practices and training other Keepers. The position will also assist with development of an 
Australasian management plan for elephants and with developing elephant exhibit and 
breeding facilities. It is essential that applicants have considerable elephant husbandry 
and training experience and experience training Keepers. Salary: A$27,000 - A$29,250 or 
A$30,000 - $32,000 (average inclusive of penalty rates for rostered work). For Conditions 
and Service, Statement of Duties, Selection Criteria and information on how to apply 
contact: Ms. Sue Sims, Collections Assistant, Perth Zoo - telephone (619) 474-0334, FAX (619) 
367-3921. Closing date: 20 May 1992. 

ZOO KEEPER . ..Topehsi Zoo - requires high school diploma, college-level biology 
coursework, and one year zoo experience. Elephant experience preferred. Starting salary 
$8.54 /hour plus benefits. Salary range to $12. 70/hr. Send resume to: Department of 
Human Resources, City of Topeka, P.O. Box 1996, Topeka, KS 66601. 

CURATOR OF NATURAL SCIENCES (Randall Museum. 

San FranciscOf CA) ... supervises and delivers educational programs for children and 
adults. ■ Responsible for staff supervision, museum exhibits and collections, including live 
animals. Salary $32,000-$39,000 annually. Requires baccalaurate in natural science plus 
2 years’ experience. For application contact Peter Singh, CSC requirement and selection: 
(415) 557-4883. File before 22 May 1992. 

BIRD KEEPER . ..the Washington Zoological Park is looking for a full time bird keeper. 
Experience with psittacines, waterfowl and cranes (raptors optional). Degree or equivalent 
zoo related experience. Daily duties include bird care, habitat upkeep, breeding programs, 
record keeping, training, acquisition, etc. Must be willing to work weekends/holidays. 
Starting salary $12,000 with year-end bonus and excellent benefits. Excellent growth 
potential. Salary commensurate with experience. Contact/send resume to; Peter A. 
Rittler, Administrator, Washington Zoological Park, 19525 SE 45th, Issaquah, WA 98027. 
Position open until filled. 


184 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 

City State/Province Zip 


Telephone 


(home) 


(work) 


U.S. Members 


C a n a di an Mgml?g r § 


I I $30.00 Professional/U.S. 

Full-time Keepers 

I I $25.00 Affiliate/U.S. 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $25.00 Associate/U.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


I I $35.00 Professional/Canada 

Full-time Keepers 

EZ! $30.00 Affiliate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

I I $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


I I $50.00 or up Contributmg/U.S. 

Individuals 

I I $50.00 or up Institutional/U.S. 

Organizations I Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


□ 

□ 


$55.00 or up Contributing/Canada 

Individuals 

$55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 

Organizations ! Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


International Members 


Library Only 


I I $40.00 International 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


□ $20.00 Libraiy 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 

Zoo Address 

Title 

Work Area 

Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S.A. 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.SA. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 



St 

<0 

Ui 

Ui 


<x> 

c 

<x> 

Ui 


o 


00 

o\ 


o 

w 

C/) s 


O ;:- 

Him 

N ;: 
§ :’ 

Ws 

O ! 


05 < 
05 CL 
05 • 
O 
05 


ts 

(D 


o 


55 " SH ^ 
^ f-4 tu 

s C- 
2 8 
?u 


3 r* 


Iju 1— • 

r^ cr 
O “3 

r» 04 


-5 

r-J 

•-< 

O 


9L 


o 

C? 

ua 

o 



n 


81. 

ro 


o 

T* 

04 

& 

-5 

7<r" 


CjJ 


CaI 



jAnimal June 1992 

Keepers' 

[Forum 

! 

: 7Cc> 

AJZ'P 



Indicated toProfessioncdAnirnal Care 


ANIMAL KEEPERS' FORUM, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 June 1992 

Volume Nineteen 

Editor-In-Chief: Susan Chan Number Six 

Associate Editors: Kayla Grams & Gretchen Ziegler 

Animal Keepers’ Forum (ISSN 0164-9531) is a monthly journal of the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc., 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the 
annual pubUcation costs o f Animal Keepers' Forum . Third Class postage paid at Topeka, KS. Postmaster: 
Please send address changes to: 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

Administrative Offices, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 
Barbara Manspeaker, Administrative Secretary 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Ed Hansen, Reid Park Zoo, Tucson, AZ 85716 President 

Janet McCoy, Washington Park Zoo, Portland, OR 97221 Vice President 

Ellen Bradfield, Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta, GA 30315 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112 

Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Immediate Past President 

COMMITTEE CHAIRPERSONS - PROTECT HEADS 


Awards Committee 

Jan McCoy, Washington Park Zoo 

Book Re view Coordinators 

Melba T. Brown, National Zoo - general interest 

Tom Aversa, Boston Metro Zoos - technical 

Staff Exchang e 

Dale Frerking, Kansas City Zoo 

AAZK History Committee 

Rachel Rogers, San Diego Zoo 
Public Education Committee 
Elaine Puzo, Newark Museum MiniZoo 
Keeper-AccQmmodatiQns List 

Heidi Manicki, Metro Toronto Zoo 

An Approach to. Zookeeping 

Pat Sammarco, Gainesville, FL 
Zoo Infant Development Project 
Harmony Frazier-Taylor, Woodland Park Zoo 
AAZK Manual of Resources 

Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo 

Nominations & Elections 

Mike Light, Kings’ Island 
Membersh ip Directory 


Keeper Training & Education 

{includes Library Resources, 

Reference Search, and Keeper Training 
Materials) L.R/R.S. - Marilyn Cole, Metro 
Toronto; KTM - Laura Treschel, Minnesota Zoo 
Researoh/Grants Committee 

Susan M. Barnard, Zoo Atlanta 

Animal ..Data Transfer Form 

Bemie Feldman, Burnet Park Zoo 
AAZK Liaison to AAZPA 

Oliver Claffey, Metro Toronto Zoo 
Biological Values/Gestation 
Toni Danzig, Greater S. F. Bay Area Chapter 
Diet Notebook 

Susan Bunn Spencer, Beardsley Zoological Gdns. 

By-Laws Review 

VACANCY 

Zoo/Universitv List 

Mike Illig, Washington Park Zoo 

Legislative Advisor 

Phyl Nilson Wojcik, John Ball Zoo 

Publications Funding Committee 

VACANCY 


Tucson AAZK Chapter, Tucson, AZ 
Exhibit Design Form - John Brangan, Roger Williams Zoo / Eric Krussman, National Zoo - Co-Chairs 
International Affairs Coordinators - Mona Keith, Calgary Zoo (east) Pam McDougall, Calgary Zoo (west) il 

Conservation. Preservation. R estoration (CPR) Committee - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo 
Bowling for Rhinos ‘92 Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Indianapolis Zoo 
Ecosystem Survival Plan fESPl National C oordinator - Norman Gershenz, San Francisco Zoo 


Keeper Training Videotape 

Production Coordinator - Harry Hofauer, Metro Toronto Zoo, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Order/Distribution Center at AAZK Administrative Offices in Topeka 


Liaison and Information Network for Keepers (LINK) 
Coordinator - Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada 


printed on recycled paper 


Table of Contents 


Information for Contributors 185 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt 186 - 187 

From the President/New Members Announced 188 

Zoo Infant Development Project Update/T-Shirt Survey Results ........190 

How Do Your Genes Flow? 

Considerations in Genetic Management of Captive Populations 191 - 198 

Chapter News............... .198 - 200 

Enrichment Options (Cats, Binturong, Skinks, Gibbon, Emus) 201 

Lewa Downs Conservation Report 202 

Ngare Sergoi Support Group Membership Form 203 

Biological Values for Selected Mammals III Order Form 204 

A New Life for Mona the Elephant... 205 - 210 

Book Reviews (Elephants: The Deciding Decade and 

The Asian Elephant: Ecology and Management 210 - 212 

Looking Back 212 

Information Please (Virginia Opossum weight reduction diet) 212 

Legislative Outlook (Wetland Conservation, Asian Bear & Wild Bird Trade) 213 - 214 

Regional Coordinators List 215 

Opportunity Knocks 216 

Final Call for PapersAVorkshops for Conference ‘92, Registration and Hotel Forms, 

Conference Highlights and Airline Discount Information (jOLD INSERT 

Election ‘93 (Board of Directors) Duties ,Qualifications, Nomination Procedures, 
Nominator Form, Nominee Biographical Form BLUE INSERT 


Information for Contributors 

Animal Keepers' Forum publishes original papers and news items of interest to the animal 
keeping profession. Non-members are welcome to submit articles for consideration. 

Articles should be typed or hand-printed and double-spaced. All illustrations, graphs, 
charts and tables should be clearly marked, in final form, and should fit in a page size no 
greater than 15cm x 25 l/2cm ( 6" x 10"). Literature used should be cited in the text (Brown, 
1986) and alphabetically in final bibliography. Avoid footnotes. Include scientific name of 
species (as per ISIS) the first time it is used. Thereafter use common name. Use metric 
system for weights and measurements (standard equivalents may be noted in 
parenthesis). Use the continental dating system (day-month-year). Times should be listed 
as per the 24-hour clock (0800, 1630 hrs. etc.) Black and white photos only are accepted. 
Color slides should be converted to black and white prints (minimum size 3x5 inch) before 
submission. Clearly marked captions should accompany photos. Please list photo credit. 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers' Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for 
publication. Articles of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the 
zoo professionals who serve as referees for AKF . No commitment is made to the author, but 
an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be 
separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The editor reserves the 
right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by the 
author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed envelope. Telephone or FAX contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted. However, long articles must be sent by U.S. mail. The phone 
number is (913) 272-5821 Ext. 31. FAX # is 913-272-2539. 

DEADLINE FOR EACH EDITION IS THE 15TH 

OF THE FB£CEDI NG MONIH 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the 
Animal Keepers' Forum editorial staff or the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 
Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a 
copy of the reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. Reprints of material appearing in 
this journal may be ordered from the editor. Back issues are available for $2.00 each. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 185 


This month’s cover features the Pika, also known as a Mouse Hare or Conie. This animal 
belongs to the single living genus Ochotons, which contains 19 species. Pikas inhabit open 
plains, deserts, steppes, talus or piles of broken rock in many countries throughout the 
Northern Hemisphere. They feed on a variety of vegetation and most populations 
construct haypiles of sun-cured grasses, sedges and weeds for use as food during the 
winter. Although they live in regions where winters are long and severe, they do not 
hibernate. Breeding season for Ochotona occurs in the spring and summer and most 
populations produce two or more litters per year. Gestation is 30 days and litter size may 
vary from 4-10 young. This month’s cover art is by Sam Clites, a keeper at the Louisville 
Zoological Gardens, Louisville, KY. Thanks, Sam! 


Scoops 


and 


Scuttlebutt 


N ationa l Position 

The newly formed Publication Funding Committee (PFC) is looking for a new Chair in 
light of the recent resignation of Joseph Rindler of the Columbus Zoo. This position would 
require working with the Board Overseer, Rachel W. Rogers, towards the development of 
methods and goals for the PFC. 

Skills helpful to this position would be the ability to run an IBM PC w/ WordPerfect 5.0 
and/or a MacPlus w/ Microsoft Word 4.0B. This person would also be responsible for the 
correspondence necessary to coordinate committee members. The PFC is a very important 
committee to the future of the AAZK, so we are looking for persons serious about being a part 
of our fundraising team! 

For further information or if you are interested in this position, please send resume to: 
Rachel Watkins Rogers, AAZK Board Member, San Diego Zoo, Mammal Dept., P.O. Box 
551, San Diego, CA 92112-0551, or phone (619) 231-1515 Ext. 4394, 6:30 a.m. - 2:30 p.m. 
(Friday - Tuesday) Western Standard Time. Deadline for response is 15 August 1992 . 

New Chair for Legislative Committee Named 

Phyllis Nilson Wojcik, John Ball Zoo, Grand Rapids^ MI, has been approved by the Board 
of Directors as Chair of the AAZK Legislative Committee. In the coming months Phyllis 
will be taking over putting together the Legislative Outlook column for AKF which has 
been handled during the past year by the editor. This column will hopefully keep members 
aware of current and pending legislation affecting wild animals and zoos, information 
on interesting environmental issues, and provide information on how members may 
become involved in voicing their opinions on these issues. 


Important Phone Number Corrections - Please Note ! 

Patty Pearthree, Bowling for Rhinos Chairperson 
(317)322-8723 

Conference ^92 Airline Discount Number 
1-800-424-3434 Ext 195 


186 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Continued 


Accessory Note 

Please be advised that until further notice the AAZK logo stickers and car decals are no 
longer available. We hope to have these popular accessories available soon. Watch your 
AKF for notice of when and where you may order them once again. Thank you. 

Histpry Bopk Prpj get Cpntmygs tQ guppQit 

The AAZK Board of Directors and History Committee Chair Rachel Rogers wish to thank 
the following individuals and Chapters who have donated funding towards the publication 
of the 25th Anniversary History Book: Krista Swanberg, Sedro Valley, WA; the Dallas Zoo 
Keepers Association, Dallas, TX; Portland Chapter of AAZK, Washington- Park Zoo, 
Portland, OR; and the Zoo Atlanta AAZK Chapter, Atlanta, GA. Many thanks! 

The AAZK Board of Directors and the AO staff wish to thank the Florida Suncoast Chapter 
(Tampa, FL) for their generous donation of $200 to the operating budget of the Association. 
Their willingness to support their parent organization is much appreciated. Their 
donation represents close to the cost of mailing the Animal Keepers’ Forum for one month. 
The Florida Suncoast Chapter is made up of members from Busch Gardens and the Lowry 
Park Zoo. 


Noniiiiations and Elections Committee Update 

-submitted by Mike Light, NEC Chair, Wild Animal Habitat , Kings Island 

As mentioned in the last issue of AKF , we have been busy making improvements to the 
AAZK Board of Directors nomination and election procedure. The committee and the 
Board of Directors feel these changes are needed to make our election more professional. 
The major changes that have been made are as follows: 

1) Nominee biographical sketches and ballots will be mailed to voting members via 
first class mail. 

2) Ballots will be printed on 3 x 5-inch cards to make tabulating the results easier. 

3) A pre-addressed return envelope will be sent along with each ballot. 

4) An independent Certified Public Accountant has been contracted to tabulate our 
election results. 

5) Ballots will be returned directly to the CPA. 

6) A better system for requesting a replacement ballot has been developed. 

These are the major changes that have been approved by the Board of Directors and will be 
implemented for the 1993 election. If you have any questions, please contact Mike Light, 
NEC Chair, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings Island, Kings Island, OH 45034. 

Please note that nominatin forms may be found inside the Conference ’92 insert in this 
issue of AKF . 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


187 


From the President. 


It may seem far off, but the National Conference and the Association’s 25th Anniversary 
celebration is just around the corner. This year’s conference, hosted by the San Diego 
AAZK Chapter, promises to be a memorable event, with a challenging program and visits 
to three world-class institutions. 

Now is the time to direct your concerns and ideas to the AAZK Board of Directors. In order 
for any item to receive complete attention from the Board, it must be filed in writing and 
submitted by 1 August 1992. 

The focus of the Sunday Open Board Meeting will change slightly this year. The morning 
session will be dedicated to the “State of the Association”. During this session, the 
delegates will receive reports on the various aspects of the business workings of our 
Association, including a complete financial report and a review of the Animal Keepers' 

Forum. 

The afternoon sessions will shift from a Committee reporting format to actual concurrent 
committee workshops, open to the membership. In the past the many committees of our 
Association were forced to squeeze in a formal meeting or two between papers, tours and 
events. This year we are going with open workshop sessions that will allow for active 
participation from the membership and the committee members. The agenda will be posted 
at the conference. Filing any suggestions that you may have, in writing with the 
Committee Chair, by the 1 August deadline will help make sure that your ideas receive full 
consideration from the committee. i 

We all look forward to a professional, productive conference. , || 



Reid Park Zoo 


AAZK Announces New Professional/Contributing Members 


Rebecca Ewing, Roger Williams Prk Zoo (RI) 

Jill Stumbaugh, Pet Farm Park (VA) 

Madeline A. Roberts, NC Museum of Life/Science 
Carol Motley, Project Wildlife, Inc. (OK) 

Patrick Callahan, Cincinnati Zoo ((OH) 

Brian McKenna, Lincoln Park Zoo (IL) 

Susan Benson, Denver Zoo (CO) 

Shawn Shackleford, Gatlinburg’s Municipal Black Bear Habitat (TN) 

NOTE: Last month Sandra Riddle, Caldwell Zoo, Tyler, TX, was incorrectly listed as Sandra Rider.,. 


Gabriel Sigerson, Philadelphia Zoo (PA) 

Leslie Brook, NC Museum of Life/Science (NC) 
Michael A. Leonard, Zoo Atlanta (GA) 

Linda Berwick, Santa Fe CC Teaching Zoo (FL) 
Mark Booth, Indianapolis Zoo (IN) 

Sandy Werner, Lincoln Park Zoo (IL) 

Lori Dunn, Bowmanville Zoo (ONT.) 


New Contributing Members 

Cate Werner, Keeper, Denver Zoo, Denver, CO 

Renewing Contributing Members 

Folsom’s Children’s Zoo, Lincoln, NE 
Gene DeBever, Chicago, IL 


188 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 



Quality exotic 
animal diets 


^ TTP^l TIUI ^'^uti'itionally fsalanced 
OrXJu 1I%UM Fixed formylation • E 


Economical 


When you need a complete line of 
high-quality dry and frozen 
animal diets for your feeding 
program, call Animal Spectrum. 


NEB^HSKA BBAUB 

h 1 



SPECTRUM 


BROOD-RITE 

HEATERS 


Frozen feline diets 
Frozen bird of prey diets 
Frozen canine diet 
Chunk and chopped horsemeat, 
hearts, livers, rib, shank, 
knuckle bones, and tailbones 

Banana flavored psittacine/primate, 20% protein, dry 
Banana flavored primate, Pro-Plus 25% protein dry 
Leaf Eater primate dry Omnivore dry 

Llama Vitamins & Minerals dry Polar Bear dry 
Marmoset/Tamarin dry Ratite dry 

Hoofstock supplement, with Selenium dry 

Bulbless heaters— nothing to break 
Safe around all animals and 
bedding material. 

Even heat distribution in 240, 500, 
or 750 wattages. 


One call does it all 

FREE 1 - 800 - 228-4005 

FAX 308-534-7015 


Animal Spectrum, Inc. 

P.O. Box 721 

North Platte, NE 69101-0721 


LAST SPRING ! 


LAST SUMMER ! 

IKmrr VBMcmmrr FKTJEcr P>a“ “OW to coUect data for ZTOP ! 

If you would like to have your zoo and 
yoiuxelf represented in the first 
ZIPD Notebook: Mammals 
(and possibly the only notebook for 
this group) you need to get your ZIDP 
data sheets to me by 31 October 1992.* 

Why not make the AAZK National Conference in San Diego your target date? 
You can bring your completed forms with you and give them to me there OR 
you can FAX material to me at: 

FAX (206) 684-4873 

We currently have over 200 completed data forms representing approximately 
30 families with over 55 different species from 35 institutions. 

BUT 

That leaves approximately 80 mammal families NOT represented. 

PLEASE HELP ! 

I hope to see you in San Diego with HUGE stacks of completed data forms. 




*I may fudge this date to the end of the year, but not beyond. 


• 4 ' 




Results of T-Shirt Preference Survey Announced 

Earlier this year the Little Rock Chapter sent a survey into the Forum regarding T-shirts 
and sweatshirts. I would like to thank all of you who responded to the survey. Results of the 
survey are as follows: 

Sweatshirts: Grey and Forest Green 
T-Shirts: Tan, Forest Green and Maroon 

Grey sweatshirts and tan T-shirts are currently available. The new colors will not be 
available until the old colors are sold out. When the new colors become available you will 
be notified through AKF . submitted by Marie Schmude, T-shirt Chair, Little Rock AAZK 
Chapter, Little Rock, AR. 

(Editor’s note: This item arrived after deadline and we were too far along in closing out the 
June issue to be able to include a T-shirt ! Sweatshirt Order Form . We will plan on running 
the order form next month for those who would like to get these items. Or you may write to 
Marie at the Little Rock Zoo for more information.) 

190 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 



How Do Your Genes Flow? 

Considerations in Genetic Management 
of Captive Populations 




Elizabeth Notleyf Keeper 
Taronga Zoo 
Mosmarif N.S,W. 
Australia 


(Editor's note: This paper was presented at the 1986 Annual Conference of the 
Australasian Society of Zoo Keepers and published in their journal, Thvlacinus. Vol. 12, 
No. 3, Spring 1987. It is reprinted here with permission of the editor and the author.) 


Among the goals of the modern zoo is conservation. It has been suggested that there are 
four aspects of participation by zoos in conservation efforts (Seal, 1978). These include: 

1. Education or increasing awareness through education programs, graphics, 

design of exhibits, publicity and gaining participation in local programs 
(Seal, 1978). 

2. Design of exhibits and holding facilities being oriented towards the breeding of 

individual species. This includes the gradual reduction of species being 
exhibited by zoos and an increase in the numbers of the individual species held 
(Seal, 1978). Taronga Zoo’s Statement of Purpose (April, 1986) states as one of its 
aims... "To promote the conservation of wildlife through the care and 
propagation of selected species and increasing public awareness of man's 
impact on animals and their environment and encouraging solutions to 
these problems". 

3. As research centers zoos can provide a major contribution to the needed data base 
for efforts to increase the likelihood of survival of endangered or threatened 
species in their native habitat. This provides the possibility to describe many 
features of the species’ life history from careful study in captivity (Seal, 1978). 
Note that this is only possible in populations that have not been selectively bred 
towards domestication. 

In this case, we, as keepers, must utilize adequate record keeping techniques 
and be prepared to liaise with researchers to help hasten the process. 

4. The breeding programs of zoos can also make a direct contribution to the 

conservation effort. This includes total captive production of animals for 
exhibit purposes and the actual preservation of a limited number of endangered 
species (Seal, 1978). 

The rest of this paper will be concerned with some of the management aspects of breeding 
programs. There are basically two objectives of breeding programs in zoos. 

The first one is to develop a self-sustaining captive population from which animals may be 
drawn for exhibit purposes. It is possible to selectively breed zoo domesticated stock of a 
given species which is well suited to captive life but completely unsuited to an existence in 
its original or any wild habitat. In these cases it is unnecessary to provide a reservoir of a 
gene pool for the preservation of the species (Seal, 1978). 

The choice should be clearly documented and recognized since such selectively inbred 
strains in all probability will not produce an accurate representation of the species for 
either life history studies or development of data for suitable management of the species in 


Animal Keepers Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


191 


How Do Your Genes Flow?. Continued 

the wild. They also run a high risk of loss of vigor, reduced viability, growth rate, fertility 
and extinction (Seal, 1978). This effect of inbreeding has been well documented for 
Przewalski's Horse (Foose, 1977), while Taronga Zoo's giraffes have shown reduced 
viability - these giraffes are basically all related to one male. 

A bird species at Taronga Zoo for which this first management type is suitable is the Long- 
tailed finch (Poephila acuticauda). At present these inhabit a fairly large aviary with a 
population of around 85 individuals. However, due to the large population size, it has 
problems due to overcrowding and stress-related diseases including Salmonella and 
other parasites. 

It is possible, in such a situation, to work out a maximum population suitable for the 
available facilities and then work out a demographic plan to maintain a zero population 
growth. 

It is first important to be able to tell the age of the individual. This can be done by color 
banding six monthly and yearly the individuals up to a year old by feather plumage aging 
techniques. Then, by keeping good records on mortality, obtain data on the first year 
survivorship and the annual adult survivorship average. These two characteristics of a 
species then determine the average number of offspring per parent necessary to maintain 
a stationary population. Mortality data, especially during the first year of life, are 
essential for determining the detrimental effects of inbreeding. The failure to recognize 
inbreeding in the past can, in most cases, be attributed to the lack of adequate records. 

Foose (1977) proposed a plan for demographic planning which is summarized below: 

1. Determine the existing and, if possible, potential age and sex specific 

survivorships and fertilities; calculate the existing age structure by sex. 

2. Project how the population size and age structure will change in the near 

future, subject to the above determined survivorships and fertilities. 

3. Determine the finite rates of change and stable age distributions associated 

with determined sets of existing and potential survivorships and fertilities. 

4. Determine - 

A. ^ carrying capacity for the captive population. 

B. number of surplus animals needed for other purposes, e.g. reintroduction 

into the wild (sales for financing ongoing project). 

5. Within the upper limits set by the potential or maximum existing values of the 

demographic parameters, construct (by computer) the one or more sets of 
managed survivorships and fertilities that will produce a stationary captive 
population by culling (age specific removals) and/or contraception. 

The variation in culling and contraception required by the different stationary 
sets of survivorships and fertilities represents the alternatives for sustained 
production of surpluses once a stationary population is attained. 

6. Determine the sets of stationary age distributions associated with each of the 

above determined stationary sets of managed survivorships and fertilities. 

The total number of animals in one or more of these stationary age distributions 
should approximate the desired carrying capacity for the population. 

7. Devise (again by computer) a plan for moving from the existing to a stationary 

population which best fits the carrying capacity and surplus production desired. 

8. Investigate random or chance fluctuations in the population that might occur 
in the future. 


192 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


How Do Your €^nes Flow?. Continued 


9. Try to select individuals for demographic planning with a genetic model in 
mind. 

The other major breeding strategy in zoos is to attempt to maintain as much of the genetic 
variability present in the wild gene pool as possible. This strategy is especially applicable 
to the breeding of endangered species with a view to release into their native habitat or to 
species rare in Australia in captivity, e.g. Macaws, Victorian Crowned Pigeons. 

Captive propagation programs dedicated to the eventual return of species to nature must 
adhere to certain genetic principles, which are (Brown, 1983) - 

a. The 'bottleneck effect’ on the level of genetic variation should be minimized 
by maximizing the size of the founding population (See Fig. 1, Senner, 1980). 

The 'bottleneck effect' is basically where a small number of individuals 
establishes a new population - the bottleneck occurring at the population's 
minimum size. In the bottleneck there is not a great loss of variance - a sample 
of as little as 3 breeding pairs will contain greater than 90% of the variance 
present in the source population. 

However, the effect on allelic diversity is much more severe. Intuitively it is 
obvious that alleles present at low frequency have little chance of being maintain- 
ed through the bottleneck. The consequences of this loss we can only guess at. In 
the short-term there is probably little effect. In the long-term, however, in fluctuat- 
ing or changing environments, rare alleles may be crucial. This view is support- 
ed historically by the rapid evolution of resistance - resistance of bacteria to 
antibiotics, insects to pesticides, rodents to warfaring and plants to heavy metals. 
In at least three of these cases, the presence, at low frequency, of the resistant geno- 
types can be detected among populations not subjected to selection (Brown, 1983). 



Figure 1. The sensitivity of the model to variation in the number 
of founders (Senner, 1980). 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


193 


How Do Your Genes Flow?, Continued 


b. The rate of inbreeding should be minimized. The rate of inbreeding, AF, 
is equivalent to the proportion A of polymorphic loci that become fixed, i.e. 
homozygous for a particular allele, in any one generation. In a random mating 
population AF =— i- where N = the number of breeding individuals (Brown, 1983) 
2N 

A substantial body of literature supports the view that population fitness is 
positively correlated with heterozygosity. Therefore, with inbreeding you 
increase the rate of homozygosity, thereby decreasing fitness. 

It has also been shown that a 10% increase in the inbreeding coefficient produces 
a 5-10% decline in a particular reproductive trait. Considering total reproduc- 
tive performance, the decline in fitness jumps to a staggering 25% or so for 
species which have not been inbred in the past (Brown, 1983). 

The question that arises is- - is there then a threshold rate of inbreeding below 
which fitness can be maintained? From the accumulated experience of animal 
breeders, the answer appears to be 'yes'. They use the empirical rule of thumb 
that natural selection for performance and fertility can balance the effects of 
genetic drift, i.e. AF (inbreeding rate) per generation is no more than 1%. This 
1% rule is known as the basic rule of conservation genetics. From this rule we 
are able to calculate the absolute minimum effective population size consistent 
with the short-term preservation of fitness. In the equation AF = ^ with 

2N 

AF = 0..01, we find that the lower limit of an ideal random mating population 
is 50 (Brown, 1983). 

Using this we can then follow one of the schemes for maximum avoidance of 
inbreeding. Figure 2 (Flesness, 1977) shows one scheme and Figure 3 shows 
some for smaller populations (Senner, 1980). These can be used for any size 
population and are designed to ensure each individual contributes equally to 
the next generation, therefore minimizing inbreeding. Alternatives to these 
schemes will also be discussed later. 


To help reduce the rate of inbreeding there are three other management techniques open to 
us. 


1. As the ratio of effective number to census number has been shown to be highly sensitive 
to the sex ratio among breeding adults, the number of males to females should be equal (see 
Fig. 4). In the case of herd animals, males can still be rotated each year (Brown, 1983). 

2. Equalizing the number of progeny can also help increase the effective population size 
where 

62 = variance in family size 
N = census number 
Nc = effective number 
Nc =4N 

2 - 1-62 therefore if 62 = 0, 

then the effective population size is twice the census number - and this occurs when each 
member of the population contributes equally to the next generation. 


As an equal to the use of the complex maximum avoidance of inbreeding schemes, 
virtually the same benefit can be obtained by equalizing the contribution each individual 
makes to the next generation. For birds ( and mammals) with low fecundities, it is also 
desirable to maximize the number of offspring per female. The greater the number of 


194 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


How Do Your Genes Flow?. Continued 

offspring, the easier it is to equalize family size (by culling), the greater the opportunity for 
natural selection and the smaller the number of generations required to reach or surpass 
the desired effective size. For this, improved husbandry techniques are always necessary. 



Figure 2. Maximum avoidance of inbreeding scheme showing how least related animals 
are paired over each succeeding generation. (Flesness, 1977). 




Figure 3. Mating Schemes for smaller populations used to decrease the rate of inbreeding 
in captive populations (Senner, 1980). 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


195 


How Do Your Genes Flow?. Continued 



3. If the species breeding occurs in two isolated captive populations, then routine reciprocal 
transfers greatly reduce the rate of inbreeding in both populations. With a transfer of 1-2 
individuals per generation, the two populations behave genetically as a single inbreeding 
unit. 

An example of these techniques from Frankel & Soule is shown below. 


Table 1. Hypothetical 'worst' and 'best' cases for genetic management of a captive 
population (Brown, 1983). 


Variables 

Worst Case 

Best Case 

Original number of animals 

32 

32 

Number in each zoo 

16 

16 

No. of males breeding in zoo 

2 per zoo 

8 per zoo 

Sex ratio 

0.25 

1.0 

Migration 

None 

1 per generation 

Mating system 

Random 

Forced pairings 

Progeny distribution 

Random 

Equal 

Effective number (Nc) 

6.4/zoo 

32/zoo 

Change in F (inbreeding 
coefficient) per generation 

0.078 

0.0083 


196 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


How Do Your Genes Flow?. Continued 

Finally, conscious and unconscious artificial selection should be minimized and 
behavioral changes, particularly towards domestication, should be minimized (Brown, 
1983). 

It is almost inevitable that the breeder chooses animals that can be readily handled. 
Individuals that die as a consequence of handling stress are automatically selected 
against. Similarly, aggressive individuals are often not chosen for breeding purposes. 
In nature, of course, nervousness or aggressiveness is very much part of a species 
behavioral survival mechanism. 

It was noted that the promotion of fecundity by improved husbandry increased the 
opportunity for culling. It's all too easy to forget the efficiency with which selection culls 
natural populations. The weak, the sick and physiologically or anatomically abnormal 
do not survive to reproduce in nature. In zoos, however, rare and expensive animals 
(particularly newborn) are maintained in an intensive-care like environment. The 
consequences of this include the frequency of deleterious alleles are bound to increase and 
the longer the group is captively bred the more genetically handicapped it will become 
(Brown, 1983). 

Conclusion 

The correct breeding strategy for a captive propagation program depends upon the 
program’s aims. These must be clearly defined before establishing a captive population. 

Conservation authorities must determine the criteria on which species for captive 
propagation are to be chosen. 

Genetic management is absolutely essential if any captive group destined to return to 
natural is to retain its fitness, evolutionary potential and if domestication is to be avoided. 

The 1% rule should apply, Ne = 50 being achieved by managing sex ratio, migration 
between colonies and by equalizing the reproductive contributions of families. In the best 
cases, Ne (effective population size) can be twice the actual number of breeding adults. 


Appendix I 

Definitions: 

Conservation - denotes policies and programs for the long-term retention of natural 
communities under conditions which provide the potential for continuing evolution. 

Preservation - encompasses activities which provide for the short-term maintenance of 
individuals or groups but not for their evolutionary change. 

Bottleneck - a period when a population becomes reduced to only a few individuals. 

Allele - one of two or more alternative forms of a gene - usually recognized by the 
phenotype or observable characteristic of an individual'. 

Genetic Drift - variation in gene frequency from one generation to another due to chance 
fluctuations. 

Founder effect - genetic drift due to the founding of a population by a small number of 
individuals. 

Heterozygous - a cell or organism having two different alleles at a given locus on 
homologous chromosomes. 

Homozygous - having the same allele at a given locus on homologous chromosomes. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


197 


How Do Your Genes Flow?. Continued 


Inbreeding - mating between relatives 

Inbreeding coefficient « the probability that two genes (alleles) at a locus are identical by 
descent. 

Inbreeding depression - reduction in fitness or vigor due to the inbreeding of normally 
outbreeding organisms. 


References 

Ayala, F.S. & Kiger, Jr. J.A. 'Modern Genetics' (2nd Ed) (1984). Benjamin/Cummins 
Publishing Co. 

Brown, A.M. (1983) 'Conservation Genetics in Victoria' - Fisheries and Wildlife 
Victoria; Resources and Planning Branch Technical Report Series No. 1. 

Flesness, N.R. (1977) 'Gene Pool Conservation and Computer Analysis' International 
Zoo Yearbook No. 17: 77-81. 

Foose, T.J. (1977) 'Demographic Models for Management of Captive Populations'. 
International Zoo Yearbook No. 17:70-76. 

Seal, U.S. 'The Noah's Ark Problem. Multigeneration Management of Wild Species 
in Captivity'. In Endangered Birds: Management Techniques for preserving 
threatened species. S.A. Temple (ed.) University of Wisconsin Press, Madison. 

Senner, J.W. (1980) 'Inbreeding, Depression and the Survival of Zoo Populations'. In 

Conservation Biology. An Evolutionary Ecological Perspective. ME. Soule and 
B.A. Wilcox (eds.) S. Naver Associates Massachusetts. 

Zoological Parks Board of N.S.W. Development Plan. Vol. 1, Statement of Aims and 
Objectives. April 1986. 


Chapter 



So far 1992 has been busy for our 
Chapter. Our January meeting took 
place at the N.C. Zoo’s Veterinary 
Hospital. A tour of the hospital was 
given and slides of the Toledo Zoo were 
shown. 


North Carolina Chapter AAZK 


News 


an informative lecture and slide show 
about the plight of the rhinos and the 
work being done at Ngare Sergoi. We 
had very good attendance and Andy 
sold several T-shirts. A “donation” fee 
was charged from each attendee that 
went to the Ngare Sergoi Support Group. 
Approximately $650 was raised from the 
group for this event. While in 
Asheboro, Andy gave talks to four 
schools. He was a big hit with the kids 
and we are still hearing great remarks 
about his visit. Thanks, Andy! 


The conservation Parking Meter was 
received in mid-March. It was 
unveiled/dedicated on 25 April at the 
North Carolina Zoological Park. 
Participants included Mr. Robert Fry, 
Director of the N. C. Zoo; Ms. Katherine 
Skinner, Director of the N.C. Nature 
Conservancy; and Ms. Kathy Trogdon, 
President of the N.C. Chapter. For the 
first six days “in action”, by the end of 
April, the Meter collected a total of 
$88.05. 


Our Chapter assisted the N.C. 
Zoological Society on 25 April with the 
annual Zoo Run by getting volunteers to 
act as course monitors. The Chapter 
also donated a Chapter T-shirt for a 
door prize. 


To help kick off our Bowling for Rhinos 
event (held 20 May), Andy Lodge 
visited the N.C. Zoo on 8 April and gave 


Four Chapter members spoke to the 
Docents at the N.C. Zoo in February 
about AAZK and the projects that our 
Chapter is involved in. There were 
many positive comments about aazk 
and we hope to recruit new members as 
well as participants in the Chapter’s 
activities. 


198 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Chapter News. Continued 

Two Chapter members visited the 
keepers at the Greenville Zoo in South 
Carolina in March and attended their 
Chapter meeting. Slides were shown of 
the N.C. Zoo and Chapter projects were 
discussed. 

-Lucy Segerson, Secretary 
Chapter Liaison 

Jackson Zoo AAZK Chapter 

The Chapter has gotten off the ground 
well this year after being almost 
defunct at the end of 1991. We are 
planning a Bowling for Rhinos event 
for 16 June. This will be a first for the 
Chapter. 

Numerous projects have already been 
completed due to our new enthusiastic 
members. A garage sale in May 
brought in $200 and a cookie sale made 
$84. More sales are planned in the 
future with all proceeds going towards 
zoo improvements. 

One of these projects, completed earlier 
this year, was a gunite rock waterfall 
constructed by the animal care staff in 
our King Vulture exhibit. A big thanks 
goes to Les Witt for his time in teaching 
us this procedure. 

Many goals have been set and some 
completed because of the enthusiasm 
and dedication of our members. Our 
efforts have already been appreciated by 
visitors and other staff members. We 
look forward to more improvements 
this year. 

-submitted by Kelly Creamer 

Dallas Zoo AAZK Chapter 

In the past several months we have had 
a variety of guest speakers at our 
meetings. A herpetologist from the 
Wellington Zoo in New Zealand gave 
an informative lecture on Tuataras 
(The Dallas Zoo is proud to have 
received eight of these fascinating 
animals on loan). 

In March, Tom and Wanda Cannon 
informed us of their recent work with 
Mark and Delia Owens in Africa. 


Lastly, in April our staff zoologist. Dr. 
Cynthia Bennett, enlighted our Chapter 
on zoo research and some of the on- 
going projects at the zoo. 

The Dallas Zoo AAZK Chapter will 
again participate in Bowling for 
Rhinos this year. This event has been 
scheduled for 31 May. Last year’s Bowl- 
a-Thon was a major success raising 
over $3000. This year we hope to top that! 

-Kevin Lew, Chapter Liaison 


Greenville Zoo AAZK Chapter 

New officers for 1992 are: 

President Janie Raxter 

Vice Pres Kevin Coker 

Secretary Brina Mauro 

Treasurer Anke Meyer 

In our March meeting we had two guest 
speakers, Lucy Segerson, our Regional 
Coordinator, and Gisela Wiggins, 
from the North Carolina Zoo. They 
shared slides of their zoo and we 
exchanged ideas. 

Our staff was invited to the N.C. Zoo on 
8 April to hear Andy Lodge, President of 
Ngare Sergoi Support Group. Anke 
Meyer and I went to the meeting and it 
was great! In addition, the next day 
Anke and I were taken around the zoo 
and we had a wonderful time. Many 
thanks to Lucy, Gisela and the keeper 
staff at N.C. for their hospitality. 

We had our Third Annual Bowling for 
Rhinos fundraiser on 9 May. We had 
11 bowlers and many friends turn out 
for this event. It was a lot of fun. 

-Janie Raxter, President 


BiY-er CitY Chapter AAZK 

The John Ball Zoo Chapter, Grand 
Rapids, MI has recently changed its 
name to the River City AAZK chapter. 
Dana LaBlanc, Chapter secretary, has 
recently accepted a position at the Lubee 
Foundation in Gainesville, FL. We 
wish him the best of luck. Bruce 
Wojcik will fill the position of 
secretary for 1992. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


199 


Continued 

Our Chapter is planning the biggest 
Bowling for Rhinoa yet which will be a 
big job since we raised $5,867 in 1990 
and $4,236in 1991! We also participate 
in an Adopt-A-Stream program with the 
West Michigan Environment Action 
Council. 

-Phyl Nilson-Wojcik, Pres. 


San Diego AAZK Chapter 

April program. ..the Chapter was 
pleased to have Carmi Penny, Curator 
of Mammals (San Diego Zoo) speak at 
our monthly meeting. Carmi talked 
alot about how zoos can work with other 
organizations. 

He discussed the San Diego Zoo’s work 
with Australia and the koalas. Since 
1984, koalas have been sent to 25 cities 
and four countries through the S.D. 
Zoo’s Koala Loan Program. The S.D. 
Zoo has the largest producing colony 
outside Australia. 

The S.D. Zoo is now charging for the 
very first time to loan out koalas, with 
funds being sent to Australia. The Zoo 
has set up an Australian Conservation 
Fund. Carmi went on to discuss other 
conservation/educational programs 
and passed out pamphlet guidelines. 

-Mary Dural, Chapter Liaison 


National Zoological P ark Chapter 

Sandy Skrei, Executive Director of Zoo 
Conservation Outreach Group (Fossil 
Rim, TX) gave a slide presentation at 
our March Chapter meeting. She 
discussed some of the current 
conditions, as well as the future 
potential, of Central American zoos. 
Her slides illustrated ZCOG’s efforts to 
help these zoos to help themselves as a 
result of on-site educational and 
conservation training programs 
provided by ZCOG, She also described 
what opportunities can be offered to 
foreign zoos, as well as direct 
individual involvement available as a 
result of anyone becoming a member of 
ZCOG. 


Once again our Chapter helped 
celebrate Earth Day at the zoo by 
providing close to 200 memorial 
placards for a mock cemetery to honor 
some of the animal species that have 
become extinct at the hands of man. 
The Chapter wishes to extend its 
appreciation to everyone who helped 
with this project, especially Peter Miller 
who coordinated everything from 
determining the specific details, 
purchasing the materials and cutting 
the boards to size. We also wish to 
express appreciation to Bill Xanten and 
the Graphics Department which 
provided the lettering (which saved us 
countless hours of hand-lettering like 
we did last year), and thanks to all the 
Chapter members who helped with the 
painting and application of the lettering 
to the placards. They were displayed on 
our Lion/Tiger hillside and will be 
used at future zoo events. 

-Kathy Kelly, Chapter Liaison 


This and That 

Environmentally Speaking 

Freshwater Resourcesi only 2% of 
America’s rivers are free-flowing, 
because of 65,000 dams built for 
irrigation, drinking water, and 
hydropower. (The Christian Science 
Monitor, 6/18/91) 

Biotas North American waterfowl 
populations have declined 30% since 
1969, mostly due to loss of wetland 
habitat. (The Christian Science Monitor, 
12/23/91). 

Population: one of the few animals 
that still outnumbers California’s 31 
million human beings is the wild rabbit. 
California’s population has doubled 
since 1960. (California Dept, of Fish 
and Game and U.S. Census Bureau). 

The above was excerpted from 
Carrying Capacity Network's 
Clearinghouse Bulletin. 


200 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Conference '92 
Final Call for Papers and 
Workshops 

"Enriching Today" is the theme for paper sessions and workshops at the 1992 AAZK 
National Conference. Any topic related to the care of captive exotic animals will be 
considered, however, those that involve new animal care techniques, significant 
achievements and special projects, technological innovations, and fresh approaches 
toward captive animal management may be given priority. 

The Papers and Workshops Committee for the San Diego Conference is expecting a 
record number of abstract submissions, so early contact with the Papers and Workshops 
Committee is critical. Abstracts will be accepted for review until July 31, 
1992. 

Abstracts should be limited to one or two paragraphs, should describe in detail the 
significance of the presentation topic, and should briefly list the results, conclusions, or 
benefits of the work described. Because the abstracts will be printed in the conference 
program, it is essential that submissions be well-organized and clearly-written. Abstracts 
that are poorly- written, that do not contain proper submission information, or that do not 
otherwise meet submission criteria will be returned with a letter rejecting the abstract 
outright or else suggesting the corrections or alterations required for acceptance. 

Upon acceptance of a paper or workshop abstract, a letter of notification will be mailed to 
the presenter along with a copy of the article "Guidelines for Typing Papers for AAZK 
Conference Proceedings." A typed draft of each paper is due at the time of presentation 
for publication in the Conference Proceedings. A refund of $25.00 off the registration 
fee will be awarded to each presenter only after they have turned in their paper to the 
session moderator. Formal paper presentations will be limited to 15 minutes. 

Abstracts must include the following information: 

Name of Presenter and Co-authors 
Zoological Affiliation 
Position/Title 

Title of PaperA’itle of Workshop 
A/V Equipment Needs 

Send to: 

Terri Peterson, Chairperson 
Papers and Workshops Committee 
c/o AAZK San Diego Chapter 
P.O. Box 551 

San Diego, CA 92112-0551 

The Papers and Workshops Committee is eager to assist anyone who has an idea for any 
kind of presentation: formal paper, workshop, poster presentation, panel discussion, etc. 
Additional information and advice on the design and development of presentation ideas can 
be obtained by contacting the Committee Chairperson. 



1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 

SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 
SEPTEMBER 27 THROUGH OCTOBER 2, 1992 


■CONFERE NCE R EGISTRATION FORM 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

STATE/PROVINCE 
PHONE ( ) 


POSITION/TITLE 


CITY 

ZIP CODE 

ZOO AFFILIATION 


AAZK CHAPTER 

NUMBER OF AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCES ATTENDED 

AAZK COMMITTEE MEMBER? 

PRESENTING A PAPER? 

CONDUCTING A WORKSHOP? 

PARTICIPATING IN ZOOLYMPICS? 

BRINGING AN AUCTION ITEM? 

VEGETARIAN? YES NO 

T-SHIRT? YES NO 

ARRIVAL DATE AND TIME 


YES 

NO 

YES 

NO 

YES 

NO 

YES 

NO 


TYPE 

SIZE SM MED LG XLG 


EARLY REGISTRATION INCENTIVE TOUR; 1ST CHOICE 

2ND CHOICE 
3RD CHOICE 

CONFERENCE FEES* * 

AAZK MEMBER OR SPOUSE $95.00 

NON-MEMBER $105.00 

LATE FEE (AFTER AUGUST 21, 1992) $10.00 

TOTAL FEE ENCLOSED $ 


*FEES INCLUDE A $15;00 CONTRIBUTION TO AAZK NATIONAL. 


PLEASE CONTACT THE AAZK CONFERENCE HOTLINE FOR ADDITIONAL 
CONFERENCE INFORMATION: (619) 231-1515 EXT. 4672. 

PLEASE MAKE CHECKS PAYABLE TO: AAZK CONFERENCE '92 


RETURN THIS FORM AND ALL FEES TO: 
1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 
AAZK SAN DIEGO CHAPTER 
P.O. BOX 551 

SAN DIEGO. CA 92112-0551 



ELECTION 


'93 


WE WANT YOU! Do you wish to help your professional organization? Become an 
AAZK Board Member. Two seats are up for election - those held by Ed Hansen and Janet 
McCoy, whose terms expire on 31 December 1993. New board members will serve a four- 
year term from 1 January 1994 through 31 December 1997. Why is this first call for 
nominations so early? TIME is the answer. Nominations, candidates verification and 
tallying mailed ballots require time. We also wish to notify winners early enough to allow 
them to make arrangements to attend the National AAZK Conference before they assume 
office the following January. This will enable the new Board Members to become familiar 
with Board responsibilities and AAZK activities before they assume responsibility for our 
organization. 

Duties of the Board of Directors 


For a more detailed explanation of the expanded duties of the Board, refer to the By-Laws 
(available upon request from Administrative Offices in Topeka, KS). 

1) Select, appoint or remove officers, committees, agents and employees of the 

Association, including prescribing powers and duties. 

2) To control and manage the Association and its property, passing upon acquisition and 

disbursements with approval of a majority of the Board. 

3) To formulate policies, mles and regulations in accord with the Constitution & By-Laws. 

4) To uphold the Constitution of AAZK and the policies of the Association. 

5) To appear at Board meetings, to accept Board assignments and to devote the time to 

communicatios pertinent to all Board business, including answering correspondence 
promptly and efficiently. 

Qualifications for Nomination 

1) Nominee must be a Professional Member of AAZK and must have been a member of the 

Association for at least one year. 

2) Nominee must be presently employed as an animal keeper/attendant by a recognized 

zoological institution or aquarium in the U.S. or Canada and must have ^en in the 
zoological field for at least two years. 

Nomination Procedure 


1) Nominator Form: 

a. List the name of the nominee, phone, address, and institution. 

b) State in 150 words or less the reason(s) why the nominee warrants election to 

the Board of Directors. 

c) Nominator signs forms and mails to NEC Chairperson. 

d) Notifies nominee that they nominated him/her for the Board. 

2) Nominee Biographical Form: 

a) Professional background: places of employment, length of service, titles. 

b) Membership in AAZK: National and local chapters, number of years, offices 

held, involvement in activities. 

c) Educational background. 

d) Membership in Affiliate Organizations: (AAZPA, Audubon, etc.) 

e) State in 5(X) words or less why you would like to be on the BOD and any other 
pertinent information, (optional) 

f) References (one or two) 

g) Nominee signs forms and mails to NEC Chairperson. 

NOTE: Candidate is ineligible for nomination if both the nominator and nominee 
biographical forms are not complete and returned to the NEC Chairperson by 31 
January 1992. Send competed forms to: Mike Light, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings 
Island, Kings Island, OH 45034. 


Nomination Form for 
AAZK Board of Directors 


Qualifications for Nomination; 

1) Nominee must be a Professional Member of AAZK and must have been a 

member of the Association for at least one year. 

2) Nominee must be presently employed as an animal keeper/attendant by a 

recognized zoological institution or aquarium in the U.S. or Canada 
and must have been in the zoological field for at least two years. 

1. Name of Nomin££i 

Address : 


Phone: 

Institution: 

Director: 

2. State in 150 words or less the reason(s) why the nominee warrants 
election to the AAZK Board of Directors. 


3. Signature of Nominatniii. 


4. Form must be received by the NEC Chairperson bv 31 .lanuarv 1992. 
Send to: Mike Light, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings Island, Kings Island, OH 45034. 


Nominee Biographical Form 

for AAZK Board of Directors 

(To be completed by Nominee) 


1. Name: 

Address: 


Phone: 


PLEASE LIST THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION 

2. Professional Background: (places of employment, length of service, 
titles) 


3. Membership in AAZK: 

a) National: number of years 
Activities: 


b) Local Chapter(s): number of years, offices held, involvement in 
activities. 


4. Educational Background i 


5. Memberships in Affiliate Organizations j (AAZPA, Audubon, WWF, etc*) 


6. State in 500 words or less why you would like to be on the BOD and any 
other pertinent information, (optional) 


7. References (one or two)i gave name, address and phone number where 
they can be reached: 


8. Nominee's Signature:. 


9. Form must be received by NEC Chair bv 31 January 1992. Send form 

to: Mike Light, Wild Animal Habitat, Kings Island, Kings Island, OH 45034. 


1992 AAZK NATIONAL CONFERENCE 

SAN DIEGO, CALIFORNIA 
SEPTEMBER 27 THROUGH OCTOBER 2, 1992 



RESORT HOTEL 


HOTEL REGISTRATION FORM 


NAME 

ADDRESS 

CITY STATE/PROVINCE 

ZIP CODE PHONE ( ) 

ARRIVAL DATE CHECK-OUT DATE 


I WILL BE PAYING BY: CHECK CREDIT CARD 

(First night’s deposit or credit card guarantee is required). 

ROOM GUARANTEED BY; VISA MC AMEX 

CREDIT CARD NUMBER - - - 

NAME AS IT APPEARS ON CARD 

EXPIRATION DATE 

*** CONFERENCE ROOM RATE Gncluding 9% room tax): 

$98.10 per night 1 to 4 people per room 

Rooms for the AAZK Conference are being held until August 21st. Any reservations 
made after that date will be on a space available basis only. 

A 24-hour cancellation notice is required for deposit refunds. 

Check-in time is 4:00 p.m. Check-out time is 12:00 noon. 

To make reservations by phone, dial 1-800-288-0770. 

Most rooms have two double beds, sleeper sofa, and kitchenette. King-size rooms are 
available on a request basis only. 

Parking at the Catamaran is free for those registered at the hotel. For those not 
staying at the hotel, there is a $4.00 per day parking fee. 


Please return this form to: 


CATAMARAN RESORT HOTEL 
RESERVATIONS 

AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF ZOO KEEPERS 
3999 MISSION BOULEVARD 
SAN DIEGO, CA 92109 


Announcing 


1992 AAZK National Conference 



- Celebrating Yesterday 
- Enriching Today 
- Shaping Tomorrow 


Dates: September 27 - October 2 


Catamaran Resort Hotel 


San Diego, California 


Conference Highlights: 

Anna Merz and Andy Lodge speaking on Ngare Sergoi 
Rhino Sanctuary in Kenya 

Presentation by Richard Block from World Wildlife Fund 
California Beach Party 

Ice Breaker on the William D. Evans Paddlewheel boat on 
Mission Bay 

Zoolympics on the Beach 

Visits to the San Diego Zoo, San Diego Wild Animal Park and 
Sea World of California 

Behind-the-scenes tours at the San Diego Zoo, San Diego 
Wild Animal Park and Sea World of California 
The new Shark Encounter at Sea World of California 
A brand new Bird Show at Sea World of California 
The new Gorilla Tropics at the San Diego Zoo 

Come !!!! To San Diego for a terrific learning and sharing 
experience with fellow keepers and animal care profession- 
als from around the world. 


Airlines Discounts 

To take advantage of substantial discounts for Conference '92 on 
American and Delta Airlines, contact: 

Sundance Travel, Inc. 

19800 Mac Arthur Blvd., Suite 100 
Irvine, CA 92715 

1 (714) 752-5456 or 1 (800) 424-3434* extension 195 
* Please note that the 800 number given in April's AKF issue was 
incorrect. Sorry for the inconvenience. 



Judie Steenberg’s letter to the Editor (May 1992) pointed out some important considerations to 
keep in mind when working with environmental enrichment. In past months, we have printed ideas 
submitted by keepers, as well as items we have found in catalogues and booklets. We cannot 
guarantee that the latter have been tried successfully, and some ideas wtll have drawbacks. 
Certain suggestions may work well in one facility but not at all in another. Keepers should try to 
anticipate all possible problems with an idea before it is attempted. Take care not to be overly 
cautious however, at the expense of enriching the animal’s live. With some thought and effort, a 
proper balance can be achieved. We welcome and encourage more comments about the ideas 
printed here, and as always, keep those ideas coming in. 

CATS - Palm tree bark is a great source of stimulation for small and large cats. The bark near the 
bottom of palm trees comes off easily and cats will shred and bat them around. At our zoo we have 
also found that the baboons like palm bark on occasion too. 


--Rae Alexander, Keeper 
Micki Grove Zoo, Lodi, CA 


BINTURONG - paper bags, boxes, towels 

Chinchillas, Domestic rabbits, Guinea pigs - rearrange the furniture in enclosure 
Shingleback skinks - scatter food (bury some), offer yellow non-toxic flowers 
White-handed gibbons - mirror, hide food in bags 
Emus - running hose or sprinkler, puddles of water 


- Betty Jean Schmitt, Keeper 
Virginia Zoological Park 
Norfolk, VA 


The idea for a Treat Box shown below was submitted by Bruce Clark of the 
Toledo Zoo, Toledo, OH. 



treat filled possibly 
with bedding to 
increase activity time. 


Treat Box: hinged lid with mesh sized for species; increases eating time. 


201 



Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Lewa Downs 

Conservation Report 1992 

submitted by 

Andy Lodge, Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. 

Columbus, OH 

In January of this year I was at Lewa Downs as part of a National Geographic T.V. wildlife 
special focusing on my work with Kenyan wildlife and the conservation effort being made 
at Lewa. This special will be aired sometime in early 1993 and is entitled “Keepers”. I 
hope this special will help bring attention to the outstanding work being dome by all the 
people involved with Lewa Downs, both in Kenya and in North America. This special 
includes all the projects currently going on at Lewa, such as the giraffe move, the Ngare 
Ndare forest Project, and the release of three dehorned rhinos from the Ngare Sergoi 
Sanctuary on to Lewa Downs. 

The giraffe relocation is progressing smoothly. To date 127 giraffe have been relocated to 
game parks such as Samburu where in past years poaching took a heavy toll on these 
animals. By moving the giraffe we are already seeing improvement in some of the foliage 
on Lewa. 

The monies raised this year will be used to fence in the rest of Lewa. When finished there 
will be 215 sq. km. of protected area for wildlife. These 215 sq. km. include the Ngare 
Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary, the Ngare Ndare Forest, and all of Lewa Downs. 

After some setbacks last year involving the black rhinos we'are back on track with two 
births and two more of our females are pregnant. In talking with Dr. Esmond Bradley 
Martin, he informed me that in the last four years the Kenya black rhino population has 
grown by 5% and it is estimated there are around 400 black rhinos now in the country. Four 
hundred may not seem like many considering there were 20,000 in 1960, but at least the 
poaching seems to be pretty well under control at present. 

The Ngare Ndare Forest fence is complete and was officially dedicated in early April. 
This is a high profile project and everyone has high hopes for tits success. Everyone 
involved from the Lewa conservation team to the Kenya government to the local farmers 
send their sincere thanks to the American Association of Zoo Keepers and the Ngare Sergoi 
Support for making the forest Project a reality. 

We hope that we will continue to have the backing of AAZK and concerned people 
throughout North America so we can continue our work to save these magnificent animals 
for future generations. Again, thank you all so very much. 




As reported in the Newsletter of the International Committee on Cultural Tourism of the 
International Council on Monuments and Sites, and quoted in the 23 September 1991 issue of 
New Yorker . Zimbabwe lost 27 rhinos to poachers in 1990, but rangers shot and killed 28 
poachers. New Yorker’s comment: “Chalk up one for the rhinos.” -from The Ark. 
newsletter of the Lincoln Park Zoo Docents, Lincoln, Park Zoo, Chicago, IL. 


202 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 




The Official Newsletter of the Ngare Sergoi Support Group 


The Ngare Sergoi Support Group would like to thank all the 
keepers for their support through Bowling for Rhinos. As a means to 
promote the rhino sanctuary and expand awareness of conservation 
issues, memberships in NSSG are available. As a member you will: 

Receive a year's subscription to H.O.R.N. Newsletter. 

Quarterly updates on the Sanctuary, future plans at Lewa 
Downs, black rhino information, a children's colxunn, and 
a variety of conservation articles appear in each issue. 

Obtain a 10% discoxmt on all Ngare Sergoi Support Group 
products. 

Have the satisfation of knowing that your dollars continue 
to support and enhance this important and successful 
wildlife conservation effort. 

Your membership dues will help protect the Black Rhinos at the Ngare 
Sergoi Rhino Sanctuary, Basic membership (in one of the categories listed 
below) entitles you to the quarterly newsletter, which includes updates on the 
Sanctuary, and 10% discount on all Ngare Sergoi products. 

I I New Q Renewal 

General Membership $15.00 

National members, American 
Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc $10.00 

Student membership $10.00 

AAZK Chapters, Corporations $25.00 

Other — Contribution $ 


□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 

□ 


Name 

Address 

City State Zip 


Ngare Sergoi Support Group is a 501 (cX3) non-profit and 
tax-exempt organization. Your donation is fully 
tax-deductible to the full extent allowed by law. 


SEND Memberships to: 

Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. 

P.O. Box 29503, Columbus, OH 43229 



T<oW Available 


Biological Values for 
Selected Mammals 
Third Edition - 1992 



AAZK, Inc. is pleased to announce the availability of Biological Values for Selected 
Mammals. Third Edition . This important reference work is a project of the Greater San 
Francisco Bay Area Chapter of AAZK and was the result of thousands of hours of volimteer 
time spent in collecting data, doing computer entry, editing, proofreading, etc. Project 
Coordinator and Editor was Toni Danzig of San Francisco. 

This Third Edition differs in a number of respects from the previous two editions. This 
1992 edition is published in an 8 1/2 by 11 inch format and is comb-bound. It contains 
information on 457 species of mammals and covers values ranging from geographic range 
and habitat to Circadian cycle, size/measiu^ments, reproductive data, life expectancy, body 
temperatvtre, rearing information and status in the wild to name a few. About half of the 
species listings also include habitat range maps. Every attempt has been made to use only 
the most widely accepted scientific resoimces for data gathering. The volume contains a 
complete bibliography of references utilized. 

Biological Values for Selected Mammals - Third Edition may now be ordered through the 
AAZK Administrative Offices. Please fill in the form below and return with your check or 
money order (U.S.FUNDS ONLY) to: BV III, AAZK, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Make checks payable to “AAZK, Inc. ” 


Cl 


d 


d d d 


Him 


Please send 
Name: 


copy(s) of BV ni to: 


Address: 
City: 


Zip/Postal Code: 
AAZK Member _ 


State/F*rovmce: 
Country: 


Non-Member . 


PRICES 

AA2K Member Prices 

Non-Member Prices 


Domestic - $26.50 (includes postage) 
Canadian - $32.50 (includes air postage) 
Overseas - $32.50 (includes surface postage) 

Domestic - $35.00 (include postage) 
Canadian - $45.00 (includes air postage) 
Overseas - $45.00 (includes surface postage) 


TOTAL Enclosed $ 

204 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


J 


A New Life for Mona the Elephant 


By 

James L. Bousquet, Director 
Walk-in-the-Wild Zoo, Spokane, WA 

(Editor’s note: This article was written while Janies Bousquet was Elephant Supervisor at 
the El Paso Zoo, El Paso, TX and therefore deals with the animals and exhibits at that 
facility.) 

When I accepted the job as Elephant Supervisor at the El Paso Zoo I knew it would be a 
challenge. My primary responsibility would be training a very aggressive, 40-year-old 
Asian cow (Elephas maximus) named Mona. At least 5 or 6 keepers have been attacked or 
run off by her antics. Recognizing Mona’s problems and the keeper safety issue, the El 
Paso Zoo’s management made a commitment to give her a better life. So the Elephant 
Supervisor position was created. 

After seeing her squalid living conditions, it wasn’t hard to see why she was continually 
angry. A small building and yard with nothing in it to occupy her time would obviously 
create an animal that was neurotic and aggressive. There was no training program and 
no occupational activities to make Mona feel a part of the real world. At night she was 
chained on a very short chain, if she felt like it, that is. Otherwise she did as she pleased. 
Mona was fed mostly alfalfa, so her stools were lacking in form and volume - not the mini- 
bowling balls you expect to see from a healthy elephant. Mona’s feet were badly rotted as 
well. Interestingly enough, everyone thought her feet were fine. After I taught her “FOOT 
HERE”, we found that the bottoms of her feet and the nails were badly rotted. 

It all looked like for formidable job, but fortunately I have had experience in several other 
zoos with similar situations. This paper will outline some of the techniques I used in this 
situation. Therefore, I would like to present some key factors which are necessary for 
effectively training and working with a problem animal. Then I will describe how I used 
them with Mona. I hope this information will be of assistance to those of you who have to 
work with an aggressive animal. 



One of the important commands Jim taught Mona was FOOT HERE so that her pads and 
nails could be inspected for damage. (Photo by Helen M. Hawley) 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


205 


A NfiYiT T .ife for Mona. Continued 
Factors Which Give A Keeper An Advantage; 

1. The first 3 or 4 days are the Critical Period in establishing your rank in the 

eyes of the elephant. 

2. A new keeper in the elephant area is an Unknown Factor. 

A. The elephant is cautious at first because it doesn’t know if you are an 
easy mark or not. 

3. Elephants usually show Overt Physical Signs of Aggression. 

A. A keeper can react to these before the elephant becomes violent. 

B. An example of such behavior is Ears Out Display, Squinting of the Eyes When 
Approaching You, Showing the Whites of the Eyes, etc. 

4. Reacting quickly to early signs of aggression will Unnerve the elephant because it 

doesn’t know we can observe their behavioral signs of aggression. 

5. In similar situations, the Alpha Keeper Position is open for the taking. 

A. If you can, you must step into this position and take control of the animal. 
(Respect and affection will develop in time.) 

6. Sooner or later you will have to stand up to the animal and Back It Down. I’ve never 

worked with an elephant, aggressive or not, that didn’t test me in some way. 

7. Aggressive Behavior is Sequential in Nature. It starts with subtle behavior and builds to 

a climax which is the ATTACK. You will do much better if you React to This 
Behavior and Correct It in the Early Stages. 

In order to react properly to the various stages of aggressive behavior, you must rerognize 
them. So here are some examples you may find helpfuh. 

1. They act as thought they Can’t Remember Learned Behaviors even though they 

are well trained. (They are testing you) Make Them Do It Right. 

2. They are Balky or Slow to React to a normal routine (They are testing you). 

3. They try to stand next to you and slowly Displace you by pushing you to the side and then 

stand where you where standing. Make Them Get Over. 

4. They will back toward you Reaching for You with Their Tail. Make Them Stop. 

5. They can deliver quite a blow with their ears or tail. This Shows Their Disrespect 

for You. 

6. They show Ears Out behavior. The ears are held straight out from the head rather than 

back against the head. It is instinctual, so they can’t do an 3 rthing about it. This 
Behavior Shows They are Thinking Aggressively. 

7. They move toward you with their Head Held High, Ears Out and the Whites of Tkeir 

Eyes Showing. That’s got to intimidate anyone. You can pull their head down by 
hooking the top of the ear and saying “‘Head Down”. Just the weight of their head 
dropping on you will kill you, so be careful. 

8. Doing a Head Stand in front of you as a show of strength. Let them stand and take 

control or hook them under the chin and say “Get Up”. 

9. Plowing up the earth with their trunk or tusks to intimidate you. 

10. Rushing around trumpeting to unnerve a keeper. 

11. Running toward a keeper, swerving away at the last moment. 

12. The Last Phase is an Attack It is Critical to Stop This Sequential Behavior Pattern 

in steps 1-6. 


206 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


A New Life for Mona. Continued 

My first three days with Mona were the most critical. You must establish yourself right off 
with an aggressive animal. Otherwise it is an uphill, and probably losing, battle if the 
elephant has made up its mind you are going to be easy to bully. If you can work into a 
routine slowly it is probably best, but with an aggressive animal sooner or later you will 
have to stand your ground. Unfortunately, I didn’t have that luxury because no one in the 
zoo had control of Mona. There was no information about how she SET UP a keeper for an 
attack or how she showed her aggressiveness. So I went it alone. Mona’s physical 
condition warranted a quick takeover as well. 

I knew Mona resented me the first day when I entered the bam. She was much bigger than I 
remembered when I saw her during my job interview. I felt I had several things in my 
favor however'^ the element of surprise, the unknown and a very big and heavy ankus. 
Mona did know one behavior, “FOOT”. This is an advantage as well because you must 
have something to use to get control of the animal. “FOOT” was it for me. 

Mona was arrogant and indignant as I helped clean the barn. I felt she was watching me 
closely the whole time. I learned a valuable lesson many years ago when working in the 
barn with a large bull elephant. I felt he wasn’t paying much attention to me until I 
adjusted the ankus hanging in my belt and he jumped. So, though Mona appeared to be 
ignoring me, I felt quite certain she was watching me closely for a show of weakness. I let 
an experienced keeper unchain her and she wandered slowly out of the bam. We followed 
to clean the yard. (We clean the yard after lock up now.) The morning was uneventful, so 
we left the yard. 

After lunch all hell broke loose. Mona was disgusted at my return and threw a spectacular 
tantmm. Flinging hay and dirt, she mshed around the yard tmmpeting. I wondered, what 
am I doing here anyway? We did some nervous yard cleaning and I waited for the 
obvious. It wasn’t long in coming. Mona moved in with ears out and eyes ablaze with her 
best threats. I stepped in with as hearty a “FOOT” as I could muster. Mona flinched and 
tried to pull away. She was obviously taken by surprise. I pursued her trying to make her 
“FOOT STEADY’, something she was not accustomed to doing. 

Mona tried moves I expected because several elephants have done it to me before. They spin 
trying to throw you to the ground. Or they turn their rump toward you and keep it there as 
you try to reach their head with the ankus. If you are quick you can stop the spinning by 
hooking the front leg at the chest or hooking the opposite side of the lower mandible. Be 
careful not to let the elephant pull you down and under its feet. The mmp in the face routine 
can be stopped by poking the rear feet with the point of the ankus. 

Mona was certainly surprised at my response, but equally surprised were several zoo 
employees who had been watching me chase “Mona the Terrible” around the yard amid my 
yelling and her bellowing. I finally managed to stop her and make her do a “FOOT 
STEADY’. Always end a training session with the animal under control or with a 
behavior done correctly. “Good Girl”. 

On my way to work the next day I felt uneasy knowing that today would be worse than 
yesterday. Though I had won, I doubt that Mona felt “he will be back and he is mine”. 
Surely she felt she had won and it was “here today and gone tomorrow”. Wrong, Mona! 
When I entered the bam she was enraged. Dropping a mouthful of hay, she angrily shook 
her chain. 1 swallowed hard and entered the stall to begin cleaning. This time she had her 
eyes directly on me the whole time. We quickly cleaned the barn and this time I made 
Mona “FOOT” so I could remove her leg chain. Mona quickly left the barn and waited out 
in the yard for Round Two. 

Mona was much more aggressive than I had expected. She immediately tried to intimidate 
me with HEAD UP and EARS OUT displays. When that was unsuccessful she plowed up 
the yard in front of me with her trunk and then rolled on the ground trumpeting the whole 
time. I waited until she got up and stepped in quickly to “FOOT STEADY’. She spun and 
moved quickly to a corner where the bam and the exhibit wall meet, presenting me with the 
old mmp in the face routine. Prodding the rear feet with the point of the ankus works here 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


207 


A New Life for Mona. Continued 

too. Mona did a little dance and finally realized the futility in this move. Exiting the 
corner, I was able to hook her front leg and “FOOT STEADY” her. Then I gave Mona a 
“GK)OD GIRL”. (Always lavish them with praise for a job well done.) Mona is extremely 
afraid of chains, so they have been able to chain her on only one leg for the last 35 years. A 
four leg chaining program was out of the question at this time. 

I felt I had made real progress that morning and looked forward to the afternoon session. 
After lunch we went to work with Mona again with the hope that things would begin to get 
better. This was not to be. She was much like she was in the A.M. session, Mona presented 
me with another tantrum and it began to look like she was really going to attack me. I 
think at this point she felt, as I did, she must pull out all the stops and finish things off. I let 
Mona follow me into the bam where she had injured several people in years past. (Though I 
feel you must strike an animal only when absolutely necessary, I truly felt this was the 
time and place.) Mona was truly a tough customer, so a show of force was in order. This 
was where the heavy ankus came in handy. Have at least one sturdy, heavy ankus for 
serious training. The small ones can easily pull out of your hand and they lack the impact 
necessary to leave a lasting impression. 


Mona confidently reached for me with her trunk and I let her have it on the end of the 
trimk. (Don’t hit them on the tip of the trunk or on the sinus cavity.) Apparently this made 
the required impression on Mona because she spun with a squeal and ears flapping she 
rushed from the barn. I followed and made her “FOOT STEADY’ holding her foot up with 
the ankus. This was the beginning of the end for Mona. The end of an era and the 
beginning of a new life. (Obviously I left out a lot of what went on, but this will at least give 
you some idea of the process.) 



Since Mona had received only 
minimal training in her 35-plus 
years, there was much to do to get her to 
accept not only the training 
commands, but also a trainer. Like 
all intelligent members of her species, 
Mona tested Jim frequently in the 
early days of training. Here she 
responds to the TRUNK UP and FOOT 
UP commands in the outside yard at 
the El Paso Zoo. (Photo by Mike 
Quinn) 


Training, though uncomfortable for the elephant at first, allows us to give them a much 
richer life. Mona now knows 13 new behaviors, her feet are nearly cured and her skin is 
well on its way to being normal. She hasn’t attacked anyone in four months (as of 2/92) 
and she is behaving well in sessions with a new keeper. Several businesses have donated 
time and labor to build her a stand and a harness which she loves. What’s even more 
interesting is that Mona’s barn and yard have not changed at all, yet her life has been 
enriched. For those of you who have the commitment to a higher level of animal care, don’t 
let poor animal facilities deter you from giving your animals the best life possible. In 
about 1 Va years Mona will have a new display to live in, but until that time we will 
continue to make her life as rich and meaningful as possible. 

208 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


A New Life for Mona. Continued 


Mona’s foot problems were interesting. With her feet on the ground they looked fine. No 
one could make her place her foot on the foot work stand properly, so they had never seen the 
bottoms of her feet. They were badly rotted with large necrotic areas in the pads and 
between the nails and the pads. It takes several foot positions on the stand to groom a foot 
properly, so it took several weeks of conditioning to get Mona used to it. I use “FOOT 
HERE” to teach elephants to place their foot in a particular spot. We rubbed her feet with our 
hands and the ankus to get her used to the contact. Then slowly I began to use the rasp and 
hoof knife. That is all I use as I find I can remove any and all tissue effectively with these 
tools, I use the rasp on the outer nail to smooth and round it. This works well on the cuticle. 
However, don’t rasp the cuticle too thin or the nail will separate from the cuticle. I can cut 
pad and nail tissue rapidly with a sharp hoof knife. You must be careful on nail and pad 
tissue not to cut too deeply. You can tell you are nearing the blood supply when the tissue 
gets a pink tinge to it. 


The author and Senior Keeper George 
Howard are shown working on 
Mona’s feet Because no one had been 
able to get Mona to cooperate in 
inspecting the condition of her feet, the 
poor condition, which included large 
necrotic areas, was not discovered 
until she was trained to obey the FOOT 
ELERE command. (Photo by Mike 
Quinn) 



Sessions started slowly at first and then graduated into 15 or 20 minutes of work before her 
regular training program. Some of her nails were actually pointed they were so long. My 
mission was to bring these down and round them smoothly into the pad on the bottom of her 
foot. The infected cracks between the nails and the pads and on the pads had to be cut out. 
Some were as much as 2 inches deep, so it took a long time. I started by cutting as deep as I 
could into the rotten area and then cutting adjacent tissue down to that level. I wanted the 
pads to be even, smooth and flexible. If you do a lot of deep cutting you must allow the blood 
supply to recede and tissue replacement to occur before you continue. This takes time, so in 
the mornings I always use the foot work stand to place Mona’s feet on for washing. This 
keeps her used to using the stand even when we are not doing regular maintenance. I used 
a betadine wash twice a day during the early stages of foot care. It is great stuff and I found, 
when I was removing old tissue, that it had penetrated as much as 1 inch into the tissue. 

The necrotic areas seem to develop in two ways. They can grow straight into the tissue or 
they can grow in and under the surrounding tissue. I think it starts with the surface growth 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


209 


A New Life for Mona. Continued 

and then, if unattended, it deepens. Therefore, it is important to inspect and groom their 
feet regularly. I open all cracks and cut out all the black tissue. All high spots are 
smoothed out. The nails should flow smoothly into the pads and rise a little away from the 
ground at the front. Too much pressure can cause them to crack. If the pad is healthy and 
properly groomed it will be flexible and you can see it expand dramatically when the 
elephant steps on it. An elephant’s foot will never be perfectly smooth, but overall it should 
be cut to the same level. Be sure to remove stones or accumulated matter daily. 

I’ve seen many elephants with Mona’s skin condition. It is crusted with accumulated dead 
skin, dirt, feces whifch forms a MASK. In serious cases, the MASK covers the entire body 
actually affecting the animal’s health. Abscesses and pressure sores also develop in 
animals not washed and oiled regularly. This accumulated filth actually clogs pores and 
hair follicles compromising the animal’s ability to cool its body. Expressionless faces 
take on a new personality when the MASK is removed. So the value of daily baths, oiling 
and brushing cannot be overemphasized. 

Those of you who work with elephants must certainly share my feeling that it is interesting 
and rewarding work. But working with an aggressive animal can make work very 
difficult and dangerous. I hope sharing this information will make life a little better for 
those keepers and their elephants. Those of you having success with your problem 



Elephants: The Deciding Decade 

Edited by Ronald Orenstein 
Sierra Club Books, San Francisco 1991 
160 pages Hardback Brice: $35.00 

Review by Missy Betcher Lodge 
Editor H.O.R.N. 

Ngare Sergoi Support Group, Inc. 
Columbus, OH 

“1989 was the year of hope for the African elephant. The 1990s will be its deciding decade.” 
This statement from the preface provides Ronald Orenstein with the book’s subtitle, and the 
recurrent theme in the six essays comprising the work. 

Elephants: The Deciding Decade is one of three African elephant books recently published; 
the others are Boyd Norton’s The African Elephant: Last Davs in Eden and Roger 
DiSilvestro’s The African Elephant: Twilight in Eden . The publication of three so similar 
books can be attributed to the March 1992 CITES convention which will reconsider the ivory 
ban imposed in 1989. In his preface, Orenstein provides an informative, clear discussion 
of the CITES convention and the ivory ban. 

A wide range of experts have contributed to Elephants . They include: Richard Leakey, 
Director of the Kenyan Wildlife Service; Perez Olindo, Senior Associate of the African 
Wildlife Foundation; Ian Redmond, Coordinator for Ele-Fund; Jeheskel Shoshani, Head 
of the Elephant Interest Group; and David Western, Chairman, Elephant and Rhino 
Specialist Group, lUCN. The essays are not technical or research-oriented. Instead they 
are personal reflections on African elephants and the writer’s perspective of the animals’ 
current situation. 

All the contributors emphatically state that the ivory ban was important and since 1989 the 
bottom has fallen out of the ivory market. They declare that the war to save the African 

210 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Rook ^view .Continmd 

elephant has not been won, however. Not only must the ivory ban continue, but the world 
must also deal with the problem of habitat loss due to farming and increased human 
populations. 

After awhile this message becomes redundant. Most people reading Elephants are doing so 
because they care about the African elephant. The emphasis on the need to continue the 
ivory ban eventually detracts from the more personal thoughts of the contributors. 

The photography of Brian Beck is the redeeming feature of Elephants . Almost every page 
includes a color photo. In addition, there are five photo essays, each illustrating an aspect 
of the African elephants’ life or environment. For example, ‘Toung Elephants” is an 11- 
page photo spread of calves learning and playing. Especially poignant is a close-up of an 
elephant’s eye. The intelligence and sadness peering out of the page proclaims Orenstein’s 
message better than the most eloquent essayist. 

As an aside, all proceeds from Elephants goes to the International Wildlife Coalition’s 
s.cholarship fund. Award money will go to the children of rangers whose achievement in 
anti-poaching work has been outstanding. It is a bonus to buyers that money from the book 
returns to Africa. 

An excellent bibliography and an annotated list of organizations with elephant-related 
conservation programs are included. 

If a reader requires a book with elephant facts, technical information, or research studies, 
this is not the correct one. But, for beautiful African elephant photography in a book that 
demands support for elephant conservation. Elephants: The Deciding Decade is an 
admirable choice. 

The Asian Elephant: Ecology and Management 

By R. Sukumar 

Cambridge University Press, 1989 
40 West 20th St., NY, NY 10011 
251 pgs. Hardback 

Review by John Lehnhardt 
Collection Manager 
Dept, of Mammalogy 
National Zoological Park 
Washington, DC 


This book is an in-depth study of the ecology of the Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) on 
the Indian subcontinent which focuses on the conflict between elephants and humans over 
land use. It can be compared to the extensive work already published on the African 
elephant {Loxodonta africana). The author, A. Sukumar, is a plant ecologist who has 
turned his interest to elephant-plant-human interaction. 

The book begins with a brief description of the historical record of the interaction between 
humans and Asian elephants over the last 5,000 years, followed by a country by country 
account of the current Asian elephant population status. Both the general historical 
information and the population data in this section are interesting. 

About one half of the book consists of the description, in great detail, of the study site, 
methods and results of the ecological study of land and vegetation use by man and 
elephant. Much of this section of the book is rather dry reading but it contains a lot of 
information about the natural history of the Asian elephant not available in any other 
source. 

The remainder of the book discusses how current human land use practices can be 
modified to minimize the human elephant conflict so that both species, people and 
elephants, can coexist and prosper. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


211 


Book 'Rievie-w . Continued 

This book is not meant to be easy, popular reading. It is a scientific and scholarly treatise 
and is rather dry and technical in its presentation. However, it has a great deal of 
interesting information about Asian elephant natural history which is not available 
elsewhere: for example, wild diet, reproductive rates and home range sizes. 

The recommendations for conservation strategies are well thought out and include 
discussions of current strategies for habitat preservation used in Africa. The bibliography 
is excellent. 

I recommend this book as a resource volume to anyone interested in wild Asian elephant 
conservation issues. The factual information about elephant natural history is also 
informative, particularly as a comparison to African elephants. 


Mm(sk 


(Editor ’.V note: in the next several issues of AKF we will continue to reprint articles and 
items which appeared earlier in the Association ’s history. The old saying ’’the more things 
change, the more they stay the same ” seems to hold true with these articles which are as 
relevant today as the day they were written. 

The following item was submitted by Judie Steenberg, Woodland Park Zoo and was 
published in the November 1981 issue of AKF. 


Wouldn’t It Be Nice For All? 
or 

Twelve Ways to Improve Personnel Relationships 


1. If you open it, close it. 

2. If you turn it on, turn it off. 

3. If you unlock it, lock it. 

4. If you break it, repair it. 

5. If you can’t fix it, report it. 

6. If you make a mess, clean it up. 


7. If you use it, don’t abuse it. 

8. If you move it, put it back. 

9. If you don’t know how to operate it, leave it alone. 

10. If you borrow it, return it promptly. 

1 1. If it belongs to someone else, get permission 
before taking it. 

12. It if doesn’t concern you, don’t mess with it in 
the first place. 


Information Please 

The Potter Park Zoo is seeking published and unpublished information concerning the use 
of weight reduction diets for Virginia opossum (Didelphis virgiana) and the long-term 
efficacy of such diets. Please send information to: Mark S. Edwards, Research Associate, 
Potter Park Zoological Gardens, 1301 South Pennsylvania Avenue, Lansing, MI 48912. 


212 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


Legislative Outlook 


Migratory Bird Comjmission Approves Funding 

for Wetland Conservation Efforts Across North America 

Ducks, geese and other wildlife will continue to benefit from 
58,000 acres of wetland habitat from New Jersey to Texas to 
Manitoba, Canada, because of more than $11 million in land 
acquisition and enhancement funding recently approved by the 
Migratory Bird Conservation Commission. 



Eight of these projects, covering 7,700 acres, will be paid for with $4.8 million from the 
Migratory Bird Conservation Fund. The fund consists primarily of money received from 
the sale of the Federal Migratory Bird Hunting and Conservation Stamp (the Federal 
“Duck Stamp”) that must be purchased by all waterfowl hunters 16 years and older. By law, 
this money must be used to acquire waterfowl habitat. 


In each case, the new land will be added to existing National Wildlife Refuges (NWR). 
The projects include 985 acres at Brazoria NWR in Texas; 34 acres at Lower Hatchie NWR 
in Tennessee; 615 acres at Edwin B. Forsythe NWR in New Jersey; 3,237 acres at Morgan 
Brake NWR in Mississippi; 2,000 acres at Roanoke River NWR in North Carolina; 1.138 
acres at Tallahatchie NWR in Mississippi; 40 acres at Cache River NWR in Arkansas; 
and 240 acres at Arapaho NWR in Colorado. 

The commission also approved $6.8 million for 17 projects under the North American Wet- 
lands Conservation Act. This legislation provides partial funding for wetlands conserva- 
tion projects in Canada, Mexico, and the United States. Funds come from interest on Fed- 
eral excise taxes on hunting equipment sales, fines from violators of the Migratory Bird 
Treaty Act, and private contributions. 

The biggest projects approved were $1.9 million to acquire and manage 7,000 acres of 
cypress swamp at Caddo Lake in northeastern Texas and $1.3 million to protect and 
enhance 6,000 acres of critical shorebird areas in the Maurice River on the New Jersey side 
of the Delaware Bay. The State of Texas and the Texas Nature Conservancy have contrib- 
uted an additional $1.9 million for the Caddo Lake project. The Maurice River tracts are 
home to the world’s largest population of globally endangered plants, and the coastline pro- 
vides vital habitat for 60 percent of the world’s population of shorebirds. The State of New 
Jersey and The Nature Conservancy have contributed $2.8 million to this project. 

So far in Fiscal Year 1992, the Commission has approved $50 million for 88 projects in the 
United States, Canada and Mexico. 

-Department of the Interior News Release 


TBAFFIC USA Reports on Asian Bear Trade 

According to a report recently released by TRAFFIC USA, the wildlife trade monitoring 
arm of World Wildlife Fund, the ever-increasing demand for bear parts in Asia may now 
be jeopardizing the American black bear population. The report noted that in some Asian 
countries the total value of saleable bear parts (including gallbladders, claws and paws) 
may make the animal worth $10,000 or more. According to WWF, demand is so great and 
so profitable that whole bear carcasses are now being found in the U.S., Canada and the for- 
mer Soviet Union with only the gallbladders having been taken. 

Bear gallbladders are used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat such ailments as hepa- 
titis, heart and liver disease, diabetes and tooth decay. Bear paws are served in upscale 
Taiwanese restaurants for $1 ,400 a plate. 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


213 



Legislative Outlook, Continued 


Of the eight bear species worldwide, six are in severe decline and because of the increasing 
demand for bear parts, bear poachers have turned to North America as one of the last abun- 
dant sources of bears. In particular danger are North American black bears. 

The international trade in most bear species is regulated to some degree by CITES, but 
much of the trade in bears and bear parts throughout Asia is illegal and goes unreported. 
U.S. bear populations are not covered under CITES. Another problem which makes poach- 
ing of U.S. bears attractive to smugglers is the inconsistency of laws from state to state con- 
cerning protection of bears. Since the gallbladders of American black bears are indistin- 
guishable from those of Asiatic bears, these are often pawned off as being from the Asiatic 


species. 


-excerpted from TRAFFIC Report in 
FOCUS. Vol 14, No. 2, March ! April 1992 



While the Coffin’s cockatoo (Cacatua goffini) was moved to Appendix I, other threatened 
bird species got little assistance at the CITES meeting held in Kyoto, Japan. One U.S. 
backed resolution that was gutted in committee called for a halt to trade in species suffering 
from high death rates during transport to importing countries. Another defeated proposal 
called for suspending trade in endangered parrot species where information is 
unavailable on their status and the impact of trade. 

Many exporting countries argue that they need time to determine the status of their bird 
species and to deal with the problems of the trade, and that trade, for now, should not be 
restricted. CITES rules specify that before a country may export protected birds, a scientific 
authority in the state must determine that exports will not harm the survival of those 
species. Many countries, however, do not have appropriate scientific experts or resources to 
evaluate the impact of such exports. 

Consequently at least 45 countries simply banned the capture and export of their native 
birds. Importing countries are also moving to protect wild-caught birds - the European 
Parliament has recommended that the Economic Community ban such imports, and the 
U.S. Congress is considering similar legislation. 

The lucrative international pet trade is a devastating threat to many of the world’s rare and 
beautiful birds. Not only are many birds killed during capture, but vital habitat is also 
often destroyed. Even those birds that survive capture often die during transport. One 
estimate puts death rates at 80% for birds which are smuggled illegally. 

Because of the difficulty in monitoring the well-being of birds during transport and the 
resulting high death rate, more than 50 commercial airlines - and all U.S. airlines - now 
prohibit shipments of wild birds. However, the three African airlines listed below are still 
transporting birds for the pet trade. The African Wildlife Foundation is asking all those 
interesting in restricting such trade to write to these airlines urging them to cease such 


transports. 


Air Aftdque 

Mr. Yves-Roland Bilecart 
P.D.G., Boite Postale 1575 
Abidjan 01, Ivory Coast 


Egypt Air 

Mr. Abdel Moneim Mosman 
7209 Fifth Avenue 
New York, NY 10019 


Kenya Airways 
Mr. Phillip Ndegwa 
Secretary-Chairman 
Box 199002 
Nairobi, Kenya 


-excerpted from Wildlife News, Vol. 27, No. 1 
Spring 1992, African Wildlife Federation 




214 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


L.I.N.K. 

(liaison and Information Network for Keepers) 

Coordinator for the LINK System: Mark de Denus, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon 
Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada R3P OR5. (204) 837-2916 {h}. 

Regional Coordinators 

ALABAMA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
ALASKA - Vacancy 

ARIZONA - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. Randolph Way, Tucson, AZ 85716 
ARELANSAS - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher, Little Rock Zoological Gardens, 

#1 Jonesboro Dr., Little Rock, AR 72205 
CALIFORNIA- Vacancy 

COLORADO - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 80205 
CONNECTICUT- Jeanette Nadeau, Roger Williams Park Zoo, Providence, RI 02905 
DELEWARE - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
FLORIDA - Rick Smith, 6116 Maijo, Tampa, FL 33617 (813) 985-1290 [h]; (813) 935-8552 [w] 

GEORGIA - Fred Alvey, Zoo Atlanta, 800 Cherokee Ave. S.E., Atlanta, GA 30315 
HAWAII - Michelle Suenishi, Hilton Hawaiian Village, 2950 Ena Rd., Honolulu, HI 96815 
IDAHO -Vacancy 

ILLINOIS - Pat Swieca, 5710 W. Cullom Ave., Chicago, IL 60634 

INDIANA - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 

IOWA - Carla Wieser, Omaha's Henry Doorly Zoo, 10th St. & Deer Park Blvd., Omaha, NE 68107 

KANSAS - Gretchen Ziegler, Topeka Zoo, 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 

KENTUCKY - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 

LOUISIANA - Michelle Asselin, Audubon Park & Zoological Gardens, P.O. Box 4327, New Orleans, LA 70115 
MAINE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MARYLAND - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 
MASSACHUSETTS - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

MICHIGAN - Dan Powell, Potawatomi Zoo, 500 S. Greenlawn, South Bend, IN 46615 
MINNESOTA - Tim Hill, Minnesota Zoological Gardens, 13000 Zoo Blvd., Apple Valley, MN 55124 
MISSISSIPPI - Jeannie Frazier, Jackson Zoological Park, 2918 W. Capitol, Jackson, MS 39209 
MISSOURI - Vacancy 
MONTANA - Vacancy 

NEBRASKA -Carla Wieser (see address under Iowa) 

NEVADA - Patricia Simonet, Wildlife Safaris, P.O. Box 6735, Incline Village, NV 89450 
NEW HAMPSHIRE - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

NEW JIERSEY - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard Ave., Philadelphia, PA 19104 
NEW MEXICO - Bruce Eneboe, Reid Park Zoo, 1100 S. RandolphWay, Tucson, AZ 857716 
EAST NEW YORK - Prank Leonard, Bronx Zoo, 185th & Southern Blvd., Bronx, NY 10460 
WEST NEW YORK - Alan Baker, Burnet Park Zoo, 500 Burnet Park Dr., Syracuse, NY 13204 
NORTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carolina Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
NORTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets, Assiniboine Park Zoo, 2355 Corydon Ave., Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Canada R3P 0R5 (204) 986-4040 [w] 

OHIO - Thomas Benner, Toledo Zoo, 2700 Broadway, Toledo, OH 43609 
OKLAHOMA - Debbie Jackson or Ann Rademacher (see addresses under AR) 

OREGON - Anna Michel, Washington Park Zoo, 4001 SW Canyon Rd., Portland, OR 97221 
PENNSYLVANIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
RHODE ISLAND - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

SOUTH CAROLINA - Lucy Segerson, North Carohna Zoo, Rt. 4, Box 83, Asheboro, NC 27203 
SOUTH DAKOTA - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

TENNESSEE - Gail Karr or Cindy Pinger, Memphis Zoo & Aquarium, 2000 Galloway, Memphis, TN 38112 
TEXAS - Ann Marie Greco, San Antonio Zoo, 3903 N. St. Mary's St., San Antonio, TX 78212 
UTAH - Suzanne Chacon-Brennan, Denver Zoo, City Park, Denver, CO 80205 
VERMONT - Jeanette Nadeau (see addresses under CT) 

VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WASHINGTON - Elandra Aum, Woodland Park Zoo, 5500 Phinney Ave. N, Seattle, WA 98103 
WEST VIRGINIA - Theresa Maas, Philadelphia Zoo, 34th & Girard , Philadelphia, PA 19104 
WISCONSIN -Wayne Hazlett, 3768 S. 89th St., Milwaukee, WI 53228 
WYOMING - Vacancy 

DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - Theresa Maas (see address under PA) 

Province of Ontario - Neil Porter, Metro Toronto Zoo, Box 280, West Hill, Ontario MIE 4R5 Canada 
Provinces of Manitoba & Saskatchewan - Bob Debets (see address under ND) 

Province of Quebec - Chantal Routhier, Granby Zoo, 347 Rue Bourget, Granby, Quebec, Canada J2G lE 8 
Provinces of Alberta & British Columbia - Grant Tkachuk, 10139 157th St., #206, Edmonton, Alberta T5P 2T9 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 6 1992 


215 


Institutions wishing to advertise employment opportunities are asked to send pertinent data 
by the 15th of each month to: Opportunity Knocks l AKF. 635 Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606. 
Please include closing dates for positions available. There is no charge for this service 
and phone-in listings of positions which become available close to deadline are accepted. 
Our phone is 1-800-242-4519 (U.S.); 1-800-468-1966 (Canada). Our FAX is 913-272-2539. 


SANCTUARY MANAGER ...mana£[eT wanted for primate sanctuary. Candidate must 
have minimum of five years’ experience in a supervisory position in a rehabilitation or zoo 
atmosphere. Great opportunity. For more information, send resume and references to 
P.O. Box 15306, San Antonio, TX 78212. 

The following two (2) positions are available at the Baltimore Zoo. For either position send 
cover letter, resume and references to: Personnel Manager, Baltimore Zoo, Druid Hill 
Park, Baltimore, MD 21217. 

MEDICAL TECHNOLOGIST . ..(he Baltimore Zoo Medical Dept, is seeking a laboratory 
technologist to perform all aspects of laboratory testing on a wide variety of animal species. 
Responsibilities include management of the lab. Experience preferred. 

SR. KEEPER/HERP DEPT. ♦♦.requires two year’s professional experience working with a 
diverse collection of amphibians and reptiles, including venomous species, and a 
Bachelor’s degree in an appropriate field. Equivalent experience may be substituted for a 
degree. Responsibilities include collection/exhibit development and maintenance, 
research program development, data collection/analysis and staff supervision. Strong 
exhibitry skills, including live plant maintenance, and experience with amphibians 
desirable. 

BIRD KEEPER/NARRATOR ...TeauiTes high school diploma or at least two year’s 
experience in a zoological institution. Caring for and handling a variety of birds. Raptor 
experience would be helpful, but not required. Must be able to lecture and narrate to large 
crowds of people. Send resume to: Ralph Williams, General Manager, Jungle Larry’s 
Zoological Park, P.O. Box 7129, Naples, FL 33941. Please submit by 2 July 1992. 

ANIMAL KEEPER/MAMMAL DEPT ...daily responsibilities include animal care and 
maintenance, daily record keeping and interactions with the education staff and the 
public. College degree in biological field required. Please send resume and statement of 
interest to: Carol McCarthy, Animal Collection Administration, Brookfield Zoo, 3300 Golf 
Road, Brookfield, IL 60513. 

DIRECTOR OF WILDLIFE . ..reo^xnres knowledge in all aspects of animal management 
and care and experience with exotic animals. Supervisory experience, good leadership 
and verbal/written communication skills needed plus a combination of education and 
practical experience in zoology. Responsible for all aspects of fulltime/seasonal staff, 
budget preparation/implementation, animal records, and any other departmental related 
duties. Send resume to: Personnel Director, Florida Leisure Acquisition Corporation, 
P.O. Box 370, Silver Springs, FL 32688. 

« 


AZH Announces Conference 

The Association of Zoo Horticulturists will hold their 12th annual conference from 3-7 
October. If you would like more information, please contact Fred Beiner, Marine World 
Africa U.S.A., Marine World Parkway, Vallejo, CA 94589 PHONE (707) 644-4000, 
Ext. 657 FAX (707) 644-03241. 


216 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 19, No. 5 1992 


AAZK Membership Application 


Name 


check here if renewal [ ] 


Address 


City 


State/Province 


Tip 


Tel^hone 


(home) 


(work) 




Canadian Members 


□ $30.00 Professional/U.S. 

Full-time Keepers 

I I $25.00 AffiHateAJ.S. 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $25.00 Associate/U.S. 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


I I $35.00 Professional/Canada 
Full-time Keepers 

d $30.00 AfBliate/Canada 

Other staff & volunteers 

□ $30.00 Associate/Canada 

Those not connected with 
an animal facility 


□ $50.00 or up Coiitributmg^.S. 

Individuals 

□ $50.00 or up Institutioiial/U.S. 

Organizations ! Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


□ 

□ 


$55.00 or up Contributing/Canada 

Individuals 

$55.00 or up Institutional/Canada 
Organizations / Institutions 
(requires Board approval) 


International Members 


library Only 


I i $40.00 Intematioiial 

All members outside U.S. & 
Canada regardless of category 


□ $20.00Iibraiy 

Available only to 
established libraries 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 1 

ZooAddress 

Title 

Work Area 

Mail this application and check or money order (U.S. CURRENCY ONLY PLEASE), made 
payable to American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., to : AAZK Administrative Offices, 
Topeka Zoo, 635 S.W. Gage Blvd., Topeka, KS 66606 U.S. A 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers' Forum . The membership card is 
good for free admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 


PRINTED IN U.S Jk. 
©1992 AAZK, Inc. 




& M 
•tj cn 

O 


P 


P 


r orq 


N 

O 

o 

W 


CO S ® 


Oi 

o 


a 

o 



:z: 

:s; 

£u 

r--! 

ft* 

U1 

“O 

n- 

zr 


l-a. 

1-1. 


a 

n 

U3 

r- 

3 

r1- 

O 

rr 

‘T 


Z3 

ft* 



“3 

r-i 



O 




O 

o 


o 

u:3 



n 

ft* 


;S; 


"D 

ft* 

ail 


1 


142 SI xy 
04/94 1981 15 / 



H 

i 

O W 

d' 

CD 

> o 

WH 

RSI 

w ^ 




0d Od 

o 

CO 

fej' 










f> ^ W ^ C/) \ Z 

NOiiniiiSNi NViNosHiiws S3 iavaan libraries smithsonian“ins' 

/> 21 W 2 ^ 2 


Z 

'Is 

s == 

C 2 5 '\ > 

LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOUfliliSNI NVINOSHJ.IWs'”s3 1 

“ w) 5 ^ ^ ^ ^ - , o) 






3 pc ^ ^ Q L>v^ V d'-tl-t-y >^ Q 

NOIini!iSNl^NVINOSHlllAiS^S3 IdVdan'^LIBRARI ES^SMITHSOnIanI^INS 

! 5 V I ^ 

In- ^ 




“libraries SMITHSONIAN~INSTITUTION‘^NOIiniliSNl“NVINOSHilWS S3 1 
2 \ w z V </) z 15 




z 
(/) 

O 

z 

/) ' Z (/) •*' Z c/) 2 

NoiiniiiSNi__NViNOSHiii^s SBiBvaan libraries Smithsonian ins 

/) z \ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

jj X?35Tin;^ /n V LlJ . 

r / 



LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlifliliSNI NVINOSHillNS S 3 
Z r- Z r- ... z 



O'^ 

m DL,^ ^ m ^ rn 

NOlinillSNrNVlNOSHlIIAiS S3 I B Vd 8 H^LI B R AR ! ES^SMITHSONIAN INS 
-Ji z w z ^ z 

s -s 5 , „ I , 

' X ■ 8 i?B il) ^ ^ 




z w Z CO *, Z CO 

LIBRARIES SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOlinillSNI NVINOSHimS S3 

CO Z CO — . CO 

UJ ><<^vaSOa; 7 x LU /AVA^VArX ClJ 



^N 0 IXniliSNI~‘NVIN 0 SHillNS^S 3 iaVaan“'LIBRARI ES^SMITHSONIAN^INS 
Z r- , 2 r- 2 

° 0 “ c 5 ° 

-..STOVA ^ t; /S 4 ^’'Wj\ 33 








C/) £ c/) 

( N0IJ.niliSNrNVlN0SHilWS^S3 I aVd a n^LI B PAR 1 ES ^SMITHSONIAN^ in; 



C/) 


> s > 

1^LIBRARIEs‘"sMITHSONIAN_INSTITUTION^NOIiniliSNI_NVINOSHillNS^S3 
" ^ ~ ^ ^ 

j^NoiiniiiSNi^NviNOSHiiws^sa I Tvaa n|;^Li B^AR i es^ Smithsonian;;^ in 

O xtSiiTSx in \<>. 2 ^■5^2 ^ “ xT'oTSSk O 





W m >'^'' z 'vi!il2SX m Xisos^i^ ^ ^ 

1 “L I B R AR I ES^SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION NOliOiliSNI NVINOSHillAIS SI 

2 ^ ^ 2 » ^ ^ S 

1 § IC^ ^ ^ i 5/ 

2 2 ^ ^ ^ Xi(A(osvi^ > 

•4 ‘"NOlifliliSNI^NVINOSHillMs'^SH I B Va 9 IT^LI BRAR 1 ES SMITHSONIAN_IN 
m 5 \ ^ 5 js., 

oQ 5 5 o 

^ Z -J 2 ^ ^ z 

l”*LIBR ARIES SMITHSONIANINSTITUTION NOlifliliSNI NVINOSHillAlS S 

° . i I .<^5; I 




</) 

2 


C) ^ '' (/) ~ c/5 _ 

N NoiiniiiSNi NViNOSHims S3iyvyan libraries Smithsonian i 
z; c/5 ^ ^ ^ 




~ 

i wMm t ^4tAW z t t: 

n^LIBRARIEs‘”sMITHSONIAN^INSTITUTION NOliniliSNI NVINOSHilWS S 

- CO =: 5 ,.vy 

icj S 

y’ // '^ I 




' 5 v.x. 

5 ;;; o m o 

IN^NOIiniUSNl“’NVINOSHillNS^S3l avaan LI BRAR lES SMITHSONIAN I 
z r* , 2 r* 2 . ' 

o 5 ” 


1^ 



