
February 2012 



ANIMAL KEEPERS’ FORUM . 3601 S.W. 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 
Phone: (785) 273-9149 FAX (785) 273-1980 February 2012 

Vol. 39, No. 2 

Media Production Editor: Shane Good 'Assistant Media Production Editor: Elizabeth Thibodeaux 
• Senior Editor: Becky Richendollar, Riverbanks Zoo • Enrichment Options Column Coordinators: 
Julie Hartell-DeNardo, St. Louis, MO and Ric Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo & Living Museum • Legislative/ 
Conservation Outlook Column Coordinator: Greg McKinney, Philadelphia, PA • ATC Column 
Co-Cordinators: Kim Kezer, Zoo New England and Jay Pratte, Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo • 
Conservation Station Coordinator: Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum is published monthly by the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., 
3601 S.W. 29th Street, Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. Ten dollars of each membership fee 
goes toward the annual publication costs of Animal Keepers’ Forum . Postage paid at Topeka, KS. 

AAZK Executive Director: Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc., Topeka KS 

also serves as AAZK Liaison to the American Zoo & Aquarium Association (AZA) 

AAZK Administrative Secretary: Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK, Inc., Topeka, KS 


BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112-0551 President 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830-1000 Vice President 

Kelly Wilson, Detroit Zoological Society, Royal Oak, MI 48067 
Deana Walz, The Living Planet Aquarium, Sandy, UT 84094-4409 
Denise Wagner, Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, AZ 85008 


COMMITTEES/COORDINATORS/PROJECT MANAGERS 


By-laws 

Chair - Ric Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo 

Grants Committee 

Chair - Shelly Roach, Columbus Zoo 

Behavioral Husbandry Committee 

Chair - Christina Dembiec, Jacksonville Zoo 

Conservation Committee Chair 

Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter 

Bowling for Rhinos 

Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Cary, NC 

Products and Membership 

Jacque Blessington, K.C. Zoo, Project Manager 


Ethics 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
Awards 

Janet McCoy, The Oregon Zoo 
Professional Development 
Melaina Wallace, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
ICZ Coordinator 

Norah Famham, Woodland Park Zoo 
Media/Website 

Denise Wagner, Phoenix Zoo, Project Manager 

Social Media 

Sean Walcott, SeaWorld San Diego, Project Manager 


Conference Program Manager 
Victor Aim, Oakland Zoo 


MEMBERSHIP SERVICES 

Data Transfer Forms 
Available for download at www.aazk.org 

AAZK Publications/Logo Products/ Apparel 
AAZK Administrative Office/Topeka 
or at www.aazk.org 


f \ printed on Recycled Paper 


Table of Contents 

About the Cover/Information for Contributors 50 

From the President 51-53 

The Scoop 54-57 

Letters to the Editor 58-61 

Coming Events 63-65 

AAZK Announces New Members....... 66 

General Announcements 67 

Call for Papers For Dedicated Issue of AKF - CHELONIANS................ 68 

Thank You Commercial Members 69 

The Biggest Loser - Ape Style 70-76 

A Special Partnership Part I 77-80 

Enrichment Options: Lemur Island Enrichment Part II 81 -89 

Training Tales (Catch a Tiger by the Tail: The Next Phase of Tiger Training at 

Disney s Animal Kingdom®) 90-94 

Conservation Station (A Conversation for the Conservationist) 95-96 



AMERICAN 

ASSOCIATION 


Of ZOO KEEPERS 


MISSION STATEMENT 
(Revised April 2009) 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

The American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. exists to advance excellence in the animal 
keeping profession, foster effective communcation beneficial to animal care, support deserving 
conservation projects, and promote the preservation of our natural resources and animal life. 


About the Cover - The animal pictured is an adult male drill ( Mandrillus leucophaeus). Drills are among 
the most critically endangered species of primate in the entire world. His piercing eyes almost seem to 
search the hearts and souls of we humans for our help in attempting to bring them back from the brink of 
extinction. The photo was submitted by Douglas Kresl and was a first-place winner in the photo contest 
that supported the very successful 2011 AAZK National Conference in San Diego. 

Drills are closely related to baboons and even more closely related to mandrills {Mandrillus sphinx ). 
They are members of the old-world monkey family Cercopithecidae. According to Wikipedia®, “A single 
dominant male leads a troop of around 20 females and is father to most of the young. Longevity is up to 
28 years. The diet is primarily frugivorous, taking a wide range of fruit, but they also eat herbs, roots, 
eggs, insects, and occasionally small mammals. Drills are among Africa’s most endangered mammals, and 
are listed by the IUCN as the highest conservation priority of all African primates. Drill numbers have 
been declining in all known habitat areas for decades as a result of illegal commercial hunting, habitat 
destruction, and human development; as few as 3,000 drills may remain in the wild, with the highest 
population estimate only 8,000. A total of 174 drills recovered from illegal capture are in semi-captivity at 
the Drill Rehabilitation and Breeding Centre in Nigeria and about 40 in other zoos internationally.” 

Source: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DrillJmammal) 

Please Note New Monthly Deadline and Contact Information 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers ’ Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for publication. Articles 
of a research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the zoo professionals who serve as 
referees for AKF. No commitment is made to the author, but an effort will be made to publish articles 
as soon as possible. Lengthy articles may be separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the 
Editor. The Editor reserves the right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in 
writing by the author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, self- 
addressed, appropriately-sized envelope. Telephone, fax or email contributions of late-breaking news or 
last-minute insertions are accepted as space allows. Phone (330) 483-1104; FAX (330) 483-1444; email 
is shane.good@aazk.org . If you have questions about submission guidelines, please contact the Editor. 
Submission guidelines are also found at: http://aazk.org/akf-submission-ffuidelines/. 

Deadline for each regular issue is the 3rd of the preceding month. 

Dedicated issues may have separate deadline dates and will be noted by the Editor. 

Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the AKF staff or the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc. Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a copy of 
the reprinted material is forwarded to the Editor. If an article is shown to be separately copyrighted by 
the author(s), then permission must be sought from the author(s). Reprints of material appearing in this 
journal may be ordered from the Editor. Regular back issues are available for $4.00 each. Special issues 
may cost more. 

E-Mail Addresses: 

You may reach Barbara Manspeaker at the AAZK Administrative Offices at: aazkoffice@zk.kscoxmail.com . 
You may reach Shane Good and Animal Keepers Forum at: shane.good@aazk.org . 

Mailing Address: 

AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 


AAZK website Address: www.aazk.org 
BFR Website: http://aazkbfr.org 


50 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol 39, No. 2 


From the President 


$4 Million 

As of this writing, Bowling for Rhinos (BFR) 
is about five thousand dollars shy of the $4 
million mark. According to BFR Coordinator 
Patty Pearthree, if all projected funds raised are 
turned in by the remaining Chapters, we may 
well exceed this important milestone in BFR 
history. Even if we fall a few dollars shy of this 
landmark, it will be close enough to really get 
excited about! 

Since 1990, Chapters across the country have 
gathered annually in an effort to support rhino 
conservation. To date, these funds have made 
it possible to help protect rhino species in both 
Africa and Indonesia. In addition to rhino 
conservation, funds generated from BFR events 
also support cheetah conservation in Kenya. AAZK’s flagship conservation program has made a 
profound impact on conservation in these areas. Through your hard work and generous support, you 
help equip Rhino Protection Units on two continents, resulting in better protection against poachers 
in Lewa, Sumatra, and Java. 

Chapters Champion the Cause 

None of the success of Bowling for Rhinos would be possible were it not for the incredible energy that 
AAZK Chapters and individual members exert during the weeks and months that precede this annual 
event. Each year, the pavement gets pounded, the flyers go up and chapters all across the United 
States (even some Canadian Chapters, too) begin the procession of pledges and donations. T-shirts 
are designed and sold, and in one of their finest hours of leadership and camaraderie, Chapters make a 
huge impact on Rhino conservation. Most importantly, not only do you raise funds for conservation, 
you also share the cause and educate others about the need for protecting endangered species and 
their habitat. At my Chapter, BFR brings non- AAZK members together to support a worthy cause. 
I am sure it is the same at your Chapter as well. 



The Trends 

It’s safe to say that that during the first BFR events back in 1990, there must have been a great deal 
of excitement. Since then that energy has taken off, resulting in some pretty impressive totals. If 
you go back and look at the BFR totals over the years, you’ll see some pretty interesting, though not 
so surprising trends. I have taken the liberty to include some graphs for you to make those trends 
stand out more. 

If you look at the Average BFR Totals, you’ll see that BFR has raised between $99,393 and $3 16,397 
annually in its 22-year history. You’ll also notice that with the exception of the 1 8 th year (2007), BFR 
fundraising has been a steady incline. In the second graph (Average Number of BFR Events), 
you’ll see how the number of participating AAZK Chapters has risen over the years. The correlation 
is evident: the more amount of participating Chapters, the greater the totals for BFR. 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


51 


A Plateau 


Looking at the BFR Totals and Average Number of BFR Events graphs, I am surprised to see 
that while we have increased the number of BFR events; our totals raised have essentially reached a 
plateau. The economy has much to do with that, I am certain, but nonetheless, the figures are there. 
The silver lining here is that you have made great strides in increasing Chapter participation in BFR 
with an event increase of over 20% in the last four years! 


Breaking the Pattern 

Recently, at our strategic planning meeting, AAZK established a goal of $500,000 for BFR. 
Considering that BFR’s best year boasted a sum of $316,397, $500,000 is quite a target. To 
effectively reach this target, we need to look at ways to improve our fundraising strategies for BFR. 
Quite simply, it comes down to this: more chapters raising more funds for BFR will help us achieve 
this goal. To help this process gain momentum, we will include a workshop at Syracuse on creating 
a successful event. We will utilize the expertise of Chapters who have a long history of gargantuan 
fundraising results for BFR. We want to set you all up to succeed as well as exceed our expectations! 
In the end, conservation efforts in Africa and Indonesia will reap the benefits. 

BFR is the flagship conservation project of AAZK. Through BFR, we have a long established 
tradition of supporting conservation. And our efforts are measureable; BFR funds help provide 
protection for rhinos and support habitat preservation for rhinos, cheetahs, and other species. 

Congratulate yourselves for a job well done! It is quite an accomplishment to raise $4 million in a 
little over 20 years. It has taken a great team effort; one that I am confident will continue on as we 
forge ahead to our new goal of raising $500,000 annually for BFR. While it’s not possible for us 
to save every species, we can make an impact as an organization, as a Chapter, and as individuals. 

Send me your thoughts. Some of you have seen BFR develop since its inception while for others; 
it is a new adventure in raising funds and awareness for conservation. Feel free to e-mail me at 
bob.cisneros@aazk.org . 

% 




EDITOR ’S NOTE: We did it! Just before this issue went to press, Bowling for 
Rhinos Coordinator Patty Pearthree announced that our flagship fundraiser 




has officially surpassed four million dollars in funds raised since the event's 
inception in 1990. All AAZK members, past and present, should be proud of 
this accomplishment. One of the things that makes any conservation project 

successful is long-term commitment, and since 1990 AAZK members have been 

• . . ■ 

saving species and protecting habitat across the globe. Congratulations on a job 




well done. Let's hope our success carries over into 






liitliil , , 
lltllilll 

km? 


fl 




iffgifi 

tKB 




52 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 





Average BFR Totals 


$350,000 

$300,000 

$250,000 

$200,000 

$150,000 

$100,000 

$50,000 

$0 


$265,205 


$192,789 


$149,249 

| 


|99,39| 

III 

I 

I § I 


S Average BFR Totals 


$7,000 

$6,000 

$5,000 

$4,000 

$3,000 

$2,000 

$1,000 

$0 


Average Amount Raised per Event 

$5,970 


Average Number of BFR Events 

65 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


53 



THE SCOOP 



Photo courtesy of Robert and Carolyn Buchanan, Polar Bears International 


Only 1 month is left in the AAZK Chapters’ Third “Trees for You and Me” AAZK Chapter 
Challenge which runs 1 September 2011 -1 March 2012. The link to “Trees” will be on Polar Bears 
International’s® (PBI) website. We will be helping to build the Polar Bear Forest® in Wisconsin with 
the help of the Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources (WDNR). Our goal this year is to raise 
$25,000. Once again for each $1 donated up to 3 trees will be planted in the Polar Bear Forest. The 
winning AAZK Chapter will again have a tree planted in their zoo or community thanks to PBI, along 
with a plaque. “Trees” is a true collaboration between PBI, WDNR, and AAZK to plant trees, reduce 
CO 2 and help polar bears! 


PBI’s link for “Trees for You and Me” to donate; don’t forget to find 
your AAZK Chapter on the scroll and click to win. 
polarbearsintemational.org/programs/trees-vou-and-me-model-nation 


PBI’s link to how the AAZK Chapters are doing in this year’s competition 
polarbearsintemational.org/programs/trees-vou-me-date-0 


AAZK’s link to AAZK/PBI and reforestation 
aazk.org/aazk-and-polar-bears-intemational/ 


Any questions or comments contact 
christv.mazrimas-ott@aazk.org . 



for you and me 

J 



AMERICAN 

ASSOCIATION 


Of ZOO KEEPERS 


54 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Congratulations to the Battle Creek Chapter! 


The Battle Creek Chapter of AAZK is the midpoint leader in our annual Chapter Challenge known 
as “Trees for You and Me”. As the midpoint leader, they will receive a bush to commemorate their 
achievement. At our last tally, we have raised $7,039 towards our goal of $25,000. Here is how the 
top ten Chapters stack up in the annual Chapter Challenge so far: 

1500 Battle Creek AAZK Chapter 

1 000 Tucson AAZK Chapter 

795 Detroit AAZK Chapter 

750 Greater Philadelphia AAZK Chapter 

565 Brookfield AAZK Chapter 

548 Lincoln Park AAZK Chapter 

500 Lion Country Safari AAZK Chapter 

260 Tulsa AAZK Chapter 

250 Orange County Chapter of AAZK 

206 Greater Houston AAZK Chapter 


Member Updates 


Tammy Root Steps Down from AAZK Board of Directors 

Tammy Root, formerly of the Indianapolis Zoo, has 
stepped down from the AAZK Board of Directors to 
pursue her new endeavors as a Researcher with Harlan 
Labs in Indiana. Tammy was a Board Member since 
2007, the Board’s Oversight of the Behavioral Husbandry, 
Awards, and Grants Committees, and was a member of the 
National Enrichment Committee from 2004-2007, and the 
National Animal Training Committee from 2005-2007. 
Tammy was also very active on the local Chapter level. 
She was a very influential member of our Association 
and her leadership will be missed. We wish her well in 
her new endeavors and thank her for her many years of 
commitment to this Association. 



Tammy Root 


Denise Wagner Returns to the AAZK Board of Directors 

AAZK, Inc. is pleased to announce the appointment of 
Denise Wagner of the Phoenix Zoo to replace outgoing 
Board Member Tammy Root. Denise originally served 
on the AAZK Board of Directors from 2001-2009 and is 
a former President of the Association. Denise will assume 
oversight of the Awards and Grants Committees. Denise 
can be reached at denise.wagner@aazk.org . Welcome 
back to the Board Denise! 



Denise Wagner 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


55 



Victor Aim 




Angela Cecil Binney training 
a southern white rhinoceros 
(Ceratotherium simum simum), 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom 
(Off Exhibit) 


Victor Aim Selected as New Conference Project Manager 

AAZK, Inc. is taking on a greater role in helping conference 
hosts with the planning and structure of future conferences. 
To facilitate this, we have added a new Project Manager to 
help coordinate communication and goals between AAZK, 
Inc. and the conference hosts. The Conference Project 
Manager (CPM) will interact directly and act as a liaison 
between the Professional Development Committee and the 
Chapter Conference Committees. 

Victor Aim (Oakland Zoo) has been selected as AAZK’s 
Conference Project Manager. A national member since 2001, 
Victor has spent the last three years serving on the Professional 
Development Committee. No stranger to conferences, 
Victor has attended many of the AAZK Conferences as both 
presenter and workshop facilitator. Victor can be reached at 
victor.alm@aazk.org . Congratulations Victor! 

Mark DeDenus Steps Down from Associate 
Editor Position 

Mark DeDenus, a retired keeper from Tucson’s Reid Park 
Zoo and formerly of Assiniboine Park Zoo, has stepped 
down after many years as an Associate Editor of the Animal 
Keepers’ Forum. Mark was also a former Board Member 
of the Association from 1992-1995, and winner of AAZK’s 
Lifetime Achievement Award. If there were an AAZK Hall 
of Fame, Mark’s bronze statue would undoubtedly grace 
the lobby. We wish Mark a happy retirement and many 
rewarding years in his new job title: Grandfather. 

Angela Cecil Binney Steps Down from BHC 

Angela Cecil Binney of Disney’s Animal Kingdom is stepping 
down from her positions within the Behavioral Husbandry 
Committee and the AKF’s Training Tales Column. Angela will 
be pursuing new endeavors through her recently appointed 
position of Research Coordinator for the Animals, Science & 
Environment Department at Disney’s Animal Kingdom. 

Angela helped begin AAZK’s original Training Committee 
with Beth Stark of the Toledo Zoo in 2000. In 2004, she 
became the committee’s Co-Chair with Kim Kezer of Zoo 
New England, and the Committee’s name was changed to 
the Animal Training Committee. In 2009, she “retired” 
from the Chair position, but remained on the committee as a 
member (when it officially became known as the BHC) and 
Editor of the AKF’s Training Tales column, for which she 
was an Editor from 2006 until recently. 

We wish Angela well in her new endeavors as she moves from 
Animal Keeper/Trainer to Researcher. Let’s hope that she just 
replaces her training columns in the AKF with some papers 
related to her new work as a researcher. I have already dropped 
some not so subtle hints! 


56 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Bontebok SSP Seeks Coordinator 
and Studbook Keeper 

The AZA Antelope and Giraffe TAG is seeking 
a Program Leader (Studbook Keeper and SSP 
Coordinator) for the Bontebok SSP program. 
Those interested in applying for this vacancy 
should contact Martha Fischer, Antelope and 
Giraffe TAG Chair, at fischer@stlzoo.org by 1 
March 2012. 


SAVE THE DATE! - 
Ungulate TAG Meetings 

The AZA Ungulate TAGs will be holding their 
midyear meetings in conjunction with the 
2012 AZA Midyear Meeting in Palm Springs, 

California, hosted by Living Desert. 

This year the meetings will include midyear working meetings for the AZA 
Antelope and Giraffe TAG, the AZA Equid TAG, the AZA Cervid TAG, the AZA 
Caprid TAG, the AZA Wild Pig and Peccary TAG and the AZA Cattle TAG, as well 
as the Annual Ungulate TAG Research Symposium. In addition this year, the AZA 
Avian Scientific Advisory Group and the AZA Ungulate TAGs are collaborating on 
a joint workshop on Bird/Hoofstock Multi-species Exhibit Management. 

We would love for you to join us this year. Please mark your calendar with the 
following date: 



• 26 March, 1-5 pm 

Joint ASAG/Ungulate TAG Bird/Hoofstock Multi-species 


Exhibit Management Workshop 

• 28 March, 9:30 am - 5:30 pm 

AZA Ungulate TAG working meeting (agenda 


is coming soon!) 

• 29 March, 8 am - 5 pm 

AZA Ungulate TAG working meeting (agenda is 


coming soon!) 


For a full conference schedule, please visit aza.org/mymschedule/ 

Registration and Hotel information can be found here: aza.org/midyearmeeting/ 
We really hope to see you there! 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


57 



LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 


In the December 2011 issue of the AKF, we reported on the tragedy in Zanesville, 
OH that involved the deaths of 49 exotic animals at a southeastern Ohio animal 
preserve. The report included an editorial and also a special interview with Dr. 
Chris Kuhar, Curator of Primates and Small Mammals at Cleveland Metroparks 
Zoo. What follows is some of your feedback. 


Dear Editor, 

Now is the time for all true animal lovers to join together. We must not let the lives of 49 exotic 
animals die in vain. I have been helping both people and exotic animals for over 38 years. Ten 
years ago I started the non-profit organization, Outreach for Animals. This organization consists of 
law enforcement, firefighters, EMT/paramedics, ER physicians, and veterinarians. Our mission is to 
teach proper behavior around wildlife. I did this because the private ownership of dangerous exotic 
animals has escalated in the United States. I am the subject of the internationally award-winning 
documentary “The Elephant in the Living Room.” Traveling the world, promoting the film and 
lecturing, I have learned that the private ownership of dangerous exotic animals is a phenomena 
found only in the United States. What I mean by that, is in Africa, India, Australia, and South 
America average people do not keep dangerous exotic animals in their homes. They have a healthy 
“respect” for wildlife. We have lost all “respect” for wildlife in the United States. What people see 
on educational TV programs is a man -vs- nature type show or animal experts living with tigers as 
house cats. The animals represented on these shows are usually surgically altered or medicated. 
When an uninformed person tries to bring a tiger into their home, they get a baptism in reality. These 
new owners honestly believe they can take their new pet to the local zoo and turn it in when they can 
no longer handle it, or want it. The worst scenario is what happened in the Everglades, when python 
owners released their oversized pets believing they were saving the animal, a bom free mentality. I 
have learned from asking dangerous exotic animal owners “why did you get this animal?” All have 
responded “because I saw it on TV.” This monkey see, monkey do mentality has become dangerous 
to both animal and owner. I have always said “when you bring a dangerous exotic animal into your 
home, it’s a time bomb waiting to explode.” You never know what is going to trigger it, or when it’s 
going to go off, only that it will. The owners have also signed a death warrant for themselves or the 
animal. One will usually die. The majority of the time it’s the animal. 

The members of AAZK need to be out front for this cause. What other group has more experience 
with dangerous exotic animals? Your knowledge is valuable and needs to be shared with the average 
Joe or Jane who watch Animal Planet. We together have to do what our TV experts have failed to do. 
We need to reach out to the public and teach “respect” for animals. Since the Zanesville Massacre 
the average person has been reaching out for answers. They have realized that their media heroes and 
government officials have failed to tell them the whole story. We need to step up and be the voice 
they need. We need to be the voice of the 49 exotic animal victims of Zanesville, Ohio. Now is the 
time to act. 

Tim Harrison 

Director, Outreach for Animals 

Editor s Note: Tim Harrison is the subject of the internationally award-winning documentary “ The 
Elephant in the Living Room. ” 


58 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Dear Editor, 


I would like to comment on the incident in Ohio. First, it was very tragic and unfortunately has put 
a bad light on private owners, small zoos, sanctuaries, etc. We need to look at the facts here. The 
OWNER supposedly let all the animals out which leads to a few questions. One, why did he have to 
cut fences to let them out? If he’s the owner, he had keys to unlock gates. Second, they said a suicide 
note was found, yet nothing was released about what it said. They also said they weren’t sure how he 
died and I haven’t heard anymore about an autopsy, etc. Wouldn’t it be evident that he died from a 
big cat bite or gunshot wound? We also must remember, this was not an ESCAPE. It was a deliberate 
RELEASE. Escape makes it sound like these animals can get out at anytime and the public needs to 
be scared that these animals can get out of any enclosure at any time, including from zoos. Since it 
was the owners that let the animals out, let’s not blame this because he was a private owner. After 
all, any person who has keys or access to animals in any setting has the potential to let animals out. I 
believe there have been cases in AZA zoos where people have broken into a zoo and let animals out. 

What needs to be put in perspective is why this happened and will it happen again. Instead the media 
has made it seem like anyone with potentially dangerous animals is a ticking time bomb. In this 
particular case, there were animal organizations trying to get these animals taken from this man, but 
authorities refused to get involved. 

I think we all agree that there should be stricter regulations on who can own exotic animals and how 
those animals are kept. Being a sanctuary director, I have seen animals kept in horrible conditions, but 
this hasn’t been limited to just exotics. I see horses starving, dogs chained up so tight and long that the 
skin of the animal grew around the chain, emus let loose in the country when the market dropped on 
them and the list goes on. With so many states starting to impose stricter regulations, exotic animals, 
at least the big cats, are not being sold as pets like they once were. In Texas, most of the breeders have 
gone out of business. Many counties have banned ownership and the private owners that did exist have 
not obtained new animals once their animals died. Big cats became a fad like so many other animals do. 
The fad is ending and unfortunately there are other exotic animals taking their place. Those of us in the 
animal business, especially rescue, know most of those that operate in exotic breeding and know where 
a lot of private owners are and truthfully there have not been as many calls in the last few years to rescue 
big cats from private owners. We are seeing small zoos and other sanctuaries go out of business due to 
the economy and those animals have to be rescued. The media for years has certainly exaggerated the 
amount of big cats in Texas. A new survey was done and we have less than 300 big cats in captivity in 
Texas. Less than 3,000 in the United States and this includes zoos, sanctuaries and private owners. To 
say there are more tigers in Texas than in India or the wild is not exactly a profound statement since we 
are now seeing the possibility of less than 2,000 tigers in the wild. 

It’s time we stop scaring the public about exotic animals and educate them. The fact is, animals can 
escape or be released from any facility. It is our job to make sure safety measures are put into place as 
best as possible to protect the animals and the public. I believe everyone from the small zoo owner, 
sanctuaries, responsible breeders and AZA zoos want to see proper regulations put in place and 
therefore we must all work together to see this happen. We have to remember that extreme animal 
rights groups are trying to stop animals from being kept in many places, including zoos. The first 
attack is the private owner and small zoos. Once those are gone, they move on to the next entity. AR 
groups have already attacked AZA zoos on how their animals are handled, yet they are not the experts 
but are gaining a hold on everyone in the industry. 

Terri Werner, Co-Founder / Director of Operations 
Tiger Creek Wildlife Refuge 
Tyler, TX 
tigercreek.org 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


59 


Dear Editor, 


I read with great interest your editorial in follow-up to the tragedy near Zanesville, OH that unfolded 
on 19 October 2011. Less than a month before that incident our non-profit exotic animal sanctuary, 
located in northeastern Indiana, welcomed filmmaker Michael Webber and Tim Harrison, one of 
the subjects of the prophetic documentary film “The Elephant in the Living Room”, to our facility 
for an educational Q&A about the exploding and epidemic exotic pet trade. As a home to more 
than 80 surrendered and confiscated former exotic “pets”, we had been following this film, and Mr. 
Harrison’s organization, Outreach for Animals, long before Terry Thompson made exotic pets the 
topic of break-room discussions around the nation. Little did we know what would unfold so close 
to home, so soon after an engaging evening with some of our “heroes”. 

In the world of non-profits, we’re told how critical it is to stay focused on the “mission”. At Black 
Pine, we are constantly faced with requests to provide refuge to rabbits, raccoons, and potbelly 
pigs. We have helped such animals in the past, but have learned that although EVERY animal is 
worthy of help, OUR mission is to provide refuge specifically to the most “exotic” of pets, such as 
tigers, monkeys, and bears, that typically face the fewest second-chance opportunities. To allow 
ourselves to sway from that purpose and commitment would surely stretch our resources too thin, 
and ultimately diminish our success. 

While I appreciate, for example, the Columbus Zoo’s involvement during and after the Zanesville 
incident, I am honestly perplexed as to how doing so was acting within their mission. It may indeed 
be a great publicity move, and truly commendable, to be the “hero” in this case, but I’m not sure 
how they and other zoo personnel will explain to every Joe Private owner from here on out why 
they can’t take in THEIR leopard or grizzly bear. This surely must be crossing the minds of zoo 
directors around the nation, not just my own. I believe the mission of most AZA-accredited zoos is 
well-understood by the general public. Swaying from the mission, I fear, would confuse an already 
largely ignorant public. Are zoos really willing to compromise the quality of their populations to 
save someone’s “pet”? I’m doubting that makes sense in the larger picture. 

We have a long way to go in collaboratively educating the public about the differences between 
private owners, private (unaccredited) zoos, sanctuaries, pseudo-sanctuaries, and accredited zoos. In 
my personal experience, I’m not sure the majority of people working in zoos fully understand those 
differences. That may well be a starting point to consider within zoo education programs. Zoos will 
surely continue to take the lead on task forces, in hearings, and to help drive legislative change and 
generally have more financial and human resources to do so. I hope they will also reach out and 
collaborate, as has been done in OH, to help ensure other affected organizations are involved as well. 
Despite the very best intentions, zoos are capable of being driven more by profit than a smaller, less 
“public” sanctuary may be. I believe that contrast is critical to these discussions. 

I look forward to seeing how the next few years unfold. Surely we all believe exotic, potentially 
dangerous animals do not make good pets. If we can start there, and stay focused on making that 
the “mission” of any collaborations that unfold, then I believe we can all be successful in creating 
positive change. 

Lori Gagen, Executive Director 
Black Pine Animal Sanctuary 
blackpine.org 


60 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Dear Editor, 


Thank you for opening this discussion in AKF. After reading the AKF interview with Dr. Kuhar, I am 
compelled to share my thoughts about banning private ownership of dangerous and exotic animals 
with AAZK. Dr. Kuhar points out that defining “dangerous animals” is challenging. I believe the 
real problem with this idea pertains to private ownership. To the average citizen private ownership 
of an exotic dangerous animal sounds like keeping lions and tigers in your backyard, but zoological 
professionals should understand, if they don’t already, that private refers to a facility that is not 
owned by the government. The exotic animal ban law in Washington state, for example, defines a 
“Person [as] any individual, partnership, corporation, organization, trade or professional association, 
firm, limited liability company, joint venture, association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity, and 
any officer, member, shareholder, director, employee, agent, or representative thereof.” 

There are responsible private exotic animal owners of all sizes throughout the country that breed, 
keep, train and sell exotic animals for the purposes of education, edutainment, Television/Movies, 
conservation and zoo collections. Some of these facilities may be accredited by the AZA or ZAA. 
The AZA has been able to lobby states with ban language, like Washington, to allow their accredited 
facilities as exceptions. The ZAA is currently working to do the same as those situations arise. This 
is well and good for those of us in accredited institutions (exhale, wipe brow) but I do not believe 
it is good for conservation and education or even necessary for public safety and animal welfare. I 
believe in professional standards and the value of accreditation, however animal escapes can occur 
at accredited facilities and government facilities just the same as they can at private facilities. Tax 
status (profit vs nonprofit) has nothing to do with how animals are cared for or managed, and banning 
private exotic ownership would not prevent people from exhibiting criminally insane behavior, such 
as that demonstrated in Zanesville. 

The lax regulations in Ohio do need addressing and are cause for public safety and animal welfare 
concern, but nothing that cannot be solved by basic state and local permitting and oversight. If 
states rush to start banning private exotic animal ownership they will be unnecessarily limiting 
wildlife education opportunities, limiting the genetic diversity in zoological collections, and prove 
economically damaging for private facilities and the communities in which they reside. 

I disagree with Dr. Kuhar ’s position that the public cannot distinguish between “us” and “them” 
referring to AZA accredited institutions vs ‘roadside zoos’. I would say that animal activists like 
HSUS who were quick to use this issue to further their agenda do not distinguish between any version 
of “us” and “them”. On the contrary, the public that I talk to daily are discriminating visitors that 
are able to recognize well-managed animal collections and actively post on review sites and social 
media. However, I do not think they understand how private ownership is legally defined in ban laws. 

I cannot agree with his last point more. If we, as the AAZK, continue to educate the public on 
what we do as professionals and strive for excellence in our field and within our institutions, we 
can effectively address any public concerns about captive animal collections. I Would also suggest 
advocating for “sensible” legislation when necessary. 

Respectfully, 

Vanessa Stoffel 
Bearizona Wildlife Park 
1500 ERte 66 
Williams, AZ 86046 
bearizona.com 
facebook.com/bearizona 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


61 




THIRD AND FINAL CALL FOR 

Abstracts Due 01 April 2012 at papers@i 
For more information go to the ICZ website 


4 th International 
Congress on Zookeeping 

9-13 September 3011, Singapore 

Wcum Uoic&b, t)ru. 


Themed "MANY VOICES, ONE CALLING", this conference hopes to bring together delegates 
from around the world for the objectives of enhancing the professionalism of zookeepers 
and the welfare of their animals. We encourage keepers to share their knowledge and 
experiences with fellow keepers at this momentous event. 


We look forward to hear your MANY VOICES committing to our ONE CALLING. 
See you in Singapore 2012! 


For more information: 

website: www.iczoo.org email: congress@iczoo.org 


Hosted by Wildlife Reserves Singapore, in conjunction with ICZ 


62 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 




Coming Events 

Post Your Upcoming Events here — e-mail shane.good@aazk.org 


March 7-9, 2012 

Association of Professional Wildlife Educators 
Hosted by Happy Hollow Zoo, San Jose, CA. 
For more information please visit apwe.org . 


August 8-14, 2012 

The World Congress of Herpetology 

To be held in Vancouver, Canada. For more 
information see worldcongressoflierpetologv. com . 


April 27-30, 2012 and October 12-15, 2012 
From Good Care to Great Welfare: A Workshop 
Designed for Animal Care Professionals 

Presented by the Center for Zoo Animal Welfare 
Detroit Zoological Society. A unique four- 
day workshop for animal care staff working 
with captive exotic animals. The workshop is 
designed to help participants better understand 
animals’ perspectives and experiences, address 
the challenges captivity imposes on animal 
welfare, and develop the skills necessary 
to assess and improve overall well-being. 
Exercises and experiences are immersive and 
designed to help us understand captivity from 
the animals’ point of view. Limited scholarship 
opportunities available. 


August 16-19. 2012 

The 10 th Annual Symposium on the Conservation 
and Biology of Tortoises and Freshwater Turtles 

Tucson, AZ. Hosted by the Turtle Survival 
Alliance and the IUCN Tortoise and Freshwater 
Turtle Specialist Group. For more information 
go to turtlesurvival.org. 

September 9-13, 2012 

4 th International Congress on Zookeeping 

Sponsored by Wildlife Reserves Singapore/ 
Singapore Tourism Bureau. Theme: “Many 
Voices, One Calling”. For info on sponsorship 
or exhibit opportunities email eo@aszk.org.au. 
Check the ICZ website iczoo.org for latest 
news/information. 


For information contact: Elizabeth Arbaugh, 
Animal Welfare Manager, Detroit Zoological 
Society, Tel: 248-398-0903 x3643, E-mail: 
Elizabeth@dzs.org or visit czaw.org . 

May 6-11, 2012 

ABMA Annual Conference 

Hosted by Oakland Zoo, California Academy 
of Sciences, and CuriOdyssey. The conference 
location will be the San Francisco Airport 
Mariott, Burlingame, CA. See the theabma.org 
for more info. 

May 13-16, 2012 

Shape of Enrichment Regional Workshop 

Hosted by Howletts and Port Lympne Wild 
Animal Parks, Kent, UK. For more information 
go to enrichment.org. 


July 15-21, 2012 

NATIONAL ZOO KEEPER WEEK 


For more information on AZA Conferences 


September 23-27, 2012 
AAZK National Conference 

Hosted by the Rosamond Gifford Zoo and 
the Rosamond Gifford Zoo AAZK Chapter 
in Syracuse, NY. For more information see 
rgzaazk.org. 

Upcoming AAZK National Conferences 

2012 - Syracuse, NY - September 23-27 

2013 - Asheboro, NC - September 22-26 
2014 - Orlando, FL - September 8-12 


For information on upcoming AAZK 
conferences, watch the AAZK 
website at aazk.org 

Upcoming AZA National Conferences 

September 8-13, 2012 
AZA 2012 Annual Conference 
Hosted by Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, AZ 

September 7-12, 2013 
AZA 2013 Annual Conference 
Hosted by the Kansas City Zoo, 
Kansas City, MO 


see aza.org/ConfWork/AC Intro/index.html. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


63 


Conference 2012 - Simply Syracuse! 


There’s a light at the end of the tunnel for Rosamond Gifford Zoo AAZK. Plans for the 20 1 2 
conference in Syracuse are well under way! Conference dates are set for 23-27 September. 

We will be finalizing our workshops in the next few days and will have summaries of 
these workshops available for your zoo’s executive and management teams in the next 
couple of weeks. 

AAZK Professional Development Committee workshops will include: 

• Team Building 

• Professional Development at Your Zoo 

• African Wild Dog Husbandry 

• Emergency Preparedness Workshop: Do you Know What to Do? 

• Basics of AZA Population Management 

• Creating a Successful AAZK Chapter 

• Bowling for Rhinos: Creating a Successful Event 

• Polar Bears International Leadership Camp 

• Raptor Workshop : Intro to F alconry and How to Make Your Own F alconry Equipment 

• Quarantine Protocols: Training and Enrichment 

Rosamond Gifford Zoo will be hosting the following workshops: 

• Management and Prevention of Zoonotic Disease 

• Anesthesia and a Zoo Keeper’s Role 

• A Practical Look at Darting 

• Elephant Husbandry and Training 

• Ungulate Restraint 

• Penguin Husbandry and Restraint 

• Small Mammal and Primate Capture and Restraint 

• Sloth Husbandry and Training 

• Creating a Zoo Keeper Driven Public Relations Program 
Conference registration should be live as of 1 February 2012! 

Syracuse 2012 Chapter Challenge 

The Rosamond Gifford Zoo Chapter of the American Association of Zoo Keepers will be 
hosting the 2012 National AAZK Conference in September of 2012. We are excited to offer 
this opportunity to support our efforts to highlight in-situ conservation efforts, research 
projects and programs that encourage zoo visitors to protect wildlife and wild places. 

To learn more about the 2012 Chapter Challenge and ways you can support the 2012 
National AAZK Conference, please contact: 

Tammy Singer 
tsinger@rgzaazk.org 

315-435-8511 ext: 120 


64 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


I 


Second Call for Papers 

The Rosamond Gifford Zoo AAZK Chapter 
is pleased to host the 2012 National 
AAZK Conference from September 23- 
27, 2012. The Conference theme “On 
the Path Toward Conservation” will 
highlight in-situ conservation efforts, 
research projects and programs that 
encourage visitors to protect wildlife and 
wild places. We will be accepting abstracts for 
the following categories: 


^ Syracu se ^ 

Ss**,' 



FJfi 

Of! T he Path Toward Conservation 






Papers: 

Authors will be allowed 1 5 minutes for a presentation with five minutes of Q & A immediately 
following. Abstracts should focus on the conference theme or innovative approaches to zoo 
keeping including animal welfare, conservation, husbandry, education and training. 


Posters: 

Posters will be on display throughout the conference with a scheduled Q & A session to 
be determined. 


Guidelines for Abstracts: 

Abstracts should be no more than 250 words and submitted as a Microsoft Word document 
via e-mail to submissions@rgzaazk.org. 

Please include the following information: 

• Name of authors and presenter 

• Institution / Affiliation 

• Position / Title 

• Title of Work (please specify poster or paper) 

• AV requirements 

• Contact information (please include e-mail) 

Deadline for Abstracts is May 1, 2012 

Authors will be notified, regarding acceptance, by June 1, 2012. All papers must be received 
by July 15, 2012 to be included in the conference program. 

For more information on the 2012 National AAZK Conference, please visit our website at 

rgzaazk.org 


See You in Syracuse! 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


65 


AAZK Announces New Members 


New Commercial Member 

Zoo Med Laboratories, Inc., San Luis Obispo (CA) 

New Institutional Member 

Lionshare Educational Organization, Inc., Greenwich (CT) 

New Professional Members 
Andy Burke, Animal Adventure, Bolton (MA) 

Jared Leger, Animal Adventure , Bolton (MA) 

Danielle Leger, Animal Adventure, Bolton (MA) 

Josh Carmichael, Animal Adventure, Bolton (MA) 

Jennifer Proscia, Turtle Back Zoo, W. Orange (NJ) 

Alicia DuBrava, Buffalo Zoological Gardens, Buffalo (NY) 

J.P. Waite, Discovery Reptiles, Naples (FL) 

Kathryn N. Strain, Memphis Zoo, Memphis (TN) 

Nicole Harmon, Washington Park Zoo, Michigan City (IN) 
Steven Bums, Wildwood Zoo, Marshfield (WI) 

Brianna Larson, Como Zoo, St. Paul (MN) 

Melissa Pritchett, St. Louis Zoo, St. Louis (MO) 

Amber Henderson, Moody Gardens, Galveston (TX) 

Amanda Robinson, Moody Gardens, Galveston (TX) 

Libby Hayes, Moody Gardens, Galveston (TX) 

Emily Graham, San Antonio Zoo & Aquar.. San Antonio (TX) 
Nicole Dinardo, San Antonio Zoo, San Antonio (TX) 

Katie Ahl, Woodland Park Zoo, Seattle (WA) 

Amanda Chomos, Point Defiance Zoo & Aquarium, Tacoma (WA) 
Kimberlee Clark, Woodland Park Zoo, Seattle (WA) 

Peggy Farr, Woodland Park Zoo, Seattle (WA) 

Renewing Contributing Member 

Verla Atkins, Atascosa (TX) 

Renewing Institutional Members 

Elmwood Park Zoo, Norristown (PA) 

SFC Teaching Zoo, Gainesville (FL) 

Lemur Conservation Foundation, Inc., Myakka City (FL) 
Wildwood Wildlife Park, Minocqua (WI) 

Como Park Zoo, St. Paul (MN) 

Pine Grove Zoo, Little Falls (MN) 

Zoo of Acadiana, Broussard (LA) 

Tiger Creek Wildlife Refuge, Tyler (TX) 


THANK YOU for your Membership! 


66 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


— General Announcements 

Attention All Photographers - AKF Needs Your Photos 


Attention all photographers, the AKF needs your photos as potential cover photos and special 
feature photos throughout the issue. All photos need to be high resolution, 300 dpi or greater. All 
photographers will need to submit a photo release form that can be found at aazk.org/animal-keepers- 
forum/aazk-photo-model-release-form/ . Photos that clearly depict facility logos and behind-the- 
scenes shots will need permission of the facility to be used. 

Subjects for the photos should revolve around animal husbandry, conservation, education/ 
interpretation, professional development, significant achievements in the industry (births, exhibits, 
staff, etc.), and can also include some of the more humorous or unique siuations that we all come 
across each day in our occupations. Accompanying text with each photo is strongly encouraged. 


AAZK Awards Committee Now Accepting Nominations 


The AAZK Awards Committee is accepting nominations for the Lifetime Achievement Award, Jean 
M. Hromadka AAZK Excellence in Animal Care Award, The Lutz Ruhe Meritorious Achievement - 
AAZK Professional of the Year Award, the Lee Houts Enrichment Excellence Award, the Certificate 
of Merit for Zoo Keeper Education, the Certificate of Excellence in Exhibit Renovation, the 
Certificate of Merit in Conservation, the Mazuri Animal Nutrition Award, and the AAZK Chapter of 
the Year Award that will be presented at the 2012 AAZK Conference in Syracuse, NY. The deadline 
for nominations is 1 May 2012. Information concerning the qualifications, nomination procedure, 
selection procedure, and an explanation of the awards may be obtained at aazk. org/committee/ 
awards-committee/ . 


"Like" American Association of 
Zoo Keepers on Facebook today 
and help us reach 1000 members 
on our Facebook page! We are 
at 902 and counting. You will 
receive regular updates on the 
Association, surveys, and lots 
of valuable information. 




Bill & Marcia Brant 



P.O. Box 430 

Newberry, FL 32669-0430 
(352) 472-9189 
Fax: (352) 472-9192 
e-mail : Grrot Rodent @ aol .com 


Animal Keepers Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


67 




Call for Papers 

For Dedicated Issue of AKF - CHELONIANS 


We are planning in 2012 on producing an edition of Animal Keepers ’Forum dedicated to Chelonians. 
We would like those interested to submit manuscripts for consideration for inclusion in this dedicated 
issue. Our concept for this issue would include articles both on basic Chelonian husbandry for 
animal care professionals with little or no experience working with this group, as well as articles 
relating to the most advanced techniques in captive husbandry for these species. 

Possible topics might include the following: 

• Chelonian Care and Management 

• Chelonian Conservation 

• Chelonian Field Research 

• Reproduction 

• Behavioral Management 

Papers should be submitted electronically in MS Word only to shane.good@aazk.org. Please use 
Times New Roman font (lOpt text body). Please put “Chelonian Issue” in the subject line of your 
e-mail. Papers should be no more than 10 pages in length. Any charts and/or graphs should be 
submitted in their native program (i.e. Microsoft Excel, Word). Photos submitted electronically 
should be high-resolution (minimum 300 dpi) jpg or tiff files. Be sure to include proper photo 
credit and a suggested caption for each photo. Please reference the complete set of AKF submission 
guidelines at aazk.org/akf-submission-guidelines/. 

Be sure to also include your complete contact information including name, address, e-mail and a 
daytime phone where you may be reached if we have questions concerning your submission. Also 
be sure to include your facility and your job title at that facility. 

Deadline for submission of articles for this special Chelonian Issue is April 1, 2012. 

Call for Papers 

For Dedicated Issue of AKF - Diabetic Animals 



All topics related to the diagnosis, veterinary treatment, behavioral management, and all other 
considerations related to the care of diabetic animals will be covered. Deadline for submission of 
articles is March 15, 2012. See above for guidelines. 


0 

□ 

f 

AAZK 

u 

IGREATEH ORLANDO 

CHAPTER 


Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter 
Announces 2014 Conference Dates 


The Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter will be hosting the AAZK 
National Conference 8-12 September 2014. The Icebreaker 
will occur on the evening of 8 September. Start planning 
ahead now! 


68 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 





AAZK Inc. would like to thank our 
Commercial Members for their continued 
support in 2012! Please keep them in mind 
as you conduct your business 

throughout the year. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


69 


Biggest Loser — Ape Style 

How husbandry changes can result in significant weight loss 


By Leslie Lurz, Animal Keeper 
Maureen Leahy, Curator of Primates 
Lincoln Park Zoo, Chicago, IL, tJ.S.A. 
llurz@lpzoo.om 


Overview 

At Lincoln Park Zoo in Chicago, Illinois, several adult western lowland gorillas ( Gorilla gorilla 
gorilla ) were found to be overweight in 2008. Weight issues are of great concern since obesity in 
gorillas can result in a variety of health problems, including elevated cholesterol concentrations 
and premature cardiovascular disease (Gorilla SSP, 2008). In fact, cardiovascular disease is 
the leading cause of mortality in captive adult gorillas (Gorilla SSP, 2008; Lammey et al. 2008). 
Understanding that the maintenance of a gorilla’s optimal body weight may significantly reduce the 
health risks associated with progressive heart ailments — ranging from aneurism to valvular disease 
to cardiomyopathy — and Type 2 diabetes (Duffy, 2009; Tordiffe, 2008), animal care staff responded 
with both dietary and husbandry interventions. 

This paper demonstrates how changes in husbandry, management, and diet (implemented over a 
two-year period) effectively promoted weight loss for targeted individuals within the gorillas housed 
at Lincoln Park Zoo (LPZ). This paper will highlight the case of “Kowali,” a 33-year-old gorilla and 
one of LPZ’s most significantly overweight adult females, who ultimately lost over 50 pounds [22.7 
kg] over the course of two years. 

Introduction 

Body- weight management can be a challenging component of animal care. Some animals live a 
more sedentary lifestyle in zoological settings. Care must be taken to ensure that animals do not 
become overweight or obese as a result. Given their social nature and the need to provide group 
foraging opportunities, non-human primate species can be especially challenging. It is often difficult 
to manage dietary portion control when dominant animals hoard preferred foods and displace 
subordinate individuals from some foraging opportunities. 

Because of the complexity of gorilla social structures, scientists theorize that dominant animals may 
be prone to excess weight gain (Ullery, et al. 2003). The dominant animal tends to determine the 
time that others spend feeding in any particular location, leaving the subordinate animals to eat only 
what is left over. This pattern of hierarchical behavior might result in excessive food intake by the 
dominant animals given their natural social dynamic. This dominant animal theory may explain 
one of the contributing factors for the weight gain of several gorillas housed at Lincoln Park Zoo in 
Chicago, Illinois, including the case of one adult female named Kowali. 

Kowali resides in one of LPZ’s gorilla troops along with a silverback, two adult females, and her 
juvenile son. Kowali has a history of above-average weights compared with other LPZ females of 
similar age. She is also shorter in stature than the other adult female gorillas; as a result, weight 
increases tend to be more visible on her stout frame. In January 2008, Kowali (then 30 years old) 
topped the scale at more than 270 pounds, and the zoo’s veterinarians and nutritionist rated her body 
condition score as obese. A body condition score is defined as an assessment of the animal’s weight- 
for-age and weight-for-height ratios and its relative proportions of muscle and fat. Having Kowali 
identified as obese was a catalyst for the animal care staff to come up with creative and new ways to 
address weight for the gorillas housed at LPZ. 


70 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


LPZ’s animal care staff devised a plan that would address diet management and activity for Kowali 
by focusing on five different goals: (1) incorporating scale training into the husbandry routine to 
obtain quarterly weights; (2) integrating additional exercise into her daily routine; (3) modifying diet 
content; (4) varying food presentation; and (5) increasing feeding schedules. The remainder of this 
paper describes the changes in husbandry practices made at LPZ in an attempt to reduce Kowali ’s 
weight and the results seen from those modifications. 

Methods 

Monitoring weights with scale training 

Prior to 2008, animal weights were obtained somewhat opportunistically and often solely during 
routine physical exams. Since then, keepers have made it a priority to monitor the apes’ weights more 
closely. Like the majority of LPZ apes, Kowali is now scale trained, meaning she will voluntarily 
sit on a scale and hold the position long enough to get an accurate weight. Other group members 
are stationed elsewhere while the focal individual is on the scale. The goal is to weigh each animal 
quarterly, but some individuals require variation depending on the individual’s health and body 
condition. Records are kept to monitor their weights, which are reported to other members of our 
animal care staff, including veterinarians and the nutritionist. Kowali is now typically weighed every 
three months to closely monitor her weight-loss progress. 



The scale used to monitor Kowali ’s weight. 


Exercise 

Operant-conditioning training sessions using positive-reinforcement techniques are integral to the 
husbandry practices at LPZ. The apes participate in individual operant-conditioning training sessions 
once daily in the morning, and ape groups are alternated to receive an additional afternoon training 
session. All the apes are trained to present various body parts to allow for visual inspection, hand- 
injections, and desensitization to other medical props. These sessions also provide an opportunity for 
keepers to encourage the apes to move about their exhibits and “exercise.” 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


71 


In the case of Kowali, specific efforts were made to have her engage in behaviors that mimicked 
callisthenic-like exercises during these training sessions. Callisthenics are a dynamic form of exercise 
that consists of simple movements, often in repetition, to promote muscular and cardiovascular 
fitness. To facilitate this, her primary trainer devised a shaping plan to condition her to stand, sit, 
lift her legs, and repeat these movements. Reinforcements for offering a correct behavioral response 
were fruit, produce, and Mazuri® leaf-eater chow, which were already a part of her normal diet. As a 
result, there was an increase in her movement and activity level without increasing her caloric intake. 

Initially, it was challenging to motivate an overweight animal like Kowali to exercise, so keepers 
started slowly with a simple “stand” and “sit” routine. She would stand; then the trainer would 
bridge, reinforce her, and ask her to sit. The trainer continued to work on this routine, increasing 
the number of repetitions over time. Next, the duration of her “stand” behavior was increased so 
that Kowali stood and the trainer asked her to “hold.” In the beginning, she would stand and then 
creep back down, but she learned quickly that she would not be reinforced if she sat before the cue, 
which usually terminated the exercise portion of her session. After she was comfortable standing 
for a longer duration, her established husbandry behaviors were incorporated while she remained 
standing, including leg lifts (“foot” presentation at various heights on the cage front), mouth, ear, 
shoulder, arm, chest, belly, etc. The trainer asked her to present these behaviors while she remained 
standing; Kowali was variably reinforced for her efforts. The sit-and-stand exercise portion remained 
part of her routine as well. Over time Kowali built up her endurance, so exercise portions of her 
training session were extended and included more repetitions. Later, the laser pointer was introduced 
to Kowali’s training routine. Once she learned to touch the laser dot, she locomoted around to follow 
the dot, touch it, and be reinforced. Once these behaviors were established, any ape keeper could ask 
her for them if her primary trainer was unavailable. This enabled Kowali to remain consistent with 
a daily exercise routine. 

Kowali’s exercise training was not without its challenges, as she would sometimes appear frustrated 
when the number of exercise repetitions in her session began to increase. Kowali tried to swipe 
or bark at the keeper through the mesh barrier. As a result, her primary trainer developed some 
guidelines to curb her aggression. If she was minimally aggressive (e.g. hand flick directed toward 
keeper or slight barking), she would receive an LRS (least stimulus response, or three to five seconds 
with no response from the trainer) and then her session would continue. If she was aggressive a 
second time, her session would be ended. If she was unacceptably aggressive towards the trainer 
(e.g. attempted to grab her trainer), her session would be ended immediately. With all other keepers 
consistently following these criteria, her aggression quickly subsided. 

Kowali’s Diet Modifications 

Kowali quickly adjusted to the exercise portion of her weight loss program, but her diet needed to 
be addressed as well. At Regenstein Center for African Apes, individual diets are formulated by 
veterinarians and the nutritionist. Gorillas’ daily diet includes fruit, leafy greens, vegetables, starch, 
and Mazuri® leaf-eater chow. In 2008, with the exception of individual fruit rations, all other diet 
items were group fed, including Mazuri® leaf-eater chow, which is the most calorically dense item in 
their diet (See Figure 1, which shows Kowali’s daily diet amounts) 


Figure 1: Kowali’s Daily Diet 


Food item (kg) 

Veggies 

Greens 

Strarehes 

Fruits 

Leaf Eater 
chow 

G&R 

chow 

Total 

Kowali (0.1 
Gorilla) 

0.70 

1.10 

0.10 

0.10 

0.40 

0.00 

2d 


72 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, VoL 39, No. 2 


Kowali’s individual diet had already been at a 10% reduction from the standard adult female gorilla 
diet to promote weight loss, so keeper staff needed to explore additional alternatives for food 
presentation and distribution. Since she was a more dominant animal in her group, she was likely to 
receive more than her share of food. To troubleshoot this, keeper staff incorporated individually hand- 
feeding chow to each gorilla in the group during a training session. This greatly reduced Kowali’s 
opportunity to pick up more than her prescribed chow ration while foraging. The percentage of 
hand-fed chow was increased in increments, such that currently 25% of the gorillas’ individual daily 
chow ration is hand-fed. This is in addition to the individuals’ daily fruit ration that is already 100% 
hand-fed as reinforcement for operant-conditioning training sessions. 

It was also important for keeper staff to remain cognizant of using certain food types and quantities 
for enrichment. All apes receive daily enrichment to promote increased forage time or provide mental 
stimulation in the form of a feeding puzzle or novel item. Previously, enrichment foods such as 
raisins, sunflower seeds, etc. were fed sporadically throughout the day as an ad lib supplement to their 
complete diet. In lieu of this, the calorically dense chow biscuits were reduced by 10%; in their place, 
enrichment foods were added into their total allotment of daily kilocalories. Keepers still choose 
which enrichment foods to feed, but items are chosen from an extensive list of pre-approved options 
and are pre-measured prior to feeding. 

(See Figure 2 for enrichment food items and measurements) 

Diet Presentation 

To encourage climbing for exercise and provide a foraging challenge for the apes, keeper staff also 
started using chow feeders. These feeders are made from PVC tubes tied together with rope and holes 
cut in them. Once keepers fill them with chow, they are hung on the outside of the exhibit mesh at 
least 12 feet high so the apes have to climb up and then use their fingers to get the chow out. This 
challenged the gorillas, including Kowali, to expend more energy foraging. The feeders required the 
animal to vertically climb and hang while foraging as opposed to simply foraging for chow on their 
dayroom floor. For Kowali’s troop, typically two or three feeders were hung in different locations in 
their exhibit to minimize aggression. In the beginning, all the chow was placed in the PVC feeders, 
but some gorillas eventually learned to bang the feeder against the mesh so the chow fell out easily, 
sometimes right into the lap of whatever gorilla was sitting underneath. Subsequently the amount of 
chow placed in the PVC feeders was alternated along with the placement of the feeders on the exhibit 
mesh. LPZ staff is currently devising new chow feeder prototypes. 

Feeding Schedule 

Finally, in an effort to maximize foraging opportunities, keeper staff increased the number of feedings 
per day. In 2008, Kowali’s group was originally receiving the majority of their produce scatter in one 
feeding in their dayroom around 10:00 hrs., following their shift up from the holding area. Keepers 
now set aside a portion of the troop’s diet, including forage items, produce, or enrichment foods. In 
the afternoon keepers either scatter diet items in their yards, toss items from the building’s roof, or 
shift the group down into their holding area (most often in the winter months when outdoor yard 
access is limited) and scatter in their exhibit dayrooms. These afternoon scatters allow the apes 
another opportunity to forage and get some extra exercise. 

Results 

At Regenstein Center for African Apes at Lincoln Park Zoo, diet and husbandry modifications have 
resulted in significant weight loss for Kowali. To date, she has lost more than 501bs. [~22.7kg]. 
The following graph illustrates her weight loss (in pounds) since early 2008. (Figure 3 illustrates 
Kowali’s weight loss since we began implementing these changes) 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


73 


Figure 2: Enrichment food items and sample measurements: 



grams for lOOkcal 

Kwan’s group=1400 kcal daily 

Ice 

X 

X 

Jello (prepared) 

X 

X 

Raisins 

33 g = 1/8 cup 

1 3/4 cups 

Cereal - sugar free 



Bran Flakes 

25.6 g=2/3 cup 

9 1/3 cups 

Com flakes 

24 g = 2/3 cup 

9 1/3 cups 

Toasted oats 

28 g = 1 cup 

14 cups 

Crispix 

28 g = 1 cup 

14 cups 

Pasta (cooked) 

26 g = 1/4 cup 

3 1/2 cups 

Popcorn 

28 g = 3 cups 

42 cups 

Rice 

77 g = 1/2 cup 

7 cups 

Steel cut oatmeal (cooked) 

50 grams =1/3 cup 

4 2/3 cups 




Applesauce 

161 g = 2/3 cup 

2/3 cup + 1300 kcal other scatter 

Sugar-free Jam 

170 g = 2/3 cup 

2/3 cup + 1300kcal other scatter 

Frozen Blueberries 

196 g = 1 1/2 cups 

1 1/2 cups + 1300kcal other scatter 







Honey 

64(1 tbs) 

5 tbs + 1 lOOkcal other scatter 

Peanut butter 

100 (1 tbs) 

5 tbs + 1 lOOkcal other scatter 

Peanuts 

60 (for 10) 

50 pnuts =1100 kcal other scatter 

Sunflower Seeds 

51( 1 tbs) 

5 tbs + 1 lOOkcal other scatter 

Crickets 

6.5 for 10 

50 bugs + 1400 kcal other scatter 

Waxworms 

8.8 for 10 

50 bugs + 1400 kcal other scatter 

Mealworms 

19.5 for 10 

50 bugs + 1300 kcal other scatter 


Figure 3: Kowali's Weight Loss 



74 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 



Kowali before Kowali after 


Discussion 

It is important to note that the husbandry and diet changes described in this paper did not all start on 
the same day. It took several months to establish the exercise programs and implement the diet and 
husbandry changes. With everyone’s dedication, these modifications were relatively easy and had 
minimal impact on keeper time and the building’s budget. It was a team effort and definitely worth 
the commitment! 

Kowali was not the only gorilla with successful weight loss. After applying these same principles 
many other previously overweight LPZ gorillas have had significant weight losses, including both 
silverbacks: Kwan lost more than 401bs. [18.14kg], and Jo Jo has lost nearly 601bs. [27.2kg] to date . 



Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


75 


Figure 5: JoJo's Weight Loss 



These practices are continuing to be implemented at LPZ with the intended effect. LPZ continues to 
explore potential innovative ideas to further promote and improve overall health in the apes. These 
results demonstrate how small changes in diet presentation, food distribution, and exercise (through 
positive reinforcement training), can make a big difference to an individual animal! 

Acknowledgments 

Lincoln Park Zoo’s keeper staff of Regenstein Center for African Apes 

Dr. Kathryn Gamble, Director of Veterinary Services 

Dr. Shana Lavin, Nutrition Manager 

Katherine Wagner, Ape Cognition Intern 

Dr. Megan R. Ross, Vice President of Animal Care 

References 

Blood, D.C., et al. 2006. Saunders Comprehensive Veterinary Dictionary 3rd Editions. 

Duffy, Linda. 4 April 2009. “Monkeying around with heart disease.” Denver Examiner. 

Gorilla SSP®. 2008. http://www.clemetzoo.com/gorillassp/GHP. 

Lammey, M., et al. 2008. Interstital Myocardial Fibrosis in a Captive Chimpanzee 
(Pan troglodytes) Population. Comparative Medicine. 58: 389-394. 

Tordiffe, Adrian. July 2008. “Silverback gorilla treated for type II diabetes.” 

Zoo News- Volume 6. National Zoological Gardens of South Africa. 

Ullery, E., et al. 2003. Nutrient Requirements of Nonhuman Primates. 

Washington, DC 


Photo Credits: Lincoln Park Zoo Staff 


76 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Part I - A Special Partnership 

By Melba Brown, Primate Keeper 
Smithsonian’s National Zoological Park 
Washington, DC 


This past spring, an e-mail announcement crossed my computer screen at work seeking interested 
employees who wanted to work with interns for the summer through the Smithsonian Institution’s 
Access to Opportunities Program. As you can imagine, the number of e-mails that move through 
the network is, at times, pretty overwhelming and I have to admit that occasionally my fingers glide 
toward the delete button before I read them completely. However, this short communication was 
different. I was drawn to the content more deeply and discovered that the interns with whom they 
sought to match employees with had disabilities. 

When I saw the inquiry, I wanted to take on an intern but had to think twice about it as I had just 
transferred to a different unit and was not sure how my supervisor would feel about it. Besides, I was 
training on a new line. After a moment’s thought, I sent my supervisor a quick e-mail forwarding the 
inquiry to let her know that I wanted to work with a summer intern. Not quite sure of her response, 
I was pleasantly surprised to see her immediate e-mail approving the internship. I was considering 
a lemur research project on an island exhibit and thought the intern would be able to help me with it. 
Thinking back on my previous experiences with volunteers who were hearing-impaired, I knew that 
the intern would be able to work directly with me while I carried out my keeper duties and be able to 
assist with the research goals. 

After initial communications required to move the process forward were completed, I waited to 
review applications. Eventually, I received an application from an intern who was hearing-impaired 
and had a cognitive disability. The latter term has a wide range of interpretation. I decided to work 
with the intern without quite knowing what the disability was, thinking that I would flesh out the 
project when I had more information about the intern. The e-mails were moving along swiftly and 
then came to an abrupt halt when the one intern mysteriously turned into two interns who were 
cognitively disabled. How was I going to work with these two individuals and be in training myself? 
Right when I thought I understood the matter at hand, I received a communication that the interns 
would be accompanied by job coaches, a potential of five individuals. My new unit has office space 
that is comparable to a sardine can and not much available space in the building. I could just imagine 
the looks from co-workers as I traipsed through the orangutan line with five folks in tow, for over two 
months. My head was spinning. What does cognitively disabled mean? How would I communicate 
with the interns? Would we be able to understand each other? What if something went wrong? After 
a short time of introspection, I decided to take a breath and simply go for it. 

I met and interviewed the two applicants who were accompanied by three staff members from their 
school. This original count was five. I was reasonably confident that I could communicate with 
the intern who was hearing-impaired but soon learned that what I knew about the hearing-impaired 
world was somewhat limited. 

Thomas is a wonderful young man who relies on reading lips, hearing sounds, signing and a method 
of communication known as Cued Speech. When you look into Thomas’s eyes, they reveal a person 
who is very thoughtful and curious. Lawrence is a gregarious young man who is quick to smile. He 
speaks with fluidity and expresses his thoughts with ease. The accompanying coaches were excited 
about the project and I spent time taking them on a tour of Lemur Island, talking about the lemurs and 
the project idea. At one point, Thomas gave me a picture that he drew of a ring-tailed lemur (Lemur 
catta) on a tree branch with an outline of Africa and Madagascar. I was informed that he thinks in 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


77 


pictures and is a visual learner. That bit of information proved useful to me in conceptualizing the 
project. The final design incorporated a number of visual components. Minutes into the tour, I 
noticed that Thomas was not completely engaged in what I was saying. His coach jumped in with 
signs and speech cues to make sure he understood the conversation. I tend to get a little chatty and 
realized at that point that I needed the coaches to help make this partnership flow by assisting with 
communication. I wanted, however, to find a way to communicate with Thomas myself and meet 
him on his own terms. 



We all had a few weeks before the schedule became finalized and the research would officially 
begin. I used this time to brush up on my Sign-Language skills and print an on-line copy of Cued 
Speech signs to familiarize myself with this mode of communication. I designed a data collection 
sheet and instructed the interns to learn as much as they could about the species they were going 
to observe. They had a week where they practiced observations until they were comfortable with 
the methodology and data codes. After a few minor corrections to notation entries, Thomas and 
Lawrence were ready to put on their research hats. 

The interns and coaches, now a count of four individuals, were officially outfitted in their volunteer 
uniforms and the research commenced. Lemur Island is centrally located in the zoo and due to the 
number of observations required for the study, a large bin was set up at the base of the island stairwell. 
It was stocked with equipment and a steady supply of snacks. My co-workers were very supportive 
by setting up the exhibit as needed for observations as well as filling in for me when I was away from 
work. As the weeks went on, I would routinely touch base with everyone, do observations myself 
and take photographs. The interns and coaches were very committed to the research and they learned 
how to identify similar looking animals from a distance away, especially Thomas. 


78 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 



A solid research rhythm had been established 
and upon checking in, both Lawrence and 
Thomas with Jane close by (count now three) 
greeted me with warm smiles. Lawrence was 
generous with hugs and conversed about the 
many times he visited the zoo when he was 
younger. As usual, Lawrence was talkative 
but Thomas was mostly quiet. Initially, 
there was a little distance between Thomas 
and myself and I was not sure how I could 
close that divide. The observations and data 
collection were tedious and at times quite 
boring. I knew that I could balance out that 
experience for the interns by taking them 
on behind-the-scenes tours in the park. Our 
first destination was Gibbon Ridge where 
the white-cheeked gibbons (Nomascus 
leucogenys) and siamangs (Symphalangus 
syndactylus) live. I walked the crew over 
and let them experience the animals up- 
close. We were there for about 15 minutes 
learning about the primates. When we left 
the building and headed back to the island, 
Thomas waved his hand at me and said 
with great exuberance, “That was cool!” 
The break-through moment I had hoped for had arrived. I agreed with him and was delighted by 
his joyful grin. After that, the distance between us closed like a shift door. Animals often have a 
remarkable effect on people and I am always touched when I witness powerful moments such as this. 

Thomas had an eagle-eyed approach to the study and Lawrence was more casual in his style. This 
difference in approach was understandable due to the fact that Thomas had twice as many animals to 
account for than Lawrence. They had their clipboards, data sheets, binoculars and stopwatches. On 
occasion, Thomas acted as timekeeper by calling out, “Time!” at the appropriate intervals. These 
budding scientists became confident in their roles as researchers and they articulated their gained 
knowledge by answering questions and talking to visitors about the lemurs in between observations. 
Their enthusiasm was palpable and the visitors became more engaged in the exhibit. 

Thomas, Lawrence and Jane worked through the morning and they finished out the afternoon 
observations with great effort and dedication. From time to time, other coaches showed up and 
assisted with data collection as well as moral support, including Thomas’s mom and dad. This was 
an expression of teamwork at its absolute best. The Lemur Island Research Project was completed 
without any major problems. The biggest challenge turned out to be the weather. Washington D.C. 
had one sizzling summer! When the temperature and humidity exceeded 100°F, the project was 
delayed until conditions improved. As the research started to wind down, we all discussed potential 
plans for the interns as they both wanted to continue volunteering at the zoo in some capacity. 

Thomas and Lawrence spent their summer learning about lemur biology and exploring the research 
method. They interpreted lemur behavior for the visitors and made a tangible contribution to the way 
the exhibit is managed. Each one’s self-esteem soared and the zoo played an important role in their 
development. Thomas and Lawrence are people with special qualities and abilities that were given a 
chance to exercise their skills. By putting a spotlight on what they could accomplish and having 
confidence in their ability to learn and perform, they had a real opportunity to make a difference. 



Lawrence and Thomas conducting observations 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


19 


Lawrence has since started another internship at a scientific institution. He wants to return to the zoo 
in the future. Thomas is a volunteer Keeper Aide at the National Zoo’s Kids’ Farm. His career goal 
is to work with animals. 

As I write these final sentences and think back on this memorable partnership, I am proud of the team 
that came together. I am thankful for the experience of teaching Thomas and Lawrence and helping 
to advance their knowledge and enthusiasm for animals. A partnership is especially rewarding when it 
works both ways. Now, my interpretation of a cognitive disability is a cognitive ability with adjustments. 
I look forward to next spring when that singular e-mail crosses my computer screen again. . . 



Thomas volunteering at the Kids’ Farm 


New Species of Lemur Discovered in Madagascar 

Research published in the January issue of Primates reported the discovery of 
a new species of mouse lemur that is now colloquially known as Gerp’s mouse 
lemur ( Microcebus gerpi ) after the research group that discovered it. The new 
lemur is about the size of a hamster, approximately 2-2.5 ounces (60-70 grams), 
nocturnal, presumed to be omnivorous, and lives in the lowland areas of the 
Sahafina rainforest. 

The new species’ closest genetic relative is the Jolly’s mouse lemur 
{Microcebus jollyae) , while the mouse lemur closest in physical appearance 
is the Goodman’s mouse lemur {Microcebus lehilahytsara ). According to the 
researchers, there appears to be an altitudinal-range variation that prevents 
these different species of lemurs from sharing habitat. The different species 
of lemurs do not move up or down in altitude very easily, and are therefore 
restricted in their habitat preferences. 

The lowland rainforests that encompass this species of lemur’s small range are not in 
a protected area of Madagascar. Poaching, deforestation, and habitat fragmentation 
are serious threats to this species that we are just beginning to know. 


Source: http://news.discoverv.com/animals/new-lemur-madagascar- 1201 1 2.html 



80 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 



k Sfefti wsyi*? 


Part II - Lemur Island Enrichment 

Enrichment Effects on Lemur Behavior and Exhibit Visibility 
Lemur catta and Eulemur fulvus rufus 
Smithsonian’s National Zoological Park 
Melba Brown, Thomas Morere, Lawrence Anderson and Jane Steil 


Introduction 

Visitors to The National Zoo’s Lemur Island (photo 1) are treated to a scenic view of plant life and 
a towering waterfall. The island is a mixed-species exhibit that features 2.2 Ring-tailed Lemurs, 
Lemur catta (photo 2); 1.1 Red- fronted Lemurs, Eulemur fulvus rufus (photo 3); 0.0.100+ Turtles 
(Red-eared Sliders, Trachemys scripta elegans; Yellow-bellied Sliders, Trachemys scripta script, 
and Hybrid Sliders, Painted Turtles, Chrysemys picta ; 0.0.3 Box Turtles, Terrapene Carolina ); 0.0.2 
Bullfrogs, Lithobates catesbeiana; Toads, Anaxyrus sp; and 0.0.1 Northern Brown Snake, Storeria 
dekayi. The indoor facilities include 7 off-exhibit enclosures with a runway along one side and has 
cross chute capabilities. The lemurs stay indoors in the evening and during harsh weather. When on 
exhibit, however, the lemurs spend a significant amount of time away from public view on Olmstead 
Walk, the zoo’s main thoroughfare. The back of the island attracts the lemurs more than the front. 
Visitor traffic behind the exhibit is low and visitor frustration is often expressed by the question, 
“Where are the lemurs?” 

To explore this particular management challenge, this study looked at the effects of gustatory, 
olfactory, visual and tactile enrichment presented on the island. The research objectives were to 
determine the activity budgets for the lemurs; determine their exhibit space and surface use; introduce 
and evaluate enrichment on Lemur Island; and, increase the lemurs’ visibility. This paper presents 
the results relating to activity budgets and enrichment effects on lemur behavior and exhibit visibility. 
The exhibit space and surface use results will be published in another publication. 

Prior to this study, when the lemurs were offered food items on the island, they were difficult to shift 
indoors when needed. Also, due to a previous rodent problem on the island, prepared food is not 
offered to them while on exhibit. They do, however, forage on a variety of plants growing in and near 
the exhibit such as Scarlet Curls Willow (Salix matsudana x S. alba), Common Plantain (Plantago 
major), Ground Ivy ( Glechoma hederacea). Crape Myrtle (. Lagerstroemia sp.) flowers and dried 
leaf litter. Of particular note is their preference for new leaf growth on the Scarlet Curls Willow and 
Common Plantain herb. This tendency towards eating new plant growth has been seen in semi-free- 
ranging ring-tailed lemurs (Dierenfeld and McCann, 1999). 

Several reasons expressed by staff as to why the lemurs prefer the back of the island include fear of 
turtles and hawks, presence of trees and shade availability, heated huts, ground cover; and a general 
anticipation of entering the building for the PM feeding. The entryway into the indoor facility is 
located at the back of the island. One additional reason for the preference could be that the boulders 
along the front of the exhibit may get too hot during warmer weather and the lemurs limit their time 
walking on them. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


81 




Photo 1 : Lemur Island front view - 6,968 square feet; moat - 3,490 square feet 

Informal preliminary observations revealed that the lemurs, when on exhibit, were motivated to 
move and explore the island in search of foraging material (leaves, tree buds, small plants and leaf 
litter). Thick vegetation is concentrated on the back and sides of the island. The front of the island 
consists primarily of boulders, a waterfall and pool. There is sparse vegetation as well as limited 
shaded areas along the front of the exhibit. Their basic preference for the back of the island may 
simply be due to the higher concentration of foliage. The lemurs have been observed along the front 
of the exhibit but only for relatively short periods of time in comparison to their time spent elsewhere. 


Photo 2: Ring-tailed lemurs, Lemur catta Photo 3: Red-fronted lemurs, Eulemur fulvus rufus 

Animals and Method 

Lemurs are prosimians that are native to Madagascar and the Comores Islands. They live in varied 
habitats. They are folivorous and will ingest fruit, insects, soil and other matter (Simmen et al., 
2006). One of the main physical characteristics of lemurs is a moist nose and a high level of 
olfaction. They have scent glands and use chemical communication to transmit specific information 
between individuals and groups. Ring-tailed lemurs have striking black and white tails. Males and 
females look similar but closer inspection reveals distinctive features. The Lemur Island ring-tailed 


82 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


lemurs range in age from 12 years to 23 years. Red- fronted Lemurs are a subspecies of Brown 
Lemur, Eulemur fulvus. Males and females are sexually dichromatic. In photo 3, the male is in the 
foreground and the female is in the background. The red-fronted lemurs are 19 and 26 years-old. 
The research objectives were explored by placing 4 forms of enrichment along pre-determined, as 
well as random locations on the island and quantifying the information gathered by establishing the 
lemurs’ activity budgets without the enrichment and then comparing this baseline data to their activity 
budgets once the enrichment items were in place. An emphasis was placed on exhibit location to 
determine how effective the enrichment was as far as increasing animal visibility. To facilitate island 
observations and measure visibility, the island was divided into quadrants and coded as Q1 (front 
left); Q2 (rear left); Q3 (rear right); and Q4 (front right.) 

The behaviors observed and recorded were Rest, Move, Forage, Groom, Other and Not Visible. For 
the purpose of this study, we defined ‘Forage’ as the actual act of solid or liquid consumption. 


Ethogram 

Rest: Sitting or reclining 

Move: Walking, running, climbing or jumping 

Forage: Eating fresh and dried plant material or other solid matter and drinking 

Groom: Licking or combing fur (auto-grooming and allo-grooming) 

Other: Any other behavior not listed, including scent-marking (rubbing chest, 
wrist or genital on an object or surface); fighting or stink-fighting, play behavior, 
mounting, chasing 

NV: Not visible 


Enrichment 

1. ) Browse: Each day, a wheelbarrow full of browse [Maple — Acer platanoides (Norway), Acer 

saccharinum (sugar), Acer japonica (Japanese red)], Bamboo — Phyllostachys aureosulcata 
(yellow groove,) Phyllostachys aurea (golden) ox Phyllostachys bisettii, Pseudosasa japonica 
(arrow), Bradford Pear (Pyrus calleryiana ) and/or Mulberry — Moms alba (white) and/or 
Moms rubra (red) was divided and placed in different locations (photo 4). 

2. ) Fresh Rosemary ( Rosmarinus officinalis) Sprigs: Each day, 7-9 sprigs were placed in 

different locations (photo 5). Prior to being put on the island, the sprigs were rubbed to 
release more of their herbaceous scent. Ring-tailed lemurs have been observed in the wild 
ingesting herbs (Soma, 2006). 

3. ) Ginger {Zingiber officinale ) Essential Oil in Cholla Wood: Essential oils are extractions 

from plant parts (petals, roots, leaves, bark). Cholla wood is the skeletal part of a cholla 
cactus {Opuntia sp.). Each day, 7-10 drops of essential oil were placed along each piece of 
cholla wood (photo 6). Eight pieces of wood were used for this phase. The highly-scented 
wood was placed in different locations on the island. At the end of each day, the wood was 
collected and placed in a plastic bag and the next day, additional drops were added so that 
each consecutive day of the study, the scent on the wood became more concentrated. 

4. ) Clay-rich Soil: The island soil is dry and very compact and not readily available or 

attractive to the lemurs as evidenced by preliminary observations. Each day, 3 lbs of soil 
was divided into piles and placed in different locations (photo 7). The enrichment soil 
was collected and processed to remove any unwanted matter. The soil was stored in a 
refrigerator prior to use. Primates have been heavily documented as engaging in geophagy 
(Krishnamani and Mahaney, 2000) (Ganzhom, 1987) (Pinkus, Susan, Smith, James N.M. 
and Jolly, Alison, 2006). 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


83 



Photo 4: L. catta eating browse 
Photo courtesy of Jane Steil 



Photo 5: L. catta near rosemary 



Photo 6: Ginger essential oil and cholla 



Photo 7 : E. fulvus rufus grabbing soil 


The Group Scan-sampling Methodology was used for this project. The research team used a 
stopwatch and data collection sheets for coded entries. For each part of the study, the observers 
conducted five, 30-minute observations at 3 -minute intervals per day for four days between the hours 
of 10:00am - 2:30pm (1000hr-1430hr). The 3 -minute interval was determined to be the best one 
after conducting preliminary trials with 1 -minute and 2-minute intervals. When inclement weather 
prevented observations, the study continued on the next scheduled day. Temperature and weather 
conditions were noted on the data sheets: sunny, cloudy, partly sunny or partly cloudy. Four additional 
observers were involved in data collection to help reduce observer bias. The total observation hours 
were 50 hours per species. There were 20 observation days. The data were analyzed and entered into 
histograms with a 5% standard deviation. The information is presented in percentages of time spent 
engaged in observed activities. The unpaired t test was used to determine significance. 

Results 

Chart 1 illustrates the activity budget results for the ring-tailed lemurs. The majority of time was 
spent resting (51%). In comparison, a field study of Malagasy ring-tailed lemurs reported a similar 
resting budget result (53.7%) (Simmen et al., 2010). The ring-tailed lemurs had significant movement 
behavior (23%) and grooming behavior (14%). They were not visible a lower percentage of time 
(9%). Foraging was the least frequent behavior (3%). 


84 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Lemur catta Baseline Activity Budget 



Chart 1: Ring-tailed Lemur Activity Budget 



Chart 2: Red-fronted Lemur Activity Budget 


Chart 2 illustrates the activity budget results for the red-fronted lemurs. The resting behavior was the 
dominant behavior (60%). In comparison, a field study of red-fronted lemurs reported a lower resting 
budget result (47%) (Overdorff, 1996). The 27% increase seen in our lemurs may be a result of the 
weather and/or age. The red-fronted lemurs were not visible 33% of the time which is more than three 
times that of the ring-tailed lemurs. This is understandable due to the small sample size: n=2. The 
movement behavior (3%), grooming behavior (1%), and foraging behavior (2%) results were low. 

The ring-tailed lemur Chart 3 illustrates their baseline activity as it relates to the enrichment. The 
resting behavior and ginger/cholla enrichment result was found to be extremely significant (P = 
0.0002); and, the resting behavior and soil enrichment result was very significant (P = 0.0096). 
The movement behavior with ginger/cholla enrichment resulted in a very significant behavioral 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


85 


L. catta Enrichment Activity 


■ Baseline Browse * Rosemary H Ginger/Cholla ■Soil 



Rest Move Forage Groom Other NV 


Chart 3: L. catta baseline and enrichment activity 



E. fulvus rufus Enrichment Activity 


■ Baseline Browse ® Rosemary ■Ginger/Cholla 8 Soil 


OU J 

v© ! 

^70 

i 

j 

m | 

•| 60 

' 

1 

ll f . ;rrQr . a ... T1 .^ |LL __ u , jj J ^ L __ LLJ _, 

JC 


& 50 



o 40 

c 


" ' " " ‘ "" " 

•| 30 + 


1 

o 20 


h~r~ — 1 1 

* io 4 



n 


' , ,, s _ ... . ... Sm 

U r 

Rest 

Move Forage Groom Other NV 


Chart 4: E. fulvus rufus baseline and enrichment activity 


To see these graphs in color, and to see this paper in its entirety in full color, please 
visit aazk. ors/catesorv/akf/columns/ 

decrease (P = 0.0094). The foraging results show some degree of activity increase with the forms 
of enrichment that could be consumed, namely browse, rosemary and soil. The grooming behavior 
and ginger/cholla enrichment result shows a significant decrease in this behavior (P = 0.0162). The 
grooming activity and soil enrichment resulted in a significant decrease in the behavior as well (P = 
0.0050). There was, however, an increase in the grooming behavior with the rosemary enrichment. 
The chart illustrates a level of visibility increase with each form of enrichment. 

The red-fronted lemur Chart 4 illustrates their baseline activity as it relates to the enrichment. There 
was an increase in resting behavior in the presence of rosemary (P = 0.618), ginger/cholla and soil. 
There was a significant increase in the movement behavior (P = 0.0428) with browse enrichment. 
The chart shows an increase in foraging activity in the presence of browse, rosemary and soil. The 
grooming behavior with browse enrichment resulted in a significant increase in the behavior (P = 
0.0435). The chart shows an increase in visibility with each form of enrichment. Rosemary was 
particularly effective in increasing visibility (P = 0.0073). 

86 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


Discussion 

The activity budget results for the ring-tailed lemurs were unexpected. One assumption was they 
were not visible a significant amount of time when on exhibit. The study showed they were not 
visible 9% of the time. During the summer, the trees on the island have full canopies and when 
the lemurs are resting in them, they can be difficult to see until they are pointed out by interpreters. 
Another assumption was they consumed plenty of island vegetation. The results of the study showed 
a low percentage of time engaged in vegetation consumption. The activity budget results for the red- 
fronted lemurs support the assumption that they were not visible a significant amount of time (33%). 
They spent most of their time resting (60%) which could have been a factor of weather extremes and/ 
or age. Also, they moved less than expected which could have been explained by the weather as well. 
Like the ring-tails, the red-fronted lemurs did not spend a significant amount of time foraging (2%). 
One thing that was noted consistently during the observations was both groups tended to forage most 
when they were initially released on the island and early in the growing season. They ate fresh buds 
on trees, consumed dried leaves and nibbled on low-lying new growth. 

The ring-tailed lemurs’ responses to the enrichment forms compared to the baseline activity provided 
interesting information. The resting behavior increased in the presence of browse, ginger/cholla 
and soil; and, the resting behavior decreased with the rosemary. They were very attracted to the 
rosemary and they were observed carrying the sprigs around the island. Their movement showed 
a slight decrease with the browse and rosemary enrichment and more of a decrease in the presence 
of ginger/cholla and soil enrichment. Their foraging behavior increased with each form of edible 
enrichment. They were observed eating the enrichment browse. Also, they readily consumed the 
soil and were observed increasing their intake of island vegetation. These observations support one 
of the reasons suggested for geophagy which is to detoxify the system by absorbing tannins and other 
components found in plants (Johns and Duquette, 1991). The grooming behavior decreased in the 
presence of browse, ginger/cholla and soil; and, increased with the fragrant rosemary. As was noted 
above, the ring-tailed lemurs carried the rosemary around the exhibit and the fresh herb, undoubtedly, 
left its strong scent on their hands and fur which, most likely, caused an increase in the grooming 
behavior. The other behaviors showed a slight increase with the browse, rosemary and soil. They 
were not visibly interactive with the ginger/cholla enrichment, even though the scent was prevalent. 
There were observed instances of displacement among the lemurs which resulted in less enrichment 
time for particular individuals. There was an increase in visibility with each form of enrichment, in 
particular, the soil. The ring-tailed lemurs were most visible with the soil present and they were very 
engaged in soil consumption. 

The red fronted lemurs’ responses to the enrichment forms compared to the baseline activity results 
yielded interesting information as well. The chart indicates that they rested less and moved more, 
foraged more and groomed more with the browse enrichment. They were observed eating the 
browse. They became more active and were much more visible. A possible reason could be related to 
an increase in energy levels with the desired foraging matter available. The chart shows an increase 
in their foraging behavior in the presence of the enrichment forms that were edible, similar to the 
ring-tailed lemur results. Of note was their increase in other behaviors in the presence of soil. They 
were observed ingesting the soil. Again, there were instances of lemur displacement and a degree of 
competition. The red-fronted lemurs did not physically interact with the ginger/cholla enrichment. 
The strong concentration of scent may have had a repellent effect. Like the ring-tailed lemurs, the 
red-fronted lemurs were more visible with each form of enrichment offered. 

In conclusion, the presence of varietal enrichment offered on Lemur Island can have a measurable 
impact on the activity and visibility of the lemurs. Seasonality was a significant factor in this study. 
The project was conducted in May, June and July of 2011 with high temperatures and humidity. 
At times, the lemurs were less active than expected most likely due to the weather conditions. 
Noteworthy, though, was their heightened attraction to the clay-rich soil. A further study may 
take a closer look at the interactions of the lemurs with clay-rich soil and its impact on island 
vegetation consumption. 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


87 


Acknowledgements 

Smithsonian’s Access to Opportunities Program: - Krista Flores and Emily Shapiro; 
Ivymount School - great support from Lu Merrick, Laura Klingler, Donna Morere 
and John Monti; The Primate Unit for great support: Lisa Stevens for project approval, 
Megan Anderson for being the back-up organizer, Amanda Bania, Marty Dearie, Laurie 
Thompson, Heather Harl, Becky Malinsky, Erin Stromberg and KC Braesch for lemur 
shifting and enrichment placement; Eric Kliebert for digging the soil; Heidi Hellmuth - for 
enrichment support; Brian McLaren, Melinda Whicher & Suzy Alberts - Lemur Island plant 
IDs; Department of Nutritional Resources for collecting and delivering varietal browse and 
fresh rosemary - Mike Maslanska, Bill Clements, Karen Lisi, Lisa Schneider, Albert Olsen, 
Tyrone Savoy, Eric Smith, Bernard Graham, Deb Grupenhoff, Matt Neff, Laurie Smith 
and Sara Allison; Polly Lasker - NZP Librarian; Dr. Sara Zehr, Research Manager, Duke 
Lemur Center for species information; Reptile Department - Matt Evans for IDs; Amma 
Tabirih and Patrice Payne for administrative support; Anthony Hiza and Greg Ose - sounding 
boards; The Lemurs - Thank you to the red- fronted lemurs - Red Oak and Flare; and the ring- 
tailed lemurs - Andromeda, Myrto, Ninna and Gelon! 


Bibliography 

Dierenfeld, Ellen S. and McCann, Colleen M. 1999. Nutrient composition of selected plant 
species consumed by semi free-ranging lion-tailed macaques ( Macaca silenus) and ring-tailed 
lemurs {Lemur catta ) on St. Catherines Island, Georgia, U.S.A. Zoo Biology, 18:481-494. 

Ganzhom, Jorg U. 1987. Soil consumption of two groups of semi-free-ranging lemurs 
{Lemur catta and Lemur fulvus). Ethology, 74, 146-154. 

Johns, Timothy and Duquette, Martin. 1991. Detoxification and mineral supplementation as 
functions of geophagy. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 53:448-456. 

Krishnamani, R and Mahaney William C. 2000. Geophagy among primates: adaptive 
significance and ecological consequences. Animal Behavior, 59, 899-915. 

Overdorff, Deborah J. 1996. Ecological correlates to activity and habitat use of two prosimian 
primates ‘.{Eulemur rubriventer) and {Eulemur fulvus rufus) in Madasgascar. American Journal 
of Primatologv , 40 :327-342. 

Pinkus, Susan, Smith, James N.M. and Jolly, Alison. 2006 Feeding competition between introduced 
{Eulemur fulvus) and native {Lemur catta) during the birth season at Berenty Reserve, Southern 
Madagascar. Ring-tailed Lemur Biology, 119-140. 

Simmen, Bruno et al. 2010. Total energy expenditure and body composition in two free-living 
sympatric lemurs. PloS One, Volume 5, Issue 3. 

Simmen, Bruno et al. 2006. Plant species fed on by {Lemur catta) in gallery forests of the southern 
Domain of Madagascar. Ring-tailed Lemur Biology, 55-68. 

Soma, Takaya. 2006. Tradition and novelty: Lemur catta feeding strategy on introduced tree 
species at Berenty Reserve. Ring-tailed Lemur Biology, 141-160. 


88 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


BHC Comments by Enrichment Options Co-Editor Richard Kotarsky: 


Thanks Melba, James, Lawrence and Thomas for sharing your paper with the AAZK membership! 
This paper is another excellent example of a successful goal-directed enrichment initiative that 
can be used to solve management issues such as visibility of a popular exhibited species. You did 
an excellent job with the research into the species’ natural histories and natural behaviors; then 
designing a plan working towards encouraging a specific behavioral goal such as increased activity 
and visibility for the zoo visitors. Using the ethogram as a tool for your observations to determine 
the success of the enrichment and the specific goals for each species is an excellent way to quantify 
and qualify the results. Lastly, your results clearly show that the presence of goal-based varietal 
enrichment and something as simple as giving variable choices offered daily on the Lemur Island can 
have an obvious significant impact on the activity and visibility of the lemurs. Thanks again Melba, 
James, Lawrence and Thomas. I greatly enjoyed your paper. 


World’s First Hybrid Sharks Found 
Off Coast of Australia 


Marine biologists from the Queensland Department of Primary Industries and Fisheries 
say they have discovered the world’s first hybrid sharks. The unprecedented discovery 
involves hybridization between common blacktip ( Carcharhinus limbatus ) sharks and 
Australian blacktip ( Carcharhinus tilstoni ) sharks. The biologists say the interbreeding is 
a sign that the sharks are adapting to warmer waters, and that the hybrids appear stronger 
and more fit, which could eventually result in displacement of the original species. 

The Australian blacktips are able to only live in the tropical waters off the coast of northern 
Australia, while the common blacktips can live 1,200 miles closer to the Antarctic. 
Currently, up to 20% of the blacktips are now hybrids. The biologists speculate that 
hybridization could help the sharks with adapting to environmental change. 

Source:http://www.dailvmail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-2081647/Worlds-hvbrid-shark- 

Australia-interbreeding-make-stronger.html 


Big Cat Internships Available 

Join us in 

l § 4 “Saving Tigers One by One” 
As seen on Animal Planet® 




TNB E 

unaum dim 



66 


.55 


Growing Up Tiger 

Apply at: www.tigercreek.org 


li 




Learn about Big Cat Management. Internship involves Animal Care Apprentice and 
Public Education. We offer experience that counts towards employment. 

TIGER MISSING LINK FOUNDATION / TIGER CREEK WILDLIFE REFUGE 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


89 


The AAZK Behavioral Husbandry Committee Presents 

3NU*... 


* *. 


v<3- 


Where you can share your training experiences! 

Training Tales Editors - Jay Pratte, Henry Doorly Zoo; 

Kim Kezer, Zoo New England; and Angela Binney, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 

Catch a Tiger By the Tail: 

The Next Phase of Tiger Training at 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom® 

By 

Angela Miller, Animal Keeper 
Disney s Animal Kingdom®, Walt Disney World Company 
PO. Box 10,000, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830 


Introduction 

The animal care team at Disney’s Animal Kingdom® has been training a multitude of husbandry and 
medical behaviors with our collection of 0.6 tigers ( Panthera tigris ) for over 13 years. Training is 
an integral part of our daily animal management. We have been successfully expanding the range 
of our health care procedures including voluntary blood draws (Figure 1), rectal temperatures, 



Figure 1. Voluntary blood collection from the tail of a tiger, in the training crate at 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, image taken in off show holding area. 


90 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


intramuscular and subcutaneous injections. For detailed information about our tiger training program 
in the crate, see “Catch a Tiger by the Tail: Tiger Training at Disney’s Animal Kingdom®”, 2002. 
Additional detailed information about our tiger training program is available in other published 
papers (Templeton and Sevenich, 1999; Binney and Johannes, 2002). As with most animals, each 
individual tiger has progressed through the training process a little differently, and what has worked 
with one tiger may have been tweaked slightly for others. 

As our collection has been aging, training new medical behaviors has become a priority. Kidney 
disease is a common ailment among aging felines and a recognized problem in aging tigers (Tilson 
and Seal, 1987). Kidney health can be monitored using blood and urine values and imaging of the 
kidney. The Department of Animal Health team helped us prioritize behaviors we could train to 
monitor kidney health without anesthesia. As a result, voluntary blood pressure, ultrasounds and 
urine collection have been added to our standard trained husbandry behaviors for tigers. 

New Medical Behaviors 

First, we trained the tigers to allow voluntary blood pressure measurements from the tail. A standard 
human wrist blood pressure cuff was used to collect blood pressure on a frequent basis (see Figure 2). 
Since little is known about normal tiger blood pressure, getting multiple readings has been helpful 
in gaining baseline values for the monitoring process. These can be compared to readings when an 
animal is showing clinical or behavioral signs of illness. We also take blood pressure readings with 
the same cuffs during our every-other-year immobilizations for comparisons between an awake tiger 
and a tiger under anesthesia. 



Figure 2. Use of blood pressure cuff on the tail of a tiger, in the training crate at 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, image taken in off show holding area. 


Secondly, we decided that monitoring the kidneys via ultrasound would be a great way to gain a 
baseline of kidney shape, size, and appearance. This information is used to monitor how the kidneys 
change over time or how individual kidneys might be different among the different tigers. In order to 
get a diagnostic image, the ultrasound probe must maintain good contact with the skin; however, fur 
typically interferes with this. There are several options available to ensure good contact with the probe: 
the fur can be shaved, the area can be dampened with water or ultrasound gel can be applied to the 

Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


91 




rrrrrrrrrrrrrr 

rnrrrrrrrrrrrr mmmmmmmammm 

n rrrrr rrrr rrr j . .. i usi 

ir^pppurprrrrr mm mmwmmwmmm 

% rrrrrr.- ; 

pitiPif riiiS 
llliPis SHyp&a 


fur. We did not want to have to shave 
the tigers for each ultrasound, so we 
opted to try the water first paired with 
ultrasound gel. We trained one tiger 
to allow us to dampen her side before 
entering the crate for the ultrasound. 

Through trial and error we found 
that the tigers did not need to be 
this wet, but that an ample supply 
of ultrasound gel alone would be 
sufficient for an accurate sonogram 
picture. We initially started training 
for ultrasounds of the right kidney as 
this side was the position tigers were 
accustomed to for other procedures in 
the crate. The tiger first was trained 
to enter the crate and turn around. We Figure 3. Ultrasound of the right kidney in a tiger, 

then acclimated the tigers to a mock in the training crate at Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, 

ultrasound machine, which was just a image taken in off show holding area, 

box painted to look like a TV monitor, and a mock wand, which was a stick with an old computer 
mouse attached to it. Next, we habituated the tigers to having a veterinarian located on the right side 
of the crate. The next step was sliding open the access door, and then touching the tiger with the 
ultrasound probe with increasing amounts of pressure and finally adding the ultrasound gel (see Figure 
3). Some maneuvering of the tiger’s body position, by strategically placing the food while rewarding, 
was required to successfully image the kidney. The entire procedure has usually taken between 5 and 
1 5 minutes depending on how quickly the kidney can be located by the veterinarian with the ultrasound 
machine. During the procedure, we have intermittently reinforced the tiger for calm behavior and 
remaining in the requested position. Once we have been able to get consistent pictures from the right 
kidney, we have moved on to training for the left kidney ultrasound. The keeper and the veterinarian 
swapped locations so the tiger essentially would lie down on their other side. This position took a little 
longer to acclimate the tigers to since this is not the most familiar position for the tigers in the crate, but 

otherwise the steps were the same for 
training ultrasound of both kidneys. 
We have been closely monitoring 
the shape and size of the kidneys for 
comparison quarterly over the last 4 
years and we have noticed changes 
over time with some of the tigers. 


Finally we collect and compare 
monthly urine samples. The samples 
are collected by placing a film 
canister on the end of a stick under 
the tiger as they urinate (see Figure 
4). Urination was a captured 
behavior, where keepers reinforced 
the tiger for offering urination each 
time it occurred. While capturing 
this behavior, it was noted that the 
tigers frequently urinated as soon as 
they woke up in the morning when 


Figure 4. Collection of a free catch urine sample from a tiger 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, image taken in off show holding area. 


keepers arrived at the building. Utilizing this consistent time, the tigers were shifted into the transfer 
chute to collect the urine first thing in the morning. The urine was then analyzed by trained keepers 
using test strips and results recorded for future use. The tigers with kidney disease have monthly 
samples submitted for complete urinalysis from our veterinary laboratory. Urinalysis can detect such 
things as a presence of urinary tract infections, blood, protein or crystals in the urine. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


92 



Figure 5. Skin tenting on a tiger, in the training crate at Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, 
image taken in off show holding area. 


One of the side effects of kidney disease is dehydration. One of the signs of dehydration is decreased skin 
elasticity. We decided to monitor levels of dehydration by tenting the skin. This can be done by pulling a 
small portion of skin up and looking to see how long it takes the skin to return to the normal position (see 
Figure 5). We perform skin tenting in the same position as kidney ultrasounds, with a keeper on one side 
of the crate and a keeper or veterinary technician on the other side of the crate. If an animal is dehydrated, 
the lifted skin will typically not return to normal for several seconds. 



We also monitor the color of the 
tigers’ gums. Healthy gums should 
be pink and moist. Pale or grey 
coloring can indicate dehydration, 
anemia or shock. We also check for 
mouth ulcers, which can be a 
symptom of kidney problems. Both 
of these can be observed by asking 
for an open mouth behavior to get a 
good look at the gums (see Figure 6). 


In addition to making sure the tigers 
have ample access to fresh water, we 
provide frozen ice treats to encourage 
hydration. Subcutaneous fluid therapy 
can also be beneficial in the event of 
extreme dehydration. The training 
that we started for administering 
subcutaneous fluids has also been 
continued with each individual in the 

event that fluids are needed as a result of kidney disease. Additional detailed information about 
training for subcutaneous fluids is available in the previously mentioned paper (Miller, 2002). In 


Figure 6. Open mouth behavior by a tiger, Disney’s Animal 
Kingdom®, image taken in off show holding area. 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 93 


order to habituate the tigers to the fluids, we 
have a bag of fluids as a training prop located 
near the crate area. While we do not give fluids on 
a routine basis, we do pull the skin and do mock 
injections using a paper clip over the back area to 
desensitize them to the process (see Figure 7). 

Conclusion 

The combined information from the blood 
values, blood pressure readings, ultrasounds, 
urinalysis, skin tenting and oral exams is a great 
way to look at the overall picture of kidney 
health as the tigers age. These findings also 
provide us with valuable information if a tiger 
has a potential health issue. We have utilized 
the data to make informed decisions on medical 
management and treatment with one of our 
tigers during a health crisis without the need for 
an immobilization. The baseline information is 
invaluable in highlighting any changes over 
time. Training these additional behaviors relied 
on a solid foundation of our original crate 
behaviors and a strong partnership with our 
Animal Health team. The new behaviors and 
procedures provide more comprehensive 
information about kidney health in our aging 
tiger population. This knowledge allows our 
team to make informed management decisions 
to improve our care for the tigers. 

It has been truly inspiring to see so many institutions utilizing training to assist with multiple health 
care procedures in a protected contact environment with felids. Although not every zoo has a crate 
designed specifically for such procedures, there has been fantastic progress made at zoos utilizing the 
facilities they already have. We hope that providing this information will help other zoos develop 
tools to monitor kidney health in their captive felids as well. 

Thanks 

A special thanks to Lidia Castro, our long-time veterinary technician partner. Without her assistance 
in acquiring medical equipment and dedication to coming to multiple training sessions each week, we 
would have been unable to make such quick progress in the consistent training of these behaviors. 
Dr. Beth Nolan was instrumental in helping us design the training steps and performing the kidney 
ultrasounds. Thanks to the many animal keepers who have worked on various aspects of this project 
over the years and the Behavioral Husbandry team for overseeing these projects. Thanks also to the 
Trails and East Savannah keepers and managers who have been very supportive of the training process. 

References 

Binney, A., Johannes, L. 2002. Use of Operant Conditioning to Prepare Tigers for an Emergency 
Recall. AAZK National Conference Proceedings'. 224-233. 

Miller, A. 2002. Catch a Tiger by the Tail: Tiger Training at Disney’s Animal Kingdom. Animal 
Keeper ’s Forum Vol. 29(7): 299-303. 

Templeton, M., Sevenich, M. 1999. Tiger Training at Disney’s Animal Kingdom: Husbandry and 
Enrichment and its Role in Guest Experience. AAZK National Conference Proceedings'. 137-141. 
Tilson, R.L., Seal U.S. 1987. Tigers of the World: The biology, biopolitics, management and 
conservation of an endangered species. Noyes Publications. 



Figure 7. Subcutaneous fluid therapy with a tiger in 
the training crate at Disney’s Animal Kingdom®, 
image taken in off show holding area. 


94 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


©°)C3 

m 

mss 

D®ca 

s 

Ti 

& 

TI 

1C 

w 

N 


A Conversation for the Conservationist 

T’Noya Thompson Gonzales 
AAZK Conservation Committee 


I often wonder what the future will bring. . . 

As animal care professionals, we see the pertinent need for proactive action in regards to conservation. 
Gradually, the rest of the human population is realizing that need. We are losing land, resources, 
people and animals. We know this. It is compelling for us to tell, post, raise money, plant and 
research. Can we do more though? How can we reach the millions of people that can help in this 
fight? When will our societies realize that we are running out of time? 

I googled the question, “What is the worst environmental problem?” and the second story that 
popped up stated “Overpopulation”. The bold and capitalized word captured my attention. We 
are the number one contributing factor to our environmental status. Was that surprising? No. Is it 
troubling? Yes. I realize this is preaching to the choir, but stay with me. 

What can I say to you savvy conservationists? You are aware of the issues, you are doing all you can 
do and you care. I am sure there are many of you reading this that have asked yourself the questions, 
“What more can I do? How else can I say it? Where else can I write it?” I ask myself the same 
questions as I read alarming headlines and emails. What is it that I can say to you that you don’t 
already know? What do I know? I am a 28 year-old woman with only seven years in this field. I do 
know this though; in order to get anywhere in life you have to continuously push yourself and once 
you get there, push for the next level. I believe the next level consists of strengthening our cores and 
growing out to achieve success. That core for most of us consists of family, friends and co-workers. 
Think of those people. Have you ever asked them about conservation issues? Do they all recycle? 
Do they donate time or money to conservation related issues? Do they take 30-minute showers? Do 
they know how badly pollution affects the health of all of us? What if each person you knew did 
one more thing and then told all the people they knew? This is not a new concept. I know, it doesn’t 
shout eureka to me either. However, I know that there are times where I have said nothing at times 
when I want to say everything. There have been times where I have silently picked up a can out of the 
trash because I knew that the person didn’t recycle. Should I have asked them again if they recycle? 
Should I locate a center in their area and give them the info? Seems like a miniscule thing, but it all 
adds up. We know this. I feel sometimes that we are like salmon swimming upstream. We are all so 
tired but we have to remember if a few of us get through, it’s worth it. 

With our AAZK Chapters, how can we get involved locally to affect globally? Let’s face it, we need 
more manpower. It’s hard when the core of a Chapter is burnt out and when work life becomes too 
hectic to include AAZK. We all have been there. That is the point when you have to push to the next 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 


95 


level. It is time to pull more people into the ring and build our Chapters up to make a mark on our 
communities. Easier said than done but slow and steady wins the race, right? I know at times we get 
tired and busy, I know I sure do, but we can’t give up. That is not an option. So, we need to continue 
to set goals with ourselves and our Chapters. There is nothing better than reaching those goals and 
mailing off the check that will aide in conservation efforts. 

Forgive all of my questions, but I think that these questions may bring us the answers we need, 
especially with the coming of the New Year. Resolutions are in the making. What can I do to make 
this year better for myself, family and friends? The truth is we all want the same things: to be 
healthier, to be successful, to be financially stable, and to be a better person. Each year we get 
closer to all of those things with hard work and dedication. I believe it is the same concept with 
conservation issues. Each year has to be better than the last; we have no time to spare. We have 
to keep moving forward and keep each other motivated so that we can work together to get to the 
next level. I am so proud to be a part of an organization that is striving to do all it can to help our 
planet. As I think of the Board of Directors, AAZK committees, all the Chapters and members, I am 
inspired to push myself to the next level. Due to that inspiration, I have the motivation needed to start 
these conversations. A conversation can begin with a mere question. A mere question can yield big 
answers. I know what I have to do this year. Do you? 


ICZ and IRF Announce Opportunity to See Asian 
Rhinos: Earth’s Most Threatened Land Mammals 

International Congress on Zookeeping Pre and Post-Conference Tours to Visit 
Ujung Kulon, Bukit Barisan Selatan, and Way Kambas National Parks 


• ICZ Pre-conference tour: 28 August - 8 September 2012 
Led by Dr. Susie Ellis, International Rhino Foundation 

• ICZ Post-conference tour: 14 September - 23 September 2012 
Led by Kerry Crosbie, Asian Rhino Project 

• Maximum 6 participants per trip 

• Cost: US $2,100 per person* 

For Further Information, please contact Dr. Susie Ellis at s.ellis@rhinos.org 
To see the full brochure, please visit the ICZ website at iczoo.org 

*double occupancy - includes all activities, airfare from Singapore to Jakarta, Jakarta to 
Bandar Lampung, all in-country transportation, accommodations, park fees, meals and non- 
alcoholic beverages. Excludes alcoholic beverages, laundry, and other personal expenses. 
Single supplement is US $400. 



INTERNATIONAL CONGRESS OF 


ZOOKEEPERS 


INTERNATIONAL 




RUIN 


FOUNDATION 


96 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 39, No. 2 



AAZK Membership Application (Please Print) □ Check here if renewal 

Membership includes a subscription to Animal Keepers ’Forum. Your membership card is 
good for free or discounted admission to many zoos and aquariums in the U.S. and Canada. 
To apply online, please visit www.aazk.org. 

Name 

Email _ 

Mailing Address _ 

City State/Province Zip/Postal Code 

Country 

U.S. Members 

$45 Professional Full-time Keeper 

□ $40 Affiliate Other staff & volunteers 

□ $30 Student Must supply copy of current 
student ID at time of application 

□ $70 Individuals Contributing/U.S. 

□ $150 Institutional Membership/U.S. 

Requires AAZK Board approval 

□ $150 Commercial Member 

i.e. animal-related food & supplies 

□ $45 Library Only Available ONLY to 
public & university libraries (in U.S.) 


Canadian Members 

□ $50 Professional Full-time Keeper 

□ $50 Affiliate Other staff & volunteers 

□ $35 Student Must supply copy of current 
student ID at time of application 

□ $70 Individuals Contributing/Canada 

□ $150 Institutional Membership/Canada 

Requires AAZK Board approval 

□ $60 International Members All members 
outside U.S. & Canada regardless of category 


Zoo Affiliation (if anv ) 


Zoo Address 


Title 


Payment must be in U.S. FUNDS ONLY 

□ My check is enclosed (payable to AAZK, Inc.) 

□ Please charge my □ VISA □ MasterCard 

Acct. Number 


Name on Card 

Expiration Date 

Signature 



Please mail this application to: 

AAZK Administrative Offices 
3601 SW 29th St, Suite 133 
Topeka, KS 66614=2054 


Printed in U.S.A. 
©2011 AAZK, Inc. 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARIES 



3 9088 01661 1584 



o to 


o 



rj CL 

, >■ 


<c 


u t5 cc: 


Cl 

£*"■ 


<c 

<a 


*c 

c 



JD 


Cl 

-*«t 


uj 



X 


m 

w 

c 

f#*ul 

JE 

o 

O 

3*! 

«4«n* 

r-. 

# 


* 

% 

3 

rs 

% 




fj»4 

o 


+* 

o 

3& 

to 

fy 

3&f 

c-s#* 



Hirt 

o 


*»* <M j£3 

% 

C 

•<•4 

* 

IOOOZ 


QC t>. o 

5fc 

c ac P'S H- 

❖ 

© 

€2 

348 

u*rs 

X 3 

3ft 

x: oj 

O 3“* 

# i»4 *» 

C4 as : 

♦ 

’^P5 

03 ' 


^sci a c 
*5- m ss 3 


