




NOVEMBER 2009 

The Journal of the American 
Association of Zoo Keeners, Inc. 


ANIMAl KEEPERS’ 

F O R U IVI 



ANIMAL KEEPERS’ FORUM 3601 S.W. 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 

Phone; (785) 273-9149 FAX (785) 273-1980 November 200^ 

Vol. 36, No. 11 


AKF Managing Editor; Susan D. Chan • Associate Editors: Becky Richendollar, North Carolina Zoo • Mark de 
Denus, Winnipeg, MB • Enrichment Options Column Coordinator: Julie Hartell-DeNardo, Oakland Zoo and Ric 
Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo & Living Museum • Legislative/Conservation Outlook Column Co-Coordinators: Becky 
Richendollar, North Carolina Zoo and Greg McKinney, Philadelphia, PA • Reactions Column Coordinator: 
William K. Baker, Jr., Abilene Zoo, Abilene, TX • ATC Column Co-Cordinators: Angela Binney, Disney’s Animal 
Kingdom; Kim Kezer, Zoo New England; Jay Pratte, Zoo Atlanta • Conservation Station Co-Coordinators: 
Penny Jolly, Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter and Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter • Proofreader: 
Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK Administrative Office. 

Animal Keepers’ Forum is published monthly by the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc., 3601 S.W. 29th 
Street, Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. Ten dollars of each membership fee goes toward the annual publica- 
tion costs of Animal Keepers’ Forum . Postage paid at Topeka, KS. 

AAZK Executive Director: Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc., Topeka KS 

also serves as AAZK Liaison to the Association of Zoos & Aquariums (AZA) 

AAZK Administrative Secretary; Barbara Manspeaker, AAZK, Inc., Topeka, KS 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

Shane Good, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo, Cleveland, OH 44109 President 

Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo, San Diego, CA 92112-0551 Vice President 

Tammy Root, Indianapolis Zoo, Indianapolis, IN 46222 

Gisela Wiggins, North Carolina Zoo, Asheboro, NC 27205-1425 

Penny Jolly, Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830-1000 


COMM1TTEES/COORD1NATORS/PRO.TECT MANAGERS 

By-laws 

Chair - Gisela A. Wiggins, North Carolina Zoo 

Grants Committee 

Chair - Shelly Roach, Columbus Zoo 

Behavioral Husbandry Committee 

Chair - Deana Walz, The Living Planet Aquarium 

Professional Development 

Melaina Wallace, Disney’s Animal Kingdom 

ICZ Coordinators 

Shane Good, Cleveland Metroparks Zoo 
and Norah Famham, Woodland Park Zoo 
MediaAVebsite 

Denise Wagner, The Phoenix Zoo, Prctject Manager 


Ethics 

Chair - Bob Cisneros, San Diego Zoo 
Awards 

Chair - Janet McCoy, The Oregon Zoo 

Annual Conferences 

Coordinator - Ed Hansen, AAZK, Inc. 

Conservation Committee 

Amanda Kamradt, New England AAZK Chapter 

Bowling for . R h inos 

Coordinator - Patty Pearthree, Cary, NC 

Products and Membership 

Jacque Blessington, K. C. Zoo, Project Manager 


MEMBERSHIP SERVICES 

Data Transfer Forms 


Available for download at www.aazk.org 


AAZK Publications/Logo Products 

Available through the AAZK website or from The AAZK Administrative Offices/Topeka 

o printed on Recycled Paper 


Table of Contents 

About the Cover/Information for Contributors. ......................450 

Scoops & Scuttlebutt......... ....451 - 454 

From the Executive Director. 456 

In Memorium ~ Gerald “Red” Thomas. ......................................................................................457 

AAZK, Inc. Thanks Its Chapters for Their Support .458 - 459 

Coming Events .......460 - 461 

Call For Papers for Avian Husbandry Issue.......................... ..................461 

Training Tales (Seeking Submissions). 462 

AAZK Announces New Members.... 463 

Letters to the Editor. ...464 - 465 

Crisis Management CD Now Available .466 

Enrichment Options {Humboldt Penguin Enrichment)..... ......467 - 469 

Professional Development Grant Report/Info on AAZK Grants Available .....470 

Assessing Immediate and Long-Term Effects of Environmental Enrichment: 

Implications for Welfare of African Clawless Otters {Aonyx capensis).... 471 - 476 

Care and Management of Geriatric Animals in Zoos (order info)..... 477 

Book Reviews {Bats in Captivity, Vol. 1 - Biological and Medical Aspects; Handbook of Venoms and 

Toxins in Reptiles; and Hey, Mister —Your Alligator s Loose..... 478 - 479 

ZOOTUBE on Display in 10 U.S. Zoos.... 480 

Behavior-based Bear Husbandry for Winter Denning: 

A practical application at Fortress of the Bear, Sitka, Alaska....... 482 - 486 

Conservation/Legislative Update ....487 - 492 



35th Anniversary - 1974 - 2009 

MISSION STATEMENT 
(Revised April 2009) 

American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. 

The mission of the American Association of Zoo Keepers, Inc. is to advance excellence in the animal 
keeping profession, foster effective communcation beneficial to animal care, support deserving 
conservation projects, and promote the preservation of our natural resources and animal life. 


This month ’s cover features a drawing of Harris ’ antelope ground squirrels (Ammospermophilus harrisi) 
drawn by Marie Tester, a Docent and Research Volunteer at the Los Angeles Zoo and Botanical Gardens, 
Los Angeles, CA. This species is quite small, weighing only about one-quarterof a pound with a body length 
of about six inches. Their coats are grayish with a white stripe down each side. A white ring encircles each 
eye, giving the Harris ’antelope squirrel a spectacled appearance. They hold their three-inch long tails over 
their backs to provide shade in the dry deserts and rocky hills of the southwestern U.S. and northwestern 
Mexico areas where they live. They are diurnal and active during even the hottest part of the day, sheltering 
in burrows at night. They have a higher body temperature (97-107°F/~36-42°C) than any other non- 
sweating mammal and cool themselves by salivating. They practice “heat-dumping, ” lying on their bellies 
in the shade with their legs sprawled out to rid their bodies of excess heat. Their diet depends on where they 
live; cactus fruit and seeds, mesquite beans, and yucca seeds. They store some food in their underground 
burrows. Although mating can take place from December or January until June, peak reproductive activity 
occurs from February-March. Gestation lasts for about 30 days, and the litter size may range from 5-14. 
The average litter size is 6.5. Females give birth to only one litter per year. Newborns are naked and the 
skin is pink and somewhat transparent. In some parts of its range, the Harris ’ antelope squirrel is losing 
habitat to agriculture and other human developments. It is considered threatened in the state of California. 
The Los Angeles Zoo exhibits four of these ground squirrels and patrons enjoy watching them bounce around 
the exhibit like they ’ve been shot from tiny cannons. Thanks, Marie! 

Articles sent to Animal Keepers ’Forum will be reviewed by the editorial staff for publication. Articles of a 
research or technical nature will be submitted to one or more of the zoo professionals who serve as referees 
for AKF. No commitment is made to the author, but an effort will be made to publish articles as soon as 
possible. Lengthy articles may be separated into monthly installments at the discretion of the editor. The 
editor reserves the right to edit material without consultation unless approval is requested in writing by 
the author. Materials submitted will not be returned unless accompanied by a stamped, selLaddressed, 
appropriately-sized envelope. Telephone, fax or email contributions of late-breaking news or last-minute 
insertions are accepted as space allows. Phone 785-273-9149; FAX (785) 273-1980; email is akfeditor@ 
zk.kscoxmail.com< If you have questions about submission guidelines, please contact the Editor. 


Deadline for each regular issue is the 10th of the preceding month. 
Dedicated issues may have separate deadline dates and will be noted by the editor. 


Articles printed do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the AKF staff or the American Association of Zoo 
Keepers, Inc. Publication does not indicate endorsement by the Association. 

Items in this publication may be reprinted providing credit to this publication is given and a copy of the 
reprinted material is forwarded to the editor. If an article is shown to be separately copyrighted by the 
author(s), then permission must be sought from the author(s). Reprints of material appearing in this journal 
may be ordered from the editor. Regular back issues are available for $4.00 each. Special issues may cost 
more. 


E-Mail Addresses: 

You may reach Barbara Manspeaker at AAZK Administrative Offices at: aazkoffice@zk.kscoxmaiLcom< 
You may reach Susan Chan md Animal Keepers’ Forum at: akfeditor@zk.kscoxmaiLcom< 

Mailing Address: 

AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054 


AAZK website address: www.aazk.org 
BFR Website: http://aazkbfr.org 


450 Animal Keepers ’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Scoops & Scuttlebutt 

Combined AAZK/ICZ Conference Quite a Gathering 

The combined conference for the American Association of Zoo Keepers and the 
International Congress on Zookeeping, held in September in Seattle, WA, was an 
amazing gathering of zoo professionals from near and far. A total of 406 delegates 
came together for nearly a week of paper sessions, workshops, zoo visits and a chance 
to interact with colleagues representing 25 countries besides the U.S. These included 
delegates from the following countries: Australia, Austria, Bahamas, Cameroon, Canada, Columbia, 
Denmark, France, Gabon, Germany, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Japan, Kenya, The Netherlands, New 
Zealand, The Phillipines, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, 
and the United Kingdom. The Puget Sound Chapter of AAZK and the Woodland Park Zoo are to be 
congratulated on hosting a stimulating and very “green” conference. AAZK appreciates all of the 
hard work by Chapter members, as well as other zoo staff and volunteers, ICZ members and many 
others for their extraordinary efforts in putting on this unique joint conference. 



Seeking Bird Photos 

We are currently planning on producing an issue of AKF dedicated to Avian Husbandry in April of 
2010. We would like to feature a four-color photo cover for this issue. Therefore, we are soliciting 
you photographers out there to submit your best and most colorful bird photos to the editorial staff 
for their consideration. There is a Call for Papers for this issue elsewhere in this issue of AKF 
that has a submission deadline of January 5, 2010. For your photo to be considered for the cover 
of this dedicated issue, it needs to be to the AKF staff by February 1, 2010. Photos should be 
high resolution (300 dpi) and may be sent as jpg or tif files attached to the editor’s email address 
(akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail.com) Those submitting should also include their name, full mailing 
address, email address and daytime or cell phone number. Photographers should also include both 
the common and scientific name of the species featured and a paragraph or two about its natural 
history. If you have questions about making a submission, please contact Susan Chan at the email 
address above or call 785-273-9149. 


Rolling With “Bowling For Rhinos” (BFRJ - from BFR Coordinator Patty Pearthree 
We had an excellent meeting at the AAZK/ICZ conference in Seattle. All three organizations 
supported by “Bowling For Rhinos” funds met with the Board and the BFR coordinator to come 
together to “grow” the BFR program. These organizations are “Lewa Wildlife Conservancy” (LWC), 
“International Rhino Foundation”(IRF) and “Action for Cheetahs”(ACK)-formerly called “Cheetah 
Conservation Fund-Kenya”. 



Our #1 BFR goal for 2010 is to have all 85 AAZK Chapters 
participate in “Bowling For Rhinos”. Don’t panic. If bowling is not 
the thing to do in your area, any type of fundraiser is welcome. Some 
chapters have been very successful with “Wii bowling”, “ Run/ 
Race for Rhinos”, ‘Rummage for Rhinos”, “Rock n’ for Rhinos”, 
“Sailing for Rhinos”. . .and the list goes on. All donations, of course 
are always welcome and count as participation. Remember, it takes 
about five consecutive years for a fundraising event to catch on 
in your community so it is important to keep rolling with BFR in 
order to be successful. 


Our #2 BFR Goal is to raise $400,000 in 2010. If we increase the overall size of the “conservation 
pie” each of the organizations we support will receive a larger amount of money. It will be tough in 
this economy but all three organizations are also feeling the effect of the economy and are in need 
of extra support more than ever. During tough times, poaching pressure increases and the cost of 
protecting wildlife increases. 


Animal Keepers Forum, VoL 36, No. 9 451 


If your Chapter has not yet turned in funds from the 2009 event, it is not too late. Please do so ASAP, 
We raised $273,000 in 2008 and it looks like 2009 will be less than $250,000. If your Chapter is able 
to make a “year-end donation” toward the 2009 BFR event, please send funds by December 1** to: 
Patty Pearthree, c/o BFR, 318 Montibello Dr., Cary, NC 27513 

Checks payable to: “AAZK, Inc-BFR” 

Indianapolis Prize Winning Conservationist Fights for Snow Leopards’ Survival 

As Vice President of Panthera and Senior Conservationist for the Wildlife Conservation Society 
< http://www.wcs.org/saving-wild-places.aspx > , George B. Schaller, Ph.D., is relentless in his pursuit 
to save endangered species across the globe. The winner of the second Indianapolis Prize credits the 
award with helping him reach some important milestones in his work to save snow leopards in 2009. 

Generous with his time and resources, Schaller used a 
portion of the $100,000 Indianapolis Prize to visit China’s 
Qinghai Province in May 2009 to help initiate snow 
leopard programs supported by Panthera, an organization 
whose mission is to conserve the world’s 36 species 
of wild cats. Most of Schaller’s work was conducted 
in the Sanjiangyuan Reserve (“Source of Three Rivers 
Reserve” — Yellow, Yangtze, Mekong), which covers 
nearly 58,000 square miles, primarily at elevations 
above 11,800 feet. In addition to assessing snow leopard 
presence and threats, the trip provided Peking University 
Ph.D. student Li Juan with the training she needs to 
start a snow leopard study this year. Schaller and Juan 
traveled more than 2,600 miles to evaluate potential study 
areas for the student’s research project, and Schaller 
will continue to mentor Juan as she pursues her Ph.D. 

While in Asia, Schaller met with representatives from 
the Snow Leopard Trust and Shan Shui, one of the leading conservation organizations in China, to 
create a new collaborative snow leopard research and conservation program. These organizations 
signed a long-term agreement that will bring much needed expertise and funding to efforts to save 
snow leopards in China, where as much as 50 percent of the remaining wild population exists. 

“George Schaller’s extensive research, fieldwork and training have been essential to 
saving snow leopards in regions of China,” said Tom McCarthy, Director of Snow Leopard 
Programs for Panthera. “I can’t think of a better use of the Indianapolis Prize funds 
than teaching future generations the urgency and necessity of wildlife conservation.” 

“The important aspects of this project for me,” added Michael Crowther, president and CEO 
of the Indianapolis Zoo, “are its collaborative and long-term nature. It’s George’s innate 
ability to bring people together and to forge alliances that overcome the short-term problems 
of political or geographic conflicts in order to serve the greater good that makes him a hero 
for me, and for the world. It seems he has again worked his magic for the snow leopards.” 

Nominees Announced for the 2010 Indianapolis Prize 

Leading animal conservationists vie for $100,000 award 

Twenty-nine animal conservationists who have dedicated their lives to saving the Earth’s endangered 
species have been nominated to receive the biennial Indianapolis Prize, the world’s leading award 
for animal conservation. The nominees’ work spans the globe, representing a range of species from 
insects to mammals, and includes amphibians, elephants, bats, wolves and sharks, among many 
others. The Nominating Committee will review the applications and select the six finalists, who 
will be announced in the spring of 2010. The Prize Jury will then determine the winner who will be 
announced in mid-2010 and honored at the next Indianapolis Prize Gala, to be held September 25, 
2010 in Indianapolis. 



452 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


In addition to receiving the $100,000 Prize, the recipient is also awarded the Lilly Medal, an original 
work of art that signifies the winner’s contributions to conserving some of the world’s most threatened 
animals. The 2008 Indianapolis Prize was awarded to legendary field biologist George Schaller, Ph.D. 
Schaller’s accomplishments span decades and continents, bringing fresh focus to the plight of several 
endangered species - from tigers in India to gorillas in Rwanda- and inspiring others to join the crusade. 

“Following in Schaller’s footsteps will not be easy, but the current nominees are exceptional,” 
said Michael Crowther, president and CEO of the Indianapolis Zoo, the organization 
responsible for initiating the conservation award. “These conservationists are all living their 
own unique and fascinating adventures that battle the odds, but achieve great victories.” 


In alphabetical order, the nominees for the 2010 Indianapolis Prize are: 

• Gerardo Ceballos, Ph.D.: (Institute de Ecologia, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico) 
Leader in designing conservation strategies for endangered species and threatened ecosystems; 
conducted the first geographically explicit analysis of patterns of population and species extinction in 
a major taxonomic group (mammals). 

• Nigel Collar, Ph.D.: (BirdLife International) Researched and compiled a unique and comprehensive 
dataset on globally threatened bird species that was published in groundbreaking regional Red Data 
Books worldwide, 

• Iain Douglas-Hamilton, Ph.D.: (Save the Elephants) Founded Save the Elephants; devotes his life 
to the cause of elephant conservation - from testifying before Congress to leading anti-poaching aid 
programs in Africa. 

• Karen Eckert, Ph.D.: (WIDECAST: Wider Caribbean Sea Turtle Conservation Network) Dedicated 
to research, multilateral marine resource management and the international conservation policies for 
sea turtles for more than three decades. 

• Ruth M. Elsey, M.D.: (Louisiana Department of Wildlife and Fisheries) Fostered programs to 
enhance the survivability and sustainability of the American alligator, in addition to parallel efforts for 
other crocodilians. 

• George Fenwick, Ph.D.: (American Bird Conservancy) Founded American Bird Conservancy; 
dedicated to creating and sustaining globally significant biodiversity reserves, tackling policy-based 
threats to birds and generating funding resources for the biodiversity community. 

• Rodney Fox: (Rodney Fox Shark Expeditions/Fox Shark Research Foundation) Miracle survivor of 
one of the world’s worst shark attacks; regarded as a world authority on Great White Shark research, 
observation and conservation, 

• Birute Mary Galdikas, Ph.D.: (Orangutan Foundation International) More than 35 years of 
advancing research on wild orangutan ecology and behavior; established rehabilitation and release 
programs and saved millions of acres of tropical rain forest in Kalimantan. 

• Paul Garber, Ph.D.: (University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign) More than 30 years of dedication 
and commitment to research, conservation and educational programs involving the monkeys of Latin 
America. 

• Jack Hanna: (Columbus Zoo and Aquarium) For more than 30 years, Hanna has been the public 
face of zoos, bringing the conservation message to millions of people worldwide; passionately 
dedicated to Rwanda’s endangered animals and its people. 

• Maurice Hornocker, Ph.D.: (Selway Institute; Professor Emeritus, University of Idaho) Devoted 
his career to understanding the ecological role of wild cats and advocating for the conservation of 
large carnivores, including the first-ever field investigation of cougars. 

• Rick Hudson: (Fort Worth Zoo; International Iguana Foundation; lUCN Turtle Survival Alliance) 
Dedicated advocate for reptile conservation, including groundbreaking work with the Jamaican iguana 
and the coordination of the largest turtle rescue event in history. 

• Lisa Hywood: (Tikki Hywood Trust) Works tirelessly to preserve Zimbabwe’s wildlife - including 
captive breeding, management and monitored release of endangered species and conservation 
education in under-privileged, rural areas. 

• Rodney Jackson, Ph.D.: (Snow Leopard Conservancy) Conducted an in-depth radio-tracking study 
of snow leopards in the 1980s; dedicated to building local communities’ capacity as key players in 
conserving the species. 

• Jana Johnson, M.S., Ph.D.: (Moorpark College, The Butterfly Project) Founded The Butterfly 
Project, a center for endangered butterfly propagation and research; helped the Palos Verdes blue 
butterfly population, once presumed extinct, grow from 200 to 10,000. 

• James Earl Kennamer, Ph.D.: (National Wild Turkey Federation) Devoted leader in wild turkey 
research, scientific wildlife management and forging cooperative conservation partnerships to grow 
the wild turkey population from 1.3 million to 7 million in less than 30 years. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 453 


• Thomas H. Kunz, Ph.D.: (Boston University) For more than 50 years, has significantly and 
instrumentally contributed to the conservation and teaching of bat ecology, physiology and behavior. 

• Amanda Lollar: (Bat World Sanctuary) Established Bat World Sanctuary, the largest rehabilitation 
facility in the world dedicated exclusively to bats; created the first nutritionally sound diet for 
debilitated bats, 

• Edward Louis Jr., Ph.D., DVM: (Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo) Tireless conservation advocate of 
island biogeography, including the discovery of 30 percent of known lemurs to date. 

• Laurie Marker, D.Phil.: (Cheetah Conservation Fund) Founded the Cheetah Conservation Fund; 
led a conservation program from humble beginnings in rural Namibia to an unparalleled model for 
predator conservation. 

• Stephen McCulloch: (Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution) Created legislation to fund several 
ongoing marine mammal research and conservation programs while working to construct the first 
teaching marine mammal hospital, science and education center. 

• Rodrigo Medellin, Ph.D.: (University of Mexico) Galvanized bat research throughout Latin 
America by using a multipronged approach including research, education, population biology, 
molecular ecology and community involvement. 

• Gregory Rasmussen, Ph.D.: (Painted Dog Conservation) Diligent advocate of the critically 
endangered African wild dogs; founder of the Painted Dog Conservation, which strives to increase the 
range and numbers of wild dogs in Zimbabwe and elsewhere in Africa. 

• Patrick T. Redig, DVM, Ph.D.: (The Raptor Center, College of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of Minnesota) Dedicated more than 35 years to protecting raptor populations though extensive field 
work, bench research, clinical work, professional teaching and community service. 

• Lente Lidia Roode: (Hoedspruit Endangered Species Centre) Established the Hoedspruit 
Endangered Species Centre, a nonprofit organization that provides a safe haven for orphaned and sick 
animals, complete with an education center, rescue unit and breeding program. 

• Patrick Rose: (Save the Manatee Club) Worked to help educate opponents, build coalitions and 
focus on specific protection goals for manatees, including protecting the manatee’s habitat and 
advocating for strong growth management laws. 

• Carl Safina, Ph.D.: (Blue Ocean Institute) Brought ocean conservation into the environmental 
mainstream by using science, art and literature to inspire “sea ethic.” 

• Simon Stuart, Ph.D.: (lUCN-World Conservation Union) Developed the lUCN Red List Categories 
and Criteria, which assesses the extinction risk for species. 

• Amanda Vincent, Ph.D.: (The University of British Columbia) First person to study seahorses 
underwater, document extensive commercial trade, and initiate a seahorse conservation project. 

Project Seahorse. 


New Animal Data Transfer Form is Here! Now Find It on the Web 

Do you remember the days when you were transferring an animal to a new facility and had to fill out 
three different ADT forms? You were probably wondering why some of the information on the forms 
was redundant, weren’t you? Well, the redundancy is over! We all know how busy and stressful it 
can be when transferring animals between facilities. It can be very time consuming to fill out all of 
the paper work. In 2007, the Animal Training Committee of AAZK, Inc combined all three forms 
into one easy form to use. 

The Animal Data Transfer form is a form that is used when transferring animals from one institution 
to another. All of us have the same goal: to provide the best possible care for the animals we care 
for. The information on the form provides the receiving institution staff with the right tools that 
they would need to give that animal the best care possible. This form includes all the information 
someone would need about an animal from diet to behavioral history to training and enrichment 
history. The form can be found at www.aazk.org , About Us link at top of page. Animal Data Transfer 
Form link on left side of page. 

AAZK encourages staff working with the animal prior to shipping to fill out the form. Your manager 
doesn’t have to be the one to fill it out. Most of the time, the keepers know the animal history the 
best. Any information you can give the receiving institution, no matter how small you may think it 
is, will be very helpful. 

Happy Animal Transferring! If you have any questions about the form, please contact Tammy Root, 
AAZK National Board Member, at troot@indvzoo.com . 


454 Animal Keepers ’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 



eiEfS 4\§ l9t¥lR§i 4§ 
THii 4NiDMi4L 


Working in partnership with zoos 
and aquariums, MAZURf PhD 
nutritionists develop industry 
leading products specifically for 
each species. From aardvarks 
to zebras, we work hard to give 
your animals the most of what 
they need. 

For more information on 
MAZURF pro duct S”inciuding 

nutritional analyses and research 
findings-visit www.mazuri.com 


or call l-800-ZH7~8941 for the 
location of your nearest dealer. 
Because when it comes to great 
nutrition, we’re committed to 
the health and longevity of 
every animal. 


Ma..ri 

The Exotic Animal Feeding Resource 


www.mazuri.com 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 455 


I pom ine Lxecuiive LJiPecicf 


There is never a good time to raise membership dues. 

Our Association has only increased membership fees three times in the past 25 years. 

This is a difficult decision, but one that must be made. The economy is beginning to rebound so in 
order to maintain our goals, objectives and publications, beginning on January 1, 2010, individual 
membership dues will increase by $5.00. 

Your membership is important to this Association. Beginning in 2010, AAZK will initiate a 
membership recruitment campaign in all categories. We have identified a targeted strategy for 
membership recruitment and we will be calling upon our membership to help this program to succeed. 
There are some interesting gaps that we need to fill. Did you know? 

There are over 200 AZA-accredited institutions, but less than 80 AAZK Chapters. 

In facilities where an AAZK Chapter has been established, less than 50% of those facilities are 
AAZK Institutional Members. It is estimated that less than 15% of the professional animal keepers 
in accredited institutions are members of AAZK. Associate and Affiliate membership in AAZK has 
decreased by over 100 individuals in the past two years. 

The combined membership dollars account for over 55% of our operating budget, with Chapter Fees 
covering another 30%. Increasing membership in all categories and, more importantly retaining 
those members over the course of their professional careers, is a goal that we must achieve beginning 
in 2010. With membership recruitment and retention, it is hoped that membership dues will not have 
to increase until the end of the next decade. 

Thank you for all the hard work you do in support of 
AAZK. 


AMERICAN Ed Hansen 

ExecutiveDirector 


of ZOO KEEPERS 


ASSOCIATION 




456 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


In 7t)cmortum 

Gerald ‘‘Red” Thomas 


November 25, 1936 September 26, 2009 






The American Association of Zoo Keepers lost one 
of its founding members, Gerald “Red” Thomas on 
Saturday, September 26“’. Red was a senior elephant 
keeper at the San Diego Zoo from 1962 until 1999. 


“Red Thomas was a great mentor to new keepers, 
always willing to share his knowledge ,” comments Joan 
Embery, San Diego Zoo’s Conservation Ambassador. 
“He was open to learning new ideas despite his years 
of experience. He put his ego aside, as evidenced by 
the number of times he remained behind the stage 
curtain; on the ready to lend a hand, if necessary.” 
Red worked with 
Joan on many 

Red and San Diego Animal Ambassador Joan occasions while 
Embery walk a couple of zoo residents. she educated 

guests about the 

wonderful world of animals on the “Tonight Show” starring 
Johnny Carson. 


A former Marine, Red had a quiet competence and grace under 
pressure. He didn’t have formal animal training but was good 
at doing things on the fly” noted Ron Ringer, a senior keeper at 

San Diego who 
had worked with 
Thomas. “Red 
learned on the job 
and he was good 
at everything he 
did.” 


Red Thomas, 

DickSweeney, charges at the San Diego Zoo. 
Conrad Grayson, 

Dennis Melvin 

Ken Willingham, Carl Pyle and Walter Bromley 
were the seven Founding Members of the American 
Red and one of San Diego Zoo s Koalas. Association of Zoo Keepers. The concept of a 

professional organization for animal caregivers was 
conceived in 1967 by these seven zoo keepers from 
San Diego. Their goal was to establish an organization 
that promoted professional growth for keepers and 
encourage communication between keepers from 
other institutions. Red was instrumental in forming 
this organization which, 42 years later, has grown 
into a full-scale professional organization with 
over 2400 members from almost 250 animal care 
organizations. 


Red is survived by his wife Bernandette; son Gary; 
daughters Nancy, Ellen and Barbara; step-daughters 
Annie and Kasey; brother Montey and sister Anita; as 
well as 15 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. 
He will be missed. 

(Photos courtesy of the Zoologiocal Society of San Diego and AAZK, Inc.) 


AKF Editor Susan Chan and AAZK 
Administrative Secretary Barbara Manspeaker 
at the 1987 AAZK Conference in Milwaukee 
where the AAZK Founders were honored. 


Animal Keepers ' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 457 


AAZK, Inc. Thanks Its Chapters for Their Support in 2009 

In 2006 the Board of Directors adopted a policy of recognizing the monetary contributions of AAZK 
Chapters to the Association. These contributions are a combination of donations, re-charter fees, and 
duty obligations forwarded to the Association. The AAZK Board of Directors and Staff would like to 
thank all of the AAZK Chapters for their support 


Platinum 
($2000 and up) 

The Greater Cleveland Area AAZK Chapter 
Utah Chapter of AAZK 


Gold 

($1000 to $2000) 

Cape May County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Columbus AAZK Chapter 
Indianapolis AAZK Chapter 
Milwaukee County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
St. Louis AAZK Chapter 
Audubon Park AAZK Chapter 
Phoenix Chapter of AAZK 
Southern Ontario Zoo Keepers AAZK Chapter 


Silver 

($500 to $1000) 


New England Chapter of AAZK 
Greater Philadelphia AAZK Chapter 
North Carolina AAZK Chapter 
South Florida AAZK Chapter 
Birmingham Zoo Chapter of AAZK 
Memphis Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Detroit Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Lincoln Park AAZK Chapter 
Topeka Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Omaha AAZK Chapter 
Tulsa Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Houston AAZK Chapter 
Rocky Mountain AAZK Chapter 
EFBC Chapter 
Puget Sound AAZK Chapter 


Rosamond Gifford Zoo AAZK Chapter 
National Capital AAZK Chapter 
Georgia AAZK Chapter 
Palm Beach Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Nashville AAZK Chapter 
Louisville Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Minnesota Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Kansas City AAZK Chapter 
Sedgwick County Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Little Rock Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Dallas Zoo AAZK Chapter 
San Antonio Zoo AAZK Chapter 
San Diego AAZK Chapter 
San Francisco Bay Area Chapter of AAZK 


458 Animal Keepers’ Forum, VoL 36, No. 9 


Bronze 
(Upto $500) 


AAZK Chapter of New Bedford 
Beardsley Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Greater Baltimore Chapter of AAZK 
Jacksonville AAZK Chapter 
Lion Country Safari AAZK Chapter 
Knoxville Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Toledo Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Battle Creek AAZK Chapter 
Brookfield AAZK Chapter 
Central Illinois AAZK Chapter 
Riverside Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Oklahoma City Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Galveston Chapter of AAZK 
El Paso del Norte AAZK Chapter 
Snake River AAZK Chapter 
Tucson AAZK Chapter 
California Desert AAZK Chapter 
Honolulu Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Point Defiance AAZK Chapter 


Roger Williams Park Zoo AAZK Chapter 
The Seneca Park Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Chesapeake AAZK Chapter 
Greater Orlando AAZK Chapter 
Tampa Bay AAZK Chapter 
Jackson Zookeepers Association 
Greater Cincinnati Chapter of AAZK 
West Michigan Association of Zoo Keepers 
The Scovill Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Ozarks Chapter of the AAZK 
Baton Rouge Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Fort Worth Zoo AAZK Chapter 
West Texas Chapter of AAZK 
AAZK of Cheyenne Mountain Zoo 
Wildlife World Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Los Angeles Zoo AAZK Chapter 
Orange County AAZK Chapter 
Portland AAZK Chapter 
Assiniboine Park AAZK Chapter 


To the 78 Chapters that contributed to the American Association of Zoo Keepers in 2009: 

Thank You for Your Support! 


Big Cat Internships Available 

Join us in 

“Saving Tigers One by One” 

As seen on Animal Planet® 

“Growing Up Tiger” 

Apply at: www.tigercreek.org 

Learn about Big Cat Management. Internship involves Animal Care Apprentice and 
Public Education. We offer experience that counts towards employment. 

TIGER MISSING LINK FOUNDATION / TIGER CREEK WILDLIFE REFUGE 


liil 


P 

[reek 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 459 


Coming Events 


Post Your Coming Events Here 
email to: akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail.com 


February 21-24, 2010 - Giraffe Professionals 
Conference to be held in Phoenix , AZ. The 
International Association of Giraffe Care Professionals 
is pleased to announce the first-ever conference “All 
of the Above” devoted to all aspects of giraffe care in 
captivity. AH individuals interested in giraffe and the 
advancement of their care are invited to join us for this 
groundbreaking event. Conference is being hosted by 
the Phoenix Zoo with sponsorship from the Oakland 
Zoo. For more information, registration or for those 
who may be interested in presenting at the conference, 
please visi t http://www.giraffecare.org/ 

March 3-6, 2010 - International Association of 
Avian Trainers and Educators (lAATE) Conference 
held in Albuquerque, NM. It’s not too early to start 
planning to attend the 2010 LAATE Conference hosted 
by Avian Ambassadors in Albuquerque, New Mexico. 
TTie 2010 LAATE Conference will provide a wonderful 
opportunity to learn more about avian training, 
show content, educational messaging, enrichment 
ideas, avian health and welfare from the leading 
authorities in the industry. Get ready for Conference 
Trips, Workshops, Visit the Rio Grande Zoo and 
Aquarium, and we are bringing back the Training 
Panel. Stephen J. Bodio is our Keynote Speaker. 
Steve was born and educated in Boston and has lived 
in Magdalena , New Mexico, for over twenty years. 
Lie has traveled extensively in Europe, Africa, and 
especially Asia. His book Eagle Dreams is about 
the Kazakh horsemen of Mongolia . It is the journey 
to and in writing this book that Steve will talk about 
with his slide presentation. We also have Susan G. 
Friedman, Ph.D with a featured paper on Saturday 
morning! Dr. Friedman is a psychology professor 
at Utah State University with a special interest in 
applied behavior analysis (ABA), the technology of 
behavior change so effective with human learners. 
Over the last decade, she has pioneered the 
dissemination of ABA principles, procedures and 
ethical standards to improve the quality of life for 
animals. For more information visit www.IAATE. 
org and start planning today! 

This year, Online Registration is available! Go to 
www.IAATE.org for all registration and conference 
details. Online registrations must be submitted 
and Mail-in registrations must be postmarked by 
February 6, 2010. Walk-in registrations will be 
accepted at the conference. 

Hotel Reservations must be made by February 14, 
2010 to get the special I A ATE rate. 

April 15 -18, 2010 - 4th Otter Keeper Workshop 
the Cincinnati Zoo in Cincinnati, Ohio will 
host. This year the focus of the workshop will 
be expanded to include all of the otters managed 
under the Otter SSP® North American river otters, 
Asian small-clawed otters, African clawless, 
African spot-necked and giant otters. Keepers 
working with any of the species are welcome to 
attend. Topics will include: captive management 


issues, enrichment, training, water quality, health 
care, nutrition, diet, hand-raising, exhibit design, 
lots of sharing of information between keepers. 

Registration will be $75 and the deadline is 
December 15. 2009 . Spots fill up fast so please 
register early. A waiting list will be maintained 
once the workshop is filled. Due to the popularity 
of the workshop, priority will be given to first 
time attendees. Please just one registrant per 
institution. No refunds after January 15, 2010. 
Accommodations: A hotel near the Cincinnati 

Zoo or the Newport Aquarium. Room 
negotiations are ongoing. Roommates are 
encouraged. You will be matched if you 
indicate that you wish to have a roommate. 
Information can be found on: www.OtterSpotter. 
com 

For more information contact: David Hamilton at 
Seneca Park Zoo, 2222 St. Paul St., Rochester, NY 
14617; phone: 585-336-2502; 585-266-5775 fax 
dJb_a_mJ J _L o _ n ^ m .o_n_ro_e_c ojj_ n 4_y_^ 

April 25-30, 2010 - Animal Behavior Management 
Alliance (ABMA) Annual Conference - In Pittsburgh, 
PA. The theme of this 10th Anniversary Conference 
is “Defining a Decade: Animal Management - Past, 
Present, and Future”. 

Conference programming includes: Dr. Vint VLrga, 
a Veterinary Behaviorist as keynote speaker, formal 
presentations, numerous workshops and seminars, 
a poster session, and site visits to animal facilities. 
All conference details can be found at www. 
theabma.org . The conference will be held at the 
Hilton Pittsburgh located in downtown Pittsburgh. 
Mention that you are with the ABMA and receive 
a special room rate of $ 119/night Reservations 
must be made by March 23, 2010 at 412-391-4600. 
Contact Nicole Begley at nicole.begley@aviary.org 
or 412-323-7235 ext 216 with questions. 

May 11-15, 2010 - International Gorilla 
Workshop - 2010 - Oklahoma City Zoo is excited 
to host the 2010 International Gorilla Workshop. 
We hope you’ll join us for these informative 
sessions. Our keynote speakers who are confirmed 
are Dave Morgan and Charlene Jendry. We are in 
final confirmation stage to get Dr. liana Kutinsky 
here as our third keynote. The Gorilla Workshop 
was created to promote and improve husbandry, 
management and conservation of gorillas. It is 
necessary to collaborate with colleagues to better 
provide for and understand gorillas in our care. The 
2010 Gorilla Workshop will include a number of 
topics with an emphasis on multi-male and bachelor 
groups, as well as innovative and best practices in 
gorilla husbandry. The deadline for abstracts is 10 
February 2010. 


460 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Abstracts must contain the following: 

• Author’s name, affiliation, address, e-mail 
address and phone number 

• Title of paper 

• Concise description of paper not to exceed 500 
words (single space) 

• On a separate page please provide a concise bio 
of the author/presenter 

Suggested Topics (1 full day will be devoted to each 
main topic): Innovations and best practices in gorilla 
husbandry: Retro-fitting existing cages; Innovations 
in exhibit and holding design to facilitate husbandry; 
Philosophy driven husbandry programs - What’s 
yours and why does it work for your facility?; How 
to promote mother-rearing; Surrogate programs;; 
Behavioral husbandry - What is working to promote 
innovations in gorilla management?; Multi-male and 
bachelor groups: Best practices - What’s working at 
your facility? What’s not and how can we learn from 
it?; Research Updates; Complexities such as holding/ 
exhibit design; Introduction strategies; Management 
strategies; Field Work and Conservation: Ape 
Sanctuaries/Updates from the Field; Fundraisers to 
support in situ work; and In or Ex-situ conservation 
education programs. 


Please send via e-mail or CD (in Word format) to: 
Laura Bottaro OR Donna Mobbs, OKC Zoo, 2101 
NE 50th St.„ Okla. City, OK 73111 Emails: 
LB ottaro @ okczoo .com DMobbs @ okczoo .com 

Registration fees of $195 are due by 10 February 
2010. A late fee of $30 will be assessed after 10 
February. Ten dollars from each registration will be 
combined to benefit one or more in situ conservation 
project(s). If you have other general question 
about the workshop, OKC, etc, please contact Brian 
Aucone, BrianA@okczoo.com, 405-425-0283. 

August 30 - September 3, 2010 - 7th International 
Penguin Conference - in Boston, MA. Hosted 
by The New England Aquarium. For info email 
ipcboston@neaq.org 

September 28-October 2,2010 - 20th International 
Zoo Educators^ (IZE) Biennial Conference - at 
Disney’s Animal Kingdom, Orlando, I^. For more 
information, please visit http://www.izea.net 

September 7-12, 2010 - NationalAZAD Conference 
Hosted by Brookfield Zoo, Brookfield, IL USA. 


Call for Papers 
for AKF Dedicated Issue 
on Avian Husbandry and Breeding 

Zoo and aquarium animal collections are experiencing a crisis in sustainability. Without 
successful husbandry and breeding we stand to lose the diversity that is vital to great collections. 
This is being strongly felt in the avian world. In March of 2010 there will be a dedicated 
issue to avian husbandry and breeding. We are seeking articles pertaining to what has worked, 
and often more importantly, what has not worked in the art and science of avian husbandry 
and breeding. By sharing information we can begin to make collaborations and work towards 
building stronger and sustainable populations. 

Papers should be submitted electronically in MS Word only to akfeditor@zk.kscoxmail. 
com. Please put Avian Special Issue in your subject line. Papers should be no more then 10 
pages in length. Any charts or graphs should be submitted as separate jpg or tif files along with 
the manuscript. We would encourage photos of your animals to include and these should also 
be submitted electronically as either jpg or tif files. Please make certain all photos are high 
resolution (300 dpi) 

If you cannot submit your materials electronically, you may send them on a disk or CD to: 
Dedicated Issue, AAZK, Inc., 3601 SW 29* St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. If you 
cannot submit your photos electronically, you may also send 3x4 inch prints. Be sure to include 
proper photo credit and suggested captions for each photo are appreciated. 

You should also include your complete contact information including address, email and 
daytime phone number where you may be reached if we have questions concerning your 
submission. 

Deadline for receipt of articles for consideration is 

****Januarv 5, 2010**** 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 461 


The AAZK Behavioral Husbandry Committee Presents 





Where you can share your training experiences! 


Training Tales Editors - Jay Pratte, Zoo Atlanta; Kim Kezer, Zoo New England; 
and Angela Binney, Disney s Animal Kingdom 

The Behavioral Husbandry Committee wants to hear your ‘Training Tales’ - the good, the bad and 
the fabulous! 

Please submit your “Training Tales” and experiences in operant conditioning to share with Animal 
Keepers’ Forum readers. This opportunity provides a convenient outlet for you to exhibit your 
training challenges, methods and milestones with the AAZK member network. Please submit entries 
based on the following guidelines: 

a) S ubmit a brief description of a training project at your zoo. These can be 500 words or less, 
in text or bullet points. Or it can be longer (up to 1000 words) if you wish to elaborate; 
however, short and simple descriptions with a few images are just as perfect. Details 
should include the following: 

1 . Define the training goal (what did you try to do and for what purpose?) 

2. List important steps (How did you do it - include plans that changed along 

the way/what worked & what didn’t work) 

3. Timeline used (how long did it take) 

4. Tips you learned along the way 

b) Include 1-2 digital photos (jpg or tif in high resoution [300 dpi] that clearly depict the animal 
in the learning process or performing the desired goal. Please list source and photographer 
of each image and a suggested caption for each photo submitted). 

c) Please Note: We do not mind reprinting material if it is particularly useful to our readers; 
however, we want to be sure to give proper credit to previously published material. If your entry 
is not a first time publication, please include publication information (Journal name. Volume, 
Issue, Pages) with your submission. 

Please send entries or questions to: Jay Pratte at ipratte@zooatlanta.org . Kim Kezer at kkezer@ 
zoonewengland.com or Angela Binney at Angela.C.Binnev@disnev.com (use Training Tales Entry 
as the subject line). 


Happy Training! 


462 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


AAZK Announces New Members 

New Professional Members 

Thomas Anderson, Squam Lakes Natural Science 
Center (NH); Caitlyn Hoskyns, Buffalo Zoo (NY); 
Stephanie Vaugh- Williams, Virginia Safari Park 
(VA); Laura Schillinger, Birmingham (AL); Dara 
Kelly, Brookfield Zoo (IL); KellyBriggs, Kansas 
City Zoo (MO); John Fitchett, Audubon Nature 
Institute (LA); Sara Caruso, Fort Worth Zoo 
(TX); Deeanna Croasmun, PUot Peak WUdfife 
Park (NV); and Michael Bates, San Diego Zoo 
(CA). We no longer print the names of those 
Professional Members who do not list their facility 
on their membership application/renewal (There 
was one for October). 

New Institutional Members 

Wildlife Conservation Society 
Bronx Zoo, Bronx, NY 
Steven E. Sanderson, PhD., President/CEO 

Buffalo Zoo, Buffalo, NY 
Donna Fernandez, President/CEO 

Renewing Institutional Members 


Mark Your Calendars! 
Upcoming AAZK National 
Conferences 

2010 - Philadelphia, PA - August 22-26 
2011 - San Diego, CA - August 24-28 
2012 - Syracuse, NY - September 23-27 

For information on upcoming AAZK 
conferences, watch the AAZK website at 
www.aazk.org 


Upcoming AZA Conferences 

September 11-16, 2010 - AZA 2010 Annual 

Conference - Hosted by Houston Zoo, Houston, 
TX. 

September 12-17, 2011 - AZA 2011 Annual 

Conference - Hosted by Zoo Atlanta, Atlanta , GA 


September 8-13, 2012 - AZA 2012 Annual 
Conference - Hosted by Phoenix Zoo, Phoenix, 
AZ 

September 7-12, 2013 - AZA 2013 Annual 
Conference - Hosted by the Kansas City Zoo, 
Kansas City , MO 


Louisville Zoo, Louisville, KY 
John Walczak, Director 

Boonshaft Museum of Discovery 
Dayton, OH 
Mark Mazzei, Director 

Northeastern Wisconsin Zoo 
Green Bay, WI 
Neil Anderson, Director 

Renewing Contributing Members 

John Rowden 
Central Park Zoo 
New York, New York 

Janell Lentz 
Coralville, lA 

William H. Disher 
San Diego Zoo Volunteer 
San Diego, CA 


For info on AZA Conferences, see http://aza.org/ 
ConfWork/AC_Intro/index .html 



THE 

GOURMET 
RODENT, 
INC." 


RATS AND MICE 


Bill & Marcia Brant 


12921 SWlstRd.,Ste 107, 
PBM #434 
Jonesville, FL 32669 


(352) 472-9189 
Fax: (352) 472-9192 
e-mail: GrmtRodent@aol.com 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 463 



Letters to the Editor 



Readers are welcome to comment upon material 
published in Animal Keepers’ Forum through a 
Letter to the Editor. We welcome a free exchange 
of ideas benefiting the zoo keeping profession. 


Dear Ms. Chan, 

I’ve just received my October 2009 issue of Animal Keepers ’Forum, and I noted on the last page, in 
the Conservation/Legislative Update, a news brief about the juvenile chimpanzee at The Institute of 
Greatly Endangered and Rare Species (T.LG.E.R.S.) bottle-feeding an infant puma. 

I was disappointed to see AAZK giving press to this organization, when the practices at T.LG.E.R.S. 
are in such direct opposition, philosophically and ethically, to professional zookeeping standards. 
AAZK is surely aware of the inappropriate husbandry practices used to manage apes that are 
presented in such unnatural circumstances, and of the fact that such undignified portrayals have a 
demonstrably adverse effect on their status as a highly endangered species. 

The Chimpanzee SSP®, Orangutan SSP®’ and Ape TAG are working hard to raise the public’s 
awareness of the endangered status of apes, and presentation of frivolous and harmful images of 
these animals - in a professional publication section headed “Conservation” - counters this critical 
message. 

Performing apes, such as the juvenile presented by T.LG.E.R.S., are taken from their mothers at a 
very young age. This causes tremendous emotional and psychological distress to the mother as well 
as to the infant. Trainers frequently use fear and physical discipline to control their apes, and the 
degree of force increases as the apes grow. 

Such performing apes are youngsters. Audiences see cute, cuddly, human-like animals and they often 
form the impression that they are easily handled. These images make young apes popular as pets 
and for use in the entertainment industry. However, as AAZK is aware, adult chimps are much larger 
than babies, much stronger than humans, very strong-willed, and can seldom be handled. Zoos often 
receive calls for help from owners who can no longer manage these intelligent, powerful animals. A 
zoo or sanctuary may be able to take in a few of these abandoned chimpanzees, but most of them are 
placed back in the pet trade and all too often in very inhumane conditions. 

Images like those promoted by T.LG.E.R.S. serve to undermine the welfare and conservation goals 
that AAZK works hard to achieve. I respectfully request that AAZK review its editorial policies in 
order to prevent such inadvertent promotion of organizations and facilities whose business philosophy 
and ethical position stands in opposition to professional animal management standards. 

Thank you for your consideration. 

Sincerely, 

Lori Perkins Chair, Orangutan SSP® 

Director of Animal Programs, Zoo Atlanta 
AAZK Affiliate Member 


We thank Lori for her thoughtful letter but wish to remind readers that the appearance of any article 
in this publication does not imply endorsement by Animal Keepers ’Forum or AAZK, Inc. We welcome 
your letters on this or other topics of interest related to AKF. ~ Eds. 


464 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 



Dear Editor, 


I wanted to express my sincere and humble thanks for the Lifetime Achievement Award that was 
awarded to me at the recent AAZK Conference. I was very disappointed that I was unable to attend 
the conference and appreciate Gisela Wiggins picking it up for me. To receive this award from an 
organization that has played such a prominent role in my career as a zoo keeper, and also as registrar 
at the North Carolina Zoological Park, means a great deal to me. I want to thank my co-workers, 
cohorts and friends at the N.C. Zoo for their nomination of this honor. 

In looking over my zoo keeping career, I really don’t think I would have had as much success without 
AAZK. Over the last 25 years, the role of zoo keeper has changed and expanded tremendously 
which has positively affected the care and lives of animals; and AAZK has played a vital role in this 
change. For me, being able to attend the annual conference for 13 consecutive years was invaluable 
because: “Invaluable” - was information and the newest techniques learned that could be brought 
back to the zoo; “Invaluable” - was networking among fellow keepers with similar challenges in 
their workplaces; “Invaluable” - was the camaraderie and friendships made; “Invaluable” - was the 
message of conservation and appreciation of our world; “Invaluable” - was the “spark” and “energy” 
generated and received that kept me going until the next conference! The many AAZK publications 
offered over the years, especially AKF, were also helpful in providing fresh ideas and up-to-date 
information. 

I have been blessed to be able to work in a zoo setting with such awesome animals and fellow co- 
workers, where I was allowed at times to “try something new.” What a privilege it has been to share 
life with them. I have been blessed to visit Lewa Downs twice and see some of the species that I 
worked with in their natural habitat. 

I encourage all you “youngsters” to participate in AAZK in any way you can. You all have something 
to offer and I promise you, one day you’ll realize that what you are receiving is far greater than what 
you are giving. Carry on! 

Lucy Segerson, Retired Zoo Keeper/Registrar 
North Carolina Zoological Park 
Asheboro, NC 

{Editor ’s Note: Lucy also certainly gave back to this Association, both with her local AAZK Chapter 
and by her service on national committees and the national Board of Directors. See page 411 of the 
October issue of AKF for Lucy s profile. Our congratulations again to Lucy for this much-deserved 
recognition. SDC) 

GREEN TIP of the MONTH 

A team of internationally renowned marine researchers led by Roberto Danovaro of the Polytechnic 
University of Marche, Acona, Italy, learned that UV blocking chemicals in sunscreen are causing 
coral bleaching. Parabens, cinnamare, benzophenone, camphor derivatives can rapidly cause 
viral infections that promote coral bleaching which kills off coral even if present in small 
amounts. Twenty five percent of sunscreen applied to the skin is released in the water during the 
course of only twenty minutes. The presence of these chemicals produces high levels of viral 
infections that kill off algae necessary for coral reefs to survive. Those swimming, snorkeling and 
diving near coral reefs should not wear sunscreens with the above named ingredients as they are 
causing the coral to die. Reefs that are exposed to humans wearing sunscreens are in jeopardy. 

How can you protect your skin and the coral reefs? 

Use a sunscreen with eco-compatible UV filters such as kaolin, zinc oxide, titanium 
dioxide. You can also use sunscreens that have physical, reflective filters and eco- 
friendly chemical ingredients will help our critically important coral environment survive. 

Source: Suncreens Cause Coral Bleaching by Promoting Viral Infections; Danovaro, Bongiorni, 
Corinaldesi, Giovannelli, Damiani, Astolfi, Greci and Pusceddu; Environmental Health Perspectives; 
volume 116, Number 3, March, 2008. (doi: 10.1289/10966; http://dx.d 0 i. 0 r 2 ) 


Animal Keepers Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 465 



New Resource CD 
Available from 
AAZK^ Inc. 


This CD includes - in searchable 
PDF format - all of the papers, 
resource lists, and species protocols 
originally published in the 400+ 
page book. Resources for Crisis 
Management in Zoos and Other 

Animal Care Facilities ( 1 999), 
as well as all the manuscripts 
published in the November/ 
December 2007 issue of Animal 
Keepers Forum dedicated to crisis 
management in zoos. The original 
1999 book has been out of print 
for some time and is no longer 
available for purchase. 


The CD is searchable by author, title or word. Chapter Titles from the original Crisis 
Management Book include: Factors That Influence Crisis Management in a Zoological Setting, 
Developing an Emergency Preparedness Plan, Emergency Response and Crisis Management 
Teams, Public Relations and the Crisis Situation, Animal Restraint and Animal Identification 
Techniques, Dealing with a Crisis Situation: Case Studies/Zoological Crisis, Case Studies/ 
Natural Disasters, Case Studies/Manmade Disaster, Case Studies/Injury or Death at the 
Zoo, and Taxon-Specific Crisis Management Protocols. The Appendices includes Resource 
Lists, Sample Forms and a list of Vendors with products useful in crisis situations. Included 
papers from the dedicated issue of AKF include: Crisis Management Planning in Zoological 
Institutions, Disease Risk Communication and Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza, Developing 
a Weapons Team for Dangerous Animal Emergencies, Who’s Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf?, 
Chemical Restraint of Exotic Animals in a Emergency Situation, The Veterinary Role of First 
Responders to a Medical Emergency in a Crisis Management Situation, Critical Incident Stress 
Management: A Proven Tool for Addressing Staff Needs After a Traumatic Event, Developing 
a Program for Dangerous Animal Emergencies: Procedures for Animal Escapes, Unauthorized 
Person in with Dangerous Animals, Dive Safety in Zoos and Aquariums, Wildlife! One 
Facility’s Response and Lessons Learned, Keeping Communications Equipment Powered 
in an Emergency, The Terrorist Threat to Zoological Institutions, Hurricane Preparedness: 
Lessons Learned from Hurricane Katrina, Training Dangerous Animals Safely is No Accident, 
Firearms Use and Training in AZA Institutions, and Aspects of a Safety Program for Zoos and 
Aquariums. 


Cost of this resource CD is $25.00 for AAZK Members and $50.00 for nonmembers. First 
class postage is included. This CD may be ordered online at the AAZK website (www.aazk. 
org) under “Publications” or you may order by calling the AAZK Office at 785-273-9149 and 
making your purchase with a Mastercard or Visa. 


466 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 





EO Editors - 

Julie Hartell-DeNardo, Oakland Zoo and Ric Kotarsky, Tulsa Zoo & Living Museum 

Making a Splash! Humboldt Penguin Enrichment at die Milwaukee County Zoo 

By Heather Neldner, Zookeeper 
Milwaukee County Zoological Gardens, Milwaukee, WI 

In September of 2005, we started an enrichment program for the flock of Humboldt penguins {Sphe- 
niscus humboldti) at the Milwaukee County Zoo with the goals of encouraging the birds to swim and 
to interact with each other more. Two of the birds (Houdini & Arisco) have chronic foot issues and 
we were hoping they would improve with more swimming. 

The Milwaukee County Zoo’s Humboldt Penguin exhibit is the first exhibit guests see when entering 
the zoo. It is an open air exhibit, with a large rocky structure and a 15,000-gallon pool. The birds have 
access to the exhibit and indoor holding area 24/7 all year long. We currently house 6.5 penguins with 
the oldest bird being 23 years old and the youngest having hatched in May of 2008. Prior to starting a 
formal enrichment program for the birds, they were only offered a Boomer Ball®, some plastic bottles 

with colored objects sealed inside them, and ice 
blocks once in a while to play with. Most of their 
enrichment was in the form of interacting with the 
public through the glass viewing windows. 

The first step in the enrichment program process 
was to complete the paperwork to obtain approval, 
via a three-level process, for the items we chose. 
The first level is obtaining supervisor approval, 
then it moves on to our curator for second approval, 
and then on to the veterinarian for final approval. 
Currently we have 30 items approved for our birds 
but not all of the items have been utilized as yet. 
Most of the items are dog toys because they are 
very durable and most of them float. 

Toys are only given in the pool while we can supervise the birds to make sure they interact with 
them appropriately. This also gives us the opportunity to do enrichment talks during this time, if the 
public seems interested in what is going on. We are also hoping (and it has seemed effective) that 
if toys are not in the pool all the time, people will be less likely to toss items in the pool. If a bird is 
held inside away from the others for any reason (sickness, medical work-ups, weaning, etc) they can 
have a durable toy, such as a Boomer Ball®, plastic keys or a confetti bottle all the time to play with 
to prevent boredom. Our Graphics Department has made us a fantastic sign that explains enrichment 
to the public and explains why toys are only given when supervised. 

It is very rare that we have any aggression between the birds (exhibited as displacement, or chasing) 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 467 





when playing with the toys. They all appear to “share” the toys pretty well. Most of the birds have 
shown a high level of interest in the toys and rarely do any birds show fear or avoidance of a new 
item. If the birds appear to be avoiding a toy, I will 
play with the toy myself to demonstrate it is “ok” 
and will encourage them to join me. Usually this 
does the trick and the more curious penguins will 
start playing with the toy, with the others occasion- 
ally joining later. 


Toys are rotated often since the penguins do seem 
to get bored with individual toys if they are offered 
too frequently and will stop interacting with those 
items. We have made an enrichment calendar to 
help coordinate this. Alternatively, the birds never 
seem to get tired of some toys. These include a 
small white Boomer Ball®, bubbles, confetti bottles 
and a tennis ball turtle. Their play sessions don’t 
always last a long time, with a notable decrease in 
interactions with the toys after about 1 5 minutes or 

so frequently observed. If we sit outside and encourage the play, with praise and by interacting 
with the birds and the toy - for example, tossing the Frisbee® out for Houdini to “fetch” - this will 
encourage the birds to stay in the water longer and play with the items more. If there is a large crowd 
of people out by the exhibit cheering the birds on, they will play with the toys longer and more 
vigorously. They appear to enjoy the attention! 


enrichment program to zoo visitors. 

{Photo: H. Neldner) 


Some of their favorite toys include: tennis ball turtle, ten- 
nis ball dumbbell, fabric Frisbee®, confetti bottle (Neldner, 
2008), small Boomer Ball®, and floating plastic dumbbell. 
Houdini frequently puts the floating dumbbell on his back 
and/or flips it onto his back and puts it across his chest and 
floats with it there. He will also put the fabric Frisbee® on 
his head like a hat and swim around with it on his head. 
We have a motorized fish toy that the penguins frequently 
chase and they appear to enjoy ice blocks with silversides 
frozen in them, as they push the ice blocks around until the 
ice melts to get at the fish inside. 


{Photo: H. Neldner) 


Some toys, such as the Kong® toy (we do not have a float- 
ing Kong®), rubber squiggly ball (colorful rubber dog ball) and plastic keys (these are a puppy toy), 
we have to restrict to giving inside because they sink and are hard to retrieve from the pool. We also 
give colored golf balls and bubbles inside. The penguins enthusiastically chase bubbles but we do not 
want to encourage the public to blow bubbles at any of our animals. Two toys in particular we have 
to watch very closely are coconut halves and the 
fabric Frisbee®, because several of the penguins 
have figured out how to push them into the filter 
system intakes and they are very hard to remove 
if they get in there. As a precaution, we always 
turn off the filter prior to giving these two par- 
ticular items. 


Through painting enrichment opportunities for 
the penguins we have found a way to combine 
enrichment and conservation. The gift shop 
manager proposed selling the paintings in the 
gift shop with the proceeds of the paintings 
going into the conservation fund. We decided 
that the money should go to Humboldt Penguin 


468 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol 36, No. 9 


conservation in Chile. As of July 2008 (we started selling paintings in the gift shop sometime in 
2007), we have sold 48 paintings raising $1,199.52 for conservation programs. We have also donated 
several paintings to AZA, AAZK, and lAATE silent auctions to help benefit conservation programs. 

Training has been incorporated into the enrichment schedule and most of the birds get very excited, 
as seen by crowding around, standing on the tips of their toes and pushing and shoving to get closer 

to the trainer when they know that we are going to do a training 
session. Training is not done every day with the birds, but we 
try to incorporate at least one or two training sessions a week. 
Station training using a piece of dry deck or a specific spot 
on exhibit has been extremely helpful in teaching our more 
aggressive birds how to wait their turn at meal times and has 
prevented a lot of squabbling and bruised fingers. 

We are currently training the entire flock to stand voluntarily on 
a scale for weighing. Most of the birds have quickly learned this 
and they often push and shove to be the first one on the scale. 
One of our youngest penguins has not figured out the stairs yet 
and needs to be helped down to get to the scale and our oldest 
bird has a hard time coming down the stairs but if she will let us 
help her down, she will eagerly stand on the scale. 

Because of Houdini’s chronic foot problems we trained him 
to target on our hands (sometimes he prefers to target on our 
boots) while he is in the water and to stay floating in front of us 

so we can look at the bottoms of his feet. 

We can also touch his band and change it 
if necessary without restraining him. He 
will also allow us to trim his toenails with 
minimal restraint. We are working with the 
other birds to get them used to us touching 
their bands too, with the goal of being able 
to change the bands without having to 
restrain the birds. 

Has the enrichment been successful? We 
believe so. The penguins interact with 
each other more and spend more time 
swimming, with and without toys. Hou- 
dini’s foot problems are always better 
if he swims more. One of our penguins 
did not historically interact with the oth- 
ers very much and now will interact with 
them when playing with toys. The penguins 

seem to enjoy their one-on-one keeper time during 
enrichment sessions and the public genuinely seems 
to enjoy both the enrichment talks and watching the 
animals having a good time with the toys. This has 
also been a great way for the keepers to interact with 
a public by answering questions. So for a splashing 
good time. . ..just add water, toys and penguins! 

References 

Neldner, Heather. (2008) “The Confetti Bottle - A 
Novel Enrichment” March 2008. Animal Keepers’ 
Forww, Vol.35, No. 3, Pg 97-99 

Houdini getting a foot check. (Photo: Amanda Ista) 




The author weighs the penguins who have been scale 

trained. (Photo: Bryan Kwiatkowski) 



Mongo painting. (Photo: it schujjf) 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 469 


Professional Development Grant Final Report By Michael Skidmore, Keeper 

Lincoln Park Zoo, Chicago, IL 

I attended the International Rhino Keepers Association Workshop in May 2009, in part due to a 
grant from the AAZK Grant committee. I have been to numerous AAZK National Conferences but 
not many relating to a specific species or group. The last conference like this I attended was the 
International Wolf Conference in 2000. The workshop was wonderful and very informative. 

I have only worked with black rhinos but a lot of the information on whites and Asian rhinos was also 
helpful or may prove helpful in the future. I have already used some of the information I gathered 
here at Lincoln Park Zoo, such as saving browse branches for chewing in the cold months when 
there is no browse to help keep our rhinos teeth healthy. I have already asked our vets numerous 
questions on adding or taking things off our rhino’s diets. We now use alfalfa cubes as a training 
supplement instead of running for more produce. One thing everyone learned is that there is no 
consensus on black rhino’s diets, there were so many variations. The amount of alfalfa and grass hay 
fed, supplements, grain type and produce amounts all varied widely. We thought we were feeding 
maybe too much alfalfa at 50% but some feed almost 100% while others feed none. 

Foot and skin care was also covered and I have the names of some products I would like to try here. 
Busch Gardens did a great job hosting, and the visits to Busch and Lowry were also well done. I 
would like to thank the AAZK Grant Committee as well as the IRKA scholarship committee and 
Lincoln Park Zoo for helping me attend this workshop. 


You are encouraged to check out the granting information available in the Member’s Only section of 
the AAZK website ( www.aazk.org ). If you have not as yet signed up for the Member’s Only section, 
do so soon-it is easy and fast and offers you a wealth of resources and information not available on 
the public pages. 

The AAZK Professional Travel Grant 

The AAZK Professional Travel Grant is designed to assist AAZK members with costs associated 
with attending professional meetings or workshops, or, participating in field research. The applicant 
must be an AAZK member in good standing and demonstrate 1 ) the value of participating in the 
workshop, meeting, or research and 2) how it will contribute to their professional goals and growth. 
Grant winners are expected to write an article for possible publication in the AAZK Forum on their 
experience and submit this to the Grants Committee Chair within 3 months of completion of travel. 

1 Grant available at: $1000.00 (or split between several smaller requests) 

Application Deadline: March 1 (of the year before the costs associated have been incurred) 

The AAZK/AZA Advances in Animal Keeping Course Grant 

The AAZK/AZA Advances in Animal Keeping Course Grant is designed to assist AAZK members 
with costs associated with attending the Advances in Animal Keeping Course offered through AZA. 

1 Grant available at: $1000.00 

Application Deadline: March 1 (of the year before the actual class) 

The AAZK Conservation. Preservation and Restoration Grant 

The purpose of the AAZK CPR Committee’s Zoo Keeper Grant in Conservation is to encourage and 
support efforts in conservation conducted by AAZK members in zoological parks and aquariums 
around the world. 

1 Grant available at: $1000.00 (or split between several small projects) 

Application Deadline: March 1 (of the year before the actual project) 

The AAZK Research Grant 

The purpose of the AAZK Research Committee’s Zoo Keeper Grant in Research is to encourage 
and support efforts in non-invasive research conducted by AAZK members in zoological parks and 
aquariums around the world. 

2 Grants available at: $1000.00 (or split between several small projects) 

Application Deadline: March 1 (of the year before the actual project) 


470 Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Assessing Immediate and Long-Term Effects 
of Environmental Enrichment: 

Implications for Welfare of African Clawless Otters (Aonyx capensis) 


By Sanderson M.S.^ Daigle C.L.^, Stark-Posta Siegford J. M.^ 

* Animal Care Department, Pueblo Zoo, 3455 Nuekolls Avenue, Pueblo, CO 81005 
^ Animal Behavior and Welfare Group, Department of Animal Scienee, Miehigan State University, 
East Lansing, MI 48824 

^Toledo Zoo, Department of Behavioral Husbandry and Researeh, Toledo, OH 43614 
*Correspondenee to: Beth Stark-Posta, beth.posta@toledozoo.org or Dr. Janice Siegford, siegford® 
msu.edu 

Introduction 

The use of environmental enrichment in zoos has become standard practice in the last decade due to 
its positive effects on recipients, but little is known about long-term effects on behavior and therefore 
welfare. Environmental enrichment can be considered any addition to an exhibit that improves 
both the physiological and psychological well-being of an animal by offering an external stimulus 
that promotes expression of healthy, internally-motivated behaviors and lessens the frequency of 
stereotypic or other negative behaviors (Shepherdson, 1998; Shyne, 2006; Mench, 1998). 

Two African clawless otters {Aonyx capensis) were studied at the Toledo Zoo in 2007 to follow both 
the short-term and long-term effects of enrichment presentation. Wild A. capensis are crepuscular 
animals that are found in rivers, lakes and streams where they catch a variety of prey including crabs, 
frogs, catfish, lobster and abalone by surface swimming and bottom diving (Lariviere, 2001; Estes, 
1991; Rowe-Rowe, 1986). Food is detected and gathered using the clawless, unwebbed front digits, 
which have heightened tactile senses, to manipulate rocks and substrate at the bottom of rivers and 
lakes (Estes, 1991; Somers, 2000; Somers et al., 2004). 

Environmental enrichment increases mental stimulation, can alleviate social tension, and encourages 
natural behaviors in many captive species (Swiasgood and Shepherdson, 2005; Skibiel et al., 2007; 
Shepherdson et al., 1993). Enrichment in this study was designed to encourage species-specific 
behaviors and address the individual needs of the otters. This pair had been recommended for 
breeding but was coexisting in a female-dominated negative social dynamic. It was hoped that 
by introducing novel enrichment items that could facilitate natural behaviors, breeding would be 
encouraged and social tensions alleviated. Studies on other species of captive otters have determined 
food presentation preference {Aonyx cinerea; Foster-Turley, 1982), feeding habits and hunting 
preferences {Lutra lutra: Erlinge, 1968), temporal behavior patterns {Enyhdra lutris; Antonelis et al., 
1981), and strategies to alleviate undesirable captive begging behaviors {Aonyx cinerea; Gothard, 
2007). However, no studies have been conducted on the captive population of A. capensis, which is 
currently housed in only three AZA zoos. Since little is known about wild or captive behavior of 
A. capensis, studies of similar otter species were considered when making assumptions regarding 
appropriate enrichment and desired behavioral outcomes, such as food preference for live prey and 
increased swimming and exploration with environmental complexity respectively (Foster-Turley and 
Markowitz, 1982; Hunter et al., 2002). 

Otters are social, highly intelligent and investigative animals who respond positively to stimulating 
changes in their environment (Foster-Turley, 1982). Simple enrichment strategies such as providing 
new types of food or presenting food in new ways can increase demonstration of natural behaviors by 
captive otters (Gothard, 2007; Erlinge, 1968). Studies of captive otters have shown that swimming 
increases with increased environmental complexity (Harris, 1968). Wild otters typically utilize only 
the edges of water bodies during foraging (Somers and Nel, 2004). While A. capensis spend more 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 471 


time on land and are more opportunistic than other species of otters, they rely on lakes, ponds and 
swamps to forage for food (Carugati and Perrin, 1998). The purpose of this study was to evaluate 
the behavioral changes of two captive African clawless otters over a two-month period following 
changes and additions to their current enrichment program. Enrichment was provided to encourage 
species-specific behavior, particularly those behaviors related to searching and swimming for food 
items in the water. It was hypothesized that increasing environmental stimulation by providing 
food enrichment, manipulatable items, and external scents to captive African Clawless otters would 
increase the diversity and duration of behaviors, enclosure utilization and positive interactions 
between the animals. 

Methods 

Two African clawless otters, 1 male (Turk) and 1 female (Jenny), were studied at the Toledo Zoo 
at three time points: 1) Pre-enrichment (PRE); 2) Post-enrichment 1 (immediately after regular 
presentation of enrichment began, POST 1); and 3) Post-enrichment 2 (after one month of regular 
presentation of enrichment, POST 2). Prior to implementation, enrichment items were approved 

for A. capensis by the Toledo Zoo. 
Items were chosen to target specific 
goal behaviors based on the analysis 
of the otters’ activity budgets during 
the pre-enrichment period. Food 
items included fish (live and dead), 
live crayfish and clams, gelatin, and 
fish frozen in ice. Items encouraging 
manipulation included a plastic saucer 
sled, hoola hoop, PVC fish hanger 
and water jug fish feeder. Olfactory 
enrichment items such as spices, 
coffee grounds and alpaca fur were 
spread throughout all ground levels 
of the exhibit. Different enrichment 
items were placed on exhibit once in the morning and again in the afternoon. One or more objects 
were placed on exhibit at each time to provide enough items for each otter to have an opportunity for 
individual interaction. 

Baseline data were collected from late June to early July 2007 prior to the addition of enrichment 
(PRE). After regular presentation of enrichment began, additional data were collected at two 
time points: August 2007 (POST 1) and September/October (POST 2). Data were collected via 
instantaneous scan sampling twice per day between 0900 and 1700, once before noon and once after 
noon each day. Behaviors displayed by each otter and their location in the exhibit were noted every 
minute for 30 minutes. Sampling times for each data collection period were chosen to ensure that the 
entire 0900-1700 time-frame was evenly sampled. 

Data were collected while otters were in the outdoor exhibit, which consisted of a pool that extended 
to the viewing glass, an island at the front of the exhibit connected by a ladder to a lower level of 
exhibit, and an upper level of the exhibit. The upper and lower levels encompass approximately half 
of the exhibit and stretch from the pool area to the back of the exhibit and lead to indoor holding. 
When collecting data, the observer stood at the visitor viewing window at the front of the exhibit and 
recorded behaviors and locations of the individuals. An ethogram of African clawless otter behavior 
was constructed based on preliminary observations (Table 1) and a literature review. During data 
analysis, these behaviors were consolidated into general categories (Table 2). Data were analyzed 
using simple descriptive statistics due to the small sample size (n=2). 



Jenny follows a trail of scent on the front island. 
(Photo: Megan Sharra) 


472 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Table 1: Behavioral Ethogram for African Clawless Otters at the Toledo Zoo 

Behavior 

Description 

Walk/Run 

Animal takes more than 2 steps in any direction using its feet but not in a stereotypic pattern (i.e. 
pacing), Does not include foraging behavior 

Swim 

Animal moves in any direction in the water, includes propelling oneself with limbs or tail off 
pool exhibit wall. Does not include searching for food 

Investigation of Non-Food 

Animal is exploring any part of its environment, including raising head to smell air, observe 
visitof^, or lowering head to inspect substrate, exhibit furniture, and any other object on exhibit 
in land or water (including rocks, logs, enrichment devices, etc.) without aetuaJiy moving or 
picking up item 

Forage 

Similar to Investigation. Animal is actively searching for food while food is present (may be 
walking or swimming while foraging). May consume food while continuing to forage. 

Eat 

Animal is either in the process of putting food in its mouth, or chewing food in a stationary 
position 

Self-Maintenance 

Animal is actively rubbing or rolling on ground (sand or grass), may include wiping sand on 
body or face with paws 

Dig 

Animal removes substrate (usually sand) with paws 

Social 

Affiliative interaction with conspeeifics such as sniffing, grooming, play and sexual behavior 

Aggression 

Includes threatening behavior, charging, grabbing, and fighting with conspeeifics 

Inactive 

Animal is stationary' and not exhibiting any other behavior 

Enrichment use 

Animal is touching the enrichment device with any part of its body, which includes holding, 
rubbing on, etc. 


Table 2: Consolidated non-social behaviors grouped for analysis 

Category 

Behaviors combined from Tabic 1 

Locomotion 

Walkrun and swimming 

General maintenance 

Eat and self-maintenance 

Goal-directed behaviors 

Forage, dig, investigation, and enrichment use (intended to note increases in species- 
specific activity) 

Inactive 

Inactive 

Oih'-r 

Any recording of other, out of view, and out of view active 


Results & Discussion 

Few studies have been published on the behavior and activity patterns of wild and captive A. capensis 
(Somers, 2000; Somers and Nel, 2004). This is an exploratory study describing behaviors of captive 
A. capensis and the effect of enrichment on behavior and exhibit use. One goal of the enrichment was 
to increase species-specific behaviors such as swimming, foraging and investigation levels to closely 
resemble natural rates, thus providing for improved animal welfare, as well as a more educational 
experience for visitors. PRE time budgets revealed that both otters were inactive for a considerable 
amount of their day. Turk in particular was inactive in over half the PRE observations. Regular 
enrichment increased overall activity and goal behaviors for Jenny and Turk during POST 1 . In the 
short-term, regular enrichment increased the time both Jenny and Turk spent in the water, presumably 
due to the water-based enrichment. The most striking changes in POST 1 were Jenny’s increase of 
goal behaviors from <15% to 35% and Turk’s increase of locomotion from 10% to 25% of his daily 
budget. PRE location budgets revealed that Jenny utilized all areas of the exhibit, in contrast to 
Turk, who spent over 60% of his time on the lower level. While on the lower level, both otters were 
primarily inactive, giving visitors a poor viewing experience. Short-term goal-directed behavioral 
changes were observed to occur and be related to short-term exhibit location preferences (Figure 1). 
In the POST 1 session, Turk increased the time spent in the water to 50% and decreased the time he 
spent on the lower level. In the POST 2 period, Turk returned to PRE rates, spending the majority 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 473 


of his time (80%) on the lower level. Jenny divided her PRE time between exhibit locations evenly, 
with a slight emphasis on the water and the front island (Figure 1). Jenny increased her time spent in 
the water in the POST 1 period, to nearly 60% of her daily budget while during POST 2 she returned 
to splitting her time between the lower level and in the water. Otters are crepuscular and therefore 
spend dawn and dusk hours foraging. Because data collection at the zoo occurred during times that 
wild otters would be inactive, the results could have been affected by this temporal artifact. 

Social interactions between Jenny and Turk during PRE were minimal (~15%) (Figure 2). During 
POST 1, interactions increased to about 28%. However, during POST 2, interaction rates dropped 
to 10%. The existing dominance hierarchy, social tension, and limited positive contact between 
Jenny and Turk prior to the study warrants exploration into any effect enrichment may have on 
their interactions. Non-aggressive interactions increased during POST 1 session yet never directly 
involved enrichment items. Similar to other trends, the increased rate of social interactions was 
short-lived. This may have been because all observed interactions took place in the water and as time 
spent in the water declined to PRE levels, so did the opportunity for social interactions. 



4 ! 

£ 20 


10 


Fig. 2: Effect of Enrichment on Social Interactions 


Pre 


Postl 

Data Collection Period 


Post 2 


474 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Fig. 3: Pre-Enrichment and Post-Enrichment Activity Budgets 


80 

70 



Locomotion 


Gen. Maint. Goal Behaviors inactive 

Consolidated non-social behaviors from Table 2 



1 J Pre 


« J Post 1 


m ] Post 2 

— 

TPre 


T Post 1 


T Post 2 



Other 


Conclusion 

The return of POST 2 use of exhibit, locations, and social interactions to PRE rates demonstrates that 
the novelty and stimulation of enrichment can lessen over time (Shepherdson, 1998). Habituation 
in a captive environment is unavoidable and may need to be counteracted by a larger repertoire 
of enrichment items and increased variability of when items are presented. A wider array of 
devices would allow for longer periods between presentation of each item, possibly prolonging the 
effectiveness of an individual item and, in turn, improving welfare for a longer period. Furthermore, 
utilizing an enrichment calendar that 
encourages frequency and scheduling 
variability of enrichment presentation may 
help to prevent habituation and anticipation 
of when items will be provided. POST 2 
data suggest that it is crucial to monitor 
the effect of enrichment beyond the initial 
response of the animals, as the initial 
response may not accurately represent long- 
term effectiveness. 

No stereotypic behavior was observed in 
either otter prior to or during the study; 
however, adding more environmental 
stimulation could prevent such behaviors 
from occurring in the future. Increasing species-specific activity levels and diversity of behaviors 
displayed as well as and heightening visibility to the public were the main goals of this enrichment 
study. Jenny and Turk spent the majority of their time inactive during baseline data collection, 
but exhibited an increase in target behaviors, including increased time in the water, during initial 
enrichment exposure periods. The addition of regular enrichment resulted in short-term (POST 1) 
increases of locomotion and goal-directed behaviors and decreases in inactive behavior for both 
otters; however, long-term (POST 2) rates of these behaviors returned to PRE levels (Figure 3). 

Our study supports the idea that appropriately designed environmental enrichment can increase 
positive, natural behaviors as well as exhibit use in a captive population of African clawless 



Turk manipulates enrichment in the pool. 
(Photo: Megan Sharra) 


Animal Keepers ’Forum, VoL 36, No. 9 475 


otters. A daily presentation of various water-based and land-based enrichment items provided 
enough stimulation to motivate an inactive animal to change its activity budget. However, initial 
behavioral changes did not last throughout the study, suggesting that increased exposure to regular 
enrichment items may reduce behavioral motivations and result in habituation. Therefore an initial 
reaction to enrichment cannot ensure its long-term effectiveness and the novelty of enrichment 
that initially increases overall activity can wear off within weeks. Captive enrichment programs 
should be evaluated regularly and careful consideration should be taken when designing, choosing, 
and presenting environmental enrichment to ensure the items are providing species appropriate 
stimulation and preventing habituation. 

Acknowledgements 

We would like to thank the staff of The Toledo Zoo for their assistance and input throughout the study 
and for the use of their facilities. We would also like to thank the Animal Agriculture Initiative at 
Michigan State University supporting presentation and publication of the results of this study. 

References; 

Antonelis GA, Leatherwood S, Cornell LH, Antrim JG. 1981 . Activity cycle and food selection of 
captive sea otters. The Murrelet 62 (1): 6 - 9. 

Carugati C and Perrin MR. 1998. Requirements of the cape claw less otter (Aonyx capensis) and 
the spotted-necked otter {Lutra maculicollis) in the Natal Drakensburg (South Africa). 
Proceedings of the 7‘^ International Otter Colloquium, Trebon, Czech Republic. 

Estes, R. 1991. The behavior guide to African mammals: including hoofed mammals, carnivores, 
primates / Richard Despard Estes; drawings by Daniel Otte ; foreword by E.O. 

Wilson. Berkeley: University of California Press. 

Erlinge, S. 1968. Eood studies on captive otters Lutra lutra L. Okios. 19: 259 - 270. 

Eoster-Turley, R, Markowitz, H. (1982). A captive behavioral enrichment study with Asian small 
clawed river otters {Aonyx cinerea). Zoo Biology 1: 29-43. 

Gothard, N. (2007) What is the proximate cause of begging behavior in a group of captive Asian 
short clawed otters? lUCN Otter Specialist Group Bulletin. 24 (1): 14-35. 

Hunter, S., Bay, M.S., Martin, M.L., and Hatfield, J.S. (2002). Behavioral effects of environmental 
enrichment on harbor seals {Phoca vitulina concolor) and gray seals {Halichoerus 
grupus). Zoo Biology 21: 315-3^1 . 

Lariviere, Serge. Mammalian Species: Aonyx capensis. The American Society of Mammologists. 
June, 5, 1002. p.1-6. 

Mench, J.A. 1998. Environmental Enrichment and the Importance of Exploratory Behavior 
in Shepherdson, D.J., Mellen, J.D., Hutchins, M. Second Nature: Environmental 
Enrichment for Captive Animals. Washington: Smithsonian Inst. Press, p. 30-46. 
Rowe-Rowe, D. (1986) African Otters - is their Existence Threatened? 
lUCN Otter Spec. Group Bull. 1:9-11 

Shepherdson DJ, Carlstead K, Mellen JD, Seidensticker J. 1993. The influence of food presentation 
on the behavior of small cats in confined environments. Zoo Biology 12:203 - 216. 
Shepherdson, D.J. (1998) Tracing the Path of Environmental Enrichment in Zoos In: Shepherdson, 
D.J., Mellen, J.D., Hutchins, M. Second Nature: Environmental Enrichment for Captive 
Animals. Washington: Smithsonian Inst. Press, p. 1-12. 

Shyne, A. (2006). Meta-analytic review of the effects of enrichment on stereotypic behavior 
in zoo mammals. Zoo Biology 25: 311-331 . 

Skibiel AL, Trevino HS, Naugher K. 2007. Comparison of several types of enrichment for 
captive felids. Zoo Biology 26: 371 - 381. 

Somers, M.J. (2000). Eoraging behaviour of Cape clawless otters {Aonyx capensis) in a marine 
habitat. J. Zool. Lond. 252: 473-480. 

Somers, M. J. and J. A. J. Nel. 2004. Movement patterns and home range of Cape clawless otters 
(Aonyx capensis), affected by high food density patches. J. Zool., Lond. 262: 91 -98. 
Swiasgood RR and Shepherdson DJ. 2005. Scientific approaches to enrichment and stereotypies in 
zoo animals: what’s been done and where should we go next? 

Zoo Biology 24:499 - 518. 


476 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 



Special Double Issue of Animal Keepers’ Forum Dedicated to the 
Care and Management of Geriatric Animals Available for Purchase 


• From the President - Remembering the Golden Girls 

• Acknowledgements from the Editor 

• The Future is Now: New Strategies for Geriatric Care at the Oakland Zoo 

• Some Thoughts on Veterinary Considerations on the Management of the Geriatric Zoo Patient 

• Pachyderm Milestones 

• The Oldest of the Old 

• An Easy Way Out: PVC Ladder Assists Geriatric Animals 

• The Old Hippo That Could 

• It's a Geriatric Jungle Out There 

• Joint Disease and Its Management in Captive Bear Species 

• Never Too Late (Training a geriatric white rhino) 

• Assiniboine Park Zoo's Debby the Polar Bear 

• The Widower - Care of a Geriatric Bird at The National Aviary 

• The Care and Management of Geriatric Gorillas in Captivity and The Role of Louisville Zoo's 

Husbandry Program 

• Gravity and Hydrotherapy Procedures as a Way to Reduce the Possibility of Stiffening Joints 

in Elephants After an Injury 

• A Public Relations Professional's Look at Geriatric Animals and Euthanasia 

• Donna the Hippo is 57 years Old 

• Using Cue Conditioning to Facilitate Voluntary Separation for Supplemental Feeding in 

a Geriatric 0.1 Scimitar-homed Oryx (Oryx dammah) 

• World's Oldest Asian Elephant Lived to be 86 Years Old 

• Some Considerations in the Care of an Elderly Red-Ruffed Lemur 

• Collaborative Management and Interpretation of Arthritis in a Geriatric Giraffe 

• Indoors Natural Substrates for Elephants and Medical Issues Associated with Hard Surfaces 

• Old Bears, New Care 

• Improving the Quality of Life for Tiffany, a 40-year-old Female Western Lowland Gorilla 

{Gorilla g. gorilla) at the Topeka Zoo 

• Topeka Zoo's Long-lived Hippo Duo 

• Ode to the Oldies: Geriatric Keepers Caring for Geriatric Critters 

• Longevity in the Animal Kingdom 

• 104 pages of great information! 

Price: $25 for AAZK Members Order at www.aazk.org (under Publications) 

$50 for Non-Members Or call 785-273-9149 to order by credit card 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 477 






Bats in Captivity 

Volume 1: Biological and Medical Aspects 

Edited by Susan M. Barnard 
Logos Press, Washington, DC 2009 
ISBN# 978-1-934899-02-1 

Price $99 95 Review by Steven M Wmg Curator 

Also available in paperback I^isviUeZoo. Lmsvilk. KY 


Bats are popular zoo exhibits and this status has been growing in recent years. An informed public 
expects enhanced zoo exhibits and they are demanding to know that we as zoo professionals are 
taking the best possible care of our animals. We recognize the need for good husbandry techniques 
as we care for endangered species and intensify our efforts as the threat of white-nose syndrome 
strengthens. 

There is definitely a need for all current knowledge to be in one place. 

‘Bats in Captivity’ is an attempt to combine all that is known about keeping chiropterans in captivity 
into one place. The series is actually a compilation of solicited papers with 22 authors contributing 
to the first volume. Each chapter has been peer reviewed, formatted and arranged by the editor. Of 
particular interest is the inclusion of papers by bat managers from around the world. 

Volume 1 encompasses the biological and medical aspects of keeping bats in captivity including, but 
not limited to, anatomy, physiology and the medical management of bats. 

Much of this information can be found in other texts, but there is a distinct advantage to being able to 
find it in one place. Barnard’s knowledge from many years of rehabilitating native bats is evident in 
the chapters dealing with common health disorders and will be especially helpful when encountering 
these ailments in our collections. 

Extremely useful information is also included on bat restraint, anesthesia and surgery. An interesting 
and thoughtful chapter is devoted to euthanasia. The chapter on drug dosages and formulary will 
prove especially helpful to lesser experienced bat caregivers or those without regular access to 
seasoned zoo veterinarians, but seasoned professionals will also value this resource. 

Many of us have books on our shelves dealing with the natural history of bats. But there are few 
works dealing to this degree with the captive medical management of bats. I would recommend this 
book for keepers, curators and veterinarians with bats in their collections. 

Handbook of Venoms and Toxins in Reptiles 

By Stephen P. Mackessy July 2009 

CRC Press/Talor & Francis Group, 6000 BrokenSound Prkwy., Ste. 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487 

ISBN# 978-0-8493-9165-1 

xvi + 521 pages Price: $129.00 

The Handbook of Venoms and Toxins in Reptiles offers “one-stop shopping” to all biologists, 
biochemists, toxicologists, physicians, clinicians and epidemiologists, and informed laypersons 
interested in the biology of venomous reptiles, the biochemistry and molecular biology of venoms, and 
the effects and treatment of human envenomation. This book examines the topic generally, provides 


478 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


an overview of the current taxonomy of these reptiles, explains the similarities and differences in the 
venom delivery apparatus in different groups of reptiles, reviews state-of-the-art knowledge about 
specific venom components and their action, and summarizes effects of envenomation and treatment 
in humans on different continents. Written by experts from 12 countries, the book has both a broad 
perspective and international relevance. Unlike previous books addressing venoms, this volume 
bridges several very different areas in modem biology and provides a synthesis of current knowledge 
about venoms and venomous reptiles. The wealth of illustrations, including an 8 page full color 
insert, present a view of reptile toxinology from the whole animal to the glands producing venoms to 
the molecular models and the mechanisms of actions of the toxins themselves. 

To order, contact: CRC Press at 1-800-272-7737 or orders@tavlorandfrancis.com 


Hev. Mister --Your Alligator’s Loose! 

By Gary K. Clarke, Director Emeritus - World Famous Topeka Zoo 
2009 Bmaski Publishing, 214 N. 2100 Rd., Lecompton, KS 66050 
ISBN#0-94 1974-23-3 

10 1/2 X 7 3/4 544 pgs. Review fySmmChcm,AKF Editor 

$29.95 + $5 s/h AAZK Administrative Office, Topeka KS 

Gary Clarke has always been a great storyteller and his new book. Hey Mister, Your Alligator ’s 
Loose! combines the three things that he seems to love most - animals, people and zoos. Having 
known Gary for many years, I have been privy to his many zoo tales and off-the-wall sense of humor. 
Reading this book was, for me, like a trip down memory lane since my family and I had been heavily 
involved as volunteers at the World Famous Topeka Zoo during Gary’s tenure as director. 

Clarke began his zoo career as a seasonal keeper at the Kansa City Zoo where his love for and 
interest in all things animal blossomed. His career later led him to a lab research position at Midwest 
Research Institute (where the infamous “Big Red” snake bite occurred). A stint as a full-time keeper 
at Kansas City was followed by a curatorial position at the Fort Worth Zoo. In 1963, at the tender 
age of 24, Clarke was offered the position of Zoo Director in Topeka and inherited a rag-tag group 
of cast-off domestic animals, a few monkeys, a deer and a dusty bison. Crazy, right? But this was a 
man on a mission; a man with a vision of what the zoo could become. 

This lively and delightfully illustrated volume traces Gary’s years at the Topeka Zoo— how he 
generated amazing community support for the facility beginning with Project Noah’s Ark that 
brought some of the first truly exotic animals to the city. The Topeka Zoo became the “little engine 
that could”, and under Clarke’s direction accomplished some pretty amazing things— for example, the 
first geodesic domed tropical rainforest exhibit in North America, a glass-tunneled walkway through 
the center of the gorilla yard of the Discovering Apes complex [DA], a month-long Koala Loan from 
the San Diego Zoo (at the time Topeka was the smallest zoo ever to be allowed such a loan), a Lion’s 
Pride exhibit where lively cubs delighted visitors of all ages. The list goes on and on. 

This book is a fun read filled with anecdotes about the zoo, the zoo world in general, and the amazing 
array of animals that have shared Gary’s life (both at the zoo and at his home). You’ll enjoy the 
stories of Djkarta Jim, the awesome male orangutan who - before the gathered dignitaries and press 
on opening day, calmy broke the limb of one of the steel and concrete reinforced tree limbs in DA; 
the tale of black jaguars Darth and Leia; the coming of lowland gorillas Max and Tiffany to the 
Topeka Zoo; the birth of the first giraffe in Kansas; or the amusing tale of Schroeder the Alligator 
who inspired the title for this book. 

My only real criticism of the book is that it weighs four and a half pounds so will not be one you 
take to read on your next airplane trip. But it is far from a “coffee table book” and should provide the 
reader with a most enjoyable tour of the crazy and wonderful world of zoos. Enjoy! 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 479 


ZOOTUBE on Display in 10 U. S. Zoos 

Animal Planet and AZA Join Forces in Educational Kiosks 



Kiosk located at Zoo Atlanta 
offers children an opportunity to 
learn more about animals and 
the planet. 


In the September 2009 issue of AKF we featured an article 
about the interactive educational kiosks being set up in 
10 zoos around the country (page 381). The project is a 
joint venture between Animal Planet and the Association 
of Zoos and Aquariums. Five more locations are planned 
before year’s end. 



A visitor checks out the ZOOTUBE 
kiosk at Omaha’s Henry Doorly Zoo. 



This kiosk is located near the gorilla 
exhibit at Zoo Atlanta. 


ZOOTUBE kiosks are currently 
located at Busch Gardens Tampa Bay, 
Columbus Zoo & Aquarium, Houston 
Zoo, Lincoln Park Zoo, Omaha’s Henry 
Doorly Zoo, Oregon Zoo, Philadelphia 
Zoo, Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium, 
Saint Louis Zoo and Zoo Atlanta. 

For a sneak-peak at ZOOTUBE content, 
visit www.aza.org/animal-planet 


Photos courtesy of 



480 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


First Edition, Hard Bound, 

Dust Jacket, 544 pages, 

10 1/2x7 3/4 inches. 

Over 70 Color and B&W 
Photographs, Original Artwork. 
Baranski Publishing 
Company, 2009. 

$29,95 + $5.00 shipping & 
handling. 


HEY MISTER ^ YOUR ALLIGATOR’S LOOSE! 

details Gary Clarke’s lifelong passion for animals and 
chronicles his extraordinary career in the world of zoos. 

Gary’s philosophy is that zoos are unique because they are real 
The animals are not cartoon characters or advertising gimmicks— 
they are themselves, alive in all their glory. 

Everyone has a zoo story— a memorable personal experience that 
has touched their life. Yet, most people really don’t know how 
to visit a zoo! In this book, Gary shares the allure and magic of 
wondrous and incredible animals. This is an engaging read for 
anyone enchanted with the animal kingdom. 

Order from: Gary K. Clarke 

Zoo Poo Press/ AKF 
R O. Box 4863 
Topeka, KS 66604-0863 

Kindly make checks payable to Zoo Poo Press 

Please indicate how you would like Gary to inscribe 
your book. Telephone inquiries at 785-272-7604. 



Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 481 




Behavior-tased Bear Blustandpij for Winter D enninq: 

A practical application at Fortress of the Bear, Sitha, Alaska 

Paper presented at the Advancing Bear Care Conference 
November 2009, San Francisco, CA 


By Christine Fenwick, Bear Manager 
Fortress of the Bear 
PO Box 2337, Sitka, AK 99835 
oso. ursa@yahoo. com 

Abstract 

Behaviors were closely monitored for two, two-year old, male brown bear (Ursus arctos) cubs at 
Fortress of the Bear in Sitka, Alaska during the fall, winter, and spring of 2008 and 2009. Denning 
behaviors became evident in early November with changes in food consumption, and activity peri- 
ods. Food consumption decreased from 14,000 kilocalories per day per bear in September to 4,100 
kilocalories per day per bear in November. Killisnoo and Chaik weighed 200 and 225 kilograms 
respectively in September. Daylight hours and daily temperatures decreased in November; however 
the fall was atypically warm by two to seven degrees Celsius. Diet consumption reached a low of 
1,696 kilocalories per day per bear in late December. Each bear exhibited its own unique behav- 
ioral response to the changes in the captive environment. Keeper routines changed in response to 
changes in bear behavior. Visitor attendance decreased, and other disturbances were also reduced. 
In the deepest part of winter, the bears were still eating, defecating, and urinating. The cubs had 
decreased activity for parts of the day, and were spending 18 to 20 hours in the den. Food consump- 
tion and activity levels returned to normal with the increase in daylight hours and temperatures of 
March and April. Most influential on their behavior, was the dynamic relationship between the two 
cubs. Although allowed to feed to satiation during the hyperphagia stage of late summer, they may 
not have had enough fat on them for winter denning. As cubs, their bodies continued to grow through 
the winter as they lost fat and gained length and height, emerging from the den 1.5cm taller than 
when they entered. There were also uncontrollable outside disturbances, and there may have been 
other factors affecting their denning behavior. The bears were fed according to their consumptive 
needs, given denning space and denning material. 

Behavior-based husbandry utilizes the natural history of an animal to determine the appropriate hus- 
bandry practices to best meet their needs. For brown bears and black bears, there are seasonal 
changes that affect their behaviors, most notably during the winter, which is naturally a time of 
denning. In wild bears that have a sufficient fat layer to allow winter denning, there are three main 
behavioral cues of winter denning: 1 . Decreased food and water consumption, often times ceasing to 
eat and drink completely; 2. Decreased activity, often spending more time near the den site as winter 
approaches; and 3. Entering a den and remaining in the den for prolonged periods of time, some 
bears will enter a winter den and remain there for up to six months in the far north (Brown, 2009). 
Winter denning is a complex biological and biochemical process influenced by many variables that 
include, but are not limited to: acquisition of a sufficient fat layer to survive a winter without food, 
decreased daylight hours, decreased average daily temperatures, and an appropriate denning site and 
denning materials. When all of the factors are present, they produce predictable winter denning 
behaviors. These factors are variable and are necessary to meet the changing environment from 
year to year as winters will differ. In captive communities, keepers are tasked with making decisions 
for the animals in their care to best meet the needs of those animals and the management needs of 
the facility. Often times keepers are required to maintain protocols that do not allow the animals to 
choose what is best for themselves. For winter denning in bears, many factors must align for denning 
to occur, and no one knows better than the bears themselves if all those factors are in line (Poulsen, 
2008). The onset of winter is a time of reduced food abundance, and food reduction for denning 
should follow the bears’ cues. 


Fortress of the Bear is home to two male, brother, brown bear cubs, Killisnoo and Chaik, who turned 
two in the winter of 2008-2009. The exhibit has full exposure to the elements, and the bears are 


482 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


exposed to year-round weather patterns, vegetation changes, and temperature changes. The den is 
completely enclosed providing a private, quiet, dark, and dry space. The den is not temperature con- 
trolled, and its temperature is roughly the same as the ambient temperature. The bears were observed 
closely throughout the year to identify behavior patterns, and husbandry protocols were modified 
based on the behavioral cues from the bears. 

The bears’ behaviors were closely 
monitored on a daily basis, with 
observations logged in the daily 
paperwork. Keepers watched for: 
aggressive behavior, play behaviors, 
general activity levels, food 
consumption, and weight fluctuations. 
In the fall and winter, behaviors 
were monitored for denning specific 
cues that would indicate a change in 
husbandry. Denning behavior cues 
included: decreased activity levels, 
decreased play behavior, increased 
nest building behavior, increased 
time within the den, and decreased 
food consumption. Decreases in 
behaviors were determined based on 
a comparison to summer behaviors 
exhibited by the bears. Husbandry changed as bear behavior changed. Average temperatures, 
daylight hours, and precipitation were recorded for each month. Kilocalorie content of the diet 
was figured using averages for kilocalorie content of foods normally fed. All food is donated, so 
the types of produce, dog food brand, and meat sources were highly variable. Average kilocalorie 
content for food was broken down into produce, dog food, and meat. With kilocalorie content of 
all types of produce averaged, all types of possible dog food brands averaged, and all types of meat 
sources averaged. Daily nutritional logs were kept to track the diet levels. Diets consisted of dog 
food, produce, and meat fed in a 1:1 :2 ratio respectively. Diets were decreased in the fall based 
on cues from the bears, and kilocalorie content of diet changes was logged. No supplements were 
given, and enrichment food was counted as part of the overall diet and calculated into their overall 
kilocalorie intake. 

August and September were months of hyperphagia for the bears, and they consumed 14,022 
kilocalories per day. August and September had 16 and 12.5 hours of daylight respectively, and 
temperatures were 10°C [50°F]. Due to security concerns the bears were locked within a secure night 
holding area every night. They were released into the exhibit at 0730 in the morning, and brought 
back in for the night at 1 930. The night holding area was set up with extensive enrichment every night 
to allow them the option to play and interact if they chose to. They were most active in the morning 
upon release into the area. They spent an average of two hours moving around the area, interacting 
with enrichment and with each other. They often slept at some point in the middle of the day between 
1100 and 1400, and they spent upward of six hours a day playing in the pond, both with each other, 
or entertaining themselves on their own. Many factors influenced their behavior on a daily basis and 
included: weather, temperature, visitor interaction, and interactions among themselves. They were 
generally active again in the late afternoon, through to the evening. At night, they interacted with the 
enrichment, fed, and slept. Keepers arrived in the morning at 0700 for training sessions, enrichment 
preparation, and release of bears out into the exhibit. This was a typical routine for the bears and 
keepers through spring summer and fall. 

In October diet consumption decreased to 10,700 kilocalories per day per bear, as they were leaving 
an average of a quarter of their diet uneaten. Daylight hours decreased to 10.5 hours a day, and this 



Inside the bear den. Nesting materials include straw, sticks, 
and shredded paper. Chaik worked meticulously to get the 
nest just right for winter denning. (Photo: Christine Fenwick) 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 483 


affected keeper schedules. October is also the rainiest month of the year averaging 37 cm of rain for 
the month. The bears were let out into the exhibit at 0800 and brought back in at night at 1800. The 
activity pattern of the bears remained the same during the day. They were consuming all of their 
enrichment food in the area in the morning, but were less interested in food provided by keepers 
throughout the day. When brought into the night holding, the bears would eat the dog food, most 
of the meat, and most of the produce, leaving some produce uneaten. The bears were usually still 
sleeping when keepers came in the next morning to let them back into the exhibit. 

In November, the greatest reduction in food consumption occurred from 10,752 to 4,100 kilocalories 
per day per bear. This fell further mid-month to 3,400 kilocalories per day per bear. Keepers reduced 
feedings based on uneaten diets. Temperatures for this month were slightly warmer than previous 
years at 4°C [39.2°F]. Daylight hours decreased to eight hours each day. The activity patterns of 
the bears changed dramatically this month, and they were given unlimited access to the den at all 
times so they could choose where they wanted to spend their time. The bears exhibited increased 
lethargy, decreased play behavior, and decreased interactions between the two bears. The common 
behaviors in the exhibit were laying around, walking for short periods of time followed by laying 
down, yawning, resting their heads on logs, increased time within the den, and increased nesting 
behavior. Reduction in daylight hours and 
temperature influenced the bears’ behavior 
with an increased desire to nest build, spend 
more time sleeping within the den, and to 
consume less food. The bears appeared to 
have sufficient fat layers, bellies hanging 
below their knees at the start of fall, and 
their reduced consumption indicated that 
they may have had sufficient fat to den. 

Chaik (shy-eek) also showed an increase 
in nest building behavior, which prompted 
keepers to prepare the denning area. The 
bears were given straw, sticks, and shredded 
paper within the den. Chaik was meticulous 
with the den each day, breaking trees in the 
exhibit to bring them inside the den for the 
nest, and keepers responded by providing 
more sticks and twigs as nesting material. 

Chaik spent 20-45 minutes nest building, and would build, add to, or modify the nest at least two 
or three times a day at the beginning of the month. Killisnoo did not participate in nest building 
behavior this month. He would watch Chaik rake and drag the branches in, but was never observed 
collecting or raking branches into the den himself. 

In December, food consumption fell from 3,400 to 1,696 kilocalories and then slightly increased in 
January to 2,876 kilocalories, and they continued to eat through this time. Each day averaged six 
hours of daylight, and 0°C [32°F] through these two months. They spent an average of 20 hours 
within the den, most of that time was spent sleeping, but they would always get up for food fed in the 
exhibit, and when they could hear people. There was less snow fall than the previous two years, and 
temperatures were warmer than the previous two years. As growing two-year-olds, there may have 
been more pressure on their system to keep eating through the winter, although at greatly reduced 
levels. The dynamic relationship between the cubs also greatly affected their denning behavior. 
Chaik spent more time nest building, and was also more lethargic than Killisnoo, who only started to 
nest build more than a month after Chaik. Killisnoo would also lay in the den with Chaik, but would 
not let Chaik sleep. Killisnoo would slap or bite his brother in the den. 

As the months progressed, Killisnoo calmed down, responding to his brother’s decreased activity. 
Chaik was more active, responding to his brother’s activity patterns. Diets were increased when there 



Chaik Bear showing increased lethargy in December 
2008 by resting his head on a log after a short walk in 

the exhibit. (Photo: Christine Fenwick) 


484 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 



was an increase of aggressive behavior from Chaik toward Killisnoo, which was usually uncommon. 
Increased consumptive needs may have been due to sporadic periods of clear sunny weather, which 
resulted in increased activity periods in the exhibit during the day. When more food was provided, 
the aggressive behaviors subsided. Aggressive behaviors observed included hard biting and growl- 
ing with head shaking while biting whenever Killisnoo got close to Chaik in the exhibit. Chaik 
would engage Killisnoo in a full body wrestling match with biting and growling whenever Killisnoo 
approached, and an overall short temper from Chaik, which was different from his usual passive tol- 
erant behavior toward his brother. Once more food was offered these behaviors subsided. As the nest 
was already made in November, they spent less time nest building, but more time in the den using the 
nest. Chaik would periodically take branches from the exhibit to add to the den, and keepers added 
nesting materials as necessary to ensure the nest remained dry, as the bears were out in the snow and 
their warm snow covered bodies would make the nesting materials damp. The bears came out of the 
den when they heard keepers working in other parts of the facility, and would re-enter the den when 
keepers left for the day. The bears came out of the night holding after lOOOhrs most days, and would 
go back in around 0230hrs in the afternoon. Enrichment was removed from the daily schedule, and 
training was put on hold to resume in the spring. 


Table 1: A comparison of daylight hours, precipitation, daily temperatures, and kilocalorie consump- 
tion. Amount of precipitation did not seem to affect or correlate with behavior changes overall. 


Month 

Hours of 
Daylight 

Precipitation 
in cm 

Daily Temp 
inT 

Keal consumption 
First of month 

Kcal 

consumption 

Last of month 

September 

13 

28 

10 

14,022 

12,589 

October 

12 

37 

7 

10,752 

10,752 

November 

8 

28 

4 

4,106 

3,702 

December 

7 

24 

0 

3,419 

L696 

Januar>' 

6.5 

22 

0 

2,876 

2,876 

February 

9 

IS 

1 

3,771 

4.257 

March 

11 

17 

2 

4,823 

N,021 

April 

14 

15 

4 

8,520 

14,890 

May 

16 

14 

8 

14,890 

14,890 


In February, food consumption increased late in the month to 4,257 kilocalories. Daylight hours 
increased to nine hours a day, and the bears became more active. They came out of the den earlier in 
the day, stayed out longer, played more together, played on their own, and more time moving around 
the area, and less time within the den. There were reports of wild bears emerging from their dens 
in the surrounding area and on adjacent islands as early as mid-February, which is not common for 



Killisnoo Bear showing increasing lethargy by 
resting on a log in the exhibit in January 2009. 


(Photo by Christine Fenwick) 


this area. Wild bears typically start to emerge from 
their dens in April (Schoen, Gende, 2007). The 
end of February was cold at 1°C [33.8°F], but a 
week and a half of sunny weather correlated to be- 
havior change in the bears. Increased activity and 
aggression from Chaik was a definite indicator that 
hunger was increasing, and diets were increased. 
Chaik would growl and aggressively attack Killis- 
noo if he even came close to food. As food was 
increased, this behavior again subsided. Training 
was offered if the bears were up to participating 
in sessions. 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 485 



Chart 1: A comparison of daylight hours, food consumption at 1/100 scale, and daily temperature in 
degrees Celsius for September through May. 


Consumption almost doubled in late March from 4,823 to 8,021 kilocalories. Daylight hours in- 
creased to 11 hours a day, temperatures increased to 2°C [35.6°F], and the activity level also in- 
creased. They spent only a few hours a night within the den, and transitioned to sleeping out in the 
exhibit space. They had completely abandoned their den by late March, choosing to sleep out in the 
exhibit at night as well. Their activity levels were increasing. They were more playful and active 
in the area so more food was necessary since they were burning more calories each day. They also 
showed more aggressive behaviors around food, which dissipated as food was increased. Training 
and enrichment was fully integrated into their daily schedule. 

There was another jump in consumption in late April from 8,021 to 14,890 kilocalories, which was 
above kilocalorie intake of hyperphagia of last summer with a high at that time of 14,022 kilocalo- 
ries. There was a growth spurt in both of the bears, increasing in height by more than 1cm. In May, 
kilocalorie consumption leveled off and they exhibited their normal behavior patterns consistent with 
last year in spring and early summer. There were 1 6 hours of daylight each day, and increasing day- 
light each day. Temperatures were unusually warm at 8°C [46.4°F], with mild weather. Enrichment 
schedules continued at full scale, and training and keeper interaction also remained at high levels as 
winter denning behaviors had completely ended, and the bears were back to their normal spring and 
summer behavior patterns. 

There are many factors that trigger hibernation in wild bears, and the situation becomes more com- 
plicated in a captive environment. As keepers, it is necessary to understand the natural behaviors that 
are displayed by the bears, and make decisions to enhance and allow the behaviors to develop. The 
bears know best what needs to happen to meet their needs, especially when it comes to winter den- 
ning. Winter denning in brown bears and black bears is a natural process, and is triggered in part by 
decreases in day light and temperatures. These changes take place even in warm climates, and they 
can affect the behaviors of the bears in these climates as well. It is very important to know the bears 
well, and be able to identify the behaviors that are indicative of winter denning. Once the behaviors 
are identified, the behavioral cues offered by the bears should be used to guide the husbandry prac- 
tices. It is difficult to meet the management needs of a facility and the animals needs as well, and a 
successful balance must be struck to meet all of those needs. 

References 

Brown, G. The Bear Almanac. A Comprehensive Guide to Bears of the World 2 ^ Editioa Guilford, CT 
Lyons Press. 2009.Pg.l52- 160. 

Poulseg E. Denning Processes . Listserve communication, March 2008. 

Schoen, J. and Gende, S. The Coastal Forests and Mountains Ecoregion of Southeast Alaska and the Tongas 

National Forest A Conservation Assessment and Resource Synthesis. Anchorage AK. Audubon Society 
and Nature Conservancy. Cliapter62Mainnials: Brown Bear. 2007 Pg 7-9. 


486 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


Con^^fe^atXxyn/Le^U^l^^ lipdycutey 

Column Coordinators: Becky Richendollar, North Carolina Zoo 
and Greg McKinney, Philadelphia PA 

This month ’s column was put together by 
column co-coordinator Greg McKinney 

Reintroduced Ferrets Face Poison Threat - While Canadian wildlife 
officials were celebrating a “historic” reintroduction of the extirpated 
black-footed ferret {Mustela nigripes) to a southern Saskatchewan park 

on October 2 2009, U.S. environmentalists were launching a lawsuit targeting 10 states — including 
Montana, which forms the Canadian park’s southern boundary — where commercial prairie-dog 
poisons such as “Kaput” are blamed for also killing the pest’s chief predator: the critically endangered 
ferret. 

Bizarre ly, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service — which collaborated with Parks Canada, the World 
Wildlife Fund and the Calgary and Toronto zoos in raising the 34 ferrets released in Saskatchewan 
— is at odds with its fellow federal body, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, over American 
farmers’ use of the poisons to rid their fields of prairie dogs. The burrowing rodent is the primary food 
source of the black-footed ferret, a member of the weasel family that was presumed extinct in North 
America from the 1950s to 1981, when a small group of the animals was discovered in Wyoming. 
Catastrophic habitat loss and the near-eradication of its prairie-dog prey by Midwest farmers were 
blamed for the demise of the ferret by the 1950s. 

Saskatchewan’s Grasslands National Park is the heart of the historic Canadian habitat for the species, 
which once ranged in Canada from about Moose Jaw, Sask., to Medicine Hat and Lethbridge in 
southern Alberta. Known to have feasted for millennia on the black-tailed prairie dog {Cynomys 
ludovicianus) of North America’s Midwestern plains, the ferret — a slinky carnivore with dark legs 
and raccoon-like, masked eyes — was last seen in Canada in 1937, near the Frenchman River in 
southern Saskatchewan. 




(Photo: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) 


back from the brink of extinction, 
approval of the poisons. 


The early October’s reintroduction was hailed 
as a conservation milestone for Canada. But 
according to court documents filed just days 
earlier in the U.S. by Defenders of Wildlife 
and Audubon of Kansas, the USFWS fears that 
North America’s vulnerable black-footed ferrets 
face an inadvertent threat of poisoning. The 
groups point to letters from the wildlife service 
to the EPA, warning that the EPA-approved 
Kaput and Rozol — meant to control nuisance 
populations of black-tailed prairie dogs — could 
kill endangered ferrets that eat the poisoned 
flesh of their prey. That, the groups argue in the 
suit, could derail the multimillion-dollar. North 
America-wide effort — in the U.S., Mexico and 
now Canada — to bring the black-footed ferret 
The EPA has announced it will review the complaints about its 


“I found it ironic,” Defenders of Wildlife attorney Jason Rylander told Canwest News Service, “that 
the reintroduction effort was received with so much enthusiasm in Canada, while at the same time, 
our Environmental Protection Agency is approving widespread poisoning of prairie dogs — and 
undermining our ferret reintroduction program at the same time.” 

Even more startling is the proximity of the Canadian reintroduction effort to one of the states involved 
in the lawsuit, said Rylander. “It would be unfortunate if, in your efforts to restore ferrets, that any 
migrating over the border would risk being impacted by the overuse of rodenticides,” he said. “It’s 
poison.” 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 487 


In a joint statement by World Wildlife Fund officials from Canada and the U.S., the organization 
applauded the Saskatchewan ferret reintroduction as a model for “cross-border co-operation” in 
North American conservation. “Nature doesn’t recognize the borders between the U.S., Canada and 
Mexico,” the statement said, “so our conservation efforts must stretch across those boundaries if we 
are to successfully restore North America’s threatened grassland ecosystems.” Source: Canwest News 
Service, Randy Boswell, 5 October 2009 

Hatching a Marine Breakthrough: First Triggerfish Raised in Captivity could Transform 
Aquarium Business - The tiny black and silver fish in a 50-gallon vat at Roger Williams University 
do not look like the aquaculture breakthrough they just may turn out to be. But the four-month-old 
tropical queen triggerfish (Balistes vetula), which can grow to a foot and a half long with iridescent 
yellows and blues, are the first triggerfish to be raised in captivity. And if researchers perfect their 
technique, other marine aquarium fish - including threatened ones like the queen trigger - could be 
raised in hatcheries instead of taken out of the wild. 

“We grew them on the first real try,” Andy Rhyne, assistant professor of biology at Roger Williams 
and a research scientist at New England Aquarium, said as he gazed at the three wriggling fish with 
a smile. “It’s a springboard.” 

Roger Williams and aquarium researchers 
teamed up to overcome a decades-old obstacle 
to growing many kinds of marine fish: feeding 
them when they are young. Today, the vast 
majority of freshwater fish in home aquariums 
are produced by aquaculture. Freshwater fish 
tend to be relatively easy to grow because their 
larvae are large, some can be fed dry food, or 
scientists have been working on them so long 
that they know how best to make them grow. 
But most marine fish larvae are smaller and 
require a live meal. Researchers have met with 
limited success feeding larvae tiny aquatic 
animals called rotifers. Those organisms can 
grow fast and at great densities, but are often 
too big to be fed to marine fish or do not have 
the nutritional punch they need. 

As a result, only a tiny percentage of marine aquarium fish are grown by aquaculture. Most are 
caught in the wild. But there are problems: Some species are overfished, while others are caught in 
damaging and often deadly ways, such as by squirting cyanide into reefs to anesthetize the fish so 
collectors can gather them. In the ocean, marine fish larvae eat copepods - tiny crustaceans found 
virtually everywhere. But raising copepods in the lab is extraordinarily difficult. The tiny animals 
have complicated temperature, salinity, and food requirements. 

“People have cultivated copepods over the years in moderate quantities, but no one has been able to 
do it in bulk,” said Nancy Marcus, a copepod specialist and dean of the graduate school at Florida 
State University. 

Rhyne, along with colleague Erik Stenn, who has an algae biotech company, were having some 
success with copepods in Florida. Rhyne was hired in August in a novel arrangement between the 
aquarium and Roger Williams to study larval fish production at the aquarium and start a program in 
aquarium science and aquaculture at the university. 

Triggerfish seemed a natural species to attempt to grow - and one that New England Aquarium 
scientists had tried for years to rear. Queen triggers grow too large to be a popular home aquarium 
fish, but their size and coloration have made them popular in public aquariums. Since they are 
threatened, Rhyne and Michael Tlusty, the aquarium’s director of research, figured if they could grow 
a queen trigger, aquariums would not have to take them from the wild. This summer, researchers 
collected tens of thousands of queen triggerfish eggs from one nest in the aquarium’s giant ocean tank 
and brought them to the marine lab at Roger Williams, overlooking Narragansett Bay. Thousands 



Queen Tri^erfish 

(Photo: Clark Anderson/Aqua Images) 


488 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 56, No. 9 


hatched, but the team focused on a relatively small number to feed with a local species of copepod 
they were growing. Most died, but today four remain alive - three at Roger Williams and one at the 
aquarium - and all have grown large enough to be fed dry food. 

There is a long way to go, Rhyne said: Copepods are still incredibly fussy to raise. But he said 
he is getting closer to figuring out how to raise large quantities of them. And the fact they grew a 
triggerfish with the copepods gives the scientists hope that other species could be grown in the same 
way for public aquariums. Their work may also one day affect the estimated $250 million trade in 
ornamental marine fish - some species of triggerfish are worth $500 each. Even if businesses raise 
only small amounts of copepods, it could be profitable because the fish are so expensive. 

“There is a lot of economic pressure to [raise] marine fish,” said David Lass of Nahant, an aquarium 
fish specialist. But the ability to raise marine hobby fish comes with great responsibility, Tlusty 
said. Many are caught in an environmentally responsible way and serve as a key economic engine to 
impoverished areas of the world. In some cases, the fish collecting provides revenue - and incentives 
“ to keep swaths of reefs conserved. “It really needs to be put in a global perspective,” Tlusty said. 
“You can’t start producing every marine species in captivity.” Still, he said, raising the marine fish 
is exciting. 

“When I came here 10 years ago, there was a proposal floating around to raise triggerfish. It’s exciting 
[we did it] but it points out the enormous amount of work that still needs to be done.” Source: Boston 
Globe, Beth Daley, 28 September 2009 

Palau Creates World’s First Shark Sanctuary - The tiny Pacific nation of Palau is creating the 
world’s first shark sanctuary, a biological hotspot to protect great hammerheads (Sphyrna mokarran), 
leopard sharks {Triakis semifasciata), oceanic whitetip sharks {Carcharhinus longimanus) and more 
than 130 other species fighting extinction in the Pacific Ocean. But with only one boat to patrol 
240,000 square miles (621,600 square kilometers) of Palau’s newly protected waters — including 
its exclusive economic zone, or EEZ, that extends 200 miles (320 kilometers) from its coastline — 
enforcement of the new measure could be almost like swimming against the tide. 



Palau’s president, who announced the news to the United Nations General Assembly, acknowledges 
the difficulty of patrolling ocean waters nearly the size of Texas or France with a single boat. But he 
hopes others will respect Palauan territorial waters — and that the shark haven inspires more such 
conservation efforts globally. 


“Palau will declare its territorial waters 
and extended economic zone to be the first 
officially recognized sanctuary for sharks,” 
Palauan President Johnson Toribiong told the 
Associated Press in an interview. 


Shark fishing has grown rapidly since the mid- 
1 980s, driven by a rising demand — mainly in 
China — for shark fin soup, a highly prized 
symbol of wealth. Because of their long 
life spans and low fertility rates, sharks are 
vulnerable to overfishing. Within its EEZ, a 
nation may regulate fisheries and scientific 
research and develop other economic efforts. 
The U.N.’s Food and Agriculture Organization 
estimates more than half of highly migratory 
sharks are overexploited or depleted. Toribiong 
said a recent flyover by Australian aircraft 
showed more than 70 vessels fishing Palau’s w 


This undated photo provided by the Micronesian 
Shark Foundation shows sharks from an 
allegedly illegal Taiwanese fishing vessel busted 
in Palau on Aug. 5, 2009. 

ters, many of them illegally. 


“We’ll do the very best we can, given our resources,” he said. “The purpose of this is to call attention 
to the world to the killing of sharks for commercial purposes, including to get the fins to make shark 
fin soups, and then they throw the bodies in the water.” 


Animal Keepers’ Forum, Vol. 26, No. 9 489 


Tourists go to Palau for its spectacular diving in the tropical waters, dramatic coral and rich marine 
life. The remote Pacific nation recently made global headlines when it agreed to President Barack 
Obama’s request to take a group of Uighurs — Turkic Muslims from China’s far western Xinjiang 
region — as part of plans to close the Guantanamo Bay detention center. Palau is one of the world’s 
smallest countries, with some 20,000 people scattered over 190-square mile (490-square kilometer) 
archipelago of lush tropical landscapes in the Western Pacific. Its shark sanctuary will shelter more 
than 135 Western Pacific species of sharks and rays considered endangered or vulnerable, or for 
which there is not enough data to determine how the species is faring. 

“Palau has basically raised the bar for the rest of the world for shark conservation,” said Matt Rand, 
director for global shark conservation for Washington-based Pew Environment Group, an advocacy 
organization. 

Elsewhere, Europe is trying to crack down on shark fishing in its waters. In February, the European 
Commission proposed its first-ever shark conservation rules for European waters. EU countries 
account for a third of shark meat exports globally, and shark steaks are increasingly served in 
restaurants, replacing pricier swordfish steaks, and shark products are also finding their way into 
lotions and leather sports shoes. 

Toribiong said he also will call for a global moratorium on “shark finning” — the practice of hacking 
off shark fins and throwing the body back into the sea — and an end to unregulated and destructive 
bottom trawling on the high seas. Palau is among 20 seafaring nations that already have voluntarily 
agreed to end bottom trawling, which involves fishing boats that drag giant nets along the sea floor. 
Enormously effective at catching fish, the nets from bottom trawling also wipe out almost everything 
in their path, smash coral and stir clouds of sediment that smother sea life, marine experts say. The 
U.N. has called bottom trawling a danger to unique and unexplored ecological systems and said 
slightly more than half the underwater mountain and coral ecosystems in the world can be found 
beyond the protection of national boundaries. Source: The Associated Press, John Heilprin, 24 September, 
2009 

Alaska Sea Otters Granted Critical Habitat Protection - It took a court order to accomplish, but 
threatened sea otters in southwest Alaska now will have some respite from the pressure of human 
activities. The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service has designated 5,855 square miles of nearshore waters 
along the Aleutian Islands, Bering Sea, and Alaska Peninsula as critical habitat for the northern sea 
otter {Enhydra lutris kenyoni). The Service does not anticipate that this critical habitat designation 
will result in any closure of commercial fishing in southwest Alaska because sea otters eat bottom- 
dwelling creatures of no commercial value and spend most of their time in shallow water elose to the 
shore. The agency took this action under a court order resulting from a lawsuit against the Service by 
the Center for Biological Diversity. 

“Critical habitat has a proven record of aiding the recovery of endangered species,” said Rebecca 
Noblin, a staff attorney with the Center in Anchorage. “We are pleased that habitat for threatened 
Alaska sea otters will finally be protected. With the habitat protections of the Endangered Species Act 
now extended to sea otters in Alaska, this iconic species has a fighting chance of recovery.” 

The Center first petitioned the Service to protect sea otters in southwest Alaska under the Endangered 
Species Act in August 2000. Two lawsuits and five years later, sea otters in this region received 
protections provided by the law, following population declines of up to 90% in many areas. Fewer 
than 40,000 otters were estimated to exist in southwestern Alaska in 2005, down from more than 
100,000 in the 1970s. Declines are most pronounced in the Aleutian Islands, where the population 
has dropped from more than 70,000 to fewer than 10,000 animals. The exact cause of the decline is 
unknown, but scientists have speculated that increased predation by killer whales {Orcinus orca) may 
be a factor. Sea otters in the area are also threatened by proposals to open Bristol Bay in the Bering 
Sea to oil development, along with changes to the ecosystem brought about by global warming and 
overfishing. 

The Endangered Species Act requires that critical habitat be designated when a species is listed. 
Congress has emphasized the importance of critical habitat, stating that “the ultimate effectiveness of 
the Endangered Species Act will depend on the designation of critical habitat.” 


490 Animal Keepers’ Forum, Voi 36, No. 9 


But the Bush-era Fish and Wildlife Service took the attitude that critical habitat designations were 
a hindrance that did not benefit listed species. In all critical habitat press releases during the Bush 
administration, the Fish and Wildlife Service wrote, “In 30 years of implementing the Endangered 
Species Act, the Service has found that the designation of critical habitat provides little additional 
protection to most listed species, while preventing the Service from using scarce conservation 
resources for activities with greater conservation benefits. In almost all cases, recovery of listed 
species will come through voluntary cooperative partnerships, not regulatory measures such as 
critical habitat.” 

Under the Obama administration, the Service has not 
been using that language. Recognizing that the Bush 
administration would designate critical habitat only as a 
result of litigation, in December 2006 the Center filed a 
lawsuit in federal district court in Washington, DC, seeking 
critical habitat for Alaska’s sea otters. In April 2007 the 
Center reached an agreement with the Fish and Wildlife 
Service, which provided that critical habitat for the otter 
had to be finalized by October 2009. The recent habitat 
designation includes all nearshore waters in the current 
range of the southwest Alaska population of the sea otter 
within 100 meters of mean high tide, waters less than 
two meters in depth, and kelp forests in waters less than 
20 meters deep. In total, the areas making up the otter’s 
critical habitat equate to 5,855 square miles. While the 
designation includes critical areas for the sea otter, it falls 
short, the Center says, because it fails to protect deeper 
waters and areas fiarther from shore that the otter also needs 
to recover. 

The Interior Department has proposed opening up areas in the Bering Sea near Bristol Bay to offshore 
oil and gas development, but such development would be devastating for sea otters, Noblin warns. 
Because they rely on their fiir as insulation against the cold, sea otters are extremely vulnerable to 
oil spills. As many as 1,000 sea otters died from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in 1989. More recently, 
the Selendang Ayu oil spill in the Aleutian Islands in December 2004 killed numerous animals in this 
vulnerable sea otter population. 

“While today’s habitat designation is an important step in preventing the extinction of sea otters 
in southwest Alaska,” said Noblin, “we still must do much more to ensure their eventual recovery, 
including protecting offshore habitat and eliminating the threat of oil development in Bristol Bay.” 

The worldwide sea otter population was reduced to just a few hundred animals between 1 742 and 
1911, due to commercial harvest by the Russian and Russian- American fur trade. Three populations 
of sea otters exist in Alaska today, but only the southwest Alaska population is listed as threatened. 
The Service estimates the statewide population at around 70,000 animals. Source: Environmental News 

Service, 8 October 2009 

Argentine Zoo to Release 3 Endangered Eagles - An Argentine zoo plans to release three endangered 
crowned eagles {Stephanoaetus coronatus) back into the wild after several months of rehabilitation 
during captivity. The birds are to be taken to Catamarca, San Juan and La Pampa provinces for 
reintroduction into nature. Biologists will monitor them through tracking devices placed on their 
backs. Trainer Andres Capdevielle says the raptors are the most threatened species of eagle in South 
America — fewer than 1,000 exist in the wild, according to a 2004 estimate. Capdevielle said that 
while at the Buenos Aires Zoo, the birds’ rehabilitation program included frequent flights to rebuild 
muscle after captivity. One underwent surgery for a bullet wound in the foot. Source: The Associated 
Press, 30 September 2009 

White House to Rethink Endangered Species Lists - From wolverines to black-tailed prairie 
dogs, dozens of plants and animals around the nation are being re-evaluated for possible inclusion on 
threatened or endangered species lists. The Obama administration is taking a fresh look, in many cases 
under court order, at Bush administration rejections of special status for certain plants and animals. A 
move to prevent extinction of more species could limit housing construction and energy development. 



Alaskan Sea Otter 


(Photo: US. Fish and Wildlife Service) 


Animal Keepers' Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 491 


New species under consideration for protection have “aesthetic, ecological, education, historical, 
recreational and scientific value,” and those facing extinction “could be indicators of bigger ecosystem 
problems that could hurt us,” said Bridget Fahey, regional director of endangered species for the 
Interior Department’s Fish and Wildlife Service. 

“Science shows that when you start removing species from our ecosystem things can start to break 
down,” Fahey said. 

In Colorado, the state government is working through a parallel process to protect imperiled animals. 
State wildlife overseers, who took the initiative of re-introducing the lynx {Lynx canadensis), recently 
began weighing the feasibility of a state wolverine-recovery program. 

The wolverine {Gulo gulo) “has a reputation of being sort of a bad-tempered animal that tends to 
break into cabins and wreak havoc. It’s not the same charismatic type of critter the lynx is. But we 
have the type of habitat that could sustain wolverines,” said Tom Nesler, chief of wildlife conservation 
for Colorado. 

At the federal level. Endangered Species Act litigation has forced a re-evaluation of dozens of species 
rejected under President George W. Bush, including the mountain plover {Charadrius montanus), 
wolverine, greater sage grouse {Centrocercus urophasianus), white-tailed prairie dog {Cynomys 
leucurus) and the Gunnison sage grouse {Centrocerus minimus). 

The proposal to add 19,000 acres to the current 20,000 acres designated as critical habitat for the 
Preble’s meadow jumping mouse (Zapus hudsonius preblei) also is tied to court action. A nine- 
inch-long brown rodent with enlarged rear feet, the mouse forages in wetlands along Colorado’s 
high-growth Front Range from Fort Collins to Colorado Springs. It’s one of eight species nationwide 
for which federal courts have ordered reconsideration following a finding of inappropriate political 
meddling by a Bush administration deputy assistant secretary for fish, wildlife and parks. 

In response to petitions for dozens of other species, federal wildlife officials have begun in-depth 
analyses of survival threats, including climate change, that could qualify each as endangered. While 
environmentalists say they’re hoping President Barack Obama and Interior Secretary Ken Salazar 
will move to protect many more species, some expressed doubts. 

The Obama administration’s environmental interests focus “more on energy and land issues” than 
on saving endangered species, said Kieran Suckling, executive director of the Center for Biological 
Diversity. Tom Strickland, assistant secretary of the Interior for fish, wildlife and parks, said the 
administration is trying to balance the two interests. 

“We have a very strong commitment in this administration to promote renewable energy. But that 
will not be done at the expense of other environmental considerations,” Strickland said. “We will do 
our best to harmonize those twin goals.” Source: The Denver Post, Bruce Finley, 7 October 2009 

Nine Wolves Taken So Far in Montana - Hunters in Montana reported taking nine wolves through 
the beginning of October 2009 in the state’s first-ever organized wolf hunt. Gray wolves (Canis lupus) 
were removed from the endangered species list in 
Montana and Idaho in the spring after climbing 
back from near-extermination last century. 

Before their endangered listing, the animals were 
poisoned, shot and trapped, but never subject to 
a regulated hunting season. This year’s hunt has 
a quota of 75 of the predators. Montana wildlife 
officials say the hunts are needed to control 
increasingly frequent wolf attacks on livestock. 

But environmentalists who filed a lawsuit over the 
issue say the species remains at risk. More than 
10,500 wolf licenses have been sold in Montana 
this year, only 50 of them to nonresidents. Source: 

The Associated Press, 6 October 2009 



GrayWoIf^ 

(Photo: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) 


492 Animal Keepers ’Forum, Vol. 36, No. 9 


A AZK Membership Application (Piease Print) 


Check here if renewal [ ] 


Name 

Email 

Mailing Address 

City 

State/Province Zip/Postal Code Country 


U.S. Members Canadian Members 


$40.00 Professional 

$40.00 Professional 


1 ^ Full-time Keeper 

I . Full-time Keeper 


LJ $35.00 Affiliate 

LJ $40.00 Affiliate 


1 . Other staff & volunteers 

1 . Other staff & volunteers 


LJ $25.00 student 

LJ $25.00 student 


Must supply copy of current student 

Must supply copy of current student 


ID at time of application 

1 1 

ID at time of application 

1 1 


$65.00 or up - Individuals 

LJ $65.00 or up - Individuals 


Contributing/U.S. 

Contributing/Canada 


$150.00 or up 

$150.00 or up 


Institutional/U.S. 

Institutional/Canada 


Organizations/Institutions 

Organizations/Institutions 


(requires Board approval) 

r ' ' ^ 

(requires Board approval) 


LJ $150.00 Commercial Member 

LJ $40.00 Library Only 


(i.e. animal-related food & supplies) 

Available ONLY to public & 



university libraries (In U.S.) 


LJ $55.00 International Members 

(All members outside U.S. & Canada regardless of category) 


Zoo Affiliation (if any) 
Zoo Address 
Title 


Ll My check is enclosed (AAZK, Inc.) 
Mastercard Visa Card# 



Please charge my credit card 


Name on card Expiration date 

Signature 


Mail this application to: AAZK Administrative Offices, 3601 SW 29th St., Suite 133, Topeka, KS 66614-2054. 
Make checks/money orders payable to AAZK, Inc. Must be in U.S. FUNDS ONLY . Membership includes a 
subscription to Animal Keepers ’Forum. The membership card is good for free or discounted admission to many 
zoos and aquariums in the U.S, and Canada. 


Printed in U.S. A. 
©2009 AAZK, Inc. 




rja->“ 

•43 CD 01 



H- 


2 

u 




Cl 




<z 



z 

<c 



««- 


•r“^ 


*««— « 

Cl 


C»J 


U ,1 

in 

^—4 

im 

y< 


o 

• 

k—i 

o 

r-- 


zr 

ijoc; 

t 

z 

:■!« 

csr 

ro 

,** 


n;i 

1—1 


3 !c 

C 1 

o 


•A 

Xi 

o 

Z 

: 4 < 

*-» C 

cu 



^ J « 1 » 


zm 

?!•: 

_j«.i 

o 

- 

:<* 

D SIOJO 

— z 


O fl‘-^ 




1-400 


z 


r-^o 

- 

S)C 

!•»«» — 

z 

; 4 < 

‘XI 

C 3 

" 7 "^ 

: 4 « 

c o xih: 

z 

SJ.! 

O-t -3 

- 


o fXjX 

:4c r«j ^ ui CO 
:<c itt-r lO<i: 



