AQUAPHYTE 


A Newsletter about Aquatic, Wetland and Invasive Plants 

Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants 

with support from 

The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, 

Invasive Plant Management Section 

Volume 30 Number 1 Summer 2011 Gainesville, Florida ISSN 0893-7702 


UF 


UNIVERSITY of 

FLORIDA 

IFAS Extension 


A Look Inside 

At the Center . page 2 

Applications in 

Plant Invasions . page 3 

A Short-Term Retrospective. 

Clearing a Trail . page 4 

For the Next Generation. 

Restoration Toolbox . . .page 5 
Adding adapted biotypes. 

Books/Reports, etc . page 6 

See the latest additions 
to the CAIP library. 

Mary’s Picks . page 8 

Selected articles by APIRS 
cataloger Mary Langeland. 

From the Database. . . .page 10 
A sampling of new additions 
to the APIRS database. 

FloraGator . page 15 

New key to Florida 
flowering plant families. 


r ^ 

CAIP Information Office Staff 

Karen Brown, Coordinator, 

Educational Media/Communications 

Amy Richard, 

Education Initiative Coordinator 

Mary Langeland, 

APIRS Reader, Cataloger 

Lynda Dillon, 

Education Initiative Program Assistant 

Anne Taylor, 

APIRS Assistant 

Charlie Bogatescu, 

Information Technology Specialist 

Jennifer Green, 

Invasive Species Specialist 

\ ___y 


News from APIRS 

By Karen Brown 

T he Aquatic Plant Information Retrieval System (APIRS) continues to grow, with the number of 
annotated records now exceeding 80,000. As longtime contributors to APIRS know, the database has 
been in service since the mid-1980s, providing access to the collective literature on aquatic plant species. 
The original mission of the database was to aid aquatic weed managers in developing countries. Prob¬ 
lems included stranded villages, inaccessible fishing areas, impassable waterways, disease transmission, 
clogged reservoirs, weed-choked irrigation and drainage canals, and more. Initial APIRS funding was 
provided by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID). As the database grew to include 
a wider geographic range (worldwide) and a broader scope (riparian, wetland, salt marsh, macroalgae, 
some seagrasses, Florida mangroves, and more), the workload grew. Primary financial support shifted 
to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers-Aquatic Plant Control Research Program (APCRP), the agency 
charged with maintaining federal navigable waterways, including weed control. One of Florida’s own 
federal waterways, the St. Johns River, has a colorful history that includes the lavender fiowers of water 
hyacinths (Eichhornia crassipes) covering the water surface from shore to shore. The University of 
Florida also supported one full-time position. Meanwhile, computer technology was evolving to enable 
easier and faster searches of the APIRS database. Original searches were performed in overnight batches 
at the University’s regional data center, using complex Boolean search strings. Resultant bibliographies 
were printed and mailed to researchers. No fees were charged as the database grew largely from con¬ 
tributions of articles by researchers. We enjoyed colorful stamps from around the world and friendly 
correspondence from scientists, libraries and research institutions. 

The advent of the Internet made the Center’s website possible in 1995 and allowed online access 
to the database shortly thereafter. The commercial search software used was extremely expensive and 
required upgrades we were unable to afford. Search commands were still complex. Although access 
was now available to all, in reality, only two of us knew how to effectively search APIRS. By 2005 
and with primary funding now coming from the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, 
Invasive Plant Management Section (previously the Florida Department of Environmental Protection, 
Bureau of Aquatic Plant Management), APIRS had become part of a broader range of services. Thanks 
to the creative energy of its founder, the late Vic Ramey, APIRS had been Joined by an expansive 
website and many educational materials such as original video productions on aquatic plant identifi¬ 
cation and management, botanical drawings, photographs, and a companion website. Plant Manage¬ 
ment in Florida Waters . A second companion website, the Florida Invasive Plant Education Initiative , 
was developed to help school teachers introduce this topic to young students. To incorporate these 
expansions and clarify our larger purpose, we became known simply as the Information Office of the 
Center for Aquatic Plants. The Center, too, ultimately expanded to become the Center for Aquatic and 
Invasive Plants (CAIP), as invasive terrestrial (or upland) plants in Florida’s public lands had grown 
to frightening proportions. In addition to our lakes, rivers and wetlands, gems such as Everglades Na¬ 
tional Park were threatened with loss of their native vegetation and alteration of ecosystem functions 
from encroachment of invasive plant species. Many seasoned aquatic biologists and natural resource 
managers shared their expertise and expanded their work into upland areas because the overall goal 
was the same—to control invasive plant infestations and protect natural resources. APIRS staff 


See APIRS, continued on page 16. 






















Page 2 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


At the Center 2010-2011 

By Dr. William T. Haller, Acting Director 

T he faculty and staff at the UF/IFAS Center for Aquatic and 
Invasive Plants (CAIP) were very active this past year con¬ 
ducting research and educational programs on invasive plant biol¬ 
ogy and control. Major cooperative programs are conducted with 
numerous partners including, but not limited to, the Invasive Plant 
Management section of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conserva¬ 
tion Commission (FWC), Osceola County, the St. Johns and South 
Florida Water Management Districts, and the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers Environmental Research and Development Center. A 
highlight in 2010 was the release of the Aquatic Weed Control Best 
Management Practices manual, edited by Dr. Gettys, Dr. Bellaud, 
and myself, and published by the Aquatic Ecosystem Restoration 
Foundation tAERFf More than 20 authors contributed chapters 
to the manual. The first printing of 12,000 copies is nearly deplet¬ 
ed. The manual can be viewed or downloaded from the CAIP or 
AERF websites. 

The CAIP was formed within the University of Florida’s Agri¬ 
cultural Experiment Station by the 1978 Florida Eegislature. The 
mission of the CAIP is to provide support and coordination to the 
UF Institute of Food and Agricultural Science (IFAS) faculty and 
staff working on developing environmentally-sound management 
practices for aquatic and natural area weeds. The CAIP is also re¬ 
sponsible for extending information on the benefits of native plants 
and the impacts of invasive weeds to the public. This is accom¬ 
plished by providing written information ( edis.ifas.ufl.edu ), online 
communication materials, and training courses. 

The annual Aquatic Weed Short Course was presented in May 
2011 in Coral Springs, FE with over 400 attendees. The course 
is designed in cooperation with the Florida Department of Agri¬ 
culture and Consumer Services (FDACS) to provide Continuing 
Education Units (CEUs) to licensed pesticide applicators and pro¬ 
vide basic training for those (>150) taking pesticide certification 
exams for the first time. The Southeast Herbicide Applicators Con¬ 
ference (SEHAC) is planned for North Florida (Panama City) in 
early October 2011. More conference information is available at 
the website. 

The annual PEANT CAMP workshop for school teachers, pro¬ 
duced by CAIP Education Initiative Coordinator Amy Richard, 
was held June 11-15 in Gainesville. Twenty-four teachers attend¬ 
ed, representing school districts and environmental centers from 
around the state. PEANT CAMP is part of the CAIP’s Invasive 
Plant Education Initiative that provides training, field experience, 
plant identification, interactive activities, communication materi¬ 
als, and full curriculum (that meets Florida’s Sunshine State teach¬ 
ing standards) to teachers. They are encouraged to use the materi¬ 
als in their classrooms and share them with other teachers within 
their districts. PEANT CAMP is an extensive four-day expense- 
paid training course; teachers must apply and are selected based on 
subjects taught, previous experience, letters of recommendation, 
and more. 

Graduate Students 

Dr. Atul Puri completed his doctoral program at the CAIP and 


has been working for DuPont in Wilmington, Delaware for sev¬ 
eral months. Graduate students Sushila Chaudhari and Court¬ 
ney Stokes have completed their M.S. degrees and moved into 
Ph.D. programs at North Carolina State and Cornell University, 
respectively. Sarah Berger (M.S.), Brett Bultemeier (Ph.D.), and 
Abhishek Mukherjee (Ph.D.) are finishing their degrees this sum¬ 
mer. Dr. Jeff Hutchinson completed his doctoral program and is 
now conducting research in a post-doctoral position with Dr. Ken 
Eangeland. 

New M.S. students include Eeif Willey from Indiana work¬ 
ing with Dr. Michael Netherland (Agronomy), and Kate Wilson, 
formerly of Washington State and Idaho, working with Dr. Tracy 
Irani in the Department of Agricultural Education and Communi¬ 
cation on natural resource communication and outreach. 


UF 


UNIVERSITY of 

FLORIDA 

IFAS Extension 

Center for Aquatic 
and Invasive Plants 


Faculty 

The long-vacant 
Weed Ecologist posi¬ 
tion in the Agronomy 
Department, former¬ 
ly held by Dr. Alison 
Fox (now retired), 
will be filled by Dr. 

Euke Flory this sum- 

mer after he wraps up his post-doctoral responsibilities at Indiana 
University. Responsibilities for this position include teaching the 
“Biological Invaders” course and overseeing the IFAS Weed As¬ 
sessment Program, among other duties. 

Dr. Taizo Uchida, Weed Ecologist and Associate Professor from 
Kyushu Sangyo University in Fukuoka City, Japan, will spend a 
six-month sabbatical at the CAIP from September 2011-March 
2012 . 


We also expect to help Dr. Kevin Murphy and his graduate 
student in Gainesville in July 2011 as they conduct a worldwide 
survey of high pH or chalk streams. This will involve sampling 
many spring runs in North Florida, which will be a pleasant task 
in mid-summer. 


Other Accomplishments 

Amy Richard has taken the lead in representing the CAIP in de¬ 
veloping the role and mission of the newly formed North Ameri¬ 
can Invasive Species Network . The purpose of this network, 
which includes invasive species centers in Mexico and Canada, 
is to provide greater access to, and coordination of. North Ameri¬ 
can invasive species information and research activities. 

From a personal standpoint, our several years of research with 
new aquatic herbicides has paid off nicely in 2010-2011 with 
the U.S. Environment Protection Agency’s registration of fiumi- 
oxazin (Clipper'^^ and bispyribac-sodium (Tradewind'^^ from 
Valent Corporation. The registration of several new aquatic her¬ 
bicides in the past decade now provides us with several modes- 
of-action which will help in managing the potential development 
of herbicide-resistant populations of aquatic weeds. 





















Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 3 


Applications In Plant Invasions: 
From A Center Newcomer 


By Colette C. Jacono, Ph.D 


O n joining the Center in 2009, I might never have predicted 
the variety of problems and possibilities in plant invasions 
awaiting in Florida, nor imagined their broader-reaching effects on 
other beings and environments on our planet. Research projects in 
natural area wetlands have been my primary focus; however, the 
strong extension directive maintained by the Center has presented 
a wide conduit through which new invasion scenarios continue to 
be presented. 

Under a research grant from the South Florida Water Manage¬ 
ment District, the agency that oversees water resources in the 
southern half of Florida, we are using seed storage and greenhouse 
regeneration trials to understand the early life history processes 
crucial to the establishment and persistence of Tropical American 
watergrass (Luziola subintegra). Although Neotropical in origin, 
the endemic distribution of this “rice-related” species is not clear 
because, based on botanical records, it has moved significantly 
in recent decades in the greater Caribbean Basin. Since its 2007 
discovery in Florida, and despite a concerted regimen of herbi¬ 
cide treatment. Tropical American watergrass has spread in Lake 
Okeechobee, and invaded a restoration wetland on the eastern mar¬ 
gin of Everglades National Park. We are learning how hydrology 
interacts with seed survival in the soil and with seedling regenera¬ 
tion in the colonization of new sites. At the same time we are iden¬ 
tifying and monitoring the response of associated plant species at 
the Everglades site, in order to better guide restoration processes. 
These applied studies focused on providing immediate informa¬ 
tion needed by land managers to accurately predict population dy¬ 
namics in conjunction with their ongoing herbicide applications 
for management purposes. 



DNA “fingerprint" analysis was used to clarify the endemism of 
this water clover fern (MarsileaJ which was previously considered 
introduced in central Florida. 


Through research funding from the St. Johns River Water Man¬ 
agement District, the agency responsible for water resources in 
northeast and east-central Florida, we are refining an integrated 
approach for the long-term control of Wright’s nutrush {Scleria 
lacustris) in seasonal wetlands. Our aim is to deplete the extensive 
seed bank existing in marsh soils while preventing continued seed 


A Short-Term Retrospective 


production in recurring populations. By timing significantly re¬ 
duced herbicide dosage with plant growth stage, we can minimize 
non-target damage to native species while still achieving control of 
Wright’s nutrush. Our current recommendation was released this 
month as part of a fact sheet for resource managers thttp://edis. 
ifas.ufi.edu/ag352 T Such recommendations are based on extensive 
findings produced while I was with the United States Geological 
Survey and are detailed in the fact sheet. 

The St. Johns River District also sponsored the final leg in our 
collaborative project with the Florida Museum of Natural History 
on the taxonomy of water clover ferns (Marsilea). We utilized DNA 
sequencing of several plastid regions to “fingerprint” Marsilea spec¬ 
imens from around the world in order to provide an identification 
and source of origin for unknown plants that have been expanding 
at several locales in central Florida. Molecular sequencing was ex¬ 
pected to resolve not only the question of Marsilea's endemism, but 
also whether weed management or conservation protection should 
be employed. Our results concluded the specimens are an un¬ 
described species that is native in Florida and identical to a col¬ 
lection made over 100 years ago. Its return to the Emeralda Marsh 
Restoration Area could refiect the restoration of more natural hydro 
periods in the greater Eake Griffin ecosystem as its occurrence can 
be expected to increase following events that open the vegetative 
canopy and incorporate fiuctuation into surface waters. 

Several important invasion scenarios have arisen through Cen¬ 
ter extension, all of which bear broad-reaching impacts. Aroma 
(Dichrostachys cinerea subsp. africana) has now been found at 
multiple sites in the Florida Keys and in central Florida. A thorny, 
thicket-forming Old World legume. Aroma is internationally rec¬ 
ognized as a high-risk species for its invasive tendencies. In re¬ 
gions as near as Cuba, it is cited as an introduced weed of national 
significance. In Florida, two Cooperative Invasive Species Man¬ 
agement Areas (CISMAs) are willing to contribute labor to tackle 
the thorny thickets; nevertheless, it is anticipated that the CISMAs 
will fall short of an eradication goal. Aroma has broad climate and 
soil suitability, fixes nitrogen, tolerates mutilation, and re-sprouts 
from the base as well as from extensive root structures and seeds. 
Eittle is known about its invasion ecology and management pro¬ 
grams are non-existent. While our immediate efforts in obtaining 
grant funds for a Joint eradication/research program have failed, 
we hope that such an effort will be forthcoming. 

Applied science in the ecology of invasions is an increasingly 
pressing need as climates change and human exertions on the en¬ 
vironment become more severe. The discovery of science-based 
solutions for invasion management hinge on our ability to apply 
ecological approaches to understanding why species interact as 
they do with their introduced environment. I only hope that closed 
budgets and tight belts will not diffuse mankind’s responsibility 
for alleviating his heavy footprint in the realm of plant invasions. 

Colette C. Jacono, formerly a post-doctoral associate under 
Professor Ken Langeland at the Center for Aquatic & Invasive 
Plants, recently took a position with the U.S. Department of Agri¬ 
culture in Gainesville. 












Page 4 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


Clearing a Trail for the Next Generation 

By Amy Richard 


F or six years the UF/IFAS Center for Aquatic and Invasive 
Plants (CAIP) has been leading a concerted outreach effort for 
educators in Florida. The short-term goal of the Florida Invasive 
Plant Education Initiative is to raise awareness among upper el¬ 
ementary, middle, and high school teachers about invasive plants, 
and to inspire them to bring this important topic into their class¬ 
room and to fellow educators. The long-term goal is to bolster our 
next generation with tools and the desire to become responsible 
environmental stewards. 

Toward this end, UF/IFAS CAIP collaborated with dozens of 
teachers to develop curriculum about aquatic and upland invasive 
plants in Florida. Several audio-visual presentations and a host of 
learning materials have been developed for use in the classroom 
as a result. The on-going project has been made possible through 
a collaborative effort of CAIP and the Invasive Plant Management 
Section of the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission 
(FWC). 



PLANT CAMP participants visit Lake TohopekaJiga (Toho) in Osceola 
County—a “quintessential ” multiple-use Florida waterbody that sup¬ 
ports eco-tourism (airboat and binding tours); bass fishing, and duck 
hunting, while also serving as a federal flood control project. The arrival 
of endangered snail kites a few years ago further complicated large- 
scale hydrilla management. The snail kites depend on an invasive apple 
snail for food, which in turn feeds on the invasive aquatic plant, hydrilla. 

A major component of the Education Initiative is an annual in¬ 
vasive plant teacher-training workshop, one of the first of its kind 
in the country, hosted by CAIP and FWC each June. The 5-day 
PLANT CAMP workshop includes field trips, rigorous hands-on 
plant identification activities, and classroom lectures—all designed 
to provide teachers with greater background knowledge and first¬ 
hand experience with large-scale invasive plant infestations. More 
than 160 teachers have been formally trained at these events. 

Recently, the CAIP outreach team developed an evaluation in¬ 
strument to determine the effectiveness of these efforts. In August 
2010, the survey was distributed among former participants to de¬ 


termine (1) if they are using their training and materials, and (2) 
if they experienced an increased awareness, understanding, and 
acceptance of the plant management practices they learned about 
during their training and use of materials. 



PLANT CAMP participants compete in a hands-on plant identification 
quiz to sharpen their observation and identification skills. 


The following highlights are encouraging: 

• Nearly 85% of respondents have been teaching their students 
about invasive plants since they received training, represent¬ 
ing a 47% gain from those who taught the subject before re¬ 
ceiving training. The same gain was achieved with regard to 
teachers training fellow teachers. 

• 98% of respondents agreed (i.e., “agree” and “strongly agree” 
combined) they are now more aware of the need to manage 
invasive plants. 

• Nearly 97% say the workshop made them more aware of the 
high financial costs of managing aquatic invasive plants. 

• As a result of their learning, 66% of respondents agreed (i.e., 
“agree” and “strongly agree” combined) the use of herbicides 
is necessary. 

• Even higher percentages of respondents agreed that biologi¬ 
cal, mechanical and physical control methods were neces¬ 
sary—over 83% for each. 

• More than 90% “strongly favored” and “somewhat favored” 
(combined) physical control methods. 

• Nearly 13% “strongly oppose” the use of chemical control. 

• Biological control and mechanical control both received fa¬ 
vorable responses from more than 85% of respondents. 

• PLANT CAMP graduates have trained or introduced the topic 
of invasive plants to an estimated 1,169 teacher-colleagues 
and an estimated 17,679 students as a result of these efforts. 

Amy Richard is Coordinator of the Education Initiative at the 
Center for Aquatic & Invasive Plants. 


















Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 5 


Adding to the restoration toolbox: identifying widely 
adapted biotypes of eelgrass 


By Lyn Gettys, PhD 

adapted to the less-than-ideal conditions at many restoration sites 
to increase the likelihood of successful establishment of newly 
planted vegetation. 

Here at the Center, we are currently conducting a screen¬ 
ing program to identify biotypes (similar to botanical varieties) 
of eelgrass that tolerate and thrive in sediments with high levels 
of organic material and nutrients. Plants are grown under “com¬ 
mon nursery” conditions in sediment types ranging from pure 
sand to pure peat, and under nutrient levels ranging from none 
to high (4 g of controlled-release fertilizer per liter of sediment). 
We have evaluated plants from commercial sources and from a 
number of lakes throughout Florida where populations of eelgrass 
naturally occur. Some of these lakes have the sandy, nutrient-poor 
sediments typically preferred by eelgrass, but others have mucky, 
nutrient-rich sediments. We have thus far identified several bio¬ 
types of eelgrass that are highly productive regardless of sediment 
conditions. One of these biotypes is from a commercial source, 
but the others are field-collected plants from Florida lakes (includ¬ 
ing Lakes Seminole and Okahumpka) with the “hostile,” mucky, 
nutrient-rich conditions common at many lake restoration sites. 
These widely adapted biotypes of eelgrass may be very useful in 
lake restoration projects and give restoration managers another 
tool to increase revegetation success at sites where most eelgrass 
fails to establish. 

Lyn Gettys is a Research Assistant Scientist at the Center for 
Aquatic & Invasive Plants. 


The native submersed plant, Vallisneria 
americana, in Lake Okeechobee, Florida. 
Most of the eelgrass disappearedfrom this 
lake a number of years ago but volunteer 
populations began to appear after hurricanes 
in 2004 and 2005. 

Photo by Kate Wilson, May 2011. 



M any lake restoration projects begin with the removal of inva¬ 
sive plants, muck, and accumulated detritus. The resulting 
habitat is often devoid of submersed aquatic vegetation, thereby 
lacking the underwater plant communities needed to provide 
ecosystem functions such as structure for fish and other aquatic 
animals. Therefore, an important part of many lake restoration 
projects is the introduction of native submersed plants. Most res¬ 
toration ecologists agree that the best plant material for these proj¬ 
ects is vegetation collected from areas near the restoration site. 
However, this is not always feasible for a number of reasons. For 
example, there may not be adequate source populations of suit¬ 
able plants near the restoration site, or conditions at nearby sites 
may be quite different from the lake targeted for restoration. As 
a result, it may be necessary to obtain plant material from other 
sources. 

Eelgrass {Vallisneria americana) is widely used in Florida lake 
restoration projects because the species is a native submersed pe¬ 
rennial plant that grows in water up to 10 feet deep. It also toler¬ 
ates a wide range of environmental conditions, including low light 
levels. The majority of naturally occurring populations of eelgrass 
are found in lakes with sandy, nutrient-poor sediments; however, 
many lakes targeted for restoration have sediments that are mucky 
and high in nutrients. A number of restoration projects have been 
unsuccessful because, despite significant inputs in labor and plant 
material, self-sustaining populations of eelgrass failed to become 
established. Therefore, it is important to use plant material that is 











Page 6 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


BOOKS/REPORTS. ETC. 


Glistening Carnivores—The Sticky-Leaved Insect-Eating Plants 

By Stewart McPherson. 2008. 392pp. ISBN 978-0-9558918-1-6. Redfern Natu¬ 
ral History Productions, www.redfernnaturalhistorv.com 

No less than 278 color photographs illustrate this unfettered book that describes 
the seven genera of sticky-leaved insect-eating plants {Byblis, Drosera, Droso- 
phyllum, Ibicella, Pinguicula, Roridula and Triphyophyllum). Ethnobotanical uses 
and botanical history are reported throughout, with extensive and numerous ex¬ 
cerpts from historical and modern sources, especially Charles Darwin, to whom 
the book is dedicated and whose work on insectivorous plants is documented in 
the first chapter. According to the author, Darwin’s “meticulous studies first estab¬ 
lished the carnivorous nature of Drosera and other sticky-leaved plants.” Other 
references provide such entertaining gems as “.. .much esteemed by medieval al¬ 
chemists and herbalists who claimed that it would burn off warts and excite lust in 
cattle.” Of particular interest was the story of Carolus Linnaeus who, upon receiv¬ 
ing a sketch of the trap of Dionaea muscipula together with plant material (1769), 
responded that the idea of an insect-eating plant was “.. .ridiculous and that it was 
contrary to the God-given rules of nature.” He reportedly referenced Genesis I, 
29-30 and declared the notion blasphemous. Charles Darwin published his own 
book. Insectivorous Plants, more than 100 years later (1875). Glistening Carni¬ 
vores reads like a personal journal of the daily explorations and nightly readings of 
a scientist singularly obsessed with these fascinating plants. And no wonder! 

A Guide to the Control and Management of Invasive Phrag- 
MiTES - Second Edition 

By B. Avers, R. Fahlsing, E. Kafcas, J. Schafer, et al. 2009. 38 pp. Michigan 
Department of Natural Resources, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Available as a 



PDFfile from www. michWan. 20 v See DNR, Wildlife & Habitat, Plant Species. 


“An aggressive, nonnative variety of phragmites (Phragmites australis), also known as common reed, is threatening the ecological 
health of Michigan wetlands and coastal shorelines. This invasive variety of phragmites is becoming widespread throughout the Great 
Lakes and is displacing the native variety of the same species, as well as many other native plants.” The goal of this guide is to provide 
information about effective methods to control and manage Phragmites. Because the guide discusses tools that are not typically applied 
by the average landowner, it is intended primarily for land or resource managers from agencies, professional organizations, and busi¬ 
nesses; extension agents; or others in a similar profession. Control methods are described and include herbicide treatments, prescribed 
fire, mechanical treatment, and water level management (fiooding). Three management strategies are described, and long-term manage¬ 
ment and monitoring are discussed. 


A Book of Reed {Phragmites australis (Cav.) Trin. ex Steudel, Eormerly Phragmites communis Trin.) 
By S.M. Haslam. 2010. 261 pp. ISBN 978-0-9564692-0-5. Forrest Text, Cardigan, UK. 


This esteemed author considers common reed a remarkable plant and thoroughly explores its life history, pattern and growth, genetic 
and clonal variations, and physical and economic impacts. We are told that “Because of its cosmopolitan distribution, its fascinating 
biology, its uses to people and its responses to so many habitat factors, Phragmites is indeed a plant worth studying and reading about.” 
This book is your opportunity to do Just that. 


A Selection of Plants for Greening of Waterways and Waterbodies in the Tropics 


ByJ.W.H. Yong, TP. Yok, N.H. Hassan, and TS. Ngin (eds.) 2010. 480pp. ISBN 978-981-08-5086-9. National Parks Board, Nanyang 
Technological University, Public Utilities Board, Singapore. 


This book is a practical guide to using aquatic plants in urban settings, including landscaped ponds, planted edges of stormwater sedi¬ 
mentation basins, naturalisation of canals and river banks, constructed wetlands, “cleansing biotopes” and floating vegetated islands in 
reservoirs or waterways. The book is luxuriantly illustrated with color photographs of the various applications for greening waterways 
and waterbodies, and of the 114 plants selected and grouped by type (rheophytes, floaters, floating-leaf plants, submerged and emergent 
plants, and mangroves and other plants of coastal habitats). It aims to reach a diverse audience, including urban planners, hydrological 
engineers, architects, landscape designers, and horticulturists. The book is part of a larger effort to develop a “Periodic Table of Plants” 
that will serve as a reference to plants best suited to absorbing chemical elements or compounds from the environment. Where pollutant 
uptake (phytoremediation) capacity for specific plants is known, the relevant information has been included in the plant descriptions. 









AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


Page 7 


Phytoremediation includes the removal of nutrients, heavy metals, metalloids, pesticides, hydrocarbon, organics and endocrine disrupters. 
This book is informative, attractive, and interesting, and serves as an enticing invitation to visit Singapore to view this work in progress. 

Identification Guide for Invasive Plants in Sri Lanka 
By Lalith Gunasekera. 2009. 125pp. ISBN 978-0-646-51489-5. http://www.sarasavi.Ik/ 

The main objective of this book is to improve public knowledge, awareness, and identification of the most invasive plants in Sri Lanka. 
The book covers invasive plants in aquatic, agricultural, natural, and forest ecosystems. 


The Global Diversity of Taro—Ethnobotany and Conservation 


By V. Ramanatha Rao, P. J. Matthews, P. B. Eyzaguirre and D. Hunter (editors) 
This book begins with a consideration of taro’s history as a food and then travels 
from Ghana, through Indonesia, Vietnam, China and Cuba, finally finishing up 
in the Pacific Region. Taro is one of the world’s oldest food crops, dating back 
over 9,000 years. First domesticated in Southeast Asia, it has spread throughout 
the world and is now an important crop in Asia, Pacific, Africa and the Carib¬ 
bean. Farmers and communities have depended on taro cultivation to meet their 
daily needs for millennia and have nurtured and adapted the crop. However, they 
face many risks because of taro’s vulnerability to biotic and abiotic problems, 
and global climate change. Worldwide, taro ranks fourteenth among staple veg¬ 
etable crops with approximately 12 million tons produced globally from about 2 
million hectares, with an average yield of 6.5 t/ha. (FAOSTAT 2010 estimates). 
Taro is also a sacred plant in many cultures, with high prestige and strong cultural 
and symbolic importance. This book on taro is among the first to offer a global 
approach, covering all regions, disciplinary perspectives and uses of the plant. 
Contributors from different disciplines and geographic regions offer a multidis¬ 
ciplinary and evolutionary perspective on taro that shows how one of the world’s 
oldest domesticated plant species continues to evolve and acquire new uses. The 
book also demonstrates how the story of taro can serve as a model for the in situ 
conservation and use of a staple crop whose global importance is evidenced at the 
local level in traditional food systems, and not in global commodity markets or 
trade. The book may be downloaded as a PDF file at http://www.bioversitvintema- 
tional.org/publications.html or requested via e-mail at: bioversity-publications@ 
cgiar.org 


^ The Global 

Diversity of Taro 

Ethnobotany and 
Conservation 



Cryptocoryne of Peninsular Malaysia 

ByA.S. Othman, N. Jacobsen, andM. Mansor. 2009. 102pp. ISBN978-983-861-377-8 (hard cover), -4 (soft cover). University Sains 
Malaysia Press, Pulau Pinang. 

“The aquatic and amphibious genus Cryptocoryne, popularly known as Water Trumpet, is a very characteristic plant component when 
you visit the forest streams in Peninsular Malaysia, where each species in shape, size, and fiowering is adapted to exactly those circum¬ 
stances under which it is found in the forests. The ultimate experience is when you explore the forests and come upon a stream which which 
is fully covered with leaves of a Cryptocoryne species.... The book is the result of many years of research and cooperation regarding the 
Water Trumpets of Peninsular Malaysia.” These charismatic plants are popular among aquarium enthusiasts due to the variable shapes and 
attractive colors of their foliage. They are entomophilous (pollinated by insects), with male and female fiowers hidden within a “kettle”. 
Chapters include an overview of the genus, morphology and cytology, evolution of the genus (using evidence from chromosome numbers 
and molecular DNA analysis), and systematic treatment, as well as a discussion of the conservation needs for each species. Although some 
photographs are less than sharp, the book is nicely illustrated overall with color images of the species. 


NEW JOURNAL 

Inland Waters: Journal of the International Society of Limnology is a new, international, peer-reviewed journal for original papers 
that advance our understanding of inland aquatic ecosystems and their management. 

Inland Waters replaces the SIL (International Society of Limnology [formerly International Association of Theoretical and Ap¬ 
plied Limnology; Societas Internationalis Limnologiae, SIL]) Proceedings (Verhandlungen), but will remain as faithful as possible, 
with encouragement of a worldwide set of authors and short (except for papers arising from named and plenary talks at Congresses), 
rapidly-published papers. The scope of the journal includes all aspects of physical, chemical, and biological limnology, as well as 
applied and regional limnology. Publication in the journal is not restricted to SIL members. 

Inland Waters is an “online first” journal, publishing papers online as they are accepted, and then in four print issues per year. The 
first issue was published in April 2011. The journal is available through membership of SIL, with free online access to SIL members, 
and by subscription. Visit www.limnologv.org 















Page 8 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


MARY’S PICKS 


Items of special interest from APIRS reader/cataloger, Mary Lange land 


Blanco, S. & Ector, L. (2009) Distribution, ecology and nui¬ 
sance effects of the freshwater invasive diatom Didymosphe- 
nia geminata (Lyngbye) M. Schmidt: a literature review. 
Nova Hedwigia 88:347-422 

Didymo, short for Didymosphenia geminata, is an invasive 
microalgae with massive proliferation, which forms conspicu¬ 
ous growths in streams. In this bibliographic study, accord¬ 
ing to Blanco and Ector, “a near exhaustive investigation was 
performed in the scientific literature, phycological inventories, 
technical reports and internet databases” to account for present 
records. “This paper investigates the historic and current bio¬ 
geographic range of this invasive species (and varieties) based 
on 1,000 citations collected mainly from the scientific literature. 
The locations where this diatom has appeared, including both 
fossil and recent records, are presented in world distribution 
maps. Our results confirm that the native range of D. geminata 
is almost restricted to the Holarctic region, though its distribu¬ 
tion area is broader than usually reported in the literature. The 
ecological profile of this alga, along with its nuisance effects, is 
also discussed.” 

Chaplin, G.I & Valentine, J.F. (2009) Macroinvertebrate Pro¬ 
duction in the Submerged Aquatic Vegetation of the Mobile- 
Tensaw Delta: Effects of an Exotic Species at the Base of an 
Estuarine Food Web. Estuaries and Coasts 32(2):319-332 

Chaplin and Valentine report the first estimates of the effects 
of the proliferation of Myriophyllum spicatum, an exotic sub¬ 
merged aquatic vegetation (SAV) species, on macroinvertebrate 
production in the Mobile-Tensaw Delta, a tidally infiuenced es¬ 
tuary of the northern Gulf of Mexico. They do this by compar¬ 
ing the secondary production occurring on two native SAV spe¬ 
cies, Heteranthera dubia and Vallisneria americana. 

Annual macroinvertebrate production of crustaceans, gastro¬ 
pods, bivalves and insect larvae on these three dominant SAV 
species was estimated. Production was greatest on M. spicatum 
and H. dubia and least on V. americana, however, the research¬ 
ers report that the production on M. spicatum was three times 
greater than on either of the two native SAV species. 

Regarding this high productivity on a non-native plant, the 
authors say, “From this limited comparison made within a single 
trophic level, it could be argued that the spread of M. spicatum 
within the Mobile-Tensaw Delta is one example of an exotic 
species benefiting an open coastal ecosystem...we believe that 
assessments of the impacts of exotic SAV species on coastal 
food webs, including our own, remain too simple and that there 
is a need to make these assessments from a broader perspec¬ 
tive.” 

The authors conclude: Based on no-choice palatability tests, 
it is probable that the high production within the structurally 
complex M spicatum and H. dubia was the result of reduced 
predator foraging efficiency. Thus, they contend that “it is pre¬ 
mature to conclude that the extraordinary production measured 
on M. spicatum is responsible for the persistence of higher order 
consumers in the Delta food web.” 


Coates, C. (2009) Aquatic Plants Surviving in the Acidic Lakes 
of the Ocala National Forest. Aquatics 31(2): 15-16 

The Ocala National Forest sits atop ancient sand dunes that 
played a key role in the development of 600+ highly acidic lakes 
that are unique to this national forest. Coates states, “... the lakes 
with pH ranges between 4.1 and 4.4 are of particular interest and 
have been classified by the Forest Service as highly acidic.” Fakes 
Clay, Gobbler, Mary and Fawbreaker have pH values of 4.4, 4.1, 
4.4 and 4.3, respectively. Factors contributing to the acidity of the 
lakes include surface water as the sole source of recharge; three of 
the lakes are seepage lakes with no stream flow into or out of them; 
and, lack of natural buffering. 

One effect of the acidic water is to slow the decomposition rate 
of organic matter, reducing nutrients available for plants. None¬ 
theless, according to Coates, “In the lakes of the Ocala Nation¬ 
al Forest aquatic plants survive and even thrive in these highly 
acidic conditions,” including Fuirena scirpoidea (rush fuirena), 
Leersia hexandra (southern cut grass), Nuphar luteum (spatter- 
dock), Utriculariafloridana (Florida yellow bladderwort), Utricu- 
laria purpurea (eastern purple bladderwort), Panicum hemitomon 
(maidencane), Nymphaea odorata (fragrant water lily), and Web¬ 
ster ia confervoides (algal bulrush). 

The author says further questions remain: Are the pH levels in 
these lakes stable or are the levels slowly decreasing? If they are 
decreasing, what are the implications? When the pH level in a lake 
reaches 4.3 or lower, aquatic plant coverage and species diversity 
appear to decline. If that is the case, at what pH level does aquatic 
plant life disappear? Will the lakes of the Ocala National Forest 
ever reach that point? 

Meyerson, L.A, Voila, D.V., & Brown, R.N. (2010) Hybridiza¬ 
tion of Invasive Phragmites australis with a Native Snbspecies 
in North America. Biol. Invasions 12(1): 103-111 

Both native and introduced lineages of Phragmites australis oc¬ 
cur in North America so there is an excellent opportunity to in¬ 
vestigate intraspecific hybridization. According to Meyerson et af, 
“The major goals of this research were to demonstrate coincident 
flowering phenologies of multiple populations of native and intro¬ 
duced Phragmites collected from a broad geographic range and to 
prove that hybridization between the native and introduced strains 
of P. australis was indeed possible.” 

The authors report for the first time in this article, “that native 
and introduced populations of Phragmites can hybridize. There is 
substantial overlap in flowering period between native and intro¬ 
duced populations from the same geographic locations.” 

Their “data demonstrates the ability of the native and introduced 
lineages to interbreed, but successful crosses were highly depen¬ 
dent on the identities of the parent populations. Furthermore, only 
crosses with introduced Phragmites pollen donors and native re¬ 
cipients exhibited seed set, suggesting gene flow is unidirection¬ 
al.” Nonetheless the concern is, “If hybridization is occurring in 
the field, it will undoubtedly lead to further declines of the native 
subspecies through genetic swamping and, potentially, through in¬ 
creased competition if hybrids exhibit increased vigor.” 





Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 9 


Joyeux, M., Vincent, O. & Marmottan, P. (2011) Mechanical 
Model of the Ultrafast Underwater Trap of Utricularia. Physi¬ 
cal Review E83, 021911 

Joyeux et al. offer a fascinating look at the mechanism enabling 
the underwater traps (bladderlike organs) of bladderworts to catch 
their prey. The model they propose combines two phases: repeti¬ 
tion of an “active slow deflation followed by passive fast suction” 
sequence. 

During the first, slow step, the door is indeed closed and the con¬ 
cave wall curvature, due to the lower internal pressure, results in 
elastic energy being stored in the walls. The second, ultrafast step 
begins when a potential prey touches one of the trigger hairs and 
is engulfed when the walls of the trap release the stored energy. 
Both experimental results and theoretical models are presented in 
an effort to understand this mechanism. A combination of high¬ 
speed video imaging, scanning electron microscopy, light-sheet 
fluorescence microscopy, particle tracking, and molecular dynam¬ 
ics simulations was used to visualize the motion of the door and 
propose a plausible mechanism. 

The authors propose a mechanical model that describes both 
phases and strongly supports the hypothesis that the trap door 
acts as a flexible valve that buckles under the combined effects 
of pressure forces and the mechanical stimulation of trigger hairs, 
and not as a panel articulated on hinges. 

Nesom, G.U. (2009) Assessment of Invasiveness and Ecological 
Impact in Non-Native Plants of Texas. J. Bot. Res. Inst. Texas 
3(2):971-991 

Nesom’s method, titled “Fundamental Invasiveness Index”, 
serves as a framework for assessment and ranking of each of 
the non-native species of Texas according to their invasiveness 
and ecological impact. The Index is based on knowledge of the 
species from held, herbarium, and literature, according to four 
criteria: 

FI: Invasive in both disturbed and natural habitats, negatively 
affecting native species or natural biodiversity by altering native 
vegetation and habitats or by outcompeting or hybridizing with 
native species; or, invasive into agricultural habitats and causing 
significant economic damage; including woody, herbaceous, and 
aquatic species. 

F2: Abundant in number and widespread; commonly invasive 
in disturbed habitats, much less commonly in natural habitats; 
subdivided into woody, herbaceous, and aquatic species. 

F3: Relatively few in number, known from relatively few lo¬ 
calities, usually in disturbed habitats; subdivided into woody and 
herbaceous species. 

F4: Status unknown. 

The 812 non-native species growing outside of cultivation in 
Texas have been documented. A preliminary list of non-native 
species in Texas was developed by the author from the USDA 
PLANTS Database. Journals and other literature were reviewed 
for possible additions, and, he notes, a number of species were 
excluded. “Only plants that are naturalized have been included 
in the assessment.” Nesom’s method “emphasizes simplicity, al¬ 
lowing assessment of the large number of non-native species (all 
that are known to occur in the state).” Of the entire list, 25 are 
aquatic (9 classified as FI, 16 classified as F2). Four Appendices 
list the plants and their rankings, including a Watch List with 


a section of “Potential and expanding new arrivals with global 
warming in south and coastal Texas.” 

Pemberton, R.W. & Bodle, M.J. (2009) Native North Ameri¬ 
can Azolla Weevil, Stenopelmus rufinasus (Coleoptera: Curcu- 
lionidae). Uses the Invasive Old Azollapinnata as a Host 

Plant. FI. Entomol. 92(1): 153-155 

Azolla pinnata, a tiny aquatic fern native to a large area of the 
tropics, subtropics, and warm temperate regions of Africa, Asia, 
and Australia, was found to be naturalized in waterways of south¬ 
ern Florida near Jupiter, in May 2007, by Bodle. The fern is classi¬ 
fied as a Federal Noxious Weed and was found to be naturalized in 
North Carolina in 1999, where it continues to persist. 

Pemberton and Bodle contend that “because of the difficulty in 
eradicating A. pinnata, it is prudent to consider other potential con¬ 
trol approaches. Biological control appears feasible for a number 
of reasons.” Two insect herbivores are Azolla specialists in North 
America: one is a flea beetle, Pseudolampsis guttata (LeConte), 
occurring in the eastern U.S. and using A. caroliniana as its host 
plant; the other is a weevil, Stenopelmus rufinasus Gyllenhal, oc¬ 
curring in the western and southern U.S. 

According to the summary, the native weevil, Stenopelmus ru¬ 
finasus, a specialist herbivore on North American mosquito ferns 
(Azolla spp.), has adopted Azolla pinnata, an incipient invasive 
weed in Florida from the Old World. This situation, in which a 
weed has invaded the native area of a successful biological control 
agent of a congeneric weed in another region, is unique. Should 
A. pinnata escape eradication, S. rufinasus may prove useful as a 
control agent. 

Pipalova, I, Kvet, J. & Adamek, Z. (2009) Limnological Chang¬ 
es in a Pond Ecosystem cansed by Grass Carp (Ctenopharyn- 
godon idella Val.) Low Stocking Density. Czech J. Animal Sci. 
54(l):31-45 

Pipalova, Kvet and Adamek looked at direct and indirect con¬ 
sequences of stocking a pond with grass carp. No previous stud¬ 
ies used real control ponds. The purpose of this experiment “was 
to identify (1) changes in nutrient concentrations particularly 
of phosphorous and nitrogen in the water and sediment; and (2) 
changes in phytoplankton, zooplankton and zoobenthos biomass 
and abundance after a moderate stocking rate of grass carp in a 
small and shallow pond.” 

The study was conducted at the experimental facility of the Re¬ 
search Institute of Fish Culture and Hydrobiology in the Czech 
Republic, from 1998 to 2000. Direct consequences of grass carp 
stocking on the biomass of aquatic macrophytes was measured in 
a pond, resulting in the biomass of Cladophora globulina, Eleo- 
charis acicularis and Potamogeton pusillus being significantly 
decreased. Cladophora biomass was impacted the most. Indirect 
consequences of grass carp stocking on water chemistry were lim¬ 
ited, with only the concentration of nitrogen increasing significant¬ 
ly. This was also true of sediment nutrients. The authors conclude 
that “the changes in water and sediment chemistry were greater in 
the pond without grass carp due to the presence and subsequent 
dieoff of the filamentous alga Cladophora globulina and thus the 
changes caused by grass carp stocking were not statistically sig¬ 
nificant.” 

See Mary’s Picks, continued on page 14. 




Page 10 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


FROM THE DATABASE 

The APIRS database now contains more than 80,000 annotated citations to the 
aquatic and wetland plant literature and to the literature on invasive species in Flor¬ 
ida. The database is created from the contributions of researchers, and is used by 
researchers, worldwide. A small sample of recent additions to the APIRS collection 
is provided below. References cited include peer-reviewed research articles, govern¬ 
ment reports, books and book chapters, dissertations and theses, and gray litera¬ 
ture such as abstracts from proceedings. To obtain full-text of citations, contact your 
nearest academic library or search online. httn://Dlants.ifas.ufl.edu/APIRS/ 


ADAM, E., MUTANGA, O., RUGEGE, D. 
Multispectral and hyperspectral remote 
sensing for identification and mapping of 
wetland vegetation: a review. 

WETLANDS ECOL. MANAGE. 18(3):281-296. 2010. 

ADAMEC, L. 

By which mechanism does prey capture en¬ 
hance plant growth in aquatic carnivorous 
plants: stimulation of shoot apex? 

FUNDAM. APPL. LIMNOL. 178(2): 171-176. 2011. 

AIKIO, S., DUNCAN, RP., HULME, P.E. 

Lag-phases in alien plant invasions: sepa¬ 
rating the facts from the artefacts. 

OIKOS 119(2);370-378.2010. 

ALBERT, V.A., JOBSON, R.W., 
MICHAEL, T.P., TAYLOR, D. J. 

The carnivorous bladderwort (Utricularia, 
Lentibulariaceae): a system inflates. 

J. EXP. BOX 61(l):5-9. 2010. 

ANONYMOUS 

Fabricated water hyacinth yarn? 

ANN. BOX 105(l):v. 2010. 

ANONYMOUS 

High-resolution aquatic vegetation survey 
of the Kissimmee Chain of Lakes and Lake 
Istokpoga. 

REMETRIX, EEC, WEB ATLAS: WWW.REME- 
TR1X.COM, FOLDER OF FINAL MAPS, AUGUST, 
40 PR 2010. 

APPENROTH, K.-J., NICKEL, G. 

Turion formation in Spirodela polyrhiza. 
the environmental signals that induce the 
developmental process in nature. 

PHYSIOL. PLANT. 138(3):312-320. 2010. 

BALDISSEROTTO, C., FERRONI, L., 
ZANZI, C., MARCHESINI, R, ET AL 
Morpho-physiological and biochemical 
responses in the floating lamina of Trapa 


natans exposed to molybdenum. 
PROTOPLASMA 240(l-4):83-97. 2010. 

BADGLEY, B.D., THOMAS, ELM., 
HARWOOD, V.J. 

The effects of submerged aquatic vegeta¬ 
tion on the persistence of environmental 
populations of Enterococcus spp. 

ENVIRON. MICROBIOL. 12(5): 1271-1281. 2010. 

BINI, L.M., THOMAZ, S.M., 
CARVALHO, P. 

Limnological effects of Egeria najas Pl- 
anchon (Hydrocharitaceae) in the arms of 
Itaipu Reservoir (Brazil, Paraguay). 
LIMNOLOGY ll(l):39-47. 2010. 

BOG, M., BAUMBACH, H., 
SCHWEEN, U., HELLWIG, E, ET AL 

Genetic structure of the genus Lemna L. 
(Lemnaceae) as revealed by amplified frag¬ 
ment length polymorphism. 

PLANTA 232:609-619. 2010. 

BOUSTANY, R.G., MICHOT, T.C., 
MOSS, RE. 

Effects of salinity and light on biomass and 
growth of Vallisneria americana from low¬ 
er St. Johns River, FI, USA. 

WETLANDS ECOL. MANAG. 18(2):203-217. 2010. 

BOWNES, A., HILL, M.P., 

BYRNE, M.J. 

Evaluating the impact of herbivory by 
a grasshopper, Cornops aquaticum (Or- 
thoptera: Acrididae), on the competitive 
performance and biomass accumulation 
of water hyacinth, Eichhornia crassipes 
(Pontederiaceae). 

BIOL. CONTROL 53(3):297-303. 2010. 

BRIX, H., LORENZEN, B., 
MENDELSSOHN, I.A., MCKEE, K.L., 
ETAL 

Can differences in phosphorus uptake ki¬ 


netics explain the distribution of cattail and 
sawgrass in the Florida Everglades? 

BMC PLANT BIOL. 10:23-34. 2010. 

BURKS, R.L., KYLE, C.H., 

TRAWICK, M.K. 

Pink eggs and snails: field oviposition pat¬ 
terns of an invasive snail, Pomacea insu- 
larum, indicate a preference for an invasive 
macrophyte. 

HYDROBIOLOGIA646(l):243-251. 2010. 

CATFORD, J.A., DOWNES, B.J. 

Using multi-scale species distribution data 
to infer drivers of biological invasion in ri¬ 
parian wetlands. 

DIVERS. DISTRIB. 16(l):20-32. 2010. 

CENTER, T.D., DRAY, F.A. 

Bottom-up control of water hyacinth wee¬ 
vil populations: do the plants regulate the 
insects? 

J. APPL. ECOL. 47(2):329-337. 2010. 

CHO, H.J., BIBER, P.D. 

Seed propagation protocol for wigeongrass 
(Ruppia maritima) (Mississippi). 

ECOL. RESTOR. 28(2): 135-137. 2010. 

DAVALOS, A., BLOSSEY, B. 

The effects of flooding, plant traits, and pre¬ 
dation on purple loosestrife leaf-beetles. 
ENTOMOL. EXP. APPL. 135(l):85-95. 2010. 

DAVISON, V.E. 

Water weeds for sale. 

J. WILDL. MANAGE. ll(l):95-96. 1947. 

ELANSARY, H.O.M., ADAMEC, L., 
STORCHOVA, H. 

Uniformity of organellar DNA in Aldro- 
vanda vesiculosa, an endangered aquatic 
carnivorous species, distributed across four 
continents. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(3):214-220. 2010. 

ELLIOTT, A., GUNAWARDENA, 

A.H.L.A.N. 

Calcium inhibition halts developmental 
programmed cell death in the lace plant, 
Aponogeton madagascariensisl 
BOTANY 88(2):206-210. 2010. 

EMERINE, S.E., RICHARDSON, R.J., 
TRUE, S.L., WEST, A.M., ET AL 

Greenhouse response of six aquatic inva¬ 
sive weeds to imazamox. 

J. AQUAT PLANT MANAGE. 48:105-111. 2010. 






Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 11 


EVERITT, J.H., YANG, C. 

Using aerial photography and image analy¬ 
sis to measure changes in giant reed popu¬ 
lations. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:47-51. 2010. 

FEITOZA, L.L., MARTINS, M.LG., 
CASTRO, A.A.J.F., FELIX, L.P., ETAL 

Cytogenetics of Alismataceae and Limno- 
charitaceae: CMA/DAPI banding and 45S 
rDNA sites. 

PLANT SYST. EVOL. 286(3-4); 199-208. 2010. 

FRANCESCHINI, M.C., POIDE 
NEIFF, A., GALASSI, M.E. 

Is the biomass of water hyacinth lost through 
herbivory in native areas important? 

AQUAT BOX 92(4);250-256. 2010. 

GLOMSKI, L.M., NETHERLAND, M.D. 

Response of Eurasian and hybrid water- 
milfoil to low use rates and extended expo¬ 
sures of 2,4-D and triclopyr. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:12-14. 2010. 

GUISINGER, M.M., CHUMLEY, T.W., 
KUEHL, J.V., BOORE,J.L., ETAL 

Implications of the plastid genome sequence 
of Typha (Typhaceae, Poales) for under¬ 
standing genome evolution in Poaceae. 

J. MOLEC. EVOL. 70(2): 149-166. 2010. 

HAMDAN, M.A., ASADA, T., 

HASSAN, EM., WARNER, B.G., ETAL 
Vegetation response to re-flooding in the 
Mesopotamian wetlands, southern Iraq. 
WETLANDS 30(2): 177-188. 2010. 

HEALY, M.T., ZEDLER, J.B. 

Setbacks in replacing Phalaris arundina- 
cea monotypes with sedge meadow veg¬ 
etation. 

RESTOR. ECOL. 18(2): 155-164. 2010. 

HERZSCHUH, U., MISCHKE, S., 
MEYER, H., PLESSEN, B., ETAL 

Using variations in the stable carbon iso¬ 
tope composition of macrophyte remains to 
quantify nutrient dynamics in lakes. 

J. PALEOLIMNOL. 43(4);739-750. 2010. 

KIDDING, B., NOLET, B.A., 

DE BOER, T., DE VRIES, P.P., ETAL 

Above- and below-ground vertebrate her¬ 
bivory may each favour a different subordi¬ 
nate species in an aquatic plant community. 
OECOLOGIA 162(1): 199-208. 2010. 


HOWARD, R. J. 

Intraspecific variation in growth of marsh 
macrophytes in response to salinity and soil 
type: implications for wetland restoration. 
ESTUARIES AND COASTS 33(1):127-138. 2010. 

HU, C., GE, E, ZHANG, S., LIU, B., 
ETAL 

Isolation of antialgal compounds from 
Potamogeton melaianus and algal inhibi¬ 
tory effects of common fatty acids. 

J. LAKE SCI. 22(4):569-576. 2010. 

HUTCHINSON, J.T., 

LANGELAND, K.A. 

Evaluation of aerial herbicide application 
for reduction of woody vegetation in a 
floodplain marsh. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:40-46. 2010. 

JO, LS., HAN, D.U., CHO, Y. J., LEE, E. J. 

Effects of light, temperature, and water 
depth on growth of a rare aquatic plant. Ra¬ 
nunculus kadzusensis. 

J. PLANT BIOL. 53(l):88-93. 2010. 

KARBERG, J.M., GALE, M.R. 

Exploration of meaningful subspecies defi¬ 
nitions of the carnivorous northern pitcher 
plant (Sarraceniapurpurea), throughout its 
geographic distribution. 

CONSERV. GENET. 11:2369-2378. 2010. 

KELTING, D.L., LAXSON, C.L. 

Cost and effectiveness of hand harvesting 
to control the Eurasian watermilfoil popu¬ 
lation in upper Saranac Eake, New York. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:1-5. 2010. 

KETTENRING, K.M., MCCORMICK, 
M.K., BARON, H.M., WHIGHAM, D.E 

Phragmites australis (common reed) inva¬ 
sion in the Rhode River subestuary of the 
Chesapeake Bay: disentangling the effects 
of foliar nutrients, genetic diversity, patch 
size, and seed viability. 

ESTUAR. COASTS 33(1):118-126. 2010. 

KIM, 1. 

Morphological study of the suction trap in 
aquatic Utricularia japonica. 

KOREAN J. MICROSCOPY 40(2): 109-116. 2010. 

KLEEBERG, A., KOHLER, J., 
SUKHODOLOVA, T., 
SUKHODOLOV,A. 

Effects of aquatic macrophytes on organic 
matter deposition, resuspension and phos¬ 


phorus entrainment in a lowland river. 
FRESHWATER BIOL. 55(2)326-345. 2010. 

KOSCHNICK, T.J., PETTY, D.G., 
JOHNSON, B., HULON, C., ETAL 

Comparative aquatic dissipation rates fol¬ 
lowing applications of Renovate OTF gran¬ 
ular herbicide and Rhodamine WT liquid. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:34-39. 2010. 

KOUAME, M.K., DIETOA, M.Y., DA 
COSTA, S.K., EDIA, E.O., ETAL 

Aquatic macroinvertebrate assemblages 
associated with root masses of water hya¬ 
cinths, Eichhornia crassipes (Mart.) Solms- 
Eaubach, 1883 (Commelinales: Pontederi- 
aceae) in Taabo Eake, Ivory Coast. 

J. NATUR. HIST. 44(5-6):257-278. 2010. 

KOVALENKO, K.E., DIBBLE, E.D., 
AGOSTINHO, A.A., CANTANHEDE, 
G., ETAL 

Direct and indirect effects of an introduced 
piscivore, Cichla kelberi and their modifi¬ 
cation by aquatic plants. 
HYDROBIOLOGIA638(l):245-253. 2010. 

LANGELAND, K.A., FISHEL, EM. 
Aquatic pest control. 

SM 3, UNIVERSITY OF FLORIDA, INSTITUTE 
OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURAL SCIENCES, 
GAINESVILLE, FL, 116 PP. 2010. 

LAPOINTE, B.E., BEDFORD, B.J. 

Ecology and nutrition of invasive Cauler- 
pa brachypus f parvifolia blooms on coral 
reefs off southeast Florida, U.S.A. 
HARMFUL ALGAE 9(1): 1-12. 2010. 

LI, J., PENG, S.L., CHEN, L.Y., 
WANG,R.L., ETAL 

Use of Sonneratia apetala allelopathy to 
control Spartina alterniflora weed. 
ALLELOPATHY!. 25(1): 123-132. 2010. 

LI, S., LISSNER, J., MENDELSSOHN, 
LA.,BRIX, H., ETAL 

Nutrient and growth responses of cattail 
{Typha domingensis) to redox intensity and 
phosphate availability. 

ANN. BOX 105(1):175-184. 2010. 

LU, J., ZHAO, L., MA, R., ZHANG, R, 
ETAL 

Performance of the biological control 
agent fiea beetle Agasicles hygrophila (Co- 
leoptera: Chrysomelidae), on two plant 
species Alternanthera philoxeroides (alii- 




Page 12 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


gatorweed) and^. sessilis (joyweed). 

BIOL. CONTROL. 54(1):9-13. 2010. 

MAEZO, M.J., FOURNIER, H., 
BEISNER, B.E. 

Potential and realized interactions between 
two aquatic invasive species: Eurasian wa- 
termilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum) and 
rusty crayfish (Orconectes rusticus). 

CAN. J. FISH. AQUAT. SCI. 67(4);684-700. 2010. 

MALLISON, C.T., THOMPSON, B.Z. 

Planting strategies to reestablish aquatic 
grasses. 

J. AQUAT. PLANT MANAGE. 48:52-55 (NOTES). 
2010 . 

MAYENCE, C.E., HESTER, M.W. 
Growth and allocation by a keystone wet¬ 
land plant, Panicum hemitomon, and im¬ 
plications for managing and rehabilitating 
coastal freshwater marshes, Louisiana, 
USA. 

WETEANDS ECOE. MANAG. 18(2):149-163. 2010. 

MCCORMICK, M.K., KETTENRING, 

K. M., BARON, H.M., WHIGHAM, D.E 

Extent and reproductive mechanisms of 
Phragmites australis spread in brackish wet¬ 
lands in Chesapeake Bay, Maryland (USA). 
WETEANDS 30(l):67-74. 2010. 

MCFARLANE, E. 

Watercraft inspector handbook. 

WISCONSIN DEPARTMENT OF NATURAE RE¬ 
SOURCES, UW-EXTENSION, WISCONSIN AS¬ 
SOCIATION OF EAKES, 160 PP. 2010. 

MERINO, J.H., HUVAL, D., 

NYMAN, A. J. 

Implication of nutrient and salinity interac¬ 
tion on the productivity of Spartina patens. 
WETEANDS ECOE. MANAG. 18(2);111-117. 2010. 

MERMILLOD-BLONDIN, E, 
LEMOINE, D.G. 

Ecosystem engineering by tubificid worms 
stimulates macrophyte growth in poorly 
oxygenated wetland sediments. 

FUNCT. ECOE. 24(2):444-453. 2010. 

MIAO, S., EDELSTEIN, C., 
CARSTENN, S., GU, B. 

Immediate ecological impacts of a pre¬ 
scribed fire on a cattail-dominated wetland 
in Florida Everglades. 

FUNDAM. APPE. EIMNOE , ARCH. HYDROBIOE. 
176(1):29-4L 2010. 


MICHELAN, T.S., THOMAZ, S.M., 
MORMUL, R.P., CARVALHO, P. 

Effects of an exotic invasive macrophyte 
(tropical signalgrass) on native plant com¬ 
munity composition, species richness and 
functional diversity. 

FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(6): 1315-1326. 2010. 

MONY, C., MERCIER, E., BONIS, A., 
BOUZILLE, J.B. 

Reproductive strategies may explain plant 
tolerance to inundation: a mesocosm ex¬ 
periment using six marsh species. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(2):99-104. 2010. 

MOODY, M.L., LES, D.H. 

Systematics of the aquatic angiosperm ge¬ 
nus Myriophyllum (Haloragaceae). 
SYSTEMATIC BOTANY 35( 1): 121 -139. 2010. 

MOORE, M., ROMANO, S.P., COOK, T. 

Synthesis of upper Mississippi River sys¬ 
tem submersed and emergent aquatic veg¬ 
etation: past, present, and future. 
HYDROBIOEOGIA 640( 1): 103-114. 2010. 

MORMUL, R.P., THOMAZ, S.M., 
HIGUTI, J., MARTENS, K. 

Ostracod (Crustacea) colonization of a na¬ 
tive and a non-native macrophyte species of 
Hydrocharitaceae in the upper Parana flood- 
plain (Brazil): an experimental evaluation. 
HYDROBIOEOGIA 644( 1):185-193. 2010. 

MUDGE, C.R., HALLER, W.T., 
NETHERLAND, M.D., 

KOWALSKY, J.K. 

Evaluating the influence of pH-dependent 
hydrolysis on the efficacy of flumioxazin 
for hydrilla control. 

J. AQUAT. PEANT MANAGE. 48:25-30. 2010. 

NUNES, E.L.P., DE LIMA, M.C., 
COAN, A.L, MOCO, M.C.D. 

Contribution to the embryology of Potamoge- 
ton L. (Alismatales: Potamogetonaceae). 
AQUAT. BOX 93(l):32-38. 2010. 

O’HARE, M.T., CLARKE, R.T., 
BOWES, M.J., CAILES, C., ET AL 
Eutrophication impacts on a river macro¬ 
phyte. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(3): 173-178. 2010. 

OVERHOLT, W., HANAGAN, M., 
DIAZ, R., WILLIAMS, D. 

Phragmites australis in Florida: native or 
exotic? 


FEORIDA EXOTIC PEST PEANT COUNCIE (FEEP- 
PC) 25TH ANNUAE SYMPOSIUM, APR. 5-8, CRYS- 
TAE RIVER, FE, PP. 17-18 (ABSTRACT). 2010. 

PAN, L., XIA, Q., QUAN, Z., LIU, H., 
ETAL 

Development of novel EST-SSRs from sa¬ 
cred lotus (Nelumbo nucifera Gaertn) and 
their utilization for the genetic diversity 
analysis of N. nucifera. 

J. HERED. 101(l):71-82. 2010. 

PATIL, S., SINGH, VP. 

Characteristics of monami wave in sub¬ 
merged vegetated flow. 

J. HYDROE. ENG. 15(3):171-18L 2010. 

PIERCE, S.C., MOORE, M.T., 
LARSEN, D., PEZESHKI, S.R. 

Macronutrient (N, P, K) and redoximor- 
phic metal (Fe, Mn) allocation in Leersia 
oryzoides (rice cutgrass) grown under dif¬ 
ferent flood regimes. 

WATER AIR SOIE POEEUT. 207(l-4):73-84. 2010. 

PLACHNO, B.J., SWIATEK, P. 

Unusual embryo structure in viviparous 
Utricularia nelumbifolia, with remarks on 
embryo evolution in genus Utricularia. 
PROTOPEASMA239 (l-4):69-80. 2010. 

POOVEY, A.G., GETSINGER, K.D. 

Comparative response of monoecious and 
dioecious hydrilla to endothall. 

J. AQUAT. PEANT MANAGE. 48:15-20. 2010. 

QUINTINO, V, FREITAS, R., 
MAMEDE, R., RICARDO, E, ETAL 

Remote sensing of underwater vegetation 
using single-beam acoustics. 

ICES J. MAR. SCI. 67(3):594-605. 2010. 

RAULINGS, E.J., MORRIS, K., 
ROACHE, M.C., BOON, P.L 

The importance of water regimes operating 
at small spatial scales for the diversity and 
structure of wetland vegetation. 
FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(3):701-715. 2010. 

RODRIGUES, R.B., THOMAZ, S.M. 

Photosynthetic and growth responses of Ege- 
ria densa to photosynthetic active radiation. 
AQUAT. BOX 92(4):281-284. 2010. 

RONZHINA, D.A., IVANOV, L.A., 
P’YANKOV, VI. 

Chemical composition of leaves and struc- 





Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 13 


ture of photosynthetic apparatus in aquatic 
higher plants. 

RUSS. J. PLANT PHYSIOL. 57(3):368-375. 2010. 

ROTHLISBERGER, J.D., 
CHADDERTON, W.L., 

MCNULTY, J., LODGE, D.M. 

Aquatic invasive species transport via trail- 
ered boats: what is being moved, who is 
moving it, and what can be done. 

FISHERIES 35(3): 121-132. 2010. 

SALGADO, J., SAYER, C., 
CARVALHO, L., DAVIDSON, T., 

ETAL 

Assessing aquatic macrophyte community 
change through the integration of paleo 
limnological and historical data at Loch 
Leven, Scotland. 

J. PAEEOEIMNOE. 43(1): 191-204. 2010. 

SAYER, C.D., DAVIDSON, T.A., 
JONES, J.L 

Seasonal dynamics of macrophytes and 
phytoplankton in shallow lakes: a eutro¬ 
phication-driven pathway from plants to 
plankton? 

FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(3):500-513. 2010. 

SHEARER, J.F. 

A historical perspective of pathogen bio¬ 
logical control of aquatic plants. 

WEED TECHNOE. 24(2):202-207. 2010. 

SCHELSKE, C.L., LOWE, E.E, 
KENNEY, W.F., BATTOE, L.E., 

ETAL 

How anthropogenic darkening of Lake 
Apopka induced benthic light limitation 
and forced the shift from macrophyte to 
phytoplankton dominance. 

EIMNOE. OCEANOGR. 55(3): 1201-1212. 2010. 

SHUCKSMITH, J.D., BOXALL, J.B., 
GUYMER, I. 

Effects of emergent and submerged natural 
vegetation on longitudinal mixing in open 
channel flow. 

WATER RESOURCES RESEARCH 46:4504-4518. 
2010 . 

SHI, Q., ZHANG, J., ZHANG, C., 

LI, C., ETAL 

Preparation of activated carbon from cattail 
and its application for dyes removal 
J. ENVIRON. SCI.-CHINA22(l):91-97. 2010. 


SILVA, T.S.F., COSTA, M.P.F., 
MELACK, J.M. 

Assessment of two biomass estimation 
methods for aquatic vegetation growing on 
the Amazon floodplain. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(3): 161-167. 2010. 

SONGPANICH, P., HONGTRAKUL, V 

Intersubgeneric cross in Nymphaea spp. L. 
to develop a blue hardy waterlily. 

SCI. HORT.-AMSTERDAM 124(4):475-48L 2010. 

SORRELL, B.K., HAWES, 1. 

Convective gas flow development and the 
maximum depths achieved by helophyte 
vegetation in lakes. 

ANN. BOX 105(1): 165-174. 2010. 

SOUSA, W.T.Z., THOMAZ, S.M., 
MURPHY, K. J. 

Response of native Egeria najas Planch, 
and invasive Hydrilla verticillata (L.f) 
Royle to altered hydroecological regime in 
a subtropical river. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(l):40-48. 2010. 

SPENCER, D.E, REJMANEK, M. 
Competition between two submerged 
aquatic macrophytes, Potamogeton pecti- 
natus and Potamogeton gramineus, across 
a light gradient. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(4):239-244. 2010. 

SULLIVAN, L., WILDOVA, R., 
GOLDBERG, D., VOGEL, C. 

Growth of three cattail {Typha) taxa in re¬ 
sponse to elevated CO 2 . 

PEANT ECOE. 207(1):121-129. 2010. 

SULTANA, M., ASAEDA, T., 

AZIM, M.E., FUJINO, T. 

Morphological responses of a submerged 
macrophyte to epiphyton. 

AQUAT. ECOE. 44:73-81. 2010. 

THUM, R.A., LENNON, J.T. 

Comparative ecological niche models predict 
the invasive spread of variable-leaf milfoil 
(Myriophyllum heterophyllum) and its poten¬ 
tial impact on closely related native species. 
BIOE. INVASIONS 12(1): 133-143. 2010. 

TRAVIS, S.E., MARBURGER, J.E., 
WINDELS, S., KUBATOVA, B. 

Hybridization dynamics of invasive cattail 
(Typhaceae) stands in the western Great 
Lakes region of North America: a molecu¬ 
lar analysis. 

J. ECOE. 98(1):7-16. 2010. 


TUCKETT, R.E., MERRITT, D.J., 

HAY, ER., HOPPER, S.D., ETAL 

Dormancy, germination and seed bank stor¬ 
age: a study in support of ex situ conserva¬ 
tion of macrophytes of southwest Australian 
temporary pools. 

FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(5): 1118-1129. 2010. 

VILLAMAGNA, A.M., MURPHY, B.R. 

Ecological and socio-economic impacts of 
invasive water hyacinth (Eichhornia cras- 
sipes)\ a review. 

FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(2):282-298. 2010. 

VANDERBOSCH, D.A., 
GALATOWITSCH, S.M. 

An assessment of urban lakeshore restora¬ 
tions in Minnesota. 

ECOE. RESTOR. 28(l):71-80. 2010. 

WERSAL, R.M., MADSEN, J.D. 

Combinations of Penoxsulam and Diquat 
as foliar applications for control of water- 
hyacinth and common salvinia: evidence of 
herbicide antagonism. 

J. AQUAT PEANT MANAGE. 48:21-25. 2010. 

WONG, P.K., LIANG, Y, LIU, N.Y., 
QIU, J.-W. 

Palatability of macrophytes to the invasive 
freshwater snail Pomacea canaliculata. 
differential effects of multiple plant traits. 
FRESHWATER BIOE. 55(10):2023-203L 2010. 

XIAO, C., WANG, X., XIA, J., LIU, G. 

The effect of temperature, water level and 
burial depth on seed germination of Myrio¬ 
phyllum spicatum and Potamogeton mala- 
ianus. 

AQUAT. BOX 92(l):28-32. 2010. 

YO, M.-J., SOLTIS, P.S., SOLTIS, D.E. 

Expression of floral MADS-box genes in 
two divergent water lilies: Nymphaeales 
and Nelumbo. 

INX J. PEANT SCI. 171(2): 121-146. 2010. 

ZHANG, Y.-Y, ZHANG, D.-Y, 
BARRETT, S.C.H. 

Genetic uniformity characterizes the inva¬ 
sive spread of water hyacinth {Eichhornia 
crassipes), a clonal aquatic plant. 

MOE. ECOE. 19(9): 1774-1786. 2010. 

ZUR BURG, F.W. 

The effect of certain herbicides on the wa¬ 
ter hyacinth and other aquatic plants. 

PROC. SOIE SCI. SOC. FEA., CEEWISTON, FE, 
OCX 12-13, 1948, VOE. 9:92-99. 1949. 




Page 14 


AQUAPHYTE 


Summer 2011 


MARY’S PICKS continued from page 9. 

Riefner, R.E. & Smith, A.R. (2009) Salvinia minima and S. ob- 
longifolia (Salviniaceae) New to California, with Notes on the 
S. auriculata Complex. J. Bot. Res. Inst. Texas 3(2):855-866 

The authors report the first doeumented oceurrence of Salvinia 
minima and S. oblongifolia in California and also review the range, 
ecology, reproduction, potential invasiveness, mode of introduc¬ 
tion, and likely pathways of dispersal. In addition, Salvinia molesta, 
previously found in California and known as one of the world’s 
worst aquatic weeds, is re-examined using venation patterns, and its 
presence in the state is confirmed. A key for identification of sterile 
material of species of Salvinia in California is provided. 

Although S. molesta and other species from the S. auriculata 
complex (exhibiting the recognizable “egg beater” shaped hairs) 
are listed as Federal Noxious Weeds and their importation prohib¬ 
ited, “.. .the continuing growth of internet sales and demand for the 
water-garden industry will increase the likelihood that species of 
Salvinia will continue to be introduced by cultivation and escape to 
California’s urban and wildland wetland habitats.” 

Tipping, P.W., Center, T.D., Sosa, A.J. & Dray, F.A. (2011) 
Host Specificity Assessment and Potential Impact of Mega- 
melus scutellaris (Hemiptera: Delphacidae) on Waterhyacinth 
Eichhornia crassipes (Pontederiales: Pontederiaceae). Biocon¬ 
trol Sci. and Technol. 21(l):75-87 

Eichhornia crassipes, the aquatic weed having perhaps the great¬ 
est socio-economic impact worldwide, was evaluated for biological 
control by the delphacid, Megamelus scutellaris. The insect was 
evaluated under quarantine conditions for host specificity includ¬ 
ing no-choice, two-choice, nymph transfer, and sustainability tests. 
Survival and development of adults and nymphs was the primary 
metric used for determining host suitability because feeding scars 
are inconclusive. To determine the fundamental host range of M. 
scutellaris, 69 plant species were tested: 27 were native, 5 were 
exotic, and 11 were economically important species. 

After conducting no-choice and choice tests, nymph transfer tests 
and impact tests, it was determined that Megamelus scutellaris ex¬ 
hibited a high level of oviposition and developmental fidelity to E. 
crassipes. The insect was not able to sustain populations on any test 
plant past the FI generation. 

The authors conclude M. scutellaris is sufficiently host-specific 
and therefore can be safely released on E. crassipes in the United 
States. The insect significantly stressed E. crassipes under artificial 
but conservative testing conditions, demonstrating its potential to 
augment the suppressive effects caused by the existing biological 
control agents in the U.S. The USDA Animal Plant Health Inspec¬ 
tion Service issued a general release permit for M. scutellaris in 
February 2010 and releases have been conducted in selected loca¬ 
tions. 

Van de Wiel, C.C.M., Van der Schoot, J., Van Valkenbnrg, 
J.L.C.H., Dnistermaat, H. & Smnlders, M.J.M. (2009) DNA 
Barcoding Discriminates the Noxious Invasive Plant Spe¬ 
cies, Floating Pennywort (Hydrocotyle ranunculoides L.f.), 
from Non-Invasive Relatives. Molecular Ecology Resources 
9(4): 1086-1091 


There is great interest in using DNA barcoding for identifying 
plants and standardizing a protocol to barcode plants, especially 
known invasives. At ports of entry, should a protocol be developed 
and widely available, one would be able to unequivocally distin¬ 
guish the invaders from related, non-invasive species. Toward that 
end, the authors show “that it is possible to distinguish H. ranuncu¬ 
loides from a series of closely related congeners by using a single 
plastid DNA sequence, trnH-psbA.” 

For this study the invasive plant, Hydrocotyle ranunculoides, 
was chosen because of the problems it causes to waterways in the 
Netherlands and because, “for identification purposes within mor¬ 
phologically well-distinguishable species groups, such as the genus 
Hydrocotyle, genetic variation is not an insurmountable issue, as the 
main problems will be to discriminate between the closely related 
taxa.” 

Van de Wiel et al. found that sequencing one variable chloroplast 
locus, trnH-psbA, was sufficient for distinguishing a noxious inva¬ 
sive plant from a series of closely related congeners. The authors’ 
hope is that “this could be helpful with enforcing a ban on import of 
such invasives, such as is already in place in the Netherlands.” 

Xiong, W., Yu, D., Wang, Q., Liu, C., & Wang, L. (2009) A 
Snail Prefers Native over Exotic Freshwater Plants: Implica¬ 
tions for the Enemy Release Hypotheses. Freshwater Biology 
53(ll):2256-2263 

One of the widely accepted theories used to explain the success 
of invasive plants is the enemy release hypothesis (ERH). To test 
the ERH, the researchers assessed the palatability of 20 native and 7 
exotic plants to Radix swinhoei, a generalist herbivorous snail, itself 
native to Eianzi Eake in Hubei Province, China. 

In this study the authors predicted, according to ERH hypothesis, 
that (i) snails would prefer native over exotic species in a phyloge- 
netically paired assay (eight pairs) and (ii) snails would prefer native 
over exotic species in a lake where all occurred. In all eight feeding 
assays, R. swinhoei showed a significant preference for the native 
over the exotic species in seven of the eight matched taxonomic 
pairs. The authors conclude, “Exotic plants in our study were less 
palatable than native plants, suggesting that exotics have a potential 
advantage in invading lakes and wetlands in this area, and perhaps 
elsewhere.” 


Florida Research Newsletter 

The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Com mi ssion 
(FWC) Invasive Plant Management Section’s Research 
and Outreach Program publishes a research newsletter to 
help resource managers in Florida stay informed about current 
FWC contracted research and outreach in invasive plant man¬ 
agement. The FWC Invasive Plant Management Research and 
Outreach Program Newsletter is compiled by Don C. Schmitz, 
Research Program Manager, Invasive Plant Management Sec¬ 
tion, Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission in 
Tallahassee, Florida. Don.Schmitz@MyFWC.com 








Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 15 


FloraGator—a new multiple-entry key to the flowering 
plant families of Florida 

By Niels Proctor and Dr. Sandra Wilson 


H ow do you identify an unknown plant? There are formal means 
and informal means of plant identification, and—if you’re 
anything like the rest of us—^you probably start with the informal 
means. You ask the guy across the hall. You flip through some 
plant books to find something similar. Maybe you Google “purple 
fiowers and opposite leaves” to see if you get lucky. Sooner or 
later though, if you really want to identify the mystery plant in 
your hand, you’ll need to give up on the half-hearted approach 
and turn to that traditional tool of plant identification: the single¬ 
entry, dichotomous key. 

For at least a few centuries, written botanical keys have been 
the standard method of identifying unknown plants. Such keys 
are “single-entry” because they expect you to start at a particular 
point (Question 1) and they are “dichotomous” 
because they present a choice of precisely two 
options at each and every step. When you use 
a key of this kind, you are led through a series 
of (hopefully) clear-cut choices until, by giving 
a series of (hopefully) accurate answers, you 
eventually arrive at the correct identification. 

Written keys have some fairly obvious ben¬ 
efits. They are cheap to make and easy to repro¬ 
duce. They are exceedingly portable and easy 
to replace. And they carry the benefit of expert 
guidance. When you use a dichotomous key, 
you are being led by the unseen hand of some expert botanist who 
has selected the most distinctive and reliable features of the plant 
for identification. The disadvantage of such a key is that it can’t 
possibly cover all the plant ID problems that come up in real life. 
What if you reach a question about fiowers, but the plant you’re 
holding isn’t in bloom? Or what if there’s a question about leaves 
but you’re only holding a fiower that someone picked and brought 
in to your office? Dichotomous keys can also be very slow ways 
to identify some unusual plant that could be identified in moments 
if someone asked the right questions about a few distinctive fea¬ 
tures. 

To address all of these problems, botanists began experiment¬ 
ing a few decades ago with a new kind of identification tool: a 
“multiple-entry” key that collects information without any par¬ 
ticular order or starting point. The first such keys, produced in the 
1960s, were simple (but clever) punch card affairs. They allowed 
a user to line up a series of holes punched through index cards to 
see which plants matched certain combinations of features. The 
card stacks were effective tools for identification, but they were 
bulky to carry and expensive to produce and they never really 
caught on. 

A newer generation of tools, produced around the turn of the 
century, were computer programs that could compare a list of 
plant features with a database of species descriptions. These pro¬ 
grams brought enormous potential for botanical research, and they 
are still being used and developed. Their primary limitation is that 


they require the user to download and install a particular piece 
of software. The newest identification tools, that are just begin¬ 
ning to come online, are web-based, multiple-entry keys. These 
keys don’t require any special software apart from a normal web 
browser, and they are available to anyone with an internet con¬ 
nection. 

As part of the environmental horticulture program (funded 
through a mini-grant within the College of Agricultural and Life 
Sciences), we have begun to develop one such web-based, multi¬ 
ple-entry key to let botanists identify unknown plants to the fam¬ 
ily level. We call our key “FloraGator” and we are programming it 
to cover all 189 of the flowering plant families found in the natural 
areas of Florida. The site allows a user to enter information from 
a list of 220 fiowering plant characteristics and 
receive a list of the corresponding families that 
display those features. By steadily entering more 
and more information about a plant, a user should 
be able to narrow down the list to a single family. 

Because FloraGator is a multiple-entry key, 
there is no “hidden botanisf ’ guiding the user to 
the most distinctive or useful features for identi¬ 
fication. This may make the key harder to use for 
some beginners, but our hope is that it also makes 
the key a better educational tool. Students who 
use the site become active plant investigators, ap¬ 
plying their new botanical terminology and searching for clues 
to a correct identification. And, along they way, they learn which 
features are most useful and powerful for reaching that correct ID. 
(To help students practice these plant identification skills, we’ve 
included several old botanical illustrations as part of the site.) 

Multiple-entry keys are going to become more common in the 
near future, and they’re also likely to make the Jump from com¬ 
puters to cell phones. Our lab is actively pursuing grant funding to 
convert FloraGator from a web site to a smart phone app. Once we 
make that transition, a plant enthusiast anywhere in the state will 
be able to pull out a phone, enter some information, and quickly 
identify a plant to the family level. It will be a neat (and fun) bit 
of technology, and we hope it will be considerably more reliable 
than asking that guy down the hall. 

Can you help us test FloraGator? 

FloraGator is primarily intended to be a teaching tool for stu¬ 
dents of botany and plant systematics. We hope that it will give 
users an active role in collecting information and applying ter¬ 
minology. But, to be sure it works, we need to do some testing. 

To help us out, please go to this URL: http://hort.ifas.ufi.edu/ 
fioragator/ 

Key out a plant (or two) and send us your results. We would 
love to hear how it worked and get any suggestions you have for 
improvements. 









Summer 2011 


AQUAPHYTE 


Page 16 


AriK^, continued from page 1. 

continued to expand the scope of bibliographic 
coverage, now adding upland invasive plants 
in Florida to the collected citations. 

The database was eventually reprogrammed 
by a University of Florida computer-science 
student as part of his senior project (at no cost 
to us). Data entry improved remarkably but 
searching APIRS is still complex and still, es¬ 
sentially only two people are adept at using the 
database to its full potential. Colorful stamps 
have been replaced by e-mail messages with 
file attachments, and correspondence has be¬ 
come swift and brief 

Although amazing developments on the In¬ 
ternet have streamlined the process of building 
the APIRS collection, we struggle to align our 
mission with the overwhelming availability of 


literature on the web while keeping within our 
very limited budget. The volume of literature 
is astoundingly large and widely dispersed in 
a myriad of Journals, proceedings, websites, 
blogs, books, newsletters, and grey literature 
over the entire globe. Numerous research in¬ 
terconnections exist (invasion theory, plant 
physiology, phytosociology, taxonomy, genet¬ 
ics, management, etc.), creating a bewildering 
variety of possibilities. We try to remember 
who funds our work (the state of Florida). Do 
we confine our collections to problem spe¬ 
cies in Florida? What about research from the 
native ranges of invasive species in Florida? 
Or invasive plant research in similar latitudes 
or neighboring states? Modeling, economic 
impacts, management theory, screening and 
prevention studies? We struggle to keep pace 
with these developments, and wish for updated 


programming to bring APIRS closer to current 
standards. In addition, there is a broader Infor¬ 
mation Office to run. 

While all universities in the United States 
have experienced budget cuts and changes in 
direction over the past several years, we con¬ 
tinue moving forward to provide information 
to researchers, managers, and educators to 
assist in their work. The Center is an integral 
part of the University of Florida’s IFAS exten¬ 
sion, research and teaching program. We will 
keep you posted on the Information Office and 
APIRS database efforts with issues of AQUA¬ 
PHYTE, now in its 30th year. In the mean¬ 
time, please continue to send us your research 
articles, books, conference proceedings, and 
an occasional greeting from your part of the 
world—and please let us know if we can assist 
you. That part of our mission is unchanged. 


AQUAPHYTE 


AQUAPHYTE is the newsletter of the 
Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants 
(CAIP) and the Aquatic, Wetland and 
Invasive Plant Information Retrieval 
System (APIRS) of the University of 
Florida / Institute of Food and Agricultural 
Sciences (UF/IFAS). Support for CAIP is 
provided by the Florida Fish and Wildlife 
Conservation Commission, Invasive Plant 
Management Section, and UF/IFAS. 

EDITOR: Karen Brown 

AQUAPHYTE is sent to managers, 
researchers and agencies in 71 countries 
around the world. Comments, announce¬ 
ments, news items and other information 
relevant to aquatic and invasive plant 
research are solicited. 

Inclusion in AQUAPHYTE does not 
constitute endorsement, nor does exclu¬ 
sion represent criticism, of any item, 
organization, individual, or institution by 
the University of Florida. 



UNIVERSITY of 

FLORIDA 


IFAS Extension 

Center for Aquatic 
and Invasive Plants 


University of Florida 

Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences 

Center for Aquatic and Invasive Plants (CAIP) 

7922 N.W. 71st Street, Gainesville, FL 32653-3071 USA 
CAIP-website@ufl.edu • http://plants.ifas.ufl.edu 



Aroma (Dichrostachys cinerea subspecies africana) is readily 
available in the international, national, and local trade. It is touted 
on the Web as an interesting specimen for the landscape, and an 
appealing bonsai species. Photo by C. Jacono, March 2010. 

See artiele on page 3 of this issue. 





















