






Aquilegia: Newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant Society 

Dedicated to furthering the knowiedge, appreciation, and conservation of native piants and habitats ofCoiorado through education, 

stewardship, and advocacy 


STAFF 

Linda Smith, Administrative Coordinator & Sales Manager 
conpsoffice@gmail.com, 970-663-4085 
Jen Bousselot, Membership & Marketing Coordinator 
conpspromote@gmail.com 

Board of Directors 
OFFICERS 

President(Co-): Charlie Turner conpscturner@gmail.com 

President(Co-): Jan L. Turner JLturner@regis.edu 

Vice-President: Irene Shonie irene.shonle@colostate.edu 

Treasurer: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 

Secretary: Denise Wilson deniseclairwilson@gmail.com 

MEMBERS-AT-LARGE 

Jenny Ramp Neale nealejr@gmail.com 

Bob Powell robertlpowell@durango.net 

Lenore Mitchell mitchelllenore89@gmail.com 

Steve Olson sdolsonoslods@aol.com 

Jessica Smithjpsmith24@gmail.com 

Jan L.TurnerJLturner@regis.edu 

Cecily Mui cmui.svcc.gmail.com 

Amy Yarger amy@bigempire.com 

CHAPTER PRESIDENTS 

Boulder: Erica Cooper boulderconps@gmail.com 
Gore Range: Nanette Kuich kix@vail.net 
Metro Denver: Samantha Clark sam1 1 30@hotmail.com 
Northern: Renee Galeano-Popp mtnpoppies@aol.com 
Plateau: Stephen Stern stephen.r.stern@gmail.com 
Southeast: Jeff Jonesjjones@jonestc.com 
Southwest: John Bregarjohnbregar09@gmail.com 
COMMITTEE CHAIRS 

Conservation: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Education & Outreach: Sara Copp src71 5@gmail.com 
Field Studies: Steve Popovich stevepopovich@hotmail.com 
Finance: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Florticulture & Restoration: Jim Tolstrup jim@suburbitat.org 
Media: Jan Turner JLturner@regis.edu 
Membership: Charlie Turner conpscturner@gmail.com 
Research Grants: Catherine Kleier ckleier@regis.edu 
Sales: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
Workshops: Ronda Koski ronda.koski@colostate.edu 
Webmaster: Mo Ewing bayardewing@gmail.com 
SOCIAL MEDIA 

E-Newsletter Editor & Social Media Coordinator: Jen Bousselot 
Facebook: Carol English Twitter: Sally White 

AQUILEGIA: Newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant Society 

Aquilegia Vol. 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 201 6 
ISSN 21 61 -731 7 (Online) - ISSN 2162-0865 (Print) 

Copyright © 2016 

Aquilegia is the newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant 
Society. Members receive four regular issues per year 
(Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter) plus a special issue for the 
Society Annual Conference held in the Fall. 

All contributions are subject to editing for brevity, 
grammar, and consistency, with final approval of 
substantive changes by the author. Articles from 
Aquilegia may be used by other native plant societies 
or non-profit groups, if fully cited to the author and 
attributed to Aquilegia. 

The deadline for the Fall issue is October 30. 

Announcements, news, articles, book reviews, poems, 
botanical illustrations, photographs, and other 
contributions should be sent to the editor. 

Editor: Jan Turner JLTurner@regis.edu 

Cartoonist :Rob Pudim Columnists: Mo Ewing, Jim Borland 

Proofreaders: Linda Smith, Nan Daniels, Jen Bousselot, Sophia 

Warsh 

Layout & Design: Jan Turner, Troubleshooter: Charlie Turner 


Inside this issue 

Columns 

News & Announcements 31 

Conservation Corner: Agencies & Organizations 17 

Grow Native 43 

Book Review & New Books 41 

Articles 

Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week 4 

Tass Kelso: Tributes 6 

Dr. Arthur Kruckeberg - Obituary 9 

Superbloom at Rabbit Valley 10 

CoNPS 201 6 Annual Conference & CO Rare Plant Symposium 11 

Forty Years of CoNPS History 15 

Steinkamp Research Report: Regarding DeBeque Phacelia's 

Taxonomic Synonymy 19 

Zen and the Art of Wildflower Science 22 

Crowded Parks 24 

CoNPS Garden Tours 25 

Volunteers Make a Difference 30 

Eastern Slope News & Articles 35 

Browns Canyon Bioblitz 36 

Ute Indian Prayer Trees 36 

Western Slope News & Articles 38 

Bioblitz in the West: Plateau Chapter 38 

Grizzly Peak Research Natural Area 38 

Learning Field Techniques in Sagebrush Country 39 

Amazing Weekend at RMBL 40 


Botanicum absurdum by Rob Pudim 



2 


Aquiiegia Voiume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 




Your Support of CoNPS 

Members support the Colorado Native Plant Society in a number of ways. This serves to fulfill the mission of CoNPS, furthering 
the knowledge, appreciation, and conservation of native plants and habitats of Colorado through education, stewardship, and 
advocacy. 

Your service as volunteers makes a direct contribution to CoNPS' programs, whether it is promoting native plant gardening by of- 
fering your yard for a native plant garden tour, presenting programs for children at a nature center or library, helping pull weeds to 
reduce invasive plants in an area, organizing or leading a field trip so that others can learn about native plants and areas that need 
to be conserved, organizing or teaching a workshop or field seminar so members and non-members receive in-depth knowledge 
of a plant group or other subject, helping with the annual conference so information from a number of experts can be shared with 
a large group of people, giving input on plants or habitats that are being threatened, helping get information to readers through 
the website, social media, and /Agu/Veg/a, or volunteering on bioblitzes. CoNPS has a number of committees that organize mem- 
bers to make a difference in a specific area of education or conservation. We are divided into chapters that offer excellent educa- 
tional opportunities including field trips, chapter programs, and service projects. 

The bottom line is that it is all about you. You can make a difference. You can do it from home on your computer or out in the field. 
You will see volunteers making a difference at the CoNPS Annual Conference. You will see volunteers making a difference when 
you go on a field trip or attend a chapter meeting, . There are so many ways you can help. On page 30, you can read about the 
contribution of two CoNPS volunteers, David and Kate, who have reached a large number of children and adults with their pro- 
grams on plants and pollinators. We are grateful to David, Kate, and the many others who volunteer for CoNPS. You, too, can make 
a difference and have fun doing it! There is a "Volunteer" link on the CoNPS website menu that will lead you to descriptions of the 
CoNPS committees and what they do. The chapters can always use volunteers, tool At the Annual Conference at 6 p.m., attend the 
CoNPS Town Hall Meeting. Ask questions, give suggestions about the future of CoNPS, and find out about volunteer opportunities. 

Toetry By tfie Otfier yeatts* 

*(Not William Butler Yeats or Lora ine Yeatts, but Dick Yeatts, PhD, physicist, poet, writer, musician, and mountaineer) 


Vipsacus 

Herbophyles are want to fuss about die genus Dipsacus. 

A nasty weed, diat is a fact; but teasel has a second act. 
Dipsacus stands tall and proud, brisded heads above the crowd 
Of lesser plants amassed below ividi litde more dian leaves to show. 
In fields nidi limigry moudis to feed, teasels have abmidant seed. 
In all die shops diat fuller wool, teasel is die perfect tool. 

And to erne one’s many ills. Dr. Dipsa has the pills: 

Should you have a broken bone, no need to sit ai omid and moan; 
Or if you have a stomach ache, here’s die medicine to take; 

For liver, kidney, brain or skin, Dipsacus is sure to ivin; 

And to put your mind at ease, teasel cures Lyme disease. 

Now to brighten up your day, try teasel in a doral bouquet. 
Need a pet about die house? Make yourself a teasel mouse! 
Dipsa, here, is Greek for diirst, so let us keep hrst what’s first: 
Lift a glass, you have the knack, become a dipsamaniac. 

Dick Ye 

Photos by Loraine Yeatts 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week 

Proclamation Signed by Gov. John Hickenlooper 

Thanks to the efforts of Colorado Native Plant Society members, Governor John Hickenlooper signed a proclamation designating 
June 1 0 through June 1 6 as Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week. Some other states have Native Plant Days or Weeks includ- 
ing New Mexico, Texas, and California, but this year is the first time that Native Plant Appreciation Week has been celebrated in 
Colorado. The proclamation is significant because it is a recognition by the State of the importance of native plants and habitats 
to the citizens of Colorado and the many reasons to cherish and protect the plants. Special thanks go to Jennifer Bousselot, CoNPS 
Membership and Marketing Coordinator, who made the establishment of a Colorado Native Plant Week a goal when she start- 




WHEREAS, Colorado is known for its beautiful scenery of colorful native wildflowers and diverse native plant 
communities which transition over 10,000 feet of elevation from grasslands, riparian areas with ribbons of 
cottonwood and willow, sagebrush semi-desert shriiblands, pihon-juniper pygmy forests, scrub oak and mountain 
mahogany montane shrublands, montane forests of Douglas-fir, ponderosa pine, lodgepole pines, and aspen 
groves that reach into the subalpine forests of Engelmann spruce, subalpine fir, limber pine, and bristlecone pine, 
and to the delicate plants of the alpine t undra; and 

WEIEREAS, our state fiowei; the Rocky Mountain columbine (Aquilegia coerlea), our state grass, blue grama, 
(Bouteloua gracilis), and our state tree, the Colorado blue spruce (Picea pungens) all serve as beautiful symbols 
for Colorado: and 

WHEREAS, the native plants of Colorado, such as the ancient bristlecone pine that is 2,500 years old, a limber 
pine 1, 600 years old, and an aspen grove with a root system over 80, 000 years old, are some of the most ancient 
residents of Colorado; and 

WHEREAS, native plant ecosystems with riparian, wetlands, and fens are important to keeping Colorado’s 
watersheds healthy; and 

WHEREAS, Colorado has over 3,000 native plant species, 132 of those species being endemic, and their habitats 
are in danger of being crowded out by invasive, non-native plants; and 

WHEREAS, Colorado ’s native plants are a critical part of our state 's natural heritage, and over 500 native plant 
species are recognized as rare; and 

WHEREAS, the native ecosystems provide necessary food and habitat for the smallest to largest of creatures: 
pollinators, birds, pika, marmot, pronghorn, bighorn sheep, elk, bears, and other wildlife of the state; and 

WHEREAS, native plants incorporated into the landscaping in our yards and communities helps increase the 
amount of habitat available to our native wildlife displaced by human development and necessary for biodiversity 
and a healthy ecosystem, and helps decrease the amount of resources, such as water and chemicals, used in our 
yards; and 

Therefore, I, John W. Hickenlooper, Governor of the entire State of Colorado, do hereby proclaim, forever after, 
the period between June 10, 2016 and June 16, 2016, as 

NA TIVE PLANTS WEEK 

in the State of Colorado. 

Executive Seal of the State of 
Colorado, this tenth day of June, 

2016 


ed her job with CoNPS in July, 201 5. Cecily Mui, 
CoNPS Board member, was instrumental in bring- 
ing CoNPS' request for a Colorado Native Plant 
Appreciation Day to the attention of the Colorado 
legislature after helping Jen draft a request in 
writing. The proclamation itself was the collabora- 
tive effort of a number of CoNPS members but it 
never would have come to be without the efforts 
of these two dynamic women, Jen Bousselot and 
Cecily Mui. 

The proclamation became effective on June 10, 
2016, the anniversary of the founding of the Colo- 
rado Native Plant Society. A party was held at the 
Audubon Society of Denver Amphitheater at Chat- 
field State Park to celebrate the 40th anniversary of 
CoNPS and the first Colorado Native Plant Appreci- 
ation Week. Board members including Cecily Mui, 
Jen Bousselot, Jan Loechell Turner, Charlie Turner, 
Jessica Smith, Mo Ewing, Amy Yarger, and Denise 
Wilson took turns reading the statements from the 
proclamation. 


CoNPS members were delighted that Jen Bous- 
selot organized the party celebrating this historic 
event. 



Jen Bousselot looks on as Cecily Mui reads from the 
proclamation. Photos by Loraine Yeatts. 



Jen Bousselot, Charlie Amy Yarger and Mo Ewing 
Turner, and Jessica Smith 


4 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


CoNPS 40th Anniversary & 
Native Plant Week Celebration 


The CoNPS 40th Anniversary Party & Native Plant Appreciation 
Week celebration at the Audubon Society of Greater Denver's 
Amphitheater at Chatfield State Park on June 1 0, featured a 
potiuck, the presentation by Cecily Mui of the Native Plants Ap- 
preciation Week proclamation signed by Governor Hickenloop- 
er, talks by Dr. Jack Carter and Dr. Bill Weber, and music by MikI 
Brawner and Eve Reshetnik Brawner of Harlequin's Gardens. 

The Colorado Native Plant Society was incorporated on June 
1 0, 1 976 so June 1 0, 201 6 was the perfect date to celebrate the 
anniversary and Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week. 

The founding of CoNPS was prompted by a 1976 workshop on 
threatened and endangered plants sponsored by the Denver 
Audubon Society and the U.S. Forest Service. Therefore, it was 
quite appropriate that the celebration was held at the Audu- 
bon Society of Greater Denver's facility and that USFS Regional 
Botanist,Tyler Johnson, and Executive Director of the Audubon 
Society of Greater Denver, Karl Brummert, were present. 

The evening started with a delicious potiuck (CoNPS members 
are excellent cooks) that members enjoyed on the deck outside 
the Audubon Nature Center. Pat Murphy staffed the Book Sales 
table and members brought seeds and plants to swap. Rick 
Brune's contribution of seeds and plants was spectacular! 

Following a reading of the statements in the proclamation by 
CoNPS Board members. Jack Carter gave an interesting talk and 
slide presentation on important botanists in Colorado botany 
including the contributions of amateur botanists. Jack also 
announced thatTass Kelso, one of the botanists featured in his 
presentation, had passed away Just days before. Jack and Tass 
were friends and colleagues at Colorado College. Jack success- 
fully battled the bright setting sun and strong winds (Charlie 
Turner held the screen to prevent it from blowing away) while 
giving his PowerPoint presentation. 

Next, long-time Boulder Chapter members and owners of 
Harlequin's Gardens, MikI and Eve Brawner, entertained the 
audience with their songs. Harlequin's Gardens in Boulder is 
well-known for its excellent selection of native plants. 

The evening concluded with a 
fascinating talk by Bill Weber 
about the reason for the strange 
distribution of a species of 
moss. Bill Weber was a founding 
member of CoNPS and the first 
elected president of CoNPS. 


Dr. Bill Weber 





From left to rightiTyler Johnson, Jessica Smith, AmyYarger, Mo Ewing, 
Jen Bousselot (behind Mo), Cecily Mui, Denise Wilson, Jan Loechell 
Turner, Karl Brummert, Executive Director, Audubon Society of Greater 
Denver. Photo by Loraine Yeatts. 



Above: MikI and Eve Brawner performing. 

Below: Potiuck dinner; In foreground, Rick Brune, Charlie 
and Jan Turner. 



Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



Tributes to a Beloved Colorado Botanist: Tass Kelso 

Botanist and professorTass Kelso, passed away in June. Tass was a remarkable botanist and a remarkable person, whose 
friendship, research, and fine teaching skills touched the lives of many people. Below are some tributes from her friends and 
colleagues. 


Tass Kelso: The Loss of a Dear Friend 

by Jack Carter 


On June 8th we lost Sylvia "Tass" Kelso to pancreatic cancer, and what a terrible loss it was 
for so many reasons. Beyond being an outstanding teacher and distinguished scholar and 
investigator in the plant sciences, Tass had a personality and demeanor that made it a real joy 
to work with her. She had a gentle and quiet attitude towards learning that enticed students 
and faculty alike to want to Join her in the study of plants and the conservation of the natural 
world. She also had the disposition and presence, plus an academic background, that fit into 
the liberal arts and science college campus. 

Her undergraduate degree from Dartmouth College, a Master's Degree from the University 
of Colorado, (where she studied under Bill Weber), and a PhD from the University of Alaska 
prepared her for the Colorado College setting. In 1 987, when she arrived on campus, she 
brought with her an enthusiasm for the alpine and arctic flora of the Rocky Mountains, and she 
had a deep interest in maintaining and contributing to the Jack L. Carter Herbarium. Tass was a 
member of the Botanical Society of America, the American Society of Plant Taxonomy, and the 
Colorado Native Plant Society. 



Tass Kelso 

Photo courtesy of George Maentz 


She devoted many years to the study of systematics and reproductive biology of the Primu- 
laceae, and published several important papers addressing the variation and evolution with- 
in the taxon. Throughout her tenure at Colorado College she continued to study the vascular 

flora of the Pikes Peak region, recently publishing Peak 
to Prairie: Botanicai Landscapes of the Pikes Peak Region, 
and Fiora of the Pikes Peak Region, which are publica- 
tions that will stand the test of time. The quality of the 
written word, the illustrations, and the photos in these 
papers reflect the knowledge and skills of Tass Kelso at 
her best. 

Tass is survived by her wonderful partner and husband, 
George Maentz, who has Joined with her through the 
years to form a powerful team. 




Tass Kelso leading a CoNPS field trip 
Photo © Loraine Yeatts, 2006 


Tass Kelso 

Photo © Loraine Yeatts, 2006 
ofthe donor's choice. 


Memorial gifts in her memory may be made to the Tass Kelso Fund for the Study of Plant 
Diversity in the Pikes Peak Region at Colorado College (Colorado College Advancement, 14 
East Cache La Poudre St, Colorado Springs, CO 80903-3294) or to a conservation organization 


I have always been pleased that the faculty at Colorado College selected Tass to replace me in my retirement, for ours has been a 
wonderful friendship. 

Jack Carter is professor emeritus, Coiorado Coiiege, and author ofthe Trees & Shrubs of Coiorado . 

Tribute to Tass Kelso, Botanist, Master Teacher, Mentor, and Friend 


by M. Shane Heschel and Candace Galen 

Sylvia "Tass" Kelso, Professor Emerita of Organismal Biology & Ecology (QBE) at Colorado College, died in 
June 201 6. Tass was a member ofthe Biology/OBE Departments for 29 years, where as a teacher, scholar, 
and advisor she helped hundreds of students over the course of her career to become better scholars 
and stewards ofthe Earth through the study of botany. 

The geography of her life spanned the breadth ofthe U.S., ranging from coastal New England to the 
Alaskan tundra to the mountains and prairies of Colorado. After graduating from Dartmouth College, 

Photo by George Maentz 



6 


Aquiiegia Voiume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 









she began sharing her love of 
learning with elementary school 
students in New Hampshire. 

Eventually, her interest in plant 
diversity and the habitats sustain- 
ing it led to a Master's Degree from 
the University of Colorado and 
PhD in Botany at the University of 
Alaska. There, her investigations of 
arctic and alpine flora took shape, 
launching a research program that 
eventually led to more than 50 
publications and professional re- 
ports. Her research largely focused 
on the biogeography of alpine 
flora, including habitat require- 
ments, plant-pollinator relation- 
ships, species distributions, and 
phylogenetics. Tass' expertise in 
the genus Primula encompassed detailed studies of its ecology, 
breeding systems and taxonomy that spanned three continents 
and drew upon morphological and genetic studies. Moving 
beyond the "true" primroses, Tass' interest in edaphic special- 
ization drew her attention to a rare evening primrose, Oeno- 
thera harringtonii, endemic to the silty prairies of southeastern 
Colorado. Through the medium of this plant, Tass established a 
large collaborative team ("Dimensions of Biodiversity") whose 
comparative studies of Oenothera have stretched across west- 
ern North America. 


Photo by Candace Galen 2006 


Tass' love of evolutionary biology and systematics was further 
expressed in her work with herbaria, which she began as a 
graduate student at the University of Colorado Museum in 
Boulder. Tass was a champion for herbaria and trained dozens 
of students in the finer points of plant collections. At Colorado 
College, Tass' curatorial work with the Jack Carter Herbarium 
was instrumental in establishing it as a national resource for 
studies of Southwestern flora. 

As a botanist, evolutionary biologist, and conservation scientist, 
Tass was deeply committed to preserving the biodiversity of 
alpine, grassland, and riparian systems in Colorado. For this 
work she was recognized as an Outstanding Volunteer by the 
Colorado Natural Heritage Program. In addition to training 
botanists who have continued in their educations as gradu- 
ate students and practicing conservation stewards, Tass, her 
husband George Maentz, and her students have developed 
detailed management plans for many parks and open spaces in 
Colorado. In Colorado Springs alone, Tass and George's efforts 
led to the preservation of several parks and open spaces, such 
as the land adjoining the University of Colorado and Red Rock 
Canyon. Their work continues to conserve important and 
amazingly diverse habitats. Her efforts as a teacher-scholar 
will richly benefit generations of botanists and lovers of plant 
biodiversity. 

Tass and George welcomed botanists from afar into their home 
and accompanied them in exploring the Rocky Mountain flora. 
Visitors were rewarded with evening pollination performances 
by hawk moths and yucca moths, followed by morning con- 



Photo by Candace Galen 

versation over hearty cups of espresso and walks that revealed 
glimpses of rare and elusive plants hidden in the wetlands, 
fens, meadows and alpine habitats of Colorado. 


Tass' passion for teaching was infectious and her students and 
colleagues richly benefited from their interactions with Tass. A 
John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Professor at Colorado Col- 
lege, Tass was a master teacher who regularly taught courses in 
botany, evolution, and conservation biology, and was able to 
inspire every student in the room with a quiet confidence and 
a respect for learning styles that was superceded only by her 
love of plants. Tass' influence as a mentor has been long lasting 
and transformative. She was a 
demanding but gentle advisor 
who modeled hard work, atten- 
tion to detail, and thoughtfulness 
for generations of students. Her 
love of the natural world, her 
enthusiasm for botany, and her 
great talents and generosity 
shaped many lives and careers. 

The botany community has lost a 
master teacher/scholar, a champion for 
biodiversity, and a wonderful person who saw great beauty in 
the world. 



Tass Kelso Photo by 
Maentz 2002 


Contributions in Tass's memory can be made to the Kelso Fund 
for the Study of Plant Diversity in the Pikes Peak Region at Col- 
orado College, PO Box 1117, Colorado Springs, CO 80901 . This 
fund will support student research in botany and especially, 
fund projects making use of the herbarium to study biodiversi- 
ty. 

M. Shane Heschel, Associate Professor and Associate Chair, Organ- 
ismal Biology and Ecology Department, Colorado College; Robert 
Raguso, Professor and Chair, Department of Neurobiology and 
Behavior, Cornell University; Jill S. Miller, Professor of Biology and 
Environmental Studies, Amherst College; Candace Galen, Professor 
of Biological Sciences, University of Missouri. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


1 



Remembering Dr. Sylvia "Tass" Kelso 

by Denise Culver 

Sylvia "Tass" Kelso, Professor Emeritus at Colorado College, passed 
away on June 8, 201 6 after an 1 8-month struggle with pancreatic 
cancer. 

Since 1 987 she was a member of the faculty at Colorado College, 
teaching courses in botany, conservation, and evolutionary biology, 
among others, and was Curator of the Carter Herbarium (COCO). She 
was dedicated to sharing her enthusiasm and teaching about plants 
with students and with the public. 

Awards and honors include the Colorado College Burlington Northern 
Award for Faculty Achievement in Teaching (1 992); the John D. and 
Catherine!. MacArthur Professor at Colorado College (1992-1994); 
the Verner Z. Reed Professor of Natural Sciences endowed position 
(2004-2007); and she was recognized as Outstanding Volunteer by 
the Colorado Natural Heritage Program. 

Tass' botanical specialties included the systematics and reproductive 
biology of the Primulaceae, on which she authored numerous papers. 

She also studied and published papers on the arctic and alpine flora and its phytogeography, the floras of southeastern Colorado 
and the Pikes Peak region, edaphic endemism, grasslands, the influence of Quaternary environments on plant distributions, plant 
reproductive biology, and the continuing importance of floristic exploration. Her research on Primulaceae has resulted in most of 
her contributions, culminating most recently in treatments of Primula, Androsace, and Douglasia in Volume 8 of Flora of North Ameri- 
ca and Dodecatheon and Primula in the revision of the Jepson Manual of the flora of California. 

Tass and her husband George Maentz have been wonderful supporters of CNHP for over 20 years. The "Bed and Breakfast on Mesa 
Road" in Colorado Springs is a favorite with staff. Several CNHP staff have been students of Tass over the years, so lass's legacy 
continues. On a personal note, one of my favorite memories is of Tass running through the short willows {Salixglauca) on the South 
slope of Pikes Peak with her plant collection bag bouncing along her side! 

Tass' botanical expertise, intellect, and friendship will be greatly missed. 



Tass Kelso (right) and Denise Culver (left) collecting cut-leaved 
groundsel {Senecio eremophilus) on the south slope of Pikes Peak. 


Denise Culver is a Wetland Ecologist with the Colorado Natural Heritage Program (CNHP) and co-author with Joanna Lemly of Field 
Guide to Colorado Wetland Plants (available from the CoNPS Bookstore). Denise teaches workshops and field seminars for CoNPS. 

This article is printed with permission from the Colorado Natural Heritage Program Blog, http://cnhpblog.blogspot.eom/2016/07/remem- 
bering-dr-sylvia-tass-kelso.html (July 13,2016). 



Platyschkuhria integrifolia (Desert Daisy) covered the meadows with waving, golden yellow 
flowers when we arrived on May 4. They were just beginning to unfurl buds and only got 
better and more floriferous as the days passed. 

I returned home with 1,400 photos from a two-week trip. That's an average of 100 photos per 
day! It may be another 6 or 7 years before a display of this magnitude returns to those barren 
shale hills. In the meantime, I will have my photos and my memories to remind me of that 
flowerland paradise. 

Jane Hendrix is a member of the Gore Range Chapter. She and her husband, Klaus, lead 
willdfiower hikes in the Breckenridge area and give tours of their Mountain View Experimental 
Gardens. Jane is a talented botanist, writer, and photographer. Visit her websites at http://www. 
picturetrail.com/snowtrekker7 and http://www.picturetrail.com/hendrix. Photos in this article © 
Jane Hendrix. 


David Goulson, British Bumblebee Expert & Author Speaks in Boulder/Westminster Sept.25 and 26 

Dave Goulson is a British scientist and conservationist who is a leading authority on bumble bees. He will speak publicly in Colo- 
rado on Sunday, September 25th at the Jaipur Literature Festival in Boulder (the last time is 4-5 p.m.) http://www.bouldercolora- 
dousa.com/events/Jaipur-literature-festival/ and on Monday, September 26th at the Butterfly Pavilion. https://bouldercolorado. 
gov/planning/connecting-the-dots CoNPS ENews will have more information. 


8 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


DR. ARTHUR R. KRUCKEBERG 
(MARCH 21, 1920 - MAY 25, 2016) 
by Richard Olmstead 



Two giants of the PNW botany: A.R. Kruckeberg and C.L Hitchcock 


Art Kruckeberg, Emeritus Professor of Botany, University of 
Washington, died on May 25, 201 6, at age 96. Art left a legacy 
as a scholar, teacher, promoter of gardening with native plants, 
and conservation activist. 

Art joined the Botany Department as an Assistant Professor in 
1 950 after completing his Ph.D, at UC Berkeley. He grew up in 
California and was imbued with all things botanical from an 
early age; his family owned a publishing house called Krucke- 
berg Press, which published gardening and horticultural pub- 
lications. He began grad school in 1 941 at Stanford, where he 
spent the previous summer as a field assistant for the famous 
botanical research team of Jens Clausen, David Keck, and Wil- 
liam Heisey (Clausen, Keck, and Heisey rolls off the tongue of 
most botanists the way Tinker, Evers, and Chance does baseball 
afficionados). 

Due to forces beyond his control, graduate study would have 
to wait. After the attack on Pearl Harbor, Art enlisted in the 
Navy and was recruited into their language program, where 
he learned Japanese. He spent the rest of the war years and a 
year of postwar occupation, translating Japanese documents 
and interpreting interrogations of captured Japanese prison- 
ers. To the very end of his life. Art was proud of his mastery of 
Japanese. I had the occasion to spend a week at a conference in 
Japan with Art in 1 989; he could still speak the language AND 
remembered the plants he had seen there even though it had 
been over 40 years since he had left Japan. 

After the war, he returned to California to start grad school 
again, this time at Berkeley. He completed his Ph.D. under the 
supervision of Herbert Mason, with Hans Jenny and G. Ledyard 
Stebbins on his committee. Mason had recently begun study- 
ing the unique flora found on serpentine soils in California. Art's 
dissertation {An Experimental Inquiry into the Nature of Ende- 
mism on Serpentine Soils) helped bring the descriptive work on 
serpentine endemism into the realm of experimental science. 
Art maintained a research program on serpentine plants 
throughout his career, writing several books for both academic 
and lay audiences, in addition to a significant body of scientific 
publications. 


Once Art's academic bona 
fides were well established, 
he increasingly devoted his 
attention to public outreach 
through his writings, promo- 
tion of conservation activism, 
and pushing for the estab- 
lishment of environmental 
legislation to preserve lands for 
their value to biodiversity. In 
1 972, he led the movement to 
create the Washington Natural 
Area Preserves Act, in 1 973, 
he developed the first list of 
rare and endangered plants 
in Washington. In 1976 he 
helped found the Washington 
Native Plant Society, and in 
1 982 he helped create the Wash- 
ington Natural Heritage Program within the Department of 
Natural Resources to oversee management of natural area 
preserves and endangered species, and during those years 
also served on the US Forest Service commission to identify 
parcels of federal land to preserve as Research Natural Areas. 
Art was awarded the prestigious Peter Raven Award for 
public outreach in botany by the American Society of Plant 
Taxonomists in 2006. 

Art leaves a living legacy in the form of the 4-acre garden 
he and his wife Mareen developed over the course of 50 
years in Shoreline. This is the "type garden" for his most 
widely known book. Gardening with Native Plants in the 
Pacific Northwest. This book has turned on generations 
of gardeners to the Joy and conservation value of using 
our native flora in home gardens. When the book was first 
published, it won the "Governor's Award" for outstanding 
books published by Washington authors. The Kruckeberg 
Botanic Garden is now a public garden owned by the City of 
Shoreline and managed by the Kruckeberg Botanic Garden 
Foundation. 

Art served on my Ph.D. committee and I have a debt of 
gratitude for Art's support over the years. During the last 
few weeks, I have been sorting through the detritus of a 
career left behind in Art's last office in the Plant Lab. With 
news of his passing, the many memories into the man who 
influenced me so, take on additional meaning. A legion of 
friends, colleagues, and many who never met him, but were 
influenced by his work, will mourn his passing. 

Gifts in honor of Art can be directed to the Kruckeberg 
Foundation or to the endowment he created in the Depart- 
ment of Biology for Plant Biology. Please make checks out 
to the University of Washington, with "Kruckeberg endow- 
ment" on the memo line. Questions? Contact Lisa at <lisa- 
tran(a)uw.edu> or 206.685.21 85. 

Plates accompanying this BEN obituary are posted at 
http://mpb.ou.edu/ben/507/ben507_plates.pdf 

This article reprinted with permission from Richard Olmstead, Profes- 
sor, Dept, of Biology, University of Washington. Photos are from the 
Kruckeberg family collection. 



Siskiyou collecting trip 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


9 



The Desert is Blooming: 

Rabbit Valley Super-Bloom Dazzles Plant Lovers 

by Jane Hendrix 


1-70 is the fast track from Grand Junction to the stunning red rock country of eastern Utah. Not much to see. Just endless, barren 
shale hills. But when the rains come in late winter, those shale hills burst forth with a palette of colorful wildflowers so numerous 
one can hardly find a bare spot to put down a foot. Hiking slows to a walk and then to a shuffle with many stops to find the next 
spot to step upon without damaging a gorgeous flower. The last time we witnessed such an explosion of color was in May 2009. 
To our delight. May 201 6 was even more floriferous. Here are just a few of dozens of species that delighted us at every turn. 





coccmea 
(Scarlet Globemallow) 

took our breath away! 

So numerous were they 
that they streaked the 
hillsides orange. I hiked 
down from the road to 
get closeup photos of 
this lovely species and 
discovered it also emits a 
delightful fragrance. 


Mirabilis multiflora (Colorado Four 
O'clock) teased me for days. It is unmis- 
takable with its huge, rounded leaves and 
sprawling habit. Festooned with tightly 
closed buds, I tried to catch it in full bloom. 
Contrary to its common name, it does 
not bloom at 4 p.m. (not even correcting 
for Daylight Saving Time). It also doesn't 
bloom at night or at first light. On our last 
day in western Colorado, Klaus found this 
specimen in its full glory. The time was 1 2 
noon MDT. 


Oenothera caespitosa (Tufted 
Evening Primrose) dotted the land- 
scape like lingering patches of snow. 
Its large, white flowers are equally 
showy when they fade to deep pink 
and close in the light of midday. 


Calochortus nuttallii (Sego Lily) were in bloom by the hundreds of thousands - mabe mil- 
lions. Looking closer at each blooming plant, I saw one or two additional buds waiing to Join 
the chorus of this incredible bloom. The Sego Lily ranges in color from snow white through 
soft pink to deep rose-fuchsia. No two flowers have exactly the same color which prompts the 
photographer to try to capture each different hue. When the bloom is done, nothing remains. 
The stalks become dry and brittle and the strong winds break them off at the surface, sweep- 
ing clean those shale hills. 


About 20 minutes after I photographed this one and only clump of deep rose Sego Lilies and 
was out of sight in another area, a returning hiker picked the whole group for her wildflower 
bouquet. My heart was broken. Those happy, smiling flowers were now corpses. I was so glad 
I had not delayed in capturing their essence while they were still alive. The moral of this story: 
Never put off photographing a flower you encounter until the light is better, the rain has 
stopped, the wind is calmer, you go to the bathroom or get a snack. 


Eriogonum oval! folium (Ova I leaf 
Buckwheat) grows in a tight mound 
of small, gray-green leaves with per- 
fectly round clusters of creamy white 
flowers dancing 6 inches above its 
foliage. 


Lygodesmia grandiflora 
(Showy Rush Pink) took 
me by surprise the first 
time I encountered it - Just 
a solitary blossom topping 
spidery-looking foliage. 

It is a large flower for the 
height of the plant, which 
is only about 6 inches, and- 
perfectly designed with its 
soft pinkish-lilac ray flow- 
ers. I look for it every time 
we are in this area in May. 


10 


(cont. on bottom of page 8) 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



CoNPS 2016 Annual Conference 

1976 - 2016: Forty Years of Change: Plants, People, Places 
MacAllister Building, 4001 Discovery Dr., University of Colorado, Boulder 



Above: Monarda fistulosa and Flatirons Photo by Jan L Turner 


CoNPS Annual Conference & 
40th Anniversary Celebration 

Please join us in Boulder, CO, on Sept. 24-25, 
to celebrate the founding of CoNPS 40 years 
ago, honor our founders, and learn about 
changes in botany, plant ecology, native plant 
gardening, and pollination biology from 1976 
to the present. 

The schedules for Friday, Saturday, and Sun- 
day are listed in brief in this issue. For com- 
plete details, see the Annual Conference issue 
of Aquilegia that came out last month. It can 
be found on the CoNPS website on the menu 
under "Resources" -> "Aquilegia Newsletter." 

The next few pages contain some updates 
about the Annual Conference. Already, over 
200 people have registered for the conference. 

Parking at the MacAllister Bldg. Lot 

Parking lot attendants will be selling parking 
permits for $10 per day in the morning until 
9:00 a.m. Cash only. 


Reporters & Photographers Needed for 
Annual Conference 

Would you be willing to take photos at the Rare Plant Sympo- 
sium, CoNPS Conference, or on your field trip for Aquilegia? 
Would you be willing to write a summary of a talk or field trip 
for Aquilegia? If so, please contact Jan LTurner at JLTurner(S) 
regis.edu. 

PHOTO CONTEST DEADLINE EXTENDED - Please 
send in electronic submissions ASAP. Must re- 
ceive 8x10" prints by Sept. 22. 

Lodging & Campgrounds 


Lightning Talks About Current Research 

The Botany Track on Saturday afternoon will feature a number 
of Colorado graduate and undergraduate students reporting 
on their research. Most of the speakers giving lightning talks 
have been selected. 

Jessie Condon. Floristic Inventory of Mclnnis Canyons National 
Conservation Area. Undergraduate of Environmental Sciences 
and Technology. Colorado Mesa University. Grand Junction. 
Advisor: Dr. Stephen Stern. 

Carla DeMasters. How Do Native Annual and Biennial Species 
Affect Cheatgrass Abundance?" 


Some Boulder Chapter members have offered their spare 
bedrooms for Conference attendees in need of lodging. Please 
contact Jan Turner for info. JLTurner@regis.edu. Other options 
will be posted on the CoNPS website. 


Dyan Harden. Strategic Precaution: /W/mu/i/sgem/n/parL/s 
Moisture Content Thresholds for Cold Storage. MS Horticulture 
& Landscape Architecture. Colorado State University. Advisor: 
Dr. Jim Klett 


Charge cards will be accepted at the Bookstore and Silent 
Auction. CoNPS book prices are discounted and usually 
lower than that of Amazon. To participate in the drawing 
for door prizes, cash is needed. 

Silent Auction & Book Sale (Cont. from page 14) 

Door Prize Too! 

Bring some dollar bills with you to the Saturday Conference 
because there will be a cash donation box. For each donated $1 
you will receive 1 door prize ticket. A $5 donation will receive 6 
door prize tickets. The winner of the door prize will receive half 
of the door prize donations! 


James Cooper. Measuring Rates of Vegetative Response to 
Riparian Restoration in the Gunnison Valley. Graduate Student. 
Western State University. Gunnison. Advisor: Dr. Tom Grant III. 

Mat Sharpies. Vascular Flora of the South San Juan Mountains: 
A Natural History Inventory of Two Southern Rockies Slopes. 
Graduate student. University of Colorado, Boulder. 

Joe Statwick. Astragalus linifolius: When the Loss of a Rare Spe- 
cies is a Win for Conservation. Recent PhD graduate from the 
Department of Biological Sciences, University of Denver. Ad- 
vised by Anna Sher at DU and Jennifer Ramp Neale at Denver 
Botanic Gardens, Department of Research and Conservation. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


1 


13th Annual Colorado Rare Plant Symposium Fri., Sept. 23 MacAllister Bldg. 

8:30 Registration 

9:00 Introduction and ground rules - Jennifer Neale, DBG 

9:1 5 Review of Southwest Colorado G2 plant species: status review, current conservation efforts and priority conservation action 
needs - Jill Handwerk, CNHP 

10:30 Break 

10:45 Breakout Session : Group input for T&E, Gl, and remaining G2 &G3 plant species of Colorado: status review, survey results, 
threats and current conservation efforts 

1 1 :30 Lunch (on your own; the cafe in the McAllister Bldg, may be open on Friday; it is closed on weekends) 

1 :00 Breakout Session: highlights and priority conservation action needs for the coming year 
2:00 Demonstration of interactive county map of rare plants 
2:15 Demonstration of regional interactive herbaria 

2:30 Break 

2:45 Field Season Highlights: ^) Mimulus gemmiparus surveys and reintroduction; 2) Browns Canyon BioBlitz 
3:00 Conservation Success: Ipomopsis polyontha 

4:30 Adjourn 

5- 7 p.m. Friday Night Reception and Tours of the CU Museum (RARE II) and CU Norlin Library (Weber) (Meet at Museum) 



[SmH 


pi£t.ai!irr5-nFn- 


Norlin 

Library 


OJAtC 


FCSH 

ATUS 

CEKIBR 


■.laiAL l« 
ARTS U 


[aETaCtfMSTCT 


^Museum 


CDUfGE AllhUE 


P,IElkCRIU. 

QhlTHI 


U^l 


EJUCffiHACL 


iVjrfFVK 


iDU iirnsr 
INTBIhUTiaMilL 


.IHMJGITY 


MWKyLgy i JtibJ fiiff 



j 








MUSEUM of NATURAL HISTORY 



Parking near the CU Museum 

There is "The Stampede" a RTD bus service from the CU 
Research Park to Main Campus that runs 7 AM-7 PM www. 
colorado.edu/pts/stampede. 

There are two on-campus options to park after 5 PM which 
offer easy access to Norlin Library and CUMNH. The closest 
public parking is Euclid Autopark (the garage portion is cur- 
rently under construction) but they have opened a public lot 
due south of that Autopark in lot #204. (see attached map) 
There is also lot #208, right next to our Museum which is 
usually empty after 5 PM. Payment can be made online, with 
credit card or coins at Pay stations in the parking lot. 


12 


r 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 







n 

rafiDr 


CoNPS Conference & = 

" ilaie Plant Symposium J 

McAllister Bldg ^ 


ARAPAHO 

RIDGE 



University of 
Colo radio Museum ot 


University of (^hprado 
Coors Everj^Center ^ 




Folsorn Field 

Friday Night Reception 
RARE II Exhibit 


4DD1 Discovery Drive 0» 


Aurora Ave 


Mfltlisori Av& 
E Euciid Ai/e 


A urofa 7 Park 


H ^ ntin 

3.7 mii#s 


Aurora Avs 
! SS ^ 


Aurora Ave 


Hflsefme^Rd 


0 9 min 

3 r. mllp? 


Wilii.ams 

Viliaoe 






Baselina Rd 

Map data ©201 5 Google:> 


I 


Basi 


201 6 CoNPS ANNUAL CONFERENCE SCHEDULE SAT., SEPT. 24 

Please join us in celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Colorado Native Plant Society and Governor Hickenlooper's proclamation 
of June 1 0 to June 1 6, 201 6, as Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week. Our theme focuses on change in the environment and 
the disciplines of botany, ecology, conservation, and horticulture with emphasis on native plants over the past 4 decades. 

8:1 5 - 8:55 Registration, Booksale, Silent Auction, Photo Contest 

9:00 - 9:05 Welcome to the University of Colorado - Bill Bowman 

9:05 - 9:1 0 Welcome to CoNPS Annual Conference 40th Anniversary - Charlie Turner 

9:1 0 - 9:30 40 Years of Change in Bioinformatics - Dieter Wilken 

9:35 - 9:45 Recognition of the Founders and Early Members 

9:45 - 1 0:05 How and Why CoNPS Came to Be- Discussion by Founders 

1 0:1 0 - 1 0:30 Colorado and the World - Bill Weber 

1 0:35 - 1 1 :00 Break - Booksale, Silent Auction, Poster Session, Vendors, Photo Contest 

1 1:00 - 1 1:30 The Flies, Birds, and Bees That Pollinate Our Wildflowers - David Inouye 
1 1 :35 - 1 1 :55 Alpine Plants and the Changing Environment - Bill Bowman 
1 2:00 - 1 2:1 0 Tass Kelso: A Remarkable Life - Dave Anderson and Jill Handwerk 
12:10 - 12:15 CoNPS Special Merit Award - Jill Handwerk, recipient 

1 2:1 5 - 1 :1 5 Lunch (bring your own) or Buffet (pre-purchased available for $10), Book Sale, 

Silent Auction (Bids close at 1 2:55), Poster Sessions, Vendors, Photo Contest 

1 :1 5 - 1 :35 Return of the Native - Panayoti Kelaidis 

1 :40 - 2:1 0 Forty Years of Progress in Pollination Biology, and What It Means for Citizen Scientists 
- Nick Waser and Mary Price 

2:1 5 - 2:35 Forty Years of Change at Rocky Mountain National Park - John Emerick 
2:40 - 3:00 Where has Plant Ecology Gone since 1 976? - David Buckner 

3:05-3:25 Botany Is Not Dead But This Plant Is: The Importance of Herbaria and Regional Floras for the 21st Century 
and Beyond - Jennifer Ackerfield 

3:30 - 3:50 Break - Booksale, Vendors, Photo Contest (Voting ends at 3:40 p.m.). 

Pay For and Pick Up Silent Auction Items 

3:50 - 5:00 Botany Track and Horticulture Track (running concurrently) 

Botany Track 

3:50 - 4:1 0 Who We Are Is What We Leave Behind - Jack Carter 

4:1 5 - 4:35 Using Course - Based Research Experiences to Advance Our Understanding of the Flora 
of Colorado - Leo Bruederle 

4:40 - 5:00 Lightning talks - Student research (see page 1 1 for details) 

Horticulture Track 

3:50 - 4:1 0 Benefits of Native Plants in the Garden - Irene Shonie 

4:15 -4:35 Conservation of Colorado Flora on Rooftops - Jen Bousselot Pizza, Appetizers, and Cake will be 

4:40 - 5:00 Installing Colorado Native Plants in the Landscape - Alison Peck served at the social! 


5:00 - 7:00 CoNPS 40th Anniversary Social & Celebration of Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week (in MacAllister Bldg.) 
5:00 - 7:00 CoNPS Town Hall Meeting - Let's discuss what we would like for the next 40 years...or even Just next year! 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 201 6 


13 



CoNPS Conference FIELD TRIPS Sun., Sept. 25th 

Morning Choices (9 .m. - noon) - Choose one 

Bee-Watching at Denver Botanic Gardens (DBG) at Chatfield, Littleton - Carol Kearns and Diana Oliveras 
Rabbit Mountain Open Space, Boulder - Susan Spackman Panjabi 
Ranson/Edwards Homestead Open Space - Tom Schweich 

Exploring the Foothills Forest - Shortgrass Prairie Transition: A Visit to Boulder Mountain - John Emerick 
University of Colorado Herbarium Tour - Tim Hogan 
Location TBD - Jennifer Ackerfield 

Fall Colors and Tallgrass Prairie Biodiversity - Lynn Riedel & Lynn Sullivan 
Ancient Big Bluestem Grasslands of the South Boulder Area - David Buckner 

Afternoon - Tours (Can go to both) or Working Field Trip 

Tour of Harlequin's Gardens & Fall Plant Sale, Boulder - MikI Brawner (2-4 p.m.) 

Tour of High Plains Environmental Center & Plant Sale, Loveland- Jim Tolstrup (1 -4 p.m.) 

Tallgrass & Wildflower Seed Collection in Boulder's Prairies: A Working Field Trip - Lynn Riedel & Amy Ansari (1 -4 p.m.) 

Full Day Field Trip (9 a.m. - 5 p.m.) 

Secrets of Castlewood Canyon - Jeanne Willson 


Help the Colorado Native Plant Society Launch Our New Scholarship Program and 

Release a $2,300 Matching Pledge! 

The Colorado Native Plant Society is excited to launch a scholarship program to broaden educational opportunities. Scholarship 
funds are available for CoNPS workshops, seminars, field trips, and our annual conference (September 23-25). Applications are 
available on our website, and should be submitted at least two weeks prior to the requested event. 

CoNPS Board Member Cecily Mui wants to share with you a special message and she hopes that you will Join her to 
get the Scholarship Program off the ground with up to $2,300 in matching funds: 

The African proverb, "It takes a village to raise a child," couldn't be more true in my life. My brother, sister and I are grate- 
ful for the numerous sacrifices our hard working immigrant parents made in order for the three of us to experience op- Cecily Mui 

portunities that they didn't have. Friends of our family and caring people in our community exposed us to new experiences 
and expanded our idea as to the possibilities in our new world. While my family lived in a large metropolitan city, each of us were drawn 
to the refuge of nature, whether it was my parents growing their favorite flowers, school field trips or friends introducing us to camping 
and bonfires, or for myself, the realization that I could have a career in natural areas management. Lifelong learning is a core value that 
the Mui family would like to pay forward in honor of those who have contributed to our success and broadened our knowledge. 

My family and I are pledging up to $2,300 in matching funds for donations made to the scholarship program between now and the 
CoNPS annual conference. It is our vision to see everyone donating at least a dollar to represent the importance of the gift of learning 
and expanding the mission of the Colorado Native Plant Society. Please join us and donate to make learning possible for everyone 
seeking to grow. 




Silent Auction & Book Sale - Get Ready for Some Exciting Buys! 

The CoNPS Annual Meeting Book Sale and Silent Auction are highly anticipated events! CoNPS has a tre- 
mendous selection of new and used books available at very good prices. Pat Murphy always does a great 
Job running the Book Sale with help from Linda Smith and Denise Wilson. 

This year the Silent Auction, run by BethAnne Bane, will be larger than usual. Jen Bousselot helped find 
corporate donations. REI will be donating a half dome tent. Plan Jeffco is donating an In Plein Sight art 
experience and Susan Tweit is donating autographed copies of her Colorado Scenic Bvwavs. Taking the 
Other Road book set. CoNPS co-president, Charlie Turner, will be donating more of his handmade bee 

block houses, and Jan and Charlie Turner will be offering to cook and serve a dinner at their house and will also offer a Red Rocks 
field trip along with an autographed copy of their Wildflowers of Red Rocks Park book. There will also be original art work, pr 

Proceeds from the conference support CoNPS' wide-ranging projects including education, conservation, native plant gar- 
dening, and botanical and horticultural publications and activities. 

We are grateful for the support of all our sponsors and we cannot thank them enough for making this year's 40th Anni- 
versary Conference a huge success! If you or your business are interested in donating an item for the silent auction please 
contact BethAnne Bane: bethannebane(S)gmail.com (Cont. on page 1 1) 



14 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





Forty Years of CoNPS History 

by Bob Henry 


CoNPS is celebrating its 40th Anniversary with a variety of events 
and a proclamation from the Governor. The upcoming Annual 
Conference will continue the celebration with the theme of "Forty 
Years of Change: Plants, People, Places." 

Several of the Society's founders will attend the conference and of- 
fer perspectives on its origins and accomplishments. As a preview, 
this article is a look back at our beginnings. 

For many of the factual details of the founding, I am indebted to 
Dieter Wilkin's article of the founding of CoNPS, written on the 10th 
anniversary and published in Aquilegia in Jan. 1987 (Vol. 1 1, no 1). 

BEGINNINGS 

In the 1 970's, increasing concern with environmental trends 
led to the enactment of several landmark Federal and State 
laws. At the Federal level, the Environmental Protection Act, 
the Clean Water Act, and the Clean Air Act were enacted. At the 
same time, the Federal Land Policy Management Act codified 
long-term Federal policy of retention of public lands in public 
ownership, and provided a land-use planning process along 
the lines of the Forest Service. 

In one fashion or another, each of these laws increased the 
need for objective data and more science in environmental and 
land-use decisions. 

It was the enactment of the Endangered Species Act in 1 973, 
however, that provided the opportunity and sparked much 
activity to protect animal and plant populations from increas- 
ing threats. 

Interest in conservation issues was also rising within the states, 
exemplified by the creation of the Colorado Natural Areas 
Program near the end of the decade. Local Jurisdictions added 
to this trend; examples include the city and county of Boulder's 
open spaces, Jefferson County's open spaces, Larimer County's 
open spaces, and Fort Collins' natural areas. 

Scientific and citizen interest both fostered the enactment of 
these laws and spurred activities in support of the laws. Nearly 
a decade before, the California Native Plant Society had been 
founded. Colorado would soon follow, and others later, until 
every state would have a native plant society or similar organi- 
zation. 

FOUNDING AND EARLY ACTIVITIES 

In the spring of 1 976, largely through the efforts of Jerry Marti- 
nez and Bob Buttery of the U.S. Forest Service and Lois Webster 
and Bob Turner of the Audubon Society, a Threatened and 
Endangered Species Workshop was held at the Denver Botanic 
Gardens. The purpose of the workshop was to organize efforts 
to protect rare plants in Colorado. Participants were from the 
two organizations above, as well as universities and several 
Federal agencies. Among the ideas discussed at the workshop 
was the establishment of a Colorado native plant society that 
would raise public awareness of native plants and the need for 
their protection. 


As a result, an organizing committee was established. Jon Halv- 
erson, a lawyer and member of the Audubon Society, drafted 
the bylaws, prepared the Society's articles of incorporation 
and secured non-profit status for the Society, and CoNPS was 
officially established on June 1 0, 1 976. 

The principal aim of the new organization was summarized in 
its first newsletter: "to encourage the appreciation and conser- 
vation of the native plants and ecosystems of Colorado." 

The remainder of 1 976 and early 1 977 were especially busy as 
the new organization went to work on several fronts. 

Ten committees were established to focus on different as- 
pects of the mission. These included committees addressed to 
the outreach activities of the Society including: Endangered 
Species, Environmental Documents, Legislation, Education, 
Horticulture and Rehabilitation, and Publicity. Membership 
and Funding committees were set up to deal with operational 
needs. The Publications committee addressed both internal 
and external needs. Finally, a Field Trip committee was estab- 
lished to organize member outings. (The first Society field trip 
took place in July 1976, Just six weeks after the formal estab- 
lishment of CoNPS. Seventeen people Joined the trip to Niwot 
Ridge, near Boulder, led by Chuck Feddema and Kim Vories.) 

The Publications Committee was charged with producing a 
regular newsletter, as well as a future bulletin or Journal for 
lengthier material. 

The Society's first general meeting was held at the Denver 
Botanic Gardens in October 1 976, with 1 70 attendees. Actual 
membership was 1 10 by the end of the year. Another meeting 
was held in Fort Collins in January 1 977, by which time the 
membership list had grown to 1 50. 

In addition to the committees, the organization envisioned the 
establishment of local chapters throughout the state. The first 
chapter organized was the Fort Collins chapter (later Northern 
Colorado) in November 1 976. It was soon followed by the Boul- 
der, Yampa Valley, and Denver chapters. 

THROUGH THE YEARS TO TODAY 

Through the years, CoNPS has expanded both its activities and 
its membership (now over 1,000). 

In the early eighties, the Society sponsored its first workshop. It 
was a great success, and led to the many workshops that have 
been held since, providing a unique opportunity to explore 
native plants in times other than "field season". 

In addition to the newsletter, CoNPS has produced a number 
of publications and products, ranging from the two editions of 
Rare Plants of Colorado to t-shirts and posters, and a variety of 
smaller publications. CoNPS has also provided financial support 
to publication of Colorado floras. 

The awarding of research grants was made possible by be- 
quests in memory of Dr. John Marr, Charter President of CoNPS, 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


15 


and Myrna Steinkannp, who served as Mennbership Comnnittee 
Chair and in other capacities for many years. 

Both the statewide organization and local chapters have been 
involved in issues affecting native plants. From huge impacts 
such as the proposed oil shale production in the Piceance Basin 
to more localized issues like preservation of rare alpine habitat 
at Mt. Evans, CoNPS and its members have been and continue 
to be involved. 

Members have played key roles as officers, committee chairs, 
editors, field trip and workshop leaders, and in all CoNPS 
activities. Numerous Federal and State agencies, as well as city 
and county government agencies, have been frequent partners 
(and occasional adversaries), while other organizations such as 
The Nature Conservancy, the Denver Botanic Gardens, the uni- 
versities, and many others have partnered in a myriad of field 
projects, education programs, and advocacy efforts. 

Today, CoNPS continues to pursue its goals with dozens of 
field trips each year, the ever-popular workshops (usually an- 
nounced with reminders that those who are interested should 
sign up early, lest all the spaces be filled before they do), the 
CoNPS online Store, chapter meetings throughout the state, 
summer field seminars, an annual conference (that includes the 
very popular book sale and the silent auction), plant sales, a 
large, full-color newsletter {Aquilegia), an E-Newsletter pro- 
duced using MailChimp software, and a website with a wealth 
of information about the Colorado flora and CoNPS activities. 

CoNPS HISTORY COMING SOON! 

A history of CoNPS is now in preparation, using the newsletter 
archive and other CoNPS archive material as the primary sourc- 
es. The first working draft will be completed by the time of the 
annual conference, and the final version this winter. 

The objectives of the history are to tell the CoNPS story in an 
interesting and readable way, and to provide a record or refer- 
ence tool for information about the Society. 

The history will include a narrative, along with compilations 
of historical information such as officers, annual meetings and 
their themes, honorary life members and their contributions, 
research grants and reports, newsletter editors, and a brief 
historical chronology. Selected illustrations from the newsletter 
will also be included. 

Decisions on the publication and distribution of the history 
have yet to be made, but members will be kept apprised. 

THE NEWSLETTER ARCHIVE AND INDEX (IN PREPARATION) 

Hundreds of issues of the "Newsletter" and "Aquilegia" have 
been published under the eyes of at least 1 4 editors. Through 
201 5, they total over 2,300 pages, typewritten and then printed 
in the early days on a mimeograph, in the early 80's with a Ra- 
dio Shack TRS80 computer with a dot matrix printer, and now 
in color with Adobe InDesign desktop publishing software. 

Most are archived in the online collections of Regis Universi- 
ty. (More recent issues are also available online at the CoNPS 
website). 


The material gives us insight into the early activities of the So- 
ciety (announcements of meetings, field trips. Board minutes, 
etc.) and there is much material of academic use. This includes 
innumerable articles about finding and identifying native 
plants, habitats and locales, growing native plants, and more. 
Book reviews and announcements of publications by mem- 
bers abound. There are discussions of numerous conservation 
issues - representing almost a catalog of threats to the native 
plant, ranging from cactus theft to the placement of ICBM mis- 
siles and associated access roads. Sometimes non-native plants 
and uses found their way into the pages, such as a recipe for 
dandelion wine. 

Biographical information abounds - founders, awardees, 
notables in the botanical world, and the inevitable humor of 
editors and contributors, some of it quite groan-worthy. (In the 
unlikely event you haven't heard the one about Fred E. Fungus 
and Alice Algae taking a lichen to each other, and their mar- 
riage ending up on the rocks, you can find a version of it in Vol. 
7 (1 983), No.l , courtesy of the Northern Nevada Native Plant 
Society Newsletter). 

The print version of the newsletter archive is housed in the 
Regis University Library Archives. But while it contains much 
information - some useful, some merely entertaining - its use- 
fulness has been limited by the lack of an index to locate useful 
material deeply buried in the 2,300 pages. 

When the index is complete, researchers will be able to readily 
find information by subject (especially plant taxa, habitats and 
locales), author, and title. Major biographical information, book 
reviews and announcements, and more will also be indexed. 

Bob Henry, editor of Aquilegia from 2009 to 2013, lives in Chey- 
enne, Wyoming and is the author of the yet-to-be-published Too 
Short to Bind: Homesteading at Rawhide Butte, a/7/sforyof 
eleven homesteaders and their families, who left Iowa and took 
up "dry farming" in Wyoming under the Enlarged Homestead Act 
of 1909. 

From CoNPS ENews (check ENews for details) 

Eriogonum Society Annual Meeting Sept. 16-19 
Desert Studies Institute, Baker, California 

(My)Great Night in Denver! by the National Wildlife Federation 
Thursday, September 29, 201 6, 5-7pm in downtown Denver 

Exploring Rocky Mountain National Park with CO Biology 
Teachers Association, Oct. 1 , 201 6, 8:30am-5:l 5pm, at RMNP 

California's third Salvia Summit (Salvia Summit III) 

Friday, October 7 through Sunday, October 9, 201 6 in Berkeley 

Boulder County Seed Collection with Wildland Restoration 
Volunteers, Sat. Oct. 22, 201 6 in Boulder County 

Colorado Science Conference 

Fri. Nov.l 8, 201 6, 8am-4pm at Denver Mart 

Southern Rockies Seed Network Annual Meeting 
Wednesday, December 7, 201 6, 8am-5pm in Loveland 


16 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


Conservation Corner: 

Agencies and Organizations in Colorado Conserving Native Plants 

by Jessica Smith 

This article is intended as a guide to some of the agencies and organizations which conserve Colorado's native plants and land- 
scapes. The list of participants in conservation in Colorado is large and diverse, and covering the full range is not possible in this 
article. Native plants are preserved on undeveloped lands, held by private individuals and public agencies, with management 
for conservation. Agencies may acquire open space through fee-title acquisition (the purchase of land) or through conservation 
easements (land-use restrictions, accepted by an owner for financial reward, on private land). Additionally, there are many orga- 
nizations that do not hold property, but support conservation through research, education, advocacy, regulation and recogni- 
tion. Many of these agencies and organizations rely on volunteers to execute their missions or on public input to shape policy. 
This article includes websites and suggestions on ways to get involved. 

The U.S. Forest Service (USFS) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) 

Two federal agencies combined are entrusted with the management of approximately 23 million acres of public land in Colorado: 
the US Forest Service (USFS) (almost 1 5 million acres) and the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) (over 8 million). Both agencies 
have either a regional or state botanist, as well as a list of sensitive species, the conservation of which must be considered in man- 
agement actions. The USFS administers eleven national forests and two grasslands in Colorado, grouped into seven administrative 
units (with one unit based in Wyoming). Two of the six units in Colorado currently employ a forest botanist. The BLM administers 
land in Colorado through ten field offices, with two of the ten offices currently employing a botanist, along with ecologist and 
natural resource specialists. Representatives from the USFS and BLM, along with many other partners discussed below, are mem- 
bers of the Rare Plant Technical Committee (RPTC), a group of agency, academic and NGO botanists working to advance rare plant 
conservation in Colorado. As part of the Annual Meeting, the Colorado Native Plant Society includes the Rare Plant Symposium, a 
meeting place for the RPTC and other botanists to exchange information about Colorado's rarest plants. 201 5 was the 1 2th annual 
meeting of the Symposium. Information about past symposia can be found here: http://www.cnhp.colostate.edu/teams/botany. 
asp#symposia. Both the BLM and USFS have special designations for lands, which recognize areas with unique values and confer 
special management prescriptions. On BLM lands. Wilderness Study Areas (WSA) identify areas which may be suitable for wilder- 
ness designation. 

A second common designation is an Area of Critical Environmental Concern (ACEC). This designation is made by administrative ac- 
tion in a Resource Management Plan (RMP) to protect and prevent irreparable damage to sensitive resources. The USFS may desig- 
nate land as Research Natural Areas (RNA); these are lands which are permanently protected and maintained in natural conditions 
to preserve biodiversity or serve as reference ecosystem. Both agencies rely on public input to direct their planning efforts. The 
BLM posts the status of RMP updates, with information on how to comment here: http://www.blm.gov/co/st/en/BLM_Programs/ 
and_use_planning/rmp.html and the USFS here: http://www.fs.usda.gov/main/r2/landmanagement/planning. 

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) 

The US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) is the federal agency charged with protecting endangered species, working to conserve 
fish and wildlife, but also plants and their habitats. There are currently 1 6 plant species in Colorado which are listed as federally 
threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act (ESA). In the case of plants, the Act only affords protections to these 
species on federal lands or if there is a federal nexus with the property. Many states have laws which create a state list of endan- 
gered plants, providing more protections, but Colorado has no such law.TheCoNPS Board of Directors voted in October of 2015 
to sign on to the Native Plant Conservation Campaign to call for equal protections for plants under the ESA. 

The Colorado State Land Board (SLB) 

The Colorado State Land Board (SLB), established in 1 876, holds and manages more than three million acres of land in Colorado, 
given to the state by the federal government to generate revenue for public schools and institutions. Properties owned by SLB are 
not open for public visitation, but are treated as private property and managed for profit, with land being leased to individuals 
or agencies. Land uses include grazing, crop lands, mineral withdrawal, commercial development, and recreation. In 1 996, Col- 
orado voters approved an amendment to the constitution to designate 1 0% (300,000 acres) of SLB holdings into a Stewardship 
Trust. Lands in this trust have outstanding beauty, high natural values, and/or critically important wildlife habitat and open space. 
Stewardship Trust designation does not preclude any land uses, even mineral withdrawal; however, development is under greater 
scrutiny. The SLB has recently completed a revision of the trust holdings. CoNPS Board of Directors met with SLB representatives at 
their December 2014 meeting, and the Board was able to comment on the realignment. Stay up to date with the ongoings of the 
SLB on their News and Media page: http://trustlands.state.co.us/NewsandMedia/Pages/NewsandNotices.aspx. 

Colorado Parks and Wildlife (CPS) 

Along with the State Land Board, Colorado Parks and Wildlife (CPW) is a division under Colorado's Department of Natural Resourc- 
es within state government. Colorado Parks and Wildlife was formed in 201 1 from a merger of the Colorado Division of Wildlife 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


(DOW) and Colorado State Parks. CPW has total land holdings of over 1 million acres. Of these lands, 45% are owned outright and 
another 44% are in conservation easement. Only 0.2% of CPW's budget comes from Colorado's general fund (state budget). 

The bulk of CPW funding comes from license sales and other wildlife fees. Despite a merged agency, wildlife related revenue must 
still be used for wildlife related expenditures, as required by federal law (Pittman-Robertson Act). CPW has recently made a large 
contribution to rare plant conservation in Colorado with the addition of a Rare Plant Addendum in the State Wildlife Action Plan 
(http://cpw.state.co.us/Documents/CNAP/Rare-Plant-SWAP-201 5.pdf). The Addendum, authored by the Colorado Natural Heritage 
Program (CNHP, discussed below) with input from many stakeholders, includes a statewide strategic direction for the conservation 
of Colorado's 1 1 7 Plant Species of Greatest Conservation Need. 

The Colorado Natural Areas Program (CNAP) 

The Colorado Natural Areas Program (CNAP) is a small program under Colorado Parks and Wildlife which works cooperatively with 
landowners through voluntary agreements to recognize areas with natural features of statewide or global significance. The Pro- 
gram designates lands as state Natural Areas, working with all types of landowners. The landowner retains ownership and man- 
agement of the property. Over its almost 40 year tenure, CNAP has supported the conservation of more than 250 rare, threatened 
or endangered species or communities and built a registry of 93 designated Natural Areas with over 1 75,000 acres. Additionally, 
CNAP is the only state government program with an emphasis on rare plant conservation. Learn more about the Colorado Natural 
Areas Program, and ways to get involved, here: http://cpw.state.co.us/aboutus/Pages/CNAP.aspx. 

The Colorado Natural Heritage Program (CNHP) 

The Colorado Natural Heritage Program (CNHP) is a non-profit scientific organization affiliated with the Warner College of Natural 
Resources at Colorado State University. The CNHP Botany Team tracks and ranks over 500 rare plant species and many more plant 
communities in Colorado, using a standardized natural heritage methodology. CNHP also maintains a database with the location 
and status of populations of these species. Along with tracking rare species, CNHP also offers many conservation tools, such as 
climate change vulnerability assessments and the identification of Primary Conservation Areas (PCA), areas across the state which 
harbor high biodiversity. The Biodiversity Scorecard is a project developed in partnership with The Nature Conservancy (TNC), 
which provides the conservation status of biological features in the state. TNC has been a leader in the science of conservation 
and over the past 50 years has protected one million acres in Colorado. For more information about these organizations, see their 
websites: http://www.cnhp.colostate.edu/and http://www.nature.org. 

Other Organizations Performing Botanical Research 

Scientific research on native and rare plant species is critical in directing appropriate conservation measures, and Colorado has 
many outstanding academic researchers and many herbaria to document and study the flora of Colorado. The three largest 
herbaria in the state, the University Herbarium at the University of Colorado, Boulder (COLO), the Kathryn Kalmbach Herbarium at 
the Denver Botanic Gardens (KHD), and the Colorado State University Herbarium (CS) have roughly 300,000 collections combined, 
with most collections searchable online (COLO: http://cumuseum-archive.colorado.edu/Research/Botany/Databases/search.php 
and KHD, CSU: http://swbiodiversity.org/seinet/index.php). The herbaria are also open to the public by appointment for self-study 
and research. The Denver Botanic Gardens Research and Conservation department supports a large group of scientists conduct- 
ing long-term monitoring studies, conservation genetics work, seed collections, and ex-situ conservation for some of Colorado's 
most rare plant species. 

Vast acreage of land is also held by local city and county open space agencies, which balance management goals of recreation 
and conservation. These agencies seek public input to direct management goals. Over the past year, CoNPS has offered several 
volunteer opportunities to influence conservation on local open space properties. The Boulder CoNPS chapter offered a volun- 
teer position to represent CoNPS interests in preserving native habitats in the City of Boulder OSMP (Open Space and Mountain 
Parks) North Trail Study Area plan (https://conps.org/volunteer-needed-to-work-on-osmp-north-tsa-plan/). In the summer of 2015, 
CoNPS participated in two bioblitz events, along with other conservationists, at the Pineries El Paso County Open Space, to inven- 
tory state-rare plant species. By knowing the locations of these rare species, land managers will be able to protect these sensitive 
plants during salvage logging from the Black Forest Fire of 201 3. 

(Continued on page 21) 


Left: Krigio bifloro 
Photo by 
Audrey Boag 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 




Pineries Bioblitz August 201 5 Photo by Audrey Boag 


18 




Steinkamp Research Grant Report: 

Resolving DeBeque Phacelia's Taxonomic Synonymy 

by Brandee Wills 

Phacelia submutica is a rare desert wildflower, endemic to a specific soil type found only within a 12-mile radius of the town of 
DeBeque, from which the plant gets its common name, DeBeque Phacelia (Fig. l).This diminutive spring annual is a federally pro- 
tected species, listed as threatened under the Endangered Species Act in August of 201 1 primarily due to oil and gas development 
occurring in its already limited range, resulting in the modification or destruction of the unique desert ecosystem that this plant 
needs to survive. 

Interestingly, DeBeque Phacelia hasn't always had the scientific name Phocelio submutica. When the type specimen was collected 
from DeBeque in May of 191 1 by George E. Osterhout (a name I'm sure many of you are familiar with, as numerous Coloradan 
endemics such as Astragalus osterhoutii, Oreocarya osterhoutii, and Penstemon osterhoutii bear his name), it was identified as Em- 
menanthe scopulina, or Phacelia scopulina. It wasn't until 30 years later 
specimen was formally described as a new and distinct species, Phacei 
mutica (DeBeque Phacelia), by John T. Howell (1 944). Howell felt that C 
Phacelia was a distinct species because of the plant's hairless style anc 
seed capsule, for which the scientific name of the plant is derived (the 
sub- meaning "almost" or"nearly"and muticus meaning "without a po 

However, DeBeque Phacelia's taxonomic woes do not end there. In 1 9 
Halse reduced DeBeque Phacelia to a variety of P. scopulina (the specie 
terhout had initially identified the plant as in 1 91 1 ). Halse felt that the 
characters described previously were too variable among the two plai 
for DeBeque Phacelia to be considered distinct from P scopulina. Desp 
valid publication, DeBeque Phacelia still has two names. The U.S. Fish i 
life Service and the Bureau of Land Management consider the plant a 
species (P. submutica), while the Forest Service treats it as variety (P. scopulina 
var. submutica) of the more widespread species P scopulina. 

But, "What's in a name? That which we call a Phacelia by any other name would smell as sweet," would it not? Actually taxonomy, 
and how we delineate species, is incredibly important for the conservation and management of rare plants. The listing of sub- 
species and varieties under the Endangered Species Act can be controversial, as they may not always represent distinct genetic 
entities. Although morphological variation may be present in a subspecies or variety of plant, this variation may just be due to 
site specific ecological differences, such as soil type, and not genetics, a phenomenon called phenotypic plasticity. Over half of 
the species protected under the Endangered Species Act in the United States are plants, though they receive less than 5% of total 
funding allocated to threatened and endangered species (Negron-Ortiz 201 3). Because DeBeque Phacelia is protected under the 
Endangered Species Act it is important to determine if this species is a distinct genetic entity or Just a morphological variant of a 
more widespread species in order to Justify continued resource allocation to its conservation. 

To determine if DeBeque Phacelia was a distinct species I collected molecular data from three gene regions, the nuclear ITS region 
and the chloroplast regions ndhF and aptH-aptI, for DeBeque Phacelia and all of its closest relatives, the species in Phacelia sec- 
tions Miltitzia and Euglypta {Phacelia is a large genus, so taxonomist have broken it down into subgenera and then into sections). I 
used the data collected from those three gene regions to construct phylogenetic trees to infer evolutionary relationships between 
DeBeque Phacelia and the other species in these sections. Collecting molecular data is an excellent way to delineate species in 
sections such as these. There are twenty species in these two sections, and like DeBeque Phacelia, they are all mostly small, desert 
annuals found on unique soils throughout the western United States. The morphology of these plants is highly variable within and 
among the species of these sections. Because of that, taxonomists have defined these plant species based on minute and esoteric 
morphological characteristics, making the correct identification of these plants difficult and resulting in their complicated taxo- 
nomic history. 

The majority of my samples came from herbarium specimen tissue, which 1 ) allowed us to cost effectively increase sample size 
and collect species from throughout their known distributions and 2) identify mistakes in herbarium specimen identification 
versus actual phylogenetic inconsistencies (i.e., ask the question, are these "good" species?). Although I was unable to go out into 
the field and collect these specimens myself, I feel as though I lived vicariously through all of the collectors whose specimens I 
sampled. I visited the University of Wyoming's Rocky Mountain Herbarium, Colorado State University's Herbarium, and the Univer- 
sity of Colorado's Herbarium with my advisor and three undergraduate students assisting on this project. We combed the collec- 
tions for any of the species in Phacelia sections Miltitzia and Euglypta, specifically focused on finding those specimens collected 
or annotated by the experts, due to the difficulty of correctly identifying species in these sections. It was a great feeling to come 
across a specimen collected or annotated by Howell or Halse. Holding one of their specimens was to hold a small piece of Phace- 




Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


19 



Ha's taxonomic history in my hands. 

Analyzing the data revealed some interesting results. I had hypothesized 
based on Howell and Halse's work that DeBeque Phacelia's closest rela- 
tive would be P. scopulina (and here I must admit some subterfuge, for 
my true hypothesis was that none of these plants were "good" species, 
how could they be when they all looked so similar!?). However, what we 
found was that DeBeque Phacelia's closest relative isn't P scopulina at all, 
but is actually a different species, P salina. This was a surprise! Although, 
in retrospect it shouldn't have been considering that DeBeque Phacelia 
and P salina both have similar morphologies and soil preferences. Really, 
a number of the species we collected could have easily been DeBeque 
Phacelia's closest relative because they all are so morphologically similar. 

However, things get more complicated than that. 

Have you ever thought about how we define a species? I assure you, 
the debate is often more philosophical in nature than scientific. Un- 
fortunately, I didn't take my advisor's "Species and Speciation" class 
until this project was well underway, and so therefore was blissfully 
unaware of that fact when I initially wrote my proposal and applied for 
the Steinkamp Fund. I thought using molecular genetic data to identify 
whether DeBeque Phacelia was a distinct species would be easy. Collect 
the data, analyze the data, and all of a sudden you know whether or not 
it's a species, right? However, the term species, which describes discrete taxonomic entities, is Just but one snapshot of a longer 
evolutionary timescale, and is in direct conflict with the ongoing evolutionary processes which ultimately lead to speciation. 

While you might think I'm Just philosophizing here, this became evident when I looked at the topology of my phylogenetic trees. 

The nuclear ITS tree resolved DeBeque Phacelia as a monophyletic group 
nested within P salina (Bayesian posterior probability=0.99) (Fig. 3), 
while DeBeque Phacelia was found to be unresolved with P salina in the 
chloroplast trees (Bayesian posterior probability^! in the combined ndhF 
and atpH-atpl tree) (Fig. 4). However, it is important to remember when 
interpreting phylogenetic trees that gene trees do not always equal spe- 
cies trees. As lineages split, genes naturally go through phases of poly- 
phyly (like what we see in the nuclear ITS tree) before monophyly (the 
topology we look for to indicate a "good" species, for example, P scopulina 
in the nuclear ITS tree) is reached as ancestral genetic variation is sorted. 

Though P salina is not resolved as monophyletic and sister to DeBeque 
Phacelia in the ITS tree, with time, this lineage will sort out into a mono- 
phyletic group. While DeBeque Phacelia and P salina were paraphyletic 
in the chloroplast trees, this can be attributed to 1 ) the recent divergence 
of these two species and 2) the slow mutation rate of these regions. But 
what does this all mean? Is DeBeque Phacelia a "good" species? The answer is yes. DeBeque Phacelia is a distinct species because 
of its monophyly in the ITS tree, as well as its diagnosable geographical (DeBeque, Colorado), ecological (strict soil requirements), 
and morphological (rounded capsule) characters. So with the applica- 
tion of the phylogenetic species concept, which defines a species as the 
smallest group with diagnosable characters, DeBeque Phacelia should be 
restored to full species status. 

Those of you who have looked closely at Figures 3 and 4 may have no- 
ticed that two of my Phacelia scopulina specimens are not located in the 
phylogenetic tree where they should be (i.e., with the other P scopulina's), 
but rather associate with P salina. These specimens consistently grouped 
with the wrong species in every analysis (including other genetic analyses 
not discussed here), indicating that these two specimens are misidenti- 
fied P salina specimens. These specimens were collected by very skilled 
botanists, and this is pointed out not to shame these botanists, but rather 
to illustrate how difficult it is to correctly identify species in these sections 
based on morphology alone. Additionally, this Justifies our thorough 
sampling. Phylogenetic trees created from misidentified specimens skew true evolutionary relationships, but by sampling numer- 
ous individuals, we were able to discover mistakes in identification. 


Combmed Chloroplast Tree 



•F. moKO^Ksis NV-* 

■P. is V'^ 

•F. s ubm udca CO BR2 3 
■P. sainatmca CO CR3 
■P. sabtnulifa CO FSl-S 
■P. sabmulica CO PR 13 
•F. saiHtiuliiHi CO SC13 
■F. sclinc TliTf* 

■P. salina 
■P. salina 
■P. salina 

■P. scapulina • 

•P. scttpulina * 

■P. scopulina 
■P. scopulina 
■P. scopulina CO^ 

■P. scopulina 11^" 

■F. scopulina 
•F. scopulina OR‘= 

•P. gy mnoclada ““ 

■F. Sr iiotocloda 
■P. giabcrritna. 


Nuclear ITS Tree 




20 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


Although biologists have always struggled with the "species problem", taxonomy remains integral to conservation biology, which 
is primarily concerned with protecting these discrete taxonomic entities. The purpose of this study was to determine if DeBeque 
Phacelia is a distinct genetic entity, and with thorough species sampling across numerous gene regions this was confirmed, even 
with a lack of monophyly in our phylogenetic trees. If the goal of conservation biology is to maintain biodiversity, then in theory 
how we define biodiversity is arbitrary. However, the legislation protecting biodiversity is focused on conserving biodiversity at 
the species level, and because funding for plants is limited, correctly delineating taxa becomes important in the justification of 
funds. Not only did this study restore DeBeque Phacelia to full species status, it also provided me an opportunity to explore this 
plant's complex evolutionary history, providing an important evolutionary context to the conservation of this species. 

I'd like to sincerely thank: the Colorado Native Plant Society for the Steinkamp Fund, without which I would not have been able to 
learn about this plant's unique evolutionary history; Ronald Hartman from the Rocky Mountain Herbarium, Tim Hogan from the 
University of Colorado Herbarium, and Jen Ackerfield from the Colorado State University Herbarium (sorry Jen, you're going to 
have to revise Phacelia in your second edition) for being so kind and allowing me to destructively sample their specimens; Maddie, 
Brennan, and Hannah for their help on this project; and my advisor Dr. Mitchell McGlaughlin for teaching this field botanist some 
new tricks (everything I know about genetics!). 

References 

Halse, R. R. 1981. Taxonomy of P/iace//a section M/Vf/fz/a (Hydrophyllaceae). Madrono. 28: 121-132. 

Howell, J. T. 1 944. A revision of Phacelia section Miltitzia. Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci. 25: 357-376. 

Negron-Ortiz, V. 2013. Pattern of expenditures for plant conservation under the Endangered Species Act. Biol. Cons. 171: 36-43. 

Brandee Wills received her Bachelor's degree in Biology from Western State Colorado University in 20 1 0. Upon graduating she spent her 
summers surveying and monitoring rare plants for the Bureau of Land Management and her winters as a ski bum. She recently received 
her Master's degree in Plant Conservation Genetics from the University of Northern Colorado. She can be contacted at wills.brandee@ 
gmail.com. Photos in this article by Brandee Wills. 


Conservation Corner (Cont. from page 1 8) 

Several organizations in Colorado partner with land manage- 
ment agencies to offer work projects on public land to restore 
native plant habitat. Two of these are Wildlands Restoration 
Volunteers (http://www.wlrv.org/) and Volunteers for Outdoor 
Colorado (http://www.voc.org/). Other organizations, such as 
the Southern Rockies Seed Network (http://www.synergy3.org/ 
seed.php), specialize in opportunities to collect native seed to 
be used in restoration. Additionally, CoNPS has many opportu- 
nities to get involved with on-the-ground conservation listed 
on our website on our Conservation Projects page: (https:// 
conps.org/conservation-proJects/). The diversity and number of 
organizations and people working towards the conservation of 
Colorado's native plants and landscapes is truly staggering. 
CoNPS is proud to be a partner in the Colorado conservation 
community. 

Jessica Smith has worked as a field technician surveying rare 
plants and plant communities for the Colorado Natural Areas 
Program since 2013. She is a member of the CoNPS Board and the 
Conservation Committee. 

Jeffco Open Space In Plein Sight (Cont. from page 31 ) 

along the Clear CreekTrail in Golden. The public is invited to 
take a hike or stroll to observe the painters as they work. 

This incredible week of painting will culminate in a gallery 
exhibit October 8-9, featuring all of the works created during 
the preceding week. These works will be on display and avail- 
able for purchase at the Golden Community Center, 1 470 1 0th 
Street, Golden, CO. 

"We expect to have hundreds of pieces available at the final 
gallery exhibit, in a range of affordable prices," says Margot Zal- 
len, PLAN Jeffco President. "In addition to providing a unique 


cultural experience for the entire Metro Denver community, 
these events will allow attendees to bring the beauty of Jeffco's 
Open Space parks into their homes and offices as a reminder of 
why we live in Colorado." 

http://Jeffco.us/public-engagement/news/2016/in-plein-sight- 

outdoor-painting-event-features-27-artists/ 

The Urban Prairies Project 

The Urban Prairies Project is recruiting individuals to be 
a cadre of long-term, committed open space "restoration 
master" volunteers who assist with leading restoration work 
days, collect data about the plants and wildlife at the site and 
engage the public with information about their local open 
spaces through presentations or publications. Contact Amy 
Yarger at ayarger@butterflies.org for details. 


Webinar: Meet the Monarchs! 

(for youth, but anyone welcome) 

Register now. https://goo.gl/forms/pJXQH7eJQODktoH22 

Date and Time: Tuesday, October 4th, 2 PM Eastern Time. 

Join Dr. Karen Oberhauser, a scientist from the University of 
Minnesota, and Cathy Downs, a natural science educator from 
central Texas for this interactive webinar (for youth audiences). 
You will learn about the amazing monarch butterflies and their 
unique long-distance migration. From their milkweed host 
plants to parasitoids that ail them, we will explore the complex 
life history of the species. In addition, you will learn how to get 
involved in your own school or backyard to help monarchs, and 
benefit many other wildlife species at the same time! Listen 
carefully, and don't forget to take notes; we will have a few pop 
quiz questions throughout the webinar! Tracy McCleaf, USFWS, 
Email: tracy_mccleaf@fws.gov 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



Zen and the Art of WHdflower Science 

by Krista Langlois 



Outside David Inouye's Colorado cabin at 9,600 feet, the morning air still smells like yesterday's rain. Bumblebees, drunk on pollen, 
drone from one flower to the next, while hummingbirds zip back and forth like tiny fighter pilots to the sugar water Inouye puts 
out for them. Inouye, a research ecologist from the University of Maryland, stands stock-still on a deck, one hand holding the red 
plastic hummingbird feeder, the other moving slowly toward it. The iridescent birds ignore him. One hovers at the cusp of the 
feeder. 

Inouye's hand creeps closer. 

Without a sound, he closes it. His grip is firm but not constricting, and the male broad-tailed hummingbird that against all odds 
finds itself enclosed in a human fist doesn't seem alarmed. As Inouye carries it through his creaky cabin door, its head peeks out 
from between his thumb and pointer finger, its black eyes curious, alert. 

In his four decades at the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory in Gothic, Colorado, Inouye has captured and banded some 500 
hummingbirds in an effort to understand their niche in the meadows surrounding his cabin. When he started, he had no intention 
of documenting climate change. But lately, as its effects have begun rejiggering alpine communities worldwide, Inouye's research 
is emerging as one of the strongest indicators that mountain ecosystems are changing more quickly — and more dramatically — 
than previously suspected. The most compelling evidence comes not from hummingbirds, but from another, unexpected byprod- 
uct of Inouye's patient research: A massive data set on the plants they and other pollinators visit. 

Back in the early 1 970s, Inouye realized that to understand hummingbirds, he also had to learn about wildflowers. So he and a 
group of colleagues each plotted out a few patches of meadow in the West Elk Mountains and spent the summer counting the 
number of blooms there. After a few years, his colleagues had the data they wanted and abandoned their plots. But Inouye, then a 
Ph.D. candidate at the University of North Carolina, kept plugging away. 

Every summer, he returned to the same high-altitude meadows, meticulously recording how many of each species of flowers 
there were, when they blossomed and when they died back. By 201 3, he and his grad students had amassed an unparalleled data 
set, covering some 2 million individual flowers from 1 21 species. It was enough to conclude that, since the 1 970s, Rocky Mountain 
wildflower season has lengthened by an average of 35 days. 

The implications of that finding — published earlier this year in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences — reach 
past these particular alpine meadows, to the rest of the Rockies and beyond. "Across the globe, one of the strongest indicators of 
climate change is the timing of biological events," says the study's lead author Paul CaraDonna, a 26-year-old Ph.D. student at the 
University of Arizona. Other studies have focused just on the date of first flowering, which offers only a half-formed picture of the 
changes taking place. 


22 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





To the wildflower enthusiasts who gather each year in the nearby mountain town of Crested Butte — the official wildflower cap- 
ital of Colorado — an extra month of blooms may seem like the bright side of climate change. But because most alpine species 
are perennials that can live up to 30 years, "flowering longer could actually have a counterintuitive effect," CaraDonna explains. 
"They're investing so much energy in reproduction that they may actually be growing less." 

Plus, a longer flowering season doesn't always mean more flowers, because while snowfall tends to melt earlier, the date of win- 
ter's last hard frost hasn't changed. Many plants are budding sooner, but a solid frost in May or June will still kill them, resulting in 
years with very few flowers. (Colorado fruit growers face a similar problem: False springs cause orchards to bud too soon, only to 
have the burgeoning apricots and cherries killed off when wintry weather returns.) 

In the alpine zone, that kind of die-off affects bees, butterflies, hummingbirds and other flower-reliant creatures. Broad-tailed 
hummingbirds like those summering outside Inouye's cabin, for example, migrate from Southern Mexico to the Colorado Rockies 
every spring. Their cue to head north seems to come from the lengthening daylight, which means they'll continue to arrive at 
roughly the same time regardless of how climate change affects conditions at the northern end of their route. Some years, they 
may arrive to find hardly any flowers at all. Other years, they may find that peak flowering of the species they depend on has 
already come and gone. 

"The floral landscape is being reshuffled," CaraDonna says. "It's like going to a grocery store and getting used to all the food items 
being in the same aisles, and then you go back and everything's in a different place." 

With the hummingbird still peering out from his left hand, Inouye uses his right to pour himself a cup of tea. He sips it gingerly 
before fitting the hummingbird's leg with a metal band no bigger than a grain of rice and jotting its ID in a handwritten log. 

Tall and lanky, with black hair Just beginning to go gray, Inouye, now 64, moves with a Zen-like patience. His demeanor is 
well-suited to the Rocky Mountain Biological Lab, a rustic field station in an old mining camp where some of the country's lon- 
gest-running ecology studies take place. Scientists here tend to return year after year, and their pursuits are the stuff of bio-nerd 
lore: The lab's only permanent resident, Billy Barr, has turned decades of lonely winter nights into one of the most comprehensive 
avalanche and snowfall records anywhere, and a project documenting yellow-bellied marmots is so long-lived it's been handed 
down from one scientist to the next, like an heirloom. The desire to understand this one place has surpassed science and become 
a kind of love. 

"As humans, we live 60 to 100 years if we're lucky," CaraDonna says. "But ecosystems operate on such a different scale. We've gotten 
amazing insight into how natural systems work because we've been paying attention to them for so long, and from so many dif- 
ferent perspectives." 

Inouye's own family history at Gothic spans four generations: his father, a physician, volunteered here in the '70s; Inouye's son, 
Brian, has been coming since he was a year old. Now 44, Brian and his wife — fellow biologist Nora Underwood — bring along 
their daughter, Miyoko, who spends her days catching bugs with the lab's day camp. If Miyoko returns as an adult, the landscape 
she'll see may be hardly recognizable. But thanks to her family's work, she'll have access to a detailed record that will help her, and 
us, understand what's been lost. 

At the cabin, Inouye pads back out to the front porch. He unfurls his hand. A moment later, the emerald bird, weighing about the 
same as a penny, is sucking nectar from a nearby patch of larkspur. Then it lifts up into the sky, a dark speck against a blue canvas, 
plummets, and is gone. 

David Inouye will be a speaker at the 2016 CoNPS Annual Conference in Boulder, Colorado, on September 24. 

High Country News 

From their website: High Country News is a 501 (c)3 Colorado-based nonprofit media organization that covers the important issues 
and stories that define the American West. Our mission is to inform and inspire people - through in-depth Journalism - to act on 
behalf of the West's diverse natural and human communities. High Country News publishes an award-winning magazine, a popular 
website and a weekly op-ed column service, along with special reports and books. Through in-depth reporting. High Country News 
covers the American West's public lands, water, natural resources, grazing, wilderness, wildlife, logging, politics, communities, 
growth and other issues now changing the face of the West. From Alaska and the Northern Rockies to the desert Southwest, from 
the Great Plains to the West Coast, High Country News' coverage spans 12 Western states and is the leading source for regional 
environmental news, analysis and commentary - an essential resource for those who care about this region. The Los Angeles Times 
describes High Country News as "the most influential environmental Journal in the Mountain \N est'.' High Country A/ews' indepen- 
dent research and unique voice are supported largely by our devoted readership through subscriptions and contributions to the 
Research Fund. Grant support, advertising and syndication sales make up the rest." https://www.hcn.org/about 
CoNPS is sad to report that HCN founder, Tom Bell, who was a Wyoming rancher and environmentalist, passed away on 
August 30. http://www.hcn.org/articles/tom-bell-High-Country-News-founder-passes?utm_source=wcn 1 &utm_medium=email 
From JLT: Please consider subscribing to HCN or giving a donation to their Research Fund to support this unique and important 
resource. You might also consider donating to HCN in honor of Tom Bell, www.hcn.org 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


23 


Crowded Parks: Are You Part of the Monoculture? 

by Mary Ann Bonnell 

School is back in session, weekend 1-70 corridor traffic is congested, people are pressed for time and want to save money and 
enjoy Colorado's outdoors. Colorado's population growth will continue to add pressure to close-in, easily accessible areas. These 
factors have more and more Denver Metro Area residents staying closer to home and visiting the parks and trails in Jefferson 
County that are convenient and fun for hiking, mountain biking, climbing, trail running, fishing and horseback riding. With so 
many people so close to Jeffco Open Space Parks, finding a parking spot at peak times can be a struggle for visitors. The popularity 
of our parks creates parking and crowding challenges at peak times and there's no simple solution to the overflowing parking lots. 
We want to get people outdoors and we want them want them to be safe and sane while doing so. 

Are you part of the park crowding monoculture? If you want to experience congested conditions, here are some simple metrics to 
follow: 

1 . Plan to visit on a weekend or holiday 

2. Plan to arrive at the park sometime between 9 a.m. and 3 p.m. 

3. Plan your visit on a perfect weather day in spring, summer or fall 

Combining one or more of these metrics assures you will experience con- 
gested conditions. Apply all three and you have the perfect storm for a crazy, 
congested open space experience. Diversify your visit and avoid the mono- 
culture with these suggestions: 

1 . Plan your visit on a weekday. 

2. If the weekend is your only option, plan to arrive before 9 a.m. or after 3 
p.m. I worked the evening curfew shift in our parks this summer, and I can tell 
you that our parks are absolutely wonderful after 6 p.m. on weekends. 

3. Plan your visit for before or after work. Most Jeffco Open Space parks are 
open from one hour before sunrise to one hour after sunset. Around the sum- 
mer solstice, you have from 4:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. to enjoy a park visit. 

4. Consider a winter visit or a walk in the rain. With proper safety gear and 
weather precautions, a visit during less than ideal weather conditions can be 
refreshing and allow you to see our parks in a quieter light. 

Please consider these additional monoculture avoidance tips: 

A parking spot is not an entitlement. Parking is first come, first served. If 
you arrive and find all of the designated spots are full, the safest and most 
resource conscious choice is to change your plans. Many visitors endanger 
themselves, their children, their pets and fragile park resources by creatively 
parking in undesignated areas such as along busy highways or in grassy areas 
next to park access roads. Colorado Native Plant Society members should know better than anyone about the long-term, negative 
impacts of improvised parking on native vegetation. Don't do it. 

Never park in a NO PARKING area or in front of a NO PARKING sign and hope you "will get away with it". Areas are designated NO 
PARKING for important safety reasons such as emergency access, traffic flow and/or sight lines for park ingress and egress. Jeff- 
co Open Space Rangers ticket folks who park in designated no parking areas because they are often creating a safety hazard by 
doing so. 

Planning a group visit? Avoid contributing to the monoculture. Jeffco Open Space monitors and permits group activities in our 
parks. A Saturday Wildflower Hike MeetUp for 20 people at 1 0 a.m. at West Mount Falcon may seem like no big deal, but schedul- 
ing activities like this amplifies crowding and frustration on several levels, including parking and trail user conflict. When hosting 
a group activity, keep numbers small, emphasize carpooling and choose a day of the week and time that is outside of the perfect 
storm for the crowding monoculture. We encourage Colorado Native Plant Society members to avoid the crowding monoculture 
by actively and thoughtfully diffusing and diversifying your park use schedule. We believe you will have a safer and more enjoy- 
able experience by doing so. 

Jeffco Open Space was founded as a land conservation organization in 1 972 to preserve land, protect park and natural resources 
and provide healthy nature-based experiences. We are funded with a one-half of one percent sales tax that has preserved over 
54,680 acres and created 28 regional parks and 230 miles of trails in Jefferson County. 

Mary Ann Bonnell Is Visitor Services Supervisor and Canyon Regions Supervisor for Jefferson County Open Space. 



24 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





The Sunday after the 40th anniversary party, CoNPS members 
continued celebrating the first Colorado Native Plant Apprecia- 
tion Day with a tour of native gardens in the Boulder area. Par- 
ticipants had a choice of 3 residential yards, the garden at the 
Chautauqua Ranger's Cottage, and the garden at Harlequin's 
Gardens. What a wonderful way to get ideas for your own yard! 
Charlie and I can't resist an interesting garden, so we headed to 
Boulder with a garden tour map and camera in hand. Unfortu- 
nately, we ran out of time to visit the beautiful native gardens at 
Boulder's Harlequin's Gardens and the Rangers' Cottage. 

Linda Boley's Yard: Plants, Art, and Bees 

First we visited the yard of Linda Boley and we were impressed 
with the lovely design, the variety of plants, and the many 
artistic touches. Linda has a background in graphic design and 
it shows. Before she retired, Linda worked at the University of 
Colorado Museum. Although Linda's emphasis is more on rock 
gardening than native plant gardening, her design ideas would 
work well with native plants. A picture is worth a thousand 
words, so here is a photo tour of Linda's yard. 


The front yard is striking with curving paths meandering 
through a variety of plants with different colors and textures. 
Behind the garden is a "lawn" of low-growing thyme with bulbs 
that add color in the spring. 


CoNPS June 1 1 Garden Tour: Boulder Area 

Colorado Native Plant Appreciation Week Event 
by Jan Turner 


Nothing goes to waste. When 
a tree died, Linda turned it 
into a piece of artwork: A blue 
wind tree. 


Linda participates in the Bee's Needs program. Her cedar fence 
came alive with some green paint and Linda's talent. Another 
beautiful piece of art, Linda created a bee house of a variety of 
materials providing different sized holes to attract a variety of 
bees. The entire time we were there, the bee apartment was 
buzzing with activity. 



Kitty Brighton's LEED Platinum- 
Rated House & Native Yard 


To help make sure her house received the 
LEED platinum status (the highest rating), Kit- 
ty Brighton employed the services of Alison 
Peck of Matrix Gardens to design a low-water 
garden consisting almost entirely of native 
plants. In the front of the house, attached 
planters in the same style as the house con- 
tain a colorful array of natives including prick- 
ly pear cactus, red penstemons, and sulphur 
flower. Note: Alison Peck, who designed this 
garden, will be a speaker at the CoNPS Annual 
Conference on September 24th. 



Photos in this article by 
Jan Loechell Turner 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 





The front yard contains a variety of native grasses interspersed with wildflowers.The backyard is terraced with a meadow of 
blue grama on each level and a line of flowers that will likely spread among the clumps of blue grama grass. Rabbitbrush growing 
toward the back of the property helps to conceal a utilities box. The landscape is drought-tolerant and the biodiversity should 
attract a number of native pollinators and other wildlife. On Kitty's rooftop patio, there are potted plants that receive some shade 
from the solar panels that are active on both sides and are arranged in an interesting pattern. LEED (Leadership in Energy and 
Design) is a green building certification program used throughout the world. 

Jean Morgan's Cottage Garden showcases many native species that support urban wildlife, making her yard a Na- 
tional Wildlife Federation Backyard Wildlife Habitat. Her garden features many less common natives as well as unique xeric plants 
and two successful hell strips. Jean's house is on the historic register and her yard is filled with her inventive art including a hippo- 
potamus made out of a bathtub with a head made out of shovels, ladder latches, railroad pins, faucet handles, and trailer lights. It 
serves as a giant flower pot for sedums. Photos from left to right: Jean Morgan and Charlie Turner behind Jean's homemade pond 
surrounded by blanket flower {Gaillardia) and a handsome crane. Hippo planter/yard art. Jean and the large and beautiful native, 
prince's plume {Stanleyo pinnata). 



26 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 




CoNPS July 31 Garden Tour: Denver Area 

On July 31, CoNPS held a native plant garden tour in the Denver area. Five gardens were toured, each with its own unique style. 
Garden Tour participants were especially enthralled by tours of the yards of two well-known Denver-area horticulturists, Kelly 
Grummons (formerly of Timberline Gardens) and Jim Borland, Co-host of the "Ask the Garden Pros" radio show, former Denver 
Botanic Gardens horticulturist, and former CoNPS President. Visitors also enjoyed the yards of three other native plant gardeners: 
Kit Cohan's beautiful Garden in the Rocks in the Golden area, Jan & Charlie Turner's native plant yard in Golden, and Brian Kurzel's 
lovely native hell-strip in Denver. Seventy-seven people attended the tour despite the cloudy weather and occasional rain. 

The yard owners were concerned about showing their yards in late July when not much was blooming. It seemed to be during the 
"dry spell" between the spring/summer blooms and the late summer/early fall blooms, but visitors still found much to enjoy. Some 
flowers were blooming in each of the yards and each yard had a different style with different ideas that might be adapted to the 
yards of other CoNPS members. Pollinators were in abundance on the plants that were blooming and many people were photo- 
graphing the pollinators as well as the native plants. 

The CoNPS Fall Native Plant Sale ends September 15. If the deadline isn't over, you can go to the CoNPS website to browse 
through the online catalog to select some plants for your native plant garden to support native pollinators, create habitat for birds 
and other wildlife, reduce mowing and the consumption of fossil fuels, water, and pesticides and give your yard a sense of place. 
There will be another online plant sale in the spring. 


Kelly Grummon's Amazing Yard 



First photo and last photo by Kelly Grummons. The rest of the photos are by Jen Bousselot. 


Kelly's garden is a testing ground for new varieties of xeric plants: trees, shrubs, perennials, grasses and annuals. You'll see numer- 
ous Arctostaphylos species in evaluation, over 1 00 species of western, native cacti, agaves and yuccas and many of Kelly's hybrids 
and horticultural selections of native and exotic perennials. The garden is dominated at this time by Dog Tuff^ African dogtooth 
grass which is under evaluation and going through maintenance protocols for commercial production. This location is also the 
home of the mail order website coldhardycactus.com. Kelly has three (soon to be four) greenhouses for the production of cacti for 
the mail order operation. Kelly Grummon 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


27 





Jim and Dorothy Borland's Ultimate Native Plant Garden 

This primarily Colorado native plant garden was installed in the summer of 1 997 and immediately decimated by hail. The entire 
garden has been watered only once since that time. Perennials and annuals move of their own free will even though they were 
originally planted where it was thought they would do best. The major theme of the garden has evolved somewhat by including 
plants from similar climates around the world, including 4,000+ Tulipa, Allium, Calochortus and Colchicum species. Jim Borland 



Kit Cohan's Garden in the Rocks 



This yard was converted from a poor lawn area attempting to grow in native mudstone in the front yard, 
and weeds in the back yard with a few typical English garden plants suffering in the sandy, dry soil. The 
non-xeric plants were given away in order to convert this to an entirely xeric yard. The lawn sprinkler sys- 
tem was converted to a drip irrigation system for both the front and back yards. The dominant plant in the 
front yard is a hardy manzanita native to the Uncompahgre plateau of western Colorado; the back yard is 
heavily slanted towards native and non-native plants for the benefit of hummingbirds, butterflies and na- 
tive pollinators. The yard contains plenty of agastaches, salvia species, milkweed, a variety of xeric native 
and non-native shrubs, penstemons, lavender, varieties of Missouri primrose, sulfur buckwheat, ornamen- 
tal native grasses, and plenty of smaller plants, including a few enjoying their first year in the ground after 
being purchased at this year's CoNPS plant sale. Kit Cohan 


Photos by Kit Cohan 


28 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


Brian Kurzel's Yard: Native Hellstrip in the City 



Apache Plume 



Ten years ago, two areas that were a lawn and a dog run were converted into mostly-native gardens that don't use supplemental 
water and allow the fittest species to 'fight it out' These gardens won a blue ribbon in the 2013 Denver County Fair for 'Best Lawn 
Conversions' and they received 'Certified Wildlife Habitat' status from the National Wildlife Federation in 201 5. They also provide 
examples of some native plants that do well in the Denver climate, provide some habitat for pollinators and add some texture 
and beauty to the neighborhood. Brian Kurzel 



WILDLIFE 

Habitat. 



Charlie and Jan Turner's Native Plants Yard in Golden 



Many plants had finished blooming and others were getting ready to bloom in the Turner's yard, but the high point of the yard 
tour was a bush morning glory {Ipomoeo leptophylla) with abundant large, pink-lavendar blooms. The plant grows from a large 
tuber and the plant stems and leaves cover an area about 4 feet wide. Another regional native of interest was the fernbush. The 
fragrant blooms were attracting many species of bees including bumblebees and some large spider wasps (shown in inset photos) 
that were the subject of much photography. The bottom middle photo was supplied by the Turners to show what the yard looked 
like the previous month, with the Gaillardia aristata and Yucca glauca in bloom. The yard is a National Wildlife Federation Certified 
Wildlife Habitat and sustains many pollinators and other local wildlife. Jan Turner Photos by Jan Loechell Turner 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


Volunteers Make a Difference: 

David Julie and Kate Goes In Center Teach Pollination 



Children at Louisville Public Library are captivated by the presenta- 
tion by David and Kate. 


Two CoNPS volunteers have made a tremendous impact on 
the pollinator knowledge of children and adults in the Denver 
Metro area and nearby communities. 

David Julie and Kate Goes In Center have been giving pre- 
sentations on pollination to children and adults in a number 
of locations. Their presentations are creative and involve 
role-playing and interaction to engage the children and 
adults attending their programs. They made a number of 
props to allow children to participate as pollinators and to 
understand how pollination occurs. 

We owe our thanks to David and Kate for their wonderful 
work. Thanks is also due to Sara Copp, Chair of CoNPS Educa- 
tion & Outreach Committee, and Jen Bousselot, Membership 
& Marketing Coordinator, who helped arrange for David and 
Kate to present their programs. 

David and Kate have taught at the Senior Naturalists Program 
at Bear Creek Lake State Park in Lakewood, Louisville Public 
Library, Longmont Public Library, and the Cal-Wood Educa- 
tion Center near Jamestown. They presented two programs 
at the Sandstone Ranch Visitor and Learning Center in Long- 
mont. 

Just think what an impact it would make if two members from 
every chapter did this! 


The reports below are by David Julie. 

Photos are by Kate Goes In Center. 

Louisville Public Library: Monarchs, Milkweed, Wildflowers 

Catherine Jepson, of the Louisville Department of Natural Re- 
sources, invited CoNPS to provide a program at the Louisville 
Library on monarchs, milkweed, and wildflowers on June 23rd. 
More than 1 00 people attended, including scores of children of 
all ages and a few dozen adults, including many seniors. 

Longmont Public Library Celebrates Pollinators 

Elektra Greer, Head of Children's and Teen Services at Long- 
mont Public Library, invited CoNPS to participate in the library's 
"Celebrate Our Pollinators! Storytime" events for children and 
families on June 8th and 1 4th. About eighty enthusiastic. 


attentive young people attended one of the four sessions with 
their parents. 

CoNPS members, David Julie and Kate Goes In Center, offered 
a program on plant pollination by wind and animals, includ- 
ing hummingbirds, bats, flies, butterflies, and especially bees. 
Children learned about photosynthesis, the parts of a flower, 
nectar, pollen, and seeds. Most animal pollinators unintention- 
ally move pollen among flowers as they feed on nectar. How- 
ever, bees intentionally gather pollen, and nectar, to feed their 
young. A leafcutter bee female stores a provision of pollen and 
nectar in a nest, then lays an egg on it, and closes the cell. The 
egg hatches, the larva grows and molts several times as it eats, 
then spins a silken cocoon in which it remains throughout the 
winter. The following spring, the young pupates and emerges 
as an adult. The children were also briefly introduced to bum- 
ble bees, honey bees, and monarch butterflies. 

The program incorporated lots of role-playing and participa- 
tion including gathering pollen and nectar from models of 
huge anthers and nectaries. 

Each child received a postcard they chose of either a female 
monarch butterfly, a male monarch butterfly, or a female leaf- 
cutter bee. 

Bear Creek Lake Park's Senior Naturalists Program 

This letter from Bear Creek Lake Park Naturist Supervisor, Jody 
Morse, says it all: 

I would like to take this moment and thank you for sending 
David Julie our way. He gave his presentation on Pollinators/ 
Bees today for my Sr. Naturalist program! He had 1 3 people that 
were totally captivated by his every word! 

We conduct our program from 9-1 1 am. We usually have class 
time the first hour then head out. David spoke for 2 and Vi 
hours and it felt like 20 minutes. Everyone had questions and 
were fascinated by David's knowledge and passion!! 

Thanks you for sending such a great resource our way!! 

Jody Morse, Park Naturalist Supervisor, Bear Creek Lake Park 

Left: Naturalists holding 
the CoNPS handouts, 
bee nesting blocks, 
and Asclepias speciosa 
and Ratibida columnif- 
era seeds that David 
provided. 

Sandstone Ranch Visitor & Learning Center 

Robin Boden, the Volunteer Coordinator at Sandstone Ranch 
Visitor and Learning Center in Longmont, invited CoNPS to 
participate in her Bee Amazed evening education for children 
and families on August 1 6th. About twenty young people 
and twenty adults attended on the beautiful Learning Center 
grounds. 

(Cont. on page 43) 



30 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 




NEWS & ANNOUNCEMENTS 


New Southeast Chapter President and 
Field Trip Coordinator 

Jeff Jones, the new Southeast Chapter President, has been 

involved in the computer industry for 
36+ years as a business owner and 
otherwise. His passions are all things 
Science related. Jeff has a Bachelor's 
degrees in Mathematics, Philosophy 
and Computer Science. His inter- 
ests in ornithology and botany are 
probably more active than others 
these days. He has been studying and 
practicing botany since his childhood 
years in Asheville, NC. It has been a 
passion and process for him since 
then. In the past two decades Jeff 
has attended several CoNPS field trips 
throughout the state as well as leading a couple each year. He 
has lived in Woodland Park, CO (Teller County) at 8,500' for the 
past 28 years with his wife, Connie. They raised their daughter 
there and she now lives and works in Denver. 

Doris Drisgill, the new field trip 
coordinator for the SE Chapter, is an 
amateur botanizer who has been 
leading flower walks in the Pikes 
Peak region since 1 993, first with 
El Paso County Parks, then with 
Colorado Springs City Parks, and 
the last decade or more with CoNPS 
SE Chapter. She has been an active 
member since the SE Chapter got 
started back in the mid-90's, and was 
co-president for several years with George Cameron and also 
with Liz Klein. Doris hopes the chapter will live long and prosper. 

The Board thanks Richard Bunn for serving as the SE Chapter 
president for the past year. Richard kept Board meetings lively 
with his keen sense of humor (wise cracks) and intelligent, 
thoughtful input. Richard stepped down because of time con- 
straints. 

Jeffco Open Space In Plein Sight 

Hosted by PLAN Jeffco, "In Plein Sight,"October 4-9, is the first 
First Ever Live Painting Event to be Held in Jefferson County 
Open Space Parks. PLAN Jeffco is a nonprofit, volunteer-led or- 
ganization of open space advocates based in Jefferson County. 

Featuring more than two dozen professional artists painting 
from dawn to dusk October 4 - 8, 201 6 at one Jeffco Open 
Space location each day. In Plein Sight is a free, public exhibi- 
tion for all ages to enjoy. Artists will be located in South Valley 
Park, Mount Falcon Park, Crown Hill Park, White Ranch Park and 

(Continued on page 21) 




Jeff Jones 


New Northern Chapter President 

Renee Galeano-Popp is the new 

president of the Northern Chapter. She 
received her undergraduate degree in 
Botany followed by graduate work in 
Forest Ecology, both at Northern Arizo- 
na University. 

She spent 20 years in the USDA Forest 
Service serving as District, Forest and 
ultimately Regional Botanist in Albu- 
querque, N.M. 

Her longest tenure was as Assistant 
Director of Fish, Wildlife and Rare Plants at the Lincoln Nation- 
al Forest in New Mexico. In Colorado, she spent 1 0 years in 
private consulting mainly working on environmental impact 
studies in over a dozen states before retiring. 



Renee Galeano-Popp 


She has been a member of Arizona, New Mexico and Colorado 
Native Plant Societies throughout her time in each state. Renee 
believes strongly that our organization should be active in 
education as well as advocacy in these times of environmental 
crisis. 

Many thanks to Ronda Koski for her service as the Northern 
Chapter President. Now that Renee has assumed the chap- 
ter presidency, Ronda will have more time for her Job as a 
Research Associate, Landscape Architecture, with CSU, 
her Job as CoNPS Workshop Coordinator, and her many other 
activities. 



Harlequin's Gardens Expansion: 
Natives for Wholesale 

Harlequin's Gardens in Boulder is expanding. We have pur- 
chased an adjacent acre of land for growing more plants. Our 
goal is to build a greenhouse that does not use fossil fuels, to 
grow plants free of toxic pesticides. 


We will grow even more native plants and native shrubs 
from local seed when possible. Besides supplying Harlequin's 
Gardens, we will be selling wholesale to local landscaping 
companies. This could be significant in strengthening our 
native communities. 


Our new propagation manager, Gary Meis, loves to grow 
natives. Email him atWholesale@HarlequinsGardens.com 

Harlequin's Gardens will be getting collection permits from 
Boulder Open Space and Mt. Parks. We also welcome sugges- 
tions of what to grow, where to collect and donations of seeds 
that are accurately identified. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



CoNPS Fall Online Native Plant Sale Now in Progress! Order by Sept. 15th! 






Fall is a great time to plant and you may now place your order for native plants on the CoNPS website. More than 45 different 
species of Colorado native plants are being offered for sale, primarily in 4" and one gallon pots. Perennials, grasses, and shrubs 

are available. 


Varrovi - ALhilltJH 
IhhuIosb -1’ 

ii^^iqhr X vvkirh - 


Vti'rtjw - Achillea 
lanulosa 1 ga 


Miikvrtied. 'Slld'iVy - 

Ascicpias spcciosa 


Milkweyd. QuClerllv 
riihisfo:^?^ 



Tririgtid - 

Artcmtiia friqids 4" 


Rj’a'irje - 
Artemisia 


Colu'^biiih*. Ve|{ciw - 
Aquileqie 


Am ifht 


Fri’^ye'd - 
Artc'miEiyB fnqieJa 1 


You can order up until September 1 5th. The pick 
up will be Saturday, September 24, at the CoNPS 
Annual Conference. The native plants are guar- 
anteed "Neonicotinodia Free" by the native plant 
supplier. High Plains Environmental Center (HPEC). 
HPEC is a non-profit focused on "restoring nature 
where we live, work, and play." In order to improve 
the availability of native plants for landscaping 
and restoration, thereby creating habitat in the 
communities that we design and build, we grow 
native plants form seed at our Loveland, CO 
facility. Many of our offerings are grown from seed 
collected within Larimer and Boulder Counties.. 
Our plants are grown, mostly outdoors, without 
the use of pesticides or fossil fuels. All proceeds 
go toward funding our environmental outreach 
and education programs. Visit our website www. 
suburbitat.org. 


If you would like assistance in selecting and/or planting instructions please contact Charles Turner at conpscturner(a)gmail.com or 
JimTolstrup at jim(a)suburbitat.org. 


HPEC Educational Visitor Center 
Collaboration with City of Loveland 

This autumn. High Plains 
Environmental Center (HPEC) 
will break ground on a new 
building located on the shores 

of Houts Reservoir, within The - — HlGlI I^LAINS 

Lakes at Centerra neighbor- envihonmen tal centch 

hood, in Loveland. The 2800 

square foot building will be roughly half administrative offices 
and half public space including a classroom and library. 

The HPEC educational visitor center will focus on conserving 
and restoring Colorado's unique native biodiversity in the 
midst of development. The center will demonstrate, through 
extensive gardens and exhibits, the benefits to wildlife and 
water conservation derived from the use of native plants in 
landscaping, open space, and urban stormwater ponds. 

The High Plains School (Pre-K through 8) currently under 
construction is a 1 0 minute walk from HPEC through a 1 0 acre 
constructed watershed restored with native vegetation. The 
school will have a collaborative relationship with HPEC and a 
STEM curriculum with a heightened focus on science and envi- 
ronmental sustainability. 

Funding for the one million dollar HPEC construction will come 
from the sale of the current HPEC offices. McWhinney, the 
developer of Centerra, has committed $250,000 to the project. 
An additional $400,000 will come from the City of Loveland 
through a collaborative partnership with the Parks and Open 
Space Department. The HPEC project is expected to be com- 
pleted in late 201 6 or early 201 7. 

Article courtesy Jim Tolstrup and HPEC 



High Plains Environmental Center (HPEC) 
Selling Native Plants at Whole Foods 

Native plants for pollina- 
tors are being sold at the 
Fort Collins Whole Foods 
thanks to the effort of High 
Plains Environmental 
Center Executive Director, 

Jim Tolstrup. As Chair of 
the CoNPS Horticulture & 

Restoration Committee, 

Jim spearheaded the 
Spring Onilne Native Plant Sale, that was an overwhelmng 
success with over $9,000 of plants sold. The Fall Online Native 
Plant Sale end September 1 5. 

Bocks Publish a Mystery 

"Carl Bock and I have Just published our 
first fiction book, a mystery set on the 
Arizona-Mexico boundary where we have 
done science for over 4 decades. We are so 
happy about this. We have published it as 
an ebook and paperback because we are 
in a hurry due to our age. Tomorrow I am 
going to post a picture of the cover. This 
book is called Coronado's Trail. Carl won 
a prize with his manuscript in a contest he entered. We have 
roared through getting it into reality form." Jane Bock 

Jane and Carl Bock are professors emerita/emeritus from the 
University of Colorado, Boulder. 

Note: To order this book, go to smile.amazon.com. Be sure and 
select CoNPS as your charity before you order. 




32 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





High Country Apps Designates CoNPS as 
a Conservation Partner 



High Country Apps and Al Schneider have designated CoNPS as 
their "conservation partner" and 5% of worldwide sales of the 
"Colorado Rocky Mountain Wildflowers"will go to CoNPS. 

Colorado Rocky Mountain Wildfiowers presents more than 500 
wildflowers, shrubs, trees, and ferns of the Colorado Rockies and 
Greater Rocky Mountain Area. Designed for expert and begin- 
ner alike, this guide presents each species in a clear, informative 
format that provides photos and illustrations of the plant, an 
easily understood description, distinctive field marks, preferred 
habitats, and tidbits on the plant's ecology and cultural use. An 
innovative, easy-to-use key allows the user to select flower color, 
leaf type, and other characteristics to quickly identify unknown 
plants. You are on a hike, look down and see a flower with yellow 
petals and opposite leaves but don't know its name. It could be 
tall and thorny, sticky with black berries, sweet-smelling with 
square stems. Just select what you do know on the app and all 
plants matching your description will be shown. Photographs 
and information used by the app are stored locally, making the 
app available to use with or without a data connection. There is 
an Apple iOS version and Google Play Android version. The price 
is $9.99. 


Go to the CoNPS Book Store under Apps to link to High Country 
Apps to purchase Colorado Rocky Mountain Wildflowers at https:// 
conps.org/co-rocky-mountain-wildflowers-app/ 

CoNPS Sponsors Awards at 201 6 Colorado 
Science & Engineering Fair 



For the first time ever, CoNPS spon- 
sored two $50 awards for the Colora- 
do Science & Engineering Fair held in 
April 201 6 at the Lory Student 
at Colorado State University in Fort 
Collins. 


1st Place Winner: 

Kathryn T Kummel (7th Grade). 

"All Spruced Up: The Causes and Con- 
sequences of Spruce Invasion into 
Aspen Canopies." Photo by Jen Bousselot 


2nd Place Winner: 

Ruby Stith (6th Grade). "Type of Seed vs. Distance Dispersed." 


Congratulations to the budding plant scientists! And thank you 
to Renee Galeano-Popp and Jen Bousselot for teaming up to 
judge the special awards. CoNPS will be back again next year 
for the 62nd annual Colorado Science and Engineering Fair. 


City of Fort Collins Installs Green Wall 

On July 1 8th the City of Fort 
Collins installed the first 
outdoor perennial green wall 
(also known as a living wall) in 
Colorado on a new municipal 
building being constructed 
at Mason and La Porte Ave. 

This effort was managed by a 
program called Nature in the 
City and involved City staff from Natural Areas, Parks Depart- 
ment and several other groups including funding in part from 
the Stormwater Department. The City of Fort Collins brought 
in several outside partners including the Institute for the Built 
Environment, a landscape architect and horticulturist, Jen 
Bousselot (CoNPS' Membership and Marketing Coordinator) 
from CSU.This Sempergreen modular green wall was grown at 
Gulley's greenhouse from mid-May until the day it was in- 
stalled. The green wall will be maintained by City of Fort Collins 
Parks Department staff. Data will be captured and published 
on performance and plant cover as it is one of the few outdoor 
perennial green walls in a cold and dry climate. Kudos to Jen 
Bousselot for her involvement in this project. 

The Colorado Pollinators Summit 

The first annual Colorado Pollinator Summit took place at the 
University of Colorado Sustainability, Energy, & Environment 
Complex (SEEC) on June 1 6, 201 6. 

The purpose of the summit was to 
bring together representatives from 
a number of organizations that are 
interested in the conservation of 
pollinators. Members from non-profits, 
education, business, and government 
agencies participated in the summit. 

After a talk by Michele Colopy of Pollinator Stewardship Council, 
the participants broke into groups for discussion of collabora- 
tion and networking. CoNPS was one of the groups represented 
at the Summit and other members expressed an interest in 
CoNPS' native plant sales. The summit was organized by Butter- 
fly Pavilion, Colorado State Beekeepers Association, and People 
and Pollinators Action Network. 

Native Plant Master® Program Webinar: 
Design a Native Plant Garden 

Have you ever wanted someone to help you plan a design a 
native plant garden or help in expanding an existing one? If 
so, you won't want to miss our last special class of the season. 
Webinar - Designing a Native Plant Garden, scheduled for 
Thursday, November 3 from noon to 1 p.m. 

This online class will be taught by Deryn Davidson, Horticulture 
Agent CSU Extension in Boulder County. From the comfort of 
your home or office, you'll learn how to design and develop 
your very own native plant garden. 

For questions or to receive notices of future classes, please 
contact npmassistant(a)Jeffco.us. 




Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 1 6 


33 




CoNPS Goes International: Aquilegia is in 
United Nations Database, AGRIS 

That's right! Aquilegia: Newsletter of the Colorado Native Plant 
Society '\s one of the journals indexed and included full-text in 
the database of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations, AGRIS: International Information System of the 
Agricultural Science &Technology. 


CD agris.fao.org/agris-search/index, do 


Food and Agriculture Organization Engitn e 
of the Uhitedi Nations 

ipanal Fia 

njaii ‘flJC 


AGRIS 





I I 


Of course, CoNPS members can find full text issues of Aquile- 
gia on the CoNPS website (https://conps.org) under Resources 
-> Newsletter. < https://conps.org/resources/aquilegia-news- 
letters/> That page includes our recent newsletters and a link 
to the older issues of the newsletters (the archives) on the 
Regis University website in their ePublications at Regis Uni- 
versity: a digital repository provided by the Regis University 
Library. 

CNHP Releases New Rare Plants by Coun- 
ty Interactive Map 

Check out CNHP's new interactive map for rare plants! The map 
displays the number of rare plant species in each Colorado 
county documented by CNHP and partner agencies, organi- 
zations, and individuals. Users can access pdf lists of rare plant 
species for each county by clicking a county, then clicking 
More Info on the pop up box. The plant lists contain species 
names, as well as conservation status, wetland and riparian 
dependent status, links to Rare Plant Guide profiles, and much 
more. The data used to create the map are from the CNHP Biot- 
ics 5 database. This article was reprinted with permission from 
the CNHP Blogspot http://cnhpblog.blogspot.com/ 

The uri for the map is http://csurams.maps.arcgis.com/ 

apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=8d7dce7734be48d- 

3a780b9514al332e3 



CNHP Undergraduate Researcher 
Discovers New Relationship Between 
Rare Butterfly and Ants 



Hops blue butterfly larva 
{Celastrina humulus) on 
a hops leaf. {Humulus 
neomexicanus). 


Myrmecophily is a mouthful of a word that refers to positive 
interactions between ants and other species. Such relation- 
ships are well known among the ant 
and butterfly specialists of the world. 

CNHP undergraduate researcher Tristan 
Kubik is a bit of a prodigal ant expert, 
spending time as a high school student 
collecting and cataloging ants, and 
mapping ant colonies. Kubik teamed up 
with Rob Schorr, a CNHP zoologist, to 
assist Schorr in studying populations of 
the rare hops blue butterfly {Celastrina 
humulus). For his part, Kubik has focused 
on determining if myrmecophily plays a 
role in the hops blue butterfly life histo- 
ry. Kubik recently spent weeks moni- 
toring eggs and larvae of the hops blue 
butterfly and has documented that ants 
tend larvae. Kubik has observed larger 
ants, such as carpenter ants, defending 
the larvae from predation. The caterpillars 
dissuade the ants from eating them by 
using pheromones and providing protein 
and sugar-rich secretions. This marks the 
first documentation that myrmecophily 
exists for hops blue butterflies and ants. It 
is theorized that ants provide defense for 
the larvae in exchange for the nutritional 
benefits from the nectar that the larva can 
excrete (mutualistic symbiosis). Alternately, 
some believe that the nectar is simply a 
calming agent that minimizes ant aggres- 
sion (commensalism). Kubik and Schorr 
are excited about identifying what the 
advantages may be and how this discovery can play a role in 
butterfly conservation. 

Printed with permission from CNHP blog: http://cnhpblog. 
blogspot.com/ (July 28, 2016). 

CoNPS Members Donate to Publication of 
Erin Tripp's book on Lichens of White Rocks 



Ant crawling on 
larvae 


Linda Smith reports that CoNPS members have 
donated a total of $730 toward the printing costs 
of Erin Tripp's book that will be published by the 
University Press of Colorado. 

Thank you to Colorado Native Plant Society 
members for helping make the publication of 
Field Guide to the Lichens of White Rocks possible. 



As soon as it is in print, it will be available from the CoNPS Book 
store at a discounted price. The University Press is offering it for 
pre-order. It is expected out in 201 7. 


34 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


WHAT CONPS MEMBERS DID THIS SUMMER: 

Here is a small sampling of photos from a few of the many field trips, field seminars, and a workshop! 


From the Eastern Slope 


Steve Yarbrough's High Creek Fen Field Trip 



Phenology Class: Nature's Notebook 


"Phenology refers to key seasonal changes in plants and 
animals from year to year — such as flowering, emergence of 
insects and migration of birds — especially their timing and 
relationship with weather and climate. The US National Phenol- 
ogy Network (NPN) brings together citizen scientists, govern- 
ment agencies, non-profit groups, educators, and students to 
monitor the impacts of climate change on plants and animals 
in the U.S." (National Phenology Network website, https://www. 
usanpn.org/). 

At a joint CoNPS/DBG class 
held at the Denver Botanic Gar- 
dens, Mary Goshorn (DBG) and 
Mo Ewing (CoNPS) presented 
a classroom session on the Phenology students in classroom 

Nature's Notebook program of the NPN. 



They demonstrated the website and how citizen scientists can 
record information about the time of the first leaf, first flower, 
first fruit, etc., of a number 
of species of plants that are 
being monitored in Colorado. 

The data gathered in the data- 
base can be used to ascertain 
changes over time that relate 
to climate change. 

DBG has a phenology trail 
where members can record their observations on data sheets. 
The classroom session was followed by a tour of the DBG 



Carol English's Penstemon Workshop 
and Field Trips 



Carol English Penstemon workshop 


Carol English, Botanist with the Colorado State Land Board, 
taught a two-day workshop on Penstemons. The first day of 
the workshop focused on the taxonomy of the genus and the 
second day was on ecology, horticul- 
ture, and pollination. 

During the second day of the work- 
shop, attendees were treated to a 
guest appearance and talk by Bob 
Nold, author of Penstemons. 

Two field trips were associated with 
the workshop. 

Bob Nold 


Photos by Jan Turner 

Left: Penstemon 
field trip at 
Mt. Falcon West 





phenology trail and a demonstration of traits to look for when 
filling out the data forms. 


Mo Ewing encourages 
CoNPS members to partic- 
ipate in Nature's Notebook 
and record their observa- 
tions of plants at locations 
of interest to them such as 
open space parks. 


Mo and Mary will be offer- 
ing programs on this citizen 
science project in the future. 

Photos by Jan Turner 


Mary Goshorn leads tour of 
DBG's PhenologyTrail 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


35 


Browns Canyon National Monument Bloblltz 
by Steve Olson 



Dave Anderson (left) and Pam Smith (blackshirt) of CNHP. Irene 
Shonie, CNHP student interns, Photo by Loraine Yeatts (DBG) 

The bioblitz held at Browns Canyon National Monument was 
on June 1 to 3. We had nearly 70 participants during the event. 
About 20 of those were CoNPS members (thanks to Mo Ewing 
for helping coordinate these folks). Other people came from 
the Forest Service, BLM, CNHP, DBG, along with several inde- 
pendent folks. Aside from the botanically oriented people, 
there were bird, herptile, mammal, and spider specialists. 

Browns Canyon was established as a national monument in 
February of 201 5. It is located near the head of the Rio Grande 
Rift Valley between Buena Vista and Salida. 

There is a diverse geology underlying the area, leading to an 
interesting diversity of habitat types such as pinyon-juniper 
woodlands, ponderosa pine woodlands, aspen stands, and 
meadows. It is an area that is generally not too well known, but 
now, thanks to the efforts of everyone who was able join us, we 
have a much better idea of what is present in the area. 

Although the numbers of species observed isn't fully complet- 
ed yet, we can say that we now know that at least 1 75 species 
of vascular plants are present, along with 1 7 mammals, 82 birds 
and 3 herps. There were people exploring several corners of 
the monument including Bassam Spring, Cottonwood Creek, 
HecIa Junction, Ruby Mountain, and Spring Gulch. Among the 
highlights are records of Fendler'sTownsend-Daisy {Townsendia 
fendleri), Front Range Alumroot {Heuchera hallii), and Rocky 
Mountain Indian Parsley (Cymopterus anisatus). The Pasque- 
flowers {Anemone patens) seemed a bit late to still be in bloom. 

At Browns Canyon, six interns, Lydia Fahrenkrug, Alyssa Meier, 
Blaise Newman, Gary Olds, Tyler Stratman, and Brandi Thom- 
as, along with Director Dave Anderson, Pam Smith, and Scott 
Kellman, had an amazing time surveying the diverse landscapes 
and using the opportunity to work together with many differ- 
ent organizations and professionals. Students gained hands-on 
experience in a variety of disciplines, such as small mammal trap- 
ping, plant identifying and collecting, birding, insect collecting, 
and bat surveying. It was exciting to collaborate with different 
professionals while students were introduced and helped to 
achieve the goals of a Bioblitz. (CNHP Blog). 


Ute Prayer Trees Field Seminar Surprise 


by John Anderson 



CatfaceTree (L-R): Penny Bieber, Chuck Ernst, John Anderson, Christine Guzy, 
Scott Ellis, Brad Klafehn and Ron Moore. Photo by Stella Barrett 


Something amazing and unexpected happened during the 
Ute Prayer Tree Field Seminar: Toward the end of the class, the 
students discovered a previously unknown Ute Indian Prayer 
Tree located in Fox Run Regional Park! 


The instructor, John Anderson, shared some of the research for 
his book Ute Indian Prayer Trees of the Pikes Peak Region, then 
discussed the three primary objectives for this 8-hour seminar: 

1 ) Learn the five generally accepted types of Ute Indian Prayer 
Trees (Trailmarker, Burial, Story, Medicine and Prophecy Trees), 

2) Identify characteristics of typical man-made modifications 
to trees (e.g., unnatural bends, 
distortions, scars and peeled ba 
patterns or distinctive ligature c 
tie-down marks), 

3) Recognize natural causes 
of tree scarring or disfigure- 
ment (lightning strike, disease, 
heavy-snowfall, animal interac- 
tion, etc.). 

Anderson invited the students 
to experience a traditional Ute 
Talking Circle, where a Talking 
Stick is passed around the 
Circle so everyone has an 
opportunity to speak and it is 
considered unacceptably rude 
to interrupt the person who is in possession of the Talking Stick. 



Grandfather Tree(L-R): Ron Moore, Scott 
Ellis, Penny Bieber, Christine Guzy, Stella 
Barrett, Brad Klafehn and Chuck Ernst. 
Photo by John Anderson 


The majority, if not all, of the Culturally Modified Trees (CMTs) 
discovered thus far in the Black Forest of El Paso County, are 
believed attributable to the indigenous people of present-day 
Colorado, the Ute. Although there were certainly other Native 
American tribes who had a presence in the Pikes Peak Region 
(e.g., Cheyenne, Arapahoe, Kiowa, Cherokee), only the Ute are 
known to have both a culture which included the tradition of 
modifying trees and a sustained presence in the region dating 
back hundreds if not thousands of years. 


36 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 






By mid-morning the students found themselves in the field 
along the right bank of Burgess Creek near La Foret's Taylor 
Chapel, examining what is referred to by Lite visitors to La Foret 
some thirty years ago as the Grandfather Tree. The Grandfather 
Tree, classified as a Lite Trailmarker Tree, displays a classic Lite 
Peeled Bark Pattern and is pointing directly towards what the 
Lite knew as Tava (Pikes Peak), the most sacred of all the Lite's 
Shining Mountains. 

As the field trip progressed west behind the Taylor Chapel, 
students were introduced to several other Lite Prayer Tree types 
in an alignment along Burgess Creek, including a Burial Tree 
(honoring a Lite Tribal member) before coming upon a rare Cat- 
face Tree (see top photo, previous page) created when fire was 
ceremonially introduced to scar the heartwood of a ponderosa 
pine after the outer bark had been peeled away. 

As the students made their way back to the Carriage House 
to retrieve their sack lunches, they stopped to view the native 
plants growing alongside these living 1 50-350 year old Native 
American artifacts. The students and instructor ate lunch at a 
picnic table surrounded by ponderosa pine trees lining a lush 
green spring-fed meadow offering a majestic view of Tava, the 
mountain that inspired Katherine Lee Bates to pen the words 
to "America the Beautiful" while teaching a summer session in 
1 893 at Colorado College. 

After lunch the students followed the 
instructor to another of his favorite field 
classrooms at Fox Run Regional Park. The 
afternoon session was spent examining 
dozens of other Lite Prayer Trees (Trail- 
marker, Burial, Medicine and StoryTrees) 
including what may be one of the oldest 
Lite Prayer Trees in the Black Forest located 
along an ancient trail where the Lite had 
gathered in prayer around this tree some photo by John Anderson 
hundreds of years ago. 



As the afternoon drew to an end, the students found they had 
all learned how to identifying CMTs and 
a few had wandered off the trail a short 
distance, then excitedly got the instruc- 
tor's attention with, "We think you're go- 
ing to want to see this!" Reluctantly the 
instructor, who had thought he had seen 
every CMT in the park, stood staring in 
amazement at a magnificent previously 
unknown Lite Prayer Tree. 



As the students and instructor Barrett and Penny 

, , . , , ^ ^ Bieber Photo by John Anderson) 

debriefed at the trailhead, there was 

discussion that perhaps CoNPS might be well positioned to 

help locate other CMTs Just waiting yet to be discovered across 

what the Lite knew as the Shining Mountains of present-day 

Colorado. 


To contact John W. Anderson or learn about future CMT events, go 
to \N\NW JWAnder.com or emailJohn at: ]\ n a! 22@comcast.net 


Paul Opier and Evi Buckner Opier's 
Butterfly Natural History Field Seminar 



The Opier's Butterfly Natural History Field Seminar was a huge 
success! In the morning, participants enjoyed a beautiful Power- 
Point lecture about the various groups of butterflies. 



After the lecture, with buttterfly nets in hand, the merry group 
set out in search of butterflies - and they certainly found a lot of 
them! It was a perfect late-summer day for both butterfly-lovers 
and butterflies! 


Right: Evi Buckner Opier caught a 
butterfly and deposited it on Charlie 
Turner's nose! Photo by Jan Turner. 


Butterfly field seminar participants. Paul Opier is standing on far right. 
Photo © Evi Buckner Opier, 201 6. 


Jessica Smith's Popular Grasses Classes 



This year, Jessica Smith offered her very popular annual half- 
day grasses field trip at ^ 

Green Mountain in Lake- 
wood and also offered 
a full-day summer field 
seminar at Golden Gate 
Canyon State Park. Both 
were well-attended and 
participants were delight- 
ed with Jessica's teaching 
style and handouts. 


Photo by Jan Turner 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 7 6 


37 


From the Western Slope 



Bioblitz in the West 
2016 Plateau Chapter 
by Bob Clarke 

Volunteers and natural area enthusiasts gathered on Friday, 
May 20, 201 6, to participate in what has become an annual 
event related to the BLM sponsored monitoring program for 
the threatened Phacelia submutica (De Beque Phacelia, aka P. 
scopulino var. submutica). The species was first described by 
George R Osterhout in 1 91 1 . Taxonomically and ecologically 
on slippery (when wet) and hilly ground. 

Endemic to Mesa and Garfield Counties in Western Colorado, 

P submutica (abbr. PHSU) has in the past been described as 
occurring north and west of De Beque. In 201 3 Alicia Langton, 
with the Grand Junction BLM and responsible for the monitor- 

ing program, met Lee 
1 Cassin and DaveTolen 
I and found out that they 
lived in an area that was 
I in PHSU and hookless 
cactus country. A single, 
nd population of 
PHSU was soon noted 
I on a saddle above their 
house. 

This year our volunteers 
traveled to the Cassin/ 
Tolen home off of what 
is locally known as the 
De Beque Cut-off Road 
between De Beque and Plateau Creek. The Phaceiia is found 
at around 5700 feet at this location. A query of the Natural 
Resource Conservation Service soils database refers to the soil 
type as Badland and morphologically described as rough and 
rocky terrain with steep slopes composed of parent material 
consisting of "highly calcareous residuum weathered from 
sandstone". The clayey soil, which suits PHSU, appears gray or 
brown and has a characteristic shrink-swell nature and cracks 
when dried. PHSU thrives in this terrain when others do not. 

In addition to visiting the known PHSU site, the group spread 
out a few miles east of this location after lunch, looking for 
additional populations of PHSU. No new populations were 
identified, but we certainly did confirm the rough and hilly 
nature of the countryside. 

Both P submutica and Astragaius debequaeus, which was also 
found during the bioblitz, are listed as G2S2 by the Colorado 
Natural Heritage Program. Also encountered was Pediomeium 
megaianthum var. megaianthum, which is listed as "present and 
rare" in Mesa and Garfield Counties. 

Alicia Langton provided this reference for readers who would 
like more taxonomic and ecological details. 

Ladyman, J.A.R. (2003, December 1 9). Phaceiia scopuiina (A. 
Nels) J.T. Howell var. submutica (J.T. Howell) Halse 


38 



Bioblitz participants: Front- Lee Cassin; Tiffany (BLM,) Mandy (BLM); Van Graham 
(Westwater Engineering). Back- Delia Malone (CNHP); Sam from UNC; Mit Mc- 
Glaughlin (UNC); Lonnie Renner (Westwater Engineering); David Varner; DaveTolen; 
Larry Allison (CoNPS); Bob Clarke (CoNPS) 


Phacelia submutica Photo by Bob Clarke 



Astragalus debequaeus and Pediomeium megaianthum var. megaianthum 
Photos by Bob Clarke 

(Debeque Phaceiia): A Technicai Conservation Assessment. [On- 
line]. USDA Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Region. Available: 
http://www.fs.usda.gov/lnternet/FSE_DOCUMENTS/stel- 
prdb5206879.pdf 

Bob Ciarke, M.A., is a bioiogist who has iived in Grand Junction 
and been a CONPS member since 1995. He began studying the 
iocai native flora under the guidance of Joanne Young and Peggy 
Lyon. He is cataioging and photographing the native piants of 
Mesa County and Eastern Utah including the Uncompaghre 
Plateau and Grand Mesa. 


Grizzly Peak Research Natural Area 
by Bob Powell 


The San Juan National Forest just designated a newly protected 
area in the eastern San Miguel Mountains, a group within the 
western San Juan Mountain Range- Grizzly Peak Research 
Natural Area (RNA). Its northern and eastern border is the ridge- 
line from Sheep Mt. east of Lizard Head Pass, to San Miguel 
Mt. and then south to Grizzly Peak, that is at the head of Lime 
Creek, a tributary of the Animas River. The eastern border is 
also the border between Dolores and San Juan Counties. The 
western boundary is a Jagged line south from the western edge 
of Sheep Mt.The southern border is along the upper reaches of 
the Eastern Fork of the Dolores River, upstream of the aban- 

(Cont. on page 39, column 2) 

Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 



Learning Field Techniques in Sagebrush County 
Ecological Diversity in Sagebrush Steppe within the 
Gunnison Basin Field Seminar taught by Dr. Barb Frase 
by Larry Allison 



On June 23, eight members of CoNPS met with Dr. Barb Frase 
at the City of Gunnison Legion Park to learn about the ecologi- 
cal diversity of the Gunnison Basin sagebrush steppes. Follow- 
ing introductions, Barb outlined a definition of diversity based 
on the evenness of species and species richness. As both 
evenness and richness increase, so does diversity. Landscape 
diversity was also discussed for its geographic scale. The prob- 
lem then becomes how diversity can be measured simply to 
avoid the pitfalls of any biases. 

Barb's solution to this question was a modified application 
of John Cairns' procedure published in 1962, "The Sequential 
Comparison Index: A Simplified Method for Non-Biologists to 
Estimate Relative Differences in Biological Diversity in Stream 
Pollution Studies." Using regular, linear intervals only the 
previous plant is compared to the next plant and evaluated 
as the "same" or "different". All consecutive "sames" are grouped 
into runs, all"differents"are counted as runs, and the runs are 
totaled. The total runs are then divided by the total number of 
samples giving a diversity index somewhere between 0 and 1 . 
The greater the index, the greater the diversity for the data 
collected. 

This tool was then applied to three different sites near 
Gunnison. Curecanti National Recreation Area Beaver Creek Pic- 
nic area was visited first. Barb probed our thoughts about the 
different factors influencing the sagebrush habitat and asked 
for "eyeball" estimates of diversity. Then we split into 2 teams to 
measure the diversity using the sequential method. Curacanti 
lola Picnic/Boat Launch was surveyed next using the same 
method. "Eyeball" estimates were evaluated against the diversi- 
ty. indices determined. Diversity indices for the first two sites 
clustered around 0.50. The last site visited was the Gunnison 
Mountain Park in Taylor Canyon at a higher elevation. Working 
quickly to beat the thunderstorms, data were collected for this 
area producing consistently high indices of 0.90. Our"eyeball" 
estimates proved to say little about the diversity of the sites 
when compared to calculated indices. 

Barb discussed the importance of sagebrush steppes for four 
large ungulates: deer, elk, bighorn sheep, and pronghorn. Also 
discussed was the absolute importance of the sagebrush for 
the survival of the Gunnison sage-grouse, a listed species. 
Sage-grouse are totally dependent on large tracts of sagebrush 
for feed, cover, reproduction, and the healthy diversity of 
grasses and forbs. Loss of sage habitat and corridors is respon- 
sible for declining sage-grouse populations. 


Sagebrush steppes remain an important diverse habitat. The 
sequential comparison index was found to be a useful and 
simple tool to measure diversity. Barb's enthusiasm and joy of 
teaching, along with the wonderful CoNPS collegiality, made 
this a very educational and meaningful field seminar. 

Larry Allison is a retired middle school science teacher, naturalist, 
and DBG/CNAP volunteer. He is a member of the Plateau Chapter. 

Grizzly Peak (cont. from previous page) 

doned railroad grade. The western San Juan Mountains have 
had two new large protected areas in two years. 

The designation is an excellent example of the importance 
of local action to conserve natural areas. In 1 988 the Sheep 
Mountain Alliance was formed in Telluride to successfully 
block new timber sales on the slopes of Sheep Mountain by 
Lizard Head Pass. For many years they have advocated special 
protection of the area that is covered in the new RNA. Finally, 
success. They have also been successful in protecting the valley 
floor belowTelluride. Their actions have been very important 
in protecting natural areas in eastern San Miguel County and 
northern Dolores County. 

The total area of the RNA is 3,254 acres. Elevations range from 
1 0,1 41 ft to 1 3,752 ft. The area has never been timbered, 
has never had a road or designated trail, and was only lightly 
grazed. The upper treeline varies from 1 1 ,500 ft to 
1 1 ,600 ft. Below treeline is a dense spruce/fir forest with only 
one large meadow. The average annual precipitation is 31"; the 
maximum snow depth on April 1 is 39". Access to the upper 
portions of the area during the summer is difficult; but it is a 
good area for cross-country skiing in the winter. 

Thistles Field Seminar in Gunnison 

Thistle-lovers congregated in Gunnison for ecology professor. 
Barb Frase's thistle field seminar. The class visited the Cold 
Harbor Institute, where a riparian bioblitz was occurring. A 
number of interesting plants were found on a walk through the 
fields. The class then traveled to Crested Butte to a private area 
where some exciting thistles were observed. 



Jane Hendrix is Queen of the Mountain Wildflowers. Don't miss her 
hikes! Jane has created color wildflower guide booklets for the hikes. 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


39 


Amazing Weekend at RMBL: Osha, Ants, Aphids, and Pollinators by Jan Turner 



L to R: Front row: Janis Huggins, Jane Bunin, Quinn Farrington, Nikki 
Ernst, Back row: Jan Turner, Emily Mooney, Charlie Turner, Linda Boley, 
Chuck Ernst, Cheryl Ernst, Sarah Ernst, Dave Ernst. Photos © Jan Turner 


Our weekend of field seminars at the Rocky Mountain Biologi- 
cal Lab (RMBL) was truly wonderful! The lab is located in Gothic, 
next to Crested Butte, the Wildflower Capital of Colorado, and 
the wildflowers were gorgeous! The seminars were both extremely enjoyable and educational. 


Emily pours warm Arnica 

jars. Inset: Osha root. 


small 


On Saturday, we attended Medicine on the Wild Side taught by Dr. Emily Mooney, a researcher with RMBL and faculty mem- 
ber at University of Colorado in Colorado Springs. We had a morning session in the classroom where we learned about plant 
secondary compounds and their importance in medicine and defending plants from herbivory.This was followed by a wildflower 
hike where we learned the medicinal value of a number of the native plants (the sweet cicely had a delicious anise-flavor) and 
observed the ants tending the aphids on osha (Ligusticum porteri), one of Emily's subjects of research. Apparently, aphids on osha 
growing in the shade don't produce as desirable "nectar" as ants on osha in the sun. The ants protect the aphids on osha growing 
in the sun so they can "milk" the aphids. 


After lunch, we gathered in the kitchen where Emily taught us to prepare Osha root tea. It tasted pretty good (a slight bit like root 
beer) and has immune-boosting, anti-viral properties. After that, Emily mixed bees wax flakes and Arnica that had been steeped 
in olive oil and heated the mixture under low heat to produce arnica salve for sore muscles. 

Sunday the enjoyment and education continued with Dr. Jane Ogilvie's Natural History of Rocky Mountain Pollinators. 

Jane, a bumblebee expert, was mentored by Dr. Carol Kearns of University of Colorado, Boulder, who is leading a bumblebee field 
trip at the CoNPS Annual Conference. There are so many species of bumblebees and 
we observed a number of them in the field. Jane captured some with a net and placed 
them in a tube where we could view them before she released them and they flew off 
to pollinate the beautiful mountain wildflowers. 

After lunch, when the afternoon heat moved in, we entered the herbarium where the 
insect collections and plant collections are housed. Jane showed us many species of 
insects found in RMBL, and we learned that little if any research has been done on a 
number of bees, flies, and other insects so research opportunities abound. We also met 
Dr. Rick Williams, who curates the herbarium collection. Rick gave us a demonstration 
of SEINet, a database used by RMBL and many other herbaria in the West. We were all 
sad that our weekend at RMBL was over but we took the opportunity to visit the quaint 

Gothic store that sells a great collection of books and t-shirts. Charlie purchased a bumper sticker,"! Brake for Native Bees," and I 
purchased RuMBLings: A History and Highiights of the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory by Ellen F. Dobbin. 



40 


Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 





RighUJhe class visited 
David Inouye outside 
his cabin. He dennon- 
strated his technique 
for catching and 
banding humming- 
birds. 


Left: Jane Ogilvie demonstrat- 
ed how to mark bumblebees 
with a colored marker. This way, 
bumblebees can be tracked. 
Once the bumblebees were 
marked or examined, they were 
set free. We observed a 
number of species of bees 
through the mesh. 

Photos by Charlie Turner 


Photos by Charlie Turner 


John Fielder's Photography Field Seminar 
in Steamboat Springs 



People in photo, clockwise from left: John Fielder, Joe Leahy, Deb 
Pace, Connie Heginbotham, Stanley Heginbotham, Lucy Ginley. 



The feedback from the participants of John Fielder's photog- 
raphy seminar was enthusiastic and positive! CoNPS is grateful 
to John Fielder for donating $1,000 to CoNPS. John is a strong 
supporter of environmental organizations. CoNPS has some of 
his books in the CoNPS book store. 


BOOK REVIEW 

Rocky Mountain Wildflowers: Field Guide 

Review by Jack Carter 

Linda Nagy and husband, Bernie 
Nagy (photographer), are truly flow- 
ering plant enthusiasts and they 
want to encourage others to enjoy 
the beautiful flora of the central and 
southern Rocky Mountains. Their 
small pocket guide (4x6 inches) is 
exactly what they describe in the 
introduction. Just about everything 
first time travelers to the Rocky Mountains need to know, to 
start to identify a small part of the extensive floristic beauty 
that surrounds them, can be found in this publication. 

The 270 species are described first with a photograph, then 
with a common name, followed by a scientific name, the habi- 
tat, life zone, and flowering date. Two pages in the front of the 
book are devoted to descriptive terminology including flower 
parts, inflorescences, leaf shapes and their arrangements on the 
stem. The key to locating the species in the book is the flower 
color, as is true in similar field guides, and beginners commonly 
will be attracted to the plants by the flowers. 

However, flower color can be very confusing, especially when 
we can identify so many red (65 species included), yellow (61 
species included) or green flowers (Just eight species included) 
that are omitted from this attractive book. There are several 
hundred species with yellow flowers in the Rocky Mountains. 
And as we work our way through this small book we will start 
to see so many species in which flowers may be identified by 
one, two or more colors. At the same time, there is additional 
information that could be added to many of the descriptions, 
to assist the reader in identifying some species, but the space is 
limited. 

These are the kinds of problems we encounter in the study of 
plants, versus say birds or reptiles. If you recognize 1 00 species 
of Colorado birds or reptiles you are a knowledgeable student 
of ornithology or herpetology. But this Just doesn't work very 
well when we recognize there are more than 3,000 species of 
flowering plants in the state. 

My best guess is that as this couple continues to travel through- 
out the Rocky Mountains they will observe and photograph 
additional plant species. In another two or three growing 
seasons, they will be producing a new edition of their book 
with perhaps 400 or 500 species. Of course, they may identify 
species in which they disagree on the flower color, and their 
marriage may end in a divorce. I hope not, but I have known 
professional botanists who stopped speaking to each other 
over similar variations in the characteristics of vascular plants. 

I like this attractive little book, and many thousands of people 
should take a copy with them as they travel throughout the 
Rocky Mountains. Of course, I Just enjoy looking at good pho- 
tographs of plants. This wildflower guide is carried in the CoNPS 
bookstore. $10.50 

Jack Carter is Professor Emeritus, Bioiogy, Coiorado Coiiege. 


f\pchi \^ounUnii 


qi)nmnr€J.i 

Field Guiiit; 



Aquiiegia Voiume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 20 7 6 


41 


New Books Available at the CoNPS Annual Conference Book Sale 


Rocky Mountain National Park Natural History Handbook 

by John Ennerick, 201 5, 2nd ed. $1 3.50. 

From its geological origins to today's inspiring 
landscapes, a seasoned naturalist reveals the 
wonder of Rocky Mountain National Park in 
this natural history handbook. Striking images 
enhance the author's comprehensive descrip- 
tions of the park's ecosystems and the flora 
and fauna found in each. Discover the life in 
and around rivers and lakes, explore the alpine 
tundra, and learn about some of the issues facing Rocky. 

The Essential Guide to Rocky Mountain Mushrooms by 
Habitat by Cathy Cripps, Vera Evenson, Michael Kuo, 201 6. $24. 
Dazzling full-color photos highlight the beauty 
of hundreds of species. Easy-to-navigate entries 
offer essential descriptions and tips for identify- 
ing mushrooms, including each species' edibility, 
odor, taste, and rumored medicinal properties. 

The authors organize the mushrooms according 
to habitat zone. This ecology-centered approach 
places each species among surrounding flora and fauna. 

Flora Neomexicana III: An Illustrated Identification Manual 

by Kelly W. Allred and Robert DeWitt Ivey, 2013. 

$64.50. 

This is a flora of the state of New Mexico. It is a key 
with illustrations primarily by Robert DeWitt Ivey, 
taken from his latest edition of Flowering Plants of 
New Mexico (Ivey 2008). 

Flowering Plants of New Mexico, by Robert DeWitt Ivey, 5th ed. 
2008. $34. 

This book presents a brief introduction into the 
botany and ecology of the plants of New Mexico 
in conjunction with more than 1,600 beautifully 
crafted and scientifically accurate line drawings of 
individual species 

Ponderosa; Big Pine of the Southwest by Sylvester Allred, 2015. 
$10.50. 

Provides an introduction to the natural and human 
histories of the ponderosa pine forests of the 
Southwest that is accessible to all who wish to en- 
joy the forests. Included are discussions of bioge- 
ography, ecology, and human and natural history, 
the structure of the trees, as well as theoretical 
perspectives on issues such as climate change. 







Growing Native Plants of the Rocky Mountain Area 

by Robert Dorn. $76.50. Available in print! Also 
available as a CD. 

This large, full-color book serves as an ency- 
clopedia (arranged alphabetically) of native 
plants and how to grow them. There are color 
illustrations of each plant. This book is an 
excellent resource for native plant gardeners in 
Colorado. 




The Bees in Your Backyard by Joseph S. Wilson and Olivia 
MessingerCarril, 2016. $23.50. 4?^ 

An engaging introduction to the roughly 4,000 ^ 
different bee species found in the U.S. and 
Canada, offering essential tips for telling them 
apart in the field. Ideal for amateur naturalists 
and experts alike, it gives detailed accounts of 
every bee family and genus in North America 
with color photos, describing key identification 
features, distributions, diets, and nesting habits. 

Gardening for the Birds; How to Create a Bird-friendly Back- 
yard by George Adams, 2013. $19. 

With hundreds of native plants, extensive seasonal 
bloom and fruiting charts, and the techniques for 
creating a balanced ecosystem, this book helps 
you turn any space from a small, urban terrace to 
a large suburban yard into a home for a fascinat- 
ing variety of birds. Close-up profiles of birds from across all 
regions of North America teach you their nesting, breeding, 
and feeding habits. 


Jewels of the Plains by Claude Barr (reprinted in 
201 5). $22.50. 

From Abronia to Zinnia, Jewels of the Plains de- 
scribes the natural history and garden merits of 
more than five hundred Great Plains wildflowers. 
Considered the authoritative guide by native plant 
enthusiasts and horticulturists, it captures the 
unique beauty, resilience, and variety of wildflow- 
ers in the Great Plains. Finally this classic is back in print. 


.IKW l] 



Pollinator Friendly Gardening; Gardening 
for Bees, Butterflies and Other Pollinators by 

Rhonda Fleming Hayes, 2015. $18. 

This book explains the intriguing synergy 
between plants and pollinators, making it a 
unique sourcebook so anyone can make a yard 
a more friendly place for pollinators. 



The Best Front Range Wildflower Hikes by Mar- 
lene Borneman, 2016. $1 1.50. 

This book showcases 20 trails filled with native 
wildflower species across five life zones. Trail de- 
scriptions include habitats and interesting tidbits 
about the plants, along with a listing of native 
flora with both common and scientific names. 



Wild in the City; Fauna and Flora of Colorado 
Urban Spaces, DePaulo & Snyder, 2015. $20. 
Join artists Dorothy DePaulo and Heidi Snyder 
on an inspirational journey of discovery as they 
explore the plants and animals in the parks and 
open spaces in the Front Range of Colorado. 



42 


Note: These book descriptions adopted from Amazon. 
Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 









(Cont. from p. 30) 

CoNPS members, David Julie and Kate Goes In Center, offered 
a program on plants, pollination, and bees. Attendees learned 
about parts of a flower, nectar, pollen, and seeds. Children then 
helped demonstrate the pollen-carrying structures of different 
bees - pollen baskets (corbiculae) on honey bees and bumble 
bees, hair (scopa) on the legs of halictid bees and sunflower 
bees, and hair on abdomens of leafcutter bees. The program 
then introduced the life cycle of solitary bees like leafcutter 
bees, the annual colony cycle of bumble bees, and the perenni- 
al colony cycle of honey bees. 

The program incorporated lots of role-playing and participa- 
tion. Children especially enjoyed gathering pollen and nectar 
from models of a huge anther and nectary. 

Each child and several adults received a postcard they chose of 
either a bumble bee or a leafcutter bee. Most adult attendees 
received seeds of Prairie Coneflower {Ratibida columnifera) - a 
favorite of leafcutter bees. Rocky Mountain Bee Plant {Cleome 
serrulata) - a magnet for all bees, and Showy Milkweed {Asclepi- 
asspeciosa) - a host plant for monarch caterpillars. 



Child reaching her butterfly proboscis into flower's nectaries 
A second program at Sandstone Ranch focused on Monarch 
butterflies. Fifteen children (mostly quite young) and 20 par- 
ents attended. David and Kate's part was 30 minutes of experi- 
ential learning about Monarchs, milkweed, and flowers. By the 
end of the program, all of the children understood that Mon- 
arch caterpillars eat only milkweed (the children used scissors 
to cut paper leaves as a caterpillar's Jaws do) , that they molt 
their exoskeleton as they grow (the children held up 5 shirts 
from tiny to large), that plants provide nectar (Juicy Juice) to 
attract pollinators to move pollen from flower to flower and use 
bright petals to advertise, and that butterflies have long, coiled 
tongues to access the nectaries. We also learned about how 
Monarchs store bad tasting chemicals from milkweed, migra- 
tion, and other interesting subjects. 

Cal-Wood Education Center 

Angie Busby and Jamie Preira, Program Coordinators at the 
Cal-Wood Education Center near Jamestown, invited CoNPS to 
provide plant and pollinator training totheirstaff of about ten 
on August 22nd. Cal-Wood offers nature education and expe- 
riences for children on class trips and overnight outings. David 
Julie provided education on plants, pollination, and pollinators, 
especially bees, using methods that the Cal-Wood staff could 
employ with 5th grade visitors. There were lots of models, 
props, role-playing, and participatory activities. 


Grow Native 

PRUNING NATIVE SHRUBS 
by Jim Borland 

Not long ago, the diversity and 
age of the plants in our natural 
landscape depended upon fire to 
periodically destroy the old and 
prepare the ground for the germi- 
nation of a new crop of forest and 
meadow plants. Since we obvious- 
ly can no longer afford nature that 
luxury, native shrubs in mountain communities are not being 
renewed as before but getting old and dying. Native shrubs in 
the urban landscape may also be getting old and dying. 

Are your shrubs among the old? Look for bark peeling from 
stems, short, stubby annual growth increments only at the ends 
of stems, dead stems still attached but lying on the ground and 
few young, vigorous stems from the center of the bush. Shrubs 
in this stage of age are on their way out, progressively support- 
ing fewer and fewer blossoms, fruits or browse for deer, elk and 
other wildlife. 

All is not lost, however, for most of our wild shrubs can be given 
a new lease on life through selective techniques known as 
thinning or rejuvenation pruning. 

The selection of the pruning technique depends somewhat 
on the aims of the pruner and somewhat on the condition of 
the shrub. Thinning, sometimes referred to as renewal prun- 
ing, is practiced by selecting up to 1/2 of the oldest stems and 
removing them by cutting them to the ground in late winter or 
spring. Aside from allowing more light into the center of the 
shrub, this practice forces all new growth to emerge from the 
shrub's crown-growth that is usually quite vigorous. This new 
growth usually blooms and fruits the following year. A smaller 
percentage of the oldest stems can be pruned, but some are 
left in this technique to provide some sense of a shrub occu- 
pying the space. The oldest stems are usually the largest in di- 
ameter, darkest in color and often shredding bark. Dead stems 
are, of course, removed in the process. 

A variation on this theme is rejuvenation pruning which merely 
means that all stems are removed to the ground at the same 
time. Again, regrowth is usually rapid and vigorous. 

Do not leave stubs with either approach and do not attempt to 
tip or top prune shrubs whose names appear in the following 
list. Tip pruning results only in new growth appearing imme- 
diately behind the cut, giving the shrub a top-heavy, lollipop 
appearance. 

Practice Thinning or Rejuvenation Pruning on These Shrubs 

Boulder raspberry Snowberry or Buckbrush 

Mountain mahogany Threeleaf sumac 

Ninebark Wax currant 

Rabbitbrush Waxflower or Cliff Jamesia 

Rock spirea Woods rose 

Jim Borland is co-host of the "Ask the Garden Pros" radio show, and 
former CoNPS President 



Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


43 




Plant Society 


Fort Collins, Colorado 80522 
http://www.conps.org 





J-CarCe quin’s gardens 




Life is teaching us that diversity creates health and strength; 

Our Birds and Bees are teaching us that Native Plant Life 

If we are to learn, what we are being taught. 

If what we learn, will turn to care; i 

Then caring becomes everyday action 

With a World View of our Sacred Earth. 

Harlequin's Gardens 

Would like to invite you to enjoy 

Our neonic-free plants, native plants, organic veggie starts. 

Berry bushes, sustainable roses, many perennials. 

Shrubs and fruit trees and water-wise plants. 

Organic fertilizers, composts and minerals 

Empowering classes and knowledgeable assistance. 

HarlequinsGardens.com 303-939-9403 

Harlequin's Gardens New Western Garden features | 
many Colorado natives 

HUB 



44 


Paid advertisement Please support our advertiser's business 
Aquilegia Volume 40 No. 3 Spring/Summer 2016 


