
MARCH, 1942 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Pages 

Editorial Pages 1, 2 

Flowering Cherries, By W. H. Warren 3 

Fate, Incorporated — Landscape Architect, by Noble Hoggson 6 

New Hibiscus, by William H. Henderson 8 

Camellias, by Mrs. Donald G. Graham 9 

“He Who Plants a, Rose Plants Beauty,” by Earl William Benbow 12 

The Heaths and Heathers, By Arthur P. Dome 13 

Rock Garden Plants, by Mrs. L. N. Roberson 16 

A Few Outstanding Shrubs of Eastern Washington, by Harold T. Abbott 18 

Daphne and Its Culture, by Theodore Albert 20 

The Genus Primula, by Ida Schibig 21 

Chrysanthemums, by Mrs. George T. Williams 23 

Spring Garden Notes, by C. Wieting 25 

Book Reviews, by Jesse C. Johnson and John H. Hanley 27 


APPLY FOR MEMBERSHIP 

In The 

ARBORETUM FOUNDATION TODAY 

ARTICLE ON PAGE TWO TELLS OF ITS VALUE 


Vl 


R&ieA 


CHOICE WASHINGTON and OREGON 
ISO. 1 GRADE 

TAKEN FRESH FROM THE EARTH 
AT TIME OF PURCHASE. 


PRICES AT NURSERY 

4(H 3 for 1 0# 


Mail Orders 15% Additional to Cover Packing 
and Postage. 

If Residing in State of Washington Add 3% Sales Tax. 
WRITE FOR COMPLETE LIST 



We Have More Than 100 Varieties of Top Grade Rose Bushes. 

WRITE FOR COMPLETE LIST, Which Includes Patented Varieties and Tree Roses. 


Autumn scarlet, cerise gold 

Betty Uprichard— pink orange 

Christopher Stone scarlet 

Condesa de Sastago— coppery rose 

Dainty Bess single pink 

Duquesa de Penaranda— apricot, 
orange and pink 

Hadley rich crimson 

Joanna Hill— dark red 
Lady For teviot— apricot 


Albertine copper yellow 

American Pillai crimson pink 

Bonfir e red 

Dr. Huey— crimson maroon 
Emily Gray— yellow 


Else Poulsen— bright rose pink 

Gloria Mundi orange scarlet 

Kirsten Poulsen scarlet 


BUSH TYPE 

Lady Margaret Stewart yellow 

orange 

Lord Charlemont— deep crimson 

McGredy’s ivory white 

McGredy’s orange 

McGredy’s^— scarlet 
McGredy’s— yellow 
Mrs. C. A. Van Rossem— 
apricot yellow 
Mrs. E. P. Thom— yellow 

CLIMBERS 

Golden Emblem yellow 

Hoosier Beauty— dark red 
Lady Hillingdon— apricot 

Los Angeles salmon pink 

Mermaid — light yellow single 
Mme. Ed. Herriot— coral 

POLYANTHA or BABY ROSES 

Lafayette— •deep red 
La Marne— rosy pink 
Mile. Cecile Brunner— clear pink 
with yellow base 


Oswald Sieper— white 
Padre— coppery scarlet 
Pres. Herbert Hoover - 
scarlet orange 
Rev. F. Page-Roberts— 
yellow and red 
Shot Silk— cherry red-orange 
Sunburst— yellow 
Talisman— gold yellow and 
copper 

Ville de Paris— sun yellow 


Mrs. Aaron Ward— golden buff 
Pres. Herbert Hoover 
orange and red 

Talisman golden yellow 

and orange 


Perle d’Or— yellow with orange 
center 

Wm. Finch— pale flush pink 


— Write for List of Choice — 

Ornamental, Shade and Fruit Trees , Evergreens , Perennials, Fines and Hedge Plants. 

Phone Richmond 1161 
VISITORS ALWAYS WELCOME! 


EST. 

1903 


"Our Business Is Growing’ 

RICHMOND NURSERIES 

Richmond Beach, Washington 


Aurora Ave. (New Everett Highway) to Richmond Highlands 
1 Mile West on Richmond Beach Road. 


OPEN 
ISUNDAYS 





The Arboretum Bulletin 



Vol. V. No. 3 Seattle, Washington March, 1942 

Editor Dr. John H. Hanley 

Advertising Manager Mrs. Jesse C. Johnson 


Vol. V. No. 3 Seattle, Washington March, 1942 

Editor Dr. John H. Hanley 

Advertising Manager Mrs. Jesse C. Johnson 


Address all communications to Arboretum Foundation 
5532 White Building, Seattle, Washington 


The Enlarged Bulletin 

The Arboretum Foundation decided last 
fall to increase the size of its Bulletin for 
the March and September issues. Immediately 
following Pearl Harbor there arose some 
grave doubts as to the feasibility of continu- 
ing with the plan. Largely at the insistence 
of Mr. Donald G. Graham, your Foundation 
president, it was carried through. We offer 
herewith our first product with the hope that 
it may meet with your approval. 

1 i i 

Among Our Contributors 

Mr. W. H. Warren is Superintendent of 
Parks at Victoria, B. C., where they have, for 
a number of years, made detailed studies of 
flowering trees for ornamental purposes. 

i 

An intelligent, energetic young man, Mr. 
Noble Hoggson, has brought a lot of original 
ideas into Northwest landscape architecture. 

i 

Mr. William H. Henderson of Fresno, Cal- 
ifornia, is the well-known breeder of hibiscus 
varieties. 

i 

Mrs. Donald G. Graham, who writes on 
camellias, is chairman of the Membership 
Committee for the Arboretum Foundation. 
In conjunction with the very special garden 
developed by her husband, she has made a 
particular study of camellias and is recog- 
nized as one of our local authorities. 


Rev. Earl William Benbow is a former 
president of the Seattle Rose Society and has 
been affiliated with that organization for 12 
years. i 

Mr. Arthur Dome is the recognized source 
of really valuable information on heathers. 

i 

Mrs. L. N. Roberson is a very prominent 
member of the Western Unit of the American 
Rock Garden Society and, along with her 
husband, operates one of our best nurseries. 

i 

Mr. Harold T. Abbott is Assistant Super- 
intendent of Parks at Spokane, Washington, 
and his wide and varied experiences with 
the plants of that region make this article 
particularly worthwhile. 

i 

Mr. Theodore Albert is specializing in the 
genus Daphne at his nursery near Olympia. 

i 

The Northwest is an ideal country in which 
to grow primroses and Mrs. Ida (Walter) 
Schibig is far and away the leading amateur 
primrose specialist. 

y 

Mrs. George T. Williams has made a special 
effort to gather together and flower a tremen- 
dous number of chrysanthemum varieties, as 
is evidenced from her article. 

i 

Mr. Carol Wieting is one of our assistants 
at the University of Washington Arboretum 
greenhouses. 


Arboretum Membership 

By Mrs. Donald G. Graham 

A LREADY our Arboretum has been rated 
by experts as ranking third among the 
arboreta of the United States. The position 
of the Arboretum as a scientific station is 
now recognized, and it has many friends not 
only in the state of Washington but through- 
out the United States who believe in its value. 
This widespread interest is shown through 
our membership records. Growing from a 
membership of 315 in 1938, there are to date 
1,319 members of the Arboretum Foundation. 
Of this number there are approximately 285 
members from 82 towns and cities in the 
state of Washington outside of Seattle, and 
25 memberships from 11 other states — Cali- 
fornia, Oregon, Arizona, Illinois, Pennsyl- 
vania, Minnesota, New Jersey, Iowa, District 
of Columbia, Massachusetts and Missouri. 

There are now 76 garden clubs from 40 
towns and cities in the State of Washington 
which have memberships in the Arboretum 
Foundation. 

Extremely gratifying have been the five new 
memberships at $50 each which have been 
received within the last few months and the 
12 new memberships at $100. The 12 $100 
“corporate” memberships were taken out both 
by individuals and by business firms. 

Many times within the last few weeks the 
question has been raised as to whether inter- 
est in the Arboretum will continue with Red 
Cross and defense work being uppermost 
in people’s minds. It is significant to note 
that during December, with war declared 
and the distractions of Christmas, the names 
of 25 new members were added to our files. 
During the past month of February, 32 new 
memberships were received. But we need 
more and more new members. 

We are told that all during the World War 
of 1914-18, the English people did not over- 
look or alter their program in the care and 
upkeep of their world famous arboretum — 
Kew Gardens — founded in 1759. It is also 
interesting to note that, at the present time, 
the regular fortnightly flower shows of the 
Royal Horticultural Society, staged in Lon- 
don, have gone on with but a single inter- 
ruption which occurred during the height of 
the bombing there in September, 1940. 


Mr. Wake McLellan of San Francisco 
makes the following comment: “In England 
where the problem is a thousandfold greater 
than it is in our country or ever will be here, 
they have found that flowers play an im- 
portant part in keeping up the morale of the 
people as well as showing real affection, 
which is so appreciated and necessary at 
times like this.” 

Memberships are most valuable in the 
continued progress of this Arboretum of the 
Northwest. We look for the continued sup- 
port of our old members and hope for many 
more new members. W.P.A. work has been 
withdrawn from the Arboretum area and 
additional funds are now needed for the 
development, as well as for the maintenance, 
of that area. Memberships are the most de- 
pendable source of income. These member- 
ships have various classifications — $2.00, 
$5.00, $10.00, $25.00, $50.00, and $100.00, 
and business firms, partnerships and corpora- 
tions are eligible as well as individuals. It is 
the hope that all Arboretum Foundation 
members will at this time give special sup- 
port and aid in increasing the memberships 
of the Foundation. 


ARBORETUM MEMBERSHIP BLANK 


□ Associate $ 2.00 

| | Regular 5.00 

□ Active 10.00 

□ Sustaining 25.00 

□ Foundational 50.00 

U] Corporate 100.00 


The Arboretum Foundation, 

5532 White-Henry-Stuart Bldg., 
Seattle, Washington. 

I hereby apply for membership in the 
Arboretum Foundation and remittance 
for same is enclosed to cover dues for 
the next succeeding 12 months. 

Name 

Address 

All memberships are non-assessable. 


Two 


Flowering Cherries 

By W. H. Warren 

Superintendent of Parks, Victoria, B. C. 

T HE FOLLOWING notes on flowering 
cherries have been accumulated during 
an intensive study over the last ten years by 
the Parks Department in Victoria, B. C., in 
its endeavor to find suitable flowering trees 
to substitute for forest trees on city boule- 
vards. The latter have been a source of 
expense and trouble for many years. The 
uninterrupted service of sewers, drains and 
public utilities on streets naturally takes 
first place over the use of trees. Since street 
trees are used here more for ornamentation 
than for shade, Victoria is using varieties 
which cause least trouble to public services 
and provide the greatest ornamental value 
in flower, fruit and foliage. About 1000 
flowering trees were planted on boulevards 
in Victoria in 1941. 

The coastal section of the Northwest is as 
congenial, climatically, to the growing of 
ornamental material indigenous to the tem- 
perate zone, as any other place on the conti- 
nent. We have not scratched the surface yet 
in accumulating and testing the potential 
value of the vast quantity of material avail- 
able. The services of the University of Wash- 
ington Arboretum in this respect should in 
time be a tremendous boon to horticulture 
on both sides of the line. For instance Reh- 
der lists about 300 kinds of crabapples, haw- 
thorns and mountain ash in his “Manual of 
Cultivated Trees and Shrubs,” not to mention 
the dozens of lesser known named varieties 
of ornamental crabapples which have orig- 
inated in Canada and in the United States in 
recent years. There are in addition several 
hundred species and varieties of flowering 
cherries, exclusive of flowering plums, apri- 
cots, almonds and peaches. Doubtless there 
are many worthless varieties and differentia- 
tions scarcely worthy of varietal names, yet 
notwithstanding there are many fine varieties 
quite unknown to us that deserve a trial. 

In studying flowering cherries the exper- 
ience of the following authorities has been 
very helpful: Mr. Collingwood Ingram, fore- 
most British authority, whose articles have 
appeared periodically in the Royal Horticul- 
tural Society’s Journal, “Gardeners’ Chron- 


icle and Gardening Illustrated”; Paul B. 
Russell, assistant botanist, Bureau of Plant 
Industry, author of the excellent U.S.D.A. 
Circular No. 313, published in 1934, “The 
Oriental Flowering Cherries”; Mr. W. B. 
Clarke, Clarke’s Nursery, San Jose, Califor- 
nia, one of the most informed authorities in 
the United States; the late A. E. Wohlert, 
Wohlert’s Nurseries, Narberth, Pa., and K. 
Wada, a very progressive Japanese nursery- 
man, who visited Seattle a few years ago. 

For a detailed description of varieties, see 
the above bulletin. The following notes are 
intended only to supplement the bulletin. 
The large-growing, single-flowering cherries 
appear to be longer lived and generally more 
suitable for streets. The most promising of 
these are: Higan or Equinox cherry (Prunus 
subhirtella) and its many varietal forms and 
closely related species, Yoshino (P. yedoen- 
sis), Sargent’s cherry (P. Sargenti) and the 
cut-leafed or Pygmy cherry (P. incisa). It 
must be noted that there is still much con- 
fusion in varietal names in America, Europe 
and in Japan. 

The Higan or Equinox Group 

Prunus subhirtella. This cherry varies tre- 
mendously in habit of form and flower. 
Flowers are usually small and fleeting, often 
injured by late spring frosts. The variety 
Beni-higan has small pink flowers and is 
described as tall and upright to 60 feet high. 
Shiro-higan, similar in growth, is a form 
with white flowers up to 1% inches in diam- 
eter, a good specimen of which grows behind 
the museum in Volunteer Park. The ordinary 
Higan is a broad tree up to 25 feet high, 
floriferous in the older trees, but sometimes 
with scant bloom in the younger stages. It is 
to be noted that Rehder makes no such dis- 
tinction between the tall type and the smaller, 
broad type. There are two forms of the 
Shidare or weeping Higan, namely, the pyr- 
amidal and the mushroom type. Beni-shidare 
or Park Weeping exemplifies the first. It 
was propagated from a pink flowered weeper 
growing in Golden Gate Park. New branches 
keep rising from the crown so that the tree 
gradually gains height. Ito-Shidare, the 
thread-branched weeper, also known as 
Eureka Weeping, is the common mushroom 
type. The following notes were recorded in 
Victoria: The variety Sendaica, said to be 


Three 


the best weeping form by Wada, proved to 
be disappointing. It was quite variable, 
probably having been grown from seed. 
Wada claims it is grown for its habit rather 
than the flowers, having thread-like, pen- 
dulous branches in age. Western taste may 
not coincide with Japanese aesthetic values 
in this respect. In addition there is a double 
pink weeping Higan. One grows near the 
entrance to the Conservatory in Volunteer 
Park, Seattle. Rehder and Clarke call it Yae- 
Shidare Higan. Ingram introduced it to Eng- 
land as Sendai-ito-Zakura, and it was at his 
instigation that the Yokohama Nursery pro- 
pagated it, calling it Totsu-zakura. The dou- 
ble subhirtellas are all superior to the singles 
in ornamental value. Prunus subhirtella 
autumnalis, Jugatsu-zakura or October 
Bloomer, is a double pink cherry which 
makes a wide crown. It usually starts to 
bloom in October or November and continues 
intermittently during frost-free weather until 
April. Under our winter conditions the flow- 
ers may be injured by frost but not so the 
buds, which continue to open successively as 
soon as the weather again becomes favorable. 
In providing winter color in the garden this 
tree has high value particularly in sheltered 
positions. The largest tree in Great Britain 
is 21 feet high and 36 feet through the crown. 
Most promising of all subhirtellas are the 
double, upright forms. As particulars of 
these varieties appear to be lacking in Amer- 
ican literature, the following detailed notes 
may be of some value: 

Prunus subhirtella Fukubana (Makino) or 
Momijigari. Under our conditions, the flow- 
ers are red in the bud like Malus floribunda, 
opening a rosy pink, finally fading to pale 
pink. Petals number 12 to 21 and are three 
to four-sixteenths inches wide, i. e., narrower 
than in Atsumori. They are also more sharp- 
ly cleft at the tips than the latter and some- 
what twisted, giving the blossom a frilled or 
fluted appearance. The flowers, % to 1 % 
inches wide, are usually borne in clusters of 
three, but sometimes two or four; pistils one 
or two; leafy bracts on peduncles up to ^ 
inch long. The calyx and stems first appear 
reddish and the leaves are bronze when 
young; it flowers later than all other Higan 
cherries and is a most profuse bloomer, even 
on very young trees. The tree grows vigor- 


ously and the foliage colors well in the fall. 
Like other subhirtellas it does best when fall 
planted and seems to resent late spring plant- 
ing. This may be due to its susceptibility to 
twig blight (brown rot fungus). 

Regarding the nomenclature, which is 
somewhat confused, Ingram wrote me in 
1938: “Clarke’s Momijigari is the same plant 
as the one I received an Award of Merit for 
under the name P. subhirtella rosea plena 
in 1935. Since then I have learned that it has 
been described by Makimo in the Bot. Mag. 
of Tokyo, 1908, as P. subhirtella Fukubana, 
so this must be regarded as its correct name. 
It was Fukubana that I praised in my R.H.S. 
paper (see “Flowering Trees and Shrubs” — 
R.H.S. 1938 ; also colored plate in Gardeners’ 
Chronicle, Nov. 3, 1934).” To illustrate the 
confused nomenclature, Wada sells it under 
the name of Prunus subhirtella ascendens 
pendula rubra flore plena. He states by 
letter that it is the same as Fukubana. He 
also called it P. subhirtella fl. rubro pleno. 
Notcott, an English nurseryman, calls it P. 
subhirtella flore plena, and says it is pretty 
and distinct, quite unlike other forms of sub- 
hirtella cherries. The branches are wreathed 
in cerise pink buds opening to double or 
semi-double, clear, bright pink flowers. It is 
one of the really pink cherries likely to be- 
come a great favorite when better known. It 
should be in every collection. Marchant, an- 
other English nurseryman, claims it is strong 
growing, making a head 10 feet to 20 feet 
wide, according to the soil. The then weeping 
branches are a lovely sight in March and 
April with clusters of flowers like tiny double 
roses, vivid crimson in bud opening to deep 
carmine red. 

Regarding its habit, since we obtained 
stock from Wada, his description of it led 
us to believe it was a true Shidare higan or 
weeping type, but from Marchant’s descrip- 
tion and our observation it is upright in 
habit until maturity when the tips of the 
branches take on a pendulous habit. We note 
also it occasionally has semi-pendulous sucker 
growth on young trees. It is quite rare in 
cultivation. 

To sum up, we like it because of its long 
blooming period, which is characteristic of 
all double cherries, its attractive pink flow- 
ers, strong growth and autumn foliage. 


Four 


The double higan described by Wada as 
Atsumori or Prunus subhirtella ascendens 
rosea flore plena is, so far is I know, sold 
only by him and is unknown in Britain and 
the United States. It is slower in growth than 
Fukubana, upright in habit with larger, paler 
flowers which vary from 1 inch to 1% inches 
wide, red in the bud, opening to an apple- 
blossom pink shade, fading to pale pink or 
almost white. Old blooms have purplish 
calyces and filaments. They are borne in clus- 
ters of two to four, usually three, and each 
has 14 to 21 petals. Pedicels iy% inches; 
peduncle short, up to l/^-inch, usually nearly 
sessile; leaves small, unfolding clear green. 
The petals are 14 to % inch broad with two 
or three round lobes at the tips. The flowers 
appear flat with an open center, a shade 
deeper pink that Jugatsu. The leaves do not 
color much in the fall. It is equally as flori- 
ferous as Fukubana. The blossoms of both 
Atsumori and Fukubana seem to be more 
susceptible to late frosts than the species. 

We have experienced some difficulty pro- 
pagating higan cherries and it is probable 
that they do best grafted on seedlings of the 
same species. Pendulous varieties will be 
found difficult to grow as standards in young 
stages and require careful staking. When top 
grafted they may get one-sided which may be 
obviated by using two scions in a cleft graft. 

Yoshino and Its Varieties 

Yoshino or Prunus yedoensis is sometimes 
called Joshino in Britain. This is a vigorous 
growing, early, single flowering cherry mak- 
ing a large tree in a very short time. It grows 
well on P. avium stock and the autumn color 
is good. For a detailed description see the 
U.S.D.A. bulletin by Russell, who claims it 
will come true from seed though we find 
young trees to be so variable in habit and 
flower that it is wise to propagate vegeta- 
tively. On good soils it makes long growth 
which should be thinned out, properly 
spaced, and tipped back regularly to make 
lateral growth, otherwise it is apt soon to 
grow out of hand making lanky growth with 
few laterals, like the sweet cherry. We note 
that the long flowering stems of Yoshino give 
it a lovely light effect when in full bloom. 

Yoshino is considered to be a hybrid be- 
tween the Prunus serrulata, from which most 
of the double forms of Japanese flowering 


cherries have come, and Prunus subhirtella. 
There are a number of variations and hybrids 
of Yoshino, some of which might be worthy 
of trial. 

Akebono or Daybreak is a pink flowered 
form of Yoshino. Clarke says it is one of 
the most beautiful varieties, grows well, 
makes a good sized tree and blooms freely 
before leafing out. Specimens in Victoria, 
obtained from both Clarke and the Yokohama 
Nursery, lack vigor. Growth is slow and poor 
so far. It may be that it prefers a warmer 
climate although Wohlert in Pennsylvania 
says that it is similar in habit to Yoshino 
with larger flowers of a deeper pink shade. 
We note it is free blooming like Yoshino but 
the floral effect is bunchy because of the short 
14 -inch flower cluster stalks. 

The variety perpendens, sometimes called 
pendula, grows straight into the ground and 
does not impress us favorably. Ingram says 
the flowers are smaller than the species and 
it is not so beautiful as the original tree. 
Praecox is a variety supposed to be three 
weeks earlier than the type, according to 
Wada. Ours make a very late semi-pendulous 
growth. The trees were as green at Christ- 
mas, 1941, as in midsummer and we find 
those which make such growth do not give 
good floral displays in the spring. The wood 
is apt to be injured too easily by winter 
weather. Pandora, a double form of English 
origin, is a cross between Yoshino and P. 
subhirtella. Grown by Waterer of Bagshot, 
England, it received an Award of Merit from 
the R.H.S. The flowers are short stalked, 
rosy blush, single and of medium size. 

Shojo, described by Wada as a double 
form of Yoshino, is classified as a varietal 
form of Taizan-fukun by Ingram in the 
R.H.S. Journal, 1935. 

Taizan-fukun, a hybrid supposed to be of 
similar origin to Yoshino, is very useful 
for avenue planting. Several specimens grow 
on the road to Mr. Butchard’s Gardens in 
Victoria. The young foliage emerges a brown 
shade and fall color is good. The tree as- 
sumes a vigorous upright habit with a head 
probably 12 feet wide. The following are 
condensed notes from various authorities: 
It is a magnificent ornamental, best described 
as a fragrant double form of the well-known 
Amanagawa but with more branches, giving 


Five 


it a fuller appearance. Ingram reports it to 
have a semi-fastigiate habit with clusters of 
very double, pale pink flowers with pubescent 
pedicels and foliage as in P. Sieboldi; foliage 
is rather narrow and small, golden bronze 
when young; the bark is somewhat rough, 
sometimes peeling on young trees. Clarke 
says it is particularly valuable where space 
is limited; the flowers are rather small, but 
freely produced. 

The Cut-leaved Types 

Fuji-zakura, Fuji or cut-leaved cherry, 
Prunus incisa. This tree is also known as the 
Pygmy cherry because it is a favorite among 
the Japanese for dwarfing purposes. It re- 
sembles P. subhirtella but has a bushy habit. 
It is said to develop fast, trees trained as 
standards growing 10 feet to 15 feet in five 
years. It may make a small, elegant tree 20 
to 30 feet high though more often it is a 
thickly branched bush 6 to 18 feet. It is 
extremely free flowering though the flowers 
are small, like those of subhirtella, and 
rather fleeting. The buds, calyx and flower 
stalks are red and the red calyx is extremely 
persistent giving a wine color to the center 
of old flowers. Little mention is made of the 
excellent autumn foliage in literature. Alto- 
gether we like this cherry very much. Ingram 
has this to say of it: “It has many virtues. 
It is completely hardy, very floriferous and 
has neat birch-like foliage with deeply cut, 
double serrations. Incisa is useful for hedges, 
tolerant of shade and will stand heavy prun- 
ing. A sturdy, stocky little tree, whether in 
sunshine or in shade, it is always happy and 
cheerful. Nothing seems to daunt its deter- 
mination to flower and each spring it com- 
pletely clothes itself in snowy blossoms. At 
a distance the flowers often appear pink due 
to the red cupula and calyx merging with 
the white petals creating a soft pink effect.” 

The variety viridi-calyx has a green calyx, 
hence the floral effect is snow white. Growth 
is vigorous and upright. Fall color very 
good. Rehder calls it Yamadei. Serrata is a 
variety with less deeply serrate leaves which 
Ingram says is so indistinguishable from the 
type as not to justify a varietal name. There 
are several hybrids of incisa produced by 
Ingram. Umineka (Seagull) A.M., R.H.S., 
1928, is crossed with P. speciosa. Extremely 
(Continued on Page Thirty) 


“Fate, Incorporated — Landscape 
Architect ” 

By Noble Hoggson 

A YE TANK ve get a bulldozer now,” 
said Oleson, as he scribbled on a 
board with a pencil stub. Our contractor had 
already cut our Tudor castle down to a sub- 
urban hillside cottage, but the thought of this 
snorting monster, trampling our treasured 
ferns at fortunes per hour, terrified us. No 
sooner said than done, however, for in a cou- 
ple of days our “view lot,” with its precious 
madrona, two dogwoods and scattered small 
firs, was a mass of devastation. A yawning 
hole, seeming far too large for our tiny 
house, occupied most of the lot including one 
of the dogwoods. A stupendous pile of gravel 
and chunks of clay covered the lower hill- 
side and dribbled rocks onto the street below. 
Our elderberries, wild spirea and hazel were 
pushed flat by the avalanche while our poor 
ferns, Oregon grape and groundcover lay 
forever buried. 

Finally our foundation was completed and 
quickly the house took shape. A load of 
lumber was dumped squarely on our lone 
huckleberry and the concrete truck took a 
lower branch and two square feet of tender 
bark off the madrona. However, the house 
continued to go up as did the piles of board 
ends, shingles, broken brick, plaster chunks 
and empty paint cans. One day without warn- 
ing the monster returned and, in less time 
than it takes to tell it, shoved all the trash 
(and what little topsoil we had fought to 
save) into the gaping canyon beside the foun- 
dations. Still it was a great relief to be able 
to again walk on fairly level ground even 
though a sea of mud, and we now had high 
hopes of getting settled before Christmas. 

That turned out to be a rosy dream indeed, 
but after “unavoidable” delays and inexcus- 
able extras we finally moved in. The painters 
weren’t quite through, and one morning while 
in my shower, I was shocked by someone 
starting to take off the bathroom door for a 
minor repair. But dust and wet paint or not, 
we were at last in our own home. Of course 
the mud tracked in by the children didn’t do 
our new rugs any good and our nice hard- 
wood floor began to show premature sand 
scratches near the doors. A lawn in the spring 
would fix that all right, but meanwhile the 


Six 


winter rains were cutting great canyons and 
ravines in our “game lawn” bank. We were 
afraid the city would complain of the growing 
dune of silt on the lower street, so we looked 
up a rock man. His price seemed staggering 
after our recent extras but something had to 
be done. The completed rockery wasn’t as 
artistic as we had expected, but those great 
empty spaces between the rocks (plant pock- 
ets he called them!) would look better when 
filled with a mass of bloom — we hoped. Due 
to the condition of the soil he had to use 
more “batter” than he had planned, but it 
wasn’t ’til the following summer that we 
discovered that the additional batter made 
our only level lawn just five feet too narrow 
for the badminton court we had always 
wanted. 

The winter rains settled the dirt around the 
foundations, pulling the drains loose from 
the downspout, flooding the cellar, and leav- 
ing a long depression across our front “lawn” 
where the water pipe trench had been. We 
discovered also that the rubbish in the back- 
fill is no fit soil in which to plant the cute 
little evergreens which we bought one Satur- 
day at a hardware store. Moreover a small 
piece of shingle is one awful thing to try to 
dig through, and there were lots of them. 
Years later we discovered another mistake 
when we had to cut a tunnel through those 
“cute little evergreens” to be able to reach, 
if not see, the front door. 

Next spring, just after we had put in our 
lawn — not too good a job, but fair for ama- 
teurs — a friend sent his sprinkler man over, 
and his arguments were so convincing that 
we allowed him to crisscross our tender new 
lawn with trenches. Now at last we could 
sip our drinks at ease while the lawns watered 
themselves. We could not have had this 
luxury if the job had been as expensive as 
the other sprinkler man had claimed. But 
later in the summer, when we showed our 
man the brown, dry triangles between the 
heads of the sprinklers which impudently 
protruded inches above each green oasis, he 
said it wasn’t his fault as we really didn’t 
have sufficient pressure! I suppose he was 
right. 

During a hot week in May I returned one 
evening to find our still rather barren “rock- 
ery” studded by tired little plants. “They are 


our State Flower” claimed my wife proudly. 
“A man drove up in a truck and offered the 
entire load at a terrific bargain. Of course 
they looked a lot smaller after they were 
unloaded, but he offered to plant them him- 
self, and he was such a nice man.” A surpris- 
ing number of them lived, but we never saw 
the man again. 

The madrona slowly died, not so much 
from the scar on its trunk, as we learned from 
a radio authority, as from the fact that our 
badminton — I mean our mumblety-peg lawn 
- — had been filled three feet over its roots. 
Anyway, the expense of taking out the stump 
seemed definitely worthwhile, as the house 
was originally placed so the madrona stood 
right in the way of our end living room win- 
dow, and our view had existed only from the 
upstairs bathroom. Other shrubs we put in 
didn’t do so well and the stores claimed they 
starved to death and refused to replace them. 

All in all, we saved quite a bit on our 
original house and grounds although we had 
hoped Mother Nature would do a bit more 
to heal our wounds, than the bracken and 
thistles she planted. We never did get a 
satisfactory place to dry clothes and we were 
a bit ashamed of our garbage cans when our 
privet got leggy. It seemed we had spent a 
great deal on fertilizer for the lawns as well 
as manure and peat moss for the flower beds. 
Sometimes I wondered if the place had been 
as cheap as we figured, and thought I would 
some day go over our gardening bills for the 
years since we moved in. I was afraid we 
would have rather a rude shock. 

The shock, however, came in an entirely 
different form. Last week-end we visited the 
Johnsons who built shortly after we did. They 
proudly displayed a most amazing colored 
plan, done by a man they called a landscape 
architect. It showed the lot and everything on 
it. A little screened service yard for the 
clothes line, garbage cans and kitchen herb 
garden was tucked around behind the kitchen 
porch. A game lawn (full size) was provided 
with a simple brick grill in the corner, and 
a tiny little flower garden with stepping stones 
and a rose arbor lay on the sunny side of the 
living room wing. Every tree and shrub was 
named and located exactly, so that no matter 
when it was planted, even years later, it 
( Continued on Page Thirty -Two ) 


Seven 


New Hibiscus 

By William H. Henderson 

T HE GENUS Hibiscus contains approxi- 
mately 150 species widely distributed 
throughout the world, in Africa, Asia and 
North America. It is allied to Gossypium 
(cotton), Abutilon (flowering maple) and 
Althaea (hollyhock) . The seed pods of Hi- 
biscus esculentum (okra) and the fleshy 
calyces of H. sabdariffa are valuable for food 
purposes. 

The genus offers great possibilities to the 
plant breeder mainly because it includes 
species that are so resistant to cold that they 
are grown with ease throughout most of the 
United States. They are affected by no serious 
diseases and are peculiarly free from insect 
attacks. 

Some 16 years ago the writer became in- 
terested in hybridizing various species with 
the thought in mind to increase the size of 
flowers, range of colors and general hardi- 
ness. Work was started with the following 
species: H. militaris, which grows to a height 
of six feet and produces three-inch flowers of 
white or pale rose; H. Moscheutos, growing 
to a height of five feet with four- to five-inch 
flowers of light rose; H. coccineus, five feet 
tall with large five- or six-inch flowers of 
bright rose red. These species are all her- 
baceous perennials. 

After a period of five years, during which 
time approximately eight thousand hybrid 
seedlings were grown and tested, eight named 
-varieties were introduced. These include Fres- 
no, a variety with eight-inch flowers of richest, 
satin pink set off with a burgundy-red center; 
Mammoth White, a variety producing ten- 
inch flowers of pure white, faintly striped 
with pale rose and having a dark red eye; 
Radiation, with nine-inch blooms, flesh pink 
in color with rose stripes and a dark red 
center; Crimson Wonder, with its ten-inch 
cerise-red bloom, self-colored; Giant White, 
with a deep red center setting off the broad, 
pure white, eight-inch flower; Raven, deep, 
rich maroon, self-colored flowers seven inches 
in diameter; Clown, which produces an eight- 
inch bloom with a deep red center and a 
white ground color and with each petal 
heavily blotched at the tip with cerise rose; 
and Satan, producing seven-inch flowers of 


rose red which most nearly approach the red 
of the tropical Hibiscus Rosa-sinensis. 

Several new varieties have since been in- 
troduced and the work of improvement is 
still being carried on. These new hybrids are 
among the most easily grown of all perennials 
and require only sufficient space in which to 
develop. For best results good drainage is 
essential as well as a location in full sun. It 
is not uncommon for a plant to produce sev- 
eral hundred flowers in the first season of 
its bloom. 

All the varieties are propagated by root 
division somewhat similar to the division of 
dahlias. They may be planted from November 
until the middle of March. First year plants 
usually start to bloom in early July and 
continue until October. The following sea- 
sons will produce blossoms three weeks 
earlier. 

The hibiscus varieties delight in a well- 
drained, rich soil and should have plenty of 
water after they have made about 18 inches 
of growth. Each fall after blooming they 
should be pruned to within three inches of 
the ground. The clumps increase in size each 
year and, unless they are being used for 
hedges, they should be spaced at least four 
feet apart. They are useful as flowering 
shrubs or for the rear of the perennial border 
where four- to six-foot, bushy plants are 
needed. 

One of the most interesting experiments 
recently made was the crossing of these large- 
flowered hybrids with the species H. mutabilis, 
a tree-like form which gets up to 15 feet and 
produces three-inch, white flowers from Sep- 
tember until frost. The leaves on this type 
are large and maple-like in outline. In the 
first generation resulting from these crosses 
the following results were noted: plants bear- 
ing large flowers of rich, carmine-red, six 
inches in diameter, with individual petals 
three inches wide; other types with large, 
cerise-pink flowers; specimens which produce 
pure white blooms; a lengthening of the 
blooming season by at least two months. 

Other experiments involving new species 
are under way. Some of these include crosses 
with Althaea, with the yellow-flowered Hibis- 
cus Manihot and with the beautiful, popular 
tropical form H. Rosa-sinensis. Tests are also 
(Continued on Page Thirty -One) 


Eight 


Camellias 

By Mrs. Donald G. Graham 

T HE subject of camellias — often times 
called the “Rose of Japan” — is a com- 
prehensive one, since there are many recog- 
nized and accepted species as well as hun- 
dreds of plant and bloom varieties. This 
aristocrat of horticulture, whose history ex- 
tends back almost two centuries, has within 
the last 12 or 15 years regained a lot of its 
old prestige here in the United States. Hun- 
dreds of large specimens, purchased from old 
gardens in the South, have been transplanted 
onto estates in other parts of our country, 
especially in the South. As much as $2,000 
has been paid for individual plants, while 
$500 to $1,000 is not an unusually high price 
for a large, well-shaped specimen of good 
variety. Another manifestation of renewed 
interest in these beautiful flowering plants is 
the number of camellia shows held in the 
South within the last few years and which 
thousands have attended. California, too, has 
had consecutive camellia shows, the attend- 
ance increasing from 300 the first year to 
well over 12,000 some eight years later. 

This renewal of interest can well be under- 
stood when we see the exquisite beauty of the 
flower. It is difficult to find any word other 
than “perfection” to describe it with its cer- 
tain stiffness — its frigid elegance. 

This plant was first made known to the 
Western world in 1682 by Kaempfer — one of 
the first great botanical explorers — after he 
saw them as great and lofty trees growing in 
the open mountain forests of Japan. In its 
native country, the single form of the com- 
mon camellia was abundant in the woods, 
thriving in the shade of other trees — growing 
slowly but often reaching 40 feet in height, 
with a trunk as thick as a man’s body clothed 
with a perfectly smooth, gray, thin bark. And 
though those trees were rarely without flow- 
ers, they were in full bloom in April. These 
wild flowers seldom opened flat but were 
more or less cup shaped and perhaps for 
this reason were less valued for their beauty 
than for their fruit, which was gathered in 
October and pressed for its oil, which was in 
great local demand. It is said that the oil 
obtained from the seeds of C. Japonica was 
used by the Japanese women for dressing 
their hair. The fruit is the size of a small, 


hard apple, a bright, shining, green color 
and ribbed like a tomato. When ripe the rind 
splits open, showing brown seeds which look 
like coffee beans. 

How long before 1682 these shrubs had 
been growing in the gardens of the wealthy 
natives we can only guess, but we do know 
that by the year 1739 they were being grown 
in the English gardens of Lord Petri. In its 
native land this plant was known by the name 
“Tsubakki.” It was in England that it was 
given the name camellia, named after George 
Joseph Kamel or Camellus, a Moravian Jesuit 
priest, who, upon his return home from his 
mission in the Philippine Islands, intro- 
duced several of these plants into Europe, 
having secured them at a Chinese port. Lord 
Petri was supposed to have bought two of 
these plants. Many years following this the 
sailing ships of the old East India Co. con- 
tinued to bring choice varieties from Oriental 
gardens to England. Gradually, they appeared 
in Belgium, France, Germany and Italy, where 
horticultural experts of each country pro- 
ceeded in course of time to produce from the 
original strains of white, red, pink, single 
flowered sorts, the hosts of marvelously beau- 
tiful doubles, semi-doubles, peony and rose- 
type flowers in all manner of rich reds, pinks, 
streaked and variegated colors through to 
the purest white. Very few double flowering 
camellias were brought from the Orient. 

After the first double flowered camellia 
was obtained, those with single flowers un- 
fortunately fell out of favor and came to be 
used mainly as stocks on which other varie- 
ties were grafted and it is only of recent years 
that a renewed taste for them has arisen. 
Many authorities felt it was a mistake to 
adopt the double flower to the exclusion of 
the single kind, as they doubted the double 
flower an improvement. In fact, the single 
camellias are more beautiful in their color- 
ing and their varied depth of flower surface. 

By 1860 there were more than 1,000 hor- 
ticultural varieties and many publications 
were being offered with beautiful colored 
prints of the flower. 

After the pioneer work in England, that of 
Italy comes next in importance. The first 
camellia tree there was planted at the Palace 
of Caserta. From this tree at Caserta seeds 
were sent to Florence to the garden of Count 


Nine 


Bourtoulin. From 1830 to 1860 many grow- 
ers were at work and together raised more 
new varieties than any other European coun- 
try. 

These varieties passed quickly into the 
hands of Belgian nurserymen. It was Belgium 
that imported a variety which was later 
named after Doncklaar, director of the Royal 
Gardens of Gand. This variety was called 
Doncklaarii and Doncklaarii Elegans. Bel- 
gium, owing to the skill of her propagators, 
will be remembered mainly as the principal 
distributor of the camellia. 

The leading enthusiast in France was Abbe 
Berlese, who in 1819 raised 100 plants from 
seed from the above mentioned famous tree 
at Caserta, Italy. It was in France the ca- 
mellia scored its greatest social success. The 
Beau Brummel of the day made all his public 
appearances with a camellia in his button- 
hole. 

The first record of a camellia planted in 
the United States is a single red variety which 
was planted at Charleston in 1804. 

At first camellias were treated as green- 
house plants. In Victorian days, they were 
grown in conservatories. One such house in 
Hatfield, England, no less than 300 feet long, 
was at one time entirely devoted to camellias. 
It was said by one writer that the greenhouse 
has done us few worse wrongs than by spread- 
ing the idea that the camellia is a tender 
shrub. Its culture was so common in pots 
that little thought was given to it out of doors 
— yet it is hardier than many of our common 
evergreen shrubs. They have the advantage 
of standing a great deal of shade and drought. 
They produce a succession of bloom, so if 
frost should kill one lot of flowers, another 
set replaces it. In their wild home in the 
forests of Japan, they are said to grow only 
where they are provided with perfect natural 
drainage and the overhead protection of large 
sheltering trees. 

Location 

Plant camellias on the north or east side 
of the house or near protecting trees where 
they will have a position of filtered sunshine 
and protection from short snaps of late frost 
and cold winds. When planted on the east 
side of the house, care must still be taken 
that the early morning sun following a night 
frost does not burn the buds and new growth. 


For ordinary gardens, places that are shel- 
tered by either walls, trees or tall shrubs, if 
possible, should be chosen for camellias. 
They must never be planted in an exposed 

^ aCC ‘ Soil and Drainage 

The most suitable soil for camellias shows 
no alkali but enough coarse sand to allow 
good drainage. Any soil in which rhododen- 
drons thrive will produce good camellias. 
Given this congenial soil, good drainage and 
shelter from winds and shade from excessive 
sunshine, the plants will not fail to thrive 
and give every satisfaction. These three fac- 
tors are important, but camellias also like a 
good diet and quickly respond to an animal 
top dressing of rich farmyard manure about 
February. Lime and bone meal should be 
avoided at all times. When planted in soil 
that has been undisturbed for a long time, 
the ground should be trenched to a depth of 
1 to 2 feet. If the soil is stiff or clayey, 
then put a sufficient layer of rocks or other 
porous material in the trench to assure good 
drainage. Waterins 

Although they do not require an excessive 
amount of water, they must always be pro- 
vided with an even and constant supply. Fail- 
ure to observe this precaution will result in 
their dropping buds and sometimes leaves. 
Best results are from careful and regular use 
of water in spring and early summer fol- 
lowed by a rest period throughout July and 
August with a gradual increase of water again 
in the fall. A great deal of water will be 
needed at blooming time. After hot, dry days 
the sprinkling of foliage in late afternoon or 
evening is a good practice. 

Pruning 

No systematic pruning is required beyond 
what may be necessary to correct an ill- 
formed or ill-balanced shape, and this prun- 
ing, if necessary, should be done immediately 
after the flowering time is over. Flowers 
should be cut sparingly when plants are 
small and then only with very short stems. 
Never break blossoms off the plant. Dead 
blooms should be picked off to keep the 
plant from going to seed. 

Insects 

Camellias are singularly free from serious 
attack by insect enemies, and they suffer from 


Ten 


but few diseases. Some kinds of scale insects 
will infest them and thrips are occasionally 
troublesome. Scale may be readily destroyed 
by spraying with oil emulsions and thrips by 
a nicotine sulphate solution and soap. If at- 
tention is given to drainage, there will be few 
diseases or disorders to worry about. 

Propagating 

Camellias are commonly grown from seeds, 
cuttings and occasionally by grafting or lay- 
ering. 

Seeds 

They may be planted in any good soil in 
a cold frame to which acid woods mold or 
peat has been added — work a 3- or 4-inch 
layer of this peat into the top soil of the 
frame to an 8- or 10-inch depth. The frame 
gives an opportunity for partially shading the 
young plants and for protecting them in the 
winter. Water carefully. A mulch of leaves, 
an inch or two thick, is very helpful in pre- 
serving even moisture in the soil. Seeds sown 
in the early spring should be 6 to 16 inches 
in height by autumn. 

Layering 

This was the popular method of propa- 
gating by the Japanese in the early days. 
Select suitably placed branches — bend down 
to the ground — cover them over and leave 
until they root so well they can be taken 
away as independent plants — a growth of 
one year is best. The branch is pegged down 
so it cannot move. The tip is bent upward 
and tied to a stake. The best covering is peat 
moss which insures an even moisture. 

Cuttings 

This is the best way to propagate the spe- 
cies Sasanqua, and the most popular way to 
propagate all camellias. The tips of well- 
grown and hardened shoots or branches of 
the current season’s growth give best results. 
These cuttings, made from July to November, 
are usually 2% to 314 inches long. Plunge 
them into clean, cool sand until calloused, 
which takes a month to six weeks, and when 
well rooted, set out into small pots in a com- 
post of sandy loam and leaf mold or peat. 
Watch well that they do not become root- 
bound. 

Grafting 

This method is seldom used except by ex- 
perienced specialists, then veneer grafting is 


the method generally used. At the point 
where you decide to do the grafting, cut about 
half way through the wood and downward 
about one-half inch. Cut it out so as to leave a 
V or a ledge at the base. Shape the base of the 
scion to fit this space and make a flat surface 
upward along its side so that the flat surface 
of the scion will fit flush with the flat surface 
of the stock. Bind together well with thread 
or a fine grafting twine. Keep in a green- 
house at a temperature of 60 to 65 degrees 
with humid conditions and well shaded. In 
a few weeks gradually accustom the plants 
to more light and air. 

Species and Varieties 

In 1860 there were a thousand varieties of 
camellias — today there are many more — so 
many that it is quite confusing for the ordi- 
nary person to make a choice. Even among 
nurserymen there is a great deal of confusion 
as to the correct names. This means that if 
you want to be sure to get the right varieties, 
the wise thing to do is to buy from a recog- 
nized grower who has had many years of 
experience. 

There are a number of species, but the 
best known kind is C. Japonica. There are 
some 1,500 hybrids of this species alone, 
many of which originated in Kew Gardens — 
the famous arboretum of England. It is the 
species most generally planted and has been 
known to grow to a height of 40 feet. So 
freely are the flower buds produced, it is ad- 
visable to disbud if larger flowers are desired. 
The leaves are shiny and very dark green. 
The best varieties of this species are: Chand- 
leri Elegans, double pink variety; Donckla- 
arii, a deep crimson semi-double with white 
marblings; Latifolia, large deep red; Mag- 
noliaeflora, semi-double, flesh pink; Alba 
Plena, full double flower, clear crystal white; 
Lady Humes Blush, double white, flaked with 
delicate pink; Lady Clare, perhaps the finest 
of them all, with large, semi-double pink 
flowers. 

An interesting sidelight on this species 
Japonica is that it was regarded with super- 
stitious awe by the Japanese warriors in the 
early days. To them the red color represented 
blood and the flower, fallen from the plant, 
suggested a human head severed from its 
body; to these warriors it symbolized their 

( Continued on Page T wenty-Nine ) 


Eleven 


“He Who Plants a Rose Plants 
Beauty — ” 



By Earl William Benbow 
ecretary, Seattle Rose Society 


W HEN the first white men visited the 
Puget Sound country, the native 
Rosa nutkana or Nootka rose extended its 
hospitality and vied with the wealth of the 
forests in promises of futures to be realized 
by them. Little did the pioneers dream that 
our ideal climate with neither extremes, a long 
growing season and abundant humidity would 
offer to this native’s relatives the opportunity 
to flourish perfectly in a rose paradise. Now 
to our Charmed Land have come trouping the 
rose relatives of all the wide world to extend 
the blossom time from early May through 
the last of October leaving little more to be 
desired by the rose-wise gardener. Eventually 
to our Arboretum will come some day all the 
roses of the world and find here a haven for 
their finest achievement. 

Rose culture is rooted in our native passion 
for beauty. Dean Hole once wrote: “He who 
would have beautiful roses in his garden must 
first of all have beautiful roses in his heart.” 


This urge for beauty finds its expression in 
the willingness of men to dig and plant, hope 
and trust, adore and share the glories of the 
queen of flowers. The rose has been the 
object of devoted cultivation by rich and poor 
for centuries. Beside the humble English 
cottage or in the magnificent rose gardens of 
the Empress Josephine, human kind has wor- 
shipped the rose as the acme of beauty. It is 
one flower by which all others are judged. 
Because of its adaptability, wide variety of 
beauty, color and perfume, its range from low 
bush to tallest climber, the rose offers the 
gardener a wealth of material that has kept 
pace with progress. 

The ease of growing roses in our favored 
Northwest should be stressed until every door- 
yard has its full quota and every avenue and 
street is filled with its beauty. Too often the 
rose has suffered from its friends. In their 
eagerness to forward it, they have prescribed 
for every possible enemy that may befall the 
plant. But like humans, the average rose 
plant if given a chance to be well born, that 
is, of healthy stock when propagated and 
sanely planted in any good soil, will survive 
the seasons and provide satisfactory reasons 


for existence. And like most people the rose 
will round out its normal span of life with 
the minimum of grief. For these reasons we 
should wed our Lady Rosa with the wide 
combination of favorable factors under which 
we live and the result will be that it will 
achieve here that outstanding reputation for 
perfection which is well deserved. 

Time of Planting and, Fertilization 

In the Puget Sound country, fall planting in 
November and early December is normally 
preferred with February and March next in 
order. By all odds, the two-year-old budded 
plants, field-grown with a well-balanced top 
and root system, are the best insurance toward 
success. Pruning should be reserved for the 
second week in March to avoid the late frosts; 
stems should be painted with some tree paint 
to seal the cut ends. Moderate, not too severe, 
pruning down to live wood and to an outside 
bud, leaving three or four good canes, will 
give a maximum of bloom. Roses deserve 
all the advantages we can supply them, such 
as planting in full sunshine, soil enriched 
with humus and manures and plenty of water 
in the growing season. One can fertilize 
satisfactorily either by applications of fresh 
cow manure on the surface right after prun- 
ing (supplemented with a handful of phos- 
phate and another of potash for each plant, 
all watered into, and eventually spaded into, 
the top soil) or by a judicious use of com- 
mercial, chemical fertilizing agents. Newly 
planted roses should not be fertilized their 
first year. Like a medicine, it does not follow 
that if a little is good, a great deal will be 
much better. Wisdom is justified of her chil- 
dren and in the nature of results it is wisest 
to be careful of overfeeding the rose plant 
with chemicals. Given some reasonable care 
in warding off the aphis and chewing insects, 
no plant is more generous with its lovely 
blooms than is the rose. 

There is no rationing of roses today except 
for the man who buys late in the season. Let 
that be a warning to him who wishes a choice 
selection of the best plants available. One 
can find a rose suited to every person and to 
every situation, even the shady nook. Does 
madame adore the charm of the single roses 
or the perfume of the older hybrid-perpetuals 
or damask? Does one insist on lots of blooms 
or is one, perchance, willing to sacrifice quan- 


Twelve 


tity for quality and purify his soul with the 
larger, exhibition type where size and form 
speak of heavenly things? There is a wealth 
of variety in the rose such as one does not 
find in another flower. In the great rose nurs- 
eries of America are gathered the assortment 
of rose species which form the background 
of the genus Rosa and these in themselves are 
beautiful as accents in the shrubbery border. 
When will we ever appreciate the species rose 
for its qualities of hardiness, grace, abundant 
bloom and winter color of fruit and twig! 
The hybridizer dreams of new creations that 
shall come from future crosses within these 
natives of the North temperate hemisphere 
and perhaps in our own Washington Arbore- 
tum we shall some day possess an adequate 
collection of these interesting types. One 
American rose firm alone offers 90 distinct 
varieties as available. 

Near perfection can be attained with prac- 
tically every rose in our Puget Sound climate 
with the exception of the more tender teas 
and those with a high count of petals. These 
need the heat to do their best. Our most pop- 
ular rose is the hybrid tea — a combination of 
the blood of the older hybrid-perpetual and 
the monthly blooming tender tea rose from 
south China. For 40 years, they have kept 
the rose world on tip toe with the new com- 
binations of color, form and fragrance. Many 
of them can be grown to exhibition form. But 
a new contender for popularity in the decor- 
ative classes is the newer polyantha rose — at 
times called floribunda. With blooms mainly 
single or semi-double and abundant and con- 
tinuous performance, these jaunty varieties 
are stealing the show, their large size being 
such an improvement over the older polyan- 
thas. Yet there is one class of roses that can 
provide the thrill in May and June which 
stops everybody. These are the large flowered, 
everblooming, climbing hybrid teas from 
which dozens of choice long stemmed beauties 
can be cut at one time; their fall crop is 
rewarding too. Were I to plant just one rose, 
it would be a climbing hybrid tea. 

At a meeting of the Seattle Rose Society in 
the autumn of 1941, qualified rosarians listed 
the roses best suited for the gardens in the 
Puget Sound area; those which assure the 
gardener of maximum pleasure. Naturally 
(Continued on Page Thirty-Three) 


The Heaths and Heathers 

By Arthur P. Dome 

A S THE NORTHWEST is becoming noted 
for its adaptability to the different va- 
rieties and species of heaths and heathers, it 
is of value to know more about the care of 
these plants and to become acquainted with 
the better types. It is a known fact that, with 
proper selection, one can have heather in 
bloom all the year around. 

For those not acquainted with these plants, 
it might be well to tell of the generic differ- 
ences that characterize the different types. 
The word “heather” is the name commonly 
given to all forms of Bruckenthalia, Calluna, 
Erica, Daboecia, Phyllodoce and Cassiope. 
To be specific, the “heather” is only one gen- 
us, the Calluna, which has one species, vul- 
garis, but many varieties. Other names for the 
Calluna vulgaris are the “Ling” as in Eng- 
land, or the “Scotch Heather” of Scotland. It 
is distinguished by scale-like leaves which are 
opposite and form four rows on the stem. 
The flowers are single, about two or three 
millimeters long, or double, as in the newer 
varieties. They are produced in mass profu- 
sion on long slender spikes. The Erica, which 
is the true “Heath,” is the other important 
genus and contains over four hundred named 
species and many varieties, of which only 
15 or 20 may be grown out of doors here. 
This genus is distinguishable by the needle- 
like leaves which generally vary from three 
to five per whorl. The flowers are larger than 
those of the Calluna and in the hardy species 
and many South African ones, the corolla is 
larger than the calyx, a feature which is re- 
versed in the case of the Calluna. The flowers 
of the Erica usually appear in umbels, 
racemes, or psuedo-spikes and develop in 
abundance on the plants. The Bruckenthalia 
has just one species, B. spiculifolia, which 
has pink flowers and blooms in the spring. 
The Daboecia, sometimes called the Irish 
Heath, is quite common in the Northwest, 
though not so important. Of its three species, 
the most beautiful is the D. Azorica, a very 
outstanding plant. Cassiope and Phyllodoce, 
the heather of our mountains, are of no sig- 
nificant value except in a collector’s garden. 

Here in the Northwest we are mainly inter- 
ested in how heaths can be used in our gar- 


Thirteen 


dens, although in the past they have been used 
for medicinal purposes, for brewing an ale, 
for making a yellow dye, for roofing and even 
for*" tobacco pipes. Heathers are used most 
effectively in rockeries where they can be 
easily established. In planting a rockery with 
heather it is better to plant out in the open, 
rather than in small depressions or gullies, 
for the heather does not like to be “cuddled.” 
One should take into consideration the 
amount of moisture in the different parts of 
the rockery and how hard it will be to water. 
This should be done in order to plant the 
proper species of heather where it can make 
the best of its soil conditions. The chances 
are that the upper portion of the rockery is 
much dryer than the lower. In this case it is 
a good idea to plant drought resistant heaths 
such as Erica cinerea and varieties near the 
top and, at the bottom where the soil is moist, 
the species Erica tetralix, E. ciliaris and some 
of their allied hybrids. Hillsides are excel- 
lent places to naturalize heather. Large 
masses of plants make attractive drifts of 
color. In one of the residential parks north 
of Seattle there is quite a large hillside plant- 
ing which is a sight one will not forget. In 
these kinds of plantings, one must also make 
note of the moisture conditions if water is 
not available. Dwarf and compact heathers 
can be used with great success as edgings or 
for minute formal hedges, thus doing away 
with the dull, old-fashioned boxwood hedges. 
The winter blooming E. carnea is very effec- 
tive under deciduous azaleas and rhododen- 
drons that are planted out in the open. They 
keep the root-run cool during the summer 
and when the branches are bare in the winter 
the heaths will be blooming. Most heaths and 
heathers may also be used as ground covers; 
or some may be used as windbreaks, in which 
case they must be planted in groups to afford 
mutual protection; others make good cut 
flowers. Where the space permits, heather 
plantings can be made much more attractive 
by placing several plants of the same variety 
in a group so as to give a mass effect, as one 
might see in the moors of the British Isles. 

The heaths and heathers thrive best in full 
sun where they can be exposed to the elements 
but the less-hardy species like a more pro- 
tected spot where the wind that strikes them 
will not be cold. Do not plant the tender 


heaths in air-pockets or places where the air 
is not in motion during the cold seasons. 
Where the air is in motion there is less chance 
of damage from severe frosts. Planting Ericas 
and Callunas in damp, shady places will tend 
to make the plants soft and will lessen their 
resistance to mold and mildew. Heather can 
be planted under trees if the lower branches 
are high enough to insure sufficient sunshine. 
In general, the heaths and heathers will thrive 
in a lime-free soil, but as one becomes ac- 
quainted with individual species they will 
find what degree of acidity and alkalinity 
each will stand. Heathers like a moist, well- 
drained soil that can be easily aerated. A 
good general soil mixture is one-third sand, 
one-third peat and one-third well-rotted leaf 
mold. If your soil is very sandy, you will find 
that digging in some leaf mold and peat will 
give you a better medium. If the soil is boggy 
and contains a lot of peat, you will find that 
digging in some loam and medium-coarse 
sand will do a lot of good. Sometimes the 
soil is heavy with clay. In this case do not 
dig out all the clay and replace this with a 
more desired medium, unless you can drain 
it properly during the rainy seasons. Doing 
this will form a basin for the water in the 
adjoining soil to flow into, thus making the 
earth in the desired location sour, water- 
logged and worse off than ever. Instead, just 
dig into this clayey soil an abundance of sand 
and leaf mold. For those who are not able 
to do this, a knowledge of what soil the dif- 
ferent species will tolerate often comes in 
handy. Mr. Duane 0. Crummett, superin- 
tendent of the Arboretum greenhouses, made 
a soil test on heather in which many different 
soils were tried on many different species. 
The results were outstanding and the data 
has been published in a previous number of 
the Arboretum Bulletin. For a more gen- 
eral key to the soil, the following information 
may be helpful. If the soil is hot and sandy 
you can, by adding a little peat, establish the 
Erica cinerea and its varieties which are 
drought resistant. If the soil is very damp 
and peaty, you will find that E. tetralix, E. 
ciliaris and the hybrids of these two species 
will do very well. E. arborea, E. lusitanica, 
E. australis and the Callunas will be found 
to thrive in a lime-free loam. Erica carnea, 
E. terminalis, E. mediterranea and E. vagans 


Fourteen 


will tolerate a heavy, limey soil but will do 
better without it. 

After people have planted heather they 
often wonder if they should fertilize their 
plants. The best way they can help is to give 
them a good mulching in the spring and to 
water well during the growing season. It is 
best to use well-rotted peat and leaf mold or 
a mixture of both when mulching. When the 
plants are slow in getting started, they can 
often be speeded up by aerating the ground 
and watering with a solution of ammonium 
sulphate and Vitamin B x . 

The pruning of Ericas and Callunas is very 
important because, in many cases, it is the 
only difference between a beautiful specimen 
and one that looks very bad. It is often said 
that you should prune these plants right after 
they finish blooming, which in many cases is 
early fall. It has been found much safer to 
leave the pruning of Ericas and Callunas 
until the spring because pruning in the fall 
tends to force out a lot of soft, green growth. 
The chances are that this growth will not 
have time to harden up before the frosts come 
and it would therefore get nipped. If all the 
growth is left on the tips would be killed 
in case of frosts and in the spring these will 
be cut away in the regular pruning after all 
danger of a heavy frost has passed. 

Choosing heather now is much more inter- 
esting with the many newer varieties that are 
available. Erica carnea and its varieties bloom 
at an important time of the year, from late 
November to April, when most other plants 
are dormant. Springwood White is probably 
the most popular variety of E. carnea, mainly 
because of its bright green foliage and the 
abundance of white flowers that are larger 
than the type. A newer form is the Spring- 
wood Pink which is similar to the white va- 
riety in habit but has dainty pink flowers. 
Both of these plants should be planted on 
banks or over rocks because their prostrate 
habit does not enable them to show off their 
flowers on level ground. Another new and 
rare variety is Snow Queen. It has white 
flowers and a semi-prostrate habit, thus en- 
abling it to be very useful on flat ground. 
The E. car. King George is quite well known 
in the Northwest and is the first of the spe- 
cies to bloom. When it first begins to flower 
it is a pinkish-purple and as the weather gets 


colder the blooms turn darker. A few other 
varieties of E. carnea worthy of mention are: 
Gracilis, with rich pink flowers; Ruby Glow, 
a bright red, and Vivellii, which is uriusual 
because of its ebony-colored foliage. ■*- 

Another species that comes into bloom in 
the middle of winter is Erica mediterranea 
in which the different varieties grow from 
nine inches to six feet. The tall growing va- 
rieties, the superba and maxima, are not as 
popular as the low-growing forms. The two 
best are the E. med. hibernica Brightness and 
alba. These plants are of upright growth, 
reaching 24 and 9 inches, respectively. Bright- 
ness has rosy-lavender flowers that cover the 
entire plant; alba is just as floriferous and, 
of course, is white. 

About the first of February the tree heaths 
begin to bloom (a little later if the weather 
is cooler) and they continue until the middle 
of May. The most satisfactory tree heaths 
are the Erica australis and its variety Mr. 
Robert, but more gardens have either E. ar- 
borea or E. lusitanica. E. australis has large, 
pink flowers that come in such profusion that 
they are often sold as cut flowers. This plant, 
like its variety, will grow from six to eight 
feet unless it gets frozen back, for it cannot 
stand weather colder than 15 degrees above 
zero. The variety Mr. Robert is even more 
floriferous than the type and its white flowers 
are still larger. 

Erica umbellata is the heath needed to fill 
the gap between the time when the Erica 
carnea and mediterranea finish blooming and 
when Erica cinerea begins. It has a light 
green, feathery foliage with lavender flowers 
that are broader than the usual hardy va- 
rieties. 

Erica cinerea and its varieties constitute 
one of the best single groups of spring and 
summer-blooming heaths. They are in bloom 
from late April to September and are one 
mass of color all during this period. They 
usually grow from three to twelve inches but 
down in Portland this past summer I saw one 
approximately two feet high. There are quite 
a few good varieties of E. cinerea and we’ll 
do well to mention only a few. Probably one 
of the most outstanding is Golden Drop. This 
is the best golden-colored plant of either 
Erica or Calluna. It will grow only three 
(Continued on Page Thirty -Five) 


Fifteen 


Rock Garden Plants 

By Mrs. L. N. Roberson 

A CITY as hilly as Seattle will always 
have rock walls and rock gardens and 
for these there is an amazing variety of ma- 
terial available. We are all familiar with the 
yellow alyssum, the purple aubrietia and the 
white arabis which do so well and flower so 
prolifically in even the steepest of rock walls, 
but we are not all aware that their season may 
be prolonged and the scene varied by select- 
ing different varieties of aubrietia to give a 
color range from pink to red and from laven- 
der to purple. The season of bloom can thus 
be stretched over a much longer period than 
with only one or two varieties. 

Alyssum, also, has many varieties but only 
a few worth growing. The light form, Alys- 
sum saxatile citrinum, is delightful when 
combined with the light colored aubrietia. 

Following these very early plants the creep- 
ing phlox paints the rockery with a lavish 
hand. Lavender, red, light blue and white are 
the colors most easily obtained. One of the 
most pleasing of combinations is Phlox Blue 
Hills, a smoky blue, with Phlox Camlensis, a 
clear pink. A less well-known plant, Erys- 
imum pulchellum or Oregon Sunshine, pro- 
vides a brilliant yellow or orange companion 
for the red phlox if one has a desire for 
splashy coloring. 

For later effects, the Persian candytuft in 
its various forms, all having pink or lavender 
flowers, usually looks well near the azure 
blue of lithospermum. The latter may die 
back in such a winter as we have just ex- 
perienced, but often grows up lush and 
healthy from the roots if not disturbed. Cut- 
ting off the dead top should be postponed 
until warm weather. Another blue-flowered 
plant which makes a suitable companion for 
Persian candytuft is Globularia cordifolia. 
Its small leaves hug the ground and are sur- 
mounted by myriads of light blue balls in 
late spring. 

Still later, the rock roses or helianthemums 
open their sheets of blossoms to the sun. 
Wendel’s Rose is one of the loveliest of these 
sun-worshippers. Its gray foliage will often 
be completely hidden by the large shimmer- 
ing pink flowers. The double red and double 
yellow forms make up for the smallness of 


their blossoms by the showiness of the little 
pompon-like flowers. Another lovely color 
form is Brunette, whose flowers shade from 
apricot to orange-red and are borne in as 
great profusion as are any of the others. An 
occasional white-flowered plant among the 
others provides an interesting note of con- 
trast. 

Old-fashioned pinks and carnations seem 
out of place in a rockery because the foliage 
is too gross and the flower stems are too 
loppy, but there are dwarf forms to supersede 
them. One of the tiniest of these is Dianthus 
neglectus, whose small tufts of yellow-green 
foliage send up many two-inch stems topped 
by cherry red flowers in May or June. Quite 
a bit larger is Little Joe, a flamboyant red 
variety of recent origin. More pleasing to 
gardeners who like softer hues is Dianthus 
alpinus, whose flowers are equally large— 
an inch and a half in diameter — and are 
borne in as great profusion but which are 
clear pink instead of red. 

We must not leave out of our discussion 
the dwarf iris. Even in January the lilac and 
white flowers of Iris stylosum appear, fol- 
lowed later by the lovely rich purple of Iris 
reticulata. In an exposed, sunny location the 
latter often reaches a height of only six inches 
but it will stretch up higher with protection. 
The lower ones are better suited to rockeries. 
The common dwarf iris, Iris pumila, which 
blooms in March or April, is constantly be- 
ing hybridized so that almost any color may 
be had from an iris grower. In addition to 
the common blue or purple, one can purchase 
white, yellow, orange and even pink, all with 
poetic, mythological and, often, unpronounce- 
able names. 

Dainty Iris cristata merits consideration be- 
cause of its sweet flowers of amethyst and 
gold and the elusive fragrance described by 
one writer as that of crab apples. Similar 
but with deeper violet flowers and with a 
heavier cresting of gold is Iris verna. Iris 
gracilipes also resembles these two but it 
lacks the golden crest and has a duller ap- 
pearance. All three are deciduous but make 
up for their lack of winter foliage by the 
charm of their summer flowers. Some of the 
many iris species native to Oregon provide 
splendid rock garden material. Two of my 
favorites are the pure white form of Iris 


Sixteen 


douglasiana and the mellow gold form of 
Iris innominata. The flowers of either one 
rival orchids in exquisite daintiness. It is al- 
ways well to remember, in buying any such 
plants, that there is a great variation in color 
and that the nurseryman should not be 
blamed for disappointments if you have not 
examined his plants when they have been in 
bloom. 

Sloping, partially shady rockeries should 
never be hard to plan for we have a wealth 
of suitable plant material from which to 
choose. The dwarf rhododendrons and aza- 
leas in themselves offer many colors of flow- 
ers, leaf forms and plant shapes. A dwarf 
form of Rhododendron racemosum bearing 
the number 19404 instead of a varietal name 
will attract anyone’s attention with its clear 
pink flowers. 

A brief description of some of the other 
dwarf rhododendrons might be helpful. Hir- 
sutum, a native of the Alps, has hairy 
branches as its name implies. The cerise flow- 
ers are showy but it is a shy bloomer. Fer- 
rugineum also hails from the Alps where it 
is called “Alpen Rosen.” In its native habitat 
the tiny pink or carmine flowers burst into 
bloom seemingly overnight and hide the foli- 
age completely, but here it is not so prolific, 
although many growers are still trying to find 
conditions that will make it perform as well 
as it does in its homeland. 

Several of the dwarf rhododendrons have 
small gray leaves which seem to tuck their 
edges away during the winter so that they 
look quite forlorn but which burst into flower 
in early spring with every twig ending in a 
large cluster of blue, lavender, pink or inter- 
mediate colored flowers as the case may be. 
In this group are fastigiatum, impeditum, im- 
peanum and others. 

Among the larger flowered varieties are 
Pemakoense and Williamsianum. The best 
Pemakoense are pink flowered, as are the best 
Williamsianum, but the flowers of the latter 
are larger, often measuring two inches in 
diameter. Its round leathery leaves deserve 
commendation, also. 

Rhododendron daphnoides, although classed 
as dwarf, sometimes attains a height of four 
feet. It has shiny, pointed leaves and large, 
rose-red flowers in July or earlier. Rhododen- 
dron glaucum has distinctive rose-colored 


flowers which hang in loose clusters and are 
among the most attractive of any we know. 

We must not overlook the azaleas. Flame 
Creeper and Balsaminaeflora are both salmon 
red, the former with single and the latter with 
double flowers, and both hold their leaves 
through the winter. Hybrids of Azalea Ku- 
rume are also popular, with Pinkey one of 
the favorites. 

Hinodegiri blazes forth with red flowers 
in early spring and, although stiff in habit, 
is a great favorite for conspicuous places. 
Azalea pouhkanensis blooms a little later but 
is evergreen and has large, deep lavender 
flowers. It would be out of place in a very 
small rock garden but very much at home and 
a great addition to the picture in a medium or 
large sized one. 

Dwarf huckleberry makes a suitable ground 
cover for such a planting because the texture 
of the leaves harmonizes with other erica- 
ceous plants. Choice pockets may be filled 
with treasures such as Shortia, Wintergreen 
and Trailing Arbutus. 

Less costly but equally effective for partial 
shade is a planting of primroses, ferns, vio- 
lets and hepatica. One primula of note is a 
creeping one called Juliae which now has 
many hybrids. Juliae itself has small, claret 
colored flowers and small, round leaves with 
toothed edges but the hybrids include plants 
with both darker and lighter flowers and with 
variations in foliage and habit. 

One of the choicest of the little rock ferns 
to be used is Spleenwort or Asplenium tricho- 
manes, whose dainty fronds never reach more 
than six or eight inches in length. There are 
other small ferns also suitable for such a 
planting, that are likewise native to our state. 

When planting violets it is well to chose 
more than one kind in order to lengthen the 
season as well as to have more variety of 
color. The old-fashioned purple ones are al- 
ways favorites. Equally lovely but not so 
common are a white one called The Czar, and 
an old rose one called Rosina. All of these 
are fragrant and early. 

It is difficult to find really blue hepaticas 
but even the lavender and white ones pushing 
up with the first hint of spring gladden the 
hearts of ex-easterners. 

In such a short article we have only been 
( Continued on Page T hirty-Seven ) 


Seventeen 


A Few Outstanding Shrubs of 
Eastern Washington 

By Harold T. Abbott 
Assistant Superintendent of Parks, Spokane 

I T IS a surprise to many people to learn 
that most of the ornamental trees and 
shrubs now growing in Spokane and in the 
neighboring towns were introduced during 
the lifetime of one man, Mr. John W. Duncan, 
the Superintendent of Spokane Parks. Ac- 
cording to Mr. Duncan, all the ornamental 
shrubs in the city, at the time of his appoint- 
ment to his present position, could have been 
gathered together in one truck. 

In the 30 years Mr. Duncan has been test- 
ing new trees and shrubs for Eastern Wash- 
ington climatic conditions, he has given a 
good deal of time also to the study of the 
native shrubs which might have definite land- 
scape possibilities. Many of the native shrubs 
have been ignored by the gardeners of this 
region and it seems as if only now are the 
beauties of these commonplace species being 
appreciated. Many plantsmen are learning 
that, with proper care, a transplanted shrub 
from the nearby countryside can become one 
of the choicest features in a planting scheme. 
Gradually there is a comprehension also of 
the unique character of dry land gardening 
in Eastern Washington, a type of gardening 
which can produce all through the year in- 
comparable enjoyment from color. 

Of the woody plants in this region which 
produce flowers and fruits, the outstanding 
examples are shrubs. With the possible ex- 
ception of one or two small trees such as the 
mountain ash (Sorbus americana) and the 
Pacific dogwood (Cornus nuttalli), the beau- 
ties of flowers, brilliant fruit, and colored 
twig are found among the shrubs. With proper 
care in digging, with the selection of small 
specimens, and with adequate attention after 
planting, most of the native shrubs will re- 
spond readily when moved from the wild to 
a prominent place in a city garden. 

Space does not permit us to mention many 
of the desirable eastern Washington shrubs, 
but of the large group a few are worthy of 
our consideration. There are all reliably 
hardy; they are refined and distinctive, and 
they require very little care once they are 
established. 


Rockspirea (Holodiscus discolor) is with- 
out a doubt the foremost of the native shrubs 
of this region. It is truly western in character 
and is unlike its oriental cousins, the exochor- 
das. The large snowy panicles of tiny flowers 
coming in July are only the beginning of a 
long season of flower display. As the summer 
advances, the blooms change to deepening 
shades of buff, and with well chosen locations 
with foliage backgrounds, the holodiscus may 
become an outstanding garden asset. It has 
great possibilities as an unclipped hedge 
where there is plenty of room for develop- 
ment. Holodiscus requires a well drained 
soil, somewhat gravelly and loose. It does 
best in full sun with protection against severe 
winds. Heavy soil with overabundance of 
moisture will result in the rusting of the 
leaves and in smaller flower masses. 

Service Berry, Shadblow or Shadbush 
(Amelanchier cusickii) is gaining for itself 
a real place in the affections of gardeners. In 
Eastern Washington, the barren slopes in 
spring suddenly put forth great spots of snow 
white blooms which can be seen from great 
distances. The shadblow, like the holodiscus, 
thrives on the rocky ledges, in soil pockets, 
where it can benefit from the full sun of the 
earlier part of the day. It likes the protection 
of a nearby cliff or substantial windbreak. 
The shadblow responds well when given 
plenty of room, when out from under over- 
hanging trees, and when away from the heavy 
feeder roots of other shrubs. Blooming some- 
what later than A. cusickii, but with smaller 
flowers, is A. florida or alnifolia. Amelanchier 
is easily transplanted but must not be allowed 
to dry out. Large shrubs are apt to be killed 
back during the first winter after planting, 
so it is advisable to use smaller specimens 
wherever possible. 

As if to continue clothing the hillsides with 
white, the various unnamed species of Phila- 
delphus precede the holodiscus by coming 
into bloom in June. From the wild it is possi- 
ble to select many specimens, all different in 
particular characteristics of petals, size, habit 
of growth, color of foliage, or of flower 
fragrance. The Lewisii type is the most 
showy, although not the tallest. The individ- 
ual blooms are smaller than many of the 
others but they have a pleasant, mild odor. 
Some of the taller types have racemes as 


Eighteen 


large as any P. coronarius variety under cul- 
tivation. These tall growing species appear 
to have variations in petals, in color of the 
canes, and in the texture of the foliage. 

Eastern Washington plantsmen are pre- 
sented with many difficult problems of plant- 
ing dry south slopes. Exposures such as these 
make it almost impossible to maintain in a 
practical manner any sort of turf stand or 
evergreen ground cover. However, one of 
the sumacs, Rhus trilobata, sometimes re- 
ferred to as the ill-scented sumac, has demon- 
strated through volunteering, that it may be 
one solution for the south slope planting. It 
grows to an average height of three feet, has 
inconspicuous green flowers and small red 
fruits. The remarkable feature of this sumac 
is the dense dark green foliage which turns 
to a magnificent crimson in the fall. This 
low growing species is easily moved and can 
be successfully propagated by root cuttings. 
Its rather dwarf habit of growth places it 
among the best of the dry-land shrubs. 

Of the true ground covers of this region, 
the evergreen kinnikinnick ( Arctostaphylos 
uva-ursi) is the only one worth while. It is 
found in the foothills of the mountains in pine 
woods where there is heavy top humus and a 
sandy loam soil condition. While the native 
habitat may become very dry during the mid- 
dle of the summer, there usually is a good 
winter cover of snow and sufficient late spring 
moisture to insure protection for the plants. 
In Spokane gardens and in those of other 
eastern Washington communities, it is difficult 
to duplicate the conditions which are favor- 
able to the kinnikinnick. Fortunate indeed 
is the person who has a north slope with good 
drainage and yet one which has slight mois- 
ture throughout the hottest season. Kinni- 
kinnick is not hard to transplant or to propa- 
gate by cuttings and layering, provided one 
has regard for the proper preparation of the 
new soil conditions. More attempts at the 
raising of arctostaphylos have resulted in 
failure due to excessive moisture content of 
the soil in the new location, and due to the 
harmful effects of winter sun than to all other 
causes. 

Pacific Yew (Taxus brevifolia), while gen- 
erally considered by botanists to be a tree, is 
more commonly treated as a shrub in Eastern 
Washington. Although more pendulous than 


T. baccata and T. cuspidata, the leaves are 
very similar in color and shape to those of 
the latter. It is perfectly hardy, holds its 
color well in the winter and, of course, has 
diminutive leaves. However, because of its 
informal open habit of growth, it does not 
give promise of being a successful yew for 
neat, clipped, hedge plantings. It is a yew 
with great merit as a specimen shrub. 

To a plantsman in Eastern Washington, the 
broadleaf evergreens of the east and west 
coasts are a source of keen envy; it takes a 
person of strong will not to be tempted to 
try a few rhododendrons or kalmias. But 
the one or two broadleaf evergreens which 
will do well in the Spokane area, he prizes 
highly and uses extensively. Of these broad- 
leaf types, the best are without a doubt the 
three hollygrapes, the Oregon hollygrape 
(Mahonia Aquifolium), the creeping holly- 
grape (M. repens) and the longleaf holly- 
grape (M. nervosa). 

Oregon hollygrape has proven to be the 
most successful of the group. In protected 
spots away from the full force of drying 
winds and away from heat reflections from 
buildings, it is a hardy, refined shrub. If 
placed on north slopes, the leaves maintain 
a rich, glossy green all through the winter; 
if placed in the sun, more of the reddish 
tinge will appear in the leaves. In moving the 
Oregon hollygrape of any size, it is often 
worth while to cut the shrub back to the 
ground, much as one would do with kalmia. 
This means a sacrifice of immediate effect for 
a year or so, but once new growth has com- 
menced, the compensation in large dense 
foliage is worthwhile. 

The creeping and the longleaf hollygrapes 
are exceedingly useful in heavily wooded nat- 
uralistic hillside plantings. They must be 
left alone; they resent anything that disturbs 
their habitat. They are not as vigorous as 
Aquifolium and they suffer during winters 
which are free from snow. M. repens and M. 
nervosa are not easy to identify when grow- 
ing on mountain slopes due to the effect of 
the local conditions on their habits of growth. 
There seem to be many hybrids which have 
the combined characteristics of the two dwarf 
mahonias, such as number and width of leaf- 
lets, length of fruit clusters and the creeping 
' (Continued on Page Forty -Four) 


Nineteen 


Daphne and Its Culture 

By Theodore Albert 

A MONG our low woody ornamentals the 
plants of the genus Daphne rank 
among the very best. Their foliage is hand- 
some and their flowers are sweet scented, with 
a wide range of colors such as white, red, 
pink, purple lilac and greenish-yellow. An- 
other great advantage is that they, as a rule, 
are early bloomers, some of them opening 
their fragrant flowers regularly in February 
in our climate, while others like Daphne 
Blagyana bloom as early as December and 
do not seem to be touched by temperatures 
as low as 15 degrees above zero. 

The aforementioned Daphne Blagayana is 
a very low growing shrub suitable for use 
in the rockery or as a foreground for higher 
plants. The blossoms are creamy white, very 
fragrant and extremely persistent. The writer 
has had them in bloom from December until 
May. This variety is very partial to sunshine, 
the more the better. It thrives in any well- 
drained soil, even stiff clay, but does best in 
a soil which contains a liberal amount of 
humus and sand. The humus should not be 
supplied by peat, but rather by decomposed 
maple leaves. The flower buds are formed in 
the fall, so that if any pruning is necessary it 
should be done only right after the bloom- 
ing period is over. This holds good of all 
other varieties of daphne. 

Another variety for which sunshine and 
good drainage is a must is Daphne cneorum. 
Of this variety there are many strains on the 
market; some have very small leaves which 
as a rule denotes shy bloomers. This one is 
known as Daphne cneorum minor in contrast 
with the larger leaved variety which is known 
as major. This plant, if well grown, is one 
of the most ornamental in our gardens. Large 
healthy plants may have as many as 500 
flower heads on them. A rich sandy loam 
seems to suit this type best; it abhors peat, 
so do not use it in any form. 

Most of the plants of the green foliaged 
Daphne cneorum have dark pink flowers, 
although some of the newer strains show 
blooms which range from a light to apple- 
blossom pink in color. One strain, producing 
pure white flowers, is rather delicate and hard 
to grow. Another; interesting variety is the one 

Twenty 


with variegated foliage, the flowers of which 
are much darker and in some soils almost red. 
This form is much more open in habit of 
growth and mature plants must be severely 
cut back every two years if one wants to have 
a compact plant. The only time to prune 
Daphne cneorum is right after the blooming 
season is over in the spring. This will give 
the plant time to grow during the summer 
and one is usually rewarded with another full 
set of flowers in September or October. If 
this pruning is done every three or four years, 
the plants will always look compact and will 
not be so apt to show any dead branches or 
open spaces. In transplanting this daphne 
be careful that it always has a compact ball 
of earth around the roots. Very few of the 
daphne group can stand bare root transplant- 
ing and all of them resent it very much. To 
be successful with this small gem it is only 
necessary to avoid planting it in stiff, water- 
logged clay or in shady places. Formerly it 
was thought that the D. cneorum types wanted 
poor soil in order to reach perfection but 
lately good growers have discarded this idea 
entirely and have been planting them in rich, 
well-drained, sandy loam, where they will 
require weekly waterings and a heavy prun- 
ing every other year. 

Daphne collina comes to us from Italy, 
the island of Crete, and Asia Minor where it 
grows among the rocks and cliffs of the moun- 
tainous districts. The north section of its 
habitat corresponds with the southern part of 
the habitat of D. cneorum. The indigenous 
rock of its home is mostly a form of lime- 
stone which would make the soil more alka- 
line than acid. Hence its dislike for peat. 
The home of these two varieties and their 
habit of growth give us another tip which 
must not be neglected, namely that of good 
drainage. It will be noticed that this point 
was brought up several times. It is done on 
purpose, so as to instill in the reader its 
absolute necessity. 

Daphne collina grows to a height of about 
three feet, and its foliage and twigs are sim- 
ilar to cneorum. In full sun, although it can 
stand partial shade, it blooms freely in early 
spring and, with us, again late in fall. The 
flower heads are similar to cneorum and the 
blossoms are rosy purple and sweet scented. 

(Continued on Page Forty-Seven) 


The Genus Primula 

By Ida Schibig 

T HE size of the Genus Primula is tremen- 
dous. It is as geographically widespread 
as any of the great genera of the plant world 
and the species challenge the stars in the firm- 
ament in number and beauty. To undertake to 
study the cultural needs and to grow only a 
partial list of the species and hybrids is an 
experience that one will find all absorbing and 
delightful. 

The perky early spring flowering primroses 
are best known and are as riotous in coloring 
as a basket of Easter eggs. These are the poly- 
anthus and acaulis types that are exceedingly 
well loved and deservedly so. These Primulas, 
called border primroses by the English gar- 
deners, have done more to popularize the 
genus than any other group by their very 
essence of appeal. It is surprising to many 
admirers of this flower that these border 
primroses comprise only a portion of the 
entire clan, sharing with other species the 
section Vernales, which in itself is only a 
small part of the genus. 

In recent years, particularly in the Pacific 
Northwest, other members of this vast plant 
tribe have been successfully grown, both prac- 
tically and experimentally. To encompass all 
of them is not within the scope of this article. 
It is suitable, however, to present information 
on those kinds that have proved amenable in 
our Pacific Coast climate, with a resume of 
the generic classification in general that will 
offer a workable guide to cultural methods. 

When contemplating the culture of prim- 
roses in a broad manner, it is first of all es- 
sential to know that the species are assembled 
into three general groups, namely, woodland, 
alpine and Asiatic (bog Primula). Although 
the species in these various categories are 
extremely diversified, the understanding of 
their relationship to one another is more apt 
to simplify the approach than any other way. 
Enlarged upon in this article are three botan- 
ical classifications that typify these cultural 
groups as follows: 

1. Vernales, or woodland. 

2. Auricula, or alpine. 

3. Candelabra, or Asiatic. 

The genus Primula is grouped into 34 
botanical classifications or sections. Each 


section has been formulated by systemizing 
botanical similarities of the various species. 
Hence, each species in a given section has 
similar cultural requirements. If the culture 
of the section to which a species belongs is 
known, the culture of the species is immedi- 
ately understood. It can readily be assumed 
that this approach facilitates the study of the 
genus and it is also not difficult to know to 
which section a species belongs as the char- 
acteristics of each are quite distinct and with 
a little experience are soon recognizable. The 
Primula nomenclature and the various botan- 
ical classifications are easily perceived and 
instantly clarify the misunderstanding and 
misconception that sometimes surrounds this 
genus. 

Of the 34 Primula sections there are about 
20 in cultivation. The geographical range of 
the species includes North and South Amer- 
ia, British Isles, Europe and Asia; they are 
found in these regions only where the climate 
is temperate or alpine. Because this condi- 
tion is demanded by all Primulas our Pa- 
cific Northwest offers a natural climatic sit- 
uation in which this genus can and does 
abound. 

PRIMULA SECTIONS 

Section Vernales 

Species of this section are the least trouble 
and the best known of any group. Much has 
been written concerning the culture of the 
species in this classification which may be 
said without restraint to be as simple to grow 
as cabbages. This related group will flourish 
if planted in fairly rich, heavy loam, mixed 
with an abundance of leaf mold or other 
humus in a moist and partially shaded sit- 
uation. Propagation either by seed or divi- 
sion is effective. 

The nomenclature surrounding some of the 
species, however, is little understood and apt 
to be confusing. It is this section which con- 
tains the common primrose, cowslip and ox- 
lip. P. acaulis or vulgaris is the true prim- 
rose found throughout the Northern European 
countryside and has a delicate yellow, wide- 
open corolla which terminates a compara- 
tively short stem. P. Sibthorpi is a subspecies 
of P. acaulis and is its counterpart, distin- 
guished by violet petals. P. officinalis, or veris, 
is the cowslip; it has a cluster of slightly 
drooping, buff-yellow, red and brown spotted 

Twenty-One 


flowers on a tall stem, to which each individ- 
ual floret is fastened by a short pedicel. It 
has been the combination of these three spe- 
cies and their numerous subspecies in the 
hands of skilled cultivators that has given us 
the beautiful polyanthus that we know today 
— that is, wide open flowers grouped to form 
an umbel on a long stem in all color grada- 
tions. 

The oxlip, or P. elatior, is often confused 
with P. officinalis. This is a lovely, delicate 
woodland plant of pale yellow or pale buff 
and only partially open flowers on a one- 
sided umbel and is not believed to have any 
parental relationship with the polyanthus. 
P. elatior like P. officinalis and acaulis have 
many subspecies with only slight botanical 
differences. 

The hybrids and variations from this group 
are legion. Double flowered forms are quite 
common and are given interesting names like 
Paddy, rubra plena; Purity, large flowered 
white; Pompadour, deep ruby- velvet, and 
Marie Crousse, a rosy lilac. Dating far back 
into the early days of primrose history, muta- 
tions have arisen from time to time up to our 
present day. The forms should be mentioned 
primarily because of their unusual deviation 
from the flower type. The hose-in-hose form, 
in which the calyx has developed into a 
corolla, is found usually in shades of red and 
yellow. Jacks-in-the-green are forms of either 
cowslip or polyanthus with enlarged, funnel- 
shaped calyces, colored like the petals of the 
corolla with the addition of green variega- 
tion. Nearly all colors are represented in this 
form. As fascinating as these diversified kinds 
are, very few have good garden constitutions, 
but they are valuable from a collector’s view- 
point and as curiosities. 

P. Juliae 

From the far Caucasian Mountains, P. 
Juliae was introduced into cultivation in 
1901. Until the advent of its numerous hy- 
brids and varieties this species for many 
years remained in solitary glory as a popular 
garden plant. The type plant is entirely dif- 
ferent in general appearance from any other 
in the Vernales section. It has a close, tufted, 
spreading habit almost miniature in scale. 
Short shoots or rhizomes are produced from 
the central rootstock. These stolons root at 
the nodes and thus give a ready means of 

Twenty-Two 


increase. The glossy and numerous leaves 
are kidney shaped or rounded and are from 
one to two inches long on short stalks. The 
deep rosy-purple corolla tops a short stem 
that curves outwardly from the tufted leaves. 
This exquisite plant forms spreading carpets 
of green with masses of countless flowers. 
P. Juliae loves coolness and moisture but, 
nevertheless, is a sun lover and will luxuriate 
best in a sunny exposure with shade during 
the intense heat of the day only, and if plant- 
ed in rich, moist soil, will flower in March 
and April and will send forth sparse bloom 
throughout the year. 

Many years after the introduction of this 
fine species, experimental hybridists cross- 
pollinated it with P. acaulis, P. officinalis, 
P. elatior and various hybrid polyanthus. 
The results are startling and exciting and the 
variations, both in color and habit, are enor- 
mous. Some of the progeny are polyanthus 
in type with the refinement of P. Juliae pre- 
dominating. Others show the P. acaulis char- 
acteristic of large florescence, the plant itself 
retaining the creeping, clustered habit. Again, 
the slightly drooping umbel on a tall stem 
of the oxlip will prevail. Much like the other 
species of the Vernales section, hose-in-hose 
and jacks-in-the-green mutations will arise in 
the P. Juliae hybrids. The resultant progeny 
from first crosses are in a “state of flux”; 
therefore, the strain is not fixed and seeds 
from such plants will not come true. As a 
result, propagation of most varieties must 
be accomplished by division. Commercial 
growers list many Juliae hybrids under fan- 
ciful names that in themselves are descriptive. 

Auricula Section 

This section is distributed throughout the 
alpine ranges of Europe. As familiar as the 
common border auricula is in the gardens 
today, little is understood concerning its vast 
relationship with other species in the Auricula 
section. Although it is not necessary for the 
amateur to understand these affinites to grow 
auricula primroses, a brief summary of the 
section and the many variable forms will 
clarify and instruct the interested gardener 
in the various ramifications contained within 
this large group. For those specializing in 
rock gardening, this is indeed a fertile field, 
yet others interested in growing primroses 
(Continued on Page Thirty-Eight) 


Chrysanthemums 

By Mrs. George T. Williams 

H ISTORY tells us the chrysanthemum was 
under cultivation in China as early as 
500 B. C. and replicas of this much loved 
flower have been found in the works of 
Chinese art of very early ages. China is 
the home of this flower and the genus chry- 
santhemum is a large one belonging to the 
Compositae (the daisy family). The par- 
ticular group we know as our favorite fall 
flower was apparently derived from the spe- 
cies C. morifolium. Chrysanthemum shows 
are known to have been held in Japan about 
900 A. D. 

Plants from which the modern varieties 
have evolved were brought to Europe by the 
captain of a French ship returning from 
China in 1789. They were flowered in Eng- 
land in 1795. Further new varieties were im- 
ported from China and about 50 forms were 
known by 1826. Since 1827 European grow- 
ers have practiced hybridization and have 
raised many new varieties from seed. 

A number of new types have been secured 
by what we know as sporting. A plant will 
sometimes show a flower or a branch of 
flowers of a different form or color, thus re- 
verting to some former parent plant from 
which the variety has been hybridized. I 
once had a flower half bronze and half pink 
on a bronze variety, the grandparent being 
the pink variety. Some of these sports are 
entirely new, however, and thus the quirks 
of nature often give us some lovely new 
specimens. These sometimes come from the 
root or often from a single shoot, in which 
case the sporting branch must be rooted and 
grown on. 

Propagation from seed can he done easily 
and plants grown this way will bloom the 
same year often as soon as those from cut- 
tings, provided they are started early and 
given some bottom heat. The group known 
as the Koreans can be handled this way very 
readily. This class has been developed here 
in the United States from crossing a hardy, 
single, mountain type from Korea with some 
of our varieties. The result is a very florifer- 
ous plant, producing mostly single flowers, 
standing erect and sturdy, and making a very 
showy and worthwhile type for the perennial 


border as well as nice dainty flowers for cut- 
ting. 

Most plants are grown from cuttings three 
or four inches long, rooted in sand or sand 
and peat in early spring. These are then 
planted in good soil until root growth is am- 
ple, when they are ready to be put out in their 
blooming location in early May. In propagat- 
ing I most often use what are known as divi- 
sions or the small, rooted suckers that come 
up from the base of plants which have 
bloomed the previous year. Use just one 
stem or sucker which has a few new roots and 
cut away all the old root that connects with 
the mother plant. This is an easy way and I 
find it quite satisfactory if care is used in 
selecting the best specimens with new growth 
above the ground and several new white roots 
starting. Be sure to cut off all the old hard 
root and thus encourage the new roots just 
as in the cutting method. If you decide you 
just want to divide your clumps, make the 
divisions small and do not use any with the 
old wood growth. The only time I ever use 
the new growth that is produced on old wood 
or on last year’s stems, is when there is no 
new growth from the root and when I am 
afraid of losing the variety. Cuttings of this 
growth soon throw flower buds and the plant 
tries to bloom instead of growing into a 
healthy specimen. If a plant is left undis- 
turbed for several years and the clump gets 
too thick, cut out two-thirds of the stems be- 
fore they have grown very high, leaving only 
the strongest ones. Common garden varieties 
that are often left for years in a border plant- 
ing, may give quantities of bloom, to be sure, 
but the leaves tend to get brown and unsight- 
ly very early in the season. 

In this climate, chrysanthemums need full 
sun to give best results. Shade tends to make 
a tall, leggy growth with only a few blooms. 
Since their chief use is as cut flowers, best 
results are had by planting in a cutting gar- 
den where the soil is not robbed by other 
perennials or shrubs. They can be used in a 
border if kept to the foreground in a sunny 
spot and if the lower growing varieties are 
selected. Liquid manure can be used to good 
advantage when so planted. Heavy soil is 
not to their liking. They prefer a good, sandy 
loam well enriched with barnyard manure 
and compost, the latter being better than peat 

Twenty-Three 


as it helps hold moisture as well as supply- 
ing food. I am inclined to think too much 
peat may make the soil too acid, and the need 
of lime may be indicated. I have used to good 
advantage when planting, one-fourth cup 
equal parts fine raw bone meal and super- 
phosphate, per plant, well incorporated into 
the soil. Further feeding can be done by 
using liquid manure, especially if growing 
large specimen blooms. 

I plant in rows, two feet between plants, 
three feet between rows. This gives space for 
a plant to have plenty of air and light as 
well as making it easy to cultivate, stake and 
tie. If this amount of space is not available 
they can be grown much closer and still have 
fine flowers though they are not quite so easy 
to care for. I use five-foot stakes at the end of 
each row and one between each plant, tying 
each plant separately, crossing the string 
between the plant and the stake. Tie as soon 
as the plant gets high enough for the wind 
to blow it unduly. As it grows higher the 
string can be slipped up or re-tied higher 
up on the stake. It is best always to tie se- 
curely since a good hard wind can severely 
damage a plant heavily loaded with buds or 
blooms. Use a soft, heavy string for this 
purpose; these will usually serve two years 
if kept dry after using the first season. The 
plants need plenty of moisture though good 
drainage is most important. I have followed 
the early advice of Mr. Jacob Umlauff, for- 
mer superintendent of parks in Seattle, in 
watering, using overhead sprinkling during 
the middle of the day. This perks up the 
plant and gives time for drying off before 
the chill of evening, thus avoiding any ten- 
dency to mildew. After the buds have formed 
I irrigate. Light cultivating every few days 
helps, also. Every inducement to keep the 
plant growing at a good, healthy pace makes 
certain a profusion of lovely blooms. 

The topics most discussed by growers are 
perhaps the stopping or pinching back of the 
plant and the proper bud to “take” or grow. 
The first is the means used to stop the plant 
from growing tall and not branching. Most 
varieties throw what is termed a break bud 
or an attempt by nature to stop the growth 
of only one stem and send out growth called 
laterals which appear in the leaf axils on the 
main stem. These in turn grow on, making 


as many stems as there are leaves on the 
main stem. If a lot of flowers are desired, the 
plant is not pinched back so far, thus leaving 
plenty of stem space for lateral growth. If 
only a few specimen blooms are wanted, the 
plant is cut back to four or five leaves. Some- 
times the two lower leaves may not produce 
any laterals, so do not count them. When 
three blooms are desired it is best to save 
six leaves, this making one extra for any one 
of the four laterals which may not produce 
a good growth for blooming. These laterals 
which now make the stems of the plant will 
grow on to perhaps 18 inches, when each one 
will develop what is known as a crown bud. 
Some varieties produce the largest flowers 
from this bud, but I seldom use it. I prefer 
to stop these laterals again and then more 
laterals appear which, in turn, grow on and 
in time a cluster of buds appears; these are 
known as terminals. In England the center 
bud of this group is called the second crown 
but we usually refer to it as a terminal bud. 
If a large flower is desired, all the others in 
the cluster are pinched out. This terminal 
bud gives a more intense color than a crown 
bud though usually not so large a flower. 

If sprays are wanted, all buds can be left, 
or, in case a large flowered variety is to be 
grown for spray effect, thinning can be used. 
This means removing the larger center bud 
or two of the outer ones of the cluster. This 
often makes a better spaced spray and strong- 
er stems. It is also possible to grow both 
crown and terminal buds on the same plant 
by pinching back only the topmost two or 
three branches or laterals. This procedure is 
not recommended unless one has accidently 
broken off a crown bud or just wants to see 
what bud gives the best form and color for 
that certain variety. 

The type most universally used by the ama- 
teur grower for a supply of cut flowers is 
the spray form. Any chrysanthemum can be 
grown as a spray but the smaller flowered 
ones give the most pleasing effects. These 
come in countless shades and types, singles, 
buttons, anemones, pompons, etc. The double, 
reflexed, small flowered varieties are the most 
satisfactory. One plant will produce armsful 
of flowers and no particular skill about bud 
taking is needed. Simply cut back once and 
(Continued on Page Forty -Two) 


Twenty-Four 


Spring Garden Notes 
By C. Wieting 
Pruning 

T HE OBJECT of pruning and training 
climbing roses against a wall or fence 
is to distribute the growth and flowers uni- 
formly over the entire area, rather than to 
have several feet of bare stems with a cluster 
of flowers at the top. The trend with many 
gardeners is not to encourage too great a mass 
of flowers but rather have them well spaced 
so that not too many open flowers will be 
touching. This calls for the sacrificing of 
many good looking canes on the climbing 
rose. 

Some canes should be cut at a foot from 
the ground, others at three feet and still 
others at five feet. The new growth encour- 
aged by this treatment will develop enough 
this summer to be trained properly next year. 
Those remaining canes should be arched away 
from the center of the plant. Some canes are 
arched at the two-foot level; others at the 
three-foot level, and so on every foot or so. 
On completion the plant should look like a 
large and irregular fan. 

The tying should be done securely and de- 
cisively. Some arrangement should be made 
so that the plant will remain three or four 
inches away from the wall so that air can cir- 
culate about the branches. Weak tying allows 
the branches to thrash about in every breeze 
much like an aggravated dog on a leash. 
One can’t be too gentle with the arching. It 
takes considerable pressure to train the 
branches into proper position. Don’t be afraid 
of breaking the branches; it is their natural 
habit to arch and be limber. Some difficulty 
might come from too bruskly handling the 
branches of the variety Mermaid, which is 
reputedly more brittle than the others. 

General pruning about the garden includes 
a number of other subjects and techniques. 
Pruning should be a process of constant vig- 
ilance through this entire season and not a 
mass “blitz” at the first touch of spring fever. 
Each garden is a problem in itself with its 
differing exposures, soils and fertilization 
programs. Identical plants in different gar- 
dens might require different treatments. A 
campaign plan is needed and perhaps, after 
a study of the problem, a pruning may not 
be the solution. Rearrangement of some en- 


vironmental condition may bring about the 
desired end sooner. Fertilization or irriga- 
tion or relocation of the plant might be neces- 
sary. 

The pruning program should start with the 
disbudding of conifers. Where conifers are 
used in the garden their compactness is 
sometimes a desirable feature. Cutting off 
the ends of branches or tops usually leaves 
a portion of stem from which no growth can 
arise. Plants such as pine, spruce and fir are 
slow to renew growth from cut ends. A better 
plan is to remove the central growth bud 
from the cluster at the ends of branches at 
this season. Subsequent growth will be nat- 
ural in appearance and will bring about com- 
pactness of the plant. Too rapid growth in 
height can be easily controlled in this man- 
ner. 

The work of disbudding should not end 
with the conifers, but should be carried on 
continually with other plants. On some plants 
and trees an occasional heavy pruning is 
necessary. The usual result of heavy pruning 
is the encouragement of numerous soft 
growths at the cut ends and below. If all of 
these are left, not only does an unnatural ap- 
pearance result, but the clustered growths 
overcrowd each other and none function 
properly. Soon another major pruning job 
is in order. Stop a moment now as you pass 
that recently pruned plant. Study the growths, 
remove some young shoots and save those 
which are headed in the direction of making 
a desirable plant. The undesirable shoots 
are easily removed with a knife or rubbed off. 
Many hours of labor or many dollars for 
pruning in the future can be saved. 

The old adage about pruning summer flow- 
ering shrubs in the spring and spring blos- 
soming shrubs in the summer or after they 
complete their flowering season is good ad- 
vice, but certainly needs modification before 
application to all subjects. Again each plant 
is almost a law unto itself. Unpruned plants 
will frequently live from year to year in good 
health and may flower abundantly. However, 
at times they outgrow their location, crowd- 
ing out other plants, or carrying their flowers 
out of sight, too high to be enjoyed. Reasons 
such as these determine the necessity of prun- 
ing. Planted in poorer soil in a drier loca- 
tion an individual plant or group may need 

Twenty-Five 


little or no annual pruning and still flower 
well. 

However, if shrubs need pruning these 
suggestions might help. The brooms get 
along fairly well with little pruning except 
for the removal of dead wood and the head- 
ing back of plants grown too top-heavy. When 
cutting back these plants care should be 
taken not to cut too heavily in the old wood. 
A better plan is to cut only to within a few 
inches of the old wood. Cutting into the 
older wood might mean the death of the 
entire limb. 

Hibiscus syriacus is best pruned in early 
April when it should receive a heavy cutting 
back. This cutting back should not neces- 
sarily be an annual procedure. 

Other summer flowering shrubs for early 
pruning would include the buddleias, ceano- 
thus, fall hydrangea, ceratostigma, and vitex. 
All of these are musts, for their successful 
flowering depends upon the production of 
vigorous new shoots each year. Cut back to 
within five or six inches of the old wood. 
Most hypericums need a good heading back 
each year as the old seed heads and last sea- 
son’s foliage remain ragged looking for 
some time. One can be a little more indis- 
criminate in cutting these back as new shoots 
are reproduced readily near any cut end. 
Tamarix has both spring and fall blossoming 
species. When pruning them be sure each is 
pruned at its proper time. If you are in 
doubt better let the plant go unpruned for 
a season. The ornamental quinces are per- 
haps better pruned late in the fall when the 
flower buds can be readily seen. In this plant 
it will be noticed that the flowers are borne 
mostly in the center of the plant and little 
can be done to encourage the flowers more to 
the foreground than the removal of some of 
the unproductive wood. Remove some of the 
soft shoots that do not show buds but retain 
some others well spaced to elongate and 
form future flowers. 

In some of the larger gardens species of 
willows and dogwoods are used for ornamen- 
tal stem coloring effect in the winter months. 
On Salix alba varieties and Cornus stoloni- 
fera varieties this stem coloring is most pro 
nounced on the younger shoot. A constant 
supply of these young shoots must be main- 
tained at the desired level by hard pruning 


during April. This frequently calls for the 
removal of all wood to within a foot or so 
of the ground. 

Spraying 

A discussion of spraying following a con- 
sideration of pruning might lead one to the 
belief that garden work is little else than one 
coddling job after another, and that the en- 
joyment of the garden is but a period after a 
sentence of worries. Such is not the case, 
however. With a careful choice of trees and 
shrubs and proper environmental conditions, 
diseases and insects are more the exception 
than the rule. 

Insects do occur of necessity, not to feed 
on plants or to provide a job for the spray- 
man, but to be a source of food for birds or 
other animals. Birds are one of the natural 
enemies of insects and help considerably to 
beautify gardens in that respect. Other nat- 
ural conditions such as the weather help to 
control insects. However, even though the 
insect may be controlled, its natural enemies 
may also be controlled by the same condi- 
tion. Also a set of conditions that may dis- 
courage one pest may encourage another. 
Then too, pests frequently have prearranged 
defense positions to which they may retire, 
such as the egg or larval stage, when all 
adults are lost. When several generations are 
born each season, insects can adjust them- 
selves quite readily to wide degrees of cli- 
matic changes. Heavy freezing or fairly high 
temperatures such as occur naturally may not 
destroy all stages of an insect. Hence a few 
pests are to be expected. 

Holly is frequently affected by a leaf miner 
feeding between the upper and lower layers 
of a leaf. Brown areas on the foliage indi- 
cate the presence of this pest. The leaf miner 
adult, a small reddish gnat, leaves the foliage 
early in May and can be seen hovering about 
infected plants at that time. A spray of 
nicotine sulphate and molasses acts as a fair 
control if applied when the adults are de- 
tected. 

Another pest which troubles the holly is a 
small caterpillar, binding together several 
leaves at the tip of a shoot. The insect then 
feeds on the young shoot within the protec- 
tion of the bound leaves. Distortion of the 
new shoot results. These pests can be con- 
( Continued on Page Thirty-Four) 


Twenty-Six 


Book Reviews 
GARDENS FOR VICTORY 
By Jean-Marie Putnam and Lloyd C. Cosper 
Harcourt, Brace & Co.; Feb., 1942; $2.50 

O THE THOUSANDS of American men 
and women now planning vegetable gar- 
dens as part of their war effort, “Gardens 
for Victory,” by Jean-Marie Putnam and 
Lloyd C. Cosper will prove indispensable. It 
provides the answer to almost every con- 
ceivable question about growing vegetables. 

In England and the occupied countries the 
small home garden has been of vital impor- 
tance during this war, both to the individual 
producer and to the national economy. While 
the United States is fortunate in having 
abundant supplies of basic farm crops, in 
many parts of the country the production and 
distribution of perishable fresh vegetables 
may be restricted. A home vegetable garden 
will be a definite contribution. 

This guide to vegetable gardening covers 
the subject from planning and planting 
through cultivation and pest control to keep- 
ing and storing the produce raised. Soil con- 
ditions and fertilizer requirements for each 
vegetable are discussed, and the list of veg- 
etables so discussed includes all the com- 
monly used ones and many not so familiar. 
Planting schedules are suggested to provide 
a continuous production during the summer 
season. 

Special attention is given the small gar- 
den where space saving is essential, one most 
practicable suggestion being the use of verti- 
cal rather than horizontal space. The book 
is replete with charts and diagrams showing 
arrangements and spacing which provide the 
maximum utilization of a small area. 

For the more ambitious gardener, the con- 
struction and use of cold frames and hot beds 
are described in detail. For one who fears 
that the beauty of the garden is apt to suffer, 
the discussion on making a vegetable garden 
decorative is most reassuring. 

A chapter is devoted to the vitamin content 
and food value of the various vegetables, 
others to the culinary herbs and salad plants, 
and one to growing in chemicals instead ot 
soil. Garden plots for children are described 
and suggestions made concerning vegetables 


which mature quickly enough to satisfy the 
impatience of youngsters. 

The style of the book is exceptionally read- 
able, informal yet simple and always to the 
point. It is illustrated with numerous pen 
and ink drawings, and an unusually complete 
index makes reference easy. This practical 
book will be an aid to all amateur gardeners, 
particularly beginners, in helping their vic- 
tory gardens to produce continuous supplies 
of nutritious food, properly selected, on the 
smallest space, in the shortest time, for the 
least cost. 

— Jesse C. Johnson. 

1 i i 

SCIENCE IN THE GARDEN 
By 

H. Britton Logan and Jean-Marie Putnam 
xiv-f-255 pps. Duell, Sloan and Pearce, Inc. 
N. Y. 1941. $2.50 

Have you gardeners ever tired of reading 
bland, bald recommendations for handling 
this and that kind of plant? Or have you 
ever wondered why this or that thing that 
you have done with your plants in the garden 
has been a success or perhaps a failure? 

And you scientists, working apart in a 
small theoretical field, haven’t you often 
desired to accomplish successful research that 
can be immediately interpreted and used by 
lay people? 

This book, “Science in the Garden,” will 
prove interesting reading to both of you. In 
it there are presented the scientific explana- 
tions of the many techniques that have been 
developed in the field of gardening. Some 
of these techniques are very old. Others of 
them are absolutely new. Because it does 
develop these scientific explanations in a most 
understandable way, it is all the more im- 
portant to lay gardeners. It places emphasis 
right where emphasis is needed and it does 
this in such a way that you won’t want to put 
the book down once you have begun read- 
ing it. 

Dr. F. W. Went of the California Institute 
of Technology, who has done such very im- 
portant work in the field of plant hormones, 
has written the foreword. In it he makes 
these significant statements: “By pointing out 
a scientific basis for many of the chores of 



Twenty-Seven 


the gardener, the authors have given these 
chores a different meaning.” Not only have 
they given them a different meaning but they 
have laid particular stress upon the matter 
of continuing them in the proper way. Dr. 
Went also states: “After reading this book 
the intelligent gardener will have the satis- 
faction of realizing that many of his actions 
have a sound foundation and are more than 
mere rituals.” This is most certainly true 
and is in itself an important reason why gar- 
deners should make use of the information 
that is presented. 

There are, in all, 23 chapters covering such 
timely topics as soils, the 12-year bed, vita- 
min B x , evolution of new plants, miracle 
workers; colchicine and ace-naphthene, mod- 
ern seed-growing practice, the miniature 
greenhouse, rooting cuttings, pruning, con- 
trol of pests, what and how to spray, and 
chemical control of weeds. These are not all 
of them but they will serve to indicate the 
wide variety of subjects which are discussed 
and which are reduced to their scientific 
fundamentals by that discussion. 

Typical of the real worth of some of the 
ideas to the gardener is the material discussed 
in chapter four, “The Twelve-Year Bed.” 
Have you ever heard of planting the 10c 
plant in the 5c hole? Well, this problem is 
discussed at some length under the above 
heading and we will wager that if gardeners 
would follow the detailed discussions given 
for the preparation of garden beds, they 
would most certainly avoid most of the dif- 
ficulties they encounter in growing plants. 

Or let’s take another chapter — the one on 
vitamin B t . Are you interested in being 
brought up-to-date on this very new subject? 
Very well written, wholly interesting and 
containing much-needed garden information 
— that is our conclusion. 

John H. Hanley, 

University of Washington Arboretum. 

1 i i 

Our tulips, which are justifiably popular 
at this season, have a very interesting history. 
They were found growing in the gardens of 
Turkey as early as 1554 and shortly there- 
after made their appearance in Austria and 
Holland. 


PLANT NOW 

Giant Hybrid Hardy Hibiscus. 
Hybrid Amaryllis. 

Scarlet Wisteria Trees. 

Crimson Giant Chard. 

Catalog on Request . 

HENDERSON EXPERIMENTAL 
GARDENS 

R. R. 5, Box 22 Fresno, Calif. 


FRED HUEY NURSERY 

SPRING SPECIALS 

Tuberous Rooted Begonias. 

Pacific Hybrid Delphiniums. 

Long Spurred Columbines. 

Blue Polyanthus Primroses. 

Also Fruit and Flowering Trees, Pink Dog- 
woods, Magnolias, Azaleas, Rhodo- 
dendrons, etc. 

BOTHELL, WASH. (Kirkland Highway) 


SEEDS AND FERTILIZERS 

Complete Line of High Grade 

LAWN GRASS SEED, INSECTICIDES 
and FUNGICIDES for all purposes. 
GARDEN TOOLS OF ALL KINDS. 
POULTRY, DOG and FISH FOODS. 

J. W. DUNN & CO. 

1912 Pike Place, Public Market 
MAin 3924 SEATTLE 


Garden Books 

OF GENERAL AND SPECIAL 
INTEREST 

ix 

HARRY HARTMAN 

BOOKSELLER, INC. 

MAin 2213 SEATTLE 


Twenty-Eight 




(Continued from, Page Eleven) 
probable fate by decapitation. On the other 
hand, the Chinese appeared to have no super- 
stitious dread of this plant; to the contrary, 
they greatly admired it. 

It was perhaps because of this superstition 
that the Japanese made more use of another 
species, especially the Camellia Sasanqua. 
Sasanqua is a shrub of loose, straggling 
habit. Its flowers and leaves are somewhat 
similar and it is not quite as hardy as the 
japonica type. But it does have a fragrance 
and it comes into flower earlier in the year, 
often starting in November. 

Then there is a third species, Camellia re- 
ticulata. This type was first flowered in Eng- 
land in 1826 and is one of the most beautiful. 
Its leaves are entirely different from japon- 
ica; they are quite a dull green and large. 
So far as the individual flowers; are concerned, 
this is certainly the finest of them all. They 
are 5 to 7 inches across, sometimes even 9 
inches, with wavy petals of a lovely glowing 
crimson-rose, beautifully folded into a semi- 
double form and sufficiently numerous to give 
fullness without being over-heavy as in some 
of the other types. There is only one variety 
of this particular species. 

There are many other species of camellias; 
indeed, the plant which yields the well-known 
beverage “tea” is a species of camellia. 

All have attractive flowers, but in beauty, 
size and color none approach the three va- 
rieties already mentioned and discussed. 

i 1 1 

In the early days, as stated by the botanist 
Parkinson, tulip bulbs, when boiled and eaten 
with oil and pepper, were very wholesome. 
Clusius, after whom the popular Tulipa Clu- 
siana was named, informs us that he gave 
more than 100 bulbs to an apothecary at 
Vienna to fie preserved in sugar in the same 
manner as the roots of ginger. In the year 
1592, another apothecary tried similar ex- 
periments and found the pickled bulbs sweet 
and pleasant. It is also stated in Miller’s 
Gardeners’ Dictionary that a merchant of 
Antwerp had a cargo of tulip roots sent him 
to dispose of and, taking them for a sort 
of onion, ordered some to be roasted under 
the embers and ate them with oil and vinegar 
like common onions. 


SPRAYING 

TREES AND ORNAMENTALS 
POWER SPRAYER USED 

E. W. Sprague 

KEnwood 4288 SEATTLE 


KING of SHRUBS NURSERY 

One Mile South of Bellevue, 

ENDRE OSTBO 

RHODODENDRONS AND CAMELLIAS 

Raised from the finest hybrids imported 
from England. 

Loderi King George 

Loderi . . . Beauty of Littleworth 

Fabia . . . Romano Chai (new) 

Unique . . . Souv. W. C. Slocock 

In times like these tee should not waste time and up- 
keep on things which will have no value in the future . 


FLOWERS 

☆ 

ROSAIA BROTHERS 

Florists 

Sixth at Pine MAin 2858 


DAPHNES and CAMELLIAS 

Specimen Plants and Smaller Sizes. 

Besides the above-mentioned, we have 
many other rare varieties of plants. 

Drive direct to our nursery 
on South Bay Road, near 
Olympia, Washington. 

No Catalogs Issued. 

THEO. ALBERT NURSERY 

OLYMPIA, WASHINGTON 

South Bay Road, Route 3, Box 369. 


Twenty-Nine 


( Continued from Page Six ) 
vigorous, flowers pink, fairly large. Asor, 
A.M., R.H.S., 1937, a hybrid with P. Sargenti. 

Prunus Sargenti, Sargent’s cherry, is rated 
highly in the United States and Great Britain. 
Rehder says it is the hardiest and most vig- 
orous of Japanese cherries and very hand- 
some in bloom. Undoubtedly it is one of the 
best for park and avenue planting and is 
highly recommended for this purpose by all 
authorities. In Great Britain it prefers a cool 
climate and rich, woodland soil with sharp 
hillside drainage. It is intolerant of hot, 
hungry soil, wet soil or lifeless clay. In gen- 
eral, experience in Victoria verifies this state- 
ment. Ingram states : “It is a very fine cherry, 
flowers delicate rose pink intermingled with 
the vivid copper red young foliage, present- 
ing a strikingly beautiful appearance and in 
my opinion it is undoubtedly one of the best 
of its family. It is almost equally attractive 
in the autumn when its leaves change to 
varying hues of orange and crimson. I am 
entirely in accord with E. H. Wilson who 
said, ‘If one kind only can be planted, it 
should be this.’ In Britain, up to the present, 
it does not appear to have made such good 
growth on its own roots as on P. avium.” 

Trees from seed in Victoria prove fairly 
uniform, although variations occur in habit, 


size and color of flower and degree of autumn 
color. We note that the redder the foliage 
in the spring the more likely is the tree to 
have deep pink flowers and good autumn 
color. We cannot agree with Russell that 
seedlings take a long time to flower. Ours 
all bloomed before they were five years old. 
They make slow growth at first, but respond 
to good soil. In its young stage it is shapely 
and easy to prune. We value it equally well 
for its autumn color as for its flowers. We 
obtained from Cheals and Son, Crawley, Sus- 
sex, the best form in Britain, according to 
Ingram. So far it has not proved to be as 
good as a specimen from Wohlert’s Nursery, 
Narberth, Pa., which probably originated at 
Arnold Arboretum. A good illustration of its 
habit appears in Arnold Arboretum Bulletin, 
April 23, 1937. The hybrid between P. Sar- 
genti and P. Yoshino described as P. Juddii 
in Rehder’s Manual, I do not know. 

Choosing Cherry Varieties 
The selection of the most attractive orien- 
tal flowering cherries from amongst the 
hundreds of known varieties is not an easy 
task. The most popular varieties are usually 
those with double and semi-double pink 
blossoms. Mr. Collingwood Ingram, prob- 
ably the best authority on flowering cherries, 
selected the 12 best cherries as listed below. 


Mr. Ingram’s selection — Best in Victoria Parks — 

Single-greenish Yellow 

Ukon 

Single White 

Jo-nioi (fragrant) 

Ojochin 

Tai-haku Tai-haku, young foliage bronze 

Single Pink 

Choshu-hizakura, foliage bronze 
Single Pink fading near white 

Yoshino Yoshino, young foliage bronze green 

Double White 

Kojima (Shirotae or Mt. Fuji) Shirotae, young foliage green 

Double Pink fading to white 

Shirofugen Shirofugen, young foliage brown 

Shogetsu (Oku-miyako) Shogetsu, young foliage green 


Daikoku 

Fugenzo 

Hokusai 

Kanzan 


Double or Semi-Double Pink 

Daikoku, young foliage light bronze-green 
Fugenzo, young foliage bronze 
Yae Kanzan, young foliage bronze 
Prunus subhirtella var. Fukubana 
Prunus subhirtella var. autumnalis 


Thirty 


We also included 12 of those which have 
appeared best in Victoria. They are all vig- 
orous growing trees. It will be noted that 
Ingram has selected two varieties as being 
the best of two lesser known groups of flow- 
ering cherries, Ukon being the best of those 
with greenish colored flowers and Jo-nioi 
being the best of the so-called fragrant va- 
rieties. 

i i 1 

W oodland Garden 

This tract of two acres, centered about 
pools and woodland stream, bids fair to be- 
come one of our most attractive areas at the 
Arboretum. Under the active sponsorship of 
the West Seattle Garden Club, the Woodland 
Garden, designed by the late Mr. E. A. Fabi, 
will feature those plants, small trees and 
shrubs which grow and flower best under light 
woodland conditions. Trilliums, lady slip- 
pers, mertensias, lilies, native evergreens and 
hellebores (Christmas rose) have been plant- 
ed, and the West Seattle Garden Club is mak- 
ing available a considerable sum for the pur- 
chase of plants for the 1941-42 season. 

i i i 

The tulip which was popular in Turkish 
gardens during 1500 was entirely different 
from the popular Darwin type that is so much 
used today. The Turks liked the red and yel- 
low forms with pointed petals. The Europeans 
have preferred the other, solid colors with 
square or rounded petals. The best example 
that we have of the very early form found 
originally in Turkey is the variety Keizer- 
kroon. Keizerkroon is, however, of Dutch 
origin. 


( Continued, from Page Eight ) 
being made in grafting upon various root- 
stocks and these have indicated some rather 
unusual possibilities for the future. For ex- 
ample, it may be possible in this way to grow 
the beautiful yellow types in regions now 
considered to be too cold for them. 


FLOWERING TREES . . . SHRUBS 
FRUIT TREES 

You Are Welcome to Visit Our Nursery. 

Hopkins Nursery 

(On Bothell-Kirkland Highway) 

Bothell, Wash. Phone 391, Bothell, Wash. 

CHAS. E. SULLIVAN 

florist 

☆ 

FIVE MAIN LINES 
ANSWER TO 

SEneca 1300 

☆ 

Fourth Avenue & Stewart 
Opposite Binyon Optical Co. 

SEATTLE 


LAYRITZ NURSERIES, LTD. 

VICTORIA, B.C. 

Established 1890 

RHODODENDRONS and OTHER RARE ORNAMENTALS 

Our Specialty 

Write for Free Catalog or Pay a Visit to the Nursery, R. M. D. 3, Victoria. 


Thirty-One 


(Continued from Page Seven) 
would fit into the final picture. As a matter 
of fact, the whole place was budgeted into 
areas to be completed each season within their 
income, most of the actual work to be done 
by Steve himself. Needless to say, we were 
amazed and envious, as the Johnsons don’t 
have any more gold to spend than we do. But 
we were completely flabbergasted when we 
heard how little they had paid the landscape 
architect for this plan. “And,” said Alice, 
“he was on the job all the time during con- 
struction. He helped locate the house and 
supervised all the grading so the dirt wouldn’t 
have to be moved twice. And these ideas are 
all ours. He only tied them together with 
some of his own and helped us avoid a few 
mistakes. It really is our very own garden.” 

Few mistakes indeed. If she only knew. 
Already their place makes ours look like the 
proverbial accident going somewhere to hap- 
pen. And the money we have sunk into that 
mess. Well, if people with the Johnsons’ taste 
can get such results, watch us. Even now, 
after all our work and mistakes, I feel that 
our new professional advice will still save 
us money, and with our cute house and our 
view lot and our good taste — just come around 
next year! 

i i i 

On July 7, 1941, the Work Projects Admin- 
istration withdrew the aid which it had been 
giving toward the development of the Arbor- 
etum. This federal agency had contributed 
large sums of money to the work for almost 
five years. The principal reason for its with- 
drawal was due to the material rise in im- 
portance of national defense projects. 


Green Pastures Gardens 

2215 East 46th Street, Seattle 
Phone KEnwood 4939 

Dwarf trees and tiny shrubs for the wooded 
hills of the rock garden; rare and choice 
plants for crevices and alpine meadows. 


Seeds of “Different” Flowers 

Here are the “hard to And” varieties, gath- 
ered from odd corners of the world; 3,000 
kinds of them interestingly described in our 
new illustrated Catalog. 

Write Dept. T3 for Your Copy. 

REX D. PEARCE, Moorestown, N. 4. 


Garden Aristocrats 1942 

is an extremely interesting booklet full 
of information about the newest, rarest 
and handsomest trees and shrubs. 

Copy Mailed on Request. 

CLARKE NURSERY Box 343 San Jose, Calif. 


F. J. TEUFEL, Florist 

Complete Line of Bedding Stock 
Tuberous Begonias. 

GREENHOUSE AND SHOP 
452 27th Ave. N., 1 block north of Madls«a 
Phone EAst 8126. 


WORLD’S FINEST BERRY 

Now you can plant this famous new Olym- 
pic Berry on your home grounds and enjoy 
its rich, tangy, sweet flavor — fresh, canned, 
in pies, jams, jellies, sauces, ice creams, 
juice, wine, and in other various ways. 

Few seeds and practically no care make it a most 
desirable all-purpose berry . Send for Recipes. 

Order these sturdy 2-yr.-old roots sent to yon post- 
paid, 2 for $1.20; 6 for $2.75; 12 for $5.00. 

Patented Berry Sold Only by 

HALLACK F. GREIDER 
Olympic Berry Place, Vashon, Wash. 


THE FOLLOWING LANDSCAPE 

ARCHITECTS WISH THE 

ARBORETUM BULLETIN SUCCESS 

Noble Hoggson 

0. E. Homdahl 

1118 Fourth Ave. 

711 Broadway North 

John A. Grant 

Sturtevant & Grohs 

317 Harvard North 

652 Skinner Bldg. 


Thirty-Two 


( Continued from Page T hirteen ) 
the list is too limited to include all the good 
roses and it contains perhaps more of the 
exhibition type but every one of them has 
real merit and will justify its presence in your 
gardens. 

Red roses: Crimson Glory, Hortulannus 
Budde, Christopher Stone, Etoile de Hol- 
land, William Orr, McGredy’s Scarlet, 
Dickson’s Red, General MacArthur, Rouge 
Mallerin, Southport, Poinsetta. 

Pink roses: Editor McFarland, Picture, Susan 
Louise, The Doctor, Queen Mary, Mrs. 
Henry Bowles, J. Otto Thilow, William 
Moore, Dame Edith Helen. Sterling, Count- 
ess Vandal, Mrs. Henry Morse, Mrs. A. R. 
Barraclough, Lydia, Dr. Kirk, Imperial 
Potentate, Shot Silk, Rose Berkeley, Eter- 
nal Youth, Mme. Carolina Testout, Eli 
Knabb. 

Yellow roses: McGredy’s Yellow, Mrs. P. S. 
Dupont, Phyllis Gold, Eclipse, Golden 
Dawn, Sir Henry Seagrave, Lord Lonsdale, 
Mrs. E. P. Thom, Golden Emblem, Golden 
Gleam, McGredy’s Sunset, Joanna Hill. 
White roses: McGredy’s Ivory, Snowbird, 
Frau Karl Druschki, Kaiserin Augusta Vic- 
toria, Mrs. H. R. Darlington, Mme. Jules 
Bousche, Edith Krause, Mrs. Herbert Stev- 
ens, Clarence Goodacre, Barbara Robinson. 
Blends: Mrs. Sam McGredy, President Hoov- 
er, Saturnia, Autumn, Hinrich Gaede, Mme. 
Henri Guillott, Mrs. G. A. Van Rossem, 
Frederico Casa, Signora, Duquessa de Pen- 
aranda, McGredy’s Triumph, Girona, Lady 
Pirrie, Katharine Pechtold. 

Singles: Vesuvius, Cecil, Dainty Bess, Dainty 
Maid, Isobel, Frances Ashton, Innocence. 
Polyanthas: Anne Poulsen, Holstein, Betty 
Prior, Donald Prior, Folkstone, Snowbank, 
World’s Fair, Nypols Perfection. 

Climbing roses — with fall bloom: Cl. Hy. 
Teas — Mme. Butterfly, Lord Charlmont, 
Shot Silk, Etoile de Holland, Mrs. Sam 
McGredy, Sunburst, Talisman, Hoover, 
Reveil Dejonias, Golden Dawn, New Dawn, 
Harmony. 

Climbing roses with but one period of bloom- 
ing yet most worth while are: Paul’s Scar- 
let, Elegance, Mrs. Arthur Curtis James, 
Flash, Mme. Gregoire Stachelin, Golden 
Emblem, Paul’s Lemon Pillar. 


“It has been stated by many early writers 
that the tulip has been brought into cultiva- 
tion from the southeast corner of Europe, 
where it is found growing wild in many parts 
of Turkey, Syria and on the northern confines 
of Arabia. It was called Tulipa from the 
resemblance of its corolla to the Eastern 
head-dress called ‘Tulipan’ or ‘Turban,’ and 
from thence our name of Tulip, as well as 
that of the French ‘Tulipe,’ the Italian ‘Tu- 
lipano’ and the German ‘Tulpe.’ ” — From 
Spring Flowering Bulbs — Thayer. 


Authentic Information Together 
With High Quality Plants and 
Fair Prices Combine to Make 
Vs Your Logical Choice When 
Placing Your Order for . . . 

ROSES 

GEORGE M. SCHNELLHARDT 

175th St. and Wallingford Seattle 

% Mile East of Everett Highway. 


ROSES 

Complete Assortment 
Washington Grade No. 1. 

TUBEROUS ROOTED BEGONIAS 

Brand New and Best of Older 
Varieties. 

SEEDS 

Most Complete Assortment in 
Northwest. 

1942 Novelties and Favorites in Flowers, 
Grass and Vegetables. 

Vigor o Headquarters. 

DIAMOND SEED AND 
PET STORE 

1209 2nd Ave. SEneca 2171 


Thirty-Three 


(Continued from Page Twenty-Six) 
trolled by the application of a light oil emul- 
sion in combination with nicotine sulphate in 
the later part of March just as the eggs are 
hatching. 

Because this is a rhododendron country, 
possible pests should be considered. The 
rhododendron lacebug feeds on the under 
sides of the leaves causing a scorched appear- 
ance on the upper surface. The insect has 
prominent lacy wings three-quarters of an 
inch or so long. Control is simple with a 
nicotine sulphate or rotenone spray accom- 
panied by a spreader. 

Adult beetles of the root weevil will attack 
the foliage of many plants including rhodo- 
dendrons. These beetles are occasionally pres- 
ent at various times in the year but are most 
prominent in late spring. They chew circular 
portions from the edges of leaves. It would 
be wise to apply a poison bait such as “Go 
West” early in April and again in early June. 

Diseases of plants are best controlled by 
preventive measures such as pruning out 
the center to encourage healthier growth, 
general garden sanitation, controlling growth 
conditions, and preventive sprays. Any out- 
ward appearance that the disease might make 
is frequently a sign that its damage has been 
done and it is getting ready to move to better 
feeding grounds. 

If your Pyracantha berries were not so 
bright as they should have been or the foliage 
had a smudged appearance it might be in- 



APH-IS-ITE 


The Effective Spray for Aphis, Tent 
Caterpillars, Thrips, and Many 
Other Garden Pests. 

BUY FROM YOUR DEALER 
Send for Free Garden Talks. 

Manufactured by 

Harry N. Leckenby 

SEATTLE 


fected with apple scab. One part of lime 
sulphur to 40 parts water, applied as a spray, 
should control this. 

Mildew, that greyish dust on the surface 
of the leaves of lilac, roses and some peren- 
nials, can best be controlled by a copper 
solution spray applied at intervals as the 
leaves develop. There are several brands of 
copper solution sprays available at seed 
stores. A ten-day or two-week interval for 
spraying this is essential as the preventive 
action of the spray residue on the foliage is 
most important. 

Other diseases sometimes attack branches 
or other woody parts of the plant, gaining 
entrance usually through an injury or prun- 
ing cut. Evidence of the disease will be 
noticed in an unreasonable dying back of a 
branch or some part of the disease organism 
will show itself. Spraying is not effective 
against these. Once they are detected re- 
moval of the diseased portion including a 
portion of sound wood is essential. Part of 
the sound wood adjacent to the diseased por- 
tion may also be diseased. Application of a 
tree paint or shellac to the cut surface aids to 
prevent reinfection. Injuries and pruning 
wounds on susceptible species should always 
be similarly treated to prevent entrance of a 
disease. 

Planting 

The major operations of planting of trees 
and shrubs are almost over. However, plants 
can still be transplanted well into the season 
if the work is done by skilled men and if 
watering and pruning are carefully done. 
Some shrubs such as rhododendrons and 
others with a compact, fibrous root system 
can be moved easily at any time. Then too, 
some nurseries treat certain plants in a 
special way so they can be moved late in the 
spring. 

If some planting is contemplated analyze 
the situation and its environment before the 
proper plants are selected. English garden- 
ers and publications on whose fame the sun 
never sets, stress the location of planting as 
highly important in the success of any plant. 
Some plants want an easy living and others 
in general flower better and have better 
growth habits if they have to struggle a bit. 
Treatment of late planted trees and shrubs 
should include fairly heavy pruning in pro- 


Thirty-Four 


portion to the amount of roots lost in the 
process. The tops of the plants should be 
watered frequently and some artificial shade 
provided for a few days. These things pro- 
vided, even late spring planting can be fairly 
successful. 


COW AND HORSE MANURE 
ROCKS FOR ROCKERIES 
TOP SOIL 

Fred Mack 

KEnwood 4094 

9549 Meridian Ave. SEATTLE 


(Continued from Page Fifteen) 
inches high and during the growing season it 
is the brightest golden-yellow, but when win- 
ter comes it turns a rusty red. The two best 
white ones are E. cin. alba and Domino, the 
superior one being a matter of opinion. They 
both have erect racemes from three to six 
inches long and the only difference is that 
the Domino has ebony-colored flower stalks 
and sepals, whereas in alba they are light 
green. E. cin. Apple Blossom has pale pink 
flowers and is of a semi-prostrate habit. Of 
the highly colored ones, E. cin. splendens and 
atro-sanguinea (Smith’s Var.) are probably 
the most outstanding, the former being a 
glowing red and the latter an outstanding 
blood red. Other varieties worthy of mention 
are: coccinea with its carmine-red flowers, 
lilacina with lilac colored flowers, and atro- 
purpurea, a deep purple. 

Erica tetralix and E. ciliaris both come into 
bloom around June and are somewhat similar. 
There are several good varieties of E. tetralix 
of which alba mollis and Prageri are the 
most outstanding. The E. tet. alba mollis has 
silvery-gray foliage, small waxy-white flowers 
and grows from six to nine inches tall. Pra- 
geri has olive-green colored foliage and grows 
to about six inches high. The flowers, when 
in bud, are a deep red but as they develop 
they become paler thus giving the plant a very 
unusual effect. In the species E. ciliaris, the 
two most popular are alba and Maweana, 
both of which are of upright habit and will 
reach a height of 18 inches. The variety alba 
has light green foliage and large white flow- 
ers. Maweana has a coarser growth with 
large, deep reddish-colored flowers. Another 
ciliaris worthy of mention is Mrs. C. H. Gill 
with bright red flowers. 

Of the hardy hybrids there are only two 
really outstanding specimens, the E. hyb. 
Dawn (E. tetralixXE. ciliaris) and Winifred 
Whitely (E. cinereaXCall. vulg.). Dawn is 
especially attractive at this time of year with 
its coral-colored shoots. Winifred Whitely is 


ARBOR LAKE HUMUS 

Nature’s Own Storehouse of Fertility. 
The Key to Garden Success 

From Now On It’s All Out for a 

VICTORY GARDEN 

Watch It Grotc! 

Call Sales Office, PRospect 9754. 
SEATTLE 


“CEDARWOOD” 

FENCE 

Arches, Gates, Arbors, Trellis, Flower 
Stakes, Flats, Dog Bedding, Maltese 
Cross Cedar, All Kinds. 

J. R. LEWIS LUMBER CO. 

4711 Ballard Ave — SUnset 7440 Seattle 

Across from Seattle Cedar Lumber Mill. 



On Sale at Leading Hardware, 
Department, Seed and Feed 
Stores. 


Distributed by 

POLSON IMPLEMENT CO. 

SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 


Thirty-Five 




similar to E. cinerea with star-shaped laven- 
der flowers. 

From the latter part of July through Sep- 
tember E. vagans and its varieties are in 
bloom. The height of these plants depends 
on the one who prunes them. E. vag. Mrs. D. 
F. Maxwell and the St. Keverne are the most 
popular and best known. The former is a 
beautiful cerise and the latter is the only pink 
heath which has no trace of blue in it. The 
variety alba is, in my opinion, a better white 
than the newer Lyonesse. 

Calluna vulgaris starts blooming in July 
and some varieties carry flowers well into 
November. They grow from one inch to as 
high as four feet and most of the plants are 
very floriferous if properly looked after. Per- 
haps the most talked of heather is the Call, 
vulg. J. H. Hamilton which is about six inches 
tall with numerous double pink flowers. H. E. 
Beale is one of the most satisfactory, making 
a beautiful show in the garden and yielding 
long spikes of pinkish lavender flowers for 
bouquets. Of the newest varieties there is 
alba plena with its double white flowers, Tib 
with double red flowers and Johnson’s variety, 


a late summer bloomer with lavender flowers. 
The most outstanding moss varieties are the 
Foxii nana, Tom Thumb and nana compacta. 

There are many, many other beautiful va- 
rieties both new and old. In fact since I be- 
came interested in them about three and a 
half years ago I have collected over 200 
species and named varieties including some 
of the interesting South African varieties, 
many of which must be grown under glass. 
If you do not know heaths and heathers get 
acquainted with them for they are an asset to 
any garden. 

i i i 

The cottage tulips originated in a very in- 
teresting way. Dutch growers, disliking the 
pointed petalled forms, rogued these types 
out of their fields while they were in the 
process of developing their Darwins and 
Breeders. Plants thus rogued were apparently 
disposed of either by outright gift or by sale 
at a cheap rate to poor people. Hence it was 
that a century or more later these forms were 
rediscovered, so to speak, in the gardens of 
the cottagers. The name of the type orig- 
inated thus. 


COMPLIMENTS 

OF 

KRIST0FERS0N DAIRY 


Thirty-Six 


( Continued from Page Seventeen ) 
able to hint at the endless variety of plant 
material from which to select when making 
a rock garden. There is a plant for every sit- 
uation and for every taste if we but make 
the effort to find it. Nurserymen, amateur 
growers, books, magazines and other period- 
icals are some of the sources of information 
which will be of help in your search for 
knowledge about this branch of gardening. 

i 1 i 

Significant plant groups on hand at the 
Arboretum and their sponsorship: 

Chaenomeles (Japanese quince) — 57 vari- 
eties. Sponsored by the City Wide Garden 
Club. 

Camellias — 174 varieties. Sponsored by 
Amateur Garden Club. 

Ceanothus (Wild Lilac) — 15 varieties. 
Sponsored by Issaquah Garden Club. 

Viburnum — 39 varieties. Sponsored by the 
Seattle Chrysanthemum Society. 

Magnolias — 34 varieties. Sponsored by the 
friends of E. A. Fabi. 

Maples — 165 varieties. Sponsored by the 
Tacoma Garden Club. 

Rhododendrons — 400 species and varieties. 
Sponsored by various clubs. 

Sumacs — 20 varieties. Sponsored by the 
Kenmore Garden Club. 

Heathers — 120 varieties, largely from Mr. 
Arthur Dome. 

Flowering Peaches — 16 varieties. Spon- 
sored by the Mercer Island Garden Club. 

Clematis — 20 varieties. Sponsored by the 
Skagit Garden Club and Chuckanut District, 
Washington State Federation of Garden Clubs. 

Lilacs — 85 varieties. Sponsored by the Spo- 
kane Garden Club and the North Side Garden 
Club. 


L. N. Roberson 

Rock Plants and Water Plants 
Perennials. 

Visit Our Nursery Note. 

1540 East 102nd St. SEATTLE 


Fabi Nursery 

Flowering- Trees and Shrubs. 
Perennials and Alpines. 

Visitors Most Welcome. 

5753 Eddy St— RAinier 3202 SEATTLE 


Depue, Morgan & Co. 

COMMERCIAL PHOTOGRAPHERS 

1117 Pine Street— ELiot 2843 
SEATTLE 


PLANTS 

FOR THE YARD AND BOXES . . . 
LARGEST STOCK IN THE CITY 

Very Best Plants 

ALL THE BEST OLD FAVORITES 
AND NEWER THINGS 

We Use Only Sterilized Soil. 

Saxe Floral Gardens 

2404 East 65th Street 
We Deliver SEATTLE KEnwood 1957 


ForBETTER GARDENS and BETTER LAWNS 

USE OUR TESTED SEEDS 


All the Most Popular Brands of Fertilizers 
MORCROP . . NU-LIFE . . VIGORO . . MILORGANITE . . YIELDMOR 


We Have a Complete Line of BETTER GARDEN TOOLS 


S EATTLE 
EED CO. 


See Us For Every Garden Need. 

Catalog on Request. 
“SEATTLE’S GARDEN STORE’’ 
1316 Second Avenue 


Phone 

SEneca 1993 


Thirty-Seven 


(Continued from Page Twenty -Two) 
for general garden purposes will also find 
valuable plant material. The Auricula sec- 
tion is divided into seven subsections, each 
with separate botanical similarities — yet all 
subsections share the characteristic of in- 
volute or incurved folding of the young leaves 
which makes this section easily identified. 
Only one other Primula section, section Ver- 
ticellata, has the same habit; but with it we 
need not worry ourselves as it is a very lim- 
ited group and rarely found in cultivation. 

To briefly summarize this section of the 
genus Primula is difficult as it is one of the 
largest and contains many good species and 
hybrids that are worthy of description. How- 
ever, only a few of the most outstanding 
can be touched upon in this article. 

Subsection Euauricula 
P. auricula 

The species auricula is found on the Car- 
pathian and Apennine Mountains in Europe. 
The history of the cultivation of this plant 
dates as far hack as 1570, but, like many 
other types of primroses, this farina-covered 
and yellow-flowered original has been super- 


seded by hybrids and variations and the 
typical plants are seldom seen in gardens 
today. Show and border auriculas have been 
derived from crosses with other species in the 
Auricula section, namely with P. carniolica, 
viscosa, and hirsuta, which have given rise 
to innumerable variations of form and color 
and are broadly and conveniently grouped 
under P. pubescens. The hybrids derived 
from these crosses are so numerous that a 
complete list of named varieties would be 
staggering and not particularly helpful as 
few names are standardized and choice should 
be governed by good form and color rather 
than name. 

Propagation must be effected by division 
if it is desired to increase existing specimens. 
Raising plants from seed may give rise to 
new variations hut the chance is small that 
more than a very few will be outstanding. 
The species auricula and varieties will tol- 
erate more direct sun than anv other Primula, 
but they will reflect their appreciation if their 
roots are allowed to seek a cool root run 
which can be afforded in the rock garden. 
Any well-drained, good garden loam that is 


Specialists In Decoration 

With a staff of floral artists whose time is devoted to decora- 
tions and arrangements. The fact that explains why so many 
Seattleites turn to and depend upon “Woodlawn” for lovely 
effects. 

Satisfaction and confidence is found in knowing that your 
flowers will be arranged by artists devoted to this work. 


Woodlawn F! 


ower 

HARRY CROUCH 


St 


op 


510 UNION STREET 


SEATTLE 


MAin 0665 


Thirty-Eight 


porous, yet retentive of moisture, is about 
all this group requires. 

Other Auricula Groups 

The remaining species of the Auricula sec- 
tion are divided into six subsections which 
collectively contain the largest number of 
species in the Auricula section. The culture 
of this saxatile group is similar and requires 
a compost of loam, leaf mold and coarse 
sand. A scree bed is the ideal situation for 
these alpines but they will, in most cases, 
succeed in an open and specially prepared, 
well-drained situation facing west. They are 
not plants for the ordinary open border. 
As a whole they are small, jewel-like and rare 
and it is within this group that the rock gar- 
dener can revel. Listed are only a fraction of 
the species and hybrids of the various sub- 
sections, but they are exquisite and should 
prove interesting for those having a penchant 
for this type of gardening: 

Species: P. marginata, P. hirsuta, P. Wul- 
feniana, P. Allioni, P. viscosa, P. minima. 

Hybrids and varieties: P. marginata-var. 
Linda Pope; P. hirsutaXP- viscosa=P. Ber- 
ninae; P. minimaXP- Wulfeniana=rP. Desch- 


manni; P. hirsutaXminima=P.XFarsteri, P- 

XSteini and P.XKellereri. 

Candelabra Section 

The species of the Candelabra section 
should be far better known in our Pacific 
Northwest gardens. Due to the ease of cul- 
ture, intrinsic beauty and unusual candelabra 
inflorescence, they give real promise of at- 
taining a place in floriculture that should 
rightfully be theirs. 

This section is grouped into a classification 
called Asiatic Primula and can somewhat be 
compared with section Sikkimensis. They are 
found growing on the Himalayan Mountains 
from 7,000 to 12,000 feet, on moist mountain 
meadows or bogs. If ample moisture in a 
well-drained location can be provided them 
they will tolerate full sun, but a semi-shady 
position is also to their liking. These are 
delightful flowers for bog planting if the 
situation is not stagnant and they will flour- 
ish in a good friable loam rich in leaf mold. 

The last English Primula conference did 
not divide this section of about 30 species 
and subspecies into subsections, yet one not 
familiar with this large group might be con- 


BONNELL’S NURSERIES 

One Hundred Acres Devoted to the Growing of the Best Plants, Trees and 
Shrubs. A Few of the Newer and Rarer Plants to Be Had in Our Nursery: 

Andromeda japonica. 

Andromeda mariana, pink, rare. 

Arbutus unedo, strawberry tree. 

Camellias, 29 varieties in red, white and pink. 

Magnolias, in all varieties. 

Malus Aldenhamensis, new red flowering crab. 

Malus floribunda, dwarf pink. 

Rhododendrons, 35 varieties including Britannia, Unknown Warrior, 

Pink Perfection. 

Viburnum Davidii, dwarf evergreen. 

Viburnum bitchuiense, fragrant, rare. 

Viburnum Burkwoodii. 

Nurseries Located on Rainier Avenue 
at the South End of Lake Washington. 

OPEN SUNDAYS 

PHONE RAinier 3500 SEATTLE Route 11, Box 127 


Thirty -Nine 


fused by the two apparent types of species 
contained within this section. One type re- 
sembles P. japonica and the other P. helo- 
doxa. Nevertheless, the systematic botanists 
have retained them under one main section. 

The P. japonica type is most common. The 
deciduous foliage is similar to P. acaulis and 
the many blooms are arranged in tiers stand- 
ing straight out from the stem. Individuals 
may produce many scapes, the number being 
in direct ratio to the health and age of the 
plant. The several species of the type are cer- 
tainly not as refined and delicate as many 
Primulas, but when massed in naturalistic 
woodland plantings the group can compete 
with any. 

The P. helodoxa group has evergreen foli- 
age and the leaves are pointed and are bright 
glossy green. The flowers are also arranged 
in tiers somewhat farther apart than in the 
P. japonica group, and are funnel shaped 
and slightly pendant but not so large. 

Apparently the two types do not cross with 
each other readily. The P. helodoxa group 
mates only artificially and with difficulty, 
whereas the P. japonica group is extremely 
prolific and is apt to vitiate surrounding spe- 


Hoyl Mom's matte us 

UOWIf COOK! f S 



FAMED FOR ROOKIES, CLAIMED BY YOUNGSTERS, TOO! 
BEAT 2 eggs, add 1 !4 cup sugar, 2 teaspoons 
Mapleine, beat well. Sift together 1 cup flour, Vi 
teaspoon salt, add to egg mixture. Add 1 cup 
chopped nuts, 3 A cup raisins, Vi cup rolled oats. 
Fill greased, wax paper lined 9 xl 2-inch pan,'/j 
inch deep. Bake 1 5 to 20 minutes in moderate 
(350°) oven. Remove from pan, cool, cut into bars. 


MAKE these delicious, wholesome,"double-duty” 
Rookie Cookies for your youngsters— and for your 
man in the Armed Forces. They pack and keep 
well. Mapleine "makes” Rookie Cookies, flavors 
other treats, too. Get a bottle of Mapleine today. 

MAPLEINE 

IMITATION MAPLE FLAVOR 

for syrup . . . for flavoring 

* ENTIRE CONTENTS COPYRIGHT, 1941, CRESCENT MFG. CO. 


☆ ☆ ☆ 

Always a welcome 
addition to your 
pantry shelf. 

Crescent 

Coffee • Baking 
Powder • Spices 
Extracts • Mapleine 
Soda, Corn and 
Laundry Starch 
Bird Seed • Bluing 
Ammonia 

☆ 


cies. In the P. japonica group there are many 
good hybrids and strains, although they can 
hardly be relied upon to reproduce them- 
selves true to seed, whereas in the other 
group only a few crosses are recorded. P. 
helodoxaXanisodorar=:P. anisodoxa, having 
flowers of a crushed strawberry shade, is one 
cross that has been accomplished. 

Outstanding species of the P. helodoxa 
group are: 

P. helodoxa-Marsh Glory Primrose. This 
is the giant among the Candelabra with an 
average height of two to three feet and often 
taller. The corolla is a soft golden-yellow 
with calyces covered with a yellow farina. 
The slender stems carry the flowers at widely 
spaced intervals. Flowers in June and July. 

P. anisodora. When the leaves of this 
Primula are crushed, an odor of aniseed is 
emitted; therefore the name anisodora. This 
primrose is fine for a damp situation. The 
flowers are a deep maroon shade with a dis- 
tinct yellow eye and are carried on 18 -inch 
stems. 

P. oblanceolata, Wilsoni and Poissoni. 
This group is so much alike they can be 


Forty 


grouped together, the cultivation, general 
habit, time of flowering and all shades of 
purple flowers being similar. 

The japonica type of Primula has many 
species worth cultivation. P. japonica is a 
very robust plant and a good form is rich 
red in color. However, the many strains far 
exceed in merit the type plant. 

P. Bulleyana is a fine species and when 
massed in a woodland setting the reddish- 
orange of the florets is striking. 

P. Beesiana can either be good or very bad, 
depending on the flower color which is a 
plum-purple if it is good, otherwise indeter- 
minate muddy magenta is an apt description. 

P. pulverulenta is a fine species. Its great- 
est asset is that it is the parent of many good 
hybrids and strains. The original purple 
plant is surpassed by its numerous progeny. 

Good hybrids and strains of the japonica 
type Primula are: P. pulverulenta, Bartley 
Strain; P. pulverulenta XCockburniana=:P. 
Red Hugh; P. japonica-Miler’s Crimson; 
Alba; and Belvedere hybrids P. BulleyanaX 
pulverulenta. 

i i i 

Extensive installations of a permanent na- 
ture have been made at the Arboretum. An 
underground water system — approximately 23 
miles of pipe — covers almost the whole of 
the 267 acres. Several miles of drain tile 
have been laid where wet, lowland areas 
needed drainage. Roads and trails, eight 
miles of them, have been constructed. A fine, 
compact greenhouse unit was built for prop- 
agating purposes. A nine-acre nursery with a 
complete overhead water system has been in- 
stalled and is in full use. The service yard, 
the main office building and the new ware- 
house structure are definite assets. One and 
one-half miles of lagoons have been dredged 
to accommodate plantings of water-loving 
species. A stone house, now in use as a resi- 
dence for an employee, was built and a series 
of pools or small lakes established. Approx- 
imately 1,500 tons of rock were brought in 
and laid after a naturalistic fashion in Rho- 
dodendron Glen, Woodland Garden and the 
Rock Garden area. These have been the prin- 
cipal construction projects completed thus 
far. 


Pruning Daphne Odora 

The fragrant daphne is one of our most 
desirable winter-blooming evergreen shrubs. 
It has one unfortunate habit, namely, that 
it tends to become leggy. We had the pleasure 
recently of seeing plants in one of our nur- 
series which had been pruned in such a way 
as to create a nice, bushy and more compact 
form. In order to accomplish this, it is only 
necessary to pinch out the terminal growths 
religiously. To be sure, the practice will tend 
to keep the plant lower and it will not, there- 
fore, attain its full height in the usual num- 
ber of years, but the pinching does produce 
more branches down near the ground level. 
This practice gives the compactness that is 
too often lacking in our old specimens. 

i i i 

Rock roses will flourish in the dry areas 
under Scotch pines; good varieties are Cistus 
purpureus, and C. ladaniferus var. masculatus. 



Quick Acting . . . Long Lasting 

NuLife pays for itself many times over 
. . . it’s best for greener lawns, more beau- 
tiful flowers and more delicious fruits and 
vegetables! See your dealer today! 



Distributed by 


SEATTLE HARDWARE CO. 

SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 


Forty-One 



No Magic . . . 
Just Science! 


The magic of baking dependability 
this time can be attributed to sci- 
ence. Scientific . . . and skillful . . . 
blending of the world’s finest wheats 
make Fisher’s Blend a flour you can 
depend on. • Science, too, has dis- 
covered a way of adding valuable 
B-Vitamins and Iron to Fisher’s 
Blend Flour to give you their pro- 
tective benefits. Now you can give 
your family more of these impor- 
tant diet elements simply by mak- 
ing the use of Fisher’s Blend Flour 
one of your “good habits.” 

Your New Fisher’s BAKING 
BOOK contains over 400 “Sea 
Level” recipes, designed for 
100% success! Send 25c with 
coupon enclosed in every sack 
of Enriched Fisher’s Blend. 


AT YOUR GROCERS 



BLEND FLOUR 

ENRICHED 

“BLEND’S MAH FRIEND” 


(Continued from Page Twenty -Four) 
let nature take its course. Most new growers 
like to produce large flowers and it is a thrill 
to see a plant with two or three perfect eight 
or nine-inch blooms. 

If this type of flower is grown it means all 
side growth on each stem must be kept 
pinched out, allowing only the leaves to re- 
main. New growth and often buds will have 
to be removed at the axil of each leaf several 
times, thus keeping all the plant food to be 
used in growing a fine specimen flower while 
in the spray method the wild abandon of 
generous nature gives a riot of color from 
the increased numbers of smaller sized 
flowers. 

A newer strain known as the Early English 
type, has come into general favor of late 
years. These begin blooming as early as June 
and continue until October or early Novem- 
ber. I have grown over 100 varieties of this 
type and try to discard some of the least de- 
sirable sorts each year. But I still find myself 
with at least 50 varieties I think I must keep. 
Many are lovely sprays of almost every color 
and many are fine large varieties, some of 
the finest of which will not always perform 
the same every year and for no apparent rea- 
son. You decide to give one a toss to the 
compost heap but relent and give it another 
try and the next year it is a thing of beauty. 
This fickleness makes the game more inter- 
esting, I guess. Some of my favorites are: 

White — Spray: Snowfall, R. A. Roots, 
Cranford cream. Thin or disbud: Madonna, 
Blanche De Poitou, Debutante. 

Pink — spray: Shirley, Pride, Anthea, Sybil, 
Salmon Freda, Rose Precose, Litchfield Pur- 
ple. Thin or disbud: Juliana, Pink Reward, 
Rosalinda, Silver Queen, Mrs. Philip, Leda, 
Sybil. 

Yellow — Spray: The Ashes, Kingcup. Thin 
or disbud: H. Sutcliffe, George McLeod, Top 
Score, Hillcrest Yellow, Lizzie Jenkins, Yel- 
low Globe. 

Amber and Bronze — Spray: Copellia, Mys- 
tic Bronze, Bronze Freda, Brilliant, Wendy, 
Halo. Thin or disbud: Mrs. Wm. Whyte, 
Mary Hobbs, Antelope, Woking Bronze, Am- 
ber Utopia, Bronze Early Buttercup. 

Red — Spray : Fireglo, Gladsome, Red King. 
Thin or disbud: Birmingham, Conqueror, 
Gladiator, Jim Thorpe. If this useful strain 


Forty-Two 


is grown you need never see your plants 
caught by an early freeze before they have 
bloomed. 

Some lovely Rayonante or quilled varieties 
are Patricia Grace, pink, also sports from 
this variety in white, yellow and buff. These 
bloom in late October or early November and 
make lovely disbudded specimens. 

The pests to look out for are aphids, both 
green and black. Sometimes persistent spray- 
ing is necessary, particularly when the plant 
is young and tender. A small green worm 
which eats the very heart from the tip of the 
plant then rolls itself in a leaf, must be 
watched for carefully because once it gets a 
start it can do much damage in a short time. 
It is readily detected by the rolled-up leaf 
and can be squashed easily. Arsenate of lead 
can be used but I prefer to hand pick. A 
hopper bug sometimes stings the stem just, 
next the bud and often causes the flower to 
be one-sided. These, too, can be caught early 
on a cool morning if you are quick. 

What to do with the plants after blooming 
is always a question. One year, after having 
lost most of mine in a hard winter, I decided 
to put one plant of each variety in a cold 
frame, which is no easy task if many are 
grown. Perhaps because of the mild winter 
the plants left where they were grown were 
so much better in the spring than those lifted 
that I took the risk again and have left them 


out for the past three years. But present indi- 
cations point to a considerable loss and once 
more I vow to lift them next year. I think 
it wise not to weed too carefully late in the 
fall as any such growth helps to protect the 
new shoots. 

Its beauty in the garden and its wonderful 
keeping qualities as a cut flower should make 
the chrysanthemum indeed the queen of au- 
tumn flowers and the crowds to be seen at the 
fall shows prove it to be a prime favorite 
with a great many people. 

i i i 

In the early part of the 16th century, a 
tulip “craze” swept over Holland. Single 
bulbs were sold on every hand for fabulous 
sums. It has been recorded that as much as 
$3,000 was offered for one bulb and refused. 
For a single bulb of the variety Semper Au- 
gustus, there was offered the sum of 4,600 
florins, a new carriage, 2 gray horses and a 
complete set of harness. At a public auction 
near Amsterdam in 1637, 120 bulbs were 
sold for 90,000 guilders (about $41,000). 


CHRYSANTHEMUMS 

Cream, of the Early English Varieties. 

POLYANTHUS 

Burnaby Strain (new) — the largest extant. 
Gorgeous Mixed Colors — 100 Seeds $1.00. 

WEST C. NELSON 

8814 9th Ave. S. W., Seattle. WEst 1980. 


OUR SPECIALTIES 

if ROSES of QUALITY . . . 

Choicest new improved varieties, 2-year blooming size — 3 for $1.25. 

if BEARING SIZE FRUIT TREES . . . 

Enjoy tree-ripened fruit from your own garden. 4, 5 and 6-year trees, often trans- 
planted, trained and trimmed to bear maximum crops. 

if ORNAMENTAL FLOWERING TREES . . . 

Visit our nurseries now and select from the many NEW and UNUSUAL varieties. 

if PERENNIALS . . . 

Add color to your garden with new varieties such as PENSTEMON GIANT 
RUBY, an all-summer blooming variety, Violas, Delphinums, giant hybrids, etc. 

UNIVERSITY LOCATION OPEN SUNDAYS 



Downtown Drive'-In — 333 Denny Way University Drive-In — 4700 25th Ave. N.E. 

MAin 1119 KEnwood 1119 


Forty-Three 



(Continued from Page Nineteen) 
and semi-erect habits of growth. The lighter 
green of the foliage affords an opportunity 
for contrasts when used in plantings with the 
M. Aquifolium. 

With great possibilities, but as yet untried, 
are two forms of Ceanothus, the evergreen or 
sticky laurel (Ceanothus velutinus) and the 
deciduous or buckbrush (Ceanothus sanguin- 
eus). Velutinus has many features which 
recommend it as a shrub for cultivation. The 
leaves are a glossy dark green and the flowers, 
while not spectacular, do force us to classiy 
it with the flowering shrubs. 

Three of the elderberries are native to 
Eastern Washington, and they are all highly 
considered for mass plantings. They are Sam- 
bucus glauca or caerulea, S. pubens and S. 
melanocarpa. As with the eastern species 
these Washington natives are tall growing and 
require a great amount of space. S. glauca, 
with its powdery blue fruits; S. melanocarpa 
with its black clusters, and S. pubens with 
dark red fruits create an unusual show when 
combined in extensive mass plantings. For 
large scale naturalistic developments, the 


sambucus is deserving of very much more 
consideration than heretofore. 

When there is a need for brilliant color in 
connection with informal plantings, Sorbus 
sitchensis will prove to be a new and welcome 
addition. This low-growing mountain ash is 
closely related to Sorbus americana and re- 
sponds to the same treatment as americana. 
During the past season, the sizes and quan- 
tities of reddish-orange fruits produced by 
this shrub were such that no one could have 
asked for greater perfection. This Sorbus is 
well suited for undergrowth planting in 
slightly moist situations. 

Myrtle Pachistima, mountain lover, or 
mountain myrtle (Pachistima myrsinites), is 
potentially the best of the Eastern Washing- 
ton broadleaf evergreens. It reaches a max- 
imum of two and one-half feet in height when 
found in its shady habitat. While it is not 
as refined and as dense a shrub as boxwood, 
it can, nevertheless, be used as a dwarf edg- 
ing where box would not be successful. It 
should be propagated, as with boxwood, by 
taking matured wood in the fall. New plants 
should be protected by a lattice or cheesecloth 


Compliments of 

GEORGE GUNN, JR. 

and 

TON RANNAN 

☆ 

WEBSTER-BRINKLEY CO. 

651 ALASKA STREET 


Forty-Four 


covering until they are established. Clipping 
in the spring must be severe in order to keep 
the growth under control. The bark is easily 
injured, and for this reason care must be 
taken to protect small plants from mowers 
or from the heavy weight of snow. In Spo- 
kane winters, Pachistima myrsinites does not 
turn rusty or become subject to burning. It 
is free from leaf miners and, to date, shows 
no tendency to harbor diseases. Because of 
the satisfactory results obtained thus far in 
the growing of this shrub, further experi- 
mentation among Eastern Washington garden- 
ers is anticipated. And it is the hope of these 
growers that a truly valuable hedge shrub 
may reward them for their patient efforts. 

i i i 

Situated in a natural park in the heart of 
Seattle, the Arboretum is freely accessible to 
everyone. Mild winters, ample rainfall and 
no extremes of temperature are gifts of Na- 
ture that set the Northwest apart from most 
portions of the world. These conditions per- 
mit the growth of an unusually wide variety 
of temperate zone plants. 


CORRY’S 

Slug Death 

KILLER POWDER 

ORIGINAL ENGLISH FORMULA 
FOR SLUGS AND SNAILS 

Attracts and Kills Slugs and Snails. 

FERTILIZERS 

Nu-Life 

Vigoro Magnolia 

SEEDS 

Flowers and Vegetables. 
Extensive Selection. 

BUNGE LUMBER & HARDWARE CO. 

9620 16th Ave. S. W. 

SEATTLE 

WEst 0022. Burien Yard, GLendale 1799 







‘-ftuvi 


Laux REZ Protects 

Garden Furniture . . . Fences . . . Trellis 
Tools . . . Barrows 

Any Exposed Wood Surfaces Against 
Weather, Wear, Moisture and Decay. 


At Your Hardware , Paint 
or Lumber Store. 


I. F. LAUCKS, Inc. 

Manufacturing Chemists 

SEATTLE LOS ANGELES PORTSMOUTH, YA. VANCOUVER, B. C. 



Forty-Five 


During the year ending May 30, 1941, the 
Arboretum staff handled the following plant 


materials: 

Plants received during year 11,325 

Plants handled during year 17,809 


Packages of seeds received during year 1,847 

1 i i 

An inventory of the genus Rhododendron, 
taken at year’s end, revealed the following 
quantities on hand at the Arboretum: 


Packages of seeds Ill 

Seedlings in the greenhouses 6,100 

Seedlings in the lathhouses 15 

Seedlings and grafts in cold frames 2,414 

Plants in the nursery 1,421 

Plants in Rhododendron Glen and 

elswhere outside 1,987 


Total 12,048 

i i i 


The University of Washington Arboretum 
in Seattle occupies an area of 267 acres and 
lies immediately to the southeast, across the 
Lake Washington canal, from the University’s 
football stadium. 


It Pays to Use . . . 

HAPPY HOME 

CANNED FOODS 
and 

GOLDSHIELD 

COFFEE 

Guaranteed by 

SCHWABACHER BROS. & CO., Inc. 

Seattle, Washington 


COMPLIMENTS 
OF THE 

ISAACSON IRON WORKS 

2917 East Marginal Way 


Forty-Six 



(Continued from Page Twenty) 
Although it is still rather rare it is well worth 
growing and deserves a place in every garden. 

Daphne odora has long been a favorite of 
our gardeners. Few, if any, fail to admire a 
well-grown bush. It holds its foliage well dur- 
ing the winter and only in severe weather do 
the leaves show any sign of damage. Its habit 
of growth is also one which lends itself 
readily to the niche which it is to fill. Through 
correct and heavy pruning it can be made 
to produce sturdy, upright limbs and to attain 
a height of from three to four feet. On the 
other hand, where a more sprawling bush 
is indicated, less pruning will do the trick. 
There are several distinct types of odora dis- 
tinguished by their habit of growth, foliage 
and color of blossoms. The one most com- 
monly seen is the one with a yellow margin 
around the leaf. Of this again there are two 
sub-types, one which carries its blossoms on 
short spurs on the inside of the bush, thus 
hiding them from the world, and another 
type which produces blooms at the tips of 
the twigs, showing them boldly to everyone 
who cares to look. This latter type is still 
rather scarce but within a few years it will 
take the place of the older one. The form 
with solid green foliage has practically the 
same colored flowers as the one with the 
yellow margin. It is true that in some soils 
the color of the blossoms of the green leafed 
type is somewhat darker pink than the other 
but this difference is not constant. The flowers 
of the green type appear mostly on the tips 
of the branches which makes it more showy 
than the older kind. In habit of growth it is 
also more compact, the branches are stronger 
and they are not subject to as much breakage. 
The leaves are also slightly shorter and more 
rounded. 

In Daphne odora rubra the flowers are 
almost purple, although the habit of growth 
is about the same as above. Daphne odora 
alba is a variety that should not be overlooked 
in any garden. Its habit of growth is more 
upright than any of the other related forms. 
Flowers are carried on the tips of the branches 
and are pure white and very fragrant. The 
heads are considerably larger than in the 
pink sorts and carry many more individual 
flowers. It is a striking shrub and in the near 
future will be the pride of many gardeners. 



■rosespW 


ORTHO 


COMBINATION HOSE SPHAJ j 

insects •"* 


* KEEP your roses free from pests with the 
"ORTHO” Rose Spray Kit Kit contains 
enough Extrax Garden Spray and Greenoi 
Liquid Fungicide to make 12 full gals. Com- 
bination Spray. For control of Aphis 
Scale, Red Spider, Mildew, Black Spot 
and many other rose pests and dis- 
^"^■■^eases Easy to mix. Easy to apply 


Directions with every 

Dealers everywhere. 


ROSE SPRAY KIT 

MAKES 12 GALLONS COMBINATION ROSE SPRAY 
FOR USE AGAINST MANY ROSE INSECTS AND DISEASES 


orJPRIZE- WINNING 

ti9L ROSES 


NURSERY, 

GREENHOUSE and GARDEN 

SPRAYING 



A highly refined summer oil 
spray widely used during all 
seasons . . . especially where 
less refined 'dormant' sprays 
might prove hazardous. 

For sale by 
dealers everywhere 


KILL ANTS 

UuA, A/eut CcAsy Way! 

Use HMT-3-OOM. The patented "wick” 
does the trick. No muss. No fuss. Does not 
spHJ or sour. QUICK, CLEAN AND EASY!; 


ANT-B-GON 




KILL 

SNAILS 

AND 

SLUGS 

WITH 


SOLD BY DEALERS EVERYWHERE 


Forty-Seven 


One must see it in order to fully appreciate it. 

Daphne laureola is an evergreen, upright 
bush, whose flowers are a greenish yellow 
hue and faintly scented. Most of the blossoms 
are more green than yellow, and they are 
found near the tips of the branches just un- 
derneath the top leaves. The fruit, when ripe, 
is black and mildly poisonous. 

Daphne caucasica, a deciduous species 
which is a loose, upright grower, produces 
flowers early in the spring; they are white 
and faintly sweet scented. The fruit is black. 
The last two varieties have a place if one 
has a collection of daphne in the garden, 
otherwise they have little to recommend them. 

Daphne mezereum is placed last on the list 
not because it is the least desirable but be- 
cause it is the least understood. The shrub 
is upright and deciduous, with lilac-purple 
flowers which appear in great masses along 
the twigs before the leaves develop. They 
are followed by bright red berries which 
persist well into the summer. A single bush 
planted among the shrubbery seems to be 
entirely out of place, but used in a mass 
planting in the background or on a hillside 


they afford a beautiful sight early in spring. 
It will bring color to our gardens long before 
other shrubs show any sign of life. 

There are quite a number of other species 
and varieties of daphne not mentioned in this 
article, some because they are not hardy in 
our climate, and others because the writer is 
not sufficiently familiar with their likes and 
dislikes as to soil, climate, etc., to include 
them. 

In closing permit me to make another ob- 
servation which is only too often overlooked. 
In flowering shrubs, the same rule holds true 
as in fruit trees. There are individual trees 
in every variety which are shy bearers, which 
should never be used as parent trees from 
which to propagate since they pass on this 
fault to their progeny. The same holds true 
in daphnes and other flowering shrubs. Just 
because it is a Daphne odora is no guarantee 
that it will be a heavy bloomer; in order to 
insure this it must be propagated from a 
floriferous plant. 

1 1 i 

Begin spraying all shrubs and perennials for 
aphids as soon as leaves appear on spiraea. 


COMPLIMENTS 

OF 

FISHER S BLEND STATIONS, INC. 

☆ 

RADIO STATIONS KOMO & KJR 


Forty-Eight 



COMPLIMENTS 
OF A 


FRIEND 


THE ARBORETUM BULLETIN 
Published by the 
Arboretum Foundation 
5532 White Bldg., Seattle 
Return Postage Guaranteed 


MRS. V. SIVERTZ 

4333 PURDUE 
SEATTLE. WASH. 


Sec. 562 P.L.&R. 

U. S. POSTAGE PAID 

SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 
Permit No. 413 


Garden Headquarters 
. . . for the Northwest! 

ft 

Where you can buy the seeds, shrubs, perennials 
and annual plants you need . . . where you find 
the fertilizer, tools and other equipment for your ! 

garden. Ten conveniently located stores in down- 
town Seattle and the residential districts. 

trTOrf' - x C'T 

H Xf ^ y.'j 1|||||11|| 

1 V Pfvlffi 

L' L • ft s ’ Cl C .A. 

illiPSil I C 

ROSES 

Choice No. 1 stock, individually root 
wrapped and labeled. 2-year-old budded 
bushes that, if planted now, will give 
you gorgeous blooms this year. More li 

than a score of varieties. 

PERENNIALS 

• Our 2-year-old perennial plants will be 

on sale March 21. We expect to have 
some 200 varieties and colors of individu- T-T ^ 

ally wrapped perennials for your selec- 
tion. Dozen $2.75 or each 

Plti 

SHRUBS 

Flowering and ornamental shrubs, deciduous and ever- 
green. Carefully selected, specimen plants. New stock 
brought in twice every week . 

OTfJ 

j \ (A A--' V <<" \\x« 

|v\ f,\ w; Vgj| 

4^.-\ 

| T 

Hansen Specialties 

Flowering specialties that have become famous for 
both beauty and fruit, developed by Professor Hansen 
of Brookings, South Dakota. Dwarf Cherry, $1.00; Man- 
churian Apricot, $1.00; Flowering Manchurian Crab, 


$1.00; Red Flesh Plum, $1.50. 

ERNST HARDWARE CO. 

ELiot 7260 Sixth and Pike 


WESTERN PRINTING CO. n g j g Sfc ) SEATTLE, WASHINGTON 




