Vol. III. No. 4. 


April, 1940 








The Arboretum Bulletin 



Seattle, Washington 


Garden Soils 

By John H. Hanley 

A LTHOUGH the rise in popularity of the use of culture 
solutions or nutrient solutions in the field of profes- 
sional and amateur plant growing might seem to have cast 
a somewhat different light upon the whole problem of us- 
ing the soil as a growth medium, and particularly upon the 
value and use of fertilizer materials on soils, the funda- 
mental concepts of soil utility and soil handling remain the 
same. In some cases they have even been strengthened. On 
the basis of the apparently successful use of nutrient solu- 
tions, one might be disposed to assign to chemical fertiliza- 
tion a position of too great importance. To be sure one 
cannot neglect the chemical phase of soil fertility. An ex- 
amination of those elements which are essential to the 
growth of plants reveals the relative importance of the soil 
as a source of the majority of them. 

Tli ere are ten elements which are placed in the truly es- 
sential category. They are carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, phos- 
phorus, potassium, nitrogen, sulphur, calcium, iron and 
magnesium. In addition to these it has been found, under 
certain conditions and with certain types of plants, that 
other elements may be necessary for good growth. These 
are aluminum, silicon, chlorine, copper, boron, sodium and 
manganese. 

Of these elements carbon comes to the plant from the 
air, although the concentration of it in the air is maintained 
through the break-down of organic materials (plant and 
animal remains) in the soil; hydrogen finds its source prin- 
cipally in the soil water; and oxygen enters the plant by di- 
rect diffusion from the air as well as being carried into the 
plant tissues in chemical combination with carbon and hy- 
drogen as either carbon dioxide or water. The remainder 
of the rather long list of essential elements have their sole 
origin in the soil. Thus we can readily appreciate the im- 
portance of the chemical content of the soil when it is used 
as a growing medium. 

But, oddly enough, it is not sufficient to look only to the 
chemical side of the soil. Its physical qualities are of equal 
importance. The physical character, the soil’s texture, is 
much the more neglected phase probably because its rela- 
tion to the succesful culture of plants is not as easily under- 
stood or possibly because it is often the more laborious and 
expensive task. 

It is important to have soil in the proper condition. There 
are several reasons for this. Soil texture can influence the 
availability of the needed chemicals to the plants. The 
plants can make more efficient use of the chemicals which 
are added in fertilizers if the soil is loose and friable. 
Smaller quantities of these elements become “fixed ’ and 
unavailable if the soil is in good condition. The very small 
particles of which clay soils are composed are able to asso- 


ciate themselves intimately with the chemicals in a fertilizer 
and hold hack the needed elements from the plant. 

There is also the very important matter of an adequate 
oxygen supply. Oxygen is as essential to plant roots as to 
any other part. A loose soil permits easy penetration of 
adequate amounts of oxygen to the living roots. Oxygen 
also tends to neutralize and render ineffective many toxic 
substances which may he produced in soils, such products 
as may come from only partial breakdown of organic ma- 
terial in the soil. 

A loose, friable soil also permits easier penetration of 
the roots as they branch and grow beneath the surface. 

The chemical deficiencies in a soil can be corrected with 
relative ease. There are on the market today any number 
of reliable fertilizers which will supply in adequate 
amounts those elements which are most often lacking. The 
average commercial fertilizer is a “complete’” one, that is, 
it contains nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium (N. P. K.) 
in varying percentages of concentration. Lacking informa- 
tion on the actual concentration of these three elements in 
a garden soil, it is wise to make use of a fertilizer contain- 
ing all of them, a “complete” fertilizer. If it is possible, 
the gardener should have the soil tested periodically. Soil 
tests are designed to show the concentration of the various 
elements that is actually available to plants. Oftentimes a 
garden soil will he lacking in only one, or perhaps two, of 
them. To add a complete fertilizer under such circum- 
stances would be inefficient and might even reduce the 
growth of the plants. A plant can be injured by overdoses 
of fertilizer elements just as it can he retarded by deficien- 
cies. A soil test will show wherein lie both deficiencies and 
sufficiencies. 

The physical quality of a soil can be altered — should be 
altered — if it is not right. In changing it one may make use 
of substances which are really fertilizers, principally or- 
ganic fertilizers. Well-rotted cow manure is a fertilizer to 
the extent that it adds small amounts of available nitrogen, 
phosphorus and potassium. But it has other effects that 
are just as important. It adds to the bacterial content of 
the soil; it provides organic material that can be broken 
down to give available nitrogen ; it makes a soil more fri- 
able and easier to work; plant roots can penetrate more 
easily; and it increases aeration. All of these things are 
very important and all of them contribute to that sum total 
of factors that are implied when we say “a good garden 
soil.” Other organic materials have similar effects al- 
though they do not ordinarily contribute so completely to 
the correction of so many of the soil qualities. Peat, leaf 
mold, and compost material all are good for this purpose. 

An interesting thing has been brought to light in recent 
years through comprehensive fertilizer experiments. It has 
been demonstrated that the way in which the fertilizers are 
applied has a direct bearing upon their effectiveness. 


Broadcasting was shown to be distinctly inferior to other 
methods which required placing the fertilizers in rows or 
rings along side of or around the plants. There are several 
reasons for the effectiveness of this system. One of the 
principal ones lies in the fact that fertilizing materials 
placed in this way are more available to plant roots because 
a smaller proportion of the nutritive substances are “fixed” 
by the soil particles. 

i i i 

Terrestrial Orchids 

By Gladys France Baker 

W HEN I first came over east of the lake I planned to 
naturalize many flowers in my woods. With a good 
many I succeeded but not with terrestrial orchids. My soil 
is light and dry, moles run in from the adjoining places, 
and then in the third summer came an army of slugs, big 
black ones like baby seals, and mowed down my orchids in 
a single night. So I began growing them in tubs, sunk in 
the ground, which controls moisture, baffles moles, and 
slug bait just outside the tub helps with the slugs. The 
amount of moisture in the tubs can be controlled by the po- 
sition of drainage holes; some are up to three inches on the 
side and some are in the bottom and a good deal of peat is 
used in the soil make-up. Last year I planted three varie- 
ties in a bog built in a huge old cedar stump. It is too soon 
to be sure how well these will succeed but I hope for the 
best. In my tub gardens I have grown with complete suc- 
cess Cypripediums acaule, montanum, parfiflorum, pubes- 
cens and Reginae, and failed with fasciculatum which got 
too dry, but I mean to try that one again. 

I have also grown in tubs several Habenarias, ciliaris, 
fimbriata and psychodes and have colonies of Epipactis here 
and there, in dry ground. Calypso I have not done so well 
with; nobody has, although the ground hereabouts used to 
be purple with them. I am convinced that we have intro- 
duced too many enemies for them to survive. I had quite 
a colony established at one time, which included a rare 
white flowered one, but after they had bloomed the third 
year the Chinese pheasants ate them. Pheasants are very 
poor gardeners. The Calypso’s habit of sending up its leaf 
in the autumn invites insects, slugs, etc., that their ancestors 
never had to contend with. I am going to try them again 
under a sand screen cover with slug bait for a border and 
shall be glad to report later if I succeed. 

i i i 

Pruning of Trees and Shrubs 

By Herbert Pruvey 

S HOULD we ramble through the woods at any time of the 
year, one of the facts in evidence, if we observe closely, 
is that on the tall evergreen trees, no green shoots are appar- 
ent for almost one-half the height of the tree. Should the 
same kind of tree be observed on the outside of the wood, it 
will readily be noticed that it is clothed to the ground in 
luxuriant foliage. 

If we look closely at some of the deciduous trees, such as 
Acer macrophyllum. we see that the most vigorous shoots 
and largest leaves are situated where each shoot and leaf 
obtains a maximum of light and that the small leaves and 
weak, thin wood is where there is a lack of light. Often we 
will find these inner branches or twigs are dead and as such 
are a resting place for fungous diseases and insect pests. A 
further study of this reveals that shrubs are affected in the 
same way, the dead weak and thin wood in most cases, being 
where there is a lack of light. 


The lesson taught us then, is that nature prunes its own 
trees and I know of no tree or shrub where this is so evident 
as in Diospyros, the Persimmon. So it is that we find that 
pruning our own trees or shrubs will give us more vigorous 
shoots, finer foliage and larger flowers. 

A very important factor in pruning is the selection of the 
proper time of year to do it. This is governed by the type 
of plant we desire to prune. Broadly speaking, there are 
two periods during the year when pruning can be done. 
Plants such as the Syringa, some Viburnums, Choisya, Wis- 
taria, Paeonia, Moutan, some Jasminums, Forsythia, Exo- 
chorda and even Rhododendron, or the Lilac. We observe 
that each vigorous shoot is terminated by a very stout bud. 
If we look closely and well into the plant, we may observe 
1 or 2 weak shoots (due to lack of light) which, instead of 
being terminated by a stout bud have a small thin bud at the 
apex. The stout buds hold the embryonic flowers that will 
develop and furnish the floral display for the next season 
and the small, thin bud contains leaves only. If it is too 
weak or stands too far back in the crown, the chances are 
that it will be killed before next year by lack of light. 

Should we prune these plants in winter, with every cut we 
remove a part of our next display. Moreover, there is no 
time left for the growth to terminate and develop a stout 
flower bud for these are formed by the end of July the pre- 
vious season. But should we prune soon after the flower 
is dead, each strong shoot that springs from below the cut 
will be terminated at the apex by a stout floral bud in the 
fall. 

There is another group of plants that requires an entirely 
different time of pruning — those that flower in the summer 
and fall or after the end of June. Into this class come Hi- 
biscus, Hydrangea Otaksa and paniculata grandiflora, Dier- 
villa, Abelia, Buddleia, Ceanothus, Colutea, Callicarpa and 
others. 

In pruning the first type, those that flower in the spring, 
any dead wood should be entirely cut out. The next step is 
to remove any branches or twigs that crisscross with other 
branches or twigs, preferably taking out the one that runs 
inward; these should also be entirely removed. The plant 
that now remains has all of the shoots pointing upward and 
outward. Moreover, they are all fairly strong and vigorous. 
Now start to shape the tree by cutting back Y& to Y'2 °f the 
strong vigorous shoots, leaving the leader till last. In prun- 
ing this leader, it is well to remember that sometimes it will 
persist in growing widely out from the axis of the trunk. 
Especially in fruit trees does this occur. This can be read- 
justed by pruning to a healthy bud pointing in the desired 
direction. At first this would appear to produce a main axis 
from the trunk as though it were zigzagging, but in time it 
will straighten up. 

In the pruning of the summer and fall flowering types 
that are pruned from January through March, the first tiling 
to do is to cut out the dead, weak and thin wood entirely. 
This then leaves our shrubs with many ascending shoots or 
branches which sometimes curve downward or outward at 
the ends. If we observe these shoots that are left, we no- 
tice some appear to be a much darker color in the hark; in 
some cases it is almost black, while in other cases shoots 
that are just as strong appear a light brown. If the plant 
is a good-sized specimen with lots of light brown wood, 
the dark or blackish branches should be cut out entirely to 
the ground. This will result in strong vigorous young wood 
arising from the growth buds that are just below the ground 
line at the base of the old wood. It is from the young vig- 


orous wood of 1-2 years old that we secure our largest and 
finest flowers. In the case of hydrangeas and some other 
plants, these strong light colored shoots are then shortened 
back % or % ; in other cases, as with some spiraeas, these 
strong young shoots are left and will produce flowers over 
practically their whole length. 

It is well to remember in pruning that the natural form is 
best, and that unless a subject is a formal one in a formal 
setting, such as dwarf box, that shearing should be abol- 
ished, for it eventually becomes so thick from repeated 
shearings that the natural form is entirely lost. 

Another grief often met with is the planting of Ever- 
greens such as Cupressus lawsoniana allumi, or erecta viri- 
dis, and related plants right below the windows. They are 
put in when they are small, their green and bluish foliage 
being their selling point. Eventually they grow up in ront 
of the window and obstruct the light within and are always 
thereafter, quite a nuisance. If plants with a smaller sta- 
ture were planted in these positions, such as Juniperus Sa- 
bina tamariscifolia, J. adpressa or some of the dwarf Cham- 
aecyparis or even Aucuba japonica, this trouble would be 
obliterated. 

In some countries, shrubs are planted for the bark effects 
in winter. Such things as Cornus stolonifera and its yellow 
form, C. flavimarea, C. vitellina or Corchorus japonica are 
particularly good. It is well to remember in pruning these, 
that the young wood assumes the brightest color in the win- 
ter, hence there should be a liberal cutting-out of the 2-, 3- 
and 4-year-old wood to the ground line. 

In some cases, as in large plantings of Tamarix or Salix, 
alternate plants are cut 4 to 6 inches from the ground in al- 
ternate years. There is also a class of shrubs that require 
little or no pruning whatever. Andromeda (Pieris) flori- 
bunda, Skimmia japonica, Kalmia latifolia and Daphne are 
examples of this group. 

i i i 

Genetic Strains of Douglas Fir 

By J. H. Hanley 

T HE Douglas fir, pseudotsuga taxifolia, has greater or- 
namental possibilities than most of us realize. A 
plausible explanation of our unawareness undoubtedly lies 
in the fact that the opportunity for studying the trees, under 
conditions where each individual has ample space for de- 
veloping its typical characteristics, is not often provided. 

The Tacoma prairie area, which is gradually being in- 
vaded by the Douglas fir, is an excellent place to observe 
individual variation among seedling trees. Each plant has 
plenty of room to display the varying characters upon which 
landscape value depends. Under the highly competitive con- 
ditions found in the forest the variant races are largely 
obscured; trees grow too close, light intensity is very much 
reduced^ crowns are relatively small and variations in 
growth habits are difficult to recognize. On the prairie area 
mentioned, however, the trees tend to be full-crowned with 
living branches sweeping to the ground in most cases. Un- 
der such conditions the difference in growth habits can be 
readily recognized and the value of the individuals for 
ornamental purposes can be judged more easily. 

Our work in selecting the outstanding strains has really 
just begun. The problem is being attacked from several 
angles other than the strictly ornamental one.. Thus far 
ten strains have been selected. In making the selections the 


habit of growth, the foliage color, the propensity for natural 
pruning, and the seed viability have been the principal char- 
acters used. 

So far as habit of growth is concerned it is not difficult 
to find many variations. These variations run from an ex- 
tremely pendulous form with a corkscrew trunk (the 
branches bend down almost vertically and lie along the 
trunk), through several intermediate grades which display 
varying degrees of pendulousness, to semi-erect, erect and 
near-fastigiate types. The extreme forms are of course the 
most interesting. One particular tree with twisted, gnarled 
trunk and very pendulous branches is outstanding. It departs 
so far from the normal that it is improbable that one who 
has not seen it close at hand would recognize E as being a 
Douglas fir from even a short distance. 

The other extreme type, erect-fastigiate, is not well rep- 
resented in our collection as yet. although a form closely 
approaching it has been found and is being propagated. 
This particular tree is a beautiful specimen. The branchlets 
are ascending, stiffly rigid, and clothed with short, stiff, 
radially-spreading needles. The crown is rounded, full, and 
bushy, forty feet tall and almost as broad — a thoroughly 
magnificent tree, lacking entirely the characteristic looseness 
of crown of the type and showing very little tendency to- 
ward the usual two-ranked arrangement of the needles. 

Although the variations in growth habit are the most in- 
teresting, selections have also been made on the basis of 
foliage color. Color, of course, is more easily affected by 
local variations in soil conditions. The chances of locating 
individual trees in which foliage color is genetically deter- 
mined is therefore somewhat more difficult. In making these 
selections trees of the same approximate age and height, 
growing near each other, under what appeared to he very 
similar site conditions, were chosen. Yellow-green, bright 
green, and blue-green variants were chosen and are being 
propagated vegetatively. We are still looking for a very 
yellow and a very blue form. 

The above comment on the possible effect of slight soil 
differences on foliage color brings up another advantage to 
be found on the Tacoma prairie. The prairie terrain is rather 
ideal for a study of this kind. Abrupt and severe changes 
in elevation and soil type are at a minimum. Soil samples 
taken over wide areas were tested for p h , nitrates, phos- 
phorus, potassium, and colloidal content. Variations were 
found to be in a definitely narrow range, thus serving as 
another indication that soil and site conditions in this 
prairie area probably affect the growth variations of the 
trees to a minimum degree. 

The other characters that are being observed, propensitv 
for natural pruning and seed viability, relate to the selec- 
tion of strains for lumber purposes. Thus far we have no 
direct evidence that there are strains which show different 
abilities to prune themselves naturally. There are merely 
indications that point to certain possibilities along this line. 
The object of selections made on this basis would be to 
develop strains which would produce clearer, hence higher 
grade, lumber. So far as seed viability is concerned, germi- 
nation tests have disclosed that seeds collected from certain 
parent trees gives markedly better germination than others. 
This again is more closely allied to commerce than to land- 
scaping and it indicates the desirability, on the part of 
governmental agencies in particular, to make more careful 
selection of parent trees when seed is being collected. Of 
course the next step in this direction is to discover which 
trees produce the most vigorous seedlings. This test follows 
naturally with the experiments on seed viability. 


I 


'lin'd Z99 ’^S 













33IIV3S 

Suipjmg oSf^t 7 ‘uoijBpunoj uirqajoqjy 

9i/j iq paqsijqnj 


Niianna miaaoeav shi 




