




Contents 


1 A Change in Arnoldia 

RICHARD A. HOWARD 

2 Problems of Horticultural 
and Botanical Libraries 

JOHN F. REED 

9 Report from Hong Kong 

SHIU-YING HU 

23 Weeds : A Link with the Past 
1. The Plantain 
HELEN ROCA-GARCIA 

25 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 

ROBERT S. HEBB 

28 Makings Tilings Grow , by Thalassa Cruso. The Book 
of Spices , by Frederick Rosengarten, Jr. 

ARNOLDIA REVIEWS 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


the cover: A field of Sagittaria sagittifolia, cultivated for the edible 
corms. Lantau Island, Hong Kong. Photo: S. Y. Hu. 


A Change in Arnoldio 


In 1943 the one-word title Arnoldia was adopted for this publica- 
tion which for twenty-nine years had been called the Bulletin 
of Popular Information. This issue is the first since then with 
other changes. 

The first Bulletin is now a real collector’s item. It appeared 
on May 2, 1911, with a title that bothered librarians: “Arnold 
Arboretum, Harvard University, Bulletin of Popular Information 
— No. 1.” Charles Sargent, the Director, explained his intention 

. . to issue from time to time from the Arboretum bulletins of 
popular information in which attention will be called to the 
flowering of important plants and other matters connected with 
them.” Copies were mailed without charge to anyone who de- 
sired to receive them. The unsigned articles were written by 
Professor Sargent. 

The New Series, with numbered volumes and an annual in- 
dex, began in 1915. A note in 1916 stated: “Automobiles are 
not admitted to the Arboretum but visitors who desire carriages 
to meet them at the Forest Hills entrance can obtain them by 
telephoning . . The telephone number had but three digits. 

Series Three came out a month after Sargent’s death, in April 
1927, on coated paper permitting the first use of photographs. 
The articles were signed “E.H.W.” for Ernest Henry Wilson. A 
subscription rate was established. There is evidence of the 
tragedy that took the life of “Chinese” Wilson: an article dated 
September 15th, 1930, bears his initials for the last time. 

In 1933 Series Four introduced a new format. Donald Wyman 
joined the staff in 1935. The first of many articles by the Horti- 
culturist for the Arnold Arboretum was “Tree Troubles,” issued 
in March 1936. 

Inside our new 1970 cover, we plan to have contributions 
from several authors and a variety of articles for our readers. 
Notes on the plantings, notices of staff activities, and programs 
or classes will be listed; book reviews will be more frequent. 
Arnoldia will appear six times a year at regular intervals. To 
reduce the necessary subsidy we must increase the price to $3.50 
to subscribers, but Friends of the Arnold Arboretum will con- 
tinue to receive Arnoldia free of charge. 


Richard A. Howard 


Problems of Horticultural 
and Botanical Libraries 


The first conference on botanical and horticultural libraries was held in 
Horticultural Hall, Boston, on Thursday, November 13, 1969. Sponsored 
by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society and organized by the Society’s 
Library Committee, the Conference was conceived as an opportunity to 
discuss problems of interest to libraries in the field. Forty persons attended, 
representing more than twenty institutions. 

The first speaker was Mr. John F. Reed, Curator of the Library of the 
Neiv York Botanical Garden, who addressed himself to the “Problems of 
Horticidtural and Botanical Libraries.’’ Dr. George H. M. Lawrence, Direc- 
tor of the Hunt Botanical Library of the Carnegie-Mellon University, fol- 
lowed with a discussion entitled “Care and Preservation of Library Ma- 
terials.” The afternoon session began ivith an analysis of a library’s “Bib- 
liographic Responsibilities to the Plant Sciences” by Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr. 
In “Where Do We Go From Here 1” Mr. Gordon W. Dillon, Executive Secre- 
tary of the American Orchid Society, suggested several ways to continue 
the discussions with a series of conferences. Following a question and 
ansiver period the group, in an informal business session, accepted the 
invitation of the Hunt Botanical Library to hold a second conference, in 
Pittsburgh, on April 24-25, 1970. 

It is planned to reproduce the edited texts of the major presentations 
at the conference in this issue and in succeeding numbers of Arnoldia. 
— Ed. 

To preface my remarks, I would like first to define my concept 
of the primary roles of the major botanico-horticultural libraries. 
To me, they represent research-resource libraries of inestimable 
value which are deeply involved in collecting, preserving, and 
providing access to the bulk of the world’s literature dealing 
with the various aspects of plant science — pure and applied. 

Specifically, their responsibilities fall into three main cate- 
gories: (1) to preserve, conserve, and protect their collections; 
(2) to develop, complete, and expand their collections to meet 
the needs of both present and future users; (3) to provide ser- 
vice and accessibility to this literature and knowledge about this 
literature to their users. 


2 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries 3 


The collections held in these libraries are, in truth, national 
resources. It is important that we who are concerned with these 
libraries recognize that our responsibilities exceed the bounds 
of our individual institutions. 

In my discussion I am forced to adopt a shotgun approach 
that will touch briefly upon scattered problems in these areas of 
responsibility before going on to what I consider to be the major 
problems facing our libraries today. I think I should also say at 
this point that these problems are not unique to botanico-horti- 
cultural libraries. Although they may be more urgent for us than 
for libraries in other scientific disciplines, they are very similar 
to the problems faced by most academic research libraries. 

When one speaks of a librarian’s custodial duties many people 
immediately conjure up an image of a stuffy, intransigent 
guardian who jealously watches over the library stacks, sus- 
picious of anyone who wants to read or, worse yet, borrow a 
book, and who is really happy only when every book is in its 
proper place on the library shelves. When I speak of custodial 
duties I am referring to the positive and constructive activities 
which are part of the maintenance of collections having in- 
trinsic archival and historical value. 

One of these major responsibilities is the ever-present task 
of physical maintenance, preservation, and conservation of the 
publications and other library materials in the library collection. 
The ravages of time — use and the chemical deterioration of 
paper and binding materials — are matters of constant and in- 
creasing concern, especially in libraries that attach archival 
importance to their collections. 

A closely related problem needing much greater recognition, 
attention, and action in library circles today concerns the pro- 
duction of modern publications at high standards of quality of 
materials and workmanship. Failure of librarians to concern 
themselves with present publication practices and to put forth 
the problems that poor production standards create for research 
libraries will compound the difficulties of preservation in the 
future. 

Technology has developed long-life — pH neutral — papers 
that can be manufactured and sold at costs approximating those 
of lesser quality, more rapidly deteriorating papers. We must 
urge publishers to adopt the use of these papers in their produc- 
tion of periodicals and monographs. It is disturbing to see how 
rapidly issues of some of the outstanding scientific journals pub- 
lished in this country, as well as abroad, begin to discolor and 
become brittle. It is hard to believe that those responsible for 


4 ARNOLDIA 

these publications consider their work to be of such ephemeral 
importance. 

Physical format and design of periodicals and other publica- 
tions is still another area of great concern to librarians today, 
particularly the tendency to reduce the width of inner margins. 
Inner margins of one inch or 3/4 inch usually allow adequate 
space for libraries to bind these items either by machine over- 
sewing or preferably, in archival collections, by smythe or bench 
sewing. When, usually in the name of economy, inner margins 
are reduced to one-half inch or less, as in the case of such 
substantial journals as Planta, Excerpta Botanica and the 
Gardener’s Chronicle to name only a few, the binding of the 
volume by libraries becomes much more difficult. If such vol- 
umes are machine oversewn, there is often no inner margin 
left at all; even with smythe sewing the text often runs into the 
groove of the binding making the volume difficult to read or 
photocopy. 

Librarians must be aware of the quality of both materials and 
workmanship that go into the publications they acquire for their 
libraries, for they make a great investment in purchasing and 
maintaining these materials. When publishing and production 
standards fall below those that will allow libraries to maintain 
usable archival collections, then those concerned with libraries 
must make their voices heard. 

Collection development presents many challenges to prac- 
ticing libraries today. Because of the increasing numbers of 
publications produced each year and the even more rapidly in- 
creasing costs of books and periodicals, library purchasing 
budgets must be substantially increased each year just to allow 
libraries to hold ground in their particular areas of specializa- 
tion. At the same time, librarians and others involved with the 
selection of books, journals, and other materials for their col- 
lections, must exercise increased selectivity in allocating their 
available resources. 

A similar problem is faced by libraries trying to fill gaps in 
their holdings or involved in large-scale development of collec- 
tions of older literature. In these areas, increasing costs are 
compounded by increasing competition for this literature, espe- 
cially from the developing small college and university libraries. 

The most economical answer to large-scale development of 
collections of older literature, at least on an individual institu- 
tion basis, is the purchase of this material in microforms — 
microfiche, microfilm or microcard. That such microforms are 
relatively inexpensive and require little storage space is very 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries 5 

attractive. Unfortunately, there is one major drawback to the 
use of these materials: readers confronted with the prospect of 
having to use microforms will go out of their way, often to con- 
siderable personal expense, to avoid their use. The development 
of relatively inexpensive reading-printing equipment which pro- 
duces usable, inexpensive hard copy for consultation and refer- 
ence should be of great assistance in helping libraries overcome 
much of the resistance to the use of microforms. 

Aside from the archival value of microforms, the greatest 
value I see in them in research-resource libraries such as ours, 
is in the interlibrary loan and photocopying programs that we 
provide. By maintaining microform duplicates of rare, valuable, 
and fragile materials, explicitly for the production of photo- 
copies for interlibrary loan and in-house photocopy demands, 
libraries can save tremendously on the wear and tear on original 
materials while still providing access to them. 

The greatest problem facing any group of libraries today, be 
they related geographically or by their subject specialization, is 
their willingness to investigate, identify, and implement pro- 
grams that lead to standardization, cooperation, and shared util- 
ization of their resources and activities. 

One of the most obvious areas for this coordination is cur- 
rent acquisition and collection development. I am sure that this 
group willingly concedes the impossibility and impracticality 
of any library even to attempt to collect all of the world’s litera- 
ture dealing with the plant sciences. Instead, individually, our 
approach has been, and continues to be, one of maintaining 
more or less comprehensive collections in our particular areas 
of specialization and smaller representative collections in those 
areas of our secondary interests. Although there must be a high 
degree of overlap throughout our collections, we must look 
beyond the bounds of our own institutions and begin to think 
in terms of the total information needs of the plant scientist, and 
we must try to assure, on a collective basis, the comprehensive 
collection of the plant science literature. 

Coordination of general acquisition responsibilities must be 
accompanied by a general and freely functioning cooperation 
among libraries in sharing and distributing their unique hold- 
ings. Such a “network” approach to library resource development 
has been recognized and developed on a regional basis — par- 
ticularly in state library systems. I believe a similar approach 
can be taken on a subject basis, although difficulties arising 
from lack of geographical proximity are sure to be present. 

As I have already mentioned, in the libraries represented at 


6 ARNOLDIA 


this meeting there is a considerable overlap in our current 
acquisitions programs, probably collectively greater than 50% . 
Among selected libraries in this group, the overlap in purchases 
may exceed 90% . With such a high percentage of duplication 
in current acquisitions, we have an ideal opportunity to share in 
some way the production of cataloging data and thereby to 
reduce our individual cataloging costs. 

It has been my experience at The New York Botanical Garden 
that the cost of descriptive and subject cataloging to American 
Library Association and Library of Congress standards is often 
higher than the cost of acquiring the publication itself, partic- 
ularly when printed Library of Congress cards are unavailable 
within a reasonable period of time. We have learned through ex- 
perience that approximately 40% of our Library of Congress 
card orders for newly published monographs and serials are 
unfilled after six months. Most of this material consists of pub- 
lications in foreign languages and analytics of serials sets, the 
material for which original cataloging is most costly to prepare. 

Much costly duplicate original cataloging could be eliminated 
if we could agree to certain standards for descriptive and subject 
cataloging and devise a way in which to distribute cataloging 
copy to cooperating institutions for their individual production 
of catalog cards. Better yet, with further standardization of card 
format, we could possibly develop a centralized card reproduc- 
tion center that could supply cards to our individual libraries. 

Closely related to the cataloging of new published works is 
the production of cataloging data for our older literature collec- 
tions. Several libraries are contemplating or have begun the 
awesome task of recataloging their collections to modern stan- 
dards. The New York Botanical Garden is one of those institu- 
tions that has undertaken this massive task — one that we esti- 
mate will require 15 man-years of professional cataloging time. 
This indeed is a costly undertaking. 

To date, our experience indicates that we can obtain LC 
printed cards for slightly less than one-half of the items which 
we must process in this project. The load of original cataloging 
that our recataloging staff must perform is terrific. To me it is 
foolish and wasteful for other institutions to duplicate this work. 
I would like to see some method developed to pool and share 
such data with other libraries embarking on similar endeavors 
so that needless duplication and expense could be avoided. By 
pooling or exchanging such information we could, at the same 
time, develop a very useful bibliographic tool — a union catalog 
of our collective holdings. This would be particularly valuable 


Horticultural and Botanical Libraries \ 7 

as many of our libraries are poorly represented in The National 
Union Catalog. 

Another area where I would like to see a coordinated ap- 
proach is the preservation of archival sets of ephemeral and 
secondary publications. I am thinking specifically of seed cata- 
logs and popular gardening and horticultural magazines, many 
of which are printed on such low grade paper that they rapidly 
deteriorate even with little or no use. Two good examples 
of such publications are the journals Popular Gardening and 
Amateur Gardening, issues of which less than a decade old have 
so deteriorated that they can no longer be bound. Assuming that 
archival sets of such publications should be maintained, would 
it not be practical for one or two institutions to assume the re- 
sponsibility of conservation and preservation while the remain- 
ing libraries, interested in having ready access to these publica- 
tions, could depend upon microfilm copies? If such coordination 
is desirable, we could pool our collective sets of such publica- 
tions to make up complete sets with the best preserved copies of 
each issue. This sort of coordination of effort must come about 
if original documents are to be adequately preserved. Many 
publications of this nature have already reached an advanced 
state of decay, and their complete loss is imminent. 

A valuable bibliographic tool which could be developed 
through botanico-horticultural library cooperation is a union list 
of botanico-horticultural periodicals based on the exhaustive 
compilation B-P-H Botanico-Periodicum-Huntianum prepared at 
the Hunt Botanical Library last year. Such a list would have 
two major values: the first, to provide readily accessible and up- 
to-date knowledge of the periodical holdings of cooperating li- 
braries — information that is very incompletely available in the 
Union List of Serials ; the second, to supply us with a knowledge 
of the important gaps in our collective holdings — information 
that would be very valuable in a coordinated collection develop- 
ment program. 

There are two other areas of potential cooperative endeavor 
which I would like to mention briefly. One is the possible pooling 
of the various publication exchange activities presently carried 
out independently by a number of our libraries. At its simplest 
it could involve only the interchange of exchange lists and in- 
formation; but at a more highly organized level it could take 
the form of a centralized exchange office providing service to 
a group of libraries — sort of a Botanico-Horticultural Farming- 
ton Plan. The other proposal for coordination involves inter- 
library loan responsibilities which we all have to greater or 


8 ARNOLDIA 

lesser degrees, not just among ourselves, but with the larger li- 
brary community. Coordination of such activities might take 
the form of designating one or two of our institutions with the 
primary responsibility for meeting the bulk of interlibrary loan 
service, while the remaining institutions serve to supplement the 
resources of these primary lenders. 

One of the first questions that arises after such a spell of 
idealizing is very realistic — who will pay for such cooperative 
programs? The answer must be correspondingly realistic — we 
will! Not as additional expenses over and above those we already 
find difficult to bear but, hopefully, from the resources saved by 
not having to perform each of these tasks individually. With 
consolidation and specialization of effort in such functions as 
collection development, cataloging, and interlibrary loan, there 
should be corresponding economies. 

A less definite, but posssible, outcome of activities of coordina- 
tion and cooperation is that by working together we might 
better qualify for the grant dollar. A recent issue of College and 
Research Libraries News (no. 9, Oct. 1969) reported that the 
National Science Foundation's Office of Science Information 
Service has stated that its resources are “being concentrated 
on developing information systems in basic disciplines which 
take advantage of the available technology.” 

Coordinated and cooperative endeavors such as those I have 
outlined today are certainly a humble beginning, but they could 
eventually develop into much more sophisticated programs. 

John F. Reed 
Curator of the Library, 

New York Botanical Garden 


Report from Hong Kong 


Dr. Shiu-Ying Hu, Botanist at the Arnold Arboretum, has made three trips 
to Hong Kong since January 1968. Her first stay was from March through 
June 1968; after a summer in the United States, she returned there for 
the academic year 1968-69; she left Boston again this past September for 
her third visit. In return for financial support for her living expenses and 
field work, Dr. Hu has taught a class in Taxonomy of Angiosperms at 
Chung Chi College, a part of the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The 
Chinese University is a federation of three colleges in which the principal 
language of instruction is Chinese. The Chung Chi campus is located near 
Sha Tin in the New Territories. Dr. Hu has also made extensive herbarium 
collections of native plants. This report summarizes her activities during 
her second trip, including her short stops in Korea and Japan where she 
investigated species of daylilies under the sponsorship of the American 
Hemerocallis Society — Ed. 

Field work and botanical collections. People who have read or 
heard about Hong Kong from reports of tourists who visited the 
congested shopping areas, or from missionaries who discussed 
the conditions of refugee life, have the impression that Hong 
Kong is a small piece of land overcrowded with buildings and 
people. This is an untrue picture. Actually, 95% of the land area 
controlled by the Hong Kong government is wilderness. It is 
true that certain historical collecting sites, such as Captain 
Champion’s Happy Valley, are crowded with apartment build- 
ings, but the vast area is still botanically unexplored. A map 
issued in 1968 by the Crown Lands & Survey Office of Hong 
Kong indicates that the built-up areas are limited to the north 
side of Hong Kong proper (Victoria Island), Kowloon Peninsula, 
and very small areas in the New Territories. The primary reason 
for the lack of development in Hong Kong is water supply. Now 
the Jubilee Reservoir, the Tai Lam Chung Reservoir, and the 
Kowloon Reservoir have been built in the New Territories, and 
Plover Cove has been converted into a fresh water lake. These 
will provide water for a population shift to the New Territories. 
The huge Shek Pik Reservoir is on Lantau Island, the largest 
island in the Hong Kong area. (See map, p. 16-17.) 

When I left Hong Kong in June 1968, my collecting record 
ended with number 5551. During the summer T. K. Woo col- 


9 


10 ARNOLDIA 

lected twenty sets of specimens. On my return to Chung Chi 
College in September, I began my collections with number 5572; 
when I left this June ( 1969), the last number was 7791. During 
this period I collected approximately 2250 sets of specimens. 

Field work in the tropics is strenuous but always exiciting. 
The combination of available water and good roads makes Hong 
Kong a plant collector’s paradise in southeast Asia. The most 
memorable of my trips were ( 1 ) the visit to the type tree of 
Camellia granthamiana Sealy behind the Jubilee Reservoir, on 
Tai Mo Shan, and (2) the rediscovery of Manglietia fordiana 
Oliver on Ma On Shan. 

When Sealy described Camellia granthamiana , he remarked, 
“It was ... a shock to find that a specimen collected in the 
New Territory ... in October 1955 . . . represented a new 
and very distinct species of Camellia — especially as it is a 
striking plant with white flowers 5V2 inches across and hand- 
some, shining bullate leaves. How such a plant can have re- 
mained undiscovered until now is a mystery, . . 1 * * * 5 To find 

the cause of the mystery, to see the plant, and to collect some 
specimens for our herbaria, I participated in a field trip with 
the Hong Kong Natural History Society on November 4th, 1968. 
The area is remote from any path. There was only one man in 
the group who knew the exact locality of the tree. It is no 
mystery that the species remained hidden so long in this wilder- 
ness! The interesting thing about the occurrence of the species 
is that, after extensive field work and a thorough survey of the 
adjoining area, no other C. granthamiana was found. So, up 

1 Sealy quoted from a letter from R. E. Dean, Superintendent of the 

Gardens Division, Hong Kong, as follows: 

“You will be interested to know that only one plant, a small tree about 

10 ft. high, has so far been found. It is growing in partial shade, on the 
edge of a wooded ravine, in company with Ilex rotunda (20 feet tall), 
Caesalpinia spp. (climbing), Adina spp. (5-6 feet tall), and grass about 

5 feet tall. It is a multibranched tree, with a base diameter of a little 
over 12 inches. There is strong reason to believe that it was cut to within 
a foot or so of the ground a long time ago. 

“Its age is difficult to determine, but it is probably between fifty and 
seventy years. No other similar plants have been found growing within 
a radius of a hundred yards of this particular specimen . . . 

“The area concerned is very remote, and is served only by a narrow 
track; it is a good one and a half hours’ hike from the road. In the ordinary 
course of events it is certain that the spot is hardly ever visited, except 
by an occasional forester or villager; the forester who told us about it had 
no particular business in the area and came upon it quite by chance. It 
is quite likely that it has hitherto been passed off as a Gordonia.” ( Journal 
of the Royal Horticultural Society, LXXXI: 181—182, April 1956.) 



Fig. 1 

Camellia granthamiana Sealy 


12 ARNOLDIA 


to the present, the species is known only from the type plant. 
The species was described on the basis of two herbarium speci- 
mens; they are both in the herbarium of the Royal Botanic 
Gardens at Kew. The specimens which I collected are from the 
type plant and have both flowers and fruit. (Fig. 1, p. 11) 
Mcinglietia fordiana Oliver was described from a specimen 
collected on Victoria Island and it was known from the type tree 
only. Our herbarium has no specimen of this species. Oliver re- 
marked that M. fordiana was the first record of the genus from 
China. In the 1930's Dandy described over a dozen species of 
the genus from China, Thailand, and Indochina. Later H. H. 
Hu and his associates described another half dozen species from 
the Chinese provinces of Yunnan and Szechuan. However, M. 
fordiana has only been recorded from Hong Kong. During the 
Japanese occupation of Hong Kong the area was very short of 
fuel, and M. fordiana , together with other plants, was cut for 
firewood. On the afternoon of May 11, 1969, when my assistant 
T. K. Woo and I were looking for a shortcut to return to Chung 
Chi College from the top of Ma On Shan, I suddenly spotted a 
tree with deep green leaves and large white flowers on the other 
side of a deep gorge. Ting Kwok suggested that we wait until 
another trip to collect it, but I insisted on seeing if I had found 
another tree of Camellia granthamiayia. When we saw the tree 
up close, I thought it was a Magnolia because the luster of its 
leaves and the size of the flowers remind one of Magnolia 
grandiflora; but it is more beautiful because the anthers are a 
brilliant red. Returning to the laboratory, I keyed the specimen 
out to be Manglietia fordiana. Mr. H. C. Tang told me that M. 
fordiana had not been found anywhere except at Victoria Peak, 
and that the tree was lost in the war. Consequently, I con- 
vinced the horticulturist and landscape designer of the Chinese 
University of the importance and beauty of this species, and he 
sent three of his men to air-layer thirty plants for planting in 
the new University campus and for distribution. 

In November 1968 and February 1969 I made two collecting 
trips to Lantau, the largest island in the area; it is about one 
and two-thirds larger than Victoria Island. It has a very com- 
plicated geological formation, with granite, porphyry, marine 
silt, syenite, alluvial deposits, and sandstone all occurring in an 
area of less than fifty square miles. Until recently, the people of 
the island lived only on small alluvial plains where agriculture 
was possible. Not long ago, however, roads were built, and a 
very large reservoir was constructed at Shek Pik. Comfortable 
modern buildings with very reasonable rates have been built by 
the Methodist Mission and the YMCA. Buses and vans transport 


Report from Hong Kong 13 

people across the island. These facilities help a botanist reach 
areas that have never been botanized. 

All the students in my class in the Taxonomy of Angiosperms 
went along on the February trip. We worked for three solid days 
in various localities on Lantau Island. Before we went, two 
student volunteers did research on the geographical conditions 
of the island, including the population, towns, roads, transporta- 
tion facilities, and vegetation. Their reports were mimeographed 
and distributed to their fellow students. The seventeen students 
were divided into four field groups : ( 1 ) covering the cultivated 
areas and the market place, emphasizing the economic plants; 
(2) covering the mid-high altitudes; (3) speed climbers who 
collected high altitude specimens; and (4) covering the seashore 
and cliff plants. We chose three centers: at the eastern end of 
the island for the first day, at the southwestern end for the 
second day, and the peak on the northern side for the third 
day. The students were very enthusiastic about the work. They 
began the day with the whistle at 6:00 a.m. and ended it when 
they finished writing their field notes and pressing their material. 

My collection ran up to 170 numbers. The high altitude group 
collected much more than I did because there were three stu- 
dents in addition to T. K. Woo. The other groups collected fewer 
specimens. Some of the material collected by the high altitude 
group was indeed interesting. T. K. Woo built a charcoal heater, 
but that was insufficient for drying our specimens. The Biology 
Department at Chung Chi College built a very good drying case 
which is normally adequate for quick drying. This time, how- 
ever, there were too many specimens, and not all of them were 
properly dried. Chung Chi College keeps one specimen of each 
collection; the rest are for the Arnold Arboretum. 

It should be noted here that Ting Kwok Woo is the gardener 
of the Biology Department. He is one of the victims of the 
political upheaval in China. When he was twelve he was told, 
“You are the son of a landlord. You have no right to an educa- 
tion.” He was sent to work on a farm where he nearly starved. 
He told me that he was so hungry that he ate the thick rhizome 
of Cibotium barometz. When he became older, he escaped by 
crossing the barbed wire fence. He is now twenty-one and works 
during the day while attending night school for a middle school 
diploma; at present, he is in the second form of junior high 
school. He is very good at climbing and collecting. He can climb 
a tree like a monkey. I was indeed fortunate to have him as an 
assistant on some of my field trips. 

The biology students at Chung Chi College carry very heavy 
loads. They have five or six laboratories every week. Many of 



Fig. 2: Chung Chi campus , looking towards Ma On Shan. 
Building on left is servants’ quarters. 

Photo: S. Y. Hu. 


them have to tutor special high school pupils to earn some 
spending money. For these reasons, the biology majors have not 
organized as many field trips as the geography majors. I made 
some of my best collecting trips with geography majors or with 
the staff of the Geography Department. The outstanding ones 
were (1) the trip to Ping Chau, (2) the Castle Peak hike, (3) 
the Pak Sin Ling climb, and (4) the Dragon Pool, Plover Cove 
collection. 

Ping Chau is outside Mirs Bay and about one and a half miles 
from mainland China. It can be reached only by a large fishing 
boat. Normally, the coast and the possible danger prevent 
students from going there to study the special geological forma- 
tions and vegetation of the island. In order to lower the cost 
for the students, the organizer gathered sixty-four people for 
the trip, and one of them weighed 300 pounds! On our return 
we were stopped by a police boat, and the owner of the boat was 
arrested because his boat was licensed for only thirty-five people. 
I had a very good collection from that island, which had never 
been botanized before. 

The Castle Peak hike introduced me to a completely different 
vegetation. On this trip I made my only collections of Nepenthes 


Report from Hong Kong | 15 

and Platycodon. It was a long day, and we did not return to the 
college until midnight. 

Pak Sin Ling is a mountain chain with eight peaks. Two of 
the five students on this trip were track stars. The group planned 
to cover all eight peaks. They ate and drank very little. The 
climbing was rather strenuous for me, and my collecting must 
have delayed the students. They did not climb all the peaks 
because, by three o’clock, we saw eight fires starting from 
various directions. We were afraid of being trapped by the fire, 
so we decided to change our direction and turned south. 

Dragon Pool, inland from Plover Cove, is indeed a collector’s 
paradise. In this area I collected a specimen of the monotypic 
genus, Lysidice rhodostegia Hance. This species has never been 
reported previously from Hong Kong. I also collected Buxus, 
lllicium, and several orchids which I have not seen elsewhere. 
On this trip, as on several others, Peter Cheung, a geography 
major who is interested in plants, was my guide. 

Dr. L. Trott teaches a course in ecology in the Biology De- 
partment. He generally has each of his students choose a special 
project. He specializes in oceanography, but his students may 
select any subject that interests them. Last year there was one 
student working on the vegetation of Dog Stomach Valley; one, 
working on the ecology of fresh water fish, needed to know the 
vegetation surrounding the pond; one explored the vegetation 
of a small railway tunnel; another studied the vegetation of an 
estuary. These students all guided me to collect specimens 
which, otherwise, I would have had little opportunity to collect. 
The most interesting studies concerned the vegetation of the 
estuary and the railway tunnel. I have a complete collection 
of the mangrove vegetation. 

Dr. Trott has two boats by which he takes students to shores 
and islands. He was very kind and cooperative in allowing me 
to make collecting trips with his students. Thanks to him, I have 
a very good collection of plants from Central Island, a very 
small, uninhabited island in the middle of Tolo Harbour. 

Teaching and lecturing. Biology majors who wish to obtain 
a British-recognized B.A. degree must take and pass a diploma 
examination in the Taxonomy of Angiosperms. At Chung Chi 
College this course consists of two lectures and a three-hour 
laboratory for two fourteen-week semesters. My class had seven- 
teen people, all in their junior year. The competition for a college 
education begins at the kindergarten level; children starting 
kindergarten and first grade must take entrance examinations. 
All the way through school, they are trained to memorize and 



-f + 



18 | ARNOLDIA 

to take and pass examinations; otherwise, they have to stop 
school at any level. So all my students acquired the ability to 
perform well on examinations. They also appreciated the method 
and effort of a teacher who wanted to open their eyes to the 
structure, beauty, and variations in form of the plants around 
them, and to the significance of structures in the evolution and 
classification of plants. I had excellent students and I enjoyed 
teaching them. However, since I had not taught since 1946 
when I came to Harvard for graduate work, I was out of practice 
and took time for preparation. My three years at Lingnan Uni- 
versity as a teaching fellow and my experience in teaching plant 
taxonomy at West China University contributed to the success 
of my teaching here. 

In January 1969 President C. T. Yung located financial aid 
to pay the salary of an artist, Teresa Fung. He has also provided 
a fund for building a drier which helped a great deal in drying 
the material I collected. The college had one wooden herbarium 
case before 1968. Now it has seven metal cases for the old 
collections and its set of my collections. On May 30, 1969, an 
Australian firm fumigated the herbarium with methyl bromide. 

Meetings and conferences. In October 1968 my friend, Mrs. 
A. T. Roy, came to ask me a favor. She explained to me that 
some outstanding citizens of Hong Kong who were interested 
in conservation had asked her to participate in a meeting to be 
held at the British Council. Since she had a previous engagement 
for that day, she asked if I could take her place; she felt that my 
knowledge of the plants of Hong Kong would be of special value 
in this group. At the gathering I met about a dozen people who 
were college professors, bankers, businessmen, and a few ladies 
of society. Subsequently, I was asked to attend monthly meet- 
ings to discuss the problems of organizing a Conservancy Society 
of Hong Kong. This organization was legally established in Feb- 
ruary 1969. 

Hong Kong University organized an international Conference 
on the Conservation of the Country Side in March 1969. 
Speakers were invited from England, the United States, and 
many southeast Asian countries. I participated in the opening 
tea given by the Governor, all the excursion trips, many lectures, 
the closing banquet, and I contributed a paper on the Natural 
Forest of Hong Kong. At the meetings one encountered the small 
number of British who control agriculture, forestry, fisheries, 
planning for land utilization, etc., for Hong Kong. There were, 
by contrast, very few Chinese participants. Because of this con- 
ference, I was able to see many places that I would not have 


Report from Hong Kong | 19 

seen otherwise. I collected many interesting plants on the 
excursion trips. My collecting outfit and my activities attracted 
many people, including some newsmen. Consequently, my pic- 
ture appeared in several English and Chinese newspapers. The 
publicity had a snowball effect. In April and May telephone 
calls from owners of gardens began to accumulate, and I re- 
ceived invitations to visit many people. Two gardens were of 
special interest to me. Mrs. Gloria Barretto and her sixteen-year- 
old son have a beautiful garden on a large hill-top, seaside 
estate where they have a collection of ninety different kinds of 
native Hong Kong orchids. She called to tell me when they were 
in bloom and arranged to show me her garden to see them. The 
other person I enjoyed visiting was an old fellow who has nine 
children and a garden of bonsai. He allowed me to take small 
plant samples. He had many exhibits in the Hong Kong Flower 
Show last spring. 

Visits to Korea and Japan. On the request of Dr. George Dar- 
row, Chairman of the Scientific Committee of the American 
Hemerocallis Society, with the financial assistance of that So- 
ciety, and with the approval of the Director of the Arnold 
Arboretum, I stopped in Korea and Japan on my return trip 
to investigate species of Hemerocallis. I have prepared a report 
on my activities during these two weeks for the Committee, but 
there are several items which are also of interest to the Arnold 
Arboretum. 

The time I had was much too short to go into the field to see 
the wild Hemerocallis. In Korea Dr. T. B. Lee,, a former student 
of the Arnold Arboretum and now a professor in the College of 
Agriculture at the National University of Korea in Suwon, and 
I took a taxi for field work for a day and a half. This was a very 
costly procedure. I spent a half day examining and determining 
the Hemerocallis material he collected. In return, he gave me 
duplicates for our herbarium. In Korea I saw H. minor growing 
in its natural habitat and sent some live material, through the 
American Embassy Air Service, to Dr. F. Meyer at the National 
Arboretum. I collected herbarium specimens for the Arnold 
Arboretum. 

In Japan I stopped at Kyushu for two days and worked in the 
field. I brought back five living plants for the Arnold Arboretum 
collection of Hemerocallis at the Case Estates in Weston. I went 
to Kyoto and met Professor S. Kitamura, a wonderful admin- 
istrator and a good botanist. He introduced me to two botanists 
who accompanied me to the alpine garden at Mt. Rokko and to 
the botanical gardens at the City University of Osaka and at 


20 ARNOLDIA 

Kyoto University. I spent a day in his herbarium examining all 
the Hemerocallis and making sketches of the types and isotypes. 

I obtained nine live plants and accompanying herbarium 
material from the Mt. Rokko Alpine Garden; I obtained eighteen 
more from the Botanical Garden at the City University of Osaka. 
The Rokko plants are all Japanese species; the Osaka plants are 
of special value. One of these, H. exaltata , was raised from 
plants transplanted from the type locality. Five others were 
raised from seed obtained from China (Peking) through ex- 
change. One, H. fulva , was introduced to Japan from Nepal. 
The University of Kyoto Botanical Garden has a small triploid 
H. fulva var. pauciflora , the type plant of the variety. I obtained 
a live plant for the Arnold Arboretum collection. Altogether, I 
was able to bring back thirty live plants, and I hope that from 
these the Arboretum will have some good daylily material to 
offer American gardeners. In the alpine garden I saw American 
Syinplocarpus foetidus growing side by side with the Japanese 
Lysichiton camtschatense. The latter makes a very beautiful 
rosette, and I thought it would be interesting to have some 
plants for our meadow at Jamaica Plain. I obtained two small 
ones which I sent to Mr. Fordham. 

In Tokyo I worked in the herbaria of the National Museum 
and of the Botanical Institute of Tokyo University. Makino, 
Nakai, Ohwi, and Hara deposited their type specimens of Hem- 
erocallis in these herbaria. I examined all the material and took 
pictures of the types of H. coreana, H. exilis, H. littorea, H. 
micranthus, H. pedicellata , H. sulphurea, and H. yezoensis. My 
camera was loaded with color film, so the pictures are slides. 
The photographs and my herbarium specimens will aid our 
understanding of the original descriptions by Japanese botanists. 

In the Botanical Garden at the University of Tokyo I saw a 
Hydrangea with a ball-shaped habit, about 1.5 meters in dia- 
meter, covered with shiny, green leaves, and flat panicles of 
blue flowers surrounded by pink bracts. I have not seen such 
a beautiful Hydrangea anywhere though I have covered most of 
the trails that E. H. Wilson traveled in Western China. I learned 
that this cultivar has not been named yet. I was permitted to 
make cuttings for the Arboretum, and I sent them to Mr. Ford- 
ham under the name Hydrangea Tokyo Delight’. 

In retrospect. Looking back over my life and work from March 
1968 to June 1969, I can conclude with pride that I have been 
busy and productive. I made four trips over the Pacific and 
brought back over 2700 herbarium specimens with duplicates, 
and thirty live plants for the Arnold Arboretum. The 500 odd 



Fig. 3: Lunch time on a field trip. The man eating his lunch 
organized a party to look for salamanders — at 1 ,000 ft. altitude. 

Photo: S. Y. Hu. 


numbers of specimens collected in the spring of 1968 were 
identified that summer. The Herbarium Secretary typed the 
labels, and about 2000 duplicate specimens were distributed. 
I worked on identifying the 2200 new collections last summer. 
In comparing my collections with the named specimens in the 
combined herbaria, I found that most of them are valuable addi- 
tions, either of new phases of development or because they repre- 
sent new records for the area. 

My first trip served as an exploration of the problems and 
possibilities of preparing a modern flora of Hong Kong. During 
my second trip I made extensive botanical investigations of 
Hong Kong and the New Territories. From the accompanying 
map one can see the areas which I covered in the spring of 1968, 
the fall of 1968, and the spring of 1969. Although, to a tourist, 
Hong Kong is a small, congested shopping area, to a botanist 
who wants to investigate its vegetation and botanical resources, 
it is big, wild, and fascinating. On my numerous trips I have 
retraced my steps only on two occasions, and then in different 
seasons. In every locality I visited, there were new things to see 
and to collect. Some of the material is very localized and hard to 
find. 

I have been puzzled about one problem: the ferns. I examined 
all the fern collections in the Hong Kong Herbarium in the 
spring of 1968 and I prepared a key. From this work I formed 
a good idea of the ferns of Hong Kong. On my trips I tried to 
collect all the fern species, but I found less than a quarter of the 
number that was in the herbarium. Naturally, I wonder what 


22 ARNOLDIA 

has happened to the ferns in the past one hundred years. There 
are three or four species which are common, but where are the 
others? 

Regarding the preparation of an illustrated flora, I can report 
progress in three directions : ( 1 ) The collection and identifica- 
tion of specimens form a broad and sound foundation for the 
flora. (2) By helping a student who is interested in the medicinal 
plants of Hong Kong, I have accumulated a great deal of in- 
formation on the economic uses of plants. With my help, Lee 
Fung Oi has collected over 300 samples from herbalists and has 
recorded their medicinal properties and methods of use. After 
I identified her material, the samples were stored in envelopes, 
with her original notes, in the herbarium of Chung Chi College. 
All this information will be incorporated into the flora as notes. 
(3) About 300 illustrations were drawn, each representing one 
genus. Teresa Fung, the seventeen-year-old artist, is very skillful. 
My only regret is that I could not spend more time with her 
to help her with detailed structures and with developing her 
ability to the fullest extent. The preparation of lecture notes and 
the care of specimens were more urgent than the supervision of 
her work. When I could not show her the details of certain 
genera, I had to ask her to make habit sketches. Consequently, 
there are many illustrations which I did not allow her to ink 
because I wanted to make corrections and additions. 

Looking towards the future. At a time when the biological 
sciences swing strongly to cellular and molecular study, to some 
people it seems out of fashion to talk about a flora of Hong Kong. 
However, the preparation of a modern illustrated flora has a 
place — actually, an importance — in botanical research. That 
the people of Hong Kong feel the need of such a flora has been 
well expressed by the encouragement and support given to my 
work by Dr. C. T. Yung, President of Chung Chi College. Act- 
ually, a cry for an illustrated flora of Hong Kong was made by 
the residents forty years ago. In 1928, A. H. Crook, Headmaster 
of Queen’s College, Hong Kong, published some illustrated, pop- 
ular articles on Hong Kong plants. In 1930, he reprinted these 
articles in book form and called it The Flowering Plants of Hong 
Kong ( Ranunculaceae to Meliaceae ). In a book review in the 
Hong Kong Naturalist, the reviewer wrote: “It is to be hoped 
that some one can be found to complete a work so admirably 
started. There is no doubt that an illustrated . . . flora of this 
Colony is badly wanted. If Mr. Crook’s work could be brought 
to a successful conclusion it would fill a long felt want.” 

Shiu-Ying Hu 



1. The Plantain 

Many of the common weeds found in the Arnold Arboretum 
were once known as useful plants, worthy of full-page engrav- 
ings in the old herbals, the medical books of ancient and medi- 
eval times. Most of them are species of European or Asiatic 
origin; their histories can be traced back to a period when there 
were no books, word of their efficacy as remedies or charms 
spreading from place to place by wandering merchants and 
soldiers returning from foreign lands. 

Plantain or pigweed ( Plantago major), one of the commonest 
of weeds, has a long and colorful history. One of the first to 
mention it was Dioscorides, writing in the first century A.D. 
Dioscorides was a Greek physician who traveled widely and de- 
scribed many plants new for that time. He prescribed the leaves 


23 


24 ARNOLDIA 

of the plantain for the treatment of dogbite and recommended 
that the leaves be chewed to alleviate toothache. 

Plantain was mentioned in the tenth century in a Saxon 
manuscript, the Leechbook of Bald, where, called by its Saxon 
name “waybroad,” it was described as one of the magic herbs 
which occupied a prominent place in Saxon herb lore. 

In the late 1500's John Gerard, a barber-surgeon and well- 
known horticulturist, listed plantain in his Herball or General 
Historie of Plantes, stating, “the juice dropped in the eies codes 
the heat and inflammation thereof.” 

Plantain was so commonly used in the time of Shakespeare 
that it found its way into one of his plays : 

Romeo: Your plantain leaf is excellent for that. 

Benvoleo: For what, I pray thee? 

Romeo: For your broken shin. 

( Romeo and Juliet, Act I, Scene II) 

Fifty years after the landing of the pilgrims John Josselyn, 
a British visitor to America, reported in his New England Rare- 
fies Discovered that the plantain, unknown in the Western 
Hemisphere before Europeans arrived, had already become com- 
mon, and had been given a name by the Indians meaning 
“Englishman’s foot” or “white man’s foot,” because it became 
established wherever Englishmen set foot. 

Longfellow used this common name for the plant in his poem 
Hiawatha, speaking of the English settlers: 

Wheresoe’er they tread, beneath them 

Springs a flower unknown among us. 

Springs the white man’s foot in blossom. 

Plantain was still being used medicinally in the nineteenth 
century. Plantain seeds, being mucilaginous, were used in pul- 
monary diseases, according to the Cyclopedia or Universial Dic- 
tionary of Arts, Science, and Literature, of Abraham Rees, 
printed in 1819. As recently as 1899 the Century Dictionary and 
Cyclopedia listed a medical use for the plantain: “The leaf is 
bound upon inflamed surfaces with a soothing effect.” 

Thus the plantain, which gardeners do their best to eradicate, 
comes down to us from the past, not only as a useful and re- 
spected plant, but also as quite a literary one. 

Helen Roca-Garcia 


Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 


A walk through the Arboretum on a mild day in winter can be 
a rewarding experience but, judging from the number of visitors 
we see at this time of year, few people are aware of this. Possibly 
the cold weather is responsible for such a seasonal lack of inter- 
est in plants, but it is more probable that we judge the beauty 
of a plant too much in terms of the flowers it produces, of the 
fruit it bears, or of its fall color. 

It is true that climate places rather severe restrictions upon 
the types of plants that can be grown in this area. In comparison 
with milder parts of the country, we certainly cannot boast a 
long list of broad-leaved evergreens to brighten a dreary land- 
scape. Smaller still would be a list of those plants which retain 
conspicuous attractive fruits or berries throughout the winter, 
and even smaller would be a list of flowers that could be seen 
in the few mild interludes between winter blasts. 

What, then, does the Arboretum have to offer during nearly 
six months of the year when leaves are gone from the trees? 
Mainly, there is a chance to see many things which are either 
hidden or unnoticed at other times. 

The true character of the shape and habit of growth of indivi- 
dual trees can be fully appreciated. The Phellodendrons along 
the Meadow Road present a remarkable picture with their wide, 
arching, ascending, corky branches supporting a delicate tracery 
of twigs posed against the blue winter sky. Further along the 
road ancient oaks in the natural woods somberly proclaim the 
grace and dignity which only age can impart. The picture is 
repeated in various ways throughout the Arboretum, and par- 
ticularly good examples of diversity of form may be found 
among the lindens, maples, elms, oaks, and especially the co- 
nifers. It is difficult to imagine a lovelier view in any garden than 
that of the Pinetum after a heavy fall of snow. 

Another favorite winter scene is that of the American Beeches 
on the bank of Bussey Brook opposite Hemlock Hill. Surrounded 
on three sides by dark conifers, the silver-gray trunks and 
branches literally glow in the sunlight and present a striking 


25 


26 ARNOLDIA 

example of the use of color in the winter landscape. Near the 
three ponds at the far end of the Meadow Road are extensive 
plantings of Cornus sericea and C. sericea ‘Flaviramea’. Stems of 
the former are red; those of the latter, bright yellow. This pleas- 
ing contrast is enhanced by the dull red twigs of the Virginia 
Rose, Rosa virginiana. planted as a low informal hedge in the 
foreground. 

Scattered throughout the Arboretum are noteworthy trees 
which, for one reason or another, have interesting bark charac- 
teristics. Some are brightly colored, some are striped, others ex- 
foliate. The magnificent specimen of the Paperbark Maple, Acer 
griseum , on Bussey Hill should not be missed. The peeling cin- 
namon-brown bark which glows in the low rays of the winter 
sun provides about as much as any photographer could demand. 

A walk past the shrub beds by the Centre Street wall will 
reveal a number of broad-leaved evergreens which are hardy 
at the Arboretum, and the dwarf conifers on the slope below 
the bonsai house deserve a visit to see the variations in color 
which these plants exhibit in winter. 

Robert S. Hebb 


Summary of weather data recorded at the Dana Greenhouses, 
January 1968-November 1969 


1968 1969 

Avg. Avg. 


Precipitation 

8 a.m. Temp. 


Precipitation 

8 a.m. Temp. 

4.14 

20 

JAN 

2.41 

25 

.82 

22.5 

FEB 

5.45 

27 

9.20 

36.5 

MAR 

2.41 

33 

2.16 

51 

APR 

5.06 

49.7 

3.91 

54.2 

MAY 

2.84 

57.1 

6.25 

64 

JUN 

1.18 

67.6 

.61 

71.9 

JUL 

3.01 

68.7 

1.86 

66.1 

AUG 

2.28 

68.5 

2.14 

58.6 

SEP 

4.90 

58.6 

1.75 

51.3 

OCT 

1.97 

48.1 

7.26 

6.15 

39.3 

26.8 

NOV 

DEC 

9.72 

40.4 


Fig. 4, opposite: Arnold Arboretum , conifers in winter. 
Photo: P. Bruns. 




Arnoldio Reviews 


Making Things Grow , by Thalassa Cruso 

Unquestionably, this book will be enormously popular. Few 
gardening books, in my memory, have had the advance and con- 
tinuing publicity given to Making Things Grow. The inevitable 
popularity of this book makes one wish it had been more care- 
fully prepared. Praise or criticism must fall on Miss Cruso’s 
shoulders. No editor’s name is given. No credits are given. There 
is no bibliography. The proofreading of the manuscript leaves 
much to be desired. A book reviewer is not supposed to hunt for 
errors, I am told, but when the errors jump at you from the 
pages, it is another matter. “Polydody” and “Rohea” occur more 
than once in the book. Other misspellings, like “zygocatus,” 
“abutilion,” “pulcherria,” and “bilfurcatum,” show up too fre- 
quently. And something called an “aeomema” is most puzzling; 
she probably means “aeonium.” 

Miss Cruso’s ability to raise one’s hackles while watching some 
of her TV shows has not diminished in this book. About as fast 
as she deflates old myths, she creates new ones. It is hard to 
accept such statements as “little plants must have each others’ 
company to thrive;” or when speaking of ferns, “unlike any other 
plant making use of photosynthesis, they never bloom and set 
seed;” “pot soil remains in good condition only when it has active 
roots at work inside;” “flowering plants . . . need a drop by 
night of from 5 to 8 degrees if they are to continue opening 
their buds;” “roots will not stir into new growth unless they feel 
the pressure of earth against them;” or “sage, which is a close 
cousin both of lantana and salvia, . . .” One could go on quot- 
ing more of these flatly stated, very questionable pronounce- 
ments, but the above will suffice. It is strange, also, to read of 
lavish praise given to the use of bone meal in soil mixes. 

In the introduction, Thalassa Cruso states her two reasons for 
writing the book: “to convince would-be gardeners that making 
things grow indoors is not too complicated for them to manage. 


28 


Reviews I 29 


and to bring gardening back for the gardenless gardener.” The 
chapters on “neglectable” plants and indoor lighting are ex- 
tremely well done and certainly by themselves would bring about 
these two desired ends. Too many people approach the problems 
of using artificial lighting for indoor plants with great trepida- 
tion. Miss Cruso quite thoroughly allays their fears. The chapter 
on neglectable plants leaves one with no arguments for not 
growing some sort of house plants. 

A wry sense of humor and a flair for the dramatic add to the 
pleasures of the book. But occasionally the drama gets a bit out 
of hand. Both on TV and in the book “potting back” a plant and 
the necessary chopping away of some of the roots becomes more 
a performance worthy of the Grand Guignol than a routine 
gardening procedure. 

The drawings done by Grambs Miller are adequate, and only 
one error seems to have crept in regarding them. On page 116 
a mislabelling of azaleas occurs. This is probably not the artist’s 
fault. 

One last request, Miss Cruso: please stop referring to cactus 
“leaves.” Those things are really modified stems. 

G. P. 

Thalassa Cruso, Making Things Grow, New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf, Inc., 1969. $6.95 


The Book of Spices, by Frederick Rosengarten, Jr. 

Books on spices have been written by herbalists, botanists, his- 
torians, geographers, and cooks, but this uniquely beautiful, 
accurate, and readable volume has been written by a man who 
has grown, processed, and marketed spices and who clearly 
loves his wares. After identifying “What Are Spices,” he treats 
the reader to a fascinating “Brief History of Spices” that melds 
the ancient and modern histories of these products of commerce. 
Thirty-five concise treatments of individual spices follow, iden- 
tifying the plant botanically, the part of it which is used, its 
range in nature, and its use, culture, and processing. With each 
prospectus are a few welcome recipes, for who has not a little- 
used box of spice on the shelf and yearns for the recipe which 


30 ARNOLDIA 


will demonstrate most effectively the characteristic of that single 
spice. 

The author suggests that the first authentic, if fragmentary, 
records of the use of spices may be associated with the age of 
the pyramids in Egypt, nearly 4,000 years ago, where onions 
and garlic are depicted being fed to laborers to protect their 
health. Uses do not change; how very frequently today one 
smells onions and garlic still being used as a food, a spice, or — 
according to some — a sure cure for a cold. Another early use 
of spices, and perhaps the precursor of the pickling process, was 
for embalming, yet only in recent years have we proven the 
germicidal properties of many spice oils. Spicy odors improved 
the air in a period when sanitation was not what we know 
today, and the plain starchy foods of the period tasted better 
when spices were added. The claim that spices were aphrodisiacs 
was as prevalent then as now. 

Whatever the basic reason for the use of spices, history shows 
us that spices were desired by slaves and kings, by churches 
and governments, and that they were attained by fair means 
and foul. Botanical gardens were established in many tropical 
areas to grow plants from stolen spices. One shares the anguish 
of a botanist who reported that the spice trees he grew from 
carefully imported seeds were all male plants incapable of pro- 
ducing the needed and valuable fruit. Commercial fortunes were 
made, and many lives lost, in the cultivation and trade of spices. 
New areas of the world were explored for safe routes for trade 
or new sources of the plant products that modern man buys 
without peril in the supermarket. The author has selected ap- 
propriate facts and presents them well. 

Mr. Rosengarten has drawn information from many sources. 
One almost turns a page quickly to see who is quoted next, for 
Shakespeare precedes Chaucer or follows Keats. Reports from 
the Grete Herbal or Culpepper may be as appropriate in this text 
as a quotation from the Bible, or a table from the USDA or the 
Commonwealth Secretariat. So, too, with the illustrations in this 
handsome book. A crude drawing from a manuscript dated 512 
A.D., a woodcut from the 16th century, an illustration from 
Curtis’s Botanical Magazine, or a sensitive contemporary photo- 
graph of a very self-conscious little girl holding her dog near 
an herb grown in Guatemala are examples of illustrations well 
chosen and clearly appropriate to the subject. Special attention 
should be paid to the botanical plates reproduced from early 
German works completely unknown to botanists I have ques- 
tioned. These are models of technical excellence of color repro- 


Reviews I 31 


duction; the captions are translated. An appendix consists of 
a few tables of supply and demand statistics, a short glossary, 
and a useful bibliography. Even the two indices, one to recipes 
and one to general subject matter, merit a compliment. 

I do not know the relative roles of the author or the publisher 
in this production. Certainly both are to be commended, and I 
recommend this useful, interesting, and beautiful book. 

R.A.H. 

Frederick Rosengarten, Jr., The Book of Spices, Wynnewood, 
Pa.: Livingston Publishing Co., 1969. 489 pages, 330 illustra- 
tions, 73 color plates. $20.00. 


Fig. 5: Bussey Brook. Photo: P. Bruns. 



Staff of the Arnold Arboretum 

Richard Alden Howard, Ph.D., Arnold Professor of Botany, 
Professor of Dendrology, and Director 
Karl Sax, S.D., Professor of Botany, Emeritus 
Alfred Linn Bogle, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Pamela Anne Bruns, B.A., Artist 
Jeanne Caldwell, B.A., Assistant Librarian 
Michael Anthony Canoso, M.S., Senior Curatorial Assistant 
Constance Elizabeth Derderian, Honorary Curator of the 
Bonsai Collection 

Gordon Parker DeWolf, Jr., Ph.D., Horticultural Taxonomist 
Thomas Elias, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
William Ed Grime, B.A., Curatorial Assistant 
Thomas Gordon Hartley, Ph.D., Associate Curator of 
Pacific Botany 

Robert Stephen Hebb, S.B., Assistant Horticulturist 
Winifred Parker Hebb, S.B., Herbarium Assistant 
Heman Arthur Howard, Assistant Horticulturist 
Shiu-Ying Hu, Ph.D., Botanist 

Thomas Matthew Kinahan, Superintendent, Case Estates 
Charles Robert Long, A.M., Librarian 
Norton Miller, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Lorin Ives Nevling, Jr., Ph.D., Curator and Supervisor of 
the Herbaria 

Dulcie Alicia Powell, M.A., Botanist 
George Howard Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 
Helen Roca-Garcia, A.M., Research Assistant 
Bernice Giduz Schubert, Ph.D., Curator and Editor 
Paul Davidsen Sorensen, Ph.D., Assistant Horticultural 
Taxonomist 

Stephanne Sutton, A.B., Archivist 
Robert Gerow Williams, B.S., Superintendent 
Carroll Emory Wood, Jr., Ph.D., Curator 
Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist 


Printed in the U.S.A. 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
%la°rdUntrsi,y, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, V.S.A. 



ARNOLDIA 

Arboretum / Vol. 30, No. 2 / March 15, 197C 


aRARY 


1 O 


7 1970 


NEW YORK 
BOTANfCAL GARDEN 


rt 


Contents 

33 What Can We Do About Pollution 

GORDON P. DE WOLF, JR. 

56 Care and Preservation 
of Library Materials 

GEORGE H. M. LAWRENCE 

67 Notes on the Genus Ilex Linnaeus 

SHIU-YING HU 

72 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 

ROBERT S. HEBB 

75 Arnoldia Reviews 


ARNOLDIA 


is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


On the cover: Hamamelis mollis at the Arnold Arboretum. 


What Can We Do About Pollution? 


It is not easy to say anything new about pollution of the environ- 
ment. It is a bad thing. We all oppose it in theory. Why, then, 
does it continue? Because, when it comes down to specific 
instances, specific pressures — generally economic — appear. 
Someone’s self-interest is threatened. Each writer must ap- 
proach the problem from his own experience and interests. The 
popular and technical press are now full of facts and figures 
about pollution. The legislatures and the executives are pro- 
posing programs right and left. Pollution can be controlled, here 
and now. The cost is greatly increased taxation and control of 
the size of our population. Neither, alone, will help. We must 
have both. 

I am appalled by the unsanitary conditions that pollution 
forces our society to endure. I am aware of local needs and 
pressures to convert undeveloped land to “useful” purposes. I 
have to admit that some of these needs and pressures are valid. 
I realize that a balance must be struck between the preservation 
of open space and the needs of people for places to live. The 
sub-rural environment that I desire for my children is also de- 
sired by others, and so I have to admit that undeveloped land 
must be made available to others for housing. My concern is 
that the development of undeveloped land should be orderly and 
in the best interest of all. 

Although the Boston-Washington megalopolis is the largest 
concentration of cities in the world, there is now more “wild” 
land in southern New England than there has been for more 
than 100 years Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut 
are three of the four most densely populated states in the Union. 
Despite this, only 9% of the land area is devoted to industry, 
commerce, or residences; 17% of the land is devoted to agricul- 
ture; 65% of the land is in forest, and the remaining 9% is 
under water or covered by non-forested wetlands. One hundred 
and ten years ago 60% of the land area of Massachusetts was 
cleared and used for agriculture, residences, or industry; 20% 
was “waste,” and only 20% under forest. Wildlife also has in- 
creased over the last hundred years, even over the last forty 


33 


34 [ ARNOLDIA 

years. In 1930 E. J. Palmer recorded that rabbits were rare or 
lacking in the Arboretum; they are common today. Within this 
same period the raccoon and opossum have become firmly estab- 
lished in the Boston metropolitan area. 

This is not to say that all is well. All is not well, and we 
know it. But there is a larger picture that we must attempt to 
see. Urbanization and concomitant pollution, as they concern 
us, are localized in a few river valleys, in the Boston and Narra- 
gansett basins, and on the outer edge of the coastal plain from 
New Haven to New York. Our water resources (brooks, rivers, 
ponds, marshes, and sea coast) are badly polluted. The air over 
our larger cities is polluted. The effect of insecticides on wild- 
life, and on us, is a problem of considerable proportions. But, 
excepting these special cases, we are in much better shape 
than we might expect. Our greatest concern should not be 
Man’s effect upon wildlife but, rather, Man’s effect upon him- 
self. Nature will survive; Man may not. 

The problems that we face with regard to environmental pollu- 
tion are serious. I do not think that overstating any facet of 
the situation does us any great good. What I would like to do is 
to present both sides of some environmental questions. I shall 
offer some comments and recommendations on the general 
problem. After that I shall deal with the consequences of a few 
specific problems. 

General Considerations. Basically, all of our pollution problems 
are caused by what is currently called over-population. Our 
population is growing at a rate that is greater than our ability 
to provide municipal services for it. Generally, every new fami- 
ly in a community costs the town or municipality more for ser- 
vices than it can recover from that family in taxes. Hence, the 
taxes on all of us must continually increase. In the inevitable 
competition for funds the schools, rightly, are placed at the 
top of the list. Unfortunately, sanitation, which bears directly 
on environmental quality, is almost inevitably given a low 
priority. 

Every animal or plant population pollutes its environment 
with its wastes. Under natural conditions, the total environment 
is able to accommodate the natural rate of pollution, converting 
wastes to useful nutrients. If any single species increases out 
of balance with the total environment, the population of that 
species is reduced, either by starvation, disease, or by strangu- 
lation in its own waste. 

In the case of human population, the problem of waste dis- 


Pollution I 35 


posal is now acute, as are the problems of starvation and dis- 
ease. It is doubtful that we can find money enough to construct 
waste disposal facilities fast enough to prevent further en- 
vironmental deterioration. Indeed, we shall be lucky to keep 
pace with increasing population. Even if we could construct 
facilities fast enough, it is even more doubtful that trained per- 
sonnel to operate them would be available. Like it or not, these 
are the problems we face. We cannot leave these problems and 
migrate to the frontier. We must stand where we are and fight 
this battle on this ground. 



In Massachusetts, and in the country as a whole, the rights 
of the individual are correctly given prime protection by the 
courts. Unfortunately, these rights include the right to befoul 
our own property. Only when danger to the life or property of 
others can be clearly demonstrated will the courts be prevailed 
upon to act restrictively. If the amenity of open or underdevel- 
oped land is to be securely protected and preserved, it must be 
accomplished by public or private ownership. We cannot, by 
law, impose our individual standards of amenity upon others. 

Many laws and programs have been passed by the various 
legislative bodies to protect society from the abuses of individ- 
uals. Pollution, however, continues only slightly abated. Why? 
In Massachusetts, and probably in many other states, we do not 
need radically new legislation or programs. The problem in this 
state, and I believe in most other states, is that the present laws 
are neither obeyed nor enforced. The laws are not obeyed 
because the legislatures have not voted sufficient money to pro- 
vide the trained manpower necessary to enforce them. Towns 


36 ARNOLDIA 

and municipalities, even if they choose to attempt to obey the 
laws, do not have the personnel to enforce them. Further, the 
towns and municipalities have found that state agencies either 
will not challenge them or, if challenge occurs, the judicial 
process can be dragged out so as to make the challenge nearly 
meaningless. The single answer, then, is money: money on 
both the state and local levels to enforce compliance with the 
laws. Until manpower is available, legislation is futile. It ap- 
pears that we will not have sufficient money for this task until 
the size of the population is stabilized. The problem is as simple 
as that. 

It is dangerous to wait, however; we must face the situation 
in its current context. First, local government must be pressured 
to obey the laws with the exercise of police action by the state. 
Qualified engineers and other technicians must be prevailed 
upon to serve, gratis, on the appropriate town or municipal 
boards. The general population must be prevailed upon to learn 
the laws and to report problems as they arise. People must 
demand that local government act promptly to rectify the prob- 
lems. Second, in the absence of appropriate local response the 
appropriate state agency — usually the state Department of 
Public Health — must be pressured to provide police action. 
In general, the state Department of Public Health is the primary 
agency charged with maintenance of environmental quality. In 
Massachusetts the Department has developed a series of mini- 
mum standards for the protection of the environment. Un- 
fortunately, in Massachusetts the state pay scale is too low for 
the Department to hold the qualified personnel it needs. Also, 
the table of staffing provided by the legislature does not permit 
enough people for effective enforcement activities. The current 
work load of the present staff is such that a citizen’s complaint 
must wait an average of three weeks before it can receive even 
a preliminary investigation. Resolution of that complaint may 
take three months or longer. The situation is intolerable. 

Local complaints arise from the inability of local boards of 
health to deal with their own problems. The engineers employed 
by communities are not, in general, qualified to deal with public 
health problems. This problem is compounded by the lack of 
knowledge of the local boards of the long-term consequences 
of environmental deterioration — or, to be blunt, of the results 
of deviation from the requirements of the sanitary code. 

Tactically, environmental problems should be handled as fol- 
lows : ( 1 ) Determine the exact circumstances of the particular 
case, including the presumed deviations from local or state laws. 


Pollution 1 37 


(2) Contact the local board of health (in writing, by certified 
mail) detailing the problem and requesting an answer, in writ- 
ing, by a given date. (3) If satisfaction is not forthcoming 
from the local board, contact the district state sanitary engineer, 
in writing, (again, by certified mail) enclosing a copy of the 
letter sent to the local board, and request an answer by a given 
date. (4) If need be, contact the head of the state Department 
of Public Health (also by certified mail) enclosing copies of all 
relevant correspondence. 

It is important to remember that, given the pressure of in- 
creasing population, development of undeveloped land cannot 
be stopped. It can only be regulated and directed into accept- 
able directions. In the long run land can only be preserved in 
its natural state by public or private ownership. The nature con- 
servancy or local land trusts can accomplish this. Further, we 
have to accept the fact that any method of preserving land in 
its natural state will cost money. If sufficient public employees 
are to be engaged to protect the environment, the money must 
come from some source. Either taxes will have to be raised or 
some other activity will have to be curtailed. Perhaps roads will 
suffer, or perhaps we will have to do without a new municipal 
building or a sports stadium. This is the choice that the public 
has to make. 

I am not particularly hopeful that local communities will 
solve their own problems by their own choice. Most people are 
not concerned with anything other than their own personal 
problems. By and large local officials will not act in the public 
interest — as distinct from their own private, financial, or pres- 
tige interests — unless there is the threat of police action from 
the state. The vast majority of the population will oppose the 
additional taxation that is necessary for pollution control. It 
is up to the state legislatures and executives to provide legisla- 
tion and money to enforce that legislation for the public good. 
To date we have seen plenty of legislation but very little money 
for its implementation and enforcement. 

Pollution of Soil and Water. A particular level of pollution can 
occur in one, or both, of two ways: a low level of pollution by 
a large number of sources, or a relatively high level of pollution 
by a few sources. It is easy to see the high level of pollution 
produced by an industrial establishment and equally easy to 
think that if only industrial pollution could be stopped our prob- 
lems would end. However, the situation is not so clear-cut. Of 
course, industrial plants should curb their pollution of the en- 


38 1 ARNOLDIA 

vironment. Yet if all industrial pollution were eliminated, our 
job would be only half done. 

At least 50% of soil, water, and probably air pollution is pro- 
duced by the individual home owner. At least half of the sur- 
plus nutrients that now befoul our lakes and rivers originate 
from the effluence of the sewage disposal facilities of individual 
home owners, the fertilizers they apply to their lawns and 
gardens, and farms. There is no question that industrial pollu- 
tion can and should be controlled, but what of the balance? The 
home owner’s dry well, cesspool, or septic tank is simply not an 
acceptable solution to the problems of household waste disposal. 
The ground water in many of our suburban communities is al- 
ready hopelessly contaminated with bacteria and chemicals. 
The only satisfactory solution is for all homes to be connected 
to a public sewer system, and for the wastes to be treated in a 
modern, efficient sewage disposal plant. 

Again, we are faced with the problem of money. Sewers are 
expensive to lay. Efficient sewage treatment plants are expen- 
sive to build, maintain, and staff. They seldom occupy a high 
place in the budget priorities of towns and municipalities. In 
the long run increased taxes are the only answer. Federal grants 
are not free. They are all paid for with taxes, yours and mine. 

If the problem of sewage disposal is not enough, another one 
is forcing itself upon our consciousness: common table salt — 
sodium chloride — pollution. The use of salt is one of the most 
effective and economical techniques for clearing roads of snow 
and ice in winter. One frequent, observable result of this prac- 
tice is the death of grasses and herbaceous vegetation along the 
sides of roads that have been salted during the previous winter. 
In addition, we may note the decline in vigor, or even death, 
of some roadside trees. The obvious line of reasoning is: (1) 
salt is used to clear snow and ice from the road; (2) we have 
used salt in the past to kill weeds and grass in driveways and 
paths; (3) salt has killed the roadside grasses and herbs; (4) 
salt is killing the trees. Unfortunately, like so many obvious 
lines of reasoning, this one is only partially valid. Statements 
(1) and (2) are obviously true, statement (3) probably follows, 
but statement (4) is questionable as a generalization, though 
probably true in individual cases. I can do no better than to 
quote from a talk by Dr. F. W. Holmes of the Shade Tree Labora- 
tories of the University of Massachusetts: “Obviously a great 
many factors that are present along a road can harm a tree. 
Salt is only one of them. Others include fill, compaction of soil, 
absence of topsoil, limited surface area for air and water to 


Pollution 1 39 


reach the roots, pavement over the roots, all the usual insects 
and infectious diseases (especially diseased root systems), nat- 
ural drought, artificial droughts from alteration of the water 
table by drainage systems, increased numbers of injuries 
through artificial transplantings of trees (through automobile 
accidents and vandalism) cutting of roots in ditches for the 
sake of various installations, gas leaking into the soil, electrical 
injuries, herbicides and other chemicals and air pollution fumes; 
to lump it all in a single phrase, all the ills of civilization. After 
a decade of diagnostic work in Massachusetts, I am strongly 
inclined to say that ‘civilization’ is the most serious disease agent 
affecting shade trees, not standing second even to the famous 
Dutch elm disease! When we are faced with a tree which has 
undergone all of these site injuries, and which may therefore 
be especially subject to all those diseases and insect pests that 
preferentially attack weakened or wounded trees, then how are 
we to judge to what extent salt has played a detrimental role?” 

Salt is definitely a factor in the decline in vigor and death 
of some roadside trees. The relationship may be direct, as in 
the case of species such as the sugar maple in which salt may 
be absorbed by the tree in lethal quantities; or it may be in- 
direct, since it appears that salt-treated soils are low in soluble 
nutrients, and the tree may be literally starving. The problem 
of what to do about roadside trees is easy to handle. Salt- 
intolerant species should be replaced with salt-tolerant trees. 
Roadside soils should have a regular program of fertilization. 

Since salt is very quickly leached through the upper levels 
of the soil, its effects on roadside vegetation are temporary. It 
reaches subsoil water tables quickly and gets into ponds and 
streams. In Massachusetts we are now beginning to have prob- 
lems, which will undoubtedly continue and intensify, with salt 
contamination of domestic wells and water supplies. In addi- 
tion, we will have to cope with salt contaminating streams and 
lakes, destroying fish and other wildlife, and polluting public 
water supplies. The problem of the selective killing of roadside 
vegetation is one that we can five with, but I am not sure that 
we can live with polluted reservoirs. 

At present there is no economical method for removing com- 
mon salt from water. It can only be diluted with unpolluted 
water to an acceptable level of palatability. With our present 
population growth and the resulting pressure on water supplies, 
it is questionable how long this technique will serve us. If we 
stop using salt to clear the roads, we will need to compensate 
with a vast capital expenditure for mechanical equipment to 


40 ARNOLDIA 

plow and remove snow and to spread sand. Operating expenses 
will also rise, not only for drivers and mechanics, but also for 
personnel to clear the sand from roadsides and gutters at the 
end of the winter. Are we willing to accept more taxation for 
unpolluted water? 

Air Pollution. Many, perhaps most, metropolitan areas have 
problems with air pollution. Boston is no exception. That our 
problems are not greater is due in part to nature — - the lay of 
the land and the prevailing winds — - and in part to a long 
history of legislation aimed at air quality control in our metro- 
politan area. However, inadequate funding has prevented the 
State Department of Public Health from employing a sufficient 
number of qualified engineers to assess the conditions to formu- 
late adequate regulations promptly, and to enforce the regula- 
tions once they are established as law. The situation can, per- 
haps, be best described by quoting from a special report to the 
Massachusetts legislature prepared by the department, and sub- 
mitted in September of 1968. 

“Legislative authority for control of air pollution in the Com- 
monwealth [of Massachusetts] by a responsible public agency 
was first established in 1869 at the time of the creation of the 
State Board of Health. Air pollution control was included in its 
environmental sanitation program. By the turn of the century 
certain aspects of air pollution control were recognized to be of 
a regional nature and the Legislature, in 1901, enacted a Gen- 
eral Law to control the emission of dark smoke from sources 
other than locomotives and brick kilns However, ‘special-inter- 
est’ amendments to exclude public utility corporation, wood- 
burning plants, and pottery kilns reduced the effectiveness of 
this law, and brought about the formation of a citizens’ com- 
mittee for smoke abatement to protest to the legislature. . . . 
The Committee’s efforts were rewarded when, as a result of its 
persuasion, the Boston Chamber of Commerce filed a petition 
to the General Court, titled ‘An Act to Provide for the Abate- 
ment of Smoke in the City of Boston and Vicinity,’ which be- 
came Chapter 651 of the Acts of 1910." 

. . It provided for a ‘smoke district’ comprising the cities 
of Boston, Cambridge, Somerville, Everett, Chelsea, and the 
town of Brookline, and encompassing an area of 66 square 
miles with a population of almost one million. . . . Enlarge- 
ment of the ‘smoke district’ to include 29 cities and towns with 
a population of over 1,800,000 within an area of 290 square 
miles, took place in 1928. ... In 1960, new legislation . . . 


Pollution I 41 


was enacted which replaced the ‘smoke district’ with a Metro- 
politan Air Pollution Control District . . . , comprising Boston 
and 29 contiguous cities and towns with an area of 320 square 
miles and a population of over two million people. . . . The 
Department of Public Health, under this law, was given author- 
ity to regulate all sources of atmospheric pollution within the 
District. In the Rules and Regulations subsequently adopted in 
1961, ‘atmospheric pollution’ was defined as ‘the presence in 
the ambient air space of one or more air contaminants or com- 
binations thereof in such quantities and of such duration as to 
(a) cause a nuisance; (b) be injurious or, on the basis of cur- 
rent information, be potentially injurious to human or animal 
life, to vegetation, or to property; or (c) unreasonably interfere 
with the comfortable enjoyment of life and property or the con- 
duct of business.’ ” 

“A good air use management program should strive to keep 
in balance its efforts to reduce air contamination and its suf- 
ferance of reasonable use of its air (as a resource) to receive 
(and transport away) certain wastes resulting from man’s in- 
dividual and collective activities. Such use, however, must be 
in a manner compatible with, but to an extent no greater than, 
the capability of the ambient (outdoor) air to tolerate such use 
without undue detriment to man and his environment of con- 
cern. Expensive air pollution control measures for the preserva- 
tion of pristine purity of air, for preservation reasons alone, and 
where lack of such would produce no significant hazard to man 
or to those elements in the environment for which man has a 
real concern is, per se, a waste of a valuable resource. . . 

Two categories of pollution which have concerned the Metro- 
politan Air Pollution Control District have been “particulates,” 
i.e., those particles such as soot and flyash which settle rather 
rapidly out of the air, and those particles which are so small as 
to settle very slowly, but cause soiling, odors, and reduced visi- 
bility; and sulphur dioxide, which causes sensory and respiratory 
irritation, corrosion of metal, stone and painted surfaces, and 
vegetation damage. 

“Particulate air contaminants result principally from combus- 
tion for the production of heat, power and the destruction of 
wastes; from industrial (or commercial) processes involving 
abrasion, fuming, and loss of process materials; from abrasive 
phenomena such as automobile tire and brake wear; and by 
natural weathering, wind effects, pollen production and evapora- 
tion-condensation. . . . Particulates may be emitted from com- 
bustion processes as a result of gaseous suspension of ash, un- 



Fig. 1: Boston’s Prudential building disappears in smog. 
Photos: P. Bruns. 


burned carbon, and carbonaceous compounds. The amounts 
vary depending on ( 1 ) the amount of ash in the fuel (up to 
25% in refuse, 5-15% in coal and 0.5% in oil . . .); (2) the 
nature of the combustion process . . . ; (3) the efficiency of the 
process; and (4) the nature and efficiency of air cleaning equip- 
ment utilized. . . . The ‘natural background’ of such suspended 
particulate material in New England averages about thirty micro- 
grams per cubic meter (30^ g/M 3 ). This level is the result 
principally from pollen-scattering, wind-disturbance of soil, other 


42 



Pollution | 43 

natural phenomena, weathering of surfaces, evaporation of sea 
spray, and forest fires. . . 

On the fringes of the Metropolitan Boston area total partic- 
ulates average 50 ^ g/M 3 . Close to the city center the average 
concentration rises to 60^ g/M 3 . In the central core the average 
concentration is approximately 85^ g/M 3 , with a winter average 
in South Boston of 128^ g/M 3 . Reports of sulphur dioxide levels 
are available for the inner portion of the Metropolitan area. 
These average more than .03 parts of sulphur dioxide per million 
parts of air, a level which has been determined as being injurious 
to some vegetation. 

Apart from particulates and sulphur dioxide, the atmospheric 
pollutant that is currently receiving much attention is so-called 
photo-chemical smog, a complex mixture of substances caused 
by the action of sunlight on the chemicals emitted as exhaust 
gases by automobiles. This is alleged to be the principal problem 
in and around Los Angeles and to be causing injury and death 
to pine forests on the mountain slopes some 40-60 miles from 
that city. Much has been written about the dangers of photo- 
chemical smog, and much damage has been attributed to it in 
other parts of the country. One has to say, in all honesty, that 
relatively few hard facts are available. Some damage to vegeta- 
tion has been blamed on photo-chemical smog in the Boston 
area and, undoubtedly, some damage has taken place, but there 
is a notable absence of information about exactly how much 
smog produces what kind of damage on which plants. We are 
lacking measurements of pollution levels that would indicate 
that smog could have produced the damage reported. I, for one, 
have not seen any damage in the Boston area that could be 
unequivocally attributed to smog — drought, yes; salt, yes; but 
smog, no. On the other hand. Dr. William Feder, of the Waltham 
Field Station of the University of Massachusetts, has reported 
that ozone (one of the components of photo-chemical smog) is 
a problem in this area. He has said “. . . The sensitive tobacco 
plant used [as an indicator] will react to about to 5 parts 
per million of ozone in the ambient air. These same tobacco 
plants will react to 2-3 ppm of ozone and 0.2 ppm of sulphur 
dioxide to give another type of leaf reaction. Comparison of 
plant damage and meter reading information seems to indicate 
that during a summer like the summer of 1967 total oxidant in 
and around the Boston area may reach as high as 15-20 parts 
per hundred million (i.e., .15-. 2 parts per million) for as long 
as 4-5 hours on a sunny day. This amount of oxidant is enough 
to injure marigold, petunia, and the very sensitive tobacco 


44 ARNOLDIA 

plant." This is, however, probably not sufficient to damage most 
trees and shrubs. What does concern all of us is what effect 
long-continued exposure to low levels of these pollutants will 
have both on vegetation and on humans. At present, this kind 
of information is not available. 

Pesticides. The pesticide controversy, 
like so many other controversies, is a 
battle fought on false premises. The 
agricultural chemical industry pictures 
itself as a knight in white armor fight- 
ing valiantly to provide food for man- 
kind while picturing the anti-pesticide 
forces as trolls, fighting to deny man- 
kind its daily bread. The conservation- 
ists see the picture just the other way. 

In reality, very few people would deny that agricultural pro- 
duction must be increased. Increased agricultural production 
is dependent, among other things, upon protection of crops from 
injury or destruction by insects and other vermin. In the present 
state of our knowledge protection must be based on protection 
by chemical agents. Biological protective agents or strategies 
have been developed in the past for some pests and are now 
being studied for others. However, effective, widespread pro- 
tection by biological agents lies sometime in the future. Since 
we must protect our crops now, the quarrel resolves itself into 
a choice of chemicals for present use. 

Many chemical pesticides are presently available. Some of 
them are extremely toxic to all life forms. Some have short life- 
spans in the environment. Others are persistent in the environ- 
ment and have already been demonstrated to have deleterious ef- 
fects on various species of wildlife. In the past only two criteria 
seem to have influenced our use of pesticides : their effectiveness 
as pesticides and, to a lesser extent, their immediate toxicity to 
man. The agricultural chemical companies have a heavy in- 
vestment in particular chemicals which are economically ad- 
vantageous for them to produce. They also resent being made 
the culprits of environmental deterioration. They feel that they 
have played the game by the rules and they dislike having the 
rules changed to their disadvantage. 

The pesticide problem, lest we forget, is not new. Before the 
Second World War great reliance was placed upon the use of 
pesticides containing arsenic, such as lead arsenate, Paris Green 
(copper aceto-arsenite), and calcium arsenate. In the 1940’s 
and early 1950’s it became apparent that agriculture was in 



Pollution I 45 


trouble. Following many years of heavy applications of arsenical 
sprays, compounds of arsenic had accumulated in the soil. The 
presence of these compounds reduced the yields of many crops 
that had been protected from insect attack. Further, it was 
found that some crops were accumulating arsenic to the amount 
of 14 ppm of their dry weight. Since arsenic and lead are both 
accumulated to lethal levels in the human body, and since the 
lethal dose for an adult is on the order one half to one teaspoon- 
ful, the inherent danger was very real. A radical change of 
insecticides was necessary, and the synthetic organic insecticides 
seemed an obvious answer. We were so relieved to have the 
arsenical problem solved that we chose to ignore the plain warn- 
ings that we had, even then, about the intrinsic dangers of the 
synthetics. Now, with the advantage of hindsight, we are only 
too ready to blame industry for doing exactly what we asked it 
to do fifteen or twenty years ago. 

What we should do, at present, is determine what is safe — 
and economical — and concentrate on them. Arsenicals in any 
form, in my opinion, ought to be banned. That includes the 
arsenical rodent poisons and herbicides. We do not have to 
repeat here all that has been written of the ecological tragedies 
caused by modern synthetic insecticides. There is only one 
point to make. Among the vast number of chemical pesticides 
in commerce there are a few that are economically effective 
and relatively safe ecologically. (See Appendix, page 50.) We 
should concentrate on using them. It is within the capacity of 
the industry to produce other similar pesticides. We should 
stop the noise and get on with the business of producing food. 

In general, the following pesticides are environmentally safe 
for use by the home owner or home gardener : 


Malathion Aphids, caterpillars, beetles, leaf hoppers, 

leaf miners, plant bugs, scale and mealy 
bug, springtails, thrips, white fly, cutworms. 


Methoxychlor Caterpillars, spittle bugs, apple maggot, 

codling moth, Japanese beetle, plum cur- 
culio, tent caterpillar. 

Carbaryl ( Sevin ) Beetles, rose chafer, periodic cicada, pickle- 

worm, squash vine borer, stink bug, bag- 
worm, fall canker worm, codling moth, 
grasshoppers. 

Dicofol Spider mites, cyclamen mites. 

For household insects Malathion will control those listed 
below. Care must be exercised not to contaminate foodstuffs 
or eating or cooking utensils. 


46 1 ARNOLDIA 

Ants 

Bedbugs 

Cockroaches 

Fleas (dust dogs and cats with 5% carbaryl powder) 

Flies (pyrethrum -+- piperonyl butoxide is even safer) 

Silverfish and firebrats 
Spiders 

Ticks (dust dogs and cats with 5% carbaryl powder) 

Although it is intensely poisonous to man, and the fumes are 
irritating, nicotine is effective against aphids, thrips and other 
soft-bodied insects and is safe environmentally. Dormant oil is 
effective against scale insects when applied during the winter. 
Summer oil sprays are useful against scale during the growing 
season. Pyrethrum and Rotenone are effective against many 
soft-bodied insects. Lime-sulphur, in strong solution, is effective 
against scale when applied in the winter. In the summer a 
weaker solution is used as a fungicide. 

Summary. The problem of pollution control, then, can be 
summed up as follows : ( 1 ) we can dramatically reduce the 
present levels of pollution with present technology; (2) this 
reduction in pollution can be obtained only by greatly increased 
expenditure of money; (3) the only source of money is increased 
taxation; (4) beyond money, some activities, i.e., snow removal 
and pest control, may be considerably less effective than they 
are at present; (5) if industry and municipalities and private 
citizens rigorously control their pollution, much increased taxa- 
tion can be avoided. 

I believe that we must control pollution for our own survival 
and that we must accept increased taxation and reduced ef- 
ficiency to pay for it. I also believe that, in the long run, we 
can save ourselves a great deal of taxation and grief by con- 
trolling the size of our population. This is the price that we 
must pay for our survival as a free society. We must control 
the size of our population and we must reduce our present level 
of environmental pollution if we are to survive. Or, put another 
way, will you settle for your pocketbook and your present 
amenities now, or will you sacrifice some of these so that your 
children and grandchildren can live in the kind of society that 
you enjoy? 


Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr. 


Pollution I 47 


Bibliography 

Air Quality Criteria for Sulfur Oxides, U.S. Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, 
10-1 to 10-22, 1969. 

Bear, F. E., “Toxic Elements in Soils,” Yearbook of Agriculture 
1957 , 165-171, 1957. 

Boswell, V. R., “Residues, Soils and Plants,” Yearbook of Agri- 
culture 1952, 284-296, 1952. 

Frear, D. E. H., Pesticide Index, ed. 4, State College, Pa.: College 
Science Publishers, 1969. 

, S. Friedman, and T. De Martino, Pesticide Handbook — 

Entoma, ed. 21, State College, Pa.: College Science Pub- 
lishers, 1969. 

Gates, C. D., and C. Riordan, “A Preliminary Study of Nutrient 
Inputs into Cayuga and Seneca Lakes,” Cornell Planta- 
tions 23 (4): 59-62, 1967-68. 

Heggestad, H. E., “Diseases of Crops and Ornamental Plants 
Incited by Air Pollutants,” Phytopathology 58: 1089- 
1097, 1968. 

Hepting, G. H., “Diseases of Forest and Tree Crops Caused by 
Air Pollutants,” Phytopathology 58: 1098-1101, 1968. 

Hibben, C. R., “Ozone Toxicity to Sugar Maple,” Phytopathology 
59: 1423-1428, 1969. 

Holmes, F. W., “Effects of Use of Snow Control Chemicals on 
Street Trees,” New Jersey Federation of Shade Tree Com- 
missions, 39th Annual Meeting, 1964, 38-45, 1964. 

, “Salt Injury to Trees,” Phytopathology 51: 712-718, 

1961. 

, and J. H. Baker, “Salt Injury to Trees II,” Phytopathol- 
ogy 56: 633-634, 1966. 

Hough, W. S., and A. F. Mason, Spraying, Dusting and Fumigat- 
ing of Plants, ed. 2, New York: Macmillan, 1951. 

Kotheimer, J., C. Niblett, and A. E. Rich, “Salt Injury to Trees, 
II,” Forest Notes, Spring 1965, 2 unnumbered pages. 

Lacasse, N. L., and W. J. Moroz, eds. Handbook of Effects 
Assessment Vegetation Damage, Center for Air Environ- 
ment Studies, State College, Pa., Pennsylvania State Uni- 
versity, 1969. 

Metcalf, C. L., and W. P. Flint, Destructive and Useful Insects, 
ed. 2, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1939. 

Nebiker, J. H., “The Technology of Pollution Abatement,” The 
Massachusetts Heritage 7(3): 4 unnumbered pages, 
1969. 


48 ARNOLDIA 

Pesticide Information Manual , Northeastern Regional Pesticide 
Coordinators, 1966. 

Rich. A. E., “Effects of De-icing Chemicals on Woody Plants,” 
mimeographed, 3 pages, undated. (From University of 
New Hampshire Experiment Station.) 

, and N. L. Lacasse, “Salt Injury to Roadside Trees,” Forest 

Notes, Winter 1963-64, 2 unnumbered pages. 

Sinclair, W. A., “Polluted Air: Potent New Selective Force in 
Forests,” Journal of Forestry 67(5): 305-309, 1969. 

Smith, D. M., “Adapting Forestry to Megalopolitan Southern 
New England,” The Massachusetts Heritage 7(2): 4 
unnumbered pages, 1969. 

Special Report on the Investigation and Study of Air Quality in 
the Metropolitan ( Boston ) Air Pollution Control District, 
1965-1966 , Bureau of Environmental Sanitation, Massa- 
chusetts Department of Public Health, 1968. 

State Sanitary Code , Article XI, Minimum Requirements for the 
Disposal of Sanitary Sewage in Unsezvered Areas, Massa- 
chusetts Department of Public Health, 1966. 

“Suggested Guide for the Use of Insecticides to Control Insects 
Affecting Groups, Livestock, Households, Stored Prod- 
ucts, Forests and Forest Products, 1967,” Agriculture 
Handbook No. 331, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agri- 
cultural Research Service, Washington, D.C.: Govern- 
ment Printing Office, 1967. 

Westing, A. H., “Plants and Salt in the Roadside Environment,” 
Phytopathology 59: 1174-1181, 1969. 


Appendix. 

The following table (pp. 50-55) has been compiled from a number of 
sources, notably Agriculture Handbook 331 and the Pesticide Information 
Manual. It is intended to give some idea of the hazards to man and to the 
environment that are inherent in some of the insecticides in use today. 
LD.^ is the amount of chemical in micrograms of chemical per kilogram of 
body weight needed to kill one half of a population of laboratory animals. 
As such it is a rough indication of toxicity to humans. The smaller the 
number, the more lethal the substance. 





pH 

P< 


03 

"O 

O 

s 


T3 

O 

s 


cfi £ w 


cd 

> * 
g 03 
© '■Q 

o 


p 

C/3 2 

■gw 


CC Qi 

a it? 


C/3 S 

y O 

^ M 


T3 

C/3 03 

<y C 

cd 


TJ 

S3 

0) 

s . 

s 

o 

03 

o 


„ Pm 
” Pm 

«* * £ 


C/3 5 
y O 

£*“■» H 

o 

e3 


cd -d 
7| cfl OJ c/3 

© 03 d ^ 






C/3 



4«5 

03 

0) 




S5 

W3 

03 

03 

$2 

0) 


C>JD 

!-< 

cd 

"d 

O 

C/3 

>> 

cd 

£ 

CO 

CO 

J-= 

O- 

3 

O 

O 

45 

C/3 

o 

co 

1 

cd 

03 

C^ 

"d 

o 

co 

2 

u 

03 

03 







> 

cu 




<M 



03 

C/3 









CO 

03 


45 

bJ3 

2 

bJD 

2 

5JD 

45 

bJD 

45 

bJD 




2 

C/3 

1/3 

2 

2 

CO 

CO 

"g 

03 

"5 

M 

03 

45 

bJD 

2 

bJD 

2 

bJD 

03 

cd 

03 

45 

bJD 

2 

bJD 

c£ 

T3 

o 

2 

C/3 

C/3 

T3 

o 

2 

co 


a 




s 



jxicity 

Fish 

high 

rH 

1 

o 

high 

high 

0 
CO 

l> 

1 

CO 

slight 

high 

high 

high 

H 







03 









Rats 

slight 

high 

slight 

slight 

high 

high 

cd 

03 

-a 

O 

a 

Q 

2,000 

39-60 

480 

3900 

16-80 

CQ 

CN 

58-63 


r< c/3 

"d ^ 
. „ d cd 
5f> O T3 

i^s 

1 ti 


03 

_, "ed 
-C u 

&D bo 03 

._, •!—) rf~« 

X X o 


x x 

60 SC 


u aj 
'O T3 

o o 

a s 


'bL '§) § 

^ 1 Hn ^ 


_ O 

§ 8 § § t 

Soi §S 

O o i-i CN co 


cd 

"d 


o- 


e- « 

T3 

O 


0) 

*5 2 
p£ m 

bJD 03 

45 ^ 

W3 O 


pS 

bJD 


O 

O 

o 

CN cO 
co 


H3 

CO 


45 

bD 


T3 

O 

S 


-d 

o 

s 


45 

bJD 


O 

LO 


43 

0- 


03 M 
03 y 

^ cd 

03 -h 

•“• T3 cd ^ 

s a .s % 

^ O m 2 

< < < 


H <u o < 

C C/3 pS 

.5 i 2 s 

5^-s a 

£ s H 2 
< < < 


>> 

45 


45 

Pm 

c 

N 

< 


.. $5 

S .2 

c« ^ 

X 

cu 


fi .s 


^ cd 


3 

pD 

3 

o 


^ hJ 2 ts 

Ph 4^ 03 *3 Pm ^ 

£>1 O d) ® ’ H ^ 

g jd «s p 

S3 ps 


3 

o 

2 

Pm 


w e- Q 


u 


w O 

a- g 

1 frit 

2 ca o 
O X X 

X lM K 
Cd C6 

o o o 


.y w 
» » c 

C fi <u 


o o o 


a - 

«S .q 


X 

O 


03 


G .S’ 


C/3 C/3 

03 03 
£*■» ^ 


> c 
5 o ( 


03 

03 


C/3 C/3 

0) 0) 


C/3 C/3 

cj a/ 
>* 


Ph 

o 

^0 C/3 

[fl OJ 

£.S .g 


^ cw 

pC h 

£ XS 


C/3 C/3 

03 03 


bJD bX) 
G G 
O O 


£ 03 
£ 03 
LO i-h 

I 

Of 


bO 

G 

o 


fG C/3 
-*-» rj 

G *5 

0 G 

g o 

s £ 
CO u 

1 CD 


o 

pG 


pG 

W) 


03 03 

os cS 

5 h i=, 
03 03 
03 03 
O O 

£ £ 


fG fG 

bJD M) 

2 2 


42 u 

bJD 03 
32 r G 


03 

03 

O 


fG 

bJD 


fG 

bD 


pG 

bJD 


bJD 

2 


rG 

W) 


03 03 

Gj 03 
u *h 
03 03 

03 03 

o a 
£ £ 
03 


03 bJD 
T3 

O ^ 


fG 

bJD 


fG 

bJO 


fG 

bX) 




fG 

b£ 


03 

O 


fG 

bJD 


fG 

W) 


£ 

fP £ 
M £ 

2 2 

£ 


fG fG 

bX) bJD 


pG fG 


03 - 

hh 

03 bJD 

TJ ^ 

O ~ 


03 

2 - 
M pG 

03 bJD 
03 •£ 
O 


03 

03 

O 


03 

03 

O 


pG 

be 


pG 

bX 


fG 

bJD 


pG 

b0 


O 

O CD 
^ of 


12 

<N CO 
<N 


03 03 

v « 

co rrd 

CO N 

« s 

•sii 
§ 2 
o © 

IS 

<j 


C/3 ~ 03 _ 

o ^ C/3 G 

fG c« ^ O O •< 

&|sl 

S £ ? g 
o a »o2^S5 S 6 

o ►. P P P M ii <u 

U U Q P Q Q a 


o 

2 

C3 


si w 
rt § 
x 2 

o 


03 

03 g 
C/3 Q 1—1 

GrC fl 

2 fc.g 

cl rt - 
rt o 


•« su _ 

a! X> £ 9 P 
S P P 


a,~ 
«s £ 


p p 


"© S 
P P 


a 

o 

3 _i 

S < 

Cfl yo 

G 0 

03 G 
fG bl 

Ph £ 


G 

o 

<4h 

N 

o 

2 


p P 


& H 
P 


M C3 qn C/3 


o a o 

■x o s 

■° *i 3 


* 3 

2 o 
ca s 


© 

© 


03 p*~* .^h 

S “ p 
p S 


'L O) 

•2 « ^ S 
5 x m «? 
s°Z2 
P P P 


Pesticide Toxicity Hazards 

LD ; „ Rats Birds Bees Persistence Wildlife Environment Applicator 


C/5 C/3 

0 03 0) 

"a >> 


03 

"3 -M 

*"< 73 

T3 -rH 

2 p 73 


bX) 


« SC CO 
n 9 ai 


C/5 C/D C/3 

hj d; a; 

p*-! ^ ^ 


73 73 

03 03 hr) 


C /3 pC 

0 bX) 


C/3 C/3 C/3 
03 03 OJ 

>-s 


73 73 rC 

03 03 OX) 


73 73 

03 03 

P*~> K*~» 


2 73 

O 

73 T1 

as bX) r< 

03 o 

* jd 2 


r- 73 

o ^ 

73 


73 

£ ^ 

Vi o ^ 

53-71 

73 H U 
03 _ ° 

g ^ CO 

° <N 


bX) 

fl 

o 


bJD bX) 

C C 
O O 


03 03 

C3 OS —4 

U *"* xr 

qj dj 0X3 
T 3 T 3 *2 
O O ^ 


3 r 3 

S 'ab S 


33 

M 


M’S M 

32 32 32 


,W) bX) 

i 23 


r£ 

W) 


bX) 


bX3 bJD o 

V 'P HO 
^ ^ c 


03 

- "S 3 ts 

i-M ^ 

bX) 03 bX) 
•2 T 3 

^ O 71 


r£ 

bo 


bJj dx) bX) 


33 S 
bX) qj 
V T3 
^ O 

s 


r£ U 

bX) S 

‘3 T 3 


bX) 


00 CD 
*“1 CO 
I I 
lo 


in 
lo ^ 

CD <N O 
I I O 
r- lo lo 

(N H 
<N 


A 


n pu 

2 § 
03 £9 
bJO Q 


W 


3 Z 
c cu 
w w 


03 r* 
73 ” 

* 5 
2 
w 


g 32 2 
32 2 2 


,c n 


Q) o b) 

S .2 <u 

w d. <u 


3 h 33 


W 


„ 3 

O O 


t« Ph 

O. h 

o W 

X x 


Q 3 Q 


^ 32 


P’S (5 « 

0) O CD 

32 32 J 


2 S S 


05 

b£) 0) 

5P ^ 


£ 

O 


05 

0) 


£ 

O 


C/5 

0) 


P 

C/5 Q 
0) ° 
£■*"> M 


s. 


73 

tf) cfl ^ 

<u a/ P 

a 


C/5 

0) 


£ 

o 


C/5 

a/ 


£ 

o 


£ 

o 


c^» 


C/5 

a/ 


£ 

o 


c^- 


C/5 

CD 

>» 


C/5 


bJD a3 

P 73 



05 

■5 

P 


o 


s 


<N 


05 

03 

73 


T 

rH 


a3 

73 

<D 

P 


O 


45 

P 

O 

s 

CD 

p 

O 


05 

4* 

<D 

<D 

£ 

CO 


c^- 


pC 45 

bJD bJD 


45 


bX) 

•pH 


73 

O 


45 & 
b J).W) 

75 ^ 


s 

p 

s 

2 

s 

0) 

a3 

H 

CD 

73 

O 

£ 




eP 

bJD 


45 


t£> 

2 


73 

O 


45 

bJD 


bJD 

2 


45 


_bJD 

2 


£ 

p 

J 

£ 

8 


£ 

o 


o 

o 

o 

in 


cA 



o 

in 

(N 



in 

•A 

CD 


3« 

II 

o “ 
■£ w 
2 cb 


d O w M - 

§ « 3 u < 

|Sf5« 

S^x^o 

<D .3 o >*33 

■a x ,e x p, 
>« o *? o c 
X A 2 ,C -S 
^ oj ^ aj qj 
§ § § 


<u 

xs 

c n <! 

S* 

42 P 
8 2 
3 p 


§ S 


ft _ 
rt l-H 

a x 
& 2 
« ^ 


t/> 


o 

3»s 

. s 

rt rt 

z z 


p 

CD CS 
CD <4h 
05 M 

§1 
> o 

Sd £ 



CD 

CD 

w 

S3 

rt 


iS X C 
O « 

2 > X 
"O { 
> > 


o o 


>* 

,S 


<u S 

a) 2 


'a 

>. 

x 

O 


Pallethrine-see 

Allethrine 

Parathion I, A 3-13 high high high high 1 month yes yes yes 

trained operator only 

Paris green high long yes 


Pesticide Toxicity Hazards 

LD,; 0 Rats Fish Birds Bees Persistence Wildlife Environment Applicator 


i 


72 

Cx. (D 02 

P>^ ^ 


o 

g 


o 

g 




72 

02 

P^ 


72 

02 

P^ 



O. 


72 

02 

P^ 


72 

02 

P^ 


O 

c 


o ^ 

rH C /3 

C cG 


I 


P^ 

03 

-a 

in 

l 

co 


V 2 

pG 5 

C G 
o § 
£ 8 


S £ 

aj 3 

S s 
o 3 
£ £ 


cC 

b£) 


pG pG 

bJD bJD 


02 

T3 

O 


o- 

pG 


0) 02 
T3 T 3 
O O 
£ £ 


I o 
o o 
o o 
in 


co 

(N 

in 


I o m 
o 2 i> 
in g I 
(nSo 
h ^ in 


o r 

pG • 

a 


G X 
o 2 

Jh — 
02 2 
Gh-° 


pG a 


p 

G 

o 


o o 

pG pG 

Ph Pi 


P^ 

P-. 


A 

s 


£ .£ 
02 pG 


O 

1 a 
1 3 * 


03 

l pG < 


LJ PH , , 

r<? * ^ 


a 


< " «o 

a os 


m £ 

o® 

a 


H-t 02 
02 ? 
G ^ 
O 

G to 

S co 
o Q 
CG cn 


3 G 
’> 
02 
cn 


Carbaryl 
Sodium arsenite 
Spectricide-see 


Thiodan-see 

Endosulfon 

Thiodemeton-see 



S 0) fi 
o d o 

2 § 'a 

a a-g 

« IS " 

^ x .H 

© u 

H H 


© 


o 
£ 

QJ © 

© 

tf] n w 
• OJ 

£ o ‘ 
o -Q 

2 a 


2 G 

g a 

o 


“ o ,* 
ttf V S PM 
d ^ 9 CL 


A, rt 

8 W J3 


SO o« g-O Jh 

H U ^ 

H H > 


> N 


|| II II II 
m <J b w 


Insecticide 


Care and Preservation 
of Library Materials 


This is the second in the series of talks presented at the Massachusetts 
Horticultural Society’s conference on botanical and horticultural libraries 
in November 1969. Since Dr. Lawrence spoke from informal notes, the 
article is an edited version of the transcript prepared from a tape record- 
ing of his lecture. — Ed. 

Conservation practices have to be recognized and put into effect 
within the modest limitations of space and staff. I do not want 
people to think that library records and materials are primarily 
books because, when you get into almost any library that we 
represent here, they go into at least five categories. I mention 
books, which are more or less obvious, and I separate pamphlets. 
John Reed talked about the small, ephemeral, peripheral pub- 
lications that from a historical and archival standpoint are very 
important, yet they have always been shoved aside. They get 
into the pamphlet boxes and they are the dust-catchers. They 
get beaten up. Often they do not even get catalogued. Yet they 
may be the only publication on the subject. They may be the 
first publication. 

I think of Charles Short, in Lexington, Kentucky, who pub- 
lished twenty-five or thirty papers as separate, private publica- 
tions. He intended them to go into a periodical that was being 
published at Transylvania University but the periodical went 
bust. He had the papers written so he published them himself 
over a period of about five years. Each was published indepen- 
dently and sent around gratuitously to his friends. Today they 
are rare. They are not in good condition. Because he paid for 
them himself, they were economically published and printed 
on poor paper. But they are reports of the botany — the medical 
botany and ethnobotany — of that area that you will not find 
anywhere else. Pamphlets are important and, while from a 
librarian’s standpoint they are books, they are subject to differ- 
ent conservation practices. Not only do they often have to be 
treated chemically to preserve them, to sanitize them, to get rid 
of the mildew, but they have to be put into some kind of a 
binding. They should be bound to open completely flat so that 


56 


Library Materials | 57 

we may make facsimile reproductions of them. What we at the 
Hunt Botanical Library do, for example, is to mount these small 
publications with an acceptable adhesive on a stub about % 
inch wide of a heavy Permalife stock, and hinge it into a pam- 
phlet binder. 

A manuscript is any material that is not printed : typescript, 
holograph, or letters. In systematic botany we have the problem 
of identifying handwritten notes on botanical specimens, espe- 
cially when the writer did not initial them or sign them. In this 
country there are a half a dozen large collections of representa- 
tive handwriting of botanists. There is a very fine collection at 
the British Museum of Natural History, assembled for this 
purpose. 

There is the matter of seeking, acquiring, and then taking 
care of the manuscripts of authors. John Hutchinson, a man 
now 88 years old, is still publishing and very active. When I 
wrote him three or four years ago for the manuscript of one of 
his books, he said he would be glad to give it to me. It arrived 
just as clean and nice as you could ask except for the printer’s 
marks. I wrote back and said: “Dr. Hutchinson, this isn’t the 
manuscript I want. I recall that you told me that, when you 
first submitted your manuscript, the publisher told you to cut 
it by a third because it was too long. That is the manuscript I 
want because I want to know what you left out and what you 
felt was not so important — where you had to trim.” Hutchin- 
son said, “Oh, I threw that one away. Who cares about that?” 
It is not the final but the penultimate manuscript that you are 
seeking. Conservation of this type of material is in a class by 
itself. 

Then we have another a^ea which I am afraid is where li- 
brarians — and I must quickly disclaim being a librarian — 
are not doing an adequate job. This is with collections of pho- 
tographic material. Sadly enough, too often they are neglected 
because of lack of funds or because there is no one on the 
staff with the interest to care for them. From a historical 
standpoint, a wealth of material can be found in photographic 
prints. A great many photographs are now deteriorating be- 
cause someone did not wash all the hypo out. If only their 
negatives had been saved, we might have had another source 
from which to reconstitute them. True, you can take a faded, 
deteriorated print and produce a fair print from it, but it costs 
money. This applies also to the photographs we get today. Do 
not think that because they come from a commercial photog- 
rapher they necessarily are going to last. 


58 ARNOLDIA 

Color transparencies, you may say, are hopeless; you cannot 
save them anyway. But there are conservation practices that 
can be used to preserve them. Back in 1939 we made a set of 
some 200 Kodachromes of macroscopic dissections of the insides 
of flowers. They were made in duplicate. One set was put in 
boxes, sealed, and put in cold storage refrigeration chambers 
at a temperature of about 30°F. About every five years that 
set was opened and examined. When looked at last year no 
deterioration was discernible. 

We have heard about the limitations of the life of microfilm, 
conditions which also apply to microfische. More recently we 
have had to contend with the preservation of tape recordings, 
because the science of oral history is becoming increasingly 
important. Within four to five years, with normal tension on 
the tape, you may get an echo on cassette recordings. There- 
fore, they should be transferred to the archivally accepted mylar 
tape 1.5 mils thick. 

We all know the limitations of paper and that the acid prob- 
lems of paper are very real. But sometimes we forget that it is 
not just the paper of the book or the letter, but it is the paper 
in which paper materials are placed, bound, or filed. For ex- 
ample, in our library we have gone over to using Permalife 
paper stock for file folders and envelopes, because the folders 
obtained from most commercial companies have a pH varying 
from 4.7 to 5.5. (A pH of 7.0 is neutral; anything below that 
is acid.) These same acid papers will pick up chemicals from 
the atmosphere and, in combination with moisture, the pH will 
become lower over a period of, say, 25 years. We are switching 
over to Permalife papers which have, as you know, a pH of 8 
to 8.2, and there are enough residual alkaloids that act as buffers 
against atmospheric chemicals and will hold the pH to about 
7.0 for a period of 300 years or more. It is important that your 
file folders be as permanent as possible. The same thing applies 
to envelopes. We recently received from the Smithsonian In- 
stitution files of correspondence of botanists that were in the 
ordinary Government franked envelopes, so highly acid that you 
could take a pile of them and snap it in half. 

There is a paper available for wrapping packages of archival 
records to give them the best protection. It is called Bagasse 
and is known also in the paper trade as Kraft Ayensee paper. 
Ordinary wrapping paper, cheap envelopes, and ordinary file 
folders are made from wood pulp, and one material in the wood 
pulp that causes damage is lignin, an inherent anatomical part 
of the wood, which is not removed in the papermaking process. 


Library Materials | 59 

It breaks down to form one of the paper damaging acids. It is 
lignin that makes newspaper turn yellow after 48 hours of 
exposure to sunlight. However, the Bagasse paper is made in 
the Gulf area from sugar cane, which is a grass. Any paper 
made from a grass has no lignin in it. When available, it usually 
costs no more than the cheap, lignin-loaded, kraft wrapping 
paper. We use Bagasse paper for wrapping anything. It has a 
pH of 8.2 and flexibility. It does not discolor or get brittle, and 
it is not going to add any acids to whatever is wrapped in it. 

The same consideration applies when you mat your prints. 
We file our watercolors, drawings, and prints matted — if they 
are large enough to have a mat. If not, we put a piece of pure 
cellulose acetate over the front of a piece of mat board and 
make an envelope in which the prints and drawings are individ- 
ually stored. We are very particular to ensure that the materials 
we use have an acceptable longevity. We use a mat material, 
available in several thicknesses, tints, and surfaces, that is 
100% rag with a pH of 6.8. 

Do not be deceived by papers identified as rag paper. In 
early times rag papers were made from linen fiber, non-wood 
with no lignin. The name “rag” then meant that they used 
rags that had not been dyed or chemically bleached with chlo- 
rides. Today you have paper that is identified as “rag,” but 
that identification is virtually meaningless. By contrast, some 
wood pulp papers, properly made and treated, are better than 
“rag” paper that is up to four times as costly. Most of today’s 
so-called rag paper is of cotton fiber, from rags that invariably 
have been dyed. It has had various chemical treatments. So, 
when you read the watermark of a paper identifying it as of 
such and such rag content, or as having a given percentage of 
cotton fiber, the real test is whether or not the fiber means any- 
thing. It may mean greater strength but, even so, it can be 
very dangerous paper to use. 

Binding leather may be good or bad depending on how it was 
tanned and dyed. English calfskins made before the 1930’s 
were mostly improperly tanned. The residual acids and process- 
ing chemicals caused it to deteriorate. This is why in so many 
calfskin volumes — you pick them up and then have a devil of 
a time getting the reddish powder off your clothing — the 
leather has rotted beyond recall. Any leather binding of today 
will absorb injurious gases from the atmosphere, no matter how 
fine the skin may have been when it was put on the volume. 
For this reason, when you treat a leather binding it is well to 
treat it first with a deacidifying agent, such as a 7% aqueous 


60 I ARNOLDIA 

solution of potassium lactate. This will not deacidify the ma- 
terial itself, but it will counteract the acids which have come 
into the leather since the book was bound. After this has dried, 
apply the leather dressing that is your favorite. 

You do not use the same leather dressings on vellum or 
parchment that you use on other leathers. If you do anything, 
the recommendation is to use a bland soap, such as Ivory, and 
to sponge the binding with a minimum of water to remove all 
the residual surface dirt. Then use something like a saddle 
soap for dressing. Do not apply excessive amounts of neats-foot 
oil, lanolin, or the usual leather dressings. 

The big problem with vellum is its hypersensitivity to humid- 
ity changes. You have had vellum-bound books on your shelves 
whose covers have curled outwards. The reason for this is that 
the vellum, sensitive to humidity changes, will shrink and 
curl the boards. Usually, the inside of the board is covered 
only with paper. What is normally done to counteract this is to 
bind the inside of the cover with vellum. Then you have a 
counteracting situation and the side board remains flat. An 
alternative, and one we use, is to put such bindings in slip cases; 
the case will hold the sides from curling. But, if you have great 
fluctuations in humidity, you may put a book into the case and, 
after a sudden drop of humidity, may not be able to get it out 
again. 

Inks also present problems in record preservation. In our 
work we have had considerable experience within the last year 
and a half in preserving newspapers. Some years ago I began 
“cultivating” a physician in Stockholm who had a collection of 
Linnaeus items, and we wished to have his library. He was a 
sixth generation descendant of Linnaeus and, for reasons of 
national pride, he wanted the collection to stay in Sweden. 
This was understandable. Some of you may know of the great 
Waller collection of medical books and medical history. Dr. 
Waller, also a Swede, had collected perhaps the second finest 
private collection of medical works anywhere. On his death he 
gave it to the University of Uppsala but had a two-volume 
catalogue prepared while it was still in his home. Today those 
books are in the same boxes, in the Library’s basement, that 
they were in when taken from his home. Dr. Birger Strandell, 
the man who owned the Linnaeus collection, knew about this 
and he foresaw that the same thing could happen to his collec- 
tion. I think this fear was one of the motivating forces that 
caused him to relinquish them to America. In the course of the 
negotiations for the Linnaeus collection, he would say, “Now 


Library Materials | 61 

don't forget, I have six cartons of cuttings that go with it.” I 
can remember my grandmother’s clippings out of the news- 
papers, and when I thought about those six cartons of cuttings, 

I am afraid I was a little bit scornful of them. When they came 
with the collection to Pittsburgh, we made a catalogue of the 
collection. There remained the six cartons of cuttings. When 
all else was done, we began to process them and found that 
there were between five and six thousand clippings in that col- 
lection, tied up in bundles, year by year. We have now processed 
about six thousand and, out of that number — believe it or 
not — less than twenty lacked the identifying name of the 
newspaper and the date of publication! It has proved to be a 
fabulous collection, dating back into the early 1800’s and ending 
in 1967, just before he brought it to this country. 

These cuttings are now in forty-eight 11" X 14" looseleaf 
albums, having cellulose acetate envelope-type leaves. The black 
sheet inside each acetate envelope was removed and deacidified. 
A sheet of white Permalife paper was placed on each side of 
the black sheet, the latter being punched to fit the multi-ring 
album. The cuttings were mounted by “tacking” corners with 
3M Magic Mending tape. All were arranged chronologically. 
When text of the clipping was on both sides, we would xerox 
the second side on Permalife paper, mounting it in its proper 
place to provide continuous copy. 

The paper of a majority of these cuttings had deteriorated. 
We know that from about 1870 on all newsprint is full of acid. 
The cuttings had to be treated. I have been criticized for the 
treatment used on these cuttings because the process is not 100 
percent reversible. As we all know, one of the fundamental 
precepts to any records conservation work is that anything 
added to or done with a document or a book must be reversible. 
This ensures that, if it is a bad technique, you can undo it and 
at least return the material to the poor condition it was in before 
you touched it. We deacidified these cuttings with a relatively 
new process that has not been widely publicized to date. It 
involves the application of a solution of 95% ethyl alcohol and 
a 4% solution of commercial 8% magnesium methylate in 
methanol. We atomize it, spray it on, diluting with ethanol 
when spraying it. To that solution we add 4% of soluble nylon. 
(When nylon is used, application is by brush or dipping.) This 
impregnates the cellulose fibers. It does not increase the fold- 
ing strength of the paper but it does give a sizing to the paper 
and penetrates the interstices between the fibers as well as the 
fibers themselves. It increases the tensile strength — that is, 


62 ARNOLDIA 

the tear strength — so that these acid-damaged clippings, now 
becoming fragmentary, are conserved and will remain so in- 
definitely. The process is not wholly reversible. I may, after 
I am below ground, be damned for it, but we have found no 
tests that indicate that it is dangerous or deleterious to paper 
materials. 

The matter of pigments, particularly of hand-colored plates, 
is a very difficult one, and I am not going to go into details 
here, but I can say that there are more complicated techniques 
available for cleaning and deacidifying them. If you have a 
print that is badly foxed — foxing is due to a fungus whose 
spores are common in the earth’s atmosphere — you can de- 
acidify your materials, eliminate the fungus spores in them, 
and raise the pH to a level where the spores will not germinate. 
You can then bleach the plate very carefully to remove most 
or all of the foxing stains. I am not recommending bleaching 
at this time as a washing technique, because we know that for 
rare books you think many times before you do it. But if you 
have prints (not original art work) you can clean them up 
and then reinforce them by lamination on the back. There are 
techniques whereby you cover with a brush the colored material 
— the paints and the pigments — on a watercolor and then 
immerse it in an aqueous solution to clean up the paper, remov- 
ing the protective coating later. These things can be done, but 
the material must be sufficiently important to justify the cost. 

The subject of adhesives is one that we all should be very 
conscious of, and be concerned about. We have a rule in our 
library — once in a while I find it violated — that there shall 
be no rubber cement in the library. No rubber cement. I do 
not care what the label says about its permanence; there is not 
any such thing for any such product now on the market. It is 
not permanent. We have had paintings for which we paid 
very good sums of money that have come, unbeknownst to us, 
mounted or tacked with a gob of rubber cement. Then, four 
or five years later, that little brown stain comes right through 
the paper. No solvent or bleach has been devised that will 
remove it. We all know that rubber cement has a limited 
longevity — five, maybe ten, years — and then all adhesive 
quality is gone. We received from the Smithsonian Institution 
a collection of 600 or 700 drawings by a famous botanical 
artist, with all the floral dissections “pasted” on with rubber 
cement. When they arrived all the dissections had fallen down 
to the bottom of every envelope. We had to consult reproduc- 
tions of them in the original publications to determine which 


Library Materials \ 63 

ones went with what and get the dissections with the right plate. 
All of this because rubber cement isn’t worth a damn. It is a 
heinous material to have around. It ruins preservable materials 
in many ways. So stay away from rubber cement in any form. 
For the same reason, stay away from ordinary so-called Scotch 
tape. The 3M Magic Mending Tape does have a reasonably long 
life, is not known to stain materials, and is to be recommended 
for making minor repairs to leaves of books or other materials 
not expected to have the longevity of archival records. 

Use any adhesive that retains those qualities, that can be 
removed at any future time, and which is known to be free of 
properties damaging to the bonded materials during the period 
it is in use. Common flour paste, often known as library paste, 
remains one of the best for bonding paper materials. It is, per- 
haps, best to select a commercial product from a supplier of 
book binding materials, choosing it on the basis of desired con- 
sistency, drying-rate, and strength. When greater strength is 
required of an adhesive than is to be had from a flour paste, 
then choose an archivally acceptable polyvinylacetate adhesive 
(known in the trade as a PVA adhesive). 

The Barrows Research Laboratory made a study of PVA ad- 
hesives in 1967 and found only one then on the market that 
has an acceptable degree of longevity, completely satisfactory 
for the equivalent of 300 years of aging, with no breakdown 
and no acid-producing disintegration. It is made by the South- 
ern Adhesives Corporation (4105 Castlewood Road, Richmond, 
Va.), and sold under the name Longlife Bookbinding PVA Ad- 
hesive. Now there is also a British-made product available 
domestically from Process Materials Corporation (329 Veterans 
Blvd., Carlstadt, N.J.) and sold under the name of Promatco 
Adhesive No. A-1023. It is a water-dilutable emulsion, having 
a basic consistency of molasses. This extra “body” or consis- 
tency is an advantage for many users. 

For mounting prints or drawings on an acceptable board, 
one may use the dry-mount method as for photographs, an ad- 
hesive liquid or paste, or best of all, one may hinge them. The 
dry-mount method involves an overall application of heat to melt 
a paraffin-impregnated tissue into the surfaces of both print and 
mount board. Adequate adhesion demands that the heat be 
just right — not too high or too low — or the bonding will not 
hold long. It is an archivally accepted process. The use of liquid 
or semiliquid adhesives requires a combination of speed and 
skill to avoid wrinkles. 

Next, as to photographic films, the subject of film base and 


64 ARNOLDIA 

negative emulsions has taught us that the old nitrate base of 
film is not only explosive, but has a relatively short life. We 
know that there is no such thing today as a permanent film. 
If you talk to people at the Library of Congress, concerned with 
the large collections of motion picture films, you will learn that 
they plan to remake prints about every 35 years because, not 
only is there the question of the life of the film base itself but, 
in the case of movies, there is shrinkage so it may not fit the 
projector sprockets; or when you put the film in it will break 
when you try to project it. There is no form of longevity, even 
within our generation. 

Now as to the agents that are responsible for the deterioration 
of our library records: man, of course, is the primary one; man, 
by his decision to use cheap stuff to begin with; man, in the 
way he handles things. There is something to be said concern- 
ing whom you permit to handle your rare books. Recognizing 
the fallibility of man, we have in our library a rule that every- 
thing in it belongs to the University; the question that gets to 
me time and time again is, who can use these books? We say, 
anyone can use them who has the competency to do so. That 
does not necessarily mean that all librarians can handle them. 

Ultraviolet light is very damaging, as we know, to many li- 
brary materials, particularly to pigments in leathers, prints, 
and paintings. As a rule of thumb, a print gallery that is illu- 
minated by fluorescent light, unprotected by any filter, is using 
a light source that is eight times as damaging to paintings and 
bindings as is a gallery illuminated with tungsten lamps. There 
are counteracting filters; Rohm and Haas makes one that is 
reasonably effective. But fluorescent lighting sometimes is used 
because architects say that it will cut down the heat. I would 
rather counter the heat with air conditioning than to try to 
eliminate this large output of ultraviolet light. For example, 
in 1962 we had acquired the library of the great 18th century 
French scientist, Michel Adanson. I thought it would be nice 
to have all the books and manuscripts that had to be boxed done 
in bright green leather. Within two years after this was done 
the leather of those once beautiful boxes became a dull olive- 
green yellow. Leather dyes in greens and purples just do not 
hold fast under ultraviolet light, even of the normal intensity 
we have in our library stacks. Fluorescent light, when lighting 
colored materials, is to be recognized and treated as a serious 
villain. When you have exhibit material in cases illuminated 
by fluorescent light, if you are not using filters to restrict the 


Library Materials | 65 

ultraviolet portion of its spectrum, please, please, turn the pages 
every day. 

Air, with its chemical pollutants, is always working against 
us, and this is why we have papers that are impregnated with 
buffer materials to counteract the acidity generated from sul- 
furous gases in the air. Books may be printed on perfectly good 
paper, paper with an acceptable pH of 6 or 6.5 that, after 25 
years begins to deteriorate just from pollutants in the air. 

Heat, moisture, air conditioning, and humidification are of 
utmost importance to a library. If you must make a choice 
between temperature and humidity control, take off your coat 
and suffer the heat but have controlled humidification. Of the 
two, the control of humidity is more critical to the preservation 
and conservation of all kinds of library materials. 

It is our experience that if you can control the percentage 
of relative humidity within limits of 45° to 55° the year round, 
this is fine. Remember also that air conditioning equipment 
with built-in humidification provisions and controls is a mechan- 
ical device. It must have what the engineers call “down-time” 
for service and replacement of worn parts. If you have a down- 
time of 24 hours and a simultaneous drop or surge of outdoor 
humidity, you can still create havoc with your collections. 

Mildew is a factor in conserving of library materials. It is 
a fungus that thrives at a relative humidity range of 65% and 
above. For some institutions, particularly those along the 
eastern seaboard, dehumidification of library spaces in the 
summertime may be of greater importance than any other en- 
vironmental control. Forget about the temperature, but keep 
that humidity constantly below 60% because mildew spores 
are always in the air and, when in an environment of 65% or 
above for three hours, they begin to germinate. No chemical 
that will inhibit or prevent the germination of mildew spores 
is known that will remain an active fungicide in the material 
for more than a year. Thymol is a good inhibitor. A 5% solu- 
tion of thymol in alcohol applied to the outside of a volume will 
kill the mildew spores that are there and it will deter their 
germination for a period of eight or ten months. 

The proverbial rodents and insects are something to watch 
for. We have in our library an installation permitting fumiga- 
tion under vacuum. Such a system is essential to an active 
conservation program. You may not have silverfish running 
around, or you may, yet their eggs may be there. You may have 
a collection loaded with mildew spores or other fungi that need 
to be killed. If you have a flood situation, this moisture and 


66 ARNOLDIA 

the temperature immediately become optimum for germination 
of mildew spores and, apart from drying the materials properly 
and salvaging what you have, there is a responsibility first to 
kill those fungus spores by fumigation. 

This survey treats only some of the problems we face as 
custodians of library materials. The technical aspects of re- 
storing materials are subjects only for the skilled specialist. 
No librarian or library assistant should attempt to take major 
corrective measures on his own. To do so can cause greater 
damage — even loss — of precious materials. The important 
thing is to know the areas of risk, the destructive agents, and 
where to turn when help is needed. Conservation of these ma- 
terials, as opposed to restoration, means rejection of imper- 
manent papers of any kind, of damaging adhesives, and avoid- 
ance of undue exposure of materials to ultraviolet light. Give 
humidity control a higher priority than air conditioning. Take 
a personal responsibility for the treasures in your charge so 
they may be available to tomorrow’s scholars. 

George H. M. Lawrence 

Director, 

Hunt Botanical Library 


Notes on the Genus Ilex Linnaeus 


The American Horticultural Society and the Holly Society of 
America are going to publish a revised edition of the Handbook 
of Hollies. For the revision of the chapter on Eastern Asian 
Hollies, I found it necessary to publish the following notes in 
advance. 

Name Change 

Since the publication of the Handbook of Hollies in 1957, a 
species of Ilex has been introduced into the United States of 
America under the name Ilex insignis Hook, f., first by Mrs. F. 
Leighton Meserve from Sikkim, and again by Dr. F. G. Meyer 
from gardens and nurseries of England. These materials have 
been used in holly hybridization in America. Since Hooker’s 
specific epithet is a later homonym, its use should be discon- 
tinued. The correct name is Ilex nobilis Gumbleton, which is 
not listed in the Index Kewensis. The nomenclatural history of 
this species is as follows: 

Ilex nobilis Gumbleton, Gard. Chron. III. 1: 177. 1887. 

Ilex insignis Hook, f., FI. Brit. Ind. 1: 599. 1875, non Ilex 
insignis Heer, FI. Foss. Alask. 37. t. X. 1869. 

Ilex kingiana Cockerell in Torreya 11: 264. 1911. 

In a short article on “Hardiness of Ilex nobilis or insignis,” 
Gumbleton gave the origin of the plant: “a native of the Dar- 
jeeling hills.” He also characterized it as having “leaves from 
10 to 11 inches long, of a rich deep shade of green, and deeply 
toothed along the edges.” Regarding hardiness he said, “when 
grafted on a stock of common holly ... it becomes almost, 
if not perfectly hardy.” 

A New Hybrid 

Recently several members of the American Holly Society have 
tried to produce hollies of distinct horticultural merits by hy- 
bridizing species from widely separated phytogeographical re- 
gions. In the United States National Arboretum, Mr. William 
Kosar has produced many interesting new hybrids. In St. James, 
Long Island, New York, Mrs. F. Leighton Meserve has had 
wonderful results in hybridizing Asiatic species with the English 


67 



c 


Genus Ilex | 69 


Holly, Ilex aquifolium L. So far as I know, only two clones 
selected from one hybrid population of the Meserve products 
are in the market. These have been distributed by Jackson & 
Perkins Co. since 1964. For inclusion of this hybrid in the 
revised edition of the Handbook of Hollies, it is necessary to 
name and describe it properly. 

Ilex X meserveae (I. rugosa F. Schmidt X aquifolium L.), 
S. Y. Hu, hyb. nov. 

Frutex ramosus, 1-2 m. altus; ramulis erectis vel patentibus, 
hornotinis sparse puberulis; foliis ovatis vel ellipticis, 1.8-5 cm. 
longis, 0.7-3 cm. latis, margine spinoso-dentatis, basi rotundatis, 
acutis vel obtusis, apice acutis et spinosis, coriaceis, costa media 
et nervis lateralibus supra impresso-insculptis; inflorescentiis 
fasciculatis, axillaribus; floribus 4-meris; fructibus rubris, glo- 
bosis, 8 mm. diametro; pyrenis 4, subsemiellipsoideis, 4 mm. 
longis, dorso 2.5 mm. latis, bgnescentibus durescentibusque. 

Specimens examined (all deposited in the Arnold Arboretum); 
Group A. F, hybrids of I. rugosa (I) X I- aquifolium (I): S. Y. 
Hu 7792, a compact shrub 1.5 m. high; leaves ovate, spinose; 
flowers white (May 4, 1964), fruit red (Dec. 31, 1964); nursery 
name ‘Blue Girl’ (Type, AA) (Plant Patent 2434) 1 . S. Y. Hu 
7793, a selection from the same hybridization, nursery name 
‘Blue Girl 2’; endosperm of fertile seeds white hke coconut meat. 
S. Y. Hu 7794, a compact shrub, ca. 1 m. high; leaves ovate, 
deep green, spinose, the nerves insculped above; flowers white, 
fragrant (May 4, 1964); nursery name ‘Blue Boy’ (Plant Patent 
2435 ) 2 . S. Y. Hu 7796, a staminate plant with elliptic leaves, 
5-8 spines on each side. S. Y. Hu 7797, a staminate plant with 
ovate spinose leaves; nursery name ‘Yellow Boy’. S. Y. Hu 7798 , 

1 American Nurseryman 120 (7): 109, 1964. 

- American Nurseryman 120 (7): 106-107, 1964. 


Fig. 2: a. Habit sketch of the seed parent. Ilex rugosa F. Schmidt, showing 
the crenulate serrate leaves, few-flowered inflorescences, and 
conspicuously impressed veins (S. Y. Hu 7810). Scale: XI. 

b. Habit sketch of the pollen parent, I. aquifolium L., showing the 
oblong sinuate spinose leaves, many flowered inflorescences, and 
rather inconspicuous mid-ribs and lateral nerves (S. Y. Hu 7811). 
Scale: XI . 

c. Habit sketch of Ilex x meserveae S. Y. Hu, showing the spinose 
leaves, abundant flowers, and conspicuously impressed veins 
(S. Y. Hu 7792). Scale: XI. 

d. A fruit of Ilex x meserveae. Scale: X3. 


70 ARNOLDIA 


a staminate plant with ovate spinose leaves 3-3.5 cm. long, 1.7- 
2.3 cm. wide, base rotundate; nursery # 4-53. S. Y. Hu 7799, 
a staminate plant with small elliptic leaves 2-3 cm. long, 1.2- 
1.6 cm. wide; nursery # 1-57. Group B. F, hybrids I. rugosa 
(I) X I- aquifolium (II); S. Y. Hu 7795 , compact shrubs with 
elliptic strongly spinose leaves; nursery numbers M-3 for the 
staminate plant, F-l for pistillate plant. S. Y. Hu 7800, a very 
compact staminate plant with small elliptic spinose leaves, 1.8-3 
cm. long, 0.7-1. 5 cm. wide, acute at the base; nursery # 2-57. 
S. Y. Hu 7802 , a pistillate plant with rather large elliptic spinose 
leaves 3-4.5 cm. long, 1.3-2. 3 cm. wide, green with purplish 
tint; fruits abundant, pyrenes all fertile; nursery # F-l. S. Y. 
Hu 7803 , a pistillate plant with elliptic spinose leaves 2. 5-3. 5 
cm. long, 1.3-2 cm. wide, base acute or obtuse; fruits sometimes 
in cymose clusters, nursery # F-2. S. Y. Hu 7804 , a staminate 
plant with weakly spinose elliptic leaves 3. 5-4. 5 cm. long, 1.4- 
1.9 cm. wide, approaching the shape and spines of the leaves of 
I. ciliospinosa Loes.; nursery # M-5. S. Y. Hu 7805, containing 
two branches, one a staminate plant and the other a pistillate 
plant, both with rather large elliptic leaves, strongly spinose, 
3-5 cm. long, 1.7-2. 5 cm. wide; nursery numbers F-2 for the 
pistillate plant and M-4 for the staminate plant. Group C. Fi 
hybrid of I. rugosa (II) X aquifolium (I): S. Y. Hu 7801 , a 
very compact staminate plant with elliptic or oblong spinose 
leaves 2.5-3 cm. long, 1.1-1. 8 cm. wide, base acute or obtuse; 
nursery # 2-58. Group D. F, hybrids of 1. rugosa (I) x I- aqui- 
folium (III): S. Y. Hu 7806, a pistillate plant with elliptic weak- 
ly spinose leaves rather loosely arranged on the stem, 3-4.5 cm. 
long, 1.3-2 cm. wide, base acute, rarely obtuse, approaching the 
appearance of 1. ciliospinosa Loes.; fruiting pedicels rather long, 
almost equal to the diameter of the fruit in length. S. Y. Hu 

7807, vigorously growing pistillate plant shy of flowering and 
with rather large elliptic spinose leaves, 5-5.3 cm. long, 1.8-2. 3 
cm. wide, obtuse at the base, 5-10 spines on each side. Group 
E. F, hybrid of I. rugosa (II) X aquifolium (II); S. Y. Hu 

7808, a staminate plant with elliptic leaves strongly spinose, 
3-4 cm. long, 1.1-1. 6 cm. wide, base obtuse or acute; nursery 
# 1-58. Group F. Parent plants: S. Y. Hu 7809, Ilex rugosa F. 
Schmidt (I), a low shrub V 2 m. high, top flat, with elliptic or 
ovate-elliptic crenulate-serrate leaves (Fig. 2a), glabrous stem 
and pedicels; said to be introduced from Japan by the Arnold 
Arboretum, 6 plants went to the Westbury Rose Company, Long 
Island, New York. Paul D. Vossberg, Propagator of the Company 
gave Mrs. F. L. Meserve one plant which became the mother 


Genus Ilex 71 


of many of her hybrids. S. Y. Hu 7810, the flowering stage of 
the same plant. S. Y. Hu 7811, a staminate plant of Ilex aqui- 
folium L. (I), small tree 3 m. high, with purplish puberulent 
branchlets, pilose peduncles and pedicels, ciliate calyx lobes; 
oblong sinuate strongly spinose leaves (Fig. 2b). S. Y. Hu 7812, 
a staminate plant of I. aquifolium L. (Ill) with puberulent 
branchlets, rather large elliptic or rarely obovate leaves 5-8 cm. 
long, 2-4.3 cm. wide, strongly spinose with 4-9 spines on each 
side. 

From the material cited above, it is apparent that Ilex X 
meserveae includes many F, hybrids made between 1 . rugosa 
and 1 . aquifolium which have rather small spinose leaves, fas- 
ciculate puberulent inflorescences, ciliate calyx lobes, and red 
globose fruits with 4 woody pyrenes each. 

For the seed parent, the hybridizer used two plants of I. 
rugosa which she called ‘Long Island’ = (I), and ‘Arnold Arbo- 
retum’ = (II), and for the pollen parent she used three plants 
of I. aquifolium which she called ‘Lawrence White’ = (I), 
‘Fisher’s Island’ = (II), and ‘Goliath’ = (III). All the plants 
of the Fi generation acquire the characters of low stature and 
the impressed nerves on the upper leaf-surface from the seed 
parent, and the characters of spinose leaves, puberulent stems 
and inflorescences, and abundance of flowers from the pollen 
parent. 

There are two distinct leaf-forms, i.e., plants with ovate 
leaves and plants with elliptic leaves. The clones in the market, 
I. meserveae ‘Blue Girl’ (Plant Patent 2434) and I. meserveae 
‘Blue Boy’ (Plant Patent 2435) both have ovate leaves. 


Shiu-Ying Hu 


Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 


One of the most satisfactory and remarkable of the conifers 
which are hardy at the Arnold Arboretum is the Serbian spruce, 
Picea omorika. The Arboretum introduced this tree into cul- 
tivation in the United States as long ago as 1881 and, despite 
its availability in nurseries today, it is still not planted as fre- 
quently as it should be. 

The outstanding feature of the Serbian spruce is its narrow 
and nearly columnar habit of growth. Well grown specimens 
can be easily recognized from a considerable distance and 
stand out from all other trees in the landscape in much the 
same manner as the less desirable Lombardy poplar. 

Young plants have a pyramidal shape not unlike many other 
conifers, but they grow fairly rapidly and taper more and more 
with age until the spire-like habit of the older tree is reached. 
A distinctly graceful touch is added by the position assumed by 
branches on various parts of the tree. The lower branches are 
pendulous with upward arching tips, those in the middle are 
more nearly horizontal, and the shorter topmost branches point 
in an upward direction. 

A close examination will reveal several other interesting 
features. The needles are flat in cross section, not four-sided 
as the needles of most other spruces. Further, they are a deep 
glossy-green above and whitish below. This pleasing contrast is 
easily seen as the branches move in the wind. 

To extend the list of virtues which the Serbian spruce pos- 
sesses, one must add that it is extremely hardy and can be ex- 
pected to thrive where temperatures reach — 10°F. or lower. A 
modern plant in every sense of the word, it will tolerate a con- 
siderable amount of atmospheric pollution and grow on a fairly 
wide range of soil conditions, even near the sea. 


Fig. 3: Picea omorika at the Arnold Arboretum. Photo: P. Bruns. 


72 




74 1 ARNOLDIA 

Young plants have been reported to suffer occasionally from 
attacks of the white pine weevil, an insect which causes serious 
damage by boring into the terminal shoots. Although this a 
difficult problem to control, it has not stopped us from plant- 
ing white pines and should not be that important a factor in 
limiting the desirability of the Serbian spruce. 

Careful consideration should be given to the placement of 
Picea omorika in the landscape. It is best seen as a single speci- 
men or as a group planting in the distance. It is a mistake to 
place it too close to other large plants because shading will 
eventually cause the loss of lower branches. This should also 
be taken into account when making a group planting and, where 
possible, a minimum space of twelve to fifteen feet between 
plants is desirable. 

Several excellent specimens of the Serbian spruce may be 
seen in the Arboretum at the top of the slope occupied by the 
conifer collection in Kent Field. Six of our plants are over 
eighty years old, and fifty to sixty feet in height. 

Robert S. Hebb 


Summary of weather data recorded at the Dana Greenhouses, 
December 1969 and January 1970. 

Avg. 

Precipitation 8 a.m. Temp. 


December 10.14 28.2 

January 107 16.1 


Editors’ note: We regret that, in our anxiety to produce an error-free issue 
in January, we left Mr. Fordham’s name off the staff list. 


Arnoldio Reviews 


Dr. Alexander Garden of Charles Town, by Edmund Berkeley 
and Dorothy Smith Berkeley 

The Quest for Plants, by Alice M. Coats 

The Early Horticidturists, by Ronald Webber 

The past decade was one of the most productive of this century 
in horticultural publishing as witnessed by the scores of titles 
from both sides of the Atlantic. The history of horticulture has 
come in for special attention during this period. In the last 
months of 1969 two titles appeared which should be of very 
great interest to the American horticultural audience. The third, 
though published in 1968, merits attention here. 

The first of these is the biography of a Scottish naturalist 
and doctor. Dr. Alexander Garden, who practiced medicine in 
Charleston between 1752 and 1782. As he had supposed as a 
youth. Dr. Garden found ample opportunity to flourish in the 
New World. After thirty years’ residence he had accumulated 
a town house and plantation, twenty-five household slaves, and 
debts due him of nearly sixty-five thousand pounds sterling. 
In addition to family duties, a heavy medical practice, and the 
burdens of Establishment status. Dr. Garden managed to collect 
and send specimens to Linnaeus, Gronovius, and Ellis. He 
maintained a lively correspondence with these men and with 
Bartram and Collinson. Since he was a Loyalist, Dr. Garden 
was banished from South Carolina in 1782. He was not to 
return to America or to his beloved Otranto, the plantation 
celebrated in George Ogilvie’s “The Planter.” The relationship 
between Dr. Garden and his son, along with his origins in Scot- 
land — both of which have been mythologized (see U. P. Hed- 
rick’s A History of Horticulture in America ) — have been clar- 
ified in this book. A convincing case is made here that, if 
allowed to remain. Dr. Garden might have contributed much 
toward the foundation of learning in the South. His scholarship 
and intimate familiarity with the Linnean system could have 


75 


76 ARNOLDIA 

meant much to the fledgling studies of the natural history of 
the New World. 

Already acclaimed for their biography of John Clayton, Ed- 
mund and Dorothy Berkeley have done more than add another 
carefully researched and engaging story to American history, 
for they have snatched from almost total obscurity an American 
naturalist long ago given his due by Linnaeus and his eighteenth 
century contemporaries. Dr. Garden, whose burial place is 
still unknown, is commemorated by the genus Gardenia. 

With admirable tenacity, Alice Coats has produced a work, 
encyclopedic in scope, which should find a wide readership 
among horticulturists in the United States. The concern here 
is with plant collectors who were professional gardeners but, 
fortunately for the value of the book, gardeners who botanized 
are included. The author divides the world into ten areas and 
proceeds chronologically to give capsule histories, both personal 
and professional, of one hundred and seventy-two collectors and 
their significant introductions. Of particular interest to Ameri- 
can gardeners will be those New World collectors from Trades- 
cant II through Lyon in the east of North America, to Fremont 
through Jeffrey in the west. The incredibly bad luck and physi- 
cal discomforts of many of these explorers are difficult to imag- 
ine in our day of partial technological control over nature. 

There are twenty-six excellently reproduced illustrations from 
original portraits, engravings, and maps. The six-page bibliog- 
raphy is excellent, although periodical citations have been 
omitted. There are both person and plant indices. The latter 
contains over a thousand plant names which include many of 
the favorites of garden and greenhouse today. Every gardener 
can use this work to enhance his knowledge by sharing the ex- 
periences of the discoverers. 

Less exhaustive and weighted toward commercial gardening, 
the short history by Ronald Webber presents vignettes of thirteen 
horticulturists of England from the seventeenth through the 
nineteenth centuries. Readers will be delighted with the story 
of the development of such firms as Rochford’s in the Lea 
Valley; the success of Robert Smith, an outstanding market 
gardener; Thomas Smith, who introduced the intensive cultiva- 
tion techniques termed “French gardening’’ to England; Wills 
and Segar, the flower supplier to the Court. The introductory 
chapter is devoted to an essay on English horticulture to 1900. 
Here we learn of the development of the greenhouse and of the 
influence of Dutch, Flemish, and Walloon emigrants of the 
eighteenth century on the course of English horticulture. 


Reviews I 77 


All three of these works are remarkably free from gross or 
trifling errors. All the authors are to be congratulated on the 
quality of their works in three neglected areas. Serious gar- 
deners and the public at large will want to consult each while 
winter-time still abounds. 

C. R. L. 

Edmund Berkeley and Dorothy Smith Berkeley, Dr. Alexander 
Garden of Charles Town, Chapel Hill: The University of 
North Carolina Press, 1969. $10.00. 

Alice M. Coats, The Quest for Plants, London: Studio Vista, 
1969. 84/. 

Ronald Webber, The Early Horticulturists, Newton Abbot: David 
& Charles, 1968. 40/. 


The powers-that-be at the American Museum of National His- 
tory in New York decided to celebrate the institution’s centen- 
nial, 1869-1969, with the theme “Can Man Survive?” and a 
show of the same name. The decision is thought-provoking, as 
is the somewhat circumstantial and recent arrival of a moon 
rock which is on display nearby, in cunning juxtaposition. The 
moon rock, by the way, is very pretty. 

“Can Man Survive?” launches a multi-media attack on pollu- 
tion, over-population, and other evils of modern and, particular- 
ly, urban civilization. Because of the special character of the 
show, the Museum built a temporary exhibition area in the 
huge main hall off the Eighth Avenue entrance. The perfor- 
mance goes on inside this ungainly structure, and it is really very 
well done. One progresses through a series of spaces, sees films 
which are continuous, informative, and brief enough to fend 
off boredom or physical fatigue. There are also slides projected 
onto interesting forms, “Pop” style industrial sculptures, and 
occasional things to read. Most people were observed to neglect 
the latter because the light is variously dim or confusing. The 
last section of the show, devoted to air pollution, is wonderfully 
effective. Slides of garbage, spewing chimneys, traffic jams, 
and other offensive scenes flash on and off in controlled chaos; 



Reviews | 79 


there is a full-scale model of the rear end of a New York bus; 
the pungent odor of hydrogen-sulfide fills the air. (I am, frank- 
ly, mystified as to how they managed to isolate the odor in a 
single area. ) The exit is dramatic and, like the end of a 
Hitchcock movie, should not be spoiled for those who have not 
yet seen the show. 

“Can Man Survive?” surveys the problems of air and water 
pollution, food and population, and upsets in what is left of our 
natural environment. While the content of the show may seem 
elementary to those familiar with the current literature, it is well 
to remember that most people do not realize that these are 
problems. The Museum has found a compelling, appropriate 
form in which to publicize them, and this show will undoubtedly 
win sympathy for cleaner air, purer water, and birth control. 

My single objection to the presentation is that the Museum 
has found it necessary to charge ad admission fee of $1.00 for 
non-member adults (50^ for children). This is a great pity 
because the cost excludes a number of people who simply cannot 
afford it. Many New York children take profitable refuge in the 
Museum on cold afternoons and would find much to amuse and 
educate them in this show. Minor compensation: the moon 
rock is free. 

In a brochure which accompanies the show, Gardner Stout, 
President of the Museum, writes: “That man will survive is 
likely. When the chips are down, he is astonishingly adaptable, 
cunningly expert. But the concept of survival by itself is a 
minimal and chilling one. Survival can be appallingly rudi- 
mentary. Our concern is with the quality of survival, and our 
hope is that this exhibit will nourish in all of us a sense of self- 
evaluation, of self-perspective, and primarily a sense of the 
good life.” 

If you are in New York, see “Can Man Survive?” It will be 
there through 1970. 

S. S. 


Fig. 4: Galanthus caucasius. Photo: P. Bruns. 


Lecture Series: 


“Meet the Staff” 


In the fall of 1968, the Arnold Arboretum instituted a series 
of talks by some members of the staff. This spring’s program 
will allow six more members of the staff to speak about subjects 
that interest them as well as you. 

Time-. 8 P.M., Tuesday evenings: March 24 to April 
28, 1970 

Place: The Schoolhouse, 133 Wellesley Street, Weston, 
Massachusetts 


March 24 : 
March 31 : 
April 7 : 
April 14: 
April 2 1 : 
April 28 : 


In Panarfia with the Colorful San Bias Indians 
Thomas Elias, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Plants and Birds of Some Central Pacific Islands 
Charles R. Long, A.M., Librarian 
American Gardens 

Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist 

A Plantsman in the British Isles 

Robert S. Hebb, B.S., Assistant Horticulturist 

In the Mountains of Jamaica 

Dulcie A. Powell, M.A., Botanist 

Two Sides of Everest 

George FI. Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 


Refreshments will be served at 7:30 P.M., and the lecture will 
begin promptly at 8. Please park in the areas indicated be- 
hind the barn. Limited space makes it necessary to restrict the 
size of this group to 30 members. 

This series requires a registration fee of $5.00 for Friends of 
the Arnold Arborteum*; $10.00 for others. Any member of the 
immediate family of a “Friend” may register for these meetings 
but a registration fee of $5.00 must be paid for each person. 

* Information on how to become a “Friend of the Arnold Arboretum” 
can be obtained by writing or calling the Arnold Arboretum, Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130. Telephone: 524—1717. 


1970 Spring Classes 
of the Arnold Arboretum 


Practical Gardening for the Homeozvner Mr. Robert S. Hebb 
This series is designed to teach gardening skills as they relate 
to plantings usually found around the home. Although it will be 
a continuation of the course presented last fall, more emphasis 
will be placed upon supervised practical work, utilizing the vari- 
ous plantings at the Case Estates in Weston. Newcomers are 
welcome. 

Five classes : Wednesdays April 29-May 27, 2 to 4 P.M. 

Field Class in Ornamental Plants Dr. Donald Wyman 

The month of May is the peak of the flowering period for most 
of the trees and shrubs in the Arnold Arboretum. Field classes 
will permit observation of most plants as they come into flower. 
Discussions will include an evaluation of many plants, with sug- 
gestions on their availability, culture, and proper use. In case 
of rain, the meetings will be held indoors. 

Five classes: Fridays May 1-29, 10 to 12 A.M. 

Each of the above 2 series of talks requires a registration fee of 
$5.00 for Friends of the Arnold Arboretum; $10.00 for others. 

Elementary Techniques of Bonsai Mrs. Ara R. Derderian 

This series will consist of three two-hour lectures during which 
the basF principles of bonsai will be explained, such as soil 
preparation, potting-up procedures, pruning techniques, and gen- 
eral design. The last Saturday will be an all-day workshop at 
which participants will be given a small tree and a container 
to make a bonsai of their own. Classes will be conducted at the 
Dana Greenhouses at the Arnold Arboretum. 

Saturdays May 2, 9, 16, 10 A.M. to 12 Noon 

Saturday May 23, 10 to 3 P.M. 

The above course requires a registration fee of $25.00 for 
Friends of the Arnold Arboretum; $35.00 for others. 


Printed in the U.S.A. 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 



Contents 

81 Horticulture at the Arnold Arboretum, 1936-1970 

DONALD WYMAN 

100 Plant with Nature 

WILLIAM FLEMER III 

107 Basic Books for the Library 

GORDON P. DE WOLF, JR. 

114 Weeds: A Link with the Past 

2. Purslane 

HELEN ROCA-GARCIA 

116 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 
120 Man, Nature, and History, by W. M. S. Russell 

ARNOLDIA REVIEWS 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


On the cover: Malus ‘Katherine’ at the Arnold Arboretum. 
Crab apple cultivar named by Donald Wyman and distributed 
by the Arnold Arboretum. Photo: H. Howard. 


Horticulture at the 
Arnold Arboretum, 1936-1970 


The new editors of Arnoldia take real pleasure in dedicating this issue 
to Dr. Donald Wyman, Horticulturist at the Arnold Arboretum, who will 
retire from active service to the Arboretum in August of this year. For 
most of the past thirty-five years, Dr. Wyman has been largely responsible 
for the care and maintenance of the living collections of the Arnold Arbore- 
tum. During this period he has also advanced the knowledge and appre- 
ciation of hardy woody plants by the horticultural public through his 
books and through his articles, published in Arnoldia and elsewhere. We 
observe with satisfaction that he has received many symbols of recogni- 
tion of his activities from both European and American horticultural 
societies. 

Since 1936 Donald Wyman has been intimately associated with Ar- 
noldia, as author and editor. It is only fitting, then, that this issue should 
contain a condensation of a longer report that he has written as a record 
of his horticultural activities at Jamaica Plain and at the Case Estates 
of the Arnold Arboretum in Weston. — Ed. 

After the deaths of Charles Sprague Sargent, in 1927, and Ernest 
H. Wilson, in 1930, staff interest in horticulture at the Arbore- 
tum was at an all time low. For the next several years plantings 
made under the direction of these two men were considered 
sacrosanct and were not changed or removed. When the author 
was appointed Horticulturist in 1935 he found that there was 
much work to be done. At that time interest seemed to be 
directed primarily to fields other than popular horticulture. 
Planting of the grounds as well as the introduction of seeds, 
plants, and cuttings had continued chiefly because of the inter- 
est of William H. Judd (the former propagator), but it had 
become obvious that space for the display of new materials on 
the grounds was in short supply. Some of the trees, notably 
the caryas, had originally been set out to simulate forestry 
plantings. They had become overcrowded. In some other areas 
many old trees, in poor condition, had not been removed merely 
because they had been placed by either Sargent or Wilson. Fi- 
nally, plants which had been unidentified when set out re- 
mained unidentified. 

Because of the lack of staff interest in the living collection, 
the card index of plants on the grounds had not been properly 


81 


82 [ ARNOLDIA 


checked for many years. As a result, there was no true record 
of what plants were actually alive. It became obvious that the 
only way to remedy this was to map the grounds thoroughly, 
an operation which took the full time of two men for nearly 
two years. When this job was finished, in 1938, the card files 
were brought up to date. It was then easy to see the large num- 
ber of duplicate plants of some species which had been planted 
over the years. Since that time the planting of new plants and 
removal of old ones has always been carefully integrated through 
the mapping department, and all files and the master set of 
maps are kept up-to-date. This entails several closely unified 
operations done by one individual. These operations are ab- 
solutely necessary if the collections are to be kept the best 
labeled and mapped anywhere in the United States. When the 
big hurricane of 1938 blew down 1500 trees in the Arboretum, 
it was obvious, even to the most critical observers, that judicious 


Fig. 1: 

Donald Wyman 
at the 

Arboretum, 1950. 



Horticulture at the Arboretum I 83 


thinning out of old and decrepit specimens could add much to 
the beauty of the grounds. At this time the Horticulturist took 
careful steps in this direction. 

With the increased interest in the grounds on the part of 
the staff after 1938, another change in planting policy was 
made. The old method of planting only in botanical sequence 
or in botanical groups was not followed as rigidly as it had been 
before. When valued ornamental species or varieties would 
show off well at a turn of the road, on a bank, or as a focal 
point at the end of a vista, such planting was done regardless 
of where the plants entered into the botanical sequence. 

Good color charts became available at this time. As a result, 
in the early 1940’s, studies were made of the large collections 
of Syringa, Weigela, Philadelphus , Deutzia, Chaenomeles, 
Malus, Spiraea, etc., in order to make reasonably certain that 
the hundreds of varieties in these genera were properly labeled. 
This was not the easiest thing to do in groups with large num- 
bers of hybrid varieties, but it was done by the Horticulturist 
and Assistant Horticulturist (Heman Howard), and checkups 
of these groups in the past two decades have been greatly has- 
tened by the painstaking work done earlier in the 1940’s. 

Many of the plants which had gone unlabeled for many 
years were excellent specimens. Until his retirement in 1948, 
Ernest Palmer had the task of collecting herbarium specimens 
of them, adding the individual plants to the accession records, 
and identifying those that he could with the assistance of Alfred 
Rehder. Large numbers of previously unlabeled plants were 
soon properly tagged and recorded. However, the identification 
of many other plants is a difficult task that is still to be done. 

After studying our records, the Weather Bureau temperature 
records, plant injuries after the severe winters of ’34-35 and 
’42-43, and redrawing the Arboretum hardiness map, it be- 
came evident that it was a waste of propagating time and dis- 
play space to continue to plant shrubs, trees, and vines which 
experience had shown were not completely hardy. Consequent- 
ly, all Zone VII plants, and many of those hardy in Zone VI — 
especially if they had been repeatedly injured by winter cold — 
were removed from the collections and have not been grown 
again. This policy was formulated in the mid 1940’s. Now, 
with more nursery space available in Weston, plants in the 
doubtful category — i.e. clones supposedly more hardy than 
the species — can be tried. It is not necessary to give such 
plants valued display space in the living collections until their 
hardiness has been proved in the nurseries. 


84 | ARNOLDIA 

During the war years of 1941-45 the plantings suffered from 
lack of attention. Part of the time there was no one in the 
labeling department, and labeling was almost completely ne- 
glected. General maintenance was at an absolute minimum, 
and little pruning was done, a fact which was especially notice- 
able in the rhododendrons, which quickly became lanky and 
overgrown. After the war it was necessary to adopt a heavy 
pruning program. The rhododendrons were severely reduced 
in size, but they came back into fairly good form after only a 
few years. 

With a developing interest in economic botany, land of the 
former Bussey grounds at the corner of South Street and the 
Arborway was assigned, in 1941, to the Massachusetts College 
of Pharmacy for a display garden of medicinal plants. This 
plot was maintained until the late 60’s when the land was taken 
by the State for the Blood Laboratory. A crab apple survey was 
made by the Horticulturist at this time, and Crab Apples for 
America was first published in 1943. 

In 1944 an estimated seventy-five fires occurred on the 
grounds. It was noted that many of these occurred in the fall 
in the old Crataegus collection on Peters Hill. Here the trees 
grew close together, mowing was difficult, and the grass, es- 
pecially under the trees, grew tall. These factors prompted the 
consideration of removal of the major part of this collection — 
accomplished in 1948-49 by means of a special donation from 
John S. Ames. The area was then fertilized and plowed, and 
a special creeping red fescue grass mixture originally used in 
Rhode Island was sown. This grass stayed green much later in 
the fall and did not burn as readily as the previous grasses. 
Also, the crab apple trees which were planted on the hill were 
spaced so that mowing could be easily accomplished. This op- 
eration materially reduced grass fires in this area. 

In 1954 the crab apple collection was extended across the 
road from the hill to the area beside the railroad tracks formerly 
occupied by a collection of poplars. Since poplars are short- 
lived, susceptible to disease, easily blown over by storms, (and 
none too ornamental), it was decided to reduce this collection 
to a minimum and replant the area with crab apples which 
would be a colorful sight for those many daily commuters on 
the adjacent railroad. 

Landscaping 

Since 1880, when the grounds were originally laid out by Fred- 
erick Law Olmsted, no landscape architect had been responsible 


Horticulture at the Arboretum \ 85 


for any major planning, although many had tried to obtain per- 
mission to become consulting landscape architects. In 1946, 
near the end of his administration. Dr. E. D. Merrill was pre- 
vailed upon to appoint Mrs. Beatrix Farrand as the landscape 
architect for the Arboretum. It was most unfortunate that, even 
with her extensive experience, she sometimes failed to compre- 
hend the practical needs of the Arboretum. One of her most 
successful suggestions was the azalea border along the Meadow 
Road, planted in 1949. However, when she recommended that 
the shrub collection be removed and the shrubs planted in 
small groups in the same area, it became obvious to both Dr. 
Merrill and Dr. Karl Sax that some of her ideas, if carried out, 
would cost far too much in day-to-day maintenance. 

It has always been my strong conviction that landscape 
planning should be left to those on the staff who have had land- 
scape training and who understand the diverse practical prob- 
lems of maintaining the plantings. The landscape architect’s 
contribution comes in planning the original lay-out, not in re- 
vamping an arboretum such as this after it is tightly planted. 

In practice, the Horticulturist and the Superintendent 
(Robert G. Williams) have been responsible for the policies gov- 
erning the care and placing of the plants since 1940. Prior to 
this time a “committee of three” had been appointed by Dr. 
Merrill, but it is most difficult for someone without horticultural 
training to work smoothly in a practical situation. In any event, 
the “committee of three” did not work satisfactorily, so the Hor- 
ticulturist and the Superintendent took it upon themselves to 
move and place plants at the proper times. They decided, for ex- 
ample, on a long-range lilac planting plan by which, eventually, 
the 100 best lilacs would be located between the road and the 
walk in the lilac collection. Many mediocre to poor varieties 
have had to be removed in the years since, and the better ones 
have been placed here and at the base of the bank on the other 
side of the walk. 

Introduction and Distribution of New Plants 
The introduction of new plants into the Arboretum has always 
been the prime responsibility of the Horticulturist. Each year 
seed lists sent from botanical gardens and arboreta all over the 
world are scrutinized for new plants, and requests are sent for 
seed of those we do not have and which give promise of success 
under our conditions. Unfortunately the germination of much 
of the seed received has been most disappointing. The Horti- 
culturist noted, as early as 1939, that a surprisingly small per- 



Fig. 2: Foreground, Rhododendron yedoense var. poukhanense; center. 
Cytisus praecox. Photo: H. Howard. 


centage of seed obtained from foreign sources was viable. Bo- 
tanic gardens were to blame as well as botanists collecting in 
the field. Many an institution has not learned that seeds of 
many plants need special treatment as soon as they are ripe if 
they are to retain their viability. The practice has been to col- 
lect all seed, dry it, and store it until such time as complete 
shipments could be made. As a result, for example, only 8% 
of 585 seed packets received from the Yu Expedition in China 
(1938) had seed which germinated. This represented a great 
loss to the collector and also to the Arboretum, which had to 
process all of these seeds. An issue of Arnoldia (vol. 13:41-60, 
1953) was written and sent to collectors and certain botanic 
gardens, explaining the viability of seeds and listing those 
which should be handled in specific ways to ensure germination. 
There is still missionary work to be done in this field with many 
botanic gardens. 

All too many institutions list seed which will not come true. 


86 


Horticulture at the Arboretum I 87 


Seed collected from clones, for example, is unlikely to produce 
plants like the parent. Much seed collected in botanic gardens 
will not come true to name because of the great incidence of 
cross-pollination in large collections of related plants. Much 
of this seed will produce hybrids, and one must recognize this 
fact. Also, in some collections, the parent plants are not ac- 
curately named. It is extremely important that seedlings re- 
sulting from such seed be carefully re-identified as they mature 
and be withheld from display collections until their identity is 
certain. 

Every few years the Horticulturist has requested the latest 
catalogues from what he considers to be the best nurseries in 
the country. These have been searched carefully for new plants. 
The nursery industry is extremely lax in using proper nomen- 
clature, so one must always be on the lookout for synonyms 
as well as for the nursery which has a penchant for placing new 
or queer names on old, established varieties. In the past thirty- 
four years well over 98% of the nurseries approached have been 
glad to donate new plants for trial in the Arnold Arboretum. 
Sometimes it has seemed advisable to request propagation wood 
only of plants in short supply, since we are well equipped to 
handle any type of woody plant propagation. 

The record for three recent years, in which the Horticulturist 
located nursery sources for species and varieties of woody 
plants which were not represented in the collections at the time, 
shows the following: 

1958- 59 380 species and varieties 

1959- 60 480 species and varieties 

1960- 61 586 species and varieties 

Specific requests were made for all these plants. 

Correspondence often turns up new plants because many of 
our correspondents know of our interest and are anxious to re- 
port novelties to us as soon as possible. Frequently the Arnold 
Arboretum combines with other institutions in subsidizing, or 
partially subsidizing, collecting trips to various parts of the 
world. These trips may result in collections of seeds as well 
as specimens for the herbarium. If the seeds or plants we re- 
ceive from such expeditions are known not to be hardy here, 
they are given to other botanical gardens in warmer climates. 

All staff members are always on the lookout for new plants. 
The Horticulturist has made three trips to Europe, searching in 
the larger private gardens and botanical gardens for new ma- 
terial or for varieties once grown at Jamaica Plain but lost for 
some reason or other. The trip in 1951 netted about 500 species 


88 ! ARNOLDIA 

and varieties, and the trip in 1965 resulted in the introduc- 
tion of 930 species and varieties. Many of these were intro- 
duced into the United States for the first time. Although such 
plant introductions often go unrecorded as far as the American 
horticultural press is concerned, the Arnold Arboretum has a 
long record of activity in this field. This activity is not being 
neglected even now when individual “plant hunting” in the 
Orient is largely dormant. 

There are many pitfalls connected with such a program of 
plant introduction. All of the plants so introduced do not live. 
Some plants are in poor condition when they arrive, others prove 
not to be hardy. The Propagator must exert extreme care to 
propagate these new acquisitions as soon as possible, so that 
at least a few have a chance to grow into sturdy specimens. 
Though not always possible, this is always the objective. 

It is one of the chief functions of the Arboretum to see to it 
that worthy new plants which it has introduced are distributed 
in America and in other parts of the north temperate regions of 
the world. Propagating material is always available to other 
scientific institutions if our plants are large enough. It is avail- 
able to most commercial growers if the plants requested are un- 
available elsewhere and if the particular nursery concerned 
eventually works up its own propagation stock from what we 
send. 

Many years ago it was decided that Arnold Arboretum plants 
would not be used as a stock block for commercial growers who 
requested the same things year after year. On rare occasions 
the Arboretum does supply propagation material of commercial- 
ly grown plants to certain growers who are interested in ob- 
taining “true-to-name” plants (i.e. certain varieties of lilacs, 
crab apples, weigelas, etc.). The amount of propagation ma- 
terial given is usually reasonably small — a dozen cuttings may 
be offered rather than the 1,000 that some commercial growers 
request. No plants or plant materials are sold. 

No seed list is published. Rather, the responsibility is on the 
individual plantsman to request specific things at the right 
time or to write in advance of seed collecting time. It has been 
felt that a lengthy seed list would only whet the appetite of 
lazy growers who figure that checking them is the easiest way 
to obtain plants. This would create considerable extra work 
for the hard-pressed Arboretum staff. It is best to rely on the 
truly interested individual to ask for specific plant items. We 
also attempt to inform those people who obviously do not know 
that seed of particular items they have requested is likely to 
prove to be of hybrid origin and will not yield true-to-name 


Horticulture at the Arboretum \ 89 

plants. Most plantsmen know this, but there are many who do 
not. Crab apples are a case in point. We dislike to see stock 
of Malus arnoldiana, for example, offered in a nursery cata- 
logue as coming originally from the Arnold Arboretum, when 
we know that the original propagating material was seed. 

Plants are offered by the Arboretum to nurserymen with the 
understanding that they may be neither patented nor sold. 
Propagations from these plants, however, can be sold. In our 
regular program of plant distribution, started in 1941, ten to a 
dozen species and varieties are offered each year. The Horti- 
culturist writes a paragraph about each, noting its prime orna- 
mental properties, the ease of propagation, and the length of 
time it takes to produce salable plants. Nurserymen have been 
selected, throughout this country and Europe, and asked if 
they wish to participate in the program. They are not urged to 
take any plants, but to request those that they think might fit 
well with their customer requirements. Usually three to six 
plants of a kind are given to the nurserymen. Sometimes, with 
easily propagated plants, seeds or cuttings are offered. To 
qualify for this program, the “Cooperating Nurserymen Pro- 
gram,” a nurseryman must publish a catalogue and do business 
on a national scale. One hundred and ninety-six plants have 
been offered in this program since it was initiated. Most of 
these species and varieties are now listed in the catalogues of 
many commercial nurserymen throughout the country. 

From 1936 until 1945 the nursery area for the Arboretum 
was a small plot of ground beside the State Laboratory Building 
on the old Bussey Institution property. There was also an area 
with a board fence on three sides next to the greenhouse, 
where some of the less hardy plants were wintered. At one 
time posts were erected and a lath roof constructed to reduce 
light intensity in summer. There was also one “cold pit” (about 
50' x 8') where material could be wintered over. When the 
Commonwealth “took” the major nursery area in 1945, giving 
only a week’s notice for plant removal, an additional nursery 
was made on the South Street tract, but the area, not properly 
fenced in, proved to be susceptible to vandalism. 

In 1942, with the acquisition of the Case Estates in Weston, 
plenty of nursery space became available. In 1962, when the 
new Dana Greenhouses were built, a relatively large nursery 
area was developed adjacent to them. The policy established 
at this time was to grow on all recently propagated plants for 
a number of years in the Dana Greenhouse nursery and then 
to move them out to the Case Estates for further growth. This 
move is always done in the spring so that the plants have a 


90 ARNOLDIA 


growing season to become accustomed to the new conditions. 
The nursery at the old greenhouse on the Bussey land generally 
held several hundred species and varieties at one time. Today 
the nurseries at the Case Estates alone may contain as many as 
2,000 species and varieties. 

When it came to making the nursery area at the Dana Green- 
houses, we found that the heavy equipment used in the green- 
house construction had compacted the soil to such an extent 
that the water drainage was impaired. After the original plant- 
ing in 1962 the nurseries had to be completely redug, the top 
soil moved away, and twenty inches of gravel put in. A tile 
drain was laid, the top soil was replaced, and the drainage has 
been satisfactory ever since. 

Labor 

On July 2, 1935, the Arboretum employed fourteen men on the 
grounds crew and met a payroll of $360.00 for a fifty hour week. 
In 1969 we had a crew of approximately twelve with a payroll 
of $1,450.00 for a forty hour week — or 220 man hours per 
week less than in 1935. In the interim supervisory staff have 
done everything possible to acquire the best machines, to use 
the best chemicals for weed killers and spray materials, and to 
improve general working practices to reduce hand labor. Much 
has been accomplished in this field. However, one example of 
maintenance problems is the following: In 1936 the Arboretum 
was paid to allow horse-drawn equipment to cut hay and remove 
it. A few years later it was removed in the same manner with- 
out payment. A few years later still the Arboretum had to pay 
to have the hay removed. Finally, a few years following this, 
we had to cut it ourselves when no one could be found either to 
buy or take it. After the war we started to cut it several times 
a year, with tractor-drawn equipment, and to maintain it as it 
is today. 

Even by 1947 there were 1,000 man days less per year spent 
on the grounds than in 1931. This had occurred largely because 
of an extremely tight labor budget which had been cut to the 
bone during the war years and because of a reduction in the 
number of hours in the work week. 

In 1936 there was little differentiation in labor pay, and men 
were selected from the crew — at no additional pay — to do 
specialized jobs such as pruning. After the labor was union- 
ized in 1947, specially trained pruners did the climbing at 
higher pay. Now it is extremely difficult for us to hire young 
men for pruning. 


Horticulture at the Arboretum I 91 



The “crew” has always been a good one. Many a young fel- 
low has stayed only a few years, then left to branch out on his 
own as a “landscape contractor.” In this way, the Arboretum 
has served as a training center with an educational program. 
In recent years high school or college boys have been taken on 
for the three summer months to work both in the Arboretum 
at Jamaica Plain and in Weston. In both areas the local high 
schools have sent us good workers. In Weston, particularly, 
preference is given to local boys. 

Flower Shows 

In the past thirty-four years the Arboretum has cooperated with 
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in “showing” some of 


Fig. 3: “Bee Tree” and “Girdling Vines.” Part of Arnold Arboretum ex- 
hibit at the 1970 Spring Flower Show. The exhibit won first prize 
in the educational category and a gold medal. 

Photo: H. Hoivard. 


92 I ARNOLDIA 

the plants it grows at some of the smaller flower shows. It has 
also entered the large spring flower shows with these major ex- 
hibits : 

1953 Pruning 

1954 Larz Anderson Collection of Dwarf Plants 

1955 Ground Cover Plants 

1956 Propagation 

1957 Plants Introduced by the Arnold Arboretum 

1958 A Hobbyist’s Rhododendron Garden 

1959 Bonsai 

1960 Pruning 

1961 Cultivated Plants in Their Places of Origin 

1962 Dwarf Evergreen Plants 

1963 Seeds and Seed Germination 

1964 Mulching 

1970 Pruning 

Since 1953 the Arboretum has also exhibited in New York, 
Detroit, Cleveland, Philadelphia, Washington, D.C., Worcester, 
Massachusetts, and at the Floriade in Rotterdam, Holland, in 
1960. 

The Case Estates 

The Arnold Arboretum began its horticultural work in Weston 
in 1942 when Miss Louisa Case gave to Harvard University, 
for the purposes of the Arnold Arboretum, 59 acres of land on 
which were a greenhouse, a large barn, and a large house. 
While no propagation work was done in the greenhouse at this 
time, a nursery of woody plants was started, and quite a few 
ornamental trees and shrubs were planted on the grounds. In 
1945 Miss Marion R. Case left an adjoining ninety acres, much 
of which had been used in previous years to grow vegetables 
and fruits as crops. Somewhat later Miss Louisa Case left 
forty-one acres more. These combined properties became known 
as the Case Estates of the Arnold Arboretum. 

On the two estates there had been a vineyard with several 
hundred grape varieties; orchards containing 156 apple trees, 
eight crab apples, five plums, and ten pear trees; 700 varieties 
of Iris; and several perennial gardens. Many of the shrub 
plantings had become weedy and overgrown during the war 
years, and the devastating effects of the 1938 hurricane were 
still very evident in the wooded areas. It became the task of 
the Horticulturist to mold these holdings into a valuable hor- 
ticultural entity for use by the Arnold Arboretum. 

After considerable thought and discussion it was decided to 


Horticulture at the Arboretum I 93 


make the Case Estates function in three ways for the benefit of 
the Arnold Arboretum. First: the land was to be used as the 
major growing-on area for plants eventually to be planted on 
the grounds at Jamaica Plain. Second: it was to be used for 
experimentation which would add to our knowledge of orna- 
mental horticulture. Also, new materials for maintenance could 
be thoroughly tested before they were adopted in the general 
maintenance program at Jamaica Plain. Third: the grounds 
should be ornamentally developed with special plantings and 
demonstration plots of particular interest to suburban home 
owners, landscape architects, tree wardens, nurserymen, and 
other plantsmen. 

It was decided not to plant another arboretum here, but 
rather to include types of ornamental plantings that would not 
be made at Jamaica Plain. All these things have been accom- 
plished. 

Horticulture at the Case Estates 

When the two estates were first given to the Arnold Arboretum 
in 1945 the Iris collection was reduced to plants of 100 of the 
best varieties. Stock of some 500 varieties was given to the Bos- 
ton Park Department. Other varieties were donated to various 
other institutions which were able to make use of them in 
their landscape plantings. Most of the grapes were removed, 
and many of the fruit trees were eliminated. Over the years, 
as more space became necessary for nursery plantings, more of 
the apple trees have been removed. Land which had been used 
for vegetable crops was turned into use for woody plant nur- 
series. 

The best of the perennials from the several perennial gardens 
were dug and planted in what is now the Low Maintenance Gar- 
den. It had been known as the Peony Garden, featuring only 
peonies, inter-planted with annuals. Mrs. Wyman was most 
interested in this project and agreed to be responsible for it. 
She enlisted the aid of the Weston Garden Club, many of whose 
members were then actively interested in obtaining flowers to 
decorate the rooms of the several large veterans’ hospitals in 
the vicinity. These garden club members agreed to work in this 
over-grown garden, in return for the privilege of cutting flowers 
on special occasions for the hospitals. 

Over the years literally hundreds of different shrubs, dwarf 
evergreens, perennials, and bulbs have been planted in the 
Low Maintenance Garden under Mrs. Wyman’s direction. Both 
Mrs. Wyman and the Horticulturist have spent many hours in 


94 ARNOLDIA 

this garden, weeding, replacing, and moving plants, and label- 
ing them. The inventory of plants here runs at nearly 200 
species and varieties at any one time. It must be admitted that, 
because of its location in a frost pocket, winter losses are often 
high, and replacements must be made during April before 
many visitors come to inspect the garden. (Labeling in the fu- 
ture must be done by someone who knows the plants, as the 
work crew cannot be expected to do it.) 

Beginning in the late fifties new mulching materials were 
tried and demonstrated in the Low Maintenance Garden. Later 
it became expedient to restrict the mulch here to pine needles. 
In 1966 the Director had a series of mulch display plots laid out 
in the neighboring field by Henry Draper (then the Superinten- 
dent of the Case Estates), demonstrating twenty different kinds 
of mulching materials. 

Beginning in 1945, and continuing until 1952, much of the 
seed propagation and some of the softwood propagation were 
done in the small greenhouse attached to the barn at 135 Wel- 
lesley Street. This did much to relieve the crowded conditions 
at the old greenhouse on the former Bussey property near the 
State Antitoxin Laboratory in Jamaica Plain. 

Planting about the grounds was not neglected. A hedge of 
hemlock was planted in front of 102 Wellesley Street, and the 
rhododendron planting there was greatly augmented. Many 
plants were added at the rear of this property. A line of Malus 
‘Henrietta Crosby’ was planted along the north side of Wellesley 
Street to conceal the nursery area; across from this a hedge 
of Prinsepia sinensis and plantings of Viburnum and Syringa 
prestoniae varieties were placed to screen the fields beyond. 

One hundred and thirty-eight crab apple trees of seventy-one 
species and varieties have been set out in the big field bordering 
Newton Street, making a striking display when in flower and 
fruit. A most interesting planting of eighty-seven miscellaneous 
ornamental trees of twenty-nine species and varieties has been 
made in the same big field. All of these are labeled, and it is 
interesting to note that more and more people stop in this field 
to scrutinize these plants. Another planting of crab apples was 
made along Ash Street, just inside the stone wall, and has been 
greatly admired by Ash Street residents during the past years. 
Also, various ornamental plantings have been made around the 
Case Estate houses. 

While these plantings conform with the policy established for 
the Case Estates, most of them have been made with an eye to 
beautifying the grounds for the townspeople. The Case Estates 


Horticulture at the Arboretum ] 95 


are in a conspicuous location in the geographic center of Wes- 
ton, and these colorful plantings have gone a long way to make 
this area a decided asset to the community. 

In 1950 about seventy plots of ground cover plants were laid 
out near the old cow barn. This planting proved so popular 
that it was enlarged and now encompasses over 200 plots. It is 
of interest that nearly all of the original plots are still in ex- 
istence. In 1951 a small tree demonstration plot was laid out 
immediately behind the collection of ground covers. At a later 
date the Boston Edison Company became interested in these 
trees and contributed over $100.00 for the purchase of addi- 
tional trees of the varieties listed in “Trees for Your Communi- 
ty,” a publication of the New England Electrical Services Coun- 
cil which the Horticulturist helped to write. 



Fig. 4: Magnolia x loebneri ‘Merrill’. Photo: H. Howard. 


In 1947, with the removal from the Arnold Arboretum in 
Jamaica Plain of the major part of the Berberis and Ribes col- 
lections to the Case Estates, the “permanent” nursery area was 
started. Studies had been made in some of the large collections 
at Jamaica Plain, and it had become obvious that continued 
planting there was impossible for lack of space. It was decided 
that the Horticulturist would select some of the mediocre-to- 
poor species and varieties for removal to the Case Estates, 
leaving only the better ornamental types at Jamaica Plain. At 



96 ARNOLDIA 


first there were 202 plants in this “permanent” nursery. Now 
there are approximately 1,000 species and varieties in this per- 
manent planting, all labeled, all properly indexed, and all re- 
corded in the master file at Jamaica Plain. 

Three genera were worked out to show the tremendous 
amount of prime display area that has been saved by this 
policy decision: 


Weigela 

Deutzia 

Spiraea 


Number to 
Weston 
28 
50 
68 


Number left at 
Jamaica Plain 
24 
27 
36 


Duplicate plants 
Discarded 
27 
62 
61 


This system reduced the number of plants in the three genera 
at Jamaica Plain from 383 to 87 — a decided improvement. No 
species, varieties, or clones were discarded; plants of all were 
kept, the better species and clones for ornamental display were 
left at Jamaica Plain where they should be, receiving much 
better care and display space than they formerly had. This 
policy has been kept over the years as the Horticulturist and 
Assistant Horticulturist have studied succeeding groups. 


Special Collections 

Between 1951 and 1953 eighty-three plants of thirty-seven spe- 
cies and varieties of hollies were planted in the woods back 
of the evergreen nursery. This was done because of partial 
shelter here in the winter and because of increasing vandalism 
at Jamaica Plain, where it was impossible to keep well-fruited 
plants of evergreen, red-berried hollies in good condition. Sum- 
mer watering, a definite spray program, fertilizing, and mulch- 
ing have resulted in increasingly good crops of fruit in recent 
years. 

In 1960 the New England branch of the American Daffodil 
Society was allowed the use of a small space for the planting 
of varieties of Narcissus. All of the collecting was done by that 
organization, chiefly by Dr. Helen Scorgie, of Princeton, Mass., 
with labor supplied by the Arboretum. Now nearly 300 varieties 
are growing at the Case Estates. During the past few years 
Dr. Scorgie has been rearranging the collection almost annually, 
so that the arrangement of the varieties in the beds differs from 
year to year. 

In 1963 the Horticulturist became interested in lilies, and 
a demonstration plot of over 200 of them — later increased to 
250 — was planted. For the first few years they were outstand- 


Horticulture at the Arboretum | 97 

ing, but unfortunately a major part of this collection was de- 
stroyed by rodents. In 1963, also, the Hosta collection was 
started, chiefly at the instigation of Mrs. Frances Williams of 
Winchester. At the present time there are over 100 species and 
clones growing in this one collection. 

The Hemerocallis Society wished to cooperate in the planting 
of a Hemerocallis collection and, since it supplied a large num- 
ber of plants, the beds were laid out and planted in 1965. The 
supervisory committee consisted of Mrs. Percy L. Merry of 
Needham, Mr. George Pride of Worcester (now Associate Hor- 
ticulturist at the Arboretum), and Mrs. S. P. Shaw of Weston. 
The beds now contain over 200 varieties, among which are 63 
clones from a collection of old-fashioned cultivars given to the 
Arnold Arboretum about 1950 by Professor Stephen Hamblin, 
formerly of Harvard University. 

One of the staff members became interested in the genus 
Allium, and in 1967 a display bed consisting of 60 species and 
varieties was planted near the lily collection. All plants were 
labeled, and they attract much attention from visitors. Many 
onions are excellent ornamentals, and few gardeners have re- 
alized that there are so many species and varieties available 
today. In 1964 a planting of about 180 Chaenomeles of 130 
species, varieties, and cultivars was made in the lower nursery 
as a result of studies made by staff members responsible for 
assembling the International Registration List of Chaenomeles 
published in 1963. 

Experimental Research 

The plantings and wooded areas of the Case Estates have been 
used for various experimental purposes, not the least important 
of which has been the trial of new weed killers. When a weed 
killer was studied thoroughly enough so that we understood 
what it would and would not do, it was used on the plantings 
in Jamaica Plain if it had proved satisfactory; but, in the course 
of these experiments, several weed killers proved to be too un- 
reliable to be used on the display plantings and were discarded 
after the first trials at the Case Estates. 

Other organizations affiliated with Harvard University have 
been allowed the use of portions of the Case Estate property at 
various times. In 1946 an agreement was made between the 
Arnold Arboretum and the Harvard Graduate School of Design 
which allowed the landscape department to use a small piece 
of land bordering the woods, above the former vineyard, which 
was not immediately adaptable for Arboretum use. The Bussey 


•W 



Fig. 5: Hosta plot at the Case Estates. Photo: D. Wyman. 


Institution was allowed to use, temporarily, two acres of other 
land for growing corn, and in 1948 the Cabot Foundation plant- 
ed seven acres, in the big field bordering Newton Street, with 
forest trees under special study. Finally, in connection with 
Dr. Sax’s studies of dwarfing techniques and dwarfing root- 
stocks for apples, a series of experimental plantings were made 
in 1948, 1952, and 1959. 

In 1966 an experimental nursery of over 130 different kinds 
of trees was planted in the large field along Newton Street to 
allow them to grow to a large size. It was anticipated that they 
might be needed for planting at Jamaica Plain. 

Thirty-four wisteria vines were planted on the vine trellis at 
the Case Estates in the spring of 1946. These had all been 
propagated asexually from one double-flowered vine. Various 
pruning and fertilizing practices were carried out on these vines 
up until 1962, the main object being to note which ones aided 
flowering. Similarly, other trellises in this general area were 
utilized with nearly thirty different varieties of Celastrus vines in 


98 



Horticulture at the Arboretum I 99 


a series of studies to learn more about sex changes and pollina- 
tion methods for producing more fruit on plants of this genus. 

The field on the east side of Wellesley Street was used for 
a series of experiments to determine the best pruning and fertiliz- 
ing practices to aid the growth and color of fruits, flowers, and 
autumn foliage of some twenty different ornamental shrubs. 
Each group of plants was asexually propagated from a single 
plant. Later, these same plants were used in field demonstra- 
tions of different methods of pruning. 

These are only a few of the more evident types of experiments 
which have been carried out here over the years. In recent 
years an “open house” day each year has done much to increase 
interest in the plantings. 

Referring back to the policies established in 1945, we can see 
that the Arnold Arboretum land at Jamaica Plain and the Case 
Estates in Weston has been welded into a harmonious unit, of 
benefit to staff members and of considerable interest to the 
general public. 

Donald Wyman 


The Holly Society of America and the International Registration 
Authority for cultivated Ilex (holly) wish to announce a change 
in the place of the registration authority from the College of 
Agriculture and Environmental Science, Rutgers, the State Uni- 
versity, New Brunswick, New Jersey, with Dr. E. R. Orton, Jr. 
as registrar, to the U.S. National Arboretum, Washington, D.C., 
20002, with Mr. G. K. Eisenbeiss as registrar. 

All future national and international holly registrations and in- 
quiries are to be sent to Mr. G. K. Eisenbeiss. 


Plant With Nature 1 


Readers of the works of the late Louis Bromfield will remember 
that in his series of books about his experience in farming at 
Malabar he repeatedly stressed farming with nature rather 
than against nature. Mr. Bromfield was a man who came to 
agriculture late in life, became tremendously excited by it and 
in some ways could almost be characterized as an' agricultural 
mystic. 

Many of the theories that he embraced with such passion 
did not withstand the proof of careful objective testing in the 
field. However, his basic reverence for nature resulted in at- 
tempts to adjust agricultural practices to conform to the natural 
way in which the soil or plant behaves, and these attempts have 
not received the serious attention that they deserve. 

Scientifically trained agriculturists in particular are put off 
by the intemperate enthusiasm and broad generalizations that 
characterize much of his agricultural writing. Still the basic 
kernel of his thinking is valid. It is cheaper, more efficient and 
more profitable to farm with nature. It is at best an uphill 
struggle to try to farm in a way which violates natural ecological 
principles. 

Nurserymen are agriculturists too, even those who do nothing 
but landscape planting and do not own an acre of land in field 
production. Frequently they are dealing with plant material 
that is infinitely more exacting in its ecological requirements 
than the traditional farm crops. Most of these crops have, dur- 
ing the thousands of years they have been cultivated, become 
wholly artificial creations completely dependent upon man’s 
plowed fields for existence and unable to survive in the wild. 
No matter what part of the industry in which a nurseryman is 
engaged, his profits and, indeed, his very survival are dependent 
upon how well the plants he produces or sells survive and grow. 


1 Reprinted from the December 15, 1969, issue of the American Nursery- 
man with the permission of the editor and the author. 


100 


Plant with Nature | 101 


Natural Cycle of Growth 

Young men studying at horticultural schools often wonder why 
they are required to learn so much “theory,” when they are 
really interested in the “practical” parts of an education, how 
to do those operations that obviously and quickly relate to a 
dollar earned. They resent the seemingly dull theoretical parts 
of plant physiology and ecology and the apparently “obvious” 
facts describing the natural cycle of plant growth. 

Yet in our temperate zone, in which most of the world’s 
nursery operations are conducted, the seasons alternate between 
a period of active growth in the spring and summer and a period 
of dormancy deepening in the fall to almost complete quiescence 
in the winter. Complex biochemical changes take place within 
the plant as it goes through these recurrent cycles. 

To ignore these natural phenomena in the very practical op- 
erations of propagation and transplanting is to court disaster in 
some operations or at best to do things the hard way with the 
resulting increased costs and diminished results. Consequently 
approaching with an eager and open mind these “theoretical” 
questions as to how a plant behaves and why it does so has a 
most practical application after all. 

Propagating with Nature 

For countless years, gardeners idly observed that many kinds 
of flowers bloomed only at a certain time in the year, and no 
amount of irrigation or fertilizing would induce them to depart 
from this pattern. Eventually curious minds began to wonder 
why this was so, and these investigations led Garner and Allard 
to formulate the principle in 1920 that such plants behaved 
this way in response to variations in the length of the daylight 
at different times in the growing season. This discovery and 
its refinements have been of the greatest practical value to the 
florist industry. 

The photoperiodic response of woody plants is less dramatic 
than that of many herbaceous plants, but it is there, and ad- 
justing propagating schedules to it will greatly improve results'. 
Indeed, some plants, like certain deciduous azaleas and the 
so-called French hybrid lilacs, are virtually impossible to root 
except during their spring cycle of growth, which coincides with 
the longest days of the year. 

Transplanting Nature’s Way 

During the early spring, just when woody plants are break- 
ing into growth, is the best time to transplant in the nursery 


102 | ARNOLDIA 

or to plant on a landscape job. However, the ideal part of this 
best time is of very short duration, often a mere couple of 
weeks. It is of course impossible to compress enough work into 
this brief period to support a business for the remaining majority 
of the year. 

Therefore it is important to separate trees for example, into 
groups composed of those which are easy, fairly easy and dif- 
ficult to transplant. Fortunes have been lost in the landscape 
contracting business through ignorance or willfulness in insist- 
ing on planting the “difficult” trees at the wrong time of the year. 

Two particularly cranky trees are the willow oak ( Quercus 
phellos ) and the tulip tree ( Liriodendron tulipifera ). The tulip 
tree, a member of the magnolia family, has, like magnolias, 
fleshy roots, which are slow to regenerate. If transplanted in 
the late fall or winter, the severed roots will decay back from 
the cut ends until the next cycle of growth in the spring, and 
heavy losses will result. 

Move at Optimum Time 

In one well-known landscape contract that featured hundreds 
of large-caliper tulip trees, they were a total loss, and the con- 
tractor was bankrupted by the job. By delaying the execution 
of this job and working with nature by moving these trees at 
the optimum time in the spring just as growth was commenc- 
ing, 100 percent survival could have been achieved, and a 
handsome profit would have replaced the disaster. 

The willow oak is very difficult for a quite different reason. It 
is both thin-barked and extremely twiggy. If moved in the late 
fall or winter when no root regeneration can occur, the trees 
simply dry out and perish. If moved in the spring just before 
or just as new growth is beginning, there is no chance for 
drying out to proceed very far because new root growth occurs 
immediately and supplies water to the branches. Thus knowl- 
edge of the idiosyncrasies of certain difficult trees and the 
implications of their growth cycles is of the utmost importance 
in scheduling nursery operations and landscape contracting. 

Ecological Requirements 

Nurserymen and landscape architects often do not pay suffi- 
cient attention to the ecological requirements of the plants 
commonly used in landscape planting and thus attempt to fight 
nature rather than work with her. Such a course is fraught 
with disappointment. Either the plants die outright, with costly 
losses to the contractor, or else they merely survive in a sickly 


Plant with Nature I 103 


condition which disappoints the owner who expected a beauti- 
ful planting and thus cast doubts on the ability of the designer. 

Many ornamental plants are adaptable to a great variety of 
growing conditions, and there is usually one in which they look 
exactly “right.” Others, however, have exacting ecological re- 
quirements which cannot be ignored. Although they will not 
thrive in all sites even though they are perfectly hardy in that 
climatic zone, they are very useful precisely because of their 
special requirements. 

With the science of ecology at its present developed state, it 
should not be possible to find the flagrant violations of nature 
still to be seen in a few landscape plantings. But there they are 
— the bed of shrunken rhododendrons baking on the south face 
of a big building, the creeping junipers battling it out with 
phomopsis blight as a ground cover in the shade of big trees, 
or the yellow-brown mass of pachysandra struggling to survive 
on a dry, sunny bank. 

The Happy Reverse 

At the other end of the spectrum, the happy reverse is to be seen, 
designed by an architect or landscape consultant with an in- 
stinctive “feel” for plant requirements. His are the results of 
planting with nature — the lush foliaged Rhododendron maxi- 
mum on the sheltered north face of the building, the mass plant- 
ing of thriving yuccas on the “impossible” dry knoll or the 
thicket of myrica on the highway bank where salt spray is a 
problem each winter. On such a job, establishing the plant ma- 
terial is easy, and the results are lasting and beautiful. 

Solving Poor Drainage 

Next to neglect in watering during the first season after plant- 
ing, more losses on landscape jobs result from poor drainage 
than any other cause. Every elementary botanical textbook 
says that roots require water and oxygen for survival and 
growth. Both landscape designers and landscape contractors 
far more often consider supplying water than air. 

The reason that drainage is such a problem on so many land- 
scape sites is that the soil has been so frightfully abused dur- 
ing the construction of the buildings or of the facility itself. 
Bulldozers, trucks and the feet of the workmen themselves 
cross and recross the area to be planted, often in wet, muddy 
weather, until not a vestige of granular soil structure remains. 
Unless generous planting pits are excavated and filled with 
good soil and under-drainage is supplied (see fig. 6a), neither 
plant survival nor subsequent growth will be satisfactory. 


a, p 


104 ARNOLDIA 






Fig. 6: a. Planting in compacted soil. 

b. Planting trees in wet areas. 

. Planting shrubs in wet areas. 

Sand dune planting. For seashore : Rosa rugosa, Prunus mari- 
tima, Myrica pensylvanica, Elaeagnus umbellata, etc. 


Plant with Nature I 105 


Of still greater challenge to the landscape contractor is the 
low, wet planting site with little opportunity to install under- 
drainage. Here also nature points the way to a solution, which 
can be observed in any young maple swamp on really wet 
ground. The trees will be observed each to be growing on a 
small projection of soil. The seeds which gave rise to each sur- 
viving tree germinated originally on tussocks or other soil pro- 
jections above the surrounding wet soil. Later when the trees 
grew older they gradually extended their roots downward and 
outward into the surrounding soil and successfully invaded and 
utilized it for growing substrate. 

This natural method can be used with great success in land- 
scape planting under similar conditions. Beds of shrubs or the 
soil balls of shade and ornamental trees can be placed partially 
raised above the grade level (see figs. 6b,c). As in planting 
at grade level, a saucer-shaped depression must be provided for 
watering during the first growing season after planting. It 
goes without saying that species adapted to wet soils must be 
used for landscaping such sites. 

Such a partially raised planting will look somewhat peculiar 
for the first couple of years after planting, but in a surprisingly 
short period of time the soil of the mounds seems to settle down 
or level out. Before very long the slight raise which remains 
from the little hill necessary to establish the planting will be 
a quite unnoticeable feature of the whole planting. 

Planting in Sand 

Nature also points the way to an intelligent observer in the 
problem of establishing successfully a planting in extremely 
sandy porous soils such as found in many areas at the seashore. 

Wherever a beach plum or another seaside shrub has been 
uncovered by a shift in the sand dunes or big excavation, the 
stem of the plant will be found to be enormously long, extend- 
ing far down for many yards into the sand to where permanent 
moisture is to be found. 

When one plants under such sandy conditions the root mass 
should be set several times deeper than would be normal (see 
fig. 6d). Often leggy plants which would be unacceptable for 
regular landscaping can be used for sand dune planting with 
fine results. 

Human Predation 

A real problem exists in trying to establish and maintain land- 
scape plantings in areas of heavy pedestrian traffic and dense 


106 | ARNOLDIA 

occupancy, such as municipal building grounds and public 
housing projects. Here also observation of how nature solves 
these problems is of value to the landscape architect. In desert 
areas or steppes where woody plant life is hard pressed to sur- 
vive and animal browsing is a severe adverse factor, successful 
woody plants are spiny and thorny to ward off potential de- 
stroyers. 

The landscape designer must adopt the same solution for 
plantings of shrubs and small trees so susceptible to vandalism. 
Where a hedge of Japanese holly will not survive a single grow- 
ing season, a hedge of Berberis julianae will grow on to a ripe 
old age. Where a flowering crab apple or cherry will be torn to 
pieces the first time it blooms, a Washington or cockspur haw- 
thorn will be perfectly secure and provide a fine display of flow- 
ers and colorful fruits each year. Where a birch would soon lose 
all its bark, a thorny honey locust will grow untouched to ma- 
turity. 

In all aspects of the challenging and infinitely rewarding 
nursery profession, intelligent observation and comprehension 
of nature’s way indicate the easy way and the profitable way 
to perform nursery and landscape operations. When does a 
seed ripen? Usually that is the time to sow it. Does it pass 
through the digestive tracts of birds before it falls to the ground? 
Then it should be cleaned of pulp before it is sown. Does a plant 
occur on moist northern exposures in the wild? That is the lo- 
cation it will do best in on the landscape planting. 

Is the plant a xerophyte under natural conditions? Here is 
the solution for that dry, sun-baked location. Does a plant 
thrive at the salt-lashed seashore? It is a possibility for northern 
highway planting. Is a very desirable tree very difficult to 
transplant? Landscape planting schedules should be juggled 
if possible to permit transplanting it at the limited optimal 
planting time, or else it should be dug and heeled in under 
special care so the shock of the move has been overcome before 
it goes to the landscape site. 

Landscape and nursery transplanting is an unnatural phe- 
nomenon for any plant, and it is easiest and safest when na- 
tural considerations are working for, rather than against, the 
nurseryman. 

William Flemer III 
Princeton Nurseries 
Princeton, New Jersey 


Basic Books for the Library 


This is the final article taken from the series of talks presented at the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society’s conference on botanical and horti- 
cultural libraries in November 1969. — Ed. 

An institutional library, whether a public, college, or society 
library, is the place to go when one wants an answer to “any” 
question. There are two basic kinds of library tools needed to 
answer such questions. One is subject matter materials: books, 
magazines, and bulletins. Then there are the indices, atlases, 
dictionaries, encyclopedias, and textbooks that are needed to 
get at the information in the subject matter materials or to 
supplement those materials. Because subject matter libraries 
tend to be weak with regard to supplementary materials, it has 
seemed useful to compile a list of references. 

The following titles are, in my experience, the basic refer- 
ences needed to make a subject matter botanical and horticul- 
tural library work. Those titles preceded with an asterisk are 
absolutely essential; there can be no substitutes for them. The 
other titles on the list are extremely useful, but not absolutely 
essential. This list does not include purely subject matter books. 

Dictionaries 

Brown, R. W. Composition of Scientific Words. Baltimore: Pri- 
vately printed, 1954. 

*Flood, W. E. Scientific Words, Their Structure and Meaning. 
London: Oldborne, 1960. Perhaps not the most complete, 
but certainly the best value for the money. 

*Henderson, I. F., and W. D. Henderson. A Dictionary of Sci- 
entific Terms. (7th ed.) Princeton, N.J.: Van Nostrand, 
1960. Good for newer terms. Earlier editions are not par- 
ticularly useful. 

* Jackson, B. D. A Glossary of Botanic Terms. (4th ed.) Lon- 
don: Duckworth & Co., 1928. The basic work in English. 
There is a 1949 reprint of this edition. 

*Schneider, C. K. Illustriertes Handworterbuch der Botanik. 
Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1905. Probably the best one- 
volume dictionary; illustrated. 

*Stearn, W. T. Botanical Latin. London: Nelson, 1966. Gram- 
mar, glossary, and much else of interest. 

*Willis, J. C. A Dictionary of the Flowering Plants and Ferns. 
(6th ed.) Cambridge: University Press, 1931. Full of 
useful miscellaneous information. Edition reprinted in 
1960. 


108 ARNOLDIA 

Wood, R. S. An English-Classical Dictionary for the Use of 
Taxonomists. Claremont, Calif.: Pomona College, 1966. 

^Foreign language-English dictionaries for all of the modem 
European languages, Latin, and classical Greek. 

Bibliographies & Nomenclators 

Arber, A. Herbals, Their Origin and Evolution. (2nd ed. ) 
Cambridge: University Press, 1938. 

* Bibliography of Agriculture. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, 1942 +. Title and reference listings 
of articles in the various fields of agriculture. Coverage of 
botanical and horticultural titles is probably more exten- 
sive than Biological Abstracts, but it is not an abstracting 
journal. 

*Biological Abstracts. Philadelphia: Biological Abstracts, 1926 
+. Abstracts of biological publications. Useful. 

Blake, S. F. Guide to Popular Floras. ( “Bibliographical Bulletin,” 
No. 23.) Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture, 1954. 

* , and A. C. Atwood. Geographical Guide to the Floras 

of the World. 2 vols. (“U.S. Department of Agriculture 
Miscellaneous Publications,” No. 401, 797.) Washington, 
D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1942 (vol. 1), 1961 
(vol. 2). Essential. The introduction to the second volume 
contains an annotated list of reference works which sup- 
plements this list. 

Blunt, W., and W. T. Stearn. The Art of Botanical Illustration. 
London: Collins, 1951. 

Dalla Torre, K. W. and H. Harms. Genera Siphonogamarum & 
Indexband. Leipzig: Wilhelm Engelmann, 1907, 1908. 
Useful as a source of information about synonomy of ge- 
neric names. Essentially replaced by 7th edition of Willis’ 
Dictionary. Edition reprinted in 1958 and 1963. 

Dunthorne, G. Flozver and Fruit Prints of the 18th and Early 
19th Centuries. Washington, D.C. : Privately printed, 1938. 

*Frodin, D. G. Guide to the Standard Floras of the World. 
Knoxville, Tenn. : Department of Botany, University of 
Tennessee, 1964. Mimeographed. Useful list of the floras 
which should be in any botanical or horticultural library. 

*Jackson, B. D. Index Kewensis plantarum phanerogamarum, 
2 vols. & 13 supplements. Oxford: University Press, 1893- 
1966+. Essential in a botanical library, very useful in a 
horticultural library. Lists the places of publication of bi- 
nomials. 


Basic Books I 109 


Lawrence, G. H. M. An Annotated Guide to Reference Works 
for Advanced Plantsmen. Pittsburgh: Hunt Botanical Li- 
brary, 1966. Mimeographed. 

*Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Dictionary Catalog of the 
Library. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1962. Catalog of the largest 
American horticultural library. Useful. 

*Merrill, E. D., and E. H. Walker. A Bibliography of Eastern 
Asiatic Botany. 2 vols. Jamaica Plain : Arnold Arboretum, 
1938 (vol. 1); Washington, D.C.: American Institute of 
Biological Sciences, 1960 (vol. 2). Almost absolutely es- 
sential. Useful far outside of its stated geographical area. 
The subject lists at the end are particularly valuable. 

Nissen, C. Die Botanische Buchillustration. 2 vols. & supple- 
ment. Stuttgart: Hiersemann, 1951, 1966. Essential if 
you are going to do anything with illustrated books. The 
notes on authors, illustrators, engravers, and publishers are 
very useful. 

*Pritzel, G. A. Thesaurus Literaturae Botanicae. (2nd ed.) 
Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1871. This is the one basic, essential 
library tool. One simply cannot function without it. Au- 
thors and their dates, titles and dates of publication, size, 
numbers of pages, and miscellaneous notes. Also extensive 
systematic lists of titles at the back. Reprinted in 1950. 

*Rehder, A. Bibliography of Cultivated Trees and Shrubs. . . . 
Jamaica Plain: Arnold Arboretum, 1949. Very useful, as 
far as it goes, listing extensive synonomy for accepted 
names. 

*Smith, R. C., and R. H. Painter. Guide to the Literature of the 
Zoological Sciences. (7th ed.) Minneapolis: Burgess, 
1966. Very useful annotated list of publications of gen- 
eral biological interest. 

Stafleu, F. A. Taxonomic Literature (“Regnum Vegetable,” No. 
52.) Utrecht: Privately printed, 1967. 

*Stapf, O. Index Londinensis to Illustrations of Flowering 
Plants, Ferns, and Fern Allies. 6 vols. Oxford: University 
Press, 1929-1941. 

*Union List of Serials. (3rd ed.) New York: H. W. Wilson, 
1965. Location of periodicals in U.S. libraries. 

United States Department of Agriculture Library. Botany Sub- 
ject Index. Boston: G. K. Hall, 1958. A useful subject 
index, but very incomplete. 

*Willis, J. C. Dictionary of the Flowering Plants and Ferns. 
(7th ed., revised by H. K. Airey-Shaw. ) Cambridge: Uni- 
versity Press, 1966. Essentially an annotated list of generic 
names. Very useful. 


110 j ARNOLDIA 

^Woodward, B. B., and A. C. Townsend. British Museum (N. 
H.), Catalogue of the Books, Manuscripts, Maps, and Draw- 
ings. 8 vols. London: British Museum, 1903-1940. Basic. 
One can survive — though not very happily — if one has 
Pritzel. Reprinted in 1964. 

Synoptic Works and Dictionaries 

*Bailey, L. H., ed. The Standard Cyclopedia of Horticulture. 6 
vols. New York: Macmillan, 1914-1917. Still standard, 
reprinted several times, including a three-volume edition. 
The keys for identification in vol. 1 are very useful. 

* . Manual of Cultivated Plants. (2nd ed.) New York: 

Macmillan, 1949. The standard work. 

* , and E. Z. Bailey, compilers. Hortus Second. New 

York: Macmillan, 1941. Very useful for common names. 
Bentham, G., and J. D. Hooker. Genera Plantarum. London: 
Lovell Reeve, 1862-1883. Useful. Many people consider 
this to be indispensable; I don’t. 

^Chittenden, F. J., ed. The Royal Horticultural Society Dic- 
tionary of Gardening. 4 vols. & 2 supplements. Oxford: 
University Press, 1951-1969. There are keys for the iden- 
tification of the species of some genera, as well as lists 
of cultivars. 

*Dallimore, W., and A. B. Jackson. Handbook of Coniferae and 
Ginkgoaceae, ed. S. G. Harrison. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1967. Probably preferable to Kriissmann for those 
whose native language is English. 

*Davis, P. H. and J. Cullen. The Identification of Flowering 
Plant Families. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1965. Essen- 
tially a set of keys for identification. 

*DeCandolle, A. P., A. DeCandolle, & C. DeCandolle. Prodromus 
Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis. 17 vols. in 20. 
Paris: Masson, 1824-1873. The latest comprehensive treat- 
ment for many groups of dicots. 

Encke, F., ed. Parey's Blumengartnerei. (2nd ed.) 2 vols. & 
Index. Berlin: Paul Parey, 1958-1960. Useful for plants 
cultivated in northern Europe. 

*Engler, A., and K. Prantl. Die Naturlichen Pflanzenfamilien. 
(1st ed.) 4 vols. in 24. Wilhelm Engelmann, 1887-1914. 
If only one work of this kind can be had, this should be 
it! Particularly valuable for the illustrations. A second 
edition has been started but is not complete — and is very 
expensive. Reasonably priced copies of the first edition 
can still be found in the second hand book market. 


Basic Books I 111 


*Graf, A. B. Exotica 3, Pictorial Cyclopedia of Exotic Plants. 
Rutherford, N.J.: Roehrs Co., 1968. Useful for identifica- 
tion. The names need to be checked. 

*Hooker, J. D., ed. Le Maout and Decaisne, A General System 
of Botany, Descriptive and Analytical . . . Translated by 
Mrs. Hooker. London: Longmans Green, 1876. The illus- 
trations are excellent and abundant, and the text is use- 
ful. Basic for a teaching library. 

Hutchinson, J. The Families of Flowering Plants. (2nd ed.) 2 
vols. Oxford: University Press, 1959. I prefer Rendle. 

*Kriissmann, G. Handbuch der Laubgeholze. 2 vols. Berlin: 
Paul Parey, 1959-1962. Useful for cultivated forms. Good 
line drawings. 

* . Die Nadelgeholze. (2nd ed.) Berlin: Paul Parey, 

1960-1962. Useful. 

* Loudon, J. C. Arboretum et Fruticetum Britanicum. (1st ed.) 

8 vols. London: Longmans, Orme, Brown, Greene and 
Longmans, 1838. Full of interesting information. 

*Miller, P. The Gardener’s and Botanist’s Dictionary. (9th ed., 
by T. Martyn.) 2 vols. London : Law & Gilbert, 1807. This 
is the most useful edition for all save nomenclatural pur- 
poses for which the 8th ed. is essential. It has extensive 
synonomy, as well as much information about economic 
uses. 

*Ouden, P. den, and B. K. Boom. Manual of Cultivated Coni- 
fers. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1965. Useful. 

*Rehder, A. A Manual of Trees and Shrubs Hardy in North 
America. New York: Macmillan, 1954. Standard for the 
area north of latitude 35°. 

Rendle, A. B. The Classification of Flowering Plants. 2 vols. 
Cambridge: University Press, 1925, 1930. A good text- 
book, with a bias toward the British flora. Reprinted in 
1963. 

*Werdermann, E., and H. Melchior. A. Engler’s Syllabus der 
Pflanzenfamilien. (12th ed.) 2 vols. Berlin: Borntrager, 
1954 (vol. 1), 1964 (vol. 2). Preferable to either Rendle 
or Hutchinson. Written in a German which is not difficult 
to follow. Especially valuable for the bibliographies. 

Economic Plants 

*Burkill, I. H. A Dictionary of the Economic Products of the 
Malay Peninsula. 2 vols. London: Crown Agents for the 
Colonies, 1935. Essential; full of information. Reprinted 
in 1966. 


112 | ARNOLDIA 

^Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India. The 
Wealth of India. Vol. 1 + . New Delhi: Council of Scien- 
tific and Industrial Research, 1948+. Extremely useful 
treatment of economic plant material of the tropics and 
sub-tropics. Particularly valuable because of bibliog- 
raphies appended to the articles. 

DeCandolle, A. Origin of Cultivated Plants. (2nd ed.) Lon- 
don: Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., 1886. The basic work. 
Reprinted in 1959. 

*Hedrick, U. P., ed. Sturtevant’s Notes on Edible Plants. Al- 
bany, N.Y. : State Printer, 1919. A basic work. 

*Kingsbury, J. M. Poisonous Plants of the United States and 
Canada. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1964. The 
standard work. Essential. 

Watt, J. M., and M. G. Beyer-Brandwijk. The Medicinal and 
Poisonous Plants of Southern and Eastern Africa. Edin- 
burgh: Livingston, 1962. Full of information. Valuable 
far outside the stated geographical limits. 

Plant Anatomy 

*Esau, K. Plant Anatomy. (2nd ed.) New York: Wiley, 1965. 
A textbook, but just about encyclopedic in scope. 

*Metcalfe, C. R., and L. Chalk. Anatomy of the Dicotyledons. 2 
vols. Oxford: University Press, 1950. Supplements and 
brings up to date the work of Solereder. 

* — , and P. B. Tomlinson. Anatomy of the Monocotyledons. 

Oxford: University Press, 1960+. A series of essentially 
family anatomical monographs. 

*Solereder, H. Systematic Anatomy of the Dicotyledons. Trans- 
lated by L. A. Boodle and F. E. Fritsch. 2 vols. Oxford: 
University Press, 1908. The basic work. 

Textbooks and Miscellaneous References 

Atlante Intern azionale del Touring Club Italiano. (5th ed.) 
Milan: Touring Club Italiano, 1936. In my opinion, this is 
the best of the older atlases. Many people, however, prefer 
Haack or Scobel. 

*Bartholemew, J., ed. The Times Atlas of the World. 5 vols. 
Edinburgh: Bartholemew, 1955-1959. This is the best 
general atlas in print. The one volume edition does not 
open well. 

Black, C. A. Soil-Plant Relationships. (2nd ed.) New York: 
Wiley, 1968. 

ESSA. World Weather Records 1951-1960. Vols. 1-7. Wash- 
ington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1965+. 


Basic Books | 113 

Haack, H. Steiler’s Hand-Atlas. (10th ed.) Gotha: Justus 
Perthes, 1930-1931. 

Hartmann, H. T., and D. E. Kerster. Plant Propagation. Engle- 
wood Cliffs, N.J. : Prentice-Hall, 1968. 

Johansen, D. A. Plant Microtechnique. New York, McGraw- 
Hill, 1940. This is the basic work in print. Zimmermann’s 
work is still useful. 

Kingsett, C. T. Chemical Encyclopedia. (4th ed.) New York: 
Van Nostrand, 1928. 

Lawrence, G. H. M. Taxonomy of Vascular Plants. New York: 
Macmillan, 1951. Valuable for the annotated lists of rec- 
ommended books. 

McLean, R. C., and W. R. I. Cook. Plant Science Formulae. 
(2nd ed.) London: Macmillan, 1952. 

, & — . Practical Field Ecology. London: George 

Allen and Unwin, 1946. An essential “cookbook” for any- 
one planning to do simple ecological surveys. 

Moldenke, H. N. and A. L. Moldenke. Plants of the Bible. Wal- 
tham, Mass.: Chronica Botanica, 1952. 

Pirone, P. P., B. O. Dodge, and H. W. Rickett. Diseases of Or- 
namental Plants. (3rd ed.) New York: Ronald Press, 
1960. 

Purvis, M. J., D. C. Collier, and D. Walls. Laboratory Tech- 
niques in Botany. (2nd ed.) London: Butterworth’s, 1966. 

*Royal Horticultural Society Color Chart. (1st or 2nd ed.) Lon- 
don: Royal Horticultural Society, 1938-1939, 1966. There 
are other color charts, but this seems to dominate the field. 

Scobel, A. Andree’s Allgemeiner Handatlas. (4th ed.) Biele- 
feld & Leipzig: Velhagen and Klasing, 1910. 

*Strasburger’s Textbook of Botany. Rewritten by R. Harder, W. 
Schumacher, F. Firbas, and D. von Denffer. Translated 
from 28th German edition by P. Bell and D. Coombe. Lon- 
don: Longmans, 1965. The best botanical textbook for 
reference available. 

^United States Board on Geographic Names. Official Standard 
Names Gazetteers. Nos. 1-1 10+. Washington, D.C.: De- 
partment of the Interior, 1955-19694-. Indispensable for 
finding locations of place names and also for the listing of 
standard maps in the introduction to each part. 

*Weast, R. C., ed. Handbook of Chemistry and Physics. (48th 
ed.) Cleveland: Chemical Rubber Co., 1967. 

Zimmermann, A. Botanical Microtechnique . Translated by J. 
E. Humphrey. London: A. Constable & Co., 1896. 

Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr. 


Weeds: A Link with the Past 



2 . Purslane 

Purslane, wild portulaca, or pusley ( Portulaca oleracea ), is a 
small plant which appears each spring in the Arboretum, grow- 
ing flat against the ground in the nurseries surrounding the 
greenhouses. 

The origin of purslane is buried in prehistory. Alphonse De 
Candolle, in The Origin of Cultivated Plants, wrote that Portu- 
laca oleracea was “one of the kitchen garden plants most widely 
diffused throughout the old world from earliest time,” and was 
found in India, Greece, and Persia. 

Purslane was mentioned in the “Natural History” of Pliny as 
one of the vegetables used by the Romans. Pliny, or Gaius 
Plinius Secundus, usually referred to as Pliny the Elder, was 
a Roman living about 23-79 A.D. He compiled an encyclopedia, 


114 I ARNOLDIA 


Purslane I 115 


Historia Naturalis, which dealt with many subjects as they 
were known at that time, including geography, the fine arts, 
zoology, and botany. He also included food and food plants — 
among them cabbage, cucumber, turnip, parsnip, and purslane. 

In the 16th century John Gerard described the use of purs- 
lane: “Rawe Purslane is much used in salads with oile, salt, 
and vinegar.” John Parkinson, a writer and herbalist who 
lived about the same time as Gerard, had a more colorful use 
for purslane. He wrote that purslane was not only a remedy 
for a crick in the neck, but also for “blastings by lightning, or 
planets, and for burnings by Gunpowder or otherwise.” This 
somewhat dramatic information was revealed in a guide to 
gardening entitled Paradisus in Sole Paradisus Terrestris. Par- 
kinson appears to have been fond of puns, because the title may 
be translated from the Latin as “Park in Sun, Park on Earth.” 

What was perhaps the first “Salad Cook Book” was written in 
1699 by John Evelyn, a London gentleman-farmer. Called Ace- 
taria, a Discourse of Sallets, it gave, among other things, in- 
structions for making purslane pickle. In this country one of 
Bernard McMahons seed catalogs which was printed in Phil- 
adelphia about 1800 listed two kinds of purslane: “Green Gar- 
den Purslane” and “Golden Purslane, a variety.” 

However, not everyone agreed about the virtues of purslane; 
in 1821 William Cobbett wrote in The America n Gardener, 
perhaps a little unkindly, that purslane was a “mischievous 
weed that Frenchmen and pigs eat when they can get nothing 
else. Both use it in salad, that is to say, raw.” 

Henry Thoreau, in Walden, or Life in the Woods (1854), 
mentioned the use of purslane : “I have made a satisfactory din- 
ner on several accounts, simply off a dish of purslane which I 
gathered in my cornfield, boiled and salted.” 

Last summer when I discovered a crop of purslane growing 
in one of my flower beds, inspired by my reading, I allowed the 
plants to grow. In a month they became large and sturdy, with 
succulent triangular leaves and thick juicy stems. I harvested 
them and boiled them gently just a few minutes until they were 
barely tender. Drained, salted lightly, and generously buttered, 
they make a delicious vegetable, more tender than the most 
delicate young spinach leaves, the stems tasting slightly of acid. 

Perhaps those of us who raise our own vegetables, struggling 
with temperamental plants, fertilizing, dusting, and spraying, 
are overlooking a good vegetable when we pull purslane up by 
the roots and fling it on the mulch pile. 

Helen Roca-Garcia 


Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 


Malus ‘Donald Wyman’ 

During the past few years staff members have become inter- 
ested in a crab apple tree which was first noticed on the grounds 
of the Arnold Arboretum as a spontaneous seedling prior to 
1950. The reason for our recent interest results from obser- 
vation of its ability to retain its fruit, in good condition, well 
into the winter months when the fruit of nearly every other 
crab apple in the collection has either dropped, been eaten by 
the birds, or has turned brown and unattractive. 

Under our conditions the tree flowers annually and has con- 
sistently produced a heavy crop of glossy, bright red fruits 
which average 1 cm. in diameter. As winter progresses the 
color will fade, but even by the end of March enough red is re- 
tained to classify the fruits as having definite ornamental value 
throughout the entire winter. 

The tree will also be of interest to those who plant crab apples 
as a source of food for birds. We have noted during the past 
two winters that the fruits seem to mature or become palatable 
to birds at varying times throughout the season. They are not 
taken all at once as is the case with some of the other crab 
apples that have persistent fruit; therefore, it may be consid- 
ered as a source of “slow-release” bird food. 

The buds are pink but they open to single, white flowers 
which are 4.5 cm. across when fully expanded. During four 
years in which detailed observations were made, heaviness of 
flowering was rated from moderately heavy to very heavy. Our 
specimen is a small tree, sixteen feet tall, of compact growth 
habit. It may be seen on the SW side of Peters Hill just across 
the road from the Alnus collection. 

A tree of this sort will be a valuable addition to the winter 
landscape, and for this reason we are naming it in honor of 
Dr. Donald Wyman as a small tribute to his many years of 
interest in this fine group of ornamental trees. Malus ‘Donald 
Wyman’ has been propagated in limited quantity during the 
past winter and will soon be made available to nurserymen who 
participate in our Cooperating Nurserymen Program. We hope 
that, before long, it may become available to the general public. 

Robert S. Hebb 


116 


Arboretum Notes I 117 


The International Plant Propagator’s Society — 

Nineteenth Annual Meeting 

The Eastern Region of the International Plant Propagator’s So- 
ciety met for its annual program on December 3, 1969, at the 
Hotel Commodore in New York City. Meetings of this society 
move about each year and are held in various parts of the eastern 
United States. The 1967 meeting, for example, was held in 
Mobile, Alabama, while that for 1968 took place in Toronto, 
Canada. To celebrate the society’s Twentieth Anniversary, the 
Eastern and Western regions will gather at middle ground for 
a combined meeting to be held in September of this year at 
St. Paul, Minnesota. This will be the first joint session for the 
two regions, and a delegation from the newly formed region of 
Great Britain and Ireland also plans to attend. 

The first day of the meeting was devoted to a tour of the 
various horticultural organizations in the Long Island area 
with the initial stop being at Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster 
Bay. A few statistics relative to Planting Fields — formerly the 
renowned William Robert Coe Estate — show that it is a year- 
round horticultural center about one hour from New York 
City by car. Included in its 409 total acres are 160 permanently 
preserved as an arboretum, 200 devoted to fine woodlands, and 
five to a synoptic garden which includes over 400 species of 
woody taxa. In the bulb collection are over 80,000 plants, in- 
cluding 140 varieties of daffodils. A number of service green- 
houses are used to raise plants for the 22,000 square foot dis- 
play houses. When we visited poinsettias were being readied 
for a Christmas show; at Easter lilies are featured. 

The next stop was at the Christie Estate located in Mutton- 
town. An outstanding collection of abnormal conifers had been 
brought together here. On viewing these remarkable specimens 
one gets the impression that they were planted many years 
ago. However, this is not the case. L. K. Christie, who met an 
untimely death several years ago, sought large specimens 
throughout Long Island and had them moved to the location 
at great expense. Among these oddities are conifers that are 
dwarf, slow-growing, pendulous, fastigiate, variegated, etc. The 
future of this unique collection had been in question since the 
owner’s demise. However, a recent arrangement has been made 
whereby the Nassau County Park System has agreed to take 
over. Therefore, it will not be lost to horticulture. 

During the afternoon we visited two commercial nurseries. 
At the Johnson Avenue Rare Plant Nursery there was a large 
collection of unusual plant material. Mr. Joseph Cesarini, the 


118 | ARNOLDIA 

proprietor, is a natural born plant collector and displays many 
rarely seen specimens in his miniature arboretum. Mr. Ce- 
sarini certainly does not spend time in wasted motion, for at 
his establishment are twenty-five large plastic houses of con- 
tainer-grown plants which are managed with only one full-time 
and two part-time employees. 

On December 4th we began the first of five formal sessions 
which were to cover two and one-half days. The emphasis of 
this opening session was placed on research techniques. The 
highlight was an excellent talk on the “Principles of In Vitro 
Culture,” given by Toshio Murashige, University of California, 
Riverside, California. 

During the second session, devoted to “Propagation Tech- 
niques” and moderated by Joseph Cesarini, procedures used in 
the vegetative propagation of plants were discussed. Included 
among the presentations were papers on production of “Juve- 
nile Shoots from Root Pieces,” “Outdoor Softwood Cutting 
Propagation,” “Softwood Cuttings under Polyethylene Tents,” 
and “A Practical System of Cold Frame Propagation,” by Mr. 
P. D. Orum of D. Hill Nursery Company, Dundee, Illinois. Many 
were interested in the latter because of the relatively inexpen- 
sive techniques recommended. Much interest was also indicated 
in the production of juvenile shoots from root pieces. That pre- 
sentation dealt with a successful method of propagating several 
plant species which cannot otherwise be rooted from cuttings. 

Plant nutrition and growth came in for their share of atten- 
tion during the second session of the afternoon. In addition to 
other topics, two papers dealt with regulators which retard 
growth and their effect on budding and hardiness of rhododen- 
drons. These were particularly interesting because of their im- 
portance to those concerned with raising rhododendrons and 
azaleas. 

During the morning of December 5th attention was focused 
on the propagation of specific plants. Perhaps a safe statement 
to make here is that a plant must be difficult to propagate and 
offer some important asset in order to receive consideration at 
this session. Included were discussions on Primus serotina, 
Acer griseum, and Hamamelis, and the techniques involved in 
handling cuttings from white pine witches’-broom seedlings. 
It is good to note the greater trend toward cooperation among 
the various groups who are interested in the same plants. An 
example of this was the paper on “Mist Propagation” of black 
cherry ( Prunus serotina). This subject is of great importance 
to the lumber industry, and the vegetative propagation of specific 


Arboretum Notes ] 119 


clones with desirable characteristics is, therefore, significant. 
Acer griseum is a tremendously appealing plant, and the pre- 
sentation dealing with its propagation was based on factual in- 
formation which came about through research. 

Problems of management and cultural practices are often 
overlooked at meetings such as these. Not so here, however, 
for the entire Friday afternoon session was devoted to managerial 
problems. Such items as cost analysis, schedules, mechaniza- 
tion, water usage, stock scion hardiness relationships, and breed- 
ing of woody ornamental plants were covered in considerable 
detail. 

The final portion of the afternoon program featured the regu- 
larly scheduled presentation of “New Plant Introductions” mod- 
erated by Alfred J. Fordham. 

Both the authors feel that “bull sessions” are often among 
the most rewarding parts of these meetings. The evening of 
December 5th would fit this category, for it was then that the 
question and answer period was held. A question box is set up 
at the start of the meetings, and throughout the sessions the 
participants are urged to contribute questions which are then 
posed by a moderator and answered from the floor. This part 
of the program has great appeal, and attendance is always high. 
It is a rare occasion when someone from this group of specialists 
cannot furnish an answer to any question. 

Alfred J. Fordham 

Robert C. Kennedy 

Mercer Fellow 


Summary of weather data recorded at the Dana Greenhouses, 
February and March 1970. 


February 

March 


Precipitation 

4.97 

3.71 


Avg. 

8 a.m. Temp. 
26.75 
33.8 


Editors’ Note: In the review on page 77 of our March 15th issue, the Ameri- 
can Museum of “National” History should, of course, be the American 
Museum of Natural History. Our apologies to our readers and the insti- 
tution. 


Arnoldia Reviews 

Man, Nature, and History, by W. M. S. Russell 

This volume is the current offering in the Nature and Science 
Library sponsored by the American Museum of Natural History. 
The Nature and Science Library is a series of books designed, 
so the jacket blurb says, for readers of junior high school level. 
The books are, in fact, eminently readable for adults. The sub- 
ject matter of the series is natural history in its broadest sense. 
The individual volumes each treat some particular facet of 
nature, or man's interaction with nature. Previous volumes have 
dealt with zoos, archaeology, water, the human body, and pre- 
mechanical human cultures. Each volume, handsomely de- 
signed and copiously illustrated in color, is written by an author 
with academic or professional competence in the particular 
field. It is of some interest to note that most of the authors are 
British. 

I originally subscribed to the series thinking that the books 
might be suitable for my children. I find that, in most cases, I 
am the one who reads each book as it arrives. 

The current volume is essentially a history of European man 
and the effect that changing agricultural practices have had on 
him and on his culture. It begins, at the beginning, in the Near 
East, and there are excursions onto all of the continents. Fam- 
ines, pestilence, and wars all find their place in the story, and 
the final chapter ends on the sober problem of current overpopu- 
lation. 

Why did civilization rise in the dry belt of North Africa, the 
Near East, and China? Why did it fall? What is the relevance 
of the legend of Cain and Abel? One explanation is given here 
— and most persuasively. What effect did the kind of plow have 
on field size and shape and on village planning in western 
Europe? And why and how did the forest expand and retreat 
in response to the activities of man in western Europe? What 
effect has pestilence had on this, and what other effects does 
it seem to have on human population and civilization? Who 
knows the role played by Elisha King Root in the clearing of the 
American frontier? All these questions and many more are not 
ignored in this little book. 

The subject is timely, and the book is very much to the point. 
This volume, and indeed the entire series, is highly recom- 
mended to the readers of Arnoldia. 

G. P. De W. 

W. M. S. Russell. Man, Nature, and History , Nature and Science 
Library, Garden City, New York: Natural History Press, 1969. 


Staff of the Arnold Arboretum 


Richard Alden Howard, Ph.D. Arnold Professor of Botany, 
Professor of Dendrology, and Director 
Karl Sax, S.D., Professor of Botany, Emeritus 
Alfred Linn Bogle, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Pamela Anne Bruns, B.A., Artist 
Jeanne Caldwell, B.A., Library Assistant 
Michael Anthony Canoso, M.S., Senior Curatorial Assistant 
Constance Elizabeth Derderian, Honorary Curator of the 
Bonsai Collection 

Gordon Parker DeWolf, Jr., Ph.D., Horticultural Taxonomist 
Thomas Elias, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Alfred James Fordham, Propagator 
William Ed Grime, B.A., Curatorial Assistant 
Thomas Gordon Hartley, Ph.D., Associate Curator of 
Pacific Botany 

Robert Stephen Hebb, S.B., Assistant Horticulturist 
Winifred Parker Hebb, S.B., Herbarium Assistant 
Heman Arthur Howard, Assistant Horticulturist 
Shiu-Ying Hu, Ph.D., Botanist 

Thomas Matthew Kinahan, Superintendent, Case Estates 
Charles Robert Long, A.M., Librarian 
Norton Miller, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Lorin Ives Nevling, Jr., Ph.D., Curator and Supervisor of 
the Herbaria 

Dulcie Alicia Powell, M.A., Assistant Curator 
George Howard Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 
Helen Roca-Garcia, A.M., Research Assistant 
Bernice Giduz Schubert, Ph.D., Curator and Editor 
Paul Davidsen Sorensen, Ph.D., Assistant Horticultural 
Taxonomist 

Stephanne Sutton, A.B., Archivist 
Robert Gerow Williams, B.S., Superintendent 
Carroll Emory Wood, Jr., Ph.D., Curator 
Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist 


Printed in the U.S.A. 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 


ter 

.30. 


i 



ARNOLDIA 

The Arnold Arboretum / Vol. 30, No. 4 / July 15, 1970 



new 

rANIC/ 





TL n^R 




■1/:) 

’ n\ \Wm 

p! 






aypifl 



R"' _^^R 

; ; mjjjt it 



F 










Contents 

121 The Dahlia: An Early History 

PAUL D. SORENSEN 

139 Yews in Fiction and Fact 

MARK SILRER 
GORDON P. DE WOLF, JR. 

148 Frances Williams and Her Garden Adventures 

GERTRUDE S. WISTER 

155 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 

ROBERT S. HEBB 

159 ARNOLDIA REVIEWS 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


On the cover: Taxus baccata in the churchyard of Painsivick, 
Gloucestershire. Photo: © Mark Silber 1970. 


The Dahlia: An Early History 


In 1934 Marshall Howe, of the New York Botanical Garden, 
compiled a list of Dahlia cultivars containing more than 14,000 
names. This number represents an astonishing average of over 
100 newly named cultivars during each of the 143 years since 
1791, when dahlias were first brought into cultivation in the 
gardens of Spain following their arrival from Mexico. Today 
dahlias are among the most familiar and cherished subjects of 
gardens in all parts of the globe. Interest in the garden dahlia 
has, in its brief modern history, generated the founding of 
dahlia societies on both sides of the Atlantic, with memberships 
in the thousands; produced an industry with annual revenues 
in the millions of dollars resulting from the sale and exchange 
of living plants and seeds; spawned horticultural shows de- 
signed exclusively around home-grown and professionally grown 
dahlias on the local, reigonal, national, and even international 
levels; and created scores of books and hundreds of published 
articles covering dahlia history, cultivation, and the classifica- 
tion of the garden forms as well as the more formal taxonomy 
of the wild species. 

Despite such intense interest and attention, the history of 
our garden dahlia has been treated in a sketchy and piecemeal 
manner. At the present time no definitive history exists which 
spans the entire period for which records are known. Many 
errors and much fiction lie scattered in the literature of the past 
and present, relating to the dahlia. Some of these have been 
picked up and repeated as fact by subsequent authors who have 
failed to authenticate their information by going to original 
source materials. Some writers of the past have made sweeping 
judgments of the validity of certain facts and details of dahlia 
history while providing not a word of reasoning in support of 
their conclusions. 

During the past several years I have been concerned with 
preparing a treatise on the systematics and classification of the 
genus Dahlia as a whole, with particular emphasis upon the 
data from the wild species. 1 While principally a “botanical” 
project, this effort has involved extensive reading in both the 


121 


122 | ARNOLDIA 

botanical literature as well as in that literature otherwise 
deemed horticultural. Such a survey became necessary because 
there were times in the past when a careful distinction was not 
made between the naming and classification of wild and do- 
mesticated plants. Thus, I became inadvertently aware of many 
facts concerning the history of the Dahlia in cultivation. In 
several instances the sources of some of the errors alluded to 
above became apparent to me, and some interesting new facts 
were brought to light, which proved worthwhile in clearing up 
our view of the origin of Dahlia cultivation. 

One may, for the sake of convenience, divide Dahlia history 
arbitrarily into several periods, each of which serves to focus 
attention upon one or a few major developments : 

1) Prehistorical and early historical period (c. 1552-1790) 

2) Period of early scientific description (1790-1796) 

3) Early introduction and distribution of first modern cul- 
tivars and species (1796-1804) 

4) Early breeding period (1804-1814) 

5) Controlled breeding period (1814-1929) 

6) Genetic breeding period (1929-present) 

7) Period when nutritional control in cultivation was applied 
( ? - present ) 

The present account is devoted to consideration of the first three 
periods. The first of these, as we shall see, concerns develop- 
ments which took place in the dahlia’s native land, Mexico, 
while the second and third periods belong to Europe, as do the 
remaining periods. One must keep in mind that at times the 
dahlia has had a dual history, one relating primarily to botanical 
endeavors and the other to horticultural. The above periods 
emphasize the horticultural side of the genus. 

Formal Dahlia history begins in the late 18th century in 
Spain, where Antonio Jose Cavanilles gave the genus its Latin 
name in commemoration of Andreas Dahl, a Swedish botanist 
and pupil of Linnaeus. Cavanilles, then a senior member of the 
staff of the Royal Botanic Garden in Madrid (not its director as 
often stated 2 ), had received seeds of Mexican plants. 3 Plants 
grown from these seeds were cultivated in Madrid and com- 
prised the materials upon which Cavanilles based his descrip- 
tion of the first “dahlia,” Dahlia pinnata. Thus, even from the 
earliest days of the scientific period of its history, the dahlia was 
a cultivated plant. As we shall see, the cultivation of dahlias 
really begins much earlier. At the appropriate time I shall come 
back to further discussion of Cavanilles’ dahlias. 


The Dahlia | 123 

Our garden dahlia seems so familiar 
that few among us are aware of its 
nativity in Mexico. Most persons learn- 
ing this for the first time express con- 
siderable surprise, usually having 
thought the dahlia to have originated 
in Europe (which, in a certain sense, it 
did, inasmuch as the great majority of 
our horticultural forms were created 
through various kinds of plant breeding 
in Europe by European plantsmen). But 
all of the species known of the genus 
are native within the borders of Mexico 
and adjacent countries of Central Ameri- 
ca. Long before Cavanilles described the 
genus, these species — there are now 
twenty-seven known — existed as un- 
1 molested members of the flora occupying mostly the great cen- 
tral plateau or highlands of Mexico/ Even today one can see 
them during the months of August and September in profusion 
along the highways, growing out of cliffs, among boulders, in 
cultivated fields alongside the milpa or maize which we call 
corn, and on open slopes of the volcanic mountains. If dahlias 
grew in New England and behaved here as they do in Mexico, 
we would surely regard them as weeds. These weeds of Mexico 
are the progenitors of our garden dahlias, and the early history 
of these garden plants is closely linked to the history of Mexico, 
especially that period which passed before and soon after the 
Spanish conquest. 

Our interest centers on the Aztecs and Moctezuma.* This 
young prince gained the throne in 1502 and ruled for eighteen 
years before his fall when he was made a captive of the Spanish 
conquerors led by Hernan Cortes in 1520. 4 A few extant eye- 
witness accounts indicate that the Aztecs of this period engaged 
in horticultural practices. Recently, Zelia Nuttall has written 
about the gardens of Mexico. 3 In her review we learn that the 
construction of gardens was one of the principal activities to 
which the ruling classes devoted themselves. As in our own 
society, Aztec gardens were each specialized to fulfill a single 
purpose. There were gardens for ornamental plants, special 



The name has several variations, including the more familiar Monte- 
zuma. 


124 | ARNOLDIA 

ones for plants which gave off a pleasing fragrance, gardens for 
medicinal plants, some for cut flowers, orchards, and vegetable 
gardens. Gardening in Aztec society was an activity conducted 
solely at the behest and pleasure of the noblemen, the labor 
being carried on by slaves. Moctezuma himself owned many 
gardens. Hernan Cortes, in a letter to his Emperor, Charles V, 
describes one of Moctezuma’s gardens at Iztapalapa, a town 
several miles from the capital, Tenochtitlan: “There are . . . 
very refreshing gardens with many trees and sweet-scented 
flowers, bathing places of fresh water . . . He also has a large 
orchard . . . Toward the wall of the garden are hedges of lattice 
work made of cane, behind which are all sorts of plantations of 
trees and aromatic herbs.” Bernal Diaz, Lieutenant of Cortes, 
wrote about Iztapalapa saying: “The garden and orchard are 
most admirable. I saw and walked about in them and could not 
satiate myself sufficiently looking at the many trees and enjoy- 
ing the perfume of each. And there were walks bordered with 
the roses of this country and flowers and many fruit trees and 
flowering shrubs.” 

The most wonderful of all Moctezuma’s gardens was the 
tropical one at Huaxtepec. It was with the use of this garden 
that Moctezuma’s father instituted an elaborate program of 
plant introduction. Huaxtepec lay in the tropical valley south 
of the Valley of Mexico and occupied an elevation 2,000 feet 
lower, with a climate somewhat ameliorated from that of the 
capital, which was about 7,400 feet above sea level. It made an 
ideal place in which to try out the cultivation of introduced 
plants. Requests were dispatched to all the lords of the empire, 
especially to those who ruled settlements along the coasts, that 
they send a selection of plants from their regions for cultivation 
in Huaxtepec. Great ceremony accompanied the planting of 
each introduction, which arrived “balled and burlapped!” their 
roots enclosed in earth and the whole wrapped with richly 
decorated mantles. Priests were summoned to make animal 
sacrifices for each planting, spilling blood of the offering as well 
as some drawn from their own ears onto the soil prepared for 
the plant. 

Cortes visited the garden in Huaxtepec and reckoned its size 
at two leagues, or six and one-half miles, in circumference — 
roughly two times the size of the Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica 
Plain. When he and others in his company saw it “and prom- 
enaded in it for a while they were filled with admiration and 
said that even in Spain they had never seen a finer kind of 
pleasure garden.” It’s a pity that precious little remains of this 


The Dahlia [ 125 


horticultural splendor. At Huaxtepec there could be seen, as 
recently as 1925, a few aging monarchs of Taxodium , or cypress 
trees, which had been planted in long colonnades. By now even 
these may be gone. 

As a natural corollary to developing skills in the horticultural 
arts, the Aztecs also devoted much effort to the practice of 
medicine utilizing remedies prepared from plants. 

In the years following the Spanish conquest of Mexico, which 
was completed in 1552, many Europeans came to the New 
World from the monastic schools of Spain and France to teach 
in the new convents and schools which had been established 
for the education of the sons of Aztec noblemen. Some of the 
friars recognized that Aztec medical arts contained many 
remedies superior to those they had learned in Europe. Some 
of them endeavored to study the uses of native medicines and 
to acquire the skills of the Aztecs in their preparation. Others 
became engaged in learning the Aztec language, Nahuatl, and 
eventually they contrived a Nahuatl grammar which greatly 
aided in their grasp of Aztec culture. At the same time the 
development of a Nahuatl grammar had the result of hastening 
the instruction of Aztec pupils in their study of Latin and 
Spanish. With this the stage was set for an important event 
which relates to our review of dahlia history. 

The Earliest Record of a “Dahlia”. One of the earliest institu- 
tions of learning in the New World dedicated to improving the 
education of Aztec boys was established in 1536. The college 
of Santa Cruz was constructed in the native quarter of the 
ancient city of Mexico at the Convent of Tlaltelulco. It attracted 
many gifted teachers. An Aztec pupil at the college, given the 
name Martinus de la Cruz, there learned to write his native 
Nahuatl and, through his interest in medicine, eventually rose 
to become “Physician of the College” and to give instruction in 
medicine to other native sons. Also among the Indian boys who 
distinguished themselves by their ability was a young man from 
Xochimilco, a place which then, as today, was a horticultural 
and agricultural center. This young man had been given the 
name Juannes Badianus. He had mastered Latin sufficiently to 
be made a “Reader of Latin” at the college. 

Having been reared in the region of the horticulturally impor- 
tant Xochimilco, an area south of the city of Mexico, Juannes 
Badianus brought to the college an intimate familiarity with the 
plants cultivated by the Aztecs. Badianus and Martinus — the 
one skilled in the cultivation of plants and fluent in the Latin 



Fig. 2: The Cohuanenepilli 
found in The Badianus 
Manuscript. Reproduced 
from the facsimile edition 
by Emmart. This represents 
the world’s first illustration 
of a dahlia. 


language, the other trained in medical knowledge and practices 
— co-authored an illustrated herbal, considered the first book 
written about the medicinal plants of the New World, The 
Badianus Manuscript, An Aztec Herbal of 1 552. This important 
manuscript was written first in Nahuatl by Martinus de la Cruz 
and then translated into Latin by Juannes Badianus. It lay 
forgotten and unknown for nearly 400 years until its rediscovery 
at the Vatican Library in 1931. The fascinating historical events 
attending the writing of this simple little book have been fully 
investigated by Emily Emmart and published in her detailed 
introduction to the facsimile edition of the manuscript. 6 The 
Badianus Manuscript contains what may be taken as the earliest 
illustration of a Dahlia that has thus far come down to us. We 
are doubly fortunate that this Dahlia illustration is in full color 
in the facsimile, assisting greatly in our recognition of the plant 
(see Fig. 2, reproduced here from PI. 59 of the facsimile). As 
will be shown later, nearly 300 years intervene before a colored 
picture of a Dahlia again appears in botanical literature. 

The Martinus-Badianus illustration of the dahlia is somewhat 
contrived and stylized in a manner typifying most of the draw- 
ings in their book. Because of this it would be presumptive to 
assert its correspondence with any of the wild species as we 


126 I ARNOLDIA 


The Dahlia I 127 


know them today. That it is a Dahlia at all is a matter of judg- 
ment. In The Badianus Manuscript we are shown a picture of 
a plant with three flowering heads, each producing eight ligulate 
or ray florets and each borne singly at the end of a branch. The 
pinnately compound leaves are opposite each other across the 
stem (though some are shown arranged alternately). Except 
for the few alternate leaves, the other characteristics displayed 
are all those one usually associates with the genus Dahlia. It is 
unfortunate the best known and probably most characteristic 
feature of the genus, namely the tuberous root, is poorly drawn 
and rather non-descript. The generalized portrayal of the roots 
may be a reflection of the emphasis the authors have placed 
upon the stems as the most important part of the plant. Only 
the stems are used in the medicinal preparations they describe. 
One should, perhaps, not search too deeply for any significance 
in the authors’ omission of the tuberous roots. Emmart has 
pointed out that the manner in which roots are portrayed in the 
manuscript is intended to convey in symbolic form the respec- 
tive natural habitats of each plant. Thus the roots of their 
dahlia are shown penetrating the symbol for rocks or stones, 
thereby accurately asserting the plant is to be found among the 
rocks of nearby mountain slopes. 

The color of the rays as reproduced in the facsimile is of such 
a tint that one cannot determine whether it represents a shade 
of purple or a shade of scarlet. The same color appears in the 
illustrations of other plants throughout the book and is also 
used by the writers for the lettering of all the names and sub- 
titles. If pressed for a specific determination of this Dahlia, 
I should likely choose to call it Dahlia coccinea. In so doing I 
can scarcely avoid taking into consideration that D. coccinea is 
the most widespread of the species. One finds it particularly 
abundant on the mountain slopes surrounding the Valley of 
Mexico. Other species occur in this region as well, but these 
tend to have more restricted ranges and would be less well 
known. 

Regarding medicinal properties, it is worthwhile to note briefly 
the early uses Aztec physicians found for dahlias as revealed in 
The Badianus Manuscript. Emmart 7 has carefully analyzed 
the Latin text and offered her own English translation and com- 
mentary. Stems of the dahlia, in combination with extracts and 
ground up seeds of other plants, were used principally in a 
preparation for the treatment of a disorder called the “closed 
urinary meatus.” According to Martinus de la Cruz, the Aztec’s 
name for the dahlia used in this way was “Cohuanenepilli,” 


128 | ARNOLDIA 

which means “serpent tongue.” Emmart explains that nothing 
about a dahila resembles a serpents tongue, rather the name 
is a reference to the use of the plant. Other species with this 
vernacular name were used in the treatment of the same dis- 
order. One such, recognized as a Passiflora and identified by 
Martinez 8 as P. jonillensis , bears leaves vaguely suggestive of 
a snake’s forked tongue. 

These early Aztec herbalists provide us with a record of the 
medicinal plants of Ancient Mexico but tell us nothing about 
their cultivation. At best we can only guess that in a culture 
where medicinal plants were grown in special gardens, as those 
created by Moctezuma for his court physicians, the dahlia would 
have been a likely subject. 

The “Dahlias” of Francisco Hernandez. Interestingly, our second 
historical encounter with a dahlia is in a source similar to that 
of The Badianus Manuscript — a medical book. By the middle 
of the 16th Century Europeans regularly received reports from 
the fabulous lands the Spanish had colonized across the Atlantic. 
Woodcuts of the period reveal the exaggerations of some tales 
told about the New World. Such excessiveness aroused curi- 
osity among Europeans and undoubtedly hastened further ex- 
ploration. His interest perhaps awakened by such reports. King 
Phillip II of Spain commissioned his personal physician, Fran- 
cisco Hernandez, to travel to Nueva Espana and prepare an 
account of “the natural history of the land.” King Phillip hon- 
ored Hernandez with the title “Protomedico of the Indies” and 
provided a generous sum of money to support his work. Her- 
nandez sailed from Spain in 1570 with five years allotted him 
to complete his task. 

The salient facts of Hernandez’ travels have been recorded 
by Standley, 9 where we read that five years were scarcely enough 
to complete his work. By 1575 he had sixteen folio volumes 
ready for publication, but he remained in Mexico two more 
years, continually engaged with the objects of his commission. 
In September 1577 he returned to Spain hoping to address him- 
self immediately to the problem of publishing his book. Diffi- 
culties arose to thwart his efforts, and he died in 1578 without 
seeing his work in print. 

Nearly a century elapsed before work again began on publish- 
ing the manuscript. Meanwhile, other persons had extracted 
from it certain portions which they thought important, and 
these received further attention from students and scholars who 
added their annotations. When at last the book did appear, 


The Dahlia | 129 

published in Rome about 1651, one wonders how much of it 
was the work of Hernandez and how much that of others. 

The title of Hernandez’ book is Rerum Medicaruvi Novae 
Hispaniae Thesaurus seu Plantarum, Animalium, Mineralium 
Mexicanorum Historia (happily, often abbreviated simply The- 
saurus'). It contains the enormous quantity of detailed observa- 
tions he made as well as the sketches he produced of the land- 
scape, plants, and animals. Considering the magnitude of the 
task, it was a very complete work for that period, and at times 
has been called the world's first natural history. 

Our interest here with Hernandez’ Thesaurus is that in it are 
found sketches of three dahlias, introduced by their vernacular 
Nahuatl names, acocotli and cocoxochitl , which Safford 10 trans- 
lates as follows : . . [the names are] derived from cocotli, 

signifying the word ‘syringa’ a hollow-stemmed plant; acocotli 
literally translated becoming ‘water-cane’ or ‘water-pipe’; coco- 
xochitl, ‘cane-flower’ or ‘hollow-stem-flower.’ ” Of particular sig- 
nificance are the characteristics of the dahlias revealed in these 
sketches. On page 372 of the Thesaurus (redrawn here in Fig. 
3) is a dahlia essentially like many contemporary cultivars, in 
that the capitula or heads are shown with multiple whorls of 
ligulate florets. Such heads are called, in the terminology of 
today’s horticultural trade, “double-flowered.” Wild individuals 
of Dahlia species do not normally produce such heads but 
rather produce heads with a uniform single whorl of eight 
ligulate florets or rays (Fig. 1). Double-flowered forms seem to 
be extremely common among cultivated genera of Compositae, 
the plant family to which Dahlia belongs. Strains producing 
double-flowered heads are usually derived through selection 
from variants, of which some or all of the tubular shaped disc 
florets occupying the center of the heads are abnormally mod- 
ified into florets developing an elongate ray or strap-shaped 
ligule composed of the fused petals of the corolla. Many of the 
common cultivated genera of Compositae are known to modern 
gardeners only in their double-flowered form, but this type is 
rare among wild populations. During the course of two 8,000- 
mile collecting trips by auto through Mexico and Central Ameri- 
ca, I visited and collected from hundreds of wild populations 
of Dahlia species without seeing a single individual bearing 
double-flowered heads. Moreover, of the more than 2,000 her- 
barium specimens which I examined for my studies of the genus, 
the only double-flowered specimens were those of cultivars col- 
lected from garden-grown plants, mostly from Europe and the 
United States. 


130 ' ARNOLDIA 

In Hernandez’ Thesaurus there appear, in all, three separate 
illustrations of dahlias. These figures were reproduced by wood- 
cuts, worked from the original sketches made by Hernandez. 
The quality of the figures varies somewhat. For example, the 
illustration reproduced here in Fig. 3 has very well drawn heads 
which show the principal diagnostic features of the dahlia 
capitulum. First of all the heads show clearly their degree of 
doubleness, and in this regard they may be compared to many 
of those produced on our modern cultivars. More importantly, 
or of more diagnostic value, are the reflexed outer involucral 
bracts. The position of these bracts is a trait present in well 
over half the wild species and all of the modern cultivars. These 
bracts, usually five in number, but ranging within the genus 
from four to six (rarely to seven or more), surround the capi- 
tulum tightly in the young bud. As the buds near anthesis the 
bracts begin to be reflexed and remain so during the flowering 
period and later. Ultimately, as the fruits or achenes reach 
maturity, the inner whorl of bracts subtending the non-func- 
tional ovaries of the ligulate florets also become reflexed. When 
this happens the ripe achenes dislodge and are dispersed short 
distances by the wind. 

The leaves on this illustration are not clearly drawn. It is 
difficult to relate the plant in the figure to any known species 
of the genus solely on the characteristics of the leaves as they 
are portrayed. The accompanying description may only be mis- 
leading in this respect. Hernandez, in reference to the leaves, 
writes, “Folia Aquilegiae.” On first appearances this would seem 
to mean the leaves resemble those of Aquilegia , but one ought 
not assume this too readily as this description was written in 
1570 — long before a uniform usage of generic names was in 
practice. Nor do the leaves in the woodcut resemble those of 
Aquilegia in the present application of that name. It must be 
recalled that this woodcut is a “second-hand” interpretation of 
the original sketches which Hernandez made. Indeed, even the 
description may be the interpretation or annotation of one of 
the compilers. 

The reverse problem of identification is true for the two 
figures which appear on page 31 of the Thesaurus (see Fig. 4). 
In this pair of woodcuts the leaves are quite clearly drawn, but 
the characteristics of the double-flowered heads are obscure. 
Payne, 11 has made it clear he does not believe there are in these 
illustrations sufficient details to assert their specific — or even 
their generic — identity. I would agree that one might justifi- 
ably retain some skepticism concerning their relationships to 


Fig. 3: A “double-floivered” dahlia, called Acocoxochitl. Redrawn 

from Hernandez’ Thesaurus, p. 372. 



132 j ARNOLDIA 

known Dahlia species. However, there are at least three extant 
species of the genus which bear leaves roughly corresponding 
to those in the figures. These are Dahlia coccinea, D. pinnata, 
and D. brevis. Also, in the remarks about the figures the brief 
description states “stellatos flores e pallido rubiscentes” or 
“flowers star-shaped, from pale [i.e. yellow] to red,” and “Radix 
gustu odorata, amara , &■ acris est” or “the root is sweet-smelling, 
bitter, and sharp in taste.” The description of the root is apt 
and agrees with my own reaction to the taste and odor of the 
tubers of the more widely distributed species such as Dahlia 
coccinea. On the other hand, the description of the flowers 
(meaning head) “from pale to red,” may be interpreted in two 
ways, each of which can relate the description to Dahlia coc- 
cinea. First: Hernandez may have been considering the two- 
colored nature of the heads in which the centrally placed yellow 
disc florets are surrounded by the red ligulate florets; or he 
might have been referring to the color of the ligules themselves 
which, in different individuals, often within the same popula- 
tion, ranges from yellow to scarlet, frequently with parti-colored 
intermediates. Second: Hernandez mentions the geographic 
location of the plants he observed. He calls them “De acocotli 
Quauhnahuacensi & Tepoztlanensi” or “The acocotli of Cuerna- 
vaca and Tepoztlan.” These cities, located in the present-day 
State of Morelos and known to have been well-established pueb- 
los in pre-Hispanic times, are 18 kilometers apart and are sit- 
uated in the midst of rich Dahlia country, where frequently one 
encounters, from mid- or late July through September, entire 
hillsides given over to large populations of these striking plants. 

In the foregoing assessment of the Dahlia sketches which 
appear in Hernandez’ Thesaurus, I have referred to the compari- 
sons one may draw between them and the wild species of the 
genus. The question remains, were the plants Hernandez ob- 
served wild or domesticated? Did he sketch them from spon- 
taneous natural populations or did he use as his subjects in- 
dividuals found under cultivation in an Aztec garden? In the 
text accompanying the figures of acocotli Hernandez makes no 
mention of the cultivation of the plants he sketched. 

I have found no direct evidence that Hernandez’ dahlias were 
of garden origin. Most authors who have offered summaries of 
dahlia history state that Hernandez’ plants were from an Aztec 
garden. One early writer came to the conclusion that Hernandez 
wrote about garden plants; since then all writers have repeated 
this conclusion without further substantiation. On the other 
hand, the conclusion that Hernandez described dahlias from 



Fig. 4: Two double-flowered dahlias, called Acoctoli and Cocoxochitl. 

Redrawn from Hernandez’ Thesaurus, p. 31. 


134 | ARNOLDIA 

gardens has a sound basis. Hernandez may very well have seen 
his acocotli in an Aztec garden, for it is known he spent the 
bulk of the time devoted to his writing at the Convent of Huax- 
tepec where, as described earlier, one of Ancient Mexico’s lar- 
gest and most elaborate gardens was located. When the first 
double-flowered acocotli was discovered by the pre-Hispanic 
people of Mexico or Central America, either among the spon- 
taneous plants in the mountains or among offspring of plants 
the early gardeners had brought into cultivation, it must have 
been at once treasured and given careful protection. To a people 
who derived medicine from these plants, the rare occurrence of 
an abnormal double-flowered form surely aroused enormous in- 
terest and was considered a phenomenon of grave significance. 
Might one not guess that an Aztec apothecary, seeing a double- 
flowered dahlia for the first time, would have reasoned its heal- 
ing powers to be also “doubled?” 

Every society has had its panacea. Remembering that Her- 
nandez was a physician, we note he has taken cognizance of 
many Aztec remedies. About the use of dahlias he writes, “[The 
tuber] when consumed in a weight of one ounce, alleviates 
stomach pain, dissipates blowing, draws forth urine, invokes 
perspiration, drives out coldness, strengthens the stomach weak 
because of the cold, turns aside cholic, opens what has been 
blocked, and when moved to the swellings, disperses them.” 

The “Aster” of Thierij de Menonville. Nicolas Joseph Thiery de 
Menonville served the King of France as a thief. This French 
botanist and pupil of de Jussieu lived in the colony of Santo 
Domingo whence he was commissioned to perform a secret 
service in Mexico in 1777. His mission: to secure living speci- 
mens of the jealously guarded cochineal insect and the Nopal 
cactus on which the insect lived. He was to smuggle these to 
the French islands in the Caribbean, where it was hoped a dye 
industry would flourish. Whereas Hernandez was a physician 
who regarded plants from the viewpoint of their medicinal prop- 
erties, Thiery de Menonville was a botanist whose orientation 
was scientific and esthetic. Once in Mexico he traveled from the 
city of Veracruz to the city of Oaxaca and, in a very interesting 
written account of his travels, describes the plants and the 
vegetation he observed, both in the wild and under domestica- 
tion. He writes of a visit to a local merchant’s garden in the 
mountains where he had gone to observe the Nopal: “I was 
struck at once by a double violet aster, as large as those of 
France, but produced on a shrub resembling, by its pinnate 


The Dahlia I 135 


leaves, that of our Elder, and which created a very good effect. 

. . 12 Here is a clear reference to the early cultivation of an 

“improved” plant which roughly describes Dahlia tenuicaulis , a 
species native to Cerro de San Felipe, which towers over the city 
of Oaxaca. 

Some authors have credited Thiery de Menonville with the 
introduction of dahlia seeds into France, 13 but I find this ac- 
creditation wholely obscure. The only plant materials he men- 
tions carrying with him on his departure from Oaxaca were 
cuttings of the Nopal cactus, which he carefully concealed. 
Thiery de Menonville died in Santo Domingo in 1780 and may 
never have returned to France. There seems to be no record that 
dahlias, in fact, reached the Old World until about 1788 or 1789, 
when an event occurred to awaken Europeans to the ornamental 
possibilties of the genus. 

Dahlias Reach Europe. Fate in the eighteenth century, Vincente 
Cervantes, a man associated with a Mexican botanic garden, 
consigned to Antonio Jose Cavanilles, in Madrid, a shipment of 
seeds of Mexican plants. Cavanilles, who was then Professor 
and later Director of the Royal Botanic Gardens of Spain, raised 
from among these seeds the plants he used to describe the first 
three species of the genus Dahlia.* He published his finding 
in six books called leones et Descriptiones Plantarum. The first 
volume (1791) contains his drawing and description of Dahlia 
pinnataM The importance of this first scientifically recognized 
species of the genus Dahlia warrants further comment. 

The precise origin of Dahlia pinnata is not known. Cavanilles, 
in his remarks on the nativity of the species, states merely that 
it grows in Mexico. Knowledge of its origin would be very 
revealing to us because this early record is also of a double- 
flowered form. Could it be this plant was discovered in the wild 
by Cervantes or someone in his employ? Perhaps Cervantes 
gathered the seeds from plants cultivated in an Aztec garden. 
More likely, the seeds were gathered from plants in a botanic 
garden of Mexico City where the Spanish had undoubtedly 
assembled many of the wild and domesticated plants of the land 
during the 200 years of colonial occupation. 

In a later volume (1796) of his leones, Cavanilles described 
and illustrated two additional species of Dahlia, D. rosea and 
D. coccinea. The flowering heads of both these species as seen 
in the plates drawn of them bore ligulate florets in a single 


It is unlikely tubers could have survived the voyage. 


136 | ARNOLDIA 

whorl. 15 The origin of the seeds from which these plants grew 
is equally as obscure as the origin of the seeds of Dahlia 
pinnata. They could as well have come from wild populations 
as from a garden, since their single-flowered heads indicate 
they had not undergone selection for “improvement.” 

During the latter half of the eighteenth century Europeans 
developed a great enthusiasm for plants of the New World. 
Because of Spain’s role as a colonial power, botanists and plants- 
men of other European countries were eager to maintain corre- 
spondence with the Royal Botanic Garden in Madrid, where each 
returning vessel delivered an increasing and bewildering number 
of new and unusual plants from the floras of Nueva Hispania. 
Regular exchanges of plant materials between individuals and 
institutions were established so that, in a short time, new in- 
troductions of plants with particular merit received a wide 
distribution. 

As reported in an article by Thouin, Cavanilles sent seeds of 
his three dahlias to M. Thibaud of France in the year 1802. 16 
Thibaud conveyed these seeds to the botanists of the Paris 
Museum of Natural History where they were grown and tested. 
For his article, believed to be the first ever dealing with the 
modern procedures for the cultivation of dahlias, Thouin pro- 
vided the world’s first published colored portrait of these plants. 
This portrait created a great interest in itself, for it was soon 
reproduced in several other European journals and horticultural 
magazines, and undoubtedly helped to create further enthusiasm 
for these new garden plants. 

Exactly how widely seeds of dahlias were disseminated from 
Madrid is not fully known. What is known is that dahlia seeds 
were received at Montpellier, in Berlin, in St. Petersburg, and 
at Kensington, England. No doubt other places — such as the 
horticultural capitals of Brussels, Leiden, Copenhagen, Edin- 
burgh, and Kew — were not neglected in this distribution. In 
Montpellier, the French botanist, Alphonse de Candolle, received 
seeds in 1802 from Cavanilles. 17 Seeds were also received in 
Berlin about 1802, and there, in the following year, Willdenow 
prepared a revision of the genus for the fourth edition of Lin- 
naeus’ Species Plantar am. With this revision Willdenow intro- 
duced the genus under a new name, that of Georgina , believing 
that the name Dahlia (Cavanilles, 1791) had already been used 
for a genus of the Hamamelidaceae described by Thunberg in 
1792. This error in dates, and the substitution of the name 
Georgina for Dahlia , took many years to correct. The name 
Georgina became firmly established in the literature and horti- 


The Dahlia ! 137 


culture of the countries east of the Rhine, where even today it 
persists as a common name for the garden dahlia. 

For many years it was thought that dahlias were first intro- 
duced into Great Britain in 1789 through the auspices of one 
Lady Bute. Few stopped to consider that the genus had not 
even been described until 1791. An enthusiastic “detective” by 
the name of C. Harman Payne, of England — about the time 
of what was thought to be the 100th anniversary of the arrival 
of dahlias in England — grappled with this problem. 18 He 
studied the events and records of the 18th century and dis- 
covered that the error could be traced to an edition of Hortus 
Kewensis by Aiton (1813), in which the date of introduction 
was given as 1789. This turned out to be an error of the printer 
who had transposed the last two digits of 1798. The error had 
been noted and corrected in a supplement to this work published 
a few years later, but the correction went unnoticed. Payne also 
deduced that living plants had not been introduced in 1798; 
rather, what had been received in England, at Kew, were three 
herbarium specimens of dahlias. These had been sent to the 
(by then) Marchioness of Bute by Dr. Ortega, Director of the 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Madrid. The Marchioness in turn gave 
them to the herbarium at Kew. 

The first authenticated introduction of living dahlia materials 
into England occurred in 1803 — and on this date many authors 
agree. The source of the information is volume 6, plate 408, 
dated November 1804, of Andrew’s Botanist’s Repository, where 
the world’s second published colored portrait of a dahlia ap- 
pears. The accompanying text states that the illustration was 
made from a plant grown from seeds sent from Madrid the year 
before to Lady Holland of Holland House, Kensington. The 
picture is that of Dahlia pinnata. 

Having placed living dahlias in the hands of plant breeders 
in the horticultural centers of Europe, the portents of a new 
floral industry were assured. The results of the flourishing 
period which followed are some we all still share and enjoy. 

Paul D. Sorensen 
Assistant Professor 
Northern Illinois University 


NOTES 

1 Sorensen, Paul D., “Revision of the genus Dahlia (Compositae, Heli- 
antheae — - Coreopsidinae),” Rhodora 71: 309—416, 1969. 

2 Colmeiro, Miguel, Bosquejo Historico y Estadistico del Jardin Botanico 
de Madrid, Madrid, 1875, p. 79. 


138 I ARNOLDIA 


3 Cavanilles, Antonio Jose, leones et Descriptiones Plantarum, Preface to 
vol. 1. 1791. 

4 McHenry, J. Patrick, A Short History of Mexico, New York: Doubleday 
(Dolphin), 1970, p. 22. 

5 Nuttall, Zelia, “The Gardens of Ancient Mexico,” Smithsonian Reports 
for 1923, 1925, pp. 453-^64. Publication 2776. 

“ Emmart, Emily W., The Badianus Manuscript, an Aztec Herbal of 
1 552 (a facsimile edition of the Codex Barberini, Latin 241, Vatican Li- 
brary), Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1940, Introduction pp. 1—81. 

7 Ibid. pp. 263-264. 

8 Martinez, Maximo, Las P lantas Medicinales de Mexico, Mexico, 1933, 
p. 372. 

0 Standley, Paul C., “Trees and Shrubs of Mexico.” Contributions of the 
U.S. National Herbarium 23(1): 9—19, 1920. 

10 Safford, W. E., “Notes on the genus Dahlia with descriptions of two 
new species from Guatemala,” Journal of the Washington Academy 9: 
364-373, 1919. 

11 Payne, C. Harman, “When was the Dahlia first introduced into En- 
gland?” Gardener’s Chronicle Series 3, 60: 143-144, 1916. 

12 Thiery de Menonville, Nicholas Joseph, Traite de la Culture du Nopal 
et de VEducation de la Cochenille dans les Colonies Francoises de VAmeri- 
que; Precede d’un Voyage a Guaxaca, Santo Domingo, Haiti, 1787, p. 132. 

13 Sherff, E. E., “Dahlias — new facts about these garden favorites,” 
Chicago Natural History Museum Bulletin 22(6): 5-7, 1951; “The native 
dahlias of Mexico,” Bulletin of the Louisiana Society for Horticultural 
Research 2(2): 62-76, 1962. 

14 Cavanilles, op. cit. 1 : 57, tab. 80, 1791. 

15 Cavanilles, op. cit. 3: 33, tab. 265 & 266, 1796. 

10 Thouin, Andre, “Memoire sur la culture des Dahlia,” Annales du 
Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris 3: 420—423, illus., 1804. 

17 Andre, Edouard, “Le centenaire du Dahlia,” Revue Horticole, 61; 
523-524, 1889. 

18 Payne, C. Harman, loc. cit. 


Mr. Heman A. Howard, Assistant Horticulturist, will resign from 
the staff on August 31st of this year. Mr. Howard, who came to 
the Arboretum in 1929, has been responsible for a multitude of 
duties — labeling, mapping, checking, and photographing the 
plants on the grounds for the past several years. Needless to 
say, the staff will miss his hard work and good humor. We wish 
him well in his new position as Horticulturist at the Heritage 
Plantation, Sandwich, Mass. 


Yews in Fiction and Fact 


Of vast circumference and gloom profound 
This solitary Tree! a living thing 
Produced too slowly ever to decay; 

Of form and aspect too magnificent 
To be destroyed. 

Wordsworth 

Yew trees first caught the photographer’s attention during a 
summer auto tour of England and Wales.* He was particularly 
drawn to them when he arrived in the small town of Painswick 
in Gloucestershire. As one drives into the center of the village, 
one sees that it is dominated by its churchyard. The church — 
a beautiful, old stone edifice dedicated to St. Mary the Virgin — 
is surrounded by some ninety yew trees, each meticulously 
trimmed and manicured into free-standing forms, shaping paths 
and walks throughout the yard. 

The characteristic deep green, dense foliage of the trees con- 
trasts with the grays of the church and gravestones to create a 
mood that borders between enchanting and haunting. Accord- 
ing to tradition, the Painswick yews are clipped faithfully, on 
September 8, during the feast of the nativity of Our Lady. On 
the following Sunday — known locally as “clipping Sunday” — 
the parishioners march in procession around the churchyard 
and join hands, forming a ring around the church. Following 
that, they gather at the foot of a flight of steps leading to a 
tower door from which a sermon is preached. 

Yews in History and Literature. It is difficult to think of the 
English countryside without conjuring up some images of old 
churchyards, resplendent with Taxus baccata. The trees are so 
abundant in certain areas that they are called the “Hampshire 
weed.” According to some references, the yews are even older 
than the churchyards themselves and may be the only surviving 
vestiges of medieval times. 

* Mark Silber, a professional photographer, is co-author of this article 
and was formerly a student in Professor Richard Schultes’ Economic 
Botany class at Harvard. Mr. Silber is especially interested in ancient 
literary references to plants and animals. 


139 


140 | ARNOLDIA 

The association of the churchyard yew with the emblem of 
immortality most probably came into Christian tradition from 
pagan Britain. The yew is believed to have been but one of 
many pre-Christian symbols of nature that influenced later 
religious beliefs. It is easy to understand why the yew was 
selected for such meaning when one considers that it was, in 
early times, one of the only evergreen trees in England and 
Wales. Therefore, its foliage was not only decorative but “ever- 
lasting.” The yew was probably planted on religious sites and 
was a survival of pre-Christian tree worshippers. It is perhaps 
remarkable that it survived the transition from pre-Christian 
to Christian times, since Christian councils of the sixth and 
seventh centuries restricted the veneration of trees. 

In a short and interesting book titled The Churchyard Yews 
and Immortality, V. Cornish tells of his efforts to arrange the 
records of distribution and ages of yews found in Great Britain 
and, to a limited extent, on the Continent. In so doing, Cornish 
discovered that the distribution of these trees has been partly 
determined by the soil and rainfall available. In Wales, a coun- 
try of heavy rainfall, the yews were abundant. Cornish esti- 
mates the age of some of these trees as about 900 years. He 
also recorded local legends which assigned to yews ages of some- 
where between one and two thousand years. The traditions are 
repudiated by certain botanical experts who report that there 



Yews | 141 

is no proof that any trees now in existence date back to Drui- 
dical times. 

Although historians do not always agree on the origins of the 
use of yews in association with religion, it is generally accepted 
that the early Roman invaders of Britain used the yew in their 
funeral rites in place of the usual cypress and pine. Like the 
cypress, the yew was considered as a symbol of the resurrection 
and of immortality. Yew branches were used to line graves and 
to blanket caskets. Yew branches were also worn in hats and 
in buttonholes by mourners. 

It is also fairly certain that the yew was used by some in 
place of palms for Palm Sunday celebrations. In the English 
churchyards of Kent, and in parts of Ireland, yew trees are 
referred to as palms because of their use in the palm services. 1 
The yew was also used in church decoration along with the 
male catkins of Salix caprea, the goat willow. 2 

The very fact that yews are so often found in churchyards 
and graveyards has given rise to numerous superstitions about 
them. In Dallimore’s book, Holly, Yew & Box, he quotes, from 
R. Turner, one of the more interesting of these stories: 

1 Ernest H. Wilson, “The Romance of Our Trees, IV. The Yew,” The 
Garden Magazine 30: 213—217 (January 1920). 

2 W. Dallimore, Holly, Yew & Box, London: John Lane, The Bodley 
Head, 1908. 



Fig. 5: T. baccata in the 
Painswick, Gloucestershire 
churchyard, where there are 
some ninety specimens. 
Photo: © Mark Silber. 



142 | ARNOLDIA 

... if the Yew be set in a place subject to poysonous 
vapours, the very branches will draw and imbibe them, 
hence it is conceived that the judicious in former times 
planted it in churchyards on the west side, because those 
places, being fuller of putrefaction and gross oleaginous 
vapours exhaled out of the graves by the setting sun, and 
sometimes drawn by those meteors called ignes fatui, divers 
have been frightened, supposing some dead bodies to walk, 
etc. 

It was undoubtedly this very superstition that moved Lord 
Tennyson to write in his poem “In Memoriam” the following 
lines : 

Old Yew, which graspest at the stones 
That name the underlying dead. 

Thy fibres net the dreamless head, 

Thy roots are wrapt about the bones. 

In his book Dallimore cited numerous writers and passages from 
literature that show the association of yews with death and 
immortality. These writers include Dryden, Virgil, Pliny, John 
Fletcher, Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Dyer, and Sir Walter Scott. 

Dallimore also suggests that the poisonous nature of the 
foliage has probably caused some of the undesirable associations 
to be made with yews. The toxic qualities were exaggerated in 
writings to the extent that there are authors who claimed that 
anyone who lay down to sleep beneath a yew would die. Such 
would also be the fate of those who were so cursed as to dream 
of the yew tree. 

While yews have had their longstanding association with 
things religious and superstitious, they have also long been 
associated with matters more specifically utilitarian. For cen- 
turies the wood of these trees has been coveted for the purpose 
of making archers’ bows. It was used for the crossbows and long 
bows that warriors bore in the battles of Cressy and Poitiers. 
And it is still used in the sportman’s bow. 

An interesting few lines from “The Song of the Bow,” by Sir 
Arthur Conan Doyle, read: 

The bow was made in England, 

Of true wood, of yew wood, 

The wood of English bows. 

Taxus baccata and Other Species. The genus Taxus, to which 
the commonly cultivated yews belong, consists of some eight 


Yews I 143 


species of evergreen, needle-leaved shrubs or trees. The species 
are native to forest areas scattered over the North Temperate 
Zone. Of the eight species, only two and the hybrid between 
them are commonly cultivated in North America. Three more 
may be found in the collections of specialists or in botanical 
gardens. The differences listed in the books between the species 
do not seem to be very great. It must be admitted that some 
botanists, in the past, have considered them all to be merely 
varieties of a single species. However, the technical differences, 
combined with the differences of habit and habitat, do seem to 
be sufficient justification for keeping the entities separate. The 
five species that may be met with in cultivation may be dis- 
tinguished as follows: 

Leaves gradually pointed; scales of the winter buds obtuse, without a keel, 
persistent at the base of the branchlets; mature branchlets greenish 
(Zone VI, except one var. to Zone V) T. baccata 

Leaves abruptly pointed; scales of the winter buds obtuse or pointed, 
keeled or not, not persistent at the base of the branchlets 

Scales of the winter buds not abruptly pointed, not keeled; leaves 2—4 
cm. long, mature branchlets yellowish green (Zone V) 
T. chinensis 


Scales of the winter buds abruptly pointed, keeled 

Leaves with a broad, prominent midrib, 2—3 mm. broad, 1.5— 2.5 
cm. long; mature branchlets reddish brown (Zone IV) 
T. cuspidata 

Leaves with only a slightly raised midrib, 1.5—2 mm. broad 

Plant generally a low, frequently straggling, shrub; leaves 
1.3—2 cm. long; seed broader than long; mature branch- 
lets green (Zone II) T. canadensis 

Plant a tree; leaves 1-2 cm. long; seed longer than broad; 
mature branchlets yellowish green (Zone VI) 
T. brevifolia 

Taxus x media Rehder (T. cuspidata x T. baccata ) is a 
hybrid that is commonly met with in the nursery trade. It 
originated about 1900 in the Hunnewell Arboretum in Wellesley, 
Massachusetts. Various forms are in the trade, but perhaps the 
most common are two erect forms, T. x media var. hatfieldii 
Rehder and T. x media var. hicksii Rehder. The technical 
characters are, in general, intermediate between the parents, 
except that the mature branchlets are olive green, frequently 
reddish above. 

A second hybrid, Taxus X hunnewelliana Rehder (T. cuspi- 


144 | ARNOLDIA 

data x T. canadensis ) is much less commonly seen. This re- 
sembles T. cuspidata but generally has narrower, lighter green 
leaves. In winter the leaves usually take on a reddish cast, as 
do those of one of its parents, T. canadensis. 

Though usually of dioecious nature (individual plants being 
either male or female), yews are found which bear both male 
and female reproductive organs. The female structures are 
small and greenish and, until ripe, inconspicuous. The male 
“catkins” are also small, but when pollen is shed they become 
yellow. The pollen is wind borne and abundantly produced — 
so copious, indeed, that the ground under the plants may be 
completely discolored by it. The fruit is a nut-like seed partly 
enclosed in a pinkish or reddish succulent cup. With the excep- 
tion of the cup, which is apparently only slightly poisonous, all 
parts of the plant are intensely poisonous to all classes of live- 
stock and to humans. The poisonous principles seem to be two 
alkaloids and a volatile oil, which is a slowly acting irritant. 
Children are attracted by the brightly colored, fleshy cup in the 
fall. In cases where children have ingested the fruit, it is prob- 
ably wise to induce vomiting or to have the stomach pumped. 
In any event, a physician should be contacted. 

The following passage, quoted from Thomas Martyn’s edition 
of Phillip Miller's Gardener’s Dictionary (1807), is too touching 
to pass without sharing with the modern gardening public: 

A clergyman, who was a curate in Sussex, informed me, 
that a young lady and her servant, his parishioners, being 
seized with an ague, were advised to take a decoction of 
Rue, which they unhappily mistaking for Yew, sent to the 
church-yard, where a large old tree grew, and gathered a 
quantity of the leaves, of which they made a decoction, and 
drank it upon going to bed. The next morning they were 
both found dead. This was Sunday: on the thursday fol- 
lowing, the clergyman was called upon to bury them: he 
performed the office on the servant, but the young lady 
had so fine a bloom on her countenance, that they enter- 
tained hopes of her being in a state of suspended anima- 
tion, and accordingly tried the experiments usual in such 
cases, but without success: they determined however not 
to bury her at that time, but kept her till the ensuing 
Saturday, and even then the corpse remained totally un- 
changed. What made it more remarkable was, that the 
accident happened in november, and the weather was of 
that damp murky kind in which the flesh keeps worst. 


Yews [ 145 


The name Taxus canadensis was first used by Humphrey 
Marshall in his sales catalog “Arbustum Americanum, the 
American Grove, or an Alphabetical Catalogue of Forest Trees 
and Shrubs Native of the American United States,” published 
at Philadelphia in 1875. The plant had, of course, been known 
much earlier, but had been treated as a form of Taxus baccata. 
It is alleged to have been introduced into cultivation in England 
in 1800, though where, and by whom, seem not to have been 
recorded. Although by far the hardiest of the yews, it seems 
to be cultivated relatively seldom. Unlike T. baccata and T. 
cuspidate , it appears to require some shade to do well. Various 
gardening authorities suggest that its great value may be as a 
ground cover under evergreens. Rehder, writing in Bailey’s 
Cyclopedia of Horticulture, says it is a “Prostrate shrub, with 
wide-spreading slender branches, rarely more than 3 feet high. 
Leaves . . . assuming in winter usually a reddish tint ... In cul- 
tivation it becomes usually a more upright and less straggling 
shrub.” In nature it occurs from Newfoundland to Manitoba, 
southward through New England to western Virginia, through 
west central Indiana, northern Illinois to northeast Iowa. 

Taxus brevifolia, named by Thomas Nuttall, is a tree of the 
forests of the west coast of the American continent, ranging 
southward from British Columbia to California and eastward to 
Montana. It was introduced into English gardens in 1854 by 
William Lobb. It seems to be little cultivated and has the reputa- 
tion, among gardeners, of being a difficult plant to grow. The 
name is said to be erroneously applied in the trade to T. cuspi- 
date nana. 

Taxus cuspidata was named by P. F. von Siebold and J. G. 
Zuccarini in their great Flora Japonica of 1826-70, though it 
was first described as T. baccata by Thunberg in 1784. It was 
introduced into cultivation in England by Robert Fortune in 
1855. Fortune received it from a Mr. Beale, in Shanghai, who, 
in turn, had received it from Japan. It was introduced into the 
United States in 1862 by Dr. George R. Hall. In Japan it occurs 
naturally in the mountains of the islands of Hokkaido, Honshu, 
Shikoku, and Kyushu. In Japan the timber has been used in 
water tanks, pails, and baths, and it is used for carved trays, 
chopsticks, clogs, and the bows of the Ainos. 

In nature this is an erect, broadly conical tree, to fifty feet 
tall. This form is known in the trade as T. cuspidata var. 
capitata. Most authorities record that cuttings taken from 
lateral branches of the capitata variety do not develop a leader 
and grow instead into spreading shrubs. E. H. Wilson, however, 


146 | ARNOLDIA 

asserted that these “shrubs” generally produce a leader after 
some years and assume the typical tree form. Whatever the case 
may be, there are now more than a dozen horticultural forms in 
the trade which do seem to maintain the shrub habit. Indeed, 
it is possibly the most common yew in cultivation in the United 
States, where the various forms are often used in foundation 
plantings. In common with the European T. baccata, it responds 
well to shearing, making a dense hedge or, if the gardener has 
the patience, making an excellent plant for topiary work. In 
addition to all these virtues, it is easy of cultivation and in most 
situations grows relatively rapidly. 

T. baccata Linnaeus occurs in nature from latitude 63° 10' 
north in Sweden, Norway, Scotland, Estonia, multitudinously 
throughout Great Britain and France, down to the Mediterran- 
ean and the Atlas mountains in Algiers. Toward the east, yew 
inhabits the plain and the hilly countries to Asia Minor, and up 
to the Ural mountains in Russia. 

In the old books several names for the tree occur: Yeugh, 
Eugh, Iw, Ewe, Yewgh, Ugh, and Yw are designations for the 
same plant. Yw is said to be the Welsh, and Iw the Anglo- 
Saxon. Many years of cultivation of T. baccata give a definite 
advantage to this evergreen in its use as a garden decoration. 
Indeed, there are about 100 named forms of the species in cul- 
tivation. The leaves are approximately 1-1% inches in length 
and from 1/16-3/16 of an inch in width, varying in color from 
holly-green to an almost black green. One of the most inter- 
esting characteristics of the tree is its adaptability to pruning. 
When pruned to a desired shape, the tree’s remaining branches 
let out new shoots in great numbers to fill out the general com- 
position and empty volume of the tree crown. 

The yew has been used for ornamental gardening as far back 
in English history as Tudor times. Not only were the trees used 
to form hedges, they were also clipped into the forms of animals, 
birds, and geometric shapes. The art of training and trimming 
trees — known as topiary art — gained popularity during the 
seventeenth century, to die down in the eighteenth. Such 
gardening tastes have not been regenerated with any comparable 
enthusiasm since. 

Some experts estimate that the growth of the trunk, being 
very slow, does not exceed the rate of one foot in diameter in 
sixty to seventy years. 3 Yews reach diameters of twelve to fifteen 
feet and a height of up to eighty feet. It has been said that 

3 Sir Herbert Maxwell, “The Principles and Prospect of British Forestry, 
XIV,” The Garden 84: 258, 1920. 


Yews I 147 


some specimens in England are well over 1,000 years old. This 
longevity is in part due to the peculiar characteristic of yews to 
grow healthy tissue around decayed, rotten, or hollow core. 

The wood used in antiquity, especially for bows and arrows, 
is said to be the finest for this purpose. However, in use for 
furniture, not only is it difficult to handle and carve, but due 
to the above mentioned characteristics, one never knows whether 
a particular stem is solid or hollow, strong or decayed. And 
one does not know until the wood is felled. The yew’s remark- 
able ability to survive in spite of the frost-induced decay has 
been attributed to the old beliefs in the tree’s divine protection 
and association with everlasting life. It is one of the reasons 
that the yew is so frequently found cultivated in the church- 
yards and near graves. Having seen them in such locations so 
often, the photographer can testify to their majestic and haunt- 
ing appearance. 

Mark Silber 

Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr. 


Malus ‘Donald Wyman’. Many comments have been received 
since publication of the description of Malus ‘Donald Wyman’ 
in the last issue of this journal. Perhaps the most interesting 
one came from Mr. Ralph H. Smith, Associate Wildlife Biologist 
at the Wildlife Research Laboratory in Delmar, New York. Mr. 
Smith was given propagating material from our specimen a 
number of years ago. 

His observations are as follows: 

“Perhaps you will be interested in some comments on its 
performance. We top-grafted it onto volunteer common apple 
and also budded it onto Malus sieboldi and common apple. It 
grows vigorously, flowers well every year and fruits even in the 
years when common, volunteer apple has no fruit. 

Its bright red, glossy fruit, if undisturbed, persists in good 
color until late March, and in a shriveled state until the flowers 
appear in May. The returning robins, catbirds and starlings 
remove the fruit in April and May. 

On the hilltops in southwestern Albany County, at 1900 feet, 
the pine and evening grosbeaks found our tree behind our office 
building and cleaned it in about a week. ‘Profusion’ is almost 
as long lasting in fruit but is not as colorful for so long. Only 
‘Sissipuk’ holds fruit longer, because nothing touches the fruit, 
so far.” 


R.S.H. 


Frances Williams and Her 
Garden Adventures 


Some plant lovers find adventure in far-away places, on distant 
mountains and in wild valleys, or in ancient exotic gardens. 
Others, although they may dream of these alluring spots, are 
able to find adventure at their doorsteps. Frances Ropes Wil- 
liams was one of the stay-at-homes, in Winchester, a suburb 
of Boston. But on her small property of only a third of an acre, 
shaded by several large trees, she gardened for many years, first 
in the time she could spare from her growing family, then, 
when her children were grown, much more intensively. 

Mrs. Williams was a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology in landscape architecture, and her studies there, 
she said, gave her a background in horticulture. (How many 
landscape architects can say that of their training?) She was 
in her middle years when she entered into the concentrated 
phase of her gardening adventui'e, and she tackled it with a 
keen and observant mind, and, apparently, with boundless 
energy, both physical and mental. Her activities extended on 
both sides of the doorstep. Not only was she active outdoors. 
She kept voluminous records, and had a wide correspondence. 

Since her yard was shady, Mrs. Williams started accumulat- 
ing plants that would thrive under her conditions. She found 
that there were many that she could grow well. She enjoyed 
those with gray leaves and those with white or yellow variega- 
tions that added summer interest, as well as many other ground 
covers — lamiums, artemisias, wild-gingers. Plantainlilies (hos- 
tas) flourished under the big trees, and she found pleasure in 
making groupings of ground covers around them that accen- 
tuated their characteristics. A variety of Hosta sieboldiana with 
yellow-edged leaves, for example, was surrounded by a form of 
Vinca minor with yellow-edged leaves. Under and around all 
these were small spring bulbs. Texture, form, and scale and the 
changes of the seasons all were subjects of her attention, as 
well as growth behaviors. 

She found that there were herbs that she could grow in the 


148 I ARNOLDIA 


Frances Williams I 149 


shade and, through her interest in herbs, she became active in 
the Herb Society of America. She became corresponding secre- 
tary and continued serving in this office for many years, finally, 
in recognition of her devotion, being made Honorary Correspond- 
ing Secretary. She also served the Society as curator of its 
herbarium. In 1952 she received the first Award of Merit given 
by the Society, and in 1956 the New England Unit of the Soci- 
ety made her an honorary member. 

It was the genus Hosta, however, that began to occupy more 
and more of her time and attention. It was in the early 1930’s 
that she began collecting hostas, which proved to be well adapted 
to the somewhat damp shade of her partial acre. She bought 
some from local nurseries, and friends in Salem, where she grew 
up, gave her plants from old gardens. 

Her interest in the plants grew, so that she looked up nur- 
series farther away to acquire more kinds. She began photo- 
graphing plants at different stages of growth, and her record- 
keeping grew in importance. Each plant, when she acquired it, 
received a number. Each photograph bore the record of the 
number of the plant, its source, and the date the picture was 
taken. In her notebooks, plants were entered with names, 
numbers, sources, and other information connected with them. 
Through forty years she kept up all this information and added 
to it. She noted growth and bloom habits. She investigated the 
differences of root structure. The peculiarities of sporting did 
not escape her attention. In the fall of 1967 she wrote (at the 
age of 84) : “I have been much interested this fall in the shoots 
with leaf buds at the ends of some hemerocallis roots. And in 
the fact that some of my hosta roots have leaf shoots on them, 
either at the end of the root or as fat little 1/16-inch buds that 
grew as perky little plants . . .” 

At another time she wrote: “In several cases Hosta undulata 
(different plants) have sent out shoots that have become what 
is called Hosta erromena , big leaves, long stems two to three 
feet, and leaf blades five by ten inches, plants five feet across.” 
The validity of this observation was confirmed when H. erro- 
mena was reduced to a variety of H. undulata by Maekawa. 

As the years went by, seedlings began to appear in the garden 
that were attractive enough to be singled out for increase. At 
first Mrs. Williams shared these with others designated only by 
the numbers she had assigned to them. Later she named a 
number of plants that were introduced by Mrs. Thomas Nesmith 
of Fairmount Gardens. Unfortunately, plants given away under 
number were often given Latin names or descriptive designa- 


150 j ARNOLDIA 

tions by the recipients. Mrs. Williams also shared other hostas, 
including the offspring of seed she received from the Nikko 
Botanic Garden in Japan in 1950. 

Her exhibits at the shows of the Massachusetts Horticultural 
Society won awards, including, in 1953, a bronze medal. Her 
photographs appeared among those in the study, The Genus 
Hosta in Swedish Gardens , by Nils Hylander (Uppsala, 1954). 
Her articles appeared in the Brooklyn Botanic Garden’s Plants 
and Gardens, and in other gardening magazines. 

She also did some hand crossing, and several of the plants 
that were grown from the seed of the pollinated plants were 
named and introduced. 

Hosta Cidtivars of Mrs. Williams. In the following list, I use 
the names used by Mrs. Williams.* They will be understood by 
those who have a serious interest in hostas, and I do not wish 
to wander into the maze of Hosta taxonomy, described by Prof. 
Hylander as a nightmare. Where quotes are used, I am repeat- 
ing Mrs. Williams’ written words. I have included Mrs. Williams’ 
numbers with the cultivar names. 

‘Beatrice’, #1399A. Seedling of H. lancifolia albomarginata, 
planted 1958. “May 1962 — one leaf variegated with yellow 
stripes. 1965 — plant had five variegated leaves.” ‘Beatrice’ 
tends to give variegated seedlings, which make it of great inter- 
est to those who like to play with hostas. 

‘Betsy King’, #502. (Introduced 1960) Mrs. Williams thought 
this to be a decorata-laneifolia hybrid. It starts growth early 
in the spring like lancifolia, and the flower shape is very like 
that of decorata. It is light to moderate purple, the color solid 
outside and solid inside except for six white stripes at the 
joinings of the perianth segments. The leaf mound is to 14 
inches, the scapes reach 20 inches. It is an effective garden 
plant, neat and well proportioned, the color darker than that 
of most hostas, blooming in early August. It is one of Mrs. 
Williams’ best. 

‘Carol’, #1429. A clone with white-edged leaves, a sport cut 
out of H. fortunei #152 in 1967. 

* The nomenclature of cultivated hostas is somewhat complex. Those 
who wish to pursue the subject further should consult: Hylander, Nils, 
“Genus Hosta in Swedish Gardens,” Acta Horti Bergani 16: 339-420, 1954. 

, “The Genus Hosta,” Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society 

85: 356-366, 1960. 

Hensen, K. J. W., “Preliminary Registration Lists of Cultivar Names in 
Hosta Tratt,” Mededelingen van de Landbouwhogeschool te Wagen- 
ingen 63 (7): 1-12, 1963. 


Frances Wililams \ 151 


‘Dorothy’, #511. (Introduced 1961) Mrs. Williams guessed 
the parents to be fortunei and decorata. The leaves are gray 
underneath, and the shape of decorata, though more cordate. 
The flowers are like those of H. fortunei. They are light purple 
outside, striped a little deeper inside. The plant is well pro- 
portioned, with 30-inch scapes. The leaves are about 5 y 2 inches 
wide by 7 inches long. 

‘Frances Williams’, #383. Named by G. W. Robinson, super- 
intendent of the Oxford Botanical Garden ( Journal of the Royal 
Horticultural Society, February 1963). Mrs. Williams picked 
this out of a batch of H. sieboldiana seedlings at Bristol Nur- 
series in 1936. It is included with her plants because it was 
through her efforts that it was singled out, propagated, and 
introduced into commerce as a special clone. It has been known 
as H. sieboldiana “Yellow Edge’ and H. sieboldiana aureo-mar- 
ginata. A large clump is a handsome and effective accent in a 
shady place. It still commands a good price, as much as nine 
or ten dollars, after almost thirty-five years. 

‘Golden Circles’, #1141. Seedling found in 1954 under ‘Fran- 
ces Williams’. Mrs. Williams said the yellow edge was broader; 
otherwise it, too, is typical H. sieboldiana. 

‘Green Pie Crust’, #1290. Seedling found in 1951. The large 
leaves have neatly ruffled margins. The flowers are pale purple, 
almost white. The beautifully crimped leaves of this large, 
handsome plant make it especially choice, and it is sure to be 
ardently sought after when it becomes better known. 

‘Green Ripples’, #851. (Named 1967-68) Seedling of H. 
fortunei gigantea #128. Mrs. Williams’ photograph of #128 
shows rather wavy foliage. A large plant, the light green leaves 
with crinkled edges, the flowers very pale. 

‘Kathleen’, #1528. (Named 1968) Seedling. “Lovely soft 
pinky flowers — similar to H. fortunei, gray leaves.” 

‘Louisa’, #537. (Introduced some years ago, but not named 
by Mrs. Williams until 1969.) This charming little hosta found 
its way into gardens under several designations. Gray and Cole 
introduced it, calling it Hosta lancifolia albomarginata alba. 
The white-edged lanceolate leaves are about 4% inches long 
by 1 y 2 inches wide, making a mound about a foot high. The 
white flaring flowers on two-foot scapes begin to bloom in mid- 
August. It has also been called Hosta “minor alba” white edge, 
and F. R. W. #537. It, too, gives interesting seedlings, some 
variegated, some white-flowered. Combinations of both traits 
are likely. ‘Louisa’ is a choice, dainty plant. 


152 I ARNOLDIA 



‘Sentinels’, #1350. (Introduced 1966) Seedling found in 
1954. “Profuse purple flowers, upright flower stalks. Very early 
shiny green leaves like lancifolia.” Blooms in late August. 

‘Sprite’, #795. Seedling found about 1946. “Low, six inches, 
flower eight inches, leaf thickened. Mosaic?” This was not in- 
troduced, perhaps because of the possible mosaic, or perhaps 
it lacked the proper attraction. 

‘Sunlight’, #1142. A sport of ‘Frances Williams’ with yellow- 
green leaves. It is rather weak because of its lack of chlorophyll, 
with a tendency to brown at the edges. It reverted to green in 
Mrs. Williams’ garden, but still exists in the collection at the 
Case Estates of the Arnold Arboretum. 


Mrs. Williams’ Crosses. In 1949 Mrs. Williams pollinated a 
plant of Hosta “minor alba” (I use the double quotes and lack 
of italics to indicate that this well known and widely used name 
has no botanical standing) with pollen from H. plantaginea , 


Fig. 6: Hosta sieboldiana ‘Frances Williams‘ with yellow edged leaves. 
Photo: Frances R. Williams. 



Frances Williams I 153 


She considered the offspring to be the result of this cross, but 
I can see no trace of H. plantaginea in the plants that she 
named and introduced. They may well be hybrids, however. 
Plants similar to the ones she named often appear in our garden, 
where many hostas have been growing together for several 
decades. However, ‘Sweet Susan’, result of another hand cross, 
is the unmistakable hybrid it is supposed to be. 

‘Lavender Lady’, #1025. (Introduced 1964) “Very pale pinky 
lavender flowers, stalk l 1 /, to 2 feet.” Mid-August. 

‘Purple Profusion’, #1024. (Introduced 1962) “Dark purple 
flowers, stalks 30 to 37 inches.” Leaves a little broader than 
those of ‘Lavender Lady’. Mid-August. 

‘Slim Polly’, #1155. (Introduced 1964) Flowers pale purple, 
late August. Purplish red in base of petioles. 

‘Snow Flakes’, #1154. (Introduced 1964) White flowers in 
early August. Taller, with wider leaves than typical “minor 
alba.” Flowers slightly inflated toward base of tube. 

‘Tinker Bell’, #1156. (Introduced 1963?) White flaring 
flowers in early August. The leaves are more slender than those 
of ‘Snow Flakes’, and the plant is smaller and weaker. 

‘Sweet Susan’, #1383. (Introduced 1966) The only plant 
resulting from the 1958 cross of H. lancifolia albomarginata by 
H. plantaginea. This is an interesting hybrid, as it is such an 
obvious blend of the two parents in size of leaves, flowers, and 
seed-pods. The number of well formed capsules is surprising, 
but there are few seeds. I planted some last fall but had no 
germination. The flowers of ‘Sweet Susan’ are somewhat fra- 
grant, their color pale purple, deeper than those of the well 
known hybrid of H. plantaginea , ‘Honeybells’. Mrs. Williams’ 
granddaughter, Susan Williams, did the actual pollen-dabbing 
of this cross. 

Another cross made by Mrs. Williams in 1948 involved H. 
plantaginea and H. decorata. She records but one resulting 
seedling. 

‘Pancakes’, #1023. She says of it, “Squat, dumpy . . . leaves 
flat, oval and round . . . lovely gentle purple flowers.” I have 
never seen it, and do not know anything more of it than this. 
Mrs. Williams does not mention any scent. 

The Moral of a Long Tale. The moral of all this is that Mrs. 
Williams had a very good time in her little garden. Within the 
confines of what seems to have been an ordinary suburban 
housewife’s horizons, she found adventure. The moral is further 
that we owe her some very fine plants, that she loved to share 


154 | ARNOLDIA 

plants and information with others, and that she kept records? 
How often in horticulture do we hear the sad refrain, “He kept 
no records.” So anxious was Mrs. Williams to pass on informa- 
tion that in the last years of her life, with her eyesight failing, 
she wrote out notes on her plants with a felt pen, only a few 
large words to a page. 

She gave plants to several institutions as well as to many in- 
dividuals. She gave seventy-five, all with her numbers, to the 
Arnold Arboretum, and these can be seen in the hosta collec- 
tion at the Case Estates in Weston. Her daughter. Miss Con- 
stance Williams, writes that her family plans to give a collection 
to her Alma Mater, M.I.T. 

The Herb Society will always claim her as its own. After she 
died in the autumn of 1969 at the age of 86, the Appalachian 
Mountain Club noted that it had lost a life member. The other 
societies and organizations to which she belonged must feel 
poorer without her, but richer for having known her. 

The American Hosta Society, bom in 1968, gave her a cita- 
tion in the summer of 1969, “for inspiring others with the love 
of Hosta.” But perhaps the loveliest tribute came from one who 
had long known her through the Herb Society. With deepest 
feeling she said, “I never knew her to say an unkind word about 
anyone.” 

As for those records, there are boxes and boxes of them. No 
doubt there is much that will not be preserved. They cover her 
other plants, not only Hosta. But as far as Hosta goes, there are 
enthusiasts who will willingly comb them over, gleaning out all 
that is of permanent value to add to our store of information 
about Mrs. Williams’ plants, and Hosta in general. 

We shall always be grateful to Frances Williams for her gen- 
erosity, for the lovely plants she has given us, and for those 
voluminous records. 

Gertrude S. Wister 
Sivarthmore, Pa. 


Summary of weather data recorded at the Dana Greenhouses, 
April and May 1970. 


Avg. 

8 a.m. Temp. 


April 

May 


Precipitation 

3.84 

3.79 


46.93 

57.19 


Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 


Spring Planting Program. Planting activities this spring have 
concentrated upon the renovation and landscaping of several 
key areas which, for one reason or another, were in need of 
special attention so that the grounds may be in the best possible 
condition by 1972, when the Arboretum will celebrate its 100th 
anniversary. In conjunction with this, certain mass plantings 
of the more showy spring flowering shrubs, especially azaleas, 
have been enlarged to provide more color during the time of 
year when public attendance is highest. 

This has necessitated the planting of nearly two thousand 
shrubs of various sizes and represents a temporary departure 
from the normal spring sequence of moving plants to Jamaica 
Plain from the growing areas at the Case Estates. For a project 
of this size, it was necessary that the Arboretum obtain most 
of the plant material from commercial nursery sources, and it 
should be noted here, with gratitude, the good will that was 
shown by all the nurserymen we approached. Nearly all the 
plants were specially selected and offered at reduced prices for 
Arboretum use. 

The planting season started in late April when workmen from 
a commercial tree company arrived on the grounds to move 
seven large specimens of the longstalk holly, Ilex pedunculosa, 
from the Ilex plantings at the Centre Street beds to new posi- 
tions in front of the Administration Building. The need for 
evergreen material in the vicinity of the Administration Build- 
ing and the Jamaica Plain Gate has been realized for some 
time, and the opportunity to make such plantings came as a 
result of the disastrous snow and ice storm which occurred in 
the winter of 1968-69. Among other things, this storm severely 
damaged several large plants of Magnolia stellata in the border 
in front of the Administration Building. Two of them were so 
badly broken that they had to be removed. They were replaced 
with three specimens of Ilex pedunculosa, approximately 9 feet 
tall. Three more, of large dimensions, were placed as free 
standing specimens at the southeast corner of the Administra- 
tion Building where they serve to soften the rather harsh lines 
at that corner of the Building. The largest plant is 12 feet 
high, 10 feet wide, and weighed approximately 2 y 2 tons. These 
plants presented a most unusual sight as they moved slowly 
through the Arboretum, on special equipment, from their old 
site to the new one. 


155 


7: George Robert White Medal of 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society, 
ded to Dr. Donald Wyman, “author 
any books and innumerable articles, 
fatigable teacher and lecturer, ener- 
holder of executive office at various 
s in national horticultural organiza- 
, ivorthy recipient of many of the 
est awards in horticulture at home 
abroad. . . the virtual embodiment of 
culture in Neiu England.” 



HORTICUL'l UUA1 1 
soany-Av#J<wo 

DOMAU) V/YiVl AN 

; M0MIX1X 

m 


J OH. 

HORiK Ul I 


i 


Fig. 8: Ilex pedunculosa en route to its new home. Photo: P. Bruns. 



Arboretum Notes | 157 

A matching planting of three 9 foot specimens of the umbrella 
pine, Sciadopitys verticillatci, was made at the opposite corner 
of the building. It was particularly fortunate that such large 
specimens of this handsome and slow-growing conifer could 
be located, for we are now able to display, in a prominent place, 
two of the best exotic evergreens which are hardy in this area. 

Sciadopitys is valued for its dark green leaves which are ar- 
ranged in whorls and, more particularly, for its very dense habit. 
Ilex pedunculosa, an Arnold Arboretum introduction from Japan 
in 1892, is one of the hardiest of the evergreen hollies and, 
despite its availability in nurseries, is all too seldom seen in 
gardens. It forms a large shrub or small, slow-growing tree with 
dense shiny leaves and glossy red berries which hang downward 
on stalks nearly an inch long. 

Much other evergreen material has been used in this area. 
A bed of Pieris floribunda, the mountain andromeda, was made 
at the entrance to the driveway near the main gate. Although 
this plant is fairly common, it deserves the prominent placement 
allotted to it here as it is perhaps the most attractive and de- 
pendable of all the broad-leaved evergreen shrubs for the north. 
The erect clusters of white flowers, perfect hardiness, evergreen 
leaves, and prominent flower buds all winter long provide a 
combination of good attributes difficult to beat in any other 
plant. 

Across the road, on the south side of the main gate, a large 
mass planting of Rhododendron carolinianum, the Carolina 
rhododendron, has been made. The pale rosy-purple flowers 
should provide an attractive welcome to vistors who use this 
gate at lilac time. When these grow a bit larger an especially 
pleasing effect should be evident in the contrasting flower colors 
of the rhododendrons and a nearby specimen of Forthergilla 
major, a relative of the witch-hazels with interesting white 
flowers in mid-May. 

Another major project which was started is the renovation 
of the extensive azalea border which lines one side of the 
Meadow Road, starting opposite the Administration Building 
and running nearly to the shrub collection, a length of almost 
a quarter of a mile. This border was planted in 1949 at the 
suggestion of Mrs. Beatrix Farrand, who served as a landscape 
consultant for the Arboretum. The original idea was to display 
the various species and cultivars of azaleas hardy at the Ar- 
boretum according to the sequence in which they blossom, with 
the earliest flowering species starting diagonally across from 
the Administration Building and finishing at the other end of 
the road with the later flowering varieties. 


158 I ARNOLDIA 

Many factors have necessitated the task of renovating the 
border at this time. It has been found over the years that very 
poor soil conditions in several places have contributed to the 
decline of some of the plants. A number of these, in poor condi- 
tion, were discarded in early spring; others were removed to the 
nursery for rejuvenation. Soon after this many tons of soil were 
removed to a depth of about two feet and, after a layer of gravel 
was laid to provide drainage, better soil was brought from 
another part of the Arboretum to fill in the holes. Approximately 
one third of the azalea border has now been replanted and, 
where possible, the plants have been rearranged according to 
the proper sequence of blossom. Much work remains to be done 
at another time, especially the planting of a large number of 
cultivars which are new to the collection and still in the nur- 
series 

A new planting was made around the large pond near the 
shrub collection. This includes Rhododendron vaseyi , the pink- 
shell azalea, R. prinophyllum , the roseshell azalea, and R. peri- 
clymenoides, the pinxterbloom azalea. These species were se- 
lected because they bloom at the same time as the lilacs nearby 
and should, as they increase in size, reflect nicely into the pond. 

The last major azalea planting to be undertaken was the 
placing of 50 Rhododendron schlippenbcichii , the royal azalea, 
next to the older planting on Bussey Hill. The grouping is now 
situated in such a way as to be visible for some distance along 
the road which leads to the top of the hill. 

Finally, two slopes at the Weld Street Tract were planted with 
ground covers. This is planned to be a demonstration of plants 
which can be used to cover a dry slope, also to provide an inter- 
esting view for motorists traveling along Centre Street or Weld 
Street. Over a thousand small plants were placed on these two 
banks. They include the following: 

Akebici quinata 
Coronilla varia ‘Penngift’ 

Euonymus fortunei ‘Coloratus’ 

Juniperus chinensis ‘Sargentii’ 

Juniperus horizontalis ‘Douglasii’ 

Lonicera henryi 
Lycium chinense 
Parthenocissus quinquefolia 
Rhus aromatic a 
Rosa wichuraiana 
Stephanandra incisa ‘Crispa’ 


Robert S. Hebb 


Arnoldia Reviews 

Orchids, by Floyd S. Shuttleworth, Herbert S. Zim, and Gordon 
W. Dillon 

When one of the greatest orchidologists of all time, Oakes Ames, 
wrote, “Few genera of plants have played greater havoc with 
human pride: few genera of plants have so humbled men of 
science,” he was thinking of Charles Darwin and John Lindley 
and their well documented troubles with the orchid genera, 
Catasetum and Cycnoches. This huge, eccentric family has not 
only humbled and confused but delighted and entertained per- 
haps a greater number of people the world over than any other 
family of plants. There seems to be no end to surprises in the 
orchid family. It is pleasing to find in this sprightly little book, 
modestly titled Orchids, a large number of orchids excellently 
illustrated and carefully described. In addition to Catasetum, 
Cycnoches, and many other genera, one finds the “bucket 
orchids” like Coryanthes; cucumber orchids; “blue” orchids; 
orchids involved with pseudo-copulation, as in the genus 
Ophrys; “weed” orchids; and, perhaps one of the most incredible 
of all, the recently discovered Australian orchid that grows and 
flowers entirely under the ground. 

“This book surveys the great Orchid Family as it illustrates 
and describes those selected wild forms that best show the 
family characteristics and diversities. It also attempts to show 
those species most commonly cultivated and often used in 
breeding.” So states the foreword. This promise is well carried 
out. It is difficult to imagine that any other publication costing 
as little as $1.25 can possibly bring as much enlightenment and 
pleasure regarding orchids as this booklet. It deserves to sell 
by the hundreds of thousands. 

Vividly depicting the orchid family from an evolutionary 
standpoint, the book fairly explodes with a multitude of skill- 
fully done color illustrations by Elmer Smith. Mr. Smith con- 
fesses that he does not grow orchids. He must have spent a 
great amount of time in painstaking research in order to pro- 
duce as remarkable a series of scientifically accurate and aesthe- 
tically pleasing studies of the several hundred species that we 
find here. An enormous quantity of botanical information is 
tied in nicely with the illustrations. Additional pleasant tidbits 
are liberally scattered throughout the text. It was a happy col- 
laboration when Gordon Dillon, who edited the American Orchid 
Society Bulletin for more than twenty-five years. Dr. Herbert 
Zim, an outstanding authority on science education, and the 
late Dr. Floyd S. Shuttleworth, of Wisconsin State University, 
prepared the text for the Golden Nature Guide series. 


159 


160 ARNOLDIA 

It should come as welcome news to the owners of this small 
volume that the publishers are already at work on a “coffee table 
size” edition, in which much more information can be given 
and larger reproductions of the excellent plates will be possible. 

G.H.P. 

Floyd S. Shuttleworth, Herbert S. Zim, and Gordon W. Dillon, 
Orchids, New York: Golden Press, 1970. $1.25 

The Oxford Book of Food Plants , by G. B. Masefield, M. Wallis, 
and S. G. Harrison; illustrations by B. E. Nicholson. 

This is a book written in Great Britain for a British audience. 
It claims to deal with 420 varieties of food and/or condiment 
producing plants. When it treats plants cultivated in Britain 
(nearly half the text and plates) it seems to be quite good. 
When it deals with plants unfamiliar in the British Isles it leaves 
— at least occasionally — something to be desired. For ex- 
ample, the description of “sugaring-off” maple sugar (p. 16) 
is surely confused. The pecan (p. 29) has 11-17 (not 7) curved 
(not straight) leaflets — very distinct from other caryas and not 
at all like the illustration. Both the butternut and the Ameri- 
can walnut have the basal leaflets much smaller than the others; 
in the butternut all the leaflets are sessile, while in the Ameri- 
can walnut they are stalked. The colors of the carrots (p. 175) 
and the ‘Summer Crookneck’ squash (p. 123) seem to be inac- 
curate. These are only a few small complaints, perhaps, but one 
cannot feel completely confident about the treatment of plants 
with which one is unfamiliar if one knows that erroneous state- 
ments or illustrations are given for plants with which one is 
familiar. 

It is disappointing that this book, with its limited frame of 
reference, does not inspire more confidence. It is regrettable 
that the style is so pedestrian. Exciting work is being done on 
the origins, wanderings, and chemistry of economic plants. 
Particular economic plants have molded the history of civiliza- 
tions and influenced the development of whole cultures. One 
looks in vain for such information here. 

The value of the book lies in its illustrations, and, despite what 
has been said above, they appear to be, for the most part, ac- 
curate. The colors could have been better, and it is regrettable 
that they are not. All in all, this book does fill a gap in the 
popular literature. One must, say, even though without en- 
thusiasm, that it is useful. 

G. P. DeW. 

G. B. Masefield, M. Wallis, and S. G. Harrison, The Oxford Book 
of Food Plants, London: Oxford University Press, 1969. 


Staff of the Arnold Arboretum 

Richard Alden Howard, Ph.D., Arnold Professor of Botany, 
Professor of Dendrology, and Director 
Karl Sax, S.D., Professor of Botany, Emeritus 
Pamela Anne Bruns, B.A., Artist 
Jeanne Caldwell, B.A., Library Assistant 
Michael Anthony Canoso, M.S., Senior Curatorial Assistant 
Constance Elizabeth Derderian, Honorary Curator of the 
Bonsai Collection 

Gordon Parker DeWolf, Jr., Ph.D., Horticulturist 
Thomas Elias, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Alfred James Fordham, Propagator 
William Ed Grime, B.A., Curatorial Assistant 
Thomas Gordon Hartley, Ph.D., Associate Curator of Pacific 
Botany 

Robert Stephen Hebb, S.B., Assistaiit Horticulturist 
Heman Arthur Howard, Assistant Horticulturist 
Shiu-Ying Hu, Ph.D., Botanist 

Thomas Matthew Kinahan, Superintendent, Case Estates 
Charles Robert Long, A.M., Librarian 
Norton Miller, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Lorin Ives Nevling, Jr., Ph.D., Curator and Supervisor of 
the Herbaria 

Dulcie Alicia Powell, M.A., Assistant Curator 
George Howard Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 
Helen Roca-Garcia, A.M., Research Assistant 
Bernice Giduz Schubert, Ph.D., Curator and Editor 
Robert Gerow Williams, B.S., Superintendent 
Carroll Emory Wood, Jr., Ph.D., Curator 
Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist 


Printed in the U.S.A. 




ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 



ARNOLDIA 


The Arnold Arboretum / Vol, 30, No. 5 / Sept. 15 1970 



Contents 

161 The Cork Trees 

HELEN ROCA-GARCIA 

168 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 

ROBERT S. HEBB 

175 Suburban Economics 

GORDON P. DE WOLF, JR. 

180 Actinidia chinensis, the Kiwi Fruit 

STEPHANNE SUTTON 

186 Climate at the Arnold Arboretum 

ALFRED JAMES FORDHAM 

196 ARNOLDIA REVIEWS 

A Photoguide to the Patterns of Discoloration and 
Decay in Living Northern Hardwood Trees, by Alex 
L. Shigo and Edwin H. Larson 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


On the cover: Phellodendron armurense at the Arnold Arboretum. 

Photo: P. Bruns. 


Facing: View of Cork Trees along Meadow Road. Photo: P. Bruns. 




The Cork Trees 


Along the road which follows the meadow south from the Ad- 
ministration Building is a stand of large trees — their green 
flowers tinged with pink attracting bees in the late spring, the 
yellow leaves adding a gay note in the fall, and the gnarled 
open branches making interesting patterns against the snow 
in winter. The deep green foliage with pinnately compound 
leaves may suggest walnut trees, but their rough furrowed 
bark and dark blue-black berries identify them as Asiatic Cork 
trees or Phellodendrons. 

These trees belong to the Rutaceae, the family to which the 
orange and other citrus fruits belong, and like them they have 
leaves which are aromatic when bruised. The glands which 
produce these volatile oils can be seen with a magnifying glass 
as clear dots along the margins of the leaf. 

The Phellodendron trees are dioecious, having male and 
female flowers on separate trees and the flowers of both sexes, 
small and green with varying amounts of pink, are borne on 
panicles at the ends of the branches. In the flowers of one of 
the species, Phellodendron chinense, the green petals are no- 
ticeably streaked with rose and the densely flowered panicles 
are quite decorative. 

Inside the female flower the five united carpels are borne on 
a short stalk (gynophore) of glandular tissue which produces 
the nectar. This glandular area also appears beneath the 
rudimentary carpels in the male flower and in other genera 
of the family may appear as a disc or ring. 

In autumn the Phellodendron leaves turn a light clear yel- 
low; they fall quickly, leaving in the female trees bunches of 
black fruit hanging from the ends of the branches like small 
grapes. These fruits have a strong aromatic odor and contain 
five or six dark seeds. The fruits stay on the trees most of the 
winter, providing food for starlings, robins, and other birds. 

The oldest of the Cork trees in the Arnold Arboretum is an 
Amur Cork tree, Phellodendron amurense, with gnarled and 
bent trunk, the thick branches spreading from about four feet 
above the ground. Here and there on the ground are exposed 


162 


The Cork Trees I 163 


large flat areas of woody root. The light grey bark is thick and 
furrowed, and although the tree gives the appearance of age, 
it is age accompanied by strength and grace. This patriarch 
of the group came as a seed from the Imperial Garden of St. 
Petersburg, Russia, and was planted here September 14, 1874, 
two years after the beginning of the Arboretum. Next to it 
stands another tree which was grafted from a piece of the first 
tree in November 18, 1882. This species is originally from north- 
east Asia, and gets its name from the great Amur river of that 
area. 

There are several Chinese cork trees, P. chinense, in the 
Arboretum collection. In parts of China the bark of this tree 
is called Huang-po and is used as a general remedy. One of 
these trees was grown from seed collected by Ernest H. Wilson 
in 1908 during his travels in China. The seed was from Western 
Hupeh, and Wilson described the area in his book, A Naturalist 
in Western Asia : “In the gorges the main river is joined by 
numerous lateral streams, branches of which flow through 
glens of wondrous beauty. These riverlets in winding their 
way usually fill nearly the entire bed of the glen and are bound- 
ed by walls of cliff from 300 to 1000 feet sheer. Waterfalls are 
numerous and wherever it is possible vegetation is rampant.” 
In 1919 Wilson became Assistant to the Director of the Ar- 
boretum and later he was made Keeper (his own term) under 
Oakes Ames. 

The Arboretum has several examples of the Lavalle Cork 
tree, P. Lavallei. Two are from seed collected in Azuma, Japan, 
in 1905, by John George Jack, Assistant Professor of Den- 
drology at the Arboretum. The third, planted in 1919, is from 
seed collected by Wilson in Tokyo. 

Two of the Sakhalin Cork trees (P. sachalinense) in the Ar- 
boretum are grafts made in 1919 of a tree which came from 
Germany in 1905 and is no longer living. The third Sakhalin 
Cork tree is a small tree, a comparative newcomer, raised from 
seed sent from the University of Tokyo in 1952. The name 
Sakhalin is from the name of an island north of Japan; the 
species is native there, in Korea, northern Japan, and western 
China. Another tree of this species which grew for some years 
in the Arboretum but is no longer living was grown from seed 
sent by William Smith Clark, president of Massachusetts Agri- 
cultural College, from Hokkaido in northern Japan in 1877. 
Clark went to Japan to establish an agricultural college at Sap- 
poro, and while he was there he sent back seeds of many na- 
tive trees and shrubs. Among these were the tree lilac ( Syrin - 




«fc^SS 


'*&*?£.■ -4»&rP* ■ *■ ijgMMr^P™ 


'.' 14 ^*.,'%-' 


16S ARNOLDIA 

ga reticulata ), the Sakhalin Cork tree, the evergreen Bittersweet 
( Euonymus radicans var. vegeta) and others. 

The Pearfruit Cork tree ( Phellodendron piriforme) , is from 
seed received from the Botanical Institute of Leningrad, Russia, 
and was planted here in 1926. A graft of this tree is in the col- 
lection also. 

The two comparatively small trees of the Japanese Cork tree 
( Phellodendron japonicum') came as seed from the Botanic 
Garden, Berlin-Dahlen, Germany, in 1956. However, this species 
was represented much earlier in Cambridge, Massachusetts, by 
a tree now dead about which John Singer Sargent wrote in Trees 
and Shrubs, “It was raised before 1870 in the Botanic Garden of 
Harvard University at Cambridge, from seed from the Imperial 
Garden at St. Petersburg and probably collected by Maximowicz 
in Japan.” C. J. Maximowicz was chief botanist at the Imperial 
Botanic Garden in the nineteenth century. From 1860 to 1864 
he travelled in Japan and accumulated a large collection of 
Japanese plants. 

In addition to far and romantic places, the Cork collection 
represents the work of a large number of anonymous men who 
collected fruit and seeds and kept careful records, men who 
planted the seeds or grafted young cuttings on to sturdy root- 
stocks, men who tended the young plants from germination 
until they were ready to be put out in the Arboretum. Each 
individual tree has a number and a filing card, and a record 
is kept of its growth until it dies. 

Recently a study was made of Phellodendron seeds. Groups 
of one hundred seeds were planted under varying conditions 
to determine the best method of germination. And at the Case 
Estates in Weston, Massachusetts, there are several young 
Cork trees which were started within the past few years at 
the Arboretum greenhouse as seeds. Some of the seeds came 
from the Botanical Garden at the University of Bucharest, 
others came from England, Germany, and Russia. After a 
year or two at the greenhouse and at the nursery, they were 
transferred to Weston, where they are now young trees up to 
seven feet high. In this way the Arboretum is assured of re- 
placements when the present trees grow old and die. 

Helen Roca-Garcia 


Backing: Phellodendron amurense. Photo: H. Howard. 

Facing: Malus sargentii. Photo: H. Howard. 



Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 


168 


ARNOLDIA 


03 

rG 


03 c /3 c 


03 

X ' 0 
G G 
ctf 03 


03 

c 3 bO 
G 


i+H 

o 

<u 

iH 

05 


5 h 
03 
& 
o 

o x 

03 

■y rG ^ 

3 o ° 
£ 2 ,G 
> w 
= 4 H ? G 
O SH qG 
O 

i — i 03 
03 O rr 

1 ) O tl 

Eh ‘ti «> 
aj o oj 

rG 03 ^ 


“I 

S I 

O ^ 
Gh 03 

=2 G 

03 £ 

rG fG , 


rt 


o c 

03 g 

a, & 

03 O 
rG CS 03 

'■> oj -rH 
^ 3 G 


•G O 

X* 

§ S 

O O 

■rt jh 

G ^ 

03 - 

s .1 


m G 

& ni 

m -a 


o 5 

bJO 

fl 

s 

G 

4— » 

as 


<L> 

C /3 U O 

G ^ 


05 


03 > 

G O 
• G 5 -c 
X3 Oh- 


bJD Oh 

G 

•a « 

cur 3 3 

03 E— 1 rG 


0 ) rH 

C /3 .£h 


fl "O 

° ‘3 

c /3 G 


03 

03 £ 


PQ c /3 
P 0 ) 
CO Sh 
<P CL> 


<D O c+h O 


C/3 


T3 03 
0 / <L> 


C /3 G 

<u £ 

Jh 3 

p -3 

a; 

Sh 

- - o 

X ^ X 
I G < 

•s 

M 4-> 

CD (D 

S£-S 
1 g § 

f 3 G ^ 

O q 3 

03 £ 


■G ^ 
o 

03 'o 

G ° 

03 q_, 

C rt 
S 0 ) 

•rH ,_q 


bJO 


C/3 


O o 
° fl 

G J 2 "So 
03 X G 

> G rt 

W o -G 

. B ° 
^ 0)0 
G 

S a « 

> g & 

n w 


C bJD 

3 * C 


& U 
o "5 


0 ) 

c/3 

0 ) 

PP 


CD 

42 


0 ) 


£ =2 w> B S 


3 hh c 
« o) ai G 
S £ 'C r^ 
< H G a! 


Sh X 

« G 

> 03 

Gh g « 

0 ) G f 5 

co o H 


03 


bJO 

C 
2 
G 
D 
PQ 
, fl 

o G o 

03 _T u *Tl 

P 3 m <4 

° x K G 


a 

a ?, 

o °3 

•S o 


s o 
o <u •« 

■CG iT g .5 

Q D t « v C 

u n 2 ^ fi 

O pC D T3 

c /3 PQ c 


o 

u 

pQ 

p 

Sh 

43 

C/3 


A * 
03 S 

0j C/3 ,5 

•2 ^ S 

o 3 J 

*+!£?»< 
t 3 ff 

W ■< 03 


— 

S 


« £ h 5 Gi 

n ,-H OJ 

& « -a n cr 

P r*^ C c /3 3 
co P CD ^ f-h n 

£ ^ <u ° £ 5 

P P _r! .2 ^ CL “ 

.2 ps i£ 13 o 

Ci, J ^ PS 


8 

a 

rC 

43 


G 3 


to 

•O 


> G 3 
<r g a 

§^:s 

i s a 
o S t< 

oSh 


B 

=S rC 
s 2 
2 S 

I - 

II 

co 

„ B 
•2 - 2 
N 2 

B "o 2 

2 ^ s 

B « g 

2 ; w i*. 


P 

O 

s 

g 

o 

O 


V 

rC 

C/3 

P 

PQ 

fD 

P 

M 

rP 

C/3 


S -S 


a: 


p p 
o o 


(D 03 

3 Ph 
o o 
S V U 
o 

*42 03 0 ) 

g U A 
g ctf os 


V. rP 


P 

PU 




U PQ PQ 


^ -h 

s S* „ 

B W r2 

2 ^ g- 
S a | 
g o 
S s p 


Trees with Vivid Autumn Color 


Acer rubrum Red or Swamp Maple Brilliant red Maple Collection 

Amelanchier species Service berries Yellow, orange, red Meadow Road 

Betula species Birch Yellow Betula Collection 

Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura tree Yellow to scarlet Meadow Road 


Arboretum Notes 


169 


m 


a S 

o .0 


2 a a a . . . . 

£ rt S o o ju o 
p,K S y O w 


o o 


V O o =£3 


3 


cd 




01 0) 
oi ai 
Ph Ph PQ PQ 


01 

01 < 4-1 

01 -l~( 

01 C 
D O 
PQ O 


Tl ^ 
cd o 
o u 
PQ 

cd 

£ a 

o 

T3 


& fl 


tuO 

Tl 


3 3 3 
x E x 


01 C/3 01 

3 3 P 
PQ PQ PQ 


£ O 


o 

U 

cd 

b£) 

PJ 


o< a art w 3 3 3 
D ffi ffi K 


co c /5 on g 

-w -M "O 

cd 

oi ai 


3 G 

Tl Q ^ Sp k -5 ^ qj 


O 
q. <n 
QU qJ 


bJD 

PI 


_ TJ 
p 01 


01 


01 

3 ^ 

cd cd 
oi 01 

C13 


01 

0) <u 5? 

g fi § * 
g 2 8 | 

£ £ 42 ^ rt 
4 -> 01 , £ P >-> P P 

s S §.“223 2 S 33 

^c/ 30 PQ 00 PQ 0 c/ 3 PQPQ 


£ 

0 
PQ 

01 
>Y 

£ 

01 

&JD 

0! 

cd 


> 3 
5 n 

0 cd 

a o 

01 Wl 


d ^ 

S .2 

T3 


dij 

PJ 

cd 


oi F 
W) • 
PJ F 
cd F 


2 cd F d F d F 3 

0 ) O y O ^ ^ 

pQOPQc/ 3 pQpQPQOf 


fei 

o pP 

0 i 

b£> <^ 

3 


o 

pC 

3 

cd 

X 

fl 

o 

"So 

PJ 


pd pC 


•PJ ° 

S 2 j S' 3 *fl 

+-* JP C/5 C/5 01 

So* ' J 


W rt 


O a! 

o ^ 


01 

PQ 

cd 

g;s 

a3 

S S 

3 u 
W fa 


.a 

cd 

A 

PJ 

0) 

T 3 

*3 


PQ 


a §< 

5) H f 


oju v 1 m 
01 ^ 01 

PJ > Cd H 

O C/3 PQ C/3 


>> 

a - 
01 
pP! 


cd 


PI PJ 


^ ^ ^ 3 

+-. cd & O 
3 O O ^ 
MU n 
h u cd C ^ 
cd O u .3 01 . , 

C /3 O C /3 Ph PQ PQ C /3 


PJ 
3 
O 

§ 

fl 
cd 

w _ Ol 

cd co % 


f 


pq n 


■3 

e 

o 

^ cct 


« 


_ C 

S P< 

CO 05 

s s 

Cl Cl 


05 O 

u o 


o u 


'S ■§ « 
§3.s 

^ Sl W 
Cl 05 ^ 

05 05 

S s s 

Cl Cl « 

c c JQ 

rt rt tt, 


J s 


Cl 


o p§ 

S 


S 

s 

01 

j*. 

o 

J " 

C S 

i 5 
w 1 
« ■§ 


. H §■ a g* 
O 3 d 


( 


S £ O 
”01 c *2 
p 3 


o o o o 

Jp. Jp. t*. V. 

Oj Oj Oj Oj 


« g 

co pQ p 
3 S S 3 Q o 

O' O' 0/ Qt <% co I 


Sorbus aucupama & vars. European Mountam-ash Reddish Peters 

Stewartia koreana Korean Stewartia Orange-red Bussey 


170 


ARNOLDIA 


■o 

ci 

o 


cd cd 




T3 

£ 

O 

Ph 


PS 

o 

4Q 

£ 


U O 


o 0 

^ -Q 

4o ^ > 

0^0 

fcS 2 

w § 


D 0 

JH ,D 

6 S 


3 o 
“O 

< 73 


>-i Sh Jh >h X! 

OJ 0) c« <D S 

■3 3 XI a 

3 3 ^ 3 ^ 

S jH "3 n 3 

a & to > Q 

cjoj £ 

co w Z 


n n 

Q 


S H 

a fe 


fn CJ M n Sh CJ 


5 3 > 

> CJD o 

o 33 3 Z 

Z 

-a c T3 ° 


S 2 g 

0 -w qj 

> c/i Cj 


<D O £ 0) CD 
££ W)Q >^Q 
0 - 5 -1 


& £ 


Q d) £ 
^ £ 
o CJ CD 

4-> C (J 
■ £> CD 

^ ftP 
0 0 
k -5 CO 


rt 


TJ "£ 


"0 

(D 


bJD 


T 3 


, ~ ^ 


PQ PQ 


PQ PQ 


£ 

Q 


Cd 

o 

co 


T3 

CD 

5h 

bJD 

'C 

PQ 


S' h j 
£ ^ ^ 
gs &• 

° ^ oo 

^ cd ^ 


TJ 


CD 

& 3 

r2 T3 

r-H CD 
ID 
>H 


TV c_) 
W) W Q. 
.0 ^ 
’S g 


T3 ^ 
0 
PQ 


T3 

O 

Ph 

£ 

£ 

o 


cd 

T3 


0 

bD 


PQ 


T3 

O 

£4 

T3 c/D 
0 0 

STE 

'?JS 

^ Tf 
>H CJ 

Q PC 


Z " 


S S n 

*■ S Si 

** U H 

a 

s 


Td 

o 

0 

% - 

gp c 

a! 

.£ 3 

>H Ph 

0 C/D 

1 8 

a o 


O 

PQ 

£ 

cd 


0 

r£ 

1 

cd 

ffi 


bJO 

W 


T3 

O 

> 

W 

£ 

cd 


£fci 

o 

U 

0 

£ 

£ 


0 

£2 

0 

> Ph 
£3 O 
CO x 

£ £ 


cd 


cd 


£ u 

3 OJ 

o £ 

§< 


^ £ 

•S 2 


CD 

& 


S 5 

£ PP 
£ ^ 


o 

£t 2 

- i? 
£ £ 
s- ~r 

O v. 
U O 


£ 


P, 


e> 


•2 

"5 


£ 


£d 

CD 


Ilex pedunculosa Longstalk Holly Bright red on slender October thru Centre Street Path, Ad- 

stalks December ministration Building 


Arboretum Notes 


171 


© X 

S ^ 

S O 01 2 

co ^ 

o 'S 5 « 
£ o 3 


ed ed 

fn ^ 


d 

PJ 

o 

Pm 


-a 


TJ 

«s 

o 

to 2 

CO rQ. 

g> 

< 


CB X) 

tfl 


w 

S „ x 5 
SgKtf 

K p 


CO 


3 ^ 
u « 

5 s 

-M o 

co > ' 

3 s, 

3 

< t 


T) 

■ti 

X 

P 5 '! 

co n O 
TJ +-• 

o> fl ja 

01 01 M 

co -*j .12 


o 
o 


u u 

3 3? zi 
3 SL 


«s 

a 

Cfl 


3 ,2 

O’ to 


p< 

cfl 

S 3 


01 u 
-o g 

2 s 

J 2 o 

XI X 

a ’5 
£ § 
S o 

X rt 


03 


O 

O 


0 

3 

SO 


& 

w 


s 

I 

3 

O' 


<B r? 
+j mm 
<D 
Pm 


« TJ 
O cd 
O o 
rt 

03 

g £ 
2 o 

rt 'O 

« 2 


I | 

S | 

£ u > 
a <u £ 
<u x Z 

M s _ 
>> s ° 
« « k 
o Q 2 


3 

a 

is 

o 


a 

CS 


X X 
~ 0 


stn 

3 w 


S3 

ccj 

X 


3 co 
X) 3 

a o 


« 


3 

o 

W 


£ ° 
H ^ O 

job 

s * 1 


ts 

S s 

H 

O 


PJ 

o 

■-d 

u 

0 


W) 

.s 

d 

3 

m 

£ 

o 


pp 

TJ O 
o3 CJ 
O 

ps « 

3 


S u 

P! P! 


^mSwS 


to 0 

S w 

g 3 

"O £ 
< 


Sf CS 

W <H 

3b ^ 

3 XI 

ffl a 

o 

a a 

o 

V 08 

C3 

£ X X 

“55 

•rt O O 

.5 rt pci 

I ° ° 

<! d d 
03 o3 
rj 0 0) 

oS§ 


44 

© 

o 


d d 
«3 cd 
O O 

PS ed 


0 ) 4 ) 

s § 


oj pQ 

co p 

% »H 

PQ 5 


bJD 

P! 

cd 


cd cd 


^ ?H 0) 


d 

cd 

O 1 


0 ) 

ao 

P! 


flS 03 .Pfd Cd 


r \ ^ w m CJ 'JM r ) CU 5»4 

O Ph C/3 00 PQ^PQC/Dt-J^COPQ^O 



.& E=J 

01 

P3 ^ 

o ^ 


a a 


d & 3 ST 

H «« rr] ^ 

CO 3 r*=1 ^ 

q d cd 
W) MX 3 

.5 8 2 a 
>4 « a. 
osboS J 2 S " 1 


a m c h 

nS C t O 

fe-g e * 


O ►>. X 
> > 


MPhoHOBlK 


"53 

e 

e 


CO 


^3 

Q O 

01 pS 5 

a, o 

CO 


CO 

S 2 
-3 
a 



, -a x ^ js o 
« os 0$ as ctj oj 


172 


ARNOLDIA 


p g 
o o 


73 O 
o3 O 


73 
P 

O fP 


PU S > Cfl > > 


0000 

J±> JU 

^ 'o 'o 'o 'o 

§ U U U U ^ 

.2 M 

*42 -Q X) -P 0 
2 P P 3 P ^ 

O M M M *H 0 

o ss rC cs cs o 

s4 m th/I m ft; 


S "O 

W < 


“ 3 
3 01 
cq u, 


3 

M 


'q M 
On w 

o u 0 

QJ 

<fl 2 *H 

P 
p 
W) 

03 


^ S 

G 4J 
2 O G 

iS 3 S 

w w u 


a! 


3 

3 « 


«3 4J 

73 


3 T3 S 
3! e « 1 

t» " -*? 


° O 2 3 
ftn "I c 

£ u «j £ 

o ^ 


0 


P m 

O ^ 

■2 O 
2 S3 

0 > r ^ 

ij I " 3 § 
e ° ’S 3 s s 


J C C (1 
2 71 < 2 


Is 

i _ CO, C 
TJ IH .3 
_ - „ 3 <U 3 „3 

CO ec; CO pH cu, cn 


a 73 


s 

p 

p 

N 

3 0 
^ 2 


> 


oh “ t | 

l a i « “ 

0 7^33 

3 “ <n a 3 

o a ^ c o 

3 as cs a 3 

5 § £ Z 5 


pC ^ 
o 0 . 

U £ > 

P JH ° 

S s 2 

o o O 


co, 
*fc 01 
W w 


CO, Co, 


60 bfl ‘ 

3 3 

<4 < Cfl W 


■§ s 

5 § 

■* 3 


> 

o 

z 

°3 


O w 


a, 

H 

P 

Qh 

0 ^ 
>fH 03 


0 


-P >H >H 'o .E£ 5 ^ 


pC ti *5 -M 

C/3 pP fP QJ 
*2 W) &JO--H 

5 m 'Z -2 

PQM W> 


0 


_ 0 
2 C/3 

O 73 


CUD O 


u/ ^ 

r* P ^ U ^ 

,P oj 5 h q> 

-P 0 fD 0 

3 0 1h ^ 

^ P P5 3 0 

_ 0 ^ fP T 2 

— ' OJ OS ^ Sh 

^ fQ 0 c3 

W) w fP 

^ d 0 . 

g 5 3 as 3 >> 

•"2 P c 0 P M 

~ 2 O .3 u q* a3 

r o * 5 o 

o o ^ w > 


s i 6 s 

°lo| 

=3 P P o 


S,S 3, 3, 3,3? 
0 0 0 0 P 

C/3 CO CO CO 


p* 


a 


0 


pO 

K*“> 

P P 

o3 g 

0 5 ^ 

fD P 0 

0 p c/3 c/j 

W rt 3 03 

0 P 0 

P ^ 2 P 

g 0 S O 

& ^ ^ O 

w U U 


T3 & 
3 CT 
M 3 


S 2 

* 

-P > V rt rt 


3 


7i 3 ffl n 


c S 

s I 
2 § 
3 3 
< W 


o 

c/i 3C 
P 3 


3 3 
01 SI 

coc*: 

03 c 


6 z 

o O 


cr 3, Co, 3, 
0 0 0 0 
< CO CO CO 


0 

*9 

) o 

; Ph 


73 

0 


^3 T3 


fP f^ ^ ^ 

.£f ^ 73 0 

C -2 0 
W W Q 


o g 

p r. 

go 

cd ^ 

S 5 
0 > ^ s 


7 

0 

03 


03 


pq Ph co co 


2 o 

2 ^r 
•S 2 
. 2 ^ 

03 ^ 
s- 

’S ? ‘ 


O O 
C5 itr 
2 2 


Q 0 


a 

s s s s 

- -PJ ^ 

o ? 0 S 2 2 2 

o I c 3 5 ^ 5 

OS O') > > > > > 


'e 

e 

o 

eo 

fO 

S 

SO 

rfi 


« 

Ol >c 

£ 8 
3 C 


f>5 Z cq 


05 05 <>3 Vi 


0 0 0 0 
cq eq ca cq 


■ 2 . .2 

« 


o o 


o 3 
o >. 

73 73 


Oj Oj 
-* o 


73 3 

3 S 

a ^ 

03 33 

« K 
2 O 
^ 3 
Kl w 


B 2 
£ -a 
2 ; « 
O 03 

H H 


a 

ss 

a .2 
ft« 'I 

aS a 

BOO 
«w ^ 

05 2 

2 
•pa 

O O 


2 £ 


2 2 

2 23 CD 

03 2 2 

3§§ 


Arboretum Notes I 173 


3 

O u O 

B o rj3 
o • J2 o 

0) T3 In 0) 

33 p£ 2 S3 
o ^ > o 
U £ o O 

"333 


Oj HrH 
<D hh 


£ 03 
O 2 

s « 

? 3 

•9 s 

3 0) 

i! a 

w O 


« «3 
D .2 o 
3 -3 o 

3 « s 


<u 

81 ! 
u > 


p 

O 

V 

u u 
a; <d 

s a 


a 

o 
U 

£ 

p 

£ -p x> 
p p p 

O ^ 

^ ^ 
> CO CO 


p 
•2 
d u 

13 

t* o 
U 


O U 


P3 

o 

U 

£ 

p 

£ 

p 

> 


0 

&b 

O 

Z 

P 

ctf 

H-3 

1° 


O tJ 
oj X 

Q ° 

o 0 u 0 

CD <D <D CD 

QQPQ 

O 

z 

P 

< 

T3 

O 

O 

0 2 


0 2 

° 0 0 0 

0 

Ph 

<D 

3 

&, 

P CD 

Ph 

CD 

bi) bX) 

P P 

bi) bi) bi) bi) 

P P P P 

Ph 

P 

§ 

CO 

►—3 

►4 CO 

CO 

< <J 

<3 <5 < < 

CO 


1 

<D 

P 

O 


CD 

bJO 

P 

2 

o « 


C/5 

c/5 3 
S-h ^ 

r2 ° 

O >, 

U Sh 


S3 - 

03 *0 

P 

CD 


2 T3 


S3 p _ 

^»«-T _T ,h »h ^ .2 CD ^ 03 P hn _< J3 

CD ^3 ^3,0^73 +ft P OJ O w.h^ o3P 

M CD CD IT CD 0 2 J - ^ 

O CQ tf £ tf § PQ Q 


ti O y II i-h 

PQ PQ co >< O 


D 

6jo 

3 

03 


S u 
Jp 2 
^ S 

ai p 

PQ to 


.S 

« 


>. O 
a P3 

| 3 
1 S 
egg 


T3 

O 


CD kJ 

>< £ 


£ 

p 

£ £ 

ii 

p > 

(D > 


T3 £ 
.£ Id 
hJ >h 


£ 

p 

p 

U 

P 

0 ^ 


P 

.o 

a 

CD 

42 

P T3 
oj 0) 
M -w 

° P 
P H 


P 


<D <D 

Ph w> 
o P 
£ 03 
P 3h 

W O 


P 

•2 

s 

p 

p 


p * 


« 

3 

o 


I 

o 

s 


S’ w 
s -2 

tb U 

**• ft 

CO 

•2 

<D 

Ph 

a- a, 

h t •!* 
3 3 

2 2 « 
t. ~ 

0 0 3 

p 

Ph 

CO 

0 

0 

2 S 
'8 “ 
a. S 

& 3 

P CO 

CO 

^ S 

*>2 

§ g 
§5 

•2 w 

i?.c 

S QS 

P 

CO 

0 

a. a Si 

s s -g 

35 3) 

Ph 

S 

3) 

05 

to CO 

CO 

f-i > 


I s 

3 3 

•w Jo 

fs 

~:S 

^ T3 


3 

fr 

3 

s s g 

3 3^; 
3 3^ 

333 

QQ H 


s 

3 
g 3 


S 

3 

o 


Qj 3 
00 O 

S-S 


3 3 

-e«j •?»>» *<» *e*H 

> > > > 


3 3 

S £ 

3 3 

c -a 

> 


Robert S. Hebb 



Suburban Economics 


This is being written during the first heat wave of the season 
in the Boston area. It is being written while much of the East 
Coast area is suffering the effects of air pollution. It is being 
written while a shortage of water has resulted in a ban on out- 
side watering in many communities (this in spite of the fact 
that the first six months of this year had 2.1 inches more rain 
than the same period last year). It is being written while the 
Northeast has an enforced decrease in electrical voltage. We 
are entitled to ask why, in the richest nation on earth, we, the en- 
lightened middle class, must suffer these inconveniences. 

The answer is, simply, that we are reaping what we have 
sown. Our population has become too large, too rapidly, for 
our resources, natural and artificial, to cope with our demands. 
We have the technology to solve our problems. We can change 
our sources of energy or change our methods of generating 
energy to clean up our air. It will be expensive, it will take 
some years, but we do have the technology to do it. We can 
clean up our rivers and streams and lakes and ponds. We can 
enlarge our reservoirs and build larger pipelines to bring the 
water to our cities. We can increase our supply of electricity. 
It will be expensive and it will take some years, but we do have 
the technology to do it. All of our technological capacity will 
be to no avail, however, if we do not control the size and growth 
of our population. At present our population is growing too 
rapidly for our technological capacity to cope with it. 

Let us take a homely example. In the suburban town in which 
I live we have just had a proposal for the construction of a 24- 
unit apartment complex. This will, the builders say, bring to 
the town some $12,000.00 in new real estate tax revenue an- 
nually. Let us do the arithmetic and see what really will hap- 
pen. 

We are told that about 50% of our tax dollar goes for support 
of the schools, the other 50% for running the town. If our 
per student school cost is about $700.00, and the number of 
students approximates the number of taxable units, then each 
family (or taxable unit) must be assessed, on average, some 
$1,400.00 per year. This is, in fact, the approximate assessment 
on a $30,000.00 property. However, the families living in our 
24-unit apartment complex will be paying no real property 

175 


Facing: Elaeagnus multiflora. Photo: H. Howard. 


176 | ARNOLDIA 

tax, and will have on the average only about $2,000.00 of as- 
sessable personal property. At our current rate of about $40.00 
per thousand, this will return to the town only about $80.00 per 
family per year. In other words, each family will cost the town 
some $1,320.00 per year. For our 24-unit complex this will 
total some $31,680.00 per year. Real property assessment on 
the complex we are told will bring in only $12,000.00. There- 
fore, the complex will cost the town some $19,680.00 annually. 
If we assume that each $100,000.00 of costs adds $1.00 to the 
tax rate, then this apartment complex will cost each family 
in town about $0.20 per thousand of valuation, or $6.00 per 
year on a $30,000.00 property. 

Make no mistake. The only people who benefit from an in- 
crease in population in your town are the real estate agents, 
the developers, and the builders. The town does not benefit 
from them, and you, as a taxpayer, only stand to lose money. 

At our present level of taxation my town cannot keep up with 
its responsibilities to its citizens. It cannot afford the new 
schools that are necessary now. It cannot afford to hire the 
teachers it needs for best educational conditions. It cannot 
maintain its roads and streets in good condition. Local sources 
of water are now being exploited to maximum capacity. It 
could not afford to buy water elsewhere even if alternative 
sources were available — which they are not. And our 24-unit 
apartment complex will require at least 6,000 gallons of water 
per day. 

We are told that we must preserve our environment. What is 
it that we must preserve? When the first settlers arrived in 
New England they found a countryside characterized by vast 
stands of white pine. They found sandy coasts with stands of 
pitch pine. They found rocky hills covered with scrub oaks. 
They also found forests of white and red oak, and hickory. The 
pines and scrub oak are maintained in our area by burning. 
Under natural circumstances they would have been replaced 
in a few hundred years by oak and hickory. Forest land is 
able to sustain a relatively small population of animals, includ- 
ing man. Man is an animal of forest edges and adjacent grass- 
lands. The first settlers cleared the forests, burning many of 
the felled trees. Through the colonial period and after, this 
clearing continued. One hundred and fifty years ago 80% 
of southern New England was cleared, or at least cut over. As 
the land wore out and as population increased, large numbers 
of farmers left the land, either moving to the cities or moving 
westward. The fields grew up to trees. Only the most fertile 


Suburban Economics j 177 


lands within reach of the cities and towns remained in farm- 
land. Beginning in the 1930s even these farms became un- 
profitable and many of them were abandoned. Again the fields 
grew up to trees. Today, we are planting subdivisions in these 
areas. The scrubby woodlots that now blossom with houses 
were, not too long ago, fields and pastures. What is it that we 
wish to preserve? Second growth scrub? Farmland? What? 

The songbirds that we wish to maintain are not creatures 
of the forest primeval, the climax forest, but are denizens of 
second growth scrub and woodland margins. So are the deer 
and the rabbits and the foxes. So, we might add, are the pink 
lady slippers and the trailing arbutus, the hepaticas and the 
violets. The fact of the matter is that we do not want to pre- 
serve nature in its primeval condition. We desire to preserve 
an environment that can only be created in nature by “disasters.” 
Under natural conditions such things as hurricanes and forest 
fires exercise this function. In an agrarian society this is main- 
tained by the farmers. In our society which suppresses natural 
disasters and agrarian clearing our human environment disap- 
pears, going back to forest. Much of southern New England is 
now unsuitable for human habitation, Dense forest, albeit sec- 
ond growth scrub, covers more than 60% of the land surface. 
We maintain our dense populations of songbirds and deer by 
artificial feeding in the wintertime. We lament the disappear- 
ance of the pink lady slipper and the trailing arbutus — but 
we suppress the environment in which they can survive. 

The environment that we live in is not stable. It is not na- 
tural for a large population of any organism, Homo sapiens in- 
cluded, to maintain itself indefinitely without deleterious effects 
upon other organisms. To maintain a large population of peo- 
ple we must clear land for habitation and industry that would 
otherwise be in forest or grassland. We must clear additional 
land to raise crops and to raise cattle. We must maintain un- 
naturally large populations of food producing organisms — and 
to do this we must ruthlessly exterminate those organisms that 
would destroy our crops. If we do not do this we will starve. We 
must remove our wastes and deposit them somewhere else in 
the environment. If we do not do this we will suffer pestilence. 
The environment which we create is also suitable for other 
organisms. Rats and cockroaches share our habitations. Po- 
tato bugs, gypsy moths, and rabbits share our gardens. Deer 
share our orchards. We destroy predators — weasels, foxes, 
bobcats, owls and hawks — which would help to control the 
vermin and pests because they also threaten (we think) “our” 


178 ARNOLDIA 

animals and plants. We have built up an artificial environ- 
ment to preserve our own lives — and, if we are to survive 
at our present standard of living, we must preserve this arti- 
ficial environment by artificial means. 

In the past, when the human population was smaller, our 
present means of pest control and waste disposal were sufficient 
for our needs. Today, with a large and rapidly increasing pop- 
ulation of humans, yesterday’s techniques are not sufficient. 
We must use pesticides to preserve our crops so that we will not 
starve. We must use more effective methods of waste disposal 
so that our excreta does not sterilize our land and water. Sim- 
ple reduction in the percentage pollution, accompanied by an 
ever increasing number of individuals will result in a net in- 
crease of pollution. If we wish to preserve our artificial en- 
vironment so that we may survive, we must reduce the size of 
our population. 

We are told that we live under the threat of atomic extinction. 
We are probably much closer to extermination by starvation, or 
thirst, or pestilence. Quite possibly, the limitation of our water 
resources will be the factor that first sets a limit on the size of 
our population. For example, the town of Stoughton has im- 
posed a five-year ban on new building because it does not have 
sufficient water to support additional population. Many other 
communities have had to impose a ban on outside water use. 
In my town we are assured that we have plenty of water, it is 
just that we cannot pump it fast enough to supply peak demand. 
Four years ago our town fathers employed an engineering con- 
sultant firm to study our water needs. They estimated that by 
1986 our town would need to pump 3.4 million gallons of water 
per day. During the last week our water department has been 
pumping 3.8 million gallons per day. Over the period 1959- 
1965 our water requirements were 1.84 million gallons per 
day or less. Obviously, something is seriously wrong with our 
expert study. If other towns are in the same position, and it is 
fair to suspect that they are, then our water supply situation 
is critical. If we add to this the serious threat of salt pollution 
from winter salting of our roads, our problems of water supply 
are compounded. 

We are told that the suburbs must accept some of the excess 
population of the core cities. In theory this is an acceptable 
thesis — but in practice it is clear that this will only hasten the 
arrival of our time of crisis. We must have fewer people, not 
more. We must limit the size of our population. 

This past year has seen a number of efforts sponsored by 


Suburban Economics | 179 

citizens groups to improve the quality of the environment. 
Many of these movements, however, have not taken into con- 
sideration the effects of specific programs on the total prob- 
lem. For example, we in the Boston area now have a ban on 
all outdoor burning. As a result, in my town the amount of rub- 
bish taken to our sanitary land fill has increased by 41%. Dis- 
posal of solid wastes was already a problem in eastern Massa- 
chusetts before the ban on burning was imposed. This will only 
increase the seriousness of the problem. 

A second citizen effort has been to ban the use of sprays for 
street trees in a nearby town. One can confidently predict that 
within a year or so this town will have a serious problem with 
birch leaf miner. It will be more difficult and more costly to 
control dutch elm disease. Aphids on lindens will become a 
serious nuisance. And it is quite possible that the gypsy moth 
will move in to defoliate all of the trees. 

This is not a plea for business as usual. It is a plea for rea- 
son and moderation. We must develop and utilize pesticides 
and pesticide techniques that are specific for the pests that 
trouble us. We must develop strategies and techniques for 
effective disposal and/or reuse of solid wastes. We must extend 
domestic sewer lines to serve all of the properties in our sub- 
urbs — and build modern sewage treatment facilities that will 
serve all of our cities and towns. If we started today we could 
not have these facilities in operation sooner than five years from 
now. (It would take at least a year for planning and drawing 
up specifications, the better part of another year for the pro- 
duction of building plans, and at least three years to construct 
the facilities.) These are the realities of the situation. In the 
meantime, unless we change our ways overnight, our total pop- 
ulation will have increased by at least three per cent, and our 
volume of waste by an astronomical figure. All of this will cost 
us money in the form of additional taxes. We must stop our 
growth. We must change our ways. One last word. It is not 
the poor who have done this to us. It is the middle class 
families who can afford $30,000 houses, and who fill those 
houses with three, five, or ten children. People who insist on 
having dishwashers and washing machines and dryers and air 
conditioners and three cars in their garages. In short, we have 
done it to ourselves. We are the ones who must change our ways. 


Gordon P. De Wolf, Jr. 


Actinidia Chinensis, the Kiwi Fruit 


Specialty food stores and supermarkets with imagination have 
recently been featuring something called Kiwi fruit. Food 
columnists — perhaps in desperation for a story — have tried 
it, been agreeably surprised by its taste and texture, and written 
glowing reports; it seems to be catching on. Kiwi fruits have 
made occasional appearances in gourmet shops for several years 
as Chinese gooseberries, Cape gooseberries, and sometimes 
— perish the thought — under their correct botanical name, 
Actinidia chinerisis, but it took a fetching epithet like Kiwi 
fruits to take the housewife’s fancy. So far as we know. New 
Zealand's ambulatory Apteryx with hairy feathers and the fruit 
named after him have nothing to do with each other. 

The Arnold Arboretum has a sentimental attachment to Ac- 
tinidia chinensis by virtue of the plant’s association with the 
late Ernest Henry Wilson. A climbing shrub in the family Ac- 
tinidiaceae, Actinidia chinensis is, as its specific name sug- 
gests, a native of China and does not, as the commercial name 
could lead one to believe, originate down under. The earliest 
record for collection of the species belongs to the Jesuit priest, 
Father d’Incarville, a pupil of the French botanist, Bernard de 
Jussieu. Around 1741, d’Incarville sent de Jussieu a specimen 
of A. chinensis which he found in the vicinity of Macao. The 
latter, however, either did not know what to make of it or 
somehow overlooked it, because the species was not described 
until more than a hundred years later when Jules Planchon 
wrote a brief diagnosis of it based on a collection by Robert 
Fortune from the Chinese mainland. Fortune’s specimen had 
flowers but no fruit, and Planchon did not say anything about 
the fruit being edible nor did Fortune remark at all upon this 
fact in his accounts of his Chinese adventures. This omission 
is surprising, for Fortune was a keen observer and reporter of 
strange fruits and flowers. One can only surmise that, in fact, 
he never saw the fruits either in the marketplace or on the din- 
ner table. 

The Chinese, however, knew and used Actinidia chinensis 
fruit as food, and there are references to it in ancient herbals as 


180 


The Kiwi Fruit I 181 



refreshing and thirst quenching. Wilson, on his first expedi- 
tion for the Veitch nurseries at the turn of the century, was — 
if not the first westerner to taste the fruit — the first to record 
its edibility; its delicate flavor enchanted him. 1 ’ 2 ’ 3 

“A climber called ‘Yang-tao’ in Hupeh and ‘Mao-erh-tao’ in 
Szechuan (Actinidia chinensis) is very abundant from 
2500 to 6000 feet altitude. It produces excellent fruit of 
% a roundish or oval shape, 1 inch to 2% inches long, with 
a thin, brown, often hairy skin, covering a luscious green 
flesh. This is an excellent dessert fruit, and makes a fine 
preserve. In 1900 I had the pleasure of introducing this 
fruit to the foreign residents of Ichang, with whom it 
found immediate favour, and is now known throughout 
the Yangtsze Valley as the ‘Ichang Gooseberry.’ ... It is 
a good garden plant; the only drawback is that the flowers 
are polygamous, and it is necessary to secure the herma- 
phrodite form to ensure fruit.” 


182 | ARNOLDIA 

Wilson sent seeds back to the Veitch nurseries in England, 
and the seeds germinated. A. chinensis thrived in its new en- 
vironment, and in 1906 the Veitches described it enthusiastical- 
ly as “a rapid grower, valuable for very handsome foliage, cov- 
ered with bright red hairs in a young state. The flowers, not 
yet seen in cultivation, are bright yellow, very handsome, and 
followed by edible fruits about the size of walnuts with a fla- 
vour resembling ripe gooseberries.” (“Bright yellow” seems a bit 
of an overstatement but, after all, the Veitches had not seen 
flowers yet.) One remarks that the nursery emphasized the 
plant as an ornamental rather than as a fruit producer. 

As far as we can tell from our old accession records, the 
Arnold Arboretum first received shipments of A. chinensis from 
the Veitch nurseries in 1905; Wilson subsequently sent a batch 
of seeds in 1908 during his first expedition under Arboretum 
auspices. In 1904, however, the U.S. Department of Agricul- 
ture Bureau of Plant Industry, which publishes very thorough 
records, listed the receipt of seeds of an Actinidia sp. called 
Yang-taw by the Chinese, with a “fruit said to be very fine, has 
flavor of gooseberry, fig, and citron”; this was obviously A. 
chinensis. Wilson shipped it to the USDA through the American 
Consul-General in Hankow, and the Bureau of Plant Industry 
forwarded it to the Plant Introduction Garden in Chico, Califor- 
nia, for trial. 

The practice at the Arboretum was to distribute a portion of 
seeds or cuttings to selected nurseries and individuals, and 
one may safely assume this happened with Wilson’s 1908 ship- 
ment. Hopefully, Actinidia chinensis fared better in other mild- 
er areas — or in nursery greenhouses — than it did outdoors 
at Jamaica Plain. The material which Veitch sent in 1905 died 
by 1912; the 1908 seed lot expired in 1914. A. chinensis simply 
could not take New England winters, though other Actinidia 
species survive them. Meanwhile, the USDA lot at Chico came 
along very nicely, producing fruit in 1910. The Arnold Arbore- 
tum still makes an occasional attempt to cultivate A. chinensis. 
Last fall Mr. A1 Fordham, the propagator, remarked on some 
growing along the greenhouse fence, but pessimistically pre- 
dicted it would winter-kill. It did. 

There is an interesting footnote to the introduction of the 
plant into Western horticulture. Both Veitch and Sargent 
measured the species from an ornamental viewpoint. Like crab- 
apples, its fruit production was simply an agreeable factor com- 
plimenting its decorative possibilities. Though far from being a 


The Kiwi Fruit j 183 


spectacular species, A. chinensis has many desirable qualities. 
In a favorable climate it grows vigorously and produces a hand- 
some foliage with creamy white flowers, one and a half to two 
inches in diameter, rapidly fading to buff yellow. (At no time 
are they the bright yellow advertised by Veitch.) Due to its 
lusty growth, the English and Europeans plant it frequently, 
and it is available in American nurseries. Naturally, the selec- 
tion of ornamental plants for the home garden is, to a large ex- 
tent, a question of personal taste. Alfred Rehder thought A. 
chinensis “the most beautiful of the Actinidias” and a good gar- 
den plant. By contrast, Dr. Donald Wyman does not get very 
enthusiastic about it, and he recommends it for someone in a 
rush for a large climber, perhaps to cover some unsightly object. 

While the Arnold Arboretum by tradition, and Sargent as its 
first Director, evaluated A. chinensis as an ornamental, the 
USDA eyed it as a potential source of fruit. This attitude once 
led Sargent to make the withering and somewhat unjust remark 
that Department of Agriculture officials were only interested in 
what they could eat. Personally, Sargent took a dim view of 
introducing new food products to the American dinner table and 
recognized the reluctance of the average person to experiment 
with exotic tastes. But people may be more adventurous in their 
dining habits now. For example, after half a century as an 
abused curiosity, (a situation which one author blames on the 
use of the old uncomplimentary name, alligator pear) the avo- 
cado has come into its own. Kiwi fruits may be gaining pop- 
ularity and, unlike other food products, their price is descending. 

Actinidia chinensis fruits, or berries, are ovoid and about the 
size of an egg. While not particularly appetizing on the exterior, 
peeled or in section their color is a clear jade green. Many tiny, 
purple seeds surround the inner core, and they are small enough 
so that one need not remove them. The fruits resemble melon 
in texture; in taste, they are sweet and succulent, not at all like 
the gooseberry, and have been compared to strawberries, black- 
berries, melons, rhubarb, bananas, and so on, without any gen- 
eral agreement except that most people who have tried them, 
like them. They are reported to be richer in Vitamin C than 
oranges. 

The fruit on the market today is not American-grown but 
comes from New Zealand. (Hence, one presumes, the name 
Kiwi fruit.) Although the USDA began its trials of A. chinensis 
about two years earlier than the probable date of introduction 
of the species into New Zealand, for some reason it caught on 
as a crop plant there while it never got out of trial gardens in 


184 ARNOLDIA 

the United States. Despite efforts to convince independent 
growers of its potential, the Department of Agriculture has 
failed to stimulate commercial interest. Yet there is ample evi- 
dence that A. chinensis grows well in California, north Florida, 
and the Gulf states. Meanwhile, New Zealand raises and sells 
several thousand tons of fruit annually. 

New Zealanders did not begin commercial cultivation of the 
species until about 1940, many years after it had been intro- 
duced. By 1964 they were producing 840 tons of fruit in a 
single year at the rate of four tons per acre. Out of this crop, 
80 tons went as exports to Britain, Australia, Canada, and the 
United States. Picked before they ripen, the fruits keep very 
well : eight weeks in common storage and more than four months 
in cold storage (31-32 degrees F. at 90 per cent relative humid- 
ity). The New Zealand growers have been enterprising in de- 
veloping improved cultivars of A. chinensis with bigger and 
better fruits. An extra large fruited cultivar with superior 
flavor, Hayward is used exclusively for export to the United 
States. This, then, is what we see in the markets. 

If the American public displays any sign of real interest in 
the fruits, domestic growers may be encouraged to raise Actinidia 
chinensis. But, thus far, no one has been that adventurous. 

For further reference see : 

Schroeder, C. A. and W. A. Fletcher, “The Chinese Gooseberry 
( Actinidia chinensis ) in New Zealand,” Economic Botany: 
Vol. 21, No. 1, 81-92. January-March 1963. 

Menninger, Edwin A., “Actinidia chinensis; A Promising Fruit 
and Some Related Species,” The American Horticultural 
Magazine , Vol. 45, No. 2, 252-256. April 1966. 

Smith, Robert L., “Kiwi — A Potential New Crop for Califor- 
nia,” Lasca Leaves, Vol. 20, No. 1, 8-10. March 1970. 

Stephanne Sutton 

1. Jade Jewel (supplied by The New Zealand Fruit Growers Federation 
Limited) 

12 oz tin pineapple 

1/4 cup quick cooking tapioca 

14 teaspoon salt 

1 cup water 

% cup sugar 

3 tablespoons lemon juice 
3 kiwi fruit 

Drain the pineapple and reserve both juice and fruit. In a saucepan, put 
the tapioca, salt, water, and pineapple juice. Cook over low heat with 
regular stirring until the tapioca is clear. Add sugar. Remove from the 


The Kiwi Fruit I 185 


heat and add the lemon juice, stirring it in well. Leave to cool. Peel the 
kiwi fruit and cut into large chunks. When the tapioca mixture is cold, 
fold the pineapple pieces and kiwi fruit through it. Spoon into dessert 
glasses and chill. (Serves 6) 

2. Greenstone Pie 

1 cooked 7- to 8-inch sweet short pastry pie shell 
4 to 6 kiwi fruit 

2 egg whites 

4 tablespoons sugar 

Peel the kiwi fruit and cut into quarter-inch rings. Whip the egg whites 
until stiff, then beat in the sugar gradually to form a thick meringue. 
Immediately before serving, pile the sliced fruit into the cooked pie shell 
and cover with the meringue. Place in 400° oven and cook for about 5 
minutes to brown the meringue. Serve at once. (Serves 6) 

3. Kiwi Fruit Upside Down Cake 

2 oz butter 
% cup sugar 

1 teaspoon grated lemon rind 

3 or 4 kiwi fruit 
1 \ 4 cups flour 

2 teaspoons baking powder 
14 teaspoon salt 

Vz cup sugar 

1 egg 

V 2 cup milk 

2 oz. butter, melted 

Select an 8-inch round cake tin and in it melt the first measure of butter. 
Sprinkle with the first measure of sugar and spread over the bottom of 
the tin so an even layer is formed. Sprinkle with lemon rind. Peel the 
kiwi fruit and cut in rings 14 inch thick. Place these in a pattern over 
the bottom of the tin. Sift the flour, baking powder, and salt into a bowl 
and add the sugar. Beat the egg and blend in the milk, then tip all the 
liquid into the dry ingredients and stir until completely blended. Pour in 
the melted butter and mix well. Carefully pour the batter over the fruit 
and topping in the tin. Bake at 350° for about 45 minutes or until cooked. 
Remove from the oven and allow cake to stand in the tin for 5 minutes 
before inverting on a plate. Serve warm or cold with cream. (Serves 
6 to 8) 


Climate at the Arnold Arboretum 


Climate has been defined as a generalization of weather con- 
ditions of a region. Factors such as temperature, pressure, 
humidity, precipitation, sunshine, cloudiness, and wind through- 
out the year, averaged over a series of years, comprise the 
climate. Climate is the principal factor that limits which 
plants may or may not be grown in a specific region. At the 
Arnold Arboretum some woody plants cannot tolerate the heat 
and dryness of summer, but the survival of most plants is de- 
termined by various aspects of temperature which involve cold. 
Some plants which start growth early can be injured by spring 
frosts. Others may be killed by freezing in autumn before they 
have properly hardened in preparation for winter. The principal 
determining factor, however, is severe winter cold. 

Arboretum Weather Station. Climatological records are sig- 
nificant to botanical institutions that are concerned with living 
plants. With such data, it becomes possible to compile infor- 
mation which adds to the knowledge concerning the climatic 
tolerances of plants. Frequently, the exact date when winter 
injury occurred can be determined. 

Since August 15, 1962, the Arnold Arboretum has maintained 
a simple climatological substation in cooperation with the 
U.S. Weather Bureau. A representative of the Weather Bu- 
reau approved a site for the instruments, supervised their 
installation, and checked the thermometer for accuracy. Daily 
at 8:00 A.M. observations of temperatures and precipitation 
covering the previous 24 hours are entered on forms which the 
Weather Bureau provides. Mr. Artur Norietis, a member of the 
Dana Greenhouse staff and resident watchman, has been large- 
ly responsible for operating the station. Despite the fact that 
records only apply to a relatively short seven-year period, some 
interesting data have been accumulated. 

Equipment. The equipment consists of a maximum and 
minimum self-registering thermometer furnished by the Ar- 
boretum and an eight-inch nonrecording precipitation gauge 
provided by the Weather Bureau. 


186 


Climate at the Arboretum I 187 


Microclimates. Those familiar with the Arnold Arboretum 
are aware of the wide variety of topographical features that are 
present within the bounds of this relatively small 265 acre 
area. Elevations range from 50 to 233 feet. The terrain is 
comprised of summits, ridges, valleys, slopes of varying de- 
grees, flat areas, and so on. These features lead to an assort- 
ment of exposures which face all points of the compass. With 
such geographical variation there is also a wide diversity of 
climatic differences. Some are subtle and others are obvious. 
These deviations from the overall climatic picture are known 
as microclimates and can occur within feet and even inches 
of one and other. 

In November 1934, Dr. Hugh M. Raup, then a member of the 
Arboretum staff, chose eight locations in the Arboretum and 
set up a station at each where temperatures could be recorded. 
Some of these records remained when Dr. Raup left and from 
them have been extracted some interesting microclimatic data. 

Station 1 was positioned at the southwest side of the Admin- 
istration Building where the land slopes gently toward the 
meadow and where the station was sheltered from the north, 
east, and west. 

Station 2 was situated on flat land in the shrub order. The 
shrub order is in one of the lowest areas of the Arboretum and 
the land slopes toward it from all directions, making it an ideal 
location for a cold pocket. 

Station 3 was located on Bussey Hill about 50 yards south 
of the summit and on a crest — an ideal position for good 
air drainage. 

A site for Station 4 was chosen on a gentle southeast slope 
near the Centre Street Path. It was well protected from the 
north and west by higher elevations and has proven to be one 
of the most favorable microclimates in the Arboretum. 

Station 5 was located in the Juniper collection on a small 
plateau well sheltered from wind by surrounding slopes and 
hills. It is of interest that many Indian artifacts were found 
here. This would indicate that an Indian camp site existed there 
despite the fact that it proved to be one of the Arboretum’s 
coldest microclimates according to the Raup records. Indians 
lived close to nature and though they had no knowledge of 
microclimates, they did know that some sites were more suit- 
able to comfort than others. This awareness would be of 
prime importance to those living through a harsh New England 
winter under primitive circumstances. Several considerations 
may well account for their choosing this location. Nearby to 


188 ARNOLDIA 



The Weather Station in the Dana Greenhouse Nursery. Rain gauge at 
left. Box for thermometer at right. 


the south was a free-flowing brook and to the north was a 
spring. The area is well sheltered from bitter winds of winter 
and they could avoid the chill factor which can lead to 
much greater human discomfort than severe cold. Together 
with these features it seems reasonable to suppose the area at 
that time was wooded and, therefore, could have a climate 
which differed somewhat from that shown by the Raup records. 

Station 6, the most sheltered site of all, was placed on Hem- 
lock Hill. The area then was populated by massive hemlocks, 
many of which were later lost in the 1938 hurricane. 

At Station 7 in the isolated Peters Hill area, observations 
were recorded for about one month when they were discontinued 
with the notation, “thermometer stolen.” 

Station 8 was near the Arboretum greenhouses which were 
then located off South Street on property of the Bussey Insti- 
tution. The site was a small plateau with the land falling away 
in all directions. The discovery of numerous Indian relics re- 
veals that a camp site also existed here. Although shown by 
the Raup records to be the most favorable microclimate of all, 


Climate at the Arboretuvi I 189 


it was exposed to the wind from all directions. Again, the area 
was perhaps wooded, a condition that would tend to mitigate 
the chill factor associated with winter winds. 

Interpretation of Some Temperature Gradients. The follow- 
ing examples of temperature gradients have been selected from 
the Raup records. Each morning during the winter of 1934-35 
observations pertaining to the previous night were recorded at 
about 9:00 A.M. For purpose of illustration, easily interpreted 
extremes have been chosen and they concern only minima. 

Table 1 shows low temperatures and wide variation in the 
gradients. They are typical of calm, clear nights. Under such 
conditions air loses heat to outer space through radiational 
cooling. Temperature drop is often greater during winter than 
at other seasons because the long nights which prevail allow 
radiational cooling to take place over a maximum period of 
time. With the absence of wind, cold air drains from the higher 
elevations and settles in lower areas (frost or cold pockets) lead- 
ing to wide diversity of minima in the microclimates. These are 
the nights during which our lowest temperatures occur and 
they are the most damaging to plants. At such times, the shrub 
collection usually had the coldest temperature while the area 
near the greenhouse had the warmest. It is interesting that the 
temperature stations which showed the greatest extremes were 
the closest together — about 200 yards. However, the topog- 
raphy is such that the same differences would prevail at the 
edge of the greenhouse plateau and in the flat area below which 
contains the shrub collection — a distance of about 90 or 100 
feet with a difference in elevation of 30 feet. 

Table 1 

Minima Under Clear Conditions, Winds Light to Very Light 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 7 

8 

- 16.0 

- 26.0 

- 16.9 

- 20.7 

- 25.1 

- 17.8 

- 7.5 

- 6.9 

- 15.4 

- 8.3 

- 9.2 

- 19.4 

- 6.8 

- 5.3 

- 3.7 

- 14.3 

- 2.9 

- 7.0 

- 12.0 

- 3.8 

- 6.0 

16.7 

8.0 

17.8 

15.0 

9.6 

18.0 

18.0 


These examples are typical of calm, clear nights when heat is lost 
to atmosphere through radiational cooling. In the absence of wind, 
cold air drains from higher elevations and settles in the low areas. 

Table 2 shows minimal differences in temperature. Brisk 
winds led to a mixing and stirring of the atmosphere and there- 
fore minima showed only slight variation at all stations. Under 


190 | ARNOLDIA 

conditions of high winds. Station 8, which usually had the 
warmest microclimate, often showed lower temperatures due 
to its exposed position. 


Table 2 

Minima Under Clear Conditions, Estimated Wind Velocity 
Medium to Brisk 


Station 1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 7 

8 

8.0 

7.1 

6.9 

7.2 

6.4 

7.3 

6.1 

11.7 

11.2 

10.5 

11.3 

10.3 

11.5 

10.2 

11.2 

11.0 

10.1 

11.0 

10.1 

11.5 

10.8 

17.8 

17.0 

16.2 

17.0 

16.1 

17.4 

16.1 

Brisk winds led to a 

mixing and 

stirring 

of the atmosphere 

and 

therefore temperatures 

were 

quite 

similar at all 

stations. 



Table 3 illustrates the uniformity that was evident in the 
minima under cloudy conditions. If calm nights such as these 
had been clear, there would have been wide variations. How- 
ever, the cloud blanket intercepted and prevented the radiation 
of heat from below. In the absence of radiational cooling, there 
is a pattern of uniformity despite light winds. As would be ex- 
pected, similar gradients frequently came about during periods 
of rain and snow. 


Table 3 


Minima Under Cloudy Conditions, Estimated Wind Velocity 
Light to Very Light 


Station 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 8 

28.0 

28.0 

27.4 

28.0 

28.0 

28.0 

— 

16.3 

17.1 

17.0 

15.1 

15.9 

15.9 

19.5 

17.1 

17.0 

16.0 

16.9 

16.2 

17.0 

16.5 

28.0 

28.0 

27.5 

28.0 

27.7 

28.0 

29.3 


The cloud cover intercepted and prevented the radiation of heat 
from below. In the absence of radiational cooling, only slight dif- 
ferences appeared in the minima despite relative calm. 


Table 4 

Average Minimum Temperatures at Arboretum Stations 
January 1935 

Station 1234 56 78 

14.2 11.6 14.0 13.0 10.9 14.2 15.9 


Those responsible for planting the Arboretum in its early 
years were aware of the more favorable microclimates in the 
vicinities of Stations 1, 3, 4, and 6 and set out many plants of 
questionable hardiness in those areas. 


Climate at the Arboretum \ 191 

Factors which Influence the Climate at Boston. In the An- 
nual Summary of Boston Climatological Data (1968), pub- 
lished by the U.S. Department of Commerce, the Boston climate 
is described as follows: 

“Three important influences are responsible for the main 
features of Boston’s climate. First, the latitude (42'N) places 
the city in the zone of prevailing west to east atmospheric 
flow in which are encompassed the northward and south- 
ward movements of large bodies of air from tropical and 
polar regions. This results in variety and changeability of 
the weather elements. Secondly, Boston is situated on or 
near several tracks frequently followed by systems of low 
air pressure. The consequent fluctuations from fair to 
cloudy or stormy conditions reinforce the influence of the 
first factor, while also assuring a rather dependable pre- 
cipitation supply. The third factor, Boston’s East Coast 
location, is a moderating factor effecting temperature ex- 
tremes of winter and summer.” 

Boston’s official weather station is located at Logan Inter- 
national Airport in East Boston. It is situated seven miles 
northeast of the Arnold Arboretum. Its climate is modified by 
proximity to the sea and is quite different from that at the 
Arnold Arboretum. Temperatures are usually cooler in summer, 
warmer in winter, and have less range in the extremes. To 
show these differences data concerning the past three years 
have been brought together in Table 5. 

Table 5 

Comparative Data Official Boston and Arnold Arboretum 
Weather Stations 


1966 

1967 

1968 

A. A. Logan 

A. A. Logan 

A. A. Logan 


January 

24.5 

28.8 

29.8 

35.1 

20 

25.6 

July 

73.6 

74.9 

74.5 

73.0 

76 

75.2 

Maximum 

100 

97 

97 

94 

98 

98 

Minimum 

-1 

3 

-9 

-3 

-6 

-4 

Growing 

season (days) 169 

216 

154 

210 

172 

249 

Last 

frost 

Apr. 27 

Mar. 29 

May 7 Apr. 13 

May 8 Mar. 26 

First 

frost 

Oct. 13 

Oct. 31 

Oct. 8 

Nov. 9 

Oct. 27 

Nov. 30 

Growing 

Season. 

The 

growing season is 

defined 

as the 

number of days between 

the last day of killing frost 

in the 


spring and the first day with killing frost in autumn. This time 


192 ARNOLDIA 

is determined by the last spring and the first fall temperature 
of 32 degrees F. or lower. 

Those concerned with gardening realize the considerable year- 
to-year variation that can occur in length of the growing season. 
During one year in the Boston area, frost may take place in 
early September while it might not occur until November in 
the more favorable microclimates. Note in Table 5 that Boston 



The eight-inch nonrecording precipitation gauges. Left to right: funnel 
to be attached at top of gauge, gauge proper, reservoir in which the 
gauge is set. 


was favored with 47, 56, and 77 more growing days during the 
three years concerned than the Arboretum. 

Importance of Small Differences in Temperature. On oc- 
casion, small differences in temperature can be of critical im- 



Climate at the Arboretum I 193 


portance. During a two-day period on December 28 and 29, 
1968, precipitation amounting to 1.29 inches was recorded at 
the Arboretum. Temperatures at that time flirted with the 
freezing point — 30 to 34 degrees F. There was little if any 
build-up of ice and no damage occurred in the plant collections. 
However, at the Case Estates of the Arnold Arboretum, 13.5 
miles further inland at Weston, conditions were quite different. 
The temperature there is usually a few degrees colder than at 
Jamaica Plain. Precipitation which fell as rain in Jamaica 
Plain became freezing rain at Weston. Enormous weights of 
ice formed on the branches of trees until they could no longer 
support the burden and snapped or split. 

On the other hand, the Arboretum in Jamaica Plain may suffer 
damage while the Case Estates at Weston may not. On Feb- 
ruary 9, 1969, snow began to fall at 5:30 A.M. The temperature 
was 31 degrees F. Snow continued through that day, the fol- 
lowing night, and finally stopped at 1:00 P.M. on February 10, 
leaving an accumulation of 15.8 inches temperatures during the 
period showed a maximum of 32 degrees F. and a minimum of 
30 degrees F. The near-freezing temperature resulted in snow 
that was heavy and moist. Each flake seemed to remain where 
it fell. Plants became so overburdened with the accumulation of 
wet snow that damage was devastating. Many trees of weak 
structure such as magnolias, Douglas firs, and carpinus were 
broken and split to pieces. A lace-bark pine, which is an es- 
pecially weak-wooded tree, broke off at ground level. Evergreens, 
which hold their foliage and therefore have more snow catch- 
ing surface, were particularly vulnerable. Some junipers were 
broken in half and some were literally pulled out of the ground 
by the great weight of the snow. Much of the Arboretum was 
in shambles. Meanwhile, the temperature at the Case Estates 
was apparently a bit colder and the snow was drier. It did not 
cling so did no harm. It is interesting that at this time the 
temperature along the shore south of Boston was slightly 
warmer and precipitation was in the form of rain. 

Alfred James Fordham 


194 ARNOLDIA 



Faxon Drawings for Christmas 

The staff of the Arnold Arboretum has selected four of 
Charles Edward Faxon’s botanical drawings, originally pub- 
lished in The Silva of North America, for Christmas cards. The 
cards and envelopes are available in boxes of 20 (five of each 
of the four cards) or individually. The drawings are in black 
and white, printed on heavy card stock. 

The four illustrations are: 

1. Ilex opaca, American Holly 

2. Larix occidentalis, Tamarach 

3. Thuya occidentalis , White Cedar 

4. Pinus ponderosa. Yellow Pine 

Price : Box of 20 cards (four illustrations) — 


Friends of the Arnold Arboretum* $3.00 

Others $3.50 

Single cards — 

Friends of the Arnold Arboretum* .20 

Others .25 


* Information on how to become a “Friend of the Arnold Arboretum” 
can be obtained by writing or calling the Arnold Arboretum, Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130. Telephone: 524-1717. 


195 


Arnoldio Reviews 


A Photo Guide to the Patterns of Discoloration and Decay in 
Living Northern Hardwood Trees, by Alex L. Shigo and Edwin 
vH. Larson. 

Judging by its title this ought to be a formidable treatise — but 
it isn’t. For the forester for whom it is probably primarily in- 
tended, it is a straightforward explanation of what causes de- 
fects and discoloration in the wood of commercial forest trees. 
For the homeowner, the landscape gardener, the town tree 
warden, it gives an indication of the amount of internal damage 
caused to a tree by a particular kind of injury. Put another way, 
it suggests what kind of injury is best treated by removing the 
tree and what injuries are unlikely to weaken a tree unduly. 
It provides a visual explanation of the reasons why aborists 
place such great emphasis on clean flush cuts — why branch 
stubs should not be left on the tree to decay. Injuries by squir- 
rels (yes!), sapsuckers, and porcupines are shown. 

Fifty-nine reproductions of color photographs show what the 
inside and outside of the tree looks like with the various in- 
juries. Dr. Shigo’s basic tool is the chain saw, which allows 
longitudinal sections of a tree trunk to be made easily. This 
is, if you will, the results of tree autopsy. It certainly demon- 
strates the value of the method. 

Highly recommended for homeowners interested in the well- 
being of their trees. 

G.P.DeW. 

U.S.D.A. Research Paper NE-127. Northeast Forest Experi- 
ment Station: Upper Darby, Pennsylvania. 1969. Available on 
request. 


196 


1970 Fall Classes of the 
Arnold Arboretum 


Elementary Techniques of Bonsai, Indoor Material 

Mrs. Ara R. Derderian 
This series will consist of three 2-hour lectures and a work- 
shop at the last meeting. The basic principles of bonsai will 
be explained, such as soil preparation, potting-up procedures, 
pruning techniques, and general design. Classes will be con- 
ducted at the Dana Greenhouses at the Arnold Arboretum. Con- 
tainers and plant material will be provided. 

Thursday mornings 10:00 to 12:00 September 17, 24, and 

Oct. 1 

Thursday, Workshop, 10:00 to 2:00 October 8 

Registration fee for Friends of the Arnold Arboretum,* $25.00; 
others, $35.00. 

Two Meetings for Advanced Bonsai Enthusiasts 

Mrs. Ara R. Derderian 
Each class will be independent of the other. The September 
class will concentrate on design and the October class on prun- 
ing. Members may bring one plant for criticism to each ses- 
sion. Each class will involve a fee of $7.50 for Friends and 
$10.00 for others. 

Saturday mornings 9:00 to 12:00 

September 26 and October 3 

Propagation of Woody Plants from Seed 

Mr. Alfred J. Fordham 
A discussion of methods used to collect, clean, and pretreat 
seeds to prepare them for germination. Seeds to take home 
will be provided from the Arboretum collection. Suitable foot- 
gear should be worn since part of the session involves walking 

* Information on how to become a Friend of the Arnold Arboretum 
can be obtained by writing or calling the Arnold Arboretum, Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130. 


197 


198 ARNOLDIA 

around the grounds. One meeting, Tuesday morning, 10:00 to 
12 : 00, September 22. Class limited to 20. Free, but open only to 
Friends of the Arnold Arboretum. Meet at Dana Greenhouses. 

Propagation of Woody Plants from Cuttings 

Mr. Alfred J. Fordham 
A discussion of methods used to collect and prepare cuttings 
for most effective results in propagation. Cuttings will be sup- 
plied by the Arboretum to take home. One meeting, Thursday 
morning 10:00 to 12:00, October 29. Class limited to 20. Free, 
but open only to Friends of the Arnold Arboretum. Meet at 
Dana Greenhouses. 

Practical Gardening For the Home Owner 

Mr. Robert S. Hebb 

This is a series of five classes designed to teach gardening 
skills as they relate to plantings usually found around the home. 
Emphasis will be placed upon the various aspects of planning 
and maintaining a perennial garden with its associated plant- 
ings. This will include an opportunity to participate in the 
renovation of the Low Maintenance Garden at the Case Estates. 
Newcomers are welcome. Class limited to 20. Parking is avail- 
able near the barn at 135 Wellesley Street, Weston. All classes 
will meet first at the Red Schoolhouse at 133 Wellesley Street. 
Wednesdays, 1:00 to 4:00 September 30-October 28. 

Registration fee for Friends of the Arnold Arboretum, $5.00; 
others, $10.00. 

Fall Field Course In Ornamental Woody Plants 

Dr. Gordon P. DeWolf 
Five informal outdoor talks and field trips on the Arboretum 
grounds under the supervision of Dr. DeWolf and the horti- 
cultural staff make up the Fall Field Class. Different plant 
groups and areas of the Arboretum are studied on each trip. 
During the sessions the berried trees and shrubs, autumn color, 
the evergreens, and similar topics will be considered. There are 
opportunities for questions and answers relating to the identi- 
fication and culture of ornamental woody plants which are at 
the Arboretum or are suitable for culture in New England. Meet 
at Administration Building. In case of rain or cold weather, 
meetings are held indoors. 

Friday mornings, 10:00 to 12:00 October 2 to October 30 
Registration fee for Friends of the Arnold Arboretum, $5.00; 
others, $10.00. 


Fall Classes I 199 


Evenings With Friends II 

In the Fall of 1969 a series of talks called Evenings With 
Friends was so successful that a similar series will be offered 
this fall. The speakers are all members of a group known as 
the Friends of the Arnold Arboretum. In this group now num- 
bering more than 1,100, there are many fine speakers with 
extremely interesting and varied subjects. We will hear from 
6 Friends in this series. Full details of the program have been 
mailed out to all members of the Friends. All sessions will meet 
at The Red Schoolhouse, 133 Wellesley Street, Weston. 

Five Tuesday evenings at 8:00 October 13 to November 10 
Registration fee for Friends of the Arnold Arboretum, $7.50; 
others, $15.00. 


Summary of Weather Data Recorded at Dana Greenhouse 

A1 Fordham’s timely article on climate in this issue highlights 
the vagaries of the weather. For the interest of readers of 
Arnoldia we present below a tabular summary of some pre- 
cipitation and temperature data for 1969 and 1970. 

It is of interest to note that January 1970, was very much cold- 
er (about 9°F) than last year. We have seen some of the results 
of that in winter killing of some of our shrubs. 

It is also well worth noting that through July we had 2.17 inches 
of rain more than we had during the same period last year. 
June was especially wet. 


1969 1970 



Average 



Average 


8 A.M. 



8 A.M. 

Precipitation 

Temp. 


Precipitation 

Temp. 

2.41 

25 

Jan. 

1.07 

16.1 

5.45 

27 

Feb. 

4.97 

26.75 

2.41 

33 

Mar. 

3.71 

33.8 

5.06 

49.7 

April 

3.84 

46.93 

2.84 

57.1 

May 

3.79 

57.19 

1.18 

67.6 

June 

4.07 

65.3 

3.01 

68.7 

July 

3.08 

71.32 

2.28 

68.5 

Aug. 



4.90 

58.6 

Sept. 



1.97 

48.1 

Oct. 



9.72 

40.4 

Nov. 



10.14 

28.2 

Dec. 



22.36 

Total 

Jan. -June 

24.53 



200 ' ARNOLDIA 


An Index to Arnoldia, 

Volumes 1-29, (1941-1969) 

Dr. Donald Wyman will retire at the end of August 1970, 
ending his role as Horticulturist at the Arnold Arboretum which 
began on January 1, 1936. For this service, a total of 34 years 
and 8 months, the President and Fellows of Harvard College, 
the Trustees of the Arnold Arboretum, have voted to honor Dr. 
Wyman with the title of Horticulturist, Emeritus. We, the staff, 
wish also to honor him and dedicate to him this Cumulative 
Index to Arnoldia which we have prepared cooperatively. 

When Dr. Wyman joined the Arboretum staff he accepted the 
editorship of the Arnold Arboretum Bulletin of Popular Infor- 
mation, the earlier issues of which had been edited primarily 
and successively by Charles Sargent, Ernest Wilson, and Edgar 
Anderson. Between 1936 and 1940 Dr. Wyman wrote 39 ar- 
ticles for the Bulletin. In 1941 the title of this publication was 
changed to Arnoldia at the suggestion of the director at that 
time. Dr. E. D. Merrill, who observed that the one-word title 
would be easier to cite. Dr. Wyman served as editor and prin- 
cipal contributor to Arnoldia throughout the period covered by 
this cumulative index, with the exception of a two-year respite 
in 1967 and 1968. The articles he wrote were based largely on 
his own observations of the plants grown at the Arnold Arbore- 
tum in Jamaica Plain and the Case Estates in Weston. Many 
articles were timely suggestions to the readers on what was in 
flower, what was to be seen on the grounds, or how to handle 
the injuries plants suffered in winter storms or hurricanes. Other 
articles dealt with the classification of cultivated woody plants, 
the sources of unusual plants, or the methods of propagating 
and caring for these materials. Perhaps the general theme of 
all his writing was an evaluation of the plant from a horticul- 
turist’s point of view. The words “recommended,” “not recom- 
mended,” or “of merit” are frequent in his papers. His articles 
were often revised after an interval of a few years to add in- 
formation or to make comparisons with newer introductions re- 
cently tested in Massachusetts. Finally, many of these observa- 
tions were incorporated in his several books — T rees for Ameri- 
can Gardens, Shrubs and Vines for American Gardens, and The 
Saturday Morning Gardener, to mention only the best-known 
volumes. 

Each Friend of the Arnold Arboretum is entitled to a com- 
plimentary copy of the Index. Copies are available to others 
for $1.50. 


Staff of the Arnold Arboretum 


Richard Alden Howard, Ph.D., Arnold Professor of Botany, Pro- 
fessor of Dendrology, and Director 
Karl Sax, S.D., Professor of Botany, Emeritus 
Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist, Emeritus 
Pamela Anne Bruns, B.A., Artist 
Jeanne Caldwell, B.A., Library Assistant 
Michael Anthony Canoso, M.S., Senior Curatorial Assistant 
Constance Elizabeth Derderian, Honorary Curator of the Bonsai 
Collection 

Elsa Dorfman, M.A., Editor, ARNOLDIA 
Gordon Parker DeWolf, Jr., Ph.D., Horticulturist 
Thomas Elias, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Alfred James Fordham, Propagator 
William Ed Grime, B.A., Curatorial Assistant 
Thomas Gordon Hartley, Ph.D., Associate Curator of Pacific 
Botany 

Robert Stephen Hebb, S.B., Assistant Horticulturist 
Shiu-Ying Hu, Ph.D., Botanist 

Thomas Matthew Kinahan, Superintendent, Case Estates 
Charles Robert Long, A.M., Librarian 

Lorin Ives Nevling, Jr., Ph.D., Curator and Supervisor of the 
Herbaria 

Dulcie Alicia Powell, M.A., Assistant Curator 
George Howard Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 
Helen Roca-Garcia, A.M., Research Assistant 
Bernice Giduz Schubert, Ph.D., Curator and Editor 
Stephanne Sutton, B.A., Research Fellow 
Robert Gerow Williams, B.S., Superintendent 
Carroll Emory Wood, Jr., Ph.D., Curator 


Printed in the U.S.A. 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 






_/L^- t :M 


SB^^aSajLI 


ggy **^mSt* 

R* 








Contents 


201 The Director’s Report 


251 Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 
Plant Registrations 

ROBERT S. HEBB 


ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 02130 


Published six times a year: on the 15th of January, 
March, May, July, September, and November 
Subscriptions: $3.50 per year. Single copies, 60 cents 


On the cover: A view on Hemlock Hill. 

Photo: P. Bruns. 


All photographs by Pamela Bruns except where indicated. 


The Director’s Report 


The Arnold Arboretum During the Fiscal Year 
Ended June 30, 1970 

Many adjectives have been used to describe the events of the 
past year. It has been a disturbing year — a year of student 
unrest and rebellion, a year of inflation, a year that could not 
fail to provoke a reappraisal of values. The staff of the Arnold 
Arboretum, our physical plant, and our activities have not been 
immune nor isolated from the turmoil. The Arnold Arboretum 
is many things: to some people it is an oasis of relative peace 
and quiet, to some a place of horticultural beauty, and to others 
a place of scientific achievement and contribution. However in 
this year there have been changes; there have been challenges 
and difficulties; but there has been progress as well, and op- 
portunity to reflect and plan ahead. I wish to report on many 
of these activities. 

The Arnold Arboretum is administratively a part of Harvard 
University. While it is unique in being privately endowed, de- 
pendent on a public interested in its activities for financial sup- 
port, at the same time the rules of its operation are incorporated 
with an educational institution of considerable repute for its 
standards and its procedures. The grounds are also listed in the 
inventory of park lands held by the Boston Parks and Recreation 
Department. Today student and public unrest has affected the 
staff of this institution and we have seen an increased disregard 
for public or personal property on the grounds; on the other 
hand, the demands for basic and relevant information have 
increased during the year. The knowledge of the staff, the 
reference collections, and the records of what grows where on 
this earth have become increasingly valuable and have been 
called upon more frequently than ever in this year of sudden 
awareness of the environment. 

Since the establishment of the Journal of the Arnold Arbo- 
retum 50 years ago the Annual Report of the Director has been 
published in the October issue as a record of scientific accom- 
plishments and activities of the staff. In the last decade the 


201 


202 ARNOLDIA 

report has been reprinted and distributed to the Friends of the 
Arnold Arboretum. This report now appears in the new format 
of Arnoldia to acknowledge directly the support of the Friends 
of the Arnold Arboretum. Reprints will be distributed to scien- 
tific organizations associated with us in the study of plant life. 

The Staff 

Dr. Donald Wyman, horticulturist for the past 34 years and 
8 months, retired officially on August 31, 1970, the anniversary 
of his first appointment. Dr. Wyman’s contributions to the 
development of the living collections, his editorship of Arnoldia, 
his books and many articles, his spring and fall classes, and 
other lectures have helped increase the knowledge of plants 
grown in New England and have helped define and establish 
the role of the Arnold Arboretum itself. The President and Fel- 
lows of Harvard University approved the recommendation of 
the Director and the staff that Dr. Wyman receive in retirement 
the title “Horticulturist, Emeritus.” 

On the occasion of Dr. Wyman’s last class on May 29th, the 
staff invited former staff members and his associates in pro- 
fessional organizations to a luncheon in his honor. Representa- 
tives of the Visiting Committee, the Massachusetts Horticultural 
Society, the Boston Horticultural Club, the American Horticul- 
tural Society, and the American Association of Botanic Gardens 
and Arboreta were present. The Visiting Committee presented 
him with a handsome inscribed silver tray. The staff dedicated 
to him a special publication, “A Cumulative Index to Arnoldia, 
Volumes 1-29”; and presented a symbolic plant to him: Malus 
‘Donald Wyman.’ The members of the ground crew, with Mr. 
Charles Mackey as spokesman, made their own presentation of 
a desk set. We are pleased to report that Dr. Wyman will con- 
tinue to use the offices, library, and collections of the Arnold 
Arboretum. 

On July 1, 1970, Dr. Gordon P. DeWolf officially assumed the 
role of Horticulturist of the Arnold Arboretum. Dr. DeWolf has 
been horticultural taxonomist for the Arboretum since 1967. 
His background includes training and associations at the Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts, University of Malaya in Singapore, 
the Bailey Hortorium, the University of Cambridge, England, 
and the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew. 

Mr. Heman Howard, Assistant Horticulturist, selected early 
retirement to accept a position as Horticulturist at the Heritage 
Plantation. Mr. Howard who joined the Arboretum staff in 1929 
has had a continuous and important role in mapping, labelling, 




Presentation of gift from Grounds 
Crew to Dr. Donald Wyman 
by Charles J. Mackey. 


Dr. Wyman presenting a corsage 
to Mrs. Wyman at the luncheon 
given in his honor. 


204 ARNOLDIA 


and photographing the living collections. We also lose the ser- 
vices of Mrs. Elsie Howard who has been the head mounter at 
the Arnold Arboretum. 

Three staff members completed their term appointments and 
have assumed new positions. Dr. A. Linn Bogle and Dr. Norton 
Miller, who have assisted Dr. Carroll Wood on the Generic 
Flora of the Southeastern United States project, accepted posts 
at the University of New Hampshire and the University of North 
Carolina, respectively. Dr. Paul Sorensen, Horticultural Tax- 
onomist, has joined the faculty of Northern Illinois University. 

Mr. Victor Marx, a joint appointee with the Gray Herbarium 
as librarian of the two institutions, accepted an appointment 
at the University of Oregon libraries and was succeeded by Mr. 
C. R. Long, in September. Mrs. Alice Miczo, horticultural secre- 
tary. resigned and was replaced by Mrs. Rosemary Walsh. Miss 
Stephanne Sutton, who wrote the biography of Charles Sargent, 
resigned to devote herself to a new book. She has been ap- 
pointed an Honorary Research Fellow to permit her to continue 
her studies of the life of Dr. Joseph Rock, at one time a plant 




The Director’s Report | 205 

collector for the Arnold Arboretum. Mrs. Robert Hebb resigned 
as herbarium assistant. 

Staff honors 

The Massachusetts Horticultural Society awarded Dr. Wyman 
the George Robert White Medal with the citation: 

“for 35 years horticulturist to the Arnold Arboretum, author 
of many books and innumerable articles, indefatigable 
teacher and lecturer, energetic holder of executive office at 
various times in national horticultural organizations, 
worthy recipient of many of the highest awards in horticul- 
ture at home and abroad. It is indeed fitting that in this 
year of his retirement from the Arboretum, this Society 
which he served as Trustee for 16 years, until becoming a 
Vice-President last year, should in making this award recog- 
nize him as the virtual embodiment of horticulture in New 
England.” 

This year Mr. Robert Williams, superintendent of buildings 
and grounds, reached his 25th anniversary with Harvard Uni- 
versity. Regretably, student disturbances forced the cancellation 
of the annual recognition celebration. 

Community and Professional Service 

Mr. Robert Hebb as advisor to the Brookline Massachusetts 
Conservation Committee is helping the town develop a 35-acre 
tract as a wildlife sanctuary. 

Mr. George Pride is a member of the Garden and Grounds 
Committee of Old Sturbridge Village. He has been elected a 
director of the American Rock Garden Society. 

Dr. Bernice Schubert was appointed Supervisor of the Harvard 
University Herbaria building for a three-year term. She was 
also elected to the council of the Society for Economic Botany. 

Dr. Richard Howard was elected a Fellow of the Linnaean 
Society of London and continues as chairman of the Plant 
Records Center Committee of the American Horticultural Soci- 
ety. 

Dr. Gordon DeWolf is chairman of the Committee on Vandal- 
ism established by Mayor Kevin White and the Boston Parks and 
Recreation Department of the City of Boston, and consultant 
to the Cambridge Model Cities program concerned with the 
planting of trees and the establishment of parks. He is a mem- 
ber of the Library Committee of the Massachusetts Horticul- 
tural Society and reviews books for “Choice,” a periodical of the 
Association of College and Research Libraries devoted to the 
proper selection of books for college libraries. 


Dr. Wyman’s field class. 


206 ARNOLDIA 


Horticulture 

The effects of adverse weather reported for previous years, 
dry summers and severe winter ice storms, coupled with several 
serious fires due to vandalism were revealed in increasing signs 
of damage in individual plants and in collections on the grounds 
in Jamaica Plain. Dr. DeWolf and Mr. Hebb with the coopera- 
tion of Mr. Williams and Mr. Fordham undertook the planning 
of a work program for the continued development of plantings 
on the grounds. A favorable spring season permitted early 
access to the grounds and the accomplishment of many initial 
improvements. The most conspicuous program centered around 
the area near the Administration Building and the principal 
entrance to the grounds. A new foundation planting for the 
Administration Building is in the process of development in- 
cluding seven specimens of Ilex pedunculosa which were moved 
from the grounds to the front of the building by a commercial 
contract. [One plant was estimated to weigh three tons, heavier 
than could be handled by our equipment]. Three large Sciadop- 
itys verticillata filled gaps left by the storm-damaged plants of 
Magnolia stellata. A mass planting of Pieris floribunda has been 
established at one side of the Arborway gate and a planting of 
Rhododendron carolinianum on the other side. Plants of Kalmia 
latifolia will help screen the fenced-in parking area. A large 
storm drain was placed from the Administration Building to 
the Meadow Road which we hope will handle the drainage prob- 
lem which has long plagued us. The meadow to the left of the 
Administration Building was regraded by commercial contract; 
this area will be seeded in the fall and should offer a pleasing 
vista from the entrance gate. The upper slope of this open area 
is in the process of development. Several Magnolias and three 
Picea ormorica have been planted here; Ilex glabra has been 
planted under the Liriodendrons as a focal point of green for 
midwinter. 

The azalea planting along the Meadow Road which was de- 
signed to show a sequence of bloom has been uneven in its 
growth and a test trench revealed a shallow water table and a 
hard pan of heavy clay. We have removed the top soil, added 
drainage and fill, and increased the top soil before replacing 
the plants, hoping to improve the appearance of this area. 

The area of the three ponds adjacent to the shrub collection 
also received attention. One pond had been previously cleared 
and deepened to remove the concentrated growth of aquatic 
plants. The border planting of small-flowered Vaccinium species 


The Director’s Report \ 207 

was removed and 80 plants of Rhododendron vaseyi, R. prino- 
phyllum (R. roseum ), and R. periclymenoides (R. nudiflorum ) 
were added to provide a color accent here about the time the 
lilacs are in bloom. In the same area a new planting of herb- 
aceous Hibiscus species will provide summer color. 

As plantings at the Overlook Path on Bussey Hill which had 
been severely damaged by fires in previous years were not re- 
covering properly, additional plants of Rhododendron schlippen- 
bachii, R. prinophyllum , and R. periclymenoides were added to 
improve the mass color effect. 

The Kalmia border at the foot of Hemlock Hill has been 
damaged severely in winter ice storms and dry summers of pre- 
vious years, and 25 plants of Kalmia latifolia were added to fill 
in conspicuous gaps. Extensive fire damage to the rockery in 
June 1969 required the removal of many plants from this col- 
lection and partial replanting was completed during the spring. 

The newly graded road on the Weld-Waiter tract was sealed 
with an oil surface during the spring. The new road has already 
proved to be an effective fire barrier for the frequent burnings 
experienced in this area. Along the banks of Weld and Centre 
Streets some 1100 ground cover plants were set out to serve 
as a demonstration area for bank planting and roadside areas. 
These 15 acres were resurveyed and new maps prepared for all 
plantings within this zone. 

In 1969 the Arboretum staff, as a matter of policy, stopped 
using DDT and 2-4-5-T. Safer insecticides are now being used, 
notably Sevin and Methoxychlor. We have also shifted to Sovasol 
(a petroleum distillate) as a weed killer and increased the use 
of heavy applications of wood chips as mulching material. The 
use of Casoron to control weedy grasses continues but is being 
reduced. New England is experiencing a severe plague of tent 
caterpillars at the present time, but the Arboretum collections 
have escaped the infestation by constant attention and early 
physical removal and burning of any nests which developed. 

During the past winter rabbits caused extensive damage in 
many beds, especially those on Bussey Hill. The collections of 
Cotoneaster and Fothergilla were particularly hard hit. In the 
coming winter, control of this damage by the use of a repellant 
spray will be tried. 

Increasing vandalism remains a problem. Twenty-five panes 
of glass in the Administration Building have been broken by 
stones or bullets and these are being replaced by Lexan, a break- 
resistant glass substitute. A large bronze plaque was stolen from 
the entrance gate and six of the bonsai were stolen. Litter has 


208 | ARNOLDIA 

become more abundant, and deliberate breaking of beer bottles 
increased to such a point that during May approximately 10% 
of the working hours were spent in pickup. To remedy this sit- 
uation, and in addition because of the aggregation of unkempt 
individuals on the grounds in the late afternoon hours, we re- 
tained the Burns Detective Agency to provide some protection 
through the early evening hours. A uniformed guard now patrols 
the grounds in a three wheeled Cushman vehicle which we 
purchased. 

Labelling and mapping the grounds is a continuous activity 
for the staff. A portion of the grounds is checked every year for 
the accuracy of the maps and the condition of the plants and 
labels. (The ground crew prepares duplicate labels during the 
winter). With the new plantings under way, over 42 sectional 
maps have had to be redrawn this year. The overgrowth of 
understock and the development of weed trees from seeds dis- 
tributed by birds is also a constant problem. 

The Arnold Arboretum participated in the Spring Flower 
Show of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. This year a 
pruning exhibit was prepared under the direction of Mr. Wil- 
liams and Mr. Heman Howard which featured whole shrubs 
painted to show which branches should be removed for proper 
growth, as well as examples of pruning to remedy other frequent 
problems. The exhibit won a gold medal as well as first prize 
as an educational exhibit. It was used, in part, again in a 
Boston show in June, and was restaged in part within the 
Administration Building for the groups which visited the Arbo- 
retum in the spring. A display of fruiting branches prepared 
by Mr. Heman Howard at the Fall Harvest Show of the Massa- 
chusetts Horticultural Society was awarded an educational cer- 
tificate and the John S. Ames trophy. A similar display prepared 
by Mr. Pride and Mr. Smith at the Worcester County Horticul- 
tural Society Fall show won a special award. An exhibit of 
wreath-making materials prepared by Heman Howard was 
given an Award of Appreciation by the Garden Club Federation 
at their show at Christmas. Several plants from our bonsai 
collection were exhibited by Mr. Hebb and Mrs. Derderian at the 
Bonsai exhibit and workshop of the Massachusetts Horticultural 
Society. Finally, the “Best Specimen of the Show” ribbon of the 
American Iris Society was won by Mr. Pride for a stalk of 
‘Winter Olympics’ grown in a display collection at the Case 
Estates, during the Worcester County Horticultural Society’s 
Iris show. 

The greenhouses of the Arboretum supervised by Mr. Alfred 



Site preparation for planting of several large specimens of Ilex pedun- 
culosa in front of the Administration Building. 


Fordham, the propagator, are used primarily to propagate plants 
for the living collections and for the research and teaching of 
the staff. The greenhouses are open to the public one afternoon 
a week and on special open house days during the year. The 
Arboretum staff members request seeds or propagating material 
from other institutions for the collections or for research pro- 
grams, and in turn try to fill requests from other botanical 
gardens or individual scientists for materials we grow or can 
acquire in New England or in areas of staff field work. 


210 ARNOLDIA 

During the past year the propagator received 85 shipments of 
seeds of 232 species and varieties from the United States and 
22 other countries. Living material such as stems, plants, or 
roots represented an additional 138 shipments of 524 species 
and varieties from nine countries. Although most of this 
material was requested by the staff, a sizeable amount was con- 
tributed by persons interested in our work. In response to re- 
quests or to distribute material from our collections of new 
introductions, unusual or rare plants, we sent out 47 shipments 
of seeds of 110 species and varieties to 10 countries. Living 
plant material was distributed in 148 shipments of 631 species 
and varieties to scientists or botanical institutions in 13 coun- 
tries. 

The living collections of the Arboretum often contain a single 
or only a few specimens of a given plant and a regular program 
is conducted to ensure proper representation of such items 
within the collection. Last year 373 species and varieties were 
propagated to prepare replacements for specimens which seemed 
to be failing or were in insufficient numbers in the collections. 
To provide the staff with material for taxonomic or analytic 
work, including studies in cytology and anatomy or simply for 
herbarium vouchers, the propagation department processed 79 
taxa. Another 330 items were processed simply to acquire addi- 
tional data on dormancy, root development, or response to varia- 
tion in treatments preceding germination. 

The greenhouse area and the activities in plant propagation 
are of interest to many professional visitors or groups. All 
guided tours of the Arboretum have a stop at the greenhouses 
and in addition student groups from other universities have 
regularly scheduled visits. Each year a class open to the Friends 
of the Arnold Arboretum has one or more meetings at the 
greenhouses on the subject of plant propagation. 

Mr. Fordham is chairman of the committee on new plant 
introductions of the International Plant Propagators’ Society. 
At the last annual meeting he presented papers on the propaga- 
tion of juvenile shoots from root pieces and on the propagation 
of Acer grisenvi. He served on a question and answer panel 
at the 24th American Horticultural Congress and was a speaker 
at the short courses held in Rhode Island and in Massachusetts, 
as well as at the eastern regional meeting of the American 
Rhododendron Society. 

The grounds of the Arnold Arboretum in Jamaica Plain are 
closed to driving on weekends throughout the year but are open 
to pedestrians. Although few visitors enter the Administration 



Completed planting of Ilex pedunculosa. 


Moving a large specimen of Ilex pedunculosa from the Centre Street area 
to a new site at the Administration Building. 


S 





Bmm 

jg 







The Director’s Report | 213 

Building, we have been aware of frequent attempts to reach 
us by telephone on weekends; therefore we initiated a program 
of staff duty on Saturdays and Sundays. The telephone ques- 
tions ranged from calls related to poisonous plants directed here 
from the Boston Poison Center through all types of horticultural 
queries to simple requests for directions. Since these clearly 
cannot be handled by an answering service it appears desirable 
to continue staff duty on weekends during the spring. 

Again this year a bill was filed in the legislature of the 
Commonwealth to build a major recreational facility within the 
Arnold Arboretum, this time to consist of formal play areas in- 
cluding a swimming pool. State Senator Oliver Ames and 
Representative Mrs. Mary Newman were instrumental in op- 
posing these bills. 

The Herbarium 

An herbarium is a scientific collection of dried plants or 
representative portions of a plant, arranged in a systematic 
order so that the specimens are readily available for reference 
and study. The organization of an herbarium at the Arnold 
Arboretum was almost simultaneous with the founding of the 
Arboretum and was intended to be a record of what was grow- 
ing in Jamaica Plain before plant introductions were begun in 
1872. Subsequently, the collection has grown to include the 
native, introduced, and cultivated plants from all parts of the 
world. In 1954 the herbarium was divided, the specimens 
representative of the native floras of the world being housed in 
Cambridge, and those representing plants under cultivation, 
particularly ornamentals, continued to be housed in Jamaica 
Plain. 

New specimens are obtained in a variety of ways: by in- 
dividual staff members in the course of their research; by gifts 
or purchases from collectors, often on special expeditions; or 
through an extensive exchange program with sister institutions. 
Properly prepared specimens, with accompanying labels which 
supply pertinent information, can be expected to last for long 
periods of time. The specimens can yield large quantities of data 
by general observation and, with special techniques, details of 
anatomy and chemistry. Some specimens are an historical 
record of areas which have been lost to highways, the site of 
buildings, or agricultural areas. Other specimens demonstrate 
the range of variation to be found in a plant population, or 
indicate the range of soil types on which the plant grows, or the 
extent of geographic distribution of particular plants. 


A view in the Dana Greenhouses. 


214 ARNOLDIA 

Use and Growth of Specimens Collected 

During the past year 26.974 dried specimens were mounted 
and added to the herbarium, bringing the total collection to 
935,839 sheets. Of this total, 143,365 specimens of cultivated 
plants are housed in Jamaica Plain. The Arboretum received 
22,536 specimens by exchange, gift, or subsidy, for identifica- 
tion, or as the result of staff field work. The largest numbers 
came from Asia, with the United States ranking second. We dis- 
tributed to other herbaria 15,607 sheets, primarily duplicate speci- 
mens. Thus, the herbarium continues to increase in size and 
in value. This growth continues to present a problem in Cam- 
bridge where materials in the standard steel herbarium cases 
become ever more crowded. The necessity of housing the speci- 
mens in cardboard boxes on top of the steel cases was begun 
two years ago and at present over 766 boxes, the equivalent of 
42 steel cases, are in use. The opportunity for physical expan- 
sion of the building is remote and the expedient of cardboard 
boxes, absolutely undesirable, must be continued. 

The use of the herbarium by the staff and visitors is contin- 
uous and reflects the need and the value of the collections. The 
number of scholarly visitors increased during the year due 
primarily to increased activity in the field of systematic botany. 
We prefer our specimens to be used in place yet we recognize 
the need for individuals to borrow specimens when they can 
not visit. We in turn borrow materials from other institutions. 
During the past year we sent on loan 14,764 specimens, as 161 
loans, averaging 91 specimens, to 43 United States institutions 
and 31 in foreign countries. For staff and student use we bor- 
rowed 9,129 specimens as 178 loans from 65 institutions, 33 in 
the United States and 32 abroad. An analysis of these loans 
revealed that 34 percent were for student use which accounted 
for 58 percent of the total number of specimens borrowed. 
This reflects the broad nature of student thesis problems. 

Fumigation 

Because herbarium specimens are subject to attack by insects, 
curatorial procedures involve fumigation of lots of specimens 
in the course of handling material upon acquisition for loans 
or transfers, and their storage in steel cases. Occasionally, 
fumigation of larger amounts of material is required and during 
the past year the entire Harvard University Herbaria building 
was fumigated. With the cooperation of the University Depart- 
ment of Buildings and Grounds, a contract was made with the 
Waltham Chemical Company for the fumigation. The staff was 


The Director’s Report | 215 

required to remove certain furniture and equipment from the 
building, which was then sealed and fumigated; a police guard 
was maintained to prevent entry. Employees of the Waltham 
Company then opened the building and began procedures to 
remove residual fumes by fans and with the air conditioning 
system. Officials of the company and the University Environ- 
mental Health Unit checked the building independently before 
the building was declared ready for reoccupancy. The fumiga- 
tion program was accomplished under the direction of Dr. 
Bernice Schubert. 

Research 

Four separate floristic studies are being conducted by staff 
members of the Arboretum. These include studies of the South- 
eastern United States; the state of Veracruz, in Mexico; the 
Lesser Antilles of the West Indies; and the Territory of Hong 
Kong: 

Dr. Carroll Wood and his associates, with a grant from the 
National Science Foundation, continued their studies towards 
a Generic Flora of the Southeastern United States, with portions 
of the study being published regularly in the Journal of the 
Arnold Arboretum. Treatments of the families Basellaceae, 
Cannabidaceae, Portulacaceae, and Ulmaceae along with the 
tribe Mutisieae of the Compositae were published. Completed 
and in press are studies of the Acanthaceae, Aizoaceae, Fag- 
aceae, Molluginaceae, and Urticaceae. 

Dr. Lorin Nevling, Supervisor of the combined herbaria 
of the Arnold Arboretum and the Gray Herbarium, was awarded 
a grant by the National Science Foundation to cooperate with 
botanists of the National University of Mexico to undertake 
floristic studies of the state of Veracruz. The grant will be ad- 
ministered by the Gray Herbarium. Dr. Arturo Gomez-Pompa, 
formerly a Mercer Fellow of the Arnold Arboretum, and Dr. 
Nevling will coordinate this new project. Graduate students of 
both universities will be involved in the field work as well as 
the herbarium and library studies. Several innovative tech- 
niques employing computer aids are being employed, and special 
collections of the cultivated plants are being made. 

Dr. Shiu-Ying Hu has spent the past year as a visitor to the 
Department of Botany, Chung Chi College in Hong Kong. With 
the cooperation of the members of that college, field studies in 
Hong Kong and the New Territories have resulted in the collec- 
tion of representative plants. Dr. Hu is preparing a new flora 
of the area which will include keys and descriptions, and will 


216 ARNOLDIA 

be illustrated with drawings made from fresh materials. 

Dr. Richard Howard and Miss Dulcie Powell have continued 
their work on a Flora of the Lesser Antilles of the West Indies. 
Dr. Howard made a short field trip to Montserrat in February 
to collect plants. With the cooperation of interested individuals 
in the area, new and often exciting collections of plants are 
being received for identification. Final editing of a manuscript 
dealing with the ferns and fern allies of the area prepared by 
Mr. George Proctor of the Institute of Jamaica is underway. 

Other research 

Miss Powell's studies of the plants introduced by Capt. 
William Bligh to the West Indies and to Europe was completed 
and submitted for publication. Additional papers on the mossy 
or elfin forest on Pico del Oeste in Puerto Rico by Dr. Howard 
and his collaborators have appeared in the Journal of the Arnold 
Arboretum, and others completing the series are in preparation. 

Monographic or restricted studies of genera or families of 
plants involve all of the staff. Dr. Bogle continued his work on 
the Hamamelidaceae in addition to his studies of the Nyctagin- 
aceae for the Generic Flora of the Southeastern United States. 
A special cooperative study of Geocarpon of the Caryophyllaceae 
is nearing completion. Dr. DeWolf is studying genera of the 
Moraceae, especially Ficus and Dorstenia. Dr. Elias is investiga- 
ing the foliar nectaries of various genera of the subfamily of the 
Mimosoideae of the Leguminosae, with particular reference to 
Inga and Pithecellobium. His studies also include the American 
genera Calipea and Angostura of the Rutaceae. Dr. Hartley has 
finished a manuscript on the collections he made in New Guinea 
as part of a larger phytochemical study of the flora. This ma- 
terial will be submitted for publication jointly with chemists 
from the CSIRO chemical research laboratory in Melbourne. He 
is continuing his work on the Malesian-Australasian Rutaceae 
and with Dr. Perry is examining material of the New Guinea 
species of Syzygium. Drs. Nevling and Elias have collaborated in 
palynological studies of the Mimosoid Leguminosae, especially 
the genus Calliandra where the type of pollen polyads were found 
to be correlated with an array of morphological features. Dr. 
Schubert has completed work on two floristic treatments of 
Desmodium in Africa. 

Systematic Plant Anatomy 

The wood collection of the Arnold Arboretum received addi- 
tional curatorial attention during the year when portions of the 


The Director’s Report \ 217 

collection were placed in plastic bags for easier filing. The un- 
catalogued collections of Guiana woods made by Stahel and 
those of A. C. Smith made in the Fiji Islands were classified, 
and other smaller collections previously retained as separate 
units for special studies were returned to the general collections 
and arranged systematically. Microscope slides of North Ameri- 
can Woods prepared cooperatively at North Carolina State Uni- 
versity were added to the collections, as were slides of wood of 
China collected by and obtained from Syracuse University. 

Anatomical studies of the floral nectaries of two species of 
Marcgravia from Puerto Rico were completed by Dr. Howard 
and Mrs. Roca-Garcia. This work was reported at the Interna- 
tional Botanical Congress and has been published in the 
Journal of the Arnold Arboretum. Considerable progress con- 
tinues in the studies by Dr. Howard of nodal and petiolar 
anatomy in a survey of patterns and variations in woody Dicoty- 
ledons. During the summer Mrs. Tissa Herat, a graduate stu- 
dent at Occidental College, aided Mrs. Roca-Garcia in this work. 
A special search was made for other occurrences of the “split 
lateral” trace pattern which appears to be common in the 
Gesneriaceae and Zygophyllaceae. A paper on this topic has 
been prepared for publication. 

The work of Dr. Elias on the vascularization of foliar nectaries 
in Inga and other genera of the Leguminosae was reported at 
the meetings of the American Institute of Biological Sciences. 
Mr. Mario Sousa-Sanchez has worked with seedlings and the 
development of vascular patterns in successive leaves in his 
studies of Central American species of Lonchocarpus. 

Library 

The library of the Arnold Arboretum is divided between loca- 
tions in Cambridge and Jamaica Plain in a way similar to the 
herbarium. That is, the material essential to work in horticul- 
ture and forestry is housed in Jamaica Plain while the essential- 
ly non-horticultural material is housed in Cambridge. 

In September Mr. Charles Robert Long was appointed jointly 
as head librarian of the Arnold Arboretum and Gray Herbarium 
to replace Mr. Victor Marx. Miss Jeanne Caldwell was appointed 
library assistant of the Arnold Arboretum with primary re- 
sponsibility for the library materials housed in Jamaica Plain. 
Part-time staff employees have included Mrs. Heidi Duda as 
cataloguer, Mrs. Yvonne Brown and Mrs. Kathy Bye as library 
assistants and Mrs. Joan Retsinas as secretary. Student labor 
is used to shelve, clean, and treat bindings of volumes. 


218 ARNOLDIA 


A staff library committee to aid the librarian consisting of 
Dr. L. I. Nevling and Dr. Gordon DeWolf, and Dr. Rolla Tryon 
of the Gray Herbarium staff, was appointed during the year. 
The committee will advise the librarian and his staff on the 
selection of books and the problems faced by the expanding 
library collection. There is a steady increase in new periodicals, 
new volumes, new reproductions, and in the costs of materials 
and services. Careful decisions are necessary to ensure the 
quality of the library for modern research. 

We have serious limitations of space in the library areas in 
Cambridge. Free shelf space is currently estimated at 13% . 
Professional librarians recommend a minimum of 15% for 
space in which proper housing of volumes, adjustments to addi- 
tions and expansion can be accomplished at a minimum of 
cost. As a temporary measure additional shelving has been 
purchased which will extend the library stacks into space pre- 
viously used for study tables. Additional space for shelving is 
also available in Jamaica Plain. 

The Arnold Arboretum library receives 498 periodicals which 
are issued weekly to annually. During the past year we have 
added 926 volumes and 376 pamphlets, bringing the total li- 
brary accession to 77.648 titles. We share the purchase of 
microfilms and microfiche with the Gray Herbarium and with 
other Harvard libraries so that 138 microfilm reels and 9,187 
microfiche are available for study. 

A survey of the library materials of the Arnold Arboretum 
during the year has indicated gaps in our holdings of important 
floras, monographs, and periodicals, and steps have been taken 
to acquire the missing items. This study revealed the necessity 
for the development of a shelf list for the library in Jamaica 
Plain, for the treatment of leather-bound volumes which show 
signs of ageing, and for the binding of many items within our 
holdings. For example, at the present time there are 3,027 un- 
bound volumes of periodicals and 1,400 monographs in Cam- 
bridge, and 1,343 periodicals in Jamaica Plain. This will neces- 
sitate increased expenditures in binding during the next few 
years. 

The library receives on a regular basis issues of the Gray 
Herbarium Index, Index Genericorum, the Torrey Index, and 
additions are made to the shelf list, author and title cards, and 
the Rehder Index of cultivated plants. It is estimated that 9,000 
cards are filed annually in our current program. 

Cataloguing of new volumes is handled in part by our own 
staff, but where catalogue card copy can be obtained from the 


Witches’ Broom seedlings on White Pine (Pinus strobus), all from same 
seed lot germinated in 1964. 





The Director’s Report | 221 

Library of Congress or the New York Botanical Garden in 
duplicate form, this method has also been employed. A new 
classification of field notes, plant lists, and collectors data has 
been added to the library during the year to handle these im- 
portant historical items. The Arboretum also has miscellaneous 
materials of archival value of former staff members and asso- 
ciates which number around 20,000 items. 

The volumes on the subject of forestry belonging to the 
Arnold Arboretum, which had been housed at the Harvard Forest 
in Petersham since World War II, were returned to Jamaica 
Plain two years ago. The reclassification of these volumes was 
completed during the year and the titles are now included in the 
appropriate catalogues. 

Work continues on the process of cataloguing the collection 
of forestry volumes transferred to the Arboretum from the 
Widener Library. 

The new format for Arnoldia offers the opportunity of accept- 
ing library books for review. A notice of the willingness of the 
staff to accept volumes for review has been sent to appropriate 
publishers and it is expected that review volumes may add to 
our library in several areas where we hesitate to purchase 
volumes. The library staff will accept the responsibility for 
many of the reviews or notices of publication while the pro- 
fessional staff will handle the technical volumes. 

Mr. Long attended the Librarians’ and Cataloguers’ luncheons 
held under the auspices of the Widener Library which furnish 
close contact with the many libraries of Harvard University. 
A new national organization of librarians of Botanical and 
Horticultural Libraries was formed during the year with meet- 
ings at various centers planned after the initial meeting at the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society; Mr. Long serves as chair- 
man of the Secretariat of this group. He is also chairman of 
the Public Relations Committee of the New England Library 
Association and chairman of the nominating committee for 
the Alumni Association of the Simmons College of Library 
Science. 

Travel and exploration 

The XI International Botanical Congress was held in Septem- 
ber 1969 on the campus of the University of Washington; Drs. 
Bogle, Howard, Nevling, Schubert, and Wood attended. Three 
presented papers in sessions of contributed papers or symposia. 
Normally, an international meeting abroad is the opportunity 
to visit botanic gardens, to acquire pictures for teaching pur- 


Brush Chipper. Wood chips are used for mulch. 






Lightning damage to a Canadian Hemlock on Bussey Hill. 


poses, or to consult herbaria and libraries. The west coast of 
the United States offered a similar opportunity for consultation 
or visits to the University of Washington Arboretum, the Uni- 
versities of California, the California Academy of Sciences, or 
places between the West Coast and Boston. Many foreign scien- 
tists en route to and from the Botanical Congress made stops 
at the Arboretum to use or see our collections. 

Dr. Schubert and Dr. Sorensen attended the Fourth Mexican 
Botanical Congress held in Monterey and Saltillo where Dr. 
Schubert was invited to act as chairman for one session and 
to present a paper on her work with Mexican species of Dio- 
scorea. 

Mr. George Pride used his vacation to travel around the world 
visiting botanical gardens, again photographing plants and 
scenes useful in our education program. He was able to acquire 
some plant material of potential use in our greenhouses or suf- 
ficiently hardy to live outdoors in the Arboretum collections. 


224 | ARNOLDIA 

His stops included the Hawaiian Islands. Australia, New Guinea, 
the Trobriand Islands, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and 
Denmark. 

During the past year Dr. Shiu-Ying Hu has continued field 
work associated with her project to revise a flora of Hong Kong. 

Dr. Nevling and Mr. Sousa made independent trips to Mexico 
for their respective studies of the Flora of Vera Cruz and of the 
genus Lonchocarpus. Each acquired considerable material basic 
to his studies. 

Dr. Howard visited Puerto Rico to continue his periodic ob- 
servations on the dwarf forest on Pico del Oeste in the Luquillo 
mountains, and extended his trip for a week of collecting on the 
summits of the mountains of Montserrat searching for alpine 
plants on these rarely explored peaks. 

Dr. Howard also represented the Arnold Arboretum at the 
festivities associated with the 300th anniversary celebrations 
of the founding of the Royal Botanic Garden in Edinburgh, 
Scotland. Following formal meetings, a special group made a 
study tour of Scottish gardens. Dr. Howard was able to visit the 
Botanical Garden in Brussels, Belgium, and the Royal Botanical 
Gardens at Kew, primarily to obtain additional material for his 
anatomical studies from the greenhouse collections of these 
institutions. The courtesies extended by the directors of each 
garden are gratefully acknowledged. 

Education 

The professional members of the staff of the Arnold Arbor- 
etum, as members of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and the 
Department of Biology at Harvard, are available to advise under- 
graduate and graduate students in special research courses. 
At intervals they also offer formal courses within the University 
and participate in the Harvard University Extension Course 
program. In addition, members of the staff prepare flower show 
exhibits and conduct tours of the grounds; participate in lecture 
series and offer special lectures to clubs at the Arboretum or 
elsewhere; participate in scientific meetings; speak at colleges; 
and take part in panel discussions or short courses held for 
horticulture. 

Mr. Hebb gave an Arboretum-sponsored course in “Practical 
Gardening for the Home Owner” at the Case Estates and a 
special short course in “Garden Maintenance” in Hanover, New 
Hampshire. Dr. Howard participated in the Cornell University 
— University of New Hampshire Summer Program in Marine 
Sciences at the Isles of Shoals and taught the systematic sec- 


The Directors Report | 225 

tion of a Tropical Botany Seminar in cooperation with the Uni- 
versity of Miami and the Fairchild Tropical Garden in Miami, 
Florida. He was sponsored by the American Institute of Bio- 
logical Sciences as a speaker at six colleges and universities in 
programs associated with Earth Day during the spring. The 
Association of Tropical Biology sponsored a symposium on 
Adaptive Aspects of Insular Evolution on the campus of the 
University of Puerto Rico in Mayaguez. Dr. Howard presented 
a paper on the alpine plants of the Antilles and then, with Roy 
Woodbury, led a field trip to the Maricao Forest in Western 
Puerto Rico followed by one the next day in the Luquillo Moun- 
tains in eastern Puerto Rico. 

Mr. Pride reported on his experiences in plant hunting around 
the world to the American Rock Garden Society and the Wor- 
cester Horticultural Society as well as to several garden clubs. 

Dr. Nevling and Dr. Schubert and a graduate student, Mr. 
Rodman, conducted the luncheon seminars in systematic botany 
held weekly in Cambridge. Dr. Schubert and Dr. Wood gave a 
seminar designed especially for graduate students preparing 
their first scientific papers for publication. Dr. Wood and Dr. 
Howard offered an Arboretum course for the Friends called 
“Botany in Boston’s Restaurants” in reality a practical course 
in the economic botany of foods. Dr. Wood spoke to the botan- 
ical staff at Cornell on the relationships of the flora of eastern 
North America. He took part in a symposium at the Interna- 
tional Botanical Congress on “Some floristic relationships of 
eastern North America,” and at Virginia Polytechnic in Blacks- 
burg, Virginia, on the distributional history of the biota of the 
Southern Appalachians. Dr. Wyman, Mr. Hebb, Mr. Fordham, 
and Mrs. Derderian all offered individual courses at the Arbo- 
retum or the Case Estates for the Friends. 

The Arboretum staff has also worked with student employees 
from other colleges in training programs using our facilities. 
These involved cooperative work-study programs with Antioch 
College of Yellow Springs, Ohio; Goddard College in Vermont; 
and Smith College in Northampton, Mass. Also the staff spon- 
sored the winter meeting of the New England section of the 
American Society of Horticultural Sciences in Cambridge. 
Eleven staff members served as guides on buses during the 
annual meeting of the Garden Club of America during their 
visit to the Arnold Arboretum. The staff offered a prevue show- 
ing of an exhibit of Margaret Stones’ drawings of Tasmanian 
plants published as the Endemic Flora of Tasmania; the ex- 
hibit was open to the public for two weeks in the lecture room 



Class presented at the Dana Greenhouses by Mrs. Ara Derderian in 
elementary techniques of Bonsai. 


of the Administration Building. 

A gift of money by a Friend who wishes to remain anonymous 
permitted the staff to offer the Arnold Arboretum Achievement 
Award for Botanical and Horticultural Excellence to a student 
selected by nomination from schools in the Boston area. The 
Awai’d in 1970 was made to Mr. Mark Saunders of Jamaica 
Plain High School who received a selection of books of his 
choice which would be useful in continuing his education. Mr. 
Saunders requested that the gift plants offered by the Arboretum 
as part of the award be given to the Jamaica Plain High School 
for plantings on the grounds to aid in the class work at the 
school. 

Although these are but a few of the many activities of the 
staff, they are indicative of its role in public education, an im- 
portant function of a modern arboretum. 



Bonsai Rhododendron indicum, 
which was received in March 
1966 from Ofnna Botanical Gar- 
den, Kanagaiva-Ken, Japan. 


Bonsai House. 



228 ARNOLDIA 
Case Estates 

The extensive work on the grounds in Jamaica Plain altered 
the Case Estates’ normal planting and transplanting schedule. 
Small plants propagated in the greenhouses can be set out at 
the Case Estates to grow to a larger size. Normally planting and 
transplanting is done in the spring and in the fall. As the 
plants develop in Weston they are pruned to acquire a satis- 
factory form and if they flower they are checked for accuracy 
of identification, and their need is considered for the plantings 
in Jamaica Plain. 

In anticipation of the Centennial of the Arnold Arboretum in 
1972, the staff has prepared a larger than usual number of 
special plants for distribution to other botanical gardens, to 
special groups for possible commemorative plantings, and as 
gifts to the Friends. Three new areas of land were opened dur- 
ing the spring, two of which were immediately filled with con- 
tainer-grown stock for further growth. All of these trees were 
staked and have received special attention. A third area which 
will be used during the next planting season was ploughed and 
sown to rye grass. 

Nearly every year we find some material in the nurseries 
that are surplus to our needs. This material is offered to Har- 
vard’s other educational institutions; to the Boston Park Depart- 
ment and to the town of Weston. This year plants were ac- 
cepted by the Medical School area. Additional plants were given 
to Wellesley College, the State College at Bridgewater, and to 
the Friends of the Arnold Arboretum. Special plants of Meta- 
sequoia glyptostroboid.es were supplied to Franklin Pierce Col- 
lege for instructional use on their grounds. Two truckloads of 
trees and shrubs were contributed to the Roxbury-Dorchester 
beautification program as a part of the continued interest of 
Mrs. Augusta Bailey. Nine selected groups of plants were made 
available to WGBH-TV Channel 2 for their annual benefit auc- 
tion; we are pleased that these plants, most of which are not 
available through local nurseries, draw high bids. 

Plants in the display beds of mulching materials had grown 
beyond desirable size for the educational exhibit and accordingly 
one-half of the display was renovated. Several kinds of edging 
strips are being employed to separate areas of mulch materials. 
(Small shrubs have been used in the mulch beds to emphasize 
the proper use of mulches.) 

The perennial garden, which has been called a low main- 
tenance garden, reached the point where additional maintenance 
was required. Again, individual shrubs had grown beyond a 


The Director’s Report | 229 

desirable size for demonstration purposes. Mr. Hebb began a 
study of the perennial garden with the idea of using the neces- 
sary redevelopment as a project for one of next year’s class 
programs. Many plants are scheduled to be removed from the 
perennial garden and younger plants have been purchased or 
propagated for fall planting. 

Herbarium specimens from the rock garden, the greenhouses, 
and the vegetable and flower gardens on the Case Estates, as 
well as from the nurseries, were prepared in multiple sets for 
the Arboretum herbarium and for distribution to other institu- 
tions. 

Each year a larger number of requests are received for special 
meetings or tours of the Case Estates. The lecture room in the 
Red School House is made available to such groups as the 
American Hemerocallis Society, the American Rock Garden 
Society, or the Worcester County Horticultural Society, when 
such a meeting is associated with a tour of the grounds or a 
study of the special plantings. Lecture series and classes open 
to the Friends are also held in this room, which regrettably can- 
not accommodate more than forty people. The Harvard Uni- 
versity College Teas Association has met in Jamaica Plain dur- 
ing the past two years; this year they requested that their spring 
meeting be held in Weston. Fortunately, a fine spring day coin- 
cided with their scheduled meeting and the event could be held 
outdoors. When the weather is inclement, the bam, where 
mechanical equipment is maintained, can be used in lieu of 
a large meeting room. Several garden clubs from the New 
England states received guided tours of the Case Estates, and 
the grounds were used for special meetings by the Harvard Law 
School and the Harvard Librarians Association. 

A general Open House for the public was held in May with 
good attendance. We have noticed that when an Open House 
is announced in the Boston and suburban papers, visitation 
increases noticeably on the days before and immediately after 
the event. 

Additional plantings have been made in the rock garden area 
maintained at the Case Estates. Mr. Pride, during a tour around 
the world, was able to obtain seeds and plants from native loca- 
tions as well as from other botanic gardens for trial in the Case 
Estates plantings. Members of the American Rock Garden Soci- 
ety have been particularly generous in supplying unusual plants 
for this collection. A large selection of species and clones of 
Sedum and Sempervivum taxa for trial were the gift of the Oak- 
hill Gardens of Dallas, Oregon. 



ROXBURY-DORCHESTER BEAUTIFICATION PROGRAM 


George Pride and Mrs. Augusta Bailey inspecting Seaver Street area in 
Roxbury for potential community park. 


Michigan Avenue community garden after four years of hard work. 



Fence finally installed around Seaver Street area 






Beauty spreads to the next corner on Michigan Avenue. One year’s effort. 


mmam 

SARSTSXH-S 5 

mutsrrs 


fmsE 






1 


sr * — 


r 






Getting children involved in “Window Park,” Nonuell Street area in 
Dorchester. 


Inspecting children’s efforts in Norwell Street “Window Park” area. 


234 | ARNOLDIA 
Mercer Research Fellows 

A portion of the income from the bequest of Martha Dana 
Mercer to the Arnold Arboretum is applied each year to bring 
scholars to the Arboretum to work with specific staff members 
and to use the collections of living plants, the herbarium, and 
the library. Applications for these awards, known as Mercer 
Research Fellowships, may be submitted at any time and are 
awarded as funds are available for a few months or for periods 
not exceeding two years. Candidates may be undergraduates, 
predoctoral students accepted in the Graduate School of Arts 
and Sciences, or postdoctoral students. The following persons 
received Mercer Fellowships for all or part of the last year. 
Their affiliation and field of interest is indicated : 

Lucy Dos Passos, Occidental College. Horticultural taxonomy; 

plants of the Boston Public Garden. 

Rukmani Herat, Occidental College. Vascular patterns of nodes 
and petioles. 

Tissa Herat, Occidental College. The Theaceae and the Flora 
of Ceylon. 

Syed M. A. Kazmi, Peshawar University, Pakistan. The Boragin- 
aceae of Pakistan; basic botanical bibliography of Pakistan 
and adjacent areas. 

Robert C. Kennedy, University of New Hampshire. Propagation 
of woody plants by seeds. 

Madeleine Ly-Tio-Fane, Sugar Research Institute, Mauritius. 

Botanists and plant introduction via Mauritius. 

Nancy M. Page, Stanford University. Plant propagation; land- 
scape design. 

Mario Sousa-Sanchez, University of Mexico. Graduate studies 
with a thesis on Lonchocarpus (Leguminosae). 

Margaret H. Stone, Bailey Hortorium. Library and herbarium 
research. 

The Friettds of the Arnold Arboretum 

The Friends of the Arnold Arboretum is an informal group 
of people who by annual or occasional gifts support our work. 
In addition to financial support, we receive from the Friends 
gifts of books and plants, or artifacts of botanical or horticul- 
tural value. 

During the past year, largely through the efforts of Mr. Pride 
and Mrs. Pelkus, invitations to join the Friends were sent to 
the membership of groups with similar or compatible interests. 
We are pleased that the contributing membership is now over 


A view in the loiv maintenance garden at the Case Estates. 





236 [ ARNOLDIA 

1,100 persons, most of whom are from Massachusetts, with 
representatives from 34 other states and Canada. 

The gifts of the Friends are used to support horticultural and 
other work with the living collections in Jamaica Plain and 
Weston. Gifts are tax deductible within the usual federal 
regulations. The Arboretum endowment has been built over 
the years through such gifts and it is these funds which support 
our every activity. A number of Friends wish their gifts to be 
accumulated as special gifts to be made during the centennial 
year 1972 at which time they will be announced. 

Friends receive a free subscription to Arnoldia and are invited 
to participate in classes and to attend lectures at special rates. 
Six special events exclusively for the Friends were held during 
the past year: (1) a lecture followed by a tasting of Alsatian 
wines; (2) gift day when a collection of orchid plants were 
given to Friends many of whom later attended a Cattleya work- 
shop; (3) preview visit to the exhibit of paintings of the plants 
of Tasmania by Margaret Stones; (4) gift day when surplus 
plants from the Arboretum were distributed; (5) “Evening with 
Friends” and (6) Lecture Series; “Meet the Staff” talks by Miss 
Powell and Messrs. Elias, Hebb, Long, Pride and Wyman. To 
show our appreciation to the Friends for their support we are 
continuing to develop our program for them and hope to create 
a more formal organization before 1972 — our centennial year. 

Grants 

A grant from the National Science Foundation to support the 
work of Dr. Carroll Wood on the Generic Flora of the South- 
eastern United States was renewed during the year. Dr. Lorin 
Nevling also received an NSF grant to work on the flora of 
Vera Cruz. Grants from the NSF were also in effect during the 
year to support the field work of Dr. Howard, and the works of 
Dr. DeWolf on taxonomy of tropical American and African figs. 

Publications 

The Journal of the Arnold Arboretum was begun in 1920 as 
a quarterly publication primarily to report the scientific studies 
of the staff and the students of the Arboretum. With the first 
issue in 1970 the Journal began its fifty-first volume and the 
Harvard Alumni Bulletin paid tribute to this half century by 
noting: 

“The Bulletin, having just reached its 71st birthday, 

wishes to congratulate another Harvard publication, 





Mulch display beds at the Case Estates during renovation. 


the Journal of the Arnold Arboretum which is celebrat- 
ing its 50th anniversary. Published quarterly, the 
Journal started as an outlet for the scientific work of 
the staff of the Arnold Arboretum. Now, only five 
editors later, it enjoys high reputation in the botanical 
world for the articles it contains, and for editorial 
excellence.” 

With the new volume the cover has been changed in color and 
is decorated with a drawing of the Golden Larch. Four issues 
appeared during the year with 33 articles by 36 authors and a 
total of 605 pages. Dr. Bernice G. Schubert is the editor. 

Arnoldia 

Arnoldia, another publication of the staff, also experienced 
changes during the year. First issued in several consecutive 
series beginning in 1911 as the Bulletin of Popular Information, 



The Director’s Report | 239 

the title was changed in 1940 to Arnoldia. For 29 years Dr. 
Donald Wyman served as principal editor and each of the 12 
issues during the year considered a single topic of horticultural 
interest. With his retirement, Dr. Wyman passed on the respon- 
sibility of Arnoldia to Miss Stephanne Sutton, who suggested 
a publication of different format which would contain several 
appropriate articles on a schedule six times a year. Mr. Chris- 
topher Reed redesigned the publication and the photographic 
covers are now familiar to readers. Each issue will contain 
approximately 32 pages and the price was increased to a real- 
istic figure of $3.50. We extend our special thanks to Mr. 
Howard Allgaier of the Botanical Museum who has produced 
Arnoldia from handset type for many years. The new printer 
will be the Harvard University Printing Office. 

The Index 

The staff collaborated to prepare a cumulative index to the 
29 volumes of Arnoldia edited by Dr. Wyman. We are indebted 
to Mrs. Robert Hebb of the Arboretum staff and Miss Sonia 
Adrouny, now a graduate student at the University of Massa- 
chusetts, for their hard work in preparing the entries. 

Biography 

Miss Stephanne Sutton completed the manuscript of her 
biography of Charles Sprague Sargent, the first director of the 
Arnold Arboretum. The book will be published by the Harvard 
University Press in November 1970. Miss Sutton resigned her 
present position at the end of the fiscal year to be free to write 
and travel. Her new corporation title is Honorary Research 
Fellow. 

The Board of Overseers Committee to Visit the Arnold Arboretum 

A part of the supervision that the administration of Harvard 
University offers the Arnold Arboretum is the Committee to 
Visit the Arnold Arboretum, created by the Board of Overseers. 
One alumni-elected member of the Board of Overseers is given 
the assignment of assessing the activities and functions of the 
Arnold Arboretum and its staff. That individual serves as chair- 
man of a committee which visits the Arboretum in its several 
locations twice a year. During the past year a fall meeting was 
held in Jamaica Plain and at the Case Estates, and the spring 
meeting at Jamaica Plain and at Cambridge. Committee mem- 
bers representing horticulture and botany may be familiar in 
their occupations with commercial horticulture, botanical 


Stachys grandiflora as part of new planting in mulch display beds at the 
Case Estates. 



The Director’s Report | 241 

gardens, or publications. One member is usually a resident of 
the town of Weston, the location of the Case Estates; the chair- 
man of the Boston Department of Parks and Recreation is an 
official member. 

Members of the Visiting Committee have aided the Director 
many times in the past on special problems. The staff is par- 
ticularly indebted this year to Mrs. Richard Pratt who served 
as local chairman for the annual meeting of the Garden Club 
of America held in Boston. The members who attended the 
meeting toured the Arnold Arboretum, and as souvenirs of their 
visit were given packets of seeds and copies of publications. 
Mrs. Pratt arranged for the local members of the Visiting Com- 
mittee to aid as hostesses during the visit to the Arboretum. 
She also recruited members of the Garden Club of Chestnut Hill 
to help finance refreshments for the visiting group and to fill 
envelopes with seeds stratified in advance for ready germination. 

The Visiting Committee during the academic year 1969-70 
included : 

George Putnam, Chairman, Boston, Massachusetts 

George R. Clark, Vice-Chairman, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Mrs. George L. Batchelder, Jr., Beverly, Massachusetts 

Mrs. Ralph Bradley, Canton, Massachusetts 

Frederick D. Brown, Webster, Massachusetts 

Mrs. Paul C. Cabot, Needham, Massachusetts 

Joseph Curtis, Commissioner, Boston Parks and Recreation 

Department 

Mrs. Dudley B. Dumaine, Weston, Massachusetts 

William Flemer, III, Princeton, New Jersey 

Mrs. Julian W. Hill, Wilmington, Delaware 

Henry B. Hosmer, Boston, Massachusetts 

Seth L. Kelsey, Greenville, Delaware 

Russell E. Larson, University Park, Pennsylvania 

Milford R. Lawrence, Falmouth, Massachusetts 

Mrs. John E. Lockwood, Bedford, New York 

Harold E. Moore, Jr., Ithaca, New York 

R. Henry Norweb, Jr., Mentor, Ohio 

Mrs. Richard W. Pratt, Chestnut Hill, Massachusetts 

Mrs. Donald P. Ross, Montchanin, Delaware 

Francis W. Sargent, Boston, Massachusetts 

George Taylor, Kew, England 

Mrs. Julian Underwood, South Dartmouth, Massachusetts 
Mrs. G. Kennard Wakefield, Milton, Massachusetts 
Nathaniel Whittier, Medfield, Massachusetts 
Mrs. John G. Williams, Gladwyne, Pennsylvania 


Bergenia cordifolia as part of new planting in mulch display beds at the 
Case Estates. 


242 ARNOLDIA 


Bibliography of Published Writings of the Staff 
July 1, 1969 — June 30, 1970 

Anonymous. A cumulative index to Arnoldia; Volumes 1-29 (1941- 
1969). 87p. Arnold Arb. publ. 1970. 

Bogle, A. L. Flower and pseudanthium in Distylium (Hamamelid- 
aceae). Xlth International Botanical Congress. Abstracts, p. 
17, Aug. 1969. 

. The genera of Portulacaceae and Basellaceae in the south- 
eastern United States. Jour. Arnold Arb. 50: 566-598. Oct. 1969. 
t Brizicky, G. K. Subgeneric and sectional names: their starting 
points and early sources. Taxon 18(6): 643-660. 1969. 

Derderian, C. E. Wintering bonsai at the Arnold Arboretum. Bonsai 
3(4): 12-13. 1970. 

DeWolf, G. P., Jr. A new species of Ficus from Suriname. Jour. 
Arnold Arb. 50: 478-480. July 1969. 

— . The problem of Ficus dicranostyla Mildbr. Kew Bull. 23: 

501-506. 1969. 

. What can we do about pollution? Arnoldia 30: 33-55. March 

1970. Partially reprinted in Gourd Seed 31(2): 17. 1970. 

. Basic books for the library. Arnoldia 30: 107—113. May 1970. 

. [Review ofl Man, nature, and history. Arnoldia 30: 120. 

May 1970. 

. The genus Fittonia (Acanthaceae). Baileya 17(1): 34—37. 

1970. 

Elias, T. S. Menyanthaceae. In: Flora of Panama by R. E. Woodson, 
Jr. and R. W. Schery. Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 56: 29-32. 1969. 
— . In: Chromosome numbers of Phanerogams. 3. Ann. Missouri 
Bot. Gard. 56: 472. 1969. 

— . The genus of Ulmaceae in the southeastern United States. 
Jour. Arnold Arb. 51: 18-40. 1970. 

. A monograph of the genus Hamelia (Rubiaceae). Disserta- 
tion Abstracts 30: 3501. 1970. 

Fordham, A. J. Germination of woody legume seeds with imperme- 
able seed coats. Australian Plants 4: 294—295, 327. 1968. 

. Cedrus deodara ‘Kashmir’ and its propagation by cuttings. 

Internat. PI. Prop. Soc. Comb. Proc. 18: 319-321. 1968. 

. The Deodar Cedar; two new hardier forms. Plants and 

Gardens 25(2): 33. 1969. 

. Propagation of rhododendrons. Quarterly Bull, of the Am. 

Rhododendron Soc. 23: 162-165. July 1969. 

. The propagation of Elliottia racemosa. Am. Nurseryman 

130(4): 18, 125, 126, 127. Aug. 1969. Gardener’s Chronicle 
166(19): 14-15. Nov. 1969. 

. Propagation of woodv plants by seed. Univ. of Wash. Arb. 

Bull. 32: 90-92, 101. Winter, 1969. 

. The National Association of Propagating Nurserymen. Plant 

Propagator. 15(4): 2-10. 1970. 



The visit of the Garden Club of America to the Arnold Arboretum 


& R. C. Kennedy. The International Plant Propagators’ Society 

— Nineteenth Annual Meeting. Arnoldia 30: 117-119. May 
1970. 

. Acer griseum and its propagation. Trees 30: 8—9. 1970. 

Hartley, T. G. A revision of the genus Flindersia (Rutaceae). Jour. 
Arnold Arb. 50: 481-526. 1969. 

. Additional notes on the Malesian species of Zanthoxylum 

(Rutaceae). Jour. Arnold Arb. 51: 423-426. 1970. 

Hebb, R. S. Notes from the Arnold Arboretum. Arnoldia 30: 25—26. 
Jan. 1970. 

. Notes from the Arnold Arboretum. Arnoldia 30: 72-74. 

March 1970. 

— . Notes from the Arnold Arboretum. Arnoldia 30: 116. May 

1970. 

Howard, R. A. The saccate nectaries of Marcgravia. Xlth Interna- 
tional Botanical Congress. Abstracts, p. 96. Aug. 1969. 

. A checklist of cultivar names used in the genus Lantana. 

Arnoldia 29: 73—109. Oct. 1969. 


244 ARNOLDIA 


, R. J. Wagner & A. B. Wagner. The ecology of an elfin forest 

in Puerto Rico, 9. Chemical studies of colored leaves. Jour. 
Arnold Arb. 50: 556-565. Oct. 1969. 

. The Director’s Report. The Arnold Arboretum during the 

fiscal year ended June 30, 1969. Jour. Arnold Arb. 50: 629- 
649. Oct. 1969. 

& D. A. Powell. Some useful plants of the West Indies in an 

historical setting. Herbarist 35: 32^10. 1969. 

. The ecology of an elfin forest in Puerto Rico, 10. Notes on 

two species of Marcgravia. Jour. Arnold Arb. 51: 41-55. Jan. 
1970. 

. [Review of] The book of spices. Arnoldia 30: 29—31. Jan. 

1970. 

. Wanted: information on the distribution of cultivated plants. 

BioScience 20(2): 79-86. Jan. 1970. 

. Lantana camara — A prize and a peril. Am. Hort. Mag. 49: 

31—37. Winter 1970. 

Hu, S. Y. Explorations for new daylilies in South Korea and Japan 
-June 10 -June 23, 1969. Hemerocallis Jour. 23(4): 12-30. 
1969. 

. Report from Hong Kong. Arnoldia 30: 9—22. Jan. 1970. 

. Notes on the genus Ilex Linnaeus. Arnoldia 30: 67—71. 

March 1970. 

. Dendrobium in Chinese medicine. Economic Botany 24: 

165-174. April 1970. 

Kennedy, R. C. & A. J. Fordham. The International Plant Propaga- 
tors’ Society — Nineteenth Annual Meeting. Arnoldia 30: 117- 
119. 1970. 

Long, C. R. [Review of] The complete book of growing plants from 
seed. Libr. Jour. 94(16): 3076. 15 Sept. 1969. 

. [Review of] Seaweed of Cape Cod and the Islands. Libr. 

Jour. 94(16): 3076. 15 Sept. 1969. 

. [Review of] A world of islands. Libr. Jour. 94(17): 3441. 

1 Oct. 1969. 

. Public relations: report on NELA workshop. North Counties 

Libraries 12(5): 1-7. 1969. 

Public relations: a resume. NELA Newsletter 1(5): 76-79. 

1969. 

& A. A. Tappe. A survey of the Framingham public library 

system. 85p. privately printed. Boston. 1970. 

. [Review of] Dr. Alexander Garden of Charles Town. The 

quest for plants. The early horticulturists. Arnoldia 30: 75- 
77. March 1970. 

. [Review of] The country garden. Libr. Jour. 95(7): 1384. 

1 April 1970. 

. [Review of] Poso del Mundo. Libr. Jour. 95(7): 1368. 

1 April 1970. 

. [Review of] The green thumb book of fruit and vegetable 

gardening. Libr. Jour. 95(10): 1852. 15 May 1970. 

. [ Review of] Succulents and cactus. Libr. Jour. 95(10): 1852. 

15 May 1970. 

. [Review of] Evolution and design in the plant kingdom. 

Libr. Jour. 95(10): 1852. 15 May 1970. 


Liatris spicata at the Case Estates. 





246 ARNOLDIA 

Miller, N. G. & D. H. Vitt. Additional Bryophytes from sinkholes in 
Alpena County, Michigan, including Orthotrichum pallens new 
to eastern North America. Michigan Botanist 9(2): 87-94. 
1970. 

Nevling, L. I., Jr. The ecology of an elfin forest in Puerto Rico, 12. 
A new species of Gonocalyx (Ericaceae). Jour. Arnold Arb. 51: 
221-227. 1970. 

Powell, D. A. & R. A. Howard. Some useful plants of the West Indies 
in an historical setting. Herbarist 35: 32^0. 1969. 

Pride, G. H. [Review of] Making things grow. Arnoldia 30: 28-29. 
Jan. 1970. 

. Three seasons of lilies. Horticulture 48(3): 30—32, 60. March 

1970. 

Roca-Garcia, H. Weeds: A link with the past. 1. The plantain. 
Arnoldia 30: 23-24. 1970. 

. Weeds: A link with the past. 2. Purslane. Arnoldia 30: 

114-115. 1970. 

Sousa, M. Influencia de las Aves en la Vegetacion de la Laguna del 
Majahal en Los Tuxtlas, Ver. Bol. Soc. Bot. Mexico 30: 97— 
112. 1969. 

. Las Colecciones Botanicas de C. A. Purpus en Mexico. 

Periodo 1898-1925. Univ. of Cal. Pub. in Bot. 51: 1—36. I-IX. 
1969. 

Sutton, S. B. Das Arnold Arboretum. Garten 1: 13-15. 1970. 

Credited incorrectly to R. A. Howard by the translator. 

Wood, C. E. Plumbago auriculata versus P. capensis (Plumbagin- 
aceae). Baileya 16(4): 137—139. 1968. 

. Some floristic relationships of eastern North America. Xlth 

International Botanical Congress. Abstracts, p. 242. Aug. 1969. 

. Man’s threat to himself. Roanoke College Bulletin 49(6): 

1-5. 1970. 

Wyman, D. The best shrubs for dry or wet soils. Am. Nurseryman 
130(3): 12-13, 56-59. 1 Aug. 1969. 

. Espaliered plants. Arnoldia 29: 49—59. 29 Aug. 1969. 

. Espaliers. Horticulture 47(9): 28—29, 45; Sept. ’69. 

. The best plants with colored foliage. Am. Nurseryman 

130(5): 12-13, 64-72. 1 Sept. 1969. 

. The mountain-ashes. Arnoldia 29: 61—68. 12 Sept. 1969. 

. The best plants for highways. Am. Nurseryman 130(7): 

12-13, 110-111. 1 Oct. 1969. 

. The best of the dwarf evergreens. Am. Nurseryman 130(9): 

10-11, 46-56. 1 Nov. 1969. 

& F. D. Wyman. Christmas decorations from woody plant 

materials. Arnoldia 29: 111—132. 14 Nov. 1969. 

& F. D. Wyman. Christmas decorations from the garden. 

Horticulture 47(12): 24-25; Dec. 1969. 

. The best trees for narrow streets. Am. Nurseryman 130(11): 

10-12, 53-54. 1 Dec. 1969. 

. Hedges for special purposes. Arnoldia 29: 135—146. 26 

Dec. 1969. 


Summer view of the meadow with Helianthus tuberosus. 











jgjL ‘ ^ si.-"' * .• > TC "* • • s *sfNls?< 





fF J^ll 

tjsr* 


,( MI . ' V . ^gB 

A. * 


p 1 ®? 1 .' '^*“ 


ralltir i Tim 

gpr^ 









The Director s Report | 249 

. Seventy five years of growing rhododendrons in the Arnold 

Arboretum. Quarterly Bull, of the Am. Rhododendron Soc. 
24(1): 24-32. Jan. 1970. 

. The best of the pest-free ornamentals. Am. Nurseryman 

131(2): 14-15,71-72. 15 Jan. 1970. 

. The flowering dogwood. Horticulture 48(5): 44-45. May 

1970. 

— - — . Horticulture at the Arnold Arboretum, 1936—1970. Arnoldia 
30: 81-99. 15 May 1970. 

. The complete Metasequoia story. Am. Nurseryman 131(12): 

12-13, 28-36. 15 June 1970. 

Richard A. Howard, Director 


Staff of the Arnold Arboretum • Spring 1970 

Front row: 

Dr. Lily M. Perry; Miss Stephanne B. Sutton; Miss Jeanne B. Caldwell; 
Miss Nancy M. Page; Mrs. Emilie McCarthy; Miss Victoria Bell; Miss 
Georgette Frazer (Mrs. S. Kaye); Miss Alice W. Kellogg (Mrs. M. T. Hal- 
laran); Mrs. Elna D. Grinbergs; Miss Pamela A. Bruns; Mrs. Rosemary 
Walsh; Mrs. Nancy Dunkly; Miss Dulcie Powell; Dr. Bernice G. Schubert; 
Mrs. Helen Roca-Garcia. 

Middle row: 

Dr. Richard A. Howard; Alfred J. Fordham; Harry Hill; Ralph Benotti; 
Arturs Ginters; Charles Mackey; Dr. Syed M. A. Kazmi; Dr. A. Linn 
Bogle; Dr. Gordon P. DeWolf, Jr.; Heman A. Howard; Mrs. Mildred Pel- 
kus; Miss Virginia Savage; Mrs. Winnifred Hebb; Robert S. Hebb; Dr. 
Lorin I. Nevling; William E. Grime; Willie Casterlow; Vincent Antonovich; 
Ernest Abolins; Peter Ward; Angus MacNeil; Walter Polesky. 

Back row: 

Arturs Norietis; George H. Pride; Thomas M. Kinahan; Dr. Thomas S. 
Elias; Dr. Carroll E. Wood; Clarence Parker; Daniel Reuben; Joachim 
Hourihan; Michael Canoso; Scott Vonnegut; Dr. Paul Sorensen; Dr. Thom- 
as G. Hartley; Dr. Norton G. Miller; Carl Joplin; William Schwabe; Rob- 
ert G. Williams; Maurice Sheehan; Michael Gormley; Henry Goodell; 
Timothy O’ Leary; Domingo Rivera. 


Photo: Hutchins Photography, Inc. 


250 ARNOLDIA 


Staff of the Arnold Arboretum 

1969-1970 

Richard Alden Howard, Ph.D., Arnold Professor of Botany, Pro- 
fessor of Dendrology, and Director 

Karl Sax, S.D., Professor of Botany, Emeritus 


Alfred Linn Bogle, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Pamela Anne Bruns, B.A., Artist 
Jeanne B. Caldwell, B.A., Library Assistant 
Michael Anthony Canoso, M.S., Senior Curatorial Assistant * 
Constance Elizabeth Derderian, Honorary Curator of the Bonsai 
Collection 

Gordon Parker DeWolf, Jr., Ph.D., Horticultural Taxonomist 
Thomas Sam Elias. Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Alfred James Fordham, Propagator 
William Ed Grime, B.A., Curatorial Assistant * 

Thomas Gordon Hartley, Ph.D., Associate Curator 
Robert Stephen Hebb, S.B., Assistant Horticulturist 
Winnifred Parker Hebb, S.B., Herbarium Assistant 
Heman Arthur Howard, Assistant Horticulturist 
Shiu-Ying Hu, Ph.D., Botanist 

Thomas Matthew Kinahan, Superintendent, Case Estates 
Charles Robert Long, M.A., Librarian * (Appointed Sept. 1, 
1969) 

Victor Ferenc Marx, M.Libr., Librarian * (Resigned Sept. 1969) 
Norton George Miller, Ph.D., Assistant Curator 
Lorin Ives Nevling, Jr., Ph.D., Curator and Supervisor of the 
Herbaria * 

Dulcie Alicia Powell, M.A., Botanist 
George Howard Pride, M.A., Associate Horticulturist 
Helen Roca-Garcia, A.M., Research Assistant 
Bernice Giduz Schubert, Ph.D., Curator and Editor 
Paul Davidsen Sorensen, Ph.D., Assistant Horticultural Taxon- 
omist 

Stephanne Barry Sutton, A.B., Archivist 
Robert Gerow Williams, B.S., Superintendent 
Carroll Emory Wood, Jr., Ph.D., Curator 
Donald Wyman, Ph.D., Horticulturist 

* Appointed jointly with the Gray Herbarium. 


Notes from the Arnold Arboretum 
Plant Registrations 


Every so often during the past 9 years new cultivars registered 
by the Arnold Arboretum have been published in Arnoldia. 
With the new format for Arnoldia, these will be published an- 
nually in the November issue along with the Director’s Report. 

Included in this issue are those cultivars which have been 
registered between January 1, 1969, and October 1. 1970. All 
correspondence concerned with more information, plants, or 
propagating material of these plants, should be directed to the 
various originators or introducers, not the Arnold Arboretum. 

Abies concolor ‘Gables Weeping’ 

This originated as a seedling in 1951 in the nursery of Joseph 

B. Gable, Stewartstown, Pa., and was introduced in 1966 by 
Mr. & Mrs. Donald Smith of the Watnong Nursery, Morris 
Plains, N. J. Mr. Smith writes, “To my knowledge this is the 
only truly dwarf weeping form of Abies concolor. At 18 years 
it is 16" high and 20" across.” 

Carissa grandiflora ‘Seminole Queen’ 

A low, compact form of Carissa grandiflora introduced in 
1954 by the Seminole Nurseries, 7800 Seminole Blvd., Seminole, 
Fla. In the words of Mr. Richard C. Johnson of Seminole Nur- 
series, it “thrives in all except wet and poorly drained soils. 

C. ‘Seminole Queen’ is distinguished by its glossy dark green 
foliage and has a medium-sized, round leaf. It is self-branching 
and has a dense, low-growing compact habit of growth.” Hardy 
in Zone 10. 

Carya ovata ‘Holden’ 

This has been registered for the Holden Arboretum, Sperry 
Road, Mentor, Ohio, by Dr. Peter A. Hyypio of the L. H. Bailey 
Hortorium, Cornell University, Ithaca, N. Y. The original plant, 
which is well over 25 years old, was first noticed in 1966 grow- 
ing at the corner of Main and Baldwin Sts., Hudson, Ohio. 


251 



252 | ARNOLDIA 

In Dr. Hyypio’s words, “The tree has an undivided stem from 
which rather slender lateral branches arise and grow upward 
at a rather wide angle. As the limbs lengthen they begin to arc 
and droop; at their tips almost all twigs curve upward. This un- 
usual pendulous branching habit gives the tree a tall slender 
conical form which is attractive both in the winter and summer 
condition.” Hardy in Zone 4. 

Cercis canadensis ‘Royal White’ 

This originated with the late Mr. Royal Oakes, Bluffs, Scott 
County, 111. as a seedling from a native tree in Scott County, 
111. The age of the original plant is unknown, but it first flowered 
about 1940 and was selected before 1950. It was introduced 
in 1950 by the Louis Gerardi Nursery, R.F.D. 1. O’Fallon, 111. 

Prof. Joseph C. McDaniel of the University of Illinois at 
Urbana says the plant produces abundant white flowers opening 
somewhat earlier in the season and slightly larger than C. 
canadensis alba. The plant is more compact, matures earlier, 
and the leaves are wider-angled at the base of the blade. Plants 
are cross-fertile, but incompatible to their own pollen. Although 
fully hardy at Urbana, 111., the northern limit is unknown. 


Arboretum Notes I 253 


Cercis canadensis ‘Silver Cloud’ 

Mr. Theodore R. Klein, Yellow-Dell Nursery, Crestwood, Ky. 
selected this plant in 1964 from a row of seedling liners orig- 
inally from Tennessee. 

Mr. Klein writes, “The plant produces few flowers and is 
principally noteworthy for its decorative foliage. Most leaves 
on all branches are margined or splashed with silvery white 
variegation. Plants are less vigorous than typical C. canadensis 
and the branches are more slender. They seem to do best if 
planted in light shade and out of strong winds.” 

Cornus stolonifera ‘Isanti’ 

This is an introduction from the Minnesota Landscape Arbo- 
retum, Box 132-1, Route 1, Chaska, Minn, which was first ob- 
served in 1963 as a sport on a plant growing at the Cedar Creek 
Natural History Area, East Bethel, Anoka Co., Minn. 

Mr. Albert G. Johnson, Research Fellow, University of Minne- 
sota describes the plant as having a dense, compact habit of 
growth. Branchlets are fine and produce a dense broomy shrub. 
The growth rate is about half that of normal C. stolonifera. 

Chionanthus virginicus ‘Floyd’ 

This originated as a chance seedling in the Sonnemann Ex- 
perimental Garden, 605 N. 5th St., Vandalia, 111., around 1945. 
It is named for the late W. Floyd Sonnemann by Prof. J. C. 
McDaniel, Department of Horticulture, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, 111., who will introduce it in 1971- 
72. Prof. McDaniel writes, “The distinguishing feature is its 
more dense and upright growth habit. Compared with typical 
seedlings, this clone has more branching on new growth, 
branches emerge at an acute angle and grow straighter, produc- 
ing a shrub taller than broad. It is staminate, with a few perfect 
flowers in its large panicles.” Hardy in Zone 4. 

Daphne burkwoodii ‘Carol Mackie’ 

This sport of Daphne burkwoodii originated in the garden of 
Mrs. Carol Mackie, Far Hills, N. J., in 1962. The original plant 
is now in the possession of Mr. and Mrs. Donald P. Smith, Wat- 
nong Nursery, Morris Plains, N. J., who introduced it in 1968. 
Mr. Smith reports that the leaves are green with a clean rim 
of gold all the way around each leaf. A small plant of this is 
now in the nursery at the Arnold Arboretum and shows promise 
of being one of the most interesting new variegated plants we 
have seen here for some time. Hardy in Zone 5. 


Albizia julibrissin ‘Ernest Wilson.’ 


254 ARNOLDIA 
Exochorda ‘Carol Ann Bianco’ 

This plant originated in 1959 as the result of a cross between 
Exochorda macrantha The Bride’ and E. racemosa made by Mr. 
Giovannina Bianco, 2220 Woodcrest Dr., Lynchburg, Va. 

Mr. Bianco writes that the plant is bushier and has larger 
flowers than either of the parents. It is shorter than either of 
the parents, and blooms a week later than E. racemosa. Hardy 
in Zone 5. 


Liriodendron tulipifera ‘Ardis’ 

The original seed from which this plant grew was probably 
collected from a tree native in southern Illinois and germinated 
at a state forest nursery. The selection was made by Mr. and 
Mrs. W. F. Sonnemann, Sonnemann Experimental Garden, 605 
N. 5th Street, Vandalia, 111., in 1957. Prof. J. C. McDaniel, Div. 
of Ornamental Horticulture, University of Illinois, Urbana, 111., 
has named the plant to honor Mrs. Sonnemann. Prof. McDaniel 
writes, “The original seedling tree and those budded from it are 
handsome miniatures of the species with !4 to V 3 the normal 
leaf diameter and tree height to date. Internode length is much 
reduced and color is normal. No flower buds have formed yet. 
It is hardy at Vandalia, Illinois and for the first winter at 
Urbana.’’ In a letter dated March 10, 1970, Prof. McDaniel 
amends his original description by stating, “L. tulipifera ‘Ardis’ 
is not completely nonflowering, as previously suspected. The 
original tree this winter was discovered to have remnants of two 
fruits, from flowers borne in 1969.” 


Malus X adstringens ‘Kelsey’ 

This cultivar originated at the Canadian Department of Agri- 
culture, Research Station, P. O. Box 3001, Morden, Manitoba, 
Canada. The seed was taken from a plant (M#6011) which 
originated as a cross between Malus X adstringens ‘Almey’ and 
M. X adstringens #5212. The male parent was M. X adstringens 
#5908. It first flowered in 1966 and was introduced in 1970. 
Mr. W. A. Gumming, Head of the Ornamentals and Fruit Crops 
Section of the C.D.A. Research Station writes, “The flowers are 
semi-double with 10 to 16 petals. This is the only truly hardy 
double flowering crabapple which will survive in Zone 3. At 
Morden in Zone 3b double flowering crabapples including 
Dorothea’, ‘Katherine’, M. ioensis ‘Plena’, and the recent Ottawa 
introductions are not hardy.” 


Arboretum Notes I 255 


Malus X adstringens ‘Rodney’ 

Approximately twenty years ago this tree originated at the 
nursery of Kelley and Kelley, Inc., Long Lake, Minn., as a seed- 
ling from Malus ‘Hoppa’. The male parent is unknown. It was 
introduced by Mr. Rodney F. Kelley, who characterizes it as 
being an extremely vigorous grower and very hardy in Minne- 
sota. The flowers are white, followed by dark red fruit which 
remain on the plant well into the winter. The thick glossy green 
leaves remain on the tree long after other trees are bare. 

Malus X adstringens ‘Sparkler’ 

This cultivar was selected in 1947 at the University of Minne- 
sota Fruit Breeding Farm as a seedling from Malus ‘Hoppa’. 
The male parent is unknown. The original plant first flowered 
in 1945 and is now 28 years old. 

It was introduced commercially in 1969 and was first de- 
scribed in that year in the University of Minnesota Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Miscellaneous Report 84. Dr. Robert Mac- 
Clain, Associate Professor, Department of Horticultural Science, 
University of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minn., reports that the plant 
reaches a height of 12-15 ft. and has a horizontal branching 
habit. The two-inch flowers are rose-pink and single. Fruits are 
dark red, V 4 — V 2 inch in diameter, and the calyces are decid- 
uous. Leaves are broadly ovate, acuminate, serrate, lVz-2 inches 
long, reddish in the spring and dark green later. 

It is reported to be hardy in Zone 2 and prefers a well drained, 
loamy soil and exposure to full sun. 

Malus ‘American Beauty’ 

This first flowered in 1962 at Princeton Nurseries, P. O. Box 
191, Princeton, N. J. and was selected in 1963 by Mr. William 
Flemer, III, of Princeton Nurseries. Seed was taken from 
Malus ‘Katherine’ and the male parent was M. ‘Almey’. The 
plant was introduced in 1970 by Princeton Nurseries (Plant 
Patent #2821 ). 

Mr. Flemer describes the plant as having an exceptionally 
vigorous habit of growth. It blooms annually with large (5 
to 5.5 cm.) double flowers which are clear red (Munsell Chart 
7.5 RP 4/11). Foliage is bronze red when young, bronze 
green at maturity. Hardy in Zone 4. 

Malus ‘Cameron’ 

This cultivar originated at the Central Experimental Farm of 
the Ottawa Research Station, Canada Department of Agricul- 


256 ARNOLDIA 

ture, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, in 1956. Seed was taken from 
Malus ‘Arrow’, and the male parent was M. ‘Katherine’. 

It will be introduced commercially in 1973 by the Canadian 
Ornamental Plant Foundation, c/o Ross & Robinson, 39 James 
St. S., Hamilton, Ontario. Dr. D. R. Sampson of the Ottawa 
Research Station describes the plant as having large (4.5 cm. 
across) double red flowers (7.5 RP 5/12). The leaves are 
lustrous bronze in the spring, turning to dark green in summer. 
Fruits are small (13.8 mm. diameter) and lustrous purple. It 
makes a tall-oval shaped specimen with moderate branch angles. 

This was named in honor of Mr. D. F. Cameron, formerly 
the ornamental plant breeder for the Canada Department of 
Agriculture, at Ottawa, who bred ‘Maybride’, ‘Prince Charming’, 
and this cultivar. 

Malus ‘Donald Wyman’ 

As described in Arnoldia : Vol. 30, No. 3, p. 116, May 15, 
1970, this tree was named in honor of Dr. Donald Wyman. 

The original plant was first noticed as a spontaneous seedling 
on the Arboretum grounds prior to 1950. Flower buds are pink 
but they open to single, white flowers which are 4.5 cm. across. 
Under our conditions the tree flowers annually and has con- 
sistently produced a heavy crop of glossy, bright red fruits 
which average 1 cm. in diameter. The tree retains its fruit in 
good condition well into the winter months when the fruit of 
nearly every other crabapple in the collection has either dropped, 
been eaten by the birds, or has turned brown and unattractive. 
Probably hardier than Zone 4. 

Malus ‘Maybride’ 

This cultivar originated at the Central Experimental Farm 
of the Ottawa Research Station, Canada Department of Agricul- 
ture, Ottawa, Ontario, in 1956. Seed was taken from Malus 
‘Dorothea’, and the male parent was M. ‘Makamik’. 

The large white flowers are 4.8 cm. across and have 17 to 18 
petals. It blooms profusely every year at the same time as or a 
few days later than M. ‘Makamik’ and M. ‘Almey’. The fruit is 
dull red to yellowish green, 18.7 mm. in diameter, and of little 
ornamental merit. Hardy in Zone 5a (C.D.A. Map). 

Malus ‘Pink Perfection’ 

This first flowered in 1960 at Princeton Nurseries, P. O. Box 
191, Princeton, N. J., and was selected by Mr. William Flemer, 
III, of Princeton Nurseries. Seed was taken from Malus ‘Kath- 



Cephalanthus occidentalis pubescens, 


| 


c: ‘ * s 

, ■„ ■ : ■ 


erine’ and the male parent was M. ‘Almey’. The plant was in- 
troduced in 1970 by Princeton Nurseries (Plant Patent #2912). 

Mr. Flemer describes the plant as having a vigorous oval habit 
of growth. Flowers are large (5 to 6 cm.), double pink (Mun- 






258 ARNOLDIA 

sell Chart 10 RP 7.8), and have 15 to 16 petals. The foliage 
is green and resistant to Apple Scab. Hardy in Zone 4. 

Malus ‘Pink Charming’ 

This plant originated at the Central Experimental Farm of 
the Ottawa Research Station, Canada Department of Agricul- 
ture, Ottawa, Ontario in 1956. Seed was taken from Malus 
‘Makamik’, and the male parent was M. ‘Katherine’. 

This is a late bloomer. Flowers are medium-sized (4 cm.), 
purplish red (7.5 RP 4/11) and double (12-14 petals). With 
age, the color fades from the center outward from orchid to 
white, while the margin remains deep purplish pink (5 RP 
6/10). Flowering is profuse and annual. 

The flowering season begins one week after M. ‘Almey’ and 
M. ‘Makamik’ and extends, at Ottawa, almost into the flowering 
season of M. ioensis ‘Plena’. 

The fruits which are seldom produced, are dark purple and 
average 13.1 mm. in diameter. The foliage is bronze and retains 
its good color during the summer and fall. It is resistant to 
Apple Scab. Hardy in Zone 5a (C.D.A. Map). 

Correspondence concerning M. ‘Cameron’, M. ‘Maybride’, and 
M. ‘Prince Charming’ should be directed to Dr. D. R. Sampson 
of the Ottawa Research Station. 

Malus ‘Royal Ruby’ 

This cultivar originated fifteen years ago in the Simpson 
Orchard Co., Inc., 1504 Wheatland Rd., Vincennes, Ind. The 
seed is from Malus ‘Van Eseltine’ and the male parent is M. 
‘Almey’. It was first noted in flower in 1959 and introduced in 
1969 by the Cole Nursery Co., Rt. 1, Circleville, Ohio. In describ- 
ing this plant, Mr. William H. Collins of the Cole Nursery Co. 
says, “To our knowledge, this clone has the largest and reddest 
double flowers of any variety known to this organization. 
Flowers have been measured on young vigorous 2 and 3 year old 
plants up to 3 inches in diameter, average size is about 2 inches. 
Habit is upright. Foliage semi-glossy, scab-free, nearly fruitless 
but some Vz inch red fruit sets occasionally. Parentage denotes 
hardiness.” 

Malus ‘Snowcloud’ 

This first flowered in 1963 at Princeton Nurseries, P. O. Box 
191, Princeton, N. J., and was selected in 1964 by Mr. William 
Flemer, III, of Princeton Nurseries. Seed was taken from 
Malus ‘Katherine’ and the male plant was M. ‘Almey’. The plant 


Arboretum Notes | 259 

was introduced in 1970 by Princeton Nurseries (Plant Patent 
#2913). 

Mr. Flemer describes the plant as having a strong, vigorous, 
upright habit of growth, flowers large (6.5 to 7.5 cm.) and 
double ( 13 to 14 petals per flower). The color is white. Foliage 
is resistant to Apple Scab and fruit production is sparse. Hardy 
in Zone 4. 

Nandina domestica ‘Moyer Red’ 

First observed in 1952 at Moyer’s Nursery, Winston, Ore., by 
the late C. E. Moyer, this cultivar was introduced commercially 
by Mr. Levi M. Gourley, Dillard Nursery, Dillard, Ore., in 1956. 

In Mr. Gourley’s words, “The red foliage is much more intense 
in color, retaining it more consistently through the season, and 
covering the bush more completely with red than the normal 
N. domestica. Also, the upderfoliage is a deeper green and of 
more consistent quality than the type.” Hardy in Zone 7. 

Pinus fiexilis ‘Scratch Gravel’ 

This is a dense, upright form of P. fiexilis which was found 
in 1963 by Mr. Clayton Berg, Box 845, Helena, Mont. The 
original plant is believed to be between 50 and 150 years old 
and is growing at ‘Scratch Gravel’, Silver City Rd., Lewis & 
Clark County, Mont. 

In the words of Mr. Berg this is “a broadly upright form of 
unusual density and symmetry. Comparatively speaking it is 
a robust grower — at least in its present location.” Hardy in 
Zone 2. 

Pinus ponderosa ‘Twodot Columnar’ 

The original plant was found in 1964 by Mr. Clayton Berg, 
Box 845, Helena, Mont., growing south of U.S. Rte. #12, Two- 
dot, Montana. It is believed to be between 20 and 30 years old. 

In Mr. Berg’s words, “This is like any young P. ponderosa 
in the area except that it is narrower in stature and the side 
limbs show a definite tendency to more upright initial growth 
than is normal.” Hardy in Zone 2. 

Pinus banksiana ‘Uncle Fogey’ 

This is an introduction from the Minnesota Landscape Arbo- 
retum, Box 132-1, Route 1, Chaska, Minn, and was discovered 
in 1960 at 6513-19th Ave. S., Richfield, Minn. 

Mr. Albert G. Johnson, Research Fellow, University of Minne- 
sota, describes the plant as having a prostrate habit of growth, 


260 | ARNOLDIA 

or being pendulous if grafted high. The leaves and cones are 
typical in size for P. banksiana. Although this would normally 
be propagated by grafting, it is reported that seedlings “come 
true” up to 95% of the time. 

Tsuga canadensis ‘Watnong Star’ 

This was found as a chance seedling in the woods of New 
Hampshire, by Mr. Robert Clark, Rochester Parks, Rochester, 
N. Y., in 1958. The original plant is now in the possession of 
Mr. and Mrs. Donald P. Smith, of the Watnong Nursery, Morris 
Plains, N. J. who introduced it in 1969. In Mr. Smith’s words, 
“At 11 years this plant is a soft globe 16" high and 20" in 
diameter. The texture is tight, but not stiff. New growth is 
almost white at the tips, giving the effect of hundreds of small 
white stars.” Originated in Zone 5. 


Robert S. Hebb 


Summary of weather data recorded at the Dana Greenhouses. 
August and September 1970. 


Average 


Precipitation 


8 a.m. Temp. 


August 

September 


6.31 

2.59 


69 

59.5 


A view on Hemlock Hill. 






ARNOLDIA is a publication of the Arnold Arboretum 
of Harvard University, Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts, U.S.A. 














New York Botanical Garden Library 



3 5185 00297 37 


I 

5 





