

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


LIBRARY 

OK THE 

GRAY HERBARIUM 


Received 

OcAobef AS.WSH 













Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
BHL-SIL-FEDLINK 


https://archive.org/details/arnoldiaarno_5 



ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 


VOLUME VII 

x 947 


PUBLISHED BY THE 

ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

JAMAICA PLAIN, MASSACHUSETTS 







ILLUSTRATIONS 


Routes between the Arnold Arboretum and the Case Estates, Map, Plate I, op- 
posite p. 4. 

No. 8240 Arnold Cherry — This photograph taken in 1944, shows the flowering 
and growth habit of the hybrid cherry at the age of four years. Plate II, op- 
posite p. 10. 

All these elms on Boydon Road, Columbus, Ohio, were killed by the Phloem 
necrosis disease of elms. Plate III, opposite p. 18. 

Azalea Path as it will appear on Bussey Hill about mid-May. Plate IV, opposite 

p. 26. 

Tilia cordata , Plate V, opposite p. 80. 

Picea Engelmanni , as it grows in the Arnold Arboretum. Plate VI, opposite p. 34. 

Pyrus ussuriensis , Plate VII, opposite p. 39. 

The Meadow Road in the Arnold Arboretum. Plate VIII, opposite p. 58. 

This beautiful bronze plaque in honor of Professor Charles S. Sargent was pre- 
pared at the expense of the Visiting Committee who were all personal friends 
of Professor Sargent. Plate IX, p. 60. 

Ulmus parvlfolia: the true Chinese elm (left); Stewartia koreana: Korean stewartia 
(right). Plate X, opposite p. 62. 

Acer griseum: the paper bark maple with lustrous brown exfoliating bark (left) ; 
Pinus Bungeana: the lace bark pine, the best of all the pines for ornamental 
bark (right). Plate XI, opposite p. 67. 


[Hi] 













! 








i 
















ARNOLDIA 


( MAR 20 1947 ) 

^*18 a*. n ^ 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 MARCH 21, 1947 Number 1 

THE PAST YEAR AT THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

M ANY changes have been made at the Arnold Arboretum during the past 
year, especially in some of the living collections. The many friends of the 
Arboretum will be interested in understanding some of the past events which 
have made it possible to undertake these changes, and in our plans for the future. 
This issue of Arnoldia will be devoted to an explanation of the situation so that 
3ur friends can better understand and appreciate the alterations when they visit 
the Arboretum this spring. 

Everyone familiar with the late Professor Charles Sprague Sargent knows of 
his great love for the Arboretum and the plants grown there. Since his death in 
1927, no one has seen fit to materially modify the plantings for which he was 
personally responsible. Undoubtedly he would have been the first to recommend 
the removal of many plants and even entire plantings, once they had served their 
purpose; Mrs. Beatrix Farrand also recognized this fact (Arnoldia, Vol. 6, No. 
10). Since Professor Sargent’s death, however, plants have continued to be sent 
to the Arboretum, new plants and some sent for ‘ ‘trial” to the extent of approx- 
imately 600 a year. Since the area (265 acres) has not been enlarged, and trial 
growing space had to be given for new and untried plants, the general plantings 
became more and more crowded, with the result that individual specimens re- 
ceived less care. 

Labor and Staff 

In the interim since 1927, with an ever-increasing plant population, labor in 
general has been demanding (and receiving) increased wages for fewer working 
hours. For various economic reasons there has been a gradual reduction of the 
50-hour week to the 40-hour week with an accompanying increase in labor costs. 
As a result of this situation and the difficulty of obtaining labor during the war 
years, only half the time was being spent on the maintenance of the living col- 
lections in 1944 as was spent in 1931, and possibly considerably less than half 


the time that was spent on the collections when Professor Sargent was living. 
By the end of World War II it became evident to even the casual observer that 
this situation could not continue. 

During the past year we have had 12 full time and 5 part time men working 
on the grounds for a total of 3905 man days of labor (figured on an 8 hour day 
basis) at a cost of $30,500. In 1931, when a total of 5400 man days was spent 
in the collections, it cost $24,232. The hourly wages of our permanent labor staff 
has more than doubled during the past ten years. Labor efficiency has been in- 
creased by greater use of mechanized equipment, but this, too, is expensive. 

At the end of the war the Arboretum found itself with a greatly depleted labor 
force. Some of the men had been taken on to fill vacancies only temporarily, and 
were obviously not interested in their work. The lack of care due to labor deple- 
tion during the war years was all too evident in many collections. The Arbore- 
tum suffered a tremendous loss when the Superintendent, Victor Schmitt, and the 
Propagator, William H. Judd, both of whom spent almost their entire lives work- 
ing in the Arboretum and both of whom were carefully trained by Professor Sar- 
gent, died within a year and a half of each other. Valued nursery land adjacent 
to the greenhouses was taken by the state as essential for the erection of an ad- 
dition to the State Antitoxin Laboratory. 

Contrasted with this, the bright side of the picture gradually became evident 
late in 1945 when some of our young men came home from the armed services 
and we were once more able to hire additional competent workers. Heman 
Howard, for 14 years in charge of labelling and mapping at the Arboretum, re- 
turned from the army in 1945 and was made Assistant Horticulturist. Alfred 
Fordham, for 14 years Assistant Propagator at the Arboretum, returned from 
the Army in 1946 and was made Assistant Superintendent January 1 , 1947. 
Mr. Robert Williams, who came to the Arboretum in 1945 as Superintendent to 
fill the vacancy left by the death of Mr. Victor Schmitt continues in his ener- 
getic efforts to keep the collections properly maintained. 

Mr. Richard H. Fillmore has been appointed Propagator starting March 1, to 
carry on the work formerly done by Mr. Judd. Mr. Fillmore comes from a hor- 
' ticultural family, and has worked in his father’s nursery in Nova Scotia. He 
graduated from Acadia University, Nova Scotia, in 1945 (majoring in botany) 
and since then has taken graduate work at Massachusetts State College (major- 
ing in landscape architecture), transferring to Cornell University in 1946; he 
hopes to receive his M.S. degree in Ornamental Horticulture from that institution 
this June. 

In early 1946 a full time tree pruner was employed, a young man trained in 
the skills of modern arboriculture. He and his immediate successors have proved 
many times over that they are worth their extra compensation, especially in an 
arboretum such as ours where all the men we had during the war were unable 
to do pruning work off the ground. 


[ 2 ] 


Mechanized equipment such as tractors, specialized tractor-drawn lawn mowers, 
etc., have been purchased during the past five years to reduce the amount of 
hand labor necessary. One of the most recent acquisitions has been a Disston 
chain saw, purchased last fall. This alone has resulted in a tremendous saving in 
labor. This morning, for instance, three men using the machine, felled and cut 
up (in less than 48" lengths) a 30" oak in less than an hour, a job which would 
formerly have taken three men at least a full day. 

Several substantial bequests have made it possible for the Arboretum to increase 
the budget for labor and equipment although increased costs still keep our labor 
force much smaller than in Sargent’s time. 

The Case Bequests 

The generous gifts of Miss Louisa W. Case and her sister Miss Marian Roby 
Case, both of Weston, occurring over a period of several years, have come at a 
most opportune time. In the fall of 1945, as a memorial to her father, James B. 
Case, Miss Louisa W. Case of Weston gave the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard 
University an outright gift of $50,000.00 together with her residence, green- 
houses, barns and fifty-nine acres of land to be utilized for the purposes of the 
Arnold Arboretum. In July, 1944, her sister, Miss Marian Roby Case, left the 
Arboretum some ninety acres of land, various buildings and what has amounted 
to a capital endowment of $420,000.00. In the fall of 1946, Miss Louisa Case 
left an additional forty acres of land and a residuary amount of money from her 
estate as yet undetermined. 

M iss Marian Roby Case had been interested in horticulture ever since she 
started her summer school for boys in Weston in 1909. Since that time her 
Weston estate had been carefully planted with many kinds of fruit trees and or- 
namental specimens so that her gardens were of great interest to the community. 
Miss Louisa W. Case, too, had been interested in the Arnold Arboretum for many 
years and served on its Visiting Committee. Because of their interest in horticul- 
ture in general and in the Arnold Arboretum in particular, the Arboretum is now 
in a much better position to carry on its horticultural work than it has been for 
many years. 

As a result of these excellent gifts from people who were deeply interested in 
the work of the Arnold Arboretum, land is now available for nurseries and ex- 
perimental plots. Much preliminary work has been done during the past two years 
to make it possible to set up a most interesting series of horticultural experiments 
on these properties this spring. Many of the experiments have to do with cul- 
tural practices governing the color of the foliage, flower, fruit and autumn colora- 
tion of many ornamental woody plants. A sufficient endowment was given with 
these Case estates so that they can be operated without reducing the funds avail- 
able for maintenance work in the Arboretum at Jamaica Plain. 


[ 3 ] 


The Balch Bequest 


The Arnold Arboretum has also received this past year $150,000.00 from the 
estate of Katherine T. Balch, wife of the late John Balch of Milton. Mr. Balch 
was a friend of the Arboretum for many years, frequently visiting- the collections 
and coming for advice in order to help him solve his many problems as tree warden 
for the town of Milton. By the terms of the will the money was left “to be used 
so far as possible for practical horticulture and for such uses as may reasonably 
add to the interest and enjoyment of the average visitor and the general beauty 
of the Arboretum.” 

Reorganization 

Finally, the reorganization of botanical activities at Harvard and the passage 
of time have resulted in certain administrative changes in the Arnold Arboretum. 
In order to coordinate the various botanical institutions of the University the 
botanical activities have been divided into two administrative areas. The first in- 
cludes the taxonomic and morphological activities of the Arnold Arboretum, the 
Gray Herbarium, the Botanical Museum and the Farlow Herbarium. The other 
includes the experimental and field work of the Arnold Arboretum, the Bussey 
Institution, the Harvard Forest, the Cabot Foundation and the Atkins Garden in 
Cuba. It is hoped that such coordination of the outlying botanical agencies with 
the Department of Botany will save duplication of certain activities and person- 
nel. Such a plan was proposed by Dr. E. D. Merrill when he first came to Har- 
vard as the Director of the Arnold Arboretum. When Dr. Merrill retired as Di- 
rector at the age of 70 last fall, the administration of the Arnold Arboretum came 
under the direction of the chairmen of the two botanical areas, with Dr. Karl 
Sax, Professor of Botany, serving as Acting Director. 

New Policies 

A combination of all these circumstances since the war has resulted in an in- 
creased emphasis on the horticultural activities of the Arboretum. Two policies 
have gradually evolved which may greatly affect the future of the general main- 
tenance work in the Arboretum. In the first place, a greater part of the nursery 
space for the initial trial of new plants and replacement plants will be on the 
Case estates in Weston. The breeding and most of the propagation will be con- 
tinued at the Arnold Arboretum. In Weston sufficient land is available so that 
plants can be grown to flowering size before they are moved to permanent plant- 
ings. If it is found that a ‘‘new” variety differs only slightly from another long 
established in the collections, differs shall we say by an additional pubescence of 
the leaf or a slightly more entire leaf margin than another variety already estab- 
lished, it may not be kept. Full notes will be taken for the permanent records 
and then the plant may be discarded merely because it differs so slightly. 

The second policy is perhaps more important. Certain varieties which have not 
proved themselves to be among the best of their group for ornamental purposes 

[ 4 ] 




may be removed from the general collections at Jamaica Plain and grown on the 
Case estates in Weston. Here such varieties, important for scientific reasons, would 
be lined out in rows and cultivated by machine at comparatively little expense. 
More room for better growth and display would again be given to the remaining 
plants in that particular group at the Arnold Arboretum. At Jamaica Plain, then, 
one would be able to see the most important plants and the best ornamental vari- 
eties in certain groups normally having a large number of varieties. If one wanted 
first-hand information of the others in the group, he could easily see these at the 
Case estates in Weston. In other words, as Mrs. Farrand has very rightly pointed 
out, it is impossible to continue to grow all the woody plants that are hardy in 
this climate on the 265 acres, especially if certain wooded areas and other impor- 
tant landscape features are to be maintained, as they should. 

All parties concerned having agreed in general to these two policies, certain 
things have been done last year and this, which will, we hope, make the Arbo- 
retum a much more interesting and instructive place to visit. 


Work Accomplished The Past Year 

1. Many duplicate shrubs and trees have been removed. Often when a number of 
plants are set out all grown from the same seed lot, interesting and valuable vari- 
ations will occur among the plants. It is always advisable to grow species from 
seed collected near the extremes of their known habitat and this can greatly in- 
crease the number of plants of a certain species. An intelligent understanding 
of this situation has to be made with each species to limit the number of plants 
grown. This winter, for instance, we were able to remove over 900 plants of 25 
genera without eliminating any species or variety of importance. 


2. Vistas are being opened. Because of the elimination of some 150 elm and ash 
trees, several splendid vistas have been opened, one showing Bussey Hill from 
the Forest Hills Gate, another showing the Customs House Tower from Bussey 
Hill, and another through the elms. Vistas have been opened also in the oaks 
and in the lindens with the elimination of some 80 linden and horse-chestnut 
duplicates. The trees remaining in all these collections are bound to benefit by 
having more room for proper development and by our ability, under the circum- 
stances, to give them much more of the proper care that they need. It should be 
emphasized that not a single species or variety has been entirely eliminated by 
this thinning process. There are the following species and varieties of these plants 
represented in our collections at present : 



No. ofsp. and var. 

No. of i 

Aesculus 

36 

102 

Fraxinus 

48 

109 

Tilia 

40 

103 

Ulmus 

65 

158 


3. A greater part of the barberry collection has been removed to the Case estates. 
This was done because the U.S. Dept, of Agriculture is placing more and more 
restrictions on the growing and shipping of barberries carrying the dread black 
stem rust of wheat. Only about 25 species and varieties of barberries are immune. 
These are remaining in the Arboretum. The remainder (some 96 species and va- 
rieties) have already been planted on the Case estates. 

4. The greater part of the Ribes collection has been removed to the Case estates. 
These are known to be be alternate hosts of the white pine blister rust, and rigid 
restrictions are placed against growing them in areas where five needled pines are 
grown. Hence the general public has difficulties in growing them. Over 40 spe- 
cies and varieties of these have been planted on the Case estates, with only a 
few of the ornamental ones left in the Arboretum. 

5. Spent hops are being used as a mulch in many collections. It has been demon- 
strated that, on soils similar to those in the Arboretum, woody plants benefit from 
mulches. The difficulty comes in finding the proper mulch. Hay is excellent in 
areas removed from the public where fire is not a hazard. Peat moss, too, makes 
a splendid mulch, but in areas where this has to be applied in the Arboretum 
there is no available water, and it has been proved time and time again, right in 
the Arboretum, that, under our conditions, where weeks of summer drought are 
common, the surface of peat moss will dry out to such an extent that it consti- 
tutes a serious fire hazard. A carelessly flipped cigarette or a small fire actually 
started by boys, is an ever-present hazard, and once dry peat moss starts to 
smoulder and is whipped into a blaze by a strong wind, it is one of the most dif- 
ficult types of fire to put out. 

As a consequence, we are experimenting with spent hops, hauled from one of 
the local breweries. It is too early to say much about them except that they do 
not burn so readily as peat moss and that their water retentive value is higher. 
Visitors to the Arboretum this spring will see a gr^at deal of hops around the 
plants, and if they have just been applied the odor will be all too evident. How- 
ever, we hope it is all for the better growth of the plants, and the objectionable 
odor of hops does disappear after a week or so. 

6. The lilac collection in the Arboretum will probably not be further enlarged. The 
Arnold Arboretum has more varieties of lilacs than any other institution in this 
country if not in the world. It is a valued collection. Few other arboreta or 
botanic gardens are willing to grow some 450 named varieties of lilac; yet at the 
moment the feeling seems to be that this is a valuable reference collection and 
all these varieties should continue to be grown at the one place in this country 
where students of this diversified group of ornamental plants can see how similar 
many varieties are. There is not enough room in the lilac collection for all these 

[ 6 ] 


varieties. Consequently, nearly 100 of the less important varieties will be lined 
out on the Case estates, where they can be studied by those who wish to do so, 
but where the general public will not be confused by an additional number of 
varieties (many of them unavailable from nurseries). 

7. Weigela , Philadelphus , Deutzia and Spiraea collections, it is hoped, will be 
similarly treated this spring. 

8. The lilac collection wax thoroughly pruned for the first time since 19J/.1. It is 
difficult to understand the tremendous amount of work done here last spring 
(well over 75 man days of 8 hours each) and the great amount of material it was 
necessary to remove. The lilacs may not produce a heavy display of bloom this 
spring, but they are in better physical condition than they have been in many 
years and should definitely show it by producing a bumper crop of blossoms in 
1948. 

9. The Euonymus collection formerly by the Aesculus collection was moved early 
last spring to its permanent place at the foot of Bussey Hill. At the same time 
some thirty different Phellodendron duplicates were removed and the work com- 
pleted before early spring visitors arrived. It was of great interest that of the 
very few visitors who did note the change, all agreed it was a decided improvement. 

10. Weed plants in all collections are continually being pulled out with tractors. In 
no place is this more evident than along the meadow side of Meadow Road where 
several weeks were spent in eliminating a greater part of the overgrown shrub- 
bery. Now, because of the great interest in ground covers it is proposed to plant 
demonstration areas of some of the better types here. Only a few will be planted 
this spring, since much of the ground will have to be weeded carefully for a full 
year in preparation for other demonstration beds. The right kind of ground covers, 
properly grown, are far easier to maintain than grass. Even the highway depart- 
ments are coming to realize this. The increased cost of adequate maintenance labor 
is forcing the planting of ground covers where they have not been used before. 

1 1. All the roads in the Arboretum were resurfaced last spring by the Park Depart- 
ment of the City of Boston. This makes the walking much more pleasant and 
removes some of the bad holes which have occurred over a number of years. The 
work was completed before Lilac Sunday last year. Mr. William P. Long, Chair- 
man of the Boston Park Commission, is to be thanked for his foresight in com- 
pleting this work at such an opportune time. 

12. A few additional plants will be added to the plantings around the Administration 
Building. Mrs. Farrand has suggested that some of the better introductions of the 
Arnold Arboretum be selected for permanent display in this prominent area. 

[ 7 ] 


Current Plans 




It is hoped that the general weeding out of undesirable plants can be continued 
this year. It is also hoped that some of the duplicates among the conifers can be 
removed to give those remaining more room in which to grow. A program for I 
the proper fertilization of certain collections will be again undertaken. In the 
past, stable manure has been purchased from time to time and put on the col- 
lections most in need of it. This is most beneficial but it is a time-consuming 
operation, and we hope to be able to cover more areas more quickly and econo- I 
mically by the use of a combination of commercial fertilizer and mulches. 

We are also planning to rearrange the general planting in the Chinese collec- j 
tion on Bussey Hill. Some of the unsightly specimens have been and will be re- - 
moved to other places in the Arboretum and it is hoped that a general planting j 
of azaleas cap be featured in this likely spot. There are over 125 different kinds 
of azaleas growing in the Arborfetum now, but they are distributed in many places, j 
It is hoped that this general location can be so planned and landscaped that this 
will be the azalea collection where some can always be seen in flower during the 
two full months that they bloom. Such a planting when observed from the top 
of Bussey Hill would be a sight worth remembering. 

In order to make such an outstanding planting feasible it is necessary to lay a 
water line to this area so that the plants can be properly watered during droughts, t 
Mr. William P. Long, Chairman of the Boston Park Commission, has promised 
that he will include in his 1947 budget, a request for the money for a water sys- ■ 
tern throughout the entire Arboretum, for he realizes, as we do, the tremendous 
advantages which would accrue therefrom. Not only would it be possible to water 
plants when they needed it most, but also our own men could undoubtedly con- 
trol many small fires without calling out the city fire trucks. As an example of 
our difficulties in this respect, on one particularly dry day in February this year 
our men put out eight set fires in one afternoon and called for assistance from the f 
fire department only once. This was during the week of school vacation. It is 1 
hoped that the Park Department can see its way clear shortly to erecting proper 
fences around a few unfenced areas in the Arboretum. 

This then is a general discussion of what has been happening at the Arnold 
Arboretum since the war. With an increasing interest in ornamental plantings 
clearly evidenced over the entire country it is only logical that this great collec- 
tion of plants — America’s greatest garden — should once more be put in excel- 
lent condition so that the thousands of visitors each year can fully appreciate the 
many plant treasures it has on display. 

Donald Wyman 


[ 8 ] 


ARNOLDIA 


f MAR 26 1947 

V Ll 8 





A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 MARCH 26, 1947 Number 2 


PLANT BREEDING AT THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

F OR nearly 60 years the Arnold Arboretum has introduced plants of horticul- 
tural interest from all parts of the world. This has been done by cooperation 
with other botanic gardens and horticultural institutions and by field collections 
made by our own staff members or agents in North America, Europe and Asia. 
During this time nearly a thousand species and varieties have been introduced 
into cultivation in the United States by the Arnold Arboretum. Many of them 
have proved to be of great horticultural value. Among the outstanding introduc- 
tions are the Sargent Cherry, the Dove tree, a hardy form of the Cedar of Leba- 
. non, the Regal lily, Mains hupehensis, Malus toringoides, Rhododendron obtusum 
kaempferi , and Kolkwitzia amabilis. 

It is possible that a few more new hardy ornamental trees and shrubs will be 
found in the fields and forests of the Orient, but plant collectors have explored 
- most of the north temperate zone. New species or varieties must now be obtained 
largely by the selection of occasional “sports” or mutations, or by producing 
hybrids of various species and varieties. These methods have long been used with 
the more common species of ornamental plants, and the great array of horticul- 
tural varieties of roses, rhododendrons, lilacs, and other ornamentals are the re- 
sults of the plant breeders art. 

The Arnold Arboretum provides an unusual opportunity for the plant breeder, 
i Here we have trees and shrubs from all parts of the world and crosses can be 
made between some of these species which in nature would never hybridize be- 
cause of geographic isolation. Some of our most important ornamental trees and 
shrubs have been produced in the past by crosses between American and European 
or Asiatic species. For example, the London Plane tree which is so often used 
for street planting in Europe and the United States originated in England from 
a cross between our Platanus occidentalis and the Mediterranean P/atanus orient alls. 
The hybrid is more vigorous and hardy than either parent. Some of our hardiest 

[ 9 ] 


Rhododendrons have resulted from crosses between the American Rhododendron 
catawhiense and the European Rhododendron ponticum and other species. At the 
Arnold Arboretum we have crossed our native white pine, Pinus strohus , with the 
Himalayan white pine, Pinus Griffithii, and with the Japanese white pine, Pinus 
parviflora, to produce new types of possible economic and ornamental value. 

Plant breeding work was started at the Arnold Arboretum nearly 20 years ago. 
The early work was confined largely to problems of species origins and relation- 
ships as a foundation for the breeding program. The breeding of trees and shrubs 
is a time consuming and expensive project. Many species can be crossed only 
with difficulty, if at all, so that large numbers of pollinations must be made. Any 
hybrids obtained must be grown to flowering size and the plants must have room 
to develop naturally, so that the growth habits can be observed. Often a second 
generation is necessary to obtain the proper combinations of parental characters. 
Promising hybrids should then be grown for another generation as cuttings or on 
standard root stocks in order to study their behavior following the usual methods 
of propagation. In some cases test plantings should be made in various locations 
to test the adaptability of a new variety. Thus the time required to develop a 
new variety by hybridization will vary from six or seven years in the case of for- 
sythias to nearly 10 years for apples and much longer for maples and pines. 

After the hybrids are selected and tested they are still not available for gen- j 
eral distribution. Since the Arnold Arboretum can not engage in a general 
nursery business, the new varieties must be propagated and distributed to coop- 
erating nurserymen. They in turn will need several more years in which to 
propagate the nursery stock for release to the public. 

A number of hybrid plants have now been selected and include several varieties 
of forsythia, a long-flowering cherry, and many new ornamental apples. The two 
forsythia varieties have been named, and cuttings have been sent to cooperating 
nurserymen. ‘‘Arnold Dwarf” is a segregate from a cross between Forsythia in- 
termedia and F. japonica. The original plant in our nursery is about 2 feet tall, 
and has a spread of about 8 feet at the age of six years. The drooping branches 
root readily and produce a creeping mass of foliage. The leaves are small, about 
an inch long. Unfortunately this forsythia has not produced flowers and may 
never do so, but its vegetative habit is so attractive that it should be of value as 
a ground cover or border plant. 

“Arnold Giant” is a tetraploid forsythia induced by treating a seedling of 
Forsythia intermedia with colchicine. This was done by one of our student assist- 
ants, George Skirm. Like most plants with a double chromosome number, the 
leaves are thicker and greener, and the flowers are larger and darker than the 
parental form. The leaves are ovate, three to four inches long, and with serrated 
margins. The plant is somewhat stiff when young, but forms a compact spreading 
bush when mature. This variety has flowered every year for the past four seasons, j 
and is hardier than most species and varieties of forsythia although probably not j 
as hardy as F. ovata. 


[io] 



PLATE II 

No. 824-0 Arnold Cherry — This photograph taken in 194-4. shows the flowering and growth habit 
■f the hybrid cherry at the age of four years. 


Among the cherry hybrids one of the most interesting is a form which ap- 
peared in the progeny of a hybrid between Prunus subhirtilla and P. yedoense. 
The original plant flowered when it was two years old, and at six years it is about 
7 feet tall. It bears a profusion of small semi-double white flowers, which show j 
a tinge of pink as the flowers open. The flower buds develop irregularly, so that 
in a normal season there is a good bloom for 10 days to two weeks. This variety, 
as yet unnamed, will be distributed to nurserymen next year. 

The apple hybrids have yielded a number of promising varieties, but the pro- 
portion of good types has been small — as those of you who aided this work by 
growing the seedlings can testify. As a partial compensation to our cooperative 
friends who carried on this testing work we hope to be able to supply you with 
some of the better varieties in a few years. Meanwhile if you have any outstand- 
ing trees from the hybrids which we distributed in 1940, please let us know so 
that we can propagate them. 

Most lilac varieties have been produced from Syringa vulgaris by plant breeders 
in France, Germany, and Rochester Park in this country. An outstanding ex- 
ception is the Chinese lilac, a hybrid between S. vulgaris and S. laciniata (formerly 
S. persica var.) which first originated as a natural hybrid in a European botanic 
garden in 1777. This hybrid has since been produced artificially, although in 
limited numbers. The cross is easily made, and the hybrids grow slowly for the 
first year or two, and then about 97 percent of the seedlings die. Most of those 
which survive lack vigor. We have been able to remedy this trouble by buddings 
the young hybrids on tree lilac (S. amurensis japonica) root stocks. The tree lilac ( 
also makes a good stock for the common lilac varieties. 

Other lilac species can be crossed, but not if they belong to different sections 
of the genus. Crosses between S. laciniata and S. pinnatifolia produce vigorous 
hybrids which may prove to be of value. We have also produced hybrids of S. I 
pinnatifolia and S. vulgaris, but they produce poor flower clusters, and since they 
are completely sterile they can not be used in further breeding experiments. Thei 
small flowered species can be intercrossed to some extent, but they are too much 
alike to produce distinctly new types of lilacs. 

The hybrids are grown in the nursery plots of the Bussey Institution, and a 
few of the selected hybrids are grown on the Bussey grounds to provide readily 
accessible propagating material. Formerly the hybrids were tested on the Walter 
Street tract, a piece of land owned by, but not incorporated into, the adjacent 
Arnold Arboretum. Our hybrids are now to be tested at the Case estates in Wes- 
ton, recently given to the Arnold Arboretum, where ample land is available and 
where there is little or no danger of vandalism. 

Although the greenhouses and nursery plots of the Bussey Institution are not 
open to the general public, amateur or professional horticulturists who are in- 
terested in plant breeding or propagation are always welcome. 

Karl Sax 

[ 12 ] 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 APRIL 4, 1947 Number 3 

THE BUSSEY INSTITUTION 

T HE Bussey Institution has played an important part in the development of 
the Arnold Arboretum. When the Arnold Arboretum was established in 1872 
the Bussey Institution provided most of the land for the new organization. The 
two institutions worked in harmony for many years and when the Bussey Insti- 
tution was closed in 1936 part of the funds were used to support the work of the 
Arboretum. Under the reorganization of botanical activities at Harvard these two 
institutions will continue to cooperate. 

In 1835 Benjamin Bussey provided in his will for both the land and an endow- 
ment for a school of agriculture and horticulture, thus anticipating by more than 
25 years the Morrill Act of Congress establishing the State Agricultural Colleges. 
The obligations of the Bussey Trust were not liquidated until 1862, and the or- 
ganization of the Bussey Institution was effected in 1871. The curriculum covered 
a three-year course for undergraduates who had done a year’s work at the Law- 
rence Scientific School. Inadequate funds, competition from State Colleges, and 
the transfer to the Arnold Arboretum of most of the Bussey land led to the ter- 
mination of Harvard’s undergraduate school of agriculture in 1906. 

In 1907 the Bussey Institution was reorganized as a graduate school “for ad- 
vanced instruction and research in scientific problems that relate and contribute 
to practical agriculture and horticulture.” Under the administration of W. M. 
Wheeler, with the cooperation of East, Castle, Brues, Bailey and Ames, the 
Bussey Institution soon became a center of graduate instruction and research in 
genetics, entomology, plant anatomy, and economic botany. It attracted gradu- 
ate students from both the United States and foreign countries who have subse- 
quently become leaders in agricultural institutions and other fields of applied 
biology. In the field of genetics alone 40 men obtained the Sc.D. degree before 
the Bussey Institution was closed in 1936. 

The research contributions from the Bussey Institution have been equally im- 


[ 13 ] 


pressive. Perhaps the greatest single contribution to agriculture of this century 
was made by two biologists of “ivy” colleges — Shull of Princeton and East of 
Harvard — when they developed the method of crossing inbred lines of corn to 
produce the vigorous and productive hybrid corn which now dominates American 
agriculture. It is estimated that the development and utilization of hybrid corn 
was worth more than half a billion dollars to the farmers of this country last year. 

In 1930 the Bussey faculty was merged with the faculty of Arts and Sciences, 1 
and in 1936 the Bussey staff was transferred to the Biological Laboratories in 
Cambridge. The Bussey Institution continued as a holding agency, and the funds 
were used largely to support the work of the Arnold Arboretum. Under the re- 
cent reorganization of botanical activities at Harvard, the Bussey Institution will 
be included in the newly created Institute for Research in Experimental and Ap- 
plied Botany, whose objective is that of coordinating the activities of the Botanic t 
Garden, the Bussey Institution, the Harvard Forest, the Atkins Garden and Re- 
search Laboratory in Cuba, and the living collections of the Arnold Arboretum. 

During the war years the Bussey Building was renovated by the Medical Corps 
of the U.S. Army, who occupied it until the summer of 1946. Most of the build- 
ing is now occupied by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, which 
will be responsible for all maintenance and repairs. We have retained a large 
laboratory for use as summer quarters for staff members and students in horticul- 
tural and botanical work, and have ample quarters for the Arnold Arboretum 
maintenance staff in the basement. The grounds and greenhouses will continue 
to be used for experimental work in botany, plant breeding, horticulture and 
agriculture by staff’ members and students. The grounds also contain the green- 
houses and nursery plots of the Arboretum, although much of the nursery work 
has now been transferred to the Case estates in Weston. 

When the Bussey Institution gave up undergraduate instruction in agriculture 
and horticulture, and became organized for graduate work in applied biology, the 
original functions of the institution were not forgotten. Many of the graduate! 
students came from agricultural colleges, and of those who specialized in plant 
genetics most have returned to agricultural work in State or Federal service. Since 
agriculture is based upon the fundamental biological sciences a curriculum in pure 
science can provide the essential training for research in agriculture. The Bussey 
Institution fulfilled this need in the past and now as part of the Institute for Re- 
search in Experimental and Applied Botany can again contribute to the instruc- 
tion of graduate students interested in agricultural research. In addition, provision 
has been made for work in tropical agriculture, the field work to be done at the 
Atkins Botanic Garden in Cuba. 

During recent years experimental work in agriculture and horticulture has been 
conducted at the Bussey Institution by Professors Karl Sax and Paul C. Mangels- 
dorf. Problems related to the origin of corn are being studied by crossing standard 
varieties with forms from Central and South America and with related genera. 

[ 14 ] 


By means of genetic and cytological analysis it is possible to determine relation- 
ships and possible origins of our modern corn varieties. 

Other work with corn includes the production of new sweet varieties adapted 
to New England. Seven years ago the white “Midget,” an early corn of very 
high quality, was crossed with “Golden Bantam.” The hybrid was backcrossed 
on “Midget” and the yellow segregates backcrossed on “Midget” a second time. 
The next year the plants were selfed to obtain pure yellow types. These were 
selected for uniformity of growth habit and foliage color, and were then inter- 
crossed. As a result we have a new variety which has the earliness and high quality 
of “Midget” but one which is more productive and has more vitamin A. We have 
named the new variety “Seven-eighths Midget” since approximately seven- 
eighths of its germplasm is derived from “Midget. ” We now have seed for distri- 
bution to those who wish to cooperate in making field tests for productivity and 
eating tests for quality. 

Although the “Seven-eighths Midget” is a corn of very high quality, the 
yields are relatively low. Yields have been increased by crossing “Seven-eighths 
Midget” with an early dwarf strain of “Golden Bantam” and utilizing the vigor 
of the first generation hybrids. This hybrid corn retains most of the quality of the 
“Midget” and is, in our opinion, of higher quality than any of the many hybrid 
sweet corn varieties now on the market. Seed of this hybrid is being produced 
this year so that it can be distributed for testing in the New England area next 
year. 

The artificial induction of polyploidy to increase the size of flowers, fruits and 
seeds has been of considerable value with certain ornamental plants. Doubling 
the chromosome number of species of crop plants has not been very satisfactory. 
Such polyploids are partially sterile and seed production is reduced. We have 
produced tetraploid sweet corn, broccoli, turnips, rye, wheat and barley, but none 
of these polyploids have been of economic value. Chromosome doubling in sterile 
generic or species hybrids, however, restores fertility and results in new species 
or genera. At the Bussey Institution we have produced a new genus by doubling 
the chromosome number of a wheat-rye hybrid, and a new species of wheat has 
been resynthesized. Hundreds of new species have been produced throughout 
the world during the past decade by the artificial induction of polyploidy in sterile 
species hybrids. Some of these will be of economic value. Many of our economic 
crop plants have originated by natural doubling of the chromosomes of species 
hybrids in nature, but nature required thousands or perhaps millions of years. 

Investigators at the Bussey Institution were among the first in this country to 
utilize embryo culture as an aid in plant breeding. Crosses between distinct spe- 
i cies often produce no viable seed, but in some cases this sterility can be overcome 
by culturing the young embryos in nutrient solution and permitting them to ma- 
ture independently of the mother plant. 

Clonal lines of apple root stocks are becoming more generally used since it has 


been found that tree growth can be controlled if certain types of root stocks are 
used. Of special interest are the 4 ‘Mailing” dwarfing root stocks originated in 
England. The disadvantage of clonal root stocks is the cost of propagation by lay- 
ering. In our breeding of ornamental species of apples we have found half a dozen 
Asiatic species which breed true from seed due to apomixis. We are now testing 
these species — Malus toringoides, M. hupehensis, M. sikkimensis , and other species 
— as root stocks for “McIntosh” and other commercial varieties with the hope 
that some may have a dwarfing effect. These Asiatic species are also resistant or 
immune to crown gall — a factor of some importance in commercial propagation. 

In the genus Prunus we have found that P. tomeutosa has a dwarfing effect on 
the commercial varieties of peaches and promotes early fruiting, but more time 
is required to determine its practical value. For lilac propagation the tree lilac is 
giving very promising results as a root stock for standard Syringa vulgaris varie- 
ties. In the Pomoideae a more or less systematic survey is being made of the 
grafting compatibility of the different genera. 

The work of the Bussey Institution is closely coordinated with that of the 
Arnold Arboretum and the Harvard Forest. Under the auspices of the Cabot i 
Foundation, a forest tree breeding project was started ten years ago. Numerous 
hybrids have been made between the species of poplars growing in the Arnold 
Arboretum. We now have about fifty selected clonal lines of hybrid poplars which 
make a much more rapid growth than do the parental species. These are to be 
tested under field conditions at the Harvard Forest for growth rate and disease \ 
resistance in order to select desirable types which can be used for reforestation r j 
for special purposes. Species hybrids of pines also show hybrid vigor and a num- 
ber of our hybrids have been planted in the Arnold Arboretum for further tests 
and seed production. Eventually these, too, will be tested at the Harvard Forest. 

The Bussey Institution, as part of the Institute for Research in Experimental 
and Applied Botany, will continue to conduct work in pure and applied science. 
With the facilities of the Arnold Arboretum, the Biological Laboratories, the 
Harvard Forest, and the Atkins Garden, Harvard is in a better position than it 
has ever been before to contribute to the basic sciences of agriculture and horti- 
culture. 

Karl Sax 


[ 16 ] 


^kTh* r Sp//^ 

APR 3 (947 ^ 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 APRIL 11, 1947 Number 4 

WATCH THE ELMS 

A T a town caucus the other night, attended by over five hundred persons, 
most of whom own their own homes in a suburban Boston area, I was sur- 
prised to find the sentiment expressed that the elms would 4 ‘take care of them- 
selves.” This, even after the town tree warden had made an impassioned and 
intelligent plea for sufficient funds to spray the elms along that town’s highways 
in order to prevent the influx of the Dutch elm disease, known to be within fif- 
teen miles or less of that town. The lesson I learned was that the tree warden 
knew the problem and knew the required measures to be taken, but there were 
not enough individuals present who were equally well-informed to force the town 
authorities to supply the available funds this year. As a result of this episode, it 
was thought advisable to devote this issue of Arnoldia to a few points concerning 
the Dutch elm disease which will help all property owners, especially those in 
Massachusetts, to understand the current situation. 

Although the Dutch elm disease has been killing trees in this country since 
1930, it has been only during the later war years that the number of trees known 
to have the disease in Massachusetts are as follows: 

1941 - 1 
1942 - 6 
1943 - 4 
1944 - 32 
1945 - 42 
1946 - 296 

1947 - 87 (first two months only) 

The disease has appeared in 48 cities and towns in this state, among which are 
Quincy, Plymouth, Braintree, Hingham, Milton and Weymouth, all fairly close 
to Metropolitan Boston. The disease is also reported to be in Providence, Rhode 

Island. 


[ 17 ] 


There is no basis for assuming that elms anywhere in the state of Massachu- 
setts will be immune, nor is it possible to estimate how many other trees are af- 
fected with the disease right now. Every elm in a sickened or dying condition 
can be considered as a potential victim. Such trees should be carefully examined 
by experts, and immediate steps taken to rectify their condition. 

It is not necessary to consider in detail here the tremendous damage done to 
the elms of northern New Jersey, for many subscribers to Arnoldia are unfortu- 
nately too aware of that already. It should be said however, that in certain Con- 
necticut towns and cities where funds or interest on the part of the citizens was 
lacking during the past few years, street trees in general were neglected. As a 
result of this inactivity there are so many dead elms killed by the disease that 
practically the entire park appropriation for the towns is necessary this year just 
to remove the dead trees. 

This is not the time to fly off in an emotional whirl about the value of these 
stately trees or the tremendous loss in property values if the elms are wiped out. 
Rather is this the time for those of us living in Massachusetts to carefully exam- 
ine the situation as we find it now, and see what can be done about it this year, 
both individually and collectively. 

Much has been written and will be written concerning the symptoms of the 
disease which include wilting, curling, yellowing and early falling of the leaves 
together with a brown streaking of the infected wood and inner bark. Proof of 
the presence of the disease is only possible by laboratory technicians who make 
certain cultures and tests with the woody parts of the infested tree. Death, either 
gradual or sudden, results from the fungus causing the disease. 

It is particularly important to note that the disease is carried by a small bark 
beetle ( Scolytus multistriatus ) feeding in the bark of small branches or twigs, com- 
monly in crotches. The beetles develop from the egg stage in dying or dead elm 
trees in the bark, just the places where the fungus causing the disease thrives. 
The insects then carry the spores to healthy trees and infection takes place in 
those same crotches where the adult beetles feed. It is not known how far these 
beetles will fly when aided by favorable winds, but there have been cases when 
they have carried the fungus at least two miles. Present research with control 
measures for the disease seem to point to the fact that if the spread of the beetle 
can be controlled, this automatically reduces the spread of the disease. Progress 
of the Dutch elm disease is closely associated with beetle infested dead elm wood 
where the fungus thrives. Dead elm trees result from many diverse causes, but 
it is evident that cleaning up such dead wood is of the utmost importance in con- 
trolling the disease. Hence it is important for everyone to understand just what 
can be done to obtain this end. 

Massachusetts is being invaded by the disease at a time when DDT in some 
form is available to the public. 

Unfortunately, entomologists have not had sufficient time to experiment with 

[ 18 ] 



PLATE III 

All these elms on Boydon Road. Columbus, Ohio, were killed by the Phloem necrosis 
disease of elms. This disease does not occur in New England, but a similar sight might 
result from the inroads of the Dutch Elm disease in New England towns unless precau- 
tionary steps are taken for its effective control. Courtesy “ Trees Magazine ” 


DDT so that they are not as yet agreed on the exact amounts which should be 
used for controlling the elm bark beetle without burning the foliage of the tree. 
DDT will be available this spring in many forms and many claims will be made 
for these. We know that it is more effective in controlling many leaf-eating in- 
sects than is lead-arsenate. However, the feeding habits of the elm bark beetle 
are peculiar in that the feeding is done mostly in the crotches of twigs and the 
beetles move around far less than caterpillars and voracious leaf-feeding insects. 
Hence a greater concentration of DDT must be applied in such a manner as to 
run down the twigs and drench all the twigs and crotches. DDT kills the beetles, 
but the amount known to prevent feeding for several weeks may injure the foli- 
age of the tree in leaf. Hence, a blanket recommendation for applying any time 
can not be made at the time this is being written. Two suggestions are given on 
page 22. 

There is no known cure for the disease once it has started in a tree, but it may 
be possible to control this carrier of the disease, and certainly as far as Massa- 
chusetts is concerned, now is the time to attempt to do it. An ounce of preven- 
tion is always worth that pound of cure, and in Massachusetts, much beauty and 
money may be economically conserved if proper preventative measures are taken 
at once. 


What The Individual Can Do 

1 . Carefully examine all the elms on the property for dead or broken branches. 
All such branches should be cut off and burned before May first, when the beetles 
first emerge. 

2. Any elm trees that are dead or in a dying condition should be cut down and 
burned at once. The disease is spread more often by elm bark beetles which live 
in dead or cut elm wood than by beetles which feed on living twigs. No cut elm 
wood should be allowed to remain out-of-doors with the bark on. It may be pos- 
sible to spray such wood with 2% DDT in fuel oil so that the wood will not 
harbor the bark beetle, but it is much more satisfactory to burn the wood at once 
and take no chances. 

3. Keep sound elms in good growing condition. This can be done by: 

a. Spraying the trees to control cankerworms, elm leaf beetles, and other 
destructive insects. 

b. Spraying the trees with the right materials at the proper time to control 
the elm bark beetle. 

c. Fertilizing those trees which would obviously benefit from it. Many com- 
petent commercial organizations are prepared to do this. 


[ 20 ] 


4. -Notify the proper authorities of a dead or dying tree on private or public 
property. In Massachusetts this might be the tree warden of the town. Or sam- 
ples of the apparently diseased twigs or wood can be sent the Dutch Elm Disease 
Laboratory at Massachusetts State College, Amherst. Other states have their own 
stations for receiving this type of material. Such stations are the only proper 
places where the presence of the disease in a tree can be definitely proved. 

5. Once a tree is known to have the disease, it should be removed (and de- 
stroyed) at once, as it will deteriorate rapidly and serve as a source of infection 
for other trees in the neighborhood. If home owners everywhere would only 
realize this and act at once , forcing their towns to act as quickly, some of the tre- 
mendous destruction caused by this disease in the past might have been avoided. 

6. When it becomes necessary to plant a tree, consider the possibilities of 
using some other tree. It is admitted that none have the graceful vase-shaped 
form of the elm. At the same time it should also be admitted that there are many 
ornamental trees which have fewer insect and disease pests, and also much more 
ornamental flowers, fruits and autumn color. These are all decided assets, espe- 
cially in planting on the home grounds. If no other tree will properly meet the 
situation, plant an elm, but in light of the current situation, be certain that 
other ornamental trees have been carefully considered before the elm is chosen. 

What The Community Can Do 

1 . In Massachusetss the community can give the local tree warden every assis- 
tance that he needs. He is the man who should know what to do about an in- 
fected tree or a doubtful one, how to spray it and how to remove it and at what 
cost. He should be provided with sufficient town funds to do the necessary spray- 
ing to keep the elm bark beetle controlled on all town-owned trees, and he should 
see to it that prompt action is taken with removal and disposal of diseased elms 
once their presence is known. 

2. The community can provide for a vigilant watch of all elm trees in its area. 

3. All elm logs and branches at the town dump should be burned if possible 
or sprayed with a 2% solution of DDT in fuel oil. 

4. Spray program: — The town should provide funds for the spraying of all 
town-owned elm trees for general insect control, and wherever possible for elm 
bark beetle control. As far as the general program is concerned it might be di- 
vided into two parts (for this year only). 

A. Spraying of dead trees or those known to have the disease. The first spray 
for elm bark beetle control suggested by Dr. D. E. Parker and Dr. B. W. Wil- 


ford, Bureau of Entomology, United States Department of Agriculture, could 
be applied as a dormant spray just before May first (in Massachusetts) and a second 
application about July first if the trees are still standing when the second gen- 
eration of the beetle is active. 


The formula is : 

DDT — technical grade 
Benzene, industrial grade 
Velsicol AR 50 
Triton X-100 
Water 


16 pounds 
9 quarts 
4 quarts 
1 pint 
100 gallons 


(Velsicol AR 50 — Obtained from: Velsicol Corporation, 120 East Pearson St., 
Chicago, Illinois) 

(Triton X-100— From : Rohm & Haas Company, Washington Square, Phila- 
delphia, Pennsylvania) 


The DDT is mixed with the solvents (benzene and Velsicol) and then the 
emulsifier (Triton X-100) is added. This stock mixture is stable when stored at 
temperatures over 60 ° F. Once mixed with water the mixture should be used 
within 24 hours. 

It has been suggested that in order to control the bark beetles (especially on 
dead or diseased trees) the trees must be thoroughly sprayed so that all twigs 
and crotches are thoroughly wet with the spray. For the average elm tree an 
amount of spray containing about one pound of DDT is supposed to be enough. 
If only leaf beetles, cankerworms, etc. are to be controlled it is estimated that 
spray containing only 4 lb. DDT is sufficient for the average elm tree. 

It is most unfortunate that this is the best spray recommended so far since 
DDT Technical grade (actually 100 % DDT) may be difficult if not impossible 
to obtain this spring. There is such a demand on those manufacturing the DDT 
that most of the supply to be manufactured this spring has been already sold tot 
other manufacturers who are putting out commercial DDT products of consid- 
erably less concentration than 100%. If some of these products are used in order 
to obtain a 2% DDT solution it must be done with the full realization that many | 
such mixtures have not been fully tested, and injury to the foliage may result when 
such mixtures are applied in July. 

B. Spraying live elms in fairly good condition : — It is suggested that wettable 
powders containing 50 % DDT be used (this year only) in the general spray pro- 
gram for insects eating the foliage of elms, especially the elm leaf beetle and 
the cankerworms. 

Wettable powder containing 50 % DDT is safe on the trees and will kill the bark 
beetles but does not remain effective longer than two weeks. Although it does 


not equal the effectiveness of the emulsion, 4 to 6 pounds of the powder is the 
most practical amount to use in 100 gallons of water. Applications about May 20 
and again July 10-15 will control elm leaf beetle and cankerworms, and give 
partial control of the elm bark beetle. 

It should be pointed out that these sprays are for the high pressure conven- 
tional spraying machine. Spraying by airplane, or application by using the new 
blower-sprayer type of apparatus will control the elm leaf beetle and other leaf 
eating insects, but may not give sufficient DDT to fully control the elm bark 
beetle. The new blower-sprayers, sometimes referred to as ‘ ‘fog” machines, w ill 
be difficult to obtain in quantity this year. It is highly probable, however, that 
in the future most of the spraying will be done with these machines or a combi- 
nation of these and the use of helicopters for large areas. 

In other words, materials and methods of application this spring and sum- 
mer still must be considered in the experimental stages. Any of these materials 
are probably better than the old-fashioned lead arsenate in controlling most elm 
insects. By next year entomologists feel they will have had sufficient time for ex- 
perimentation to be able to recommend two sprays applied 75 days apart which 
will definitely control the elm bark beetle without injuring the elms. This year 
we will have to do the best we can with the recommendations and spray materials 
available. 

5. When new street tree plantings are to be made, consider selecting trees 
other than the American elm. If, after a careful analysis of the situation, elms 
must be used, it might be advisable to use another type of tree in addition to 
elms, so that no one street would be planted exclusively to the American elm. 
Whether or not this would be advisable or feasible, depends entirely on local 
conditions and concepts. 

Donald Wyman 


[ 23 ] 


Suggested Ornamental Trees for Various Purposes 


It seems advisable at this time to consider other trees to use in place of the 
American elm, both as street trees and as ornamental shade trees on private 
property. It may be that no trees will be found which can completely fill the 
place of the American elm. However, the following list contains many excellent 
ornamental trees, serviceable for many purposes. Such a list may prove helpful 
in selecting just the right tree for the right place. 


Acer ginnala 
Acer platanoides 
Acer platanoides Schwedleri 
Acer saccharum 
Albizzia julibrissin rosea 
Amelanchier laevis 
Betula papyrifera 
Cercidiphyllum japonicum 
Cercis canadensis 
Chionanthus virginica 
Cladrastis lutea 
Cornus florida and varieties 
Crataegus crus-galli 
Crataegus Phaenopyrum 
Fagus grandifolia 
Fagus sylvatica and varieties 
Ginkgo biloba 
Larix decidua 
Liriodendron tulipfera 
Liquidambar styraciflua 
Magnolia acuminata 
Malus arnoldiana 
Malus atrosanguinea 
Malus baccata 
Malus “ Flame 99 
Malus floribunda 
Malus “Hopa” 

Malus hupehensis 
Malus * 4 Katherine ’ * 

Malus purpurea aldenhamensis 
Malus “Redflesh” 

Malus robusta 

Malus robusta persicifolia 


Malus Sargenti 

Malus Zumi calocarpa 

Nyssa sylvatica 

Oxydendrum arboreum 

Phellodendron amurense 

Picea Omorika 

Pinus nigra 

Pinus resinosa 

Pinus strobus 

Populus alba 

Populus Maximowiczii 

Prunus Sargenti 

Prunus subhirtella autumnalis 

Pseudolarix amabilis 

Pseudotsuga taxifolia 

Quercus alba 

Quercus coccinea 

Quercus macrocarpa 

Quercus palustris 

Quercus rubra 

Quercus velutina 

Salix babylonica 

Salix blanda 

Sassafras albidum 

Sorbus aucuparia 

Syringa amurensis japonica 

Tilia cordata 

Tilia euchlora 

Tilia tomentosa 

Tilia vulgaris 

Tsuga canadensis 

Tsuga caroliniana 

Viburnum prunifolium 


[ 24 ] 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 MAY 9, 1947 Number 5 


SPRING IN THE ARBORETUM 

T HE past winter has been kind to plants in New England, especially those in 
the Arnold Arboretum. There were no heavy ice storms to break branches 
and twigs, no days when the temperature dropped so low as to cause serious 
damage to shrubs and trees. There was not much snow as a protecting blanket, 
i yet very little injury has shown up on any of the plants in the Arboretum. Late 
frosts have injured the flowers of Abeliophyllum distichum , Magnolia stellata , M. 
denudata and M. kobus after they were in full bloom. 

Forsythia bloomed unusually well this year. A new planting of F. intermedia 
jii spectabilis planted on the bank at the rear of the Administration Building a few 
years ago bloomed very well. Forsythia ov'ata was late in coming out so that it 
was in full bloom when the other species appeared. Forsythia europaea was, as 
usual, about the last of the group to open its flowers. 

The Prunus collection at the Forest Hills Gate was at its best last week, none 
of them showing any killed flower buds. Prunas subhirtella autumnalis was particu- 
larly lovely. Those who know the Arboretum well will miss the large specimen 
i of P. Sargentii in this collection near the ponds. It had to be removed last summer 
| {*fter a particularly heavy wind storm did it irreparable damage. The lesson 
learned from this incident is that this species is best grown with a single central 
trunk. This plant was grown from the seed lot imported from Japan in 1890 and 
j had been allowed to grow with several main branches all originating from about 
I the same place at the base of the tree. Various rods had been installed, years 
ago, in an attempt to keep the tree from splitting up, but at the age of 56 years, 
bad structural defects took their toll. If it had not been for these, the tree could 
! probably have lived to be twice this age. 

Visitors to the Arboretum this spring are particularly urged to walk to the top 
of Bussey Hill, especially during azalea and lilac time, for here one can obtain a 
: splendid view of the collections looking toward the Forest Hills Gate. Azalea 



Path has been pruned out somewhat in order to make more room on the paths, 
but even this will not detract from the wealth of bloom that will be displayed 
here about the middle of May. Some of the Acanthopanax species and other mis- 
cellaneous plants on the far side of this hill will probably be removed to other 
places, since there are several in this group that very definitely are not ornamen- ! 
tals, and should not be taking up the valuable display space in this area. 

The lilac collection is in better condition than it has been in many years. I, 
Much pruning was done last year, and it is obvious that some of the suckers re- 
maining should still be removed, but all in all the collection is in fine shape. 
There may not be as many blossoms produced this year as in some former years, 
but the collection is in a much better condition to produce a bumper crop of 
flower buds for 1948. Of particular attention should be the collection of the 
Syringa Prestoniae and some of its hybrids at the upper end of this group. These 
plants are comparatively new in American nurseries, certainly in American gar- 
dens. They bloom a week to ten days after the common lilac varieties, and so 
lengthen the season of bloom. Attention is called to them because of their vigorous 
growth and profuse flower clusters which become very conspicuous in early June. 

The elms in the Arboretum have been carefully pruned during the winter. 
Those that were known to be in poor condition have been removed entirely, for 
we want to take every precaution possible against the inroads of the Dutch elm 
disease, not yet in the Arboretum. The elms will be sprayed shortly with a highly 
concentrated solution of DDT recommended in Arnoldia, Vol. 7, No. 4, pages 
17-24, April 11, 1947, and a careful watch will be maintained for other pests , 
throughout the summer. 

The crabapples should be a real display this year. Some changes have been 
made in the collection near the Forest Hills Gate, some of the older trees re- 
moved and new, better flowering varieties planted in their place. These of course 
will not blossom for several years. The older collection of crabapples at the base 
of Peters Hill shows promise of producing splendid bloom, about the middle of t 
May, although the first one to appear, Ma/us baccala mandshurica , showed deep » 
color in the flower buds, May second. The flowers when fully developed are white. , 

Pieris japonica bloomed very well this spring. Some good plants of it are doing 
nicely in the rockery, and where this plant has some protection from winter cold, 
it makes a splendid evergreen. Rhododendron Keiskei has flowered nicely in one 
of the nurseries. A plant grown from the original seed sent to this country in 
1905 by Professor J. G. Jack of the Arboretum died a few years ago and the 
Arboretum again obtained seed from Japan in 1939. The flowers are pale j^ellow, 
a little over an inch and a half in diameter with only about three to six flowers 
in a cluster. However, there are few evergreen rhododendrons with pale yellow 
flowers and this might well be one which could be used in hybridizing work. 
Rhododendron mucronulatum bloomed well and was not too severely damaged by 
late frosts to give a good display. Viburnum fra grans had very few flowers this 

[ 26 ] 



PLATE IV 

Azalea Pass as it will appear on Bussey Hill about mid May. 


year. The Corylopsis were covered with bloom, another proof that the past win- 
ter was a mild one. These species are among the first to show the effects of low 
temperatures by killed flower buds. 

One of the interesting and colorful displays of spring is the color of unfolding 
foliage. A walk through the Arboretum now is of great interest for this reason 
alone. The bronze of the foliage of CercidiphyUum japonicum, the yellow and light 
greens of the various willows, the green of some viburnums and the greens of the 
bush honeysuckles are all clearly in evidence. As spring marches on the foliage 
of these plants changes to other colors giving way to the foliage colors of other 
plants, like the bronze of the oaks, the light green of the native Fogns grandifolia , 
the green of the maples and the red of the Schwedler’s maple. These and many 
others are well worth watching for and appreciating. In the fall, autumn color 
makes one complete and brilliant display, but in the spring the picture is chang- 
ing almost daily. To one who can appreciate these spring changes, the foliage 
color in the spring is almost as beautiful as that in the fall. 

Further mention should be made of the hops which are being used as an ex- 
perimental mulch in the Arboretum. One sees them everywhere, and those with 
a keen sense of smell may claim that the odor of decaying hops and the fragrance 
of spring blooms do not mix. Admittedly they do not, yet we are trying to find 
an inexpensive mulch for the plants that will not catch fire quickly. Peat moss 
will. Apparently hops will not. Whether or not it is the perfect mulch remains 
to be seen. Some places received a mulch of this material last summer, so there 
is opportunity to judge what it may do over this length}" period. Some have more 
recently been placed in the shrub collection and around a few of the lilacs. It 
appears that it may assist in controlling the weeds about these plants, although 
it makes an excellent medium for the germination of new weed seeds. 

Estimated Blooming Dates 

The season is slightly retarded due to the cold wet weather of the last two 
weeks. However a few really warm days and plants will quickly burst into bloom. 
It is always difficult to accurately gauge blooming dates in advance. Here is the 
best that can be done at this point : 


Chaenomeles species 

May 

10-17 

Cornus florida 

May 

1 5 — 2*2 

Magnolia soulangeana vars. 

May 

7-14 

Malus species 

May 

10-23 

Rhododendron obtusum Kaempferi 

May 

15-22 

Schlippenbachii 

May 

15-22 

* 4 T T 

Vaseyi 

May 

15-22 

yedoense poukhanense 

May 

1 5 - 2 1 

Syringa vulgaris & vars. 

May 

17-24 



Donald Wyman 


[• 28 ] 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 JUNE 27, 1947 Number 6 

FIFTY YEARS OF GARDENING IN NORTHERN MANITOBA 

I was always fond of gardening. I probably inherited this love of plants, for 
among my mother’s people there was usually at least one in each family who 
was fond of growing things. One of my ancestors planted a garden over two 
hundred years ago that is still one of the show places of Scotland. 

Some of the happiest days of my early childhood were spent in an old garden 
near Aberdeen, Scotland. It was there I really learned to know many plants that 
are still my favourites. Among the shrubs were rhododendrons, lilacs and mock- 
oranges ; there were fragrant herbs such as myrrh, rosemary and southernwood, 
and the path that led down to a bed of old-fashioned moss and cabbage roses was 
bordered with double white and pink varieties of Dianthus plumarius. The window 
of my bedroom looked out into an old Yew tree, covered in the fall with red 
berries, and the birds that sheltered there would wake me up in the morning 
with their song. Along the edge of the driveway Narcissus poeticus and daffodils 
were naturalized under the maples that formed the avenue. A small stream, or 
4 ‘burn” as we call it in Scotland, ran through the property and Mimulus luteus 
grew in the grass along its banks, apparently wild. Down by the wall under 
which the burn flowed there was a copper beech, a few of whose branchlets trailed 
in the water as if loath to see it go. It was here, also, that I first knew the 
monkey puzzle tree, a tree that can be grown in Boston, only under glass. 

I am the youngest of a large family which came to Canada fifty years ago and 
settled near where I now live in northern Manitoba. At that time this was the 
northern outpost of agriculture in Manitoba. We were thirty miles from the near- 
est town which had only one train a week. There were no telephones or motor 
cars in those days and the journey to town and back took two days with horses. 
The early settlers made their living principally by stock-raising and little garden- 
ing was done other than the growing of enough of the more common vegetables 
for home consumption. At that time there were no varieties of either corn or 

[• 29 ] 


tomatoes that could be ripened out-of-doors in northern Manitoba. A few zinnias, 
petunias and portulacas were sometimes grown, but I was told that it was scarcely 
worth while bothering with them as they would only be coming nicely into bloom 
when the early autumn frosts would destroy them. In spite of this, the first dollar 
I had was saved for the purchase of flower seeds and I was able to show those 
early settlers that other flowers besides petunias, portulacas and zinnias could be 
grown in this district. 

There was no horticultural page in any of the Manitoba papers those days, and 
the only horticultural information within nw reach was contained in the annual 
reports of the Dominion Government Experimental Farms which were established 
in 1886. In these reports I found a mine of information including articles on plant 
breeding by the late Dr. William Saunders, the founder and first director of the 
Dominion Experimental Farms, As I grew to manhood I started growing trees 
and shrubs from seed secured from trade sources and also from the horticultural 
division of the Experimental Farm. Later on, when I secured a farm of my own, 

I bought nursery stock from many available sources, only to find that very few 
of my old favourites could be cultivated here. None of the old roses were fully 
hardy, neither the mockoranges nor Spiraea. Van Houttei could be expected to 
flower unless protected, and even the common lilacs were sometimes injured by 
our severe winters. At that time it was thought that trees also, especially coni- 
fers, could not be grown on the Canadian prairies. The reports on Dr. Saunder’s 
work in plant breeding led me to think that possibly I, too, could obtain or pro- 
duce new strains that would be hardy here. 

The quest for material to carry on this work led me into correspondence with 
many men and institutions well known to the horticultural world, including the 
late Professor C. S. Sargent; Mr. W. T. Macoun, Dominion Horticulturist; and 
the Edinburgh, Kew, and Upsala Botanic Gardens. To all these men and insti- . 
tutions with which I came in contact, either personally or by correspondence, I 
owe much. My horticultural work at this time was merely a hobby, as in con- i 
junction with a brother I was carrying on a fairly large grain and stock farm and 
I was in charge of the live stock end of the business. Being much in the saddle 
I had a good opportunity to get acquainted with our native plants and to study 
their habits. 

As my collection of plants grew, I found that there was quite a difference in 
the hardiness of geographical forms of the same species. For instance, the Scotch 
pine, usually grown from commercial seed collected in Germany, was hardy in 
ordinary winters, but every so often we would have test winters that would kill 
many of them outright and badly injure many more. The same species when i 
grown from seed of the north- Russian, Finnish, or north -Swedish forms is equally j 
as hardy as our native Jack pine and a very much finer and faster growing tree. 1 
With the Norway spruce, the Finnish form is also much hardier than that grown 
from ordinary commercial seed, and can stand our worst winters without injury. ' 

[ 30 ] 





PLATE V 

Tilia cordata 



An interesting example of this variation of hardiness within the species is pro- 
vided by Acer glabrum. I have collected this maple from four different sources, 
viz. near Boulder, Colorado; west of Cheyenne, Wyoming; at Waterton Park in 
southwest Alberta ; and just west of Fernie in southeastern British Columbia. Our 
Canadian forms usually kill to near the snow line ; some of those from Wyoming 
have suffered in very severe winters, but the lone specimen from Colorado has 
never been injured by winter. 

Ulmus pumila has given us a very vivid illustration of the difference in hardi- 
ness of geographical strains. In 1940 a nursery row 100 yards long had three 
quarters of its length planted to this elm grown from seed secured from Harbin, 
Manchuria, and the balance of the row was planted to a strain that had been 
hardy for a number of years in southern Manitoba and was bearing seed there. 
In September 1942, the temperature went down to zero, and during the follow- 
ing winter we had temperatures of -50 and -55° F. In the spring of 1943 the 
Ulmus pumila from Harbin was alive to the tips of the branches, while the other 
strain was killed out, root and branch. 

With many other trees and shrubs I have found that the forms in commerce 
are not suited to our conditions, and were hardy only when special strains were 
collected or secured from correspondents. Besides the examples already noted, 
the following are hardy at Dropmore only when special strains are secured : 


Acer saccharinum 
Deutzia parviflora 
Juniperus communis 
Juniperus scopulorum 
Juniperus virginiana 
Larix decidua 
Larix leptolepis 
Larix occidentalis 
Pinus contorta 
Pinus flexilis 


Pinus strobus 
Prunus triflora koreana 
Pyrus ussuriensis 
Tilia americana 
Tilia cordata 
Thuja occidentalis 
Ulmus japonica 
Ulmus scabra 
Weigela florida 


The hardy strain of Ulmus scabra came to me as seeds from the Upsala Botanic 
Gardens, and Ulmus japonica is the Manchurian form sent to me by the Bureau 
of Plant Industry at Washington. Prunus triflora koreana is even hardier than the 
wild Prunus nigra that I collected twenty miles east of Dropmore. The fruits of 
some of its varieties are excellent eating, raw or cooked, and come nearer to 
the domestic varieties in quality than any other plum that is hardy here. I have 
crossed this plum with our sand cherries, sand cherry hybrids, and with a green 
gage plum of my own raising. The latter cross gave weak plants that do not look 
promising at the present time. 

In October 1918, after four strenuous war years, I took a three weeks’ holiday 

[ 32 ] 


and paid my first visit to the Central Experimental Farm at Ottawa, and the 
Arnold Arboretum. After having seen a little of the great wealth of material to 
be found at the Arboretum, I decided to report to Professor Sargent. A kindly- 
looking elderly gentleman, accompanied by a younger man, was pointing out 
some trees as I approached and enquired the way to the Administration Building. 
They were Professor Sargent and his companion, the Superintendent, while the 
trees they were examining were Chinese pear species. I noticed that one tree 
had already shed its leaves, and remarked to Professor Sargent that if any tree 
was to prove hardy with us I felt sure that would be the one. It proved to be 
Pyrus ussuriensis and from the scion that I brought back with me I grew what is 
now the oldest hardy pear tree on the prairies of western Canada. 

Among the other treasures I brought back with me, were some one-year-old 
seedlings of two lilacs grown from seed collected on the Diamond mountains of 
Korea by E. H. Wilson in 1917. These lilacs ( Syringa velutina and S. oblata dila- 
iata) have proved absolutely hardy at Dropmore ; and, therefore, in 1921 I crossed 
some of the “French” lilacs, which sometimes are quite severely injured by our 
winters, with £. oblata dilatala. A new race of “American” lilacs resulted which 
seems better suited to our continental climate than the European varieties of the 
common lilac. These new lilacs have several interesting features. Many of them 
have bronze leaves in spring, and turn a deep purple in autumn. They do not 
sucker to the same extent as do the older, lilacs (in fact a hedge of the first hy- 
brids raised in 1922 has not suckered yet) and they are extremely free-flowering 
and fragrant. In some of my later crosses of these lilacs the blooms compare well 
with Lemoine’s varieties and are much hardier here in northern Manitoba. 

Professor Sargent sent me seeds of several varieties of trees and shrubs collected 
by Dr. J.F.Rock in western Kansu, but very little of this material has proved suf- 
ficiently hardy for our cold, dry climate. At the present time, those that are still 
alive and promising are Betula albo-sinensis , Picea purpurea , Daphne Gira/dii, D. 
tangutica, Potent ilia fruticosa and Caragana brevifolia. I corresponded with Profes- 
sor Sargent until the time of his death — indeed, his last letter was written to me 
just a few days before he died and it fell to me to write a Canadian appreciation 
of his work. 

In 1924, the Great Plains Horticultural Section of the American Association 
for the Advancement of Science, met in Manitoba and about twenty of the mem- 
bers spent a day at my place. Among this company were Professor Alderman of 
the Division of Horticulture at the University of Minnesota and Mr. M. B. Davis 
of Ottawa (now the Dominion Horticulturist). They were quite surprised at the 
variety of material I had succeeded in collecting and growing and also at the 
amount of plant breeding I had already done. These men strongly advised me to 
keep on with the work, even if it meant commercializing it. By 1924 rural west- 
ern Canada was already suffering from the post-war depression. I decided to take 
the advice of Professor Alderman and Mr. Davis, and a few years later the Mani- 


toba Hardy Plant Nursery was established and now has patrons from the Yukon 
to Europe, and as far south as New Zealand. 

Next to growing the plants themselves, I enjoy reading books on plants and 
their distribution. As we are so far from any large town, I have no opportunity 
to consult the horticultural or botanical shelves of a good library, so have had to 
build up a small library of my own. In one of my books, “Flore des Serres et 
des Jardines de l’Europe,” Vol. XIX, I saw photographs of Caragana jubata and 
Malus baccata “jlore roseo pleno” and decided that both probably would be hardy 
if I could secure them. After several years I obtained the Caragana and now have ! 
a well-grown bush of it about four feet high. The young branches of Caragana 
jubata are very wooly and the leaf stalks and stipules become hard and thorny, 
making it a difficult shrub to graft. Under conditions in this hemisphere it is also 
difficult to raise from seed, and is therefore likely to remain scarce in American 
gardens. I consider this a pity, as it is rather striking looking when in bloom. 
The double-flowered Malus baccata has so far eluded me and apparently is no 
longer grown in western Europe. 

Another of my own books, Bean’s “Trees and Shrubs Hardy in the British 
Isles,” indicates that a number of hardy trees and shrubs from cold dry sections 
of the northern hemisphere do not flourish in Britain. Bean speaks of one of these 
as follows: Populus tristis (Fischer) is a balsam poplar allied to the above, with 
similar downy shoots and leaf stalks .... Brandis, alluding to it as P. balsam- 
ifera , says it occurs in arid valleys of the inner north-western Himalayas. Prob- 
ably our climate is too moist and dull for it. Although introduced in 1896 from i, ( 
Spaeth’s Nursery at Berlin, it has never succeeded; and although it makes vig- 
orous growths during the summer, they are frequently cut back in winter, and it 
has never got beyond a few feet high.” Ten years ago I obtained cuttings of this 
poplar from Kew and now have several trees over thirty feet high. Besides being 
a fast grower, and very easily propagated from cuttings, it is highly resistant to 
the leaf rust that frequently disfigures all our native poplars. So far I have hy- 
brids between it and our aspen and balsam poplar, and have seeds ripening on i 
cottonwood that were fertilized with its pollen. I hope to get a disease resistant 
tree with soft white wood that will grow easily from cuttings. 

The way that some plants appear in gardens often makes a most interesting 
story. Ribes diacanthum unexpectedly grew in my garden from some unknown 
source years before I secured seed of it from a correspondent in Manchuria. This, 
by the way, is a much more attractive shrub in northern Manitoba than R. a/pi- 
num. It grows up to four feet high and besides fruiting freely its foliage colours 
up brilliantly in autumn. Larix Gmelini japonica came to me from the Yokohama 
Nursery Company under the name of Larix leptolepis. Knowing that it was not 
named correctly, I sent a sample of the seed to the late E. H. Wilson, who found 
out from the manager of the Japanese firm that the seed had been collected in 
the Kurile Islands. This larch is better suited to our climate than L. leptolepis and 

[ 34 ] 



PLATE VI 

Picea Engelmanni as it grows in the Arnold Arboretum. 


my plants look as if they will develop into beautiful specimens. In the midst of 
a block of Siberian spruce, some of which have now started to bear cones, there 
is one answering the description of Picea bicolor rejlexa. This seed was secured 
from Johannes Rafn & Son of Copenhagen, Denmark, and it is just possible that 
a few of the seeds of the Japanese spruce may have become mixed with the Si- 
berian species. Seeds of juniper from Japan yielded one plant that was quite 
obviously different from the rest. Now over fifteen years old, this has quite an | 
ancient tree look about it, though only twelve inches high and about sixteen 
inches across. So far it has proved quite hardy with us. A rooted cutting is now 
in the nursery of the Arnold Arboretum under the provisional name of Chamae- 
cyparis 4< Dropmore variety.” It has not as yet borne fruit. 

Two shrub families that are interesting garden subjects and have quite a few 
members that are hardy in northern Manitoba are the daphnes and the brooms. 
Besides the two daphnes already mentioned we have Daphne Mezereum, B. Cneo- 
rum and its lovely and very dwarf white form, and a six-inch plant of D. collina 
which came safely through last winter without protection and has flower buds 
now showing colour. Among the brooms, Cytisus clecumbens becomes a mat of yel- 
low, two inches high and one to two feet acoss in June. Cytisus nigricans , C. 
austriacus , C. el-ongatus , C. hirsutus , C. leucanthus var. Schipkaensis, and C. purpureus 
all have forms sufficiently hardy to be worth cultivating. In genistas, the spiny 
four-to-six-inch bushlets of Genista sylvestris flower freely. Genista tinctoria and ! 
the double-flowered form are very showy and reliable. Genista sagitta/is, though i 
it at times suffers a little from our winters, is as a rule a mass of gold in summer. 
Another member of the pea family that is quite hardy here is Maackia amurensis J 
with its upright spikes of yellow-eyed white flowers. In some seasons this seed 
ripens freely with us. 

Before the great drought of the nineteen thirties completely wiped out my col- 
lection of rhododendrons, I had some measure of success with a number of the 
hardiest species. Both Rhododendron hirsutum and R. ferrugineum had flowered for t 
several years. Even R. caucasicum had lived through a winter and flowered. Seed- 
lings of its close relative, R. chrysanthum, proved winter-hardy and I had hoped ! 
to raise hybrids between these two. Unfortunately, before R. chrysanthum flow- 
ered, the drought period had reached us and in July it died. Our only water 
supply at that time came from a well 285 feet deep and it contained far too much 
lime and iron to be of any value to rhododendrons. Rhododendron mucronu/atum, 
R. canadense , and Erica carnea have all lived long enough to flower when planted 
in especially prepared soil, but curiously enough I have had little success with 
R. dauricum. Where suitable soil and moisture conditions can be provided, and I 
snow covering in winter can be relied upon, there is no doubt that a number of 
rhododendrons would prove hardy and fairly easy to cultivate. In such a location 
there is a wide open field for the plant breeder who cares to work with this type t 
of shrub. 


[ 36 ] 


Some of the More Unusual Trees at Dropmore 

Acer saccharinum, 35 feet high, bole circumference 22 inches. 

Larix decidua, up to 50 feet high with bole circumference up to 2 feet 4 inches 
at 30 years of age. 

Larix Gmelini japonica, 25 feet high, with a bole circumference of 13 inches. 
This is a most variable tree in leaf colour and habit, and some forms are highly 
ornamental. 

Larix laricina, up to 50 feet in height with bole circumference of 2 feet 4 
inches. Though usually found growing in swamps in nature, this tree has stood 
the drought years much better than any of the poplars. 

Larix sibirica, thirty years old, up to 45 feet high with bole circumferences 
running from 2 feet 4 inches to 3 feet at 3 feet above ground level. A belt of 
seedlings eleven years old are now up to 25 feet in height, some of them with a 
bole circumference of 23 inches at 3 feet above ground. The parent trees were 
growing near the European and American larches and many of the young trees 
show signs of hybrid origin in both the bark and cones. 

Picea abies, a beautiful specimen in a sheltered spot, 45 feet high with branch 
spread of 28 feet, bole circumference 3 feet. 

Picea pungens glauca, 35 feet high, bole circumference 2 feet 10 inches. 

Pinus Cembra, 20 feet high, bole circumference 17 inches at 3 feet. 

Pinus Cembra sibirica, 24 feet high, bole circumference 1? inches. 

Pinus flexilis, 17 feet high, bole circumference 11 inches. 

Pinus sylvestris, 30 years old, now up to 50 feet high with bole circumference 
running from 2 feet 6 inches to 3 feet. 

Populus tristis, ten j T ears old, over 30 feet high with a bole in circumference 
of 2 feet 8 inches and a branch spread of 22 feet. 

Pyrus ussuriensis, twenty-six years old, circumference at three feet, 2 feet 10 
inches, height 25 feet, spread of branches 25 feet. 

Sorbus amurensis forms a clump reaching a height of 24 feet, the main stem 
having a circumference of 25 inches, three feet from the ground. 

Sorbus aucuparia grown from seed collected near the headwaters of the River 
Tay in Perthshire, Scotland ; now 20 feet high and with three main stems from 
12 to 15 inches in circumference. 

Thuja occidentalis, 25 feet high, bole circumference 29 inches at 2 feet. 

Tilia americana, 30 feet high, 25 feet spread of branches and bole circumfer- 
ence of 2 feet 8 inches at three feet. 

Tilia cordata, a clump 22 feet high with a spread of 20 feet, the main stem 
having a bole circumference of 23 inches. 

Ulmus japonica from seed collected in Manchuria for the United States De- 
partment of Agriculture. This tree has three main stems near the ground, each 
of which is from 24 to 25 inches in circumference. Though only 20 feet high, 
this tree has a spread of branches of 24 feet. 

[ 37 ] 



PLATE VII 

Pyrus ussuriensis 


Conifers at Dropmore 


Abies balsamea 

Picea abies 

Abies holophylla 

Picea bicolor reflexa 

Abies nephrolepis 

Picea Engelmanni 

Abies sibirica 

Picea glauca 

Chamaecyparis (?) Dropmore variety 

Picea jezoensis 

Juniperus communis 

Picea mariana 

Juniperus horizontalis 

Picea obovata 

Juniperus Sabina 

Picea purpurea 

Juniperus scopulorum 

Pinus Banksiana 

Juniperus virginiana 

Pinus Cembra 

Larix decidua 

Pinus Cembra sibirica 

Larix Gmelini 

Pinus contorta 

Larix Gmelini japonica 

Pinus flexilis 

Larix Gmelini japonica X sibirica 

Pinus Mugo 

raised by intention at Dropmore 

Pinus ponderosa 

Larix Gmelini olgensis 

Pinus resinosa 

Larix laricina 

Pinus Strobus 

Larix leptolepis 

Pinus sylvestris 

Larix occidentalis 

Pseudotsuga Douglasii 


Though much progress has been made in gardening during the past fifty years, 
there is still much to do. Many of the trees and shrubs of northeastern Asia 
with northern limits in Kamchatka, eastern Siberia, Saghalien and northern 
I Korea, have been introduced to cultivation from their southern or insular limits 
and may prove much hardier when secured from colder and drier districts. Sy- 
ringa japonica , introduced to cultivation from Saporo in the north island of Japan 
by Professor Sargent, is the only broad-leaved tree or shrub from Japan that has 
proved fully hardy here. Possibly others from the same neighbourhood would re- 
pay a thorough trial. While we have a small company of very enthusiastic plant 
workers in western Canada who are doing much to improve our fruits, vegetables 
and flowers by plant breeding, there is still much more to do than they can hope 
to accomplish. Personally, I would like to see some of the following plants intro- 
duced : a hardy weeping willow, a pyramidal poplar, a double-flowered Malus 
baccata , large-flowered dogwoods, buckeyes with bright-coloured flowers (the Ohio 
buckeye is quite hardy), and truly hardy viburnums with the fragrance and beauty 
of Viburnum Car/esii. 

A complete list of hardy bulbs and herbaceous perennials that are grown at 
Dropmore would be wearisome, so 1 will mention only a few of the more out- 
standing that are finding their way into our northern gardens by way of Drop- 
more. In early spring we have Callianthemum angustjfolium with its pure white 
buttercups, and Viola altaica that becomes a mat of cream or yellow pansies 

[ 39 ] 


(rarely blue) in early May. These are hybridizing with the garden violas to give 
what I hope will be a race of quite hardy pansies. Towards the end of June or 
early July, Iris Kaempferi from Manchuria and Iris acutifolia , which came to me 
from Leyden Botanic Gardens, are among the most striking flowers in the gar- 
den. There is Ligularia speciosa with enormous elephant-ear leaves and fifteen to I 
eighteen-inch spikes of orange yellow flowers. Chrysanthemum Zawads/cii from j: 
Austria, though rather a disappointing daisy that is scarcely worth growing on 4 
its own account, has given me some hybrids that are both hardy and beautiful, 
(it is interesting to note here that the inspiration I got from a visit to Alex Cum- | 
ming of Bristol, Connecticut, started me breeding chrysanthemums.) Muscari | 
polyanthum is also quite at home and towards the end of May, Tulipa Ostrowskiana I 
(scarlet) and T. Kolpakowskiana (yellow) make brilliant patches of colour. In early I 
June the white narcissus of the Swiss Alps comes into bloom. This was collected I 
for me by Henry Correvon, high above Montreux, about twenty-five years ago, I 
and is the only narcissus that really does well here. Then as the German iris I 
starts to flower, we have Allium zebdanense (pure white) and the blue Ixiolirion I 
montanum. These two make a lovely picture when grown together. Lilies of course I 
are grown by the acre at Dropmore, and our collection of these is being aug- I 
mented yearly. That, however, is a story in itself. 

While my work with plants has been done entirely with a view to securing I 
forms suited for this region, it is interesting to note that some of my hybrids are 1 
beginning to find a place in widely separated gardens of the world. It is a great I 
satisfaction to know that some of the new hybrids raised here have been suffi- 
ciently outstanding to warrant their being planted elsewhere, even in gardens^! 
where an extremely low temperature is not the all important factor in the selec-d 
tion of varieties. 

F. L. Skinner 

Dropmore, Manitoba, Canada 

Mr. Skinner owns and operates one of the most northern nurseries for orna- 
mental plant materials in North America. His experiences and observations in 
growing ornamental woody plants where winter temperatures may go to —50° F. 
or even lower may prove of interest to Arnoldia readers. 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 SEPTEMBER 26, 194-7 Numbers 7-8 

AMERICAN HORTICULTURE NEEDS TO ADOPT 
UNIFORM COLOR STANDARDS 

I rpHE time has come for American Horticulture to adopt some uniform standard 
by which color can be accurately measured and uniformly judged and de- 
scribed the country over. Many industries have done this. Horticulture seems 
to be far behind. The advent of color advertising in magazines of national circu- 
lation, and the production of moving pictures in color have clearly emphasized 
the fact that sometimes colors are accurately portrayed and sometimes they are 
not. Color photography for the amateur has done still more to educate people to 
the fact that colors can vary, and that it is very difficult to select the proper 
words or terms to describe them. Those of us who are constantly studying plants 
realize better than most, the necessity for having an accurate standard by which 
we can compare the colors of flowers, foliage and fruits, and afterwards to de- 
scribe those colors in uniform terms understood by other individuals who have 
not seen the flowers themselves. 

Color photography is one means of recording colors. A slight over-exposure of 
film will give a light color or tint, and a slight under-exposure will give a slightly 
darker shade, so that this method of recording color is not satisfactory. The other 
day a color positive was brought in for criticism. The plant photographed was 
Rhododendron mucronulatum , but the film had been slightly over-exposed so that it 
was not the true color of this species, but rather the much better color of Rhodo- 
dendron Albrechtii. Such mistakes are easily made. Then, too, the development 
of most color films takes time, so that eventually when they are returned fully 
developed, the plants photographed have frequently lost their flowers or fruits. 

Reasons for Adopting Uniform Color Standards 

There are many good reasons for the adoption of a good horticultural color chart by 
the horticultural organizations of this country. Some of the more important ones are : 


1 . One term refers to one specific color throughout the country. 

As an example of the present confusion in attempting to describe the colors of 
flowers without a color standard, let us take two plants and see how various 
authors describe them : 

Cercis canadensis 

pink flower bud, deep red calyx— Werthner, “Some American Trees” 

rose pink to purplish — Rogers, “The Tree Book” 

pink to purplish pink — Lamson, ‘ Gardening With Shrubs” 

reddish purple or pink — Graham and McMinn, “Ornamental Shrubs and 
Vines of the Pacific Coast” 

red — Wright, “Garden Trees and Shrubs” 

rosy pink — Van Dersal, “Ornamental American Shrubs” ; Rehder, “Manual 
of Cultivated Trees and Shrubs” ; Hottes, “The Book of Trees” ; Bailey, 
“Cyclopaedia of Horticulture” 

bright pink to purple — nursery catalogues 

Compared with the Horticultural Colour Chart it is “Fuchsia Purple 28/3 to 
28/2.” 

A new variety of Cercis canadensis was brought to our attention this spring. In 
view of the above descriptions it was not clear to say that it was merely a “lighter 
pink.” On comparison with the Horticultural Colour Chart, however, it proved 
to be “Rose Madder 23,” or five full hues removed from the color of the species 
itself. The use of this terminology and a glance at the Colour Chart are sufficient 
to clearly denote the difference between the species and the variety. 

Another plant widely grown by nurserymen, is a clone, and is variously de- 
scribed as follows : 

Cornus florida rubra 

bright rosy red — Bean, “Trees aind Shrubs of British Isles” 

pink or rose — Bailey, “Cyclopaedia of Horticulture” 

red or pink — Rehder, “Manual of Cultivated Trees and Shrubs” 

pink — Lamson, “Gardening with Shrubs”; Wilson, “if I Were To Make 
A Garden” 

red — Wright, “Garden Trees and Shrubs” 
bright pink to deep red — nursery catalogues 

Compared with the Horticultural Colour Chart it is “Empire Rose o621.” 
Numerous other examples could easily be given, but these should be sufficient to 
show the confusion now existing ill the description of plant colors. 

[ 42 ] 


2 . Colors can be properly and uniformly described in popular articles, scientific 

descriptions and plant patents. 

In writing of a new crabapple which is described in Boston as having scarlet 
flowers or fruits, some one interested in this description in Seattle, Washington, 
can consult a color chart and quickly find the exact color, shade or tint referred 
to. Merely stating that the flowers are pink to purplish, or a light purplish pink 
is not enough and is certainly not satisfactory to the individual w T ho knows of 
several varieties which could be in this general class. But to state that the buds 
are “crimson” and the flowers are “Chinese Rose” when fully opened, according 
to a certain standard color chart, is a definite observation worthy of permanent 
recording. New plants should not be named unless the flower and fruit colors are 
compared with those in the color chart and described in the same terms used in 
the accepted chart. Plants should not be patented unless their colors are likewise 
compared and described. There are many situations occurring in flower shows 
when reference to known color charts would be most helpful to those making dis- 
plays as well as those who have to judge them. Botanists especially could use the 
chart to good advantage in describing the colors of flowers and fruits of new spe- 
cies. Those who write for the national horticultural magazines should freely make 
use of color charts and their terminology, so that when “Dexter’s Pink” azalea 
is referred to as “crimson,” it should mean the same exact color to everyone 
reading the article, regardless of the part of the country in which the article is 
read. The word “crimson” may now mean “red” to one, “bright red” to 
another, and “scarlet” to a third individual. If the terminology of the color 
chart is uniformly adopted, each one of those terms will refer to a specific color 
in the chart — and only one. Everyone having access to the chart will then know 
the exact color which is meant by the specific term used. 


3 . Color comparisons can be quickly made w ith plants grown in widely sepa- 
rated areas. 

Hybrid seed is often grown simultaneously in several areas and comparisons in 
color can be easily made by use of the chart. New varieties can be tested in sev- 
eral areas and uniform color comparisons can be made. 


4. Color comparisons can be made of the same plant in different years. 

Also in comparing colors of varieties that bloom at different seasons, the colors 
can be uniformly compared by use of the chart. 

5 . Color comparisons based on a uniform chart would be an asset in describing 
the results of certain experiments with plants. 

In selecting the better varieties from a large group of Chaenomeles, or sweet 
peas, or petunias, the color chart is an ideal means of assisting in the segregation 
of these varieties that have identical colors of flow ers, fruits or foliage. This is a 

[ 43 ] 


very important point for many times a “new” variety appears which is merely 
an old variety that is unknown to the plantsman or which may have disappeared 
from gardens for some time. By properly recording the colors of all varieties ac- 
cording to color chart standards, much of the present confusion dealing with 
“new” varieties might be eliminated. 

It might be argued that different people see the same color in different ways, 
hence a color chart is not a good means of comparison. In order to check the 
ability of one individual to determine color properly and accurately with reference 
to a number of other individuals, thirteen of the people in the office of the Arn- 
old Arboretum one afternoon were given a petal from a single peony blossom and 
asked to compare it with the color chart, taking all the time they wanted but not 
comparing notes or suggestions, one with the other. It is interesting to note that 
of the 800 color blocks in this chart nine people selected the same identical block, 
62?/l. Two people chose the next hue, 527 ; one chose a hue four blocks re- 
moved, 26/2, and one chose a hue seven blocks removed, 625/l. Translating 
this to the colors, the majority called the color fuchsine pink, two called it rhoda- 
mine pink, one called it solferino purple and one, phlox pink. 

Translating this still further, 7 5% of the people chose the same identical color 
block. In looking at the other colors chosen, it is important to point out the fact 
that they are very similar. Consequently colors can be compared reasonably well 
by various individuals. 

Available Color Charts 

Several color charts are available. “Color Standards and Color Nomenclature” 
by Robert Ridgway, published in 1912, contains 53 color plates with 800 different 
colors, tints and shades. The “M unsell Book of Color” published in 1942, has 
been considerably used by various professions in the United States. The pocket 
editions, conveniently sized, contain 42 color charts with 906 colors, tints and 
shades. Neither of these charts has been found completely satisfactory in our 
work with plant colors at the Arnold Arboretum. Ridgway ’s chart contains many 
blues, greens, browns, and purples, but not nearly enough of the reds and yel- 
lows for our type of work. One is frequently confronted with the annoying fact 
that there is no color in the chart comparable to the one in the flower or fruit 
being studied. The same is true of the Munsell chart. 

The Horticultural Colour Chart 

The “Horticultural Colour Chart” has been used in the horticultural studies 
at the Arnold Arboretum for the past nine years. It is highly recommended (and 
published) by the Royal Horticultural Society of Great Britain. This contains 200 
color plates, each representing a color plus three graduated tints. The colors 
themselves and the names of the colors have been primarily selected for the pur- 
poses of horticulture, a very important fact. There are a sufficient number of the 


right colors from which to choose so that one can usually find just the right hue, 
tint, or shade. New terms for certain colors have been selected from the names 
of well-known flowers whenever possible. This color chart has been most useful 
in assisting with the study of many plant groups in the Arnold Arboretum, and 
it can well be adopted by the horticultural organizations of North America, 
j The compilers of this color chart have selected those colors most frequently 
found in garden flowers. Each of the 200 colors is carefully numbered and named 
and has three lighter tints shown as well. Color names for corresponding colors 
in four other color systems are given whenever there is a corresponding color. 
These systems are the British Colour Council, Ridgway ’s “Color Standards and 
Nomenclature,” Oberthiir et Dauthenay’s “Repertoire de Couleurs,” Ostwald’s 
Colour System. It may be interesting to those who have used Ridgway to note 
that of the 200 colors (colors, tints or shades) used in that chart only 72 were 
found sufficiently common to be selected for the Horticultural Colour Chart. This 
emphasizes the fact that well over half of Ridgway ’s colors have not been selected 
for this strictly horticultural color chart. 

A brief history of the color name is given together with foreign equivalents in 
Dutch, French, German, Italian, Latin and Spanish. Most important of all, hor- 
ticultural examples are given for each color, shade or tint whenever it is possible 
to do so. For instance, the horticultural example for the color “Spiraea Red” is 
Spiraea bumalda var. “Anthony Waterer” ; for “Mandarin Red” three examples 
are given : Lychnis cha/cedonica, Lilium chalcedonicum, Tulipa Korolkozcii. The hor- 
ticultural example for “Phlox Purple” is Primula Siebo/dii; for “Lobelia Blue,” 
Muscari armeniacum and Lobelia tenuior. Such notes are most helpful and are not 
given by any other color chart. 

Then too, the horticultural names given to the colors will probably be of much 
‘more interest to horticulturists in general than is the number system of the Mun- 
sell plan. A comparison of a few color names will illustrate the emphasis which 
has been placed on horticultural terminology in the English Chart: 


Identical Colors 


English Horticultural Color Chart 

Primrose Yellow 
Buttercup Yellow 
Apricot 
Plum Purple 
Veronica Violet 
Lobelia Blue 
Gentian Blue 
Carnation Green 
Pea Green 

[ 45 ] 


Ridgway 

Pale Lemon Yellow 
Light Cadmium 
Capucine Yellow 
Cotinga Purple 
Light Violet 
Blue Violet 
Phenyl Blue 
Gnaphalium Green 
Yellow Green 




How It Works 


The English Horticultural Colour Chart consists of 64 “full hues” or color tones 
comprising equal gradations of the spectrum range together with 136 lighter tints 
and deeper shades of these 64 selected hues. In this chart the numbering system 
is very simple. The 64 selected hues are numbered 1 to 64. The bottom color on 
each of these sheets is the full hue, and the three blocks above are three pro- 
gressively lighter tints. All other of the 136 sheets are either tints or shades of 
these selected hues and are so numbered that they can be easily distinguished 
and the hue to which they refer readily identified. 

The simple comparison of colors is the same for all the charts. Specimens should 
be examined and matched indoors in a good north light immediately after cut- 
ting. It is essential to obtain a composite picture of the flower color from several 
blossoms, or to take specific readings for the flower bud, another just at the time 
it is fully open and another when it starts to fade. It is usually advisable to study 
the color at arm’s length for a moment or two, and in comparing it with various 
colors, use a black mask to keep all miscellaneous colors from affecting the final 
estimate. 

Color can vary in three different ways, i.e., in hue (that attribute by which one 
color is distinguishable from another); by tone (by which it appears to hold a 
certain position in a light to dark scale) ; and intensity (by which the brilliancy 
of a hue is revealed). Tints are considered to be lighter tones of any certain 
color, and shades are considered to be darker tones of any certain color. 

Tints and shades are noted (as well as the colors) by a numbering system. 
Each color block in the chart has its own number. In describing the color of 
Begonia fuchsioides , it would be given as “ Porcelain Rose 620/ 1 ” which means 
that it is the darkest of the three lighter tints of “Porcelain Rose.” Rose “Coral 
Cluster” would be “Porcelain Rose 620/2.” a tint once again lighter than that 
of Begonia fuchsioides. 

Grouping Colors 

There is still another feature about this chart which seems very good, especially 
to those who wish to be accurate, but not alarmingly so. If the chart is adopted 
and the terminology used, the colors can be grouped so that a very fine color dif- 
ferentiation in color names is not necessary. For instance, the yellows are listed 
below with the grouping as given in the chart : 


Primrose Yellow 601 

Sulphur Yellow 1 

Mimosa Yellow 602 

Canary Yellow 2 

Naples Yellow 

[ 46 ] 


403 


Yellow 




Orange Yellow 


Yellowish Orange 


Orange 


Barium Yellow 

.503 

Empire Yellow 

603 

Aureolin 

3 

Straw Yellow 

604 

Lemon Yellow 

4 

Amber Yellow 

50 5 

Chrome Yellow (Light) 

605 

Buttercup Yellow 

5 

Chinese Yellow 

606 

Indian Yellow 

6 

Egyptian Buff 

407 

Orange Buff 

507 

Maize Yellow 

607 

Saffron Yellow 

7 

Yellow Ochre 

o7 

Cadmium Orange 

8 

Apricot 

609 

Tangerine Orange 

9 

Majolica Yellow 

o9 

Nasturtium Orange 

610 

Orpiment Orange 

10 

Spanish Orange 

olO 

Persimmon Orange 

710 

Marigold Orange 

1 1 

Salmon 

412 

Peach 

512 

Carrot Red 

612 

Orange 

12 


| From the above list it will be seen that there are 32 different colors up to the 
orange (and it should not be overlooked that three tints of each of these 32 are 
given, making a total of 128 yellows). This may be much too fine a differentia- 
tion for general purposes. These 32 colors can be condensed into four general 
groups, namely, “Light Yellow,” “Yellow,” “Orange Yellow” and “Yellowish 
Orange.” In each general group the color limits are sufficient to make allowances 
for slight variations in the fading of flower colors. The color nomenclature is still 
accurate and bounded by very definite color limits so that in using these general 
Iterms one can often be sufficiently accurate for many purposes. 

[ 47 ] 




If lumping these colors together is too general, “Yellow” can be broken down 
and more accurately defined as u Lemon Yellow,” “Buttercup Yellow” and “In- 
dian Yellow.” If this is not fine enough, these three hues can be broken down 
even further so that “Indian Yellow,” for instance, can be defined as “Egyptian 
Buff,” “Orange Buff,” or “Maize Yellow.” Each one of these colors has three 
additional tints. So it is seen that the system of giving color names need not be 
too general nor too simple. It all depends on how accurate the users wish to be. 
This system of naming colors should have many obvious advantages. 

A Study of Chaenomeles 

It might be interesting to see how this chart has helped in the study of the 
varieties of Chaenomeles. In the collection of the Arnold Arboretum are growing 
about fifty named varieties of this genus. Only two or three are of value for their 
habit; the rest are grown primarily for their bright spring flowers. Many are 
practically identical. In making comparisons with the Horticultural Colour Chart, 
the following notes were taken in 1947 : 

Color of Chaenomeles lagenaria varieties at Arnold Arboretum May 15, 1947 




Corresponding Color in 

Chart 

alpina (C. japonic a var.) 

Fire Red 1 5/ 1 


“Vermilion” 

4 4 

“ 15/2 to Vermilion 

1 8/l 

“Knaphill Scarlet” 

Poppy Red 16/ 1 


“incendie” 

4 4 

“ 16/1 


“Double Orange” 

4 4 

“ 16 


“Apricot” 

Mandarin Red 1 7/ 1 


“Kermesina semi-plena” 

Begonia 619 to 619/2 


“Semperflorens” 

Scarlet 1 9 / 1 


“Versicolor lutescens” 

4 4 

19/l 


“Columbia” 

4 4 

19/l 


“Folds rubis” 

4 4 

19/1 


“Sanguinea semi-plena” 

6 6 

19/l 


“Rosea plena” 

4 4 

19/l to Geranium Lake 20/l 

“Cardinalis” 

4 4 

19/l to 

“ 20/l 

“Atrococcinea plena” 

4 4 

19/l to 

44 20/1 

“Baltzii” 

4 4 

19/l to 

44 20/1 

Rubra grandiflora” 

4 4 

19/l to 

44 20/1 

“Blood Red” 

Signal Red 719/3 



“Phyllis Moore” * Porcelain Rose 620 

[ 48 ] 


‘Bonfire” 

‘Early Apple Blossom” 
Atrococcinea” 
‘Crimson and Gold” 


Delft Rose o20/ 1 
“ o20/l 

“ “ 020/ 1 
Blood Red 820/ 1 


Enchantment” 

Pink Beauty” 

Eximea” 

Cathay ensis” hybrids No. 3 19, 331 
Simonii” 

Leonard’s Variety” 
Atrosanguinea” 

Umbilicata” 

Contorta” 

Apple Blossom” 

Grandiflora semi-plena” 
Marmorata” 

Moerloesi” 

Versicolor” 

Rosea grandiflora” 

Grandiflora” 

Grandiflora semi-plena” 


Carmine Rose 621 
Carmine 2 1 / 1 
“ 21/1 
2 1 / 1 


Turkey Red 721 
“ 721 
“ 721 
Currant Red 821 
Dawn Pink 523 

White to Carmine Rose 621 

“ “ “ “ 621 

“ “ “ “ 621 

“ “ “ “ 621 

‘ “ 621 

“ 621 

“ 621 
“ “ 621 


4 4 4 4 


Alba” 


White 


Candida” 

Falconet Charlet” 


Nivalis” 


The Chaenomeles varieties listed above have nineteen different colors, hues, 
tints or shades — far too many for the general run of display gardens. Hence it 
becomes necessary to study these varieties and their colors and see how the num- 
ber of varieties can be reduced. The first step is to study the color nomenclature 
in the Horticultural Colour Chart within this color range. 

Colors Listed from Orange to Camellian Rose 


Orange 


Orange 
Saturn Red 


12 

13 


Reddish Orange 


Orange Red 


Indian Orange 

713 

Chinese Coral 

614 

Nasturtium Red 

14 

Burnt Orange 

ol4 

Fire Red 

15 

Capsicum, Red 

715 

Orient Pink 

416 

Shell Pink 

516 

Shrimp Red 

616 

Poppy Red 

16 

Brick Red 

ol 6 

Mandarin Red 

17 

Dutch Vermilion 

717 

Azalea Pink 

618 

Vermilion 

18 

Jasper Red 

ol 8 

Garnet Brown 

oo9 1 8 

Begonia 

619 

Coral Pink 

06 19 

Scarlet 

19 

Signal Red 

719 

Orient Red 

819 

Venetian Pink 

420 

French Rose 

520 

Porcelain Rose 

620 

Geranium Lake 

20 

Delft Rose 

o 20 

Blood Red 

820 

Carmine Rose 

621 

Empire Rose 

o621 

Carmine 

21 

Claret Rose 

o 21 

Turkey Red 

721 

Currant Red 

821 

Camellia Rose 

622 


[ 50 ] 


By studying this listing of colors it is obvious that the 19 colors into which the 
Chaenomeles fall can be grouped into seven general color groups : 


1. 

Orange ( 12-6 16) 


2. 

Reddish Orange (16- 

-619) 

8. 

Scarlet (l9-620) 


4. 

Geranium Lake (20- 

-06 2 1 ) 

.5. 

Turkey Red (72l) 


6. 

White to Carmine 


7. 

White 



Then, if the above are to be the color “classes,” a re-study of the varieties 
falling into each class is necessary to determine “the best” for each group. Be- 
cause of similarity in size, habit, fruit and ease of growth, many of these varieties 
are similar to others in ornamental usefulness. Hence the classification of the va- 
rieties according to flower color affords an excellent basis on which to judge them 
for the purpose of selecting a few of the better varieties. If twelve varieties have 
practically the same flower color, then profuseness of flowering, size of flower and 
singleness or doubleness are the criteria on which the best are selected. Working 
over the large group in this way, the color classes and the varieties can be arbi- 
trarily reduced in the following order: 

1. Orange — japonica nlpina (S) (lowest of all) 

2. Reddish Orange — “Apricot” (S); “Double Orange” (D) 

8. Scarlet — “Kermesina semi-plena” (SD) (tallest of all) “Cardinalis” (D); 

“Baltzii” (S) ; “Sanguinea semi-plena” (SD) 

4. Geranium Lake— “Phyllis Moore” (D); “Bonfire” (S); Blood Red” (S); 

“Rosea plena” (SD) 

5. Turkey Red — “Simonii” (SD); “Umbilicata” (S) 

6. White to Carmine — “Marmoraia” (S); “Moerloesi” (S) ; “Grandiflora 

semi-plena” (SD) 

7. White — “Nivalis” (S) ; “Falconet Charlet” (S) 

S = single flowers 
SD = semi-double flowers 
D= double flowers 

[ 51 ] 


Xote: 


Seven color groups instead of nineteen and seventeen varieties instead of forty- 
three — quite a reduction ! 

So it is seen how the use of a color standard helps materially in the study of 
a group of plants, grown chiefly for the bright colors of its flowers. 

It is hoped that the horticultural organizations of this country will take up this 
important problem and do something about it. It may be that all are not uni- 
formly agreed upon the adoption of one, particular chart, but certainly all should 
be agreed that the present chaotic condition of color nomenclature in Horticul- 
ture should be immediately rectified. 


Donald Wyman 


Note: 


Republication of Sargent’s Silva of North America 

This standard very beautifully illustrated work was originally published in 14 
volumes quarto between the years 1891 and 1902. Its original price was $350.00 
for the complete set. It has long been out of print, and naturally the selling 
price advanced as copies were occasionally offered by dealers. The work contains 
740 magnificent plates illustrating the trees of North America north of Mexico. 

Now, thanks to the initiative of Mr. Peter Smith, Publisher, 351 Fifth Avenue, 
New York, this basic work is again available. Official permission to republish 
Sargent’s Si/va was granted to Mr. Smith in 1945. The work has been repro- 
duced by the modern offset lithograph process and is an exact replica of the 
original text. It is printed on very excellent paper. This new issue is of the same 
size (quarto) as the original, but is bound in library buckram, two volumes in 
one, i.e., forming seven volumes instead of the original fourteen. 

The new issue sells for $200.00 a set. For all practical purposes this re-issue 
is as valuable as the original edition. The lithoprint work was done by the Mur- 
ray Printing Company, Cambridge, a firm noted for its high quality of excellence. 
The offset work on this book was so well done that it was selected, by a compe- 
tent committee of judges, to be among the best books by offset in 1947. 


[52 ] 


ARNOLDIA 


/<? S"“W*s^v 

f i .r n i94r ) 

A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 OCTOBER 10, 1947 Number 9 

SEED COLLECTION DATES OF WOODY PLANTS 

M ANY people are interested in collecting the seeds of woody plants, chiefly 
for propagation purposes. It is very difficult to find the dates on which 
many of them ripen. During the war years special lists of these ripening dates 
had to be made up for some of the young people at the Arnold Arboretum who 
were doing the seed collecting at that time, since they were unfamiliar with most 
of the plants. This information, together with some other notes, has been massed 
together into one large list which gives the approximate dates on which seed is 
gathered in the Arnold Arboretum. 

The actual date seed ripens in one locality may vary from year to year in the 
same way and for the same reasons as do the blooming dates of plants and the 
autumn color. This year, for instance, the Acer rubrum Schlesingeri opposite the 
Administration Building in the Arboretum changed its color to a good red, Sep- 
tember 21 whereas last year it was definitely red by September first. 

Often one makes a special effort to collect seed of a certain plant only to find 
on coming to the plant that all of it has fallen on the ground or been eaten by 
the birds and rodents, or been partially destroyed by weevils. The seeds of witch 
hazels, in particular, must be collected before the capsules open, for at that time 
they are actually thrown considerable distances by the explosive opening of the 
capsule. Certain plants like Chionanthus virginicus , with fleshy fruits, may appear 
ripe one day and be gone the next, merely because a flock of birds have taken 
them all from the plant in a few hours time. This has happened with this plant 
on several occasions in the Arboretum. 

There are many plants which retain their fruits for a long time in the fall, and 
far into the winter, the fruits of which may be collected over a long period. Many 
of the seeds collected on the dates in the following list will have to be cleaned 
and dried, preferably in the greenhouse. Then there is an after-ripening period 
or a period of dormancy for many seeds so that it is frequently months from the 



time the seed is collected until it is ready for planting. However, when seed is 
to be obtained for special purposes, it is best to collect it as soon as it is ripe, in- 
stead of waiting too long and taking the chance of it disappearing. The following 
list of dates on which seed collections have been made in the Arboretum can be 
considerably more flexible than the single date entry would lead one to believe. 
Other seed collecting dates should be inserted as the information is collected and 
the entire series of dates changed to agree with local climatic conditions. 


Seed Collection Dates 


Abies sp. 

Oct. 1 5 

Carpinus sp. 

Aug. 20 

Acanthopanax sp. 

Oct. 10 

Castanea mollissima 

Oct. 15 

Acer Ginnala 

Aug. 15 

Ceanothus pallidus roseus 

Aug. 15 ; 

Acer griseum 

Sept. 15 

Cedrus libani 

Aug. 15 

Acer negundo 

Sept. 5 

Celastrus sp. 

Oct. 10 

Acer platanoides 

Sept. 20 

Cercidiphyllum japonicum 

Oct. 20 

Acer saccharum 

Sept. 19 

Chaenomeles lagenaria 

Oct. 16 

Aesculus sp. 

Sept. 1 5 

Chionanthus sp. 

Sept. 15 

Akebia quinata 

Sept. 15 

Cornus alba 

June 20 

Albizzia julibrissin rosea 

Oct. 20 

Cornus Amomum 

Aug. 30 

Alnus glutinosa 

Oct. 20 

Cornus asperifolia 

Sept. 5 

Amelanchier amabilis 

July 30 

Cornus Baileyi 

Aug. 20 

Amelanchier oblongifolia 

June 20 

Cornus florida 

Oct. 5 

Amelanchier sanguinea 

July 30 

Cornus glabrata 

Sept. 5 

Amelanchier spicata 

July 5 

Cornus kousa 

Aug. 30 

Ampelopsis sp. 

Oct. 5 

Cornus mas 

Aug. 15 

Aralia spinosa 

Sept. 20 

Cornus racemosa 

Aug. 15 

Aronia arbuti folia 

Oct. 10 

Cornus sanguinea 

Sept. 30 

Aronia melanocarpa 

Sept. 15 

Cornus stolonifera 

July 5 

Aronia prunifolia 

Oct. 10 

Cotin us Coggygria 

Aug. 30 

Berberis aggregata 

Nov. 5 

Cotoneaster acutifolia 

Oct. 10 

Berberis amurensis 

Oct. 5 

Cotoneaster adpressa 

Sept. 20 

Berberis Bretschneideri 

Oct. 5 

Cotoneaster affinis 

Nov. 15 

Berberis canadensis 

Nov. 5 

Cotoneaster ambigua 

Sept. 20 

Berberis chinensis 

Oct. 15 

Cotoneaster bullata 

Oct. 10 

Berberis Fendleri 

Aug. 30 

Cotoneaster Dielsiana 

Oct. 10 

Berberis Gilgiana 

Oct. 15 

Cotoneaster divaricata 

Oct. 10 

Berberis Henry ana 

Sept. 20 

Cotoneaster foveolata 

Oct. 5 

Berberis heteropoda 

Aug. 30 

Cotoneaster horizontalis 

Oct. 30 

Berberis koreana 

Oct. 30 

Cotoneaster integerrima 

Oct. 30 

Berberis laxiflora 

Aug. 20 

Cotoneaster lucida 

Oct. 10 

Berberis Poireti 

Sept. 20 

Cotoneaster melanocarpa 

Sept. 20 

Berberis Thunbergii 

Nov. 10 

Cotoneaster moupinensis 

Sept. 20 

Berberis Vernae 

Sept. 5 

Cotoneaster multiflora 

Nov. 5 

Berberis vulgaris 

Oct. 20 

Cotoneaster nitens 

Sept. 20 

Betula papyrifera 

Aug. 20 

Cotoneaster racemiflora 

Aug. 30 

Buddleia sp. 

Oct. 20 

Cotoneaster rosea 

Sept. 20 

Callicarpa sp. 

Nov. 5 

Cotoneaster rugosa 

Nov. 30 

Caragana Maximowicziana 

Aug. 30 

Cotoneaster salicifolia 

Nov. 30 


[ 54 ] 


Cotoneaster tenuipes 

Sept. 20 

Lonicera bella 

July 5 

Cotoneaster tomentosa 

Oct. 30 

Lonicera bracteolaris 

Nov. 15 

Cotoneaster Zabeli 

Oct. 10 

Lonicera chrysantha 

July 5 

Crataegus arnoldiana 

Aug. 15 

Lonicera coerulea 

June 15 

Crataegus Laval lei 

. Nov. 20 

Lonicera demissa 

Aug. 30 

Crataegus nitida 

Nov. 20 

Lonicera Ferdinandi 

Oct. 10 

Crataegus Oxyacantha 

Oct. 20 

Lonicera fragrantissima 

May 30 

Crataegus Pbaenopyrum 

Nov. 30 

Lonicera Henryi 

Nov. 15 

Crataegus prunifolia 

Nov. 20 

Lonicera iberica 

Sept. 30 

Crataegus punctata 

Sept. 5 

Lonicera Korolkovii 

Nov. 15 

Cytisus nigricans 

Aug. 15 

Lonicera Maackii 

Nov. 15 

; Cytisus purpureus 

Aug. 15 

Lonicera Maximowiczii 

July 5 

Daphne Mezereum 

June 15 

Lonicera Morrowii 

June 30 

Ehretia thyrsiflora 

Aug. 20 

Lonicera muendeniensis 

July 5 

Elaeagnus multiflora 

July 5 

Lonicera notha 

July 5 

Elaeagnus umbellata 

Nov. 15 

Lonicera orientalis 

Aug. 30 

Euonymus alata 

Oct. 15 

Lonicera Standishii 

May 30 

Euonymus americana 

Oct. 15 

Lonicera subsessilis 

Sept. 15 

Euonymus bulgarica 

Oct. 10 

Lonicera tangutica 

Aug. 30 

P2uonymus Bungeana 

Oct. 15 

Lonicera tatarica 

July 5 

Euonymus Fortunei vegeta 

Oct. 15 

Lonicera Webbiana 

Aug. 15 

jEuonvmus nikoensis 

Oct. 15 

Lonicera Xylosteum 

July 5 

lEuonymus obovata 

Oct. 15 

Lycium sp. 

Oct. 20 

jEuonymus sanguinea 

Oct. 15 

Magnolia acuminata 

Oct. 5 

Evodia Daniellii 

Sept. 15 

Magnolia Soulangeana 

Oct. 5 

Fagus sp. 

Sept. 20 

Magnolia stellata 

Oct. 5 

Fothergilla sp. 

Oct. 5 

Mahonia Aquifolium 

July 5 

Gaylussacia sp. 

Aug. 15 

Malus baccata 

Oct. 20 

Gingko biloba 

Oct. 15 

Malus robusta 

Oct. 30 

Halesia sp. 

Sept. 20 

Malus toringoides 

Oct. 20 

Hamamelis sp. 

Oct. 5 

Malus many sp. 

Oct. 25 

Hicoria sp. 

Oct. 15 

Morus sp. 

July 25 

Hippophae rhamnoides 

Oct. 30 

Myrica pensylvanica 

Nov. 5 

Hydrangea petiolaris 

Oct. 10 

Nemopanthus mucronatus 

July 5 

Ilex geniculata 

Aug. 5 

Nyssa sylvatica 

Sept. 20 

Ilex glabra 

Nov. 30 

Oxydendrum arboreum 

Oct. 22 

Ilex laevigata 

Sept. 20 

Philadelpbus virginalis 

Sept. 10 

jllex opaca 

Oct. 30 

Photinia villosa 

Oct. 20 

Ilex verticillata 

Oct . 1 5 

Physocarpus sp. 

Oct. 20 

Ilex yunnanensis 

Sept. 20 

Picea sp. 

Oct. 15 

Juglans sp. 

Oct. 15 

Pieris sp. 

Sept. 20 

iJuniperus sp. 

Oct. 15 

Pinus sp. 

Sept. 25 

Kalopanax pictus 

Sept. 20 

Prinsepia sp. 

Aug. 5 

Kolkwitzia amabilis 

Aug. 20 

Prunus apetala 

June 5 

Laburnum sp. 

Aug. 20 

Prunus canescens 

June 15 

.Leucotboe Catesbaei 

Oct. 15 

Prunus cerasifera 

Aug. 20 

Ligustrum sp. 

Oct. 30 

Prunus Cerasus 

June 30 

iLindera Benzoin 

Sept. 15 

Prunus glandulosa 

Aug. 10 

Lonicera alpigena 

Aug. 5 

Prunus japonica 

Aug. 5 

Lonicera Altmannii 

July 5 

Prunus maritima 

Aug. 8 


[ 55 ] 


Prunus Sargenti 

June 20 

Rosa Willmottiae 

Sept. 15 

Prunus subhirtella 

June 20 

Rosa Woodsii 

Sept. 15 

Prunus tomentosa 

June 20 

Sambucus canadensis 

Aug. 30 

Pseudolarix amabilis 

Oct. 30 

Schisandra chinensis 

Sept. 15 

Pseudotsuga taxifolia 

Oct. 10 

Solanum Dulcamara 

Oct. 5 

Pyracantha coccinea 

Nov. 15 

Sorbaronia Jackii 

Oct. 5 

Quercus sp. 

Sept. 10-20 

Sorbus sp. 

Oct. 5 

Rhamnus Frangula 

Aug. 5 

Spiraea Veitchii 

Aug. 20 

Rhododendron sp. 

Oct. 15 

Stewartia sp. 

Oct. 15 

Rhodotypos scandens 

Nov. 5 

Symphoricarpos sp. 

Oct. 10 

Rhus copallina 

Sept. 5 

Symplocos paniculata 

Sept. 30 

Rhus typhina 

Aug. 5 

Syringa amurensis 

Aug. 30 

Ribes fasciculatum 

Nov. 15 

Taxus sp. 

Oct. 10 

Ribes odoratum 

Aug. 5 

Thuja occidentalis 

Oct. 15 

Robinia sp. 

Oct. 5 

Tilia sp. 

Oct. 15 

Rosa acicularis 

Sept. 15 

Tsuga sp. 

Oct. 10 

Rosa agrestis 

July 20 

Ulmus americana 

May 5 

Rosa alba 

Sept. 15 

Ulmus parvifolia 

Oct. 15 

Rosa amblyotis 

Aug. 5 

Ulmus pumila 

May 5 

Rosa arvensis 

Oct. 30 

Vaccinium Oldhamii 

Oct. 5 

Rosa blanda 

Sept. 15 

Vaccinium corymbosum 

July 30 

Rosa canina 

Oct. 15 

Vaccinium Vitis-idaea 

July 20 

Rosa Carolina 

Aug. 30 

Viburnum acerifolium 

Oct. 15 

Rosa coriifolia 

Sept. 15 

Viburnum alnifolium 

Aug. 20 

Rosa corymbifera 

Oct. 15 

Viburnum betulifolium 

Oct. 5 

Rosa davurica 

Aug. 30 

Viburnum Burkwoodii 

Oct. 30 

Rosa Ecae 

July 30 

Viburnum Carlesii 

Oct. 5 

Rosa Eglanteria 

Oct. 15 

Viburnum cassinoides 

Oct. 5 

Rosa gallica 

Sept. 30 

Viburnum dentatum 

Oct. 5 

Rosa Harisonii 

Aug. 5 

Viburnum dilatatum 

Sept. 20 

Rosa Helenae 

Oct. 15 

Viburnum fragrans 

June 20 

Rosa hibernica 

Oct. 15 

Viburnum hupehense 

Oct. 20 

Rosa horrida 

Oct. 1 5 

Viburnum Lantana 

Aug. 20 

Rosa Hugonis 

July 20 

Viburnum Lentago 

Oct. 20 

Rosa Macounii 

Aug. 30 

Viburnum lobophyllum 

Nov. 5 

Rosa multiflora 

Nov. 20 

Viburnum Opulus 

Nov. 5 

Rosa pendulina 

Aug. 30 

Viburnum ovatifolium 

Oct. 5 

Rosa Primula 

Aug. 5 

Viburnum prunifolium 

Oct. 5 

Rosa reversa 

Sept. 5 

Viburnum Sargenti 

Nov. 5 

Rosa Roxburghii 

July 20 

Viburnum setigerum 

Oct. 15 

Rosa rubrifolia 

Sept. 15 

Viburnum Sieboldii 

Aug. 15 

Rosa rugosa 

Sept. 5 

Viburnum tomentosum 

July 15 

Rosa setigera 

Nov. 15 

Viburnum trilobum 

Aug. 30 

Rosa spinosissima 

July 20 

Viburnum Wrightii 

Sept. 15 

Rosa virginiana 

Oct. 30 

Wisteria sp. 

Oct. 30 

Rosa Wichuraiana 

Nov. 15 

Zanthoxylum americanum 

Sept. 5 



Donald 

Wyman 


[ 56 ] 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 OCTOBER 17, 1947 Number 10 

THE DROUGHT 

T HE Arnold Arboretum has received practically no rain since September 2 
when a generous 2.71 inches fell. During the month of August (with nor- 
mally inches of rain) only about 2 inches fell. As a result of this, the plants 
in the Arboretum are suffering from the terrible drought which has struck New 
England and is doing such tremendous damage. The woods are tinder dry, but 
what is even more important (though less noticeable) to those who are interested 
in good ornamental plantings, the soil is extremely dry. In pulling some weed 
shrubs during the past two weeks, we noticed that the soil is powder dry for sev- 
eral feet below the surface. The foliage of the trees and shrubs started off to a 
splendid display of color this fall, only to be prematurely dried up by lack of suf- 
ficient moisture. This is the worst fall drought during the past thirty three years. 

There are two very important things to keep in mind for those with gardens 
in the drought area. Any plantings made this fall should receive plenty of water 
if they are to be kept alive over winter. Secondly, and more important, is the 
plight of the evergreens, both narrow-leaved and broad-leaved. These plants de- 
pend upon absorbing their winter’s supply of water just prior to the time the 
ground freezes in the late fall or early winter. With the unusually warm — actually 
hot — days which we have been having for several weeks, these evergreens have 
given off far more water than usual for this time of year, and there is far less 
available for them to absorb from the soil than there has been for decades. 

If evergreens are to have any chance at all of coming through the winter in a 
normal condition, they must receive plenty of water from now until the time the 
ground freezes. This is of the utmost importance. If sufficient rains do not come, 
and these plants are compelled to go into the winter with no additional water, 
serious “winter injury” will result, not necessarily from any climatic condition 
brought about by winter cold, but because the plants do not have sufficient water 
before winter sets in. Consequently water all evergreens well, now, and do not 
allow the soil about them to dry out again before the ground freezes. 

[ 57 ] 


FRUITS THIS FALL 


This has been a rather good year for the fruiting of woody plants, especially 
the conifers. Many of the shrubs have also produced their full complement of 
fruits as well. Sorbus discolor , for instance; with pure white fruits, was literally 
covered this fall. Many of the viburnums produced an abundance of fruits, as 
well as the Malus , Lonicera and Taxus species. It was a season when the fruits i 
ripened fast. Many of the conifers opened their cones in record time, probably 1 
because of the effects of the drought, so that seed collecting had to be done i 
rapidly in order to obtain everything desired. Fleshy fruits, especially those 
ripening in the fall, matured quickly due to the drought and the weeks of un- 
seasonably warm weather. 

One of the disconcerting things noticed in late October is that some of the I 
dormant buds on certain shrubs are starting in to new growth. The dry and ex- j 
tremely warm weather has brought this about. Such young growth of course has 
no possible chance of survival when it appears at this time. With the warm 
weather predicted to remain for some time yet, this additional danger to shrubs 
will probably be increased. There is little that can be done about it, unfortunately, i 

Some of the more interesting plants with fruits this fall were Decaisnea Far- 
gesii , with fleshy purple pods, somewhat similar to, but smaller than, those of 
Akebia quinata. Ca/licarpa japonica was covered with its bright purple fruits and 
some of the native deciduous hollies were also well covered with fruits. Ailanthus \ 
altissima erythrocarpa displayed its red fruits well, thus underlining the fact that i 
it has more colorful fruits than the species growing immediately beside it with 
pale yellowish to almost colorless fruits. Cotoneaster muliijlora and C. racemijlora 
soongorica were well covered with their conspicuous bright berries. One of the 
most interesting of all was the fruit of Lonicera quin quel ocularis transluscens, with ! 
white, translucent fruit through which the brown seeds are easily seen. The yel- 
low fruiting Viburnum dilatatum xanthocarpum also was resplendent in its colorful 
fruits, and branches placed in water keep this bright display for many days. A 
splendid specimen of Viburnum setigerum aurantiacum growing on Bussey Hill, 
bore many clusters of its bright orange fruit, unique among the hardy northern 
viburnums. 

One other plant bears particular mention, for it fruited unusually well this fall, 
namely Celastrus angulata. This has been growing in the Arnold Arboretum since \ 
1924 and is apparently hardy. It has never been listed in our records of plants v 
suffering winter injury. Its vigorous growth, large leaves and 6 inch long clus- I 
ters of yellow to “Indian Orange” berries in late October and November, make 
it unusually prominent at this time of year. 

Donald Wyman 


[ 58 ] 





PLATE VIII. The Meadow Road in the Arnold Arboretum. 

( Ulmus americana and Rosa virginiana on left; Xanthorrhiza simplicissima as a ground cover bordering walk on right.) It is 
just such scenes as this which are now being given special attention in the Arboretum. Considerable progress has been made 
this fall in reorganizing the plantings in the Shrub Collection, Forsythia, Philadelphvs, Weigela. Deutzias and Spiraeas. It is 
hoped that more can be accomplished this winter and next spring. 


This beautiful bronze plaque in honor of Professor Charles S. Sargent was prepared at the expense of certain 
members of the Visiting Committee who were all personal friends of Professor Sargent. It was installed on the 
right-hand pillar of the Jamaica Plain Gate of the Arnold Arboretum in mid-May 1946. 





ARNOLDIA 




A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 


Volume 7 


NOVEMBER 28, 194-7 Number 11 


WOODY PLANTS WITH INTERESTING BARK IN WINTER 

A TRIP through the Arnold Arboretum in the dead of winter will disclose a 
number of plants with interesting bark characteristics, some of them new 
to many gardeners. The lists appended to this issue of Arnoldia are the results 
of just such a trip. Some of the plants are commonly known; others, possibly 
unusual in gardens, should very definitely be noted as potential colorful contrib- 
utors to winter gardens. The more color in. the winter landscape, the more in- 
teresting the garden. 

The color and general characteristics of a tree’s bark come with old age, and 
mature trees are valued specifically for these characteristics. However, shrubs 
with colored twigs frequently can be forced to grow brighter-colored twigs for 
winter display if a few simple maintenance items are practiced. 

Cornus alba, the Tatarian dogwood, is known to have red one-year twigs. The 
color will not be pronounced on an old plant which has been growing in poor soil 
for some length of time, and the one-year growth may be only two or three inches 
in length. This is not conducive to a colorful display. If the same plant is heavily 
pruned in the early spring, possibly even cut to the ground, then it will send out 
vigorous young shoots which will color nicely by winter. Applying a nitrogenous 
fertilizer will also help in the production of colorful bark. In fact, any practice 
which aids the rapid vegetative growth of the shoots, will aid in the coloration 
of the bark of the twigs. 

Varieties might well be selected which are known to be vividly colored. The 
best of all the shrubby dogwoods for colored winter twigs is Cornus alba sibirica , 
the Siberian dogwood with twigs a brilliant red, and when the plant is forced 
into vigorous growth during the growing season, there is not a woody plant with 
bark more prominently colored in winter. 

Sunshine plays an important part in the coloration of some twigs, just as it does 
in promoting more intensive color in the fall foliage. Some of the blueberries, tor 

[ 61 .] 


instance, may have green to greenish one-year twigs when they are grown in the 
shade, but in the sunshine their one-year twigs turn a bright red. This is espe- 
cially true of such plants as Cornus alba sibirica and Salix alba chermesina, both of 
which can produce twigs of brilliant color. The older these plants become, the 
less brilliant this color, merely because the one-vear twigs become smaller and 
more dispersed throughout the plant. When the plant is young, or when it has 
been pruned heavily, then the one-year shoots are confined to a smaller space, j 
and make a much more brilliant display. 

The following list of shrubs and trees include about 150 plants which have ] 
colored bark or colored twigs in winter, and all are growing in the Arnold Arbo- j 
return. Certainly there are sufficient to make possible an interesting selection for | 
any winter garden. The seventy plants listed with an asterisk (*) have bark more j 
interesting than the others and might be given preference wherever possible. Of 
course, there are other plants of interest for their bark characteristics in winter, 
but the ones listed are some of the more important. 

Plants with Red Twigs or Red Bark 

Acer palmatum 'j Twigs red, but dispersed over such a wide area 

Acer pseudo-sieboldianum / the co lor j s mostly unnoticeable from a distance ! | 

Acer Sieboldianum / 

Ceanothus pallidus rosea — dull red 
*Cornus alba 

*Cornus alba sibirica — bright red, bark more colorful than any other dogwood 
Cornus amomum 
Cornus arnoldiana 
Cornus australis 
Cornus glabrata 
Cornus obliqua 
Cornus pubescens 
*Cornus stolonifera 

*Cornus stolonifera coloradensis — young twigs dull red 
Cornus Walteri — young twigs dark red 
*Gavlussacia baccata — twigs of current year’s growth red 
Gaylussacia frondosa — twigs of current year’s growth red 
Hvd rangea petiolaris - — young twigs a shiny reddish brown 
Leucothoe racemosa — twigs of current year’s growth red 
*Pinus sylvestris — bark of upper branches and trunk red 
*Rosa acicularis — young twigs dark red 
*Rosa canina — young twigs dark red 
Rosa centifolia — young twigs dull red 
*Rosa coriifolia cinerea — young twigs glossy red 
*Rosa Kochiana — twigs bright red, one of best 

[ 62 ] 





Left — Ulmus parvi/olia: the true Chinese elm. Apparently not all plants of this species have this desirable interesting 
bark characteristic. Trees should be propagated asexually from native trees with this type of bark. Right — Steicartia 
koreana: Korean stewartia. Several other stewartias also have this interesting type of bark. 


Rosa Luciae — young twigs dull reddish purple 
Rosa multiflora — young twigs dull red 
Rosa pomifera — young twigs glossy red 
*Rosa setigera — twigs bright red, one of best 
Rosa Spaldingii — young twigs glossy red 
*Rosa virginiana — - twigs bright red, one of best 
*Salix alba chermesina — vigorous young branches a bright red 
*Vaccinium corymbosum — twigs of current year’s growth red 
^Viburnum opulus nanum — younger twigs red 

Shrubs with Gray Twigs 

(These are sufficiently prominent to afford a colorful contrast in the winter) 

Acanthopanax Sieboldianus — all twigs gray 
Aesculus parviflora 
Aralia sp. 

*Buddleia alternifolia., — young twigs gray, older branches light brown 
*Clethra alnifolia 
*Cornus racemosa 
*Elaeagnus umbellata 

*Ilex decidua — both young and old twigs gray 
*Lonicera Morrowii — all twigs gray 
Lonicera tatarica — all twigs gray 
Lvcium chinense 
Myrica pensvlvanica 
*Neillia sinensis — all twigs gray 
*Prinsepia sp. — all twigs gray 
Spiraea cana 
Viburnum Opulus 
Viburnum Sargenti 
Viburnum trilobum 

Plants with Green Twigs 

Coronilla emeroides 

Coronilla Emerus — but not a good color 
*Cytisus praecox 
*Cytisus scoparius 
*Cytisus supinus 
Genista radiata 
*Jasminum nudiflorum 
*Kerria japonica f 

*Poncirus trifolia ta — twigs, oldei* branches green 
*Rosa Wichuraiana 
Salix blanda — twigs green to brown 

f ] 


Sophora japonica — twigs green but not a good color 
Smilax sp. 

Shrubs with Yellow Twigs 
*Cornus stolonifera flaviramea 

Kerria japonica aureo-vittata — twigs predominantly yellow, but some pure 
green, some striped yellow and green 
*Salix alba tristis 
*Salix alba vitellina 

*Zenobia pulverulenta — young twigs light yellowish brown. Probably this would 
be a prominent color if the plant were cut to the ground occasionally 

Shrubs with Twigs a Conspicuous Light Brown Color 

*Akebia quinata ^Hydrangea arborescens 

Celastrus orbiculata Philadelphus Lemoinei vars. 

Deutzia sp. 

Bark of Trunk and Branches Gray 

*Acer rubrum 
*Acer saccharinum 
*Amelanchier sp. 

Celtis Bungeana 

Celtis laevigata — gray bark on upper trunk 
Celtis occidentalis — gray bark on upper trunk 
*Cladrastis lutea 
Crataegus — many species 
Euonymus sachalinensis — dark gray bark 
Euonymus Maackii 
*Fagus — all species 

*\Iagnolia — - several species — especially the bark of the upper trunk and 
branches 

Malus micromalus 

Quercus borealis — bark of young trunk and branches 
Quercus velutina — bark of young trunk and branches 
*Sorbus sp. — light gray bark 
*Ulmus carpinifolia 

Ulmus hollandica superba — bark of young trunk and branches light gray 
Ulmus laciniata nikoensis — bark light gray 


Bark of Trunk and Branches White 


*Betula coerulea 
*Betula coerulea-grandis 
*Betula japonica 
*Betula Maximowicziana 


*Betula papyrifera (best) 
*Betula populifolia 
*Betula pendula 
*Betula utilis 


[ 65 ] 


Left — Acer griseum: the Paper bark maple with lustrous brown exfoliating bark. 

Right — Finns Bungeana: the Lace bark pine, the best of all the pines for ornamental bark. 



Bark of Trunk Cherry-Like 

(sometimes exfoliating) 

Betula lutea — bark of older trunks .yellowish brown 
*Prunus Sargentii 

*Prunus serrula — bright red, one of best ! 

* Primus Schmittii — very glossy, red 

Prunus — many other species of course, but above are some of the most out- 
standing 

Syringa amurensis japonica 

Bark of Trunk or Older Branches Exfoliating, Either Shredding Off 
in Long Strips or Flaking Off in Regular or Irregular Patches 

*Acer griseum — one of best, light brown color 
Acer triflorum 

Betula davurica — purplish brown bark, very good and peculiarly interesting 
in that the bark peels or flakes off in regular strips an inch or so square 
Betula lutea — bark of older trunks yellowish, cherry -like, exfoliating 
Betula nigra — dark, blackish, plated bark on older trunks, often chipping off 1 
Betula — white-barked species 

Clethra acuminata — older bark brown, exposed young bark gray 
Cornus officinalis 

Deutzia glabrata — peculiar exfoliating bark, light brown new bark, dark brown 
old bark 

Euonymus sanguinea — dark gray exfoliating bark, irregularly colored patches 
remaining on older stems 
*Hicoria ovata — stiff older bark flaking off 

*Hypericum arnoldianum — peeling and a lustrous reddish brown 
*Kolkwitzia amabilis — bark shredding off in long strips 
*Lonicera Ferdinandi — bark shredding off in long strips 
Lonicera iberica — bark shredding off in long strips 
j^Parrotia persica — bark flaking, older bark red brown 
Pnysocarpus sp. — shredding bark 

*Platanus acerifolia — greenish underbark on some specimens and not on others, 
flaking off in irregular patches 

*Platanus occidentalis — white underbark, gray outerbark flaking off in irregular 
patches 

*Pinus Bungeana — bark flaking off in irregular patches, underbark almost white 
Rosa Roxburghii — bark shredding off in long strips 
*Stewartia koreana — mottled bark and of the best! Older bark brown, younger 
bark light brown 

Stewartia pseudo-camellia — also mottled but not as ornamental as S. koreana 

[ 67 ] 


*Ulmus parvifolia — mottled bark, flaking off in irregular patches. Apparently 
this is a clonal characteristic, for some trees do not appear to have it 


Miscellaneous 

Acer capillipes — green striped bark 
*Acer pensylvanicum — green and striped bark 
Ceanothus americanus — bark green to light brown 
Decaisnea Fargesii — gray to yellow old and young twigs 
*Euonymus alata - — corky wings on twigs and older branches 
*Phellodendron amurense — bark corky on mature trees 
Prunus triloba — bark of older branches a pronounced black 
Quercus montana — corky bark on mature trees 
Rubus occidentalis — twigs whitish to pinkish 
Salix fragilis — bark of young branches yellow brown 
*Salix purpurea — twigs reddish purple 
Ulmus alata — corky wings on twigs 

Zelkova serrata - — corky ridges on bark of twigs and small branches 

Donald Wyman 


[ 68 ] 


Herbarium 
d University 


ARNOLDIA 



A continuation of the 
Bulletin of Popular Information 
of the Arnold Arboretum, Harvard University 

Volume 7 DECEMBER 12, 1947 Number 12 

SPENT HOPS — AN EFFECTIVE MULCHING MATERIAL 

T HE eradication of weeds by means of applying chemicals has become a pop- 
ular method in the garden, and many a gardener is probably trying out some 
preparation in order to eliminate tedious hand labor. In the Arnold Arboretum 
we have been forced to find time-saving means of eliminating weeds. Many chem- 
ical materials have been tried, and not all have proved successful. Some of our 
experiences have taught us lessons that may be helpful to others, and as a result, 
these notes are offered. 

There are many kinds of weeds in every garden, but the weeds with which 
we have to deal in the ornamental plantings of the Arnold Arboretum are chiefly 
perennial weeds, and the rampant spreading quack grass ( Agropyron repens). 
When allowed to grow eight inches or more in height about the base of a recently 
planted small tree or shrub this pernicious pest can (and frequently does) mate- 
rially weaken the plant and in some cases may grow so vigorously that it will 
absorb a greater part of the moisture about the plant during dry spells, and so 
be responsible for the death of the plant. 

It is this type of weed, growing around younger plants that have been set out 
as individuals throughout the 265 acres of the Arboretum, which has proved 
I costly. A good many years ago, sufficient labor was available so that the weeds 
about all young plants could be kept in check by hand-hoeing. Now, of course, 
with high wages and restricted budget, such costly hand labor is out of the ques- 
tion. Other means must be used to control weeds. One of the methods used in 
weed control at the Arnold Arboretum is the use of mulches. 

Various Types Tried 

Mulches are highly desirable about many plants, and indeed, experiments have 
shown that on Massachusetts soils similar to those in the Arnold Arboretum, al- 
most any kind of a mulch will aid tree growth. However, it is not quite as simple 

[ 69 ] 




as that in the Arboretum. In the first place, a mulch must be fairly inexpensive 
to meet our needs. Secondly, it must be neat in appearance, be easily maintained 
and not blow away in high winds. Lastly — and this is most important — it must 
not be easily burned or set on fire. It has proved very difficult to find a mulching 
material meeting all three of these essential requirements. 

Hay and straw make good and cheap mulches, but they are quickly set on fire. 
Unfortunately, this type of vandalism is one which must be met in any public 
area. A flash fire about the base of a tree or shrub can easily mar permanently 
or even kill the plant. 

Leaves have been used, but unless these are well-rotted, they burn easily, and 
even in the case of leaf mold, there are times when it will dry out during the hot 
summer months and then can easily be burned, especially during periods of high 
winds. Oak leaves and maple leaves, individually and mixed together have been 
tried without too much success. 

Wood shavings, mixed with horse manure (when the shavings have been used 
as bedding in stables) have been tried. Under some conditions these may prove 
satisfactory, but under our conditions this material dries out quickly and tends to 
blow about, giving the plantings an unkempt appearance. 

Ground coconut hulls, buckwheat hulls, ground banana stalks, and glass fibers, 
have been tried, but these have proved too expensive to be used extensively un- 
der our conditions. Vermiculite, too, was tried as a mulch, but it proved too ex- 
pensive to be used on the large scale necessary in the Arboretum. It tended to 
pack down rather hard after it had been exposed to the elements out-of-doors for 
a few months, and it was quickly evident that it proved an ideal medium for the 
germination of weed seeds. 

Peat moss has, of course, been used extensively in planting and when so used 
has been thoroughly mixed with soil. Used strictly as a mulch, it is neat in ap- 
pearance, and not too expensive, but as everyone knows, it does dry out, espe- 
cially in summer. We have had several experiences with peat fires in the Arbo- 
retum, and some experience with small blazes in peat mulches. The last one was 
the most costly. Native peat moss was obtained from a local source at a reason- 
able cost and was placed six inches thick about the conifers in the dwarf collec- 
tion. Admittedly it looked exceptionally well. However, a month after it was 
applied it became very dry due to a summer drought. A fire started, either set 
by children or as a result of a carelessly flipped cigarette, and with a stiff breeze, 
flames were quickly whipped up that ruined hundreds of dollars worth of rare 
plants before the fire department came. A new fire was whipped into a blaze by 
the wind on every spot of peat moss mulch where a spark would light. 

The fire department put on 600 gallons of water, and our own spray cart ap- 
plied another 600 gallons that afternoon. The area burned over was about 50' X 
1 50'. By nightfall it looked as if all the smoldering spots were out. The next 
morning, the peat moss in that area was smoldering in 19 places and had to be 

[ 70 ] 


dug out. Consequently, on areas far removed from a water supply, and where 
there is a fire menace in one form or another, peat moss is not the type of mulch 
to use, especially on valuable plants which could be destroyed by fire. It is of 
course widely used as a mulch, but in areas where water can be applied inter- 
mittently to keep it moist, and where there is no fire menace. 

Spent Hops 

After these experiences, and others, spent hops were used in mulching. These 
are obtained inexpensively and hauled directly from a local brewery while there 
is still a strong odor to them, but over the year and a half they have been used, 
they are proving better as a mulching material, for our purposes, than any of the 
above-mentioned materials. They are inexpensive, easily applied, look well, do 
not dry out quickly and do not burn readily. 

Approximately 87% °f their weight (as obtained from the brewery) is water, 
12% organic matter, 0.4% nitrogen and 1% ash. They test very acid (pH 4.8). 
From this analysis, it is obvious that there is not much to them, yet the interest- 
ing thing is that after they have been exposed to the atmosphere of a dry room 
for over a month, they still will not blaze up and <4 catch fire” when a match is 
applied. They can be burned, yes, but the blaze goes out soon unless the fire is 
sustained by other combustible material. If a fire were started in the leaves about 
them and were fanned by a very high wind, they might burn. However, for all 
practical purposes it appears that they burn only with the greatest difficulty. 
They have been used in all parts of the Arboretum, and although we recently 
experienced a very severe drought, there was no fire in any of the mulches of 
hops, nor did these catch on fire when adjacent areas burned. 

Not everyone will be sufficiently enthusiastic about their non-burning proper- 
ties to use them to protect plants from fire. We have done just that, placing heavy 
mulches about the arborvitae specimens to prevent a possible fire from spreading 
to this highly vulnerable group of plants. They retain a large amount of water 
for long periods and so are very serviceable for use in a mulch. 

When applied in the summer, and especially when applied in a mulch approx- 
imately 6 r/ deep about a plant, care should be taken to keep the hops 6 r/ to 10 /r 
away from young trunks and tender shoots. If this is not done, the extremely 
high temperatures caused by the wet, disintegrating hops in the hot summer sun, 
will cause injury to the succulent or tender-barked stems. 

Disagreeable Odor 

Some characteristic may appear that will prove a decided deterrent to their 
use as a mulch, but during the one and a half years of their use in the Arnold 
Arboretum, no serious drawback has been found except, possibly, their odor. In 
a small compact garden near the house, this would probably be obnoxious, but in 


the open spaces of the Arboretum we find that the odor gradually disappears after 
a few weeks. 

Several conditions are created in the soil under a mulch which are conducive 
to the better growth of plants. Mulches of hops, if thick enough, keep the weeds 
under control about a plant which is an additional benefit, and in many cases the 
most important. A thin layer, 2" to 3" deep is not sufficient to kill the weeds. 
A 6 /; mulch is effective. One of the experiments was carried out under lawn 
conditions. A 6 " mulch of hops was placed in wide circles about several trees in 
February. Not a single blade of grass came through this mulch until the end of 
June when a few small weeds appeared. By mid-July they were growing vigor- 
ously, but a mere stirring and rearranging of the hops, covering over the vigorous 
weeds, was sufficient to stop all weed growth under that mulch for the rest of the 
season. In other words, it took about five minutes to maintain this particular hop 
mulch for the year. 

When applied to taller, more vigorous growing grass, the grass or weeds may 
force growth through in a shorter period, in which case they are easily pulled. 
Rearrangement of the mulch several times might be equally satisfactory. How- 
ever, if not promptly attended to, the few weeds that do come through the mulch 
will grow far more vigorously than they would without it. Mulches of hops have 
been placed on rhododendrons, laurel, lilacs, cotoneasters, elms, cytisus, roses, 
spiraeas, deutzias, hydrangeas, hollies and many other plants in the Arnold Ar- 
boretum with excellent results. 

Many chemicals are also being tried at the Arnold Arboretum to combat the 
weed menace. Some are proving more successful than others. Burning the weeds 
with a flame gun has been tried in several situations and has not proved as effec- 
tive a control under our conditions as the hop mulch, nor as the application of 
certain chemicals. These experiments are continuing and will be reported later. 
After a year and a half of mulching with spent hops continuously under many 
varied situations, they have proved highly effective material for weed control 
about woody plants, under the conditions prevalent in the Arnold Arboretum. 

Donald Wyman 


Note: The Horticultural Colour Chart (described in Arnoldia 7 : 41-52), pub- 
lished by the Royal Horticultural Society of England, may now be purchased in 
this country from the Chronica Botanica Company, 79 Sartelle Road, Waltham, 
Massachusetts, at a cost of $14.00. 


[ 72 ] 


ini iJnivp--<iifv 

II li U \ < • t f * » <j I v. j 

S, is hS . 

index to volume vii 

Illustrations are in bold face type 


Abeliophyllum distichum, 25 
Acer glabrum, 32 

— griseum, Plate XI, opposite p. 67 

— rubrum Schlesingeri, 53 
Agropyron repens, 69 

Ailanthus altissima erythrocarpa, 58 
American Association for the Ad- 
vancement of Science, 33 
American Horticulture Needs to 
Adopt Uniform Color Standards, 
41-52 

Antitoxin Laboratory, State of Massa- 
chusetts, 2 
Arnold Arboretum 

— Azalea Collection, 8 

— Barberry Collection, 6 

— Chinese Collection, 8 

— Current Plans, 8 

— Deutzia Collection, 7 

— Drought at the, 57 

— Euonymus Collection, 7 

— Fall Fruits at the, 58 

— Labor and Staff of, 1 

— Lilac Collection, 6, 7 

— Mulches, 6, 69-72 

— New Equipment, 3 
* — New Policies, 4 

— Opening of New Vistas, 5 

— Past Year at the, 1-8 

— Philadelphus Collection, 7 

— Plant Breeding at the, 9-12 

— Plantings at Administration 

Building, 7 

— Removal of Duplicate Shrubs and 

Trees, 5 

— Reorganization, 4 


Ribes Collection, 6 
Roads, Resurfacing of, 7 
Spiraea Collection, 7 
Visiting Committee, 3 
Work Accomplished the Past Year 
at the, 5 

— Water System, 8 

Weed Plants, Removal of, 7 

— Weigela Collection, 7 

Arnold Cherry, No. 8240, Plate II, 
opposite p. 10 

Atkins Garden and Research Labora- 
tory in Cuba, 4, 14, 16 
Azalea Path on Bussey Hill, Plate 
IV, opposite p. 26 
Balch Bequest, the, 4 
Balch, John, 4 

— Mrs. Katherine T., 4 

Bark, Woody Plants With Interest- 
ing, 61-68 

— Cherry-like bark on trunk, 67 

— Exfoliating bark, 67, 68 

— Gray bark on trunk and branches, 

65 

— Gray twigs, shrubs with, 64 

— Green twigs, plants with, 64 

— Interesting bark, miscellaneous 

list of, 68 

— Light brown color, conspicuous, 

shrubs with, 65 

— Red twigs or red bark, plants 

with, 62, 64 

— White bark on trunk and 

branches, 65 

— Yellow twigs, shrubs with, 65 
Betula albo-sinensis, 33 


[ 3*1 


Blooming Dates, Estimated, 2 8 
Botanic Garden, Harvard University, 
14 

Boston Park Commission, 8 

— Park Department, 7, 8 
British Colour Council, System, 4 5 
Bureau of Entomology, U.S.D. A., 22 
Bussey, Benjamin, 18 

— Institution, 4, 12, 13-16 

— Trust, 13 

Cabot Foundation, 4, 16 
Canada, Gardening in Northern 
Manitoba, 29-40 
Caragana brevifolia, 33 

— jubata, 34 

Case Estates, 3—7, 12, 14 
Case Estates, Routes Between The 
Arnold Arboretum And, Plate I, 
opposite p. 4 
Case, James B., 3 

— M iss Louisia W., 3 
- M iss Marian, 3 

Celastrus angulata, 58 
Central Experimental Farm, Ottawa, 
Canada, 33 

Cercidiphyllum japonicum, 28 
Cercis canadensis, color comparison 
of flowers, 42 

Chaenomeles, color study of, 48-52 
Chamaecy paris 4 4 Dropmore Variety, ’ ’ 
36 

Chionanthus virginicus, 53 
Collection Dates of Seed of Woody 
Plants, 53-56 

Color, names for, or terms used for, 
46 

Color of Bark of Woody Plants, 61-68 
Color Standards, American Horticul- 
ture Needs to Adopt Uniform, 41- 

52 

Color Standards, Reasons for Adopt- 
ing, 41—44 


Conifers at Dropmore, a list of, 39 
Corn, hybrids of, 15 
Cornus alba, 61 
sibirica, 61 , 62 

— florida rubra, color comparison of 

flowers, 42 
Corylopsis, 28 
Cvtisus austriacus, 36 

— decumbens, 36 

— elongatus, 36 

— hirsutus, 36 

— leucanthus Schipkaensis, 36 

— nigricans, 36 

— purpureus, 36 
Daphne Cneorum, 36 

— collina, 36 

— Giraldii, 33 

— Mezereum, 36. 

— tangutica, 33 
Davis, M. B. , 33 
DDT, 26, 18-23 
Decaisnea Fargesii, 58 

Disease of Elms, Phloem necrosis, 
Plate III, opposite p. 18 
Dogwood, Tatarian, 61 
Dropmore, Manitoba, Canada, 29-40 
Dutch Elm Disease, Control of, 17-23 
Dutch Elm Disease Laboratory, Uni- 
versity of Massachusetts, 21 
Edinburgh Botanic Garden, 30 
Elm Disease, Dutch, 17-23 
Elms, Watch the, 17-23 
Entomology, Bureau of, U.S.D. A., 22 
Erica carnea, 36 
Fagus grandifolia, 28 
Fall fruits, 58 
Farlow Herbarium, 4 
Farrand, Mrs. Beatrix, 1, 5, 7 
Fillmore, Richard H., 2 
Fordham, Alfred, 2 
Forsythia 4 4 Arnold Dwarf,” 10 

— “Arnold Giant,” 10 


Forsythia europaea, 25 

— intermedia spectabilis, 25 

— ovata, 10 
Fruits This Fall, 58 
Genista sagittalis, 86 

— sylvestris, 86 

— tinctoria, 86 
Gray Herbarium, 4 

Harvard Biological Laboratories, 14, 
1 6 

— Botanical Museum, 4 

— Department of Botany, 4 

— Forest, 4, 14, 16 
Hops, Spent, 71 

Horticultural Colour Chart, English, 
42, 44-48 

— American source for, 72 
Howard, Heman, 2 

Institute for Research in Experimen- 
tal and Applied Botany, 14, 16 
Judd, William H., 2 
Kew Botanic Garden, 80 
Kolkwitzia amabilis, 9 
[ Larix Gmelini japonica, 84 
Lawrence Scientific School, 13 
Long, William P., 7, 8 
Lonicera quinquelocularis translucens 
58 

Maackia amurensis, 36 
Macoun, W.T.. 30 
Magnolia denudata, 25 
|j — kobus, 25 
j — stellata, 25 
Malus baccata mandshurica, 26 
j — hupehensis, 9 

— sikkimensis, 16 
; — toringoides, 9 

Mangelsdorf, PaulC., 14 
Manitoba Hardy Plant Nursery, 34 
Manitoba, Northern, Fifty Years of 
Gardening in, 29-40 
Massachusetts Department of Public 
Health, 14 


Massachusetts, University of, 21 
Meadow Road in the Arnold Arbore- 
tum, Plate VIII, opposite p. 58 
Merrill, E. D., 4 
Minnesota, University of, 33 
Morrill Act of Congress, 13 
“M unsell Book of Color,” 44 
Oberthiir et Dauthenay’s “Repertoire 
de Coleurs,” 45 

Ornamental Trees, Suggested for 
Various Purposes, List of, 24 
Ostwald’s Colour System, 45 
Parker, D.E., 21 
Picea bicolor reflexa, 36 

— purpurea, 33 
Pieris japonica, 26 

Pinus Bungeana, Plate XI, opposite 
p. 67 

Pinus Griffithii, 10 
Plane Tree, London, 9 
Plant Breeding at the Arnold 
Arboretum, 9—12 
Platanus occidentals, 9 

— orientalis, 9 
Populus tristis, 34 
Potentilla frutieosa, 33 
Prunus nigra, 32 

— — Sargentii, 25 

— subhirtella 12 
autumnalis, 25 

— tomentosa, 16 

— triflora koreana, 32 

— yedoense, 12 
Pyrus ussuriensis, 33 

Pyrus ussuriensis, Plate VII, oppo- 
site p. 39 
Quack grass, 69 
Ribes diacanthum, 84 
Ridgway, Color Standards and Color 
Nomenclature, 44, 45 
Rhododendron canadense, 36 

— catawbiense, 10 


Rhododendron caucasicum, 36 

— chrysanthum, 36 

— dauricum, 36 

— ferrugineum, 36 

— hirsutum, 36 

— keiskei, 26 

— mucronulatum, 26, 36 

— obtusum Kaempferi, 9 

— ponticum, 10 
Rock, J.F., 33 

Royal Horticultural Society of Great 
Britain, 44 

Salix alba chermesina, 62 
Sargent, Charles Sprague, 1 , 2, 30, 
33, 39 

Sargent Plaque, Plate IX, p. 60 
Sargent’s Silva of North America,” 
52 

Sax, Karl, 4, 12, 14 
Schmitt, Victor, 2 
Scolytus multistriatus, 18 
Seed Collection Dates of Woody 
Plants, 53-56 
Skinner, F.L., 29-40 
Skirm, George, 10 
Sorbus discolor, 58 
Spent Hops — An Effective Mulching 
Material, 69-72 

Spring in the Arboretum, 25-28 
Spiraea Van Houttei, 30 
Standards of Color, Uniform, 41-52 


Stewartia koreana, Plate X, oppo- 
site p. 62 

Syringa amurensis japonica, 12, 39 

— japonica, 39 

— laciniata, 12 

- — oblata dilatata, 33 

— persica var., 12 

— pinnatifolia, 12 

— Prestoniae, 26 

— velutina, 33 

Tilia cordata, Plate V, opposite p. 30 
Trees, Unusual, a list of some at 
Dropmore, 37 
Ulmus japonica, 32 
Ulmus parvifolia, Plate X, opposite 

p. 62 

Ulmus pumila, 32 

— scabra, 32 

United States Department of Agricul- 
ture, Bureau of Entomology, 22 
Upsala Botanic Garden, 30 
Viburnum Carlesii, 39 

— dilatatum xanthocarpum, 58 

— fragrans, 26 
Watch the Elms, 17-23 
Wheeler, W.M., 13 
Wilford, B.W., 21 
Williams, Robert, 2 
Wilson, E.H., 34 

Woody Plants With Interesting Bark 
In Winter, 61-68 


These bulletins will be discontinued until Spring of next year. Subscription 
renewals for 1948 are now due, price $1.00 per year. Checks should be made 
payable to Harvard University; and mailed to the Arnold Arboretum, Jamaica 
Plain 30, Mass. 


[ 76 ] 


























