

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 

OF THE 


GRAY HERBARIUM 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2017 with funding from 
BHL-SIL-FEDLINK 


https://archive.org/details/arnoldia60arno 




f • 


“ i: 


1 



(I 

I 




The Magazine df th§^noh 


GRAY 





Delicatissimum (1891) 



Purpureum Grandiflorum (1886) 



Rhododendron catawbiense 



US 


AUG 0 9 2000 


OHAY 


amoidia 


Volume 60 Number 1 2000 

Arnoldia (ISSN 004-2633; USPS 866-100) is 
published quarterly by the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Second-class postage paid at 
Boston, Massachusetts. 

Subscriptions are $20.00 per calendar year domestic, 
$25.00 foreign, payable in advance. Single copies of 
most issues are $5.00; the exceptions are 58/4-59/1 
(Metasequoia After Fifty Years) and 54/4 (A Source- 
book of Cultivar Names), which are $10.00. Remit- 
tances may be made in U.S. dollars, by check drawn 
on a U.S. bank; by international money order,- or 
by Visa or Mastercard. Send orders, remittances, 
change-of-address notices, and all other subscription- 
related communications to; Circulation Manager, 
Arnoldia, The Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130-3500. 

Telephone 617/524-1718; facsimile 617/524-1418; 
e-mail arnoldia@arnarb.harvard.edu. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to 
Arnoldia Circulation Manager 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA 02130-3500 

Karen Madsen, Editor 
Andy Winther, Designer 

Editorial Committee 
Phyllis Andersen 
Ellen S. Bennett 
Robert E. Cook 
Peter Del Tredici 
Gary Roller 
Stephen A. Spongberg 
Kim E. Tripp 

Copyright © 2000. The President and Fellows of 
Harvard College 


Page 

2 Mary Gibson Henry, Plantswoman 
Extraordinaire 
Mary Harrison 

13 Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators at 
the Arnold Arboretum 
David Giblin 

20 A Fresh Look at a Traditional Favorite: 
Rhododendrons 
Richard Brooks 

27 Rhododendrons, from The Bulletin of 
Popular Information, 1934 
Edgar Anderson 

19 In Pursuit of Ironclads 
Karen Madsen 

Front cover: Rhododendron 'Big Deal' photographed 
by Dick Brooks. 

Inside covers: Watercolor drawings of petals from 
"ironclad" hybrid rhododendrons and their common 
parent. Rhododendron catawbiense. The hybrids are 
among the oldest rhododendrons in the Arboretum 
(year planted is in parenthesis), all were imported 
from England. Painted by C. H. L. Gebfert as a guide 
to identification by color, 1931. Archives of the 
Arnold Arboretum. 

Back cover: Hand-colored photograph of rhododen- 
drons at 'Wellesley', where H. H. Hunnewell 
conducted many of the early hardiness trials. 
Archives of the Arnold Arboretum. 



Mary Gibson Henry, 
Plantswoman Extraordinaire 

Mary Harrison 


I n the eighteenth century the amateur was a 
familiar breed of botanist, especially in Colonial 
America. lohn Bartram, who was to become the 
king's botanist in 1765, learned his art through expe- 
rience in the field and by corresponding with horti- 
culturists and botanists on both sides of the Atlantic, 
lane Golden, sometimes referred to as America's first 
woman botanist, learned from her father and the 
hooks he procured for her, and through correspon- 
dence with botanists who admired her ability to rec- 
ognize unusual species around her home in New 
York State. In the twentieth century the tradition 
continued and was represented especially well by 
Mary Gibson Henry. 

Mary Henry was born in 1884 at her grandparents' 
house near Jenkinstown, Pennsylvania, to Susan 
Worrell Pepper and lohn Howard Gibson. Her 
mother's family were Quakers who had come from 
England with William Penn and taken part in the 
founding of Philadelphia. Horticulture was a tradi- 
tional pursuit on both sides of the family. George 
Pepper, a great-grandfather, had been a member of 
the first Council of the Pennsylvania Horticultural 
Society in 1828, and her Gibson grandfather, a keen 
plantsman, had his own greenhouse. Her father 
enjoyed hunting and camping, and contributed to her 
interest in the natural world. 

The home of Mary's family was in the center of 
Philadelphia and had no garden, but before her 
father's death in 1894, the family often visited 
Moosehead Lake in Maine. There, under her father's 
influence, her familiarity with the countryside devel- 
oped. She became especially interested in native 
plants, and her first acquaintanceship with twin- 


Mary Gibson Henry (second from left) photographed in 
the ballroont of her grandparents’ house, ‘Maybrook’. in 
Wynnewood, Pennsylvania. To her left is her daughter 
fosephine deNemours Henry, and at her right is her aunt 
Mary Klett Gibson. At the far right is her daughter Mary 

Gibson Henry Davis. 


i 


Mary Gibson Henry 3 



ALL PHOTOS, COURTESY OF THE HENRY FOUNDATION FOR BOTANICAL RESEARCH 


4 Arnoldia 60/1 


flower (Linnaea borealis), a dwarf evergreen 
shrub, awakened in her "not only a love for and 
appreciation of the absolute perfection of the 
flower itself, hut also for the dark, silent forest 
that shelters such treasures." Many years later 
(1932) she came upon this plant again, in north- 
ern British Columbia, growing "in damp, shady 
woods, in lower altitudes and on hare, bleak, 
stony mountain tops up to 6000 feet." 

Mary attended the Agnes Irwin School in 
Philadelphia for six years,- when she left in 1902, 
her formal education ended. In the years follow- 
ing school she visited the Grand Canyon and 
the Colorado Rockies, and on a trip to Europe 
she climbed Mont Blanc with her brother and 
several guides. 

In 1909 she married John Norman Henry, a 
physician who later became Philadelphia's 
director of public health as well as president of 
the General Alumni Society of the University of 
Pennsylvania. The couple first lived in Philadel- 
phia where Mrs. Henry had "a nice backyard . . . 
and a tiny greenhouse." In 1915 they acquired a 
large farm in Maryland with a view to building 
a home there. The plan was abandoned when 
World War I interfered and Dr. Henry volun- 
teered for duty overseas. Nevertheless, long 
summers spent in existing bungalows on the 
property allowed Mrs. Henry to develop a large 
kitchen garden, acquire some exotic ornamen- 
tals, and experiment with native rock plants. 
In addition to gardening in Maryland, she 
cultivated orchids in the Philadelphia green- 
house, and in 1924 she published an essay on 
the subiect in Garden Magazine. She read 
widely in horticulture and botany, and it was 
her reading during this period that first devel- 
oped her interest in wild plants of the southeast- 
ern United States. Two books were of special 
significance to her, Manual of the Southeastern 
Flora by 1. K. Small and The Travels of William 
Bartram, which she found an "unending source 
of inspiration." 

Time to indulge horticultural interests was 
limited, however, for Mrs. Henry quickly 
became the mother of five children, the young- 
est of whom died at the age of six. Although 
basically confined to home during the twenties, 
she continued to expand her knowledge about 
plants by studying nursery catalogs, often from 


distant places — Trees and Shrubs from a nursery 
in Tunbridge Wells, England; Coolidge Rare 
Plant Gardens (1923) from a California nursery; 
Himalayan and Indigenous Plants, Bulbs, 
Seeds (1927) from a nursery in Bengal, India. 
Seed lists came from the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture's Office of Foreign Plant Introduc- 
tions, and from the Royal Botanic Garden, 
Edinburgh, which she had visited in 1923. (Fol- 
lowing that visit Mrs. Henry initiated a corre- 
spondence with the R.B.G.'s Regius Keeper, 
William Wright-Smith, that lasted until he died 
in 1956. Indeed, Wright-Smith was among the 
earliest of several mentors to whom she looked 
for professional advice.) 

In 1926 the Henrys bought Gladwyne, a run- 
down farm of ninety hilly acres twelve miles 
from the center of Philadelphia, where they 
hoped to combine the functions of their Phila- 
delphia and Maryland homes. As the Henrys' 
architect described it, a greenhouse was built 
with a house attached. Planting must have 
begun immediately, for a 1928 inventory of 
the Gladwyne garden records over 200 shrubs 
and plants, with multiple varieties of several 
species — seven Cornus florida and three Hama- 
melis vernalis, for example. Mrs. Henry's inter- 
est in diversity within a single species was 
later reflected in her passion for collecting 
and hybridizing and an unflagging pursuit 
of particular colors and dimensions. By 1931 
there were some 850 trees and shrubs in her gar- 
den, some of them new Asiatic finds acquired 
from the collectors Forrest, Wilson, Rock, 
Farrer, and Ward. 

Another of Mrs. Henry's early mentors was 
Francis Pennell, curator of botany at the Acad- 
emy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia, from 
whom she sought help with identification. 
When she expressed an interest in collecting 
wild plants for her garden, it was he who urged 
her to collect herbarium specimens along with 
the plants and schooled her in how to document 
her finds. 

In part, Mrs. Henry attributed her desire to 
collect to William Bartram. His glowing descrip- 
tion of Rhododendron speciosum flammeum 
(now R. speciosum] had fired her desire to 
acquire a specimen, and when her search in 
commercial outlets and botanical gardens 


JOSEPHINE HENRY COUR I ESY OF THE HENRY FOUNDA ' ION FOR BOTANICAL RESEARCH 


Mary Gibson Henry 5 



One of the showiest of native American azaleas. Rhododendron 
speciosum (now R. flammeum), the Oconee azalea. Mrs. Henry's 
repeated journeys in search of this plant resulted in seven color 
variants. Its range is confined to USDA zones 6 and 7. 


proved unsuccessful, she decided to seek it in 
the wild. This was the impetus for a long life of 
annual and sometime biannual collecting trips 
that continued until her death in 1967. 

Her sympathetic husband encouraged her to 
fulfill her ambitions and was able to equip her 
handsomely with the tools and transport needed 
for her expeditions. A car (specifically, a Lincoln 
Continental), "outfitted with an 'attic,' an elec- 
trically lit desk and a bookcase" was designed. 
"The rear compartment is insulated and venti- 
lated so that newly collected plants can travel 
comfortably. Three plant presses, numerous 
buckets, spades etc. are part of the equipment." 
This unusual vehicle was driven by a chauffeur, 
Ernest Perks, who remained with the Henrys for 
sixty-five years. On some of her journeys Mrs. 


Henry was also accompanied by her 
daughter Josephine, a skilled photog- 
rapher who took color photographs 
of plants later used by Mrs. Henry in 
her lectures. 

On her first trip to the Southeast she 
covered 2,000 miles and on that and 
later trips collected seven color varia- 
tions of Rhododendron speciosum. 
Later expeditions were made along 
the Atlantic Coastal Plain, on the 
Piedmont Plateau, in Appalachia, and 
in the mountains of east Tennessee 
and Alabama. Mrs. Henry planted her 
finds at Gladwyne and sent herbarium 
specimens to the Academy of Natural 
History in Philadelphia and the Royal 
Botanic Garden, Edinburgh. 

Experience quickly taught her that 
"rare and beautiful plants can be found 
in places that are difficult of access. . . . 
Often one has to shove one's self 
through or wriggle under briars, with 
awkward results to clothing . . . Wad- 
ing usually bare legged through count- 
less rattlesnake infested swamps adds 
immensely to the interest of the day's 
work . . . On several occasions I have 
been so deeply mired I had to be pulled 
out." She also learned that the habi- 
tats of many of the plants she sought 
were in urgent need of protection. In 
the Southeast she found the swamp 
habitats of wild lilies being used as waterholes 
for cattle or as dumps. To encourage the growth 
of grass for grazing, farmers often burned brush, 
destroying wild azaleas at the same time. These 
threats reinforced her determination to collect 
and cultivate American natives and to eventu- 
ally introduce them to American gardens. 

During a family holiday to Canada's Jasper 
National Park in 1930, the Henry family learned 
of a "tropical valley" in northern British 
Columbia that was reportedly frost-free in spite 
of the extreme winter temperatures surrounding 
it. Their curiosity aroused, the family decided to 
explore the area; for Mrs. Henry the opportunity 
to collect in completely new territory in terrain 
ranging from 2,550 to 9,000 feet was an irresist- 
ible challenge. 



6 A mold id 60/ 1 



Maiy Gibson Henry and members of her family at the outset of their expedition to British Columbia in 1930. 


The Canadian Department of the Interior had 
little information on the area. Mrs. Henry sum- 
marized it later, "Waterfalls and rapids in the 
rivers make traveling hy water impossible, 
while the distance by land is great over wide 
stretches of hog and mountainous country still 
in Its virgin roughness, and much of it yet 
unmapped." However, an old schoolfriend of 
Dr. Henry, then head of the Canadian National 
Railways, gave them helpful advice, and the 
Canadian government sent along a topographer, 
K. F. McCusker, to map the territory as they 
explored. Since the Henry family included two 
sons and two daughters ranging in age from 14 
to 21 and their travels would take them to 
remote areas, they also arranged for a physician 
to accompany them. 

The party left Philadelphia hy train on lime 
25, 1931, arriving at Pouce Coupe, m northern 
British Columhia, on lune 30. From there they 
motored to Fort St. lohn, where they joined the 
9 men, 58 horses, and all the supplies that 


would accompany them. For the next eighty 
days, they traveled fifteen to twenty miles a day 
on horseback with occasional stops to collect 
plants, seeds, and herbarium specimens. The 
journey led them alongside rivers and through 
meadows filled with Jacob's ladder iPole- 
monium), larkspur (Delphinium!, and penste- 
mons. In the higher country bellflower 
(Campanula) and forget-me-not iMyosotis) 
were abundant. "Collecting plants while riding 
with a pack is not always a simple matter. A 
trowel goes in a leather sheath on one side of my 
belt and a knife on the other side. A strong pair 
of saddle bags is fastened to the pommel on my 
saddle, in which each morning are placed sev- 
eral empty jam cans. Each evening all full cans 
are aired and watered, and in the morning are all 
carefully packed in wooden packing cases on the 
horses. Quite frequently the cans were frozen 
solid to the ground and I had to use my ax to 
chop them loose." Mrs. Henry's collecting 
methods proved reasonably successful, and 


Maiy Gibson Henry 7 


Tropical Valleys in the Far Northwest 

Reports such as those heard by the Henrys of 
"tropical" valleys in Canada's far northwest 
were frequent at the time. The heating agent 
was the many sulphur springs in those val- 
leys. In the 1920s their warmth enabled a 
trapper working out of Fort Laird, within 
seven degrees of the Arctic Circle, to grow 
winter crops of potatoes, onions, and tobacco. 

The area the Henrys were interested in 
exploring lies between the Peace and Liard 
rivers, roughly 56° north latitude ik 121° 
west longtitude and 58° north latitude 
123° west longitude. The first Europeans had 
made their way through the northern Rocky 
Mountains by way of the Peace River some 
150 years previously, but few botanical 
collectors had been there. In 1872, the Cana- 
dian botanist John Macoun, working for the 
Canadian Pacific Railway, collected in the 
vicinity of Fort St. lohn (established about 
1805) and Hudson Hope (established in 
1808). He also collected for the Canadian 
Geological Survey, which carried out a sci- 
entific investigation of the Peace River in 
1875. Further surveys by others had been 
made in 1887 and 1891, resulting in some 
knowledge of the distribution of certain 
trees and shrubs. 

In response to the Henrys' discussions 
with the Canadian Department of the 
Interior, one of their topographers, K. F. 
McCusker, was assigned to accompany the 
group and to map the territory. The expedi- 
tion began on 25 June 1931, covered a thou- 
sand miles on foot and horseback, and lasted 
eighty days. Near sulphur springs, Mary 


Henry noted "rank growth of delphinium 
often over eight feet tall and raspberries, 
roses and vetches growing in the thickest, 
most luxuriant tangle." A pool nine feet 
in diameter with crystal clear water and 
temperatures estimated at about ninety 
degrees Fahrenheit provided an "Arctic Tub" 
enjoyed by the group. 

McCusker gave Henry family names to 
many of the rivers, lakes, and mountains 
they encountered. One mountain at 9,000 
feet "stands forth pre-eminently, its snow- 
covered summit towering above the others, 
the highest mountain we saw all summer." 
This McCusker named for Mary Henry and 
subsequently British Columbia's Depart- 
ment of Lands made the name official. 

In the following year Flugh Raup, then an 
associate researcher at the Arnold Arbore- 
tum, made an Arboretum-sponsored collect- 
ing trip to the same territory. He described 
his experience and catalogued his and Mary 
Henry's collections in Phytogeographic 
Studies in the Peace and Upper Liard River 
Regions, Canada. He included a brief 
account of the Henry expedition and noted 
that Mrs. Henry "collected 350 numbers of 
flowering plants and ferns, making notable 
additions to the known flora of the region." 

On a lecture tour of England and Scotland 
in 1948, Mrs. Henry presented an account 
of her travels to the Royal Horticultural 
Society and to the Royal Scottish Geographi- 
cal Society, which awarded her the Mungo 
Park Medal for Exploration in Northern 
British Columbia. 


many of the plants survived the journey back 
to Philadelphia. Opuntia frigida, Monarda 
mollis var. menthaefolia, Artemesia frigida, 
Amelanchier florida, and Cornus stolonifera 
survived at Gladwyne for some years, but many 
of the northerners were unable to adjust to the 
local climate. 

Mrs. Henry considered the most interesting 
find of the expedition to be Lapland rosebay 


(Rhododendron lapponicum), collected near 
St. Paul's lake in northern British Columbia. She 
sent a specimen for identification to Alfred 
Rehder, the curator of the herbarium at the 
Arnold Arboretum, who reported that it was pre- 
viously known in North America only in the 
East northward of the higher mountains of north- 
ern New York and New England. He declared it 
"an extremely interesting discovery ... its occur- 


8 Arnoldia 60/1 


rence in Western North America is of great 
phytogeographical interest ... I have placed a 
small twig of it on record in our herbarium ... for 
neither we nor the Gray herbarium had any 
specimens of this species from the West." 

Herbarium specimens were also distributed 
to the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadel- 
phia and the Royal Botanical Garden, 
Edinburgh, and a few woody plants came to 
the Arnold Arboretum. The Royal Botanical 
Garden, Edinburgh, also received seventy pack- 
ages of seed, and fifty cans of living plants went 
to Gladwyne. 

Mrs. Henry traveled back to the Peace River 
area in 1932, 1933, and 1935 with her daughter, 
Josephine, and K. F. McCusker, the topographer. 
They communicated with Philadelphia via 
twelve carrier pigeons they brought with them 
and received messages from Dr. Henry by radio 
receiver. 

Following these trips to British Columbia 
Mrs. Henry continued collecting in the south- 
eastern part of the United States. Nothing could 
surpass her delight in the northlands, but com- 
paratively few plants from there were able to 
survive the hot summers in Philadelphia, 
whereas plants from the Southeast flourished 
there. "As a field botanist," she wrote, "duty 
calls me to those fertile fields of our southern 
states where so many treasures lurk in out of 
the way corners." 

From 1931 to 1935 Mrs. Henry wrote six parts 
of her account of the Peace River expedition. 
Collecting Plants Beyond the Frontier, pub- 
lished by National Horticulture Magazine; two 
final segments appeared in the same journal in 
1949. During this period she also wrote twenty- 
three other articles, most of them published 
in Horticulture or in National Horticulture 
Magazine. Her topics included uncommon oaks 
and rare rhododendrons, little known violets 
and unusual honeysuckles, hybrid jasmines and 
Indian begonias. Based on her own personal 
experience, she evaluated plants for cold hardi- 
ness and recommended soil mixtures, trans- 
planting methods, and greenhouse techniques. 

Following her husband's death in 1938, Mrs. 
Henry turned her attention to expanding her 
garden. At the summit of the land at Gladwyne 
was a huge deposit of Baltimore gneiss around 


which she developed a naturalistic rock garden. 
The plantings included native American alpine 
plants, some of them collected in northern Brit- 
ish Columbia; many varieties of phlox, silene, 
and artemesia; hymenocallis from Georgia and 
Florida; tradescantia from the Gulf of Mexico; 
gentiana from New Jersey; and yuccas from 
eighteen different locations; calycanthus and 
low-growing magnolias from Georgia; and many 
varieties of dwarf rhododendrons. A trillium 
garden was planted in a woody area near a small 
stream, and collections from Texas, New 
Mexico, and Arizona were established in a 
desert rock garden. Each plant was provided 
with a soil mixture and habitat as similar as 



Hymenocallis henryae. Mrs. Henry found this new species 
in western Florida; botanist Hamilton Traub described and 
named it. Mrs. Henry collected species of Hymenocallis 
from eleven southern states. Some were planted out- 
side and lifted for the winter. At one time she had 125 
varieties of lily, "distinct, beautiful variants of eastern 
American lilies . " As she herself noted, lilies "engaged 
much of my time. " 


Mary Gibson Henry 9 



"As for my rock garden, the largest of the existing pile of rocks were too big to move and all I did was to 
rearrange the smaller ones and to make paths and steps that are scarcely distinguishable. Soils were changed 
into suitable mixtures” (1943). Mrs. Henry gives scale. 


possible to its original growing conditions; the 
change in latitude often resulted in plants 
remaining desirably small and compact. 

Visitors to Gladwyne often commented on 
the range of plants growing there. E. H. Wilson, 
in identifying Queicus pumila, which Mrs. 
Henry had sent him, expressed surprise that this 
southeastern plant should prove hardy in Phila- 
delphia,- and William fudd, Arnold Arboretum 
propagator and one of Mrs. Henry's advisors, 
was impressed by the many rare and unusual 
plants that could not be found elsewhere so 
far north. 

At the end of the 1930s Mrs. Henry began to 
receive recognition for her achievements. She 
became a director of the American Horticultural 
Society and a council member of the Pennsylva- 


nia Horticultural Society. When the Rock 
Garden Society inaugurated their bulletin in 
1943, she was appointed associate editor and 
wrote the first article in volume one, number 
one, "A Rock Garden of Natives." In 1941 she 
hecame a research associate in the department 
of botany at the Academy of Natural Sciences, 
Philadelphia. That same year the Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society awarded her their 
Schaeffer Gold Medal for her "notable contribu- 
tion to horticulture. Her keen eye has detected 
many species and varieties of horticultural 
value. These have been transplanted to or propa- 
gated in her garden at Gladwyne and her skill in 
their culture has made possible the demonstra- 
tion that many highly attractive native plants 
can be grown far from their native haunts ... As 
a result of her untiring efforts we are now more 


10 Arnuldia 60/1 



Phlox X henryac, a cross of P. nivalis and P. bifida, originated at 
Gladwyne, "a chance seedling in my trial garden. ” P x henryae, a pale 
pink with deeply notched lobes, is in the foreground with P. bifida 
in the rear. 


than ever aware of the tremendous potentiali- 
ties of the native American flora for supplying 
plants worthy of cultivation." 

It was at this time that Mrs. Henry began 
to make her plants available to nurseries. The 
Upper Banks Nursery, operated by Fairman 
Furness, was a fifty-acre garden and rare plant 
nursery along Ridley Creek in Media, Pennsyl- 
vania. In 1940 Mrs Henry gave Furness permis- 
sion to gather cuttings of many of the plants in 
her garden. When the plants were ready for 
distribution in 1942, he published a catalog. 
Rare and Native Shrubs Collected by Mary 
Henry, that included varieties of Rhododen- 
dron, Calycanthus, Halesia, Philadelphus, and 
Syringa that she had developed. The Mayfair 
Nurseries, rock garden specialists in Hillsdale, 
New lersey, also offered plants from Gladwyne, 


including many varieties of Mrs. 
Henry's phlox and penstemon. 

Over the years her interest in collect- 
ing and breeding lilies had grown. 
In 1946 she was awarded the silver 
medal at a lily show organized by the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society. 
"The most outstanding exhibit of lilies 
from the American wilds was the eight 
selections of Lilium philadelphicum 
now being cultured by Mrs. Henry 
at Gladwyne, Pennsylvania," wrote the 
judges. 

Perhaps the most satisfying achieve- 
ment in her work with lilies was the 
discovery of a fragrant, yellow specimen 
in a cattle pasture in southern Alabama, 
near the Gulf of Mexico. "1 had long 
hoped," she confessed, "that 1 might 
chance upon some species which had 
remained unknown to science." In addi- 
tion to herbarium specimens she col- 
lected seeds, which were successfully 
propagated at Gladwyne and bloomed 
after five years. The species did prove to 
be a new discovery; Mrs. Henry named 
it Lilium iridollae, for it represented 
to her "the pot of gold at the foot of 
my rainbow." 

In 1949 Mrs. Henry's garden was 
threatened with destruction when the 
State of Pennsylvania and the U.S. 
Army Engineers decided to use Gladwyne "as a 
dump for the silt, sewage and refuse to be 
pumped from the bottom of the Schuykill 
River." She called upon her many botanist 
friends and colleagues around the United States 
and in Great Britain to support her appeal to the 
governor of Pennsylvania to spare the property. 
Not only was the appeal successful, but the let- 
ters her supporters wrote provide clear evidence 
of Mrs. Henry's status in the horticultural 
world. All spoke of the importance of her collec- 
tion of native and rare American plants and 
of its great scientific and horticultural value. 
Some put the garden in the same class as the 
Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew and the Arnold 
Arboretum. Mrs. Henry was described as a 
highly competent botanist and an extremely 
skilled horticulturist. The president of the 



Mary Gibson Henry 1 1 


Royal Horticultural Society pointed out that 
her fine American flora, "much superior to 
the ordinary run," were being distributed to 
gardens in England. Hugh Ratip, professor of 
botany at the Harvard Forest, wrote, "She has 
been an indefatigable student of horticultural 
values in the native American flora, in the 
finest tradition." 

To safeguard the garden's future, Mrs. Henry 
established the Henry Foundation for Botanical 
Research, dedicated "to the collection and pres- 
ervation of choice, rare and endangered New 
World Plants." 

A year or so before her death Mrs. Henry was 
advised by her physician to reduce the strenu- 
ous level of her activities. She nevertheless con- 
tinued to lead a full life as outlined in the 1966 
publication Accomplishments of the Founda- 
tion, which recounts her activities during the 


last full year of her life. Between May and 
August she spent 42 days in the field, traveling 
in Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, 
Kentucky, North Carolina, and Florida, and col- 
lecting some 75 plants, including another 
Lillhnn iridollae and a Styrax americanum that 
still grows at Gladwyne. That same year she 
filled orders from retail nurseries all over the 
United States and from individuals from Peru to 
Israel. She distributed Gladwyne material to the 
Morris Arboretum, the University of Arkansas, 
the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, Hilliers 
Nursery in England, and the Agricultural 
Experimental Station in Puerto Rico. Visitors to 
her garden included members of the American 
Rhododendron Society, the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture, the New York Botanical Garden, 
the Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh, and the 
department of botany at Princeton University. 



Mrs. Henry wrote in her autobiography. “Winters have found me enmeshed deeply in the routine work of my 
tiny greenhouse and six coldframes . . . about 600 pots and flats to be repotted and taken care of and that duty 
devolves entirely on me. Most of the pots contain Amaryllids and what began as ‘winter fun has turned into 
a serious breeding program. ” 


12 Arnoldia 60/1 



Lilium iridollae (the pot-of-gold lily) was perhaps the most 
cherished of Mrs. Henry’s many finds. She collected the 
original specimen and seeds in southern Alabama, 1940. A 
single-flowering plant of three to five feet in height, her 
seedlings first flowered in 1945. 


On a collecting trip in North Carolina in 
April 1967, Mary Gibson Henry died at the age 
of eighty-two. Her years of devotion to horticul- 
ture had produced many solid achievements: 
over a hundred articles had been published 
in iournals such as Herhertia, Bartonia, and 
National Horticultural Magazine; herbaria in 
Scotland and North America had received thou- 
sands of specimen sheets from her collections; 
the hardiness of plants previously thought too 
tender for Philadelphia had been demonstrated; 
new species and varieties had been introduced 
to arboreta and nurseries,- interest in American 
flora for American gardens had been stimulated; 
the garden at Gladwyne had been preserved for 
future generations. 

Following her mother's death in 1967, 
Josephine deN. Henry became director of the 
Foundation, a position she held until 1996, 
when she was succeeded by Mrs. Henry's grand- 
daughter Susan Treadway. These successors 
have continued to expand the collection of 
native American plants and to maintain the 
natural qualities of the garden. Through lec- 
tures, plant sales, and garden tours, new genera- 
tions are introduced to the work and ideals of 
the garden's founder. 


References 

Archives of the Henry Foundation for Botanical 
Research, Gladwyne, Pennsylvania 

25 September 1943. William Henry Judd to 
Mary Gibson Henry. 

13 November 1931. Alfred Rehder to Mary 
Gibson Henry. 

27 November 1931. Ibid. 

19 December 1935. Ibid. 

29 November 1929. E.H. Wilson to Mary 
Gibson Henry. 

Henry, Josephine deN. 1980. Not All Plantsmen Are 
Men. Bulletin of the American Rock Garden 
Society 3,0[1]: 68-73 & 30(3): 115-122. 

Henry, Mary Gibson. 1950. An Autobiography. 
Herhertia 6: 1 1-30. 

1933. Exploring and Plant Collecting in Northern 

British Columbia. Year Book of the Pennsyl- 
vania Horticultural Society. 68-75. 

1946. A New Lily from Southern Alabama and 

Northern Florida. Bartonia: Journal of the 
Philadelphia Botanical Club 24: 1-4. 

Raup, Hugh M. 1934. Phytogeographic Studies in the 
Peace and Upper Liard River Regions, Canada. 
Contributions from the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University VI. 

Stout, C. Frederick C. 1942. Report of the President. 

Year Book of the Pennsylvania Horticultural 
Society, 1 1 . 

Acknowledgments 

The author thanks members of the Henry Foundation 
Miss Josephine deN. Henry, Susan Treadway, and Betsey 
Davis for their generous hospitality and help in the 
preparation of this essay. Particularly appreciated is their 
willingness to grant access to their vast collection of 
correspondence and photographs. 

Note 

To visit the Henry Foundation for Botanical Research, 
call 610-525-2037 or write to the Foundation at Box 7, 
Gladwyne, PA 19035, for reservations and information 
about membership, educational programs, plant sale, 
hours, fees, directions, and parking. 


Mary Harrison is a volunteer in the Arboretum's 
herbarium and library. She has annotated the letters and 
diaries of William Judd, the letters of Oakes Ames, and 
indexed the minutes of the Horticultural Club of Boston. 
Her next undertaking will be the annotation of the 
diaries of plant explorer Joseph Rock. 


Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators at 
the Arnold Arboretum 



David Giblin 


The flowers of magnolias are open to all, pollinators and nonpollinators 
alike. In this photograph of Magnolia acuminata var. subcordata, the visitor, 
a bee. happens to be a pollinator, but it could just as well be a beetle or fly 
enjoying a free meal. 


M any visitors to the 
Arnold Arboretum 
know it as a world- 
renowned garden with an unpar- 
alleled collection of woody 
plants. For others, it is a park 
affording respite from urban 
pressures. For still others, it is an 
important resource for studying 
a wide range of topics, from plant 
exploration to arboriculture, 
from plant taxonomy to the 
history of landscape design. 

Speaking for myself, as a floral 
biologist I view the Arboretum 
as one of the world's finest muse- 
ums of pollination biology. 

The plant collections of the 
Arnold Arboretum are living 
illustrations of the remarkable 
floral diversity engendered over 
evolutionary time by the partici- 
pation of pollinators in plant reproduction. The 
variety of floral sizes, shapes, colors, and fra- 
grances on display demonstrate the range of 
adaptations evolved by the flowering plants in 
response to the predilections and idiosyncrasies 
of their pollinators. 

For example, some flowers in the collections 
are open to all potential pollinators,- others have 
evolved complex morphologies that allow entry 
to only the most reliable visitors. Each morphol- 
ogy reflects a strategy that has proven success- 
ful in ensuring that these winged vectors 
transport pollen between flowers. Among the 
more astonishing strategies are the use of petal 
color and pattern as signals, both honest and 
deceptive, and of male floral parts that are 
spring-loaded or acoustically sensitive. 

By definition pollination is the process 
whereby pollen grains (male gametes) are depos- 


ited on the female reproductive structures of vas- 
cular seed plants, typically with the aid of ani- 
mals, wind, or water. For pollination to result in 
fertilization, the sperm cell of a pollen grain must 
unite with the egg cell of an ovule, after which 
the fertilized ovule develops into a seed. 

Basic biology teaches that the living vascular 
seed plants are divided into the gymnosperms 
(the conifers, cycads, gnetophytes, and ginkgo) 
and the angiosperms (flowering plants) on the 
basis of their reproductive characters. The 
primary distinction is that gymnosperms (liter- 
ally, "naked seeds") lack flowers — the ovules 
are borne openly in cones — whereas in angio- 
sperms ("vesseled seeds") the ovules are 
enclosed within the carpel of the flower. The 
fossil record has shown that flowers evolved 
after the gymnosperms, making the latter the 
more ancestral lineage. 



ARCHIVES OF > HE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


14 Arnoldici 60/1 


The course of floral evolution in angiosperms 
involved several major trends. These include a 
reduction in overall complexity (for instance, a 
reduced number of stamens or petals), a transi- 
tion from radial to bilateral floral symmetry, the 
fusion of petal and/or sepal parts, and a transi- 
tion from a superior ovary (that is, the ovary sits 
above the attachment of the other floral whorls) 
to an inferior one. It is important to remember 
that these are trends; evolution is not a linear 
process. Ancestral morphologies such as radi- 
ally symmetrical flowers with separate petals 
and superior ovaries can be found in angiosperm 
families that are regarded as having originated 
more recently. 

Most biologists agree that insects, probably 
beetles, were the first pollinators, and that 
gymnosperms were the first seed plants to rely 
on pollinators for reproduction (Leppik 1960). 
Gymnosperm taxa, including members of 
Cycadaceae and Gnetaceae {Welwitschia 
mirabilis and species of Ephedra], a\\ show evi- 
dence of being insect-pollinated (Norstog 1987; 
Cooper-Driver 1994; Proctor and Yeo 1996). Pre- 
sumably insects feed on the protein-rich pollen 
of the male cones and on a sticky, sugar-rich 
feature of the female cone that catches airborne 


pollen grains. In the course of foraging among 
plants, the insects deposit pollen on the female 
cones, allowing fertilization to begin. 

The evolutionary pathway from the gymno- 
sperms to the angiosperms has not yet been 
completely mapped. We do know that gymno- 
sperms are almost exclusively wind-pollinated, 
whereas the majority of angiosperms evolved a 
dependence on insects, birds, or mammals for 
pollination. Interestingly, recent systematics 
studies have shown that speciation in plants has 
been greater in those lineages that are animal- 
pollinated (Dodd et al. 1999). Those studies 
support the theory that diffuse coevolution 
between angiosperms and their pollinators con- 
tributed to today's diversity of flowering plant 
species (Takhtajan 1991). 

Diffuse coevolution occurs when two groups 
of organisms — in this case, flowering plants and 
pollinators — interact in such a way that evolu- 
tionary change in one group leads to evolution- 
ary change in the other. Evidence for diffuse 
coevolution in the plant-pollinator relationship 
is suggested by the fossil record, which shows 
rapid diversification within both angiosperm 
and insect lineages between 75 and 50 million 
years ago (Proctor and Yeo 1996). For example, 
the length of bee mouthparts 
increased during the time that 
tubular flowers arose,- longer 
mouthparts presumably allowed 
access to nectar found at the 
base of many tubular-flowered 
species. 

Nevertheless, pollination 
biologists dispute the degree of 
specialization in the coevolu- 
tionary association between 
plants and pollinators. Several 
leading researchers believe that 
the evolution of floral morpholo- 
gies that attract specific pollina- 
tors are the exception. Their 
evidence is the observation that 
flowers of many plant species are 
visited often by a diversity of 
insect types (Waser et al. 1996). 
Opponents of this view argue 
that visitation does not always 
result in pollination, and it is 



In the bilaterally symmetrical flowers of yellowwoods. the pistil and stamens 
are tightly enclosed within the petals, permitting access only to bees, which 
are both discriminating and reliable pollinators. 


Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators 15 



Prior to pollinator visitation, “spring-loaded” an- 
thers are held by the lower petals. Pollinators disrupt 
the petals upon entry, releasing the anthers, which 
deposit their pollen on the insect’s underside. From 
The Natural History of Pollination by Michael 
Proctor, Peter Yeo, and Andrew Lack. 1996. Used by 
courtesy of Timber Press. 

pollinator preference that has driven diversifica- 
tion in floral morphology. 

The long-standing, coevolutionary associa- 
tion between plants and pollinators is based on 
a mutualism, a win-win situation for the par- 
ticipants of a biological interaction. In this case, 
plants benefit by getting their pollen trans- 
ported between flowers, and pollinators benefit 
by acquiring pollen, nectar, or oils from the 
flowers that they visit. 

A mutualism often requires con- 
tinual adjustments by the partici- 
pants to ensure a parity in benefits. 

From the plant's perspective, the 
number of fertilized ovules must be 
high enough to justify the invest- 
ment in energy required to attract 
and reward pollinators. This invest- 
ment can be measured in terms of 
flower size and number, duration of 
flowering period, and/or amounts 
of pollen, nectar, or oil produced. 

To ensure adequate return on this 
investment, plants typically do not 
provision each flower with rewards 
high enough to satisfy the pol- 
linator's needs in a single visit. The 
goal is to offer a reward generous 
enough to attract pollinators and 
yet stingy enough that the pollina- 
tor needs to visit several flowers 


in order to meet its foraging requirements. 
Increased flower visitation should increase the 
likelihood of successful pollination. 

Conversely, pollinators would ideally visit 
only those flowers that provide an adequate 
reward relative to the time and energy invested 
in foraging. Assuming easy access to adequate 
rewards, the most efficient approach would be 
to forage randomly among species. In that case, 
however, the plants would be the losers: the pol- 
len from one plant species might end up in the 
flower of an unrelated species, and the reproduc- 
tive success of each species would be reduced. 

The result of these conflicts in perspective 
has been the evolution of strategic compromises 
between plants and their pollinators. Examples 
can he found throughout the Arboretum 
grounds, enabling us to retrace major develop- 
ments in these give-and-take relationships. 
They have contributed substantially to the aes- 
thetic appeal of the Arboretum and, indeed, of 
gardens everywhere. 

The magnolia family (Magnoliaceae), promi- 
nently displayed near the Hunnewell Visitor 
Center, is one of the most ancestral angiosperm 
families in the living collections. Members of 
the genus Magnolia possess a generalized floral 
morphology that does not discriminate among 
floral visitors: the flowers are radially sym- 



The reflexed anthers of Kalmia latifolia in the left photo indicate an 
unpollinated flower. The photo at right shows how the anthers are 
released after pollinator visitation. 


CAROLINA BIOLOGICAL SUPPLY COMi'ANY 


ARCHIVES OF I HE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


16 Arnoldia 60/1 




A truss of mountain laurel with some anthers still reflexed and yet to be 
pollinated, and some released, indicating pollination. 


Communication between flowers and pollinators is common. In Catalpa 
spccioso the combination of dark brown splotches (most easily seen in 
the rightmost flower) and yellow patches orient pollinators to the location 
of the nectar. 

metrical; the petals are many and large,- and a 
central strobilus (cone) containing numerous 
stamens and pistils rises above the petals. A 
glance inside the flowers on a single tree reveals 
the result of this open-door policy: a diverse 
assemblage of flies, bees, and beetles can typi- 
cally be found. Pollen is the only floral reward 
offered — not an ideal arrangement from the 
tree's viewpoint, since pollen is a primary food 


source for some adult beetles 
and flies. Consequently these 
floral visitors are consuming 
rather than transporting the 
pollen, which reduces the repro- 
ductive opportunities for the 
tree; such is the downside to the 
easy-access approach. However, 
in most cases, some of the pollen 
sticks to the insects' bodies while 
they feed, to be deposited on the 
stigmas of flowers visited later. 

In some cases, certain visitors 
are clearly inadequate as polli- 
nators, a category that includes 
the indiscriminate forager. A 
visitor that acquires pollen from 
the flowers of species A and 
then visits the flowers of species 
B makes a poor pollinator; 
reproductive opportunities for 
both plants have been lost. Pol- 
len from A is wasted if it ends 
up on B's flowers because fertili- 
zation does not occur. Addition- 
ally, the stigmatic surface of B 
is clogged by A's pollen, and 
this reduces B's reproductive 
capacity. Some plants have 
evolved a two-step solution to 
this problem: first, they con- 
trive to attract pollinators 
capable of fidelity, and second, 
they develop ways to keep out 
all other visitors. 

Walking up the Arboretum's 
main drive we encounter yel- 
lowwood (Cladrastis kentukea), 
scholar tree (Styphnolobium 
japonicum, formerly Sophora 
iaponica], and bristly locust 
(Robinia hispida), members of the legume fam- 
ily (Fahaceae). Unlike the magnolias, these 
plants have bilaterally symmetrical flowers 
with the pistil and stamens hidden inside a tight 
enclosure of petals. Only bees have the strength 
and coordination to manipulate the petals and 
gain access to the flower's interior and the nec- 
tar it holds; and unlike beetles and flies, bees 
show a good deal of species-level constancy 



Che Chun-Tao & Ng Sze-Kei 


Tke Arnold Arkoretum 


NEWS 


Symposium in Honor of Professor Shiu-ying Hu on the Occasion 
of Her 92nd Birthday 

David E. Boufford, Assistant Director for Collections, Harvard University Herbaria 



Dr. Hu poses before panels that celebrate her long and distinguished 


career in botany. 

Shui-ying Hu, botanist emerita 
of the Arnold Arboretum, was 
honored at the Chinese University 
ol Hong Kong on February 
19, 2000, with a special sympo- 
sium and birthday celebration 
sponsored by the Ma Man Fai 
Chinese Medicine Education 
Foundation Fund. 

Dr. Hu arrived in the United 
States from China in 1946 to enter 
graduate school at Radclifte Col- 
lege. Her doctoral dissertation on 
the genus Ilex (Aquifoliaceae) was 
carried out at the Arnold Arbore- 
tum under the direction of E. D. 
Merrill, director of the Arboretum 
1935—1946. Dr. Hu was an accom- 


plished botanist before her arrival; 
she had conducted fieldwork in 
western Sichuan in the late 1930s 
and early 1940s, at a time when 
only a few men (notably, Armand 
David, Joseph Rock, and E. H. 
Wilson) had explored that region. 

By the time Dr. Hu obtained 
her doctorate, just three years after 
her arrival, the American Philo- 
sophical Society had granted her 
funds to write an account of the 
flora of China. In support of her 
application, Karl Sax, Arboretum 
director 1946—1954, described her 
as “one of the most competent and 
industrious students I have ever 
known . . . ." Those qualities have 


been obvious to all throughout 
Dr. Hu’s career and have not 
diminished in her “retirement," 
which is now of 25 years' dura- 
tion. Nor has her interest in all 
aspects of plants, particularly 
those of China, waned. She entered 
the new century still working 
ten-hour days and reading proofs 
of her 900-page book on the 
food plants of China, which will 
be published within the next 
few months. 


Harvard Heroes 
Named 

Robert E. Cook, Director 

Each June for the past five years, 
Sally Zeckhauser, Harvard's vice 
president for administration 
fVPA), has hosted a grand cer- 
emony to honor as Harvard 
Heroes the individuals in her 
organization who have made a 
special contribution during the 
past year. 

On June 14, I together with 
many other Arboretum staff 
attended this year’s ceremony, at 
which three of our employees were 
recognized for their extra efforts 
over the past year. All three con- 
tributed time and energy to a spe- 
cial initiative organized by Sally 

• continued on page 3 



ELLEN S. BENNETT 







Campaign Participants 

Despite the twenty-degree drop in 
temperature on May 9, 2()()(), spir- 
its rose liigh at tlie Arboretum’s 
capital camjiaign celebration. The 
event acknowledged the commit- 
ment and success of those involved 
m the recently completed S8.25 
million campaign. After a welcome 
from Arboretum director Robert 
E. Cook, guests were gratefully 
recognized for their good work by 
co-chair Noni Ames of the director’s 
advisory board, campaign chair 
Francis O. Hunnewell, and Harvard 
provost Harvey V. Fineberg. Also 
recognized was Fisa M. Hastings 
who, as director of development 
during the campaign, spearheaded Celebrating a successful campaign are, from left, Francis O. Hunnewell, 
the fundraising. Lisa M. Hastings, Robert E. Cook, Mart- E. Vf ilson, and Harvey \'. Eineberg. 


Celebrate 



Former Director Recognized 



Dr. Howard, photographed in 19'71 on the sornma of St. \'incent’s Soufriere, 
preparing specimens of a plant new to botany and known only from this 
location. Just two years later the volcano erupted, giving Lhicivniui hrncei, 
which Dr. Howard named for his son, a very brief tenure in botany. 


Richard A. Howard, former direc- 
tor of the Arnold Arboretum and 
professor of dendrology emeritus 
of Harvard University, has recently 
received two distinguished honors. 

One, the 1999 Allerton Medal, 
recognized his significant contri- 
butions to the conservation of 
tropical plant diversity. The 
medal is awarded by the National 
Tropical Botanical Garden based 
in Kalaheo, Hawaii; the citation 
acknowledges his “decades of 
heroic service in the advancement 
of tropical horticulture and the 
understanding of tropical plants.” 

More recently. Dr. Howard’s 
botanical work in the Caribbean 
islands was acclaimed at a sym- 
posium on the flora of the 
Antilles held recently at the 
New York Botanical Garden. The tribute included a 
much-relished painting of Cuhanola cJomiuigetisis by 
the NYBG’s botanical artist Bobbi Angel. 


Dr. Howard is the author of the six-volume Flora 
of the Lesser Antilles as well as many other works on 
tropical botany. 


2 


SPRING 2000 


Archives of the Arnold Arboretum Karen Madsen 



Karen Madsen 


Arboretum Exhibit Awarded Two Medals 


Julie Coop, Superintendent 
of Grounds 



Arnold Arboretum staff, past and present. The Arboretum’s New England 
Spring Flower Show exhibit was designed, installed, and maintained by, 
from left. Jack Alexander, Julie Coop, John Olmsted, Keiko Satoh, and 
Tom For. A poster-sized photograph of illustrious past Arboretum staff is 
behind them. 


The Arnold Arboretum’s exhibit 
at the 2{)()() New England Spring 
Flower Show was honored with 
two medals. The Garden Club of 
America Bulkley Medal recognizes 
a special exhibit in the fields of 
horticulture, botany, or conserva- 
tion that possesses exceptional 
educational merit and increases 
the knowledge and awareness of 
the viewing public. The Massa- 
chusetts Horticultural Society also 
awarded the exhibit a Gold Medal 
tor Horticultural Merit. 

The intent of the exhibit was 
to illustrate the collaborations of 
some of the many talented people 
associated with the Arboretum, 
both past and present. These 
gifted people work to bring plants 
from the wild to the Arboretum grounds and beyond, 
perhaps even to the viewing public’s own backyard. 
Lilies, dawn redwoods, and other plants introduced 
into cultivation by the Arnold Arboretum were fea- 
tured along with informative text, illustrations, and 
herbarium specimens. The focal point of the exhibit 
was a large group photograph taken in 1916 of 


Sargent, our first director; Wilson, renowned plant 
collector; Faxon, botanist and illustrator of Sdva of 
North America: Rehder, taxonomist extraordinaire; 
and Camillo Schneider, a German plant collector and 
dendrologist who, forced to abandon fieldwork in 
China, sought asylum and employment at the Arbo- 
retum during World War 1. 



• from page ! 

to improve the quality of the workplace for all employ- 
ees of VPA. John DelRosso is one of the exceptional 
arborists who helps maintain the high quality of our 
collection of woody plants. Sheila Connor is our 
research archivist and heads our horticultural library 
in Jamaica Plain. Candace Julyan heads up all our 
educational programs for adults, children, and visitors 
to the grounds. 

At the ceremony all three individuals were person- 
ally thanked by Neil Rudenstine, president of Harvard, 
for their dedication to the University and its mission, 
and for the special contribution that the Arboretum 
makes to research and education. On behalf of the 
entire staff, I express my personal appreciation to 
Candace Julyan, John DelRosso, Sheila Connor John, Sheila, and Candace for a job well done. 


ARNOLD ARBORETUM NEWS 


Peter Del Tredici 




Arboretum Staff 
Changes 

David Russo, facilities supervisor, 
came to the Arboretum last March 
from Harvard's planning and real 
estate department, where he 
served as building superintendent 
for faculty and graduate students. 



He brought with him to Harvard 
twenty years’ experience as a car- 
penter, five of those years in his 
own carpentry business. As facili- 
ties supervisor, Dave manages all 
of the Arboretum's buildings, 
both in Jamaica Plain and at the 
Clase Estates in Weston. Much of 
his job involves finding, schedul- 
ing, and overseeing contractors, 
but from time to time he finds an 
occasion to keep up his cabinet- 
building skills as well. 



Sheryl Barnes joined the 
Arboretum in April as web project 
manager. In this new position 
Sheryl will manage the websites of 
the Arnold Arboretum (www. arbo- 
retum. harvard.edu) and the Insti- 
tute for Cultural Landscape Studies 
(www.icls.harvard.edu). Sheryl’s 
previous position was with the 
Center for Health and the Global 
Environment of Harvard Medical 


School, where among other 
responsibilities she managed the 
center’s website. She has also 
worked for the Massachusetts 
Public Interest Research Group. 
Sheryl is a graduate of Cornell 
University with a double major 
in biology and society and in 
government. 

The newest member of our 
grounds crew is Bethany Grasso, 
who started work as gardener in 
early June. Most recently Bethany 
worked for Perennial Gardens, a 
garden design and installation 
company in Roslindale. Earlier, 



she gained a good deal of practical 
experience through internships 
serv'ed at the Hampshire College 
Earm Center, the Arnold Arbore- 
tum, and Longwood Gardens. 
Bethany earned her bachelor of 
science in plant and soil science. 


with a concentration in sustainable 
agriculture, from the University of 
Massachusetts, Amherst. She is a 
Massachusett-certified arborist. 

Also of note on the grounds is 
Tom Por’s move from gardener to 
arborist. Tom, who hails from St. 
Thomas, Ontario, served as an 
Arboretum intern in 1997 and as 
our apprentice in 199H. 

Joe Melanson, who has been 
a visitor information assistant in 
the Arboretum’s education depart- 
ment for the past four years, 
recently acquired his professional 
library degree. He will use his 
skills and knowledge in his new 
position as assistant archivist in 
the library. 

Within the education depart- 
ment, Ellen Bennett has been 
promoted from manager of horti- 
cultural information to assistant 
director of education. In her new 
role, Ellen will oversee the adult 
education program, children’s 
education program, and visitor 
services. Though she will continue 
to oversee horticultural informa- 
tion, many of the tasks associated 
with her past position will move 
to the visitor services assistants. 


20th Annual Fall Plant Sale 

Please join us for the 2()th Annual Fall Plant Sale, to be held this year 
on Sunday, September 17, 2()()(), at the Case Estates in Weston. 

An enticing variety of trees, shrubs, and herbaceous perennials selected 
by Arboretum staff will be sold in and around the barn. The barn will 
open to members at the sustaining level and above at 8:00 a.m., to all 
members at 9:00 a.m., and to the general public at 10:30 a.m. 

Other events of the day include a live auction featuring rare and 
choice plants; a specialty sales tent with unusual plants donated by gen- 
erous individuals and nurseries; and Society Row, where representatives 
of more than 20 plant societies will sell plants and offer advice. Knowl- 
edgeable plantspeople will be on hand to answer questions. 

For more information about the plant sale or to become a member 
of the Friends of the Arnold Arboretum, please call Karen O’Connell at 
6l 7/524- 1 7 18 X 165. Members will receive the plant sale catalog in 
August and will receive free plants and a discount on plant purchases 
in the barn on the day of the sale! 


E 


SPRING 2000 





ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOI D ARBORETUM 


Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators 1 7 


while foraging. Bees visit legume flowers for 
their nectar, as this sugar-based solution fuels 
their flight. Many legumes use "spring-loaded" 
stamens to ensure that the bees they nourish 
earn their meal. As a bee makes its way into the 
flower to collect the nectar reward, the flower's 
spring-loaded stamens are tripped, propelling its 
pollen onto the bee's underside. When the bee 
visits the next flower, the pollen is deposited on 
the stigma as the bee enters, and pollination has 
been effectively, and efficiently, achieved. 

Legumes are not alone in using spring-loaded 
stamens to affix pollen to visitors. Mountain 
laurel (Kalmia latifolia), a member of the heath 
family (Ericaceae) and a New England native, 
can be found throughout the Arboretum. Over 
evolutionary time, petals on the flowers have 



Members of the Aesculus genus, including this horse- 
chestnut, A. X planteriensis, maximize the size 
of inflorescence display by retaining pollinated 
flowers. Pollinators distinguish between virgin and 
pollinated flowers on the basis of colored patches 
on the petals. 


fused to form a cuplike structure that offers a 
steady landing surface for pollinators. Inspect 
the flower closely and you will see that the 
anthers are held in small depressions that ring 
the inner periphery of the petal tissue. This cre- 
ates tension on the filaments that hold the 
anthers, as their other end is anchored lower 
down in the center of the flower. Each stamen 
therefore looks like a small catapult. The pres- 
sure of a pollinator walking on the petal surface 
sets off one or several of these catapults, and the 
pollen is plastered onto the visitor's body. 

Signals are the attraction strategy of choice 
for several taxa in the Arboretum. Catalpa 
speciosa (western catalpa), like other members 
of the bignone family (Bignonaceae), can be 
found on Bussey Hill just above the lilac collec- 
tion. It produces large, white, tubular flowers 
with a pronounced lower lip. Looking inside a 
flower one notices two distinctive features: one, 
a pair of broad yellow stripes that start near the 
mouth of the tube and terminate at its base, and 
two, some small, brownish-purple splotches 
scattered throughout the tube. To our eyes it 
is color and pattern beautifully arranged, but 
to bees these are guides to that highly prized 
reward, nectar. 

In some taxa, signalling to potential pollina- 
tors continues even after the flowers have been 
pollinated. Red buckeye (Aesculus pavia), of the 
horse-chestnut family (Hippocastanaceae), is 
found growing along the main drive just beyond 
the Cornus collection. It produces red tubular 
flowers with yellow nectar guides that attract 
pollination by bees, but here, after a flower is 
pollinated, the guides "turn themselves off" by 
changing from yellow to pink (Weiss 1995). To 
understand the benefits of such a signal, con- 
sider once again the perspective of the bees. 

Many pollinating bees sip nectar continu- 
ously in order to fuel the flight muscles that 
carry them between the flowers they visit and 
the brood they provision with pollen. Like all 
animals, bees strive for maximum foraging effi- 
ciency. After encountering several unrewarding 
flowers on a single plant, a bee is likely to move 
on to another nearby. As a result, the plant that 
is snubbed loses reproductive opportunities. 
By turning off the nectar guides of the flowers 
that have already been visited, the red buckeye 


ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


1 8 Ainoldia 60/1 



The faintly darker patch on the petals of this Weigela 
middendorffiana indicate that the flowers have been 
pollinated. 


directs pollinators to profitable flowers, thereby 
enhancing their efficiency while improving 
its own reproductive opportunities. Other taxa 
in the Arhoretum that employ post-pollination 
signaling either through color or morphologi- 
cal changes in floral parts include flowering 
weigela in Caprifoliaceae, Scots broom {Cytisus 
scoparius) in Fabaceae, and goldenrain tree 
{Koelreuteria paniculata] in Sapindaceae 
(Weiss 1995). 

Flowering plants are certainly not above prac- 
ticing deception in order to attract pollinators. 
Like restaurant owners, they live in a competi- 
tive world where the biggest challenge is per- 
suading the desired clientele to stop in and 
where advertising may be a useful tool. Within 
some taxa there is a positive correlation 
between flower size and the amount of reward: 
the bigger the flower, the more pollen or nectar 
to be found. However, some plants don't always 
back up their advertising. 


Doublefilc vihurnum (Viburnum plicatum f. 
tomentusum) is in Caprifoliaceae; it grows in 
the vihurnum collection located near the Dana 
Greenhouses. Snow-white flowers are produced 
in flashy, flat-topped cymes that few human 
visitors fail to notice. However, close inspection 
of an individual cyme reveals that its showmess 
resides in the ring of large (0.75 to 1.5 inches 
wide) sterile flowers that surround an interior 
cluster of unenticing fertile flowers. The pri- 
mary role of the sterile flowers is to attract 
pollinators — rather deceptively, since they offer 
no reward. Much like restaurant customers 
who find that the special of the day is no longer 
being served, pollinators will nevertheless 
indulge themselves in whatever rewards the 
fertile flowers do offer before leaving. 

A final example brings us back to the 
Hunnewell Visitor Center. In my view, 
Actinidia arguta (bower actinidia), a vine in 
Actinidiaceae, boasts the most innovative polli- 
nation mechanism found at the Arboretum. It 
grows along the fence just south of the main 
entrance. This species is primarily dioecious, 
meaning that there are separate male and female 
plants. Pollen is extracted from the male flow- 
ers through an amazing process known as "buzz 
pollination" (Buchmann 1983, Proctor et al. 
1996). A visiting bee grabs the anthers with its 
legs and then vibrates its wings while remaining 
stationary. This generates an acoustic resonance 
that causes pollen grains to pour out of the 
anthers and onto the hee's body. When the bee 
forages for nectar in a female A. arguta flower, 
pollination is achieved. 

This has by no means been an exhaustive 
account of pollination mechanisms on display 
at the Arnold Arboretum. Examples can easily 
be found to illustrate the adaptive significance 
of many other pollination-related flower charac- 
teristics; the positioning of the ovary with 
respect to the petals and sepals, inflorescence 
architecture, and floral fragrance all have adap- 
tive value in the context of pollination. Clearly, 
successful pollination, a challenge faced by all 
vascular seed plants, bas been solved in many 
ways. The Arnold Arboretum provides in a 
single location an unusually comprehensive 
taxonomic collection that allows visitors to 
observe the remarkable innovations that have 


Flowering Plants and Their Pollinators 19 


Deception can reduce metabolic costs associated with pollinator attraction. 
Large sterile flowers draw pollinators toward the diminutive fertile ones of 
Viburnum plicatum f. tomentosum. 


resulted from the mutualistic 
relationship between plants and 
their pollinators. Viewing the 
living collections at the Arnold 
Arboretum as a pollination biol- 
ogy museum reminds us that 
the diversity of flower shapes, 
colors, and sizes that brighten 
our gardens, entertain our 
minds, and touch our spirits 
have their origins in a relation- 
ship that was initiated over 100 
million years ago. 

Literature Cited 

Buchmann, S.L. 1983. Buzz pol- 
lination in angiosperms. 

Handbook of experimental 
pollination biology, ed. 

C.E. Jones &. R.J. Little. 

New York: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, 73-113. 

Cooper-Driver, G. 1994. Welwitchia rairabiiis: A Dream 
Come True. Arnoldia 54(2|: 2-10. 

Dodd, M.E., J. Silvertown, and M.W. Chase. 1999. 

Phylogenetic analysis of trait evolution and 
species diversity variation among angiosperm 
families. Evolution 53: 732-744. 

Leppik, E.E. 1960. Early evolution of flower types. 
Lloydia 3: 72-92. 

Norstog, K. 1987. Cycads and the origin of insect 
pollination. American Scientist 75: 270-278. 

Proctor, M., P. Yeo, and A. Lack. 1996. The natural 
history of pollination. Portland, OR: Timber 
Press, 179-180. 

Takhtajan, A. 1991. Evolutionary trends in flowering 
plants. New York: Columbia University Press, 
171-184. 


Waser, N.M., L. Chittka, M.V. Price, N.M. Williams, 
J. Ollerton. 1996. Generalization in pollina- 
tion systems, and why it matters. Ecology 77: 
1043-1060. 

Weiss, M.R. 1995. Floral color change: a widespread 
functional convergence. American Journal of 
Botany 81[1): 167-185. 


David Gihlin was an intern and curatorial associate in 
the Arboretum's plant records department. Since then, 
he has earned a master's degree in conservation biology 
from the University of Washington and is currently a 
doctoral candidate at the University of Missouri where 
he is studying the relationship between pollinators and 
floral longevity. 



ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


A Fresh Look at a 
Traditional Favorite: 
Rhododendrons 

Richard Brooks 

R hododendrons have been used exten- 
sively in New England landscapes for 
nearly a century and a half. Everywhere 
you go you see them: in parks and puhlic build- 
ings, lined up in front of filling stations, in resi- 
dential foundation plantings, and sometimes 
even naturalized in woodlands. I think that 
qualifies them as "traditional favorites." 

But I would guess that 99 percent of the 
rhododendrons commonly seen represent a very 
small group — perhaps ten or a dozen — of "tried 
and true" varieties, such as 'Roseum Elegans', or 
the ubiquitous 'PJM', or the evergreen azalea 
'Hino Crimson', or occasionally some of the 
flamboyant Exhury hybrid deciduous azaleas. 

Now I have nothing against these old-timers. 
They have proven their mettle by surviving and 
flourishing despite the vicissitudes of our noto- 
rious New England climate. But they represent 
only the tip of the iceberg — a small fraction of 
the spectrum of size, form, foliage, and flower 
that characterize this extraordinary genus. 

The genus Rhododendron is one of the largest 
in the plant kingdom. There are between eight 



‘Bah’ 



‘Firestorm’ 


hundred and one thousand species that inhabit 
the wild areas of the world, and from them have 
been developed (and are still being developed) 
literally tens of thousands of hybrids. They 
range in size and habit from forty-foot trees to 
spreading groundcovers only a few inches tall; 
from leaves a massive fifteen inches in length to 
a diminutive dime size; and flowers from large 
trumpets to tiny stars, in nearly every color of 
the rainbow. 

In this article I will introduce a small sample 
of this large and varied palette — plants that are 
proven performers in New England's hardiness 
zones 5 and 6 (and some even in zone 4) but are 
virtually unknown and unused by landscape 
professionals and home gardeners. 

In landscape value these can he grouped into 
several categories: First, plants that represent 
the expanded range of flower color that is now 
available. Second, plants of low-growing and 
even dwarf stature that are more appropriate 
for today's smaller properties. Third, plants 
that extend the blooming season from early 
April through late fuly or even August. And 


Al l IMIOTOS HY nil AUTHOR 


Rhododendrons 21 



‘Wojnar’s Purple’ 



j ‘Calsap’ 

I 



I ‘Casanova’ 


last, plants with special foliage interest 
that makes them even more valuable dur- 
ing the fifty weeks a year that they are not 
in bloom. 

A Fresh Look at Flower Colors 

One fault found by many landscape profes- 
sionals with the standard "ironclad" vari- 
eties is that the bloom color — especially 
the pinks and reds — is tainted with a 
purplish or lavender cast. Rejoice! Many 
hybrids with blooms in clear, unflawed 
colors are now available. One of the most 
outstanding of these is 'Bali', which has a 
neat, dense, mounding habit, reaches three 
to four feet in height and five to six feet in 
diameter at maturity, and bears flowers of 
a pale pink, lit with a yellow throat. 
'Dexter's Champagne' has a more open, 
rangy habit, which 1 can overlook for the 
sake of its creamy blossoms, tinged pink. 
'Janet Blair', with large, ruffled, pale pink 
flowers, is acquiring a reputation as an all- 
time great performer in the eastern United 
States, equaling if not surpassing in vigor 
and reliability another pink-flowered 
rhododendron, the well-known and often 
used 'Scintillation'. 

Among the reds, 'Vivacious', bred at 
the Vineland Station in Ontario, offers 
cardinal-red blooms untainted with purple 
and superb leathery foliage. 'Firestorm', an 
introduction of the late Dr. Gustav 
Mehlquist of Connecticut, blooms with 
deep red flowers late in the season, usually 
the first or second week in June. And a 
sister seedling, 'Scarlet Romance', carries 
the vivid color of 'Vivacious' into that 
same period. 

The old English cultivar 'Purple 
Splendour' is still popular in milder cli- 
mates for its intense, deep violet flowers, 
but unfortunately it is not reliable in zone 
5 and often fails even in zone 6. Happily, 
we now have several hybrids that supply 
the same regal color on a much hardier 
plant. One is 'Jonathan Shaw', with a low, 
densely branching habit; another is 
'Wojnar's Purple', another Mehlquist intro- 
duction, which grows somewhat taller. 


1 



22 Arnoldia 60/1 


The old English hybrid 'Sappho' draws rave 
reviews for its snow-white flowers with a star- 
tling hlotch, or flare, of deep purple, hut it is 
hopelessly tender for much of New England. Its 
hardier counterparts are 'Calsap' and 'White 
Peter', both with a fairly tall hut densely branch- 
ing habit. 

Yes, Virginia, yellow rhododendrons really do 
exist, although until recently none were reliably 
hardy in the Northeast. But we now have a 
number of yellow- and near yellow-flowered 
evergreen rhododendrons that are reliably hardy 
in zones 5 and 6. 'Arctic Gold' and 'Big Deal', 
both introductions of Weston Nurseries in 
Hopkinton, Massachusetts, form reasonably 
dense, medium-growing shrubs with excellent 
foliage. 'Vinecrest', another introduction 
from Ontario, has light yellow blossoms that 
emerge from peach-colored buds on a taller, 
more open plant. 

'Capistrano', one of the last introductions of 
that master hybridizer, the late David Leach, 
forms a dense, low-growing mound with deep 
green foliage and flowers of a no-nonsense yel- 



'Edmond Amateis’ 




Rhododendron degronianum subsp. Yakushimanum, bovee 
dwarf form. 


low. 'Casanova', also from Leach, has a similar 
habit and pale yellow flowers spotted with 
apricot-orange, opening from near-red buds. 
'Santa Fe', somewhat taller growing, blooms in 
an unusual shade of orange-pink. 

For white-flowered cultivars to set off this 
rainbow array of colors, one could hardly 
improve on two more hybrids from Dr. Leach: 
'Edmond Amateis', which carries huge trusses 
of white flowers highlighted by a touch of red in 
the center on a vigorous, stiff, upright plant; and 
'Dolly Madison', whose pink buds soften to 
white upon opening, with a more spreading and 
open habit of growth. 

A Fresh Look at Smaller Rhododendrons 

We've all seen new houses with "foundation 
plantings" of cute little rhododendrons plunked 
down along the front under the windows. They 



Rhododendrons 23 



'Dorothy Swift’ 


I 




'Percy Wiseman ' 


'Tow Head' 


look great for two or three years, and the 
owners are delighted with the color they 
provide every spring. But rhododendrons 
have a way of growing, and in time the 
kinds that are commonly used in this way 
can get very large indeed. Before you know 
it, those cute little mounds are engulfing 
the house and blocking out the view. You 
can cut them hack, of course, but you'll be 
faced with the same problem again in a few 
more years. If you must provide a founda- 
tion planting (and I'm suggesting that there 
are alternatives), at least use lower-growing 
rhododendrons; they will provide all the 
benefits of evergreen foliage and colorful 
bloom without frequent pruning. Such 
rhododendrons abound in today's nursery 
catalogs, and many of them are based on 
the species Rhododendron yakushimanum 
(now properly R. degronianuin subsp. 
yakushimanum). 

The species "Yaks" form a neat, dense, 
self-branching mound, from one to two feet 
tall at ten years of age. The leaves are held 
by the plant five or six years, sometimes 
even longer (versus the two or three years 
that the old ironclads retain their leaves), 
and display a thick, felt-like coating of fine 
hairs (indumentum) on the underside. The 
flowers open white from pink buds. 

Plant breeders have gone wild over this 
species, crossing it with many other kinds 
in an attempt to capture its desirable traits 
of habit and foliage in hybrids with differ- 
ent colored blossoms. 'Hachmann's Polaris' 
retains the pink color in the flower instead 
of fading to white,- 'Dorothy Swift', another 
introduction from Dr. Mehlquist, features 
the same colored blossoms as the species in 
a somewhat larger growing plant. (Most 
"Yak" hybrids are larger growing than the 
species.) 'Percy Wiseman' is already popular 
for its profuse peaches-and-cream flowers. 

For really tight spaces there are dwarf 
plants, some even suitable for the rock gar- 
den: 'Ginny Gee' forms a spreading mound 
only 18 inches tall and two to three feet 
wide at maturity and smothers itself in 
bloom every spring. 'Tow FFead' brings pale 
yellow blossom color to this group. 





24 Ainoldici 60/1 



‘ April Gem’ 


A Fresh Look at an Extended 
Blooming Season 

Most rhododendron fanciers are familiar with 
Rhododendron mucronulatum, the so-called 
"Korean Azalea" (actually not an azalea at all, 
hut a small-leaved rhododendron that happens 
to be deciduous); it opens the flowering season 
in early to mid April. A few years ago, this and 
'PJM' were nearly the only April-flowering 
rhododendrons commonly available. Now early 
bloomers are available in a range of colors — 
'April Snow', another Weston introduction, 
with pure white, double, star-shaped flowers; 
'April Song', still another from Weston, with 
soft pink flowers; 'April Gem', a Mehlquist 
hybrid, with fully double, white flowers like 
miniature gardenias; and 'Landmark', from 
Weston, with nearly red single flowers. 

A brief digression: I'm often asked what the 
distinction is between azaleas and rhododen- 
drons. Botanically speaking, all azaleas belong 
to the genus Rhododendron. They constitute 
two of the eight suhgenera into which taxono- 



'Summei Snow', photographed the last week in June 



Alexander’ 


mists have divided the genus: the deciduous 
azaleas (suhgenus Pentanthera] and the so- 
called evergreen azaleas (subgenus Tsutsusi], 
Both groups are distinguished from other 
rhododendrons by several characteristics: their 
leaves and stems never have scales, as do such 
small-leaved rhododendrons as 'PJM' and R. 
mucronulatum; their flowers usually (but not 
always) have five stamens, unlike the other 
rhododendrons, which usually have ten or more 
stamens; and the hairs on azalea leaves are 
always simple, never branched, unlike the hairs 
that constitute the indumentum on species 
such as R. yakushimanum. 

Having established what an azalea is, let's 
now consider extending rhododendron bloom 
beyond Memorial Day. Usually we don't look 
for much except in the late-flowering rosebay. 
Rhododendron maximum. But the flowers of R. 
maximum are small and not very showy and 




Rhododendrons 25 



Rhododendron makinoi 



‘Teddy Bear’ 


tend to be hidden by the new leaves, which 
form much earlier. Now rhododendrons are 
available with large, impressive flowers that 
appear long after the midseason kinds are hut 
a memory. Two examples are 'Summer 
Snow', a David Leach hybrid with snowy 
white flowers, and 'Summer Glow', with 
vivid pink flowers. 

Bloom can be extended even into late sum- 
mer with some recent deciduous azalea intro- 
ductions, bred from several late-flowering, 
native American species, fust a sampling: 
'Millenium', near-red bloom in early to mid 
July; 'Golden Showers', peach buds that open 
yellow, turning creamy white, in mid fuly; 
'Pennsylvania', light pink, hlooms in late fuly 
to early August. These azaleas have two addi- 
tional virtues. Many of them are fragrant, and 
their foliage is much more resistant to mil- 
dew than the older Exbury hybrid azaleas, 
which often look pretty shabby by the end of 
our interminably hot and humid summers. 

For prostrate groundcovers, Polly Hill's 
evergreen azalea introductions can hardly be 
surpassed. Their mature height is less than a 
foot, and they spread to cover an area two to 
three feet in diameter. A couple of examples 
are 'Alexander', flowering in late lime, the 
color of ripe watermelon, and 'Late Love', a 
light pink. 

A Fresh Look at Rhododendron Foliage 

Varied foliage types and sizes can provide 
many diverse textures in the green landscape 
before and after the relatively brief blooming 
season. Rhododendron makinoi has long, nar- 
row, almost spiky leaves. R. kiusianum, the 
Kyushu azalea from Japan, has delicate sprays 
of tiny, glossy leaves; its flowers, as an added 
bonus, come in a range of colors from white 
through pinks and lavenders to near-red. 

The new growth of some forms of Rhodo- 
dendron degronianum are handsomely colored 
by a powdery tomentum (dense matted hair). 
In 'Teddy Bear' the persistent indumentum 
on the leaf undersurface is a bright cinnamon 
color. In 'Golfer' the white tomentum cover- 
ing the new growth persists for most of the 
summer, making a vivid contrast with the 
glossy dark green of the older leaves. 


26 Ainoldia 60/1 



Rhododendron ponticum 'Vaiiegatum' 



Rhododendron ponticum ‘Goldflimmei’ 


Finally, there are even rhododendrons with 
variegated foliage: Rhododendron ponticum 
'VariegatLim', with gray-green leaves edged in 
white, unfortunately not reliably hardy in zone 
5 hut fine in milder parts of zone 6 and along 
the Atlantic coast and Cape Cod, and 
'Goldflimmer', which has a completely different 
leaf pattern, green-streaked and mottled yellow. 

Some Cultural Pointers 

Planted in too much sun, a rhododendron can 
resemble a variegated shrub. The old ironclad 
varieties are often planted in full sun, and yes, 
many of them tolerate the exposure — hut toler- 
ance does not constitute preference. They may 


bloom prolifically, but they always 
look stressed: the foliage tends to a 
yellow instead of deep green, and the 
annual growth is short and stunted. 
A rule of thumb is that the larger 
the leaf, the more shade the plant 
prefers. Rhododendron maximum, for 
instance, grows well in almost full 
shade. On the other hand, the small- 
leaved types, like 'PIM' and both 
deciduous and evergreen azaleas need 
plenty of sun to grow and bloom well. 

Besides the amount of sun and 
shade, the most important cultural 
factors to consider are the following. 
First, plant rhododendrons in well- 
drained, open-textured, acid (pFl 4.5 
to 6.0) soil that contains copious 
quantities of coarse organic matter. 
(Remember that soil near a foundation, 
especially in older buildings, may 
be alkaline due to leaching of lime 
from mortar.) 

Second, plant them shallow. Rhodo- 
dendrons have a naturally shallow root 
system, and if the roothall is covered 
with soil, the roots can suffer from lack 
of oxygen. The top of the roothall 
should actually be above the surface of 
the surrounding soil. 

Third, provide a year-round mulch 
of coarse organic matter to insulate 
the shallow roots from extremes of 
heat and cold, to conserve soil mois- 
ture, and discourage weeds. Pine needles, rotted 
woodchips, chopped oak leaves and pinebark 
are all appropriate for mulch, but be sure not to 
pile it against the stems of the plant, which will 
encourage disease. And finally, ask your growers 
and suppliers for these less-than-common 
rhododendrons and begin enjoying them soon. 


Dick Brooks, a past president of the American 
Rhododendron Society, was awarded the Gold Medal of 
that organization in 1998. In 1999 he received the 
Massachusetts Horticultural Society’s lackson Dawson 
Memorial Award for skill in the hybridization and 
propagation of hardy woody plants. 


ARNOLD ARBORETUM 

HARVARD UNIVERSITY 



BULLETIN 


OF POPULAR INFORMATION 


Series 4 . Vol. II JULY 9, 1934 Number 5 


R hododendrons, what a privilege it would be, if we could call back 
as we walk through the collection, the men who have contributed to the 
development of our garden rhododendrons. They would make an interesting 
and varied assemblage — Dean Herbert, the Earl of Carnarvon, Sir ]. D. Hooker, blunt 
Anthony Waterer, lohn Fraser, gentle Peter Collinson in his Quaker garb, and Baron 
Ungern Sternberg. For the rhododendrons of our gardens are quite literally something 
new under the sun,- there is nothing just like them in nature. Aristocratic cosmopolites, 
they came into being in Victorian England when species from the Old World and 
the New were sympathetically gathered by plant collectors and intelligently blended 
by a few hybridizers. 

The contributing species are all mountain lovers. From the lower slopes about the 
Mediterranean and Black Seas comes Rhododendron ponticum; higher up in the 
Caucasus are the hardier R. caucasicum and R. Smiinowii. Our own southern moun- 
tains contributed the hardy and attractive R. catawbiense which occurs by thousands 
of acres on the upper slopes of the southern Alleghenies. Near the North Carolina 
boundary among the open balsam woods and natural meadows which form the summit 
of Roan Mountain, it reaches as far as the eye can see, growing in scattered groups in 
the open meadows and forming a dense undergrowth beneath the balsams. It was from 
this very locality that it was first collected for European gardens by John Fraser, over 
a hundred years ago. Fraser was a Scotchman, who as a very young man, like many 
another Scotchman, had gone to London to seek his fortune. He eventually became one 
of the most successful of those early plant collectors who ransacked the American con- 
tinent to provide novel and beautiful plants for European gardens. He had phenomenal 
success m Russia where he became a favorite of Catharine the Great. After her death, 
by Imperial ukase, he was sent back to America with orders to furnish rare and novel 
plants for the imperial collections. "Accompanied by his eldest son, John, he embarked 
in the year 1799 for the southern states of North America, where he prosecuted his 
researches in various unexplored parts of the continent. On the summit of the Great 
Roan or Bald Mountain, on a spot which commands a view of five states, it was Mr. 


28 Arnoldici 60/1 


Fraser's good fortune to discover and collect living specimens of the new and splendid 
R. catawbiense, from which so many beautiful hybrid varieties have since been obtained 
by skillful cultivators." * 

Another American species, the rosehay, R. maximum, has been little used by the 
English hybridizers, unfortunately so for American gardens, since it is one of the hardi- 
est of the lot. It is of particular interest to New Englanders for it is occasionally found 
native as far north as Sebago Lake and southern New Hampshire. It was among the 
American plants introduced into England by the Quaker botanist Peter Collinson. The 
religious bond between English and American Quakers kept up a lively interchange 
between the two countries. Quakers had always been interested in gardening; George 
Fox, the founder of the Society of Friends, had specified that the "nature of herbs, roots, 
plants, and trees" should be taught in Quaker schools. What more natural then, but that 
packets of seed and pressed plants and much garden information should pass back 
and forth between the two countries. In this way R. maximum was sent from the New 
World to the Old and in Peter Collinson's "Commonplace Book for June 26, 1756" we 
find the entry, "The great mountain laurel or rhododendron flowered for the first time 
in my garden." 

One other species, the showiest of the lot, R. arboreum, came from the foothills of 
the Himalayas. It contributed splendor to the garden rhododendrons for it is a great 
shrub-like tree with large flowers of bright red, varying in different strains from blush 
pink to a black crimson. Unfortunately, it brought in a tropical aversion to cold along 
with all this tropical splendor. R. arboreum itself can barely be grown out-of-doors even 
in England; it was not until it had been hybridized with hardy American species that a 
plant was produced which could withstand the English winters. English hybridizers, 
however, have continued to use R. arboreum and other lovely but tender species in their 
work. The result is a glorious group of flowering shrubs but one which Americans must 
cross the ocean to see. Only a few of the thousand or more named varieties will stand 
our hot summers and cold winters. Among the pinks we can recommend "Mrs. C. S. 
Sargent" and "Henrietta Sargent" in deep pink and "Lady Armstrong" and "Roseum 
elegans" in rose pink. The hardiest reds are "Charles Dickens," and "H. W. Sargent." In 
dark purple the best are "Purpureum grandiflorum" and "Purpureum elegans." 

Most of these ironclad varieties are the creations of one man, Anthony Waterer, an 
English nurseryman who became a sort of godfather to American gardeners. His particu- 
lar affection for Americans came about in an interesting way. When Andrew Jackson 
Downing laid out the grounds about the National Capitol, he ordered plants from 
Waterer. The plants were received but before payment was made Downing had died. 
His friend and neighbor, Henry Winthrop Sargent, when settling the estate found 
Waterer's unpaid hill. By the influence of his college classmate Charles Sumner, he got 
a special bill through congress and Waterer was eventually paid. Now, Anthony Waterer 
was a forthright, John Bull sort of a man, as strong in his likes as in his dislikes. Sargent's 
action led to a lifelong friendship, one which was large enough to include Sargent's 

* Condensed from the account by Sir William Hooker, in the "Companion to the Botanical Magazine." 


Rhododendrons, A Brief History 29 


friends and his friend's friends as well. It was Henry Winthrop Sargent who brought 
Anthony Waterer and his rhododendrons to the attention of his cousins, H. H. 
Hunnewell and Charles Sprague Sargent. It was this friendship which led to the great 
rhododendron collections at the Hunnewell estate in Wellesley, at Professor Sargent's 
home in Brookline, and at the Arnold Arhoretum. 

In growing rhododendrons it is necessary to rememher their likes and dislikes. They 
hate a limey soil. They dislike hot sun in the spring and summer, cold winds in winter. 
They like partial shade and a soil which is well drained hut moist at the roots. The situ- 
ation provided for them in the Arnold Arhoretum is almost ideal. The bold ridge of hem- 
locks to the south screens them from the sun and helps to keep the soil moist at the 
roots. Even there they could be grown in greater perfection if they were more sheltered 
from winter winds and from adventuresome small boys. This latter pest is a very real 
problem in growing rhododendrons at the Arboretum. Anyone who was ever a hoy does 
not blame the urchins for wanting to play about in the Bussey Brook and to crawl up 
through the rhododendron beds among the giant hushes. Yet anyone who knows rhodo- 
dendrons and their needs knows that this crawling is very hard on the bushes. Twigs 
snap off and sunshine strikes at the roots. The passing of hundreds of pairs of little feet, 
and little knees as well, wears out the very soil. The rich, cool mulch which has so care- 
fully been built up is scuffed away and bit by bit the collection succumbs. 

Of late years rhododendrons here and elsewhere in New England have been attacked 
by the lacewing fly. These bizarre little creatures are scarcely larger than the head of a 
pin. Under the microscope they appear like humpbacked monsters dressed in lace. 
Monsters they are in action as well as appearance, for they gather under the rhododen- 
dron leaves and suck its juices. They can be successfully controlled by using an oil 
spray but their attacks are kept to a minimum if the rhododendrons are planted in 
semishade. The insects dislike the shade; the shrubs prefer it, therefore such a situation 
is doubly preferable. 

One of the Caucasian species, the handsome R. Smirnowii, thwarts the lacewing fly 
by clothing its leaves below with a mat of woolly hair. So protective is this covering that 
even the hybrids between R. Smirnowii and the other species are practically immune. 
Fortunately, for the next generation of American gardeners, hybridizers are at last at 
work creating new varieties for this country, varieties which will be winter hardy and 
summer hardy, which will at least discourage attack from the lacewing fly and which 
will, nevertheless, compare with present-day English varieties in the size and beauty of 
their flowers. 


Edgar Anderson 


A geneticist at the Missouri Botanical Garden and professor of botany at Washington University in 
St. Louis for most of his career, from 1931 to 1935 Edgar Anderson (1897-1969) oversaw the care of 
the Arnold Arboretum's living collections and conducted its relations with the public. An interesting 
and prolific writer, two collections of his essays are in print. Plants, Man and Life and Landscape 
Papers. As regards small boys and lacewing flies, the former appear to have found other pursuits but 
the latter remain. 


TERRY HUN l UNDATED. ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


In Pursuit of Ironclads 


Karen Madsen 

R hododendrons were celebrated embellishments of nineteenth-century England's 
great estates, but these star performers did not find a place in New England gar- 
dens until hybridizers solved a dilemma: the hardy species lacked good color, 
and species with good color lacked hardiness. The American Rhododendron 
catawbiense possessed hardiness, but bore flowers of "a disagreeable purple rose." Spe- 
cies with desirable color, such as the deep red Himalayan R. arboreum, lacked hardiness, 
even in much of Britain. Over the century European plantsmen developed hundreds of 
hybrids with R. catawbiense as the primary hardy parent. In the 1850s Anthony Waterer 



of Knap Hill nursery in Surrey began hybridizing rhododendrons for color, but especially 
for hardiness. David Leach described Waterer's achievement in Rhododendrons of the 
World (1961), "For their time [his hybrids] represented a triumph of the hybridist's art: 
the principles of heredity in plant breeding were not then in use; there were but a hand- 
ful of species available as parents,- and the English climate did not test the full limit of 
hardiness which Waterer had imparted to his creations with such remarkable success." 
A visitor described Knap Hill (seen in the photo above) in 1892. 

The Knap Hill nursery is the most extensive, as it is the oldest, establishment in England 
in which the cultivation of American plants has been made a specialty. Its extent exceeds 
200 acres, of which more than 60 acres are allotted to the cultivation of American 
plants. . . . Running straight through the nursery is a very long carriage-drive connecting 
two public roads, and this drive Mr. [Anthony] Waterer generously permits the public to 


Ironclads 3 



use, with certain reservations as to dogs, etc. Thousands of people go every year to Knap 
Hill to see the wonderful display made by the Rhododendrons and Azaleas. Whit-Monday 
is quite a gala day, the crowd being so great that the workmen of the nursery have to act 
as patrols to keep the visitors in order. To understand all this one must see the plants for 
himself. I had no idea that the display was so magnificent ... Of course, when it is remem- 
bered that these plants have been a specialty in this nursery for more than a century, that 
the best varieties have nearly all been raised there, and that the Waterers have always been 
what is called Rhododendron mad, the extent and interest of the collection are to some 
degree accounted for. ..." 

— Visitor, 1892, Garden and Forest V(227): 304-306 

A pioneer in rhododendron culture in New England, H. H. Hunnewell of Wellesley, 
Massachusetts, first wrote of planting rhododendrons in his diary of 1856, when hardy 
meant summering in the ground hut wintering indoors, like figs. Each year he recorded 
conditions and performance and shared his knowledge freely and enthusiastically. In 
1896 he found reason to congratulate himself. 

fune [1896]. In looking back over the horticultural records that I have been in the habit of 
making in this journal for more than forty years, I find I have invariably at this season 
expressed my admiration of our beautiful show of rhododendrons, though until of latter 
years my plants were small and so limited in number that they have made a very modest 
appearance compared with the thousands in my collection at the present time, many of 
which are more than fifteen feet in height and fifty feet in circumference. . . . 


At the H. H. Hunnewell estate, the lavender-rose ‘Everestianum’ , an old favorite developed by 
Anthony Waterer at midcentury. An 1892 letter to Garden and Forest reported that in early June 
the magnificent trusses of Hunnewell’ s rhododendrons were "distinguishable miles away.’ 


ALFRED RF.HDER, 1900. AIU.'HIVES OF THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


32 Arnoldia 60/1 


It is a singular fact that this shrub and the Kalmia latifolia, both natives of this country, 
should be so little cultivated here; for among hardy plants they are undoubtedly the most 
ornamental, and the rhododendron especially stands at the head of the list of rare and 
desirable shrubs in England, — and well it may, for it combines more qualities than any 
other shrub during the entire year, with its gorgeous trusses of a dozen or more flowers of 
every shade imaginable of white, purple, and crimson, its magnificent evergreen foliage, 
and, lastly, its noble habit of growth. . . . 

I have heard it whispered about that I have too many rhododendrons — as if one could 
have too many diamonds! In reply I say it has been my aim and desire for half a century to 
possess the largest and best collection of this shrub of any one in the country, and I have 
succeeded, and feel proud of my success. It has been my hobby, I confess, and I have 
worked hard for it; but it has not prevented my giving attention to other things and 
having a liberal supply of other shrubs, though they attract very little notice from my 
numerous visitors compared with the rhododendrons. 

— Notes on Rhododendrons, 1896, Life, Letters and Diary of Horatio Hollis Hunnewell, 
ed. Hollis Horatio Hunnewell, privately printed, 1906 

Most Americans discovered rhododendrons in 1876 when Anthony Waterer brought 
1,500 plants in 80 varieties to the Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia. (He presented 
most of those plants to C. S. Sargent, and in the 1880s sent what he thought to be his 
hardiest varieties to the Arnold Arboretum for testing.) The Philadelphia display was an 
eye-opener; gardeners were smitten, Americans ordered hundreds of thousands of plants 
from England and began hardiness trials in earnest. Lists of the hardiest hybrids appeared 
frequently in garden magazines, not least in C. S. Sargent's weekly. Garden and Forest 
(1888-1897), and from 1911 the Arhoretum's Bulletin of Popular Information. 

Expectations were very high and hopes even higher; year after year promising new 
hybrids appeared. But weather took its toll on most of those candidates, and near the end 
of his life Sargent lost patience: "More money has been wasted probably in this country 
during the last fifty or sixty years in attempting to cultivate broad-leaved evergreen 
Rhododendrons, for which with few exceptions the climate is not really suited, than on any 
other plants (1926)." Nonetheless in the 1920s a short list of reliably hardy catawbiense 
hybrids emerged, earning the tag ironclad: 'Album Elegans', 'Album Grandiflorum', 
'Atrosanguineum', 'Delicatissimum', 'Everestianum', 'Mrs. Charles S. Sargent', 
'Roseum elegans', 'Purpureum Elegans', 'Purpureum Grandiflorum', and a few others. 

Three-quarters of a century later, five original Waterer plants on that list still grow in 
the Arboretum at the base of Hemlock Hill: 'Album Grandiflorum' and 'Purpureum 
Grandiflorum' planted in 1886; 'Album Elegans' and 'Purpureum Elegans', 1891; and 
'Atrosanguineum', 1896. Not on the list are four other survivors from the nineteenth 
century: 'Bicolor', 'Delicatissimum', 'Mrs. Harry Ingersoll', and 'Parsons Grandiflorum'. 
The latter was bred at Knap Hill but introduced by the only American nursery to 
hybridize rhododendrons in the nineteenth century, the Long Island firm of Samuel 
B. Parsons. Not until the 1920s, after the passage of Quarantine No. 37, when imports 
were banned, prices rose, and supply diminished, did other American plantsmen turn 
to hybridizing these American plants. Sargent would he cheered by the results. 



Album Grandiflorum (1686) 



Bicolor ( 1891) 



Atrosanguineum (1896) 



Mrs. Harry Ingersoll (1891) Purpureum Elegans (1891) 




BoiaBical ExcmioDS. 


Botanists wishing to visit anv of the celebrated locali- 
ties in Burlington or Atlantic Counties. N. J.. can make 
favorable arrangements with me to act as guide. I 
know the best localities for most of the rare plants ot 
this region, such as Schizaea pusilla, Narthecium 
Americanum, Breweria Pickeringii. and many others. 

Botanical Specimens. 

Those wishing to obtain fresh specimens of the 
Pine Barren plants can obtain them at very 
reasonable rates of me. Send me a list of those 
you want, and I will quote price on such as I can 
collect 

A Box of Wild Flowers. 

On receipt of 75 cts. I will send to any address, 
post-paia, a box of rare wild flowers in perfect 
condition for botanical specimens. 


F. L. Bassett, Botanist, 

HAMMONTON, N. J. 


HOUGH'S “AMERICAN WOODS’ 

A publication illustrated hy actual specimens 
showing different views of the grain. Write 
for information before making Holiday pur- 
chases, and inclose 10 cts. for specimens. 
The work now covers most of the woods of eastern 
U. S., and the interesting woods of the Pacific Slope are 
now in hand ; the first mscicie ready for delivery. 

Address Romeyn B. Hough, Lowville, N. Y. 


CLIMBING |!'■eye•'»'■•Cha^ningdecora- 

'^"* *•* ^* * ■ ^" tion for house, church or 
pBDM schoolroom. Used at receptions, dinners. 

leas. etc. Beautiful Holiday Gift. In 
packages, by mail, 20 sprays. Jt; postage, xoc. Send 
for Illustratea Circular. Maidenhair Fern. 

CLlMBlNfl FERN CO.* 13 School St., Boston, Hsm. 


SEND YOUR NAME. 


The Best List of Books 

in Botany, Entomology, 
Ornithology, Biology and 
Zoology, Natural History; 
with allied studies, 
for Naturalists 
and Others. 


BRADLEE WHIDDEN, 

Publisher and Bookseller, 

18 Arch Street, . Boston, Mass. 


You have a hobby? Good. If not, 
choose one, and Now. Study the Birds, the 
Plants, the Insects, the Rocks — anything in 
Nature — out of doors. You will never 
regret this good advice, and will learn. 
You will want a few Books; get the Best, 
always, and write to Whidden, as above. 


Th 


A Weekly Revi 

Feuttdfd 
to cts. a copy 

“It is impos 
in the August Author^ “ lo get a day-by-day 
knowledge of American literature without 
taking in The Critic. I read it regularly.’ 

New volumes begin January and July. 

THE CRITIC CO.. 

387 Fourth Avenue, New York. 


C Choice Seed.j";c, p.icket. Circularlree. 

mrysanthemumS 

T. H. SPAULDING, Orange. N. J. ^ 1 # 


5 a current recora 01 wnai is newesi 
best for use in gardens and for ornament in home 
grounds. 

It is taken and read bv city and suburban residents 
of taste and wealth, and there is no paper whose indi- 
vidual readers have greater purchasing power than 
those of GARDEN AND FOREST. It is, therefore, 
one of the very best mediums for the advertisement 
eve^hing required in a modem, well-appointed home 
in city or countiy. The advertisements of trees, shrubs 
and plants, real estate, books, schools, routes of travel, 
and of all articles required for the comfort, convenience 
and luxury in families of means and refinement, may 
be Inserted in its columns to advantage. 

Copies of GARDEN AND FOR^ are rarely de- 
stroyed. Therefore, advertisements in its columns 
have a lasting value not possessed by those in ordinary 
periodicals. 

GARDEN AND FOREST PUBLISHING CO., 
Tribune BinLotNC, New York. 


OUT-OF-DOORS FOR WOMEN 

AN ILLUSTRATED MONTHLY MAG.AZIXE. 
Send IOC., and ask for our list of Rare Cacti Bulbs, etc. 

Mrs. 0. L. ORCUTT, Editor, 

ORCUTT, CALIFORNIA. 


SOUTHERN 

Timber and Mineral Lands. 


At present prices is the cheapest property in America. 

ROBERTSON, ^Lai^^and 
Cincinnati, O. 


Small Tracts. 


LEWIS' LEAF CHARTS, No. J. 

Life-size pictures uf the leaves of Oaks of the Black 
Oak type- Price, 50 cts. e.ich. For sale by the author, 
GRACE ANNA LEWIS, Media, Pa. Agents, with un- 
exceptional references, wanted for the rlorthem and 
Middle Slates. 


TREE SEEDS. 

MESSBS. FR. SlIRCHHOFF & CO. 
are open to buy Tree Seeds in large quantities. Send 
samples and lowest quotations to 
P. O. Box 3326. JOHANNKBURG. S. A, R. 


FARMER ON THE STRAWBERRY 

^ little book written by our L. J. Farmer, who lias spent his life among 
small fruits. A complete practical treatise; price, 25c. Every person ordering will 
i-eceive six Lady Thompson Strawberry Plants, if they mention this paper. aS” The 
first person who urdei s Irom each Stale will receive S* worth ot pl.ints (our choice) free. 
If you love fruits, semi for our catalogue of plants and trees, tret*. Highfst Aw,trds on 
Strnwberrin at the H'orhfs Fair. 

THE L. J. FARMER NURSERY CO., P. 0. Box X, PULASKI, N. Y. 


Garden and Forest. 

The best garden paper in America. 

This is the season when its advice and directions are needed 
by all who cultivate trees, shrubs, flowers and vegetables, and are 
interested in the care of home-grounds. 

“A year’s reading of Garden and Forest is an education .” — Boston Evening 
Transcript. 

Beaatlfnlly Illustrated. Published Weekly. a Vear. 


SPRING OFFER. 

For three months of the spring planting season, beginning April ist, 

ONE DOLLAR. 

Garden and Forest Publishing Company, 

TRIBUNE BUILDING. NEW YORK. 






DEC 1 3 203Q 


G!^AY li£^?eARIU?l 


n '1 V . u 


amoidia 


GARDEN AND FOREST (1888-1897); PART ONE 


Volume 60 • Number 2 • 2000 

Arnoldia (ISSN 004-2633; USPS 866-100) is 
published quarterly by the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Second-class postage paid at 
Boston, Massachusetts. 

Subscriptions are $20.00 per calendar year domestic, 
$25.00 foreign, payable in advance. Single copies of 
most issues are $5.00; the exceptions are 58/4-59/1 
IMetasequoia After Fifty Years) and 54/4 {A Source- 
book of Cultivar Names), which are $10.00. Remit- 
tances may be made in U.S. dollars, by check drawn 
on a U.S. hank; by international money order; or 
by Visa or Mastercard. Send orders, remittances, 
change-of-address notices, and all other subscription- 
related communications to: Circulation Manager, 
Arnoldia. The Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130-3500. 

Telephone 617/524-1718; facsimile 617/524-1418; 
e-mail arnoldia@arnarb.harvard.edu. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to 
Arnoldia Circulation Manager 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA 02130-3500 

Karen Madsen, Editor 
Andy Winther, Designer 

Editorial Committee 
Phyllis Andersen 
Ellen S. Bennett 
Robert E. Cook 
Peter Del Tredici 
Gary Roller 
Stephen A. Spongberg 
Kim E. Tripp 

Copyright © 2000. The President and Fellows of 
Harvard College 

Covers: Advertisements assembled from issues of 
Garden and Eorest. 

Inside front cover: A group of young Pinus ponderosa, 
probably one hundred feet high, growing in the 
Yosemite Valley where they were photographed by 
W. H. Rollins. Originally published in Garden and 
Eorest. 1895. 

Inside back covet: Three venerable, windswept 
Cedrus libani ssp. atlantica (Mount Atlas cedar), 
photographed in Algeria by Maurice L. de Vilmorin. 
Published in Garden and Forest. 1896. 


Page 

1 Preface 

4 Garden and Forest (February 29, 1888) 1: ii 

6 Garden and Forest: The Botanical Basis of It All 

Stephen A. Spongberg 

9 New or Little Known Plants. Rosa IVlinutifolia 
(1888) 

Sereno Watson 

1 0 An Interesting Rediscovery (1891) 

1 1 from Notes on the Forest Flora of Japan. — II 
[Floras of Japan and Eastern America Com- 
pared] (1893) 

C. S. Sargent 

14 from The Knees of the Bald Cypress (1890) 
Letters to the Editor 
1 7 from The Tupelo Tree ( 1 890) 

19 A High-Grade Paper: Garden and Forest and 
Nineteenth-Century American Forestry 

Char Miller 

19 A Slaughtered Giant (1890) 

20 from The Axe in its Relation to Ornamental 
Trees (1890) 

Editorial 

23 Wanted, a Tract on Forestry (1891) 

Letter to the Editor 

24 Value of Mountain Forests ( 1890) 

/. B. Harrison 

26 A New Jersey Pine Forest (1888) 

C. S. Sargent 

27 /rom The Sihlwald. — I &. II (1890) 

Gifford Pinchot 

30 from Notes on the Forest Flora of Japan. — XXIII 
[The Avenue of Cryptomeria at Nikko] (1893) 
C. S. Sargent 

32 A Museum Specimen of Sequoia gigantea ( 1 892) 
Editorial 

34 The Forests of the National Domain (1895) 
Editorials 

38 Notes from Garden and Forest 

39 “Master of a Felicitous English Style": Mulliam 
Augustus Stiles, Editor of Garden and Forest 

Phyllis Andersen 

42 from New Dangers to Public Parks (1897) 
Editorial 

44 Remembering Bernice G. Schubert, 1913-2000 

Richard A. Howard 


PRACTICAL POPULAR. SCIENTIFICALLY EXACT. 




^GAR^PEN„ 

*3' /N N [) 

FORE ST 

A-JOURNAL-OFHORTICULTURE, 
LANDSCAPE-ART- ANDFORESTRY 


JANUAKY I I M6 ■ « W w i j ai mi l 


I NDISPENSABLE to all who 
love gardens or the literature 
of gardens ; to all who own 
country places or take pleasure in 
rural scenery ; to all who desire 
a broader knowledre of trees, 
shrubs, fruits and flowers. Gar- 
den AND P'oREST Stands for the 
protection of our forests, for the 
preservation of natural beauty, 
for a purer taste in the design 
and decoration of public and pri- 
vate grounds, and is universally 
pronounced the best horticultural 
journal ever published for Ameri- 


cans. 

For the enlightened owners of gardens and 
woodlands this journal is invaluable . — New 
York Tribune. 

Its character is at once dignified and 
pleasing, and its contents are scholarly and 
scientific in the exact sense . — Chicago Evening 
youmal. 

It continues on its high level — its highest 
level, for it has no peer. It appeals, as mere 
literature, to every cultivated person, and is 
full of information for the lover of Flowers 
and Trees.— At Y. Evening Post. 

The foremost journal of its class, keeping in 
touch with every advance in the scientific, 
artistic and practical phases of horticilture 
and arboriculture . — Boston Herald. 


Published weekly. $4.00 a year. 

Specimen copy free on application. 


GARDEN AND FOREST PUBLISHING CO,, 

'XVllDuno BxAlldiriKi Yorlc. 


Preface 


Much of my time and attention during the year has been 
devoted to the establishment of a weekly publication intended 
to extend and popularize the knowledge of trees and their cul- 
tivation, and of gardening and garden-botany. There existed no 
journal or periodical bulletin, published in this country, in 
which the results of the experiments carried on in the Arbore- 
tum, and the mass of facts about plants could be printed 
promptly and regularly, so that they could reach the large num- 
ber of students now interested in this subject. The first issue of 
Garden and Forest appeared on the 29th of February, and 
there is already reason to believe that this journal will aid 
materially in increasing the educational value of the Arbore- 
tum and in extending its influence. 

— Charles S. Sargent, 1888 Report to the President of 
the University 

T his issue of Arnoldia and the next are devoted 
to that publication, Garden and Forest, A 
Journal of Horticulture, Landscape Art and 
Forestry (1888-1897). Founded and "conducted" hy 
the Arnold Arhoretum's first director, C. S. Sargent, 
funded hy him and hy the same Boston Brahmins who 
had underwritten the Arboretum, and published and 
edited in New York, it was not officially an Arboretum 
publication. Nonetheless, true to Sargent's intent, its 
512 issues comprise a trove of information on the 
Arhoretum's plant collections. But Sargent's ambi- 
tions for the journal extended much farther than the 
Arboretum, encompassing the entire plant world and 
stretching even to the welfare of the nation. An 1891 
flyer called it "indispensable not only to the practical 
Horticulturist, Botanist, Landscape-Gardener and For- 
ester, hut to every owner of a Country or Suburban 
Home who desires sound instruction in all branches 
of ornamental and economic planting." It continued: 

Garden and Fc^rest contains from week to week articles 
showing how grounds can be laid out to the best advantage; 
how lawns should be made and kept; what trees and shrubs are 
effective for decoration and suited to the diverse climates of the 
American Continent, and how these should be planted and 
cared for. It endeavors, by instruction or suggestion, and by 
constant reference to pertinent principles of good taste, to aid 
those who desire to beautify their homes. It aims also at arous- 
ing intelligent interest in the care and management of public 
places, such as Parks, School-grounds, Cemeteries, etc., and at 
furthering the efforts made for the improvement of highw-ays 
and the beautifying of roadsides. The department devoted to 



Forestry treats of preservation and management of our forests, 
subjects of vital and urgent importance to the nation's welfare. 
Garden and Forest is alone in this field. 

With all that, the recital does not mention that 
its weekly seven-to-eleven pages also broached 
agronomy, entomology, and pathology, reviewed 
books and recent periodicals, listed exhibitions and 
expositions, and even covered the retail flower mar- 
ket. What was once said about Sargent himself can be 
said about his magazine: nothing connected with 
plants was alien to it. 

We are devoting this issue and the next to Garden 
and Forest because the Library of Congress, working 
with horticultural archivist Sheila Connor, has put 
the entire contents of Garden and Forest online 
(http://lcweb.loc.gov/preserv/prd/gardfor/ 
digitizegf.html) — the first effort in its "digital 
reformatting program," a new method of making 
fragile publications available to a wide readership. To 
enhance the online text, our director, Robert E. Cook, 
has solicited essays on its coverage of botany, forestry 
and forest conservation, landscape art, and horticul- 
ture, and archivist foseph Melanson is approaching 
the halfway mark in his compilation of a detailed and 
cumulative subject index that will greatly improve 
access to its contents. 

The primary subjects of this issue of Arnoldia are 
botany and forestry as covered in Garden and Forest. 
Essays discussing the significance and influence of 
that coverage are accompanied by excerpts from the 
magazine. These are followed by an essay on the role 
of its editor, the little known, often forgotten William 
Stiles. Landscape art and horticulture will be the sub- 
jects of the next issue's essays, by Ethan Carr and Mac 
Griswold, also accompanied by several excerpts. The 
story of the Library of Congress' digitization project — 
the magazine's "journey into cyberspace" — will be 
related by project manager LeeEllen Eriedland. A word 
of explanation may be helpful: excerpts from Garden 
and Forest are printed on a tinted background, and 
brackets indicate editorial interpolations. 

Garden and Forest is a journal of tremendous his- 
torical interest, but also of surprising relevance to 
contemporary issues. We hope this brief immersion in 
a century-old magazine proves as absorbing to read as 
it was to edit. 


What AdvArs Say. 

As indicative of the value of Garden 
AND Forest as a medium of business an- 
nouncement, attention is invited to the fol- 
lowing extracts from recent letters of some 
regular advertisers : 

Evergreen, Wis, 

My advertising in Garden and Forest 
last year cost me seventy-five cents for 
each customer mentioning Garden and 
Forest ; the average of most of the lead- 
ing agricultural papers was ninety cents. 

GEORGE PINNEY. 

Germantown, Phila. 

We have always found Garden and 
Forest one of the best advertising medi- 
ums for our business. We consider that, 
in the interest of gardening. Garden and 
Forest should have every encourage- 
ment. THOS. MEEHAN & SONS. 

15 John Street, New York. 

We take pleasure in saying that we have 
reason to be satisfied with the result of 
our advertising in Garden and Forest. 

JAS. M. THORBURN & CO. 

Bordentown, N. J. 

I should consider it a misfortune to be 
left out of the advertising columns of 
Garden and Forest. I consider it the 
best of the horticultural journals which 1 
patronize. 

EDMUND D. STURTEVANT. 

Cambridge, Mass. 

We have invariably found in Garden 
AND Forest a medium most valuable to 
our trade, reaching a circle of high class 
purchasers, and in consequence assuring 
the most satisfactory results. 

SHADY HILL NURSERY CO., 

E. L. Beard, Pres’t. 

United States Nurseries, Short Hills, N. J. 

Garden and Forest reaches the very 
classes interested in horticulture, which are 
always likely buyers. W. A. MANDA. 

Reading Nursery, Reading, Mass. 

We would state that Garden and 
Forest has proved the most advantage- 
ous medium to us in direct paying results 
of any that we have used. Our repetition 
of our yearly contract, we believe, would 
indicate our opinion of the paper. 

JACOB W. MANNING. 

Specimen copy free on application. 


GARDEN AM FOREST PUBLISHING CO, 

Tribune BuUdlns, New Yorlt. 


II 


Garden and Forest 


February 29, 1888 


GARDEN AND FOREST: 

An Illustrated Weekly Journal of Horticulture, Landscape Art and Forestry. 


GARDEN AND FOREST will be devoted to Fdorticulture in all its branches, Garden Botany, Den- 
drology and Landscape Gardening, and will discuss Plant Diseases and Insects injurious to vegetation. 

Professor C. S. Sargent, of Fiarvard College, will have editorial control of GARDEN AND FOREST. 

Professor Wm. G. Farlow, of Harvard College, will have editorial charge of the Department of Cryp- 
togamic Botany and Plant Diseases. 

Professor A. S. Packard, of Brown University, will have editorial charge of the Department of Entomology. 

Mr. Wm. A. Stiles will be the Managing Editor. 

GARDEN AND FOREST will record all noteworthy discoveries and all progress in science and 
practice within its field at home and abroad. It will place scientific information clearly and simply before 
the public, and make available for the instruction of all persons interested in garden plants the conclu- 
sions reached by the most trustworthy investigators. Arrangements have been made to figure and describe 
new and little-known plants (especially North American) of horticultural promise. A department will be 
devoted to the history and description of ornamental trees and shrubs. New florists' flowers, fruits and 
vegetables will be made known, and experienced gardeners will describe practical methods of cultivation. 

GARDEN AND FOREST will report the proceedings of the principal Horticultural Societies of the 
United States and the condition of the horticultural trade in the chief commercial centres of the country. 

GARDEN AND FOREST, in view of the growing taste for rural life, and of the multiplication of 
country residences in all parts of the United States, especially in the vicinity of the cities and of the larger 
towns, will make a special feature of discussing the planning and planting of private gardens and grounds, 
small and large, and will endeavor to assist all who desire to make their home surroundings attractive 
and artistic. It will be a medium of instruction for all persons interested in preserving and developing the 
beauty of natural scenery. It will co-operate with Village Improvement Societies and every other organized 
effort to secure the proper ordering and maintenance of parks and squares, cemeteries, railroad stations, 
school grounds and roadsides. It will treat of Landscape Gardening in all its phases,- reviewing its history 
and discussing its connection with architecture. 

GARDEN AND FOREST will give special attention to scientific and practical Forestry in their vari- 
ous departments, including Forest Conservation and economic Tree Planting, and to all the important 
questions which grow out of the intimate relation of the forests of the country to its climate, soil, water 
supply and material development. 

Original information on all these subjects will be furnished by numerous American and Foreign 
correspondents. Among those who have promised contributions to GARDEN AND FOREST are: 


Mr. Sereno Watson, Curator of the Herbarium, 
Harvard College. 

Prof. Geo. L. Goodale, Harvard College. 

" Wolcott Gibbs, " 

" Wm. H. Brewer, Yale College. 

" D. G. Eaton, " 

" Wm. J. Beal, Agricultural College of Michigan. 
" L. H. Bailey, Jr., " 

" ]. L. Budd, Agricultural College of Iowa. 

" B. D. Halsted, " 

" F. W. Hilgard, University of California. 

" J. T. Rothrock, University of Pennsylvania. 

" Chas. E. Bessey, University of Nebraska. 


" Wm. Trelease, Shaw School of Botany, St. Louis. 
" T. 1. Burrill, University of Illinois. 

" W. W. Bailey, Brown University. 

" E. A. PoPENOE, Agricultural College, Kansas. 

" Raphael Pumpelly, United States Geological 
Survey. 

" James H. Gardiner, Director New York State 
Survey. 

" Wm. R. Lazenby, Director of the Ohio Agricul- 
tural Experiment Station. 

" W. W. Tracy, Detroit, Mich. 

" C. V. Riley, Washington, D.C. 

Mr. Donald G. Mitchell, New Haven, Conn. 


Garden and Forest 5 


" Frank J. Scott, Toledo, O. 

Hon. Adolphe Leue, Secretary of the Ohio Forestry 
Bureau. 

" B. G. Northrop, Clinton, Conn. 

Mr. G. W. Hotchkiss, Secretary of the Lumber 
Manufacturers' Association. 

Dr. C. L. Anderson, Santa Cruz, Cal. 

Mr. Frederick Law Olmsted, Brookline, Mass. 

" Francis Parkman, Boston. 

Dr. C. C. Parry, San Francisco. 

Mr. Prosper f. Berckmans, President of the American 
Pomological Society. 

" Charles A. Dana, New York. 

" Burnet Landreth, Philadelphia. 

" Robert Ridgeway, Washington, D.C. 

" Calvert Vaux, New York. 

" J. B. Harrison, Franklin Falls, N. H. 

Dr. Henry P. Walcott, President of the Massachusetts 
Horticultural Society. 

Mr. C. G. Pringle, Charlotte, Vt. 

" Robert Douglas, Waukegan, 111. 

" H. W. S. Cleveland, Minneapolis, Minn. 

" Chas. W. Garfield, Secretary of the American 
Pomological Society. 

" C. R. Orcutt, San Diego, Cal. 

" B. E. Fernow, Chief of the Forestry Division, 
Washington, D.C. 

" John Birkenbine, Secretary of the Pennsylvania 
Forestry Association. 

" JosiAH Hoopes, Westchester, Pa. 

" Peter Henderson, New York. 

" Wm. Falconer, Glen Cove, N.Y. 

" Jackson Dawson, Jamaica Plain, Mass. 

" Wm. H. Hall, State Engineer, Sacramento, Cal. 

" C. C. Crozier, Department of Agriculture, 
Washington, D.C. 


The Rev. E. P. Roe, Cornwall, N.Y. 

Dr. C. C. Abbott, Trenton, N. J. 

Mrs. Schuyler Van Rensselaer, New York. 

" Mary Treat, Vineland, N.J. 

Dr. Karl Mohr, Mobile, Ala. 

Hon. J. B. Walker, Forest Commissioner of New 
Hampshire. 

Mr. Wm. Hamilton Gibson, Brooklyn, N.Y. 

" Edgar T. Ensign, Forest Commissioner of 
Colorado 

" E. S. Carman, Editor of the Rural New Yorker. 

" Wm. M. Canby, Wilmington, Del. 

" John Robinson, Salem, Mass. 

" J. D. Lyman, Exeter, N.H. 

" Samuel Parsons, Jr., Superintendent of Central 
Park, N.Y. 

" Wm. McMillan, Superintendent of Parks, Buffalo, 
N.Y. 

" Sylvester Baxter, Boston. 

" Charles Eliot, Boston. 

" John Thorpe, Secretary of the New York Horticul- 
tural Society. 

" Edwin Lonsdale, Secretary of the Philadelphia 
Horticultural Society. 

" Robert Craig, President of the Philadelphia 
Florists' Club. 

" Samuel B. Parsons, Flushing, N.Y. 

" George Ellwanger, Rochester. 

" P. H. Barry, Rochester. 

" W. J. Stewart, Boston, Mass. 

" W. A. Manda, Botanic Gardens, Cambridge, Mass. 
" David Allan, Mount Vernon, Mass. 

" Wm. Robinson, North Easton, Mass. 

" A. H. Fewkes, Newton Highlands, Mass. 

" F. Goldring, Kenwood, N.Y. 

" C. M. Atkinson, Brookline, Mass. 


Dr. Maxwell T. Masters, Editor of the Gardener’s 
Chronicle. 

Mr. Geo. Nicholson, Curator of the Royal Gardens, Kew. 
" W. B. Hemsley, Herbarium, Royal Gardens, Kew. 

" Wm. Goldring, London. 

Mr. Max Leichtlin, Baden Baden. 

M. Edouard Andre, Editor of the Revue Horticole, 
Paris, France. 

Dr. G. M. Dawson, Geological Survey of Canada. 

Prof. John Macoun, " 


M. Charles Naudin, Director of the Gardens of the 
Villa Thuret, Antibes. 

Dr. Chas. Bolle, Berlin. 

M. J. Allard, Angers, Maine &. Loire, France. 

Dr. H. Mayr, University of Tokio, Japan. 

Prof. D. F. Penhallow, Director of the Botanical 
Gardens, Montreal. 

Mr. Wm. Saunders, Director of the Agricultural 
Experiment Station, Ontario. 

" Wm. Little, Montreal. 


Single numbers, 10 cents. Subscription price. Four Dollars a year, in advance. 

THE GARDEN AND FOREST PUBLISHING CO., Limited, 
Tribune Building, New York 
D. A. MUNRO, Manager 


6 Arnoldia 60/2 



Glcditsia japonica. One of the 285 botanical drawings made by C. E. Faxon for Garden and Forest. From 
volume 6, page 165. 


Garden and Forest: The Botanical Basis of It All 

Stephen A. Spongberg 


O n February 29, 1888, the weekly peri- 
odical Garden and Forest, A Journal 
of Horticulture, Landscape Art and 
Forestry, was inaugurated. Rather oddly, the 
statement outlining the purpose of the new pub- 
lication, along with an extensive list of future 
contributors, was relegated to a page in the 
advertising section that preceded the main text. 
It was evident, however, that the journal had 
been inspired by similar publications in 
England, including the long-running Journal of 
Horticulture, Cottage Gardener, and Country 
Gentleman’s Companion. In particular, its for- 
mat and content mirrored in many respects that 
of The Gardener’s Chronicle, which had begun 
publication in 1841. 

Somewhat oddly, the first article to appear in 
Garden and Forest was an obituary. Asa Gray, 
the preeminent Harvard botanist, had died a 
month earlier on January 30. The obituary sum- 
marized briefly the long and extremely distin- 
guished career that had earned for Gray (and for 
American botany along with him) the respect of 
the international scientific community. Ameri- 
can botany was no longer the exclusive domain 
of Europeans; American scientists, under Gray's 
leadership, had established their own scientific 
traditions. It was through his studies of the 
American flora, particularly his comparisons of 
Japanese plants to their close relatives in North 
America, that Gray had achieved international 
recognition. These observations, demonstrating 
the close similarity between the floras of eastern 
North America and eastern Asia, had lent cred- 
ibility to his defense of Darwin's writings and 
played a crucial role in the development of botany 
and of its sub-discipline, phytogeography. 

But it should not surprise us that Charles 
Sprague Sargent began the first issue of Garden 
and Forest with a glowing tribute to Asa Gray 
for Sargent had been Gray's protege, and it was 
thanks to him that Sargent had been asked to 


prepare the Report of the Forests of North 
America (Exclusive of Mexico) for the Tenth 
Census of the United States (1880) — an impor- 
tant stepping stone in his career. Equally impor- 
tant, Gray had nominated and campaigned for 
Sargent to he named the founding director of the 
Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University and, 
simultaneously, the director of the Harvard 
Botanic Garden, positions Sargent had accepted 
in 1872. As a consequence of these positions and 
of his natural talents and interests, Sargent had 
become an accomplished botanist and adminis- 
trator and had established strong relationships 
with botanists worldwide,- and following in 
Gray's footsteps, he would add significantly to 
botanical scholarship during his fifty-five year 
tenure at the Arnold Arboretum. Sargent had 
discussed with Gray his intention to found Gar- 
den and Forest and had looked forward to his 
mentor's continuing advice and his contribu- 
tions to the periodical. 

It was clearly obvious that Garden and Forest 
was to be a botanical publication: a cursory 
glance at the indices published for each volume 
shows the dominance of plant names (in botani- 
cal Latin form). Sargent realized that it was a 
knowledge of botany that was to inform the 
development of all the other diseiplines he 
intended the journal to foster: horticulture, 
landscape art, and forestry. In the first issue Max 
Leichtlin, a German botanist and horticulturist, 
wrote about "New Plants from Afghanistan," 
and George L. Goodale, first director of 
Harvard's Botanical Museum, reviewed a key to 
the forest trees of Kansas and the latest edition 
of Asa Gray's Elements of Botany. Other con- 
tributors included the noted field botanist 
Cyrus Guernsey Pringle and William Trelease, 
first director of the Missouri Botanical Garden, 
who co-authored a column entitled "Plant 
Notes." In the April 4 issue of the same year 
an editorial entitled "The Study of Botany by 


8 Arnoldia 60/2 



Shortia galacifolia (Oconee bells), drawn by C. E. Faxon. In the 
first volume of Garden and Forest, C. S. Sargent wrote that “of all 
the plants studied and described and classified by Asa Gray, this 
little herb most excited his interest . " Sargent’s story of the loss 
and rediscovery of the plant appears in volume 1, pages 506-507. 


Horticulturists" stressed the importance of a 
strong basis in botanical knowledge for any 
horticulturist; Asa Gray's successor at the her- 
barium in Cambridge, Sereno Watson, contrib- 
uted a column entitled "New or Little Known 
Plants: Rosa minutifolia-/' and William G. 
Farlow, another of Gray's appointees at Harvard, 
wrote on nitrogen fixation by plants in his 
article, "Tubercles on Leguminous Roots." 

Each issue also provided references to the cur- 
rent botanical and horticultural literature in a 
section on "Recent Plant Portraits." In the May 
2, 1888, number, another regular column made 
its first appearance; "Notes from the Arnold 
Arboretum." This feature was of special impor- 
tance to Sargent, and the first contribution was 
authored by his assistant at the Arboretum, 
John George lack. Over the succeeding ten years 
this column would document the development 
of the Arboretum, focusing particularly on the 


many new plants discovered by the 
Arboretum's agents, many of which 
were introduced into cultivation by 
the Arboretum. 

One of the most significant series 
of botanical articles to appear in 
Garden and Forest resulted from 
Sargent's 1892 sojourn in lapan, 
which inaugurated the Arnold Arbo- 
retum's mission to explore the floras 
of eastern Asia. Entitled "Notes on 
the Forest Flora of Japan," this series 
first appeared on January 18, 1893, 
and concluded in the December 27 
issue of the same year. In 1894, the 
publishing firm of Houghton, Mifflin 
and Company collected these articles 
in one volume entitled Forest Flora of 
Japan, one of Sargent's most enduring 
publications, and of special interest as 
the first treatise in English on the 
then little-known trees of Japan. In 
these essays Sargent built on the pio- 
neering work of his mentor Asa Gray 
by elaborating on the close relation- 
ships of the floras of eastern Asia and 
eastern North America. 

Closer to home, the pages of Gar- 
den and Forest provided news about 
botanical discoveries and advances in 
North America. New genera and species were 
described in its pages, such as the malvaceous 
genus Robinsonella, initially with two species 
{R. cordata and R. divergens] from Mexico, and 
articles on regional floras were commonplace. 
Among the latter were Carl Purdy's "The Flora 
of the California Coast Range," which appeared 
in three parts between May and June of 1896, 
and E. N. Plank's extensive "Botanical Notes 
from Texas," which appeared in twenty-five seg- 
ments between January 1893 and May of 1895. 

Specific plant groups were also featured in 
articles that recounted the taxon's discovery 
and naming, its native habitat, range, and ecol- 
ogy, as well as its usefulness in cultivation. 
Sargent's "Notes on Cultivated Conifers," 
appeared in thirteen issues of volume ten,- 
Michael S. Behb contributed a five-part series 
entitled "Notes on Some Arborescent Willows 
of North America" between September and 



The Botanical Basis 9 



NEW OR LITTLE KNOWN PLANTS. 
Rosa minutifolia. 


O UR wild Roses have an ill reputation among botanists 
for the uncertainty which often attends the determina- 
tion of their species. But there are some, fortunately, about 
which there can be no doubt, and we have given the figure of 
one which carries its distinctive characteristics obtrusively 
to the front and cannot be mistaken. Not only is there no 
other American Rose like it, but it stands alone in the 
genus ... It has been found only on the peninsula of Lower 
California, near All Saints (Todos Santos) Bay, about 40 miles 
south of San Diego, where it was discovered in 1882, form- 
ing low, dense thickets upon the dry hillsides bordering the 
shore. . . . Evidently the flower in its wild state cannot be 
commended as well suited to the florist's needs, but from its 
habit of growth the plant may well prove a decided ornament 
to the lawn and garden in our more southern States, where it 
would doubtless be hardy. 

S[ereno] W[atson]. 

[Garden and Forest 2 (1888): 103. Engraving by C. E. Faxon] 


December of 1895; and of a more practical 
nature R. H. Price wrote on the "Classification 
of Varieties of Peaches" in January of 1897. 

The list of botanical themes goes on: bio- 
graphical sketches of famous botanists of the 
past, including one in the May 1894 issue on 
Stephen Elliott (for whom the rare genus 
Elliottia had been named); an esoteric five-part 
series by W. R. Gerard on "Plant Names of 
Indian Origin," which appeared in June and July 
of 1896; and even features as technically chal- 
lenging as John George Jack's "Some Unusual 


Androgynous Flower-clusters," which 
ran in June of 1895. In fact, the scope 
of the articles that were published in 
Garden and Forest spanned the entire 
corpus of botanical science as it was 
known in the late nineteenth century. 
Taken together this literature com- 
prises a remarkable trove of informa- 
tion that is not found elsewhere in 
botanical literature and that in many 
ways remains relevant even today, as 
well as of great historical value. 

On December 29, 1897, the five 
hundred and fourteenth issue of Gar- 
den and Forest included an announce- 
ment that it was to be the magazine's 
last. This last issue brought the total 
number of pages published during 
Garden and Forest’s ten-year life to an 
impressive five thousand six hundred 
and sixty-eight! The reason for termi- 
nation was financial: "This experi- 
ment . . . has shown conclusively that 
there are not persons enough in the 
United States interested in the sub- 
jects which have been presented in the 
columns of Garden and Forest to 
make a journal of its class and charac- 
ter self-supporting." This was a sorry 
commentary on the dearth of interest 
among the wider American population 
in issues concerning botany, forestry, 
conservation, and landscape design. 

Since the demise of Garden and 
Forest, no attempt has been made to 
re-institute the kind of interdiscipli- 
nary dialogue it had provided for a 
brief ten years. The several profes- 
sional disciplines it addressed have evolved and 
diverged, becoming more and more distinct and 
isolated from one another. Even today a journal 
similar to Garden and Forest might face finan- 
cial difficulties, but many would welcome a 
new vehicle for exchanging information and 
ideas among all the professions that are funda- 
mentally plant-based. 


Stephen A. Spongberg is Executive Director of The Polly 
Hill Arboretum in West Tisbury, Massachusetts, and 
Curator Emeritus of the Arnold Arboretum. 


10 Ainoldia 60/2 


AN INTERESTING REDISCOVERY. 

M rs. J. G. SMYTH, of Greenville, South Carolina, sends us fresh flow^ers of 
Lonicera flava, gathered hy herself on Paris Mountain, probably in the 
very spot where this plant was last seen growing wild by any botanist. This was 

in the year 1810, when fohn Fraser, a Scotch 
collector, paid a visit to Paris Mountain and 
gathered seeds or roots of this plant and 
sent them to England. From the descen- 
dants of these plants of Fraser's kept in gar- 
dens has been preserved the knowledge of 
this beautiful species. Last year a figure and 
description of Lonicera flava [yellow hon- 
eysuckle] were published in this journal 
(vol. iii., 187, f. 187), and the interest this 
excited in what appeared to be a "lost 
plant" led our correspondent to investigate 
Paris Mountain, a low outlying spur of the 
Blue Ridge which rises from the plain close 
to Greenville. Her search was successful, 
and on the 17th of April Mrs. Smyth found 
the Honeysuckle in flower, and now sends 
us specimens with this note; 

The plants were found, and this was the only place, on the north side of the moun- 
tain, a hundred and fifty or two hundred feet from the top or highest point of the 
mountain, which is 2,054 feet above the level of the sea. The Lonicera was growing 
in a very rocky place, about fifteen or twenty feet square, a place which looked, 
except for the many arid large rocks scattered over it, as if it might have been a cleared 
spot. All around and about it the original foliage of the forest had never been dis- 
turbed, tall Oaks, and Chestnuts, and the thick undergrowth of Azaleas and Rhodo- 
dendrons forming a dense shade. The soil is rich and black from the long 
accumulation of leaf-mold, damp and rich, and just such a soil as the Rhododendron 
grows and thrives in. The stems are not more than two feet high, but 1 thought would 
have grown longer if there had been any support for them to cling to and run on. The 
roots send out long runners, and these send up shoots from every little point, so that 
in trying to get a root one might pull up yards and yards before it would break. 

Lonicera flava is one of the rarest of American plants, and although it has been 
known from the very beginning of the century, there is apparently no evidence 
that it grows anywhere except in this one spot on Paris Mountain. Mrs. Smyth's 
most interesting discovery removes another from the now short list of plants 
known to our early botanists, but unknown to their successors. Now that 
Darbya, Shortia and Lonicera flava have been found again, Gordonia Altamaha 
[now Franklinia alatamaha] and Illicium parviflorum [now 1. floridanum, anise 
tree] are the only prizes left among species known to have existed to reward the 
botanical collector in the south Atlantic states. It is a curious fact that both of 
these plants, like Lonicera flava, have been preserved in gardens for nearly a cen- 
tury, although all recent efforts to find them in their native haunts have failed. 

[Garden and Forest 4 (1891): 253-254] 



Lonicera flava illustrated for Garden and Forest 
by C. E. Faxon. 


The Botanical Basis 1 1 


from NOTES ON THE FOREST FLORA OF JAPAN— II. 

T ravelers in japan liave often insisted on the resemblance between 
that country and eastern America in the general features of vegetation. 
But with the exception of Yezo, which is still mostly uninhabited and in a 
state of nature, and those portions of the other islands which are above 
3,000 feet over the level of the ocean, it is difficult to form a sufficiently 
accurate idea of the general appearance of the original forest-covering of 
Japan to be able to compare the aspects of its vegetation with those of any 
other country, for every foot of the lowlands and the mountain valleys of 
the three southern islands have been cultivated for centuries. And the foot- 
hills and low mountains which were once clothed with forests, and might 
be again, are now covered with coarse herbage (principally Eulalia) and are 
destitute of trees, except such as have sprung up in sheltered ravines and 
have succeeded in escaping the fires which are set every year to burn off the 
dry grasses. Remoteness, bad roads, and the impossibility of bringing down 
their timber into the valleys have saved the mountain forests of Japan, and 
these may still be seen, especially between 5,000 and 8,000 feet over the 
level of the sea, in their natural condition. But these elevated forests are 
composed of comparatively few species, and if it were not for the planta- 
tions of Conifers, which the Japanese for at least twelve centuries, it is said, 
have been making to supply their workers in wood with material, and for 
the trees preserved or planted in the temple grounds in the neighborhood 
of towns, it would be impossible to obtain any idea at all of many of the 
Japanese trees. But, fortunately, the priests of Buddha have planted and 
replanted trees for a thousand years about their temples, which are often 
surrounded by what now appear to be natural woods, as no tree is ever cut 
and no attempt is made to clear up the undergrowth. These groves are 
sometimes of considerable extent and contain noble trees, Japanese and 
Chinese, which give some idea of what the inhabitants of the forests of 
Japan were before the land was cleared for agriculture. 

The floras of Japan and eastern America have, it is true, some curious fea- 
tures in common, and the presence in the two regions of certain types not 
found elsewhere, show their relationship. But such plants are usually small, 
and for the most part rare or confined to the high mountains. Diphylleia, 
Buckleya, Epigaea and Shortia show the common origin of the two floras; 
but these are rare plants in Japan as they are in America, with the excep- 
tion of Epigaea [trailing arbutus], and probably not one traveler in ten thou- 
sand has ever seen them, while the chief elements of the forest flora of 
northern Japan, the only part of the empire where, as has already been said, 
comparison is possible — those which all travelers notice — do not recall 
America so much, perhaps, as they do Siberia and Europe. 

The broad-leaved Black Oaks, which form the most distinct and con- 
spicuous feature in all the forests of eastern America, are entirely absent 
from Japan, and the deciduous-leaved White Oaks, which, in Japan, form a 
large part of the forest-growth of the north, are of the European and not of 
the American type, with the exception of Quercus dentata, which has no 


12 Arnoldia 60/2 


related species in America. The Chestnut Oaks, which are common and 
conspicuous, both m the northern and southern parts of eastern America, 
do not occur in lapan, and the Evergreen Oaks, which abound in the south- 
ern part of that empire, where they arc more common than any other group 
of trees, are Asiatic and not American m their relationships. . . . 



The illustration gives some idea of the general appearance of the great coniferous forests "^ich cover the 
highlands of central Japan. In the foreground, Lake Yumoto, famous for its thermal springs, nestles 5;000 feet 
above the sea among the Nikko Mountains. The forests which rise from the shores of the lake are principally 
comprised of Hemlock (Tsuga diversifolia), among which are Birch (Betula Ermanni , Abies Le 

Pterocarya, Cercidiphyllum and the Mountain Ash [Sorbus]. In the dense shade by the shores of the lake 
grow dwirf forms of the Indian Azalea, Elliottia paniculata, our Canadian ^ 

great masses of Rhododendron Metternichii, which in these forests replaces Rhododendron Catawbiense of 
th^Appalachian Mountains, the dwarf Ilex rugosa, Clethra, here at the upper limits of its distribution, Panax 
horridMdevil's club], and the dwarf Blueberries which inhabit mountain slopes in all northern countries, as 
well as the ubiquitous Bamboos. 




The Botanical Basis 13 


The forests of the two regions possess in common Magnolia and 
Aesculus [horse-chestnuts], which are more abundant in species and 
individuals in America than in Japan. The Rhuses, or Sumachs, are very 
similar in the two regions, and so are the Witch-hazel and the arborescent 
Aralia. Cornus macrophylla [now C. controversa] of Japan is only an 
enlarged Cornus alternifolia [pagoda dogwood] of eastern America, and the 
so-called Flowering Dogwoods of the two countries are very much alilce. 
The Japanese Walnut is very like the American Butternut, while, rather 
curiously, the Japanese Thuja [red cedar] and the two Chamaecyparis, the 
Piceas [spruce] and Abies [fir], resemble species of Pacific North America, 
a region whose flora has little affinity with that of eastern Asia. Torreya is 
common to the two regions; in America it is one of the most local of all our 
trees, while in Japan it is abundant in the mountainous regions of the cen- 
tral and southern parts of the empire. 

Apart from the characters which distinguish related genera and species 
of Japanese trees from their American congeners there are many aspects of 
vegetation which make the two countries unlike. The number of broad- 
leaved evergreen trees is much greater in southern Japan than it is in the 
southern United States, there being fifty species of these trees in the 
former, and only twenty in eastern America (exclusive always of southern 
Florida), and the general aspect of the groves and woods at the sea-level, 
even in the latitude of Tokyo, is of broad-leaved evergreens. The number of 
evergreen shrubs in proportion to the entire flora is much greater in Japan, 
too, than it is in America, and plants of this character grow much further 
north in the former than in the latter country. The small number of spe- 
cies of Pinus in Japan, and their scarcity at the north, is in striking contrast 
to the number and distribution of this genus in eastern America, where 
there are thirteen species, to only five in Japan (including one shrub). In 
Japan the Hemlock forms continuous and almost unbroken forests of great 
extent on the mountain-slopes, which are over 5,000 feet above the sea, 
while in eastern America this tree is rarely found except scattered in small 
groves or as single individuals through the deciduous-leaved forests. . . . 
The wild Grape grows in the damp forests of Yezo with a vigor and to a size 
which the American species do not attain, even in the semi-tropical cli- 
mate of the southern Mississippi valley. Actinidia arguta climbs into the 
tops of the tallest trees, and nothing is so un-American or so attracts the 
attention of the American traveler in Japan as the trunks of trees clothed 
to the height of sixty or eighty feet with splendid masses of the climbing 
Hydrangeas (H. petiolaris and Schizophragma), or with the lustrous ever- 
green foliage of the climbing Evonymus. Wistaria is represented, it is true, 
in eastern America, but here it is nowhere very common or one of the chief 
features of vegetation as it is in Japan; and the Ivy, a southern plant only in 
Japan, and not very common, helps to remind the traveler that he is in the 
Old and not in the New World. 


[Garden and Forest 6(1893): 38-39] 


C.S.Slargent] 


14 Arnoldici 60/2 


THE KNEES OF THE BALD CYPRESS: 

A NEW THEORY OF THEIR FUNCTION. 

To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir. — From time to time, during and sinee my first visit to our southern tier 
of states in 1876, I have examined, sketched and photographed the roots of the 
Deciduous Cypress — the Taxodium distichum of Richard. I was attracted to the 
tree because of the singular beauty of its form and foliage and by the unusual 
boldness with which it raises its great, gray, smooth column, sometimes over a 
hundred feet, perpendicularly, above and upon what an engineer would pro- 
nounce a most dangerous foundation — loose submerged sand, the saturated 
morass or the soft alluvium of low river margins. But notwithstanding this seem- 
ing insecurity, I have never found a healthy Cypress that had fallen before the 
fierce hurricanes that sweep through the southern forest-lands. 

The surprising and characteristic temerity of the tree is accompanied by 
another striking peculiarity — it almost invariably, in soft soils, throws upward 
from the upper surface of its roots conspicuous protuberances that are known as 
"Cypress knees." 

These seemingly abnormal growths have attracted much attention, and for 
more than half a century have furnished an enigma to the solution of which 
scientific travelers have addressed themselves. . . . 

In 1887 I had the good fortune to find a number of Cypress-trees under such 
unusual conditions that their aforetime subterranean anatomy could be studied 
without obstruction, and I reached a conclusion respecting the use to the tree of 
the protuberances . . . Some recent publications on the subject, by widely and 
favorably known authors, have, however, ascribed to the Cypress-knees the sole 
function of aerating the sap of the parent tree, and this idea bids fair to become 
embedded in botanical literature. . . . 

Stretches of the shore of Lake Monroe, in central Florida, are closely set with 
large Cypress-trees. They grow in various kinds of bottom — clay, mud and sand. 
Those of which I shall here speak stood in sand so loose that when the level of 
the water was lowered the waves readily washed it away and carried it into the 
depths of the lake. Some vertical feet of the root-system was thus finely exposed. 
After several days spent in examining a score or more large trees that had been 
thus denuded I became convinced that the most important function of the 
Cypress knee is to stiffen and strengthen the root, in order that a great tree may 
anchor itself safely in a yielding material. . . . 

The accompanying picture is from a photograph that I made in 1887 of the 
lower portion of a tree that rises some seventy feet above the shore line of Lake 
Monroe. The original surface of the sand was near the level of the higher roots. 
The picture shows the manner in which this peculiar species throws out horizon- 
tal roots from its conical (usually hollow) buttressed base. At different distances 
from this conical base these horizontal roots project strong branches more or less 
perpendicularly into the earth. Where such perpendicular "flukes" branch from 
the main horizontal "shank," it will be seen, there is formed a large knob, which 
is the "knee" under discussion. This knee, when fully developed, is generally 
hollow, comparatively soft, gnarled, and very difficult to rupture, so that it has 
the quality of a spring that becomes more rigid as it is extended or compressed 
out of its normal shape. When in a hurricane the great tree rocks back and forth 


The Botanical Basi.' 15 



Denuded roots of the Bald Cypress, showing knees and underground structure. 


on its base, and with its immense leverage pulls upon this odd shaped wooden 
anchor instead of straightening out in the soft material as an ordinary root might, 
thus allowing the tree to lean over and add its weight to the destructive force of 
the storm, it grips the sand as the bower-anchor would do, and resists every 
motion. The elasticity at the point of junction allows one after another of the 
perpendicular flukes attached to the same shank to come into effective action, 
so that before being drawn from the sand or ruptured the combined flukes present 
an enormous resistance. . . . 

Finally, I may perhaps be permitted to add an observation regarding the roots 
of other trees that trench upon the same soils affected by the Cypress and often 
take advantage of the anchors it sets so boldly m treacherous bottoms. These 
trees project their cable-like, flexible roots in every direction horizontally, inter- 
lacing continually until a fabric is woven on the surface of the soft earth like the 
tangled web of a gigantic basket. . . . Such communities of trees, provided with 
ordinary roots, advance against and overcome enemies where singly they would 
perish in the conflict. The cyclone, the loose sand, the morass — these are the 
enemies they contend with, as it were, in unbroken phalanx, shoulder to shoul- 
der, their shields locked, their spears bristling against the foe; but the graceful 
plumed Cypress, the knight-errant of the sylvan host, bearing with him his trusty 
anchor — the emblem of Hope — goes forth alone and defiant, afar from his fellows, 
scorning the methods of his vassals, and planting himself boldly amid a waste of 
waters, where no other tree dare venture, stands, age after age, erect, isolated, but 
ever ready to do battle with the elements. Twenty centuries of driving rain and 


16 Arnoldia 60/2 


snow and fierce hurricane beat upon his towering form, and yet he stands there, 
the stern, gray and solitary sentinel of the morass, clinging to the quaking earth 
with the grasp of Hercules, to whom men were building temples when his war- 
denship began. 

New York, Jan. 2d. Robert H. Lamboin 

[Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 21-22] 

THE KNEES OF THE BALD CYPRESS. 

To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir. — I have read the interesting essay of Dr. Lamborn in your issue for January 
8th with great pleasure. My own observations on the knees of the Cypress do not 
seem to me reconcilable with Dr. Lamborn's hypothesis. The objections which 
they raise to it are as follows: 

1st. The trees on the sandy uplands need the assumed support quite as much, 
if not more, than those which grow on the neighboring loam — often clayey — of 
the inundated bottoms, yet these upland forms always lack the excrescences. 

2d. While a slight upward growing protuberance would doubtless strengthen 
the root, the tall column exhibited by many knees would have no value in this 
regard. 

3d. The summits of the knees normally attain a height which brings them 
above the level of the water in the growing season; when they cannot attain this 
elevation the tree fails to develop. When, by the subsidence of the land at an 
earthquake, or the artificial flooding of the area by dams, the crests of the knees 
are brought under permanent water, the condition is fatal to the plant. 

4th. The fact that the Cypress-knees serve as respiratory organs is made the 
more probable by the existence of sharp upward flexures of the roots of the 
Tupelo (see "Effect of permanent moisture on certain forest trees" in Science 
(xiii., 176; March, 1889). These flexures, as there shown, are horseshoe-shaped 
curves of the whole root, which, like the Cypress-knees, rise above the level of 
permanent water. On the Tupelo these structures are clearly of no advantage 
as anchors. Dr. Wilson and others have shown that similar structures exist in 
many plants. 

I was aware that roots extended downward from the base of the Cypress-knees, 
but it seemed to me that the position of these roots was to be attributed to dis- 
turbance in the circulation and growth, brought about by the development of the 
knees rather than that the knees gave rise to the vertical roots. 

Although 1 cannot at present agree with Dr. Lamborn in his main view, his 
paper seems to me a very important contribution to a discussion which promises 
to throw much light on the laws of plant development. 

Harvard University. N. S. Shaler 

[Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 57 

Editor’s note: It appears that both correspondents were incorrect. C. A. Brown 
and G. N. Montz wrote in Baldcypress: The Tree Unique, The Wood Eternal 
(1986): "The concept that baldcypress knees are pneumatophores has not been 
accepted experimentally, but the knees have been shown to conduct respiration. 
The height of knees cannot, in all cases, be correlated to the average high water 
levels. Only knees attached to low, conical trees may be used to determine the 


The Botanical Basis 


17 


average height of floodwaters in a given swamp. Knees, when present, may aid in 
strengthening of the hasal support, hut they apparently do not function as anchor- 
ing devices for the trees since those without knees are wind-resistant. Knee for- 
mation is considered to he a response to the aero-hydroperiod. Based upon all 
studies to date, we conclude that storage of starch (which can he converted hack 
into glucose as needed) is the major function of haldcypress knees."] 


THE TUPELO TREE. 



HE forests of eastern America contain few trees more interesting to the 


J- botanist or of greater ornamental value than the Tupelo, Pepperidge, Sour 
Gum or Water Gum, as one of the American representatives of the small genus 
Nyssa is popularly called in different parts of the country. This genus was so 
named hy Linnaeus for a water nymph, because the species known to him, inhab- 
itants of our far southern states, grow usually in shallow ponds or deep swamps 
overflowed for a considerable part of each year. Its nearest American relatives are 
the Cornels [dogwoods], from which Nyssa differs principally in its five instead 
of four-parted flowers, which are rarely perfect, but produce their male and 
female organs separately, while the flowers of the Cornels are perfect, and, in its 
alternate leaves, the leaves of our Cornels being opposite except in the case of a 
single species. 

The distribution of the genus is exceptional and interesting. Three species, or 
four, according to the opinion of some excellent observers, inhabit different parts 
of eastern North America from Maine to Texas. . . . This is not the place, and it 
is not our intention, to discuss at this time the limits of the different American 
species, which have puzzled botanists ever since they have known them, the 
confusion beginning with Linnaeus himself, who included two very distinct spe- 
cies under his original description. It is our purpose merely to call attention to 
one of the species still little known or appreciated by planters as an ornamental 
tree. This is the Nyssa which is generally distributed through all the eastern por- 
tions of the United States south of the southern part of the state of Maine and 
central Michigan. Nyssa aquatica appears to be the correct botanical name for 
this tree, although it is only in the extreme south that it grows in water. [The 
specific N. aquatica is now used only for that southern population and N. 
sylvatica for the more northerly and abundant populations.] Near the coast of the 
northern states it always grows by the borders of swamps in low, moist ground; 
and in the interior, especially on the lower slopes of the high Allegheny Moun- 
tains, where it attains its greatest size, it is found at considerable distances from 
the water-courses and associated with the Oaks, Magnolias, Hemlocks, Hicko- 
ries and Ashes which form the principal part of the forest-growth. Here the 
Tupelo grows sometimes to a height of considerably more than a hundred feet, 
with a tall, stout trunk three or four feet in diameter, and short slender branches, 
contracted in their development by its neighbors in the forest. Near the coast it 
is always a much smaller tree, especially in the southern states, and it is rare to 
find it more than fifty feet high except in the mountain forests or in those of the 
lower Ohio valley — a region of exceptional and extraordinary tree-growth. . . . 

The Tupelo was introduced into England in 1808 by John Lyon, an English 
plant-collector who traveled widely in North America early in the century. It was 
doubtless sent earlier to Erance, as it is hardly possible that Michaux could have 


1 8 Ainoldici 60/2 



The value of the Tupelo as an ornamental tree is shown in our illustration representing a group of 
these trees growing naturally near a small pond in the town of West Medford, Massachusetts, and 
made from one of the excellent tree portraits for which we are indebted to Mr. Henry Brooks. 


failed to introduce such a distinct and beautiful tree into the plantations of his 
native land. Whether this is true or not it is certain that no American tree is now 
more rarely seen in Europe, and a really fine specimen outside of America is not 
easily recalled. . . . The roots are remarkably stout and long, with few rootlets, so 
that the trees are never easy to move unless they have been grown in the nursery 
and specially prepared for transplanting. It is easily raised from seed, however, 
the seedlings are easily transplanted, and if they are set while still young where 
the trees are to grow permanently, no difficulty will be experienced with them. 
Even large plants dug up in the swamps can be successfully moved if extraordi- 
nary care is taken in the operation, but for the ordinary cultivator it is best to 
depend on small, nursery-grown plants when they can be obtained. 

The Tupelo should he more often seen in ornamental plantations than it is at 
present. The habit of this tree when allowed sufficient room in which to grow is 
striking and interesting and quite unlike that assumed by any other of our hardy 
trees. The foliage is abundant and lustrous, and in the autumn it assumes a bril- 
liancy and splendor of coloring unrivaled by that of our other trees. It is one of 
those trees which always attract attention^ — in the winter by its peculiar habit, 
m summer by the beauty of its foliage and in autumn by its coloring. . . . 

[Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 485-486] 




A SLAUGHTERED GIANT. 

O UR illustration shows a Sequoia gigantea with chop- 
pers at work inside the cleft cutting their way through 
the trunk. This is not a tree of the first size, being less than 
twenty-five feet in diameter and about twenty at the point 
where it was cut. In point of beauty and symmetry it was one 
of the best of the surviving Big Trees. It stood until a year ago 
in the Tule River forest, Tulare County, California, and was 
sold by the private owner of the land to certain persons who 
wished to exhibit it. The plan was to take a section of the 
trunk, hollow it out to a shell and then divide it into conven- 
ient and portable pieces, so that it could be carried about 
and set up as a show. The project fell through, however, for 
lack of funds, and the section of the slaughtered tree never 
got beyond Visalia, in the county where it stood. It is now 
stored in that city. Let us hope that the original owner of the 
tree and its destroyers may some day realize that it will 
never again make such an exhibition of grandeur and grace 
as it did while towering above the spot where it began life as 
a seedling a thousand years ago. 

[Gaiden and Forest (1890) 3: 570] 


A High-Grade 
Paper: Garden and 
Forest and 
Nineteenth-Century 
American Forestry 

Char Miller 


S tephanne B. Sutton made no 
grand claims in her 1970 biogra- 
phy of Charles S. Sargent for 
Garden and Forest, the weekly 
horticultural magazine he published 
between 1888 and 1897. While ac- 
knowledging that it was a "first-rate 
publication," deftly edited by the tal- 
ented journalist William A. Stiles, and 
conceding that it was "an immediate 
success," she also contrasted the effu- 
sive praise it received with its lack of 
"popularity"; the plaudits may have 
been "gratifying," but a larger circula- 
tion would have eased the journal's 
incessant "financial crisis." Small in 
number, its readers included "people 
who worked with plants — foresters, 
nurserymen, botanists, landscape 
designers, and others whose opinions 
mattered" in scientific and political 
arenas. By its coverage of matters 
botanical, the "magazine did its small 
part to raise the horticulturist from 
amateur to professional standing"; its 
words, "when quoted in a politician's 
speech or in the column of a popular 
newspaper . . . carried authority."' 

Yet neither small circulation nor 
brief existence diminishes the maga- 
zine's historical significance: it was 
arguably the most important late- 
nineteenth-century forum for discuss- 
ing the role of science in human 
affairs. Those who wrote about horti- 



20 Ainoldia 60/2 


from THE AXE IN ITS RELATION TO 
ORNAMENTAL TREES. 

I T is a curious fact that Americans, who have destroyed 
more trees wastefully and foolishly than the people of any 
other country, and have stood and seen their forests, the envy 
of the rest of the world, swept away with hardly a voice 
raised in protest, are more unwilling than other people to use 
the axe in cases where the cutting of trees is really essential. 
A hundred square miles of forest may be swept by fire from 
some mountain range through the carelessness of an idle 
hunter, a mountain stream may be ruined, and the fertility 
of a smiling valley threatened. It is all taken as a matter of 
course, and is looked on as one of those unfortunate occur- 
rences which the community is powerless to prevent. The 
lorests of the national domain are robbed of their timber, and 
the public is satisfied with the simple acknowledgment of 
the general government that it has not the power or author- 
ity to protect its own property against the organized bands of 
plunderers who have been preying on it for a quarter of a cen- 
tury or longer. This indifference to trees when they are com- 
posing elements of the forest is a marked feature in American 
character, and is all the more marked from its contrast with 
our feelings about trees individually, especially trees which 
we have planted ourselves or have seen planted. When a tree 
is cut in one of the parks of this city there is a protest raised 
against the so-called barbarity of the act by a hundred voices 
which are silent about the destruction of the Adirondack 
forests. The protest in the one case is as much the result of 
ignorance and indifference as the silence in the other; and it 
is as necessary to use the axe, if the beauty and value of 
ornamental plantations are to be maintained, as it is to save 
the forests on the headwaters of important streams. . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 545] 


culture or landscape design or forestry 
were not just reporting on the latest 
discoveries in their respective fields, 
but were also participating in a larger 
cultural debate about the appropriate 
role of expertise in scientific research 
and in shaping public policy. This 
debate had profound national conse- 
quences, eventually broadening the 
responsibilities of the federal govern- 
ment and influencing the intellectual 
contours of modern America. 

Contributors to Garden and Forest, 
for example, used the journal to boldly 
propose a new agenda for political 
action in the United States. Nowhere 
was this more evident than in the 
magazine's advocacy of the emerging 
science of forestry, of which Sargent 
was a staunch supporter. Editorials 
calling for the preservation of the 
nation's forested estate and editor 
Stiles' aggressive solicitation of 
articles by foresters who shared these 
sympathies established Garden and 
Forest as the voice of those who 
sought closer federal supervision of 
public woodlands. 

This demand was a tough sell, as its 
staff and writers recognized: Ameri- 
cans had little interest in federal land 
management, and no taste at all for 
the regulation of resource exploitation 
by a powerful bureaucracy, especially 
during a period when the Industrial 
Revolution was consuming vast quan- 
tities of timber. To change public 
opinion, they would have to disseminate 
counterarguments, a task that Garden and For- 
est supported with evident enthusiasm. In its 
ten volumes, the journal published an astonish- 
ing number of articles related to forestry — more 
than 450; together, they helped educate a popu- 
lace that hitherto was ignorant about this sci- 
ence and its social significance. 

Europeans, by contrast, knew a lot about the 
subject, benefitting from political cultures — 
either monarchical or republican — that assumed 
considerable power over public and private 
property: they had long experimented with for- 


est management and had developed professional 
schools to promote research and educate forest 
managers. Americans who worried about the 
rapid disappearance of their forests were encour- 
aged to study European models, first by George 
Perkins Marsh's pathbreaking Man and Nature: 
The Earth as Modified by Ffuman Action (1864), 
and later by Garden and Forest. In looking east- 
ward, they resembled reformers in other fields 
who over the next seventy years would partici- 
pate in a vibrant transatlantic exchange of ideas; 
these Americans — whether concerned about 
urban social services or devastated landscapes — 


Forestry 2 1 


mm i» mmi\ 

Is much more durable than Pine. 

Cypress Sash Bars 

up to 32 feet in length, or over. 

Cypress Shingles 

Cost no more than pine or cedar, and will last 
three or four times as long. Send for our book, 

“Cypress Lumber and its Uses.” 

Mention Garden and Forest. 

THE A. T. STEARNS LUMBER CO., 

Neponset, Boston, Mass. 


The Protection of Woodlands 

Against Dangers Resulting from Organic and 
Inorganic Causes. 

By HERMANN FURST, 

Translated by Dr. John Nisbet, of the Indiana Forest 
Sei*vice. 

” A thorough and conscientious work ; one that 
arouses reflection, and is therefore worthy of caretul 
reading .*’ — Garden and Forest. 

8vo, cloth, illustrated with colored plates, $3.50. 

For sale by all booksellers, or, postpaid, upon receipt 
of price. 

WILLIAn R. JENKINS, 

851 and 853 Sixth Avenue, New York. 


HARDY EVERGREENS 

I ■ BOTH NATIVE AND EOREIGN, 

FOR 

Lawns, Parks and Cemeteries 

A large stock of COLORADO CONIFERS, from six 
inches to six feet high, all g^own from seeds on our own 
grounds. 

EVERGREEN SEEDLINGS in large quantities for 
Nursery and Forest planting. 

SHADE TREES for Street and Ornamental planting. 
DECIDUOUS TREE SEEDLINGS for Forest plant- 
ing. 

Our Transplanted Trees stand much further apart 
than is usual in Nurseries, hence are perfect in form 
and extra well-rooted. 

R. DOUGLAS & SONS, 

Waukegan, III. 


WHITE PINE. 

200,000 nursery-grown from northern seed, in sizes 
4 to 6, 6 to 9, 9 to 12 and 12 to 15 inches high ; all trans- 
planted and finely rooted. Also a large and fine gen- 
eral nursery stock of choice Evergreen and Deciduous 
Trees and Shrubs. Send your list of wants and let us 
price it. Low freight rales to New York City. Time, 
24 to 30 hours. 

HERBERT A. JACKSON, 

Forest City Nurseries, Portland, Maine. 


readily accepted European prescriptions for resolving 
social ills through governmental intervention.^ 

Almost every number of Garden and Forest, for 
example, included news from abroad. One squib that 
editor Stiles inserted announced that a Societe des 
Sylviculteurs de France et des Colonies had been formed 
"for the purpose of diffusing the knowledge of silvicul- 
ture and increasing the popular interest in this art." Why 
bother with such a minor event in France? Because the 
new organization's ambitions mirrored those of the 
American magazine's patrons and other readers. Stiles 
also made space for lengthy reviews of books that 
described the latest European advances in forestry sci- 
ence and devoted many columns to enthusiastic first- 
hand accounts of tours of forests in Russia and Italy, 
England, Germany, and France. Priority was given, how- 
ever, to learned assessments of the transferability of the 
European experience to the New World. One of those 
who so argued was Gifford Pmchot, who while studying 
at L'Ecole nationale forestiere in Nancy, France, wrote a 
series of articles on European forestry for Garden and 
Forest. In one that compared various governmental for- 
estry systems in Europe, he pointed out that the "prin- 
ciples which underlie not only German, hut all rational 
forest-management, are true all the world over," Gifford 
Pinchot observed, "but the methods into which the 
same principles have developed are as widely dissimilar 
as the countries in which they are being applied." That 
being the case, there was one European country that 
"may best claim our attention" — Switzerland. Its "his- 
tory of forestry ... is of peculiar interest to the people of 
the United States," he suggested, "because in its begin- 
nings may be traced many of the characteristics of the 
situation here and now, and because the Swiss, like the 
Americans, were confronted by the problem of a con- 
crete forest-policy extending over the various states of a 
common union. 

Other authors reached similar conclusions, and like 
Pinchot exemplified the opportunities inherent in cross- 
cultural fertilization: Garl A. Schenck, a German-born 
and -trained forester who managed George Vanderbilt's 
vast forests at Biltmore, North Garolina, also established 
the first American forestry school there in 1898; that 
same year Bernard Fernow, his countryman, became the 
first head of Gornell's School of Forestry after serving as 
the third chief of the U.S. Bureau of Forestry from 1886 
to 1898. Pinchot, along with his family, underwrote the 
Yale School of Forestry in 1900. Throughout their 
careers as foresters and educators, each man was sensi- 
tive to the difficulty of importing cultural institutions. 



22 Arnoldia 60/2 


NJATIVE TREES, 

The largest and best stock in America furnished by the dozen, hundred or 
thousand, at extremely low prices. I am selling agent for Harlan P. Kelsey's North 
Carolina Nursery, and will send descriptive catalogue on application. 

J. WILKINSON ELLIOTT, 

Landscape Architect, Pittsburg, Pa. 


but each knew that 
the development of 
forest management in 
America would ini- 
tially depend on Euro- 
pean ideas. ■* 

Fernow and Pinchot 
in particular beat the 
drum for an augmented 
governmental presence 
on public lands, a posi- 
tion that Sargent seconded strongly in his edito- 
rial campaign for forest reservations. Moreover, 
their writings had educational value for a grow- 
ing cadre of professional foresters that was just 
beginning to carve out a distinct niche within 
the field of landscape management. "If I say that 
forestry has nothing whatsoever to do with the 
planting of road-side trees, that parks and 
gardens are foreign to its nature . . . that scenery 
is altogether outside its province," Pinchot 
asserted in Garden and Forest in 1895, "I am 
making a conservative statement with which 
every forester will agree." Its connections with 
"arboriculture and landscape art" derive from 
the fact that "it employs to a certain extent the 
same raw material . . . hut applies it to a wholly 
different purpose." American foresters, like 
their European counterparts before them, were 
staking out their turf.^ 

This assertion of professional specialization, 
when linked to the slow but significant growth 
of public support for an increased federal inter- 
vention in forestry management, was invaluable 
in developing a political movement devoted to 
conserving natural resources. It is of lasting 
significance that this new ethos of conservation, 
which would dominate early twentieth- 
century political discourse in America, found 
its first sustained and vivid expression in Gar- 
den and Forest. 

Endnotes 

' S. B. Sutton, Charles Sprague Sargent and the Arnold 
Arboretum (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1970), 131-133. 

^ George Perkins Marsh, Man and Nature: The Earth 
as Modified by Human Action (New York: Charles 
Scribner, 1864); Donald I. Pisani, "Forests and 
Conservation, 1865-1890," in Char Miller, ed., 
American Forests: Nature, Culture, and Politics, 


(Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1997), 15-34,- 
Daniel T. Rogers, Atlantic Crossings: Social Politics 
in a Progressive Age (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1998); Char Miller, "Wooden Politics: Bernhard 
Fernow and the Quest for a National Forest Policy, 
1876-1898," in Harold K. Steen, ed.. The Origins of 
the National Forests (Durham: Forest History 
Society, 1992), 287-301. 

^ Garden and Forest (hereafter, GePF) 4 (1891): 22. 

GePF 10 (1897): 397; 8 (1895): 319; Carl A. Schenck, 
"Private and Public Forestry," Ge)F 10 (1897): 232- 
233, 242-243, 252, 262; Bernard Fernow, "European 
Forest Management," GePF 1 (1888): 454-455; "Why 
We Need Skilled Foresters," GePF 8 (1895): 131; 
Gifford Pinchot, "The Forest," GePF 3 (1890): 374, 
386; "Forest-policy Abroad," 4 (1891): 8-9. 

^ Char Miller and James G. Lewis, "A Contested Past: 
Forestry Education in the United States, 1898-1998," 
Journal of Forestry 97 (1999): 38-43; Gifford Pinchot, 
"The Need for Forest Schools in America," GeOF 8 
(1895): 298. Sargent and Pinchot publicly disagreed on 
one aspect of the professionalization of forestry, 
namely, the use of military officers as forest guards on 
the nation's forests. Sargent favored training military 
officers in the principles of forestry, while Pinchot 
believed that only a professional civilian service 
was appropriate. GePF 3 (1890): 581; 3 (1891): 9; 4 
(1891)150: 9; 4 (1891): 34-5. As intense as their 
disagreements would become, they were convinced 
that the federal government must patrol these 
valuable public lands; their care could not be left to 
the states or corporations. 

.Acknowledgment 

I am grateful to lames G. Lewis for his research 

assistance on this project. 


Char Miller is professor and chair of history at Trinity 
University. He is co-author of The Greatest Good: 100 
Years of Forestry in America (1999), editor of American 
Forests: Nature, Culture and Politics (1997) and of Water 
in the West (2000); he is also author of a forthcoming 
biography of Gifford Pinchot. 


Forestry 23 


WANTED, A TRACT ON FORESTRY. 

To the Editor of Garden and Forest; 

Sir. — The necessity of forestry reform is admitted by all intelligent 
people who take time to examine the question, but no reform can make 
much headway until the people at large become convinced of its neces- 
sity. The prime need, then, in every such cause is to instruct them as 
quickly as possible in that which so greatly concerns their welfare. 

The two great avenues to the human mind are through the eye and the 
ear, and of these the first is, no doubt, the most important. That which 
we see makes, on the whole, the greatest impression. Such object- 
lessons, therefore, as that contemplated by the Adirondack League Club, 
referred to in your issue of February 18th, will, of course, be a vast help 
in forming a healthy public opinion concerning the management of our 
national forests. The fine example of the city of Fynn [Massachusetts], 
which is now engaged in acquiring a vast and varied tract of adjacent 
woodland, embracing some 1,400 acres, to be held as a public forest and 
park for the use of the people forever, is another splendid object-lesson,- 
the enterprise of the little village of Freedonia, New York, which has had 
the wit to seize the park idea by the right handle and forestall the future 
by boldly laying out two parks in the very heart of the town. These and 
other similar examples help along the causes with which they may sev- 
erally be classified far more rapidly than can the very best of preaching. 
May such tangible teaching increase. 

Yet there is a large and important work to be accomplished through 
the "foolishness of preaching." The press has done and is doing much. 
Still it occurs to me that there is need of, or at least room for, special 
work through such tracts as that one which assisted the great 
rehoisement of certain districts of France. There, the forests having dis- 
appeared through heedless cutting, and the turf been gradually destroyed 
by the sharp hoofs and the hungry gnawing of the flocks, great and 
increasing damage from floods began to overwhelm the valleys. To 
reclothe the heights and restore the equilibrium was found to be impos- 
sible until the people — the peasantry who had votes — had been won 
over. A prize was offered for the best short work adapted to teaching 
them these lessons, the little book "Studies of Master Peter" being the 
successful competitor. Some similar work, all the better if shorter, 
which could be widely disseminated among our rural populations 
would, I am confident, accomplish much toward producing a right popu- 
lar view of the vast forest-interests of our land. Who will write one? 

Dorchester, Mass. S. 

(Mr. B. E. Fernow, Chief of the Forestry Department at Washington, has 
already written some leaflets for general distribution, but we cannot 
have too many of them nor have them prepared from too many points of 
view. — Ed.) 

[Garden and Forest 4 (1891): 106] 


24 Arnoldia 60/2 


VALUE OF MOUNTAIN FORESTS. 

T he first and most important function of mountain forests is the preservation 
of the mountains themselves by clothing them w^ith soil. The relation of moun- 
tain forests to the soil out of which they grow is curious and interesting. The soil 
now produces the trees, but the forest has produced the soil which now nourishes 
it. There was a time when there was no soil on the mountains of New Hampshire, 
nor on any portion of the Appalachian System — when the mountains were only 
ridges, slopes and summits of bare rock. They were composed wholly of mineral 
substances, of matter entirely inert and incapable of supplying food to vegetable 
organisms. There was not an atom of soil on the rocks of the whole region, and no 
vegetable growth of any kind. Then when conditions permitted. Nature began a new 
order of things here with some of the lowest forms of vegetable life, resembling the 
lichens of our time. Some of these could grow here and there on the rocks, and what- 
ever could grow would die and decay, but would not wholly perish. Some slight par- 
ticles of its fibre or substance would remain undestroyed through all the changes of 
decomposition, and in the course of centuries or thousands of years a thin film of 
soil was accumulated here and there sufficient to nourish vegetation of a little 
higher character and organization than had belonged to the pioneer organisms. 

How great the distance from that far beginning to the first trees! And very poor 
and inferior trees the earliest ones were, when they did appear, compared with those 
which make our forests now; but they were the best that the still scanty soil would 
sustain. Ever since the leaves of the first trees began to fall the trees have been 
slowly adding to the deposit of soil which now covers the rocks, and which has 
reached the depth and productive potency required to sustain the noble forests of 
our own time. 

The great stratum of fertile, life-producing soil which now lies folded around the 
shoulders of the hills is the result and accumulation of patient ages of dendral toil. 
Nature has wrought incessantly, through mighty cycles of time, to clothe the desert 
rocks with life and beauty, and in the untainted air of these lofty slopes and plateaus 
she now grows forests which are like the columned aisles of vast cathedrals. Ships 
which cleave the waves of every sea, and the cottages and palaces of mighty cities, 
with myriads of structures for man's varied industries, have been builded of the 
materials supplied by our mountain forests. The superior quality of the timber now 
grown, and the vast quantities in which it is produced, are effects of the wonderful 
fertility which the soil has attained. It is richer than ever before, but it has not 
reached the limit of possible productiveness. There is no such limit, indeed, and if 
our mountain forests were rightly managed they would forever increase in fertility 
and the quality of their timber would be thereby gradually improved. 

A forest is the only crop, so far as I know, which can be produced perpetually on 
the same ground without diminishing in any degree the fertility of the soil. It is a 
remarkable fact that a forest not only does not impoverish the soil out of which it 
grows, but that it actually enriches it. As the soil is thus improved it responds by 
producing superior timber. A mountain forest would yield better timber, and more 
of it, at the end of a thousand years of proper management than at the beginning and 
proper management means and includes the cutting of every tree when it reaches 
its best estate. 


Forestry 25 


Farming in Mountain Regions. 

The entire effort at farming in mountain forest-regions in this country is often a 
most destructive and suicidal mistake. Much of the ground that has been cleared for 
cultivation in such regions is so steep that if forest-conditions are once destroyed 
upon it the soil is certain to be washed away. It has always been manifest to intelli- 
gent observers that such land is suited to the perpetual production of timber, and of 
that crop alone. In many instances in our state land has been cleared and "farmed" 
with very slight returns which would be much more valuable than it now is if it 
were still clothed with forest. The yield of farm products in such cases is scanty and 
uncertain. In some places the land is too high and cold for successful cultivation. 
There are frosts late in spring and early in autumn, and sometimes in every month 
of the brief summer, and the soil is soon exhausted. It would be difficult to find 
anywhere an instance of more obvious natural adaptation to a particular function 
than our whole mountain forest-region exhibits in its fitness for permanent benefi- 
cial use after forest-conditions have been fully destroyed. It would have been much 
better if some of our "abandoned farms" had never been cleared. In some parts of 
our country vast values have been permanently blotted out by clearing and culti- 
vating mountain land, and those states will be poorer for all time to come by reason 
of the resulting destruction and removal of the soil of considerable areas of their 
mountain regions. 

Ruin by Fire. 

The most fatal agency in destroying the soil of a mountain forest-country, and in 
wrecking the mountains themselves, is that of fire, and in the history of most moun- 
tain forest-regions the operation of this agency has been closely connected with the 
attempts to cultivate the soil to which I have just referred. In various regions of the 
Appalachian mountain system many of the farms have been cleared simply by burn- 
ing the timber and brush left on a tract after it has been lumbered over, and the first 
crop is planted in the ashes. In a few years the soil is exhausted or washed away, and 
the farmer goes a little farther up or down the valley, or across the stream which 
runs through it, and repeats the operation. But the injury to the mountains which is 
caused by the destruction of the soil of these limited tracts which have been cleared 
for cultivation is trivial when compared with the losses which have resulted from 
the forest-fires having their origin in these clearings. 

When we consider the rapidly increasing density of the population of our coun- 
try, and the great advance in the value of all fertile lands, especially in the eastern 
states, it is obvious that the complete destruction of the soil of any considerable area 
is a very serious matter. There are few kinds of losses or misfortunes affecting 
property which are so calamitous as this. It is a crime against posterity, a permanent 
subtraction from the wealth and the capabilities of the country. The soil is, to a very 
great extent, the country itself. A burned city can be rebuilt, and the system of 
insurance distributes the loss widely. But there is no insurance on the soil of our 
mountain forests, and when it is once thoroughly burned it will require mighty 
cycles of time to restore it. Its producing capacity for ages, and all the "promise 
and potency" of a perpetual succession of valuable crops, are at once reduced to 
nothingness. 

— From the Report of J. B. Harrison, Commissioner of Forests for New Hampshire 
[Garden and Forest 3i (1890): 613-614] 


26 Ainohlia 60/2 



A NEW JERSEY PINE EOREST. 

T he illustration upon page 164 represents a pure forest of Pitch Pine iPinus 
rigida) in Ocean County, New Jersey. It is situated about twelve miles from 
the sea coast, and forms a part of the extensive and interesting domain which sur- 
rounds the Laurel House at Lakewood, to the proprietors of which establishment 
it belongs. 

This forest is interesting from several points of view. It is extremely pictur- 
esque and beautiful. It occupies ground which only fifty years ago was employed 
for farming purposes; and it is one of few forests composed of a single species of 
tree which can he seen in the Northern States, where a number of different trees 
are usually associated together in forest growth. The Pines in this Lakewood 





Forestry 1 l1 


forest have an average height of fifty feet; and their trunks an average diameter 
of ten inches. They stand so close together that grasses and undershruhs cannot 
survive in their dense unbroken shade. The forest floor is deeply carpeted with 
moss, however, and altogether this forest reminds one more of one of the planted 
Pine forests of northern Europe than anything we rememher to have seen before 
in the United States. The rapid and vigorous growth of this young forest upon 
poor and comparatively worthless lands shows, moreover — and this is its chief 
interest — the way such lands along the Atlantic seaboard, north of Virginia, can 
be used to the best advantage. And finally it illustrates the possibility of protect- 
ing, by means of a little trouble and foresight, such forests from burning up in 
the fires which annually rage, unchecked, over great tracts in the New Jersey 
coast region. . . . 

The Pitch Pine is not one of the most valuable Pine trees of the United States. 
Its wood is coarse grained, full of resin, and not very strong. . . . Before southern 
pine was brought to this market the pitch pine of New Jersey was the only avail- 
able material in many parts of the State for timbers and flooring; and there are 
still houses in some counties where floors and floor-timbers are known to have 
been in constant use for more than a century. But it is for firewood and for char- 
coal that the pitch pine is most valuable,- and the nearness and accessibility of 
these New Jersey Pine forests to great centres of population give them special 
importance as sources of fuel supply, which no other forests of this character in 
the country possess. Much land within three or four hours by rail of this city and 
of Philadelphia, now utterly unproductive and rapidly deteriorating through the 
fires which sweep over it every year, can be made highly productive and profit- 
able by means of the Pitch Pine. People who own land of this character will see 
much to interest and instruct them in these Lakewood forests, and in those in 
the town of Orleans, on Cape Cod, in Massachusetts. 

C.S.Slargent] 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 166] 


THE SIHLWALD.— I. 

I T was my good fortune recently to pass a month in the Sihlwald, as that 
portion of the forest-property of the City of Zurich is called, which stretches 
for some five miles along the narrow valley of the Sihl. It is not often that a for- 
est is so favorably situated both geographically and as to the conditions which 
determine the value and fertility of timber-lands,- and while there are many 
peculiarities in its management which mark it as distinct from the great body 
of European forests, it exhibits so full a knowledge of forestry applied to such 
excellent conditions and so admirable an adaptation of means to ends, that if it 
fails of being typical of that which is, it may assuredly challenge attention as the 
illustration of that which ought to be. Further, since during the last fiscal year it 
yielded to the city a net revenue of more than eight dollars per acre, a short 
account of it may serve to emphasize the fact, so often lost sight of, that the pro- 
tection of forests is not an end, but a means, and that the whole question of for- 
estry has a very definite and important financial bearing. It has, therefore, seemed 
that a few words upon the Sihlwald might not be without interest to the readers 


28 Arnoldia 60/2 


of Garden and Forest, and I purpose, after describing it briefly in the present 
paper, and sketching the management of the forest in a second, to touch upon it 
in a final one as a piece of municipal property . . . That precious condition of the 
surface which the French and German unite in describing as "forest-soil," so 
slow in forming and so quick to disappear wherever the full sunlight is allowed 
to reach the ground, has here been produced in perfection by centuries of forest- 
growth. It is perhaps to this factor, next to the abundance of humidity, that the 
high annual yield of wood in the Sihlwald is due. 

The growth which covers the soil thus fortunately suited to its needs is a 
mixed high or seedling forest, in which the deciduous trees largely predominate. 
Under the law of the rotation of forest-crops, not so well known as that which 
determines an analogous success in agriculture because it acts over vastly 
longer periods, the character of the mixture has undergone a gradual change, 
until, in the course of two centuries and a half, the percentage of coniferous 
trees has declined from sixty-one to fourteen, and the deciduous forest has taken 
their place. . . . 

Scattered along between this forest and the Sihl . . . are placed the saw-mill, 
handle factory and injection plant, whose presence as integral parts of the equip- 
ment of the forest, chiefly distinguishes the management of the Sihlwald from 
that of other similarly situated European woodlands. 


THE SIHLWALD.— II. 

I N the organization of a normally stocked forest the object of first importance 
is the cutting each year of an amount of timber equal to the total annual 
increase over the whole area, and no more. It is further desirable in any long 
settled community that the forests be so managed as to yield a measurably con- 
stant return in material. Otherwise difficulties in the supply of labor and the dis- 
posal of the produce make themselves felt, and the value of the forest to its owner 
tends to decrease. This is especially true in the case of the Sihlwald, whose mills 
derive their raw material exclusively from the forest to which they belong, and 
whose supply of labor is limited to the men whom it furnishes with steady 
employment. Either excess of deficit in the annual production implies loss. 

In order to attain this steadiness of yield it is obviously necessary that a cer- 
tain number of trees become fit to cut each year. The Sihlwald has accordingly 
been so "organized" that areas of equal productive capacity are covered by stocks 
of every age, from last year's seedling to the mature tree. . . . The working plan 
for the Lower Sihlwald, then, prescribes for the forest . . . the operations of what 
Dr. Schlich has called in his Manual of Forestry "The Shelter-wood Compart- 
ment System." It may not be without interest to follow the life history of a com- 
partment in which this system is carried out. 

After the mature trees had been felled and removed from the area which fur- 
nished the yield of the Lower Sihlwald last year the thick crop of seedlings which 
had grown up under their shelter was finally exposed to the full influence of the 
light and air. The felling and rough shaping of the timber, the piling of logs and 
cord-wood and the trampling of the men had combined with the crisis of expo- 
sure to destroy the new crop in places and create a few small blanks. Fiere, as 


Forestry 29 



View in the Sihlwald 

soon as the disappearance of the snow had made it possible, groups of the kinds 
of seedlings necessary to preserve the mixture or destined to increase the propor- 
tion of the more valuable species were planted. The operation, necessarily an 
expensive one, is justified by the greater resistance of a mixed forest to nearly all 
the calamities which may befall standing timber. Simultaneously with the plant- 
ing the Willows, Hazels and other worthless species were destroyed, as well as 
the "pre-existing seedlings," whose larger growth, according to the disputed 
theory held at the Sihlwald, would damage their younger neighbors more by their 
shade than their greater volume would increase the final yield of timber. The 
incipient forest, then, practically uniform in age and size and broken by no blanks 
which the growth of a year or two will not conceal, is fairly started on the course 
of healthy development, which it is to continue undisturbed until it reaches the 
age of fifteen years. 

At this point occurs the first of a series of thinnings which follow each other 
at intervals of seven or eight years, until the trees have entered the last third of 
their existence. There is, perhaps, no silvicultural question more in dispute than 
this of the time and degree of thinning which will yield the best results in qual- 
ity and quantity of timber. The method pursued at the Sihlwald, consecrated by 
habit and success, gives ample space for the healthy development of the crown 
from a very early age without admitting light enough through the leaf-canopy to 
sustain an undergrowth until the the trees are nearly ready to give place to their 
descendants. Such shrubs or seedlings as still appear, thanks to a shade-hearing 



30 Arnoldia 60/2 


temperament, are systematically cut out. It may be strongly doubted whether 
such a policy might safely be applied on soil less moist than that of the Sihlwald; 
but here, at least, the trees reach the age of sixty years, tall, straight, clean-holed, 
and in condition to make the best of the last part of the period of maximum 
growth, which a large number of measurements have shown to occur in general 
between the ages of seventy and ninety years. A heavy thinning now comes to 
the assistance of the best specimens of growth, and they are left to profit by it 
until seven years before the date fixed for their fall. Then begin the regeneration 
cuttings, whose object is to admit through the leaf-canopy an amount of light, 
varying with the temperament of each species, whose mission is to give vitality 
to the seedlings which the trees, stimulated themselves by their more favorable 
situation, now begin to produce in considerable quantities. To this end the light 
which falls from above has a powerful auxiliary in that which the system of fell- 
ing each year in a long narrow strip admits from the side, and so admirable is this 
double method that the time which elapses between the beginning and the end 
of a regeneration is but half the average for less favored localities. This applies 
only to the deciduous trees. The time required by the conifers is much longer, and 
the incomplete regeneration which they furnish is supplemented by planting in 
the blanks already mentioned. But for the self-sown seedlings of both classes the 
amount of light is gradually increased, the trees which shelter them are at length 
wholly removed, and the cycle of growth repeats itself. . . . 

Nancy, France. Gifford Pinchot 

[Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 374, 386] 

from NOTES ON THE FOREST FLORA OF JAPAN.— XXIIL 

. . . THE most generally planted timber-tree of Japan is the Sake, Cryptomeria 
laponica, and its wood is more universally used throughout the empire than that 
of any other Conifer. It is one of the common trees of temple-gardens and road- 
side plantations, and, when seen at its best, as in the temple-groves at Nikko or 
Nara, where it rises to the height of a hundred or a hundred and twenty-five feet, 
with a tall shaft-like stem tapering abruptly from a broad base, covered with 
bright cinnamon-red bark and crowned with a regular conical dark green head, it 
is a beautiful and stately tree which has no rival except in the Sequoias of Cali- 
fornia. Great planted forests of the Cryptomeria appear all over Hondo on broken 
foot-hills and mountain-slopes up to an elevation of nearly three thousand feet 
above the sea, low valleys and good soil being usually selected for such planta- 
tions, as the trees need protection from high winds. The plantations decrease in 
size and luxuriance in northern Hondo, and the cultivation of the Sake does not 
appear to be attempted north of Hakkodate where there is a grove of small trees 
on the slope of the hill above the town. The wood is coarse-grained, with thick 
layers of annual growth, dark reddish heart-wood and thick page sap-wood; it is 
easily worked, strong and durable, and is employed in all sorts of construction. 
The bark, which is carefully stripped from the trees when they are cut down, is 
an important article of commerce and is used to cover the roofs of houses. A large 
round bunch of branchlets covered with their leaves hung over the door of a shop 
is the familiar sign of the dealer in sake. 


Forestry 31 



Japan owes much of the beauty of its groves and gardens to the Cryptomeria. 
Nowhere is there a more solemn and impressive group of treees than that which 
surrounds the temples and tombs at Nikko, and the long avenue of this tree, 
under which the descendants of leyasu traveled from the capital of the Shoguns 
to do honor at the burial-place of the founder of the Tokugawa dynasty, has not 
its equal in stately grandeur. This avenue, if the story told of its origin is true, 
can teach a useful lesson, and carries hope to the heart of the planter of trees who 
will see in it a monument more lasting than those which men sometimes erect 
in stone or bronze in the effort to perpetuate the memory of their greatness. 
When the body of leyasu was laid m its last resting-place on the Nikko hills his 
successor in the Shogunate called upon the Damios of the empire to send each a 
stone or bronze lantern to decorate the grounds about the mortuary temples. All 
complied with the order but one man, who, too poor to send a lantern, offered 
instead to plant trees beside the road, that visitors to the tomb might be protected 
from the heat of the sun. The offer was fortunately accepted, and so well was the 
work done that the poor man's offering surpasses in value a thousand-fold those 
of all his more fortunate contemporaries. 

Something of the beauty of this avenue appears in the illustration, although, 
without the aid of colors, it is impossible to give an idea of the beauty of the 
Cryptomeria. The planted avenue extends practically all the way from Tokyo to 
Nikko, but it is only when the road reaches the foot-hills that it passes between 


?>1 Arnoldia 60/2 


rows of Cryptomerias, the lower part being planted, as is the case with the other 
great highways of Japan, with Pine-trees; nor, as it has often been stated, is this 
avenue continuous, for whenever a village occurs or a roadside tea-house, which 
are scattered all along the road, there is a break in the row of trees, and it is only 
in some particular spots that a long view of continuous trees is obtained. The 
railroad, which follows parallel and close to the avenue for a considerable dis- 
tance and then crosses it just before the Nikko station is reached, is a serious 
injury to it. The trees, as will be seen in the illustration, are planted on high 
banks made by throwing up the surface-soil from the roadway; they are usually 
planted in double rows, and often so close together that sometimes two or three 
trees have grown together by a process of natural grafting. Young trees are con- 
stantly put in to fill gaps, and every care apparently is taken to preserve and 
protect the plantation. How many of the trees originally planted when the 
avenue was first laid out in the beginning of the seventeenth century are left it is 
impossible to say, but I suspect that most of those now standing are of much later 
date. One of the tree;s close to the upper end of the road which had been injured 
by fire was cut down during our visit to Nikko. The sturnp, breast-high above the 
ground, measured four feet inside the bark, and showed only one hundred 
and five layers of annual growth. Few of the trees in the avenue were much 
larger than this, although in the neighborhood of the temples there are a few 
which girt over twenty feet; these were probably planted when the grounds were 
first laid out. 

The two [most valuable timber-trees in Japan], Chamscyparis and the Cryp- 
tomeria, are now almost unknown in a wild state. They may, perhaps, be found 
growing naturally on some of the southern mountains which we did not visit; 
wherever we went, however, we saw only trees that had been planted by man, 
although some of the plantations had evidently lived through several centuries. 


C.S.Slaigent] 


[Garden and Forest 6 (1893): 443] 


A MUSEUM SPECIMEN OF SEQUOIA GIGANTEA. 



section of a trunk of one of the California Big Trees is now almost ready to 


-tjLhe set up in the Jesup collection of American woods in the Museum of Natu- 
ral History in this city. Like the other specimens of this collection, this one is 
four and a half feet in long, measuring with the grain, but it is rather more than 
twenty feet in diameter, and when fully prepared the great wheel will be set up 
on its rim as the beautiful specimen of Redwood is near by. The tree grew on land 
now owned by the King's River Lumber Company, near Sequoia, Fresno County, 
California, a long day's ride up the mountain from Visalia. To make transporta- 
tion possible it was split into twelve sections, the centre-piece being round, and 
eleven other radiating from it. It is an admirable specimen, with perfect grain and 
apparently no wind-checks, although through one of the sections there is a nar- 
row decayed tunnel something like eighteen inches long and an inch or two in 
width. Outside of this, however, the trunk is perfectly solid, and this decay prob- 
ably came from some injury to the trunk, which may have been bruised by a fall- 
ing tree; and if we can estimate time by annual rings of growth the accident 
happened at about the date when the Pilgrims landed at Plymouth. Mr. S. D. Dill, 


Forestry 33 


who has prepared all the specimens for this great exhibition, is now riveting the 
segments of the giant trunk together with great iron bolts, so that it will be per- 
fectly solid when it is finally ready for its position in the centre of the collection. 

The tree from which this trunk section was cut was one of a few trees left 
standing of a once magnificent Sequoia-grove, and the stumps about it show that 
their growth was very large, one not far from this tree being forty feet m diam- 
eter. The remains of the old mill which has turned these venerable trees into 
lumber is still there, but other mills are at work cutting from 125,000 to 130,000 
feet every day. It may be said that the Converse Basin tract of Sequoias, which 
belongs to the King's River Lumber Company, is about ten miles back from the 
place where this tree was cut, and Mr. Moore, the Superintendent of the com- 
pany, estimates that there is enough of that one kind of timber on the tract to 
keep these mills running at their present capacity for fifty years. When the trees 
which stand high up on the slopes of canons are felled the logs are cut off into 
proper lengths. They are then blown apart by dynamite into halves, quarters and 
eighths, and a powerful steam-engine, with a steel cable, draws this split timber 
down to a greased tramway of round peeled logs, over which they are shot away 
to the mill, near the mouth of the canon. They are then sawed up into lumber of 



Stump of Sequoia gigantea on land of the King's River Lumber Company 


34 Arnoldia 60/2 


proper sizes and floated down through a V-shaped flume from the mill to the rail- 
road, sixty-two miles away. This flume is supplied hy a large reservoir in the 
mountains. Although when dry the Sequoia is one of the lightest of American 
woods, it is very heavy when full of sap, and will not float readily until it is sea- 
soned, so that the timber needs to lie some time before it is floated out of the 
mountain. The lumber looks very much like redwood, and is sold under this 
name. Indeed, it is only distinguished from redwood by the eye of an expert. 

This particular tree was called "Mark Twain," and girthed sixty-two feet at 
eight feet from the ground and ninety feet at the surface. It was a straight, hand- 
some tree some three hundred feet high, and without a limb for about two hun- 
dred feet from the ground. Mr. Moore estimated that it contained four hundred 
thousand feet of lumber, and the specimen cut, four and a half feet long, weighed 
over thirty tons. It took two men about three weeks to cut it down. The axemen 
chopped out deep notches on the opposite sides of the tree, leaving a compara- 
tively narrow strip through the centre untouched. A notch was then cut at one 
end of this centre-piece on the side toward which the tree was to fall . . . Two long 
cross-cut saws were then welded together and the workrnen began to saw in hori- 
zontally opposite the cut last mentioned, and wedges were driven in until the 
tree toppled over . . . [The illustration] gives some idea of the size of the tree at 
the ground. Fifty men of the Lumber Company's force are here seen standing out 
on the sap-wood and bark of the stump, and the tools with which the giant was 
overthrown lie in the centre, where there is easily room for a hundred more men. 
Of course, the butt of the log that fell was sawn off above the bevel made by the 
axes, and in a plane perpendicular to the axis of the log, so that the bottom of 
the specimen in the museum represents a cut about ten feet from the ground. 
A section of the log next above this has been secured as a specimen for the 
British Museum. 

Every lover of nature must be rejoiced at the fact that the National Govern- 
ment has taken possession of several of the most extensive groves of Big Trees 
that remain in California, so that they cannot pass into private hands and be 
turned into lumber, a fate which has already befallen so many of these oldest and 
noblest inhabitants of our mountain forests. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 5 (1892): 541-542] 

THE FORESTS OF THE NATIONAL DOMAIN. 

T he small company of forward-looking people who, in the face of almost 
universal apathy, had been for years urging the necessity of some rational 
system of management for the forests on our national domain, felt greatly 
encouraged ten years ago when President Arthur was moved to mention the sub- 
ject in one of his annual messages. We have no systematic forest-policy yet, not 
even the beginning of such a policy, but we are no longer surprised or unduly 
elated over the fact that men in places of high authority consider the matter 
worth talking about, at least. President Cleveland, like his immediate predeces- 
sors, in his message to Congress, which assembled last month, strongly advised 
that some adequate protection should be provided for the areas of forest which 
had been reserved by proclamation, and he also recommended the adoption of 


Forestry 35 


some comprehensive scheme of forest-management. He condemned the present 
policy of the Government of surrendering for small considerations immense 
tracts of timber-land which ought to be reserved as permanent sources of timber- 
supply, and urged the prompt abandonment of this wasteful policy for a conser- 
vative one, which should recognize in a practical way the importance of our 
forest-inheritance as a vital element of the national prosperity. 

The House of Representatives, too, has taken prompt action upon Mr. McRae's 
bill, entitled. An Act to Protect Public Forest Reservations. The provisions of the 
bill are simple. It authorizes the employment of the army to patrol these reser- 
vations, as has been done effectively in the Yellowstone Park and in the Yosemite 
Valley, and it empowers the Secretary of the Interior to make regulations in 
regard to their occupancy, to utilize the timber of commercial value they contain, 
and to preserve the forest-cover from destruction. It also empowers the Secretary 
of the Interior to cut and sell timber on non-reserved lands under the same rules 
as those made for the forest reservations, provided that it shall be first shown that 
such cuttings shall not be injurious to the public interests. The bill had some 
unfortunate features, but any system which regulates the use of public timber is 
better than the indiscriminate plunder that has been going on hitherto, and the 
authorization to use the military for protective purposes is altogether commend- 
able. The bill was amended, however, to strike out, if we understand it correctly, 
the provisions relating to non-reserved lands, and it restricts the sale of timber 
on the reservations to trees that are dead or mature, thus limiting skilled forest 
practice, instead of authorizing trained foresters to make their own selection, 
and, worse than all, it grants free supplies of timber from the reservations to 
miners and settlers. 

It is to be hoped that when this measure comes before the Senate that its origi- 
nal features will be restored. In its present form it does little more than to expose 
the timber on the reservations to new dangers. ... If military protection is 
assured, that is one step forward, but if such protection is made possible only 
when the War Department shall consider it worth while, it is a very short step, 
indeed. No doubt, any measure which gives the assurance of efficient policing of 
the reservations, or efficiently controls the cutting of public timber, is to that 
extent a gain, but we certainly want something more definite and decisive than 
the McRae bill as it now stands. . . . 

[Garden and Forest 8 (1895): 1] 

W HAT is to be the fate of forests on the national domain, and how is the 
much larger forest area of the country, now in private hands, to be man- 
aged in the future, are questions which, a few years ago, would have excited but 
trifling interest anywhere in the United States. The current issue of The Century 
magazine shows that these matters are now subjects of serious study by many 
thoughtful Americans. The editor of a great periodical is a good judge of what 
subjects are of immediate popular interest, and the fact that The Century not 
only makes a distinct proposition of its own for action in the matter of forest- 
preservation, but devotes ten pages to setting forth the views of persons who, 
from their official standing or personal knowledge, are qualified to say something 



GARDEN 


/\ N D 



FOREST 

A-JOURNAL OF HORTICULTURE 
HANDSCAPEARTAND-FORESTRYI 


• lANl I ARY- 50 ■ 1895 

1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 m iiu iif jjiAJui^JuuuiJuujii' uulu t.wr j i ■ i vvj w um J/\l\U/\ivi <-'u i itti'fJU’iimmiuiiiiiiiiiiiifuijrjuMiiimuiiuJuuduiAUJii 


lu iifju’iimm uuuimiux »juLurjuMiiimuiiJuyuud^^ 


Price Ten Cents.] Copyright, 1895, by Thb Garden and Forest Pubushing Cohpany, [$4.00 A YeaR, IN ADVANCE, 

[few, Rare aiOeaill Flits. 


I F you are interested in HARDV PLANTS, TREES and SHREBS tor 
wautifying your grounds in the spring, kindly inform us of your wants. We carry the 
largest stock of H.^RDV PLANTS in America, including many new varieties of great 
merit, prices and estimates of which will be sent on application. 

We also furnish experienced and skillful Landscape Gardeners for parties desiring their 
assistance. 

We always have on our register experienced men in all branches of Horticulture, whom 
we can recommend as desirabU and competmt Gardemrs. 

The great Novelty of 1895, the California Violet, 

blooms from September until May profusely, with protection only against frost. We have 
received bunches of the flowers at our office, showing it to be as large as a silver dollar, stems 
ten to fourteen inches long, beautiful violet^rolor, and intensely fragrant. Thousands of the 
plants are being sold. Orders will be filled strictly in rotation in March. Price 25c. each, 
$2.50 per dozen, $15.00 per hundred, $100.00 per thousand ; 500 at thousand rate. 


STROBILANTHES DYERIANUS. 

This is the most valuable novelty that has been in- 
troduced for years. For bedding Is superior to the 
finest Coleus ; withstands hot sun and dry weather 
better. 

Sp/nea **Aathooy Waterer.** Flowers rich crimson. 
Lord Penzance's Sew hybrid Sweetbriers. 

A large collection of Rare Hothouse and Green- 
house Plants, carefully grown, at low rates. Orchids, etc. 
PELARQONIUnS. All the finest European novelties. 
RARE AND BEAUTIFUL EVERGREENS. 
ORNAMENTAL TREES. SHRUBS. Ac. 
P/CONIES.— A large collection of the finest in cultiva- 
tion. Hardy Perennials, Phloxes, Japanese Ins, 
Roses, Clematis, etc. New and Standard Fruits, etc. 

Catalogues on application. -^9 

JOHN SAUL, Washington, D. C. 


Pitcher & Manda, 

(Incorporated) 

SHORT HILLS, N. J. 


HO, PLANTERS! 

S END for our large Wholesale List of Collected, 
Native Ornamentals. Good plants; low prices. 
Try us.— WM. H. HARRISON k SONS, Lebanon 
Springs, N. Y., U. S. A. (Please mention this paper.) 


The February “Century,” 

READY FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 1 st, 

WILL CONTAIN 

— SYMPOSIUn ON 


Prof. Sargent’s Scheme of Forest Preser= 
vation by Military Control, 


Edward A. Bowers, 

U. S. Asst. Commissioner of Public Lands, 

B. E. Fernow, 

Chief of Division of Forestry, 

Dept, of Agriculture. 

J. T. Rothrock, 

Pres. Penna. State Forest Commission. 


CONTRIBUTED BY 

Frederick Law Olmsted. 
Verplanck Colvin, 

Supt. Adirondack Survey. 

Theodore Roosevelt. 
Gifford Pinchot. 

N. S. Shaler. 


D. n. Riordan, 

Pres. Arizona Lumber and Timber Co. 

John riuir. 

Cleveland Abbe, 

Prof.of.\feteorology, U. S. Weather Bureau. 

William J. Palmer. 


George S. Anderson, Captain U. S. A., in charge of Yellowstone National Park. 

DON’T MISS IT. READY ON FRIDAY. SOLD EVERYWHERE. 



Forestry 37 


worth hearing on the subject, is an evidence that we are gradually nearing the 
time when indifference and lethargy in relation to this matter will give place to 
an active realization of the fact that the prosperity of our country is directly con- 
nected with the proper management of our forests. 

Six years ago, when speaking of the nation's forests, it was urged in this jour- 
nal that all forest-lands belonging to the Government should be withheld from 
sale until an examination of these lands, and of the agricultural lands depending 
upon them for water-supply, would show what tracts of timber could be put upon 
the market without threatening important interests in the country below them. 
For the protection of these forests against injury from man and beast, it was 
advised that, pending this investigation, the guardianship of the forests on the 
national domain should be entrusted to the United States Army and that this 
examination of the national forests should be conducted by a commission, 
appointed by the President, of men able to report upon the magnitude and qual- 
ity of our forests, and upon their relations to other interests. No commission 
was appointed, however; perhaps the time was not ripe for such a plan, modest 
and moderate as it was; but certainly if such a commission had then been named, 
we should now know more about our forests than we do. In The Century sympo- 
sium a man so well qualified to speak as Mr. Bowers, the Assistant Commis- 
sioner of Public Lands, declares that estimates of the amount of forest-land 
owned by the Government vary between the lowest and the highest by twenty 
millions of acres, which means that we have no absolute knowledge whatever. 
And since no one can do more than make a rough guess at the area of these lands, 
any surmise as to the amount of timber growing on any portion of them, or of 
its value, or of the ease or difficulty with which these woodlands can be made 
permanently productive, would be wilder still. It seems, then, that the need of a 
board of investigation is quite as urgent to-day as it was when the proposition 
was first made . . . 

There seems to be little question as to the advisability of employing the army 
as a police force while this investigation goes on. Captain Anderson, who has 
been in command of the troops in the Yellowstone National Park, ought to be a 
competent judge in this matter, and in his contribution to the symposium it is 
stated that the soldiers of his command have served every purpose of a forest- 
guard most satisfactorily. ... Of course, this service would only be temporary, 
for the time is coming when a policy, which only means mere protection of the 
woods from timber thieves and browsing animals and fire, must be replaced by 
an active system of reproductive management such as is used in other industries 
of this country and in the forests of other civilized nations. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 8 (1895): 51] 


Old trees in their living state are the only things that money cannot command. 
Rivers leave their beds, run into cities and traverse mountains for it; obelisks and 
arches, palaces and temples, amphitheatres and pyramids rise up like exhalations 
at its bidding; even the free spirit of man, the only thing great on earth, crouches 
and cowers in its presence. It passes away and vanishes before venerable trees. 

— Walter Savage Landor. 


38 Arnoldia 60/2 


NOTES. 


An old legend traces the origin of the Thistle as the 
emblem of the Scottish kingdom to the far-away time 
when the Danes were invading the country. On a dark 
night, runs the story, as they were advancing to attack 
an encampment of Scots, one of them trod on a Thistle, 
and the thoughtless exclamation which followed awak- 
ened the slumherers, who, springing to arms, defeated 
their assailants. In gratitude for this deliverance 
the flower of the Thistle was adopted as the national 
emblem. [8(1895): 300] 

In the Bulletin of the United States National 
Museum, No. 39, Dr. Frederick D. Coville, botanist of 
the Department of Agriculture, has recently printed 
some clear directions for collecting specimens of plants 
and information illustrating their aboriginal uses, which 
will be found useful to both travelers and settlers who 
have an opportunity to observe the habits of any of the 
tribes of American Indians. [8(1895): 300) 

The Idard Maple of Maine furnishes a large part of the 
material used in the manufacture of shoe-pegs, although 
the wood of the Canoe Birch is sometimes used for this 
purpose. Shoe-pegs are sold by the bushel, and now range 
from seventy-five cents to one dollar a bushel, $150,000 
having been received, it is stated by a correspondent of 
The Manufacturer and Builder of this city, last year by 
the Maine shoe-peg factories. [5(1892): 228] 

The destruction of the forests which has been going 
on about the diamond mines near Kimberley, South 
Africa, is believed by Dr. William Crookes to have seri- 
ously modified the climate. The country within a radius 
of a hundred miles has been stripped of wood to supply 
timber for the mines. The forests were barriers against 
the wind; they tempered the heat of the sun in a region 
where the air is extremely dry, and their removal is 
thought to account for the dust storms which have been 
so frequent in that country this year. [10 (1897): 249-250] 

Professor Roberts, of Cornell University, is sending 
out circulars to notify whom it may concern that under 
the Agricultural Extension Bill the college of agriculture 
of that university has undertaken to assist, free of 
expense, all teachers who wish to introduce what is 
called "nature studies" into the public schools. Nature 
study means nothing more than seeing familiar things in 
a new light, and the Cornell faculty wish to encourage 
the investigation of common objects so as to teach accu- 
rate observation and the power of clearly expressing 
what is seen. [10(1897): 150] 

Professor McDougal gives some very good reasons in 
the current number of Appleton's Popular Science 
Monthly for the establishment of a botanical garden in 
the West Indies, so that tropical plants could be studied 


without going to Buitenzorg or some other garden on the 
other side of the world. A laboratory and garden in the 
West Indies could be reached from any important city in 
our country in four or five days, and it would be much 
more accessible for the European botanist even than are 
those established among the antipodes. Such a garden 
would be of direct benefit to a great number of working 
botanists in America and furnish investigators and 
graduate students of this country with unequaled facili- 
ties for biological research. [9(1896): 510] 

A thoroughly useful Farmers' Bulletin of about 
twenty pages, just issued by the United States Depart- 
ment of Agriculture, is entitled Washed Soils. How to 
Prevent and Reclaim Them. Along the banks of the Ohio 
and in many portions of the south hundreds of fields 
have been washed and furrowed beyond the possibility of 
profitable cultivation. FFow the destruction of forests has 
caused these gullies, how to prevent them, and how by 
cultivation, reforesting and covering up the ground with 
grass this evil can be checked and cured is plainly set 
forth in these pages. The illustrations are not artistic, 
but they are helpful, and the methods of constructing 
hillside ditches and terraces, the best preparation for 
forests, with approved methods of planting and caring 
for them, are all plainly set forth. The statements in this 
little tract are so truthful, and the deductions so logical 
and convincing, that every landowner who is not already 
familiar with them ought to read and consider them. 
[9(1896): 510[ 

The Northwestern Lumberman, in speaking of the 
great flood in the Mississippi valley, says that the deluge 
has so far subsided that lumber will soon begin to move 
northward again over the overflowed region, but much of 
it will be unfit for shipment because it has been under 
water and is covered with silt. This dirt-covered material 
will all need to be cleaned, and this will involve a vast 
amount of work and expense. Where the cottonwood has 
been covered with water it will be practically ruined, as 
the dirt can hardly be washed out of its fuzzy fibres, and 
the result of this is seen in the fact that the price of this 
lumber has advanced one dollar a thousand. Lucky 
manufacturers whose lumber piles have been above the 
water will make the most of their advantages, and the 
effect will be seen in the market for oak and ash as well 
as for cottonwood. It will be several weeks before logging 
can proceed in the bottom-lands with the mills restored 
to running condition. There will be mud everywhere, 
tramways washed out, bridges and trestles destroyed, so 
that it will be midsummer before everything can be 
restored to order, with mills running steadily, and weeks 
more will elapse before the newly cut lumber is dry 
enough to ship. [10(1897): 190] 


"Master of a Felicitous English Style": William 
Augustus Stiles, Editor of Garden and Forest 

Phyllis Andersen 


"When we think of it, we cannot but recognize that few people have written 
about parks as Stiles wrote. Olmsted and Vaux, yes, and Whately. It was litera- 
ture they wrote ... in addition to facts, Stiles had that literary touch, the pen- 
etrative, imaginative quality that no horticulturist had whom I have ever known. 
He claimed nothing original, the writings and sayings of Olmsted and Vaux 
being his authority, but he illuminated ail they had given him with the lambent 
flame of his literary genius." — Samuel Parsons Jr., 1 926 


C harles Sprague Sargent was the self- 
appointed "conductor" of the nine- 
teenth-century journal Garden and 
Forest.' Like all maestros he has been given 
almost sole credit for the journal's achieve- 
ments: its timely reports of horticultural 
advances, its prescient warnings of threats to 
forests and scenery, and its unique linking of 
disciplines. Sargent did have significant exper- 
tise in the many fields covered in Garden and 
Forest, but he was less a savant than a manager 
who knew how to pick a good team. Credit for 
the graceful prose and for the eloquent advocacy 
for public parks should go not to Sargent, but to 
Garden and Forest’s editor William Stiles. 
Stiles, an experienced New York journalist who 
also enjoyed a distinguished career in public ser- 
vice, was appointed managing editor by the 
founders of the journal in 1888. The editorial 
office of Garden and Forest was located in the 
Tribune Building in New York, and Stiles con- 
tinued in his long-established role of editorial 
writer for the New York Tribune during his ten- 
ure as editor of Garden and Forest. Sargent 
"conducted" from his base at the Arnold Arbo- 
retum m Boston, where he was director. 

Stiles' role in Garden and Forest has not been 
widely recognized, not because it was intention- 
ally obscured by Sargent, who fully appreciated 
both his editorial skills and his character, but 
rather by routine library practice. The full mast- 


head of Garden and Forest listing staff names 
and positions, editorial mission, and contribu- 
tors was positioned in the front of the publica- 
tion in an advertising section. When the issues 
were subsequently bound by libraries, the adver- 
tising sections were commonly removed as hav- 
ing no future value. Hence the information 
about Stiles' role was lost, as well as the adver- 
tisements, now recognized as historically 
significant in their own right. What remained 
was an abbreviated masthead on the first edito- 
rial page listing Charles Sprague Sargent as 
Conductor. Stiles' role was further obscured 
by the fact that most of the lead editorials of 
the journal, many of them authored by Stiles, 
were unsigned. 

William Augustus Stiles was horn in Decker- 
town (now Sussex), New Jersey, on March 9, 
1837. His father, Edward Augustus Stiles, was a 
mathematician and educator who founded 
Mount Retirement Seminary, a successful pre- 
paratory school in northern New Jersey. His 
mother was the former Eveline Belmont 
Howell. William was educated at his father's 
school and at Yale, graduating from Yale in 
1859. He returned briefly to the Mount Retire- 
ment Seminary to teach, but in 1864, hoping 
that a sea voyage would improve his health, par- 
ticularly the weak eyesight that was to plague 
him all of his life, he traveled to California by 


40 Arnoldia 60/2 


way of the Isthmus of Panama. He briefly held a 
teaching post in Oakland, but soon left to join 
the corps of engineers laying out the new Union 
Pacific Railroad line across the Sierra Nevadas. 
However, his weak eyesight, further strained by 
detailed mapmaking, forced him to return to his 
father's farm in New lersey for a period of recu- 
peration. Having formed an interest in plants 
during his time in California, Stiles now began 
a systematic study of plants, collecting in the 
wild and cultivating nursery stock. Later, his 
interests expanded to include forestry, agricul- 
tural technology, and landscape gardening. He 
also became interested in local politics during 
this period and later ran for New Jersey state 
offices several times. After a brief stint as a 
gauger (or tax collector) in New York City he 
began his career in journalism. 

Samuel Parsons Jr., landscape architect for the 
New York City Department of Parks in the 
1890s, tells the story of an after-dinner speech 
Stiles made to a group of Yale alumni in New 
York in the late 1870s. According to Parsons, 
Stiles' wit and intelligence so captivated 
Whitelaw Reid, publisher of the New York Tri- 
bune, that he engaged Stiles on the spot as an 
editorial writer for the Tribune, a position he 
was to hold until the end of his life.^ Jn 1883 
Stiles also became the agricultural correspon- 
dent for the Philadelphia Weekly Press, report- 
ing on current research in agricultural methods. 

Stiles' early writings for the Tribune estab- 
lished him as a thoughtful and knowledgeable 
spokesman for local issues. ("There was nothing 
of the superficial smartness of the ordinary 
newspaper man, but his articles were written in 
a grave and judicious style, with a fine literary 
quality."^) He quickly focused on public parks, 
advocating additions to New York City's 
parklands and objecting to what he saw as 
misguided efforts to improve those already 
established — particularly Central Park. 

The early 1880s were a period of significant 
controversy for Central Park. Like all large pub- 
lic works projects the park had become a rally- 
ing point for those seeking quick recognition in 
local politics. The pent-up frustrations of those 
not in sympathy with the Olmsted and Vaux 
design resulted in a questioning of priorities. 
They questioned the park's dedication to the 



William Augustus Stiles (1837-1897) 

passive enjoyment of scenery, asking what 
classes of society were best served by this type 
of park. Inappropriate intrusions in the form of 
active recreation facilities and popular amuse- 
ments were proposed. In his editorials Stiles 
positioned himself as a staunch defender of the 
Olmsted-Vaux vision. Frederick Law Olmsted 
Jr. and Theodora Kimball, in the introduction to 
their bibliography of works on Central Park in 
Forty Years of Landscape Architecture: Central 
Park, note the significance of Garden and 
Forest’s coverage of park issues: "The history of 
Central Park during the critical ten-year period 
covered by Garden and Forest (begun in 1888 
and edited by friends and warm defenders of the 
Park) is so well reflected in its pages that per- 
haps a disproportionate number of references — 
all to editorials — in this periodical have been 
here included."'* 

Stiles and Olmsted had a long-standing pro- 
fessional friendship. When Charles Sargent 
became ill in early 1888, just before the launch 
of Garden and Forest, Olmsted, who had con- 
tributed $500 to the initial financing of the 
journal, stepped in to offer advice and support to 
the new editor. The correspondence between 
Stiles and Olmsted, who had by then relocated 
to Brookline, Massachusetts, reveals Stiles' 


ARC HIVFSOl mr ARNOll) ARBORI TUM 


William Augustus Stiles 41 


W ILLIAM STILES was assisted at Garden and Forest by 
Mary B. Coulston. Coulston, who wrote the biographi- 
cal entry for Stiles in Liberty Hyde Bailey's Cyclopedia of 
American Horticulture (1902), is described by Bailey as sim- 
ply "M. B. Coulston, formerly Assistant Editor of Garden and 
Forest of Ithaca, New York." Coulston wrote a number of 
signed articles on horticultural subjects for Garden and For- 
est. While little is known of her early career, she figures later 
as a significant participant in the early planning of Balboa 
Park in San Diego, California. By 1902, relocated to 
Livermore, California, Coulston was hired by the San Diego 
Park Improvement Committee to be its secretary and to write 
articles for the local newspapers supporting the improvement 
of San Diego's City Park. She is described by her colleagues as 
possessing extensive knowledge of parks in the United States 
and Europe as a result of her position at Garden and Forest. 
She is credited with bringing the New York-hased landscape 
architect Samuel Parsons — a well-known advocate of 
Olmsted and Vaux's vision for Central Park — to the attention 
of the San Diego Park Committee, and with helping facilitate 
his hiring as designer of what was to become Balboa Park. She 
had apparently been well trained by Stiles, and perhaps 
Sargent, to define the mission of urban parks as bringing rural 
scenery to the city. Coulston died in 1904 while attending a 
summer school session at the University of California at 
Berkeley. Her friend Kate Sessions, the renowned California 
horticulturist and garden designer, arranged to have her ashes 
buried under a cedar of Lebanon tree in Balboa Park. * 

' Mary B. Coulston's role in the planning of Balboa Park is described 
in Richard W. Amero, "Samuel Parsons Finds Xanadu in San Diego," 
fouinal of San Diego History 44 (Winter 1998). 


gratitude to Olmsted for his sugges- 
tions of topics and authors for the 
journal. Olmsted, like many others, 
valued Stiles' views on the transfor- 
mation of the field of landscape 
gardening into the profession of 
landscape architecture. In a letter of 
advice to his son Ered Jr., Olmsted 
reflected on his own role and that of 
others in the emerging profession: 

"It is as if the war had just begun 
and my part had been to keep the 
enemy in check until reinforce- 
ments could arrive. These young 
men, John [Olmsted], Harry 
[Codman], [Charles] Eliot and 
[Charles] Coolidge, with Sargent 
and Stiles and Mrs. Van 
Rensselaer, are the advance of the 
reinforcements."^ 

In 1892 Stiles began to use the 
editorial columns of Garden and 
Forest and the New York Tribune to 
call attention to a proposed speed- 
way through Central Park along its 
western boundary, a project he felt 
was totally contrary to Olmsted 
and Vaux's vision: "[This project] 
would make an offensive exhibition 
of the power of money to confiscate 
for the pleasure of a few rich men 
the ground which offers to the poor 
of the city their only opportunity to 
enjoy the sight of verdant fields."^ 

In 1895 the newly elected mayor of New 
York, William L. Strong, appointed William 
Stiles to the Board of Park Commissioners, a 
politically powerful body with substantial influ- 
ence over capital expenditures. Shortly after 
Stiles' appointment, the speedway proposal was 
resurrected, this time not in Central Park but 
along the west bank of the Harlem River. An 
engineering firm was to design it rather than 
Calvert Vaux, who was then landscape architect 
for the New York City Parks Department. This 
was only one of a series of humiliating attacks 
on Vaux from members of the Park Board who 
continued to try to discredit him for his partici- 
pation in stopping the Central Park speedway 
proposal. Lacking the thick skin so useful to 


those in public service, Vaux suffered under 
these attacks. He needed a protector, and Wil- 
liam Stiles gladly accepted the role, rallying sup- 
port for Vaux from a significant number of 
prominent New Yorkers. Vaux's son Bowyer said 
that Stiles had "perhaps a keener appreciation" 
of his father's genius than any other citizen.^ 

William Stiles died on October 6, 1897, at the 
home of his sister Mrs. E. H. Davey. Never 
married, he had remained close to his two sisters 
and to the family property in northern New 
Jersey. In the fulsome style of the period, the 
obituary notices praised his contributions to the 
protection of the parks of New York and to the 
responsibility of government and civic leaders to 



42 Arnoldia 60/2 


serve the needs of the disadvantaged. 
The memorial notice published in the 
October 13, 1897, issue of Garden and 
Forest, unsigned but undoubtedly 
written by Charles Sargent, under- 
scored Stiles' "inflexible purpose": 

He has been more, however, than a 
brilliant and successful editor of a 
technical journal; keen love of nature 
and sympathy with the cravings of the 
poor shut within city walls from the 
sight and enjoyment of the country 
made him fully understand the value 
and true meaning of urban parks, and 
for twenty years, always with that 
modesty which was one of his strong- 
est characteristics, but with inflexible 
purpose, he has stood between the 
parks of this city and men who at dif- 
ferent times and under different pre- 
tenses have tried to deface them. . . . 
His death is a serious loss to the read- 
ers of Garden and Forest and to every 
one in the United States interested in 
landscape-gardening, horticulture and 
the care and protection of our national 
and state forests. 

Garden and Forest ceased publica- 
tion in 1898. Despite the high quality 
of its writing, its appeal to practition- 
ers in many fields, its international 
interests and noted contributors, the 
magazine had always run at a loss; 
Sargent had been covering its deficit 
for years. But it may have been the loss 
of Stiles that decided the issue, for 
Sargent's major responsibility at that 
time was building the scientific cred- 
ibility of the Arnold Arboretum. The 
magazine had been in many ways 
Sargent's experiment. In addition to 
reporting on "all progress in science 
and practice" — horticulture, "garden 
botany," dendrology, scientific and 
practical forestry — it deliberately 
linked these fields with landscape gar- 
dening. It even stretched its mission to 
link landscape gardening with archi- 
tecture. Stiles' appointment as editor 
of Garden and Forest gave it a lively, 
stylish prose comparable to that of 


NEW DANGERS TO PUBLIC PARKS. 

I N praising the man whose recent death means a 
heavy loss to the readers of this journal, and in 
noting his long usefulness as the most keen-eyed 
and devoted defender of the public parks of New 
York, the daily papers have dwelt forcibly upon 
the dangers which threaten these parks from the 
"assaults of the ignorant and vicious." But the 
parks are threatened by other dangers, newer than 
these, more subtile and insidious, less easily recog- 
nized as dangers, and therefore less likely to be 
frankly and forcibly resisted. And the conscious- 
ness of this fact greatly augments, among those 
who keep close watch upon our parks, the regret 
which every intelligent American must have felt 
when he heard of the death of Mr. Stiles. 

The ignorant and the vicious have long been 
enemies of the parks — persons who deny their util- 
ity because it cannot be translated into terms of 
dollars and cents; those who are eager to injure 
them for the sake of giving to the city something, 
advantageous, perhaps, in its own way, which they 
think of more "practical benefit"; who wish to 
exploit them for their own profit or who plan to fill 
them with ugly objects; who barbarously injure 
their grass, trees, flowers or monuments for their 
own mischievous pleasure; or who think they 
know more about caring for them than their pro- 
fessional superintendents, and therefore try to 
"arouse the public" whenever a dying tree is cut or 
any other needful and desirable work proposed. 

These people represent the unintelligent, uncul- 
tivated and unconscientious elements of the popu- 
lation. They are now recognized as enemies of 
the public, which in some degree is on its guard 
against them. Teachers, champions and leaders are 
still needed to defend the parks from their possible 
attacks. But the public is now easily roused to 
oppose their worst efforts; and it is probable that 
no such bold assault upon Central Park will again 
be attempted as the effort made a few years ago to 
run a speedway through it, or the equally horrible 
one to turn part of it into a barren parade-ground. 
And the public may likewise be counted upon, 
although not so confidently, to forbid the attempts 
of individuals to dot it with penny-in-the-slot 


William Augustus Stiles 43 


machines or newspaper kiosks, or otherwise to 
disfigure it and to pervert it from its true service 
for the profit of personal greed under the pretense 
of supplying special "conveniences" or "plea- 
sures" to its frequenters. 

The danger to our pleasure-grounds from engi- 
neers necessarily employed upon them, but devoid 
of the right artistic feeling and unwilling to abide 
by the counsels of landscape-gardeners, has 
recently been dwelt upon in these pages and may 
for the moment be passed by. What we wish now 
to point out is that it seems probable that more 
and more schemes to further definitely intellec- 
tual or aesthetic ends will be prosecuted without 
due regard to the integrity and beauty of our parks 
as works of landscape-art, and that the patrons of 
science and literature and of art of other kinds are 
likely to try to injure our great artistic creations 
like Central and Prospect Parks. And this is, of 
course, a very insidious danger, as the schemes 
may be worthy in themselves, and the people who 
urge them are those whom the public has been told 
it should trust most implicitly in intellectual and 
artistic matters. 

It is at least a question whether the new Public 
Library should have been allowed to claim the site 
of the old reservoir on Fifth Avenue, which other- 
wise would have been added to the area of Bryant 
Park. The Metropolitan Museum should not have 
been given a site within Central Park, but placed 
beyond its limits, as the Museum of Natural His- 
tory was upon its western borders. And the stand 
which Mr. Stiles took, as Park Commissioner, in 
opposing the desires of the Botanical Society — 
which, if carried out, will seriously impair the 
peculiar beauty of Bronx Park and its utility as a 
public pleasure-ground — must convince all the 
readers of this journal, who know of his devotion 
to botany and horticulture and to the task of 
spreading an interest in them among the people at 
large, that here, too, a great mistake has been 
made, and by just the kind of persons who ought to 
be trustworthy guides with regard to the right con- 
servation of the public's park-lands. . . . 

[Garden and Forest 10 (1897): 439] 


journals of a more general nature; 
Century Magazine, Putnam’s Maga- 
zine, North American Review. While 
there were other magazines devoted to 
horticulture and garden-making, they 
were written and edited by horticul- 
turists and nurserymen and lacked the 
international scope and literary style 
of Garden and Forest. "His mastery of 
a felicitous English style and his pro- 
found and sympathetic knowledge of 
floral and arboreal life made him one 
of the most instructive and charming 
of contemporary writers; with refined 
taste and sturdy integrity . . 

Endnote.s 

Note on sources: The basic facts of Stiles' life 
were constructed from the extensive obituary 
notices published at his death: New York 
Tribune, 7 October 1897; New York Times, 7 
October 1897; Garden and Forest, 13 October 
1897. M. S. Coulston's biographical entry on 
William Stiles in Liberty Hyde Bailey's 
Cyclopedia of American Horticulture, 1902, 
was also consulted, as well as correspondence 
between Stiles and Frederick Law Olmsted 
from early 1888 (Frederick Law Olmsted 
Papers, Library of Congress). 

* Garden and Forest was not the first 
publication to be "conducted"; lohn 
Claudius Loudon called himself the 
"conductor" of The Gardener’s Magazine 
(London, 1826-1844). 

^ Mabel Parsons, ed.. Memories of Samuel 
Parsons (New York: Putnam's, 1926), 127. 

^ Parsons, 128. 

■* Forty Years of Landscape Architecture: 
Central Park (New York; Putnam's, 1928), 
563. 

^ Frederick Law Olmsted Sr. to Frederick 
Law Olmsted Jr., 5 September 1890. 

® Garden and Forest, 9 March 1892, 109. 

^ C. Bowyer Vaux to fohn C. Olmsted, 8 
December 1895, quoted in Francis R. 
Kowsky, Country, Park, and City: The 
Architecture of Calvert Vaux (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1998), 319. 

* New York Tribune, 7 October 1897. 


Phyllis Andersen is Director of the Institute 
for Cultural Landscape Studies of the Arnold 
Arboretum. 


Bernice Giduz Schubert, 1913-2000 


I t is with an overwhelming sense of loss that 
we record the death on August 14, 2000, of 
Bernice Schuhert, botanist, editor, colleague, 
and friend of the Arnold Arboretum, whose 
career at Harvard encompassed a total of fifty- 
three years, first at the Gray Herbarium and 
later at the Arnold Arboretum. 

Dr. Schubert was born on October 6, 1913, in 
Boston. She graduated from the Massachusetts 
College of Agriculture (now part of the Univer- 
sity of Massachusetts, Amherst) in 1935 and 
earned both an A.M. (1937) and a Ph.D, (1942) 
from Radcliffe College. She was employed at the 
Gray Herbarium part time while a student 
(1936-1941) and later full time (1941-1949), 
working as a technical assistant in plant tax- 
onomy and, more importantly, as editorial aide 
to Professor Merritt Fernald, then director of the 
Gray Herbarium, on his two major works, the 
eighth edition of Gray’s Manual of Botany 
(1951) and Edible Wild Plants of Eastern North 
America (1958), coauthored with Kinsey, plus a 
decade of individual publications. 

When Professor Fernald died, about three 
months after publication of the Manual, Dr. 
Schubert went to the Jardin Botanique de I'Etat 
in Brussels on a Guggenheim fellowship where 
she worked on Leguminosae of the Belgian 
Congo and Ruanda Urundi. Upon her return to 
the United States in November 1952, she was 
employed in the Plant Introduction Section 
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture in 
Beltsville, Maryland. The first phase of her work 
there involved the taxonomy of North and 
Central American species of the genus 
Dioscorea. In a second and related phase, she 
cooperated with chemists of the National Insti- 
tutes of Health in a search for plants with alka- 
loids of potential use in treating high blood 
pressure, collecting samples in Cuba, Puerto 
Rico, Costa Rica, Panama, Mexico, and Brazil. 
A summary publication coauthored with J. 1. 
Willaman, "Alkaloid-Bearing Plants and Their 


Contained Alkaloids," was issued in 1961 as 
U.S.D.A. Technical Bulletin 1234. 

In the fall of 1962 Dr. Schubert came to the 
Arnold Arboretum, first as associate curator and 
later as curator — an unusual appointment for a 
woman at a time when there were no women on 
the roster of Harvard's biology department, and 
when curatorial appointments were the aca- 
demic equivalent of associate or full professor. 
In addition to her curatorial work, as senior lec- 
turer she serv.ed as advisor to both undergraduate 
and graduate biology students and, from 1969 
through 1975, she was supervisor of the Harvard 
University Herbaria building, an arduous task 
with many interruptions and little appreciation. 
And when my successor as director, Peter 
Ashton, was delayed by visa problems, she filled 
in as acting director of the Arboretum in Cam- 
bridge from July 1 to September 30, 1978, bridg- 
ing the gap with her usual competence and 
outspoken distaste for administrative jobs. 

Dr. Schubert's prime responsibility was as 
editor of the Journal of the Arnold Arboretum, 
a post she filled until 1975, after which she 
chaired the editorial committee (now known as 
the joint Arnold Arboretum-Gray Herbarium 
publication committee). In 1984, to honor both 
her retirement and her seventieth birthday, the 
Journal staff dedicated number 3 of volume 65 
to her. It was said then and can be repeated now 
that during her tenure as editor, the Journal was 
considered one of the best-edited botanical peri- 
odicals of its kind, and she was known to all her 
authors as a kind editor. 

Over the course of her long career. Dr. 
Schuhert received a great deal of recognition. 
She was honored for her work on the genus 
Begonia with the Eva Kenworthy Gray award of 
the American Begonia Society and by a Silver 
Medal of the Massachusetts Horticultural Soci- 
ety. She was an honorary member of the 
Sociedad Botanica de Mexico and a fellow of the 
Linnean Society of London. Other memberships 


Bernice Giduz Schubert 45 



included the Societe Royale de 
Botanique de Belgique; the Wash- 
ington Academy of Sciences,- the 
American Society of Plant Tax- 
onomists; the International Asso- 
ciation of Plant Taxonomy (where 
she served as secretary of both the 
Standing Committee on Stabiliza- 
tion and of the Committee on 
Nomina Ambigua); the American 
Institute of Biological Sciences; 
the Botanical Society of America,- 
the New England Botanical Cluh,- 
and the Society of Economic 
Botany (where she served on the 
Couneil). In 1978 she served on 
the committee on Desmodieae for 
the International Legume Confer- 
ence held at Kew. A full listing of 
Dr. Schubert's ninety-four publi- 
cations will be given in Taxon. 

Among them are twenty-nine 
papers on Begonia, nineteen on 
Desmodimn, twelve on steroids, 
eleven on Dioscorea, in addition 
to obituaries, book reviews, and 
articles on miscellaneous other 
subjects. 

Dr. Schubert welcomed all visi- 
tors to the Harvard University 
Herbaria, offering a tour of the 
Jamaica Plain collections or of the 
botanists' graves at Mt. Auburn 
Cemetery. She often entertained 
in her apartment, a botanical 
treasure-house of museum-quality 
artifacts; the "wooden flowers of El Fortin" were 
a partieular interest. For years her living room 
was dominated by a full-size loom on which she 
practiced weaving as a hobby. In her last years 
she continued to entertain students and profes- 
sional botanists at restaurants, still exercising 
her talent for making each guest feel special. 

My own sixty-year association with Bernice 
Schubert began when we were fellow graduate 
students in the Radcliffe laboratory of the Gray 
Herbarium and it continued through our years 
of retirement. I developed a deep respect and 
appreciation for this remarkable woman whose 
contributions to the Arboretum and the Her- 


baria were unprecedented both in number and 
variety, and this at a time when the careers of 
most women in botany were limited to short- 
term appointments to the Generic Flora of 
the Southeastern United States project or as 
research fellows, Mercer fellows, herbarium 
assistants, or, vaguely, as botanists. 

Her ashes are buried m Mt. Auburn Cemetery 
where Asa Gray, Sereno Watson, Merritt L. 
Fernald, Oakes Ames, Gharles Schweinfurth, 
Reed Rollins, and other former Harvard bota- 
nists are interred. 

Richard A. Howard 


46 Arnoldia 60/2 


U.S. POSTAL SERVICE 

STATEMENT OF OWNERSHIP, MANAGEMENT, AND CIRCULATION 
(Required by 39 U.S.C. 3685) 

1. Publication Title: Arnoldia. 1. Publication No; 0004-2633. 3. Filing Date: 31 October 
2000. 4. Issue Frequency: Quarterly. 5. No. of Issues Published Annually: 4. 6. Annual Sub- 
scription Price: $20.00 domestic; $25.00 foreign. 7. Complete Mailing Address of Known 
Office of Publication: Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, lamaica Plain, Suffolk County, 
MA 02130-3500. 8. Complete Mailing Address of Headquarters of General Business Office 
of Publisher: Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, Jamaica Plain, Suffolk County, MA 02130- 
3500. 9. Full Names and Complete Mailing Address of Publisher, Editor, and Managing 
Editor: Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, Jamaica Plain, Suffolk County, MA 02130-3500, 
publisher; Karen Madsen, Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, Jamaica Plain, MA 02130- 
3500, editor. 10. Owner: The Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Suffolk County, MA 02130-3500. 1 1. Known Bondholders, Mortgagees, and 
Other Security Holders Owning or Holding 1 Percent or More of Total Amount of Bonds, 
Mortgages, or Other Securities: none. 12. The purpose, function, and nonprofit status of 
this organization and the exempt status for federal income tax purposes have not changed 
during the preceding 12 months. 13. Publication Name: Arnoldia. 14. Issue Date for 
Circulation Data Below: November, 2000. 15. Extent and Nature of Circulation, a. Total 
No. Copies. Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 3,863. Actual No. 
Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 3,900. b. Paid and/or Requested 
Circulation. (1) Paid/Requested Outside-County Mail Subscriptions. Average No. Copies 
Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 
2,884. No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 2,850. (2) Paid 
In-County Subscriptions: none. (3) Sales Through Dealers and Carriers, Street Vendors, and 
Counter Sales: none. (4) Other Classes Mailed Through the USPS: none. c. Total Paid and/ 
or Requested Circulation. Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 
2,884. Actual No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 2,850. d. Free 
Distribution by Mail. Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 159. 
Actual No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 144. e. Free Distribu- 
tion Outside the Mail: Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 150. 
Actual No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 140. f. Total Free 
Distribution: Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 309. Actual 
No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 284. g. Total Distribution: 
Average No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months; 3,193. Actual No. Copies of 
Single Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 3,134. h. Copies Not Distributed. Average 
No. Copies Each Issue During Preceding 12 Months; 670. Actual No. Copies of Single 
Issue Published Nearest to Filing Date: 766. i. Total. Average No. Copies Each Issue Dur- 
ing Preceding 12 Months: 3,863. Actual No. Copies of Single Issue Published Nearest to 
Filing Date: 3,900. j. Percent Paid and/or Requested Circulation. Average No. Copies Each 
Issue During Preceding 12 Months: 90%. Actual No. Copies of Single Issue Published Near- 
est to Filing Date: 91%. I certify that all information furnished on this form is true and 
complete. Karen Madsen, Editor. 


Tne Arnold Arnoretum 


V 0 I . 6 


NEWS 


Arboretum Embarks on Strategic Planning Process 


Robert E. Cook, Director 

At the millenium, the Arnold 
Arboretum finds itself at an unusual 
place in its history. Over the past 
decade, great improvements have 
been made in the curation of the 
living collections and the care of 
the grounds. The Hunnewell Visi- 
tor Center, our main administra- 
tive building, has been fully 
renovated and our other facilities 
and equipment have been brought 
to a high state of maintenance. 

Our staff has grown in size with 
new programs in education and 
cultural landscapes, and we con- 
tinue to mount international expe- 
ditions for botanical exploration 
and collecting. We are about to 
begin construction on three major 
landscape projects, the largest of 
which will create a new collection 
of sun-loving shrubs and vines 
in a four-acre garden. Finally, 
we have successfully completed 
a fundraising campaign that 
garnered nearly ten million dol- 
lars. This, combined with the 
remarkable performance of the 
Harvard Management Company 
over the past several years, has 
more than doubled the value of 
our endowment. 

It is, therefore, an ideal time 
to stop, take a breath, and decide 
where we would like to go in the 
next two decades. Several years 
ago our staff assessed our pro- 
grams as part of a long-range 
planning effort. Many of the ideas 
that surfaced during this process 


have taken programmatic form. 
Some have been more successful 
than others, and many have broad- 
ened the activities of the Arbore- 
tum staff beyond a narrow focus 
on woody plant research and 
education. 

Because of our strong financial 
and administrative position, it is 
appropriate that a strategic plan- 
ning process examine a wide range 
of options while bringing a criti- 
cal perspective to the assumptions 
and constraints that have tradi- 
tionally governed the operations 
of the Arboretum. We should 
determine what our core values are 
and how these might fuel a set of 


ambitious goals for the coming 
quarter century. 

We have concluded that this 
will require external assistance, and 
we have identified a consultant, the 
Technical Development Corpora- 
tion of Boston, with excellent expe- 
rience in facilitating critical 
self-examination and providing 
guidance on developing long-range 
plans for nonprofit organizations. 
We anticipate a process that will 
begin this fall and yield a final 
document by May of 2001. 

I thank all the friends of the 
Arboretum whose loyal support and 
generous contributions have given 
us this wonderful opportunity. 


A Visit to Cuba's Cienfuegos 
Botanical Garden 


Peter Del T redid, Director of Lit 

It was my unbelievably good 
fortune to spend eight days this 
August at the Cienfuegos Botani- 
cal Garden in Cuba. My trip was 
sponsored by Harvard University's 
David Rockefeller Center of Latin 
American Studies, which asked 
me to evaluate the current condi- 
tion of the garden and to provide 
the staff with technical assistance 
in garden maintenance and plant 
propagation. 

The garden, which in Harvard 
circles is known as the Atkins 
Garden, was founded in 1899 as a 
partnership between a Boston- 


iug Collect iotn 

based sugarmill owner, Edwin F. 
Atkins, and Harvard University, 
in particular, professors George L. 
Goodale and Oakes Ames. In its 
early days, the garden was chiefly 
devoted to studying plants of 
economic importance (especially 
sugar cane) and was funded 
entirely by Atkins. In 1920, he 
arranged for a long-term lease of 
the garden to Harvard and estab- 
lished an endowment to fund 
research m tropical economic 
botany by Harvard professors and 
students. As well as being inter- 

• continued on page 2 


ELLEN S. BENNETT 


EDITOR 






Staff of the Cientuegos Garden. 



The former Harvard Biological Laboratorv- building. 


• from page I 

csted in economic plants, Atkins 
was deeply interested in trees and 
personally supported the develop- 
ment of an arboretum by sending 
many trees to the garden from 
nurseries in Florida. At the time 
of his death in 1926, the arbore- 
tum was a well-established part of 
the garden. 

When the garden was founded, 
it was only eleven acres in size. 

It grew steadily in size in direct 
proportion to the Atkins family 
interest in the project, eventually 
reaching a maximum of 221 acres 
in 1938. A small laboratory facil- 
ity was built in 1924 (which also 
housed the library) to facilitate the 
research use of the collections. 
Harvard continued to opetate the 
garden until 1961, when the 
Cuban government nationalized 
the Atkins sugar plantation and 
mill and took control of the gar- 
den. They renamed it the 
“Cienfuegos Botanical Garden” 
and placed it under the adminis- 
tration of the Cuban Academy 
of Sciences. 

The first official post- 1961 
contact between the Cienfuegos 
Botanical Garden and Harvard 
University occurred in November 
of last year, thanks to the con- 
certed efforts ol the David 
Rockefeller Center and members 
of the Atkins family. Around the 
time of my visit this past summer, 
a strong e-mail communication 
channel made preparations for the 
trip relatively easy. The current 
director. Dr. Lazaro Ojeda, was 
extremely helpful, and the lateness 
of the hour notwithstanding, was 
at the garden to greet my wife 
Susan (who acted as my translator) 
and me. We lodged in the 
immaculately maintained "Casa 
Catalina,” a dormitory built in 
1938 to house visiting scholars. 
Planting season was in full swing 


while we were there, so we got to 
see the garden in all-out opera- 
tion, including nursery, curatorial, 
and maintenance functions. 
Despite a scarcity of resources 
(especially gasoline), the garden is 
maintained to a high level, and 
new plants are being added con- 
tinuously. The palm collection is 
particularly impressive with about 
267 species in 66 genera growing 
on the grounds. Also noteworthy 
are the collections of bamboo, figs, 
and legumes. 

Just as interesting as the collec- 
tions was our dialogue with the 
staff on a wide variety of issues 


that affect botanical gardens — 
conservation and education as well 
as the more traditional topics of 
maintenance and propagation. My 
wife and I came away with deep 
respect for the staff s dedication to 
their work and with the knowl- 
edge that the garden’s future will 
be bright. Indeed, this coming 
November (perhaps as you are 
reading this article) the 
Cienfuegos Garden, in honor of its 
hundredth anniversary, will be 
hosting a special international 
symposium on "Challenges Facing 
Botanical Gardens in the Twenty- 
First Century.” 


2 


60/2 2000 


Peter Del Tredki Peter Del TredKi 



Arboretum Holds Oldest Franklinias 

Pamela Thomjison, Adult Education Coordinator 


A survey conducted by Historic 
Bartram’s Garden and the John 
Bartram Association reveals that 
the two oldest documented 
Iranklinia trees in the world, dat- 
ing from 1905 , are growing at the 
Arnold Arboretum. These trees, 
known botanically as Franklinia 
alatamaha. are descendants of a 
tree of Bartram’s original collec- 
tion at Historic Bartram’s Garden 
in Philadelphia, which was given 
to the Arboretum in 1884 by 
Philadelphia city councilman 
Thomas Meehan, a former gar- 
dener at Bartram’s Garden. Both 
trees can be found on Chinese 
Path on Bussey Hill. 

In 1 998, as part of a 
tricentennial celebration of bota- 
nist and explorer John Bartram, 
the John Bartram Association 
launched an international 
franklinia census to determine 
how many are growing and where, 
as well as to locate the oldest 
specimens. By May of this year, 
2,046 franklinias were reported 
from 35 states and the District of 
Columbia and 8 foreign countries. 
In New England, Massachusetts 
reported 92 specimens; Connecti- 
cut has 56; Rhode Island, 15; 

New Hampshire, 3; Vermont, 2; 
and Maine, 1. 

Although several people 
reported franklinias thought to be 
about 100 years old (on New 
York’s Long Island, the Connecti- 
cut coastline, and in the Philadel- 
phia area), the Arboretum was 
able to document the age of its 
specimens. That any of these trees 
exist today is due to John Bartram 
and his son William, who first 
discovered the plant in the wild in 
1765 and had the foresight to 
propagate the plant for their gar- 


den and to distribute cuttings. 

The tree has not been found in the 
wild since 1 803. 

Beyond dates and locations 
of trees, the census data create a 
resource for those wishing to grow 
franklinia. To determine the opti- 
mum growing conditions, the sur- 
vey requested information on soil, 
drainage, exposure, and more. The 
consensus is that franklinias favor 
a clay soil with excellent drainage, 
prefer to be situated among other 
plantings in south-facing loca- 
tions, and thrive in sun to part 
shade. Most of the franklinias 
reported are six to ten feet in 
height with a trunk circumference 
of one to five inches. The majority 
range in age from one to ten years 



old. The Arboretum’s largest 
plant is 19.99 feet in height and 
spread and 10.78 inches in diam- 
eter at breast height. 

To find out more about the 
history and availability of the 
franklinia, visit Historic Bartram’s 
Garden at www.libertynet.org/ 
bartram. 



The 2000 Arboretum interns: Standing in rear, Otto Hasilo, Grant Jones, 
Dino Rossi, Andrew Pulte; seated at center, Alice Kitajima, Phil Kopt, 
Andrew Maciaszek, Maria Liszkay, Mary Sullivan; front, Virginia 
Harding, Andrew Heffner, Eva Novoa, Katalin Heja. Not pictured: 

Sheila Rabideaux. 


ARNOLD ARBORETUM NEWS 


3 


KirstmBehn kustm Behn 




New on the Institute for Cultural Landscape Studies Website 
www.icls.harvard.edu/current.htm 


The Future of Farming on Protected Landscapes. This edited version of a roundtable held at the 
Arnold Arboretum prohles discussion participants and their farms, and focuses on preserving the com- 
plex social and economic processes that produce farm landscapes: 

• Land, the Most Visible Farm Asset: Land Protection in a Changing Farm Economy, 
Preserving Farm Regions, Affordability & Property Rights 

• Farm Operations, the “Work” in “Working Landscapes”: Farmer Recruitment & Farm 
Finances, New Farm Markets & Products (including environmental quality & education!) 

• Farmers & Nonfarmers: Farm Neighbors, the Nonfarming Public 

Natural Science and Cultural Landscapes. The Institute is looking for ways to tap into relevant work 
in the natural sciences, particularly ecology. The first items to be posted are talks by Arnold Arboretum 
director Robert E. Cook: 

• Is Landscape Preservation an Oxymoron? 

• Do Landscapes Learn? Ecology's “New Paradigm” and Design in Landscape Architecture 

The site will also explore the changing ways in which scientists have defined an “ecosystem,” the 
tangled history of the far newer term “ecosystem management,” and the broader bistort’ of connections 
(or the lack of them) between science and landscape management. 

w ww.icls.harvard.edu/events.htm 

Check this page for upcoming events sponsored by the Institute and others, as well as for readings and 
publications related to past and upcoming events. Fall 2000 Institute events have included: 

• A session on farmland at the Massachusetts statewide historic preserv’ation conference 

• A series of field walks and talks called Reading the Landscape of New England 

• A free public lecture. Open Space in Boston: Let’s Not Suburbanize From VC'ithin 

To contact the Institute for Cultural Landscape Studies, please leave a message at 617-524-1'^ 18 xl''5 
or email icls@arnarb.harvard.edu. 


Letters of Participation Awarded 

The Arnold Arboretum offers three letters of participation through the adult education program. These 
letters provide students with a focus of study and documentation ol courses taken at the Arboretum. More 
information about the letters of participation is located in the Arboretum's catalog of programs and events. 
Since the fall 1997 issue of Arnold'ta, a number of people have completed the requirements for letters of 
participation. Ciongratulations to each! 

Letters of participation have been earned by: 


'X'oody Plant Propagation 
Paula Berardi 
Robert Cappuccio 
Miriam Hawkes 
Larry Lee Jones 
Susan Lemont 


Temperate Woody Plant 
Materials 

Paula Berardi 
Robert Cappuccio 
Dorick Corbo 
Laura llorky 
Larry Lee Jones 


Historic Landscape 
Preservation 

Linda DesRoches 
Terri Rochon 
Priscilla Williams 
Dale Wfilson 


60/2 200 



New Staff 


Michael Dosmann has joined the 
Arboretum as a Putnam Fellow in 
the living collections department. 
His primary responsibilities will 
be the planting design and selec- 
tion for the new shrub and vine 



garden. He will also participate in 
various projects on the grounds as 
well as pursue his own research 
using the living collections. 

Michael received his bachelor 
of science in public horticulture 
from Purdue University and his 
master of science in horticulture 
from Iowa State University (ISU) 
in 1996 and 1998, respectively. 

As the Garden Club of America’s 
Martin McLaren Fellow for 1998- 
1999 , he worked at the Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew, the Royal 
Botanic Garden Edinburgh, and 
the school of plant science. Uni- 
versity of Reading. He comes to 
us from ISU’s department of hor- 
ticulture where he was employed 
as a research assistant. Michael’s 
interests in horticulture and 
botany span woody plant ecology 
and systematics, and ornamental 
plant selection and evaluation. 
And, like most plantsmen, he 
keeps his eyes open for the rare, 
unusual, and interesting. 


Karen Pinto’s staff assistantship 
will be shared between the admin- 
istration department and the 



Institute for Cultural Landscape 
Studies. She comes to us with 
fourteen years’ experience at 
Harv'ard, in the Graduate School 
of Public Health and Medical 
School; she has also worked in the 
fields of law and human services. 

Nancy Sableski, our new 
children’s education coordinator 
and a Jamaica Plain neighbor, has 



been visiting the Arboretum for 
over twenty years, often to paint 
landscapes. She holds a BFA with 
honors in painting from the Mas- 
sachusetts College of Art and a 
master’s degree from Simmons 
College School of Social Work. 
Nancy became a volunteer school 
guide in the Arboretum’s field 
studies program in April, 1998; 
she was later hired as school pro- 
grams assistant. Most recently, she 
coordinated the Boston Urban 
Gardeners’ education program. 

Her volunteer work now involves 
coordinating the fall “Artists in 


the Arboretum" show for Jamaica 
Plain Open Studios. 

Steve Schneider is the Arboretum’s 
apprentice for 2000-2001. This 
year-long position allows him to 
rotate through the three areas of 
the living collections department: 
curation, greenhouses, and 


grounds. Originally from Quincy, 
Massachusetts, Steve earned his 
bachelor of science in biology 
from Northeastern University in 
May 2000. He is not, however, a 
new face at the Arboretum: he 
spent the summer of 1999 work- 
ing as an intern in the Dana 
Greenhouses. Since graduation, he 
has served as adjunct curator of 
the Northeastern University Her- 
barium, where he also worked as a 
student. He aspires to a career in a 
botanical garden as horticultural 
therapist. 

Two new faces are serving our 
visitors at the Arboretum’s front 
desk. Sonia Brenner and Sandra 
Morgan have joined Sheryl White 
as visitor serv'ices assistants in the 
education department. 

Sonia earned her bachelor of 
arts degree in comparative litera- 
ture from Oberlin College in May 
2000. She spent her junior year at 
the Paris Center for Critical Stud- 
ies and the University of Paris. 
Sonia has taught at a nature 
center in West Virginia, served 



ARNOLD ARBORETUM NEWS 


5 







as an art museum docent in Ohio, 
and most recently served as media 
liaison for a Washington, DC, 
mural project. 

Sandra earned her bachelor of 
science degree in education from 
California University of Pennsyl- 
vania. She taught in the Pitts- 
burgh public school system and at 
the Children’s Place in Boston, 
where she served as lead teacher. 
Sandra recently started an enter- 


prise that provides consulting 
services related to education for 
families and childcare centers. She 



also writes haiku poetry, and 
her first book of poems will be 
published (on her own handmade 
paper) in November. 

Sheryl has increased her hours 
at the front desk to four days a 
week. She earned her BFA and a 
teaching certificate from the Uni- 
versity of Michigan College of 



Architecture and Design. She has 
worked as a freelance graphic 
designer and illustrator, taught 
gardening basics at the Brookline 
Adult Education Center, and 
designed gardens. Sheryl exhibits 
her paintings at a number of ven- 
ues in our region; through January 
4 her work can be seen in a group 
show hosted by the Massachusetts 
Department of Environmental 
Protection in Boston. 



Philip C. Beals SB’42 

Phil and Elaine Beals 

To learn more about how you can support the Arboretum and 
also receive an annual income and tax benefits, please contact: 


Planning for the Future of 
the Arnold Arboretum 

"I have had a life-long interest in gardening, horti- 
culture, and farming, so the Arboretum has been a 
natural draw for me and I would just like to see it 
continue to succeed. 1 truly admire the Arboretum's 
mission of combined research, teaching, and public 
education. The Arboretum is a heartfelt place. It's 
just a joy to visit and I encourage its preservation. To 
support this wonderful institution, I have made a 
planned gift through Harvard and 1 hope others will 
do the same.” 


Christine C. Santos 
Director of Development 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA ()2130-.55()() 

Phone: (617) 524-171S, extension 1 1.3 

Fax: (617) 524-141S 

E-mail: chris_santos(“'’ harvard.edu 


Anne D. McClintock or Brandi M. Sikorski 

Harvard University Planned Giving 

1 24 Mount Auburn Street 

Cambridge, MA 02138-5795 

Phone: (SOO) 446-1277 or (617) 495-4647 

Fax: (617)495-0521 

E-mail : pgofe^harvard .edu 

Web : http:// w w w . haa . harvard . ed u 'pgo 








THE SILVA OF NORTH AMERICA; 

A Description of the Trees which grow naturally in North America, 
exclusive of Mexico. 

By CHARLES SPRAGUE SARGENT, 

Director of the Arnold Arboretum of Harvard University. 

Illustrated with Figures and Analyses drawn from Nature by CHARLES Edward Faxon, and 
engraved by Philibert and FucfeNE Picart. Jn twelve volumes^ quarto^ eaeh containing 
fifty Plates, Price, ^ 2 y.oo each, net. Vol. VI. now ready. 

*• It is one of the most important works of descriptive science which this genera- 
tion has produced .” — New York Tribune. 

“Within its limitations the most important w'ork of its kind that has yet been 
produced .” — The Gardeners' Chronicle (London). 

HOUGHTON, MIFFLIN & CO., Boston. 

II East iTtli St., New York. 


Readers of GARDEN AND FOREST: 

Note Well this ... 

Unprecedented Offer. 

To NEW SUBSCRIBERS the publishers of 

Litteirs Living Age 

will send that magazine aod 

Garden and Forest, 

each one year, for 

S9.00. 

This offer is good only unfit October 15th. 

la remitting mention this advertisement and also date 
of paper. 

“He who subscribes for a few years to L t n ai x’s 
Living Agb, gathers a choice library, even though he 
may have no other books.” — AVw York Observer. 

Published weekly at |8.oo a year. Each Issue con- 
tains 64 pages, or over 3,300 pages a year, forming four 
large octavo volumes of 824 pages each. 

LiTTELL & Co., Publishers, 

P. o. Boac 5206. Boston, Mass. 


®hc ^dcutific ^mcrifaii 

PUBLISHED WEEKLY. 

Subscriptions, Sj.oo a Vear, 

• 1.50 for Six Monttis. 

Bent bjr Mail, prepaid. 

NOTICE TO ADVERTISERS. 

Adveriiaemenle are cbarsed for in Thx SciKNnrtc 
AtctBiOAN aeoordms to tbe space tbej ooonpy. measured in 
aerate tn*o. sot solid. This uotioe is set in solid afate tyjw. 
and shows tbe width of tbe advertiaio^ oolam&k We 
osualb’ count eight words to tbe agate line; foorteen linoe 
to tbe inch. 

Tbe chargee for publication are 76 cents per lice for each 


U.EpiUig^PniitliigCo. 

PHOTO -PROCESSES. 

EltlllED PUTES fOt iU ILMTUIITE FOKPOSEl 
320-322 Pearl Street, 

NEW VORK. 


EDUCATIONAL. 




The LeadingConutnlonf of Amtriia 

Cael Fabltbn, Director. 

FoandtdiD lM3bg 

K, Toorjdo.^ 




"^Seod for Prospectas 
grriog full information. 
Fkanx W. Hals, Genera] Managtr. 


The Cambridge School. A se- 
lect private school for young ladies . 
Fits for Radcliffe and other colleges. 
There are courses for graduates of 
other schools, who do not care to go 
to college. There are two Resi- 
dences. Arthur Gilman, A.M., 
is the Director. 

Cambridge, Massachusetts. 



PHACTICAL. POPULAR. SCIENTIFICALLY EXACT. 



NDISPENS.ABLE to all who 
love gardens or the literature 
of gardens ; to all who own 
country places or take pleasure in 
rural scenery ; to all who desire 
a broader knowledge of trees, 
shrubs, fruits and flowers. Gar- 
den AND Eokest stands for the 
protection of our forests, for the 
preservation of natural beauty, 
for a purer taste in the design 
and decoration of public and pri- 
vate grounds, and is universally 
pronounced the best horticultural 
journal ever published for Ameri- 
cans. 

For the enlightened owners of gardens and 
woodlands this journal is invaluable. — New 
York Tribune. 

Its writers are authorities in their lines and 
the illustrations very artistic. — Spri'n^eld 
Union. 

Its character is at once dignified and 
pleasing, and its contents are scholarly and 
scientific in the exact sense. — Chicago Evening 
foumal. 

It continues on its high level — its highest 
level, for it has no peer. It appeals, as mere 
literature, to every cultivated person, and is 
full of information for the lover of Flowers 
and Trees. — N, Y. Evening Post, 

Its arrival is the coming of a wise and intel- 
ligent and entertaining friend, who enables 
us to live more happily because more harmo- 
niously with nature. — Harper's Weekly. 

The foremost journal of its class, keeping in 
touch with every advance in the scientitic, 
artistic and practical phases of horb'ci Iture 
and arboriculture. — Boston Herald. 


Published weekly. $4.00 a year. 

Hpeclmen copy free on application. 

GARDEN AND FOREST PDBLISHING CO,, 

'Prlbcinw Bcilldlcxs. Nww Yortc. 


iDMrtioo. on tb0 luide of tbe peper ; ...... ^ ...... .w. vwvu 

iuMKioo on the ooteide. or beck pen. 

AdvertUemeots mey be dieplwed ea desired, end eooom- 
penied bx ente. Tbe cbeige will be for tbe epece ectnelly 
oeonpied, et tbe retee per hoe ebove mentioned. 

Cberf ee for edvertieemente ere pegeble in edvanoe, nnlees 
olberwiee epeoieliv errenged. 

“ Raeineee end Fereonel ” Notioea. Cl per line eeob inser- 
tion, eight words (of two txilebiea eeob) to tbe line. 

MUNN A CO., Publishers, 

361 Broadway. New York. 


BACK NUMBERS WANTED. 

Noe. 10, 96. aS. *9. in 3 *. 33 . ?<• 7 ^ 78. Co. 86. 97, 107. 
and Index of 149 of Caeokn and r oaasT. — Addreea, 

GARDEN AND FOREST PUBLISHING CO.. 
New York Ciiy. 



r- • 



10.000 Berberls Tliunbergii. 1*4 to 7 ft. 

50. 000 •• red berried. 2 lo 3 >i ft. 

16.000 •* purple leaved, 3 to ft 

20.000 Backthoms, 3 to 4 ft. 

30.000 California 3 to 3 ft 

10.000 Common Privet, 3 to 6 tt 

6.000 Strong Multiflora aod Sweetbrier Roses. 
Also Althspa, Snowberry, Spiraa, Viburnum, Cornus, 
Wt Lilac. 3 'thomed Acacia, and all Evergreen Hedge 
Plants. Priced Catalogue to any address. 

B. M. WATSON, Old Colony Nurseries 

PLYMOUTH. MASS. 


KODAKS ’r...... 

The lightest and most practical cameras for hand or 
tripod use. An illustrated manual, free with every 
Kodak, tells how to develop and print the pictures. 

Eastman Kodak Company, 


BULBS 


P HLOXES 

PLANTING. PEONIES 

Ellwanser & Barry, kmKteTx'.'": 


N€W MODEL 



Has no 
Equal 
in the 
riarket. 


Our Late*; 
i n d b e s 
Mower Combiri 
improve 
ments of years of ei 
perience and is 
equated for quality ol 
work. Simplicity and dur. 
ability. 


CHADBORN & 
COLDWELLMFQ.CO. 

Newburgh, N. Y. 

'Is Chicago Warcrooms; 


66 & 67 N. Clinton Street. 


Largest Manufacturers of Lawn Mowers in 'he World. 


F ^\ O I ^ ^ perfect remedy for 

Vo III ba MILDEW & BLACK 
ROT on GRAPES, ^Fruits, Plants and Vege- 
tables. 5 -lb. box. soc. ; 35 lbs., is.oo. For* 
warded only by Express ; Cash with order. — 
Sold by C. H. JOOSTEN, 36 Dey Street, New York, 
and Seedsmen. 


THE PARAGON CHESTNUT 

is highly recommended by the leading horticulturists 
of the country. 

Fine young trees tor sale this fall. Address 

H. 91. E9iGLH & S09{. 9farleUa, Pa. 



mr- 


wet 


t amoldh 

The Magazine of the Arnold Arboretum 



4lst YEAR. 1,000 ACRES. 

STORRS & HARRISON CO., Box 


29 GREENHOUSES. 

6, Painesville, Ohio 


JOHN H. JACKSON, Successor to JACKSON BROS. 


Established 1852. 


NEW YORK STATE DRAIN TILE and PIPE WORKS. Main Office, 98 Third Are., Albany, N. Y. 

Manufacturer of and Dealer in Agricultural Drain Tile, Salt 
« ■ «— « dated Sewer Pipe, Red Pressed Brick, Mortar Colors, Fire 

| Q.-T I Lrf ' tI] Brick, Oven Tile, Chimney and Flue Lining. Chimney Tops, 

11 ...-- ^^^= Fire Clay Stove Pipe, Fire Clay, Kaolin, ^caustic Sidewalk 

Tile, Rosendale aod Portland Cement, Lime, Plaster, etc. 


Water-lilies. 

X ] 0\V is the time to plant all the hardy 
varieties of POND LILIES and the 
EGYPTIAN LOTUS, the most stalely of all 
Aquatics and the easiest in cultivation. Plant 
also Japan Iris, Bamboos, Giant Reeds, 
Hardy Grasses, Perennials and sub-aquatic 
plants. Send for catalogue with prices and 
cultural instructions. Selections made for all 
purposes. 

WM. THICKER & CO., Clifton, N. J. 



Ati. DT A Ktrr SHELL for lOe. to the readers of this 
paper; regnlsrpriceSSc. First book is — “ How Wo 
Made the Old Farm Pay.” Second book— “Peach 
Culture.” Third book — ''How to Propatfato Fruit 
Trees, Vines and Plants,” Fonrth — “Green's Frilit 
Instructors” Offer good for ten days only. 


What Shall I Do With It ? 

If you are asking yourself this question relative to the Garden or Grounds which surround your home, 
and wish to improve them during the coming year, write us Get Our Plans and Saggestions. Th^ will 
cost you nothing, and prove of value to you. Hundreds of our customers throughout the country have found 
this to be the case. 

SHADY HILL NURSERY CO., Cambridge, Mass. 


LORD & BDRMAM CO., 

Horticultural Architects and Builders, 

STEAM AND HOT-WATER HEATING ENGINEERS. 

Plans aod Estimates furnished on application. 



Largest Builders of Greenhouse Structures. Six Highest Awards at the World's Fair. 

Send four cents postage for Illustrated Catalogue. 

LORD ^ BURNHAM CO., 

Architectural Office : i6o Fifth Avenue, corner 2 ist Street, New York. 

Factory: Irvington-on-Hudson, New York. 
















FEB 0 6 2001 



CRAY h£il£/;Rlua4 


GARDEN AND FOREST (1888-1897): PART TWO 


Volume 60 • Number 3 • 2000 

Arnoldia (ISSN 004-2633; USPS 866-100) is 
published quarterly by the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Second-class postage paid at 
Boston, Massachusetts. 

Subscriptions are $20.00 per calendar year domestic, 
$25.00 foreign, payable in advance. Single copies of 
most issues are $5.00; the exceptions are 58/4—59/1 
(Metasequoia After Fifty Years) and 54/4 (A Source- 
book of Cultivar Names), which are $10.00. Remit- 
tances may be made in U.S. dollars, by check drawn 
on a U.S. bank; by international money order; or 
by Visa or Mastercard. Send orders, remittances, 
change-of-address notices, and all other subscription- 
related communications to: Circulation Manager, 
Arnoldia, The Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130-3500. 

Telephone 617/524-1718; facsimile 617/524—1418; 
e-mail arnoldia@arnarb.harvard.edu. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to 
Arnoldia Circulation Manager 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA 02130-3500 

Karen Madsen, Editor 
Andy Winther, Designer 

Editorial Committee 
Phyllis Andersen 
Ellen S. Bennett 
Robert E. Cook 
Peter Del Tredici 
Gary Roller 
Stephen A. Spongberg 
Kim E. Tripp 

Copyright © 2001. The President and Fellows of 
Harvard College 

Covers: Advertisements chosen from issues of 
Garden and Forest. 

Inside front cover: A drawing of a California cottage 
covered by a twelve-year-old Noisette rose, published 
m Garden and Forest (1891) as an example of "the 
possibilities of horticulture in that favored region." 

Inside back cover: M. Landers' drawing of an olive 
tree in the Garden of Gethsemane, known as "The 
Tree of Agony" and popularly believed to exceed 
2,000 years of age. Garden and Forest (1888) charac- 
terized it as "a venerable and characteristic specimen 
of a tree which has few rivals in its usefulness to the 
human race, while individually it is one of the best 
known and most interesting trees in the world." 


Page 

2 Garden and Forest’s Journey to Cyberspace 

Lee Ellen Eriedman 

4 Garden and Forest and "Landscape Art" 

Ethan Carr 

6 A View in Central Park (1888) 

8 The Field of Landscape-art (1897) 

Editorial 

9 The Squares of Paris (1888) 

Henry S. Codman 

10 The Plan of the Columbian Fair Grounds (1892) 
Editorials 

12 The Gardens at Monte Carlo (1891) 

Editorial 

14 The Necessity of Planning (1896) 

Charles Eliot 

16 Proposed Plan for Madison Square, New York 
(1896) 

M. G. Van Rensselaer et) correspondents 
20 House at Honmoku in Japan (1888) 

22 Foreign Plants and American Scenery (1888) 
Editorial &> Frederick Law Olmsted 

26 Wayside Beauty (1888) 

27 Park-making as a National Art (1897) 

Editorial 

28 Notes from Garden and Forest 

29 The Influence of Garden and Forest on the 
Development of Horticulture 

Mac Griswold 

30 Horticultural Education (1896) 

Editorial 

33 The Effect of Gardening upon the Mind (1891) 
Editorial 

33 Various Motives for Gardening (1896) 

Editorial 

35 Delights of a Rough Garden (1896) 

D. H. R. Goodale 

35 Farming on Vacant City Lots (1896) 

Editorial 

36 Sentimentalism and Tree-felling (1893) 

Editorial 

37 The Use of Trees and Shrubs with Leaves of 
Abnormal Colors (1897) 

Editorial 

38 Christmas Green (1888) 

Editorial 

39 Plant Notes. Japanese Iris (1888) 

40 New or Little-Known Plants; Xanthoceras 
sorbifolia (1893) 

42 Climbing Plants on Boston Buildings (1894) 
Sylvester Baxter 

44 The Floating Gardens of Mexico (1895) 

Charles H. Coe 

47 Notes from Garden and Eorest 


Garden and Forest's Journey to Cyberspace 


LeeEllen Friedland 


In March 1 888, the first issue of a new periodical, Garden and Forest: A Journal 
of Horticulture, Landscape Art, and Forestry, was received by the Library of 
Congress for copyright deposit. Every week thereafter, until the journal ceased 
publication in December 1 897, subsequent issues of Garden and Forest were 
added to the Library's collection. 


S ince the time of its original publication, 
Garden and Forest has provided readers 
at the Library of Congress — and other 
libraries — a distinctive and invaluable resource. 
Its pages contain a vast array of materials, from 
articles on entomology and pomology to advice 
on ornamental plant gardening to position state- 
ments on forest conservation policy to summa- 
ries of retail flower market prices. Every issue is 
generously illustrated with detailed line draw- 
ings, photographs, and landscape plans. The 
advertisements on the front and back cover 
leaves of each issue serve as a guide to eommer- 
cial products and services of the time, including 
flower pots, seeds and bulbs, tools, glass for 
greenhouses and graperies, horticultural archi- 
tects, nurseries, and gardeners. There are also 
advertisements for periodicals on 
agriculture and literature, and 
even a Pocket Kodak camera 
appropriate for amateur photogra- 
phers who might wish to capture 
"snow-scapes" of "leafless trees 
and ice-bound streams." 

How did Garden and Forest 
journey from the shelves of the 
Library of Congress, where it 
rested safely for a century, to 
cyberspace, where, in December 
1999, it became the first complete 
serial publication digitized by 
the Library and released on the 
Internet? Three intertwining 
paths formed this journey and rep- 
resented a confluence of issues — 


digital technology, historical content value, and 
preservation needs — central to the Library's 
mission. 

The Library of Congress began to explore the 
use of digital technology to create reproductions 
of historical collection materials in 1990. The 
goal of the early pilot program, called "Ameri- 
can Memory," was to "get the champagne out of 
the bottle" in order to share the Library's trea- 
sures with broader audiences.' Most of the col- 
lection materials chosen to be digitized were 
nominated by Library curators, but some project 
ideas arose through other channels. One such 
instance was in response to a generous gift from 
Laurance S. and Mary French Rockefeller to 
fund digital collections about subjects of 
longstanding interest to them: President Calvin 



Journey to Cyberspace 3 


Coolidge and his times and the history of the 
conservation movement in the United States^ 

As work got underway on the digital collec- 
tion to he called "The Evolution of the Conser- 
vation Movement, 1850-1920," Library staff 
were confronted with an embarrassment of 
riches. The Library of Congress has outstanding 
collections in the history of science, especially 
covering eighteenth- and nineteenth-century 

America, and in the 
areas of gardening, 
horticulture, forestry, 
and landscape art. 
Among these riches. 
Garden and Forest 
stood out in several 
ways. In addition to 
primary information 
on scientific topics, it provided a wonderful 
snapshot of the cultural history of the early con- 
servation movement in the United States. A 
striking number of important individuals active 
in the burgeoning conservation movement pub- 
lished in Garden and Forest, and their writing 
spanned the broad range of interests that 
impelled them, including landscape design and 
preservation, national and urban park develop- 
ment, scientific forestry, forest conservation, 
horticulture, and botany. Garden and Forest 
also published the work of a significant number 
of woman authors, an unusual occurrence in 
publications of the time. 

Although interest in Garden and Forest was 
high, technical impediments initially prohib- 
ited its inclusion in the American Memory 
digital collection. Over the next several years, 
some of those impediments lessened, but the 
journal's overall size — almost 9,000 pages — and 
the relative expense to digitize it in its entirety 
remained concerns. The frequent requests 
for Garden and Forest by researchers coming 
to the Library of Congress throughout this 
period, however, reinforced its importance as 
a resource. 

During the time Garden and Forest was being 
considered for digitizing, Library staff noticed 
that its paper showed signs of deterioration, 
including embrittlement. At that time, the 
Library's Preservation Directorate began to 
develop its digital reformatting program to 


provide another option for creating surrogates 
of original materials that might be damaged 
if used by readers. Garden and Forest was 
chosen as the first project for this new approach, 
and since standard procedure in preservation 
reformatting — with older technologies such as 
microfilm as well as new digital technologies — 
is to capture the complete work, there was no 
question that every volume of the serial would 
be digitized in its entirety.^ The Preservation 
digitizing approach also led to two fruitful col- 
laborations for the Library: one with the Univer- 
sity of Michigan, to deliver Garden and Forest 
on the Internet through a collaborative gateway 
that provides access to many nineteenth- 
century periodicals,-^ and one with the Arnold 
Arboretum of Harvard University, to develop 
specialized access aids to the content, including 
background essays and a detailed subject index. 

Since Garden and Forest was released online 
in December 1999, it has had a new and greatly 
expanded life among millions of pages of other 
electronic journals that provide full text access 
over the Internet.^ This has enabled tens of 
thousands of new researchers throughout the 
world, who might never have discovered 
Garden and Forest on a library shelf, to have a 
first-hand glimpse of a critical period in the 
history of the conservation movement in the 
United States and the development of related 
scientific fields. 

Endnotes 

' The American Memory digital collections can be 
viewed at the Library of Congress web site: http:// 
memory.loc.gov/ 

^ See: http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/coolhtml/ 
coolhome.html and http://memory.loc.gov/ammem/ 
amrvhtml/conshome.html 

^ See: http://lcweb.loc.gov/preserv/prd/presdig/ 
presintro.html; http://lcweb.loc.gov/preserv/prd/ 
gardfor/digitizegf.html; and http://lcweb.loc.gov/ 
preserv/prd/presdig/presphase.html 

See: http://lcweb.loc.gov/preserv/prd/gardfor/ 
digitizegf.html 

^ See: http://lcweh.loc.gov/preserv/prd/gardfor/ 
gfhome.html 


LeeEllen Friedland is a Senior Specialist with the 
National Digital Library Program at the Library of 
Congress. 



4 Arnoldia 60/3 



'he avenue of Cypress trees . . . forms the most conspicuous feature of the garaen or tne vuia c^iusa. lu 
f Verona. The villa itself, a Renaissance building, is not of great architectural importance, nor are the gardens 
ery extensive covering, perhaps, an acre and a half of ground. But they are beautifully laid out m the tr 
tahan style, and there is nothing m all Italy finer m its way than this Cypress avenue_ The trees are probably 
ome four hundred years old. and most of them are in fine condition . . . [Garden and Forest 2 11889). 458\ 


Garden and Forest and “Landscape Art" 


Ethan Carr 

L aura Wood Roper notes in her 1973 biog- 
raphy of Frederick Law Olmsted that the 
1890s were years of "staggering reverses" 
for the profession of landscape architecture. Pio- 
neers such as Frederick Law Olmsted and 
Id. W. S. Cleveland retired from practice, while 
the untimely deaths of Henry S. Codman and 
Charles Eliot diminished the next generation.' 
But it was also during this period that a body of 
theory and technical expertise was developed 
and became the basis for training landscape 
architects. What had been a practice, in other 
words, matured into a profession. And much of 
this transition is documented in the pages of 
Garden and Forest. 

Garden and Forest, published from 1888 
through 1897, benefited from an extraordinary 
group of editors and contributors who saw it 
as their best forum for shaping the profession 
of landscape architecture. Correspondents 
included (besides Olmsted, Cleveland, Eliot, 
and Codman) Beatrix Jones (later Farrand), 
Samuel B. Parsons, Charles H. Lowrie, Frank A. 
Waugh, O. C. Simonds, Warren H. Manning, 
Harold A. Caparn, Wilhelm Miller, J. C. 
Olmsted — all leading practitioners of the day. 
Eliot and Codman described European land- 
scapes seen during the travels that had been 
part of their apprenticeship. Others discussed 
specific aspects of technique and practice, for 
example, "The Treatment of Slopes and Banks" 
(J. C. Olmsted), "Park Construction" (Cleve- 
land), and "The Garden in Relation to the 
House" (Farrand).^ The editors Charles Sprague 
Sargent and William A. Stiles published descrip- 
tions of showcase projects including the Boston 
Metropolitan Parks, the World's Columbian 
Exposition in Chicago, and Biltmore, as well as 
plans of smaller but typical residences and gar- 
dens.^ In an era before a professional organiza- 
tion or academic instruction existed in the field 
of landscape architecture. Garden and Forest 
took on aspects of both. 

The magazine did all this, of course, while 
also promoting scientific forestry, botany, horti- 
culture, city planning, and scenic preservation; 


indeed, numerous professions trace their early 
development in part to the influence of Garden 
and Forest. But landscape architecture, which 
aspired to combine planning and design on 
many scales, enjoyed a special status in the 
magazine and influenced its editorial structure. 
Landscape architecture was not limited to the 
"planting of flower-beds and of ornamental 
shrubs," the Garden and Forest editors asserted 
in 1897, but was a "broad and catholic art . . . as 
useful in the preservation of the Yosemite Val- 
ley or the scenery of Niagara as it is in planning 
a pastoral park or the grounds about a country 
house.'"' Descriptions like these summarized 
not only the ambitions of landscape architects, 
but also the editorial goals of Garden and For- 
est. It was the emphasis on landscape architec- 
ture, Stiles felt, that distinguished Garden and 
Forest from "any other garden paper. Stiles 
and Sargent published articles on horticulture 
and "country place" design alongside calls for 
the "Preservation of Natural Scenery" from sub- 
urban Boston to the Sierra Nevada." In the edi- 
torial tradition of Loudon and Downing, readers 
were urged to expand the aesthetic sensibilities 
developed in their own gardens and to become 
advocates for better management of the larger 
landscape, especially of public parks and forests. 

If the practice of landscape architecture 
offered conceptual unity to Garden and Forest, 
the magazine in turn helped define the emerging 
theory of the profession. This was largely due 
to the contributions of the art historian and 
critic Mariana Griswold (Mrs. Schuyler) Van 
Rensselaer, who contributed a total of almost 50 
articles beginning with a seven-part series on 
"Landscape Gardening" in 1888. Already an 
established art critic. Van Rensselaer became 
intrigued with landscape architecture through 
her friendship with the elder Olmsted. In her 
Garden and Forest articles, she set out to define 
landscape architecture as "landscape art," 
which, after architecture, sculpture, and paint- 
ing, constituted the "fourth art" of design.' To 
Olmsted's great satisfaction, she helped estab- 
lish the professional status of landscape archi- 


6 Arnoldia 60/3 



A VIEW IN CENTRAL PARK. 

T he view on this page is taken from a point in the Ramhle in the Central 
Park of this city, looking southward, and including a portion of the Ter- 
race. Of course, it is much more than a picture of the Terrace, hut it clearly 
shows how much this bit of architecture adds to the composition. The distant 
horizon line of trees has an attractiveness of its own. Nearer by are the upper 
Terrace lines contrasting with the masses of foliage above them. Below these 
are the open arches with deeper shadows, then the lower lines of the Terrace, 
the lake shore and the passage of water separating more distinctly the extreme 
distance from the middle distance. All these, with the lines of the shrubbery 
about the little lawn, mark the successive planes of the composition and help 
to bring out the gradations of light and shadow. In the Park the observer would 
enioy in addition the ever varying tints of the sky which would also he 
reflected in the water, while he could look up to and into the leafy framework 
in the foreground forever without exhausting its interest. The illustration is a 
good example of what can be accomplished by framing in a distant object with 
foliage, so as to make a complete and consistent picture, and there is no rea- 
son why such planting as it shows should he confined to public parks. Many a 
lawn could be made the foreground of a picture quite as attractive, and it could 
be graded and planted so as to emphasize the interest and increase the 
pictorial effect of some important object, natural or artificial, and trees could 
be disposed about it so as to concentrate the attention which would otherwise 
he distracted by surrounding objects. 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 30] 


'Landscape Art” 7 


tects by defining their practice as a fine art, 
unlike the craft or trade of gardening.* 

Continuing this essentially Reptonian dis- 
course, Van Rensselaer distinguished landscape 
art from the other fine arts hy observing that it 
"uses the same materials as nature herself."^ 
The landscape gardener (her preferred term) 
"takes from nature not only his models hut his 
materials and his methods." This "partnership 
with Nature" might seem to limit the artist's 
opportunity for self expression, a necessary 
quality of true art. But like the painter or the 
sculptor, the landscape gardener observes nature 
and "re-unites her scattered excellences" in 
artistic compositions that express the whole- 
ness and unity that nature possesses but rarely 
reveals in a single place or view. Nature always 
provides "vitality, light, atmosphere," she 
concluded, and especially "what no other artist 
ever gets — perfection in details." But "composi- 
tion ... is the chief thing in art . . . and the land- 
scape gardener's compositions are and must be 
his own."'° 

Van Rensselaer's contributions in Garden and 
Forest made her a foremost landscape theorist of 
her day, and her ideas would be taught to genera- 
tions of American landscape architects." If 
many of her discussions of nature and art would 
not seem out of place in the late eighteenth cen- 
tury, to a remarkable degree they also antici- 
pated some of today's debates in the fields of 
landscape design and planning. Van Rensselaer 
deplored the naive tendency to assume that 
rural scenery was "natural," for example, when 
it was usually the (often unintended) product of 
generations of cultivation and management. 
Nature and art were rarely mutually exclusive 
in the landscape. Sargent and Stiles adopted this 
theme and criticized the excessive veneration 
of what was assumed to be natural or "wild" 
because it had led to the neglect of "that part of 
the landscape which is necessarily not wild — 
the landscape of our daily lives — the humanized 
scenery of the earth." In words that resonate 
today, they regretted the tendency of people to 
travel "in search of the picturesque while what 
might be the picturesqueness of their own 
neighborhood is unperceived or destroyed."" 

Throughout the pages of Garden and Forest, 
simplistic distinctions between what is 
"nature" and what is "art" were condemned, as 
were dogmatic preferences for either the "natu- 


ral" or the "formal" styles in garden design." 
"Landscape art" encompassed both spheres, 
which is why it offered a unique means for 
improving a broad range of public and private 
environments, from vacation villas to city plans 
and from municipal parks to national reserva- 
tions. Landscape art was necessary in all these 
designs because without it they could never 
achieve the unity inherent in great artistic 
compositions. The "true artist" planned 
landscapes — from gardens to entire cities — by 
first analyzing and recognizing the "characteris- 
tic and salient aspects of the place," in order to 
"work in harmony with them instead of coming 
into conflict with nature."" 

Garden and Forest was dedicated to advanc- 
ing landscape design as a compositional "art," 
inspired by the greater composition and unity of 
"nature" and intended to integrate human soci- 
ety into the larger, natural environment. Land- 
scape architecture was seen as the profession 
that would supply the necessary artists. But 
landscape art was not for art's sake alone. In an 
editorial reflecting the sentiments of the elder 
Olmsted (as was often the case), Sargent and 
Stiles state that "true art is not the servant of 
some temporary fashion, but something that is 
to endure, and must, therefore, have a perma- 
nent basis in the necessities and aspirations of 
human life."" 

Among contemporary landscape projects, 
therefore, none received more attention in the 
pages of Garden and Forest than the Metropoli- 
tan Park Commission's system of suburban 
parks around Boston. Charles Eliot, who first 
proposed the system in an 1890 letter to Garden 
and Forest, was praised as an example of the 
"true artist" needed to successfully direct such 
a project." But the deaths of both Eliot and 
Stiles in 1897, followed soon by the demise of 
Garden and Forest, marked the end of one era 
and the beginning of another. Within three 
years, landscape architects had established their 
own professional organization, the American 
Society of Landscape Architects (1899), and 
instituted the first academic program in the 
field, at Harvard University (1900). The profes- 
sion flourished, bolstered by a growing market 
for "country place" residential design. Whether 
Garden and Forest’s ideals of "landscape art" 
survived as well in the new century, however, is 
an open question. 


8 Arnoldia 60/3 


Endnotes 

' Laura Wood Roper, FLO: A Biography of 
Frederick Law Olmsted (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1973), 475. 

^ Garden and Forest (hereafter, GedF] 1 (1888): 
267, 326-327; 3 (1890): 129; 4 (1891): 184; 10 
1897): 132. 

^ GedF 1 (1888): 508; 6 (1893): 361-362; 8 
(1895): 481-482. 

G&>F 10 (1897): 192. 

^ Quoted in Roper, FLO, 404. 

^ See Ge^f 2(1889): 133; 3 (1890): 257; 7 ( 1894): 
1; 10 (1897): 222. 

^ The articles, as well as at least one GedF 
editorial written by Van Rensselaer (6 (1893): 
1 19-120), became the basis for her book. Art 
Out-of-Doors: Hints on Good Taste in 
Gardening (New York: Charles Scribner's 
Sons, 1893). In 1889, Van Rensselaer began a 
series of G&>F articles on garden history, 
s GedF 1 (1888): 2. 

® The late 18th-century British landscape 
gardener Humphry Repton (who coined the 
term "landscape gardener") was a figure of 
considerable interest to American landscape 
architects in the 1880s. When J. C. Olmsted, 
Eliot, and others began to meet as an 
informal professional society at that time, 
they named their group the "Repton Club." 
Norman T. Newton, Design on the Land: The 
Development of Landscape Architecture 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971), 
386. Also see Humphry Repton, The Art 
of Landscape Gardening, ed. John Nolen 
(Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1907). 

‘0 GedF 1 (1888): 2, 14-15, 27, 38. 

" Art Out-of-Doors was republished in 1925, 
and many of Van Rensselaer's ideas were 
assimilated into Henry V. Hubbard and 
Theodora Kimball's standard textbook. An 
Introduction to the Study of Landscape 
Design (1917; rev. ed.. New York: The 
Macmillan Company, 1929). 

Get)F6 (1893) : 531. 

See Ge)F 1 (1888): 51-52, 481; 7 (1894): 261- 
262, 341-342; 10(1897): 191-192. 

Ge9f 6 (1893): 531. 

>5 Ge9f 9 (1896): 171; see Roper, FLO, 435. 

See Ge)F3 (1890): 85-86; 3 (1890): 109, 117- 
118; 7 (1893): 191. 


Ethan Carr is a landscape architect with the 
National Park Service and the author of 
Wilderness by Design (University of Nebraska 
Press), which received the American Society of 
Landscape Architects' honor award in 1998. 


THE FIELD OF LANDSCAPE-ART. 

W E are constantly asked whether the profes- 
sion of landscape-gardening offers a promis- 
ing field for young men who are looking for some 
calling in life which will be useful and remunera- 
tive. We have always felt obliged to reply that there 
is comparatively small demand for the counsel of 
landscape-gardeners in this country . . . The preva- 
lent idea is that his work is chiefly ornamental and 
that his province is to do about the same thing for 
the surroundings of a house that the decorative 
artist does for its interior when he selects the furni- 
ture, rugs and hangings and decided upon color- 
schemes and the like. That is, after an architect has 
built a house, it is considered proper to call in a 
landscape-gardener to plant some ornamental trees 
and shrubs about it and lay out paths and flower- 
beds in order to beautify the grounds. ... In fact, the 
beauty of the scene, which includes both the house 
and the grounds, should grow up from the general 
design and framework of the house and grounds as a 
place where all the varied necessities of the family 
in the way of health and happiness and home life are 
the first things considered. . . . 

All this means that a landscape-gardener ought to 
be much more than a mere decorative planter. The 
successful designing of public parks or of private 
grounds for daily occupation means first of all the 
study of human wants — the necessities of men and 
women and children of various circumstances and 
conditions. A good artist must be primarily a man of 
sound judgment and he should have a cultivated 
mind, wide sympathies and catholic tastes. Reading 
and travel and scholarship can do for the designer in 
landscape all that they can accomplish for the archi- 
tect. A man may be able to mass a shrubbery effec- 
tively or arrange a border of herbaceous plants with 
skill and yet not have a particle of that profounder 
art which was seen in the grouping of the great 
buildings at the Columbian Exposition, and the 
planning of that Court of Honor which was the 
crowning artistic success of Mr. Olmsted's life. This 
view of the case contemplates an ideal that is rarely 
attained, and it is because the work of real artists in 
this line is rarely seen and still more rarely appreci- 
ated that the very existence of such an art is practi- 
cally ignored or denied. . . . 

(Editorial. Garden and Forest 10 (1897): 161] 


Landscape Art” 9 


THE SQUARES OF PARIS. 

O NE of the best features of the park system of Paris is the number of small 
squares scattered about in the different quarters of the city. The parks 
themselves, especially the larger ones, are at such great distances from the 
crowded centres of population, that the working classes, except on Sundays and 
holidays, seldom have a chance to visit them, so that these squares admirably 
serve the purpose of keeping the children out of the streets, and of allowing the 
poorer people, in the few hours of leisure they have during the week, to get a 
breath of fresh air and a glimpse of green. 

A stranger, on first entering one of them, marvels as he sees how neatly they 
are kept while so thickly crowded with visitors, reading, working or playing. In 
plan they are usually quite simple, as the accompanying diagram will show. A 

broad gravel walk, ten or twelve feet wide, 
following near but separated from the 
boundary by occasional shrubbery planta- 
tions, encloses a quiet piece of lawn suffi- 
ciently open to get a glimpse through to the 
opposite end, but planted on the sides with 
trees, shrubs and foliage plants. 

There are few attempts at fancy garden- 
ing, but much care has been taken to select 
hardy shrubs and plants with the view of 
avoiding bare and empty beds during the winter. The condition of the turf is 
everywhere excellent, for water is freely used, and suitable small playgrounds 
are provided for the children, which serve the purpose of keeping them off the 
grass. These playgrounds, which are an admirable feature, are generally formed 
by simply widening the walks in the corners and planting enough trees there to 
afford ample shade. There are always one or two flower beds, which are kept 
bright and attractive during the spring and summer by a constant succession of 
showy flowering and foliage plants. Permanent seats are provided, but not in suf- 
ficient numbers to accommodate every one, but for a very small sum a chair for 
the whole morning or afternoon can be hired and you can move it about at will. 

The only serious fault in all these squares is the stiff and formal appearance of 
the shrubberies. Almost without exception these plantations are in the form of 
regular figures — circles, ovals or ellipses — and they are always planted on slight 
mounds. These two facts detract very much from any effect of naturalness, and 
it seems a great pity that, when it is so easy to give a varying outline to the 
groups, it has not been done. It would also be an improvement to plant the bor- 
ders of these beds with plants or shrubs of low, half trailing habit, and thus, in a 
measure, hide the sharp, stiff outline between the turf and the dug ground of the 
bed ... in Paris there are no less than seventy breathing places, not counting 
the boulevards and other tree-planted streets. They are usually most attractive 
spots and teach a lesson which might very well be copied in many of the crowded 
cities of our country. 



Paris. 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 267] 


Henry S. Codman 



REFERENCES 

r ARIZONA. 
i.ARHANSAS. 

3. CALirORNIA. 

N. COLORADO. 

5. CONN€CTICUT. 

6. DEIAY{AR£. 


7. FLORIDA /g/ / 

8 . GEORGIA g! i 

reNBESSCE iALA BAHIA M 
9. WAHO. 

10 INDIANA, 

II.IOWA. 

H. KANSAS. 

15. KENTUCKY. 

IV. LOUISIANA. 

15. MAINE. 

16. MASSACHUSETTS. 

IT. MARYLAND. 

IS. MICHIGAN 
\l9. MINNESOTA. 

MISSISSIPPI. 

II . MISSOURI. 

??, MONTANA. 

?i. NEBRASKA 
NEKA DA. 

£5. NEW HAMSHIRE 

26. NEW JERSEY. 

27. WYOMING. 

\i%. NEW YORK , 

\V> . N. DAKOTA. £ 

\S0 N CAROLINA. M 

XS'.OHIO Ef/j. 

c/M 

I 33. PENNSYyan/A. M/g/i 
\\yi. RHODE ISLAND mg/ / 
\55.S. CAROLINA. /W/-^ 
^H.S. DAKOTA * ' ! 

37.7f7t/S. // 

33. UTAH / 

39. VERMONT. ^ 

W. VIRGINIA 
VI. WASHINGTON , 

\ Vi. W VIRGINIA / 

V?. WISCONSIN /< 

NEW MEXICO j 


if PARADE 


M 




A , great BRITAIN 

a. MEXICO 

C. GERMANY. 

D. ECUADOR. • 

E. GUATEMALA. 

F. COSTA RICA 

G. JAPAN. 


H . AROENT/NC /tEP{/Birc<^' 
/ , SRAHL RIO. 

J. COLOMBIA. 

H. CHILI,, 


STEAMBOAT 




// nw ^ If 

WORLD'S COLUMBIAN EXPOSITION 

GENER-.\L PI..-\N 


MCTACV 


Plan of the Columbian Exposition in Chicago, April 1892, by F. L. Olmsted & Co. 


J i/Y 



“Landscape Art” 11 


THE PLAN OF THE COLUMBIAN FAIR GROUNDS. 

M ore than twenty years ago a design was prepared by Messrs. Olmsted, Vaux 
iSt Co. for laying out three tracts of land which were known together as South 
Park, Chicago. One of these tracts is now Jackson Park, the site of the Columbian 
Exposition. Among the striking features of this plot of land, as pointed out in the 
report accompanying the plan alluded to, was its long frontage on the lake, which, in 
the opinion of the designers, added an element of such grandeur and sublimity that it 
compensated for the absence of picturesque elevations of surface, while at the same 
time it provided means of transportation by water from the city, whose business 
centre was some seven miles away . . . Visitors who come by rail would pass through 
the arches of this stately structure [the Administration Building, the loftiest and most 
strictly monumental building on the grounds] into the quadrangle, where their first 
impressions of the Exhibition will be received. A glance at the map will explain to 
some extent this arrangement and the magnitude of the scale upon which the whole 
idea is worked out will be understood when it is remembered that the basin contains 
nearly nine acres of water. 

This plan of ushering visitors into the grounds through a porch of such dignity and 
into a court surrounded by architectural splendors, instead of letting them in through 
some side-entrance, so to speak, seems to us one of the finest inspirations of the 
design. No group of buildings approaching these in magnitude or of equal ambition 
in design, and related to each other so intimately, has ever been constructed in the 
entire history of architecture, and while the designers of the separate buildings have 
been allowed certain liberties as to details of expression they have worked together 
in perfect sympathy to secure a single consistent and harmonious effect . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 5(1892): 289] 

In the throng who witnessed on Monday the Columbian Exposition few probably 
realized that the harmony of the scene and the perfection and convenience of the 
whole scheme of arrangement were due to the genius of one man, Frederick Law 
Olmsted. Many others have brought to this great enterprise their gifts of labor, devo- 
tion, artistic training and the enthusiasm born of a great opportunity, but the spark 
of genius which has produced a single and consistent work of art, changing the sandy 
and uninviting waste of Jackson Park into a marvel of stately beauty, sprung from his 
brain. Of this the world may still be ignorant, but his associates realize and proclaim 
it; and the architects, sculptors and painters who have been inspired to their sincerest 
efforts feel that their work serves a nobler purpose, because the labor of each contrib- 
uted to the harmonious development and expression of his comprehensive idea . . . 

The foremost artist which the New World has yet produced, Mr. Olmsted, has been 
singularly fortunate in impressing himself during his own life upon his time and 
people, and in living to see with his own eyes the development and perfection of his 
greatest conceptions. The memory of his name and personality may be dimmed in the 
passage of years, for it is the fate of architects to be lost in their work, but millions of 
people now unborn will find rest and refreshment in the contemplation of smiling 
landscapes which he has made, and will enjoy the shade of trees which he has planted. 
No American has been more useful in his time or has made a more valuable and 
lasting contribution to civilization in this country. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 6 (1893): 192] 


12 Arnoldia 60/3 



THE GARDENS AT MONTE CARLO. 

M any are the sins that have been committed in the laying out and huild 
ing of American towns, but the greatest of all, perhaps, has been the 
neglect or defacement of their water-fronts. Whether the adjacent water is ocean 
or great river, lake or little stream, we seldom see its shores turned to the best 
advantage, and often they present a more deplorable aspect than any other part 
of the town. In New York tumbledown, malodorous, muddy wharfs, flanked by 
streets which are frequently pools of water, line a shore that ought to be encircled 
by well-built, well-kept piers, and even the precious little expanse of Battery Park 
is daily threatened with curtailment; in Boston the back yards of Beacon Street 
houses lie along the wide estuary where a stately, tree-bordered esplanade should 


The Gardens at Monte Carlo. 

have stretched; and the river or brook which intersects a country town is most 
often edged by rickety sheds or fringed with ragged weeds, and is spanned by 
bridges as perishable as they are ugly. Of late years public attention has, indeed, 
been directed to the subject of water-fronts, and much has been done to secure 
them, in the outskirts of great cities, against the disfigurement that has over- 
taken them in portions already built. The parks at Chicago have been laid out 
with a wise sense of the value of the lake-frontage. Boston has claimed for simi- 
lar purposes certain stretches of the Back Bay Shore, and New York has con- 
structed Riverside Drive and bought the water-front near Pelham. But there is 
need that more should be done in this direction and that we should learn from 
older countries the art of beautifying the water-fronts we are beginning at least 
to reserve. All foreign countries are full of examples of this art, whether it has 
been employed merely to dignify reaches of shore that must be put to commer- 
cial use or to create ornamental promenades and gardens. The quays at Antwerp 


“Landscape Alt" 13 


are as good in their more prosaic way as the Thames Embankment in London. 
The Elbe at Dresden is not defaced by the structures that line its banks, though 
they are not all terraced promenades, but include steamboat-landings, private 
grounds, hotels and restaurants. At Rouen the chief hotels look out on a river 
crowded with shipping, yet look on a scene devoid of squalor or architectural 
meanness. At Lyons the great stream rushes between close-pressed ranks of tall 
buildings, yet a fine drive runs by it in many places, and everywhere the shore 
is agreeable to look upon. At Prague there is a truly magnificent series of wide 
esplanades upon which some of the finest buildings in the city have been placed, 
and a succession of bridges where the newest wrought-iron span does not seem 
out of artistic keeping with the famous great stone bridge which, until some of 
its arches were swept away last summer, had stood intact since medieval times. 
And so one might pass from land to land and town to town, only to find that 
everywhere the water-front is valued and everywhere is intelligently treated, 
with parks or avenues if possible, and if not, at least with respectable buildings 
and cleanly shores. 

The picture we give [above] shows a peculiarly charming treatment of a water- 
front. As possessing the only public gaming-house still open in Europe, Monaco 
would in any case attract a multitude of visitors. But its development would 
never have been so great, and it would never have drawn thousands of tourists 
who do not come for the sake of gaming, had its situation not been so marvel- 
ously beautiful. The town itself, and the promontory of Monte Carlo where the 
Casino stands, overlook from their rocky heights the vast blue expanse of the 
Mediterranean, and the gift of nature has been sedulously enhanced by the intel- 
ligence of man. The drives along the cliff-edge are admirably planned, and, like 
the Casino gardens, show what may be achieved when architecture and horticul- 
ture are combined by an artistic hand. Monsieur Edouard Andre, the famous 
French landscape-gardener, never did a better piece of work than here, and the 
effect of his planting has been increased by the skill of gardeners who have caused 
Palms and other exotic plants to grow with extraordinary luxuriance. The treat- 
ment is somewhat formal, as befits the neighborhood of stately buildings and the 
presence of perpetual crowds of visitors. But there is no monotonous regularity 
in the arrangement either of the terraces and balustrades or of the sub-tropical 
plants which give such a singular charm to the spot in the eyes of travelers fresh 
from the wintry north. We can imagine what such a shore would be were this an 
American watering-place. It would doubtless not be given up to utter neglect and 
dishevelment, but a wooden paling would probably replace the marble balus- 
trade, board walks the gravel slopes and marble steps, badly chosen trees in 
inharmonious variety the orderly avenue, and a stretch of Coleus-beds the beau- 
tifully grouped shrubbery. Of course, the exact treatment appropriate at Monaco 
would not be appropriate in a northern American watering-place,- but something 
of the same orderliness, dignity and beauty ought to be secured far more often 
than it is. And while, in American country places, picturesqueness, rather than 
symmetrical stateliness, is usually appropriate, there are cases where it would be 
better to try for the more formal architectural charm which distinguishes the 
Casino gardens at Monte Carlo. 

[Garden and Forest 4 (1891): 194] 


14 Arnoldia 60/3 


THE NECESSITY OF PLANNING. 

T he daily work of the architect and the landscape-architect is popularly sup- 
posed to consist in ornamenting lands and buildings so as to make them 
appear beautiful. Rooms may be inconveniently and awkwardly shaped, but they 
can be "beautified" by rich furniture and upholstery. Whole buildings may be 
irrationally planned, but they may still be made "artistic" by means of mould- 
ings, carvings and mosaic. House and grounds and college grounds, private gar- 
dens and public parks may be senselessly, as well as ineffectively, arranged, but 
they may still be glorified by yellow and purple leafage. In short, "The world is 
still deceived with ornament." 

On the other hand, although all seekers for the truth concerning beauty have 
discerned elements which defy analysis, such special students have nevertheless 
deduced from the visible and historical facts a whole series of fixed principles, 
which are quite as surely established as any of the other so-called laws of nature. 
Among these, perhaps, the most important is this, that "in all the arts which 
serve the use, convenience, or comfort of man, from gardening and building down 
to the designing of the humblest utensil which it is desired to make beautiful, 
utility and fitness for intended purpose must be first considered." It is to be 
remembered that this is not theory but law. As a matter of fact and experience 
satisfying beauty is not won unless the law of nature is obeyed. 

That faithful and well-reasoned planning for the accomplishment of purpose 
is necessary to the success of the work of architects of buildings is now generally 
understood. "A plan" is a skillful combination of convenience with effectiveness 
of arrangement. "A design" is made up of plan, construction and outward appear- 
ance, and by no means consists of the latter only. Indeed, the external aspect 
of a structure depends directly on the mode of construction, the construction 
depends, in turn, on the plan, and the plan on the purpose in view; with the 
result that the whole appearance of the building inevitably and naturally 
expresses this purpose. 

If it be true that expression, character, and even beauty are thus most surely 
won, in the case of buildings, by keeping decoration subsidiary and designing 
with purpose in view from the start, it is equally true of all the wide field of 
architecture, using the word in its broadest imaginable sense. "Architecture, a 
great subject, truly," says William Morris, "for it embraces the consideration of 
the whole of the external surroundings of the life of man; we cannot escape from 
it if we would, for it means the moulding and altering to human needs of the very 
face of the earth itself." A busy pasture or a smooth green field in forest-clad New 
England is as truly a product of human handiwork as a green meadow in treeless 
and dusty Utah, yet each is beautiful, and neither owes a particle of its beauty to 
decoration. The English deer-park, with its broad-spreading trees, or the church- 
yard, with its ancient stones and yews, the typical Yankee farm with its low 
buildings and great Elm, or the Live Oaks and quaint structures of the plantations 
of Louisiana, these and all similarly interesting landscapes are interesting, not 
because they have been decorated, but because they are strongly characterized 
and highly expressive. Their moving beauty is the natural product of straightfor- 
ward work for the adaptation of land and landscape to human needs and uses. 


“Landscape Art 


15 


Believing these things, it will he impossible for us, when a tract of land is 
newly dedicated to some special purpose, be it that of a suburban lot, a railroad- 
station yard, a new village, a country-seat or a public park, to stand by and see it 
thoughtlessly laid out and then, perhaps, turned over to the decorators. We shall 
insist on premeditation and careful fundamental planning, knowing that therein 
lies the best, if not the only, hope of happy results. Once possessed of faith in that 
law of nature in accordance with which beauty springs from fitness, we shall be 
ready to agree that, when purpose is served, formal gardens, rectilinear avenues 
and courts of honor are not only permitted, but commanded. On the other hand, 
we shall be equally strenuous in demanding studied planning and adaptation to 
environment and purpose in the laying out of whatever work may need to be 
done to make the wildest place of private or public resort accessible and enjoy- 
able. Positive injury to the landscape of such places can be avoided only by pains- 
taking, while the available resources of scenery can be economized only be 
careful devising. So with the whole range of problems which lie between these 
extremes. No work of man is ever successfully accomplished without taking 
thought beforehand; in other words, without planning. 

And, strange as it may appear, opposition to such planning for effective results 
will not, in practice, be found to come from those who attempt decoration only 
because they know not how else to attain to the beautiful, fust as the literary 
class in China ruinously opposes change of any kind, so there is with us a com- 
paratively small, but influential, body of refined persons, far too well educated 
to be "deceived by ornament," who most unfortunately, though unintentionally, 
assist in the triumphs of ugliness by blindly opposing all attempts to adapt land 
and landscape to changed or new requirements. Enjoying the pleasanter scenery 
of their surroundings as it exists — certain shady roads, or some lingering fields 
or farm-lands — these estimable people talk of "letting Nature alone" or "keep- 
ing Nature natural," as if such a thing were possible in a world which was made 
for man. No, the "moulding and altering" of the earth goes forward of necessity, 
and if those who ought to be leaders will not help to guide the world aright, the 
work will surely be done badly; as it is, in fact, done badly in the neighborhood 
of all our great towns. To refuse to exercise foresight and to adapt to purpose in 
due season, is simply to court disaster. Instead of hanging back, it ought to be the 
pride and pleasure of these very people to see to it that proper plans are season- 
ably laid for the widening of roads so that fine trees shall not be sacrificed, to see 
to it that electric-car tracks shall be placed only in suitably selected and specially 
arranged streets, that public reservations of one type or another shall be provided 
in accordance with some consistent general scheme, and that such reservations 
shall be saved from both decorative and haphazard development by the early 
adoption of rational and comprehensive plans. There is needed a little less 
selfish contentment in the doomed landscape of the present, a sharper sense of 
responsibility to the future and a living faith in that law of God, in obedience to 
which everything which is well adapted to use and purpose is sure to be interest- 
ing and expressive, and if not beautiful, at least on the way to be. 

Brookline, Mass. Charles Eliot 

[Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 342] 


1 6 Arnoldia 60/3 


PROPOSED PLAN FOR MADISON SQUARE, 

NEW YORK CITY. 

. . . SIXTY years ago few buildings, except rural ones, stood north of Union 
Square, and the area now called Madison Square was an open tract some ten 
acres in extent in the centre of which stood a House of Refuge for unruly 
boys — an altogether neglected and unsightly tract, of which the only use- 
ful feature was a little pond used for skating in the winter. When the House 
of Refuge burned in 1839, efforts were made to improve the place, but noth- 
ing substantial was accomplished until the mayoralty of lames Harper, 
between the years 1844 and 1847. This was some ten years before Central 
Park was thought of, and although Downing had already done some of his 
best work, he had not yet laid out those urban squares in Washington which 
first showed American eyes what might be accomplished in this direction. 

When studied on paper the plan of Madison Square shows the working 
of design, not of accident; yet its treatment is so petty and monotonous, so 



Fig. 18 — Present Arrangement of Madison Square, Fig. 19 — Suggestion for the Improvement of Madison 
New York. Square, by E. Hamilton Bell and Daniel W. Langton. 


“Landscape Art” 17 


wanting alike in broad unity, in effective variety and in conspicuous points 
of interest, that, we believe, few New Yorkers realize that it has any plan 
at all . . . The one virtue of the design is that those who wish to cross the 
park diagonally may do so with reasonable directness. And its chief defect 
is that its many minor paths cut up its lawns so pitilessly that the eye 
nowhere rests upon a quiet, reposeful stretch of green. 

Truly naturalistic schemes of park design are, of course, more difficult 
to manage well on a small than on a large scale; and they are not as appro- 
priate as others when the architectural surroundings of the pleasure-ground 
are of an obtrusively urban sort. Therefore, Messrs. Bell &. Langton have 
sensibly conceived their rearrangement of Madison Square upon semi- 
formal lines. It may appear that in drawing their main paths anew they 
have made diagonal circulation less direct,- hut measurements show that, 
if anything, they have shortened the diagonal courses. By suppressing the 
minor paths they have won space for wide lawns. Yet the accommodation 
for strollers and for playing children, and for rows of seats as well, which is 
lost in this way, is more than made good by the broad mall which forms 
the central feature of their design, the two parallel paths which lie beyond 
its flanking flower-beds, and the large open circles which surround the 
basin that now exists, and the one which they indicate as balancing it 
toward the north . . . 

(The plan] is published here less with the idea that Madison Square may 
actually be renovated according to its indications than in the belief that a 
comparison of it with the existing state of the Square will be instructive to 
those charged with the arrangement of new small parks in this and other 
cities ... As a rule, a formal or semi-formal manner of treatment, resulting 
in a pleasure-ground which is properly to be called a large garden rather 
than a park, must be most appropriate for restricted areas in the heart of a 
great city. And Messrs. Bell & Langton show that such a manner of treat- 
ment need not exclude variety in design, abundance of shade, the reposeful 
effect of wide green lawns, or even such seemingly unstudied, yet artistic, 
arrangements of trees, shrubs and grass as may produce pleasingly natural- 
istic impressions and illusions. 

New York City. M. G. Van Rensselaer 

[Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 143] 

CORRESPONDENCE. 

The Plans of Madison Square. 

To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir, — All persons interested in park-making will certainly be grateful for 
the two plans of Madison Square in your last issue and the study of their 
comparative merits by Mrs. Van Rensselaer. Perhaps still further discussion 
may be helpful, and I therefore write to say that it is hardly correct to 
classify the old plan as belonging to the naturalistic class. I draw a heavy 
line (see fig. 22) to show how symmetrical it is except where it has been 


18 Arnoldia 60/3 




distorted in two or three places. Curved lines are not necessarily natural. 
Of course, the building (C) ought to be less conspicuous than it is, and the 
revised plan corrects this. Plainly, too, the statues are introductions of a 
later date, and the original designer is not responsible for placing them 
where they are. They might be well removed to the points (NN). If this were 
done I do not discover any great superiority in the proposed plan over the 
old one. The area is so small that the insertion of a bit of rectangular treat- 
ment surrounded by a curvilinear treatment seems incongruous. Nor is it 
large enough for a "variety of design, abundance of shade, an effect of wide 
green lawns with seemingly unstudied, yet artistic, arrangement of trees, 
shrubs and grass, which produce pleasingly naturalistic impressions and 
illusions." An attempt to accomplish all this in so contracted a space must 
result in confusion. Let us have symmetry where this is needed, but curvi- 
linear symmetry and rectangular symmetry ought not to be mixed up in so 
small a place . . . Altogether, if there could he some rearrangement in the 
planting to make the symmetry of the present plan more evident, it strikes 
me as better than the new ones . . . Messrs. Bell & Langton have been 


“Landscape Art” 19 


hampered by their efforts to save standing trees, so that they were allowed 
very little freedom of treatment, and it is not fair to criticise their plan as 
an original work. 

New York City. S.A. 


To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir, — I observe that in both plans of Madison Square, published in your 
issue for April 8th, the paths which converge at the circles are very inaccu- 
rately centered — that is, the axes of the paths do not point to the centres of 
the circle, and if the designs were executed as shown on the map the result 
would be disastrous. This, however, may be simply carelessness on the part 
of the draughtsman. I should add that both plans ought to show great seat- 
ing capacity. Seats ought to be recessed so that the feet of those using them 
will not be in the way of pedestrians, because the paths as wide as those in 
the plans give no more than the necessary walking space. 

New York L.G.S. 

[Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 158-159] 

Madison Square Again 

To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir, — Your correspondent, S. A. . . . criticises the plan of Madison Square 
of Messrs. Bell & Langton because the centre of the park is formalized. I 
think the criticism just. He points out the symmetrical arrangement of 
paths as they exist, and says that the place is too small to contain formal as 
well as naturalistic effects. A seven-acre piece of ground is certainly too 
small for effects of wide green lawns if the centre is taken up with a recti- 
linear scheme covering more than an acre and a half. But seven acres are 
enough for naturalistic effects of respectable extent. Your correspondents 
(right, as I think) agree that formal features are desirable in a park of this 
kind. 1 do not believe, however, in the value of "symmetry" in lines of 
travel on a place of this size. This symmetry is not very obvious even on 
paper until emphasized by black lines, and it might be apparent to an 
observer hovering over it in a balloon. But how shall one who strolls into 
the square know that the path in which he walks is balanced by a similar 
on the other side? Artists in landscape too often forget that their paper 
plans are deceptive. Cannot effects of wide green lawns, abundance of 
shade and so forth be combined in seven acres with the popular formal 
effects? I think they can by relegating the formal design to a part of the 
ground where it will not interfere with the appearance of size. I enclose a 
design as a suggestion . . . 

BB are the statues, C the kiosk, A the Farragut monument . . . 

Pittsburg, PA. H. A. Caparn 

[Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 178] 


20 Arnoldio 60/3 



HOUSE AT HONMOKU IN JAPAN. 

T he photograph from which our illustration was drawn seemed to us of 
especial interest as displaying a Japanese solution of a problem very similar 
to that which often confronts a builder on the rocky shores of New England, 
especially north of Cape Cod, and on the borders of many of our inland lakes. 
This problem is to place a country-house on a rugged shore to the best advantage, 
while preserving, as far as possible, the natural character of the spot. It is only of 
very recent years that it has been so much as considered in this country. We have 
been much too anxious to imitate, under wholly different conditions, the coun- 
try homes of Europe, and, in particular, of England. We have wanted to surround 
our houses with green lawns, well-kept flower-beds and trees symmetrical in 
shape and planted in accordance with the supposed laws of landscape gardening 
as practiced in countries all parts of which have long been subjected to cultiva- 
tion. And we have too often tried to secure all this in actual defiance of natural 
conditions, and at the sacrifice of natural beauties which, to a really cultivated 
eye, would have seemed of priceless value. We have too often sacrificed the 
chance for a beautiful, wide outlook over the water by placing the house so far 
from the brink that lawns and drives eould encircle it; have cut away the native 
growth of tree and shrubs — rough and straggling, perhaps, but picturesque and 
precious for that very reason — and replaced them by nursery specimens,- have 
planted gardeners' flowers in the stead of nature's beautiful wild products, and in 




Landscape Art 


21 


the end, after a vast expenditure of time, pains and money, have succeeded in 
producing merely a had imitation of an English villa, unattractive in itself, and 
utterly out of keeping with the landscape environing it. 

Fortunately, tastes are changing, and one of the chief facts to he placed to the 
credit of the architectural profession in America to-day is the fact that it has 
developed a keen sense for the diverse natural beauties of our country, and an 
admirable power of adapting its constructions to the site and the surroundings at 
the moment in question. It is getting to be recognized as a binding aesthetic rule 
that a house shall conform itself to site and surroundings, and that these shall 
not be defaced to suit the character of a design abstractly evolved on paper, or 
tortured into the semblance of something which foreign hands had created 
under very different conditions. Many American homes exist, built within the 
last ten years, which are as worthy of praise from the point of view of appropri- 
ateness and picturesque charm as the Japanese house in our present picture ... It 
will be noted that this house is placed quite at the edge of the cliff, so that the 
most extended possible view is obtained; that every tree which could be pre- 
served in building it has been preserved; that the wild aspect of the spot has not 
been interfered with, and that the construction of man, alike in the house itself, 
and in the fences, steps and other surroundings, have been kept as simple and 
unobtrusive as possible. Picturesqueness is not the only quality to be prized, 
either in architectural or in gardening art; and it is a quality which, if forced into 
life where it does not naturally belong, is distressing to every cultivated eye. But 
when nature gives us picturesqueness in so clear and pronounced a form as here, 
the architect must accept her leading or ruin the effect both of her work and of 
his own. And spots quite as distinctively picturesque as this, and very similar in 
character, abound, as we have said, in many parts of our pine-grown, rocky 
coasts, and demand analogous architectural treatment. Naturally, to advise direct 
imitation of a Japanese house in America is no part of our desire, yet it may be 
said that the general architectural idea embodied in this house is far better fitted 
to adaptation in this country than most of those European models upon which 
we have so largely drawn in the past. 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 314-315, 319] 


Each of us is constituted with a special idiosyncrasy related in some mysteri- 
ous way to certain ideas of natural scenery, and when we find ourselves in a scene 
answering to our idiosyncrasy the mind feels itself at home there and rapidly 
attaches itself by affection. The influence of scenery upon happiness is far greater 
than is generally believed. There is a nostalgia which is not exactly a longing for 
one's birthplace, but a weary dissatisfaction with the nature that lies around us, 
and a hopeless desire for the nature that we were born to enjoy. 

— Philip Gilbert Hamerton. 

A sunset, a forest, a snow-storm, a certain river-view, are more to me than 
many friends, and do ordinarily divide my days with my books. 


— Emerson. 


22 Arnoldia 60/3 


FOREIGN PLANTS AND AMERICAN SCENERY. 

I T is not easy to explain why certain plants look distinctly in place in certain 
situations and why other plants look as distinctly out of place in the same situ- 
ations. This is a matter which nature perhaps has settled for us. It is certain at 
any rate that combinations of plants other than those which nature makes or 
adopts, inevitably possess inharmonious elements which no amount of familiar- 
ity can ever quite reconcile to the educated eye. Examples of what we wish to 
explain abound in all our public parks, and especially in Prospect Park in Brook- 
lyn, where there is more of nature than in any other great park, and where along 
the borders of some of the natural woods and in connection with native shrub- 
bery great masses of garden shrubs, Diervillas, Philadelphus, Deutzias, Forsythias 
and Lilacs, have been inserted. These are all beautiful plants. They never seem 
out of place in a garden,- but the moment they are placed in contact with our wild 
plants growing naturally as they do, fortunately, in the Brooklyn park, they look 
not only out of place, but are a positive injury to the scene. It is not that their 
flowers are too showy or conspicuous for such positions. The flowers of some 
native shrubs like the Elder, the Flowering Dogwood and the Viburnums, are as 
showy as those of any garden shrub. The reason is rather that we have become 
accustomed to see certain plants adapted by nature to fill certain positions in 
combination with certain other plants in a given region; and that all attempts to 
force nature, so to speak, by bringing in alien elements from remote continents 
and climates, must inevitably produce inharmonious results. Landscape garden- 
ers have rarely paid much attention to this subject, or sufficiently studied nature 
with reference to the harmonious combination of plants in the construction of 
scenery, and especially of scenery intended to produce upon the mind the idea 
of repose. Nature, nevertheless, is the great teacher to which the artist who 
would hope to imitate her, however crudely, must ever turn for instruction 
and for inspiration. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 266] 


To the Editor of Garden and Forest: 

Sir. — In Garden and Forest of August 1st, page 266, the law seems to me to 
have been laid down that the introduction of foreign plants in our scenery is 
destructive of landscape repose and harmony. No exception was suggested, and 
the word harmony was used, if I am not mistaken, as it commonly is in criticism 
of landscape painting, not of matters of scientific interest; not as if the question 
were one of what, in matters of literary criticism, is called "the unities." 

That a fashion of planting far-fetched trees with little discrimination has led 
to deplorable results, no good observer can doubt. That these results are of such 
a character that we should, from horror of them, be led, as a rule, in our landscape 
planting, to taboo all trees coming from over sea, many of your readers will not, 
I am sure, be ready to admit, and if no one else has yet offered to say why, I will 
ask you to let me assume that duty. 

Suppose anywhere in our Northern Atlantic States an abandoned clearing, 
such as in Virginia is called an "old-field;" — suppose it to be bordered by the 
aboriginal forest, with such brushwood as is natural to its glades and skirts strag- 
gling out upon the open; — suppose that mixing with this there is a more recent. 


“Landscape Art 


23 


yet well advanced growth of trees and bushes sprung from seed, of which a part 
has drifted from the forest, a part from a neighboring abandoned homestead, 
while a part has been brought by birds from distant gardens, so that along with 
the natives, there is a remarkable variety of trees and bushes of foreign ances- 
trv’; — suppose a road through more open parts of the old-field, and that on this 
road a man is passing who, having lately come from New Zealand (or the moon), 
know's nothing of the vegetation of Europe, Asia or North America, yet has a good 
eye and susceptibility to the influences of scener>'. 

Now suppose, lastly, that this man is asked to point out, one after another, so 
that a list can be made, trees and bushes in an order that will represent the 
degree in which they appear to him to have an aspect of distinctiveness,- No. 1 
being that which stands out from among the others as the most of all incongru- 
ous, unblending, unassimilating, inharmonious and apparently exotic; No. 2 the 
next so, and so on. 

The question, as we understand it, is essentially this: Would all of the trees 
and bushes that had come of a foreign ancestry be noted before any of the old 
native Stock- 

Some of them surely would stand high on the list, and some of much popular- 
ity, such as Horse Chestnut and Ginkgo and numerous sports of trees in them- 
selves, at least, less objectionable on this score, as, for example. Weeping Beech 
and most of the more pronounced weepers,- most of the Japanese Maples, also, 
and the dwarf, motley-hued and monstrous sorts of Conifers. 

But, all? or, as a rule, with unimportant exceptions? So far from it, to our eyes, 
that we doubt whether, even of different species of the same genus, the visitor 
would not point out some of the native before some of the foreign — some of the 
American Magnolias, for example, before any of the Asiatic. We doubt if the 
European Red Bud, the Oriental Plane or the Chinese Wistaria (out of bloom) 
would be selected before their American cousins. It appears to us that Rubus 
odoratus would be noticed before Rubus tiuticosus. Passing from the nearer rela- 
tives, it seems to us likely, also, that many of the European and Asiatic Maples, 
Elms, Ashes, Limes and Beeches would be named after such common American 
forest trees as the Catalpas, Sassafras, Liquidambar, Tulip, Tupelo and Honey 
Locust; that the American Chionanthus, Angelica, Cercis, Ptelia, Sumachs, 
Flowering Dogwood, Pipevine and Rhododendrons would be placed before some 
of the foreign Barberries, Privets, Spireas, Loniceras, Forsythias, Diervillas or 
even Lilacs. We doubt if the stranger, seeing some of these latter bushes forming 
groups spontaneously with the natives, would suspect them to be of foreign ori- 
gin, or that they would appear to him any more strange and discordant notes in 
the landscape than such common and generally distributed natives as have been 
named. We doubt if Barberry', Privet, Sweetbriar and Cherokee Rose, which, in 
parts of our country, are among the commonest wild shrubs, or the Fall Dande- 
lion, Buttercups, Mints, Hemp Nettle and a dozen others which, in parts, are 
among the commonest wild herbaceous plants, though it is believed all of foreign 
descent, would ever be thought, by such an observer, out of place in our scenery' 
because of their disreposeful and inharmonious influence. Two hundred years 
hence are not Japanese Honeysuckle, "Japanese Ivy" and "Japanese Box" lEuony- 
mus radicans) likely to be equally bone of our bone in scenery? . . . 

Again, may we not (as artists) think that there are places with us in which a 
landscape composition might be given a touch of grace, delicacy and fineness 


24 Arnoldia 60/3 


by the blending into a body of low, native tree foliage that of the Tamarisk or 
the Oleaster, that would not be supplied in a given situation by any of our 
native trees? 

Is there a plant that more provokes poetic sentiment than the Ivy? Is there 
any country in which Ivy grows with happier effect or more thriftily than it does 
in company with the native Madrona, Yew and Douglas Spruce on our north- 
west coast? Yet it must have been introduced there not long since from the oppo- 
site side of the world. Would not the man be a public benefactor who would bring 
us from anywhere an evergreen vine of at all corresponding influence in 
landscape that would equally adapt itself to the climatic conditions of our north- 
eastern coast? . . . 

Before agreeing that no addition can be made to our native forest, except to its 
injury, we should consider that trees for landscape improvement are not solely 
those that please simply from their fitness to merely fall quietly into harmony 
with such as are already established. Trees would be of no less value to us that, 
being adapted to our climate, would supply elements of vivacity, emphasis, 
accent, to points of our scenery, such as we see happily produced by the Upright 
Cypress and the horizontally branching Stone Pine when growing out of Ilex 
groves on the Mediterranean. And this is a reminder that some scholar has said 
that we can form little idea of what the scenery of Italy was in the time of Virgil 
from what we see there now. This because so many trees and plants, which were 
then common, have since become rare, and because so many, then unknown, 
have since become common. Is there reason for believing that the primitive scen- 
ery of Italy was, on this account, more pleasing than the present? 

The present large majority of foreign trees that have been introduced with us 
during the last fifty years, and which have promised well for a time, have been 
found unable to permanently endure the alternate extremes of our climate, but 
that there are many perfectly suited with it we have abundant evidence. Does the 
White Willow flourish better or grow older or larger in any of the meadows of its 
native land than in ours? . . . But on this point of the adaptability of many foreign 
trees to flourish in American climates, only think of Peaches, Pears and Apples. 

Brookline, September, 1888 Frederick Law Olmsted 

[Mr. Olmsted's letter should be read with the greatest care and attention. No man 
now living has created so much and such admirable landscape, and no man is 
better equipped to discuss all that relates to his art. The position which Garden 
AND Forest has taken upon the question of composition in plantations made 
with the view of landscape effect is embraced in the following sentence, 
extracted from the article to which Mr. Olmsted refers: "It is certain, at any rate, 
that combinations of plants, other than those which nature makes or adapts, 
inevitably possess inharmonious elements which no amount of familiarity can 
ever quite reconcile to the educated eye." This sentence was written with spe- 
cial reference to the fact that in Prospect Park, in Brooklyn, various showy flow- 
ered garden-shrubs of foreign origin had been massed among native shrubs 
growing apparently spontaneously along the borders of a natural wood in the 
most sylvan part of the park. The effect which this combination produced 
appeared to us inharmonious, and therefore less pleasing than if the plantation 
had been confined to such shrubs as may be found growing naturally on Long 


Landscape Ait 


25 


Island in similar situations. How far the idea of harmony in composition in land- 
scape is dependent upon association it is hard to say. Mr. Olmsted acknowledges 
that trees like the Ginkgo, the Horse Chestnut and the Weeping Beech would 
look out of place in an American landscape — that is, trees which have no proto- 
types in our natural, native scenery. But would the inhabitant of New Zealand or 
of the moon, whom we suppose to be totally ignorant of the vegetation of the 
north temperate portions of the earth's surface, find anything to jar upon his feel- 
ings in seeing a Weeping Willow or a Ginkgo or a Horse Chestnut growing with 
and among Hickories, Tupelos or Sequoias, which may be taken as the three 
peculiarly North American trees? Probably he would find the combination an 
appropriate and pleasing one, and no feeling of inharmoniousness would ever 
cross his mind. Foreign trees with American prototypes, like the Beech, 
Linn[denl, Red-Bud, Plane, from which they can hardly be distinguished except 
by a botanist, do not jar upon the sense of fitness when used in landscape plant- 
ing here, because for all intents and purposes they are the same as our own spe- 
cies, except that, as a rule, they never grow here as vigorously; and, therefore, are 
less attractive objects. The European Oak, if it would grow here, might replace 
the American White Oak, which it closely resembles, anywhere, and this is true 
of almost every European tree which has an eastern American representative. We 
certainly did not intend to convey the idea that all American trees could be asso- 
ciated together harmoniously. One of the broad-leaved Magnolias of the south- 
ern Alleghany Mountains would appear as much out of place, from our point of 
view, in a northern landscape, as any tree from any foreign land could possibly 
do. This same Magnolia, however, amid the broad-leaved evergreens and luxuri- 
ant growth of the southern forests, seems to form an appropriate and necessary 
feature of the forest scenery. The fact that the Barberry in New England, the 
Cherokee Rose, the Pride of China tree, or the Ailanthus in the Southern States, 
when these plants are naturalized, and have been familiar objects for generations, 
do not look out of place in the landscape, confirms our idea that fitness comes 
not from similarity or dissimilarity of form or color or texture, but from mental 
association. When we have seen certain plants growing together often enough 
and long enough — that is, when they have been "adopted" by nature, to quote our 
own words — we become accustomed to the combination. It is only new and star- 
tling combinations which shock our mental susceptibilities. There is nothing 
more startling (and whatever is startling can form no part of a restful landscape) 
than to come upon an Apple-tree, as one may sometimes do in parts of New 
Jersey, growing in the midst of a thick Pine woods, and showing that the land 
had once been tilled. But if Apple-trees grew in our woods, and we had always 
seen them there, the combination would not seem an unnatural one. 

The truth is that great masters of landscape construction can combine mate- 
rial drawn from many climates and many countries into one harmonious whole, 
but the masters of the art are not many, and the planter who is not sure of his 
genius can wisely follow nature in her teachings of harmony in composition. 
Had this reservation been made in the article referred to, our statement that "all 
attempts to force Nature, so to speak, by bringing in alien elements from remote 
continents and climates, must inevitably produce inharmonious results," would, 
perhaps, have been less open to criticism. — Ed.] 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 418-419] 


26 Arnoldia 60/3 



WAYSIDE BEAUTY. 

I N these days there is no lack of advice to plant trees hy every roadside, and 
Village Improvement Societies are furnishing good examples of neatly kept 
highways. But many of our country roads are already bordered with trees and 
shrubs and climbing vines of Nature's own planting, and it is quite as important 
to preserve the wild beauty of this spontaneous growth as it is to provide for the 
more formal and stately rows of Elms and Maples which are planted on Arbor 
days. The illustration [above] gives a glimpse of a New England by-road which, 
fortunately, has escaped the axe and brush-hook of the enterprising path-master. 
Many officials in charge of our highways appreciate the value of trees when 
planted in straight rows and at equal distances, but a group of Cockspur Thorn, 
or Sassafras, or Black Haw, or a thicket of Sumach, or Hazel-nut, is too often 
looked upon as a disfigurement and a proof that the overseer is neglecting his 
duty to keep the roadside neat and clean. Miles on miles of wayside beauty are 
sacrificed every year to this mania for "trimming up," hut the trees and shrubs 
spring up again to clothe the desert made by man. In smooth and level regions a 
strip of greensward bordering the wheel-way and running under the open fences 
into adjoining fields is always pleasing, and it cannot be too neatly kept. But in 
all hilly and stony regions east of the Alleghanies, no lovelier road-border can 
be conceived of than the native trees and shrubs which flourish where they are 
left to themselves . . . 


[Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 42] 



“Landscape Art 


27 


PARK-MAKING AS A NATIONAL ART. 

T he Atlantic Monthly for January contains a noteworthy article under this title 
by Mrs. M. C. Robbins, who is well known to the readers of this journal. Her 
thesis is that the desire for the creation of beauty in America will find its fullest 
expression in the design and construction of public parks rather than in painting, 
sculpture or architecture. We have already done well in these latter fields, hut our 
craving for liberty, and for enlarged and untrammeled utterance, can only he satis- 
fied by bringing under control the mighty forces of nature and compelling them to 
develop and make manifest our artistic ideas ... In our youthful exuberance we long 
for something that will appeal to all the people — something colossal and distinctly 
American — and this so-called Art of Public Improvement will find full scope in 
treating vast areas of mountain and cataract and forest in works of sufficient 
moment to need the support of sovereign states, or even of the Federal Government, 
and which need an army to protect them . . . Mrs. Robbins' conclusion is that 
"there is everything in the United States to nourish a great art — wealth, enthusiasm, 
generosity, a sense of boundless capacity, the verve and spring of youth and unlim- 
ited aspiration. In the Art of Public Improvement, the dreamer and the utilitarian 
can combine, the nation's beauty and the nation's wealth can in it he united, and 
our achievements may be such as to satisfy even American ambition" . . . 

The rapidity with which the acquisition of park lands by cities has been going on 
will be understood when it is remembered that in 1869 there were only two well- 
advanced rural parks in the United States. Fifteen years later there were twenty, and 
now there is hardly a city of consequence in the country which has not made the 
beginning of a system of parks and parkways. It is true, as Mrs. Robbins says, that 
when the schemes now begun have been fully carried out we shall have public 
reservations reaching, in what is practically an unbroken series, from the eastern 
seaboard to the shores of California. "The idea of such a continuous reservation, 
a national parkway from the Atlantic to the Pacific, leading from one beautiful 
pleasure-ground to another, or passing through great tracts of woodland controlled 
by Government foresters, is not inconsistent with the genius of our country, which 
ever seeks a closer union between its parts,- while the gradually enlarging park sys- 
tems of our cities indicate the way it may be brought out in the linking together of 
suburb to suburb by great boulevards, which tend to bring civilization to distant 
homes by affording safe and easy communication between them". . . 

We no longer hear objections of this sort against park-building, but there is 
another danger that ought to be shunned. It is not enough to secure a certain num- 
ber of acres where they can be had with least cost and trouble. In the first place, the 
land should be wisely selected and its boundaries intelligently determined. Design 
for its improvement must be made by competent artists and executed with skill. 
When completed, pleasure-grounds must be maintained with care, for, if left to 
uncontrolled nature and unpoliced, they may become repulsive desolations. To 
secure a good design we need a school of landscape art, for, although such a school 
will never create a great artist, it can teach him the history of what has been done, 
point out to him what tools he needs and how to use them, and show him how he 
can most directly reach his end . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 10 (1897): 11-12] 


28 Arnoldici 60/3 


NOTES. 


Mayor Hart, of Boston, has written to city forester 
Doogue requesting him to make flower-heds on the 
Common and in the Public Garden which shall imitate 
in form and color the United States flag, the Massachu- 
setts coat of arms, the seal of the City of Boston, and the 
badges of the Loyal Legion, the Woman's Relief Corps 
and the Sons of Veterans. And yet it has been asserted 
and believed that Boston is a city of culture and refine- 
ment. [3 (1890): 148] 

Besides its great parks, London now has 198 open 
spaces of less than ten acres in extent, with an aggregate 
area of three hundred and fifty-four and a half acres. Most 
of these grounds have been secured for public use in 
comparatively recent time, and the Gardeners’ Chron- 
icle well says that any one who would have ventured to 
prophesy fifty years ago that there would have been now 
nearly two hundred such places for recreation and resort 
in the great city, would have been laughed at as a 
dreamer. [8 (1895): 10] 

One of the most curious trees in Germany stands on 
the left bank of the River Oder, in Ratibor, Silesia. It is a 
Maple, at least one hundred years old, which has been 
twisted and cut into a sort of circular two-storied house. 
A flight of steps leads up to the first level, where the 
branches have been gradually woven together so that 
they make a firm leafy floor; above this is a second floor 
of smaller diameter, formed in the same way,- and the 
ends of the branches have been woven into solid walls, 
and cut so that eight windows light each of the apart- 
ments. Below the first floor, at the level of the second, 
and at the top of the tree the boughs have been allowed 
to grow out naturally, while the intermediate walls and 
the edges of the window-like openings are kept closely 
clipped. [7 (1894): 270] 

An English lady. Miss Wilkinson, has, in recent years, 
made herself widely known as a landscape-gardener, 
capable of undertaking public works and of carrying 
them to completion under her personal supervision, and 
Vauxhall Park, in London, opened to the public last year, 
is one of her latest works. Commenting upon these facts, 
and characterizing Vauxhall Park as "a remarkable work 
in every respect," the Revue Horticole recently said: "So 
we see that a woman has entered the professional camp, 
the camp of practicing artists, and has proved her right 
to a distinguished place in it by worthy results. It seems 
a curious sign of the times. Who knows whether the 
delicate gifts of woman may not introduce valuable 
innovations, unknown refinements, into our gardening 
conceptions?" [8 (1895): 100] 


From the twenty-sixth annual report of the Park Com- 
missioners of West Chicago, it seems that the parks in 
that city are suffering from the same abuses of which the 
Park Board of Buffalo complain. It is said that visitors 
make walks across the turf and mutilate the plants. 
There is no cure for such a state of things except a more 
elevated and refined public sentiment. A community 
which allows the beauty of its public grounds to be 
trampled out so far proves itself lacking in certain ele- 
ments of civilization. The people who are helping to 
devastate the Chicago parks, the wealthy men in this 
city who have tried more than once to turn Central Park 
into a trotting-course, the wheelmen and horsemen who 
are endeavoring now to confiscate a part of the Buffalo 
park system for bicycle tracks and speedroads, all belong 
to the same class. They are not intentionally public 
enemies. The trouble is they are not yet completely civi- 
lized. [8 (1895): 120] 

Mr. W. K. Dexter, of St. Louis, has offered to present 
250 acres of land at Hiawatha Lake to the people of 
Hennepin County, Minnesota, as a public park. The 
donor's purpose is to have the tract preserved in its natu- 
ral state, and he therefore makes it a condition of the gift 
that no landscape-artist shall be allowed to touch it. Mr. 
Dexter evidently entertains the mistaken belief that 
landscape-art and formal gardening are identical terms, 
or, at least, that landscape-gardening means primarily 
the destruction of natural beauty to make room for 
something that is artificial. Perhaps, too, he has not con- 
sidered the fact that the highest beauty of this wild tract 
will never be discovered until some real artist studies 
out a practical scheme for making its key-points inviting 
and accessible, nor that its original charm will surely 
disappear as it becomes frequented unless provision is 
made for restoring what is worn away and maintaining 
and developing its essential elements, a work which also 
requires the highest artistic taste and training. When 
Mr. Dexter gives himself thoroughly to a study of the 
problems of design and maintenance, which must be 
solved if his praiseworthy and public-spirited purpose is 
to be carried out to the best advantage, he may still feel 
inclined to resent any suggestions from the class of 
landscape-gardeners whose loftiest aim is to arrange 
flower-beds and plant purple Barberries and golden 
Elders on suburban lawns, but he will welcome the 
advice of some true artist in landscape, who will be cer- 
tain to have a broad appreciation of Nature and a respect 
for her simplest as well as her noblest manifestations. 
[8 (1895): 320] 


The Influence of Garden and Forest on the 
Development of Horticulture 


Mac Griswold 


G arden and Forest: A Journal of Horticul- 
ture, Landscape Art, and Forestry, the 
brainchild of the Arnold Arboretum's 
first director, Charles Sprague Sargent, was 
published during a period (1888-1897) when 
the science of everything that grows — wild or 
cultivated — was still (barely) considered a single 
discipline. It's as if today's readers of, say. Scien- 
tific American, Natural History, Martha Stewart 
Living, and The Nation could scan the weekly 
issue of a single sixteen-page magazine and find 
detailed articles of specific interest to them. 

It can't go without comment, however, that 
Garden and Forest’s readers were assumed to 
have general interests that far outran any nar- 
row bounds of the subjects listed in its title. In 
1889 Harper & Brothers, the New York publish- 
ing house, ran advertisements in the magazine 
for William Dean Howell's latest novel, April 
Hopes; for a Miss Juliet Corson's work on how 
to feed a family on $500 a year (subtitled A 
Daily Reference Book for Young and Inexperi- 
enced Housewives)) and for a Civil War history 
written by an African-American who had served 
in the war, A History of the Negro Troops in 
the War of the Rebellion, 1861-1865, by G. W. 
Williams, LL.D. 

Within this diverse setting Garden and Forest 
nonetheless published many editorials and 

articles that mark 
the beginnings of the 
specialized disciplines 
of horticulture, land- 
scape architecture, 
botany, and forestry, 
with practitioners 
debating the direc- 
tions their develop- 
ing fields should 
Bruchus limbatus. follow. Horticulture, 



then as now, seems to have been the most 
vaguely delineated of the four, though as land- 
scape architecture and forestry, previously con- 
sidered to be aspects of horticulture, evolved 
into separate professions, the practice of horti- 
culture became more circumscribed as well as 
more professional. 



30 Arnoldia 60/3 



Before reading those debates there- 
fore, it is wise to scan the pages of 
Garden and Forest for an idea of what 
was meant by "horticulture" in late 
nineteenth-century America. Today's 
general reader could assume that the 
term referred first and foremost to 
ornamental horticulture, as it does 
now. But in 1888 horticulture, which 
had piggybacked on agriculture since 
the days of colonial settlement, was 
still concerned with fruit and veg- 
etable gardening to a very large extent. 
In 1988, the late Elisabeth Woodhurn, 
an authority on horticultural literature, 
wrote an addendum to a new edition 
of U. P. Hedrick's A Flistory of Horti- 
culture in the United States to 1860 
(originally published in 1950). Tallying 
hooks published on various "horticul- 
tural" topics between 1861 and 1920, 
she arrived at the following ranking, 
from highest to lowest in number: 


HORTICULTURAL EDUCATION. 

I N a recent number of this journal it was held that the 
study of horticulture and agriculture in their scientific 
aspects has a distinct value as a factor in furnishing exercise 
for certain powers of the mind. Every one admits that the 
natural sciences should have a place in the curriculum of 
colleges and schools as elements of wholesome intellectual 
development . . . but the fact should be emphasized that the 
mental exercise and discipline furnished by horticultural 
education in its broad sense is equal, and perhaps superior, 
to that furnished by the study of any other science. No kind 
of mental application will be more effectual in forming hab- 
its of careful observation and comparison and in securing 
those orderly methods of thinking which are of the greatest 
use in the examination of many of the problems which con- 
front us in our daily life. 

In an article in a recent number of Science on Horticulture 
at Cornell, we are glad to see that this view is set forth with 
considerable fullness by Professor Bailey, who contends that 
horticulture as studied at that university is capable of adding 
much to the value of a course of liberal academic training. 
Professor Bailey illustrates the merits of horticulture as a 
science by showing some of its uses and applications in dis- 
cussing the theory of evolution, which is perhaps now the 
most important conception with which the thinking world 
has to deal. In supporting the hypothesis of evolution, horti- 
culture shows the development of life in actual operation. 
More than six thousand species of plants are cultivated, and 
most of these have been broken up into varied forms by the 
touch of man. Some species have produced thousands of dis- 
tinct forms, and the methods of the production of many of 
them are on record. In place of arguments as to the probable 
influence of climate upon plants the horticulturist cites defi- 
nite cases, so that there is no conjecture about the matter. 
Instead of speculating upon the transmission of acquired 
characters the horticulturist furnishes proofs of such trans- 
mission. Paleontology brings disjointed evidence in regard to 
the influence of selection and probable changes from envi- 
ronment, while the horticulturist brings examples before 
our eyes to prove that he can modify and mould vegetation 
at his will. The horticulturist creates new species and shows 
you numbers of cultivated plants of which no one knows 
the original form, because the ones with which we are 
acquainted are so unlike the type that the two can never be 
connected. This is only a single line of inquiry, and other 
illustrations quite as striking can be given to show that there 
is an abundant field for scientific research and profound 
thought in horticultural science as such . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 9 (1896); 31] 


Horticulture 31 




A Double-flowered Cyclamen. 


fruits; vegetables; 
practical horticul- 
ture (propagation 
and cultivation); 
landscape and gar- 
dens (by which 
she meant design); 
and then flowers, 
flower gardening, 
and ornamental 
plants, which she 
ranked last. 

Garden and Forest covered all these catego- 
ries, offering descriptions of new species and of 
gardens and giving cultural direction and design 
advice. It also published articles specifically for 
greenhouse propagators and growers; articles for 
professional florists included a weekly flower- 
market bulletin. All this played a part in shap- 
ing the development of modern horticulture. 

Most effective in promoting horticulture 
as a professional discipline separate from botany 

and landscape archi- 
tecture, however, 
were some hard- 
hitting pieces that 
both criticized and 
set goals for horti- 
cultural training. 
For example, the 
publication in 1889 
of an editorial on 
the negligible qual- 
ity of American 
horticultural edu- 
cation in the same 
issue as a descrip- 
tion of the French national school of horticul- 
ture clearly illustrated the two sides of the 
debate on professional training, the big question 
that eternally enlivens any discussion of horti- 
culture being: How much is science and how 
much is practice? 

Such American schools of horticulture as 
now exist, the 1889 editorial proposed, "provide 
an excellent course of botanical study and offer 
instruction in some branches of practical horti- 
culture. It will not, however, he maintained 
by the best friends of these schools, that a 
well equipped gardener was ever graduated 


Proliferous flower of Cyclamen. 


from any one of them." In other words, the real 
lack in American training was experience in 
actual gardening. 

The schools' problem arose from "the want of 
appreciation of the requirement of a sound hor- 
ticultural education on the part of their 
founders, and in part from the prevailing ten- 
dency of the American people to be satisfied 
with a hasty and in- 
sufficient training 
for any vocation in 
life." Until there is a 
market for skilled 
men that will cause 
wages to rise, the 
piece curtly con- 
cludes, "our Schools 
of Horticulture can 
wisely give up try- 
ing to teach young 
men who do not 
want to be taugbt, 
and devote their en- 
ergies to those wider 
fields of usefulness 
which, fortunately, 
are open to them, 
and by experiments, 
and in many other ways, at least help to create 
the demand for skilled gardeners which they 
were founded to supply."' 

Garden and Forest's description of the three- 
year course at the National School of Horticul- 
ture at Versailles could he called its formula for 
an ideal horticultural education. This short 
piece is the work of Henry Sargent Codman, 
Charles Sprague Sargent's nephew and Frederick 
Law Olmsted's promising (and short-lived) 
young employee. At twenty-five he was study- 
ing in France with Edouard Frangois Andre, the 
French landscape architect soon to be appointed 
head of the Versailles school. The essence of his 
piece is that of the editorial: American horticul- 
tural training needs more of the practical.^ 

An 1899 editorial argued strongly for a hefty 
dose of science even in the most practical appli- 
cations of horticulture. It cited a pronounce- 
ment, both snobbish and categorical, by the 
then director of the Royal Botanical Gardens at 
Kew that "Horticulture is essentially an empiri- 



Poppies and their background. 


32 Arnoldia 60/3 



The Opening bud of a 

grape-flower. 

cal art. Botanical science can afford little a priori 
information as to the cultural conditions which 
any plant will require or tolerate; these for the 
most part can only be found out by trial and 
experience."-^ In other words, farmers and grow- 
ers should not be taught science. 

The editorial went on to offer a tentative but 
genuinely populist answer: "When it is stated 
that the gardener who has a genius for his work 
will 'naturally hit upon the right method' of cul- 
tivation, this means that the gardener has been 
doing just what the man of science would have 
done if he had been engaged in research in the 
same field. It seems to our people that a man 
who knows why he adopts a given method of 
cultivation is likely to be a more practical culti- 
vator, less likely to fail in the essentials of the 
practice, than one who blindly follows the rule 
of thumb. Horticulture and agriculture, too, are 
no doubt largely empirical arts; but we sympa- 
thize in the belief that the addition of scientific 
knowledge will help to place them on a founda- 
tion more sure and productive than that of indi- 
vidual experience." In other words, farmers and 
growers should be actively involved in, and the 
beneficiaries of, scientific horticulture. Garden 
and Forest’s balanced and democratic editorial 
stance may well he what, in the long run, did 
the most for the development of modern Ameri- 
can horticulture. 

The editors' stance was also well borne out 
in articles such as those by George Lincoln 
Goodale, the Fisher Professor of Natural History 
at Harvard. His long series on the principles of 
physiological botany helped to define the syn- 
ergy between the scientist and the gardener as 



Pistil and stamens of a 
grape-flower. 


integral to modern horticulture, without any 
hierarchical distinction.-* His mild-mannered 
prose is as easily understood by a lay audience as 
by a professional one and his science would 
have been as useful to a greenhouse propagator 
as to an interested fellow professor. That is to 
say, his experiments were exactly those that 
would "help to create the demand for skilled 
gardeners" deemed so necessary in the 1899 edi- 
torial cited above. 

Goodale's thirteenth piece, "Some of the Con- 
ditions Which Favor Rapid Growth — Certain 
Physical Phenomena of Growth," includes a 
vivid little section on the remarkable strength 
of cellular growth in plants. His final sentence 
on the prodigious and often hidden power of 
root growth could stand as a metaphor for the 
manner in which all the articles and much of 
the debate published in Garden and Forest 
helped lift modern horticulture to new heights 
by addressing a small, intelligent, interested, 
and yet demographically broad audience 
over a single decade. "The force exerted in 
all these instances," Goodale writes, "has been 
exercised solely by the innumerable delicate, 
thin-walled cells, which increase in number 
and in size in the orderly manner we have 
attempted to describe."^ 

Endnotes 

' "Schools of Horticulture," Garden and Forest 
(hereafter, GePF] 2 (1889): 25. 

^ H. S. Codman, "The National School of Horticulture 
at Versailles," GePF 2 (1889): 27. 

^ '"A Gardeners' Problem,'" Ge)F 3 (1890): 149. 

* "Principles of Physiological Botany as Applied to 
Horticulture and Forestry," GePF 1 (1898): 8-9, 20-21, 
32-33, 44-45, 56, 68-69, 80-81, 92, 104-105, 116- 
117,128-129, 140-141, 153, 164-165, 177-178, 188, 
201-202, 213-214, 225, 249-250. 

5 Ibid., 153. 


Mac Griswold's most recent book is Washington's 
Gardens at Mount Vernon: Landscape of the Inner Man 
(1999). She is also the author of "A History of Gardening 
m the United States," in The New Royal Horticultural 
Society Dictionary of Gardening (1992), edited by Sir 
Aldous Huxley, and the co-author of The Golden Age of 
American Gardens (1991). 


Hoiticultme 33 


THE EFFECT OF GARDENING UPON THE MIND. 

A taste for gardening is one of the elemental impulses of humanity. There are 
individuals without it, as there are people without sight or hearing or a sense 
of smell; but, on the whole, to dig comes naturally to man, and at some time or other 
in the course of his existence the desire to own a portion of the earth's surface is apt 
to seize upon him and demand satisfaction. 

This impulse is of maturity rather than of youth, for gardening in its larger sense 
is a thoughtful pursuit, appealing to the broader qualities of the understanding. It is 
not merely the desire for healthful exercise which stirs a man, but also the wish to 
learn the secrets of our common mother, to force her hand, as it were, and compel 
her to reward his toil. The fable of the giant Antaeus, who renewed his strength 
when he came in contact with the earth, has a subtle meaning, for it is by this 
contact that many weary souls have found rest and arisen refreshed . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 4 (1891); 505] 

VARIOUS MOTIVES FOR GARDENING. 

W E have just received a letter from a valued correspondent in which he says 
that he cannot understand the insistence of Garden and Forest upon plan- 
ning and planting for general effect. He delights in his garden, but his pleasure is not 
associated in any degree with the landscape as he understands it. He loves plants, 
he appreciates the beauty of flowers, he enjoys their companionship and he reads 
with interest everything that is said about new or old ones which any way broadens 
his knowledge of their habits and helps him to cultivate them more successfully. 
He finds abundant comfort in gardening of this kind, but he sees nothing to attract 
him in landscape-gardening. No doubt, this statement represents the innermost 
feeling of many people who take a genuine interest in horticulture, and it is often 
expressed to us in one way or another. With people of this taste and temperament 
the garden exists for its plants, and the plants are not grown for the sake of the gar- 
den. That is, a garden in this view is a place where a collection of plants is carefully 
attended and enjoyed for their individual beauty and other interesting qualities, and 
with no purpose of forming, in connection with the house, any picture which is to 
be studied and enjoyed as a whole. Perhaps the majority of all who are interested in 
gardens sympathize with the view of our correspondent, and they find a real plea- 
sure, and pleasure of a most refining and refreshing kind, in their practice. It is our 
belief, however, that they might do all this, and at the same time gain a new and 
ever-growing satisfaction if they gave thought to the general modeling and arrange- 
ment of the whole scene as well as to its individual details. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 341] 


One beautiful way in which flowers can be used, especially those distinguished 
for the brightness and clearness of their coloring or for their tall stalks, is to plant 
them in moss and among wild vegetation along the edge of a brook or some other 
piece of water. The reflections in the water and the play of their movements thus 
doubled clothes with a new charm this scene which is altogether natural. 

— Hirschfeld’s “Theorie der Gartenkunst," Leipzig, 1777. 


34 Arnoldia 60/3 



A Japanese Flower Vender's Basket. There is no country in the world where flowers are so universally 
beloved as in Japan. They are inseparable from the life, art and literature of the people, and to deprive the 
Japanese of their flowers would be to take the sunshine out of their lives . . . Flowers are distributed among 
the people by means of perambulating flower-sellers, and by flower-fairs. The seller goes about the streets 
carrying two huge bamboo baskets swung from a pole across his shoulders. These baskets are divided into a 
number of different compartments, each containing a different variety of cut flowers or leaves. The carrier is 
sometimes almost hidden by the great mass of flowers and foliage he bears . . . Theodore Wores. New York. 
[1 (1888): 338-339] 




Hoiticulture 35 


DELIGHTS OF A ROUGH GARDEN. 

I N offering suggestions on gardening to the enthusiastic beginner it is usual to 
lay down at the outset a few unmistakable rules for his prudent guidance: 
Undertake no more than you can care for with thoroughness. Neatness is the first 
essential. Be content with small beginnings, and so on indefinitely. 

The pleasures of the opposite plan, the rich satisfaction of a big, rough garden, 
in which beginnings and complete successes are somewhat loosely connected, 
and yet where freedom and beauty do live together in harmony, these attractive 
possibilities seldom find an advocate. On the strength of an experiment now in 
its fourth year I beg leave to put in a plea for the garden in which neatness is not 
a first essential. It seems quite possible to make a kind of treaty with Nature, in 
which she consents to do for a rough, yet much-loved garden filled with all sorts 
of tentative beginnings of loveliness, that which she does with so much charm 
for any old abandoned garden left wholly to her possession. The lover of wild 
beauty, who loves tamed and cultured beauty also, may find an opportunity for 
gardening upon this scale on any little country place of a few acres . . . 

One of the delights of a rough garden is its continual surprises. With the habit 
of tucking in seeds, cuttings, roots and bulbs, as occasion serves, planting and 
sowing without formality, there is something very delightful in the apparent 
spontaneity with which unlooked-for bloom and beauty often come to light. 
Broad mixed borders in which hardy plants are irregularly grouped (not without 
a constant study of the advantages of contrast and relief) make this the simplest 
matter possible. The Iris or the Lily bulb is buried, the seed is sown and the 
ground occupied staked to prevent accidents; suddenly, as it seems, a new shape 
of delicate beauty greets the eye. A big rough garden gives an encouraging oppor- 
tunity to experiment . . . Not annuals and biennials merely, but shrubs and 
trees also increase and multiply with extraordinary ease in the rough garden, 
where the discipline is not too severe. Fruit and flower, shade and fragrance, 
homely use and stately adornment mingle happily here in the garden held in 
partnership with Nature . . . 

Amherst, Mass. D. H. R. Goodale 

[Garden and Forest 9(1896): 303-304] 

FARMING ON VACANT CITY LOTS. 

D uring these times of agricultural depression the profits realized by farm 
ers, even under the best conditions, are meagre enough, and, therefore, 
when Mayor Pingree, of Detroit, first conceived the idea of utilizing vacant city 
lots for the growing of potatoes by the unemployed of that city — that is, by men 
who were generally quite ignorant of the theory and practice of cultivating the 
soil — the experiment was looked upon as visionary, if not ridiculous. The result 
of the first year's cultivation, however, which enabled nearly one thousand fami- 
lies to support themselves through the winter by their crops alone, stimulated 
certain public-spirited citizens of New York to make a similar effort here, and the 
result is published in No. I of the periodical Notes, published by the New York 
Association for Improving the Condition of the Poor. Of course, the philanthropic 
aspect of this experiment is the one of prime importance. The result proves that 


36 Arnoldia 60/3 


many persons who own vacant land would prefer to have it cultivated instead of 
lying idle and unproductive, and that a very limited area will suffice to raise 
enough vegetables to contribute largely to the support of a family through the 
winter. It proves, too, that very many of the destitute people in tenement-houses 
are willing to work and can be made to support themselves with a very little help 
advanced as a loan. Besides this, the project offers a natural plan for giving to the 
people who dwell in stifling tenement-houses opportunity to work for them- 
selves in the open air and under healthful conditions. It gives mothers the advan- 
tage of taking their children out of the heated houses and giving them a taste of 
rural life. It enables the superannuated and partially crippled to support them- 
selves. In addition to these advantages, the entire scheme has a substantial busi- 
ness basis, with none of the odious and depressing suggestions of a charity. 

Naturally, however, the educational side of this vacant-lot farming will have a 
special interest to readers of a journal devoted to the art of cultivating the soil . . . 
In every city where this vacant-lot farming has been successful the soil has been 
cultivated in accordance with the teachings of science . . . Every process from the 
very beginning to the end was carefully supervised, so that this vacant-lot 
farming, apart from its direct pecuniary profit, had a much more important func- 
tion as a school of agriculture . . . 

We cannot but assume that many of these tenement-house farmers who have 
had the advantage of this year of schooling will discover that there is a happier 
and wholesomer life for them outside of the congested districts of great cities . . . 
[I]f, under capable instruction, agriculture can be made profitable in city lots, and 
if the good example of experiment stations is visible in better farming all about 
them, why should not actual instruction in agriculture be made a part of the cur- 
riculum of rural common schools? . . . 


[Editorial. Garden and Forest 9 (1896): 91-92] 


SENTIMENTALISM AND TREE-FELLING. 



writer in a late number of the Springfield Republican finds his sensibilities 


-Za. wounded by the tone of Mrs. Van Rensselaer's book, entitled. Art Out-of- 
doors. and especially by the advice to cut down trees, given in the chapter en- 
titled "A Word for the Axe." It is not our purpose to enter into any defense of the 
book, which must stand on its own merits, any farther than to say that we know 
of no work where more sound doctrine on the subjects treated is given in the 
same space. On several occasions, however. Garden and Forest has advised the 
cutting down of trees, and a good many of them, in pleasure-grounds and else- 
where, and have been met with this same protest made by the writer in the 
Republican that no true lover of nature would think of such sacrilege. Now, we 
have no inclination to retort upon a critic of this sort that his own love of nature 
may be conventional and fictitious. We have no doubt that this writer, and many 
other good people who are distressed whenever they see or hear of the felling of a 
tree, love nature most sincerely after a sentimental fashion. But we believe that 
many people, whose practices they condemn, love nature quite as sincerely, and 
in a much more robust, and certainly more intelligent, way . . . 


[Editorial. Garden and Forest 6 (1893): 311] 


Horticulture 37 



Chrysanthemums. — It often happens after Chrysanthemums have done flowering that they are 
stowed away either under green-house benches where there is but little light, or in cellars where 
there is less, or are left out in the weather to struggle as best they can with the elements. Good 
Chrysanthemums cannot be had next year from stock subjected to such treatment. Growers who aim 
at fine plants and fine flowers are now giving their stock-plants the best attention; the weaker kinds 
are placed in a cold green-house or frame, close to the light, and they are never allowed to want for 
water; the stronger kinds have also good positions in airy frames or green-houses . . . John Thorpe. 
Pearl River, N.Y. [Garden and Forest 1 (1888): 523] 

THE USE OF TREES AND SHRUBS WITH LEAVES OF 
ABNORMAL COLORS. 

A Boston correspondent writes in a discouraged tone about the planting he 
observes in the suburbs of that city. It seems to him that popular taste is 
setting strongly toward Prunus Pissardi [a purple-leaved form of P. cerasifolia, or 
cherry plum], the Golden Elder [Sambucus nigra 'Aurea'], variegated Negundos 
[Acer negundo, box-elder] and the like. We have no doubt that too many trees and 
shrubs which are valued for the abnormal coloring of their leaves are used about 
Boston, and, in fact, about every other American city. Unless our own observa- 
tion is at fault, however, the tendency of public taste, as a rule, is in the other 
direction, by which we mean that the people who plant nowadays are more 
inclined to follow the teachings of nature in this respect than they were a few 
years ago, when the tree agent, with his highly colored catalogues, was more per- 
vasive and influential than he now is. The so-called foliage plants with brightly 
colored leaves and hues, set in patterns of various sorts, are certainly not as 
prevalent as they once were, and it is very evident that in American parks the use 
of shrubs and trees with streaked and spotted or vari-colored leaves is not as 


38 Arnoldia 60/3 


profuse as it is in European parks. Perhaps, our correspondent in some afternoon 
drive has observed several glaring offenses against that quietness and self-restraint 
in planting which alone can make home grounds homelike, and this has depressed 
his spirits . . . 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 10 (1897): 301] 

CHRISTMAS GREEN. 

E very morning for a week past the steamboat Minnie Cornell, from Keyport, 
New Jersey, has come to her pier loaded with "rope" and "fancy green." "Rope" 
is the trade name for the cables made of Cluh-moss and occasionally of Hemlock 
spray, and used for looping into festoons or twining about columns in Christmas 
decorations. "Fancy green" includes the wreaths, stars and other designs, manufac- 
tured chiefly from the leaves of Holly, Laurel and Rhododendron, together with 
Mosses, green or gray, from Oak trunks and Cedar boughs, scarlet berries of the 
Black Alder, the bluish gray fruit of the Juniper, the scarlet and orange fruits of the 
Bittersweet, not to speak of Grasses dried and dyed in fearful and wonderful colors. 
The little steamer has more than once carried 60,000 yards of the festooning mate- 
rial, and 1,500 dozen stars and wreaths at a single trip, and the entire amount of 
"rope" brought to this market during the season would reach from New York to 
Boston. The very first Christmas green sold in this city came from Keyport. Some 
forty-five years ago the wife of a Monmouth County farmer gathered enough 
Ground Pine to fill a sheet with the four corners tied together, and shipped it on a 
sloop with her poultry. It proved a lucky venture, and ever since, the people of 
Monmouth Gounty have held almost a monopoly of the industry, although both 
the species of Glub-moss most largely used. Lycopodium dendroideum and 
L. complanatum, were practically exterminated from that region years ago. They are 
still abundant, however, in Gonnecticut, some parts of northern New York, and 
Massachusetts, and are shipped to New Jersey in such quantities that large dealers 
buy them by the ton, and the manufacture of these festal wreaths and cables gives 
employment to the wives and daughters of many farmers after the fall work on the 
farm is over. 

The trade in Ghristmas-trees began in 1851, when Mark Carr yoked up his oxen 
and hauled from the Catskills to the steamboat landing on the Hudson two sled- 
loads of young Balsams, and paid a silver dollar for the privilege of selling them on 
the corner of Vesey and Greenwich Streets. At least 150,000 trees have been piled 
up along the docks of the North River during the last week, and since the days of 
Mark Carr many a dealer has been glad to pay a hundred dollars for a corner privi- 
lege for holiday trade in Christmas trees. About half of the trees this year come from 
Maine, the remainder from the Berkshire Hills, the Black River country in the 
Adirondacks, and the Catskills. Good trees in the Gatskills are becoming scarce, 
however, and the woodsmen of those mountains are looking elsewhere for their 
material. Short jointed, stocky trees with perfect whorls of branches at the base of 
each annual growth, are the most sought for, and the Maine trees, as a rule, com- 
mand rather higher prices than any others. The trees come up thickly where hard- 
wood timber has been cleared away, and if they are cut above the second or third 
joint, one of the limbs soon turns upward and becomes a leader to furnish another 
Christmas-tree. In this way the same land is cut over several times. Fortunately the 


Horticulture 39 


Balsam Fir is about as nearly worthless for any other purpose as any of our native 
trees, and therefore the waste of cutting so much young timber is not serious. A few 
Black Spruces come among the Firs, and Hemlock houghs, which, oddly enough, are 
made to do duty as Palm branches in some church services [and] are in growing 
demand every year. Trees from Maine arc shipped as far south as Baltimore; and of 
late years large quantities of Holly branches, mostly from Maryland, since the lim- 
ited supply in New Jersey is nearly exhausted, are sent as far north as Boston. Within 
two or three years the Mistletoe has been sold here in a few shops and even on the 
streets, hut in spite of its association with Christmas festivities in Old World tradi- 
tions, It has filled hut a small place here in the regular market of Christmas green. 
And yet this parasite is common on the Gum trees of southern New Icrscy, and it 
is never so heautiful as at this season with its transparent berries clustered among 
its evergreen leaves. 

[Editorial. Garden and Forest 1(1888): 505-506) 

PLANT NOTES. 

Japanese Iris. 

O NE of the most attractive features in Mr. lohn L. Gardner's heautiful garden 
m Brookline, Massachusetts, is the bed of Japanese Iris (Iris laevigata or 
Kaeinpferi), which forms the subject of our illustration. The plants, which were 
selected in Japan with great care by Mrs. Gardner, represent the best named Japa- 
nese varieties. They are arranged according to color, in the Japanese fashion; each 



A Bed of Japanese Iris. 


40 Arnoldia 60/3 


row across the bed consisting of one variety, those with white flowers at one end, 
and then all the intermediate shades to the dark blues and purples at the other 
end. The bed is sunk eight or ten inches below the surface of the surrounding 
lawn, and is furnished on one side with a perforated water-pipe so that the plants 
can be irrigated during the growing season. It is eighteen inches deep and consists 
of a rich compost of loam and thoroughly rotten cow-manure, and every year it 
gets a good top dressing of manure. Every pleasant morning after the middle of 
May the water is turned on at nine o'clock and allowed to run till three or four 
o'clock in the afternoon; by that time the bed is thoroughly saturated and cov- 
ered to a depth of two or three inches with water,- the supply is then shut off until 
the next morning. Some of the varieties, under this generous treatment, grow to 
a height of five or six feet, and have produced flowers fully ten inches across, and 
surprising in their profusion and beauty. While irrigation is doubtless necessary 
to develop the greatest perfection of the Japanese Iris, it can be successfully 
grown in this country in ordinary seasons in any good garden soil and without 
artificial watering. Very fine flowers have been produced without special treat- 
ment by Mr. [Francis] Parkman and other American growers, who have raised 
good seedling varieties of this plant without giving to it more care than is 
required by other Irises . . . The flowers are hardly surpassed in delicacy of tex- 
ture or in beauty of color, but they do not appear here until July, and the hot sun 
soon fades them. The blooming season may be prolonged by the use of an awning 
placed over the beds during the day, but it cannot be denied that this plant flow- 
ers too late here, and that its period of beauty is too short in this climate ever to 
make it a great popular favorite . . . 

[Garden and Forest 1 (1888); 259-260] 

NEW OR LITTLE-KNOWN PLANTS. 

Xanthoceras sorbifolia. 

T o Mr. Paul Dana we are indebted for the opportunity of publishing in this 
issue the portrait of a remarkably fine specimen of the rare Xanthoceras 
sorbifolia in Mr. Dana's collection at Dosoris [Long Island, New York]. 

Xanthoceras sorbifolia is a small tree of northern China, related to the Bladder- 
nuts [Staphlea] and Horse-chestnuts, and interesting as the only representation 
of the genus to which it belongs, and which owes its name to the presence 
between the petals of curious yellow horn-shaped glands. It is one of the most 
attractive of the hardy plants which our gardens owe to northern China, the region 
from which many of the most beautiful trees and shrubs in cultivation have been 
brought. It is a leafy, glabrous or puberulous plant with opposite pinnate leaves 
eight to twelve inches in length; the leaflets are alternate, linear-oblong, acute, 
coarsely serrate, dark green and glossy on the upper surface and pale on the lower. 
The flowers are white, handsomely marked with red streaks at the base of the 
petals, and are produced in great profusion in lateral racemes eight or twelve 
inches long, appearing as the leaves are unfolding. The fruit, which is a globose 
or pear-shaped capsule, not unlike that of some of the smooth-fruited Horse- 
chestnuts in general appearance, finally splits into three valves, and contains a 
number of globose, nearly black, shining seeds half an inch in diameter. 


Horticulture 41 


Xanthoceras was discovered nearly sixty years ago by the German botanist 
Bunge, who accompanied a Russian mission which traveled overland from St. 
Petersburg to Pekin; it was not, however, introduced into our gardens until nearly 
forty years later, when the French missionary David sent it to the Jardin des 
Plantes, in Paris, where the original plant may still be seen. 

In spite of its hardiness and the beauty of its flowers, Xanthoceras is still 
rare in American and European gardens. This is, perhaps, due to the fact that. 



Xanthoceras sorbifolia, at Dosoris, Long Island 




42 Ainoldia 60/3 


although it is hardy against cold, it is evidently fastidious and does not grow 
well in all soils and situations. Most of the plants which have been tried in this 
country have perished sooner or later, and it is unusual to find either here or in 
Europe so large, vigorous and healthy a specimen as the one at Dosoris. 

From the Abbe David's notes we learn that Xanthoceras is a tree fifteen to eigh- 
teen feet high, and exceedingly rare in those parts of China and Mongolia which 
he visited; that it is cultivated in the gardens of Pekin,- and that the seeds are 
eaten by the Chinese. 

At our request, Mr. Dana has sent us for the benefit of our readers the follow- 
ing note upon his method of cultivating Xanthoceras, which we hope will now 
become a more common object in our gardens; 

"I first saw a plant of Xanthoceras at Baden-Baden on the grounds of Herr Max 
Leichtlin about the year 1884. 1 admired it, and Herr Leichtlin spoke of it as a new 
plant of great promise, which he felt sure would be an acquisition to horticulture. 
I secured two plants, and have been cultivating them now for eight or ten years. 
They are six feet high, and grow in rich warm loam. They have no protection 
whatever, and yet they have never lost a branch in winter, and they endure our 
dry summers perfectly. They are not strong-growing shrubs, but they bear flow- 
ers in great profusion, and are more beautiful when in bloom than at any other 
season. They ripen seeds every year, and I would be glad to furnish some of them 
to any one who cares to test the plant." 

[Garden and Forest 6 (1893): 284-286] 

CLIMBING PLANTS ON BOSTON BUILDINGS. 

P ROBABLY nowhere else in this country does the service performed by climb- 
ing and clinging plants in clothing and adorning the walls of buildings receive 
such good illustration as in and around Boston. Ampelopsis tricuspidata [now 
Parthenocissiis tricuspidata] was first domesticated here, and has so long been a 
striking feature of this city as to gain for it throughout the country the familiar 
name of "Boston Ivy." This name, however, is seldom heard here, where it is 
most commonly known as the "Japanese Ivy" or the "Japanese Ampelopsis." 

Ampelopsis tricuspidata had probably been cultivated hereabout for several 
years before it became particularly noticeable, but its popularity dates back to the 
Centennial year of 1876. Although for years familiar with all parts of the city and 
a close observer of such things, I had never noticed this plant until my return in 
1877, after an absence of a year or so, when I was at once struck by its prevalence. 
It did not become remarkably common hereabout until about 1880. Now, how- 
ever, it is seen everywhere, and is even more prevalent than its cousin, our beau- 
tiful native Virginia Creeper. It has become as characteristic of our city and 
suburban scenes as the White Pine is of our rural New England landscape, and 
one of our foremost authorities once told me that he regarded it as the greatest 
horticultural acquisition of the century. 

Occasionally its use is excessive, but its luxuriant habit is seldom encouraged 
to an undesirable extent. This is probably due to the fact that one of its most 
conspicuous services consists in the concealment, or the amelioration, of archi- 
tectural ugliness, and, fortunately, the people most liable to employ it to excess 
are generally the ones most responsible for bad architecture. Ugly objects are so 


Horticulture 43 


generally made graceful and picturesque by the kindly offices of the Japanese 
Ampelopsis that the instances of its over-liberal use are usually merciful conceal- 
ments. The Japanese Ivy, or, still better for this particular purpose, the Virginia 
Creeper [Parthenocissus quinquefolia], could be usefully employed to drape the 
electric-wire poles, whose gaunt interminable processions make hideous the 
highways throughout the country, and convert them, for a large portion of the 
year, at least, into objects of beauty, if the necessities of the linemen, with their 
climbing-spurs, did not forbid. This might, however, be done with poles that 
require no climbing, as the posts that support the trolley-wires of the electric- 
railways, particularly along a road that has been adorned with central-lawn 
spaces, like the boulevards of Beacon Street or Commonwealth Avenue. 

As a means for the mitigation of bad architecture, the Japanese Ampelopsis on 
our Museum of Fine Arts [then located on Copley Square] furnishes an instruc- 
tive example, though it is not carried far enough. It clambered bravely over the 
ugly walls of parti-colored terra cotta and brick, and for a while so nearly effaced 
the unspeakable reliefs of the second story as to give them the charm of indefi- 
niteness. But the trustees have since restricted the creeper to the first story . . . 

Probably the building most famous for its exuberant, but not in the least 
excessive, growth of Ampelopsis is the Old South Meeting-house, where it creeps 
over an enormous expanse of gray old walls and high up on the tower, relieving 
the severity of the Puritan architecture with its gentle touch. The suggestion of 
nature amid the piles of neighboring brick and stone in the heart of the business 
section of the town does much to heighten the charm of the Old South's garb of 
greenery. And this leads me to express dissent from only one point in the admi- 
rable editorial on the general subject of the use of clinging growths in combina- 
tion with architecture that appeared in Garden and Forest a few months ago. 
The New York Post-office was instanced as one of the buildings where such a 
growth would not be in place. But to my mind it would be peculiarly appropriate 
there, for the reason that the architecture of that building is intensely offensive. 
If, by any means, an ample growth of Ampelopsis or any other creeping 
things could only be coaxed to embower a goodly portion of its facades, it would 
not only mitigate the inartistic character of the edifice, but it would serve 
to unite it with the remnant of the neighboring City Fiall Park, from which its 
site was unrighteously taken, and in a measure atone for the perpetual affront 
of its existence . . . 

One of the few redeeming features of our extravagantly praised Public Garden 
is the growth of Virginia Creeper and Japanese Honeysuckle, that converts the 
iron fence on the western side into a beautiful hedge, and the Japanese 
Ampelopsis that covers some of its stone posts. This creeper would perform an 
inestimable service if it were allowed to clamber at will over the bad sculpture 
in the Public Garden and the Common. 

The value of trailing growths for fences is not appreciated in this country as it 
should be. In Germany the Virginia Creeper is put to simple and effective use for 
this purpose in urban public grounds. A light, low fence is made of stakes and 
connecting wires; the Virginia Creeper is trained up each stake and made to form 
graceful festoons between. Its employment in some such fashion would do good 
service on a place like the Cambridge Common, for instance, now a bare, unat- 
tractive expanse, having a sort of kinship with the New England rustic burying- 


44 Arnoldia 60/3 


ground. It is surrounded by a fence composed of unhewn granite posts with 
squared rails of wood between. Virginia Creeper, Japanese Ampelopsis, and per- 
haps other twining or climbing plants, might convert this old fence into a thing 
of beauty. In public parks the requirement for protection of the borders some- 
times necessitates guards of wire and stakes along the paths. These are often 
great disfigurements, and their offensive aspect, in places where they seem to be 
required permanently, might be at least mitigated by the use of Virginia Creeper 
after the German fashion . . . 

Boston. Sylvester Baxter 

[Garden and Forest 7(1894): 432-433] 

THE FLOATING GARDENS OF MEXICO. 

T he famous chinampas, or floating gardens, are a never-ending attraction of 
the City of Mexico, and yet little is known to the general reader regarding 
these curious places. Contrary to the general belief, the so-called floating gardens 
of the present day do not float. Many years since, however — in fact, before the 
conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards — the name was appropriate, for real float- 
ing gardens were then common on the lakes in the Valley of Mexico, especially 
in the immediate vicinity of the city. But when Humboldt visited Mexico (then 
called New Spain) in 1803, and Abbe Francesco Clavigero (a missionary among 
the Indians) a few years later, these peculiar possessions of the Mexicans were 
rapidly diminishing in number,- and in 1826 Captain G. F. Lyon informs us that 
"the little gardens constructed on bushes or wooden rafts no longer exist in 
the immediate vicinity of Mexico (the city); but I learned that some may yet be 
seen at Inchimilco."*, 

Abbe Francesco Clavigero describes the true floating gardens as follows: "They 
plait and twist Willows and roots of many plants, or other materials, together, 
which are light, but capable of supporting the earth of the garden firmly united. 
Upon this foundation they lay the light bushes which float on the lake, and over 
all the mud and dirt which they draw from the bottom of the same lake."t 
The common form was a quadrangle, and the average size about fifteen by forty 
feet, although some of the largest were a hundred feet in extent. Many of the lat- 
ter contained a small hut, in which the cultivator sometimes lived; one or more 
trees were also growing in the centre of these largest plots. The earth used was 
extremely rich, and this being kept in a moist state by its proximity to the water 
(the elevation above it being not over a foot), the gardens were productive of the 
choicest vegetables and flowers, including also Maize. 

The gardens of the present day are very different affairs. They do not float, but, 
on the contrary, are composed of strips of solid ground, usually about fifteen by 
thirty feet in extent, although some are larger. These plots are intersected by 
small canals, through which visitors are propelled in canoes. They are con- 
structed by heaping up the earth about two feet above the water. Willows, and 
sometimes Poplars or Silver Maples, also a species of Cane, are often grown along 

* lournal of a Residence and Tour in the Republic of Mexico in 1826, vol. ii. 
t History of Mexico. 1807, vol. ii. 


Horticulture 45 



their banks to keep them from washing down. The nearest gardens to the City of 
Mexico are along La Viga Canal, a public waterway about forty feet in width and 
of varying depth. Its source is Lake Texcoco (formerly known as Tezcuco), two 
and a half miles west of the city, from whence it flows to a point near the town 
and then returns by a circuitous route to the lake. The gardens are located where 
the ground is naturally low or swampy. 

All produce the choicest vegetables, flowers, and not infrequently fruits, in 
great abundance, embracing nearly every variety grown in the United States, and 
others unknown to us. Even in the ditches or little canals beautiful Water-lilies 
often line the way, while many of the plots are one mass of vari-colored flowers, 
the most common ones being Roses, Pinks, Geraniums, Poppies and Fuchsias. 
The great variety of shades and the enormous size of many kinds astonish and 
delight the visitor from more northern latitudes. The Poppies are more attractive 
than our finest Paeonies; on certain feast days every one wears a wreath made 
exclusively from these showy flowers. 

The quick and luxuriant growth of the products is mainly due to the daily 
application of water, which is dipped up in gourds attached to long swinging and 
pivoted poles, and deftly thrown about. It is needless to say that the cultivator 
never depends upon rain. Some of the plots are occupied by their owners and their 
families, who live in charming little houses constructed of cane, and surrounded 
by all their possessions, often including cows, horses, pigs and chickens. La Viga 


46 Arnoldia 60/3 


Canal is almost impassable on Sundays especially, and the same may be said of 
the beautiful driveways along its tree-lined banks; for Sunday in the City of 
Mexico is the liveliest and, in many respects, the busiest day of all the week. It is 
the great market day as well as holiday, and a large number of the craft on La Viga 
are loaded with produce of every description from the gardens and elsewhere. The 
visitor to the floating gardens seldom hides his disappointment on discovering 
that they are stationary, but he never regrets having visited them; indeed, a day 
spent on the canal and among the chinampas will long be remembered as one of 
the pleasantest in Mexico. 

Little is certainly known regarding the origin of these famous places. Abbe 
Clavigero says that when the Mexicans were driven from their native country, 
ages in the past, they were forced to occupy small islands in Lake Texcoco, where 
"they ceased for some years to cultivate the land, because they had none, until 
necessity and industry together taught them to form movable fields and gardens, 
which floated on the waters of the lake. . . . These were the first fields which the 
Mexicans owned after the foundation of Mexico." The custom may have origi- 
nated as above stated, but the following view, founded on a careful examination 
of some of the oldest works on Mexico, is advanced as the more probable, espe- 
cially since the Mexicans still retained and cultivated the watery plots after their 
independence was again established. 

For long ages the Valley of Mexico was subjected to devastating inundations. 
The valley is about sixty miles in diameter, and is surrounded by a continuous 
wall of hills and mountains. The waters collected on these flow into six princi- 
pal lakes. The plaza mayor, or great square, in the City of Mexico is elevated a 
few inehes only above the nearest lake — Texcoco. In former times, a prolonged 
rainy season caused the surplus waters in the other lakes — which have an eleva- 
tion of from three to thirteen feet above the plaza mayor — to burst their banks 
and flow into Lake Texcoco, which in turn overflowed and flooded the valley. In 
June, 1629, the date of the last great flood, the city was covered with water to a 
depth of three feet, and it remained in that state for five years. 

The regular fields were, of course, ruined whenever a freshet traversed the val- 
ley, and necessity finally compelled the people to depend upon floating gardens 
for a supply of produce at all seasons, and to prevent a famine. These were 
moored in places where the rise and fall of the lake waters would not affect them. 
During the period when floods were looked for at any time, these floating patches 
were very common, but when the city and valley were partially protected by a 
gigantic canal in 1789 (commenced in 1607*), by which the main overflow was 
carried off in safety, they gradually disappeared, until at the present time noth- 
ing but tbe pretty name and stationary plots surrounded by water remains to 
perpetuate an ancient custom. 

Washington, D.C. Charles H. Coe 

[Garden and Forest 8 (1895): 432-433] 

* The drainage canal, commenced by the Aztecs, has been greatly improved and only 

recently finished by the Mexican Valley Drainage and Canal Company, so that all 

surplus water and the sewage of the city is now completely carried off. 


Horticulture 47 


NOTES. 


It is stated that Mr. Ruskin maintains a Cherr\-- 
orchard solely for the benefit of the birds on his estate. 
(5 il891':36] 

Forty-six lapanese gardeners are now employed, it 
is said, in California, where it appears that the taste 
for lapanese fruit and ornamental trees has greatly 
increased. [2 (1889): 180] 

The last English census enumerated about 5,000 
women who are professional gardeners in that country, 
and six who are employed in superintending the drainage 
of towms. [7 (1894’:10] 

The health officer of San Francisco recently examined 
eight samples of fruit ieUies bought in the open market, 
and not one of them proved to be made of sound ripe 
fruit. Several apple ieUies were colored, while one in tin 
contained turnip pulp, colored with a nilin e dye to repre- 
sent strawberry ielly. (9 il896'; 290] 

The latest atrocity in the way of "fashionable" floral 
arrangements is a muff comp)osed of flowers, for the use 
of bridesmaids at weddings. People seem slow to learn 
that there is a right way and a wTong way to use natural 
flowers, and that all ways are wrong that force them to 
simulate the form of some article of dress or ornament. 
12 ,1889); 180] 

It has been suggested that instead of the present plan 
of distribution of free seeds by the Government that the 
Department of Agriculture should issue legal-tender 
notes which Congressmen could distribute among their 
constituents, so that each one could purchase the par- 
ticular kind of seeds or flowers or shrubs or trees he 
needed. Why not? [10 ,1897); 190] 

At this season, wherever any planting is done for 
beauty or for use, a httle groimd should be set apart for 
the children in eveiy home. The possession and cultiva- 
tion of a miniature garden will do much to cultivate hab- 
its of observation, turn the attention to the mysteries 
and beauties of plant-life and develop a taste which tsdll 
be a fruitful source of pleasure in after hie. 17 |189-f): l-fO] 

A correspondent inquires how much land it would 
require to furnish strawberries enough to supply an 
average-sized family. We should say that such a family 
might have in an average year all the fresh berries needed 
during their season, besides a few for canning, if five or 
six rows of plants a hundred feet long were set out 
and cultivated with rather more than average care. 
1^(18941:330] 

The people of California are to be congratulated upon 
Professor Hilgard's decision to refuse the position of 
Assistant Commissioner of Agriculture, offered to him 
by the President, and to remain the Director of the 


California experiment station, where he can accomplish 
infinitely more than he could do in Washington, imder 
the demoralizing political influences which beset the 
Department of Agriculture. [2 ,18891: 180] 

A woman in Brookl>'n who visited the grave of a de- 
ceased relative in C>'press Flills Cemetery, some months 
ago, alleges that she was poisoned by Rhus Toxicoden- 
dron [poison ity] which had been allowed to grow in her 
lot. She has sued the cemetert' association for 510,000 
damages on account of the sufferings which she has 
since endured. This gives rise to some veiy interesting 
questions as to the responsibilities of corporations who 
control cemeteries. [8 ,18951; 430] [In 1897 the plaintiff 
was awarded damages in the amount of 53,400. — Ed.] 

A writer in the Soutbein Stockman says to test the 
ripeness of a Water Melon, the thumb-nail should he 
dratsTi over it so as to scrape off the thin green skin. If the 
edges of the skin on each side of the scar are left ragged 
and granulated, and the rind under the scar is smooth, 
firm, white and glossy, the melon is ripe. If the edges of 
the scar are smooth and even and the nail plows into the 
rind in places and the skin does not come off clean, then 
the melon is green. Two melons, one known to be ripe 
and the other green, should be taken and this test prac- 
ticed on them until the difference is plainly observed. 
[5 ,1892': 600] 

The French Government has made Fhofessor C. V. Riley 
a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor as a deserved comph- 
ment for his effective studies in economical entomologt". 
His researches have not only been of advantage to the 
farmers and fruit-growers of the United States, but he 
discovered that the phylloxera was an American insect, 
and identical with the pest which had proved so disas- 
trous to French vineyards. He also introduced into 
France the spraying-nozzle which bears his name, and 
which, with certain modifications, is used in that coun- 
try to counteract the mildew of the vine. [2 ,1889): 444] 

At the late Chrysanthemum show in Philadelphia, 
Mr. W. K. Harris exhibited a plant upon which twenty 
distinct varieties had been grafted and all were in bloom 
at the same time. This suggests a new line of work, inas- 
much as such plants would be obiects of great popular 
interest at exhibitions, if a proper selection and arrange- 
ment of colors were made. It may be questioned, how- 
ever, whether a plant bearing several different kinds of 
flowers possesses any value except as a curiosity. 
Whether some varieties of feeble growth would be 
improved if grafted on a more robust stock can be ascer- 
tained by experiment. [1 (1888': 480] 

The early settlers of New lersey were not slow to dis- 
cover the peculiar value and uses of the cranberries 


48 Ainoldia 60/3 


which grow in the swampy sections of the Pines. Mahlon 
Stacy, writing from West Jersey in April, 1680, to his 
brother in Yorkshire, says that from "May till Michael- 
mas we have great store of very good wild fruit, as straw- 
berries and hurtelberries, which are like our bilberries in 
England, but far sweeter, and very wholesome," and he 
adds: "the cranberries are much like cherries for color 
and bigness, and may be kept till fruit comes in again. 
An excellent sauce is made of them for venison, turkeys 
and other great fowl. They are better to make tarts than 
either gooseberries or cherries. We have them brought to 
our houses in great plenty by the Indians." [7 (1894): 430] 

We are sorry to learn that Mr. C. M. Atkinson, one of 
the best all-round gardeners that America has seen, has 
been obliged, through physical infirmity, to retire from 
the charge, which he has held for nearly thirty years, of 
the gardens and estate of Mr. John L. Gardrier, of 
Brookline, Massachusetts. This place has long been 
known to lovers of horticulture for its well-grown 
fruits and flowers, and especially for many of those old- 
fashioned hard wood greenhouse-plants which are so 
sadly neglected in most gardens of the present day, and 
which Mr. Atkinson grew to perfection. His skill, how- 
ever, was not limited to any single field, and he was 
equally successful with Azaleas, Japanese Irises, Roses, 
Orchids, Violets, and all sorts of greenhouse and hardy 
plants. [8 (1895):30] 

Professor [L. H.j Bailey and Mr. Wilhelm Miller have 
issued another bulletin on the Chrysanthemum which 
contains much that is of interest to florists and flower 
lovers generally. Mr. Miller's chapter entitled "Chrysan- 
themums at Home" is certainly worth publishing under 
the Nixon Act, and perhaps the horticultural knowledge 
which can be disseminated by investigations and publi- 
cations of this character justify the use of the costly 
machinery of the experiment station in this particular 
direction. The question is whether it could not be used 
to better advantage elsewhere. But since the bulletin is 
published primarily for educational purposes, we must 
express our regret at the use of such a barbarism as 
"mum" for Chrysanthemum. A subject which is of suf- 
ficient importance to be discussed in a bulletin from a 
university ought to command the use of dignified and 
scholarly language. [10 (1897): 270] 

In an interesting article, called "Waste Products Made 
Useful," published in the North American Review for 
November, Lord Playfair says: "As to perfumes, there are 
some which arc really oils, and others extracted from 
flowers. There arc others which are made artificially, and 
curiously, most frequently, out of bad-smelling com- 
pounds. The fusel-oil, separated out in the distillation of 
spirits, has a peculiarly nasty and sickening odor. It is 
used, after treatment with acids and oxidizing agents, to 
make the oil of apples and the oil of pears. Oil of grapes 
and oil of cognac are little more than fusel-oil largely 


diluted. Oil of pineapples, on the other hand, is best 
made by the action of putrid cheese on sugar, or by dis- 
tilling rancid butter with alcohol and oil of vitriol. This 
oil is largely used for making pineapple ale. Many a fair 
forehead used to be damped with 'Eau de Millefleurs' 
without knowing that its essential ingredient was got 
from the drainings of cow-houses, though now it can be 
obtained cheaper from one of the constituents of gas-tar. 
[5 (1891): 540] 

Christmas gifts supplied by florists this year consisted 
almost entirely of boxes of cut flowers, violets and roses 
being the favorites. Large, deep-colored Marie Louise vio- 
lets, their long stems allowing of loose, graceful arrange- 
ment, sold for as much as five dollars a hundred. Roses 
cost from three dollars to eighteen dollars a dozen, an 
extra quality of American Beauty commanding the out- 
side price of three dollars each. Lilacs at twenty-five 
cents to fifty cents a spray, tulips at one cent each, and 
stevia at fifty cents for a small bunch, were specialties of 
the holiday season. Carnations were plentiful and cheap,- 
some well-cultivated specimens of William Scott, mea- 
suring two and a half inches across, brought the extreme 
price of two dollars a dozen. The Orchid season is now 
fairly begun, and cut blooms of Cattleya at nine dollars a 
dozen, and Cypripedium insigne at four dollars a dozen, 
were in good supply. Fruited plants of Ardisia crenulata 
and the Otaheite orange were in some demand, and 
specimen plants of Cyclamens and of Chinese Primroses 
in ornamental baskets found considerable favor. But the 
most beautiful and the most costly were luxuriantly 
flowered plants of Heath, their foliage almost hidden 
under the myriad of tiny bells, and a few extra early pink 
and white Azaleas. [8 (1895): 10] 


With the present issue, which completes the tenth 
volume, the publication of Carden and Forest ends. 
For ten years the experiment has been tried of publish- 
ing a weekly journal devoted to horticulture and forestry, 
absolutely free from all trade influences, and as good as 
it has been possible for us to make it. This experiment, 
which has cost a large amount of time and money has 
shown conclusively that there are not persons enough in 
the United States interested in the subjects which have 
been presented in the columns of Carden and Forest to 
make a journal of its class and character self-supporting. 
It is useless to expend more time and money on a publi- 
cation which cannot be made financially successful, and 
must, therefore, sooner or later cease to exist. 

Mr. J. H. Griffith, Room 106, Tribune Building, New 
York, is authorized to receive money due to the Com- 
pany, and to attend to any other business matters which 
may arise in winding up its affairs. 

Garden and Forest Publishing Co. 

[10 (1897): 518] 





TOKIO NURSERIES, 

Komagome, Tokio, Japan. 

Cable address : 
NURSERIES, TOKIO. 

Uly=bulbs, 

PLANTS, SEEDS, etc. 

Catab't^e on application. 





Readers' Wants. Situations Wanted, 

BTC.. BTC 


QARDENERS, FARHERS. 

We are constantly receiving applications for 
situations from trained men as above, many of whom 
we know as reliable. Particulars cheerfully i'urnUhed. 
No fees.— R. & J. FARQUHAR & CO, Seed and Bulb 
Dealers, i6 and 19 South Market Street, Boston. 


E nglish gardener wants situation. 

Married, no children, 38 years old, experienced 
and well recommended, three years in last place, under- 
stands thoroughly whole care and conduct of gentle- 
man’s place, including plants, greenhouses, etc. — Ad- 
dress “JAMES,” care of Jos. Breck & Sons. Bureau of 
Registry and Information, 49 to 53 North Market St, 
Boston, Mass. 


G ^ ARDENER wants situation ; eighteen years’ ex- 
f perieoce; married, one child; over Hve years in 
last situation ; understands the management of choice 
stove and greenhouse plants, orchids, ferns, chrys- 
anthemums, roses, and the general routine work of a 
gentleman’s place- — ALFRED SMITH, care of Sie- 
brecht & Waaley, Rose Hill Nurseries, New Rochelle, 
N. Y. 


E nergetic young man (m). who has a thor- 
ough knowledge of hardy perennials, trees, 
shrubs, etc., methods of planting, etc., wants employ- 
ment with landscape-gardener or nursery firm, rirst- 
olass reference from present employer.— Address H. 
M., Short Hills, N. J. 


W ANTED, a situation by a good, thoroughly e 
perienced Fruit, Vegetable and Grape’ Grower 
and Farm Manager. — Address M. L. GARDNER, Hop- 
(tinsville, Chnstian Co., Ky. 


LANDSCAPE GARDENERS. 


STEUBEN SCHINDLER, C. E., 

(pupil op the late j. weiocnmann.) 

CA:soscArE garobnbr. 

f Encinebrikc. 

LA^DSCAPB: < ARCHtTECTVRB- 

( Gardening. 

Designs, Maps, Plans, Specifications and Estimates for 
the laying-out of Parks, Cemeteries, Boulevards and 
Suburban Residences. Drainage and Planting Plans, 
Advice, Superintendence ana Inspection. Twenty 
years’ experience. 
references: 

Walter Katt6. Ch’f Eng’r N. Y. C. & H. R. R. R. 
John Bogart. Ex-Slate Eng’r, New York. 

M. A. Kellogg, EDg*rof Construction, Dep’t Pub. Parks, 
N. y. aty. 

P. O. Box 52, WEST HOBOKEN, N. J. 


DAVID HILL COOLIDQE, Jr., 

Landscape Architect, 

7.6 EXCHANGE BUILDING. STATE ST.. BOSTON. 

Advice, Design and Plans furnished for the improve- 
ment and laying out of Country Residences, Sea-side 
Villas, Parks, Cemeteries. Public Souares, Recreation 
Grounds, and for the artistic development of Land 
Schemes. 


SAMUEL HENSHAW, 

Landscape Gardener, 

West New Brighton, Staten Island, N. Y. 

Plans and estimates made for the laying-out of public 
and private grounds: also consultation in regard to 
planting and arranging of trees and shrubs lor per- 
manent effect. 


W A. MANDA, Advice, designs and executes com- 
• plete parks, flower, vegetable and fruit gardens, 
borders or beds, greenhouses and frames. Furnishes 
everything you need to beautify your home surround- 
ings. If you want best result, adaress W. A. MANDA, 
Horticultural Expert, South Orange, N. J. 


CANTON GARDEN PLOW. 



Send 15 cts. for one of our 

MINIATURE GOLD PLOWS 

For Scarf Pin or Watch Charm. 


If you want a 

HAND CART 

Write us for Prices. 


-4- 

Our Garden Plow 

Weighs 20 lbs . retails for $5. 
Thousands are in use. 


Pronounced as one of the best Garden Plows ever offered. 
Throe shovels and rake atLachmenl, steel wheel, adjustable 
frame. The cut illustrates the plow. We will ship you one .at 
$7 75, payable in 60 ctiys. 

SIRE SELLER. 


Parlin & Orendorif Co., 

MixHu/acturfTi of Agriculiurnl Imflemmtt. 

Largest and oldest permanently established Plow Factory In America. 


( Kansas City, 
BBANCH OFFICES: {Minneapolis, 
( Dallas. 


Omaha. St. Louis. 
Des Moines. Dubuque. 
Decatur, III., 


CANTON, ILL. 


Great A.iiction Sale 


OF RAKE AND VALUABLE 



W. ELLIOTT & SONS 


Have received instructions from Mrs. E. A. McFadden 
to sell by public auction the entire collection of Orchids 
and Cypripediums belonging to her late husband, F. T. 
McFadden, Esq., Cincinnati, Ohio, 

On TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 25th, 

AT THEIR SALESROOMS, 

Nos. 54 and 5 G DEY STREET, NEW YORK, 
AT ELEVEN O’CLOCK A. M. 

The collection has been long and favorably known as 
one of the choicest in the county, more especially the 
Cypripediums, in which Mr. McFadden took great pride. 
Catalogue will be mailed to all applicants. 

W. ELLIOTT. Auctioneer. 


Bowker’s ^ 

fc: Lawn Dressing. 

For rich green grass, brilliant ^^2 
^ flowers, and foliage. 

FERTILIZER CO., ^ 

DUlf IxLFl aosTeN 4 new vork.^S 



DESTROYS I 

Shall It be Toor Ilouoe or 
a Pound of Copper? 
Entirely Dew departure In pro- 
tecting buildings from lightning. 

Patents of N. D. C. Hodges, 

JEdtfor of Science. 

Send for circulars. Agents wanted. 
AacRiCAN Ligbtning Protection Co., 
'■4 Broadway, New York, 


IIADIIV TDCCC SHRUBS, VINES, EVERGREENS 

■■nllU I I IlkkO^ 3nd Hardy Herbaceous Flowers. 

The finest general assortment ol Hardy Ornamental Plants In America. 

Fully Illustrated Catalogue (300 pages) free upon application. Send your Uat of needs for special rales. 

THE READING NURSERY, ) Reading, Mass. 


Hit; NEW APPLES, PEARS, NUT TREES & NOVELTIES 3t?o\"cV/s. 

Starr, the largest early apple, ix In. around, marketable xst week in luly; P.nragon, 
Parlin and others. Itincoln Coreless Pear, very Urge and very late : Seneca, large, 
handsome and immediately after Bartlett. Japan Golden Susset, Vt. Beanty, etc. 
Japan Quince Columbia, unequaied for jelly. ITutS — Parry’s Giant. 6 in. around, 
the largest known chestnut; Paragon. Numbo and many others. 'Walnuts— French. 
Persian. Japan, English and American. Pecans, Almonds and Filberts. Eleagnus 
Longipes. Hardy Oranges ; Dwarf Rocky Mt. Cherries, free from insects, black knots 
and other diseases. Small Fruits, Grapes, Currants, etc.: Shade Trees. Ornamental 

POMONA NURSERIES. 




Chinese & Japanese Rare Seeds 

Direct from China and Japan in original hand- 
ivalnted imported l>ags, comprising Japanese 
Chrysanthnnums, Chinese Pinks. Ins K.t-mpfrri, 
Vinca Rnsen, Piatycudon ('irandiflom. Chinese 
P.i-onles, Japanese Mammoth Monnng Glory. Tri- 
cosanlhes Cucumcroides. Leucanihemum Nip- 
ponicuin. Each, loc pkt.,orihc 9 lor 75c. lllus- 
lialed catalogue tree. 90c. per ll>. Yellow Glohr 
Danvers Onion Sbei). iicwcrop; rverv seed grows. 
H. Cr. FAUST & CO.. tuAcC North Front 
Street, I'iilladelplila, Pa. 

















mr 0 iv200i 


GRAY HERBARIUM 


amolaia 


Volume 60 • Number 4 • 2000-2001 

Ainoldia (ISSN 004-2633; USPS 866-100) is 
published quarterly by the Arnold Arboretum of 
Harvard University. Second-class postage is paid at 
Boston, Massachusetts. 

Subscriptions are $20.00 per calendar year domestic, 
$25.00 foreign, payable in advance. Single copies of 
most issues are $5.00; the exceptions are 58/4-59/1 
(Metasequoia After Fifty Years) and 54/4 (A Source- 
book of Cultivar Names), which are $10.00. Remit- 
tances may be made in U.S. dollars by check drawn 
on a U.S. bank; by international money order; and 
by Visa or Mastercard. Send orders, remittances, 
change-of-address notices, and all other subscription- 
related communications to: Circulation Manager, 
Arnoldia, The Arnold Arboretum, 125 Arborway, 
Jamaica Plain, Massachusetts 02130-3500. 

Telephone 617/524-1718; facsimile 617/524-1418; 
e-mail arnoldia@arnarb.harvard.edu. 

Postmaster: Send address changes to 
Arnoldia Circulation Manager 
The Arnold Arboretum 
125 Arborway 

Jamaica Plain, MA 02130-3500 

Karen Madsen, Editor 
Andy Winther, Designer 

Editorial Committee 
Phyllis Andersen 
Ellen S. Bennett 
Robert E. Cook 
Peter Del Tredici 
Gary Roller 
Stephen A. Spongberg 
Kim E. Tripp 


Page 

2 The View From the Forest Canopy 
Richard Primack, Melvin Goh, and 
Meekiong Kalu 

10 Survival of the Most Adaptable 
Peter Del Tredici 

19 Cypress Knees: An Enduring Enigma 
Christopher H. Briand 

26 Ginkgo biloba in Japan 
Mariko Handa 

35 Arnold Arboretum Weather Station 
Data — 2000 

37 Index to Volume 60 

Front cover: The “knees" of Taxodium distichum. 

Inside front cover: A gallery of adaptable plants. 

First row, from left to right: Stewartia sinensis, 
Liriodendron tulipifera x chinense, Aristolochia 
mandshuriensis. 

Second row: Cercidiphyllum iaponicum 'Morioka 
Weeping', Quercus phellos. Hydrangea quercifolia. 

Third row: Abies koreana, Koelreuteria paniculata 
'Rose Lantern', Rhododendron calendulaceum. 

Inside back cover: First row, from left to right: 
Xanthoceras sorbifolium. Heptacodium miconiodes. 
Hydrangea quercifolia. 

Second row: Koelreuteria paniculata 'Rose 
Lantern', Stewartia sinensis. Hydrangea paniculata 
'Praecox'. 

Third row: Rhododendron arborescens, 

Enkianthus perulatus, Lindera obtusilobum. 


Copyright © 2001. The President and Fellows of Back cover: Betula platyphylla seen through Acer 

Harvard College pseudosieboldianum on Changbai Shan, north China. 



Tree climber fugah Tagi photographed on a giant strangler fig. Ficus sp. IMoraceae). 




The View from the Forest Canopy 

Richard Primack, Melvin Goh, and Meekiong Kalu 


F or decades, botanists from Harvard Uni- 
versity and elsewhere have been studying 
the remarkably diverse flora of the 
rainforests on the island of Borneo. Much of 
this interest was sparked hy Peter Ashton, 
former director of the Arnold Arboretum, who 
has been doing research in Borneo for over forty 
years. Through the years, many Harvard stu- 
dents, undergraduate and graduate, as well as 
postdoctoral and staff researchers, have traveled 
to Borneo to look for new plant species, to hunt 
for plants with medicinal potential, or to deter- 
mine the environmental effects of logging. 
Others have pursued zoological interests. Tim 
Laman, an Arnold Arhoretum Associate, com- 
bined his knowledge of the rainforest with 
his photographic skills to produce a series of 
articles for National Geographic, most recently 
one on gliding frogs, lizards, and snakes that 
live in the forest canopy. Cheryl Knott and 
Mark Leighton of Harvard's Peahody Museum 
have investigated the ecology of orangutans, 
monkeys, hornhills, and other large mammals 
and birds. 

Whatever the subject being investigated, a 
key member of all these exploration teams in 
Borneo's rainforest is a person known as a "tree 
climber." Not surprisingly, a tree climber's offi- 
cial job is to climb trees and collect specimens 
of leaves, flowers, and fruits that are then dried 
and mounted on herbarium sheets for use in 
botanical research. The best tree climbers are 
also experts in camp craft and forest lore. Two of 
the most famous tree climbers in all of South- 
east Asia, both of them well known to Harvard 
researchers, are fugah Tagi and Banyeng Ludong, 
now in their fifties and recently retired from the 
Sarawak Forest Department. Sarawak, which is 
part of Malaysia, occupies the northwest coast 
of Borneo. 

Both lugah and Banyeng grew up in remote 
longhouses, the sort of single-structure villages 
on stilts that are common in Borneo. After their 


childhood, they went to Kuching, the capital of 
Sarawak, seeking education and work. They 
both have the "burongs" — bird tattoos on their 
throats and star tattoos on their shoulders — that 
mark them as members of the rural Ihans (also 
known as the Sea Dayaks), but apart from that, 
they are very different in both appearance and 
personality, lugah is short, weighing only 
around a hundred pounds, with an outgoing, 
fun-loving personality. In a group he is often 
the main talker, loudly telling stories in an 
excited, high-pitched voice. By contrast, 
Banyeng is barrel-chested, with a quieter, more 
reserved personality. He usually speaks more 
slowly and hesitantly, but occasionally he, too, 
becomes excited. 

The Traditional Way of Climbing Trees 

In their working years, both lugah and Banyeng 
could climb virtually any tree in Sarawak's 
forest: few trees were too tall or too difficult for 
these two, who used the traditional methods 
they had learned from boyhood and refined 
while working for the Forest Department. The 
most common method involves an inchworm- 
like series of movements — grabbing a tree with 
the arms, raising the legs along the trunk, and 
gripping the trunk with their feet while extend- 
ing the body another one to two feet up the 
trunk — movements repeated again and again 
until the top of the tree is reached. 

When the trees were of ideal size for climbing 
in this way — about two feet in diameter — 
Banyeng and fugah could scoot to the top in a 
minute or two. When the trees were smaller, or 
had slippery bark, they sometimes tied a rope 
around their ankles to increase the pressure of 
their feet against the trunk. 

When the trunk of the targeted tree is too 
thick to hold onto, the traditional tree climber 
has to work from a smaller tree nearby. If the 
smaller tree is flexible enough, he might simply 
climb to the top branch and swing back and 


4 Arnoldia 60/4 



Jugah Tagi demonstrates the techniques of traditional tree climbing. 


forth until he can reach over, grab a branch of 
the larger tree, and leap across. Other situations 
require the use of a "penyulok," a forked pole 
up to thirty or thirty-five feet long to which 
another forked stick is tied with a vine to make 
a hook. For example, after climbing the smaller 
tree, the tree climber might haul up the 
penyulok into the tree using a long, rope-like 
rattan vine. He then extends the penyulok hori- 
zontally to hook a branch on the target tree and 
twists the branch until it breaks off and falls to 
the ground. In other cases the climber might 
build bridges between the two trees: after pull- 
ing up the penyulok and hooking it over a 
branch on the target tree, he ties the base of the 
penyulok to the smaller tree and crosses over it 
to the larger tree 

As one can imagine, these maneuvers, often 
performed hundreds of feet above the ground, 
require extraordinary strength and suppleness, 
as well as long practice, lugah and Banyeng 
never used safety equipment even when climb- 


ing trees more than 175 feet tall, relying on their 
own skill and confidence to avoid accidents. 
Today's young tree climbers, by contrast, make 
extensive use of tree-climbing spurs and belts 
and specialized rock-climbing equipment. This 
makes tree climbing much slower and more 
restrictive than the traditional methods. 

But it also makes the climbing safer. Banyeng, 
who still does contract work with the Forest 
Department, comments on the danger inherent 
in his unusual profession: "There is always an 
element of fear when you are so high up, but the 
higher we go, the more careful we are. The few 
times that I have fallen it was because I wasn't 
careful enough, as I was not very high yet. My 
worst accident was near Melinau Gorge in Mulu 
National Park, where I not only fell out of a tree, 
but also rolled down a hill and got really hanged 
up all over." 

Paul Chai, at the time a Forest Department 
botanist and who frequently worked with visit- 
ing Harvard researchers, recalls this incident. 


Tree Climbers 5 




Maneuvering the penyulok into position. 


Constructing the hook end of a penyulok. 


and says that other mem- 
hers of the party thought 
Banyeng had prohahly been 
killed in the fall. When they 
dashed down the slope to 
find him, however, they 
discovered that Banyeng's 
main complaint was that he 
couldn't find his new clay 
pipe, which had fallen out 
of his mouth during his 
tumhle down the hill. 

"Daily-Paid" Tree Climbers: 
Two Careers Begin 

In the early 1960s, when 
fugah and Banyeng first 
signed up with the Forest 
Department as daily-paid 
tree climhers, they hardly 
expected to become full- 
time employees, much less 



Using the penyulok to break off flowering branches from a neighboring tree. 



H S. WOOD IN A MANUAL OF DIPTEHOCARP TREES OF HRUNEI STATE AND SARAWAK. SUIM’i EMENT. F S ASHTi)N. 196:1 


6 Arnoldia 60/4 



A young Banyeng Ludong photographed beside the trunk of a resak batu 
tree. Cotylelobium malayan (Dipterocarpaceae). 

recognized experts in their trade. Climbing trees 
came naturally to them; like other boys in their 
longhouses, they had learned tree climbing 
along with fishing, hunting, and farming. But 
both possessed unusual agility and curiosity, 
which made them well-suited to their future 
occupation. 

The two men came to the profession through 
similar routes. In 1963, lugah, then a young Ihan 
from a longhouse on the Sut River, a tributary of 
the Kaiang River, upstream of Kapit in central 
Sarawak. He met the well-known forester B. E. 

Smythies, of the Sarawak Forest Department, in 
Kuching, the state capital, where he had gone to 
look for work. Smythies' name was familiar to 
lugah because a friend had worked for him in 
Brunei. lugah managed to convince Smythies 


of his abilities and his willingness to 
work hard, and that was the begin- 
ning of his career. 

lugah recalls the opportunity that 
Smythies' offer represented: "At that 
time, life at our longhouse was quite 
difficult. I helped on the farm and 
occasionally took rubber and wild 
fruits to Kapit, the nearest town, for 
sale. The journey itself was difficult 
then — a day's paddling from the 
longhouse to the town and a further 
two-day ride back upstream. When 
the offer was made of a job paying 
RM 4.00 per day [now just over one 
U.S. dollar], I grabbed it, since the 
amount seemed very big. I had no 
formal education as far as plants or 
trees were concerned. At first, all I 
knew was how to climb the trees and 
collect whatever plant specimens 
were needed." 

Banyeng came from a longhouse 
on the Merit River, a tributary of the 
great Rajang River. He arrived in 
Kuching in 1957 and spent six years 
in a Chinese primary school. He too 
met B. E. Smythies and applied for 
the job of daily-paid tree climber. He 
was soon hired, as he came highly 
recommended by Robb Anderson, 
the great authority on Southeast 
Asian peat swamp forests. "To get 
RM 4.00 a day then was quite a good pay," 
recalls Banyeng, now the father of four grown 
children. "I think that I was hired because I 
was very interested in the job, and I grabbed the 
offer, as it was not that easy to get a job without 
many skills." 

It quickly became evident to both men that 
they would need to learn a great deal in order to 
succeed at their new profession, lugah tells of a 
conversation he had with Peter Ashton, then 
working as a Forest Department botanist: "He 
asked me if I knew the names of the plants or 
trees we were collecting from, and when I said 
no, he looked at me with disbelief and chided 
me for my lack of knowledge. It was, according 
to him, a necessity for me to at least know the 
local names of the plants. This was one of the 


Tree Climbers 7 


skills required of tree climbers, to know the 
names the local communities gave to the plants. 

"I knew that what he said was true and cor- 
rect. I had to know the names, not only for my- 
self hut also because of what I was doing. With 
little education and knowledge, I realized that if 
I were to he good at what I do, I had to master 
some of the skills needed in the trade. Over the 
years, I learned the local names of the plants and 
trees. For many trees, I also learned the species 
and family names used hy plant experts." 

Outdoing Botanists at Their Own Game 

Indeed, both Banyeng and lugah are storehouses 
of hotanical knowledge. Through years of work- 
ing with local botanists and foresters, as well as 
with visitors from Fiarvard and other universi- 
ties, lugah and Banyeng have come to know the 
names of hundreds of tree species, and often 
their scientific Latin names as well. When they 
are not able to identify a species, they can usu- 
ally recognize the family to which the tree 
belongs, or the species it is related to. 

So proficient are they that they can often 
remember where they first saw a particular spe- 
cies, a huge help in field identification. And m 
contrast to most trained botanists, who must 
study plants carefully before venturing an 
identification, Banyeng and lugah can name 
plants on sight with incredible speed. At Bako 
National Park, lugah used to play a game with 
botanists, who would show him a leafy branch 
for five seconds and then hide it from sight. If 
lugah knew the species, he would say the name 
instantly. To make the game more challenging, 
the botanists showed the branch for only three 
seconds or even one, and the result was the 
same — if lugah knew the species, he needed 
only the briefest glance to recognize it. But his 
skills went even farther, he could he shown 
two or even three branches mingled together, all 
of different species, and still identify them 
instantly. In addition to being expert at field 
identification, both Banyeng and lugah are 
repositories of knowledge about the ways villagers 
use each part of a tree species — for construction, 
medicine, rope, or food — and which animals eat 
the fruit, leaves, or bark. 

lugah and Banyeng eventually taught practi- 
cal field identification to dozens of other Forest 



Banyeng holding a fruiting branch of a sabal palm, 
Pinanga tomentella. 


Department staff and visitors. Paul Chai, now 
working with the International Tropical Timber 
Organization, recalls how Jugah and Banyeng 
would begin hy showing newcomers a leafy 
branch. Then, over the course of days and weeks 
in the field, they would reduce the learning cues 
to a single leaf, then part of a leaf, and finally 
only part of a rotten leaf. These lessons were 
always taught in good humor and accompanied 
by lots of laughter at each stage. 

The Care and Feeding of Scientists 

Probably the tree climbers' most important job 
is to keep the research scientists alive in the 
field, particularly when the scientists are visit- 
ing Borneo for the first time. Between the two of 
them, Jugah and Banyeng have saved the lives of 
numerous inexperienced biologists, including 
one of the authors, Richard Primack. 

Primack recalls a Flarvard-sponsored expedi- 
tion in 1981 to Mulu National Park, at that time 
still a wild and remote area, when Jugah saved 


RICHARD PRIMACK 


8 Arnoldia 60/4 



Jugcih helping to identify branches at Bako National Park. 

him from a serious accident or death: "On one 
of the evenings, while Jugah was setting up a 
camp on the side of Mt. Mulu, I crossed a shal- 
low, rock-filled stream to a little island, about a 
hundred feet long by fifteen feet wide, on which 
were growing some unusual shrubs and vines 
that I wanted to collect. I noted that above me 
the mountain was draped in black rain clouds, 
but I didn't give it much thought. As I was 
collecting plants, I saw Jugah gesturing at me 
urgently, but I couldn't hear what he was shout- 
ing due to the rising roar of the stream. From the 
look on his face I could see that something was 
terribly wrong. 

"Deciding I had better see what Jugah wanted, 
I was preparing to cross the twenty-foot stream 
to where he was standing when I saw that most 
of the rocks were now covered by the surging 
stream. As I watched, the water was getting 
visibly higher! Suddenly, I realized that a flash 
flood was coming. I struggled to the middle of 
the stream but couldn't keep my footing in the 
strong, knee-high current that covered the slip- 
pery rocks below. I was fighting just to keep 
standing in the rush of oncoming water. Just 
then, Jugah dashed into the stream and hauled 
me out onto the bank, despite the fact that I 
outweighed him by sixty pounds. Within the 
next few minutes, the water level in the stream 


rose another two feet, covering 
the little island and the place 
where I had been innocently 
wandering about only minutes 
before." 

Another life-threatening in- 
cident involved an American 
biologist who had come to col- 
lect snakes on the Sarawak 
coast with Jugah and other 
members of the Forest Depart- 
ment. "Fie was quite inexperi- 
enced in catching snakes, as it 
turned out," Jugah recounts. 
"A boat dropped us off in the 
afternoon in the Santubong 
area. We were planning to col- 
lect snakes at night, with the 
boat picking us up the next 
morning. The American told 
us that he was interested in 
collecting king cobras and other poisonous 
snakes. I told him that these were very danger- 
ous snakes and that he should let me catch 
them for him, or he should at least wear gloves. 
Before long we caught sight of a poisonous 
snake near some bushes. Saying he didn't need 
our help, he brushed us aside. Despite our 
warnings, he insisted that he was capable of 
catching the snake himself with his bare 
hands. As he reached for the snake, it bit his 
hand, and as he struggled to grab its head, it bit 
him a second time. 

"Finally, hearing our screams, he flung the 
snake into the forest. Fie asked us how serious 
the bite was. I told him, 'You are going to die 
unless you go right to the Kuching Fiospital,' 
and he then asked me what was the fastest way 
to the hospital. There was no road to the coast 
then; we had reached the place by boat but it 
was not due to pick us up until the next day. By 
then, he would have been long dead from the 
snake's poison! Luckily for him, we managed to 
find a fisherman who had just returned from his 
fishing trip and was willing to take us back to 
Kuching. But the fisherman was asking RM 
50.00 to ferry us to Kuching, which seemed very 
high. The American didn't seem too pleased 
about the high price and asked me what I 
thought of the situation. 



Tree Climbers 9 


"'It's quite simple,' I told him. 'Either you pay 
him or we wait for our boat tomorrow. Only by 
then we will he carrying your dead body with 
us.' Upon hearing that, he made no further fuss, 
and we arrived in Kuching just in time to get 
treatment for the bites." lugah laughs as he 
finishes: "The American left Sarawak without 
going out snake-collecting again." 

Another crucial role played by tree climbers is 
that of supplementing their expeditions' limited 
supply of tinned meats with fresh meat, lugah 
and Banyeng are highly skilled fishermen and 
hunters and often welcomed the opportunity to 
use these skills while on field trips. In the early 
days, any animal could be shot for food, but 
awareness of the need for conservation later 
resulted in restrictions against hunting 
monkeys, hornbills, and other endangered wild- 
life. This often meant that the tree climbers 
faced conflicting demands: the need to follow 
the new restrictions on the one hand, and the 
need to supply food for expedition members on 
the other. 

Fortunately, even if the hunting wasn't good, 
there were always fish to be caught. Mountain 
streams often produced a large supply of small 
fish, albeit full of bones. Any pole with a bit of 
string, a fishhook or a bent nail, and a small 
berry or insect as bait would suffice for fishing 
gear. Lee Hua Seng, associate director of the 
Forest Department and a frequent visitor to the 
forest, recalls that Banyeng had a special talent 
for catching freshwater carp using a fishing rod 
fashioned from the midrib of a palm frond, with 
a grasshopper tied to its end for bait. 

Richard Primack also recalls one memorable 
evening m 1986 when he was working with a 
student, Pamela Hall, and Forest Department 
staff at the remote Bukit Mersing Protected 
Forest, way upriver and a long walk into the 
forest. One night everybody was sleeping in the 
streamside camp except lugah, who was out 
hunting. When a gunshot echoed through the 
forest, everyone woke up. About tv/enty min- 
utes later, lugah emerged from the dark forest 
carrying a dead porcupine the size of a basket- 
ball. The men heaped up the campfire with 
wood and threw the porcupine on it to burn off 
the quills. The experience of sitting around a 
huge fire at eleven o'clock at night on a remote 


Borneo mountain, with clouds of burning porcu- 
pine smoke rising in the air and sparks flying 
from the crackling quills, will definitely not he 
forgotten soon. 

Tree climbers are also responsible for setting 
up camps in remote locations, making sure the 
camps are safe, functional, and if possible, com- 
fortable. The basic camp consists of a frame- 
work of poles over which tarps are stretched to 
keep out the rain. Simple cots covered with 
mosquito netting serve as beds. Often, the tree 
climbers are asked to improvise special struc- 
tures, such as a writing desk and chair for a sci- 
entist, or a temporary shelter of palm leaves 
when a sudden rain shower erupts. 

Banyeng and Jugah learned that their knowl- 
edge of camp craft was not always heeded, how- 
ever. Banyeng often worked with Peter Ashton, 
and Banyeng recalls that while Ashton was 
brilliant as an administrator and biologist, he 
sometimes chose not to listen to advice. "Dur- 
ing one of our collecting expeditions along the 
Baram River he insisted on pitching his tent 
along a riverbed despite repeated warnings from 
us. The rainwater that fed the stream eventually 
rushed down the slope later that evening and 
washed away his tent, leaving him cursing and 
fuming over the situation," Banyeng remem- 
bers, laughing. 

Today there are still tree climbers in the Forest 
Department collecting tree branches for botani- 
cal projects and also gathering fruits and seeds 
for various replanting projects. But these young 
tree climbers, with their special climbing shoes, 
belts, and ropes cannot easily move around in 
the forest because their equipment is so heavy 
and cumbersome. Climbing with the new gear 
is slow and tiring in comparison with the speed 
with which the young Jugah and Banyeng 
bounded up trees with no equipment at all. 
Those days are over for the tree climbers, the 
Forest Department, and the visiting researchers, 
but the vivid memories remain. 


Richard Primack is a professor of plant ecology at Boston 
University and -was recently a Bullard Fellow in the 
Harvard University Herbaria. Melvin Goh is a reporter 
for the Sarawak Tribune. Meekiong Kalu is a research 
officer for the Sarawak Biodiversity Centre. 


Survival of the Most Adaptable 


Peter Del Tredici 


B otanic gardens and arboreta are great 
places for the adventurous gardener to 
explore for plants and new ways to use 
them. Tucked into out-of-the-way, often untidy 
corners one can find plants that are refreshingly 
different from those offered by the trendy horti- 
cultural industry or seen in our monotonous 
suburban landscapes. Often these plants have 
been underutilized because they cannot meet 
the demands of a horticultural marketplace that 
requires rapid turnover. Botanic gardens, by 
contrast, are islands of stability where plants 
can grow and develop at their own pace. This is 
especially important in the case of trees, which 
can be very slow to develop, often taking fifteen 
to twenty years to produce flowers or cones. 

A brief summary of how plants become part 
of botanic garden collections will illustrate the 
value of these collections for the gardener inter- 
ested in expanding his or her horticultural 
options. To begin with, the source of the plants 
is an important part of the process. Botanic gar- 
dens, particularly those with a research mission, 
go to great lengths to obtain plant material that 
has been collected in the wild and documented 
with herbarium specimens. This expensive and 
time-consuming documentation ensures for 
future generations that our plants are properly 
identified. And that represents only the begin- 
ning of tbe plant documentation, wbicb con- 
sumes a significant portion of the Arboretum's 
living collections budget. 

In contrast, there is no way to know for cer- 
tain that a plant in a nursery is what the label 
says it is. Indeed, most nurseries raise their 
plants from very small seedlings or cuttings that 
they purchase, and they use the identifications 
that come with them. If the seeds were collected 
from the wild (and correctly identified), the 
seedlings will be true to type. If the source nurs- 
ery made an identification mistake, however, 
the error will spread throughout the industry. 


After seeds have been collected in the wild 
and received at the greenhouse, they are chilled 
or scarified before being sown. When and if they 
germinate, the resulting seedlings are potted up. 
Once they reach an appropriate size in the nurs- 
ery, which differs widely from garden to garden, 
they are labeled and planted out in permanent 
locations where it is hoped they will flourish. 
The plants are watered and weeded during their 
first year or two on the grounds, but after that 
they are generally left to develop in their own 
good time, under conditions that might be 
called "benign neglect." The whole process, 
from seed to being planted out on the grounds, 
is long, taking three to five years for shrubs and 
five to seven for trees. 

The purpose of this article is to highlight 
some noteworthy plants that have made it 
through the cultivation process at the Arnold 
Arboretum but are still not common in the 
landscapes and gardens of the Northeast. Some 
of them can be considered new, having only 
recently become available commercially, while 
others are not currently available through nurs- 
eries even though they have been growing on 
tbe Arboretum grounds for over a hundred 
years. The latter group includes plants that have 
always been ignored by the nursery industry, 
and others that may have been popular in the 
past but have fallen out of favor and are now 
essentially forgotten. 

Most of the plants on the list are adaptable to 
a wide range of environmental conditions, grow- 
ing well in either full sun or partial shade, and 
on wet or dry sites. All of them have performed 
well on the Arboretum's well-drained, acidic 
soils, and most have few, if any, pest or disease 
problems. Keep in mind, however, that this 
characterization is based on a small sample size 
and may not hold true if the plants become 
widely planted. It should also be noted that the 
USDA hardiness zone ratings, as well as the 


Adaptable Plants 1 1 



sizes of the plants, are meant as guidelines 
rather than as absolute judgments. 

While most of the plants have multiseason 
interest, I have organized the list around their 
primary season of interest. The list is heavily 
weighted toward species rather than cultivars, for 
two reasons: first, many of the plants have not 
yet undergone intensive horticultural selection 
in either nurseries or landscapes, so no cultivars 
are available,- and second, the primary criterion 
for selection was ecological adaptability, which is 
best treated as an attribute of the species as a 
whole rather than of a particular cultivar. 

Selecting plants with broad adaptability may 
be the best approach to one of the gardener's pri- 
mary goals: choosing the right plant for the right 
place. Unfortunately, highly adaptable species 
can also he highly invasive; the trick is to iden- 
tify species that are adaptable but not invasive. 
The amur cork tree (Phellodendron amurense) 
is an example of a species that has the potential 
to become an invasive if it becomes widely 
planted in the Northeast. It is an unfortunate 
conundrum that every plant, including 
Stewartia pseudocamellia and Acer palmatum, 
has the potential to become invasive when 
growing conditions allow its seedlings to get 
established. 

My reasons for assembling this list go well 
beyond an interest in seeing greater variety in 
our local landscapes. Our physi- 
cal environment is changing 
rapidly — in large part because of 
human activities — and there is 
an urgent need to identify plant 
species that can thrive alongside 
people and the pollution we 
inevitably create. The plants 
listed below have performed reli- 
ably under a variety of environ- 
mental conditions with minimal 
maintenance and little supple- 
mental irrigation; they can 
therefore be considered "pre- 
adapted" to flourish under the 
erratic weather extremes that 
global warming appears to have 
in store for us. I hope this eclec- 
tic sample of ornamentals will 
not only encourage horticultural 


experimentation, but also get more people 
thinking in practical terms about the impending 
changes in our environment. 

SPRING 

Aristolochia manschuiiensis (Manchurian 
dutchman's pipe): zone 4 (?). This rarely seen 
vine produces three-quarter-inch-long yellow 
flowers early in spring before the foliage 
emerges, making it much showier than the 
American species, A. macrophylla, whose flow- 
ers are hidden under fully expanded leaves. 
While the two species are similar in growth rate 
and habit, the leaves of the Manchurian species 
are somewhat larger and a duller green than 
those of the American species. 

Chionanthus retusus (Chinese fringetree): zone 
5. Chinese fringetree is more tree-like than its 
straggly American cousin, C. virginicus. In May 
or June, the whole plant is covered by small, 
white flowers, followed by a large crop of blue- 
purple fruit in fall. When planted in an open 
situation, Chinese fringetree will develop into 
an elegant specimen about thirty feet in height 
with a similar spread. It has a broad distribution 
in Asia, where it shows considerable variation 
in hardiness, leaf shape, and growth form. 
At least two distinct ecotypes are available 
from commercial nurseries in the United States, 


Chionanthus retusus 


12 Arnoldia 60/4 


one adapted to warm, dry climates like that 
of southern California and the other better 
suited to cold, moist climates like that of New 
England. 

Corylopsis spicata (Japanese winterhazel): 
zone 5. All winterhazels produce beautiful, soft- 
yellow flowers in early spring and perform best 
in moist soil under light shade. Japanese 
winterhazel, together witli fragrant winterhazel 


(C. glabrescens), is the hardiest species of the 
genus. It can reach six to ten feet in height witJi 
an equal spread and works well as a mass plant- 
ing. The soft yellow color of its flowers offers an 
attractive antidote to the bright yellow forsythia 
that bloom at about the same time. 

Fothergillci major 'Mt. Airy': zone 5. The 'Mt. 
Airy' cultivar is more vigorous and floriferous 
than the species. It spreads rapidly from under- 
ground stems and tolerates a wide range of con- 
ditions. It grows to about five or six feet in 
height and produces fall color in a gorgeous 
blend of yellow, orange, and scarlet. 


large, pendant, white flowers in early spring. 
The combination of upright, conical habit and 
drooping flowers is very striking. Like both its 
parents, 'Wada's Memory' does best in full sun 
and moist soil. 

Prunus cyclamina (cyclamen cberry): zone 6 
(5?). A native of central China, cyclamen cherry 
grows to thirty feet in height with an equal 
spread. It produces prolific clusters of small, 
rose-pink flowers in early 
spring, and in fall its foliage 
turns a beautiful orange-red. 
Compared to other cherries cul- 
tivated at the Arnold Arbore- 
tum, cyclamen cherry is free of 
pests and disease. 

Rhododendron calendulaceum 
(flame azalea): zone 5. This aza- 
lea is one of the best-adapted to 
the Northeast. It blooms in late 
May to early June, producing 
yellow, orange, or red flowers. 
It grows equally well in sun and 
shade and is tolerant of drought 
and, compared to other azaleas, 
of soils with high pHs. Inferior 
hybrids and cultivars have 
largely displaced the flame 
azalea in contemporary land- 
scapes, but its hardiness and lack of susceptibil- 
ity to powdery mildew bave led to a resurgence 
of interest, especially for naturalistic plantings. 

Syringa x chinensis 'Lilac Sunday': zone 3. This 
cultivar of the persian lilac, selected at the 
Arnold Arboretum, is a large, spreading shrub 
that can grow to be ten to fifteen feet tall and 
equally wide, producing foot-long racemes of 
light purple flowers in mid-May. In general, 
Persian lilac is more heat tolerant and disease 
resistant than the common lilac (Syringa vul- 
garis): it also produces a smaller, more delicate 
foliage, creating a lacy appearance. 



Corylopsis spicata 


Magnolia x 'Wada's Memory': zone 4. This 
hybrid of the willowleaf (M. salicifolia) and 
kobus (M. kohusj magnolias grows to be about 
thirty feet tall and only ten feet wide, producing 


Weigela suhsessilis (Korean weigela): zone 5. 
This multistemmed shrub from Korea grows to 
be about six feet tall and six feet wide. In May it 
produces three-inch-long flowers that change 


Adaptable Plants 13 



Syringa x chinensis ‘Lilac Sunday’ 


Aesculus parviflora (bottle- 
brush buckeye): zone 4. This 
large, July-blooming buckeye 
is native to the southeastern 
United States. Its spectacular 
flower spikes can reach up to 
twelve inches in length. It is 
decidedly shrubby in habit, 
forming large clumps from 
underground suckers and lay- 
ers. Unlike most buckeyes, it is 
totally free of leaf scorch, so its 
foliage looks good throughout 
the summer and fall. Because it 
grows equally well in sun or 
shade, the bottlehrush buckeye 
is perfect for sites where the 
woodland meets the garden's 
edge — especially since its win- 


gradually from pale yellow to lavender, creat- 
ing an interesting, multicolored effect. The 
plant deserves further testing under both 
nursery and landscape conditions. 


Xanthocems sorbifolium (yellowhorn): zone 4 
(3?)- An upright shrub or small tree from 
China, yellowhorn grows to fifteen feet in 
height with a somewhat gawky growth habit. 
It produces showy white flowers on six- 
to ten-inch-long racemes in late spring. 
Yellowhorn is tolerant of full sun and of dry 
soils with high pHs; together with its ability 
to spread from root suckers, this makes it 
potentially useful for highway embankments 
and other difficult sites. 


SUMMER 


Actinidia kolomikta (kolomikta kiwi): zone 
4. This unusual vine from northeast Asia nor- 
mally produces irregularly variegated leaf tips 
of white and pink in spring and summer, mak- 
ing it look as though someone had splashed 
paint on its leaves. It should be sited so that 
its dramatic foliage can he viewed from above 
(e.g., below a deck). If left to its own devices, 
the kolomikta kiwi can spread into adjacent 
trees and damage them, a problem that can he 
avoided by training it to a trellis or periodi- 
cally pruning it. 


Aesculus parviflora 




1 4 Arnoldia 60/4 



Aesculus parviflora 


central leader without staking. 
It produces strongly pendant 
branches with a growth form 
reminiscent of weeping beech, 
and it should be planted near 
water for fastest growth and best 
effect. Twenty-year-old plants of 
'Morioka Weeping' are now over 
thirty feet tall and ten feet wide. 

Hydrangea paniculata 'Praecox' 
(early hydrangea): zone 3. Early 
hydrangea forms a large shrub 
growing to about ten feet in 
height and the same in width. It 
begins to flower in midsummer, 
continuing for about six weeks, 
with sterile flowers that gradu- 
ally turn from white to red to 
papery brown. In appearance, it 
is more "natural" than the old- 
fashioned peegee hydrangea {H. 
paniculata 'Grandiflora'), but it 
is every bit as hardy and flexible 
in its soil and moisture require- 
ments. The cultivar 'Tardiva' is 
similar to 'Praecox', but blooms 
about a month later. 



Hydrangea paniculata ‘Praecox’ 

ter habit can be gawky when cultivated as a 
specimen in the open. 

Cercidiphyllum japonicum "Morioka Weeping': 
zone 4. This spectacular katsura cultivar origi- 
nated in Morioka City, Iwate Prefecture, lapan, 
and was introduced into North America by the 
Arnold Arboretum in 1981 under the name 
Cercidiphyllum magnificum 'Pendulum'. 
'Morioka Weeping' can he distinguished from 
other weeping katsuras by its ability to form a 


Hydrangea quercifolia (oakleaf 
hydrangea): zone 5. The horticul- 
tural merits of this outstanding 
shrub, a native of the Southeast, 
have finally been recognized. It 
grows well in either sun or 
shade, and is tolerant of dry soils. 
It produces beautiful blossoms 
in July and stunning burgundy- 
red fall color; in fact, even if 
the plant never flowered, it would he worth 
growing for its bold foliage. This species and all 
of its cultivars well deserve the popularity they 
are now enjoying. 


Liriodendron tulipifera x chinense (Chinese- 
American tulip tree): zone 5(?). One plant of this 
cross has been growing at the Arboretum since 
1981; it is now over thirty feet tall and fifteen 
feet wide. Its foliage is bronzy colored in spring, 
and its flowers, though somewhat smaller than 


Adaptable Plants 15 



Quercus phellos 

those of the American species, have more 
orange in their petals. This hybrid tulip tree was 
developed at the University of North Carolina 
in 1978 and should he tested in landscape situa- 
tions. The specimen at the Arboretum has been 
given the cultivar name 'Chapel Hill'. 


Rhododendron arborescens (sweet azalea): zone 
4. Sweet azalea is native to moist habitats 
throughout the mountains of the Southeast. In 
late June and July it produces extremely fragrant 
white flowers that are highlighted by bright red 
anther filaments. Since its glossy green foliage 
is generally undamaged by insects or fungi, it 
remains attractive throughout the growing sea- 
son. Sweet azalea can grow to about six feet in 
height and spreads laterally by underground 
stems, making it an ideal choice for naturalistic 
landscapes. 

Xanthorhiza simplicissirna (yellowroot): zone 3. 
This woody groundcover grows to be about two 
feet tall, spreading vigorously by underground 
stems and performing well in both wet and dry 
soils and in sun or shade. Its adaptability and 
persistence make yellowroot a good choice for 
low-maintenance landscapes. It was used more 
commonly in the past than it currently is. 

FALL 

Acer pseudosieboldianum (Korean maple): zone 
4. This medium-sized understory tree from 
northeast Asia produces spectacular fall color 
ranging from orange to scarlet in late October. 
The species is similar in general appearance to 
the Japanese maple (A. palmatum), but it is 
more upright in habit — growing to be about 
thirty feet tall and fifteen feet wide — and more 
cold hardy. It deserves wider testing under land- 
scape conditions, particularly in zones 4 and 5, 
where Japanese maple can have problems. 


Quercus phellos (willow oak): zone 5b. 
Although commonly planted as a street or park 
tree in the South, willow oak m underutilized 
in the Northeast. When raised from seed 
colleeted in the northern part of its range (e.g., 
central New Jersey), it is perfectly hardy into 
southern New England. It grows to about sixty 
feet and maintains a strong central leader well 
up into the crown. Its small, narrow leaves cast 
a light shade that allows grass to prosper under- 
neath it, and, as an added bonus, are easy to 
clean up in the fall. Willow oak is late to leaf 
out in the spring, but it makes up for its slow 
start by growing continuously throughout the 
heat of summer. 


Acer triflorinn (twisted-bark maple): zone 5 (4?). 
This mid-sized tree from northeast China can 
grow to forty feet in New England. Like its near 
relative the paperbark maple (A. griseumj, it 
produces trifoliate leaves. Its most striking fea- 
tures include late fall color that ranges from 
bright red to orange, and its whitish-tan, shred- 
ding bark in winter. A triflorum performs reli- 
ably under a wide range of conditions and 
appears to be hardier than A. griseum. 

Enkianthus perulatus (white enkianthus): zone 
5. White enkianthus is a slow-growing decidu- 
ous shrub from Japan that eventually grows to 
six feet in height with a similar spread. In spring 


16 Arnoldia 60/4 


It produces small, white flowers, and in fall its 
fine-textured foliage turns rich burgundy to 
flaming scarlet, brighter than any other plant 
cultivated at the Arnold Arboretum, where 
specimens of £. perulatus have been growing in 
full sun and dry soil for over a hundred years. 


Euonymus carnosus (glossy euonymus): zone 6 
(5?). This small deciduous tree from China 
can grow to about twenty feet in height. At 
the Arnold Arboretum, glossy euonymus 
has been free of pests and disease for nearly 
twenty years. Its shiny, dark green foliage turns 
a striking burgundy red in late fall, quite unlike 
that of any other euonymus cultivated at the 
Arboretum. 

Heptacodium miconioides (seven-son flower): 
zone 5. This tall deciduous shrub or small tree, 
introduced from China in 1980, can grow to he 
about twenty feet tall and fifteen feet wide. 
Heptacodium produces six-inch-long panicles 
of small, white flowers in late summer, fol- 
lowed rapidly by a beautiful display of showy, 
rose-magenta seeds in early autumn. It is 
tolerant of clay soils, road salt, and full sun, 
making it a good choice for roadside plantings. 
Its white, exfoliating hark is spectacular in 
winter, especially when trained to develop 
a single stem. 


Koeheuteria paniculata 'Rose Lantern' ('Rose 
Lantern' golden raintree): zone 5. This decidu- 
ous, round-headed tree grows from thirty- to 
forty-feet tall with an equal spread. It produces 
striking yellow flowers in showy panicles in late 
August or early September, almost a month 
later than is typical of the spe- 
cies. The fruit capsules are an 
attractive light pink, eventu- 
ally turning paper-brown. 'Rose 
Lantern' grows well in full sun 
and dry soil, making it suitable 
for streets and parking lots. 
This clone has been widely dis- 
tributed under the cultivar 
name 'September'. 

Lindera obtusiloba (Japanese 
spicebush): zone 5b. This de- 
ciduous, wide-spreading shrub 
grows to about fifteen feet in 
height with an equal spread. Its 
leathery, distinctively lobed 
leaves are extremely handsome 
and turn a bright, chrome yel- 
low for a full two weeks in late 
fall — indeed, in terms of fall 
color, Japanese spicebush is one of the 
Arboretum's most reliable performers. Jt is a 
complete mystery why one seldom sees this 
plant in New England landscapes. 

WINTER 

Ilex pendunculosa (longstalk holly): zone 5. 
This Japanese species, which can grow to be fif- 
teen feet tall and ten feet wide, is one of the har- 
diest of the upright hollies. Its attractive red 
fruit and delicately creased, glossy foliage make 
it an excellent choice for northern gardens, 
either as an informal hedge or as a specimen. 
Like most hollies, it grows best in light shade 
and moist, well-drained soil. 

Magnolia virginiana var. australis (evergreen 
sweetbay): zone 5b. This slender, upright tree 
grows to be thirty feet tall and ten to fifteen feet 
wide, with a strong central trunk. The evergreen 
sweetbay has narrow leaves and deliciously fra- 
grant, two-inch-wide flowers in June and July. A 
native of the Southeast, it is hotanically and 




Adaptable Plants 1 7 



Magnolia virginiana var. australis 


horticulturally distinct from the shrubby, de- 
ciduous sweetbay that grows in the Northeast 
(var. virginiana], but not quite as hardy. 

Stewartia sinensis (Chinese stewartia): zone 6 
(5?). This species is an understory tree from 
China that can grow to thirty or forty feet in 
height. In summer it produces small, white 
flowers (one-and-a-half-inch in diameter). With 
its smooth bark, white to tan in color and 
resembling alabaster, Chinese stewartia is every 
bit as beautiful as the more commonly planted 
Korean stewartia, S. pseudocamellia. It needs 
moist, well-drained soil and performs well in 
either full sun or light shade. 

CONIFERS 

Abies koreana (Korean fir): zone 5. This rela- 
tively small fir, around twenty to thirty feet tall 
and ten feet wide at maturity, produces highly 
ornamental purple-blue cones at a young age. 
Like most true firs, this Korean species requires 


full sun, but unlike other species it flourishes at 
sea level and is tolerant of a variety of soil con- 
ditions. This is one of the few firs suitable for 
use in small residential landscapes. 

Calocedius decurrens (California incense 
cedar): zone 5. This tall evergreen from the 
mountains of California grows to be about fifty 
feet tall in the East. Incense cedar typically 
develops a narrow, almost fastigiate, growth 
habit that is very striking in the landscape, with 
foliage that stays bright green through the win- 
ter. It grows best in full sun and is tolerant of a 
wide range of soil conditions, including clay and 
extreme drought, and has no serious pest or dis- 
ease problems in the East. This plant deserves to 
be much more widely grown than it currently is. 



Abies koreana 




1 8 Arnoldici 60/4 


Cedrus deodara 'Shalimar': zone 6. This hardy 
form of the deodar cedar was selected at the 
Arnold Arhoretum in 1982, where it grows to 
about thirty feet in height. Its beautiful, blue- 
gray foliage and graceful, drooping branches 
make the deodar cedar a dramatic landscape 
specimen. It grows best in full sun and is very 
tolerant of dry soil. 

Thuja plicata (western arhorvitae); zone 5. 
Although native to northwestern North 
America, this species is perfectly hardy in the 
Northeast. In comparison to T. occidentalis, the 
eastern arhorvitae, T. plicata is taller and looser 
in growth habit, forms a strong central leader, 
and has much better winter color. It can grow to 
be fifty or sixty feet tall in the East, with a 
spread of about twenty feet. 




Cedrus deodar ‘Shalimar’ 


Tsuga chinensis (Chinese hemlock): zone 6 (5?). 
A tall evergreen, Chinese hemlock grows to 
at least fifty feet in height in the Boston area. 
Preliminary evidence indicates that it is resis- 
tant to the hemlock woolly adelgid, but more 
research is needed before the species gets a full 
recommendation. The oldest specimen in North 
America, collected in China by E. H. Wilson, 
has been growing at the Arnold Arhoretum 
since 1910. 


Peter Del Tredici is director of living collections at the 
Arnold Arboretum. 

For a list of nurseries that carry these plants, contact the 
Arboretum's membership department by mail or by 
e-mail (memhership@arnarb.harvard.edu). 


Cypress Knees: An Enduring Enigma 


Christopher H. 
Briand 


The cypresses keep 
their secrets from the 
prying investigator. 
— J.E. Rogers, 1905 



T he function of cy- 
press knees has long 
intrigued botanists. 

In 1819, Frangois Andre 
Michaux wrote, "No cause 
can be assigned for their 
existence," and in 1882 Asa 
Gray concurred. Neverthe- 
less, throughout the nineteenth century and 
continuing to the present, botanists have put 
forth hypotheses about the function of these 
peculiar formations, hypotheses that have 
included aeration of the root system, vegetative 
reproduction, mechanical support, nutrient 
accumulation, and carbohydrate storage. The 
aeration theory has been the most popular and, 
indeed, is presented without question in some 
botany texts, but in fact, no explanation has 
been generally accepted.* 

The genus Taxodium has been present in 
North America since at least the Upper Creta- 
ceous, approximately seventy million years ago, 
but very little is known about when knees first 
developed and why. Knees can he found on both 
varieties now extant in the United States. 
Baldcypress (Taxodium distichum var. 
distichum) is distributed along the coastal plain 
from southern Delaware to southern Florida, 
west to southeastern Texas, and inland along 
the Mississippi Valley as far north as southern 
Illinois and Indiana. Pondcypress (Taxodium 
distichum var. imbricarium) has a more limited 
distribution, with its northern limit in south- 


the Wolf River, near Memphis, Tennessee. 

eastern Virginia and its range extending south 
throughout Florida and west to southeast 
Louisiana. The two varieties are readily distin- 
guished by their leaf morphology and the 
orientation of both their leaves and hranchlets. 
While the leaves of baldcypress are needle- 
like and generally arranged in two rows, those 
of pondcypress are scalelike and radially 
distributed around the hranchlets. Also, 
baldcypress hranchlets are horizontally ori- 
ented, whereas pondcypress hranchlets are often 
ascending. Where they overlap m distribution, 
however, there is considerable morphological 
intergradation. ^ 

Visitors to the cypress swamps of the south- 
eastern United States are often intrigued by the 
swollen bases, or buttresses, of cypresses, and by 
the woody conical structures — the knees — of 
varying size found around the base of many 
trees. More than anything else, the knees 
resemble termite mounds, but are in fact out- 
growths of the shallow, horizontal roots of the 
cypress trees and are not caused by insect activ- 
ity. Knees are formed on the upper surface of 
these roots by the vascular cambium, the 


Baldcypresses in 


k**r' 


20 Arnoldia 60/4 



The denuded roots of a baldcypress, showing the knees and underground structure. 


meristematic layer that produces xylem and 
phloem, the tissues that transport water and 
nutrients through the plant. The knees are gen- 
erally solid, hut may hecome hollow over time 
due to rotting. In cypress plantations, knees are 
found on trees as young as twelve years old.^ 
Cypress knees vary greatly in size. In 1803, 
Andrew Ellicot observed knees as high as eight 
to ten feet; the tallest on record is a knee four- 
teen feet in height seen on a tree growing along 
the Suwannee River, which flows through Geor- 
gia and Florida.^ Many researchers have agreed 
that it is average water depth that determines 
the height of knees, and one observer, Mattoon, 
reported that the knees on trees growing in 
softer soils were larger than those produced by 
trees growing on firmer land.^ 

In spite of much research and a plethora of 
hypotheses, exactly what stimulates cypresses 
to form knees remains, like the knees' function, 
unknown. In the following, I will review all 
these hypotheses and the present state of our 
knowledge about cypress knees. 


The Aeration Hypothesis 

Knees are most often found on the roots of trees 
growing in wet soil and in relatively shallow 
water; they are generally absent from trees 
growing in deeper water and only occasionally 
on trees growing on land that is dry year-round. 
In 1934, Herman Kurz and Delzie Deniaree, 
working in Florida, suggested that knees may be 
caused by the root system being alternately 
exposed to water and air. In 1956, L. A. 
Whitford, a researcher working in North Caro- 
lina, came to a similar conclusion: "The forma- 
tion of cypress knees seems ... to he a response 
of the cambium of a root growing in poorly aer- 
ated soil or water to chance exposure to the air 
during the spring or early summer." Another 
indication that aeration may play a role m knee 
development emerged from research done in 
1991 by Fukuji Yamamoto, who observed that 
the number of knees per tree declined with 
increasing water depth. The fact that knees have 
been reported on trees found on land that is dry 
year-round, of course, throws into question the 


Tne Arnold ArLoretum 


V 0 1 . 6 ( 

) / N 


NEWS 2 

IMM] 

- 2 


1 


Sun-Loving Shrubs and Vines: A Garden of Their Own 


Robert E. Cook, Director 

Two thousand and one will be a 
year of landscape construction at 
the Arboretum. Five years ago we 
added a 15-acre wetland to our 
lease with the City of Boston. This 
spring we will initiate construc- 
tion of a stonedust pedestrian 
pathway that will open the site to 
the public by connecting the For- 
est Hills train station with a major 
gateway into the grounds at South 
Street. New steel gates, stone pil- 
lars, and walls will be added at 
each end ot the path. A second 
project will install similar steel 


gates at Bussey Street where it 
separates the Peters Hill area from 
the rest of the Arboretum. New 
land for the planting of trees will 
be created by removing a short 
stretch ot existing asphalt roadway 
along the south edge ot Bussey 
Brook. We will say more about 
these projects in a later issue. 

Our largest landscape project, 
set to begin construction in May, 
will create the Sim-Lovmg Shrub 
and Vine Garden on three acres of 
land located northeast of our 
greenhouse and bonsai complex. 


Designed by the landscape archi- 
tecture firm ot Reed Hilderbrand, 
this new garden will allow us to 
greatly expand our current collec- 
tion and to display up to 400 
shrub species and cultivars not 
grown elsewhere on the grounds. 

In addition, an open-air pavilion 
with attached trellises, and an 
extensive system of steel vine 
structures will permit us to grow 
approximately 100 vine species as 
individual specimens integrated 
into a single horticultural space. 

• continued on page 2 



A Schoolyard 
Arboretum 

Last November teachers and stu- 
dents at the Nathan Hale Elemen- 
tary School in Roxbury held a 
ceremony to dedicate their newly 
constructed schoolyard, which has 
been specially designed to include 
an arboretum. Twelve remarkable 
trees will become part of the edu- 
cational experiences for both 
teachers and students, as they 
document each tree’s growth and 
characteristics over the years. 

This schoolyard renovation is 
part of the Boston Schoolyard Ini- 
tiative {BSD, which awards grants 
to schools with a vision as well as 
a constituency capable of making 
significant improvements to the 
schoolyard environment. For the 


past four years, the BSI has funded 
the renovation of 48 public 
schoolyards. Two years ago, the 
BSI approached staff at the Arbo- 


retum to discuss how to ensure 
that the newly designed play- 
grounds were places for outside 

• • continued on page 4 



ELLEN S. BENNETT 


Kirsiln Behn 












• from page I 

The garden will provide a new, 
unique destination lor visitors, 
offering a diverse collection of 
woody shrub and vine taxa in an 
elegant botanic garden setting. As 
a collection, it will also create an 
array of educational opportunities: 
students of horticulture and land- 
scape design as well as the general 
public will learn the practical uses 
of shrubs and vines. 

In keeping with the agricul- 
tural nature of our nursery and 
propagation greenhouses nearby, 
the garden will consist of a series 
of terraces laid out on a gently 
sloping site and created by exten- 


sive fieldstone retaining walls; 
each terrace will have a series of 
planting beds separated by grass 
pathways. The site is framed at 
the top by a long, high, stone 
retaining wall below the bonsai 
house that runs for more than five 
hundred feet in length and reaches 
almost eight feet at its maximum 
height. Stonedust paths lead visi- 
tors along this great wall among 
vine structures to a vine-covered 
pavilion overlooking the garden 
and down bluestone steps onto the 
great lawn that sweeps downhill 
through the center of the terrace 
system. Despite a thirty-foot 
difference in grade between the 


top and bottom of the garden, 
it will be fully accessible to wheel- 
chairs and mobility-impaired 
visitors. 

Construction of the Shrub and 
Vine Garden will require closing 
the greenhouse and bonsai area for 
a period of six months. While 
construction should be complete 
by Thanksgiving, the planting of 
shrubs and vines will be delayed 
until the spring of 2002. We 
believe that this new collection, 
displayed in a beautiful garden 
setting, will make a unique con- 
tribution to the horticultural 
resources of the Arboretum and 
the City of Boston. 


2001 PIPD Releases 

In its continuing efforts to share exceptional woody 
plants from the living collections with progressive 
nursery professionals, the Arboretum is releasing two 
outstanding plants in its Plant Introduction, Promo- 
tion, and Distribution Program for 2001. 

Fothergilla gardenii 'Harold Epstein' was first col- 
lected in Jesup County, Georgia, by the late Harold 
Epstein of Larchmont, New York, plantsman 
extraordinaire. Originally classified as a separate 
species — F. parvifulta — later investigations have 
placed it within F. garden!!. It is a diminutive shrub 
with a low, dense, mounding form that slowly 
reaches a height of 10 to 12 inches and a width of 
16 to 18 inches in about five years. The white, 
bottlebrush-like flowers are fragrant and appear in 
late April to early May. The dark-green foliage of 
summer turns yellow to vibrant orange-red in 
autumn. Though its overall appearance is delicate, the 
Harold Epstein fothergilla thrives in full sun and is 
insect- and disease-resistant. Its ability to sucker and 
spread allows it to form a good groundcover mat. 

Liqnidambar acalycina, a Chinese sweetgum, was 
introduced into the U.S. in 1980 by the Sino- American 
Botanical Expedition, in which the Arboretum was a 
participant. Its three-lobed leaves give this species an 
appearance very different from our native, five-lobed 
Liqnidambar styradflna. Spring foliage is burgundy- 



Liquidamhar acalycina 


red, maturing to dark green in summer, and finally 
becoming yellow in autumn. Specimens that have 
been growing at the Arboretum for 20 years are nar- 
row and upright in habit with smooth, silver bark. 
The tree appears to be as easy to grow as other mem- 
bers of its genus are, and it exhibits no serious pest 
or disease problems. 

Nurserymen interested in participating in the 
PIPD program should contact Tom Ward by fax at 
617/524-6413. 


)0 


2 


60/4 2 


1 


Tom Ward 





Terry Sharik, Arnold Arboretum Associate, 


talks about his textbook project 

Dendrology, or “the study ol trees,” is taught in vir- 
tually every university that offers an undergraduate 
degree in lorestry. In the U.S. alone, this amounts to 
more than sixty schools. The advanced courses stu- 
dents take may vary, but all of them take dendrology 
near the beginning of their studies. Indeed, the 
degree of enthusiasm generated in the dendrology 
course may spell the difference between a student 
staying in forestry and choosing another field. 

Typically, the textbooks used in dendrology 
courses cover the economically important tree species 
native to that country or at best to that continent 
(very few species occur on more than one continent). 
For example, of the nearly 1 ,000 tree species native 
to the conterminous United States, the beginning 
student enrolled in a dendrology course may be 
expected to know 100 species in 30 genera in some 
detail. Currently available textbooks offer instruction 
on these key species that includes morphological 
characteristics important in identification, together 
with information on geographic distribution, size 
of mature individuals, economic uses, and various 
aspects of the ecology of the species. The challenge 
for the instructor is to make this catalogued informa- 
tion come alive, and this is no easy task. 

I am writing a dendrology textbook for under- 
graduates that reaches far beyond current textbooks 
in its geographic scope and in its attention to the 
aspects of form and function that adapt trees to grow 
in particular environments. The text will focus on 
ecologically and culturally important genera of trees 
in the temperate regions of the world. Focusing on 
genera instead of species (most genera extend over 
more than one continent) will expose students to the 
major patterns in the evolution of tree habit and 
enable them to appreciate the variations on a theme 
that exist in the species constituting a particular 
genus. This global genus approach will allow 
instructors to supplement the text with study of 
local and regional woody plant floras and observa- 
tions of trees in their natural habitats, thus helping 
the material come alive. 

Focusing on the relationships between form and 
function will also help students to understand why, 
for example, species of some genera survive where 
heavy snowfall and cold climates are the norm, while 
others thrive in regions where water is scarce most of 
the year. This, in turn, can lead to an appreciation of 
the changes in species distribution that may occur as 



a result of impending global climate change. The 
approach also has the virtue of shifting the emphasis 
from a static to a process orientation. 

In September 2()()(), I relocated at the Arnold 
Arboretum as patt of a one-year sabbatical leave from 
Utah State University. With over 2,000 species and 
nearly 5,()()() taxa, the living collections of temperate- 
region woody plants from all major continents are 
clearly among the best in the country. The plant 
collections together with the herbarium specimens 
and literature on woody plants worldwide, both in 
Jamaica Plain and Cambridge, make this an ideal 
location for my preparation. Later on, I anticipate 
traveling to other continents to observe and photo- 
graph species of the genera to be covered in the text- 
book in their natural habitats. 

We are clearly at a point in history where how 
we manipulate our local forest ecosystems has global 
implications, a fact that needs to be more deeply 
appreciated by undergraduates who will manage those 
ecosystems and their resources. 1 hope this project 
will inspire a more global approach to dendrology 
that instructors will in turn instill in their students. 

Dr. Sharik is Professor and Head of the Department 
of Forest Resources, in the College of Natural 
Resources, at Utah State University, Logan, UT 
84322-5215. While at the Arboretum, he can be 
reached by telephone at 617-524-1718 ext. 140 or 
by e-mail at tlsharik@cnr.usu.edu. 


ARNOLD ARBORETUM NEWS 


3 


Kirsiii) 6ehn 




• • from page I 

learning as well as recreation. 

This rec]uesr was sparked by the 
Arboretum's program Seasonal 
Investigations, a yearlong course 
of study funded by the National 
Science Foundation, which sup- 
ports teachers who wish to incor- 
porate outdoor tree studies in 
their science curricula. 

In 1999, with partial funding 
from the BSI through a grant 
from the Greater Boston Urban 
Resources Partnership, the Arbo- 
retum began a pilot project with 
the Nathan Hale School to iden- 
tify and develop program elements 
for a schoolyard arboretum that 
could be used by other BSI-funded 
schools. From October 1999 
through February 2001, Arbore- 
tum staff worked with the teach- 
ers and principal to incorporate 
an arboretum into the schoolyard 
plans and to create a professional 
development program that 
supports outdoor studies using 
the trees. 


The project included a series 
of monthly teacher workshops and 
meetings devoted to increasing 
teachers’ knowledge of trees and 
to considering how teachers might 
incorporate tree study into science 
lessons. One outcome was a list of 
trees that offer a variety of bark 
textures, flower forms and times, 
leaves, and overall shapes. 

The project culminated in a 
schoolwide election of a favorite 
tree. Each candidate was intro- 
duced through photographs and 
descriptions. The students then 
researched the trees on a special 
website, and finally everyone 
voted. When the overwhelming 
favorite — Acer saccharum (sugar 
maple) — was announced at the 
next week’s assembly, students 
broke into enthusiastic applause. 

This project has allowed us to 
identify issues related to integrat- 
ing a schoolyard arboretum into 
the educational experiences of 
teachers and their students. These 
issues include the time required 


for both teachers and students to 
adequately explore cjuestions and 
ideas; professional development 
efforts that address the use of the 
outdoors as well as science con- 
tent; the kinds of support, both 
human and technical, that can aid 
in such an endeavor; and the 
importance of school leadership in 
reaching a successful conclusion. 

There is much to celebrate 
about this pilot study. Participat- 
ing teachers learned how to incor- 
porate outdoor studies into their 
science curriculum. The entire 
school community is aware of 
the arboretum in the schoolyard 
and has established a sense of 
stewardship around the continued 
growth of these trees. We have 
learned a great deal about what 
makes such a project work well 
and are seeking funding to con- 
tinue this work. To learn more 
about this program, visit the spe- 
cial schoolyard arboretum website 
www.arboretum.harv'ard.edu/ 
~schoolyard/nsO. 


Upcoming Events 

Lilac Sunday 

The Arboretum’s annual celebra- 
tion of lilacs will occur on Sunday, 

May 13 — Mothers Day. The only 
day when picnicking is allowed on 
the grounds. Lilac Sunday is a 
time-honored tradition for visitors 
who enjoy the sights and scents of 
our extensive lilac collection. The 
day includes food, dance perfor- 
mances, a limited number of lilac 
plants for sale, lots of lilac infor- 
mation, and, of course, the lilacs! 

Admission is free, and the event 
occurs from 1():()() am to 4:00 pm. 

Fall Plant Sale 

Mark your calendars for Sunday, September 16, when the 21st Annual Fall Plant Sale will be held at the Case 
Estates in Weston. For updates as they become available, you can check our website — www. arboretum. harvard. edu. 
We anticipate quality and quantity in all areas: plant selection, attendance, and weather. 



4 • 60/4 2000-2001 


Karen Madsen 




Cypress Knees 21 


need for periodic flooding or drying to stimulate 
knee formation.^ « 

The need for aeration has been a favorite 
hypothesis for explaining the function, as well 
as the formation, of knees. Since all plant roots 
need a source of air to carry out cellular respira- 
tion, some researchers have suggested that 
knees are simply a form of pneumatophore, or 
breathing root. Pneumatophores are specialized 
roots that characterize many woody plants 
growing in poorly aerated soils, such as in 
swamps or in the intertidal zone; examples 
include Avicennia nitida (black mangrove), 
Sonneratia alba (mangrove apple), and 
Bruguiera parviflora (small-leafed orange man- 
grove). Pneumatophores grow either entirely 
above the level of the water, or in such a way as 
to he exposed only during low tide. They are 
characterized by the presence of lenticels 
(porous regions in the hark that allow gas 
exchange with the atmosphere) and of aeren- 
chyma, the specialized internal tissues that 
transport gases through many hydrophytic 
plants.^ 

The first published suggestion that cypress 
knees may be a form of pneumatophores dates 
from 1848, when Montroville W. Dickenson 
and Andrew Brown wrote in the American 
Journal of Science and Arts that by means of 
knees "the roots although totally submerged, 
have a connection with the atmosphere." They 
also suggested that when the knees were inun- 
dated, the connection with the atmosphere 
could he maintained by the swollen base of the 
tree, sometimes called the "bottle buttress": 
"Such enlargements never fail to rise to the top 
of the highest water level . . ." In 1887 
Nathaniel Shaler conjectured that "[the] func- 
tion of the knees is in some way connected 
with the process of aeration of the sap ..." 
with air entering the knees through newly 
formed bark at their apex. He also observed 
that trees died when the water rose high 
enough to inundate the knees. Two years later, 
in 1889, another researcher was even more 
categorical: "[the] location and occurrence [of 
knees] indicate beyond a doubt that they are 
for purposes of aerating the plant." In their 
1934 paper, however, Kurz and Demaree stated 
just as categorically that it is "difficult to rec- 



Single young baldcypress with buttressed base 
growing in Chipman Pond, Delaware. 


oncile the aeration hypothesis with the fact 
that cypresses of the deeper waters are devoid 
of knees."® 

As early as 1890, Robert H. Lamhorn, writing 
in Garden and Forest, had suggested that tests 
be conducted to learn whether or not knees 
were indeed "aerating" the trees' roots. Never- 
theless, in spite of all the theorizing, little was 
done to test the pneumatophore hypothesis 
until 1952, when Paul }. Kramer and his col- 
leagues at Duke University used modern physi- 
ological techniques to ascertain the amount of 
oxygen consumed by knees on living cypresses. 
They enclosed the knees in airtight containers 
sealed with a mixture of paraffin and beeswax, 
and used an oxygen analyzer to measure the 
amount of oxygen consumed over several 
weeks. The rate of oxygen consumption was 
actually lower than for other plants, leading 
the researchers to conclude that "the available 
evidence indicates that cypress knees play no 
important role as aerating organs."^ 


CHRIS BRIAND 


PETER DEL TRE DICI 


22 Ainoldia 60/4 



Baldcypress knees appear to march from dry land into the Wolf 
River, Tennessee. 


Anatomical evidence presents another prob- 
lem for the hypothesis that knees are a form 
of pneumatophore. Two studies found that 
knees lacked aerenchyma — the spongy tissues 
in true pneumatophores that transport air 
from the knee to the rest of the root system. 
In addition, lenticels — the regions of the bark 
that in pneumatophores allow air to be taken 
up from the atmosphere — are also absent from 
cypress knees. 

The Methane Emission Hypothesis 

A less frequently heard theory is one presented 
by William M. Pulliam in 1992: "Given the pos- 
sibility that cypress knees provide a conduit to 


the below-ground environment, it was 
hypothesized in the present study that 
knees may also show methane emis- 
sions." Methane is not toxic to plants, 
hut neither is it of use to them. 

Pulliam measured total methane 
emissions from trees in swamps border- 
ing the Ogeechee River in Georgia, 
finding rates that averaged 0.9 milli- 
grams per day." His tests showed that 
cypress knees accounted for a negligible 
amount of the methane emissions 
from the swamp — less than one per- 
cent. This methane is commonly 
referred to as "swamp gas." Further- 
more, it is quite possible that even this 
miniscule amount of methane was 
being produced by the bacteria that are 
found on the outside of the knees, 
rather than being vented from the soil 
through the knees." 

The Vegetative Reproduction 
Hypothesis 

Lamhorn, in his 1890 review of what 
was known about cypress knees at that 
time, mentioned and then quickly dis- 
carded the idea that cypress knees were 
organs of vegetative reproduction: "I 
have . . . examined hundreds of living 
'knees' in southern swamps, and found 
upon them no trace of bud, leaf or 
sprout ..." No one has since revisited 
this hypothesis. 

The Mechanical Support Hypothesis 
Buttresses and stilt roots provide mechanical 
support for a number of tropical trees. It was 
again Lamhorn, in 1890, who first proposed that 
knees perform the same function for cypress 
trees growing in wet soil: "I became eonvinced 
that the most important function of the Cypress 
knee is to stiffen and strengthen the root, in 
order that a great tree may anchor itself safely 
in a yielding material." Increased support, he 
believed, allowed cypresses to withstand strong 
winds such as those produeed by hurricanes. 
Lamhorn suggested that knees located on hori- 
zontal roots add stiffness and strength to the 
iunction between the horizontal root to which 



Cypress Knees 23 


the knees are attached and the vertical roots 
that branch off directly below the knees. In 
1915, Wilbur R. Mattoon, working for the 
United States Forest Service, concurred with 
Lamborn, opining that knees were involved in 
"enlarging and strengthening the basal support" 
provided by the rest of the root system. He 
pointed out that deep roots growing down from 
the base of the knees provided considerable 
anchorage for the tree. Both Mattoon and 
Lamborn premised their hypotheses on the 
assumption that vertically oriented roots and 
knees always occur at the same location on 
horizontal roots, as was apparently the case in 


their observations. However, Clair A. Brown 
and Glen N. Montz found that cypresses some- 
times produce knees at locations other than 
above downward-growing roots, and, con- 
versely, that some downward-growing roots do 
not share a junction with knees on the horizon- 
tal roots. And, as with the pneumatophore 
theory, the absence of knees on the roots of 
trees growing in deeper water casts doubt on 
this hypothesis, since there is no reason to 
believe that they too wouldn't need support. 
The hypothesis could be tested empirically in 
the same way that researchers have used cables 
and winches to pull down trees in order to 


Looping Roots vs. Knees 


Q 

Z 

< 

sc 

u 

G 



Cypress, as well as water tupelo (Nyssa aquatica), red maple (Acer rubrum), and a 
number of other swamp and mangrove species, also produce looping roots that 
somewhat resemble knees. In baldcypress, normal knees are often found at their 
apex. These looping roots are essentially roots that grow up out of and then back 
into the soil, producing an aboveground loop or fold. In water tupelo, looping roots 
can reach a height of 22 inches and a width of 26 inches. The function of these 
structures, beyond that of normal roots, is obscure. Penfound observed that aeren- 

chyma was lacking in the looping roots of water 
tupelo and questioned the efficacy of these struc- 
tures as pneumatophores. Knees have even been 
reported on pond pine (Finns serotina) growing 
under wet conditions in Georgia. It is unclear if 
these resemble normal knees or looping roots. 


A looping root of red maple (Acer rubrum) 
growing in a swamp at Adkins’ Mill Pond. 
Maryland. 


Knees are beginning to form at the apex of the looping roots of a 
cultivated baldcypress. 



CHRIS BRIANH 


24 Arnoldia 60/4 


compare the stability of buttressed versus 
non-buttressed tropical trees — such a test 
could compare trees with knees to trees that 
have had their knees removed — but no one 
has yet done so.'^ 

The Nutrient Acquisition Hypothesis 

Lamborn postulated that another secondary 
function of cypress knees, along with that of 
giving mechanical support, was to act as "drift 
catchers" that accumulate organic nutrients 
during periods of water movement. A hundred 
years later, Hans Rummer and his colleagues at 


Baldcypress trees with buttresses at Trussum Pond, Delaware. 

Zurich made a similar supposition about loop- 
ing cypress roots, which they also called knees, 
after studying baldcypress in a Florida cypress 
dome. (A cypress dome is a group of cypresses 
growing in a shallow depression where the larg- 
est trees are located in the center and tree height 
declines toward the periphery.) They found that 
the number of looping cypress roots present 
were highly correlated with the number of dead 
cypress trees in the dome, but not with the 
number of live trees. In other words, looping 
root density increased with an increase in the 
number of dead cypress stumps. They also 
observed that approximately 98 percent of the 
youngest looping roots spread over the stumps 
and penetrated the dead wood. Older looping 


roots were not generally in direct contact with 
decaying stumps. Direct evidence of nutrient 
acquisition was not obtained, however. 
Rummer and his colleagues suggested that fur- 
ther work was needed to determine if "young 
root loops extract nutrients from stumps . . . [or] 
. . . use stumps merely as vertical supports to 
reach air above the water table. 

The Carbohydrate Storage Hypothesis 
Clair A. Brown in 1984 and again with Montz 
in 1986 postulated that the primary function of 
cypress knees is as a storage organ. They 
reported the presence of 
"granules" — presumably 
amyloplasts (organelles 
that store starch) — and 
confirmed the presence 
of starch by performing 
iodine tests on the 
cut surface of sectioned 
knees. Even if their 
hypothesis is accurate, 
unanswered questions 
remain about the func- 
tion of knees. Why do 
cypresses need an auxil- 
iary storage organ when 
growing under wet condi- 
tions, but not dry? Is it 
possible that cypress 
roots in general store 
starch, and that knees 
are simply extensions of 
these storage areas? Unfortunately, no compari- 
son of the storage capacity of roots and knees 
has been made to test the hypothesis.'’’ 

After nearly two hundred years of speculation 
and research, the function or functions of the 
knees of cypresses remain unclear. Darwin 
referred to the origin of the flowering plants as 
an "abominable mystery"; it appears that the 
function of cypress knees is another.'^ The truth 
may be that cypress knees evolved in response 
to past environmental pressures that no longer 
exist, in which case their function may he lost 
in the depths of time. Before we accept this con- 
clusion, however, much further research is 
needed on this fascinating subiect. 



Cypress Knees 25 


Endnotes 

' Julia E. Rogers, The Tree Book (New York, 1905); F. A. 
Michaux, The North American Sylva (Paris, 1819); 
R. H. Lamborn, The knees of the bald cypress; a new 
theory of their function. Garden and Forest 3 (1890): 
21-22; excerpted in Arnoldia 60(2): 14-16; J. D. 
Mauseth, Botany, 2nd ed. (Philadelphia, 1995). 

^ K. R. Aulenback and B. A. LePage, Taxodium wallisii 
sp. nov.: First occurrence of Taxodium from the 
Upper Cretaceous, International Journal of Plant 
Science 159 (1998): 367-390; L. P. Wilhite and J. R. 
Toliver, Taxodium distichum JL.) Rich. Baldcypress, 
Silvics of North America, ed. R. M. Burns and B. H. 
Honkala (Forest Service, USDA, Washington, D.C.), 
563-572; FI. S. Neufeld, Effects of light on growth, 
morphology, and photosynthesis in Baldcypress 
(Taxodium distichum [L.] Rich.) and Pondcypress 
(T. ascendens Brongn.) seedlings. Bulletin of the 
Torrey Botanical Club 110 (1983): 43-54; Ibid., 
Wilhite and Toliver. 

^ W. T. Penfound, Comparative structure of the wood 
in the "knees," swollen bases, and normal trunks of 
the tupelo gum (Nyssa aquatica L.), American 
Journal of Botany 21 (1934): 623-631; C. A. Brown 
and G. N. Montz, Baldcypress: the tree unique, the 
wood eternal (Baton Rouge, LA, 1986); D. DenUyl, 
Some observations on bald cypress in Indiana, 
Ecology 41 (1961): 841-843. 

* P. J. Kramer. W. S. Riley, and T. T. Bannister, Gas 
exchange of cypress knees. Ecology 33 (1952): 117- 
121; A. Ellicott, Journal of Andrew Ellicott 
(Philadelphia, 1803; reprinted Chicago, 1962). 

^ N. S. Shaler, Notes on the bald cypress. Memoirs of 
the Museum of Comparative Zoology (Harvard 
College, Cambridge) 16 (1887): 3-15; W. P. Wilson, 
The production of aerating organs on roots of swamp 
and other plants, Proceedings of the Academy of 
Natural Science of Philadelphia 41(1889): 67-69; W. 
R. Mattoon, The southern cypress (USDA Bulletin 
272, 1915); H. Kurz and D. Demaree, Cypress 
buttresses and knees in relation to water and air. 
Ecology 15 (1934): 36-41; G. F. Beaven and H. J. 
Costing, Pocomoke Swamp: a study of a cypress 
swamp on the Eastern Shore of Maryland, Bulletin of 
the Torrey Botanical Club 66 (1939): 367-389; Ibid., 
Brown and MontZ; J. L. Kernell and G. F. Levy, The 
relationship of bald cypress (Taxodium distichum 
[L.jRichard) knee height to water depth, Castanea 55 
(1990): 217-222. 

^ Ibid., Wilson; Kurz and Demaree; DenUyl; Brown and 
MontZ; L. A. Whitford, A theory on the formation of 
cypress knees. Journal of the Elisha Mitchell Science 
Society 71 (1956): 80-83; F. Yamamoto, Effects of 
depth of flooding on growth and anatomy of stems 


and knee roots of Taxodium distichum. lAWA 
Bulletin 13 (1992): 93-104. 

^ A. D. Bell, Plant Eorm (Oxford, 1991). 

® M. W. Dickeson and A. Brown, On the cypress timber 
of Mississippi and Louisiana, American Journal of 
Science and Arts 5 (1848): 15-22; Ibid., Shaler; 
Wilson; Kurz and Demaree. 

’ Ibid., Lamborn; P. J. Kramer, W. S. Riley, and T. T. 
Bannister. 

Ibid., Penfound; Brown and Montz. 

W. M. Pulliam, Methane emissions from cypress 
knees in southeastern floodplain swamp, Oecologia 
91 (1992): 126-128. 

C. Edelin and C. Atger, Stem and root tree 
architecture: Questions for plant biomechanics, 
Biomimetics 1 (1994): 253-266; Ibid., Lamborn; 
Mattoon; Brown and MontZ; M. J. Crook, A. R. Ennos, 
and J. R. Banks, The function of buttress roots: a 
comparative study of the anchorage systems of 
buttressed (Aglaia and Nephelium ramboutan 
species) and nonbuttressed (Mallotus wrayi) tropical 
trees. Journal of Experimental Botany 48 (1997): 
1703-1716. 

Ibid., Lamborn; H. Kummer, et al.. Nutritional 
exploitation of dead trunks: another function of 
cypress knees (Taxodium distichum)! Trees 5 (1991): 
122-123; H. Kurz, Cypress domes. Annual Report of 
Florida State Geological Survey (1933). 

C. A. Brown, Morphology and biology of cypress 
trees. Cypress Swamps, ed. K. C. Ewel and H. T. 
Odum (Gainesville, FL, 1984), 16-24; Ibid., Brown 
and Montz. 

D. H. Scott, The Evolution of Plants (New York, NY, 
1905). 

Ibid., Wilson; Bell; Brown & MontZ; Penfound; P, B. 
Tomlinson, The Botany of Mangroves (Cambridge, 
UK, 1986). 


Christopher H. Briand is Associate Professor in the 
Department of Biological Sciences, Salisbury State 
University, Salisbury, MD 21801, and producer of 
the Salisbury State University Arboretum website 
(www.ssu.edu/arboretum). Thanks are extended to 
William Grogan, Mark Holland, and Judith Stribling 
(Salisbury State University) for their assistance and 
suggestions, and to Joan Rye at the American Journal of 
Science (Kline Geology Laboratory, Yale University) for 
providing a copy of the paper by Dickeson and Brown. 


Ginkgo bilob a in Japan 

Mcihko Handa 


V arious theories estimate when ginkgo 
arrived in Japan. Some say it grew here 
during the Mesozoic era hut then died 
out. Others argue that it arrived from China 
along with Buddhism in the sixth century. 
Nothing has been proven, but whenever and 
however it arrived, ginkgo is deeply rooted in 
the lives of the Japanese people, admired for its 
beautiful shape and its seasonal colors. Today 
ginkgos grow throughout Japan, along roadsides 
and streets, in parks and schoolyards, on shrine 
grounds, and in private gardens. Ginkgo serves fre- 
quently as the symbol of a region or as an object 
of worship, and it plays a role in many legends. 

Ginkgo as a Roadside and Street Tree in Japan 

According to one account, roadside trees in 
Japan date back to the middle of the eighth 
century, when fruit trees were planted along 
roads for the benefit of travelers. It was in the 
latter half of the nineteenth century, however — 
when Japan opened its borders and began to 
modernize — that trees became a part of urban 
landscapes. 

The forerunners of modern street trees were 
first seen in Yokohama and in the capital, 
Tokyo. Willow and pine trees were planted 
along a street called Bashamichi in Yokohama 
in 1867. In 1873, black pine (Pinus thunbergiij, 
cherry (Prunus), maple (Acer), and other species 
were planted in Tokyo along Ginza Street, 
newly modernized by the construction of Euro- 
pean-style brick buildings. The first major use of 
imported trees to line city streets occurred in 
1875 when a North American native, Robinia 
pseudoacacia (black locust), was planted in 
Tokyo, having been grown from seeds brought 
back to Japan from the 1873 International 
Exposition in Vienna. Ailanthus altissinia 
(tree-of-heaven), Firmiana simplex (Chinese 
bottle tree), and other species were also planted 


at that time, but because of 
inappropriate planting methods 
or insufficient care, most of 
these trees died. 

In 1907 a replanting project 
was initiated along Tokyo's 
streets using ten species 
selected for fast growth and the 
ability to withstand urban con- 
ditions; among them, Platanus 
(plane tree], Liriodendron 
tulipifera (tulip tree), Chinese 
bottle tree, Castanea (chest- 
nut), Acer buergerianum (tri- 
dent maple), Styphnolobium 
japonicum (pagoda or scholar 
tree), Cornus (dogwood), 

Fraxinus (ash), and Mallotus 
japonicus. Ginkgos were cho- 
sen for the front of Tokyo's City 
Hall, marking the species' 
debut as a street tree in Japan. 

Tokyo's urban tree-planting 
projects suffered two major set- 
backs during the first half of the 
twentieth century. In 1923, the 
fires following the Great Kanto 
Earthquake destroyed more 
than half the street trees, leav- 
ing only about 10,000 still 
standing. As part of the effort to restore the city, 
more than 16,000 new trees were planted by the 
national government and nearly 5,000 by the 
city of Tokyo itself. This time the principal spe- 
cies chosen were ginkgo, plane tree, and black 
locust, all of them fast maturing. 

The second disaster was the bombing of Japan 
during World War II, which destroyed 121,162 
street and roadside trees in Tokyo, or about 45 
percent of the 27 1 , 1 68 that were standing before 
the war. Postwar, the government's War Recov- 




Ginkgo bilob a 



Ginkgos along Midosuji Avenue in Osaka City. 




vmJK 






BBiimi 

1 


er\' Agency appointed a committee to design a 
tree restoration project. The committee sug- 
gested that local trees he used for replanting, in 
order to take advantage of each region's environ- 
mental conditions. 

Government records trace the changes in tree 
species planted in the aftermath of these disas- 
ters and during the ensuing period of normahty. 
Between 1922 and 196^, the species planted 
most often along roadsides and streets through- 
out lapan was the plane tree, with ginkgo in sec- 


ond place. The plane tree was preferred because 
it best suited the need for fast restoration; first 
from the 1923 earthquake, and later, from the 
devastation caused by the war. However, the 
characteristics that made it useful during the 
recover)" periods — fast growth, vigorous sprout- 
ing capacity, and relatively big leaves — made it 
difficult to maintain as the city matured, and 
since 1982 ginkgo has been the preferred species 
for street and roadside planting. Ginkgo grows 
well in urban environments, withstanding pol- 



28 Arnoldia 60/4 



Ginkgos line a walk at the Tsukuba Research Center of the 
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology in Tokyo. 


lution, cold, and even fire. Unlike the plane tree, 
its shape remains symmetrical, and its changing 
appearance more clearly marks the progress of 
the seasons. Similar factors explain the popular- 
ity of lapanese zelkova (Z. serrata) and trident 
maple. Evergreen camphor (Cinnamomum 
camphora) is increasingly used for its year- 
round foliage. And cherry trees remain Japan's 
overwhelming favorite among flowering trees, 
despite their susceptibility to disease. The mix 
of trees has varied hy region, however. Ginkgo 
has been designated the prefectural tree in 
Tokyo, Kanagawa, and Osaka Prefectures, indi- 
cating that It is used preferentially there. 

By 1991 a total of almost five million street 
and roadside trees were recorded in Japan — four 


trees for every kilometer of "ordinary" roads, 
which can be defined broadly as all roads and 
streets except expressways. A greater diversity 
of species were planted after the war: whereas in 
1938 the top ten species in areas surveyed had 
accounted for 95 percent of all trees, by 1991, 
the top ten had fallen to 52 percent of the total, 
although in aggregate, the five million trees rep- 
resented five hundred different species. Ginkgo, 
with 11.5 percent of the total, was followed in 
popularity by cherry (various species), Japanese 
zelkova, trident maple, and plane tree. 

The use of trees is very different along roads 
managed by public corporations (primarily 
expressways). These trees accounted for an addi- 
tional 1.7 million trees in 1991, representing 
about 210 species, with Japanese red pine (Pinus 
densiflora), black pine, and cedar (Cryptomeria 
japonica) being the most commonly used, and 
ginkgo accounting for only one-tenth of one per- 
cent. On these wide, high-speed expressways. 



Lines of ginkgos are faced with evergreen camphor 
trees on Otemae Avenue, Himeji City. 


GOURTESY OF 1I1MF.|I CITY 


Ginkgo biloba 29 


large numbers of evergreens are 
planted to reduce traffic noise 
in the surrounding residential 
areas. Where expressways pass 
through undeveloped areas, 
such as mountain foothills, 
species are selected for har- 
mony with the surrounding 
natural vegetation. Both these 
factors mean that ginkgo trees 
are limited to service areas 
along expressways. 




Above, double rows of ginkgos draw the eye to the Meiji Memorial Gallery, 
Tokyo, photographed in 1988. Below, the sculpted allee in winter 1999. 


Ginkgo in Geometrical 
Japanese Landscapes 

Ginkgo trees in Japan have 
often been used in designs that 
incorporate Western landscap- 
ing features, among them 
allees. An allee of ginkgos 
shapes the approach to the 
Meiji Jingu Gaien (Meiji 
Memorial Gallery) in Tokyo, 
built in 1926; two lines of 
ginkgo stand on either side of 
the path that leads from 
Aoyama Street to the Gallery. 

To exaggerate the perspective, 
the trees are maintained such 
that their heights decrease as 
they approach the Gallery — an 
effect that is further magnified 
hy the slight downward slope of 
the ground. The massive gink- 
gos guide the viewer's line of 
sight to directly focus on the 
Gallery. The entire complex 
includes 146 ginkgos, arranged 
in the four lines leading to the 
Gallery and in two additional, 
shorter allees that branch off to 
the left. The largest of the trees is now about 79 
feet tall, with a trunk diameter of about nine 
feet; the shortest is 56 feet tall with a diameter 
of about six feet. The trees are pruned every four 
years to maintain their beautiful shape. 

Ginkgos also form the allee in Tokyo's 
National Showa Memorial Park, a 450-acre park 
that was created in 1983 to commemorate the 


fiftieth anniversary of the accession of the 
Emperor Showa. Because the site had previously 
been occupied by the United States' Tachikawa 
military base, its condition first had to he 
improved. The 600 buildings on the base were 
removed, ponds were excavated, hills were 
reconstructed, and trees were planted and 
grasses sown to create forests and fields. 


D 


S 


f- 


DURTbSY OF MF.IM lINGU CiAIEN 


COUR 1 I-.SY OF NATH iNIAI SI IOWA MEMORIAL PARK WORKS 0FFK:E 


30 Arnoldia 60/4 




Geoinetiically pruned ginkgos in the National Showa Memorial Park, Tokyo.- 


mately 130 centimeters [51 
inches] above the ground." 
According to a survey in 1988, 
of the 55,798 giant trees of all 
kinds in Japan, 4,318 (7.7 per- 
cent) were ginkgos, taking 
fourth place after cedar, Japa- 
nese zelkova, and camphor. 

When ginkgos grow to 
immense size, some of them 
develop distinctive shapes that 
are reflected in the names given 
to them. In the senbon (one- 
thousand) ginkgo, the central 
trunk is surrounded by many 
secondary trunks, forming a 
single large tree that looks like 
a collection of many separate 


From the park's Tachikawa Gate, a canal 
extends 255 yards to fountains at the opposite 
end and, on each side, four lines of ginkgo trees. 
The 108 ginkgos were moved to their present 
location from other places on the site in 1982. 
They are kept at 23 feet to conform with height 
restrictions imposed by the proximity of the 
Self-Defense Force Air Base. 

The ginkgo allees at both these sites — the 
Meiji Memorial Gallery and the National 
Showa Memorial Park — illustrate how Western 
influences have been adapted to the Japanese 
sensibility. By using ginkgos — a species that has 
rarely been used in Western geometric land- 
scapes — the landscape architect, Yoshinohu 
Orishimo, rendered it unique. The allee is a 
form that originated in Europe, hut in using 
ginkgos, the effect is very different. This way of 
combining a form, or vessel, from the West with 
materials, or contents, of the East is an excellent 
example of the way culture changes and is trans- 
mitted in Japan. 


Individual Ginkgo Trees of Note 

Many individual ginkgos have taken on special 
importance in Japan, either for historical rea- 
sons or for their place in legend or simply for 
their size. A giant tree is defined by Japan's 
Environment Agency as "a tree with a trunk 
diameter of 300 centimeters [117 inches, or 
close to 10 feet] or more at a height of approxi- 


Hashigaini-cho. a giant ginkgo in Aomori Prefecture, 
northern Honshu. 




Ginkgo biloba 3 1 



i Shibata-cho, a giant in Miyagi Piefecture. northern 
I Honshu. Camellia japonica is flowering at its base. 


trees — therefore the name "one-thousand 
ginkgos." Sakasa (upside-down) ginkgos are 
so-called because their branches, especially the 
lower ones, appear to be upside down. The 
names meoto (husband-wife) ginkgo and oyako 
(parent-child) ginkgo refer to pairs of trees grow- 
ing close together and appearing to be related. 
Ohatsuki ginkgo is a name used when flowers 
bloom at the margins of leaves; ohatsuki means 
"stuck to leaves." In the chichi (breast) ginkgo, 
a number of aerial roots droop down from the 
thick branches and trunk of the trees, becoming 
narrower as they near the ground. Many women 
pray to these sacred trees for the ability to nurse 
their babies. 

Many trees, whether giant or not, are associ- 
ated with legend and worship. A good example 


is the Nigatake ginkgo at Ichou Machi, Sendai 
City, Miyagi Prefecture. It is a female tree about 
115 feet in height with a trunk diameter of 
about 8.2 feet at chest height; it is said to be 
a thousand years old. Of its many "breast 
columns," the largest is 63 inches in diameter. 
According to legend, the dying wish of 
Byakkouni, a wet nurse of the Emperor Shoumu 
(reign 724-749), was that a ginkgo be planted on 
her grave mound. A god is said to be enshrined 
at the foot of the tree. Women who cannot pro- 
duce their own milk often worship there. 

Another famous old ginkgo tree, called 
mizufuki (water-spray) ginkgo, stands in front of 
the Founder's Hall at the Nishi Hongwanji 
Temple in Kyoto. Its age is estimated to be 400 
to 500 years old. A legend tells that when the 
fire that swept through Kyoto in 788 threatened 



Nigatake ginkgo at Ichou Machi. Sendai City, Miyagi 
Prefecture. 



32 Arnoldia 60/4 


W hen the Mizufuki ginkgo showed signs of decline, a Kyoto tree doctor, Shoji Yamada, was 
called in to restore its vigor. First, he studied the tree externally and found spreading trunk 
rot and hollowing. Next, to investigate the soil layers and the distribution of the root system, soil 
excavations 4 feet deep and 3.2 feet wide were made at three locations under the tips of the canopy. 
This revealed that the soil was severely compacted by foot pressure to a depth of 4 to 6 inches, 
hampering the growth of feeder roots and causing asphyxiation. The measures taken to help the tree 
recover its vigor were: 


1 . Dead parts of the trunk and 
large branches were pruned 
to remove rot, taking care 
not to harm the tree's beau- 
tiful shape. Then, urethane 
resin was injected into the 
tree; putty was used to pre- 
vent rainwater from pen- 
etrating this repair work. 
Finally, an antibacterial 
agent was applied. 

2. The soil beneath and 
around the tree was exca- 
vated to a depth of 20 
inches — using great care 
not to damage the fine 
roots — then filled with 
new soil, a soil-improve- 
ment agent, and fertilizer. 

3. A shallow embankment was 
formed and groundcovers 
planted to retain moisture 
in summer and prevent 
freezing in winter. 

4. To protect the tree from 
soil compaction, a fence 
and curbstones were placed 
around the tree to keep 
people away from it. 

By mid-April of the same year, 
fresh young buds had formed. 
The tree has recovered its 
vigor and appears to be in good 
condition. 




Mizufiiki ginkgo at Nishi Hongwanji Temple, Kyoto, photographed in 2000. 


Ginkgo biloba 33 



to spread to the Hall, this large, 
male ginkgo sprayed a column of 
water on the flames, saving the 
building. It is 39 feet in height 
with a circumference at the roots 
of 29 feet and a canopy of 85 feet 
in diameter. In 1994 the tree was 
losing its vigor: its branches were 
drying up, and the size and den- 
sity of its leaves were dwindling. 

Fortunately, treatment carried 
out at that time has restored the 
tree to health. 

Perhaps the most famous 
ginkgo stands in Hiroshima. 

When the atomic bomb was 
dropped on that city on August 6, 

1945, some of the trees in the 
temple called Housenbou sur- 
vived the atomic blast, although 
it was only one kilometer from 
its center. One of these survi- 
vors was a ginkgo tree that 
stands near the main building of 
the temple. The building was 
instantly destroyed but the 
ginkgo survived; fresh young 
buds appeared soon afterward, 
and new branches formed. 

The temple's followers were 
eager to rebuild the main build- 
ing, but the ginkgo tree presented 
a problem. There was no room for 
it elsewhere on the temple 
grounds, and in any case, it would 
have been risky to move such a 
large tree, estimated to be 150 
years old. Rather than cut it 
down, the building was modified to preserve 
the tree where it stood. The roof was changed to 
give the tree more space, and two stairways 
were built in the front of the building to form an 
inverted "U" with the ginkgo protected inside 
it. An opening under the stone stairs allows 
air to flow past the tree. This accommodation 
expresses the intense feelings that this ginkgo 


A Hiroshima survivor stands before the Housenbou Temple, 
Hiroshima City. 

tree inspires, still living today, a precious wit- 
ness to the disaster. It has a powerful impact on 
all who see it. 


Mariko Handa is in charge of the research department of 
Parks and Recreation Foundation, Tokyo. This article is 
adapted from "Ginkgo Landscapes" by Dr. Handa, Yasuo 
lizuka, and Nobuo Fujiwara, which appeared in the 1997 
Ginkgo Biloba — A Global Treasure. 




ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOLO ARBORETUM 


34 Arnoldio 60/4 



;inkgo biloba and shrine in China, the village of Leng che. Valley of the Tung River 
'estern Sichuan. Measured at eighty feet in height and twenty-five in circumference and 
hotographed by E. H. Wilson. 1 August 1908. 




35 


Arnold Arboretum Weather Station Data — 2000 



Avg. 

Max. 

Temp. 

(°E) 

Avg. 

Min. 

Temp. 

(°F) 

Avg. 

Temp. 

(°F) 

Max. 

Temp. 

(°E) 

Min. 

Temp. 

(°E) 

Precipi- 

tation 

(in.) 

Snow- 

fall 

(in.) 

JAN 

36 

17 

27 

65 

-2 

3.87 

16.2 

FEB 

43 

22 

33 

66 

0 

3.35 

8.85 

MAR 

54 

33 

44 

78 

14 

4.49 

3 

APRIL 

57 

38 

48 

78 

24 

6.88 

0 

MAY 

72 

48 

60 

97 

35 

3.16 

0 

JUNE 

82 

56 

69 

96 

44 

6.67 

0 

JULY 

84 

62 

73 

93 

52 

4.91 

0 

AUG 

83 

61 

72 

96 

50 

1.78 

0 

SEPT 

77 

52 

65 

93 

32 

4.52 

0 

OCT 

66 

43 

55 

84 

32 

3.54 

0 

NOV 

47 

34 

41 

66 

12 

4.87 

0 

DEC 

37 

18 

27 

66 

5 

5.73 

0 


Average Maximum Temperature 

62° 

Average Minimum Temperature 

40° 

Average Temperature 

51° 

Total Precipitation 

53.77 inches 

Total Snowfall 

28.05 inches 

Warmest Temperature 

97° on May 8 

Coldest Temperature 

-2° on January 17 

Date of Last Spring Frost 

28° on April 15 

Date of First Fall Frost 

32° on September 29 

Growing Season 

167 days 


Note: According to state climatologist R. Lautzenheiser, the year 2000 was abnormally cold and wet; compared 
to 1999, it was 2.2 degrees colder and more than 5 inches wetter. February, March, and April were very mild — 
March 2000 was one of the warmest on record — but this was offset by the unusually wet and cool June and 
July. June ranked eleventh for precipitation in 130 years. September through December were also below normal 
in temperature; the first killing frost arrived on September 29. Snowfall totaled only 28.05 inches, 13.5 inches 
below normal. 

The consistent rains through spring, summer, and fall made 2000 a very good planting year. Trees and shrubs 
put on more than average growth and appeared to be recovering well from the droughts of a few years ago. 


ARCHIVES OF THE ARNOLD ARBORETUM 


36 Arnoldia 60/4 



Tree climbing iii the Arnold Arboretum. 1949. Heman Howard photographed 
arborist William Stef any near the top of a white pine. 



Index to Volume 60 (2000) 

Numbers in brackets refer to issues, those in boldface to illustrations of the entries. 


Abies koreana [4] inside front cover, 
17 

Academy of Natural Sciences 
[Philadelphia] [1] 4, 5, 8, 9 
Acer [4] 26 

— buergerianum [4] 26 

— griseum [4] 1 5 

— palmatum [4] 15 

— pseudosieboldianum [4] back 
cover, 15 

— rubruin [4] 23 

— triflorum [4] 15 
Actmidia, bower [1] 18 
Actinidia arguta [1] 18 
Aesculus [1] 17 

— pavia [1] 17 

— parviflora [4] 13, 14 

— X planteriensis [1] 1^ 

Ailanthus altissima [4] 26 
Amelanchier florida [1] 7 
American-fapanese congeners [2] 

11-13 

Amur cork tree [4| 1 1 
Andersen, Phyllis, "'Master of a 
Felicitous English Style': William 
Augustus Stiles, Editor of Garden 
and Forest" [2] 39-43 
Anderson, Edgar, "Rhododendrons" 
[1934] [1] 27-28 
Anderson, Rob [4] 6 
Arhorvitae, eastern [4] 18 

— western [4] 18 
Aristolochia macrophylla [4] 1 1 

— mandshiiriensis [4] inside front 
cover, 1 1 

Arnold Arboretum [1] 7, 8, 13-19, 

29, 32; [2] 7, 8, 39, 42, 44, 45; [4] 3, 
10, 12, 14-16, 18 

Bulletin of Popular Informa- 
tion [ 1 ] 32 

Weather Station Data — 2000 

[4] 35 

Artemesia frigida [1] 7 
Ashton, Peter [2] 44; [4] 3, 6, 9 
"Axe in Its Relation to Ornamental 
Trees" [1890] [2] 21 
Azalea [1] 24-25, 31 

— deciduous [1[ 24, 25, 26 

— evergreen [1] 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 

— Exbury [1] 20, 25 

— flame [4] 12 

— Korean [1] 24 

— Kyushu [1] 25 

— Oconee [1] 5 

— sweet [4] 15 

Bailey, Liberty Hyde [2] 41; [3] 30 
Bartram, John [1[ 2 
Bartram, William [1] 4 


Baxter, Sylvester, "Climbing Plants 
on Boston Buildings" [1894] [3[ 
42-44 

Begonia [2] 44 

"Bernice Giduz Schubert, 1913-2000," 
Richard A. Howard [2] 44-45 
Betula platyphylla [4] back cover 
Bottle-tree, Chinese [4] 26 
Briand, Christopher H., "Cypress 
Knees: An Enduring Enigma" [4] 
19-25 

British Museum [2] 34 
Bronx Park [NY] [2[ 43 
Brooks, Henry, photo by [2[ 18 
Brooks, Richard [Dick], "A Fresh 
Look at a Traditional Favorite: 
Rhododendrons" [1] 20-26 

photos by [1] front cover 

Broom, Scots [1] 18 
Buckeye, bottlebrush [4] 13 

— red [1] 17 

Calocedrus decurrens [4] 17, 18 
Camphor, [4] 28, 30 
Caparn, Harold A., "Correspon- 
dence: Madison Square Again" 
[1896] [3] 19 

Carr, Ethan, "Garden and Forest 
and 'Landscape Art'" [3] 5, 7-8 
Castanea [4] 26 
Catalpa, western [1] 17 
Catalpa specioso [1] 16, 17 
Cedar [4] 28, 30 

— deodar [4] 18 

— Mount Atlas [2] inside back cover 
Cedrus deodar 'Shalimar' [4] 18 

— libani ssp. atlantica [2]: inside 
back cover 

Central Park [New York City] [2] 40, 
42, 43 

Cercidiphyllum japonicum 
'Morioka Weeping' [4] inside front 
cover, 14 
Chai, Paul [4] 4, 7 
Cherry [4] 26, 28 
Chestnut [4] 26 
Chionanthus retusus [4] 12 

— virginicus [4] 1 1 
"Christmas Green" [1888] [3] 38 
"Chrysanthemums" [1888], John 

Thorpe [3] 37 

Cinnamomum camphora [4] 28 
Cladrastis kentukea [1] 16 
Clavigero, Abbe Francisco [3] 44-46 
Cleveland, H. W. S. [3] 5 
"Climbing Plants on Boston 
Buildings" [1894], Sylvester 
Baxter [3] 42-44 


Codman, Henry S. (Harry) [2] 41; [3] 
5, 31 

"The Squares of Paris" 

[1888] [3] 9 

Coe, Charles H., "The Floating Gar- 
dens of Mexico" [1895] [3] 44-46 
Collecting Plants Beyond the 
Frontier [Mary G. Henry] [1] 8 
Columbian Exposition [Chicago) [3] 
8, 11 

Connor, Sheila [2] 3 
Cook, Robert E. [2] 3 
Cornell [University] [3] 30 
Cornels [2] 1 7 
Cornus [4] 26 

— stolonifera [ 1 ] 7 
"Correspondence. Madison Square 

Again" [1896], H. A. Caparn [3] 19 
"Correspondence. The Plans of 
Madison Square" [1896], S. A. [3] 
17-19 

Corylopsis glabrescens [4] 12 

— spicata [4| 12 
Cotylelobium malayan [4] 6 
Coulston, Mary B. [2] 41 
Cryptomeria japonica [2] 30, 31, 32; 

[4] 28 

Cyclamen cherry [4] 12 
Cypress [3] 4 

— bald [2] 14-17; [4] 19-24, 25 

roots [2] 15; [4] 19, 20, 21-24 

looping [4] 23, 24 

— dome [4] 24 

— knees [2] 14-17; [4] 19, 20, 21, 22, 
23, 24 

— pond [4] 19, 22 

— swamp [4] 19 

"Cypress Knees: An Enduring 
Enigma," Christopher H. Briand 
[4] 19-25 

Cytisus scoparius [1] 18 

"Delights of a Rough Garden" 
[1896], D. H. R. Goodale [3] 35 
Dogwood [4] 26 

Downing, Andrew Jackson [1] 28 
Dutchman's pipe, Manchurian [4] 11 

"Effect of Gardening Upon the 
Mind" [1891] [3] 33 
Eliot, Charles, [2] 41; [3[ 5, 7 

"The Necessity of Planning" 

[1896] [3[ 14-15 
Elliott, Stephen [2] 9 
Enkianthus, white [4[ 15 
Enkianthus perulatus [4] inside 
back cover, 15, 16 
Euonymus, glossy [4] 16 
Euonymus carnosus [4] 16 


38 Arnoldia 60/4 


Evolution, floral |1| 14 

"Farming on Vacant City Lots" 
(1896] (3] 35-36 

Faxon, C. E., drawings by [2] 6, 8, 10 
Fernald, Merritt [2] 44 
Fernow, Bernard [2| 21, 22, 23 
Ficus [4] 2 

"Field of Landscape Art" [1897] [3] 8 
Fig, strangler [4] 2 
Fir, Korean [4] 17 
Fiimiana simplex [4] 26 
"Floating Gardens of Mexico" [1895], 
Charles H. Coe [3] 44-46, 45 
"Flowering Plants and Their 
Pollinators at the Arnold Arbo- 
retum," David Giblin [1] 13-19 
Fly, lacewing [1] 29 
"Foreign Plants and American 
Scenery" [1888] [3] 22, 24-25 
"Forests of the National Domain" 
[1895] [2] 34-37 

Fothergilla major 'Mt. Airy' [4] 12 
Fragrant winterhazel [4] 12 
Fraser, John [1] 27; [2] 10 
Fraxinus [4] 26 
"Fresh Look at a Traditional 
Favorite: Rhododendrons," 

Richard Brooks [1] 20-26 
Friedland, LeeEllen, "Garden and 
Forest’s Journey to Cyberspace" 

[3] 2-3 

Fringetree, Chinese [4] 1 1 

Garden and Forest [1] 32; [2] 2-42; 

[3] 2-48 

"Garden and Forest and 'Landscape 
Art,"' Ethan Carr [3] 5, 7-8 
"Garden and Forest: The Botanical 
Basis of It All," Stephen A. 
Spongherg [2] 7-9 
"Garden and Forest's Journey to 
Cyberspace," LeeEllen Friedland 
[3] 2-3 

"Gardens at Monte Carlo" [1891] [3] 
12-13 

Gebfert, C. H. L., paintings by [1] 
inside front and back covers 
Giblin, David, "Flowering Plants 
and Their Pollinators at the 
Arnold Arboretum [1] 13-19 
Ginkgo [4] 26-33 

— as street tree [4] 26-29 

— giant [4] 30-31 

— in legend [4] 31-33 
Ginkgo hiloba [4] 34 

"Ginkgo biloba in Japan," Mariko 
Handa [4] 26-33 

Gladwyne, PA [1] 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 

11, 12 

Gleditsia japonica [1] 6 
Goh, Melvin, "The View from the 
Forest Canopy," with Richard 
Primack and Meekiong Kalu [4] 
3-9 


Goldenrain tree [1] 18 
Goodale, D. H. R., "Delights of a 
Rough Garden" [1896] [3] 35 
Goodale, George L. [2] 7; [3] 32 
Gray, Asa [2] 7 

Gray Herbarium [Harvard Univer- 
sity] [2] 44, 45 

Griswold, Mac, "The Influence of 
Garden and Forest on the 
Development of Horticulture" [3] 
29-32 

Handa, Mariko, "Ginkgo biloba in 
Japan" [4] 26-33 

Harrison, J. B., "Value of Mountain 
Forests [1890]" [2] 24-25 
Harrison, Mary, "Mary Gibson 
Henry, Plantswoman 
Extraordinaire" [1] 2-12 
Harvard Botanic Garden [2] 7 
Harvard Botanical Museum [2] 7 
Harvard University [4] 3 

Herbaria [2] 44, 45 

Hemlock, Chinese [4] 18 
Henry Foundation for Botanical 
Research [1] 10 

Henry, Josephine deNancrede [1] 3, 
5, 8, 12 

Henry, Mary Gibson [1] 2-12, 3, 6, 

9, 11 

Heptacodium miconioides [4] inside 
back cover, 16 

"High-Grade Paper: Garden and 
Forest and Nineteenth-Century 
American Forestry," Char Miller 
[2] 19-22 
Hill, Polly [1] 25 
Holly, longstalk [4] 16 
Honeysuckle [2] 10 
Horse-chestnut [1] 17 
"Horticultural Education" [1896] [3] 

30 

"House at Honmoku in Japan" 

[1888] [3] 20-21 

Howard, Heman, photo by [4] 36 
Howard, Richard A., "Bernice Giduz 
Schubert, 1913-2000" [2] 44-45 
Hunnewell, H. H. [1] 1, 29, 31, 32 
estate of [Wellesley, MA] [1] 

31 

Hydrangea, early [4] 14 

— peegee [4] 14 

Hydrangea paniculata 'Grandiflora' 
[4] 14 

'Praecox' [4] inside back cover, 

14 

'Tardiva' [4] 14 

— quercifolia [4] inside front & 
back covers, 14 

Hymenocallis henryae [ 1 ] 8 

Ilex pendunculosa [4] 16 
"In Pursuit of Ironclads," Karen 
Madsen [ 1 ] 29-32 
Incense cedar, California [4] 1 7 


"Influence of Garden and Forest on 
the Development of Horticul- 
ture," Mac Griswold [3] 29-32 
"Interesting Rediscovery" [1891] [2] 
10 

Jack, John George [2] 8, 9 
Japan, forest flora, [2] 1 1-13, 30-32 
"Japanese Flower Vender's Basket" 
[1888], Theodore Wores [2] 34 
Japanese winterhazel [4] 12 
Judd, William [1] 9 

Kalmia latifolia [1] 15, 17, 32 
Kalu, Meekiong, "The View from 
the Forest Canopy," with Richard 
Primack and Melvin Goh [4] 3-9 
Katsura 'Morioka Weeping' [4] 14 
Kimball, Theodora [2] 40 
Kiwi, kolomikta [4] 13 
Knap Hill nursery, Surrey [England] 
[1130,31,32 

"Knees of the Bald Cypress" [1890], 
N. S. Shaler [2] 16-17 
"Knees of the Bald Cypress: A New 
Theory of Their Function" [1890], 
Robert H. Lamborn [2] 15-16 
Knott, Cheryl [4] 3 
Koelreuteria paniculata [1] 18 

'Rose Lantern' [4] inside front 

& back covers, 16 
Korean weigela [4] 12 
Kuching [Sarawak, Malaysia] [4] 3, 

6 , 8 

Kyoto [4] 3 1 

Lake Monroe [FL] [1] 14-17 
Lake Yumoto [Japan] [2] 12 
Laman, Tim [4] 3 

Landers, M., drawing by [23] inside 
back cover 
Lapland rosebay [1] 7 
Leach, David [1] 22, 25, 30 
Library of Congress [2] 3; [3] 2-3 
Lilac, common [4] 12 
Lilies [1] 8, 10 

Lilium iridollae [1] 10, 11, 12 

— philadelphicum [1] 10 
Lily, pot-of-gold [1] 12 

Lindera obtusilobum [4] inside back 
cover, 16 

Linnaea borealis [1] 4 
Linnaeus [2] 1 7 
Liriodendron tulipifera [4] 26 

X chinense 'Chapel Hill' [4] 

inside front cover, 14 
Locust, black [4] 26 

— bristly [1] 16 
Lonicera flava [2] 10 
Ludong, Banyeng [4] 3-9, 6, 7 
Lyon, John [2] 17 

Macoun, John [1] 7 
Madsen, Karen, "In Pursuit of 
Ironclads" [1] 29-32 


Index 39 


"Preface"[2] 2-3 

Magnolia family |1) 15 
Magnolia [ 1 ] 1 5 

— acuminata var. subcordata [1)13 

— kobus [4] 12 

— salicifolia [4] 12 

— virginiana var. australis [4] 16 
virginiana [4] 1 7 

— X 'Wada's Memory' [4] 12 
Magnoliaceae [1] 15 
Mallotus japonicus [4] 26 
Manning, Warren H. [3] 5 
Maple [4] 26 

— Japanese [4] 15 

— Korean [4] 15 

— paperbark [4] 15 

— trident [4] 26, 28 

— twisted-bark [4] 15 
Marsh, George Perkins [2] 20 
"Mary Gibson Henry, Plantswoman 

Extraordinaire," Mary Harrison [1] 
2-12 

'"Master of a Felicitous Style': 
William Augustus Stiles, Editor of 
Garden and Forest," Phyllis 
Andersen [2] 39-43 
Mayfair Nurseries [Hillsdale, NJ] [1] 
10 

McCusker, K. F. [1] 6, 7, 8 
Mehlquist, Gustav [1] 21, 23, 24 
Melanson, Joseph [2] 3 
Metropolitan Museum [NY] [2] 43 
Metropolitan Park Commission 
[Boston] [3[ 7 
Miller, Wilhelm [3] 5 
Monarda mollis var. menthaefolia 
[117 

Mount Auburn Cemetery [Cam- 
bridge, MA] [2[ 45 
Mountain laurel [1] 16, 17 
Mulu National Park [Malaysia] [4] 

4, 7 

Museum of Natural History [NY] 

[2[ 43 

Jesup collection of 

American woods [2] 32 
"Museum Specimen of Sequoia 
Gigantea" [1892] [2] 32-34 

"Necessity of Planning" [1896], 
Charles Eliot [3] 14-15 
"New Dangers to Public Parks" 
[1897] [2] 42-43 

"r4ew Jersey Pine Forest" [1888], C. 

5. Sargent [2] 26-27 

"New or Little Known Plants. Rosa 
Minutifolia" [1888], Sereno 
Watson [2] 9 

Nikko Mountains [Japan] [2] 12 
"Notes," Garden and Forest [2] 38; 
[3] 28, 47-48 

"Notes on the Forest Flora of 
Japan — II" [excerpt, 1893], C. S. 
Sargent [2[ 1 1-13 


XXIII" 

[excerpt, 1893], C. S. Sargent [2] 
30-32 

Nyssa [2] 1 7 

— aquatica [2] 17; [4] 23 

— sylvatica [2] 17 

Oak, willow [4] 15 

Oconee bells [2] 8 

Olive tree [3] inside back cover 

Olmsted, Frederick Law [2] 40, 41; 

[3] 5, 1 1 

"To the Editor of Garden 

and Forest" [1888] [3] 22-24 
Olmsted, Frederick Law, Jr. [2] 40 
Olmsted, J. C. [3] 5 
Olmsted, Vaux & Co. [3] 1 1 
Opuntia frigida [1] 7 
Orishimo, Yoshinohu [4] 30 

Pagoda tree [4] 26 
"Park-Making as a National Art" 
[1897] [3] 27 

Parsons, Samuel B. [1] 32 
Parsons, Samuel, Jr. [2] 39, 40, 41; 

[3] 5 

Pennell, Francis [1] 4 
Persian lilac [4] 12 
Phellodendron amurense [4] 11 
Phlox X bifida [1)10 
Pinanga tomentella [4] 7 
Pinchot, Gifford [2] 21, 22 
Pine [4] 26 

— black [4] 26, 28 

— Japanese red [4] 28 

— pitch [2] 26-27 

— pond [4] 23 

Pinus densiflora [4] 28 

— X henry ae [1] 10 

— ponderosa [2] inside front cover, 26 

— serotina [4] 23 

— thunbergii [4] 26 

"Plan of the Columbian Fair 
Grounds" [1892, 1893] [3] 10-11 
Plane tree [4] 26, 27, 28 
Plant documentation [4] 10 

— identifications [4] 10 
Platanus [4] 26 
Pneumatophore [4] 21-23 
Pollination [1] 13-19 

Primack, Richard, "The View from 
the Forest Canopy," with Melvin 
Goh and Meekiong Kalu [4] 3-9 
Pringle, Cyrus Guernsey [2] 7 
Prospect Park [Brooklyn, NY] [2] 43 
"Proposed Plan for Madison Square, 
New York City" [1896], M. G. Van 
Rensselaer [3] 16-19 
Prunus [4] 26 

— cyclamina [4] 12 

Quercus phellos [4] inside front 
cover, 15 

— pumila [1] 9 

Raup, Hugh [1] 7, 10 


Rehder, Alfred [ 1 ] 7 
Resak batu tree [4[ 6 
Rhododendron [1]: 20-26, 27-29, 
30-32 

— ironclad varieties [1]: 21, 26, 28, 32 

— rosebay [1]: 28 
Rhododendron [1]: 20 

— 'Album Elegans' [1]: inside front 
cover, 32 

— 'Album Grandiflorum' [1]: inside 
back cover, 32 

— 'Alexander' [1[: 24, 25 

— 'April Gem' [1[: 24 

— arborescens [4] inside back cover, 
15 

— arboreum [1]: 28, 30 

— 'Arctic Gold' [ 1 [: 22 

— 'Atrosanguineum' [1]: inside back 
cover, 32 

— 'Bali' [1[: 21 

— 'Bicolor' [1]: inside back cover, 32 

— 'Big Deal' [1]: front cover, 22 

— 'Calsap' [1[; 21, 22 

— calendulaceum [4] inside front 
cover, 12 

— 'Capistrano' [1[: 22 

— 'Casanova' [1]: 21, 22 

— caucasicum [1[: 27 

— cawtabiense [1]: inside front 
cover, 27, 28, 30 

— 'Charles Dickens' [ 1 [: 28 

— degronianum [1]: 25 

'Golfer' [1]: 25 

'Teddy Bear' [1]: 25 

subsp. yakushimanum [1]: 22, 

23 

— 'Delicatissimum' [1]: inside front 
cover, 32 

— 'Dexter's Champagne' [1]: 21 

— 'Dolly Madison' [1]: 22 

— 'Dorothy Swift' [1]: 23 

— 'Edmond Amateis' [1]: 22 

— 'Everestianum' [1]: 31, 32 

— 'Firestorm [1]: 20 

— flammeiim [1[: 5 

— 'Ginny Gee' [1]: 23 

— 'Grandiflorum' [1]: inside front 
cover 

— 'H. W. Sargent' [1]: 28 

— 'Hachmann's Polaris' [1]: 23 

— 'Henrietta Sargent' [1]: 28 

— 'Hino Crimson' [1]: 20 

— 'Indian Run' [1]: 25 

— 'Janet Blair' [1]: 21 

— 'Jonathan Shaw' [1]: 21 

— kiusianum [1]: 25 

— 'Landmark' [1]: 24 

— 'Late Love' [1]: 25 

— lapponicum [1]: 7 

— makinoi [1]: 25 

— maximum [1]: 24, 26, 28 

— 'Mrs. Charles S. Sargent' [1]: 
inside front cover, 28, 32 

— 'Mrs. Harry Ingersoll' [1]: inside 
back cover, 32 


40 Arnoldia 60/4 


— nmcioculatum |1]: 24 

— 'Parsons Grandiflorum' [1]: 32 

— 'Percy Wiseman' [1]: 23 
— 'PIM' [1]; 20, 24, 26 

— ponticum 'Goldflimmer' [1]: 26, 27 
'Variegatum [1]: 26 

— 'Purple Splendour' [1): 21 

— 'Purpureum Elegans' [1|: inside 
back cover, 28, 32 

— 'Purpureum Grandiflorum' [1]; 

28, 32 

— 'Roseum Elegans' [1]: 20, 28, 32 

— 'Santa Fe' [1): 22 

— 'Sappho' [1]: 22 

— 'Scarlet Romance' [1]: 21 

— 'Scintillation' [1]: 21 

— smiinowii [1]: 17, 29 

— speciosum flammeum [1]: 4, 5 

— 'Summer Glow' [1]: 25 

— 'Summer Snow' [ij; 24, 25 

— 'Tow Head' [1]: 23 

— 'Vinecrest' [1]: 22 
— • 'Vivacious' [IJ: 21 

— 'White Peter' [1): 22 

— 'Wojnar's Purple' [1]: 21 

— yakushimanum [1]: 23-24 
"Rhododendrons" [1934], Edgar 

Anderson [1]: 27-28 
Rhododendrons at 'Wellesley' [1]: 

back cover 
Robbins, M. C. [3] 27 
Robinia hispida [1] 16 

— pseudoacacia [4] 26 
Rollins, W. H., photograph by [2] 

inside front cover 
Roots, looping [4] 23, 24 
Roper, Laura Wood [3] 5 
Rosa minutifolia [2] 9 
'Rose Lantern' golden raintree [4] 16 
Royal Botanic Garden, Edinburgh [ 1 ] 

4, 5, 8 

Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew [1] 10 
Sake [2] 30 

Sarawak [Malaysia] Forest Depart- 
ment [4] 3-9 

Sargent, Charles Sprague [1] 29, 32; 
[2[ 2-3, 7, 8, 19, 20, 22, 39, 42; [3[ 

5, 29 

from "Notes on the Forest 

Flora of Japan— 11" [1893] [2] 1 1-13 

from "Notes on the Forest 

Flora of Japan- XXIll" [1893] [2] 
30-32 

Sargent, Henry Winthrop [1] 28-29 
Schenck, Carl A. [2] 21 
Scholar tree [1] 16; [4] 26 
Schubert, Bernice Giduz [2] 44-45 
Seng, Lee Hua [4] 9 
"Sentimentalism and Tree-Felling" 
[1893] [3] 36 
Sequoia [2] 30 

Sequoia gigantea [2] 18, 32, 33 


Sessions, Kate [2] 41 
Seven-son flower [4] 16 
Shortia galacifolia [2] 8 
Sihlwald [2] 29 
"Sihlwald— I" [1890], Gifford 
Pmchot [2] 27-28 

11" [1890], Gifford Pinchot [2] 

28-30 

"Slaughtered Giant" [1890] [2] 19 
Smythies, B. E. [4] 6 
Sour gum [2] 17 
Spicebush, Japanese [4] 16 
Spongberg, Stephen A., "Garden 
and Forest: The Botanical Basis of 
It All" [2] 7-9 

"Squares of Paris" [1888], Henry S. 

Codman [3] 9 
Stefany, William [4] 36 
Stewartia, Chinese [4] 17 

— Korean [4] 1 7 

Stewartia, pseudocamellia [4] 11, 17 

— sinensis [4] inside front & back 
covers, 17 

Stiles, William A. [2] 19, 20, 21, 39^ 
43, 40; [3] 5 

Styphnolobium japonicum [1] 16; 

[4] 26 

Styrax americanum [1[ 11 
"Survival of the Most Adaptable," 
Peter Del Tredici [4] 10-18 
Sutton, Stephanne B. [2] 19 
Sweetbay, evergreen [4] 16 
Syringa x cbinensis 'Lilac Sunday' 
[4[ 12, 13 

— vulgaris [4] 12 

Tagi, Jugah [4]: 2-9, 4, 5, 8 
Taxodium [4] 19 

— distichum [4] front cover 

var. distichum [4] 19 

var. imbricarium [4] 19 

Thorpe, John, "Chrysanthemums" 

[1888] [3] 27 

Thuja occidentalis [4] 18 

— plicata [4] 18 

"To the Editor of Garden and 
Forest" [1888], Frederick Law 
Olmsted [3] 22-24 
"To the Editor of Garden and 
Forest" [1896], L.G.S. [3] 19 
Tokyo [4] 26, 28-30 
Trelease, William [2] 7 
Tree climber [4] 2-9 

— climbing, traditional methods [4] 
3-5, 4, 5 

Tree-of-heaven [4] 26 
Tsuga chinensis [4] 18 
Tulip tree [4] 26 

Chinese- American [4] 14 

Tupelo [2] 17-18 

— water [4] 23 

"Tupelo Tree" [1890] [2] 17-18 
Twinflower [ 1 ] 3-4 


Upper Banks Nursery [Media, PA] 

[ 1 ] 10 

"Use of Trees and Shrubs with 
Leaves of Abnormal Colors" 

[1897] [3] 37-38 

"Value of Mountain Forests" [1890], 
J. B. Harrison [2] 24-25 
Van Rensselaer, Marianna Griswold 
[2] 41; [3] 5, 7, 36 

"Proposed Plan for 

Madison Square, New York City" 
[1896] [3] 16-17 

"Various Motives for Gardening" 
[1896] [3133 
Vaux [Calvert] [2] 40, 41 
Viburnum, doublefile [1] 18, 19 
Viburnum plicatum f. tomentosum 
[1] 18, 19 

"View from the Forest Canopy," 
Richard Primack, Melvin Goh, 
and Meekiong Kalu [4] 3-9 
"View in Central Park" [1888] [3] 6 
Villa Giusti [Verona] [3] 4 
Vilmorin, Maurice L. de, photograph 
by [2] inside back cover 

"Wanted, a Tract on Forestry" 

[1891], S. [2] 23 

Waterer, Anthony [1] 28-29, 30-32 
Watson, Sereno, "New or Little 
Known Plants. Rosa Minutifolia" 
[1888] [2] 8, 9 

"Wayside Beauty" [1888] [3] 26 
Weigela, flowering [1] 18 

— Korean [4] 12 

Weigela middendorffiana [1] 18 

— subsessilis [4] 12 

'Wellesley' [H. H. Hunnewell estate, 
MA] [1] back cover 
Weston Nurseries [Hopkinton, MA] 
[1] 22, 24 

Willaman, J. J. [2] 44 
Willow [4] 26 

Willowleaf magnolia [4] 12 
Wilson, E. H. [1] 9; [4] 18, photo by, 34 
World's Columbian Exposition 
[Chicago] [3] 10-1 1 
Wright-Smith, William [1] 4 

Xanthoceras sorbifolium [4] inside 
back cover, 13 

Xanthorhiza simplicissima [4] 15 

Yamada, Shoji [4] 32 
Yellowhorn [4] 13 
Yellowroot [4] 15 
Yellowwood [1] 14, 16 

Zelkova, Japanese [4] 28, 30 
Zelkova serrata [4] 28 

















