Wo 




r< g 








CO «r <i 


PT5T" 


Jir.-ccr^ 




'xcTCc <4 




<WL CiC ^ 









SB403 

^ .M451b 

V . 1 6 







pl'-sC - 

1 I 












Ex J.IBRIS 

The Pennsylvania 
Horticultural Society 

From the library of 
i4ARY HELSIi VliiGATE LLOYD 








Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2016 



https://archive.org/details/auctariumofbotanOOmaun 










y/yyy//,/ 



% 



SIMPKIN* AXl) MAUSHALI-.STATIOXKRS IL.VLI. COrRT, 



SIIKIIWUOI) A>M) €• PATERXOSTKK UOW 






THE AUCTARIUM 



OF THE 

BOTANIC GARDEN; 



CONTAINING 



MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION, 

CONNECTED WITH THE 



CULTIVATION OF A GARDEN, 

AND 



A. T TLT IR ^ IL IHE I § TT O JR o 



PART I. 



Tbe First Part of the Auctarium has appeared, in small portions, in 
Maund’s Botanic Garden, 

Prior to No. 193 ; and the Second Part is continued in the subsequent 
monthly numbers of the same work, commencing with 193. 



LONDON: 

SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, AND CO., STATIONERS* HALL COURT ; SHERWOOD AND 
00., PATERNOSTER ROW ; J. ROBERTSON, DUBLIN; W. WHYTE AND CO., 
EDINBURGH ; AND JACKSON, NEW YORK, 



. -s 



"H I.?} 



AUCTARIUM 



OF 



S’!!!!! ©AIEIDIlIKr. 



1 Cabbages from Sups. The young sprouts, which first grow 
from the stalks, after the Cabbage has been cut, should be 
slipped off, when they are from one to two inches long, and the 
wound rubbed over with wood ashes. The more fully to con- 
stringe and close the mouths of the vessels, where they have been 
separated from the parent plant, they should be exposed to the 
air, about twenty-four hours in summer, and at least double that 
time in winter. They are then to be planted out in the same 
manner as seedling plants; and they will produce cabbages 
equally fine, and, of course, sprouts for further increase. Peter 
Kendall, Esq. of Higham Lodge, Suffolk, saw this method prac- 
tised in the Brazils. He has since practised it himself ; and 
from Ills information, it has also been pursued in the London 
Horticultural Society’s Garden with success. He informs us 
that the first sprouts only, after the cabbage has been cut, are 
applicable to this method; as tlie second crop always runs to 
seed. This new method of propagation is important for several 
reasons; perpetuating a valuable sort, without deterioration, not 
being amongst the least of them. 

2 Scotch Pine. Pinus sylvestris. This species of tree, commonly 
known, as the Scotch fir, yields the red deal, so abundantly im- 
ported from Norway and Russia, and used in house carpentry. 
The living tree, by incision, in summer, affords common turpen- 
tine. This, by distillation, yields spirits of turpentine; and the 
residuum of the operation is resin, either black or yellow, accord- 
ing as the distillation has been conducted, with or without water. 
Its roots being submitted to heat, in an appropriate oven, pro- 
duce tar; and this, again, by exsiccation, becomes pitch. 

102 



2 



3 Mignionette. Reseda odorata. Sow mignionette at the end of 
July, in the open ground; pot in September, and leave exposed 
till frost is expected. Take into the house, and it will flower 
during winter. Sow, a month later, and protect through winter, 
for early spring flowering. If potted singly, and trained to sin- 
gle stems, nipping off, all the early flowers as they appear, 
handsome frutescent plants will be produced. This has been 
practised, and the plants sold as a new variety, called Tree Mig- 
nionette. A correspondent of the Gardener’s Magazine No. 43, 
says he has a plant of common mignionette, in a conservatory', 
ten feet high. 

4 Transplanting Trees. The annular layers of wood, shown in 
the trunk of a tree, on cutting it through, horizontally, are 
widest on the side growing towards the south. The central 
circle will be found nearest the northern side of the tree's cir- 
cumference. The sap vessels of trees being thus naturally 
adapted to aspect, they should be placed to their respective 
cardinal points when transplanted; that is, the side which has 
been growing towards the south, should again be planted to- 
wards the south. Evelyn, in 1660, asserted, from much experi- 
ence, that one tree in an hundred would not miscarry were this 
duly observed. We can bear testimony to its importance. 
Indeed, the constricted vessels of the north, or those of more 
difiuse growth towards the south, would seem ill adapted to the 
economy of an opposite aspect. 

5 Alpine Strawberries. By picking off their first and second 
show of flower-stems, their bearing season will be delayed till 
August, and continue through the two following months. 

6 Progressive Potting. Plants which make root freely, such 
as Balsams, Coxcombs, Lobelias, Chrysanthemums, are greatly- 
encouraged in their grow th, by progressive potting ; that is, by 
planting them, whilst they are young, in very small pots; and 
when their roots begin to spread freely round the inside of the 
pot, to remove them into others, a little larger. At each re- 
moval, the ball of earth, about the roots, should be continued 
unbroken; and be increased, in the fresh pot, by a stratum of 
suitable compost, of about half an inch in thickness all round. 
Thus, the whole pot will be regularly filled with a reticulated 
mass of fibrous roots, instead of such accumulation of root be- 
ing found only against the inside surface of the pot. 



3 



7 Seeds of Stocks. Mathiola annua, &c. It is an erroneous 
opinion that double flowering plants have any influence on the 
seeds of single ones growing near them. Seed should be saved 
from those flowers which have more than four petals ; and such 
plants as produce flowers having only four petals, should be 
pulled up as soon as their quality is discovered. The farina of 
ordinary flowers may deteriorate the seed of good ones; but 
double flowers are void of farina. 




8 Plant Supporters. The durability, the neatness, and the 
present very low price, of iron, combine to occasion its general 
introduction to our gardens for ornamental and useful purposes. 
Above, we have given sketches of plant supporters. Figure 1, 
a wrought iron rod, let into a cast iron socket. Those of 2 feet 
in height cost 5s. per dozen. 3 feet, 6s. 4 feet, 7s. 5 feet, 

8s. 6d. 6| leet, 10s. 6d. per dozen. Fig. 3, one of larger 

dimensions, and wholly of cast-metal. Those of 4 feet high, 
weigh 401bs. per dozen, and cost 10s. 6d. 6 feet, Ifcwt. 18s. 6d. 

7 feet, 2jcwt. 25s. These are the ]>rices charged by Messrs. 
Cottam and Hallen, of London. Fig. 2, a wrought iron sup- 
port, used by 3Ir. C. Lawrence, for standard Roses. The height 
must be adapted to the stock. A few of the strongest shoots 
should be confined to the ring of the support, and all the others 
cut back as usual. Fig. 4, is a stand which we have had 



103 



4 



made by Mr. J. Jones, of Binningham, for the Calampelis, Mau- 
randia, or other free-growing climbers. Its height, when fixed 
in the soil, is 6| feet; the small rings, through the uprights, are 
11 inches diameter; the largest ring in the lower extender is 30 
inches diameter. The uprights are of ^ round iron ; and the 
rings f. Fig. 5, represents one upright only, more clearly 
to show its formation. Fig. 6, a support for Dahlias, made by 
Mr. Murphy, of Dublin, which stands 4 feet above the surface; 
7 of which cost 20s. Fig. 7, shows how it may be placed 
when out of use. Fig. 4, may be closed up in a similar man- 
ner. Mr. Jones unites his rings by a nut; each end of the iron 
of w hich the ring is formed, being a screw. 

9 Draining Flower Pots. Of all circumstances connected with 

the culture of flowering plants in pots, none is more important, 
and less regarded, than di aining. By draining we mean put- 
ting a stratum of broken pots, broken tiles or bricks of a soft 
(juality, or, which is an imperfect substitute, gravel, in the bottom 
of the pots, underneath the soil and roots of the plant. Pots- 
herds should be broken dow n till the largest does not exceed 
the size of a French bean. This operation will produce much 
of smaller size, even powder, w hich should occupy the top of 
the stratum. Asa general rule, we recommend that every pot 
have one fourth of its depth occupied by this material. 

10 American Blight. Aphis lanigera. The simplest mode that 
we know, of exterpating this enemy of fruit trees, is to brush 
over the affected parts w ith spirits of turpentine. This distilled 
limpid fluid, well applied with a painter’s brush, penetrates the 
most minute interstices of the bark, which is of the utmost im- 
portance. Mr. Turner, (Gardener’s Magazine, v. 3) used three 
parts of soap-makers’ lees, and one of turpentine, with success, 
which is more economical. Soot, soot and salt, soft soap, to- 
bacco w ater, and stale urine ; also, heterogeneous mixtures of 
acids, alkalies, sulphur, nux vomica, mercurial and arsenical 
preparations, have been used with various degrees of success, 
and recommended ; but as no peculiar efficacy has been disco- 
vered in the latter poisonous ingredients which the more sim- 
ple ones do not possess, we w ould not recommend their use. 
It freijuently is serviceable to pare away the rough bark of 
trees, but they should subsequently have due attention, or the 
evil may be increased. 



5 



11 Culture of Pelargoniums. Cut down the plants, pretty 
closely in August. When they have produced new buds, a quar- 
ter of an inch long, clear the soil from them, shorten their roots, 
and replant them in small pots of fresh compost; afterwards 
water, and enclose them in a cold frame. When they have fully 
recovered transplanting, give them full exposure, continue it 
till frost is expected, and then take them, for winter protection, 
into a green-house or airy sitting room. In spring, they should 
be repotted as frequently as the roots are found to have run 
freely round the inside of the pot. Pelargoniums (Geraniums) 
thus annually treated, will prove bushy and vigorous; and will 
flower longer, and more abundantly, than is usual. 




12 Heating by Hot Water. Wishing to diffuse the heat, in a 
sitting room, more regularly than is effected by the common 
grate, we had, in the building of it, a recess left in the wall, 
extending all along one side, to the right and left of the fire- 
place. This rece.ss opens 12 inches to the room; is 4^ inches 
deep in the wall; and one foot from the floor. The cavity 
thus made, receives the pipes, which pass behind the chimney- 
jiiece, from the boiler, at the back of the grate. They extend in 
the form here represented, and the space they occupy in the wall 
is fronted with a frame of wire lattice. The little l)oiler, a, is 
fixed behind, and close against, the cast-metal back of the grate; 
which metal back does not reach, as is usual, to the bottom of 
the grate, but w ithin 2 inches of it. The boiler is also fixed at 
a corresponding height, so that its bottom is equal with the bot- 
tom of the sloping back-plate alluded to; and thus a cavity of 
2 inches is left, which forms a flue, from the bottom of the fire, 
that is continued under and round the back of the boiler, and 
ultimately communicates with the chimney. To prevent a cur- 
rent of air into this flue, through the bottom of the grate, a solid 
iron plate is laid on it. The boiler is 14 inches long; 4 inches 
deep; and 6 inches wide, from back to front. Each pipe, which 
is 3 inches diameter, is horizontal from its union with the sujiply 
pipe at b, to its returning point at c; thence to the boiler, at d, 
an inch fall is allowed. The supply pijie, b, may be carried to 

IM 



6 



any part required. The whole is of copper. It is so simple in 
detail, that no minor directions are required. The hot water 
circulates freely through the pipes, in the direction shown by the 
little arrows, and diffuses a general warmth in those j)arts of the 
room, which must, otherwise, inevitably be coldest. It may be 
fixed to any grate. N othing is seen in the room but the lattice 
work before the pipes, which admits the escape of the hot air. 
Of course, it is only required to carry the pipes on the other 
side of the wall, either to heat another room, a hall, or a green 
house, as circumstances may require. 

13 Propagation by Layers. A method of layering, mentioned 
by Mr. Main, in his Vegetable Physiology, is found particu- 
larly successful in the propagation of some flowering shrubs, 
viz. the shoot, to be layered, has circular incisions made above 
and below each bud, along its whole length ; it is then pegged 
down on the surface of the ground, and lightly covered with a 
sandy compost. Each bud will produce a shoot rising erectly 
in the air, and root fibres being at the same time ejected from 
the incisions, independent plants, separable in the autumn, are 
soon formed. The long sucker-like shoots of rose trees are well 
calculated for this mode of propagation; and as some sorts of 
these eject roots sooner from young than from old wood, jirac- 
titioners omit ringing the bark, and wait till the young shoots 
produced from the layers are five or six inches long: a tongue 
incision is then made at the bottom of each, and embedded in 
sand, they readily make roots; the old layer remaining to pro- 
duce other shoots, which may be struck in like manner. 

14 Raspberries in succession. The young stems of raspberries, 
which shoot up in the summer of one year, produce their fruit 
in the following year. If such young stems be cut down, in 
February, to within three or four inches of the ground, in lieu 
of leaving them nearly their full height, it will so retard their 
flowering, that their fruit will not be ripened till autumn. They 
should not be subjected to this tieatment two years together. 

15 Annuals rendered Perennial. Many annuals may be pre- 
served through winter, in a green-house, by striking cuttings of 
them, in August or September. The Chrysanthemum corona- 
rium, Clarkia, Collinsia, Stocks, and many others, may be men- 
tioned. The advantage obtained, is their early flowering, and 
the jireservation of superior varieties. 



7 



16 Colours of Flowers. The fugitive property of some colours 
is well known; and in no way better exemplified than as they 
naturally exist in Flowers. The fume arising from a common 
sulphur match, which is, in fact, sulpluiric acid, will change pur- 
ple and crimson colours to pink. The blue, in combination 
with red, is readily discharged; indeed, a pink or purple flower 
might be completely bleached by holding it in the fumes of 
sulphur. Thus, roses and dahlias have been made to assume a 
variegated and very novel appearance. The blue of Conime- 
lina tuberosa is more permanent, as are yellows and greens. 
Bright pink stripes and veins may be produced on the dark 
purple petals of panseys, dahlias, and other dark-coloured flow- 
ers, with a camel hair pencil and oil of vitriol, to yield a rather 
pleasing effect. Such lines should not be drawn to the edge of 
the petal, or a little injur}' will soon be evident; nor should they 
be strong, nor near together, as they quickly spread. These 
])layful deceptions may yield occasional amusement, but it would 
be neither good taste, nor good feeling, to permit a friend to quit 
our society under any false impression occasioned by such arts. 
Knowledge of this sort is ])rincipally valuable by exhibiting the 
visible chemical action of one ingredient on another, and by 
awakening the mind to what is, and may be, done. Various silk 
and cotton articles, having a coloured ground, and white pat- 
tern, are first dyed of one uniform colour; and their white pat- 
terns given by the application of a liquid, to discharge part of 
their ground colour. The liquid so employed is, not unffe- 
(piently, injurious to the fabric of these articles, which will ac- 
count for the j)remature decay, particularly of some sorts, of 
printed cottons. 

17 Onions of Large Size. When the beds are formed, by the 
usual method, trample them heavily, and roll them finnly. On 
this compact surface sow the seed, and cover it the usual depth, 
with a rich compost. The bulbs, instead of sinking, will spread 
superficially to a good size, and ripen earlier. 

18 Preserving Apples. A method of preserving apples, which 
will be useful to many persons, independently of the superior 
freshness of the fruit so kept, appears in the London Horticul- 
tural Transactions, and also in the Gardener’s IVIagazine. It 
is by burying them, nearly as potatoes. Dig a pit of two feet 
deep, in a dry situation, of sufficient extent to contain the 

1U5 



8 



apples intended to be preserved. Put in a layer of straw, at 
the bottom, and also round the sides, which may be kept up by 
temporary means, or it may be placed in as the apples are 
added. Then fill the pit carefully with fruit, and continue the 
layer of straw entirely over the bed. On this spread the earth 
that was taken out, raising it highest in the middle, and extend- 
ing it at least eighteen inches beyond the sides of the pit. 

19 Pruning Currants. Martin Doyle, in his useful little work, 
“ Practical Gardening,” says that the most productive trees and 
the largest branches of currants, he ever saw, were ‘produced 
by cutting the shoots of every year to within three eyes of the 
former year’s wood; and by cutting short spurs of but an inch 
or two in length, for fruiting also, whenever opportunity per- 
mitted, upon the chief limbs, which should always be limited to 
about half a dozen, and kept clear of shoots, except those spurs.’ 

20 Oenothera c.®spitosa and anisoloba, to Propagate. In 
October, make cuttings of the roots, an inch and a half, or two 
inches long. Plant these, either singly, in small pots, or several 
of them, an inch or two apart, in a large pot. Use a light and 
rather dry soil; place them in a cold frame, where they should 
remain, without watering, till March. Afterwards, the roots 
should be gradually stimulated by occasional waterings, and, if 
it be convenient, the warmth of a gentle hot bed. The root 
cuttings will soon afford healthy plants, for transferring to beds 
or the mixed flower border. 

21 Holly Hedges. Holly should be transplanted whilst the 
plants are young; that is, when a foot or eighteen inches high, 
or they are less likely to succeed. It has been obseiTed in the 
Horticultural Register, that the whole secret of success in the 
removal of Holly, consists in performing it at Midsummer, in 
lieu of Winter, as is the general practice. The soil should, 
occasionally, be forked up, about the plants; and the young 
lower shoots hooked down, beneath the soil as layers. They 
will readily strike root, and the bottom of a fence may thus be 
rendered exceedingly compact. 

22 To Destroy Worms. Put a bushel of quick lime into a tub, 
with twenty gallons of water, let it remain two or three days, 
occasionally stirring it. With a watering pan apply the clear 
lime water, copiously, over garden walks or turlj three or four 
successive evenings. 



9 



23 Pink; Culture of. Raise a frame, a foot above the patli; 
put therein an incli thick of fresh lime, to stop out worms; on 
this, put four indies tliick of strong stable manure, and tread 
it firmly down. Fill up the frame with the following compost: 
Fresh loam, four parts; old hotbed, three parts; finely broken 
oil-cake, one part. In this, the young plants should be put out; 
eighteen inches apart, each way, as soon as they have struck 
root from the pipings. In February give a top dressing of 
finely sifted sandy earth, in [ireference to loose compost or 
manure, which encourage insects. Side buds, and all above 
four jirincipal ones, for flowering, should be taken oft', as soon 
as they appear. Shade from sun and rain, whilst in flower, and 
water freely between the plants. 

24 Raised Borders. It is well knoiin that the pink, carnation, 
and some other plants, require to be kept diy; consequently, 
careful growers generally raise their beds above the level of the 
garden paths. This is, sometimes, done with boards, but a much 
more tasteful border, for the support of the earth, may be raised 
with lumps of gypsum, spar, tufa, or even rough, over-burnt, 
and deformed bricks, or any of these materials conjointly. In 
the joints of such border some of the saxifrages and sedums 
may be planted, so as to render it a permanent ornament in lieu 
of a deformity. It is true that this species of fence is, in some 
degree liable to harbour insects, but if florists’ flowers be the 
objects of cultivation, it would not be difficult to protect the 
plants, from such insects as crawl only, by a very nanow trough 
of oil or tar. 

25 Skeletons of Fish. As branches of natural history, the 
skeletons of animals, and of vegetables also, become interesting. 
Those of small fish are readily obtained, in the spring, when 
tadpoles are to be met with. A few of them should be put into 
a wide mouthed bottle or jar, full of brook water, or of that 
taken from the place where these animals are found; which 
should be frequently changed. Remove the scales from a small 
fish, and by threads, suspend it in the bottle, in a horizontal 
position, and the tadpoles will consume the soft part of the fish, 
leaving a perfect skeleton of clean bones. Should any of the 
tadpoles die in the bottle they should be immediately removed, 
or the survivors will consume them, and thereby neglect the 

business you have set them, 
loe 



10 



26 Fuchsias, in the Open Borders. Put out Fuchsias into the 
open borders in May. At Midsummer strike cuttings of the 
young shoots, under a hand-glass. When rooted, put them into 
small pots of light soil, remembering the injunction, as to drain- 
ing, under paragraph 9. These plants should be fully exposed, 
till frosts commence; when it will be proper to place them in 
the windows of an airy room without fire, till very severe wea- 
ther requires their removal to the warmer atmosphere of an 
inhabited room. In fair weather give them air in the day time, 
but they will require very little water, never so much as to keep 
(he soil in what may be considered a moist state. Expose them 
to warm showers, and the sun, early in the spring; and they 
will be strong and healthy for turning out of the pots, into the 
open garden, in May, as first mentioned. In autumn, when the 
young plants, in pots, are taken into the house, cut off the old 
ones, which grow in the borders, close to the ground. Cover 
them to the depth of six inches, with moss, undecayed tan, leaf 
mould, or saw-dust, taking care to extend this protection a foot 
each way from the plant, or more, if not inconvenient. In April 
uncover them, and they will very soon make strong shoots, 
and flower luxuriantly in autumn. The fleshy roots of Fuchsia 
thymifolia, from which it readily makes young shoots, render it 
well suited to this sort of protection. The Fuchsia virgata we 
consider the hardiest, and under all circumstances, the best 
species for the borders. 

27 CovENT Garden Measures. In order that quotations of 
London prices of garden produce may be understood, we have 
arranged the following table from the Philosophical Magazine. 

The Sieve is equal to ^ a Bushel. 

Half Sieve, 1 Peck. 

Quarter Sieve, 1 Gallon. 

Laro^e Punnet, (nearly) Quarts. 

Second Punnet, 1 Pottle. 

Pottle, 2 Quarts. 

Third Punnet, 1 Quart. 

Least Punnet, Ig Pint. 

Carrots, turnips, leeks, and sweet herbs, are sold by the bunch, 
a completely indefinite quantity. The punnet is nearly as 
vague. Honest tradesmen must anxiously desire a revision of 
such a system of measures. 



11 



28 Shells to Clean. The following instructions respecting 
shells, we have drawn up principally from Captain Brown’s 
Conchologist’s Text Book. They will be found useful. If any 
extraneous matter be attached to shells, first steep them in warm 
water; if too hot, it will greatly injure them, by cracking their 
polished surface in all directions ; then remove as much of the dis- 
figuring material as can safely be done, by cutting and scraping it. 
Afterwards, very much dilute a little muriatic acid, and apply 
it with a camel hair pencil, to the matter required to be removed. 
Let it remain a minute or two; dip the shell in cold water, and 
brush it. If the extraneous matter be not removed, repeat the 
operation, taking care so to regulate the strength of the acid, 
and time of applying it, as not to injure the shell. If there be 
fear that any delicate parts of the shell may receive injury from 
accidental exposure to the acid, such pm ts may be protected by 
a thin coat of melted bees’ wax. When the corrosion has been 
completed, apply a little Florence oil, and polish with flannel 
or a brush. Some use also a little emery or tripoly. 

29 Cement for Shells. Such shells as happen to be perforated 
by insects, or othenvise injured, so as to require the filling up 
of any little cavities, or joining of parts together, may be ad- 
mirably repaired with the following composition. 

Fine Spanish whitening, . . 2 oz. Gum arabic, in powder, .... 2 oz. 

Finest flour, j oz. Ox gall, a teaspoonful. 

Well rub these ingredients together in a mortar, and keep the 
mixture for use. Of this, a paste may be made to fill up holes, 
or a cement of thinner consistence, for joining broken parts. 
When required, add a little hot water to part of it for present 
purpose. If mixed and suffered to harden, it may again be 
softened by hot water, and is equally good. Or, keep the gum 
separately, making a strong mucilage of it, and then mix it in- 
to the other ingredients. The advantage of this method is the 
complete solution of the gum, which, otherwise, will sometimes 
appear as little transparent specks in the cement. 

30 Shells to Repair. Fill up injured parts with the above com- 
position, observing to leave the cement more prominent than 
the adjoining parts of the shell. When it has become dry and 
hard, reduce the cement to the required height, either by the 
use of a knife, graver, or file; taking care to represent the natu- 
ral irregularities of the shell. With water-colour then give 

m 



12 



the natural tints, and afterwards polish the part with a brush, 
flannel, or palm of the hand; and ultimately apply a little Flor- 
ence oil, dry it off again with flannel, and if attentively execu- 
ted, the injury may escape the notice of the nicest observer. A 
little fine olive oil, or Florence oil, as the best sort is usually call- 
ed, is found of infinite use in preserving the exterior coating of 
shells, which oftentimes, from lying by, cracks and peels off. 
It also greatly restores their natural colours, even when the sur- 
face is become somewhat chalky. “Shells are composed of 
animal matter and lime, and when they are decomposed, it is 
from the animal matter being set at liberty by the action of some 
acid; consequently the application of oil, is a substitute for the 
animal matter which they had lost.” It is, therefore, a great 
preservation against decay. A solution of gum arable is fre- 
quently applied as a varnish to shells, but the gloss it gives is 
unnatural. 

31 Scarlet Geranium. This plant is a gay ornament in the bor- 
ders, and according to a correspondent in the Horticultural 
Register, may be cultivated without a greenhouse. Plant cut- 
tings of it in September, under a hand-glass, in a warm dry bor- 
der. Protect from frost, with mats, as occasion may require ; 
and in winter avoid watering, as damp is then injurious. In 
April, remove them from beneath the hand-glass, into the bor- 
ders, without disturbing their roots, and they will blossom freely. 

32 Transplanting Trees. It frequently happens that trees of a 
large size, or of several years’ growth, require removal; to effect 
which, without due preparation, would either destroy them, or 
so affect their luxuriance, as to render them unsightly or use- 
less during two or three subsequent years. Great advantage will 
arise out of the following practice. In winter, dig a trench, at a 
proper distance, round the tree, deep enough to cut off its main 
roots, in such manner as would be required for common trans- 
planting. Let it remain in this state, or with merely covering 
the trench with boards, twelve months. At the expiration of 
such time, the roots will have thrown out young and active 
lateral fibres within the remaining ball of earth, that will not 
only assist in holding the earth together, during the operation 
of removal, but will also be ready to take up a due portion of 
fluids for the immediate nourishment of the tree, after its remo- 
val, and prevent the common consequences of transplanting. 



13 



33 Currant and Gooseberry Cuttings. The numerous suck- 
ers produced at the roots of Gooseberry and Currant trees, are 
often troublesome, as well as injurious to the trees. When young 
trees are raised from cuttings, this inconvenience may be en- 
tirely prevented, by removing the buds from that part of the 
cutting which is inserted in the earth. To produce good plants 
with single stems, no buds should be left on the cuttings within 
six inches of the soil. 

34 Mildew on VVall Trees. Mr. W. Townsend, in the Horti- 
cultural Register, states that early in the spring, he used lime 
water, mixtures of sulphur, of soap, turpentine, and other in- 
gredients, as a preventative against mildew on trees, but found 
them to have no effect as such. From his experience he has 
come to this conclusion, that nothing has yet been discovered 
which will act as a preventative. But after the disease has 
commenced, he says “ Water alone, if applied by a powerful 
engine, and early in the afternoon, is an effective remedy, but 
it must be regularly applied until the disease be eradicated; 
yet, if applied too early in the afternoon, it causes the leaves to 
assume a brownish appearance, but otherwise it does the trees 
no injury. ” We differ, in opinion, from Mr. Townsend, in this 
last assertion, regarding the injury sustained, for reasons which 
are explained in the following article. 

3-5 Watering Plants, exposed to the Sun. It is quite pro- 
verbial that plants should not be watered under a hot exposure 
to the sun. It is, doubtless, injurious, which the sceptic may 
readily prove. It is oftentimes said that jilants are scalded, 
when they have been watered in hot weather, and their foliage 
become brown from the injury. If would be more philosophic 
to say they are frozen, notwithstanding it may occur at Mid- 
summer; for the injury thus inflicted, certainly arises from the 
abstraction of heat, consequent on the rapid evaporation of the 
water, from the surface of the jdant. Its vessels become sud- 
denly constringed, as by an autumnal frost, and brown leaves 
bear evidence of the damage sustained. As far as is possible, 
artificial watering should be effected when nature assisfs the 
operation; either by a cool atmos|ihere, dews, or such gentle 
showers as oftentimes occur without effectually moistening the 
earth. Let none forget to tighten the surface of the soil, which 
frequent waterings may in some degree have Macadamized. 

lOS 



14 



36 Soot as Manure. Six quarts of soot to a hogshead of water, 
is stated, in the Gardener’s Magazine, vol. 2, to make a liquid 
manure of excellent properties. To plants in pots, to pines, 
and to common vegetables, it is said to have proved an admi- 
rable stimulus. 

37 Protection of Wall Fruit Trees. It is well known, from 
observation, that copings of about eighteen inches w ide, on gar- 
den walls, preserve a temperature on its surface, at times, several 
degrees above that of the surrounding atmosphere. It obstructs 
the ascent of heat and the descent of cold ; and by the protec- 
tion which it affords the wall from rain, much evaporation is 
avoided, which tends so rapidly to carry off its imbibed heat. 
These copings, however, are expensive, of heavy appearance, 
and prevent the access of showers when they would be benefi- 
cial. This has been somewhat obviated by having it made of 
boards, with hinges, to admit its being turned back, occasion- 
ally, on the top of the wall. But, further to meet some of these 
objections, Mr. Gorrie, of Annat Gardens, uses a living vegeta- 
ble coping, which is both useful and ornamental. In the Gar- 
dener’s Magazine he says “ I have long observed the advan- 
tage to peach trees of a coping formed by the ample leaves of 
the fig, compared with others not under such protection. This, 
some years since, induced me to turn my attention in quest of 
some ornamental plant which might be trained on a light trellis 
from the ground upward to the top of the wall, at right angles 
from the wall, and occupying the same breadth across the bor- 
der as the trellised projection at the top; the supporting trellises 
to stand at the extremities of the shoots of peach and other 
tender fruit trees, or at equal distances from their stems. The 
plant I have fixed on, and planted for that purpose, is the 
double-flowered Ayrshire rose. The leaves of this rose tree 
expand early in spring, when their aid is wanted in exposed 
situations ; and, where plants of it are trained on side trellises, 
they contribute to produce a calm serenity along the face of 
the wall, while those on the projecting trellis become sufficient- 
ly close for repelling terrestrial radiated heat, and throwing it 
back on the wall and border : thus, in both instances, contri- 
buting towards the protection of the tender blossom, and the 
setting and maturing of the fruit.” Various methods of giving 
temporary protection will, shortly, be noticed. 



15 



38 OxALis CRENATA, CCLTURE. In the Botanic Garden, under 
No. 433, we have given various particulars regarding this newly- 
introduced edible plant. We now state our experience in its cul- 
ture, whence such conclusions may be drawn, by our readers, as 
will shorten their path to success. In the first week of April, all 
our tubers were put into small pots of rich compost; a few of them 
being cut into small pieces or sets, as potatoes; the whole of 
these grew, but the plants were less luxuriant than those from 
whole tubers. They were submitted to a hotbed, for six weeks, 
which induced a free vegetation. After this, the following 
methods of further culture were pureued. First, a pit, three 
feet square, and two feet deep, was nearly filled with fresh sta- 
ble manure; on this, a nine-inch stratum of good garden mould 
was laid, and a plant of the Oxalis crenata turned out on the 
centre of it. A second was planted immediately in manure. 
A third on a bed very freely dressed with lime. Two plants 
were turned into a manured trench, a foot deep. Two were 
planted on a ridge, a foot high; and two on the level surface, 
without manure. The soil being deep, rich, and very light, they 
all grew luxuriantly; showing a little difference in favour of 
the most highly manured plants. They had a slight moulding 
up, and their stems increased so greatly, that it was found most 
convenient to tie each plant up to three or four supports. They 
produced verj' few flowers; indeed, some of the plants produced 
none at all. 'flms they continued till the present week, Dec. 20, 
when they were taken up, the tops having been destroyed by 
frost. The produce from the plants, thus differently treated, 
has not varied sufficiently to waiTant any conclusion that either 
one or the other methods of jjlanting, are worthy of im])licit 
imitation. Those in the trench afforded the greatest supply of 
tubers; and one plant yielded loO in number; varving in size 
from a pea to two inches long, the whole weighing a pound and a 
half. Each of the other plants produced about half the quan- 
tity. The difference did not, however, depend on the plants 
having been grown in a trench, but from the trench having been 
filled with soil in the autumn, which formed a late moulding up. 
Here we discover the peculiar economy of this new vegetable. 
Everj" stem is capable of being made productive. In lieu of 
their being tied up, and even espaliered, as was the case with 
ours, it seems to be desirable that they be spread out on the 



lOS 



16 



surface of the ground; and either covered with light rich mould 
as they proceed in growth, leaving only, perhaps, six inches of 
the end of each shoot out of the soil. Or, as no emission of 
tubers takes place till late in summer, the stems may remain 
spread out on the surface of the bed, in all directions, till about 
August, and then receive a covering of two inches thick of light 
compost, nearly to the ends of the stems. The propriety of 
this mode of treatment we deduce from the fact, that our tubers 
grew from the succulent ascending stems, a little beneath the 
soil which had been drawn up to them; and furthermore, a stem 
which chanced to lie on the earth, threw out a good sized tuber 
from its underside, at six inches from its connexion with the 
root. On the other hand, where a portion of the surface soil 
had been taken from about a plant, the produce was only half 
a dozen diminutive tubers. Still, we conceive that much depth 
of moulding up would be useless, for the tubers occur only near 
to the surface. Hence the rationale of laying the stems. The 
facility of increase in the Oxalis crenata is show n by an experi- 
ment which we tried. In July, we took up a strong plant, and 
divided its stems into thirty parts; some with, and some with- 
out, fibrous roots. These were planted in a trench, watered, and 
shaded, and every one grew, and produced from four to a dozen 
tubers. Had their treatment been guided by a full knowledge 
of their habits, the produce would have been great. 

A Correspondent of the Gardener’s Mag. v. 9, says that a plant 
produced four pounds of tubers; but of its culture no account is 
given which has reference to its peculiar habit. In the same 
volume. Dr. Hamilton observes, that a plant, grown on an old 
cucumber bed, produced a thousand blossoms. This was very 
unlike ours. The hardy character of the tubers appears import- 
ant. Mr. Cameron, Curator of the Birmingham Horticultural 
Society’s Garden, observed some of them exposed to frosts, not- 
withstanding which, they vegetated in the spring. 

This plant, even in its present state of perfection, is entitled to 
the best attention of the public; but doubly so, when it is recol- 
lected that some of our best vegetables have arisen out of insigni- 
ficant weeds. We invite societies to offer premiums for the best 
produce from the Oxalis crenata; and in aid of such patriotic 
object we shall be most happy to present tubers of it to those 
who aj)|)ly to us before the first of March next. 



17 



39 Microscopic Objects. The Microscope affords a boundless 
source of delight to the naturalist. We shall, occasionally, 
throw in our mite to Ids enjoyments. Mr. Gould, in the Philo- 
sophical Magazine, says — “ Take a single scale from any fish; 
put it on a fiat piece of glass, and cover it with a drop of pure 
water ; press the scale, to make it lie flat on the glass. Place 
it under the microscope, with a piece of black paper, or the 
black ivory stage-piece of the microscope, as it must be viewed 
as a perfectly opaque object, or the eflect is not seen. By 
means of a condenser, throw a strong light upon it from a lamp 
or candle, and you will observe a multitude of minute bodies in 
motion on the scale ; but they are much more visible in that 
part of the drop of water which the scale does not occupy, 
forming a most beautiful and interesting microscopic object.” 
These little shining particles have been thought, he says, to be 
animalculae. We see no shadow of reason in supposing them 
to he animalculae. They are fragments of the bright silvery 
coating w Inch covers the exposed part of each scale, and which 
gives to fish their attractive brilliancy. This glossy covering 
may easily he scraped from a scale into a single drop of water ; 
and, on a black substance, and in a bright light, it will be seen 
with the naked eye, to shine in the water, as iron pyrites in cal- 
careous spar; or as the spangle-like fissures of avanturine. 
Dried, with pressure, as between the leaves of a book, fishes 
scales form another object for the microscope. 

40 I’rotection from Drought. In some situations plants suf- 
fer much from a long continuance of dry weather, and watering 
constitutes but a partial, though expensive, remedy. Deep dig- 
ging, for protection against drought, and the more certain pro- 
duce of good crops, has long been observed to be highly ad- 
vantageous. It, doubtless, arises from the increased facility, 
afforded to the fibrous roots, of their descent to collect moisture. 
The idea is not new. An old author — Mountain, after describ- 
ing different modes of w atering, says, “ But if all these manner 
of helps and wayes shall faile the Gardener, or cannot well be 
compassed in the Garden ground, then shall he dig the ground 
after the mind of Palladius Rutilius, three or four foot the 
deeper or lower. For the beds on such wise ordered, being 
workmanly laboured and sowen, may the better endure through 

the low standing, the whole drought of the Summer dayes.” 
no 



18 



41 Raising Annuals in the Borders. Dig the soil, and make 
it light and fine. Mark thereon, with the top of a large flower- 
pot, a circular impression; within which sow the flower seeds. 
The pot should then be j)laced, bottom upwards, over the seeds, 
there to remain till they have struck root; when it should be 
raised up, about two inches from the soil, and there supported 
for a few days, and then be entirely removed. By this practice 
the seeds, on their first germination, are protected from birds 
and slugs. A moist atmosphere, and warmth, is afforded them, 
which hastens the vegetation of the seeds, and increases the 
chances of success. The use of pots is not recommended to 
supercede that of small hand-glasses, but as affording conveni- 
ence where hand-glasses are not at command. 

42 Method of Transplanting. Small plants may be very neat- 
ly and safely transplanted from the borders, by making narrow 
trenches round them, and filling such trenches with plaister of 
Paris, mixed with water to the consistence of a thick cream. 
This quickly becomes hard, and forms a pot, by which the plant 
may be taken up without disturbing its roots. AVith a little in- 
genuity, the soil and roots may be so encompassed, with the 
same material, as to greatly facilitate the safe removal of a 
choice plant to any reasonable distance. 

43 To destroy Ants. The most effectual method of destroying 
ants, that we have ever tried, is the use of the following mixture. 
Take equal quantities of loaf sugar, arsenic, and finely powder- 
ed dried bread; rub them together in a mortar, till they are 
very well mixed. This should be kept in a bottle, in readiness 
for laying small quantities near their haunts. Great care is re- 
quisite in the use of this mixture, for it is injurious to vegetable, 
as well as animal, life. 

44 To DESTROY THE ApHis. Tobacco water forms the most use- 
ful wash that we know, for cleansing all sorts of trees of the 
Aphis. Every one should raise his own tobacco for this pur- 
pose. Sow seeds of the most usually cultivated species of to- 
bacco — the Nicotiana tabacum, on a hotbed, in April. Plant 
out the seedlings, at the end of May, into a rich soil, three feet 
apart. If they be topped when a foot high, it will increase the 
growth of leaves and lateral shoots. Gather the whole of their 
herbage, when in flower, dry it, and lay it by for making decoc- 
tions when required for use. Apply it with a syringe. 



19 



45 Atmosphere, influenced by Land and Water. Many cir- 
cumstances, besides the immediate agency, or absence, of the 
solar rays, combine to influence the temperature of tlie atmos- 
phere. Both the earth and sea are continually softening the 
rigours of winter, by imparting portions of the heat they im- 
bibed, during summer; whilst that absorption of summer heat, 
and also evaporation, ameliorate the intensity of the vivid sun- 
beams at that season. The capacities of land and water for 
receiving and communicating heat, are, however, very different; 
and the capacity of each element is also variable under difl'erent 
circumstances — water from its depth; earth from its quality, 
colour, or surface position. During summer, a maritime at- 
mosphere is cooler than an inland one, partly by the process 
of evaporation, and partly by the diffusion of the solar heat to 
a greater depth; but in winter, it is warmer than over the land, 
from the surface water giving out its heat, and then descending 
by its augmented gravity, when its place becomes occupied by 
water of a higher temperature, to yield up its heat, in turn, and 
also its situation. This alternate change of heavier and lighter 
particles proceeds, and the temperature of the atmosphere is 
thereby continually equalized in a greater degree than by land, 
from the more ready facility water affords to the diffusion of 
its heat; and also the depth easily acted upon. Hence it is, 
that in gardens on the sea coast, even in Scotland, plants thrive 
in the open air, in winter, which, in the midland counties of 
England, would perish from the severity of cold. 

46 Atmosphere, influenced by Forests and Position. In 
latitudes, distant from the equator, islands are w armer than con- 
tinents, because they jiarticipate more of the temperature of the 
sea. This is, happily for us, elucidated by the temperature of 
our own island; Great Britain being under the same parallel 
of latitude as the inclement Labrador, and countries south of 
Hudson’s Bay, — too cold even to admit of cultivation. Coun- 
tries that lie southward of any sea, are warmer than those that 
have the same sea to the south of them, at least, in our hemis- 
phere; because, the winds that should cool them in winter, are 
tempered, by passing to them over that sea. Tracts of land, 
which are covered with trees and luxuriant vegetables, are much 
colder than those which have less surface of vegetable matter: 

for though living vegetables alter their temperature slowly, yet 
111 



20 



the evaporation from their numerous surfaces, is much greater 
than from the same space of land, uncovered with vegetables. 
From experiments, it appears that forests discharge one-third 
more vapour into the atmosphere, even than the same space of 
ground would do if actually covered with water. Now, as 
water, in the form of vapour, is the evident associate and con- 
ductor of heat, this forms one reason why woody countries are 
colder than those that are open and cultivated. Besides this, 
when trees are tall and close, as forests, they exclude the sun’s 
rays, and the winter snows are preserved by them, to spread 
their influence over a milder season. These combined circum- 
stances enable us to account for the amelioration of climate that 
attends agricultural cultivation. 

47 Atmosphere, influenced by Altitude. The Andes, al- 
most under the equatorial line, rest their base on burning sands. 
About their middle height is a most pleasant and temperate cli- 
mate, covering an extensive plain, on which is built the city of 
Quito; whilst their forehead is encircled with eternal snow, per- 
haps coeval with the mountains. Yet, according to the accounts 
of Don Ulloa, these three discordant climates seldom encroach 
much on each other’s territories. The hot winds below, if they 
ascend, become cooled by their expansion; hence they cannot 
affect the snow on the summit; and the cold winds, that sweep 
the summit, become condensed as they descend, and of temper- 
ate warmth before they reach the fertile plains of Quito. From 
the preceding observations, a glimpse will be caught of some 
of the secondary causes of heat and cold; but the temperature 
of the atmosphere, and the vicissitudes of its heat and cold, are 
subject to such a variety of irregularities, that no theory which 
ha^ yet been proposed, is altogether sufficient to explain. It is, 
notwithstanding, highly delightful and advantageous to the phi- 
losophic mind, to search out the cause and effect, as far as it is 
laid open to us, of the unerring progress of natural agencies, 
which are continually operating, in the works of nature, for the 
advantage of created beings. 

48 Heat and Cold. It being shown that a variety of circum- 
stances in nature, combine to prevent sudden transitions from 
one extreme of temperature to the other, the cultivator should 
assist this process of nature. In frosty weather, shade exposed 
plants from the sun; and in other cases, as reason may dictate. 



21 



49 Specific Gravity of Hot and Cold Water. The follow- 
ing experiment, from Dr. Lartlner’s Cyclopaedia, vol. 17, will 
elucidate some of the facts which we have previously stated, 
with respect to the transmission of heat by Water. If a quan- 
tity of cold water be thrown into a vessel, a thermometer being 
immersed in it, and a quantity of hot water be poured care- 
fully over it, so as to prevent the fluids mixing by the agita- 
tion, it will be found that the hot water will float on the cold. 
The thermometer immersed in the cold water will not rise; nor 
w ill a thermometer immersed in the hot water, poured over it, fall. 
But if, by introducing a spoon into the vessel, and agitating 
the water, a mixture of hot and cold be produced, the lower 
thermometer will immediately rise and the upper fall, and both 
will ultimately stand at the same temperature, intermediately 
between their former indications. If, on the contrary, hot wa- 
ter be first poured into a vessel, a thermometer being immersed 
in it; and then cold water be carefully poured upon the hot, so 
as to prevent such agitation as would cause the fluids to mix, 
and a thermometer be also immersed in it, it will be immediate- 
ly found that the lower temperature will fall, and the higher one 
will rise. In fact, the cold water descends through the hot by 
its superior gravity; but in this case the fluids, in passing 
through one another, become mixed, and the whole mass will 
take an intermediate temperature. 

50 Preserved Flowers and Plants. Mr. Lindsey, the intelli- 
gent manager of the Gardens at Chiswick House, has just pre- 
sented to the 3Iedico-Botanical Society some very beautiful 
and highly preserved specimens of dried plants and herbs, re- 
taining, in a peculiar degree, the whole of the volatile oil and 
aroma, and the colour of the recent plant. The plan adopted, 
is to dry the substance in a close and dark room; and not, as is 
usually the case, by exposure to a current of air and the action 
of the light. AVhen the separation of the aqueous particles is 
effected by their evaporation, and they are tolerably dry, they 
are submitted to pressure in small quantities, enveloped in pa- 
per, until the oil appears on the surface, and which is known by 
its discoloration; by this, all change of colour, by the action of 
the light, or further loss of volatile matters by evaporation, is 
prevented. In pot-herbs, as well as medicinal plants, the im- 
provement and superiority is very decided. 

112 60, New Mo. Mag. 



22 



51 Philosophy of Hot-house Management. It is too gene- 
rally supposed that all plants, from countries between the tropics, 
may be placed together; and that, if a certain degree of heat be 
kept up, it is all that is necessary. This, however, is not the 
case; temperature is only one of the conditions requisite — light, 
air, moisture, are also essential ; and to know how to apportion 
these properly, it is necessary to study the habits of the plants 
in their native countries. Plants which grow in thick woods, 
impervious to the light of day, obviously require shade ; while 
others, natives of extensive open plains, will not thrive without 
abundant light; some need to be kept dry, others moist; and in 
short, though experience will, of course, ultimately lead garden- 
ers to pursue the proper course, much time and many valuable 
plants might be saved by studying the native habits of plants 
previously to attempting their culture. One point in the cul- 
ture of exotic plants, which few gardeners are aware of, and 
which is yet of paramount importance, is the necessity which 
exists of their having a season of absolute repose. Deciduous 
trees, growing in the open air, enjoy this when they lose their 
leaves; and even evergreens have a period when they cease to 
push out young shoots, and appear perfectly at rest. Most ex- 
otics are exposed in their native countries to alternate seasons 
of drought and moisture; remaining perfectly stationary during 
the first period, and growing rapidly during the second. This 
habit should be attended to in stoves; they should be forced 
rapidly at one season with both heat and moisture, and left in 
a comparatively neglected state during the other, almost with- 
out water, and in a very poor soil. Mesembrjanthemums, and 
most plants brought from South Africa, require this treatment. 

52 Pear Trees, to render Fruitful. Pear trees frequently 
blossom profusely, but fail to perfect fruit. A few days before 
the blossoms open, thin them with a pair of scissors, so as to 
leave not exceeding five or six of the strongest blossom buds 
near the centre of each cluster of flowers. This operation has 
the effect of diverting the sap to the flowers which remain, and 
gives them strength to set one or two pears in each cluster. 
Another mode is to defer pruning the young wood, until the 
blossoms are in the state described, and then shortening them 
to the required length. This also checks the progress of the 
sap, and enables the tree to set fruit freely. 

51, New Mo. Mag. 53, Card. Mag. 



23 



53 Turnip Fly. The devastation, made in some seasons, by the 
Turnip Fly, is an evil to farmers, of which it is difficult to cal- 
culate the extent. The following important article appeared in 
the Entomological Magazine, from a correspondent who signs 
himself Rusticus. We give it verbatim. I first sowed some 
turnip seed in a flower pot, with earth out of my garden ; it pro- 
duced the animal in abundance. Secondly, I inclosed the pot 
with pasteboard and canvass, with the same success ; but there 
was still a possibility of the enemy getting in, as I had not 
made the cover sufficiently close. Thirdly, I made a light frame, 
about eight indies square, covering it with very fine silk gauze, 
and carefully stopping the crevices of the door with pasted 
paper, and round the pot, where the cover was fastened on to 
it, with putty, so that there was now no possibility of any thing 
coming to it from without ; yet this experiment was attended 
with the same success : however, one point, that is, a negative 
point, was now proved, namely, that the fly did not come to the 
turnip from other plants; this was a point gained. Fourthly, 
I baked the earth in a cast iron pot over the fire, and used no 
water to water the seed, but such as I had boiled myself, apply- 
ing it at the bottom of the pot in a common feeder, then I used 
the same care and took the same precautions as before — I did 
not take off the cover till the plants were of a considerable size, 
and I found them all a-hop with beetles. I had now made 
another step ; that the beetle did not come from other plants, 
I had found before; but now it was clear it was not in the earth 
nor in the water. Fifthly, with a lens I examined the seed, 
and found on it a number of white flattish substances; some 
seeds were without any, but there were generally one, two, three, 
four, and in one instance five, on a single seed ; these I con- 
cluded to be eggs, and thought the only way now left me was 
to attack them ; it w ould have been easy enough to have poked 
them off with a needle, but I could not see how I was to em- 
ploy a needle and a magnifying glass on a sack of turnip seed. 
I recollected, however, that I had found that some salt and 
water, into which I had once unintentionally dropped a paper 
of silkworms’ eggs, had killed them to an egg; it was therefore 
worth while trying in this case : I accordingly made some pretty 
strong brine, and soaked the seed in it for twenty-four hours, 
then dried it thoroughly, and with all the precautions I have 

113 



24 



mentioned above, I sowed it again, and with a kind of success ; 
there was not a single fly, but neither was there a turnip. No- 
thing discouraged at this, I tried again and again, and I found 
that, without weakening the brine, if the seed was only kept in 
it three hours, there were no beetles, but yet the seed came up 
as well as ever. I cannot say that I never find beetles on the 
young plants, but I never have a crop destroyed, or even seri- 
ously injured by them. 

54 Birds’ Eggs. Ornithology, or the consideration and descrip- 
tion of birds, like other branches of natural history, has of late 
occupied increased attention. That the works of creation have 
generally not made the impressions they should do upon us, is 
chiefly owing to the extraordinary anomaly, as Mr. Drummond 
justly observes, that natural history forms no necessary part of 
the education of young or old. One part of its illustration is 
by the eggs of birds; and these, with their various tints and 
speckling, when arranged under their respective names, form 
a cabinet, indispensable to those who collect the birds them- 
selves; and interesting to every observer of nature. Their shapes 
merit a remark. This is not an exact oval, but generally, one 
end is smaller than the other, whereby they occupy less space 
in the nest, than if they were truly oval bodies of the same di- 
mensions. This peculiar arrangement has been thought to exist, 
more or less, as the number of eggs, in proportion to the size 
of the bird, require the economy of space. We give, from the 
Natural History Magazine, the sketch of an instrument, by 
which their contents may be readily extracted, without the usual 
danger of breaking, and by a single perforation only. 




Make a small pin-hole at the side of the egg, large enough to 
admit the point of the pipe, which is to be one-sixth part of an 
inch; then apply your mouth to the entrance of the pipe, and 
suck as hard as you can, when immediately the contents of the 
egg rise, and are lodged in the ball of the tube, without pro- 
ceeding higher towards the mouth. Next, blow the contents 
from the pipe, and suck a little clean water up into the ball, and 
blow it into the egg; shake the egg in your hand for about a 
minute, and, applying the point of the tube, withdraw the water, 
which leaves the egg perfectly clean. 



25 



55 The Chinese Method of Propagating Trees. The Chi- 
nese, instead of raising fruit trees from seeds, or from grafts, as 
is the custom in Europe, have adopted the following method of 
increasing them. They select a tree of that species which they 
wish to propagate, and fix upon such a branch as will least in- 
jure or disfigure the tree by its removal. Round the branch of 
the tree, and as neeir as they can, conveniently, to its junction 
with the trunk, they wind a rope, made of straw, mixed with rich 
soil or manure, until a ball is formed, five or six times the dia- 
meter of the branch. This is intended as a bed into which the 
young roots may shoot. Having performed this part of the 
operation, they, immediately under the ball, divide the bark 
down to the wood for nearly two-thirds of the circumference of 
the branch. A cocoa-nut shell, or small pot, is then hung over 
the ball, with a hole iu its bottom so small that water put into 
it will fall only in drops. By this the rope is kept continually 
moist. During three succeeding weeks nothing farther is re- 
quired, except to supply the vessel with water. At the expira- 
tion of that period one-third of the remaining bark is cut off, 
and the former incision is carried considerably deeper into the 
wood, as by this time it is expected that some roots have struck 
into the rope, and are giving their assistance in support of the 
branch. After a similar period the operation is repeated, and 
in about two months from the commencement of the process, 
the roots may generally be seen intersecting each other on the 
surface of the ball, which is a sign that they are sufficiently ad- 
vanced to admit of the separation of the branch from the tree. 
This is best done by sawing it off at the incision. Care must 
be taken that the rope, which by this time is nearly rotten, is 
not shaken by the motion. The branch is then planted as a 
young tree. This method has been practised in our own coun- 
try; but, generally, in lieu of wrapping the branch with a straw 
band, it is run through the hole of a flower pot, which is after- 
wards filled with soil; or, if this be impracticable, pots may be 
made with an opening on one side, to admit the branch. If a 
pot be used, the addition of a straw or hay band round it, will 
counteract evaporation. The principle is precisely that of lay- 
ering, but oftentimes may be useful where that cannot be con- 
veniently adopted. The season of spring, when nature assumes 
her utmost vigour, should be preferred for this operation. 

*1-* 55, New Mo. Mag. 



•26 



56 Bark Beds. As tan is slow of decomposition, and during that 
process, gives out a considerable degree of heat, it becomes an 
important article to the horticulturist, inasmuch as it can be 
procured in many places, at very little cost. Some of our 
friends make hotbeds of it, on a small scale, merely for raising 
their annuals and striking cuttings. It should be remembered 
that a small bed cools quickly, and therefore is less efficient 
than a large one. Also, that as atmospheric air is a slow con- 
ductor of heat, it is advantageous to surround the bed with 
spongy or porous materials. A well-made straw hurdle is more 
efficient in confining heat than a four-inch brick wall. Mr. 
Tyso, in the Gardener’s Magazine, gives the result of several 
years' experience on bark beds. He says, “ My bed is made in 
a brick j)it, nine feet long, five feet six inches broad, and six 
feet deep; and contains more than two waggon loads of tanner’s 
bark. At first, I made the bed in March, of bark exposed two 
or three days to drying winds. This heated sufficiently for a 
time; but when I removed it, in Sej)tember, I found a large por- 
tion of the tan quite dry and perished, by a whitish mould, re- 
taining no heat whatever. In the centre, and towards the bot- 
tom, there was moisture, and about seventy-five degrees of heat. 
I then renewed the bed by two-thirds of fresh tan, just as it came 
from the pits, without drying, and mixed it with another of the 
freshest old tan. In a few days this began to heat, and retained 
a good heat for six months. On this bed I preserved, during 
the winter, a number of pelargoniums and other greenhouse 
plants, giving them all the heat I could by day, and covering up 
at night; and the plants, in general, looked better than those in 
my greenhouse. In the March following I renewed my bed 
again. On this I struck my georginas, raised two crops of me- 
lons, struck my pelargoniums and other plants, and, in Septem- 
ber last, I renewed it again for winter use. My plan has been, 
to sift at least one-third of the old tan, and mix the undecayed 
parts with the new’ tan, until the pit was three parts full, and 
then add fresh tan to complete it.” 

57 Alpine Plants, their Habitat. Few plants present more 
attractions to the cultivator, than those called Alpines. The 
term, as applied to plants cultivated in gardens, comprehends 
not only such as are found wild in mountainous districts, but 
also in low swamps, and peat soil. On mountains, they are 



27 



watered, during summer, by frequent showers and heavy dews ; 
whilst, in winter, they are protected from the effects of frost by 
a covering of snow. In marshy situations, during summer, they 
are subject to frequent inundations and night fogs. During 
winter, some are completely under water; others grow amongst 
sphagnum, near to flow ing springs, which are seldom frozen. In 
both the elevated and low stations, the water, being pure and in 
constant motion, the soil is prevented from becoming sour, al- 
though it be constantly moist. Hence the necessity of a pecu- 
liar treatment for plants inhabiting such situations. 

58 Alpine Plants, their Culture. The subjects of this inter- 
esting division may be successfully grown, and more easily pre- 
served, in pots than by any other mode of culture. The requi- 
site materials for this purpose are peat, loam, and sharp gritty 
river or pit sand. Also, some broken pots for drainage. Where 
the soil, which is to be used, is apt to adhere too compactly, 
some of the smallest drainers may be sifted out, and mixed a- 
mongst it, to keep it more porous, and allow the water to pass 
through freely. 3Iost of the genera flourish in a mixture of 
equal quantities of peat and loam, mixed up with one-fourth part 
of sand. Some few require pure peat, w ith a mixture of sand. 
The general potting ought to be done in April, when the plants 
begin to grow. This is efl’ected by first putting one inch of 
drainers in the bottoms of the pots, and a little of the coarse 
siftings of the mould over them, to prevent the soil from mix- 
ing with the drainers. The tine soil should then be used, and 
be pressed rather firmly about the plants. 3Iany plants succeed 
best by being again divided, and fresh potted during the sum- 
mer, allowing the plants to become strong before their flowering 
season. The best situation for placing a collection of alpines, 
from April to November, is in a shady sheltered situation, 
plunged in sand or other porous soil. They should be kept 
moist, and to be also, in dry weather, frequently watered over 
head by an engine, or watering pot, with a finely perforated rose. 
In winter, the more delicate species should be protected in a 
frame, open to any aspect excepting the south. During this sea- 
son, they will only require to be w atered sparingly, and this should 
be done without wetting the foliage, or the sand in which the 
pots are immersed. When grown upon artificial rock w ork, the 
same soil should be used as for potting. If attention to water- 

115 57) 5S) Oarencom. 



28 



ing these plants frequently over head, in dry weather, could be 
attended to, they would grow more luxuriantly than in pots. 
Peculiar modes of treatment, for particular genera or species, 
will be given at a future period. The above directions apply 
to the general cultivation of alpines. 

59 Leaf Mould. Decayed leaves form a most valuable ingredient 
in compost for potting ; or for enriching and pulverizing the 
common soil of the garden. We collect them, indiscriminately, 
in autumn ; lay them together, closely, in a heap, turn and well 
mix them every three or four months; and in the second spring, 
after gathering, they may be riddled for use. If this be attend- 
ed to annually, a stock may be accumulated, and part remain 
to be two or three years old, which is very desirable for the 
nicer purposes of the florist. For speedily decomposing leaves, 
Martin Doyle, in his Practical Gardening, directs, that as soon 
as gathered, they be well saturated with the drainage of the 
stable or farm-yard, or with soap suds ; then enclosed over and 
about with fresh stable manure, to occasion immediate fermen- 
tation. When the heat subsides, the leaves should be turned over, 
moistened again if requisite, and enclosed as before, by which 
process, those of the sycamore, elm, alder, maple, and all the soft 
kinds, become ready for use in two months. 

60 Leaves for Hotbeds. The harder kinds of leaves, as those 
of the oak, sweet chestnut, beech, and hornbeam, have been ad- 
vantageously used both in hotbeds and pine pits. Speedily, 
who published a work on the culture of the Pine, was convinced, 
after twenty-five years’ experience, that leaves are superior to 
tail for the pine pit. If gathered in a dry state, he first watered 
them, then laid them together, within hurdles, to the height of 
several feet, treading them closely. In this state they remained 
six weeks, after which they were mixed together, watered if re- 
quisite, and then well trodden into the pine pits. A thin layer 
of tan was then spread over the whole, on which the pine pots 
were placed, and their interstices filled up with tan. He consi- 
dered that two most important advantages were afforded by 
leaves. They never heated violently ; and their heat was far 
more permanent. His beds were stirred but once a year, and 
then re-made, with one-half of fresh leaves, and one-half of the 
least decayed part of the old ones. Mixed with manure for hot- 
beds, they greatly prolong its heat. 



61 Noisette Rose, to flower low, in beds. To effect this, 
the Noisette Rose should be wholly pruned back, in February, 
to within six inches of the ground. When it has made shoots, 
six or seven inches long, which will be towards the close of 
April, the ends of the strong shoots, or suckers, should be pinched 
off, which will cause them to push forth laterals. Their growth 
should be examined every fortnight, during the summer, and as 
such strong shoots show themselves, past the stipulated length, 
they should be pinched off, and a multitude of dwarf free-flower- 
ing lateral shoots will be produced in succession, till frosts prevent 
it. We cannot convey to our readers an idea of the immense mass 
of flowers thus produced, in beds of this rose, from the early part 
of June through the whole of summer. A large bed has, at 
this moment, upwards of five hundred flowers and buds on every 
square foot of its area. A single shoot only has one hundred 
and twenty. 

62 Noisette Rose, to propagate. In February, when it has 
been cut back, as above directed, the branches, which have been 
cut off, should be shortened to a bud, at their lower ends, cut to 
proper lengths, potted, and then plunged in the tan bed of a 
stove, where they will root freely in a short time, and may be 
planted out in the following May. If the plants be not required 
till the following year, the branches, as they are cut from the 
old stocks, in February, may, without any sort of dressing or 
preparation, be laid in a trench, in a cool shady situation, and 
half of them will grow, and be fit for transplanting in the follow- 
ing spring. A w hole hedge of them was so propagated last year. 

63 Sowing Small Seeds. Instead of covering flower seeds, in- 
discriminately, the eighth of an inch deep, or even more, when 
they are sowed, such as are very small, should not be covered 
at all. The inequality of the loose surface of the soil forms 
ample covering for them, when watered, however delicately 
that watering may be effected. We sowed seeds of Nierembergia 
phcenicea, in April, and sprinkled a very small quantity of fine 
compost over them; not so much as entirely to cover all the 
seeds, but even this was too much. They were submitted to a 
hotbed for a month, and then put in the open air, in the shade, 
a fortnight longer; after this the young plants, which were abun- 
dant, were wholly drawn from the seed pots and transplanted. 
The surface of the soil in the seed pots was then slightly stirred 

116 61, 62, 1. Markham. 



32 



and watered, and the pots again placed in a hotbed. A second 
crop of plants, almost as numerous as the first, has sprung from 
the original sowing. The seeds being too deeply buried did not 
vegetate; and to this cause may oftentimes be attributed the 
failure of many sorts of flower seeds. It will readily be con- 
ceived that seeds, in a state of incipient vegetation, so imme- 
diately on the surface of the soil, may be quickly destroyed by 
heat. This will be most effectually prevented, in the borders, 
by turning pots over them ; and in the greenhouse or hotbed, 
by a very moderate share of attention to watering; with the addi- 
tion of a flat piece of glass placed on the top of the seed pot. 
This latter method is practised by an admirable cultivator, who 
informs us that the only precaution necessary, to secure all the 
advantages of this practice, is gradually to raise the glass from 
tlie pot, when the seeds are observed to burst their cuticle, by 
beginning to vegetate. We should not omit to notice that some 
persons press down the surface of their pots of compost, to make 
it rather firm, and quite even, before they scatter the seeds upon 
it. When the compost is very light, this method is beneficial, 
by its preventing too rapid an evaporation of moisture; and, as 
tlie seeds are prevented from sinking beneath the surface, a 
slight sprinkling of very finely sifted compost over them, will, 
in most cases be advantageous. 

64 Planting Peas. It is a common practice to plant peas over 
a whole compartment of the garden; or, at least, several rows 
together. A better method, excepting for the early crop, is 
that of distributing them in separate rows, a considerable distance 
apart, filling up the spaces with beds of other vegetables. The 
partial shade yielded by tall sorts is frequently advantageous to 
adjoining crops of celery, endive, lettuce, and the cabbage tribe; 
and the produce of peas w ill be a third greater than when crowd- 
ed together. Scarlet runners and common beans are likewise 
greatly benefited by the same method of single row planting; and 
it should not be forgotten, that the beauty of the vegetable gar- 
den is increased by this method of regular distribution. 

65 Alpine Strawberry, from Seed. The Alpine Strawberry, 
under judicious culture, is a valuable acquisition to every fruit 
garden. It is generally esteemed as superior to any other for 
preserves, creams, and confections, and other similar uses, ex- 
cept as a dessert confection, where the fruit is required to be 

64, Ilort. Reg. 



33 



large and whole. In consequence of its growing and bearing al- 
most any where, it oftentimes loses its requisite share of attention. 
AVe shall merely notice the methods, generally, by which this 
fruit may be obtained in perfection, and in almost all sea- 
sons. The best mode of propagation, and that least practised, 
is by raising the plants from seed. Choose fit strawberries, 
rub them to pieces in water, and collect the seeds by straining 
the whole through muslin or a fine sieve, and dry them for lay- 
ing up. In the beginning of March, sow some of these in pots, 
and forward them in a hotbed; transplant in May, and they will 
bear fruit from August till frosts commence. Sow again at the 
end of March, in the open ground, and plants will be produced 
which will atibrd a further chance of a late Autumnal crop, and 
an early crop in the following year. Transplanting from seed 
or nursery beds may be performed at any season, so that if a few 
feet of ground be sowed annually, beds may be planted where- 
ever it happens to be convenient, and a succession of fruit be 
secured through more than half the year. The fruiting beds 
should never continue more than two years without a removal. 
It would be superfluous to detail the routine of culture, nothing 
but common-sense proceedings being required to secure success. 

66 Bark-bound Apple Trees. There are many instances of 
old and large apple and pear trees, which are almost constantly 
barren. This is usually attributed to unsuitableness of soil or 
situation, to unfavourable seasons, or to the ravages of insects, 
or blight. Barrenness, however, often proceeds from a cause 
which is seldom suspected, and by very many orehardists not 
even known to exist. This malady is constriction of the bark. 
The bark is an excrementitious production of a tree. It consists 
of a number of layers; a new’ one being formed in every year; so 
that the number of eoats of bark, like those of the wood, are al- 
ways equal to the age of the tree. As new layers of both are an- 
nually formed within the bark, its exterior being expansible, is 
either stretched horizont<ally, rent longitudinally, or thrown off 
in flakes periodically. This is the uniform and natural process 
of every healthy tree: but if from any cause the expansible pro- 
perty of the outer layers of bark be lost or destroyed, they be- 
come indurated, and no longer yield to the accretion of the vital 
membrane; the latter is eonfined, the motion of the sap is ar- 
rested, and a general paralysis pervades the whole system. In 

117 C6, J. Main. 



34 



lliis stfite of a tree, the shoots, foliage, and flowers, are all 
diminutive. Tlie fruit rarely sets, and if it does, never arrives 
at full perfection. Besides these defects, such languid trees are 
the favourite prey ol insects, whose depredations, adding to the 
general debility of their victim, sooner or later occasions pre- 
mature di.ssolution. 

67 Decortication of Apple Trees should he had recourse to 
when they are bark -bound as above described. If the tree be 
twenty years old, sixteen of the exterior layers may be shaved off 
with impunity. The vital membrane situated within the bark 
and wood, and whence all accretions arise, is the only vulnera- 
ble member of a tree, and so that this is left entire no bad conse- 
quence can ensue. If, indeed, only one layer be left, it will be 
a suflicient protection to the new layers of bark and wood; and 
which, when relieved from the compression of the exterior lay- 
ers, will immediately assume healthy functions, swell into full 
volume, and yield to the languishing head the long-wanted sup- 
ply of nutrient sap. It should be understood, that it is chiefly 
through the vital membrane and the recently formed layers of 
bark and wood, on each side of it, that all connexion between 
the roots and branches is maintained. The action of the ex- 
tremities is reciprocal, an increased demand of the head is an- 
swered by an increased supply from the root. At the same 
time, the member which forms the connexion, is itself enlarged 
to enable it to perform the office of a conduit. But if this en- 
largement cannot take place by reason of constriction, derange- 
ment of the natural processes follows, and a general stagnation 
is induced. Removing at least half the substance, of the outer 
bark, not only gives liberty to the vital organization, but in a 
most efficient manner frees the ti’ee of the nests and eggs of in- 
sects so injurious to them. The smoothed surface of the stem 
and branches is also, for several years after decortication, less in- 
viting to the parent insects to choose for nestling places for 
their broods. 

6fi The Growth of Vegetables is a phenomenon ever before 
our eyes. We can observe the apparently formless embryo 
swell into a tree of vast bulk. Every member of the system re- 
ceives annual additions, some of which persist for a limited time; 
others quickly perish never to be renewed. But whence is de- 
rived, and how is the accretory matter accumulated ? One 

67, 68, J. Main. 



35 



physiologist answers, by food taken in by the roots, which being 
diffused throughout the system, assists to distend, by dilatation, 
pre-existing membranes: but this idea has been clearly proved 
erroneous. Another physiologist maintains, that every hud in- 
creases the stem by ejecting fibres down between the wood and 
bark, (o form the new alburnum; but neither has this idea been 
clearly proved. The most generally received opinion is that 
suggested by T. A. Knight, Esq. President of the London Hor- 
ticultural Society; namely, that all new accretions are elab- 
orated out of the sap, it being said to be “organizable.” Now, 
whether this be possible has become a question. In whatever 
state the sap is found, whether as resin, gum, mucilage, &c., it 
is always homogeneous, and perfectly free from every atom of 
woody matter; which, by combination, or mutual attraction, 
might be supposed to form into membranes like the crystals of 
inorganic matter. Sap serves to fill the cells and distend the 
membranes; but neither cellular nor vascular organization can 
be formed of it. Could this happen, entire organs, viz. leaves, 
flowers, fruit, and seeds, would be the result of accumulations 
of sap; and if an organ or membrane, why not a whole plant! 
If a new layer of wood can be formed of sap, so may the whole 
system: but as the whole must originate in a seed, sporule, or 
from some previously existing dissevered part of a plant, so must 
every membrane proceed from a rudimental basis. This basis is 
the “vital membrane” alluded to. 

69 Penguicula grandiflora and vulgaris. These two beau- 
tiful species, although seldom seen in collections of alpine plants, 
are of easy culture. Towards autumn they form a main bulb, 
surrounded by several smaller ofisets. These are readily ob- 
served, being close to the surface of the soil, during w inter, whilst 
the plants are in a dormant state. In February, separate these 
bulbs; put the largest, singly, into small pots; the smaller ones, 
several in a pot, merely fixing the bulbs in the soil, but scarcely 
covering them. The strongest plants may, during summer, if 
necessary, be repotted into pots of larger sizes, keeping the bulbs 
entire, as they will never bear dividing, nor the removal of any 
soil from their roots, whilst in a growing state. The finest peat, 
mixed with one third of sharp sand, forms the suitable soil for 
them; plenty of drainers being used beneath it. Although some 
cultivators keep these plants standing in pans of water, during 

IIS 69y Darencom. 



36 



suniincr, they succeed quite as well, if }duuged amongst other 
alpines, and treated according to the general directions given 
under the 58th section of this Auctarium. During winter, a few 
plants may be placed in the cold frame. 

70 Parnassia PALUSTRis AND CAROLINA, require to be fresh pot- 
ted in April, just before they commence growing; which is also 
the season for dividing them. The best soil is pure peat, with 
one third part sand. Pots of small size to be used, and these 
to be nearly half filled with drainers. As the plants increase 
in size they should be removed into larger pots; taking care to 
keep the balls entire about their roots. Parnassia Carolina, re- 
quires the protection of the cold frame in winter. 

71 Potatoes, culture of. In the Irish Farmer’s and Garden- 
er’s JMagazine, several communications have appeared on the 
culture of the potatoe. As this is a subject of no mean importance, 
to English as well as Irish, we shall give a few general ideas 
from amongst the conflicting opinions delivered in that work, 
and by cultivators of our own acquaintance. Several writers 
agree that potatoes which have not been well ripened, and fully 
matured in autumn, are unfit for planting. This may be cor- 
rect iu reference to a general crop, but we know the practice of 
some experienced men, is to plant for a late crop, on the ground, 
which has been cleared of early pease; to obtain somewhat im- 
mature potatoes, expressly for the supply of the next year’s sets, 
of the earliest sorts. These, certainly, produce an earlier crop; 
but as early produce is by no means synonymous with large 
produce — the desideratum of a main crop, it may be as correct 
as it is reasonable, that well-matured potatoes, are the most suit- 
able for the purpose of reproduction. The next point of con- 
sideration is, their preservation, during winter. It is pretty gen- 
erally agreed, that permitting potatoes to be exposed, and be- 
come dry, deteriorates their quality for the purpose of planting. 
Another very important difterence exists in the practice of atten- 
tive potatoe growers, regarding which it may be unnecessary to 
give details of experiments; inasmuch as most persons know 
that large potatoes, when planted whole, produce a better crop 
than when cut into sets; and that large potatoes, for this purpose, 
surpass small ones. This, however, as a general practice, is re- 
jected by most growers, on the ground that planting whole pota- 
toes is the most expensive. It must be admitted as somewhat 

70| Darencom. 



37 



more so than planting sets, yet but little, inasmuch as whole 
potatoes are not required to be planted so closely as sets ; and 
the produce, generally, more than compensates for the differ- 
ence. Again, the chances of an unproductive crop in an unpro- 
pitious season, will be greatly reduced. These advantages how- 
ever, are not universally admitted. The usual practice of mould- 
ing up is objected to by some persons, as not only useless, but 
detrimental to the crop. They hoe two or three times, to keep 
down weeds, and lighten the soil, but leave it otherwise flat. We 
merely submit the hint, as every one can readily satisfy him- 
self as to its truth or fallacy. The most important, and least re- 
garded, circumstance connected with the culture of the potatoe, 
is its renewal from seeds. To effect this, it is only required, 
that the balls or apples, as they are usually called, be gathered 
from the stems, late in autumn, when they have become some- 
what soft. These should be broken to pieces, in a fine sieve or 
cloth, and the pulp washed from the seeds, in the same manner 
as in collecting strawberry seeds. They should be laid by and 
sown early in 3Iarch, in pots or boxes of light rich compost; 
and they may then be placed either in a hotbed, or tbe w indow of 
a sitting room. When the young plants appear, they should 
liave plenty of air in mild weather; and by the end of 3Iay they 
will be fit for transplanting into the open ground, in rows, two 
feet apart; and from nine inches to a foot apart in the rows; 
the soil to be, as a matter of course, rich, light, and well pre- 
pared. Large potatoes, of new varieties, will be produced in 
autumn, all of which should be kept, and planted whole in the 
following spring, to ascertain their qualities. If, in the first 
week of April, the seeds be thinly sown, on open beds, in a good 
situation, the potatoes will, generally, be perfected in Autumn. 
In this case no transplanting will be required, otherwise than to 
thin the plants, where necessary. The importance of raising 
new varieties cannot be too highly appreciated; but as some 
sorts do not, usually, produce seeds we will, shortly, give ]\Ir. 
Knight’s method of inducing them to do so. 

2 Vegetation in glazed Boxes. In a letter from Mr. N. B. 
Ward.ofWellclose Square, London, read to the Society of Arts, a 
novel mode of growing plants, in glazed boxes, w as described by 
that Gentleman. His experiments having been made in thesmoke 
of London, their success is, consequently, doubly important, 

119 



38 



since tliey open some of ihe advantages of a domestic conser- 
vatory where they were previously unattainable. In a sub- 
sequent letter, communicated to the Gardener’s INIagazine, he 
mentions his having observed poa annua, and aspedium filix- 
mas spring up in a large bottle of moist mould, covered with a 
lid; he placed the bottle in the open air, in a northern aspect, 
and both plants lived three years, without either watering or the 
removal of the lid. Accidental admission of rain ultimately des- 
troyed them. Mr. Ward states that he has repeated the exper- 
iment, with uniform success, on more than sixty species of fern; 
and further says, that, “Various other plants, vascular as well as 
cellular, and more particularly those which delight in humid 
situations, succeed as well as the ferns. Among others may be 
enumerated, — oxalis acetosella, anemone nemorosa, dentaria 
bulbifera, Paris quadrifolia, veronica montana, Listera nidus 
avis, &c. The method of proceeding is very simple. The ferns, 
&c., may be planted in boxes of any size or shape, furnished 
with glazed sides and a glazed lid. The bottom of the box 
should be filled with nearly equal portions of bog moss, veget- 
able mould and sand ; and the ferns, after planting, should be 
most copiously watered, and the superfluous water allowed to 
drain off through a plughole at the bottom of the box : the plug 
is then to be put in tightly, the glazed lid applied, and no farther 
care is requisite than that of keeping the box in the light. In 
this way many plants will grow for years, without requiring any 
fresh supply of water. It is scarcely necessary to point out the 
advantages which this plan, subject to some modifications, ac- 
cording to the enclosed plants, offers to the horticulturist, and 
to the physiological botanist. To the one, it furnishes a ready- 
mode of importing most plants, without risk, from the most dis- 
tant regions of the globe ; and, to the other, the opportunity of 
making more accurate experiments than have hitherto been 
practicable, on many important points connected w ith vegetable 
economy. The numerous experiments I have already made have, 
I think, established one important fact, that the air of London, 
when freed from adventitious matter, is as fitted to support vege- 
table life as the air of the country.” We need only add that 
Mr. Ward’s boxes are a few inches deep, of wood, firmly made; 
the glazed sides and top being adapted to the height of the 
plants which they are intended to contain. 



30 



3 Tobacco, cultivation of. Tobacco, in fumigations and in- 
fusions, is a principal remedy against the ravages of insects; 
hence it is an important article to the horticulturist. And as 
our laws, we believe, do not prohibit the cultivation of it, in such 
small quantities as would be required for this purpose, we shall 
give the heads of a paper, by Mr. John AVilson, on its culture 
and preparation, as practised in the garden of the London Hor- 
ticultural Society. It has been a common practice, by most 
persons, to ferment the leaves, by laying them in heaps, when 
fresh gathered. This practice, in the paper before us, is depre- 
cated. The following are its principal directions. Sow seeds, in 
pots, about the middle of March; place them in a hotbed. Trans- 
plant into other pots, when requisite, and gradually inure the 
plants to the open air. In the middle of May, finally plant out 
the seedlings, in rich soil, three feet apart. Shade and water, 
as occasion may require. Pinch off all lateral shoots, as they 
appear, that the leaves may possess the whole nutriment. Top 
the plants, when about sixteen leaves high. When the leaves 
become mottled, early in September, the plants should be taken 
up, entire. In the Horticultural Gardens, a mushroom house 
was employed for the drying process. The plants were hung 
up, the house closed, and the temperature raised to, and con- 
tinued at, 70 degrees, for four or five days, till the leaves became 
yellow; it was then gradually increased to between 80 and 90 de- 
grees, till the thickest part of the midribs were quite dry, and 
would readily break ; which took about twelve days more. The 
leaves being curled and crisp, the fire was discontinued, and the 
floor of the house well watered, and kept moist lor 24 hours; 
this had the effect of rendering the tobacco leaves again pliable. 
They were then stripped from the stalks, laid flat on each other, 
and pressed smoothly into a tub. Moist weather occasioned 
their moulding a little; in consequence of which they were taken 
out, dried again to crispness, and in like manner moistened to 
render them manageable. They were then repacked in the tub 
as before, where they kept and improved in smell and appearance. 
It is said to be requisite to submit the leaves to a low tem])era- 
ture, till they attain their yellow tint, or they w ill dry of too light 
a colour. This does not appear to us important. The principal 
object seems to be, that they be thoroughly dry before they are 
packed up for keeping. It is suggested that the plants may be 

120 73t Trans. Hort. Soc. T. o. s. 



40 



hung u[), in a shed, till the yellow tint be assunaed, and then re- 
moved to the drying house. We have thought that, in general, 
the more quickly plants are dried, the better are their qualities 
preserved. The sort cultivated, is a large-leaved variety of the 
Virginian tobacco. Its net produce, half a pound to each plant, 
being 2420 pounds to an acre. 

74 Pelargoniums, TO PROPAGATE. The following method of cul- 
ture, as stated in Mantell’s Floriculture, is worthy of being re- 
membered by such as desire a gay flower garden. “Those who 
cultivate geraniums (now known as pelargoniums) extensively 
in the open air, and who have not the means of protecting them 
in a green-house during winter, w ill find it advantageous to adopt 
the plan recommended by Mr. Mackenzie. In the autumn, cut- 
tings may be taken from old-established plants, and being pre- 
jiared in the usual manner, twenty or thirty may be inserted in 
a pot, about nine inches in diameter; they should then be plunged 
into a hotbed, and allowed to remain until they have taken root. 
AVhen the frosts set in, they may be removed to a room, of any 
other place where they can be protected from the cold. A small 
window, w ith a shelf in the centre, will contain two hundred plants. 
About the middle or latter end of March, the enttings may be 
repotted singly, and put into any sheltered situation until the 
season for transplanting them into the open air. By this means 
a supply of young plants may, from year to year, be obtained, 
with scarcely any trouble.” From the same author we give 
another direction, which although known to many, is not re- 
membered by all, viz. 

75 Laying Chinese Roses. “About the beginning of July, just 
when the tree is coming into flower, being provided with a sharp 
knife, and a few hooked pegs, commence by taking hold of the 
shoot intended to be layered, and making an incision just below 
the bud, on the upperside of the branch, pass the knife half way 
up to the next bud ; then give the branch a slight twist, that the 
part so cut may rest upon the soil ; fix in the peg, to hold the 
layer in its place, and cover it with soil, to about the depth of 
two inches. The custom of layering without the incision, so 
greatly retards the striking of the roots, that frequently they can- 
not be detached from the stools till the following spring; whereas • 
if the incision be made, they w ill be ready, in favourable seasons, 
in two or three months.” 



41 



6 Bulbs IN Glasses. Thebulbs, usually flowered in water alone, 
are the hyacinth, narcissus, early tulips, Persian iris, Guernsey 
lily, and crocuses. Those who delight in relieving their winter 
apartments, from the destitution which their flower stands must 
sometimes exhibit, need not confine themselves to this list. They 
may take up almost any bulbs, from the borders, and place them 
on water. The absence of glasses, made expressly for the pur- 
pose, need not be an obstacle; sheet lead may be fitted in the 
tops of china, or other stands, and have holes cut in it, of proper 
size to receive the bulbs. Various other methods, also, may rea- 
dily be devised. The Greenhouse Companion has explicit di- 
rections on this subject, which are practical and good. The au- 
thor says, “The season for placing the bulbs on water, may be 
at any period after they have been matured; but the most usual 
with spring bulbs is October, and from that month to February; 
and with autumnal bulbs, August and September. Planting in 
earth, for a few weeks, such bulbs as are to be blown on water, 
is the best mode of causing them to protrude roots freely, which, 
when they are placed on water at once, is not always the case. 
Whenever the roots are a cpiarter of an inch in length, take them 
out of the earth, wash them gently, so as not to injure the rad- 
icles, and then place them on the water. It is not essential that 
bulbs, on water, should be placed in much heat, for the principal 
stimulus to a newly-planted bulb is the moisture; and if the room 
in which the glasses are placed, be kept to 45° or 48«, that 
will promote their vegetation, for some time, as much as if 10° or 
or lo° higher. When the flower stem has risen an inch or two, 
then the heat may be considerably increased : that is, the glasses 
may be removed from a room without a fire to one where a fire 
is kept, and where the temperature will generally be found be- 
tween oo° and 65°. Here they will advance^with considerable ra- 
j)idity, especially if placed on a stand, or stage, near a window of 
south or south-east aspect. They will blow, however, without 
any $un; but the colours of the flowers will be inferior. Those 
who keep bulbs on water are often at a loss when to change it. 
There is no fixed time for this purpose : the principle is to keep 
the water sweet and pure. In a temperature of 45° or 48°, when 
the bulbs are newly planted, this will be effected by changing 
once a week. At 60°, and the glass nearly filled w ith roots, the 
water will get putrid and show a inuddiness in two or three days 
121 



42 



or less, and whenever it does so, it ought to be changed. The 
operation of changing is easily done by one person, when the 
roots are only an inch or two long; but after the flower stems 
are of some length, and the roots nearly at the bottom of the 
glass, two persons become requisite ; one to take out the bulb 
and hold it, and to dip its roots once or twice in a vessel of 
clear water, to clean them a little; and another to empty and 
rinse out the glass, and re-fill it with water. It is essential that 
the water used for renewal or for rinsing the roots, should be of 
the same temperature as that which it is to replace ; and this 
can easily be done by pouring a little hot water into the cold 
water. Whether the water be hard or soft is unimportant.” 
Some persons add the size of a small pea of nitre to each fresh 
glass of water. We have thought it beneficial. 

77 Moles to destroy. It is sometimes with difficulty that these 
little animals are taken in traps, particularly where the propri- 
etor of a garden cannot, without committing trespass, pursue 
them in their misdoings. A Brussels work, on horticulture, 
translated in the Gardener’s Magazine, directs that powdered 
nux vomica be sprinkled on earth worms; that these remain to- 
gether two days, and afterwards be placed in the runs. The 
moles will eat them and be thereby poisoned. 

78 Scale on Pines. There are very few pine growers who have 
never had occassion to seek a remedy against the attack of this 
troublesome insect. Mr. John Rogers, who really appears to 
write from experience, has published a little work, “ The Fruit 
Cultivator.” In this, the venerable author, for he says that he is 
in his eighty-third year, observes, “Many remedies have been 
advertised for the desti’uction of the different insects which infest 
pines ; but the writer used but one, which he always found effica- 
cious. This was nothing more than sponging the plants with 
soft water, to a gallon of which was put half a pint of tobacco 
liquor ; and while yet moist, dusting the leaves with a hair-dres- 
ser’s puff, charged with the following ingredients, in pow der, viz. 

1 lb. Sulphur Vivum. 1 oz. Stone Vitriol, powdered. 

4 oz. Camphor finely powdered. 2 quarts of Soot, finely sifted. 
The whole to be well mixed, and kept dry in ajar, closely corked 
when not wanted for use. After this application, the plants 
should be kept in moist heat for a few days, at the end of which 
time all the insects will have fled.” 



43 



79 Lace made by CAXERriLLARS, A most extraordinary species 
of manufacture, has been contrived by an officer of engineers, at 
Munich. It consists of lace and veil, with open patterns in them, 
made entirely by caterpillars. The following is the mode of 
proceeding adopted. Having made a paste of the leaves of the 
plant, on which the species of caterpillar he employs feeds, he 
spreads it thinly over a stone, or other flat substance, of the re- 
quired size. He then with a camel-hair pencil dipped in olive 
oil, draws the pattern he wishes the insects to leave open. This 
stone is then placed in an inclined position, and a considerable 
number of the caterpillars are placed at the bottom. A peculiar 
species is chosen, which spins a strong web; and the animals 
commence at the bottom, eating and spinning their way up to 
the top, carefully avoiding every part touched by the oil, but 
devouring every other part of the paste. The extreme lightness 
of these veils, combined with some strength, is truly surprising. 
One of them, measuring twenty-six and a half inches by seven- 
teen inches, weighed only a grain and a half; a degree of light- 
ness which will appear more strongly by contrast with other 
fabrics. One square yard of the substance of which these veils 
are made, weighs four grains and one-third, whilst one square 
yard of silk gauze, weighs one hundred and thirty-seven grains; 
and one square yard of the finest patent net weighs two hun- 
dred and sixty-two grains. 

SO To PRESERVE DRIED Herbs. Mr. Liiulsey, Gardener to the 
Duke of Devonshire at Chiswick, has made a great improve- 
ment in the mode of jireserving dried sweet herbs; such as thyme, 
marjorum, savory, sage, &c. After drying them in the usual 
manner in the shade, he puts each sort into a small box, 8 or 10 
inches long, by 5 or 6 inches broad, and 6 or 8 inches deep; and, 
by means of boards of the size of the interior length and w idth 
of the box, and a screw-press, he presses the herbs into cakes, 
or little trusses. These are afterwards carefully wrapped up in 
paper ; and, being kept in a dry place, are found to retain their 
aroma, in as perfect a state as when they were put in the press, 
for at least three years, the extent of 3Ir. Lindsey’s experience. 

81 Desmodilm r.YRAXs; or moving plant. This plant was, for- 
merly, called Hedysarum gyrans; and the peculiar property of 
continual motion which its ternate leaves possess, has interested 
naturalists ever since it was noticed by the younger Linneus. 

122. AVCTARICM 79« Babbage's Manufac. SO, Card. Mag. 



44 



In a letter to his friend Mutis, he says, “ I have raised a very 
wonderful plant this year in iny Garden. It is a new species of 
Hedysarum from Bengal. This plant has a spontaneous motion 
in its foliage, which seems almost voluntary. You are aware 
that various parts of the vegetable body, especially those sub- 
servient to impregnation, can be so stimulated by the touch as to 
exhibit some kind of movement. You know also the motion of 
some kinds of Mimosa and Oxalis, as well as of the Dionaea mus- 
cipula, arising from the touch of any extraneous body, or from the 
agitation of the wind. But the plant in question is not affected 
by either of these causes. Whether in the open air or in a close 
room, it spontaneously moves its leaflets, now one way, now an- 
other, one, two, or more at a time; not all at once, nor all in one 
direction; and this takes place whether the air be serene, cloudy, 
or rainy. It has not yet flowered, but I expect that event in the 
course of the autumn. The plant requires great heat.” Instan- 
ces of incomprehensible action like this can but awaken the atten- 
tion of the most apathetic. We will give a figure and particu- 
lars of this plant in the fifth page of the Floral Register. The 
irritability of some plants is better known, especially that of mi- 
mosa pudica, or humble plant, whose leaves shrink from the 
touch, the culture of which may be recommended to the curious 
amongst our young friends. Seeds are easily obtained, and an 
efficient hotbed during summer, in which the plants should be 
constantly kept, will sufficiently mature them for the purpose of 
shewing their sensitive peculiarities. This is a property which 
advances the vegetable towards the animal kingdom, just as in- 
stinct advances the brute towards the human species. 

82 Noxious Animals TO Destroy. A novel and scientific me- 
thod of destroying rats, mice, and other animals, appears in Dr. 
Thomson’s Records of Science, from the French of M. Thenard. 
It is by sulphuretted hydrogen gas. Animals, when allowed to 
breathe this gas in a state of purity, fall down as if struck with a 
bullet; and even in a highly diluted state it is peculiarly delete- 
rious ; so much so that a dog is speedily killed by breathing air 
which has been impregnated with a thousandth part only of the 
gas. 31. Thenard states the success of actual experiments ; and 
from these there appears great probability that in old buildings, 
ricks and underground runs of rats, or other animals, the method 
may be advantageously employed. It is easily effected by 



45 



generating the gas in a retort, the mouth of which should be 
fitted into their run with a little plaister. The following are the 
requisite ingredients. Mix four parts of iron hlings, and three 
parts of flowers of sulphur in a mortar with a pestle. Place the 
mixture in a convenient vessel and moisten it with four parts 
of boiling water, stirring it with a piece of wood or glass. Add 
gradually afterwards four parts more of water, and introduce it 
into a retort having a tubulare, or side opening. The retort, 
with its ingredients, should then be fitted to the run. After- 
wards pour upon the mixture, in the retort, through its side 
opening, common oil of vitriol, diluted with five times its vo- 
lume of water, and close the side aperture. The gas will escape 
and be diffused through the runs. When the effervescence 
ceases, add more of the diluted oil of vitriol ; and repeat this 
till no further effervescence can be produced. Should any of the 
gas escape into an apartment and occasion inconvenience, it 
may be removed by dropping a little sulphuric acid upon chlo- 
ride of lime, commonly called bleaching powder. 

83 Transmitted Plants. From the mismanagement of House 
Plants which have been transmitted a considerable distance, 
however carefully packed, some of the more delicate sorts are 
occasionally liable to perish, soon after their arrival. A little 
proper care bestowed upon them for a few days will prevent, 
to a considerable extent, this loss. Nurserymen, from their 
experience, know well how to select plants in such state of 
growth as are most likely to endure the vicissitudes of a 
journey, as well as the requisite mode of packing for safety of 
transmission: but frequently from the nature of the package, 
and various means of conveyance, the |)lants are, during their 
journey, nearly excluded both from air and light, and arrive at 
their destination, in a weakened state; unable, at first, either to 
endure the rays of the sun or a free current of air. By imme- 
diately placing such plants in full exposure in the houses, 
where they are to remain, many losses will oftentimes ensue. 
To prevent this, all that is requisite is, that upon being unpack- 
ed, the plants be placed in a part of the house w here there is no 
draught of air, but plenty of light; and where they will be en- 
tirely shaded from the sun. They should be watered but sel- 
dom, and it should be given in small quantities. In a week or 
ten days they will have so far recovered that they may be placed 

U3. AOCTABICM. 



4G 



amongst other plants, where they are to remain. Hardy trees, 
shrubs, and' herbaceous plants, when removed to a distance, du- 
ring winter, seldom require any particular care, from iheir being 
in a dormant state; unless they have been very long confined in 
the packages ; in which case, all that is necessary is to throw a 
little soil over their roots, in a temporary manner, in a sheltered 
situation, and cover them w ith a mat for a few days previously to 
their being planted. When herbaceous plants are removed, 
during summer, they soon become weakly, and require to be 
potted, and placed in a shaded situation; either in a cold frame, 
or beneath hand glasses, till they have taken root; when they 
may be gradually hardened, and finally turned out of the pots 
into the places where they are to remain. 

84 Division of Perennials. Aster alpinus, ramosus, acris, 
hyssopifolius, amellus, linarifolius, and punctatus, are favour- 
ites in almost every garden; whilst the tall robust species are 
nearly discarded, or only used for filling up vacant spaces in 
shrubberies, where little care is bestowed upon them. There 
are, however, few plants that will more amply repay for a little 
labour in cultivation than many belonging to this genus. Everj' 
season, early in March, take up all the free-growing sorts, re- 
plant only three suckers of the spreading sorts, and only a small 
piece from the outside of the more compact rooted kinds. As 
they advance in growth, keep them carefully tied to stakes; 
and in autumn, they will produce finer flowers, and in more 
abundance, than if the whole patch had been left to send up a 
great number of flower stems, to the detriment of each other. 

85 Oil of Seeds. To those persons whose occupation, or their 
pleasures, introduce them so frequently amongst seeds of innu- 
merable varieties, it might be interesting to ascertain some of 
the properties of such seeds. All contain more or less of ole- 
aginous matter; and to this circumstance may be attributed, in a 
considerable degree, their longevity when deeply buried in the 
earth. Oil, as an article of commerce, is obtained from seeds in 
various ways; chiefly by heat and expression; sometimes by 
expression without heat; and essential oils principally by distil- 
lation. In a communication from Serangapore, contained in 
the Mechanic’s Magazine, is another method also, which we 
shall quote, “ Let the seeds be ground down or pounded, and 
well mixed by the hand with water. Strain off the liquid, and 

83, 84, D. Cameron. 



47 



break so much of the solid parts of the seeds as remain behind, 
upon the filter, with water as before. Repeat this process un- 
til you have made an emulsion, which may be supposed to con- 
tain all the oily matter of the seeds. Put the emulsion in a pan, 
upon a gentle fire, and at the heat of 212° the water will rapid- 
ly evaporate; and when wholly dissipated, will leave behind it 
a J)asty mass, consisting of the oil, combined with so much of 
the solid portion of the seeds as may have passed through the 
filter. This mass, if allowed to remain in the pan, upon the 
fire, will gradually separate into two portions, one being the so- 
lid matter of the seeds, and the other the oil, which may be re- 
moved in a perfectly limped state, with a spoon, or separated 
by straining. Cold-drawn is a term frequently applied to oil; 
very few sorts, however, are so obtained. 

S6 Protection of Wall Trees. In the variable climate of 
Great Britain it is well known that the blossoms and young 
fruit of trees, trained against walls, are always liable to injury 
from spring frosts, whereby the fondest hopes of the horticul- 
turist are oftentimes totally annihilated. Various modes of 
spring protection have been invented, and almost every method 
has its advocates. We shall ex|)lain some of them, and leave 
our readers to adopt such as circumstances shall dictate. 3Ir. 

D. Cameron’s method* of protection is to place long boughs 

of birch against the tree; first cut- 
ting otf the strongest projecting 
branches from one side of them, 
to admit their being placed more 
closely against the trees; then fas- 
ten them by a few shreds, to the 
wall, spread their branches regu- 
larly, and fasten these also, where requisite. Afterwards, ex- 
tend cords along the wall, as represented by the annexed figure, 
confining the nails at intervals of five or six feet. As a few va- 
cancies will occur, these should be filled up by the small branch- 
es first cut off. Mr. Cameron justly observes that this method 
jirevents a current of cold air circulating against the fruit trees, 
which some methods of protection do not obviate. If the boughs 
are gathered about 3Iidsumraer and laiil by, they will retain 
their foliage, and prove the more efficient. Another method, 
probably more convenient to many persons, inasmuch as straw 

* Gard, Mag. \ol. 7 - 




124. AUCTARIUM. 



48 



can be readily obtained, where birch is a scarce article. This 
method is effected by simply tying together small handfuls of 
straw, perhaps forty straws in each, and suspending them on lines 

before the trees, letting one line 
of them overwrap another, as re- 
presented. Some persons apply 
small branches of birch, or beech, 
or fir, by suspending it on cords 
according to this method.* 

A neater practice than either of the above, where expense does 
not deter its application, is found in the use of woollen net. 
This article is wove for the purpose, of a mesh from half an 
inch to an inch square. If a board, of two feet w ide, be affixed 
to the top of the wall, in a roof-like direction, and the net be 
fastened to its edge, and extended thence to the foot of the wall, 
a neat and efficient protection will be afforded — one that will 
be no deformity in the most ornamental garden. Some horti- 
culturists consider that the sloping boards alone form sufficient 

protection, as the action of cold 
is in the greatest degree directly 
downwards, from the active princi- 
ple ofheat being directed upwards; 
the projecting roof has, therefore, 
a double purpose, by its prevent- 
ing the escape of the heat emitted 
from the earth in cold weather, and also the consequent descent 
of cold from above. Again, hurdles with their bars wrapped 
with straw bands have been placed before the trees; also can- 
vass curtains, oiled paper frames, and various other contri- 
vances which common sense will suggest to every cultivator. 
Where the daily attention of opening and closing which these 
require, can be bestowed, no difficulty need occur; but the more 
essential enquiry is, how sufficient protection can be aflbrded 
with the least trouble and expense. The methods we have 
chiefly dwelt u])on are such as are intended to be adopted be- 
fore the blossom opens, and to remain without further attention 
till the fruit is beginning to swell. Aspect, exposure, and other 
local circumstances will always vary the success of different 
modes of protection. These can only be met by the reflecting 
and experienced cultivator. 

* Gard. Mag. vol 7. 





49 



87 Solution of Corrosive Sublimate. This valuable solu- 
tion was, we believe, first introduced to notice by Mr. M'atterton, 
the celebrated naturalist and traveller. As a protection against 
the ravages of insects, on preserved specimens, either animal or 
vegetable, it is more efficient, and convenient of application, 
than any other at present in use. It is made by adding from a 
dram to a dram and a half of corrosive sublimate to half a pint 
of the strongest spirit of wine, (alcohol.) This solution may 
be applied with a camel-hair pencil to the bodies of insects; 
indeed, many of them, particularly the coleopterous class, may 
be wholly immersed in it a few seconds. Large animals should 
be washed over with it on all parts most likely to be attacked ; 
and the entire surface of the feathers of birds should be carefully 
brushed over with this protecting fluid. If the solution be made 
too strong it will leave the appearance of a fine white powder on 
the dark coloured parts; it should, therefore, be first tried by- 
applying it to some black substance; and if, when dry, the so- 
lution appears to have communicated any degree of whiteness to 
it, more spirit must be added. If the solution has any mixture 
of small particles or impurities, it should be carefully strained, 
or poured from such matter. 

88 Anatomized Leaves. The exquisitely beautiful structure of 
the vascular system of leaves can be duly appreciated by those 
only who have seen specimens properly prepared. iNIarcus Au- 
relius Severinus, who published, in 1645, a description of the 
skeleton leaf of cactus opuntia, is said to have been the first to 
adopt an artificial method of preparing these interesting objects 
of vegetable structure. Although we have seen directions for 
effecting this, we could not, confidently, publish them ; but by 
the favour of W, T. Iliff, Esq. of Newington, we are enabled to 
gratify our readers. lie has, obligingly, sent us beautiful speci- 
mens of leaves, completely cleared of their cuticle and pulpy 
matter, exhibiting the most exquisite network of vessels that can 
be imagined; and also the following directions for preparing 
them. He says. Many individuals who have seen the fibrous 
structure of vegetables, have expressed much admiration at their 
beauty, and regret at the difficulty attending the preparation of 
the same. I am induced, therefore, to state to your readers, 
that the difficulty rests with themselves. If the seed-vessel of 
the datura stramonium or hyoscyamus niger ; the calyx of the 

ISS. AUCTARICM. 



50 



pliysallis alkekengi, or nicandria physaloides, are put into wa- 
ter, and allowed to remain, without an exchange of water, until 
decomposition is carried to the requisite extent, they may he 
freed from their cuticle, and the pulpy matter; and after ma- 
cerating them a short time in fresh clear water, they may be 
bleached by immersion in a diluted solution of chloride of lime, 
say one-sixth of the chloride to five-sixths of water. They must 
be well washed from this fluid when whitened sufficiently ; and 
quickly dried, either before a fire, or in the sun. Care must be 
taken not to allow the destructive process to be carried too far, 
or the fibrous structure will become injured ; nor allow the pre- 
parations to remain too long in the chloride, or injury w ill also 
arise. In selecting leaves for this purpose, those w ith the strong- 
est fibre should be preferred. Their fibrous parts, and also the 
seed vessels and calyces alluded to, should be cleared by a camel 
hair brush, or fine pen, from such portions of cuticle, or pulpy 
matter, as adhere too strongly to be removed by a small stream 
of water. The leaves of the ceratoria siliqua, ruscus aculeatus, 
and ilex, are, with the foregoing, the most easy to prepare. I 
have tried a variety of other methods, none, however, answer so 
well as the one I have explained, and therefore I communi- 
cate it, without fear of its being attended with difficulty, if pro- 
perly applied. Some of the specimens may require several 
months maceration before the preparation can be completed. 

89 OxALis Crenata. We gave but little attention to this plant 
last year; we had, however, a row of it planted late in the sea- 
son. In the first week of September, scarcely was there the ru- 
diment of a tuber to any of the plants. We took the whole of 
them up, and laid them in a broad shallow trench, spread their 
stems, and covered them, with earth, full two thirds of their 
length. In about six w eeks, on examining them, many of their 
stems were, literally, covered with small tubers. They were not 
taken up till Christmas, when the produce was abundant, al- 
though the tubers were, generally, small. This certainly indicates 
that some modification of such treatment should be employed 
soon after Midsummer, to induce productiveness at a season 
when the growth of the tubers may proceed uninterruptedly. 
Our object in removing the plants, in September, was to check 
their luxuriance, and thereby induce the produce of tubers. This 
succeeded fully. 



51 



90 Broccoli from Slips. In a former part of the Auctarium we 
gave an account of the successful mode of propagating Cab- 
bages from Slips. Mr. Rutger, in the Gardener’s Magazine, 
has given an account of his success in propagating Broccoli by 
the same method. The heads having been cut off for use, in 
the spring, the stems were left to produce sprouts. In J une, the 
sprouts were slipped off, and after being exposed a day or two, 
in the sun, to cauterize the wound, they were planted in the usu- 
al manner. In two or three weeks they had taken root; and in 
the course of the autumn made fine stocky plants. l\Ir. Rut- 
ger says that he has seen many instances of Broccoli, thus grown, 
having heads three feet in circumference, and as close and com- 
pact as possible; butt his extraordinary luxuriance he attributes 
to the use of sea weed as manure. 

91 Ferns; Cultivation of. Ferns, from the variety and deli- 
cate forms of their fronds, are favourites with most cultivators of 
plants. The supposed difticuity of growing those species, re- 
quiring the protection of glass, caused their cultivation, for ma- 
ny years, to be limited to very few gardens. It is now rapidly 
extending, and with so much success, that in many places they 
are grown as readily as any of the [ihenogamous plants. The 
number of species, under cultivation in the various gardens 
throughout the country, is upwards of two hundred, and that 
number is still increasing by the importation ofliving plants, and 
from seeds taken out of herbariums. Twenty years ago there 
were not, perhaps, above thirty species to be found growing in 
the stoves and greenhouses of Great Britain. Attention to the 
following simple direction is all that is necessary to ensure suc- 
cess in their cultivation, under glass as well as out of doors. 
Those requiring the protection of the stove and greenhouse may 
all be grown successfully in the stove only; where they should 
be placed together for convenience of watering. It is immate- 
rial whether they be exposed to the sun, or kept in the shade, 
doing equally well in either situation. The most convenient 
place, however, is frequently the back of the house. Here they 
become an interesting decoration, under the shade of larger 
plants, where little else would succeed. The pots containing 
Ferns, must be kept rather moist at all times; and their fronds 
also require frequent waterings over head, with the syringe, or 
a w atering pot having a fine rose. This should be attended to 

126. AVCTABICM. 91, D. Camcrou. 



52 



twice or three times every fine day in summer; and once or 
oftener, in winter; regulating the extent of such over-head wa- 
terings according to the weather or strength of the ferns. Those 
who possess a greenhouse only may there cultivate the species 
suitable thereto. There the pots should be kept moist; but in 
summer, the plants will not require over-head watering more 
than three times a week. In winter the pots should be kept 
more dry, and the plants, in this season, require no over-head 
watering. Many of the species, kept both in stove and green- 
house will be benefited by being placed for a few weeks, during 
summer, in a cold frame, in a shaded situation, where the lights 
can be drawn off during the night, and in cloudy weather. 
The requisite soil, for potting the stronger growing kinds, is 
half peat and half loam, mixed with a fourth part of sharp sand. 
And for the smaller kinds peat and sand; using at all times 
plenty of drainers. Most of those ferns which require house 
protection, may be readily increased by being divided; and of 
several species, self sown plants will be found in profusion in the 
pots. Division may be effected at all seasons; spring and au- 
tumn are, however, to be preferred. In the operation of potting 
Ferns, place a piece of broken pot on each side of the root; 
pressing with them, a little soil against the plant; then fill the 
pot with the soil pressed down rather firmly. When large spe- 
cimens are desired, remove into larger sized pots as often as the 
roots get matted, but before they begin to decay ; using at each 
successive shifting, coarser soil; that for the larger sized pots, 
being merely turfy soil chopped up with the spade, and mixed 
with some coarse drainers, to allow the water to pass off more 
freely. The roots of some of the larger plants w ill occasionally 
perish, from the soil becoming sour, from continued waterings. 
These must be divested of all decayed roots, have their balls 
reduced, and repotted into smaller pots, where they will soon 
make fresh roots. The small and more delicate species of 
hardy ferns are most successfully cultivated in small pots, placed 
among the Alpine plants. Some require the protection of a 
cold frame during winter. They may be increased by dividing 
at any time from spring to midsummer. Five or six species of 
this description, although natives of cold climates, require, from 
the shelter and warmth of their native habitats, to be grown 
along with the stove and greenhouse species. The stronger 



53 



growing hardy species may also be grown in pots; the best me- 
thod is, however, to have them planted out into the open ground, 
in a moist and shaded border, either in sandy peat, or peat 
and loam; where they will require no further care than occasi- 
onal waterings in very dry weather. These may be increased by 
dividing. When the offsets are small they require to be potted, 
and turned out, with their balls entire, when fully established. 

92 Calampelis scaber from seed.s. Several complaints have 
reached us of the uncertainty of the seed of this plant vegetating. 
This arises, principally, out of mismanagement. Indeed, we 
have plants, received from a friend, which sprung spontaneously 
at the foot of a wall, beneath the parent, and endured the frosts 
of last winter. Its seeds should be sown in a hotbed, on the top 
of a pot of fine compost, and not covered, excepting by a little 
moss; and not by this so entirely as to prevent the seeds being- 
seen through it. A few days after the seeds have vegetated re- 
move the moss, and be careful neither to let the sun shine di- 
rectly on the plants, whilst very young, nor suffer the soil to be- 
come too dry. 

93 Noisette Roses, in beds. 3Ir. Markham’s method of origi- 
nating gay rose beds, and prolonging their beauty, as given 
under No. 61, has already obtained numerous followers. In re- 
ply to some enquiries, we add to the former observations, that 
the system recommended is not applicable to the slow-growing 
deciduous roses. It is equally as suitable to a single bush of 
the Noisette, as to a whole bed. The distance at which the Noi- 
sette Rose is first planted in beds, may be considered of little 
moment. The stock of plants, and space to be covered, may be 
admitted to govern the regulation of distance. If planted pretty 
numerously, the bed may at once be covered ; but if w idely apart, 
layers may be put down, either in spring, or about midsummer, 
to fill up vacancies to any reasonable extent. If young shoots 
be pegged down, beneath the soil, in summer, and its surface 
protected from drought, by a little half-decayed hotbed manure, 
they will strike root most readily. One scrap of knowledge 
should have a place in the minds of all lovers of roses; which is, 
that the soil in which they are planted can scarcely ever be made 
too rich, and that most frequently it is by far too poor. 

94 Culture of Vines. A Practical Treatise on the Cultivation 
of the Grape Vine on open walls, has been published by Mr. 

ItJ. AUCTARIUM. 



54 



Clement Hoare. The lucid and practical manner in which the 
subject is treated, and the advantageous results which are prom- 
ised by this work, entitle it to the attention of every cultivator of 
the Vine — indeed, of every person who possesses a spare wall. 
Mr. Hoare observes, that “The Vine is supposed to have been in- 
troduced into Britain at the commencement of the Christian era; 
and history amply proves, that for a long series of ages, vine- 
yards were very common in the southern parts of this island, and 
that the quantity of wine was so great, as to be considered one 
of the staple products of the land. From some cause or other, 
however, they have fallen into general neglect, although good 
Grapes might be grown on Vines, trained as espaliers, or in the 
same manner as in the vineyards abroad, from which excellent 
w ine could be made at a cost that would not exceed that of mod- 
erately strong beer. Why vineyards should have so completely 
disappeared, it is difficult to say, since there are many thousands 
of acres of poor land that are of little value in an agricultural 
point of view, but on which Vines would flourish and produce 
abundant crops of Grapes, and yield thereby a most profitable 
return.” In regard to the success attainable by training on walls, 
Mr. Hoare remarks, “It is not too much to assert, that the surface 
of the walls of every cottage of a medium size, that is applicable 
to the training of Vines, is capable of producing, annually, as 
many grapes as would be worth half the amount of its rental. 
Every square foot of the surface of a wall, may in a short space 
of time, be covered with bearing wood, sufficient to produce, on 
an average, a pound weight of grapes, and I have frequently 
grown double that quantity on the same extent of surface.” 
Other advantages are available to the attentive cultivator. The 
method of culture recommended yields a superabundance of 
young shoots, leaves, and unripe fruit, which require pruning off. 
Of these, with water and sugar, experiments have demonstrated, 
both in France and England, as stated by Dr. Macculloch, w ine 
may be produced in no respect differing from that wholly made of 
immature fruit, and consequently resembling wine of foreign 
grow th. Various means are combined to attain the entire ad- 

vantages. The leading principle, however, depends on extensive 
pruning of the vine — not permitting the grow th of more wood than 
it is intended shall be productive; nor of more fruit, than the 
tree, uninjured, can fully mature. Mr. Hoare, from various 



55 



experiments, has arrived at conclusions which promise to be of the 
highest importance. He has formed a scale of the weight of 
fruit, which a vine can perfectly mature; the scale being made 
dependent on the circumference of its stem, near to the ground, 
at the autumnal pruning. Thus, a vine whose stem is three 
inches in circumference, can mature 5 lbs. of Grapes. inches, 
10 lbs. 4 inches, 15 lbs. 4| inches, 20 lbs; and so on, allow- 
ing 5 lbs. for every additional half inch of circumference. “No 
vine is taken cognizance of, until its stem measures three 
inches in girth, as under that size vines ought never to be suffer- 
ed to ripen any fruit. This is a rule that should be strictly ad- 
hered to in the management of young vines, for it may be safely 
asserted, that for every pound weight of grapes extracted from 
a vine before it has grown to that size, ten pounds will be lost 
during the next 6ve years, independently of the very severe 
check which is given to its growth by premature bearing. But 
by husbanding its strength till its roots have multiplied suffici- 
ently to provide a full supply of nourishment without suffering 
from exhaustion, the plant commences its fruit bearing life with a 
degree of vigour, which lays a sure foundation for its future pros- 
perity”. We will mention a few of the leading features of 3Ir. 
Hoare’s practice of pruning; at the same time we refer such of 
our readers as take much interest in the growth of the vine, to 
his work ; in which the details of the subject are so practically 
illustrated that no slight extract can do credit to the experience 
whence it has emanated. In the first place we will copy his 
General Rules, which may be advantageously borne in mind. 
“ 1. In pruning, always cut upwards, and in a sloping direction. 
2. Always leave an inch of blank wood beyond a terminal bud, 
and let the cut be on the opposite side of the bud. 3. Prune so 
as to leave as few wounds as possible; and let the surface of every 
cut be perfectly smooth. 4. In cutting out an old branch, prune 
it even with the parent limb, that the wound may quickly heal. 
5. Prune so as to obtain the quantity of fruit desired, on the 
smallest number of shoots possible. 6. Never prune in frosty 
weather, nor when a frost is expected. 7. Never prune in the 
month of March, April, or May. Pruning in either of these 
months causes bleeding, and occasions thereby a wasteful and an 
injurious expenditure of sap. 8. Let the general autumnal pru- 
ning take place as soon after the first of October as the gather- 

12S. ACCTARIDM. 



56 



iiig of the fruit will permit.” Future bearing shoots. The 
shoots intended for the next year’s bearing should be selected 
towards the end of May. The required number may be pretty 
nearly estimated, and they should be so situated as to have, when 
trained, a clear space of twenty-eight inches between each. This 
will afford a space of nine inches on each side of such shoots, 
when in bearing, in addition to five inches to be allowed on each 
side of the young succession shoots, which will have to be trained 
up, alternately, between them. Nailing should be repeated 
whenever the shoots have grown twelve inches beyond their last 
nail. If long jointed, they should be curved a little in training, 
by bending them from their former direction every time of nailing, 
which will occasion more buds to be produced in a given length. 
At the commencement of September, these future bearing shoots 
should be stopped ; that is, their points pinched off, to hasten 
the maturation of the wood, and to give an accumulation of 
sap to the buds. All Tc?^c^r^7s produced at the footstalks of 
the bunches of fruit should be pinched off. Side shoots, also, 
which are not bearers, should be pinched off an inch beyond the 
first joint. Those which are bearers, should, at the beginning of 
June, be pinched off an inch beyond the last bunch of fruit. 
The Leaves should be so disposed, as far as is possible, in such 
manner as to form a uniform shade or covering, one leaf thick- 
ness, over the whole tree. That the fruit have this genial shelter 
is indispensable. The Bunches of Fruit, when as large as 
small pease, should be counted, and their ultimate weight calcu- 
lated. Each bunch may be estimated at half a pound, and if 
the whole amount exceeds the stipulated weight, allowed by the 
preceding scale to be ripened, it must be reduced to such amount. 
Now, also, must the berries in each bunch be thinned, and such 
operation should be continued, weekly, as occasion requires. 
“ The best general rule that can be given, says Mr. Hoare, is 
that the berries, during the whole period of their grow th, until 
they have made their last sw ell, must never be suffered to cluster, 
or to press the sides of each other.” Autumn Pruning. This 
should be effected in October; when all the main shoots, which 
have just yielded their crop, must be cut out; remembering to 
leave a few of them as spurs, with two buds each, in proper situ- 
ations, to produce the succession shoots in the following spring. 
These spurs should, of course, be left alternately with the bearers. 



57 



They are left with two buds each, to guard against accidents, one 
shoot only being required. If, in the following year, two per- 
fect shoots be produced from these spurs, the weakest of the two 
must be cut out, in the first week of July. Now it is that an es- 
timate should be made of the required quantity of bearing wood, 
to be retained for the following summer’s crop. This is done by 
counting the buds; as many of which should be reserved for 
bearing, as the number of half pounds of fruit which it is inten- 
ded to allow the tree to ripen; observing to allow two extra 
buds to each shoot. All the superfluous wood should be cut 
away, and the stems nailed in straight lines till spring. 




Spring Training. This consists in wholly releasing the bearing 
shoots from the wall, and training them in a serpentine direction. 
The advantage arising from this mode of training is, that the flow' 
of sap is hereby retarded, and every bud is made productive. 
If, on the contrary, the shoots be trained quite straight, in a per- 
pendicular direction, the buds, at their extremities, will burst first; 
and these will shoot with undue vigour, whilst the buds, at the 
bottom will remain entirely dormant. This operation should be 
performed at the commencement of March. The more clearly 
to elucidate this method, we have given, above, the representa- 
tion of a vine, as it would appear after the spring training. 
These are the prominent features of Mr. Hoare’s practice; still, 
as we have previously said, those who are interested in the cul- 
ture of the Vine, should consult his work. It is full of practi- 
cal directions, to many of which we have not even alluded. 

129. AUCTARIUM. 



58 



95 Diseases of the Larch. According to 3Ir, Stephens of Edin- 
burgh, who has addressed a letter to De Candolle upon the sub- 
ject, the Larch, Larix Europaea,is subject, in Great Britain, to two 
diseases. The first disease consists in the decay of the heart of 
the wood. It occurs not only in wet situations, but also in dry 
places, as in Nottinghamshire, where immense losses have been 
sustained. It has only manifested a slight appearance at Dun- 
keld, and is most prevalent in England. The Larch has been 
found not to thrive, where Scotch fir, Pinus Sylvestris, has pre- 
viously existed; but this is not the cause of the disease. Another 
disease to which it is subject, is a blister, which forms about two 
feet above the ground. These blisters are produced on two sides 
of the tree, alternately, until they reach the top, when the tree 
dies from above, downwards as it were. Sometimes the blister 
surrounds a branch, which breaks off in the course of time. This 
accident is frequently ascribed to the weight of snow. The range 
of this disease is at present bounded by the county of Forfar, and 
the south of the Grampians. It attacks entire plantations, but 
rarely trees above 25 years of age, and is most destructive in 
poor soils, or on hard formations, as clinkstone. None of the 
Dunkeld trees, at an elevation of 1000 feet, have been affected. 
De Candolle states, that on the Alps, the Larch is free from any 
disease, save the occasional loss of its leaves by the attacks of a 
caterpillar, and a resinous blister or canker, which however, pro- 
duce no injurious effect upon the tree. It grows extremely well 
at Moritzburgh, near Dresden, in a moist sandy soil, 238 feet 
above the sea. He proposes, for this country, the following re- 
commendations: 1. That the higher parts of the country are 

best suited for its growth, provided that the ground be not too dry, 
nor hard, nor marshy. 2. That the sides of the hills are better 
suited for it than the summits; and if the summits are marshy, 
the inferior parts of the mountains will be proper for it. 3. It is 
remarked on the Alps, that the Larch succeeds better in a north- 
ern than in a southern exposure. The difference is sometimes so 
striking, that in vallies running from east to west, it is not un- 
common to see the side exposed to the north, covered with Larches, 
and that exposed to the south, with scarce a tree. This may be 
ascribed to the irregularity of the spring, but will not apply to 
this country. 4. The plantations of Larch in this country are 
too thick, the trees being generally planted at a distance of 3 or 

95, Records of Science.— Translated from Bibliotheque Universelle. 



59 



4 feet. De Candolle considers that the young trees ought to be 
planted at a distance of 10 feet, and if planted closer, they should 
be gradually thinned for 20 years. He recommends, likewise, 
that for security, uew seed should be brought from the Valais, 
where the cones are dried by the heat of the sun, and not from 
the Tyrol, where fire is employed for this purpose. M. Em. 
Thomas sells them at the rate of 2j francs (2s. Id.) the half 
Killogramme (1^ lb. troy.) M. Thomas advises that the trees 
should be always transplanted in autumn and not in spring. 

96 New METHOD OF Drying Plants. Dr. Hunefield recommends 
a new method of drying plants, by covering them first with the 
powder of lycopodium, and then placing them in a vessel con- 
taining chloride of calcium. By this method the colour and 
flexibility are preserved. On the 29th of July, 1831, the ther- 
mometer being at 53|°, Dr. Goppert of Breslaw, placed in a 24 
ounce glass, two leaves of the hyacinth, and a specimen of the 
Fumaria officinalis, with two ounces of muriate of lime, in such 
a manner that the plants were not in contact with the salt. On 
the following day the leaves began to dry, and on the 3rd of Au- 
gust, although not dead, the hyacinth leaves were capable of be- 
ing reduced to a fine powder. Even fleshy plants, as the Sedum 
rupestre, are so much dried in seven days, that they may be pul- 
verized. The lycopodium powder prevents the sap from escaping. 

97 New Fruits. By this term we do not mean, as the reader 
might at first be apt to suppose, fruits the produce of foreign 
countries and recently imported into Britain; but we mean fruits 
newly introduced in a living state into our gardens or hot- 
houses, and brought to perfection there. Of late years the Lo- 
quat and the purple-fruited Granadillo have been successfully 
cultivated, under glass, in various English gardens. The Long- 
yen (Euphoria longana) has produced its fruit in the splendid 
and lofty hot-houses at Syon, the seat of the Duke of Northum- 
berland, near Brentford ; the Banana was in fruit in the stove 
attached to the Coliseum, in the Regent’s Park, last summer, 
and it yields a crop every year in the large hot-house at Wynn- 
stay, the seat of Sir William Watkin Wynn, in Denbighshire. 
In the vinery at the Experimental Garden, Inverleith, near 
Edinburgh (an institution well worth visiting), a small tree of 
the Psidium Cattleyanum, or China Guava, has ripened its 
fruit freely for two years past. The fruit is round, about the 

130 ACCTARICM. 96, Records of Science ; from Brande’s Pharm. 



60 



size of a small ]5lum, of a fine claret colour; the pulp is soft, 
only a little firmer than that of a strawberry, and of a delight- 
ful subacid flavour. Mr. John Robison, Secretary of the Roy- 
al Society of Edinburgh, who had tasted the fruit in India, 
declared the Experimental Garden specimens to be nowise in- 
ferior in quality. These home-grown guavas were found to 
make most desirable preserves. During the same period, a still 
more rare kind of fruit has been produced, for the first time in 
Britain, in the stove of Mr. Bateman, of Knypersley near Con- 
gleton, — a gentleman distinguished for his zeal, liberality, and 
success, in introducing and cultivating the singular tropical 
epiphytes. This is the Carambola, or the fruit of the Averrhoa 
Carambola, a native of the East Indies. Mr. P. N. Don, the 
intelligent gardener there, mentions that “during last autumn 
(1834) the tree fruited in great abundance.” The fruit is of the 
size and shape of a duck-egg, but with angles on the sides. It 
“was used by the family for tarts, and also for preserves, and 
was allowed by excellent judges to be superior for pleasant fla- 
vour to any thing they had tasted.” 

98 Saxifraga, Culture of. This extensive, neat, and orna- 
mental genus, succeeds well under alpine pot culture, and with 
a greater degree of certainty in preserving the different species 
than when planted out into the open ground, even in a well pre- 
pared soil. They will bear dividing, and repotting, at almost 
any season; the month of August, however, is perhaps the best 
time; most of the species will then have flowered, and still suffici- 
ency of time will be remaining for their becoming established be- 
fore winter. Equal portions of loam, peat, and sand, will suit 
nearly all the species. Saxifraga rivularis, nivalis, caesia, and 
retusu require good peat, mixed with one-third part of sand; 
and the whole of the species require plenty of drainers in the 
bottoms of the pots. The stemless species require only to be 
repotted to the same depth as before dividing, when strong enough 
for that purpose. The stemmed species, whether they increase 
in size, by elongating their stems upward, or by spreading over 
the pots, require dividing and repotting deeper than previously, 
to enable them to emit young roots from the softer parts of their 
stems. When in good health the only species requiring frame 
protection, during winter, are ligulata and cuscutiformis; two 
species which are most frequently treated as greenhouse plants. 

98, D. Camerou. 



G1 



99 Hardy Heaths, culture of. Erica Australis, carnea, cili- 
aris, cinerea, and its varieties ; mediterranea, stricta, scoparia, 
vagans, and its varieties; Calluna vulgaris, and its varieties; 
IMenziesia polifolia, and its varieties, amounting, in all, to up- 
wards of thirty species and varieties, are all free-flowering, neat, 
and ornamental plants. They are of low growth, and of easy 
culture ; and suitable either to embellish the flower border, or 
front of the shrubbery. The requisite soil for encouraging the 
growth of these very desirable plants, is equal portions of peat 
and loam ; or, light sandy peat. The general complaint of the 
hardy heaths being short-lived is easily remedied. This is ef- 
fected by layering a few of the young branches every year; as 
all the sorts, when so treated, will strike root very freely. For 
obtaining young plants, by this means, it is not indispensable, 
that any particular season be observed. It may be performed 
whenever an opportunity ofters. Every second year, after lay- 
ering, the whole may be taken up, in the month of March, and 
some of the young plants may be put to occupy the places of 
the old ones. Or, where large specimens are desired, the young 
plants may be left growing around the parent, as the latter will 
rarely die off when the process of laying some of the shoots 
around it every year is practised. They protect each other 
from the violent effects of wind, or extremes of temperature. 
Single upright standard plants of this genus, when fully expo- 
sed in the garden, are not unfrequently blown about by the wind, 
their roots loosened, if not broken off, and thus they are greatly 
injured or altogether destroyed. It should be remembered that 
their exposure in the garden, and the pruning to which they 
are very frequently subjected, are at variance with their natu- 
ral habits. Layering will remedy much of the evil. 

100 Butterflies’ Wings. In the series of works, entitled the 
Naturalist’s Library, conducted by Sir William Jardine, a de- 
lightful volume, by Mr James Duncan, on British Butterflies, 
has just made its appearance. It has numerous plates, prettily 
executed. From its introduction, where its author notices the 
brilliancy and beauty of the wings of various Butterflies, we 
have the following information, “ The mode of jiainting em- 
ployed to produce these rich tints, may not improperly be called 
a kind of natural mosaic, for the colours invariably reside in the 
scales, which form a dense covering over the whole surface. 

131 HOCTABICM. 99, D. Comeroii. 



62 



These scales are usually of an oval or elongated form, and trun- 
cated at the tip, where they are occasionally divided into teeth; 
but sometimes they are conical, linear, or triangular. They 
are fixed in the wing by means of a narrow pedicle, and are 
most commonly disposed in transverse rows, placed close to- 
gether, and overlapping each other like the tiles of a roof. In 
some instances, they are placed without any regular order, and 
in certain cases there appear to be two layers of scales on both 
sides of the wings. When they are rubbed off, the w ing is found 
to consist of an elastic membrane, thin and transparent, and 
marked with slightly indented lines, forming a kind of groove for 
the insertion of the scales. The latter are so minute that they 
appear to the naked eye like powder or dust, and as they are 
very closely placed, their numbers on a single insect are aston- 
ishingly great. Leeuwenhoek counted upwards of 400,000 on 
the wings of the silk moth, an insect not above one-fourtb of 
the size of some of our native butterflies. But how much infe- 
rior must this number be to that necessary to form a covering 
to some foreign butterflies, the wings of which expand upwards 
of half a foot; or certain species of Moths, some of which (such 
as the Atlas Moth of the east, or the Great Owl Moth of Brazil,) 
sometimes measure nearly a foot across the w ings ! A modenr 
mosaic picture may contain 870 tesserulaj, or separate pieces, 
in one square inch of surface ; but the same extent of a butter- 
fly’s wing sometimes consists of no fewer than 100,736 ! ” 

101 Mango, Naturalization of. The Mango, so celebrated in 
the East, for its delicious fruit, has been ripened in England, 
by Earl Powis; and, in the opinion of naturalists, familiar 
with Indian botany, might be more extensively cultivated here, 
than from its usual arboreous nature, might be supposed possi- 
ble. Mr. Royle states, (Illust. Himalayan Mountains, part 6), 
that “by grafting and transplanting, the ordinary growth is 
much impeded, and shrubs of less than four feet in height 
have borne in the Saharumpore Botanic Garden, (Norlh India) 
about a dozen mangoes. It would be necessary only to imitate 
tbe climate, by giving a greenhouse cold in winter, rapidly rais- 
ing the heat in February and March, and continuing it till May 
and J une, or about the accession of the rains, when the addition 
of moisture to the heat is indicated, as the mangoes only per- 
fectly ripen after the atmosphere has become moist in the rains. 

]01» Mechauic's Ma^. June, 1835. 



63 



102 Slugs, to destroy. By night and by day, the horticultu- 
rist has numerous enemies to guard against and to encounter. 
Amongst these, two or three species of Lymax, known indiscrim- 
inately as Slugs, are, doubtless, the most formidable. Some of 
our friends have used wheat chaff, cut straw, and the piles of 
barley; others soot, lime, saw-dust, and sundry similar sub- 
stances ; all with more or less success. Oftentimes under fa- 
vourable circumstances, and the convenience of such articles 
being at hand, they are not unworthy of attention. Generally, 
however, we object to them all. The flower garden, as a work 
of art, as well as nature, rarely admits the spreading of chaff, 
and similar substances, without a disagreeable display of litter. 
In the kitchen garden this will generally be esteemed as less 
important, therefore we mention them as passing hints, for the 
advantage of such as may find them convenient. In our own 
practice we have always regarded hand picking as the only effi- 
cient method of protection against the depredations of Slugs. 
To facilitate this operation it is necessary to entice them together, 
and in this we have followed the usual method of spreading sli- 
ces of turnip, cabbage leaves, or other refuse likely to prove at- 
tractive, and afford them a convenient retreat. As an additional 
attraction to these little animals, our attention has been urgently 
called by a friend to a method oftentimes mentioned and prac- 
tised by gardeners, but which, we are assured, deserves to be re- 
commended with more than ordinary zeal. It is simply the ad- 
dition of a very little fat, of almost any description, to the cab- 
bage leaves,after having thoroughly warmed them before the fire. 

103 Iron and Steel, to preserve from Rusting. As the 
preservation of iron, in a clean and perfect state, is oftentimes 
very desirable to the gardener and horticulturist, we copy the 
following from the Records of Science for June, 1835. Several 
methods of preventing instruments of steel and iron from oxidat- 
ing are well known ; such as covering them with mercurial oint- 
ment, grease, oil or marrow, or placing them in calcined lime. 
The former of these I have found the most effectual as well as the 
most convenient mode. M. Payen has, however, lately propo- 
sed a new plan for accomplishing the same object. He found 
that a saturated solution of carbonate of soda, mixed with its 
own volume of water, disengaged only part of its volume of 
air, and preserved iron from rusting, and did not lose this power 

13': AUCTAEICM. 



G4 



even when diluted with twenty-five times its volume of water. 
A saturated solution of borate of soda, as well as a mixture of 
ammonia and water, disengaged no gas, nor underwent any con- 
traction, but preserved iron from oxidating. Saturated lime 
water, diluted with an equal volume of water, possessed the same 
power. A saturated solution of potash, diluted with 1000 and 
2000 parts of water, preserved iron; but when saturated with a 
current of carbonic acid, the oxidation of the metal occurred in 
common water. A saturated solution of potash diluted with 
4000 or 3000 parts of water, had not the property of preventing 
oxidation, and upon turn sol, this solution exhibited an alkahne 
reaction. M. Payen, sensible of the impracticability of immer- 
sing surgical instruments in a liquid, suggests the propriety of 
forming a varnish of the saturated solution of potash and gum 
tragacanth. He made a comparative experiment upon muskets, 
one of which he varnished over, and the other w as left in its nat- 
ural state. After a lapse of fifteen days the former was quite 
bright while the latter was rusted. He considers that the solu- 
tions of soda will be preferable to those of potash, because they 
are less deliquiscent. The effects of these solutions in prevent- 
ing oxidation were so decided, that he compared, carefully, the 
consequences when iron was placed in common water. About 
24 minutes after immersion a thin opaline halo surrounds it, 
which increases in size and intensity. At the end of an hour, 
it is sensibly brown, and gradually a deposit begins to form on 
the greatest part of the iron, and at the bottom of the vessel. 

104 Celery, to preserve in wtnter. Gardeners frequently 
cover their rows of Celery w ith straw', or give an additional mould- 
ing as a protection against frost. This method is very inferior 
to taking it up entirely, before severe frosts sets in, and storing 
it between very thin layers of straw, on the floor of a damp cel- 
lar, till required for use. Or, which is still a superior method, 
as noticed in the Gardener’s Magazine, v. 11, 63, take it up, 
shorten the leaves and roots, let it dry for a few days, and then 
bury it in sand, in a cool cellar, observing to keep the roots apart 
by a sufficiency of sand. After being thus covered, the greatest 
care will be required in washing it, which should be thoroughly 
performed, by well rinsing, with the root ends upwards. If the 
sand be once suffered to get between the stalks, entire separation 
of them is the only remedy. 



65 



105 Ink, PERMANENT. The following is from the Records of Sci- 
ence, translated from the Annales de Chemie. Mr. Braconnot, 
of Nancy has published a receipt for ink, which he says an- 
swers extremely well in Botanic Gardens, and in open or wet sit- 
uations where names are required to he preserved permanently. 
Take of 

Verdigris, 1 part. Soot, ^ part. 

Sal ammonia, 1 ]>art. Water, 10 parts. 

Mix the powder in a glass or porcelain mortar, adding at first 
one part of water, in order to mix them well, then add the re- 
mainder of the water. Shake the ink well from time to time. 
When it is to be used we must write with it upon a plate of zinc, 
and after some days it becomes hard, and cannot be obliterated 
by atmospherical influence or by rubbing. The ink may be 
tinged by any color, by substituting for the soot or lamp black 
some mineral colouring matter. Zinc Tallies are easily pro- 
cured, as this metal is now rolled into thiii sheets for covering 
buildings, and other uses, in lieu of lead ; it being both lighter 
and cheaper; and not liable to decay by oxidation. 

106 Marble to preserve. It has long beeen matter of regret, 
that polished marble cannot be lully exposed in our northern 
latitude without immediate injury and ultimate destruction. 
But for this circumstance white marble would prove a valuable 
adjunct to the buildings and embellishments of the first class of 
ornamental gardens. Some experiments have lately been made 
and explained in evidence, before the committee of arts and 
manufactures, by 3Ir. John Ilenny, from which their is every 
probability that a coating may be so applied to marble as to 
preserve it for a great length of time. Wax is the substance 
used, and this he believes to be almost indistructable under at- 
mospheric influence alone. He has tried in on the frieze of the 
Athenseum, Hyde Park Corner, with complete success. A 
piece of polished marble was first submitted to experiment. A 
little melted wax was applied to a part of it, with a camel-hair 
pencil, and the marble warmed till it absorded the wax. After 
being exposed during a whole winter, the polish on the unpro- 
tected part was destroyed, but where the wax had been ap])lied 
it was uninjured. If the wax be dissolved in turpentine it pen- 
etrates to a greater depth into the marble, but this was thought 
unnecessary, as the wax alone was observed to sink into it to the 



133 AUCTABIUM. 



GG 



depth of one-sixteenth of an inch. It is indispensable that the 
marble be made warm, therefore large statues, or architectural 
ornaments, which cannot be moved to a fire, must have heat ap- 
plied to them, by the use of hot irons. Thus, by beginning the 
work at the top it may be gradually warmed, and the wax would 
run downwards over the marble, and be conveniently exposed to 
the heat. AVhilst warm the superfluous wax is wiped off the 
surface, which is left with the appearance of beautiful old mar- 
ble. White wax is recommended, as least liable to change co- 
lour. We think that advantage may be taken of this hint, and 
that wax may be employed in the protection of ornamental cast- 
ings and sculpture, which have been executed in various soft 
materials. We hope that some of our friends will immediately 
put it to the test. 

107 Damping off. Many herbaceous plants that will endure any 
degree of frost, without injury, are frequently lost, in mild win- 
ters, by what is technically called damping off; occasioned by 
the humidity of our atmosphere This may, to a considerable 
extent, be prevented, by raising a mound of sand, a few inches 
high, over their crowns, upon the surface of the soil. This 
should be done in November, and be removed in spring, just 
before the young shoots reach the surface; the danger being 
over as soon as vegetation has fairly commenced. 

108 Grow th of plants. This subject is so full of interest, and 
also of admiration, to the contemplative mind, that when treated 
perspicuously and concisely, as we find it treated by Dr. Turner, 
it becomes important as well, morally, as scientifically. He says, 
“While a plant differs from an animal, in exhibiting no signs 
of perception or voluntary motion, and in possessing no stomach 
to serve as a receptacle for its food, there exists between them 
a close analogy both of parts and functions; which, though not 
discerned at first, becomes striking on a nearer examination. 
The stem and branches act as a frame work or skeleton for the 
support and protection of the parts necessary to the life of the 
individual. The root serves the purpose of a stomach by im- 
bibing nutritious juices from the soil, and thus supplying the 
plant with materials for its growth. The sap or circulating fluid, 
composed of w ater, holding in solution saline, extractive, mucila- 
ginous, saccharine, and other soluble substances, rises upwards 
through the wood in a distinct system of tubes called the common 

lOT} Dareucom. 



67 



vessels, which correspond in their office to the lacteals and pul- 
monary arteries of animals, and are distributed in minute ram- 
ifications over the surface of the leaves. In its passage through 
this organ, which may be termed the lungs of a plant, the sap 
is fully exposed to the agency of light and air, experiences 
a change by which it is more completely adapted to the wants 
of the vegetable economy, and then descends through the 
inner layer of the bark in another system of tubes called the 
proper vessels, yielding in its course all the juices and prin- 
ciples peculiar to the plant. This leads to the consideration of the 
109 Chemical Changes in Plants. The chemical changes which 
take place during the circulation of the sap are in general of 
such a complicated nature, and so much under the control of 
the vital principle, as to elude the sagacity of the chemist. One 
part of the subject, however, namely, the reciprocal agency of 
the atmosphere and growing vegetables on each other, falls 
within the reach of chemical enquiry, and has accordingly been 
investigated by several philosophers. For the leading facts 
relative to what is called the respiration of plants, or the chem- 
ical changes which the leaves of growing vegetables produce on 
the atmosphere, we are indebted to Priestly and Igenhousz, the 
former of whom discovered that plants absorb carbonic acid 
from the air, under certain circumstances, and emit oxygen in 
return ; and the latter ascertained that this change occurs only 
during exposure to the direct rays of the sun. When a healthy 
plant, the roots of which are supplied with proper nourishment, 
is exposed to the direct solar beams in a given quantity of 
atmos|)heric air the carbonic acid after a certain interval is 
removed, and an equal volume of oxygen is substituted for 
it. If a fresh portion of carbonic acid is supplied, the same 
result will ensue. In like manner, Sennebier and Woodhouse 
observed that when the leaves of a plant are immersed in water, 
and exposed to the rays of the sun, oxygen gas is disengaged. 
That the evolution of oxygen in this experiment is accompa- 
nied with a proportional absorption of carbonic acid, is proved 
by employing water, deprived of carbonic acid by boiling, in 
which case little or no oxygen is procured. Such are the chan- 
ges induced by plants when exposed to sunshine; but in the 
dark an opposite effect ensues. Carbonic acid gas is not ab- 
sorbed under these circumstances, nor is oxygen gas evolved; 

134 ATJCTARIVM. 



G8 



but, on the contrary, oxygen disappears, and carbonic acid gas 
is evolved. In the dark, therefore, vegetables deteriorate ra- 
ther than purify the air, producing the same effect as the respi- 
ration of animals.” An ingenious explanation, supported by 
experiments, of the cause of these opposite effects, has been 
offered by Professor Burnet, which appears satisfactory. He 
considers that the influence of vegetation on the atmosphere is 
owing not to one, but to two functions, that is to the 
110 Digestion* and Respiration of Plants. Respiration is 
believed to proceed at all times as in animals, without intermic- 
sion, and its uniform effect is the production of carbonic acid ; 
while the former takes place only under the influence of light, 
and gives rise to evolution of oxygen gas, and the abstraction 
of carbonic acid. A plant exposed to sunshine, purifies the air 
by absorbing carbonic acid from the atmosphere, as well as 
that emitted by its own respiration, and emits oxygen gas in re- 
turn. In the dark, digestion is at a stand, and respiration con- 
tinuing without intermission, carbonic acid accumulates. From 
several of the preceding facts, it is supposed that the oxygen 
emitted by plants, while under the influence of light, is derived 
from the carbonic acid which they absorb, and that the carbon 
of that gas is applied to the purposes of nutrition. Consistently 
with this view it has been observed that plants do not thrive 
when kept in an atmosphere of pure oxygen; and it was found 
by Dr. Percival and IMr. Henry, that the presence of a little 
carbonic acid is even favourable to their growth, Saussure, 
who examined this subject minutely, ascertained that plants 
grow better in an atmosphere which contains about one-twelfth 
of carbonic acid than in common air, provided they are expo- 
sed to sunshine. But if that gas be present in a greater propor- 
tion, its influence is prejudicial: in an atmosphere consisting of 
one-half of its volume of carbonic acid, the plants perished in 
seven days; and they did not vegetate at all when that gas was 
in the proportion of two-thirds. In the shade the presence 
of carbonic acid is always detrimental. He likewise observed 
that the presence of oxygen is necessary, in order that a plant 
should derive benefit from admixture w ith carbonic acid. Saus- 
sure is of opinion that plants derive a large quantity of their car- 
bon from the carbonic acid of the atmosphere, an opinion which 
receives great weight from the two following comparative 



69 



experiments. On causing a plant to vegetate in pure water, sup- 
plied with common air and exposed to light, the carbon of the 
plant increased in quantity ; but when supplied with common 
air in a dark situation, it even lost a portion of the carbon 
which it had previously possessed. 

Ill Light, its effects on Plants. Light is necessary to the col- 
our of plants. The experiments of Sennebier and Mr. Gough have 
shown that the green colour of the leaves is not developed, except 
when they are in a situation to absorb oxygen and give out carbonic 
acid. Though the experiments of different philosophers agree as 
to the influence of vegetation on the air in sunshine and during the 
night, very different opinions have been expressed both as to the 
phenomena occasioned by diffused daylight, and concerning the 
total effect produced by plants on the constitution of the atmo- 
sphere. Priestly found that air vitiated by combustion, or the 
respiration of animals, and left in contact for several days and 
nights with a sprig of mint, was gradually restored to its origi- 
nal purity ; and hence he inferred that the oxygen gas, con- 
sumed during these and various other processes, is restored to 
the mass of the atmosphere by the agency of growing vegetables. 
This doctrine was confirmed by the researches of Ingenhousz and 
Saussure, who found that the quantity of oxygen evolved from 
plants by day exceeds that of carbonic acid emitted during the 
night; and Davy arrived at the same conclusions as Priestley. 
But an opposite opinion has been supported by Mr. Ellis, who 
from an extensive series of experiments, contrived with much 
sagacity, inferred that growing plants give out oxygen only in 
direct sunshine, while at all other times they absorb it ; that 
when exposed to the ordinary vicissitudes of sunshine and shade, 
light and darkness, they form more carbonic acid in the period 
of a day and night, than they destroy ; and, consequently, that 
the general effect of vegetation on the atmosphere is the same 
as that produced by animals. The recent experiments of Dr. 
Daubeny appear decisive of this question. He has convinced 
himself that in fine weather a plant consisting chiefly of leaves 
and stems, if confined in the same portion of air night and day, 
and duly supplied with carbonic acid gas during the sunshine, 
will go on adding to the proportion of oxygen present, so long 
as it continues healthy, at least up to a certain point, the slight 
diminution of oxygen and increase of carbonic acid which take 

135 lUCTABICM. 



70 



place during the night, bearing no considerable ratio to the de- 
gree in which the opposite effect occurs by day. He accounts 
for the discordance between his own results and those of Mr. 
Ellis, by his having carefully removed the plants from the ex- 
perimenting jar immediately they began to suffer from the heat 
or confinement, and conducted the experiments on a larger and 
more suitable scale. 

112 Food of Plants. The chief source from which plants de- 
rive the materials for their growth, is the soil. However various 
the composition of the soil, it consists essentially of two parts, 
so far as its solid constituents are concerned. One is a certain 
quantity of earthy matters, such as siliceous earth, clay, lime, 
and sometimes magnesia; and the other is formed from the re- 
mains of animal and vegetable substances, which, when mixed 
with the former, constitute common mould. A mixture of this 
kind, moistened by rain, affords the proper nourishment of 
plants. The water, percolating through the mould, dissolves 
the soluble salts with which it comes in contact, together with 
the gaseous, extractive, and other matters which are formed du- 
ring the decomposition of the animal and vegetable remains. 
In this state it is readily' absorbed by the roots and conveyed as 
sap to the leaves, where it undergoes a process of assimilation. 
But though this is the natural process by which plants obtain 
the greater part of their nourishment, and without which they 
do not arrive at perfect maturity, they may live, grow, and even 
increase in weight, when wholly deprived of nutrition from this 
source. Thus in the experiment of Saussure, already described, 
sprigs of peppermint were found to vegetate in distilled water; 
and it is well known that many plants grow when merely sus- 
pended in the air. In the hot-houses of the botanical garden of 
Edinburgh, for example, there are two plants, species of the fig 
tree, the ficus australis and ficus elastica, the latter of which, 
as Dr. Graham asserts, has been suspended for ten, and the for- 
mer for nearly sixteen years, during which time they have con- 
tinued to send out shoots and leaves. Before scientific men 
had learned to appreciate the influence of atmospheric air on 
vegetation, the increase of carbonaceous matter, which occurs 
in some of these instances, was supposed to be derived from 
water, an opinion naturally suggested by the important offices 
performed by this fluid in the vegetable economy. Without 

108 to 112 from Dr. Turner’s Elements of Chemistry. 



71 



water plants speedily wither and die. It gives the soft parts 
that degree of succulence necessary for the performance of their 
functions; — it affords two elements, oxygen and hydrogen, 
which either as water, or under some other form, are contained 
in all vegetable products ; — and, lastly, the roots absorb from 
the soil those substances only, which are dissolved or suspended 
in water. So carefully, indeed, has nature provided against the 
chance of deficient moisture, that the leaves are endowed with a 
property both of absorbing aqueous vapour directly from the 
atmosphere, and of lowering their temperature during the night 
by radiation so as to cause a deposition of dew upon their sur- 
face, in consequence of which, during the driest seasons and in 
the warmest climates, they frequently continue to convey this 
fluid to the plant, when it can no longer be obtained in sufficient 
quantity from the soil. But necessary as water is to vegetable 
life, it cannot yield to plants a principle which it does not pos- 
sess. The carbonaceous matter which accumulates in plants, 
under the circumstances, above mentioned, may, with every ap- 
pearance of justice, be referred to the atmosphere; since we 
know that carbonic acid exists there, and that growing vegeta- 
bles have the property of taking carbon from that gas. 

113 Ashes OF Plants. When plants are incinerated, their ashes 
are found to contain saline and earthy matters, the .elements of 
which, if not the compounds themselves, are supposed to be de- 
rived from the soil. Such at least is the view deducible from 
the researches of Saussure, and which might have been antici- 
pated by reasoning on chemical principles. The experiments 
of M. Schrader, however, lead to a different conclusion. He 
sowed several kinds of grain, such as barley, wheat, rye, and 
oats, in pure flowers of sulphur, and supplied the shoots as they 
grew with nothing but air, light, and distilled water. On in- 
cinerating the plants, thus treated, they yielded a greater quan- 
tity of saline and earthy matters than were originally present in 
the seeds. These results, supposing them accurate, may be ac- 
counted for in two ways. It may be supposed in the first place, 
that the foreign matters were introduced accidentally from ex- 
traneous sources, as by fine particles of dust floating in the at- 
mosphere; or, secondly, it may be conceived, that they were 
derived from the sulphur, air, and water, with which the plants 
were supplied. If the latter opinion be adopted, we must infer 

136 AUCTARICM. U3, Dr. Turner's Elements of Chemistry. 



either that the vital principle, which certainly controls chemical 
affinity in a surprising manner, and directs this power in the pro- 
duction of new compounds from elementary bodies, may like- 
wise convert one element into another; or that some of the sub- 
stances, supposed by chemists to be simple, such as oxygen and 
hydrogen, are compounds, not of two, but of a variety of differ- 
ent principles. As these conjectures are without foundation, 
and are utterly at variance with the facts and principles of the 
science, I do not hesitate in adopting the more probable opin- 
ion, that the experiments of M. Schrader were influenced by 
some source of error which escaped detection. 

114 Peat Soil. Under the name of Peat, a soil which is so fre- 
quently recommended as indispensable to the successful culture 
of various species of plants, is comprehended two very different 
kinds of earth, w ith numerous intermediate varieties. Some of 
these are totally unfit for use, without previous preparation and 
admixture. Heath peat is that found upon dry barren heaths, 
generally only a few inches thick, of a black colour, with a mix- 
ture of sand. This answers well for pot culture, either by it- 
self or mixed with other soils. When used for beds of Ameri- 
can plants, one-fourth part of fresh loam should be mixed with 
it. Bog peat is found in low marshy situations, frequently of 
considerable depth, without any mixture of sand. This descrip- 
tion of peat is unfit for garden purposes, in the state in which it 
is originally dug from such marshy grounds. It should be laid 
in heaps, or rather in flat beds, to have full exposure, through 
an entire winter; and in such situation it will require to be fre- 
quently turned over, to sweeten and to become pulverized. 
AVhen thoroughly friable, it is more valuable than heath peat, 
being, by the addition of sand, applicable to every purpose to 
which peat soil can be used, whether simply or compounded 
with more common soils. If peat of this description be laid 
over the common garden borders, to the thickness of three or 
four inches, and then very well worked in amongst the common 
earth, to the depth of 18 inches, it will be found to add greatly 
to its fertility, for every purpose both of the kitchen and flower 
garden. There is scarcely a hardy exotic, bnt will grow in it 
most luxuriantly. A description of bog peat will sometimes be 
met w ith, particularly in mining districts, of a yellowish hue, or 
having veins or strata, principally of such colour. This we have 

114) Dareacom. 



73 



found to contain a considerable portion of oxide of iron; and 
although reduced to powder and mixed with sand, before being 
used, we have seen American shrubs which had been planted in 
it, dwindle year after year, and ultimately die. 

115 AVoodlice, to Destroy. Very few hothouses or frames are 
entirely exempt from that troublesome little animal, the Wood- 
louse, the Onisens ascellus of Linneus. AVhen few in number 
the injury done by them to growing plants is trifling; we may, 
notwithstanding, wish the sons of Galen possessed those few for 
the benefit of their jaundiced patients. In common hotbeds 
and mushroom beds, when from overheating or other causes, 
they become dry, and afford convenient places for shelter and in- 
crease, Woodlice are, sometimes, so numerous as to destroy 
much of their crops, and have been found difficult of extirpa- 
tion. By complying with the following directions this diffi- 
culty may be removed. These insects are very partial to the 
fleshy roots of the common white Bryony, — ’Bryonia dioica. If 
this be cut into thin slices, and allowed to become nearly dry, it 
makes an excellent bait for entrapping them. The Briony is 
conveniently used by putting one or two slices into a garden pan, 
or on a tile, with a little loose dry moss over it, where the insects 
resort. They will soon both find and feed upon the Briony 
root; and as the dry moss will afford them convenient shelter 
they will remain beneath it. These traps should be examined 
every morning or oftener, when the insects may be destroyed. 
The Bryony is found sparingly in most old hedge rows; but as 
the roots are difficult to discover, during winter, a root or two 
should be transplanted into the garden, to be ready when w anted. 

116 Fossil Ferns. In a number of the Athenzeum of 1835, was 
a notice on Fossil Ferns. As it contains an assertion somewhat 
at variance with our anticipations, geologically; and also a me- 
thod of comparison, worth remembering, we copy it. “As it is 
very rare to find a fossil fern, the mere impression, generally 
speaking, being all that remains, a M. Gcepper has taken the 
impression of a number of recent ferns, in order, by comparison, 
to try and ascertain the fossil species with greater facility. By 
this method, M. Gcepper has been able to recognize more than 
thirty species, which are analogous to those of the present day.” 

117 R.vfflesia Arnoldi. In the Floral Register we have fig- 
ured this most extraordinary production, and its character de- 

137 AUCT.iRIUM. 117, Trans. Lin. Soc. Vol. 13. Condensed in Loudon’s Mag. Nat. Hist. Vol. 1. 



74 



mands further notice than wecouldthere bestow on it. Dr. Robert 
Brown lias given an interesting paper on the subject, and the 
singularity of the plant demands that we should supply our 
readers with an account of its peculiar structure. “It is a par- 
asite, growing in woods, on the roots and stems of those immense 
climbers, generally of the genus Vitis, which are attached, like 
cables, to the largest trees in the forest. The flower constitutes 
the whole of the plant, there being neither leaves, roots, nor a 
stem. It is a true parasite, growing out of another plant in the man- 
ner of the. mistletoe, and not on the decayed surface of plants, as 
the common fern on the trunks of old oak pollards. The breadth 
of a full-grown flower exceeds three feet; and the petals, which are 
subrotund, measure twelve inches from the base to the apex, and it 
is about a foot from the insertion of the one petal to the oppo- 
siteone; what is considered thenectarium would hold twelve pints; 
the pistils, which are abortive, are as large as cows’ horns, and 
the weight of the whole is calculated to be about fifteen pounds. 
The flow er, fully blown, was discovered in a jungle, grow ing close 
to the ground under the bushes, with a swarm of flies hovering 
over the nectary, and apparently laying their eggs in its sub- 
stance. The colour of the five petals is a brick red, covered 
with protuberances of a yellowish white. The smell is that of 
tainted beef. The structure of Rafflesia is too imperfectly known 
to admit of determining its place in the natural system ; but Mr. 
Brown is inclined to think it will be found to approach either to 
Asarinse or Passiflorea;. Its first appearance is that of a round 
nob, proceeding from a crack or hollow in the stem or root. 
This knob, when cut through, exhibits the infant flower envelo- 
ped in numerous bracteal sheaths, which successively open and 
wither away as the flower enlarges, until, at the time of full ex- 
pansion, there are but a very few remaining, which have some- 
what the appearance of a broken calyx. It takes three months 
from the first appearance of the bud to the full expansion of the 
flower. The fruit has not yet been seen by botanists, but is said 
by the natives, to be a many-seeded berry. The female flower 
differs little in appearance from the male, further than being 
w ithout the anthers of the latter. The modes of union between 
a parasite and its supporter or stock, vary in different genera and 
species of this class of vegetables. Some, as the mistletoe and 
Rafflesia, depend on the stock for nourishment during the whole 



75 



of their existence ; others, as the common broom rape, are ori- 
ginated in the soil, and afterwards, when they have attached 
themselves to their stock, the original roots die; other parasites, 
again, are originated on the stock, and in their more advanced 
state produce roots of their own. In some cases the nature of 
the connection between the parasite and the stock is such, “ as 
can only be explained on the supposition, that the germinating 
seed of the parasite excites a specific action in the stock, the re- 
sult of which is the formation of a structure, either wholly or in 
part derived from the root, and adapted to the support and pro- 
tection of the undeveloped parasite ; analogous, therefore, to the 
production of galls by the puncture of insects.” on this suppos- 
ition may be explained, the connection between the flower Rafile- 
sia and the root from whence it springs. 

118 Rhododendron, Grafting of. Mr. .Joseph Walker of Ban- 
ner Cross, near Sheffield, has succeeded in grafting the Rhodo- 
dendron Alta-clerense on the ponticum. In a communication 
inserted in the last (74th) Number of the Gardener’s Magazine, 
he states that having obtained a small sprig of the Rhododen- 
dron Alta-clerense from Mr. Paxton at Chatsworth, he inserted 
the end of it into a potatoe, and took it home. Happening, he 
says, to have a small jilant of Rhododendron ponticum in a pot, 
I cut it down to about five inches above the pot, and grafted it in 
the whip manner with the small sprig thus |)rocured, letting the 
end still remain inserted in the potatoe. I then clayed it, and 
put it under a hand glass in a cool vinery, where it united to 
the stock, and is now a healthy plant, standing out under a 
south wall. 

119 Preserving Plants during a Voyage. Capt. R. Gillies, 
of the ship Hibernia, communicated the following method to 
Messrs. Fox; given in the Report of the Royal Cornwall Poly- 
technic Society. “ In accordance with your wishes, I have 
much pleasure in describing to you the mode in which the 
plants brought by me from Calcutta were put up. The plants 
were all intended for the greenhouse in England, and, 1 presume, 
were of a delicate kind. Each plant was in a box, six inches 
square, by one foot in depth, filled to the top with a kind of 
clay ; and, no doubt, well saturated with water, previously to 
being put into the large outer box, which contained eight of 
these small ones. The large box was constructed in the usual 

188 AUCTARICM. H9» Gardener’s Mag. 12, 204. 



76 



way ; that is, a glazed roof about two feet high, the glass strong 
enough to resist the fall of a small rope, or other light body. 
It was hermetically closed with the common lime cement of the 
country, and was never opened during a voyage of five months. 
AVhen we arrived in England, the plants were all in beautiful 
health, and had grown to the full height of the case, the leaves 
pressing against the glass. In dry weather, I always observed 
moisture within the glass, which was caused, no doubt, by the 
evaporation of the earth, and was again absorbed by the plants. 
It is difficult to account for the perfect health of the plants, 
without the full admission of the atmosphere ; but oxygen suffi- 
cient was probably admitted, either through the pores of the 
wood, or otherwise. It is, however, a fact, that no water was 
given to them during the voyage, and that they were landed in 
excellent order.” This reminds us of Mr. Ward’s plant cases, 
explained at section 72. 

120 Pomegranate, to flower. Under common management, 
the double-flowered Pomegranate rarely blossoms freely, and 
oftentimes not at all. Mr. David Whale, Gardener, of Winches- 
ter, in a paper inserted in the Floricultural Cabinet, No. 39. says 
“The double flowering kind is much more esteemed than the 
other in this country, for the sake of its large fine double flowers, 
which are of a most beautiful scarlet colour ; and if the trees 
are well managed, and supplied with due nourishment, they 
will continue to produce flowers for four or five months suc- 
cessively, which renders it one of the most valuable flowering 
trees. This sort may be rendered more productive of flowers, by 
grafting it upon stalks of the single kind, which checks the lux- 
uriance of the trees, and causes them to produce flowers upon 
almost every shoot. There have been various ways recom- 
mended to manage the pomegranate, so as to make it flower 
freely, and forty years’ experience has taught me what I conceive 
to be the most successful method. I do all my pruning in the 
summer season; training the branches at a regular distance, of 
about four inches apart, in the same way as I train a plum tree ; 
towards the latter end of June I look over the trees, and remove 
all the shoots that are running to wood; at which time they are 
young and tender, and are easily removed without the assistance 
of a knife. Care must be taken to leave all spurs and blossom 
shoots, which are easily distinguished from w ood shoots. This I 
do about three times during the summer, and by this treatment 



77 



the tree continues to flower four or five months, making a very 
grand appearance, and repaying by its beauty for every care a 
gardener can bestow. The knife should never be used about 
these trees in winter, except to remove decayed branches, &c. 
They are easily propagated by layers or cuttings. To accom- 
plish the first, in March, select some of the young branches for 
the purpose, give a little slit at a bud underneath, or they will ea- 
sily strike root without slitting, and I consider that method to 
be the safest ; lay them in the usual way, water them occasion- 
ally during the summer, and by the following autumn they will 
be well rooted so that they may be taken off" and removed to 
any warm situation, to gain strength, before they are planted 
where they are to remain. If cuttings are required, in June, 
take some young tops of branches, select a warm place in the 
garden, place them under a hand-glass, shade them in hot w ea- 
ther, and by autumn they will have taken root.’’ 

121 Culture of Cacte.^:. In the extensive family of Cactese 
are some of the most showy plants which we possess, either for 
the greenhouse or for decorating a room. Amongst them we 
may [larticularly mention Cereus speciosissimus, speciosus, trun- 
catus, Ackermanni, Jenkensonni, hybrida, all of which are of 
the easiest management, whether cultivated in the greenhouse, 
or in sitting rooms. The soil in which it was formerly consi- 
dered requisite to ])ot these splendid plants, was that which was 
poor, and mixed with old lime rubbish. It has, however, of late 
been dicovered that rich soil, mixed with manure, is preferable. 
How far the same compost would suit other succulent plants 
has yet to be ascertained by experience. From IMarch to No- 
vember the various species of Cereus ought to have a plentiful 
supply of water; and occasionally they should likewise be sup- 
])lied with liquid manure. During the winter months it is de- 
sirable that they be kept both cool and dry, a treatment that will 
induce a most abundant produce of flower buds, which will 
soon burst forth after they begin to receive a plentiful supply of 
water in March. They are readily increased by cuttings, and 
by grafting upon each other, a method which admits of many 
species being grown upon the same plant. The best stock on 
which the Cereus truncatus can be grafted is the Pereskia acu- 
leata, upon which it grows more rapidly than even from its own 
roots. When thus grafted upon a high stock, and trained care- 

139 .\UCTABICM. 121, D. Cameron. 



78 



fully in an Umbrella form, it produces a most novel and inter- 
esting appearance. Much has been done in hybridising these 
plants, and it is likely that many beautiful and singular varieties 
may yet be obtained by the same means, particularly if the sub- 
genera Mammillaria, Melocactus, Echinocactus, Opuntia, 
Periskia, and Rhipsalis, will fertilize the Cereus. In other 
genera, seeds saved from hybrids are found to produce the great- 
est number of new varieties, the existing hybrids of this genus 
ought therefore, in artificial fertilization, to be employed as the 
female parent. 

122 Potatoes, moulding up. Much disparity of opinion oc- 
curs respecting the utility of moulding up Potatoes. Joseph 
Hayward, Esq. in the ninth volume of the Gardener’s Maga- 
zine, objects to the practice altogether, as one not only of inu- 
tility, but of injurious tendency towards the crop. We wish 
that some of our friends would assist in obtaining further proofs. 
Mr Hayward says, “Observing that a farmer, in managing a 
field of potatoes alongside one of mine, did not earth them up, 
but simply flat-hoed the surface of the soil to clear away the 
weeds, while I had mine earthed up with great care, I deter- 
mined on noticing the difference on taking up the crop; and, to 
my astonishment, he had 14 tons per acre, while I had not more 
than half the quantity, and his potatoes were of a more mar- 
ketable quality than mine ; being generally of a good size, while 
mine were large and small. The result induced me to question 
the farmer ; and he told me it was a practice he had followed 
for many years, as he thought the earthing up was worse than 
labour thrown away; that, a year or two before, he had obtain- 
ed 19 tons per acre by the same management. This statement 
put me upon considering the principles upon which such a re- 
sult was founded; and it appeared to me that, by drawing up 
the earth over the potato, in sloping ridges, it was deprived of 
its due supply of moisture by the rains ; for, when they fell, the 
w ater was cast into the ditches. Further, in regard to the idea 
that, by thus earthing up, the number of tubers is increased, 
the effect is quite the reverse; for experience proves that a pota- 
to placed an inch only under the surface of the earth will pro- 
duce a greater number of tubers than one planted at the depth 
of a foot. From reasoning thus, I determined to adopt the 
practice: however, such is the force of prejudice, that I have 



79 



been able to make but few proselytes. A year or two since, 
I prevailed on a clergyman to try the practice on a strip of half 
an acre, running through a large field, treated in the common 
manner ; and he told me that, on taking up the crop, he did not 
find much difference in the gross quantity; but that those which 
had not been earthed up, were more generally of a good size ; 
not so many large and small as the other part of the field. I 
have no doubt, if potatoes are planted shallow, and placed wide 
enough apart to admit of the stems being laid down after the 
young potatoes are formed, and to have the earth between them 
thrown over five or six inches thick, so as to form a flat surface, 
that it would increase the crop. But this is a very different 
operation from that I object to.” 

123 Proteace®, Culture of. Difficulties have hitherto pre- 
sented themselves in the culture of the several species of Bank- 
sia, Dryandra, and others of the Proteaceae, which form prom- 
inent ornaments of the greenhouse. Many of these interesting 
plants, which have at different times been admired in the prin- 
cipal collections around the metropolis, are now no where to be 
found. One reason of this has doubtless arisen out of the man- 
agement which has existed in the practice of continuing to stim- 
ulate the plants into active growth, immediately after their 
flowering season ; the time which, in their indigenous situations, 
naturally constitutes their season of repose. In tropical coun- 
tries the season of vegetable repose does not occur from low' 
temperature, as in our own climate. With us a low temperature, 
which distinguishes our winters, depresses vegetables into tor- 
pidity and rest — a state of existence which is as requisite to ve- 
getable as to animal life. In tropical plains, heat is perpetual, 
but the magnificent plants, natives of those climates, still have 
their season of rest ; a season which the judicious cultivator will 
endeavour to imitate. Within the tropics the year possesses 
two prominent features, as in our northern latitude; but with us 
this arises from temperature, whilst in the tropics it arises from 
moisture. During the rainy season, attended as it is by inten- 
sity of heat, plants vegetate with a luxuriance, and assume a 
character of magnificence, of which no artificial means can af- 
ford an adequate idea. Under this increased stimulus, their 
flowers and fruit proceed rapidly to maturity, and by the time 
of its accomplishment, intense heat and drought begin to spread, 

140 iOCTARlOt. 



80 



languor and inactivity, and vegetable life thus overpowered, 
sinks into repose. This season of drought is what the cultivator 
has studiously to imitate. His tropical plants should have but 
sufficient moisture merely to continue their existence ; and thus 
they will be prepared, at the proper season, when water is al- 
lowed them freely, to vegetate with their natural vigour. We 
have been led into this comment, by an article of Sir W. J. 
Hooker, in the Botanical Magezine, combining a paper on the 
culture of these plants, communicated by Mr. J. Smith, of his 
Majesty’s gardens at Kew. It is stated that Mr. Smith, adver- 
ting to the interesting pamphlet of Mr. Macuab, the excellent 
Superintendent of the Royal Botanic Garden, at Edinburgh, on 
the propagation and culture of Cape Heaths, which appeared 
in 1831, observes, that he had pursued with success for some 
time antecedent to that date, the same mode of treatment of 
Proteaceae under his care, that is recommended in that publica- 
tion, with respect to the culture of Heaths, viz. in regard to 
shifting the plants into fresh and larger pots; in the process of 
which, it is very important to afford, by means of potsherds, or 
or fragments of half-baked pottery, a good drainage below, and 
especially to avoid deep potting, by placing the plant, with its 
ball of earth round the roots quite entire, so as to be some two 
or three inches above the surface of the soil at the edge of the 
pot, which will have the effect of carrying off any superabundant 
moisture from the roots to the circumference, and thus prevent 
the chance of water becoming stagnant round the base of the 
stem ; by inattention to this latter circumstance, many a Banksia 
and Dryandra in other collections have been killed; whilst a 
steady regard to free drainage, to an abundant circulation of air, 
and a low temperature, he has succeeded in preserving many 
fine proteaceous plants longer than is generally effected in other 
gardens in the neighbourhood of Loudon. The soil, continues 
this intelligent cultivator, which I use in the culture of most of 
the Proteaceae, is a good fresh loam, with which, if stiff, I mix 
a portion of sand, so as not to admit of its being retentive of 
water. In time, after being potted as already directed, the main 
roots next the stem of the plant will become uncovered: this 
circumstance I regard as favourable to the health of the plant : 
there will be no danger of its dying suddenly, as I have known 
many to do, that have been buried alive, — in other words, been 



81 



deeply potted!” “In the winter months, care should he taken 
not to saturate the earth with water, nor wet the leaves or stem 
more than can be avoided. In dry weather however, during 
the summer season, water may be freely given to the plants 
about sunset, and a very essential point to be observed is, that 
when they are placed out in the open air in groups, the sun’s 
rays should not be allowed to fall directly on the sides of the 
pots, for if they are, all the feeding spongioles of the tender 
roots round the inner side of the pot, will assuredly be destroy- 
ed, and the life of the plant greatly endangered. Repeatedly 
have I known a Banksia to have been killed by the solar ray 
having been thus allowed to act on the side of the pot, which 
six months’ afterwards retained so much of a life-like look — 
being ke[)t yet in its pot — as to appear to the eye of a superficial 
observer, to be still alive, and in perfect vigour. The lowest 
greenhouse temperature that can judiciously be allowed, to pre- 
vent the effects of frost, is sufficient for the generality of the fa- 
mily now in cultivation in Britain, and no artificial heat is 
required for their preservation, excepting in severe frosty wea- 
ther.” “As the rapid upright-growing species are, if left to 
themselves, shorter-lived than others naturally more robust, 
the free use of the knife is recommended, and the growth of the 
plants checked, by keeping the luxuriant shoots cut back. This 
remark is especially applicable to those beautiful plants of the 
order, with simple, strait, wand-like stems, such for example as 
Banksia Brownii and Dryandra Serra, the former of which has 
been lost to several collections that could once have boasted 
of it, by its having been suffered to shoot up into exuberant 
growth, far beyond what the slender, tapering, thinly-fibred 
root could at all furnish sustenance. By heading these down 
somewhat, and thus reducing the ascending axis, or column of 
circulation, a more robust habit is induced, a growth of roots 
in their pots takes place, lateral branches are thrown out, and 
the plants thus treated at Kew, are now in the best possible 
health, with every indicative of being fully established in that 
garden.” 

124 Peas. The Fellows of the London Horticultural Society 
must derive satisfaction from the undoubted benefits which Hor- 
ticulture and Floriculture have received from their united efforts. 
One of the useful practices in the Society’s garden is that of 

141 AnCTlRlDM. 



82 



collecting Kitchen vegetables, from various sources, and cul- 
tivating them in juxtaposition, to ascertain their comparative 
value. This has been done with Peas, and a Report of the re- 
sult appears in the fifth part of the Society’s Transactions. An 
abridgement has been given in the Gardener’s Magazine, which 
we shall further curtail. Mr. George Gordon the writer of the 
Report has given the estimate of the most superior sorts, for 
cultivation, under four heads, viz: 

For early sowing. Early Dwarf, or Pois nain hatif. 
Height about H ft., and somewhat resembling Bishop’s Dwarf, 
but is more prolific; broad, mostly containing 5 peas. It 
is the best of the dwarfs, as it is very prolific, and of good 
quality. Early Frame; also known as Best early, early 
siugle-blossomed, early double blossomed frame, early one-eyed, 
double dwarf frame, single frame, early dwarf frame, superfine 
early. Bait’s early dwarf nimble, early Wilson, Young’s very 
early, early Nicholas, Perkins’s early frame, early Nana, Ma- 
son’s double-blossomed, Russell’s fine early, early French, 
dwarf Albany. About 4 ft. high, and rather slender. Pods 
small and round, mostly containing 5 or 6 peas. Very proli- 
fic, of excellent quality, and the earliest pea in the whole col- 
lection. The number of blossoms on this pea entirely depends 
on the soil and situation it is grown in. It must not be con- 
founded with the following sort. Early Charlton ; also, 
known as Golden Charlton, early sugar frame, late dwarf, 
Twesly dwarf. Hotspur, Wrench’s Hotspur, double dwarf Hot- 
spur, early Hotspur, golden Hotspur, common Hotspur, early 
Nicholas Hotspur, Nimble Taylor, very fine late garden, Pad- 
dington, Essex Reading, Russell’s early blossomed. About 5 
ft. high, and of strong growth. Pods large, broad, and rather 
flattened, mostly containing 6 or 7 peas. A very prolific bearer, 
of excellent quality, and the best pea for standing the winter in 
the collection. It is about a week or ten days later than the 
early frame, but will continue much longer in bearing, and, like 
the preceding, varies in appearance according to soil, situation, 
&c. D’Auvergne. About 5 ft. high, and rather slender. 
Pods very long, nearly round, much curved and tapering a 
good deal to the extremities, mostly containing 11 or 12 peas 
if well grown. A very abundant bearer, of excellent quality, 
and later than the early Charlton in coming into use. It is the" 



83 



best pea for produce, aud deserves to be generally cultivated in 
all gardens, which it doubtless will be, when its qualities become 
better known. 

For late sowing. Knight’s Dwarf Marrow. Eng- 
lish Synonymes : Dwarf Knight’s, Knight’s new dwarf. About 
ft. or 4 ft. high, very much resembling the dwarf white mar- 
row, but of stronger growth. Pods broad, and rather flat, con- 
taining 5 or 6 peas. Of excellent quality, and very prolific. 
The seed wrinkled when ripe. Knight’s Tall Marrow. 
Ride hatif, ride tardif, ride. English Synonymes: Knight’s 
late. About 6? ft. high, aud of very strong growth. Pods 
large and broad, containing 8 or 9 peas. Of excellent quality 
and later than the preceding by a week. Peas, when ripe, shri- 
vel very much, and are remarkably sweet. This pea is the best 
of all the tall ones for late sowing in summer. Tall Green 
Marrow. English Synonymes: Green tall, new large green, im- 
perial green. About 7 ft. high, and of very strong growth. Pods 
large, broad, and rather flat, containing 8 or 9 peas. Of excel- 
lent quality, late, and very prolific. Peas, when ripe, of a yel- 
lowish green colour. Crown Pea. English Synonymes: 
American crown, rose or crown. About 5? ft. high, of very 
strong growth, with the blossoms in tufts at the extremity, 
somewhat like a crown, from which it derives its name. Pods, 
small, round, and straight, containing 5 or 6 peas. A very 
abundant bearer, of good quality, and very good for summer use. 

Sugar PEAS,(notto besown before thefirstofMarch) Early 
May Sugar. English Synonymes: Early Dutch, early sugar, 
dwarf Dutch sugar. About 4 ft. high and very slender. Pods, 
small, round, and straight, containing 6 or 7 peas. Of good qual- 
ity, but only a moderate bearer. This is the earliest pea in the 
collection, but is very tender, and will not do to sow before the 
beginning of iMarch. Large Crooked Sugar. English Syn- 
onymes : New pea, sugar pea, broad sword, early Spanish. About 
6 feet high and very strong. Pods very large, broad, and much 
twisted, containing 9 peas. Peas large and prominent in the pods. 
Of excellent quality, very productive and the best in its class. 
Vilmorin’s Sugar. About 6? feet high, and of slender growth. 
Pods, small, round, and straight, containing 7 or 8 peas, which 
as in all the other sugar peas, are very prominent, even when 
quite young. Of excellent quality, and the greatest bearer in 

1-42 AVCTABIUM. 



84 



this class. It was received from M. Vilmorin as an “especede 
pois tres-excellent.” Tamarind Pea. English Synonyme: 
Late dwarf sugar. About 4 ft. high, and of robust growth. Pods 
large, broad, and much curved, containing 9 or 10 Peas. Of 
excellent c|uality and a very abundant bearer. The pods are 
from 4 in. to o in. long, and are produced the latest in this class. 

Dwarf Blue Peas.for Sum.mer Use. Dwarf Imperial. 
English Synonymes : Blue imperial, dwarf green imperial, 
new improved imperial, new improved dwarf imperial, new 
dwarf imperial, new long-podded imperial, Sumatra, green non- 
pareil, dwarf blue prolific, blue scymitar, sabre, blue sabre, new 
sabre, dwarf sabre. About 4 ft. high, and of strong growth. 
Pods large, long, and rather flat, much pointed and containing 
8 or 9 peas. Of excellent quality, a good bearer, and one of 
the best peas for summer, as it is very late in coming into use. 
Blue Prussian. Nain vert petit, nain royal, gros vert de 
Prusse. English Synonymes: Dwarf blue Prussian, royal 
Prussian blue, fine long-podded dwarf, Prussian prolific, early 
Dutch green, green Prussian. About ft. high, and of strong 
growth. Pods long and rather round, containing 8 peas. This 
is so well known, that it is quite useless for me to say anything 
about its good qualities. It is undoubtedly the best for sum- 
mer use, and one of the greatest bearers. White Prussian. 
English Synonymes : Prolific or poor man’s profit, prolific, tall 
Prussian, dwarf white Prussian, new dwarf Norman, royal dwarf, 
royal prolific, dwarf Tewsley, Stowe pea. About 4 ft. high, and 
very robust. Pods broad, long, and rather flat, containing 7 
or 8 peas, which are large and white. Of good quality, and, 
like the blue Prussian, an excellent summer pea, and very pro- 
lific. This is the best sort for general cultivation, and well de- 
serves the name of poor man’s profit ; but it will not remain so 
long in bearing as the blue Prussian. Groom’s Superb 
Dwarf Blue. About 18 in. high, and of robust growth. 
Pods large, broad, and rather flat, containing 8 or 9 peas. Of 
excellent quality, a very abundant bearer, and a few days later 
than the blue Prussian, of which it seems a distinct dwarf vari- 
ety. Raised by Mr, H. Groom, of Walworth, who sent seeds ol 
it to the garden in 1831. This deserves general cultivation, as 
it requires no sticking, and produces more on the same space of 
ground than any other dwarf sort. 



85 



125 Cropping a Garden. As we have just copied directions, 
which we hope will be useful in enabling the cultivator of the 
kitchen garden to select from amongst the numerous sorts of 
peas those which will prove most useful for the purposes requi- 
red ; we shall now extract from the same source a few general 
directions to be observed in cropping a garden. “The object 
to be obtained by a system of cropping is that of procuring the 
greatest quantity, and the best quality, of the desired kind of 
produce, at the least possible expense of labour, time, and ma- 
nure ; and, in order that this object may be effectually obtained, 
there are certain principles which ought to be adopted as guides. 
The chief of these is to be derived from a knowledge of what spe- 
cific benefit or injury every culinary plant does to the soil, with 
reference to any other culinary plant. It ought to be known 
whether particular plants injure the soil by exhausting it of par- 
ticular principles ; or whether, as has been lately conjectured by 
De Candolle, and as some think proved, the soil is rendered un- 
fit for the growth of the same or any allied species, by excretions 
from the roots of plants; while the same excretions, acting in 
the way of manure, add to the fitness of the soil for the pro- 
duction of other species. The prevailing opinion, as every 
one knows, has long been, that plants exhaust the soil, generally, 
of vegetable food ; particularly of that kind of food which is pe- 
culiar to the species growing on it for the time being. For ex- 
ample, both potatoes and onions exhaust the soil generally ; 
while the potato deprives it of something which is necessary to 
insure the reproduction of good crops of potatoes; and the on- 
ion of something which is necessary for the reproduction of 
large crops of onions. According to the theory of De Candolle 
both crops exhaust the soil generally, and both render it unfit 
for the repetition of the particular kind of crop : but this injury, 
according to his hypothesis, is not effected by depriving the 
soil of the particular kind of nutriment requisite for the partic- 
S ular kind of species ; but by excreting into it substances pecu- 

liar to the species with which it has been cropped, which sub- 
stances render it unfit for having these crops repeated. Both 
these theories, or rather perhaps hypotheses, are attended with 
some difficulty in the case of plants which remain a great many 
years on the same soil; as, for example, perennial-rooted herba- 
ceous plants and trees. The difficulty, however, is got over in 

143 AUCTAaiCM. 125, Card. Map. Vol. IJ, 476. 



86 



both systems : by the first, or old, theory, the annual dropping 
and decay of the foliage is said to supply at once general nour- 
ishment and particular nourishment; and by the second, or 
new, theory, the same dropping of the leaves by the general 
nourishment which it supplies, is said to neutralize the particu- 
lar excretions. It must be confessed, that it is not very obvi- 
ous how general nourishment, dropped on the surface of the soil, 
can neutralize the excrementitious matter, deposited many feet 
beneath the surface ; as in the case of long-rooted herbaceous 
plants, like the saintfoin, lucern, &c.; and deep-rooting trees, 
such as the oak, &c. Nevertheless, we find that these plants 
will remain a longer period on the same soil than others, the 
roots of which never go to any great depth beneath the surface; 
such as the fibrous rooted grasses, the strawberry, &c., and the 
pine and fir tribe. We mention these things to show, that though 
it is not yet determined which is the true theory, yet that the fact 
of plants injuring, or diminishing the fertility of the soil, both 
generally and particularly, does not admit of a doubt. In 
the absence of principles founded on whichever of these hypoth- 
eses may be true, recourse is obliged to be had to rules drawn 
from the experience and observation of those who believe in the 
old theory. These rules, as adopted by the best gardeners, are 
as follows : — Crops of plants belonging to the same natural 
order or tribe, or to the natural order and tribe most nearly al- 
lied to them, should not follow each other. Thus, turnips should 
not follow any of the cabbage tribe, sea-kale, or horseradish; nor 
peas, beans. Plants which draw their nourishment chiefly 
from the surface of the soil should not follow each other, but 
should alternate with those which draw their nourishment in 
great part from the subsoil. Hence carrots and beets should 
not follow each other; nor onions and potatoes. Plants 
which draw a great deal of nourishment from the soil should 
succeed, or be succeeded by, plants which draw less nourish- 
ment. Hence, a crop grown for its fruit, such as the pea ; or 
for its roots or bulbs, such as the potato or the onion ; should 
be followed by such as are grown solely for their leaves, such 
as the common borecole, the cellery, the lettuce, &c. Plants 
which remain for several years on the soil, such as strawberries, 
asparagus, &c., should not be succeeded by other plants which 
remain a long time on the soil, but by crops of short duration; 



87 



and the soil should be continued under such crops for as long a 
period as it remained under a permanent crop. Hence, in ju- 
diciously cropped gardens, the strawberry compartment is chan- 
ged every three or four years, till it has gone the circuit of all 
the compartments ; and asparagus beds, sea-kale, &c., are re- 
newed on the same principles. Plants, the produce of which 
is collected during summer, should be succeeded by those of 
which the produce is chiefly gathered in winter or spring. The 
object of this rule is, to prevent too active and exhausting crops 
from following each other in succession. Other rules or prin- 
ciples may be drawn from the nature of the plants themselves; 
such as some requiring an extraordinary proportion of air, light, 
shade, moisture, &c.: or from the nature of the changes intended 
to be made on them by cultivation, such as blanching, succu- 
lency, magnitude, &c. In a good soil it is highly advanta- 
geous to pursue the mixed or simultaneous mode of cropping, 
which is founded on the principles, that most plants, when ger- 
minating, and for some time afterwards, thrive best in the shade ; 
and that tall-growing plants, which require to receive the light 
on each side, should be sown or planted, at some distance from 
each other. Hence, tall-growing peas are sown in rows, 10 ft. 
or 12 ft. apart; and between them are planted rows of the cab- 
bage tribe; and, again, between these are sown rows of spinach, 
lettuce, or radishes, &c. Hence, also, beans are planted in the 
same rows with potatoes or with cabbages (an old practice in the 
cottage-gardens of Scotland); and so on. The great object in 
this kind of cropping, is, to have crops on the ground, in differ- 
ent stages of grow th ; so that, the moment the soil and the sur- 
face are released from one crop, another may be in an advanced 
state, and ready, as it were, to supply its place. For this pur- 
pose, whenever one crop is removed, its place ought to be in- 
stantly supplied by plants adapted for producing another croj) 
of the proper nature to succeed it. For example, where rows 
of tall marrow-fat peas have rows of broccoli between them, 
then, the moment the peas are removed, a trench for celery may 
be formed where each row of peas stood ; and between the rows 
of brocoli, in the places where lettuces were produced early in 
the season, may be sown drills of w inter spinach. 

126 Hydra.\ge.\, blue-floweking. A value has been attached 
to the blue flowering variety of the Hydrangea hortensis, from 

I'M ADCTAEI0M. 



88 



its being less commonly seen in collections than the rose col- 
oured. Its value has been further enhanced by the mystifica- 
tion of culture and supposed difficulty in obtaining flowers of 
that colour. This may, probably, be done by various processes. 
The colour is not, however, likely to continue beyond one sea- 
son, when the means used to obtain it have been by any ingre- 
dients, given in a liquid state ; unless the application be repeat- 
ed every year. A fine blue colour may be obtained by grow- 
ing the j)lauts entirely in good heath mould. This may be 
done by potting young-rooted cuttings in that soil, or by re- 
moving all the soil from old plants, and repotting them with 
heath mould. The blue colour is generally obtained in the first 
season, to a certainty in the second, and w ill continue as long as 
that soil is used. It would be an interesting subject for inves- 
tigation to ascertain how the colour is changed by the use of 
heath mould, as it does not appear to have the same efiect upon 
other plants. As the Hydrangea is hardy the change may be 
produced by planting them out amongst the American plants. 
Various ingredients have been added to common soil to effect 
the same purpose ; these we intend to notice in a future number. 

127 Artichokes, to improve. Running small pieces of lath, or 
splinters of any wood through the flower stems, within 4 in. of 
the flower oi head, at right angles to the stem, and keeping the 
wound open, retards the opening of the flower, and makes the 
head nearly double the ordinary size.” This is a German prac- 
tice, and seems to operate, like ringing trees, by impeding the 
return of the sap, and so stagnating it in the head. 

128 Roses, CULTURE of. In a well-arranged catalogue of Roses 
byT. Rivers, jun. of Sawbridgeworth, are some useful observa- 
tions on this universally admired genus. As a few of the ideas 
are original, we shall give them further publicity. He says, “I 
still think, that, in unfavourable soils, Roses require being re- 
moved, and their roots trimmed every third or fourth year. In 
cold clayey soils, the best compost for them is rotten manure and 
pit sand; in warm dry soils, cool loam in lieu of sand; annu- 
al pruning which is quite essential, should always be done in 
October, or in March ; but October pruning will be found greatly 
advantageous as the Rose will then prepare itself during the re- 
mainder of the autumn, for vigorous growth in spring. The 
families of roses are now so well defined, that each ought to 

127» Card. Mag. Vol. 11, 41. 



89 



have its department. A clump of Hybrids for their gorgeous 
colours in June and July; of Perpetuals, for their fragrance in 
the cold autumnal months ; of Noisettes, for their elegance and 
abundance of flowers ; of Scotch Roses, for their precocity and 
humble growth; in short all require sepaiate culture to have 
them in perfection; but this of course will only apply to flower 
gardens rather extensive. Climbing Roses for pillars should 
be planted in a very rich soil, as they will then put forth strong 
central branches, of eight or ten feet in length. These, when fas- 
tened to the stakes, will furnish a plentiful supply of lateral 
blooming shoots for many seasons. Climbing Roses, to cover 
a sloping bank, as their flexible branches can be pegged to the 
ground in any direction, is perhaps a new idea. Thus trained 
they will form a beautiful carpet of foliage and flowers, the dark 
crimson and white varieties blending with peculiar elegance. I 
also hope to give more zest to Rose culture, in suggesting that 
all the Perpetual, Isle de Bourbon, and Noisette Roses, from 
their vigorous habits and tendency to flower, may be made line 
objects for ornamenting the Hall, See., during the autumnal 
months. For this purpose they should be put into large pots 
and well furnished with surface manure and plenty of water in 
summer; their blossoms ought also to be cut oft' just before ex- 
pansioTi. The crimson perpetual Rose has also been forced in 
F’rance with fine effect. The pots should be plunged in the na- 
tural soil to the rims, a deep frame placed over them, and the 
heat kept up with linings of hot manure, giving air as required. 
This fine autumnal Rose when thus forced and blooming in 
March or Ai)ril is most beautiful : its too short flower stalks dre 
lengthened by this mode of culture, adding to the elegance of 
the plant. Its flowers are erect, unlike many other forced Roses, 
and lose none of their colour or fragrance. For all these pur- 
poses Roses should be “worked” on the Dog Rose stock, as its 
vigorous and easily excitable habit are quite necessary, in fact 
with the exception of the Climbing Roses (to be grown as clim- 
bers,) and a few others, this stock is the only medium by which 
many choice Roses can l)e brought to perfection. My system 
of cultivating the Tea Scented Rose, by budding on it and sliel- 
tering in winter, has succeeded admirably. 

129 Tka scented roses. Of these Mr. Rivers observes, they are 
China Roses, having a strong odour of tea, they are seminal 

'■to ADCTiRlUlI. 



90 



varieties of the blush tea scented Rose, (Rosa ludica odorata) 
and of Rosa ochroleuca, or the yellow China Rose. They are 
more delicate than the common China Roses, as to cold in Win- 
ter, and also in their flowers, as they seem to require the warm 
dewy nights of August and September to bring them to per- 
fection. In hot weather, in June and July they are very fleeting, 
as their flowers are large and of a delicate texture, soon fading 
in sunny weather. They require careful cultivation, and must 
have a raised border against a south, south-east, or west wall. 
This border should be a compost of rotten manure, or leaves, 
light loam and sand, equal parts, and raised about eighteen 
inches above the surface. When grown as low Standards, they 
are surpassingly beautiful ; but they should be taken up in No- 
vember, and their roots laid in mould, in a shed, as our sharp 
winters would injure them, so as to prevent their blooming in 
perfection if left exposed. 

130 Moss Roses. Mr. Rivers publishes a List of twenty-four va- 
rieties of Moss Roses, and says, one step further towards a dark 
crimson Moss is made in the “ Rouge de Luxembourg,” which 
is very beautiful, and a most luxuriant grower. Most of the 
varieties prefer a cool soil, though Mossy de Meaux is perhaps 
an exception, as it seems to flourish better in light dry soils. 
The White Moss unless budded on the dog Rose, (Rosa canina) 
will not in general grow well; its sickly appearance in some 
situations may be often traced to its being worked on some im- 
proper stock. If on its own roots in rich soils, it will often 
change to pale blush. All are well adapted for Standards; but 
to have them in perfection in warm dry situations, in IMarch, 
put round each stem, on the surface of the soil, the fourth of a 
barrowful of manure; on this, place flints or moss, to take of its 
unsightly appearance, and make a little ornamental mound. 
This treatment will keep the soil cool, and make them bloom 
in a most superior manner, even in situations previously thought 
to be most ungeuial to their culture. The manure should be 
spread on the surface in November, and lightly forked in. We 
should add that the List of Roses published by Messrs. Rivers 
and Son, of Sawbridgeworth, Herts, is by far the most com- 
plete and best digested which has come under our notice. The 
Roses are classed in a popular method, and the colour, form, 
and character of the flow er of each is mentioned. 



91 



131 Poisons; their Action on Vegetables. Dr. Harlan, in his 
Medical and Physical Researches, 1835, has stated the effects 
of numerous experiments which he made to ascertain the effects 
of poisons on living vegetables. As the subject is one of impor- 
tance, we copy the following interesting facts. “The applica- 
tion of certain poisons to plants and flowers, in order to destroy 
noxious insects and larvae is not unfrequently recommended; 
and doubts have been expressed as to the injury that might 
occur to the plants themselves by such treatment. It has even 
been positively asserted, that the destruction of the plant is the 
necessary consequence of the application of certain vegetable 
poisons in some instances. I have been led to the present in- 
vestigation by perusing a notice of experiments of a similar 
nature, by 31. 3Iarcaire Princep, a professor of botany at Gene- 
va, in the Bulletin des Sciences Naturelles for 3Iarch, 1830, of 
which the following is an extract : “ The experiments detailed 
in this memoir, have for their object to prove that the juices or 
extracts of plants, poisonous to animals, are equally so to the 
vegetables from which they are obtained. Thus 31. 3Iarcaire 
Princep has succeeded in killing branches, and even entire in- 
dividual plants of the datura stramonium, hyoscyamus niger, 
and momordica elaterium, by plunging them into distilled wa- 
ter, charged with the juices and extracts of these plants, or even 
by watering them with this narcotic water. 31. Goeppert of 
Breslau, has ])ub!ished in the annals of Poggendorff, an account 
of experiments from which he derived very different results.” 
But neither of these authors extended his experiments to the in- 
troduction of poisons into the substance of the plants. I first 
confined myself to a repetition of the exj)eriments of 31. Princep, 
but obtained results entirely at variance with his. I now deter- 
mined to pursue the subject on a more extensive scale. In the 
garden of the Philadelphia Alms-house Infirmary, I selected a 
number of young and thriving plants, and assisted by the gar- 
dener and several of the resident physicians, I applied the fol- 
lowing named poisons, as hereafter specified, taking care to 
wound the hark of the perennial, and the interior parts of the 
annual plants, so that the poison should be directly applied to 
the wounded sap-vessels. The poisons used were, the extracts 
of stramonium, belladonna, andcicuta; the essential oil of nico- 
liaua tabacum, diluted hydrocyanic acid, and oxydum arsenici. 

146 AUCTAlclUM. 131, Lancet, No. 665. 



92 



“ Experiment 1. September 18th. A strong thick solution 
of the extract of belladonna and cicuta, (German manufactory) 
was introduced into the bark and pith of different stems of the 
stramonium. 2. Extract of belladonna introduced into the stem 
of the palma Christi. 3. Powdered white oxyd of arsenic was 
freely spread about the root of a young palma Christi, and the 
plant was watered. 4. Arsenic introduced into the stalks of 
two young tobacco plants, near the roots. 5. Two young 
stramonium plants were selected: arsenic was introduced into 
the stalks and stems of one, and spread about the root of the 
other, and the plant watered. 6. Dilute hydrocyanic acid in- 
troduced into an incision made in the stalk of a stramonium. 

7. Dilute hodrocyanic acid poured on the root of lady-slipper. 

8. Strong oil of tobacco introduced into the stalk of palma 
Christi. 9. The same into the stalk of stramonium. 10. The 
same into the stalk of a young tobacco plant. 11. The same 
into a branch of the fig-tree. 12. The same placed freely round 
the root of a young pear-tree, the earth being loosened and wa- 
tered. 13. The same placed round the root of palma Christi. 

14. The same introduced into the stalk of euphorbia sericea. 

15. Arsenic freely spread round the root of the mimosa sensi- 
tiva — exposed to the rain and dews.” 

“ Some of these experiments were frequently repeated with 
great care. The same result universally followed in every in- 
stance. Not one plant, shrub, or flower, displayed signs of the 
least injury from the various applications of the different poi- 
sons ; some, indeed, appeared to thrive better for the attentions 
which were rendered them. Some of the experiments were sub- 
sequently repeated at my request, by Mr. John Carr,at Bartram’s 
Botanic Garden, with extracts of belladonna, and cicuta, and 
oil of tobacco. These additional experiments performed by a 
skilful practical botanist, confirmed the observations previously 
made : hence, we are permitted to conclude, first, that the ex- 
periments detailed by Professor Princep are erroneous. Sec- 
ond, that substances which act as lethal poisons to animal life, 
are not so to vegetables. We cannot but admire the wisdom, 
order, and harmony of creation ! fixed to the earth by immuta- 
ble laws, plants and flowers would have soon ceased to exist, had 
their susceptibilities, like those of animals, rendered them liable 
to the agency of poisons, to contact with which they are exposed. 



93 



Dr. Featherstonhaugh adds the following testimonial: “We 
had the satisfaction of assisting, during the present month, to- 
gether with Professor Del Rio, at a repetition of curious exper- 
iments on vegetable substances, with vegetable and mineral poi- 
sons, conducted by Dr. Harlan, assisted by Dr. Moore, in the 
garden of the Philadelphia Alms-house Infirmary. Each of 
the poisons were separately introduced into the circulation of 
individual plants, by incisions made in the stems, under the 
leaves, and by similar, sep2irate applications of them to their 
roots ; by infusions, and by powder also, in the case of arsenic. 
In some instances the poisons were placed round the roots only, 
viz. corrosive sublimate, arsenic, sp. turpentine, and oil of tobacco. 
In none of these instances was any of the plants poisoned. One 
of tlie young geraniums faded after constant impregnation, for 
three days, of the earth about its roots, but this is evidently at- 
tributable to its soil being rendered unfit for the support of veg- 
etable life. We must therefore adhere to the reasonable opinion, 
that plants have the property of segregating from the soil or 
atmosphere those principles which are proper for their healthy 
state, and of rejecting those which are injurious to their organi- 
zation. If plants yield to the deleterious influence of those 
principles which are injurious to other organized bodies, it is 
because — as in the case of the young geranium — they cannot 
appropriate those salutary principles, upon which their existence 
depends, and which enables them to excercise their natural 
functions, one of which is, to reject that which is injurious to 
,.Jbcm. We speak now of the circulation of plants, and not of 
the mechanical application of poison to their parts. Oil of tur- 
pentine applied several days to the bark of many trees, and es- 
pecially the linden tree, will soften and eventually destroy the 
part ; but the experiments tried with the balsamina, or lady- 
slipper, the palma Christi, the cabbage, and tobacco plant, 
whose roots were liberally supplied with spirits of turpentine, 
prove that it did not affect them through their circulation.” 

We do not entertain a single doubt of the correctness of Dr. 
Harlan’s statement of experiments, here set forth; but, judging 
from these alone, we cannot admit the justice of the Doctor’s 
conclusion — namely “ That the experiments detailed by Pro- 
fessor Princep are erroneous.” As far as Dr. Harlan has de- 
tailed HIS experiments they cannot be taken as a total disproof 

H7 iCCTAEIUM. 



94 



of those of Professor Princep. The one applied his poison to 
the surface of the leaves, which may be said to be the lungs of 
a plant; the other to its roots and wood. We hope that some 
of our friends will extend these interesting enquiries, and favour 
us with the result, that we may publish it for the gratification of 
our readers. 

132 Brugmansia suaveolens. It is not generally known that 
Brugmansia suaveolens, a plant very generally called Datura 
arborea, is nearly hardy, and that it flourishes, and becomes so 
magnificent a plant, in the borders, during summer. To give 
assistance and encouragement to the culture of this plant, we 
will copy a communication of Mr. Spence to the Gardener’s 
Magazine, Vol. 12, 589. “About the first of June, I turned 
the Brugmansia out of the pot, and planted it in the open bor- 
der, with its ball entire ; giving plenty of water at the time, and 
occasionally repeating it at the root, and likewise over the top. 
This, I think, it is best to do in the morning, as the plant is 
not then so liable to flag throughout the day. About a month 
after this, the roots having extended a considerable distance 
from the stem, I allowed the plant to flag a little, by withholding 
water; and then with a spade I cut all round close to the old 
ball ; but first had a quantity of rotten dung ready to be worked 
down with the spade to the bottom of the roots. After working 
in the dung, I gave the ground a good watering, in order to 
moisten the ground down to where the moisture was most wanted, 
instead of letting it remain to be dried up on the surface. In a 
week after this, the plant had made thousands of young roots, 
which found plenty of food close at home. This treatment I 
repeated twice in the season, the last time cutting the roots one 
inch farther from the ball, than the first time. This does not 
injure the plant ; on the contrary, it is surprising to see how it 
will grow immediately after the operation: and another advan- 
tage of cutting off the roots is, that the plant is easily repotted 
in the autumn; provided the diameter of the space included 
within the last cutting be a little less than the pot for which it 
is intended. By the above treatment, this plant (without inclu- 
ding the flowers that were on it in May) has, from the middle of 
August to the end of September, expanded 1050 flowers, each 
of which measures 50 square inches ; so that it has produced in 
six weeks, 52,500 square inches of flowers. The height of this 



95 



plant is six feet, its diameter ten and a half feet, and its age 
four years. We have two more, nearly as good ; and two others 
one year old, which have opened 100 flowers each. In the 
morning and evening, the fragrance of these flowers scented the 
air to the distance of 60 yards. An engraving of the Brugman- 
sia sanguinea, will shortly appear in the Botanist. 

The principle here acted upon by Mr. Spence, that of short- 
ening the roots to induce the production of laterals, or additional 
feeders, and then increasing their supply of nutritive matter, is 
one that deserves the attention of all Horticulturists. This 
principle may be applied by numerous methods, which will 
readily present themselves to the minds of practical men. Judg- 
ing of the principle, theoretically, (for we have not practical 
knowledge on the subject) we may as reasonably anticipate 
advantages to accrue, in many instances, from pruning the roots 
of a plant, as from shortening its branches. 

133 Filberts; Planting. So little attention is usually paid to 
the management of Filbert Bushes, that we think an article on 
the subject in the Auctakium may be useful to very many of 
our readers. More plain and practical directions we have not 
met with, than are given by Mr. Rogers in his Fruit Cultivator, 
a little work of real merit, — a practical guide ; to which we are 
indebted for the following instructions. The cultivation of the 
Filbert in England is but little regarded, excepting in the 
county of Kent, where hundreds of acres testify that it forms a 
prominent branch of rural economy. The most favourable 
land for a plantation seems to be a light loam on a dry gravelly 
subsoil ; with proper attention, however, the Filbert will succeed 
on almost any soil or situation. It should be observed that too 
rich a soil is not favourable to its productiveness ; hence it is 
not requisite that manure be supplied to the ground in which 
it is planted. Winter, or very early in spring, is the season for 
making plantations. “ The young plants which are chosen by 
the Maidstone growers are such as have been raised from layers, 
and which have been lined or bedded out in the nursery for two 
or three years. The plantations in Kent are either in single 
rows, or in entire quarters or fields. The plants are put in at 
eight or ten feet distances, more or less, according to the quality 
of the soil. Six hundred and eighty plants are required for an 
acre, at eight feet distances every way ; at ten feet distances, 

148 ACCTiBlDM. 



96 



four hundred and thirty-five ; and at twelve feet distances, three 
hundred and two trees will be required.” 

134 Filberts; Early pruning. “It may be matter of wonder, 
but so it happens, that the generality of gardeners know little 
or nothing about pruning Filbert Trees. The art has never been 
studied either by masters or men ; and it is remarkable, that 
this branch of the pruner’s art should have been brought to 
perfection by the untaught, unlettered Kentish peasant — with- 
out books — without master, save experience — without mistress, 
save Nature herself! It is curious too, that this art has been 
engrossed by the labourers in the central parts of the county, 
and without its being followed in other parts of the kingdom. 
The principle of the Kentish primers appears to be this : to 
check and control the natural grow th, and thereby bring forth 
the fruit-bearing principle in greater force and energy. After 
training the tree to a dw arfed habit, they allow it to expend its 
strength in no other way than in the production of flowers and 
fruit. The Filbert is naturally only a shrub, or small tree, and 
the cultivator makes it still less, for his convenience in pruning 
and gathering the fruit. That style of pruning which is found 
the best for the currant, is also the best for the Filbert. Each 
plant should have one strong upright shoot, of not less than 
three feet in height, this being necessary in order to the future 
form of the head ; and this, early in the spring, after the trees 
have been put out in their final stations, is cut down to about 
eighteen inches from the ground. This height w ill admit of a 
'clear stem of twelve inches below, and which part must be at 
first and ever afterwards kept free from shoots, as well as suckers 
from the root. This deprivation of shoots and suckers will 
cause the buds left at the top to push with greater vigour. If 
eight strong shoots be produced in the first summer, they must 
be carefully preserved, as that number is required to form the 
head ; but if less than this number come forth, then two or three 
of the strongest (or the whole if necessary) must be shortened 
back to half their length at the next pruning, in order to obtain 
the requisite number. The sufficient number of branches being- 
obtained, if not in the first, certainly after the second pruning, 
they are to be carefully preserved and trained outwards and 
upwards ; at first nearly horizontal, but curving gradually up- 
ward at the point. The easiest mode of doing this is by using 



97 



a hoop of the proper size placed within the shoots, and to which 
the latter are tied in star-like order, and at equal twelve-inch 
distances. Such a laterally curving position may be much 
assisted and caused by a careful primer, always cutting at an 
outside bud, which, when grown sufficiently far outwards, natu- 
rally turn up to form the permanent branches. The points of 
the branches are allowed to rise to the height of six feet, but 
never higher; and the middle of the tree is always kept free 
from shoots and branches, so that a well-trained head resembles 
a large bowl.” 

135 Filberts; Productive pruning. “The subsequent ma- 
nagement of the trees, both while gaining the desired form, and 
after having gained it, consists in preserving all the short spurs 
which will be produced on the branches, and cutting away or 
shortening the laterals which every year rise from the same. 
The management of these laterals is of great consequence. If 
they exceed the length of six inches, they may he cut back to a 
few buds ; but if less, they should be preserved, as their points 
iue generally fruitful. The grand object with the primer is to 
have the branches thickly beset w ith fruitful spurs, and which 
are only reduced in length, when, after a few years’ growth, 
they become too distant from the branch, when they are cut 
back to a healthy spur behind. If any part of the branch be- 
comes accidentally naked, a strong shoot from the bottom may 
be led up, and managed so as to fill up the vacancy. When 
Filbert Trees are thus managed, and have arrived at their full 
volume in width and height, they may be kept in the same state 
for many years — say twenty or thirty — l>y the knife only, and 
with the requisite skill in using it. The practical example 
set us by the Maidstone jnuners confirms two very essential 
principles in the art of gardening, viz. that by counteracting the 
natural tendencies of a plant, it may be dw arfed, and by thus 
dwarfing, making it more fruitful. The Filbert Tree is so con- 
stituted, that it is ever extending itself by throwing up a multi- 
plicity of suckers, which exhaust the bearing branches and 
render them sterile ; but denying the plant its tendency to in- 
crease itself by suckers, promotes its energy to increase itself 
by seeds.” 

13G Plants, Slips, and Flowers to revive. Most persons 
have heard of Camphor water as a stimulant to faded plants 

149 ADCTAKIUM. 



98 



and flowers, but as we have not registered the method of using 
it, we will now do so. The directions of M. de Droste are to 
“dissolve camphor to saturation in alcohol, adding the former 
until it remains solid at the bottom of the latter; a sufficient 
quantity of rain or river water is then to have the alcoholic so- 
lution added to it, in the proportion of four drops to one ounce 
of w ater. As the camphor comes in contact with the water, it 
will form a thin solid film, which is to be well beaten up with 
the water: for a short time the camphor will float in the water 
in small flocculi, but will ultimately combine with the fluid and 
disappear. Plants which have been removed from the earth, 
and have suffered by a journey or otherwise, should be plunged 
into this camphorated water, so that they may be entirely co- 
vered : in about two, or at most three hours, the contracted 
leaves will expand again; the young faded and dependent shoots 
w ill erect themselves, and the dried bark will become smooth 
and full. That being effected, the plant is to be placed in good 
earth, copiously watered with rain or river water, and protected 
from the too powerful action of the sun, until the roots have 
taken good hold of the ground. AVhen large plants, as trees, 
are to be revived, their roots are to be plunged into the cam- 
phorated water for three hours ; the trunk and even the head 
of the tree being frequently wetted with the same water, so as 
to retain them in a properly moistened state. But it is always 
best, if possible, to immerse the whole of the plant. Shoots, 
sprigs, slips, and roots, are to be treated in a similar manner. 
If plants thus treated are not restored in four hours, their death 
may be considered as certain, for they cannot be recalled to life 
by any artificial means. They should, consequently, never be 
left more than four hours in the camphorated bath ; because 
the exciting action of the camphor, when it is continued for a 
longer period, may injure the plants, instead of doing good to 
them. It is not necessary to say that the final prosperity of 
the plants, thus re-animated by the camphorated water, must 
depend upon the particular properties of the former, the state 
of their roots, and the pains that are taken with them. The 
camphor produces no other effect than to restore life to plants 
nearly dead : after that, all proceeds according to the ordinary 
laws, and their ultimate state must be left to art and nature.” 
It should not be forgotten that a hand-glass placed over faded 



99 



seedlings, or other young plants which have been removed, will 
assist greatly in recovering them and making them strike root 
afresh. We may add, that dowers in nosegays will continue 
much longer in beauty, if the water in which they are kept be 
changed daily; and at each change a small piece of the lower 
end of the stem, which has rested in the water, be cut off. 

137 Electricity, its influence on Vegetation. Mr. Pine, 
of Maidstone, in a letter on this interesting subject, inserted in 
No. 692 of the Mechanics’ Magazine, says, “We have endea- 
voured to trace a relation between the structure and functions 
of plants, and the properties of the surrounding elements, fa- 
vouring the conclusion that electricity is the grand agent by 
which the several processes of vegetation are carried forward. 
Air, water, and solar light, have respectively been viewed as 
conveying electric influence to the vegetable kingdom. The 
predominant influence of each of these elements appears to take 
place in the order just mentioned ; and the dry winds of March, 
the copious rains of April, and bright sunshine of May, appear 
to exhibit this succession Hi a general view, while the mingled 
and varying states of the weather show the almost continual 
necessity of their mingled operation in different degrees. It 
may here be observed by the way, that whereas the vital j)rin- 
ciple in animals is maintained by means of a portion of the 
atmosphere which is uniformly siip|)lied at all seasons, and is 
administered to all the more jieifect kinds in the exact propor- 
tion which is requisite to jireserve the uniformity of their heat 
and vitality; that of vegetables depending on the vicissitudes 
of the seasons, and even on the variations of the weather, is 
subject to the like vicissitudes and variations. To me it ap- 
pears, that in reality they both depend upon the same subtile 
fluid as emanating from the sun ; but whereas, plants derive it 
in an uncombined state from the floating winds, the condensing 
vapours, and the direct rays of the sun ; animals imbibe it by 
means of the peculiar organisation of the lungs in those more 
copious and uniform supplies which their more elevated nature 
requires, by a chemical decomposition of oxygen in those or- 
gans. But this important branch of inquiry cannot be pursued 
in this place. I now wish to offer a few remarks on the pro- 
gress of vegetation under the influence of the several elements. 
1st. The electric influence of the air in producing the first ex- 

150 AUCTABICM. 136, Qrly. Jl. of Science, N. 8. 1, 499. 



100 



citement and spring of vegetation, appears to depend much on 
the partial absence of its influences under the forms of conden- 
sing vapour, and of solar light ; as these, by employing the elec- 
tric fluid in the processes of gftrwth and maturation, would di- 
rect large quantities of it from that which is all-essential in the 
first instance. Hence, our March commences with a total desti- 
tution of leaves in all the more foliagenous species of trees, while 
the annuals among herbs have disappeared. The only vegeta- 
tive remains of these respective kinds are contained in the buds 
protruding from the trees, and the seeds which lie concealed in 
the soil. Thus a large proportion of those rays, which, as the 
season advances, are employed in the two subsequent processes 
of vegetation, are reserved to impart electricity to the air, as the 
instrument of producing the first excitement in the yet closed 
germs. As a farther preparation, — during the winter, now- at 
its termination, the vapours exhaled into the atmosphere in the 
preceding summer are gradually condensed, and conveyed into 
the earth in the forms of rain, snow, and hail, by which means 
that extraordinary dryness, which distinguishes the early spring, 
and is remarked by agriculturists for its salutary effects, is in 
part produced; and in part, probably, by the rarifying influ- 
ence of the increasing rays, causing the lower strata of our cli- 
mate to ascend and give place to the denser and yet drier air 
rushing in from regions into which fewer vapours had been ex- 
haled, and from which they had been more completely remo- 
ved by a more condensing temperature. These w inds are, more- 
over, of use in removing all particles of moisture, together with 
other impurities from the exterior of plants, and from the surface 
of the soil ; so that nothing may be left to be acted upon by the 
electric influence, but the buds, seeds, and emerging shoots. 
When the winds have sufficiently performed their office of des- 
siccation, that of vegetative excitement and germination seems 
speedily to commence. The glancing rays of the early season 
of the year are evidently more favourable to their accumulation 
in the atmosphere than the more direct rays of the advancing 
season; and from this cause in conjunction with those above 
stated, a much larger proportion of them will be lodged in the 
air, or resting upon it, reaching to some distance upward, than 
at a later season. The electric matter accumulating in the 
higher strata, will propel it downward, and probably at once 



101 



force a portion of it into the earth, and cause a partial state of 
negation of it upon its surface; which being followed by a 
powerful rush upward, as the temperature and rarefaction of the 
contiguous air increases, must give a great impulse to the seeds 
and shoots, and act as the immediate cause of germination. As 
the first incitement to the seeds contained in the soil may thus 
be produced, so that of the buds of trees must be greatly pro- 
moted by the electricity of the rushing winds. That the elec- 
tricity is much more intense during the cold dry winds of ^larch, 
in a clear atmosphere, than at any other season, I have been 
assured by Mr. Sturgeon to be the result of his numerous ex- 
periments, in conformity with the few observations which I have 
made. It may be worth while, however, to observe, that the 
conclusion had presented itself from the above considerations 
previously to his favouring me with this information ; so that 
theory and experiment have in this respect coincided, without 
the one being biassed by the other. That a negative state of 
the seed and the soil in which it is deposited, in respect to the 
atmosphere, is peculiarly favourable to germination, while it is 
much promoted by electricity in general, appears from the fol- 
lowing experiment. I sowed some mustard seed on the 20th 
of April in similar soils, one electrified positively, a second 
negatively, and a third in its ordinary state. In four days the 
electrified plants appeared, but those negatively electrified were 
the most advanced ; those not electrified did not appear till two 
days later. On the 12th of 3Iay the plants in a negative state 
had grown to 2} inches; those in a positive state to 2t inches; 
those not electrified to IJ inches; the electrified plants were 
strong and flourishing in proportion. I am here induced to 
recite the particulars which I received from a medical electri- 
cian, of which a general mention has been made. A narcissus 
plant which was in a verj’ languishing state, being placed in the 
room in which his powerful electric machine was kept in fre- 
quent action, soon began to exhibit signs of extraordinary vi- 
gour. It grew to the height of thirty-six inches, and was stout 
and luxuriant in proportion. Some branches of the moss rose 
and various other flowers placed in water on the mantle of his 
room, retained their colours while the seeds were forming, during 
five weeks, and at last dropped off" witliout assuming a withered 
appearance. A turk’s-cap lily drooped during several hours of 

151 AUCTiBICM. 



102 



the night when the action of the machine was suspended, but 
resumed its vigour, and again stood erect under its renewed 
action. These particulars, on the general correctness of which 
I have every reason to rely, are admirably illustrative of the 
principle, that a relative state of negation in the source of vege- 
tation from beneath, as compared with the positive state of the 
atmosphere, though without any absolute addition to the quan- 
tity of electric matter, is a most material requisite to its origin 
and progress. The general high temperature of the room no 
doubt aided considerably in the process. I lately observed, 
that whereas sprigs of plants inserted in water, from which the 
carbonic acid has been expelled by boiling, appear to perish 
nearly as rapidly as if they had been destitute of moisture: when 
the water is impregnated with an additional quantity of this 
gas they retain their vigour. It appears, therefore, highly pro- 
bable that this gas is essential, or greatly conducive, to the rise 
of the sap, in consequence of the affinity of its oxygen with the 
positive electricity of the atmosphere, while its carbon is sepa- 
rated from it and deposited in the leaf, or conveyed into tlie 
substance of the plant. The electricity of the air, as distin- 
guished from that of vapours and of solar light, has chiefly 
occupied the above remarks. My endeavour has been to show 
that the solar fluid is economised in it, to the exclusion, in a 
great degree, of the action of vapours and of the direct rays of 
light upon the shooting and expanding leaf, for the purpose of 
imparting the first excitement to the germ. The process of 
nutrition, in connection with an increased supply of electric 
matter, as the principle of vitality now becomes indispensable, 
and is accordingly administered in abundance. 

133 Flies to exclude from Houses. It seems to have been 
known to the ancients that the common House Fly (Musca 
domestica) may be deterred from entering apartments simply 
by extending a network of white thread before the openings of 
the room. The Italians sometimes adopt this plan, and for 
fruit houses, or even for wall trees, it may probably be of essen- 
tial sendee. It is further stated in the Transactions of the 
Entomological Society, I, p. 4, that “ if small nails be fixed all 
round the window frame, at the distance of about an inch from 
each other, and threads be then stretched across both vertically 
and horizontally, the apparatus will be equally effectual in ex- 



103 



eluding the flies;” but that “the light should enter the room 
on one side of it only ; for if there be a thorough light, either 
from an opposite or side window, the flies pass through the net 
without scruple.” 

139 Olive Tree. Olea Eukop^a. Few vegetables have been so 
repeatedly noticed and enthusiastically described by the ancient 
writers as the olive tree. In all ages it seems to have been 
adopted as the emblem of benignity and peace. It is frequently 
mentioned in the Bible : the ancient Greeks were well acquaint- 
ed with it; and several products of it were employed in medi- 
cine by Hippocrates. Pliny is most diffuse in his account of it. 
Notwithstanding that the olive is now so common in the 
southern parts of Europe, it is supposed by many to have been 
derived from Asia. Pliny tells us on the authority of Fenestella, 
that there were no olive trees in Italy, Spain, and Africa, in the 
reign of Tarquinius Priscus, in the 173rd year from the founda- 
tion of the city of Rome. The Phoenicians are said to have in- 
troduced the olive tree into France 680 years before Christ. It 
is a tree which grows slowly, and may live for centuries ; indeed 
there are some plantations of it in Italy which are supposed to 
have existed in the time of Pliny. Its ordinary height is from 
twenty to thirty feet. The wood is hard and is employed in 
cabinet-work. The leaves stand in pairs on short petioles ; they 
are lanceolate acute, on the upper side of a dark green, on the 
under, whitish. Countries like Provence and Languedoc, where 
the olive is extensively cultivated, have a dull and monotonous 
appearance, from the whitish character of the foliage. Mr. 
Sharpe in the 48th letter from Italy, says he was wretchedly dis- 
appointed to find the hue of this tree resembling our hedges when 
covered with dust. The flowers are small and white ; they form 
axillary compound racemes. The fruit is an ellijitical dark 
bluish ^een drupe, which incloses a very hard kernel (pyrena) 
in which there is usually only one ovule, the others having become 
abortive. The products of this species necessary to be noticed 
are the following. 

140 Products of the Olive Tree. Resin. The older writers 
speak of anexudationfromolive trees, and which Dioscorides de- 
scribes as thetearsof the ^ihiopic olive. In modern times it has 
been improperly termed olive gum. It was formerly employed in 
medicine. Olive Leaves. The leaves of the olive tree have 

152 AUCTARIUM. 139, lo 14*:, .Medical Gazette, fol. 20, p. 375. 



104 



been analysed by Pallas, who, among other products, found tan- 
nin and gallic acid. They have been employed externally, as 
astringents and antiseptics ; internally, as tonics in intermittents. 
Fruit. The preserved olives which are so admired as a dessert, 
are the green unripe fruit deprived of part of their bitterness by 
soaking them in water, and then preserved in an aromatised 
solution of salt. Several varieties are met with in commerce, 
but the most common is the small French, and the large Span- 
ish olive. Olives a la picholine have been soaked in a solution 
of lime or alkali. Oil. The olive is certainly remarkable as 
a fiuit, from the circumstance of its sarcocarp abounding in a 
bland, fixed oil, which is readily obtained by expression. The 
process for curing it is somewhat modified in different countries, 
but its principle is in all essentially the same. 

141 Prep-vratiox of Olive Oil. In Spain the olives are pres- 
sed by conical iron rollers, elevated above the stage or floor, 
round which they move on two little margins to prevent the ker- 
nel being injured, the oil from which is said to have an unplea- 
sant flavour. Spanish olive oil, however, is inferior to other 
kinds, from the circumstance of the time which elapses between 
the gathering and the grinding of the olives. This arises from 
the number of mills not being in proportion to the quantity of 
fruit to be ground; so that the olives are placed in heaps to 
wait their turn, and in consequence often undergo decomposi- 
tion. An excellent account of the manufacture of French olive 
oil is given by Duhamel du Monceau, in his “ Traite des Arbres 
Fruitiers.” The finest oil is procured by bruising the fruit in 
the mill immediately they are gathered, and then submitting the 
paste to pressure. The first product has a greenish tint, and is 
termed virgin oil. The cake or marc is removed from the press, 
broken up with the hand, moistened with boiling water, and re- 
pressed. The products are water, and oil of a second quality ; 
these separate by standing. The cake which is left is termed 
grignon, and is employed by some as fuel ; others, however, fer- 
ment it, and by the aid of boiling water obtain a very inferior 
oil, called gorgon, which is employed either for soap-making or 
burning in lamps. With the view of increasing the quantity of 
oil, some persons allow the olives to undergo incipient fermenta- 
tion, which breaks dow n the parenchyma of the fruit before they 
are pressed ; but the quality of the oil is thereby injured. Gui- 



105 



beurt tells us that it is a yellow^ mild, agreeable oil, and is much 
used for the table. Recently-drawn olive oil deposits by stand- 
ing, a white fibrous matter, which the ancients employed in med- 
icine under the name of amurca. In commerce we meet with 
several varieties of olive oil of unequal quality. A very fine 
kind (Florence oil) is brought from Florence in flasks, which 
are surrounded by a kind of net-work formed by the leaves of a 
monocotyledonous plant, and packed in what are called in com- 
merce half chests. Lucca oil is imported in jars, holding nine- 
teen gallons each. We have, besides, Gallipoli, Sicily, and 
Spanish oil : they are of inferior quality. According to Sieuve, 
100 lbs. of olives yield about 32 lbs. of oil ; 21 of which come 
from the pericarp, 4 from the seed, and 7 from the woody mat- 
ter of the nut. That obtained from the pericarp is of the finest 
quality. Olive oil is an unctuous fluid, of a yellow or greenish 
yellow colour, having little or no odour, and a mild taste. It is 
lighter than water ; readily dissolves in aether, but is very slightly 
soluble only in alcohol. With alkalies if forms soaps. The 
Castile soap employed in medicine is made with this oil and so- 
da: it is essentially a mixture of oleate and margarate of soda. 
Olive oil combines with the oxyde of lead to form the well known 
emplastrum plumbi or eleomargarate of lead. By exposure to 
air this oil readily becomes rancid. 

142 Adulteration of Olive Oil. Olive oil is said to be some- 
times adulterated with poppy oil, though I believe such an oc- 
currence to be rare in this country. Four methods, however, 
have been proposed for detecting the fraud ; and as they have 
reference to some characteristic properties of olive oil, they de- 
serve notice. The first is the beading : if we shake pure olive 
oil in a phial half filled with it, the surface of the oil soon becomes 
smooth by re|)ose ; whereas when poppy oil is present, a num- 
ber of air bubbles (or beads, as they are termed) remain. The 
second method is by congelation, — olive oil more readily con- 
gealing than poppy oil. The third method is that founded on 
the conducting power of the oil for electricity, and effected by 
an instrument called an electrical diagometer. This consists of 
one of Zamboni’s dry piles and a feebly magnetized needle mov- 
ing freely on a pivot. The electricity develoj)ed by the pile is 
made to produce a deviation in the direction of the needle; but 
when any substance is interposed between the needle and the 

153 ACCTARICM 



106 



pile, the deviation is less in proportion to the bad conducting 
power of the interposed substance. Now the conducting power 
of olive oil is, according to Rosseau, 675 times worse than other 
vegetable oils ; but the addition of two drops of poppy or beech 
nut oil to 154/^ grains of olive oil is sufficient to quadruple the 
conducting power of the latter. The fourth method is by nitrate 
of mercury. If recently made nitrate of mercury (prepared by 
dissolving six parts of mercury in 7’5 parts of nitric acid, sp. gr. 
1’36) be mixed with twelve times its weight of pure olive oil, and 
the mixture strongly agitated, the whole mass becomes solid in 
the course of a few hours. With poppy or other oils, the nitrate 
of mercury does not form a solid compound, and therefore when 
they are mixed with olive oil, we judge of their presence and 
quantity by the degree and quickness of the solidification of the 
suspected oil. I have already discussed the theory of the pro- 
cess. In this country the employment of olive oil for the table 
is limited, when we compare it with the extensive and important 
uses made of it in some other more southern countries. Thus in 
Spain it is consumed as a substitute for butter. 

143 Insects, destruction of. At the last meeting of the Horti- 
cultural Society, a communication was read from Air. IngTam, 
of Southampton, on a simple an efficacious method of destroy- 
ing the red spider, green fly, thrip, and scale, and other insects 
obnoxious to vegetation, without any injury to the plant. It 
consisted merely in placing the plants within a frame well closed, 
and putting between the pots laurel leaves well bruised. After 
remaining in this state for about an hour it will be found that 
all the two former insects are destroyed, and the plants must 
then be removed to a warm place, but a long exposure to the 
vapour of the leaves for about eight hours is found necessary 
for the removal of the thrip and scale. For a house, 20 feet 
long by 12 feet wide, two bushels of leaves are found sufficient, 
which may be bruised inside ; the roof and sides are to be kept 
close with matting, and the night time is considered best for the 
purpose of the experiment The effects are to be attributed to 
the hydrocyanic acid evolved from the leaves, which agrees with 
a recommendation made by Mr. Waterhouse, at a late meeting 
of the Entomological Society, for the destruction of insects in 
the canvas of pictures or wood of the frames, and in old books, 
&c., similar to the plan he employs in destroying insects in spe- 

143, Athenaeum, No. 510. 



107 



cimens of natural history. It consists in introducing a few drops 
of prussic acid into a box closed as tightly as possible, and pla- 
cing therein the infested article, when the destruction of insects 
will be very quick, as will be seen from their falling down to 
the bottom of the box, which has sometimes been quite covered 
with them, although a small quantity only of the acid has been 
employed. 

144 Truffle, observations on. Although the edible Truffle 
(Tuber cibarium) is indigenous to several parts of England, it 
is very little known; and the tables of the opulent are usually 
supplied with it, somtimes at an exorbitant price, from the con- 
tinent. It is universally admitted to be far superior to the 
mushroom, or other of the fungi; notwithstanding this, we be- 
lieve that no successful attempt to cultivate it in England has 
been made, a circumstance which should stimulate gardeners 
to surmount the difficulty, if any really exist. The Germans 
have preceded us in their attention to this subject, and two of 
their works have been lately translated by F. Mascall, Esq. 
From these 3Ir. Loudon has given a long article in his Gard- 
ener’s jMagazine, to which we are indebted for the following con- 
cise extracts. 3Iuch is said on the subject of training dogs, 
and even |)igs to discover the truffle in its native habitat, but 
our more immediate object is to invite attention to its culture 
in situations where it may be collected without such aid. With 
connoisseurs the Truffle is said to be in higher estimation than 
the pine-apple amongst ffnit, or the oyster amongst bivalves, 
therefore it may be presumed that persons who possess favour- 
able situations for their growth will gladly avail themselves of 
instructions for their culture, either to enhance the })leasures of 
the table or as a source of profit. 

145 Truffle; a description of. It is of a round form, more 
or less approaching to that of a sphere, or of an egg, or some- 
times kidney-shaped, and somewhat rough with protuberances. 
The colour of the surface is, when it is young, whitish; but in 
those that are full grown, it is either blackish or a deep black. 
The colour of the inside is whitish, with dark blue and white, 
grey, reddish, light brown, or dark brown veins, of the thickness 
of a horse-hair, which are usually variously entangled, and 
which form a kind of net-work, or mat. Between the veins are 
numerous cavities, filled with a great deal of mucilage and small 

AUCTAKIU3I 



108 



solid grains. These scarcely visible glands were formerly said 
to be the seeds or germs of the young Truffles. The less the 
inside of the truffle is coloured by dark veins, the more tender 
and delicious is its flesh, The blackish external rind is hard, 
and very rough, by means of fine fissures, grains, and protuber- 
ances; and forms, with its small facets, which are almost hex- 
agonal, an appearance by which it somewhat resembles the fir- 
apples of the larch. Whilst the Truffle is young, its smell re- 
sembles that of putrid plants, or of moist vegetable earth. 
When it first approaches the point of time at which it has at- 
tained its full growth, it diffuses an agreeable smell which is 
peculiar to it, resembling that of musk, but which lasts only a 
few days; it then becomes stronger, and the nearer the fungus 
is to its death and its dissolution, which speedily ensues, so 
much the more unpleasant is its smell. Whilst young, the flesh 
is watery, and its taste is insipid: when fully formed, its firm 
flesh, which is like the kernel of the almond and the nut, has 
an extremely aromatic and delicious taste; but as soon as the 
fungus begins to decay, and worms and putrescence to attack 
it, its taste is bitter and disagreeable. Wherever Truffles are 
produced, there they are to be found the whole year through, 
from the beginning of spring till late in autumn; but in the 
greatest plenty from towards the end of the month of August to 
the latter end of October. They thrive extremely, like all fun- 
gi, in warm moist autumns, and are then most delicious. After 
warm continuing showers, they are found nearer the surface of 
the soil, sometimes so high that they form little hemispherical 
mounds of earth, in which small clefts are produced by the 
sun’s rays. If the soil is loose, and dry weather succeeds, the 
earth which was raised up falls down, and the Truffle is seen 
half-uncovered. Nevertheless, these Truffles are of small value, 
as they are generally either dead or worm eaten. The favourite 
habitat of Truffles is a somewhat moist light wood-soil, which is 
defended from the immediate effect of the burning rays of the 
sun by large oak trees, standing at a distance from each other, 
but is not deprived, by thick bushes, of the free access of cur- 
rents of air. Where, in woods, there are places bare of timber 
trees, and with but few bushes, or covered with pollarded wood 
that does not stand thick, they tlirive under an oak, beech, 
whitethorn, and even under a fruit tree, and sometimes attain 



109 



the weight of from a pound to a pound and a half : this unusual 
size, however, is only met with in moist warm grounds. Here 
they lie nearer the surface of the soil. The drier the soil is, the 
deeper they are produced in it ; but are usually so much the 
smaller : to this the vicinity of springs is the sole exception. 

146 Truffle, Cultivation of. Upon the first production of the 
Truffle its size is scarcely perceivable ; as it proceeds in its 
growth, the earth that is around it is pressed together and jnished 
off. On this account the Truffle can prosper in none but a loose 
soil. If the soil is everywhere equally loose, the Truffle as- 
sumes a globular form ; but this is changed if there is on one 
side a greater opposition than on the other ; as, for instance, by 
a root or a stone. Hence the different forms of the tubers may 
be explained. Where the soil is most moist, whether above or 
under the Truffle, there it will either rise up or sink deeper. 
In laying out Truffle beds a distinction must be made between 
wood land and garden land. The former needs not much jue- 
))aration, and promises a surer profit than garden land, with 
which must be artificially mixed those species of earth that, in 
the former, have for several years been accumulated by nature. 
He, therefore, who can take for new Truffle beds wood land, es- 
pecially that which for centuries has produced the above men- 
tioned trees, spares both time and expense. But whether the 
'J’niffle plantation be made in a wood or a garden, the first re- 
(piisite is a somewhat moist soil in a low situation. The ground 
itself, however, must not contain any sharp or sour component 
parts, but must be mellow and fertile. Least of all are adap- 
ted to the purpose, situations in the neighbourhood of morasses 
or turf moors ; and especially those low situations the subsoil 
of which is full of saline or sour matter. This is easily known 
by the reeds, horsetail, (Equisetum,) coarse kinds of grass, and 
mosses, wliich grow upon their surface, and, whether green or 
dry, are rejected by cattle and sheep, or only eaten by them 
from excessive hunger. He who has no such mellow soil, in a 
depressed situation, upon his j)roperty, may most easily form 
it by art in the neighbourhood of springs, or at the foot of a 
rising ground ; but the first plantation is thereby proportionally 
rendered more expensive. The ground designed for the culti- 
vation of Truffles must, in the first place, be dug out from four 
feet to five feet deep, and be lined at the bottom, and on the 

155 ADCTABIUM 



110 



sides with a stratum of clay or very fat loam of a foot thick, 
that the spring water which is conducted to it may not strain 
through and run off. If the subsoil be loam or clay, the thick- 
ness of the stratum of clay to be placed upon it may be dimin- 
ished ; but, if it be a dry sand, it must be more than a foot 
thick. This artificial depression is then filled with earth artifi- 
cially prepared, and now the spring, or small brook is turned 
upon it. Truffles certainly require a moist soil, but they can- 
not endure boggy ground or standing water ; a ditch, must, 
therefore, be cut to carry away all su|)erfluous water. This 
ditch is either opened or shut accordingly as a superfluity or 
want of water renders necessary. But if, in very hot dry sum- 
mers, the supply of water should itself fail, the Truffle beds 
must be sufficiently moistened with pure river water. This is 
the expedient to which recourse must be had in dry situations, 
that neither possess a spring, nor a small brook for watering a 
plantation of Truffles. Since only small beds, and not large 
fields, are taken for the cultivation of Truffles, the greatest care 
may be taken in the preparatory steps, the expense of which will 
however, never be so considerable as to be much felt by the 
landed proprietor. A calcareous or chalky marl forms the 
groundwork of all artificial mixtures of soils for the cultivation 
of the Truffle. When this is to be had in the neighbourhood, it 
is mixed with the fourth part of iron sandstone. If this marl 
be not in the environs, then finely-beaten calcareous stone or 
beaten chalk must supply its place : to this must be added from 
the fourth to the third part of ferruginous sand, and the whole 
mixed together as uniformly as possible. With this artifi- 
cial calcareous marl the Truffle bed (which has been dug out 
from two and a half feet to three feet deep) is filled up a 
foot high, in the place of the natural earth. It is advantage- 
ous when the pit, which is dug out for that purpose, before it is 
filled with the new soil, is lined on the sides and bottom with 
unburnt calcareous stone. By this means not only will mice, 
and several kinds of worms, be prevented from establishing 
themselves in the new Truffle beds, and preparing to destroy 
the young germs of the Truffles, but sudden heavy rains will 
be prevented from occasioning an injurious mixture of the dif- 
ferent kinds of earth. Where calcai'eous stone is not to be had, 
sandstone may be used instead of it, especially if it contains 



Ill 



iron ; or, at all events, either other natural stones, or artificial 
ones, made by the hands of men, may be made use of. The 
bottom of the pit must not, however, be paved so as to be water 
tight, in order that the water may sink into the subsoil, and not 
cause an injurious bog, instead of the moist depression that is 
intended. If, when the pit is dug out, a compact soil is met 
with, for example, a loamy bottom, the paving of the bottom of 
the pit is superfluous: it would obstruct the binding of the un- 
der strata with the new-laid bottom of the truflle plantation. It 
sometimes haj>pens, that, in digging out the pit, a bed of clay 
is met with, which is impervious to water. In such a case, it is 
better to leave the place and choose another, than instead of rais- 
ing Truffles, only to make a small bog. All tlie above prepa- 
rations are necessary for wood lands, and for plantations in large 
gardens and English shrubberies; but the further filling up of 
the pit is different for each place. In woods the soil contains 
much vegetable matter; but that is not enough, especially w'hen 
an artificial mixture of earths is undertaken. In order to ob- 
tain a very nutritious vegetable earth, let pure cow dung be 
carried into heaps in the spring, and left to fall into earth in 
the course of the summer. That is best which is collected as 
fresh as possible on pastures and commons. That it may not 
lose its nutritious matter through drought and heat, the heaps 
must be made in a shady place, be turned from time to time, 
and, in dry weather be often moistened. In autumn when the 
leaves fall from the trees, a I'ourth or fifth [>art of this earth is 
to be added to the natural wood soil ; and of fallen oak leaves, 
or, if these are not to be had, of fallen hornbeam leaves, as 
much in bulk as half the mixture amounts to : the whole must 
then be carefully mixed together. The pit is to be completely 
filled with the mixture, which is to be covered with a layer of 
oak leaves, of from four inches to six inches thick. A wood 
soil, with much vegetable earth from oak trees, requires a 
smaller addition of oak leaves, than a soil that contains less of 
It. The pit, when filled, is to be covered over with a thick layer 
of leaves, the scattering of which may be prevented by some 
earth taken from the mixture being spread over them, or by 
small branches of oak being laid upon them, and secured by 
stones. Such a cover of leaves is of great service to the plant- 
ing of Truffles; since by the moisture of the winter the most 



156 AUCTAUICM. 



112 



efficacious matter is extracted (rom it, and communicated to the 
soil beneath. For this reason, a new cover must be laid upon 
it every autumn. Early in the following spring, the uppermost 
layer being exhausted by the air, is to be taken away; but the 
under and moist one lightly dug in, or, which is still better, ra- 
ked flat, lest tbe tender germs of the Truffles should be injured 
or destroyed ; but when the Truffle plantation is first made, the 
whole cover must be deeply dug down. Every j)revious pre- 
paration is thus made for the cultivation of Truffles. We now 
come to the mode of causing them to be produced. Since they 
are neither sown, nor, like animals, propagated by eggs and 
young ones, the only thing that remains for us to do is, to cause 
the soil to produce Truffles. If Truffles are to be transplanted 
from one situation to another, and to be promoted to be the an- 
cestors of their species, the greatest precautions must be taken 
lest they die on tlie journey, and become useless. This is the 
greatest difficulty to be encountered in the planting of Truffles, 
and thus the plantation may easily fail. Truffles, at their full 
growth, must not be chosen for transplanting: at that time their 
vital powers are too feeble ; they are then too near dying to 
cause the production of their species in their new situation. 
They are as little able to bear the violent removal from their 
ancient situation, and transplantation into a new one, as an old 
tree. Equally injurious is the planting of tender Truffle germs 
or very small Truffles. These also cannot be taken from their 
parental earth, and abandoned to their new situation, without 
being exposed to the hazard of dying. Let, therefore. Truffles 
of a middle size, and in the full possession of their vital pow ers 
be chosen for transplanting. They should be taken up on a 
showery day, or at least a cloudy one, in such a manner as that 
they may remain completely enveloped in a ball of earth, and 
be as little as possible exposed to the access of the air. If the 
earth is very loose, so as not to hold firmly together; or if, 
through previous drought, it had lost its natural viscidity, which 
it has not fully recovered again through the last rain ; the place 
where the Truffles are must have a great deal of water poured 
over it a few hours before they are taken up. The fungi then 
will be easily taken up, together with the earth about them, and 
put into a wooden case, which must be filled with moist wood 
earth, from the place of growth of the Truffles, and closely fas- 



113 



tened down. Truffles may thus be sent many miles, without 
any danger of their perishing. Only upon long journeys, which 
last several days and weeks, the case must often be opened, for 
an hour at a time, and the earth from time to time be moistened 
with fresh river water, that the Truffles may not Irecome mouldy 
and putrid. When the Truffles have reached their appointed 
destination, the case must be immediately opened in an airy 
but shady place, and the earth moistened, if necessary ; after 
which, they must be planted as soon as possible in the situ- 
ation intended for them. It is not advisable to distribute the 
Truffles over the whole of the bed; it is better to plant them 
upon a small part of it. As, upon a newly-made bed, the mat- 
ter in the earth has not taken the direction necessary to the 
production of this species of fungus, it is easily conceivable 
that a single Truffle cannot act sufficiently to produce this di- 
rection, but that the united power of several is recpiisite. In 
the earlier attempts, it was, indeed, expected from a single fun- 
gus, or even born jrieces cut off, that they should exert this 
power u])on the new soil ; but the expectation was continually 
frustrated. According to the nature of the soil, whether more 
or less moist, the Truffles are set from two inches to four inches 
or at the most, six inches deep. The soil in which they are 
enveloped in their journey is left upon them, and the utmost 
efforts are made to |)revent their being exposed to the access of 
the air, or even to that of the sun’s rays. On this account, the 
planting of them must take place only in the evening, when the 
sun is gone down, or in very cloudy weather. Holes of the 
depth required must be made !)eforehand, the bottoms of w hich 
must be strewed with soil out of the case; then each Truffle 
must be carefully lifted up, with the soil that is about it, j)lanted, 
and the soil that still remains in the case be distributed in the 
holes. If the holes are not filled with this, they must be filled 
with the soil of their new situation, which must be moistened 
with repeated sprinklings of water. The new jilantation must 
then be amply covered w ith twigs cut from the oak or hornbeam ; 
and the soil must be planted with young trees of these kinds, 
not crowded, but at such a distance as to give sufficient shade, 
so as to prevent the land from being dried up. 

The best time for transplanting Truffles is towards the middle 
of spring, and in the beginning of autumn, about which latter 

li7 AOCTARIOM. 



114 



season the greatest number of half-grown Truffles is to be found. 
About this time, the land is usually moist enough of itself, so 
that it is not necessary to water it to prevent its being dried 
up. But, in case it should be dry from great drought, it must 
assuredly be moistened in this manner ; in doing which, the wa- 
ter, nevertheless, must not be poured on in streams, as the ger- 
minating brood would thereby be easily choked, or entirely de- 
stroyed. It has already been observed, that, in the succeeding 
autumn, the new plantation should be covered with a layer of 
oak leaves. The plantation thus remains undisturbed till the 
next autumn, only that it is to be freed from large plants that 
shade it too much, and exhaust all the strength of the soil ; but 
small fine grasses must be suffered to remain, as they give the 
ground beneficial shade, and prevent too great exhalation. In 
general, at least in the first years, let endeavours be made to 
imitate the wood soil as much as possible, in order to obtain 
the sooner a rich return of Truffles. In the first year, the 
Truffles will be little increased. These fungi have, as yet, too 
little strength to act powerfully upon the environs, and to com- 
pel them to bring forth a large number of tubers. If the plan- 
tations have been made in the spring, there will be found in the 
next autumn some few young Trufiles, about the size of a nut, 
with a yellowish outer rind, and of a spongy consistence; an 
indication that they must remain a longer time to attain their 
ripeness, and along with it, their firm consistence and dark co- 
lour. In the mean time, these young Truffles are the most cer- 
tain indication that the plantation has succeeded, and that a 
well-furnished Truffle bed will be obtained in the sequel. 

By the preceding observations, it will be seen that the old 
black vegetable soil of woods must be obtained or imitated, as 
a compost to favour the growth of Trufiles ; that the situation 
should be moderately shaded from the summer sun by trees, 
and a regular moisture maintained, without approaching the 
quality of a marsh. An old Wood or Forest, or well estab- 
lished Shrubbery will generally afford a better situation for 
Truffle beds than a garden. A small open space in either of 
these, partially shaded by any trees excepting firs, and posses- 
sing the qualifications previously mentioned, should if possi- 
ble, be chosen. The best manure to stimulate the growth, 
and yield a fine flavour, according to the authority we have 



115 



followed, is that from oak leaves, lightly forked in when decayed, 
and also applied as a winter covering leaving them till April, 
when they will be partially rotted and fit for that purpose. In 
all cases like the present, where experience has not produced 
definite rules for the guidance of the young cultivator, he must 
study nature. The usual places of growth of any plant should 
he regarded in respect to quality of soil, moisture, shade, as- 
pect, &c. and by imitating these in cultivation success may be 
rendered almost certain. It will be requisite to remember that 
pigs, foxes, squirrels, and mice, are enemies Ifom which Truffles 
must be defended. 

147 Fuschias. When in the open ground they should be cut down 
in October or November, and covered over with tan; or in the 
absence of this, with leaves, straw, or sand. IMany persons, 
thinking that part of their stems may survive the winter and 
assist the spring growth, suffer them to remain ; but it should 
be known that such stems, unless they can be completely pro- 
tected as in a greenhouse, will, in their gradual decay, act as 
S()onges on the roots, and exhaust their strength. Should the 
])lants have been neglected till frosts have partially destroyed 
their stems, it will, even then, be desirable to treat them as 
above described. 

148 Leaves, Withered. As with the stems of the Fuschia so it 
is with withering leaves. In their decay, they absorb, and as- 
sist in evaporating, the sap of the ])lant, without performing 
any useful office in return. Therefore, when leaves of any 
shrubby plant begin to wither, take them off immediately. We 
have seen orange trees, which have been removed at an unsea- 
sonable period, with their leaves drooping and partly withered. 
Some of these trees, by way of experiment, were entirely stripped 
of such leaves. These threw out young foliage and soon reco- 
vered ; whilst those on which the w ithered leaves continued till 
they fell off naturally, recovered with difficulty, and evidently 
suffered more than those which had a contrary treatment. It 
must not be forgotten that it is prejudicial to the course of na- 
ture to destroy the foliage of a healthy plant ; but here it was 
the choice of two evils — the destruction of the foliage, or fhe 
continuance of it when worse than useless. 

149 I.N'SECTS AND Laurel Leaves. Under Section 143 we gave 
an account of a method of destroying insects, by inclosing 

ADCTAKIUM. 



116 



the infested plants in frames, ^uth bruised laurel leaves. 
By an article contained in the Gardener’s fllagazine, it appears 
that j)lants also may he injured by the same treatment, and 
that precaution in the use of such recipe is indispensihle. From 
the latter work,Vol. 13, p. ooO, we copy the following commu- 
nication. “ Having read in the Gardener’s Magazine, an ac- 
count of a method of destroying insects that infest plants, taken 
from a paper read before the Horticultural Society, I was indu- 
ced to give it a trial, as the means stated were so simple. I ac- 
cordingly procured a quantity of laurel leaves; and, having well 
bruised them, s|)iead them in the evening on the floor of a small 
stove. On the following day, at noon, I was surprised to see 
all the young leaves of some vines under the rafters appear as 
though scorched ; and, upon further examination, I found many 
ol' the stove plants affected in the same manner : the euphor- 
bias, in a few days, lost nearly all their leaves ; and the gesne- 
rias, gloxinias, &c., though they did not lose their leaves, yet 
presented a very unsightly appearance. I immediately conclu- 
ded that this was caused by the odour of the laurel leaves, and 
instantly swept them all out of the house ; but, to be sure of the 
matter, I took a plant of pelargonium and placed it under a 
hand-glass with a quantity of the bruised laurel leaves, and on 
the following morning it presented precisely the same appear- 
anee as the plants in the stove ; which satisfied me of the inju- 
rious effects of the laurel leaves on vegetation, though, at the 
same time, they were incapable of destroying the mealy bug, 
which was the insect I was chiefly annoyed with. I send you 
this account, that you may, if you think fit, publish it as a con- 
tradiction to the assertion, that the odour of laurel leaves will 
not injure ])lants, and thus prevent other gardeners from falling 
into the same error that I have done.” 

F50 Rhouodendroxs, WITHOUT PEAT. It may not be Uninterest- 
ing to many of our readers to know that it is not absolutely 
indispensible to the successful growth of the Rhododendron, 
that it be planted in peat soil. Shade seems to be of greater 
importance to it than peat. In many situations, having shade, 
a northern aspect, a moist subsoil, contiguity to water, or other 
similar advantage, this plant may be seen growing luxuriantly 
without any portion of peat applied to its roots. On the other 
hand, after proj>er care has been taken to provide peat soil for 



117 



planting in^ and all due attention paid to the removal of this 
magnificent shrub into situations, exposed, dry, and open to the 
full effects of the sun, we rarely, if ever, have seen it grow with 
that vigour which could be considered satisfactory. One in- 
stance apparently at variance with this opinion occurs to our re- 
collection, but here its success we found dependent on a moist 
red sand-stone rock two feet only beneath the surface. In con- 
sidering what description of earth,independently of peat, is best 
suited for the Rhododendron, we recommend alight sandy loam; 
and this may be improved by the admixture of decayed leaves, 
or other vegetable matter. Young plants may now be purchas- 
ed at a very reasonable price from any nurseryman, otherwise 
their propagation from seed is quite easy; and particularly de- 
sirable on account of the variation in tint and character of the 
plants so raised, the more especially if seeds be preserved from 
plants which have flowered near to other species. If care be 
taken to fertilize the flowers of one species with the pollen of 
another, (see Botanic Garden, No. 26’i) hybrids may of course 
be expected, many of which may now be met with of the most 
splendid character. 

lol Chemical CHANGES IN Veget.vbles. Very few subjects offer 
a greater degree of interest to the enquiring mind than the 
chemical changes continually going on in vegetal)le substances. 
All matter is composed of very few simple elements. Its vari- 
able character is produced by the varying proportions of these 
elements. The woody fibre of vegetables consists of Carbon, 
51.43, Oxygen 42.73, Hydrogen 5.82. An hundred parts of 
sugar is compounded of carbon 42.85, and 57.15 parts of Oxy- 
gen and Hydrogen in the proportions which constitute w ater. 
Hence the elements of sugar are nearly the same as water, with 
the addition of carbon. Wood is also composed of the same ele- 
ments, with a larger proportional of Hydrogen. TJiis subject 
has been introduced more immediately to our notice by Mr. 
Everitt, in a lecture before the Medico-Botanical Society which 
was reported in the Lancet, No. 753, from which we copy the 
following: “Mr. Everitt delivered a lecture on a peculiar class 
of chemical changes brought about in compound bodies, more 
particularly in organic compounds, merely by the jiresence of cer- 
tain agents, where these agents do not enter into combination with 
the substance acted on, either as a whole, or yield to them any 

IW AOCTAEIUM. 



118 



part of their constituents ; they appear to us as far as our ob- 
servations and their changes go, to act only by their presence. 
The instances which Mr. Everitt cited in illustration of this class 
of phenomena, were the conversion of starch into sugar, merely 
by its being boiled for a few hours with water slightly acidula- 
ted with sulphuric acid, which acid, after it has effected the mo- 
dification, is found in a perfectly uncombined and unaltered 
state, and can be removed by chalk, the sugar being then left 
alone in solution. A similar action is effected by the same 
agent on the fibres of wood or lignin ; thus if linen be cut into 
very small pieces, and oil of vitriol dropped on little by litlte, 
carefully stirring the whole to prevent the temperature rising, 
afterward rubbing the mass in a mortar, it soon loses its fibrous 
character and becomes homogenous, and cpiite soluble in water, 
from which if we remove the acid by chalk and evaporate to 
dryness, we obtain a substance exactly similar to gum arabic. 
If, previously to removing the acid, the solution be kept at 212 
degrees, or the boiling point of heat, for thirty or forty hours, 
and then the acid be removed as before, in lieu of gum we have 
sugar, like that obtained from the starch. Here, as in the other 
case, no part of the acid has disa]ipeared or been destroyed. 
Another instance is the conversion of sugar, when dissolved in 
water and the solution kept at a certain temperature, into alco- 
hol and carbonic acid, by the presence of a little ferment or 
some few other matters. The conversion of alcohol into ether 
and water has been proved to be a similar case, it having been 
shewn that a definite quantity of sulphuric acid, properly dilu- 
ted with water, and the process managed in a peculiar way, was 
capable of etherifying any indefinite quantity of alcohol.” 

152 Garden Walls. We have, previously, had occasion to men- 
tion, in terms of commendation the straight-forward directions 
contained in a little work — Rogers’s Fruit Cultivator. From 
this we copy the following observations, “ Garden walls are 
usually built higher or lower, according to the size of the gar- 
den itself. From eight to ten feet from the offset at the bot- 
tom, to the underside of the coping, is height enough for a 
garden containing from two to four acres. Garden walls have 
been built on arches, for the purpose of allowing the roots of 
the trees to extend themselves in all directions; but this can 
answer no good purpose, because their is quite scope enough 



119 



for the roots of a wall tree in the border in front, without invit- 
ing them into the border behind. Arched walls are only ne- 
cessary for the front walls of vineries or peach-houses. For the 
safety of the walls, they should be built with piers or pilasters 
behind, twenty or thirty feet apart, and projecting four inches 
from the face of the wall. Low walls are much more conveni- 
ent in the management of the trees, than those requiring ladders 
to perform the necessary business ; and all fruit trees extended 
horizontally are for the most part much more fertile, and cer- 
tainly easier defended and under more control than if trained 
upright, and high up out of reach : so that two walls of six 
feet in height, with trees planted at good distances from each 
other, will yield during any term of years, much more fruit 
than one wall of twelve feet in height. True it is, we often see 
pears or vines trained to a great height on buildings; but the 
value of the fruit is (supposing the trees are fruitful) much les- 
sened, when the great trouble and danger of dressing the trees 
is taken into account. Besides high walls are by no means ne- 
cessary for the crops of either a fruit or kitchen garden. A free 
ventilation is necessary at all times The effects of high winds 
are much less to be dreaded than those of foul, stagnated air, 
pent up all round by lofty walls. 

The advantages of walls for the protection and ripening of 
exotic fruit, need not be insisted on. Their reflection of the 
sun’s light, and retention of his heat throughout the greater 
j)ortion of the night, are the favouring circumstances which 
forward as well as <lefend the tender trees; and at the same 
time, the branches being all securely fastened, and trained in 
any form to the wall, renders them safe from the violence of 
storm or tempest. Walls ol' a moderate height, however, are 
preferable to over-lofty ones, more especially if the upper part 
of them be naked. )\Iany of our best fruits are naturally dwarf- 
ish, and we take pains to make them more so. How ridiculous 
then it is, to see such dwarfed trees planted against a wall of treble 
their full-grown height. For the convenient culture of dwarf 
fruit trees, low walls are sometimes built across gardens of suffi- 
cient extent. These are usually nine-inch work, with pilasters 
of fourteen-inch work, at about sixteen feet distances behind. 
The height need not be more than six feet, and on which great 
quantities of fruit may be produced both in front and on the back ; 

160 ACCT^KICM. 



120 



these are particularly convenient for matting up currants or other 
fruits required to be kept on the trees alter the regular season. 

The best form of a garden is a square, or long square, with 
the angles rounded. The centre ol' the northward wall is the 
])lace for hothouses, if any be built. The borders, for wall fruit, 
should not be less than twelve feet wide; and if the bottom be 
liard and dry (and if not it should be first made so), a depth of 
eighteen inches of good fresh soil w ill be sufficient I'or any kind 
of tree. These borders should never be cropped with rank- 
growing vegetables ; nor ever dug deeply, but w ith a blunt-tined 
fork. In dry summer weather, the surface of these borders 
should be kept moderately moist, by inulcbing and occasional 
waterings; and lre(juent!y sprinkled with soot, to deter insects 
from nestling in the ground or on the trees. There have been, 
in former times, many fanciful ideas entertained respecting the 
best directions or lines in which garden walls should be built. 
Some projectors advised, that they should be built in a zigzag 
form, to obtain a greater variety of aspect, by means of which 
they expected the fruit season would be prolonged. Others 
embracing the same principle, advised the garden wall to be 
built circular; in order to meet the direct rays of the sun in 
every hour of the day. Others again advised the south walls 
to be built straight, but with (at short intervals) segments of 
circles bowing backwards, to form recesses for every tree. All 
this was contrived with a view to obtain a greater variety of the 
effects of light, or greater shelter from the withering winds of 
March. These notions, however, are all now forgotten ; expe- 
rience proving, that these fantastically built walls created so 
many eddies and sudden gusts of wind, that, instead of genial 
warmth and quiet shelter, they caused cold and bleakness. Hot 
walls, that is, walls heated by internal smoke flues, have been 
extensively built in the North of England and Scotland; but 
without some other covering over the trees, to keep in the heat 
and protect the excited dowers from sudden changes of weather, 
the trees seldom bear an earlier crop than those on the common 
walls. Such structures are therefore not so much in fashion as 
formerly, as a very little more additional expense will build a 
proper forcing house that may be dej)ended upon. For the per- 
fectly ripening of late French pears, hot walls have been often 
found useful ; but for which purpose alone, they are seldom built. 



121 



153 Soda as a Manure. It has been oftentimes stated that Soda 
imparts a very beneficial effect as a stimulant to vegetation. We 
cannot refer to any specific authority for proof of the assertion, 
probability, however, is in its favour, and the experiment may 
be made with very little trouble and expense. If Soda be not 
generally advantageous it may be so under certain circumstances, 
therefore it is desirable tliat it should have a fair trial, the more 
especially as it is remarkably cheap, being worth at the maker’s 
works, but ten or twelve shillings per cwt. The method of 
using it is to dissolve one pound in fourteen gallons of water, 
and apply the solution to the plants as common water. 

154 Rosa Indica odorata. Culture. The Messrs. Rivers and 
Son, Nurserymen, of Sawbridgeworth, Herts, are directing their 
particular attention to Roses, and we doubt not, as well as 
advantageous to themselves, their exertions will prove very gra- 
tifying to Rose growers generally. IMr. T. Rivers, jun. has is- 
sued gratis, a classified catalogue of nearly .900 Roses, each 
one named, described, and priced. He has also published 
a further description with directions for their culture, entitled 
“The Rose Amateur’s Guide,” founded, as he says, on “The 
result of twenty years’ experience, gained by the culture of 
choice Roses on a much larger scale than any where in Europe.” 
As a specimen of the information which it contains we copy 
from it, (page 76) the following directions for cultivating the 
Rosa Indica odorata, commonly called the sweet-scented, or tea- 
scented China Rose. “ As these interesting Roses require more 
care in their culture than any yet described, I will endeavour to 
give the most explicit directions I am able, so as to ensure at 
least a chance of success. One most essential rule must be 
observed in all moist soils and situations; when grown on their 
own roots they must have a raised border in some warm and 
sheltered place. This may be made with flints or pieces of rock 
in the shape of a detached rock border, ora four-inch cemented 
brick wall, one foot or eighteen inches high, may be built on 
the southern front of a wall, thick hedge or wooden fence, at a 
distance so as to allow the border to be two feet w ide ; the earth 
of this border must be removed to eighteen inches in depth, nine 
inches filled up with pieces of bricks, tiles, stones, or lime rub- 
bish; on this place a layer of compost, half loam or garden 
mould, and half rotten manure well mixed, to which add some 

lOl AUCTABICJI. 



122 



river or white pit sand : this layer of mould ought to be a foot 
thick or more, so as to allow for its settling: the plants may be 
planted about two feet apeirt. In severe frosty weather, in the 
dead of winter, (you need not begin till December,) protect 
them with green furze or whin branches, or any kind of light 
spray that will admit the air and. yet keep off the violence of 
severe frost. I have found the branches of furze the best of 
all protectors. With this treatment they will seldom receive 
any injury from our severest winters, and they will bloom in 
great perfection all summer. This is the culture they require 
if grown as low dwarfs on their own roots; but perhaps the 
most eligible mode for the amateur is to grow them budded or 
grafted on low stems of the Dog Rose, or Blush Boursault, 
which seems, if possible, even a more congenial stock; they 
may be then arranged in the beds of any flower garden, and 
graduated in height so as to form a bank of foliage and flowers. 
Grafted or budded plants, when established, will in general 
brave our severest winters ; but still it will be most prudent in 
November either to remove them to some warm shed, and lay 
their roots in damp mould, or to reduce their heads, and give 
each plant an oiled paper cap. This is a mode practised in the 
north of Italy, with great success, to protect their tender roses 
and other plants ; and though paper caps may not be thought 
objects of ornament on an English lawn, yet the method will 
be found very eligible in many cases. In March those that 
have been laid in the shed for protection, may be removed to 
the flower borders, pruning off all superfluous and dead shoots; 
they will bloom the following summer in great perfection, and 
in general surpass those that have been suffered to remain in 
the ground without protection. Some of the varieties are 
much more robust and vigorous than others, and equally beau- 
tiful as those of more delicate habits; it will therefore be 
scarcely worth while to grow any but what are of known hard- 
ihood and vigour. I have pointed out some of these in my 
notices, but time can only make a knowledge of their habits 
more perfect. Worked plants of Tea-scented Roses force very 
well: they do not require to be established one year in pots, for 
if only potted in October or November, and forced with a gen- 
tle heat, in January and February they will bloom finely; in 
March and April the extreme beauty of their foliage and flowers 



12 :} 



will amply repay the attention given to them, as they have a 
peculiar softness and delicacy of appearance when forced and 
growing luxuriantly.” 

loo Grasses for Lawns. In many situations it is difficult to 
obtain good turf to lay on lawns or grass-plots, we, therefore, 
now give directions for forming it from grass seeds, a practice 
which is rarely pursued, although a very efficient means of ob- 
taining the end required. It may be regretted that so little 
attention has been paid to this subject by the agriculturist. 
Dutch clover {Trifolium repens), Trefoil [Medicago Ivpu- 
Hna), Rye grass {Lolium perenne), Cocksfoot grass {Dactylis 
glomerata), and a few others of the coarser species are all that 
have generally been thought of by the farmer, as necessary to 
produce a permanent pasture; and an early spring crop of 
bents from the Rye-grass has oftentimes been seen to be the 
chief produce of the best soil. The error of such plan is best 
shown by an examination of the produce of those pastures 
which we would desire to imitate. The late George Sinclair, 
under the direction and support of his Grace the Duke of Bed- 
ford, instituted various enquiries and experiments, regarding 
the nutrition, culture, and value to the agriculturist, of the 
grasses, usually found in English pastures, the results of which 
he published under the title of Ilortus Grarnineus Woburnen- 
sis, a work that deserves to be more generally known. In his 
examination of the herbage of various old pastures he discov- 
ered from twelve to twenty distinct species of grass in a single 
square foot; it is therefore evident that to obtain a good turf, 
without waiting for its natural production, we must sow the 
requisite variety of seeds. Although we had not intended to 
enter so generally into this subject, we will, as it is one of im- 
portance, annex a list of the grass seeds and their proportions, 
recommended by Sinclair, to be sown together, to form a per- 
manent pasture, and afterwards select those species which are 
best calculated for our own immediate purpose — the clothing 
of Lawns. 

Tlic proportions in which the seeds of the different species should be mixed 
for perinnnent pasture ; — 

Cock’s-foot grass ( Dactylis glomerata) 8 pecks. 

Meadow-fescue [Festuca pratensis) 8 

Meadow foxtail-grass {Alopecurus pratensis) 8 

16i AOCTAEICM. 



124 



Rough-stalked meadow grass {Poa trivialis) 8 pecks. 

Tall oat-like soft-grass, {Holcus avenaceus) 2 

Meadow cat’s-tail {Phleum pratense) 15 lbs. 

Hard or smooth fescue (T’eitMcadMriM5CM/a or g/aira) 8 pecks. 

Crested dog’s-tail {Cynosurus c.ristatiis) 4 

Nerved meadow-grass (Poa weruata) 2 

Wood meadow-grass (Poa nemoralis) 4 

Narrow-leaved meadow-grass (Poa anguxtijblia) 1 

Broad-leaved creeping bent, or fiorin {Agrostis sto- 

lonifera, \ar. latifolia) 

Rye- grass {Lolium 2 }erenne) 4 

White or Dutch clover {Trifolium repens) 15 lbs. 

Bush vetch (Vida sepium) 2 pecks. 

Sweet-scented verual grass (Anthoxanthum odoratum) 1 

Perennial red clover {Trifolium pratense perenne) 12 lbs. 

Yarrow, {Achillea millefolium,) 4 

It appears that seeds mixed in the above proportions, and 
sowed, one bushel on an acre, would yield only about two 
seeds to every srpiare inch, whilst on the most fertile pastures 
seven plants are found within the same space. The propriety, 
however, of sowing three bushels and a half on an acre, which 
would be equal to seven seeds to an inch may be much ques- 
tioned. Half this quantity would suffice to produce such a 
crop as would shed its seed in the second year, and supply an 
ample stock of young plants ; and it may be presumed that 
those species would prove the most fertile to which the soil was 
most congenial, whereby seeds of unsuitable species would not 
be unprofitably spent. The method of sowing is given by Sin- 
clair as follows: — 

“ I have sown the seeds of the same grasses in every month 
of the year, January excepted : and though much depends on 
the weather and the state of the ground, the results were always 
in favour of the month of September and the beginning of Au- 
gust ; and, next to that, the middle or latter end of May, accor- 
ding as the weather was dry. The seeds vegetated, and grew 
with most vigour under the following circumstances ; when the 
ground had been deeply stirred, broken very fine, and made 
])erfectly smooth and compact on the surface, with a heavy rol- 
ler, previous to sowing the seeds; the ground in a dry state, at 
the time of sowing, the seeds sown on this fine, dry, compact 




125 



surface : the larger seeds not more than just covered, by draw- 
ing a fine rake on the level surface, and afterwards sowing the 
small seeds and covering them no farther than w hat was effected 
by a repetition of the roller. The results further shewed, that, 
next to a course, inconsolidated, or loose surface, the practice 
of deep sowing was, in the second degree, more injurious to the 
vegetation of the seeds and the first progress of the plants, than 
any other error that could be made in the manual part of the 
])rocess of sowing the natural grasses on a soil of good quality. 
When land is to be sown for permanent pasture, no admixture 
of any annual or grain crop, or broad-leaved clover, should be 
admitted with the grass seeds. Experience proves that they 
are highly injurious to the intention of speedily forming a solid 
j)roductive sward ; and that the profit that may accrue from a 
grain crop thus obtained, will be much overbalanced by the loss 
of grass in the two following seasons. Every plant of these 
annual crops occupies a place, to the detriment of the expected 
sward ; besides rendering the surface porous by the decay of 
their roots in the end of autumn, much mischief, likewise, is 
done to the sward by portions of the crops being beat down 
with heavy rains. The above mixture should be sown in the 
autumn or spring, at the rate of four bushels and a half to the 
acre; much less will form a good pasture, but when the seeds 
can be had from the farm at a moderate expense, the maximum 
quantity should be adopted. *f sown in spring it will be found 
highly useful, in the following autumn, to give the surface a 
slight top-dressing with rotten manure or compost, in which the 
seeds or roots of weeds are not suspected, and to sow immedi- 
ately after half a bushel, more or less, of the mixture of seeds, 
according as the sward appears to be deficient of plants ; after 
which, (the top-dressing being previously well reduced by a 
slight bush-harrow,) the roller should be liberally used; and 
rolling for the first two years, should never be neglected at any 
favourable opportunity. If the seeds are sown in autumn, the 
top-dressing, resowing, and rolling, will be found equally re- 
quisite and beneficial in the following month of May ; and even 
if repeated in the following autumn, they will greatly forward 
the intention. This is imitating the process of nature in form- 
ing pastures, — with this advantage, that for one seed of a valu- 
able species of grass supplied to the soil by the slow and gradual 

163 ADCTAEIDM. 



126 



process of nature, in one season, a thousand are supplied in the 
same space of time; and thus take possession of their natural 
soil, without the danger and inconvenience of expelling its 
usurpers. 

There has been some difference of opinion respecting the man- 
ner of reaping the produce of seedling grasses ; whether by de- 
pasturing witli sheep, or by mowing after the plants have per- 
fected their seed. The manure supplied by sheep to the young 
grasses is of great advantage ; but the animals are apt to bite too 
close to die root, and sometimes tear up the young plants alto- 
gether. I have found, on repeated trials, that cropping seedling 
grasses before they had produced flowers, had the effect of 
retarding and weakening the after-growth of the plants for that 
season very much. But after the period of flowering:, cropping 
was found to strengthen, and rather encourage the growth of 
plants. In the same way I found that old plants of grass, when 
cut very close after the first shoots of the spring made their 
appearance, afforded about one-third less weight of produce in 
the whole season than those plants of the same species which 
were left uncut till the flowering culms began to appear. As 
the advantages of the manure of the sheep may be supplied by 
top-dressing, and the disadvantages resulting to the tender seed- 
ling plants from early and close cropping cannot so speedily 
be removed, the practice of suffering the grasses to produce 
flowers before they are cut, w ith the application of top-dressings, 
and the use of the roller, till the spring of the second year, ap- 
pears to be far more profitable than the former practice of depas- 
turing the seedling grasses at an earlier period than the spring 
of the second year. But in this, no doubt, as well as in other 
particular modes of management recommended for general prac- 
tice in the culture of plants, local circumstances may interfere 
so much as often to render some modification of them necessarj\” 
Having given the general principles to be regarded in the 
production of a permanent turf, we shall now give a list of those 
species of grass, &c. which are proper for Lawns, that is, such 
as will produce a close and fine surface. As well as for forming 
a close and permanent turf, these grasses will be found admira- 
bly adapted for repairing bare and injured places in shrubberies 
and pleasure grounds, arising from shade ; but in the greatest 
part of such situations they will require to be sown annually. 



127 



which cannot be done in a more suitable month than April, 
when the earth can be properly prepared for the reception of 
the seeds, and the young herbage will r|uickly effect the pur- 
pose intended. 



LIST OF GRASSES, SUITABLE FOR LAWNS. 
Agrostis canina. Festuca diiriuscula. 



Agrostis vulgaris. 
Alopecurus pratensis. 
Anthoxanthum odoratum. 
Avena flavescens. 

Briza media. 

Cynosurus cristatus. 



Festuca ovina. 

Festuca rubra. 

Lolium perenne, (narrow-lvd.) 
Phleum pratense. 

Poa pratensis. 

Trifolium minus 



Having been led into the present subject farther than we 
first intended, we have endeavoured to obtain every sort of 
information which may be likely to facilitate the ready attain- 
ment of permanent pastures by those who desire to practice 
the method we advocate. In a communication with which 
we have been favoured by IMessrs. Cormack, Son, ^nd Com- 
pany, of New Cross Nursery, Kent, (in which firm the late 
George Sinclair before-mentioned, was a partner) we are in- 
formed that they sup[)ly grass seeds, mixed of fifteen or six- 
teen species, duly proportioned according to the nature of the 
soil on which they are to be sown. The quantity recommended 
is from three bushels to three bushels and a half per acre ; the 
price thirteen shillings and sixpence per bushel, for pasture 
seeds ; and the finer sorts, for Lawns, eighteen shillings per 
bushel. 



156 Strawberry, annual planting of. It has long been the 
practice of some horticulturists to break up their Strawberry 
beds after gathering the first year’s produce, and consequently 
of planting fresh beds annually. The recommendation of this 
mode of culture to general adoption may require to be some- 
what qualified; still, we believe, that in light rich soils, with due 
attention, more abundant crops, and finer fruit, can be produced 
by this than by any other method of cultivation. Strong soils, 
in which the Strawberry is not unfrequently grown with great 
success, in beds of many years’ standing, will require due ame- 
lioration before they can be expected to afford all the advan- 
tages consequent on annual planting. This arises simply from 
the young plants requiring more time to become well-established 

iw aoctabidm. 



128 



and to develope their full powers, in stiff than in light and well 
pulverized earth. For their attainment of requisite strength, in 
one season, they are much dependent on the months of August 
and September; therefore a stiff and unyielding soil, with 
dry weather, would certainly prevent the growth so indispen- 
sable. We have been led to these considerations by the prac- 
tice of a philosophical horticulturist, Mr. Darke of Birmingham, 
as explained in a Lecture delivered by him before the Birming- 
ham Society for the Promotion of Floral and Horticultural 
Knowledge. Mr. Darke’s mode of proceeding meets the diffi- 
culty arising out of soils which we have noticed, by first estab- 
lishing his plants in a prepared compost, and we entertain no 
doubt but the practice of his method will generally be crowned 
with complete success. 3Tr. Darke observed that “The portion of 
the plant which yielded fruit was confined to the offsets or run- 
ners of the preceding year, and from thenceforth they were 
nearly barren. Having observed that runners ceased to be pro- 
duced about the month of September, it followed that the prin- 
cipal part of the sap was deposited subsequent to that time ; and 
since the produce of the following year wholly depended upon 
the deposition of a sufficient quantity to render the blossom buds 
productive, he concluded that if any means could be adopted to 
prolong the time naturally assigned for that purpose, in the same 
proportion would be insured a superior crop of fruit. The ex- 
periment he made was with the Downton Strawberry. As soon 
as the runners had produced roots about half an inch in length, 
and previous to their penetrating the soil, he cut off a quantity, 
leaving on each side of the roots about four inches of the run- 
ner. Having prepared a nursery bed, by throwing out the soil 
to the depth of six inches, and trodden the bottom very hard, to 
prevent the young fibres from penetrating, he then mixed the 
loose soil with a quantity of light half-decomposed stable man- 
ure, which he returned into the bed, raking the whole smoothly 
over, and dividing the surface into drills, six inches assunder 
and one inch deep. He then took the young plant and placing 
a finger upon each end of the runner left thereto, he pressed it 
down in the form of an arch, the plant being on the top, and 
resting on the surface of the soil ; the portions of the runner 
left on each side thus held it firmly, and as appeared to him, 
materially forwarded its growth and strength, by supplying it 



129 



with the moisture absorbed from the soil. When the wliole bed 
was thus planted, it was well watered ; and as the weather was 
very dry, a mat was thrown over it for a few days, to exclude 
the heat of the sun. Under this management the plants soon 
established themselves, and increased rapidly; the roots having 
in about ten weeks penetrated the soil in all directions. About 
the latter end of August, or early in September, he formed the 
bed for their final situation, in an open, exposed part of the 
garden. This he made eighteen inches w ide, and having thrown 
out the soil to the depth of twelve inches, he filled up the trench 
with well-decomposed manure, mixing it up with the soil at the 
bottom of the trench to the depth of another foot. The surface 
was then reduced to a proper height, on which the plants were 
placed, having, in order that their roots might sustain no injury 
in removing them from the nursery' bed, divided the soil into 
cubes with a spade, each having a plant in the centre of its up- 
|)er surface, which were placed twelve inches distant from each 
othe'". He then ])laced a portion of the soil tlrat had been mixed 
with manure round the plants, which were afterwards watered, 
and nothing further was done to them till the following spring, 
when the bed was cleaned by hand weeding, to prevent injury 
to the roots by the use of either hoe, or rake ; and in the course 
of the spring they w ere twice w ell supplied w ith liquid manure. 
.About this period, to his great surprise, instead of one scape 
from each plant being produced, as he had anticipated, none 
threw up less than three, and the average number was five, all 
sufficiently strong to support the fruit above the foliage. Hav- 
ing previously observed, that after the first seven or eight blos- 
soms on each scape had set their fruit, the remaining ones were 
so small as to be nearly useless, he cut off all the blossoms ex- 
cept this number. Thus managed, the fruit all assumed the 
cockscomb shape, and were unusually large and of a delicious 
flavour. Plants, which, for experiment, were left to bear a 
second crop, produced numerous weak offsets, but little fruit, 
and that of an ordinary quality. 

IMr. Darke’s method, here stated, is, we doubt not, excellent. 
We have, ourselves, for several years, practised annual jdant- 
ing of Strawberries, and generally, with complete success. If 
however, the months of July and August prove very dry, par- 
ticular attention will be required to watering and encouraging 

W ADCTAalOM. 



130 



ihe rooting and gi’owth of the runners, both before and after 
they are separated from the old plants. Various means may 
be employed to effect this, such as hooking down the runners 
at the first joint, or placing stones on them ; but of all methods 
which we have tried, and which comes near to Mr. Darke’s, 
that of sinking small pots in the sides of old beds and then 
fixing the joint of a runner in each, is the most efficient; be- 
cause the plants may be turned out of the pots, as soon as well 
rooted, with their balls of earth entire, without the least check 
being given to their growth. 

New beds should be prepared by double digging, and well 
pulverizing the earth ; and whatever manure is applied should 
be thoroughly broken and mixed with it. The width of the 
beds is matter of fancy. We prefer beds having two rows of 
plants only, and these rows only from a foot to eighteen inches 
asunder, with intervals of three or four feet between each dou- 
ble row. In the rows, we put the plants but from four to six 
inches apart, according to the sort. When the plants remain 
but one year in the bed, close planting does not impoverish 
them, therefore it increases the produce, and assists in keeping 
it clean. As the fruit of the double row s can be conveniently 
gathered from one side only, the alternate spaces between them 
should be left untrodden, for the runners to spread over in the 
following spring. Even if these be to be cut off, agreeably to 
Mr. Darke’s method, they are less interfered with than when 
walks are made on both sides the beds. Draining tiles placed 
along the outsides of the double rows of plants make a neat 
support for the fruit from the earth, at the same time as they 
assist in retaining moisture. The leading consideration for the 
horticulturist who renews his beds annually should be to plant 
them as early as is possible. Attention to this point cannot be 
too forcibly insisted on. The best means of effecting it is to 
prepare the new beds as soon as a few of the first runners 
have struck root, and continue to transfer the young plants to 
them, (or to Mr. Darke’s nursery beds) as they are found 
sufficiently rooted for removal. We never have, willingly, de- 
ferred the latest planting past the month of July; having seen 
the loss of a week or two in planting, with subsequent hot and 
dry weather, most materially retard the growth of the young 
plants, and consequently reduce the crop of fruit. 



131 



1-57 Evergreen Shrubs, transplanting. The great impor- 
tance of choosing a suitable season for removing Evergreen 
Shrubs will be acknowledged by every one who has had even 
but little experience in garden or shrubbery culture. By those 
who have removed only a few American plants, it may be said 
that all seasons are alike, if but moderate attention be paid to 
the operation. It is true that many of these bear removal at 
almost any time of the year, but this arises from their numer- 
ous tufted fibrous roots, which grow together in a complicated 
mass, and hold the soil amongst them. This, however, is not 
the case with Evergreens generally, and more particularly with 
those of large growth, therefore attention should be paid to the 
season, as well as the mode, of removal. An article written by 
Mr. Glendinning on this subject, and inserted in the thirteenth 
volume of the Gardener’s IMagazine is written in the true spirit 
of philosophy, ami may assist the cultivator in his reasonings 
on this subject. Every one must acknowledge how desirable it 
is that gardening operations, as fai’ as is possible, be reduced to 
])hilosophical princi|>les, in lieu of being executed on merely 
empirical rules. Mr. Glendinning says “ The following hints 
are ap[)lied to the trans|)lanling of large plants, as small ones 
may be removed at almost any season with nearly equal suc- 
cess. In the prosecution of some alterations, w hich have involv- 
ed the [)lanting of numerous large evergreens, and in consider- 
able variety, immediate effect being desired, opportunities 
presented themselves of comparing extensively the result of the 
various seasons, and marking the effect of each. I may premise 
that an opinion, and notan erroneous one, is commonly enter- 
tained, that, should evergreen shrubs be removed during the 
months of November, December, .lanuary, and February, the 
effect will be nearly the same. Notwithstanding this, I am 
still, however, persuaded that there is a certain time better than 
any other for performing every operation, especially of garden- 
ing, the data for the fixing of which are found in the immutable 
laws of vegetable economy. The various scientific operations 
of the skilful horticulturist are guided by these axioms ; and a 
knowledge of them, he is aware, is indispensable to the success 
of his performances. Hence, such an acquaintance with the 
physiology of plants points out to him the seasons of grafting 
and budding, the removal of shrubs, and every other operation 

16S AOCTiRIDM. 



132 



which he has to perforin; and enables him, also, to calculate 
with certainty on his success. Having said thus much by the 
way of preliminary remark, I come now to what more immedi- 
ately forms the subject of this paper; viz. the proper season at 
which evergreen shrubs should be transplanted, so as to sustain 
the least injury from their removal. The period, then, of the 
greatest action in the economy of these shrubs is surely not the 
desirable time ; neither can that be the most fitting season 
when they are in a comparatively torpid state. In the former 
instance, the plants will suffer from the natural season of excite- 
ment, which the more or less unavoidable mutilation of the 
roots will render them unfit to sustain; whereas, in the latter 
case, the fibrous roots will perish from the extended period dur- 
ing which the plants will be compelled to remain in a torpid 
condition. Well, then, a time between the two extremes (say 
during the month of April) may be suggested ; but this would 
be a fatal suggestion, as at this season all vegetable life is, as 
it were, charged, like a voltaic battery, waiting the influence of 
a genial sun to discharge its accumulated provisions into leaves, 
flowers, and fruit. The branches must sympathize with the 
roots, which, at the three periods cited, ought not to be dis- 
quieted. It will be perceptible, from the preceding observa- 
tions, that there is yet another season at which the proceedings 
of the skilful and cautious may be rendered successful; and the 
guide for discovering this period is a very simple one. The 
time I propose shall be alike free from the extremes of either pre- 
sent or immediate prospective excitement, and shall yet not be 
the season of maximum transpiration. It is a well-known and 
understood fact, as well as a matter of common practice, that 
the successful propagation of a great number of evergreen 
shrubs is prosperously effected at the time the young shoots 
have attained a firmness of texture, easily distinguished by the 
practical operator. We may instance the laurel, camellia, &c., 
which will have arrived at this condition about the end of Au- 
gust. These cuttings then contain abundance of the active cir- 
culating fluid, wliich, in its downward course, forms a callosity 
which presently emits roots. It is this time, during the de- 
clining year, which I have found the most desirable season to 
conduct the operation of transplanting evergreen shrubs. I 
have thus laid down a general rule for removing evergreens 



133 



familiar to every body, and mentioned a law upon which it is 
founded, which is within the comprehension of all. The young 
shoots, at this season, will have attained sufficient maturity to 
render their suffering from removal, or from the aridity of the 
season, very trifling; as the whole plant will contain enough of 
the active sap to propel fresh spongioles when located ; so that, 
after a copious watering, the general appearance of the plant 
will have sustained little change. The preceding statement 
may be rather loose; still, my recommendation is founded on 
some degree of reason, as in practice it has proved successful. 
I may just add that, if it does not render the contending, and 
apparently somewhat anomalous, opinions held on this subject 
reducible into one regular and rational mode of proceeding, it 
may, at least, have a tendency to that end. 

158 Leaf-moulu, as a substitute for Peat-soil. In a for- 
mer section of the Auctarium we reminded our readers that 
Leaf-mould was a valuable ingredient in composts for garden 
uses. We shall now extract some useful hints and directions 
from Haynes’s Essay on Soils and Composts. The subject is 
one of primary interest to every cultivator of a garden, and one 
which has not met with corresponding attention. The author 
recommends decayed leaves as a substitute for Peat-soil ; and 
when properly mixed with sand it will generally not inappro- 
priately supply its place. ‘ In this preparation, the decayed 
leaves of deciduous trees are a principal ingredient. These 
may be readily obtained, and at an easy expense, in most situ- 
ations. In October the general fall usually commences, and 
immediately after the first frost they will come down plenti- 
fully ; when, if there is no wind, those fallen near the trees may 
be readily gathered into heaps. Previous, however, to forming 
the leaves into large heaps, it will be necessary to give the 
leaves an ample watering, whilst putting them together, in or- 
der to promote an early heat or sweating throughout the whole 
heap ; such warmth being most essential to their rotting fully 
down, and by which they will the more speedily decay. There 
will also be no danger of their being disturbed or removed by the 
wind, if they are abundantly watered on being first put together, 
as they will immediately heat and turn to decay ; requiring no 
other watering, except on the top, should the weather continue 
extremely dry. Having thus compleated a large heap, thrust 

167 AOCTAEICM. 



134 



therein a strong and sharp-pointed stake, nearly to the bottom, 
there to remain, as is commonly practised in liot-heds : you 
may judge of the decay of the leaves by the abatement of the 
heat; which, if sufficient, will have much reduced the hulk of 
the heap. As it is necessary that the whole heap be fully and 
completely rotted down, it will be requisite to turn it over once 
or twice during the winter, after the heat has subsided ; and 
especially in snowy or frosty weather, to render the whole more 
light : and it being thereby, in a slight degree, exposed to se- 
vere and penetrating frosts, the whole will better decay, and 
become more rotten before the spring ; when it is likely that at 
least a part of the compost may be required for use. 

On the whole being completely rotted down, it will produce 
a soil not dissimilar to that collected from decayed trees; and 
will prove equally genial to vegetation, when aided by another 
ingredient, to render it more similar to peat-earth. It will now 
therefore, be requisite to add to it one-fourth part of the softest 
and finest white sand that can be procured ; taking care that 
it be intermixed, so that the whole may become fully incorpo- 
rated, by repeatedly turning it over weekly, or, at least, once 
in a fortnight : and, in doing this, it will be necessary to re- 
move all the rubbish you perceive in it, such as any stones, 
wood, tiles, or undecayed substances which might have been 
collected with the leaves: but on no account be prevailed upon 
to sift over the heap, under the idea of better mixing the sand 
and decayed leaves together; a process which has, invariably, 
proved hurtful to composts of every description. Where there 
is not the convenience of collecting a great quantity of these 
leaves at home, it may be very desirable as well as easy, to ob- 
tain them, at the fall of the leaf, from some neighbouring plan- 
tations, copses, or woods : raking them together early, as they 
fall from the trees ; and carting them home at the most conve- 
nient times in the winter season, after they have decayed, when 
but little room will be required, to stow them, where they are 
wanted for use. On removing them home, it will be proper 
to afford further waterings to such leaves as remain undecayed ; 
and they should remain, as much as possible, exposed to the 
action of the air, wind, rain, sun, frost, snow, &c. to mellow 
and ameliorate ; as, without such exposure, the soil would con- 
tract a fusty and unhealthy smell, and prove ungenial to the 



135 



purposes designed ; aUvaj s recollecting that a full exposure to 
the air, in composts of every description, will render them most 
salubrious to every species of trees, shrubs, plants, and flowers. 

159 White Sand, its utility. In the business of planting 
cuttings in the open ground of the more tender evergreen trees 
and shrubs, under hand-glasses, in the autumn; as well as the 
more hardy greenhouse plants, such as the myrtle, fuchsia, 
rose, cistus, germander, &c. no unmixed soil whatever can be 
found to bear a comparison with the finest white sand ; as cut- 
tings planted therein will be far the most secure from mouldi- 
ness and damp, throughout the autumnal and winter seasons; 
during which periods, the pots in which they are planted, gen- 
erally remain standing up to their rims in the common ground, 
as the greatest preservative from frost ; lint in which situation 
they are more exposed to damp, than if standing on the surface 
of the ground. Although but little more. than a knob, or 
swelling protuberance at the foot of the cuttings, can be ex- 
pected to be formed during the first autumn and winter; yet on 
the advance of spring, they w ill early make roots, even without 
the addition of any other soil or compost to the sand, to pro- 
mote their growth; These young plants should be potted off, 
or transplanted in some way, as soon as they have formed suffi- 
cient roots. Immense (juantities (from planting small cuttings) 
may thus be annually propagated, by means of covering them 
with full sized single hand-glasses: but this process will only 
extend to such as are evergreen; and amongst them not to such 
as are resinous, as firs, pines, &c.: these, however, producing as 
they do, abundance of ripe seeds in favourable seasons, we are 
less anxious to propagate them by cuttings. In the propagation, 
by this process, of the trees and shrubs alluded to, it must be 
recollected, that the sand is to be considered as not farther essen- 
tial than merely to cause or promote a growth in the cuttings, 
sufficient for their transplantation; as on their being removed 
to another situation, in the next stage of the process, a mixture 
of suitable soil, w ith a proportion of sand only will be requisite, 
e are not asserting that yellow sand will not equally apply in 
both cases of planting cuttings of hardy evergreen trees and 
shrubs, both by summer planting in the ojien exposure, and 
autumn-planting under hand-glasses; but, in all the experi- 
ments we have witnessed, and throughout the whole of our 

AUCTABIVM. fUync« OD Soils aad Composts* 



136 



own practice, white sand, where it could be obtained, has been 
invariably employed, and most successfully. 

When we reflect that dampness is the chief annoyance to cut- 
tings, of almost every description, planted under hand-glasses, 
it seems reasonable that every propagator should strenuously 
guard against it; to effect which, nothing is likely to be devi- 
sed so admirably calculated to discharge w et and prevent reten- 
tion of moisture, as sand alone ; and this in preference to every 
other soil or compost we know of. Barren and sterile as sand 
may appear to be, we know of no article of greater utility in the 
propagation and culture, not only of shrubby plants, but also 
of the more choice and delicate herbaceous plants ; invariably 
preferring that which is most fine and soft, but which is only to 
be obtained in particular situations. We are not aware how 
far sand, of any particular description, is in itself possessed of 
vegetative properties ; but of this we are fully assured, from 
numerous and repeated experiments, that there are few soils, 
with which it cannot be intermixed to the greatest advantage, 
and in various other branches of horticulture, as well as in the 
propagation of plants and flowers ; it being admirably adapted 
from its opening nature, to open the pores of heavier, more 
close, and adhesive soils ; thereby expanding the entire mass 
of compost, and rendering it porous, and open to the free ad- 
mission and full expansion of the delicately fine thread-like 
roots of j)lants and flowers; and, in this, we have most satis- 
factorily witnessed and experienced its singular and superior 
efficacy. We have known, in various cases, plants to have 
been placed in soils most opposite and ungenial to their natures, 
and thereby early inclining to decay; but which have been 
speedily restored to their original v igour by a proper and timely 
application of white sand. 

Sand, like many other articles, will be found a local rather 
than a general production throughout the kingdom. In its 
colour and softness it most materially varies; and is more or 
less favourable to our present purpose. That, however, which 
has been invariably found to surpass all others, for general 
and particular purposes iu horticulture is a peculiarly soft and 
white sand, of such unusual smoothness, that it is considered as 
useless for certain domestic purposes, scouering, &c. ; and, in 
point of fineness, is nearly equal to emery flour. The finer the 



137 



sand is which we employ, the more soft will the compost prove 
which we form with it; tending to promote expansion in the 
heavier soils. Where none other than white sand, which 
is usually coarse, can be obtained, small quantities of the finer 
])arts of it can be sifted out with a fine sieve or washed. Lit- 
tle argument can, however, be necessary to convince the unpre- 
judiced florist, gardener, or amateur, of the general utility of 
suitable sand, when intermixed with the more cold and heavier 
soils; and thereby rendering them open and porous, and capa- 
ble of discharging all copious falls of rain, snow, &c.; which 
tend to overcharge those soils which are adhesive with an un- 
due proportion of moisture, and thereby chill and starve the 
stock of plants and flowers upon them. 

IGO Ax Excellent Compost. This is applicable to superior 
fibrous-rooted perennial, herbaceous plants, in the open ground ; 
as well as to the common hardy and greenhouse plants. Of the 
efficacy as a general manure of the blood of bullocks or other 
animals, farmers and gardeners who have habitually employed 
the refuse of slaughter-houses will be able to afford testimony; 
and there is no method by which it can be better applied, in the 
culture of any crop, than as compost; as, by repeatedly turning 
it over, it will mix and incorporate most readily with the earth. 
Blood is an ingredient to be readily and cheaply procured in 
most situations; anil it may be applied warm or cold, fresh or 
stale, as may best suit the convenience of the florist: it may be 
also kept a length of time without injury or annoyance when 
occasion does not retjuire its immediate use. Where blood can- 
not be procured in the immediate neighbourhood, the best mode 
of conveying it from a distance will be in small casks, as is 
adopted by the sugar-bakers in London ; who thus receive their 
supplies from the principal slaughter-houses, from whence it 
may be procured at a trivial expense. In general it will, how- 
ever, be most convenient and efficient to use it in a compost. 
To form a superior compost, prepare the following ingredients, 
Hazle-loam earth, from the richest pasture ground; bog soil, 
from meadow or other lowlands; hot-bed stable manure fully rot- 
ted down ; and the finest white sand ; mixing them in equal quan- 
tities. On first putting the above together, add bullocks or other 
blood, in the proportion of one gallon to two wheelbarrows’ full 
of compost. That the whole may be more completely incorpo- 

1G9 AT7CTAJUUU. lOO, Haynes on Soils aoit Composts. 



rated, give it repeated turnings over ; and lay it in a situation 
where it may be fully exposed to the weather, as long as occa- 
sion will permit. The longer time can he allowed in preparing 
it, the better will the compost prove. Where it is convenient to 
allow twelve months for its preparation, it will require to be 
turned over monthly ; if six months, once in a fortnight; and 
if a shorter time, as three months only, it will require to be 
turned over weekly. In such a short period as the latter, how- 
ever, there will be scarcely sufficient time for the greensward to 
rot; which will prove a material inconvenience, as it would oc- 
casion the decay of many roots planted therein: and conse- 
quently, must be all picked out, before the compost is applied 
to the beds. On no account be prevailed upon to sift the com- 
])ost ; which process is invariably injurious, by promoting decay 
in most roots. 

Long experience has fully demonstrated the great utility of 
hazle-loam earth in the culture of the superior bulbous-rooted 
and other flowers ; but the practice of later years has clearly 
proved that our mode of treatment will admit of great improve- 
ment, in numerous cases, by the addition of more soft and cool 
soils. In the present case, the loam which ought to be procui’- 
ed is that partaking of a sandy nature, and somewhat light; 
and thereby rendered more open and inadhesive, so as to admit 
of the fibres of the plants more readily and effectually making 
way therein, and to discharge all heavy falling rains, and prevent 
that standing wet so frequently injurious to roots during the 
cold seasons of autumn and winter : whereas that of a more 
close, binding and adhesive nature, inclining to clay, would by 
retaining such moisture, abundantly decay the roots. In pro- 
curing this loamy earth, it will be necessary to dig and take 
away all the turf or greensward therewith ; which on becoming 
rotten, will enrich the compost and make it light ; recollecting, 
that, in order to obtain only the best and richest part of the 
earth, you must dig no deeper than from eight to ten inches, or 
even less, to avoid an inferior soil. A further advantage attends 
the use of a loam of a sandy nature, that it will, in all stages of 
the business, work better than that which inclines to clay, espe- 
cially on its being, in the least degree, moist or wet; and with- 
out settling heavy in the beds, so as to bind about the roots of 
the plants : it wall also be at all times more open and loose/ to 



139 



admit of being hoed and raked on its surface ; hence the neces-- 
sity of employing fine white sand in a greater proportion than 
before directed, where only clayey or binding loam can be ob- 
tained 

161 Peas, Early Crop of. The following description of a 
method of raising early Peas, by the late Thomas Andrew 
Knight, was published in the fifth volume of the London Horti- 
cultural Society’s Transactions, and although an exact adher- 
ence to the details of the practice here described may be unim- 
portant we know the general principle to be so advantageous 
that we have no hesitation in laying it before our readers. The 
practice is rendered valuable on account of the contingencies 
attending autumn-sown Peas. 3Ir. Knight observes, “ I pur- 
posely delayed the experiment, which 1 proceed to relate, till 
the first day of iMarch. Upon that day the ground was pre- 
pared, and part of the seed sown, as usual, in rows, Avere the 
plants were to remain : at the same time other peas of the 
same early kind, were sown in circles, within the circumference 
of pots, often inches in diameter, inside measure. These pots 
were nearly filled with a compost of a peculiar kind; from the 
highly nutritive and stimulating qualities of which I anticipa- 
ted much acceleration in the growth of my plants; Avith the 
advantage of being able to remove them, at the proper period, 
to the open ground, without having their roots at all detached 
from their pasture, OAving to the fibrous organic texture of the 
compost. This Avas made of equal parts of thin turf, to Avhich 
much lifeless herbage Avas attached, and unfermented stable 
manure, Avithout litter; and a quantity of the ashes of burnt 
Aveeds, containing, as usual, a good deal of burnt mould, equiva- 
lent in bulk to about one-tAvelfth of the other materials. The 
Avhole was reduced to small fragments, and Avell intermixed ; and 
the pots were filled with it, Avithin an inch of their t^ips. The 
j)eas Avere then sown upon the surface of the compost, and co- 
vered Avith common mould; and the pots Avere placed in my 
peach house. In this they remained till the i)lants Avere an inch 
high, Avhen they were removed into the open air; but they Avere 
protected, during the night, for some time, and particularly Avhen 
the character of the evening indicated the probability of frost. 

In the last week of 3Iarch, the plants were taken from the pots, 
and planted in roAvs in the open ground; and I have the satis- 

170 AtJCTARlOM. 



140 



faction to observe, that very nearly the whole of the compost ad- 
hered firmly to their roots ; and that their growth, subsequently, 
was not apparently checked in any degree, by their transplant- 
ation. They were placed in rows, contiguous to those which 
had been previously sown; a small quantity of compost, similar 
to that put into the pots being added ; and the common mould 
was then closed round their roots, and raised upon each side of 
the rows. Sticks to support and protect the plants were imme- 
diate! y added in rather more than the ordinary number and quan- 
tity ; and .subsequently, no particular care or attention was paid 
to them. On the morning of the 29th of April, I ascertained 
the comparative growth of my plants, which had been subjected 
to the different modes of treatment above mentioned, in two 
rows which grew contiguous to each other: A\hen I found the 
height of those which hadbeen raised in pots to be fifteen inches; 
and that of the others to be scarcely four inches; and I much 
doubt, whether I ever possessed in the most favourable season, 
as forward a crop of peas as my garden now contains. 

Many causes appear to me to have operated in conjunction, 
to produce the foregoing effects. It has long been known that 
snow does not, in winter, lie so long upon the ground which has 
been manured in the same season, with fresh unfermented stable 
manure, as upon unmanured ground; and therefore I conclude, 
that some degree of heat existed in and emanated from the com- 
post; though probably, never in a sufficient degree to have been 
sensible to the touch of any warm-blooded animal. If placed in 
a considerable heap, such a compost as that described, and even 
when the stable manure is much less in quantity will heat violent! y. 
I have often suffered the compost of this kind, which I employ 
for pine-apples, to become hot, to prevent the subsequent ap- 
pearance of earth-worms in it. If heat was in any degree gen- 
erated by the compost in which the peas grew, the escape of it 
was necessarily retarded by the numerous sticks by which the 
ground was partially covered; and liftle injury could have been 
sustained from the shade of those, because the quantity of light, 
comparatively with the temperature of the air, and growth of 
the plants is very great after the vernal equinox; and it is every 
day increasing in power and influence. Another cause of the 
rapid growth of the transplanted peas, has probably, been the 
very favourable state of the soil, in which they have been placed 



141 



it having been tin ned over with the spade, immediately before 
transplantation took place; for peas never thrive well in strong 
soils, when such have been compressed, and soddened, in early 
spring, by much moisture. But the chief causes of their very 
rapid growth have, I believe, been the highly nutritive and 
stimulating quality of the compost, and the presence of some 
degree of aflditional warmth : for I have, in former seasons 
derived great advantage from [ilacing a moderate quantity of 
nearly similar compost immediately under the rows of peas 
which have been sown in the usual manner; except that the 
seeds were placed upon the surface of the soil within which 
tlie compost had been Iniried, and covered by having had 
the soil collected from each side, to form a ridge over them. 
In all cases, where a compost of the kind I have described is 
employed to accelerate the growth of dwarfish and early peas, 
it should be used in small quantities only; that the early 
growth of the plants may be promoted, without excessive, and 
consequently injurious, luxuriance being. given. For trans- 
planted peas, 1 should prefer a poor and light soil ; so that the 
roots might be led, as they would be under such circumstances, 
to confine themselves to narrow limits; and the [ilants, conse- 
quently, be brought to an early maturity.” The above experi- 
ment was ultimately |)roductive of a very abundant crop, at 
least twelve days earlier than those sown at the same time in 
the usual way, and with a much more rapid succession of 
jiroduce. 

162 Microscope. The great difficulty of viewing the animal- 
cube, &c. in fluids under high magnifying powers, must have 
been continually felt, by all the admirers of the microscope. An 
improvement, therefore, which effectually removes every ob- 
stacle to this investigation, — by rendering the surface of the 
fluid truly plane, spreading it thinner, and extending it to a 
much wider space around, at the same time confining the ani- 
malculiB in more limited depth, whereby their forms and move- 
ments become most readily discernible; and also preventing 
evaporation from the surface of the fluid, which often dims the 
lens and jierplexes the observer, or even puts a stop to his 
proceeding; as well as totally doing away the possibility of 
the lens dipping into the fluid, whilst adjusting its focus, as is 
continually happening in the present methods of viewing these 

171 iCCTABIUM. 



142 



objects; — will, no doubt, be duly appreciated by the scientific 
world. It will render every one capable of extending the 
powers of the microscope in a much greater degree than has 
hitherto been done; and thereby, must inevitably lead to 
the discovery of many of Nature’s minute secrets, which for 
want of such facilities have remained indefinite, or entirely 
concealed. The necessity of continually adjusting the micro- 
scope, from time to time, to follow the various movements of 
the animalculae, in rising to the surface, or descending into the 
depths of the fluid, is by this discovery rendered totally un- 
necessary. The evaporation of the fluid is very greatly dimin- 
ished by this invention; and, consequently, the examination of 
it, and of the various animalculae, &c. contained in it, may be 
prolonged to a much gieater period than could be effected 
under the usual modes of employing high magnifying powers. 

These great advantages may appear to many to be quite 
unattainable, by any thing less than a great expense in appa- 
ratus; but, when it is said, that the only addition to that 
usually employed, consists in laying upon the surface of the 
drop of fluid a thin slice of talc or mica, the wonder ceases; 
and we can only wonder that so exceedingly obvious, simple, 
and useful a contrivance shonld have remained so long un- 
employed. Of course, it will be understood, that the fluid 
should be laid upon the flat surface of a glass slip, when 
under examination. The animalculse in the water may be 
viewed under the power of a lens in a single microscope, of 
only one sixtieth of an inch focus, with the utmost facility; and 
also, the full powers of a compound microscope may be em- 
ployed in the same manner, the object lens nearly touching 
the talc. 

The substitntion of a slip of talc, in place of the two glass 
slips, usually employed in viewing transparent objects, well 
deserves to be universally adopted. This new application of 
it, however, to viewing the animalculae, &c. in flnids, will now 
render slips of 'talc an indispensible part of the microscopic 
apparatus: in their absence, one of the round talcs, usually to 
be met with, will be found highly useful upon many occasions. 
Instantly upon the talc touching the surface of the fluid, the 
capillary attraction between the talc and the slip of glass, 
disperses it on every side, and produces most of the beneficial 



143 



results described in the beginning of this article. The others 
follow as matters of course. The slip of talc should be rubbed 
as little as possible, in cleaning it, as it is exceedingly liable 
to become scratched, to lose its polish, and to be dull or dis- 
coloured; when either of these is the case, it should be 
exchanged for another slip. 

163. Pear Trees against AValls. It is now no uncommon 
practice for the horticulturist to pave the bottom of his fruit 
tree borders, but as the following observations, written, it is 
evident, by a practical man, possess much good reasoning, we 
co|)y them. They are communicated by Mr. Robert Hiver to 
the Gardener’s 3Iagazine, vol. v. ]>. 60. “ There are few sub- 

jects in horticulture which can be more acceptable to your 
readers than a system by which good crops of fruit may be ob- 
tained from pear trees jilanted against the east and west walls 
in gentlemen’s gardens; the bad crops these trees have afforded 
liave been proverbial ever since I can remember ; and the un- 
natural schemes that are now resorted to, such as strangulation, 
ringing, depressing of the branches, and reverse-grafting, show 
that a good system of cultivation is not yet established. This 
failure has generally been imputed by gardeners to the climate ; 
but as the trees are seldom without fruit at the extremity of the 
branches, the supposition may be considered erroneous. 

It is about twenty years ago since I noticed a brown Beurree 
])car tree, trained against the east front of a farmer’s cottage. 
This tree grew upon a limestone rock, where there was very 
little earth, yet it never failed to yiehl, yearly, plenty of large 
and well-flavoured fruit. From what I observed of this tree, it 
ajipeared evident that the rich and deep border, usually jire- 
pared by gardeners, was decidedly wrong, as the plants in this 
case generated too muchsaj), which always induces disease and 
barrenness; and, I believe it will be found in the tree, as in the 
human constitution, that the state of health consists in the me- 
dium between emptiness and repletion. Sir H. Davy has 
shown the utility of stones in agricultural crops; and I have 
found them exceedingly beneficial in the formation of fruit-tree 
borders; they prevent the accumulation of water in very wet 
weather, and also retain sufficient moisture for the purposes of 
the plant in dry seasons. In 1813, I replanted an old pear 
wall, "240 ft. long : the border for these trees was 12ft. wide, and 

172 ADCTAEIDM. 



144 



only 26 in. deep, 8 in. of which were filled with stones, such as 
could he most readily procured in the neighbourhood, and the 
remaining 18 with tlie mould whicli composed the old border. 
By this scanty supply of earth for the roots of these plants I 
have succeeded in obtaining a fruitful and healthy growth, 
enually remote from debility and luxuriance ; and by this 
simple process I procure fruit all over the tree, as regularly as 
if it had been mechanically placed, both plentifully up the 
main stem, and on the lowest horizontal branches. My trees 
are fim-trained in the best manner ; the shoots are kept as uni- 
form and straight as the plications of the instrument from 
whence the term is derived, and, when the fruit is full grown 
exhibit one ol the most interesting scenes to be met with within 
the confines of a garden. 

With regard to pruning, the knife should be used as spar- 
ingly as possible ; I conceive it to be as injurious to this tribe 
of fruit-trees, as the lancet is to animal life ; it creates those 
inconveniences which it is employed to remove : whoever in- 
dulges in its free use, most certainly defeats his own purpose. 
Let any man who is inclined to dissent from this opinion, con- 
sider the common thorn confined in a hedge, where it annually 
undergoes the operation of clipping, and the shrub in its primi- 
tive growth, and he will want no argument to convince him ot 
the impropriety of the practice. But my plants require very 
little assistance from the knife : they make no breast-wood, the 
energies of the tree being chiefly engaged in forming blossom- 
buds for the future crop. 

It may be justly inferred, from what is here stated, that the 
bad success which most gardeners have experienced in the cul- 
tivation of this valuable fruit, arises principally from the luxu- 
riant state of their trees ; the limited space which they occupy 
on the wall is so disproportionate to their natural grow th, that 
it is almost impossible, with deep and highly manured borders 
to reclaim them from a habit of plethorical sterility. The farina 
and the whole fructification, partake of this unhealthy condition ; 
and it may be observed, that fruits fecundated with bad pollen 
scarcely ever resist the atmospheric changes which they after- 
wards encounter. From observations made in vegetable phy- 
siology, I am persuaded that the tree is j)rincipally the produce 
of the earth, and the fruit of the atmosphere; a great diminu- 



145 



tion of vigour may take place in tlie one, without any percep- 
tible alteration in the other. It is, therefore, the first object of 
the cultivator to proportion the supply of nutriment to the ex- 
tent of his tree, and this will be best effected by the shallow 
border above described.” 

164 Germination of Seeds. This subject is one which falls 
more or less frerjuently under the observation of all our readers, 
but the attention of all may not be alike directed to the interest- 
ing circumstances under which it takes place, and its attendant 
phenomena ; therefore, we purpose laying before our readers, 
information on this process of nature, as given by Professor 
Thomp.son, in his admirable work on the Chemistry of Vegeta- 
ble iiodies, p. 961. He says “Natural historians have proved, 
by a very complete induction of facts, that alt plants arise from 
seeds. The pretended exceptions have disappeared, one after 
another, as our knowledge of vegetables increased : and now 
there remains scarcely a single objection entitled to the smallest 
regard. The attempt of Girtanner to revive the doctrine of 
e(|uivocal generation, deserves no attention whatever; because 
bis conclusions are absolutely incompatible with the experi- 
ments of Mr. Sennebier upon the very substance on which his 
theory is founded. 

A seed consists of three parts ; namely the cotyledons, the 
radicle, and (he jilumula, which are usually enclosed in a cover. 
If we take a garden bean, we may perceive each of these three 
jiarts with great ease ; for this seed is of so large a size, that all 
its organs are exceedingly distinct. AVhen we strip off the ex- 
ternal coats of the bean, which are two, and of different degrees 
of thickness in different parts, we find that it easily divides 
into two lobes, pretty nearly of the same size and figure. Each 
of these lobes is called a cotyledon. The cotyledons of the 
bean, then, are two in number. Near that part of the lobes 
which is contiguous to what is called the eye of the bean, there 
is a small round white body, which comes out between the two 
lobes. This body is called the radicle. Attached to the radi- 
cle there is another small round body, whicb lies between the 
cotyledons, and wholly within them, so that it cannot be seen 
till they are separated from each other. This body is called 
the plumula. The apjiearance and shape of these three parts 
vary much in different seeds; but there is no seed which wants 

173 ADCTAKIOM. 



146 



lliem. The figure and size of the seed depend chiefly u])on the 
cotyledons. This is evidently the case with the bean, and it is so 
with all other seeds. The number of cotyledons is different in 
different seeds. Some seeds have only one cotyledon, as the 
seeds of wheat, oat, barley, and the whole tribe of grasses ; but 
most seeds, like the bean, have two cotyledons. 

When a seed is placed in a situation favourable to vegetation 
it very soon changes its appearance. The radicle is converted 
into a root, and sinks into the earth, the plumula on the other 
hand, rises above the earth, and becomes the trunk or stem. 
AVhen these changes take place, the seed is said to germinate : 
the process itself has been called germination. Seeds do not 
germinate equally and indifferently in all places and seasons. 
Germination, therefore, is a process which does not depend 
upon the seed alone ; something external must also affect it. 
It is a well known fact, that seeds will not germinate unless 
moisture have access to them ; for seeds, if they are kept per- 
fectly dry, never vegetate at all, and yet their power of vegeta- 
tion is not destroyed. AVater, then, is essential to germination. 
Too much water, however, is no less prejudicial to most seeds 
than none at all. The seeds of water plants, indeed, germinate 
and vegetate extremely well in water ; but most other seeds, if 
they are kept in water beyond a certain time, are rotted and 
destroyed altogether. 

It is well known also, that seeds will not germinate, even 
though supplied with water, provided the temperature be below 
a certain degree. No seed, for instance, on which the experi- 
ment has been tried, can be made to vegetate at or below the 
freezing point : yet this degree of cold does not injure the veg- 
etating power of seeds; for many seeds will vegetate as well as 
ever after having been frozen, or after having been kept in fro- 
zen water. AVe may conclude, then, that a certain degree of 
heat is necessary for the germination of seeds : and every spe- 
cies of plant seems to have a degree peculiar to itself, at which 
its seeds begin to germinate; for every seed has a peculiar sea- 
son at which it begins to germinate, and this season varies with 
the temperature of the air. Mr. Adanson found that seeds, 
when sown at the same time in France and in Senegal, always 
appeared sooner above ground in the latter country, where the 
climate is hotter than in France. 



147 



Seeds, although supplied with moisture and placed in a pro- 
per temperature, will not germinate, provided atmospherical air 
be completely excluded from them. Mr. Ray found that grains 
of lettuce did not germinate in the vacuum of an air pump, 
but they began to grow as soon as air was admitted 1o them. 
Homberg made a number of experiments on the same subject, 
which were published in the 3Iemoirs of the French Academy 
for the year 1693. He found that the greater number of seeds 
which he tried refused to vegetate in the vacuum of an air pump. 
Some, however, did germinate : but Boyle, Muschenbroek, and 
Boerhave, who made experiments on the same subject in suc- 
cession, proved beyond a doubt that no ])lant vegetates in the vac- 
uum of an air pumj) ; and that in those cases in which Romberg’s 
seeds germinated the vacuum was far from perfect, a quantity of 
air still remaining in the receiver. It follows, therefore, that no 
seed will germinate unless atmospherical air, or some air having 
the same properties, have access to it. It is for this reason that 
seeds will not germinate at a certain depth below the surface of 
the earth. 3Ir. Scheele found that beans would not germinate 
except oxygen gas were present : Mr. Achard afterwards proved 
that oxygen gas is absolutely necessary for the germination of 
all seeds, and that no seed w ill germinate in azotic gas, or hy- 
drogen gas, or carbonic acid gas, unless these gasses contain a 
mixture of oxygen gas. These experiments have been con- 
firmed by Mr. Gough, 3Ir. Cruikshank, and many other phi- 
losophers. It follows, therefore, that it is not the whole atmos- 
pheric air, but merely the oxygen gas which it contains, that is 
necessary for the germination of seeds. Nay, Mr. Humboldt 
has ascertained that seeds vegetate more rapidly when steeped 
in chlorine, or when watered with it ; and this substance is well 
known for the facility with which it decomposes water and sets 
at liberty oxygen. It seems even to augment the vegetative 
power of seeds. At Vienna several seeds which had been long 
kept, and which had constantly refused to germinate, grew rea- 
dily when treated with it. 

Light also has considerable influence on the germination of 
seed. Ingenhousz found that seeds always germinate faster in 
the dark than when exposed to the light. His experiments were 
repeated by Mr. Sennebier with equal success. But the Abbe 
Bertholin, who distinguished himself so much by his labours, 

174 ADCTABICM. 



148 



to demonstrate the effect of electricity on vegetation, objected 
to the conclusions of these philosophers, and affirmed that the 
difference in the germination of seeds in the shade and in the light 
was owing, not to the light itself, but to the difference in the 
moisture in the two situations ; the moisture evaporating much 
faster from the seeds in the light than from those in the shade ; 
and he affirmed, that when precautions were taken to keep the 
seeds equally moist, those in the sun germinated sooner than 
those in the shade. But when Mr. Sennebier repeated his for- 
mer experiments, and employed every possible precaution to 
ensure equality of moisture in both situations, he constantly 
found the seeds in the shade germinate sooner than those in the 
light. We may conclude, therefore, that light is injurious to 
germination ; and hence one reason for covering seeds with the 
soil in which they are to grow. But from the recent experiments 
of Saussure, there is reason to believe that light is only injurious 
in consequence of the heat which it produces ; for when the 
direct rays of the sun were intercepted, though light was ad- 
mitted, the germination of the seeds was not sensibly retarded. 

Thus we have seen that seeds will not germinate unless mois- 
ture, heat, and oxygen be present. Now, in what manner do 
these substances affect the seed ? AVhat are the changes which 
they produce ? It was observed before, that all seeds have one 
or more cotyledons. These cotyledons contain a quantity of 
farinaceous matter, laid up on purpose to supply the embryo 
plant with food as soon as it begins to require it. This food, 
however, must undergo some previous preparation before it can 
be applied by the plant to the formation or completion of its 
organs. It is probable that all the phenomena of germination 
which we can perceive, consist in the chemical changes which 
are produced in that food, and the consequent development of 
the organs of the plant. 

When a seed is placed in favourable circumstances, it gradu- 
ally imbibes moisture, and very soon after emits a quantity of 
carbonic acid gas, even though no oxygen gas be present. If 
no oxygen gas be present, the process stops here, and no ger- 
mination takes place ; but if oxygen gas be present, a portion 
of it is converted into carbonic acid gas. From the experi- 
ments of Saussure, it appears, that if seeds be left to germinate 
in a determinate portion of oxygen gas or common air, the bulk 



149 



of that gas is not altered ; the carbonic acid formed being equal 
to the oxygen which has disap[)eared. Hence it follows, that 
the carbonic acid contains in it exactly the whole oxygen 
consumed. No oxygen, then, is absorbed by the seed; or at 
least, if it be absorbed, none of it is retained, the whole being 
thrown out in combination with carbon. The quantity of ox- 
ygen thus changed into carbonic acid by the germination of 
seeds, is in some measure proportional to the weight of the seed : 
but some seeds require more than others. In the experiments 
of Saussure, wheat and barley, weight for weight, consumed 
less oxygen than peas ; while peas consumed less than beans 
and kidney-beans. The oxygen consumed by wheat and bar- 
ley amounts to between -njJjjth and 2535 th of their weight; while 
that consumed by l)eans and kidney-beans may amount to icrath 
part of their weight. Similar experiments were made by Dr. 
AV'^oodhouse. 

From the observation of M. T. de Saussure, it appears that 
during the first stage of germination, the carbonic acid evolved 
exceeds the bulk of the oxygen absorbed, but afterwards the 
oxygen absorbed exceeds the bulk of the carbonic acid evolved. 
Azotic gas he found was always absorbed during germination 
in air, but not during gei inination in oxygen gas, or a mix- 
ture of equal volumes of oxygen and azotic gases. It does not 
appear that any water is decomposed during the process of ger- 
mination, at least we have no evidence that it is so. Neither 
hydrogen nor oxygen gas are emitted. It would not be sur- 
prising if a portion of water, so far from being decomposed, 
were actually formed by the union of its constituents previously 
existing in the grain. hen Saussure dried seeds at a certain 
temperature before germination, and afterwards brought them 
to the same degree of dryness alter germination, be always found 
that the loss of weight was greater that it ought to have been. 
Thus 73 peas, which together, (wlien dried at 77°) weighed 200 
grains, when left with five times their weight of water in a 
vessel full of air, and standing over mercury for two days, ger- 
minated, and produced 4^ cubic inches of carbonic acid. They 
were taken out and dried slowly at the same temperature ; 
during their drying they changed cubic inches more of oxy- 
gen into carbonic acid. Now these 9 inches of carbonic acid 
contain 1 .7 grains of carbon. The water in which the peas had 

175 AUCTABIOM. 



150 



been placed while germinating, when evaporated to dryness, 
left 0.75 grains of mucilaginous matter. Thus the peas, by 
germinating and drying ought to have lost only 2.45 grains, 
leaving a residue of 197.55 grains. But their weight was only 
189 grains. So that they had lost 8 grains more than can be 
accounted lor by the mucilage taken up by the water and car- 
bonic acid formed. We are obliged to suppose this loss owing 
to water. From Saussure’s experiments, this water seems to 
be formed or set at liberty during the drying of the seeds, for 
the (juantity of it always increased with the slowness of the pro- 
cess of drying. 

Several seeds, by germinating, acquire a sweetish taste. 
Hence it has been supposed, that the mucilage which they con- 
tain is converted into saccharine matter. We see that the car- 
bon is diminished by germination ; and unless water be formed, 
the proportion of hydrogen and oxygen must be proportionably 
augmented. It is obvious from the process of malting, that heat 
is generated during germination. 1 have seen the radicles of 
barley, when kept without turning on the malt floor, shoot out 
half an inch in a single night, and the heat rise as high as 100°. 

So far seems to be the work of chemistry alone ; at least we 
have no right to conclude that any other agent interferes; since 
hay, when it happens to imbibe moisture, exhibits nearly the 
same jirocesses. Carbonic acid gas is evolved, oxygen gas is 
absorbed, heat is produced so abundantly, that the hay often 
takes fire : at the same time a quantity of sugar is formed. It 
is owing to a partial change of the same kind that old hay gen- 
erally tastes much sweeter than new hay. Now we have no 
reason to suppose that any agents peculiar to the vegetable king- 
dom reside in hay ; as all vegetation, and all power of vegeta- 
ting are evidently destroyed. But when the farina in the .seeds 
of vegetables is converted into sugar, a number of vessels make 
their appearance in the cotyledon. These vessels may indeed 
be detected in many seeds before germination commences, but 
they become much more distinct after it has made some pro- 
gi’ess. Branches from them have been demonstrated by Grew, 
Malpighi, and Hedwig, passing into the radicle, and distributed 
through every part of it. These evidently carry the nourish- 
ment prepared in the cotyledons to the radicle ; for if the coty- 
ledons be cut off, even after the processes above described are 



151 



completed, germination as Bonnet and Sennebier ascertained by 
experiment, immediately stops. The food therefore is conveyed 
from the cotyledons into the radicle ; the radicle increases 
in size, assumes the form of a root, sinks down into the earth, 
and soon becomes capable of extracting the nourishment neces- 
seiry for the future growth of the plant. Even at this period, 
after the radicle has become a perfect root, the plant, as Senne- 
bier ascertained by experiment, ceases to vegetate if the coty- 
ledons be cut olf. They are still, then, absolutely necessary 
for the vegetation of the plant. The cotyledons now assume 
the appearance of leaves, and appear above the ground, forming 
what are called the seminal leaves of the plant. After this the 
plumula gradually increases in size, rises out of the earth and 
expands itself into branches and leaves. The seminal leaves 
soon after this, decay and drop otf, and the plant carries on all 
the processes of vegetation without their assistance. 

As it does not appear that there is any communication between 
the cotyledons and the plumula, it must follow that the nour- 
ishment passes into the plumula from the radicle; and accord- 
ingly we see that the plumula does not begin to vegetate till 
the radicle has made some progress. Since the plant ceases to 
vegetate, even after the radicle has been converted into a root, 
if the cotyledons be removed before the plumula is developed, 
it follows that the radicle is insufficient of itself to carry on the 
processesof vegetation, and that the cotyledons still continue to 
perform a part. Now we have seen already what that part is ; 
they prepare food for the nourishment of the plant. The root, 
then, is of itself, insufficient for this purpose. When the coty- 
ledons assume the form of seminal leaves, it is evident that 
the nourishment which was originally laid up in them for the 
support of the embryo plant is exhausted, yet they still continue 
as necessary as ever. They must therefore receive the nourish- 
ment which is imbibed by the root; they must produce some 
changes on it, render it suitable for the purposes of vegetation, 
and then send it back again to be transmitted to the plumula. 
After tlie plumula has acquired a certain size, which must be 
at least a line, if the cotyledons be cut off, the plant, as Mr. 
Bonnet euscertained by a number of experiments, afterwards 
repeated with equal success by Mr. Sennebier, does not cease 
to vegetate, but it continues always a mere pigmy : its size, when 

176 AUCTABICU. 



152 



compared with that of a plant whose cotyledons are allowed to 
remain, being only as 2 to 7. When the plumula has expanded 
completely into leaves, the cotyledons may be removed without 
injuring the plant, and they very soon decay of themselves. 
It appears, then, that this new office of the cotyledons is after- 
wards performed by that part of the plant wliich is above 
ground. 

Thus we have traced the phenomena of germination as far as 
they have been detected. The facts are obvious; but the man- 
ner in which they are produced is a profound secret. We can 
neither explain how the food enters into the vessels, how it is 
conveyed to the different parts of the plant, how it is deposited 
in every organ, nor how it is employed to increase the size of the 
old parts, or to form new parts. These phenomena are anala- 
gous to nothing in mechanics or chemistry, but resemble 
exactly the organization and nourishment of animals. They 
belong therefore to that difficult branch of science known by 
the name of Physiology. 

165 Grapes to ripen early In a communication to the London 
Horticultural Society, J. Williams, Esq. of Pitmaston, detailed 
a method of hastening the Maturation of Grapes, which may be 
important to many of our readers. Observing that old trees, 
with long trunks, the rigidity of whose vessels probably 
obstructed the descent of the sap, ripened their fruit the earliest, 
he considered that the same effect could be produced artificially 
by ringing the stem or branches. This he tried, with success, 
and says, “ The best time for performing the operation on Vines 
growing in the open air is towards the end of July, or begin- 
ning of August; and it is a material point, not to let the remo- 
ved circle of bark be too wide : from one to two eighths of an 
inch will be a space of sufficient width ; the exposed alburnum 
will then be covered again with new bark before the following 
winter, so that there will be no danger of injuring the future 
health of the tree. It is not of much consequence in what part 
of the tree the incision is made, but in case the trunk is very 
large, I should then recommend, that the circles be made in the 
smaller branches. 

It is to be observed that all shoots which come out from the 
root of the vine, or from the front of the trunk situated below 
the incision, must be removed as often as they appear, unless 



153 



bearing wood is particularly wanted to fill up the lower part of 
the wall, in which case one or two shoots may be left. 

It will be satisfactory to the philosophic horticulturist to 
follow Mr. Williams through his experiments, from which he 
came to the preceding conclusions. He says, “ to prove whether 
or not my conjectures were correct, I made incisions through 
the bark on the trunks of several Vines growing in my garden, 
removing a circle of bark from each, and thus leaving the na- 
ked alburnum above an inch in width completely exposed; this 
was done in the months of June and July. The following 
autumn the fruit gl owing on these trees came to great perfection, 
having ripened from a fortnight to three weeks earlier than 
usual : but in the succeeding spring, the Vines did not shoot 
with their accustomed vigour, and I found that I had injured them 
by exposing the alburnum unnecessarily.” 

“ Last summer these experiments were repeated ; at the end of 
July, and beginning of August, I took annular excisions of bark 
from the trunks of several of my Vines, and that the exposed 
alburnum might be again covered with new bark by the end of 
autumn, the removed circles were made rather less than a quarter 
of an inch in width. T wo vines of the White Frontiniac, in simi- 
lar states of growth, being trained near to each other on a south 
wall, were selected for trial ; one of these was experimented 
on, (if I may use the term) the other was left in its natural state, 
to form a standard of comparison. When the circle of bark 
had been removed about a fortnight, the berries on the experi- 
mented tree, began evidently to swell faster than those on the 
other, and by the beginning of September showed indications 
of approaching ripeness, while the fruit of the unexperimented 
tree continued green and small. In fhe beginning of October 
the fruit on the tree, that had the bark removed from it, was quite 
ripe, the other only just began to show a disposition to ripen, 
for the bunches w ere shortly afterwards destroyed by the autum- 
nal frosts. In every case in which circles of bark were removed, 
I invariably found thatthe fruit notonly ripened earlier, but the 
berries were considerably larger than usual, and more highly 
flavoured. The effects thus produced, I can account for only, 
by adopting 3Ir Knight’s theory of the downw ard circulation of 
the sap, the truth of which these experiments, in my opinion, 
tend strongly to confirm. I therefore imagine by cutting 

177 iCCTAKIVM, 



154 



through tlie cortex and liber without wounding the alburnum, 
that the descent of that portion.of the sap, which has undergone 
preparation in the leaf is obstructed and confined in the branches 
situate above the incision ; consequently the fruit is better nou- 
rislied and its maturation hastened. It is certainly a consider- 
able point gained in the culture of the vine, to be able to bring 
the fruit to perfection, by a process so simple and so easily per- 
formed.” 

“ I think that this practice may be extended to other fruits, so 
as to hasten their maturity, especially Figs, in which there is a 
most abundant flow of returning sap ; and it demonstrates to us, 
why old trees are more disposed to bear frait than young ones. 
Miller informs us, that the vineyards in Italy are thought to 
improve every year by age, till they are fifty years old. It 
therefore appears to me, that nature in the course of time, pro- 
duces effects similar to what I have above recommended to be 
done by art. For, as trees become old, the returning vessels do 
not convey the sap into the roots, with the same facility they 
did when young ; thus by occasionally removing circles of bark, 
we only anticipate the process of nature ; in both cases a stag- 
nation of the true sap is obtained in the fruiting branches, and 
the redundant nutriment then passes into the fruit. I have 
sometimes found that after the circle of the bark has been re- 
moved, a small portion of the inner bark has adhered to the 
alburnum ; it is of the utmost importance to remove this; 
though ever so small, otherwise in a vei’y short space of time, 
the communication is again established with the root, and little 
or no effect produced. Therefore in about ten days after the 
first operation has been performed, I generally look at the part 
from whence the bark was removed, and separate any small 
portion, which may have escaped the knife the first time.” 

To the cultivator of Vines on open walls in England, and 
there are but few persons who occupy a house in the country 
but may cultivate the Vine, the practice here detailed appears 
most important. Mr. Williams found that when he had taken 
off a ring of bark of unnecessary width from the trunks of his 
Vines, his success, in regard to the fruit, w as complete, but that 
his Vines were less vigourous in the following spring. This 
would be expected ; but as the same effect may be produced by 
ringing the branches, no such inconvenience would be likely to 



155 



arise, because, if the trees be trained on Mr. Hoare’s principle, 
as detailed under section 94 of the Auctariura, the mutilated 
stems would l)e wholly cut away as soon as the fruit on them 
had been matured. We recommend every person possessing 
Vines to aim at combining these advantages. 

166 Waterproof Canvass. As gardening operations may fre- 
quently be much assisted by waterproof canvass, we copy the 
following directions for preparing it from the French of Farri- 
mann and Thilly, as translated in the fifth volume of the Tech- 
nical Repository. “ To lOOlbs. of the best linseed oil add 1 -/lbs. 
of acetate of lead, lllbs. of calcined umber, l|lbs. of white- 
lead, and lilbs. of very finely-powdered pumice stone. These 
solid suhstances, well ground and mixed together, must be 
boiled in the oil for ten hours, over a moderate fire, to prevent 
the oil from burning. This varnish should be of such a con- 
sistence, that, when mixed with a third part of its weight of 
|)ipe-clay, it should be as thick as treacle. It should be left to 
settle eight days, and then passed through a lawn sieve. Then 
grind in a solution of strong and clear glue, as much pipe-clay 
as amounts in weight to the tenth part of the oil employed, 
and mix to the consistence of ointment; adding the varnish by 
degrees, and stirring it well with a wooden spatula. This varnish 
must be repeatedly stirred, till it l)ecomes ])erfectly fluid ; and 
then the desired tint is given l>y adding a fourth part of the 
colour ground in oil. The linen must be stretched upon a 
wooden frame; and the composition apj)lied upon it, with a 
large spatula, three inches broad and nine inches long. The 
frame, then, must be inverted, and the operation repeated upon 
the other side of the cloth; it is then to be left to dry for a 
week, and separated from the frame for use. This cloth may 
be used for riding hoods, covers for carriages, &c.” 

!67 Fruit, ITS Change of Character. The following obser- 
vations of a late assistant to the London Horticultural Society, 
inserted in the fifth volume of its Transactions, are such as 
should be known to the fruit grower, and will be interesting to 
the Physiologist. “In the course of the two last seasons, sev- 
eral specimens of fruits came within my observation, in which 
a deviation from their ti ue character was very perceptible. In 
remarking on the evident intermixture of colour, form, and fla- 
vour, which some of these fruits presented, I did not hesitate 

178 ItJCTAEIUM. 



15G 



to ascribe it to tlie farina of one variety having come in contact 
vritli tiie flowers of another, at a moment wlien the stigmas were 
in a proper condition to receive it : and, on mentioning my 
opinion, [ was surprised to find, tliat the fact of such intermix- 
ture producing an immediate change in the fruit, was generally 
doubted, and by many persons ]ironounced to be impossible. 
This led me to inquire, whether the subject had ever before 
engaged the attention of horticulturists ; and not to go farther 
back than the beginning of the last century, (though both 
Theophrastus and Pliny seem to allude to it,) I found that 
the notion was entertained by Bradley, who, in his New Im- 
provements in Planting and Gardening, after giving directions 
for fertilizing the female flowers of the hazel with the pollen of the 
male, says, — “ By this knowledge Ave may alter the property and 
taste of any fruit, by impregnating the one with the farina of 
another of the same class ; as, for example, a Codlin with a 
Pearmain, which will occasion the Codlin, so impregnated, to 
last a longer time than usual, and be of a sharper taste : or if 
the winter fruit should be fecundated with the dust of the sum- 
mer kinds, they will decay before their usual time : and it is 
from this accidental coupling of the farina of one kind with the 
other, that, in an orchard where there is variety of apples, even 
the fruit gathered from the same tree differs in its flavour and 
times of ripening; and moreover, the seeds of those apples so 
generated, being changed by that means from their natural 
qualities, will produce different kinds of fruit, if they are sown.” 
In the Philosophical Transactions, also, for the yeai\ 1745, 
the subject is noticed by Mr. Benjamin Cook, in a paper, con- 
cerning the effect which the farina of the blossoms of different 
sorts of apple-trees had on the fruit of a neighbouring tree. In 
this communication it is stated, that Mr. Cook “sent to Mr. 
Peter Collinson, some Russetings, changed by the farina of a 
next neighbour, whose name he wanted skill to know; but could 
only say, that the Russeting had acquired its face and com- 
plexion. Mr. Collinson then produced several samples of the 
apples : an untainted Russeting ; a Russeting changed in 
complexion, which grew among a great cluster of unaltered 
brethren ; and some apples of the other tree which had caused 
the change in the Russetings, and whose fruit, had in return, 
received a rough coat from the Russetings.” A farther proof 



157 



of such intermixture taking place, is given by the same writer, 
in the Transactions for the year 1748, and again alluded to by 
him in those for the year 1749. 

Having thus shewn that the opinion entertained is not a novel 
one, I shall proceed to mention the instances which I have ob- 
ser\ed. In the spring of 1819, I gave some carefully-saved 
melon seeds, of the Netted Succado kind, to a friend near Lon- 
don. The young plants raised from these were injudiciously 
planted by the gardener, in a frame with another larger and in- 
ferior variety. The fruits of the Succado set well ; but, as they 
swelled, they gave evident symptoms of having lost their true 
character; and, when cut, were found to be very worthless; aris- 
ing, as 1 conceive, from tlie share which the inferior variety had 
in them. In the autumn of the same year, I examined on the 
trees in Mr. Braddick’s garden, at Thames Ditton, an evident 
mixture of character in a Codlin and the Ribston Pippin, in 
more than one individual, on the sides of the trees next to one 
another; while the fruit on the opposite sides where wholly 
untainted. The probability of sucli mixtures taking place is 
great in 3Ir. Braddick’s Garden, owing to many varieties being 
grafted on the same stock, and to the closeness with which both 
the es|)alier and standard trees are planted. Early in the year 
18'i0, IMr. Braddick sent to the Society samples of two sorts of 
apples of the preceding year’s growth which he had himself 
taken from the trees, and carefully preserved, to shew the extra 
ordinary sport which they had made. The two sorts were the 
Holland Pippin, and the AVhite Winter Calville, apples totally 
dissimilar in appearance ; they grew on low standards. Aery 
near each other : two of the specimens, gathered from the sides 
of the trees not contiguous, retained their natural character 
perfectly well, but the White Calville gathered from the side of 
the tree next the Holland Pippin, had lost much of its own form 
and colour, and partaken largely of those of its neighbour ; while 
the Holland Pippin, taken from the side next the Calville, 
had become nearly a Calville in form and colour. In October 
of the same year, Mr. Brogden shewed me two apples, in which 
a no less remarkable change liad taken place. The one was a 
French Crab, grown near a Ribston Pippin, the character of 
which it had taken ; and the other was a Golden Pippin, Avhich 
grew near a Russet, and in which the two varieties, though so 

179 ICCTiEIDM. 



158 



wholly different were evidently blended. These several instan- 
ces, all coming within my observation in the course of two sea- 
sons, have fully satisfied me, that a change both in character 
and quality, is frequently effected. It will be for the physiolo- 
gist to instruct us as to the mode by which it is done ; and pro- 
bably a close investigation of the subject may discover, in this 
process of nature, sufficient to account for the occasional appear- 
ance of a nectarine on the same branch with a peach : this, 
indeed, appears to me a more reasonable mode of accounting 
for such an anomaly, than any which I have yet heard suggested. 

I have noticed these few facts, for the purpose of drawing the 
attention of horticulturists to the subject ; and I trust, that those 
who have leisure and opportunities will, by actual experiment, 
endeavour to ascertain whence these occasional deviations arise. 
Such an investigation will not be useless ; for if their does exist 
in fruits such a liability to change, it will at once be evident to 
the intelligent cultivator how much care is requisite in growing 
melons, cucumbers. See. to secure their fine characters, even 
without reference to saving seed for a future crop. Such exper- 
iments will, I doubt not, frequently succeed, if made with care 
and on large-flowered plants. On apples, pears, &c. it will pro- 
bably be accident only that will give success. 

168 Distribution of Orchidace®. The universal admiration 
bestowed on orchidaceous plants may render occasional obser- 
vations regarding them not uninteresting, even to those who 
take no part in the cultivation of these members of the nobility 
of vegetation. As they require to be constantly kept in a high 
stove temperature, under peculiar management, few persons, 
comparatively, devote their time and pecuniary means to their 
culture ; still, through floral exhibitions and the liberality of 
those who do possess them, most persons, who desire it, have 
opportunities of witnessing the variously mingled colouring, 
and the monstrous shapes, assumed by these plants. This sub- 
ject has been more immediately brought under our notice, by 
the splendid publication of James Bateman, Esq. who possesses 
a magnificent collection of this noble family of plants ; a family 
which, as he says, “is remarkable for having always its dwell- 
ing aloft upon the branches of trees, and w hich scorns the lowly 
ground ; like the seats and castles of the great, which are usually 
built in elevated situations.” In the days of Linneus this family 



159 



contained 100 known species, the zealous researches of modern 
botanists have extended the number to 2000; and from the 
success attending the exertions of numerous botanists who are 
travelling the wildest parts of Asia, Africa, and America, in 
(juest of these and other plants, no just estimate can be made 
of the magnitude to which ultimately the Flora of the globe may 
be found to extend. 

As the Hotanic Garden is intended to. interest and assist 
those who cultivate flowers in the open ground of our own 
climate, so the Botani.st is intended to carry out the science 
still further, and to pourtray, chiefly, those plants of the 
most surprising forms, which demand of us the protection of 
the greenhouse or the stove. Here we have, and intend still 
further to delineate some of the choicest specimens of orchi- 
daceous plants, to which the above observations refer. Mr. 
Bateman, in reference to their geographical distril)ution, obser- 
ving that “Asia, Africa, and America will, perhaps, be found 
to divide the sj)ecies of the order amongst them into three 
nearly equal proportions (for the few which Europe produces 
need scarcely be taken into the account) ; and the closer we 
approach the tropics, the more numerous and beautiful they 
become. Arrived, at length, within the precincts of the torrid 
zone, we find them no longer ‘ prone on the ground ’ as hereto- 
fore, but conspicuous on the branches of the most rugged trees 
of the dampest and wildest forests, attracting the eye of the 
naturalist from afar, by the dazzling brilliancy of their colours, 
or arresting his attention by their delicious fragrance. And, 
here, we must take occasion to observe, that, although plants 
of this description are not unfrequently termed ‘parasitic,’ the 
epithet is altogether misapplied ; for while the parasites prey 
upon the vital juices of their victims, and perish with them, the 
‘epiphytes’ derive nothing but their stay, or local habitation, 
from the plants on which they have established themselves; 
and continue to flourish and flower, indifferent whether their 
sui)porters live or die. The great majority of the Orchidacea; 
of the tropics belong to the latter, or epij)hytic, class ; there are 
however, a few that do not, as was long ago observed by the 
same ingenious Rumphius, to whom we have already liad occa- 
sion to advert. After noticing, in terms of due commendation, 
the dignified habits of most of the tribe, he proceeds with a sigh 

IW (VDCTARIOM. 



IGO 



to remark that 'among these vegetable nobles, just as among 
the nobles of mankind, some degenerate individuals are ever to 
be found, who are on the ground always, and seem to constitute 
a class of their own.’ But it is not merely in their habits that 
the terrestrial species are placed below the epiphytes, they are 
also greatly inferior to them in singularity and beauty ” 

“ The Orchidaceae of each of the three great divisions of the 
globe have features of their own, so marked and peculiar, that, 
in most cases, a practised eye would have little difficulty in 
referring even a totally new form to its proper habitation. 
Thus, for example, the pendent stems and graceful flowers of 
many of the dendrobiums, aerides, and their allies, give a char- 
acter of beauty and lightness to tlie orchidaceous flora of tropical 
I ndia, which contrasts most strongly with the clumsy pseudobulbs 
of the bolbophyllums, or the long tails of the angrsecums of Af- 
rica. Again, in America, the characteristic features are, the 
upright vegetation (as distinguished from the pendent) of the 
epidendrums, the long straggling flower-spikes of many of the 
oncidiums, and a much greater variety of grotesque and marvel- 
lous forms than is to be met with in any part of the old world.” 
“ The uses to which the plants of this family are applied are 
few; but, in several instances, highly romantic. In Demerara, 
that most dreadful of all poisons, the ‘ Wourali,’ is thickened 
by the juice of the catasetums; and in Amboyna,the true ' Elixir 
of Love’ is prepared from the minute farina-like seeds of the 
Grammatophyllumspeciosum, which plant has just been receiv- 
ed in England, in a living state, from Mr. Gumming. In Mex- 
ico, where the ' language of flowers ’ is understood by all, the 
OrchidacefE seem to compose near the whole alphabet. Not an 
infant is baptized, not a marriage celebrated, nor a funeral ob- 
sequy performed, at which the aid of these flowers is not called 
in by the sentimental natives, to assist the expression of their 
feelings. They are offered by the devotee at the shrine of his 
favourite saint; by the lover, at the feet of his mistress ; and by 
the sorrowing survivor, at the grave of his friend ; whether, in 
short, on fast days or feast days, on occasions of rejoicing, or in 
moments of distress, these flowers are sought for with an avidity 
which would seem to say there was no sympathy like theirs; — 
thus ‘ Flor de los Santos,’ Flor de Corpus,’ Flor de los Muertos,’ 
‘Flor de Maio,’ 'No me Elvides’ (or forget me not), are but a 



161 



few names out of the many that might be cited to prove the 
liigh consideration in which our favourites are held in the New 
World. Nor are these the only honours that are paid to them, 
for Hernandez assures us that, in Mexico, the Indian chiefs set 
the very highest value on their blossoms, for the sake of their 
great beauty, strange figure, and delightful perfume. The fol- 
lowing are, however, almost the only known instances in which 
the tribe do any direct service to mankind. The bulbs of Max- 
illaria bicolor contain a large quantity of an insipid watery fluid, 
which is greedily sucked by the poor natives of Peru in the dry 
season. A fluid of a similar nature is obtained from what is 
probably a L;elia, in Mexico, and is administered as a cooling 
draught in fevers. From the roots of some of the orchises, even 
in Europe, the nutritive substance called ‘salep’ is obtained; in 
New Zealand, certain species are of considerable importance as 
esculents; and, in Guiana, the soles of the shoemaker are much 
indebted to the viscid matter obtained from the Catasetums and 
Cyrtopodiums, as are the poisoned arrows of the Indian. If the 
OrchidacejE have few uses they yield us pleasure of an intellect- 
ual kind, and so intense that it might attract the man of pleasure 
by its splendour; the virtuoso, by its rarity; and the man of 
science, by its novelty and extraordinary character.” 

Now that our aim is to give to those of our readers some gen- 
eral information respecting those wonders of the desert, of which 
they may occasionally witness specimens, we will copy the trans- 
lation of M. Descourtilz’s remarks on the Orchidaceae of Mexico 
given by Ur. Lindley in the Miscellaneous matter of (he Botan- 
ical Register. “It is in the bosom of the vast solitudes of 
America that these, the most diversified of plants, s|)ring up, 
flower, and perish. The entire life of a man, though devoted 
to their special study, would never finish their examination, so 
prodigious is the variety of their species, many of w hich are only 
seen after the fall of the protector upon which they lived. 

There is no part of Brazil, no latitude, no elevation above the 
sea, w here are not to be found Orchidaceae as different from each 
other as the conditions under which they glow. Some bask in 
the heat of the plains, others luxuriate in the agreeable freshness 
of a stream of water, attaching themselves to the branches of the 
trees which cover the waves with a verdant grotto; and others, 

181 &OCTAR1VU. 



162 



real cliildren of the mist, delight in a di izzling atmosphere, and 
support with ease the violence of stormy winds, and the often 
icy coldness of the Serras, whether stationed within a few feet 
of the earth, or swinging in the air from the houghs of the an- 
cient patriarchs of the forest. Some grow in deep recesses and 
gloomy arcades, where there is a perpetual circulation of a damp 
and heated atmosphere ; others, on the contrary, prefer the open 
glades, or Rocas, where some fallen trees, whose own foliage has 
perished, supply them with a scanty but sufficient nourishment. 

It is impossible to form an idea of a tropical forest by the 
woods of Europe, where the ivy is the only parasite which finds 
a permanent support. The Sertoes, or virgin woods, which cover 
a part of America, present the traveller w ith scenery incompar- 
able for its majestic character, and rich variety. AA'ho is there 
that would not be astonished at finding himself amidst a veget- 
ation, of which each individual struggles with its neighbour for 
existence, darting up, eagerly searching for the light of a cloud- 
less sun and a purer air, only to be found at a prodigious eleva- 
tion, and leaving darkness and water at their feet. It is here 
that trees of patriarchal age perish in the embrace of enormous 
climbers which overwhelm and bear them down, and which are 
sometimes carried overhead like cables, in other cases interlaced 
like the meshes of a net, and not unfrequently stand like lofty 
leaf-capped columns of spiral open-work, after the trees about 
which they have writhed themselves have fallen to decay with- 
in their grasp. 

Amidst this forest of ropes of sylvan rigging, grow innumera- 
ble Ferns, which hang down in plumes, or festoons, or the gay- 
est lacework, vast quantities of Araceous plants, and especially 
Tillandsias, forming broad patches of verdure upon a sombre 
ground. In the midst of airy garlands of Aristolochias, Big- 
nonias. Convolvuluses, and Passion-flowers live the Orchidaceae, 
each particular species of which seems to haunt its own peculiar 
plant. Thus the Epidendrum of the Cinchona refuses to live 
in the branches of the Lecythis and Couratari, notwithstanding 
that the seeds of these epiphytes are scattered indiscriminately 
by the wind. Other tribes again are always free from Orchid- 
aceae, as the huge trunks of Malvaceous trees, Isoras, Caroli- 
neas. Plantains, and Palms. 



163 



It is chiefly at the time of flowering that Orchidaceae become 
remarkable in their native haunts, and then less for the diversity 
of their forms, or the gaudiness of their colours, than for the 
exquisite perfume which they exhale. It is thus that I have 
often been led to the discovery of charming species, lurking 
amidst the foliage, and which my eye would never have 
detected.” 

169 Planting Trees. The following extract from the Inverness 
Courier contains information of a practice which should not be 
forgotten by planters. “ In most plantations there is a loss of 
about eight per cent, on the plants, from frost or other causes, 
and the great object of the forester is to accelerate and secure 
their growth the first year. On this head we can give a useful 
hint from the experience of Darnaway. One hundred and fifty 
acres have, within the last two or three years, been planted there 
without a single instance of loss, and this has been achieved 
by a very simple process, which merits the name and the honours 
of a discovery. It is merely putting a small quantity of lime 
into the hole in which the plant is laid. About four bushels of 
lime will suffice for an acre : it is thoroughly mixed and incor- 
porated with the mould, before the plant is inserted. The 
eflect of the lime is to push on the growth of the plant in its 
first and most precarious stage : new fibres begin to form and 
ramify from the tap-root, and not only is tlie growth of the plant 
secured, but it is advanced in a double ratio, compared with the 
ordinary system, where no lime is used. We saw this process 
in operation two years ago, and were not a little anxious as to 
the result of tlie lime. We had great faith in the sagacity and 
practical knowledge of IMr. Cutlar, the forester, but we confess we 
had a doubt that liming the plant would force it on prematurely, 
and that after a brief season of remarkable growth it would be 
found deficient in stamina, and decline as rapidly as it had 
arisen. Experience and observation have dispelled these fears. 
The plants are thriving steadily and vigorously in the most 
ex])osed parts of the forest; and, the dangerous period of their 
existence being over, there seems no doubt that they will con- 
tinue to assert and maintain their superiority of growth over 
their brethren of the forest. Indeed, we anticipate that in a 
short time lime will be universally used for this purpose, as it 
is in the operations of agriculture. The person that first used 

IS2 iCCTiBICM. 



164 



lime for manuring his land in Ross-shire, was 3Iajor Mackenzie, 
of Fodclerty, and many of his neighbours shook their heads in 
wonderment and pity at the adoption of such a scheme for 
“ burning up the land.” The worthy major, however, tri- 
umphed over all the unbelievers of the district, and has lived to 
see the universal adoption of lime, as well as another potent 
auxilliary of the soil, bone dust. May we not hope for a simi- 
lar result as to the application of lime in our forest plantations ? 
With respect to quality of soil, we need only remark that, where- 
ever ferns grow strong and abundantly, oaks will thrive and 
prosper ; and it is on a soil of this description that lime has 
been found to answer in the nurture of plants. 

170 Grafting Ipomieas. A mode of grafting Ipomoeas, commu- 
nicated by Mr. D. Beaton, to the Gardener’s Magazine, (vol. 15, 
p. 161 ) is worthy of notice ; not alone for its value in describing 
an easy mode of propagating this genus, but from its explana- 
tion of a principle, which is known to be applicable to many 
others. Mr. Beaton observes “ I practise grafting Ipomoeas, 
in order to get plants with as little trouble as possible of Ipo- 
moea Horsfalliae, which does not strike roots so readily as some 
others of this graceful family from cuttings, and laying is not 
always convenient in ornamental plant stoves. The process 
of grafting is quite simple, and, to a person versed in the sub- 
ject, it would be quite sufficient to say that cuttings of Ipomoea 
Horsfalliae were grafted on the spare tubers of Ipomoea insignis, 
or on those of any other species in that section ; but to the 
amateur it may be useful to state, that when the shoots of Ipo- 
moea Horsfalliae begin to grow in the spring, and when the eye 
is just ready to push in a young shoot half an inch long, is the 
best time for this operation. Then cut the scions with two 
eyes, the upper one to form the leading shoot, and the lower 
one to help the union with the tuber; cut the scion or shoot 
just below the joint, and cut out a slice an inch long on the 
opposite side to the eye. Then take a young tuber, and cut 
away a slice to correspond with your graft; fit them close 
together, and tie them tight with a piece of matting ; pot the 
tuber in as small a pot as you can get it into, using very light 
soil ; set the pot into a hot frame, or merely into the stove, and 
in a few days the union will be complete, and your plant will 
go on just the same as if it were on its own roots from the first. 



165 



A few side tubers can easily be spared from an established plant 
for this purpose; but for the nurseryman, or where a great 
number of plants are wanted, the following is the best and 
shortest way to go to work. At any time during the growing 
season, take as many cuttings as you want of plants, of Iporaoea 
insignis, or of the species of Ipomoea which Mr. Low of Clap- 
ton introduced from the higher parts of Brazil, which is much 
hardier than the Ipomoea insignis, and in all respects a better 
stock for Ipomoea Horsfalliae than Ipomoea insignis. They will 
strike roots in a fortnight ; and in a short time they will form 
young tubers, like those of young dahlias ; then shake them out 
of the pot, and graft them as above. Or any practised person 
may take the young points, of the current season’s growth, and 
insert them in the bottom of the cutting, instead of in the tuber, 
and they will take just as well ; but when this plan is adopted 
the cuttings ought to be divested of their bottom eyes when first 
put in, otherwise these eyes will be found troulilesome in pushing 
up and contending with the graft. 

171 Apple Trees, pruning. The late T. A. Knight, in his 
excellent Treatise on the Apple and Pear, animadverting on the 
unscientific mode of pruning practised by farmers, says “ The 
apple tree, being naturally very full of branches, frequently 
requires the operation of pruning ; and when properly executed, 
great advantages will be found to arise from it. But, as it is 
generally performed in Herefordshire, the injury the tree sustains 
is much greater than the benefit it receives. The ignorant primer 
gets into the middle of it, and lays about him to right and left, till 
lie leaves only small tufts of branches at the extremities of the 
large boughs. These branches, now receiving the whole nour- 
ishment of the tree, of course increase rapidly, and soon become, 
when loaded with fruit or snow, too heavy for the long naked 
boughs to support, which arc of necessity full of dead knots 
from the former labours of the primer. Many hundred trees 
annually perish from this cause. The present system of prun- 
ing ought to be precisely reversed ; and the primer should 
confine himself almost entirely to the extremities of the bearing 
branches, which are always too full of wood, and leave the in- 
ternal part of the tree nearly as he finds it. 

In pruning the apple tree, and all other standard trees, the 
points of the external branches should be every where rendered 

1S3 lOCTAKItJM. 



166 



tliiii and pervious to the light; so that the internal parts of the 
tree may not be wholly shaded by the external parts ; the light 
should penetrate deeply into the tree, on every side ; but not 
any where through it. Wheu the pruner has judiciously exe- 
cuted his work, every part of the tree, internal as well as external 
will be productive of fruit. A tree, thus pruned, will not only 
produce more Iruit, but will also be able to support a much 
heavier load of it, without danger of being broken ; for 
any given weight will depress the branch, not simply in pro- 
portion to its quantity, but in the compound proportion of its 
quantity, and of its horizontal distance from the point of sus- 
pension ; by a mode of action similar to that of the weight on 
the beam of the steel-yard ; and hence a hundred and fifty 
pounds, suspended at one foot distance from the trunk, will 
distress the branch, which supports it, no more than ten pounds 
at fifteen feet distance would do. Every tree will therefore 
support a larger weight of fruit, without danger of being broken, 
in proportion as the parts of such weight are made to approach 
nearer to its centre. 

Each variety of the apple tree has its own peculiar form of 
grow th ; and this it will ultimately assume, in a considerable 
degree, in defiance of the art of the pruner. Something may 
nevertheless be done to correct whatever is defective. When the 
growth of any variety is w^eak and reclining, the principle stem 
should be ti’ained to a considerable height, before it be allowed 
to produce branches ; and if any of these take a horizontal, or 
pendent direction, they should be regularly taken oft’. One 
])i inciple leading stem should be encouraged almost to the sum- 
mit of the tree, to prevent a sudden division into two large boughs 
of nearly equal strength ; for the fork which these form is apt to 
divide and break, when the branches are loaded with fruit. All 
efforts to give the heads of young trees a round and regularly 
spreading form, whilst in the nursery, will be found injurious 
in the future stages of their growth. Large branches should 
rarely, or never be amputated. 

In the garden-culture of the apple, where the trees are re- 
tained as dwarfs or espaliers, the more vigorously growing kinds 
are often rendered unproductive by the excessive, though neces- 
sary, use of the pruning knife. I have always succeeded in 
making trees of this kind fruitful by digging them up, and 



167 



replacing them, with some fresh mould, in the same situation. 
Tlie too great luxuriance of growth is checked, and a dispo- 
sition to hear is in consequence brought on 
172 Berberis AND Mahonia. It will be known to most of our 
readers that the genus Berberis has been divided; and that a 
portion of its species are called Mahonia. Some of these are 
very ornamental shrubs and but little known, which has occa- 
sioned the introduction of the following observations, for the 
benefit of those who can cultivate them. 

Alahonia glumacea, repens, and aquifolium, are three species, 
which, from tlieir extreme hardiness, abundance of blossoms, 
and evergreen habit, deserve to be planted more extensively in 
flower gardens, than they at present are. They do not require 
protection, however severe the winter may be. The soil best 
suited for them is a mixture of loam and peat, or a light sandy 
loam. After being established for two or three years, these three 
species send out abundance of creeping suckers, which fre- 
<|uently do not show themselves above ground until they are 
tw'o or three feet from the stem of the parent; these, if not 
wanted for increase, will rapidly add to the size and beauty of 
the original ])lant. If required to be taken off, the suckers 
should be cut asunder with a sharp spade, near to the stem of 
the plant, late in summer, and taken up for transplanting late 
in autumn, when they will be found furnished with abundance 
of roots. 

Mahonia fascicularis is considerably more tender, and will sel- 
dom survive a severe winter without injury, unless carefully 
covered. This species does not send out suckers from the 
roots, as is the habit of those mentioned above. The Berberis 
empetrifolia, (figured under No. 653 of the Botanic Garden) 
is a hardy evergreen shrub, of great beauty, wlien in flower. 
Its small leaves and slender ]>rostrate brandies, give it a very 
ditt'erent apjiearance from the other species of Berberis and 
Mahonia, and make it a desirable jilant for rock-work. The 
soil should be the same as for the Mahonias. AVhen planted 
in flower beds it is beneficial to lay down the prostrate branches 
occasionally, both to prevent their being tossed about by the 
wind, and for increase. The laid branches seldom produce 
many roots in the first season after laying, but in the autumn 
of the second, abundance of roots will be formed, and the young 

184 AUCTABIUU. 172, D. Cameron. 



168 



plants may be taken off and transplanted. This species, some- 
times flowers late in the autumn as well as early in spring. 

173 Grapes to preserve. A translation of several articles from 
the Transactions of the Prussian Gardening Society, is given in 
the eighth volume of the Gardener’s Magazine, amongst which 
occur directions for Preserving Grapes. The method is easy 
as well as advantageous, and may be very gratifying to the 
curious in the growth of fruit. The following are the directions 
given. “ In the spring, before the buds begin to swell, take 
healthy well-ripened shoot of the preceding year, and draw it 
up through the bottom hole of a flower-pot of about fifteen 
inches in diameter ; then fill the pot with rich soil, and cover both 
the soil and the outside of the pot with moss, to keep in the 
moisture. Water now and then, according to the season. By 
the end of August, cut the shoot half through, just below the 
pot, so as to increase the number of roots, which will be formed 
about this time in the soil contained in the pot. In the course 
of the month of October, according to the season, cut the shoot 
quite through, and remove the pot, with the vine, laden with 
from twelve to twenty bunches of fruit, to a dry airy room, 
with a northern exposure; here water occasionally, till the 
leaves drop off, but no longer. Thus treated, the fruit will keep 
good on the vine till the end of February, preserving its natural 
flavour. The best sort for this purpose is the white sweetwater.” 
Fruit, thus exhibited, as if entirely grown in. the pot, w'ould 
not be an uninteresting object, independently of the advantage 
obtained by its preservation. Various methods have been 
practised to preserve Grapes after being gathered. Foreign 
Grapes are usually packed in casks or jars, amongst saw-dust, 
which answers the purpose of preserving them from decay, as 
■well as injury from carriage to this country. Some persons 
after gathering the fruit, dip the stems of each bunch into 
melted resin, and then hang them up, in paper bags, in a cool 
dry room. Others suspend the bunches of fruit in boxes, place 
the berries as far asunder as the stems will admit, and then fill 
the box with clean dry sand ; or what appears to be less objec- 
tionable, clean small seed of some sort. None which could be 
readily obtained, would answer better for this purpose than 
clover seed. Whatever system be pursued, it would seem to be 
desirable that the fruit be kept cool and dry. 



169 



174 Soils, their Temperature. “Many soils are popularly 
distinguished as cold ; and the distinction, though at first view 
it may appear to be founded on prejudice, is really just. Some 
soils are much more heiated by the rays of the sun, all other 
circumstances being equal, than others ; and soils brought to the 
same degree of heat, cool in different times, i. e. some cool much 
faster than others. 

This property has been very little attended to in a philosophi- 
cal point of view; yet it is of the highest importance in agriculture. 
In general, soils that consist principally of a still’ white clay are 
difficultly heated ; and iieing usually very moist, they retain 
their heat only for a short time. Chalks are similar, in one re- 
spect, that they are difficultly heated ; but being drier they retain 
their heat longer, less being consumed in causing the evaporation 
of their moisture. A black soil, containing much soft vegetable 
matter, is most heated by the sun and air ; and the coloured soils, 
and the soils containing carbonaceous matter, or ferruginous mat- 
ter exposed under equal circumstances to the sun, accpiire a much 
higher temperature than pale-coloured soils. When soils are per- 
fectly dry, those that most readily become heated by the solar rays, 
likewise cool most ra]>idly, their power of losing heat by radi- 
ation being greatest ; but I have ascertained, by experiment, that 
the darkest coloured dry soil, (that which contains abundance of 
animal or vegetable matter, substances which most facilitate the 
diminution of temperature,) when heated to the same degree, 
])rovided it be within the common limits of the effect of solar 
heat, will cool more slowly than a wet pale soil, entirely composed 
of earthy matter. 1 found that a rich black mould, which 
contained nearly i of the vegetable matter, had its temper- 
ature increased in an hour from 6o° to 88“ by exposure to 
sunshine ; whilst a chalk soil was heated only to 69“ under the 
same circumstances. But the mould removed into fhe shade, 
where the temperature was 62”, lost, in half an hour, 15“; 
whereas the chalk, under the .same circumstances, had lost 
only 4“. A brown fertile soil, and a cold barren clay, were each 
artificially heated to 88“, having been previously dried : they 
were then cxjiosed in a temperature of 57“ ; in half an hour the 
dark soil was found to have lost 9“ of heat ; the clay had lost 
only 6". An equal portion of the clay containing moisture, after 
being heated to 88“, was exposed in a temperature of 55°; in less 

185 AHCTARIUM. Davy’i Agricul. Chemitt. 



170 



than a quarter of an hour, it was found to have gained the tem- 
perature of tlie room. The soils in all these experiments were 
placed in small tin plate ti’ays, two inches square, and half an 
inch in depth, and the temperature ascertained by a delicate 
thermometer. 

Nothing can he more evident than that the genial heat of the 
soil, particularly in spring, must be of the highest importance to 
the rising plant. And when the leaves are fully developed, the 
ground is shaded, and any injurious influence, which in the 
summer might be expected from too great a heat, entirely pre- 
vented ; so that the temperatm’e of the surface, when bare and 
exposed to the rays of the sun, affords at least one indication of 
the degrees of its fertility ; and the thermometer may be some- 
times a useful instrument to the purchaser or improver of lands. 
There is a very simple test of the cooling or radiating powers of 
soils, the formation of dew upon them, or their relative increase 
of weight by exposure to the air, after being diied in the day or 
the night, in sunshine or in shade. The soil that radiates most 
heat acquires the greatest increase of weight ; and of course the 
radiating powers of the soil are not only connected with its 
temperature, but likewise with its relations to moisture The 
moisture in the soil influences its temperature ; and the man- 
ner in which it is distributed through, or combined with, the 
earthy materials, is of great importance in relation to the nutri- 
ment of the plant. If water is too strongly attracted by the 
earths, it will not be absorbed by the roots of the plants ; if it is 
in too great a quantity, or too loosely united to them, it tends to 
injure or destroy the fibrous parts of the roots. 

The power of soils to absorb water from air is much connected 
with fertility. When this power is great, the plant is supplied 
with moisture in dry seasons; and the effect of evaporation in 
the day is counteracted by the absorption of aqueous vapour 
from the atmosphere, by the interior parts of the soil during the 
day, and by both the exterior and interior during the night. The 
stiff clays approaching to pipe clays in their nature, which 
take up the greatest quantity of water when poured upon them 
in a fluid form, are not the soils which absorb most moisture 
from the atmosphere in dry weather. They cake, and present 
only a small surface to the air; and the vegetation on them is 
generally .burnt up almost as readily as on sands. The soils 



171 



that are most efficient in supplyin;^ the plant with water by 
atinosplieric absorption, are those in which there is a due mix- 
ture of sand, finely divided clay, and carbonate of lime, with 
some animal or vegetable matter : and which are so loose and 
light as to be permeable to the atmosphere. With respect to 
this quality, carbonate of lime and animal and vegetable matter 
are of great use in soils ; they give absorbent power to the soil 
without giving it likewise tenacity: sand, which also destroys 
tenacity, on the contrary, gives little absorbent power.” Due 
attention to the foregoing observations cannot ffiil of being use- 
ful to those who are desirous of increasing the productive qual- 
ities of their soil ; an object which is sometimes sought without 
the guidance of any scientific or rational principle. 

17o FjEOM V MOUTAN, TO INCREASE. Various methods may be 
|)ractised to increase the Tree Paeony, none of which, however, 
seem to have the effect of making it a cheap and generally cul- 
tivated plant. This can but be regretted, on account of its 
splendour and its hardiness. Under No. 241, in the Botanic 
(iarden, we have published a method of raising young plants 
with facility, and it lias been practised very successfully, by 
many amateur gardeners, but it has not been attended to 
generally. Another method has been adopted liy M. Soulange 
Bodin of Paris, and published in I.e Bon .Jardinier for 1839. 
A translation is given in the 15th volume of the Gardener’s 
Magazine. The method is simply that of cleft-grafting a 
young shoot of the Tree Picony on a tuber of the common 
herbaceous Pa>ony, placing it in a pot, plunging it heat, and 
covering it with a liell-glass. It is recommended that the 
operation be performed at the end of .luly or beginning of 
August. IMr. Loudon observes, that “Mr. IMasters of Canter- 
bury has adopted this mode of propagating, with this difference, 
that, after grafting, the graft being tied with bast, and covered 
with grafting-wax, the whole is inserted into a bed of tan, 
leaving only about half an inch of the point of the scion above 
the surface. The grafted plants are inserted in the angular 
interstices between the pots, with which the pit is usually 
occupied; two, three, or four, are placed together, according 
to the size of the triangular space; and a larger or smaller 
l)ell-glass is placed over them, as may be requisite. The tubers 
throw out roots by the end of .September, or the beginning of 

18G .t.DCTA.SICM. 



172 



October, and are then taken up and potted, and placed in a 
cold frame, where they remain through the winter. 

The grafting wax used for covering this giaft is composed as 
follows; — Burgundy pitch, 1 lb.; black pitch, 4 oz.; rosin, 2 
oz.; yellow wax, 2 oz.; tallow, or suet, oz. The whole 
melted together, and, after being allowed to cool, it is used 
when rather less than milk-warm. 

176 Food of Plants. In a former part of the Auctarium, we 
inserted some interesting remarks on Germination from the late 
work of Dr. Thompson, on the Chemistry of Organic bodies, 
a treatise which we recommend to such persons as feel an inter- 
est in the chemistry of vegetables. AVe will here extract a por- 
tion of his observations on tlie Food of Plants. He says. 
“ Plants after they have germinated, do not remain stationary, 
but are continually increasing in size. A tree, for instance, 
every season adds considerably to its former bulk. The root 
sends forth new shoots, and the old ones become larger and 
thicker. The same increment takes place in the branches and 
the trunk. AVhen we examine this increase more minutely, we 
find that a new layer of wood or rather of alburnum, has been 
added to the tree in every part, and this addition has been made 
just under the bark. Vfe find too that a layer of alburnum 
has assumed the appearance of perfect wood. Duhamel has 
shown also that a new layer of liber next to the alburnum, is 
formed every year. Besides this addition of vegetable fibre, a 
great number of leaves have been produced, and the tree puts 
forth flowers and forms seeds. It is evident from all this, that 
a great deal of new matter is continually making its appearance 
in plants. Hence, since it would be absurd to suppose that 
they create new matter, it must follow that they receive it by 
some channel or other. Plants, then, require food as well as 
animals. Now, what is this food, and whence do they derive 
it ? These questions can only be answered by an attentive sur- 
vey of the substances which are contained in vegetables, and 
an examination of those substances which are necessary for 
their vegetation. If we could succeed completely, it would 
throw a great deal of light upon the nature of soils, and of ma- 
nures, and on some of the most important questions in agricul- 
ture. But we are far indeed at present from being able to 
examine the subject to the bottom. 



; 



173 



Dr. Thompson pursues the preceding subject as follows, 
shewing the dependence of vegetables on water, air, and soil, viz. 

177 Water indispensable to Vegetation. “In the first place 
it is certain that plants will not vegetate without water; for 
whenever they are deprived of it they wither and die. Hence 
the well-known use of rains and dews, and the artificial water- 
ing of ground. Water, then, is at least an essential part of the 
food of plants. But many plants grow in pure water; and 
therefore it may be questioned whether water is not the only 
food of plants. This opinion was adopted very long ago, and 
numerous experiments have been made in order to demonstrate 
it. Indeed it was the general belief of the seventeenth century; 
and some of the most successful improvers of the physiology of 
plants, in the eighteenth century, have embraced it. The most 
zealous advocates for it were. Van Helmont, Boyle, Bonnet, 
Duhamel, and Tillet. 

Van Helmont planted a willow which weighed five pounds in 
an earthen vessel filled with ’iOO lbs. of soil, previously dried in 
an oven, and then moistened with rain water. This vessel he 
sank into the earth, and he watered his willow, sometimes with 
rain and sometimes with distilled water. After five years it 
weighed 169} lbs. and the eartli in which it was planted, when 
again dried, was found to have lost only two ounces of its original 
weight. Here it has been said, was an increase of 164 lbs. and 
yet the only food of the willow was jiure water; therefore it Ibllows 
that pure w ater is sufficient to afford nourishment to plants. The 
insufficiency of this experiment to decide the question was first 
pointed out by Bergmann, in 1773. He showed, from the ex- 
periments of Margraft’, that the rain water employed by Van Hel- 
mont contained in it as much earth as could exist in the willow 
at the end of five years. For according to the experiments of 
Margraff, one pound of rain w ater contains one grain of earth. 
'I’he growth of the willow, therefore, by no means proves that 
the earth which plants contain has been formed out of water. 
Besides as 3Ir. Kirwan has remarked, the earthen vessel must 
have often absorbeil moisture from the surrounding earth, im- 
pregnated with whatever substance the earth contained; for 
unglazed earthen vessels, as Hales and Tillet have shown, 
readily transmit moisture. Hence, it is evident that no conclu- 
sion w hatever can be drawn from this experiment ; for all the 

187 aUCTABICM. 



174 



substances which the willow contained, except water, may have 
been derived from the rain water, the earth in the pot, and the 
moisture imbibed from the surrounding soil. 

The experiments of Duhamel and Tillet are equally incon- 
clusive ; so that it is impossible for them to decide the question, 
whether water be the sole nourishment of plants or not ? But 
all the attempts hitherto made to raise plants from pure water 
have failed ; the plants vegetating only for a certain time, and 
never perfecting their seeds. These experiments were made by 
Hassenfratz, Saussure, and others, with the same unfavourable 
result. Duhamel found that an oak, which he had raised by 
water from an acorn, made less and less progress every year, 
AVe see, too, that those bulbous roots, such as hyacinths, tulips, 
&c. which are made to grow in water, unless they be planted 
in the earth every other year, refuse at last to flower, and even 
to vegetate; especially if they produce new bulbous roots an- 
nually, and the old ones decay. From all these facts and exper- 
iments, it is reasonable to conclude that water is not the sole 
food of plants 

So far, indeed, is water from being tlie sole food of plants, 
that in general, only a certain proportion of it is serviceable, 
too much being equally prejudicial to them as too little. 
Some plants, it is true, grow constantly in water, and will not 
vegetate in any other situation ; but the rest are entirely de- 
stroyed when kept immersed in that fluid beyond a certain 
time, 3Iost plants require a certain degree of moisture in or- 
der to vegetate well. This is one reason why different soils are 
required for different plants. Rice, for instance, requires a 
very wet soil : were we to sow it in the ground on which wheat 
grows luxuriantly it would not succeed : and wheat, on the con- 
trary would rot in the rice ground. AVe should therefore in 
choosing a soil proper for the ])lants which we mean to raise, 
consider the quantity of moisture which is best adapted for 
them, and choose our soil accordingly. Now the dryness or 
moisture of a soil depends upon two things ; the nature and 
proportions of the earths which compose it, and the quantity of 
rain which falls upon it. Every soil contains at least three 
earths, silica, lime, and alumina, and sometimes also magne- 
sia. The silica is always in a state of sand. Now soils retain 
moisture longer or shorter according to the proportions of these 



175 



eartlis. Those which contain the greatest quantity of sand retain 
it the shortest, and those which contain the greatest quantity of 
alumina, retain it longest. The first is a dry, the second a wet 
soil. Lime and magnesia are intermediate between these two 
extremes: they render a sandy soil more retentive of moisture, 
and diminish the wetness of a clayey soil. It is evident there- 
fore, that l)y mixing together proper |)roportions of these four 
earths, we may form a soil of any degree of dryness and mois- 
ture that we please. 

But w hatever be the nature of the soil, its moisture must de- 
pend in general upon the quantity of rain which falls. If no 
rain at all fall, a soil, however retentive of moisture it be, must 
remain dry ; and if rain were very frequently falling, the soil 
must be open indeed, if it be not constantly wet. The propor- 
tion of the different earths in a soil, therefore, must depend 
upon the (piantity of rain which falls. In a rainy country, the 
soil ought to be open ; in a dry country it ought to be retentive 
of moisture. In the first, there ought to be a greater propor- 
tion of sand, in the second of clay.” 

178 Air indispensable to Vegetation. “That air is neces- 
sary for the vegetation of (ilants has been completely jiroved; 
and that a considerable portion, at least of the carbonaceous 
matter which they contain, is absorbed from the air, has been 
rendered probable by the experiments of chemical philosophers. 
Three articles which furnish nourishment to plants are supplied 
by the atmosphere; namely, carbonic acid, oxygen, and mois- 
ture; but it has been disputed how far plants are capable of 
absorbing carbonic acid, without the assistance of the soil on 
which they usually vegetate. 

Mr. Hassenfratz analyzed the bulbous roots of hyacinths, in 
order to discover the quantity of water, carbon, and hydrogen, 
which they contained ; and by repeating the analysis on a num- 
ber of bulbs, he discovered how much of these ingredients was 
contained in a given weight of the bulb. He analyzed also 
kidney-beans and cress seeds in the same manner. Then he 
made a number of each of these vegetate in pure water, taking 
the precaution to weigh them before hand, in order to ascertain 
the precise quantify of carbon which they contained. The 
plants being then placed, some within doors, and others in the 
open air, grew and flowered, but produced no seed. He after- 
wards dried them, collecting with care all their leaves and every 

1S3 auctaeicm. 



176 



other part which had dropped off during the course of vegeta- 
tion. On submitting each part to a chemical analysis, he 
found that the quantity of carbon which it contained, was some- 
what less than the quantity which existed in the bulb, or the 
seed from which the plant had sprung. 

These experiments have been repeated by Saussure with a 
very different result. Sprigs of mentha piperita, allowed to 
vegetate for some time in distilled water, nearly doubled the 
portion of carbon which they originally contained ; but when 
the same experiment was repeated in a place where but little 
light had access, the carbon, instead of being increased, was 
somewhat diminished, has Hassenfratz had found. Hence, it 
is possible that the result obtained by Hassenfratz was owing 
to the want of light. Thus it cannot be doubted, lliat plants, 
even when they vegetate in pure w ater, are capable of absorb- 
ing nourishment from the air; but as plants in this situation 
cannot produce perfect seeds, and as they gradually decay and 
cease to vegetate, it is obvious that water and air alone are not 
sufficient.” 

179 Soil INDISPENSABLE TO Vegetation. “ The third, and only 
remaining source from which plants can draw their food, is 
the soil on which they grow. Now this soil consists of two 
parts; namely, pure earths, which constitute its basis, and the 
remains of animals and vegetables applied as manure. One 
use of the earthy part of the soil is to furnish a support for 
the plants, and to administer the proper quantity of water to 
them ; but as all plants contain earthy and saline matters, and 
as these substances are constantly present, w e cannot avoid con- 
sidering them as in some measure constituting an essential part 
of plants. Now there is reason to believe that the proportion 
of earthy and saline matters in plants is considerably influenced 
by the soil on which they vegetate. Saussure made beans grow 
in three different situations. The first set was supported by 
distilled water; tlie second was planted in sand and supported 
by rain water; the third was planted in a pot filled with mould 
and placed in a garden. The ashes yielded by these different 
plants were to each other in the following proportions: — 

1 Those fed by distilled water . 3.9 

2 Those fed by rain water, . 7.5 

3 Those growing in soil . 12.0 



177 



Here the quantity of fixed water, yielded by the beans which 
had vegetated in soil, was more than three times greater 
than what was obtained from those which had been fed solely 
by distilled water. 

The same philosopher examined the ashes of various plants 
growing on a granitic, and on a calcareous soil. The plants 
which grew on the granitic soil contained a considerable pro- 
portion of silica and metallic oxides ; those which grew in the 
calcareous, little or none of these bodies, but a greater propor- 
tion of calcareous earth than the granitic plants. 

'I’lius it cannot be doubted, that the proportion of earthy 
matter contained in plants is considerably influenced by the 
nature of the soil on which they grow ; but whether plants de- 
rive the whole of these fixed principles from the soil, or whether 
they are capable of forming them to a certain extent by the 
unknown powers of vegetation are ({uestions not yet finally 
decided. 

180 Saline MATTER i\ Plants. “ Besides earths, plants always 
contain a portion of saline matter. Those that grow at a dis- 
tance from the sea contain potash, while sea-plants contain 
soda and common salt. Phosphate of lime is a constant ingre- 
dient, and phosphate of potash a very common one. Some 
plants contain ])eculiar salts. Thus nitrate of soda is usually 
present in barley, nitrate of potash in nettles and the sun- 
flower, &c. It appears from the experiments that have been 
made, that peculiar salts promote the vegetation of peculiar 
plants. Sea plants require common salt, and languish in soils 
wliere it is not to be found. Borage, nettles, and pellitory, 
thrive only in soils which contain nitrate of lime or potash : 
gypsum promotes the vegetation of lucern and clover. 

Salts then are not inactive; and when properly applied, they 
promote the growth of vegetables. In these cases they appear 
to be absorbed by the plants which they invigorate. Duhamel 
found tliat sea plants made little progress in soils which con- 
tain no common salt. Bullion made seeds of sun flower to 
grow in a sandy soil, containing no trace of nitre. On examin- 
ing the plants, no nitrate of potash could be detected in them, 
but the salt made its appearance as usual when the plants were 
watered with a weak nitrous solution. From the experiments 
of Saussure, we learn that plants absorb saline solutions in very 

139 ACCTABICU. 



178 



different proportions, and tliat in general those are absorbed in 
greatest quantity which are most injurious to vegetation. Saus- 
sure explains this apparent aiiomally by supposing that a por- 
tion of the roots were soon destroyed by the injurious liquids, 
and that then they absorbed the solution indiscriminately. 
When various salts were dissolved at once in the same solutions, 
and plants made to vegetate in them, it was found that differ- 
ent proportions of the salts were absorbed. Thus it appears 
that plants do not absorb saline bodies indiscriminately. Saus- 
sure supposes that the difference depends rather upon the 
degree of liquidity which the solution possesses, than upon any 
discriminating power in the root. But if this were the case it 
would be difficult to explain how so much greater a proportion 
of water should be absorbed than of the salt which it holds in 
solution. 

181 Animal and Vegetable Manure. Water, carbonic acid, 
and oxygen, and perhaps also earths and salts, constitute a part 
of the food of plants; but is very clear that the whole food is 
not furnished by these substances. It is well known that if 
vegetables be successively raised on the same ground, they at 
last exhaust it, or render it sterile ; and to prevent this, farmers 
are obliged to supply their grounds annually with a quantity of 
manure. Without this manure or some equivalent, plants can- 
not be made to thrive, or to perfect their seeds. Neither water, 
air, nor earths, nor salts, will prevent them from perishing. 
Giobert mixed together the four earths, silica, alumina, lime, 
and magnesia, in the proper proportions to constitute a fertile 
soil ; and after moistening them with water, planted several 
vegetables in them; but none of them grew well till he moist- 
ened his soil with water from a dunghill. Lampadius planted 
different vegetables in compartments of his garden, filled each 
with one of the pure earths, and watered them with the liquor 
which exuded from a dunghill. They all grew, notwithstand- 
ing the diversity of the soil ; and each contained the usual 
earthy constituents of plants, notwithstanding the absence of 
these constituents from the soil. 

It is not the earths which constitute a fertile soil, but the 
remains of animal and vegetable substances, and the propor- 
tion of these capable of being held in solution by water. It 
appears from the experiments of Mr.Hassenfratz, that substances 



179 



employed as manures produce effects in times proportioned to 
their degree of putrefaction ; those substances which are most 
putrid producing the most speedy effects, and of course soonest 
losing their efficacy. Having manured two pieces of the same 
kind of soil, the one with a mixture of dung and straw highly 
putrefied, the other with the same mixture newly made, and the 
straw almost fresh, he observed, that during the first year, the 
[)lants which grew on the land manured with the putrefied dung 
produced a much better crop than the other ; hut the second 
year (no new dung being added), the ground which had been 
manured with the unputrefied dung produced the best aop : the 
same thing took place the third year, after which both seemed 
to be ecjually exhausted. Here it is evident that the putrefied 
dung acted soonest and was soonest exhausted. It follows from 
this, that carbon only acts as a manure when in a particular 
state of combination ; and this state, whatever it may he, is evi- 
dently produced by putrefaction. Another experiment of the 
same chemist renders this truth still more evident. He allowed 
shavings of wood to remain for about ten months in a moist 
place till they began to putrefy, and then spread them over a 
piece of ground by way of manure. The first two years this 
piece of ground produced nothing more than others which had 
not been manured at all ; the third year it was better, the fourth 
year it was still better, the fifth year it reached its maximum of 
fertility; after which it declined constantly till the ninth, when 
it was (piite exhausted. Here the effect of the manure evidently 
depended upon its progress in putrefaction. 

When vegetables are allowed to putrefy in the open air, they 
are converted into a loose black substance, well know n under the 
name vegetable mould. On this mould plants grow with great 
vigour. It is the substance which renders newly-cultivated 
lands in America, &c. so fertile. When exposed to the air, in 
the course of cultivation, it is gradually w asted and destroyed, 
and the lands are thus impoverished. This vegetable mould, 
therefore, is obviously one of the grand sources of the food 
of plants. It deserves, therefore, an accurate examination. 

182 Acid Soils. Einhof examined a sort of mould to which he 
has given the name of acid vegetable mould. It occurs in 
low-lying meadows and marshes, and the plants which grow 
upon it in these situations are the different species of carex, 

loo adctaricu. 



180 



juncus, and eriophorum. It constitutes also the principal part 
of the mould in high-lying situations, and moors where the soil 
is covered with heath (erica vulgaris). This mould is distin- 
guished from the preceding by containing a notable portion of 
phosphoric and acetic acids, which give it the property of 
reddening vegetable blues. The extractive which it contains is 
chiefly insoluble in water. This sour vegetable mould bears a 
considerable resemblance to peat, into which indeed it probably 
passes. Like it, peat contains a portion of phosphoric acid, 
and probably also of acetic acid, and an extractive readily solu- 
ble in alkalies, though but sparingly in water. Einhof has 
observed, that acid vegetable mould never occurs in those, soils 
which abound in lime, and that it is counteracted and brought 
to the state of good mould by the action of lime and marl, ft 
is clear that these manures will neutralize the acids, and thus 
enable the extractive, and other vegetable substances, to be 
acted upon by the atmosphere, to yield carbonic acid, and to 
assume those states which are proper for the nourishment of 
vegetables. It is probable that they act also directly upon the 
vegetable matter, and occasion decompositions favourable for 
vegetation. Hence the efficacy of lime when supplied to peat 
moss, and to sour lands in general. 

Upon the whole, then, it appears that plants are fed chiefly 
by that portion of vegetable matter which becomes soluble in 
water, and assumes the properties of extractive ; that the quan- 
tity of it in soil must neither be too great nor too small ; that the 
insoluble part of vegetable mould gradually assumes this state, 
either by the action of the atmosphere, or of earths or salts; 
that the presence of an acid, by countei’acting this change, 
injures the nourishing quality of vegetable mould; and that 
lime is serviceable, partly by neutr alizing the acid, and partly 
by accelerating the decomposition of vegetable mould. Animal 
manures probably supply similar materials with vegetable mould. 
They probably pr-event the formatiorr of acids, or neutralize 
them when formed : and likewise promote the decomposition 
and solubility of vegetable matter. The striking effects which 
animal manure produces on the growth of vegetables are well 
krrown; though it is not possible at present to point out the way 
in which they act. 

Such is the present state of our knowledge respecting the food 



181 



of plants, as far as it is supplied by the soil in which they vege- 
tate. It is probable that it is imbibed by the extremities 
of the roots only ; for Duhamel observed, that the portion of 
the soil which is soonest exhausted is precisely that part in 
which the greatest number of the extremities of roots lies. This 
shows us the reason why the roots of plants are continually 
increasing in length. By this means, they are enabled, in some 
measure, to go in quest of nourishment. The extremities of the 
roots seem to have a peculiar structure adapted for the imbi- 
bing of moisture. If we cut off the extremity of a root, it never 
increases any more in length : therefore its use as a root has 
been in a great measure destroyed. But its sides send out 
fibres which act the part of roots, and imbibe food by their ex- 
tremity. Nay, in some cases, when the extremity of a root is 
cut off the whole decays, and a new one is formed in its j)lace. 
This, as Dr. Bell informs us, is the case with the hyacinth. 
The extremities of the roots contain no visible opening. Hence 
we may conclude that tlie food which they imbibe, whatever it 
may be, must be in a state of solution; whilst the absolute ne- 
cessity of water renders it probable that water is the solvent. 
And, in fact, the carbonaceous matter in all active manures is 
in such a state of combination that it is soluble in water. All 
the salts which we can suppose to make a part of the food of 
plants, are more or less soluble in water. This is the case also 
witli lime, whether it be pure or in the state of a salt ; magne- 
sia and alumina may be rendered so by means of carbonic acid 
gas; and Bergman, Macie, and Klaproth, have shown that even 
silica may l>e dissolved in water. We can see, therefore, in 
general, though we have no precise notions of the very combi- 
nations which are immediately imbibed by plants, that all the 
substances which form essential parts of that food may be dis- 
solved in water.” See Thomson’s Chemistry of Organic Bodies. 

183 Chrys.antiiemums, Cclture of. Although our own prac- 
tice inclines us to prefer propagating Chinese Chrysanthemums 
from cuttings, still we are free to confess, that where they can 
be divided, trained to a wall of good aspect, and have a light 
rich compost to grow in, they become exceedingly splendid. 
The late 3Ir. Haworth, of Chelsea, paid much attention to this 
plant, and as he so decidedly preferred division of the old plants, 
we will take the liberty of copying his directions, for the benefit 

191 ACCTARIUM. 



182 



of our readers, as they appear in a communication to Mr. Lou- 
don, and given in the ninth volume of the Gardeners’ Magazine. 
He says “ There have been various methods recommended for 
the cultivation and propagation of these showy plants, and that 
by cuttings in May, is now almost universally adopted. But I 
do not approve of this for strong fibrous-rooted, hardy herba- 
ceous plants with late autumnal blossoms ; for critical time is 
lost by the delay of striking the cuttings ; and, if they are accel- 
erated by heat and glass, they are (more than any other plants) 
debilitated, weakened, and dwarfed, and often lose their lower 
leaves by the time their flowers are open, having a faint and 
sickly appearance, instead of the vigorous growth of such roots, 
if annually parted and transplanted like perennial asters or 
other hardy and herbaceous plants. 

I recommend their voracious and very fibrous roots to be parted 
in autumn or early spring, and planted in very rich manured 
light soil, at the foot of a south or west aspected wall, with not 
more than one, two, or three branches from each root, trained 
to the wall as regularly and as thinly as a peach tree, cutting 
off all superfluous shoots and weak lateral flower-buds. They 
must, when planted, be watered in the usual way, and after- 
wards all over their leaves, with a fine rose wateringpan, lightly, 
as a fine slight shower, as often as their foliage flags, quailing 
to the beams of a powerful sun, which will sometimes be three 
times a day in the hottest weather. This will quickly re-erect 
their drooping leaves, without scorching or blistering them, 
and cause these uncommonly slow-growing plants to advance 
with a degree of comparative rapidity that is as pleasing as it 
is surprising, and their leaves will become twice as large 
as when treated in the usual way. The size of this foli- 
age, too, as in bulbous and most other plants, will indicate the 
increase of size also in the expected but as yet invisible flowers. 
Thus treated, these conspicuous plants will reach the height 
of three or four feet in the smaller sorts, and that of seven and 
eight at least, in the tallest kinds, terminating in abundant and 
most beautiful flowers, many of which will far surpass five inches 
in expansion, and with almost every colour, except deep scar- 
let and the tints of blue. 

But other aspects than the south or west, and even the open 
borders in very favourable seasons will suit the greater part of 



183 



these plants, near London, tolerably well, and enable them to 
open their flowers, though much later and smaller than tliose 
against a south aspected wall, where they will expand every 
season; and if properly blended as to colour, at the middle and 
end of every November, they are capable of making a more 
showy and magnificent appearance of flowery beauty, richness, 
and elegance, than I ever beheld in any other group. The du- 
ration of their hardy flowers is likewise greater than that of 
other autumnal plants, both as to individual blossoms, and in 
the lateral successioual ones, and even when cut for bouquets and 
placed in vessels of water; one plant of the old purple, in my 
garden, having had flowers from the beginning of November, 
to the second week in January. But the earlier they can be 
made to come into blossom, by open air treatment (for all 
forcing irretrievably weakens them) the better, and the longer 
will be their duration, and the finer their soft but agreeable 
chamomile scent. 

184 Alpines, Winter Treatment of. To be successful in 
preserving the more tender sorts of Alpine plants, in pits and 
frames, care must be taken to make the bottom perfectly dry, to 
plunge the |)Ots in dry sand, as near the glass as possible, to 
remove, occasionally, wet adhesive soil from the tops of the pots, 
and supply its place with dry light sandy com|)Ost; to admit 
plenty of air during fair weather, by drawing tlie sashes entirely 
ofl’during tlieday, and during bad weather to give air by lifting up 
the lights. When winter sets in, a layer of fern, straw, or other 
similar protecting material, should be put round the pit, or 
frame, to prevent the frost from penetrating it. During the night, 
w hen frost is severe, protect with mats or other covering. When 
once the frost has reached the surface of the pots it then becomes 
safer to let the covering remain on during the day-time also, and 
not remove it or give air until the soil, &c. is tlioroughly thawed, 
the sun and air then doing the [ilauts more injury than they 
receive by exclusion from light. 

This mode of management approaches pretty nearly to their 
natural winter treatment on their native mountains, covered as 
they are for months by snow, and thereby excluded from atmos- 
pheric changes. Little or no water is necessary from Novem- 
ber until February or March, when, as the sun becomes more 
powerful, many begin to grow, and require moistening over 

192 AUCTAEIUM. 1S4, D. CamcroD. 



184 



head as well as by the soil. In 3Iarch the plants will also be 
benefited by leaving off the sashes during mild nights^ prepar- 
tory to their being placed in their summer quarters. The pits 
and frames should be made to face east, west, or north, but not 
south. 

185 Seedling Fruit trees indispensable. The decay of 
the best varieties of fruit-bearing trees, which have been distri- 
buted through the country by grafts, is a circumstance of great 
importance. There is no mode of preserving them ; and no 
resource, except that of raising new varieties from seeds. Wliere 
a species has been ameliorated by culture, the seeds it affords, 
other circumstances being similar, produce more vigorous and 
perfect plants ; and in this way the great improvements in 
the production of our fields and gardens seem to have been 
occasioned. 

Wheat, in its indigenous state, as a natural production of the 
soil, appears to have been a very small grass; and the case is 
still more remarkable with the ap[)le and plum. The crab seems 
to have been the parent of all our apples. And two fruits can 
scarcely be conceived more different, in size, colour, and 
appearance, than the wild plum and the rich magnum bonum. 

The seeds of plants exalted by cultivation always furnish 
large and improved varieties ; but the flavour, and even the col- 
our of the fruit, seems to be a matter of accident. Thus a hun- 
dred seeds of the golden pippin will all produce fine large-leaved 
apple-trees, bearing fruit of a considerable size ; but the tastes 
and colours of the apples from each will be different, and none 
will be the same in kind as those of the pippin itself. Some will 
be sweet, some sour, some bitter, some mawkish, some aromatic ; 
some yellow, some green, some red, and some streaked. All 
the apples will, however, be much more perfect than those from 
the seeds of a crab, which produce trees all of the same kind, 
and all bearing sour and diminutive fruit. 

The lai ger and thicker the leaves of a seedling, and the more 
expanded its blossoms, the more it is likely to produce a good 
variety of fruit. Short-leaved trees should never be selected ; 
for these approach nearer to the original standard ; whereas the 
other qualities indicate the influence of cultivation. 

Seeds should be chosen from the most highly cultivated 
varieties, as they give the most vigorous produce. 

185, Davy’s Agricultural Chemistry, 



185 



AUCTABITCTMo 



186 Reviving Flowers. Under section 136 some directions will 
be found concerning the method of reviving plants, or parts of 
plants, which may have become faded, as recommended by M. de 
Droste, Camphor he found to be the most efficient stimulant, 
and entire submersion of the plants in a w’eak solution of it to be 
the best method of application. In reviving flowers, submer- 
sion may occasionally be resorted to, with those of strong petals, 
but it cannot be generally practised. If the following easy 
method of application of Camphor be employed, it will often- 
times be found particularly useful to those who desire to pro- 
long the beauty of a flower for the purpose of making a correct 
drawing of it. Add a tea-spoonful of camphorated spirit of 
w ine to a tumbler-full of water, then having cut off the ends of 
drooping flowers, insert them therein. After four or five hours 
take them out again, cut off the extreme ends of the stems, and 
put them in fresh water. Another method, which we have found 
to be useful, is to place the ends of flower stems in hot water for 
ten minutes, then cut off as much of their stems as was immer- 
sed in the hot water, and place them in cold water to remain. 
Either of these methods will be found useful, but flowers rarely 
last long after such resuscitation. 

AVhen cut specimens of flowers have been long enclosed in a 
box, as is sometimes the case with those which are transmitted 
to distant parts of the country to be drawn and published, we 
find that exposure to the light quickly destroys their beauty ; 
but by keeping them still secluded from light, and in a somew hat 
moist atmosphere, which may be produced by a little damp 
moss kept in the box which contains them, the freshness of 
many may be much prolonged. Specimens which we have 
received in boxes by post, from the Royal Botanic Garden, 
Edinburgh, through the favour of Dr. Graham, have occu- 
pied two nights and a day in their transmission, yet they have 
generally arrived in perfection ; and by continuing as much as 

193 ADCTAKIOM. 



186 



was convenient, their seclusion from light, some flowers have 
been ke]>t a fortnight in perfection. 

187 Camphor. The mention of this gum in the above article 
reminds us that some further notice of it may not be unac- 
ceptable. This substance exists in rosemary, thyme, sage, lav- 
ender, anemone, and other plants, but the article of commerce 
is imported from Japan, Sumatra, and Borneo. That from the 
two latter islands is obtained from a large forest tree called 
Dryobalanus camphora, of Forster, in a concrete state, by split- 
ting its central or heart-wood to pieces. The Japan Camphor 
is from a species of laurel, the laurus camphora, which the na- 
tives cut into chips, and obtain the camphor in a crude state by 
distillation. It is further purified in this country and submitted 
to a sort of sublimation, with steam. Camphor is lighter than 
water, and a singular phenomenon has been observed relative 
to its floating on this fluid which may interest some of our rea- 
ders. If into a bason of clean water a few small light pieces 
be scraped from a lump of Camphor, they will instantly com- 
mence whirling round on the surface with great velocity, some 
describing circles, and others spinning on their own axis. This 
phenomenon has not, we believe, been satisfactorily accounted 
for. 

188 Greenhouse Plants. As many of our readers are inter- 
ested in the management of Greenhouse ])lants, and our chief 
desire is to be useful to all, some hints on the general manage- 
ment of a greenhouse may not be unacceptable. It should be 
first observed that “ Greenhouse Plant ” is an appellation of local 
import only, for it will be seen, as a matter of course, that 
plants which will require the greenhouse in one country will 
not do so in another, nor even in opposite parts of our own 
country, as may be instanced in the difference of treatment 
some require in the north of England and Devonshire. 

The principal part of these which we cultivate in the Green- 
house are such as are natives of New Holland, the Cape of 
Good Hope, some parts of China, INIexico, and various other 
countries situate between the tenth and fortieth degrees of lati- 
tude, both north and south of the equator. It has been already 
noticed that altitude, or the height which any part of a moun- 
tain rises above the level of the sea, has its temperature affected 



187 



by such elevation as well ashy the distance at which it happens 
to be situated from the ecjuator. Hence it is evident that plants 
will not always be found hardy or tender in proportion as they 
are natives of a more northern or southern latitude. It is 
therefore chiefly on the experience of tliemselves or their prede- 
cessors that cultivators depend for a knowledge of the hardihood 
of any plant under their care. 

Plants which we consider as belonging to the Greenhouse 
require a higher temperature to bring them to perfection than 
is usually present in this country ; but this increased temper- 
ature is in general obtained simply by an inclosed building of 
glass, which admits and confines the heat of the sun’s rays with- 
out permitting it to be dissipated by wind or cold air. Artificial 
heat, produced by fire, is required only in winter, and then only 
to keep the temperature of the house above the freezing point, 
or to dissipate the damp which may collect therein, from the 
evaporation continually going on from the plants and moist soil, 
which in winter the more readily becomes condensed, from the 
coldness of the glass and walls. 

“ 7’he plants should be looked over most days to see if any 
require water, w hich must only be given when quite dry ; in the 
winter season ; from nine to twelve o’clock in the morning is the 
best time for watering them, for, if watered in the afternoon, 
they are apt to be chilled at night, which makes their leaves 
look yellow and unhealthy. When the surface of the mould is 
green with moss, &c., the top should be taken off, and the 
surface moved with a flat stick, but not deep enough to disturb 
the roots; if a little fresh mould is wanted on any of them, it 
should be added, always being careful to put the same kind of 
soil they are already grown in, for we have seen a dift’erent kind 
])ut on sometimes, which injures plants more than some cul- 
tivators are aware of. When the weather begins to get warm 
in spring, a little air should be admitted all night, to harden the 
plants before they are set out, a little must be given at first, and 
continue to increase it till they have full air, if the weather will 
allow of it. The time of setting them out in the open air depends 
entirely on the weather. Sometimes they may be put out with 
safety by the middle of May, in other seasons not till the latter 
end; but they had better stay in a little too long, than be jjut 
out too soon. Calm cloudy weather is the best for setting them 

194 AOCTiEICM. 



188 



out, when a sheltered situation should be chosen for them. 
The best time for shifting them into fresh pots, is early in spring ; 
some shift them before they are set out, and let them make 
fresh roots whilst in the Greenhouse, which is a very good plan, 
particularly for young or tender plants. If any plants are too 
tall, and want cutting back, it should be done early in spring, 
as soon as they begin to grow ; then they have time to recover 
themselves, and make good bushy plants by autumn. 

Cuttings require to be put in at various seasons. From 
Christmas to May, may be considered the best time for cuttings 
in general, but some will require to be put in at various seasons 
throughout the year, according to the state of the shoots, in the 
same manner as Stove Plants. Most of the young plants that 
are potted off in spring, will want shifting into larger pots in 
autumn. While the plants are out they must be attended 
regularly with water. The best time for watering them in 
summer, is as late as possible in the afternoon, then they have 
all the night to refresh themselves. If watered in the morning of 
a warm day, they will dry again almost immediately. Plants 
should not remain out too long in autumn, as they are liable to 
have too much wet. The middle of September should be the 
latest, but give them full air as long as the weather will permit. 

Seeds of Greenhouse plants should be sown early in spring ; 
the beginning of February is a good time, then the plants get 
strength before winter; and the sooner seedlings are potted off 
the better. 

In preparing mould for the plants, it should be chopped up 
with the spade altogether, turf and all, and not sifted as is the 
general practice, and a great reason of plants not succeeding; for 
by sifting it all the stringy and rooty part of the mould is lost, 
which is certainly the best part of it, for it keeps the soil light 
in the pots, so that the roots can spread themselves regularly, 
which is not the case when sifted, for then it gets close together, 
and often bakes as hard as a brick, so that it is impossible for the 
roots to get through it.” 

189 Dessert Apples and Pears. A correspondent of the Gar- 
dener’s Gazette, who signs himself W. P. A., Newmarket, has 
given in that much-improved and now excellent Gardeners’ 
Newspaper, lists of the best twelve dessert Apples and twelve 
Pears for espalier training, with remarks which are evidently 



189 



from the pen of an experienced cultivator, and we are sure the 
talented and never-tiring conductor of that paper will not 
object to our availing ourselves of the prominent parts of so 
useful an article. The labours of the late Thomas Andrew 
Knight have been of inestimable value to this department of 
horticulture, not alone from the improvements which, during 
a long and active life, he himself effected in the varieties of the 
apple and pear, but also from the attention which he has 
thereby drawn to these fruits, making them of infinitely more 
value in the dessert than any other produced in this country. 
The writer of the article referred to has given synonymes, 
or the different names, by which the sorts are usually known, 
their season of ripening, and also remarks which will be useful 
to the cultivator of these useful fruits. The following is the 
list of apples, restricted to twelve varieties. 

APPLES. 



Names. 


Synonymes. • 


Seftson of Ripening. 


Devonshire Quarrenden. . 


..Red Quarrenden 




Oslin 






Wormsley Pippin 


..Knight's Codlin 




King of Pippins 


..Hampshire Yellow 




Kerry Pippin 






Court of Wick 


. . Wood’s H untingdon . . . . 




Golden Pippin 


. . Pepin d’Or, Reinette d’.4n 


g. Nov., April. 


Ribston Pippin 


. . Formosa Pippin ........ 




Sam Young 


..Irish Russet 




Old Nonpareil 


..Reinette Nonpareil 




Scarlet ditto 


..New Scarlet ditto 




Court Pendre Plat 


. .Garnon's Apple 





In the above list 1 have placed such only as I know to be 
vigorous-growing and free-bearing kinds in almost all soils. 
The Golden Pippin, however, as generally planted, is an ex- 
ception to this rule. Young trees of this kind appear deter- 
mined not to grow in old orchards; but if pits four feet wide 
and eighteen inches deep be prepared, and well drained with 
brick rubbish, and then filled with fresh loam from an old 
pasture, with about one-fourth of leaf-mould, or perfectly 
decayed manure, they will grow quite as well as any of the 
delicate kinds. I intend to plant according to the above 
suggestions, and have not a doubt but success will crowm my 
labours. Sam Young is an excellent dessert apple, by no 

195 AUCTABirM. 



190 



means so well known as its merits entitle it to be. In the 
autumn of 1838 I had an opportunity of tasting it in the 
neighbourhood of Dublin, where it is much cultivated, and in 
my estimation it is very little inferior to the Golden Pippin. 
The tree is a low, vigorous grower, seemingly well adapted for 
a moist situation ; it produces fruit abundantly, which is in 
perfection till the middle of April. The Court Pendre Plat, 
or, as it is called in the north of England, theWollaton Pippin, 
is one of the best and most beautiful apples in cultivation ; it 
keeps well until May, and in Belgium, I am informed, it is 
brought to table in great perfection in June and July. To the 
above list many excellent varieties might be added; but I am 
not acquainted with any better than those I have enumerated. 



Names. 


PEARS. 

Synonymes. Season of Eipening 


Jargonelle 


. . .Epargne 


.Aug., Sept. 


.Summer Franc Real ... 


. . .Franc Real d’Ete 


.Sept., Oct. 


Brown Beurre 


. . . Golden Beurre 


. Oct , Nov. 


Seckle 


, . .New York Red Cheek . . . . , 


.Oct., Nov. 


Marie Louise 


, ..Braddick’s Field Standard. 


.Oct., Nov. 


Crassane 


. . . Bergamotte Crassane 


. Oct., Dec. 


Winter Nelis 


...Bonne de Malines 


.Nov., Jan. 


Hacon’s Incomparable . 


. ..Downham Seedling 


• Dec., Jan. 


Napoleon 


. ...Medaille 


.Dec., Jan. 


Glout Mnrceau 


...Beurre d’Hardenpont 


.Dec., Jan. 


Passe Colmar 


...Chapman’s 


.Dec., Jan. 


Beurre Ranee 


. ..Hardenpont du Printemps. 


• Feb., May. 



Of pears, the above collection contains the cream of all that 
I have yet met with, and which I consider worthy of cultivation. 
There may be a few equal to those enumerated, but I am not 
aware that there are any superior to them. The Jargonelle 
planted against east, west, and north walls, and a few trained 
as espaliers or standards will give an excellent succession from 
the end of July to the middle of September. Summer Franc 
Real is a September pear, requiring to be used fresh from the 
tree; if kept only a few days after being gathered, it will be 
quite useless. As a bearer, either as a standard or against a 
wall, it is as prolific as the Hawthornden apple. Brown Beurre ; 
this excellent pear is too well known to require any note of 
commendation from my hands. With me it is rather a pre- 
carious ripener. Last year I had some of it ripe on the 20th 



191 



of September; this year, from the same tree, they were not 
ripe until the 7th of October. I have trees on all aspects 
except the north ; from the west it is ripe first, second from the 
east, third from standards on a dry soil, fourth from a south 
wall, and last from standards on a very strong soil in a wet 
situation. What can be the reason of its keeping better from 
a south aspect than from any other ? Is it because the tree 
being exposed to the full solar influence, the juices are more 
highly elaborated, and consequently the fruit being formed of 
superior material, is better able to resist decay, on the principle 
that strong wine is not so liable to turn acid as weak? I 
should like to have the opinion of some of your scientific con- 
tributors on this subject. The Seckle is an .\meiican pear of 
first-rate quality.” (The origin of the introduction of this pear 
to notice shall be mentioned at the end of this article.) “Marie 
Louise is one of the best, if not the very best, pears in cultiva- 
tion. It produces its fruit on the points of the young shoots, 
and therefore in pruning it must not be spurred in like the 
generality of pears, but only have the strong shoots thinned out. 
On a wall it should be treated the same as a peach, that is, 
have young wood laid in every season. The Crassane is a 
good but rather tender |)ear ; with me it is generally ripe about 
the middle of October, from a west aspect ; but fruit from 
branches of the same tree trained perpendicularly down the 
east side of the wall do not ripen until Decembei', and I have 
some now from a south wall which will keej) a fortnight or three 
weeks longer. Winter Nelis, or, as it is called in this part, 
“Curtis’s Royal,” is a small pear of first-rate quality. It bears 
very freely as a standard, and this year the fruit is much superior 
to that from a wall. Last year, Ifom standards, the fruit was 
not ripe until January; this year, from the same tree, it was 
ri|)e early in November, and is now done, but fruit from a west 
wall is just ready for table. How are we to account for this 
discrepancy in ripening? ITacon’s Incomparable, Napoleon, 
Glout Morceau, and Passe Colmar, are all excellent at this 
season. Napoleon and Passe Colmar are the only two pears 
in this collection that are improved in quality by being gi-own 
on a wall. This, I should think, arises from their containing 
a great quantity of juice, which by being exposed to the supe- 
rior heat of a wall, a great portion of the aqueous matter is 

196 AUCTAEICM. 



192 



evaporated, and consequently, the saccharine being concen- 
trated, the fruit is richer than it would be if ripened under the 
more disadvantageous circumstance of a full exposure. For my 
own part, I am convinced that many of our pears, both native 
and continental varieties, are deteriorated rather than improved 
in quality by being grown on walls ; and I am sure that such as 
Summer Franc Real, Maria Louise, Winter Nelis, Hacon’s 
Incomparable, and others of similar consistency of flesh, will, 
if ripened under anything like favourable circumstances, that 
is, with the heads of the tree tolerably open, so as to allow the 
sun to get to the fruit, always be superior in flavour to fruit of 
the same kinds ripened on walls. As a proof of this I may 
mention that the Beurre Ranee (" De Ranze ”), from east and 
west walls, under my care, is almost tasteless; from a south 
wall it is tolerably good, but from espaliers it is decidedly the 
best. Hacon’s Incomparable is a hardy good bearing kind, of 
very superior quality, and deserving to be planted by the dozen. 
The original tree of this kind stands in a baker’s yard at 
Downham, in Norfolk (hence the synonyme Downham Seed- 
ling), and annually produces an abundant crop. Glout Mor- 
ceau is a delicious pear; the flesh is so rich and deliquescent 
that no one can avoid admiring it. 

I have now given what I consider the twelve best pears in 
cultivation, that is, to give a succession for table throughout 
the season ; but to those who may feel inclined to have a more 
extensive collection, I can recommend as good and early ones 
• — Muscat Robert, Passans du Portugal, and Williams’s Bon 
Chretien ; for October, Louis Bonne (of Jersey), Beurre Bose, 
and Gansel’s Bergamot ; and for late ones, Ne plus Meuris, and 
Easter Beurre. The latter, however, with me, and likewise 
Beurre Diel, Duchess d'Angouleme, and Chaumontel, except 
for their fine appearance and large size, are quite worthless. 
Any one wishing to plant what to me appears the most beauti- 
ful fruit in existence, may plant Forelle, or, as it is commonly 
called, the Trout pear, from the speckles resembling those of 
the fish of that name. It is not a fine-flavoured pear, but this 
is made up for by its beautiful appearance in the dessert.” 

The above article has been copied under the impression that 
it will be useful to many readers of the Auctarium, and if any 
cultivators of the Apple or Pear, possess varieties which are 



193 



decidedly superior to those here named, we hope that they will 
inform us of the fact, and enable us to communicate it for the 
benefit of others, seeing that the best fruit is as easily cultivated 
as the most worthless. 

We have alluded to the origin of the Seckle Pear. The 
cori ect spelling of the name of this pear, we have been politely 
informed by T. B. Barclay, Esq., of Wavretree Lodge, Liver- 
pool, is Seckel; and that the occasion of its application, and 
the introduction of the pear to notice, is as follows. About fifty 
years ago a portion of that fine range of pasture ground, 
spreading from Philadelphia to the confluence of the Delaware 
and Schuylkill, belonged to a German, who discovered, in one 
of his meadows, the pear-tree in question. The quality of the 
fiiiit being very superior, it was soon increased, and spread far 
and wide, under its discoverer’s name, Seckel (not Seckle, as 
usually spelt). As no other tree of the same description has 
been found in the United States, it is of course considered, says 
3Ir. Barclay, to be a cutting brought by some early European 
settler, probably from Holland, or possibly from Sweden, this 
very spot having been first taken possession of by settlers from 
those countries, wliere, possibly, the parent tree of the variety 
may yet be found. 

190 Gkkenhouse Plants in the Open Garden. The practice 
of transplanting greenhouse and half-hardy plants into the 
flower garden, in May, or the beginning of .June, for the purpose 
of enlivening the liorders with their blossoms during summer 
and autumn, is justly carried to a considerable extent, in most 
places, with such showy plants, as all the varieties of Verbenas, 
Salvias, Fuchias, Lobelias, Anagallis, &c. This practice may 
be extended to almost all other soft-wooded free-flowering green- 
house and half-hardy plants, lioth frutescent and herbaceous. 
And although all are not calculated to make so splendid a dis- 
])lay as those mentioned above, still they add much additional 
variety, flower much more freely, and continue much longer in 
blossom, than if kept in pots in the houses; while their removal 
gives more room in the greenhouse, for hard wooded plants 
necessarily left there, as well as tor the introduction of Balsams, 
Ike. as they come into flower. Those about to be recommended 
for planting out, being chiefly of easy propagation, cuttings of 
their young wood may be readily struck in the latter end of 

197 .\nCTARIXJMi 100» Canicron. 



194 



August and heginuing of September ; and when rooted, maybe 
placed, several together, in store pots, during winter, in frames, 
pits, or agreenhouse, where they occupy but small space; and 
by being potted singly, in February or March, will be fit for 
turning out into the open ground when the planting season 
arrives. 

It would occupy too much space to enumerate every individ- 
ual species, fit for this purpose, but almost all the species which 
are usually considered greenhouse plants, of the following 
genera might be so employed ; viz. — Anigozanthus, Aristea, 
Agatha'a coelestis, Cobaea, Berckheya, Crassula, Calendula, 
Calceolaria, Cineraria, Dianthus, Dracocephalum, Gazania, 
Gnaphalium, Loiihospermum, Heliotropium, Leconites, Laven- 
dula, Lotus, Lobelia, IMesembryanthemum, Maurandia, Neja, 
Nicofiana, Nierembergia, Othona, Petunia, Rochea, Salvia, Sel- 
ago, Stachys, Salpiglossis, Tropaeolum, Verbena, Veronica, &c. 

The ground where they are to be planted should be well dug 
or trenched, and enriched by well rotted manure. The time for 
transplanting will vary in different seasons; that best suited for 
turning out Dahlias will also be suitable for species of the above 
genera. Much of their subsequent progress will depend upon 
the plants being so thoroughly hardened, before transplanting, 
as to sustain no perceptible check in their transition from a 
protected state to that of being wholly exposed to the vicissi- 
tudes of the open air. They may be hardened by various means, 
but a spare frame or pit will be most efficient, in which they 
ought to be placed a fortnight before being turned out, that 
they may receive an increased portion of air every day, until 
the sashes can be left off’ a few days entirely, without the plants 
sustaining injury. When hardened in the greenhouse, they 
should be placed as near to the glass as possible, and near to 
that part of the house where the air is admitted. In transplant- 
ing, select a cloudy day for the purpose, or one when there is 
the appearance of coming showers. Turn them out of the pots 
with their balls entire ; and if the roots are fresh and not over 
matted around the ball, plant them without disturbing their 
roots, about an inch deeper in the soil than they have been in 
the pots; but if the roots are much matted, or beginning to 
decay, it will be better to remove the greater portion, particu- 
larly those in a state of decay, from around the ball before 



195 



planting. When they have been well hardened, and a judicious 
time selected for turning them out, they commence growing im- 
mediately ; whereas, if not well hardened, the leaves will turn 
entirely brown, and several weeks of the season will be lost be- 
fore they recover their vigour ; and perhaps then will not have 
sufficient time for flowering so well as they otherw ise would have 
done. Those who have the advantage of a spare wall, might 
also, with advantage, cover it with some of the more hardy of 
the hard-wooded New Holland plants, which seldom flower pro- 
fusely, until established for two or three years, receiving some 
slight protection in winter. These are more appropriate for 
w’alls, than such plants as will, in every season, flower well in the 
open ground. We will, shortly, give a list of shrubs which are 
suited to the purpose here suggested. 

191 M.vnure, the application of. The properties of various 
species of Manure, the comparative stimulus which they afford 
to different plants, and the best modes of applying them, are 
subjects of the first importance to the horticulturist. These con- 
siderations, hitherto much neglected, are now meeting due atten- 
tion from practical as well as theoretical men; and as general 
principles become estalilished, or particular facts of importance 
elucidated, we intend introducing them to our readers. Dr. 
Lindley, in his Theory of Horticulture, has some observations 
on the application of Manures, which are much to the purpose, 
and which we transcribe. They may be useful to be held in 
mind, w hen we, hereafter, treat on the preparation of stimulating 
substances. He says “ Provided manure is of a permanent char- 
acter, it does not very much matter at what time it is admin- 
istered, because, if it does not act at first, it will sooner or later; 
but when it is of such a nature as to he easily dissipated, like 
malt -dust, or soot, or yeast, a knowledge of the proper season 
becomes extremely necessary. Plants will not receive the influ- 
ence of manure so readily at any season as w hen they are in the 
most rapid and steady growth ; because at that time the absorb- 
ing force of their roots, and their vital energies are all greatest. 
It is for this reason that a top-dressing is almost useless to a 
lawn at midsummer, but better in the spring, and best of all in 
October. If applied at midsummer, the ground is dry, and the 
vegetation extremely languid. When a top-dressing is applied 
in the spring, the lawn profits by it so long as it continues to 

198 ACCTiRICM. 



19fi 



grow vigorously ; but the c[uick appi oach of summer daily inter- 
feres with the force of this kind of vegetation, and diminishes 
the effects of the manure. On the contrary, if October is the 
season chosen for the operation, the grasses are then beginning 
to grow steadily, the operations of the mower are, or should 
be, suspended, and there are seven clear months at least during 
which the effects of the manure continue to be felt. It may be 
indifferent at what season such manures as bones, and other 
kinds of matter which decompose very slowly, are employed; 
yet there can be no doubt that upon every known principle 
they also should be given at a time when vegetation is most 
active; hence the every-day practice of digging manure into 
the borders of a garden in spring, or shortly before an annual 
crop is about to be committed to the soil. As to the manner 
of applying manure, it must be obvious that it can be of no use 
unless it is in contact with the absorbing parts of the roots ; 
now those parts are the young fibres and spongioles, and, when 
plants have arrived at any considerable size, the roots form the 
radii of a circle whose circumference is the principal line of 
absorption. This being so, if a plant has arrived at the state 
of a bush or tree, it is useless to apply manure to the base of 
the stem, because that is precisely where the power of absorp- 
tion is the weakest, if it e.xists at all ; and as the circle formed 
by the roots is generally greater than that of the branches, the 
proper manner of applying manure is, to introduce it into the 
ground at a distance from the stem about equal to tlie radius 
formed by the branches. And yet, although this is so evi- 
dently right, I have seen a gardener, who ought to have known 
much better, sedulously administering liquid manure, by pour- 
ing it into the soil at the base of the stem ; which is much the 
same thing as if an attempt were made to feed a man through 
the soles of his feet.” 

192 Nitrate of Soda. In accordance with our previous re- 
marks, we copy the following fact communicated by a corres- 
pondent to the Gardener’s Chronicle, (May 15, 1841). “In the 
beginning of June, 1840, I planted a piece of ground with 
Dahlias, the soil of which was very poor and light; in August 
they flowered freely, but small, and open in the centre when 
full blown. I then dissolved 11b. nitrate of soda, in 12 gallons 
of soft water, and applied it liberally all over the soil with a 



197 



watering-pau, and repeated it whenever watering was necessary; 
in the course of a fortnight its effects were truly astonishing; 
the plants became a fine healthy green — the flowers much 
larger, very brilliant, and perfect; some of which, exhil)ited in 
a stand in the amateur class, obtained a second prize at a pro- 
vincial Dahlia show, notwithstanding there were twenty-four 
competitors. 

193 Repotting Plants. The proper management of plants in 
pots requires not only attention, but also, some experience; or, 
in the absence of experience, a knowledge of the requirements 
of plants, when growing under such artificial circumstances. 
The following observations, copied from Lindley’s Theory of 
Horticulture, will prove useful to many cultivators, by exhibit- 
ing to them the reasons for adopting certain operations which 
arc so frequently recommended. “It is found that the roots of 
potted plants invaiiably direct themselves towards the sides of 
the pot, as must indeed necessarily happen in consequence of 
their disposition to grow horizontally. Having reached the 
sides, they do not turn back, but follow the earthenware surface, 
till at last they form an entangled stratum enclosing a ball of 
earth; then, if not relieved by repotting, they rise upwards to- 
wards the surface, or they attempt to force themselves back to 
the centre. The greater part, however, are always found in con- 
tact with the porous earthern side of the vessel; and especially 
all the most powerfully obsorbent, that is youngest, parts. 
They are, therefore, in contact with a body subject to great 
variations of temperature and moisture, in consequence of ex- 
posure to the sun, or to a dry air in motion, unless in those rare 
cases where the air is kept by artificial means .shaded, and uni- 
formly damp. By these means, in a dry summer day, when 
the leaves are perspiring freely, and therefore requiring an 
abundance of water from the roots, the latter are placed in con- 
tact with a substance whose moisture is continually diminishing; 
or in a greenhouse, where the pots are syringed, the heat of the 
earth in contact with the roots is lowered by a copious evapor- 
ation from the sides of the pot, just when, in nature, the bottom 
heat should be the greatest. The evil consequences of this are 
well known to gardeners, who however seldom take any suffi- 
cient precautions to prevent it. Greenhouse plants exposed to 
the open air in summer always suffer severely from the irregular 

199 ACCTABIDU. 



198 



condition of the sides of the pots ; whence the common practice 
of plunging them in the earth, for the purpose of bringing 
them into the condition of plants gi’owing in the open ground. 
This is, however, attended with some disadvantage; for the 
plants root, through the bottom of the pots or over the edges, 
among the earth in which they are plunged; and, when 
taken up in the autumn for removal into the greenhouse, they 
must have all such roots cut off again ; for there are no means 
of bringing them within the limits of a pot. For these and 
similar reasons, no good gardener will expose his greenhouse 
plants to the open air in summer, if he can help it; unless they 
are duplicates, or unless there is some object to be attained 
very different from the strange notion that they are hardened 
by this process. The effect that is really produced upon them 
is, to give them a sort of artificial winter in summer, that is, to 
expose them to a period of comparative rest from growth, 
which, in many cases, is useful. The best method of counter- 
acting the injurious effects of exposure to the air is by employ- 
ing double pots, the space between the two pots being filled up 
with moss, or any other substance retentive of moisture. 

To be managed perfectly, a plant, when young, should be 
placed in as small a pot as it will grow in, and it should be 
gradually and successively transferred to larger pots as it ad- 
vances in size. If this is done, the warmth to which the pot is 
exposed will be more immediately felt by the roots; the latter, 
as they grow, will ramify regularly all through the mass of 
earth, which, moreover, will be thoroughly drained : but, if, on 
the other hand, a very small young plant is placed at once in a 
large pot, and left to grow there, the drainage will be less 
perfect, the large mass of earth will be less sensible of the heat 
to which it is exposed, the roots will from the first take a 
horizontal direction towards the outside of the pot, and, once 
there, will follow its surface as has been already stated, 
exhausting the small quantity of earth with which they are then 
in contact, and profiting little or nothing by the main body of 
soil in the interior of the pot. It is by paying constant atten- 
tion to the shifting of the growing plant, by the employment of 
a very rich stimulating soil, and by a thorough knowledge of 
the kind of atmosphere which suits them best, that have 
been obtained those magnificent Peljirgoniums, Cockscombs, 



199 



Balsams, and similar flowers, which have so often and so justly 
excited the admiration of even the most experienced garden- 
ers.” It should be observed that those plants, such as Bal- 
sams, Lobelias, &c. which throw out roots from their stems, 
will be benefited by being sunk a little deeper in the soil at 
each potting, but those which do not do so would be injured by 
such sinking. It should be remembered, too, that in pots 
plants demand a lighter or more porous soil than would be 
suitable to them in the open ground. 

194 Ranunculuses, Culture of. We have been favoured with 
flowers of remarkably fine seedling Ranunculuses, raised by 
nir. Tyso of Wallingford, Berkshire, one of which has been 
drawn, and will shortly be published in the Botanic Garden. 
31 r. Tyso is, we believe, the most extensive and successful 
cultivator of this favourite flower in England, and we are obli- 
ged to him for furnishing us with practical instructions for its 
cultivation. This paper is the result of long experience, we 
therefore, give it entire. 

The Ranunculus Asiaticus, or Garden Ranunculus, is a hardy 
herbaceous perennial, forming a fasciculus of small tubers, about 
an inch and a half deep in the soil, which require to be taken 
up as soon as vegetation has ceased, or they are in a state of rest: 
these should be kept dry till the return of the planting season. 
There are innumerable varieties of this interesting species, 
above a thousand of which have received distinctive names, but 
they are for the most part of an arbitrary character. The 
Ranunculus has long been a favourite with the Florist, al- 
though by many unsuccessfully cultivated. It is deservedly 
esteemed for the symmetry of its double blossoms, the brillian- 
cy of its colours, and the great variety it displays. In a well 
selected bed may be seen, scarlet, purple, crimson, yellow, white, 
dark, (approaching to black,) with others which are denominated 
seifs: and bicolored sorts with white, yellow, buff, or crimson 
grounds, beautifully edged, spotted, mottled, shaded, or striped, 
in infinite variety. In offering a few hints on the cultivation 
of this attractive flower, it may be desirable to arrange them 
under different heads. The first point then after the possession 
of a collection of roots is to seek a suitable 

Soil. The Ranunculus delights in a rich hazely loam. If 
the natural soil of the garden be unfavourable, the top spit of 

200 AUCTARICM. 



200 



a pasture, of rather heavy and tenacious qualities should be 
procured, with the turf, and laid in a ridge some months be- 
Ibre use. To this may be added, about one third of old 
manure, turning it over, and mixing it till thoroughly incorpo- 
rated. This is of importance, as the tubers coming in contact 
with fresh manure engenders disease, and is highly injurious. 
To give precise directions for selecting a soil is difficult, but it 
is deserving of remark, that a pasture abounding with, and lux- 
uriantly sustaining, the British varieties of Ranunculus, or But- 
ter-cups, as they are usually called, has also been found 
congenial to the Asiatic species. 

Preparation of Beds. Having chosen an open but not 
exposed part of the garden, remove the earth a foot deep, and 
about three feet wide, and fill the bed with the prepared com- 
post. This is best done in Autumn, that time may be 
allowed for the earth to settle. The surface of the beds should 
be level, and not more than an inch higher than the paths, in 
order that the roots may be kept regularly cool and moist; 
and as the Ranunculus thrives on a firm bottom, the compost 
should not be disturbed at the time of planting, more than is 
just needful for that operation. 

Season for Planting. The best season for general plant- 
ing is the last week in February — the plants have not then to 
contend with the severities of the winter. In some seasons roots 
may be planted w ith advantage in October; they will have more 
time to vegetate, and establish themselves; will make stronger 
plants, and will bloom more vigorously, and about a fortnight 
earlier than if planted in spring. Considerable risk however, 
attends autumn planting, and it is not recommended, except to 
those who have a large stock, by way of experiment. Plant 
the roots in drills, and an inch and a half deep, four inches 
apart in the rows, and the rows six inches asunder. The 
plants will make their appearance in a month; after which it 
■will be advantageous to press the soil closely around them with 
the hands, stopping up the holes made by worms, frosts, and 
the protrusion of the leaves tlirough the surface. A little addi- 
tion of rich mould, between the rows, as a top dressing, will 
promote vegetation. 

Watering. April showers, and rains in May, are essential 
requisites of a congenial season. The Ranunculus delights in 



201 



a moist soil, and if there be a deficiency of rain in May, water 
must be plentifully supplied, just at the time the flower buds 
are appearing. This is a critical point of time, and for lack of 
moisture many plants fail to bloom, and send up only an abor- 
tive flower stem. Water from a pond or brook is better than 
from a well; it should be applied morning or evening, between 
the rows, from a tube pot, and not over the foliage, except in 
cloudy and showery weather. It may appear an anomalous 
direction to water in wet weather, but advantage should be 
taken of a shower falling to give a copious watering, as the 
plants are then naturally in a better state to receive moisture 
than in dry weather, when their pores are contracted. 

Shading. To obtain perfect blooms, a shade of hurdles, 
netting, or white calico should be used, when the blooms begin 
to expand. It should be so placed as to admit of abundance 
of air, and be removed in cloudy weather, and at night. This 
will not only prolong the period of flowering, but increase the 
.size of the blooms, and preserve the colours of the darker sorts : 
those with light grounds will, much better, sustain the sun’s 
rays. Many sorts will produce more flower buds than should 
be permitted to mature, they should, therefore, be pinched off 
when young, leaving two or three to each root. 

Taking dp. The roots may be lifted as soon as the foliage 
turns yellow, or if the weather be dry, they may remain till it 
becomes brown. The Ranunculus is apt to vegetate again im- 
mediately after it is brought to a state of rest, care is therefore 
required when the weather is moist at this season, to select and 
take up the sorts as they ripen, and not to wait until the 
whole are fit. Spread the roots thin, in an airy cool place, 
that they may dry gradually, and keep them in bags or boxes, 
till the planting season. 

Properties of a fine Ranunculus. First. Stem. — The 
stem should be strong, straight, from eight to twelve inches in 
height, and capable of supporting a large blossom. Second. 
Shape. — The blossom should resemble half a globe, with pet- 
als having entire well rounded edges, termed rose-leaved. 
Third. Size. — From two to three inches in diameter. Fourth. 
Colour. — Anything clear, rich, and brilliant, either consisting 
of one colour, as dark, white, crimson, yellow, &c. or bicolored, 
as edged, spotted, mottled, or striped. 

201 , AUCTAEIUM. 



202 



Seedlings. Every admirer of this beautiful flower, should 
cultivate seedlings, as they possess all the luxuriance and vig- 
our of youth, and produce larger and finer blossoms than the 
old varieties. Persons desirous of saving seed, should procure 
some seedlings, possessing fine properties, because these afford 
pollen for the purpose of impregnation, which is very seldom 
the case with long established sorts. The perfection of the art 
of raising seedlings, consists in having some of the best show 
flowers in each class, which produce an eye or pericarp: viz. 
dark, white, scarlet, yellow, edged, spatted, &c. and a number 
of the best semidoubles of each corresponding class, which 
produce anthers, as well as pericarps. Then apply the farina 
of any semidoubles that afford it, to the pericarp of the flower 
you have selected as a seed bearer. The most approved me- 
thod of fertilizing, is by gathering the semidoubles, and apply 
the pollen, by lightly pouring it on the pericarp, but if semi- 
doubles are scarce, then the application may be made with a 
large camel’s hair pencil. This operation should be repeated 
for several days, in fine sunny weather. The stems bearing 
seed vessels, should be supported with sticks, and two or three 
bandages of matting, to prevent the stalks from breaking down, 
which would deprive the seed of the necessary nutriment. 
Gather the seed when it turns brown, and keep it loose in a 
drawer, in a dry place. The seed vessels should be preserved 
entire till the time of sowing, when the seeds should be separ- 
ated from the pod, by carefully scraping them off with a knife. 

Sowing. The seed should be sown on a moderately light 
rich loam, in boxes or pots, not less than five inches deep. 
Put some coarse siftings at the bottom of the boxes, and then 
fill up with your compost, which should be broken fine but not 
sifted. Make the surface quite level and press it gently with a 
board, then sow the seeds about an eighth of an inch apart, and 
water with a finely perforated rose water pot, to make them lie 
flatj then sprinkle with fine dry mould, just sufficient to cover 
the seeds which should not be more than the thickness of a 
shilling below the surface. The boxes should be kept regular- 
ly moist by gentle waterings, which will often make the seeds 
bare, when this occurs they must again be lightly covered with 
fine mould. 

The best seasons for sowing are October and February, the 



203 



seed will come up in about a month. The boxes may be 
placed in a cold frame, on a thick layer of ashes, and be 
shaded when there is much sun. Care must be taken to pre- 
serve the young plants from slugs and other insects. About 
the second week in May, plunge the boxes up to the edge, in 
the open ground, where they have only tlie morning sun. 
About the beginning of July, when the foliage begins to turn 
yellow, water must be gradually discontinued, and the roots 
suffered to go into a state of rest; they may then be taken up, 
sifting the surface soil of the boxes, that the small tubers may 
not be lost. A ftw gentle drying, store the roots in a box of 
dry sand. The seedling roots may be planted at the same 
time and treated in the same way as directed under the head 
‘season for planting’. In consequence of their luxuriant 
growth they will require to be i)lanted quite as far distant 
apart as the established sorts; though the seedling roots the 
first year are much less in size, yet the major part of them will 
bloom profusely the following season, and will, under the 
management above detailed, amply compensate the florist for 
the trouble attending their culture. 

195 Linn.^:a borealis. Culture of. This little plant is highly 
interesting, from the association which it has with one of the 
most talented naturalists that ever existed. Men, like all other 
objects, whether of nature or art, are judged of comparatively, 
and although we have those of the present day whose know- 
ledge in natural history exeeeds that of any in tlie preceding 
century, still they are less in advance of their contemporaries 
than was Linneus in advance of the age in which he lived. 
He so far outstripped all his competitors in the investigation of 
tlie works of creation, as to be entitled to be called the most 
eminent naturalist the world has ever produced. On this 
account in part we advocate the culture of the little plant 
which bears his name and partly because it claims our atten- 
tion for its own sake — for its pretty pale rose-coloured sweet- 
scented flowers. 

In commencing its cultivation care should be taken to obtain 
well rooted plants, or first to pot them in light sandy peat 
until they are well rooted; they may then be turned out into a 
light sandy peat bed, in any sheltered situation, either in full 
exposure to the sun, or in the shade. As the slender shoots 

202, AUCTARIUM. 195, D. Cameron. 



204 



advance in growth they should be pegged down to the surface 
at some of the joints, and covered here and there with a little 
soil, to cause them to make young roots; and when once the 
plants become thoroughly established they will grow rapidly 
into a dense mass of interwoven creeping stems. Amongst 
these some light peat may, occasionally, be mixed; and if it 
be desired that a considerable space should be covered with 
the plants, they may be divided in April, into small patches, 
and taken up with the soil about their roots and then planted 
two feet apart; and by subsequently attending to the pegging 
down of the shoots, they will cover, in little more than a year, 
all the spaces left between the plants. There are what are 
considered to be two varieties in cultivation ; that from North 
America is said to be of freest growth, but a shy flowerer; 
whilst the other — a Scotch variety, is said to flower freely but 
is of slower growth. After cultivating both sorts, for several 
years, I find them equally luxuriant, and to flower equally well, 
when treated as I have directed. Generally, in the month of 
June they flower abundantly, and prove quite hardy. 

196 Layers, Rooting. To the late Thomas Andrew Knight, 
the vegetable physiologist and horticulturist are more indebted 
than to any individual of the present century. His numerous 
experiments have determined questions, and exposed facts pre- 
viously un-thought-of, we shall, therefore, occasionally select 
from his papers which have lately been published by his family, 
with a sketch of his life, forming a single, but highly interes- 
ting, volume. The following experiment on Layers, will 
suggest to the propagator of shrubs new modes of operation. 

When a layer is prepared, and deposited in the ground, the 
progress of the sap, in its descent towards the original roots, is 
intercepted upon the side where the partially detached part, or 
tongue, of the layer is divided from the branch ; and this in- 
tercepted sap is, in consequence, generally soon employed in 
the formation of new roots. But tliere are many species of 
trees which do not readily emit roots by this mode of treat- 
ment ; and I suspected that, wherever roots are not emitted by 
layers, the sap, which descends from the leaves, must escape 
almost wholly through the remaining portion of bark, which 
connects the layer with the parent plant. I therefore attempt- 
ed, in the last and the preceding spring, to accelerate the 



205 



emission of roots by layers of trees of different species which 
do not readily emit roots^ by the following means, having 
detached the tongue of the layers from the branches in the 
usual manner. Soon after Midsummer, when the leaves upon 
the layers had acquired their full growth, and were, according 
to my hypothesis, in tlie act of generating the true sap of the 
plant, the layers were taken out of the soil, and I found that 
those of several species of trees did not indicate any disposition 
to generate roots, a small portion of cellular bark only having 
issued from the interior surface of the bark in the wounded 
parts. I therefore took measures to prevent the return of the 
sap through the bark, from the layers to the parent trees, by 
making, round each branch, two circular incisions through the 
bark, immediately above the space where the tongue of the 
layer had been detached; and the bark between these inci- 
sions, which were about twice the diameter of the branch apart, 
was taken oft’. The surface of the decorticated spaces was 
then scraped with a knife, to i)revent the reproduction of the 
bark, and the layers were recommitted to the soil ; and at the 
end of the month I had the pleasure to ol>serve that roots had 
been abundantly emitted by every one. In other instances, I 
obtained the same results by simply scraping off, at the same 
season, a portion of the bark, immediately at the base of the 
tongue of the layers, without taking them out of the ground. 

By the preceding mode of management, the ascending fluid 
is permitted to pass freely into the layer, to promote its growth, 
and to return till the period arrives at which layers generally 
begin to emit roots ; the return of tlie sap through the bark, is 
then interrupted, and roots are, in consequence, emitted; and 
I entertain little doubt that good plants of trees, of almost every 
species, may be thus obtained at the end of every season. I 
wish it, however, to be understood, that my experiments have 
been confined to comparatively few species of trees ; and that 
I am not much in the habit of cultivating trees of difficult 
propagation. 

197 Oniox, Culture of. Every bulbous-rooted plant, and 
indeed every plant which produces leaves, and lives longer than 
one year, generates, in one season, the sap, or vegetable blood, 
which composes the leaves and roots of the succeeding spring ; 
and when the sap has accumulated during one or more seasons, 

203, AUCTARIUM. 197» Knight’s Papers, p. 181. 



206 



it is ultimately expended in the production of blossoms and 
seeds. This reserved sap is deposited in, and composes in a 
great measure, the bulb; and the quantity accumulated, as well 
as the period required for its accumulation, varies greatly in the 
same species of plant, under more or less favourable circum- 
stances. Thus, the Onion, in the south of Europe, acquires a 
much larger size during the long and warm summers of Spain 
and Portugal, in a single season, than the colder climate of 
England ; but under the following mode of culture, which 1 
have long practised, two summers in England produce nearly 
the effect of one in Spain or Portugal, and the Onion assumes 
nearly the form and size of those thence imported. 

Seeds of the Spanish or Portugal Onion are sown at the 
usual period in the spring, very thickly and in poor soil ; gen- 
erally under the shade of a fruit tree ; and in such situation 
the bulbs, in the autumn, are rarely found much to exceed 
the size of a large pea. These are then taken from the 
ground, and preserved till the succeeding spring, when they are 
planted at equal distances from each other, and they afford 
plants which differ from those raised immediately from seed, 
only in possessing much greater strength and vigour, owing to 
the quantity of previously generated sap, being much greater in 
the bulb than in the seed. The bulbs, thus raised, often exceed 
considerably five inches in diameter, and being more mature, 
they are with more certainty preserved, in a state of perfect 
soundness, through the winter than those raised from seed in a 
single season. The same effects are, in some measure, produced 
by sowing the seeds in August, as is often done ; but the crops 
often perish during the winter, and the ground becomes com- 
pressed and saddened (to use an antiquated term) by the winter 
rains; and I have in consequence always found that any given 
weight of this plant may be obtained, with less expense to the 
grower, by the mode of culture I recommend, than by any 
other which I have seen practised. 

198 Stems of Fruit Trees, Protection of. The blossoms 
of fruit trees fall off abortively in some seasons, and produce 
much fruit in others, in which the weather, relatively to tem- 
perature and moisture, has been nearly the same during the 
flowering season of such trees, and it is in very favourable, or 
very unfavourable seasons only, that the gardener can, with 

198, Knight’s Papers, p. 236. 



207 



any degree of precision, pronounce what portion of his blossoms 
will afford fruit. If a larger part of it than he has been led 
to anticipate prove abortive, he generally attributes its falling 
off to something which he calls a blight, and which he sup- 
poses to be the operation of some unknown noxious quality in 
the atmosphere, during the season in which his trees have been 
in blossom. 

jNIany circumstances have at different periods come under 
my observation, which have led me to draw a different conclu- 
sion, and to believe that whenever a very large portion of the 
well organized blossom of fruit trees falls off abortively, in a 
moderately favourable season, the cause of the failure may 
generally be traced to some previous check which the motion 
and operation of the vital fluid of the tree has sustained. 

It is well known that the bark of oak trees is usually stripped 
off in the spring, and that in the same season the bark of other 
trees may easily be detached from their alburnum, or sap- 
wood, from which it is, at that season, separated by the inter- 
vention of a mixed cellular and mucilaginous substance; this 
is apparently employed in the organization of a new layer of 
fibre, or inner bark, the annual formation of which is essential 
to the growth of the tree. If, at this period, a severe frosty night, 
or very cold winds occur, tlie bark of the trunk or main stem 
of the oak tree becomes again firmly attached to its alburnum, 
from which it cannot be separated till the return of milder 
weather. Neither the health of the tree, nor its foliage, nor its 
blossoms, appear to sustain any material injury by this sudden 
suspension of its functions; but the crop of acorns invariably 
fails. The apple and pear tree appear to be affected to the 
same extent by similar degrees of cold. Their blossoms, like 
those of the oak, often unfold perfectly well, and present the 
most healthy and vigorous character ; and their pollen sheds 
freely. Their fruit also appears to set well ; but the whole, or 
nearly the whole, falls off just at the period when its growth 
ought to commence. Some varieties of the apple and pear are 
much more capable of bearing unfavourable weather than 
others; and even the oak trees present, in this respect, some 
dissimilarity of constitution. It is near the surface of the earth 
that frost in the spring operates most powerfully; and the 
unfolding buds of oak and ash trees, which are situated near 

20t, ACCTAKICM. 



208 



the ground, are not unfrequently destroyed, whilst those of the 
more elevated branches escape injury; and hence arises, I 
think, a probability that some advantages may be derived from 
protecting the stems or larger branches of fruit trees, as far as 
practicable, from frost in the spring; and the following facts 
appear strongly to support this conclusion. 

3Ir. Williams, of Pitmaston, pointed out to me, two or three 
years ago, an apple tree which, having had its stem and part of 
its larger branches covered by evergreen trees, had borne a 
succession of crops of fruit ; whilst other trees, of the same 
variety, and growing contiguously in the same soil, but without 
having had their stems protected, had been wholly unpro- 
ductive. I subsequently saw, in the garden of another of my 
friends, Mr. Arkwright, of Hampton Court, in Herefordshire, a 
nectarine tree, which having sprung up from a seed accidentally, 
in a plantation of laurels, had borne, as a standard tree, three 
successive crops of fruit. The possessor of it, with the inten- 
tion of promoting its growth and health, cut away the laurel 
branches which surrounded its stems, in the winter of 182.3-4, 
and in the succeeding season not a single fruit was produced. 
Never having known an instance of a standard nectarine tree 
bearing fruit iu a climate so unfavourable, or nearly so unfa- 
vourable, I was led to expect that the variety possessed an 
extraordinary degree of hardiness ; but having inserted some 
buds of it into bearing branches upon the walls of my garden, 
at Downton, in the summer of 1822, 1 have not had any reason 
to believe that its blossoms are at all more patient of cold than 
those of other seedling varieties of the nectarine, 

1 planted some years ago in my garden, under a wall, in a 
north-east aspect, and shaded by a contiguous building, a 
common China rose tree (Rosa indica) and a plant of Irish ivy. 
Both have risen considerably above the top of the wall, which 
is thirteen feet high; and the rose tree, of which the stem is 
wholly covered by the branches and foliage of the ivy, has 
annually produced more abundant flowers, and exhibited 
symptoms of more luxuriant health, than any other flee of the 
same kind in my possession. The soil in which it grows is 
poor and unfavourable ; and I am unable to discover any cause, 
except the protection it receives, from which it has derived its 
luxuriant health and growth. 



209 



Ivy is generally, I believe, known to gardeners as a creeping 
dependant plant only ; but when the trees have acquired a 
considerable age, and have produced fruit-bearing branches, 
these exhibit an independant form of growth, which they retain 
when detached, and form very hardy evergreen shrubs of low 
stature. If these were intermixed with plants of the more 
delicate varieties of the Chinese rose, or other low deciduous 
and somewhat tender-flowering shrubs, so that the stems of the 
latter would be covered in the winter, whilst their foliage would 
be fully exposed to the light in summer, I think it probable 
that those might be successfully cultivated in situations where 
they would perish without such protection; and the evergreen 
foliage of the ivy plants in winter would be generally thought 
ornamental. Detached fruit-bearing branches of ivy readily 
emit roots, and the requisite kind of plants would therefore be 
easily obtained. 

199 Greenhouse Shrubs, for Walls. Having, at section 190 
of the Auctarium, given a list of greenhouse and half-hardy 
free-flowering plants, suitable for turning into the open ground, 
in the month of May, with directions concerning their man- 
agement, we now proceed to give a list of the hard-wooded 
and less free-flowering greenhouse plants, for planting against 
an open wall. These, to be seen in perfection, must be 
preserved for years, by some slight protection, every winter; 
such as fern, spruce fir, branches of broom, &c., according 
as one or the other may be conveniently obtained. The cover- 
ing should not, however, prevent light being admitted to the 
plants, otherwise they will be likely to suffer upon the covering 
being removed. As most of the plants about to be recom- 
mended ripen their wood in autumn, and remain dormant 
during winter, they endure much more cold, without injury, 
than those recommended for the flower-beds; which, from 
their succulent nature, are sometimes destioyed by the first 
sharp frost of autumn. The wall for planting against should 
have a border prepared in front of it, four feet wide, by mixing 
a portion of peat and sand, with the common soil, to the depth 
of two feet and a half, the bottom being first made perfectly dry. 
The plants should be hardened gradually, as recommended in 
section 190, and turned out against the wall in the latter end of 
May, at such a distance from each other as the different species 

205, AUCTABICM. 199| D. CameroD, 



210 



may require, according to the sizes they are likely to attain. 
In their subsequent management they should be kept closely 
nailed to the wall, and part cut out of them, when they become 
too crowded. The surface of the border should be loosened 
twice or thrice each season, but no manure dug in. The 
plants should be selected from some of the following genera: 
Acacia, Arbutus, Banksia, Beaufortia, Callistachys, Callis- 
temon. Camellia, Cassuarina, Ceanothus, Colletia, Duvaua, 
Edwardsia, Eucalyptus, Grevillea, Hakea, Leptospermum, Mel- 
aleuca, Metrosideros,Pillosporum,Pomaderris,Sollya,Veronica, 
Viburnum, &c. Until the plants cover the wall, vacant spaces 
may be covered with some of the free-growing greenhouse 
creepers, such as Cobseas, Lophospermums, Maurandyas, Tro- 
paeolums, &c. The soil, as well as the situation near the wall, 
will also be well-suited to the Gladiolus, Ixia, Oxalis, Zephy- 
ranthes, and other greenhouse bulbs. The Belladona Lily 
(Amaryllis belladona), of which flowering bulbs are annually 
imported, would, if planted near the wall, grow finely; and, 
after being established two or three years, will, every autumn, 
send up plenty of flower scapes, of a much larger size than 
those obtained from imported bulbs. This plant will also with- 
stand the severity of ordinary winters, without protection. A 
few plants of Melaleucas, Edwardsias, and Metrosideros, were, 
as far back as 1810, cultivated against a dwelling-house, in the 
nursery of Dicksons and Co., Edinburgh, where they grew for 
many years, and were, perhaps, amongst the first plants so 
treated in our island. 

200 Alstr(EMERia, treatment of. We are indebted to Mr. 
AV. Scott, the intelligent gardener at Bury Hill, for the follow- 
ing observations on the culture of Alstrcemeria, a genus of 
which he is a most successful cultivator. Most of the species 
will do very well in the open ground, but require to be planted 
under a wall, or in front of a greenhouse. As they begin to 
grow in the autumn, and early in spring, they will require 
frequent examinations, as snails and slugs are very fond of 
them ; and a covering of finely-sifted coal ashes will be found 
very useful, in keeping off these enemies, and also as a protec- 
tion from frost. The border should be made of old rotten 
manure and light loam ; and, if the subsoil be wet, a draining 
of brick rubbish would be useful, as too much moisture would 



211 



rot the roots in winter. They should also be sheltered from 
rough winds. Pelegrina will be found the tenderest of the 
genus, excepting the stove species — caryophylla. If grown 
in the greenhouse, Simsii, hoemantha, ligtu, tricolor, and aurea, 
will require a period of rest, from the beginning of August till 
November; whilst pelegrina, psittacina, and Errembaultii, will 
require very little. They should be fresh potted every season, 
in pots as small as they will conveniently go into; and as they 
fill them with roots, they should be shifted into larger, when 
they are growing very fast, which will be in April and May. 
They must be protected from rough winds, and will require a 
great quantity of water, for if suffered to Hag, the ends of the 
leaves will wither, and make them unsightly. They should 
have as much free mild air as possible. The soil should be 
one-quarter rotten hotbed manure, and the remainder light 
sandy loam. The twining varieties (now called Bomaria), 
such as acutifolia, hirtella, &c., will require a rope or other 
convenient support. 

■201 Root Pruning. We now fulfil the promise to introduce 
our readers to a knowledge of the practice of Root Pruning 
unproductive Fruit Trees, of luxuriant growth, for the purpose 
of rendering them fruitful ; a subject which will obtain the 
earnest attention of every thinking horticulturist. This practice 
has, long ago, lieeu partially followed, but to Mr. Rivers, of 
Sawbridgeworth, belongs the merit of introducing it more 
prominently to public notice. It ought, however, to be men- 
tioned that, several years ago, Mr. Errington, the gardener at 
Oulton Park, stated, in a communication to the Gardeners’ 
^lagazine (vol. 6, p. 693), the advantages he had obtained from 
Root Pruning his Peach, Pear, and Plum, trees. 

This operation may be performed in any month, between the 
end of October, and the beginning of the following March; but 
that which has hitherto been recommended is November. 
Before this month be, as a matter of course, received as the best 
in which Root Pruning can be performed, we hope that some of 
our horticultural friends will, by direct experiment, establish its 
claim to superiority. We know that the roots of trees are not 
wholly inactive during winter, and if they form, in that season, 
a necessary reservoir of fluids, advantageous to the nutrition of 
blossoms, which, on account of the temperature of the atmos- 

206 , AUCTABIUM. 



212 



phere, cannot then ascend into the branches, it may be that a 
bleeding (as it is called) of the roots would take place, when 
wounded in winter, just as it occurs in the branches of vines when 
they are severely cut back in spring ; and thus the blossoms, 
notwithstanding the exuberance of the branches, may be de- 
prived of a requisite (nutritive stimulus when active vegetation 
commences. The produce of blossoms is chiefly dependent on 
the concentrated juices of autumn and winter, and it would 
therefore seem desirable not to aim at depletion of these juices 
by autumn root pruning, but to enforce on the tree a rigid 
abstinence during summer, which will be effected by spring 
root pruning. 

It must be remembered that blossom-buds and leaf-buds, in 
their incipient state, are identical in their organization ; and 
that those buds which under favourable circumstances afford 
blossoms, would, if too much luxuriance be present in the tree, 
be driven, as it were, into the produce of leaves and branches 
only. Hence it becomes the study of the horticulturist to assist 
the tree in feeding its blossom-buds to a certain degree, so as 
to secure their healthy expansion ; but to restrict it from 
conveying into them such an excess of nutriment as may divert 
them from their original purpose to that of the tree’s enlarge- 
ment. It will now be seen that the horticulturist has his trees 
completely under control ; if they are impoverished, he can feed 
them ; if too luxuriant, and thereby unproductive, he can, by 
reducing their roots, check that luxuriance to any extent he 
chooses. 

We will now give the substance of a paper read before the 
London Horticultural Society, in April, 1841, by 3Ir. Thomas 
Rivers, jun. His experience is chiefly founded on the manage- 
ment of trees which were under his care, from the time of their 
being first planted ; this, however, is unimportant, as every 
intelligent gardener will readily understand how best to avail 
himself of the advantages of root pruning, when its principles 
are so clearly developed. He says — 

“ Supposing a tree to be planted in November or December, it 
may remain untouched two years from that period, and then, 
early in November, if possible, a circumferential trench ten 
inches from the stem of the tree, and eighteen inches deep, 
should be dug, and every root cut with a sharp spade, which 



213 



should be introduced quite under the stem at about fifteen 
inches in depth, so as completely to intercept every perpendi- 
cular root. The following year, the third from planting, a 
trench may again be opened, at fourteen inches from the stem, 
so as not to injure the fibrous roots of the preceding summer’s 
growth, and the spade again used to cut off all the circumfer- 
ential and perpendicular roots, that are getting out of bounds; 
the fourth year the same operation may be repeated, at 
eighteen inches from the stem, and in all subsequent root- 
pruning this distance from the stem must be kept ; this will 
leave enough undisturbed earth round each tree to sustain as 
much fruit as ought to grow, for the object is to obtain a small 
prolific tree. I assume, that in the course of years a perfect 
ball of fibrous roots will be formed, which will only require 
occasional examination. But it must be borne in mind that 
this circular mass of soil will, in a few years, be exhausted; to 
remedy which I had left round each tree a slight depression in 
the soil, or in other words, the trench has not been quite filled 
in; this circular furrow I have filled with fresh night soil, which 
has had a most excellent effect; any other liquid manure would 
undoubtedly be equally efficacious, but my soil was poor, and 
1 thought it required strong manure. As it did not come in 
contact with the roots, no injury resulted from using such a 
powerful raw manure. There is, perhaps, no absolute necessity 
for liquid manuring, as common stable manure may be laid 
round each tree in the autumn, and suffered to be washed in by 
the rains of winter, and drawn in by the worms. In mention- 
ing liquid manure, I give the result of my own practice ; the 
great end to attain seems (to use an agricultural phrase) to be 
able “to feed at home ;” that is, to give the mass of spongioles 
enough nutriment in a small space, but not too much, so that a 
tree will make shoots about four inches long in one season, (for 
such I conceive ought to be the maximum of growth) and at 
the same time be able to produce abundance of blossom-buds 
and fruit; on trees of many varieties of pears the former will 
be in too great abundance ; I think removing a portion in early 
spring, would be an improvement in pear culture. I have not 
mentioned the necessity of pruning the branches of pear trees 
thus brought into early fruitfulness; all that is necessary is the 
occasional removal of a crowded branch ; the fact being that 

207, ACCTABIVM. 



214 



root pruning almost does away with the necessity of branch 
pruning. Sometimes, however, a root will escape the spade, 
and then, in the following summer, a vigorous shoot or two will 
make their appearance; these should be shortened in July, to 
within four buds of their base, and the following autumn the 
feeding root must be diligently searched for and pruned. All 
over-vigorous shoots should be shortened in July, as it tends 
so much to the formation of blossom-buds. To prune roots 
with a spade may seem a rough and ungarden-like operation, 
but to use a knife would be tedious. In defence of spade 
pruning I can only say, that it seems to answer perfectly well 
with my trees, and experience is generally a tolerable guide. 
I have also practised root pruning on apple trees for two years, 
and have reason to hope for perfect success. Some trees have 
been arrested in a most extraordinary state of vigorous 
growth, making, previously to their being root pruned, shoots 
from four to five feet in one season, having been planted about 
five years. From plums and cherries I have reason to hope 
for the same results. 

I have not mentioned the possibility of root pruning fruit 
trees of twenty or thirty years’ growth with advantage. Irre- 
gular amputation of the roots of fruit trees, too vigorous, is, I 
am aware, an old practice ; but the regular and annual or 
biennial pruning of them, so as to keep a tree full of youth and 
vigour, in a stationary and prolific state, has not, that I am 
aware of, been recommended by any known author, although 
it may have been practised. In urging its applicability to 
trees of twenty or thirty years’ growth, I must recommend 
caution; the circular trench should not be nearer the stem than 
three feet, and only two-thirds of the roots should be pruned 
the first season, leaving one-third as support to the tree, so that 
it is not blown on one side by the wind ; and these, of course, 
must be left where they will best give this support. The 
following season half of the remaining roots may be cut, or, if 
the tree is inclined to vigorous growth, all of them; but, if it 
gives symptoms of being checked too much, they may, on the 
contrary, remain undisturbed for one or even two seasons. If, 
as is often the case, in pear trees, the roots are all perpendicular, 
the tree must be supported with stakes, for one or two years 
after complete amputation. 



215 



As regards the space required for each tree, when subjected 
to root pruning, planted in squares, or in rows by the sides of 
garden walks, six feet, tree from tree, will be found sufficient. 
For the form of the tree, the conical is indubitably the most 
agreeable, and generally convenient ; but for facility of protec- 
tion from spring frosts, or from birds by the cheap netting now 
so much used, trees trained as spreading bushes, the branches 
kept near the ground by hooked pegs, either of wood or iron 
ought to be tried. I feel confident the size and flavour of the 
fruit would be improved from being near such a radiating sur- 
face as the earth. 

Apples grafted on the Paradise stock, are astonishingly fruit- 
ful when root pruned, but in dry and poor soils, I should 
recommend the crab as a preferable stock. From the expe- 
rience of the last season, I can now confidently state, that Plums 
become equally prolific with other fruit trees when root pruned j 
and such esteemed Nuts, as the Cosford, the Frizzled Filbert, 
and the Dwarf Prolific Nut, may be made objects of much 
garden interest by being root pruned; the common Filbert 
might also be experimented on. The best form that can be 
given all the varieties of Nuts is tlie dwarf standard, with clear 
stems, two or three feet in height, and close compact heads, yet 
their shoots not too much crowded. Jt will not perhaps be out 
of place to enumerate here a few oftlie advantages of systematic 
root pruning. 

1st. The facility of thinning, and in some varieties, of set- 
ting the blossoms of shy bearing sorts, and of thinning and 
gathering the fruit. 

•2nd. It will make the gardener independent of the natural 
soil of his garden, as a few barrows-full of rich mould will sup- 
port a tree for a lengthened period, thus placing bad soils 
nearly on a level with those the most favourable. 

3rd. The capability of removing trees of fifteen or twenty 
years’ growth, with as much facility as furniture. To tenants 
tliis w ill indeed be a boon, for perhaps one of the greatest annoy- 
ances a tenant is subjected to, is, that of being obliged to leave 
behind him trees that he has nurtured with the utmost care. 

4th. The possibility of netting over a complete miniature 
Orchard, so as to protect it from the nipping frosts of spring, 
and the depredations of birds in summer. 

208 , ADCTABICU. 



216 



In conclusion I must again recommend caution; enough of 
vigour must be left in the tree to support its crop of fruit, and 
one, two, or three seasons’ cessation from root pruning, will often 
be found necessary. 

By beginners the following directions should be observed : 
If a number of established trees are to be operated upon, I 
should recommend them not to be all pruned in one season : 
thus, I would prune one third the first year, and the remainder 
the two seasons following; for it must be recollected, that trees 
in a state of uncontrolled luxuriance, suddenly and severely 
root pruned, will not be able to bring any fruit to perfection 
the following season. It is perhaps departing from the fruit 
garden rather suddenly, but I cannot forbear suggesting, how 
exceedingly ornamental, even to the smallest lawns, may be 
made (by root pruning) some of the most beautiful of our 
flowering trees ; such as the varieties of the Hawthorn, Pyrus, 
more particularly Pyrus Spectabilis, a most splendid tree, but 
too luxuriant for small flower gardens ; above all, the varieties of 
Robinia, which at present, owing to their rudeness of growth, 
and consequent liability to being wind-driven, cannot be 
planted in any flower garden, or on any lawn ; with root prun- 
ing they may be made, (particulaidy as standards), objects of 
extreme beauty. 

The varieties of the Horse chestnut, many of which are too 
rude for small lawns, may also be made to produce their flowers 
abundantly ; and some of the climbing roses, such as the 
Banksian roses, varieties of Rosa Sempervirens, the Boursault 
and Ayrshire roses, may be checked by root pruning, so as to 
produce their flowers in incredible abundance. I need not 
point out to the rose cultivator the great advantage of keep- 
these too vigorous species of roses in bounds; if the soil is rich 
and they are trained to pillars, they soon get unwieldy and 
suffer much from the wind, and if the knife is used, it only 
induces an abundance of shoots, and checks all tendency to the 
production of flowers. Now radical pruning, at once remedies 
the evil, and pillars of roses from six to eight feet in height, 
may be kept at that height, producing every season thousands 
of their beautiful flowers, and never giving any annoyance from 
their over-luxuriant habits. Climbing roses should be root 
pruned every autumn, if cultivated as pillar roses on small 



217 



lawns, and no floral ornament can be more interesting and 
beautiful ; those who have had their pillars of roses prostrated 
by a high wind in June, will I flatter myself appreciate this 
hint, and be able by root-pruning, to make their climbing roses 
fit subjects even for a small rose garden. 

Thus far have we followed Mr. Rivers through his paper, as 
read before the London Horticultural Society, and the thanks 
of Horticulturalists are due to him for bringing the subject so 
prominently before the public. He has roused the attention of 
the cultivator to general principles ; but further experience is 
required to enable us to pronounce on all its advantages, and 
to appreciate the methods of proceedure. 

Root-pruning, in winter has succeeded admirably, but we 
are not sure that it is the best season, under all circumstances. 
Checking luxuriance by cutting off large roots has been suc- 
cessful, but we are not sure that the practice should be indulged 
in without due attention being paid to the subsequent encourage- 
ment of the growth of small ones. Dr. Lindley has somewhere 
.said that a rank growth in a tree is not better evidence of health 
thancorpulenceinmau. Wethiuk the comparison defective. Man 
is endowed with reason to guide him, and if he offends against 
its dictates, he is sure to meet punishment. Disease is the re- 
sult of unfit indulgence. Whereas, if a tree be planted in rich 
soil, it luxuriates and grows, as nature intended it should grow, 
till it arrives at maturity, and tlien it becomes fruitful. But we 
are not content to wait for the period of maturity. M e desire 
that it should produce fruit in its very childhood ; therefore we 
starve it into extraordinary exertion ; we alarm nature, as it 
were, and she, in this, as in hundreds of other instances, makes 
an immediate effort at re-production. In the vegetable world, 
when an individual is maimed, irregularly supplied with food, 
or subjected to other treatment that may endanger life, it will 
generally be seen, that the means of increase are thereby called 
into greater activity. 

Root-pruning has hitherto been performed after the fall of 
the leaf, but to obtain flowers in the following spring, it may 
be reasonably supposed that if pruned in August the trees would 
have a better opportunity of maturing blossom-buds for the fol- 
lowing spring. Experience is yet wanting to show the different 
circumstances under which the process may be most advanta- 

209 , ACCTiRICM. 



218 



geously executed ; and as this is hereafter obtained we hope to 
convey it to the readers of tlie Botanic Garden. 

202 Bulbs Propagated by Leaves. When writing the obser- 
vations on the last article, regarding the re-production of plants, 
Mr. Herbert’s success in propagating bulbs from leaves presented 
itself, as one not amongst the least interesting of that class of 
natural phenomena. Reproduction, by bulbs, we have occa- 
sionally noticed in the Botanic Garden, (See Nos. 21, 53), and 
their growth from a leaf is the less surprising when the true na- 
ture of the bulb is considered. Mr. Herbert says, in the Gar- 
dener’s Chronicle, v. 1, 381. “ In the year 1809 1 first tried to 

raise bulbs of a Cape Oj-nithogalum by setting a cutting of a 
leaf. The leaf was cut off just below the surface of the earth in 
an early stage of its growth, before the flower-stalk had begun 
to rise ; and it was set in the earth near the edge of the pot in 
which the mother plant was growing, and so left to its fate. 
The leaf continued quite fresh, and on examination (when the 
bulb was flowering,) a number of young bulbs and radical 
fibres were found adhering to it. They appeared to have been 
formed by the return of the sap which had nourished the leaf. 
Thereupon two or three more leaves were taken off and placed 
in like situations, but they turned yellow and died without pro- 
ducing any bulbs. It appeared to me then, and it was confirmed 
by subsequent experience, that in order to obtain a satisfiictory 
result, the leaf must be taken off while the plant is advancing 
in its growth. I found it easy thus to multiply some bulbs that 
did not willingly produce offsets. I afterwards tried, without 
cutting the leaf off, to make an oblique incision in it under 
ground, and in some cases just above ground ; attempting, in 
fact, to raise bulbs by layering the leaf. This attempt was also 
successful, and some young bulbs were formed on the edge of 
the cut above ground, as well as below. I tried cuttings of the 
stem of some species of Lilium, and obtained bulbs at the axil 
of the leaf, as well as from the scales of the bulb ; and that prac- 
tice has been since much resorted to by gardeners, though I be- 
lieve it originated with me. I raised a great number of bulbs 
of the little plant which has been successively called Massonia, 
Scilla, and Hyacinthus corymbosus, by setting a pot full of its 
leaves, and |)lacing a l)ell-glass over them for a short time. A 
bulb was obtained with equal facility from a leaf of a rare 



219 



species of Eucorais; and experiments with the leaves of Lache- 
nalias were equally successful. I apprehend that all liliaceous 
bulbs may be thus propagated ; but the more fleshy the leaf, 
the more easily the object will be attained. 

203 Cabbage, .Asparagus, Beans. The efforts of old stems of 
vegetables to produce young shoots, which may be useful for 
domestic purposes, are well exhibited in the following cases, 
which have been handed to us on the authority of Mr. J. Pax- 
ton. In giving a new stimulus to the roots of plants which have 
been cut down, as described in the following cases, we think that 
too much stress cannot be laid on the application of liquid 
manure; and also on keeping the surface of the earth clean, and 
fre(|uently stirred. Regarding Cabbage, the directions are, 
“ When a head has been cut, the stump, with a few young 
leaves, should remain in the ground, that a new head may 
be formed at the setting on of each leaf, for the sap in its 
progress upwards to sustain the leaf, will also support the for- 
mation of the young head. Therefore the absurd practice of 
cutting off the leaves and leaving the stumps bare, being a great 
check to vegetation, ought to be entirely abandoned. Those 
stumps which remain in the ground all the winter, will proba- 
bly produce heads earlier in the spring than the plants from 
seed sow n between tbe 20th of July and the 5th of August. 
Some of the stumps, w ith their young leaves, might be removed 
into sheds, rooms, or other covered places, at the commence- 
ment of frost, hung up by tlieir roots, and replanted in March. 
These probably will i)roduce heads still earlier than the former. 
The running to seed of cabbage plants may be checked in due 
time, by placing a small twig through the stem of each plant, to 
impede the sap.” 

204 .'Asparagus. The following are the directions for obtaining a 
second crop of Asparagus in one season. “Towards the end of 
July, especially if it be rainy weather, cut down the stalks of 
the plants, fork up the beds and rake them, if the weather be 
dry, sprinkle the beds with liquid manure, and leave them rather 
flat, instead of the usual round shape, in order that they may 
retain all the moisture. In ten or fifteen days the Asparagus 
will begin to appear. If the weather continue dry, apply liquid 
manure three times a week. By tltis method you may cut Aspa- 
ragus till the end of September. 

210. AnCTAEIUM. 



220 



205 Beans. It has been found an excellent plan to cut down the 
stalks immediately after the crop is gathered, as they will soon 
throw up young shoots, and if showery weather succeed, yield 
a better crop of beaus than is obtained by late planting. 

206 Pinks, to Propagate. It may seem to be unnecessary 
that we should call attention to any mode of propagating the 
Pink, (Dianthus plumarius,) seeing that it can be effected so 
easily. We think, however, that Mr. Mearns, of the Zoological 
Gardens, 3Ianchester, to whose zeal and ability, horticulturalists 
owe much gratitude, has not only given us a more easy method 
of cultivating it than has hitherto been practised, but he has 
also, by his method, developed a principle which may prove of 
value. He uses no hand-glass, nor other covering, and observes 
that scarcely one in a hundred of his slips fail to grow. He 
says, “ I had many years been aware, that shortening, or any 
way cropping the foliage of the Pink, previously to putting it 
in to strike, was a bad plan; it likewise suggested itself to me, 
that, (something after my principle of coiling the vine) if I 
doubled up the lower end of each slip, it would undoubtedly 
facilitate the emission of roots ; and to enable me to accomplish 
it with the greater facility, I made the soil much firmer than is 
usually done in the general manner of piping. I do not use a 
dibber to plant with, but my fore-finger; I lay the lower end of 
my slip horizontally upon the surface of the soil, and so press it 
down into it; when, from the firmness of the soil, the slip is 
compelled to clip round the end of the finger; with the other 
hand I ttirn up the top to its perpendicular, and press the 
lower end down till the tail is about half an inch beneath the 
soil ; I then make the soil firm, and the operation is complete. 
If the slips are too long, I cut them up to a joint, to a suitable 
length. I have slipped off hundreds, and have not even cutoff 
the rag left on in slipping; and by the above process, not one 
cutting has failed ; yet it is better that the ragged end be cut off, 
either with a sharp knife, or with scissars, which is generally 
the most expeditious method. I planted 1700 slips this last 
season, not twenty of which missed, and all my plants are firm 
and stocky. The first season that I commenced operations here, 
I used to shade them, when the sun was powerful, for the first 
fortnight, with fresh cabbage or rhubarb leaves, laid over some 
pegs, stuck diagonally amongst them, or a few hoops bowed 



221 



over them, placing the under side of such leaves at all times 
undermost; by which means a humid atmosphere is preserved, 
whilst the powerful sun is upon them. The last two years I 
have used no shading, as I have had no time to attend to it, 
and few plants have missed. The pipings are best left with 
no other attention after planting, besides occasional watering, 
in dry weather, and keeping them free from weeds till time for 
planting out, which may be done at any time after the plants 
are perfectly rooted : the usual season, however, to plant out 
for flowering in the highest perfection is September; and for 
propagation, all the month of June, even to the middle of 
July. 

237 Propagation of Trees by Cuttings. The following 
experiments, made by the late Thomas Andrew Knight, are 
I'ounded on a principle, Avhich, if properly regulated, may 
greatly facilitate the propagation of such ligneous plants, as 
have hitherto proved difficult of increase. Many practical 
cultivators have thought that some cuttings emit roots more 
freely if not deprived of any of their leaves, still as the results 
of their experience have not been elucidated by physiological 
eiupiiry, they have hitherto gained but little attention. Many 
of our readers will have pleasure in following the close reason- 
ing of Mr. Knight’s philosophic mind through the following 
article, which was read before the London Horticultural 
Society in 1838; and we hope that some of them will carry 
out and perfect the practice to which it points with so fair a 
promise of success. 

“ When a cutting of any deciduous tree is planted in autumn, 
or winter, or spring, it contains within it a portion of the true, 
as it has been called, or vital sap, of the tree of which it once 
formed a part. This fluid, relatively to plants, is very closely 
analogous to the arterial blood of animals ; and I shall there- 
fore, to distinguish it from the watery fluid, which rises 
abundantly through the alburnum, call it tlie arterial sap of 
the tree. Cuttings of some species of trees very freely emit 
roots and leaves : whilst others usually produce a few leaves 
only and then die ; and others scarcely exhibit any signs of 
life ; but no cutting ever possesses the power of regenerating, 
and adding to itself vitally, a single particle of matter, till it 
has acquired mature and efficient foliage. A part of the arterial 

211. AUCTABIOM. 



222 



sap previously in the cutting assumes an organic solid form ; 
and the cutting in consequence necessarily becomes, to some 
extent, exhausted. 

Summer cuttings possess the advantage of having mature 
and efficient foliage ; but such foliage is easily injured or 
destroyed, and if it be not carefully and skilfully managed, it 
dies. These cuttings (such as I have usually seen employed) 
have some mature and efficient foliage, and other foliage, 
which is young and growing; and consequently two distinct 
processes are going on at the same time within them, which 
operate in opposition to each other. By the mature leaves, 
carbon, under the influence of light, is taken up from the 
surrounding atmosphere, and arterial sap is generated. The 
young and immature leaves, on the contrary, vitiate the air in 
which they grow by throwing off carbon ; and they expend, in 
adding to their own bulk, that which ought to be expended in 
the creation of shoots. This circumstance respecting the 
different operations of immature and mature leaves upon the 
surrounding air presented itself to the early labourers in pneu- 
matic chemistry. Dr. Priestly noticed the discharge of oxygen 
gas, or dephlogisticated air (as it was then called), from mature 
leaves; Scheele making, as he supposed, a similar experiment 
upon the young leaves of germinating beans, found these to 
vitiate air in which tliey grew. These results were then sup- 
posed to be widely at variance with each other; but subsequent 
experience has proved both philosophers to have been equally 
correct. 

I possess many young seedling trees of the Ulmus campestris, 
or suberosa, or glabra, for the widely-varying characters of my 
seedling trees satisfy me that these three supposed species are 
varieties only of a single species. One of these seedling plants 
presented a form of growth which induced me to wish to pro- 
pagate from it. It shows a strong disposition to aspire to a 
very great height with a single straight stem, and with only 
very small lateral branches, and to be therefore calculated to 
afford sound timber of great length and bulk, which is pecu- 
liarly valuable, and difficult to be obtained, for the keels of 
large ships; and the original tree is growing with very great 
rapidity in a poor soil and cold climate. The stem of this tree 
near the ground presented, in July, many very slender shoots 



223 



about three inches long. These were tlien pulled off, and 
reduced to about an inch in length, with a single mature leaf 
upon the upper end of each ; and the cuttings were then 
planted so deeply in the soil, that the buds at the bases of the 
leaves were but just visible above the surface of the soil. The 
cuttings were then covered with bell-glasses, in pots, and put 
upon the flue of a hothouse, and subjected to a temperature 
of about 80°. Water was very abundantly given; but the 
under surfaces of the leaves were not wetted. These were, in 
the slightest degree, faded, though they were wholly exposed 
to the sun ; and roots were emitted in about fifteen days. I 
subjected a few cuttings, taken from the bearing-branches of a 
mulberry tree, to the same mode of management, and with the 
same result; and I think it extremely probable that the 
different varieties of camellia, and trees of almost every species, 
exclusive of the fir tribe, might be propagated with perfect 
success and facility by (he same means. 

Evergreen trees of some species possess the power of ripen- 
ing their fruit during winter. The common ivy and the loquat 
are well known examples of this; and this circumstance, 
combined with many others, led me to infer that the leaves of 
such trees possess in a second year the same, or nearly the 
same, power, as in the first. I therefore planted, about a 
month ago, some cuttings of the old double-blossomed white 
and Warratah camellia, having reduced the wood to little more 
than half an inch in length, and cut it off obliquely, so as to 
present a long surface of it; and I reduced it further by paring 
it very thin, at and near to its lower extremities. The leaves 
continue to look perfectly fresh ; and the buds, in more than 
one instance, have produced shoots of more than an inch in 
length, and apparently possessing perfect health and much 
vigour. Water has been very abundantly given; because I 
conceived that the flow' of arterial sap from the leaf would be 
so great, comparatively with the quantity of the bark and 
alburnum of the cuttings, as to preclude the possibility of the 
rooting of these. 

The cuttings above described present, in the organization, a 
considerable resemblance to seedling trees, at different periods 
of the growth of the latter. The bud very closely resembles 
the plumule; and the leaf, the cotyledon, extended into a seed 

212. 4DCTABIOM. 



224 



leaf ; and tlie organ which has been and is called a radicle, is 
certainly a caudex, and not a root. It is capable of being 
made to extend, in some cases, to more than two hundred 
times its first length, between two articulations; a power which 
is not possessed in any degree by the roots of trees. Whether 
the caudex of the cuttings of camellia, above mentioned, have 
emitted or will, or will not, emit roots, I am not yet prepared 
to decide; but I entertain very confident hopes of success.” 

238 Half-hardy Plants, preservation of. Most cultivators 
of half-hardy or frame plants sometimes meet disappointment; 
and, as America suffers more the extremes of climate than 
England, we here give the observations of one of America’s 
best Horticulturists — Mr. Downing, of the Botanic Garden 
and Nurseries, Newburgh, New York, as they appear in Hovey’s 
Magazine of Horticulture, vol. 5; conceiving that any practice 
which is useful in the United States for the preservation of 
plants, will be an exceedingly safe guide in England. He 
says, “The amateur of fine flowering shrubs or plants will often 
find himself thwarted in his attempts to cultivate, in the open 
air, many beautiful ligneous and herbaceous species, which 
thrive, perhaps with all their wonted vigour and luxuriance, 
during the warm and cloudless days of our almost tropical 
summer, but which the severe and protracted cold of our 
winters either partially or wholly destroy. Such trees and shrubs 
as are not originally from the tropical regions (which latter 
require the aid of the greenhouse or stove) will, many of them, 
bear our winters in the Middle States with but a slight pro- 
tection afforded, either by situation or actual covering, during 
the most inclement season. How in the best manner to apply 
this protection, so as to insure success, is a question of some 
importance to the novice in such matters. 

It is a very common practice, even with many who consider 
themselves somewhat experienced horticulturists, when they 
wish to place a tender or half-hardy shrub in a very favourable 
location, to choose some warm sheltered nook, fully open to 
the sun’s rays during winter. Here, they flatter themselves, the 
concentrated warmth of the aspect and the many genial thaws 
which will take place in so comfortable a position, cannot but 
ensure the preservation of the individual shrub or plant. In 
the spring it is with much surprise they behold their favourite 



225 



blackened and dead in all its leading shoots ; and their astonish- 
ment will be still greater, should they have chanced to leave a 
duplicate of the same species under the shade of some cold 
north wall or building, where it will most probably be found per- 
fectly green, fresh, and uninjured in its wood or branches. 

The rationale of the foregoing facts seems to be as follows. 
In our cold and protracted winters, when the thermometer is 
depressed below the zero of Fahrenheit, the sap vessels of 
all half hardy plants become completely frozen. At the same 
time our sun, during many days in winter, shines out with an al- 
most undimmed brightness and warmth, and, rapidly thawing 
the fluids in these sap vessels, the latter are so distended by 
the sudden melting and perhaps subsequent freezing, as in many 
places to be completely burst and incapacitated from performing 
the functions for which they are intended. Those plants, how- 
ever, which are protected from the sun’s rays, and, consequently, 
from the deleterious etfects of this rapid change in the sap 
from partial fluidity to congelation, but which are, on the con- 
trary, restored to their former state by means of a gradual 
thaw ing, as, for example, by the slowly increasing warmth of 
returning spring, they will, in most cases, be found to have suf- 
fierred little or nothing by the severity of the cold to which they 
have been exposed. 

Acting in accordance with this, we may protect many ten- 
der plants, simply by placing them out of the reach of the sun’s 
rays during winter. On this principle, a northern exposure 
will, in most cases, be found greatly preferable to a due south 
aspect. After the unparalled rigor of the winter of 1836 — 7, 
peach and other tender fruit trees, planted on the northern sides 
of hills, were found to be but little injured, whilst those on warm 
southern knolls were almost universally destroyed throughout 
the Middle and Eastern States. 

Carnations, monthly roses, and many other plants of similar 
habits, suft’er severely in the more northern parts of the Unit- 
ed States, if left in the open ground without covering; but, as 
many culturists are aware, the trifling shelter of a little straw, 
salt hay, or stems of decayed plants, thrown over them to pro- 
tect them (not from the cold, but from the injurious influence 
of the sun) they are almost as perfectly preserved, as in a more 
temperate climate. 

313 . AUCTARIUM. 



226 



Cold frames, which are pits for the preservation of tender 
plants, without fire, are constructed upon this principle. A 
friend of ours has succeeded in preserving a very considerable 
collection of camellias in the open air in a thin hoard frame 
without artificial heat, and with only the slight covering of the 
common frame lights and a few layers of mats above them. 
During winter this was scarcely ever opened, except occasion- 
ally, to admit the air, but never the sun, and, at the approach 
of spring, the frame was again subjected to the full influence of 
the sun and air in the most careful and gradual manner. 

Such half hardy trees or shrubs as the Acacia julibrissin, 
the white European jasmine, &c. may be kept in fine condi- 
tion, simply by sheathing them with straw at the approach of 
winter. Even the Lagerstraemia indica, and Aucuba japonica, 
may be kept in full vigour in the open air, in this latitude, by 
this practice. Some of the more tender magnolias require and 
amply repay this trifling care, and almost every half hardy 
shrub, or tree, may be carried through the most inclement 
portion of our year, in a state of comparative security in this 
manner. 

It is well known to those who have made many experiments in 
the naturalization of half hardy trees or shrubs, that the suc- 
cess with which they withstand the effect of intense cold de- 
pends mainly upon the complete maturity of the young wood. 
Should the shoots of the current year, even of our more hardy 
trees, be caught by an untimely frost, before they have ripened, 
they will suffer greatly by the combined action of the frost and 
sun upon the well filled and immature sap vessels; while, on 
the contrary, even comparatively tender trees will withstand 
very severe cold, if they are furnished only with sound mature 
wood. This will point out to the culturist the necessity of 
placing the half hardy shrub or tree upon a dry and warm sub- 
soil, where it will not be likely to be urged into late growth 
by excessive moisture of the soil. In such situations, natural- 
ization of tender trees may be carried on with the best hopes 
of success. 

Nearly all half hardy trees will require the sheathing of stra\v 
before mentioned, over the whole of their exposed stems and 
branches while they are yet young; as the tree advances in size, 
only the upper branches will probably need protection until. 



227 



in a few years, if the specimen is favorably situated, the cover- 
ing may perhaps be dispensed with altogether, the wood having 
become sufficiently hardy, and the tree so much acclimated as 
to bear the full rig^r of the season. 

209 Pits and Frames for Half-hardy Plants. Connected witli 
the above subject is that of pits and frames for the protection 
of such plants as do not really require to be kept in a green- 
house, but still demand some shelter from the rigor of severe 
winters. Pits, from two to three feet deep, are the most 
conveniently protected from the effects of frost, inasmuch as 
their sides, at a little distance from the surface, would be in no 
wise exposed to it; and as its elevation would be inconsider- 
able, the top could be readily covered over with straw, mats, 
or other suitable materials. Pits however, are more damp 
than frames on the surface of the ground, and many of the 
more succulent plants are liable to damp off in them. Hence 
frames are best, if due attention be paid to covering them 
properly in severe frosts. Whether pits or elevated frames be 
used, we strongly recommend that the pots be plunged to their 
rims in dry sand, this will prevent the immediate penetration 
of cold to the roots of the plants; and also equalize the moist- 
ure of the soil in which they are planted. 

Very frequently a situation for a frame can be found outside 
a liouse, or its offices, against a wall, that is kept dry, if not 
warm, by a fire within ; the advantage of this is incalculable. 
Here plants may be kept in an atmosphere sufficiently dry to 
prevent the baneful effects of damp, which is generally more 
destructive than cold. When a plant begins to flag from 
drought it can be watered ; but till it exhibits such want, it is 
safest without being watered; indeed, water is rarely required 
in a cold frame during winter. The expense, and the casual- 
ties attending glass, is not unfrequently an obstacle to the use 
of winter frames in flower gardens; this, however, may be 
dispensed with altogether. Oiled paper is oftentimes used in 
lieu of it, and used successfully ; but a better substitute by far, 
is varnished calico. So cheap is calico that it may be purchas- 
ed of good quality for the purpose, thirty inches wide, for 
threepence the yard. This, when stretched on frames, which 
an ingenious gardener would make himself, and brushed over 
with varnish, which may be bought for eighteen-pence a pint, 

2U. ACCTARIOM. 



228 



would afford light and protection to the plants, at a most 
trifling cost. 

All who can afford a border for the growth of flowers may 
provide themselves with such convenience, and surely nothing 
in floriculture affords greater pleasure than the possession of 
numerous plants in this class; such as the beautiful species 
aud varieties of Verbena, Pentstemon, Fuschia, Petunia, Salvia, 
Phlox, Calceolaria, Primula, and a host of other beauties; 
many of which cannot be kept with any degree of certainty 
but with the assistance of this or some other mode of protect- 
tion. 

Ill addition to this plan, it should not be forgotten that every 
dwelling house offers itself as a place of safety for these plants 
of delicate constitution. No young lady has a bedroom, or 
family a living room, but may be made, without inconvenience, 
a winter refuge for a good collection. If one plant of a sort only, 
be kept through the winter, it can be readily increased in 
spring, and abundance thereby possessed. 

It would be unnecessary that we should here enter on the 
detail of the management of any of these species as window 
plants; this we intend doing as opportunity offers, and as va- 
rious suitable subjects are introduced into the pages of the 
Botanic Garden; it should, however, be mentioned that to 
winter half-hardy plants in the house, they should not be kept 
too warm, but merely from frost, and their soil which must be 
light and sandy, should be kept as dry as the plants will bear, 
witliout withering. 

In our recommendation of frames, made of varnished calico 
instead of glass, we should not omit to mention their utility 
during summer as well as winter. Early in spring the gardener 
may avail himself of their assistance in the propagation of 
annuals; for these are always the most successfully raised in 
pots, and with such protection may be obtained two or three 
weeks earlier than if sown in the open ground. Again, if the 
advantage of a hotbed be at command for raising annuals, it is 
quite I’equisite that for a week or fortnight after their removal 
from the hotbed they should have a slight protection during 
the night ; and also shade from the direct rays of the sun 
during day. Here the convenience of these economical frames 
will be experienced, even in establishments where expense 



229 



would be a secondary consideration; for the ameliorated light 
and heat admitted within them has advantages superior to 
glass, not but air must be given during mild days, to seedlings 
within them, and shade also may sometimes be required. 

Another purpose for which these cottage frames, as they may 
be called, will be found useful, after the young annuals have 
quitted their fostering care, is that of striking cuttings. In 
this department they may be used more or less during the 
whole of the summer. 3Iauy cuttings would strike readily, 
when enclosed in these frames, which would not root in the 
open ground; and others which will generally strike root in a 
shady border, will be much forwarded, and success be more 
certain when they are employed. 

The following plants, amongst others, we may mention as 
generally requiring to be propagated every year, and for which 
the assistance of these cheap frames will be found exceedingly 
useful; viz., various species and varieties of Fuchsia, Verbena, 
Carnation, Pink, Wall-flower, Pansy, Pelargonium, Dahlia, 
Salvia, Phlox, Petunia, Helianthemum, Iberis ; and a variety 
of more tender plants, also, may, with their assistance, be 
readily propagated, and ke|)t in the house during winter, for 
turning into the borders in May. In pursuing this subject of 
jjrotection to such plants as are of too delicate a constitution to 
bear the rigour of our winters, but on which much of the 
attraction and gaiety of a flower garden at the present day 
depends, we may add an article, from the Gardeners’ Chronicle, 
probably from the pen of Dr. Lindley, which contains some 
valuable hints on — 

210 Acclimatisixg Plants. “ In former days men entertained 
the most exaggerated ideas concerning acclimatising, and 
seemed to believe that all the productions of the tropics might 
be had in England, if we could but gradually inure such 
productions to the climate. As the negro could be acclima- 
tised, so it was thought could plants from Negroland. We 
were told that the course to follow was to accustom tender 
plants to cold climates by slow degrees; to introduce the 
productions of the tropics to Madeira, and there to save theii' 
seeds ; then in Spain or Portugal to sow those seeds, and 
when the plants thus obtained produced their fruits, to commit 
them to the earth in the warmer counties of England, or the 

215, AOCTARICM. 



230 



yet milder districts of Ireland; and, at last, to sow in Middle- 
sex the seeds so saved in Devonshire or Ireland. We do not 
believe that the experiment in this form was ever tried ; and, if 
it had, we have no doubt that it would have failed ; for 
experience tells us that the constitution of plants is not 
affected by such means. On the contrary, we find, what it is 
rather disheartening to know, that the constitution natural to 
a species of plant is almost unchangeable. When we look 
around us at the cases which a half-informed person might 
regard as instances of acclimatisation by seed, we find they are 
all unfavourable to the supposition, that species may be 
rendered less tender by art. Take, for example. Kidney- 
beans, Onions, Potatoes, and Mignionette — all plants of the 
most extensive cultivation, for many years, and perpetually 
reproduced by seed : are they at this day in one single degree 
more hardy than they were in the first year of their intro- 
duction ? All experience says — no. The first frost of autumn 
destroys the Potato with as much certainty as in the days of 
its discoverer, Raleigh. 

To be sure, we are occasionally reminded of apparent 
exceptions to this, and are told that the Larch Fir was origin- 
ally treated as a greenhouse plant ; and we believe that there 
are those who infer from such a circumstance, that the Larch 
is become hardier than it was. This is, however, a mistake : 
the Larch was originally as hardy as it now is, only we did 
not know it, and put it into a greenhouse from ignorance 
of its real nature. 

But, although to acclimatise plants by seed-saving, seems 
a hopeless task, means certainly do exist of rendering half- 
hardy species less tender, and these we proceed to explain. 
One of the principle causes of the destruction of exotic plants* 
in the open air, is not so much the actual amount of cold 
to which they are exposed in our winters, as their being ill 
prepared to resist it. We know, from experience, that a low 
temperature acts injuriously upon plants in proportion to 
their watery contents ; that young shoots filled with watery 
sap perish in winter, while the old and drier branches are 
unhurt ; and that succulent herbage, of whatever kind, is 
the first to indicate the action of frost. Means therefore 
should be taken to cause an exotic to prepare itself for 



231 



winter, by getting naturally into as dry a condition as circum- 
stances will permit. But the only means we possess of 
effecting this consists in choosing a thoroughly well drained 
soil, and an elevated situation ; the first preventing a plant 
filling itself with moisture during winter, or over-growing 
itself in summer, so as to be unable to ripen its wood; and 
the latter securing it from the action of those early frosts of 
autumn, or late frosts of spring, which are so pernicious 
even to our own wild trees. In an elevated situation, a 
plant also escapes the risk of being stimulated into growth by 
a few days’ warmth, succeeded by nipping cold, which so often 
occurs in our variable climate. This was very remarkable in 
the hard winter of 1837-38, when so many exotics perished: 
on that occasion the Araucaria Fir was killed in warm and 
sheltered valleys, but stood unscathed on the hills of Hamp- 
shire ; and all over the country the same fact was remarked 
in other species. 

AVhere perfect drainage cannot be secured, it is scarcely 
worth attempting to naturalise an exotic tree; for, in the first 
place, it cannot ripen its wood — and secondly, the water that 
surrounds the roots in winter is absorbed by them incessantly, 
and gradually gorges the branches so as to render them sus- 
ceptable of an amount of cold which would be unfelt in a drier 
state. On the other hand, we find that wherever great success 
has attended the preservation of tender plants in the open air 
during many years, it is invariably connected with a soil 
completely deprived of its superfluous moisture, either by 
nature or art. 

In selecting the station in which an exotic should be planted, 
it will always be found better that the place should be shaded 
than exposed to the full influence of the sun. One reason is, 
that a plant, even if frozen hard, may be recovered if it thaws 
very gradually, although it will certainly perish if the thaw is 
sudden. Now in a southern aspect a plant is in the most disad- 
vantageous position pos.sible with respect to this circumstance. 
We received the other day from Owston, near Doncaster, a 
branch of the tender shining-leaved variety of Laurestinus, 
which has lived for many years in a situation where it never 
sees the sun for an instant in the course of the year, and it 
stands frosts which are fatal to tlie same species elsewhere in 



216, AXICTiElCM. 



232 



the sun. Another reason is, that in a warm sunny place a 
plant is stimulated into early growth, and subsequently suffers 
from the late frosts of spring ; while, in a situation to which 
the sun does not reach, a plant commences growth later, not 
earlier, than elsewhere, and thus avoids getting into a tender con- 
dition at an unfavourable season. We have seen this remarkably 
exemplified in the Tree Paeony, which flowers abundantly on 
the border of a shrubbery facing the north, and has its blossoms 
as regularly cut off by frost in the warm nooks of a southern 
exposure. Two things are evident, if these observations are 
just. The first is, that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, 
to acclimatise exotics in low gardens incapable of drainage ; 
the second is, that some situations are naturally so favourable 
for this purpose, that skill is scarcely necessary to produce 
success.” 

Generally speaking, small town gardens are ill calculated 
for acclimatising plants. Even if care has been taken to drain 
them properly, and the soil has been made light and friable, by 
the admixture of old building rubbish, sand, and decayed 
leaves, all of which are excellent for the purpose; still such 
gardens seem to possess a moisture of atmosphere, and want of 
ventilation, during winter, that is uncongenial to such purpose. 
On the other hand, we have seen many of our friends, in 
country towns, with a few yards square of land attached to their 
houses, so contrive to cultivate it, during summer, as to abash 
the very nobility of their neighbourhood. Beds and stands of 
florists’ flowers; groups of brilliantly flowering half-hardy 
herbaceous plants; with walls and trellis-work clothed with 
climbers, all of which have flowered to admiration, and 
produced a fairy scene where least expected. Not unfre- 
quently is a small greenhouse attached to such gardens, which 
affords winter protection to very many of the choice plants, 
which in more congenial situations bear full exposure, or find 
ample protection in the cold frame. For the information of 
those who may be desirous of garnishing their gardens with 
some of the more rare specimens of nature’s dainties, we will 
add the practical results, from exposing half-hardy plants, 
obtained by several cultivators, which may fall under the head of 
211 Acclimatisation proved. At Prestonkirk, so far north as 
near the 56th degree of latitude, and not very near to the 



233 



sea, Mr. Street of Biel, says (Gardeners’ Chronicle v. 1,309) 
“ I planted out in the open border, here, four large plants 
of the Agapanthus uinbellatus, early in the spring of 1825, 
in different places, and slightly varying earths. They were 
planted in a southern aspect, and are all thriving well. 
At approach of winter, I put some leafy mould, moss, or 
decayed bark, over the surface ; and stick firm over all, some 
evergreen branches of Red Cedar or Cypress, which is cleared 
away in April. They flower every year, from July to October 
or November. In 1835, one plant, set deeply in rich earth, 
with a clayey subsoil, at about 170 feet above the level of 
the sea, produced 12 stems, which bore 891 flowers. Calla 
aethiopica, in pots, produces ripe seeds here, some of which 
were sown in the open ground, on a hill, in the end of March, 
1822. They were protected with an old broken frame, and in 
about six or seven weeks fifteen seedlings appeared. In the 
autumn they were taken up, with some earth about them, put 
then into pots, and kej)t in a glass-house during the winter, and 
one of them flowered at about thirteen months old. In the 
spring of 1823, a seedling was planted out under a high wall, 
in a western aspect, where the sun cannot shine on it until 
mid-day, in an argillaceous soil, on a decayed rocky sub- 
stratum ; this plant continued to grow and flower freely every 
year, at the end of May, and in June; it generally produced 
4 flowers. In June, 1828, it produced 11 flower-s, and per- 
fected a few seeds. In 1824 and 1828, I found 8 seeds in one 
berry. This plant remained undisturbed till the spring of 
1838 ; it was then dug up, and a large mass of rootlets was 
found, which would have made a great number of plants. It 
was replanted in the same place, and is now going on well; at 
the approach of winter it is covered over with old tan or leafy 
mould; and early in the spring the earth about it is stirred up. 
There are here seedling plants, growing in other situations, 
which I expect will bloom this season. Oxalis floribunda 
was planted in the open border, rather deep ; it survived the 
last two winters well, and begins to flower in June, continuing 
till December, but it has not yet produced seeds. It is 
now (April 15th) springing up healthily. Oxalis crenata 
survived the last winter, notwithstanding that the frost was 
severe.” 

217, ADCTiBICM. 



& 



234 



Piptantlius Nepalensis (Botanic Garden, No. 418), grew, 
as we are informed by Mr. Cameron, to a considerable sized 
shrub, in the Birmingham Garden. It flowered several years, 
l)oth in peat and light sandy soil, suffered little in winter, 
produced abundance both of flowers and seeds, until the 
winter of 1837-8 killed the whole. 

Salvia fulgens, in the same garden, lived for four or five 
years, sometimes but little injured, at other times destroyed to 
the ground. Some of the plants were a considerable size, but 
they all perished in 1837-8. 

IMany years ago, plants of Melaluca hypericifolia, IMetosi- 
deros saligna, Edwardsia microphylla, and Edwardsia graudi- 
flora, and some other smaller plants, were trained against the wall 
of the dwelling house of a nursery, at Edinburgh, where they 
were covered with mats, in severe weather ; but probable that 
care was unnecessary, as, during five or six years, they never 
seemed to be in the least injured by frost; the soil was of 
middling texture, well drained. 

Cineraria maritima, in Surrey, stood uninjured for years, in 
a garden in an elevated situation, in a strong stiff clayey soil, 
mixed with pebbles ; while, in a mueh lower situation, and 
with a light soil, it would not survive a moderate winter, 
although only a mile intervened between the two situations. 

Acacia julibrissin, in the same county, in a low, but airy, 
situation, attained the height of 10 to 12 feet, against a west 
wall, and flowered freely ; but in an adjacent garden it never 
survived the winter, although all apparent circumstances were 
equal. 

Calla aBthiopica is perfectly hardy when immersed in water, 
from 12 to 18 inches in depth, the frost never reaching the 
roots, although the tops may be destroyed. 

Aponogeton distachyon (Botanic Garden, No. 5.59), when 
kept in water, in a stove or greenhouse, as it formerly was, 
seldom flowered ; but when plaeed in an open pond, it not only 
flowers nearly the whole year, but also increases rapidly, 
either by runners or by seeds ; probably the latter 

Alstrcemeria acutifolia has been against the east end of a 
stove, in the Birmingham Garden, ten years; never having 
suffered from the weather, flowers freely every year; the soil 
deep, light, and dry. 



235 



Fuchsia macrostemotij variety discolor, from its being a shy 
flowerer, is nearly discarded from gardens. A plant has been 
out of doors, in the Birmingham Garden, for about three 
years, has proved deciduous; and, last season (1842), flowered 
splendidly, and also ripened seeds. As the plant is now 
become large, it resists the effects of frost, and is become one 
of the most ornamental shrubs. 

Berberis empetrifolia would appear, by the Botanical Register, 
to require the protection of a frame. This must be owing to 
the soil it is grown in ; here, in peat, it may almost be termed 
a weed. 

Gardoquia betonicioides proves perfectly hardy, as a herba- 
ceous plant, in a middling soil. 

Fuchsia virgata becomes, as it were, herbaceous, being cut 
down every year, but springs up vigorously every spring, and 
flowers in profusion. 

The Mignionette, on light soil, comes up plentifully every 
season from self-sown seed, proving that the seed is hardy 
enough. Potatoes, also, come up freely from self-sown seed, 
even when potatoes, accidentally left in the soil, perish. Other 
instances of seeds vegetating, might be given, to prove that 
seeds are more hardy than the plants. 

Leycesteria formosa has become very ornamental as a hardy 
shrub, in a light soil. 

A light, dry, deep, soil, and elevated situation, are most 
favourable for many plants ; light sandy peat for others, whilst 
a few of the more tender plants do best in a stiff damp soil. 
The soil ought to be loosened up before, and sometimes during, 
winter. Close covering is worse than none, unless carefully 
attended to, by being removed to give light and air often. 
Again, after long-continued frost, caution must be observed in 
admitting light and air. See Auctarium, section 184. 

Deep planting has been recommended by some, for the pre- 
servation of the roots of tender plants; the good, however, is 
counterbalanced by the puny growth of those planted too 
deeply. 

It does not appear to be the intensity or continuation of frost 
that does the greatest injury. 3Iany plants that will bear frost 
with impunity, are killed readily by the alternations of our 
climate, particularly when vegetation has commenced. 

218. AUCTABICM. 



236 



Messrs. Pope and Sons, of Handsworth — a locality whose 
temperature ranges below the average of that of the midland 
counties, report to us that with them Pinus lanceolata has stood 
out several years, in an exposed situation, having been rather 
injured during frost, from its contiguity to water. It grows in 
rather a moist clayey earth. Aralia Japouica, in the same 
situation, appears to be hardy. 

Calitra spinosa has withstood the frosts of several winters, in 
a cold northern exposure and light soil, but was much injured 
in 1837-8; as were some Leptospermums, which had been in 
the open ground several winters, and were grown into bushes, 
and flowered abundantly. 

Rhododendron arboreum album grows well on a dry border, 
exposed to the south, but suffered much in 1837-8 ; and a 
plant in a moist situation perished. 

The following plants, which are accounted tender, lived in a 
south border, in the front of a greenhouse, in the Handsworth 
nursery, during the winter of 1841-2; — Chlidauthus fragrans; 
Coburgia incarnata ; Relmannia Sinensis; and Malva con- 
cinna. The old double red Camellia has stood, without 
protection, on a south border, for many years. It retains its 
foliage, but never blooms. 

The gaiety and variety of plants displayed in the open flower 
borders, are now so much an object of attention with every 
person possessing a garden, that it becomes important to know 
what amongst our greenhouse or frame plants are likely, with 
a little extra attention, to bear full exposure. Generally 
speaking, no great change takes place in the constitution of 
plants; indeed with some of those propagated, from generation 
to generation, by one mode or other of division, there is none at 
all. Amongst those, however, which are propagated from seeds, 
considerable variation does exist. The hardihood of hundreds 
of plants in cultivation, has never been tested ; but when it has, 
and any prove more hardy than was anticipated, it is desirable 
that the fact should be known, since, hereby, it may be 
considered that a fresh accession to the open parterre is obtained. 
It is evident, that by such experiments, many valuable plants 
will be lost, therefore few persons are willing to make the 
sacrifice. It shall be our duty, at a future time, to give a 
further list. 



237 



212 Pots, HOLLOW-SIDED. It being difficult, by words, to describe 
even simple instruments or apparatus so clearly as is desirable, 
we present our readers with a delineation of Mr. Brown’s 
patent double-sided flower-pot. It resembles one pot within 
another, a hollow space being formed between the two, for 
water; with an aperture by which it maybe filled. As the 
inside pot is bevelled off to meet the exteiior one, a thin edge 
is formed, preventing any clumsiness of appearance when in 
use. 

It has been said that “In the 
multitude of counsellors there is 
safety ; ” we will therefore take 
the liberty of transcribing the 
remarks of Dr. Lindley, as they 
appear in the Gardeners’ Chro- 
nicle, of December 3rd, 1842; 
and those of a Correspondent, 
in the same paper; and then 
offer a few observations founded 
on our own experience. The Doctor says, “We regard this as 
a contrivance of very great value. Everybody knows how 
much plants suffer during summer, from the heat and dryness 
of the pots in which they are growing, and how frequently it 
is required to obviate the inconvenience, by placing one pot 
within another, or by surrounding them with moss, or by 
plunging them in soil. All this is rendered unnecessary by 
the contrivance in question ; for, if the sides of the pot are left 
empty, the stratum of air contained in them will prevent the 
earth from becoming heated ; and, if they are filled with water, 
the inconvenience of over-watering, on the one hand, or over- 
drying, on the other, will be prevented in summer, because 
water will be continually filtering slowly through the inside 
lining as the roots require it. The latter reason will make it 
invaluable for striking cuttings, and for window gardens, 
where it is almost impossible to keep plants duly supplied with 
moisture, even if the servants entrusted with the duty would 
give themselves the trouble to attend to it.” His corres- 
pondent says, “If water be introduced between the sides of this 
kind of pot, its inner surface will be always wet : and so the 
young roots will receive too much fluid, so that they will rot, 

219. iDCTARIOM. 




238 



and the plant will die : but, if the empty space be permitted to 
remain empty, the inner portion of the pot receiving moisture 
only from the watering required for the well-being of the plant, 
the outer side having water occasionally poured on it, or the 
pot being immersed for a few minutes in it, he feels assured 
that the sides of the pot will be kept so fully saturated by these 
means, that they will be constantly giving out into the empty 
space a vapour, by which the inner portion of the innermost 
pot (towards which the young roots always incline, and with 
which they are in contact) will be kept sufficiently cool and 
moist, and (he roots will be preserved from injury.” 

We presume Mr. Brown never contemplated making a pot 
that would supersede all others, but one that should meet 
certain circumstances in cultivation; and in this he has, doubt- 
less, succeeded. Where flowers, in pots, are required to decorate 
balconies, terraces, or other similarly exposed situations, in 
summer, these will be exceedingly advantageous, inasmuch as 
they will save care and labour. As regards the value of the 
principle, we think that neither has Dr. Bindley, or his Corres- 
pondent, carried out his observations quite far enough. They 
have treated the subject as if all plants were alike in habit and 
constitution ; as if every vegetable being would be alike either 
killed or cured by this new hydropathic mode of treatment. 
Scores of people have rejoiced in the wet sheets of the Silesian 
Peasant, but many also have suffered for their boldness in 
trusting to the cold-water doctors. So would Mr. Brown’s 
cold-water pot be health to hundreds of plants, but disease 
to others. 

Early in our gardening career, we had hard Staffordshire 
flower-pots in common use, but soon discovered that these were 
too retentive of moisture ; that the soil in them continued too 
long wet, and that when laid by, without attention, it soon 
produced a crop of liver- wort; many plants in them were, also, 
much injured by the continual moist state of the soil. We 
then obtained Bristol pots, of a very porous nature, which are 
well adapted for general use, but not for all. Having now 
both hard and soft pots at hand, it would seem impossible 
ever to use the one or the other without thinking of the suit- 
ableness of the tenement to the tenant. The florist, in potting 
his pinks, would take those pots wliich were softest, that his 



239 



plants might be kept tolerably dry ; but, for his polyanthuses, 
he would use the hard ones, for the advantage of continued 
moisture. Again, his lobelias would, of course, occupy the 
hard pots — they cannot be kept too moist; whilst for his chry- 
santhemums he would prefer the more porous description, for 
with undue moisture the leaves of these would become yellow 
and fall off. 

It will be no contradiction to these observations, should we 
be told that all these circumstances may be properly met by 
the use of soil of more or less sandy and pervious quality, 
combined with proper attention. We readily admit that a 
plant may be kept in health and luxuriant growth, in a glazed 
pot, or even in an iron vessel without a drain hole. Nice atten- 
tion to the quality of soil, and a supply of the precise quantity 
of water required by the plant, would surmount all inconve- 
niences that would otherwise arise from the quality of the pot; 
but this sort of accurate and exact management should never 
be expected; therefore, for common purposes, we should look 
out for that flower pot which will prove the most useful under 
all the circumstances which influence its employment — that 
offers the smallest amount of inconvenience under the common 
attention, or rather inattention, that more or less must inevitably 
prevail in every garden. 

At present, we have no clear and definite data from which 
deductions, otherwise than conditionally, can be drawn. In- 
deed, this must always be more or less the case, inasmuch as it 
is, we presume, impossil^le to burn pots, so as to produce them 
always alike pervious to moisture. A hard pot, cased with 
water, may transmit insufficient fluid to the |>lant; whilst a 
soft one, under similar conditions, may admit it so rapidly as 
to be injurious. Therefore alter all, it is pretty evident, that 
efficient cultivation is not to be effected without discrimination 
— without the application of common sense, to vary its oper- 
ations according to circumstances. 

W e are favoured with a letter from zEgaeon, the correspon- 
dent of the Chronicle, above alluded to, advocating the moist 
atmosphere system ; that is, by closing the aperture of the 
cistern, and depending on the moisture of the included air, 
which he thinks may be rendered more or less humid by the 
exterior application of water. Now, we cannot object to this, 

220 . AOCTABIDM. 



240 



as one mode of employing the cistern pot; but we cannot 
advocate any one particular method of use, in preference to 
all others. Mr. Brown claims, and we believe justly, the 
invention of a surrounding cistern, which may be completely 
closed at pleasure; and this addition greatly increases the 
facilities of varying the degree of moisture about the plant ; 
and with such precision, that every variety of circumstance 
may be met. For instance, in the first place, if the cistern be 
left dry and open, the protection of the inner pot from atmos- 
pheric influence will be very slight. Secondly: If the cistern 
be corked, a more humid atmosphere will be preserved in it, by 
the partial retention of the moisture that will be transmitted 
from the soil, through the side of the pot with which it is in 
contact. Thirdly : If an inch or two of the bottom of the pot 
were to be dipt in a glazing, or by other means rendered im- 
pervious to water, this part of the cistern would then hold a 
small quantity of water, which, in warm weather, would add 
much to the moisture of the enclosed air. Fourthly : If the 
cistern be filled with water, it would filter through the pot, and 
be imbibed by the soil, in a greater or less degree, according 
as the pot was more or less porous, giving to the plant the 
greatest degree of moisture afforded by this contrivance. 

In conclusion, it may be added, in commendation of Mr. 
Brown’s cistern pots — as these may be called, plants cannot be 
so readily injured by inattention, as if in common pots; and 
furthermore, by using them with strict attention, any required 
degree of moisture may be more perfectly secured, than by 
any method with which we are at present acquainted. So far 
we have pursued the subject theoretically, and theory must 
precede practice. At a future time we hope to give our readers 
the results of experience. We would refer to one idea which 
we have dropt in considering this subject; it is that respecting 
the glazing of the bottoms of pots. Now, as a stratum of 
drainers should occupy the bottom of every pot, if that part of 
it, in contact with the drainers, were glazed, and did not assist 
in carrying off the moisture from them, some advantage w ould 
be occasionally afforded. Besides which, the pots would be less 
objectionable when placed on shelves without pans ; which 
sometimes happens, even in the sitting room. We leave the 
idea with Mr. Brown, and the curious in these matters. 



241 



213 3Ianures. Guano. So much has of late been said, and 
written, about this celebrated manure, that enquiries become 
more and more frequent, regarding its intrinsic qualities, and 
the methods of best and most profitably employing it. Some 
use it in a liquid state; some, mixed with earthy ingredients; 
and others apply the pure Guano alone. Some too, work it 
into the soil, either generally or partially; others apply it to 
the surface. Regarding quantity, the practice has been equally 
variable ; Guano having been used from one cwt. on an acre, 
even to ten. These discrepances puzzle plain practical men, 
and induce them to neglect that which is worthy of attention. 
Such circumstances are, at present, inseparable from the 
subject ; not alone because this is a newly-introduced article, 
but because we are all young in the knowledge of manures in 
general. 

The compounding of various manures together is a subject 
of much importance ; one that has scarcely been thought of, 
excepting a few of the rudest processes, which have been 
adopted without the guidance of a single idea as to the effect 
likely to be produced. It is well known that the drugs of 
our pharmacopaia greatly assist, or ameliorate, each other in 
their effects on the human body. So, also, is it of the food 
which we ourselves eat ; and so it probably is with the food of 
living vegetables; but, at present, in the science of the nutrition 
of vegetables, men, generally speaking, are merely empirics, — 
knowing almost nothing of the “mode of operation” of the food 
of plants; even whether from the atmosphere or the earth, the 
vegetable collects the greater portion of the elements of its 
solids. It is, however, a gratifying fact, that rays of light are 
darting through the crevices of ignorance, and it cannot be 
doubted but that ere long, although we may not be walking in 
broad sun-shine, we shall be emancipated from the darkness 
which has so long invested this department of natural science. 
Liebeg has risen as a star of the first magnitude; and 
promises, by his light, to guide _^us on our way to regions 
of comparative brightness. 

Although our intention, in this place, is chiefly to bring 
together the leading practical facts which have been elicited by 
the use of a newly-introduced substance, as a manure ; still we 
cannot pass ov.er the imaginings which naturally arise on 

331. AOCTARIDM. 



242 



approaching the subject; and these general observations may, 
we trust, the better prepare some of our readers, for carrying 
into successful practice, the experiments of their predecessors; 
although they may be unable to investigate those laws and 
processes essential to the development of organic nature. 

The importance of attention to this subject will be better 
understood by looking through its effects. These are an 
increase of organic, out of inorganic, matter; — of vegetable, and 
hence animal, life, out of the inorganised substances of the earth. 
In regard to animal or vegetable life, Liebeg’s general remarks on 
nutrition are appropriate. He says, “ The continued existence 
of all living beings is dependent on the reception by them of 
certain substances, which are applied to the nutrition of their 
frame. An enquiry, therefore, into the conditions on which 
the life and growth of living beings depend, involves the study 
of those substances which serve them as nutriment, as well as 
the investigation of the sources whence these substances are 
derived, and the changes which they undergo in process of 
assimilation. A beautiful connection subsists between the 
organic and inorganic kingdoms of nature. Inorganic matter 
affords food to plants, and they, on the other hand, yield the 
means of subsistence to animals. The conditions necessary for 
animal and vegetable nutrition are essentially different. An 
animal requires for its development, and for the sustenance of 
its vital functions, a certain class of substances which can only 
be generated by organic beings possessed of life. Although 
many animals are entirely carnivorous, yet their primary 
nutriment must be derived from plants; for the animals upon 
which they subsist receive tlieir nourishment from vegetable 
matter. But plants find new nutritive material only in inor- 
ganic substances. Hence one great end of vegetable life is to 
generate matter adapted for the nutrition of animals out of 
inorganic substances, which are not fitted for this purpose.” 
Hence, we recognise the necessity of vegetable life, before 
animal life can find support. On the third day of creation 
the Almighty clothed the earth with vegetables ; He sub- 
sequently created animals to exist upon them. 

We shall now bring under notice, numerous facts which have 
arisen out of the use of Guano as manure ; and from these, 
draw general conclusions for the guidance of future practice. 



243 



Some of our readers ma}' not, however, be aware of the origin 
of this substance, therefore tlie history of an article which 
is now become so important in commerce, and so useful in 
rural economy, should be known. The Spanish author, Antonio 
di Ulloa, published his voyage to South America, in 1748, and 
in 1758 an English translation appeared, in which a clear 
statement of the benefits enjoyed by the Peruvians from the use 
of Guano may be seen. These statements seem to have been 
lost sight of, till the celebrated traveller and naturalist. Von 
Humboldt, visited South America, and further described its 
abundance, its qualities, and uses; and from whose account 
most that we know has been collected. 

Its name. Guano, or Huana, in the language of central 
Peru, signifies manure; and, from the existence of this sub- 
stance over a certain district of that country, chiefly included 
between the fifteenth and twentieth degrees of south latitude 
inclusive, several places have taken their names. Guano is not, 
by any means, a newly-discovered manure ; its use, amongst 
the Peruvians, in the culture of maize and capsicums, on their 
sandy plains, is traced back five or six hundred years; and, 
without it, cultivation there would seem to be useless, — the 
land would be a mere arid expanse. Hence a regular trade, 
between the Guano islands of the South Sea, and the coast of 
Peru, has for centuries past existed. A vessel employed in 
this trade is called a guanero, and so offensive is the effluvia, 
arising from it, that it produces nausea and sneezing in the 
passengers of a ship merely sailing near it. Indeed, one 
small island, expressly called Islan di Guano, is said to emit so 
intolerable a stench, that vessels are deterred from approaching 
its shores. 

The excavation of mountains of this substance, where it has 
been found fifty or even sixty feet thick, gave rise to the belief 
that it was a peculiar sort of earth there deposited — that it was 
impossible for such an accumulation to have arisen from the 
droppings of birds; but that such is the fact is beyond doubt. 
This has given rise to much speculative opinion. It is asked, 
“Has it originated in the same islands where it is now found, or 
has it been accumulated there by some revolution of the earth ?” 
Does it point back to an era when the deluged globe was 
provided with a greater number of aquatic birds than at the 

222 . AUCTAEICM. 



244 



present time, in the same manner as the coal formation refers 
us back to a vastly luxuriant vegetation ? Or, was the Guano 
formed under circumstances perfectly similar to those now 
existing; and was nothing required to produce such immense 
stratification, but a long succession of ages ?” AVhen we look 
back to the countless years that must have passed away before 
such accumulations could have taken place, simply by the 
presence of flamingos and cormorants, it certainly gives rise to 
unbounded astonishment. One fact, related by Garsilaso, a 
Spanish author, should be stated. He acknowledges the 
importance of Guano to Peru, and says that under the govern- 
ment of those rulers called incas, in the fifteenth century, it was 
made a crime, punishable by death, to destroy any of the sea- 
fowl that inhabited the Guano islands. This law has, long ago, 
been laid aside ; it indicates, however, the estimation in which 
the substance was held ; and also throws a gleam of light on 
the means of its accumulation. 

It may be asked, why the manure from sea-fowl, which 
abounds in considerable quantities on some of the rocky islands 
in the north of Britain, may not equal Guano ? or why the pro- 
ducts of our own pigeon cotes and hen roosts may not be of equal 
value ? Each of these is known to be a powerful stimulant to 
vegetation, a circumstance which arises mainly from the com- 
bination of the solid and liquid excretions of birds ; but that 
which has been exposed on rocks in Europe has its most 
valuable portions washed away, by repeated rains ; whereas, in 
that immediate part of the globe whence Guano is brought, it 
never rains. The manure is deposited stratum on stratum, 
where it consolidates, dries, and retains all its powerful amo- 
niacal and other ingredients. Again, a wide distinction exists 
between the excrements of carnivorous and granivorous 
animals; between that of marine birds, which live on fish, and 
poultry, which live on vegetables. Who amongst us does not 
know the difference between the offensive gasses arising from 
decaying animal matter, and that of hay, or similar vegetables ? 
These gasses, which have hitherto been suffered to escape, 
and are thereby lost, but which it should be the object of 
the agriculturist to retain — to fix, as it is called, are the very 
essence of manures, and that which, more than any thing else, 
is required for the luxuriant growth of agricultural crops. 



245 



As Guano is found spread over an immense extent of country, 
it is likely that it will vary much in quality, from a circum- 
stance already mentioned — that of deterioration by washing. 
It is found beyond the boundaries of those extremely dry 
districts, in which rain is almost unknown ; and, when brought 
to us from a humid and wet climate, it will be greatly weakened 
in its effects. It is also found on low rocks and promontories 
on the American coast, where sand may drift over it, and be 
mixed with the genuine manure. These circumstances demand 
the attention of the purchaser. 

We shall forbear to enter on the chemical analysis of Guano ; 
it is more our province to show its effects, and to inform our 
readers how it maybe most efficiently employed in horticulture. 
We have, in progress, various experiments to assist in proving 
its value ; and, as far as these have gone, they have, in general, 
been most satisfactory. We have already proved that it may 
be used too freely, and that injury may thereby be produced. 
In a liquid state, four ounces to a gallon of water, applied twice 
a week for three weeks, to beds of Strawberries, it has occa- 
sioned an amazing growth of foliage and blossoms, but its 
influence on the crop of fruit remains to be seen. On the 
other hand, a bed of seedling alpine strawberry plants, which 
had been up about a month, was thinly sprinkled with unmixed 
Guano in powder, and it destroyed every plant where it was 
applied. The half of a bed of Onions, which were six inches 
high, were sprinkled over, a month ago, with pure Guano, at the 
rate of two ounces to every square yard, being upwards of five 
cwt. to the acre ; the season has been rainy, and the Onions, 
treated with Guano, are double the size of those not so treated. 
Potatoes, which were six inches high, had Guano sprinkled 
along the rows, amongst their stems, at the rate of an ounce and 
a half to every yard; and these are now (five weeks subse- 
(jently) far superior to those in parts of the rows purposely left 
without Guano. Nine parts of light soil were mixed with one of 
Guano, and half a spadeful of the compost was put into each of 
the holes regularly made to receive it, in a prepared bed of light 
soil ; in the midst of the compost, in each hole, a plant of 
Brussels Sprouts was put, and then well watered. This was 
done a month ago, and, at the present time, more than half the 
plants have dwindled and died. Geraniums were watered, at 

223 . AUCTARIUU. 



246 



intervals of a week, five times only in the whole, with Guano 
water, four ounces to the gallon of water, their leaves then 
began to curl, and, although the use of the liquid Guano has 
been discontinued two months, it is unlikely that the plants 
will recover till they are potted in fresh soil. Plants, of various 
sorts, in pots, watered only with Guano water, half an ounce to 
a gallon, have flourished astonishingly — none have failed. 
These are lessons which cannot be mistaken. 

In a pamphlet by Cuthbert W. Johnson, Esq , on Guano as 
a Fertilizer, which may be referred to by those who are inter- 
ested in the enquiry, we observe a communication from Henry 
Bland, Esq., of Liverpool, a late resident of Peru, in which is 
described the method of using this manure in that country. 
The practice is, doubtless, founded on experience, and indicates 
the propriety of applying it sparingly to young plants, and 
increasing the quantity in proportion to their strength. In 
allusion to the cultivation of maize, or Indian corn, Mr. Bland 
says, “ When the plants are six or eight inches above ground, 
a pinch of Guano, as much as can be easily held between the 
thumb and two fingers, is placed around each bunch, and the 
whole is usually irrigated immediately afterwards. Guano is 
again applied when the plant is about throwing out its fruits; a 
handful is then applied to each bunch, and irrigation immedi- 
ately follows. The next succeeding crops, potatoes and wheat, 
are produced without any further application of manure.” 

From amongst observations and experiments published by 
Messrs. Gibbs and Son, on Guano, and from private sources, 
we select the following information. In the growth of Pota- 
toes, two and a half cwt. to the acre, put into the drills, which 
probably would not be more than an ounce to the yard, its 
effect was superior to a regular supply of stable manure. 
Sown on Grass, at the rate of an ounce to the square yard, 
which, let it be recollected, is, in round numbers, 3001bs. to the 
acre, its effects have been proved to be highly productive. It 
has been used on Grass land, even to the amount of a ton per 
acre, and with still increased success. We have not yet dis- 
covered the extent to which it may be applied to Grass land, 
without its becoming injurious from excess of quantity. When- 
ever Guano is intended to be spread broadcast over land it will 
be the most convenient mode to effect its regularity by first 



247 



mixing it with three or four times its bulk of fine dry loamy 
earth ; and, of course, using a proportionably increased quan- 
tity of the mixture. Sir T. F. Buxton, Bart., applied to grass 
Guano at the rate of 2 cwt. to the acre ; and Soot 4 cwt. to 
the acre. The produce was 561bs. from a rod, manured with 
Soot, and 1 14lbs. from the same quantity, manured with Guano. 

We shall not, here, recapitulate various experiments minutely, 
but notice their general results; not, however, omitting any 
particulars that may seem desirable to guide our readers in the 
use of Guano. 

Mr. Banton, of Siesdon, had a field of wheat, sown in Octo- 
ber, which through the winter, he says, was thick and strong, 
and, in April, rather forward for the season. On the 23rd of 
April he had six plots, of a quarter of an acre each, accurately 
measured off, and to these respective lots he applied the fol- 
lowing manures, at the rate per acre mentioned, and obtained 
the produce per acre as stated against each experiment respec- 
tively; viz. — 

1. Guano, Ij cwt. produce, 45 bushels. 



It may be only necessary further to remark that the quantity 
of straw grown on the plot manured with Guano alone con- 
siderably exceeded that of either of the others ; the wheat, also, 
was of equal weight per bushel. 

In another experiment, at Wraxall, Somersetshire, 2 cwt. 
2qrs. 291bs. of Guano was tried against 12 tons of stable manure, 
and also against 20 bushels of Bones. Here the Guano was 
sown after the wheat had been drilled in, and harrowed at once. 
The produce from the Guano-manured ground was greatest. 

An experiment with a crop of Swede turnips, at the same place, 
shows the following results. 24 cwt. of Guano, mixed with a 
like quantity of mould, and half as much powdered charcoal, 
produced 17 tons of turnips per acre, each ton of the produce 
costing 2s. Id. for manure. 20 tons of Stable Alanure pro- 

224 . AVCTABICM. 




14 cwt. of the mixture, 

3. Nitrate of Soda, 14 cwt. 

4 White caustic Lime, 4 to 
5. Lime 10 cwt.. Salt 5 cwt 



6. No manure. 



vious to its application 




248 



duced 16 tons of turnips, each ton costing 5s. lid. for manure. 

32 bushels of crushed Bones produced 15 tons of turnips, 

at a cost of 5s. 9d. for each ton of the produce. The Guano 
compost was laid in rows, covered with the plough, and the 
seed drilled in upon it. 

Mr. Skirving, of Walton Nursery, Liverpool, has used Guano 
extensively, and says, which is important for the farmer to 
know, that it is not a temporary stimulant; good crops having 
been obtained, without any manure whatever, from land where 
Guano had been used and good crops produced in the preceding 
year. He further states, “In the gardens and nursery grounds 
I have used it in a liquid state, and in that manner it has 
surpassed every manure yet discovered. Its effects on young 
fruit and forest trees, is wonderful ; also, upon hothouse and 
greenhouse plants of every description ; even the exotic heaths, 
to which manure of every kind has been considered injurious, 
seem to flourish in a manner beyond precedent, when watered 
with it. About 41bs. to 12 gallons of water are enough for the 
liquid. The water should stand twenty-four hours before use; 
and, when drawn off, 12 gallons more may be put to the same 
Guano.” From our own experience, we object to the propor- 
tion of Guano used in water by Mr. Skirving, for applying to 
plants in pots. Even if an ounce only be added to every gallon 
of water, we doubt the propriety of using it oftener than once a 
week. We still require further experience to guide us in the 
use of this powerful ingredient; it will, however, have been col- 
lected from our own experiments, stated in page 245, that 
caution in its application is necessary. That uniformity of 
strength may be obtained, any undissolved Guano remaining at 
the bottom of a liquid cask, should always be cleaned out, for 
garden use, and the requisite proportions again mixed. 

In a preceding page we mentioned the luxuriant growth of 
strawberry plants, from the use of Guano ; we can now state the 
effect on the crop of fruit. Its application to AVilliams’s Vigor- 
nian, occasioned too much foliage, and the plants appeared as 
if drawn up under the shade of trees. We fell into the usual 
error of over-dosing them, and the crop was not improved. The 
other variety of strawberry on which it was tried, was Myatt’s 
Pine; here the result was different; the plants as.sumed no 
more than a healthy luxuriance, and the crop was a very 



249 



abundant one. It is quite evident that tlie luxuriant growth 
given by Guano to this shy bearing Strawberry, is highly 
advantageous to its fertility. Most persons agree in acknow- 
ledging Myatt’s Pine Strawberry to be the finest-flavoured and 
the most difficult to cultivate successfully, of any in our gardens; 
we believe, however, complaint against its fertility need no 
longer exist. If runners be planted as early as they can be 
obtained — certainly not later than July, and the beds be sup- 
plied with Guano-water, four ounces to the gallon, once a week 
for four weeks, commencing as soon as the blossom buds are 
visible in the hearts of the plants, we believe they will not 
fail to bear abundantly ; and, by maturing the latest flowers, 
will continue longer in bearing than many other sorts. Prob- 
ably it would be advantageous to apply a little Guano to the 
plants in September; but, if greatly stimulated at this season, 
the plants may, possibly, be driven into flower, to the prejudice 
of the spring blossom. The Roseberry Strawberry is much 
less desirable than it would otherwise be, were it not for the 
shortness of its fruit stalks, whereby half the produce is mixed 
with the soil, and spoilt. Now, there appears reason for believ- 
ing, if liquid Guano were, perhaps twice, applied, when the 
fruiting stems have fairly appeared from the crowns of the 
plants, tliat an impetus may be given to their grow th, and that 
they would be thereby lengthened, very much to the benefit of 
the crop of fruit. This, however, is but theoretical — we have 
not yet tried it. 

Since our observations on Guano have been published in the 
foregoing pages, we have to thank many friends for their com- 
munications on the subject; and we hope to receive many 
more. One gentleman tells us that w hen his turnips came into 
the rougli leaf, and were almost destroyed by the fly, he put 
two ounces of Guano into a two-gallon garden pan full of water, 
stirred it up, and then, through the rose, well watered the young 
plants over head. He left some of the turnips unwatered, to 
prove the effect of the experiment, and he observes that he is 
unable to express his astonishment at the vigorous growth of 
those supplied with Guano. The fly left them immediately, 
whilst the remainder were half destroyed, and those left were of 
weakly growth. Another gentleman says, that, from our 
remarks, he had been induced to make a cask of liquid manure^ 

225. ACCTABICM. 



250 



by putting four ounces of Guano to every gallon of water. Of 
this mixture he put a pint to every gallon of water, and applied 
it to his plants once a week. His Fuchsias, Pelargoniums, 
Myrtles, in fact, every plant to which he has applied it, has 
flowered most exuberantly. At one of the Cornwall Royal 
Horticultural Society’s exhibitions, Mr. W. E. Rendle, of 
Plymouth, stated that, in his nursery, he had for some time used 
Guano, but he had fallen into the common error of using it 
too freely, and he found that it destroyed the plants; but 
experience had taught him that 'when used in a liquid state, 
half an ounce to a gallon of water, it formed a very valuable 
liquid manure. 

We have before us many statements from practical men, on 
the application of Guano, to almost every description of pro- 
duce, both of the farm and garden ; and in all instances, where 
it had been used discreetly, it has proved the most valuable 
ingredient that has hitherto been tried, as manure. From our 
own experience, and that of numerous agriculturists and horti- 
culturists, with whom we have corresponded, we infer that the 
practice of the Peruvians, in the use of Guano, has been duly 
founded on experience, and is that which proves the most 
beneficial; we mean the application of it to the plant when in a 
growing state, in preference to its mixture with the earth before, 
or at the time of, sowing the seed. Again, the Peruvians 
are correct in applying water immediately after its application, 
without which it cannot enter the earth, and be taken up by the 
roots of the plant. Hence, the advantage of applying it in a 
liquid state, when convenient, or in showery weather. Mixing 
it with other manures seems to be unnecessary ; but, for the 
convenience of equal distribution, it may require mixing with 
some pulverized ingredient, for which purpose dry light earth 
of any sort will suffice. 

In consequence of our account of Guano having been written 
and published at monthly intervals, it has assumed a some- 
what desultoi y form ; these intervals have, however, supplied 
much additional information, but which it would be useless to 
state here in detail ; sufiice it to say, we have seen, or been 
informed of, its application to almost every species of farm 
and garden crop, and when properly applied, has, in no 
instance, failed to produce the most beneficial results. 



251 



The foregoing subject has been treated at some length, on 
account of its more than usual importance. We shall now sum 
up the whole by giving practical deductions for the guidance of 
those who may be induced to use Guano; recommending that 
in experiments, a portion of each crop be left unmanured, that 
a proper comparison may be made. 

1. Guano rapidly absorbs moisture, therefore attention 
should be paid to the state in which it is observed to be when 
about to be purchased ; or much water will be paid for. 

2 . It loses ammonia by exposure, therefore it should be 
kept in close boxes or casks. 

3. As it is sometimes found in hard lumps, it should be 
properly powdered before being used. 

4. If Guano be applied to the surface of the soil, as a top 
dressing, its effects will not be developed, without rain or arti- 
ficial watering. 

5. It should not be sown in an unmixed state, in immediate 
contact with seeds. By drilling it in with seeds it has been 
found, in some instances, to destroy them as soon as germination 
commenced. 

6. It may be mixed, for application, in a dry state, with any 
convenient powdery substance, as sand, dry peat, dry loamy 
soil, ashes, powdered charcoal, powdered gypsum, malt-dust, &c. 
and in such state will be more convenient for equal distribution. 

7. It should not be mixed with lime, nor wood ashes, nor 
bones; if combined with any of these, some decomposition would 
ensue, and a portion of its valuable properties would be lost. 

8. Experience seems to indicate that Guano is the most 
beneficial when applied to plants in a growing state, and as a 
top dressing, whether in the powder, or a liquid state. When 
used with potatoes this rule may, probably, not so strictly apply; 
but here, the plant, whilst very young, has a protected reservoir 
of nutriment of its own, therefore the Guano may be mixed 
with the soil in contact with the potatoes planted. 

9. To the Gardener we w’ould say, keep a small box of 
Guano always at hand; you can then sprinkle a little round 
a plant, stir the soil, and water at once, by way of experiment. 
Also, about a meat spoonful may be put into a large watering 
pan of water, stirred about for a few seconds, and used at once, 
if the ready-made liquor be not at hand. 

226, AUCTAEIUM. 



252 



10. Rub together, on a plate or stone, a little fresh-slacked 
lime, with four times the same quantity of Guano; put it into a 
wide-mouthed bottle; you will then have evidence, from the 
smell, not only of the abundant quantity of Ammonia which it 
possesses, but also of the impropriety of mixing lime with 
it, for use; seeing that the ammonia is liberated, and would be 
lost in the atmosphere. 

Lastly. It is better to use too little than too much. 

214. Alkalies; their effects. Since the alkali, called Am- 
monia, is found so abundantly in Guano, the following article, 
which we copy from the Records of Science, may not inappro- 
priately follow the preceding subject. A correspondent of that 
work says, “ During last summer I performed a series of expe- 
riments, with a view to ascertain what effect various substances 
had in supporting vegetable growth. For this purpose I pro- 
cured several plants, and placed them in vessels of water, adding 
to each, various proportions of alkaline salts, and other matters. 
Now, I found that more than one-thousandth part of potassa, 
soda, or their salts, would prove injurious, rendering the plant 
sickly or destroying it, according to the strength of the solution. 
By adding a thousandth part only, I found the plant invigorated 
and decidedly more healthy than those plants which were in 
water alone. Some of these plants existed in these vehicles for 
six or eight weeks, and to all appearance would have lived 
longer had I prolonged the experiment, but they required 
renewing with the stimulants after the space of twelve, twenty- 
four, or thirty -six hours, according to the size of the plant; 
for water rendered alkaline by carbonate of soda, for instance, 
to the strength above mentioned, although it would at the time 
turn reddened litmus paper blue, and display its presence on 
turmeric paper, yet, after a lapse of some hours, the water ceased 
to possess these properties, and even the plants, if cut trans- 
versely near the lower part, although the alkali had been absorbed, 
would denote the presence of a free acid. Beneficial as were the 
alkalies, still more visible developement ensued from those 
vessels wherein I had placed the oxide of iron and of zinc, these 
would bear a larger quantity than the former, as they are less 
soluble in water, and not so abundantly absorbed — still, after 
some time standing, it seemed their solubility was increased, 
probably from the secretion of some acid from the plant 



253 



converting the oxide into salt, soluble in water, consequently, 
more readily absorbed into the plant. The plants are capable 
of secreting an acid, or that water is capable of abstracting one, 
cannot be doubted, as the alkaline waters, after some time 
standing would produce an acid effect on the tests. 

215 Plants, Growing in Sitting Rooms. It is an unquestion- 
able fact that some plants may be seen flourishing more abun- 
dantly in the window of a dwellinghouse, under the care of an 
uninitiated individual, than in many well-managed greenhouses; 
whilst under the charge of others, they only linger out a miser- 
able existence. This is frequently occasioned by the plants 
being kept standing in pans, into which the water is poured 
when the plant is supposed to require watering. As it is indis- 
pensable to have pans under the pots in rooms, smaller pans 
should be turned, upside down within them, upon which to 
place the plant. Whenever water is given, it should be gently 
poured on the top of the earth in the pot, and the precaution, 
here recommended, will prevent such water as may percolate 
through the soil from again reaching the pot in which the plant 
is growing. Plants in rooms are generally over watered. It 
is impossible to say how often Fuchias, Pelargoniums, &c., 
should be watered, or how much at a time should be given them, 
as the same plant would require more or less according to cir- 
cumstances ; that is, in regard to the temperature of the room ; 
and also the degree of activity with which it may happen to be 
growing. To all cultivators of window plants, we would say, 
it is by far safer to give too little water than too much, as the 
plants themselves will give notice when they are in want of 
water, by their leaves beginning to droop ; but the eflects of 
over watering is oftentimes not discovered till the health of the 
plant has been seriously affected. On this head, which is the 
most important of all others, in window gardening, it is justly 
said, in the Gardeners’ Chronicle, “The best, and only general 
rules that can be adopted are, in winter, keep plants not grow- 
ing fast, rather dry ; in spring, increase the quantity with their 
activity, and the sun’s power, keeping them in a mediun state of 
moisture; in summer, water daily; and in autumn, decrease 
with the length of the day, and the returning torpidity of the 
plants, until the dry state of tlie winter is again reached. 
All this resolves in the following: — Plants when growing fast 

2'27. AOCTABIOU. 



254 



may have free supplies of water, which must be lessened as their 
growth approaches maturity ; and cease, or nearly so, when 
that is attained, until the return of their growing season.” In 
winter they are frequently kept in too warm a part of the room; 
they need not be removed from the window during frost, unless 
it be very severe ; and then, being placed on the floor, near 
to the window, will be sufficient; they will be safe where 
water placed beside them merely begins to freeze. Camellias 
will even bear the soil being a little frozen ; the cause of 
their frequently losing their blossom buds is occasioned by 
their being kept in too warm a part of the room in severe wea- 
ther. Plants should not, after the window has been long kept 
closed, have it opened widely at once ; but the plants should be 
inured to the air, by degrees. Placing them out in the sun, 
without their being thus gradually inured to much light and air, 
is very injurious to them. Many cultivators are quite uncon- 
scious of the injury plants receive by a sudden change from that 
state in which they have been long kept, to one of an opposite 
tendency. Heaths will bear as much frost as the Camellia. 

Pelargonium, Fuchsia, Rose, and similar plants should be 
potted in rich loamy soil, mixed with manure that is rotted to 
soil ; whilst those requiring peat soil, such as Ericas, Epacrises, 
&c., must not have any sort of rotted manure put to the soil, nor 
ever be watered with liquid manure. A very good compost 
for potting those requiring rich soil, may be obtained from old 
hedge rows, which have been enriched by the decaying leaves 
of the hawthorn, &c., and also sweetened by long exposure to 
all sorts of weather. A word should be said on the state of the 
soil in pots. Watering in the usual way will, unavoidably, 
render the earth close, and when dry, also hard; therefore 
it should be loosened, with a sharp stick, kept for the purpose. 
Plants requiring to have larger pots may be shifted at any 
season, for if they are turned carefully out of their pots, not a 
root need be disturbed during the operation. Another tribe of 
plants, with thick fleshy stems or leaves, termed succulent 
plants, are well adapted for window cultivation, but they require 
a different kind of treatment from that above recommended. 
Amongst them are Mesembryanthemum, with its hundreds of 
species; Cactus, Aloe, Mammillaria, Sempervivum, — all plants 
of interest ; many amongst them of the most grotesque forms ; 



255 



and, which is important to young nurses, capable of putting up 
with perpetual neglect, without drooping a leaf, or offering a 
look of reproach. We will, ere long, give instructions for the 
management of this interesting tribe, and also an enumeration 
of those species best adapted to window culture, both as res- 
pects their habit and their appearance. 

216 Fumigating Plants. We have, sometimes, occasion to re- 
commend the Fumigation of plants, an operation which is not 
unfrequently indispensable, even although the best attention 
be paid to them, to keep them in health. It is true, that one 
of the chief encouragements of the aphis, is the unhealthy con- 
dition of a growing vegetable ; still it will be seen that these 
insects sometimes abound where there is no disease apparently 
present, to invite their visitation. Under any circumstances, 
as the presence of these visitors is both unsightly and prejudi- 
cial, it is important that they should be timely eradicated. 
To inform our readers how to effect this in an easy and effec- 
tual manner, will now be our business. 

For the fumigation of plants, tobacco has long been the 
substance used ; and as it proves efficient for the purposes 
intended, without being injurious to the plants, we need not 
seek for nostrums or novelties. Tobacco paper has been used 
by some persons — paper charged with, we presume, an infusion 
of tobacco, and sold in London, by Tobacconists. This has 
been approved by some cultivators, whilst others have thought 
it less desirable than tobacco. If plants are to be fumigated 
in frames or greenhouses, it is simply necessary to close the 
lights, and fill the building with the fumes of the tobacco. If 
single plants require to be fumigated, they must be placed 
under hand-glasses, within boxes, casks, or an enclosed situa- 
tion, capable of containing the fumes, and retaining them about 
the plants. The next consideration is the burning of the 
tobacco, in order to produce the fumes. When fired, without 
the admixture of other material, more combustible than itself, 
it will not continue to burn; therefore the common practice has 
been to take clear lighted embers, or gleeds, as they are called 
in some counties of England, in a chafingdish or pot, and on 
this to place the tobacco. Further to facilitate the same object 
fumigating bellows were invented ; which are, in many cases, 
useful as well as elegant appendages to the garden. By these 

228. AUCTABIUM. 



256 



tlie smoke may be forcibly directed against any plant that 
especially requires such attention, A cheap instrument of this 
description may be made by any tinman, to fit on the tube of a 
pair of bellows ; or, which is better, that of a patent blower, on 
account of its continual blast. It consists simply of a tube of 
any convenient length and size, having an enlargement near 
the end that fits on the bellows, formed as a box, made to part, 
and receive the lighted tobacco. A finely perforated piece of 
tin or fine wire lattice, placed on the one side of the tobacco, 
will be useful to prevent the smaller portions from being blown 
through the tube. When the tobacco is set burning, and a 
steady blast of air blown through it, any enclosed place may 
soon be filled with smoke. 

Another method of bnrning tobacco has of late been prac- 
tised, that of connecting it with touch-paper; that is, soft paper, 
soaked in a strong solution of salt-petre, and then dried. If a 
layer of tobacco be laid on this touch-paper, and both be 
rolled up slightly, into sizes somewhat larger than cigars, so 
that the paper and tobacco be intermixed, they will burn toge- 
ther freely; the salt-petre (nitre) contained in the touch-paper, 
being sufficient to sustain combustion. In order to keep these 
rolls together the outer edges of the paper should be pasted up 
their sides. A modification of this plan is mentioned in tlie 
Gardeners’ Chronicle, which is to roll the touch-paper up into 
tubes, like sky rockets, and then fill them with tobacco. When 
lighted, the case of touch-paper burns gradually, and the tobacco 
also, from the assistance it thus obtains. 

In these latter experiments, where salt-petre is used, it should 
not be forgotten that both nitrogen and oxygen will be evol- 
ved during combustion. The quantity will be small, and should 
be rather beneficial to vegetation than otherwise ; still an 
overdose, may perhaps, be inadvertently administered. When 
plants have been thus fumigated, they should continue closed 
up till the following day, that the full effect of the effluvia may 
be obtained; then it will be desirable to syringe and thoroughly 
wash the plants from the dead insects. If any happen not to 
be destroyed, they will be found, if the fumigation has been 
properly performed, so weak as to yield to the washing, and 
the plants be left thoroughly divested of these troublesome 
intruders on the florists’ pleasures. 



257 



217 Soils, improvement of. Agriculture and horticulture are 
now seen to be entirely dependent on a code of scientific prin- 
ciples, which, time ago, were never dreamt of as necessary to 
their successful application. We should be wanting in attention 
to our readers did we not introduce to them a portion of that 
scientific knowledge which is now-a-days so greatly disturbing 
the equilibrium of old prejudices. Chemistry must lend its aid 
in the cultivation of a garden or a farm, and we doubt not but 
its application will, ere long, be brought within the reach of 
every one. Not that we expect all to become chemists, any 
more than we expect all to become lawyers or doctors ; but, 
doubtless, chemical knowledge will be brought to market just 
as is legal or medical; and the farmer or the gardener will, ere 
long, administer, according to the prescription of the chemist, 
proper remedies to the clay he cultivates, just as by the pre- 
scription of his medical man he now applies remedies to the 
clay he wears. 

Our countryman. Sir Humphry Davy, promulgated the first 
hints regarding the necessity of analyzing soils, and guiding 
agriculture by the laws of chemistry ; but it remained for 
Liebig, the celebrated Professor of chemistry in the university 
of Giessen, to make a decided advance in this department of 
science. His first work, on Agricultural Chemistry ; and his 
second, on Animal Chemistry, are eminent 'examples of acute 
research, — they are in advance of their day, which has, perhaps, 
been felt by their author; and induced him to publish a short 
series of “Familiar Letters on Chemistry,” which will command 
the attention of the learned and unlearned. That the value of 
this little work may be known, we will here extract the leading 
features of two of the Letters, relating equally to agriculture 
and horticulture. The author says : — 

“Experience in agriculture shows that the production of veget- 
ables on a given surface increases with the supply of certain 
matters, originally parts of the soil which had been taken up 
from it by plants — the excrements of man and animals. These 
are nothing more than matters derived from vegetable food, 
which, in the vital processes of animals, or after their death, 
assume again the form under which they originally existed, as 
parts of the soil. Now, we know that the atmosphere contains 
none of these substances, and therefore can replace none; and 

2'39. AUCTABIUU. 



258 



we know that their removal from a soil destroys its fertility, 
which may be restored and increased by a new supply. 

Is it possible, after so many decisive investigations into the 
origin of animals and vegetables, the use of the alkalies, of lime, 
and the phosphates, any doubt can exist as to the principles 
upon which a rational agriculture depends ? Can the art of 
agriculture be based upon anything but the restitution of 
a disturbed equilibrium ? Can it be imagined that any country 
however rich and fertile, with a flourishing commerce, which 
for centuries exports its produce in the shape of grain and 
cattle, will maintain its fertility, if the same commerce does not 
restore, in some form of manure, those elements which have 
been removed from the soil, and which cannot be replaced by 
the atmosphere ? Must not the same fate await every such 
country which has actually befallen the once prolific soil of 
Virginia, now, in many parts, unable to grow its former staple 
productions — wheat and tobacco. ? 

In the large towns of England the produce both of English 
and foreign agriculture is largely consumed ; elements of the 
soil indispensable to plants do not return to the fields — contri- 
vances resulting from the manners and customs of English 
people, and peculiar to them, render it difiicult, perhaps impos- 
sible, to collect the enormous quantity of the phosphates which 
are daily, as solid and liquid excrements, carried into the rivers. 
These phosphates, although present in the soil in the smallest 
quantity, are its most important mineral constituents. It was 
observed that many English fields, exhausted in that manner, 
immediately doubled their produce, as if by miracle, when 
dressed with bone earth imported from the continent. But if 
the export of bones from Germany is continued to the extent it 
has hitherto reached, the soil of Germany must be gradually 
exhausted, and the extent of loss may be estimated, by con- 
sidering that one pound of bones contains as much phosphoric 
acid as a hundred-weight of grain. 

A field in which we cultivate the same plant for several suc- 
cessive years becomes barren for that plant in a period varying 
with the nature of the soil; in one field it nill be in three, in 
another in seven, in a third in twenty, in a fourth in a hundred 
years. One field bears wheat, and no peas; another beans or 
turnips, but no tobacco ; a third gives a plentiful crop of 



259 



turnips, but will not bear clover. What is the reason that a 
field loses its fertility for one plant, the same which at first 
flourished there ? What is the reason one kind of plant 
succeeds in a field where another fails ? ” 

“ These questions belong to science. What means are 
necessary to preserve to a field its fertility for one and the same 
plant ? — what to render one field fertile for two, for three, for 
all plants ? ” 

“These last questions are put by art, but they cannot be 
answered by art. If a farmer, without the guidance of just 
scientific principles, is trying experiments to render a field 
fertile for a plant, which it otherwise will not bear, his prospect 
of success is very small. The most exact observations prove 
that the method of cultivation must vary with the geognostical 
condition of the subsoil. In basalt, gray wacke, porphyry, sand- 
stone, limestone, &c., are certain elements indispensable to the 
growth of plants, and the presence of which renders them fertile. 
This fully explains the difference in the necessary methods of 
culture for different places; since it is obvious that the essential 
elements of the soil must vary with the varieties of composition 
of the rocks, from the disintegration of which they originated.” 

“Wheat, clover, turnips, for example, each require certain 
elements from the soil ; they will not flourish where the appro- 
priate elements are absent. Science teaches us what elements 
are essential to every species of plants by an analysis of their 
ashes. If therefore a soil is found wanting in any of those 
elements, we discover at once the cause of its barrenness, and 
its removal may now be readily accomplished.” 

“In the effects of time, in what in agriculture are technically 
called fallows — the repose of the fields — we recognise by science 
certain chemical actions, which are continually exercised by the 
elements of the atmosphere upon the whole surface of our globe. 
By the action of its oxygen and its carbonic acid, aided by water, 
rain, changes of temperature, &c., certain elementary consti- 
tuents of rocks, or of their ruins, which form the soil capable of 
cultivation, are rendered soluble in water, and consequently 
become separable from all their insoluble parts. By their 
influence the necessary elements of the soil become fitted for 
assimilation by plants ; and it is precisely the end which is 
obtained by the mechanical operations of farming. They accel- 

330. AUCTABICU. 



260 



erate the decomposition of the soil, in order to provide a new 
generation of plants with the necessary elements in a condition 
favourable to their assimilation. It is obvious that the rapidity 
of the decomposition of a solid body must increase with the 
extension of its surface; the more points of contact we offer in 
a given time to the external chemical agent, the more rapid 
will be its action.” (Hence arises the advantage of frequently 
stirring the soil, and exposing fresh portions of it to the action 
of the atmosphere.) 

“All plants, cultivated as food, require for their healthy susten- 
ance the alkalies and alkaline earths, each in a certain pro- 
portion ; and in addition to these, the ceralia, or corn tribe, do 
not succeed in a soil destitute of silica, or sand, in a soluble 
condition. The combinations of this substance, found as 
natural productions, namely, the silicates, differ greatly in the 
degree of facility with which they undergo decomposition, in 
consequence of the unequal resistance opposed by their integral 
parts to the dissolving power of the atmospheric agencies. 
Thus the granite of Corsica degenerates into a powder in a 
time which scarcely suffices to deprive the polished granite of 
Heidelberg of its lustre.” 

“ Some soils abound in silicates so readily decomposable, that 
in every one or two years, as much silicate of potash becomes 
soluble and fitted for assimilation as is required by the leaves 
and straw of a crop of wheat. In Hungary, extensive districts 
are not uncommon where wheat and tobacco have been grown 
alternately upon the same soil for centuries, the land never 
receiving back any of those mineral elements which were with- 
drawn in the grain and straw. On the other hand, there are 
fields in which the necessary amount of soluble silicate of potash, 
for a single crop of wheat, is not separated from the insoluble 
masses in the soil in less than two, three, or even more years.” 

" The term fallow, in agriculture, designates that period in 
which the soil, left to the influence of the atmosphere, becomes 
enriched with those soluble mineral constituents. Fallow, 
however, does not generally imply an entire cessation of culti- 
vation, but only an interval in the growth of the ceralia. That 
store of silicates and alkalies, which is the principal condition 
of their success is obtained, if potatoes or turnips are grown 
upon the same fields in the intermediate periods, since these 



261 



crops do not abstract a particle of silica, and therefore leave the 
field equally fertile for the following crop of wheat.” 

“The preceding remarks will render it obvious to you, that 
the mechanical working of the soil is the simplest and cheapest 
method of rendering the elements of nutrition contained in it 
accessible to plants.” 

“ But, it may be asked. Are there not other means of decom- 
posing the soil besides its mechanical subdivision — are there 
not substances, which by their chemical operation shall equally 
well or better render its constituents suitable for entering into 
vegetable organisms? Yes: we certainly possess such sub- 
stances, and one of them, namely, quick-lime, has been em- 
ployed for the last century past in England for this purpose : 
and it would be difficult to find a substance better adapted to 
this service, as it is simple, and, in almost all localities, cheap 
and easily accessible. ’ 

“In the month of October the fields of Yorkshire and Oxford- 
shire look as if they were covered with snow. Whole square 
miles are seen whitened over with quick-lime, which, during 
the moist winter months, exercises its beneficial influence upon 
the stiff clayey soil of those counties. The fertility of the soil 
is increased by the lime. The ceralia require the alkalies and 
alkaline silicates, which the action of the lime renders fit for 
assimilation by the plants. If, in addition to these, there is any 
decaying organic matter present in the soil supplying carbonic 
acid, it may facilitate their development ; but it is not essential 
to their growth. If we furnish the soil with ammonia, and the 
phosphates, which are indispensable to the ceralia, with the 
alkaline silicates, we have all the conditions necessary to ensure 
an abundant harvest. The atmosphere is an inexhaustible 
store of carbonic acid.” 

“A no less favourable influence than that of lime is exercised 
upon the soil of peaty land by the mere act of burning it , this 
greatly enhances its fertility. We have not long been ac- 
quainted with the remarkable change which the properties of 
clay undergo by burning. The observation was first made in 
the process of analysing the clay silicates. Many of these, in 
their natural state, are not acted on by acids, but they become 
perfectly soluble if heated to redness before the application of 
the acid. This property belongs to potters’ clay, pipe-clay, 

231 . AUCTABICM. 



262 



loam, and many different modifications of clay in soils. In 
their natural state they may be boiled in concentrated sulphuric 
acid, without sensible change ; but, if feebly burned, as is done 
with the pipe clay in many alum manufactories, they dissolve 
in the acid with the greatest facility, the contained silica being 
separated like a jelly in a soluble state. Potters’ clay belongs 
to the most sterile kinds of soil, and yet it contains within itself 
all the constituent elements essential to a most luxurious 
growth of plants; but their mere presence is insufficient to 
secure this end. The soil must be accessible to the atmos- 
phere, to its oxygen, to its carbonic acid ; — these must pene- 
trate it, in order to secure the conditions necessary to a happy 
and vigorous development of the roots. The elements present 
must be brought into that peculiar state of combination which 
will enable them to enter into plants. Plastic clay is wanting 
in these properties; but they are imparted to it by a feeble 
calcination.” 

“At Hardwicke Court, near Gloucester, I have seen a garden 
(Mr. Baker’s) consisting of a stiff clay, which was perfectly 
sterile, become by mere burning extremely fertile. The oper- 
ation was extended to a depth of three feet. This was an 
expensive process, certainly ; but it was effectual.” 

“The great difference in the properties of burnt and unburnt 
clay is illustrated by what is seen in brick houses, built in moist 
situations. In the town of Flanders, for instance, where most 
buildings are of brick, efflorescence of salts cover the surfaces of 
the walls, like a white nap, within a few days after they are 
erected. If this saline incrustation is washed away by the 
rain, it soon re-appears ; and this is even observed on walls 
which, like the gateway of Lisle, have been erected for centuries. 
These saline incrustations consist of carbonates and snlphates, 
with alkaline bases; and it is well known these act an impor- 
tant part in vegetation. The influence of lime in their pro- 
duction is manifested by their appearing first at the place 
where the mortar and brick come into contact.” 

“ I have now, I trust, explained to your satisfaction, that 
the mechanical operations of agriculture, — the application 
of lime and chalk to lands — and the burning of clay, depend 
upon one and the same scientific principle : they are means of 
accelerating the decomposition of the alkaline clay silicates, in 



263 



order to provide plants, at the beginning of a new vegetation, 
with certain inorganic matters indispensable for their nutrition.” 

Attention to the preceding pages will show the gardener how 
important it is that he should frequently stir the surface-soil of 
his garden, that it may the more readily form new combinations 
with the gases of the atmosphere; besides this, we believe that 
the very form alone of the surface has an influence in the 
attraction of electric fluid. Nature furnishes plants with innu- 
merable points, in one form or other, and it is more than possible 
that these are intended as the immediate recipients of electricity. 
Again, lime, applied to old moist garden ground, we confldently 
recommend as highly beneficial, not only for its mechanical 
effect in pulverizing the soil, but also on account of its bringing 
into immediate action, as manure, the organic matter that may 
have there accumulated in a state unsuitable for the food of 
those plants with which the ground had been cropped. It 
should be remembered that lime must not be mixed with 
animal manures, as it would liberate their most valuable 
property, its ammonia. 

218 Charcoal. The late numbers of the Auctarium have been 
devoted to the subject of manures, and none can be investigated 
which is of greater importance to the horticulturist, for it is 
mainly on this that he is dependent for success in his operations. 
The last seven years have shown horticulture and agriculture to 
be so far dependent on chemistry and the sister sciences, that 
they have assumed a new character. Hence it is that manures 
have been so generally brought under consideration. Liebeg, 
whose views have been quoted above, has introduced Charcoal 
to notice as a manure, and various experiments with it have 
consequently been tried. Its useful properties seem to depend 
mainly on the carbonic acid which it supplies to plants, its 
retention of ammonia, and the advantage it produces by keep- 
ing the soil open for the ready extension of their roots. That 
carbonic acid is important to plants, will be readily admitted, 
when it is considered how great a quantity of charcoal, or car- 
bon, all vegetables contain. The increased facility of burnt 
soil depends, in part, on the carbonised roots of vegetables 
which it contains. Liebeg has stated that “plants thrive in 
powdered charcoal, and may be brought to blossom and bear 
fruit, if exposed to the influence of the rain and the atmosphere ; 

232. iOCTABIOM. 



264 



the charcoal may be previously heated to redness. Charcoal 
is the most unchangeable substance known, it may be kept 
for centuries without change, and is, therefore, not subject to 
decomposition. The only substance which it can yield to 
plants, are some salts which it contains, amongst which is 
silicate of potash ; it is known, however, to possess the power 
of condensing gases within its pores, and particularly carbonic 
acid. And it is by virtue of this power that the roots of plants 
are supplied with Charcoal, with an atmosphere of carbonic 
acid, which is received as quickly as it is abstracted.” 

Liebeg seems to have founded this theory of Charcoal '^con- 
densing gases within its pores,” on its indistructibility. Its 
durable quality, however, is but comparative, and English 
chemists admit its decomposition, to which may be attributed 
its powers which have produced such beneficial effects in the 
hands of the gardener. “ Plants do not, however, attain matu- 
rity under ordinary curcumstances, in charcoal powder, when 
they are moistened with pure distilled water, instead of rain 
or river water. Rain water must therefore contain within it 
one of the essentials of vegetable life ; this is the presence of a 
compound containing nitrogen, the exclusion of w hich entirely 
deprives Charcoal of its influence to vegetation.” The admis- 
sion of this fact presents no incoutrovertable argument in 
support of the theory before alluded to, since rain or river 
water may contain the requisite ingredients to facilitate the 
decomposition of Charcoal. 

The experiments of Lucas, which are set forth by the above- 
mentioned eminent man, were carried on in the Botanical 
Garden of Munich. In the hothouse, powdered Charcoal was 
used instead of tan, in which the pots of plants were plunged; 
the requisite warmth being maintained in it by a hollow space 
beneath, which communicated with the fire. The roots of 
some of the plants having descended through the drain hole of 
the pots, soon afforded evidence of their possession of a new 
stimulus, which seems to have first led to the experimenting, in 
the above garden, with charcoal. It was mixed in various 
proportions; sometimes with an equal quantity of earth, and 
sometimes with only a third part, and in each instance the 
results were highly satisfactory. It was then used alone, instead 
of silver sand, to receive cuttings, and, when thus employed, its 



265 



influences appear to have been even more beneficial than in the 
growth of plants. 

The Charcoal of firs and pines, as far as any difference was 
seen, proved most suitable for use, and was improved by being 
exposed during winter to the action of the atmosphere. That, 
however, obtained from calcined bones seems to have been 
preferable to all others. Mr. Lucas says, “It is superfluous to 
remark, that in treating plants in the manner here described, 
they must be plentifully supplied with water, since the air 
having such free access, penetrates and dries the roots, so, that 
unless this precaution be taken, the failure of all such experi- 
ments is unavoidable. The action of Charcoal consists pri- 
marily in its preserving the parts of the plants with which it is 
in contact — whether they be roots, branches, leaves, or pieces 
of leaves — unchanged in their vital power for a long space of 
time, so that the plant obtains time to develope the organs 
which are necessary for its further support and |)ropagation. 
There can scarcely be a doubt also that the Charcoal under- 
goes decomposition; for, after being used five to six years, it 
becomes a coaly earth ; and, if this is the case, it must yield 
carbon, or carbonic oxide abundantly, to the plants growing in 
it, and thus afford the principal substance necessary for the 
nutrition of vegetables. In what other manner indeed can we 
explain the deep green colour and great luxuriance of the 
leaves and every part of the plants, which can be obtained in 
no other kind of soil, according to the opinion of men well 
qualified to judge ? Its porosity, as well as the power which it 
possesses of absorbing water with rapidity, and, after its satur- 
ation, of allowing all other water to sink through it, are causes 
also of its favourable effects. These experiments show what a 
close affinity the component parts of Charcoal have to all 
plants, for every experiment was crowned with success, although 
plants belonging to a great many different families were sub- 
jected to trial.” 

Mr. Carlton, a correspondent of the Gardeners’ Chronicle, 
visited the Botanical Gardens at Munich, and his evidence in 
favour of the utility of Charcoal is worth repeating. In 
describing a propagating pit, he observes that “Nothing can be 
more simple than the whole apparatus. It is nothing more 
than a common pit, with a flue along the middle, on which is a 

2a3. AnCTABICM. 



266 



reservoir of water, the steam from which passes through the bed 
of Charcoal which is placed above it. Upon the Charcoal, 
small glass frames, of the commonest kind, are placed, to exclude 
the air from the cuttings in their early age. It may be sug- 
gested, and indeed would immediately strike any one who 
examines the apparatus, that the success may be owing to the 
moist heat in which the cuttings are constantly kept. No 
question it is so in part, but I am quite satisfied the extraor- 
dinary results I witnessed are quite as much owing to the men- 
struum of propagation as to the decided advantage above stated; 
and I doubt whether peat and sand, under any circumstances, 
would cause the quantity of roots to be produced which I saw 
there at the end of three weeks’ insertion in the bed. It is 
necessary that the Charcoal should be fine, but not in dust, 
which will consolidate and prevent the fibres penetrating in 
every direction, as they do when it is of the proper size. In 
some part of the process, fine peat is mixed with the Charcoal ; 
but I think this is rather in the rooting afterwards, and that the 
first process of striking, in most species, succeeds best in the 
pure material. From what has been stated, it is clear the 
necessary apparatus is simple of application, and of little cost; 
a part of any flued pit, or one heated by hot water, would 
answer every purpose ; though in any nursery, or even gentle- 
man’s establishment, the making one on purpose would be of 
trifling expense, compared to the results, as, owing to the 
rapidity of the operation, a very small bed would suffice. With 
respect to the virtues of Charcoal itself, producing the results 
we are considering, I have little doubt that they consist prin- 
cipally in the porous and perfectly permeable nature of it. 
The heat and moisture are constantly present and passing 
through, without any saturation or stagnation, or induration, 
taking place. There may be something in the vegetative 
powers of it, but I imagine this to be the true cause of the 
superiority over any other material as yet known for pro- 
pagation.” 

It is certain that plants of every sort are chiefly composed of 
Charcoal; for, if burnt, the residuum will always be Charcoal, 
provided combustion be not carried so far as to dissipate the 
carbon, its chief ingredient, and leave only ashes. This being 
the case, the question arises, whence do they obtain it ? Some 



267 



assert that it is wholly absorbed, in the form of carbonic acid, 
from the atmosphere; others imagine that its chief portion is 
taken up by the roots ; again, others believe that the entire 
surface of plants is absorbent, and that carbonic acid gas is taken 
in both from the atmosphere, and from the earth in which the 
plant grows. The latter opinion is by far the most probable, 
and no contradiction can be given it, merely because a plant 
has grown in earth and water, both of which were believed not 
to possess it. This is an uncertain criterion, for carbonic acid 
is more or less every where present; it is, as Dr. Lindley 
truly says, "A kind of air, compounded of carbon and oxygen, 
found in the atmosphere, incessantly expelled from the lungs of 
animals, and produced by the decay of vegetable and animal 
bodies. On this invisible, untouchable, substance plants feed; 
out of this they help themselves to the charcoal, returning the 
oxygen to the air. And thus the vast forests of the earth, and 
all the herbage at their feet, are gradually built up, and 
fashioned into the beautiful green mantle of our planet.” 

The evidence in support of the beneficial influence of Char- 
coal, as a manure to plants, is so convincing that we cannot for 
a moment doubt its validity. It is natural enough that the 
zealous advocates of any novelty should sometimes over-rate 
its advantages. We are always prepared to meet this, but, 
from the statements of respectable persons, and from our 
own experience, we are convinced that Charcoal, independently 
of its mechanical action in keeping composts light and per- 
vious, is an active stimulant to vegetation ; and when kept in 
contact with the roots of growing plants, it has been found to 
lose thereby a portion of its weight, which is tolerably clear 
evidence that the plant must have appropriated some of its 
ingredients to its own use. Still, whether it be from its own 
decomposition, or by its attraction of certain gases from the 
atmosphere, as stated by Liebeg, is to the practical man of little 
importance. In some respects it is superior to other manures 
which have been of late brought prominently under notice; 
for it is not likely to prove unsuitable to any variety of soil; 
nor is it likely that it can be used in excess, since it can, as 
previously shown in the experiments of Mr. Lucas, be used 
advantageously by itself. On the contrary, Guana and Salt 
have been used incautiously, and proved injurious, and the 

234. AOCTIBIDM. 



268 



latter, it is now known, is unsuitable to moist stiff land; still, 
both the one and the other of these are certainly, under proper 
management, of inestimable value to the agriculturist and 
horticulturist. 

Charcoal, as shown in the preceding pages, has, under 
certain circumstances, been used alone; we may now further 
notice its having been used in various proportions, mixed with 
soils of various sorts, and with great success. It has, on the 
contrary, in the estimate of one or two cultivators, been con- 
sidered of little use. This may have arisen from the liberal 
use of other stimulants, either with, or in comparison with, it; 
and forms no criterion, on which to found an opinion, unless 
proper data were given. To form a compost for cucumbers it 
has been successfully used, in equal proportions with fresh 
loam ; without other manure. For orchidaceous epiphytes it 
has proved peculiarly applicable ; blocks of wood being charred, 
the plants have been secured on them, and have grown with 
the most gratifying luxuriance. Mr. Barnes, the gardener at 
Bicton, Devonshire, the seat of the Right Honourable Lady 
Rolle, appears to have used Charcoal more abundantly than any 
other person. He does not found his admiration of it on a few 
experiments, or the uncertain operations of a season or two, but 
on the liberal use of it for fourteen years, on, as he says, thou- 
sands of plants, without meeting with one that did not delight 
in it. In a mixture of loam and Charcoal only, he seems to 
have succeeded to admiration in the culture of pines and other 
stove plants, palms, &c. Musa sapienta he mentions as having 
been planted out in this mixture, in March — a young plant, four 
feet high ; at the end of the following September it was fourteen 
feet six inches high, with leaves reaching to the very top of the 
house, thirty-three feet high ; the base of the stem being three 
feet three inches in circumference. The removal of the surface 
soil, and supplying its place with Charcoal and loam, seems to 
have produced the most striking effects. Amongst which may 
be noticed the growth of Cycas revoluta, with seven hundred 
fruit on it; Luculia gratissiina seven feet high; Doryanthes 
excelsa, flower stem sixteen feet high ; Cactus speciosissima 
twenty feet high. Mr. Barnes says that every plant under his 
care has Charcoal used about it; this assertion from a practical 
man, will go far to dissipate the fears that may have arisen in 



269 



the minds of those who have indulged too freely in the use of 
other newly-introduced manures. We have, ourselves, had a 
small proportion of rather finely powdered Charcoal mixed with 
sand, for propagating plants in, and never have we previously 
seen cuttings make such rapid growth in the stems, even before 
roots had been emitted, indicating an atmospheric influence 
beneath the bell-glasses. Mr. Rivers, in his cultivation of 
Roses in pots, has successfully used turf, roasted an hour on an 
iron plate. This, he says, chars the underside, and acts most 
beneficially. It is well known that clay, by being burnt, loses 
its tenacity ; and, as Dr. Lindley has suggested, the roots of 
grasses, &c., being charred within the turf may contribute much 
to the benefits that usually arise from its use. 

In America experiments have been tried with Charcoal, in the 
culture of plants, and it has been there considered a valuable 
manure. In Italy also, it has been used in the vineyards with 
success, and apparently, from the statement in the Biblioteca 
Agraria, for agricultural purposes, for some years past, where 
the same quantity to the acre is considered to be sufficient as is 
employed of rags or bones. In Germany, at Munich, where 
horticulturists are fully aware of the advantages promised by 
the use of Charcoal, a regular course of experiments has been 
instituted, the results of which, we hope, ere long, to present to 
our readers. The leaves of Gesnera, Gloxinia, Crassula, and 
others, of similar character, have struck root in Charcoal, and 
made plants. The seeds of some species of Ferns, which have 
been found to be of difficult growth, have germinated quickly in 
powdered Charcoal. 

In addition to the advantages that have been derived from 
the growth of plants in a mixture of Charcoal and earth, and 
also in striking cuttings, and raising seedlings, in pure Charcoal, 
this substance has been tried at Munich, with considerable suc- 
cess, as a preservative of plants. Thus, plants of various sorts, 
as Ferns, Calceolarias, Salvias, &c., were packed in a box in 
dry or very slightly moistened Charcoal, the box was then 
closed down, and laid by for a month. On being opened most 
of the plants were in a tolerably good state of preservation, and 
only some very succulent ones had decayed. Cut flowers also, 
similarly treated, were pretty well preserved for spaces of time 
varying from a week to a fortnight. 

235 . AUCTIEICM. 



270 



To test the quality of Charcoal, prepared from wood of differ- 
ent sorts, M. Seitz, the inspector of the Royal Garden of 
Munich, had Charcoal made from Oaks, Limes, Ashes, Beeches, 
Alders, AVillows, Elms, and Firs. These were kept separate, 
and placed in compartments in a hotbed. Their effects in the 
culture of plants under circumstances exactly alike, was then 
proved, and scarcely a difference could be discerned. If a 
difference was perceptible it was in favour of the Fir Charcoal. 
Bone Charcoal, however, excelled them all, when used for strik- 
ing plants. 

Charcoal will be easily obtained in any part of the country, 
and in any state of pulverization that may be required for horti- 
cultural purposes, when a demand for it has been created ; still 
some persons, who possess offal wood, may be desirous of 
making it. The operation is a very simple one, requiring only 
that the wood be burnt without exposure to the atmosphere, just 
as coal is burnt for obtaining common gas. As a correspondent 
of the Gardeners’ Chronicle (J. Lowder) has given a plain ac- 
count of his practice, we will copy his description of it from that 
useful publication for the benefit of our readers. He says, “I 
cut up a quantity of wood into billets of about eighteen inches 
long, and placed three or four wheelbarrowfnis upon a handful 
of straw and a few dry sticks, and set fire to the straw’. As the 
wood began to ignite I surrounded it with sods from the side of 
the road, tolerably dry, and common road dirt (throwing on the 
latter in lumps, so as not completely to exclude the air), until 
the wood was covered all over. Soon the whole heap was 
burning together, and, as the fire made its appearance through 
the dirt, or rather as the dirt became burnt, I threw on more 
dirt. At night I added as much as I thought would be burned 
by the morning, and thus the heap was kept burning for several 
days. Upon clearing away the burnt earth, I found the wood 
I had used for lighting the fire completely charred, but not a 
stick consumed. Thus, I have accomplished two objects by 
one operation ; I have made Charcoal as well as a regular pro- 
fessor of that art ; and have also prepared a capital compost 
of burnt earth and sods, which I intend to enrich by dosing it 
with liquid manure. I have made several heaps since I 6rst 
made the attempt, and have not failed in a single instance. 
The wood I used is Black Poplar, as I happened to have a 



271 



quantity by me, which was cut last winter. I also gave the 
preference to this material from having read lately in the 
Chronicle that the lightest wood made the best Charcoal.” 

It is the more important that the principle of making Char- 
coal should be understood, inasmuch as great quantities of veg- 
etable refuse, of one sort or other, may be used for the purpose, 
and rendered valuable. Amongst this we may mention the offal 
stakes and stems of the garden, sawdust, tan ; and in cider 
countries it is probable that the refuse of apples from the cider 
mill may prove another source from which Charcoal may be 
obtained. 

Since the preceding part of this article was printed, further 
evidence of the powers of Charcoal has arisen ; and as it is our 
object to present the readers of the Botanic Garden with facts 
as their guide, rather than with theoretic speculations, we will 
copy a communication of the Earl of Essex to the Gardeners’ 
Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette, which has thrown new light 
on our subject. His Lordship says, — 

“Herewith I send you three plants of Turnips, (Skirving’s) 
sowed on the same plot of ground, at the same hour of the same 
day. In the case of the largest specimen. No. 1, the seed was 
well mixed with about twelve times its bulk of charcoal-dust. 
In that of the next size. No. 2, the seed was mixed with five 
times its weight of common salt, and nine bulks of Charcoal ; 
and in the case of the plant just come up, the seed was put in 
quite alone. In all three cases the seed was put in drills in soil 
which last year bore Mangold Worzel in seed, and the year 
before wheat, and no manure has been applied since. My object 
in using the Charcoal and Salt was from the consideration that 
both substances are powerful absorbents and retainers of moist- 
ure, as well as direct food for plants ” 

“Numbers 1 and 2, in spite of the parched state of the ground, 
(the 3rd of June) came up strong in five days, and continued 
growing ; No. 1, however, soon and rapidly taking the lead. 
At the end of a fortnight all three rows were once watered, which 
however failed to bring up the seed sown without anything. 
When our first rain came heavily, ten days ago. No. 1 grew 
almost visibly, and three or four days after No. 3 just began to 
show. I may also state that I sowed Belgian Carrots with 
Charcoal only, the first week in May, and though the soil then 

236 . ACCTABIGM. 



272 



was quite dusty, and so continued until ten days ago, the plant 
came up well in three weeks, which is, at least, ten days sooner 
than Carrot seed usually comes up, even under favourable cir- 
cumstances as to rain. I sowed one more row of the Turnip, with 
a double quantity of salt, which seems to have destroyed the 
seed, as none has yet appeared. If you think these experiments 
worth noticing in your excellent Journal, you are quite welcome 
to do so, and I shall feel happy if so simple a substance should 
prove of use in forcing a plant of Turnips, or other roots.” 

On the three turnips received the editor remarks, — “Of the 
specimens sent. No. 1 appears to be a plant which has had about 
six weeks’ vigorous growth ; No. 3 has not yet acquired its 
rough leaf; and No. 2 is of a medium size. This extraordi- 
nary difference in plants sown at the same time, on the same plot 
of ground, appears to be wholly owing to the simple means 
adopted, as described above, which, from his Lordship’s expe- 
rience, certainly appear to be well worthy of extensive trial.” 
219 Lime, its action. In considering manures, it is not unim- 
portant that we understand the rationale of their action ; and, 
as lime is one amongst the most generally used inorganic sub- 
stances for fertilizing the soil, we will give Sir Humphrey Davy’s 
opinion on this subject. He says, “When lime, whether freshly 
burned, or slaked, is mixed with any moist fibrous vegetable 
matter, there is a strong action between the lime and the vege- 
table matter, and they form a kind of compost together, of which 
a part is usually soluble in water. By this kind of operation, 
lime renders matter which was before comparatively inert nu- 
tritive ; and as charcoal and oxygen abound in all vegetable 
matters, it becomes at the same time converted into carbonate of 
lime. Mild lime, powdered limestone, marls or chalks, have no 
action of this kind upon vegetable matter; by their action they 
prevent the too rapid decomposition of substances already dis- 
solved; but they have no tendency to form soluble matters. It 
is obvious from these circumstances that the operation of quick- 
lime, and marl or chalk, depends upon principles altogether 
different. Quicklime, in being applied to land, tends to bring 
any hard vegetable matter that it contains into a state of more 
rapid decomposition and solution, so as to render it proper 
food for plants. Chalk, and marl, or carbonate of lime, will 
only improve the texture of the soil, or its relation to absorption. 



273 



acting merely as one of its earthy ingredients. Quicklime, when 
it becomes mild, operates in the same manner as chalk ; but in 
the act of becoming mild, it prepares soluble out of insoluble 
matter. It is upon this circumstance that the operation of lime 
in the preparation for wheat crops depends ; and its efficacy in 
fertilizing peats, and in bringing into a state of cultivation all 
soils abounding in hard roots, or dry fibres, or inert vegetable 
matter. The solution of the question, whether quicklime ought 
to be applied to a soil, depends upon the quantity of inert vege- 
table matter that it contains. The solution of the question, 
whether marl, mild lime, or powdered limestone, ought to be 
applied, depends upon the quantity of calcareous matter already 
in the soil. All soils are improved by mild lime, and ultimately 
by quicklime, which do not effervesce with acids ; and sands 
more than clays.” 

•20 Liquid Manure, to Plants in Pots. The late president 
of the London Horticultural Society was a really practical hor- 
ticulturist, and all his experiments were guided by principles so 
philosophic that they will not cease to be useful, even if his 
practice be obsolete. In carrying out our intention of gather- 
ing all useful knowledge on the subject of IManures, a paper of 
Mr. Knight’s claims attention, although written many years ago. 
He was in advance of his contemporaries. His reasoning and 
practice will encourage horticulturists in the use of Liquid 
Manure, which seems to us most desirable. He says: — “ The 
quantity of earth, which the most firm and solid parts of trees 
afford by analysis, is well known to be very small ; and even the 
species of these earths have been proved, by the younger Saus- 
sure, to be dependent, to a great extent, upon the component 
parts of the soil, in which the trees happen to have grown. A 
large extent and depth of soil seem therefore to be no further 
requisite to trees than to afford them a regular supply of water, 
and a sufficient quantity of organisable matter ; and the rapid 
growth of plants of every kind, when their roots are confined in 
a pot to a small quantity of mould, till that becomes exhausted, 
proves sufficiently the truth of this position” 

“I have shown that a seedling plum-stock, growing in a small 
pot, attained the height of nine feet seven inches, in a single 
season; which is, I believe, a much greater height than any 
seedling tree of that species was ever seen to attain in the open 

237. lUCTABIVH. 



274 



soil. But the quantity of earth, which a small pot contains, 
soon becomes exhausted, relatively to one kind of plant; though 
it may be still fertile relatively to others; and the size of the pot 
cannot be changed sufficiently often to remedy this loss of fer- 
tility ; and if it were ever so frequently changed, the mass of 
mould, which each successive emission of roots would enclose, 
must remain the same.” 

“Manure can therefore probably be most beneficially given 
in a purely liquid state; and the quantity which trees growing 
in pots have thus taken, under my care, without any injury and 
with the greatest good effect, has so much exceeded every expec- 
tation I had formed, that I am induced to communicate to the 
Society the particulars and the result of my experience.” 

“I have for some years appropriated a forcing-house, at 
Downton, to the purposes of experiment solely upon fruit-trees; 
which, as I have frequent occasion to change the subjects upon 
which I have to operate, are confined in pots. These were at first 
supplied with water, in which about one-tenth, by measure, of 
the manure of pigeons, or domestic poultry, had been infused; 
and the quantity of these substances (generally the latter) was 
increased from one-tenth to a fourth. The water, after standing 
forty-eight hours, acquired a colour considerably deeper than 
that of porter; and in this state was drawn off clear, and 
employed to feed trees of the vine, the mulberry, the peach, and 
other plants. A second quantity of water was then applied, and 
afterwards used in the same manner; when the manure was 
changed, and the same process repeated.” 

“The vine and mulberry tree, being very gross feeders, were 
not likely to be soon injured by this treatment ; but I expected 
the peach-tree, which is often greatly injured by excess of 
manure in a solid state, to give early indications of being over- 
fed. Contrary, however, to my expectations the peach tree 
maintained, at the end of two years, the most healthy and luxu- 
riant appearance imaginable, and produced fruit in the last sea- 
son in greater perfection than I had ever previously been able to 
obtain it. Some seedling plants had then acquired, at eighteen 
months old, (though the whole of their roots had been confined 
to half a square foot of mould) more than eleven feet in height 
with numerous branches, and have afforded a most abundant 
and vigorous blossom in the present spring, which has set 



275 



remarkably well ; and those trees which had been most abun- 
dantly supplied with manure have displayed the greatest degrees 
of health and luxuriance.” 

“A single orange-tree was subjected to the same mode of 
treatment, and grew with equal comparative vigour, and ap- 
peared to be as much benefited by abundant food as even the 
vine and mulberry tree.” 

“An opinion generally, though I think somewhat erroniously 
prevails, that many plants, particularly the different species and 
varieties of heath, require a very poor soil in pots ; but these 
might, I conceive, with propriety, be said to require a peculiar 
soil ; for I have never seen the common species of this genus 
spring with so much luxuriance as from a deep bed of vegetable 
mould, which had been recently very thickly covered with the 
ashes of a preceding crop of heaths, and other plants that had 
been burned upon it. And I believe, if the branches and leaves 
of the common species of heath were placed to decompose in 
water, and such water were afterwards given to the tender 
exotic species, that these, how heavily soever the water might 
be loaded with organisable matter, would be found as little 
capable of being injured by abundant food as the vine or mul- 
berry tree, though the species of food which would best suit 
those plants might prove to every species of heath destructive 
and poisonous.” 

The advantages arising from the supply of liquid manure to 
plants in pots is too obvious to require recommendation. It is 
this practice, more than any other, which is now placing one 
cultivator so eminently above another. We hope that our 
readers will avail themselves of the benefits of this knowledge. 

221 Caoutchouc or India Rubber Tree. One of the defi- 
ciencies of education, in this country, appears to be the absence 
of all regular study of the works of nature, — of the communi- 
cation of knowledge in immediate connexion with those objects 
which every where surround us. Knowledge of these is not 
simply a medium through which mere curiosity might be grati- 
fied ; indeed, a moment’s reflection will open to us a view of 
our great — almost entire, dependence on the vegetable kingdom, 
either directly or indirectly, for our food, our raiment, and 
our pleasures; hence, the more intimately we make ourselves 
acquainted with its productions, the more profit shall we derive 

238. iDCTARICM. 



276 



from it; wliether our views be confined to the narrow limit 
of worldly interests, or extended to those which exalt the mind 
to better considerations. In several parts of the European 
continent natural history is a study of the schools; hence 
it has been that we owe to our continental neighbours the dis- 
covery of many useful products, particularly in connection with 
medicine. The discovery of that most important material, 
India Rubber, has added much to our comforts; and as the 
milky sap of the tree which forms it, may for ages to come have 
passed unnoticed, it is but reasonable to infer that useful 
properties may, sooner or later, according to the activity of 
our researches, be discovered in numerous others, capable of 
administering to our pleasures or our necessities. 

That our readers may be informed of the simple mode adopted 
by an uncultivated people, to administer to their comforts, we 
will copy a communication from the Brazils, to an American 
journal : — 

“The Caoutchouc tree grows, in general, to the height of 40 
or 50 feet without branches, then branching, runs up 15 feet 
higher. The leaf is about six inches long, thin, and shaped 
like that of a peach tree. The trees show their working by the 
number of knots, or bunches made by tapping; and a singular 
fact is, that, like a cow, when most tapped, they give most milk 
or sap. As the time of operating is early day, before sunrise we 
were at hand. The blacks are first sent through the forest, 
armed with a quantity of soft clay, and a small pickaxe. On 
coming to one of the trees, a portion of the soft clay is formed 
into a cup and stuck to the trunk. The black then striking his 
pick over the cup, the sap oozes out slowly, a tree giving daily 
about a gill. The tapper continues in this way, tapping per- 
haps fifty trees, when he returns, and with a jar, passing over 
the same ground, empties his cups. So by seven o’clock the 
blacks came in with their jars, ready for working. The sap at 
this stage resembles milk in appearance, and somewhat in taste. 
It is also frequently drunk with perfect safety. If left standing 
now it will curdle like milk, disengaging a watery substance 
like whey. Shoe makers now arrange themselves to form the 
gum. Seated in the shade, with a large pan of milk on one 
side, and on the other a flagon, in which is burned a nut pecu- 
liar to this country, emitting a dense smoke, the operator having 



277 



his last, or form, held by a long stick or handle, previously 
besmeared with soft clay, (in order to slip off the shoe when 
finished) holds it over the pan, and pouring on the milk until it 
is covered, sets the coating in the smoke, then giving it a second 
coat, repeats the smoking, and so on with a third and fourth, 
until the shoe is of the required thickness, averaging from six to 
twelve coats. When finished, the shoes on the forms are 
placed in the sun the remainder of the day to drip. Next day, 
if required, they may be figured, being so soft that any impres- 
sion will be indelibly received. The natives are very dexter- 
ous in this work. With a quill and a sharp-pointed stick they 
will produce finely lined leaves and flowers, such as you may 
have seen on the shoes, in an incredibly short space of time. 
After remaining on the forms two or three days, the shoes are cut 
open on the top, allowing the last to slip out. They are then 
tied together and slung on poles, ready for the market. There 
pedlars and Jews trade for them with the country people; and 
in lots of 1,000 or more they are again sold to the merchants, 
who have them stuffed with straw, and packed in boxes to 
export, in which state they are received in the United States. 
In the same manner any shape may be manufactured. Thus 
toys are made over clay forms. After drying, the clay is bro- 
ken and extracted. Bottles, &c., in the same way. According 
as the gum grows older, it becomes darker in colour and more 
tough. The number of caoutchouc trees iu the province is 
countless. In some parts whole forests of them exist, and they 
are frequently cut down for firewood. Although the trees exist 
in Mexico and the East Indies, there appears to be no impor- 
tation into the United States from these places. The reason, I 
suppose, must be the want of that prolificness found in them here. 
The caoutchouc tree may be worked all the year; but generally 
in the wet seasons they have rest, owing to the flooded state of 
the woods; and the milk being watery, requires more to manu- 
facture the same article than in the dry season.” 

*22 WiREWORMS. The numerous insects which continually make 
their appearance amongst our plants for the purpose of preying 
upon them, call forth all the ingenuity of the gardener, either 
to slay them by human force — making the lovely parterre a 
field of battle; to create a famine amongst them by withholding 
their natural food ; to scare them away by offensive odours ; 

239. ACCTABICM. 



278 



or to overcome them by the encouragement of their natural 
enemies. 

To effect any one of these purposes efficiently, we should first 
make ourselves acquainted with our liliputian enemies in their 
various characters, and then, if we cannot conquer them in one 
shape, we possibly may in another. The insect kingdom come 
forth as performers in one general pantomime. They are 
sometimes ugly and crawling; sometimes gay and flying, or 
bounding from place to place with the utmost alacrity; even 
the troublesome little animal with whose popular appellation 
we commenced, although it be a mere crawling, twisting, hairy, 
thread-like, voracious pest to the farmer, gardener, and florist, 
it ultimately assumes the more important character of a grave- 
looking, abstemious, sombre beetle, having fresh parts to per- 
form ; consisting of running, flying, tumbling, pretending to be 
dead, and then jumping, like a clown in a pantomime off its 
back, and alighting on its feet. The fact is, — a fact which may 
surprise some of our readers, the common Wireworm becomes, 
in its perfect state, a well-known brown beetle, which is some- 
times, from its antics to which we have alluded, called Skip- 
jack ; and from a snapping noise which it produces by a little 
apparatus when it leaps, it is sometimes also called Click-beetle. 

Mr. John Curtis, the author of British Entomology — a work 
of great labour and talent ; and as regards its plates, w hich are 
also executed by Mr. Curtis, unrivalled at the present day, 
(these could be produced only by the hand of him who united 
the character of naturalist and artist) this gentleman has writ- 
ten a memoir on Wireworms, in the Journal of the Royal 
Agricultural Society; and as that work will not meet the eye 
of the generality of our readers, we will extract from it a few of 
the leading particulars. 

“Of all the insect enemies with which the farmer has to con- 
tend, there are none which are more fatal in their effects, and 
more difficult to overcome, than the Wireworms. The larvae 
of many insects are not unfrequently attached to one species of 
plants, or at least to one particular tribe or 'natural order;’ 
thus the ravages of the Turnip-fly are confined to the Cruciferae, 
of the Black-caterpillar to the turnip, of the Hessian-fly to 
corn, &c.; but in the Wireworm we have an example of a larva 
which may almost be termed omnivorous, as far as regards the 



279 



productions of the field and garden, for it will feed upon corn, 
turnips, mangold-wurzel, potatoes, grass, and cabbages, as well 
as upon the roots and stems of the choicest flowers; its opera- 
tions therefore being so extensive, the mischief done by these 
formidable little animals must be incalculable. ” 

“ It is true that every grub and worm found at the roots of 
their crops by the farmer and gardener has been hitherto stig- 
matized with the appellation of ‘the AVireworm,’ which has no 
doubt contributed to add to the amount of mischief complained 
of; nevertheless, the true Wireworms have enough to answer 
for on their own account, and. the great ignorance that has 
existed regarding them renders a narrative of their natural his- 
tory very desirable.” 

“ It will probably surprise the general reader to learn that 
there are nearly seventy species of beetles in this country which 
are the parents of Wireworms; many of them however live in 
decaying trees or under the bark, and the number that affects 
our crops of corn, vegetables, and flowers is very limited ; of 
these we shall treat as far as we have been able to obtain data 
lor their histories, but their economy appears to be very similar. 
The female beetle lays her eggs ; the eggs produce little larvae 
called Wireworms, which grow and change to pupae or chrysal- 
ides, and from these again emerge the beetles. The eggs which 
are nearly globose or slightly oval, yellowish white, and very 
minute, are laid in the earth close to the root of a plant, or 
between the enveloping leaves or sheaths near the base of the 
stalk, which I am unable to determine ; it is a very desirable part 
of their economy to be ascertained, but hitherto I have endea- 
voured in vain to detect a female depositing her eggs or to find 
any, except by dissection, when I have observed them close to 
the base of the oviduct ; the little worms produced from these 
eggs must be almost invisible to the naked eye ; they grow very 
slowly, and eventually attain the length of three-quarters of an 
inch, rarely eleven lines. These are the true AVireworms, so 
named from their cylindrical form, smooth surface, and extreme 
toughness. In this state they live five years, as proved by 
Bierkander, casting otf their skins ihrice, probably, like other 
larvse, as they increase in stature. I have examined many of 
these exuvia, which are brown ; and the animals perform this 
extraordinary moult like other caterpillars, by splitting the 

240 . ADCTABIUM. 



280 



horny skin along the thorax, and drawing themselves out at the 
aperture, leaving (like a snake) a perfect exuvia of every part, 
including eyes, horns, feet, and it is believed also of the internal 
organs. Immediately after this operation, the Wire worms are 
very tender, and of a whitish colour; but as soon as they recover 
from this great effort of nature, they move about with the great- 
est facility, gliding along and soon burrowing into the earth 
when dug up and laid on the surface, their horny coats being 
well adapted to their subterranean habits.” 

"When the Wireworm has arrived at maturity, (five years 
of age) it descends a considerable depth into the earth, forms an 
oval cell there, entirely composed of the surrounding particles 
of soil, and not even lined with silk as in the Turnip Saw-fly ; 
it then casts its skin again, and becomes a pupa or chrysalis, 
generally, it seems, at the end of July or beginning of August ; 
it is long and narrow in form, like the perfect insect, but is of 
a yellowish white. They remain in the pupa state two or three 
weeks, but many no doubt pass the winter buried and protected 
from casualities and the rigour of that inclement season; when, 
however, the appointed time comes, they burst from their 
shrouds and the earthly tombs they inhabit, and rising through 
the soil arrive at the surface, changed to perfect beetles, but of 
a whitish colour, soft, and extremely tender; exposed to the 
air and light, their bodies harden and their colour gradually 
changes, so that in a few' hours they have attained the horny 
coat which covers them, and assumed the tints which the Autlior 
of nature has assigned to the species.” 

“ The parts of the animal which were lately indistinctly seen 
as through a veil, are now distinctly visible; and all the mem- 
bers are liberated to give action to its body and animation to all 
its senses. They walk and run like dogs, with their heads and 
trunks declining, their noses close to the ground ; when they 
leap, their legs are applied closely to their bodies, and by the 
same means they fall down when the plants are approached 
upon w Inch they are resting. Its habits are now quite altered ; 
instead of the ravenous and destructive Wireworm it is now 
become an active beetle, running up the grass and readily fly- 
ing to flowers, to which it resorts for food.” Thus do we witness 
a metamorphosis instructive to all, — a subject which will be 
continued in a future number. 



THE 



BOTANIC GARDEN. 



zirsEX 



A U C T A R I U . 

PART I. 



A IE indispensable to vegetation, 

Aljiine Plants, their culture, .... 

Habitation, 

Alpine Strawberry, to delay fruiting, 

From seed, 

Alpines, winter treatment of, 

American Blight, to destroy, ... 

Anatomised Leaves, to prepare. 

Annuals, to raise in the borders, 

Rendered perennial, . 

Ants, to destroy, 

Aphis, to destroy, 

Apple Trees, bark-bound, 

Decortication of, 

Pruning of 

Artichokes, to improve, .... 

Ashes of ])lants, 

Atmosphere, inducnced by Altitude, 

Forests and Position 

Laud or Water, 

Bark Beds, 

Bark-bound apple trees, .... 

Berberis and Alahonia, 

Birds’ Eggs, to preserve, 

Blight, American, to destroy, 

Borders, raised, of stone, &c.. 

Broccoli, from slips, 

1 , 



SECTION. 

.178 

. . 58 
.. 57 

5 

64 
..184 
10 
88 
41 
15 

43 

44 
66 
67 

..171 
..127 
,113 
, 47 
. 46 
, 45 
. . 56 
. . 66 
..172 
54 
10 
24 
90 



Brugmansia suaveolens in the open ground, 

Bulbs, in glasses, 

Butterflies’ Wings described, 

Cabbage from slips, 

Cactus tribe, culture of, 

Calampelis scaber, from seeds, .... 

Camphor, 

Caterpillars, lace made by, 

Celery, to preserve in winter, 

Cement for shells, 

Chemical changes in plants, 

Vegetables, 

Chinese method of propagating trees, 

Chinese Roses, layering of, 

Chrysanthemums, culture of, .... 

Cold and Heat, sudden changes injuriou 
Colours of flowers, to change, .... 

Compost, an excellent one, 

Corrosive Sublimate, a preservative of dried specimens. 
Covent Garden market measures. 

Cropping a garden, 

Cultivation of Ferns, 

Currant trees, from cuttings, 

Damping off of plants, 

Decortication of apple trees, 

Desmodium gyrans, motion of, 

Digestion and Respiration of plants, . . . 

Diseases of the Larch, 

Division of perennials, 

Draining flower pots, 

Drought, protection from 

Drying plants, method of, 

Eggs, Birds’, to preserve, 

Electricity, its influence on vegetation. 

Evergreen Shrubs, transplanting. 

Ferns, cultivation of, 

Fossil, 

F'ilberts, planting of, 

— Productive pruning of. 

Fish Skeletons, to obtain, 

Flies, to exclude from houses, 

Flowers and slips, to revive, 

Colours of, to change, 

Flower pots, draining of, 

Food of plants, 

Fossil Ferns, 

F ruit, its change of character, .... 

Fruits, new species of, 



SECTION. 

132 

.... 76 

100 

1 

....121 
.... 92 
....187 

79 

.,..104 

29 

....109 

151 

.... 55 

75 

....183 
.... 48 
.... 16 

160 

87 
27 

....125 
.... 91 
.... 33 
.... 107 
.... 67 
.... 81 
....110 
.... 95 
.... 84 
.... 9 

40 

.... 96 
.... .54 

1.37 

.... 157 

91 

....116 
.... 33 

135 

2.5 

138 

136 

.... 16 
.... 9 
....112 

116 

167 

.... 97 



SECTION. 



Fruit trees, seedlings indispensable, 185 

Fuchsias, 147 

In the open borders, 26 

Garden, cropping of, 125 

Walls 152 

Geranium, scarlet, 31 

Glazed boxes, vegetation in, 72 

Gooseberry trees, from cuttings, 33 

Grafting Ipomceas, 170 

Rhododendrons, 118 

Grapes, to preserve, 173 

To ripen early, 165 

Grasses for lawns, 155 

Growth of vegetables, 68 

Plants, 108 

Heaths, hardy, culture of, 99 

Herbs, to preserve dried, 80 

Holly hedges, 21 

Hotbeds of bark, 56 

Hothouse management, philosophy of, 51 

Hot water, heating by, 12 

Hydrangea, blue flowering, 120 

Ink, permanent, 105 

Insects and laurel leaves, 149 

Insects, destruction of, 143 

Ipomceas, grafting, 170 

Iron and Steel, to preserve from rusting, 103 

Lace made by caterpillars, 79 

Larch, diseases of, 95 

Laurel leaves and insects, 149 

Lawns, grasses for, 1.56 

Layering China Roses, 75 

Layers, propagation by, 13 

Leaf IMould, 59 



As a substitute for peat soi 

Leaves, withered, 

To anatomise, 

For hotbeds, 

Light, its effects on plants, 

Mahonia and Berberis, 

Mango, naturalization of, 

Manure, animal and vegetable, .... 

Soda, 

Soot, 

Marble, to preserve, 

Measures, Covent Garden, 

Microscope, 

Microscopic objects, 



. . 158 
..148 

.. 88 
.. 60 
..111 
..173 
..101 
..181 
. .153 
.. 36 
..106 
.. 27 
..162 
.. 39 



Specific gravity of cold water, 

Steel and Iron, to prevent from rusting. 

Stocks, seeds of, 

Strawberries, alpine, to delay fruiting, 
From seed, ... 



-Annual planting of. 



Stone borders. 

Supporters for plants, 

Temperature of soils, 

Tobacco, cultivation of, 

Transmitted plants, 

Transplanting evergreen shrubs, . . , 

— Method of, 

Trees, 

Trullle, a description of, 

Cultivation of, , 

Observations on, 

Turnip Fly, 

Vegetables, chemical changes in, 

Action of poison on, .... 

Growth of, 

Vegetation, influence of electricity on, 

Air indispensable to, .... 

Water indispensable to, 

In glazed boxes, 

Vines, culture of, 

Walls, garden, 

Wall trees, mildew on, 

Fruit trees, protection of, 

Water, cold, specific gravity of, 

Indispensable to vegetation, 

Watering plants exposed to the sun, . 

Waterproof canvass, 

Withered leaves, 

Woodlice, to destroy, 

Worms, to destroy, 



SECTION. 

.... 49 

103 

7 

5 

.... 63 
....135 
.... 24 

8 

....174 

73 

.... 83 
....157 
.... 42 
....132 

145 

....146 

144 

33 

.... 151 
....131 
.... 68 
....137 
....178 

177 

72 

94 

....152 

34 

37 

.... 49 

177 

35 

....166 

148 

.... 1 15 
.... 22 




MAl'ND, PRlNTBHy OKOMSUKOVE. 



THE AUCTARIUM 



OF THE 



BOTANIC GARDEN; 



CONTAINING 



MISCELLANEOUS INFORMATION, 

CONNECTED WITH THE 

CULTIVATTON OF A GARDEN, 



AND 



NATURAL HISTORY. 



PART IT. 



The Second Port of the Auctarium appeared, in small portions, in 
Maund’s Botanic Gasden, 

From No. 193 to 312 dnclusive, being the completion of the work. 



LONDON: 

GBOOMBRIDOE AND SONS, PATBBNOSTEB-BOW. NEW TOBS : O. P. PUTNAM. 



AUCTARIUM 



OF 



THE BOTAHIC ©AMBEH. 



•23 Wireworms, their destruction. In the previous part of 
the Auctarium we have given, after Mr. Curtis, some interest- 
ing particulars regarding the Wireworm ; still, before we proceed 
to the consideration of means for destroying this enemy of the 
gardener, we cannot omit alluding to the remarkable power 
given to the Click-beetle — the parent of the Wireworm, of 
recovering its natural position when turned on its back. Its 
possession of a small apparatus to assist in this operation, has 
been mentioned, but to clearly describe the apparatus, and its 
action, would be difficult, without the assistance of engraved 
figures. Our readers should examine the insect itself, which in 
summer, most persons will think, is by Air too readily met with. 
It may be observed, that the beetle, when on its back, raises 
itself as an arch, by which one part of the apparatus mentioned 
slips out of the other with a snap, — the centre of the back 
which was before raised, is depressed with a sudden jerk on 
the substance that supports it, the animal thereby springs up- 
wards, turns in the air, and alights on its legs. 

“ Difficult as the Wireworm is to deal with, so much atten- 
tion has been paid to the subject by the suffering farmer and 
gardener, that numerous methods of arresting its ravages have 
been tried, some of them with great success ; and let not any 
one be discouraged because he cannot clear his land entirely, 
or at one blow sweep away a nuisance ; for extermination 
amongst these minor works of the creation is not permitted, it 
is against the laws of the Creator; for although such intervals 
of absence may occur as to lead us to think that a noxious 
animal is annihilated, it will in due time return, and again 
require all our efforts and vigilance to contend against it. We 
241. AUCT.VRIU.M. 



2 



are sometimes deceived by appearances, and it is true that by 
persecuting the higher order of animals they may be driven 
from a favourite spot or locality, and take shelter, so far from 
the haunts of man as to relieve him from their inroads, and 
dispose him to imagine that the species is lost; and in some 
instances we know that a country has been freed from races of 
animals, as the wolf and eagle, but they are not exterminated; 
and the latter, under favourable circumstances, would return: 
I think it therefore probable that by perseverance insects may 
be driven from a locality, for persecution is not agreeable to 
any animated being ; and this knowledge ought to encourage 
the cultivator not to relax in his efforts to free his land from 
destructive insects, but to be certain that those efforts are well 
directed.” 

“ Great benefits may be derived by selection of crops, by 
modes of cultivation, by manures and dressings, but, above all, 
by manual labour. Animals also whose economy tends to 
diminish destructive insects ought to be encouraged, and no 
doubt we are benefited, to an extent which it is impossible to 
conceive, by the parasitic insects whose instincts lead them to 
prey upon the eggs and eaterpillars of our enemies: they are, as 
we have shown in former memoirs, multiplied to an almost in- 
credible extent, and labour incessantly in their vocation. These 
are discoveries which have been gradually developed by the 
industry, perseverance, and research of the naturalist, for the 
improvement, amusement, and benefit of his fellow creatures; 
and I concur entirely with Mr. Hope that ‘ Agriculture may 
derive valuable assistance from the science of Entomology ; 
and I feel fully convinced that we can scarcely do a greater act 
of kindness, or be of more service to the farmer, than by point- 
ing out the nature and habits of those insects which destroy his 
crops.’ ” 

“ Mowing oats, and of course other corn, is considered the 
best method of getting rid of the Wireworm by Kollar, and 
other continental writers ; but they assign no reason, and it 
is difficult to explain the cause. It may be, that when com 
is reaped, the stubble being left long, rooks and many other 
birds will not resort to such fields, and consequently the Wire- 
worms revel without molestation. This is worth the consider- 
ation of the farmer; and whatever may be the cause, if the 



3 



statement be true, it ought not to be neglected. Long stubble 
certainly harbours many injurious insects, and amongst them, 
it is believed, the turnip-beetle, which resorts to the long hollow 
straws for shelter during the winter.” 

" -Many other applications have been recommended, and 
amongst them spirits of tar and chloride of lime. One corres- 
pondent in the ‘ Gardeners’ Chronicle’ says, ‘Spirits of tar is 
the most effectual remedy with which we are acquainted for 
destroying the Wireworm. VVe should therefore recommend 
any one to saturate some sand with that compound, and mix it 
with the soil in the beds of ranunculus and anemone when they 
are turned up in autumn,’” J. W. C., having lost his crops 
from Wireworms, also says, “Thinking that spirits of tar might 
do good, when I sowed dwarf French beans again, before cover- 
ing in the rows, I watered them with a strong solution of it; 
and the result was that they came up very strong and healthy, 
and the produce was enormous, whilst the first crop gradually 
dwindled away, and died a premature death.’” ‘The refuse 
lime of gas-works is stated to be efficacious in banishing these 
pests from the garden. Previously to the crop being planted, a 
thin covering of thelime should be spread over the ground, and 
it must be well mixed up with the soil in digging.’” F. H. B. 
“had been using some chloride-of-liine water, and poured it 
over some grass, when it immediately killed the worms. From 
this success he was induced to try it on some very sickly carna- 
tions infested with Wireworms, and had the satisfaction to find 
them recover rapidly. The proportion used was about a table- 
spoonful to a pint of water, but that of course must depend on 
the quality of the soil.’” It seems necessary to employ it with 
caution, in the flower garden at least; for in the same journal 
it is asserted, ‘ We have great doubts whether chloride of lime, 
although considerably diluted, would not be injurious to pico- 
tees, and commit as much havoc amongst them as the Wire- 
worm. We recommend you to spread some of the refuse lime 
from the gas-works over the surface of the bed, the efiluvia of 
which will probably drive them away.’” 

“As the Wireworms will live upon potatoes— as I can testify 
by having fed them on nothing else for many weeks together — 
there cannot be a better bait to catch them in the flower borders 
than slices of that tuber, as recommended by Sir Joseph Banks, 

242. ArCT.VRIUM. 



4 



wliich has been fairly tried by a friend in Hants, who tells me 
it is the only method by which he can save his carnations and 
other flowers. I have now before me communications from 
several contributors to the ‘ Gardeners’ Chronicle,’ all concur- 
ring in recommending slices of potato, &c., as the best mode 
of freeing the garden at least from this troublesome visitor. 
One of these I will transcribe : ‘ I send you an account of des- 
troying the Wire worm, which I have adopted for some years, 
my ground being full of them, so that I could neither grow 
sweet-williams, picotees, bulbs, lettuces, nor indeed any succu- 
lent plant, without their boring, running up, and eating the 
hearts out. Near these plants I now place half a potato, with 
the eyes cut out to prevent its growing, and run a pointed stick 
through the middle of it, and peg it into the ground, covering 
it over with about an inch of mould ; and in a day or two I 
have pulled out by the tail from fifteen to twenty of them from 
one piece of potatoe.’” Slices of turnip, brocoli, cabbage, 
beet-root, parsnip, carrot, apples, and young lettuce-plants, 
will answer the purpose where potatoes are scarce or not to be 
obtained ; and it is very probable, if such vegetables were 
scattered over infested corn fields, that considerable numbers 
of the Wireworm would be decoyed to them, and might be col- 
lected and destroyed; for it is even recommended by some 
persons to lay the slices of potato on the surface, although there 
are others who consider that they may be buried two or three 
inches deep ; but these variations in the mode of application 
arise, in all probability, from differences in the soil.” 

“ Excellent as many of the foregoing remedies may be, 1 
must confess I think highly of hand-picking; its eflfects are 
certain, it is comparatively not expensive, especially when it is 
borne in mind that it gives employment to the children of the 
labourer. The following fact shows the advantages of this 
system, and requires no comment. 'A striking instance,’” 
says Mr. Spence, 'of the use of hand-picking ( in most cases 
by far the most effective mode of getting rid of insects) ap- 
peared in the 'West Briton,’ a provincial paper, in November, 
1838, stating that Mr. G. Pearce, of Pennare Goran, had saved 
an acre and a half of turnips, sown to replace wheat destroyed by 
the Wireworm and attacked by hosts of these larvae, by setting 
boys to collect them; who, at the rate of lid. per 100, gathered 



5 



18,000; as many as 50 having been taken from one turnip. 
Thus, at the expense of only 1/. 2s. 6d., an acre and a half of 
turnips, worth from 5/. to 11 ., or more, was saved ; while, as the 
boys could each collect 600 per day, thirty days’ employment 
was given to them at 9d. per day, which they would not other- 
wise have had.’ ” 

We shall, at a future opportunity, recur to the important sub- 
ject of Insects, which are injurious to vegetation, seeing that so 
much of the success of gardening is dependent on due attention to 
the best means of preventing the ravages of some of the smaller 
enemies of the cultivator. 

224 Apple-trees, their Duration. The cultivation of the 
various species of fruits, which now so much occupies the atten- 
tion of horticulturists in every part of Europe, is becoming more 
and more a scientific pursuit, and its importance every where 
acknowledged. We, therefore, intend occasionally to give the 
opinions, and detail the practice, of eminent fruit growers, and 
also extracts from the writings of those authors whose experi- 
rience has rendered them worthy of record. The very first 
amongst such authors we rank the late president of the Horti- 
cultural Society — Thomas Andrew Knight ; whose numerous 
experiments, carried out as they were by industry and acuteness 
of observation, have advanced this department of horticulture 
in a greater degree than have the labours of any other indi- 
vidual. His treatise on the Apple and Pear contains much 
curious as well as important information, and from this we will 
copy some of tlie leading portions of his theories, and their 
practical elucidations. 'Fhese, we are quite sure, may be made 
advantageous to our readers, whether they cultivate ten acres, 
or only the tenth of one acre ; for the one portion as well as the 
other is available for the cultivation of the most useful of all 
fruits — the Apple and Pear. 

“The Apple is not the natural produce of any soil or climate, 
but owes its existence to human art and industry ; and differs 
from the crab, which is a native of every part of England, only 
in the changes which cultivation has produced in it. The first 
varieties which were cultivated in England were, no doubt, im- 
ported from the continent ; but at what period is not, I believe, 
known. Many were introduced by a fruiterer of Henry the 
Eighth, and some at subsequent periods ; but I am inclined to 

343. AUCTARIU.M. 



6 



think that we are indebted to the industry of the planters of the 
seventeenth, and the end of the preceding century, for most of 
those we have at present, and probably for all the old fine cider 
fruits. Of these they have left us a sufficient number; but the 
existence of every variety of this fruit appears to be confined to 
a certain period, during the earlier parts of which only it can 
be propagated with advantage to the planter. No kind of apple, 
now cultivated, appears to have existed more than two hundred 
years; and this term does not at all exceed the duration of a 
healthy tree. Vegetable, however, like animal life in indi- 
viduals, appears to have its limits fixed by nature, and immor- 
tality has alike been denied to the oak and to the mushroom ; 
to the being of a few days, and of as many centuries. The 
general law of nature must be obeyed, and each must yield its 
place to a successor. The art of the plantei- readily divides a 
single tree into almost any number that he wishes ; but the 
character of the new trees, thus raised, is very essentially differ- 
ent from that of a young seedling plant; they possess a preter- 
natural maturity, and retain the habits and diseases of the tree 
of which they naturally formed a part.” 

“All efforts which have hitherto been made to propagate 
healthy trees of those varieties which have been long in culti- 
vation, have, I believe, been entirely unsuccessful. The grafts 
grow well for two or three years, after which they become cank- ^ 
ered and mossy, and appear, what I consider them really to be, 
parts of the bearing branches of old diseased trees.” 

“AVhen I first observed the unhealthy state of all the young 
trees of these kinds, I suspected that it arose from the use of 
diseased grafts taken from old trees, and that I should be able 
to propagate all the valuable varieties by buds taken from young 
newly-grafted trees, as these can scarcely be said to take any of 
the wood of the old stock with them ; but to remove still farther 
every probability of defect which might be communicated from 
the old trees, I inserted the young shoots and buds taken from 
newly-grafted trees in other young stocks, and I repeated this 
process six times in as many years, each year taking my grafts 
and buds from those inserted in the year preceding. Stocks of 
different kinds were also used ; some where double grafted, others 
obtained from the branches of apple-trees which had emitted 
shoots from cuttings, and others from the seeds of each kind 



7 



afterwards inserted in them, under the idea that there might be 
something congenial to the fruits in stocks of this kind. The 
grafts grew tolerably, and equally well in all ; but there was a 
want of hardness and elasticity in the wood, and at the end of 
three or four years all began to canker.” 

225 Apple-trees, Canker. “ The canker, however, which con- 
stitutes their most fatal disease, often arises from other causes. 
It is always found in those varieties which have been long in 
cultivation, and in these it annually becomes more destructive, 
and evidently arises from the age of the variety ; but it often 
appears to be hereditary. A gravelly or wet soil, a cold pre- 
ceding summer, or a high exposed situation, adds much to its 
virulence. It is most fatal to young free growing trees of old 
varieties, and I have often seen the strong shoots of these totally 
destroyed by it, when the old trees growing in the same orchard, 
and from which the grafts had been taken, were nearly free from 
the disease. The latter had ceased to grow larger, but con- 
tinued to bear well, not being of very old kinds of fruits; the 
young stocks, by affording the grafts a preternatural abundance 
of nourishment, seemed in this instance to have brought on the 
disease; and I have always found that transplanting, or a heavy 
crop of fruit, which checked the growth of the tree, diminished 
its disposition to canker. In middle-aged trees of very old 
kinds, a succession of young shoots is annually produced by the 
vigour of the stock, and destroyed again in the succeeding 
winter; the quantity of fruit these produce is in consequence 
very small. In this disease something more than a mere ex- 
tinction of vegetable life appears to take place. The internal 
bark bears marks of something similar to erosion, and this, I 
believed formerly to be the original seat of the disease ; but 
subsequent observation has satisfied me that the canker is a 
disease of the wood, and not of the bark. It does not appear 
to me to be ever a primary, or merely local disease, but to arise 
from the morbid habit of the plant, and to be incurable by any 
topical application.” 

226 Apple-trees, YOUNG SEEDLINGS NOT PROLIFIC. “Being sat- 
isfied, after much unsuccessful experience, that those varieties of 
the apple, of which the original trees had long perished from 
old age, could not be made to grow. I susjiected that grafts, 
taken from very young seedling trees, not yet in a bearing state, 

244. AUCTARIUM. 



8 



could not by any means be made to produce fruit. Having 
taken cuttings from some of these of two years old, I inserted 
them in stocks of twenty years old, which had already pro- 
duced fruit. 1 afterwards frequently transplanted, and took 
every means in my power to make them produce blossoms; 
but though they grew in rich ground, which probably tended to 
accelerate their maturity, I did not succeed till the seedling trees 
were twelve years old ; and then other grafts of the same kind, 
which had been inserted but three years before, and the seed- 
ling trees themselves readily blossomed. Other cuttings were 
inserted in very old stocks, which were regrafted; these grew 
with excessive vigour, but did not produce blossoms so soon as 
the others.” 

“In these experiments I observed that the leaves of the young 
seedling plants annually changed their character, and became 
more thick and fleshy, assuming more the appearance of those 
of the old cultivated kinds. These external changes evidently 
indicated some internal ones in the constitution of the plant, 
which are probably similar, in their nature, to those which take 
place in animals between their infancy and the time when they 
become capable of |)ropagating their species.” 

“The periods, which seedling apple-trees require to attain 
sufficient maturity to produce fruit, appears to admit of more 
variation than my first experiments induced me to suppose. 
Some, which I raised, did not produce blossoms till they were 
sixteen years old ; others have blossomed in the ninth and 
tenth year ; and two plants at only five years old; I consider these 
as extraordinary instances of early maturity, as these two only 
have occurred in more than twenty thousand seedling trees that 
have come under my observation, The rapid change of cha- 
racter in the leaves of these plants attracted my observation 
when they were but two years old, and I then inserted grafts 
from one of them in older stocks. These did not blossom in the 
last spring; but the form and character of their buds already 
indicate that they possess the habit and maturity of the tree 
from which they were taken, and that an abundant blossom is 
forming for the succeeding season. In this instance the grafts, 
which were inserted in older stocks, produced blossoms one year 
later than the seedling tree : in a few other instances the grafted 
trees have preceded the others a single year ; but this has been 



9 



the greatest variation I have yet observed ; and the original tree, 
and the grafts taken from it, have most frequently produced 
their first blossoms in the same season.” 

*227 Age and Propagation of Fruit Trees. Notwithstanding 
Mr. Knight’s recorded opinion as mentioned in section 224, 
respecting the age of Apple Trees as they are usually cultivated, 
still he does not think it impossible but that such trees might be 
grown through many centuries, under management suited espe- 
cially to the purpose of a prolonged existence. He has drawn 
a marked distinction between the roots, the trunk, and the 
branches of trees; and has shown that the latter exhibit indica- 
tions of decay, whilst the roots show signs of their possessing 
the untamed nature of immaturity. “The roots,” he says, “and 
the trunk adjoining them, appear to possess in all trees a greater 
degree of durability than the bearing brandies, having a power 
of producing new branches, when the old have been destroyed 
by accident, or even by old age ; and I have found that grafts 
taken from scions, which have sprung out of the trunks of old 
ungrafted apple and pear trees, grew with much greater luxu- 
riance than those taken, at the same time, from the extremities 
of the bearing branches. The former in their growth assumed 
the appearance of young seedling stocks, and the shoots of the 
pear were, like those, covered with thorns. Those propagated 
from the bearing branches frequently produced fruit the second 
year, but the others remained long unproductive.” 

“Other grafts, which were taken from shoots out of the large 
boughs of the pear tree, in the intermediate space between the 
trunk and the bearing branches partook, in their form of growth, 
of the character of each of the foregoing kinds, producing a 
much smaller quantity of thorns than the one, but not being 
entirely free from them like the other. Whence it appears to 
follow that there is a jirogressive change from the roots to the 
extremities of the bearing branches, and probably an increas- 
ing tendency to decay ; for the life of every tree is known to be 
greatly prolonged, when its branches are frequently taken off, 
and it is compelled to reproduce its buds, or to make use of the 
reserved buds with which nature has provided it.” 

We are not enabled to conclude from Mr. Knight’s experi- 
ments, that by grafting from root shoots a complete renovation 
of a superior worn out variety may be effected, still these hints 

2«. AUCTARIUM. 



10 



are valuable, to guide the operations of future experimentalists. 
This able naturalist soon turned his active mind to the raising 
new varieties of fruit from seed, and we will give a few of the 
results of his experiments, to guide the young fruitist in his 
path, and to shorten the distance he may have to travel to 
favourable results. He says : — 

“ When I first began to suspect that my endeavours to pro- 
pagate the old fruits would not be successful, I selected the 
seeds of some of the best kinds, with an intention to propagate 
new ones. But I soon found that many of the young plants, 
(particularly those from the Golden Pippin) were nearly as 
much diseased as the trees which produced them. I several 
times raised three or four plants from seeds, taken from one 
apple, and when this had been produced by a diseased tree, I 
have had not only as many distinct varieties as there were seeds, 
but some were much diseased, and others apparently healthy ; 
though the seeds were sown on the same soil, and the plants 
afterwards grew within two feet of each other in the nursery. 
Grafts having been inserted from each, retained the habits of 
the tree from which they were taken. Few’, however, if any of 
them appeared to possess a sufficient degree of vigour to promise 
me much success in their cultivation (except in very favourable 
situations) should their fruit be such as answered my wishes.” 
“Having before observed that all the old fruits were free from 
disease when trained to a south wall, 1 thought it not improb- 
able that seedling plants raised from them would be equally 
healthy ; and that this would not be the sole advantage attend- 
ing this mode of propagation ; as the trees in this situation 
would enjoy all the benefits of a better climate, whilst their 
blossoms, being expanded before those of the neighbouring 
orchards, would escape all chance of being impregnated by the 
liirina of inferior kinds. With a view to try the effects of this 
experiment, I prepared stocks of the best kind of apple I knew, 
which could be propagated by cuttings, and planting them 
against a south wall, in extremely rich mould, 1 grafted them 
with the Stire, Golden Pippin, and a few other fruits whose time 
of ripening suited the situation in w hich I wished to plant. In 
the course of the ensuing winter the young trees were dug up, 
and (their roots having been retrenched) were again planted in 
the same places. This mode of treatment had the desired effect 



11 



of making some of them produce blossoms at two years old. I 
suffered only one or two fruits to remain on each tree, which in 
consequence attained nearly three times their common size, 
with a very high degree of maturity and perfection; and the 
appearance of the plants I raised from their seeds, so much ex- 
celled any I had formerly obtained from the same fruits, taken 
from the orchard, that, I think, I can confidently recommend 
the method I have adopted.” 

227 True office of the Earth in relation to Plants. 
It is of the first importance that, in all scientific pursuits, we 
obtain correct knowledge of the materials with which we have 
to deal. This is more especially necessary in chemistry; and 
to chemistry, it is now evident, the agriculturist must resort, to 
acquire just views of his proceedings — to know the why and the 
wherefore — to be enabled to draw just conclusions, and to apply 
them to his own profit, and the welfare of his country. The 
farmer and the gardener have usually exercised their skill 
empirically. Practice, practice, has been extolled as affording 
all wisdom ; and true enough it is, that practice, that is, a 
knowledge of results, has put them in possession of all the 
learning of their contemporaries. But the time has arrived in 
which practical knowledge — the mere knowledge that the 
application of farm-yard manure will assist in the production 
of a crop of wheat or potatoes, is not considered sufficient infor- 
mation to satisfy the inquiry of the cultivator. If the one 
produce the other, the inquiry is now made — what ingredients 
do they possess in common? what are the qualities of these 
ingredients? and can they not be supplied to the living vege- 
table by other substances than those usually employed ? The 
answers are not sufficiently evident, for we are now but just 
emerging from a state of darkness; and it behoves every one 
to assist in the general search after facts, instead of pertina- 
ciously adhering to old practices, an adherence to which we 
are sorry to observe too general an inclination. We have been 
naturally led into these reflections from reading some observa- 
tions which many advocates of improvement will think too 
extravagant. Their main features will, however, be recognised 
ere long, and we will extract them as antagonistic to the too 
pertinacious attachment to old customs, which prevails with 
some of our best friends. The observations alluded to are by 

218. ADCTARIUM. 



12 



Mr. Newman, well known as the author of an excellent work 
on British Ferns, and given in an interesting periodical — the 
Phytologist. Mr. Newman’s article is given under the title 
with which we commenced. He says, “Although so much has 
been written on the subject of gases evolved and absorbed by 
plants; on the form and functions of the stomata or mouths of 
plants; and on the obvious numerical preponderance of the 
stomata in the leaves and branches over those in the roots; yet 
the broad assertion that the office of the earth in relation to 
plants is precisely erpiivalent to its office in relation to animals 
— namely, to maintain them in the position best suited to their 
well being — has, I believe, never yet been made in print. 
Almost as long ago as I can recollect, this phytological fact 
was impressed forcibly on my mind by seeing how beautifully 
hyacinths blossom with their roots immersed in water and with- 
out a particle of earth that they could possibly reach. I have 
constantly asserted my belief on this point, but have always 
been laughed at as a visionary and theorist. It is, however, 
with infinite satisfaction that I see my views slowly gaining 
ground. Each succeeding year diminishes the number of those 
who assert tliat plants feed on the earth as we feed on meat and 
bread and potatoes: still, by far the larger portion of convers- 
ing mankind religiously believe this, and most of our farmers 
look on a rich soil as being as directly food for their wheat, as 
a sack of barley meal is food for their pigs. Now the truth is 
the very converse of this: the earth feeds on plants — is increas- 
ed by plants — owes what is called its richness and good pro- 
perties to plants. These facts are not only interesting in 
themselves, but the ends to which they are applicable would 
furnish almost a new era in existence. It can scarcely be 
doubted that nature has provided, in the earth, the best possible 
receptacle for the roots of plants; yet even this position will 
admit of considerable modification, for we have first to consider 
whether our object in cultivation is to carry out the designs of 
nature, or to make nature subserve our artificial requirings; if 
the latter, it is quite certain that art can be advantageously 
applied : we have but to call to mind our commonest fruits and 
vegetables as examples. Thus, although plants may best 
achieve their destined ends when rooted in the earth, it may 
reasonably be doubted whether in turning their good properties 



13 



to our uses a more advantageous receptacle may not be found. 
But without extending the inquiry so far as tliis, if it be once 
admitted that earth is in no wise the tbod of plants, then, ceeteris 
paribus, Xhe most unproductive sand, for instance, the heaths 
of Surrey, may be rendered as productive as the Golden Valley : 
we have only to make use of this sand, as nature intended it, for 
a rece[)tacle of roots, and then having learned what is the true 
food of jilants, to supply that food in the most profitable way. 
It is now generally admitted that carbonic acid gas is the food 
of plants; but leaving even this question lo those more compe- 
tent to decide on it correctly, it is quite certain that their food, 
whatever it may be, is evolved in greater quantities from certain 
chemical preparations than from the richest and most highly 
manured earth. Poverty of soil thus becomes a nonentity : 
rotation of crops a mere amusement : once admit that earth is 
simply a receptacle for roots, and you invest it with a property 
which you cannot wear out. Every common and heath may 
be made to produce wheat at the will of the cultivator, and the 
supply must ere long greatly exceed the consumption ; that 
very description of food, the supply of which causes such diffi- 
culty to all our legislators, becoming more abundant than our 
most zealous philanthropists could desire. 

28 Pear-trees, to make freitfcl. As we proceed with the 
Frifitist, the subjects of which it is destined to treat, branch out 
and exhibit more and more the importance of increased atten- 
tion on the part of the fruit grower. .Although it may be but a 
single tree that he has lo manage, even this, in proportion to 
his knowledge and attention, will be made matter of pleasure 
and profit. The following paper, submitted to the Horticultu- 
ral Society by its late president, T. A. Knight, Esq., indicates 
principles, of the advantages of which the cultivator may avail 
himself in other ways than those to which they are applied in 
the experiments detailed. 

“ The pear-tree exercises the patience of the planter during a 
longer period before it affords fruit, than any other grafted tree 
which finds a place in our gardens; and though it is subse- 
quently very long-lived, it generally, when trained to a wall, 
becomes in a few years unproductive of fruit, except at the 
extremities of its lateral branches. Both these defects are, 
however, 1 have good reason to believe, the result of improper 

2i7. Al’CTARlUM. 



14 



iiianageineiit ; for 1 have lately succeeded most perfectly in 
rendering iny old trees very productive in every part; ami my 
young trees have almost always afforded fruit the second year 
after l)eing grafted ; and none have remained barren beyond 
the third year.” 

“ In detailing the mode of pruning and culture 1 have adopted, 
I shall probably more easily render myself intelligible, by 
describing accurately the management of a single tree each.” 

“An old St. Germain pear-tree, of the spurious kind, had 
been trained in the fan form, against a north-west wall in my 
garden, and the central branches, as usually happens in old 
trees thus trained, had long reached the top of the wall, and 
had become wholly unproductive. The other branches afforded 
but very little fruit, and that never acquiring maturity, was 
consequently of no value ; so that it was necessary to change 
the variety, as well as to render the tree productive.” 

“ To attain these purposes, every branch which did not want 
at least twenty degrees of being perpendicular, was taken out 
at its base; and the spurs upon every other branch, which I 
intended to retain, were taken off closely with the saw and 
chisel. Into these branches, at their subdivisions, grafts were 
inserted at diffeient distances from the root, and some so near 
the extremities of the branches, that the tree extended as widely 
in the autumn, after it was grafted, as it did in the preceding 
year. The grafts were also so disposed, that every part of the 
space the tree previously covered, was equally well supplied 
with young wood.” 

“As soon, in the succeeding summer, as the young shoots 
had attained sufficient length, they were trained almost perpen- 
dicularly downwards, between the larger branches, and the wall, 
to which they were nailed. The most perpendicular remaining 
branch upon each side, was grafted about lour feet below the 
top of the wall, which is twelve feet high ; and the young shoots, 
which the grafts upon these afforded, were trained inwards, and 
bent down to occupy the space from which the old central 
branches had been taken away; and therefore very little vacant 
space anywhere remained in the end of the first autumn. A 
few blossoms, but not any fruit, were produced by several of the 
grafts in the succeeding spring; but in the following year, and 
subsequently, 1 have had abundant crops, equally dispersed 



15 



over every part of the tree; and I have scarcely ever seen such 
an exuberance of blossom as this tree presents in the present 
spring. Grafts of eight different kinds of pears had been in- 
serted, and all afforded fruit, and almost in equal abundance. 
By this mode of training, the bearing branches being small and 
short, may be changed every three or four years, till the tree is 
a century old, without the loss of a single crop ; and the cen- 
tral part, which is unproductive in every other mode of training, 
becomes the most fruitful. I proceed to the rnanagement of 
young trees.” 

"A young pear stock, which had two lateral branches upon 
each side, and was about six feet high, was planted against a 
wall early in the spring; and it was grafted in each of its 
lateral branches, two of which sprang out of the stem about 
four feet from the ground, and the others at its summit, in the 
following year. The shoots these grafts produced, when about 
a foot long, were trained downwards, as in the preceeding 
experiment, the undermost nearly perpendicularly, and the 
uppermost just below the horizontal line, placing them at such 
distances, that the leaves of one shoot did not at all shade those 
of another. In the next year, the same mode of training was 
continued, and in the following, I obtained an abundant crop of 
fruit, and the tree is again heavily loaded witl) blossoms.” 

“ This mode of training was first applied to the Aston-Town 
pear, which rarely produces fruit till six or seven years after the 
trees have been grafted; and from this variety and the Colmar, I 
have not obtained fruit till the grafts have been three years 
old.” 

“ In the future treatment of my young pear-trees it is my in- 
tention to give them very nearly the form of the old tree I have 
described, in every respect, except that these will necessarily 
•Stand upon larger stems, which I think advantageous; and I 
shall not permit the existence of so great a number of large 
lateral branches. In both cases the bearing wood will depend 
wholly beneath the large branches which feed it; for it is the 
influence of gravitation upon the sap which occasions the early 
and exuberant produce of fruit.” 

“ I scarcely need add, that where, in old trees, it is not meant 
to change the variety, nothing more will be necessary than to 
take off wholly the spurs and supernumerary large branches, 

»18. ACCTARIUM. 



16 



leaving every blossom which grows near the end of the remain- 
ing branches, or that the length of the dependent bearing wood 
must be different in different varieties. The Crassane, the 
Colmar, and Astoii-Town, will require the greatest, and the St. 
Germain probably the least length.” 

229 Curl in Potatoes. Horticulture is now taking its place 
amongst the sciences. Chemistry, on the one hand, is lending 
assistance ; whilst, on the other, vegetable physiology is guiding 
experiment to successful results. In a work written by G. W. 
Johnson, Esq., on the “Principles of Gardening,” a work full of 
useful information, where treating of the diseases of plants, the 
author states the result of his own experiments, which corrobo- 
rate his reasoning relative to the cause of the Curl in Potatoes. 
The subject is of much importance, connected as the patato is 
with the daily food of all grades of society, and here it is in the 
hands of a scientific experimentalist. 

Mr. Johnson says: — “No disease appears to me to arise from 
impared vital energy in the plant more clearly than the curl, 
that of late years has made such extensive ravages upon our 
potato crops. Any one can insure the occurrence of this dis- 
ease, at least I have found it so in the county of Essex, by 
keeping the sets in a situation favourable to their vegetation, 
as in a warm damp out-house, and then rubbing off repeatedly 
the long shoots they have thrown out. Sets that have been so 
treated, I have invariably found produce curled plants. Is not 
the reason very apparent. The vital energy had been weakened 
by the repeated efforts to vegetate; so that, when planted in the 
soil, their energy was unequal to the perfect developement of 
the parts; for the curl is nothing more or less than a distorted 
or incomplete formation of the foliage, preceded by an imperfect 
production of the fibrous roots.” 

“An equal number of whole moderately-sized potatoes that 
had been treated in three different modes, were planted the last 
week of March.” 

“No. 1. Twenty sets that had been carefully kept cold and 
dry throughout the winter, firm, unshrivelled, and with scarcely 
any symptoms of vegetation.” 

“No. 2. Twenty sets that had been kept warm and moist, and 
from which the shoots, after attaining the length of six inches, 
had been thrice removed.” 



17 



•'No. 3. Twenty sets that had been kept warm and moist for 
about half the time that No. 2 had, and from which the shoots, 
three inches in length, had been removed only twice. All the 
sets were planted on the same morning, each exactly six inches 
below the surface, and with an unsprouted eye upwards. The 
spring was genial. Of No. 1, nineteen plants came up. The 
twentieth seemed to have been removed by an accident. Of the 
nineteen not one was curled. The produce a full average crop. 
Of No. 2, all came up, but from ten to fourteen days later than 
those of No. 1, and three of the plants sixteen days later. Four- 
teen of the plants were curled. Of No. 3, all came up, but from 
ten to fourteen days later than those of No 1. Four plants 
were as severely curled as those in No. 2, eight were less so, 
and the remainder not at all ; but of these the produce was 
below an average, and a full fortnight later in ripening. Dick- 
son, Crichton, Knight, and others have found, tfjat tubers taken 
up before they are fully ripened, produce plants not so liable to 
the curl as those that have remained in the ground until com- 
pletely perfected ; and, I believe, under ordinary treatment, this 
to be the fact, for it is rational. The process of ripening pro- 
ceeds in the potato, as in the apple, after it has been gathered, 
and until that is perfected it is accumulating vigour, shews no 
appetency to vegetate,consequently is not exhaustingits vitality, 
which is a great point, considering the careless mode usually 
adopted to store them through the winter; for this energy com- 
mences its decline from the moment it begins to develope the 
parts of the future plant Tubers taken from the soil before 
perfectly ripe, never are so early in showing symptoms of vege- 
tation. Crichton, Hunter, and Y oung, in some of the works 
before referred to, have also agreed, that exposing the sets to 
light and air, allowing them to become dry and shrivelled, also 
induces the curl in the plants arising from them. This result 
of experience also confirms my conclusion, that the disease arises 
from deficient vital energy ; for no process more than this dry- 
ing one of exposure to the light and air, tends to take away 
from a tuber the power of vegetating altogether.” 

Evidence in favour of this theory is given from the practice 
of a farmer, who it is stated " employed rather small sets ; 
cutting a moderate-sized potato into at least two pieces. Un- 
favourable weather, other business, and a somewhat dilatory 

2^9. ACCTAJIICM. 



18 



habit, caused him to leave those sets upon a barn floor, drying 
for more than a week. He planted with them a two-acre field, 
and not more than three-fifths vegetated ; of which three-fifths 
a fourth was in various degrees curled. Similar results were 
obtained in the experiments of a market gardener When the 
sets were allowed to ferment in a heap, allowed to sprout, &c., 
he had a crop one-fifth of which was curled. Every one 
acquainted with the cultivation of the potato, is aware of the 
great difference existing in the varieties as to their early and 
rapid vegetation ; those that excel in this quality are, of course, 
the most easily excitable. A consequence of this is, that they 
are always planted earliest in the spring, before their vital power 
has become very active ; and of all crops, practice demonstrates 
that these early ones are least liable to the curl. But what is 
the consequence on the contrary, if an early variety is planted 
for a main crop later in the spring, when extraordinary pains 
in keeping them cold and dry have not been employed to check 
their vegetation, and consequent decrease of vital energy ? 
Such crop then is, more than any other, liable to the disease ; 
and a good preventive has been suggested by Dr. Bindley, 
namely, that of planting the tubers in autumn, immediately 
after they have ripened.” 

“The results of my view of the disease, sustained by numerous 
experiments, are that it will never occur if the following points 
are attended to : — First, that the sets are from tubers that exhibit 
scarcely any symptoms of incipient vegetation. To effect which, 
they ought throughout the winter, to be preserved as cool, and 
as much excluded from the air as possible. Secondly, that the 
tubers should be perfectly ripened. Thirdly, that they should be 
planted immediately after they are cut. Fourthly, that the 
manure applied should be spread regularly, and mixed with the 
soil, and not along a trench in immediate contact with the sets. 
Fifthly, that the crop is not raised, for several succesive years, 
on the same area.” 

In the extract we have here given, 3Ir. Johnson has well and 
practically borne out his theory. The subject is one we confess 
never to have investigated, perhaps on account of never having 
had potato crops affected by the disease in question. It may be 
that the practice we pursue of planting fair-sized whole potatoes, 
in rows a yard apart, affords protection from the disease, and 



19 



further evidence of the truth of Mr. Johnson’s opinion on the 
subject. Weak sets, close planting, and the usual method ol 
moulding up into high narrow ridges, we repudiate as practices 
which are the offspring of ignorance, perpetuated by the habit 
of the thoughtless. 

•J30 Forsyth’s Composition. The name of Forsyth is so well 
known to fruit growers; and his composition, his pruning, train- 
ing, and mode of renovating fruit trees, so frequently referred 
to, without much knowledge of their merit, that it may be gra- 
tifying to our readers to know something more of the man ; 
and also useful to be made acquainted with the leading features 
of his practice. 

Forsyth was a Scotchman, employed for several years by 
Miller, in the Chelsea Botanic Garden, whom he ultimately suc- 
ceeded as curator. This situation he held about fourteen years, 
and was then chosen to superintend the Ro}al Gardens of Ken- 
sington and St. James's, Whilst so engaged he received a 
pecuniaiy grant from Parliament, for his improved mode of 
renovating fruit trees, by the excision of diseased parts, heading 
down weak and decrepit trees, and the application of his com- 
position to all wounds thereby occasioned. Much of Forsyth’s 
practice has been approved by his successors; and every one 
that is interested in the growth of fruit should be acquainted 
with his composition, the preparation of which, for several 
years, was not disclosed to the public. 'I bis composition may 
truly be said to have been, at the time it was made known, as 
much esteemed for curing the cuts and bruises of maimed trees, 
as Marshall’s Cerate ever was for its healing virtues on the 
human body. It having been considered by the Commissioners 
of the Land Revenue that Forsyth's composition could be ad- 
vantageously applied to broken trees, in the Royal Forests, a 
representation to that effect was made to the House of Com- 
mons, and twelve gentlemen, headed by the Marquis of Aber- 
corn, were appointed as commissioners to make inquiry whether 
the composition in question was efficacious for the purpose of 
restoring the bark to injured oak trees ; and preventing or cur- 
ing injuries and defects in timber, arising from the cutting or 
breaking off ol limbs or branches. Forsyth had, for several 
years, employed it in the Royal Gardens at Kensington, where 
its effects were shown to the commissioners ; this proved satis- 

250. ACCTARIUM. 



20 



factory ; and a recompense was granted by Parliament to For- 
syth for making known the preparation, and mode of applica- 
tion of his celebrated composition. The document which un- 
folded Forsyth’s secret was dated from Kensington Gardens, 
May 11th, 1791 ; and having been esteemed of so much impor- 
tance, we give it verbatim, as follows : — 

“Take one bushel of fresh cow-dung, half a bushel of lime- 
rubbish of old buildings (that from the ceilings of rooms is pre- 
ferable) half a l)ushel of wood ashes, and a sixteenth part of a 
bushel of pit or river sand ; the three last articles are to be sifted 
fine before they are mixed ; then work them well together with 
a spade, and afterwards with a wooden beater, until the stuff is 
very smooth, like fine plaster used for the ceilings of rooms.” 

“The Composition being thus made, care must be taken to 
prepare the tree properly for its application, by cutting away 
all the dead, decayed, and injured part, till you come to the 
fresh sound wood, leaving the surface of the wood very smooth, 
and rounding off the edges of the bark with a draw-knife, or 
other instrument, perfectly smooth, which must be particularly 
attended to; then lay on the plaster about one-eighth of an inch 
thick, all over the part where the wood or bark has been so cut 
away, finishing off the edges as thin as possible; then take a 
quantity of powder of dry wood ashes, mixed with a sixth part 
of the same quantity of the ashes of burnt bones ; put it into a 
tin box, with holes in the top, and shake the powder on the 
surface of the plaster, till the whole is covered over with it, 
letting it remain for half an hour, to absorb the moisture; then 
apply more powder, rubbing it on gently with the hand, and 
repeating the application of the powder, till the whole plaster 
becomes a dry smooth surface.” 

“All trees cut down near the ground should have the surface 
made quite smooth, rounding it ofl?’ in a small degree, as before 
mentioned ; and the dry powder directed to be used afterwards 
should have an equal quantity of powder of alabaster mixed 
with it, in order the better to resist the dripping of trees and 
heavy rains.” 

“ If any of the Composition be left for a future occasion, it 
should be kept in a tub, or other vessel, and urine of any kind 
poured on it, so as to cover the surface; otherwise the atmo- 
sphere will greatly hurt the efficacy of the application.” 



21 



“Where lime-rubbish of old buildings cannot be easily got, 
take pounded chalk, or common lime, after having been slaked 
a week at least.” 

“As the growth of the tiee will gradually affect the plaster, 
by raising up its edges next the bark, care should be taken, 
where that happens, to rub it over with the finger when occa- 
sion may require (which is best done when moistened by rain), 
that the plaster may be kept whole, to prevent the air and wet 
from penetrating into the wound.” 

“WILLIAM FORSYTH.” 

“ Sworn at the Land Revenue Office, in Scotland Yard, the 
Eleventh Day of May, 1781, before Us, 

Charles Middleton. 
John Call. 

John Fordyce.” 

This Document, verified as above, became the property of 
the public. Subsequently, Forsyth found that his Composition 
could be used more advantageously in a liquid form, and he 
published the following “Additional Directions for making and 
using the Composition.” 

“To the foregoing directions for making and applying the 
Composition, it is necessary to add the following.” 

“As the best way of using the Composition is found, by ex- 
perience, to be in a liquid state ; it must, therefore, be reduced 
to the consistence of a pretty thick paint, by mixing it up with 
a sufficient quantity of urine and soap suds, and laid on with a 
painter’s brush. The powder of wood-ashes and burnt bones 
is to be applied as before directed, patting it down with the 
hand.” 

“When trees are become hollow, you must scoop out all the 
rotten, loose, and dead parts of the trunk till you come to the 
solid wood, leaving the surface smooth; then cover the hollow, 
and every part where the canker has been cut out, or branches 
lopped off, with the composition ; and, as the edges grow, take 
care not to let the new wood come in contact with the dead, 
part of which it may sometimes be necessary to leave ; but cut 
out the old dead wood as the new advances, keeping a hollow 
between them, to allow the new wood room to extend itself, and 
thereby fill up the cavity, which it will do in time, so as to make 
as it were a new tree. If the cavity be large, you may cut 

201. AUCTARIDM. 



22 



away as much at one operation as will be sufficient for three 
years. But in this you are to be guided by the size of the 
wound, and other circumstances. When the new wood, ad- 
vancing from both sides of the wound, has almost met, cut 
off the bark from both the edges, that the solid wood may join, 
which, if properly managed, it will do, leaving only a slight 
seam in the bark. If the tree be very much decayed, do not 
cut away all the dead wood at once, which would weaken the 
tree too much, if a standard, and endanger its being blown 
down by the wind. It will, therefore, be necessary to leave 
part of the dead wood, at first, to strengthen the tree, and to 
cut it out by degrees as the new wood is formed. If there be 
any canker, or gum oozing, the infected parts must be pared 
off, or cut out with a proper instrument.” 

“By using the Composition in a liquid state, more than 
three-fourths of the time and labour is saved; and I find it is 
not so liable to be thrown off as the lips grow, as when laid on 
in the consistence of plaster : it adheres firmly to the naked 
part of the wound, and yet easily gives way as the new wood 
and bark advance.” 

Much negligence has hitherto existed regarding the injuries 
to which fruit trees are liable, both from accident and old age; 
but having now explained Forsyth’s Composition, which, 
although it may not possess any superlative healing properties, 
is on the whole acknowledged to be a very useful protective ; 
and as trees which, with unheeded injuries would be destroyed, 
may oftentimes by timely attention be restored to kind growth, 
we shall, at a future opportunity, give further directions on 
this subject. 

231 Selection of Fruits. As the addition of the Fruitist to 
the Botanic Garden has excited an increased attention in the 
country to the cultivation of superior varieties of Fruits, we 
liave thought it desirable to give a Selection of those which are 
most valuable to cultivators on a small scale; and from this 
class of fruit growers no person should exclude himself who 
possesses a garden of even a few yards square. The extensive 
experience and knowledge possessed by Mr. Thompson, of the 
London Horticultural Society’s Gardens, places him at the 
head of the list of English fruit growers; and as a Selection, 
prepared by him for Loudon’s Encyclopaedia of Gardening, is 



23 



perhaps superior ou the whole to any which we could offer to 
our readers, we will give his catalogue from this work. A few 
new’ sorts, of superior excellence, will take the place of some 
of those enumerated, but they shall be noticed as we proceed in 
figuring them in the due course of publication. 

For Cottage Gardens. Where the soil and situation are 
favourable for the production of the Apple, the following sorts 
are recommended by Mr. Thompson. 

Where the space will admit of only one tree, the best is the 
Ribston pippin. 

Where two, the Ribston pippin and Dutch mignonne. 

Where three, the Wormsley pippin, Ribston pippin, and Dutch 
mignonne. 

Where four, the Wormsley pippin. King of the pippins, Ribston 
pippin, and Dutch mignonne. 

Where five, the Wormsley pippin, King of the pippins, Ribston 
pippin. Old nonpareil, and Downton nonpareil. 

Where six, the Wormsley pippin. King of the pippins, Ribston 
pippin, Alfriston, Old nonpareil, and Downton nonpareil. 
Where seven, the Wormsley pippin. King of the pippins, Ribston 
pippin, Alfriston, Dutch mignonne. Old nonpareil, and 
Downton nonpareil. 

Where eight, tlie Wormsley pippin. King of the pippins, Ribston 
pippin, Bedfordshire foundling. Court pendu plat, Alfris- 
ton, Brabant bellefleur, and Scarlet nonpareil or Downton 
nonpareil. 

Where nine, the Wormsley pippin. King of the pippins, Rib- 
ston pippin, Bedfordshire foundling. Court pendu plat, Al- 
friston, Brabant bellefleur. Scarlet nonpareil, and Down- 
ton nonpareil. 

Where ten, to the preceding add Pennington’s seedling. 

For Training Against Cottages. “It often happens that 
one or more trees can be trained against a cottage wall or roof, 
or against some wall appertaining to a cottage; in these cases 
the proper sorts are Ribston pippins. Old nonpareils, and, if a 
large garden Apple be required, the Bedfordshire foundling.” 
In situations liable to Spring Frosts “Which so often 
kill the blossoms of the generality of Apples, the Court pendu 
plat is recommendable, as its blossoms expand very late in the 
season.” 

252. AUCTARIDM. 



24 



Under Less Favourable Circumstances, “ Where the 
Ribston pippin may not succeed, the Bedfordshire foundling will 
be a hardier substitute ; or, the King of the pippins, which is 
still hardier; the Northern greening maybe planted for late 
kitchen use. For an autumn kitchen Apple, perhaps, none in 
this case is more to be recommended than the Keswick codling. 
The Hawthornden comes into an abundant bearing state at an 
early age ; and, were it not liable to die off in some soils, it 
might be preferred to the preceding.” 

A WET Soil, “And a cold bleak situation, are what the cot- 
tager has the greatest difficulty in contending with ; a poor soil 
he can enrich. In some instances it may be possible for him to 
remedy a wet soil by drainage ; but in other cases, he may find 
this beyond his means. He should, however, take care to plant 
the tree very shallow, or even place it entirely on the dug surface, 
and then cover the roots with the best mould he can collect. 
This he should afterwards keep mulched if the weather becomes 
very dry ; but otherwise, he should only keep the soil slightly 
stirred occasionally by a fork ; or, if this cannot be done without 
injuring the roots, merely hoeing it will be better. In short, 
every thing should be attended to that will encourage the roots 
to run near the surface ; the latter should therefore be trod upon 
as little as possible. Rotten manure should be applied; even 
leaves should be collected and applied in a state approaching to 
vegetable mould.” 

232 Sorts of Pears to be recommended, “Where the space is 
very limited; or for cottage gardens. Jargonelle, Marie Louise, 
Beurre de Capiaumont, Beurre Diel, Glout Morceau, Easter 
Beurre, Beurre Ranee. These are all of first-rate excellence, 
deserving the protection of walls, where such can be afforded; 
but, with the exception of the Jargonelle, they are all hardy 
enough for standards, in any climate tolerably good, as regards 
the growth of this class of fruits. It would be difficult to select 
fewer sorts than the above, because some might prefer a sort 
which would come fit for use in autumn ; others in winter or 
spring. Several sorts may, however, be worked on the same 
tree; and, it maybe farther remarked, that the Beurre Diel 
requires to have the branches kept rather thin, as otherwise its 
large and abundant foliage becomes too dense for the admission 
of sun and air to the fruit.” 



25 



233 Rats, TO Destroy. This subject, not unfrequently, becomes 
one of troublesome importance to the gardener and farmer, and 
more or less so to every housekeeper. In the Journal of the 
Royal Agricultural Society, and the Gardener’s Chronicle, 
several successful methods of either destroying or driving away 
rats, have been published; and attention has been called to the 
employment of phosphorus for the purpose. The 6rst commu- 
nication of its'use was from Captain Carr, residing in Germany; 
who, after mentioning the excessive annoyance he had experi- 
enced, says: — 

“ Several plans were tried for entrapping and poisoning, 
but our ingenuity fell so far short of their marvellous sagacity, 
that no sensible impression was made upon their hosts, not- 
withstanding an unremitting perseverance. However, having 
declared a war of extermination against the whole race, I rejoice 
in being now able to communicate to my agricultural friends 
in England an easy and certain mode of getting rid of this in- 
tolerable nuisance. A little manoeuvring may be judiciously 
used to attract the enemy to a suitable position — suppose any un- 
occupied room in an outhouse, where they particularly abound. 
Here they should be fed with any favourite food — fish or malt 
1 believe they are fond of; and then with, not a preparation of 
arsenic, which they are much too clever to touch, but pills, the 
size of peas, made of equal portions of wheaten flour and pow- 
dered sugar, intimately mixed with one-sixtieth part of that 
weight of dissolved phosphorus — say a quarter of an ounce of 
phosphorus to one pound of flour and sugar; cold water should 
be added to make the mass manageable, and the pills finely 
rolled in dry flour, and kept secluded from light and air. A 
couple of pills may be thrown into each rat-hole, or any quan- 
tity left on a plate in a dark situation, by which the double 
object is obtained of attracting the animals by the luminousuess 
of the phosphorus, and preserving it from too rapid evaporation. 
The pills should be replaced as often as eaten, and that without 
grudging; as, although all the slain may not be found, it may 
be relied on that ‘every bullet has had its billet.’ Still, in a 
day or two, many rats will be seen running to w ater, where they 
die from excessive drinking. No domestic animal appears to 
be in danger of eating this preparation except fowls. Dry wea- 
ther is most favourable to its successful application, as damp, 

2i3. ACCTARICM. 



26 



whether of situation or atmosphere, dissolves, and consequently 
weakens, the phosphorus.” 

A method of preparing the phosphorus pills superior to that 
which has been practised on the continent, and described above, 
has been made known by Dr. Ure, who says : — 

“In the Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society there was 
published, several months ago, a prescription for preparing a 
poison for the above purpose, by an English gentleman resi- 
dent in Germany. That preparation consisted essentially of 
phosphorus mixed with flour and sugar. It has been tried by 
a friend of mine, in Derbyshire, who has a most extensive farm, 
and found to answer the purpose well ; but there is a great diffi- 
culty in preparing it, from the insolubility, and even immisci- 
bility, of phosphorus in water, attended with no little danger of 
fire. The process I have found to succeed perfectly is as fol- 
lows : — Melt hogs’-lard in a bottle plunged in water heated to 
about loO deg. Fall.; introduce into it half-an-ounce of phos- 
phorus for every pound of lard ; then add a pint of proof-spirit, 
or whisky : cork the bottle firmly, after its contents have been 
heated to 150 deg., taking it at the same time out of the water- 
bath, and agitate smartly till the phosphorus becomes uniformly 
diffused, forming a milky-looking liquid. This mixture being 
cooled, with occasional agitation at first, will afford a white 
compound of phosphorus and lard, from which the spirit spon- 
taneously separates, and may be poured 'off to be used again, 
for none of it enters into the combination; but it merely serves 
to comminute the phosphorus, and to diffuse it in very fine par- 
ticles through the lard. This fatty compound, on being warmed 
very gently, may be poured out into a mixture of wheat flour 
and sugar incorporated therewith, and then flavoured with oil 
of rhodium, or not, at pleasure. The flavour may be varied 
with oil of aniseed, &c. This dough being made into pellets, is 
to be laid in rat-holes By its luminousness in the dark, it 
attracts their notice, and being agreeable fo their palates and 
noses, it is readily eaten, and proves certainly fatal. They 
soon are seen issuing from their lurking places to seek for 
water to quench their burning thirst; and they commonly 
die near the water. They continue to eat it as long as it is 
offered to them, without being deterred by the fate of their 
fellows, as is known to be the case with arsenical doses. My 



27 



friend in Derbyshire bought a pot of Mr. Meyer’s rat-poison, 
and found it to be an analogous pliosplioric preparation. The 
present mode of preparing it is the result of my own experi- 
ments, made with the view of diffusing phosphorus through a 
mass of flour and sugar, &c., without tlie risk of fire. It may 
be an easy guide for those members of the Society wlio are 
desirous of following Dr. lire's prescription, and may not have 
a thermometer at hand, to know that a temperature of 150“ of 
Fahrenheit is equivalent to a degree of heat midway between 
that at which white-of-egg coagulates, and white wax melts.” 
Rats possess an instinctive fear of any new arrangement 
about their runs, and of the smell of their enemies; hence they 
are said to be very sagacious. Be this as it may, it is indis- 
pensable that, to be successful in capturing these animals, much 
caution be employed. Traps should be made clean, and not 
unnecessarily handled with the bare bands; and, in regard to 
setting them, or laying poisoned food about, tliis should never be 
attempted till the animals liave been familiarized to the instru- 
ments, and will eat freely from the trap in an open unset state, 
such food as is similar to that intended ultimately to contain 
poison. About forty years ago, a resident of ibe county of 
Hereford vvas extremely successful in catching rats, and obtained 
(we believe) one hundred subscribers, at a guinea each or more, 
as a remuneration I'or his secret. The success of his |)lan was 
mainly dependent on the caution we have recommended. He 
used the wooden box trap, with sliding or spring ends; this was, 
at least, the principle adopted. He fastened it open, laid within 
side it a little malt, and a little straw wliich liad been drawn 
through the Iiands after rubbing them witli a drop of oil of ani- 
seed. The least imaginable of this scent suffices, as much of it 
produces disgust. The rats soon discover the bait, and are re- 
gularly fed in the open trap with malt, till tliey will come, where 
they happen to be abundant, in droves, to consume it. IVhen 
this is the case, the trap being set, several at a time will be 
taken, till tlie premises are relieved of the pest. Practised with 
caution this method proves exceedingly efficient. 

234 Fruit Trees. ( R. Errington.) Having promised explicit 
directions for the management of fruit trees in general, I must 
first deal with those general principles, which are common 
to all our hardy fruits, then explain such as apply only to 
204. AUCTAK1U.M. 



28 



certain species; as also narrate facts of importance that have 
presented themselves to me during a long course of practice. 

Situation and Soil of an orchard or fruit garden. First, 
the hill-top is too bleak, and the valley too damp. Hoar frost, 
which is soon dispersed, or with difficulty accumulated, on the 
higher grounds, is mischievous to the tender blossoms on the 
low. Hence it follows, that gentle slopes, at moderate elevations, 
are the most eligible. As regards Aspect, I prefer a trifling 
inclination to the west, on the principle of slow thawing after 
frost; by which, without doubt, its effects are greatly mitigated. 
Sloping ground also facilitates Draining, which sometimes is 
of much importance. 

The Shelter of a range of hills is, of course, considerable ; 
nevertheless proximity of shelter is of no mean value; such as 
the dense plantation, that intercepts the blast of the north, 
north-east, and north-west. If such shelter do not already 
exist, no time should be lost in establishing it. To which end 
the selection of quick-growing trees, thorough draining the 
site, and manuiing, if necessary, should each of them have due 
attention. 

The Soil for the majority of fruit trees should be a sound, 
unctuous, rather frialile loam; exceptions there are, which I will 
duly notice. Should, however, the intended site possess either 
an inclination to clay or peat, or to a weak sandy loam, these 
should be ameliorated. A free sandy loam being suitable, 
if it be deep, to the vegetables of a kitchen garden, it would be 
easier, and more economical, to form stations for all fruit trees, 
than to undertake improving or rather altering the staple of the 
whole. The subject of “Stations” will be thoroughly dis- 
cussed under that head, in its place. I may, however, observe, 
that marl, the scouring of ditches from clay soil, or even pond- 
mud, are all excellent improvers of such soil ; more especially 
with regard to its adaptability to fruit trees. Stubborn 
Clays are somewbat expensive to correct, and they are not, if 
thoroughly drained, very unsuitable to some of the commoner 
fruits, provided the trees are planted high. The “Platform” 
mode of planting should be adopted ; abundant roratiou, or ex- 
posure of such soils to the action of the atmosphere, with sub- 
sequent liberal dressings of sand, lime-rubbish, or ashes, which 
will ultimately alter their consistence. 



29 



Peaty Soils. These being generally damp and low, are 
seldom chosen for either the orchard or garden. When such, 
however, is the case, thorough draining is the first step; and 
burning, if their be a good depth of peat, is the next ; after 
which, dressings of marl, loam, sand, ditch scourings, or in fact 
almost any refuse matter, will improve it by increasing its 
tenacity. It would be well, however, after all this general im- 
provement, to plant on stations. More care is required, 
perhaps, with peaty soil, than with that of any other quality, 
when it is intended as the site for fruit trees. Without due 
admixture, it is generally ill calculated for giving due strength 
to the strong-wooded trees. The Apple-tree, like the Oak, 
flourishes most iu a strong sound loam, a|)|)roaching to clay or 
marl ; the Pear-tree, again, like the Elm, luxuriates on a 
somewhat lighter soil, and where gravel and a dry pervious 
bottom prevails. 

Subsoils. A deep and strong loam, on a gravelly bottom, 
is, above all, to be preferred, either for the orchard or kitchen 
garden. Marl or clay ranks next in importance, where the 
surface has a good slope; affording thereby facility of draining. 
It is not by any means uncommon to make such a bottom arti- 
ficially, to what I term stations; therefore if the natural subsoil 
partake of this character, its eligibility for an orchard is evident. 
One caution, however, is necessary, which is applicable to all 
retentive soils, viz. that is to plant above the ordinary ground- 
level. In which case it will follow, that in the adoption of 
platforms, they should be raised so as throw the most inffuential 
roots clear above the subsoil altogether, and perfectly within 
reach of tlie ameliorating power of the atmosphere. Peaty 
Subsoils are to be rejected at all times, as the site of an 
orchard or kitchen garden. Such are a constant source of ma- 
laria, if I may so use the term, to the vegetable world in general. 

I now come to the consideration of the Platform mode of 
planting; by which I mean, making separate Stations for each 
tree, in preference to the exjicnse of attempting to correct or 
improve the staple of a whole garden. Under the dwarfing 
system, it is surprising what a small quantity of soil is sufficient, 
provided it be of a proper texture. On cold clays, the bottom 
of the platform may, for general purposes, be fifteen to eighteen 
inches; but on upland, or sandy soils, it may be allowed three 

255. AUCTARIOM. 



30 



inches more. By the bottom of the platform, I mean the sur- 
face of the brick or rubbish stratum. 

Stations, for general purposes, should be made from six to 
eight feet square ; any material, of an impervious character, 
will be suitable. My practice is to cover the bottom with bro- 
ken bricks, which are placed a single layer thick on dry and 
sandy subsoils ; but if clayey and stagnant, six to nine inches 
thick. On these, when levelled at the surface, I sprinkle a 
good coat of cinders, to fill up the interstices; thereby securing 
drainage. One general observation I must here make, viz. — 
that, as to depth, it is a great error, on shallow soils, to make 
the soil any deeper than the natural depth of the ground ; 
the roots, in such a case, on reaching the outside of the pre- 
pared stations, would find an impenetrable breast-work of sub- 
soil, which they could not, and ought not, to enter. When the 
natural soil is thus shallow, the platforms should be prepared a 
foot wider on each side, and elevated six inches higher, and 
should accordingly have a sounder or more clayey soil. 

In preparing the soil for the stations, I must be understood 
as advising, not the most perfect mode of all, but the most 
economical ; and one within reach of the amateur, on a small 
scale, who may not, at all times, be willing to go to the expen- 
diture of those who possess extensive domains. 

First, then, the hole over the station ought to be half filled 
with new turf, from sound loamy soils, if possible. This turf 
may, if the staple be good, be cut six inches thick ; each turf 
cut in four quarters with the spade, and tumbled into the hole, 
in a rough state. Above this, the remaining part of the hole 
should be filled with materials not quite so porous ; one half the 
volume composed of peat soil, of as sound a character as can 
be obtained. If the fresh soil be rather clayey, chopped sticks, 
or the bottoms of a faggot pile, might be strewed in alternate 
layers: these will serve to secure a readier access to the 
atmosphere. 

The above general rules, as to the preparation of the stations, 
if carried fully out, will be sufficient to command a tolerable 
share of success. They will be generally adapted to the 
Apple, the Plum, and the Pear. With regard to the Vine, the 
Fig, the Peach, &c., more special directions will be required ; 
which I will endeavour to furnish in due course. 



31 



With regard to the new Flemish Pears, however, I may here 
offer a few remarks on the character of soil, &c., requisite in 
order to enable the amateur to carry out a dwarfing system 
successfully, and svith as little trouble as possible. Most of 
these are far superior to the old sorts, wliether we regard their 
free fruiting, their qualities for the dessert, or their eligibility 
for the dwarfing system. They are thus, in a peculiar manner, 
adapted to the limited garden of the amateur. In order to 
obtain some of these valuable fruits, such as Beurre d’Arem- 
berg, the Winter Neilis, the Passe Colmar, &c. &c.,of tirst-rate 
quality, a south, south-west, south-east, or due east or west 
aspect of wall is, of course, superior to an espalier station. 
Such aspects, however, are commonly wanted for the Peach 
and Nectarine, the Apricot, Vine, or Fig: these, if cultivated 
at all, must, of necessity, possess such situations, and many of 
these Pears must submit to an improved espalier mode of 
management; and a thorough control over the roots, is the 
basis on which such management must take its stand. One 
remark I may be allowed to make, before proceeding with the 
detail of Root Management, viz. — That such a plan cannot be 
expected to succeed equally all over Britain. In the southern 
half of England, success would, generally s|)eaking, be certain; 
but as we proceed northerly, a compromise must gradually take 
place. For instance, the Winter Neilis, which would succeed 
on |)roperly managed espaliers, in AVorcestershire, would require 
an east or west wall in the county of Durham, and a south 
wall in Scotland. Moderate and steady action of root, is the 
point to be aimed at; and this will be best attained by using 
a portion of hard and impenetrable material in the neighbour- 
hood of the roots. 

I find, by reference to the former part of this paper, that I 
have recommended fifteen to eighteen inches, in depth of soil, 
over the platforms, as a general rule: this is, however, too deep 
for most of the northern counties ; and as a rule whereby to 
regulate the depth of all borders, for tender trees on a dwarfing 
system, I would say, — Decrease one inch in depth for every 
degree of latitude. Thus, assuming London to be 51°, I would 
commence at fifteen inches; at Newcastle on Tyne, I would 
give eleven inches; and at Edinburgh, which is about 56°, 

I would allow ten inches only. This will be found, in dwarf- 

256. AUCTAJtlUM. 



32 



ing systems, a very safe rule, providing due care be taken to 
secure a proper staple of soil. Ripening of the Wood is 
the foundation of the whole matter ; and this will be always 
best attained by keeping the main portion of the roots near to 
the surface of the soil. Of course no digging can ever be 
allowed over the roots of trees thus situated. 

Mr. Hoare, who has lately written on Vine Culture, recom- 
mends a compost for the cultivation of the Vine out of doors, 
composed of rough bricks, plaster, charcoal, and bone waste, 
without any soil, if 1 remember correctly. This is, indeed, 
practising in extremes; and the plan has, I believe, in part 
failed. He will, however, have done much good; as it is, I 
conceive, a movement in the right direction. 

The atmosphere of Britain is moist and sunless, as compared 
with that of France and Belgium, where most of these Pears 
attain a high degree of perfection. With us these valuable 
fruit-trees are frequently found in deep and rich soils, rapidly 
increasing their young wood at the end of August ; whilst 
those on the Continent are concentrating all their energies for 
the perfect ripening of their wood, and the flavouring of their 
fruit. Hence the rationale of the platform system. Every- 
body must have observed how grass lawns “burn,” as it is 
called, over the covering of shallow drains. The soil loses 
its moisture sooner in such places, and moreover becomes 
sooner heated through by the sun’s rays ; and this, applied to 
the Pear, or other tender fruit tree, leads to an early cessation 
of the growth; besides a continual tendency to produce short- 
jointed wood during the growing season. 

I will now proceed to consider the subject of Compost, for 
the more tender kinds. To obtain as perfect a control over the 
roots as possible, the soil should be of a sound loamy character, 
and rather adhesive in its nature. If a light sandy loam were 
used, it would be so likely to participate in the vicissitudes of 
the atmosphere, that the tiees on such shallow beds would 
make scarcely any wood in dry seasons, and the fruit would be 
liable to crack. As much turf as possible should be included ; 
and it should, by all means, be filled into the station in a dry 
state. Stations, for very superior kinds, should be made 
entirely of fresh pasture soil of this character, excepting where 
it can be mixed with any half-decomposed vegetable refuse. 



33 



such as old leaves, old thatch, &c., which would be beneficial 
by its rendering the loamy mass somewhat more porous. I 
sometimes introduce new and tough straw in this way, when I 
consider the loamy material too adhesive. 

255 Peaches and Nectarines. These require a south aspect, 
in most parts of England : I have known them, however, 
succeed tolerably well on an east or west, more especially 
against the end of a house, the wall of which was warmed by a 
fire at the back. They delight in an unctuous, but free, loam; 
which should be used in a mellow state, rough chopped, and 
fresh, or nearly so, from an old pasture. My plan is to mix 
straw, or fresh long stable litter, in alternate layers, all 
through the mass, — merely a sprinkling, to prevent undue 
adhesion in the soil, and to preserve an elasticity in the mass, 
which is extremely serviceable in securing a free admission of the 
atmosphere. Such stations are also less liable to receive injury 
from treading, which is apt to close newly prepared soil in a 
most prejudicial degree. When planted, they should have a 
wheelbarrow-full of prepared compost, in contact with the roots, 
as a kind of extra assistance; which may be composed of equal 
parts of crumbling loam, and old leaf soil, with a little sharp 
sand. Finally, a barrow-full of fresher manure, should be 
applied to the surface, to prevent the roots from becoming sud- 
denly dry. The depth, and general preparation of the stations, 
to be the same as for Pears. 

256 The Apricot. This valuable fruit prefers a sound loamy 
soil, from old sward, if possible, the turf incorjiorated with it. 
On replanting a situation, previously occupied by a fruit tree, 
none of the old soil should be used again for the Apricot; 
indeed the same may be said of the Peach and Nectarine, and, 
in fact, of any other fruit tree. Where a scarcity of “maiden 
loam” exists, it is better, in making the station, to exchange the 
old soil for some of the ordinary soil of the garden, which has 
been occupied by vegetables. From one-half to two-thirds of 
this may be blended with the fresh loam, taking care, as before 
observed, to mix plenty of new straw, or long stable litter, with 
the whole mass. Considerable precaution should be taken to 
avoid a gross or over-luxuriant growth ; such a habit in the 
Apricot, frequently leads to a premature decay in the main 
shoots of the tree, a disadvantage to which the Apricot is known 

257. ACCTARIUM. 



34 



to be peculiarly liable. This tree delights in abundance of 
light, and heat, and generally succeeds best on the south wall 
of a dwellinghouse, more especially if there be a chimney on 
that side of the house ; which circumstance points directly to 
the propriety of artificially heated walls, for this most valuable 
fruit, where a liberal supply is of importance. It is worthy of 
remark here, that some of the best bearing and ripening Apri- 
cots I have ever known, had a stone pavement over their roots; 
thus evincing their partiality to warmth at the root, and protec- 
tion from that meddling weapon, the spade. 

257 The Fig. This fine fruit which ought to be within the reach 
of every one, is, perhaps, less understood, as to its habits, than 
any other of our edible fruits; a circumstance to be lamented, 
as most of the failures to which it is liable, are traceable to over 
cultivation. Short-jointed wood, so general a criterion of fruit- 
fulness in most trees, is eminently so in the Fig; and whatever 
course of culture produces this, will also bring fruitfulness in its 
train. This being admitted, limitation of root becomes abso- 
lutely necessary ; and of so severe a character, Oiateven practical 
men, in general, can scarcely reconcile themselves to such an 
extreme. It must however be borne in mind that the Fig is most 
impatient of drought, and that a constitution of soil that will 
ensure short-jointed wood, through all seasons, will be liable, in 
excessively dry summers, to cause the trees to cast their fruit, un- 
less precautions are taken to provide against the drought. Now 
this is easily overcome by what is termed “Mulching,” of which 
Iwill say a few words in their proper place. The Fig will thrive — 
and thrive too fast, in almost any ordinary garden soil ; as, 
however, severe limitation is necessary at tlie root, I would 
recommend a loamy soil, of a sound character. If the root is 
to be closely confined, and in a shallow soil, that soil must be 
slightly retentive, in order to enable the tree to withstand the 
vicissitudes to which it will be liable. Some good cultivators 
build a solid wall at two feet from that on which the Fig is train- 
ed. When this mode is adopted, however, the soil should be 
somewhat deeper, say fifteen inches; but if no retaining wall be 
employed, then a foot in depth will be amply sufficient. The 
Fig is very partial to old mortar, or lime rubbish ; and is also 
known to succeed well in a dark alluvial soil; a mixture in 
equal parts, of these two, with a third of sound tenacious loam. 



35 



would be an excellent compost, and it would be a good plan 
to coat the surface over, (if not paved,) with a very dark soil, in 
order to aid in the accumulation of heat. On propagation, 
training, &c., I will speak in due course. 

258 The Vine. The cultivation of the Vine, out of doors, can 
only be expected to succeed in the southern portions of the 
kingdom; and there only with good management, and in warm 
situations. I need scarcely observe, that a south aspect is 
almost indispensable. Certainly even an east or west aspect will 
sometimes be found to answer, providing there is, as observed 
with regard to the Apricot, a fire behind it; such cases however 
are not frequent. Much depends on a proper mode of training 
and “stopping,” which I will again advert to in its proper place. 
With regard to soil, one of a light and sandy character will be 
found the best. These soils, although “poor” as it is termed, 
in comparison with adhesive loams, are quite sufBcient for the 
cultivation of Vines out of doors, in Britain, and if they fail it 
will assuredly not be for lack of nourishment, providing they 
have a tolerably free range at the root. As to depth, however, 
great moderation should be observed ; and the platform mode, 
described previously for Pears, will do extremely well for the 
Vine. The most important item with regard to their safe and 
successful culture, consists in the adopting of a thorough drain- 
age, without which all other preparations will be found of little 
effect. Borders, for Vines out of doors, should be formed 
considerably above the surface of the ground; one-half of the 
volume of soil should, if possible, be above the level of the 
adjacent ground. 

Mr. Hoare, who has written on Vine culture, recommends a 
compost of old mortar, pounded bones, and charcoal, without, I 
believe, a particle of soil. That they may be grown in such, 
under peculiar circumstances of culture, I do not doubt; but I 
should pause before I ventured to recommend such a course to 
the amateur. It will be well, however, to take a leaf out of Mr. 
Hoare ’s book; for although the Apple pie could not be made 
entirely of Quinces, yet one or two impart a generous flavour. 
1 have no doubt that at least half of the volume of compost, for 
the Vine border, may be composed of Mr. Hoare ’s materials, 
with the best effect. However, to simplify the matter, a fine 
sandy loam, with a sprinkling of fresh stable litter, on a sound 

!258. AUCTARIU.M. 



36 



and tliorouglily drained bottom, and elevated as above described, 
will, with good after-management, ensure success. 

259 Raspberries. These will thrive in almost any ordinary soil, 
provided it be permanently moist — not wet. In this respect 
they are in habit similar to the Black Currant. The finest I 
have ever known, were growing in a dark and unctuous staple; 
rich, I presume, in humus, and of considerable depth. Where 
the site intended for them is of a loose, shallow, or gravelly, 
character, it should be well dressed with pond mud, ditch .scour- 
ings, peat, or marl, or all of these blended ; without this, or 
a similar addition, all manuring will be in vain. Old cow 
manure is very suitable for them. The ground should be 
thoroughly trenched and the materials well blended. It is a 
very good plan to plant these and the Black Currant together, 
in alternate rows, as their habit, in regard to soil, is similar. 
The rows should, if possible, run north and south ; and if Black 
Currants alternate with them, about six feet should be allowed 
from tbe row of Raspberries to the row of Currants. In 
making a new plantation, the month of February may be 
chosen, although they will succeed nearly or quite as well if 
removed in the early part of November. My practice is to put 
two young canes in each hole, nearly close together. When 
planted, they may receive a good watering, and also a top- 
dressing of rotten manure. About modes of staking, summer 
and winter dressing, &c., I will say a few words in the proper 
place. 

260 Black Currants. As before observed, with regard to 
Raspberries, a permanency of moisture in the soil is indispens- 
able; let me not, however, be misunderstood. If the ground be 
absolutely stagnant they will not succeed — it must be drained ; 
they will, however, endure more moisture than Raspberries. The 
same mode of improving the staple for a new plantation, as recom- 
mended for Raspberries, may be adopted with success. The 
farmers and cottagers of some parts of Cheshire, not unfre- 
quently plant the ditch sides with them ; and some, who are 
bad reconomists of manure — suffering their surplus fold-yard 
liquid to escape by an open ditch, obtain excellent crops from 
the Black Cunants planted on the banks of such ditches. 
Young plants, of about three years from the cutting, with half- 
a-dozen shoots, are most eligible for planting. The middle of 



37 



October is an excellent time to accomplish this, ami a little 
top-(lressin«: may be added to induce them to make rapid 
progress. Each plant requires an area of about six feet 
diameter. Modes of pruning, &c., will be adverted to in due 
course. 

261 Red and White Currants. The Red is much hardier in 
constitution than the White; the latter requiring richer soil. 
A free loam, of a sandy character, suits them best, and it should 
be two spades in depth. Thorough drainage is, of course, the 
first step, if the soil is of too retentive a character. Young 
plants, three years from the cuttings, may be planted in Novem- 
ber, or from that period to the end of February. The Red will 
require an area of five feet diameter for each plant, whilst four 
will suffice for the White. 

262 Strawberry. This delicious fruit, which may be called 
Everybody’s Favourite, is cultivated under a greater variety of 
modes than any of the preceding fruits. Whatever mode be 
adopted a considerable depth of soil is requisite, in order to 
ensure permanent success. They delight in a sound and 
somewhat unctuous loam; and if the plot intended for them be 
of a sandy or gravelly character, it should be improved by 
such materials as the furrowings from wet soils, ditchings, pond 
mud, marl, &c., &c. In making a new plantation which is 
intended to endure for a few years, in order to save the trouble 
consequent on shifting the site, a good dressing of rather 
fresh manure should be trenched in; this will keep them in 
vigour for a considerable length of time, provided the top 
management be good. A new plantation may be formed any 
time in the course of the summer, whilst young runners can 
l)e obtained ; the eai lier, however, the better. The commercial 
gardeners, who plant great breadths, generally plant in July, 
and take a crop of some other kind off the interval between the 
rows the same autumn. I would recommend the amateur, 
possessing a moderate-sized garden, to transplant young runners 
into beds, about eight inches apart, as soon as they can be 
obtained, and to remove them to their final destination in the 
middle of October, or from that time to the middle of February. 
They should, by all means, be removed with large balls of soil, 
which is easily accomplished by the use of a large trowel. 

The larger sorts, if planted in rows, will require much room. 

2o9. AUCTARIDM. 



38 



Such as the British Queen, the Old Pine, and the Kean’s 
Seedling, should be in rows, three feet apart. These, if planted 
as here recommended, may be placed, at the planting time, only 
nine inches apart, in the row; they will do thus for the first 
season, or in fact until the fruit is gathered, when every alter- 
nate plant must be destroyed, which will leave them, in the 
second year, eighteen inches apart in the row. 

Some of the smaller sorts are better, or at least quite as well, 
cultivated in beds. Such as the Alpines for autumn use, the 
Old Scarlet, the Grove-end Scarlet, the prolific Hautbois, &c. 
The Elton is a valuable Strawberry for late purposes. Straw- 
berry walls have been much in request, and most deservedly 
so; but the difficulty of renewing the plants in this position 
has been, in part, a hindrance to their more general adoption. 
I hope to be able to show, however, in some future paper, how 
this difficulty may be overcome. This, with other practical 
remarks, relating to Strawberries, must be reserved for a future 
communication. 

263 Window Flower Culture. ( By R. Errington.) Soils, 
Composts, &c. Having completed the first division of the Fruit 
Tree culture, the top management, training, &c., of which will 
shortly be resumed, I now offer a few practical remarks on the 
culture of |)ot plants in windows, frames, &c. A good sys- 
tem, even of window culture, cannot be pursued without atten- 
tion, in the first place, to soils and composts. Time was, when 
some twenty or thirty articles were amalgamated as necessaries 
for one compost, by those whose interests or ignorance kept 
the matter veiled in universal mystery. The progress of science 
however, has now somewhat dissipated those mystic notions; 
and people have at last began to discover that it is not the 
number of articles in a compost that constitute its efficiency, 
but a judicious mixture of simple soils, which are within the 
reach of every cultivator ; such as may sustain a steady and 
uniform transmission of moisture, and contain a due amount of 
the necessary pabulum to feed the extending fibres. 

A large assortment of soils are unnecessary; four things, 
however, are indispensable, to furnish compost sufficient to 
guarantee the good cultivation of window (lowers ; viz., turfy 
loam, heath soil, charcoal, and sharp sand. I need hardly in- 
clude rotten manure, as it is to be presumed that this is always 



39 



at hand ; an old cucumber bed is sufficient. A good loam, 
neither too sandy nor too clayey, but of the two, inclining to the 
latter, is certainly a great desideratum ; for on this, in the main, 
depends the durability and support of the compost. Neverthe- 
less it may be well to mention, that either heath-soil or peat 
constitutes the chief portion of the soil used for those fine plants 
which so justly attract public notice at floral exhibitions. 

This kind of loamy turf may be procured from old rest pas- 
tures, ditch sides, road sides, or lanes ; but must possess the 
requisite degree of tenacity, or soundness; and should abound 
in vegetable fibre. If covered thickly with coarse grass, or 
other vegetable matter, so much the better. It should not, by 
any means, be cut or worked in a wet state ; but should be 
either housed or piled up in a ridge, and slightly thatched if 
out of doors, or a portion of its organic matter will, on decay- 
ing, be carried away by the rains. After remaining thus for a 
few months, it will become mellow, and proper for use; and may 
be chopped small with the spade as it is wanted, but should not 
be riddled. 

264 Heath Soil. This, which is so often confounded with peat, 
is altogether of a different character — the chief points of resem- 
blance consisting in their being decayed vegetable matter. Here, 
however, the resemblance ends, their texture being very differ- 
ent; for whilst Peat is very retentive of moisture. Heath Soil 
parts with it freely ; and this is indeed the grand distinction, 
and points out the propriety of caution in the choice of those 
materials for plant culture. Thus, for Fuchsias, plants requir- 
ing much moisture, I would allow the peaty character to 
predominate; whilst for Ericas, heath soil should prevail. 

Heath soil, however, varies much in various districts ; some 
heaths producing a profusion of moss amongst the stems of the 
heaths, which, in decay, produces a rather retentive earth, 
deficient both in sand and vegetable fibre. Where such is the 
case, the mossy upper surface should be rejected, as also that 
part in contact with the subsoil; the middle layer, full of heath 
roots, being reserved for pot plants. The best heath soil con- 
tains a considerable amount of sharp silvery sand, with abun- 
dance of roots, fresh, and in various stages of decay ; the sand 
should, if possible, constitute a fourth of the mass. It may be 
in turfs, and piled up in a sharp ridge out of doors, and if well 

260. AUCTAJUDM. 



40 



managed with regard to keeping out the rain, there will be no 
necessity for thatching, as the vret penetrates this kind of soil 
with difficulty. If housed, it becomes totally desiccated, and 
is very awkward to manage in such state on the potting bench. 
It should lie for several months before being used, as the fibre 
of heath is unusually tough. If well piled up it will be preserved 
for several years; and when used it should, like loam, be well 
chopped with the spade, but not riddled. 

265 Charcoal. Any sort of charcoal will do for potting purposes, 
as almost everything depends on the size of the particles, which 
should be regulated in a considerable degree by the size of the 
“shift” given to the plant. Thus, for a three-inch pot, I would 
use charcoal in the compost in pieces of a quarter of an inch or 
less; in seven-inch pots, their size may be nearly half an inch; 
and in very large shifts, say pots of thirteen or fourteen inches 
diameter, I would increase them to nearly an inch. The species 
of plant under culture will, however, vary these circumstances. 

Charcoal is said to act as a manure, by condensing carbonic 
acid gas within its pores. Be this as it may, it is extremely 
useful as a mere transmitter of moisture, and its chemical 
characters are, doubtless, considerable. I burn my own, and 
prefer it from its mixture with the ashes; it is readily produced 
by covering up with earth the smouldering heap of brush-wood 
with all the weeds, hedge prunings, and other refuse of the 
kitchen garden, which is reserved for the purpose. See Auc- 
tarium 218. After burning, I pass the whole through a very fine 
sieve, to separate the dust or wood-ash, which I reserve by itself 
for dressing onion, carrot, and turnip ground, in the kitchen 
garden. The whole should be kept under cover until wanted. 

266 Sharp Sand. I need say little on this head, as most persons 
are familiar with the kind of sand used by gardeners, or rather 
nurserymen, who are sure to select the best. Everything 
depends on its sharpness and cleanness, and in order to ensure 
the latter quality, if pit sand, it should be washed, to divest it of 
all extraneous matter, as it is wanted chiefly, if not entirely, for 
its mechanical properties, in facilitating the steady and uniform 
escape of moisture. Two kinds should be kept if possible, the 
one extremely fine, for cuttings and plants in very small pots, 
and the other very coarse — as large as grains of raddish seed, 
if it can be obtained. Both should be equally sharp. 



41 



I have now described the only soils which are indispensable 
for the amateur, who aims at good culture, in a small greenhouse; 
or at growing window flowers with success. Before leaving this 
division of the subject 1 will, however, just glance at a few 
other articles, which are requisite in the potting shed of a larger 
establishment; these are — 

267 Manures. Amongst these I may mention guano, bone, soot, 
old and well-rotted cow manure, half-rotted leaves, and old tan; 
and, as mechanical agents, pounded crocks of various sizes, 
and pounded stone. Some other things are occasionally used, 
but these constitute the chief articles in general use. Guano 
needs little description ; the Peruvian is the best. This I use 
almost entirely for liquid manure, of which I will say a few 
words under that head, as I conceive no system of plant grow- 
ing complete without a regular mode of making and adminis- 
tering this powerful stimulant. Bone — The kind I use is 

boiled bone; and is, I believe, chiefly composed of phosphate 
of lime. This is of great utility in composts for plants which 
have to remain a considerable time in their pots or tubs, and 
require durable fertilizers. Lumps of bone will continue to 
give out their fertilizing properties for twenty years, at least. 
Soot. — This too is a powerful stimulant; we must not, however, 
trust it to any extent in composts, as it will close up the pores 
or breathing places. It is far the best used as a liquid fertilizer, 
in which state it shall be noticed. Old and well-rotted 
Cow Manure. — This needs little description, it having been in 
use for centuries ; and has ever been a favourite soil with the 
florist, and as being esteemed a “cool manure” I am inclined 
to think that the amateur might rely on this, to the exclusion 
of hotbed manure, in the culture of window flowers. Confined 
as these are to sitting rooms, they have to endure a dry atmos- 
phere, which extracts the moisture from the pots; and this 
points out the propriety of using cool composts. Half-rot- 
ted Leaves. — These are extremely useful for general purposes, 
and I should have placed them in the first section of this paper, 
but that I thought them not at all times within the reach of those 
who cultivate window flowers ; they are, however, somewhat 
capricious in composts as to durability; they are, nevertheless, 
useful in composts for plants of short duration. Old Tan. — 
Old and spent tan, as it comes from the pine pit, is excellent 

26L ACCTAJUU.M. 



42 



for the drainage of pots, intended for plants of an annual or 
temporary character. It is, however, necessary to subject it to 
a half-inch riddle, that left in the riddle being proper for such 
purposes. It would be a great improvement in this article to 
slightly char it, thus rendering it less absorbent of moisture, 
and more durable. Pounded Crocks and Stone. — Such 
plants as Ericas, Pimelias, Epacrises, Boronias, with a host of 
the New Holland plants, will not attain the size and age some- 
times desirable, on account of loss of texture in the soil ; the 
only way to obviate this difficulty is to introduce, in a liberal 
way, imperishable materials, of an angular or irregular charac- 
ter. Long after the organic matter in the soil has become 
soluble, these act as steady transmitters of moisture, and 
atmospheric action. I need scarcely add, that these porous 
materials should, in crushing, be separated into sizes, and the 
dust separated, which is very good to mix with the compost of 
any plant. The larger the “shift” any plant receives, the larger 
should these inorganic matters be; whether as drainage at the 
bottom of the pots, or blended with the compost. 

‘268 Window Flower Culture. Drainage of Pots. Having 
given practical remarks on the use of soils and composts, we 
proceed to the next division, viz. — the drainage of pots, &c. 
A few years ago it was deemed sufficient drainage that a single 
potsherd or oyster shell were placed at the bottom of the pot, 
beneath the soil; the soil too was subjected to the severe ordeal 
of the riddle, by which much of the organic matter, containing 
the necessary elements of food for the plants, and which also 
produces a peculiar mechanical condition of the soil, which can 
scarcely be supplied by other means, was rejected. These 
matters, however, have, in later days, been closely investigated; 
and the result is, that plants which some twenty years since were 
considered most difficult to cultivate, are now produced in the 
very highest degree of perfection, as is sufficiently attested by 
the splendid specimens produced at numerous horticultural 
exhibitions. The safest material for drainage, with which I am 
acquainted, is broken or pounded potsherds, from flower pots. 
Charcoal is also excellent — I had almost said indispensable ; 
and should always be at hand. These two materials, for general 
use, may be mixed together in equal parts; and three distinct 
sizes should be kept ready for use. The largest should be of 



43 



the size of walnuts, the smallest about the size of pease, and the 
other intermediate. These materials are intended to insure free 
drainage, in the absence of which the soil in the pot would 
become surcharged with the stagnant fluids, and unfit for the 
support of tender plants. For plants of robust habit, or those 
termed “gross feeders,” there is no occasion to be quite so 
particular; but when the subject is a plant of delicate root- 
action, such as an Erica, or an Epacris, it is impossible to use 
too much precaution to secure the escape of water. Two or 
three potsherds (broken pot or crock) of considerable size, 
placed at the bottom of the pot, overlapping each other, so as 
to permit the escape of water ; these protected by a size of the 
pounded material of proportionate size, and these again by a 
smaller, will be found a perfect and durable drainage. 

It is the practice of most cultivators to put a layer of moss or 
other fibrous material over this stratum of drainers. The 
principle is good, and moss is suitable for plants requiring much 
moisture, and which remain but a short period in their pots; 
but for delicate and slow-rooting plants, which have to remain 
for a considerable time undisturbed, moss is not to be recom- 
mended. Fibrous turf, of some age, is by far the safest material ; 
and for such plants, as the Geranium, which prefer a loamy 
soil, fibrous loamy turf will be found suitable. For those inclined 
to peat, or bog, nothing can exceed fibrous turf in a mellow 
state, from upland heath or moor. The turfy materials here 
alluded to should be piled up, out of doors, for six months, in 
such a heap as will exclude rain ; after which it may be removed 
to the potting shed. 

269 Potting Plants. This is a division of the subject very 
important to window culture; so much so, indeed, that without 
care and method both good drainage and excellent composts 
may be rendered quite nugatory. I will submit the following 
six maxims as the chief essentials in good potting, viz. — 

1st. Never use composts in a wet state. 

2nd. Never use them quite dry. 

3rd. l.et the |)ressure used in potting be in proportion to the 
dryness of the compost. 

4th. Introduce lumpy turf nearly all through the mass. 

5th. Let the size of the lumps be in proportion to the mass 
of fresh compost in each pot. 

262. ADCTARIUM. 



44 



6th. Use sharp sand, or other non -absorbent material, dur- 
ing the process of potting. Having premised these maxims, 
they should be considered in order. 

270 1st. — Wet Composts. No mode of potting, however scientihc, 
can obviate the evils which must arise from using wet composts. 
The conviction of this has, in later years, induced many gar- 
deners to keep a quantity of soil under cover, in a mellow state; 
this, however, has its attendant evils, as will be explained in the 
second maxim. The necessary consequence of using wet soils is 
stagnation, technically termed sourness, produced by an undue 
cohesion and closeness of the particles, by which the ameliorat- 
ing agency of the atmosphere is in a great part prevented. 

271 2nd. — Dry Composts. When soils have lain too long under 
cover they become dessicated, and in this state are almost 2 is 
unfit for potting purposes as those which are too wet; they do 
not, however, lead to such serious results, the chief evil being 
that it is most difficult to equally moisten them through. There 
is such a volume of dry air in the interstices, that before it can 
be displaced by gravitation of the water, or capillary attraction, 
the upper portion of the roots will be saturated and probably 
injured. 

272 3rd. — Pressure. This principle, in one shape or other, is 
applied by all practical men; one preferring a “ramming stick,” 
a second depending on his fingers, a third giving the pot bottom 
a rap or two on the potting bench, a fourth, the wisest of all, 
adopting all or either of the above modes according to circum- 
stances. The drier the soil, and the more lumpy, the more 
pressure may be admitted. The rationale of the practice is 
this — water carries off, by gravitation or otherwise, the soluble 
and finer particles of the soil; the more cavernous or porous 
the line of passage, the greater the robbery. But by a proper 
compression of the parts of a compost, no large cavities are left 
open, consequently no great amount of the nutritious properties 
of the soil can be readily carried downwards. 

273 4th. — Lumpy Turf. After all the recommendations as to 
mixed composts, this material occupies, and probably ever will, 
the most important consideration in the compost shed. When 
about six months old, having been piled in a ridge out of doors, 
and thatched or otherwise covered from rain, as described in 
the early portion of “Window Culture,” it is fit for removal to 



45 



the potting shed. For general purposes, lumps of this may be 
recommended to be introduced, systematically, through the 
mass of soil in the pot, with the exception of an inch or two of 
the surface. Turfy soils, or rather turfs, of this age, and thus 
managed, may be readily pulled into irregular lumps, and by 
tossing them round in a riddle, about one-part of the mere soil 
may be displaced and rejected; what remains in the riddle, 
thus rendered exceedingly porous, will furnish abundance of 
food for plants, and will at all times transmit and equalize 
moisture, with the utmost facility. As a general rule, I would 
advise it to be used in lumps of from half an inch to two inches 
in bulk. Let, however, about half an inch or so of the finer 
compost be used over them, to “surface” the pots; this acts as 
a regulator, in preventing the too sudden transmission of the 
water when applied. I may here remark, that the fifth maxim, 
is merged into the fourth ; there seems however no reason to 
regret it. 

274 6th. — Sharp Sand, It is convenient and advantageous to 
keep at all times a pan of sharp sand, on the potting bench; 
and although this material is used amongst the compost, I make 
a point of introducing it rather liberally, when the pot is about 
half full ; more especially, near to the stem of the plant. This 
will be found to facilitate the passage of moisture, better than the 
same amount diffused through the whole mass. Although not 
producing food for plants, it is well known to promote a rapid 
action of the root, and in the case of delicate plants, just potted 
off, this is of importance. In shifting tender plants, it is some- 
times indispensable to introduce lumps of stone, charcoal, &c., 
as the potting proceeds, this is a safe process with the Erica, 
Epacris, and others that have hair-like roots. 

275 Watering Pot Plants. Much care is necessary in water- 
ing plants; the best growers consider it a most important 
process. The watering of newly-potted stock should always be 
accomplished by using a very fine-rosed pot for the first fort- 
night ; several light sprinklingsshould in the first place be given, 
in succession, until the whole body of soil is moistened throngh ; 
subsequently, the open spout may be used. If a newly potted 
plant be flooded with water, until the fluid begins to stand on 
the surface of the pot, the consequence is, that much of the soluble 
and finer particles of the compost, more especially the vegetable 

263. AUCTARIUM. 



46 



matter, is carried away to the drainage; whereas, by the quiet 
sort of sprinkling here recommended, these particles are equally 
fixed through the whole mass, whence they cannot easily be dis- 
placed but through progressive decay. In watering plants in 
an ordinary state, which are tolerably well established in their 
pots, it is only necessary to lie cautious not to water them before 
they become somewhat dry, and then to give them sufficient. 
Air bubbles will frequently arise through the soil of established 
plants ; as long as these continue rising, water must be applied; 
at least to plants of strong habit. 

Over Watering. It will sometimes happen, that a plant of 
tender habit, will accidentally become saturated with water. I 
find it a good plan, to turn such out of their pots immediately, 
roll a single turn of old garden mat round the balls, and place 
them in an airy situation in-doors, until much of the moisture has 
evaporated, when they may be returned to their pots. If such 
happen to a newly potted plant of difficultcultivation, the better 
method is to repot it, adding entirely fresh compost. 

276 “Pot-bound” Plants. Some plants, as the Camellia, when 
cramped for a long time without “Shifting,” become what gar- 
deners term “Pot-bound ;” w hen thoroughly dry, noordiuary wat- 
ering can be efficient, and until they are shifted, a necessity will 
exist, for soaking them over head in water occasionally, for a 
quarter of an hour at a time. Such a course is necessary before 
shilting, for if potted in a dry state, the newly added compost, 
would become “soured,” before the old ball could be penetrated. 

277 Liquid Manure. This is well known, to be of considerable 
utility to jilantsin agrowingstate, where much vigour is required. 
Too much caution however, cannot be exercised in the applica- 
tion of it, for if used of too strong a quality, it impairs the tone 
and energy of the tender fibres ; and used in a turbid or muddy 
state, it ultimately chokes up the interstices of the soil, thereby 
excluding the necessary operation of the atmosphere. It appears 
that no certain rule can be laid down at present as to the strength 
most desirable, we all want more experience in so nice a matter, 
I will however venture to recommend for the present my own 
practice, in this way, which has proved very successful. I have 
two stone cisterns, side by side, the one is used for making the 
soot water, the other for the general mixture. The drainings of 
the cowhouse are collected and left to ferment for a fortnight. 



47 



they are then transferred to the cistern for the general mixture, 
adding three times the quantity of soot water. Guano after the 
rate of four ounces to a gallon, is then stirred well into the mass 
and when settled, and perfectly clear, it is fit for use. My maxim 
is to merely colour the water with this mixture, using about half 
a pint to a large three-gallon water pot. Clean water should, I 
think, alternate with it about every third watering; but above all, 
let the mixture be rendered clear. 

278 Winter Pruning. (R. Errington.) Before we proceed with 
directions for training, disbudding, stopping, &c., of fruit trees 
in general, we may, perhaps, not inappropriately offer a few 
simple and practical remarks on winter priming, which will at 
least be seasonable. There are certain principles, in winter 
pruning, which are applicable to all our hardy fruit trees 
intended fora dwarfing system in the kitchen garden; there are 
others also, peculiar to the same trees, in a more advanced state ; 
more especially, if trained on walls, or espalier rails. Under a 
dwarfing, or kitchen garden system, the young shoots must be 
shortened back annually, at the winter pruning, in order to fur- 
nish the whole of the tree with natural spurs as it extends; such 
trees, however, in ordinary orchards, will do, in the main, with a 
slight thinning, to prevent suffocation; or rather to enable the 
tree to produce fruit equal in quality, and size, in all its parts. 
Here, size or extension of the tree is the primary object; not 
so the espalier or dwarf tree, in the kitchen garden, which if 
permitted to extend widely would soon become barren in the 
lower parts, besides injuring the vegetables or flowers around 
it. To lay down rules for shortening back young shoots is 
impossible, so much depending on the strength, degree of ripe- 
ness, and general character of the tree. From nine inches to a 
foot, as a general rule, may be allowed until the tree attains the 
maximum height. The thinning of the branches or young 
sprays, must keep pace with the shortening; this, however, 
must not be carried to a great extreme, for a few years at the 
first, as mere provisional branches may be suffered to remain 
for four or five years, bearing a tolerable amount of fruit, and 
may then be removed. Early autumn pruning is, doubtless, 
much to be recommended; for the action of the root, even in 
deciduous trees, being continuous, (perhaps not dormant a day 
if in health,) there is a rising current of sap, more or less, 

264. AUCTARIUM. 



48 



through the whole of tlie apparently dormant season, in order 
to refill the cells, which have been somewhat emptied by the 
summer’s sun. This current first supplies the upper portion of 
the shoots, and thus it is that we find, in most cases, a few buds 
“breaking” at the extremities, whilst the lower portions of such 
shoots remain dormant. 

With regard to pruning fruit trees on walls, or espalier rails, 
we have adopted a plan for the last seven years which has been 
eminently successful, and cannot be too extensively adopted; 
being moreover founded on the natural habits of the trees. It 
is well known that Pears especially, and, I may add, most of 
the other fruit trees, are more disposed to form blossom buds 
at their extremities, or on the two-year-old wood, than on their 
spurs; such being the case, I make a practice of reserving all 
the very short-jointed young shoots of moderate growth, at the 
general disbudding, or stopping, in July. Such shoots, in the 
Pear, for instance, will be found, towards the beginning of 
August, to have assumed a dark brown colour, and to be about 
completing their summer’s growth ; these are tied down on the 
main branches, and carefully preserved at the general winter 
pruning. By these means, each and every part of the tree, from 
the stump to the extremities, becomes duly clothed with blos- 
som buds, instead of a few branches at the extreme points. In 
order, however, to secure abundance of light, on all parts of the 
tree, and in the case of wall trees, to promote the absorption of 
the solar rays by the wall, I take care to train the leading shoots 
a good distance apart, in general, six to nine inches. A line of 
wall between each two leaders is thus distinctly exposed to the 
solar rays, which becoming heated, radiates a warmth for hours 
after sunset. Pears, Plums, Apricots, and even Cherries, may 
be treated in this manner. About once in three years I cut all 
the ties that surround the branches, and give a general prun- 
ing of all exhausted, or barren, wood; cutting away, also, 
those of the lateral shoots which, from their size, are becoming 
unmanageable. 

Peaches and Nectarines should be encouraged to bear on the 
annual wood ; for although they will (especially when old) 
produce spurs, such should not be depended on. To obtain 
clean young wood, it is only necessary to prune rather freely; 
more especially the lower shoots. 



49 



279 Winter Pruning Orchard Trees, &c. The pruning of 
large, or orchard, trees, consists in merely thinning out over- 
crowded or decaying shoots, and in removing unnecessary 
sprays from the old stems; encouraging, at all times, fresh 
and growing extremities. When such trees become much 
exhausted, through sheer old age, and yet produce sufficient 
to induce the owner to kee|) them a little longer, the best plan 
is to cut away large whole branches, submitting, of course, 
the worst to the knife or saw. By such means the amount of 
sap hitherto appropriated to them will flow into the remaining 
branches. Pruning of Gooseberry bushes consists in merely 
thinning away superfluous shoots, especially those from the 
interior, which should be almost entirely removed. When the 
bush is properly pruned, no two shoots should touch. If, in 
the pendulous kinds, the branches begin to reach the ground, 
as much should be cut away as will prevent contact with the 
soil. The Black Currant requires much the same treatment in 
this respect as the Gooseberry. The Red and White Currants 
are quite different; these bear on spurs, and should have the 
young leading shoots shortened a little every year, in order to 
cause them to develope such spurs. The remainder of their 
dressing consists in shortening back the young side shoots, 
leaving about a quarter of an inch of the base of each. Vines 
must be pruned rather severely, thinning freely and shortening 
back to plump and well-ripened buds, disposing the bearing 
shoots equally. 'I’he pruning of Figs should not take place till 
April or May ; when the true bearing wood can be distinguished. 

280 Root Pruning. This operation is of great importance to 
over-luxuriant trees; it is, however, difficult to lay down rules 
for the inexperienced, as to the extent of such operations. Some 
very good and plain advice will be found in the Calendar, on 
the wrapper for March; the guiding principle there being the 
diameter of the stem. I may here add another, which may 
perhaps be still surer. It is generally admitted that the roots of 
trees extend quite as far as the branches; they will be found, 
however, to extend somewhat farther, especially under a severe 
pruning system. Assuming this as a guide, it may be recom- 
mended that one-fourth of the circle, defined by the branches, 
be cut away. The trench soil, thrown out, should never be 
returned, but in lieu thereof, some fresh unmanured earth. 

265. AUCTAR1U.M. 



A TABULAll VIEW OF FI.OWEliS SUITABLE FOB WINDOW CUT, TUBE. 




52 



282 Window Flowers. The foregoing table of plants, suitable 
for window culture, contains some which are peculiarly eligible 
for cultivation in masses in the open garden, or for producing 
gaiety in the borders during the summer or autumn months. 
The following may be particularly noticed as adapted to this 
purpose. The Chrysanthemum, Calceolaria, Fuchsia, Pelar- 
gonium, Hemimeris, Heliotrope, Lotus, Miinulus, Mignionette, 
Petunia, Rose, Salvia, and Verbena. The Chrysanthemum, 
being preserved from severe frosts, after blossoming, may be 
planted in a warm border or against a wall or trellis, in 3Iarch. 
Cuttings taken from the old stocks, in April and May, will 
make blooming plants for the following autumn, either in pots 
or the borders. The others, with the exception of Mimulus, 
Mignionette, and Rose, may be propagated by cuttings or 
suckers, soon after midsummer, and preserved, by placing 
several of the young rooted plants together in middle-sized pots, 
and merely keeping them from frost, until the following March 
or April. Mimulus, for the most part, is a hardy family, and is 
propagated by dividing the roots, Mignionette, for flowering 
in pots in March, as a window plant, should be sowm in the 
middle of September ; kept rather dry, safe from frost, and w ell 
exposed to light and air. Roses are so various in their habits 
that it is difficult to convey really useful information in a few 
words. It is desirable, however, to propagate annually, in 
July, as many at least as may be required for window culture. 
Choose half-ripened shoots, of an early growth, possessing 
healthy leaves ; and these may be struck after the manner of 
Pinks, or plants may be propagated by layers. They will 
be rooted by the end of August, and may be kept, several in 
a pot, out of the reach of severe frosts, until the following 
February, when such as may be wanted for the window should 
be potted singly; those remaining will do for the garden. The 
following are peculiarly house plants, viz. : — Achimenes, Aza- 
lea Indica, Acacia, Camellia, Cactus, Coronilla, Corro?a, Cyti- 
sus, Chorozema, Epacris, Gesnera, Primula Sinensis, Polygala, 
and Veronica speciosa. Erythrina, although partial to heat, 
has been known to thrive for years in the front of a hothouse, 
well protected during winter. Hydrangea succeeds well under 
similar circumstances. Lobelia fulgeus, and similar species, 
endure much cold; but such as bicolor require protection. 



53 



283 Fruit Trees, Training, &c. (By Mr. Errington.) Before 
proceeding to describe some of the best modes of training Fruit 
Trees, it will not, I hope, be considered superfluous to make a few 
observations of a general character; and which will be found to 
apply, less or more, to every mode which may be adopted. In- 
creased heat, free exposure to light, and economy of space, I 
presume to be the leading objects in view, under all the varieties 
of training. Now it must be obvious, that so strict a limitation of 
the branches, in artificial training, must, unless the root be held 
in check by some means, produce such a body of unnecessary 
spray, as will tend to defeat one of the purposes, and that the 
most important, with which we set out — viz., free exposure to 
light. It is therefore necessary here to remark, that no per- 
manent success can be expected, under what we may for the 
present term a dwarfing system, if the trees are planted without 
due preparation; or what is much worse, if the soil be over- 
prepared, by which I mean, too deep and too rich. I think I 
have previously shown, that the application of manures for such 
trees as the Fear, the Cherry, the Peach, &c., is quite unneces- 
sary, or rather injurious, if they are intended to undergo a 
training process, unless it be a top dressing when exhaustion 
occurs. The best plan that can be had recourse to, when 
trees are thus overcharged with juices, is either to cut away a 
portion of their roots, or to take them entirely up, and replant 
them; there is not, however, always time or convenience to 
carry out such operations. 

I will now proceed to remark on some of the best modes of 
training, jiractised at present; to examine them all would 
occupy too much space, and indeed be quite superfluous; some 
of them having no better claim to utility than many of the 
changes of fashion in a garment. 

284 Training on Walls or Fences. Two modes of trainins: 
on such structures claim [ireference to all others, on account of 
their simplicity, and the success which is known to attend them; 
these are the old fan mode, and the horizontal. The first is 
generally applied to Peaches, Plums, Cherries, and Apricots ; 
the latter to Pears. There is not the slightest reason, however, 
why the Pear should not be subject to the fan mode of training, 
which most assuredly, in a general way, excels all others. 
When the Pear is trained on the principle of tying down the 

267. AUCTAIUUM. 



54 



young spray, instead of cutting it all away at the summer dis- 
budding, as will be hereafter explained, there is no reason to 
adopt any other mode; unless dictated by fancy, or peculiarity 
of situation. 

If the wall be of very rough stone, a trellis of wire or wood 
will be necessary, to which the shoots must be tied. The trellis 
must be placed within about two inches of the wall ; for, 
although a much greater distance has been advocated by some 
theorists, it has been proved in practice that trees in such 
positions possess but very slight advantages over the ordinary 
espalier. In commencing the training of young trees, on the 
fan system, to which I deem it expedient to confine myself, in 
the present case, the main point is to continue pruning back the 
young shoots, for a couple of years, or more, in order to obtain 
the requisite number of main leaders, whether the subject be a 
Apricot, Pear, Plum, Peach, or in fact, any fruit-bearing tree. 

The distance apart at which the leaders ought to be ranged, 
must be determined by the size of the leaf. Since the elabo- 
ration of the sap in fruit trees, especially those from warm 
climates, depends so much on a due exposure of the foliage to 
light, independently of the question of heat, it is obvious, that 
the shade produced by the rivalry of leaves, in juxtaposition, is 
somewhat inimical to one of the chief principles from which we 
set out — viz., the free admission of light. As soon then as 
the requisite number of leaders is obtained, to produce the “fan,” 
the pruning must be regulated by other principles, which will 
be explained in due course. 

We come now to the subject of Espaliers, or trees placed 
under a dwarfing system, without wall or fence. Many fanci- 
fully trained forms of such trees are adopted in practice, and in 
truth many more are needed, than for those on walls. The 
principal modes, however, or rather the most useful and dis- 
tinct, may be comprised under the following heads — viz., 

1st. Upright rails, or treillage. 

2nd. Horizontal rails, or table trellis. 

3rd. Pyramidal, or upright training. 

4th. Quenouille, distaff, or down training. 

5th. Trellised arcades. 

In casting a glance over these forms of training, it may 
readily be seen that by the 2nd mode, or horizontal rails, if 



55 



placed near to the earth’s surface, the tree will be in a position 
to enjoy more warmth in the aggregate, than if trained by any 
of the other methods. This must be esteemed a matter of the 
very 6rst importance, as regards tender fruits. I have proved, 
for at least fourteen years, that this mode of training is peculi- 
arly adapted to the tender Flemish Pears, for which a good 
situation on a wall cannot always be supplied. I will now 
proceed to make a few practical observations, on these methods, 
according to the order in which they are here placed. 

‘285 1st. Upright Rails, or Treillage. These are generally 
placed about three feet from the margins of walks, and if fruit 
trees are properly trained on them, and kept in good order, 
they produce fruit of a character superior to the ordinary dwarf 
standard. They, moreover, add much to the effect of the 
garden, and admit of a small border for the cultivation of 
dwarf flowers. Many such are to be met with in old gardens, 
having been long in use, but, generally, with a very moderate 
amount of success. Want of success Sliould not, however, be 
imputed to the principle, but to imperfect management; and 
to soils too damp and rich. The trees are thus continually 
excited to make succulent growth; which, if closely pruned, 
does but the more increase; and, if left unpruned, occasions 
barrenness, by shading and robbing the blossom spurs. By the 
platform mode, explained in section 234, the trees will be 
totally altered in character; they will produce much less wood, 
and this will be of a more sturdy and short-jointed growth. 
Tliis mode is well adapted for many of the Flemish Pears. 
For those which are tender, the trellis should run east and west; 
thus furnishing a southern face for a superior amount of light. 
For such a trellis, the Glout Morceaux, the Winter Neilis, the 
Passe Colmar, the Beurre Ranee, and the Ne plus Meuris, may 
be recommended. For trellises running north and south, the 
Jargonelle, the Dunmore, the Marie Louise, the Althorp Cras- 
sanne, and the Easter Beurre, would be suitable. 

This treillage has been much used for training superior kinds 
of Apples upon, and is quite as suitable for these as for Pears; 
especially for those trees which produce slender and short- 
jointed wood ; such as Hicks’s Fancy, Kerry Pippin, Padley’s 
Pippin, Pearson’s Plate, Scarlet Crofton, Lamb-abbey Pear- 
main, Ribston Pippin, and the various Nonpareils. 

268, AUCTARIUM. 



5G 



Trellises of this kind are generally of iron; the uprights, or 
supporters, about six feet apart, and the horizontal wires nine 
inches asunder, for Apples and Pears. The uprights are some- 
times fixed in oak stumps, or what is much better, in stone 
bases. Such trellises are peculiarly adapted to the mode of 
training described in section 278 of the Auctarium ; and which 
consists of tying in, instead of cutting away, a regular portion 
of young wood of a fruitful character. 

286 2nd. Horizontal Rails, or Table Trellises. These, 
like the upright trellis, are by no means a new invention. They 
have, however, not unfrequently failed in producing the proper 
amount of success; for the reasons given in the preceding 
section. The advantages they possess, as to a warmer atmos- 
phere, over every other mode of training, with the exception of 
walls or fences, justify me in recommending them to the particu- 
lar notice of owners of small gardens. I have used table trellises 
extensively for the last fifteen years, and can bear ample testi- 
mony to their complete efficiency, when under proper manage- 
ment. Like the upright treillage, they are a suitable accom- 
paniment to the garden walk ; but do not, like those, admit of 
an accompanying flower border. The best height of such 
trellis from the ground, according to my experience, is about 
one foot ; with a horizontal width of four or five feet. They 
may be either metallic, or of wood; and for Apples and Pears 
of the tender kinds, should possess parallel rails or bars, run- 
ning in all cases north and south, at about ten or eleven inches 
apart. The soil beneath them having been duly prepared, 
according to the platform mode, as detailed in the Auctarium, 
section 23d, the surface of the soil should be covered, if possible, 
with slates, to absorb heat; these, however, are not indispen- 
sable under this mode of training, but they assist in perfecting 
both wood and fruit. If such a trellis were fitted up to receive 
a canvas covering during frosty nights, in the end of March or 
beginning of April, a crop of fruit might always be calculated 
on ; and such protection may be readily accomplished, by plac- 
ing a slight rail on each side of the trellis. The canvas would 
again be advantageous, at the end of September, for covering 
the trellis, from about three o’clock in the afternoon, especially 
after a sunny day, when the warmth of the atmosphere in the 
vicinity of the branches and fruit, would be kept up for some 



75 - 

hours after sunset ; thus promoting the ripening of the fruit, 
as well as of the wood for ensuing crops. 

287 3rd. Quenouille or Conical Training. This consists 
in carrying up a main stem to any desired height, (about six 
or eight feet being the most desirable) and, by annual pruning, 
to cause the stem to produce abundance of side shoots in its 
progress upwards. The side shoots require pruning back until 
the necessary height and full development of the side buds are 
accomplished; after which a selection of the shortest jointed 
shoots of the current year, are annually tied down, in a reversed 
position. This mode, although it has proved tolerably suc- 
cessful with the French gardeners, is seldom adopted in Britain, 
for it could, by no means, become an efficient substitute for a 
wall, which, on the continent, may be the case. The trees are, 
moreover, thought to wear out prematurely; owing.no doubt, 
to the continual check on the vital principle, by stripping the 
tree of its most active members, to keep it close and prim. If 
such a mode be adopted, I would again urge the propriety of 
connecting it with the platform method of planting ; even if 
a system of top dressing should be rendered necessary. 

288 4th. Down Training from a Main Stem. This mode 
may be more confidently recommended than the former, inas- 
much as it is more simple; and the down training of the cur- 
rent year’s shoots may commence as soon as the desired height 
is obtained, without any further sacrifice. Some persons carry 
the main stem six feet high, some are content with three feet. 
1 would suggest about four feet as very eligible ; it being neces- 
sary, with tender kinds, to keep the shoots near the surface of 
the earth, in order to secure a warmer atmosphere. This mode, 
with that of the preceding section, is also admirably adapted 
for the margins of walks, promenades, drives, &c., in small gar- 
dens; and the latter mode, well carried out, would not be 
altogether unworthy a place on small lawms, as their effect, 
when properly managed, resembles that produced by a weep- 
ing willow. Some persons drive pegs or stumi)s in the ground, 
in a circle, four or five feet from the stem of the tree, to which 
they tie the shoots ; others suspend a ball of clay to the extre- 
mities of the young wood. For this mode, and that of the 
preceding section, some of the hardier kinds of Flemish Pears 
should be selected; such as the Althorp Crassane, Fondante 

2G9. AUCTARIUM. 



58 



d'automne, Thompson’s, Marie Louise, Louis bonne of Jersey, 
Beurre die), Hacon’s Incomparable, &c. 

289 5th. Trellised Arcades. As to the effect produced, these 
are exceeding^ly ornamental ; they are made to stretch over 
a walk, which, to do justice to the plan, should, by all means, 
run north and south; one side will thus enjoy the morning’s 
sun, and the other that of the afternoon. Care should be taken 
to carry them high enough, in order that tall persons may not 
come in contact with the fruit, which will occasionally hang 
through the trellising. The uprights which carry the arch 
should, at least, be six feet in height at the sides. The same 
mode of training, as to disposition, distance, &c., may be pre- 
served here, as with the horizontal trellis; allowing, however, 
more width between the principal shoots, as it is more difficult 
to train them ; a foot to fourteen inches will be amply sufficient. 

It may be reasonably hoped that what has now been advanced 
in regard to training, will be sufficient to direct persons of small 
experience, or those about to make new gardens, in their choice 
and adaptation of the most efficient methods. I will next pro- 
ceed to offer advice on the principles of disbudding, both general 
amd special ; a process of far greater importance than is gener- 
ally imagined. In carrying out any, or all, of the above modes 
of training, it will at once, I think, be obvious, that unless the 
root be placed under control, all training, however scientihc, 
must inevitably end in disappointment. In fact, the absence of 
due regard to this one circumstance, has been the sole cause why 
trained fruit trees have so generally disappointed the expectation 
of the horticulturist. And how should it have been otherwise ? 
If the principle of reciprocity between root and branch, — more 
especially with regard to fructification, be admitted (and it can 
but be recognised by every vegetable physiologist), how is it 
possible that so severe a limitation of the branches should be 
compatible with unlimited power of the root Prevention is 
better than cure; and I have always found, that fruit trees, 
planted in sound maiden loam, not too deep, have invariably 
produced shoots of the most fruitful character. The method of 
planting, moreover, which I here call the platform system, 
supersedes the necessity of root pruning, or, in fact, any other 
root operation, with the exception of top-dressings when the 
tree becomes exhausted by age or over-bearing. 



59 



290 Fruit Trees, summer disbudding and stopping. This, if 
not the most regular, will at least be the most seasonable, mode 
of proceeding with our subject. Disbudding, although in itself a 
simple operation, is one, it may be readily conceived, of such 
power that a tree may be quickly destroyed by pushing the oper- 
ation to an extreme. It would appear that its immediate effect is 
to paralyse the action of the root, and consequently is antago- 
nistic to over luxuriance. It will also be found to limit, in some 
degree, the ultimate size or extension of the tree; and therefore 
is a necessary operation in carrying out a dwarfing system; 
or, in other words, to produce a maximum amount of fruit, in a 
minimum degree of space. 

One object, however, of greater and more immediate import- 
ance, is the free admission of light to all parts of the tree; and 
1 think it will suffice for the present, to confine my observations 
principally to this view of the subject. It will be obvious, on 
the slightest consideration of the subject, that without much sun- 
light on the leaf, there can be no properly elaborated or ripened 
fruit buds. Now this degree of light is more especially required 
to act on the leaves belonging to the embryo buds or spurs, 
which are ultimately to produce the fruit. The Plum, the Apri- 
cot, the Pear, the Apple, and the Red and White Currants, are 
instances of fruit trees bearing principally on spurs; whilst the 
Raspberry, the Black Currant, the Vine, the Peach, and the 
Morello Cherry, produce the chief of their crop on the young 
shoots. Hence it becomes manifest, that those trees which pro- 
duce their fruit on spurs, and are trained artificially, must have 
a very considerable portion of their annual shoots removed, or 
stopped, in order to admit light. I may digress to observe, 
that the old maxim, “prevention is better than cure,” is especi- 
ally applicable here. By the platform mode, so well adapted to 
a dwarfing system, in small gardens, the trees will make a very 
small amount of superfluous wood; it therefore saves much 
trouble in this respect ; and, in a great degree, supersedes the 
necessity of violent operations, which must certainly be consi- 
dered in the light of sheer necessity. These preliminaries 
being established, I will now proceed to offer a few words of 
advice about disbudding; and for the sake of simplicity, will 
generalize the matter, as the whole in detail would occupy too 
much space. 

S70. AUCTARIUM. 



60 



In the first place, I would suggest, that the operation be of a 
progressive character; this is my own practice, and is very suc- 
cessful. In the second place, I would recommend a general 
stopping of all misplaced gross shoots, sometime previously to 
their final removal. This will gradually enable the sap to find 
other channels, and will not produce so great a stagnation in the 
system as a sudden removal. In the Peach, I have known a 
sudden and heavy disbudding arrest the swelling of the fruit; 
therefore great caution is necessary. Little and often is the best 
maxim. A stopping — previous to a thorough disbudding, is of 
great utility here: no tree suffers sooner than the Peach. My 
own practice is, to thin out, at the first operation, those shoots only 
which arise from the same eye, or base, as those intended to be 
reserved. In the second operation, about a fortnight afterwards, 
to stop or pinch the tops off the intermediate shoots, some of 
which may, possibly, at the final thinning, be required to pro- 
duce a succession of young wood for the next year. The fore- 
right shoots, however, should, by all means, be rubbed entirely 
away. These points observed, there need be little more disbud- 
ding until the early part of June, when the growing shoots, 
intended to produce the next year’s crop, should be nailed to 
thi wall ; this then is the time wholly to remove all superfluous 
wood. In its removal, however, it is not always expedient to 
rub off the shoots ; they are better, when stubborn, cut with a 
sharp knife, leaving a joint or two at the base to cut away at the 
w inter pruning. Some little difference requires to be made with 
regard to the Pear. In all cases we must keep steadily in view, 
the circumstances, or conditions, of their fruiting habits, whether 
on the young wood, or on spurs. These two principles will 
classify the whole of our fruit-bearing trees. My practice with 
regard to the Pear is detailed in the earlier part of this subject^ 
and need not be here repeated. The previous stopping may 
also be applied here. I treat the Apricot exactly as the Pear, 
with regard to disbudding; taking care to tie, or nail down, all 
moderate and short-jointed shoots, and to remove, in a progres- 
sive way, all those of a succulent or watery character. The 
Plum will submit to the very same treatment as the Apricot. 
The Cherry requires an intermediate course of treatment; in- 
deed the Morello may be treated in every respect as a trained 
Black Currant — relying almost entirely on the production of a 



61 



regular seiies of annual shoots for the next year’s produce of 
blossoms and fruit. 

Another stopping, of a somewhat different character, will be 
required towards the middle of August, about which I will 
give a few words of advice shortly. In the mean time I would 
strongly urge the great importance of paying the utmost atten- 
tion to these matters, in due time ; for no system of winter 
pruning, however complete, will be long successful without good 
summer management. Indeed, if trees were properly treated 
during the growing season, it would matter little what the winter 
operations were, except as far as neatness is concerned. To- 
gether with judicious stopping and thinning, may be urged the 
very great importance of keeping down insects on trained trees. 
No pains must be considered too great in this respect, if per- 
manently useful, handsome, and dwarf trees are desired. 

291 Preparation for the ripening period of Fruit Trees. 
M ULCHiNG. Those who adopt the platform mode of planting, 
will sometimes find it necessary to spread a thin coat of manure 
on the surface of the soil over the roots, usually called Mulching. 
Indeed, whether on the platform mode or not, this is a most 
useful proceeding ; for it must be remembered, that the atmos- 
phere of a garden is much hotter, at times, than that of the 
ordinary orchard, especially in the vicinity of its walls. To 
newly-planted trees, mulching may be considered indispensable. 
It is not well, however, to apply too heavy a coat ; about three 
inches will sufHce. If dry weather prevail, the mulching should 
receive a thorough watering, whether the case be that of a newly- 
planted tree, or of one laden with fruit ; and the operation 
should not be delayed after the fruit begins to swell ; for the 
root being then in full action, much extra nourishment is thrown 
into the system of the tree, and the fruit by swelling more freely 
is sooner past the depredations of insects. 

Some of our liest Pears, as well as others of our fruits, are 
liable to crack, and become coarse and gritty ; the Old Cras- 
anne, and the Gansel’s Bergamot, may be mentioned as in- 
stances. The 3Ielon is well known to be liable to crack, when 
the treatment is not of uniform character. The first swelling- 
may be performed under a deficiency of root action, or of 
moisture. Subsequently the roots insinuate themselves into the 
linings or body of the bed, whereby a new stimulus is given 

271. AUCTARIUM. 



62 



them, and a great influx of sap takes place, whilst the rind of 
the Melon having become indurated and prepared for the ripen- 
ing process, cracks and bursts, through a surcharge of fluids. 
It is just so with Pears. They are seldom or never found to 
crack during the first swelling, or in the ripening process. If 
the trees are in sandy soil, and a dry period takes place in June, 
they become what gardeners term “hide-bound” — and the July 
rains, in many cases, become a severe test of their soundness. 
This, then, points to the propriety of choosing sound or some- 
what tenacious loams ; as also of laying on a mulching betimes, 
especially with those kinds which are so liable to crack. 

Having adverted to the spring disbudding of fruit trees, rather 
at large, in section 290, little on this subject need now be said. 
It may, however, be added, that all disbudding on the prin- 
ciples there laid down, should now be completed at once. Not 
a moment’s delay can be permitted. For, although young 
spray may remain in a crowded state with impunity, during the 
early summer months, such cannot be permitted in July and 
August, without perilling the welfare of the blossom in the en- 
suing spring. Light, — abundance of light, admitted to the 
leaf and the bud, is the great desideratum with all fruit trees. 
This is proved by the abundant blossom on most of our fruit 
trees, that usually follows a long bright summer. By this it is, 
— much more than by mere heat, that our continental neighbours 
succeed so much better than we do, with the tender sorts of 
Pears, to say nothing of the Vine. 

Disbudding, then, having been duly carried out, the next 
main point to attend to, is to stop, or pinch all luxuriant shoots; 
shoots; more especially on trained trees. These gross shoots 
are merely symptomatic of a powerful root action, and need only 
the assistance of a practised hand to divert their extra energies 
into the proper channels. Such shoots, if permitted to ramble 
at large, will divert the juices from the original fabric of the 
tree ; and create a fresh series of gross shoots, which will recip- 
rocate by the increased production of wild spray. These, then, 
should be constantly topped during the summer; and the con- 
sequence will be, that the true bearing wood will be strength- 
ened, and a succession of young shoots will be provided to the 
bottom of the tree. 

The above processes will bring us up to the middle of July, 



G3 



ami the next thing I would suggest, is to commence a stopping 
or pinching of all the superior parts of the tree, commencing 
with the extremities, and proceeding progressively downwards, 
and suffering the operation to extend over a month or more. 
This we have long practised, and find it important. It ac- 
complishes three very essential points, with most of the tender 
fruit trees. First, it has a continual tendency to equalize the 
sap. Secondly, it increases the action of the leaves in the 
neighbourhood of the fruit, by thoroughly feeding their sap 
vessels. And, thirdly, it tends to check an over-late root- 
action, which is somewhat antagonistic in northern climates, to 
what is, by practical men, termed “ripening the wood.” 

1292 Ripening Period. Under this division of our subject, we 
wish to be understood as including the ripening of the wood 
as well as the fruit. Indeed, with regard to artificially trained 
trees, of tender habits, the former is even of more importance 
than the latter ; inasmuch as not only the next year’s produce 
depends in the main on this process being duly completed, but 
the very stability and permanency of the tree itself. Having 
described the modes of disbudding and stopping gross shoots, 
or robbers, as they are called, we will assume that we have 
arrived at the middle of July. By this period trained trees, 
in general, will be found to have produced three-fourths of 
their annual increase of wood, and the impulse to further ex- 
tension will be much lessened, in consequence of the solar heat 
and light having, in a high degree, induced the elaborative 
process. Added to this, the trees become liable to temporary 
drought at the root ; which performs at this period a very neces- 
sary part, and produces a check of a far more genuine character 
than either root cutting, or ringing. This period then should be 
seized on, especially if the weather be dry, in order to reduce 
the whole of the superfluous spray, and to select, and nail or tie 
down, in a careful way, the whole of the young wood intended as 
permanent. As, however, from fresh excitement, by showery 
weather or otherwise, there will still be danger of those trees 
which produce their fruit on spurs, bursting some of their 
embryo blossom buds, it is necessary to retain a portion of the 
unnecessary shoots for a week or two, when the whole of the 
superfluous summer growth should be removed, which process 
shall be explained in the next section. The Pear and the Plum 

272. ACCTARIUM. 



64 



come more especially within the class of trees regarding which 
this caution is necessary ; and in respect to spur-bearing fruits, 
in general, our own practice shall be described. 

In the first place, with regard to Pear-trees, trained either 
horizontally or by the fan mode, it is well known to all who are 
acquainted with their habits, that they have a continual tendency, 
during the growing season, to produce succulent or watery 
shoots, near the points at which the branches diverge from the 
main stock. This is nature’s own course, and the tree, if left 
to itself, would, in the course of three or four years, run into its 
own native character — that of a standard, or tree with several 
stems. These would ultimately starve the trained shoots, ac- 
cording to a law which, with few exceptions, pervades the veget- 
able kingdom — that of causing the earliest formed, (and now 
inferior) shoots to perish first. These watery shoots, then, 
are the very first on which we commence operations, and this 
we do by pinching off their points, when they are six or eight 
inches in length. This will in general occur when the fruit 
is about the size of an acorn ; and the necessary consequence 
of the operation is, that the sap, which the “robbers” would, by 
their rapid extension, have consumed,’is propelled into the fer- 
tile branches, for the nourishment of the fruit. In June and 
July, a thinning out of the grossest shoots is to be gradually 
effected, and the remainder shortened to about six or eight inches 
in length, taking care to leave several growing unstopped at the 
extremities, to decoy the ascending sap. Care must now be 
taken, that light be admitted freely amongst all the branches ; 
and, by the end of July, sufficient shoots should have been 
removed to admit sun light through the whole fabric of the tree. 
Apricots may receive similar treatment. 

Peaches and Nectarines, in our northern climate, do not suc- 
ceed so well by the above system of spurring back. In these, 
every shoot not required for the next year’s bearing, should be 
totally removed by the middle of July. As soon as their fruit 
can be perceived to have commenced its last swelling, pinch 
or stop all the strongest shoots. By these means the size of 
the fruit is increased, and the wood so stopped, is rendered 
more perfect for the ensuing year. The weaker shoots, and 
those placed in an inferior position, may be left growing until 
the end of the season. 



65 



293 Fruit Trees. General autumn management, and revision 
of the collection, preparatory to the planting season. 

Having now laid down the necessary directions for Fruit- 
tree management, through the growing season, we arrive at the 
beginning of September ; and the principal object will now 
be to facilitate the ripening of the wood, and to prevent the 
ravages of the red spider, on the Peach and Nectarine trees. 
This insect frequently makes sad havoc, at this period, taking 
the unwary by surprise. Those who do not perfectly understand 
the offices of the leaf, in relation to the blossom of the ensuing 
year, might be led to infer that plenty of sound wood having 
been obtained, nothing more would be needed. The Peach and 
.\ectarine, however, are so sensitive to the attacks of insects, 
that one sure result of suffering the red spider to commit its 
ravages, during the autumn, will be an imperfect develop- 
ment of the blossoms in the following spring. The fruit of 
the current season, however, will be sure to suffer in a corres- 
ponding ratio, both in size and flavour; and how should it be 
otherwise, when the insects, in myriads, are devouring the very 
pabulum out of which both the quality of the fruit, and the 
fabric of the future blossom, are at once compounded. 

My practice is, if the red spider be gaining ground, to ply 
the engine or syringe, several limes a day, for about three suc- 
cessive days; making choice of dull or even rainy weather, if 
possible, in which to carry out the operation. The trees, during 
such time, should not be suffered to become dry for an hour, 
if possible. If, however, bright and continued sunshine inter- 
vene, the operation had better be suspended ; at least during the 
hotter part of the day. After this, I apply sulphur, with much 
care, to the affected leaves, being cautious not to blemish the 
fruit. If the autumn prove cloudy. Pears on the cooler aspects, 
or espaliers, should have some of the “snags,” or stumps of the 
foreright shoots, shortened still farther back, and many entirely 
removed, in order to admit sunlight on the embryo fruit buds ; 
for not a single chance of the kind should be lost at this late 
period, especially if the previous summer has not been of a 
genial character. All waste spray, or late growth, as well as 
root suckers, must be stripped entirely away ; and loose leaders 
or shoots, requiring to be reserved, should be trained closely to 
their respective situations. 

273. AUCTARIU.M. 



66 



By tlie end of the month steps may be taken towards making 
provision for the introduction of any fresh kinds of fruit trees, 
or for the removal of sucli as may have failed. One of the first 
proceedings, in this case, is to lay in a sufficient stock of fresh 
turfy or fibrous soil. September is a most eligible month for 
this, whether for fruit trees, or for general purposes. The next 
business is to examine the whole stock of fruits, to see whether 
they form a complete set for the wants of the family ; or whe- 
ther any are wanting to complete a proper succession. The 
renewal of old sorts, falling into decay, and the introduction 
of new kinds, of established reputation, must not be lost sight of. 

Great caution should be exercised in making such arrange- 
ments ; selection, and not collection, should be the guiding 
principle. For, after all, how few of the novelties of the day 
will succeed in every situation ? Therefore, in proportion to 
the limitation of garden room, should be the severity of the 
scrutiny in the selection. In planting new fruit gardens, 
arrangements should not be left to the moment of planting, but 
a complete list of fruit trees, from safe authorities, should forth- 
with be prepared, and the stations all numbered and entered in 
a garden book. This will be a guarantee against the possibility 
of error ; and will also serve as a guide to the operator, in deter- 
mining the size of the station, character of composts, &c. 

I would here beg to otTer a remark on the selection and 
preparation of trees, preparatory to planting. “First come, 
first served,” is a maxim which applies to this business. Those 
who desire to plant good trees, should, if to be procured from a 
nursery, have them selected and marked betimes in the autumn. 
If any large fruit trees are to be removed, I strongly advise 
what I have often practised ; viz., the making of a trench around 
one half of the tree, in the end of August; cutting, of course, 
through the extremities of the roots, and suffering the trench to 
remain excavated until the tree is removed. The remaining 
half of the circle may be excavated towards the end of Septem- 
ber, in like manner. This process will produce an early ces- 
sation of growth, and consequently a more perfect maturation 
of the wood in tender trees ; together with plenty of fresh fibres, 
by which the newly-planted trees will be speedily established. 
Such trees may be removed towards the end of October, but 
of this, more in the following pages. 



67 



294 Fruit, Gathering and Storing. Fruit gathering is a pro- 
cess which requires much attention, more especially the tender 
kinds of Pears; for on the amount of care exercised in this 
process will depend, in no small degree, the length of time they 
will keep in perfection. Where many sorts are to be gathered, 
at one period, time will scarcely permit their being brought, one 
sort at a time, to the fruit room, and there placed in single layers, 
as would otherwise be desirable. To meet circumstances, and 
to save time, place on an ordinary handbarrow, several hand 
baskets, each with a little hay in the bottom; and place the 
fruit in layers, with cap paper between each layer of fruit. 
Three layers in thickness may in this manner be carried with 
safety, provided it be done with steadiness of hand and foot. 

As well as on the care in gathering fruit, much depends on 
the suitableness of the fruit room, for success in preserving it 
in the most perfect state, and for the greatest length of time. 
This room should have a northern aspect ; this will greatly 
assist in preserving an uniform temperature, which is of the very 
first importance. It should never descend quite to the freezing 
point — 32 degrees ; nor rise above 45 degrees. This equable 
temperature is the most easily obtained by choosing, as we have 
said, a northern aspect, and sinking the Hoor about three feet 
below the surface of the earth about the room. As well as 
excess of temperature, excess of moisture must be avoided. A 
brick floor is found to answer exceedingly well, provided the 
bricks are well burned. If, however, the earth below the floor 
be damp, it can, in no way that we know of, be so advan- 
tageously regulated as by first paving the floor with pebbles, 
before the bricks are laid. This we have practised, with 
admirable effect, for cottage floors and domestic offices. If 
an accumulation of water takes place, in consequence of the 
sinking below the ordinary water level, a drain must be laid 
near to the building, making it, at the least, a foot deeper than 
the floor of the room. These advantages may not be every 
where attainable, but it is not the less important that they be 
stated, in order that each horticulturist may make as near ap- 
proach to them as circumstances will permit. No injury can 
be inflicted by holding up the best model for imitation. 

The shelves may be made of narrow bars, or solid boards, 
using white deal or other scentless wood ; red deal is objecfion- 

274. ACCTARICM. 



G8 



able, on account of its strong odour of turpentine. A portion 
of solid shelving should be fitted up, if possible, with lids, for 
keeping the superior late Flemish Pears. Fruit, of all kinds, 
keeps extremely well placed on a layer of cap paper, provided 
the room is pretty dry ; this, in the case of very superior kinds, 
may be laid double. The cap paper forms a soft bedding for 
them, and will prevent decaying fruit from staining the shelves; 
it will, also, prevent any unpleasant flavour being imparted to 
the fruit, from its contact wilh the wood. The room in general 
should be freely ventilated, on fine days, for some weeks ; the 
degree of ventilation being regulated by the amount of con- 
densed steam on the inner surface of the windows. As soon as 
this condensed moisture declines, the room should be kept more 
close ; but after the early part of November, the fruit room can 
rarely be ventilated with advantage, unless it be for an hour or 
two in a dry windy day. Darkness certainly seems to be of 
importance ; how the exclusion of light acts we are not aware, 
unless it hinder the spread of destructive fungi. This advantage 
is readily obtained, by keeping the shutters generally closed; 
and when hard frosts occur, mats must be nailed over the shut- 
ters, inclosing a coating of hay, six inches thick. An excellent 
account of these fungi may be found in the Gardeners’ Chro- 
nicle, for 1842, page 739, by Arthur Hill Hassall, Esq. 

These instructions should not be closed without mention of 
other methods practised by some good pomologisfs for the pre- 
servation of the finer fruits. One of them is, to place the fruit 
in boxes, with alternate layers of cleanly-washed dry sand ; so 
that each single layer may be kept completely apart from that 
above or below it. Fruit kept in this way, with due precaution 
as to temperature, &c., retains, in an admirable degree, all its 
freshness of flavour and appearance : but two disadvantages 
accompany it; the one is, that it precludes convenient exami- 
nation as to the decay of the fruit ; and the other, that the usual 
care bestowed on it, before being brought to table, will not 
completely clear it from the sand. In the eye, and in the cavity 
of the stem, sandy particles will be left, which, even with care- 
ful paring, will be liable to attach to the fruit, and produce 
in eating very disagreeable sensations. To avoid this incon- 
venience, some fruit growers wrap every Apple or Pear singly 
in paper, and then proceed as mentioned. Others wrap them 



69 



singly in the same way, and in this state fill earthen vessels with 
them, and close them up, omitting the sand altogether. This 
latter method is an admirable one; but would, of course, be 
applied only to the finest dessert varieties. One fact must how- 
ever be mentioned. Although fruit, when kept in sand, or 
closed vessels, has a fresh and nice appearance, its flavour we 
have never thought equal to that which had been exposed on 
shelves. 

295 Planting operations. The remaining portion of the trench 
around large fruit trees, intended to be removed, adverted to at 
page 66, may now be excavated, and by the end of the month, 
the trees may be removed. Little need here be said on the 
mode of preparing the stations for them, as that has been fully 
explained in preceding pages ; it may, however, be repeated, 
that loam — sound and rather adhesive loam, of from a foot to 
fifteen inches in depth, is the soil most suitable for nearly all 
fruit trees. And here we should correct a typographical error, 
which crept into page 30 of the Auctarium, eleven lines from 
the bottom. For peat soil, which there occurs, fresh soil 
should be read; by which was intended, any sort of ordinary 
garden soil, which had been used in vegetable culture, and not 
contaminated or weakened by having fruit trees grown in it 
previously. This was suggested as a matter of economy, under 
the conviction that ail parlies could not procure good loam. 

In planting fruit trees, in the latter part of October, it will 
frequently happen, that the leaves are only partially shed ; this, 
however, matters not, unless the season be very late indeed, and 
the leaves still green on the trees; when the operation should 
be delayed for another fortnight. The system of root cutting, 
by means of a trench thrown out at the end of August, as pre- 
viously advised, will, in general, enable the operator to remove 
his trees by the second week in October. Newly planted trees, 
should not, at this early period, be pruned the moment they are 
])lanted ; they may be left until the middle of November, when 
the sooner they are pruned the better ; and in the case of 
Peaches and Nectarines, the wounds should be instantly stopped 
with white lead, at least this is our own practice. 

From long experience, as well as from the concurrent testi- 
mony of some of the best gardeners of the present age, we are 
fully persuaded that the last fortnight in October, and the first 

275. AUCTARIUM. 



70 



fortnight in November, are the four best consecutive weeks 
that can be chosen from the whole year, for planting in general. 
There is, at this period, much of the summer ground heat re- 
maining; which, by affording some stimulus to the roots, will 
assist them in “laying hold of the soil,” as it is technically 
called, in their new residence. In the next place, this parti- 
cular season has usually a very moist atmosphere, from which 
the trees possess the advantage that cuttings are afforded by 
their enclosure beneath a bell-glass ; that is, they are protected 
from a drying atmosphere, which would carry off the juices of 
their foliage, and the bark of the young shoots, and thereby 
exhaust and shrivel them, at a time when they are without roots 
to absorb and keep up a proportionate supply. A newly-trans- 
planted tree or shrub is, for a short time, in nearly the same 
condition as a cutting ; inasmuch as many of the spongioles, 
or points of the minute fibrous roots, will have been broken, and 
others disturbed from their former close contact with the earth, 
thereby occasioning much interruption to absorption, which 
always requires time to repair. When transplanting is, from 
necessity, effected in a warm and improper season, puddling 
the roots, as it is called, that is, first mixing the earth with 
water to the consistence of treacle, where they are to be planted, 
and placing the roots therein, is a practice which cannot be too 
forcibly insisted on. Much has been said of late about steep- 
ing seeds in stimulating solutions, before sowing them ; but we 
believe that more good would arise from dipping the roots of 
trees or plants, on removing them, into a rich mixture of loam 
and manure, in the form of a thin paste, so that every fibre and 
spongiole would be cased therein before being planted. In refer- 
ence to autumn planting, it is well known that newly-planted 
trees, with which proper care has been taken, will continue to pro- 
duce fresh fibres through the winter ; and will, consequently, be 
in a position the better to withstand the withering effects of a 
March sun and east wind. These things being admitted, plant- 
ing should be completed as soon as possible. Where ground is 
of a damp character, proper drainage should be immediately 
effected ; and in the ordinary orchard, open gutters may be 
made, to assist in carrying off the surface-water. It would be 
superfluous here to say anything more about the platform mode 
of planting; abundant advice on that head having been given. 



71 



under section 234 of the Auctarium. One piece of advice is, 
however, necessary ; and that is, to reject all soil which has 
become exhausted by fruit or other trees. Where abundance 
of loamy soil is not to be had, the next best plan is to exchange 
such excavated soil for some of the ordinary vegetable garden 
soil. Another point of some importance may be here urged; 
which is, that the larger and older the trees are, which it is 
intended to remove, the richer the soil should be. In advo- 
cating the use of sound loam alone, in the preceding ]>arts of 
the Auctarium, as amply sufficient in itself for a dwarfing 
system, such advice was only intended to apply to young trees. 
The older and larger the tree, the greater reluctance it has to 
form new fibres, and must be “coaxed,” as gardeners say, by 
using some old vegetable matter, thoroughly blended with the 
loam, and by the addition of manures, in a mellow and decom- 
posed state. 

Trees, when planted, should receive, at least, six inches in 
depth of mulching over the surface of their roots; this is a 
proceeding of more importance than might at first sight be 
imagined. To say that it tends to enrich the soil, without 
altering, in any material degree, its texture, is not to recount 
one half of its merits. It acts in a more important manner, 
as a regulator; it will neither permit the soil beneath it to heat 
or to cool so readily, and, consequently, is important to newly- 
planted trees, both during the hottest seasons and the coldest. 
Our business is now with the coldest; and by mulching imme- 
diately, much of the remaining summer heat is arrested, and 
retained to facilitate rooting. Indeed, with six inches of 
mulch, it is probable that nearly .50° will be retained through 
the whole of the winter. This mulch should not be of a rotten 
character, but in a mellow and rather loose state; such will 
prove the best non-conductor, which is what we require, when 
the earth is losing instead of acquiring heat. Root-pruning 
should be immediately performed, where necessary ; directions 
will be found under the 280th section of the Auctarium. 

Winter pruning of trees may commence immediately, begin- 
ning with the ordinary bush fruit; but, as it will be more 
Judicious to prune some of our fruit trees in the spring, it will 
be convenient, for general purposes, to throw the whole into 
broad classes ; — they will then stand thus. — 

276 AUCTAKIUM. 



72 



Autumn pruning: — Gooseberries, Currants, Raspberries, 
Cherries, Apples, Plums, Vines. 

Spring pruning: — Peaches, Nectarines, Apricots, Filberts, 
Pears, Figs. 

The above stand nearly in the order in which they may be 
pruned ; the reason is obvious. The bush fruits cast their 
leaves first, then the Cherries. The blossom buds, moreover, 
of all the first section, can be as well distinguished in autumn 
as in the spring ; not so, however, the latter section. In this 
division, the Apricot, the Filbert, and the Pear, cannot be dis- 
tinguished, with sufficient certainty, until they begin to bud ; 
for many of the new Pears bear freely on the young wood, — 
especially under the platform mode. The Fig is well known to 
be late, and therefore brings up the rear. It should, also, be 
borne in mind, that the future success of the gardener depends 
much on getting everything of the sort completed as much as 
possible before the month of March ; for the rapidity with 
which the business of spring then presses is notorious. 

Before proceeding further in pruning affairs, we would 
direct especial attention to one or two of the great points in gene- 
ral fruit tree management, on which alone a permanency of suc- 
cess can be based; more especially the tender kinds; for which, 
under ordinary circumstances, our summers are too short ; or, 
perhaps it may be said, too much atmospheric moisture is 
present in proportion to the amount of light. We would, in 
the way of recapitulation, urge the importance of beginning 
with the root ; that is to say, of contriving to keep it under as 
much control as possible. As before stated, however, shallow 
soils will not endure sufiiciently long without their necessary 
adjuncts — viz., sound and rather adhesive loams, and timely 
top dressings, or mulching. 

A due exposure of all parts of the tree to light, is the next 
great point; indeed this will follow, after the trees are tho- 
roughly established, as a matter of course. By the platform 
mode, very little superfluous wood, comparatively speaking, will 
be produced ; and hence a saving of labour, as well as a greater 
certainty of success. 

In the following pages we will endeavour to give directions 
for pruning ; and we hope so to classify things, tliat the most 
inexperienced will understand tliem at a single glance. 



73 



296 Pruning and special details. By referring to page 72 of 
the Auctarium, it will be seen that the pruning of fruit trees in 
general was thrown into two sections, termed Autumn and 
Spring pruning. This classification, although not absolutely 
necessary, was made in order to simplify the subject. It will 
now be well to pursue the original order of the matter, by 
treating the subjects in succession, as they stand in the Aucta- 
rium, commencing at page 33. 

Peach and Nectarine. A thorough ripening of the wood, 
is the prime object in Peach culture. With this and a healthy 
root action, |)runing becomes reduced to a very simple process; 
without it, no system however elaborately carried out, can long 
be serviceable. When the young maiden tree is procured from 
the nursery, it is in general composed of only one shoot, in 
fact, having been budded, it consists of the shoot of one sea- 
son’s growth. This shoot, at planting time, must of necessity 
be shortened back, to about nine inches in length ; this is 
necessary, in order to furnish the bottom of the wall. The 
wound thus made, is of course large, as such plants are, in gen- 
eral luxuriant; and our practice is, in this case, (and indeed 
all others where wounds are made in succulent or free-growing 
shoots,) to close it up with thick paint, for no tree is more 
readily susceptible of damage from the atmosphere, than the 
Peach. 

In the first season the young tree should produce at least four 
good shoots, two on each side of the tree, and although more 
may be produced, yet it is well to encourage only this number; 
all above this may be disbudded, as soon as the four are estab- 
lished. We always form the centre of the tree last, carrying 
subordinate branches right and left into it ; or at least fre- 
quently resorting to summer stopping, if any main leaders are 
trained in a central direction, during the first two years of train- 
ing ; by the end of which period, strong side branches will have 
been formed, which cannot be subsequently robbed, by central 
shoots, to any prejudicial amount. To revert to the four young 
shoots of the first year, our practice then is to pinch off’ their 
points in a progressive order, commencing in the end of August. 
The strongest must be slopped first, and the others in due suc- 
cession, according to their strength. By these means the four 
shoots, by the autumn, will be rendered perfectly equal ; for any 

277. AUCTARIUM. 



74 



amount of control may be exercised over the branches indivi- 
dually, as well as over the system generally, by summer slop- 
ping; and when fruit cultivators, generally, can be brought to 
understand this matter in all its bearings, then, and not till 
then, will a dwarfing system be carried out, in its simplicity 
and perlection. 

In the second year, during the month of February, the four 
shoots, out of which the future fabric of the tree is to be formed, 
must be again shortened back by pruning. A foot in length 
ot each should now be left, or if the wood be thoroughly 
ripened, fifteen to eighteen inches may be allowed. In the 
course of the succeeding summer, if the tree be in a thriving 
state, its whole fabric will be formed, or nearly so; and tbe 
same course of stopping the young wood must be pursued, 
beginning with the strongest, and proceeding at intervals, in 
the ratio of strength. 

Any shoots at the lower part of the tree, of inferior character, 
must be left growing until the autumn, both at this stopping, 
and that of succeeding years; always bearing in mind, that 
when a gross shoot is pinched, that not only is the over-rapid 
enlargement of that shoot arrested, but the nourishment thereby 
previously engrossed, is, advantageously transferred to a weaker 
neighbour. 

In future years the pruning will be of a very simple charac- 
ter, ])iovided the wood is well ripened. Thinning out is the 
first principle, in order to admit light equally over the tree ; 
and for this reason two young shoots can seldom be left side 
by side, their whole length. The next great matter is to shorten 
back in a very liberal way, all the lowest placed shoots, on any 
given branch all over the tree; this is done to secure a succes- 
sion of young shoots from the lower parts of the tree, as a 
guarantee against nakedness. The third point is to shorten 
back most of tlie young shoots of the preceding summer; this 
is done for two reasons : first, in order to induce the tree to 
furnish the wall efficiently with side shoots, as extension takes 
place ; and secondly to prune away all badly ripened wood. 
The length to which the shcots are left, must be determined by 
their hardness, or ripeness, nothing more need be cut away 
than immature or late growth, and this is readily determined 
by tlie sponginess of its texture. When the wood is very weak, 



75 



it is sometimes necessary to leave it the whole length, as not 
unfrequently every bud is merely a blossom bud, with the ex- 
ception of the terminal one ; such shoots if pruned, do serious 
mischief to the system of the tree ; for they very generally set 
their fruit, which always dropoff at the stoning period, after 
considerably exhausting the tree. 

297 The Apricot. This invaluable fruit requires less winter 
pruning than most other wall trees, when properly planted; that 
is to say, in maiden soil, without manure. Like most of our 
wall fruits, top dressing, in due time, will afford it sufficient 
stimulus. Over luxuriance is very prejudicial to the Apricot; 
perhaps more so than to any other fruit tree, especially in the 
northern parts of the kingdom; causing the spurs, which in a 
healthful state, are small and numerous, to run into the cha- 
racter of gouty foreright shoots; which, on being pruned back, 
are but too apt to produce again the same character of wood. 

The warmest situation in the garden should be allotted to the 
Apricot ; no wall tree more enjoys warmth, not even the vine ; 
indeed, there is little doubt, that in the northern half of Great 
Britain, walls should be artificially heated for them, to obtain 
the greatest amount of success. 

Like the Peach, it would be well to obtain it as a 'maiden’ 
plant from the nursery; and great care should be taken that the 
stem is perfectly clean and uninjured, as the tree is liable to 
gum : if this take place, it can be no longer considered sound ; 
and the probability is, that when the tree comes to a bearing 
state, whole shoots will die away. 

The young tree having one straight shoot, similar to the Peach, 
must be headed or pruned back to about nine inches in length ; 
and thick white lead should be applied to the wound thus 
made ; as we have little doubt that disease and premature decay, 
very frequently arise from the neglect of this necessary pre- 
caution. It is well known to all good cultivators of the stone 
fruits, that air and moisture, entering .at such wounds, are very 
prejudicial ; and the more luxuriant the tree had grown, the 
more open the vessels, and of course, the more serious the con- 
sequences. In the course of the ensuing summer, the tree, with 
a little timely attention to watering, in May or June, will have 
produced, at least, four shoots — two on each side ; any more 
may be pinched back to a couple of leaves (not pruned away,) 

278, ADCTAJUUM. 



76 



four well formed shoots, being quite as many as can be well 
matured. 

In the following February, each of these four shoots must be 
pruned back, to about a foot in length ; and with another sum- 
mer’s kindly attention, a complete fan will be formed. If any 
more leading shoots are required, they may be obtained in the 
course of the ensuing summer, from the middle, or centre of the 
tree; which, as observed, regarding the Peach, should be filled 
up last, and for the most part with subordinate shoots. 

During the second summer’s training, some foreright shoots 
will be produced, together with spray of varied character ; this 
should be pinched back when from two to three inches long, 
which will cause embryo fruit spurs to protrude at its base, and 
if the tree be not too gross, such will become permanent fruit- 
bearing spurs for years to come, — clothing the tree from the 
collar to the extremities. 

After this period, no winter shortening of the main shoots 
will be necessary, unless, as sometimes happens, the extremities 
are of a very late and unripe growth ; in this case they may be 
merely cut back to the part which appears firm and of a dark 
colour. 

The pruning, in subsequent years, will be chiefly confined to 
the summer stopping of all foreright shoots, as soon as they are 
two to three inches long. It cannot be doubted but that many 
of the failures experienced in the culture of this very delightful 
fruit, occur through neglect of this summer stopping. The 
superfluous leafy shoots not only shade the fertile spurs, for 
which, even when fully exposed, all the direct rays of the sun, 
in our climate, are insufficient, but they prevent the forma- 
tion of young embryo fruit spurs, which may be seen in great 
numbers, even on very old trees, if well managed, protruding 
through the bark, no larger than the head of a small pin, and 
of a pinkish hue. Coarse foreright shoots, suffered to remain, 
produce also another serious evil ; they bring on a correspond- 
ing amount of root action, (through reciprocity) of a totally 
unnecessary character, which tends to force embryo buds de- 
signed by nature for fruit spurs, into barren shoots. Thus, evil 
begets evil. 

A little winter pruning will, however, be at all times requisite, 
for, be the management ever so complete, some superff uous wood 



77 



will have to be removed. This pruning should not be accom- 
plished until February, at which period blossom buds can be 
readily distinguished. The business now, is to remove all re- 
maining stumps, or remains of foreright shoots, which appear 
gross, or likely to produce coarse wood shoots ; and to prune 
away decaying spurs ; shortening those a little which, through 
age, have grown too far from the wall. 

By the platform mode of planting, the trees, when ten or a 
dozen years old, will perhaps appear rather too much reduced in 
strength ; if so, they must have suitable top dressings. A coat- 
ing of rotten turfy loam, containing a little manure, may be 
placed over their roots, four inches in thickness, at least ; and 
a top-dressing of manure from the stable yard over this, of three 
inches more. Whenever the trees appear to want vigour, it will 
be well to apply a good soaking of liquid manure once in each 
summer, in the month of June; this will give the necessary 
stimulus, at the season it is most required. 

298 The Fig. By referring to page 34 of the Auctarium, it will 
be seen that unless Figs are induced to grow short-jointed, no 
success can be expected ; and to effect this, it becomes abso- 
lutely essential to limit their extension of root. These things 
having been duly carried out, young plants may be obtained 
from any respectable nurseryman, in pots, and planted in the 
beginning of April ; if on the open walls, they may be about 
three feet apart. As the balls of soil will be composed of 
matted roots, such should be uncoiled, spread out, and a little 
decayed vegetable matter sprinkled amongst them, to induce 
rapid growth for the first two seasons. If cuttings of strong 
shoots are at hand, they may be stuck in of considerable size, 
instead of young plants; indeed, if carefully shaded and nursed 
for a few weeks at first, stems of considerable size may be 
planted. If unbranched, the terminal bud should be broken 
off or pruned away, to cause the emission of a sufficiency of 
side shoots. If the succeeding summer prove unusually dry, a 
top dressing of litter, and occasional waterings, will be requisite. 

In the second year they will have produced several shoots, 
besides a host of embryo buds ; and, this being the case, a 
permanent mode of training should be decided on. Whatever 
that mode may be, it should be taken as a maxim that the main 
shoots should be, on an average, nearly a foot apart. Some 

279. .\UCT.VR1UM. 



78 



persons train them in the fan form, this we disapprove, as too 
unsystematic for producing equality of distance amongst the 
shoots. We would ratlier recommend main shoots to be trained 
in parallel lines, perpendicularly, a foot apart. These will 
permanently remain, and all eligible young shoots, of a very 
short-jointed character may be, for years, tied to these main 
stems, which will thus stand as a sort of trellis, to fasten the 
young spray to. 

The trees being established, we come to the general manage- 
ment; which is simple. In summer, this demands only the 
selection of the bearing spray for the next year ; and in winter, 
the re-examination of such spray, together with protection from 
frost. We will commence with what must, for distinction’s sake, 
be termed winter pruning. This must not, however, be per- 
formed until the buds are swelling, which takes place towards 
the middle or end of April ; for then alone can the superior 
bearing wood be selected. 

The business then is, to select as many of the young shoots 
as will clothe the main stems (when tied to them) from top to 
bottom; no two young shoots, however, being permitted to grow 
side by side, for the Fig leaf being so large, the light would be 
too much excluded, and the consequence would necessarily be 
barrenness, or inferiority of fruit. A thin succession of such 
having been tied down, and the rest pruned entirely away, the 
tree will want no attention until the early part of June, when 
disbudding must commence. Although the main stems are 
one foot apart, the tree will soon become entire confusion, 
unless this process be attended to. In the 6rst disbudding, 
all long-jointed young shoots must be rubbed off; this will, 
in general, comprise at least three-fourths of the young spray. 
Soon after this, the leading shoots will require nailing, and 
when this is done, which will in general be about the end of 
June, or early part of July, as many young shoots as may be 
of proper character, and long enough, should be tied to the 
main stems. In the course of three weeks more, another selec- 
tion and disbudding of laterals should take place — again tying 
down any of fruitful character, for which there may be room. 
All that will be necessary after this, will be to look over them 
again towards the end of July, and rub off entirely every young 
shoot not wanted for the succeeding year. 



79 



Protection from severe frosts is the only thing that remains, 
and for this purpose we find nothing better than old mats, 
nailed loosely over them. If the weather prove unusually 
severe, a second mat may be applied, or some loose bay or 
straw stuffed inside the single mat. Instead of this, some fig 
growers stick spruce-fir boughs in all directions amongst the 
branches of their Fig trees, which we are told answers exceed- 
ingly well ; indeed, the fronds of the common fern, and also 
straw, have been used with equal success. 

299 The Vine. In offering observations on the general culture 
of the Vine, the reader is referred to page 35 of the Auctarium, 
where some observations concerning soil, &c., will be found, 
which require particular attention. No mode of training or 
pruning can be expected to succeed, if the Vines are planted in 
stagnant soil. A sound bottom therefore, either naturally, or 
rendered so by drainage, must form the foundation of all good 
Vine cultivation. Rich soil is by no means necessary ; indeed, 
we are persuaded that ordinary soil, if fresh, will be found 
sufficient of itself, without the addition of stimulating manures, 
excepting a little, in a decomposed state, to encourage the young 
plant to fill its station ; and the aid of top-dressings in the case 
of old or exhausted trees. Vines luxuriate when their roots 
become firmly imbedded in a sound soil, oftentimes beneath 
pavement, and not unfrequently in the ruins and rubbish of old 
buildings. Somewhat similar to this, too, is their free growth 
amongst the ashes, lava, and scoria, of Mount Vesuvius. These 
circumstances naturally suggest that one-half the volume of the 
border or bed of soil, should be composed of broken bricks, 
mortar, &c.; or in fact, any rubbish which comes to hand in 
pulling down old buildings or walls. 

The Vine is preferred, by all experienced persons, when raised 
from what are termed “eyes”; that is to say, single buds. 
These are cut from young mature wood of established Vines; 
that well ripened in the hothouse may be preferred. Eyes of this 
description, potted in single pots, and placed in an ordinary 
hotbed or plant-house, will make free-growing plants, in the 
course of one se.ason. The nurserymen, however, always keep 
an established stock of young plants on hand, and it is quite as 
economical to select from the stock of a regular Vine cultivator, 
as to devote time to their propagation. 

280. ACCT.VRirM. 



80 



lu planting them on the prepared soil, no other care is 
requisite, than to unravel the roots; for if the plant be well 
established in the pot, the I’oots will have made many convolu- 
tions. The month of March, or early part of April, is the 
most eligible period for planting, and a slight top-dressing of 
half-rotten manure, should be laid over the surface, in order to 
prevent the injurious effects of drought, and to supersede the 
necessity of watering. 

We may no w proceed to treat on the work of training. Many 
elaborate processes of the kind have been proposed in horticul- 
tural publications, which have little to recommend them when 
subjected to the analysis of experience. They are in some 
cases, very complicated, and occasion much trouble ; although 
they may appear very fascinating on paper. The old fan mode 
will be found perhaps more eligible, for Vines against dwelling 
houses, than any other ; but for the garden wall, we would train 
shoots right and left, six inches from, and parallel to, the 
ground level, to the desired distance ; and carry up permanent 
leaders from them, perpendicularly, to the top of the wall. These 
leaders should be a foot apart, for any attempt at crowding 
together a greater number of principals, will assurely defeat the 
end in view, by shading the principal leaves ; for which, when 
even fully exposed, the light of our fitful climate is perhaps less 
sufficient than the heat itself. From these principals, subordi- 
nate shoots must be encouraged to proceed at regular distances ; 
making it a point not to suffer two together, as in the case of 
the Fig. The production of these side shoots must be caused 
by an annual shortening of the young shoots, as they pro- 
ceed from the base upwards; and to this end (however much 
they may grow in a season,) they should be shortened back to 
about two feet, at each winter’s pruning, until they reach the 
top of the wall. 

The subsequent winter pruning will be of a very simple cha- 
racter; merely shortening back the young shoots of the prece- 
ding summer, to about two or three eyes or buds ; or in fact to 
any bud that appears very protuberant. The side shoots may 
then be confined by matting, to the main stems, as in the case 
of the Fig; or nailed close beside them ; always keeping a naked 
space of wall between the parallel shoots, for the absorption 
of solar heat. 



8 ] 



With regard to the winter pruning of Vines, on dwelling 
liouses, and trained on the fan principle, rather more super- 
fluous young wood has in general to be removed at the winter’s 
pruning ; in consequence of fan training being less systematic 
than the perpendicular mode. The shortening back is how- 
ever, similar; and the same precaution must be exercised with 
regard to the bearing shoots, — leaving, if possible, no two, side 
by side. 

The most important part of Vine cultivation, is the proper 
attention during the growing season ; these labours must com- 
mence with the germinating period itself. As soon as the 
young shoots expand, a selection of bearing shoots for the 
current season must take place ; and, if any vacant spaces 
threaten, shoots must occasionally be reserved, even though 
barren ones, with a view to cover the whole surface of the wall 
with a due amount of foliage. Disbudding, therefore, must be 
persisted in, until not a single shoot is left but what is requisite. 
The next process is termed “stopping,” and consists of pinch- 
ing out the terminal point of the growing shoot, an eye or two 
above the bunch of blossoms. If the wall be naked above, the 
shoot may be suffered to grow as high as necessary, and then 
stopped. 

The subsequent management now b^ '/mes reduced to the 
stopping, at frequent intervals, of all rambling spray, which 
threatens to shade the principal leaves ; for one of the main 
points is to keep the larger or first-formed leaves fully exposed 
to the light. Towards the beginning of September, or rather 
when the berries are in their last swelling, the whole of the 
mere lateral shoots, which had been frequently stopped during 
the summer, may be entirely removed: this will forsvard the 
ripening of the fruit, and assist its colouring. 

•300 The Raspberry. This is a highly useful fruit, much in re- 
quest for preserves, as well as for immediate use; and we shall 
endeavour to show how Raspberries may be obtained, for at 
least three weeks longer during the summer, than by the ordinary 
mode of cultivation. At page 36 of the Auctarium, the subject 
of soil was a chief consideration ; we shall now describe what for 
many years we have found a most successful course of practice. 

It may, however, be here repeated, that neither peculiar 
modes of training, nor top-dressing, will ensure success, unless 

281. AUCTARIUM. 



82 



a soil of good staple be provided, and that of considerable depth. 
In the first place, due regard must be paid to the difference, 
between the Antwerp or Fastolff Rasptterries, and what is 
termed the double-bearing kind ; the latter being so pruned as 
not to bear in summer, but instead thereof, to yield its fruit in 
September and October. And although at that period the latter 
are not so full flavoured as summer Raspberries, they are of 
some importance where it is necessary to produce much variety 
in the dessert. To proceed with the details of culture, we will 
commence with the new plantation : strong suckers, or canes, as 
they are termed, may be planted any time, between the fall of 
the leaf and the beginning of April, presuming the ground to 
be in a due state of preparation. If they occupy a plot of 
ground to themselves, the rows should be from four to five feet 
apart, and the plants a yard apart in the row. 

They should be pruned back previously to planting, to about 
thirty inches in length ; less would scarcely set the root in 
action, more would rob the suckers of the ensuing year. With 
some care as to watering, in dry weather, and the top-dressing, 
recommended at page 36, they will yield some good fruit in 
their first season : the main object, however, is to ensure good 
suckers or canes for the ensuing year. In the month of August, 
or as soon as the fruit is entirely gathered, the shoots which 
have borne a crop may be entirely cut away, provided some 
good suckers are prepared to supply their place. This will 
ensure maturity and perfection in the canes for the succeeding 
crop. The young canes may now be tied to the stakes — not, 
however, too closely. When very luxuriant, they will have a 
tendency to grow to an unusual height ; and, if so, in the early 
part of October, they should be reduced to within six feet of 
the ground. 

We come now to the winter dressing. In the middle of No- 
vember we pare away the surface-soil over the roots, about two 
inches in depth, in order to apply a coating of good rotten 
manure, as far as the roots extend ; which will be about a 
foot on each side of their stems. The parings, of course, form 
a ridge between the rows, and are dug in, as they are some- 
times of a weedy character ; the spade, however, must not 
approach nearer than eighteen inches to the canes. This 
leaves plenty of room for spade operations; and when the inter- 



83 



veiling space is dug deeply, some of the newly-turned soil 
serves to cover the top-dressing. This mode of top-dressing 
must be repeated annually. Winter pruning now demands 
attention. The length at which canes may be left depends 
much on their strength ; five feet, however, may be given as an 
average to which they should be reduced, in November. No 
further attention is required till April, or at least until the shoots 
have budded an inch in length; when the bands should be 
untied, preparatory to a completion of the pruning, and all 
superfluous suckers cut away. 

We consider four canes sufficient at all times ; five, however, 
should be the maximum. At this pruning we cut all the canes, 
but one, back to various lengths : thus, one remains of its full 
length, as left in November; the second is reduced six inches ; 
the third, one foot; and the fourth, eighteen inches. By this 
method, the young fruiting shoots are more equally distributed, 
from the bottom to the top of the bushes ; besides which, their 
fruit is produced in succession three weeks beyond the ordinary 
season. The double-bearing kinds are very liable to be crowded 
with a profusion of suckers; all superfluous ones must therefore 
be weeded out during the summer, leaving only those required for 
bearing. Their culture differs materially from that of the large 
kinds, inasmuch as the old canes must all be cut away, close to 
the ground, in April ; and the suckers rising at that time must be 
thinned considerably; this annual wood becomes the bearing 
wood, indeed this constitutes their chief merit. 

301 The Black Currant. A soil permanently moist, but not 
wet, is, as observed previously, the prime desideratum in the 
culture of the Black Currant: a dark-coloured unctuous loam is 
peculiarly adapted to its culture. We have, however, seen it 
succeed to admiration in highly decomposed peaty or boggy 
soils, after the superfluous water has been drained away. Such 
boggy lands require an application of marl or clay, in a pow- 
dered state, to give them consistence, and to provide against the 
vicissitudes in regard to moisture, to which boggy soils are well 
known to be liable. Dry gravelly, or sandy soils, are the least 
suitable, and it is in vain to plant the Black Currant on such, 
unless they are previously improved by those substances which 
are at once retentive of moisture and furnish nutrition, such as 
marl, adhesive loam, and old vegetable matter. In such soils, or 

28S. AUCTARIDM. 



84 



indeed in any, if plenty of water be close at hand, it would be 
■well to provide a system of irrigation ; this would be easily and 
economically accomplished, by planting a little below the ordi- 
nary ground level, on an inclined plane ; and by laying a line of 
common draining tiles, or pipes, from a head water. Whether 
irrigation, or watering by other means, be performed, it should 
be known, that when the fruit is in its earlier stage of swelling, 
is the time, above all others, to apply it; for, if they are sub- 
jected to drought at this period, they will assuredly lose a 
considerable portion of their fruit. A system of annual top- 
dressing is also of the greatest service ; although such dressing 
be mere soil, or rotten leaves. A little manure applied is, of 
course, beneficial. One circumstance connected with the Black 
Currant should be particularly noticed ; which is, its aptitude to 
produce an abundance of fibrous roots, close to the surface of the 
ground. Hence, it is evident, that spade culture carried close 
to their stems, is highly injurious; and hence, also, their impa- 
tience of drought, and the great importance of top-dressings. 

The Black Currant may be propagated either by cuttings 
or suckers, taking care to cut away the buds which are below 
the ground level, or the plants will be liable to that common 
inconvenience and injury — the production of numerous suckers. 
Cuttings may be planted in a half-shady aspect, any time from 
the fall of the leaf, until the end of February. In the succeed- 
ing summer they will make shoots of six or nine inches in 
length ; and these, at the ensuing pruning season, must be short- 
ened to about four inches. In the following summer they will 
make good bushes, and will be fit for removal to their final 
situations in the succeeding autumn or winter. 

As, however, young bushes can be so cheaply procured from 
the nurseries, it is perhaps as economical, where the garden is 
small, to purchase them ; in which case the buyer has the power 
of selection. The Black Naples, a very large-berried variety, 
is, in general, most approved. It is indeed a noble berry, but 
for general culture, in upland or dry soils, we should prefer the 
old or Common Black; for its produce, in such situations, will 
be greater in the aggregate, in an average of seasons. This 
preference may appear strange to many, but when it is con- 
sidered (borrowing an illustration from the animal kingdom) 
that the far-famed Leicester sheep would prove inferior if fed 



85 



on the Downs, to the native breed of such district, the matter 
will, by no means, appear unreasonable. One more affair re- 
mains to be noticed, and that a serious one ; the Black Currant 
is very liable to the attack of an aphis. Tobacco water, made 
by putting half a pound of strong shag tobacco to a gallon of 
warm water, and freely applying it to the foliage, will certainly 
destroy them ; but this is a somewhat expensive process. Pre- 
vention being accounted superior to cure, we would rather advise 
extra care in the preparation of the soil, as well as subsequent 
culture; more especially to provide against sudden droughts; 
during which periods, these destructive pests multiply exceed- 
ingly. 

302 Red and White Currants. These two varieties of the 
Currant are so very distinct iu habit, that it will be well to treat 
of them separately. In adverting to their culture, at page 37 
of the Auctarium, it was observed, that they prefer a soil of 
sandy character; or, in other words, a soil in the constitution 
of which the sandy principle predominates over the clay. In 
this respect they are the very opposite ot the Black Currant, 
which we described in the preceding section. This much pre- 
mised, we will proceed, first, to lay down a system of culture, 
adapted to the ordinary Red Currant. As observed with regard 
to the Black Currant, it may be propagated by cuttings of 
the young shoots of the previous summer, any time between the 
fall of the leaf, and the end of March. Every bud, on that 
portion of the cutting below the ground level, must be cut out, 
or, as practical men term it, “blinded.” 

The omission of this important item in their cultivation, will 
prove most tiresome, by the perpetual production of a crowd of 
suckers ; a bad habit, which a moment’s attention, at the proper 
time, would wholly obviate ; but if neglected, will only termi- 
nate with the life of the plant itself. The cuttings should pos- 
sess, at least, one foot of stem above the soil, and four buds, or 
eyes, as they are termed, will suffice to form a head. A shady 
situation should be selected for them, and by the succeeding 
autumn they will be such plants as may either be planted in 
their final destination, or according to the more usual course, 
remain another year in the nursery bed. In either case, they 
must be pruned back to about three buds on each of the young 
shoots. We would here observe, that, from the very cutting 

28.3. AUCTARIUM. 



86 



state onwards, the White Dutch, (which is, indeed, a very 
superior berry) will require double the amount of stimulus in 
tlie soil to that of the Red Currant. The Red Currant, in the 
final planting, will merely require deep digging, in ordinary 
cases; if, however, the soil be poor, some manure may be added ; 
always remembering, that the Red kinds — naturally inclined to 
gross growth, will develope less of the fruit-bearing side spurs 
when over-grown, than when of moderate strength. The White 
Dutch, on the contrary, will prove fruitful, as well as luxuriant, 
with a most generous soil ; and no marvel, for we have had a 
crop of berries of this kind, which would, doubtless, have weighed 
nearly as much as the bush itself. They are generally, more- 
over, so thoroughly swollen and fed, that the most unpractised 
eye would readily perceive that the constitution of the plant 
must be heavily taxed in perfecting them. The Red and White 
kinds, therefore, should always be planted on separate plots. 

Their general treatment, as to pruning, is very similar ; both 
requiring a summer’s pruning ; and we need scarcely add, both 
a winter’s dressing. The white Dutch, however, will not, under 
ordinary circumstances, require more than half the amount of 
curtailment, whether summer or winter, that the red kind re- 
quires. The Dutch or larger variety of Currant, is vei'y apt to 
grow unwieldy in the young shoots, — especially where manure 
is used. In such cases, the annual shoots are very liable to 
be broken by sharp gusts of wind and rain, which so frequently 
occur, in our variable climate, in the latter part of June, or 
early part of July. It is, therefore, far better to put the bushes 
under a course of summer pruning betimes, in order to pre- 
vent such denudation, and disarrangement of the young spray. 
Our practice is, to pass the shears over them, in the middle of 
June, merely cutting away the points of the over-grown shoots, 
which form the summit of the bushes. This, termed "stopping,” 
has been hitherto very imperfectly understood; but it has been 
growing in favour for some time, with most of our best fruit cul- 
tivators. In another fortnight we reduce the extremities of the 
side spray in like manner; taking care, however, not to admit 
too much sunshine on the fruit. This practice should be under- 
stood as applicable to strong growing bushes only ; for when 
the bushes are old, or of very moderate growth, such stopping 
is, in many cases, superfluous. The White Dutch, in fact. 



87 



seldom requires summer stopping, with the exception of lead- 
ing shoots, of robust habit. 

The winter pruning, or dressing, is pretty well known. The 
bushes having been originally “set out,” or, in other words, 
formed in a proper way, by early training, will be, in general, 
composed of some six or eight main leaders, at the distance of 
a foot apart. Their pruning will now comprise the reduction 
of all that remains of the side spray, of the preceding summer ; 
pruning all such back to within barely an inch of the main 
stems, for at the base of these side shoots, will be found a 
nucleus of embryo blossom buds, out of which the future crop 
must be produced. The points or leading shoots, also, must 
be shortened; about eight inches may be considered the maxi- 
mum to be left. The only further attention required, will be 
the top-dressing of such bushes as may become somewhat ex- 
hausted. In this process a couple of inches of soil should be 
drawn from the surface of the roots, and as much half-rotten 
manure substituted; finishing the whole by a thin coating of 
soil over the manure, to prevent waste of its properties. 

303 The Straw'berry. No fruit is cultivated under a greater 
variety of methods than the Strawberry. Some persons prefer 
growing them in beds, some in single rows, and occasionally 
they are used as edgings. They not unfrequently flourish under 
each of these modes of culture, when it is conducted with due 
attention; but in recommending a plan, which shall combine 
the greatest produce, together with the best flavour, we recom- 
mend rows, at considerable distances, in preference to beds. 
It so happens that the period when Strawberries ripen is very 
frequently unpropitious : July, in this country, is oftentimes 
a rainy month, hence the advantage of widely separated rows, 
on account of their more complete exposure to all the sunshine 
that occurs. 

We can do little better than pursue the mode of culture 
adopted by our commercial gardeners around the metropolis; 
the main feature of their cultivation being as follows; — First, 
to frequently renew the plantations; perhaps three years should 
be the maximum. Secondly, to select a loamy soil of sound 
staple, if possible, and to trench or dig it deeply: this will 
be better than over-forcing the plant with exciting manures. 
Thirdly, to take care that they are well watered in dry seasons, 

284. ACCTARIOM. 



88 



when the young fruit is swelling. These three points constitute 
the chief mysteries of Strawberry cultivation ; and, it should 
especially be borne in mind, that frequent removals of Straw- 
berry plantations, afford fresh plots in the kitchen garden, for 
the various species of the Brassica tribe; which, from their 
variety, recur so frequently, as often to puzzle the gardener 
in attempting to plan ajudicious rotation of cropping. 

The best season for planting is July ; indeed young runners 
cannot be obtained much earlier, and every tyro knows the im- 
propriety of using old plants. The ground having been duly 
trenched, and some half- decomposed manure incorporated, 
the rows may be marked out; the larger kinds, as the British 
Queen, Keen’s Seedling, Elton, &c., at from thirty to thirty-six 
inches apart ; whilst those of smaller habit, as the Grove End 
Scarlet, the Hautbois, &c., may be planted as near as twenty- 
four inches from row to row. A distance of two feet is neces- 
sary between the plants of the larger kinds, in the row ; and 
about eighteen inches will suffice for those of smaller habit. 
We usually have planted a double quantity in each row for the 
first year, making it a point to hoe up, or otherwise destroy, 
alternate plants, as soon as the first bearing season is over. With 
regard to their subsequent cultivation, we hold it essential to 
destroy, or at least keep under, all superfluous runners. These 
frequently grow so luxuriantly, that they shade the principal 
leaves; and, in that event, tend to produce barrenness in the 
parent plant. 

A winter dressing is, of course, necessary; and we would 
l)ere observe, that as some protection is necessary to the crowns, 
during severe frosts, it is much better to allow all the old and 
decaying leaves to remain on until the early part of February; 
thus they afford protection ; for we find, by experience, that the 
plant becomes completely paralysed after a severe winter; espe- 
cially if sprucely trimmed, as some persons advise, in autumn. 
Our practice is, and none can meet with greater success, to 
cut away all decayed and decaying leaves, at the end of Feb- 
ruary : then to apply a slight amount of manure between the 
rows, and to dig the dressing in ; merely a spade’s width in the 
centre between the rows. This has a tendency to check over- 
luxuriance in the leaf, and by the time the flower truss is rising, 
a new series of roots will be formed in the freshly cultivated 



89 



soil, which proves of immense benefit to the swelling fruit. 
VVe would here remark, that some material should at all times 
be placed beneath the fruit. Some persons use the mowings of 
the lawn for this purpose ; clean straw is, however, greatly to be 
preferred, as the grass is apt to encourage the wire worm, which 
frequently proves a pest. The wide row system of planting 
affords facilities for introducing this litter, which are not pos- 
sessed by the bed plan ; and this alone is a recommendation. 

Some persons recommend the tops to be mown off in the 
autumn : thus treated, we have, at times, known them bear 
pretty good crops; not however, we should say, through this 
unscientific mutilation, but in spite of it. Common sense, and 
science, seem to us equally opposed to such a proceeding ; and 
were there no other use for the foliage, it should, at least, be 
spared to protect the crowns during the winter; for, as before 
observed, the Strawberry, although a hardy plant, is some- 
times so paralysed by a severe winter, especially when closely 
trimmed in the autumn, as scarcely to rally with the returning 
spring ; and, indeed, it is sometimes entirely destroyed. Each 
plant should occupy such space that its leaves, without muti- 
lation, may spread their full amount of surface to the light, and 
a well-organized bud will be formed for the future crop. 

Strawberry walls have been highly recommended, as produc- 
ing a superior-flavoured fruit; this is perfectly correct. One 
great drawback, however, to their more extensive adoption, is 
the labour incurred in watering, and a frequent removal of the 
soil. It would be well, we think, to make a point of removing 
such walls annually, adding a little fresh soil each time. In 
such a case, very early runners should be secured, with as much 
care as gardeners take over those for forcing; these, “pricked 
out,” on rich soil, in an exposed situation, would make strong 
buds, and might be removed with a trowel in October. A rich 
and rather adhesive loam should at all times be used as soil for 
the Strawberry wall ; light soils cannot be expected to endure 
in so elevated a situation. As truly useful kinds, although not 
novelties, we recommend Keen’s Seedling, the British Queen, 
and the Elton; the latter is most valuable for late purposes. 
We plant them in a north border, five feet from the wall — and, 
by these means, generally continue gathering until the end of 
August. 



285. AUCTARIUM. 



90 



We must now advert to a favourite mode of cultivation with 
many persons, and indeed a very excellent one, where circum- 
stances are suitable. We do not practice it ourselves; but this 
is not from objection to the principle, but because we cannot 
spare ground, sufficiently early in the season, to lay down a fresh 
plantation of Strawberries. The pressure of vegetable culture 
compels us to take a summer crop or two off the ground in- 
tended for Strawberries. 

The plan is this ; — to obtain runners as early as possible, the 
earlier the better ; indeed, it is well to assist a portion to root 
for the very purpose, by pegging down the wires at the first 
joints; and, if this be done in pots, they can be transferred to 
the beds without disturbance of the roots. The ground being 
duly prepared, the runners must be planted with care, from six 
to nine inches apart in the row. Attention must now be paid 
to their rapid growth, by watering and high cultivation ; indeed, 
a liberal supply of liquid manure should be given, if the young 
plants seem to require stimulus ; for on early and high culti- 
vation the bulk of the crop entirely depends. Those who pur- 
sue this mode, never take more than two crops ; and, for the 
second year, one half of the plants, alternately in the row, must 
be taken out, to give proper space to the increasing size of those 
left. By these means a good crop of fruit, of the very finest 
description, is secured in the first season after planting. 

The Alpine Strawberry is much esteemed by some ; and 
indeed is very desirable in the autumn dessert. It is very 
advantageously propagated from seed. This should be sown in 
the early part of February, in a lively heat ; and w hen the young 
seedlings have formed a few leaves, they should be planted 
singly in very small pots, in a rich loamy compost. They 
must continue to have protection until the latter part of April, 
when they must be hardened off, as flower plants, for bedding 
out, preparatory to their final removal. Early in May they 
must be planted out, on rich loamy soil ; and it will be of great 
advantage to place slates, tiles, or stones, beneath them, in order 
to preserve the fruit clean. By this method abundant autumnal 
crops of fruit may be obtained. But similar advantage may be 
secured by another mode of proceeding, although not always 
with the same degree of certainty, unless especial care betaken, 
in very hot seasons, to keep the plants in free growth by watering. 



91 



304 The Plum. This valuable fruit, from the ordinary Damson 
up to the Green Gage, is highly serviceable in the culinary 
department. When we consider the various modes by which 
the Plum is rendered of service, both dried and preserved in 
various ways, in wine, pastry, sweetmeats, &c., the importance 
of paying some regard to the cultivation of its numerous varieties 
becomes obvious. They are, however, produced under various 
modes of culture; for the standard Damson thrives abundantly 
in our northerly counties, where the Green Gage requires a 
wall to bring it to perfection. Again, the Orleans, the Wine 
sour, &c., succeed well as ordinary bush espaliers. 

It is indispensable, where a long succession for the dessert is 
required, to place even the same kind in a variety of positions; 
thus, we have the Green Gage on an east, west, and even north 
aspect; and also on ordinary espaliers. By these means Green 
Gages are produced for six weeks in succession. To have the 
Plum continued long in the dessert, it is necessary to make a 
prudent selection from amongst the numerous sorts, and to 
a])point them to their situations with a correct knowledge of 
their habits and kinds. Indeed, we do not know of any fruit 
that has been less studied by even gardeners themselves : the 
proper order of succession, (and, of course, the benefits to be 
derived from it,) is scarcely ever observable, even in the best 
arranged gardens. At the close of this article we will endea- 
vour to assist the reader, by giving a selection, together with 
their aspects, times of ripening, &c. 

It is, in the first place, necessary to consider what soils are 
the best suited to the culture of the Plum. A mellow but 
strongish loam, is decidedly the best. The Plum will always 
be found to flourish where there is a little approach towards the 
clayey principle, providing such sound materials are thoroughly 
drained. In common with the Pear, Peach, Apricot, and in- 
deed most fruits, manures are worse than useless in the early 
growth of the tree, if it is to be subjected to a course of training ; 
unless the soil be what is termed “lean”; when top-dressings must 
be resorted to betimes. 

The Plum is generally grafted or budded on the Brussels 
stock ; this is more gross in its habit, and consequently a 
nearer match as to capacity of sap vessels, for the Plum, than 
the Mussel stock, which, as before observed, under the article 

286. AUCTAEIUM. 



92 



Peach, is the stock in ordinary use for that fruit and the Nec- 
tarine. The young plants are trained precisely in the same 
way as the Apricot, Pear, &c. ; with tlie exception of standard 
trees, as the Damson; the latter indeed being raised from suckers 
or from seed. We may therefore pass by the detail of training, 
for the sake of more important advice. 

In training on walls we advocate the tying down of the young 
shoots, annually and systematically, all over the tree; a mode 
of training which we have practised, with the utmost success, 
for the last twelve years, and which every year increases the 
value of the trees; if accompanied, we must add, by a peculiar 
mode of disbudding, which has been frequently set forth in these 
pages. We claim not to be the original inventors of this 
method, but the first to systematize it ; for, although partially 
adopted by others, no one evinced the courage to venture on it 
as a system, or to apply it generally to Plums, Apricots, and 
Pears. Indeed, it can but be matter of surprise that the system 
is so little appreciated by even very intelligent gardeners of tbe 
present day. 

The fabric of the future tree having been formed, and the 
trees placed in their final situations, whether for wall or espalier 
training, the ordinary means of pruning must be annually 
resorted to, in order to guide the young tree into a proper form; 
and if on a wall, to preserve a due equilibrium, in point of 
strength. To effect this, the usual stopping, disbudding. See., 
must be practised, in addition to the tying down of the young 
shoots, before alluded to : the shortest jointed annual shoots, 
are in this, as in all other cases, the most fruitful. 

The Plum, trained as an ordinary espalier or dwarf standard, 
has a particular tendency, in its earlier stages, to produce exces- 
sively luxuriant shoots ; more especially such as the Orleans, 
the Washington, the Magnum Bonum, and the Royale Hative. 
These must be stopped with the finger and thumb, when about 
a foot in length. This course will equalize the strength of the 
tree, and throw a greater amount of light amongst the embryo 
blossom buds of the ensuing spring. We may here observe, 
that means must at all times be taken to keep the aphides, 
and other insect enemies in check. To these the Plum family 
is particularly liable, during 3Iay and June. Some of the 
kinds are often attacked by the red spider; we have seen even 



93 



the Damson almost destroyed by it, whilst the owners were totally 
unconscious of the presence of such an enemy. Sulphur, dusted 
liberally under the leaves, in the early stages of their progress, 
will arrest their depredations. 

305 The Filbert. The cultivation of the Filbert is very simple; 
indeed, in the majority of gardens. Filbert bushes are left alto- 
gether in a state of nature, as to pruning. It has, however, 
been long since shown, that they are very superior in point of 
cropping when put under a course of training; indeed, we should 
say, no fruit better repays attention than the Filbert We would 
not confine the cultivation to the red and while Filbert; there 
are other excellent varieties, which make a desirable addition 
to the dessert; of such are the Cosford, which is remarkable 
for the thinnest of its shell, and, moreover, is an excellent 
bearer; the Frizzled Filbert, also a great bearer; and the 
Spanish Nuts, which are of the Cob character, and sometimes 
used as stocks to graft the other kinds upon, as they are not so 
liable to produce suckers. Grafting of nuts, however, is rather 
troublesome, and not a necessary process. 

Suckers, in abundance, may be obtained from stocks neg- 
lected in their cultivation; and these should be taken during 
the season for planting deciduous trees, any time from Novem- 
ber to ]March; but we prefer November. As they are by far 
more under control, when trained on a single stem, the young 
stocks, whether suckers or cuttings, should have all the eyes 
stripped away, which are below the ground level, after the 
manner of Gooseberry or Currant cuttings, technically termed 
“blinding.” Above ground, the axillary buds may be suflfered 
to produce side shoots, for a year or two ; these strengthen the 
stem, providing they are what is termed “snagged” in at the 
winter's pruning; that is, shortened back to a single bud in 
their first season’s growth. This is a practice which has, for 
many years, been applied to standard Apple trees, in nurseries, 
in order to obtain a firm stem ; the “snags” must, however, be 
totally removed in the second year, whilst the healing powers 
;ire active, and the wound will quickly become cicatrized. 

The clear stems of Filbert trees must not be less than a foot 
high, and the centre shoots should be cut away to form the tree 
into a bowl-shape. This is done to admit plenty of light amongst 
the branches. It is found that Filberts, growing in a neglected 

287. ACCTARIUM. 



94 



or untrained state, produce their fruit for the most part on the 
extremities of the branches only ; whilst those put under a course 
of cultivation, yield liberally from all sides of the leading shoots. 
In training the young shoots, therefore, regard must be had to 
these circumstances ; and the young shoots trained accordingly. 
In doing so, it is merely necessary in pruning to leave a series 
of leading shoots in a circular form, at nearly equal distances; 
about six, well placed, would form a good tree. These will 
produce plenty of laterals, which must in their turn be subjected 
to a severe thinning, at the pruning period, especially in their 
earlier stages. The fruit of the Nut is produced on the wood 
of the previous year, and, like other fruit trees, it will be sought 
in vain on luxuriant or gross shoots. In addition to thinning 
out, shortening must be had recourse to ; ariS when the tree 
has acquired a little age, the main shoots, shortened, will pro- 
duce axillary shoots, which, under proper circumstances, will 
produce blossoms. It is well known that the best period for 
pruning is when the Nuts are in blossom, which is commonly 
about the end of February ; in fact, when the catkins, which 
are the male blossoms, are shedding their fertilizing dust At 
this period, both male and female blossoms may be detected, and 
much of the wood which produces neither may be pruned away; 
especially if towards the interior of the bush. All the stronger 
shoots at the extremities should be shortened, in order to force 
out axillary shoots, for the succeeding year, which, if the trees 
be in a proper state, will, in the main, be of a fruitful character. 
At this period, if there be a deficiency of male blossoms, or cat- 
kins, it is necessary to bring some shoots, laden with catkins, 
from the wild Hazel, and suspend them amongst the Filberts: 
these will perform the indispensable office of impregnation. It 
may here be observed, that the female blossom is of a very 
obscure character, merely tipping the fruitful buds with a little 
crimson brush. 

We may here advert to the distance at which Filbert bushes 
should be planted. If they are for a single row, eight or nine 
feet will suffice. If in parallel rows, they require at least twelve 
feet between the rows ; and about eight between the plants. 
They succeed well when alternating with the Apple and other 
fruit trees ; occupying, in fact, the position frequently assigned 
to Gooseberry or Currant bushes. It is most important that 



95 



all suckers be cut away as they rise. The Filbert is not fas- 
tidious regarding soil, it succeeds best, however, in a fine loam, 
especially in sandy loam. Unless the soil be of a sterile char- 
acter, manures always produce gross growth, and unfruitfulness. 
The ground should be deeply dug, or even trenched, before the 
plantation is made. 

Root pruning has been found to answer exceedingly well with 
the Filbert, when over-luxuriant; which condition, in their 
earlier stages, very often causes disappointment in their culture. 

•306 The Cherry. We come now to a fruit which certainly occu- 
pies no mean position in the dessert; but it must be admitted 
that the cultivation, or rather the conservation, of Cherries, 
has its difficulties. Coverings are indispensable, in order to 
preserve such noble fruit as the Bigarreau or GrafBon ; which 
is so tempting even when only three parts ripe, that birds, 
wasps, earwigs, and flies of all grades, seem to vie with each 
other in cheating the proprietor of his treasure. 

If the cultivator of the Cherry has the choice of soil, sandy 
loam should be preferred; but it flourishes in almost all sorts. 
For cultivation purposes they may be divided into four distinct 
groups. First, the Morello and its congeners. Secondly, those 
of the Bigarreau character, which generally have large leaves; 
and may include such valuable kinds as the Elton, the Florence, 
the Tartarian, &c. Thirdly, the early class, generally known 
as the May Dukes, to which may be added the early Purple 
Guigne, Royal Duke, Late Duke, &c. Lastly, the various 
Hearts, as the old Black Heart, Black Eagle, and many others. 

Before proceeding further we would point to the eligibility 
of the -Morello for a much more extended cultivation. It may 
be safely averred, that it is the surest cropper of any out-door 
fruit we possess. .Any cold northern aspect will produce this 
fruit in perfection, especially for a late dessert, for tarts, and 
for the various modes of preserving. 

All the Cherries may be cultivated as ordinary standards, 
with the exception of some of the very late kinds, such as Butt- 
ner’s October Morello, the Florence, &c., which would not suc- 
ceed well in our northern counties. The Kentish, which is so 
much esteemed for drying, need indeed be grown in no other 
way. Most of the finer sorts are, however, grown on walls or 
fences; and for such purposes a variety of aspects are, if pos- 

288. AUCTARIDM. 



96 



sible, chosen, in order to provide a long succession in the dessert. 
Thus, there should always be a tree of the early May Duke in 
a southern aspect. VVe have known fruit gathered in May, when 
thus situated ; especially when the tree was on a gable which 
contained a chimney. The eastern or western aspects are equally 
eligible for a succession ; for which purpose, in a limited gar- 
den, the following might be placed to succeed the early May 
Duke before alluded to: — Elton and Bigarreau for the middle 
of July ; Florence, for the end; and the late Duke, for August. 
The Morellos would, of course, occupy, principally, the northern 
aspects. Where walls or fences are not to be had, they may be 
grown as dwarf standards or bushes ; and for this purpose will 
require precisely the same kind of training as is adopted with a 
Red Currant bush ; excepting that when once the requisite 
number of leaders are obtained, they must not be annually short- 
ened like the Currant. It is generally necessary under this 
course of treatment to fasten each principal leader to a stake, 
at least during the earlier stages of growth. These should be 
set out, at equal distances, in a perpendicular form ; for the 
advantage of placing netting over them with facility. About 
six leaders, occupying a circle of about three feet diameter, is a 
very convenient form; the centre of the tree entirely open ; and 
in this case, it would be well to set the young leaders out with 
a hoop or two. The mode of training on walls, is conducted 
on the same principle as that of the Plum or Apricot — the fan 
form being generally adopted. The young plants must have 
their leaders shortened back for a year or two, in their earlier 
stages; in order to obtain shoots enough to fill the wall : after 
which the leaders are not shortened. The subsequent prun- 
ing consists of the ordinary summer di'essing of superfluous 
spray, which may be pruned or pinched back about midsum- 
mer ; leaving, in all cases, a few joints at the base, with the 
leaves uninjured, round which a nucleus of blossom buds will 
be found. Very short jointed shoots may be tied down to the 
main stem, as recommended for Pears. It is usual to lay in 
the 3Iorello shoots very close, as the leaf is smaller than those 
of the other kinds ; indeed, the size of the leaf must in a special 
way rule the distance of the young shoots. On a south wall 
the Morello becomes exceedingly rich : in such a situation, it 
should have a rich loamy soil. 



97 



SIMPLIFICATION OF PROTECTIVE STRUCTURES 
IN OUT DOOR GARDENING. (R. Errington.) 

In consequence of the rapid advances made in horticulture, 
during the last few years, many gardening luxuries have been 
brought within the reach of the middle classes of society, which 
used to be confined almost exclusively to the domains of the 
nobility. This we conceive is in no slight degree attributable 
to our periodical gardening works. Such, in our time, are 
so numerous, that every week and month has its record — pre- 
pared, if we may use the expression, in the most digestive 
form. In many of these, sound practice is made to attemper 
theory ; whilst the latter elevates practice to a much higher 
level than it could possibly have attained without the aids of 
science. Thus, half an hour to a man of business, will gener- 
allj suffice to introduce him to a tolerably clear view of his 
subject of enquiry. 

Progression, therefore, must continue to be the maxim; and, 
for our own parts, we feel persuaded that even our labouring 
classes will, before many years have passed, be able to avail 
themselves of several of the little gardening comforts, now termed 
luxuries; more especially as the Potato disease still lurks around ; 
this, indeed, has already had the effect of diverting the course 
of cultivation somewhat out of its original channels. In the 
midst of all these improvements, however, we find little advance 
made in protective structures ; the energies of the age, as to 
gardening affairs, seem to have been chiefly directed to the 
building and heating of hothouses. By protective structures we 
here mean portable covers, or screens, which may be removed 
with facility to any part of the garden ; and which will either 
serve, without artificial warmth, to preserve half-hardy plants, 
to protect or accelerate vegetables, or even to be used for Cu- 
cumbers and iMelons, as the seasons come round. There are, 
however, a multitude of objects to which such portable and 
inexpensive affairs are a])plicable; and we shall take some 
pains to classify the objects, and show how a much improved 
system of the kind can be carried out. It becomes necessary, 
therefore, as a preliminary step, to show some objections which 
exist as to the old structures, such as the ordinary Melon frame, 
the various pits in use, hand-glasses, &c. 

289. AUCTAKIUM. 



98 



Before proceeding with our remarks, it may be well to ob- 
serve, that we do not wish it to be inferred that the simple 
structures about to be recommended should altogether supersede 
the old-fashioned pits or frames in the extensive gardening 
establishments of our nobility. Our aim is to enable the pro- 
prietors of small gardens, by more moderate expenditure, to 
enjoy many of the luxuries of their wealthier neighbours ; and 
if, under such circumstances, they cannot quite compete with 
them, at least to closely follow them in fair and honourable 
rivalry : this much as an argument. We now proceed to show 
our objections to some existing structures of this kind. 

The ordinary moveable frames. We would first suggest 
that these are too cumbrous for the general purposes of the ama- 
teur, or owner of a small garden. Such are generally formed 
into what are termed one, two, and three-light boxes. They 
are very expensive in their original construction, and being, 
where of good size, rather unwieldy, no sooner become half- 
worn, than they show a tendency to fall to pieces by their own 
weight. We are of opinion that such can never prove economical 
if measuring above three feet in width, by about seven feet in 
length; or, in other words, being what would be termed a very 
small two-light box. The ventilation, moreover, of these cum- 
brous affairs, is conducted, we conceive, on an erroneous prin- 
ciple. When half-worn, their joints become considerably loos- 
ened ; and many and frequent are the breakages of glass when 
in this state, through the mere process of giving air. They are 
also very unmanageable for locomotive purposes, generally re- 
quiring four persons to remove them. Again, they are only 
adapted to face the south — at least, such is the general usage 
with regard to them, and we shall presently show that there are 
numerous occasions in which it will be found expedient to de- 
part from this rule. Another serious fault is, that their width 
prevents the due co-operation of the linings of fermenting mate- 
rials, which it is sometimes necessary to apply in very severe 
weather. Lastly ; they are but an awkward structure at best, 
especially for the amateur, who performs many of the necessary 
operations with his own hands. We come now to what is termed 

The Brick-built Pit. We need scarcely say that these are 
fixtures; and, certainly, when contrived so as to form a decided 
part of a forcing plant-house system, with some determinate 



99 



character about them ; they are by no means unimportant ; 
and as forming adjuncts of a complete forcing system in gar- 
dens of great magnitude, we by no means object to them ; but 
to the amateur, in a small way, they are not so eligible. In- 
deed, unless for a regular wintering pit or hibernatory for half- 
hardy things, such in small gardens are most unaccommodat- 
ing affairs. We now close our list of complaints, and will 
endeavour shortly to point to some simple structures, specially 
adapted to the possessors of small gardens. 

Outlines of Proposed Simplification. It will be neces- 
sary before pointing to the size and character of protective 
structures, to classify, in some degree, the principal objects for 
which such structures are designed. We will, however, first 
offer a few observations of a general character. Our object is 
two-fold : not economy of structure alone, but an extension 
of the objects which form, by means of acceleration, or long 
succession, the dainties of the culinary or floral department. 

Indeed, the great boon of a much cheaper, as well as of a 
mucher clearer glass, must, of necessity, constitute a special 
era in horticultural affairs, in all their bearings ; and we are 
assured that our own humble labours in this respect are but 
the prelude to a much greater extension of the objects in view; 
whether in the floral or vegetable department; and that the 
day is near at hand, when tropical fruits will be brought much 
closer to our own doors than the world imagines. As Pioneers, 
therefore, we will proceed to show the policy proposed. 

We scarcely need remind those of our readers who possess 
but one small greenhouse, how often they have desired to culti- 
vate other tribes than merely tender flowering plants, but saw 
many attendant difficulties which it appeared impossible to sur- 
mount : not merely through want of space, but as much for 
want of a classification of such things ; based as such ought 
to be, on the general habits, or periodical movements, of the 
objects of culture. 

To another class of readers, we would also address ourselves. 
These are, it may be, a step in advance of the latter; and 
hivve, perhaps, more than one house, together with a pit or two, 
or frames. With this extension of glass structures, the objects 
and desires usually expand; and here we still meet with hin- 
derances; objects too broad for the system are undertaken; the 

290. AUCTAIUUM. 



100 



greenhouse is crammed, the plants drawn, whilst one or two 
merely of our protectors, which we will shortly describe, would 
so far relieve the houses of their superfluities, as to ensure well- 
grown stock. 

We must here observe that the suggestions we make, relate 
principally to small gardens ; they will, nevertheless, in the 
main, be applicable, as a subordinate branch of a system of 
forcing and plant structures, in the most extensive establish- 
ments. 

We have five forms of protective or accelerative structures 
to offer, which we consider to be all that is requisite: two of 
them are already pretty well known ; for the other three, we 
must coin titles, in order to distinguish them. 

1st, Portable opaque protectors. 

2nd, Portable glass protectors or accelerators. 

3rd, Portable drill covers. . 

4th, Portable sashes. 

5th, Hand glasses. 

We may just premise, that for the first two structures we 
intend to propose some light brick pits, which will, in divisions, 
receive at any time, any of the opaque or glass protectors, which 
may happen to be at liberty ; — our prime object being, Lliat 
not a day shall be lost, but that they be constantly employed. 
They will all be so very light, that a lady amateur, assisted by 
her maid, may, at any time, remove one of them without fur- 
ther assistance. This we consider a most important affair, for 
the old three-light frames are so cumbrous as to preclude any 
attempt to move them about by lady gardeners. 

Objects in general attainable by the proposed means. 

1. Bulbs accelerated. 

2. Deciduous shrubs accelerated. 

3. Seeds in beds accelerated. 

4. Asparagus accelerated. 

5. Rhubarb accelerated. 

6. Sea Kale accelerated. 

7. Bulbs and herbs dried. 

8. Violets accelerated. 

9. Lily of Valley accelerated. 

10. Chrysanthemums protected. 

11. Mignionette protected. 



101 



12. Lobelias protected. 

13. Half-hardy plants wintered 

14. Cape bulbs protected. 

15. Mushrooms cultivated. 

16. Cyclamens protected. 

17. Camellias protected 

18. Oranges protected. 

19. Ericas protected, 

20. Cauliflower and lettuces protected. 

21. Roses in pots, protected. 

22. Roses accelerated. 

23. Endive protected 

24. Succulents, Cacti, &c. protected. 

25. Carnations protected. 

26. Potatoes accelerated. 

27. Early Carrots acceleiated. 

28. Early ladishes accelerated. 

29. Parsley protected. 

30. New Holland tribes protected. 

31. Kidney beans accelerated. 

32. Fuchsias protected. 

The above are the chief of the objects for which such struc- 
tures are in general required; and as their coverings are not all 
required at one period, we hope to show how a set of covers of 
this kind may be kept in constant employ. To illustrate the 
matter we will suppose Sea Kale for the early crop forced, 
ready for table by the middle of November, and all cut at 
Christmas. Early potatoes might be accelerated here with the 
remains of the bottom heat, and be ready for use by the middle 
or end of March, and cleared off by the end of April, when 
Cucumbers might be introduced ; or the Protector might be 
made to receive surplus plant stock from the greenhouse, which 
at this period, is sure to want relief; thus preventing, as before 
observed, many a valuable plant from becoming drawn and 
spoiled. 

Before we proceed to place a sketch of each of these simple 
protectors before our readers, we must beg to draw attention to 
one most important consideration, which at first sight, to the 
inexperienced, might seem but a trifling affair, but which in 
reality is a matter of consequence. We mean the relation 

291. AUCTARIUM. 



102 



wliich any such structure should be made to bear to the ordi- 
nary ground level ; or, in other words how much of it should be 
above ground and how much below. 

We must at once then observe, as a general principle, that 
the lower any such structure can be kept, the warmer it will be, 
as to the average temperature, and by consequence it will thus 
tend to economise heating mateiials, whether fermenting vege- 
table matter or coal. In examining into the merits of this 
question, it must be remembered that it is not a question of 
solar heat and light alone ; the winds also must be taken into 
consideration, for to these, more than to frosts, must be ascribed 
most of those capricious alterations, and injurious depressions, 
which occur in our variable climate, more especially as affect- 
ing elevated beds warmed by fermenting materials. 

In illustration of this, it is only necessary to look at what 
passes in an ordinary dung heap, whilst fermenting for, per- 
haps, the early cucumber bed, during December or January. 
Every one conversant with this simple process knows, that un- 
less it be of considerable bulk, one of our sharp north-easters 
will very suddenly arrest its fermentation. In this dilemma, 
the gardener has recourse to linings, or an extra protective 
coating on the windward side. Now, the same amount of fer- 
menting material below the ground level, would, perhaps, in 
the first instance, not heat quite so rapidly; but once heated, 
it would not be so liable to capricious changes; for the ordi- 
nary average temperature of the soil, at a little more than a 
foot below the surface, has been proved to be a degree or 
two above the mean atmospheric temperature. It is almost 
needless to multiply arguments on this view of the question ; 
but we may add, that our very best gardeners, when building 
protective structures, with a view to economy, generally make 
them low and compact in their proportions ; and that when such 
structures as the justly celebrated Chatsworth or Kew Conser- 
vatories are built very lofty, their projectors are fully aware that 
economy is out of the question. 

It is, however, true that heat, when applied below the ground 
level, meets a neutralizing influence which must not be neg- 
lected; we mean the ready conducting power of the surround- 
ing damp earth, which would, without due attention being 
paid to it, prove even as great an enemy as wind itself on an 



103 



elevated bed. In nature there is a continual effort to equalize 
extremes, whether it be the high temperature of the hotbed, or 
the low of the ice-house; and to counteract such action 
requires all the skill of the forcing gardener. Under such 
circumstances, therefore, we have been induced to plan a pit, 
which, with the accompanying box or frames, is about two- 
thirds below the ordinary ground level, and one-third above it: 
this we shall here illustrate by a sketch, with details. 

Before proceeding farther, we would premise that at page 
99, in glancing at the outlines of our proposed simplification, 
we addressed ourselves to two classes of our readers; and in 
order to be distinctly understood, by conveying definite ideas, 
we think that it will be most expedient to explain the use of 
these structures in very small gardens, where, at the most, only 
two or three of them would be employed ; we can then enter 
into the spirit of the subject; and show how, as we observed at 
page 100, they may be made applicable 'as a subordinate 
system of forcing and protection in the most extensive estab- 
lishments.’ 

We now submit a sketch of one of our protectors or acceler- 
ators, placed on the pit; and will then describe its character, 
and mode of operation. 




protectors or accelerators, are precisely of the same size in 
every respect; for the brick pits being fixed structures, the 
portable frames or protectors are designed to be capable of easy 

292. AUCTARIUM. 



104 



removal from pit to pit,or place to place, according to the require- 
ments of the cultivator, as they are equally adapted for all pur- 
poses. We deem it necessary now to explain the reasons which 
induced us to plan the structure, somewhat differently from the 
ordinary garden frame. First, the pit, the walls of which are nine 
inches thick, and hollow, are built with brick, placed edgeways, 
with headers (as the cross bricks are called) at intervals, which 
hold the work together with firmness ; thus the desired object — a 
fined wall, is obtained, and materials are economized. Hollow 
walls are well known non-conductors of heat; they are also 
averse to the transmission of moisture, which spreads, as is well 
known, through brick walls, by capillary attraction, especially 
if they are formed of soft materials. By means of these double 
walls, then, chilling damps can scarcely enter from without, 
neither can warmth escape from within, but at a much slower 
ratio than through solid masonry. 

The sketch here given represents the pit as employed in 
wintering half-hardy plants in pots; and for this purpose it will 
merely be necessary to introduce a couple of trestles to support 
a few boards cut to the length of the pit, to carry a little sand, 
ashes, or sawdust, in which to plunge the pots of plants : or they 
may be set on the boards themselves, with moss placed between 
them, which, if regularly salted a little, before use, will be found 
to be as disagreeable to slugs as any material that can be em- 
ployed ; at the same time it is a good protection against frost, 
and pleasant for use. Of course, while thus employed, one of 
the glass protectors will be made use of; and if the inmates can 
be turned out by the second week of May, a good bed of cucum- 
bers or late melons may be produced, before the arrival of the 
usual wintering or housing period, say the middle of October. 
In anticipation of the pit being thus employed, the amateur 
must, on building it, determine on the mode of applying fer- 
menting material, for it will be very desirable, although his pit 
may be intended mainly for protection in winter, that he should 
make it an efficient source of enjoyment in the summer; and 
this will be best effected by applying a little heat from stable 
manure, or from tan, as explained in section 56 of the Aucta- 
rium, or decaying leaves, section 60. A single pit of this sort 
may stand as an independent object in a small flower gar- 
den; in which case, of course, the heat must be obtained from 



105 



the material being placed witliin the pit. This is readily 
effected by the removal of the trestles and boards, and a com- 
mon hotbed will then take its place ; which, in its turn, gives 
place in autumn to the former fittings, whilst the manure is ap- 
plied to the borders. 

If the pit or pits to be thus employed, occupy such a situa- 
tion as will admit of heat being applied by linings of manure, 
then the exterior wails should be pigeon-holed as it is termed ; 
that is, have holes left through them, of the size of a single 
brick, so that they may be closed or opened at pleasure. Again, 
if a pit can be placed with convenience, with its back or 
northern side against a wall, at the back of which manure can 
be used without inconvenience, an opening may there be made 
and manure put into it; which, as it cools, may be changed at 
pleasure; whilst the bed above, supported on the boards, remains 
undisturbed and efficiently heated. We, here, throw out these 
hints, that those unaccustomed to their consideration, may be 
assisted in availing themselves, in the most efficient and conve- 
nient manner, of the numerous gratifications that are derivable 
from expedients so simple and inexpensive. These, however, 
are but one or two out of a multitude of purposes to which such 
erections and frames may be apjilied ; as will be shown on fur- 
ther consideration of this subject. 

We may now offer a description of the glazed and opaque 
protectors. By referring to the sketch it will be seen that they 
rest on a small stone coping, placed on the brickwork, which 
forms a finish to the pit and strength to the fabric. Two things 
may be noticed as being novel in these matters : the one, that 
the protector has a north sloping light or sash; and the other, 
that the roof to the sash has a very flat inclination or pitch. In 
the first place, as to the north sash, we were anxious that the 
amateur, and especially lady amateurs, should be able to give 
air with the utmost facility. We are aware that lady gardeners 
are averse to have any thing to do with the old hotbed frame ; 
the lights of which are, for the most part, cumbrous to lift and 
adjust as may be desired. Moreover, in giving air, how fre- 
quently does destruction befal the glass of loose lights ? Now 
this north light moves on hinges, from the point a of the pro- 
tector. The north light, therefore, is made to lift up as easily 
as the lid of a box ; and its opening for tlie admission of air 

293. AUCTAEIUM. 



106 



may be graduated by any of the simple means in common 
use. Another point is involved in the principle of a north light. 
We are anxious to prevent what is termed “burning”; for most 
of the evils which happen to glass structures in small establish- 
ments, occur through the want of air being given betimes in the 
morning. Now we are persuaded that quite as much sun- 
shine, on the average, will enter the space of the southern 
portion, as the amateur can manage, — especially with our im- 
proved glass ; and through the north slope will enter a subdued 
light, which will be found exceedingly beneficial to the inmates 
of the frame — especially to the row of pots which may occupy 
the shelf marked b. The flat roof was also planned for similar 
reasons; for, however fine it may sound, to discourse about the 
principle of light abstractedly considered, many indeed are the 
cases in which it would be far better for the amateur to possess 
a modified amount of this necessary, yet powerful, element. 

We may here add to the foregoing description, that we in- 
tend the front sash also to lift up to any required height ; this, 
in reality, being the workman’s side of the pit; where all the 
operations of filling or emptying may be carried on with con- 
venience. Both this and the north slope may be made to lift 
by means of bolt hinges, which are very simple and durable. 
Some little management will be requisite, in order to prevent 
drip occurring at the apex ; this, however, will be readily 
accomplished, by the use of a strip of thin oil-cloth, or similar 
material, impervious to water. 

It will now be necessary to say a few words regarding the 
brick pits, which, as before observed at page 103, are of a fixed 
character. As shown by the section given, a portion thereof 
will be above the ground-level; and if protection in the char- 
acter of warm manure, or even straw, be used, a somewhat un- 
sightly effect will be produced, unfitting any portion of the 
garden which is in high keeping. Those who adopt these 
structures, therefore, should set out with definite plans, in order 
to avoid disappointment. We shall, in the course of our re- 
marks, so far glance at the culture of the objects ennumerated 
at pages 100 and 101, as to be able to assist amateur gardeners 
in carrying out such objects. We now offer a few remarks on 

Opaque Protectors. In point of size it is obvious that 
these must be exactly of the same width as the glazed pro- 



107 



lectors, and we would advise that they be the same length also ; 
for if the brick pit be so built as to receive two or more in a 
line, it becomes necessary that they should thus correspond. 
In form of roof, too, we prefer that they should also correspond ; 
for, although structures of a very similar character have been 
used for years, with regular span roofs, and which always an- 
swered the purposes intended (being entirely conhned to the 
forcing of asparagus and sea-kale) we consider that by giving 
them the same form of roof as the glazed protectors, we shall 
enable the amateur to appropriate them to a variety of objects 
at certain seasons, for which glazed structures are generally 
used ; thus considerably extending the objects of culture. 

We are not aware that they can be made of better materials 
than feather-edged deal boards. We have some span-roofed 
protectors, thus made, which, having been well tarred over, have 
been in constant use for fifteen years, and are now perfectly 
sound. The opaque protectors being made to work with bolt 
hinges, similar to the glazed ones, every facility will be afforded 
for carrying on the necessary operations w ithin. We now pro- 
ceed to tlie consideration of 

Portable Drill Covers. The drill cover is by no means 
a novel affair, and we claim no particular amount of novelty for 
the protectors here described. We would merely urge that 
where structures, somewhat similar, have been used, their pur- 
poses have been so much narrowed as to render them compar- 
atively unimportant; and it will be one part of our labours 
so to extend their scope as to impart to them a much greater 
amount of importance. The drill covers, too, of former days, 
were so small as to be only adapted to one or two crops; we 
are desirous of recommending drill covers which shall be easily 
transferable, and applicable through the year for the produc- 
tion of a variety of dainties, for which, as before observed, we 
must provide a special course of culture, more particularly in 
point of distances in planting and arrangement of cropping. 

Some years ago, a drill cover, of two sloping sides only, was 
recommended by Mr. M'lntosh, as adapted to the protection of 
early Pease ; and is thus described at page 65, of his Practical 
Gardener; — “The front is glazed with small pieces of glass, to 
transmit light ; and the back is composed of a board, the third 
side or bottom is open. Upon the top it will be convenient to 

291. ACCT.VRIUM. 



108 



have a handle, for the purpose of removing it as circumstances 
may require. Glass cases of this sort might be in every garden, 
and will be extremely useful for protecting all sorts of crops, and 
can be procured at a very trifling expense.” Thus far Mr. 
M'Intosh. Now, although we are proceeding on precisely the 
same principles as Mr. M’Intosh, (but with a much greater ex- 
tension of the objects sought) we have to differ in some of the 
details. For instance, although Mr. M'lntosh’s drill-cover may 
suit early Pease, yet it would scarcely be capacious enough for 
forwarding Cauliflowers, or for forcing Sea-kale and Asparagus, 
besides many other things which we shall hereafter suggest. 
The mere union of two sides, thus A is not the very best form, 
although certainly the most simple; and we think we shall be 
justified in our proposed course of alteration, by the much 
greater capacity we trust, and general eligibility, which our 
improved drill-covers will be found to possess. 

We now give a sketch, which, with the accompanying des- 
cription, will thoroughly explain the matter. 




Now, as we propose to cultivate many things in double drills, 
especially for early work, it will be readily seen how much more 
room will be afforded by the adoption of two upright sides, be- 
beneafh the span roof, although only a few inches in height. 
Indeed, in Mr. M'Intosh’s drill cover it is only possible to cul- 
tivate a single row with any chance of success ; and it scarcely 
seems worth while to institute such proceedings, without a 
prospect of producing what might be considered a remunerating 
crop. And now for the construction of the protector we have 
sketched. Like the other protectors before described, it would 
be good policy to have them made in two sets; the one opaque, 
the other containing a small amount of glass on each side of the 
roof. They ought to be in lengths of about five feet, in order 
that lady gardeners, who are daily becoming more numerous 
and ardent in horticultural pursuits, may be enabled to shift 
them with facility from one part of the garden to another. 



109 



Ventilation must, ofcourse, be provided in some way, whether 
the drill cover be glazed or opaque. Indeed, in the latter case 
it would be advisable to cause a portion of the roof, nearest the 
apex, to open from one end of the drill cover to the other, longi- 
tudinally. By this arrangement, light would be uniformly ad- 
mitted, as well as air, when mild weather occurred. The roof 
may, in that case, be composed of two feather-edged boards, of 
about five or six inches each in width, the upper over-lapping 
the lower one; the upper having a hinge at each end, and, of 
course, opening perpendicularly to the apex. The two venti- 
lating lids in giving air would thus meet above the apex, and 
might be secured by a hook and staple. This would indeed be 
perhaps the most economical mode that could be devised, and 
we do think that every small garden in the country should pos- 
sess at least half a dozen. As an adjunct to the little green- 
house too, they would at certain seasons be invaluable. Half- 
hardy plants might, with facility, be wintered in them, merely 
by having them well established in store pots, and by keeping 
them dry ; the addition of a mat, or some coarse litter, would 
thus carry the inmates through the hardest frosts. They would 
be well adapted for a small mushroom bed also; and, in this 
case, it would be very easy to apply a warm dung lining on 
each side, when the weather was severe. Many other things 
belonging to the greenhouse will readily suggest themselves ; 
even when the Vines commence their growth, when extra 
warmth becomes essential, and when so many good plants are 
thereby sure to become ‘drawn,’ a considerable amount of 
stock might be thinned out and placed beneath the drill covers, 
thus affording more room for good specimens, as well as for 
manual operations in the greenhouse. 

With regard to the glazed drill covers, we need scarcely urge 
their general superiority, at least during the growing season, for 
it must be always understood that the amount of light must, in 
nearly all cases, bear a strict relation to the rapidity of growth. 
When such relations are disturbed, or the light intercepted from 
an active vegetation, what is technically termed ‘ draw ing ’ takes 
place. This is, we conceive, familiar to every one ; a potato 
left in a comparatively dark cellar, late in spring, will afford a 
pretty good illustration of this. Although there are cases, 
especially in the wintering of plants, when the opaque drill cover 

295. ACCTARIUM. 



110 



would even prove superior to the others; yet on the whole, we 
must give a much greater amount of importance to the glazed 
covers ; nevertheless, there should, doubtless, be a set of each 
in every gardening establishment ; for the opaque covers, in 
many cases, would forward crops for the glazed ones, the latter, 
perhaps, being all engaged at the time. 

In preparing ground to receive the drill covers, some special 
culture will be necessary, of which more shall be said by and 
bye. It will not be improper, however, to observe here, that as 
the sides of our drill covers are but six inches (and it being 
only nine inches to the apex from the ground level perpendicu- 
larly) a little ingenuity will be requisite in forming the plot to 
receive them ; we name this by the way, in order to anticipate 
an objection which might be raised, of their being short of 
depth. We can show in the sequel how the objection can be 
shorn of its weight ; our intentions in planning them thus shal- 
low, were merely to render them as portable as possible, and to 
economise expense. 

Before concluding with the drill covers, we must say a few 
words about the ventilation of those which are glazed. Whe- 
ther they should have much or little glass, depends, of course, 
in some degree, on the strictness of economy with which they 
are made. As a matter of principle we should say that it would 
be well to have the whole of the span roof glazed; the sides 
and ends, of course, being of wood, for lightness and economy’s 
sake. If this plan be adopted, we do not see why the whole of 
each side of the roof should not open to ventilate the interior. 
It is, nevertheless, only of second-rate import to have these 
arrangements so carried out ; we may merely say that a copi- 
ous ventilation must be provided ; and that no doubt many of 
our readers are in a position, equally qualified with ourselves, 
to carry out such results. 

It may here be observed that, whatever the mode of venti- 
lation may be, it is essential that the flaps or ventilating portion 
open upwards from the shoulders of the drill covers towards 
the apex ; in fact, in a similar way to that suggested for 
the opaque drill covers. This will prevent the injurious effects 
of hail storms, and of cutting winds ; and moreover will be 
found of immense benefit, under the course of culture here pro- 
posed, in warding off the perpendicularly acting white frosts in 



Ill 



the months of March or April ; when it will occasionally be 
expedient to have the ventilating apertures open all the night. 

Portable Sashes. Under this head may be included all 
ordinary garden sashes, which may be thrown at liberty from 
houses, pits, or frames ; and as their size not unfrequently varies 
much, it is not easy to plan any fixed mode of culture which 
may receive benefit from them. Moreover, such are seldom at 
liberty until July or August, when they can be of little use, 
unless placed before vines or peaches on the open wall, in order 
to accelerate the ripening of both wood and fruit. We there- 
fore advert to them here, merely as forming, when available, 
one item in the category of Protectors. 

We may now be permitted to draw attention to a very econo- 
mical mode of cultivating the peach and nectarine under glass ; 
and for which the title of “Ker’s protective system” has been 
suggested. It is the invention of H. B. Ker, Esq., of Ches- 
hunt ; and, as he has established one or more in his own 
garden, and the Horticultural Society have also done the same 
in their grounds, we shall, in a short time, find out whether 
they are successful. In dealing with this division of the subject 
it will be desirable that we place a sketch and description of it 
before our readers. It consists merely of a screen of glass, 
placed over a trellis, on which the peaches or nectarines are 
trained ; sides are dispensed with, also front and ends ; with 
these it would, of course, be a regular pit or frame; herein 
then consists part of the economy. 




The above sketch will, at once, convey an idea of its for- 
mation ; and, as regards proportions, every cultivator will 
doubtless, make these subservient to his own taste and the space 
he has to spare. Mr. Ker’s sashes, or lights, are six feet eight 

296. AUCTARIUM. 



112 



inches long, as stated by Mr. Rivers, in the detail of their cost, 
hereafter given. 

The posts and rafters are made of larch poles, sawed in halves; 
and the frames or sashes for the glass are of deal, unplaned ; 
constructed without the usual dove-tailed joints — being simply 
fastened across each other. This simplicity of structure, of 
course, saves expense and labour, without interfering with the 
efficiency of the sashes. The posts which carry the roof, and 
also those which sustain the trellis, are charred at the lower 
end ; this will cause them to last many years, without giving 
trouble. The whole, when complete, is dressed over with gas- 
tar, of which Mr. Rivers, the celebrated nurseryman, has a very 
high notion, as applied to out-door gardening structures. He, 
moreover, points to the eligibility of ‘yellow pine varnish,’ for 
a similar purpose. Mr. Ker thinks that cherries and plums 
may be cultivated at the back of the peach trellis — that is, 
trained at the back of the frame which supports the lights, but 
still beneath their shelter. He has used a covering of leaves, 
two feet in depth, over the peach roots, in order to keep them 
warm. 

Mr. Rivers plants his peach trees in a slanting direction, so 
that their branches fit readily to the trellis, without any bending. 
They are planted six feet apart, and he intends removing every 
alternate tree, after three or four years, to another trellis; then 
they will be left twelve feet apart. 

To show the economical character of this structure, we beg 
to subjoin the expense, as stated by Mr. Rivers. Each light is 
6ft. Sin. by 3 ft. 2|in., and contains 2 bars, 2|in. by lin. ; 2 
sides, 2iin. by lin.; 1 cross-bar at bottom, 2|in. by lin.; 1 
cross-bar at top, 2|in. by lin. ; and 1 cross-bar in the middle, 
2iin. by lin. This gives about H cubic feet of timber; this, 



for one light, will be — 

s, d. 

1| feet of timber, at Is. 6d., 2 3 

3 rows of glass, 20ft. at 3d., 5 0 

Sawing, about 0 9 

Labour and nails, 1 0 

Glazing and Putty, 0 9 



9 9 



113 



Mr. Rivers remarks that pine varnish is the cheapest and 
most durable for rough unplaned wood; three- pence would be 
the outside cost for two coats. Mr. R. uses sheet glass, one 
foot wide, and about two feet long. 

Thus far Mr. Rivers’s account of the matter; — we may 
now be permitted to offer a remark or two of our own. We 
frankly confess that we fear the effects of the winds, which will 
frequently assume the character of eddies, or chilling draughts ; 
these are well known to be inimical to the successful culture of 
tender fruits. We would, therefore, by all means, hang some 
waterproof or other material round the sides and ends, leaving a 
portion at the upper part of the back, capable of unfolding, in 
order to let the heat escape, when too great. With this provi- 
sion, we have no doubt that Peaches, Nectarines, Apricots, and 
our tenderest Flemish Pears, might be grown to great advan- 
tage ; and why not? the structure would then possess all the 
advantages of a peach-house, and more; — it could he more 
thoroughly ventilated, and this at certain periods, would be 
found a decided advantage. 

We are very glad to see that the experiment is likely to have 
fair trial, and we hail it as, at least, a step in the right direc- 
tion ; being persuaded that, before long, much greater simpli- 
city and, of course, economy, will be introduced in this depart- 
ment of gardening ; which, aiming at utility alone, should be 
as much as possible unfettered by anxiety about appearances. 

Having worked up our subject, according to the original pro- 
positions, to the conclusion of portable sashes; we may offer a 
few brief remarks on Hand-gla.sses, which constitute the last 
of the series. These have been in pretty general use for very 
many years, and people may naturally enough suppose that they 
cannot be dispensed with. To say that they ought to be done 
away with altogether, would be saying too much, in the present 
position of gardening affairs; nevertheless, it may here be re- 
marked, that those who adopt our Protectors will have small 
occasion for them ; nay, it would soon be tolerably manifest 
that they could be entirely dispensed with, except for the pro- 
pagation of cuttings, or for the commercial gardener, for whom 
they are peculiarly adapted ; his objects being so much more 
simplified than those of the amateur, who may fairly take for 
his motto “multum in parvo.” Our market gardeners have little 

297. ACCTARIUM. 



114 



more than two prime objects in view, as to the application of the 
hand-glass ; and these two occupy the glasses by a most simple 
course of culture most of the year. Thus, with these cultiva- 
tors, they will be found occupied from October until the ensuing 
April, with Cauliflowers, which obtain high prices in the metro- 
politan and other markets. No sooner are these nursed out of 
danger, through the March winds, than preparations are syste- 
matically made to receive them on a plot of ground devoted to 
Cucumber culture. Here they are at once removed, and con- 
stantly occupied, from April until July, or even much longer. 
Some other occupations are, at times, found for them, but they 
are, for the most part, subordinate to these two objects. Euoug'h, 
we trust, has now been said to show that the horticultural pro- 
ceedings of the amateur and the commercial gardener, do not 
lie precisely in the same way ; and, therefore, the arguments, 
pro or con, as to the economical bearing of any given structure, 
are not, by any means, etjually applicable. Certainly, for the 
propagation of half-hardy, or bedding plants, as they are now’ 
popularly termed, hand-glasses, or small striking glasses, are 
very eligible ; and may, in that case, prove useful auxiliaries to 
the protectors. 

We need hardly descant here on the forms and sizes of the 
common hand-glass, our readers being, doubtless, thoroughly 
acquainted with those every-day affairs ; we must now advert 
to some other matters, to which we ought to have pointed at 
page 100 of the Auctariuin, where the programme of our sug- 
gestions will be found. We do intend, after a description of these 
structures, to show how all forcing or protective affairs, as far as 
the amateur is concerned, may be carried out; pointing to 
modes of culture as identified with this system. In the course 
of these remarks we shall have to deal with the forcing of as- 
paragus and sea-kale ; but as the forcing of these dainty escu- 
lents, in the opaque protectors, will be chiefly confined to the 
old mode of removing roots from the open ground, we beg to 
say a few words on an old system of forcing the before-named 
vegetables, where they grow; in which case a sort of protection 
is already in use, somewhat different in character from that 
which we shall propose. We here allude to span-roofed opaque 
frames, with brick walls about the beds, which have been in use 
for many years ; but we do not hence wish to be understood as 



115 



urging the absolute necessity of tliis kind of structure; for brick 
pits being established, to fit and receive either the glazed or 
opaque protectors, as the case may be, it will be quite eligible 
to plant asparagus in a portion of the pit, corresponding in 
length to one or more of the protectors ; according to the desires 
or means of the proprietor. We merely point to this frame, 
in order that those who are about remodelling their garden 
establishments, as to accelerative or protective matters, may 
have the power of selection, by our bringing every truly useful 
thing of the kind into view. 

The span-roofed frame of old usage, here alluded to, we have 
employed for years, with success; and may here describe the 
method as applied to the forcing of asparagus. The asparagus 
is planted in brick pits, four feet in width in the clear. The 
pits contain two rows of asparagus, the rows two feet apart, and 
plants ten inches apart in the row. One foot, therefore, is 
allowed between each row of asparagus and the pit wall nearest 
it; this is “pigeon-holed” from bottom to top. These beds, 
then, are placed in parallel lines, having a trench twenty-seven 
inches in width between each two pits, and thirty inches in depth; 
which depth is indeed the same as the depth of the prepared soil 
in the pit. In forcing, the span-roofed frame rests on the walls 
of the pit, and the space between the pits is filled with hot 
fermenting material ; the roof of the frame also being covered 
with straw, litter, or mats. 

This protecting roof consists merely of an exterior frame, 
formed of deal, about four inches square, to correspond with 
the size of the walls forming the asparagus pit. This supports 
the skeleton of the span-roof, which is formed with feather-edged 
boarding : a coat of gas tar completes the structure. AVe must, 
however, observe, that one of the feather-edged boards which 
constitute the span-roof, is made to draw out easily : this be- 
comes necessary in order to examine or cut tbe produce ; and 
in fair weather, to give air when necessary, and to give colour 
to the asparagus, — that sure indicator of flavour and quality. 

Having now fully described our proposed ‘simplification of 
protective structures,’ it will be necessary to enter into some 
analysis of the objects in view; and in doing so, it will be 
well, perhaps, to classify them, in order that our readers may 
have the matter in a digestible form ; and that a specific char- 

298. auctarium. 



116 



acter may attach to each of the protectors, or accelerators, which 
we have suggested. In tlius proceeding, we do not wish it to be 
understood that we are rash enough to advise parties to do away 
with the frames or pits which they already possess, and to forth- 
with adopt, at a considerable sacrifice, the forms of structure we 
have recommended. This is assuredly not our aim ; those who 
possess an establishment already, considered tolerably complete, 
will do well to abide by it; for it is not, after all, merely this 
or that form of structure, but good principles of culture, 
attentively carried out, which ensures success in the main. 
To accomplish all this it is necessary that the cultivator 
thoroughly understand first principles; these must be kept 
distinctly in the mind’s eye — once thoroughly established and 
confirmed, every point of mere practice must be subjected to 
their strict analysis. We think, therefore, that we cannot better 
discharge our duty, than by adverting to, and explaining, those 
principles of culture ; simplifying them as much as possible. 
In doing this, we must, as a preliminary step, turn back to page 
100 of the Auctarium, at which is given an ennumeration of 
some useful matters; the forcing, culture, or conservation, of 
which may be carried out, in the most perfect way, by the sys- 
tem of protectors or accelerators here proposed. 

We must now, in recapitulating the objects named at pages 
100 and 101, take the liberty of transposing the order of them 
as they there stand ; they were thrown down as they occurred 
to the mind, as fitting objects; we must now, however, endea- 
vour to arrange them according to their habits; and this, we 
trust, will at once prove a guide both to the amateur, and those 
who are merely in the beginning of horticulture. 

Classification of the Objects. 

1st division. Opaque protectors, employed for accelerating 
in the earlier stages, such as the following things : — 

Dutch and other bulbs. 

Deciduous shrubs. 

Asparagus. 

Rhubarb. 

Sea Kale. 

Mushrooms. 

Lily of the Valley. 

Deciduous Roses, &c. 



117 



2nil division. Opaque protectors, employed as mere shelter 
from severe frosts to such as follows: — 

Cape bulbs. 

Chrysanthemums. 

Lobelias. 

Cyclamens. 

Roses, various, in pots. 

Fuchsias. 

Endive, when blanched. 

Lettuces, when blanched. 

Parsley. 

Violets, &c. 

3rd division. Glazed protectors employed in wintering such 
as the following : — 

Ericas. 

Oranges. 

New Holland plants. 

Succulents, Cacti, &c. 

Carnations. 

Mignionette. 

Half-hardy bedding plants, &c. 

4th division. Glazed protectors, employed in accelerating 
such as the following: — 

Potatoes. 

Early horn Carrots. 

Radishes. 

Kidney Beans. 

Cucumbers. 

Melons. 

Strawberries, &c. 

-5th division. Drill covers, employed on such as follow; — 
Early Pease. 

Early Cauli dowers. 

Lettuces. 

Kidney Beans. 

Radishes. 

Endive. 

Parsley, &c. 

We do not wish it to be understood that we consider the above 
enumeration as by any means comprising all that may receive 

299. AUCTAEIUM. 



118 



assistance from these simple structures ; many others will occur, 
but these form, we conceive, some of the principal objects, at 
least in moderate-sized gardens, and they will serve to illustrate 
our plans. 

It will also be found in the detail we are about to give of 
their culture, &c., that plants from one division will be trans- 
ferable to another, under certain circumstances; and also that 
many things will be common to two or more of the divisions. 
Thus much by way of explanation, we will now proceed to their 
culture, taking them in detail in the order in which they stand. 

1st Division. 

Opaque protectors employed as accelerators. 

Dutch and other Bulbs. We come now to treat, in detail, 
the objects mentioned at page 116, which we purpose doing 
consecutively as there enumerated ; pointing, as we proceed, 
to the main features in their culture, more especially in re- 
ference to the employment of the structures already described. 
It is a well known law in the vegetation of most bulbs, which 
annually become deciduous, that the blossom of one year is 
generated in the year preceding. Hence it follows, that the 
blossom of a bulb, being duly organized, and in an embryo state, 
merely awaits circumstances favourable to its development. 
This is rendered manifest by the circumstance of bulbs grow- 
ing in water-glasses ; for, although the blossom maybe pro- 
duced in very high perfection, by such means, yet no one has 
ever shown that a mere offset can be thus grown into a strong and 
healthy flowering bulb. Bulbs, when placed in water-glasses, 
are usually, by good cultivators, kept in comparative darkness, 
for the tirst two months, or thereahouts : this clearly shows 
that any opaque frame or protector will suffice as well as a 
glazed one, at least during the early stages of their vegetation. 
And, indeed, such a condition is precisely what happens with a 
bulb planted six inches deep in the open ground. Here in the 
dreary season, from October to January inclusive, the earlier 
stages of development progress very slowly, and in darkness; 
together with constant moisture about the stem, preventing, 
any important amount of perspiratory action, which indeed, in 
this stage is unnecessary. When, however, the bulb has pro- 
duced leaves in the full possession of their agencies of absorb- 
tion and perspiration, then indeed an elaborative process again 



119 



commences, which is of much service in promoting the strength 
of the present blossom ; and decidedly of benefit as laying the 
foundation of future vitality in the bulb ; to say nothing of 
its forming material for the blossom of the ensuing year. 

It will be readily seen, then, that our opaque protectors will 
furnish the necessary conditions up to the period of the bulbs 
possessing leaves, when they may be transferred either to the 
glazed protectors, to the greenhouse shelf, or to the drawing 
room, as the case may be. It may here be observed, that 
what are termed “forcing bulbs,” — such as the Hyacinth, 
the Narcissus, early Tulips, the Double Jonquil, the Persian 
Iris, Crocuses, &c., require a small amount of bottom heat, 
at certain stages: 70 degrees is amply sufficient for this pur- 
pose; and it so happens that precisely the same amount of 
bottom heat will suit every plant enumerated in this division. 
We do not mean to say that the whole division must have pre- 
cisely this temperature, but that all the objects sought by this 
application of the opaque protector, may be most effectually car- 
ried out by this moderate amount of heat. For bulbs, however, 
we should say any where between 60“ and 70“, is the most con- 
genial root temperature; observing to keep down atmospheric 
heat, by ventilation or otherwise, to 55“ or 60“ at the highest. 
In order to guard those of our readers who are inexperienced in 
bulb forcing, we must observe, that for successful forcing, they 
should be obtained and potted early in September, and then 
plunged over head in ashes, old vegetable soil, or indeed com- 
mon soil, until the roots are peeping through the bottoms of the 
pots. This process will, in general, require about two months, 
so that by the end of October the pots will be nearly full of 
roots; and then, and then only, should they be introduced to 
bottom heat, with the course of culture before described. They 
will require no water through the whole process, provided they 
be potted in moist soil; and when introduced to the protec- 
tor, should be plunged four inches deep : when the bud, or 
rather the leaves, are fairly above the plunging material, they 
may be safely removed to the drawing room or greenhouse, 
observing to inure them gradually to the light, and then to 
water them rather liberally, in order to counteract the sudden 
effects of the drier atmosphere to which they are in their new 
habitation exposed. 

300. AUCTARIUM. 



120 



Deciduous Shrubs. In pursuing our subject in a con- 
secutive order, we now come to tlie acceleration or forcing of 
shrubs in general; such as the various American Azalias, the 
Moss and Cabbage Rose, the Persian Lilac, the Sweet Briar, 
and a variety of others. Such will probably continue in request 
for many years to come, notwithstanding the introduction of no- 
velties, some of which being naturally winter or spring flowerers, 
are a great disideratum in horticulture ; still, we would not that 
such pets as the old Moss Rose should be supplanted. 

Most of these shrubs, like the bulbs we before spoke about, 
organize their blossom buds in the preceding summer, and only 
await a gradual excitement, by means of heat, after a period of 
rest. During the first stages of their excitement, or acceler- 
ation, the primum mobile of successful culture must be sought 
in what is termed bottom heat. Now, although a very moder- 
ate amount may be permitted, especially during the earlier 
stages of acceleration, yet that amount must be some degrees 
in advance of the atmospheric warmth. Persons inexperienced 
in gardening affairs, will naturally ask what this amount of 
bottom heat is, on which so much depends; and before we 
conclude our advice about deciduous shrubs, we will endeavour 
to inform them. 

A bottom heat, then, being provided, for which the ordinary 
brick pits, before alluded to, will be admirably adapted, these 
shrubs will be quite at home in the opaque protectors, until 
their leaves begin to unfold, when light becomes absolutely 
essential ; and all they need will be a removal to a glazed 
protector, which, of course, must have a similar bottom heat 
provided. 

It must not here be inferred that we intend giving the amateur 
the trouble of making up a fresh pit or division, every time a 
group of plants needs a transfer, from the opaque to the glazed 
protectors. Our prime object, if we can succeed in perspicu- 
ously detining our views, is to induce the amateur to keep one, 
two, or more of such protectors, both glazed and opaque, always 
provided with a bottom heat; either by fermenting material, or 
what would be by far more systematic, (and indeed economical 
in the end) a permanent bottom heat from hot water piping. 
Such being the case, the opaque and glazed protectors would 
be continually providing for and assisting, each other; and. 



121 



indeed, when the amateur is made fully aware of how many 
dainties and gratifications, he could procure, by a systematic use 
of these protectors, and at so very moderate an expense, com- 
pared with the expensive structures we sometimes meet with, 
his protectors would be in constant occupation, and we will 
engage that it would be most difficult to find a spare corner in 
them. 

Bottom Heat for Deciduous Shrubs. Of course we do 
not presume to say that the very same amount of bottom heat 
is equally suitable to all the shrubs, that may find a place here, 
from whatever clime. Nevertheless, we know, by experience, 
that a medium point, a kind of compromise between the 
extremes, will, under judicious management, lead to general 
success. For shrubs, in the opaque protectors, during the 
first stages, from 65 to 70 degrees w ill be iirojier ; when they 
are beginning to expand their leaves, and are removed to the 
glazed protector, an advance of 5 degrees may be allowed. We 
may here advise about the atmospheric temperature also, which 
must, in all cases, bear some relation to the amount of bottom 
heat; and this should beat least 10 degrees lower than the 
bottom heat in the opaque, and about 5 degrees average in the 
glazed, accelerator. 

Let it, however, be observed, that it is not proper to adhere 
to so precise an amount on all occasions ; bottom heat has 
other relations besides those which relate to the root action. 
Nature has so established the order of affairs, that solar light is 
the cause of a much increased amount o( atmospheric warmth; 
and what takes place out of doors, must be imitated within. 
When, therefore, what in termed fair weather prevails, which in 
general, is only another form of expression, for more solar light, 
the temperature must be supposed to rise in due proportion; 
remembering one thing, that as a plant in a pot has not the 
liberty to range for food, that the same has in a state of nature, 
such is not equally able to bear extremes of temperature; too 
copious and too sudden a perspiration is frequently prejudicial. 
Under general circumstances, an advance of five degrees above 
ordinary atmospheric heat, may be permitted. For these shrubs 
a very moderate amount of ventilation will suffice : when, how- 
ever, they come into leaf, there must be a progressive increase, 
in order to facilitate the necessary elaborations. 

301. auctakium. 



122 



Asparagus Forcing. Next in order, we have the As;i ara- 
gus, for which the opaque protectors, placed on the brick pit, 
before alluded to, will be peculiarly well adapted. We may 
here allude to the fact, that there are two very distinct and rival 
modes of forcing Asparagus; the one, forcing it in the beds 
where it grows, and the other removing the roots to a prepared 
bed of fermenting material, or bottom heat provided by other 
means. The plan of removing roots for forcing, probably 
originated through the necessity for destroying what are con- 
sidered worn-out beds, and planting fresh ones, and it seems 
to be a practice of long standing. In breaking up old beds, 
of course the idea naturally occurs, that it would be well to 
cause the roots to develope what remaining buds they possess; 
and hence it would be necessary to provide bottom heat, to give 
the requisite stimulus, without which they would scarcely be in 
advance of those in the ordinary soil. 

A very mild degree of heat is the best for Asparagus forcing; 
from 70 to 75 degrees is amply sufficient ; a bottom heat 
having been provided by means of any fermenting material, or 
otherwise. The roots must be taken up with as little damage as 
possible, reserving a moderate ball of earth about each ; such, 
indeed, in the case of full grown roots, will necessarily occur. 
The surface of the bed must have a few inches of rotten ma- 
nure, or old vegetable soil, for the fibres to root into ; and on 
this the crowns or roots must be set as thickly as it is possible 
to pack them, space being valuable. The fibres will thus over- 
lay each other, which is quite immaterial When they are all 
thus placed, some fine old vegetable soil, old tan, or even ordi- 
nary soil, must be shaken into the interstices, until level with 
the crowns. 

The opaque protector may now be put over the bed thus 
prepared ; and if it be a cold period, hot linings may be applied 
immediately, even covering the roof with litter, if necessary. A 
bottom heat of 70 degrees, at the least, must, by some means, 
be maintained for the first fortnight; and by that time the buds 
will begin to sprout, when a less amount of bottom heat will 
suffice. It becomes necessary now to use water for the first 
time, not because they are dry, but in order to wash the soil 
into every crevice ; and the water thus applied, will, of itself, 
cool the fermenting material, although applied lukewarm. When 



123 



the soil is thus regularly distributed between the roots, a layer 
of fine soil or sand, of nearly six inches in thickness, must be 
spread all over the surface of the crowns, in order to give 
length to the Asparagus, and to prevent the toughness which 
would occur, through sudden depressions in the temperature, if 
left uncovered. 

In early forcing, the protectors will still require the addition 
of litter, or even a renewal of the linings; and as soon as the 
Asparagus begins to peep through the soil, as much air as possi- 
ble must be given, in order to impart colour and flavour to the 
Asparagus; colour is, indeed, indicative of flavour, and cannot 
be obtained without the influence of both air and light. Light 
sufficient, however, may be obtained in the opaque protectors 
by means already described ; and every care must be taken, 
daily, to ventilate as much as possible, as long as the Aspara- 
gus can be kept free from frosty air. We would advise those 
who contemplate an annual supply of forced Asparagus, which, 
it must be confessed, is one of the greatest culinary dainties we 
possess, to keep a good breadth in cultivation; indeed, without 
this it is impossible to carry out such a system. Our practice 
has been, for years, to force the very best we have, and to con- 
tinue planting a good stock annually. 

Our old beds of course we force, in preference to the off-hand 
destruction of the roots; the produce, however, is usually small 
in size, and is converted by the cook’s art into what is by them 
termed “ Asparagus Peas.” 

It should be remembered here, by the amateur, that the 
forcing is merely developing the latent bud ; the size and suc- 
culency depending mainly, if not entirely, on high culture in the 
open ground during the preceding year. 

Riiub.vrb Forcing, in opaque protectoi-s. Following out the 
classification at page 116, we have now Rhubarb to deal with ; 
the forcing of which is so extremely simple, that we need not 
dwell long on it. Rhubarb has much improved of late years, 
through its tendency to sport when raised from seed ; and has 
not only gained in size and succulency, but in precocity : in- 
deed, as to the latter point, some new varieties are so excitable, 
that as soon as the new year arrives, little more is needed than 
a tall chimney-pot, placed over the crowns, to ward off the cold 
winds. Still, however, the Rhubarb tart may be enjoyed before 

302. AUCTARIUM. 



124 



the approach of the new year; its production, too, is easy and 
inexpensive. 

The chief point in successful Rhubarb forcing, is the posses- 
sion of strong roots, which should not have been much gathered 
from, or plucked, in the previous season. Indeed, for very 
early forcing they should remain in the nursery beds, and their 
growth be encouraged, till required to be placed in the pro- 
tector. Some persons lay much stress on the superiority of this 
or that fancy kind, and on the usual degeneracy of seedlings. 
That such are liable to degeneracy may be true, yet we esteem 
this but a secondary consideration, when young plants are re- 
quired merely for forcing. We grow the Victoria kind entirely, 
and doubt whether there is, at present, a better. Sow seed in 
March, in drills, thin the plants, giving abundance of room, and 
keep them free from weeds. In the succeeding February, they 
should be transplanted into well manured drills, eight inches 
apart in the drill, and in the succeeding November they will be 
first-rate plants, admirably adapted for forcing. Our earliest 
crop is generally forced in the mushroom-house, in pots : here, 
however, we will point to their culture in the opaque protector 
of the amateur. 

A bottom heat, of some kind, must be provided : we use tree 
leaves and manure, mixed. From sixty-five to seventy degrees 
must be ensured to them, for about three weeks, or until they 
begin to shoot ; when the sooner the heat declines, the better : 
the bottom warmth, therefore, need be but of a temporary 
character. The roots must be taken up as entire as possible, 
and placed close together, just as explained for Asparagus ; and 
like it, must have some fine old tan or vegetable earth shaken 
into every crevice. Little more is requisite than to keep light 
from the roots; this our opaque protectors will do; and, in 
severe weather, it may be necessary to protect both the walls at 
the side, and also to cover the protector over-head. 

If the heat becomes too strong — that is to say, above eighty 
degrees, cold water must be lil)erally applied until it be suffici- 
ently reduced. Thus a supply of Rhubarb will be secured for 
several weeks, or indeed until a supply is ready to succeed it, as 
before observed, from beneath chimney-pots or other out-of-door 
shelters ; this again will be succeeded by plants on a warm 
slope. 



125 



In seasons when Apples and Gooseberries are abundant. 
Rhubarb is, by some persons, lightly esteemed; but when these 
are scarce, it becomes acceptable to all ; being, as it is, one of 
the most certain crops, of the easiest culture, and exceedingly 
wholesome. 

307 Forcing Sea Kale. Of all the succulents produced by the 
forcer’s art, none is of more general utility than the subject of 
these remarks. We may also add, that we have no forcing 
vegetable so completely within reach of all classes of society. 
Although its forcing strongly resembles thatof Rhubarb and As- 
paragus, yet having some peculiarities, we must here point them 
out, being fully persuaded that when the highly simplified mode 
of culture we are about to propose is well understood, that hun- 
dreds will, at once commence its culture ; for we see no reason 
why even the cottager w lio keeps a cow, and who, of course, pos- 
sesses warm manure, should not force Sea Kale as early as the 
middle of .lanuary, either for his own use or for carrying to 
market, if he prefer doing so. 

The opaque protectors are peculiarly eligible for this pur- 
pose. A bottom heat of 70 degrees, as nearly as possible, being 
amply sufficient. The bottom heat need only be of a temporary 
character, for as soon as the Kale has sprouted from two to 
three inches, the heat should be much checked, or the conse- 
quence will be a drawn and worthless produce. It is indispens- 
able tliat this habit of Sea Kale be attended to ; the continued 
effect of brisk heat upon it induces a more rapid growth than is 
compatible with the production of strong leaf-stalks ; therefore, 
when vegetation has been forced into action, the heat must be 
moderated ; in other respects, the application of the Protectors 
may be the same as for Rhubarb, 

Sea Kale may be conveniently forced in a mushroom house, 
where from a bin, about eight feet in length by three in width, 
almost a dish per day may be cut from the beginning of Novem- 
ber till the middle of March, when the open ground will continue 
the supply. Once a fortnight introduce about a dozen strong 
roots, making up a bottom warmth beneath them, of stable 
manure and leaves mixed together. This mixture should be 
prepared a week or two previously to its use in the pit. Our 
bin, or pit, is three feet below the floor level, and a boarding 
rests on the floor, of one foot in depth, and this is surmounted 

303. ACCTARIUM. 



12G 



by a lid, binged to the backwall. Thus the wliole appearance, 
when shut down, is that of a long and huge box. At least two 
feet of the hot manure is introduced, and on this the crowns 
or roots are placed as thickly as they can be packed; these, in 
general, average about a foot in depth, and thus their heads are 
just level with the floor, having one foot of head room. As 
soon as the buds have grown two to three inches, we cool down 
the bottom heat immediately by applying cold water, in each 
can of which a handful of salt is dissolved, applying it until 
the heat is greatly subdued, and adding more in a few days, if 
necessary. The lid, of course, is kept closed at all limes, and 
thus the Kale becomes beautifully blanched. It matters not, 
however, how cleverly the forcing is carried out, unless the 
roots are strong and sound, we therefore offer a few hints on its 
culture. 

Sow in the early part of March, in a very rich drill, and when 
the plants are up, thin them to about two inches from plant to 
plant, and keep them clean through the summer. In the fol- 
lowing February a highly manured, and deeply trenched plot 
must be prepared for their further culture ; here they are to be 
planted in rows, three feet apart, and at one foot distance in the 
row. A cleanly course of culture is, of course, carried on through 
the summer ; and, in the end of July, a good soaking of liquid 
manure should be given, adding a handful of salt to every three- 
gallon can of the liquid. This is done to cause the leaf to be- 
come boldly develo|)ed, for as the size of the leaf is, so will be the 
strength of the crown, By the latter end of October the leaves 
will begin to perish; and, at that period, trench out the whole 
stock intended for forcing, and “ lay it in by the heels.” From 
this stock the quantity can be drawn, as wanted for forcing. 
This, then, completes the whole process ; but, we may add, that 
the Kale being a marine plant, and growing principally in saline 
sands, stiff clayey soil is not well adapted for its culture. Such 
soils should be thoroughly drained, and a vast amount of sand 
or ashes incorporated with it. The bed, moreover, in which it 
is planted, may, in that case, be raised nine inches above the 
ground-level. 

308 Mushroom Culture. An important portion of the delicacy 
of forced Mushrooms, whether appearance or flavour be the 
consideration, depends on their being whitened, or blanched. 



127 



especially when used in the button state. As efficient assis- 
tants in producing this advantage, our opaque protectors are 
most appropriate structures. Gardeners in extensive establish- 
ments, who possess mushroom houses, and the adjuncts of 
roomy sheds, generally make their beds principally of what are 
termed horse droppings; but, for the amateur, we think it 
scarcely safe to recommend a material which runs into so vio- 
lent a heat. The gardener, in the former case, is rot obliged to 
ferment his manure; drying it in an open shed for a few weeks, 
with now and then a turning, will render it what is technically 
termed sweet. The amateur, with small appliances however, 
will in general, be compelled, previous to its use, to get rid of 
some of its noxious gases by fermentation ; added to which, it is 
necessary to reduce its texture in some degree, in order to facili- 
tate the spread of the spawn, which will neither luxuriate in mere 
straw, nor in a highly decomposed body of a rotten character. 
He may, therefore, use fresh manure from the stable door, merely 
shaking out with the fork, and rejecting, the longer straw. This 
then must be thrown into a heap, until it becomes very hot, and 
smokes considerably ; by which time, say about a week, most 
of the more volatile gases will be dissipatefi, and a sort of par- 
tial desiccation will be produced. This is necessary at the first 
sweating, as a part of the end in view, is to dry up extra mois- 
ture, as well as to remove noxious gases. It must now be 
turned and thoroughly shaken to pieces, placing the outsides 
in the middle. This done, it may lie four or five days, never 
suffering it to become so hot again, but merely warm, and one 
more turning will make it fit for the bed. 

The brick pits, as suggested for the protectors, will be very 
proper places to make the bed in; and here, in a week from the 
last turning, the bed may be built. It must be about a foot in 
depth, not less, and the manure must be trodden, as hard as pos- 
sible, in the process of filling. As soon as the bed is made, the 
opaque protectors must be placed on it to exclude rain, which 
would nullify the whole proceeding. In about three days 
the heat will rise, when it is the best plan to bore holes imme- 
diately, for the spawn, in order to prevent the heat rising too 
strongly; the spawn, however, must not be introduced for sev- 
eral days. In another week or so, the heat will have been at 
its highest point, and begin to descend again, and this is the 

304. AUCTARIUM. 



128 



critical moment at which to introduce the spawn. When 
spawned, a little litter may be strewed over the bed, inside the 
protector, to prevent a too sudden decline of the heat, and in 
about a fortnight the spawn, if good, will begin to spread. The 
bed may then be soiled over, about two inches thick, any ordi- 
nary garden soil will suffice for the purpose; and the soil must 
be pressed down firmly with the back of the spade. 

The spawning temperature should range from seventy to 
eighty degrees; the subsequent heat of the bed, from sixty to 
sixty-five; and the atmospheric temperature from fifty to sixty. 
In winter some covering on the outside of the protector will be 
needed. 

309 Lily of the Valley. This delightful gem of spring is an 
especial favourite with the flower-loving world ; and the more 
particularly so when forced; for forcing, if rightly conducted, 
seems to add to its grace and delicacy. A bouquet, composed of 
white Camellias, Orange blossoms, and the forced Lily of the 
Valley, is a present worthy the acceptance of a queen, and almost 
indispensable at nuptial ceremonies, in early spring. 

Our opaque protectors are perfectly adapted to their culture, 
until the blossom bud appears, when they must be gradually 
inured to the light; avoiding all sun-shine until they are in full 
blossom. They must, therefore, conformably to our system, be 
forced in pots or boxes. 

We will first point to a few principles, which require atten- 
tion in the process, and next allude to preparatory culture. 

A small bottom heat is requisite ; we use from sixty-five to 
seventy degrees ; of course it is immaterial whether it be pro- 
duced from tanks, or from fermenting materials : if the latter 
be used, shrub or tree leaves will suit the purpose, with which, 
a little sweetened, that is, partially fermented, manure, should 
be mixed. The pots, when introduced, should be plunged 
completely over head; but as the buds, in rising, would be 
crushed and deformed by the unequal pressure of the flakes of 
leaves, little mounds of finely-riddled old tan, leaf mould, or 
light soil, should be piled over the roots. In about three weeks 
the buds will begin to emerge through the soil, and then it be- 
comes necessary to expose them to a slight amount of light and 
ventilation, in order to cause them to rise in compact heads. 
The pots had better now be placed on the surface of the bed, or 



129 



only half plunged, and sprinkled with tepid water occasionally, 
for they love moisture; or, at least, are very averse to dryness. 
In another week they should be removed to the glazed protec- 
tors, or to any shady portion of the greenhouse, where they will 
gradually unfold without any further difficulty. As before ob- 
served, they must be kept from sun-light until in full blossom ; 
for a sudden exposure of them to its influences, when they first 
emerge from the soil in an etiolated state, would prove fatal 
to them. 

A little preparatory culture will render the forcing of this 
flower more convenient as well as more successful. A few buds 
should be planted for this purpose every year, in order to pre- 
serve a regular system of supply, and in the middle of March 
they will require two seasons’ culture to make them sufficiently 
strong. A damp spot should be chosen, such as the back or 
north border of the kitchen garden; and this should be set out 
in four-feet beds, making it very rich with well-decayed ma- 
nure, and adding some boggy heath soil to it. On this, well- 
blended, mark out circles at fifteen inches apart, the circles 
about eight inches in diameter, which may be impressed on 
the soil with an eight-inch pot, held in an inverted position. 
Within this circle dibble in the roots, putting them very thick, 
perhaps about two dozen good buds in the whole to each circle, 
and as soon as planted, cover the whole of the crowns with two 
inches at least of mellow manure. 

Nothing further will be necessary but clean culture, and the 
picking away of all blossom buds before they expand, for this 
strengthens the plant much. After two summers’ culture in 
the buds, pot them about the last week of October; and in doing 
so, merely cut round each circle with a sharp spade, and sink it 
into a pot large enough, first placing a potsherd or oyster shell, 
at the bottom, and on it a layer of ordinary leaves, half decayed. 
The whole stock must then be placed in the “plunging ground” 
and covered over head a foot deep, with old tan to keep out frost. 
From this place of safety they may be successively removed to 
the protectors according to the supply of flowers required; and 
by sucb means, abundance of the delightful Lily of the Valley, 
may be obtained from the early part of December, until they 
flower in the open soil. 

310 Forcing Deciduous Roses in Protectors. We shall not 

30i. AUCTAEIDM. 



130 



feel called upon to enter largely into this branch of our subject, 
although in former days, it was one of the most important con- 
nected with the spring decorations of the plant house. Now 
that such a variety of hybrid Roses are in cultivation; many of 
them possessing by nature an aptitude for early blossoming, far 
superior to the old Moss, and Provins or Cabbage Rose; 
the latter are, and will continue to be, in a considerable degree 
superseded. Still there are those who will ever esteem those 
companions of their childhood, and to such we will offer a few 
cultural hints. 

We need scarcely say, that our protectors will afford every 
facility for forcing them, so as to have them in blossom at the 
end of February, and a succession until the end of April, if ne- 
cessary; by which time their congeners in the sheltered border 
will be giving promise of a continuation of these charming 
flowers. Like most forcing plants of deciduous character, pre- 
vious good culture and a due preparation of the plant, are the 
only sure foundations of success. It requires two summers to 
produce them in superior order for forcing. Fine clear and 
young plants should be obtained in the end of February, and 
planted three in a pot; if strong bushes, laden with blossoms, 
are desired : the pots about eight or nine inches in diameter. 
The compost should be two-thirds rich turfy loam, slightly ad- 
hesive, and one-third rich manure and vegetable matter, only 
half decomposed. To this may be added a little charred mate- 
rial and sand, to ensure a free passage for water, for some three 
or four years to come. When potted they must be plunged in 
an open spot, (unless a pit or frame could be spared) and here 
they should be slightly shaded for a few weeks, if the days be 
sunny. The pots may be covered over with half-decayed rich 
manure, in the latter part of May, by which time the ground 
will have become somewhat warm; and nothing more is wanted 
but to keep them free from weeds and frosts. Early in the fol- 
lowingspring they should be turned round in their holes, to break 
whatever roots have issued through the bottom of the pots, and 
now they must be pruned back with the intent of causing them 
to thicken. All ground suckers may be cut entirely away, for 
these seldom produce blooming wood until a second year. By 
the following November they will be in first-rate order for 
forcing, and will merely require a slight shortening of the longer 



131 



shoots, before being introduced to heat. In pruning, the best 
blooming buds may be readily distinguished from the mere 
wood buds, by their plumpness, even when in a state of dor- 
mancy. Watering, with a liberal hand, is necessary during 
their preparatory course, and syringing, occasionally, with 
tobacco water ; half a pound of shag tobacco to the gallon, 
if the Aphides appear. 

During the forcing process, a bottom heat of sixty-five de- 
grees will suffice, whilst the plants are in the opaque protector; 
when, however, the leaf begins to unfold, they must be removed 
to the glazed protector, where a bottom heat of from seventy to 
seventy-five degrees will be beneficial. Plenty of atmospheric 
moisture, liberal syringings, a free ventilation, and a freedom 
from Thrips and Aphides, are the necessary conditions. 

Second Division. 

Opaqce Protectors emploted as mere shelter from severe 

FROST. 

311 Cape Bulbs. To endeavour to describe thoroughly the cul- 
ture of the numerous species of these interesting “Lilies of the 
field” of the Cape, would lead us far too wide of the objects 
contemplated at the commencement of these papers. We must 
therefore rest content, in some cases, with merely pointing to 
the eligibility of the protectors, for at least wintering numerous 
half-hardy bulbs ; occasionally showing also, that through the 
whole year, such economical structures would, for very many 
things, supply the deficiencies arising from the absence of a 
greenhouse; the latter involving more labour, and much greater 
expense. 

It is, of course, familiar to most of the readers of the Botanic 
Garden, that the seasons are very different at the Cape from 
those of our own country ; and that a much greater amount of 
aridity, from a hot dry atmosphere, prevails during a great part 
of the year. Hence the propriety of providing some kind of 
cover for the plants of such a climate. Moreover, the wintering 
such things in cold structures, must be viewed in the light of a 
retarding process : for the latter part of our summer is the 
spring of the Cape, and many of these gorgeous ffowers are 
springing into a renewed existence, at the very period that we 
in Britain are securing a long rest for them. With those who 
possess stoves or other houses of high winter temperature, the 

306. AUCTAEIUM. 



132 



case is somewhat different. Here the Amaryllis, Sparaxis, 
Ixia, and other lovely families, maybe had in l)lossom at a 
period identical with their native clime. 

We have now, therefore, merely to offer advice to the un- 
initiated on wintering them ; either for borders or for the spring 
decoration of the plant house; and also as a relief to the over- 
bui deued stages and shelves of such structures. Most of these 
bulbs are adapted to withstand intense dryness in the soil, for 
many weeks together ; and dry soil suitable for use in the pro- 
tectors, being a bad conductor of frost, constitutes a favourable 
feature in the employment of structures, from which it is not pos- 
sible to keep out frost at all times. 

In the opaque protectors, and plunged in dry saw-dust, ashes, 
tan, or even soil. Cape bulbs, in pots of light compost, will be 
found to keep remarkably well ; and if a small bottom heat, of 
tan or otherwise, should happen to be provided, so much the 
better. In the latter case, they would spring into activity at 
an earlier period ; and where there is a plant-house, requiring 
early decoration, this would be a good course to pursue, as 
they might be removed in succession, according to the state of 
their growth, to the greenhouse shelf. 

The pots, during the winter, should be covered with some- 
thing to preserve the crowns of the bulbs ; and perhaps nothing 
is better than the dust of charcoal. Ordinary chaff, too, would 
be excellent; and either of these should be applied six inches 
thick, in the middle of November. Clean dry straw would 
answer well, or even hay, but great care must be taken that wet 
does not penetrate through the covering. In very severe 
weather the protector may be covered with mats, well fastened 
to the side of the frame, incasing a layer of litter ; and thus 
they may be closed down for several weeks, without fear of 
injury. 

Some caution is requisite in applying water to these tribes 
when they awaken with the returning spring. A very little 
must be given at first, and indeed, until they are perfectly safe 
from frost, they should not receive any. Most of them will 
commence growing freely with returning warmth, in their dry 
soil, especially those possessing solid and substantial bulbs. 
Many of the smaller bulbs, such as the Ixias, Sparaxis, &c., 
succeed better if disengaged from the old soil before they com- 



133 



mence rooting: repotting them in a mixture of peat, loam, and 
leaf soil, and placing them in a comfortable situation. Indeed 
our nurserymen treat many of these tribes as the Crocus ; and 
they may be purchased from their shelves in a dry state, as other 
bulbs. 

It is well for the amateur to remember, that many of what are 
termed Cape bulbs, may be grown out of doors, in well-drained 
and snugly-situated borders; but all the larger kinds, as the 
Brunsvigias and the stronger Amaryllids, must be planted six 
or eight inches below the surface ; it being understood that this 
is congenial to their habit, and is assuredly a protective plan. 
Good cultivators generally re-pot them when they have some 
fresh green leaves, well expanded, and are advancing towards 
luxuriant growth; and, when in full vigour, they enjoy liquid 
manure. 

312 The Chrysanthemum. We come now to a flower of so 
popular a character, that no person possessing a greenhouse, 
frame, or pit, should think it complete without at least a few 
varieties of these harbingers of winter. Chrysanthemums are 
much increased in value and interest from the circumstance of 
their coming in to fill up the gap occasioned by the loss of the 
Dahlias ; for these generally fall the victims of a single night’s 
frost in October; which comes, as it were, in advance of the 
great enemy, that lingers in ambush till later in the year. The 
latter plant, in gorgeous show, has delighted us in our out-of- 
door walks ; and now, in autumn, when we are seeking the com- 
forts of the house, the other attends us within doors, and com- 
pensates for the loss we have sustained. 

The Chrysanthemum is grown by a variety of methods, occa- 
sionally not unmixed with whim ; some persons endeavouring 
to grow them as gigantic as possible; others, with Chinese pro- 
pensity, aim at dwarfing them; and a third party, regardless 
of size, seek only a prominent display of their beautiful flowers. 
Those who possess conservatories, or other such structures, 
generally follow out the first practice; whilst those who pos- 
sess but a small house, or pits, resort to the dwarfing system; 
which indeed is in part practised for the conservatory, as small 
plants are required for front situations, as also for furnishing 
baskets, stands, or vases, in the drawing room, or balconies. As 
the dwarfing system offers many conveniencies, and for which 

307. AUCTARIUM. 



134 



the protectors are admirably adapted, we will deal principally 
with this mode. 

Some growers propagate by cuttings, some by suckers, and 
others by layering. We recommend that by cuttings, as the 
most certain ; nevertheless, the most dwarf plants of all, can be 
produced by the layering system. To begin with the old plants, 
from a selection of which, of course, the next year’s plants are 
to be produced. Such being gradually hardened, and inured to 
out-of-door work, may be turned out of their pots, into a bed of 
very poor soil, in the course of February. We say very poor 
soil, for the suckers have always a tendency to grossness ; and, 
consequently, when in rich soil, they become “long-jointed.” 
This is opposed to the end at which we aim. By the early part 
of April, or it may be a few weeks later, suckers will be six or 
eight inches in height, and cuttings may be put out forthwith. 

An ordinary hand-glas.s, out of doors, will certainly suffice to 
preserve them, but a moderate amount of bottom heat will be 
advantageous ; and such being available in the glazed pro- 
tectors, they can be propagated with facility ; especially if 
propagating glasses can he placed over them. About soil, and 
the mode of making cuttings, we need say little : the cuttings, 
however, should be short, about four joints are enough. As 
soon as “struck,” they should be “hardened off,” and may re- 
main fora few weeks, in pots, without disturbance; observing 
to keep them as cool and airy as possible ; and in order to 
render them dwarf, a low temperature is absolutely necessary, 
and, of course, a free exposure to light. In a short time they 
will attain a stout and somewhat stunted appearance, and must 
be “potted off.” A good plan is to place three in a five-inch 
pot; this we think far superior to a single plant: soil we will 
advert to anon. Thus potted, in about three weeks they will be 
well established, and, in fact, will be growing freely; and at 
this period we pinch off the top from every plant. Liberal 
waterings will be necessary through the whole course of culture, 
more especially when the pots become filled with roots. 

When the five-inch pots are filled, give them, at once, their 
final shift; the size of the pot employed must in some degree 
be influenced by the situation they are finally to occupy. A 
seven-inch pot will grow them in tolerable perfection ; but the 
larger the pot, of course, the finer the blossoms will be. It now 



135 



becomes necessary to place them in an open situation in the 
garden, and to water regularly : nothing is more injurious than 
drought, although but for an hour. Towards the end of Sep- 
tember they may be placed under cover, observing to give all 
the air possible: liquid manure will now be of much service, 
and henceforth, all suckers must be trimmed away, until the 
dowering is past ; this indeed must be practised through the 
whole course of culture. For compost we use rather more than 
one-half of sound loam, the other half being composed of leaf- 
mould and rotten manure; adding a little sand and charcoal 
siftings. 

313 Lobelias. It must be borne in mind, that we are giving a 
mere epitome of the culture of the plants, enumerated at pages 
116 and 117. This must be an apology for not entering into 
those minute particulars, which, in general, garnish the details 
of culture, as expounded by those, whose whole life is spent in 
examining the exact dimensions of a Dahlia, or the orthodoxy 
of a notion, as to the correctness of outline in a Pansy blossom. 

These papers are intended to point to a few simple princi- 
ples; not merely the highest point of culture in a specimen or 
two, but by which those, who taking a close interest in gar- 
dening, through leisure and taste, may conduct or dictate the 
necessary operations. We therefore feel it a duty to point to 
a few features in culture which, whatever may be added, must 
not be forgotten. 

The subject of our present remarks, however, is familiar to 
most persons ; and before proceeding farther, it may be well to 
state, that these observations are not intended to apply to the 
annual Lobelias, or to the trailing perennial kinds of the green- 
house. It is to those glowing scarlet and crimson kinds (of 
which the old Lobelia fulgens may be considered the type), 
that we would direct attention. These, it is well known, die 
down, as gardeners term it, every autumn, and long before the 
decay of the annual shoot, nature has provided a numerous 
progeny in the character of underground suckers, from which 
the plants for the future year must be selected. The best plan 
is to take them up in masses, without disturbing the roots, and 
to sink them into roomy pots or boxes. This must be accom- 
plished in the early part of November, and no water should be 
given: they merely require some mellow soil, almost dry, packed 

308. AUCTARIUM. 



136 



closely round the balls. They may thus be immediately trans- 
ferred to the opaque protectors, for they will require no more 
light than the protectors afford, until the beginning of the suc- 
ceeding February, when they will require to be put under a 
course of high culture. If the winter prove very severe, some 
dry and clean litter or dry sawdust, may be placed over them 
inside the protector; these materials, however, must be removed 
the moment the severe weather has passed away. 

We now feel tempted to offer a few brief remarks on their 
early spring culture ; and, indeed, we feel it a duty, not only 
that our directions should conduct them into the opaque pro- 
tectors, but also out again, for they will probably demand a 
refuge in the glazed protectors. 

In the beginning of February our practice is to remove 
these store pots of Lobelias to a warmer atmosphere, to cause 
them to awake from their torpidity. Thus they remain in 
their store pots or boxes until suspended animation is restored, 
when they are broken to pieces, and each young plant sep- 
arated, and planted three in a three-inch pot, for we consider 
that these threes, well-cultivated, form a fine group; one single 
stem alone not being calculated to produce the desired effect, 
in modern gardening. 

A warm and moist atmosphere now becomes necessary, and 
nothing can be more suitable than a bed of fermenting materials 
if at hand. The shady part of a cucumber or melon frame is 
particularly suitable ; effectual shading will be indispensable for 
a week after their removal, if the weather prove very bright. 
As to compost, equal parts of sound loam, decayed manure or 
vegetable matter, and sand, will be excellent : or half ordinary 
garden soil, and half manure will suffice, or such a material as 
an old mushroom bed. In about three weeks the pots will be 
filled with roots, and it will then be necessary to commence the 
process, termed by gardeners, ‘hardening off.’ We need scarcely 
say, that the glazed protectors, or any ordinary frame, will assist 
in accomplishing this : no plan is better, however, thau the 
ordinary greenhouse, or a vinery, or peach house ; as they must 
be placed where there is no artificial heat whatever. 

By the end of April they will be fit to plant out in the 
flower garden, and a rich soil is most desirable; as the more 
luxuriant they become the more blossoms they produce. Above 



137 



all the elements which conduce to their successful culture, water 
is the most essential ; the waterpot, therefore, must be frequently 
in request. 

In planting them out it is well to keep the ball of soil a little 
below the ordinary ground level, in order that moisture, when 
administered, may lodge permanently about their stems ; for 
they produce innumerable surface fibres, which, as the season 
advances, may be nursed with a top dressing of manure. 

Before closing our remarks on the Lobelia, it is well to observe, 
that they form no mean objects in the summer decoration of the 
conservatory. Such need never be “hardened off,” as pre- 
viously, but may be inserted in large pots, on the “one shift” 
system, betimes in the season. A liberal drainage must be 
given, and the plants placed much below the surface of the pot 
rim. As they advance in growth, they may thus receive a top 
dressing, and, of course, liberal supplies of water. 

314 Cyclamen. Here we have an interesting family, to the cul- 
ture of which the means of the amateur, whose establishment is 
somewhat limited, are peculiarly adapted. Some of its species, 
moreover, are perfectly hardy, and therefore do not form legiti- 
mate subjects for our present papers ; which, of course, are 
in the main, intended to explain the use of the protectors we 
have recommended, or the ordinary frame, as the case may lie. 
The Cyclamens are, for the most part, early spring flowerers ; 
indeed, nearly all, with the exception of Europaeum, which is 
one amongst the most interesting of autumnal flowers that we 
know; although somewhat difficult to procure true, hederajfo- 
liurn being sometimes substituted for it, by ignorant or inter- 
ested dealers. Both Cyclamen Europa}um and hederrefolium, 
are British or indigenous plants, and called weeds, simply be- 
cause they are British, a distinction which we cannot admit. 
An exotic, or foreign plant, is as truly a weed when it becomes 
injurious to a crop, as a native one ; and, on the other hand, a 
useful British plant, under cultivation, cannot, with propriety, 
be termed a weed. 

We will now elucidate the culture of the tender kinds of 
Cyclamen, and in doing so, we may as well take Persicum as 
the type ; for whoever can grow this in perfection, need not 
doubt of success with the rest. Being all natives of the south 
of Europe, they of course require from the hand of the careful 

309. AUCTARIUJI. 



138 



cultivator some protection from the harsh usage of a more 
northerly climate. The Cyclamen Persicum should be raised 
from seed, although it may be increased by division of the root 
or tuber. The latter plan, however, is not to be recommended ; 
we have often tried it, but the mutilation occasioned in dividing 
them is so severe that they never fairly recover. Nothing but 
the most urgent necessity should induce the cultivator to adopt 
such a method of increase. 

The seed of Cyclamen Persicum is generally ripe about April 
or May, and should be sown immediately. A shallow pan or 
box will be eligible, and above all things the drainage must 
be complete ; for they cannot endure the least stagnation of 
moisture. Much care must be taken to cover the seeds thinly, 
yet securely ; and, as they will not germinate for several weeks, 
%ve would advise that they be covered with wet sphagnum, or 
moss of any kind; and if this can be kept damp, without 
pouring water on the soil, the seeds will be safe ; for, in all 
probability, they will not vegetate until the period at which the 
dormant roots of the parent plants begin to awake from their 
torpidity. 

In the mean time, place the seed pan on any shady shelf of 
the greenhouse ; and when the young plants begin to appear, 
regular attention, in regard to gentle waterings, &c., must be 
given them; and they may subsequently be left to enjoy a light 
and warm shelf in the greenhouse, or in the glazed protectors. 
The soil in the pan containing the seed must be kept somewhat 
moist, and must, of course, be occasionally watered ; for a desic- 
cated, dusty compost, will assuredly, not be suitable. About 
soil we will make mention in due course. We now come to 
the subsequent treatment of the young plants. 

The best plan is to keep the seedlings in a state of high cul- 
ture, as long as they show signs of a tendency to active vege- 
tation; and to this end, a temperature of sixty degrees, or nearly 
so, a light shelf, under glass, and slight but regular waterings, 
are the requisites. Towards the month of June or July, these 
young plants will evince their desire for their annual rest, which 
although partial in character, is still a cessation from active 
growth ; and, under such circumstances, it is necessary to with- 
hold, in a great degree, the amount of water they have here- 
tofore received. 



139 



In the third year the seedlings will be strong flowering plants; 
indeed, by high culture, and the best appliances, they will some- 
times attain to this state in the second year. Their subsequent 
treatment is, of course, that of the mature plants ; viz., warmth, 
and a regular supply of moisture during the growing and blos- 
soming season, and a partial w-ithdrawal of moisture and other 
exciting causes during the period of rest. 

When the plants are strong with age, it is the best plan to 
turn them out of their pots, with their balls whole, every June, 
into an elevated bed, made for the purpose, in the kitchen or 
reserve garden. They will thus make strong roots, and much 
finer plants, than by keeping them continually imprisoned in 
pots. Of course, they will require to be re-potted with balls 
of earth about their roots, early in September, each year ; and 
they should then be placed in the glazed protectors, or frame, 
or on a shelf in the greenhouse. 

For compost, take of open sand one part, charcoal dust one, 
light soil or sandy loam two, fibrous bog or heath soil two, and 
of half-decomposed leaf soil three parts. We may here observe, 
that the tender kinds must have protection ; during the growing 
season the glazed protectors, the greenhouse shelf, or the draw- 
ing room window, are all eligible situations; during rest, the 
opaque protectors. The Europaeum and hederspfolium, and we 
may, perhaps, add coum, are, of course, perfectly hardy. 

315 Roses, VARIOUS, IN Pots. Here we have a noble and varied 
group of universal favourites; for, whilst many of our popular 
flowers have succumbed to the dictates of fashion, the Rose not 
only maintains its ground, but seems destined constantly to 
advance in our estimation. In offering remarks on the eligi- 
bility of an opaque protector, for furnishing a hybernatory for 
the more tender kinds, we must of necessity allude to the classes 
into which they are divided, with their respective habits. W'e 
will, of course, not include the Moss, the Provins, or indeed any 
of the strictly deciduous Roses ; for they, in general, need no 
protection, beyond plunging up to the rims in any open situa- 
tion out of doors. But many of the Tea, the Bourbon, and the 
China Roses, with the various hybrids of either class, require 
some slight protection, whether in pots or out ; and, indeed it is 
well as to those in pots, to make a point of housing all that are 
truly valuable during the early part of October. W'e here 

310. AUCTARIUM. 



140 



merely allude to pot Roses, intended for the future decoration 
of the flower fjarden : but another object frequently exists, 
which is, a desire to preserve those late growths on some of 
the perpetuals; which with a little assistance in a greenhouse, 
the glazed protectors, or a forcing pit, will serve to embellish 
the plant house or the drawing room in February. 

Such, however, cannot be expected to succeed very long in 
the opaque protectors; and we name these by the way, merely 
to show that even these may find an asylum in such structures, 
for a few weeks, if room cannot be spared for them in glazed 
structures. Whilst in such a situation, they must have all the 
air possible, merely protecting them at night from severe frosts. 

But to return to pot Roses in general : every one desirous of 
having abundance for bedding purposes, and for the general 
decoration of the borders, should propagate liberally by cuttings 
during June and July. All kinds will root freely, provided the 
wood is in proper condition ; more especially the Teas, Chinas, 
and Bourbons, which, in the main, contain, our best bedding 
varieties. The shoots used for this purpose, should be those 
first produced in spring, or rather early summer; because a 
long and genial season lies ahead — a season affording abun- 
dant time for both facilitating their rooting, and for potting off", 
and thoroughly establishing the plants. Such in the hands of 
a good cultivator, may be well established, in five-inch pots, by 
the middle of September ; and if housed, at that period, in any 
of the protectors, or in frames, will constitute a capital reserve 
stock for the ensuing summer; whether for beds, borders, for 
specimen plants in pots, or for autumn decoration in the plant 
house. 

It is well known to the gardening world, that much contro- 
versy has been for some time carried on, respecting the kind of 
stock most suitable for budding Roses upon. Some prefer the 
Dog Rose stock, some the Boursoult, whilst others give all 
praise to the “Manetti” stock — a new kind made public by 
Mr. Rivers. Now, without assuming anything in the way of 
arbitration, in so delicate a matter, we may just observe that it 
would be well, probably, to take into consideration the kind of 
soil into which the worked Roses are ultimately to be planted. 
Every body knows that the ordinary Dog Rose luxuriates in 
an adhesive soil ; whilst the Boursoult and Manetti would 



141 



appear fitted for our lighter soils. We may, however, just ob- 
serve, that some of the finest pot Roses we have ever seen exhi- 
bited, as to size of flower, were grafted on an ordinary apple-tree 
shoot, this spring, and plunged immediately in a propagation 
pit : at least so said the gardener who produced them. The 
kinds were Smith’s Noisette, Devoniensis, Eliza Sauvage, Saf- 
frano. Souvenir de la Malmaison : the blooms were enormous. 

316 Endive, blanched. For the preservation of this, the opaque 
protectors will be admirable. If they are used for this pur- 
pose, there will be no necessity for blanching it previous to 
introduction, unless wanted speedily for use. Endive, of 
course, will not keep so long after this process has commenced; 
therefore it will be well to insert a quantity of full-grown plants 
in the protectors, towards the end of October, placing them close 
together, and, of course, removing a ball of earth with each. 
These can be tied in succession, but the bands must not be very 
tight; for through the opacity of the protectors, and close plant- 
ing, they will nearly blanch without tying. The only requisites 
will be all the air possible, complete security from frost, and 
even the slightest shower of rain. 

.317 Lettuces. These, if already in course of blanching, or com- 
mencing that stage, will keep in opaque structures ; but if they 
are to grow and enlarge in the protectors, light is absolutely 
necessary. Those blanching may be taken up, before being 
injured by frost, and treated as Endive. 

318 Parsley. It is a common practice, of late, to put some supe- 
rior Parsley in pots, in order to prov ide against a severe winter. 
Of course, such will keep admirably in the opaque protectors, 
with plenty of air, although it will become somewhat pale, if 
kept in many weeks. 

319 Violets. The Neapolitan is the safest winter-flowering 
kind ; the new perpetual Tree-Violet is, however, very hand- 
some and sweet. The single Russian succeeds well out-of- 
doors. If Violets are required all the winter, a glazed protector 
will be necessary ; and the greatest amount of success is ob- 
tained by using a slight bottom heat, say 55 to 60 degrees. Give 
liberal ventilation, and protect from rain and frost. 

320 Ericas. These maybe protected in the glazed structures bv 
having ample covering. They are, however, very subject to 
mildew, through a stagnated atmosphere, and must have abun- 

311. auctarium. 



142 



dance of air, on all possible occasions. They should be on a 
stage, if possible ; otherwise, coarse cinder ashes will make a 
very good bottom. They will require very little water during 
winter ; when indispensable, give it liberally. 

321 Oranges. If there should not be room enough, during winter, 
in a glazed structure. Oranges may be preserved in an opaque 
one, for a month or so ; for they bear partial deprivation of light 
better than most plants. Frost must, of course, be excluded. 

322 New Holland Plants. Such, with a few exceptions, may 
be wintered in the glazed protectors. Comprising, however, 
not only genera, but species, differing much in habit and degrees 
of hardihood, caution is necessary. Let them have abundance 
of light and ventilation. They may stand on a stage, as the 
Ericas, or on ashes : frost, of course, excluded. 

223 Succulents. These, as a class, are certainly not quite at 
home in the protectors, inasmuch as they are averse to damp 
air, if accompanied with a very low temperature. We have, 
nevertheless, kept the tall Cacti, for many winters, as a matter 
of necessity, in a cold pit, taking care that the soil in their pots 
and the interior of the pit were perfectly dry when they were 
housed. Of course, rain should not be permitted to reach them; 
and the structure must be a glazed one. Exclude frost and 
withhold water, until the middle of February, when they ought 
to be transfefred to some greenhouse shelf, if possible. 

224 Carnations. If these are not taken under cover until the 
middle of November, they may be preserved tolerably well in the 
opaque protectors, providing they are kept dry, and allowed to 
freeze slightly when frosts occur. They will require much air, 
and when frozen ward off sunshine. 

325 Mignionette. This may be treated as Violets. A little 
tepid water will be necessary, once a week, but avoid wetting 
their leaves. 

226 Bedding Plants. Here we have an extensive group, differ- 
ing much in habit. Most of them, however, may be well pre- 
served in the glazed protectors. Such as Senecio, Anagallis, 
and some of the trellis climbers, as Maurandia, Lophospermum, 
&c., must be kept in the greenhouse, or they will be almost sure 
to perish. As belonging to this group we may mention Lobelia, 
Salvia patens, &c., these, if dry, may be stored away in almost 
any situation, where frost cannot reach them. As to bedding 



143 



plants in general, if they are from an early propagation, and 
consequently well established in their pots, they may be pre- 
served with facility, in any ordinary structure, without artificial 
heat, providing they are tolerably dry in their pots, and kept 
free from all moisture of an extraneous character, until the end 
of January, by which time some few may require a little water. 
Every means must be taken to dispel accumulating damps, by 
a most liberal amount of ventilation. During very severe 
weather, they must be not only covered with mats, but have a 
thick coating of litter over the mats, and it is well to add another 
course of mats over the litter. The sides of the protector, or 
frame, too, must be protected with soil, or lining of some 
kind. 

If they should be slightly frozen, they must be carefully 
screened from sunshine till the frost ceases, and then gradually 
thawed : this is best done by tilting the lights about a couple of 
inches, leaving the shading on until the next day at least. 

327 Potatoes. We now come to an article which, to produce 
early, requires a little artificial bottom warmth. Potatoes may 
be forwarded in the first stage, without any special provision of 
the kind; and, indeed, it is the very best [)lan with the ash- 
leaved kidney, which is by far best, when established in pots be- 
fore planting. Our practice is to insert single whole tubers of 
the middle size, in five-inch pots, about Christmas. These are 
placed in any dark room or structure, where a fire is kept occa- 
sionally, covering the pots over with moist litter, to prevent the 
soil drying up in the pots. In less than a month they will be 
up, with strong shoots, and may at once be planted in a prepared 
frame, or the protector, with a bottom warmth of about 70°. If 
this be made of fermenting material, it should be old and half- 
spent, for the sooner the bottom heat declines, after the Potatoes 
are six inches high, the better. Of course, when once above 
ground, they must have plenty of light and air, and be well pro- 
tected from frost. 

328 Carrots, Early. Their treatment is simple, and similar to 
the Potato; the z)paque protectors, if at liberty, will forward 
them a little, without bottom warmth. Sown, however, in a 
glazed protector in January, with a slight bottom heat, they 
will be obtained very early, 

329 Radishes, 'May be sown in alternate drills with early Car- 

312 . acctarium. 



144 



rots ; or even between the early Potatoes. Being of secondary 
consideration, no special provision need be made for them. 

:330 Kidney Beans. We cannot recommend an attempt to pro- 
duce these at a very early period in the glazed protectors. Few 
without a gi eeenhouse can sustain the desired warmth, for they 
require as high a temperature as Cucumbers to insure success. 
Any one commencing with a glazed protestor in the early part 
of February, with a bottom warmth of eighty degrees, may suc- 
ceed very well. If any warm shelf in a house is at liberty they 
may be sown in pots and turned out subsequently. 

331 Cucumbers. The glazed protectors will be most admirably 
adapted for those who, desiring an early bed, wish it also 
to continue in bearing all the summer, for this saves trouble 
and expense. In such case young plants should be reared, if 
possible, in a smallYrame; and if ready to plant out by the first 
week in February, they will be early enough to give the ama- 
teur a safe chance. A bottom warmth of seventy-five to eighty 
degrees should be guaranteed them through their earlier stages, 
and an atmospheric warmth never sinking below sixty-five, 
nor rising above eighty. If fermenting material be used, great 
care must be taken in thoroughly fermenting and turning it. 

332 Melons. The treatment of these is so similar to that of the 
Cucumber, that we need add little here. Five degrees of heat 
in advance of the Cucumber will be found beneficial. 

333 Strawberries, Whether planted out in pots, the glazed 

protectors, or even ordinary frames or pits, answer well, provid- 
ing they are not required particularly early. Strawberries 
enjoy a steady bottom heat of seventy degrees, whilst the atmos- 
pheric may commence at an average of fifty degrees, advancing 
weekly about three degrees, until sixty is attained ; at which 
point they will succeed better than at a higher tempera- 
tureV 'They require abundance of air whilst in blossom, and a 
liberal amount whilst ripening, and durin'g the latter .period 
they must be kept rather drier than previously. / ; 

• • 

% 






FINIS. 



THE 



BOTANIC GARDEN. 



INDEX 

TO THE 



AUCTARIUM. 

PART II. 



Age and propagation of Fruit trees, .. 

Apple trees, canker, 

Their duration, . 

Young seedlings, not prolific. 

Apricots, 



SECTION. 

....227 

....225 

....224 

....226 

256 



Culture 

Asparagus, forcing 

Bedding plants, 

Black Currants, culture, .. 

Bulbs, Cape, culture, 

Dutch, 

Carnations, winter protection. 

Carrots, early, 

Canker of Apple-trees, 

Charcoal, for potted plants, .. 

Cherries, culture, 

Chrysanthemums, culture, .... 
Composition, Forsyth’s, .... 

Conical training, 

Composts for potting, 

Cottage gardens, fruits for, . . . . 

Cucumbers, forcing, 

Curl in Potatoes, 

Currants, black, culture, .... 

Red and white, culture 

Cyclamen, culture, 

Destruction of wire-worms, .... 
Disbudding Fruit trees, .... 
Down training Fruit trees, . . . . 

Drill covers 

Duration of Apple trees, 



....297 
page 122 
....326 
301, 260 

....311 
page 118 

.... 324 

328 

....225 

....265 

....306 

....312 

....230 

287 

....270 

231 

.. ..331 

229 

260 

261, 302 
....314 
....223 

290 

....288 
page 107 
....224 



Earth in relation to plants, 

Endive, protection of, 

Erica, protection of, 

Figs, culture of, 

Filberts, culture of, 

Forsyth’s composition, 

Frames, moveable 

Fruit trees, culture, 

Autumn management, 

Disbudding and stopping, 

Mulching, 

Planting operations, 

Ripening period 

Situation of, 

Soil for, 

Stations for, 

Training, 

Fruit, gathering and storing, 

Fruits for Cottage gardens, 

Hand-glasses, 

Heath soil 

Kidney Beans, forcing, 

Lettuces, protecting 

Lily of the Valley, forcing, 

Lobelias, culture 

Manure, Liquid, 

Manures, various, 

Melons, forcing, 

Mignionette, protecting, 

Mushrooms, culture, 

Nectarines, culture, 

New Holland plants, wintering, 

Oranges, wintering, 

Parsley, protecting, 

Peaches, culture, 

Pears, selection of, 

Pear trees, to make fruitful, 

Pit, brick-built, 

— Plan of, 

Planting operations, 

Plums, culture of, 

Potatoes, curl in 

Forcing, 

Pot-bound plants 

Potting plants, 

Composts, 

Lumpy turf, 

Pressure, 

Sand, 

Protective structures, 

Asparagus in, 

Bulbs in, 



SFCTION 

....227 

....316 

320 

2o7,2!)8 

.... 305 

230 

page 98 

....234 

293 

290 

291 

295 

....292 

234 

234 

....234 
283, 284 

294 

231 

page 113 

264 

....330 

....317 

309 

313 

....277 

....267 

....332 

325 

308 

255, 296 
....322 

314 

318 

255, 296 

232 

228 

.... 98 
....103 
....295 
....304 

229 

....327 

276 

269 

270,271 

....273 

272 

....274 
page 97 
„ 122 
„ 118 



SECTION. 

Protective structures, Classifications of objects for,. . page 1 17 

Drill covers, portable, „ 107 

Frames, moveable, „ 98 

Handglasses, „ 113 

Pit, brick-built, „ 98 

Pit, plan of, 103 

Sashes, portable, „ 111 

Shrubs, deciduous, ,, 120 

Pruning, 296 

Apricots, 296 

Autumn, 295 

Peaches and Nectarines, 296 

Root, 280 

Spring 295 

Winter, 278 

Quenouille or Conical training,, 287 

Radishes, early, 329 

Raspberries, 2.39, 300 

Rats, to destroy 233 

Red and White Currants, 261, 302 

Rhubarb, forcing, page 123 

Root pruning, 280 

Roses, deciduous, in protectors, 310 

various, in pots, 315 

Sand, for potting 274 

Sea Kale, forcing, 307 

Selection of fruits, 231 

Sharp sand, 267, 274 

Situations for fruit trees, page 28 

Stations for Fruit trees, page 3 

Strawberries, 262, 303 

Forcing, 333 

Succulents 323 

Tabular view of Window plants, 281 

Training Fruit trees, 283, 284 

Trellised Arcades, 289 

Trellises, horizontal or table, 286 

Trellises, upright, 285 

Turf for potting, 270 

V'ines, culture of, 258, 299 

Violets, protection of, 319 

Watering pot plants, 275 

Window plant culture 263, 268, 282 

Plants suitable for 281 

Winter pruning, 278 

Wire- worms, their destruction, 223 

Wood of Fruit trees, ripening 292 



FINIS. 



lA 



. I 






■t • 



'''• ‘j.Vi’ If'^i .‘ irt' > — . - _«. 

•*( I -v- Vl* ■ « 4 s/i ,*'••'• --- 

' ^ • i 2 '**'* »Vi\ f ( , ■'■ <i'f — - wj 

VMtt£ * 'h'f' •'"•>> '••' ■ * i‘‘ • — 

BEB — 

f- ' ‘ — -<fc 

.,.. ... 



»‘ • 
h 

T' 



-i-, 

‘ •«>. » ‘ • * «t^n 



> , 



■ > • *«>>*»'«« ^ T 1 1 fcfr* ** 

»*i,. * ,^v; - 6 J* 

' ■ V ■ ■ • • < t ■-• * • ■• • • ‘ ' Vf s. iT(H . ■ r-rf -t- 

LV- A*-. - •.J '- 




a? y^'C !*••’ ?,tv* *•• • ♦-'i • '* 1 )^ 

*■ ^.;..t ■•V‘^1 %.•■.• «•«*> -*'J ...I ,•*'• .Srt>iJl _ 

< *'••?••' • 'M**-* '/■ '*• -- 4 ti- .t'?~ ■ ' 

.,4 > « k* '•'■ 4 ' I t i^li 

*v I •*>.-- •-'• 'Vw. i.‘”. '.(<«- 

‘ A f., . . ,'..w . , , ', ... , i 



<; I • • • 

* ■• », ».* ^ »i 



_ ^ * L* ' »** 

r.. 

^ ^ * vLii* * lT 




•»< '* 4 . 



■la'^ 

I- . t .- 4 , if— 7 T 



.'•’’Tt- ' -V • .'j, o 

•■•■Mi* -tjf- I . .•-'•“i,( .V . I. •* ’-<.1 . -• 

, ^d,’**t* ••••'* ♦ 

* 0 "^ •*.•• «••*. ■'-‘'■-<'•>♦•11 ■ 

* *l .V.** ‘ \ir '•■ «t . . -i ' l«#» t, .it tit 

..■; ...... »-lt . • . ..'in ’ JH V... 




‘- t* 

'v*«» 






■• « ' 4.^*' J 

«'. ■ !»»>/* ,tn#^ V I - — • - 

..« .....I 'i^i.'t .►,'.» .'A '•.»’< I •*.!''■■ 

t.,. >’ W^'V'- 

. < - -t- 



• •* 4 *!V«* *•■«•«» rw , • *' i 

I *•...<■ .^... .A‘.fc 

f* ♦«'»i •»<• ..*w..v ..»**. . , > . , i|V WiUlij (iwAiiC- 

A\ .. ..tt ' a . . ... « AkiM a 



i - I < l '. .; 











fir 



PENNSYLVANIA H( 


RTICULTURAL SOCIET 




3 1827 


)0020766 1 





o' 




>>•5 


91^ 






l)» 


ITj - 


>J> ' 








»■>> 

-0 

» 


a 















>Z 




a 



















