si £' r ^ 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 123 

NUMBERS 3601-3623 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION PRESS 
WASHINGTON : 1967 



Publications of the United States Natioual Museum 

The scientific publications of the United States National Museum include two 
series, Proceedings of the United States National Museum and United States 
National Museum Bulletins. 

In these series are published original articles and monographs dealing with 
the collections and work of the Museum and setting forth newly acquired facts 
in the fields of anthropology, biology, geology, history, and technology. Copies 
of each publication are distributed to libraries and scientific organizations and 
to specialists and others interested in the various subjects. 

The Proceedings, begun in 1878, are intended for the publication, in separate 
form, of shorter papers. These are gathered in volumes, octavo in size, with 
the publication date of each paper recorded in the table of contents of the volume. 

In the Bulletin series, the first of which was issued in 1875, appear longer, 
separate publications consisting of monographs (occasionally in several parts) 
and volumes in which are collected works on related subjects. Bulletins are 
either octavo or quarto in size, depending on the needs of the presentation. 
Since 1902, papers relating to the botanical collections of the Museum have been 
published in the Bulletin series under the heading Contributions from the United 
States National Herbarium. 

Frank A. Tatlob 
Director, United States National Museum 



CONTENTS 

Nuviber 

Johnson, David H. Neotropical species of genus Triplax 
Herbst and review of genus Haematochiton Gorham (Cole- 
optera: Erotylidae). 25 pages, 10 figures. Published July 28, 
1967 . . 3601 

New species: Triplax alvarengai, T. latipalpus, T. sola. 
New combinations: Triplax divisa, Haematochiton cruentipennis, H. 
maderi. 

Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. ; Holt, Perry C; and Walton, 
Margaret. The crayfishes and then- epizootic ostracod and 
branchiobdellid associates of the Mountain Lake, Virginia, 
region. 84 pages, 22 figures. Published June 22, 1967 . . . . 3602 

James, Maurice T., and Wirth, Willis W. The species of 
Hermetia of the aurata group (Diptera: Stratiomyidae). 
19 pages, 12 figures. Published June 22, 1967 3603 

New species: Hermetia anthidium James, H. nigricornis James and 
Wirth, H. melanderi James and Wirth, H. conjuncta James, 
H. subpellucida James and Wirth, H. impressa James, H. ryckmani 
James and Wirth. 

Blake, Doris H. Revision of the beetles of genus Glyj)toscelis 
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) . 53 pages, 39 figures. Published 
July 16, 1967 3604 

New species: Glyptoscelis cylindrica, G. artemisiae, G. paula, G. 

idahoensts, G. juniperi, G. color adoens is, G. septentrionalis, G. 

peperi, G. guatemalensis, G. cahitac, G. sonorensis . 
New subspecies: Glyptoscelis juniperi zantJiocoma. 
New status: Glyptoscelis vandykei, G. ardis. 

Gill, Frank B. Observations on the pelagic distribution of 
seabirds in the western Indian Ocean. 33 pages, 2 figures. 
Published August 9, 1967 3605 

Manning, Raymond B. Review of the genus Odontodactylus 
(Crustacea: Stomatopoda). 35 pages, 9 figures. Published 

July 28, 1967 3600 

New species: Odontodactylus hawaiiensis. 

Ztjsi, Richard. The role of the depressor mandibidae muscle in 
kinesis of the avian skull. 28 pages, 13 figures. Published 

June 22, 1967 3607 

in 



IV CONTENTS 

Flint, Oliver S., Jr. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, IV: 
New species from Mexico and Central America. 24 pages, 71 

figures. Published June 22, 1967 3608 

New species: Atopsyche hidalgoi, Culoptila montanensis, Protopila 
laterospina, P. marqua, P. cristata, P. huasteca, P. spangleri, 
Chimarra duckworthi, C. ortiziana, C. antigua, C. (Curgia) aureo- 
punctata, C. (Curgia) lobata, C. (Curgia) wilsoni, Polyplectropus 
macrostylus, P. costaricensis, P. guatemalensis, P. aztecus, Xipho- 
centron aureum, Leucotrichia viridis, Zumatrichia echinata, Costa- 
trichia panamensis, Ochrolrichia cruces, Metrichia mexicana, 
Neotrichia costaricensis, Hydroptila veracruzensis, Diplectrona 
chiapensis, Hydropsyche vespertina, Pleclropsyche sandrae, Lepto- 
nema chila, Limnephilus maya, Triaenodes anomala. 

King, Warren B.; Watson, George E.; and Gould, Patrick 
J. An application of automatic data processing to the study 
of seabirds, I: Numerical coding. 29 pages, 10 figures. 

Published September 8, 1967 3609 

Kirsteuer, Ernst. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 3 : Marine archiannelids from Dominica. 

6 pages, 1 figure. Published July 6, 1967 3610 

New species: Saccocirrus archboldi. 
Field, William D. Butterflies of the new genus Calystryma 
(Lycaenidae: Theclinae, Strymonini). 31 pages, 23 figures, 

3 plates. Published August 9, 1967 3611 

New genus: Calystryma. 

New species: Calystryma keta, C. blora, C. naka, C. anapa, C. barza, 

C. tifla. 
New combination: Calystryma atrox, C. meleager, C. malta, C. gent ilia, 
C. pisis, C. trebula, C. cinniana. 

Roper, Clyde F. E., and Young, Richard E. A review of the 
Valbyteuthidae and an evaluation of its relationship with the 
Chiroteuthidae (Cephalopoda: Oegospida). 9 pages, 1 
figure, 4 plates. Published August 4, 1967 3612 

Bowman, Thomas E., and Kornicker, Louis S. Two new 
crustaceans: the parasitic copepod Sphaeronellopsis monothrix 
(Choniostomatidae) and its myodocopid ostracod host 
Parasterope pollex (Cylindroleberidae) from the southern New 
England coast. 28 pages, 7 figures, 1 plate. Published 
July 28, 1967 3613 

New species: Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, 
Parasterope pollex Kornicker. 

Froeschner, Richard C. Revision of the cactus plant bug 
genus Hesperolabops Kirkaldy (Hemiptera: Miridae). 11 
pages, 30 figures. Published July 19, 1967 3614 

New species: Hesperolabops mexica. 

New status: Hesperolabops nigriccps, H. sanguineus. 



CONTENTS V 

Robinson, Harold. Revision of the genus Harmstonia (Dip- 
tera: Dolichopodidae). 16 pages, 16 figures. Published 

July 12, 1967 3615 

New species: Harmstonia recta, H. pubescens, H. megalopyga, H. 
ornata, H. costaricensis, H. setosa, H. simplex, H. intricata, H. 
obscura, H. pallida, H. attenuate, H. davicauda. 

Woodruff, Robert E., and Cartwright, Oscar L. A review 
of the genus Ewparixia with description of a new species 
from nests of leaf-cutting ants in Louisiana (Coleoptera: 
Scarabaeidae) . 21 pages, 13 figures, 2 plates. Published 

September 8, 1967 3616 

New species: Euparixia moseri Woodruff and Cartwright. 
Allen, Harry W. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 4: Two new species of Tiphia from the 
West Indies (Hymenoptera: Tiphiidae). 4 pages, 1 figure. 

Published July 19, 1967 3617 

New species: Tiphia dominicae, T. layouae. 
Manning, Raymond B. Notes on the demanii section of genus 
Gonodactylus Berthold with descriptions of three new species 
(Crustacea: Stomatopoda). 27 pages, 8 figures. Published 

July 31, 1967 3618 

New species: Gonodactylus hendersoni, G. lanchesteri, G. choprai. 
Flint, Oliver S., Jr. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, V: 
Types of the species described by Banks and Hagen. 37 
pages, 127 figures, 1 plate. Published August 8, 1967 . . . 3619 
New combinations: Chimarra (Curgia) banksi, C. (Chimarra) bicolor, 
C. (Curgia) mexicana, Polycentropus mexicanus, P. costalis, Lepto- 
nemapoeyi, Plectromacronema subfuscum, Smicrideavarius,Phylloicus 
maculatus, Marilia mexicana, Leptocella pretiosella, Lepidostoma 
frontalis. 
New name: Smicridea banksi, 

Duckworth, W. Donald. Neoptropical Microlepidoptera, 
XV: Review of genus Thioscelis (Lepidoptera: Stenomidae). 
11 pages, 12 figures, 1 map, 1 plate. Published July 27, 

1967 3620 

New species: Thioscelis lipara, T. whalleyi, T. fuscala. 

Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. A new crayfish from Alabama Caves 
with notes on the origin of the genera Orconectes and Cam- 
barus (Decapoda: Astacidae). 17 pages, 21 figures. Pub- 
lished October 6, 1967 3621 

New species: Procambarus pecki. 

James, Maurice T. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 5: Family Stratiomyidae (Diptera). 
23 pages, 18 figures. Published November 15, 1967 . . . . 3622 



VI CONTENTS 

Cressey, Roger F. Caritus, a new genus of caligoid copepod, 
with a key to the genera of Caliginae. 8 pages, 18 figures. 
Published October 6, 1967 3623 

New genus: Caritus. 

New species: Caritus serratus. 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3601 



Neotropical Species of Genus Triplax Herbst 

And Review of Genus Haematochiton Gorham 

(Coleoptera: Erotylidae) 1 



By David H. Johnson 2 



Neotropical Species of Genus Triplax Herbst 

Although largely Holarctic in distribution, the genus Triplax 
Herbst ranges into tropical regions to some extent, especially the New 
World tropics. Some species having been erroneously referred to the 
genus and most species being inadequately described and poorly 
known, this paper is an attempt to clarify the confusion surrounding 
the Neotropical forms. 

The first Neotropical species, Triplax cruentipennis, was described 
by Lacordaire in his monograph of 1842. In 1864 Philippi described 
T. valdiviana. Gorham's work in the "Biologia Centrali-Americana" 
in 1888 added four new species, T. championi, T. hogei, T. mesomelas, 
and T. rediviva. Guerin (1952) described T. bicolor and T. azurei- 
pennis. In 1957, Delkeskamp described T. maderi from Brazil, and 
Boyle (1954, 1956, 1962) has described four species from Arizona 
whose ranges are either known or thought to extend into Mexico. 

1 Modified from a master's thesis submitted to Pennsylvania State University, 
1966. 

2 Department of Entomology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

In this study T. cruentipennis Lacordaire and T. maderi Delkeskamp 
have been removed from Triplax as now described and have been 
referred to Haematochiton Gorham. Triplax valdiviana Philippi has 
been declared incertae sedis because of the inconspicuous small 
pronotal angle pores, the lack of a brush on the maxillary palpal 
terminal segments, and the extremely elongate appearance (length to 
width ratio: 2.5 to 1). Triplax azureipennis has been declared 
incertae sedis, while T. bicolor is declared Triplax{1) bicolor Guerin. 
The present author has been unable to locate the types of these two 
forms. 

The exact relation of the following genera, listed as Neotropical 
Triplacinae by Blackwelder (1945), to the Neotropical species of 
Triplax is not known: Pselaphacus Percheron; Megischyrus Crotch, 
Ischyrus Lacordaire, Oocyanus Hope, Callischyrus Crotch, Mycomystes 
Gorham, Mycophthorus Lacordaire, Pseudolybas Gorham, Lybas 
Lacordaire, Lybanodes Gorham, Mycolybas Crotch, and Neoxestus 
Crotch. It is felt, however, that the closest related genera to the 
Neotropical species of Triplax are Paratritoma Gorham, Tritoma 
Fabricius, Haematochiton Gorham, and Mycotretus Lacordaire. 
Species of Haematochiton Gorham are recognized easily by their 
weakly widened, semicircular maxillary palpal terminal segments, 
by their inconspicuous, small pronotal angle pores, and by a body 
shape similar to Triplax. 

Neotropical Triplax species are separated easily from Paratritoma 
by the pronotal angle pores. In Paratritoma the pores are small and 
inconspicuous, while in Triplax they are large and distinctly umbili- 
cate. In other characters, such as the length to width ratio of the 
body, shape of the pronotum, development of the postmandibular 
lobes, and width of the terminal segments of the maxillary palpi with 
distinct apical brush, few significant differences have been found. 
Thus, at present, Paratritoma is considered the most closely related 
of the Neotropical genera to Triplax. 

The one Neotropical Tritoma specimen examined, that of T. 
dorsalis Gorham, can scarcely be confused with Triplax. Its broadly 
oval body, long prosternal lines, and maxillary palpal terminal seg- 
ments without apical brush are all non-Triplax characters. 

The taxonomic results of this study are that three specific names 
have been placed in new synonymy and three new species are described. 
Four species previously placed in Triplax are referred to Haema- 
tochiton Gorham or are declared incertae sedis. One species is, 
at present, of uncertain taxonomic position, while another species is 
moved from Paratritoma Gorham to Triplax. Twelve species are 
listed as Neotropical members of the genus Triplax. 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON JOHNSON 3 

Methods and terminology. — Male genitalia were prepared by 
relaxing the beetle for about an hour in warm water to which detergent 
had been added. After this relaxing, the abdomen was separated 
from the thorax and elytra, and the unsclerotized mass of tissue was 
removed from the sternites. The abdominal sternum was then placed, 
along with the rest of the beetle, on a new point and pin. The 
genitalia and associated soft organs were then soaked overnight in 
10 percent KOH in "Plant Industry" Syracuse dishes. After no 
more than 24 hours the genitalia were separated from associated 
residue, rinsed, and manipulated so that the internal sac was forcibly 
everted to show pigmentation and sclerotization of its inner surface. 
The anterior end of the internal sac was examined after being stained 
with merthiolate. 

"Neotropical" as used in this work refers to all of the New World 
south of the United States, i.e., all of Mexico, Central America, the 
Antilles, and South America. 

The terminology of external morphology is essentially that of 
Torre-Bueno (1962), while male genitalia terminology is essentially 
that of Sharp and Muir (1912). 

The use of two words to indicate color refers to a blending of color 
hues. Thus, yellowish brown implies more brown than yellow. 
In all other cases involving color, the terminology is that of Torre- 
Bueno (1962). 

Acknowledgments. — The author was fortunate in having had the 
opportunity to examine 249 Triplacinae specimens from 13 museums 
and personal collections. To the following museums and personal 
collectors the author would like to extend his thanks for the loan of 
these specimens: American Museum of Natural History (AMNH); 
British Museum (Natural History) , London (BM) ; California 
Academy of Sciences (CAS) ; Chicago Natural History Museum 
(CNHM); Department of Agriculture (Canada), Entomology Re- 
search Institute (DA) ; D. R. Whitehead personal collection, Uni- 
versity of Alberta, Alberta, Canada (DRW) ; M. Alvarenga personal 
collection, Rio de Janiero, Brazil (MA) ; Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard (MCZ) ; Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, France (MN) ; University of Arizona (UA) ; University of 
California, Berkeley (UCB); United States National Museum 
(USNM); W. W. Boyle, Pennsylvania State University (WWB). 

The author owes special thanks to M. Alvarenga, Rio de Janiero, 
Brazil, for his loan of specimens; to W. W. Boyle, Pennsylvania State 
University, under whose guidance work on Triplax was undertaken; 
to A. D escarp entries of the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, for lending the type of T. cruentipennis Lacordaire; and to 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

H. S. Dybas, Chicago Natural History Museum, who lent a great 
number of Neotropical Triplacinae. 

Systematic treatment. — Neotropical Triplax species display a 
wide range of coloration and moderate intraspecific variation in this 
coloration. Coloration includes black, ferrugineous, piceous, fulvus, 
yellowish brown, yellow, orange red, and red. Their general shape 
ranges from elongate-elliptical to relatively oval; the body length to 
width ratio ranges from about 1.6:1 to about 1.95:1. Specimens 
studied ranged in length from 2.34 to 5.12 mm and in width from 1.28 
to 2.81 mm. 

The head is elongate-oval, fitting tightly in the prothorax, and is 
visible from above. The eyes are finely faceted. The antennae are 
1 1-segmented, generally more than one-half the width of the pronotal 
base; the club is relatively lax, its length 2 or more times its width. 
Antennal segmental coloration varies within some species. The 
terminal segments of the maxillary palpi are moderately to extremely 
widened, their width ranging from about 2.75 to 4 or 5 times their 
length; the maxillary palpus has a distinct brush present along the 
truncate apex. The terminal segments of the labial palpi are short- 
setigerous, each armed with a brush along its truncate apex. The 
mentum varies from small and obscurely pentagonal to larger and 
more distinctly pentagonal, with considerable intraspecific variation. 
The postmandibular lobes range in development from moderate to 
strong; in some species they are of diagnostic value, in others they 
are not. 

The pronotum is margined laterally and basally, but it is 
immarginate medioapically between the eyes. Its shape ranges from 
subquadrate to subtrapezoidal. The pronotal angle pores are 
distinctly umbilicate, of moderate to large size. 

The elytral striae are in some species strongly impressed, in others 
they are not. The elytra are basally margined or immarginate. 

The prosternal lines are generally absent but when rarely present 
they are short, straight, not exceeding extreme anterior edges of coxae. 
The prosternum, with various degrees of punctuation among the 
species, is subtrapezoidal in shape. Prosternal, pronotal epipleural, 
mesosternal, metepisternal, and metepimeral sclerites, among others, 
are distinct. Metasternal coxal lines are generally absent but 
occasionally they are short, vestigial. 

The abdomen is composed of five sternites, the first being the widest. 
This basal sternite has a narrow intercoxal process (not nearly so 
broad as in the closely related genus Tritoma Fabricius). The 
abdominal coxal lines are usually present. 

The anterior and middle coxae are globular; those of the hindlegs 
are transverse. In comparison to the closely related genus Tritoma, 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 5 

the coxae are narrowly separated and the tibiae are weakly widened 
apically. The hind trochanters are right triangular. The femora 
are somewhat swollen. The tarsi are 5-segmented with segment 4 
strongly reduced; segment 3 has all four sides straight or nearly so. 

One part of the male genitalia, the anterior end of the internal sac, 
has been shown by Boyle (1956) to demonstrate specific diagnostic 
relationships. The present study supports this. 

Little is known concerning the life habits of this genus. In eastern 
North America favorite fungus hosts of Triplax species are species of 
Pleurotus, a soft bracket fungus; and in Arizona, T. ihompsoni has been 
taken in large numbers on Polyporus arcularius on oak. 

Genus Triplax Herbst 

Triplax Herbst, 1793, p. 146, pi. 49 (figs. 13, n). [Type-species: Silpha russica 
Linne, 1758, p. 360, by subsequent designation by Curtis, 1838 (1824-1840), 
vol. 15, p. 706.] 

The following key to the Neotropical members of the genus Triplax 
includes three species — T. thompsoni, T. marcescens, and T. cali- 
jornica — the Mexican specimens of which are not definitely known. 
It is believed, however, that their ranges extend into Mexico, and for 
this reason they are included. 

Key to Neotropical Species of Triplax 

1. Antennae black beyond segment 2, the stem clothed with moderately dense, 

coarse, black setae; antennal club narrow, segment 10 no more than 
twice as wide as segment 7; head above entirely reddish yellow; Arizona, 

Mexico? marcescens Boyle 

Antennae not black or not entirely black, at least part of the antennae in 
addition to segments 1 and 2 lighter 2 

2. Elytra distinctly margined basally 3 

Elytra immarginate basally, at most with a vestige of a margin laterally 

near the humeral callus 10 

3. Pronotum bearing a median apical and a smaller piceous spot near the 

middle of each side, the latter often weak, sometimes obsolete; anterior 
and lateral edges of postmandibular lobes sharply rounded, not posteriorly 

divergent; southwestern U.S., Mexico mesosternalis Schaeffer 

Pronotum without spots 4 

4. Elytra yellow to red 5 

Elytra never entirely yellow to red, some portion or all piceous to black . . 6 

5. Pronotum piceous to black, not yellow to red; Texas, Mexico . errans Boyle 
Pronotum yellow to red; Central America .... alvarengai, new species 

6. No part of pronotum black ... 7 

Some part of pronotum black 9 

7. Abdomen usually testaceous; terminal segments of maxillary palpi moder- 

ately widened, their width less than 3 times length; eastern North America 

to Panama flavicollis Lacordaire 

Abdomen not testaceous; terminal segments of maxillary palpi strongly 
widened, their width more than 3 times length 8 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

8. Mesothorax and metathorax not entirely black; cephalic and pronotal 

punctures not exceptionally coarse; antennal club not abruptly 3-seg- 

mented; Arizona, Mexico wehrlei Boyle 

Mesothorax and metathorax entirely black; cephalic and pronotal punctures 
exceptionally coarse; antennal club abruptly 3-segmented; Arizona, 
Mexico? thorapsoni Boyle 

9. Elytral striae strongly impressed; maxillary palpal terminal segments not 

exceptionally wide, width about 3.5 times length; lateral edges of post- 

mandibular lobes straight (fig. 7) ; Mexico sola, new species 

Elytral striae not strongly impressed; maxillary palpal terminal segments 
exceptionally wide, width about 4.7 times length; lateral edges of post- 
mandibular lobes not straight (fig. 4) ; Brazil . . latipalpus, new species 

10. Elytra not particolored 11 

Elyta particolored 12 

11. Antennae entirely yellow or testaceous; pronotal angle pores of normal 

size; Guatemala rediviva Gorham 

Antennae not entirely yellow or testaceous; pronotal angle pores extremely 
large; western North America, Mexico? californica LeConte 

12. Pronotum particolored; 60 percent of elytral length behind base not entirely 

yellow; Costa Rica, Central America? divisa (Gorham) 

Triplax alvarengai, new species 

Figure 1 

Diagnostic description: Color variable, ranging from fulvus, with 
or without elytral apical region darker, to nitidous red; underside 
testaceous to brownish; number of yellow antennal segments variable; 
body moderately nitidous. Body shape essentially elliptical, anterior 
and posterior ends about equally parabolically rounded, ratio of length 
to width 1.6 to 1; pronotum sub trapezoidal, basal width about three- 
fifths greater than apical width; elytra widest at about 35 percent of 
length behind elytral base. Antennal length about equal to distance 
to pronotal base, club 4-segmented, segment 10 about 3.5 times width 
of segment 7. Apex of epistomofrontal region of head faintly concave 
in very shallow arc or V, epistomal apex immarginate. Postmandibular 
lobes moderate in size, lateral edges somewhat rounded; terminal 
segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, width about 3.5 times 
length; men turn rather small, size and shape somewhat variable. 
Pronotal punctures not deeply impressed, somewhat more closely 
spaced and deeply impressed laterally; cephalic punctures much more 
closely spaced and coarser; elytral striae moderately impressed. 

Variation : Color is somewhat variable. Specimens examined from 
the Canal Zone displayed a brown to black area in the apical elytral 
20 to 40 per cent. An examination of the anterior end of the internal 
sac (fig. 1), however, has shown all of these specimens to be con- 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 7 

specific. The size range of the 22 specimens examined is: length 
2.81-4.27 mm; width 1.69-2.39 mm. 

Male genitalia: Illustrated in figure 1. 

Holotype: Male, labeled "Ciruclas, Costa Rica, IX-22-30; col- 
lected by A. Alfaro" (property of CNHM). Its measurements are: 
length 3.71 mm; width 2.14 mm. 

Type-locality: Ciruclas, Costa Rica. 

Paratypes: Mexico: Veracruz, Coyame (Whitehead; WWB), 4; 
Veracruz, Buen Pais (Bechtel and Schinger; CNHM), 1; Veracruz, 




Figure 1. — Triplax aharengai, 
new species: anterior end of 
internal sac, anterodorsal view. 



Cerro Gordo (Seevers; CNHM), 1. Costa Rica: Same data as type 
(CNHM), 1. Panama: Canal Zone, Barro Colorado (Darlington; 
AMNH), 1; Canal Zone, Barro Colorado Island (lot 47-4230; USNM), 
1; Canal Zone, Fort Clayton (Frick; CAS), 1; Paraiso (Schwarz; 
USNM), 1. El Salvador: La Libertad (Bechyne, MA), 5; La 
Libertad (Bechyne; WWB), 5. 

Distribution: From Panama to Mexico. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Triplax divisa (Gorham), new combination 

Figure 2 

Paratritoma divisa Gorham, 1888, p. 72, pi. 4 (fig. 11). 

Diagnostic description: Head, medial portion of pronotum, an- 
terior one-sixth of elytra, and posterior one-half of elytra piceous; 
remainder dark yellow above. Underside entirely piceous except for 
legs, maxillary and labial palpi, pronotal epipleura anteriorly, and 
posterior one-third of abdomen. Scape and pedicel yellowish; other 
segments, except for last three which are piceous, yellowish brown. 
Body moderately nitidous. Shape somewhat elliptical, length about 
1.78 times width, body widest at about three- tenths of elytral length 
behind base, length to width ratio very close to that of T. latipalpus, 
about 1.75 to 1. Last antennal segment bulbous and large, segment 
10 about 3 times width segment 8. Postmandibular lobes long, 
posteriorly slightly divergent, edges somewhat rounded (fig. 2). 
Terminal segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, ratio of 
width to length about 3.6 to 1, distinct brush along entire apex 
present (fig. 2). Men turn similar to T. latipalpus. Head punctures 
relatively deep, separated by less than 1 to greater than 4 times 
their diameter, prominent setae in punctures; pronotal punctures 
fine. 




Figure 2. — Triplax divisa (Gor- 
ham), new combination: under- 
side of head. 



Discussion: The adult is figured in full color by Gorham (1888, 
pi. 4: fig. 11). In this study two specimens were examined. Labeling 
is as follows: "Costa Rica, F. Nevermann, 24-VI-'29, property of 
U.S.N.M." (USNM, a female). "Ciruclas, Costa Rica, collected by 
A. Alfaro, IX-22-'30" (CNHM, a female). Alvarenga (1965) has 
stated that Paratritoma divisa Gorham is the type-species of Paratri- 
toma Gorham. This in effect synonymizes Triplax and Paratritoma. 
Gorham made three original watercolor drawings of the three 
"varieties" he considered to be P. divisa. The first two are red and 
black in color, the third yellowish and piceous. I have examined a 
series of Paratritoma species that I agree to be indeed Paratritoma. 
Figure 11, however, as illustrated by Gorham (1888), and the descrip- 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 9 

tion thereof provide strong evidence that figure 11 is indeed that of a 
form that should be considered Triplax. 

Male genitalia: Male not known. 

Type: Not seen. 

Distribution: Costa Rica. 

Triplax errans Boyle 

Figure 3 

Triplax errans Boyle, 1956, p. 110. 

Diagnostic description: Head above and gular region below black, 
pro thorax and antennal clubs black; elytra and scutellum orange red 
to brilliant strongly nitidous red (except in tenerals) ; antennae grading 
from brownish yellow to black; genae, mouthparts, pterothorax, 
abdomen, and legs brownish yellow; body strongly nitidous. Overall 
shape short and broad, sides of body subparallel from middle of 
pronotum to middle of elytra, lengh to width ratio 1.8 to 1; body 
widest at about one- third the elytral length behind base; pronotum 



Figure 3. — Triplax errans Boyle: 
underside of head. 



widest just in front of base, sides evenly arcuate and strongly con- 
vergent apically. Postmandibular lobes, terminal segments of 
maxillary palpi, and mentum are shown in figure 3. Antennae 
two-thirds as long as width of pronotal base, the club 5-segmented 
and gradually widening over segments 7 to 9. Pronotal punctures 
of moderate size, somewhat larger and denser laterally, each bearing 
a minute seta that feebly exceeds the puncture; cephalic punctures 
denser apically, each bearing a protruding seta; elytral intervals 
minutely punctuate. 

Variation: The 35 specimens examined ranged in length from 2.85 
to 4.34 mm and in width from 1.57 to 2.51 mm. Boyle (1956) states 
that the measurements of the type are: length 4.14 mm; width 2.30 
mm. 

Male genitalia: Boyle (1956, p. 166, fig. 99) illustrates the anterior 
end of the internal sac. 

Type: Male; labeled "Brownsville, Texas, VI-30-38; holotype, 
Triplax errans Boyle" (R. I. Sailer; collection University of Kansas). 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Type-locality: Brownsville, Cameron Co., Tex. 

Distribution: Other than the holotype from Brownsville, Tex., 
this species is known at present only from San Luis Potosi, Mexico. 
The material examined included 35 specimens from the following 
localities in San Luis Potosi: Tamazunchale, Huichihuayan, and 
Paj al. 

Triplax flavicollis Lacordaire 

Triplax flavicollis Lacordaire, 1842, p. 218. 

Triplax confinis LeConte, 1854, p. 162. 

Triplax championi Gorham, 1888, p. 78. [New synonymy.] 

Triplax hogei Gorham, 1888, p. 78. [New synonymy.] 

Triplax mesomelas Gorham, 1888, p. 79. [New synonymy.] 

Diagnostic description: Color variable; elytra ranging from fer- 
rugineous to black; the following yellow to testaceous: head, pronotum, 
pro thorax, and meso thorax; metathoracic coloration variable, some- 
times metepisterna and metepimera are black, sometimes entire 
metathorax is black; abdomen testaceous to piceous; antennal 
coloration variable, club ranging from reddish yellow to piceous, stem 
grading from reddish yellow to piceous; body moderately nitidous. 
Body shape somewhat elliptical, anterior and posterior ends about 
equally parabolically rounded. Postmandibular lobes short, their 
lateral edges often somewhat rounded and divergent posteriorly; 
terminal segments of maxillary palpi moderately widened (see Boyle, 
1956, p. 164, fig. 76), their width approaching 3 times their length, 
a distinct brush present along entire apex; mentum small; antennal 
club gradually 4-segmented. Pronotal punctures of moderate size, 
not deep; cephalic punctures much larger and denser; elytral striae 
impressed, small punctures present in elytral intervals; elytra distinctly 
margined basally. 

Variation: The observed size variation of the 108 Neotropical 
specimens examined is: length 2.60-5.12 mm; width 1.44-2.81 mm. 

Discussion: The three "species" that Gorham listed as distinct have 
not been found to be so. A "separation" of the specimens by com- 
parison of the postmandibular lobes (and coloration of the meta- 
thorax according to Gorham's descriptions) of T. championi, T. hogei, 
and T. mesomelas showed intergradation and cast doubt on the tena- 
bility of these three "species." A comparison of the anterior end of the 
internal sac of the "three forms" showed that they were conspecific. 

Male genitalia: See Boyle (1956, p. 166, fig. 93). 

Type: Not seen. 

Type-locality: North America. 

Distribution: North America east of the 100th meridian from 
Quebec to Florida and Texas, south into Mexico and Central America 