%:zi^MAjjx-~^-'^ "^^ 




'^eipavivneni of the 5^nfcrior 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

25 



PROCEEDINGS 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



^ol. III. 

1880. 



PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 



WASHIi^GTO]:^: 

aoVEENMENT PRINTING OFPICE. 

1881. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Page. 
Beau, Tarlcton H. Description of a New Hake (Phyeig Earlii), from South Carolina, 

and a Xote on the Occarrence of Phycis regiits in North Carolina C9 

Check-List of Duplicates of North American Fishes distributed by the Smithsonian 

Institution in behalf of the United States National Museum, 18"7-'80 75 

C'attie. S. TH. On the Genitalia of Male Eels and their Sexual Characters - 280 

Endlich, Fred. M. List of Species and Varieties of Minerals in the National Museum of 

the United States in 1879 333 

Oarinan, Samuel. Synopsis and Descriptions of the American Bhinobatidce 516 

Oilbert, Charles H. (See under Jordan and Gilbert.) 

Oill. Theodore. On the Identity of the Genus Leurynnis Lockington, with Lycodopsis 

Collett •247' 

Ooode, Cr. Brown. Descriptions of Seven New Species of Fishes from Deep Soundings on 

the Southern New England Coast, with Diagnoses of Two Undescribed Genera of Flounders 

and a Genus related to Merlucius 337 

Fishes from the Deep Water on the South Coast of New England obtained by the United 

States Fish Commission in the Summer of 1880 467 

The Frigate Mackerel (Awxi's i?ocAei) on the NewEngland Coast 532 

Xofacanthus phagganorus, a New Species of i\rota<;a7i«fttdflB from the Grand Banks of New- 
foundland 535 

Hay, O. P. On a Collection of IHshes from Eastern Mississippi 488 

Heilprin, Angelo. On Some New Species of Eocene MoUusca from the Sonthem United 

States 149 

Jordan, Darid S. Notes on a Collection of Fishes from East Florida, obtained by Dr. J. 

A. Henshall 17 

Notes on a Collection of Fishes from Saint John's River, Florida, obtained by Mr. A. H. 

Curtiss 22 

Note on a Forgotten Paper of Dr. Ayres, and its Bearing on the Nomenclatqre of the 

Cy prinoid Fishes of the San Francisco Markets 325 

Note on " Sema" and '' Dacentrus'''' 327 

Description of a New Species of Caranx (Caranx beani), from Beaufort, North Caro- 
lina 486 

Jordan, Darid S., and Gilbert, Charles H. Notes on a Collection of Fishes from 

San Diego, (,'alifomia 23 

Description of a New Flounder (Xystreurys liolepis), from Santa CataJina island, Cali- 
fornia 34 

Description of a New Kay (Platyrhina triseriata), from the Coast of California 36 

Description of a New Species of "Eock Cod" (Sebastichthys serriceps), iioia the Coast 

of California 38' 

On the Occurrence of Cephaloscyllium laticeps (Dumeril) Gill on the Coast of Califor- 
nia 40 

On the Oil Shark of Southern California ( Galeorhinus galeus) 42 

Description of a New Flounder (Pleuronichthys verticalis), from the Coast of California, 

with Notes on Other Species 49 

Notes on Sharks from the Coast of California 51 

On the Generic Kelations of Platyrhina exasperata 53 

Description of a New Species of Sebastichthys (Sebastichthys miniatus), from Monterey 

Bay, California 70 

Description of a New Species of "Kock-fish" {Sebastichthys camatus), from the Coast 

of California 73 

Description of a New Species of Kay (Raia stellulata), from Monterey, California 138 

Description of New Species of Xiphister and Apodichthys, from Monterey, California. .. 135 

Description of Two New Species of Sebastichthys (Sebastichthys entomelas and Sebastich- 
thys rhodochloris). from Monterey Bay, California 142 

Description of a New Agonoid Fish (Brachiopsis xyostemus), from Monterey Bay, 

California 152 

Description of a New Flounder (Hippoglossoides exilis), from the Coast of California. .. 154 

III 



IV TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

Page. 
JTordaii, David S., and Oilbcrt, Charles H. Description of a New Species of Ray 

{Eaia rhina) from the Coast of California 251 

Description of Two New Species of Fishes (Ascelichthys rhodorus and Seytalina cerdale) 

from Neah J5ay, Washington Territory 264 

Description of Two New Species of Scopeloid Fishes {Sudis ringens and Myctophum 

crenulare), from Santa Barbara Channel, California 273 

Description of Two New Species of Flounders {Parophrys ischyurus and Hippoglos- 



soides elassodon), from Puget Sound 276 

— Description of Seven New Species of Scbastoid Fishes, from the Coast of California ... 287 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid (Abeona aurora), from Monterey, California, with 
Notes on a Related Species 299 

— Description of a New Flounder (Platysomatichthys stomias), from the Coast of Califor- 
nia 301 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid Fish (Cymatogaster rosaceus), from the Coast of Cali- 
fornia 303 

— Description of a New Species of Deep-Water Fish {Icichthys Lockingtoni), from the Coast 

of California 305 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid Fish (Ditremaatripes), from the Coast of California.. 320 

— Description of a New Scorpaenoid Fish {Sebastichthys maliger), from the Coast of Cali- 
fornia 322 

— Description of a New Scorpaenoid Fish (Sebastichthys proriger), from Monterey Bay, 
California 327 

— Description of a New Agonoid (Agonus vulsus), from the Coast of California 330 

— Description of a New Species of Heinirhamphus (Remirhamphus rosce), from the Coast 

of California 335 

— Description of a New Species of Notidanoid Shark (Hexanchus corinus), from the Pacific 
Coast of the United States 352 

— Description of a New Species of Nemichthys (Nemichthys avocetta), from Puget Sound. . . 409 

— Description of a New Species of Paralepis {Paralepis coruscans), from the Straits of 



Juan do Fuca 411 

List of the Fishes of the Pacilic Coast of the United States, with a Table showing the 

Distribution of the Species 452 

On the Generic Relations of Belone exilis Girard 459 

Notes on a Collection of Fishes from Utah Lake 459 

Descri^ition of a New Species of Rock-fish {Sebastichthys chrysomelas), from the Coast 

of California 465 

lia^vrencc. Oeorgc IV. Description of a New Species of Bird of the Family Turdidce, from 

the Island of Dominica, W. I 16 

Description of a New Species of Parrot of the Genus Chrysotis, from the Island of Do- 
minica 254 

Description of a New Species of Icterus, from the West Indies 351 

liOckingtou, W. Bf. Remarks on the Species of the Genus Ghirus found in San Francisco 

Market, including one hitherto undescribed 53 

Description of a New Fish from Alaska ( Uranidea microstoma) 58 

Description of a New Species of Agonidce (Brachyopsis verrucosus), from the Coast of 

California ^ 60 

Description of a New Genus and Some New Species of California Fishes (Icosteus cenig- 

mnticus and Osmerus attenuatiis) 63 

Description of a New Chiroid Fish (Myriolepis zonifer), from Monterey Bay, California. . 248 

Description of a New Sparoid Fish {Sparus hrachysomus), from Lower California 284 

Note on a New Flat-fish (Lepidopsetta isnlepis), found in the Markets of San Fi-ancisco. . 325 

Descriiition of a New Species of Prionotus (Prionotus stephanophrys), from the Coast of 

California 529 

Katiibuii, Richard. The Littoral Marine Fauna of Provincetown, Cape Cod, Massachu- 

^'tts 116 

.'^Ldi"r"""Ti P")!"*-* Revisions of Nomenclature of Certain North American Birds 1 

A Catiilogue of the Birds of North America 163 

Catalogue of Trochilidw in the Collection of the United States National Museum 308 

R ydfr, John A, On Camaraphysema, a New Type of Sponge 269 

List of the North American Species of MjTiapods belonging to the Family of the Lysio- 

petalidcn, with a Description of a Blind Form from Luray Cave, Virginia 524 

atmith, RoMa. On the Occurrence of a Species of Cremnobates at San Diego, California 147 

>««niitli, !«»• I. Preliminary Notice of the Crustacea dredged in 64 to 325 fathoms oif the 

Soutli Coast of New England, by the United States Fish Commission, in 1880 413 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. V 

Page. 
!<( wau, James* O. The Surf Smelt of the Northwest Coast, aud the Method of Taking Them 

by the Quillehute Indians, West Coast of "Washington Territory 43 

The Eiilaehon or Candle-fish of the Northwest Coast 257 

Vcrrill, A. E. Notice of Recent Additions to the Miirine Invertehrata of the Northeast- 
ern Coast of America, with Descriptions of New Genera and Species and Critical Kemarks 

on Others 

Part II. — MoUusca, with Notes on Annelida, Echinodermata, etc., collected hy the United 

States Fish Commission 356 

Part III. — Catalogue of Mollusca recently added to the Fauna of Southern New England 405 

T^hitc, C. A. Note on the Occurrence of ProdMCttt* jrt^ra/iteus in California 46 

Note on Aerothele 47 

Description of a New Cretaceous Pinna from New Mexico 47 

Note on the Occurrence of Strieklandia Salter i and S. Davidsoni in Georgia 48 

Description of a very large Fossil Gasteropod, from the State of Puebla, Mexico 140 

Descriptions of New Invertebrate Fossils from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Bocks of 

Arkansas, "Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah 157 



PROCEEDINGS 

OF THE 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

1880. 



REVISDOIVS OF IVOMEIVCIiATURE OF CERTAIIV NORTH AMERICAN 

BIR0S. 

By ROBERT RIDGTTAY. 

The following emendations of nomenclature apply both to species 
enumerated in the latest published list of Xorth American birds — 
Coues's " Check List,"* and others not contained therein. These two 
series are therefore included in separate categories, the former having,, 
for convenience of reference, the corresponding number of the " Check. 
List " prefixed to each name. 

It is deemed inexpedient to give here a list of the species to be addedl 
to the Smithsonian Catalogue of 1859,t for the reason that they are suffi- 
ciently distinguished by the absence of the concordant number following, 
each name, in the revised list following this paper. 

a. Species given in Coues's Check List, 

4 h. Tardus AONALASCiiKAE, X Gmel. — In my report on the ornithology- 
of the fortieth parallel expedition I used the name " guttata, Pallas," 
as the earliest name certainly applicable to this species; but I now 
believe that Gmelin's name, Turdiis aonalasclilme, based upon, the 
Unalascha Thrush of Pennant (Arctic Zoology, II, p. 338) and Aoona- 
lashlca Thrush of Latham (Synopsis, II, i, p. 23), is the one which should, 
be used. As in the case of 21uscicapa guttata, Pall., there can be no 
doubt whatever that the western Dwarf Thrush {Tardus nanus, Auct., 
neo And.!) is the very species which these authors described under the 
above names. Turdus aonalaschhae being, therefore, the i^roper name- 
for the Hermit Thrushes collectively, the Middle and Eastern Province 
forms should be called, respectively, T. aonalaschlcae auduboni and T. 
aonalaschJcae pallasL With regard to the last, it is very evident that 

* A Check List of North American Birds. By Elliot Cones. Salem. Naturalists' 
Agency. 1873. 8vo, pp. 137. (635 species.) 

t Catalogue of North American Birds contained chiefly in the Mnsenm of the Smith- 
sonian Institution. By Spencer F. Baird. [First octavo edition.] "Washington: 
Smithsonian Institution. 1859. [ "Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,.103.." Not 
paged; 738 species, including varieties, all consecutively numbered.] 

t Small capitals indicate the name which is changed or emended. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 1 March S7, 1880. 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Turdus nanus, Aud., was based upon a small specimeu of the eastern 
Hermit Thrush, since Audubon distinctly says so in his account of the 
supposed sijecies. The name nanus antedates 2)aU as i ; but the latter 
having been used, in a restricted sense, exclusively for the eastern race, 
while nanus has been almost wholly applied, of late years, to the small 
west-coast form now to be called T. aonalaschJcae, it seems best to discard 
the name w«w?^s altogether and adopt for the eastern birds that of pallasi, 
as next in order of date. 

61. Helon^a sicainsoni, And. — According to Agassiz, the correct 
orthography of the generic name of this f.pecies (if to be separated 
from Hehnitlierus) is Hcloncea and not " ReUnaia,''^ as spelled by 
Audubon. {Cf. Xewton, P. Z. S., 1879, p. 552.) 

144 a. Leucosticte griseinucha (Brandt) Bj^. — The present indignations 
are that this form does not intergTade with L. fephrocotis, but, on the 
contrary, is a well-defined species of very constant characters confined 
strictly to that portion of the Alaskan coast west of the one hundred and 
thirty-fifth degree of west longitude. 

14Ga. jE(jiotluis Unaria, " var. fuscescens.^'' — ^No examples referable to 
the so-called fuscescens having ever been taken in winter, while the 
particular stage originally so named is represented by birds in highly 
intensified midsummer dress from various portions of subarctic America 
(the interior of the continent and coast of Alaska, as well as Labrador), 
the inference is natural that ^'- fuscescens''^ represents simply the mid- 
summer i^lumage of the common species. {Cf. Cones, Birds of the 
Northwest, 1874, p. 115.) 

14G&. ^(fiotlms CANESCENS exiUpcs (Coues) Eidgw. — There is every 
probability that ^. canescens is a quite distinct species, since it occurs 
in almost every district inhabited by ^. linaria (especially in the Kearc- 
tic Eegion), and cannot therefore be a geographical race of the same 
species. yE. canescens and JE. linaria JiolbolU are the large boreal races 
breeding in Greenland; JE. canescens exilipes and ^. linaria j)roj)er are 
the smaller continental forms. 

159 «. Passerculus anthinus, Bp. — This seems to be quite distinct 
from P. sandwichensis, and probably more nearly relate! to — 

IGOrf. Passerculus GUTTATUS, Lawr., which proves to be very distinct 
from P. rostratus. 

165 a (Appendix). Ammodronius nigrescens, Kidgw. — As has already 
been insisted by Mr. Maynard (see Am. Sportsman, V. Jan. 16, 1875, 
p. 248), this bird is very probably distinct specifically from A. maritimus. 

169. Melospiza fasciata (Gm.) Scott. — ^We can see no valid reason 
why Gmelin's name for this species should not be used instead of Wil- 
son's, bestowed upon it nearly a quarter of a century later. {Gf. Scott, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 6 

Am. Kat., 187G, p. 17.) The recognizable forms of this species slioiild 
therefore be known as (169 «) M. fasciata falJax, {Wdh) M. fasciata 
guttata, (109 c) M. fasciata rufina, (1096?) j\I. fasciata heermanni, and 
(lG9e) If. FASCIATA SA3IUELIS {samuelis antedating gouldii). 

1G9/. Melospiza cinerea (Gm.)Eidgw. — Throngh the explorations of 
Messrs. Dall, Turner, and Nelson, the fauna of Unalashka has of late 
years been very thoroughly investigated, and we are thus able to iden- 
tify the "Cinereous Finch" of Pennant (Arct. Zoology, II, p. C8) upon 
which Gmeliu based his FringiUa cinerea (S. N., I, ii, p. 922) with the 
species which Professor Baird afterward named Melospiza insigiiis (Trans. 
Chicago Acad., I, 1, p. 319, pi. 29, fig. 2). Throngh the same means it 
becomes equally certain that the Oonalaslca Bunting of Pennant and 
Latham {Emheriza tmalasclicensis, Gm., S. N., I, ii, j). 875) is, as some 
authors have long maintained, the bird usually called Passerella toini- 
sendi (Aud.). The known forms of Passerella having been proven by Mr. 
Henshaw to intergrade, and therefore, to constitute mere geographical 
races of a single species, they should be known by the following names : — 

188. P. iliaca (Merrem) Sw. 

t'189"«. P. iliaca unalaschcensis (Gm.) Eidgw. 

189a. P. iliaca scMstacea (Baird) Hensh. 

. P. ILIACA megarhyncha (Baird) Hensh. — 

the latter — connecting unalaschcensis with scMstacea, but peculiar in 
the extremely robust bill and other characters — not being given in the 
"Check List!" 

170a (Appendix). Peiicaia arizonce, Eidgw. — There is very strong prob- 
ability of this being quite distinct, specifically, from P. wstivalis. (See 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, 1878, p. 127, foot-note.) 

177. Spizella MONTANA (Forst.) Eidgw. — Forster's name of montana 
applied to this species in 1772 antedates Gmelin's name moniicola (1788), 
and, there being no objection to it otherwise, should be substituted for it. 

180 a. Spizella breweri, Cass. — Thus f;ir there appears not the slight- 
est evidence that this bird should be referred to ^S". pallida. The respective 
habitats of the two overlap quite considerably, and they may always be 
easily distinguished by the markings of the head. 

191. Spiza amcricana (Gm.) Bp. — In 1858 Professor Baird rejected 
the generic name Spiza for this species, for the reason that, although it 
"was first used in connection with Umberiza americana," it was "so 
mixed up with types of several other modern genera as to render it 
uncertain whether to apply it to one rather than to another " — at the same 
time remarking that "if Spiza pointed more unmistakably to the U. 
americana it might, perhaps, be necessary to adopt it." (" Birds N. Am.," 
p. 491.) Upon referring to the " Specchio Comparativo," where Bona- 
parte next, after its institution, mentions his genus Spiza, I find, in the 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

foot-note on p. 47, that lie distinctly names E. americana as the type of the 
genus ("Reconoscemmo inoltre, che quest' uccello [E. melanocepJiala] e il 
perfetto analogo della FringUla americana tipo di quel Sottogenee"). 
Four years later, however, Bonaparte proposed the name Euspiza for 
the same type ("Sag-gio," p. 141), but according to recognized rules this 
later name becomes simply a synonym of S2nza, as does also Cabauis's 
name Euspina, the latter substitued for Euspiza (Mus. Hein., I, p. 133), 
under the misapprehension that the type of the latter was the Em- 
heriza melanocepJiala of Scopoli (see M. H., p. 130) — a species not only 
generically distinct from E. americana, Gmel., but moreover hardly a 
member of the same subfamily. 

201. Plionipara zena (Linn.) Bryant. — ^'■Fringilla hicolor,''^ Linn., S, N., 
ed. 12 (17GG)=i^. zena, Linn., S. K, ed. 10 (1758). 

20G. Pipilo fusciis mesoleucus (Baird) B. B. & R. — The Arizona 
form of this species is very easily distinguishable from the true fuscus 
of Mexico, the latter being without the rufous cap of mesoleucus, the 
colors in general darker, etc. 

212 &. Agelwus tricolor (Nutt.) Bp. — Totally distinct from A.phoeni- 

ceus. 

233. Pica rustica hudsonica (Sab.) Baird. — The earliest available 
name for the European Magpie appears to be Corvus rusticus, Scopoli 
(1709), which considerably antedates ^'- melanoleuca, Vieill." (1818), and 
is now adopted by European authorities. ( Cf. Dresser, Birds of Europe, 
pt. xxii.) The American bird, therefore, if to be separated subspeci- 
fically from the European (for which there certainly seems sufficient 
reason), should be named as above. 

239 a (Appendix). Perisoreus ohscurus, Eidgw. — Since the original des- 
cription of this bird was i^ublished Mr. Henshaw has obtained addi- 
tional specimens, and, by an examination of them, together with the 
types, has adopted Mr. Sharpe's conclusion (Cat. B. Brit. Mus., Ill, p. 
105) that the form in question is a distinct species, an opinion in which 
I at present wholly agree. Not so, however, with eapitalis, Baird, which 
Mr. Sharpe treats in the same manner; the latter unquestionably grades 
directly into P. canadensis, and consequently, notwithstanding it is a 
very strongly marked form, should be called P. canadensis eapitalis. 

The Perisoreus ohscurus is of much more restricted range than was at 
first supposed, and probably does not extend much, if any, north of 
Sitka. The examples alluded to in Hist. K Am. B. (Vol. II, p. 302), 
as coming from "north of Sitka and in the Yukon territory," and which 
were stated to "incline toward the var. canadensis, '^^ are in reality refer- 
able to P. canadensis, of which they constitute a separable race, distin- 
guished by the less extent and dingy or smoky tinge of the frontal 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 5 

white patch and generally darker colors. This new race may be char- 
acterized as follows : 

Perisoreus canadensis fumifrons, Eidgw. 

Cii. — Similar to canadensis proper, but colors darker and more dingy throughout, 
and the white of the forehead obscured, or even sometimes almost wholly obliterated, 
by a wash of smoky gray or brown. 

Hub. — Coast of Alaska. 

265. Caprimulgus vociferus, Wils. — I can see no reason whatever 
for removing this bird from the genus CaprimuJgns. The type of 
'■'■ Ayitrostomus'''' is the C. caroUnensis, Gmel., which differs from all the 
other Caprimulgi (so far as I am aware) in possessing fine lateral fila- 
ments to the rictal bristles, so that, in case this character be deemed 
sufficient, the genus Anirostomus may stand, if restricted to the single 
species possessing this feature. {Cf. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, pp.142, 
143, pis. i, ii.) 

266. Phal.enoptilus nuttalU (And.) Eidgw. — This species is de- 
cidedly i^eculiar in the combination of its salient jioints of structure, 
having a lengthened, naked tarsus, like Xyctidromus, a character- 
istically velvety plumage, short, even tail, and unique wing- formula; 
features which, taken together, render it a very well-marked genus, 
which may be characterized as follows : — 

PhaLzENOPTILUS, gen. nov. 

Cu. — Differing from Caprimnlgtts and " Antrosiomus" in the short, even tail (much 
shorter than the wing), and lengthened, perfectly naked tarsus (longer than the mid- 
dle toe), the first quill shorter than the fourth, and the plumage with a peculiar, 
velvety, moth-like surface. 

Type, CaprimuJgus tiuttalli, Aud. 

As stated on images 142, 143, Proceedings of the United States National 
Museum, Vol. I (1878), the characters supposed to separate the Amer- 
ican Antrostomi from the Old World species of Ccqmmulgus, particularly 
the type of the latter genus (C. europams, L.), are wholly intangible, 
with the exception of A. caroUnensis, which has minute lateral filaments 
to the rictal bristles, these being in all other species perfectly smooth, 
or simple. On the other hand, the Caprimulgus nuttalU of Audubon 
has so many decided peculiarities of structure that it is somewhat a 
matter of surprise that its place in the genus '■'■Antrostomus^'' has not 
been questioned ere this. In fact, P. nuttalU is quite as distinct in its 
external structure from " J.." vociferus and its allies as is the Nyctidro- 
mus albicollis. The more prominent differences of structure in these 
forms may readily be seen by comparison of the birds themselves, or by 
examination of the outline drawings of i^lates I and II of the volume 
of the "Proceedings" referred to above. 

268. Chordeiles acutipennis texensis (Lawr.) B. B. & E. — The Chor- 
deiles texensis of Lawrence is merely a slightly different northern form 



6 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

of C. acuHpenms (Bodd.) Cass., of South America. (See Sclater, P. Z. S. 
18GG, p. 134, and Hist. :N^. Am. B., II, pp. 400, 407.) 

2G7. Cliordeiies popetue (Vieill.) Baird. — Brisson's name virginianus 
was not restricted to this species until many years after the institu- 
tion of Yieillot's name iiopetue ; the Litter, therefore, notwithstanding 
its barbarous character, is, by all the rules, entitled to retention. 

269. Cypselus saxatiUs {Woodh.) Ridgw. — This species agrees so very 
closely in details of structure with C. melba, Linn., that there seems to be 
no good reason for separating it genericaly from the genus Cypsclm, 
unless C. melba also is removed to another genus. The type of Pamjp- 
tila being the Cypselus cayannensiSj Gmel., the elimination of C. saxaiilis 
does not, of course, affect the validity of the latter genus, as properly 
restricted; still, there is not much more difference of form between 
^^ Fanyptila^^ cayennensis and C. saxaUUs than between (7. melba and G. 
apus^ the latter being the type of Cypselus. C. apus has the feet much 
weaker and the tarsus much more densely feathered than C. melba; 
G. saxaUlis is nearly intermediate in this resx)ect, though coming much 
nearer to C. melba. 

273. Basilinna xantusl (Lawr.) Elliot. — See Elliot's "Synopsis of 
the Trochilidce* ", p. 227. 

284. Trogon A^iBiGUUS, Gould. — The species described in ''Birds of 
North America," and figured in the atlas to that work, is the present 
one, and not T. mexicanus. The latter is chiefly distinguished by the 
absence of white bars on the tail-feathers, which are uniform black un- 
derneath, except the broad white tip. 

295. Xenopious albolarvatus (Cass.) Bd. — In addition to the very 
tangible external characters x>ointed out by Professor Baird in his char- 
acterization of a subgenus Xenopicus (B. N". Am., x^. 83), may be men- 
tioned the fact that the tongue is scarcely extensile, its tii), when fully 
X^rotruded, reaching only % of an inch beyond the t\\) of the bill, or just 
the same as in Sphyropicus thyroideus, while in Plcus mllosus liarrisi the 
X^rotrusion amounts to 2} inches, or If inches more! (See Orn. 40th 
Parallel, x^p. 546, 548, and 552, under lists of sx)ecimens of the above 
species.) 

301. Ficoides tridactylU'S americamis (Brehm) B. B. & E. — As 
X^ointed out in "History of Korth American Birds" (Vol. II, pp. 529- 
534), the differences between the American and Eurox^ean white-backed 
species of this genus are very slight, and by no means sufficient to warrant 
sx^ecific sex^aration. The common form should therefore be known as 
above, and the Rocky Mountain race, if deemed sufficiently distinct, as — 

* A Classification and Synopsis of tlie TrocbilidiE. By Daniel Giraud Elliot, F. R. 
S. E., etc. Washington City: Published by tbe Smithsonian Institution [''Smith- 
sonian Contributions to Knowledge," No. 317.] [March, 1879.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 7 

301a. Picoldes tridactylits dorsalis (Baird) B. B. & R. 

314. Colaptes auratus mexicanus (Sw.). 

The above combination becomes absolutely necessary in view of the 
indisputable and wholesale iutergradation of the auratus mid 7nexicanus 
types of this species. In the present case is afforded an excellent ex- 
ample of the difficulties in the way of consistent nomenclature, whether 
binomial or trinomial. 

31G. AJ.VCO flammeus pratincola (Bonap.) Eidgw. — Professor New- 
ton has, we think, clearly demonstrated* that the proper type of the Lin- 
n?ean genus Strix is not S. Jlammca, but S. stridiila, subsequently made 
the type of Savigny's genus Syrnium ; and that Aluco, Fleming (1828), 
should stand as the generic name of the Barn Owls. Audubon's name, 
'■'■ americana''^ (1839), for the American Barn Owl is antedated by^ra^ 
incola, Bonap. (1838), which should, in consequence, stand as the sub- 
specific name for this form. 

318 &. Sco2)s asio maccalli (Cass.) Cones. — In the "Proceedings of 
the U. S. Xat. Mus." for 1878 (Vol. I, pp. 109-111), I formally referred the 
'"'' Scops asio var. enano^^ of Lawrence to 8. maccalli, Cassin, and in a 
foot-note on p. Ill refer Mr. Sennett's specimens to the latter. This fact, 
however, seems to have been overlooked by both Dr. Cones and Mr. 
Sennett, who, in their last pai)er, continue to caU the variet^^ "/S. asio 
enano.''^ 

320. Asio wilsoniamis (Less.). — Brisson's genus Asio appears to be un- 
questionably that which should be applied to the long-eared owls, and 
has long since been adopted by some authorities. Admitting that the 
short-eared species [Strix accipitrinaj Pall.) cannot be sei)arated generi- 
cally, it would have to be called — 

321. Asio accipitrinus (Pall.) Newton. 

323. Strix nebulosa, Forst. — Professor Newton's very correct conclu- 
sion that the proper type of the Linnnean genus Strix is the S. stridula, 
necessitates the above change in the generic name of this American 
congener of that species. 

The Floridan birds of S. nebulosa I find to be so different from north- 
ern examples as to well merit subspecific separation. In his memorable 
work on the birds of East Florida (Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., I, p. 340) Mr. 
Allen refers to the much darker color of Floridan specimens, but appar- 
ently overlooks the naked toes. It is with pleasure that I dedicate this 
race to one who has done such eminent service not only to the orni- 
thology of Florida, but to the science in general. 

* Cf. Yarrell's Brit. Birds, eel. 4, vol, i, p. 150, aud The Ibis, ser. iii, vol. vi, pp.p4-105. 

t Since these pages were put iu type, I have discovered that the name stands as 
above given in the "Check List." The notice of the species here was therefore an 
oversight. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Stkix nebulosa allexi, Eidgw. 

Ch. — Similar to typical nebulosa, but toes wholly destitute of feathers or bristles, 
beiug perfectly bai'e to the extreme base ; colors darker than in nebulosa, witb less 
ocbraccous, tbe tail scarcely barred on the basal half, and the bars on the breast much 
more distinct, as well as narrower and more continuous. 

Hob. — Florida (Clearwater). 

The above characters I find to be constant in a series of tliree speci- 
mens (two $ and one $ ) sent to the National Museum by Col. S. T. 
Walker, of Clearwater, Florida. Kot only are the toes perfectly bare, 
but the feathers clothing the tarsi are much shorter than in northern 
nebulosa, thus causing the legs to appear much more slender. The only 
feathering on the toes consists of a small pointed strip on the outer side 
of the first i)halanx of the middle toe, reaching about to the second joint. 

324. Strix occidentalis (Xant.) Eidgw. 

Assuming that the Great Grey Owls are sufficiently distinct generic- 
ally from the foregoing, they should be known as — 

322. ScoTiAPTEX cinereum (Gmel.) Swains., and 
[322 a. I ScoTiAPTEX cinereum lapijonicum (Eetz.) Eidgw. 

236. ISurnia idula funerea (Linn.) Eich. & Sw. — In the 10th edition 
of ^^ tSystema Natune^^ Linnieus describes on the same page (93) kStrix 
funerea and S. tditla, in the order here given; the former being based on 
"Fu. suec. 51," the ^'•uliila flammeata, Frisch. av. t. 9" being doubtfully 
quoted; "Habitat in Europa." S. ulula is based upon "Fn. suec. 
52— Ulula, Gesn. av. 773, Aldr. ornith, 1. 8, c. G; Will, oruith. 08, t. 13, 
Eay, av. 20, n. 4;" the habitat also " in Europa." In neither case would 
the diagnoses given determine tbe species independent of the references. 
In the 12th edition, however, 8. ulula is mentioned first, with the same 
diagnosis and habitat, but with additional or more explicit references. 
S. funerea follows, with an additional diagnosis which renders the species 
unmistakable, and a reference to "^Sirij? canadensis," i>m6\ av. I, p. 518, 
t. 37, f. 2, wliich we know to be the American Hawk Owl. Furthermore, 
there is added to the habitat "America septentrional i.'^^ It is therefore 
difficult to decide which of the two names has priority as the specific 
designation. If the S. funerea is to be regarded the same in both edi- 
tions, then this name, as occurring first on the page, would be entitled to 
that claim ; but thereis nothing whatever in the account of Strix funerea 
of edition 10 to show that it is anything more than the European Hawk 
Owl ; or, in other words, the same as the species called on the same page 
^S". ulula. As the matter stands, we prefer to ta]s.e funerea of 1706 as the 
earliest date of the name as applied to the American bird, and to call the 
species S. ulula, the latter name being of certain apj)lication in the 10th 
edition, while it precedes /wjierca in the 12th. 

347. Falco fusco-cjerijlescens, Vieill.-— See Sharpe, " Catalogue of 
the Accipitres in the British Museum," I, j). 400. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. i) 

353. Buteo abbreviatus, Caban. — See Sharpe, as above, p. 1G3, who, 
however, refers it to the genus " Tacliytriorcliis.^'' See, also, Sclater ♦& 
Salvin's " ]S"omenclator Avium Neotropicalium," p. 118. 

303. Polyhorus cheriway (Jacq.) Caban. — See Sbarpe, t. c, p. 33. 
This species appears to be quite distinct from P. tliarus. 

3G1. PsEXJDOGRYPHUS caUfomianus (Shaw) E.idgw. — Concerning the 
validity of this genus, see Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club., April, 1880, i). — . 

3GG. Catharista {atrata, Bartr.). — If the name atrata, as now almost 
universally^ applied to this species, is to be accredited to Bartram, it has 
I)riority over all the synonyms ; but if we are to reject Bartram's names 
on account of his frequent " lapses " from binomialism, or his equally bad 
l^ractice of omitting descriptions (which, however, is not the case with 
regard to his mention of the present species), then uruhii of Vieillot 
(1809) takes precedence over atrata of Wilson (1812), which comes next 
in order of date. 

3G8. Columba erythrina, Licht. — Although there is no law compel- 
ling the adoption of a museum name, I prefer to do so in this case rather 
than propose a new one, since Lichtenstein's name erytlirina is a very ap- 
l)ropriate one. The name by which this species ha s usually been known — 
C. '■'■jiavirostrls^ Wagler" — is " glaringly false," and, therefore, to be re- 
jected, according to the rules of the British Association.* It is true that 
the bill sometimes appears yellowish in the dried skin, but in life it is 
always some shade of i^urple or pink, w^hitish at the extremity. What- 
ever it may be, it is impossible to identify McCall's C. solitarlus with 
this species. If his description was really penned from a specimen, his 
bird has not yet been rediscovered, no known jS'orth American Pigeon 
corresponding at all closely with his description. In any event it cannot 
be the present species, which never has " brilliant reflections" on either 
neck or breast, nor the back or under wing-coverts " light-red color." 

378. Ortalis vetula maccalU (Baird) Eidgw. — In regard to this 
emendation of the generic name, see Wharton, " The Ibis," Oct., 1879, 
p. 450. I lind the Texan birds easily distinguishable from Mexican ex- 
amples (true vetula). 

380. Canace canadensis (Linn.) Reich. — None of the American grouse 
usually referred to Tetrao resemble at all closely the type of the latter 
genus, T. urogaUus, Linn. They appear, in fact, nearly as distinct from 
Tetrao proper as are Bonasa or Fedioecetes, or other recognized American 
genera. It seems scarcely advisable, however, to admit a genus '•'■Den- 
dragaims''^ for the special accommodation of G. obscura in its various forms. 

39G. Charadrius dominicus, Miill. — Milller's name for the American 
Golden Plover, dating 177G, should take precedence over fulvus, Gmel., be- 
stowed twelve years later (1788), as the name of the species. The Asiatic 
form should therefore be called C. doniinicus fulvus (Gmel.) 

* Cf. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Jan., 18S0, p. 37. 



10 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

400 Ms (Appendix), ^gialitis cmiONiCA (Gm.) Gray.* — This sup- 
posed new species proves to be the Lesser Ringed Plover of the Old 
World, jE. curonica (Gm.) Gray, the principal synonyms of which are 
the following. It may be considered doubtful whether tlie specimen 
really was obtained near San Francisco, as stated on the label. 

Charadriiis ciironicus, Gmel., S. N., I, 1788, 692. 

JEgialitli ciironicus, Gray, Cat. Brit. B, 1833, 141.— Hartixg, Handb. Brit. B. 

187-2, 134. 
Cliaradrius pliiUppinus, Lath., lud. Oru., II, 1790, 745. 
Charadriiis Jluviatilis, Bechst., Naturg. Yog. DeutscliL, 1809, 422. 
Cliaradrius minor, Meyer & WoJLF, TascL. Vog. Deutsclil., 1810, 324. 

Charadriiis intermedins, Mexetr., Catal. , 53. 

Charadrius sonaius, Swains., B. W. Afr., II, , 235, pi. 25. 

Mgialitis microrhijnclius, KiDGW., Am. Nat., VIII, Feb. 1874, 109 ("San Francisco, 

Cal."). 

408. Himantopus mexicanus (Miiller) Ord. — Miiller's name dates 
] 77G ; thirty-one jears earlier than nigricolUs, Yieill. 

413. Scolopax rusticula (Linn.) Wharton. — See "The Ibis," Oct., 
1879, p. 453. 

4:4:2his (Appendix). Numenius tahitiensis (Gm.). — The earliest name 
for the bird afterwards named Numenius femoraUs by Mr. Peale is 
Scolopax tahitiensis^ Gmel. (S. IST., I, ii, 1788, p. 65G, n. 22). 

448. Ajaja ROSEA (Briss.) Eidgw. — The American Spoonbill being a 
very distinct generic type, for which Reichenbach proposed (in 1853) the 
name Ajaja.; it becomes necessary to change the specific name also. 
There is not, unfortunately, any post-Linn?ean synonym for this species, 
with the exception of " Platea ' mexicana, Willoughby,' " as used by Gam- 
bel ill 1849 (Jour, of Philad. Acad., I, p. 222). Gambel, however, gives 
no description; and, moreover, since the name '■hnexieana'''' is simply 
quoted from Willoughby, it seems best to adopt Brisson's very appro- 
priate name of rosea, injustice to the accurate and complete description 
of the species in the work of that author. 

454. Hydranassa TRICOLOR (Milll.) Ridgw. — If tlie Herons are to 
be subdivided at all, it seems quite necessary to recognize the generic 
name which, in 1858, Professor Baird proposed for this species (B. N. 
Am., p. GG'J), the earliest designation of which is Ardea tricolor.^ Miiller 
(177G). 

455. DiCHROMANASSA rufa (Bodd.) Ridgw, — See Bull. U. S. Geol. 
and Geog. Survey Terr., vol. iv, no. 1, p. 24G. 

4G0. Botaurus lentiginosus (Montag.) Stephens. — This appears to 
be the earliest designation of the species. 

*Am. Nat., VIII, Feb., 1874, p. 109. 