o^ 



lj''-f 



'■'it' 



SMlTHSOiNIAN INSTITUTION 
UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF niE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 96 




UNITKD STA'n-.S 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING Of KICK 

WASHINGTON : lO^S 



ADVERTISEMENT 

The scientific publications of the National Museum include two se- 
ries, known, respectively, as Proceedings and Bulletin. 

The Proceedings, begun in 1878, are intended primarily as a medium 
for the publication of original papers, based on the collections of the 
National Museum, that set forth newly acquired facts in biology, an- 
thropology, and geology, with descriptions of new forms and revisions 
of limited groups. Copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, are dis- 
tribui-ed as published to libraries and scientific organizations and to 
specialists and others interested in the different subjects. 

The dates at which these separate papers are published are recorded 
in the table of contents of each of the volumes. 

The present volume is the ninety-sixth of this series. 

The Bulletin, the first of which was issued in 1875, consists of a 
series of separate publications comprising monographs of large zoologi- 
cal groups and other general systematic treatises (occasionally in 
several volumes), faunal Avorks, reports of expeditions, catalogs of 
type specimens, special collections, and other material of similar nature. 
The majority of the volumes are octavo in size, but a quarto size has 
been adopted in a few instances in which large plates were regarded 
as indispensable. In the Bulletin series appear volumes under the 
heading Contributions from the United States National Herharivmi, 
in octavo form, published by the National Museum since 1902, which 
contain papers relating to the botanical collections of the Museum. 

Alexander Wetmore, 
Secretary, Smithsoniam. Institution. 



^iPis 






II 



Cv 



CONTENTS 

Page 

BoHAHT, G. E. The phorid flies of Guam. No. 3205. Febru- 
ary 17, 11)47^ 397-416 

New genus: Parafannia. 

New si)ecies : Mcgasclia {.Ucgusdia) Hctifimur, J/, suis, M. 
stuntzi, M. parabasiscta, Chonoccphalus hirmitus, C. subglaber, 
PuUciphora wj/inani, P. nigriventru, Parafannia molluscovora. 

C'aldweix, John S. Neotropical lanternflies of the genus 
Phinctus in the United States National Museum, with de- 
scriptions of four new species. No. 3194. May IG, 1945 ^__ 177-184 
New siiecies : Phrirtus aordidufi, P. minulacanihis, P. punctatus, 
P. regalis. 

( "lakk, Austin H.. and Zetek, Jaaies. The onychophores of 
Panama and the Canal Zone. No. 3197. February 21, 
194G ^ 205-213 

CusHMAX, R. A. The ichneumon-flies of the genus Gryp- 
tanura Brulle. mainly tropical American. No. 3193. May 
23, 1945^ 139-170 

New genus: CremnocryptuH. 

New species: Cryptunura lubcrculdta, V. dicostuta, C. quadri- 
mncuUita, C. mrdiosirigosa, C. bicarinata, C. piccothoraoB, 
C. planiscutcllata, C. polUigaster, C. conica, C. ruficeps, C. 
scptctitrionulin, C. apophysis, C. biliiicata, C. rufa, V. lineati- 
fi'tiiiir, C. coxata, C. boUvicnsis, C. isthmus, V. cxcalibur, C. 
aviridccs, C grucilipcs, C. gracilis, C. gcnulis, (J. parancnsis, C. 
trnuiterebrata, V. mnnilifroiis. 

New combinations: Cryplnnuni mcxicana (Cres.son), C. uriza- 
bcnsis (Cameron), V. propinqua (Cresson), C. prciiosa (Vier- 
eck), V. vurirgnla (Hrulle), V. inccrta (('resson), Vrcmnocryp- 
tus spiiiifcrus (Cameron), C. cingulatus (Tosquiuet). 

. A generic revision of the ichneumon-flies of the 

tribe Ophionini. No. 3200. July 17, 1917' 417-482 

New gciK'ra : AUiji-h'iphiftu, Potophion, Sintoithinn, 'I'roplitipfiion, 
Clistorapha, Jforthonrura, Chilophion, Aulophion. 

New species: Auslralophinn iit/latus, Potophion cnudatus, Simo- 
phion aicnrinatuH, Trophophion tcniiicrps, liocthonvura arida, 
Htauropoctonus chczanus, Aulophion bicarinatus, A. vxcarinu- 

tU8. 
.New CDmliiiiatlDiis : l{!i i/iirlKijihion /I'luniiipt ntiis ( AsIiiik'JkI ) , J\'. 
ligulifrr (Morlcy), Aglnophion purpurnsn uh (Smilli), A. 
su)i\'ilriinum (Endt-rleln ), CliHtoruplin suhfuliginosa (Asli- 
nn'iMl). Ginophion costalis (<;r(;sson), Vliihtjihion iihnoruiis 
(Felt), Sliiuroii'>rt(,nii.H raricgaltts (Ucbldii). 



I)at<- of iiubllrntluii. 



IV PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.86 

Page 

Davis, A. C. Review of the weevils of the tribe Ophryastini 

of America, north of Mexico. No. 3207. July 8, 1947 ^ 483-551 

New species: Eupagoderes griseus, E. aeneus, E. robustus, E. 

pilosus. 
New variety : Eupagoderes morUvallis approximatus. 

Fennah, R. G. New lanternflies (Fulgoroidea) from South 

America. No. 3189. May 9, 1945 ^ 95-104 

New genus : Iquitosa. 

New species : Pintalia quadrimaculata, P. marmorata, P. oMiqui- 
vitta, P. falcata, P. curvivitta, P. daedala, P. vomerifera, Iqui- 
tosa shannoni, Ateson seniiluteum, A. luteospersum. 

Fisher, Walter Kenrick. Echiuroid worms of the North 
Pacific Ocean. No. 3198. April 11, 1946 ^ 215-292 

New orders: Xenopneusta, Heteromyota. 

New genera : Bonclliopsis, Euhonellia, Nellobia, Lissomyema. 

New si)ecies: Thalassema steinhecki, Listriolobus pelodes, 
OcJietostoina octomyotutn, O. edax, Arhynchltc inamoenus, 
Bonelliopsis alaskana, Eubonellia valida, Nellobia eusoma, 
AcantJiohamingia parudola. 

New subspecies : Echiurus echiurus alaskanus. 

Fisher, W. S. New beetles of the family Eucnemididae from 
Central America and the West Indies. No. 3188. May 8, 

1945 1 79-93 

New genera : Neodiapodius, Hylotastella. 

New siiecies : Temnillus aspericollis, Neodiapodius buscki, Dro- 
maeolus pulcher, D. panamensis, Fornax poeyl, F. valerio, 
Plesiofornax nigrinus, Farsus convexus, ArrMpis cubanus, A. 
insularis, Dirhagus albofasciatus, Hylotastella schwarzi, Nema- 
todes exiguus. 

■ — . New cerambycid beetles belonging to the tribe 

Disteniini from Central and South America. No. 3201. 

November 26, 1946^ 329-333 

New species : Distenia lateralis, D. spinipennis, Cometes etnar- 
ginata, C. bicolor. 

Gahan, a. B. Eight new species of chalcid-flies of the genus 
Pseudaphycus Clausen, with a key to the species. No. 3200. 

November 22, 1946 ^ 311-327 

New species: Pseudaphycus mcritorius, P. abstrusus, P. malinus, 
P. anyustifrons, P. nmndus, P. Umatulus, P. meracus, P. alveo- 
latifrons. 

. Review of some chalcidoid genera related to 

Cerocephala Westwood. No. 3203. December 31, 1946 i__ 349-376 
New subfamily: Cerocephaliuae. 
New genus: Acerocephala. 



* Date of publication. 



CONTENTS V 

ruge 

Gahan, a. B. — Continued 

New species: Choctos;)U(i tabida, Accroccphala acnif/ma. 

New combinations: CIkx toKitila f rater (Girault), Th<ocoIax 
bakeri (Crawford), 'J heocolaxia viridinotnm (Dodd), T. insu- 
laris (Dodd), T. insuluris var. grandis (Dodd), T. perpuhhra 
(Dodd), 2'. pcrpulchra var. metaUica (Dodd), T. scoUjtivora 
(Ashiuead), T. pitijophthori (Aslnnead), Accroccphala atrovio- 
lacea (Crawford), Eupclinella canadouHis (Provancher). 

Gazin, C. Lewis. Machacroidcft cothen Matthew, the suber- 
tooth creodont of the Bi-idger Eocene. No. 3202. December 
16, 1946^ 335-347 

GujMore, Ciiarijjs W. Notes on recently mounted reptile 
fossil skeletons in the United States National Museum. No. 
3106. Fi'bruary 5, 1046^ 195-203 

. The osteoloory of the fossil turtle Testudo 

'pracextans Lambe, Avitli notes on other species of Testudo 
from the Oligocene of Wyoming. No. 3199. March 28, 
1946^ - 293-310 

GoijjMAN, E. A. (See under Kellogg, Remington.) 

Heinricii, Carl. The genus i^wTu/eZZaZeller: A contribution 
toward a revision of the American pyralidoid moths of the 

family Phycitidae. No. 3190. May 18, 1945^ 105-114 

New species : Funddln iiinohUia. 

Kellogg, Remixgtox, and Goldman, E. A. Review of the 

sjjider monkeys. No. 3186. November 2, 1944 ^ 1-45 

New .sui)si)ecies : Afcks gcoffroyi yucatanensis, A. g. panamensis. 

MiiJ.ER, Robert R. Hy porhamphiut patris, a new species of 
hemiramjihid fish from Sinaloa, Mexico, with an analysis of 
the generic characters of IhjporJiamphus and Ileniirani- 

phus. No. 3195. July 27, 1945^ 185-193 

New species: llyporluiinyltus jxitria. 

SciiULTZ, Leonard P. A revision of the American clingfishes, 
family Gobie.socidae, with descriptions of new geiioi-a and 
forms. No. 3187. December 30, 1944 ^ 47-77 

New gen«'ra : Acyrtun. InfratridniH, Afcon. 

New spe(!ies : Sicj/ascn hildchrandi. 

New sub.species : Cotylis niyri])ittnin woodxi. 

. A new genus and two new s[)ecies of i)erc()id 

fishes from New Guineji. family Centropomidae. No. 3191. 

March 6, 1945 ' 115-121 

New Bt'nu.s : Xcnamhu.iHia. 

New HfMi'cle.M : Xtndtnhassis honcHni, X. Himnni. 

' Date of puljllcatloii. 



VI PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.96 

Page 

ScHULTz, Leonard P. Three new sciaenid fishes of the genus 
Ophioscion from the Atlantic coasts of Central and South 
America. No. 3192. April 25, 1945 ^ 123-137 

New species: Ophiosoion brasiUensis, 0. venezuelae, 0. pana- 
mensis. 

. A revision of the genera of mullets, fishes of the 



=■5 

family Mugilidae, with descriptions of three new genera. 

No. 3204. December 5, 1946 ^ 377-395 

New geuera : Xenomugil, Crenimugil, Heteroitiugil. 

Zetek, James. (See under Ci.ark, Austin H.) 



^ Date of publication 



ILLUSTRATIONS 

PLATES 

Follow I iig 
page 

1. Lower side of head of Votylis microi^pUus (ri.wlcr) and of (\ 

nigripinnis niyripinnifi I'oters 64 

2. New South Aiuoiicau FiilKoroidea 104 

3. South American Fulgoroidea 104 

4-6. The pMius FundcUa 114 

7. Cephalic process in Phrictus 180 

8. Valvula and geuitalia in Phrivttis 180 

0,10. Species of Phrictus: Dorsal aspect 180 

IL Hyporhamphua patris, new species 193 

12. Mounteil skeleton of Crocodiliis clavis Cope 203 

l.S. Skull and k)wer jaw of Crorodilus clavis Cope 203 

1 1, ir». Skull of Crocodiliis clavis Cope 203 

16. I»isea.sed dorsal vertebrae of Crocodilns sp 203 

17. Tail, pelvis, hind linihs, and feet of Corythnsaurus casuarius Brown_ 203 

18. Skin impre.ssions of Conjthosnunis casuarius Brown 203 

19. Restoration of Cori/thosaurus casuarius Brown 203 

20. IJchiurus cchiurus alaskanus, new subspecies 292 

21. Listriolobus pelodes, new species, and Ochetostoma octomyotum, 

new species 292 

22. Listriolobus pelodes, new species 292 

23, 24. Ochetostoma octomyotum, new species 292 

2r». Arhynchite iuamoetius, new species 292 

26, 27. IloneUiopsis aUiskatia, new genus and species 292 

2S. Euhonellia ralida, new frenus and species 292 

20, ;}0. Xellohid cusoma, new genus and species 292 

;{1,32. Acunttiohaminf/ia paradola, new species 292 

^'.i-?,~). Frechis enupo Fislier and MacClinitie 292 

1^6. Urechis caupo, F. chilcnsis, and U. unicinctua 292 

37. Frcchis caupo and comniensals 292 

38-41. Tcstudo praeextans Lanibe 310 

42,43. Testudo laticunea Cope 310 

44. Testudo f/uadrala Cope; Testudo praeextans Lambe 310 

45-46. Mnrhnrroidrs cothen Matthew 347 

47. Si>f'cies of Choetospila, Thcocolax, Cerocephala, Acerocephala, and 

Theocolaxia 376 

48. Species of Thcocolax, Cerocephala, and Acerocephala 376 

40-.''>6. Ichrienmon-flios of the tribe Ophionlnl 482 

Ti:XT FICTIRES 

PnKo 

1. Distribution of the forms of spidernionkeys (Atcles) In South Amer- 

ica (map) 12 

2. Distribution of the forms of spider monkeys (Ateles) in Middle 

America (map) 14 

3. Holotype of Xmnmhassis honcHsi, new species 119 

4. IIolotyi)e of Xctuimbassis simoni, new speci»'H 121 

f). Diagranunatic sketches of snout and lower Jnw of Bairdiella chrys- 

ura fLacep<>de), Stellifer rastrifer (Jordan), and Ophiosdon 

typicus Cill 12.'» 

6. ITolotyi»e f»f Ophi'iscion hrasilicnsis, new species 129 

7. Iliilotyjx' of (tjiliioscitni rcnczurhic, new species 132 

8. JIololyp<' of Ojihi'iscioti paunmcnsis, new species 13.'> 

9. Sketch of hearl regions of Ifyporhamphus and Ifcmiramphwt 180 

VII 



VIII PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.96 

Page 

10. Lissornyema mellita (Couu) 223 

11. Thalassema steinbecki, new species 231 

12. Ldstrioloius pelodes, new species 235 

13. Listriolohus pelodes, new species 237 

14. Ochetostoma edax, new species 244 

15. BonelUa viridis : 251 

16. BonelUopsis alaskana, new species 252 

17. Urechis caupo Fisher and MacGiuitie 266 

18. Urechis caupo Fisher and MacGinitie 267 

19. Urechis caupo Fisher and MacGinitie 273 

20. Skull of Testudo pracextans Lambe 294 

21. Skull and lower jaw of Testudo praeextans Lambe 295 

22. Palatal view of the skull of Testudo praeextans Lambe 296 

23. Lower jaw of Testudo praeextans Lambe 297 

24. Carapace of Testudo praeextans Lambe 298 

25. Plastron of Testudo pi-aeextans Lambe 303 

26,27. Pelvis of Testudo praeextans Lambe 304 

28. Sketch of the maxillary, premaxillary, and preorbital bones of 

Mugil cephalus 388 

29. Sketches of the maxillary, premaxillary, and preorbital bones of 

Myxus elonfjatus 390 

30. Sketches of the maxillary, premaxillary, and preorbital bones of 

Chelon cheio 390 

31. Sketches of the maxillary, premaxillary, and preorbital bones of 

Trachystoma petardi 393 

32. Diagram of the possible I'elationships of genera of the Mugilidae 395 

33-35. Phoridae of Guam 400 

36-38. Phoridae of Guam 401 

39-41. Phoridae of Guam 404 

42-45. Phoridae of Guam 405 

46-48. Phoridae of Guam 408 

49. Genital structures of Eupagoderes cf. deserttis-caUfornicus sec- 

tion 486 

50. Sapotes puncticollis Casey 489 

51. Eupagoderes geminatus Horn 497 

52. Eupagoderes griseus, new species 499 

53. Eupadogeres aeneus, new species 500 

54. Eupagoderes mortivallis Fall 502 

55. Eupagoderes rohustus, new species 504 

56. Eupagoderes decipiens (LeCoute) 505 

57. Eupagoderes spcciosus (LeConte) 510 

58. Eupagoderes niarmoratus Fall 512 

59. Eupagoderes sordidus (LeOonte) 514 

60. Eupagoderes simulans Van Dyke 515 

61. Eupagoderes argentatus (LeConte) 516 

62. Eupagoderes lucanus Horn 518 

63. Amydrogmus variabilis Pierce 521 

64. Ophryastes tvickhami Sharp 523 

65. Ophryastes latirostris LeConte 526 

66. Ophryastes symmetricus Fall 528 

67. Ophryastes sulcipennis Casey 529 

68. Ophryastes sulcirostris (Say) 530 

69. Ophryastes porosiis LeConte 532 

70. Ophryastes tuberosus LeConte 534 

71. Ophryastes ovipennis Sharp 535 

72. Ophryastes vittatus (Say) 537 

73. Tosastes coarctatus Champion 540 

74. Tosastes globularis Pierce 542 

75. Tosastes ovalis Pierce 544 

76. Tosastes cinerascens Pierce 546 

77. Rhigopsis effracta LeConte 548 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 




issued n^t''t\»>L^JH*j;l ^V <^< 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Vol. 96 WMhington: 1944 No. 3186 



REVIEW OF THE SPIDER MONKEYS 



By Remington Kellogg and E. A. Goldman 



Field studies have shown that the forest-inhabiting spider monkeys 
of the New World are «nl)jpct to ])lasmodial infections under nat- 
ural conditions and consequently, since they are readily obtainable. 
are now being used in laboratory studies of the malaria Plasmodium. 
Spider monkeys are readily tamed and very adaptable to a life in 
captivity. Owing to their d(jcility they are easily handled by labo- 
ratory assistants, and it is not difficult to provide suitable vegetable 
fofxl for them. For these reasons it is important to establish, if pos- 
sible, the valid geographic races of these monkeys, to determine in so 
far as available collections permit the geographic ranges of the recog- 
nized forms, and to set forth tlie characteristics by which the several 
races can be recognized with s(jme degree of certainty. 

The spider monkeys form a compact group, or subfamily, the 
Ateliiiae, of the primate family Cebidae, 'I'liey are characterized by 
slender body, very long, slender limbs, and long tail, naked beneatli 
distally and prehensile; the hand has only four functional fingers, the 
thumb being usually vestigial or absent. 

These monkeys, in structure and hai)its, sliow higli specialization 
and adaptation to a strictly arboreal life. They arc limited in range 
to tlie unbroken tropical ff)rests from southern Mexico to northern 
Matto Gnjsso, Brazil, and central Bolivia in South America. In the 
forest areas inhabited, oflen including steep mountain slopes, largo 
trees have interlocking branches through which the spider monkeys 
are able to travel in long leaps at amazing speed, using the tail con- 
stantly as a powerful grasping organ for balancing, and swinging to 
differing levels. A spider monkey in a cage is seen at a disadvantage 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

compared, for example, with so active an animal as the gibbon, but 
the reason for this seems to be that room is lacking for the exercise of 
its full powers. It is interesting to speculate on the comparative 
speed that might be attained under natural conditions by these widely 
different but both outstandingly active New World and Old World 
representatives, respectively, of the order to which they belong. In 
following spider monkeys in the forest a man may keep up by run- 
ning if the ground is clear, but if impeded by having to go around 
underbrush he is quickly left behind. Spider monkeys are considered 
very good to eat by the native populations of many countries and 
are, therefore, in danger of extermination. 

Many names for spider monkeys have been based on inadequate de- 
scriptions of animals from unknown localities, and if a type specimen 
was used it may no longer be extant. The result has been great con- 
fusion in the literature bearing on the identification of material, and 
of the distribution of the nominal species recognized little has been 
known. 

The status even of the generic name Ateles has been open to ques- 
tion. The spider monkey S[imia\ Sapajus paniscus was included 
among the 14 monkeys allocated to Sapajus when this subgenus was 
proposed by Kerr (The Animal Kingdom, CI. I, Mammalia, p. 76, 
1792). No genotype seems to have been designated for the subgenus 
Sapajus Kerr, unless the statement made by J. A. Allen (Bull. Amer. 
Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 7, p. 181, June 20, 1895) that Sapajios of Kerr is 
equivalent to Cebus Erxleben, 1777, can be interpreted as restricting 
the application of the term Sapajus to the species of Gehus included 
among the 14 monkeys mentioned above. In order to eliminate any 
possible misinterpretation, the genotype of Sapajus Kerr is here desig- 
nated as S\i7nia'\ Sapajus capuclnus Kerr {op. cit., p. 78, 1792), which 
is the same as S[i77iia'] capiwina Linnaeus., 1766 {nee 1758). Inasmuch 
as the genotype of Gehus Erxleben, 1777, has been fixed (Elliott, Field 
Columbian Mus. Publ. 115, zool. ser., vol. 8, p. 560, Mar. 4, 1907) by 
subsequent designation as Sitnia capucina Linnaeus, 1766 {nee 1758), 
which in turn is equivalent to Gehus nignvittatus Wagner (see 
Cabrera, Rev. Soc. Argentina Cienc. Nat., vol. 16, pp. 21-22, 1939), 
Sapajus Kerr is herewith relegated to the synonymy of Gehus Erxle- 
ben. 

Neither opinion 147 (On the principles to be observed in interpreting 
article 34 of the International Code in relation to the rejection, as homo- 
nyms of generic and subgeneric names of the same origin and meaning 
as names previously published. Opinions and declarations rendered 
by the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature, London, 
vol. 2, pt. 14, pp. 123-132, Sept. 30, 1943) nor article 34 (International 
rules of zoological nomenclature, Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 
39, p. 86, July 30, 1926) contains an express ruling as to whether a 



THE SPIDER MONKEYS — KELLOGG AND GOLDMAN 3 

ijiven oreneric nainc is a hoinonyni oi' anolluT piwiously jmblislied 
ofenerio name that has the same ori<2:iii and meaning but that dill'ers 
from the hitter in more than one letter. If the "one letter" rule is 
strictly adhered to, then Sopajou Lacepi'de (Tableau des divisions, 
sous-divisions, ordres et genres des mannniferes, p. 4. Published as 
supplement to Discours d'ouverture et de cloture du cours d'histoire 
naturellc, et tableaux nu'thodiques des mannniferes et des oiseaux, 1799) 
is the oldest available name for the spider monkeys. The genotype of 
Sapajou Lacepede is Sapaj&u paniscus Lacepede=/S'/wMf paniscus Lin- 
naeus. Pending an opinion from the International Commission on 
Zoological Xomenclature, the generic name Ateles E. Geoffroy (Ann. 
Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 7, p. 2G2, 1806) , of which the genotype is 
likewise Simla paiiiscus Linnaeus, is here retained for the spider 
monkeys. 

We have been unable to reach any satisfactory conclusions regarding 
the identity of one of the descril)ed spider monkeys allocated to this 
genus. The '"Antigua Monkey" was described by Pennant (His- 
tory of quadrupeds, vol. 1, p. 206 (no. 212), 1781) as follows : 

Mfonkey] with a short nose; black face, hair on each side long; back and sides 
orango and black, intimately mixed ; holly white; outside of lops black ; inside ash- 
I'olorotl ; tail of a dusky ash; its length 20 inches; that of body oightocn. 

Lately in possossion of Richard Morris, Esq. of the Navy-Offico; brought from 
Antigua; but its native place uncertain; very good-natured, lively, and full of 
tricks; frequently hung by its tail. 

This monkey subsecpiently became the basis for [^Sinua] Sapajus 
variefjatuH Kerr (The Animal Kingdom, p. 79, 1792) and Simia antiqu- 
ana Pechstein (Thomas Pennant's Allgemeine Uebersicht der vierfiis- 
sigen Thiere, vol. 1, p. 227, footnote, 1799). In our judgment these 
names apply clearly to a spider monkey, and quite likely to one of the 
Middle American subspecies, but since the characters given are not 
sufficient to identify the race positively, we believe both shoidd be held 
unident ifiable. '^\n<ni Atclcs variegatws (Kerr) antedates .1 tchfi va/ic 
fjahiJi ^^'agner, the latter being preoccupied must be supplanted by 
Ateles hehehutli E. Geoffroy, which also has priority. 

Despite strongly contrasting patterns of color, dilfering lengths of 
pelage, and to some extent varying tail and foot proportions, the strik- 
ing similarity of all the spider monkeys in the more essential cranial 
features seems to indicate close reiationsiiips. The nominal sjxries 
arc here reduced to foiii-. mimI it seems to us probable that additional 
study of the genus based on moiv complete collections may result in a 
further le.ssening of the number. The most divergent forms are the 
I'lack paniscus of French Ciuiana and the silvery-bellied yucatanensis 
(jf Qiiintana Koo. Perhaps the most clearly defined line of demarca- 
tion between species, as we understand them, is in eastern Panama, 
where the range of the deep reddish panamcnsM, a member of the 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.96 

geoffroyi group, meets or closely approaches the range of the nearly all 
black Tohustus. The Rio Amazonas, however, seems to be an effective 
barrier separating the ranges of A. paniscus paniscus and A. helzebuth 
marginatiis. 

Several large series of specimens from the same locality have 
afforded us much information concerning the range of individual 
variation that may be expected in the genus Ateles. The thumb is 
normally represented by a short metacarpal, which ordinarily is not 
visible externally. When, in occasional individuals, a short proximal 
phalanx is retained it constitutes the vestigial nailless thumb. In 
two specimens of velleroms (U. S. N. M. Nos. 74662, 74663) from 
Santa Efigenia, Oaxaca, and in one of the same form (A. M. N. H. 
IS'o. 123282) from Cantoral, Honduras, these thumbs are present on 
one hand and not on the other. In one of pananiensis (A. M. N. H. 
No. 141980) from Canas Gordas, Costa Rica, the thumbs are present 
on both hands. In a specimen of hyhridus from Guaimaral, Colom- 
bia, vestigial thumbs on both hands bear small nails. Lonnberg 
(Arkiv for Zool., vol. 32A, No. 25, p. 8, July 18, 1940) describes a 
well-developed thumb with a well-developed nail on one hand only 
in a specimen of paniscus^ a small thumb present on the other hand 
being nailless. All three specimens of paniscus (A. M. N. H. Nos. 
94134, 94135, 94136) from Rio Jamunda, near Faro, on the north bank 
of the Rio Amazonas, have thumbs on both hands, as already re- 
corded by Tate (Bull. Amer. Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 76, p. 215, Oct. 20, 
1939). Two others from Lago Cuipeua, farther east on the same 
bank of this river, however, are thumbless. Lonnberg (op. cit.) 
refers to the absence of thumbs in specimens of Ateles ater 
[= chameh] from various localities, but they are present on both 
hands in a skin (C. M. No. 2775) from Rio Yapacani, Santa Cruz, 
Bolivia. The evidence thus presented indicates that vestigial thumbs 
occur irregularly throughout the genus, and no specific significance 
is attached to their presence or absence. 

Certain cranial details believed by some authors to represent dis- 
tinctive characters prove to be too variable to be of much value. As 
Lonnberg [op. cit.) has pointed out, some of the features mentioned 
as characters by Tate {op. cit.) in comparing species are subject to 
a wide range of variation. The antorbital or "malar foramen" varies 
from one or two "pin-holes" to rounded openings 5 mm. in diameter 
through the jugal. These often differ in size and number on the 
two sides of the same skull. Tate also refers to "small, triangular 
pterygoids without pointed tips" as a cranial character in paniscus. 
In the Cebidae the fossae between the true pterygoids and their ex- 
ternal reduplications are large and deep in Cehus., reduced to a ves- 
tige in Alouatta., and entirely wanting in Ateles. The external 
reduplications of the pterygoids have the tips broken off in the 



THE SPIDER MUNKEYS KELLOGG AND GOLDMAX 5 

spei-inieiis of paiif.fcus exiuninotl by Tate, but tlu'^^e wiii^like thin 
plates are in reality lar<ier and more extended posteriorly in these 
and in other specimens of pan>,'<ciis from (he Amazonian refrion than 
usual in this genus. Other characters that have been ascribed by 
Tate to paniscus but that have not been found to be constant are the 
small size of post<ilenoid jjrocesses, unexpanded zy^jfoniata of nearly 
uniform depth, and narrow teeth. The maxillary tooth rows in the 
^^enus as a whole are normally straight and convergent anteriorly, 
although skulls with parallel or arcuate tooth rows are less frequently 
observed. All the teeth in the maxillary tooth rows may be large 
or small, and the individual teeth vary in size in relation to one 
another. The posterior molars appear to be the most variable. 
They are usually similar to the first premolars in crown area but 
may be either larger or smaller. Examination of a large number of 
spider-monkey skulls shows that the cranial and dental features men- 
tioned are subject everywhere to about the same wide range of indi- 
vidual variation. Schultz (Journ. Mammalogy, vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 
28G-305, Nov. 1926) has discussed the relative ranges of variation in 
skull measurements and in the formation of the forehead in a series 
of Atelen taken in the immediate vicinity of one camp on the bank 
of the Rio Yoya in Nicaragua. 

Beyond the general similarity and the range of the usual individual 
variation in the forms of Atrles there are, however, a few cranial 
features that seem to be worthy of consideration. All the races of 
Ateles geoffroyi agree closely in the more important cranial details, 
but in the more northern subspecies vellerosus and yueatanens-ia the 
brain case is slightl}' narrower than in panamensis and other Middle 
American races. The South American species A. paniscv-f and ^1. 
hrlzehiith have a longer rostrum, a more strongly inclined backward 
facial piofile, and moie elongated nasal openings than geoffroyi. 
In j)anisf'Uf<, which api)ears to be the most divergent in cranial de- 
tails, the pf)stei-ior upi)er molars scarcely reach the transverse plane 
of the anterior roots of the zygomata, while in geoffroyi they nonnally 
jjass well beyond this plane; other j)ecidiar chaiaeters in pcmisms 
are the broad, somewhat swollen base of the rostrum and the poste- 
rior exten.sion of the external reduplications of the pterygoids. In 
cranial details, as well as in geogi-a|)hic position, At< Us fii.sc/a ps ru- 
bu.shiM is somewhat intermediate iM'tween geoffroyi wwd jxniiftcus. 

Specinu'ns examined in series have shown tliat altliough sjnder 
monkeys present considerable variation in color the vaiiation is 
within limits beyond which it does not normally pass, except as the 
usual intergradation that may be expected Ix-tween regional races or 
subspecies. The coloration, length of ptdage, and othei* external 
features, when determined by examination of specimens in suflicient 
numbers, prove to be more reliable indices to subspecific relationship 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.96 

than any cranial characters found by us. In Middle America, for 
example, skulls of vellerosus from Mexico are distinctly narrower, 
with less noticeable widening of the brain case, than those of fana- 
me^isis, but differ little in other respects and despite great differences 
in color are obviously assignable to the same species. Unlike many 
other primates the sexes in the spider monkeys differ little, if at all, 
in size. One of the largest skulls of geoffroyi is that of an old female 
from Lavala, Nicaragua. 

For loan of pertinent material our thanks are tendered to the fol- 
lowing: Dr. Thomas Barbour, director, and Barbara Lawrence, Mu- 
seum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, Mass.; Dr. Adolph H. 
Schultz, Laboratory of Physical Anthropology, Johns Hopkins 
Medical School, Baltimore, Md. ; Dr. H. E. Anthony and George G. 
Goodwin, American Museum of Natural History, New York, N. Y. ; 
J. Kenneth Doutt, Carnegie Museum, Pittsburgh, Pa.; Dr. H. C. 
Oberholser, Cleveland Museum of Natural History, Cleveland, Ohio; 
Dr. William H. Burt, University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology, 
Ann Arbor, Mich., and to the latter also for the opportunity to 
examine specimens in the Donald R. Dickey collection. 

In lists of specimens examined, the following abbreviations are 
employed : 

A. H. S., Collection of Dr. Adolph H. Scbnltz. 

A. M. N. H., American Musenm of Natural History. 

C. D., Collection of Donald R. Dickey. 

C. M., Carnegie Museum. 

C. M. N. H., Cleveland Museum of Natural History. 

M. C. Z., Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

U. M. M. Z., University of Michigan, Museum of Zoology. 

U. S. N. M., United States National Museum. 

All measurements are in millimeters. The external measurements 
were taken in the flesh by the collector as follows : Total lengthy nose 
to end of terminal vertebra; tail, upper base of tail to end of terminal 
vertebra; hind foot, back of heel to end of longest nail on digit. The 
following cranial measurements of typical adults, unless otherwise 
stated, were taken with vernier calipers by the authors: Greatest 
length, distance from anterior tip of premaxillae to inion or extreme 
posterior median point of brain case ; orhital width, distance between 
outer margins of orbits; 'postorbital constriction, least width at con- 
striction behind orbits; width of hrain case, greatest width of brain 
case at or over mastoids ; zygomatic hreadth, greatest distance between 
outside surfaces of zygomata ; inaxiUary tooth row, distance from front 
of canine to back of posterior upper molar at alveolar borders. 

The following treatment is based on a review of the scattered lit- 
erature and an examination of 251 specimens representing all the 
recognized species. The work has been done at the request of the 
Board for the Coordination of Malarial Studies of the National Re- 



THE SPIDER MONKEYS KELLOGG AND GOLDMAX 7 

search Council in the hiboiiitorics of the Division of Miimnials luid of 
the V. S. Fish and Wildlife Service in the United States National 
Museum. The nuips were drawn by Mrs. Kiithoryne C. Tubb, of the 
Fis-h and Wildlife Service. This review is inteniled to afford a work- 
ing knowledge of the genus, pending more exhaustive revision as the 
species become better known. 

KEY TO SPIDER MONKEYS (GENUS ATELES) ' 

A. Gi'iieral coloration of entire back ehieflj' black. 

B. Back and belly, a.s well as lin/bs ami tail, wbolly deep glossy black. 

C. Hairs on bead wholly black (except for short, white mustache whiskers 

on upi)er lip and sparse, short, white chin whiskers) ; pelage deep glossy 

black. 

D. Foot rather larj^e (length, hi^l to end of longest toe, 190-220 mm.). 

E. Tail normally bushy in adult (especially on upper ba.sal half, longest 

hail's on upperside .50-100 nun. in length) ; face normally flesh color, 

occasionally freckled or black; hairs on back silky, lax, and long 

(majority of hairs on midline of back 75-150 mm. in length) ; tail 

often more than twice length of head and body. (North bank of 

Amazon east of Manfios and north to Caribbean coast of Guianas. ) 

paniscus 
EE. Tail much less bushy but more densely furred in adult (longest 
hairs on upi>erside 4(M');j mm. in length); face wholly black; 
hairs on back .shorter (majority of hairs on midline of back 
75 nrm. or less) ; tail often more than twice length of head and 
bod J'. (Western Mat to Gros.so, eastern Bolivia, and north- 
eastern Peru to Rio Solimoes and Rio Jurua, Brazil.) chamek 

DD. Foot smaller (length, heel to end longest toe, 100-170 mm.) ; tail not 
noticeably bu.shy (the longest hairs on upperside 30-50 mm. in 
length) ; face wholly black, except for short, white nuistache 
whiskers on upper lip and sparse, short, white chin whiskers; 
hairs on back harsh and of medium length (majority of hairs on 
midline of back 40-70 mm. in length) ; tail variable in length, 
occasionally nearly twice as long as head and body. (Serranfa del 

Darien, Panama, to .southwestern Colombia.) robustus 

CC. Hairs on head not wholly black; semilunar forehead patch and side 
whi.skers on face white; remainder of body, lind)S, and tail deep 
glo.ssy black; foot nre<lium (length, heel to end longest toe, 170-185 
mm.) ; tail vari;d»le in length, occasionally more than twice as long 
as head and body. (Slate of Parfi. Brazil, .south of Amazon, between 

Rios TajiajTiz and Tocatitlns. ) marginatus 

JiB. liack and belly, as well as limbs and tall, not wholly deep glossy black; 
hairs on back black at hnsi', and either black dislaliy or with lii>s 
tinged with either burnt umlter or seal brown. 
F. Crown cap tawny-oUve, yellowish wood brown, oi- willi black hairs lipped 
with burnt umber; tuiderparts similar in color to \ipjH'riiarts; entire 
body, Including limb.s and tail, covered with black hairs tinged dislaliy 
with burnt umber; foot small (leiiglli. heel to end longest toe, l.'.O-170 
mm.) ; tail variable in length, usually one-flfth or more longer lh:in 
head and body. (Pacific side of cordlllera of Ecuador.) fusciceps 



' ('..lors niffitlono*! In thU kpy are nhown In Ilotjort RIdKwny'fl 'Tolor SlandnrdH nnd 
Color Nomenclature," 4.3 pp.. r.3 pig. WuHliinKton, 1012. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.98 

FF. Crown cap black, not tawny-olive, yellowish wood brown, or with hairs 
tipped with burnt umber ; underparts conspicuously lighter in color 
than upperparts, line of demarcation between upperparts and under- 
parts being sharply defined ; general coloration of crown cap on head 
as well as rest of upperparts black ; in some individuals these black 
hairs under strong light having a seal-brown tinge ; triangular fore- 
head patch yellow, golden, brownish yellow, or white (occasionally 
either entirely absent or more or less hidden by anterior stiff black 
hairs) ; side whiskers on face, when present, whitish or huffy (not 
present in some specirtfens) ; outer surfaces of forelimbs to elbows 
black ; outer surfaces of forearms to wrists generally blackish but 
occasionally similar to underparts and intermixed with long dusky 
overhairs ; outer surfaces of hind limbs usually blackish to knees or 
below, but in some specimens (particularly in eastern part of range) 
outer surfaces of hind limbs, including thighs and region around base 
of tail, distinctly straw-colored in ground color overlaid with sparse 
long black hairs (not numerous enough to affect general ground color) ; 
hairs on throat normally black, sometimes grayish, more or less 
concealed by black hairs ; remainder of underparts, inner surfaces 
of fore and hind limbs, as well as under surface of tail, yellow, 
cinnamon-buff, dull cream-buff, or pale olive-buff; tail normally 
bicolored, upper surface being black and under surface similar to 
that of underparts (in occasional specinfens upper surface of tail 
approximately same as that of under surface but more heavily inter- 
spersed with long black overhairs) ; foot large (length, heel to end 
longest toe, 190-200 mm.) ; tail variable in length but often almost 
twice length of head and body. (From near junction of Rio Caura 
with Rio Orinoco in Venezuela south to Rio Negro in Brazil, westward 
to Colombia east of Cordillera Oriental (Mambita), Ecuador east of 

Andes, and northeastern Peru.) belzebuth. 

AA. General coloration of entire back not chiefly (jet) black. 

O. A conspicuous white triangular forehead patch ; general coloration of i:pper- 
parts wood brown, darker on head and upper back and lighter on lumbar 
region and thighs ; underparts, inner surfaces of fore and hind limbs, and 
under surface of tail whitish or buffy ; side whiskers on face variable, 
sometimes whitish or buffy and sometimes dark wood brown. (Magda- 

lena River Valley and adjacent mountains, Colombia.) hybridus 

GO. No conspicuous white triangular forehead patch ; general coloration of 
upperparts not wood brown. 
H. General coloration of upperparts, except for head and shoulders on some 
individuals, tending toward light mahogany red ; underside of tail, at 
least on basal half, deep cinnamon-rufous to ferruginous ; back and 
shoulders grading from dark rusty reddish to ferruginous or burnt 
sienna, with varying admixture of overlying blackish hairs ; underparts 
similar in color to back but with less noticeable admixture of blackish 
hairs ; face, crown cap on head, and median streak on back of neck 
blackish ; sides of neck covered with a mixture of pinkish-bufE, cin- 
namon-buff, and blackish hairs ; outer surfaces of fore and hind limbs 
either black or blackish to knees and elbows ; outer surfaces of limbs 
below knees and elbows either black or with varying admixture of black 
and ferruginous hairs ; a distinct ferruginous or cinnamon-buff streak 
along inner surface of arm from armpit to elbow. (Western side of 



THE SPIDER MONKEYS — KELLOGG AND GOLDMAN 9 

central curdillera of Costa Uiea (lilo I'iiris) south to Cordillera de 

San Bias (Cerro Azul) of eastern rauama.) panamensis 

////. Cieneral coloration of upporparts, except for head and shoulders, not uni- 
form light mahogany red ; underside of tail not deep ferruginous. 
/. GeruMal coloration of uppt'riiarls as well as underparts light hufC over- 
laid with dusky tipiK-d hairs; side whiskers on face silky light buff; 
dark markings on head and limbs usually inconspicuous; crown cap 
on head grading from black to buff tinged with brownish ; stiff long 
black hairs above eyes concealing to a variable extent the white or 
buff triangular forehead patch ; elbows and outer sides of forearms 
more or less distinctly blackish ; elongate black patches on knees, the 
hairs black to roots. (Southern Nicaragua, Greytowu to Lake Mana- 
gua.) I . geoffroyi 

//. General coloration of upperparts as well as underparts not light buff. 
J. Chest and belly normally near tawny or cinnamon-rufous. 

K. General coloration of upperparts golden yellowish to cinnamon- 
rufous in tone but obscured by numerous overlying black-tipped 
hairs; crown cap black, the hairs black to base; underparts and 
flanks near tawny or cinnamon-rufous ; tail black above, more or 
less mixed with tawny below from base to near callosity; side 
whiskers on face blackish. (Eastern side of central cordillora 

of Costa Rica. ) ornatus 

KK. General coloration of upperparts lighter or duller than preceding. 
L. General coloration of upperparts, except for head and shoulders, 
clear tawny, intermixed with black-tipped hairs ; sides, thighs, 
and belly paler, tawny or cinnamon-buff, with somewhat paler 
tone extending downward to wrists and ankles on inner sur- 
faces of fore and hind limbs; shoulders and outer surfaces of 
fore and hind limbs black; tail .sharply bicolored, black above 
to tip, and tawny below; crown cap either black or dusky (in- 
dividual hairs buff or cinnamon-buff at base) ; side whiskers on 
face cream color. (Azuero Peninsula, Panama. )_-azuerensis 
LL. General coloration of upperparts, except for head and shoulders 
in some individuals, buckthorn brown to Mars brown, sparsely 
or Jioticeably intermixed with blackish hairs (especially on 
midline of back in sonit? individuals) ; belly honey yellow to 
tawny, «'Xten(liiig downward on inner surfaces r>f hind limbs to 
ankles, and a lighter tone extending downward on inner sur- 
faces of forellmbs to wrists; outer surfaces of fore and hind 
limbs usually black (in some individuals restricted more or 
le8.s to elbow and knee patclies) ; tail usimlly sharply bicolored, 
bhnk or diisky above to tip and tawny below (when otherwise, 
mixed light and dark hairs cover tall above and below) ; an- 
terior part of crown jiatch more or less suffused with cliuia- 
nion buff, owing to liglil basal color of liairs and tending to 
form a transverse band across forehead ; side whiskers on face 
light huff to cream-huff. (Northwestern Costa Rica and higlier 

p<irtioiis of northern Nicaragua.) frontatus 

JJ. Chest and belly normally neither tawny nor orhrnceous-rufous. 

J/. Upper back distinctly darker than lumbar region of back; top of 
head. nJTk and upper back, and outer surfaces of fore and liind 
llmb.s varying from blackish to brownish black. 

002420—44 -2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.96 

N. Underi>arts normally silvery whitish ; brownish black of head and 
neck passing gradually through cinnamon-drab on upper back 
to near olive-buff on lumbar region, the light drab extending 
along median line to base of tail ; side whiskers on face whit- 
ish. (Quintana Roo, Yucatan, and northeastern Guate- 
mala.) yucatanensis 

NN. Underparts not normally silvery whitish. 

O. Upperparts dark, especially on head, neck, and upper back, and 
more uniformly overlaid with black ; lumbar region more or 
less noticeably suffused with cinnamon ; pelage typically 
longer and denser ; underside of neck and throat mixed brown- 
ish and buffy ; rest of underparts including at least inner sur- 
faces of upper portions of limbs pinkish buff to cinnamon-buff, 
becoming cinnamon or rusty along sides of body ; crown cap 
blackish ; side whiskers on face blackish. (Alta Vera Paz, 

Guatemala.) pan 

00. Upperparts lighter, distinctly bicolored ; head, neck, and 
upper back brownish black ; lumbar region cinnamon-buff 
or cinnamon, darkened along midline by overlying blackish 
hairs ; underside of neck and throat varying from grayish 
to a mixture of buff-gray and brown ; underparts, includ- 
ing inner surfaces of arms in a strip narrowing from 
armpit to a point near elbows and on inner surfaces of 
legs to near ankles, varying from pinkish buff to cin- 
namon, becoming near cinnamon on sides of body ; crown 
cap blackish ; side whiskers on face dull whitish or yellow- 
ish. (Honduras and El Salvador northward through 
Guatemala to southeastern Oaxaca and the Isthmus of 
Tehuantepec and along east coast of Mexico to eastern 

San Luis Potosl.) vellerosus 

MM. Upper back not distinctly darker than lumbar region of back ; 
general coloration of upperparts, including outer surfaces of 
fore and hind limbs, as well as upper surface of tail, dusky, 
the darker hairs nearly sooty black on distal two-thirds and 
old gold on basal third, and thinly interspersed with these 
on head, neck, back, thighs, and upper surface of tail are 
old gold or silvery hairs ; coloration of upperparts further 
modified by lighter hair bases showing through ; a partially 
concealed huffy spot on forehead ; hairs on belly, inner sur- 
faces of hind limbs, and under surface of tail dull cinnamon- 
buff tipped with sooty black. (Rio Tuyra Valley of eastern 
Panama.) grisescens