a 



^eparinicnf of fhc inferior 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

17 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



PUBLISHED rXDER THE DIRECTI 




KF SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 



WASHINGTON: 

GrOVEENMENT PlilNTIXa OFFICEo 

1879. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Boaii, Tarleton H. Description of a New Sparoid Fish, Sargus Holhroohii, from Savan- 

naliBaiik 198 

Ou the Occurrence of Stichceus punctatus (Fabr.) Kxo;5er, at St. Michael's, Ahiska 279 

Ou the Identity of Euchalarodus Futnami Gill, -with Pleuronectes glaber (Storer) Gill, 

with iSTotes on the Habits of the Species 345 

Description of a Species of Lycodes {L. Turneri) from Alaska, beUeved to be unde- 



scribed 463 

See also under Goode and Bean. 

Beldlng', ij. A Partial List of the Birds of Central Califox^ia : 388 

Cook, Caleb. The Manufacture of Porpoise-Oil •• ■ 16 

I>all, W. II. Descriptions of Now Forms of Mollusks from Alaska contained in the Collec- 
tions of the National Museum 1 

Postplioceue FossOs in the Coast Eange of California 3 

Fossil Mollusks from Later Tertiaries of California 10 

Note on Shells from Costa Eica Kitchenmiddcn, cojlected by Drs. Flint and Bransford . . 23 

— 1 Distribution of CaUfoiniau Tertiary FossUs 20 

Descriptions of New Species of ShcUs from California in the Collections of the Na- 
tional Museum 40 

»- Report on the Limpets and Chitons of the Alaskan and Arctic Regions, with Descrip- 
tions of Genera and Species believed to be new ^ 281 

Edwards, Viiial K, On the Occurrence of the Oceanic Bonito, Orcynus pelamys (Linn^) 

Poey, in Vineyard Sound, Mass 203 

Oill, Tlieodore. Synopsis of the Pediculate Fishes of the Eastern Coast of Extratropi- 

cal North America 215 

Note on the Antrnnariidce 221 

On the Proper Specilic Name of the Common Pelagic Antennariid Pterophryne 223 

Note on the Ceratiidai 227 

Note on the ATaltheidce 231 

CJoode, G. Brown. _ The Clupea tyrannus of Latrobe 5 

The Occurrence of Belone latimanus in Buzzard's Bay, Massachusetts 6 

The Voices of Cnistaoeans 7 

A Kevision of the American Species of the Genus Brevoortia, with a Description of a 

New Species from the Gulf of Mexico.. , 30 

The Occurrence of Hiiypocampus antiqiiorum, or an Allied Form, on Saint George's 

Banks 45 

The Occurrence of the Canada Porcupine in "West Virginia 2G4 

Ou Two Fishes from the Bermudas mistakenly described as new by Dr. Giiuther 402 

Goode, C Brown, and TarlctOM H. Bean. The Craig Flounder of Em-ope, Glyp- 

toeephaluji cynoylossus, ou the Coast of North America 19 

The Oceanic Bonito on the Coast of the United States "24 

Description of Ccmlolatilus 'inierops, a New Species of Fish from the Gulf Coast of 

Florida 42 

On a New Serranoid Fish, Epinephelus Drumviond-Hayi, from the Bermudas and 

Florida ■. 173 

Descriptions of Two New Species of Fishes, Lutjanus Blaclcfordii and Ltitjanns 

Stearnsii, from the Coast of Florida 17G 

A Note upon the Black Grouper (Epinephelus nigritus (Holbrook) Gill) of the Southern 

Coast ' 182 

Descriptions of Two Gadoid Fishes, Phycis Chestcri and Haloporphyi-us viola, from the 

Deep-Sea Fauna of the Northwestern Atlantic 2oG 

Description of Argentina syrtansium, a New Deep-Sea Fish from Sable Island Bank 201 

The Identity of lilanonenius caudacuta (Storer) Gill with Gadus eimbrius Linn " 348 

Note on Platcssa ferruginea D. H. Storer, and Platessa rostrata H. E. Storer OCl 

On the Identity of Brosmius americanus GiU, with Brosmius hrosme (MiiUer) "White ... 302 

III 



IV TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

Page. 
Jackson, J. C S., 3TI. 1>. Arsenic Acid for protecting Anatomical Preparations ftom In- 
sects 24 

Jefferson, I^ieut. J. P.,X'. S. A. On tlie Mortality of Tislies in the Gulf of Mexico in 1878.. 363 
Jefferson, ]L,ieut. J. P., Dr. Joseph Y. Porter, and Thomas 3Ioore. On the 

DesiTuction of JTish in the Vicinity of the Tortugas during the months of September aud 
October, 1S78 244 

Jordan, David S., M. D. ISTotes on a Collection of Fishes from Clackamas Eiver, Oregon.. C9 
Joi'dan, David S., and Charles H. Gilbert. Kotes on the Fishes of Eeaufort Harbor, 

Korth Carolina 365 

I.awrence, George N. Catalogue of the Birds of Dominica, from Collections made for 
the Smithsonian Institution by Frederick A. Ober, together "with his Notes and Observa- 
tions 48 

Catalogue of the Birds of St. Vinfent, from Collections made by Mr. Fred. A. Ober, 

under the Directions of the Smithsonian Institution, "with his Xotes thereon 185 

Catalogue of the Birds of Antigua and Barbuda, from Collections made' for the Smith- 
sonian Institution, by Mr. Fred. A. Ober, ^yith his Observations 232 

Catalogue of the Birds of Grenada, from a Collection made by Mr. Fred. A. Ober for the 

Smithsonian Institution, iucluding others seen by him, but not obtained 205 

Catalog-ue of the Birds collected in Martinique by Mr. Fred. A. Ober for the Smithsonian 

Institution '. 349 

Catalogue of a Collection of Birds obtained in Guadeloupe for the Smithsonian Institu- 
tion, by Mr. Fred. A. Ober 449 

A General Catalogue of the Birds noted from the Islands of the Lesser Antilles visited 

by Mr. Fred. A. Ober ; -with a Table showing their Distribution, and those fovmd in the ITnited 
States 486 

I/ni>ton, Prof. S. T. On the Breeding Habits of the Sea-Catfish (Ariopsis 21'dherti?) 278 

Merrill, Dr. James C, \J. S. A. Kotes on the Ornithology of Southern Texas, being a List 

of Buds observed iu the Viciuity of Fort Bro\vn, Texas, from February, 1876, to June, 1878.. 118 

Poey , Pelipe. Notes on the American Species of the Genus Cyhium 3 

Pratt, Capt. R. II., V. s. A. Catalogue of Casts taken by Clark Mills, Esq., of the Heads of 
Sixty-fourlndianPrisoucrsof Various Western Tribes, and held at Fort Marion, Saint Augus- 
tine, Fla., in Charge of Capt. E. H. Pratt, U.S. A 201 

Ridg"(vay, Robert. On a 'Sevi Humming Bird (Atthis Ellioti) from Guatemala 8 

A Review of the American Species of the Genus /Scops, Savigny ....: '. 85 

Descrijjtions of Several New Species and Geographical Eaces of Birds contained in the 

Collection of the United States National Museum 2i7 

Description of Two New Species of Birds from Costa Eica, and Notes on other Eare 

Species from that Country 253 

Descriptions of New Species and Eaces of American Birds, including a Synopsis of the 

Genus Tyrannua, Cuvier .' 400 

Stearns, Silas. A Note on the Gulf Menhaden, Brevoortia patronus, Goode 181 

Steindachner, Dr. Franz. Note on Perca flaveicens 243 

Wilmot, Samuel. Notes on the Western Gizzard Shad, Dorosoma cepedianum heterunivi 

(Eaf.) Jordan , 268 



PROCEEDINGS 

OF THE 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

1878. 



I>ESCRII»TIOIVS OF KE^V FORITIS OF MOI.r.USK» FROITS ALASKA 
CONTAIIVED IIV THE COIiLECTIOlVS OF THE IVAXIONAI^ 

MSJSEUiyi, 

By "W. H. UAL.L.. 

CHITONIDJE. 
Genus AMICULA Gray. 

Type A, vestiia Sowerby. 

Subgenus Chlamydochiton Dall. 
Ch. t. ^Amiculce^ similiter sed branchiae ambientes. 

Type Chiton amiculatua Pallas. 
Amicula proper bas the branchiae median. 

Genus LEPTOOHITON Gray. 

Leptochiton Belknapi Dall, n. s. 

L. t. elongata,, valdeelevata,dorsualiter angulata; albidaplusminusve 
cinereo et nigro tincta; valvis elevatis, apicibus distinctis ; mucrone 
centrali couspicuo; sculptura ut in L. alveolo, sed granulis in areis dor- 
sualis sparsim et quincuucialiter dispositis; valva postica sub apice con- 
cava, postice sinuata; zona minima spiculis tenuibus versus marginem 
munita. Lou. 10, lat. 3™™. Div. 90°. 

^a&.— North Pacific Ocean, in lat. 53° 08' K, and Ion. 171° 19' W., 
at a depth of 1006 fathoms, black sand and shells. Brought up in the 
sounding-cup, on the sounding expedition of the United States ship 
Tuscarora, Capt. George E. Belknap, TJ. S. N., in 1874. 

This specimen comes from a greater depth than any specimen of the 
order hitherto collected. It is nearest to L. alveolus Sars, from the coast 
of Norway. 

Genus TEACHYDERMON Cpr. 

Subgenus Traohyeadsia Cpr. (Ms.). 

Trachydermon, valvis centralibus bi- seu pluri-fissatis. 
Type Chiton fiilgeirum Reeve. 
Trachyradsia aleutica Dall, n. s. 
T. t.parva, rufo-cinereii, oblonga, fornicata; jugo .icutissimO; mucrone 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 78 1 I 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

submediano, apicibus promineutibus; areis lateralis iuconspicuis ; tota 
superficie quiucuncialiter minute reticulata ; intus, valv. aut. 10-, post. 
11-, centr. 2-fissatis; deut. parvis, perspougiosis, late separatis; sub- 
grundis spongiosis, curtis; sinu parvo; zona squamulis minutis obsita. 
Lon. C, lat. S""™. 
Sab. — Western Aleutians, near low-water markj Dall. 

This bears no marked resemblance to any of the other Alaskan 
species. 

Genus TONICELLA Cpr. 

Type Chiton marmoreus Fabr. 

Tonicella saccharina Dall, n. s. 

T. t. parva, oblonga, tota superficie saccharina, rufo et albescente 
picta; mucrone submediano, inconspicuo; areis lateralis inconspicue ele- 
vatis, albescentis; areis dorsualissanguinosis, i&qne quiucuncialiter lente 
reticulatis; v. ant. 10-11-, v. post. 8-10-, v. centr. 1 fissatis ; dent, par- 
vis spongiosis, sinu parvo; subgrundis spongiosis, mediocris; zona 
coriacea ut in Tonicellw aliis : branchia? mediffi. Lon. C.5, lat. 4™"". 

j3a&.™^ Aleutian Islands, three to thirteen fathoms; Ball. 

This species has the lustre of rock-candy, and is well marked by the 
contrast of the white lateral with the red dorsal areas. 

Genus SCHIZOPLAX Dall. 

Testa et zona Tonicellw simulans ; valvre centrales sulco jugali medi- 
ano, antico argute inciso) ; branchiaj subambieutes. 

Type Chiton Brandtii Midd. 

For this remarkable Alaskan form, distinguished from all other Chi- 
tons by its slit central valves, I propose to adopt a name suggested 
by Dr. Carpenter, who, on Middendort's figures, had intended to j^ropose 
it as a subgenus of Tonicella, The specimens- obtained by my party 
seem to be the first found since the original ones were obtained. A 
careful examination of the soft parts shows that in dentition and some 
other details sufficient basis for generic separation is found, confirming 
the testimony of the valve characters. The sulcus is usually filled by 
a horny or cartilaginous deposit. 

It may be added here that investigation of the characters of the 
radula in numerous species and genera of Chitons in the National Mu- 
seum shows a very remarkable uniformity of dentition. No larger 
groups than genera are indicated in the whole order, which, it appears, 
can hardly comprise more than one family; and it is doubtful if this can 
be divided into subfamilies by any characters yet elucidated. 

The dentition in all species examined has the formula G • 2 • 1 • 2 • 6, or 

- — . . Of the te«th, the rhachidian appears always simply cusped; 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 3 

the two laterals present varied characters; the third uDciuus, counting 
outward, is usually spatulate ; while the remainder are mere bosses, or 
scales. The wide differences found in the few figures of the dentition 
of Chitons extant appear to be due to erroneous interpretation of the 
objects represented. The figures of Loven are the most satisfactory. 



rOSTPIilOCElVE FOSSIL.S IIV THE COAST BAIVOE OF CAI^IFORNIA, 

By "W, II. DAL,L. 

The National Museum has received from Mr. G. F. Merriam, of San 
Luis Eey,Cal., specimens of Donax cali/ornicus, Chione succincta, Olivella 
biplicata,au(l Cerithidea sacrata, in a semi-fossilized condition. The first 
mentioned retained a considerable part of its pinkish interior coloration. 
These fossils (probably with other species) are stated by Mr. Merriam 
to be found in great abundance at the head of a cahon in that vicinity, 
in the heart of the Coast Range, twelve miles from the sea in a direct 
line, and six hundred feet above tide-water. All the species are found 
living in abundance on the present sea-coast. This indicates a very 
recent elevation for this part of the coast, if the facts are correctly 
interpreted, and further specimens and details will be awaited with 
interest. 



NOTES ON TnE AMERICAN SPECIES OF TIIE GENUS CYBIUItl. 

By FELIPE POEY. 

[Translated by G. Brown Goode, from MS. memorandum of Professor Felipe Poey.J 
Cybium caballa, Cuv. & Val. 

Cybium cahalla, Cuvier & Valenciennes, Histoire Natnrelle des Poiesons, 
viii, 18:51, p. 187. — Guntiier, Catalogue of tbe Acantboi)terygian Fishes in 
the Collectiou of the British Museum, ii, 1860, p. 373. — Poey, Repertorio 
Fisico-Natural de la Isla de Cuba, i, 1867, p. 322 ; ii, p. 13 ; aud in Synopsia 
Piscium Cubensiuiu, op. cit., ii, p. 362. 

CyUum acervum, Cuvier & Valenciennes, Ioc. cit., p. 186 {nee ti/puii). 

Vulgo : — Sierra. 

Differential Characters. — First dorsal with fourteen spines, without a 
blaclc spot anteriorly. Body immaculate in the adult, spotted with yel- 
lowish in the young fish. 

The number of teeth increases with the age ; in large specimens, it is 
If. The larger teeth are placed upon the middle of the jaw, those in 
the lower jaw being a trifle the longer. Tbe lateral line is very sinuous 
upon the posterior portion of the body. The eye is larger than in Cy- 
bium regale. 

Bluish upon the back, whitish under the belly. First dorsal white; 
second dorsal and caudal dusky-bluish {hlen-noiratre) ; pectorals bluish, 
as is also the anal, which, however, becomes white at its extremity ; 
ventrals whitish. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Id the young fish, under the length of two or three feet, the sides are 
covered with round, irregular spots, of rather dirty yellow {jaune un peu 
sale). 

Cuvier described a specimen which weighed twenty-two pounds; at 
that size, the fish is still young, and retains its yellow spots. 

Those ordinarily taken range in weight from twelve to twenty-five 
pounds, though they reach the weight of one hundred iiounds. I have 
seen one which measured 285"^™. 

Cybium regale, (Bloch) Cuvier. 

Scomber regalis, Bloch, Naturgeschichte der ausliindischen Fische, taf. 333. 
Cybium regale, Cuvier & Valenciennes, op. cit., p. 184. — Gunther, op.cil., p. 

372.— PoEY, op. cit., i, p. 322 ; ii, p. 362. 
Vnlgo : — Pintada. 

Differential Characters. — The first dorsal has seventeen spines and the 
spot upon its anterior portion. The lateral bands and spots are persistent 
through life. 

The teeth are f ^ in a specimen of moderate size. In the upper jaw, the 
median teeth are the larger; in the lower, their size is more nearly equal. 

The back is bluish, as are also the top of the head, the second dorsal 
and its finlets, the caudal, and the pectorals. The first dorsal is white, 
having in front a spot of deep-blue, which is prolonged far back upon 
the upper edge of the tin. The anal and the ventrals are white. The 
sides are sky-blue, with silvery lustre ; the belly is white, with a bluish 
tinge. The sides are marked with broken longitudinal bands and round 
spots ; these bands and spots are yellow, more or less golden, and with 
a reddish tint. 

The ordinary size is about twelve pounds, though they sometimes 
reach the weight of twenty. 

Cybium acervum, Cuv. & Val. 

Cybium acervum, CuviER & Valenciennes, op. cit., p. 186. 

The specimens described by Cuvier were of five pounds weight. He 
claims to have received specimens from Martinique, from Santo Domingo, 
and from Cuba, those from the latter place sent by me. I can only say 
that I have not been able to find this species, and that I have not 
included it in. my manuscript " Ichthyologie". 

According to Cuvier, it has seventeen spines in the first dorsal, and 
also the black spot. The body is immaculate, even in the specimens of 
five pounds weight. 

Cybium maculatum, (Mitchill) Agassiz. 

Scomher maculatus, Mitchill, Transactions of the Literary and Philosophical 

Society of New York, i, 1815, p. 426, pi. vi, fig. 8. 
Cybium maculatum, Agassiz, in Spix, Selecta Genera et Species Piscium, 1829, 

p. 103, tab. Ix. — Cuvier & Valenciennes, op. cit., p. 181.— GtJNTHER, op. 

cit., p. 372. 

The Cyhium maculatum of the United States has the teeth somewhat 
conical and very pointed. It has seventeen dorsal spines and a black 
spot upon the first dorsal. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 5 

Cybium immaculatum, Cuv. & Val. 

Cyhiinn immaculatum, CuviKR & Valknciennes, oj). cit, p. 191. — Gi'NTnER, op. 
clt., p. 370, uote 5. 

The Cijhium immaculatum of Cnvier has the body immaculate in spe- 
cimens only six or seven inches long. 

Acanthocybium peto, Poey. 

Acanthocijbium Petua, Poey, Memorias sobre la Historia Natural cle la Isla de 

Cuba, ii, 18G0, p. 234, pi. xvi, fig. 1 ; Report., ii, p. 363. 
Vulgo : — Peto. 

This genus differs from Cyhium by its numerous dorsal spines, twenty- 
five in number. The type taken by Professor Gill has the teeth com- 
pressed, triangular. The Cuban species has the points of the teeth 
rounded. The caudal is very small. The lower jaw has its sides 
deeply notched and its extremity lower than its lateral edges. In spe- 
cimens of less than three feet, the body is covered with vertical bands 
of a vitreous lustre {(/lacees). It grows very large, sometimes attaining 
the weight of one hundred pounds. 



THE CI>UPEA TYBAIVNITS OF I^ATROBE. 

By a. BROWJV CiOODE, 

Mr. Benjamin H. Latrobe, a surveyor of public lands, published, in 
1802, a description of a clupeoid fish the affinities of which have never 
been satisfactorily determined.* Dr. DeKay, misled by the name " ale- 
wife", applied the specific name tyrannus to the northern species known 
to him bj' that popular name {Pomolohus pseudo-hareyigus), a usftge 
which was concurred in by Dr. Storer and M. Valenciennes. In his 
earlier writings. Professor Gill referred the same name to the shad 
{Alosa sapidissinia). Latrobe's paper, and the name therein proposed, 
have lately been lost sight of; but there is little doubt that they refer 
to the menhaden, or mossbunker {Clupea menhaden, Mitchill, and Bre- 
voortia menhaden., Gill). The laws of priority demand that this species 
shall hsnceforth be designated Brevoortia tyrannus. 

The fishes of the Chesapeake and its tributaries have been very little 
studied until within the past three years, and the habits of the men- 
haden are so different in these waters and in the north that it does not 
seem surprising for Northern ichthyologists to have made mistaken 
identification of Latrobe's specific name. 

A few years ago the Capes of Delaware were thought to define the 
southern range of the menhaden, while its peculiar parasite and its 
habit of ascending southern rivers were unknown. 

*A Drawing and Description of the Clupea tyrannus and Oniscus prwgusfator. By 
Benjamin H. Latrobe, F. A. P. S. <^ Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society held at Philadelphia for promoting useful knowledge, vol. v, 1802, p. 77. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

I shall soou i^ublish a full discussion of this subject. At present, my 
conclusions may be stated as follows : — 

(1) The figure, while undeniably bad, resembles the menhaden very 
closely, while it cannot be intended to represent any allied species. 
The contour, were the missing dorsal fin supplied, is similar to that of 
the menhaden. The black spot upon the scapular region is constant in 
the menhaden only, though a similar one is occasionally seen upon the 
shad and alewife. 

(2) The name "bay alewife" is the same now given to the menhaden 
in the Chesapeake and its tributaries. This is a strong argument : for 
although seventy-five years have passed since Latrobe wrote, the per- 
sistence of popular names is very remarkable, as I have elsewhere 
pointed out.* Moreover, Latrobe was also acquainted with a "her- 
ring" and a "shad". These being eliminated, there is no other fish 
than the menhaden to which the description in question can refer. 

(3) The habits of the alewife, as described by Latrobe, are essentially 
the same as those of the menhaden at the present day. The alleged 
river-ascending habits of the " bay alewife" were thought to throw its 
identity with the menhaden out of the question. This is no longer an 
obstacle. 

(4) The presence of the crustacean parasite is the strongest argu- 
ment of all. While this is found in the mouths of a large percentage 
of the southern menhaden, suggesting the local name of " bug fish", it 
has never once been found attached to any other species, although 
careful search has been made by several persons. The northern men- 
haden is free from this parasite. This is still another reason for the 
failure to identify on the part of northern writers. 

Latrobe's name has the priority over Mitchill's by thirteen years. It 
is to be regretted that it is necessary to replace by another a name so, 
appropriate and of such long standing. 

January 1, 1878, 



tbe; oc€IJICre:n€e: of beIiOive i^ATairiAivus iiv buzzard'.^ bait, 

MASSACHUSETTS. 

By O. BRO^VN GOODE. 

A peculiar species of Belone was obtained at Wood's Holl, in 1875, 
by Professor Baird. It was caught in the weir on Great Neck, owned 
by the Wood's Holl Weir Company. On study, it proved to be the form 
described by Professor Poey under the name Belone latimanus, and 
hitherto known only from Cuba. A good water-color sketch (Cat. No. 
795) was made by Mr. Kichard, a photograph (Cat. No. 218) taken, and 
the specimen and a finely colored cast (Cat. No. 16121) are preserved in 
the National Museum. 

* Catalogue of tbe Fishes of the Bermudas, 1876, p. 15. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 7 

It raay be distinguisbed from tbe commou species of our coast, Belonc 
longirostris, (Mitcbill) Gill, by many characters, tbe most salient of 
which are the more elongate form, the lesser proportionate length of 
the head, the much greater number of rays in the vertical fins {B. (ati- 
manus has D. 25: A. 23. B. longirostris has D. 13-1(3 : A, lG-19), tbe 
broader and proportionately shorter pectorals, and the forked caudal. 

The length of the specimen was 49 inches (1244.G millimetres), its 
weight 5J pounds (2381 grams). 

Color: — Back, top of bead, and snout dark green in dead specimen, 
probably beryl-green in life. Fin-rays greenish-brown. Fin membranes 
and protected parts, such as axils of pectoral fins, colorless. Sides light 
brownish, with silvery overwasb. Belly, cheeks, throat, and lower part 
of lower jaw silvery-white. Eye greenish-yellow. 

Badial /orwmZa.— Brancbiostegals XIV. D. 24: A. 25: C. 7-6+7-5: 
P. 12 : V. 6. 

January 15, 1878. 



TIBSE VOICES OF CKIISTACEANS. 

By €i. BROIIVN «001>£. 

The observations of Mr. Saville Kent and Mr. J. Wood Mason (Na- 
TURE, vols, xvi, p. 565, and xvii, p. 11) recall to mind some similar 
facts recently noted by me in tbe Bermudas. 

Several species of Alpheus were observed to have the power of pro- 
ducing loud clicking sounds. Two or three of the larger species are 
accustomed to lurk under flat stones near low-water mark. Some of 
these are two inches long. When one of them is taken between tbe 
fingers by an inexperienced collector, tbe sudden, convulsive snap 
almost invariably causes him to drop it. Tbe effect is like that of a 
sharp blow across the knuckles. Some smaller species of the genus 
are found only in the cavities of a large aplysine sponge, abundant on 
tbe reefs. I have picked out seventy or eighty from a fragment of 
sponge not more than three inches in diameter. When the sponge is 
taken in the band, tbe quick succession of clickings reminds one of the 
sound of instruments in a large telegraph office. When one of these 
animals is put in an earthen or glass vessel, it makes a much louder 
noise, resembling a quick tap with the finger-nail or tbe back of a knife 
upon tbe edge of the same vessel. This noise is produced by a convul- 
sive snapping of tbe last joint of tbe large claw, by a movement resem- 
bling that of tbe spring beetles {E later idee) ^ and tbe sounds are quite 
similar. Possibly these movements may have a protective object, enab- 
ling tbe little decapods to escape from the grasp of enemies, or to work 
out from under the stones and loose sand in which they must often 
become buried. 

Another macrurous crustacean, Gonodactylus cJiiragra, known to the 



8 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Bermudians as tbe "split-thumb", from its power of wounding by a 
sharp appendage of the larger claws, produces a viciously sharp, snap- 
ping noise, apparently in the same manner with Alpheus. 

The " Bermuda lobster" {PanuUrus americanus M. Edw.) makes a loud 
grating noise. Mr. Kent describes the voice of the allied species [Pa- 
Unurus quadricornis) as being produced by the rubbing together of the 
spinous abdominal segments. In the species observed by me, the sound 
was produced by means of certain modifications of tbe lower joints of 
tbe antennae. There is at the base of each antenna, upon the anterior 
part of the cephalo-thorax, a broad elevated ridge, parallel with the 
axis of the body, which in an adult of eighteen inches would be about 
two inches long. The rounded crests of these ridges are closely em- 
braced by processes from the sides of the basal antennal segments. The 
profile of each ridge describes the segment of a circle, the centre of 
which is the centre of articulation of its accompanying antenna. When 
the antennae are moved forward and backward, their tips waving over 
tbe back of tbe animal, the close contact of the hard, smooth, chitinous 
surfaces produces a shrill, harsh stridulation, like the sound of filing a 
saw. I have never heard the noise when the animals were under water, 
though I have seen them waving their antennjB. I have no doubt that 
they can thus produce vibrations perceptible to their mates at great 
distances, especially if their other senses are as acute as that of smell, 
which I have tested in a very curious manner. Both sexes are provided 
with the vocal organs. 

December 2.5. 1877. 



ON A NEW niJinjniivc; bird (atxhis x:i>i.ioti) froiti ouATEmALiA. 
By ROBERT RIDOWAT. 

Having had occasion, recently, to examine some specimens of Hum- 
ming Birds, I happened to notice certain striking differences between 
two examples labelled '•'■Atthis heloisw^^ — one from Guatemala, belonging 
to Mr. D. G.Elliot, the other a Mexican specimen, in my own collection, 
obtained from M. Boucard. The differences observed between these 
were so obvious that I immediately inspected the series contained in 
the collection of the National Museum, and on comparison found them 
repeated in the specimens contained therein, including two males from 
Jalapa and one from the Volcan de Fuego, Guatemala. Tbe former of 
course represent the true A. heloisw, being from the locality whence tbe 
types of that species were procured, and with them my Mexican ex- 
ample agrees in all essential particulars. Both the Guatemalan speci- 
mens, however, are very different from any of these, and undoubtedly 
represent a distinct species, which being, so far as I have been able to 
ascertain, hitherto unnamed, I propose to characterize as follows : — 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



ATTHIS ELLIOTI. 

'' Selasphorus heloisce", Scl. & Salv., Ibis, i, 1859, 129 (Guatemala); ih. 1860, 195 
(Dueuae, Guatemala).— Salvin, ib. 2GG (Guatemala; Tieira Calieute, and 
slopes of Volcan de Fuego). 

"AttM8 heloisa", B. B. & R., Hist. N. Am. B. ii, 1874, 4C5 (part : Guatemala references). 

Specific Characters.— Adult male:— Outer primary broad, the end 
not attenuated. Gorget uniform reddish-purple (much as in Calyiite 
annw), without varying tints of violet, as in A. heloisce. Jugulum 
wholly white; middle of the abdomen white; sides light rufous, slightly 
glossed with golden-green ; crissum white, tinged with light rufous. 
Upper parts metaliic-green, decidedly less golden than in A. heloisce. 
Tail with the basal half (approximately) bright cinnamon-rufous, the 
subterminal portion black; three outer feathers (on each side) tipped 
with rusty-white; the middle pair with the black portion above glossed 
with metallic-green anteriorly. Wings uniform dusky, the smaller cov- 
erts metallic-green. Wing, 1.35; tail, 1.00-1.05; culmen, 0.38-0.40. 
[Type, No. 20494, <? ad., Coll. U. S. Nat. Mus., Volcan de Fuego, Guate- 
mala.] 

With a very close general resemblance to A heloisce, this species may 
be immediatelv distinguished by the very different form of the outer 
primary, the redder and more uniform color of the throat-gorget, and 
the shorter bill. The peculiar characters of the two may be contrasted 
as follows : — 





AlCkU Tieluisae.^. Jalapa. Dr. Ileermaan.. 



AUhia ellwii. ,<?. Guatemala. OJourdeE. 



A. ellioti. 

Outer primary broad, the end not attenuated. Gorget uniform pur- 
plish-red, without varying violaceous tints. Wing, 1.35 ; tail, 1.00-1.05 ; 
culmen, 0.38-0.40. 

Hah. — Guatemala. 

A. heloisae. 

Outer primary very narrow, the end abruptly attenuated. Gorget 
reddish-violet, showing decided violet tints in certain lights. Wing, 
1.30-1.50; tail, 0.95-1.10; culmen, 0.48-0.50. 

Hab. — Eastern Mexico. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
The principal synonymy and characters of A. heloiscc are as follows: — 

ATTHIS HELOIS^. 

Ornismya lieloUcv, Less. &l Delattr., Eev. Zool. 1839, If) ( Jalapa and Quatepu, S. E. 

Mexico). 
MelUsuga heloiscv, Gray, Geu. B. i, 1849, 113, sp. 62. 
Tryphwna heloisw, Bonap., Rev. et Mag. Zool. 1854, 257. 
Selnaphorus heloisw, Gould, Monog. Trochilid. iii, 1852, pi. 141. 
Althis hdo'mc, Eeichenb., J. f. O. 1853, App., 12. — Gould, lutrod. Trochilid. Bvo 

ed. 1861, 89.— Elliot, Illusfr. Am. B. i, 1869, pi. —.—Cooper, Orn. Cal. i, 

1870, 361 (El Paso, Texas; Mexico).— B. B. & R., Hist. N. Am. B. ii, 1»74, 465, 

pi. 47, fig. 6 (El Paso, Texas ; Mexico). 

Specific Characters. — Adult male : — Outer primary very narrow, the 
end abruptly attenuated. Gorget violet-purple, with changeable tints 
in varying lights. Jugulum wholly white; middle of the abdomen 
white; sides light ru ions, slightly glossed with golden-green; crissum 
white, tinged with light rufous. Upper parts metallic golden-green, 
more bronzy than in A.elUoti. Tail with the basal half (approximately) 
clear cinnamon-rufous, the subtcrmiual portion black, with the three 
outer feathers (on each side) tipped with rusty- white; middle pair of 
feathers glossed with golden-green on the upper surface to the extreme 
tip. Wings uniform dusky, the smaller coverts golden-green. Wing, 
1.30-1.5 J; tail, 0.95-0.10; culmen, 0.48-0.50. 

Of the three adult males of A. heloisw now before me, the two from 
Jalapa are much alike; but that in my own collection, which is evi- 
dently from another part of Mexico, although, unfortunately, the pre- 
cise locality is not stated on the label, differs in several very noticeable 
particulars. The bill is very m uch more slender, the wing shorter (about 
1.30, instead of 1.50), and the general size decidedly less. What is most 
conspicuous, however, is the fact that the lateral feathers of the gorget 
are not elongated as in the Jalapa specimens, in which they are 0.25 to 
0.30 of an inch longer than the longest feathers of the middle portion, 
while there is a mixture of bluish-violet in the gorget not observable in 
the other specimens. It is barely possible that the longer lateral plumes 
of the gorget have been lost from this specimen; but in any event, the 
differences are quite sufficient to characterize a well-marked local race. 

January 29, 1878. 



FOSSDt. 1«©L,1.USKS FROM tiATEU TEKTIABIE.S OF t At.aFOR:>riA. 

By W. II. DAL,L. 

The National Museum has recently received from Mr. Ueury Hemp- 
hill a series of fossil shells collected by him from the later Tertiary 
deposits of the Californian coast. Some of them are from the vicinity 
of Santa Barbara, but the majority are from San Diego, part of them 