^e^arimeni of fKc ^nicviov 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

34 



PROCEEDINGS 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Vol. V. 
1882. 



PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 



WASHINGTON: 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE. 

1883. 



ADVERTISEMENT. 

• 

The extension of the scope of the Kational Museum during the past 
few years, and the activity of the collectors sent out in its interests, 
have caused a great increase in tlie amount of material in its possession. 
Many of the objects gathered are of a novel and imijortant character, 
and serve to throw a new light upon the study of nature and of man. 

The importance to science of i)rompt publication of descriptions of 
this material led to the establishment, in 1878, of the present series of 
publications, entitled "Proceedings of the United States National Mu- 
seum," the distinguishing peculiarity of which is that the articles are 
published in signatures as soou as matter sufficient to All sixteen pages 
has been obtained and printed. The date of publication being i)laiuly 
expressed in each signature, the ready settlement of questions of priority 
is assured. 

The articles in this series consist: First, of papers prepared by the 
scientitic corps of the National Museum ; secondly, of papers by others, 
Ibnnded upon the collections in the National Museum; and, finally, of 
interesting facts and memoranda from the correspondence of the Smith- 
sonian Institution. 

The Ijul'etins of the National Museum, the publication of which was 
commenced in 1875, consist of elaborate papers (monographs of families 
of animals, &c.), while the present series contemplates the prompt pub- 
lication of freshly acquired facts relating to biology, anthropology, and 
geology ; descriptions of restricted groups of animals and plants ; the 
settlement of particular questions relative to the synonymy of species, 
and the diaries of minor expeditions. 

This series of publications was commenced in 1878, Avith volume I, 
under the title "Proceedings of the United States National Museum," 
by the authority and at the expense of the Interior Department, and 
under the direction of the Smithsonian Institution. 

The present volume, constituting the fifth of the series, has been pre- 
pared under the editorial suiiervision of Dr. Tarleton H. Bean, curator 
of the department of fishes. 

SPENCER F. BAIED, 
Director of the TJ. S. National Museum. 

United States National Museum, 

Washington, June 20, 1883. 
(u) 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Beau, Tarletoa H. Notes on Fishes collected by Capt. Charles Bendire, U. S. A., in 

Washington Territory and Oregon, May to October, 1881 89-93 

Note on the Occurrence of a Silver Lamprey (Ichthyomyzon castaneus Girard) in Louis- 
iana 117-119 

Notes on Birds collected during the summer of 1880 in Alaska and Siberia 144-173 

(Translator.) Note on the Habits and the Eearingof the Axolotl (Ambly stoma mexica- 

num). ByM. Carbonnier 221-222 

Description of a Species of Whitefish, Coregomis hoyi (Gill) Jordan, called "Smelt" in 

some parts of New York. 658-000 

Description of a Now Species of Alepidosaurus (A. cesculapius) from Alaska 661-CC3 

(See, also, under GOODE & Bean.) 
Belding, li. Catalogue of a Collection of Birds made at various points along the "Western 

Coast of Lower California, North of Cape St. Eugenio 527-.";!2 

Catalogueof a Collection of Birds made nearthesouthernextremity of the Peninsula of 

Lower California 532-ooO 

Bendire, Capt. Charles, U. S. A. On the Eastward Distribution of the Black-tailed 

Deer { Curiacus columbianus) 348-349 

Carbonnier, M. (Translated by Tauleton H. Bean.) Note on the Habits and the Eear 

iug i.f I ho Axolotl {Amblystoma mexieanum) 221-222 

Uall, \V. II. Note on Cluster Flies 635-637 

Dn^t-M, tt»rof. Alfretl. (Translated by FUEDEIUCK W. True.) Observations on Four 

MulesiuMilk 223-225 

G ill, Theodore. On the Family Centropomidce. With one plate (Plate xi) 484-485 

Nomenclature of the Xfjj/mds 4S5-486 

On the Family and Subfamilies of Carangidtv. 487-403 

Note on the Leptocardians 515-516 

Note ou the ilf.i/zonte or Mardpobranchiates .516-517 

Note on the Bdellontomidce and Myxinidce 517-520 

J^Jttt,} ou the Pctromyzontids . 521-525 

Supplementary Note on the Pedicidati 551-556 

Note on the Pomatoniidcp- ^^7 

Note on the Affinities of the EphippUds 557-560 

On the Relations of the Family Lobotidce 560-561 

If ote on the Relationships of the Echemidlds. With one plato (Plato xii) 561-566 

Note on the Genus Spd-ros 566-567 

On the Proper Name of the Blueflsh 567-570 

Ooode, «•• BrowQ, and Bean, Tarleton II. A List of *,he Species of Fishes recorded 

asoccurringiu the Gulf of Mexico 234-240 

Descriptions of twenty five New Species of Fish from the Southern United States, and 

three New Genera, Letharchus, loglossus, and Chriodorus 412-437 

Halves, Oeorge W., PIi. W. On a Phosphxtic Sandstone from Hawthorne, in Florida. 40-48 

Hegcwald, t.ieHt. J . T. t'.. U. S. A. (See underSwAiNE & Hegewald.) 

Ininan, S. M. Catalogur of a Coll.i-tiou of Samples of Raw Cotton, presented to the United 

States National Museum by the luternatioual Cotton Exposition, Atlanta, Georgia, 1881. 644-G45 
Jordan, David S. Description of a New Species of Blenny (Isesthes gilberti) from 

Santa Barbara, California 349-351 

Jordan, :>avid S., and Gilbert, Charles H. Description of four New Species of 

Sharks from Mazatlan. Mexico ■ 102-110 

Description of a Now Shark (Carcharias lamiella) from San Diego, California 110-111 

Description of a Now Cyprinodont (Zygnnectes imirus) from Southern Illinois 143-144 

Description of a New Species of Uranidea (TJranidea polUcaris) from Lake Michigan 222-223 

Notes on Fishes observed about Pensacola, Florida, and Galveston, Texas, with 

Description of New Species 241-307 

Description of a New Species of Conodon {Conodon serrifer) from Boca Soled.ad, Lower 

California 351-352 

(III) 



IV TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Page. 



Jordan, David S., and Oilbcrt, Charles H. Catalogae of the Fishes collected hy 
Mr. John Xantus at Cape San Lucas, which are now in the United States National Mu- 
seum, with Descriptions of eight New Species 353-371 

List of Fishes collected by John Xantus at Colima, Mexico 371-372 

List of Fishes collected by Capt. John M. Dow, now in the United States National 

Museum 373-378 

List of a Collection of Fishes made by Mr. L. Belding near Cape San Lucas, Lower 

CaUfornia 378-381 

List of Fishes collected at Panama by Rev. Mr. Rowell, now preserved in the United 

States National Museum 381-382 

Descriptions of two New Species of Fishes (Sehastichthys umbrosus and Citharichthys 

stigmcevs) collected at Santa Barbara, California, by Andrea Larco 410-412 

Description of a New Species of Goby {Gobiosoma ios) from Vancouver's Island 437-438 

On certain Neglectt-d Generic Names of La C6p6de 570-576 

On the Synonomy of the Genus Bothus Raflnesquo 576-577 

Description of a New Species of Artedius (Artcdius fencstralis) from Puget Sound... 577-579 

Description of a Now Species of TTrolophus ( Urolophus asterias) from Mazatlan and 

Panama 579-580 

Notes on a Collection ot Fishes from Charleston, South Carolina, with Descriptions of 

three New Species 580-620 

List of Fishes now in the Museum of Yale College, collected by'Prof. Frank H. Brad- 
ley at Panama, with Descriptions of three New Species 620-032 

Descri])tion of two New Species of Fishes (Myrophis vafer and Chlnroscombrus or- 

queta) from Panama 645-647 

Desciiption of a New Eel (Sidcra castanea) from Mazatlan, Mexico 647-648 

( )ii t he Nomenclature of the Genus Ophichthys 648-651 

Kalb, Ocorge B. (See under Swain & Kalh.) 

Iicsquercux, It. Contribution to the Miocene Flora of Alaska 443-449 

ITIrrril!, Oeorge P. Note on a Potsdam Sandstone or Conglomerate from Berks County, 

Pen vsyl va:ii I 660-661 

IVew berry, J(. .«*. Brief Descriptions of Fossil Plants, chiefly Tertiary, from Western North 

Aineii.a 502-514 

IVuttins. <". <"• On a Collection of Birds from the Hacienda "La Palma," Gulf of Nicoya, 

(' stu KicM, with Critical Notes by Robert Ridgway 382^109 

Ridg-^vay, Robert. Description of several New Races of American Birds 9-15 

On the Genera Harporhynehug, Cabanis. and Methriopterus, Reichenbach. with a De- 

sci iption of a New Genus of Mimince 43-46 

Notes on the Native Trees of the Lower Wabash and White River Valleys, in Dlinois 

and Indima 49-88 

Critical Remarks on the Tree Creepers {Certhia) of Europe and North America 111-116 

Descriptions of some New North American Birds 343-346 

(Editor.) On a collection of birds from the H^icienda "La Palma," Gulf of Nicoj'a, 

Costa Rica, with Critical Notes by Robert Ridgway. By C. C. Nutting 382-409 

Catalogue of a Collection of Birds made in the Interior of Co.sta Rica by Mr. C. C. Nut- 
ting 493-502 

Description of a New Warbler from the Island of Santa Lucia, West Indies 525-526 

Descriptiim of a supposed New Plover from Chili 526-527 

( Edi. or.) Catalogue of a Collection of Birds made at various points along the Western 

Coast of Lower California, north of Capo St. Eugenie. By L. Belding 527-532 

(Editor.) Catalogue of a Collection of Birds made near the southern extremity of the 

Peninsula of Lower Califoruia. By L Belding 532-550 

On the Genus Tantalus, Linn., and its Allies 550-551 

Description of a Now Petrel from Alaska 656-658 

Rilr y , Charles V, Jumping Seeds and Galls. With one cut 632-635 

Ryder, J . A. Genera of tlie Scoloper.drellidfB 234 

Smith, Ron:). Desciiption of a Now Species of Uranidea (Uranidea rhothea) from Spokane 

River, Wa.sliiugton Territory 347-348 

Oil tlie Life ("olor itioii of the Young of Poriirtccu^rMS rubieundtis 652-653 

Smith, Rosa, and .•^^ain, Joseph. Notes on a Collection of Fishes from Johnson's 

InLiuiI. iiK-luiling Deseriptions of Ave New Species 119-143 

Stejneger, l^conhard. Synopsis of the West Indian M.yad''stcs. With one plate 

(Plateii) 15-27 

(Jn some Generic and Specitic Appellations of North American and European Birds . . 28-43 

Outlines of a Monograph of the C,iyg''unce. With 16 cuts 174-221 

Remarks on tht^ Systematic Arrangement of the American Turdidce. With 35 cuts . 449-48 

Stone, liivingston. Does the Panther (Felis concolor) go into the Water to kill Fish?.. 570 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Streets, Thomas H., ITI. »., U. S. IV. A Study of the Phronimida; of the North Pa- 
cific Surveying Expedition. With one plate (Plate i) 

Swain, Joseph. A Keview of the Synonathinoe of the United States, with a Description 
of one New Species 

(See, also, under Smith & Swain.) 

Swain, Joseph, and Kalb, Crcorge B. A Keview of the Genus Notunis, with a De- 
scription of one New Species 

Swainc, l.ieut. Col. P. T., U. S. A. , and Hegewald, riieut. J. T. €., U. S. A. 
Information concerning some Fossil Trees in the United States National Museum 

True, Frederick \V. (Translator). Observations on Four Mules in Milk. By Prof. 
Alfred Duges 

On a Cinnamon Bear from Pennsylvania 

Turner, liucicn ]n. On Lagopus mutus Leach and its Allies 

Verrill, A. E. Notice of Recent Additions to the Marine Tnvertebrata of the Northeast- 
ern Coast of America, with Descriptions of New Genera and Species, and Critical Re- 
marks on others. Part IV: Additions to the Deep-water Mollusca taken off Martha's 
Vineyard in 1880 and 1881 

White, C. A. New Molluscan Forms from the Laramie and Grc^n River Groups, with 
Discussion of some Associated Forms heretofore unknown. With two plates (Plates iii 
and iv) 

The Molluscan Fauna of the Truckee Group, including a New Form. With one plate 

(Plate v) 

Yarrow, H. C,M. ©. Descriptions of New Species of Reptiles and Amphibians in 
the United States National Museum 



Page. 



638-644 

1-3 

223-225 
653-656 
225-233 



99-102 
438-443 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Plate I 
Fig. 1. 

Fig. 2. 
Fig. 3. 

Fig. 4. 

Fig. 5. 

Plate II.- 

FlG. 1. 
Fig. 2. 
Fig. 3. 
Fig. 4. 
Fig. 5. 
Fig. G. 



1. -FLUTES. 
■North Pacific Phronimidte 



Page. 



Phronima atlantiea (female). Fifth thoracic foot; 1 a. Caudal 

appendages. 
Phronima atlantiea (male). Fifth thoracic foot. 
Phronima padfica (female). Fifth thoracic foot ; 3 a. Caudal 

appendages. 
Phronimella elongata (male). Fifth thoracic foot ; 4 a. Caudal 

appendages. 
Phronimella elongata (female). Fifth thoracic foot ; 5 a. Caudal 

appendages. 



-West Indian Myadestes 

Myadestes montanus Cory. 
Myadestes soliiarius Baird. 
Myadestes geniharhis Swainson. 
Myadestes sanctce-luciw Stejneger. 
Myadestes dominicanus Stejneger. 
Myadestes sibilans Lawrence. 



26 



Plate III. — Laramie and Green River Molluscan Forms. 



98 



Unio clinopisthus (sp. nov.). 



Fig. 1. 
Fig. 2. 



Left side view ; natural size. 
Dorsal view of the same example 



Anomia micronema Meek. 



Fig. 3. View of the under valve, showing the hyssal plug. 
Fig. 4. Exterior view of an upper valve. 

Fig. 5. Similar view of another example, showing coarser radiating lines. 

Fig. 6. Interior view of a very large upper valve, showing muscular scars 

and process beneath the umbo. AH of natural size. 

Campeloma prooucta (sp. noy.). 

Fig. 7. Lateral view of type specimen ; natural size. 

Fig. 8. Opposite view of the same. 

Fig. 9. Lateral view of a more robust example. 

Pyrgulifera humerosa Meek. 

Fig. 10. Lateral view of type specimen; natural size. 
Fig. 11. Opposite view of the same. 
Fig. 12. Similar view of a smaller example. 
(VI) 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. VII 

Pyrgulifera (Paramelania) damoni Smith. 

Page. 
Fig. 13. Copy of Mr. Smith's original figure. 

Pyrgulifera (Parajielania) crassigranulata Smith. 

Fig. 14. Copy of Mr. Smirh's original figure. 

Plate IV.— Larauiie aud Green River Molluscau Forms 98 

COI^BICULA BERTHOUDI (sp. UOV.). 

Fig. 1. Left side view ; natural size. 

Fig. 2. Dorsal view of another example. 

Fig. 3. Interior of left valve of another example. 

COUBICULA AUGHEYI (sp. nOV.). 

Fig. 4. Right side view ; natural size. 
Fig. 5. ' Interior view of the same example. 
Fig. 6. Dorsal view of another example. 

NeRITINA BRUNERI (sp. UOV.). 

Fig. 7. Lateral view; natural size. 

Fig. 8. Apertural view of the same example. 

MeLANOPSIS AMERICANA (sp. nOV.). 

Fig. 9. Two different lateral views ; enlarged. 

Fig. 10. Another view of the lower part of the same example, showing 
the beak and the callus of the inner lip. 

Plate V. — Molluscan Forms of the Truckee Grouj) 102 

Melania sculptilis. 

Fig. 1. Copy of Meek's original figure. 

Melania subsculptilis. 

Fig. 2. Copy of Meek's original figure. 

Melania taylori. 

Fig. 3. Copy of Gahb's original figure. 

LiTHASIA ANTIQUA. 

Fig. 4. Copy of Gabb's original figure. 

Carinifex (Vorticifex) tryoni. 
Figs. 5, 6, and 7. Different views t)f the type specimen. After Meek. 

Carinifex (Vorticifex) binneyx. 

Figs. 8 aud 9. Different views of the type specimen. After Meek. 

Ancylus undulatus. 

Fig. 10. Dorsiil view of type s]iecituen. After Meek. 
Fig. 11. Lateral outline of the same. 



VIII LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Sph^rium? idahoknse. 

Page. 
Figs. 12 and 13. Copies of Meek's original figures. 

Sph^rium rugosum. 

Figs. 14, 15, and 16. Copies of Meek's original figures. 

Latia dallii (sp. nov.). 

Fig. 17. Dorsal view of the largest known example. 

Fig. 18. Lateral view of the same. 

Fig. 19. Dorsal view of another example. 

Fig. 20. Dorsal view of another example, which has been cut away so as to 
reveal the transverse semilunar septum. 
All the figures on this plate are of natural size except Figs. 14, 15, and 

16, which are a little enlarged. 
Plate VI. — Alaskan Fossil Plants 148 

Figs. 1, 2. Equiseium glohidosiim, sp. nov., p. 444. 

Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6. Osmunda TorelU, Heer., p. 444. 

Figs. 7, 8, 9. TJtuites (Chamoecyparis) Alaskensis, sp. nov., p. 445. 

Figs. 10, 11, 12. Comptonia cuspidaia, sp. nov., p. 445. 

Fig. 13. Comptonia prwmissa, sp. nov., p. 445. 

Fig. 14. Betula Alaskana, sp. nov., p. 446. 
Plate VII.— Alaskan Fossil Plants 448 

Figs. 1. 2, 3, 4. Alnus corylifoJia, sp. nov., p. 446. 

Figs. 5, 6. Carpinus grandis, Ung., p. 446. 
Plate VIIL— Alaskan Fossil Plants 448 

Fig. 1. Fagus Deucalionis, Ung., p. 446. 

Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5. Qiiercus Dallii, sp. nov., p. 446. 

Fig. 6. Salix Eaeana, Heer., p. 447. ^ 

Plate IX.— Alaskan Fossil Plants 448 

Fig. 1. Populm Kichardsoni, Heer., p. 447. 

Fig. 2. Populua arcHca, Heer., p. 447. 

Fig. 3. Ulmus sorhifoUa, Ung., p. 447. 

Fig. 4. EUrodendroii Helreiicum, Heer., p. 449. 
Plate X.— Alaskan Fossil Plants 448 

Figs. 1, 2. Diospyros ancepn, Heer., p. 448. 

Figs. 3, 4, 5. Vacoinium reticulatum, Al. Br., p. 448. 

Fig. 6. Cornus orbi/ei-a, Heer., p. 448. 

Figs. 7, 8, 9. Magnoliu Xordenskioldi, Heer., p. 448. 
Plate XL— Skull of Centropomus 484 

Fig. 1. Dorsal view. 

Fig. 2. Lateral view. 

Fig. 3. Ventral view. 
Plate XIL— Skull of Echeneis 564 

Fig. 1. Dorsal view. 

Fig. 2. Lateral view. 

Fig. 3. Ventral view. 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. IX 

2.-CUTS. 
Symbol. ^^g°- 

Fig. 1, 11816. SteTnnm of Coscoroba Candida 176 

Fig. 2, 4642. Sternum of Oior 17G 

Fig. 3, 1856. Sternum of Olor cygnus 177 

Fig. 4, 11816. Sternnva of Coscoroba Candida 177 

Fig. 5, 1122. Sternum of Spatula chjpeata 177 

Fig. 6, 11816. Pelvis of Coscoroba Candida 178 

Fig. 7, 1586. Felvis of Cygnus gibhus 179 

Fig. 8, 49530. Anterior edge of webs of Sthenelus melancorypha 185 

Fig. 9, 49082. Nail of bill of Sthenelus melancorypha 1S5 

Fig. 10, 57272. Anterior edge of webs of Cygnus gibbus 185 

Fig. 11,57272. tifail of hill of Cygnus gibbus 185 

Fig. 12. Bill of Cygnus gibbus ' 1^7 

Fig. 13. Bill of Sthenelus melancorypha 1^7 

Fig. 14. ]i\\\ of Olor coluniManus 187 

Fig. 15. Bill of Olor cygiius, juv 207 

Fig. 16. Bill of Olor bewickii, juv 207 

41908. Structural details of ilf!/iafZeste8 icMCO^ts 457 

37472. Structural details of Bidgwayia pinicola 460 

1289. Structiyal details of iSmiia siaZis 462 

18075. Structural details of Saxicola mtianthe 462 

53719. Structural details of Hylocichla pallasi 463 

82511. Structural details of Hylocichla fuscescens 463 

1570. Structural details of fl^i/Zocic/i?a HiMsteHna 463 

56284. Structural details of Tardus viscivor us 464 

56294. Structural details of Tardus iliacus 465 

71840. Structural details of Resperocichla navia 466 

9814. Structural details of Resperocichla ncevia 466 

42636. Structural details of Catharus dryas 468 

74183. Structural details of Catharus melpomene 469 

47366. Structural details of Catharus gracilirostris 469 

82596. Structural details of Erithacus rubecula 469 

77776. Structural details of Cyanecula auecica 470 

75261. Structural details of Luscinia pMlomela 470 

853. Structural details of Merula migratoria 471 

77765. Structural details of Merula nigra 472 

74582. Structural details of Merula jamaicensis 472 

74588. Structural details of Merula (?) aurantia - 473 

74128. Head of Merula gymnophthalma 473 

55296. Structural details of Semimcrula gigas 474 

76391. Structural details of Cichlherminia herminieri 475 

74592. Structural details of Margarops fuscatus 476 

31978. Structural details of'Mimocichla rubripes 477 

54102. Structural details of Cossyphopsis reevei 478 

23594. Structural details of Flatycichla ' 'brcvipes" - 479 

44766. Structural details of Flatycichla flavipes 480 

. Structural details of Cichlopais Icucogenys 481 

30285. Structural details of Myadestes solitarius 482 

38044. Structural details of Myadestes solitarius 482 

16168. Tail of Myadestes toivnsendi 482 

38426. Structural details of Myadestes townsendi 482 

341. Structural details of Myadestes elisabethw 4-^3 

Transformations of Carpocapsa saltita^is *^'^'* 

a, larva ; b, pupa ; c, imago— enlarged, hair-lines showing nat. size ; d, 
front wing of a pale var.; c, seed, nat. size, with empty pupa skin ; /, 
do., showing hole of exit. (After Riley.) 



LIST OF COERECTIONS. 

Page 10, line 27, is should read in. 

Page 16, line 11 from bottom, sancioe-ludce should read sanctce-lucia. 
Page 89, line 21, Oncorhyncus should read Oncorhynchiis. 
Page 95, line 21, lerthondi should read berthoudi. 
Page 9-', line 9, humrosa should read humerosa. 
Page 99, line 15, view should read view. 
Page 114, line 19 from bottom, vov should read nov. 
Pa^e 115, line 6 from bottom, Siniahmoo should read Semiahmoo. 
Pa"-e 115, line 7 from bottom, Hiniahmoo should read Semiahmoo. 
Page 122, line 4, Street should read Streets. 

Page 131, line 8 from bottom, should read : 12.— Upeneus vanicolensis C. & V. 
Page 131, line 16 from bottom, trifa sciatas should read trifasciatus. 
Page 136, line 16 from bottom, Swian should read Swain. 
Page 141, line 17 from bottom, Ba toe should read Batoe. 
Page 222, line 18, Uranidba should read Uranidea. 
Page 239, line 12 from bottom, Culpea should read Clupea. 
Page 255, line 19, Fundnlus should read Fundulus. 
Page 263, line 19, Exocwtus should read Exoccetus. 
Page 266, line 23, sal and rays should be separated by more space. 
Page 267, line 23, Atherinia should read Atherina. 
Page 281, line 12, Scaiua should read Sciaena. 
Page 285, line 12, Spclted should read Spotted. 

Page 290, line 20^ OPISTOGNATHID^ should read OPISTHOGNATHID.S:. 
Page 293, line 2 from bottom, retained is not properly spaced. 
Page 297, line 1, Blocb should read Bloch. 
Page 308, line 26, Coryihoichthys should read Corythroichthya. 
Page 315, line 6 from bottom, MOLUSCA should reatl MOLLUSCA. 
Pago 376, last line, olclectiou should read collection. 
Page 386, line 7 from bottom, migratorius should read migratoria. 
Page 412, line 14, LETHARCUS should read LETHARCHUS. 
Page 413, line 3, Baiostoma brachialis should read Bieostoma brachiale. 
Page 437, line 3, Letharcus should read Letharchus. 
Page 456, line 17, Turdince should Turdlnce. 
Page 4H5, line 2, (Plate VI) should read (Plate XI). 
P.ige 486, last line, Anarhichas should read Anarrhichas. 
Page 520, line 15, Chondropteygli should read Chondropterygii, 
Page 52:1, line 25, larnal should read larval. 

Page 524, line 6 from bottom, Burmeister should read Burmeister. 
Page 524, line 5 from bottom, Soc should read Soc. . 
Page 529, line 9 from bottom, Poliptila should read Polioptila. 
Page 548, line 15, Nyctherodias should read Nyctherodius. 
Page 549, line 21, Virosylvia should read Vireosylvia. 
Page 552, line 1, Himantololophus should rea<l Hinuiut4)lophu8. 
Page 563, line 26, it should read its. 

Page 564, line 6 from bottom, Plate VII should read Plat« XII. 
- Page 570, line 10, should be in the usual title caps. 

XI 



PROCEEDINGS 

OF THE 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

18 82. 



INFORMATION CONCERNING SOME FOSSIIi TREES IN THE INITE© 
STATES NATIONAIi MUSEUM. 

By I.ieut. Col. P. T. SWAI.^E, U. S. A., aa^d I^ieait. J. T. C. HEGE- 
WAED, U. S. A. 

[Letter to General William T. Sherman. J 

Sir : I have the honor to furnish you the following information with, 
regard to the two fossil trees iirocured from "Lithodendron" at the re- 
quest of Lieut. Col. P. T. Swaine, Fifteenth Infantry : 

On or about the middle of May, 1879, the honor was conferred upon 
me to carry out written instructions received from General Sherman, 
with regard to procifring several specimens of fossil trees from "Litho- 
dendron" for the National Museum. A sergeant, ten men, and two 
drivers, rationed for twelve days, with teams and two heavy stone 
wagons, were ordered to accompany me on the expedition, taking with 
them such tools as would be necessary to procure and handle the spec- 
imens. We made the usual drives, stopping at a forage agency each 
night until we arrived at Navajoe Springs, Arizona. 

The country passed over was very dry and dusty, though the road 
was in good condition, being the regular mail route to Prescott. 

At Navajoe Springs we left the road, cutting diagonally across the 
country about 20 miles, arriving at Bear Spring near the head of Litho- 
dendron in the evening. We had to cross several aroyas, but being 
in the dry season, we had nothing to fear from water or marshy soil. 
The country traversed was desolate and barren, sage-brush and pinon 
trees abounding, good grazing and water being very scarce. Here and 
there mountain peaks stood out in bold relief like great sign-posts to 
guide the traveler on his way. The water, when found, was in small 
quantities and alkaline. 

Near the head of Lithodendron, and about Bear Spring, grazing was 

good, the Navajoes having thousands of heads of sheep there which 

they drove to the spring every morning and evening ; being always on 

the qui vive for news, they thought it strange the "Great Father in 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 82 1 June 5, 1 8 82. 



2 TKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Washington" should want some of the bones of the "Great Giant" 
their forefathers had killed years ago when taking possession of the 
country, the lava beds being the remains of the blood that ran from his 
wounds. 

Camping at Bear Spring, I turned the mules out to graze and left the 
men to prepare an early dinner whilst I rode down the valley to examine 
the thousands of specimens that lay scattered on each side of the A^alley 
along the slopes, which were perhaps 50 feet high ; the valley of the 
Lithodendron, at its widest part, being scarcely a half mile. Along 
the slopes no vegetation whatever Avas to be seen, wood being very 
scarce; the soil was composed of clay and sand mostly, and these petri- 
factions, broken into millions of pieces, lay scattered all adown these 
slopes. Some of the large fossil trees were well preserved, though the 
action of the heat and cold had broken most of them in sections from 
2 to 10 feet long, and some of these must have been immense trees; 
measaring the exposed parts of several they varied from 150 to 200 feet 
in length, and from 2 to li feet in diameter, the centers often containing 
most beautiful quartz crystals. 

I encountered considerable difficulty in trying to procure two speci- 
mens answering to the General's description, and which I thought would 
please. After finding the larger of the two fossils sent, I could find no 
mate, the remainder being of a different species, and the exi)osed part 
broken in segments too short to answer. Finally, I concluded to unearth 
part of the same specimen, which entered the ground at an angle of 
about 20^. 

Bringing back men and teams, I dug along some 30 feet, finding the 
second dark specimen, which made a good match, and which saw the 
light, perhaps, for the first time for ages, though both were parts of the 
same tree. This was on the right bank or slope of Lithodendron, one 
mile and a quarter from Bear Spring. I got both fossils loaded on 
the wagons, and camped at the Spring that night. 

iSText morning we left quite early, encountering some difficulty in 
getting over the rough country, frequently stopping to make a road to 
get on a mesa or over some aroya ; late the same evening we arrived at 
Xavajoe Springs. 

From here we encountered no further difiiculties. Arriving at the 
post 1 reported my return and the result of the expedition. (The post 
was Fort Wingate, K. Mex.) 

These specimens remained at the post until Colonel Bull, in Sei)tember, 
1879, had them boxed up and sent to Santa Fe, :N"ew Mexico. From 
there they were shipped east to Washington, I believe. 
Very respectfully, your most obedient servant, 

J. T. C. HEGEWALD, 
{Late) Second Lieutenant^ Fifteenth Infantry. 

i^EW Albany, Ind., 

September 21, 1881. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 3 

HISTORY OF THE TWO SPECIMENS OF FOSSIL TREES IN THE SMITH- 
SONIAN INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON, D. C. 

The General of the Army, General W. T. Sherman, while on a tour 
across the continent in the fall of 1878, snggested to Lieut. Col. P. T. 
Swaine, Fifteenth United States Infantry, then in command of the post 
of Fort Wingate, K. Mex., the expediency of procuring two of the pet- 
rifactions of the country in that vicinity of reasonable dimensions for 
transportation, yet sufdciently large to be worthy of a place in the 
Smithsonian Institution. Acting upon this snggestion, an expedition 
was organized early in the spring of 1879 to proceed to the Lithodeudron 
(stone ^trees) in Arizona. Thomas V. Kearns, a gentleman of long 
residence in that part of the country, and familiar with the locality to 
be explored,- kindly volunteered Ids services, and success was, in a great 
measure, due to his efforts in carrying out the wishes of the General. 
The military detaU consisted of Second Lieut. J. T. C. Hegewald, one 
sergeant, and twelve soldiers, all of the Fifteenth United States Infantry, 
and the party was well supplied with army wagon running gears spe- 
cially arranged for hauling stone, and with tools and appliances complete. 
Lieutenant Hegewald has furnished a detailed and comprehensive 
statement of the events connected with this expedition, which is inter- 
esting as an appendix to this paper. 

Only one of the two specimens obtained from the Lithodeudron by 
Mr. Kearns and Lieutenant Hegewald was forwarded to Washington. 
This is the large dark-colored one. In the place of the second one 
brought in from the locality of the Lithodeudron a better specimen was 
found on the Mesa to the north of and adjacent to Fort Wingate, 
about two miles irom the flag-staff. This is the smaller and lighter 
colored one. 

First. Lieut. S. R. Stafford, regimental quartermaster, Fifteenth 
United States Infantry, had a strong platform made of plank spiked 
together, and rolled each fossil on separately, fastening them in place 
with strap iron, and hauled them to Santa Fe, N. Mex., where they were 
detained in the government corral awaiting the collection of enough 
other curiosities to make up a car load, when they were shipped to 
Washington under the direction and care of agents of the Smithsonian. 

P. T. SWAIXE, 
Lieutenant-Colonel Fifteenth Infantry, Brevet Colonel, U. S. A. 



A STUKYOF THE PHRONIHIW-IE OF THE .\ORTJI PACIFIC SUKVEV- 
IIV« EXPEOITI©I\. 

By THO§. II. STKEET§, M, !>., U. S. IV. 

The identification of the Fhrouimw has been attended with difficulty 
on account of the absence of properly-defined characters. Glaus, who 
gives the most detailed account of them, combines in his description of 
P. sedentaria more than one species. I have had no opportunity to 
examine P. sedentaria. The following article is the result of close 



4 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

study, and comparisons of a number of specimens of each species; and 
the specilic characters here presented and figured were found to be con- 
stant, and apply to all sizes. 

The family characteristics are as follows : 

Head broad and rounded above, tapering below to the oral appara- 
tus. Eyes on the dorsal and lateral surlaces of the head. Both pairs 
of autenuaj present in the male, and long; in the female the inferior 
pair obsolete, and the superior pair short. Thorax broad anteriorly, and 
tapering posteriorly. The first and second pairs of thoracic feet short; 
the extremity of the fourth joint being more or less produced, and the 
fifth joint with a pair of wing-like appendages on either side of its 
apex. The fifth pair of thoracic feet developed into a stout, prehensile 
organ. The remaining pairs of feet simple. Abdomen narrow. The 
caudal appendages slender, cylindrical, and two-branched. 

There is a very marked resemblance among the Phrommidce. The 
family characters are many; the generic and specific characters are 
few, but constant. 

The eggs of the female are carried in an incubatory pouch between 
the posterior thoracic feet. Females with the young in every stage of 
development within the eggs may be found swimming free; yet when 
the young leave the eggs, they are always found, I believe, inside the 
body of a Fyrosoma, a Beroe, or a Medusa, which the female am])hipod 
appropriates as a home for her immature species. The parent and young 
are usually found inclosed in the same case. The former by this action 
manifests, apparently, a maternal solicitude for the welfare of her off- 
spring. This is interesting as appearing in animals so low in the scale 
of being as the am])liipods. 

There was observed a great disparity between the number of males 
and females collected in any locality. In the preparation of this article 
there were examined forty-five specimens belonging to the different ge- 
nera of the family, and the proportion of males to females was found to 
be as 1 to 8. Until quite recently the male form — being so different — was 
not recognized as belonging to the same species. The discovery Avas 

made by Clans. 

Phronima, Latreille. 

Head, thorax, and abdomen as described under Phronimidcv. The 
first and second pairs of thoracic feet short and slender, with the fourth, 
or carpal joint hroadhj liroduccd; the third and fourth pairs long, sim- 
j^le, and subequal. The fifth pair stoutly developed, and provided with 
a strong ineliensile organ, resemhling the claw of some of the Cancridw. 
The last two pairs of legs shorter than the preceding, and subequal. 
The three pairs of caudal appendages long and slender, each furnished 
with two lanceolate branches. Telson short. 

Sexual differences. — Males smaller than the females. In the female 
the inferior antennre are absent. In the position of these organs — be- 
neath the lateral eye — is a broad, rounded prominence, slightly pro- 
jecting beyond the anterior margin of the head. The apex of this 



PROCEEDINGS OF UXITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEmi. 5 

prominence usually bears a single sliort hair. The superior autenuce 
are short and three-jointed, the last joint being beset with a few audi- 
tory hairs. In the male both pairs of antenuiTe are present, and are 
provided with long, flexible llagella; the last joint of the peduncle of 
the superior pair long, as in the female, but much more robust, and 
densely furnished with hairs; the peduncle of the inferior pair three- 
jointed. The abdomen of the male is stouter, and the bases of the 
swimming feet more nearly rounded; in the female the basal portion of 
these feet are oblong-ovate, and the last segment of the thorax is longer 
and narrower than the corresponding part in the male. 

Phronima atlantica, Gueriu. 

(Plate I, Fig. 1, la, 2.) 

Phronima atlantica, Gu^rin-Meneville, Iconogr., pi. 25, fig. 4; Mag. Zool., 1836, cl, vii, 
pi. 18, fig. 1,— Milue-Edwards, Hist, des Crust., 1840, iii, p. 93.— C. Speuce 
Bate, Catalogue Ampbi. Crust., 1862, p. 319, pi. 51, fig. 4.— Daua, U. S. 
Explor. Exped., 1852, p. 1001. 

Female. — The first and second joints of the peduncle of the superior an- 
tenme S'hort; the last more than twice the length of the first two. The 
first and second i)airs of thoracic feet with the carpal joint jjroduced an- 
tero-inferiorly, and the produced portion evenlj^ set with sharp spines 
along its anterior edge; the following joint, which antagonizes with the 
produced portion of the preceding, slightly arched and spinous along its 
inferior edge; the last joint notched below the end, and furnished with 
a ribbed, pectinated appendage on either side of its base; the third joint 
prolonged anteriorly below, truncated, and set around with short, sharp 
bristles or spines. The second pair of legs longer than the first. The 
third and fourth pairs with the basal joint armed behind, at its ex- 
tremity, with a sharj) spine ; the basal joint of the fifth pair armed in 
the same manner as the two preceding, but the spine is mnch larger in 
the former; there is likewise a spine on the middle of the following 
joint, in front. The third joint of the fifth pair enlarged, arched above, 
and lengthened; the fourth joint, or palm, long, attenuated at its articu- 
lation with the third, and gradually broadening to its junction with the 
fifth joint, arched above, the inferior angle produced anteriorly into a 
long and stout i)oint, corresponding to the immovable finger of the 
Cancridw, the anterior border with two stout, ]irominent teeth, the 
upper the larger, tuberculated on the edge towards the movable finger, 
and beset with a few bristles or hairs; the fifth joint, or movable finger, 
longer than the anterior border of the palm, arched above, and with a 
broad prominence on the middle? of the inferior margin; the last joint 
very small, and in old subjects fused with the preceding joint. The 
basal joint of the sixth and seventh pairs of legs armed at the ex- 
tremity, in front, with a short spine; and the second and third joints of 
the last pair with a prominent, rounded projection on the anterior 
surface, that on the second joint more pointed. The first pair of caudal 
appendages extending almost as far backward as the extremity of the 



G PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

third pair; tlie second pair falling short of the articulation of the rami 
of the third pair, and terminating about opposite the articulation of the 
rami of the first i)air. Tel sou minute, uuguiform. 

Male. — The fifth pair of thoracic legs relatively shorter in the male; 
all the joints of the leg individually shorter and stouter than the corre- 
sponding parts in the female. The produced portion of the fourth joint, 
corresponding with the immovable finger of a crab, more produced 
downward, and less anteriorly, and arises from about the middle of the 
inferior surface. The fifth joint is more curved at its proximal extrem- 
ity, so as to antagonize with the produced portion of the fourth joint. 
These sexual characters of the fifth pair of legs are only developed in 
the mature male; in the young of this sex, the fifth pair partakes of the 
characters, more or less, of the young female. 

There were examined twenty-eight specimens of this species, coming 
from many different localities in the Pacific Ocean, varying in length 
from 4 to 21""", and there was found no material variation in the struc- 
tural character of the prehensile organ, dependent upon age (presuming 
the size of the specimen to be dependent upon its age) ; that of 4"'™, as 
well as that of 21'""\ presenting all the essential characteristics of the 
si)ecies as described and figured by Gueriu. The shape of the hand 



as deep posteriorly as anteriorly, and all the joints are relatively shorter 
and stouter. As the animal increases in size the parts become length- 
ened, and the hand is much narrower posteriorly than anteriorly. In 
one specimen only, did the teeth on the anterior surface of the hand 
show any variation; in that, the detached tooth, nearest the produced 
portion, was wanting. P. custos, probably, represents this occasional 
variation. In another example, the prominence on the concave surface 
of the movable finger was very prominent, almost tooth-like. With these 
exceptions, I fonnd no tendency to variation in these parts, which is 
contrary to the researches of Claus. According to this authority, P. 
atlantica is nothing more than the immature female form of P. sedentaria. 
I think, however, that the A^alidity of the species will no longer be ques- 
tioned, now that the male form of P. atlantica is presented. 

Locality (of those examined): Pacific Ocean, north and south of the 
equator, from latitude 30° 42' south to 37° north; and from longitude 
81° 40' west to 1()0^ 25' west. The temperature of the water varied 
from GOO to 79° Fahr. 

Phronima pacific a, Streets. 

(Plate I, Fif?. 3, 3a.) 
Phronima sedentaria, Claus, Zeitschiift wissen. Zoologie, Leipzig, 1872, XXII, pis. 

xxvi, xxvii, fig. 1-12. 
Phronima padfica, Streets, Bulletin of the National Museum, No. 7, Wasbiugtou, 1877, 
p. 128. 
Female. — The first and second joints of the superior antenuie short 
(the first narrow, the second broad) ; the last joint about twice the length 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. t 

of the first aud second combined. The structure of the first and second 
pairs of thoracic feet simihir to those of P. atlantica. The spine on the 
posterior extremity of the basal joint of the third and fourth pairs is 
wanting- in the present species, and in its place is a bristle-like hair. 
The fifth pair of legs are relatively shorter, when compared with those 
of aUanilca ; a prominent spine on the posterior extreuiity of tlie basal 
joint, but none on the following joint, in front; the third joint short, 
broad, and considerably arched above; the fourtli joint (palm) broadly 
quadrate, almost as broad as long, the superior border rounded pos- 
teriorly to the articulation of the third joint, the lower border slightly 
curved, the character of the dentition on the anterior border si!)iilar to 
that of atlantica in the general arrangement of the teeth, but the teeth 
are not nearly so prominent, or pointed, the lower, single tooth but 
slightly separated from the larger crenulated tubercle; the prolonged 
inferior angle more curved upward, and shorter than in the former spe- 
cies. The fifth joint curved, about as long as the anterior margin of 
the palm, a low convexity on the inferior margin. The first ])air of 
caudal appendages do not reach as far backward as the third pair, ex- 
tending to, or slightly beyond, the middle of the rami of the last pair; 
the second pair extends to, or slightly beyond, the point of articulation 
of the rami of the third jiair, and more than half way the length of the 
branches of the first pair. 

The characters of the fifth, or prehensile pair of legs, and the rela 
tive length of the second pair of caudal ai>pendages are sui^eient to 
readily distinguish this species from P. atlantica. 

In the young of S'""" the shape of the hand is the same as in the 
adult. On the anterior margin there are, in the place of the den- 
tated tubercle, two or three pointed teeth, springing from a slightly 
elevated base. The hand of the male is similar to that of the female, 
except that the immovable finger rises from a more receding angle, 
which, however, is less receding than that observed in P. atlantica. 

Clans confuses this species with P. sedentaria. ( Vide Zeitschrift wis- 
sen. Zoologie, Leipzig, 1872, xxii, pis. xxvi, xxvii, fig. 1-12.) 

The number of specimens examined was ten — nine females and one 
male. Their lengths varied from 3 to 12"'™. 

Locality. — Pacific Ocean, north and south of the equator — from lat 
itude 40° north to 30^ 42' south; and from longitude 97° 14' west to 
157° 37' west. The temperature of the water of the localities whence 
the specimens were obtained varied from GG° to 73° Fahr. 

The following facts may be deduced by comparison with P. atlantica. 
The present species is smaller in size, less numeroxis in the localities 
given, and a relatively larger i)roi)ortion of those in the collection came 
from localities south of the equator. 

Pheonimella, Clans. 

The shape of the head and antennre, and the general foi^n of the 
thorax and abdomen very similar to Phronima. The third pair of 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

thoracic feet long — much longer than the succeeding pair. The fifth 
pair euhirged, and used for prehension ; the extremiti/, or claw, reHemhling 
that of the Squllla — the movable finger (fifth joint) flexing against the 
anterior aspect of the palm, which is furnished with teeth. Three pairs 
of styliform caudal appendages:* the second, or middle pair short, or 
rudimentary. 

Sexual differences. — Males smaller than the females, and more robust. 
In the females the second pair of caudal appendages are rudimentary, 
almost obsolete; in the males well developed. 

In respect to the antennje and other parts of the body the sexual 
differences are similar to those observed in Phronima. 

Phronimella elongata, Clans, 

(Plate I, Fig. 4, 4a, 5, 5a.) 

Phronima dongata, Clans, Wiirzburger naturwissen. Zeit-schrift, Wihvbnrg. 1862, III^ 
IX 247, pi. vi, tig. 6-11 (male and female).— Zeicdchrift f. wisseu. Zoologie, 
Leipzig, 1S63, XII, p. 193, pi. xix, iigs. 2,3,7 (female). 

rhronlmcUa doufjata, Claus, Zeitschrift f. wisseu. Zoologie, Leipzig, 1872, XXII, pp. 
333, 336, 337. 

Andiyloni/x hamatus, streets, Bulletin of the National MLL-jenm, No. 7, Wasniugtoa, 
1877, p. 131 (female). 

Female. — The first joint of the superior antennte short; the second 
long and with a few auditory hairs at its apex. The first and second 
juiirs of thoracic feet shorter than the succeeding pairs ; the first shorter 
than the second, with the fourth joint hardly produced at its posterior 
distal extremity, the produced portion spine-like; the second pair with 
the fourth joint elongate and slender, and with the spine on the pos- 
terior distal extremity often wanting; where it is present it is much 
smaller than that on the corresponding joint of the first pair. The 
third pair of thoracic feet extremely elongate, nearly as long as tiie 
animal, the excessive lengthening being in tlie last two joints ; the 
bases of the third and fourth x)airs of feet spinous along the posterior 
edge. The base of the fifth, or prehensile, pair longer than that of the 
preceding pairs, and spinous on the anterior edge, two or three spines 
on the posterior edge near the distal extremity; the anterior edge of 
the second, third, and fourtli joints spinous; the fourth joint enlarged 
at its extremity, and armed with four or five large teeth, against which 
the following joint, or finger, impinges; the lowest of the teeth the 
largest, and touches the finger about its middle; the fifth joint about 
one-third the length of the fourth, arched; the claws of all the pairs of 
feet anchylosed with the fifth joint, and fixed at a right angle to it, form- 
ing a hook, and the apex of the fifth joint slightly produced as a straight, 
acute spine. The bases of the last two pairs somewhat club-shaped, 



* Clans stales that there are " only two pairs of styliform caudal a[)pendages." 
This is true of the female, but not of the male. In one of his plates, where the cau- 
dal extremity of a male is given, the three pairs of styliform appendages are very 
clearly represented. 



Proceedings Nat. Mus., vol. v, 1882. 



PLATE I. 




iL3 




Phronimid^ of North Pacific Surveying Expedition. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. )) 

and apex armed with a spine in front ; a spine on tbe anterior edge ot 
the following' joint. The first pair of caudal appendages terminate half 
way the rami of the third pair ; the second pair rudimentary, represented 
only by a projecting tubercle. 

Male. — The base of the superior antennae stouter than in the female, 
the first joint broad, the second long and straight, with its inferior apex 
produced, and its lower edge densely hairy; the first and second joints 
of the flagellum subequal, and together about as long as the third; the 
third and fourth subequal, the remainder of the flagellum lost. The 
inferior antenntTB more slender than the superior ; peduncle three-joiuted, 
and bent upward at the third joint ; the first joint broad, the others 
successively diminishing in breadth; flagellum very long, one-half, or 
more, than the length of the body, filamentous, joints elongate, the first 
the longest, the remainder subequal. The under surface of the flagella 
of both pairs furnished with long, equidistant hairs. The body of the 
animal smaller and stouter than the female; the last two joints of the 
third pair of feet relatively shorter, and all the feet shorter and more 
robust; the fifth joint of the fifth pair about one-half the length of the 
fourth joint, and impinges on the large tooth anterior to its middle. 
The second pair of caudal appendages well developed, and extend to 
the commencement of the rami of the first pair. 

The number of sjiecimens examined was seven — six females and one 
male — varying in lengths from 9 to 15™", and coming from localities in 
the Pacific Ocean north and south of the equator, from latitude 34<^ 00' 
north to latitude 30° 40' south, and from longitude 102° 43' west to 
longitude loO^- 00' west. Clans first describes the species as coming 
from the Mediterranean Sea. The length of the male specimen, lO'"'". 

EXPLANATION OF PLATE I. 

Fig. 1. Phronima atlantica (famaie). Fiftli thor.icic foot ; la. Caudal appendages. 

Fig. 2. Phromma atlantica (male). Fifth thoracic foot. 

Fig. 3. P/u-omniaj;ac(/tc« (female). Filth thoracic foot; 3 «. Caudal appemlages. 

Fig. 4. Phronimellaelongata (male). Fifth thoracic foot ; 4 a. Caudal appendages. 

Fig. 5. Phronimella elo7igata {female). Fifth thoracic foot; 5 a. Caudal appendages. 

Washington, D. C, March 1, 1882. 



1>ES€RBPTION OF SEVEKAL, IVE^V RACES OF AMEKICAiV BIRDS. 

By ROBERT BIDCJl^AY. 

1. METHRIOPTERUS CUEVIROSTEIS OCCIDEXTALIS.* 

Ch. — Similar to M. curvirostris, Swains., but tail much longer, colors 
darker and browner, spots of lower parts better defined and regularly 

* Methriopterus curvirostris occidentalis Eidgw., MS. 

''Harporlnjnchiis curvirostris" Lawr. Mem. Boston Soc. N. H. II. pt. iii, No. 2, 1874, 
267 (Tepic and Mazatlan). 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

cuneate or deltoid on the breast, tbe posterior lower parts siiEfused 
with much deeper fulvous, and the tail spots pale isabella-color or brown- 
ish white, instead of pure white. 

Adult : Above grayish brown, the remiges and tail more brownish ; 
middle and greater wing-coverts sometimes narrowly tipped with dull 
white, but these markings occasionally quite obsolete; three or four 
outer tail-feathers tipped with dull brownish white or pale isabella- 
color, the spots about .3o-.40 of an inch wide on inner web of lateral 
feathers, successively much more restricted on the others. Lower parts 
pale isabella-color, paler on chin and throat, which are nearly white, as 
is sometimes also the breast and middle of the abdomen, the color grad- 
ually deepening into brownish ochraceous or fulvous on the flanks, anal 
region, and crissum. Jugulnm marked with distinct, regularly cuneate 
or deltoid, spots of grayish brown, like the color of the upper parts; 
breast and sides marked with roundish, elliptical, or tear-shaped spots 
of the same, the spots largest on the breast, where sometimes more or 
less blended. Bill black, the basal portion of the mandible more brown- 
ish; legs and feet dark brownish. AVing, 4.45-4.70 (4.5(3) ; tail, 5.00-5.20 
(5.10); culmen, 1.12-1.30 (1.20); bill from nostril, .90-1.15 (1.02); gonys, 
.70-.S5 (.77); tarsus, 1.40; middle toe, 1.00-1.10 (1.05).* 

Hab. — Coast region of western Mexico, in the vicinity of Tepic and 
Mazatlan ("common resident"). 

2. MIMUS GILVUS LAWEEXCEI. 

Ch. — Differing from true M. (jiJvus in much longer wing and tail, de- 
cidedly smaller and slenderer bill, decidedly lighter and browner gray 
of upper parts, much less distinct light superciliary stri])e, and other 
details of coloration. From var. (p'ociUs is much less distinctly black 
wings, with less sharply contrasted light markings, u^iper parts browner, 
the bill smaller and more slender, etc. 

Adult: Above uniform brownish gray (much as in M. polyglottiis, hut 
rather browner); wings and tail dusky (not black), the greater coverts 
and remiges broadly edged with brownish gray (like the back), the mid- 
dle and greater wing-coverts distinctly tipped with white (forming two 
uarrow bands), and the extreme base of the primaries white, usually, 
however, concealed by the i)rimary coverts; three to five outer tail- 
feathers abruptly tipped with white, this 1.40-1 .65 inches in extent on 
the outer feather, which has. the outer web mostly or entirely white; 
the middle rectrices narrowly and indistinctly whitish or pale grayish at 
extreme tips. A very indistinct paler superciliary stripe, strongly con- 
trasted only with the dusky lores ; an indistinct dusky jiost-ocular streak ; 
eyelids pure white. Lower parts dull white, purer on the throat and 
belly, the jugulnm shaded with pale grayish, the flanks and anal-region, 
sometimes the crissum also, more or less strongly tinged with buff. Bill, 

^Extreme aud avera'^e lucasmemeiits of 4 adults. 