^€Sx^ 













^ 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 
UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 80 




UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

WASHINGTON : 1932 



ADVERTISEMENT 

The scientific publications of the National Museum include two 
series, known, respectively, as Proceedings and Bulletin. 

The Proceedings series, begun in 1878, is intended primarily as a 
medium for the publication of original papers, based on the collections 
of the National Museum, that set forth newly acquired facts in biology, 
anthropology, and geology, with descriptions of new forms and revi- 
sions of limited groups. Copies of each paper, in pamphlet form, are 
distributed as published to libraries and scientific organizations and 
to specialists and others interested in the different subjects. The 
dates at which these separate papers are published are recorded in 
the table of contents of each of the volumes. 

The present volume is the eightieth of this series. 

The series of Bulletins, the first of which was issued in 1875, con- 
tains separate publications comprising monographs of large zoological 
groups and other general systematic treatises (occasionally in several 
volumes), faunal works, reports of expeditions, catalogues of type 
specimens and special collections, and other material of similar nature. 
The majority of the volumes are octavo in size, but a quarto size has 
been adopted in a few instances in which large plates were regarded as 
indispensable. In the Bulletin series appear volumes under the head- 
ing Contributions from the United States National Herbarium, in octavo 
form, published by the National Museum siace 1902, wliich contain 
papers relating to the botanical collections of the Museum. 

Alexander Wetmore, 
Assistant Secretary, Smithsonian Institution. 

Washington, D. C, September 21, 1932. 

136711—32 nr 



CONTENTS 

Article 

Aldrich, J. M. Notes on Francis Walker's types of North 
American flies of the family Tachinidae. No. 2910, pp. 
1-16. November 10, 1931 1 10 

. North American two-winged flies of the genus 

Spathimeigenia, with descriptions of five new species. No. 
2911, pp. 1-10. December 31, 1931 ^ 11 

New species: Spathimeigenia mexicana, S. obscura, S. ereda, 
S. bridwelli, S. lexensis. 

. Records of dipterous insects of the family Tachinidae 

reared by the late George Dimmock, with description of one 
new species and notes on the genus Anetia Robineau- 
Desvoidy. No. 2920, pp. 1-8. March 31, 1932 ^ 20 

New species: Anetia dimmocki. 

Bartsch, Paul. The West American mollusks of the genus 

Acar. No. 2909, pp. 1-4. November 23, 1931 ' 9 

New species: Acar bailyi, A. panamensis. 

. A new marine shell of tiie genus Xenophora from 

Florida. No. 2917, pp. 1, 2. December 31, 1931 ' 17 

New species: Xenophora longleyi. 

Caudell, a. N. Insects of the order Orthoptera of the Pinchot 

Expedition of 1929. No. 2921, pp. 1-7. August 10, 1932 L 21 

New species: Patanga pinchoti. 

Chitwood, B. G. a review of the nematodes of the genus 
Hastospiculum, with descriptions of two new species. No. 
2919, pp. 1-9. April 28, 1932 1 19 

New species: Hastospiculum setiferum, H. onchocercum. 

Clark, Austin H. Echinoderms from the islands of Niuafoou 
and Nukualofa, Tonga Arcliipelago, with the description of 
a new genus and two new species. No. 2905, pp. 1-12. 
January 30, 1932 ' 5 

New genus: Zenocentrotus. 

New species: Zenocentrotus kellersi, Z. paradoxus. 

• Date of publication. 

V 



VI PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Article 

CusHMAN, Joseph A., and Jar vis, P. W. Upper Cretaceous 
foraminifera from Trinidad. No. 2914, pp. 1-60. March 
10, 1932' 14 

New species: Cydammina elegans, Clavulina chitinosa, Robulus 
trinitatensis, Planularia advena, Pseudopolymorphina ozawana, 
Nonion cretaceum, Operculina catenula. 

New varieties: Clavulina aspera Cushman whitei, Nodosaria 
limbata d'Orbigny tumidaia, N. limbata d'Orbigny basiornafa. 

Cushman, Joseph A., and Parker, Frances L. Recent 
foraminifera from the Atlantic coast of South America. 
No. 2903, pp. 1-24. November 19, 1931 ' 3 

New species: Elphidium australis, Buliminella parallela. 
New variety: Elphidium alvarezianum (d'Orbigny) serrulaturn. 

DoBZHANSKY, Th. The North American beetles of the genus 

Coccinella. No. 2904, pp. 1-32. November 10, 1931 ' 4 

New subspecies: Coccinella prolongata Crotch sequoiae. 

EwiNG, H. E. A catalogue of the Trombiculinae, or chigger 
mites, of the New World, with new genera and species and a 
key to the geaera. No. 2908, pp. 1-19. November 19, 1931 ^- 8 

New genera: Walchia, Endotrombicula. 

New species: Trombicula blarinae, T. dunni, T. cervulicola, T. 
piercei, T. cavicola, Neoschongastia signator, N. scelopori, 
N. brevipes, Endotrombicula penetrans, Hannemania hirsuta, 
H. penetrans. 

New name: Hannemania samboni. 

Fisher, W. S. New West Indian cerambycid beetles. No. 

2922, pp. 1-93. June?, 1932 1 22 

New genera: Pseudoeme, Brittonella, Calliclytus, Lamproclytus. 

New species: Xixuthrus domingoensis, Monodesmus atratus, 
Pseudoeme poolei, Methia pallida, Brittonella chardoni, Eburia 
longicornis, E. bahamicae, E. cinereopilosa, E. ramsdeni, E. 
portoricensis, E. cubae, E. elongata, Elaphidion splendidum, E. 
manni, E. rotundipenne, E. cayamae, E. tuber culicolle, E. cubae, 
E. fasciatum, E. hispaniolae, E. confusum, E. portoricensis, E. 
compressipenne, E. pilosum, E. dozieri, E. costipenne, E. jamai- 
censis, E. antillarum, E. gracilis, Protosphaerion testaceum, 
Stizocera vanzwaluwenburgi, Heterachtes fulgens, Cylindera 
fasciata, C. puncticollis, C. glabra, Merostenus asperatus, M. 
similis, M. elongatus, Pentomacrus punctalus, Ophistomis in- 
sularis, Neoclytus pallidicornis, N. pubicollis, Tilloclytus bruneri, 
T. minutus, T. cubae, Pentanodes albofasciaius, Calliclytus 
schwarzi, Lamproclytus elegans, Trichrous vittatus, T. bicolor, 
Heterops hispaniolae, Ataxia haitiensis, Acrepidopterum pilosum, 
Ecyrus insularis, E. hoffmanni, E. nanus, E. flavus, Dor- 
casta gracilis, Leptostylus milleri, Leiopus infuscatus, L. dozieri, 
Frobatius unicolor, Calocosrnus magnificus. 

> Date of publication. 



CONTENTS VII 

Article 

Fowler, Henry "W. The fishes obtained by the Pinchot South 
Seas Expedition of 1929, with description of one new genus 
and three new species. No. 2906, pp. 1-16. Februar}^ 16, 
1932 ' 6 

New genus: Giffordella. 

New species: Benthosema pinchoti, Ophioblennius pinchoti, Gif- 
fordella corneliae. 

Friedmann, Herbert. Observations on the growth rate of 
the foot in the mound birds of tiie genus Megajjodius. No. 
2901, pp. 1-4. October 28, 1931 ' 1 

— . Tlie birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea. No. 

2912, pp. 1-31. February 13, 1932 1 12 

. The parasitic habit in the ducks, a theoretical con- 
sideration. No. 2918, pp. 1-7. March 4, 1932 ^ 18 

Graham, David Crockett. The ancient caves of Szechwan 

Province, China. No. 2916, pp. 1-13. March 23, 1932 K. 16 

Howell, A. Brazier, and Straus, William L., jr. The 
brachial flexor muscles in primates. No. 2913, pp. 1-31. 
November 21, 1931 ^ 13 

Jarvis, p. W. (See Cushman, Joseph A.) 

Muesebeck, C. F. W. Revision of the nearctic ichneumonfhes 
belonging to the genus Macrocentrus. No. 2923, pp. 1-55. 
August 3, 1932 ' 23 

New species: Macrocentrus incojnplehis, M. crassipes, M. peroneae, 
M. crocidophorae, M. airatus, M. impressus, M. reliculaius, M. 
canarsiae, M. insularis, M. clypeatus, M. robustus, M. nigripec- 
ius, M. inslabilis, M. utilis, M. laspeyresiae, M. pulchripennis, 
M. seminiger, M. affinis, M. fuscipennis, M. texanus. 

New combination: Macrocentrus terminalis (Ashmead). 

Parker, Frances L. (See Cushman, Joseph A.) 

Riley, J. H. A second collection of birds from the Provinces 
of Yunnan and Szechwan, China, made for the National 
Geographic .Society by Dr. Joseph F. Rock. No. 2907, 
pp. 1-91. December 31, 1931 ' 7 

Straus, William L., jr. (See Howell, A. Brazier.) 

Treadwell, Aaron L. Three new species of polychaetous 

annelids in the collections of the United States National 

Museum. No. 2902, pp. 1-5. November 10, 1931 ^ 2 

New species: Nereis heterocirrata, Lumbrinereis elongata, Eupo- 
matus decoruft. 

1 Date of publication. 



VIII PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Article 

Wilson, Charles Branch. The copepod crustaceans of 

Chesapeake Bay. No. 2915, pp. 1-54. March 31, 1932 '_ 15 

New species: Pontella pennata, Canuella elongata, Robertsonia 
chesapeakensis, Cryptopontius gracilis, Hemicyclops americanus. 

•Date of publication. 



ILLUSTRATIONS 



PLATES 

The West American Mollusks of the Genus Acar 

By Paul Bartsch 

Facing page 

1 . Mollusks of the genus Acar 1 

A New Marine Shell of the Genus Xenophora from Florida 

By Paul Bartsch 
1. Xenophora longleyi, new species 2 

A Review of the Nematodes of the Genus Hastospiculum, 
with Descriptions of Two New Species 

By B. G. Chitwood 

1. Hastospiculum seiiferum, new species, and H. spinigerum 9 

2. Hastospiculum onchocercum, new species 9 

8. Species of Hastospiculum 9 

Echinoderms from the Islands of Niuafoou and Nukualofa, 
Tonga Archipelago, with the Description of a New Genus 
and Two New Species 

By Austin H. Clark 

1-3. Zenocentrotus kellersi 12 

4. Zenocentrotus kellersi and Heterocentrotus trigonarius 12 

5. Zenocentrotus kellersi, Z. paradoxus, and Echinomelra oblonga 12 

6. Zenocentrotus paradoxus and Z. kellersi 12 

7. Zenocentrotus paradoxus and Echinometra oblonga 12 

8. Heterocentrotus trigonarius 12 

Upper Cretaceous Foraminifera from Trinidad 

By Joseph A. Cushman and P. W. Jarvis 

1-16. Cretaceous foraminifera from Trinidad 60 

Recent Foraminifera from the Atlantic Coast of South 

America 

By Joseph A. Cushman and Frances L. Parker 
1-4. Recent Atlantic foraminifera from South America 24 

TX 



IC PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

A Catalogue of the Trombiculinae, or Chigger Mites, op 
THE New World, with New Genera and Species and a 
Ket to the Genera 

By H. E. Ewing 

Facing page 

1. New species of Tr ombicula Berlese 19 

2. New species of Neoschongastia Ewing 19 

3. Endotr ombicula -penetrans, new genus and species, and new species of 

Hannemania Oudemans 19 

The Birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 
By Herbert Friedmann 

1. Interior of St. Lawrence Island. Cape Kialegak 1 

2. Gambell, northwest end of St. Lawrence Island. The mountain back 

of Gambell 4 

3. Two views of the cape at Gambell 5 

4. Nest and young of raven (Corvus corax principalis) . View at GambelL 8 

5. Cormorants nesting on Punuk Island 9 

6. Eskimo netting auklets near Gambell 28 

The Ancient Caves of Szechwan Province, China 
By David Crockett Graham 

1. Fragments of a horse's head, an elephant's foot, and a horse's foot 13 

2. Fragments of a clay bottle and a bell 13 

3. Clay images of barnyard fowls 13 

4. Fragments of dog effigies 13 

5. Hand resting on lute and fish 13 

6. Figure of a man playing a flute 13 

7. 8. Heads from clay figures 13 

9. Head from the clay image of a woman 13 

10. Servant with broom and dustpan 13 

11. Fragment of a male figure with hands in sleeves 13 

12. Fragments of earthenware vessels 13 

13. Shards showing type of decoration 13 

14. Roof fragments from miniature clay houses 13 

15. Modern Chinese costumes 13 

16. Ancient Chinese cave tombs 13 

The Brachial Flexor Muscles in Primates 
By A. Brazier Howell and William L. Straus, jr. 

1. Muscles of primates 31 

J2. Muscles of primates and opossum 31 



ILLUSTRATIONS XI 

The Copepod Crustaceans op Chesapeake Bay 

By Charles Branch Wilson 

Facing page 

1 . Pontella pennaia 54 

2. Pseudodiaptomns coronatus 54 

3. Canuella elongata and Oithona brevicornis 54 

4. Robertsonia chesapeakensis and Cryptopontius gracilis 54 

5. Hemicyclops americanus and Oithona brevicornis 54 



TEXT FIGURES 

The North American Beetles of the Genus Coccinella 

By Th. Dobzhansky 

Page 

1. Male genitalia of Coccinella novemnotat a Herbst 3 

2-9. Male genitalia of the different species of Coccinella 5 

10-12. Male genitalia of Coccinella trifasciata, C. hieroglyphica, and C. un- 

decimpunclata 9 

13-20. Sipho of the different species of Coccinella 9 

21-29. Receptaculum seminis and infundibulum of the different species of 

the genus Coccinella 12 

30. Right elytron of Coccinella undecimpunctata, representing the spots 

constituting the typical pattern of the genus Coccinella 27 

The Fishes Obtained by the Pinchot South Seas Expedition op 
1929, WITH Description of One New Genus and Three New 

Species 

By Henry W. Fowler 

1. Benthosema pinchoti, new species o 

2. Coelonoius platyrhynchus (Dum^ril) 7 

3. Ophioblennius pinchoti, new species 14 

4. Giffordella corneliae, new species 15 

The Birds of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 
By Herbert Friedmann 

1. Map of the Bering Sea region, showing the location of St. Lawrence 

Island with reference to Asia and North America 2 

2. Map of St. Lawrence Island, Bering Sea 3 

The Ancient Caves of Szechwan Province, China 
By David Crockett Graham 

1. Floor plant of a six-chamber cave, carved from the stone cliffs near 

Kiating 1 

2. Plan of cave near Kiating 2 

3. Plan of double cave near Kiating 2 



XII PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. so 

Page 

4. Schematic drawing of the soiith side of a Han dynasty memorial arch 

near Yachow 3 

5. A tile roof edge forming a decorative motif frequently found in caves 

throughout Szechwan Province 4 

6. Carving on the wall of a cave-tomb near Kiating, portraying the side 

of a tile-roofed house 4 

7. Schematic drawing from a cave near Kiating, showing the type of 

half brace frequently seen in later Chinese buildings and memorial 

arches 5 

8. A simple type of ancient Chinese brace ^_ 5 

9. Carved entrance to the double cave near Kiating 5 

10. Diagram of a brace made of bricks G 

11. Brace found at each side of a cave ten li west of Kiating 6 

12. Representation of a house chiseled on the wall of a cave near Kiating. _ 7 

13. Representation of a house roof, carved on a stone pillar in a cave- 

tomb near Kiating 7 

14. Head from a small figurine 10' 

Three New Species of Polychaetous Annelids in the Collec- 
tions or THE United States National Museum 

By Aaron L. Treadwell 

1. Nereis heterocirrata, new species 2 

2. Lumbrinereis elongata, new species 3 

3. Eupomaius decorus, new species 4 

The Copepod Crustaceans of Chesapeake Bay 

By Charles Branch Wilson 

1. Chesapealie Bay biological and hydrographic stations, 1915-16 and 

1920-21 (map) .' 3 

o 



OBSERVATIONS ON THE GROWTH RATE OF THE FOOT 
IN THE MOUND BIRDS OF THE GENUS MEGAPODIUS 



By Herbert Friedmann 
Curator, Division of Birds, United States National Museum 



Among terrestrial birds the feet are generally relatively larger or 
more powerfully developed than in comparable arboreal forms, but 
there are few carinate birds with larger, more powerful feet than 
the megapodes. The uimsual development of the feet in this group 
has been assumed to be correlated with their scratching habits, 
especially in making the mounds of decaying matter or in excavat- 
ing the holes in the sand, as the case may be, in which they lay their 
eggs. Certainly few birds, even those that burrow in the ground, 
have more need of large, strong feet than the megapodes. In this 
family of birds, however, the case is somewhat different from that 
obtaining in other groups in that not only do the adults use their 
feet in digging, but the young have to dig their way up to the surface 
on hatching. In no other group of birds do the newly hatched young 
have such immediate need of strong feet. Consequently it seemed 
that a study of the feet of young and adult birds might show some- 
thing of interest in helping to understand some fragment of the 
puzzles that the life histories of the megapodes present. 

Recently the United States National Museum received a fine series 
of alcoholic specimens of Megapodius pritcJiardl collected by Lieut. 
Henry C. Kellers, United States Navy, on Niuafou Island, one of 
the Tonga group. Among these there were two chicks and one em- 
bryo nearly ready to hatch, as well as a large number of adults of 
both sexes. The embryo is remarkable in that while it is in a stage 
of development close to hatching and has the pennaceous ju venal 
plumage well developed, although still encased in sheaths like the 
trichoptiles of cuculiform birds, it has no sign of an egg tooth. Inci- 
dentally, it seems that the extent of prehatching development in 
the megapodes is not generally appreciated. Whereas in most pre- 
cocial birds, such as pheasants and ducks, the young are hatched 
fully covered with natal down, in the megapodes this plumage stage 
seems to be entirely telescoped into the period before hatching, and 

No. 2901.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80, Art. I. 

67977—31 J 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

the young birds when emerging from the egg are in the first pen- 
naceous, or juvenal, plumage. Pycraft^ has noted this, but his 
paper has been largely overlooked by ornithologists. 

The embryo has the following dimensions, in millimeters (the sizes 
of the culmen and wings are included as a scale by which to compare 
the embryo, the chicks, and the adults): Culmen, 11; wing, 74; 
tarsus, 28; first toe (without claw), 16; claw, 8; second toe, 1G.5; 
claM^, 8 ; third toe, 14.5 ; claw, 8 ; fourth toe, 11 ; claw, 7.5. 

The two chicks are alike in their dimensions (millimeters) : Cul- 
men, 11 ; wing, 82 ; tarsus, 28 ; first toe, 16 ; claw, 8.5 ; second toe, 17 ; 
claw, 8.5 ; third toe, 15 ; claw, 8.5 ; fourth toe, 11 ; claw, 8. 

Adults vary as follows (millimeters) : Culmen, 22-26 (average, 
24); wing, 178-192 (185); tarsus, 56-60 (58); first toe, 30; claw, 
18 ; second toe, 31.5 ; claw, 19 ; third toe, 30 ; ciaw, 18 ; fourth toe, 23 ; 
claw, 18.5. 

To summarize these data : The wing increases from 82 to 185 mm., 
an increase of approximately 126 per cent ; the culmen grovv's from 11 
to 24 mm., an increase of 118 per cent; the tarsus increases from 28 
to 58 mm., a growth of 107 per cent ; the first toe from 16 to 30 mm., 
an increase of 87.5 per cent; claw from 8 to 18 mm., an increase of 
125 per cent; second toe from 16.5 to 31.5 mm., an increase of 91 per 
cent; claw from 8 to 19 mm., an increase of 137.5 per cent; third 
toe from 14.6 to 30 mm., an increase of 107 per cent ; claw from 8 to 
18 mm., an increase of 125 per cent; fourth toe from 11 to 23 mm.,* an 
increase of 109 per cent ; claw from 7.5 to 18.5 mm., an increase of 
147 per cent. 

As a matter of comparison, chicks and adults of Gallus sonnerati, 
as an example of the pheasants, and of Tinamus rohustus, as a repre- 
sentative of the tiuamous (two fairly related groups), were examined, 
with the following results: In Gallus sonnerati, the culmen was 
found to increase by 56 per cent ; the wings of the young chicks being 
unfortunately in poor condition, the wing growth could not be esti- 
mated; the tarsus increased by 114 per cent; the first toe by 26 per 
cent; the second toe by 37 per cent; the third toe by 32.5 per cent; 
the fourth toe by 13 per cent; the claws by 10 to 25 per cent. In 
Tinamus rohustus again no wing data could be obtained; the culmen 
increased by 130 per cent; the tarsus by 129 per cent; the first toe 
by 95 jDer cent ; the second toe by 85 per cent ; the third toe by 85 per 
cent; the fourth toe by only 35 per cent. The claws increased by 
about 300 per cent. 

On looking over these figures we may note that the megapodes show 
a much greater postnatal development of the claws than Gallus and 
much less than Tinamus; they show a greater growth of the toes 

iProc. Fourth Internat. Ornith. Congr., p. 458, 1907. 



ART. 1 GROWTH OF THE FOOT OF MEGAPODIUS FRIEDMANN S 

generally than does Gallus and slightly more than in Tinamus; they 
show less postnatal development of the tarsus than in either of the 
latter two. To put it another way : The young megapode, on hatch- 
ing, has a rather unusually strong, well-developed tarsus, but not 
particularly large or heavily built toes or claws relative to its size as 
compared with adult birds. It has larger claws at all stages than do 
the pheasants or tinamous. The inference to be drawn from these 
few data (it is hoped they will be greatly extended by others with 
more abundant material) seems to be as follows: Adult megapodes 
are built for digging and excavating with their feet ; young ones are 
not structurally adapted to digging themselves out except in having 
the tarsus unusually large. In other words, the digging is a matter 
of the tarsus in the young, while in the adults it seems to be more a 
matter of toes and claws. The mechanical advantage is greatly in 
favor of the adults. 

This appears to be correlated with the difference in the sort of dig- 
ging the young and old birds have to do. In digging down from 
the surface the old birds can scratch and shovel away the dirt, ash, 
or sand in all directions, and in such digging large, strong toes with 
big, heavy claws are of great service. The young birds, however, 
interred in the ash, sand, or mound, have to dig their way out ; here 
the type of digging is more like an upward boring without the wide 
lateral spread possible in the adults' digging. For this type of work 
large toes with long, strong claws would be more of a hindrance than 
a help. The final conclusion to be drawn from the meager data 
available is that the premature development of the tarsus in the 
young bird up to the point of hatching is a feature that may readily 
be correlated with the peculiar breeding habits of the megapodes. 

I have dissected the legs of young and old megapodes and find 
there is no diiference in the arrangement or relative strength of the 
tendons and muscles working the toes. 

The suggestion that the manner in which the young megapode 
digs itself out is like an upward boring is substantiated indirectly 
by Ashby's notes on the Australian megapode Leipoa ocelUta? 

He writes of a newly hatched chick as follows : 

It had hatched out and alter being dried by the hot sand surrounding it, 
had scrambled up through the mound ; by the mark where it had emerged the 
course taken was ahnost perpendicular. 

Inasmuch as MegopodiiLS pritchardi is confined to the small and 
seldom visited island of Niuafou and has been collected only a few 
times, little has been recorded of it. It is one of the species that 
buries its eggs in the sand and volcanic ash and does not make laro-e 



^'Auk, vol. 46, pp. 299, 300, 1929. 



2 



PKOCEEDINGS OF THE I!TATIONAL. MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



In the fifteenth parapodium the dorsal and ventral cirri are 
relatively much smaller and more slender, and the parapodial lobe 
is heavy and blunt pointed. (Fig. 1, c.) The dorsal lobe is now 
double and the seta tuft arises between the two parts. A single 
large acicula occurs in each part of the parapodium. In parapodia 
from the posterior part of the body the dorsal half of the upper 
parapodial lobe is, relatively to the others, much larger and bears 
the slender dorsal cirrus near its apex. The ventral cirrus is small 
and inconspicuous. (Fig. 1, d.) In the first parajDodium the setae 




Figure 1. — Nereis heterocirrata, new species : o. Head, X 7.5 ; h, first 
parapodium, X 18 ; c, flf teentli parapodium, X 36 ; d, posterior 
parapodium, X 27.5 ; e, seta from first parapodium, X 250 

on the ventral part of the seta tuft have short terminal joints that 
carry long, heavy spines on the inner margins (fig. 1, e) ; those of 
the dorsal tuft have long and slender terminal joints, and these are 
finely toothed along one margin. In the posterior portions of the 
body the seta are badly broken, but so far as it is possible to tell 
both of the above varieties occur there. In addition are some with 
much more slender, noticeably " camerated " shafts, the terminal 
joints flat, elongated triangular in outline, with prominent marginal 
spines. 

Type.—U.S.l!iM. No. 19323. 



AHT. 



THREE NEW POLYCHAETOUS ANNELIDS — TEEADWELL 



LUMBRINEREIS ELONGATA, new species 

Figure 2 

In one bottle are a number of pieces of Luvibrlnereis^ one carrying 
the head and another the anal portion, and there are a number of 
other fragments. It is not possible to tell whether these all belong 
to the same individual, but they probably do, and in this case it is 
unusually long for this genus, measuring more than 300 mm. but 
with a body width of not more than 1 mm. No color appears in 
the preserved specimen. The prostomium (fig. 2, a) is sugar-loaf in 
outline, a trifle longer than wide, as long as the first three somites. 
There are two achaetous somites of which the first is a little longer 
than the second, the constriction between them being indistinct. 
Together thev are about one-third longer than the third somite. 
The first parapodia are very short, but there is a gradual increase 
in length in later ones, fu.U size be- 
ing reached at about the fiftieth 
somite. Toward the posterior end 
there is a gradual decrease in the 
width of the somites but little change 
in the size of the parapodia. Three 
blunt, conical cirri and a fragment of 
a fourth are attached to the anal 
somite. 

The para])odia have the form usual 
in this genus, with no notopodium 
and a prominent postsetal ]obe. The 
two kinds of setae characteristic of 
Lvmhrinereis are both present (fig. 
2, J). (?), the hooded form being much 
the more numerous. Tliese have a 

large subapical tooth VA'ith a series of five or six apical ones beyond it. 
Of these the largest is near the subapical, and the others decrease in 
size toward the upper part, so that at the very end it is difficult to 
determine the exact number. 

In the javv' (fig. 2, d) the forceps have a prominent carrier and a 
slender terminal portion. The left paired plate has a slender ter- 
minal tooth followed by three much heavier ones, and a basal hump 
that may be the remnant of a tooth. The second paired plate has 
two teeth, the terminal plate only one. The jaw was badly broken 
in removing and only the left side is intact, but so far as could be 
determined the plates are symmetrical on the two sides. All plates 
are dark brown. The mandible was too badly broken for description. 

Holotype.—V.^.'^M. No. 10622, from Grande Isle, La. 





FiGDEB 2. — Lumbrineieis elongata, 
new species : a. Head, X 10 ; 6, 
hooded seta, X 250 ; c, simple 
seta, X 250 ; d, part of jaw, X 45 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 80 



EUPOMATUS DKCORLfS, new species 




FiGUHE 3 

An average-sized specimen has a length of 18 mm. from the collar 
margin to the end of the pygidium and a width at the collar margin 
of 1.5 mm. The branchial filaments are about 18 on a side, their 
length in a well-expanded specimen being 3 mm. The operculum 
and its stalk are large as compared with the filaments and extend 
considerably beyond them. In the 11 specimens in the collection, 5 
have the operculum on the left side with a small and inconspicuous 
pseudoperculum on the right. In five others these relations are 
reversed, and in one there is a fully developed operculum on either 

side. The radioles are very short at the 
base of the branchia but soon become 
longer and at the end have a length foui' 
times the diameter of the branchia. 
There is a smooth tip, as long as the 
longest radiole, at the end of each 
branchia. The operculum stalk broadens 
into a funnel, which carries approxi- 
mately 40 teeth on its margin. The ter- 
minal hooks on the operculum are 12 in 
number, long, slender, and gently curv- 
ing to very sharp points. 

The branchia arise from a conmion 
base, which is about as high as the collar. 
The collar has four lobes, the doi'sal 
ones at their dorsal ends overlapping the 
bases of the opercular stalks and sepa- 
rated from one another by a considerable 
space. A deep depression on each side 
separates the dorsal from the ventral 
lobe of the collar, the two latter ones 
overlapping on the ventral surface and 
extending farther over the bases of the gills than do the dorsal. 
The fii-st seta tuft lies in the dorsal collar lobe. 

In preserved material the general body color is pale straw, marked 
as follows with dark-brown pigment : A median stripe in each ter- 
minal tooth of the opercular margin ; a narrow band on each side of 
the opercular spine, in some cases spread more diffusely over the base 
of the spine ; a heavy band on the ventral surface, covering each torus 
of the last six thoracic somites; and a very much narrower band on 
the ventral margin of each abdominal somite, marking the region of 
the torus with a minute but still prominent spot at the location of 
the seta tuft. 



/ 



ic 



b 

Figure 3. — Evpomatus decorus, 
new species : a. Dorsal abdom- 
inal seta, X 250 ; h, stout seta 
from first bundle, X 165 ; c, dor- 
sal tlioracic seta, X 250 ; d, 
uncinus. X 250 



ABT. 2 THREE NEW POLYCHAETOUS ANNELIDS TEEADWELL 5 

At the dorsal end of the setal row in abdominal somites is i tiitt 
of setae, as shown in Figure 3, a. Each has a heavy stalk, the inner 
end terminating bluntly, the outer end asymmetrically widened and 
concavo-convex in form, its margin denticulated. Fine lines extend 
down over the stalk from these denticulations. The first seta tuft 
(which lies in the dorsal collar lobe) contains two rows of setae with 
six or seven in a row. The first are slender, long, and sharp pointed 
and lie across the others at an angle of about 45°. The basal part of 
the second kind is much heavier, having four or five times the 
diameter of the slender ones. Near the apex their stalk divider into 
three spines, one of which is long, slender, and sharp-pointed, the 
other two short and conical. (Fig. 3, h.) In the rest of the thoracic 
somites the dorsal setae are moderately stout, curved, and sharp- 
pointed and have a fin along the convex margin. (Fig. 3, o.) The 
uncini are similar throughout the body, each (fig. 3, d) having a 
rounded base and six teeth, which decrease gradually in size from the 
basal to the terminal of the series. 

A fragment of the limestone tube remains attached to the hoLotype. 
This is heavy and has marked longitudinal ridges. 

Hoioiype—JJ.S.l^M. No. 19621, collected at Grand Isle, La 



0. f . •STHimeHT raiiTiia atrtcti tMi 



EECENT FORAMINIFEEA FROM THE ATLANTIC COAST 

OF SOUTH AMERICA 



By Joseph A. Cushman and Frances L. Parker 

Ciishman Laboratory for Foraminiferal Research, Sharon, Mass. 



This is the third of a series of papers on the recent foraminifera 
from the collections made by Dr. Waldo L. Schmitt, of the United 
States National Museum, on his trip about South America under the 
auspices of the Walter Rathbone Bacon scholarship of the Smith- 
sonian Institution. Those from Juan Fernandez have already been 
studied and the results published,^ as well as those from the west 
coast of South America.^ 

D'Orbigny's memoir on the foraminifera of his voyage around 
South America, published in 1839, contained figures and descrip- 
tions of many new species that have not been recorded or referred 
to since that date. Very little has been added to the knowledge of 
the foraminiferal fauna of the South American coast, including the 
Falkland Islands. The Challenge?' occupied a few stations along the 
eastern coast of South America, but mostly in the offshore waters. 
The paper by Brady, Parker, and Jones on the foraminifera of the 
Abrohlos Bank, together with the records given by Pearcey, furnished 
most of the few additional records from the region. Flint studied 
a very few of the Alhatross collections made on the trip around South 
America, and Heron-Allen and Earland are now publishing papers 
on the fauna of the Falkland Islands collected by the Discovery 
Expedition. 

The relations of the fauna are interesting. Our stations from off 
Brazil, especially the harbor of Rio de Janeiro, show that the fauna 
at that point is essentially a West Indian one, and most of the 
species are to be found in d'Orbigny's work of 1839 on the West 
Indies, or in more recent works on the fauna of the same region. The 
stations to the south along the coast of Argentina and the shallow 
water of the Falklands give a cold-water fauna, which is not closely 

' Cushman and Wickendon, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 9, 1929. 
2 Cushman and Kellett, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 75, art. 25, 1929. 



No. 2903.— Proceedings U. S. National Museum, Vol. 80. Art. 3 

68198—31 1 1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol.80 

related to that of Brazil, but which has numerous species recorded 
by d'Orbigny in 1839 from this same region, and others evidently 
extending around Cape Horn. These are identical with species de- 
scribed by d'Orbigny from the west coast. The faunas of the two 
sides of South America are, however, for the most part quite different. 
In order to avoid repetition, reference is given to the various parts 
of United States National Museum Bulletin 104 on the Atlantic 
foraminifera, where complete description and synonymy of the vari- 
ous species will be found. Nearly all the species are already known 
from earlier works, but three of the forms are here described as new. 
In order that workers may have a visual record of the forms of this 
region, nearly all the species are illustrated. Most of those not fig- 
ured here, such as the species of Elfhidium^ are already figured in 
Bulletin 104, some of them from this same material. The figures 
are from drawings made by Miss Margaret S. Moore. The data for 
the stations represented are as follows : 

Station 1. Ilha Paqueta, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 17, 1925; tidal 
flats. 
2. Nictheroy, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 22, 1925. 
8. Off Ilha Govenador, Rio de Janeiro Harbor, Brazil, August 2, 1925; 
boat dredge, 3 fathoms, muddy, shelly bottom. 
SO. Port Stanley, Falklands, February 23, 1927; boat dredge, 1 to 2 

fathoms, mud and broken shell bottom. 
85. Below Port Darwin, Choisel Sound, Falklands, March 2, 1927; bot- 
tom sampler, 4 fathoms. 
87. Ofe lower jetty. Port Howard, Falklands, March 4, 1927; bottom 

sampler, 4 fathoms. 
95. Narrows between Port Stanley and Port William, Falklands, March 

20, 1927; bottom sampler, 3 to 4 fathoms, sandy bottom. 
97. Port William, Falklands, March 20, 1927; oyster dredge, 8 to 10 

fathoms, weedy bottom. 
105. Off light, north shore Port William, Falklands, April 9, 1927, oyster 
dredge, 14 to 15 fathoms, weedy, shelly bottom. 

123. Anchorage, St. Julian, Argentina, May 6, 1927; bottom sampler. 

124. Anchorage, Puerto Deseado, Argentina, May 7, 1927 ; bottom sampler. 

Family SACCAMMINIDAE 
Genus PROTEONINA Williamson, 1858 

PROTEONINA DIFFLUGIFORMIS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 1, Figure 1 

Proteonina difflugiformis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 48, 1918. 

The specimens of this species are very common at station 85 only, 
in 4 fathoms, Choisel Sound, Falklands. They are typical, however, 
and one of them is here figured. 



ABT. 3 SOUTH AMERICAN FOEAMINIFERA CUSHMAN AND PARKER 3 

Family AMMODISCIDAE 
Genus GLOMOSPIRA Rzehak, 1888 

GLOMOSPIRA GORDIALIS (Jones and Parker) 
Plate 1, Fiqukb 2 
Glomospira gordialis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 99, 1918. 
This species is common only about the Falkland Islands in our 
material and was not found at any of the stations along the eastern 
coast of South America. It is subject to the usual variations, espe- 
cially in the plane of coiling of the chambers. 

Genus TOLYPAMMINA Rhumbler, 1895 

TOLYPAMMINA VAGANS (H. B. Brady) 

Plate 1, Figure 3 
Tolypammina vagans Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 1, p. 91, 1918. 
There are a few specimens in the shallow water from the Falkland 
region, but the species does not occur at any of the stations to the 
north. 

Family LITUOLIDAE 

Genus HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES Cushman, 1910 

HAPLOPHRAGMOIDES CANARIENSIS (d'Orbigny) 

Plate 1, Figubes 4 a, & 

Haplophragmoides canariensis Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 2, p. 38, 
1920. 

At some of the stations about the Falklands this species is very 

common and seems to be typical of the species as figured by 

d'Orbigny. It is much closer to his type figures than are many of 

the later figures given by other authors and referred to his species. 

Family MILIOLIDAE 
Genus QUINQUELOCULINA d'Orbigny, 1826 

QUINQUELOCULINA FUSCA H. B. Brady 

Piath 1, Figures 9 a-c 

QuinquelocuUna fusca Cushman, U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 104, pt. 6, p. 23, 1929. 

It might be supposed that this arenaceous species would be most 
abundant in the cold water toward the south, but the only specimens 
of arenaceous Miliolidae found belong to this species, which occurs 
only at station 1, in Rio de Janeiro Harbor. None of the other are- 
naceous species so common in the West Indian region occurs here, so 
far as our material shows. 