%:zi^MAjjx-~^-'^ "^^ 




'^eipavivneni of the 5^nfcrior 

U. S. NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

25 



PROCEEDINGS 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



^ol. III. 

1880. 



PUBLISHED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION. 



WASHIi^GTO]:^: 

aoVEENMENT PRINTING OFPICE. 

1881. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. 



Page. 
Beau, Tarlcton H. Description of a New Hake (Phyeig Earlii), from South Carolina, 

and a Xote on the Occarrence of Phycis regiits in North Carolina C9 

Check-List of Duplicates of North American Fishes distributed by the Smithsonian 

Institution in behalf of the United States National Museum, 18"7-'80 75 

C'attie. S. TH. On the Genitalia of Male Eels and their Sexual Characters - 280 

Endlich, Fred. M. List of Species and Varieties of Minerals in the National Museum of 

the United States in 1879 333 

Oarinan, Samuel. Synopsis and Descriptions of the American Bhinobatidce 516 

Oilbert, Charles H. (See under Jordan and Gilbert.) 

Oill. Theodore. On the Identity of the Genus Leurynnis Lockington, with Lycodopsis 

Collett •247' 

Ooode, Cr. Brown. Descriptions of Seven New Species of Fishes from Deep Soundings on 

the Southern New England Coast, with Diagnoses of Two Undescribed Genera of Flounders 

and a Genus related to Merlucius 337 

Fishes from the Deep Water on the South Coast of New England obtained by the United 

States Fish Commission in the Summer of 1880 467 

The Frigate Mackerel (Awxi's i?ocAei) on the NewEngland Coast 532 

Xofacanthus phagganorus, a New Species of i\rota<;a7i«fttdflB from the Grand Banks of New- 
foundland 535 

Hay, O. P. On a Collection of IHshes from Eastern Mississippi 488 

Heilprin, Angelo. On Some New Species of Eocene MoUusca from the Sonthem United 

States 149 

Jordan, Darid S. Notes on a Collection of Fishes from East Florida, obtained by Dr. J. 

A. Henshall 17 

Notes on a Collection of Fishes from Saint John's River, Florida, obtained by Mr. A. H. 

Curtiss 22 

Note on a Forgotten Paper of Dr. Ayres, and its Bearing on the Nomenclatqre of the 

Cy prinoid Fishes of the San Francisco Markets 325 

Note on " Sema" and '' Dacentrus'''' 327 

Description of a New Species of Caranx (Caranx beani), from Beaufort, North Caro- 
lina 486 

Jordan, Darid S., and Gilbert, Charles H. Notes on a Collection of Fishes from 

San Diego, (,'alifomia 23 

Description of a New Flounder (Xystreurys liolepis), from Santa CataJina island, Cali- 
fornia 34 

Description of a New Kay (Platyrhina triseriata), from the Coast of California 36 

Description of a New Species of "Eock Cod" (Sebastichthys serriceps), iioia the Coast 

of California 38' 

On the Occurrence of Cephaloscyllium laticeps (Dumeril) Gill on the Coast of Califor- 
nia 40 

On the Oil Shark of Southern California ( Galeorhinus galeus) 42 

Description of a New Flounder (Pleuronichthys verticalis), from the Coast of California, 

with Notes on Other Species 49 

Notes on Sharks from the Coast of California 51 

On the Generic Kelations of Platyrhina exasperata 53 

Description of a New Species of Sebastichthys (Sebastichthys miniatus), from Monterey 

Bay, California 70 

Description of a New Species of "Kock-fish" {Sebastichthys camatus), from the Coast 

of California 73 

Description of a New Species of Kay (Raia stellulata), from Monterey, California 138 

Description of New Species of Xiphister and Apodichthys, from Monterey, California. .. 135 

Description of Two New Species of Sebastichthys (Sebastichthys entomelas and Sebastich- 
thys rhodochloris). from Monterey Bay, California 142 

Description of a New Agonoid Fish (Brachiopsis xyostemus), from Monterey Bay, 

California 152 

Description of a New Flounder (Hippoglossoides exilis), from the Coast of California. .. 154 

III 



IV TABLE OF CONTENTS. 

Page. 
JTordaii, David S., and Oilbcrt, Charles H. Description of a New Species of Ray 

{Eaia rhina) from the Coast of California 251 

Description of Two New Species of Fishes (Ascelichthys rhodorus and Seytalina cerdale) 

from Neah J5ay, Washington Territory 264 

Description of Two New Species of Scopeloid Fishes {Sudis ringens and Myctophum 

crenulare), from Santa Barbara Channel, California 273 

Description of Two New Species of Flounders {Parophrys ischyurus and Hippoglos- 



soides elassodon), from Puget Sound 276 

— Description of Seven New Species of Scbastoid Fishes, from the Coast of California ... 287 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid (Abeona aurora), from Monterey, California, with 
Notes on a Related Species 299 

— Description of a New Flounder (Platysomatichthys stomias), from the Coast of Califor- 
nia 301 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid Fish (Cymatogaster rosaceus), from the Coast of Cali- 
fornia 303 

— Description of a New Species of Deep-Water Fish {Icichthys Lockingtoni), from the Coast 

of California 305 

— Description of a New Embiotocoid Fish (Ditremaatripes), from the Coast of California.. 320 

— Description of a New Scorpaenoid Fish {Sebastichthys maliger), from the Coast of Cali- 
fornia 322 

— Description of a New Scorpaenoid Fish (Sebastichthys proriger), from Monterey Bay, 
California 327 

— Description of a New Agonoid (Agonus vulsus), from the Coast of California 330 

— Description of a New Species of Heinirhamphus (Remirhamphus rosce), from the Coast 

of California 335 

— Description of a New Species of Notidanoid Shark (Hexanchus corinus), from the Pacific 
Coast of the United States 352 

— Description of a New Species of Nemichthys (Nemichthys avocetta), from Puget Sound. . . 409 

— Description of a New Species of Paralepis {Paralepis coruscans), from the Straits of 



Juan do Fuca 411 

List of the Fishes of the Pacilic Coast of the United States, with a Table showing the 

Distribution of the Species 452 

On the Generic Relations of Belone exilis Girard 459 

Notes on a Collection of Fishes from Utah Lake 459 

Descri^ition of a New Species of Rock-fish {Sebastichthys chrysomelas), from the Coast 

of California 465 

lia^vrencc. Oeorgc IV. Description of a New Species of Bird of the Family Turdidce, from 

the Island of Dominica, W. I 16 

Description of a New Species of Parrot of the Genus Chrysotis, from the Island of Do- 
minica 254 

Description of a New Species of Icterus, from the West Indies 351 

liOckingtou, W. Bf. Remarks on the Species of the Genus Ghirus found in San Francisco 

Market, including one hitherto undescribed 53 

Description of a New Fish from Alaska ( Uranidea microstoma) 58 

Description of a New Species of Agonidce (Brachyopsis verrucosus), from the Coast of 

California ^ 60 

Description of a New Genus and Some New Species of California Fishes (Icosteus cenig- 

mnticus and Osmerus attenuatiis) 63 

Description of a New Chiroid Fish (Myriolepis zonifer), from Monterey Bay, California. . 248 

Description of a New Sparoid Fish {Sparus hrachysomus), from Lower California 284 

Note on a New Flat-fish (Lepidopsetta isnlepis), found in the Markets of San Fi-ancisco. . 325 

Descriiition of a New Species of Prionotus (Prionotus stephanophrys), from the Coast of 

California 529 

Katiibuii, Richard. The Littoral Marine Fauna of Provincetown, Cape Cod, Massachu- 

^'tts 116 

.'^Ldi"r"""Ti P")!"*-* Revisions of Nomenclature of Certain North American Birds 1 

A Catiilogue of the Birds of North America 163 

Catalogue of Trochilidw in the Collection of the United States National Museum 308 

R ydfr, John A, On Camaraphysema, a New Type of Sponge 269 

List of the North American Species of MjTiapods belonging to the Family of the Lysio- 

petalidcn, with a Description of a Blind Form from Luray Cave, Virginia 524 

atmith, RoMa. On the Occurrence of a Species of Cremnobates at San Diego, California 147 

>««niitli, !«»• I. Preliminary Notice of the Crustacea dredged in 64 to 325 fathoms oif the 

Soutli Coast of New England, by the United States Fish Commission, in 1880 413 



TABLE OF CONTENTS. V 

Page. 
!<( wau, James* O. The Surf Smelt of the Northwest Coast, aud the Method of Taking Them 

by the Quillehute Indians, West Coast of "Washington Territory 43 

The Eiilaehon or Candle-fish of the Northwest Coast 257 

Vcrrill, A. E. Notice of Recent Additions to the Miirine Invertehrata of the Northeast- 
ern Coast of America, with Descriptions of New Genera and Species and Critical Kemarks 

on Others 

Part II. — MoUusca, with Notes on Annelida, Echinodermata, etc., collected hy the United 

States Fish Commission 356 

Part III. — Catalogue of Mollusca recently added to the Fauna of Southern New England 405 

T^hitc, C. A. Note on the Occurrence of ProdMCttt* jrt^ra/iteus in California 46 

Note on Aerothele 47 

Description of a New Cretaceous Pinna from New Mexico 47 

Note on the Occurrence of Strieklandia Salter i and S. Davidsoni in Georgia 48 

Description of a very large Fossil Gasteropod, from the State of Puebla, Mexico 140 

Descriptions of New Invertebrate Fossils from the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Bocks of 

Arkansas, "Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah 157 



PROCEEDINGS 

OF THE 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

1880. 



REVISDOIVS OF IVOMEIVCIiATURE OF CERTAIIV NORTH AMERICAN 

BIR0S. 

By ROBERT RIDGTTAY. 

The following emendations of nomenclature apply both to species 
enumerated in the latest published list of Xorth American birds — 
Coues's " Check List,"* and others not contained therein. These two 
series are therefore included in separate categories, the former having,, 
for convenience of reference, the corresponding number of the " Check. 
List " prefixed to each name. 

It is deemed inexpedient to give here a list of the species to be addedl 
to the Smithsonian Catalogue of 1859,t for the reason that they are suffi- 
ciently distinguished by the absence of the concordant number following, 
each name, in the revised list following this paper. 

a. Species given in Coues's Check List, 

4 h. Tardus AONALASCiiKAE, X Gmel. — In my report on the ornithology- 
of the fortieth parallel expedition I used the name " guttata, Pallas," 
as the earliest name certainly applicable to this species; but I now 
believe that Gmelin's name, Turdiis aonalasclilme, based upon, the 
Unalascha Thrush of Pennant (Arctic Zoology, II, p. 338) and Aoona- 
lashlca Thrush of Latham (Synopsis, II, i, p. 23), is the one which should, 
be used. As in the case of 21uscicapa guttata, Pall., there can be no 
doubt whatever that the western Dwarf Thrush {Tardus nanus, Auct., 
neo And.!) is the very species which these authors described under the 
above names. Turdus aonalaschhae being, therefore, the i^roper name- 
for the Hermit Thrushes collectively, the Middle and Eastern Province 
forms should be called, respectively, T. aonalaschlcae auduboni and T. 
aonalaschJcae pallasL With regard to the last, it is very evident that 

* A Check List of North American Birds. By Elliot Cones. Salem. Naturalists' 
Agency. 1873. 8vo, pp. 137. (635 species.) 

t Catalogue of North American Birds contained chiefly in the Mnsenm of the Smith- 
sonian Institution. By Spencer F. Baird. [First octavo edition.] "Washington: 
Smithsonian Institution. 1859. [ "Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections,.103.." Not 
paged; 738 species, including varieties, all consecutively numbered.] 

t Small capitals indicate the name which is changed or emended. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 1 March S7, 1880. 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Turdus nanus, Aud., was based upon a small specimeu of the eastern 
Hermit Thrush, since Audubon distinctly says so in his account of the 
supposed sijecies. The name nanus antedates 2)aU as i ; but the latter 
having been used, in a restricted sense, exclusively for the eastern race, 
while nanus has been almost wholly applied, of late years, to the small 
west-coast form now to be called T. aonalaschJcae, it seems best to discard 
the name w«w?^s altogether and adopt for the eastern birds that of pallasi, 
as next in order of date. 

61. Helon^a sicainsoni, And. — According to Agassiz, the correct 
orthography of the generic name of this f.pecies (if to be separated 
from Hehnitlierus) is Hcloncea and not " ReUnaia,''^ as spelled by 
Audubon. {Cf. Xewton, P. Z. S., 1879, p. 552.) 

144 a. Leucosticte griseinucha (Brandt) Bj^. — The present indignations 
are that this form does not intergTade with L. fephrocotis, but, on the 
contrary, is a well-defined species of very constant characters confined 
strictly to that portion of the Alaskan coast west of the one hundred and 
thirty-fifth degree of west longitude. 

14Ga. jE(jiotluis Unaria, " var. fuscescens.^'' — ^No examples referable to 
the so-called fuscescens having ever been taken in winter, while the 
particular stage originally so named is represented by birds in highly 
intensified midsummer dress from various portions of subarctic America 
(the interior of the continent and coast of Alaska, as well as Labrador), 
the inference is natural that ^'- fuscescens''^ represents simply the mid- 
summer i^lumage of the common species. {Cf. Cones, Birds of the 
Northwest, 1874, p. 115.) 

14G&. ^(fiotlms CANESCENS exiUpcs (Coues) Eidgw. — There is every 
probability that ^. canescens is a quite distinct species, since it occurs 
in almost every district inhabited by ^. linaria (especially in the Kearc- 
tic Eegion), and cannot therefore be a geographical race of the same 
species. yE. canescens and JE. linaria JiolbolU are the large boreal races 
breeding in Greenland; JE. canescens exilipes and ^. linaria j)roj)er are 
the smaller continental forms. 

159 «. Passerculus anthinus, Bp. — This seems to be quite distinct 
from P. sandwichensis, and probably more nearly relate! to — 

IGOrf. Passerculus GUTTATUS, Lawr., which proves to be very distinct 
from P. rostratus. 

165 a (Appendix). Ammodronius nigrescens, Kidgw. — As has already 
been insisted by Mr. Maynard (see Am. Sportsman, V. Jan. 16, 1875, 
p. 248), this bird is very probably distinct specifically from A. maritimus. 

169. Melospiza fasciata (Gm.) Scott. — ^We can see no valid reason 
why Gmelin's name for this species should not be used instead of Wil- 
son's, bestowed upon it nearly a quarter of a century later. {Gf. Scott, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 6 

Am. Kat., 187G, p. 17.) The recognizable forms of this species slioiild 
therefore be known as (169 «) M. fasciata falJax, {Wdh) M. fasciata 
guttata, (109 c) M. fasciata rufina, (1096?) j\I. fasciata heermanni, and 
(lG9e) If. FASCIATA SA3IUELIS {samuelis antedating gouldii). 

1G9/. Melospiza cinerea (Gm.)Eidgw. — Throngh the explorations of 
Messrs. Dall, Turner, and Nelson, the fauna of Unalashka has of late 
years been very thoroughly investigated, and we are thus able to iden- 
tify the "Cinereous Finch" of Pennant (Arct. Zoology, II, p. C8) upon 
which Gmeliu based his FringiUa cinerea (S. N., I, ii, p. 922) with the 
species which Professor Baird afterward named Melospiza insigiiis (Trans. 
Chicago Acad., I, 1, p. 319, pi. 29, fig. 2). Throngh the same means it 
becomes equally certain that the Oonalaslca Bunting of Pennant and 
Latham {Emheriza tmalasclicensis, Gm., S. N., I, ii, j). 875) is, as some 
authors have long maintained, the bird usually called Passerella toini- 
sendi (Aud.). The known forms of Passerella having been proven by Mr. 
Henshaw to intergrade, and therefore, to constitute mere geographical 
races of a single species, they should be known by the following names : — 

188. P. iliaca (Merrem) Sw. 

t'189"«. P. iliaca unalaschcensis (Gm.) Eidgw. 

189a. P. iliaca scMstacea (Baird) Hensh. 

. P. ILIACA megarhyncha (Baird) Hensh. — 

the latter — connecting unalaschcensis with scMstacea, but peculiar in 
the extremely robust bill and other characters — not being given in the 
"Check List!" 

170a (Appendix). Peiicaia arizonce, Eidgw. — There is very strong prob- 
ability of this being quite distinct, specifically, from P. wstivalis. (See 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, 1878, p. 127, foot-note.) 

177. Spizella MONTANA (Forst.) Eidgw. — Forster's name of montana 
applied to this species in 1772 antedates Gmelin's name moniicola (1788), 
and, there being no objection to it otherwise, should be substituted for it. 

180 a. Spizella breweri, Cass. — Thus f;ir there appears not the slight- 
est evidence that this bird should be referred to ^S". pallida. The respective 
habitats of the two overlap quite considerably, and they may always be 
easily distinguished by the markings of the head. 

191. Spiza amcricana (Gm.) Bp. — In 1858 Professor Baird rejected 
the generic name Spiza for this species, for the reason that, although it 
"was first used in connection with Umberiza americana," it was "so 
mixed up with types of several other modern genera as to render it 
uncertain whether to apply it to one rather than to another " — at the same 
time remarking that "if Spiza pointed more unmistakably to the U. 
americana it might, perhaps, be necessary to adopt it." (" Birds N. Am.," 
p. 491.) Upon referring to the " Specchio Comparativo," where Bona- 
parte next, after its institution, mentions his genus Spiza, I find, in the 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

foot-note on p. 47, that lie distinctly names E. americana as the type of the 
genus ("Reconoscemmo inoltre, che quest' uccello [E. melanocepJiala] e il 
perfetto analogo della FringUla americana tipo di quel Sottogenee"). 
Four years later, however, Bonaparte proposed the name Euspiza for 
the same type ("Sag-gio," p. 141), but according to recognized rules this 
later name becomes simply a synonym of S2nza, as does also Cabauis's 
name Euspina, the latter substitued for Euspiza (Mus. Hein., I, p. 133), 
under the misapprehension that the type of the latter was the Em- 
heriza melanocepJiala of Scopoli (see M. H., p. 130) — a species not only 
generically distinct from E. americana, Gmel., but moreover hardly a 
member of the same subfamily. 

201. Plionipara zena (Linn.) Bryant. — ^'■Fringilla hicolor,''^ Linn., S, N., 
ed. 12 (17GG)=i^. zena, Linn., S. K, ed. 10 (1758). 

20G. Pipilo fusciis mesoleucus (Baird) B. B. & R. — The Arizona 
form of this species is very easily distinguishable from the true fuscus 
of Mexico, the latter being without the rufous cap of mesoleucus, the 
colors in general darker, etc. 

212 &. Agelwus tricolor (Nutt.) Bp. — Totally distinct from A.phoeni- 

ceus. 

233. Pica rustica hudsonica (Sab.) Baird. — The earliest available 
name for the European Magpie appears to be Corvus rusticus, Scopoli 
(1709), which considerably antedates ^'- melanoleuca, Vieill." (1818), and 
is now adopted by European authorities. ( Cf. Dresser, Birds of Europe, 
pt. xxii.) The American bird, therefore, if to be separated subspeci- 
fically from the European (for which there certainly seems sufficient 
reason), should be named as above. 

239 a (Appendix). Perisoreus ohscurus, Eidgw. — Since the original des- 
cription of this bird was i^ublished Mr. Henshaw has obtained addi- 
tional specimens, and, by an examination of them, together with the 
types, has adopted Mr. Sharpe's conclusion (Cat. B. Brit. Mus., Ill, p. 
105) that the form in question is a distinct species, an opinion in which 
I at present wholly agree. Not so, however, with eapitalis, Baird, which 
Mr. Sharpe treats in the same manner; the latter unquestionably grades 
directly into P. canadensis, and consequently, notwithstanding it is a 
very strongly marked form, should be called P. canadensis eapitalis. 

The Perisoreus ohscurus is of much more restricted range than was at 
first supposed, and probably does not extend much, if any, north of 
Sitka. The examples alluded to in Hist. K Am. B. (Vol. II, p. 302), 
as coming from "north of Sitka and in the Yukon territory," and which 
were stated to "incline toward the var. canadensis, '^^ are in reality refer- 
able to P. canadensis, of which they constitute a separable race, distin- 
guished by the less extent and dingy or smoky tinge of the frontal 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 5 

white patch and generally darker colors. This new race may be char- 
acterized as follows : 

Perisoreus canadensis fumifrons, Eidgw. 

Cii. — Similar to canadensis proper, but colors darker and more dingy throughout, 
and the white of the forehead obscured, or even sometimes almost wholly obliterated, 
by a wash of smoky gray or brown. 

Hub. — Coast of Alaska. 

265. Caprimulgus vociferus, Wils. — I can see no reason whatever 
for removing this bird from the genus CaprimuJgns. The type of 
'■'■ Ayitrostomus'''' is the C. caroUnensis, Gmel., which differs from all the 
other Caprimulgi (so far as I am aware) in possessing fine lateral fila- 
ments to the rictal bristles, so that, in case this character be deemed 
sufficient, the genus Anirostomus may stand, if restricted to the single 
species possessing this feature. {Cf. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, pp.142, 
143, pis. i, ii.) 

266. Phal.enoptilus nuttalU (And.) Eidgw. — This species is de- 
cidedly i^eculiar in the combination of its salient jioints of structure, 
having a lengthened, naked tarsus, like Xyctidromus, a character- 
istically velvety plumage, short, even tail, and unique wing- formula; 
features which, taken together, render it a very well-marked genus, 
which may be characterized as follows : — 

PhaLzENOPTILUS, gen. nov. 

Cu. — Differing from Caprimnlgtts and " Antrosiomus" in the short, even tail (much 
shorter than the wing), and lengthened, perfectly naked tarsus (longer than the mid- 
dle toe), the first quill shorter than the fourth, and the plumage with a peculiar, 
velvety, moth-like surface. 

Type, CaprimuJgus tiuttalli, Aud. 

As stated on images 142, 143, Proceedings of the United States National 
Museum, Vol. I (1878), the characters supposed to separate the Amer- 
ican Antrostomi from the Old World species of Ccqmmulgus, particularly 
the type of the latter genus (C. europams, L.), are wholly intangible, 
with the exception of A. caroUnensis, which has minute lateral filaments 
to the rictal bristles, these being in all other species perfectly smooth, 
or simple. On the other hand, the Caprimulgus nuttalU of Audubon 
has so many decided peculiarities of structure that it is somewhat a 
matter of surprise that its place in the genus '■'■Antrostomus^'' has not 
been questioned ere this. In fact, P. nuttalU is quite as distinct in its 
external structure from " J.." vociferus and its allies as is the Nyctidro- 
mus albicollis. The more prominent differences of structure in these 
forms may readily be seen by comparison of the birds themselves, or by 
examination of the outline drawings of i^lates I and II of the volume 
of the "Proceedings" referred to above. 

268. Chordeiles acutipennis texensis (Lawr.) B. B. & E. — The Chor- 
deiles texensis of Lawrence is merely a slightly different northern form 



6 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

of C. acuHpenms (Bodd.) Cass., of South America. (See Sclater, P. Z. S. 
18GG, p. 134, and Hist. :N^. Am. B., II, pp. 400, 407.) 

2G7. Cliordeiies popetue (Vieill.) Baird. — Brisson's name virginianus 
was not restricted to this species until many years after the institu- 
tion of Yieillot's name iiopetue ; the Litter, therefore, notwithstanding 
its barbarous character, is, by all the rules, entitled to retention. 

269. Cypselus saxatiUs {Woodh.) Ridgw. — This species agrees so very 
closely in details of structure with C. melba, Linn., that there seems to be 
no good reason for separating it genericaly from the genus Cypsclm, 
unless C. melba also is removed to another genus. The type of Pamjp- 
tila being the Cypselus cayannensiSj Gmel., the elimination of C. saxaiilis 
does not, of course, affect the validity of the latter genus, as properly 
restricted; still, there is not much more difference of form between 
^^ Fanyptila^^ cayennensis and C. saxaUUs than between (7. melba and G. 
apus^ the latter being the type of Cypselus. C. apus has the feet much 
weaker and the tarsus much more densely feathered than C. melba; 
G. saxaUlis is nearly intermediate in this resx)ect, though coming much 
nearer to C. melba. 

273. Basilinna xantusl (Lawr.) Elliot. — See Elliot's "Synopsis of 
the Trochilidce* ", p. 227. 

284. Trogon A^iBiGUUS, Gould. — The species described in ''Birds of 
North America," and figured in the atlas to that work, is the present 
one, and not T. mexicanus. The latter is chiefly distinguished by the 
absence of white bars on the tail-feathers, which are uniform black un- 
derneath, except the broad white tip. 

295. Xenopious albolarvatus (Cass.) Bd. — In addition to the very 
tangible external characters x>ointed out by Professor Baird in his char- 
acterization of a subgenus Xenopicus (B. N". Am., x^. 83), may be men- 
tioned the fact that the tongue is scarcely extensile, its tii), when fully 
X^rotruded, reaching only % of an inch beyond the t\\) of the bill, or just 
the same as in Sphyropicus thyroideus, while in Plcus mllosus liarrisi the 
X^rotrusion amounts to 2} inches, or If inches more! (See Orn. 40th 
Parallel, x^p. 546, 548, and 552, under lists of sx)ecimens of the above 
species.) 

301. Ficoides tridactylU'S americamis (Brehm) B. B. & E. — As 
X^ointed out in "History of Korth American Birds" (Vol. II, pp. 529- 
534), the differences between the American and Eurox^ean white-backed 
species of this genus are very slight, and by no means sufficient to warrant 
sx^ecific sex^aration. The common form should therefore be known as 
above, and the Rocky Mountain race, if deemed sufficiently distinct, as — 

* A Classification and Synopsis of tlie TrocbilidiE. By Daniel Giraud Elliot, F. R. 
S. E., etc. Washington City: Published by tbe Smithsonian Institution [''Smith- 
sonian Contributions to Knowledge," No. 317.] [March, 1879.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 7 

301a. Picoldes tridactylits dorsalis (Baird) B. B. & R. 

314. Colaptes auratus mexicanus (Sw.). 

The above combination becomes absolutely necessary in view of the 
indisputable and wholesale iutergradation of the auratus mid 7nexicanus 
types of this species. In the present case is afforded an excellent ex- 
ample of the difficulties in the way of consistent nomenclature, whether 
binomial or trinomial. 

31G. AJ.VCO flammeus pratincola (Bonap.) Eidgw. — Professor New- 
ton has, we think, clearly demonstrated* that the proper type of the Lin- 
n?ean genus Strix is not S. Jlammca, but S. stridiila, subsequently made 
the type of Savigny's genus Syrnium ; and that Aluco, Fleming (1828), 
should stand as the generic name of the Barn Owls. Audubon's name, 
'■'■ americana''^ (1839), for the American Barn Owl is antedated by^ra^ 
incola, Bonap. (1838), which should, in consequence, stand as the sub- 
specific name for this form. 

318 &. Sco2)s asio maccalli (Cass.) Cones. — In the "Proceedings of 
the U. S. Xat. Mus." for 1878 (Vol. I, pp. 109-111), I formally referred the 
'"'' Scops asio var. enano^^ of Lawrence to 8. maccalli, Cassin, and in a 
foot-note on p. Ill refer Mr. Sennett's specimens to the latter. This fact, 
however, seems to have been overlooked by both Dr. Cones and Mr. 
Sennett, who, in their last pai)er, continue to caU the variet^^ "/S. asio 
enano.''^ 

320. Asio wilsoniamis (Less.). — Brisson's genus Asio appears to be un- 
questionably that which should be applied to the long-eared owls, and 
has long since been adopted by some authorities. Admitting that the 
short-eared species [Strix accipitrinaj Pall.) cannot be sei)arated generi- 
cally, it would have to be called — 

321. Asio accipitrinus (Pall.) Newton. 

323. Strix nebulosa, Forst. — Professor Newton's very correct conclu- 
sion that the proper type of the Linnnean genus Strix is the S. stridula, 
necessitates the above change in the generic name of this American 
congener of that species. 

The Floridan birds of S. nebulosa I find to be so different from north- 
ern examples as to well merit subspecific separation. In his memorable 
work on the birds of East Florida (Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., I, p. 340) Mr. 
Allen refers to the much darker color of Floridan specimens, but appar- 
ently overlooks the naked toes. It is with pleasure that I dedicate this 
race to one who has done such eminent service not only to the orni- 
thology of Florida, but to the science in general. 

* Cf. Yarrell's Brit. Birds, eel. 4, vol, i, p. 150, aud The Ibis, ser. iii, vol. vi, pp.p4-105. 

t Since these pages were put iu type, I have discovered that the name stands as 
above given in the "Check List." The notice of the species here was therefore an 
oversight. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Stkix nebulosa allexi, Eidgw. 

Ch. — Similar to typical nebulosa, but toes wholly destitute of feathers or bristles, 
beiug perfectly bai'e to the extreme base ; colors darker than in nebulosa, witb less 
ocbraccous, tbe tail scarcely barred on the basal half, and the bars on the breast much 
more distinct, as well as narrower and more continuous. 

Hob. — Florida (Clearwater). 

The above characters I find to be constant in a series of tliree speci- 
mens (two $ and one $ ) sent to the National Museum by Col. S. T. 
Walker, of Clearwater, Florida. Kot only are the toes perfectly bare, 
but the feathers clothing the tarsi are much shorter than in northern 
nebulosa, thus causing the legs to appear much more slender. The only 
feathering on the toes consists of a small pointed strip on the outer side 
of the first i)halanx of the middle toe, reaching about to the second joint. 

324. Strix occidentalis (Xant.) Eidgw. 

Assuming that the Great Grey Owls are sufficiently distinct generic- 
ally from the foregoing, they should be known as — 

322. ScoTiAPTEX cinereum (Gmel.) Swains., and 
[322 a. I ScoTiAPTEX cinereum lapijonicum (Eetz.) Eidgw. 

236. ISurnia idula funerea (Linn.) Eich. & Sw. — In the 10th edition 
of ^^ tSystema Natune^^ Linnieus describes on the same page (93) kStrix 
funerea and S. tditla, in the order here given; the former being based on 
"Fu. suec. 51," the ^'•uliila flammeata, Frisch. av. t. 9" being doubtfully 
quoted; "Habitat in Europa." S. ulula is based upon "Fn. suec. 
52— Ulula, Gesn. av. 773, Aldr. ornith, 1. 8, c. G; Will, oruith. 08, t. 13, 
Eay, av. 20, n. 4;" the habitat also " in Europa." In neither case would 
the diagnoses given determine tbe species independent of the references. 
In the 12th edition, however, 8. ulula is mentioned first, with the same 
diagnosis and habitat, but with additional or more explicit references. 
S. funerea follows, with an additional diagnosis which renders the species 
unmistakable, and a reference to "^Sirij? canadensis," i>m6\ av. I, p. 518, 
t. 37, f. 2, wliich we know to be the American Hawk Owl. Furthermore, 
there is added to the habitat "America septentrional i.'^^ It is therefore 
difficult to decide which of the two names has priority as the specific 
designation. If the S. funerea is to be regarded the same in both edi- 
tions, then this name, as occurring first on the page, would be entitled to 
that claim ; but thereis nothing whatever in the account of Strix funerea 
of edition 10 to show that it is anything more than the European Hawk 
Owl ; or, in other words, the same as the species called on the same page 
^S". ulula. As the matter stands, we prefer to ta]s.e funerea of 1706 as the 
earliest date of the name as applied to the American bird, and to call the 
species S. ulula, the latter name being of certain apj)lication in the 10th 
edition, while it precedes /wjierca in the 12th. 

347. Falco fusco-cjerijlescens, Vieill.-— See Sharpe, " Catalogue of 
the Accipitres in the British Museum," I, j). 400. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. i) 

353. Buteo abbreviatus, Caban. — See Sharpe, as above, p. 1G3, who, 
however, refers it to the genus " Tacliytriorcliis.^'' See, also, Sclater ♦& 
Salvin's " ]S"omenclator Avium Neotropicalium," p. 118. 

303. Polyhorus cheriway (Jacq.) Caban. — See Sbarpe, t. c, p. 33. 
This species appears to be quite distinct from P. tliarus. 

3G1. PsEXJDOGRYPHUS caUfomianus (Shaw) E.idgw. — Concerning the 
validity of this genus, see Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club., April, 1880, i). — . 

3GG. Catharista {atrata, Bartr.). — If the name atrata, as now almost 
universally^ applied to this species, is to be accredited to Bartram, it has 
I)riority over all the synonyms ; but if we are to reject Bartram's names 
on account of his frequent " lapses " from binomialism, or his equally bad 
l^ractice of omitting descriptions (which, however, is not the case with 
regard to his mention of the present species), then uruhii of Vieillot 
(1809) takes precedence over atrata of Wilson (1812), which comes next 
in order of date. 

3G8. Columba erythrina, Licht. — Although there is no law compel- 
ling the adoption of a museum name, I prefer to do so in this case rather 
than propose a new one, since Lichtenstein's name erytlirina is a very ap- 
l)ropriate one. The name by which this species ha s usually been known — 
C. '■'■jiavirostrls^ Wagler" — is " glaringly false," and, therefore, to be re- 
jected, according to the rules of the British Association.* It is true that 
the bill sometimes appears yellowish in the dried skin, but in life it is 
always some shade of i^urple or pink, w^hitish at the extremity. What- 
ever it may be, it is impossible to identify McCall's C. solitarlus with 
this species. If his description was really penned from a specimen, his 
bird has not yet been rediscovered, no known jS'orth American Pigeon 
corresponding at all closely with his description. In any event it cannot 
be the present species, which never has " brilliant reflections" on either 
neck or breast, nor the back or under wing-coverts " light-red color." 

378. Ortalis vetula maccalU (Baird) Eidgw. — In regard to this 
emendation of the generic name, see Wharton, " The Ibis," Oct., 1879, 
p. 450. I lind the Texan birds easily distinguishable from Mexican ex- 
amples (true vetula). 

380. Canace canadensis (Linn.) Reich. — None of the American grouse 
usually referred to Tetrao resemble at all closely the type of the latter 
genus, T. urogaUus, Linn. They appear, in fact, nearly as distinct from 
Tetrao proper as are Bonasa or Fedioecetes, or other recognized American 
genera. It seems scarcely advisable, however, to admit a genus '•'■Den- 
dragaims''^ for the special accommodation of G. obscura in its various forms. 

39G. Charadrius dominicus, Miill. — Milller's name for the American 
Golden Plover, dating 177G, should take precedence over fulvus, Gmel., be- 
stowed twelve years later (1788), as the name of the species. The Asiatic 
form should therefore be called C. doniinicus fulvus (Gmel.) 

* Cf. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Jan., 18S0, p. 37. 



10 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

400 Ms (Appendix), ^gialitis cmiONiCA (Gm.) Gray.* — This sup- 
posed new species proves to be the Lesser Ringed Plover of the Old 
World, jE. curonica (Gm.) Gray, the principal synonyms of which are 
the following. It may be considered doubtful whether tlie specimen 
really was obtained near San Francisco, as stated on the label. 

Charadriiis ciironicus, Gmel., S. N., I, 1788, 692. 

JEgialitli ciironicus, Gray, Cat. Brit. B, 1833, 141.— Hartixg, Handb. Brit. B. 

187-2, 134. 
Cliaradrius pliiUppinus, Lath., lud. Oru., II, 1790, 745. 
Charadriiis Jluviatilis, Bechst., Naturg. Yog. DeutscliL, 1809, 422. 
Cliaradrius minor, Meyer & WoJLF, TascL. Vog. Deutsclil., 1810, 324. 

Charadriiis intermedins, Mexetr., Catal. , 53. 

Charadrius sonaius, Swains., B. W. Afr., II, , 235, pi. 25. 

Mgialitis microrhijnclius, KiDGW., Am. Nat., VIII, Feb. 1874, 109 ("San Francisco, 

Cal."). 

408. Himantopus mexicanus (Miiller) Ord. — Miiller's name dates 
] 77G ; thirty-one jears earlier than nigricolUs, Yieill. 

413. Scolopax rusticula (Linn.) Wharton. — See "The Ibis," Oct., 
1879, p. 453. 

4:4:2his (Appendix). Numenius tahitiensis (Gm.). — The earliest name 
for the bird afterwards named Numenius femoraUs by Mr. Peale is 
Scolopax tahitiensis^ Gmel. (S. IST., I, ii, 1788, p. 65G, n. 22). 

448. Ajaja ROSEA (Briss.) Eidgw. — The American Spoonbill being a 
very distinct generic type, for which Reichenbach proposed (in 1853) the 
name Ajaja.; it becomes necessary to change the specific name also. 
There is not, unfortunately, any post-Linn?ean synonym for this species, 
with the exception of " Platea ' mexicana, Willoughby,' " as used by Gam- 
bel ill 1849 (Jour, of Philad. Acad., I, p. 222). Gambel, however, gives 
no description; and, moreover, since the name '■hnexieana'''' is simply 
quoted from Willoughby, it seems best to adopt Brisson's very appro- 
priate name of rosea, injustice to the accurate and complete description 
of the species in the work of that author. 

454. Hydranassa TRICOLOR (Milll.) Ridgw. — If tlie Herons are to 
be subdivided at all, it seems quite necessary to recognize the generic 
name which, in 1858, Professor Baird proposed for this species (B. N. 
Am., p. GG'J), the earliest designation of which is Ardea tricolor.^ Miiller 
(177G). 

455. DiCHROMANASSA rufa (Bodd.) Ridgw, — See Bull. U. S. Geol. 
and Geog. Survey Terr., vol. iv, no. 1, p. 24G. 

4G0. Botaurus lentiginosus (Montag.) Stephens. — This appears to 
be the earliest designation of the species. 

*Am. Nat., VIII, Feb., 1874, p. 109. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 11 

4GG a (Appendix). Eallus ohsolctus. Eidgw. — This proves to be quite 
distinct from E. elegcms, being, in fact, more nearly related to B. longi- 
rostris (sive '■'■ crepitans''''). 

472. GalUnnla galeata (Liclit.) Bp. — Quite distinct specifically from 
G. chloropus, Lath. 

473. lONORNis martinica (Linn.). — This species has usually been 
referred to either Porphyrio, Briss., or Foiphyrula, Blyth, but it is exceed- 
ingly distinct generically from both these types, particularly' the former. 
The generic name lonornis, instituted for its special reception, bj^ lleich- 
enbach in 1853 (Nat. Syst., p. xxi), seems to be the earliest one avail- 
able. 

488. Anas BOSCAS, Linn. — See Wharton, "The Ibis," Oct., 1879, 
p. 453). 

489 a (Appendix). Anas fulvigula, Bidgw. — This bird proves very 
distinct from A. obscura. 

52G. Pelecanus erythrorhynchus, Gmel. — This name antedates 
^^trachyrhynchus, Lath.," by two years, and, being no less appropriate, 
there is no valid reason why it should not be retained. {Cf. Bull. Nutt. 
Orn. Club, Jan., 1880, p. 3G.) 

525. Sula LEUCOGASTRA (Bodd.) Salvin. — See Salvio, Trans. Zool. 
Soc. Loud., IX, ix, 1875, 49G. 

529. Phalacrocorax dilophus cincinnatiis (Brandt) Eidgw. — 
This is simply the large northwestern form of P. dilophus, no more 
entitled to specific separation than var. floridanus, ^hich rei^resents 
the opposite extreme of size. 

In regard to the generic name of the Cormorants, it appears that we 
will have to use Phalacrocorax, Briss., instead of Graculus, the latter, 
properly applied, having for its type the Corvus graculus, Linn., = Gra- 
ciila pyrrhocorax, Scop. {Conf. Sharpe, Oat. Passerif. Brit. Mus., p. 146, 
foot-note.) 

547 1). Larus occidentalis, Aud. 

548 a. Larus californicus, Lawr. 

549. Larus brachyrhynchus, Eich. 

The above appear to be quite well-defined and distinct species ; the 
first more nearly related to L. affinis, Eeinh., than to argentatus ; the 
second much nearer to L. cachinnans, Pall., than to delaicarensis. 

581. OssiFRAGA gigantea (Gmel.) Homb. & Jacq. — A very distinct 
genus from Fulmarus. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

580. Fji^BETUiA fuUgiiiosa (Gmel.) Coaes. — Appears to be sufficiently 
distiuct generically from Diomedea. 

583. Priocella tenuirostris (And.) . — This bird seems sufficiently 

distinct generically from Fulmariis, and has been made the type of Pri- 
ocella, by Hombron & Jacquinot (Compt. Eend., XVIII, 1844, p. 357.) 

595. PmoFiNUS 7nelanurus (Bonn.) . — This species is the type of 

the genus Priofinus, Homb. & Jacq. (t. c. p. 355). 

600. Puffinus AUDUBONi, Finsch. — The Procellaria ohscura of Gmel. has 
been determined by Dr. Finsch (see P. Z. S. 1872, p. Ill) to be a Pacihc 
Ocean species, distinguished from the Puffinus ohscunis of recent authors 
by its white underwing-co verts and other characters. Dr. Finsch there- 
fore i:>roposed for the Atlantic species the name auduboni, as above. 

601. Puffinis aAViA (Forst.) Finsch. — See Giglioli & Salvadori, Ibis, 
1809, p. 06 ; Finsch, Jour, fiir Orn., 1872, p. 256. 

603. Puffinus GRISEUS (Gmel.) Finsch. — Cf. Finsch, Jour. fiir. Orn., 
1874, p. 209 5 Salvin, Eowley's Orn. Misc., iv, 1876, p. 236. 

619. Lund A cirrliata, Pall. — Sufficiently distinct generically from the 
species of Fratercula. 

623, Simorliijnchus pygmjsus (Gmel.) Eidgw. — The Alca pyymwa of 
Gmelin is unquestionably the young of this species, afterward named 
'■'■8. cassinV by Dr. Cones. Alca Jcamtschatica, Lepechin, is the same spe- 
cies in adult (winter?) plumage. 

&*. Species and Subspecies not in Coues's Check List. 

SiURUS N/EVius NOTABiLis, Grinnell, MS. 

Cn. — Similar to S. nwvius, but mucli larger. Wiug, 3.25 ; tail, 2.50 ; bill, from 
nostril, .50; depth at base, .25; tarsus, .83; mifldle toe, .56. Above dark grayish 
brown, the feathers of the pileum with indistinctly darker centres. Beneath yellow- 
ish white, the throat thickly spotted, and the breast and sides heavily streaked with 
blackish dusky ; a superciliary stripe of pale fulvous, hardly extending back to the 
end of the auriculars. Lores crossed by a distinct streak of black. Centre of the ab- 
domen immaculate ; lower tail-coverts with central streaks of grayish dusky ; lining of 
the wing smoky gray. Bill brownish black, the mandible growing lighter brown bas- 
ally. Feet horn-color. 
^a&.— Black Hills, Wyoming (Mus. G. B. Grinnell). 

The plumage of this bird is in all respects, so far as I can see, quite 
identical with that of ordinary darker plumaged specimens of S. nwvius, 
except that the superciliary strijje does not extend so far back and the 
streaks on the breast are broader ; the former character may be merely 
apparent, however, and owing to the manner of skinning. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 13 

Farus cinctus, Bodd. — In accrediting this species to the IS^orth Amer- 
ican fauna, on the strength of specimens collected in Alaska by Mr. Lu- 
cieu M. Turner*, I inadvertantly called it "P. sibiricus, Gmel.," at the 
time overlooking the priority of the name cinctus. 

Myiarciius jiexicaxus (Kaup) Lawr. 

Tijrannnla mexicana, Kaup, P. Z. S., Feb. 11, 1851, 51. t 

Mijiarclms mexlcanus, Lawu., Ann. Lye. N. Y., IX., 1889, 202 (nee Baird, B.N. Am., 
1858, p. 179). 
fff Tyrannula cooperi, Kaup, 1. c. (Mexico). t 

Mii'uirchus cooperi, Baird, B. N. Am., 1858, 180 (based on tbe above). 
Mijiarclms erytlirocercus, ScL. & Salv., P. Z. S. 1868, 631, 632 (Tobago & Venezuela). 
Mtjiarclms yacatanensis, Lawr., Pr. Philad. Aead. 1871, 235. 
Myiarchus obcri, Lawr., Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., I, 1877, 48 (Dominica, W. I.). 

Disclaiming any desire to prolong the discussion inaugurated by me 
in Vol. I of these Proceedings (p. 139), I however feel called upon, by 
Mr. Sennett's comments in his " Further Kotes on the Ornithology of 
the Rio Grande " (Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Survey, Yol. V, No. 3, pp. 
402-404), to offer a few additional remarks on the subject. 

The synonymy of Myiarchus mexicamis (Kaup) Lawr., as given above, 
includes all the binomial synonyms of the species in question, so far as I 
am aware; and in view of Mr. Sclater's positive declaration (P. Z. S. 
1871, p. 84) that " TyrannuJa mexicana of Kaup is identical with Myiar- 
chus cooperi of Baird," I do not see how we can avoid using Kauji's 
name for the species. Mr. Sclater's opinion certainly cannot be set 
aside, for he made actual comparison of Kaup's type specimen with the 
very examples which Professor Baird called M. cooperi, and found them 
" identical." 

The name erytlirocercus, ScL, was proposed three years before Mr. 
Sclater made this discovery, and was, moreover, based on examples 
from Tobago, Venezuela, and Bahia, and was described as " similar to 
ill. cooperi \i. e., mexicamis, Kaup], but much smaller," etc. 

In 1871, Mr. Lawrence, being apparently unaware of Br. Sclater's 
identification of T. mexicamis, Kaup, with Professor Baird's M. cooperi, 
and accepting the latter's identification of mexicamis with his (L.'s) cin- 
erascens of later date, redescribed the Mexican bird as M. yucafanensis ; 
and in 1877, on the ground of certain differences of plumage and size, 
separated (from ill. " erythrocercus ") the specimens from the Lesser An- 
tilles (Dominica) by naming them M. oheri. 

*Cf. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Jan., 1878, p. 37. 

t "I do not . . . hesitate to decide that TyrartJHtZa mexicana of Kaup is identical 
witb Myiarchus cooperi of Baird."— ScL., P. Z. S. 1871, p. 84." 

t"What Tyrannula cooperi, Kaup, is . . . does not now much signify. . . 
But it is not to be supposed that Professor Kaup would make two species of the same 
bird in the same paper. Therefore, Tyrannula cooperi of Kaup is probably not Myiarchus 
cooperi of Baird." — ScL., 1. c. 



14 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Such is, in brief, the history of the case. The point at issue, however, 
is whether specimens of this species from the Eio Grande Valley in 
Texas are to be referred to mexicanus proper or to an assumed race, 
^^erythrocercus.'" The species was originally introduced to the United 
States fauna under the name "TIf. crinitus erytlirocercus (Scl. & Salv.) 
Coues " (Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. Ter., Vol. IV, No. 1, p. 32), and 
was subsequently mentioned by the present writer as " M. erytlirocercus 
var. cooperi " (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, 1878, p. 138), both of which I 
believe to be incorrect — the former on account of the reference of the 
sptcies to M. crinitus^ and, probably, in the use of the name erytlirocer- 
cus instead of mexicanus; the latter, because erytlirocercus is the subse- 
quent name, and cannot, therefore, be used for the specific designa- 
tion, while cooperi is also very doubtfully referable to this species. In 
order, however, to present the case as briefly and clearly as possible it 
will be necessary to discuss the several points separately. 

First, as to the reference of this species to crinitus : I do not see how 
this can jiossibly be done without bringing in also M. cinerascens and 
il^. stolidus (see Hist. N. Am. B., Vol. II, p. 331); and even then I 
much doubt whether crinitus and mexicanus ever intergrade, since I 
have examined many scores of specimens, but have yet to find a speci- 
men that is truly intermediate.* There is, however, in Southwestern 
Mexico a very small race of mexicamcs, which can be distinguished from 
cinerascens only by the extension of the rufous of the retrices to the 
extreme tip of the inner web, they being in every other respect appa- 
rently quite identical. There are several such examples in the national 
collection, obtained in Tehuantepec by Professor F. Sumichrast. 

Second : It is much to be regretted that neither Dr. Kaup nor Dr. Sclater 
give measurements of the type specimens of T. mexicanus, since we 
might then readily determine whether this name belongs to the large 
or the small race of the species as occurring in Mexico. Since, however. 
Dr. Sclater remarks that "it (the said type) is certainly rather smaller 
in dimensions than two of my skins of this species (i. c, "ilf. cooperi,''^ 
Baird), and has the bill smaller"; and that "a third specimen in my 
collection, which I also refer to the (so-called) 71/. cooperi of Baird, agrees 
very v/ell with it in general dimensions, and has the bill even slightly 
smaller," it appears very evident that Kaup's T. mexicana was not based 
on one of the very large individuals of this species, but one of medium 
size, corresponding to the Eio Grande specimens. Further than this, 
the individual variations among Mexican specimens of this species affect 
only the size and proportions, not colors — at least not to any especially 
noticeable extent. 

Third : I find upon re-examination of all the material in the national 



* In Hist. N. Am. Birds, Vol. II, p. 331, wo predicated the iutergradatiou of these 
two species on the characters of an individual from Nicaragua, which, howcvei-, Dr. 
Coues (Pr. Philad. Acad. 1872, j). 6d) says, and which I also now believe, is not dis- 
tinguishable from M. crinitus. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 15 

collection (embracing numerous specimens received since my last paper 
was written), that specimens from the patria of erythrocercus proper 
(Venezuela, Tobago, Bahia, and other parts of South America) are uni- 
formly darker colored than the smaller Mexican examples, though they 
may fully equal them in size. This darkness of color is carried to an 
extreme degree in Antilleau specimens, and constitutes, so far as I am 
able to see, the sole distinguishing character of Mr. Lawrence's "71/. 
o&cri," as compared with the continental forms of the species en masse. 

Finally, I therefore conclude that, whatever may be the character of 
Central American specimens (of course they are intermediate), or 
whether the name mexicana is to be applied to the larger or smaller race 
of the Mexican bird (and the odds are strongly in favor of the latter), 
that (1) the name erythrocercus should, if to be used at all, be restricted 
to examjiles agreeing strictly with the South American " race," since it 
is subsequent in date to mexicanus ; and (2) that the Eio Grande birds 
are probably exactly like the type of the latter.* 

KycUdromus albicollis (Gmel.) Bnrm. — As explained some years 
since by Dr. Sclater (see P. Z. S. 1801, p. 10, and 18GG, p. 144), the earli- 
est name for this species is Gaprimulgus albicollis Gmel. (S. N., I, ii, 1788, 
p. 1030), the C. amcricanus of Linnaeus, quoted by Mr. Cassin (Proc. 
Philad. Acad. 1851, pp. 179, 180) and some other authors (see Mr. Sen- 
nett's two lists) being unquestionably a Jamaican species belonging to 
quite a different genus {Siphonorhis americana). All the synonyms and 
the more important references are given in my notes in Dr. Merrill's 
paper (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., I, pp. 143 and 144). 

lACHE latirostris (Sw.) Elliot. — This species, introduced to the fauna 
of the United States by Mr. Henshaw {cf. American Sportsman, v, Feb. 
20, 1875, p. 328 ; Zoology Wheeler's Exp., Orn., p. 380) under the name of 
Circe latirostris, should be hereafter known by the above name, the 
genus Circe being previously" employed in another branch of zoology 
(see Elliott, Synopsis of the Trochilidoe, p. 234). 

NoJiONYX, gen. nov. 

Ch. — Similar to Erismatura, but diiferiiig from all the species of that genus in the 
form of the maxillary unguis, which is similar to that of Fidix and allied genera, the 
same being in Erismatura the most j)eculiar and important generic character. 

Type, Anas dom'udca, Linn. 

Altogether the most distinctive feature of the genus Erismatura con- 
sists in the remarkably peculiar conformation of the maxillary unguis, 

* It seems proper to olfer here a word of explanation in reference to the second 
paragraph on page 403 of Mr. Sennett's paper, which says (referring to my remarks 
on this species in Dr. Merrill's list) : " There is no notice whatever of my specimen 
from Hidalgo, Tex., . . . which is in the National Museum, and w^hich is the lirst record 
of its existence within our limits, and which Mr. Ridgway no doubt examined when 
he coincided with Dr. Cones as to its identification." The explanation I have to make 
is, that at the time my paper ivas written and printed the specimen in question was not in 
the National Museum collection, but, with other birds, had been returned to Mr. 
Sennett, at his request, for examination. 



16 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

or nail of the upper mandible. This, viewed from above, is extremely 
small, narrow, and linear, the broader terminal half being bent very ab- 
rui3tly downward and backward, so as to be visible only from in front 
or below. With the sole exception of Anas dominica, Linn., all the 
species usually referred to this genus agree strictly with the type. Anas 
leucoccpJutla, Scop., notwithstanding other characters are more or less 
variable. Anas dominica, Linn., has the nail of normal form, or very 
much like that prevailing among the ducks generally, and on this account 
should be separated generically from Erismatura. 



DESCKBPTIOTV OF A IVEW SPECIES OF ISIRD OF THE FAMIIiY 

TUKDflD^E, FROm TBIE BSIL,Ai>JB> OF UOMIIiVBCA, W. I. 

By OEO. N. a.A\rKENCE. 

Margarops dominicensis. 

Marfjarops hcnninieri, Lawr. nee Lair., Proe. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. I, p. 52. 

Ifale. — Tlie entire upper i)lumage is of a rich dark brown, the 
crown is darker and has the edges of the feathers of a lighter 
shade; tail and quill feathers of a darker brown than the back; 
axillars and under wing-coverts white ; the lores are blackish brown ; 
the feathers back of the eyes and the ear-coverts have narrow 
shaft streaks of pale rufous ; the feathers of the neck and upper 
part of the breast are of a warm dark brown, those of the chin and 
middle of the throat with light rufous centres, those of the lower part 
of the neck and the upper part of the breast have also light rufous cen- 
tres, but in addition each feather has a light terminal si)ot ; on the 
lower part of the breast and on the sides the feathers have white centres, 
bordered strikingly with brown ; the markings of the breast-feathers are 
squamiform in shape, those of the sides lanceolate ; the abdomen is 
white, a fev/ feathers on the upj)er part are very narrowly margined 
with brown ; under tail-coverts brown, terminating with white ; outer 
feathers of thighs brown, the inner whitish ; "iris tea-color;" there is a 
naked space around the eye ; bill yellow, with the basal half of the ui^per 
mandible dusky ; tarsi and toes pale yellow. 

Length (fresh), 9 inches ; wing, 5 ; tail 3 J ; tarsus, If ; bill from front, 
{%, from gap, li. 

Type in United States National Museum. 

Mr. Ober sent five specimens of this form from Dominica, all males 
and closely resembling each other. It is probable, as in the allied spe- 
cies, that the females do not differ in i^lumage materially from the males. 

Mr. Ober's collection from Dominica contained three species of 3rar- 
garops which I never had seen before. These were referred to known 
species, two of them, I think, correctly; but the one which is the sub- 
ject of this article I now find was erroneously considered to be M. liermi- 
nleri, Lafr. I supposed these species would be the same as those recorded 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 17 

from the neigliboring islands, as they agreed well with the descriptions 
given of tbem, and there were no available specimens to compare with. 

As soon as I had finished the examination of the birds of each island 
collected by Mr. Ober, they were placed in a box by themselves, and 
not distnrbed again except for an occasional comparison. The collection 
from Gnadelonpe, containing specimens of the trne M. JierminieH, Lafr., 
was not received until more than a year after that from Dominica. 
These specimens I labelled M. hermitiieri, Lafr., as a matter of course, 
they being from the locality of the type. The difference between the 
birds from the two islands was not observed at that time, as no com- 
l^arison was made. 

This winter, having occasion to review the species of Margarops, I 
got the specimens from the different islands together for the first time, 
and at once saw that the species from Dominica was quite distinct from- 
the Guadeloupe bird. It differs from 31. herminieri, Lafr., in being less in 
length, of a more robust form, the bill stouter, and the tail shorter ; the 
brown coloring throughout is much darker and of a ruddy c'ast, instead of 
olivaceous ; the centres of the feathers on the throat and upper part of the 
breast are much more rufous, and have black spots at their ends ; the ab- 
domen is pare white, whereas in M. herminieri the lower part of the breast 
and the abdomen are covered with lanceolate-shaped markings, which are 
very striking, each feather being white, with a strongly defined bro\vn 
border ; only a very small space on the lower part of the abdomen is 
white; M. herminieri has the white ends of the under tail-coverts edged 
narrowly with pale brown ; in the new species they are white without 
borders, and it has the tarsi and toes stronger and paler in color than, 
those of M. herminieri. 

FEBPaiAKY 1, 1880. 



NOTES ©rv A COff^liEt'TffOIV ©F FISHES FROM EAST FIi©Ui;i5A,. O-B- 
TAIi^JS© BY 1>U. jr. A, HErVSHAl.t,. 

By DAVID S. JOKDAIV, M. ». 

During the past winter (1878-79) a collection of fishes was made for 
the writer by Dr. J. A. Ilenshall, of Cynthiana, Ky., in the streams and 
inlets of Eastern Florida. The number of species obtained was not 
large, but the specimens were preserved in excellent condition, and 
among them are several of interest. Two species [Gerres plumieri •^wd 
Umhrina hroussoneti) had not been previously recorded from the coast 
of the United States. Three others were, at the time of collection, new 
to science. One of these has been lately described, under the name of 
JordaneUa florid w, by Messrs. Goode and Bean. The others have been 
already noticed by me in these i^roceedings as Zygonectes rubrifrons and 
Zygonecies henshalli. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 2 Apa^ii 26, 18 80. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The marine species were obtained from Indian Eiver and from the 
neighboring coast; tlie cyprinodonts, centrarchids, and other fresh or 
brackish water species chiefly from San Sebastian Eiver and tribu- 

DIODONTID^. 

1. Chilomycterus geometricus (Schueid.) Kaup. 

URANOSCOPID/E. 

2. Astroscopiis y-graecum (C. & V.) Gill. 

A single fine specimen of this beantifiil species. Dr. Henshall in- 
forms me that this specimen in life exhibited strong electrical powers, 
these powers apparently having their seat in the naked skin on the top 
of the head. So far as I know, such phenomena have not hitherto been 
ascribed to any fish of this family. I therefore put this statement on 
record, in hopes that subsequent observers of this rare fish may be able 
to verify it. 

ECHENEIDID^E. 

3. Echeneis naucrates L. 

A single specimen, with 22 laminsB in the disk. 

CARANGID^. 

•4. Selene argentea Lac. 

Numerous fine large specimens. Specimens lately described from the 
Pacific coast nnder the name of Argyriosus pacijicus, Lockiugtou, appear 
to belong to this species. 

5. Caraiigus chrysus (Mitch.) Girard. 

6. Chloroscombrus chrysurus (Linn.) Gill. 

7. Oligoplites occidentalis (L.) Gill. 

Several flue specimens of this highly interesting species. The character 
of five (instead of seven) dorsal spines, assumed to distinguish Oligoplites 
from Scomhroides Lac. {Chorinemus C. & V.), is perhaps of insutflcient 
value for generic distinction. Some of the species of Scomhroides have, 
however, the dermal productions really scale-like, instead of the irregular 
linear imbedded ridges found in Oligoplites. This character may for the 
present, until all the species of the group are examined, be held to dis- 
tinguish the latter genus. 

SCIiENID^. 

8. Umbrina broussoneti Cuv. & Val. 

Two fine specimens of this West Indian species were obtained b^' Dr. 
Henshall. These are the first yet recorded from the United States. The 
species is not included in Goode's Catalogue of Bermudan Fishes, nor 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 19 

ill any of Poey's lists of tlie fishes of Cuba. It is, therefore, an im- 
portant addition to our fauna. This specimen agrees very fully with 
Giinther's description of Umhrina hroussoneti, and with Cuvier and 
Valenciennes's description of Umbrinacoroides. C. & V.'s description of 
U. hroussoneti gives the number of rays in the dorsal fin as X. I, 25. 
My specimens have D. X. I, 28. 

GEERIDJ^. 

9. Gerres plumieri Ciiv. & Val. 

A single fine specimen of this beautiful species. It has not been j)re- 
viously recorded from the coasts of the United States. 

SPARID^E. 

10. Lagodon rhomboides (L.) Holbr. 

PPJSTIPOMATID^. 

11. Lutjanus caxis (Schneider) Poey. 

A single fine specimen. 

CENTRARCIIID^. 

12. Micropterus pallidus (Raf.; Gill & Jordan. 

Dr. L^on Vaillant (Mission Scientifiqne an Mexique: ined.) divides 
this species provisionally into two, adopting the name '■^ ^licropterus 
salmoides^^ for the ordinary form, and that of Micropterus nuecensis 
(Baird & Girard) for the southwestern form (Texas and Mexico). Ac- 
cording to him the two are externally identical, but 21. nuecensis is dis- 
tinguished by the presence of a small patch of teeth on the tongue, the 
tongue being entirely smooth in the ordinary form. 

I have examined a number of specimens in regard to this point. 

I find lingual teeth in the following specimens : 

(1.) Two specimens, one large one small, from the Falls of the Ohio. 

(2.) One small specimen from a tributary of White Eiver at Bloom- 
ington, Ind. 

(3.) One specimen (in the museum at Paris) from Texas. 

I, find them absent in the following : 

(1.) Several specimens in HenshalFs collection from Indian Eiver. 

(2.) Specimen from Xeuse River. 

(3.) Specimens from White Eiver at Indianapolis. 

(4.) Specimens from Lake Erie. 

The presence of these teeth evidently does not depend on age, and 
apparently not on sex. It may be a specific feature, but I am inclined 
at present to think it only a feature of individual variation. I have not 
seen such teeth in the small-mouthed black bass. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

13. Chaenobryttus viridis (C. &. V.) Jor. 

14. Lepomis pallidus (Mitch.) Gill &, Jor. 

The recent rejection of the name '■'' pallidus''^ for this species by my 
friend Professor Goode (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 1879, 139) is due to his 
having overlooked the fact that Mitchell has a Lahrus pallidus as well 
as a Bodianus pallidiis in his Memoir on the Fishes of New York. The 
latter, as Professor Goode observes, is Bairdiella argyroleuca ; the 
former is Lepomis pallidus. 

15. Lepomis puiictatus (Ciiv. & V;il.) Jor. 

{Lepomis apiaiua Cope.) 

Several fine specimens. 

16. Enneacanthus obesiis (Baird) Gill. 

(Bryttus fasciatus Ilolbrook = Bryttus ohesus Baird?). 

^^ Enneacantlms milnerianus Coi^e" is included in Goode's list (Proc. 
II. S. Nat. Mus., 11, 1879, 114) of the fishes of Florida. This species ap- 
pears in my list of valid species of Centrarchidfe in Bulletin X of the 
National Museum. It is a nominal species, and came into the lists in 
this way: While vaj i)^per in Bulletin X was passing through the 
press, Professor Cope kindly sent me the proof-sheets of a paper on the 
fishes of the Saint John's, which has since appeared in the Proc. Am. 
Philos. Soc. In this i^ajier a new species with the above name was 
described. This species, however. Professor Cope saw fit to suppress 
in the publication of the paper, he having identified it with Enneacan- 
thus fasciatus. 

MUGILID^. 

17. Mugil brasiliensis Agassiz. White Mullet. 

Our other common species of Mugil, the striped mullet, Mugil 
plumieri and Mugil lineatus of authors, is doubtless the species for 
which the name of Mugil alhula L. shoukl be retained. 

SCOMBERESOCIDiE. 

18. Hemirhamphus unifasciatus Eauz. 

CYPHINODONTID^. 

19. Jordanella floridae Goode & Bean. 

Many specimens of this interesting species were obtained by Dr. 
Ilenshall. The females differ from the males chiefly in the lower verti- 
cal fins. 

20. Zygonectes rubrifrons Jordan. 
Numerous specimens. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 21 

21. Zygonectes henshalli Jordan. 

Still more abinulaut. This species and the preceding are very closely 
related, and are both nearly intermediate between Zygonectes and Fundu- 
Im. The cnrreut genera related to Fmululus are separated by characters 
of very dnbions valne. 

22. Fundulus sp. 

A small specimen witli pale cross-bars; not suitable for identification. 

23. Gambusia patruelis B. & G. 

Two specimens, agreeing with the descriptions of Gamhusia Jiolhroold 
of Girard and Giinther, and with Girard's figure of Gambusia patruelis. 
The two species are probably identical. The black bars on the caudal 
and the oblique suborbital blotch are characteristic color-marks. 

CATOSTOMID^. 

24. Erimyzon goodei Jordan. 
Many specimens. 

SILUPJD^. 

25. Amiunis erebennus Jordan. 
Many small specimens. 

ANGUILLID^. 

26. Anguilla rostrata (Le Sueur) DeK. 

A comparison of these Florida specimens with a series of eels from 
Venice renders it evident that our American eel is not identical with 
Anguilla vulgaris of Europe, as I with others have supposed. 

In our species the beginning of the dorsal is notably more posterior 
than in the European one. In Venetian specimens the distance from 
the snout to the base of the dorsal is contained 3| times in the total 
length of the fish. In Florida specimens the same distance is contained 
barely 3 times in the total length. 

The same difference is expressed differently but correctly by Dr. 
Giinther (Cat. Fish Brit. Mus., VIII, 24). He ascribes to A. vulgaris 
the character of — 

"The length of the head is nearly equal to the distance between the 
commencements of the dorsal and anal fins." 

And to A. bostoniensis {rostrata) — 

"The length of the head is conspicuously more than the distance be- 
tween the commencements of the dorsal and anal fins." 

The band of vomerine teeth also appears to extend farther back in 
A. vulgaris than in A. rostrata. 



22 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



NOTES OIV A COI^IiECTIOIV OF FISHED FKOM SAINT JOEIN'S RIVER, 
F1.0RII>A, OBTADIVEIO RY MR. A. M. CURTISS. 

By OAVID §. JORDAN. 

A small collection of iislies from Saint Jolm's Eiver was sent to Prof. 
H. E. Copeland and myself some years ago by Mr. A. U. Cnrtiss. As 
this collection contains some specimens of interest, a list is liere given: 

1. Siphonostovaa STp. (Syngnathus Anct). 

Two specimens of a variety or species of this genns, apparently unde- 
scribed, are in this collection. I have specimens of three types, sub- 
species, or species of 8i])lionostoma from our Atlantic coast, which may 
be thus compared : 



Dorsal rays 

Kings 

Dorsal fln 

Dorsal tiu 

Base of dorsal flu 

Muzzle 

Distance from snout to 
front of dorsal. 

Head contaiued 

Tail 

Belly in females 



a. fiiscum Storer. 
(Wood's Hole, Mass.) 



35; 38; 40 

18 + 37 

Longer than liead 

Dark-spotled at base . . . 

On 4 + 5 rings 

Shorter than rest of head , 

3 times in total length . . 

9 times in length 

i longer than rest of 

body 
Scarcely carinate 



b. louisianix Gthr. ? 
Beaufort, N. C. 



33 . 3'^ 

18 + 33 ('cT); '20+ 38' (?)'' 

S horter than head 

Dusky at base or plain. . 

On 3 + 5 rings 

Much longer than rest 

of head ; longest in 

females. 
2J in length 

7 times in length 

I longer than rest of 

body. 
Scarcely carinate 



Saint John's Kiver, Ma. 



30; 31. 
15 + 33. 

Shorter than head. 
Very high in females; 
black, with paler spots. 
On 3+5 rings. 
Shorter than rest of head. 



2h in length. 

7 times in leng'.h. 
J longer than rest. 

With a sharp black ca- 
rina. Color darker and 
body stouter than in 
the "others. 



These characters are all evidently subject to much variation. If these 
are true species, they differ from each other little more than the two 
sexes of the same form dift'er. 

It seems to me that the specific iM\mesfuscus,fasciatus, viridescens, and 
pecManus are all based on individuals like those above noted from Wood's 
Hole. 



2. Aphoristia plagiusa (L.) Jor. &, Gill. 

3. Chloroscombrns chrysuriis (L.) Gill. 

4. Aichosargus probatocephalus (Walb.) Gill. 

5. Lagodon rhomboides (L.) Koll)r. 

6. MicropteruG pallidus ( Raf. ) Gill & Jor. 

7. Epinephelus sp. ? (One A'cry yonug specimen.) 

8. Orthopristis fiilvomaculatum (ilitcli.) Gill. 

9. Gobiosoma alepidotum (Lac.) Grd. 

10. Chirostoma s]>. 

11. Hemiihamphus unifasciatus Kanz. 

12. Fundulus sp. 

13. Mollienesia latipinna Le Sueur. 

3.4. Brevoortia tyranniis (Latrobe) Goode. 

15. Megalops thrissoides (Blocli) Giinthor (Scales). 

16. Lepidosteus osseus (L.) Ag'. (Scales). 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 23 



NOTES ON A COI^TiECTlOIV OF FII9EIES FKO.TI SAN DIECiO, CAL- 
IFORNIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN aaid CEIARLES II. GBLKEKT. 

The writers have spent the greater part of the month of January, 
1880, in the collection and study of fishes at San Diego, Cal., in the inter- 
ests of the United States Fish Commission. As some of the species 
obtained are new to science, and others new to the United States fauna, 
it is thought advisable to present an annotated list in advance of the 
publication of a more extended report. 



HIPPOCAMPID^. 

1. Hippocampus ingens Girard. 

One large specimen seen. 

SYNGNATHID^. 

2. Syngnathiis leptorhynchus Girard. 

{Syngnailnis arundinaceus Girard.) 
Isot uncommon. 

PLEURONECTID.E. 

3. Paraiichthys niaculosus Girard. 

Very abundant. There seems to us no doubt of the correctness of 
Lockingiton's identification of the ^'■Uropsetta caUfornica^'' with this spe- 
cies. The caudal fin in the adult is somewhat double concave; iu the 
young the middle rays are more prodnced. This species is bofli dextral 
and sinistral. Out of twenty-six examples examined in reference to this 
point fifteen were found to be sinistral and eleven dextral. 

4. Citharichtliys sordidus (Girard) Giiutlier. 
Not common; one specimen seen. 

5. Hypsopsetta guttulata (Girard) Gill. 
Common. 

SOLEID^. 

6. Aplioristia atricauda sp. nov. 

Body oblong-lanceolate, anteriorly somewhat blunt, regularly nar- 
rowed behind and ending in a point, the snout rather abruptly truncate, 
eyes and color on the left side. Eyes very small, nearly even behind, 
the uiiper eye the larger and extending farthest forward. A single nos- 
tril iu front of the interorbital space and apparently a single smaller 
one below it. Mouth moderate, extending to ox)posite the eye, somewhat 



24 PROCEEDINGS OP UIS'ITEU STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

turned toward the eyed side; lips large, not fringed, the upper with a 
small blackish papilla in advance of lower eye. This is apparently nor- 
mal, hut it may be a detached piece of skin, hardened by the alcohol. 
TJi)per jaw scarcely produced, not ibrming a hook. Teeth small, on the 
blind side only, the edge of the jaw on the eyed side forming a smooth 
ridge. 

Gill-openings narrow, not extending up to the level of the mouth. 
Scales very small, ctenoid, pretty regular over the body, much smaller on 
the head, the rows of scales rendered very distinct by black dots, the 
stripes converging towards the snout. Scales on the two sides of the 
body similar. No lateral line on either side. About 105 scales (100 to 
110) in a longitudinal series from the head to the tail ; 45 to 50 in a 
cross-series. 

Dorsal fin beginning on the head, continuous with the anal around the 
tail. Ventral fin of the colored side only present, nearly on the ridge of 
the abdomen, and separated from tJie anal by an interval half longer than 
the cleft of the mouth. Eays of the middle parts of the dorsal and anal 
fins with a fleshy border at base on the blind side. 

Dorsal rays about 100; anal rays 80; no distinct caudal fin. 

Coloration brownish olive, with vertical dark half-bars, irregular in 
size and position, some of them coming down from the back and others 
up from the belly, these posteriorly nearly meeting, but anteriorly alter- 
nating. Streaks of dark i^oints along the rows of scales, these forming 
very distinct longitudinal streaks. Posterior part of dorsal and anal 
broadly edged with black. Eight side plain white. 

Measurements. 

Inches. 

Lengtli 4.8 

Deptli (proifortion of length) . .275 

Lengtli of head , 18 

Diameter of eye 02 

Litei'orhital space 01 

Cleft of mouth - 03 

Length of snout 045 

Distance from snout to dorsal 085 

Distance from snout to anal 25 

Height of dorsal 08 

Height of anal 085 

Length of caudal 08 

Length of ventral 05 

Literval between Tentrals and anal 085 

Depth of gill-opening 095 

This species is known to us from a single specimen taken by a Chinese 
fisherman. Ah Sam, in the Bay of San Diego. This specimen is now in 

the collection of the United States National Museum, No. . In 

form and number of scales, fin-rays, etc., it resembles Aplioristla or- 
nata from the AVest Indies, but the ventral fin is remote from the anal. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 25 

BATRACHID^. 

7. Porichtliya poroslsslmus (C. & Y.) Giiuther. 
Very common. 

BLENNIID^. 

G. Heterostichus rostratus Girard. 

Fouud ill the "kelp" outside the harbor. 

9. Gibbonsea elegans Cooper. 

A 8iiii;le specimen taken in the rock pools on Point Loma. 

10. Hypleurochilus gentilis (Grd.) Gill. 
AVith the i^receding, and more common. 

GOBIID^. 

11. GiUiclithys mirabilis Cooper. 

Exceedingly ahimdant in the shallow waters of the bay. Only small 
specimens seen, the maxillary in these being much less developed than 
in the adult. 

COTTID^. 

12. Leptocottus armatus Girard. 
Common in the Bay of San Diego. 

13. Oligocottus analis Grd. 

Allied, but not closely, to Ariedius quadriseriatus Lockington. 
Body compressed, especially behind, not much depressed anteriorly ■ 
head comparatively small, scarcely depressed, narrowed and rather 
pointed anteriorly, its outline triangular as viewed from above; snout 
strongly decurved in profile; mouth moderate, horizontal, the lower 
jaw included; maxillary reaching to oi)posite posterior margin of pupil; 
premaxillary anteriorly below the level of the eye; eyes large, high uj), 
close together, as long as the snout, SJ in head, their diameter double 
the width of the deep interorbital space, which has a deep lengthwise 
groove; nasal spines prominent; a doep cross-furrow behind them, which 
forms with the interocular furrow a V-shaped figure; preopercle with a 
blunt i^rocess, on which is a spine directed upwards aud outwards; no 
scales on the head; no other spines on the head. 

Branchiostegals G. Gill membranes broadly united, without isthmus. 

First dorsal beginning in front of the posterior edge of the opercle, 
its first two spines ret close together at base, diverging above, and 
shorter than the third. 

Dorsal fins contiguous, but not united, neither of them specially ele- 
vated ; pectoral fin reaching beyond front of anal, its lower rays with 
the skin thickened, and projecting much beyond the membranes; cau 
dal fin slightly rounded ; anal papilla very conspicuous. 

Fin rays: D. IX IG; A. 13-14; V. I, 3; P. IC; C. 10 +. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Posterior part of body covered with minute, imbedded, non-imbricate, 
pectinate scales, which cover most of the posterior part of the body 
above and cease anteriorly behind the middle of the spinous dorsal in 
front and at the posterior third of the soft dorsal behind; some scales 
also along the region of the lateral line anteriorly; a series of somewhat 
larger but still minute scales at base of dorsal, one below each ray, and 
another along lateral line; anteriorly, cirri take the place of the pecti- 
nations on the scales. 

No prickles on the skin. On the head and anterior parts of the body 
are very many long white, simple, bifid or trifid cirri, so that the living 
fish appears almost "woolly" with them. Some of these cirri on the 
nasal bones ; a patch between and behind the eyes ; the whole top of the 
head sparsel}'^ covered; two or three on the posterior edge of the maxil- 
lary; edge of the cheeks fringed with them as with a gray beard. A 
conspicuous row of them along the lateral line, which ceases somewhat 
behind the beginning of the scaly area. A row of cirri along the base 
of the spinous dorsal extending to about the seventh ray of the spinous 
dorsal. Many scattering cirri between the dorsal and lateral line. Skin 
of head with many mucous pores. 

Body dark, clear olive-green, with about five irregular bars of darker 
greenish; much mottled and spotted, some of the spots above clear 
blue, some rusty red, and the most of them blackish. A dark bar at 
base of caudal; lower part of sides with round black spots posteriorly. 
Fins all with cross-bars made of dark spots and lighter areas. 

Measurement of largest specimen — from Point of Bocl's. 

Total longtli 4 iuclies. 

Length to base of caudal 3.45 iuches. 

Length of head ( percentage of length to base of caudal) 30 

Deprti of body " 25 

Least depth of body " 095 

Diameter of eye " 07 

Width of head " 20 

Depth of head " 17 

Length of maxillary " 12 

Distance from snout to dorsal " 27 

Length of first dorsal " 27 

Length of second dorsal " 37 

Height of lirst dorsal " 12 

Height of second dorsal " 15 

Length of anal " 30 

Height of anal " 13 

Length of pectoral " 33 

Length'of ventral " 22 

Length of caudal " 20 

Length of longest cirri " 04 

Length of anal papilla " 03 

This description is drawn from two adult examples taken at Point of 
Eocks, near San Diego, just south of the line of Mexico, and from about 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 27 

fifteen examples of various sizes taken at the "mussel beds" on Point 

Loma, near San Diego. These are numbered ? in the museum col - 

lection. It inhabits cup-shaped pools in the rocks between tide- marks 
lurking in the Corallina, and may be caught at low tide. Its quick 
movements when alarmed render this, however, a matter of some diffi- 
culty. 

14. Scorpasnichthys marmoratus Grd. 
Occasionally taken in the kelp. 

SCORPiENID^. 

15. Sebastapistes guttatus (Girard) Gill. 
IN'ot uncommon. 

16. Sebastichthys atrovirens Jor. & Gilb. MSS. 
Occasionally taken in the keli^. 

LATILID^. 

17. Caiilolatilus princeps (Jeuyus) Gilb. 
Common in the kelp. 

SCOMBRID^. 

13. Sarda chilensis (C. & V.) J. & G. 
Abundant off shore in the fall. 

PERCID^. 

19. Paralabrax clathratus Grd. 
Frequent. 

20. Paralabrax maculofasciatus (Steiudacliner) GiU. 
Common in the bay. 

21. Stereolepis gigas Ayres. 
Occasionally taken off the coast. 

SPARID^. 

22. Girella nigricans (Ayres) Gill. 

The young common in the rock-pools. 



28 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

SCI^NIDiE. 

23. Cyuoscion magdalenae (Steiudacliner) Jor. & Gilb. 
Commou iu the bay of San Diego. 

24. Menticirrus elongatus (Giiuther) Gill. 

A large species of Menticirrus, probablj" Umhrina elongata of Giinther, 
is takeu occasionally in the bay. We have obtained one specimen. 

25. Corvina saturna (Girartl) Steiudacliner. 
ISlot uncommon. 

26. Roncador stearnsi (Steindachner) Jor. & Gilb. (gen. nov.). 

Common. This species, having a serrated preopercle aDd only villiform 
teeth in either jaw, is not a Corvina as that genus is understood by many 
recent writers. Its relations are rather with Sciccnops oceUatus, with which 
it is, however, hardl.y congeneric. We propose to consider it as the type 
of a distinct genus or subgenus, for which the name Roncador, applied 
to it by the Italian fishermen, may be adopted. This word appears also 
iu the Latin name of a related species, Umhrina ronclius. 

Roncador, gen. nov. Allied to Corvina and Sciccnops. 

Body moderately elongated, the head deep, the profile declivous, lower 
jaw included ; both jaws with a broad band of villiform teeth only ; no 
enlarged teeth or canines ; pseudobranchite present; i>reopercle strongly 
and evenly dentate j)Osteriorly, entire below; spines strong, the second 
of the anal very robust, but not very long ; caudal fin lunate, air-blad- 
der large. 

This species, Roncador stearnsi, is as readily distinguished by the black 
pectoral spot as its relative, Sciccnops ocellatus, is by the black spot on 
the caudal. 

EMBIOTOCID^. 

27. Embiotoca jacksoni Ag. 
Common. 

23. Amphistichus argenteus Ag. 
• Occasional. 

29. Ditrema furcatum (Grd.) Giintlier. 
Common. 

30. Hyperprosopon arcuatum Gibbons. 
jSlot uncommon. 

31. Cymatogaster aggregatus Gibbons. 
Very abundant. 

32. Abcona minima (Gibbous) Gill. 

Occasional. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 29 



LABRIDiE. 

33. Pimelometopon pulcher (Ayros) Gill. 

Very abuudaut iu the kelp outside the bay. 

SPHYR^NID^. 

34. Spliyraena argentea Girard. 

Very abundant outside the bay in the fall. 

ATHERINID^. 

35. Chirostoma califomiense (Girard) Gill. 
Exceedingly abundant. 

36. Atheriuops afiinis (Ayres) Steindacliner. 
Scarcely less common. 

37. Leuresthes tenuis (Ayres) Jor. & Gilb. (geu.nov.) 

LeurestJics, gen. nov., allied to Atherinops Steindachner, but with the 
teeth wanting" or reduced to slight or deciduous asperities. In the spe- 
cimens which we have obtained of this species no teeth whatever are 
observable. 

The much greater width of the i^osterior portion of the i^remaxillary 
in Chirostoma, Atherinops, and Leuresthes serve to distinguish these 
genera from Atherina, in addition to the differences in the form of the 
mouth. Lahidestlies Cope has, like Atherina, a slender premaxillary, 
but the mouth is curved and the jaws much produced forwards. The 
group called by Girard Reterognathus has likewise a broad premax- 
illary. It is probably not separable generically from Chirostovia, 
although the lower jaw is much stronger and some teeth are present on 
the vomer. 

Leuresthes tenuis is occasionally taken in San Diego Bay, but it is 
much less abundant than the others and attains a smaller size. 

MUGILID^. 

38. Mugil mexicauus Steindacliner. 

Yery abundant in San Diego Bay. Our specimens have the anal III, 
8, instead of III, 7, as stated by Dr. Steindachner. 

SCOMBERESOCIDiE. 

39. Hemirhamphus sp. incert. 

The young of a species of Hemirhamphus is very abundant in San 
Diego Bay. We are at i>resent unable to identify it with any of the 
known species, but having seen no specimens over four inches long, we 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

do not think proper to describe it as new. The rays both in dorsal and 
anal are 14 or 15 ; the lower jaw is contained 4 times in the total length. 
It is allied to H.pleii and H. umfasciatus, but it is probably distinct 
from both. 

40. Belone exilis Girard. 

Occasionally taken. One specimen seen. 

CYPRINODONTID^. 

41. Fundulus parvipinnis Girard. 

Very common in the Bay of San Diego. 

ALBULID^. 

42. Albula vulpes (L.) Goode. 

This species visits the bay at intervals, in considerable schools. Sev- 
eral specimens were obtained. 

CLUPEID^. 

43. Clupea sagax Jenyns. 

Very abundant in San Diego Bay. The very largest are nearly plain 
in coloration. The ordinary specimens have a very distinct series of 
round, blackish spots along the sides of the back, with smaller ones 
above it, which form stripes along the rows of scales. 

44. Clupea niirabilis Girard. 

Very abundant in San Diego Bay. The vomerine teeth in this spe- 
cies are very few and often not to be found. It should not l>e generic- 
ally separated from the preceding. 

ENGRAULID^. 

45. Engraulis delicatissimus Girard. j 
Very common. 

46. Engraulis ringens Jenyns. 
Very common. 

MUR^ENID^. 

47. Gymnothorax mordax (Ayres) Jor. & Gilb. 

]S[ot rare in rock-i)ools. This species is extremely iDUgnacious, strik- 
ing at a stick after the fashion of a snake. It is also very tenacious of 
life. 

Length of tail almost exactly equal to that of the rest of the body, 
head forming one-seventh of the total length ; snout short, narrow, and 
pointed, occipital region becoming fleshy and much elevated with age; 
dorsal fin beginning immediately in front of the gill openings. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 31 

Tube of the anterior nostril half as long as the eye; the posterior 
nostril with a slight membranous expansion, not forming a tube; diam- 
eter of eye contained 2| times in the length of the snout, being placed 
nearly above the middle of the gape; gill opening slightly longer than 
the eye. 

Sides of the upper jaw with two series of teeth posteriorly ; the outer 
series small, close-set, somewhat triangular in form, slightly recurved, 
immovable; the inner series similar in form, but much larger, depressi- 
ble, the series not extending so far back as the outer and consisting of 
about five teeth; the two series separated by a well-defined groove; in 
front of these, and continuous with the outer series, are three nearly 
fixed knife-shaped teeth, the posterior the larger, next a movable tooth 
similar to the last fixed one but smaller, and three small fixed teeth in 
front. On the middle line of the vomer are three depressible, fang-like, 
arrow-shaped teeth, the first rather smaller than the largest lateral teeth, 
the, other two subequal and considerably larger, the i^osterior one very 
freely movable. These teeth are subject to some variation in different 
individuals, and are seldom quite alike on both sides of the same fish. 

In the lower jaw is a single series corresponding to the fixed series in 
the upper jaw. These are similarly enlarged in front, where the series 
is partly duplicated and some of the teeth are movable. The teeth in 
the lower jaw are broader and more directed backwards than those in 
the upx^er jaw. 

MYLIOBATID^. 

48. Myliobatis californicus Gi]l. 

{EMnoptera vespertiUo Girard.) 

The commonest of the numerous stingrays in San Diego Bay. 
DASYBATID^. 

49. Pteroplatea marmorata Cooper. 

Common in Son Diego Bay. Probably distinct from P. Jiirundo, hav- 
ing a narrower disk and shorter tail, with distinct dermal fold above 
and below. 

50. Urolophus halleri Cooper. 

Common. This species is certainly not identical with U. toryedinus, 
in the synonymy of which species it is placed by Dr. Giinther. Its skin 
is entirely smooth. It is probably a valid species, more nearly allied to 
JJ. cruciatus than to U. tor^pedinus. 

51. Dasybatis dipterurus sp. no v. 

Allied to Dasyhatis centrums and D. 'pastinaea. 

Disk rhomboid, slightly broader than long; anterior margins nearly 
straight forwards, meeting in a very obtuse angle; posterior margins 
curved ; lateral angles rounded. Tail nearly half longer than disk, with 



a conspiciious cutaneous fold below and a smaller but evident one 
above. Upper jaw considerably curv'^ed, with a slight convex protuber- 
ance in front, which fits into a slight emargination in the lower jaw, 
which is convex, its outlines corresponding to the curves of the upper 
jaw. Bands of teeth wider in front than laterally. Inside of mouth 
behind the lower jaw with three fleshy processes. Teeth about f^ ; 
about 8 in a cross-series in the upper jaw and 10 in the lower. 

Color light brown, somewhat marbled with darker, but without dis- 
tinct spots ; tail blackish ; belly white. 

Skin everywhere perfectly smooth in all the specimens seen. 

Measurements of two specimens. 

No. 1. 17o. 2. 

Length of disk (in inclies) 8.75 8.50 

Length of tail (in iuchcg) 12.25 12.40 

Breadth of disk Percontageof length of disk 1. 01 1. 10 

Distance from disk to dorsal fold " 45 .53 

Length of dorsal fold '' 135 .155 

Height of dorsal fold " 0175 .019 

Distance from root of tail to anal fold. " 38 . 375 

Length of anal fold _ " 30 .335 

Height of anal fold '' 0225 .0225 

Length of snout from eye '^ 21 .18 

Interorbital width " 13 .115 

Snout to scajmlar I'idge " 32 .335 

Distance between nostrils " 155 .15 

Width of mouth , " 11 .11 

Length of branchial area " 195 .18 

Width of branchial area (in front) ... " 32 .31 

Moiithtovent " 70 .70 

Length of caudal spine " (lost) .335 

Distance of spine from disk " 35 . 325 

This species is known to us from four female specimens taken in San 
Diego Bay. These range in length from 18 to 24 inches, and are there- 
fore but partially grown. Several other specimens, some of them larger, 
have been seen in a pile of refuse fish thrown away by the Chinese fish- 
ermen. These were, however, too far gone for preservation or descrip- 
tion. 

52. Platyrhina exasperata sp. nov. 

Disk rhombic, about as broad as long, the snout prominent, but 
bluntish at the tip, the angle made by the anterior margins of the pec- 
torals rather less than a right angle, but the snout itself rounded at the 
tip. Anterior margin of pectorals nearly straight. 

Eyes rather large ; nasal ridges well separated, little converghig, not 
meeting anteriorly. Mouth rather narrow, slightly convex forward. 
Teeth about ||. Nostrils with a large anterior flap, which projects back- 
wards and covers a narrower posterior flap. 

Ventral fins separate, entire, their outer margin slightly convex. 

Tail depressed, with a broad lateral fold ; dorsal fins comparatively 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 66 

large ; caudal fin well developed ; under side of tail flattened with a 
blunt medial ridge. 

Under side covered witli a fine shagreen, like tlie skin of a shark, the 
roughnesses being triangular and closely set, depressible backwards ; 
the skin below much as in BMnohatus, but the prickles higher and 
sharper, the skin much rougher than in the latter genus. 

The branchial region, from the nostrils to the i^elvic bones, is entirely 
smooth, except the lower lip, which has a band of close-set prickles. 
A small tract in the middle of the pelvic area is prickly, and most of 
the abdomen j)roper, back to a point in front of the vent ; the anterior 
and outer three-fourths of the pectorals below and about half the ven- 
trals anteriorly and exteriorly also rough, as is the whole snout below, 
in front of the nostrils ; whole lower surface of the tail and the surface 
of the fins rough with shagreen. 

Above, the entire surface is covered with close-set stellated prickles 
of different sizes, largest on the base of the pectorals, and smallest about 
the eyes and on the outer edges of the fins. 

Besides these are several stout, bluntish, slightly recurved spines, 
with stellate bases, placed as follows: One at the ui^per anterior angle 
of the eye and two behind it, the i)osterior the larger ; a large spine on 
the back at the shoulder-girdle, in front of which are two or three on 
the median line, and a series on the middle line of the back of 10 to 12 ; 
two more on the tail between the dorsal fins ; two series on the shoulder- 
girdle, the inner of two, the outer of two to four. Xo other large sj)ines 
on the body. I^o claw-like spines are present on the i^ectorals in the 
male examples seen, all of which are, however, immature. 

Measurements. 

Total length 8. 4 inches. 

Length of disk, to root of ventral 4.4 inches = SA of total. 

Breadth of disk 51 " 

Length of tail 49 " 

Snout to scapular spine 295 " 

Eye 05 " 

Snout 11 " 

Interorbital space 055 " 

Scapular spine to first dorsal i31 " 

Length of first dorsal •• 045 " 

Height of first dorsal 095 " 

Distance between dorsals 075 " 

Length of caudal fin below 15 " 

Width between nostrils 12 " 

Width of mouth 095 " 

Snout to vent 46 " 

Width of branchial area 225 " 

Length of branchial area. 085 " 

This species is very abundant in the Bay of San Diego, where about 
twenty examples of both sexes, all very similar in size, were obtained. 

This species of the Asiatic genus Platyrhina in the waters of the 
United States is a very interesting addition to our fauna. 

Proc. Kat. Mus. 80 3 May 6, 1880. 



34 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

EHINOBATID^. 

53. Rhinobatus productus Ajtcs. 
Very commou. 

GALEORHINID^. 

54. Mustelus californicus Gill. 

Abuudaut. This species appears to be identical with the Atlantic 
Mustelus canis, itself indistinguishable from Mustelus hinnulus Blainville, 
of the Mediterranean. 

55. Triads semifasciatus Grd. 
I»J"ot uncommon. 

56. Galeocerdo sp ? 

The jaws of a large shark, with the teeth similar in both jaws, triangu- 
lar, oblique, deeply notched on the outer margin, and all strongly ser- 
rate, are i^reserved by Mr. Pitcher, of San Diego. The shark was taken 
near San Diego, but south of the Mexican line. The width of the 
mouth is about a foot. I suppose this to have been a species of Gale- 
ocerdo. 

HETERODONTID^. 

57. Heterodoiitus francisci (Grd.) Jor. it- Gilb. 

Common. 



DESCKIIPTION OF A NE^V FliOUNMEK (XYSTBEURYS l-IOIiEPfS), 

FKOiTl SANTA €ATBfiiflWA BSa^AIVD, CALIFOKIVIA. 

By ©AVI© S. JOfSBAN aaasl CMARILES H. CJSI.ISEBT. 
XYSTEEURYS LIOLEPIS, gen. et sp. nov. 

Generic ciiakacteiis. — Subfamily Hippoglossinw, allied to Hippo- 
glossina, Hqjpoglossokles, and ParaUcktliys (Pseudorhomhus). Ej^es and 
color on the right side 5 mouth large, oblique, with the teeth developed 
on both sides, stout, unequal, bluntish, in a single series 5 gill-rakers few, 
short, thick, almost triangular; scales small, cycloid, membraneous, ob- 
long in form ', lateral line simple, arched over the i^ectorals ; caudal fin 
double-truncate, the angles rounded ; dorsal fin beginning over the eye ; 
anal fin iireceded by a feeble antrorse spine ; ventrals lateral ; body ob- 
long, moderately deep, rather thin. 

This genus differs from Sippoglossoides in the arched lateral line, and 
from Rippoglossbia in the cycloid scales and in its dextral habit. From 
most of the related genera it is separated by the few stout short gill- 
rakers. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 60 

Specific chakactees. — Form broadly elliptical, the profile contin- 
uous with the curve of the back ; ventral outline from chin to past the 
ventrals nearly straight, the rest of the outline corresponding to the 
dorsal outline. Head moderate, shortish ; mouth very oblique, not so 
large as in Pared icJifJiys maculosris; the iiremaxillaries on the level of the 
pux)il when the mouth is closed, the maxillary reaching to the posterior 
border of the ej'e ; maxillary broad ; teeth in a straight row, Avide apart, 

unequal, conical, and blunt at tip, their number about :. ., , .. .,. Teeth in 

the lower jaw irregularly alternating large and small. In the ii]>per jaw 
similar, but smaller and less obviouslj' alternating. The middle tooth 
on the blind side in the upper jaw the largest. 

Eyes large, close together, the lower slightly anterior; nostrils of right 
side above and in front of lower eye ; upper nostrils turned over on the 
blind side; posterior nostrils largest, with a conspicuous flap. Interorb- 
ital space a narrow, elevated ridge, covered with very small scales; a 
few scales on the posterior part of the maxillary, none on the mandible. 

Preopercle with its posterior margin free, little movable ; cheeks and 
opercles densely covered with small, oblong, cycloid scales. Branchios- 
tegals 7. 

Gill-rakers short, blunt, triangular, scarcely one-fourth as long as the 
eye, their edges slightly dentate. There are about 7 of the large ones 
on the middle and lower part of th6 gill-arch, some rudiments above. 
(There are about 24 long and slender gill-rakers in Paralkliihys mcicido- 
sus.) 

Lateral line without dorsal branch, with a broad curve above the pec- 
torals. Scales quite small, oblong, cycloid, thin and membraneous ; little 
imbricated except behind, and somewhat imbedded in the skin, with some 
smaller supernumerary scales, especially below; scales much smaller 
on the thoracic region than on the sides. Scales of right and left sides 
similar. A series of small scales extending up each ray of the vertical 
tins. 

Lateral line with about 123 scales, pierced by tubes ; number of rows 
of scales perhaps a little greater than the number of tubes. 

Dorsal fin beginning just in advance of the middle of the pujiil, its 
first ray slightly turned toward the blind side ; some of the anterior rays 
jurcate ; most of the rays simple; the fin rather low in front, gradually 
becoming higher to a i^oint near the middle of the body, thence regu- 
larly diminishing behind, the last ray being near to the base of the caudal ; 
the caudal peduncle very short ; anal fin similar, its highest ray opposite 
the highest of the dorsal ; a weak antrorse spine at beginning of anal ; 
ventrals shortish, reaching past front of anal ; pectoral of right side 
about as long as head, that of left side half as long. Caudal fin some- 
what double-truncate, with rounded angles, the middle rays being pro- 
duced. 

Fin-rays : Dorsal, 82 ; anal, C4: ; ventrals, 7. 



36 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Measuremenis of typical specimen. 

(Ko. , United States National Museum.) 

Extreme lengtli 11.50 inclies. 

Leugtli to base of caudal fin 9.90 inclies =1.00 

Greatest doptli 41 

Least deptli - 105 

Length of caudal peduncle - .005 

Lengtli of head .23 

Width of intcrorbital area 017 

Length of snout ■- .04 

Length of niaxillaiy .10 

Length of mandible 11 

Diameter of orbit .' .065 

Distance from snout to dorsal .075 

Length of base of dorsal 77 

Greatest height of dorsal 10 

Distance of anal from snout .32 

Length of base of anal .69 

Height of longest ray .11 

Length of cftudal 13 

Length of pectoral (right side) 24 

Length of ventrals .085 

The typical example of this species was taken on a hook on the west 
side of the island of Santa Catilina, Los Angeles Connty, California. 



OE-f^CfSIPTlO^f OF A IVEtV KAY (^ff. AT YKBIfflVA TRHSERffAf A), FKOM 
TTHE COAST OF € AI.SFOKIVEA. 

B"F B)AVEI> S. JTOROAN AMO CEIAMI.ES M. OII.BEMT. 
PLATYEHIXA TRISERIATA. 

Disk broad-ovate, broader than long 5 thesuont very blnntly rounded, 
not projecting ; the angle formed anteriorly by the pectorals very ob- 
tuse; anterior margins of the pectorals slightly convex ; tail stout, in 
form intermediate between Raia and EJdnohatus, its width at base about 
equal to the length of the snout and a little more than the intcrorbital 
width ; tail much longer than the disk, not much depressed, its sides 
vertical, its lower lateral edges witli broad horizontal fold, a slight 
groove above on each side of the median series of spines. 

Dorsal tins similar, higher than long, the anterior far behind the end 
of the claspers ; the posterior free margin of both fins very convex, not 
forming an angle. Caudal fin large, well de\eloped both above and 
below, its outline entire, elliptical. Ventral fins with their margius en- 
tire, the claspers well developed. Pectoral fins extending forward to a 
point but little short of the tip of the snout. 

Eostral ridges wide apart at base, rapidly convergent, inclosing a tri- 
angular area ; a slight translucent space separates this from the o]>aque 
pectorals ; eyes small, wide a])art, the broad spiracles close behind them. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 37 

Moutli broad, its widtli equal to the distance from its front margin 
to the tip of the snout ; a deep crease passing' around the mouth 
behind, in front of which the lower lip has three folds of skin. Upper 
lip not developed, a strong fold of shin passing from the angle of the 
mouth on either side to the inner angle of the nostrils, thence straight 
across, joining its fellow on the opposite side, these folds enclos- 
ing a depressed, subtriangular, / \ -shaped area, which is bounded 

behind by the curved outline of the upper jaw. In this depression are 
three transverse cross-folds of skin. Nostrils broader than the interval 
between them, with a free fold behind, which is prolonged forwards and 
inwards in the middle, the rest of the fold being turned backward. An- 
terior edge of nostrils with a broad flap, the outer edge of which is much 
prolonged, overlapping the posterior flap, the inner edge covering the 
inner angle of the nostril. 

Both jaws strongly and somewhat regularly curved. Teeth numerous, 
rather sharp, about ff , about twelve in a cross-series. Gill oi^enings very 
narrow. 

Skin everywhere covered with a rather fine shagreen, almost precisely 
as in Hhinohatus jyroductus. The asperities are smaller below, and 
coarser on the outer anterior margin of the pectorals, where tbere are 
also two or three irregular rows of sharji, curved, backward-directed 
spines. Four strong spines on the tip of the snout, forming a rhombic 
figure ; four or five strong, bluntish spines around each eye, above and 
in front, the one at the upper anterior angle the largest. 

A series of 22 very strong spines along the median line of the back 
and tail, and two more on the tail between the dorsal fins. Oii each 
side of the tail above is a similar series of ten spines, the first opposite 
the end of the base of the ventrals, the last opposite the front of the 
first dorsal; a single strong spine on the outer edge of the shoulder-gir- 
dle and two between the spine and the dorsal series. 

Color almost exactly as in Illiinohatus prodnctus. 01ive-bro^vn above, 
whitish beneath, the vertical fins paler. Eostral area and edges of pec- 
torals somewhat translucent. I^o sharp markings of any kind anywhere. 

Measurements. 

Extreme length 17.90 inches. 

Length of disk 7.25 inches = 1.00 

Width of disk 1.09 

Width of tail at base 20 

Distance between outer humeral spines 3G 

Length of branchial area .15 

Width of branchial area in front 34 

Width of branchial area behind 28 

Distance between outer edges of nostrils j 21 

Width of mouth '-iO 

Width of interorbital area 16o 

Length of eye 06 

Length of snout from eye • .225 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Lcugtli of suont from moutli 22 

Length of nostrils 07 

Width of anterior nasal flap , 06 

Length of nasal flap , 04 

Distance from snout to iirst dorsal 1. 565 

Length of base of first dorsal 095 

Height of first dorsal 18 

Interval between dorsals - 155 

Length of second dorsal 10 

Height of second dorsal 19 

Height of caudal . 175 

Length of upper portion of caudal 455 

Distance from snout to end of base of pectoral .83 

Length of base of ventrals 28 

Width of ventrals 20 

Length of claspers .36 

The type of this species, an adult male, was taken at Santa Barbara, 
Cal., February 8, ISSO, by A. Larco, an Italian fishermen. It is num- 
bered in the collection of the United States National jVIuseum. Mr. 

Larco states that this species is not uncommon about Santa Barbara in 
spring and summer. 

This species is probably related to Platyrhina sinensis^ but it has little 
affinity with Platyrhina ejcaspcrata, already described by us, from San 
Diego. In color, form of tail, and character of the dermal covering it 
resembles the Rhinohatidcv, and its afiinities with Syrrhina, of the latter 
" family," are evident. 



OEgCRIIPTBOIV OF A NEW gIPECIES OF " KOCK COD" (SEBASTICH- 
TEJY.^ SEKBICEPS), FESO:?! TTBIE COAST OF C AI.HFOKIVSA. 

'By DAYIB> S. JOROAN asad CMARILES II. GILBERT. 

Body rather robust, heavy forwards, compressed behind, the caudal 
peduncle short and rather slender. Head large. Mouth large, rather 
oblique, the maxillary reaching to opposite the middle of the eye; the 
premaxillary anteriorly on the level of the orbit; jaws about equal, in 
the closed mouth; teeth, as usual, in villiform bands on the jaws, vomer, 
and palatines. 

Top of head with the spinous ridges very thick and strong, their tips 
bluntish, turned upward and outward; the spines on each side placed 
nearly in a right line, so that the edge of the crown seems somewhat 
regularly serrated. 

The following x^airs of spines are i:)resent: nasal, preocular, supraoc- 
ular, tympanic, occipital, and nuchal. The coronal spines (found in 
S. auriculatus and ^. ruber) are wantiug in this species, as are the post- 
ocular spines (usually present in iS. pinniger). Interorbital space be- 
tween the spines narrow, flat, and coarsely scaled (the elevated ridges 
found in S. yiigrocinctiis being wanting). The tympanic spines are 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 39 

stronger tlian in related species. The nuchal spines are as nsnal placed 
close behind the occipital. 

Preorbital bone rather broad, with a single obsolete spine directed 
downward. Preopercle with five rather short and bhmtish spines, the 
second the larger, the three lower quite suiiill. Opercle with two blunt- 
ish, diverging spines. A blunt si)ine on the shoulder girdle above the 
pectorals; two sharp suprascapular spines. Suboi^ercle and lower edge 
of opercle each with a blunt point. Preorbital scaly below. Maxillary 
naked. 

Eye rather large, its diameter about one-quarter the length of the 
head. 

Gill-rakers clavate, short, stiff, compressed, armed with bristly teeth 
above and within. There are about thirty of them in all, those nearest 
the middle of the arch longest and most perfect, the others gradually 
growing smaller and incomplete. About half of them have the poste- 
rior edge free. The longest is about one-third the length of the eye 
{I in S. melanops; |- in 8. pinniger). In form they are midway between 
the tubercle-like gill-rakers of '^ Sehastosonms^^ {8. melanops) and the 
long and slender gill-rakers in " Schastomus^^ {8. pinniger^flavidus, cmricu- 
latiis, etc.). 

Branchiostegals 7, the gill membranes, as in other species, little 
united, Avithout isthmus. 

Scales moderate, essentially as in 8. fasclatus and related species. 
Lateral line with 55 scales. 

Dorsal fin with strong spines, the fourth to seventh highest and sub- 
equal, the lowest more than half the height of the highest. Soft dorsal 
rather higher than any of the S])ines. Caudal fin broad, rounded. 
Anal fin with the second spine robust, about as long as the third and 
much stronger, the soft rays high. 

Pectoral broad and rounded, its base deep, nearly one-third the 
length of the head, its lower rays thickened as in 8. melanops, its tips 
reaching just jiast the vent. Ventrals falling just short of the front of 
anal. 

Fin rays: D. XII, 1, 13; A. Ill, 5. 

General color dark olive, blackish on the head and back, the sides 
somewhat yellowish; sides of body with black cross -bands which are 
somewhat oblique; these bauds are usually distinct, but are sometimes 
nearly obsolete in dark-colored examples. The first band runs down- 
ward from front of dorsal across base of pectoral; the second from 
near the middle of spinous dorsal to behind the ventrals; the third from 
the posterior part of the dorsal to the vent; the fourth and fifth above 
the anal, and the sixth at base of caudal. Another black bar extends 
across the scapular region and the opercular spines, and two bands radi- 
ate from the eye, obliquely downward and backward. Belly dusky 
greenish; fins blackish, with a strong olive thige. 

Lii)s, mouth, front and lotcer part of the head, with a strong wash of 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

coppery red, this color fading out on tlie thoracic region. Base of fins 
and different parts of tlie body sometimes with obscure small whitish 
spots. 

Mcasnrcmcnts. 

(ISTo. , United States Xational Museum, from Santa I!arl)ara.) 

Extreme lengtli 10.40 inches.. 

Length to base of caudal 8. 70 inches = 1. 00 

Greatest depth 38 

Least depth 11 

Length of head 35 

Diameter of eye 085 

Length of snout 10 

Width of interorhital area 055 

Length of supraocular ridge 05 

Length of occipital ridge 06 

Length of maxillary , 18 

Distance from snout to dorsal 825 

Length of base of dorsal .57 

Heiglit of longest spine 13 

Height of longest ray 1.55 

Length of base of anal 135 

Height of second spine 14 

Height of longest ray 22 

Length of caudal . 205 

Width of base of pectoral 11 

Length of pectoral 2G5 

Length of ventral .24 

This species is found in great abundance about the island of Santa 
Catalina, where eight examples were obtained by the writers. Another 
was taken at Santa Barbara, where the species is considered rare by 
the fishermen. It seems to be intermediate between the still rough er- 
hea(Jed ;S^. nigrocinetus, on the one hand, and the smoother S. fasciatus 
and S. melanops on the other. 



ON TESE OCCttlKKENCE OF €EI»KrAI.©SCYr<I.IUM IjATSC'EPS (DIT- 

MEEtlE) OII.Ii, OIV THE COAST OF CAl,EFOKIVIA. 

By DAVI© S. JORi!>A]^ and CEIAHLES H. CJffLBERT. 

While we were engaged in making collections on the coast of Los 
Angeles County, California, a shark was described to us by a Wilming- 
ton fisherman as having the habit when caught of filling himself with 
air "till he was big as a barrel," so that if thrown back in the water he 
would float away on the surface, belly ux)ward, etc., exactly after the 
fashion of the species of Tetrodon. On cross-questioning, the fisherman 
assured us that the animal was a genuine shark, with the mouth under- 
neath and many sharp teeth, and that he had frequently taken them 
near Wilmington. 

At last one of these animals was brought in to us by a fisherman 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 41 

named Yiceute Leonardo, who took it in a gill-net oif Santa Cataliua 
Island. It proved to be a species of the genus Ceplialoscyllium Gill, 
and apparently identical with the type of the genus [Scyllium laticeps 
Dumeril). This species has been hitherto recorded, so far as we know, 
only from Tasmania. 

The following is a description of our specimen (Xo. , United 

States Irrational Museum) : 

Head short and broad, broader than long, and not half as deep as 
broad ; snout verj^ blunt, not projecting much beyond the mouth ; eyes 
oblong, small, the spiracles behind them well developed ; no nictitating 
membrane ; nasal oi)enings not confluent, their flaps separated by a broad 
space, the breadth of which is two-thirds the length of the snout ; nasal 
flaps conspicuous, without cirrus; mouth very broad, not strongly 
curved, with only a trace of labial fold at the angle ; skin at the angle 
of the mouth thin, smooth, i^ale, and raised into little cross-folds. 

Teeth similar in both jaws, small, sharp, with a long central cusp and 
a small basal cusp on each side. About four series of teeth. Teeth 
30 + 30 
27 + 27' 

First dorsal beginning over middle of ventrals ; second dorsal begin- 
ning behind front of anal and ending a little before end of anal ; base of 
pectorals low and horizontal, the last two gill openings above them. 
Caudal fin short. 

Color dark grayish-brown, with five pairs of dark bars across the back, 
their form irregular ; the central pair bounded by straight lines and 
forming a cross-shaped figure ; middle part of each fin blackish ; entire 
surface of body and fins covered with round black spots of different 
sizes, these larger and less numerous on the belly ; on the sides are also 
whitish spots, smaller and less numerous than the black ones. 

This specimen was a female, with the ova nearly ripe. The stomach 
when received by us was much inflated. The intestines contained num- 
erous specimens of a small gasteropod shell. 

Other fishermen about Wilmington tell me that they take this shark 
occasionally, about two or three times a year, and that when fully 
inflated it is half as broad as long, a sta'-ement not hard to believe. 

A fisherman at Santa Barbara, Mr. A. Larco, tells me that he also 
knows this shark. He has in his possession two egg-cases, with the 
eggs, which he says were taken from one of this species. These egg- 
cases are "wheel-barrow shaped," like the egg-cases of rays, and pro- 
vided with long tendrils. 

Measia-ements. 

Length ...37 inches = 1. 00 

Greatest depth (partly distended) '-^2 

Greatest width (partly distended) 25 

Length of head 15 

Greatest width of head 18 

Length of snout (from mouth) 04 

Length of hranchial area 08 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

WitTtli of mouth 14 

Diameter of eye 03 

Distauce from snout to first dorsal 62 

Length of base of first dorsal 08 

Distance between dorsals 09 

Length of base of second dorsal 05 

Height of secoud dorsal 065 

Length of base of anal 065 

Height of anal 08 

Length of caudal .18 

Length of pectoral 21 

Length of ventral 11 



ON THE OII.-8UARK OF SOUTHEK^f CAI-IFORIVIA (OAI.EORIIIIVUS 

GAIiEl'S). 

By ]»AVI1> S. J©I£I>ATV asad CHARILES H. OILBERT. 

Along the coast of Soutliern California a large species of shark ap- 
pears in the spring in great schools. At certain places along the coast, 
especially about ^Newport Landing, in the southern part of Los Angeles 
County, the pursuit of this shark becomes a matter of considerable 
economic importance. They are taken easily with a hook, and sometimes 
great numbers of them may be surrounded and brought in with a seine. 
They are valued for their livers and fins. A single liver when the ani- 
mals first arrive, in March, will yield a gallon of oil. As much as 4,000 
gallons of this oil have been procured at Newport in a single season. 
The fins of this species are sold to the Chinamen, who find them a great 
delicacy, and pay for them 12^ cents a i)ouud. 

The present writers have succeeded in obtaining one of these " oil- 
sharks," and find the species to be the European tope, GaJeorhinus 
galeus [Galeus canis and vulgaris of authors). It is singular that our 
only knowledge of the occurrence of this species on the west coast of 
America till now has been the indication by Dr. Giinther of the pres- 
ence in the British Museum of "o. Young. San Francisco. From Mr. 
Gruber's collection." Yet, in the waters of California south of Point 
Conception it is doubtless more numerous in individuals than all other 
species of sharks combined. 

Measurements of an adult male oil-sliarli. 

Length 63 inches = 1.00 

Depth (greatest) 14 

Length of head , 18 

Length of snout (below, from mouth) 075 

Length of snout (from eye) 08 

Width of mouth 07 

Length of spiracle 0075 

Diameter of eye - 025 

Distance from snout to first dorsal , 33 

Length of base of first dorsal - 073 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 43 

Hoight of first dorsal 075 

Distance between dorsals 25 

Length of second dorsal .- - - - • 045 

Height of second dorsal 04 

Length of anal 035 

Length of candal 21 

Distance from ventrals to j)ectorals 25 

Length of pectorals 15 

Length of ventrals 045 



TEIE StTRF-SMELTr OF THE NORTHWEST €OAST, AND TkilE ITIETUOD 
OF TAEinNO- TDIEM U^ TEIE QUaJLILEDatiTE BNOIANS, WEST COAST 
OF WASEiaiVGTOIV TEKKHTOKST. 

By JAMES G. SIVAN. 

ISTeeaii Bay, Wash., Septemher 22, 1879. 

Thirty miles soutli of Cape Flattery, at the entrance j:o Fnca Strait, 
Washington Territory, is the Quillehute River, a small stream empty- 
ing into the Pacific Ocean near some rocky islets, the largest of which, 
named by the Indians "Alikistet," and by the whites "James Island," 
is a landmark for the entrance to the little bay or cove, on the shore of 
which is the i)rincipal village of the Qnillehnte Indians, who collect 
and dry for winter nse a very choice variety of smelt {Hypomesm oUdus), 
which I have named the surf-smelt, from its peculiar habit of deposit- 
ing its spawn among the shingle of the beach, coming in with the surf 
in incredible numbers, and in this respect somewhat resembling the 
capeliu {M((llotus viUosus) of New Brunswick. 

The surf-smelt closely resembles the common smelt in shape, size, and 
the peculiar cucumber-odor, but differs in having its belly covered with 
a coating of yellow fat, which imparts an oily appearance to water where 
the fish have been cleaned or washed, and makes them the very perfec- 
tion of pan-fish. 

During the month of August, 1879, 1 was at the Quillehute Indian vil- 
lage from the 17th to the 22d, with United States Indian Agent Charles 
Willoughby, and had an ample opportunity to witness the habits of the 
surf-smelt and their capture by the natives. These Indians take them 
by means of a peculiar-shaped hand-net ot a parallelogram form at top, 
five feet long, twenty inches wide, and from four to five feet deep, with 
a curved handle. 

The specimen net which I send is made of the fiber of the common 
stinging nettle ( lirtica dioica L.), which grows in luxurious abundance on 
the northwest coast near Indian villages and deserted camps. A spe- 
cimen of the i^repared fiber is also sent with the net. 

The method of preparing the nettle by the Quillehute Indians, after 
gathering a quantity and striiDping off the leaves and twigs, is to dry 
the stalks in the sun or on a frame in the lodge, near, but not directly 
over, the fire. 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

When properly dried, each stalk is split open and the sMve or woody 
part broken by the hand and i)eeled oif from the ontside skin or liber. 
This liber is then sjmn or twisted into threads or twine, by rolling- be- 
tween the palm of the hand and the bare leg-, a i)rocess at which the 
women are very expert. 

The Indians at present know nothing of the process of rotting the 
plant and breaking it to get rid of the sJiive, or of the process of hack- 
ling the fiber, and as their method is so slow and laborious, they are 
abandoning the use of the nettle as a textile plant, and use twine, which 
they either purchase ready made, or manufacture fiom cotton threads 
raveled out from flour-sacks and spun by hand, or from jute, which 
they procure from old gunny-bags which have been thrown away by 
the whites. 

I think if they could be taught the process of rotting the nettle and 
preparing the fiber as the farmers of Kentucky prepare hemp or flax, 
that they would soon be able to furnish a valuable article of commerce 
which would pay them well for their labor. 

The net I send will show the twine made by this most i)rimitive of all 
methods, and indicate the many purposes for which it may be made 
available, but in order to be i^rofitable it should be prepared in quan- 
tities like flax, or hemj^, which it greatly resembles. 

The net stitch or knot for making the mesh was not taught them by 
white men, but has been known by the coast Indians for ages. 

Kearly thirty years ago I saw the salmon-nets of the Chinook Indians 
at the mouth of the Columbia Eiver. The knowledge and use of nets 
antedates the advent of the first white man, but in the manufacture of 
the fiber and the twine they seem to have retained the most primitive 
ideas, and never have advanced. What little twine they now manufact- 
ure is made exclusively by the old women. 

The peculiar shape of the net, and the curved handle, are to enable 
Indians to best use them in the surf. A straight handle could not be 
used. 

The surf-smelt are usually most plentiful during the month of Au- 
gust, and come in such vast numbers that the water seems to be filled 
with them. Cajitain Carroll, of the steamer Alexander Duncan, plying 
between the Columbia Eiver and Paget Sound, informed me that, on 
the 24:th of August, while on his passage from Astoria to Keeah Bay, he 
ran through a school of smelts between Point Grenville and Quillehute 
which extended nearly forty miles, and at night their track was made 
visible by a bright i)hosphorescent light which emanated from them. 
I noticed the same luminous appearance in the surf in Quillehute Cove 
during each night that I remained there. 

The smelts come in with the flood tide, and when a wave breaks on 
the beach they crowd up into the very foam, and as the surf recedes 
many will be seen flapping on the sand and shingle, but invariably re- 
turning with the undertow to deeper water. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 45 

An examiDation sLowed the pebbles to be incrusted with spawn, and 
as all the smelts I cooked were males, T conclnded that the females had 
first come in and cast their spawn and were succeeded by the males, 
who deposited their milt. I handled and noticed a great many, and 
cooked several dozens on two snccessive days, but did not notice a sin- 
gle female. This might have been purely accidental, and perhaps at 
another time the catch w^ould have proved all females. 

On the first appearance of the fish, the Indians rush into the surf and 
press the outer edge of the net down firmly on the sand or shingle, the 
swash of the breaker forcing the smelts into the net. Then, as the 
water recedes, they turn round quickly and hold the net so that the 
undertow will force more smelts into it. In this way I saw them take 
at least a bushel at a single scoop. 

In their immense numbers, these smelts resemble the eulachon, 
{Osmerus pacijicus) or candle-fish, which are taken in such enormous 
quantities at Xass Eiver, in British Columbia, near the southern bouud- 
nry of xVlaska. 

After every scoop, the Indian, if successful, empties its contents od 
the beach, where the squaws and children quickly gather them into 
baskets, and carry them to the houses, where they are strung on strips 
of cedar bark and hung up to dry. The method of stringing them is to 
take each one separately and pass a half hitch v.ith the bark around the 
head just back of the gills. This keeps each fish separate, and enables 
them to dry better. 

The Quillehutes still retain the ancient superstition, formerly so i)rev- 
alent among the coast tribes, relative to their fish, that the first ones 
must not be sold or given away to be taken to anotlier place, nor must 
they be cut transversely, but split open with a muscle-shell. 

I was fortunate in obtaining quarters in the house of an Indian who 
had a cooking-stove, where we cooked our rations as suited us. One of 
the Indians of our party obtained some smelts, which he boiled for sup- 
per, cooking them in the Quillehute style ; he gave me some, which I 
fried. Xo sooner did the Quillehutes learn that I was cooking some of 
their fish than two of the head chiefs, Hovrcattl and Klakistokar, came 
to see what I was doing, as they feared I would cut the fish with a knife; 
but I fried them whole, and when they saw me take the nice crispy 
smelts with my hand and eat them entire, without aid of knife or fork, 
they grunted forth their satisfaction, and allowed me to purchase as 
many as I wished to take away. But of salmon they would neither 
give or sell. The fall run of the Salmocanis and Salmo iiroicus had just 
connnencedto come, and while they gave us all we could eat of their own 
cooking, in their own houses, they refused to sell or give a single fish to 
be taken away. They fully believed that if we took any salmon into 
our canoe, all the salmon would desert the Quillehute Ener and follow 
us to IS'eeah Bay, and if we had cut the smelts or salmon with a knife, 
they all would immediately disappear in the ocean and never return. 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

I was unable to procure even a specimen of tlie salmon, but obtained 
enough smelts to forward, some excellent specimens to Washington. 
Very respectfully, your obedient servant, 

JAMES G. SWAK. 
Prof. Spencer F. Baird, 

United States Commissioner Fish and Fisheries, 

Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D. C. 

p. S. — I omitted to mention that the surf-smelt are common in all the 
salt water of Paget Sound, but I have not heard of an instance where 
they run up fresh-water streams to spawn, like the eastern smelt. 

J. G. S. 



1VOTE OIV THE OCCUKREIVCE OF IPRODUCTUS GIGAIVTEUS liV CAI.. 

IFORi'VIA. 

By C. A. ^WMITE. 

Among a small collection of fossils sent to the National Museum by Mr. 
Ludwig Kumlien, of the United States Fish Commission, from the valley 
of McCloud Eiver, Shasta County, California, are three or four large ex- 
am])les of Productus, which I am unable to distinguish from P. giganteus 
Martin sp., the well-known type species of the genus as it is extensively 
known in European strata. They are preserved in a hard, dark-colored, 
argillaceous rock, which is partly metamorphosed, and they are, there- 
fore, somewhat imperfect; but portions of them show the characteristics 
of the species very plainly. The largest of these Californian examples 
was, when perfect, quite equal in size to the larger Euroi>ean examples 
of P: giganteus, having had a transverse diameter near the hinge of not 
less than 140 millimeters, or 5J inches. 

A small collection of fossils was sent by mail from the same locality in 
1877 by Mr. Livingston Stone, the species of which were recognized as 
of Carboniferous age, but P. giganteus was not among them, although 
the later collections indicate that they occur in the same strata. These 
associated forms of both collections are too imi)erfectly preserved for 
specitic determination, but the genera Fcnestella, Streptorhynchus, Spiri- 
gera Camarophoria, Allorisma, and Eiiomphalus are more or less satis- 
factorily recognized. They all together plainly indicate tho Carbonif- 
erous age of the strata from which they come, which fact was also 
l)reviously known through the reports of Trask and Whitney. 

This, so tar as I am aware, is the first discovery of P. giganteus in 
American strata. It is not a little remarkable that it slioidd be fotind 
in the western portion of the continent and not in the middle and east- 
ern portions, where the Carboniferous system is so well, developed, and 
where several European species of Carboniferous brachiopoda are recog- 
nized. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 47 

Fig. 1, on Plate , represents one of the examples referred to, the 

principal portion of tlie figure showing a natural cast of the dorsal valve, 
with the nmbonal portion of the ventral valve. In this figure the full 
length of the shell from back to front is not shown, but it is represented 
in the acconiijanying diagram, Fig-. 2. 

Washington, D. C, December 3, 1879. 



NOTE OX ACKOTHEIiE. 

By C. A. \%^HITE. 

Among the fossils collected from Piimordial strata at Antelope Spring, 
Southern Utah, by Mr. G. K. Gilbert and Mr. E. E. Howell, who were 
then connected w^ith the exi^lorations and surveys west of the 100th 
meridian, were a number of examples of a discinoid brachiopod. This 
form I described and figuied* under the name of Acrotretaf subsidua, 
referring it to that genus provisional!}'. JSToue of the examples were in 
a condition to show all the generic characters clearly, but certain fea- 
tures in these shells indicated their i^ossession of important differences 
from any genus then established and led me to suggest that they prob- 
ably represented a new generic type. In the same year, 187G, Prof. G. 
Linnarsson, of Stockholm, Sweden, publishedt a new generic form from 
the Primordial rocks of Sweden, under the name of Acrothele^ which 
plainly includes Acrotreta ? subsidua White. Professor Linnarsson des 
cribed two Swedish species under this generic name (A. coriacea and A. 
granulata), and in 1870 he published a third species under the name of 
A. intermedia,^ but A. siibsidua is at present the only known American 
species. It is not unlikely, however, that some of the American species 
heretofore referred to ])isci)ia will be found to belong to Acrothele. 

Washington, D. C, February 1, 1880. 



DESCRIPTIOiV OF A NEW CKETACEOIS PIIVIVA FROm TiEW 

MEXICO. 

By C. A. IVHITE. 

Pinna stevensoni. 

Shell large, elongate-triangular in marginal outline; valves moder- 
ately convex; the convexity being slight and nearly uniform poste- 
riorly, but much greater toward the front, where it amounts to an obtuse 
median angularity upon each valve, and wheie a transverse section of 
the shell has an approximately regular rhombic outline; upper border 

* Expl. ami Siir. West of tlie lOOtli Merit!., Vol. IV, p. 34, pi. I, fig. 3, a, b, c, aud d. 

tBihang till k. Svenska Vet. Akad Handliugar, Baud 3, No. 12, p. 20, pi. IV, figs. 
44-52. 

tSvcriges Geologiska Uudersokuiug ; Ser. C. Afhaud. ock Upps. No. 35, p. 25, pi. 
iii, figs. 40-44. 



48 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

straight or nearly so ; lower border slightly convex and longer than the 
nipper border ; posterior border nearly straight or slightly convex, trun- 
cating the shell obliquely downward and backward, meeting the upper 
border at a more or less distinct obtuse angle and the lower border by 
an abrupt curve. Surface marked by abundant coarse lines and imbri- 
cations of growth, which traverse the shell in slightly curved lines corre- 
sponding with the posterior border, and is apparently without trace of 
any radiating lines or ribs. 

Entire length from beak to postero-basal extremity about 215 milli- 
meters ; breadth, from the postero-dorsal extremity to the base, meas- 
ured at right angles with the upper border, 95 millimeters. 

This shell is so unlike any described American species that no detailed 
comparison with any of them is necessary ; but it is so closely related 
to P. legeriensis d'Orbignj^, from the department of Sarthe, France, that 
it is not without some hesitation that I have decided to propose a sepa- 
rate specific name. I have never had an opportunity to examine any 
of the few examples of P. legeriensis that have teen discovered, and 
my comi:)arisons are therefore only with the description and figures of 
d'Orbigny, in Pal. Frangaise, Yol. Ill, p. 257, pi. 334. From these it 
appears that our shell differs from P. legeriensis in the following particu- 
lars. The angle of divergence of the npi)er and lower margins is not so 
great, in consequence of which the breadth of the shell is not propor- 
tionally so great ; the curve by which the i)osterior border meets the 
lower border is more abrupt, and the greatest transverse diameter of the 
shell is near ilie median line instead of being much below it, as it is rep- 
resented to be in P. legeriensis. The internal median grooves upon each 
valve, and also the undulations of the lower border, mentioned by d'Or- 
bigny, appear to be entirely wanting in our shell. 

Pjosition and locality. — Cretaceous strata ; about li miles southwest- 
ward from Fort Win gate, ISrorthern New Mexico, where it was collected 
by Mr. James Stevenson, in whose honor the specific name is given. 

WASHmaTON, D. C, February 15, 1880. 



NOTE OlS THE OCCURRENCE OF STRICIttrANDINIA SAliTEKI AND 
S. I>AYBI»»$ONS BN CEORGIA. 

By C. A. ^WEflTE. 

A few months ago Lieut. A. Vv". Yogdes, United States Army, gave 
me a few fragmentary fossils from a collection which he had then lately 
made at Taylor's Eidge, in the town of Ringgold, Catoosa County, 
Georgia. The other fossils of this collection and the geology of the 
region referred to were discussed by Lieutenant Yogdes in the Decem- 
ber, 1879, number of the American Journal of Science and Arts, pp. 
475-477. He there refers, and doubtless correctly, the horizon from 
which he obtained the fossils he gave me to that of the Clinton Groui^ 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 49 

of Kcw York. They are in the condition of natural casts in fine- grained 
sandstone, but I have quite satisfactorily identified a dorsal valve of 
StrieJdandinia saltcri and one of S. davidsoni Billings. If these two spe- 
cies are correctly identified, as they apjiear to he, their discovery iu 
Georgia is especially interesting, because they have hitherto been found 
only in strata of the island of Anticosti ; and also of the indication which 
they and their associates in the two regions named afford as to the 
equivalency of the Georgia, Clinton, Anticosti strata iu America; and 
Upper Llandovery strata of Great Britain. 
WASHiNaTON, D. C, February 15, 1880. 



BESCRIPTIOIV OF A NEW^ FliOUIVDER (B»l.ElTK©IVaCIITHVS VERTI- 
CAliS!^), FROM THE COA^^T OF CALIFORNIA, WITH IVOTE!>i OIV 

OTHER SPECIES. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN aaad CB5ARI.ES M. GII.BERT. 

Pleuroiiichthys verticalis sp. nov. 

Form broad ovate, the outlines regular; head small, somewhat con- 
stricted behind the upj)er eye; eyes large, but smaller than in P. 
quadrifuhercidatus. luterorbital ridge narrow; a small tubercle or 
prominence in front of the upper eye; a large one in front of upper 
edge of lower; another larger and sharper at interior edge of the in- 
terocular space ; another at the posterior edge of the interocular spine 
ridge. This latter is developed into a long, sharj), triangular spine, 
which is nearly as long as the pupil, and is directed backwards. A 
I)rorainent tubercle at the posterior lower angle of the upper eye. Upper 
edge of opercle somewhat uneven, but no other tubercles present. 

Mouth small, as in other species; the lips thick, with lengthwise 
plicffi. 

Teeth in a broad band on the left (blind) side of each jaw ; no teeth 
on the right side in cither jaw. Gill-rakers very small, weak, and flex- 
ible, about ten in number. Scales essentially as in the other species, 
small, cycloid, imbedded, and scarcely imbricated. Lateral line nearly 
straight, with an accessory branch which extends to the middle of the 
dorsal fin. 

Dorsal fin beginning on the blind side at the level of the jiremaxillary, 
there being but about four of its rays on the left side of the median line. 
Vertical fins less elevated than in the other species, the longest rays of 
the dorsal about half the length of the head. Anal fin preceded by a 
spine. Caudal i)eduncle short and deep. Caudal fin elongate, rounded 
behind. Pectoral short, nearly equal. Yentrals moderate, reaching 
anal spine. 

Fin rays: D. G5; A. 45. 

Color dark olive-brown, with round grayish spots, the body and fins 
mottled with blackish. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 4 Hay 6, 1 § 80. 



50 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



-, United States National Museum, was taken 



The type, "So. 

in a trawl-net outside of the Golden Gate, and was procured by us in 
the San Francisco market. 

There are apparently three species of the genus Pleuronichthys, as 
restricted by Gill, in the waters of California. 

One of these is the common species in the San Francisco markets at 
present, being taken in some abundance in the trawl-nets off Point 
Eeyes and the Farallones. This species is the Pleuroniclitliys ccenosus 
of Lockington's Memoir (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 1879, 97), and, as 
Lockington suggests, it is i3robably identical with the Pleuronectes 
quadrituberculatus of Pallas. For this form we accept provisionally 
the name quadrituberculatus. 

A second species occurs farther south, two specimens having been 
procured by us at Santa Catilina Island, and one at San Luis Obispo. 
This form answers better than the preceding to Girard's description 
of his Pleuronichthys ccenosus, and it may for the present be identified 
with it. The specimen noticed by Lockington as " No. 4," " with the 
dorsal not continued downward nearly so far as the others," perhaps 
belongs to this species. 

The third species is P. verticalis, described above. 

The species may be readily sepai'ated, so far as we have observed, by 
the following characters : 

* Dorsal fin beginning on the level of the lower lip, about ten of its anterior rays 

being on the left side ; ocular region with four or more blunt prominences or 
tubercles, arranged as follows: one in front of upper eye, another at each end 
of the interorbital ridge, the jjosterior largest, but not spine-like, one behind 
the latter, and oue or two more behind the upper eye ; upper j)art of opercle 
uneven; lower jaws with a band of teeth on the right side similar to that on 
the left side, but narrower; fins high, D. 7:^, A. 46 Quadrituberculatus. 

* * Dorsal fins beginning on the level of the upper lip, only four or five of its rays being 

on the left side of the median line. 

t Posterior prominence of interocular ridge developed as a strong backward- 
directed spine ; tubercular prominences present about the upper eye ; no teeth 
on right side of lower j aw ; fins rather low, D. 65, A. 45 Verticalis. 

tt Posterior prominence of interocular ridge scarcely elevated ; other ocular tuber- 
cles obsolete ; teeth ? ; fins high, D. 68, A. 48 Ccenosus. 

Measurements. 



Extreme length, in inches 

Length to base of caudal, in inches := 1.00 . 

Body, greatest depth 

Body, least depth of tail 

Head, length 

Head, diameter of orbit , 

Dorsal, distance from first ray to median line 

Dorsal, greatest height 

Anal, greatest height 

Caudal, length 

Pectoral, length 

Ventral, leng'th 



Terticalis. 


Quad)' 


ituberci 


lattis. 


9.20 




11.85 




7.50 = 1.00 




9:20 = 


;1.00 


.54 






.02 


.14 






.13 


.24 






.23 


.07 






.083 


.055 






.11 


.13 






.10 


.13 






.18 


.255 






.28 


.135 






.18 


.11 






.11 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 51 

A second example of Xystreurys liolepis, taken at Santa Barbara, is 
sinistral. The species is, therefore, like Faraliclitliys maculosus and 
Flatk'hthys stellatus, both dextral and sinistral. In the second example 
the small accessory scales are extremely numerous. 

Two more examples of the species, noticed by us as PlatysomatlcJithys 
sfomiasj have been obtained in trawl-nets from near the Farallones. 
This species is apparently not congeneric with Flatysomatichthys hippo- 
glossoides, differing in the long and slender gill-rakers and the ctenoid 
scales, as well as in the dentition, narrow interorbital space, and other 
minor details. The large teeth in both jaws, and the small teeth in the 
outer row in the upper jaw, are distinctly arrotc-sliaped, being abruptly 
widened toward the tip, thence acutely triangular. 

We propose to consider this species as the tyjie of a distinct genus, 
which may be termed Atheresthes, from the arrow-shaped teeth. It may 
be thus defined : 

Atheresthes geu. no v. 

Eyes and color on the right side. Body long and slender, closely 
compressed, tapering into a long and slender caudal peduncle. Mouth 
extremely large, oblique, the long and narrow maxillary extending 
beyond the eye. Both jaws with two irregular series of unequal, sharp 
teeth, which are anteriorly long and slender, posteriorly short. All the 
long teeth of both jaws, and the outer series of small teeth in the upper 
jaw, arrow-shaped. Some of the anterior teeth freely depressible. In- 
terorbital space narrow. Gill-rakers long and strong, numerous. Scales 
comparatively large, ciliated, thin, and readily deciduous, those on the 
blind side similar, smooth. Lateral line without arch. Fins low and 
rather fragile, the dorsal beginning over the eye, its anterior rays low. 
Caudal lunate ; no anal spine. Pectorals and ventrals small, the latter 
both lateral. 

Type, Flatysomatichthys stomias Jor. & Gilb. 



NOTKS OIV SHARKS FROITI THE COAST OF CAI.IFORJVIA 

By DAVID S. JORDAN and CKAS. H. OII.BERT. 

The following species of sharks, not hitherto recorded from the Pacific 
coast of the United States, have been observed by the writers during 
the i^resent winter (1880) : 

1. Isurus oxyrhynchus Eafinesque. (?) 

The jaws of a species of Isitrus were obtained by us at San Pedro, the 
shark having been taken off Santa Catilina Island. The teeth agree 
essentially with those of Isurus oxyrhynchus {Lamna spallanzani of 
authors). Isurus glaucus has, however, also the same dentition, hence 
we are unable exactly to determine the species. 



52 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

2. Carcharodoii rondeleti Miiller & Henle. — Man-eater Shark. 

A large iudividual of tliis species was lately barj)oone(l at the wlialiug 
station of Poiut Carmelo, near Monterey; Its ja\ys, now in the posses- 
sion of Mr. A. C. Keating, a drnggist at Monterey, are about two feet 
across. 

Schools of this species are said to be occasionally noticed in the open 
sea from Monterey southward. 

3. Cetorhinus maximus (Linnaeus) Blainville. — Baffling Shark; Ground Shai'k. 
An individual of this species, 31 feet in length, was taken March 25 

by the whalers at Monterey, and another somewhat larger on March 
26. Several others were noticed, but only two were secured. We are 
told that eighteen or twenty years ago several of them were taken at 
Monterey, since which time few or none have been noticed in the bay. 

4. Carcharhinus glaucus (L.) Blainville. — Blue Shark. 

A young individual of this species, taken in San Francisco Bay, is in 
the museum of the California Academy of Sciences. A " Blue Shark " 
is found in the open sea along the southern coast of California, but I do 
not know whether it is this species. 

5. Galeorhinus galeus (L.) Blainville. 

As already noticed, this species is the most abundant shark of South- 
ern California. It is common at Santa Barbara, and I am told is not 
nnfrequently taken at Monterey. 

6. Galeocerdo tigrinus Miiller & Henle. — Man-eater Sharl. 

As already noticed by us, jaws of an individual of this species were 
seen by us at San Diego, near which place the animal was obtained. 

7. Cephaloscyllium laticeps (Dum^ril) Gill. — Ground Shark. 

The occurrence of this species at San Pedro has been already noticed 
by us. At Santa Barbara it is, next to Triads semifasciatus, the most 
abuudaut of the sharks. It is there taken daily in the lobster-pots set 
for the " craw-fish " {PaUnurus interruptus). Its habit of inflating itself, 
when caught, hy swallowing air, is very remarkable. 

8. Pleuracromylon laevis (Eisso) Gill. 

Two specimens of this species have been obtained by us at Monterey. 
One of them, a female, taken March 26, had the young about 8 inches 
long, each of them connected by a long umbilical cord to a placenta 
which is attached to the uterus. The occurrence of this shark, in con- 
nection with its relative, Mustelus hinnuhcs {vulgaris^ canis, etc.), on the 
Pacific coast, is very interesting. 

March 26, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 53 
ON THE OEIVERIC REI.ATIOIVS OF PI^ATYKIIBIVA EXASPERATA. 

By DAVIO S. JOKDAW ami CHARLES H. OILBFRT. 

A short time siuce a small ray was described by the present writers, 
from San Diego, under the name of Platyrldna exasperata. (Proc. U. S. 

j^at. Mus. 1880, .) Soon after a second species was described by us, 

from Santa Barbara, as Flatyrldna triseriata. (Proc. U. S. Kat. Mus. 
1880, .) 

The two species are certainly not congeneric. The former species has 
the skin above covered with stellated prickles of different sizes, and re- 
sembles the genus Eaia. The latter is covered over by a uniform tine 
shagreen, and resembles the species of syrrliina and rhinobatus. So far 
as we can ascertain from the description given by Dumeril and Giinthex 
of Platyrhina sinensis and Platyrldna schoenleinii these two species agree 
with Platyrhina triseriata in the character of the dermal covering, as well 
as in form of body. We propose therefore to consider Platyrhina exas- 
perata as the type of a distinct genus, Zapteryx, distinguished from Pla- 
tyrhina by the presence of detached, unequal, stellated prickles on the 
skin above, instead of the uniform shagreen covering found in Platyrhina, 
and from Baia hy the convex outline of the ventrals and by the greater 
development of the dorsal and caudal fins. In Baia the ventrals are 
always emarginate. 

March 2G, 1880. 



RE:nARKS OIV TIIE SPECIES OF THE GENUS CHIRUS FOUND IN 
SAN FRANCISCO i^IARKET, INCtilJDING ONE HITHERTO UNDE- 
SCRIBED. 

By TV, IS. LOCKIIVGTO^. 

Four species of the genus Chirus occur in the markets of this city. 
The two most abundant of these are C. constellatus and C. guttatus 
Grd. Of the others, one is G. pictus Grd., while the other has until 
now remained undescribed. 

C. pictus is separated from the others by some suflSciently obvious 
external characters, beside those of color, as will be evident from the 
subsequent remarks, but the writer is unable to find any constant char- 
acter except that of the coloration by which to distinguish the other 
three species. 

As, however, he has now seen several hundred examples of C. guttatus 
and G. constellatus, and a large number of both the other species, and 
as, ifotwithstanding the considerable variation in the size, number, and 
position of the marking- of each species, neither on any occasion shows 
the slightest tendency to approach the pattern of another, he submits 
that in this group the pattern of the coloration may be considered 
specific. 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Difficult tliough it may be to prove upon paper the distinctness of 
tliese forms, there do not exist on this coast any other four species be- 
longing to one group which can be so unerringly separated by the eye. 



Diagnosis. 

!s; di-( 
rio of j 



Suborbital stay scaleless; di-( gj^^^^ ^.^^ ^^^^^^^^ blotches; L • , 
ameter ol orbit about y^Jo ofj ^^rals barred. '>C.pictiis. 

total length. f '^ ) 

Sides with rings of small dark^ 

] round spots surrounding areas | 

I of lighter color than the general ^ C. coustellatus, 

I ground ; pectorals sharjoly spot- 1 

Suborbital stay scaly ; diam- | ted. J 

eter of orbit about y-ou of total <J Sides with irregularly scat- ) 

iKiiortli tared circular or subcircular ^C (/M^to/ws. 

spots ; pectorals nearly plain. ^ 
Sides with irregularly shaped ) 
blotches, disposed in live or six ^C.macido-scriatus 
longitudinal series. ) 

C. pictus. 

This form is more inconstant in the number of its fin-raj'S and in 
the coloration than any of the others. 

Six specimens now before me vary as follows in the rays of the dorsal 
and anal : 

]N"o. 1. Locality, San Francisco market D. XX, ^V ; A. 21 

Xo. 2. Locality, San Francisco market D. XXI, -^ ; A. 22 

Xo. 3. Locality, San Francisco market '. . , D. XXI, -J^ ; A. 21 

Xo. 4. Locality, Kadiak Island, Alaska D. XIX, -/r ; A. 21 

Xo. 5. Locality, San Francisco market D. XIX, -^^3- ; A. 21 

Xo. 6. Locality, Kadiak Island, Alaska. . D. XVIII, .^ ; A. 21 

The color of all the species changes rapidly on exposure to air or im- 
mersion in alcohol. 

Xo. 2, when fresh, was of a brilliant green upon the belly and lower 
part* of the flanks, deepening into brown above, and blotched with 
bright purple. After exposure, the ground tint becomes first reddish, 
and finally dull purplish brown, while the purple blotches gradually 
fade into dirty white. 

The dorsal and anal are blotched like the body, and the pectorals 
barred with the same tints. 

In all the examples examined, the ventrals are shorter than the pec- 
torals, and fall considerably short of the vent ; and the lowest pair of 
lateral lines unite much nearer to the ventrals than to the vent. 

I can perceive no constant difference between specimens from Alaska 
and those found in our market. The most ordinary number of rays in 
the first dorsal appears to be nineteen. 

Xo. 1 differs from all the others in the total absence of brighter 
blotches upon the sides, but the jiectorals are barred, and all o^her 
characters coincide. 

Chirus coustellatus. 
First dorsal, in all the individuals examined, with tweniy-one rays, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 55 

and veutrals overpassing pectorals and reaching nearly or quite to the 
vent. 

Lowest lateral line usually forking about midway between veutrals 
and vent. 

Pectoral spotted all over with light and darlc spots. 

Common in the bay of San Francisco. 

Chirus guttatus. 

First dorsal with twenty or twenty-one rays, veutrals and pectorals 
usually about even posteriorly and scarcely reaching to the vent; posi- 
tion of the fork of the lowest lateral line somewhat variable. 

Spots on sides bright orange when fresh, but becoming dark on ex- 
posure to air or alcohol. 

Chirus maculo-seriatus nov. sp. 

D. XXI, 4. ; A. 22-23 ; P. 19; Y. | ; C. (principal rays) 15; L. hit. 110. 

Body elongate, comj^ressed, the greatest height about one-fifth of the 
length (caudal included) ; greatest thickness, at opercles, about three- 
fourths of the greatest height; depth of caudal peduncle about \^ of the 
greatest depth ; head about one-fourth of total length. 

Dorsal outline rising at au angle of about 20^, with a slight curv^e to 
the origin of the dorsal, or to about its fifth ray, whence it descends 
gradually in a straight line to the caudal peduncle, which is wedge- 
shaped, increasing in width towards base of tail. 

Abdominal outline descending slowly to the scapular girdle, thence 
nearly level to anal; anal base sloj)ing upwards with a slight curve. 

Snout longer than orbit; interocular width slightly less than length 
of orbit; forehead slightly curved transversely, summit of ascending 
l^remaxillary jirocesses rising slightly above the profile of the snout. 

Anterior nostril with the edges raised into a short tube. 

Eyes lateral, elliptical ; a fimbriated flap over the orbit. 

Jaws subequal, the ui)per slightly projecting; posterior extremity of 
maxillary reaching slightly beyond anterior margin of orbit, that of 
mandible below the center of the pupil. 

Cardiform teeth in both jaws, in several rows in front, diminishing to 
a single series at the sides, the outer row larger than the others ; a patch 
of similar teeth upon the vomer, and occasionally a few on the anterior 
part of the palatines, a character which certainly cannot be of generic 
value in this group. Branchiostegals six ; gill-openings continuous be- 
low, no isthmus ; gill-rakers obsolescent, transverse. 

Dorsal arising above the flap of the opercle, slightly in front of the 
pectoral base, deeply notched ; the first dorsal strongly ai-ched on its 
upper margin ; the first ray much shorter than the second ; the other rays 
increasing in height to about the fourth, thence diminishing to the 
twentieth, which is considerably shorter than the unarticulated ray at 
the commencement of the second portion of the dorsal. 

Second dorsal lower than the first, the rays increasing to about the 



56 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

fourtli; upper margiu straigLt, slightly diminishing in height to the 
nineteenth ray, four last rays diminishing rapidly. 

Anal commencing even with the second dorsal, and coterminous and 
similar to it; raj's increasing to the third; last ray short. 

Caudal slightly emarginate on posterior margin, with numerous acces- 
sory rays running some distance up the profile of the caudal X)eduncle; 
principal rays twice bifurcate. Vent somewhat in advance of the aual. 

Pectorals rounded, central rays longest, their tips about even with the 
nineteenth dorsal spine ; rays simple ; base vertical. 

Ventrals inserted well behind the pectorals, beneath the sixth dorsal 
spine; second ray longest, its tip slightly overpassing the vent; three 
longest rays overpassing the i)ectoral. 

Lateral lines five on each side, two above and two below the principal 
line. 

The uppermost on each side commence close together on the occiput, 
run along the dorsal base outside the first row of scales, and end at the 
fourteenth ray of the soft dorsal. 

The second commences on the occiiiut, and is continued to the base ot 
the uppermost principal caudal ray. 

The third commences on the scapular region, runs parallel with the 
dorsal outline till it becomes median upon the caudal peduncle, and is con- 
tinued some distance upon the caudal. 

The fourth commences slightly in front of the pectoral base, and con- 
tinues x)arallel to the abdominal outline to opposite the seventeenth anal 
ray. 

The fifth pair are united into a median abdominal line at a point about 
half way between the vent and the axil of the ventrals ; anterior to this 
point the single line runs forward to the pectoral girdle ; i)Osterior to it 
each division runs parallel with the anal base, and ends at the base of 
the lowest princiiial caudal ray. 

Scales ctenoid, rather larger on the anterior i>ortiou of the body than 
on the posterior; the ciliation obsolete on the scales of the side of the 
head. Suborbital stay squamose. Snout, preorbital, and interoi)erculum 
scaleless. Membrane between caudal rays scaly. 

Pectoral base scaly ; some small scales at base of rays of first dorsal ; 
second dorsal with small scales between the rays for about half its height. 
Anal scaleless. 

Color, in alcohol, brown, blotched with yellowish blotches in longi- 
tudinal series. 

This hitherto undescribed species is tolerably common in the markets 
of San Francisco at some seasons of the year. 

Wlien fresh, the series of blotches along the sides are bright orange 
and bright maroon. 

A type specimen is in the National Museum. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 57 
Tahle of measurements. 



Current number of specimen. 
Locality 



No. 1. 
San Francisco. 



Xo. 2. 
San Francisco. 



Inches | lOOths 

and i of 
lOOtlis. I length.. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



lOOths 

of 

length, 

including 

caudal. 



Extreme length 

Body : 

Greatest height 

Greatest width 

Height at ventrals 

Least height of caudal peduncle 
Head : 

Greatest length 

Distance from snout to nape . 

AVidl h of interorbital area 

Length of snout 

Length of maxillary 

Lcugih of mandible 

Diauicter of orbit 

Dorsal (spinoug) : 

Distance from snout , 

Length of base 

Greatest height 

Height at flrst spine 

Dorsal {soft): 

Length of base 

Height at longest ray 

Anal : 

Distance from tip of lower jaw . 

Length of base 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Length of external rays 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from tip of lower jaw.. 

Length 

Branehiostegals 

Dorsal 



13.35 

2.73 
L99 
2.62 
1.03 

3.28 

2.2 
.62 
.95 

L20 

L53 
.68 

3.20 
3.32 
1. G4 
1.00 

3.80 
L32 

6.48 
3.67 
1 22 

1.78 
L84 

3.43. 
2.85 

4.16 
2.15 



Anal 

Caudal, principal rays 

Pectoral ' 

Ventral 

^Number of scales in lateral line to base of caudal . 
Number of transverse rows above lateral line 



XXI, 



23 
15 
19 

1 

E 

110 
15 



.208 
.15 
.107 
.078 

.245 

.165 

.045 

.07 

.09 

.115 

.051 

.24 
.25 
.123 
.074 

.285 
.10 

.485 
.275 
.093 

.135 
.14 

.2.'J7 
.215 

.314 
.162 



n.60 

2.90 
1.70 
2.90 
1.03 

2.96 
1.93 
.66 
1.00 
L14 
1.36 



.248 
.144 

.248 
.09 

.26 

.165 

.056 

.86 

.100 

.085 



3.06 
3.30 



.262 
.285 



3.50 



5.55 
3.40 



i.eo 

1.80 

2.85 
2.36 

3.25 

2.16 

6 

22 
15 
19 

1 

5 
111 

15 



.48 
.296 



.138 
.152 



,245 
,202 



,28 
,185 



The proportions of the two siieeimens measured differ considerably, 
No. 2 being- much deeper in proportion to its length than No. 1, and 
having its greatest depth immediately over the ventrals, instead of at 
tlie origin of the dorsal. 

In consequence of the more elongate form, the insertions of the ventrals 
and of the pectorals are relatively farther back in No. 1 than in No. 2. 

Similar differences of proportion exist in G. co7istellatus, and it is evi- 
dent that no weight can be attached to proportion in distinguishing 
these species. 

Neither is. it advisable, in view of individual differences observed, to 
attach much significance to the length of the ventrals, or to the i)ositiou 
of the fork of the lowest lateral line. 

C. maculo-seriatus is by no means scarce in our markets, but is less 
abundant than guttatus and constellatus. 

An example of this form is in the National Museum at Washington, 
numbered . 



58 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



SEiSCBIPTIOX OF AIVEW FISH FBOIVI AliASKA (URANIDEA ITISCROS- 

TOMA). 

By W. N. I.OCKI]\ClTO]V. 

Uranidea microstoma. 

Body loug aud low, little compressed. 

Head dei)res8ed, rather small, wider than deep 5 anterior portion of 
body about equal in width and depth, somewhat flattened on back near 
head, and gradually becoming more and more compressed posteriorly. 

Dorsal outline regularly arched, its highest point at origin of first 
dorsal ; abdominal outline nearly straight in some examples. 

Head about 4f to 4^ ; breadth of same 5^ to 4^ times in the total 
length ; orbit about 5, snout 4 to 3^ times in the length of the head. 

Eyes directed upwards, elliptical, the orbits not elevated above the 
general surface ; interorbital width, nearly equal to the transverse diam- 
eter of the orbit. 

Mouth short, small compared with others of the genus; posterior 
extremity of maxillary a little beyond the front margin of the orbit ; 
upper margin of maxillary hidden behind the preorbital in the closed 
mouth, except the short, broad, posterior extremity, which is free. 

Lower jaw shorter than the ui)per, and closing within it. 

A broad band of villiform teeth in front of both jaws. 

Teeth on vomer, none on j)alatines. 

Subopercular spine much developed, directed forwards 5 preoper- 
culum ending in a single sharp, straight spine ; branchiostegals 5. 

First dorsal commencing a little behind the pectoral base, low, the 
upper margin nearly straight ; height less than that of second dorsal, 
the tays neaily equal in length. 

Second dorsal commencing above the vent, first ray shorter than tlie 
second ; upper margin a straight line, the height of the fin diminishing 
regularly but slowly posteriorly. 

Anal shorter than second dorsal, commencing opposite the third and 
ending opposite the seventeentli ray of that fin ; anteriorly rounded, 
the rays increasing to the fourth, thence somewhat diminishing poste- 
riorly ; depth greater than the height of the second dorsal. 

Pectoral wedge-shaped, seventh ray longest; rays fleshy, simple; tip 
of seventh ray reaching about to the vent. 

Ventrals inserted a little behind insertion of pectorals, the tips not 
reaching the vent, consisting of one spine and four rays ; second, third, 
and fourth rays longest. 

Caudal slightly convex on its posterior margin when expanded ; the 
rays twice bifurcate, first bifurcation at about a third of their length. 
. from the base. 

Vent not separated from the anal fin by any considerable space ; rays 
simple. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



59 



Lateral line deflected downwards suddenly at posterior extremity of 
second dorsal, tlience posteriorly along center of caudal peduncle, and 
anteriorly parallel to dorsal outline; pores simple, 35-37. 

Body scaleless, entirely smooth. 

Color olivaceous above, lighter below ; upper portion maculated with 
darker; fins with small dark spots on the membrane; a dark band 
across caudal. 

Two specimens (Xos. 1 and 3) from fresh water, near Saint Paul's, 
Kodiak, collected by W. J. Fisher. In No. 1 the dorsals are separated 
by a considerable space ; in No. 3 by a smaller space. One of these is 
in the United States j!!^ational Museum, numbered — . 

Numerous specimens from the Aleutian Islands, collected by Captain 
Greenebaum, present no difference except in the more or less complete 
union of the dorsals, and their smaller size. The latter are i^robably 
half grown. 

As the fin-rays and other characters agree closely, I am inclined to 
think the separation of the dorsals either an individual character, or 
one due to greater age. 

Mr. Fisher's examples w^ere obtained in fresh- water lakes formed by 

the melting snows, and communicating with the ocean only by shallow 

outlets. This species differs from those of the genus found in the 

United States by its smaller mouth, lower fins, and the four soft rays 

in the ventrals. In all these respects it resembles the European TJra- 

nidca gohio. 

Dimensions. 



Total length 

Greatest depth 

Depth of caudal peduncle , 

Length of head 

Width of head 

Lougitudiual diameter of orbit 

Length of snout 

Tip of snout, alons top of head, to origin of first dorsal 

Length of base of lirat dorsal 

Length of base of second dorsal 

Tip of snout to insertion of ventrals 

Length of ventrals 

Length of pectorals 

Tip of lower jaw, along abdomen, to origin of anal 

Length of anal base 

Number of dorsal rays 

Number of anal rays 

Number of pectoriil rays 

Number of caudal rays 



No. 1. 



4.87 

.85 

.29 

1.06 

.94 

.21 

.30 

1.30 

.75 

1.62 

1.12 

.73 

1.00 

2.36 

1.28 

8-19 

14 

14 

5-10-2 



No. 2. 



.18 
.80 
.75 
.15 
.21 



.54 
1.15 



.55 
.62 



.95 

9-19 

14 

14 



No. 3. 



4.30 
. 75 
.27 

L03 
.81 
.22 
.31 

L25 
.73 

L37 
.94 
.70 
.94 

2.10 

1.25 

8-19 
12 
14 



60 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



l>ESCRII»TIO'V OF A NV.W SPECIES OF A«JO]\II>iE (BRACIIVOPSaS 

VEKKOJCOSUS), FKOM TiaE COAST OF €AL,IFOKNIA. 

By W. ]V. LiOCKII^GTOlV. 

Brachyopsis verrucosus. 

D. VII-IX, 7-8. A. 10-11. P. 14-15. V. 1-3. C. 2-10, 2. Lateral 
scutes, 34-30. 

Form elongated, slender, lateral dorsal outline rising very gradually 
from the snout to above the base of the pectoral ; central part of the 
upper orbital margin elevated above the line of the forehead and occi- 
put, as is also the tip of the lower jaw and front i^ortion of the snout, 
so that there is a not very conspicuous depression in front of the eye. 

From the highest point the dorsal outline descends gradually to the 
elongated and narrow caudal peduncle. 

Abdominal outline from posterior extremity of mandible to caudal 
peduncle straight. 

Greatest height about 11 ; greatest width 7-7^ ; length of head 4^-4^ 
times in total length to tip of caudal (mouth closed); greatest depth 
about 1 J in greatest width ; depth of caudal peduncle about 3| times in 
the greatest depth. 

Mouth oblique, the lower jaw projecting considerably beyond the 
upper, its tip entering into the dorsal outline, and its posterior extremity 
reaching to a vertical from the anterior margin of the pupil. 

Mandible half or nearly half the length of the head. 

Maxillary short, broad posteriorly, and set at a more oblique angle 
than the mandible, below which the lower angle of its posterior margin 
projects when the mouth is closed, while the entire length of its upper 
margin is hidden beneath the preorbital in the closed mouth ; a short 
and slender barbel at its posterior extremity. 

Entire length of upper jaw less than ^ that of head. 

Teeth uniform in both jaws, villiform, very small, in a band which is 
widest in front, but divided in the center. 

A i»atch of similar but even finer teeth (perceptible to the touch, but 
scarcely to the eye) on vomer, and another on each palatine. 

Eyes directed laterally and somewhat upwards, oval, their longi- 
tudinal diameter a little less than the length of the snout, and about 
^-^ in tlie length of the side of the head; interorbital area sunken, 
its width about 5 times in the length of the head. 

Snout a little longer than the longitudinal diameter of the eye ; two 
short backward-directed spines on its summit, slightly posterior to the 
line of the tubes of the nostrils. 

Preorbital large, with several small spines on its lower margin. 

Supraorbital margin set with small spines, and rising iu its posterior 
portion to a spinulose crest. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 61 

Lower orbital margin prominent, a pair of spines at its posterior 
extremity, the binder tbe larger. 

Preopercnlum with a spinnlose longitudinal ridge, ending in a back- 
ward-directed spine; a second smaller spine below tbis, at angle; lower 
limb witb two flat angular projections. 

Operculum striate, witb a ridge, ending in a spine, on its upper part. 

Occipital and lateral ridges of upper surface of bead prominent, 
spinulose or denticulated above, but without spines; lateral ridges each 
formed of three shorter ridges ; no pit on occiiHit. 

Gill-membranes continuous below, without isthmus ; branchiostegals 
five, large. 

Pectoral very long, boldly rounded on its posterior and lower mar- 
gins, broad; the upper rays slightly increasing to about the sixth, the 
five lowest decreasing rapidly. Tips of the longest rays reaching, 
nearly to or beyond the sixth dorsal ray, or to the back of the thir- 
teenth or fourteenth dorsal scute. Longest rays about equal in length 
to the head. Eays simple, base slightlj^ oblique. 

Ventrals inserted on the plane of the upper pectoral axil, longer than 
the pectorals, their greatest length about 4 times in the total length, and 
consisting of a spine and two rays, the spine attached to the first ray, 
which is of considerable length, but shorter than the second, the tip of 
which extends beyond the second anal ray. Membrane between the 
two rays broad; the second ray fringed with a membrane along its in- 
ternal margin. 

First dorsal commencing at about the eighth dorsal scute and termin- 
ating at the sixteenth. First spine shorter than the second, the next 
five about equal in length, the remainder diminishing rapidly. Height 
of the longest spines somewhat exceeeding the depth of the body below 
the fin. 

Second dorsal about equal in height and similar in form to the first, 
arising at about the nineteenth dorsal scute, and terminating at or near 
the twenty-seventh. First ray shorter than the second, the next four 
nearly equal, the remainder falling rapidly. 

Anal commencing directly below the last ray of the first dorsal, and 
coterminous with the second dorsal, its lower margin nearly straight, 
and its depth rather less than the height of the second dorsals. 

The last rays of the dorsals and anal are joined to the body by mem- 
brane. 

Posterior margin of caudal convex ; accessory rays few. 

Dorsal scutes 35-36, the two series approaching and uniting a little 
behind the second dorsal; about seven scutes between the point of 
junction and the caudal. 

Each scute produced posteriorly into a large spine bent backwards, 
and frequently denticulated upon its anterior or outer edge. Behind 
the point of junction of the two dorsal rows the spines are in closely 
coupled pairs. 



62 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Lateral scries of scutes eacli consisting of 34-36 plates, each armed 
with a spine similar to those above described. 

Ventral series containing- 29-31 plates, the last three or four single, 
the remainder forming a double series similar to the dorsal series, but 
■with less conspicuous spines. 

The ventral series commences at the axils of the ventral fins, and the 
lower surface between these fins and the gill-openings is occupied by 
several large, separate, subcircular, strongly striated scales or plates, 
those running along the margin of the gill-openings placed closer to- 
gether, and forming a series of about seven. 

About seven pairs of subcircular scales, not striated, or only slightly 
striated, are scattered along the acutely triangular space behind the 
ventrals, between the two ventral series of scutes, "which do not fairly 
meet each other anterior to the anal fin. An elongate naked area be- 
hind the pectorals, separating the lower lateral from the ventral series. 

Some small scales in the space between the mandibles, and a series 
of small, elevated, and sharp-pointed scales along the curve of the 
pectoral base. 

Vent not far behind the base of the ventrals. 

The center of the interocular space, the area between the occipital 
ridges, some spaces on the lateral f>spect of the head between the more 
prominent parts of the bones, and the areas between the large scales in 
front of the ventral are set with numerous prickles, a few of AA'hich also 
occur in the intermaudibular area. 

Similar prickles are numerous on the anterior portion of the trunk, 
occupying the spaces between the parallel dorsal and upper lateral 
series of scutes ; those of the upper surface end at the first dorsal, those 
of the upper lateral surfaces at the i^osterior extremity of the same fin. 
Behind these points the scuta of these surfaces closely interlock. 

Lateral line continuous ; a pore between each pair of scutes ; pores 
simple. 

Color. — After exposure to alcohol, the upper and lateral surfaces of 
the body are banded alternately with dull yellowish and olivaceous 
brown; pectorals whitish on their basal i)ortion, a dark spot on the 
upper and another on the lower edge excepted, and dark on their 
terminal part, the margin of the dark color running obliquely from the 
center of the first to the tip of the eleventh ray. 

Ventrals with a large black spot on the membrane inside the first ray, 
and two small si^ots near the tip of the membrane. Abdomen yellowish 
white. 

When somewhat fresher, the dirty yellowish tint of the ventrals was 
bright orange yellow, and the black of that fin was more positive, so 
that it is probable that in life the colors of the whole body were much 
brighter than they are now. 

The total length of the specimens examined, from tip of lower jaw 
(mouth closed) to tip of caudal, varied from 5.68 inches to 6.65 inches. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 63 

Actual measurements of tlie jiarts are*not given, as tlie proportions 
vary but little. 

Several examples were collected November 26, 1879, at a depth of ten 
fathoms, in Drake's Bay, 35 miles north of San Francisco, by Mr. Voy, 
who has i^resented them to the State University, Berkeley, Cal. 

One of the types is in the United States National Museum, num- 
bered . 

This species is referred to the genus Bracliyopsis^ proposed by Dr. 
Gill for the reception of Agonus rostratus. 

This genus is distinguished from Agonus by the projecting lower jaw 
and consequent comi)aratively large terminal mouth, and by the absence 
of an isthmus. 



DE^C'RaPTffOlV OF A NE'^V CEIVITS AN» SO.^E IVEIV SB»ECIES OF €At,. 
DEOKMA FISMES (ICOSTEUS ^:::VI«.^IATICtJS AIV» OSmERUS AT- 

TENUATUS). 

By TV, N. I.OCKI1VGTON. 

Fam. BLENNID^(?). 
IC03TEUS. 

Body much compressed. Teeth in a single row in both jaws, close-set, 
sharp. No teeth on vomer, palatines, or i^haryngeals. Gill-openings 
continuous under the throat, composed of flexible rays, tbe anterior 
simple. 

A single long dorsal fin ; anal similar. Base of pectorals fleshy. Ven- 
trals thoracic in i^osition. Lateral line vrith groups of spines. Pseudo 
brauchiop. 

Body scaleless throughout ; fins beset with spinules along tbe rays. 

Etymology: ejzw, to yield; v(T7£(», bone. 

Icosteus Eenigmaticus. 

Body much compressed throughout; head thicker than any portion of 
the body. Dorsal outline rising rapidly to the origin of the dorsal ; 
thence more slowly in a regular curve to about the center of the length 
of the bodj^ ; thence curving gradually downward to the caudal peduncle. 
Abdominal outline regularly curved. 

Upper and lower outlines of caudal peduncle concave, the peduncle 
widening posteriorly to support the fin-shaped caudal. 

Greatest depth about 3:} times in total length ; length of head about 5 
times in total length ; eye 6 ; snout more than 3; interorbital width about 
2^ times in the length of the head ; caudal peduncle about 5i times in 
the greatest depth. 

Nostrils simple, elongate-elliptical; eyes lateral^ tbeir diameter less 
than the length of the snout ; mouth-opening rather large, horizontal, 
or nearly so ; tip of the intermaxillary below the lower margin of the 
eye ; margin of upj)er jaw formed of the intermaxillaries only ; maxilla- 



64 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 

ries narrow tlirougliont, not hidden beneatli the preorbital ; posterior 
extremity of the maxillary extending to a little beyond a vertical from 
the center of the eye. 

Teeth. in jaws in a single row, numerous, tine, sharp-pointed, closely 
and regularly set, those in the upper jaw smaller than those in the lower. 
No teeth on vomer or palatines. ISTo pharyngeal teeth present. 

Gillralvers flexible, few, about half as long as the diameter of the eye 
on the first branchial arch, diminishing on each successive arch. 

Gill-openings continuous under the throat ; branchiostegals six. 

Dorsal commencing at a vertical above the pectoral axil, and consist- 
ing of 52-55 rays, all soft and flexible, but some of the anterior ones un- 
branched. Anterior portion of dorsal low, the rays gradually increas- 
ing in height posteriorly, the base of the fin terminating opposite to 
that of the anal, at about li times the least width of the caudal pedun- 
cle from the origin of the caudal fin; but the longest rays (last but two 
or three) extending backwards almost to the origin of the central caudal 
rays. None of the dorsal rays bifurcate more than once. 

Anal commencing opposite the 24th-27th dorsal ray ; similar to and 
about equal in depth to the height of the posterior portion of the dor- 
sal, consisting of 37-40 rays, most of them once bifurcate; its base ter- 
minating opposite to that of the dorsal, and its longest posterior rays 
extending backwards even with those of the latter ; three last anal rays 
diminishing rapidly in length. 

Some of the anterior anal rays appear to be unbranched. 

Caudal elongate, fan-shaped, the central rays longest, and the pos- 
terior margin greatly rounded. Posterior part of caudal peduncle ex- 
panded, and forming the larger half of an ellipse, around which the rays 
are set; the central ones straight, the outer ones curving outward and 
backward. Accessory rays numerous ; j)rincipal rays twice bifurcate. 

Pectorals with a fleshy base, having a curved posterior border from 
which the rays radiate, forming a fan-shaped fin ; the central rays longest, 
the others diminishing regularly on both sides. All the raj's straight ; 
the seven or eight central ones twice, the others once, bifurcate. 

Ventrals inserted n little behind the base of the pectorals, narrow, con- 
sistiug of a short (spinous ?) and four long rays. 

Lateral line conspicuous, curving downwards above the pectoral until, 
a little posterior to the origin of the anal, it reaches the median line of the 
trunk, along which it continues till it dies out ui^on the fleshy base of 
the caudal. 

Groups of small spines along the entire length of the lateral line, the 
number of spines in each group variable. About 120 groups of spines 
in the smaller example. Ko scales upon any i>ortion of the body or fins, 
but the latter rendered rough by asperities or small spinules ; a single 
series along the base of each ray, and a series along each of its branches. 

Color. — Purple spots and blotches of irregular shape upon a yellowish- 
brown ground ; the spots largest upon the dorsal region, and becoming 



rnOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



G5 



sinaller fnicl more numerous near the lateral line. The region above and 
beliind the pectorals beset ^itli numerous purple spots, smaller tlian 
those above the lateral line. Beneath the lateral line, on the posterior 
part of the body, there are no spots, except along the line of the anal; 
but probably this is the result of exposure to alcohol, wliieli has caused 
the disappearance of most of the si)cts from the smaller specimen, the 
color of Avhich, when fresher, was like that of the larger. 

Throat and greater portion of gill-membranes vrithout blotches, bat 
sown v/ith dark points, which occur ?Jso over the whole of the body and 
the interior of the mouth. Fleshy bases of caudal and pectorals with sev- 
eral purple blotches. Fins darker than the body, and shpwing traces of 
blotches of a deeper tint, especially upon tlie caudal. 

Vertebra? nunierons; vertebral column highly flexible and soft. 

Cranial bones tolerably firm, those of the lace and opercles, »S:c., highly, 
flexible. 

Entire body characterized by a lack of firmness, as it can be doubled 
up as readily as a piece of soft, thick rag. Swim-bladder large. 

I append measurements of the two specimens, but many of these nuist 
be regarded as approximate only, in consequence of the distortion aris- 
ing from the softness of texture of the fish, together with that conse- 
quent upon catting them open shortly after tliey were first procured. 

In the larger specimen the ventrals are partly" destroyed, and the tips 
of many of the dorsal and anal rays are wanting. 

The shape of the head in the two examples is verj: different, doubtless 
owing to the flexibility of the bones. In the larger the snout is blufl", 
almost perpendicalar, the dorsal outline rises rajiidly to the origin of tlie 
dorsal, and the tip of the p^Tmaxillaries is fiir below the eye ; while in 
the smaller the dorsal outline slopes regularly' from the tip of the snout, 
which is almost level with the lower margin of the eye, to the origin of 
the dorsal. 

lUmcnslons. 



Totnl Icnjrth, to tip of caudal 

Greatest depth (approximate) 

Ueptli of peduncle of tail wliere narrowest 

Lengtb of iiead 

Uiaiiieter of eye 

Interorbital width 

Length of upper jaw 

Length of snout •. 

Tip of snout to origin of dorsal 

Length of base of snout 

Length of longest po.sterior dorsal rays 

Interval between dorsal and caudal 

Tip of mandible to anal fin 

Length of anal base 

Origin of dorsal to upper axU of pectoral. 

■ Upper axil of pectoral to tip of snout 

Length of pector.ils 

Length of ventrals 

^Number of dorsal rays 

!N"unilier of anal rays' 

dumber of groups 'of spines in lateral line. 



No.L 



55 

40 

Circa 110 



Xo. 2. 



m 


m 


2b 


3A- 


iB 


f 


2i 




% 


i 




IS 


}% 














S 


2i- 


3" 


r.i 


Ci 


1,'- 












5 


5i 


3^ 


3§ 


H 








'-S 




n 


1* 


7 





52 or 53 

37 

Circa 120 



Proc. Nat. Mrs. 80- 



May S4, 1880. 



66 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

These two individuals, together with a third of smaller size, and cer- 
tainly of another species, were i^rocured in the market of San Francisco 
by W. G. W. Harford, in 1876. The fishmonger called them " deep-sea 
fish," and. said that he had never seen the kind before. !N"o others have 
appeared in the market since. A smaller example is in the museum of 
the State University, Berkeley, and was iirocured in Washington Terri- 
tory. 

The relations of this iish are i)robably with the Blennioid fishes. It 
can, however, hardly be referred to any of the current forailies, and 
should jierhaps form the type of a separate one. 

Osnisrus atteiiuatus. 

Osmcnts clongatus Lockiugton, Rep. Coiainissioners Fislieries State of Cal., 
1879, p. 43; uot Osmerus elorifjatus' Ajcvs, Proc. Cal. Acad., Vol. I, p. 17. 

D. 1-10. A. 17. P. 14. V. 1-8. 

Form elongate, fusiform, dorsal outline rising gently to a point just 
behind the origin of the pectoral, thence almost straight to dorsal, 
thence tapering regularly to the caudal peduncle. Abdominal outline 
straight from the posterior extremity of the maxillary to the ventrals, 
thence inclining upwards slowly to the caudal peduncle. 

Greatest depth 7§-8f times; head 4^ to nearly 5 times in the total 
length; eye about 4 times in the length of the head; snout about the 
same length as the eye; caudal peduncle 2f-2^ times in the greatest 
depth. 

Viewed from above, the forehead and snout diminish in width ante- 
riorly. 

Nostrils conspicuous, divided by a thin partition, simple, situated on 
a line from the top of the i^upil to the tip of the snout, and about half- 
way between the latter and the anterior margin of the orbit. 

Ey-es large, subcircular, entirely in the anterior half of the head; 
ujiper orbital margins raised, but the interorbital space between these 
margins flat transversely. 

Mouth large, the commissure straight and ascending anteriorly at an 
angle of about 30^, the tip of the upx:>er jaw horizontal with the center 
of the pui^il, and the jiosterior extremity of the maxillary on a vertical 
line from the posterior margin of the pupil ; mandible straight on its 
lower border, its tip projecting beyond that of the upper jaw. 

Dentition tolerably strong, on jaws and iialatines. Teeth of upper 
jaw in a single row, numerous, small, slender, those in front inclined 
forward, a large tooth at the symphysis. 

Lower jaw with a double row of slightly recurved teeth in front, the 
outer extending only about one-fifth of the length of the sides of the 
mandible, the inner row extending along the sides, and consisting of 
larger teeth than the outer or than those of the upper jaw; the largest 
situated along the sides, and much wider apart than those of the upi^er 
jaw. 

Inner jialatine row of numerous small teeth; outer pahitine series 



procp:edings of united states national museum. 67 

very variable iu its dcvelopmeut, but usually consistiug of few rather 
large tectli, increasing iu size forwards, the auterior tooth sometimes 
quite a large cauiue. Teeth in front part of tongue in a single series 
on each side, with a single terminal tooth ; all the teeth large and curved, 
the terminal tooth largest. A large patch of several rows of villiform 
teeth on the base of the tongue, marked off by a constriction from the 
termiual patch. 

Gill-rakers long and slender, those of tirst pair of branchial arches 
half as long as the eye, the others diminishing gradually. Branchios- 
tegals seven. 

Angle of preoperculum a little more than a right angle, both the pos- 
terior and the inferior margins nearly straight. Posterior margin of 
gill-cover forming a bold and almost regular curve, its most i)osteriorly 
produced portion occupied by the suboperculum. 

Pectoral of fourteen rays, the third or fourth longest, narrow, the 
rays Infurcate. Tips of the pectorals distant from the ventrals more 
than the length of the ventrals. 

Yentrals not greatly shorter than the pectorals ; the rays bifurcate, 
their tips not reaching to the anus; insertion of ventrals about one 
scale in advance of that of dorsal. 

Dorsal of one spine and ten bifurcate rays, highest in front, the height 
about twice the length of the base; the second ray slightly longer than 
the first, the last longer than the spine. Anal commencing at about 
the posterior third of the total length, and consisting of seventeen 
branched rays, the first very short, the second nearly equal to the third 
and longest, the fourth nearly equal to the third, thence descending 
gradually. 

Caudal deeply emarginate, almost forked; rays 11-10-9— 4^, principal 
rays several lines branched. 

Lateral line not very distinct, running along the center of the silvery 
band of each side. Scales rather large, their exposed portion forming 
a diamond-shaped pattern, each diamond about twice as deep as long. 
Head scaleless. 

No scales upon the fins. 

Adipose fin falcate, rather large. 

Color of the fresh fisli. — Light greenish gray on the back, the pattern 
of the scales marked by a series of black dots around the edge of each ; 
these die out upon the silvery lateral line. A very bright silvery line 
along the side, reaching one scale above lateral line ; the upper boundary 
of this band distinct, the lower fading into the silvery-white of the 
belly. Operculum and suboperculum bright like the lateral band, ex- 
cept above, where they become greenish gray like the back; snout and 
cheeks darker greenish gray than the back. Lower jaw with black 
points below and on the sides, closer together toward the tip. Fins 
spotted with dark points. Forehead between eyes almost black; eyes 
silvery ; pupil black. 

Locality, San Francisco. 



68 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



The whole fish is higjily transparent wheu fresh, the oiitliue of th& 
brain being elearly visible through the occi})nt. 

From Osmenis thakichtJtys, which at first siglit nearly resembles it, 
this species may be distinguished by the following characters: The 
slightly greater length and more tapering form of tlie snout, when 
viewed from above; the straight lower jaw, which in 0. thaleichtJiys is 
considerably curved upwards toward the tip ; the gradual declivity of 
the upper outline of the head, which in the latter species is straight 
with the line of the back ; the larger eyes ; the different arrangement of 
the teeth; the more elongated body, much less curvate along the abdom- 
inal outline ; and the much greater distance between the tips of the 
pectorals and the base of the ventrals. 

Dimensions. 



Inches. 

Totr-l lonjrth 4. r2 

Greatest depth of lindy .5.3 

Lengtb of head, to tip of lower jaw . 9(i 

Longitiidinp.l diameter of eye .23 

Interorbital width .19 

Length of snout, to tip of upper jaw .23 

Len^gtli without candal 3. 47 

Tip of lower jaw, to adijiose tin 2. 97 

Tii3 of lower jaw, to ventrals 1.9 

Length of pectoral .50 

Height of dorsal . , 

Length of ventral ! .45 

Tip of lower jaw to origin of dorsal ; 2. 00 

LenTth of lower jaw | .50 

Width of caudal peduncle l .20 



No. 1. I Xo. 2. 



Inches. 

4.50 

.58 

1.00 

.23 

.20 

.25 

3.84 

3.00 

2.10 

.58 

.50 

.45 

2.15 

.CO 

.20 



ISTo. 



Inches. 

5.25 

.00 

L13 

.30 

.23 

.28 

4.42 

3.02 

2.50 

.03 

.04 

.50 

2.50 

.08 

.24 



JTo. 4. !No. 5. 



Inches. 

5.72 

.72 

1.25 

, .29 

.31 

.30 

4.87 

4.14 

2.68 

.72 

.75 

.64 

2.75 

.70 

.30 



Inches. 

5.00 

.02 

L12 

.25 

.20 

.28 

4.30 

3.60 

2.35 

.65 

.62 

,53 

2.40 

.60 

.26 



No. 6. 



Inches. 

0.00 

.75 

1.22 

.:.o 

.■i45 

..al 

5.(>9 

4.31 

2.78 

.81 

.09 

.69 

2.94 



Xos. 1, 2, and 3 are alcoholic specimens ; the others were measured while fre.sh. 

The comparatively elongate form of this fish induced me to believe 
that -this species must be Q. elongatus Ayres (Proc. Cal. Acad. Sci., I, 
17, 1854), but as the latter ichthyologist transmitted examples of his 
species to Washington, and these examples were examined by Girard, 
and found by him to be identical with his Osmerus pretiosufi (= Argen- 
tina pretiosa Grd. = Hypomesns oUdtus (Pallas) Gill), there is no doubt 
that the foregoing is an undescribed species. 

There are thus four species of Microstomatidw on the Pacific coast, 
United States, viz, ThaleichtJiys pacijicus, Hypomesns ol ictus, Osmenis 
thalcichthys, and 0. attenuatus. The first of these does not occur in the 
markets of San Francisco, but is sent down packed in salt from the 
Columbia Eiver, also to some extent in oil, under the name of " Colum- 
bia Eiver sardines." The other three are brought into the markets in 
a fresh state. Hypomesus olictus grows to the largest size, and is most 
highly esteemed of the three. Osmerus attenuatus is tolerably abundant 
in the markets during the spring and summer months. 



PEOCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 69 



Dr:f§t'K5B»TI©IV OF A IVEl^' I3.%KE (PIIYCflS EAK!.!.!!), FKOITI S05JTH 
€AKOB>B?iA, ArifD A NOTE ©rtf THE Ot'C'l'BSSEI^l'E OF PBIVCDS REfJBUS 
C.-V i\-©KTE!I I'AKOHIVA. 

By TAKI.ETOIV EI. BEAM. 

1. Phyci3 eaiil-i Dmui. 

Tho United States ^STational Museum lias just received from Mr. R. E. 
Earll tliree specimens of a species of Fhycls which differ from all the 
other recognized eastern American species. It is quite unlike P. tennis, 
P. chnss, and P. chesteri, since none of the rays of the first dorsal are 
produced. In the shape of the anterior dorsal and the general form of 
the body it resembles P. .rcr/ius, from which, however, it may be at once 
distiuguished by its much smaller scales. From P. DeKayi Kaup it is 
well separated by the structure of its anterior dorsal, and by having the 
veutrals shorter than the head. The species difl'ers also from P. rostratus 
Gthr. in having a much greater number of scales between the anterior 
dorsal and the lateral line. 

3Ir. Earll secured these lish in the market of Cliarlestou. They were 
numbered 131 in his collecting invoice, and are catalogued as numbers 
25207, 25208, and 25209 of the M useuui Register. The species is dedi- 
cated to its discoverer, who first collected it and called attention to its 
specific distinctness from the four known east coast forms. 

Description. — The species is short and stout, resembling in this re- 
spect P. regins. The greatest height of the body equals twice the length 
of the longest ray of the anterior dorsal, and is contained 5 times in the 
total length, caudal included. The length of the head is contained 3| 
times in the length of the body, measured to the origin of the middle 
caudal rays. The length of the snout equals the distance between the 
eyes. The length of the upper jaw equals half that of the head. The 
length of the eye is contained nearly twice in length of snout, CJ times 
in length of head, and nearly 4 times in the length of the postorbital 
part of the head. The lower jaw is as long as the upper, but is received 
within it. The maxiUa extends somewhat behind the vertical through 
the i)osterior margin of the eye. The barbel is ^ as long as the upper 
jaw, or nearly so. Both jaws and the head of the vomer are armed with 
teeth in villiforin bands, as in other species of the genus. 
The pectorals are as long as the postorbital part of the head. 
The veutrals extend nearly to the vent, and their length is contained 
4 times in the distance from the tip of the snout to the end of the second 
dorsal. 

The distance of the anal from the tip of the snout nearly equals the 
length of the anal base. 

The origin of the anterior dorsal is directly over the axil of the pecto- 
ral ; the dorsals are su1)continuous ; none of the rays of the anterior 



70 PROCEEDINGS 'of UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

dorsal are produced, and none of tliem are longer than the longest rays 
of the second dorsal. The longest anal ray is not much more than half 
as long as the longest dorsal ray, and equals half the length of the pec- 
torals. The length of the anterior dorsal base is about equal to that of 
the snout ; the second dorsal base is about 2J times as long as the ven- 
tral fill. 

The length of the middle caudal raj'S is contained 8 times in the total 
"length witliout caudal. 

The typical specimens are 13 inches, 13.1 inches, and 14 inches long, 
respectively. 

Eadial formula.— B. VII; D. 10, C0-G3; A. 53-54 ; P. 15. 

There are 21 or 213 rows of scales between the anterior dorsal and the 
lateral line, and about 155 along the lateral line. 

Color. — Brown, with some light spots on the second dorsal and the 
sides ; the anal fin and the two dorsals margined with darker brown. 

2. Phycis ragias (Walb.) Jor. & Gilb. 

Col. Marshall McDonald, among numerous interesting forms of south- 
ern fishes, has recently secured G specimens of this species of Phycis, 
which were taken in a haul seine, March 20, 1880, at the mouth of the 
Cape Fear Eiver, in North Carolina. These are numbered 90 in his col- 
lecting invoice. Phycis regius has not been recorded so far south before ; 
specimens have been taken in York Eiver, a tributary of Chesapeake 
Bay. The discovery of two gadoids as far south as the Cape Fear and 
Charleston is quite unexpected. 

U. S. ITational Museum, 

Washington, April 9, 1880. 



l>ESCRIPTIO>f OF A IVEW .*iPECIES OF SEBASTICIITH YS (SEBAS- 
TaCBITHlS :TtI?VIATUS), FROM iWONTEREY BAY, CAI^IFOKIViA. 

By OAVIO S. J©RS>AIV ami CHARLES H. GILBERT. 

Ssbastichthys miniatus .sp. nov. 

Allied to Sebastichthijs pinniger Gill. 

Body oblong, the form much as in S. pinniger and /S'. atrovirens; the 
caudal peduncle rather stouter tban in pinniger. Ilead moderate, some- 
what pointed, the profile not very steep. Mouth rather large, the max- 
illary reaching to opposite the middle of the pupil, the premaxillary in 
front on the level of the lower edge of the pupil. Lower jaw projecting 
somewhat beyond the upper, with a rather conspicuous symphyseal 
knob, which is larger than in pinniger. Middle of lower jaw elevated, 
so that the mesian teeth are much raised, and fit into an emarginatiou 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 71 

of tlie upper jaw. This elevation is much more marked in the preseut 
species thau in plnniger. 

Head more completely scaly thau iu related species, the scales also 
rougher, the scales on the maudible, snout, preorhital, and head gen- 
erally being fully ctenoid. In ^S*. pmnhjer the scales on nearly all parts 
of the head are cycloid. Mandible scaled even to the sj'mphyseal knob. 
Interopercle fully scaled; most of the branchiostegals with series of 
scales. Maxillary-, preorbital, and tip of snout fully scaled. Preorbital 
with a narrow neck, and two distinct spines, the neck less than one- 
fourth the diameter of the eye, vdiich is of moderate size, about as in 
pinniger. 

Spinous ridges on top of head low and small. Tbe following pairs of 
spines are present: Nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, 
and occipital, six pairs in all. 

Interorbital space very broad aud almost flat, a slight depression on 
each side of the supraocular ridge, between which depressions is a 
slight convexity. 

In S. plnniger the interocular space is notablj^ narrower, and both de- 
pressions and concavity are more marked. Si^ace between occipital 
ridges slightly convex. In S. pinniger this is slightly concave. 

Preopercular spines rather long and sharp, the second the longest 
and sharpest, the spines radiating and having less of a backward direc- 
tion than in S. pinniger. 

Opercular spines sharp. Spines on subopercle and interopercle mod- 
erate. Two suprascapular spines and a rudiment of a third. 

Scales large, in about 47 transverse rows; the accessory scales few. 

Dorsal fin low, rather deeply emarginate, essentially as in S. pinniger^ 
but both spines and soft rays somewhat higher, the latter a little higher 
than the spines. Caudal fin lunate. Anal fin rather high, the second 
spine about as long as the third and rather stouter, little more than half 
the height of the soft rays. Pectoral fin moderate, as in pinniger, the 
tip reaching about to the vent, the base rather narrow, and the rays not 
fleshy. Ventrals, as in pinniger, very long, reaching past the vent al- 
most to the beginning of the anal. 

Dorsal rays XIII, 14 ; A. Ill, 7. 

Gill-rakers, as iu pinniger, very long and slender, about 10 -f 22 in 
number, the longest about § the diameter of the eye. 

Color darker than in pinniger, deep red, strictly speckled with dusky. 
Above bright deep vermilion, mottled with flesh-color on the sides, the 
belly light red. Back and sides everywhere with clusters of black dots, 
so that the whole body has a dusky shade. Top of head and back with 
vaguely defined cross-blotches made of dark points on snout, interorbi- 
tal space, occiput, under fourth dorsal spine, under eighth dorsal spine, 
one under first soft ray, last soft ray, and base of caudal. Three obscure 
orange stripes radiating from the eye. ]\raxillary with a red streak. 



72 Pr.OCEEDIXGS 01'^ UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEU:!^!.- 

Lips red, mottled with blaekisli. Uiide'V side of head liglit red, mottled 
with darker. Inside of moiitli red. 

Fius all bright vermiliou; spinous dorsal spotted with olive-gray be- 
low, the membrane posteriorly edged with blackish; soft dorsal spotted 
below with blackish, a vertical dark olive streak on each membrane; 
other fins tipped with blackish, the membranes more or less dotted. Ko 
hlacl: blotch on the s])inous dorsal; no distinct pale streak alon.g the 
lateral line. 

The coloration of ISehasficlithys piuui(/e>\ which has thus far uever been 
described, is as follows : 

Ground color light olive-gray, profuse!}" blotched with bright clear 
orange-red, the red shades predominating above, the pale below. Belly 
nearly white. Top of head with cross-blotches and marblings of orange, 
alternating with i^ale. Sides of the head flesh- colored, with three bright 
orange bands radiating from the eye; maxillary Avith orange touches. 
Ijil)s pale, tinged with blackish. Inside of mouth pale. 

Dorsal fin with the membranes bright orange, a large hJacl- hloich oc- 
cupying the membranes between the seventh and tenth dorsal si)ines; 
this si)ot is usually distinct, but in old examples it is sometimes obso- 
lete. Pectorals light red, mottled with yellowish. Other fins all bright 
orange, without dusky tips, slightly mottled with paler at base. Lateral 
line running in a distinct continuous light-gray streak, wluch is not 
crossed by the red markings. 

S. miniatus was first known to us from two specimens taken at Santa 
Barbara. These were provisionally considered as representing a variety 
oiiyinniger^ but after the examination of an extensive series of specimens 
from Monterey Bay we were forced to the conclusion that the deep-red 
forms, although nearly allied to S. 2nnniger, belong to a distinct species. 
The .difference in color is very marked and the two species may be sep- 
arated at sight. In life any of the numerous species of this genus may 
be at once recognized by the color alone, a feature which, circumstances 
of age and surroundings being equal, is in this group remarkably con- 
stant. 

This species reaches the same size as S. innniger, and is brought with 
it to the San Francisco market, but in much less abundance. 

In the description already published by us of Sebasticldliys proriger 
the specimen measured as '■'■S.p'mnigcr'''' belongs to the present species. 



PKOCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIOX/VL MUSEUM. 73 

ALcasurcmcnts. 



Extreme lengtli, in inclsos 

Li>n<itli to biise. of caudal = 100 
13ody: 

Greatest depth 

Least dei)th of taU 

Head: 

LeuQitli 

Leujitli of snout 

Di'imeter of e,ye 

Width of iiiterorbital area 

Oei-'ipital t^pine 

Hupraoiular spine 

Least width of preorbital . 

Maxillary 

Longest gill-raker 

Dorsal: 

Hi;;hest (fiftli) spine 

Longest soft ray 

Anal : 

Length of base 

Second spine 

Third spine 

Longest ray 

Caudal, middle ray 

Pectoral : 

Width of base 

Length 

Ventral," length 

Doisal rays 

Anal rays 

Scales in lateral line 



Minialus. 
(Monterey.) 



11.00 
9.10 



12.3 



.085 
.095 
.08 
.07 
.025 
.017 
17.5 
.05 

15,5 
17.3 

15.5 

13.5 

14.8 

21. 

17. 

9.5 

28.5 
27. 

xin, 14 
in, 7 

42 



Pinnigcr. 
(Monterey.) 



16.80 
13.50 

37.5 
1L8 

37.5 
.09 
.095 
.0^5 
.07 
.04 
.023 

17. 
.063 

10. 5 

18. • 



11. 
1L5 
21.5 
15. 



29. 
26. 
XIII, 14 
III, 7 
48 



I5J:SCKia»T!IOIV OF A IVEW SPECIES OF "ROCK-FISH" (SEBASTICH- 
TMY.-^ CAKNATUS), FKOM THE COAST OF CAtiffFOKrUIA. 

Ey DAVBB S. JOESJAN r.E3d CEIARI.ES M. (KSI.EERT. 

Sebasticlithys caruati:s sp. uov. 

Allied to Sehastkliihys nebnlosiis Ayres. 

Body rather short and deep, tapering rapidly to a rather slender 
cautlal peduncle. Head short, bhmtish, the profile straight and steep. 
Mouth low and rather short, the maxillary extending- to rather behind 
the posterior edge of the eye, which is rather small and elevated. Pre- 
maxillary entirely below the level of the eye, which is rather small and 
elevated. Mouth nearly horizontal, the jaws about equal, the lower jaw 
slightly shortest in the closed mouth. Ko i)rominent symiihyseal knob. 

Scales on the head rather rougher than in S. nchulosns; the lower jaw, 
maxillary, space in front of eye, and nasal region naked, as in nehu- 
losus. 

Top of head with the spinous ridges well developed, but somewhat 
lower than in S. nehulosus; otherwise very similar. The following pairs 
are present : Nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, and occipital, five 
in all. The occipital spines especially are lower and narrower than in 
yiebulosus. 

Preoi^ercular spines small and bluntish, the upj)ermost rather broader 
than the second, which is the longest. Opercular and suprascapular 
spines two each, rather short and broad. A slight spine on interopercle 
and subopercle. 



74 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Gill-rakers, as in nehulosus, sliort, coiiipressetl, somewliat clavate, the 
middle ones longer and somewliat crooked. 

Spinous dorsal always higher than in nehulosits, the highest spines 
rather higher than the soft rays, the membranes more deeply incised 
than in nebulosus, but less than in malujer. Caudal fin- truncate. Anal 
fin moderately high, the second spine stronger and slightly longer than 
the third, about two-thirds the height of the soft rays. Pectoral fins 
rather short, about reaching to the vent, their bases very broad, as in 
related species, and the lower rays thickened and fleshy. Ventrals 
reaching vent. 

Scales in 53 transverse rows; the accessory scales rather numerous. 

Dorsal, XIII, 12; anal III, 7; pyloric coeca 8; vertebrte 12 + 15. 

Pattern of coloration almost exactly identical with that of S. nehii- 
losus, but the shade of color very different. 

In S. carnatm the Light ground color is clear flesh color or pinkish, 
often tinged with grayish purple ; the light shades on the head purplish. 
The dark shades are yellowish-brown, usually tinged with greenish. 

In 8. nebidosus the light ground color is more restricted, and its hue 
is usually a clear warm brownish-yellow with orange mottlings, vary- 
ing to dusky orange-brown, below often tinged with olive. The dark 
shades are olive-black, varying to olive-brown. The Uglit shades of S. 
nebulosiis are often neai'ly identical with the darli shades of S. carnatus. 

In both species the pattern is a light ground color, with dark blotches, 
the dark color predominating above. Membrane between third and 
fourth spines always pale, this color forming a blotch at the base of 
these spines, and then exteudiug obliquely downwards and backwards, 
joining the ventral color. In front of this light area on the sides is a nar- 
row oblique dark one, in front of which in turn is a light one, which be- 
ginfe at the angle of the opercle and divides, passing around the pectorals 
and uniting below them. 

A light blotch under the eighth dorsal spine extending up on the fin ; 
also another at the juuctioii of the two dorsals, and still another under 
the last ray. Under each of these blotches irregular undulating light 
areas extend down the sides, either continuous or as detached blotches. 
The x)ale dorsal blotches correspond in position to the pink dorsal spots 
of rosaceus, constellatus, oculatus, and cJilorostictus, and to pale areas fountl 
in fascioJaris, vexiUaris, maUger, and other sjiecies. 

Head above with cross-shades and bands radiating from the eye. Fins 
with the general pattern of color of neighboring parts of the body. 

This species is very closely related to S. nebulosufi^ and from it cannot 
always be readily distinguished except by the color. Like 8. nehulosusy 
it is one of the smaller species, seldom reaching a length of much over 
a foot. It is very abundant in the Bay of Monterey, forming a large 
proportion of the "rock-fish" shipped from Monterey to the San Fran- 
cisco market. S. nebulosiis occurs in the same waters, and the exam- 
ination of great numbers of examples of both sexes and all ages has 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



75 



couvincetl ns that, altliougli closely related, the two forms are x)erma- 
nently distinct. "NYliether hereafter to be regarded as a species or as a 
"subspecies," the form is a peculiar one, aud as such worthy of a uame. 

Measitre7nenis. 



Extremp loniitli, in inches 

Lenatth to base caudal ^100 

Body: 

Greatest depth 

Least depth 

Head: 

Length 

Diameter of eye 

Length of snout 

Length of preocular ridge 

Length of suijraocular ridge 

Length of occipital ridge 

Least ■width of preorliital 

Width of interiivbital space 

Length of maxillary 

Length of longest gill-raker 

Dorsal : 

Length of base , 

Height of tifth spine 

Height of membrane between fourth and fifth spines. 

Height of longest soft ray 

Anal: 

Length of base 

Height of second spine 

Height of third spine .' 

Height of longest ray 

Caudal, length of middle rays 

Pectoral : 

Length 

Width of base 

Ventral, length 

Dorsal rays 

Anal rays 

Xumher of transverse rows of scales 



Carnatus. 
(Monterey.) 



10. 50 

8.90 




Kebidosus. 
(Monterey.) 



11.50 
9.85 

3G. 5 
11.5 

30. 

9. 
10. 

3.5 

c! . 
c!3 

-18. 



C3. ' 
16. 
11.2 
15. 5 

13.7 

13. 

13.1 

17.5 

1C.3 

26.8 
10.5 
21. 
Xin, 14 

ni,7 

•15 



April 2, 1880. 



CHECK-I.IST OF UITPJ.IC'ATKS OF NORTH A:«ERICA!V FISHES 
DIWTSJIUITED BV TIBK JX.TIITHSO.MA.'V I,-V.«>iTITl TIO> IIV BEIIAL.F 
OF TSIK U.VITEB STATES NATIONAL .TlUsiEU.Tl, 1877-lSSO. 

Prepared B>y TARLETOIV Jl. BEAN. 

LOPHIID^. 

1. Lophius piscatorius Liuu. 

Lopliius americanus Storer, Hist. Fish. Mass., 1867, p. 101, \A. xviii, fig. 2. 
22311. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

ANTENNARIID.E. 

2. Pterophryne histrio Liuu. 

Pternphryne Icevigata (Cuv.) Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A., 1873, p. 14. 
20662. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts (3). 



DIODONTID^. 

3. Diodon hystrix Liuu. 

23779. Bermuda. 

4. Chilomycterus geometricus (Liuu.) K.inp. 



9448. East coast of United States. 

14752. Koank, Connecticut. 

19460. Eastern shore of Virginia. 

19674. Beaufort, North Carolina. 

19719. Fort Macon, North Carolina. 



19707. 
20074. 
21634. 
22911. 
22912. 



Eastern shore of Virginia. 
Coast of New England. 
Newport, Rhode Lsland. 
Eastern coast of United States. 



76 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIOxN'AL MUSEUM. 



TETEODONTID.E. 



5. Tetrodon turgidus Mitch. 



GhiUchthys turgidus Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A., 
10740. Wood's Holl, Massacliusett.s. 
!Noaiik, Counecticut. 



14037. 
14746. 
14747. 
1474S. 
14749. 
14750. 
14828. 
14972. 
17596. 
17597. 
17598. 
17599. 
17000. 



Eastern coast of United States. 
!Noanlc, Connecticut. 



17601. 
17602. 
17603. 
17604. 
17005. 
17606. 
17607. 
10461. 
19765. 
19829. 
20290. 
21444. 
22718. 
23147. 



1873, p. 15. 

Koahk, Connocticat. 



Eastern shore of Virginia'. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Ea.stern coast of United States. 
Cohasset Narrows, Massachusetts. 
Eastern coast of United States. 



BALISTID.E. 

6. Alutera Schoeplii (Walb.) Goocle & Bean. 

Alutera cuspicauda Gi\l, Cat. Fish. E. Coast Ni A., 1873, p. 15. 
Ceratacaiithus auraiitiacus Gill, op. cit., p. 



14745. 
16601. 
16314. 
16567. 
18715. 
18716. 
18717. 
18718. 
18719. 
18734. 
18735. 
18736. 
18737. 
18738. 
18739. 
Ig740, 
18741. 
18742. 
18743. 
18744. 



ratacaiithus auraiitiacus Gill, op. cit., 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Menetn.sha Bight, Massachusetts. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



15. 
18745. 
18746. 
18747. 
18748. 
18749. 
18750. 
18751. 
18752. 
18753. 
18863. 
19251. 
19280. 
19282. 
19718. 
20691. 
21644. 
21649. 
22937. 
22738. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Fort Macon, North Carolina. 
Newport, Ilhode Island. 

Eastern coast of United States. 



7. Monacanthus setifer Bennett 



18893. 

18894. 
18895. 
18896. 
18897. 
18898. 
18899. 
18900. 
18901. 
18902. 
18903. 
18904. 
18905. 
18906. 
18907. 



Stcphanolcpis setifer GiU, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A., 1873, p. 15. 
)3. Wood's Holl. ^Tasa-aehnsetts. fonno ■rrr..„,ii„ i 



18908. 
18909. 
18910. 
18911. 
18912. 
18913. 
18914. 
18915. 
18916. 
18917. 
18946. 
21545. 
21631. 
23144. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Charleston, South Carolina. 
Newjiort, Ilhode Island. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



77 



8. Balistes capriscus Linn. 

21C50. :N^ewport, Rhode Island. 

9. Balistes vetula Liun. 

22731. Eastern coast of UiiitcJ States. 



I 22739. Eastern coast of United States. 



SYNGNATHID^. 



10. Syngnathus 


fuscus Storer. 








18919. 


W 


ood's Holl, 


Massachiisett.s. 


18932. 


Wood's Holl, 


Massachusetts. 


18920. 










18933. 






18921. 










18934. 






, 18922. 










18935. 






18923. 










18936. 






18924. 










18937. 






18925. 










18938. 






18926. 










18939. 






18927. 










18940. 






18928. 










1894i. 






18929. 










18942. 






18930. 










18943. 






18931. 

















GASTEROSTEID^. 



11. Gasterosteus nculsatus L. 

13397. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

19831. 

21455. 



23162. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
24433. Wilmington, Delaware. 



12. Gasterosteus pungitius L. 
23161. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



24460. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



13. Gasterosteus pungitius L. .sub. sp. hrachnpoda Bean. 



21767. American Harbor, Cuniberlaud Gulf. 
21769. 



21770. American Harhor, Cuml>erland Gulf. 



14. Apeltes quadracus (Mitcli.) Bvevoort. 

13404. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

13413. 

13418. " " 

14002. Xoanli, Counc-cticut. 



16110. Wood'-s Holl, Mass.achusett8. 

17753. 

19832. " " 

23X60. 



SOLEID.E. 



15. Solea vulgaris Quensel. 
22734. England. 

16. Achirus liiieatus (Liim.) Cnv. 

7280. AVashiugton, District of Columbia. 

10365. Potomac Eiver. 

12984. iCew Bedford, ilassachusetts. 

15091. Tompkinsville, 5few York. 

15350. Eastern coast of United States. 

15628. New Tort Market. 

19759. Eastern coast of the United States. 

19876. Potomac Eiver. 



19877. 
19878. 
19916. 
20199. 
20756. 
22021. 
23472. 
24249. 



Potomac Eiver. 

Eastern coast of the United States. 
Newport, Rhode Island. 

Potomac River. 
Chesapeake Bay. 
Providence, Rhode Island. 



78 PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES XxlTIOXAL MUSEUM. 



PLEURONECTIDiE. 

17. Pseudopleuronectes americanus (Walb.) Gill. 

14G01. Porllanil, Maine. 



14692. 
14693. 
14694. 
14695. 
14696. 
14697. 
14699. 
14700. 
14701. 
14702. 
14704. 
14706. 
14707. 
14708. 
14709. 
14710. 
14711. 
14712. 
14714. 
14716. 
14717. 
14718. 
14719. 
14721. 
14722. 
14723. 
14724. 
14725. 



Wood'.s Holl, Massacliusetts. 



14726. 
14727." 
14728. 
14729. 
14730. 
14731. 
14732. 
14733. 
14734. 
14735. 
14738. 
14739. 
14740. 
14741. 
17231. 
17232. 
17233. 
17234. 
17235. 
17236. 
17237. 
17238. 
17239. 
17240. 
20868. 
20874. 
20953. 
22730. 
23179. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



New York Market. 

Washington Mk't, from Portland, Me. 

Bucksport, Maine. 

Eastern Coast of United States. 

Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



18. Limanda ferruginea (Storer) Goocle & Bean. 



21020. 
21033. 
21051. 
21504. 
21902. 



Halifax, Nova Scotia. 



Salem, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



22323. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

22691. Milk Island Trap, Gloucester, Mass. 

24625. Halifax, Nova Scotia. 

24626. Gulf of Maine. 



19. Pleuronectes glaber (Storer) Gill. 



14657. 


Portland, Maine. 


14*658. 




14660. 




14661. 




14662. 




14663. 




14665. 




14666. 




14667. 




14668. 




14669. 




14670. 




14671. 




14672. 




14673. 




14677. 




14679. 




14680. 




. Glyptocephalus cynoglossus (Liim. 


21000. 


Massachusetts Buy. 


21001. 


Le Have Bank. 


21005. 


Halifax, Nova Scotia. 


21019. 


" " 


21032. 


Mouth of Harbor, Halifax, N. S. 


21047. 


Halifax, Nova Scotia. 


21060. 


Le Have Bank. 



14683. 
14684. 
14685. 
17163. 
17164. 
17165. 
17166. 
17167. 
17168. 
17169. 
17170. 
17171. 
17172. 
17173. 
20903. 
20904. 
20954. 
22241. 



Portland, Maine. 



"Washington Market. 

Bucksport, Maine. 

Washington Market, from Portland, Me. 



21817. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

21821. 

21908. " . " 

22694. Milk Island Trap, Gloucester, Mass. 

23141. Massachusetts Bay. 

24032. Chebucto Head, Nova Scotia. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



79 



21. Lophopsetta maculata (Mitch.) Gill. 



14634. 
14030. 
14038. 
14039. 
14040. 
14G41. 
14042. 
1404;!. 
14044, 
14047. 
14G4S. 
14049. 
146.J2. 
14G53. 
14034. 
140.53. 
10002. 
17151. 
171.52. 
17153. 



"Wood's Hull, M;iss;icluisetts. 



Portlaud, Maine. 
I\oaiilc, Connecticut. 



Wooers noil, Massachusetts. 
Eastport, Maine. 
iS'oank, Connecticut. 



17154. 
17155. 
17156. 
17157. 
1715S. 
17159. 
17100. 
17101. 
17102. 
19429. 
19753. 
22313. 
22372. 
22693. 
22735. 
22759. 
23703. 
24221. 
24202. 
24349. 



Isoauk, Counecticut. 



Charleston, South Carolina. 
Noauk, Connecticut. 

"VTood'.s IIoll, Massaclmsetts. 
Eastern coast of United States. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Ea.stern coast of United States. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Off Capo Cod, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Mas.sachusetts. 
Vineyard Sound, Massachusetts. 
Provincetown, ^lassacliusetts. 



22. Citharichthys spilopterus Gtlir. ? 

23529. Cnsfield, Maryland. 

23. Hippoglossoides platessoides (Fiihr.) Gill. 



21009. 
21021. 
21023. 
21037. 
21045. 
21040. 
21052. 
21064. 
21005. 
21785. 
21818. 
22288. 
22029. 



Halifax, Xova Scotia. 



Off Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
Halifax, JTova Scotia. 



Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

Lat. 42^ 49' N., Lon. 02=' 55' "W. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



23142. 
23920. 
24002. 
24606. 
24007. 
24609. 
24011. 
24012. 
24019. 
24021. 
24027. 
24033. 
24034. 



Massachusetts Bay. 
Sahle Island. 
Massachusetts Bay. 
Halifax, Nora Scotia. 



24. Pseudorhombus dentatus (Linu.) Gtlir. 

Ch(Bnopsetta ocellaris (DeKay) Gill. 
Chcvnopsetta dentata (Storer) Gill. 
14028. Noank, Connecticut. 



14029. 
14630. 
10029. 
16318. 
17114. 
18442. 
18443. 
18444. 
18445. 
18446. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Charleston, South Carolina. 
Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 



18447. 
18531. 
18532. 
19397. 
19398. 
19501. 
20982. 
21279. 
22717. 
22908. 
23528. 



25. Pseudorhombus oblongus (Mitch.) Gthr. 
'Chcenoxisetta ohlonga (Mitch.) GiL. 



10677. 
10078. 
10679. 
10082. 
10683. 
10716. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



14624. 
14625. 
14626. 
14627. 
19299. 
24365. 



Saint John's River, Florida. 
Kinstou, North Carolina. 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Beaufort, North Carolina. 
Charleston, South Carolina. 
Sauit John's River, Florida. 
Eastern coast of United States. 

Crisfield, Maryland. 



Noank, Connecticut. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Provincetown, Massachiisotts. 



80 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



26. Hippoglossus vulgaris Fleni. 
23394. Jeffrev's Bank. 



I 24242. Jefifrey's Bank. 



MACRUPJD.E. 

27. Macrurii.'s Bairdii Goode & Bean. 

I 24313. Gloucester, M.issachusette. 



23140. Grauil Banks. 



28. Macrurtis Fabricii Suudeval. 

Lat. 42° 46' N., Lon. 63° 45' "W. 
Off coast of New England. 
Lat. 43° 53' N"., Lon. 59° 05' W. 
Off coast of New England. 



21C15. 
21783. 
21806. 
22280. 
22646. 
22747. 
22748. 
22872. 
22873. 
22875. 
22876. 
23054. 



Sable Island Bbnl 



Off coast of New England. 



Banqueiean. 



23055. 
23057. 
23058. 
23059. 
23060. 
23061. 
23909. 
24285. 
24286. 
24702. 
24703. 



E.anquereau. 

Lat. 44° 20' N., Lon. 



7° 57' "W. 



Off coast of New England. 



GADID^. 



29. Poliachius carbonarras (Linn.) Bonn. 



14615. Eastport, Maine. 

1461G. 

14617. 

14618. 

14G21. 



■21794. 
22690. 
22796. 
24219. 

24451. 



Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts'. 



30. Gadiis niorrhua Linn. 

22215. Nomau's Land. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



22770. 
22837. 
23156. 
23166. 
23764. 



Proviucetowu, Mass.achusetts. 



24217. 
24218. 
24347. 
24380. 
24419. 
25212. 



Proviucetowu, Ma.ssachusetts. 



Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
W«)od's Holl, Massachusetts. 



31. Microgadus tomcodus (Walb.) Gill. 



10778. 
10779. 
13015. 
13019. 
13835. 
14009. 
14590. 
14591. 
14592. 
14594. 
14597. 
14598. 
14599. 
14600. 
14601. 
14602. 
14603. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



No.ank, Connecticut. 
Eastport, Maine. 



Portland, Maine. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



14604. 
14605. 
14606. 
14607. 
14608. 
14609. 
14610. 
17611. 
17746. ' 
20595. 
21454. 
22221. 
23158. 
24445. 
24457. 
24513. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



32. Phycis chuss (W.ilb.) Gill. 
22630. Gloucester. Massachusetts. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



81 



33. Phyois tenuis (Mitch.) DeKay. 
10450. Eastpoit, Maine. 
14508. AV'ooil'.s lloll, Massachusetts. 
14.5SJ9. 

14573. Eastpoit. Maine. 
14575. Portland, Maine. 
14576. 

14577. " 
14578. 
14582. 
14583. 
14584. 
14585. 
191G4. 
lyifiO. 
191C9. 
19172. 
19174. 



Wootl'.s IIoIl, Massachusetts. 



1917G. 
19756. 
21018. 
21616. 
21790. 
21796. 
21816. 
22321. 
22631. 
22653. 
22701. 
22722. 
24373. 
24143. 
24404. 
24574. 
24610. 



Wood'.s Holl, Massachusetts. 
Eastern coast of United States. 
Halifax, Xova Scotia. 
Lat. 42° 42' N., Lon. C-i^ 20' "W. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



34. Phycis regius (Walb.) Jordan &, Gilbert 

10845. Xew York Aquarium. 
10i-'47. East coast of United Statea. 



New England. 

ProviucetoAeu, Massachusetts (14). 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Halifax, Nova Scotia. 



20923. East coast of United States. 



35. Ouos (Rhinonemus) cimbrius (L.) Goode A: Bean. 

23149. (Gloucester, Massachusetts. 1 2376L P^ovinceto^vn. Massachusetts. 

23150. Halifax, Xova Scotia. 



36. Haloporphyrus viola Goode tV Ht-an. 



23062. 
23003. 
23918. 
24251. 



Lat. 44-^ 20' N., Lou. 57° 57' W. 

Grand Banks. 

Lat. 43° 41' N., Lon. 59^ 15' W. 

Lat. 44^ 13' N., Lon. 58° 02' W. 



37. Lota maculosa (LeS.) Eich. 
11019. Sanduskv, Ohio. 



11020. 
11022. 
11024. 
11201. 
11202. 
11203. 
12452. 
12466. 



Alpena, Michigan. 



Apostle Island, Lake Superior. 



24713. Lat. 43= 17' N., Lon. 51° 25' W. 

24714. Grand Banks, western edge. 

24746. Banquereau. 

24747. Lat. 59° 04' X., Lou. 43° 56' W. 



15860. New York Market. 

16637. 

16638. 

16639. 

16640. 

17782. Sandusky, Ohio. 

17783. 

19793. Alpena, Michigan. 

22926. Lake Superior. 



MEELUCIID.E. 



38. Merlucius bilineaiis (Mitcli.) Gill. 
13010. "Wood's Holl, ^^Lissachusetts. 
Portland, Maine. 
Eastport, Maine. 



14500. 
14561. 
14562. 
14563. 
14564. 
14565. 
14566. 
149.52. 
16797. 
18705. 
18706. 
18707. 
18708. 
18709. 
18710. 
18711. 
18730, 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Eastern coast of United States. 
New Bedford, Massachusetts, 
"^'ood's Holl, Mas.sachusetts. 



Proc. Nat. Mils. 80- 



18731. 
18732. 
18733. 
19757. 
19846. 
19807. 
20848. 
21055. 
21793. 
22049. 
22098. 
23154. 
24240. 
242*1. 
24268. 
24525. 
24715. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Noman's Land. 
Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Lat. 42° 53' N., Lon. 69° 14' W. 
Jeffrey's Bank. 
Lat. 42° 53' N., Lon. 09° 14' W. 
AVood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Lat. 42° 53' N., Lon. 09° 14' W. 

may 94, 1880. 



82 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM:. 



LYCODID^. 



39. Lycodes Vahlii Eciiili. 

24239. East Bauquereau. 



40. Zoarces anguillaris (Pcclc) Storer. 



14553. 


Eastport, Maine. 


22871. 


Gloucester, Massadhusetts. 


14554. 


" " 


23084. 


" 


" 


14556. 


" " 


23193. 


Massacliusetts Bay. 


14557. 


Portland, Maine. 


23760. 


Provincetown, 


Massacliusetts 


14558. 


" 


23910. 






14559. 


" " 


24222. 






21784. 


Gloucester, Massacliusetta. 


24311. 






22632. 


" 


24346. 






22C58. 


1' (t 


24382. 






22695. 


" " 









CEYPTACANTHID^. 
41. Cryptacanthodes maculatus Storer. 



21433. Eastern coast of United States. 
21857. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
24254. Fisliiug Banks, off New England. 



24255. Fishing Banks, off New England, 
24710. " " 

24737. " " 



XIPHIDIONTID^. 

42. MursBiioides gunnellus (L.) Goode & Bean. 

Murcenoides mucronatus (Mitch.) Gill. 
13429. "Wood's IIoll, Massachusetts. 



13432. " 

13438. 

13848. Eastport, Maine. 

16503. Eastern coast of United States. 

19827. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



19847. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
22842. " " 

23164. New Bedford, M^assachusetts. 

23165. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
24926. " " 



ANAERHICHADID^. 



43. Anarrhichas lupus L. 

23900. East coast of United States. 

23907. 

24234. Lat. 42^ 10' N., Lon. 66' 30' W. 



24235. 8 miles S. E. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

24699. 5 miles S. S. E. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

24700. " " 



44. Anarrhichas minor Olafsen. 

24233. Lat. 440 30' K, Lon. 57° 10' W., 250 fths. [24237. Lat. 43° 52' N., Lou. 59° 09' W:, 200 fths. 

45. Anarrhichas latifrons Steeustrup & Hallg. 

21623. Lat. 42° 27' N., Lon. 64° 20' W., 280 I 24238. Lat. 42° 53' N., Lon. 59° 09' W., 200 fths. 

fathoms. 24698. Lat. 43° 33' N., Lon. 52° 06' W., 150 fths. 

21845. Banqucrcau, 300 fathoms. 25109. Lat. 43° 33' N., Lon. 52° 06' W., 140 to 160 

22710. East coast of United States. fathoms. 



BLENNIID^. 

46. Blennius crinitus. 

21959. Bermuda. 

47. Labrosomus nuchipiuuis (Q. &'G.) Poey. 

21240. Bermuda. I 21946. Bermuda 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



83 



BATEACHID^. 



48. Batrachus tau Liuu. 

-6823. East coast of Uuited States. 
10711. WoocV.s HoU, Massachusetts. 
10743. 
10744. 

14542. Xoanli, Conuecticut. 
14543. 

14544. " " 

14545. 
14546. 
14548. 
14549. 
14550. 

14551. u • u 

14552. 
16550. Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 

49. Porichthys porosissimus. 

6669. "West coast of United States. 
9316. San Diego, California. 
17046. Santa Barbara, California. 



17210. 
17211. 
17212. 
17213. 
17214. 
17215. 
17216. 
17217. 
17218. 
17219. 
17609. 
19758. 
20632. 
22760. 



Noank, Connecticut. 



"Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 
East coast of Uuited States. 
"Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 



20005. Santa Barbara, CaUfornia. 
22333. Monterey, California. 
24814. San Diego, California. 



URANOSCOPID.E. 

50. Astroscopus aiioplus (C. &Y.) Brcvoort. 
7304. Eastern United States. 



51. Cyclopterus lumpus Linn. 
2069S. Xowport, Khode Island. 

52. Gobius soporator. 

21935. Bei-muda. 

53. Eleotris. 

19880 ? 

54. Dormitator. 

19881 ? 



CYCLOPTERID^. 

1 23051. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
GOBIID^. 



19882 ? 



TEIGLID^. 



55. Dactylopterus volitans (Liuu.) Lac 

18579. Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 

18580. 

18581. " " 

18582. 

18583. " " 

18584. " " 

18585. " " 

18586. " " 

18587. " " 

18588. " " 

18589. " " 

18590. " " 

18591. " ■ " 

18592. " " 

18593. " " 

18594. " " 

18595. " " 

18596. " " 

18597. " " 

18598. " " 



18599. 
18600. 
18601. 
18602. 
18603. 
18605. 
18606. 
18607. 
18608. 
18609. 
18610. 
18611. 
18612. 
18613. 
18614. 
18615. 
18616. 
18617. 
18618. 
18619. 



Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 



84 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



18620. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


18655. 


"Wood's Holl, 


Massachusetts. 


18622. 


18656. 


" 


" 


18623. 


18657. 


" 


" 


18624. 


18658.- 


" 


" 


18625. • 


18659. 


" 


" 


18626. 


18660. 


" 


" 


18627. 


18661. 


" 


" 


18628. " " 


18662. 


" 


" 


18629. 


18663. 


" 


" 


18630. 


18064. 


" 


" 


18631. 


18665. 


" 


" 


18632. " 


18666. 


" 


" 


18633. 


18667. 


" 


" 


18634. " " 


18668. 


" 


X 


18635. 


18669. 


" 


V 


18636. 


18070. 


" 


" 


18637. 


18671. 


" 


" 


18638. 


18672. 




" 


18639. 


18673. 


" 


" 


18640. 


18674. 


" 


" 


18643. 


18676. 


" 


" 


18644. " " 


18677. 


" 


" 


18645. 


18678. 


" 


" 


18646. 


18679. 


" 


" 


18647. 


18680. 


" 


" 


18648. 


18681. 


" 


" 


18649. " " 


18682. 


" 


" 


18650. " " 


18683. 


" 


" 


18651. 


18684. 


" 


" 


18652. 


20835. 


" 


" 


18653. 


24481. 


" 


" 


18654. " " 


24497. 


" 


" 



56. Prionotus evolans (L.) Gill. 



13575. 
13581. 
14534. 
14535. 
14536. 
14537. 
14.538. 
14539. 
14540. 
14955. 
16004. 
16008. 
16009. 
16011. 
10593. 
18868. 
18869. 
18870. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



!JToank, Connecticut. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18871. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

18872. 

18873. 

18874. " " 

18875. " " 

18876. " " 

18877. " " 

18878. " " 

18879. " " 
19307. 

19308. 

19310. 

20703. Newport, Ehode Island. 

21442. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

21652. Newport, Rhode Island. 

22713. East coast of United States. 

22750. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

22754. 



57. Prionotus carolinus (Linu.) 0.& V. 

14528. jS'oauk, Connecticut. 

14529. 

14530. 

14531. 

14532. 

14533. 

16032. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

16309. 

17142. Noank, Connecticut. 

17143. 

17144. 



17145. 
17146. 
17147. 
17148. 
17149. 
17150. 
19341. 
19342. 
19343. 
19344. 
19345. 



o^oanlv, Coiinc 



ictlcut. 



AVood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



85 



19346, 
19347. 
19348. 
19349. 
19350. 
19352. 
19353. 
19354. 
19356. 
19357. 
19358. 
19400. 
19401. 



Wood's Roll, Massachusetts. 



19403. 
19404. 
19405. 
19406. 
19407. 
19408. 
19409. 
19410. 
19415. 
20664. 
21443. 
23531. 



"Wood's Holl, Massacliuaetts. 



CoLasset Narro'ws, Massachusetts. 
Cristield, Maryland. 



AGONID^. 

58. Aspidophoroides monopterygius (Blocli) Storer. 

23174. jSIassachtisetts Bay. | 24336. rrovincetown, Massachusetts. 



59. Cottus octodecimspinosits Mitcli. 

14514. Poitlaud, Maine. 
14515. 
14516. 

14515. " " 
14.519. 
14520. 
14522. 
14523. 
14525. 
14526. 
19186. 
19187. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



€0. Cottus eeneus Mitch. 



10365. 
10367. 
13516. 
13522. 
13525, 
13530. 
13541. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



COTTID^. 






tell. 








19188. 


Wood's 


Holl, Massachusetts. 




19189. 








19190. 








19191. 








19192. 








19193. 








19194. 








19195. 








19749. 


Coast of Massachusetts. 




21036. 


Halifax 


, Nova Scotia. 




21507. 


SalcTO, 


Massachusetts. 




22266. 


Gloucester, Massachusetts. 




15093. 


Tompkinsville, 'New York. 




16185. 


Koank, 


Connecticut. 




20883. 


Wood's 


Holl, Massachusetts 




20889. 




" 




21457. 




' " 




22766. 




' " 




23159. 




' " 



61. Cottus scorpius L., suljsp. gronlaiidicus C. & Y. 

Cottus grcenlandicus Cuv. & Val. 
14507. Portland, Maine. 

14509. " " 

14510. " " 

14511. Eastport, Maine. 



21506. Salem, Massachusetts. 
22314. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
22648. " " 



62. Cottus scorpioides Fabr. 

21744. Cumheiiaud Gulf. 



22331. Cumheiland Gulf. 



63. Centridermichtliys uncinatus (Ehdt.) Giiutli. 
24340. JIast coast of United States. 



64. Gymnacanthus pistilliger (Pall.) Gill MSS. 

21732. Disco Island, Greenland. 1 21741.^* Kiantilic Harbor, Cumberland Gnlf- 

21735. " " I 



86 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



HEMITRIPTERID^E. 



65. Heniitripterus americanus (Gmel.) 
14497. Eastport, Maine. 
14499. 

Portland, Maine. 



14500. 
14.'30-2. 
14503. 
14504. 
14505. 
14959. 
16438. 
16514. 
16558. 
16594. 
19412. 
19413. 
19414. 
19748. 
20696. 



Noank, Connecticut. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Coast of Massacliusetts. 
Boston, Massacliusetts. 
Nantucket, Khode Island. 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Newport, lihode Lsland. 



Storer. ■ 

20956. 
21010. 
21026. 
21035. 
21508. 
21646. 
21795. 
22269. 
22283. 
22315. 
22647. 
22655. 
22699. 
22839. 
22843. 
24368. 



Bucksport, Maine. 
Halifax, Nova Scotia. 



Salem, Massachusetts. 
Newport, Rhode Island. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Grand Banks. 



SCORP^NIDyE. 



66. Sebastes marinus Liuu. 

Sebastes viviparus Kroyer. 
14472. Eastport, Maine. 
14473. 
14474. 
14476. 
14477. 
14478. 

14479. " " 

14480. 
14484. 

14486. " " 

■ 14488. 
14489. 
14490. 
14495. 
14496. 

21620. Lat. 42<^ 42' N., Lou. 04° 20' "W., 270 to 
300 fathoms. 



21792. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

21811. 

22267. " " 

22298. East coast of United States. 

22299. " " • 
22651. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
22700. " " 

22882. East coast of United States. 
23092. " " 

23143. Massachusetts Bay. 

23774. " 

23775. " 
23911. Banquercau. 

24637. Halifax, Nova Scotia. 



67. Sebastomiis melanops (Grd.) Gill. 
21582. "Washington Territory. 



68. Scanis radians Val. 

21373. Bermuda. 



SCARID^. 

I 21882. Bermuda. 



69. Pseudoscariis vetula (Scliu.) Gill. 
21880. Bermuda. 



LABRID^. 



70. ChoerojuUs radiatus (L.) Gooile. 
21879. Bermuda. 



PR0CEEDINC4S OF UNITED STATES NATIOXAL MUSEUM. 



87 



Xoaiik, Connecticut. 



71. Tautoga onitis (Liuu.) CJtlir. 

10.J98. Wood's KoU, ilassaebusetts. 

10599. " 

1064.3. " " 

13630. 

14446. " " 

14453. 

14454. 

14455. 

14456. 

14457. 

14458. 

14459. 

144C0. 

14461. 

14462. 

14463. 

14464. 

14466. 

14467. 

17610. 

17611. 

17612. 



"Wood's HoU, Massacliusetts 



17013. V.'ood's Hull, :^Lis.sachusett3. 

17G14. 

17015. 

17616. 

17618. 

17619. 

17620. 

17621. 

17622. 

22725. 

22769. 

22914. ilassachusetts Bay. 

22915. 

22916. 

24438. 

24444. 

24447. 

24455. 

24473. 

24507. 

24519. 

24572. 



Wood's HoU, Massacliusetts. 



72. Tautogolabrus adspersus (Walb.) Gill. 
10745. Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 



10746. 
14431. 
14432. 
14433. 
14434. 
14435. 
14436. 
14438. 
14439. 
14440. 
14441. 
14442. 
14443. 
14444. 
14445. 
14446. 
14447. 
14448. 
14449. 
14450. 
14452. 
16034. 



Portland, Maine. 



Xoant, Connecticut. 



Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 



17555. 
17556. 
17557. 
17558. 
17559. 
17560. 
17561. 
17562. 
17563. 
17564. 
17617. 
17623. 
17624. 
17625. 
17626. 
17627. 
17628. 
17629. 
22652. 
22742. 
227G7. 
23908. 



Noauk, Connecticut. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Noank, Connecticut. 



Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Provincetown, Massachusetts , 



73. Oxyjulis modestus (Grd.) Gill. 
17025. Santa Barbara, California. 



17027. Santa Barbara, California. 



POMACENTEID^. 



74. Glyphidodou saxatilis (L.) C. & V. 

10333. Bermuda. 

16856. 

18207. 

18208. 

18209. " 

18210. " 

18211. " 

18212. " 



18213. 
18214. 
18215. 
18216. 
18217. 
18218. 
21984. 



Bermuda. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
CICIILID/E. 



75. Heros. 

10008. West coast of Central America 



76. Embiotoca Jacksoni Ag. 

17048. Sauta Barbara, California. 
17049. 



I 19910. • "West coast of Central America. 
EMBIOTOCID^. 

I 22255. California. 



77. Taeniotoca lateralis (Ag.) A. Ag. 

6216. Presidio, California. . 22259. California. 

22256. California. 22304. 



78. Holconotus rhodoterus Ag. 

506. Presidio, California. 

567. Humboldt Bay. 

572. San Diogo, California. 

17028. Santa Barbara, California. 

17029. Santa Cruz Island. California. 



17030. Sauta P.arbara, California. 

17031. 

17032. 

17033. 

20340. California. 



CHJiTODONTIDvE. 

79. SarathroduB bimaculatiis (lUotli) Poej-. 

18197. Bermuda. 

18198. 

18199. 

18200. 

18201. 

80. Holacanthus ciliaris Lac. 

18243. Bernnula. 
18244. 



18202. 


Bermuda. 


18203. 


" 


18204. 


" 


18205. 


" 


18206. 




21876. 


Bermuda. 


23782. 





TRICHIURIDyE. 



8.1. Trichiurus leptuius Liun. 
19504. Beaufort, North Carolina. 
19676. Nortli Carolina. 

19677. 



21541. Charleston, South Carolina. 

22817. Pensacola, Florida. 

23139. Southern coast United States. 



SCOMBEID.^ 
82. Scomber scombrus Liuu. 

10604. Washington Market, from New En 

10605. " . " 
10650. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
10651. 
13593. 
13594. 
13595. 
13597. 

14429. Portland, Maine. 
16224. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
16443. New York Market. 
16494. Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 
18989. 
18990. 
18991. 
1899^. 



18993. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
18994. 

18995. " " 

18996. " " 
18997. 

18998. " " 
18999. 
19000. 

21808. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
23769. Provinceto-mi, Massachusetts. 
24463. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
24506. 
24514. 
24568. 

24594. " " 

25183. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



83. Scomber piieumatophorus Do la Roclic. 

23754. Proviucetown, Massachusetts. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



89 



84. Sarda pelamys (L.) Ciiv. 
8482. New Tort. 

14423. !Noank, Connecticut. 

14424. 

14425. 

85. Orcynus pelamys (L.) Poey. 

21.")5G. WiioiTs Holl, Massachuselts. 

86. Cybium maculatum (flitch.) Cuv. 
23118. AVasliinKton Market. 



14426. Noank, Connecticut. 

15455. Moutli Potomac Elver. 

22728. East coast Tnited Statas. 
22778. 



I 21557. AYood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



CAEANC4ID^. 



87. Vomer setipinnis (Mitch.) Ayres. 

16838. Xew York Market. i 

19735. East coast United States. I 

83. Argyreiosus vomer (Linn.) C. & V. 
IO.jUC). Beaiifort, IS'ortli Carolina. 

89. Decapterus punctatus (Ag.) Gill. 

18120. Bermudas. 

18121. 

18122. 

18123. 

18124. 

18125. 

18126. 

18127. 

18128. 

18129. 

18130. 

18131. 

18951. 

18952. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts, 



21G55. Newport, Rhode Island. 
22753. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18953. 
18954. 
18955. 
18956. 
18957. 
18958. 
18959. 
18960. 
18961. 
18962. 
18963. 
18964. 
19143. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



90. Trachurops crumenophthalmus (IJlocli) Gill. 



18G85. 
18686. 
18687. 
18688. 
18689. 
18690. 
18691. 
18692. 
18693. 
18694. 
18695. 
18696. 
18697. 
18698. 
18699. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18700. 
18701. 
18702. 
18703. 
18704. 
18725. 
18726. 
18727. 
18728. 
18729. 
18982. 
18983. 
21638. 
22368. 
22784. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Newport, Ehode Island. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



91. Carangus pisquetus (C.&V.) GrJ. 
Paratractus 2Jisquetiis (C. «fc V.) Gill. 
5991. Florida. 

13663. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
14401. 
14402. 
14403. 
14404. 
14406. 



14407. 
14408. 
14409. 
14410. 
14412. 
14414. 
14415. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



90 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Wood's IIoU, Massacliusetta. 



14416. 

14417. 

14418. " 

16508. 

17199. " 

17200. " " 

17201. " " 

17202. " " 

17203. " " 

17204. " 

17205. " 

17206. " " 
17207. 

17208. " " 

18807. " " 

19020. " " 

19255. " " 

92. Carangus hippos (L.) Gill. 

14389. Wood's IIoll, Mas.sacliusetts. 

14390. " 

14391. " 
14392. 

14393. 

14394. " " 

14395. 

14396. " " 

14398. " " 

14400. " " 

18779. " " 

18780. " " 
18781. 

18782. 

18783. " " 

88784. " " 

18785. " " 

18786. " " 

18787. " " 
18788. 



19296. 
19298. 
19377. 
19378. 
19381. 
19383. 
19384. 
19380. 
19388. 
19391. 
19392. 
19393. 
19394. 
20628. 
20755. 
21637. 
22781. 



18789. 
18790. 
18791. 
18792. 
18793. 
18794. 
18795. 
18796. 
18797. 
18798. 
18799. 
18800. 
18801. 
18802. 
18803. 
19492. 
20842. 
21654. 
24922. 



Wood's Holl, Massaoliusctta. 



93. Biepharichtliys crinitus (Akerly) Gill. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Mauritius. 



13087. 
13088. 
16413. 
16520. 
19984. 
19985. 
19986. 
19987. 



94. Trachynotus carolinus (L.) Gill. 

1 6249. Xe w York Market. 

18808. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

18809. " 

18810. " " 
18811. 

18812. 

18813. 

18814. '■ 

18815. 

18816. 

18817. " " 

18818. " " 

18819. " " 

18820. " " 

18821. » " 



19988. 
20205. 
20682. 
20705. 
20750. 
21040. 



Newport, lihode Island. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Beaufort, North Carolina. 
Newport, Rhode Island. 

AVood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Mauritius. 

Newport, Khode Island. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Newport, Khode Island. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18822. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

18823. 

18824. 

18825. " " 

18826. 

18827. " " 

18828. 

18829. 

18830. 

18831. 

18832. 

22322. " " 

22737. East coast of United States. 

22768. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STxVTES NATIONAL MCSEUM. 



91 



i. Seriola zonata (Mitcli.) C. & V. 
Halatractus zonatus (Mitcb.) Gill. 
10402. Wootrs Holl, Massacliusetts. 
12995. " 

12998. 
12999. 
14384. 
14385. 
14387. 
14.388. 
14953. 
1C2S2. 
1G393. 
1C543. 
1G569. 
18965. 
18960. 
18967. 
18968. 
19018. 



East coast of United States. 
"Wood's IIoH, Massachusetts. 



New Bedford, Massachusetts. 
"Wood's IIoU, Massachusetts. 



19019. 
19274. 
19365. 
1936G. 
19367. 
19368. 
19369. 
19370. 
19371. 
19372. 
19374. 
19395. 
20197. 
2064C. 
20650. 
20743. 
21636. 
22774. 



"Wood's noil, MassachiLsetts. 



^N'ewport, lihode Island. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Newport, Ehode Island. 

"Wood's IIoll, Massachusetts. 



CORYPH.ENID.E. 



96. Coryphaena Sueuri C. &, V. 

1 0485. New York Market. 



STEOMATEID.E. 



97. Palinurichthys perciformis 



14055. 
16080. 
16081. 
16082. 
16083. 
16084. 
16085. 
16086. 
16087. 
16088. 
16089. 
16090. 
16337. 
16516. 
19285. 
19286. 
19287. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Off Neman's Land. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

New York Market. 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



(Mitch.) Gill. 

19288. 
19289. 
19290. 
19291. 
19292. 
19305. 
19750. 
20704. 
22650. 
22746. 
22913. 
24252. 
24253. 
24375. 
24418. 
24431. 
24432. 



98. Poronotus triacanthus (Peck) Gill. 

10705. "Wood's lIoll, Massachusetts. 

10706. 

13249. " " 

13267. " " 

13270. " 

13271. " " 
13275. 

1.3276. " " 

13278. 

13279. "■ " 

14358. 

14360. " •• 

14361. 

14362. " '• 

14364. 

14367. 

14368. 



No.ink, Connecticut. 



14369. 
14370. 
14371. 
14372. 
14373. 
14374. 
14375. 
14376. 
14377. 
14378. 
14379. 
14381. 
14382. 
14383. 
14939. 
14944. 
14951. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



East coast of United States. 
Newport, Khode Island. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Fishing banks off coast of Maine. 
East coast of United States. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



Noauk, Connecticut, 
Eastport, Maine. 



Portland, Maine. 



Norfolk, Virginia. 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

East coast of United States. 



92 PROCEEDINGS OF UXITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Tompkinsville, K^ow York. 
"VYoodM IIoll, Massaclmsotts. 

INoauk. Connecticut. 



1.5082. 
16459. 
17188. 
17189. 
17190. 
17191. 
17192. 
17193. 
17194. 
17195. 



99. Peprilus alepidotus (L.) Cnv, 
Peprilus Gardenii (Bl. Scliu.) Gill. 
12871. Otr coast of Floriila. 



15372. 
15373. 



Washington Market. 



1719G. Koauk, Connecticut, 

17197. 

17198. 

20651. 

21667. 

23155. 

24259. 

24260. 

24927. 



'"Wood's noil, Masaacliusetts. 
liauquereau. 

Wood's Holl, Ma.^sachnsetts. 
Off coast of Maine. , 
Vineyard Sound. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



19499. 
22924. 



Beaufort, North CarolinOu 
Korfolk, Virginia. 



LATILID^. 
100. Lopholatilus chaniBeleonticeps Goode & Beau. 

■ 24291. Lat. 40= 10' N., Lon. 70= 56' W., 75 fathoms. 

BEEYCID^. 



101. Holccentrum sogo Blocli. 



18071. 
18072. 
18073. 
18074. 
18075. 
18076. 
18077. 
18078. 
18079. 



Bermiula. 



18080. 
18081. 
18082. 
18083. 
18084. 
18085. 
18086. 
18087. 
21891. 



Bermuda. 



SCI^NID^. 



102. Cynoscion carolinensis (C. &V.) Gill. 



8315. 
12807. 
19459. 
19651. 
19652. 



Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 
Norfolk, Virginia. 

Fort Macon, North Carolina. 
Beaufort, North Carolina. 



19653. 
19654. 
19713. 
22932. 

24684. 



Beaufort, North Carolina. 

Fort Macon, North Carolina. 
Off coast of North Carolina. 
Near Charleston, South Carolina. 



103. Cynoscion regalis (Bloeli) Gill. 



12804. 
14356. 
16323. 
16429. 
16548. 
18880. 
18881. 
18882. 
18883. 
18884. 
18885. 



Norfolk, Virginia. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18886. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

18887. 



18889. 
18890. 
18891. 
18892. 
18948. 
22307. 
23195. 
23508. Norfolk, Virginia. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



93 



104. Pogcnias cromis Lac. 

17904. Saint John's River, Florida. 

17905. 

17906. 

17907. " " 

17908. " " 

17909. " " 

17910. " " 

17911. " " 
17912. 

18303. 
18405. 
18406. 



18407. 
18408. 
18409. 
18410. 
18411. 
18484. 
19040. 
19041. 
19704. 
22779. 
24090. 



105. Liostomus obliquus (Mitcli.) De Kay. 



1C850. 
18047. 
18333. 
18334. 
18336. 
18448. 



New York Mar1;et. 

Mouth of Saint John's River, Florida. 

Saint John's River, Florida. 



18449. 
18450. 
19055. 
21283. 
24484. 



Suint John'a River, Florida. 



Florida. 



Southeast coast United States. 



Xear Charleston, South Carolina. 



Saint John's River, Florida. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



24688. Neai- Charleston, South Carolina. 



106. Bairdiella argyroleuca (Mitcb.) Gill. 
Baiidiclla punctata (L.) Gill. 
3370. Southeast coast of United States. 
Brunswick, Georgia. 
Mouth of Saint John's River, Florida 
Saint John's River, Florida. 



17755. 
18050. 
18335. 
18498. 
18499. 
18500. 
18501. 
18502. 
18503. 
18504. 



18505. 
18506. 
18507. 
18508. 
18509. 
18510. 
18511. 
18512. 
19002. 
22927. 
23 109. 



S:iiuT John's Rivei", Florida. 



Florida. 



South Carolina. 



107. Sciasnops ocellatus (Liim.) Gill. 

18317. Saint John's River, Florida. 
19498. Beaufort, North Carolina. 
19655. 



19714. Fort Macon, North Carolina. 
22710. Southern coast of United States. 



108. Menticirrus nebulosus (Mitoli.) Gill. 



10701. 
10709. 
14353. 
14354. 
15579. 
18712. 
18713. 
18847. 
18848. 
18849. 
18850. 



Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 

Noank, Connecticut. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
New York Market. 
Woods Holl. Massachusetts. 



18851. 
18852. 
18853. 
18854. 
18855. 
1885G. 
18857. 
18858. 
18859. 
21441. 
22757. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Cohasset Narrows, Massachusetts. 
East coast of United States. 



109. Men'cicirrus littoralis (Ilolbr.) Gill 

10081. Fhnida. 

19082. 

19083. " 

19084. 

19085. " 

19086. 



19087. 
19088. 
19089. 
19090. 
19091. 



Florida. 



94 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



110. Micropogon undulatua (L.) C. & V. 

18332. Saint John's Kiver, Florida. 18495. 

18493. " " 22740. 

18494. " " 22933. 

85. Orcyiius pelamys (L.) Poey. 
21364. Bermuda. 

112. Haploidonotus grunniens Kaf. 



Saint John's Elver, Florida. 
East coast of United States. 



I 21881. Bennuda. 



9504. 


Mississippi Valley. 




17770. 


Sandusky, Ohio 


11037. 


Sandusky, Ohio. 




17771. 


ii n 


11040. 


" " 




17772. 


" " 


11041. 


" " 




17773. 


" " 


11089. 


Ausable Eiver, Michigan. 




17774. 


" " 


12279. 


Cincinnati, Ohio. 




17775. 


" " 


12285. 


" 




17776. 


" " 


12286. 


u 11 




17777. 


11 11 


12287. 


" ■ 




17778. 


11 11 


12288. 


" " 




17779. 


u t< 


17768. 


Detroit, Michigan. 




17780. 


" " 


17709. 


Sandusky, Ohio. 




17781. 


It 11 






GEEEIDJL. 




113. Diapterus gula. 






21896. 


Bermuda. 




23580. 


Bermuda. 


23557. 


" 




23581. 


" 


23562. 


" 




23582. 


" 


23564. 


" 




23583. 


" 


23567. 


" 




23584. 


" 


23568. 


" 




23586. 


" 


23569. 


" 




23587. 


" 


23570. 


" 




23588. 


" 


23571. 


" 




23590. 


" 


23576. 


" 




23591. 


" 


23579. 


" 




23592. 


" 



114. Diapterus Lefroyi Goode. 

Eucinostomus Lefroyi Goode. 
18157. Bermuda. 
18158. 

18159. " 

18160. " 

18161. " 

18162. " 

18163. " 

18164. " 



18165. 
18166. 
18167. 
18168. 
18169. 
18170. 
18171. 
18172. 



Bermuda. 



PIMELEPTERIDiE. 



115. Pimelepterus Boscii Lac. 

10338. Bermuda. 

18173. " 

18174. " 

18175. " 

18176. " 

18177. " 
18178. 

18179. " 

18180. " 

18181. " 

18182. " 

18183. " 

18184. " 

18185. " 

18186. " 



18187. Bermuda. 


18188. " 


18189. " 


18190. " 


18191. " 


18192. 


18193. " 


18194. " 


18195. " 


18196. " 


20177. " 


21900. " 


23547. " 


23548. " 



PEOCEKDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



95 



SPAEID^. 



116. Lagodon rbomboides (L. ) Holhrook. 



17899. 
17900. 
17901. 
18343. 
18344. 
18345. 
18346. 
18451. 
18452. 
18453. 
18454. 
18455. 
18456. 



Saiut Juhu's Eiver, Florida. 



117. Archosargus probatocephalus (W 



15578. 
18309. 
18389. 
18390. 
18391. 
18392. 
18393. 
18394. 
18395. 
18396. 
18397. 
18398. 



Kew York Market. 

Saint John'.s Kiver, Florida. 



18457. 
18458. 
18459. 
18460. 
18461. 
18462. 
19134. 
19687. 
19716. 
21280. 
21569. 
21570. 
24284. 

Illb.) 
18399. 
18400. 
18401. 
18402. 
18403. 
18404. 
18413. 
18414. 
18415. 
18416. 
21546. 
22729. 



Saiut .Jolm'.s Iliver, Florid.a. 



Florida. 

Fort Macon, Korth Carolina. 

Saint Jolin's Eiver, Florida. 
Charleston, South Carolina. 

East coast of United States. 

Gill. 
Saint John'.s lUver, Florida. 



118. Stenotomus argyrops (L.) Gill. 
5940. East coast of United States. 

10652. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

10668. 

10702. " 

12922. " 

12923. 

14326. " 

14327. 

14328. 

14329. 

14330. " 

14331. " 

14332. " 

14333. " 
14335. " 
14336. 

14337. " 
14338. 

14339. " 

14340. " 

14341. " 
14342. 
14344. 

119. Sargus Holbrookii Bean. 

20979. Charleston, South Carolina. 

22870. New York Market. j 

120. Calamus megacephalus (Sw.) Poey. 
21893. Bermuda. 

121. Pagnis argenteus Scliu. ? 
24695. Off Charleston, South Carolina. 



Charleston, South Carolina. 
East coast of United States. 



YTood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



14345. 
14347. 
14348. 
14349. 
14350. 
14351. 
14352. 
14964. 
14965. 
16007. 
16030. 
16042. 
10049. 
17186. 
17187. 
21436. 
22758. 
22925. 
24468. 
24491. 
24508. 
24512. 
24545. 



24691. Charleston, South Carolina. 



Cohasset Narrows, Massachusetts. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
East coast of United States. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



96 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

PEISTIPOMATID.E. 

122. Pristipoma fulvomaculatum (Mitcli.) Gtbr. 

22923. East coast of United States. | 23507. Norfolk, Virg ma. 



123. Haemylum xanthopterum C. & V. 

18219. Bernmila. 

18220. 

18221. 

18222. 

18223. 

18224. 

18225. " 

18226. 

18227. 

18228. 

18229. 

18230. 

18231. 

124. Haemylum flaviguttatus Gill. 

19032. Colima. 

125. Hesmylum. 

19039. Florida. 

126. Lutjanus caxis (Sohu.) Poey. 

18101. Bermuda. 
18102. 
18103. 
18104. 
18105. 
18106. 
18107. 
■ 18108. 
18109. 



18232. 
18233. 
18234. 
18235. 
18236. 
18237. 
18238. 
18239. 
18240. 
18241. 
18242. 
20179. 
21372. 



Bermuda. 



18110. Bermuda. 

18111. 

18112. 

18113. 

18114. 

18115. 

18116. 

18117. 

22798. 



127. Lutjanus Blackfordii Goode & Beau. 
2^795. Southem coast of United States. 

128. Rhomboplites aurorubens (C. & V.) Gill. 

21224. Charleston, Soiitli Carolina. 1 21571. Charleston, South Carolina. 

CENTRAPtCHID.E. 



129. Micropterus salmoides (Lac.) Gill. 

10715. Potomac Kiver. 

Bay City, Michigan. 
Alpena, Michigan. 
Charlestown, New Hampshire. 



11100. 
11208. 
12308. 
12309. 
12810. 
12809. 
15517. 



Norfolk, Virginia. 
Potomac Kiver. 



10844. 
17791. 
19614. 
19015. 
10016. 
19G17. 
22727. 



New York Market. 
Holyoke, Massachusetts. 
Sandusky, Ohio. 



Bay City, Michigan. 
Potomac Kiver. 



130. Micropterus pallidus (Raf.) Gill & Jordan. 

10380. Norfolk, Virginia. i 15664. New York M.arket. 



10381. 


" 


" 


11072. 


Sandusky, 


Ohio. 


12297. 


Cincinnati 


Ohio. 


12298. 


" 


" 


12472. 


Sandusky, 


Ohio. 



16910. 
16911. 
16912. 
16913. 
16914. 



Tangipahoa Kiver, Mississippi. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



97 



17925. 
17968. 
18438. 
18439. 
18440. 
19032. 
19033. 
19034. 



S.Tiiit Jiibu's Rivor, Florida. 
Wilniiufiton, Xnrth Carolina. 
Saiut Jobn's lliver. Florida. 



131. Ambloplites rupestris (Raf.) Gill. 



4173. 
5707. 
7667. 
7673. 
7680. 
7703. 
7708. 
7734. 
8469. 
8926. 



KocLi'ster, 'Wisconsin. 
Lake Champlain. 

Yellow Creek, Ohio. 
Eacinc, Wisconsiii. 
Cleveland, Ohio. 

Yellow Creek, Ohio. 

Eed River, Biitish America. 

Sandusky, Ohio. 



1C035. 
19030. 
19037. 
19038. 
1C039. 
20555. 
21278. 
24812. 



11013. 
11014. 
IIOIG. 
11218. 
12415. 
10919. 
19022. 
23183. 
24066. 



Saiut John's River, Florida. 



Jacksonville, Florida. 
Saint John's River, Florida. 
Xorth Carolina. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 



Alpena, Michigan. 
Sandusky. Ohio. 
Tangipahoa River, Mississippi. 
Saudu.sky, Ohio. 

Aiix Plaines, Illinois. 



132. Acantharcus pomotis (Bd.) Gill. 
17844. IN'ew Jersey. 
20353. Trenton, New Jersey. 

133. Chaenobryttus gulosus (C. &V.) Gill. 

C'hcenohrijttvs viiidis (C. & V.) Jordan. 



24054. Wat.sou's Creek, Xew Jersey. 



18384. Saint John's River, Florida. 

18385. 

18387. 

18514. 

18515. " 

18516. " 
18517. 
18519. 

18520. " 

18521. 
19096. 
19097. 
19098. 

134. Apomotis cyanellus (Raf.) Jordan. 
20052. Cumberland River, Tennessee. 

135. Lepomis auritus (L.) Gill. 
4220. - Florida. 
6246. Sing Sing, Xew York. 
77.57. 

7775. ■' " 

8099. Rivers of e.ist coast of United States. 



19099. Saiut Johns River, Florida. 
19100. 

24753. "Washington Market (from N. C ) 

24754. - .. ' ' 
24755. 

24756. " u 

24757. " a 

24758. " « 

24759. " •< 
24700. " •• 
24761. " <• 
24769. '• .< 
24809. " •• 



1.5351. Su.squehanna River, Pennaylv.aniii. 

18017. 

20305. Havre de Grace, Maryland. 

21453. Potomac River. 

22230. 



136. Lepomis pallidus (Mitch.) Gill & Jordan 
11006. Sandusky, Ohio. 
11069. 
11070. 

11217. " . 

12409. 

19109. Saiut John's River, Florida 
19113. 
19114. 
19116. 
19118. 
19119. 



Proc. Nat. Mns. 80- 



19123. Saiut John's River, Florida 

1912.5. 

19126. 

19127. 

19128. 

19129. •' u 

lOl.'il. 

191.32. " I. 

191.33. " » 
24702. Xorth Carolina. 
•24703. " 



■i 



May 26, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



3.37. Lepomis punctatus. 

17948. Saint Jobu'.s Iliver, Florida. 

18361. 

18363. , 

18365. 

18366. 

18375. 



18377. Saint John's River, Florida. 

18464._ 

18473." 

18477. " " 

18480. " " 

23170. Florida. 



138. Xenotis sanguinolentus (Ag.) Jordan. 
16922. Tangipahoa Eiver, Missis.sippi. 



3.39. Xenotis peltastes (Cope) Jordan. 
3274. Racine, "Wisconsin. 



9266. Michigan, 



340. Xystroplites heros (B. & G.) Jordan. 

■4158. Saint Louis, Missouri. 

141. Eupomotis aureus (Walb.) Gill & Jordan. 



ai063. 

:no64, 

11065. 
112952. 
14941. 

i4L»42. 

149i;2. 
.18200. 
a8261. 
218202. 

18263. 

18264. 

18265. 

18266. 
JS267. 
18268. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 



South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 
Washiuiiton Market. 



18269. 
18270. 
18271. 
18272. 
18273. 
18274. 
18275. 
18276. 
18277. 
19631. 
20304. 
228C3. 
24668. 
24768. 
24810. 
24877. 



"Washington Market. 



Havre de Grace, Maryland. 

Potomac River, Washington, D. C. 

Aux Plaines, Illinois. 

"Washington Market, from North Carolina. 



3.42. Eupomotis speciosus (Holbr.) Gill. 



18364. 
-18309. 
18371. 
18373. 
18383. 
184C9. 
18478. 
19103. 



Saint John's River, Florida. 



19106. 
19107. 
19108. 
19110. 
19115. 
19117. 
19120. 



Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 



3.43. Enneacanthus margarotis Gill & Jordan. 

20494. AVatson's Creek, Mercer County, New Jersey. 

3.44. Enneacanthus obesus (Baird) Gill. 
24659. • San Francisco Market, California. 



3.45. Centrarchus irideus (Bo.sc.) C.& V. 



7747. 
-24601. 
124C62. 
2S«76. 

-.24677. 
:24748. 



Tarborough, North Carolina. 
AVashington Mi.rket, fromN. Carolina. 
Noith Carolina. 



"Washington Market, fromN. Carolina. 



24749. "Washington Market, from Nortli Carolina, 

24750. 

24751. 

24752. 

24766. 

24808. 



PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 99 



146. Ponioxys iiigromaculatus (LeS.) Giraid. 



10382. 


Xorfolk, Virginia. 


18524. 


10386. 


" " 


18525. 


11007. 


Sandusky, Ohio. 


1852G. 


11011. 


.. 


19312. 


11160. 


" 


19313. 


12805. 


Norfolk, Virginia. 


19314. 


17903. 


Saint John's Kiver, Florida. 


19315. 


17964. 


Wilmington, North Carolina. 


19317. 


17005. 


" 


19318. 


17067. 


" " 


19319. 


17969. 


" 


19320. 


17970. 


" 


23181 


18350. 


Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 


24767 


18351. 




24891. 



147. Pomoxys annularis Eaf. 

23182. Mississippi Vallej". 



148. Epinephelus striatus (Blocli) Gill. 

18088. Bemiuda. 

18089. 

18090. 

18091. 

18092. 

18093. 

18094. 



18095. 
18096. 
18097. 
18098. 
18099. 
18100. 



Kinston, North Carolina. 



Licking Eiver, Ohio. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 
"Washington Market. 



SERRANID^. 



Bermuda. 



149. Epinephelus guttatus (Gmelin) Goode. 

12709. Bermuda. 

18113. 

18119. 

150. Epinephelus morio (Cuv.) Gill. 

22775. Bermuda. 

151. Centropristis atrarius (Linu.) Barn. 



19644. Florida. 
20182. Bermuda. 
21683. 



10642. 


Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


17181. 


10667. 


" 


17182. 


14321. 


Noank, Connecticut. 


17183. 


14322. 


" 


17184. 


14323. 


" 


17241. 


14324. 


Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


19300. 


14325. 


" 


19417. 


16026. 


" 


19511. 


16574. 


" 


19641. 


17174. 


Noank, Connecticat. 


19828. 


17175. 




21440. 


17176. 




22378. 


17177. 


" 


22800. 


17178. 


" 


22959. 


17179. 




24584. 


17180. 







Noank, Connecticut. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Beaufort, North Carolina. 

Florida. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

Cohasset Narrows, Massachusetts. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

East coast of United States. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



152. Diplectruni fasiculare (C. & V.) Holbrook. 
24692. Off Charleston, South Carolina. 



100 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



ETHEOSTOMATID^. 



153. Percina caprodes (Eaf. ) Giranl. 

1152. Mcadville, Peimsylvania. 
Eacine, Wisconsin. 



1201. 
1202. 
1223. 
1246. 
1204. 
1J06. 



Wisconsin. 
Columljus, Ohio. 
Westport, New York. 
Poland, Obio. 



1017. 


Poland, (Jhio. 


13C9. 


Yellow Creek, Ohio. 


1394. 


Madrid, 5fcw York. 


8145. 


Ohio. 


9GG2. 


" 


9731. 


Potomac River. 


20407. 


Pennsylvania. 



154. Diplssiuni blennioides (Raf.) Jordau. 
1307. Black lUver, Ohio. 



PEECID^. 



155. Perca fluviatili.^. 

Perca americana Schrank. 
7118. Sandusky, Ohio. 



7259. 

7281. 

7344. 

7345. 

7^30. 

7441. 

7478. 

7878. 

8094. 

8713. 

r831. 

8832. 

8883. 
10327. 
10330. 
11001. 
11003. 
11004. 
'11005. 
11140. 
11150. 
11176. 
12321. 
12324. 
12325. 
12947. 



(5^ 



Ohio. 
Sandusky, Ohio. 



Ohio. 



Ecorse, Michigan. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 

Deep Lake, Illinois. 
Sandusky, Ohio. 



Van Hutton Lake, Michigan. 
"WashinKton Market. 



South nadl.n- Falls, Massachusetts. 



Washington Market. 



14976. 
15333. 
15334. 

15335. " 

15336. " 
15337. 

15338. " 

15339. 

15340. 

15341. 

15342. 

15343. 

15344. 

15345. " 

15346. 

15347. 

15348. 

15402. Chapman's Landing, Marj'land. 

18527. Kinston, North Carolina. 

18528. 

19450. 

19491. 

19779. 

19781. 

19782. 

19783. 

20550. 



Potomac Eiver. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 



Illinois. 



156. Stizostethiuai vitreum (Mitch.) Jordan ».t Coprland. 

StizostetMuvi americanum (Cuv.) Gid. 
10811. Sandu.sky, Ohio. 



11181. Ausable, Michigan. 

11182. 

11183. 

11184. 

11186. 

12391. Ecorse, Michigan. 

12392. 

12396. 



19709. Ecorse, Michigan. 

19770. 

22704. East coast of Fnited States. 

22705. 

22706. " " 

22707. " " 
22715. " " 
22741. '• " 



1D7. Stizostethium caaadense (Smith) Jordan, 
22238. Memiibis, Teunesseo. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 101 



LACRACID.E. 



158. Morone aniericana (Gmel.) Gill. 
IToO. SiiiK Sinir, Xow York. 
Potomac Kiver. 



"WootVs Holl, Masaacliusctta. 



AVaslunston Market. 



10633. 
10634. 
10G90. 
10729. 
10730. 
13354. 
14319. 
15323. 
15324. 
15325. 
15326. 
15327. 
15328. 
15329. 
15330. 
15331. 
15332. 



159. Roccus lineatus (Bl. Schn.) Gill. 
10693. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Norfolk, Virginia. 
"Washington Market. 



12808. 

19321. 

19322. 

19323. 

19324. " 

19325. 

1U326. 

19327. 

19328. 

19329. 

19330. 

19331. ' = 

19332. '• 
19333. 

160. Roccus chrysops (Raf.) Gill. 
9142. Sandusky, Ohio. 

IIOOG. 
llO.-.l. 

161. Paralabrax clathrata Girard. 

17037. Santa Cruz Island, California. 



15471. 
15472. 
17127. 
17128. 
17129. 
17130. 
17242. 
17243. 
17244. 
17245. 
17246. 
17247. 
17248. 
17249. 
17250. 
22308. 
24925. 



19334. 
19335. 
19336. 
19337. 
19338. 
19339. 
19447. 
19613. 
22714. 
22726. 
22960. 
23117. 
24807. 
24846. 



Chapman's Landing, Maryland. 
Noauk, Connecticut. 

Potomac Kiver. 



New York Market. 

"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



"Washington Market. 



Potomac Kiver. 
Holyoke, Mas.sachusetts. 
East coast of "United States. 



"Washington Market. 
North Carolina. 
"Washington Market. 



12468. Sandusky, Ohio. 
19020. 



I 17038. Santa Barbara, California. 



EPHIPPIIDiE. 

162. Parephippus quadratus (Gliu.) Gill. 
19493. Beaufort, North Carolina. 

POMATOMID^. 

163. Pomatomus saltatrlx (Linn.) Gill. 



10768. 


"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


17587. 


14097. 


Noank, Connecticut. 


17588. 


14312. 


" " 


17589. 


14313. 


" 


17590. 


14314. 


" " 


17591. 


14315. 


" 


17592. 


14316. 


"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


17593. 


14318. 


" 


17594. 


15554. 


New York Market. 


17595. 


1G124. 


"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


18491. 


1G125. 


" 


18492. 


16139. 


Menemsha Bight, Massachusetts. 


190.54. 


1G371. 


Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


19301. 


17585. 


Noank, Connecticut. 


22719. 


17586. 


" " 


22762. 



Noank, Connecticut. 



Saint John's Kiver, Florida. 



AVood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
East coast of Ilnited States. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachuaetta. 



102 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 



AMMODYTID^. 



164. Ammodytes americanus De Kay. 

13095. Wood's IIoll, Massacliusetts. 

16193. 

16559. ISTaiitucket, llhode Island. 



19830. Wood's Holl, Massacliusetts. 

19842. 
22841. 



ECIIENEIDID.E. 
165. Echeneis nr.uciateoides (Zneiew). 



20702. Xewport, llhude Iijlaod. 

20843. 

22776. East coast of United States. 



22917. East coast of United States. 
22918. 



SPHYEiENID^. 



166. Sphyraena borealLs De Kay. 



18754. Wood' 


s Uoll, Massacliusetts. 


18767. 


18755. 






18768. 


18756. 






18769. 


18757. 






18770. 


18758. 






18771. 


18759. 






18772. 


18760. 






18773. 


187C1. 






18774. 


18762. 






18775. 


18763. 






18776. 


18764. 






18777. 


18765. 






18773. 


18766. 




MUGJ] 


LID^. 



18767. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



167. Mugil albula Linu. 

, Mugil Uneahis Mitcli. 
14930. K'orth Carolina. 
15307. Washington Market. 
15308. 
15309. 
15310. 
15311. 

15312. " 

15313. " 
1531.5. " 
15316. " 
15317. 

15318. 
15319. 
15320. 
15321. 



15.322. 
185G8. 
18569. 
18570. 
18571. 
18572. 
18804. 
18805. 
18806. 
18807. 
21635. 
22387. 
22777. 
24510. 
24697. 



Wa.sliington Market. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Xewport, Ehodo Island. 
Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



!N"ear Ch.arleston, South Carolina. 



168. Mugil brasiliensis Ag. 

24505. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



169. Mugil cephalotus Cuv. & Val. 
18003. Honolulu, Hawaii. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 103 



ATHERINID^. 



170. Chirostoma menidiutn (L.) Gill. 
Christoma notata (Mitch.) Gill. 

13318. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
17630. 

17631. " 

17632. " " 
17633. 

17634. " 

17635. 

17636. 

17638. " " 

17639. " " 

17640. " " 
17641. 

17642. " " 

17643. " " 

17644. " " 



17645. 
17646. 
17647. 
17648. 
17649. 
17650. 
17651. 
17652. 
17653. 
17654. 
17655. 
22858. 
23157. 
24541. 
24923. 



"Wood 



s Holl, Massachusetta. 



Orland, 
Wood 



Maine, 
s Holl, Massachnsetts. 



BELONID.E. 



171. Belone longirostris (Mitch.) Gill. 
14018. Noank, Connecticut. 



17574. 
17575. 
17576. 
17577. 
17578. 
17579. 
17580. 
17581. 
17582. 
17583. 
17584. 
18833. 
18834. 
18835. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



18836. 
18837. 
18838. 
18839. 
18840. 
18841. 
18842. 
18843. 
18844. 
18845. 
18846. 
20629. 
21451. 
22371. 
22773. 



Wood 



s Holl, Massachusetts. 



172. Belone hiaus. 

21424. New York Market. 

173. Belone latimanus Poey. 

18721. "Woods Holl, Massachusetts. 



21421. New York Market. 



SCOMBRESOCID^. 



174. Hemirhamphus Pleii Val. 

18132. Bermuda. 
18133. 

18134. " * 

18135. " 

18136. " 

18137. " 

175. Scombresox saunis (Walb.) Flem. 

Scomberesox scutellatus LeS. 
19196. "Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 
19197. 

19203. Cape Cod, Massachusetts. 
19204. 
19205. " 



18138. 
18139. 
18140. 
18141. 
18142. 
18143. 



19206. 
19207. 
19208. 
19845. 



Bermuda. 



Cape Cod, Massachusetts. 



"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts.- 



104 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



176. Escx lucius Linn. 

11025. Sandusky, Ohio. 

11027. " " 
11143. 

177. Escx iiobilior Thomx^son. 

11028. Sandusky, Ohio. 

178. Esox americanus Gmelin. 

1587. Piermont, New York. 



ESOCID.T:. 



12942. 
15659. 
17784. 



6814. 
15711. 



New York. 

New York Market. 



South. Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 
New York Market. 
Sandusky, Ohio. 



I 11029. Sandusky, Ohio. 



15716. Now York Market. 
20350. Trenton, New Jersey. 
24771. Long Island, New York. 



179. Esox reticulatus LeS. 
Norfolk, Virginia. 



10388. 
12453. 
12943. 
15012. 
17785. 



South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 
Washington Market. 
Norfolk, Virginia. 



17786. Norfolk, Virginia. 
24848. Washington Market 
24892. 
24896. 



UMBRIDJi:. 



180. Umbra limi (Kirt.) Giiutli. 

Melanura limi (Kirt.) Ag. 
8807. Northfield, Illinois. 

181. Dallia pectoralis Beau. 

6661. Saint Michael's, Alaska. 



I 9288. Eacine, Wisconsia. 



CYPRINODONTIDyE. 



182. Cyprinodoa variegatus Lac. 

17706. Noank, Connecticut. 

17707. 

17708. " " 

17709. 

17710. " " 

17711: " " 

17712. " " 

17713. " " 

17714. " " 

17715. " " 

17716. " " 

17717. " " 

17718. '■ " 





719. 
720. 




721. 




722. 




724. 




725. 




726. 




727. 




728. 




729. 




730. 



19. Noank, Connecticut. 



24581. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



183. Fundulus pisculentus (Mitch.) Vul. 



13762. 
13901. 
13903. 
17681. 
17682. 
17683. 
17684. 
17685. 
17686. 
17687. 
17688. 
17689. 
17690. 
17691. 
17092. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Casco Bay, Maine. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



17693. 
17694. 
17695. 
17696. 
17097. 
17698. 
17699. 
17700. 
17701. 
17702. 
17703. 
17704. 
17705. 
20888. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 105 



184. Fundulus parvipiniiis. 

24SS3. Sau Diego, Califoiiiia. 

185. Hydrargyra majalis (Walb.) Val. 

ITOriO. AVood'a Holl, Massachusetts. 

17GJ7. 

17658. 

176J9. 

176G0. 

17601. 

17G02. 

17633. 

170S4. 

17665. 

1706G. 

17GG7. 

17G:S. 



17CG9. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

17670. 

17671. 

17672. 

17673. " " 

17G74. " " 

17675. " " 

17676. " " 

17677. " " 
17G78. " " 

17679. " " 

17680. " " 



PERCOPSID/E. 



186. Percopsis guttatus A< 

G301. Lake Superior. 



24772. Lake Superior. 



SYNODONTID^. 



187. Synodus fcDteiis (Linii.) Gill. 
195U7. Beaufort, North Carolina. 



MICROSTOMID^. 



188. Mallotus villosu.s (Miiller) Cuv. 
12698. Ilalitax, Xova Scotia. 

189. Osmerus niordaz (Mitch.) Gill. 

13330. Wood's Holl. Massachusetts. 
13333. 
13866. 

13936. Noauk, Comiecticut. 
16113. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
1G186. INoank, Corunecticut. 
18971. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
18972. 
18973. 
• 18974. 

18975. " " 



190. Osmerus pacificus. 

23184. Xaas Kiver, Oregon. 



24924. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



1897fi. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

18977. 

18078. 

18979. " " 

18980. 

19838. 

20959. Buckspoit, Maine. 

20964. 

23173. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

24441. 

24476. 



1 231S3. Fraser River, British Columhia. 
COREGONIDiE. 



191. Thymallus tricolor Cope. 






11080. 


A usable 


Kiver, 


Michigan. 


11094. 


Ausable Eiver, Michigan. 


11083. 








11095. 




11084. 








11096. 




11088. 


_ " 






11097. 




11091. 


" 






11098. 




11092. 


" 






19547. 




11093. 


" 




" 


19548. 





192. Argyrosomus Artedi (LeS.) Hoy, 
A. clupeiformis (Mitch.) Ag. 
6813. Great Lakes. 
10801. Sandusky, Ohio. 



11162. Sandusky, Ohio. 

11195. Ausable River, Michigan. 



106 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

193. Argyrosomus Artedi (LeS.) Hoy var. sisco Jor. 

21501. Geneva Lake, "Wisconsin. 



SALMONID^E. 



194. Salmo salar Linn. var. sebago Girard. 



10543. Grand Lake, Maine. 
12370. Sebes Pond, Maine. 



20764. Schoodic Lake, Maine. 



195. Salmo irideus Gibbous. 



22336. 
22338. 
22353. 
22354. 
22356. 
22359. 
22361. 
22402. 
22404. 
22405. 
22406. 
22419. 
22420. 
22421. 
22422. 
22423. 
22424. 
22425. 
22420. 
22427. 
22428. 
22429. 



McClond Kiver, California. 



California. 



McCloud Eiver, California. 



22430. 


McCloiid Eiver, C 


alifomia 


22431. 








22432. 








22454. 








22455. 








22456. 








22457. 








22458. 








22459. 








224C0. 








22462. 








22463. 








22464. 








22465. 








22470. 








22471. 








22473. 


Clackam 


as Ptiver, 


Oregon. 



22474. McCloud Eiver, California. 

22475. 

22476. 

22484. Clackamas Eiver, Oregon. 

22485. 



196. Oncorhynchus quinnat (Ricli.) Gtlir. 



22335. 
22340. 
22345. 
22393. 
22394. 
22395. 
22396. 
22410. 
22411. 
22412. 
22413. 
22414. 
22415. 
22416. 
22417. 
22418. 
22433. 



McCloud Eiver, California. 



224:^4. 
22435. 
22436. 
22437. 
22438. 
22440. 
22441. 
22444. 
22445. 
22447. 
22448. 
22449. 
22481. 
22482. 
22483. 
23153. 



McCloud Eiver, California. 



California. 



197. Salvelinus fontinalis (Mitch.) Gill & Jor. 



3613. Madrid, New Tork. 

6820. Sing Sing, New York. 

7064. 

7988. Madrid, New York, 



16098. Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. 

16099. " " ' 
21581 New York Market. 



198. Salvelinus oquassa (Girard) Gill & Jor. 
19521. New York Market. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 107 

199. Salvelinus Bairdii (Suckley) Gill & Jor. 

15533. MeCloud River, California. | 22357. Clackamas Eiver, Oregon. 

22337. " " ' 22469. McCloud River. California. 

22355. Clackamas River, Oregon. I 

ALEPIDOSAURID^. 



20t). Alepidosaurus ferox Lowe. 

22294. Oflf Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

22640. 

22641. LeHave Bank, 200-250 fathoms. 

24243. Lat. 43° 00' X., Lon. 01° 18' W., 200 fths. 



24244. Western part Lo Have Bank, 120 fathoms. 
24290. Lat. 42° 37' X., Lon. 62° 55' W., 200 fathoms. 
24207. 



HYODONTID^E. 



201. Hyodon tergisus LeS. 



11058. 


Sandusky, Ohio. 


11170. 


" 


11221. 


Cincinnati, Ohio. 


12255. 


" " 


12256. 


" 


12257. 


" 


12258. 


" " 


12259. 


" " 


12261. 


" " 


12262. 


" " 


12263. 


" " 



12450. 
12451. 
12474. 
12475. 
1247C. 
12478. 
12480. 
185G4. 
18566. 
18567. 
22961. 



Ecorse, Michigan. 
Yellowstone Eiver. 



Pompey's Pillar. 
Yellowstone River. 
Sandusky. Ohio. 
Ecorse, Michigan. 



ALBULID^. 



202. Albula vulpes. 

Allula conorhynchus Bl. Schn. 
18144. Bermuda. 
18145. 

18146. " 
18147. 
18148. 
18149. 

18150. " 

18151. " 

18152. " 



18153. Bermuda. 

18154. 

18155. 

18156. 

19788. ' 

21560. Xew York Market. 

21648. Newport. Rhode Island. 

21859. New Bedford, Massachusetts. 

21863. New London, Connecticut. 



203. Elops saurus Linn. 

15573. New York Market. 



15574. 
15580. 
16852. 
18573. 
18.574. 
18575. 
18576. 



New Bedford, Massachusetts. 
"Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



ELOPID.E. 






19037. 


Florida. 




19649. 


Fort Macon, North Carolina. 




19851. 


Wood's HoU, Massachusetts 




19874. 


■ u u 




21559. 


New York Market. 




22955. 


" 




24802. 


" 




24803. 


" 



DUSSUxMIERID^. 



204. Etrumeus teres (DeKay) Brevoort. 
19517. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



108 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



CLUPEIDiE. 

205. Bravoortia tyrannus (Latrobe) Goode. 
llrcviwrtia'inenhaden (Mitcli.) Gill. 



10G'J8. 

143UJ. 
14304. 
14305. 
14300. 
14307. 
14308. 
14309. 
14948. 
16012. 
16014. 
10310. 
18417. 
18418. 
18419. 



Wi)od's Holl, Massailiusetts. 



Xoauk, Counccticut. 



Wood's Holl, Masaachusetts. 



Saint Johu'a River. Florida. 



18420. 
18421. 
18422. 
18423. 
18424'. 
18425. 
18420. 
18427. 
18428. 
18429. 
18431. 
19043. 
19045. 
22801. 
24434. 
24465. 



Saiut John's River, Florida. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Yorktowu, Virginia, 
Wood's Holl, Masaachusetta. 



206. Brevoortia patronus Goode. 

21341. Pensacola, Florida. 



1 22810. Pensacola, Florida. 

I 2282.5. 



207. Alosa sapidissima (Wiis.) Liusly. 



Portland, Maine. 

Noank, Connecticut. 

Neu.se River, North Carolina. 

Washinijton Market. 



South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 

Avoca, North Carolina. 
Gravesend Bay, New York. 
Avoca, North Carolina. 
East coast of United States. 
Avoca, North Carolina. 



5472. New Bedford, Massachusetts. 14.')00. 

10626. Potomac River. 14301. 

10627. " 14847. 
10629. " 14931. 

12944. South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 14934. 

12945. " " 18513. 

12946. " " 19209. 

14292. Noank, Connecticut. 20469. 

14293. " " 20472. 

14294. " " 20970. 

14295. Portland, Maine. 21225. 

14296. ^ " " • 21414. 

14297. * " " 22953. 

14298. " " 23107. 

14299. " " 

208. Opisthonema thrissa Gill. 
19463. Eastern shore of Vii-ginia. 

209. Pomolobus aestivalis (Mitcli.) Goode & Bean. 

P. pseuduhareriffus (Wils.) Gill (in part). 
22370. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. | 23175. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

210. Pomolobus vernalis (Mitcli.) Goode & Bean. 

P. pseudoharenijus (Wils.) Gill (in part) 

14848. Noank. Connecticut. 

21439. Cohasset Narrows, Massachusetts. 

22369. Wood'.s Holl, Massachusetts. 

22786. 



23176. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

23177. 

23178. 



211. Pomolobus pseudoharengus (Wilson) Gill. 

Under this name, which is now known to have been bestowed npon 
the two distinct species immediately preceding it in this list, a number 
of specimens were distributed in 1877. Pomolobus vernalis may be at 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 109 



once separated from P. a'sUvaUs by its larger eye aud higher fins, 
catalogue numbers of the mixed lot follow. 



The 



10G44. 
10645. 
10609. 
10699. 
10700. 
10732. 
10753. 
14268. 
1427G. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts, 



PoitLiiiil, Maiue. 



14279. 
14280. 
14281. 
14283. 
14283. 
1428G. 
14945. 
14946. 



212. Pomolobus mediocris (Mitch.) Gill 

5470. New Bedford, Massachusetts. 
10624. rotomac riiver. 

Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



10640. 
10647. 
10671. 
10C88. 
12500. 
12802. 
15237. 



Potomac ItivoT. 
Koifolk, Virsinia. 



PotOTuac Iliver. 



1 67.^3. 
18432. 
18433. 
19456. 
19715. 
19751. 
197S5. 
10871. 



213. Clupea Larengus LiiiL!iT?iis. 



14217. 


Eastport, Maine. 






14259 


14218. 








H7.-W 


14220. 








147." 8 


14230, 








175C7 


14232. 








17508 


14235. 








175C9 


14238. 


P(ArtI;;iid, Maine. 






17570 


14241. 








. 17.571 


14242. 








17572 


14245. 








17573 


14248. 








216i-7 


142.- 1. 








22306 


14253. 


Wood's H«:ll, M: 


ssachi 


setts. 


21526 


142.-7. 




•' 







Portland, Maine. 



East coast of United States. 



Potomac River. 

Saint John's ttiver, Florida. 

Potomac Eivei'. 

Foit Macon, North Carolina. 

East coa.st of "Cnited States. 

New Jjedford, Massachusetts. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Ea.stport, Maine. 



Ipswich Eay, Ma.ssachusetts. 
\\ood'.s Holl, Massachusetts. 



DOKOSOMID.E. 



214. Do osoina cepedia- uni (Lae.) Gii! 
Vrashiu'.:ton M.iikct. 



12314. 
12315. 

128;;3. 

14991. 
1.5073. 
17131. 
17132. 
17133. 
17134. 
17135. 
17136. 
17137. 



Norfolk. Virjrinia. 
Potomac Ilivtr. 
New York Market. 
Potomac r.iver. 



171^8. Potomac Eiver. 

17130. 

17141). 

17141. 

18435. Saint John's Piver, Florida. 

1843G. 

18417. 

18529. Kinston, North Carolina. 

■18530. 

19S73. East coast of United States. 

24678. Vrashinyiton Market. 

24975. 



ENGRAULID.E. 



215. Sngraulis vittatus (Mitch.) Bd. & Giiaid. 



19003. 
19004. 
19005. 
19006. 
19007. 
19008. 
19009. 
19010. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



19011. 
19012. 
19013. 
19014. 
19015. 
19016. 
19017. 



Wood's Holl, Mas-sachu-setts. 



110 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



CATOSTOMIDJi:. 

216. Myxostoma macrolepidota (LeS.) Jor. 

24850. AVasliington Market. I 24898. Washington Market. 

24895. • •■ I 



217. Erimyzon sucetta (Lac.) Jor. 
1824.'). Potomac Eiver. 
1824G. 
18247. 
18248. 



18249. Potomafc Rivor. 

18250. 

18251. 

24897. 'Wasbiuirton Market. 



218. Hypentelium nigricans (LeS.) Jordan. 

Catostomxi.s yivjrlcans LfSutnir. 

7679. Yellow Creek, Ohio. | 153.57. Susquehanna P.irer, Pennsylvania. 

8303. Aux Plaines, lUiaoi.s. 1 19868. Yellow Creek, Ohio. 

8762. " '■ I 19870. 

9152. lUinois. I 

219. Catostomus commersonii (Lac.) Jordan. 



6853. 


Port Huron, Wisconsin. 


7677. 


Cleveland, Ohio. 


7706. 


" 


7777. 


"Wiscon.sin. 


7781. 




8409. 


Yellow Creek, Ohio. 


8440. 


Eacine, Wisconsin. 


8457. 


Port Huron, Wisconsin. 


8501. 


Detroit River, Michigan. 


8728. 


Huron River, Wisconsin. 


8870. 


Alabama. 



8984. 


Cleveland, Ohio. 


9054. 


Racine, Wisconsin. 


9059. 


Ohio. 


9170. 


Western States. 


9207. 


Lake Champlain. 


9393. 


Ecorse, Michigan. 


9G46. 


" 


20097, 


Sing Sing, ISTew York. 


20241. 


Near Richmond, Indiana 


20268. 


Root River, Wisconsin. 


24849. 


Washington Market. 



220. Catostomus longirostrum LeS. 
8437. Essex County, New York. 

CYPRINID^. 

221. Hybopsis aniarus (Grd.) Cope. 
15379. Chapman's Point, Maryland. 



222. Luxilus corimtus (Mitch.) Jordon. 
7377. Yellow Creek, Ohio. 
8556. 
9431. Aux Plaines River, Illinois. 



153.58. Susquehanna River, Pennsylvania. 
19850. Aux Plaines River, Hlinois. 



223. Semotilus corporalis (Mitch.) Putnam. 
7435. Westport, New York. ( 8833. 
8308. Root River, Wisconsin. 8956. 
8336. Westport, Lake Champlain. 8965. 
8741. Black River, Ohio. I 

224. Semotilu.'s bullaris (Raf.) Jordon. 

Semotilus rhothcus Cope. 

Semotilus argenteus (Storer) Putnam. 
7823. New England, and New York. j 12933. 

8775. ■■ ' ' " I lo404. 

8979. " '■ j 19848. 

8985. •• " 19869. 

9107. '■ " 22857. 

9645. 

225. Ceratichthys biguttatus (Kirt.) Girard. 
C31G. Llack River, Ohio. j 18019. 

15361. Bainbridge, Pennsylvania. I 



Black Warrior River, Alabama. 
Racine, Wisconsin. 
Quebec, Canada. 



South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 

New England and New York. 
Sing Sing, New York. 
Schoodic Lake, Maine. 



Bainbridge, Pennsylvania. 



PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. Ill 



226. Rhinichthys cataractae (C. & V.) Jordan. 

Iihinic}tth:is nasutus (Ayres) Ag. 
8505. Carlisle, Pennsylvania. 

227. Noteniigoniis americanus (L.) Jordon. 



92^7. AVashiiigton Market. 
11074. Sandusky, Ohio. 
11152. 

11153. " " 
11154. 
17792. 
17793. 
17794. 
17795. 

18323. Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 
183:4. 

18325. " " 

1832G. " " 
18327. 



18329. Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 

18330. 

18331. 

19063. 

190C4. 

190C5. 

19060. 

190G7. 

19068. 

19060. 

23109. Avoca, North Carolina. 

23110. 

23111. 



228. Exoglossum mazillingua (LeS.) Haldemau. 

77C0. Kew York to Ohio and Maryland. I 15360. Bainbridge, Pennsylvania. 

9044. " " " ' 

229. Idus melanotus Heckel. 

22973. Druid llill Ponds, Baltimore, Maryland. 

230. Carassius auratus (Linu.) Bleeker. 

18293. "Wa.shington Market. 

18291. 

18292. 

18293. 

231. Cyprinus carpio Linn. 

22964. Druid Hill Ponds, Bixltimore, Md. 
22966. 



18294. Washington Market. 

18297. 

20965. New York Market. 



22968. Druid Hill Ponds, Baltimore, Md. 

22969. " '• " 



I 12250, 

! 12251 

' 12252, 

12282 

12283 

212i 



SILUEID^. 

232. Ichthaelurus punctatus (Raf. ) Jordan. 

1540. Cincinnati, Ohio. 

8882. Michigan. 

11118. Sandusky, Ohio. 
11123. 

12247. Cincinnati, Ohio. 
1224S. 
12249. " ■ 'V 

233. Amiurus nigricans (LeS.) Gill. 
21269. Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 

234. Amiurus albidus (LeS.) Gill. 
I486. Potomac Elver. 

15352. Bainbridge, Pennsylvania. 

19930. Washington Market. 

20299. Havre de Grace, Maryland. 

23188. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 

235. Amiurus lophius Cope. 

15829. Huntington, Maryland. 



Cincinnati, Ohio. 



Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 



I 21270. Saint John's Eiver, Florida. 



23190. Washington Market. 

23191. 

24851. 

24893. 



1 15830. Huntington, Maryland. 

236. Amiurus natalis (LeS.) Gill var. lividus (Raf.). 

8847. Western and Southern United States. I 9220. Western and Southern United States. (7). 

237. Amiurits vulgaris (Thomp.) Nelson var. ^lurus (Grd.). 
1507. North Eed Eiver, Minnesota. 



112 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



238. Amiurus catus (L.) Gill. 
Amiurus nebulosuH (LeS.) Gill. 
1433. Sing Sing, New Toik. 
Cbesapcake Bay. 
Washiniiton Market. 



1479. 

8444. 

8G9.1. 

9085. 

9730. 

9732. 
12940. 
15353. 
18278, 
18279. 
18280. 
18281. 
18282. 



PhilaiU'liiliia. Pennsylvania. 
Wasliington Market. 
South Hadley Falks, Massachusetts. 
Bainbriflge, Pennsylvania. 
WashingtoQ Market. 



18283. 
18284. 
18285. 
18286. 
18287. 
18288. 
18289. 
19453. 
20378. 
20454. 
22108. 
23186. 
23189. 
24852. 



"Washington Market. 



Potomac Kiver. 

South Hadley Falls, Massachusetts. 

Wilkes Barre, Pennsylvania'. 

Washington Market. 

Potomac River. 

Wa.shiugton Market. 



239. Amiurus mela.s (Raf.) Jordan & Copcland. 

I 1525. Patapsco River. 



1497. Novthlielil. Illinois. 
1514. Racine, Wisconsin. 



7."i97. Cook County, Illinois. 



240. Noturus insignis (Rich.) Gill «fc Jordan. 
Xotii.n(s marjjinutus Baird. 



1470. 


James River, Virginia. 


194.54. 


Potomac River. 


15354. 


Bainbridge, Pennsylvania. 


23187. 


" 


18012. 


" 


23196. 


"■ 


18016. 









241. Noturus exilis Nelson. 
1438. South Grand River, Missouri. 

242. Noturus gyrinus (Mitch.) Raf. 
1430. Near Piermont, New York. 

243. Ariopsis felis (L.) Gill & Jordan. 

22751. ? 

CONGRID^. 

244. Conger oceanica (Mitch.) Gill. 



19495. Beaufort, North Carolina. 



I 22797. East coast of United States. 
ANGUILLIDyE. 



245. Anguilla rostrata (LeS.) De Kay. 
Anguilla hostonicnsis (LeS.) De Kay. 
18583. Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 
13584. 
13586. 
13589. 
13590. 

14051. Noank, Connecticut. 
14183. 
14184. 

14185. " " 
14180. 
14188. 

14191. u u 
14194. .' '' 
14195. 
14190. 

14200. '• " 
14202. 
14203. 

14211. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
14216. Eastport, Maine. 



1G115. 
16146. 
17220. 
17221. 
17222. 
17223. 
17224. 
17225. 
17226. 
17227. 
17228. 
17229. 
17230. 
207G6. 
22G54. 
22711. 
22910. 
24422. 
25093. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Noank, Connecticut. 



Grand Lake Stream, Maine. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 113 



SIMENCHELYID^. 



246. Simenchelys parasiticus Gill. 
21675. Le Have Bank. 



21676. 
21849. 
21862. 
22791. 
22794. 
22888. 
23071. 
23072. 
23075. 
23076. 
24370. 



"Western Bank, 200 fathoms. 

Banquereau. 

Grand Banks. 

Lat. 43° 25' 2f,, Lon. 60° 20' "W. 

Grand Bank.s. 

Lat. 44° 17' N., Lon. 58° 10' W., 120 fths. 

Banquereau. 

Lat. 43° 18' N., Lon. 60° 24' "W., 250 fths. 

Lat. 43'^ 15' N., Lon. 50° 20' W., 200 fths. 



24384. 
24385. 
24386. 
24387. 
24388. 
24395. 
24414. 
24426. 
24427. 
24428, 
24429. 
24733. 



Lat. 42° 48' N., 
Lat 42° 37' N., 
Lat. 43° 05' N., 
Lat. 44° 12' ST., 
Lat. 43° 27' N., 
Lat. 44° 02' i^., 
Lat, 43° 42' N., 
Lat. 42° 37' N., 



Lon. 63° 
Lon. 62° 
Lon. 61° 
Lon. 58° 
Lon. 60° 
Lon. 59° 
Lon. 59° 
Lon. 66° 



W., 130 fathoms. 
55' W., 200 fathoms. 
03' W., 150 fathoms. 
56' "W., 230 fathoms. 
W., 150 fathoms. 
"W., 300 fathoms. 
10' W., 300 fathoms. 
55' W., 200 fathoms. 



Lat. 44° 12' N., Lon. 58° 56' "W., 230 fathoms. 
Lat. 43° 27' N., Lon. 60° W., 150 fathoms. 
Lat. 43° 48' W., Lon. 59° W., 300 fathoma. 



MUE^NID^. 



247. Muraena sanctas-helense. 

20183. Bermuda. 



SYNAPHOBRANCHID.^. 



248. Synaphobranchus pinnatus (Gronow) Gtbr. 



21683. 
21684. 
21685. 
21848. 
21860. 
21868. 
21871. 
22792. 
22889. 
22892. 
22893. 
23077. 
23078. 
23080. 
23083. 



Le Have Bank. 



Western Bank, 200 fathoms. 

Le Have Bank, 150 fathoms. 

L-at. 43° 23' N., Lon. 60° 40' W., 280 fths. 

Lat. 59° 50' N., Lon, 43° 25' W., 300 fths. 

Lat. 42° 47' N., Lon. 63° 10' W. 

Grand Banks. 

Grand Banks, 200 fathoms. 

30 miles S. N. W. light of Sable Island. 

Lat. 4.3° 53' K., Lon. 58° 51' W., 250 fths. 

Lat. 43° 53' N., Lon. 58° 51' W., 250 fths. 

!Near George's Bank. 

Banquereau. 



23145. 
23146. 
24209. 
24210. 
24216. 
24271. 
24272. 
24352. 
24353. 
24383. 
24390. 
24430. 
24734. 
24735. 



249. Amia calva Linnoeiis. 

Falls of the Missouri 
Mississippi Valley. 



3227. 

6702. 

9502. 
11017. 
11018. 
11134. 
11135. 
11137. 
11139. 
11141. 
12495. 
16584. 



Sandusky, Ohio. 



AMllDM. 



18545. 
18546. 
18547. 
18548. 
18549. 
18550. 
18551. 
18552. 
18553. 
18555. 
23104. 



New York Market. 



Banquereau. 

Lat. 44° 29' IST., Lon. 57° 09' "W., 250 fathoms. 

Banquereau. 

Lat. 44° 30' N., Lon. 57° 08' "W., 200 fathoms. 
Lat. 43° 41' N., Lon. 59° 15' "W., 200 fathoms. 
Lat. 42° 41' N., Lon. 62° .58' W., 200 fathoms. 
Lat. 44° 30' N., Lon. 57° 08' W., 200 fathoms. 
Lat. 47° 20' ]Sr., Lon. 50° 48' "W., 48 ftithoms. 
Lat. 43° 25' N., Lon. 60° W., 180 fathoms. 
Lat. 44° N., Lon. 58° 30' W., 160 fathoms, 
Lat. 43° 05' Jr., Lon. 61° 03' W., 150 fathoma. 
Southern p.art of Western Bank. 
Grand Banks, Lat. 44°. 



Mississippi Valley. 



Aroca, North Carolina, 



LEPIDOSTEID^. 



250. Lepidosteus osseus (Liun.) Ag 
3236. Potomac Eiver. 

Mississippi Valley. 



6785. 

9510. 

9512. 
10G37. 
10717. 
12493. 



Potomac Eiver. 
Detroit, Michigan. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80- 



15366. 
15449. 
15450. 
15451. 
15452. 
18298. 
18523. 



Potomac Elver. 



Saint John's Biver, Florida, 
Kinston, Nortli Carolina. 

jHiae r, 1880. 



114 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Potomac Eiver. 



Florida. 



18556. 
18558. 
18559. 
185G0. 
18501. 
185G2. 
19048. 
19444. 
19445. 
19446. 



251. Lepidosteus platystomus Eafinesque. 
9505. Great Lakes and W. to Eocky Mts. | 12497. 



19875. 


Potomac Eiver. 


22496. 




'■ 


23102. 


Avoca, 


North Carolina 


25149. 


Potomac Eiver. 


251 5L 




" 


25153. 




" 


25154. 




" 


25155. 




" 


25158. 




" 



Great Lakes and "W. to Eocky Mts. 



POLYODONTIDiE. 



.252. Polyodon 


folium Lac 


3234. 


Foxburg 


, Pa. 


3235. 


Tennessee. 


12228. 


Cincinnati, Ohio. 


12229. 






12230. 






12231. 






12232. 






12233. 






12297, 







12331. 
12334. 
12414. 
15475. 
15480. 
15481. 
15482. 
15483. 



ACIPENSEKID^. 



Madison, Indiana. 

Cincinnati, Ohio. 
Madison, Indiana. 



253. Acipenser oacyrhynchus Mitchell. 

19897. Potomac Eiver. 22956. Potomac Eirer. 

20336. " 22957. " 

22703. " 

254. Acipenser ruthenus Linnaeus. 

22974. Baltimore, Maryland. 

255. Scaphirhynchops platyrhynchus (Raf.) Gill. 



. 2565. 


Cinci 


nnati, Ohio. 


3246. 


Itepublican Eiver, Kansas. 


3255. 


Cincinnati, Ohio, 


12230. 




' " 


12237. 




' " 


12238. 




1 11 * 


12239. 


■" 


1 « 


12240. 




" 


12241. 




I X 


12242. 


" 


256. Chimaera plumbea Gill, 


21805. 


Lat. 43° 51' X., Lon. 59° 05' W. 


21858. 


Lo Have Bank, 


21904. 


Banquereau. 


22642. 


" 


22667. 


Grand Banks, 


23912. 


Banquereau, 


23913. 




" 



12244. 
12245. 
12461. 
12463. 
12473. 
15476. 
15478. 
15479. 
22158. 



Cincinnati, Ohio. 
It (( 

(I C( 

Yellowstone River. 
Madison, Indiana. 

Mt. Carmel, Illinois. 



CHIM^RID^. 



23914. 
24287. 
24303. 
24304. 
24305. 
24306. 



Lat. 43° 32' N"., Lon. 60° 21' "W., 250 fathoms. 
Lat. 42° 37' N., Lon. 62° 55' W., 200 fathoms. 
Lat. 44° 15' N., Lon. 58° 52' W., 250 fathoms. 
Lat. 44° N., Lon. 58° 30' "W., 160 fathoms. 

Pishing Banks, 



DASYBATID^. 
257, Da.sybatis centrums (Mitcli.) Gill, MSS. 

22938. i 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 115 



258. Raia eglanteria Lac. 
22270. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



KAIID^. 



24203. Provincetown, ilassachusetta. 



259. Raia erinacea Mitch. 

14156. "Wood's HoU, Massachnsetts. 

14159. 

14160. 

14161. 

14165. 

H169. 

14172. 

260. Raia ocellata Mitch. 

14158. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

22886. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

24226. " " 

24227. " " 

261. Raia radiata Donovan. 



14176. 

2-2320. 
22386. 
22887. 
22954. 
24358. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Noank, Conuecticut. 
East coast of United States. 

Provincetown, Massachusetts. 



24229. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

24230. 

24248. Provincetown, Massachusetts. 



21012. 
21031. 
21048. 
21502. 
21815. 
22271. 
22295. 
22312. 



H.alifas, Nova Scotia. 



Salem, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 

Off Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



Gloucester, Massachusetts. 
Provincetown, Massachusetts. 

Off coast of Nova Scotia. 

"Wood'.s Holl, Massachusetts, 



22662. 
24310. 
24354. 
24608. 
24631. 
25193. 
25210. Gloucester, Massachusetts. 



ODONTASPIDID^. 



262. Eugomphodus littoralis Gill. 
22720. East coast of United States. 

SPHYENID^. 

263. Sphyrna zygaena (L.) Miill. «fe Henle. 

22942. East coast of United States. | 22943. East coast of United States. 

GALEOEHINID^. 



264. Eulamia obscurus (LeS.) Gill. 

19420. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

19421. 

19422. " " 

265. Mustelus canis (Mitch.) DeKay. 

7298. East coast of United States. 
Beesley's Point, New Jersey. 
Noank, Connecticut. 



19423. Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 

19424. " 



7301. 
14153. 
14154. 
14754. 
16006. 
16028. 
16213. 
16214. 
16215. 
16242. 
16243. 
16244 



Wood's Holl, Massachnsetts. 



16245. 
16:;46. 
16247. 
16248. 
16580. 
19257. 
19425. 
19426. 
21854. 
22712. 
22941. 
23163. 



Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 



Newport, Rhode Isl.ind. 
East coast of United States. 

Wood's HoU, Massachusetts. 



116 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



SPINACID^. 



266. Squalus acanthias Linnseus. 








Squaliig americanus (Storer) Gill. 








19275. "Wood's Holl, Massachusetts. 


19921. 


Eastport, Maine. 




19276. 


19923. 


" " ' 




19277. " " 


21855. 


George's Bank. 




19278. " " 


22316. 


Gloucester, Massachusetts. 




19279. " " 


22660. 


" " 




267. Centroscyllium Fabricii (RMt.) Miill. & Heule. 




21G22. Lat. 42° 40' N., Lon 63° 50' "W., 250 ftlis. 


23065. 


Banquereau. 




21686. George's Bank. 


23066. 


" 




21836. Off Gloucester, Massachusetts. 


23067. 


Lat. 44° 20' If., Lon. 57° 57' W. 




22281. " " 


24257. 


Lat. 43° 25' N., Lon. 60° W., 


250 fathoms. 


22637. Le Have Bank. 


24300. 


Lat. 42° 37' N., Lon. 62° 55' W. 


200 fathoms. 


22743. Lat. 43° 56' N., Lon. 59° 04' "W. 


24392. 


" 


" 


22744. Banquereau. 


24705. 


Lat. 43° 27' N., Lon. 51° 47' W. 


200 fathoms 


22749. Sable Lsland Bank. 


24706. 


" " 


" 


. 22878. Lat. 44° 33' N., Lon. 53° 48' "W. 


25105. 


Grand Banks. 




22879. Lat. 44° 23' N., Lon. 53° 25' W., 200 fths. 


25106. 


" 




22880. Lat. 44° 38' N. , Lon. 57° 09' W. , 200 fths. 


25111: 


Lat. 42° 46' IST., Lon. 65° 18' W. 


200 fathoms 


268. Centroscymnus ccElolepis Bocage 


& Capello. 




21021. Lat. 42° 40' K., Lon. 63° 50' W., 260 fths. 


23064. 


Banquereau. 




21833. Grand Banks. 


24295. 


Lat. 43° 25' K., Lon. 60° W., 180 fathoms. 


21835. 


24298. 


Lat. 42° 15' N., Lon. 58° 52' W. 


, 250 fathoms 


21905. Banquereau. 


24299. 


Lat. 42° 37' K"., Lon. 62° 55' W. 


, 200 fathoms 


22282. " 


24711. 


Lat. 44° N., Lon. 52° 50' W., 250 fathoms. 


22668. Grand Banks, 200 fathoms. 








MYXI] 


'^ID^ 






269. Myxine glutinosa LiuniBus. 








21679. Le Have Bank. 


23087. 


Lat. 44° 18' K., Lon. 58° 24' W. 


150 fathoms. 


22894. Lat. 44° 45' N., Lon. 53° 54' W., 400 fths. 


23088. 


Grand Banks. 




22895. Lat. 45° 03' K., Lon. 54° 30' "W., 85 fths. 


23089. 


Lat. 44° 17' ISi ., Lon. 58° 10' W. 


120 fathoms. 


22896. Grand Banks. 


23090. 


" " 


" 


• 22897. 


24204. 


Grand Banks. 




23085. Eastern part of George's Bank, 46 fths. 


24367. 


Banquereau. 




23086. " " " 


24725. 


Lat. 44° 30' N., Lon. 58° 07' W. 


200 fathoms. 


Washington, May 1, 1880. 









THE lilTTORAIi OTAKIIVE FAUNA OF PROVINCETOWIV, CAPE COD, 

MASSACHUSETTS. 



By RICIIARI> RATHBUIV. 

The species enumerated in the following list were, unless otherwise 
stated, all collected by the United States Fish Commission during the 
summer of 1879. As the list, however, represents only a few days' col- 
lecting, at intervals when the steamer was not available for dredging 
purposes, it must be considered as far from complete, especially as re- 
gards the smaller forms, while no attempt has been made t'> include the 
groups of Eutomostraca, Foraminifera, &c. Considering the fact that 
very little has yet been published concerning the shore animals of this 
region, I feel justified in offering the list in its present imperfect form in 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 117 

order to supply more definite information as to the so-called boundary 
line separating- the Northern and Southern New England faunaj. 

llock exjwsures are entirely wanting about the outer extremity of 
Cape Cod, and the sandy areas which compose the most of that region 
are generally of so pure a character as to ofter little inducement to 
animal life in the way of food. The littoral fauna of Provincetown and 
vicinity is therefore less rich in specdes than a more diverse region would 
be. Nevertheless a more diligent search than has hitherto been insti- 
tuted would undoubtedly result in the finding of many species additional 
to those given below. Prof. H. E. Webster, who spent the entire sum- 
mer of 1879 in collecting and studying especially the shore annelids 
about Provincetown, obtained many new forms not included in this list. 

The localities examined in 1879 were about as follows: The inner 
beach of the cape in front of the town of Provincetown, from the dike on 
the south to Wood End on the north and ^rom high-water to low- water 
mark, including the eel-grass areas lying directly off the beach and the 
broad sand-flats in front of and behind it; the inner beach at Long 
Point; the piles of the wharves, especially" those at the ends of the long- 
steamboat and railroad wharves; and the outer beaches at Wood End, 
Kace Point, «S:c. A few interesting species obtained at Wellfleet by 
Professor Webster are included in the list, and I am also indebted 
to him fcr material from about Provincetown. The identifications of 
species are only partly mine. Prof. A. E. Verrill furnishes the lists of 
worms and Nudibranchs; Prof. S. I. Smith has kindly identified the 
Am])liipods and more difficult Decapods; and Mr. Sanderson Smith 
the more critical species of Mollusks. Mr. O. Harger has also examined 
the Isopods. In addition to the species contained in the list, a species 
of Chu'onomus in the larval stage was found abundantly on the shore, 
and one or more species of mites were common among Hydroids. Of 
the one hundred and fifty-seven species included in the list, all but 
twenty-one were previously known to range both to the north and south 
of Cape Cod. Of the species whose range has been extended, thirteen 
belong properly to the fauna of Southern New England and seven to 
that of Northern New England. The southern species are as follows: 
FaUene emjmsa, Pinnixa cJicctopterana, Gehia affinis, Mcera levis, Miero- 
deutopus grandimamts, Ampliithoe longlmana, Chelura terehrans, Caprella 
geometrica, Leptochelia algicola, Sigalion arenicola, Sthenelais picta, Antho- 
stoma robustum, and Leptosynapta roseola. The northern species are: 
Leptoclielia cwca, Fraxilla zonalis, Tetrastemma rermiculus, Flanocera 
eUiptica, Emhletonia fuscata, Stiliger fuscata, and Edicardsia sulcata. 
The only new littoral species discovered by the Commission, so far as 
the collections have been worked up, is Edwardsia pallida. 

Excepting- in a few necessary instances the synonymy of the species 
has been omitted, but references have been given in nearly all cases to 
American publications in which the synonymy and range of the several 
species and other information concerning them are discussed. 

New Haven, Conn., April 8, 1880. 



118 PEOCEEDmGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



PYCKOGONIDA. 

Pallene empusa Wilson, Trans. Conn. Acad. Arts and Sciences, vol. v, p. 9, pi. iii, 
figs. 2ft to 2g, 1878. — Fhoxichilidium maxiUare Smith, Inv. of Vineyard Sound, 
p. 544, 1874 {non Stimpson). 

Found amongst the eel-grass, low water to ^ fathom. Former 
localities: Vineyard Sound (U. S. F. 0., 1871) and Noank, Conn. (U. 

S. F. C, 1874). 

MEEOSTOMATA. 

Limulus Polyphemus Latreille. Smith, Inv. V. S.,p. 580,1874. 

Very common along the entire inner shore of the cape, in the vicinity 
of Provincetown. The living specimens were usually encountered i^artly 
buried in the sand, near low-water mark. They sometimes attain a very 
large size in this region, but the majority of the specimens seen were 
from small to medium size and females. All the larger specimens col- 
lected were males. The cast skins or exuviae were sometimes so abun- 
dant that they nearly made up the little ridge of debris running along 
the upper part of the beaches. 

Two specimens, both females, were obtained in the act of molting; 
one was living, the other dead. In tbe case of the latter the operation 
of throwing off the old skin had advanced considerably, allowing us to 
measure accurately the increase in the size of the carapax for the past 
year. Of the exuvia, the greatest width of the carapax was 57'"'"; 
length of carai)ax along the median line, So"""* ; distance between the 
tips of the spines surmounting the compound eyes, 31.5'^'"; length of 
compound eye, 3.5""". The carapax of the newly expanded animal had 
a width of 07'""'; length, 45"""; distance between the spines of com- 
pound eyes, 43'"'"; length of compound eye, 5'"°'. The living specimen 
had only broken slightly through the outer skin, so that but one meas- 
urement could be made without destroj'ing it. The width of the old 
carapax was 124'""', of the new 141"'"^; but as the latter had suflered 
contraction in alcohol, it must have been larger originally. 

DECAPODA. 

Gelasinins pugnax Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. ii, p. 131, 1870; ibid., vol. v, p. 
33, 1879; Inv. V. S., p. 545, 1874. 

Very abundant on the salt marshes and uj)per part of the beaches, 
between the town and Wood End Light. Also found at the same place 
by Prof. S. I. Smith and Mr. O. Harger, in 1872. 

Gelasimus pugilator Latreille. Smith, Tians. Conn. Acad., vol. ii, p. 136, 1870 ; ibid., 
vol. V, p. 33, 1879; Inv. V. S., p. 545, 1874. 

A few specimens only of this species have been noticed from Province- 
town ; they were found on the beach near the dike in 1872, by Smith 
and narcer. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 119 

Pinuixa chaetopterana Stimi)., Ann. Lye. N. H., New York, vol. vii, j). 235, 18G0. 

Wellfleet, 1870; collected by Prof. H. E. Webster, wlio found it in 
great abimdaiice in the tubes of Amjyhitrite ornata, on the flats near the 
town. 

Platyonichus ocellatus Latr. Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 547, 1874; Trans. Conn. Acad., 
Tol. V, p. 33, 1879. 

Extremely abundant everywhere along the inner shore, in the vicinity 
of Provincetown, at low water and deeper. Large numbers were ob- 
served to be molting during August and the last of July, and fresh 
exuviiie were very common all through the latter half of the summer. 
One small specimen obtained while molting, and preserved in alcohol, 
aflbrded tbe following measurements: length of carapas in the exuvia, 
35"'"; width, 42""°; length of freshly expanded carapax, partly con- 
tracted in alcohol, 38™™ ; width, 47'°™. The largest specimen taken on 
tbe shore measured: length of carapax, 71™™ ; width, 80™™. On August 
10, and during one or more succeeding days, the young were seen swim- 
ming at the surface in countless numbers, but how ftir from the shore 
they extended was not determined ; they were very plentiful about the 
end of tbe long steamboat wharf. They varied in length of carapax 
from about 11™™ to 10 ™™. September 3 they were again abuudant, but 
less so than on the former occasion, and they remained nearer the shore, 
or at least closer to the bottom. At this time they were from 18™™ to 
23™™ long. 

Carciiius maenas (Linn^) Leacli. Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 34, 1879. — 
C. (jranidatus Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 547, 1874. 

Collected by Smith and Harger, 1872. 

Panopeus depressus Smith, Proc. Bos. Soc. N. H., vol. xii, p. 283, 1859; Inv. V. S., 
p. 547, 1874 ; Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 37, 1879. 

Collected by Smith and Harger, 1872. 

Panopeus Sayi Smith, Proc. Bos. Soc. N. H., vol. xii, p. 284, 1859; Inv. V. S., p. 547, 
1874 ; Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 37, 1879. 

Found abundantly in the eel-grass off the dike, and also collected by 
Smith and Harger, 1872. 

Cancer irroratus Say. Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 38, 1879. 
Common; shore, at low water. 

Libinia emarginata Leach. Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 45, 1879.— i. cana^ 
Vwulata Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 548, 1874. 
Very abundant at low water, Provincetown ; several very large males 
were also obtained from Wellfleet Harbor, the largest measuring: 
length of carai)ax, 113™™; width, excluding spines, 103™™. 

Eupagurus longicarpus (Say) Stimp. Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 549, 1874; Trans. Conn. 
Acad., vol. V, p. 47, 1879. 
Very abundant. 



120 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Gebia affinis Say. Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 549, 1874. 

This species was not collected at Proviiicetown, but was obtained from 
the flats at Wellfleet by Prof. H. E. Webster, in 1879, and seems to 
be abundant tliere. This is the first time it has been recorded from the 
north side of Cape Cod. 

Crangon vulgaris Fabr. Smitli, luv, V. S., p. 550, 1874; Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. 
V, p. 55, 1879. 

Very common along the shore. 

Palaemonetes vulgaris (Say) Stimp. Smith, Inv. Y. S., p. 550, 1874; Trans. Conn. 
Acad., vol. V, p. 88, 1879. 

Only a very few specimens of this species were collected, although 
it was diligently sought for. These were found in the eel-grass in front 
of the town and off the dike. 

SCHIZOPODA. 

Mysis stenolepis Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 551, 1874; Trans. Conn. Acad., vol. v, p. 103, 

1879. 

A few specimens only were collected ; they were from the eel-grass in 
front of the town. 

AMPHIPODA. 

Orchestia agilis Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 555, 1874. 
Very abundant on the beaches, under dead sea-weeds, etc. 

Talorchestia longicornis(Say) Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 556, 1874. 

Very abundant on both the outer and inner beaches, burrowing 
deeply into the sand, about high-tide level. 

Talorchestia megalopthalma (Bate) Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 556, 1874. 
Associated with the preceding. 

Hyale littoralis (Stimp.) Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 556, 1874. 

Collected in 1879; and also in 1872, by Smith and Harger. 

Calliopius laeviusculus (Kroy.) Boeck. Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 557, 1874. 

Found upon the beach at Long Point among stranded sea weeds. 

Gammarus locusta (Linn6) Fabr., Systema Entomologia, 1775. Gonld, Inv. Mass., 
ed. I, p. 334, 1841. Smith, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mns., No. 15, p. 139, 1879.^G. or- 
natus Edwards, Ann. des Sci. Nat., tome xx, p. 367, 1830; Hist. Nat. des 
Crust., tome iii, p. 47, 1840. Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 557, 1874. 

Only a few specimens of small size were obtained from the eel-grass 
in various places. The scarcity of this species at Provincetown is prob- 
ably due to the absence of rocks and of much rock- weed, which together 
form its favorite grounds. A comparison of Evu-opean with American 
specimens has enabled Professor Smith to establish the identity of G. 
ornatus and 0. locusta. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 121 
Gammarus annulatus Smith, Iiiv. V. S., p. 5r)7, 1874. 

Shore aud flats at low water, and eel-grass ; abundant. 

Gammarus mucronatus Say, Jouru. Pliila. Acad., vol. i, j). 37G, 1818. Smith, Inv. 
V. S., p. 55U, 1874. 

Shore and flats at low water; very abundant. 

Moera levis Smith, luv. V. S., p. 559, 1874. 

In the eel- grass off the dike. Kot hitherto recorded from north of 
Vineyard Sound. 

Microdeutopus grandimanus Smith. — Autonoe grandimana Bruz., Skand. Amphip. 
Gamm., p. 26, 1859. — Microdeutopus minax Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 562, 1874. 

On the shore at low water, in the eel-grass off the dike, aud among 
the sea-weeds on the piles of the wharves. Formerly known on the 
American coast only from Vineyard and Long Island Sounds. 

Amphithoe longimana Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 563, 1874. 

Found at low water and in the eel-grass in one-half fathom. Pre- 
viously known only from south of Cape Cod. 

Corophium cylindricum (Say) Smith, Inv. V. S., p. 566, 1874. 
Eel-grass, one-half fathom. 

Chelura terebrans Philippi, Smith, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 232, 1879. 

Abundant in old submerged piles of wharves, associated with Lim- 
noria Ugnornm aud Teredo navalis. First recorded from America in the 
l)aper of Professor Smith referred to above, but previously found by him 
at Wood's Holl in 1875. 

Caprella geometrica Say, Joiirn. Acad. Nat. Sci., Phila., vol. i, p. 390, 1818, Smith, 
Inv. V. S., p. 567, pi. v, fig. 20, 1874. 

In the eel-grass, one-half fathom, and also obtained from floating sea- 
weeds in Provincetown Harbor. Hitherto recorded from south of Cape 
Cod only, but discovered by the Fish Commission at Quahog Bay, 
Maine, in 1873. 

ISOPODA. 

Jaera albifrons Leach. Harger, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 158, 1879. — Jmra cojn- 
osa Stimpson, Mar. Inv. Grand Manan, p. 40, 1853. Harger, Inv. V. S., p. 571, 

1874. 

Very abundant on the shore between tides, under loose stones and 
other objects; and also in the eel- grass in very shallow water. 

Chiridotea ccEca (Say) Harger, Am. Journ. Sci., Ill, vol. xv, p. 374, 1878. 
Shore, low water; only a few specimens collected. 

Idotea irrorata (Say) Edwards. Harger, Inv. V. S., p. 569, 1874 ; Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. ii, p. 160, 1879. — Idotea tricmindata Desm., Diet, des Sci. Nat., tome xxviii, 
p. 373, 1823. 
Very abundant on the shore, on piles of wharves, in the eel-grass, 

and swimming at the surface amongst floating sea-weeds. 



122 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Idotea phosphorea Harger, Inv. V. S., p. 569, 1874. 

Occasioually foiiud swimiiiiug at the surftice in Proviucetown Har- 
bor, aud also upon the beach, with stranded sea-weeds. 

Epelys trilobus (Say) Smith, luv. V. S. , p. 571, pi. vi, fig. 28, 1874. Harger, Proc. U. S. 
Nat. Mns., vol. ii, p. 160, 1879. 

Moderately abundant; shore, between tides, and in the eel-grass, one- 
half lathom; only si)ecimens of small to medium size were met with. 

Sphaeroma quadridentatum Say. Harger, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 161, 1879. 
Abundant, but only specimens of small size were obtained; low 
water and between tides on the shore and flats, and ux^on eel-grass, in 
one-half fathom. 

Limnoria lignoruin (Eatlike) White. Harger, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 161, 
1879. 

In piles of old wharves, in company with Leptoclielia algicola and 
Chelura terebrans. 

Leptocbelia algicola Harger, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 162, 1879. — Paratanais 
algicola Harger, Am. Journ. Sci. , III, vol. xv, -p. 377, 1878. 

Very abundant at low water, on eel-grass, in one-half fathom, and 
in old piles, associated with Limnoria lignorum and Chelura. 

Leptocbelia coeca Harger, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 164, 1879. 

A single specimen only of this species was recognized among the shore 

collections. 

CIREIPEDIA. 

Balanus balancides (Linnc?) Stimp., Mar. luv. of Grand Manan, p. 39, 1853. Smith, 
luv. y.S., p. 579, 1874. 

Oommon on -piles of wharves, on shells, stones, and wood on the 
beaches, and occasioually found on floating fucus. On the piles it was 
usually of small size, but on stones lying on the beaches it often exceeded 
half an inch in diameter. 

Lepas fascicularis Ellis and Sol. Smith, luv. V. S., p. 579, 1874. 
On floating fucus in the harbor. 

ANNELIDA. 

Lepidonotus squamatus Leach. Verrill, Invertebrate Animals of Vineyard Sound, 
p. 581, pi. 10, figs. 40, 41, 1874. 

On the piles of wharves. 

Harmothoe imbricata Malmg. Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 582, 1874. 
Piles of wharves. 

SigaUon arenicola Ver., Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 167, 1879. 
Shore, in sand, at low water. 

Stbenelais picta Ver., Inv. Y. S., p. 582, 1874; Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 167, 1879. 
Shore, in sand, at low water. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 123 
Nephthys ciliata Eatlike. Ver. , In v. V. S., p. 583, 1874. 

Shore, in sand. 

Phyllodoce catenula Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 587, 1874. 
Piles of wharves. 

Eulalia pistacia Ver., lav. V. S., p. 584, 1874. 

Piles of wharves. 

Autolytus cornutus A. Ag., Jour. Bos. Soc. N. H., p. 392, 1S63. Ver., Inv. V. S., 
p. 590, pi. 13, figs. 65, G6, 1874. 

Piles of wharves, and among eel- grass near the beach. 

Nereis limbata Ehlers. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 590, pi. 11, fig. 51, 1874. 
Shore, in sand, and among eel-grass. 

Nereis virens Sars. Ver., Iqv. V. S., p. 590, pi. 11, figs. 47-50, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Liimbrinereis fragilis A. and E. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 594, 1874 {Lumhriconereis). 
Shore, in sand. 

Lumbrinereis tenuis Ver., Check List, p. 8, 1879; Inv. V. S., p. 594, 1874 {Lunibrico- 
nereis). ■ 

Shore, in sand. 

Arabella opalina Ver., Check List, p. 8, 1879; Inv. V. S., p. 594, pi. 13, figs. 69, 70, 1874 
(Lumbrico)iereis). 

Shore, in sand. 

Goniada gracilis Ver. , Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. ii, p. 174, 1879. — Eone gracilis Yer., 
Iuv.V.S.,p.596,1874. 

Shore, in sand. 

Rhyuchobolus dibranchiatus Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 596, pi. 10, figs. 43, 44, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Anthostoma fragile Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 598, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Anthostoma robustum Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 597, pi. 14, fig. 76, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Scolecolepis viridis Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 600, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Polydora ciliatum Clapar. (?) Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 603, pi. 14, fig. 78, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Cirratulus grandis Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 606, pi. 15, figs. 80, 81, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

Notomastus luridus Ver., Inv. V. S,, p. 610, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 



124 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Notomastus filiformis Ver., Inv. V. S., p. Gil, 1874. 

Shore, iu sand. 
Praxilla zonalis Ver., Proc. Am. Ass. Adv. Sci., 1873, p. 384. 

Shore, in sand. 
Clymenella torquata Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 608, pi. 14, figs. 71-73, 1874. 

Shore, in sand. 
Cistenides Gouldii Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 612, pi. 17, figs. 87, 87a, 1874. 

Shore, in sand. 
Nicolea simplex Ver. , InV, V. S., p. 613, 1874. ' 

Piles of wharf, and eel-grass.^ 

Scionopsis palmata Ver. , Inv . V. S. , p. 614, 1874. 
Piles of wharf. 

Polycirrus eximius Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 616, pi. 16, fig. 85, 1874. 
Shore, in sand, and piles of wharf. 

Fabricia stellaris Blainv. — Fabricia Lddyi Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 619, 1874. 
Piles of wharf. 

Hydroides dianthus Ver., Check List, p. 11, 1879; Inv. V. S., p. 620, 1874 {Serpula). 

On piles of wharves, and incrusting living and dead shells of Pecten 
irradions, Ensatella americanaj Littorina Uttorea, Anomia glabra, &c.; 
also on fncus and other objects j especially abundant in the vicinity of 
the dike. 

Spirorbis borealis Daud. Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 621, 1874. 
On fucns growing on the piles and floating at the surfacej abundant. 

Clitellio irrorata Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. 622, 1874. 
Shore, in sand, near high-water mark. 

Halodrillus littoralis Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 623, 1874. 

On the beach, under dead sea- weeds near high- water mark. 

GEPHYEEA. 

Phascolosoma Gouldii Dies. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 627, pi. 18, fig. 93, 1874. 
Shore, in sand. 

ENTEEOPi^EUSTA. 

Balanoglossus aurantiacus Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 627, 1874. 



Shore, in sand. 



NEMEETIN^A. 



Tetrastemma dorsalis M'Int. Ver. , Am. Journ. Sci. , vol. x, p. 40, 1875. 

Piles of wharves. 

Tetrastemma vermiculus Elir. (?) Ver. , Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. , p. 184, 1879. 
Piles of wharves. 



PROCEEDINGS OP UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 125 

Liucus viridis Vcr., Am. Joiiru. Sci., vol. x, p. 40, 1875; luv. V. S., p. G28, 1874 {Nc- 
incrtcs). 

Piles of wharves. 

Cerebratulus ingens (Leidj') Ver., Check List, p. 12, 1879; luv. V. S., p. 630, 1874 

(Alcckdia). 

Shore, in sand. 

Cerebratulus roseus (Leidy) Ver., Check List, p. 12, 187P; Inv.V. 'S., p, 030,1874 
(Mcckdia). 

Shore, in sand. 

TUEBELLAEIA.* 

Planocera elliptica Gir., Proc. Bos. Soc. Nat. Hist., p. 251, 1850. 

Piles of wharves, and on the shore nnder bits of wood, &c. 

Bdelloura Candida Gir. Ver. , Inv. V. S. , p. G34, 1874. 
Parasitic on Limulus Polyphemus. 

CEPHALOPODA. 

Ommastrephes illecebrosa (Les.) Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 034, 1874. — 0. sagitiatus Binney, 
in Gould, Inv. Mass., ed. II, p. 510, 1870. 

This species is caught in Provincetown Harbor during the summer 
and early fall in considerable numbers, to use for bait, and is often 
stranded upon the beaches at low tide. Prof. S. I. Smith and Mr. Oscar 
Harger, while at Provincetown in 1872, noticed large numbers of this 
squid about the docks, killing and eating young mackerel. Their obser- 
vations on the habits and appearance of the creature made at that time 
are given in the report of the United States Fish Commission for 
1871-'72, pp. 441, 442, 1874. 

Loligo Pealei Les. Binney, in Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 514, 1870. Ver., luv. V. S., p. 
035, 1874. 

Tliis species was not encountered at Provincetown by the Fish Com- 
mission, but it is rei^resented in the collection of Mr. J. H. Blake, of that 
place, by two pens taken from specimens caught in the harbor, in July, 
1879. It is not abundant north of Cape Cod, although several speci- 
mens were procured at Annisquam, on the north side of Cape Ann, by 
Professor Hyatt, in 1878, and it has also been previously noticed from 
Massachusetts Bay. 

GASTEROPODA. 

Ilyanassa obsoleta (Say) Stimp. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 641, 1874. Gould, Inv. Mass., 
II, p. 302,1870 {kassa). 

Yery common on many of the inner beaches, and extending up to high- 
tide level. It is especially abundant in places where the brackish 
water from i)onds runs down the face of the beach as it is left uncovered 
by the tide. 

* About six species of Bhabdocoola were collected, but they have not been determined. 



126 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Purpura lapillus (Linn6) Lam. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 360, 1870. Ver.,Iuv. V. S., 
p. G42, 1874. 

Shore, rare. 

Anachis avara (Say) Perkins. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 643, 1874. Gould, Inv. Mass., I, p. 
313, 1841 ; li, p. 356, 1870 {Columhella). 

Eare; only a single specimen was found by the writer, but others have 
collected it at Provincetown. 

Astyrla lunata (Say) Dall. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 645, 1874. — Colunibella lunaia Gould, 
luv. Mass. , il, p. 359, 1870. 

Abundant in the eel-grass in front of the town and off" the dike. 

Lunatia hercs (Say) Adams. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 338, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 
646, 1874. 

Very common along the entire inner shore, and often picked up dead 
on the outer beaches. 

Neverita duplicata (Say) Stimp. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 345, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., 
p. 646, 1874. 

Abundant, associated with Lunatia lieros. 

Littorinella niinuta (Totten) Stimp. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 653, 1874. Gould, Inv. Mass., 
II, p. 298, 1870 (Bissoa). 

Common, shore at low water. 

Skenea planorbis (Fabr.) Forbes and Hanley. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 296, 1870. 
Ver., luv. V. S., p. 655, 1874. 

Common on the shore, with Tottenia gemma, Littorinella oninuta, &c., 
and also on the piles of wharves. 

Littorina littorea (Linne) Johnston. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 308, 1870. 

Very abundant on the shore, on i)iles of wharves, and on eel-grass 
which is more or less exposed, at low tide. Just off the dike it occurs 
on the eel-grass in countless numbers, and, in common with all the other 
species of shells in that vicinity, is frequently covered with the white 
calcareous tubes of Hydroides dianthus. 

Littorina rudis (Maton) Gould, Inv. Mass., I, p. 257, 1841 ; II, p. 304, 1870. Ver., luv. 
V. S., p. 651, 1874.— i. tenebrosa Gould, In v. Mass., I, p. 259; II, p. 306. 

This is an exceedingly common species on the shore. 

Littorina palliata (Say) Gould, Inv. Mass., I, p. 260, 1841 ; II, p. 309, 1870. Ver., Inv. 

V. S.,p. 652, 1874. 

Common on the shore and on i)iles of wharves among sea- weeds. 

Lacuna vincta (Mont.) Turton. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 302, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., 
p. 652, 1874. 

On the eel- grass, shallow water; not found in much abundance. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 127 

Bittium nigrum (Totten) Stimp. Gould, luv, Mass., II, p. 321, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., 
p. G48, 1874. 

Yery abundant amongst the eel-grass, in sliallow water in front of 
the town, and off the dike, and also on the beaches, where it often 
occurs in immense numbers. 

Crepidula fornicata (Linn^) Lamarck. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 271,1870. Ver., 
luv. V. S.,p.649, 1874. 

Common, especially in the \dcinity of the dike, on shells of Pecten 
and Ensatella. 

Crepidula plana Say. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 272, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 650, 1874. 

Common off the dike, and also found elsewhere. 

Crepidula convexa Say. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 273, 1870, Ver., Inv. V. S., p.-650, 
1874. 

Abundant off the dike, adhering to the surfaces of living and dead 
shells, to Limulus, and other objects. 

Acmaea testudinalis (Mliller) Forbes and Hanley. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 661, 1874. 
Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 267, 1870 (Tectiira). 

Eare, shore; variety alveiis also found. 

Odostomia bisuturalis (Say) Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 327, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p* 
656, 1874. 

Not uncommon ; eel-grass off the dike, and elsewhere. 

Odostomia trifida (Totten) Gould, luv. Mass., I, p. 274, 1841; II, p. 328, 1870. Ver. 
Inv. V. S., p. 656, 1874. 

Associated with the last, and about equally common. 

Odostomia dealbata Stimp. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 327, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S.,p. 
656, 1&74. 

A single specimen only was obtained from the eel-grass off the dike. 

Melampus lineatus Say, Am. Conch., p. 85, 1822. — Melampus bidentatus Say. Gould, 
Inv. Mass., II, p. 467, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 662, 1874 {uoii Mont.). 

Abundant, shore, between tides. 

Onchidoris, sp. 

An undetermined species of this genus was obtained from sea- weeds 
on the inner beach at Long Point. 

Tergipes despectus Aid. and Han. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 667, 1874. — ^olis (Tergipes) 
despccta Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 248, 1870. 

From hydroids, on piles of wharves, and sea- weeds of beach. 

Embletonia fuscata Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 251, 1870. 

Found among the filamentous green algse in little rills of water on the 
beaches and sand-flats. 

Stiliger fuscata Bergli. Ver., Prelim. Check List, p. 23, 1879.— Calliopcsa (^) fuscata 
Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 250, 1870. 

Associated with Embletonia fuscata. 



128 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



LAMELLIBEANCHIATA. 

Teredo navalis Linn^. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 28, 1870. Ver. , Iiiv. V. S. , p. 669, 1874. 
Very abimdant in the piles at the outer end of steamboat wharf, and 
in other situations. A few years ago about forty feet of the above-men- 
tioned wharf was so weakened by the borings of this shell -fish that it 
completely gave way under the weight of a ship's load of merchandise 
stored upon it. 

Teredo megotara Hanley. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 30, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 670, 

1874. 

At Proviucetown, in cedar buoys (Gould). 

Teredo dilatata Stimp. Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 32, 1870. Ver., Inr. V. S.,p.670, 
1874. 

From pine buoy attached to lobster pots, at Provincetown (Gould). 

Ensatella americana (Gould) Ver., Am. Journ. Sci., vol. iii, pp. 212, 284, 1872; luv. 
V. S., p. 674, 1874.— ^oZe« americanns Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 42, 1870. 

Many dead adult shells and living young were collected on the sand- 
flats at low water. 

Mya arenaria Liun^. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 5.5, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 672, 1874, 
Very abundant on the shores and flats; especially so on the broad 
flats between the town and Wood End Light House, where, in the clean 
sands, the shells are often of a nearly pure white. 

Lyonsia hyalina Con. Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 64, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 672, 1874. 
Quite common at low water on the inner shore at Provincetown, and 
in the inlet behind Pace Point Light House. It was also picked uj) in 
extreme abundance on the outer beach at Pace Point. 

Cochlodesma Leanum (Say) Coutli. Gould, Luv. Mass., II, p. 68, 1870. Vei-., Inv. 
V. S.,p.673,1874. 

Dead shells in fresh condition were collected on the outer beach at 
Pace Point, but not on the inner. 

Spisula solidissima (Dillw.) Gray. — Macira solidissima Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 73, 
1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 680, 1874. 

Living young and adult dead shells were frequently found on the 
shore at low water. 

Ceronia arctata (Con.) Adams. Gould, luv. Mass., II, p. 80, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., 
p. 679, 1874. 

Many living specimens were obtained by Prof. H. E. Webster in the 
inlet behind Pace Point Light House and on the outer beach near the 
same place ; not known from the inner shore. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 129 

Cumingia tellinoides Con. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 79, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 
679, 1874. 

Not found by the Fish Commission, but several dead shells were col- 
lected on the inner beaches by Mr. J. H. Blake, of Cambridge, and Dr. 
Crocker, of Provincetown. 

Augulus tener (Say) Adams. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 677, 1874. Gould, luv. Mass., II, 
p. 97, 1870 (TeUina). 

Abundant on the shore, low water. 

Venus mercenaria Linn6. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 133, 1870. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 
681, 1874. 

Eare on the beaches at Provincetown, bnt very common farther south 
on the inner shores of the cape, especially in the neighborhood of Well- 
fleet, where they attain a large size and have the purple coloration of 
the interior of the shell more than usually intense and widespread. 

Tottenia gemma (Totten) Perkins. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 682, 1874. 

Very abundant on the beaches in company with tSl'enea planorbis and 
LittorineUa minuta, and also found amongst the eel-grass. The small 
dark-colored shells of this species are frequently scattered over the 
white beaches in the greatest profusion, appearing like coarse grains of 
black sand. But, being lighter than the sand, they are readily blown 
along by the wind until they collect in large numbers in the lee of any 
prominence that may present itself, and hi the furrows of the beaches.. 
In such places as these several handfuls of pure shells, with little 
admixture of sand, may often be scooped n-p. The first specimens of 
this si)ecies obtained by General Totten, its earliest describer, were from 
the beach at Provincetown. 

Laevicardium Mortoni (Con.) Perkins. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 683, 1874. Gould, Inv. 
Mass., II, p. 143, 1870 (Liocardium). 

Low water, rare. 

Cryptodon Gouldii (Phil.) Adams. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 100, 1870. Ver., Inv. 
V.S.,p.686, 1874. 

Dead shells frequently found along the beaches; probably lives in 
shallow water close to the shore, but not dredged in Cape Cod Bay in 
less than thirteen fathoms, at which depth it was very abundant. 

Solemya velum. Say. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 48, 1870. — Solenoviya velum Ver., 
Inv.V. S.,p.688,1874. 

A few dead valves only were picked up on the inner beaches. 

Astarte castanea Say. Gould, Inv. Mass., II, p. 117, 1870. Ver., Inv.V. S., p. 685, 
1874. 

Found abundantly in Provincetown Ilaibor, w^est and north of the 
light-house, at low-water mark (Gould). Although searched for at this 
locality in 1879, no specimens were discovered ; a very low tide is prob- 
ably required to uncover them. Mr. J. H. Blake says they are also- 
common low down on the inner shore, near Wood End Liglit. 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 8U 9 Jlifly S, 1880. 



130 PEOCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Argina pesata (Say) Gray. Yer., Inv. T. S., p. e&i. 1874. Gould. Inv. Mass.. II, 
p. 147,1?^0 (Area). 

Collected on the beach at Provineetown (S. I. Smith, 1S72). 

Mytilus edulis Linn^. Gould, Inv. Mass., 11, p. ISo. 1S70. Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 69-2, 
1874. 

Terr abundant, shore, piles of Tvharres, attached to floating fucns, &:c. 

Modiola plicatola Lam. Gould, Inv. Mass., n, p. 18S, 1870. Yer., Inv. Y. S.. 
p. 693, 1874. 
Yery abundant on the flats near high- water mark. 

Crenella glandula (Totten) Adams. Gould, Inv. Mass., n, p. 194, 1870. Yer., Inv, 
Y. S.,p.695,l=^-1. 

A few fresh, but not living, shells were obtained from the beaches at 
low water. Provineetown, at low water (Stimx)Son, Shells of y. Eng- 
land). This species was first known to Totten, its describer, from Pro- 
vineetown. 

Pecten iiradians Lam. Gould. Inv. Mass., n, p. 199. 1870. Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 695, 
1874. 

This species was formerly very abundant in front of the town, in the 
patches of eel-grass just below ordinary low-tide level, but at present 
the ftdl-grown shells are rarely found there. They are, however, still 
very plentiful off the dike in similar simations. The adult shells rest 
on the ground amongst the eel-grass, which at low water becomes 
thickly matted above them, generally quite concealing them. Young 
shells usually adhere to the eel-grass by their byssus. 

Anomia glabra Yer., Am. Joum. Sci.,vol. iii, p. 213, 1872; Inv. Y. S., p. 696, 1874. — 
A.ej)h}j)j)ium,electrica, squamula. Gould {non Linn^). 

Abundant on the flats in front of the dike, but generally of small 
size, attached to dead shells of Pecten irradians, Ematella americana, &c. 

TUXLCATA. 

Molgula manhattensis Yer.. Am. Joum. Sci., vol. i, p. 54, 1871 ; Inv. Y. S., p. 699, 
1874. 

Abundant near high-tide level, amongst the grass in the pools left 
on the shore at low tide ; attached to eel-grass and to floating sea-weeda. 
Also thrown up in immense numbers on the outer beach at Eace Point 
during heavy storms. 

Botryllus Gouldii Yer., Am. Joum. Sci.. vol. i, p. 211. 1871: Inv. Y. S., p. 702, 1874. 
Growing on eel-grass in shallow water and on floating sea-weeds, &c. 

BEYOZOA. 
Crisia ebumea Lamour. Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 707, 1874. 

Yery abundant on facus and eel-grass, often associated with Bugula 
turrita; on eel-grass every^^here in shallow water from the dike to 
Long Point, and on fucus growing on the piles and floating at the 
surface. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UXITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 131 

Tubulipora serpens (Linn6) Flem., Brit. Anim., p. 529, t. Johnston, Hist. Brit. 
Zooph., p. 275, 1847. — T. flahtllaris Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 708, 1874. 

Found very abundantly on the eel-grass in shallow water, forming 
small rounded clusters. 

Flustrella hispida (Fabr.) Gray. — Alcyon'idium hisjndum Smitt. Yer., Inv. Y. S., 
p. 7U8, 1-74. 

Incrusting floating fucus in the harbor, and i)robably also occurring 
on the sea- weeds of the piles. 

Vesicularia, sp. 

One or two small specimens of a Vesicularia with creeping stem, jjos- 
sibly V. una Smitt, were found upon fucus growing upon the piles. 

Bugula turrita (Desor) Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 712, pi. xxsiv, figs. 258, 259, 1874. 

Very abundant on piles of wharves, eel-grass in shallow water, and 
on floating fucus; associated with Crisia ehurnea. 

Electra pilosa (Linn^) Fisch., t. Yer., Preliminary Clieck List Mar. luv. Atl. Coast, 
p. '^9, 1879. — Memhranipora pilosa Farre, Phil. Trans., p. 412, 1837. Yer., Inv. 
Y.S.,p.712,1874. 

Incrusting fucus, laminaria, eel-grass, &c , floating in the harbor, and 
stranded on the beaches. 

CribreUina puncturata Smitt, Floridan Bryozoa, part II, p. 24, 1873. — Escliaripora 
punctata Smitt, Ofvers. af K. Yetens.-Akad. Fiirh., 1808, appendix;, p. 4. 
Yer.,Inv.Y. S.,p.713, 1874. 

On eel-grass, one-half fathom, rare. 

Hippothoa hyalina (Linne) Smitt, Floridan Bryozoa, part II, p. 40, 1873. — MoUia 
hyaUiia Smitt, Ofvers. af K. Yetens.-Akad. Fiirh., 1868, appendix, p. 16. 
Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 713. 1874. 

On floating fucus and eel-grass in the harbor, and on the beaches. 

Lepralia americana Yer.. Am. Joum. Sei., Ill, vol. is, p. 415, pi. vii, figs. 4, 5, 
ISlb.—Lejiralia Fallasiana Yer. Inv. Y. S., p. 713, 1874 (with query; non 
Busk). 

Very common ; incrusting fucus and other sea-weeds on the piles, and, 
also growing on eel- grass in shallow water. 

ECHIXODEEMATA. 

Leptosynapta Girardii (Pourtales) Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 716, 1874. 

This species is common everywhere about Provincetown, on the sandy 
beaches between low-tide and half-tide levels, but it is most abun- 
dant on the sandy flats about midway between the town and YTood End 
Light House, where large areas are left dry for a considerable time at 
low water. It also occurs in abundance on the sand-flats inside of Eace 
Point Light House, on the outer shore. 

Leptosynapta roseola Yer., Inv. Y. S., p. 716, 1874. 

Provincetown beach, and sheltered inlets bact of Race Point, on the 
outer side of Cape Cod, buried in the sand at low water, and associated 



132 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Avith L. Girardii. Collected at the latter place by Prof. H. E. Webster 
and Mr. Benedict. Hitherto known only from Kew Haven, Conn., and 
Vineyard Sonnd (VerriJl). 

Asterias^ Porbssii (Desor) Ver., Am. Jonrn. Sci., vol. xi., p. 418. 187G ; Proc. Bos. 

Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. x, p. 345, 1886; Inv. V. S., p. 718, 1874. — A. arenicola 

Stimp., Pi-oc. Bos. Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. viii, p. 268, 1862. Ver., iftiVZ., vol. x,p. 

339,1866; luv. V. S.,p. 713, 1874. — Asieracanthion lerylinus Ag., A. Ag., Mem. 

Mus. Comj). Zool., vol. v, No. 1, p. 94, pi. ix, 1877. 

Yery abundant along the shore above and below low-water mark, and 
on piles of wharves, but always of comparatively small size. A com- 
parison of the specimens from Provincetown with those obtained from 
Gloucester in 1878 shows more or less constant differences to exist 
between the two. In the former the spines are generally longer and 
more acute, sometimes even quite slender, and the pedicellarise appear 
to be somewhat more numerous, and to vary greatly in their arrange- 
ment. These differences are, however, of very slight value in this 
exceedingly variable species. 

Asterias vulgaris Stimp., MSS. Packard, Can. Nat., Dec, 1863. Ver., Proc. Bos. 
Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. x, p. 347, 1868; Inv. V. S., p. 718, 1874. 

Below low-water mark at the outer ends of the long wharves. 

Amphipholis elegans Ljimg. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 720, 1874. — AmpMura squamata 
Lyman, lUust. Cat. Mus. .Comp. Zool., No. I, p. 121, 1865 {non Delle Chiaje, t. 
Ljung.). 

Only a few specimens of this Ophiuran were obtained; they were 
from the eel-grass in very shallow water. 

ANTHOZOA. 

Metridium marginatum M.-Edw. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 738, 1874. 
Common on the mooring posts in the harbor (J. H. Blake). 

Edwardsia sulcata Ver., Mem. Bos. Soc. N. H., vol. i, No. I, p. 29, 1864. 
Sand, at low water. 

Edwardsia pallida Ver., Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus,, vol. ii, p. 198, 1879. 

In sand, at low water. 

ACALEPH^. 

Clytia Johnstoni (Alder) Hincks. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 725, 1874. 

On floating fucus thrown up on inner beach of Long Point. 
Campanularia flexuosa Hincks. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 726, 1874. 

Abundant on fucus of piles of wharves, &c. 

Obelia geniculata (Liun6) Allman. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 727, 1874. 

On floating fucus stranded on Long Point beach, inner shore. 

Obelia dichotoma (Linn4) Hincks. Ver., Inv. V. S., p. 728, 1874. 

Very abundant on eel-grass, one-half fathom. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEIBI. 133 

Sertularia pumila Linn^. Ver. , luv. V. S. , i). 732, 1874. 

Very common, and growing principally on fucus, on piles of wliarves; 
also on floating fucus in the harbor. A very robust variety was col- 
lected from fucus stranded on the outer beach at Eace Point. 



DESCKIPTION OF A NE W^ SPECIES OF RAY (RAIA STEtliUliATA) 
FROIU MONTEREY, CAEIFORIVIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDA]¥ and CHARLES H. GILBERT. 

Raia stellulata sp. nov. 

Allied to Eaia radula Delaroche. Disk much broader than long, 
anteriorly broadly arched, and convex, the tij) of the snout very slightly 
exserted. Anterior margin of pectorals undulated, convex anteriorly, 
then concave. Length of snout from eyes a little more than twice the 
width of the interocular space, which is concave, less than the distance 
between the outer angles of the spiracles. Breadth of disk equal to the 
distance from the tip of the tail to the shoulder-girdle. Length of tail 
equal to the distance from its root to the middle of the interocular area. 

Male everywhere above rough with stellate prickles, the base of the 
pectorals being almost smooth. Along the middle region of the back 
and the whole upper surface of the tail is a band of close-set, rather 
low prickles, with broad, very distinctly stellate bases. An elongate 
patch of stout, recurved spines on the anterior part of the pectorals, 
and farther back the usual series of claw-like spiues found in the males 
of all species. Stout spines above the eye, a few in the middle of the 
shoulder, and along the middle line of the tail. Sides of the tail with- 
out large prickles. Lower side smooth, except around the mouth. 

Female everywhere above rough with stellate prickles, the anterior 
region, middle of back, and u])per surface of tail most so. A median 
row of strong spines on the tail above, and six on the scapular region. 
A series of strong spines over the eye. A lateral row of rather strong 
]3rickles on the tail. Body smooth below, except anteriorly. 

Tail flat below, with a conspicuous lateral fold. Dorsal tins low, their 
height equal to the iuterorbital space, separated by a space considerably 
shorter than their base. Caudal fin reduced to a very small fold, as in 
the "genus" Uraptera^ to which this species would be referred in Miiller 
& Henle's arrangement. 

Mouth somewhat arched. Teeth not ^ery sharp, tricuspid, about 

— ^^ — . Nasal flaps slightly fringed externally. Distance between 

Of) 

nostrils about equal to the distance from them to the tip of the snout. 
Color grayish- brown, everywhere mottled with light and dark colors, 
the markings sharj) and distinct. Numerous black spots of all sizes, 
some of them ocellated. A black spot about as large as the eye at the 



134 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

base of eacli pectoral, each surrounded by a pale ring and in turn by 
another dark one. Head with blact cross-bars. The two sexes entirely 
similar in color. 

This species is not uncommon in the Bay of Monterey. We have 
obtained eight examples, which agree with each other very closely. 
One of these is a female, about 18 inches in length, in which the ovaries 
are immature. The other females are about 30 inches in length, and 
the ovaries are fully matured, containing eggs. The males are about 
30 inches long, likewise bearing evidences of maturity. These speci- 
mens are now in the United States National Museum. This species is 
readily distinguished from the two others known from the Pacific coast 
by its obtuse snout and its rough skin. 

The Eaia hinoculata Girard is the common skate of the Pacific coast, 
and is brought in in large numbers to the San Francisco markets. In 
color it is uniform light brown, with a black ring near the base of each 
pectoral, and usually a dusky crescent on each ventral. The pectoral 
ocellus is often obscure, and sometimes can hardly be traced in pre- 
served examxdes; in living specimens it is generally conspicuous. 

The skin in the male is entirely smooth above, except the anterior edge 
of the pectorals, the bony part of the snout, and the larger spines on 
the front part of the pectorals, the suj)raocular region, a few (one to 
six) on the scapular region, and a series along the median line of the 
tail. There are two or three detached si)ines usually along the side of 
the tail. The claw-like pectoral si)ines are also present. The females 
have, in addition, a lateral series of spines on the tail and some prickles 
on the posterior part of the pectorals, the larger spines found on the 
pectorals of the male being wanting. The actual length of the snout 
in B. hinoculata is not much greater than in E. stellulata, but its form 
is diflerent, the disk being anteriorly acuminate, bounded by concave 
lines, its length being more than three times the interocular space. 
Male and female exami)les of this si^ecies, with ripe eggs, or well- 
developed claspers, are about two feet long. 

Still another ray is known to us from a female example from Mon- 
terey about 30 inches in length. It agrees witli B. hinoculata in every 
respect, except in the form of the snout, which is extremely long, 
acuminate, and pointed, its length nearly four times the iuterorbital 
width. The anterior outline of the disk on each side of the snout forms 
a nearly uniform concave curve, it being scarcely at all undulated. 
These differences are shown by the appended table of measurements. 
We consider this at ])reseut a variety of Eaia hinoculata, although such 
variations in the length of the snout are unusual in the same species. 

Still another form is known to us from two examples, a male and a 
female, each about 6 feet in length, taken at Monterey. This forui must 
be considered as the Eaia cooperi Girard, as the very imperfect descrip- 
tion of the latter species agrees in all essential respects with these 
si)ecimens. 



PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 135 

Bala cooper i has the snout acutely iiroduced, rather more so than in 
B. hinoculata, though less than in the variety referred to, the distance 
from the eye to the tip of the snont being about twice the interorbital 
width. The length of the disk is § its width; the tail is | the length of 
the disk. The female is covered above with small stellate prickles, 
which are larger over the eye, on posterior edge of pectorals, on ven- 
trals, the middle line of the back, and on the tail. Prickles on tail in 
several series. Differentiated spines present only over eye and on 
tail. The male is nearly smooth, its spines essentially as in B. hino- 
culata. Color brown, with paler blotches ; a large, obscure, blackish 
blotch at base of i^ectoral. This species has scarcely a trace of caudal 

44 
40' 



fin, and is therefore likewise an " TJraptera.''^ Its teeth are about 



Whether this Baia cooperi is a distinct species or merely very old indi- 
viduals of Baia hinoculata we are now unable to decide. There are no 
important differences, except such as might accompany increased age. 

Table of measurements. 



Extreme lenjrth, in inches 

Length of disk, in inches 

Disk: 

Greatest width (hundredths of length of disk) 

Greatest width at front of eyes 

Width of .snout, midway between eyes and tip of snout. 

Distance tnim shout to first gill-opening 

Distaufc between first gill-openings 

Distaueo between last gill-openings 

Distance from first to last gill-openings 

Width of mouth 

Widt h of interorbital space 

Distance from snout to mouth 

Diameter of orbit 

Tail : 

Length 

Distance between dorsals 

Height of first dorsal 

Length of base of first dorsal 



Rata 

stellulata. 9 



17.45 
10.10 

121 
58 
41 
43 
31.5 
18 
14 
18 
8 
24 



71.5 
5 



liaia 
hinoculata. cj 



21.6 
13.00 

106 
45.5 
16.7 
50.5 
25.5 
14.3 
12.8 
15 

7 
21.5 

6.2 

67 
3.8 
8 
7.6 



Haia 

binoculata 

var. * ? 



28.8 
18.4 

103 

41 
14 



12 
15.5 



30 
5.5 



MONTEKEY, Cal., April 7, 1880. 



DESCJRIPTION!^ OF IVETV SPECIF..^ OF XIPHISTFB AND APODICH- 
THYS, FROM JTIONTFKEir, CALIFORIVfA. 



By DAVID S. JORDAIV and CHARLES H. OILDEBT, 

1. Xiphister chirus sp. nor. 

Body elongate, somewhat compressed, formed as in Xij^Mster mucosas 
{XipMilion mucosum Girard). Head short, convex in profile, not de- 
pressed above the eyes. Mouth smaU, oblique, the maxillary extending 
to opposite middle of pupil. Eye small, as long as snout, about 5 in 
head. Lower jaw slightly projecting. Teeth strong, the anterior canine- 
like, bluntishj four canines in lower jaw, six or more in the iqtper, similar 



136 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

to the posterior teeth, but somewhat enlarged. Lateral teeth of lower 
jaw short, blunt, the series extending behind the anterior canines. 
Lips full, the upper protractile. Head naked. Gill membranes united, 
without isthmus. 

Body covered with minute scales, the usual three i)arallel lateral lines 
running without union from the head to the tail. Each of these, as in 
other species, with a series of simple, transverse, alternating, short 
branches at right angles, and each with one or two open pores. These 
branches correspond in the outer lines each to a dorsal or anal ray. 
Middle line farther from each of the outer lines than these are from the 
dorsal or anal. A short dorsal line, similar to the lateral lines and simi- 
larly branched, extending from the occiput to the first dorsal spine. 
An abdominal line on each side of the belly. These gradually converge 
anteriorly and meet on the breast. They are not connected icith the lower 
lateral line. In the other species of the genus the lower lateral line 
sends a branch to the abdominal line. 

The vertical fins are similar in all the species, the dorsal of low sharp 
spines only; the anal similar, but composed of soft rays, both slightly 
joined to the caudal. 

Dorsal Jin beginning close hehind the pectoral, at a distance from the 
opercular angle not greater than the diameter of the eye. Anal begin- 
ning about a head's length nearer the snout than the base of the cau- 
dal, or about l^ head's lengths nearer snout than end of caudal. 

Pectoral tin quite small, hut several times larger than in any of the other 
species, larger than the eye, its length about equal to the distance 
between the middle and lower lateral lines. 

Fin rays: D. LXX; A. 50; P. 14. 

Color olive-brown, yellowish below ; the sides everywhere with mar- 
blings.of different shades of brown, mostly in the form of vertical bars. 
Some round black spots along the back and upi^er part of the sides; 
a black spot behind opercles. Head brown above, yellowish below; 
a narrow black streak from eye directly backward across the temporal 
region. Numerous black spots on sides of head, but no radiating bands. 
Dorsal aud anal fins with black spots; pectorals plain yellowish, a con- 
spicuous dark axillary si)ot; caudal jdain reddish. 

This species differs from the others of the genus in the large pectorals, 
the absence of anterior union of the lower lateral and the abdominal 
lines, in the position of the first rays of dorsal and anal, in the i>resence 
of more than two canines in the upi)er jaw, and in the coloration, the 
sides of the head being without stripes and the caudal plain. 

It is known to us from about twelve examples taken at the Point of 
Los Pinos, near ^Monterey. It inhabits rocks at the extreme low-tide 
mark, and is abundant chiefly among the masses of mussels which 
cover the outermost rocks exposed to the wash of the waves. Like the 
other species of the genus, it is very active and makes its way readily 
out of water over damp rocks aud algfle. It seems to reach a smaller 
size than the other species. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 137 

2. Xiphister rupestris sp. nov. 

Besides the foregoing species, which is distinguishable at sight from 
Xiphister- mucosusy a second species occurs in great abundance among 
the rocli;s about Monterey. This species is more nearly allied to X. mu- 
cosus, agreeing with it in form of body, mouth, teeth, and arrangement 
of the lateral lines; differing in the coloration of the head, in the num- 
ber of dorsal and anal rays, in the insertion of the dorsal and anal fins, 
and in the size of the pectoral fins. A description of these points will 
suffice, without the enumeration of features common to all the species 
of the genus. 

The life coloration of Xiphister mucosus is blackish green, becoming 
pale green on the belly and sides of the head; toward the tail the black- 
ish is commonly broken with much olive- green in various patterns; 
a transverse light-greenish bar at base of caudal, which extends to the 
dorsal and anal tins. Eadiating backward from the eye are three olive- 
brown streaks, these much lighter in the center and edged above and 
below with blackish, outside of which is sometimes a streak of light 
green. These streaks all merge backward in the olive-green of the 
head. The upjier streak trom the eye toward the occiput is generally 
obsolete or small and indistinct; the middle streak is wedge-shaped, 
with the edges straight or nearly so; it is but slightly more than one- 
third the length of the head; tbe third streak terminates before reach- 
ing the margin of the preopercle. A very old example, over a foot long, 
has a difi'use yellow blotch on the back anteriorly. 

In Xiphister rupestris the life coloration is olive-brown or reddish 
brown, uniform or variously marked and shaded with lighter; a light 
olivaceous bar at base of caudal, extending on dorsal and anal; behind 
this a blackish area; the tip of the caudal usually jiale. Three long, 
well-defined streaks radiating backward from the eye, these streaks 
uniform black, overlaying the olive cheeks, and abruptly' margined with 
very light olive; the upper streak is more distinct than in X. mucosus ; 
the central streak proceeds straight backward from the eye, half the 
breadth of the cheeks, at which point it is broadest ; it is then narrowed 
and bent abruptly downward ; both the middle and lower streak reach 
the margin of the preopercle, the length of the middle streak being 
three-sevenths that of the head. 

In Xiphister mucosus the dorsal fin begins anteriorly, nearly as in 
Xiphister chirus, the distance from its origin to the occiput heing less 
than that from the occiput to the tip of the sjiout. The origin of the anal 
fin is neai"ly midway from the snout to the tip of the caudal, it being 
nearer the snout than the tip of the caudal fin by from one third to two- 
thirds the length of the head. The fin rays are pretty constantly 
D. LXXIII, A. 48. The pectoral fin is as long as the eye. 

In Xiphister rupestris the dorsal fin begins farther back, the distance 
from its origin to the occiput being one-third greater than the distance from 
the occiput to the snout. The anal fin begins much in advance of the 



138 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

middle of tlie body, tlie distance from the first ray to the tip of the 
caudal exceediug the distance to the snout by nearly twice the length 
of the head. The fin rays are very constantly D. LXVI, A. 50. Pec- 
toral fin very short, its length less than the diameter of the eye (about 
three-fifths). 

These two species are extremely and equally abundant about Monte- 
rey, especially on the Point of Pines. They live under rocks in the 
sand, in crevices of rocks, and in masses of algse between tide-marks. 
They are very active, making their way readily on land, and remaining 
out of water in damp places for hours without inconvenience. We 
have procured upwards of a hundred specimens of each species, and 
find the distinctive characters, although few, to be very constant. 

Xiphister cnioreus {Xiphidium cruoreum Cope, Proc. Am. Philos. Soc, 
1873), from Alaska, is apparently either identical with Xiphister mucosus 
or closely allied to it. The description agrees better with mucosus than 
with rupestris. 

The systematic position of the genus XipMstcr deserves a moment's 
notice. Professor Gill has referred it to a family, ^'■Xipliidiontidcc^^'' dis- 
tinguished from ^^Stichwidcv^^ chiefly by the absence of pyloric cceca, and 
from " Cebedichthyidw^' by the short intestinal canal, the absence of 
pyloric coeca, and the absence of soft rays in the dorsal. 

As a matter of fact, the intestinal canal in Xiphister is but little 
shorter than in Cebedichthys. It has Jive or six well-developed pyloric cceca. 
AYhatever may be the value of the family ^^ StichwidWj'^ the w^riters do 
not believe that Cebedichthys., Xiphister, and Apodichthys are representa- 
tives of distinct families. The lateral line of Cebedichthys, by the way, 
corresponds to the ui)per lateral line of Xiphister, and like it has for its 
whole length a series of short lateral branches ending in oi^en i^ores. 

Table of measurements. 





X. chirus. 


X. mucosus, 1. 


X. mucosus, 2. 


X. rupes- 
tris, 1. 


X. rupes- 
tris, 2. 


Total lensrtli, inclies 


4.08 
3.90 

10 


10.90 
10.40 

12.9 
4.3 

13.7 

8.4 
2 

5.7 
1.7 

16 

3 
51.5 

4.7 
L7 


6.70 
6.40 

13 

3.8 

14 

8.5 


7.08 
6.75 

10 


6.25 


Length to base of caudal = 100 

Body : 

Greatest depth 


6.10 


Least depth 




Head: 

Greatest length 


14 


15.4 


15 




10 


Interorbital area 




1.8 
6.3 

2 

21 
3 
44.5 




Length of maxillary 




5 




Diameter of orbit 


2.5 
15.5 




Dorsal : 

Distance from snout •. 


15 
51.5' 


21.5 


Height 




Anal, distance from snout 


, 43 


43 


Caudal, leui^th 




Pectoral, leniith 


3 

2.5 
70 
50 




1.5 

1 
66 
50 




Pectoral, width 






Dorsal rays 


73 

48 






Anal rays 













PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 139 

3. Apodiclithys fucorum sp. no v. 

Allied to Apodiclithys Jlavidus Girard, but differing in the form of the 
anal spine, in the smaller number of flu-rays, and in the smaller size of 
the pectoral fins. 

Form of head and body and dentition as in Apodiclitliys flavidus. 
Mouth very oblique, the maxillary reaching the vertical from the center 
of the pupil. Dorsal tin beginning at a point considerably nearer the 
nape than the latter is from the end of the snout. Anal spine small, its 
length about one-fifth that of the head, iransversely very convex in front, 
and slightly concave or grooved behind. I'ectoral fins very small, about 
one-fifth the length of the head. Anal tin beginning nearer base of 
caudal than tip of snout by about three times the length of the head. 
Dosal, very constantly, LXXXIII; A. 35. 

In Apodichthys flavidus the dorsal begins as much behind the nape 
as the latter is behind the tip of the snout. The anal spine is very large, 
two-tifths the length of the head, and deeply excavated on its anterior 
surface and very convex behind, the spine being very thin and with sharp 
edges, resembling a quill-i)en. 

Pectoral fins larger, 'about two-fifths the length of the head. Anal 
beginning nearer base of caudal than tip of snout by twice the length 
of the head. Fin rays: D. XCIII; A. 40. 

The life coloration of Apodichthys fucorum is either bright olive- green 
or brownish red, becoming in alcohol either bright straAv color or ver- 
milliou ; a row of dark sjjots extending along axis of body, these some- 
times with light-bluish center, and connected by a very narrow dark 
streak. Generally a dark streak downward from eye, but no other 
markings about the head. 

The ground-color of these fishes, whether red, green, yellow, or brown, 
has no significance in specific distinction. As with many other species 
of rock-fish, they take the color of their surroundings. When in masses 
of Fuciis, this species is always olive-green; when among Chondrus, or 
other red-brown algge, it is colored like the plants. We have seen 
Oligocottus maculosus (which species is ordinarily brownish, mottled, 
the belly blue) dark grayish red in pools lined with Corallina, deep 
crimson w^hen surrounded by brighter algsie, plain gray in pools Avith 
granite bottoms and no plants, and of the most intense grass-green 
when taken from among fronds of Ulva. Other fishes imitate exactly 
the brown branches of the kelp {Macrocystis). Thus the names flavidus, 
virescens, and sanguineus have been successively applied to differently 
colored examples of Apodiclithys flavidus. 

Our specimens of the latter species are orange-red, everywhere 
dusted with minute punctulations. A few pale round spots on axis of 
body posteriorly. A narrow jet-black bar downward and backward 
from eye, falling behind the maxillary ; a shorter black streak from eye 
toward occiput. Anal fin obliquely barred with brownish. 

Apodichthys fucorum is exceedingly abundant about the Point of Los 



140 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Pinos, near Monterey. It is found mostly in masses of Fucus attached 
to rocks between tide-marks, and it is often found at low tide at a con- 
siderable distance from any water, kept damp by the masses of algae. 
Sometimes a dozen of them can be shaken from a bunch of algse 
attached to a dry rock. It is, like the species of Xiphister, very active, 
moving over stones or sand, and showing less anxiety about the x)res- 
ence of its native element than any ;ther fish known to us. The very 
numerous typical examples are all of nearly the same size as the one 
measured below. It probably does not attain so great a size as Apo- 
dichihys Jiavidus. 

We have little doubt that Professor Gill is right in uniting jiavidus 
Girard, virescens Ayres, and sanguineus Gill as one species. Whether 
inornatus Gill is diiferent or not we do not know. At any rate, its num- 
ber of fin-rays (D. XC, A. 38) will separate it from A. fucoruni. 

Table of measurements. 



Extreme lenfftli, in inches 

Length to base of caudal = 100 

Body, greatest depth 

Head : 

Length 

Distance from snout to nape 

Dorsal, distance from snout 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Height ot spine 

Length of pectoral 

Dorsal rays 

Anal rays 

Monterey, Cal., April 7, 1880 




A. Jiavidus. 



8.90 
8.50 
H 

11 
6 
11.5 

60 

4 

4 
93 
40 



JDESCBIPTIOIV OF A TEKY LAROG FOSSII. OASTEBOPOD FKOM 
THE STATE OF FUEB1,A, JAEX1€0. 

By C. A. WHITE. 

The United States National Museum has received from Mr. H. B. 
Acton, through the Hon. J. W. Foster, United States minister to 
Mexico, the very interesting fossil shell which is described in the follow- 
ing paragraphs. Mr. Acton says, in a letter accompanying the sj^ecimen, 
that it was obtained from the strata upon which are located the Zapo- 
titlan Salt Works, which works are about six miles south westward from 
the town of Tehuacan, in the State of Puebla, Mexico, and about 115 
miles inland from the Gulf coast. He gives the elevation of that local- 
ity as 6,50U feet above the level of the sea. 

Only one example of this species has been received, and it is accom- 
panied with examples of no other species. Fragments of the imbed- 
ding rock, which is a dense bluish limestone, have been carefully exam- 
ined, and although they were found to contain numerous fragments of 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 141 

fossil shells, not any of tliem were sufficiently well preserved to indicate 
eveu their generic relations. No satisfactory information has been 
obtained concerning any geological observations that may have been 
made in that region, which might convey a knowledge of the geological 
age of the strata of the locality from which the fossil in question was 
obtained, and I am therefore under the necessity of relying wholly 
upon the testimony afforded by the fossil itself. The genus to which I 
have referred it has hitherto been known only in rocks of Cretaceous 
age; and there appears to be no good reason to doubt that the strata 
from which this Mexican shell was obtained belong also to that period. 

Genus TYLOSTOMA Sharpe. 
Tylostoma princeps (sp. nov.). 

(Plate II, figs. 1 and 2.) 

Shell very large, general form rhombic-ovate, inflated; spire moder- 
ately extended ; volutions five or six, convex, having an ill-defined nar- 
row shouldering at the distal or upper portion, adjacent to the suture; 
umbilicus none, suture impressed; aperture ovate-semilunate, large, its 
length equal to more than two-thirds the full length of the shell; outer 
lip forming an approximately regular curve from near the suture to the 
anterior portion of the aperture, which, although broad, is somewhat 
produced; margin of the outer lip only slightly sinuate; inner lip bear- 
ing a broad, moderately thin callus, its outline somewhat strongly sin- 
uate and its margin narrowly flexed along its anterior portion. 

Surface marked by the ordinary lines of growth. 

Length from the apex to the front margin of the aperture, 220 milli- 
meters; greatest breadth, 160 millimeters; length of aperture, 150 mil- 
limeters. (Museum, No. 8804.) 

This is much the largest fossil gasteropod that has ever been found 
in North American Mesozoic strata; and it is excelled in size by only 
comparatively few of its class that have since existed. 

It has much the general aspect of a Limatia^ but it is referred with- 
out much hesitation to the genus Tylostoma Sharjie. This last-named 
genus is regarded by some malacologists as having affinities with the 
Tectibranchiata, near Pterodonta ; but I agree with Stoliczska and Zit- 
tel in referring it to the Pectinibranchiata, and placing it near Lunafia 
in the Naticidfe. It is true that all the characteristics of Tylostoma, as 
enumerated by Sharj)e and characteristic of most if not all the species 
which have been referred to that genus, are not clearly observable upon 
the only examjile of this species that has been discovered ; but being 
plainly without an umbilicus, or any umbilical i)erforation, in connection 
with its other characteristics, it cannot be referred to any other recog- 
nized genus of the Naticidte. The condition of our example is not such 
as to show clearly whether or not the outer lii) was thickened at the 
time of the death of the mollusk. 



142 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The varices or alternate swellings, characteristic of Tylosfoma, are 
present, but not so conspicuous upon this exami^le as they are upon 
some species of the genus, especially uj^on T. mutahiUs Gabb, another 
Mexican Cretaceous form; but they are quite as conspicuous as they 
are shown to be in the published figures of Sharpe's typ6 species, T. tor- 
ruhice. These varices or swellings are more apparent in our example 
by an apical than by a lateral view of it, but their i^reseuce is indicated 
in fig. 2 upon the ultimate and penultimate whorls. 

Although size cannot generally be relied upon as a specific character, 
the extraordinary dimensions of this shell separate it clearly from any 
other known form with which it might be otherwise in danger of being 
confounded. The only fossil species which resemble it, or even ai)iirox- 
imately approach it in size, are the Naiiea pedernaUs ?i\\([ N. priv-(irmidis 
of Eoemer, from the Cretaceous of Texas; but both these species evi- 
dently belong to a group that is now generally referred to Lunatia, or 
Euspira; and tlie largest known examples of either of these forms have 
scarcely more than half the dimensions of the examx)le here described. 



DESCRIPTIOIV OF TWO IVEAV SPEtlES OF 8FB ASTICIITnY!^ (SEBA- 
ST1CD5TBIVS ExXTOMEtiA,** X^ia SEBAS^TICHl'IlYS RfllODOCH1.0- 
RIS), FROM IT10NTKRE¥ RA¥, €AI.IFORIMlA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN and CHARLES H. OILBERT. 

Sebastichthys entomelas sp. nov. 
Allied to *S'. ovaJis (Ayres). 

Body oblong, rather elongate, the back regularly but not strongly 
arched, contracted to a rather slender caudal peduncle. Head moder- 
ate, the i^rofile less steep than in related species, but the tip of the 
snout blunter than in ovalis. Mouth small, the short maxillary extend- 
ing to below the middle of the eye. Lower jaw projecting, its tip enter- 
ing the profile, but considerably less protruding than in ovalis. Pal- 
atine teeth few. 

Preorbital very narrow, without spine. Eye rather large, about 4 in 
length of head, less than the interorbital space, which is strongly con- 
vex, especially in its middle part. 

Nasal s])ines minute. Preocular spine broad, triangular, rather prom- 
inent, more conspicuous than in mclanops. but much less so than in 
ovalis. Sui»raocular ridge little developed, its spine minute, sharp, con- 
cealed by the scales. Postocular spine present, minute, similarly con- 
cealed. No tympanic spine. Occipital ridges scarcely developed, 
concealed by the scales, without distinct spine at tip. In ovalis all 
these spines, though small, are distinct. In Jiai'idus there is no trace of 
any spines on the cranium, and the ridges are little developed. 

Preopercular spines rather small, diiected backwards, the two lower 
obsolete. Oxjercular sx)iues small, two suprascapular spines. Scales on 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 143 

top and sides of bead very small, present on maxillary, mandible, pre- 
orbital, and snout. 

Scales on body small, in about Go transverse series. 

Gill-rakers numerous, long and slender, their length about half the 
diameter of the eye. 

Dorsal spines very low and slender, the fin moderately emarginate, 
the membrane joining the last spine at about two-fifths its height. Soft 
dorsal long and low, the soft rays about as high as the highest spines, 
a little more than one-third the length of the head. Caudal forked. 
Anal low, its second spine stronger than third, but scarcely higher, less 
than two-thirds the height of the first soft ray. Pectoral fins moderate, 
not- reaching vent, their tips beyond tips of veutrals, their base 3^ iu 
length of head. 

Fin rays: D. XIII, 15; A. Ill, 8. 

Color rather dull olive-green. Sides with obscure round rusty spots. 
Belly, lips, and lower parts tinged with creamy. Obscure light and 
dark shades across cheeks. Traces of two or three obscure dark verti- 
cal bars. Dorsal dusky, with reddish shades. Caudal dusky, the rays 
olive. Other fins dusky, with creamy reddish at base. Lower half of 
pectoral distinctly reddish. 

VeritouQnuijet-hlaclc. 

This species is known to us from five specimens taken in deep water 
outside of Monterey Bay, in company with S. ovalis, riihrivinctuSj elon- 
gatus, etc. It is known to the Portuguese fishermen as ^^Buda.^^ Its 
relations are probably most intimate with ovalis, which differs in the 
following respects: 

Ovalis is much deeper and more oval in form, with the back consider- 
ably more elevated, and the profile much more steep, the lower jaw 
more x^i'otruding. The mouth reaches to the iiosterior edge of the 
puiiil. The preociilar ridge is very strong, forming a large triangular 
protuberance ending in a spine; small supraocular, postocular, tympa- 
nic, and occipital spines are i)resent, the tympanic spine very minute, 
but constant. The dorsal fin is very low, the notch between the spinous 
and soft parts extremely sliallow^ the membrane joining the last spine at 
more than two-thirds its height, the height of the spinous and soft por- 
tions about equal. The second anal spine is considerably the longest and 
strongest, scarcely lower than the soft rays. The pectoial fins are long, 
reaching to the vent. 

Anal rays. III, 7, or III, 8. 

The color of this species when adult is olivaceous, strongly tinged 
with pale creamy red, especially below. The membrane of both dorsals 
are covered with many small round black spots. Some of these are 
usually present on the body. The upper fins are greenish, the lower 
more yellowish, and most of them are more or less dusky-edged. Cau- 
dal fin rather dark. 

Peritoneum black. 



144 PEOCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The remamiiig species of this type, mvlanops, simulans, ami tlaridiis, 
differ in the absence of any distinct spines on the cranium, as well as in 
color, form, ami other peculiarities. Mchmops has the preocular riiljio 
considerably developed, and occasionally ending- in a si>iue. The others 
have this ridjie obsolete. The mouth in ^i inula )is ixud^fJacidus is consid- 
erably larger than in the other species. In nichmojKs and .s/w»/<(«,v the 
fins are slaty black, like the body, lujhu-idiis they are olivaceous, the 
caudal being distinctly brownish yellow (hence the i>opular name of 
Yellow-tail). The peritoneum in Jhn-idus is pui"e white, in nielanops 
somewhat dusky. 

Sebastichthys rhodochloris sp. nov. 
Allied to 6^. rosaceus (Girard). 

Body oblong, more elongate than in rosaceus, the back less elevated, 
the profile less steep. Mouth comparatively large, but rather smaller 
than in rosaceus, the maxillary not reaching beyond i>osterior border of 
pupil. Jaws about equal in the closed mouth, the lower with a small 
symphyseal prominence. Preorbital narrow, with two bluntish x^rojec- 
tions. Eye very large, longer than the long snout, o.V in head. 

Spinous ridges on top of head very high, slender, and sharp, more 
elevated than in rosaceus, chlorostictus, and coustellatus, and sharper. 
Xasal, jyreocular, supraocular, j^ostocuJar, tipnpanic, and occipital spines 
present, as in most of the red species. Supraocular ridge long and prom- 
inent. Postocular and tympanic spines close behind it, sharp and 
large. Interorbital space very narroic, its width even posteriorly less 
than length of supraocular spine (in rosaceus considerably more). Inter- 
orbital space with two longitudinal ridges, sharp and consi)icnous, not 
covered by the scales, the very naiTow interspace between them strongly 
concave, the spinous ridges strongly divergent behind. 

Preopercnlar spines sharp, directed backward, the three n])per long 
and i)ointed, more developed than in rosaceus, less radiating than in 
chlorostietus. Two sharp suprascapular spines. Opercular spines short 
and sharp. 

Gill-rakers about as in rosaceus and chlorostietus, moderately long and 
slender, much shorter than in oralis or piuniger, but longer than in 
nebulosus and ruber, the longest gill-raker about one-fourth the diame- 
ter of the eye. 

Dorsal tin still lower than in rosaceus, the membranes little emargiu- 
ate, the longest spine about 2'^ in head (in rosaceus 2.}). Emargination 
of dorsal moderate. Soft rays low, the highest about equal to the 
highest spine. Caudal liu slightly emarginate. 

Second anal spine proportionately longer than in any other of our 
species, very strong, curv^ed, its length about equal to that of the max- 
illary or the base of the soft dorsal, or about half the length of the 
head. It is higher than the soft rays of the anal. Pectoral lius reach- 
ing past tips of the ventrals nearly to the anal. 

D. Xin, U; A.III,G. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES- NATIONAL MUSEUM. 145 

Scales moderate, in 58 transverse series, the small accessory scales 
very numerous. 

Ground-color bright clear rose-red, icithout any trace of purplish. 
Eegion above the lateral line with much deep green, in the form of 
reticulating streaks. Below the lateral line the green gives place to 
bright golden yellow, which is similarly mixed with the red. Top of 
head with cross-bands of green and red, green streaks radiating from 
the eye, one to snout, one along maxillary, three across cheeks and 
opercles, and one across temporal region. 

Four bright pale pink spots on the sides of the back, arranged as in 
rosaceiiSj constellatus, and chlorostichis ; the color brighter than in these 
species, and entirely devoid of the purplish ring which is found in 
rosaceus; one spot is under the fourth dorsal spine, one near the lateral 
line under eighth dorsal spine, one under junction of spinous and soft 
rays, and me under the last soft ray. The first and third of these spots 
are each surrounded by a distinct ring of green. Another pink spot on 
the tip of the opercle. A distinct pale area behind eye. Dorsal with 
the rays red and tbe membranes olive-green. Caudal and anal with the 
rays red and the membranes golden. Pectorals red, dashed with olive. 
Ventrals red. Under parts of head and the inside of the mouth i)ale 
red, unspotted. 

In S. rosaceus the red on head above, and around the pink spots on 
the sides, is distinctly purple-red. The yellow or olive on the back and 
sides blends with the red instead of forming distinct reticulations, and 
there is little if any green on the back or fins. The lateral line is clear 
red, usually not crossed by the olive marks. 

SebasticJifhys rhodochloris occurs in abundance in the deep waters of 
the Bay of Monterey. It is a small fish, like S. rosaceus, and rarely 
reaches a weight of more than a pound. It is known to the fishermen 
of Monterey by the name of "Flj'-fish," >S^. rosaceus being called 
"Corsair." 

One fisherman who procured a number of them for us, on being told 
that his "Fly-fish" was very much like the "Corsair," summed up the 
relationships of the two as follows: "You bet it is like it, but it is a 
different kiml of fish." 

The following species of "rock-fish" were obtained by us in Monte- 
rey Bay. The names used by the fishermen of Monterey are appended. 
Most of these are evidently names in use for other species at the 
Azores, transferred to species of Californian waters: 

S. pancispinis Meron, Tom-cod, Jack-fish. 

S. flavidus Yellow-tail. 

S. simnlans 

S. melanops Pesce Pretre (Priest-fish, from its color). 

S. entomelas Buda. 

S. ovalis Yinva (Widow). 

Proc. Xat. Mus. 80 10 July S, 1 880. 



146 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 
s. 



atro^irens Garrnpa (Yera). 

piuniger Fliaum. 

miniatus Easher. 

auriculatus 

j)roriger. 

elongatus = Eeiia. 

vexillaris Yellow Garrupa.' 

clilorostictus Pesce Yermigiia. 

rhodocliloris Fly-fisli. 

rosacens Corsair. 

constellatus Bagre. 

ruber Tainbor. 

rubrivinctus Spanish Flag. 

rostrelliger Garruxia. 

maliger . 

carnatus Red Garrupa. 

nebulosus 

fasciolaris ■. Spotted Garrupa. 

serriceps Tree-fish. 

Table of measurements. 





Entomelas 
(Monte- 
rey). 


Ovalis 
(Monterey). 


Melanops 
(Sta. Bar- 
bara). 


Flavidus 
(Monterey). 


Rhodoclilo- 
ris (Mon- 
terey). 


Sosaceus 
(Monterey). 


Extreme length, inches 

Length to base caudal, in- 
ches — 100 


12 

10 

29.5 
9 

30.5 
7.8 

12.5 
8.7 
5 


13 

11 

35 
9 

32 
8 
11.5 

8 
5 


12.25 

10.10 

36 
11 

31.6 
7.3 

13 
9.5 
3.8 


14.90 

12.05 

33.8 
11.5 

36.5 
8.5 

16 
9.3 
5 


9.10 

7.90 

34 
9 

39.5 

12 

18.5 

5 

3 

8 

7.5 

15 
15 


8.85 
7.55 


Body: 

Greatest height 


36 


Head: 


35 




10 




19.5 


Width intei'orbital area. 
Longest giU-rakers 



3.5 

5 












7 


Dorsal : 

Height highest spine . . . 

Highest soft ray 

Height 12th spine 

Height membrane 12th 


12 

12.5 
4 

3.5 

9.5 

9 
14 

14 
21 

8 
27 
18 


13 

12 
8 

5.5 

12.5 
11.5 
14.5 

14.5 
19 

9 
31 
20 


11.3 
15 


13.7 
17 


16 
15.5 










Anal: 


8 
10 
17.5 

17 
23 

29 
29 
20.5 


9.5 
10.7 
20 

19.3 
22.5 

27 
27 
22.5 


19 

13.5 

17 


17 




15 




19 


Caudal: 

Middle rays . 




External rays 






Pectoral : 

Width base 


9 
27 
21.5 


9 5 




27.5 




20 







Santa Cruz, Cal., April 15, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 147 



O^ THE OCCURREIVCE OF A SPECBESi OF CREMNOBATES AT SAN 
©SEGO, CAEIFORNIA. 

By ROSA SMITH. 

Three specimens of a small scaly Bleuny fonud in those rocky tide- 
pools which are heavily lined witli algte, on March 6, 1880. 

This Blenny is evidently of rare occnrrence, this one point being at 
present its only known habitat on the Pacific coast of the United 
States, and these three specimens the only ones I conld procnre. It is 
accompanied by OUgocottus (malis, which in this vicinity is abundant in 
all rock-pools, by Gibhonsia elegcms of a dnll color, and by HypleurocM- 
lus gentilis. 

These specimens were i^ro vision ally identified as belonging to Cremno- 
hates monoxjlitlialmus (Glinther) Steindachner {Anchenopterus monoph- 
thalmus Giinther, Cat. Fishes Brit. Mns., iii, 275), a species hitherto 
known from three examples from the Pacific coast of Central America. 
My specimens differ from Gtiuther's description in the following partic- 
ulars: The dorsal Jin is continuous, the membrane of the third spnie 
joining the fourth near its summit in two examples, at its first third 
in the other. The iiead is x^roportionally shorter, forming two-ninths of 
the total length instead of one-fourth, and the body is less elongate, 
its depth forming one-fifth the total length instead of one-sixth. The 
characters of the San Diegan form of this genus agree more closely 
with Steindachner's description of Cremnohates affinis (Ichthyologische 
Beitriige, v, 178), a species considered by its describer as doubtfully 
distinct from G. monophtlialmus. G. affinis is known from one individual 
taken on the West Indian island of St. Thomas, the i)roportions and 
coloration of which accord with my specimens, but this species also has 
the membrane from the third dorsal si^ine joining the fourth at its hase 
("die Membrane des dritten letzten Strahles setzt sich an die Basis des 
folgenden ersten Stachels des zweiten Dorsales an"). 

If the specimens from San Diego prove to be of a distinct species, 
which seems i^robable, they will be separated from those already known 
by the single merely emarginate dorsal fin, instead of two separate 
fins. In any event, the genus Gremnobates furnishes an interesting 
addition to the fauna of our Pacific coast. 

Gremnobates integripinnis sp. nov. 

Desceiption. — The body is oblong, compressed. The head is less 
than the fourth of the total length, which measures two inches and an 
eighth. Gape of mouth oblique, the maxillaries reaching a vertical 
line intersecting x>osterior rim of orbit. Head conical, thickish, with 
the orbits placed far forward, smaU fringed tentacles on their superior 
margins, a tentacle on posterior margin of anterior nostril, and i^almate 
tentacles on occii)ut. A cusp or spine on opercle. 

Dorsal continuous, comi^osed wholly of spines of nearly equal height 



148 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

throughout, the first and second spines a little higher than the third, 
which is rather higher than the fourth, the third and fourth somewhat 
separated, but connected by membrane nearly as high as that connect- 
ing fourth and fifth, the other spines gradually increasing in height 
backward. The three anterior spines less stiff than the others. 

The two anal spines are connected by a membrane to the soft part of 
that fin, the anterior insertion of which is about midway between tip of 
snout and base of caudal. The caudal is liosteriorly rounded, its inter- 
radial membrane being emarginate ; the membrane of the last dorsal 
spine joins the base of the first ray of the caudal, while the latter is 
free from anal, the free tips of which extend beyond base of caudal. 

Pectorals fan-like, their extremities reaching a vertical line intersect- 
ing vent. Branchiostegal membranes continuous under throat. Body 
covered with conspicuous cycloid scales, which are smaller on the belly. 
'No scales on head or fins. 

Lateral line of thirty-eight scales, beginning on the scapular region, 
running anteriorly very high, abrui>tly curving around i)ectorals, and 
i:)ursuing a straight course on the median line of the side to the tail. 

Teeth rather strong, conical, in a narrow band; a single series of 
rather strong teeth on vomer. 

Color varies in three individuals: one is a dark brownish gTay; 
another, of equal size (2^ inches long), is lighter; while a third, of 1^ 
inches in length, is lavender in color. The markings are similar on all 
my specimens, each being maculated and obscurely barred with a darker 
shade of its own color; the dorsal region is always darkest, and each 
individual has an ocellated spot, black, with narrow pale edging on 
posterior portion of dorsal fin. Dorsal and anal fins each with narrow 
pale edgiug. Pectoral fins reddish violet at base, with a black crescent 
around it, the rest of the fin i^ale, with dark cross-bars. Yentrals barred. 
Caudal with a dark bar at base, the rest of the fin translucent, with 
narrow dark bars formed of spots. 

Table of measurements. 
Length: 

Total, in iuclies 2. 05 

To base of caudal, iu inches 100 = 1.70 

Body, greatest dei^th 23 

Head: 

Length ' 26 

Diameter of eye 7.5 

Length of maxillary 11 

Dorsal fin : 

Total length 80 

Distance from snout 21 

Length of anterior part 9 

Height of first spine , 6 

Height of second spine 7 

Height of third spine 4 

Height of fourth spine 3 

Height of highest spine 7.5 

Height of membrane connecting third and fourth spines 1.8 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 149 

Anal fin, distance from snout 4.7 

Caudal, length 18 

Pectoral, length 24 

Ventral, length 17 

Fin rays : 

Dorsal XXXII 

Anal II, -20 

Scales in lateral line 38 

The specimens have been presented to the United States J>rational 
Museum. 
San Diego, Cal., April 10, 1880. 



OTS SOITIE ISEW SPECIES OF EOCEIVE MOL.L1JSCA FROM THE SOITTIS- 

EBIV UIVITED STATES. 

By AWGELO IIEII.PR1^. 

A part of the species herein described have been for several past years 
among the collections of the United States National Museum. Those 
which are mentioned as coming from Texas were collected by Mr. G. W\ 
Marnoch, who sent them some years ago to Dr. C. A. White, and were 
by the latter gentleman presented to the National Museum. The num- 
ber following the description of each species is that by which it is re- 
corded in the museum register. 

PLEUEOTOMA, Lam. 
Pletjeotoma pagoda, n. sp. 

Plate, fig. 1. 

Yentricose; whorls about nine, the body- whorl nodulated on its most 
convex portion (nearly central), the nodulation consisting of a single 
series of sharp, obtusely-pointed, and flattened spines or nodes, which 
frequently appear double by the crossing of an impressed line over their 
basal portion; upper volutions with a similar series of nodes almost im- 
mediately above the sutural line, and gradually dwindling off into a cren- 
ulation ; upi)er surface of the whorls concave, faintly striated, the sinual 
rugsB indicating but a faint sinus ; lower surface with numerous well- 
developed revolving lines, which show a tendency to alternate. Aper- 
ture exceeding the spire in length, considerably contracted at about its 
center. 

Length, 1^ inch. (No. 1505.) 

Eocene of Alabama. 

This species in its general appearance greatly resembles certain forms 
of Fusus, and a comparison of more numerous specimens may show it 
to belong to that genus, although the ornamentation of the whorls, as 
well as the sinual indication, more clearly point to Pleurotoma. The 



loO PEOCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES XATIOXAL MUSEUM. 

only two specimens in the collection liave tlie outer lip fractured, and I 
am therefore unable to pronounce conclusively upon the preseuce of a 
true notch. 

PLEUK0T03IA VENUSTA, U. sp. 
Plate, lig. 2. 

Slender, acuminate ; whorls about nine, convex, ornamented by numer- 
ous tine revolving lines, which on tht? body- whorl are disposed in jiairs; 
cue deeply impressed line margins the majority of the volutions imme- 
diately below the suture: sinnated lines of growth not prominent; spu'e 
and aperture of about equal length. 

Length, l-^ inch. (So. 1509.) 

Jackson, Miss. 

Pleueotoma platysoma, n. sp. 

Plate, fig. 3. 

Whorls '? in number, flattened, each volution following the other al- 
most in direct continuation without any prominent sutural division, and 
ornamented with immerous revolving lines, which on the caudal portion 
of the body- whorl tend to alternate, a fine line interposing itself between 
the more i)romiueut ones ; aperture probably a Uttle more than one-third 
the length of the entire shell ; notch deep, sigmoidal. 

Length, 2 inches? (No. 891G.) 

Atascosa County, Texas. 

EUCHEILODON, Gabb. 

EUCHETLODON CRENO-CAEINATA, n. Sp. 

Plate, fig. 4. 

TVhorls subscalariform, flattened above, the angulation formed by a 
doubly crenulated carina ; volutions ornamented by nunun-ous revolving, 
profoundly elevated strife, which are decussated by the much finer sinn- 
ated lines of growth; the upper or flattened portion with a inxmiineut 
beaded line bordering the suture, and two (a finer and a coarser line) 
intermediate ones between the same and the cariua; outer lip grooved 
within, and i)robably sharply creuulated by the terminations of the re- 
volving stricTB; columella with about eleven beads, which decrease in 
size from above downwards. Aperture nearly equal in length to the 
spire? 

Length of fragment, 1 inch. (No. 8921.) 

Jackson, Miss. 

SCALAEIA, Lam. 

SCALAKIA UNILINEATA, U. Sp. 
Plate, fig. 5. 

Whorls about nine in number, convex, with numerous very faint, 
almost invisible, revolving lines, and much more prominent transverse 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 151 

oues (about 24 on tlie body- whorl) ; two very distinct revolving lines on 
the last volution, the upper one placed at about the middle, the lower 
one subcarinating it (only the upj)er of these two lines is seen on the 
remaining whorls, appearing there as a central line) ; base striated by 
revolving lines, and radially by the continuations of the transverse 
lines ; apperture elliptical, somewhat produced distaUy. 

Length, f inch. (No. 8920.) 

Jackson, Miss. 

FUSUS, Lam. 

Subgenus Strepsidtiba, Swainson. 

FuSUS MARNOCHI, n. Sp. 

Plate, fig. 6. 

Volutions seven or eight, the earlier three or four convex, the remain- 
der flattened; body-whorl subangulate; suture impressed; aperture 
less than one-half the length of shell, the canal shari^ly twisted; col- 
umella with a pseudo-fold following the curve of the canal. The whorls 
in the single specimen before me are destitute of ornamentation, but 
some traces of the former existence of revolving lines are ajy^aient. 

Length, | inch. (No. 8917.) 

Atascosa County, Texas. 

Ifamed after Mr. G. W. Marnoch, through whom this and other spe- 
cies of older Tertiary Texas fossOs have been obtained. 

TEEEBEA, Lam. 
Terebra plicifera, n. sp. 

Plate, fig. 8. 

Turreted; whorls ? in number, flattened, rapidly decreasing in size 
from the base ui)wards, and ornamented by numerous broad and prom- 
inently defined plicpe, having a sigmoidal flexure ; an impressed line on 
the upj)er portion of each volution produces a subsutural ring or band, 
over which the plicse and corresponding sulci are continued, and which 
occasionally tends to become double from the presence of a second im- 
pressed Mne. Body- whorl with two elevated revolving lines on its basal 
angulation; base radiately and longitudinally striated; aperture? (bro- 
ken in all specimens). 

Length? (Xo. 8919.) 

Atascosa County, Texas. 

CEASSATELLA, Lam. 
Crassatella declivis, n. sp. 

Plate, fig. 9. 

Very inequilateral, somewhat inflated anteriorly, the posterior dorsal 
margin descending very obliquely to the extremity, which is subcunei- 



152 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STxiTES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

form; anterior margin descending- rather abruptly, obtusely rounded; 
basal margin somewhat sinuous posteriorly. Surface deei^ly sulcated 
for the greater portion, the sulci mainly disappearing on the umbonial 
slope, where they give place to finely crowded striaj ; apex acute ; mus- 
cular impressions impressed ; margin minutely crenulat'ed. 

Length, If inches. (No. 2490.) 

Aquia Creek, Virginia. 

Apeil 25, 1880. 



WESCBIEPTIOIV OF A NEW AG©lVOII> FISH (KRACHYOI»SES XYOSTEE- 
IVUS), FBOM MONTEKEY BAY, CAI^BFOKNIA. 

By BAVID S. JORDAN and CIIAMJLES II. GII^ISEIST. 

Brachyopsis xyosternus sp. nov. 

Form of head and body as in Bracliyojysis verrucosus Lockington. 
Body elongate, depressed, broadest at the shoulders, thence tapering 
rapidly to the snout, and gradually and evenly to the tail. Snout broad, 
obtuse, depressed, its sides parallel. Mouth terminal, very oblique, the 
lower jaw much the longer, its tip i^rojecting upward above the upper 
profile of the snout. Mandible very broad, its greatest depth one- third 
its length, maxillary reaching to half way between front of orbit and 
pupil. A long barbel three-fourths the diameter of the orbit at its end. 
Premaxillaries anteriorly above the level of the pupil. Jaws with bands 
of villiform teeth. Vomer and palatines with slight asperities. !N"asal 
spines present. No spines on top of cranium. Interorbital space broad, 
concave, from the elevation of the supraocular ridges. Preorbital with 
two spines. A sharj) spine on the suborbital at lower posterior margin 
of eye. Preopercle with four processes, the upper one a sharp spine. 
Opercle striate, without spine. Top of head and the upper parts of the 
body without the small prickles which are found in B. verrucosus. Oc- 
cipital \)\t obsolete. 

N"o isthmus, the gill membrane united across the breast. No slit be 
hind the last gill. 

Body with the usual eight series of long keeled plates. Each keel 
terminating in a strong spine hooked backward, strine radiating in every 
direction from the spine. 

Dorsal series of plates 32, 6 before the spinous dorsal, 6 along its base, 
4 betw^een the two dorsals, 5 along the base of the soft dorsal, and 11 
behind it. The two dorsal series uniting immediately behind the soft 
dorsal, the resultant single series round, with radiating striii>, the kee- 
and spine obsolete. The two abdominal series similarly unite close be- 
hind the anal fin. 

The plates in the upper lateral series diminish in size forward, becom- 
ing very small anteriorly. The lower lateral series becomes broader for- 
wards as the other series decreases. It terminates abruptly opposite 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 153 

the origin of the seeond dorsal. In the lower lateral series are 29 plates, 
in the abdominal series 30, 10 before the anal, 8 along its base, and 11 
behind it. 

Breast ivitliout distinct plates, hxii entirely covered with minute tubercles) 
each of ichich has a central spine. A series of five plates in front of the 
base of the pectorals, four of them armed with hooked spines. 

Fin rays : D. VI-6 ; A. 8 ; V. I, 2. 

Lowest rays of pectorals not so short as in B. verrucosus, the lower- 
most two thirds the length of the longest (in B. verrucosus two-sevenths). 
Pectorals barely reaching front of anal. 

Ventrals much shorter than in B. verrucosus, the tips reaching slightly 
more than half the distance to the anal fin (beyond front of anal in B. 
verrucosus). Inner ray of ventrals very little longer than the outer, the 
connecting membrane narrow (very broad in verrucosus). Vent but lit- 
tle behind ventrals. 

Coloration. — Upper parts dusky ; mandible, cheek, and subopercle sil- 
very. Belly pale, with reddish tint. Lower half of pectoral reddish at 
base, the rest of the fin thickly dusted with black points. Yeutrals red- 
dish. Dorsal membrane immaculate, the rays punctulate with black. 
Caudal blackish. Anal reddish anteriorly, dusky behind. 

This species is related to Brachyopsis verrucosus, lately described by 
Mr. Lockington, differing, however, in several important respects, espe- 
cially {a) in the presence of small prickles on the breast instead of the 
large wart-like plates characteristic of verrucosus, (b) in the short ven- 
tral fins, (c) the absence of small prickles on the plates of the body, {d, 
the smaller number of plates, (e) the shorter vertical fins, (/) the long 
maxillary barbel, and (g) the deep mandible. 

Brachyopsis verrucosus is comparatively common in the open water be- 
tween Point Eeyes and the Farallones, and is frequently brought in in 
the trawl-nets. Brachyopsis xyosternus is thus far known oulj^ from a 
specimen found on the beach at Santa Cruz by Dr. C. L. Anderson, and 
presented by him to the United States National Museum. 

The genus to which these two species belong is well separated from 
Agonus by the absence of an isthmus, as well as by the entirely different 
form of the mouth and anterior portion of the head. Whether they are 
congeneric with the type of Brachyopsis Gill {Agonus rostratus Tilesius, 
from Kamtschatka) is yet to be proven. 





Table of measurements. 










Xyosternus, 
Santa Cruz. 


Vcrrifcosus, 
Puuta Keyes. 


Extreme length, in inches . . 


5.20 

4.40 

11 (ca) 

22 

17.5 

15 

4 

4.2 




6.45 


Lens;tli to base of caudal — 100 


5.55 


Body, greatest deptli 


12 


Head: 

Length 


24 


Distance from snout to nape 


19.5 


Greatest width 


16.5 


InterorWtal width 


5 


Length of snout 


G 



154 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
TaMe of measurements — Continued. 



Head: 

Length of maxillary 

Length of maiuliljlo 

Depth of manilible 

Diameter of orbit 

Length of mamillary barbel 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Greatest height 

Length of w{*°f-JfpP«,-J>--; 
Dorsal (soft) ■ 

' T„^„+i, r.f unc,. ^ to end of membrane. 
Length of base ^ ^^ ^^^^ ^^^ 

Height of longest ray 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Length of base{^o-'l«4-f_-^--- 

Height of longest ray 

Caudal, length 

Pectoral, length 

Ventral : 

Distance fiom snout 

Length 

Dorsal i-ays 

Anal lays 

Pectoral rays 

Ventral rays 

I^umber of tubes in lateral line 

Number of plates in dorsal series 

Number of plates in lower lateral series . . . 




Xyosternus, 
Santa Cruz. 



Yei'n(cosiis, 
Pnnta Keyes. 



7.5 
12 
2.5 
6 
1 

25.5 



13.5 
12 

52 

24 
10 

16.5 
24.5 

28 
29.5 
LS-T 
11 
14 
L2 
37 
35 
35 



Santa Oruz, Oal., April 20, 1880. 



DESCRIPTBON OF A NEIY FliOffJIVlJEK (HIPPOCiliOSSOIDFS EXBIilS), 
FROM THE COAST OF CALIF OBNIA. 

By ©ATI® S. JOKOAWf amd C1IAEI.ES M. GILKEKT. 
Hippoglossoides exilis sp. nov. 

Eyes and color on the riglit side. Body elongate, comparatively 
slender, rather closely compressed ; the dorsal outline more curved than 
the ventral, and neither strongly arched; the body tapering backwards 
Into a slender caudal j)eduncle, which is considerably longer than deep. 
Greatest depth about one-third the length to base of caudle. 

Head moderate, not obtuse, the outline of the snout continuous with 
the descending profile of the back. Mouth not large, very oblique, the 
upper jaw with its margin on each side concave, the lower jaw correspond- 
ingly convex. Lower jaw slightly protruding, with a distinct sym- 
physeal knob. Maxillary rather narrow, its x>osterior end obliquely 
truncate, not extending quite to oi)posite the middle of the pui)il. Pre- 
maxillary anteriorly on the level of the interorbital space. 

Teeth all conical, the upper jaw with tvvo distinct series; outer series 
of teeth smaller than in the other species of Hippoglossoides, not large 
anteriorly, and becoming quite small posteriorly. Teeth of the inner 
series quite small, closely and evenly set. Lower jaw with a single 



PEOCEEDING^ OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 155 

series of close-set teeth, mucli smaller than in the outer series of the 
upper jaw. 

Eyes hirge, the lower somewhat in advance of the upper, their diam- 
eter two-sevenths of the length of the head. The upper eye with some 
vertical range, but not encroaching on the dorsal line. 

Interorhital space a very narrow sharp ridge, with three rows of small 
scales, a slight ridge connecting it with the lateral line. A series of 
mucous pores around lower eye behind. About 8 scales in a series 
obliquely across the cheeks. 

Gill-rakers rather slender, shorter than in the other species of this 
genus, but similar in form, compressed, toothed on the inner edge, 
somewhat curved forwards. About 10 of them below the angle of the 
arch, the longest not one-third the diameter of the eye. 

Scales comparatively large, very much larger than in the other 
species of Hippoglossoides, thin, almost membranaceous, and somewhat 
readily deciduous, their edges conspicuously ctenoid, but much less 
rough than in H.jordani. In the latter species the scales are of much 
firmer texture, and their cilia are spine-like and stiff. The character of 
the scales is similar to that of AtherestJies stomias, which this species 
also simulates in form and color. Scales on the head entirely' similar to 
those on the body, but somewhat smaller. Those on left side also 
similar, but less strongly ctenoid. They are, however, considerably 
rougher than on the blind side in related spepies. 

Lateral line very i)rominent, its tubes coarse. It is straight behind, 
slightly and regularly rising anteriorly, without trace of arch or con- 
vexity. 

Eays of both dorsal and anal fins extensively scaly on both sides. 
Scales extending high up on all the fins. Scales 16-71-18 (12-125-43 
in Hippoglossoides jordmii ) . 

Fins low, rather fragile, the rays set well apart. 

Dorsal fin beginning immediately in front of the pupil, its anterior 
rays very low, the highest rays much behind the middle of the fin, their 
height much less than the length of the caudal peduncle, and but little 
more than the diameter of the eye. 

Anal fin similar to the dorsal, but rather higher, preceded by a spine 
which is shorter than in H.jordani. 

Caudal fin long, somewhat pointed, the middle rays unusually pro- 
duced. 

Pectoral fins small, little more than half the length of the head, that 
of the left side less than a third. Ventral fins both lateral, small, not 
reaching to the anal spine. 

Fin rays : D. 78 ; A. C2 ; Y. 6. 

Color pale olivaceous brown, rendered darker by black punctulations, 
which form an edging around each scale, sometimes with a few very 
faint bronze si)ots. Fins somewhat dusky, especially the caudal and 



156 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

pectoral ; dorsal and anal edged with yellowisli anteriorly ; ventrals with 
considerable light yellow. 

This species is known to ns from upwards of a hundred specimens 
taken in sweep-nets between the Golden Gate and Point Keyes. 

All the specimens are small, ranging from 8 to 12 inches in length. 
Its abundance, in the San Francisco market at least, seems to be con- 
fined to the month of April. 

Its relations are not intimate with the two species of this genus pre- 
viously known — H. j)latessoides of the North Atlantic and H.jordani of 
the iSTorth Pacific. From both it differs in the elongate form, much 
larger scales, fevv^er fin rays, smaller teeth, &c. With H. jordani, which 
inhabits the same waters, it agrees in scarcely any respect, excepting 
in the characters of the genus Hippoglossoides, i. e., the large mouth, 
conical teeth, ctenoid scales, simi)le, straight, lateral line, convex caudal, 
dextral eyes, «&c. 

Tahle of measurements. 



Extreme length, in inches 

Length to base of caudal, in inches =^100. . 
Body: 

Greatest height 

Least height 

Length of caudal peduncle 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Width of interorbital area 

Length (if snout 

Length of ovbii 

Length of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Length of longest gUl-raker 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Greatest height 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal: 

Length of middle rays 

Length of outer rays 

Pectoral: 

liiiiht side, lensth 

Left side, liuiith 

Ventral, right side, length 

Dorsal rays 

Anal rays 

Scales in lateral line 

Scales in transverse row above lateral line 
Scales in transverse row below lateral line 



Exilis. 


Jordani. 


10.25 


9.08 


8.40 


7.70 


33 


41 


8.2 


■ 9.8 


12.5 


8 


25.5 


28.5 


.50 


1.50 


3.7 


3.8 


9.3 


9 


9 


11 


1L5 


14 


2 


3 


9.3 


9 


S 


11.5 


35 


33 


9.5 


10.5 


20.5 


17.5 


17 


17 


14 


15.5 


8 


11 


7.5 


8 


78 


94 


62 


73 


71 


125 


16 


42 


18 


43 



San Francisco, Gal., A;gril 21, 1880. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 157 



DESCRIPTIOIVS OF 1VE\^'' I^ifVEKTEBKATE F08§lIi:.S FKOM THE 
1T1ES©Z»SC ANO CElVOZOaC BOCK!^ OF ARKANSAS, WYOMING, COI^- 
ORADO, AND UTAH. 

By C. A. 1¥HITE. 

The fossils described in the following paragraphs are among the col- 
lections of the National Museum. All except one species liave been 
selected for description from among the collections that •svere made 
under the auspices of the surveys formerly in charge, respectively, of 
Professor Powell, Dr. Hayden, and Captain Wheeler. Two of them, 
Callianassa ulrichi and Spirorbis dicJchauti, are embraced in a small Col- 
lection of Cretaceous fossils sent to the National Museum from near Lit- 
tle Eock, Ark., by Mr. E. O. Ulrich, of Cincinnati, Ohio. 

MOLLDSCA. 
CONCHIFERA. 

Genus PTERIA Scopoli. 

Subgenus OXYTOMA Meek. 

Pteeia (Oxytoma) eeecta (sp. nov.). 

Avicuhi linguiformis WMte, 187G (not Sliuiaard), Powell's Rep. Geol. Uiuta Mts., p. 95. 

Shell rather small, appearing to be nearly erect, but the axis is slightly 
oblique to the hinge-line ; both valves convex, but the right one less 
convex than the left ; hinge-line long, much longer than the axial length 
of the shell ; i^osterior wing large, its extremity acutely angular and 
moderately prominent; anterior wing comparatively large, prominent, 
obtusely pointed, defined from the body of the shell by a sinus or furrow 
in both valves, the direction of which forms a slightly obtuse or nearly 
right angle with the hinge-line ; front, exclusive of the anterior wing, 
nearly perpendicular the margin forming a nearly regular curve from 
the front all the way around to the i^osterior side, where it is flexed 
with a backward carve to meet the extremity of the hinge-line ; umbones 
somewhat prominent, especially that of the left valve. Surface having 
a nearly smooth appearance, but the lens reveals the presence of some- 
what regularly disposed concentric lines. 

Length of hinge-line, 32 millimeters; axial length of the shell, 26 
millimeters. (Museum No. 8771.) 

This shell was formerly referred by me {loc. cU.) to the Avicula lingui- 
form is of Shumard, but it differs from that species by having larger 
wings, a much longer hinge-line, and a much less oblique axis. It may 
be compared with P. (0.) salinensis White, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 
ii, p. 296, pi. 5, figs. 1 and 2; but it differs in being less robust, having 



158 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

proportionalJy larger wings, narrower body, and a more nearly erect 
axis. 

Position and locality. — Lower Potato Valley, Southern Utah, whexe it 
was obtained by Prof. J. W. Powell from Cretaceous strata. 

Genus SOLEMYA Lamarck. 

SOLEMYA BILIX (sp. nOV.). 

Shell about two and a half times as long as high, broader anteriorly 
than posteriorly ; both ends rounded, the posterior one more narrowly 
so than the other 5 both dorsal and basal margins gently convex or nearly 
straight ; test thin and fragile ; valves moderately convex from above 
downward, the greatest convexity in that direction being near the dor- 
sum ; beaks, having the usual inconspicuous character common to the 
genus, situated near the posterior end ; ligament necessarily short, but 
apparently well develoi^ed, and resting upon a fulcrum of sui)portof the 
usual character in each valve. Surface bright and, besides the usual 
lines of growth, marked by numerous faint radiating lines, which are 
visible to the unassisted eye, but are satisfactorily seen only under a 
lens, nearly imiformly distributed over the whole surface, but upon the 
middle portion they are arranged in paii's. 

Length, 20 millimeters; height at the broadest part, which is in front 
of the middle, 8 millimetres. (Museum No. 8913.) 

This is plainly a characteristic species of Solemya, but the only fossil 
species with which it need be compared is S. suhplicata Meek & Hay- 
den, from the Fox Hills Cretaceous of the Upper Missouri. It differs 
from, that species in being proportionally broader in front, in the charac- 
ter and uniformity of distribution of its radiating strife, and in wanting 
the subplicate character of the front portion. The extension of the epi- 
dermis has not been observed, but in other respects this species may be 
compared with the hving 8. velum Say in general form, and in the pair- 
ing of its radiating lines. 

Position and locality. — Cretaceous strata, associated with Mactra liolmesii 
{=Gyrenaf liolmesii Meek), about four miles north of Golden, Colo., 
where it was obtained by Mr. W. H. Holmes. These strata were for- 
merly supposed to belong to the Lignite series (Laramie), but they are 
marine Cretaceous, as I have shown in An. Eep. U. S. Geol. Sur. Terr, 
for 1877, pp. 193-196. 

Genus LUC IN A Bruguik'e. 

LUCINA PKOFUNDA (sp. nov.). 

Shell subcircular or subpentahedral ; valves not very convex; pos- 
terior side truncate, narrower than the anterior ; basal border having its 
margin more abruptly convex at its middle than towards the front and 
rear; dorsal marginshort, nearly straight; front marginliaving a nearly 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 159 

regular ciu-ve; beaks small, submedially located, distinct but incon- 
spicuous: umboual ridge slightly developed, curved, passing near the 
dorsal and posterior borders. Surface marked by the usual concentric 
lines of growth. 

Length, 20 milhmeters; height, from base to beaks, 18 millimeters. 
(Museum No. 8362.) 

This species is readily recognizable by its comparatively narrow pos- 
terior side, its deeply convex basal border, and slight convexity of the 
valves. 

Position cmd locality. — Cretaceous strata. Monument Creek, Colorado, 
where it was obtained by Dr. A. C. Peale. 

GASTEROPODA. 

Genus PLANORBIS Guettarcl. 
Planorbis ^qualis (sp. nov.). 

Shell rather small, coiled nearly in a plane, ai)i)arently sinistral; 
whorls apparently 4 or 5, in close contact but only shghtly involute, 
broadly convex upon the periphery, but their sides more narrowly con- 
vex, their transverse diameter greater than that which corresponds with 
the plane of the coil. 

Surface marked by a considerable number of revolving raised lines or 
slight angulations, which are crossed by the usual lines of growth. 

Diameter of the full coil of the largest example discovered, 6 milli- 
meters. (Museum No. 8909.) 

This is apparently the only species of typical biumbilicate Planorhis 
that has yet been discovered among the fossil fresh-water faunjie of the 
Western region, and it therefore needs no detailed comi)arison. 

Position and locality. — Green Eiver Group, Eocene, Henry's Fork of 
Green Eiver, Southern Wyoming. 

Subgenus GYRAULTJS Agassiz. 

PLAJ?fOEBis (Gyeaulus) militaris (sp. nov.). 

Shell very small, dextral, depressed-convex above, umbilicate below ; 
Tolutions two and a half to three and a half, convex on all sides except 
the inner, which is very narrowly flattened against each preceding coil; 
suture deeply impressed both above and below; surface marked by com- 
paratively coarse lines of growth. 

Diameter of the full coil of the larger examples in the collection, 4 
millimeters. (Museum No. S594.) 

This form was noticed but not named by me in vol. iv, U. S. Expl. 
& Sur. West of the 100th IMerid., p. 210. At that time I was not sat- 
isfied as to the mature condition of these shells, but by careful examina- 



160 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

tioii of a larger number of examples there seems to be no reason for 
doubt upon that point. 

The subgenus GyrauLus has not heretofore been ijublished as occurring 
among our large fossil pulmonate molliiscan faunae of the West, but at 
least two other species probably exist there, one in the Bear Eiver (Lar- 
amie) strata, and the other in those of the Green River Group. 

Position and locality. — Head of Soldiers' Fork, Utah, where they were 
obtained by one of the parties of the survey in charge of Lieutenant 
Wheeler. The true age of the strata is not at present definitely known, 
but it is understood to be either that of the upper portion of the Lara- 
mie or the lower portion of the Wahsatch Group. 

Genus LIMN^A Lamarck. 

Subgenus LEPTOLIMi^EA Swainson. 
• Li:mn^a (Leptolumnea) minuscula (sp. nov.). 

Shell rather small, moderately attenuate; spire much longer than the 
aperture; volutions six or seven, moderately convex, the distal border 
very narrowly appressed against each preceding coil; aperture small, 
elongate, subovate; columellar fold distinct, but not large. Surface 
marked by distinct lines of growth, but no revolving lines have been 
detected. 

The only two examples of this species that have been discovered are 
broken, but the full length of the larger one is estimated at 9 millime- 
ters; diameter of last volution, 3 millimeters; length of aperture, 3^ 
millimeters. (Museum No. 8907.) 

Position and locality. — From strata belonging to either the basal por- 
tion of the Green Elver Group or the upper portion of the Wahsatch 
Group, about three miles east of Table Eock Eailroad station. Southern 
Wyoming, where it is associated with Planorhis cirratus White, and also 
a small Limnreid that is probably referable to Acella Haldeman. 

Genus HELIX Linnaus. 
Subgenus PATULA Haldeman. 
Helix (Patula) sepulta (sp. nov.). 
"Shell convex above; umbilicus moderately wide; volutions about six, 
convex upon all sides except the inner ; suture impressed ; surface reg- 
ularly but minutely ribbed, the ribs having the same direction as the 
lines of growth. 

All the examples discovered are distorted by pressure, but the diam- 
eter of the full coil of the largest example was about 12 millimeters and 
its full height about 7 millimeters. (Museum No. 8908.) 

Position and locality. — The coal-bearing series of strata at Evanston, 
Wyo., where it is associated with K. evansfonensis White and other 
forms. These strata belong either to the upper part of the Laramie or 
the lower i^ortion of the Wahsatch Group. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 161 

ARTICULATA. 
VERMES. 

Genus. SPIRORBIS Lamarck. 

SPIEOKBIS? DICKHAUTI (sp. IIOY.). 

Shell discoid, one side being nearly flat and the other broadly um- 
bilicate ; volutions about five, partially embracing but all of them visible, 
somewhat rugose but increasing in size with considerable regularity ; 
peripheral side of the volutions flattened or gently convex, having a 
single revolving raised line along its middle and another similar one 
at each border, where it sharpens the angularity between the • lateral 
and peripheral sides; outer portion of both the lateral sides of the 
volutions concave, and the inner portion convex, giving the last-named 
portion a greater transverse diameter than the outer portion, the larger 
part of which is embraced by the next succeeding volution ; aperture 
small, round, and apparently, but not really, contracted. The cavity 
being round, the outer portion of the test only partakes of the irregu- 
larity described, and seems to have been deposited as an encrustation 
upon the first-formed inner portion, that of adjacent volutions seeming 
to blend, obscuring the suture. Besides a considerable degree of rugosity, 
the surface shows under the lens a peculiar granular or rather an 
etched appearance. 

Greatest diameter of the full coil of the largest example discovered, 
9 millimeters; greatest diameter of the outer volution, near the aper- 
ture, 2^ millimeters. (Museum No. 9073.) 

In size and general aspect this species resembles S. rotuhis Morton 
sp., from the Cretaceous of New Jersey, but although doubtless con- 
generic, it differs from that species in the character of its surface orna- 
mentation, and in having a round instead of quadrangular aperture. 
This shell is referred to the shell-bearing worms and not to the mollusca 
on account of the peculiar character of the test. It probably does not 
strictly belong to the genus Spirorbis, but it is regarded as at least a 
closely related form. 

Fosition and locality. — Cretaceous strata near Little Eock, Ark., 
where it was obtained by Mr. E. O. Ulrich, and also by Mr. H. E. 
Dickhaut, in whose honor the specific name is given. 

CRUSTACEA. 

Genus CALLIANASSA Leach. 

Callianassa uleichi (sp. nov.). 

Hand quadrate, flattened; inner face less convex than the outer; both 
upper and lower edges acute, tlie lower one more so than the upper, and 
finely crenulate; fixed finger slender, plain, its transverse section sub- 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 11 Auff. 24, 1880. 



162 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

triangular, gently curved, shorter tlian the hand; movable finger larger 
and stronger than the fixed one, having "a moderately strong prominent 
ridge upon the inner side, between the front end of which and the ex- 
tremity of the finger there is sometimes a distinct tooth.. Surface nearly 
smooth, but some examples are granulate about the middle of both sides 
of the hand, and several small foramina are observable along the upper 
margin of the movable finger. 

Length of hand, 13 millimeters; breadth, 10 millimeters; thickness, 
4 milUmeters. (Museum No. 8910.) 

Position and locality. — This species has been sent to the United States 
Il^ational Museum by Mr. E. O. Ulrich, in whose honor the specific name 
is given. He obtained it from Cretaceous strata near Little Rock, Ark, 
Associated with it, besides certain characteristic Cretaceous mollusca, 
there are several separate movable fingers which x)lainly belong to an- 
other decapod crustacean ; but although complete in themselves, they 
constitute too small a portion of the animal to satisfactorily base a specific 
description upon them. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 163 



A CATAIiOGUC OF THE BIRDS OF NORTB AMERICA. 
By ROBERT RIDOTVAY. 

IXTEODUCTIOiT. 

During' the interval of twenty-one years which ha« elapsed since the 
publication of the last Smithsonian catalogue,* a great advance has 
naturally been made in our knowledge of ]S'orth American ornithology; 
and so numerous and important are the changes which have resulted, 
through additions of new species, rectifications of synonymy, etc., that 
a new list seems desirable to take the place of the old one. 

The total apparent number of species given in the old catalogue has 
been increased only from 738 to 764, a slight numerical discrepancy 
which it is necessary to explain. From the catalogue of 1859 there 
have been eliminated no less than 02 names, which are either not entitled 
to a place in the Xorth American fauna or which have been degraded to 
varietal or sub-specific rank, the number of the species in the latter case 
being here simply duplicated as many times as there are varieties of a 
species. To offset this large reduction, 59 valid new species have been 
described since 1859, and 77 added, or restored, to the fauna, the acces- 
sions thus numbering 127 species, or 65 more than the eliminations. The 
forms considered to be of merely subspecific rank number 160, which, 
added to the 764 valid species recognized, gives a total of 924 definable 
forms composing the North American avian fauna, as now understood, t 

It is found impracticable to here distinguish, in all cases, between 

* Two catalogues of North Americau birds have been issued by the Sinithsoniau In- 
stitution, as follows : 

(1) Catalogue of North American Birds, chiefly in the Museum of the Smiths<juian 
Institution. By Spencer F. Baird, Assistant Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution. 
Washington: Smithsonian Institution. October, 1856. 4to, paper. 1 p. 1., pp. xvii- 
Ivi. [Reissue, with new title-page, of pp. svii-lvi of Vol. IX, Pacific R. R. Reports 
(" Birds of North America"). Includes, besides the list of 738 species, with habitats, 
tables of the higher groups, and lists of extralimital species (23 in number) treated 
in the general report, and of others (31) claimed, on apparently insufficient grounds, 
as North American; also a summary of the number of species given in the works of 
Wilson, Bonaparte, and Audubon. ] 

(2) Catalogue of North American Birds, chiefly in the Museum of the Smithsonian 
Institution. By Spencer F. Baird. First octavo edition. Washington: Smithsonian 
Institution. [Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, No. 108.] 1859. 8vo. 2 p. 11., 
pp. 19 + 2. [Essentially the same as the quarto list, but without habitats, and the 
matter relating to classification, etc. The two additional pages are an alphabetical 
index of the North American geuera. As in the quarto list, there are, ostensibly, 738 
species, but 22 numbers are duplicated, making a total of 760 names in the list.] 

T A fuU analysis of the changes made in this catalogue is given on pages 21:3-234. 



164 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

species wliicli are truly or peculiarly Nortli American and those wMch 
are more properly visitants from other countries: but in the case of 
those whose occurrence appears to be accidental or occasional, the num- 
ber preceding the name is inclosed in brackets. Of the latter class, 
species which there is good reason to believe did not reach our limits 
through natural means (/. e., those escaped from confinement) have been, 
in every case, carefully excluded, as have likewise all introduced species. 

It has been deemed best, in view of the recent discoveries along our 
southwestern border, to retain as Xorth American all the species (less 
than a dozen in number) treated by Professor Baird in Volume IX, 
Pacific Kailroad Reports ("Birds of North America"), and likewise given 
in the old catalogue, on account of their having been obtained just across 
the boundary, in Xorthern Mexico ', their discovery within our limits being 
quite certainly only a question of time and investigation. For the same 
reason, the remaining few of Giraud's " Sixteen ^N^ew Species of Texan 
Birds"* are also included. Xeither are we prepared to relinquish several 
Audubonian species which at the present time are known only fi^om 
the descriptions and figures by their discoverer [e. g., Eegulus cuvieriy 
Pcrissoglossam carbonata, Dendrceca montana, and Wilsonia minuta, ns 
well as other better-known species which are given by Audubon on Ms 
own autliority {e. g., Chrysomitris ^' mageUanka''^ = C. notata, and Eiulod- 
mus ruber). 

Several species i^eculiar to the islands of Socorro and Guadalupe, oft' 
the coast of northwestern Mexico and Lower California, respectively, 
together with the few forms peculiar to the latter peninsula, are re- 
garded as truly Xorth American, their affinities, with perhaps only two 
exceptions {i. e., Conurus holochlorus srnd Folyboriis lutosns), being strictly 
" Nearctic." 

The greatest difficulty encountered in the compilation of this work 
has been in the way of distinguishing between valid "species" find 
those forms to be regarded as geographical races of merely subspecific 
rank. The greatest care has been taken in all doubtful cases of this 
kind, and i)revious conclusions (published in "History of Xorth Ameri- 
can Birds"! and elsewhere) carefully reconsidered, with the aid of all the 
material accessible, including many specimens not previously in hand. 
This reconsideration of the subject has, in not a few cases, resulted in a 
reversal of former opinion, specimens from important localities not be- 
fore represented often deciding the point one way or the other. Every 
form whose characteristics bear unmistakably the impress of cMmatic or 

* A Description of Sixteen New Species of North American Birds, by Jacob P. 
Girand, jr. New York. George F. NesMtt, printer, Tontine Building, corner of Wall 
and AVater streets. 1841. Folio, not paged, 8 plates. [For species given in this 
work, wliicla have not since been obtained within the limits of the United States, see 
p. 229.] 

t A History of North American Birds, by S. F. Baird, T. M. Brewer, and E. Ridgway. 
Land Birds. Illustrated by 64 colored plates and 593 woodcuts. 3 vols., royal 4to. 
Boston. Little, Brown, & Co. 



^ PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 165 

local influences, gradually less marked toward the habitat of another 
form, with which it thus intergrades ; and all forms which certainly 
intergrade, no matter how widely distinct the opposite extremes may 
appear {e. g., Colaptes auratus and mexicamis), together with iutergradino- 
forms whose peculiarities are not explained by any known "law" of 
variation, have been reduced to subspecific rank. On the other hand, 
where the difference between allied forms is slight, but at the same time 
absolutely constant, and not coincident with a difference of habitat 
{e. g., certain of the small Thrushes and the various forms of Junco), 
specific rank is ui)held. There are some forms which-future investigation 
based upon adequate material, may decide to be of different rank from 
that accorded them here. We cheerfully acknowledge our fallibility, 
but at the same time would say that we have endeavored to be as con- 
scientious and consistent as possible, giving the rank of each form as it 
appears in the light of our present knowledge, independent of previous 
conclusions. 
Smithsonian Institution, January 22, 1880. 



CATALOGUE. 



1. HYLOCICHLA MUSTELINA (Gmel.) Baird. 

■Wood Thrush. [148.] 

2. HYLOCICHLA PUSCESCENS [Steph.] Baird. 

Wilson's Thrush. C151.] 

3. HYLOCICHLA ALICIA Baird. 

Gray -cheeked Thrush. [154.] 

4. HYLOCICHLA USTULATA (Xutt.) Baird. 

Russet-backed Thrush. [152.] 

4a. HYLOCICHLA USTULATA SWAINSONI (Caban.) Ridgw. 
Olive-backed Thrush. [153.] 

5. HYLOCICHLA UNALASHKiB (Gmel.) Eidgw. 

Dwarf Thrush. [150.] 

5a. HYLOCICHLA UNALASHKiE AUDUBONII (Baird) ElDGW. 
Rocky Mountain Hermit Thrush. [149 a.] 

5i. HYLOCICHLA UNALASHKiB PALLASI (Caban.) Ridgw. 
Hermit Thrush. [149.] 

[6.]' TURDUS ILIACUS Linn. 

Red-wing Thrush. 

7. MERULA MIGRATORIA (Linn.) Sw. & Rich. . 

American Robin. [155.] 

7 a. MERULA MIGRATORIA PROPINQUA RiDGW. 
"Western Robin. 

8. MERULA CONFINIS (Baird) Ridgw. 

Saint Lucas Robin. 

9. HESPEROCICHLA NiEVIA (Gmel.) Baird. 

Varied Robin. [156.] 

10. OREOSCOPTES MONT ANUS (Towns.) Baird. 

Sage Thrasher. [255.] 

11. MIMUS POLYGLOTTUS (Linn.) Boie. 

Mockingbird. [253, 253 a. ] 
166 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 167 

12. GALEOSCOPTES CAROLINENSIS (Li.xn.) Caban. 

Catbird. [•2.'->4.] 

13. HARPORHYNCHUS RUFUS (Lixx.) Caban. 

Brown Thrasher. [261,261a.] 

i:Ut. HARPORHYNCHUS RUFUS LONGIROSTRIS (Lafr.) COUES. 
Mexican Brown Thrasher. [260.] 

14. HARPORHYNCHUS CINEREUS Xantus. 

Saint Lucas Thrasher. 

14 a. HARPORHYNCHUS CINEREUS BENDIREI (CouES) Hexsh. 
Bendire's Thrasher. 

15. HARPORHYNCHUS CURVIROSTRIS (Sw.) Caban. 

Curve-billed Thrasher. [259, 259 o.] 

15 «. HARPORHYNCHUS CURVIROSTRIS PALMERI PaDGW. 
Palmer's Thrasher. 

16. HARPORHYNCHUS REDIVIVUS (Gamb.) Cabax. 

Californian Thrasher. [256.] 

16 rt. HARPORHYNCHUS REDIVIVUS LECONTEI (Lawr.) Coues. 
Leconte's Thrasher. [257.] 

17. HARPORHYNCHUS CRIS^ALIS Hexky. 

Red-vented. Thrasher. [258. ] 

18. HARPORHYNCHUS GRAYSONI Baird. 

Socorro Thrasher. 

19. CINCLUS MEXICANUS Swains. 

American Water Ouzel. [164.] 

[20.] CYANECULA SUECICA (Lixx.) Brehm. 
Blue-throated Warbler. 

[21.] SAXICOLA CENANTHE (Lixx.) Bechst. 
Stone Chat. [157.] 

22. SIALIA SIALIS (LjNX.) Haldejl 

Bluebird. [158.] 

23. SIALIA MEXICAN A Swaixs. 

Californian Bluebird. [159.] 

24. SIALIA ARCTICA. SwAixs. 

Rocky Mountain Bluebird. [160.] 

23. MYIADESTES TOWNSENDI (AuD.) Cabax. 
Townsend's Solitaire. [235.] 

26. PHAINOPEPLA NITENS (Sw.) ScL. 

Black-crested Flycatcher. [234.] 

27. POLIOPTILA CiERULEA (Lixx.) Scl. 

Blue-gray Gnatcatcher. [282.] 



168 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

28. POLIOPTILA PLUMBEA Baird. 

Plumbeous Gnatcatcher. [1^83.] 

29. POLIOPTILA. MELANURA Lawr. 

Black-capped Gnatcatcher. [284.] 

30. REGULU3 CALENDULA (Linn.) Light. 

Ruby-crowned Kinglet. [161.] 

31. REGULU3 OBSCURUS EiDGW. 

Dusky Kinglet. 

32. REGULUS CUVIERI AuD. 

Cuvier's Kinglet. [163.] 

33. REGULUS SATRAPA Light. 

Golden-crowned Kinglet. [162.] 

33 «. REGULUS SATRAPA OLIVACEUS Baird. 

Western Golden-crowned Kinglet. 

[34.] PHYLL03C0PUS BOREALIS (Blas.) Dresser. 
Kenuicott's Warbler. 

35. CHAMiEA FASCIATA Gamb. 

Ground Tit. [274.] 

36. LOPHOPHANES BICOLOR (Linn.) Bp. 

Tufted Titmouse. [285.] 

37. LOPHOPHANES ATROCRISTATUS Cass. 

Black-crested Titmouse. [286.] 

38. LOPHOPHANES INORNATUS (Gamb.) Cass. 

Plain Titmouse. [287.] 

39. LOPHOPHANES WOLLWEBERI Bonap. 

Wollweber's Titmouse. [288.] 

40. PARUS MONT ANUS, Gamb. 

Mountain Chickadee. [294.] 

41. PARUS ATRICAPILLUS LiNN. 

Black-capped Chickadee. [290.] 

41a. PARUS ATRICAPILLUS SEPTENTRIONALIS (Harris) AixeN. 
Long-tailed Chickadee. [289,289a.] 

41J. PARUS ATRICAPILLUS OCCIDENTALIS (Baird) CotjeS. 
Oregon Chickadee. [291.] 

42. PARUS CAROLINENSIS AuD. 

Carolina Chickadee. [293.] 

43. PARUS MERIDIONALIS ScL. 

Mexican Chickadee. [292.] 

[44.] PARUS CINCTUS Bodd. 

Siberian Chickadee. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 169 

45. PARUS HUDSONICUS FoRST. 

Hudsonian Chickadee. [29G.] 

46. PARUS RUFESCENS Tuv^-^-s. 

Chestnut-backed Chickadee. [29.5.] 

46a. PARUS RUFESCENS NEGLECTUS, Eidgw. 
Californian Chickadee. 

47. PSALTRIPARUS MINIMUS (Towns.) Bp. 

Least Tit. [-298.] 

48. PSALTRIPARUS PLUMBEUS Baird. 

Lead-colored Tit. [299.] 

49. PSALTRIPARUS MELANOTIS (Hartl.) Bp. 

Black-eared Tit. [297.] 

50. AURIPARUS FLAVICEP3 (Sundev.) Baird. 

Yellow-headed Tit. [:>00.] 

51. SITTA CAROLINENSIS Gmel. 

"White-bellied Nuthatch. [277.] 

51a. SITTA CAROLINENSIS ACULEATA (Cass.) Allen. 
Slender-billed Nuthatch. [278.] 

52. SITTA CANADENSIS Linn. 

Red-bellied Nuthatch. [279.] 

53. SITTA PUSILLA Lath. 

Brown-headed Nuthatch. [280.] 

54. SITTA PYGMiEA YiG. 

Pigmy Nuthatch. [281.] 

55. CERTHIA FAMILIARIS RUPA (Bartr.) Ridgw. 

Brown Creeper. [27.5.] 

55a. CERTHIA FAMILIARIS MEXICANA (Glogeu) RiDGW. 
Mexican Creeper. [276.] 

56. CAMPYLORHYNCHUS BRUNNEICAPILLUS (Lafr.) Gray. 

Cactus Wren. [262.] 

57. CAMPYLORHYNCHUS AFFINIS Xantus. 

Saint Lucas Cactus "Wren. 

58. SALPINCTES OBSOLETUS (Say) Caban. 

Rock Wren. [264.] 

58a. SALPINCTES OBSOLETUS GUADALUPENSIS RiDGW. 
Guadalupe Rock Wren. 

59 CATHERPES MEXICANUS (Sw.) Baird. 

Mexican White-throated Wren. [263. J 

59 a. CATHERPES MEXICANUS CONSPERSUS RiDGW. 
White-throated Wren. 



170 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

60. THRYOTHORUS LUDOVICIANUS (Gm.) Bp. 

Carolina Wren. ['265.] . 

GO a. THRYOTHORUS LUDOVICIANUS BERLANDIERI (CouCH) COUES. 
Berlandier's Wren. [266.] 

60 &. THRYOTHORUS LUDOVICIANUS MIAMENSIS HlDGW. 
Florida Wren. 

61. THRYOMANES BEWICKI (AuD.) Baird. 

Bewick's Wren. [267.] 

61a, THRYOMANES BEWICKI SPILURUS (ViG.) Baikd. 
Californian Bewick's Wren. 

61 6. THRYOMANES BEWICKI LEUCOGASTER Baird. 
Texan Bewick's Wren. 

62. THRYOMANES BREVICAUDA Eidgw. 

Guadalupe Wren. 

63. TROGLODYTES AEDON, Vieill. 

House Wren. [270,272.] 

63a. TROGLODYTES AEDON PARKMANNI (AuD.) CoUES, 
Western House Wren. [271.] 

64. TROGLODYTES INSULARIS Baied. 

Socorro Wren. 

65. ANORTHURA TROGLODYTES HYEMALIS (Vieill.) Coues, 

Winter Wren, ['273.] 

65ffl. ANORTHURA TROGLODYTES PACIFICUS (Baird) Eidgw. 
Western Winter Wren. 

66. ' ANORTHURA ALASCENSIS (Baird) Coues. 

Alaskan Wren. 

67. TELMATODYTES PALUSTRIS (Wils.) Baird. 

Long-billed Marsh Wren. [268.] 

67a, TELMATODYTES PALUSTRIS PALUDICOLA Baird 
Tule Wren. 

68. CISTOTHORUS STELLARIS (Licht.) Cab.\n, 

Short-billed Marsh Wren. [269.] 

[69.] MOTACILLA ALBA Lixx. 
White Wagtail. 

[70.] BUDYTES FLAVA (Linn.) Gray. 
Yellow Wagtail. 

71. ANTHUS LUDOVICIANUS (Gm.) Light. 
American Titlark. [105.] 

[72,] ANTHUS PRATENSTS (Linn.) Bechst, 
European Titlark. 



PROCEEDINGS . OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 171 

73. NEOCORYS SPRAGUEI (Aud.) Scl. 

SpragTie's Titlark. [1C6.] 

74. MNIOTILTA VARIA (Lixx.) Vieill. 

Black-and-white Creeper. [167 «.] 

74 a. MNIOTILTA VARIA BOREALIS (Nutt.) Ridgw. 
Small -billed Creeper. [167.] 

75. • PROTONOTARIA CITREA (Bodd.) Baird. 

Prothonotary Warbler. [169.] 

76. HELON^A SWAINSONI Aud. 

Swainsons Warbler. [1*9.] 

77. HELMITHERUS VERMIVORUS (G.mel.) Bp. 

Worm-eating Warbler. [178.] 

78. HELMINTHOPHAGA BACHMANI (Aud.) Caean. 

Bachman's Warbler. [182.] 

79. HELMINTHOPHAGA PINUS (Linn.) Baird. 

Blue-winged Yellow Warbler. [180.] 

80. HELMINTHOPHAGA LAWRENCEI Heerick. 

Lawrence's "Warbler. 

81. HELMINTHOPHAGA CHRYSOPTERA (LiNN.) Baird. 

Golden- w^inged Warbler. [181.] 

82. HELMINTHOPHAGA LEUCOBRONCHIALIS BREWSTER. 

White-throated Warbler. 

83. HELMINTHOPHAGA LUCIiE Cooper. 

Lucy's Warbler. 

84. HELMINTHOPHAGA VIRGINIiB Baird. 

Virginia's Warbler. [183 «.] 

85. HELMINTHOPHAGA RUFICAPILLA (WiLS.) Baird. 

Nashville Warbler. [183.] 

86. HELMINTHOPHAGA CELATA (Say) Baird. 

Orange-crowned Warbler. [184.] 

86 a. HELMINTHOPHAGA CELATA LUTESCENS RiDGW. 
Luteous Warbler. 

87. HELMINTHOPHAGA PEREGRINA (WiLS.) Baird 

Tennessee Warbler. [185.] 

83. PARULA AMERICANA (Linn.) Bp. 

Blue Yellow-backed Warbler. [168.] 

80. PARULA PITIAYUMI INSULARIS (Lawr.) Ridgw. 
Socorro Warbler. 

89 a. PARULA PITIAYUMI NIGRILORA COUES. 
Sennett's Warbler. 



172 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

90. PERISSOGLOSSA TIGRINA (Gmel.) Baird. 

Cape May Warbler. [gOo.] 

91. PERISSOGLOSSA CARBONATA (AcD.) Baird. 

Carbonated Warbler. [-207.] 

92. PEUCEDRAMUS OLIVACEUS (Giraud) Coues. 

Olive-headed Warbler. 

93. DENDRCECA iBSTIVA (Gmel.) Baird. 

Summer Yellow Bird. [203. ] 

94. DENDRCECA CiERULESCENS fLixx.) Baird. 

Black-throated Blue Warbler. [193.] 

95. DENDRCECA CORONATA (Lixx.) Gray. 

Yellow-rump Warbler. [194.] 

96. DENDRCECA AUDUBONH (Towxs.) Baird. 

Audubon's Warbler. [195.] 

97. DENDRCECA MACULOSA (Gmel.) Baird. 

Black-and-yellow Warbler. [204.] 

98. DENDRCECA CJERULEA (Wils.) Baird. 

Cerulean Warbler. [201.] 

99. DENDRCECA PBNNSYLVANICA (Lixx.) Baird. 

Chestnut-sided Warbler. [200.] 

100. DENDRCECA CASTANEA (Wils.) Baird. 

Bay-breasted Warbler. [197.] 

101. DENDRCECA STRIATA (FoRSx.) Baird. 

Black-poU Warbler. [202.] 

102. . DENDRCECA BLACKBURNIiB (Gm.) Baird. 
Blackburnian Warbler. [196.] 

103. DENDRCECA DOMINICA (Lixx.) Baird. 

Yellow-throated Warbler. [209.] 

103a. DENDRCECA DOMINICA ALBILORA Baird. 

White-browed Yellow throated Warbler. 

104. DENDRCECA GRACI^aEJ Coues. 

Grace's Warbler. 

105. DENDRCECA NIGRESCENS (Towns.) Baird. 

Black-throated Gray Warbler. [192.] 

106. DENDRCECA CHRYSOPARIA ScL. & S.alv. 

Golden-cheeked Warbler. 

107. DENDRCECA VIRENS (Gmel.) Baird. 

Black-throated Green Warbler. [189.] 

108. DENDRCECA TOWNSENDI (Nuxx.) Baird. 

Townsend's Warbler. [191.] 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 17^ 

109. DENDROBCA OCCIDENTALIS (Towxs.) Baird. 

Hermit "Waibler. [190.] 

110. DENDRCECA KIRTLANDI Baird. 

Kirtlands Warbler. [205.] 

111. DENDRCECA PINUS (Wils.) Baird. 

Pine-creeping Warbler. [198.] 

112. DENDRCECA MONTANA (Wils.) Baird. 

Blue Mountain Warbler. [199.] 

113. DENDRCECA PALMARUM (Gmel.) Baird. 

Red-poll Warbler. [20S.] 

113 «. DENDRCECA PALMARUM HYPOCHRYSEA EiDGW. 
Yellow Red-poll Warbler. 

114. DENDRCECA DISCOLOR (Vieill.) Baird. 

Prairie Warbler. [210.] 

115. SIURUS AURICAPILLUS (Lixx.) Swaixs. 

Golden-crowned Thrush. [186.] 

lie. SIURUS N^VIUS (BODD.) CoiES. 

Small-billed Water Thrush. [187.] 

116 «. SIURUS NiEVIUS NOTA3ILIS Grixxell. 
Griunell's Water Thrush. 

117. SIURUS MOTACILLA (Vieill.) Coue.s. 

Large-billed Water Thrush. [188.] 

118. OPORORNIS AGILI3 v^Vils.^ Baird. 

Connecticut Warbler. [174.] 

119. OPORORNIS FORMOSA (Wils.) Baird. 

Kentucky Warbler. [175.] 

120. GEOTHLYPIS PHILADELPHIA (Wils.) Baird. 

Mourning Warbler. [172.] 

121. GEOTHLYPIS MACGILLIVRAYI (Aud.) Baird. 

Macgillivray's Warbler. [173.] 

122. GEOTHLYPIS TRICHAS ,Lixx.) Cabax. 

Maryland Yellow-throat. [170.] 

123. ICTERIA VIRENS (Lixx.) Baird. 

YeUow-breasted Chat. [176.] 

123rt. ICTERIA VIRENS LONGICAUDA (Lawr.) Coues. 
Long-tailed Chat. [177.] 

124. WILSONIA MITRATA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Hooded Warbler. [211.] 

125. WILSONIA PUSILLA (Wils.) Bp. 

Black-capped Yellow Warbler. [213.] 



174 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

125 rt. WILSONIA PUSILLA PILEOLATA (Pall.) Ridgw. 
Pileolated Warbler. 

126. WILSONIA MINUTA (WiLS.) Eidgw. 

Small-headed Flycatcher. [212.] 

127. WILSONIA CANADENSIS (Linn.) Coues. 

Canadian Flycatching Warbler. [214,215.] 

128. SETOPHAGA RUTICILLA (Linn.) Swains. 

American Redstart. [217.] 

129. SETOPHAGA PICTA Swains. 

Painted Redstart. [218.] 

130. SETOPHAGA MINIATA Svv ains. 

Red-bellied Redstart. [219] 

131. CARDELLINA RUBRIFRONS (Giraud) Scl. 

Red-faced Warbler. 

132. ERGATICUS RUBER (Swains.) Bated. 

Red Warbler. [216.] 

133. BASILEUTERUS CULICIVORUS (Light.) Bonap. 

Brasier's Warbler. 

134. BASILEUTERUS BELLII (Giraud) Sol. 

Bell's Warbler. 

135. VIREOSYLVIA OLIVACEA (Linn.) Bonap. 

Red-eyed Vireo. [240.] 

136. VIREOSYLVIA AGILIS FLAVO-VIRIDIS (Cass.) RiDGW. 

Yellow-green Vireo. [241.] 

137. VIREOSYLVIA CARIDRIS BARBATULA (Caban.) RiDGW. 

Black-whiskered Vireo. [243.] 

138. VIREOSYLVIA PHILADELPHICA Cass. 

Philadelphia Vireo. [244.] 

139. VIREOSYLVIA GILVA (Vieill.) Cass. 

Warbling Vireo. [245.] 

139a. VIREOSYLVIA GILVA SWAINSONI Baird. 
Western Warbling Vireo. 

140. LANIVIREO FLAVIFRONS (Vieill.) Baird. 

Yellow-throated Vireo. [252.] 

141. LANIVIREO SOLITARIUS (Vieill.) Baird. 

Blue-headed Vireo. [250.] 

141a. LANIVIREO SOLITARIUS CASSINI (Xantus) Ridgw. 
Cassia's Vireo. [251.] 

141 &. LANIVIREO SOLITARIUS PLUMBEUS (CouES) All. 
Plumbeous Vireo. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 175' 

142. VIREO ATRICAPILLUS Woodh. 

Black-capped Vireo. [247.] 

143. VIREO NOVBBORACENSIS (Gmel.) Bp. 

White-eyed Vireo. [248.] 

144. VIREO HUTTONI Cass. 

Hutton's Vireo. [249.] 

145. VIREO BELLII Aro. 

Bell's Vireo. [246.] 

146. VIREO PUSILLUS Coues. 

Least Vireo. 

147. VIREO VICINIOR Coues. 

Gray Vireo. 

14S. LANIUS BOREALIS Yieill. 

Great Northern Shrike. [236.] 

149. LANIUS LUDOVICIANUS LiNX. 

Loggerhead Shrike. [237.] 

149a. LANIUS LUDOVICIANUS EXCUBITORIDES (Sw.) COUES. 
White-nimped Shrike. [233.] 

149 6. LANIUS LUDOVICIANUS ROBUSTUS Baird. 
Large-billed Shrike. 

150. AMPELIS GARRULUS Lixx. 

Northern "Wax- wing. [232.] 

151. AMPELIS CEDRORUM (Vieill.) Baikd. 

Cedar Wax-wing. [233.] 

1.52. PROGNE SUBIS (Lixx.) Baird. 

Purple Martin. [231.] 

152a. PROGNE SUBIS CRYPTOLEUCA Baird. 
Cuban Martin. [231 a. ] 

153. PETROCHELIDON LUNIFRONS (Say) Lawr. 

CUflf SwaUow. [226.] 

154. HIRUNDO ERYTHROGASTRA BODD. 

Barn Sw^allow. [225.] 

155. TACHYCINETA BICOLOR (Vieill.) Cabax. 

White-bellied Swallow. [227.] 

156. TACHYCINETA THALASSINA (SWAIXS.) CabaN. 

Violet-green Swallow. [228.] 

157. COTILE RIP ARIA (Lixx.) Boie. 

Bank Swallow. [289.] 

1-58. STELGIDOPTERYX SERRIPENNIS (AUD.) Baird. 
Rough-winged Swallow. [230.] 



176 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

159. CERTHIOLA BAHAMENSIS Reichenb. 

Baliaman Honey Creeper. [301.] 

160. EUPHONIA ELEGANTISSIMA (Bp.) Gray. 

Biue-lieaded Euphouia. [224.] 

IGl. PYRANGA RUBRA (Linn.) Vieill. 
Scarlet Tanager. [220.] 

162. PYRANGA LUDOVICIANA (WiLS.) Bp. 

Western Tanager. [223.] 

163. PYRANGA HEPATICA Swaixs. 

Hepatic Tanager. [222.] 

164. PYRANGA -SJSTIVA (Lixx.) Vieill. 

Summer Redbird. [221.] 

164 rt. PYRANGA iESTIVA COOPERI Ridgw. 
Cooper's Tanager. 

16.-1. HESPERIPHONA VESPERTINA (Cooper) Bp. 
Evening Grosbeak. [303.] 

166. PINICOLA ENUCLEATOR (Lixx.) Vieill. 
Pine Grosbeak. [304.] 

[167.] PYRRHULA CASSINI Baiep. 
Alaskan Bullfinch. 

168. CARPODACUS PURPUREUS (Gm.) Baird. 

Purple Finch. [305.] 

168 «. CARPODACUS PURPUREUS CALIFORNICUS B.-UED. 
Californian Purple Finch. [308.] 

169. CARPODACUS CASSINI Baiep. 

Cassin's Purple Finch. [307.] 

170. CARPODACUS FRONTALIS (Say) Gray. 

House Finch. [308.] 

170 rt. CARPODACUS FRONTALIS RHODOCOLPUS (Cab-O;.) Ridgw. 
Crimson House Finch. 

171. CARPODACUS AMPLUS Ridgw. 

Guadalupe House Finch. 

172. LOXIA CURVIROSTRA AMERICANA (WiLS.) COUES. 

American Crossbill. [318.] 

172«. LOXIA CURVIROSTRA MEXICANA (Strickl.) Baird. 
Mexican Crossbill. [318a.] 

173. LOXIA LEUCOPTERA Gm. 

White-winged Crossbill. [319.] 

174. LEUCOSTICTE GRISEINUCHA (Brandt) Baird. 

, Aleutian Rosy Finch. [323. ] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 177 

175. LEtJCOSTICTE TEPHROCOTIS Swains. 

Gray-crowned Rosy Finch. [322.] 

175a. LEUCOSTICTE TEPHROCOTIS LITTORALIS (Baird) Coues. 
Gray-headed Rosy Finch. 

176. LEUCOSTICTE ATRATA RiDGW. 

Black Rosy Finch. 

177. LEUCOSTICTE AUSTRALIA Allex. 

Brown-capped Rosy Finch. 

178. JEGIOTHUS CANESCENS GorLD. 

Mealy Redpoll. [321.] 

17Sa. ^GIOTHUS CANESCENS EXILIPES (CoUES) RiDGW. 
"White-rumped Redpoll. 

179. ^GIOTHUS LINARIA (LiXN.) Caban. 

Common Redpoll. [320.] 

179a. ^GIOTHUS LINARIA HOLBOLLI (Brehm) Ridgw. 
Greater Redpoll. 

180. ^GIOTHUS BRE^WSTERI EiDGW. 

Brewster's Linnet. 

181. ASTRAGALINUS TRISTIS (LiXN.) Cab. 

American Goldfinch. [313.] 

182. ASTRAGALINUS P3ALTRIA (Say) Coues. 

Green-backed Goldfinch. [314.] 

182 (t. ASTRAGALINUS PSALTRIA ARIZONA, CoUES. 
Arizona Goldfinch. [315.] 

182 b. ASTRAGALINUS PSALTRIA MEXICANUS (Sw.) COITES. 
Mexican Goldfinch. 

183. ASTRAGALINUS LA"WRENCEII (Cass.) Bp. 

Lawrence's Goldfinch. [316.] 

184. CHRYSOMITRIS NOTATA (Du Bus) Bp. 

Black-headed Goldfinch. [310.] 

185. CHRYSOMITRIS PINUS (WiLS.) Bp. 

Pine Goldfinch. [317.] 

186. PLECTROPHANES NIVALIS (LiNX.) Meyer. 

Snow Bunting. [325.] 

137. CENTROPHANES LAPPONICUS (LiNX.) Caban. 
Lapland Longspur. [326.] 

188. CENTROPHANES PICTUS (SwAixs.) Cabax. 

Smith's Longspur. [327. J 

189. CENTROPHANES ORNATUS (Towxs.) Cabax. 

Chestnut-collared Longspur. [328,329.] 
Pioc. Nat. Mus. 80 12 ^„^^ 94,188 O. 



178 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

190. RHYNCHOPHANES MACCOWNI (La-VVK.) Baird 

McCown's Longspun [330.] 

191. CENTRONYX BAIRDII (AvD.) Baird. 

Baird's Bunting. [331.] 

192. PASSERCULU3 PRINCEPS Maynard. 

Ipswich Sparro'w. 

193. PASSERCULUS SANDWICHENSIS (Gmbl.) Baird. 

Sandwich Sound Sparrow, [333.] ' 

193 a. PASSERCULUS SANDWICHENSIS SAVANNA (WiLS.) ElDGW. 
Savannah Sparrow. [332.] 

193 &. PASSERCULUS SANDWICHENSIS ALAUDINUS (Bp.) RiDGW 
Western Savannah Sparrow. [335.] 

194. PASSERCULUS ANTHINUS Bonap. 

Titlark Sparrow. [334.] 

19.5. PASSERCULUS GUTTA^TUS Lawr. 
Saint Lucas Sparrow^. 

196. PASSERCULUS ROSTRATUS (Cass.) Baird. 

Large-billed Sparrow. [336.] 

197. POCECETES GRAMINEU3 (Gm.) Baird. 

Grass Pinch. [337.] 

197a. POCECETES GRAMINEUS CONFINIS Baird. 
Western Grass Finch. 

193. COTURNICULUS PASSERINUS (WiLS.) Bp. 
YeUow- winged Span-ow. [33S.] 

193 «. COTURNICULUS PASSERINUS PERPALLIDUS RiDGW. 
Western Yellow-winged Sparrow 

199. COTURNICULUS HEN3LOWI (AuD.) Bp. 

Henslow's Sparrov/. [339.] 

200. COTURNICULUS LECONTEI (AuD.) Bp. 

Leconte's Sparrow. [340.] 

201. AMMODROMUS CAUDACUTUS (Gm.) Swains. 

Sharp-tailed Finch. [341.] 

201 «. AMMODROMUS CAUDACUTUS NELSONI Allen. 
Nelson's Sharp-tailed Finch. 

20-2. AMMODROMUS MARITIMUS (WiLS.) SwAUS'S. 
Sea-side Pinch. [342.] 

203. AMMODROMUS NIGRESCENS Ridgw. • 

Black-and-white Sea-side Finch. 

204. CH0NDE3TES GRAMMICA (Say) Bp. 

Lark Finch. [344.] 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 179 

204 a. CHONDESTES GRAMMICA STRIGATA (Sw.) Ridgw. 
Western Lark Finch. 

205. ZONOTRICHIA QUERULA (Nutt.) Game. 

Harris's SparroTW. [34S.] 

206. ZONOTRICHIA LEUCOPHRYS (Forst.) Swains. 

"White-crowned Sparrow. [345.] 

207. ZONOTRICHIA GAMBELI (Nutt.) Game. 

Gambel's White-crowned Sparrow. 

207a. ZONOTRICHIA GAMBELI INTERMEDIA RiDGW. 

Intermediate White-crowned Sparrow. [346.] 

203. ZONOTRICHIA COROITATA (Pall.) Baird. 
Golden-crowned Sparrow. [347.] 

209. ZONOTRICHIA ALBICOLLIS (Gm.) Bp. 

White-throated Sparrow. [349.] 

210. SPIZELLA MONTANA »; Forst.*) Eidgw. 

Tree Sparrow. [357.] 

211. SPIZELLA DOMBSTICA (Bartr.) Coues. 

Chipping Sparrow. [3-59.] 

211a. SPIZELLA DOMESTICA ARIZONA (CoUES) ElDGW. 
Western Chipping Sparrow. 

212. SPIZELLA PALLIDA (Sw.) Bp. 

Clay-colored Sparrow. [360.] 

213. SPIZELLA BREWERI Cass. 

Brewer's Sparrow. [361.] 

214. SPIZELLA PUSILLA (WiLS.) Bp. 

Field Sparrow. [358.] 

215. SPIZELLA ATROGULARIS (Cabax.) Bd. 

Black-chinned Sparrow. [362.] 

216. JUNCO AIKENI EiDGW. 

White-winged Snowbird. 

217. JUNCO HYEMALIS (Lixx.) SCL. 

Black Snowbird. [354.] 

218. JUNCO OREGONUS (Towns.) Scl. 

Oregon Snowbird. [352.] 

219. JUNCO ANNECTENS Baird. 

Pink-sided Snowbird. 

220. JUNCO CANICEPS (Woodh.) Baird. 

Gray -headed Snowbird. [353.] 

221. JUNCO DORSALIS Hexry. 

Red-backed Snowbird. [351.] 



180 PEOCEEDTXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

222. JUNCO CINEREUS (Swains.) Caban. 

Mexican Snowbird. [350.] 

223. JUNCO INSULARIS Ridgw. 

Guadalupe Sno"wbird. 

224. AMPHISPIZA BILINEATA (Cass.) Cohes. 

Black-throated Sparrow. [355.] 

225. AMPHISPIZA BELLII (Cass.) Coues. 

Bell's Sparrow. [356.] 

225 o. AMPHISPIZA BELLII NEVADBNSIS RiDGW. 
Sagebrush Sparrow. 

226. PEUCiBA iESTIVALIS (Light.) Cabax. 

Bachman's Finch. [370.] 

226 0. PEUCiEA iESTIVALIS ILLINOENSIS EiDGW. 
Oak-woods Sparrow. 

227. PEUCiEA ARIZON-5! Ridgw. 

Arizona Sparrow, 

228. PEUC2BA CASSINI (Woodh.) Bated. 

Cassin's Sparrow. [371.] 

229. PEUC-aiA CARPALIS Coues. 

Rufous-winged Sparrow. 

230. PEUCiEA RUFICEPS (Cass.) Baird. 

Rufous-crowned Sparrow. [372.] 

230«. PEUCiEA RUriCEPS BOUCARDI (ScL.) B.B.&R. 
Boucard's Sparrow. 

231. . MELOSPIZA FASCIATA (FoRST.) Scott. 

Song Sparrow. [363.] 

231 «. MELOSPIZA FASCIATA FALLAX Baird. 
Mountain Song Sparrow. [367.] 

231 h. MELOSPIZA FASCIATA HEERMANNI Baird. 
Heermann's Song Sparrow. [364.] 

231c. MELOSPIZA FASCIATA SAMUELIS Baird. 

Californian Song Sparrow. [343,365.] 

231 f?. MELOSPIZA FASCIATA GUTTATA (NUTT.) Baird. 
Rusty Song Sparrow. [366.] 

231 (. MELOSPIZA FASCIATA RUFINA (Brandt) Baird. 
Sooty Song Sparrow. 

232. MELOSPIZA CINEREA (Gm.) Ridgw. 

Aleutian Song Sparrow. 

233. MELOSPIZA PALUSTRIS (WiLS.) Baird. 

Swamp Sparrow. [369.] 



PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 181 

234. MELOSPIZA LINCOLNI (AuD.) Baird. 

Lincoln's Finch. [363.] 

235. PASSERELLA ILIAC A (Merrem) Sw. 

Fox-colored Sparrow. [374.] 

235 fl. PASSERELLA ILIACA UNALASHKENSIS (Gm.) Ridgw. 
Townsend's Sparro"w. [375.] 

235 &. PASSERELLA ILIACA MEGARHYNCHA (Baird) Ridgw. 
Thick-billed Sparrow. [376«.] 

235 c. PASSERELLA ILIACA SCHISTACEA (Baird) Allen. 
Slate-colored Sparrow. [376.] 

236. EMBERNAGRA RUFIVIRGATA Lawr. 

Texas Sparrow. [373.] 

237. PIPILO ERYTHROPHTHALMUS (LiXN.) ViEiLL. 

Chewink; Towhee, [391.] 

237 «. PIPILO ERYTHROPHTHALMUS ALLENI COUES. 
Florida Towhee. 

238. PIPILO MACULATUS ARCTICUS (Swains.) Coues. 

Northern Towhee. [393.] 

238o. PIPILO MACULATUS MEGALONYX (Baird) Coues. 
Spurred Towhee. [394.] 

238 b. PIPILO MACULATUS OREGONUS (Bell) Coues. 
Oregon Towhee. [392,] 

238 0. PIPILO MACULATUS CONSOBRINUS RiDGW. 
Guadalupe Towhee. 

233(7. PIPILO MACULATUS CARMANI Baird. 
Socorro Towhee. 

239. PIPILO CHLORURUS (Towxs.) Baird. 

Green-tailed Towhee. [398.] 

240. PIPILO PUSCUS MESOLBUCUS (Baird) Ridgw. 

Caiion Towhee. [397.] 

240a. PIPILO FUSCUS ALBIGULA (Baird) Coues. 
Saint Lucas Brown Towhee. 

240 &. PIPILO FUSCUS CRISSALIS (ViG.) CoUES. 

Califomian Brown Towhee. [396.] 

241 PIPILO ABERTI B.yird. 

Abert's Towhee. [395.] 

242. CARDINALIS VIRGINIANUS (Briss.) Bp. 
Cardinal Grosbeak. [390.] 

242a. CARDINALIS VIRGINIANUS IGNEUS (Baird) Coues. 
Saint Lucas Cardinal. 



182 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES. NATIONAL MrSEUM. 

243. PYRRHULOXIA SINUATA BOXAP. 

Tezan Cardinal. [389.] 

244. ZAMELODIA LUDOVICIANA (Lno,.) CouES. 

Rose-breasted Grosbeak. [3c0.] 

245. ZAMELODIA MELANOCEPHALA (SwAI^-s.) CoUES. 

Black-headed Grosbeak. [381.] 

246. GUIRACA CiERULEA (Lixx.)^,Swalxs. 

Blue Grosbeak. [382.] 

247. PASSERINA PARELLINA (Bp.) Kidgw. 

Blue Bunting. [383.] 

248. PASSERINA CYANEA (Lixx.) Gray. 

Indigo Bunting. [387.] 

249. PASSERINA AMCENA (Say) Gray. 

Lazuli Bunting. [386.] 

250. PASSERINA VERSICOLOR (Box.^.) Gray. 

Varied Bunting. [385.] 

251. PASSERINA CIRIS (Lixx.) Gray. 

Painted Bunting ; Nonpareil. [384.3 

252. SPERMOPHILA MORELETII Pucherax. 

Morelet's Seedeater. [388.] 

253. PHONIPARA ZBNA (Lixx.) Bryaxt. 

Black-faced Seedeater. 

254. SPIZA AMERICANA (Gm.) Boxap. 

Black-throated Bunting. [378.] 

255. SPIZA TOWNSENDI (AuD.) EiDGW. 

Townsend's Bunting. [379.] 

256. CALAMOSPIZA BICOLOR (Towxs.) Boxap. 

Lark Bimting. [377.] 

257. DOLICHONYX ORYZIVORUS (Lixx.) Swaixs. 

Bobolink. [399.] 

258. MOLOTHRUS ATER (Bodd.) Gray. 

Cowbird. [400.] 

258a. MOLOTHRUS ATER 0BSCURU3 (Gmel.) Coues. 
Dwarf Cowbird. 

259. MOLOTHRUS -SNEUS (Wagl.) Cabax. 

Bronzed Cowbird. 

260. XANTHOCEPHALUS ICTEROCEPHALUS (Boxap.) Bd. 

YeUow-headed Blackbird. [404.] 

261. AGEL.a]US PHOSNICEUS (Lixx.) Vieill. 

Red-and-buff-shouldered Blackbird.. [401.] 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 183 

261a. AGEL^US PHCENICEUS GUBERNATOR (Wagl.) Coues. 
Red-and-black-shouldered Blackbird. [402.] 

2G2. AGEL-SIUS TRICOLOR (Nutt.) Bp. 

Red-and-wliite-sliouldered Blackbird. [403.] 

263. STURNELLA MAGNA (Linx.) Swains. 

Meadow Lark. [40G.] 

263 a. STURNELLA MAGNA MEXICANA (SCL.) RiDGW. 
Mexican Meadow Lark. 

264. STURNELLA NEGLECTA AuD. 

Western Meadow Lark. [407.] 

265. ICTERUS VULGARIS Daud. 

Troupial. [406.] 

266. ICTERUS AUDUBONII Giraud. 

Audubou's Oriole. [409.] 

267. ICTERUS WAGLERI ScL. 

V/agler's Oriole. [412.] 

268. ICTERUS PARISORUM Boxap. 

Scott's Oriole. [411.] 

269. ICTERUS CUCULLATUS Swaixs. 

Hooded Oriole. [413.] 

270. ICTERUS SPURIUS (Lixx.) Bp. 

Orchard Oriole. [414.] 

271. ICTERUS GALBULA (Lixx.) CouES. 

Baltimore Oriole. [415.] 

272. ICTERUS BULLOCKI (Swaixs.) Bp. 

Bullock's Oriole. [416.] 

273. SCOLECOPHAGUS FERRUGINEUS (Gm.) Swaixs. 

Rusty Blackbird. [417.] 

274. SCOLECOPHAGUS CYANOCEPHALUS (Wagl.) Caba:^. 

Brewer's Blackbird. [418.] 

27.-. QUISCALUS MACRURUS Swaixs. 

Great-tailed Grackle. [419.] 

276. QUISCALUS PALUSTRIS Swaixs. 

Mexican Beat-tailed Grackle. 

277. QUISCALUS MAJOR Yieill. 

Boat-tailed Grackle. [420.] 

278. QUISCALUS PURPUREUS (Bartr.) Leicht. 

Purple Grackle. [421.] 

278fl. QUISCALUS PURPUREUS AGLiEUS (Baird) Coues. 
Florida Grackle. [422.] 



184 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM; 

278 &. QUISCALUS PURPUREUS iENEUS EiDGW. 
Bronzed Grackle. 

[279.] STURNUS VULGARIS Linn. 

European Starling. 

* 

280. CORVUS CORAX CARNIVORUS (Bartr.) Eidgw. 

American Raven. [423,424.] 

281. CORVUS CRYPTOLEUCUS Couch. 

White-necked Raven. [425.] 

262. CORVUS FRUGIVORUS Bartr. 

Common Crow. [426.] 

282 a. CORVUS FRUGIVORUS FLORID ANUS (Baird) RidgW. 
Florida Crow. [427.] 

282 &. CORVUS FRUGIVORUS CAURINUS (Baird) EidgW. 
Northwestern Fish Crow. [428.] ' 

283. CORVUS OSSIFRAGUS Wils. 

Fish Crow. [429.] 

284. PICICORVUS COLUMBIANUS (WiLS.) Bp. 

Clarke's Nutcracker. [430.] 

285. GYMNOCITTA CYANOCEPHALA M.ix. 

Maximilian's Nutcracker; Piuon Jay. [431.] 

286. PICA RUSTICA HUDSONICA (Scop.) Baird. 

Black-billed Magpie. [432.] 

287. PICA NUTTALLI Aud. 

Yellow-billed Magpie. [433.] 

288.. PSILORHINUS MOiilO (Wagl.) Gray. 
Brown Jay. [444.] 

289. CYANOCITTA CRISTATA (Linn.) Strickl. 

Blue Jay. [434.] 

290. CYANOCITTA STELLERI (Gm.) Caban. 

Steller's Jay. [435.] 

290a. CYANOCITTA STELLERI FRONTALIS Ridgw. 
Blue-fronted Jay. 

290 &. CYANOCITTA STELLERI ANNECTENS (Baird) Eidgw. 
Black-headed Jay. 

290 c. CYANOCITTA STELLERI MACROLOPHA (Baird) EidgW. 
Long-crested Jay. [436.] 

291. APHELOCOMA FLORIDANA (Bartr.) Caban. 

Florida Jay. [439.] 

292. APHELOCOMA WOODHOUSEI (Baird) Ridgw. 

Woodhouse's Jay. [438.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 185 

293. APHELOCOMA CALIFORNICA (ViG.) Cabax. 

California Jay. [437.] 

294. APHELOCOMA ULTRAMARINA COUCHII Baird. 

Couch's Jay. [441.] 

295. APHELOCOMA SORDIDA ARIZON-ffi RiDGW. 

Arizona Jay. [440.] 

296. XANTHURA LUXUOSA (Less.) Bp. 

Green Jay. [442.] 

297. PERISOREUS CANADENSIS (Lixx.) Bp. 

Canada Jay. [443.] 

297fl. PERISOREUS CANADENSIS CAPITALI3 Baird. 
■WMte-headed Jay. 

297 &. PERISOREUS CANADENSIS FUMIFRONS ElDGW. 
Smoky-fronted Jay. 

298. PERISOREUS OBSCURUS EiDGW. 

Oregon Jay. 

[299.] ALAUDA ARVENSIS Lixx. 
Sky Lark. 

300. EREMOPHILA ALPESTRI3 (FoRST.) BoiE. 

Shore Lark. [302.] 

300rt. EREMOPHILA ALPESTRIS LEUCOLiEMA COUES. 
White-throated Shore Lark. 

300 &. EREMOPHILA ALPESTRIS CHRYSOLiEMA (Wagl.) CoxJES. 
Mexican Shore Lark. 

301. MILVULUS FORPICATUS (Gm.) Swaixs: 

Scissor-tailed Flycatcher. [123.] 

[302.] MILVULUS TYR ANNUS (Lixx.) Bp. 

Fork-tailed Flycatcher. [122.] 

303. TYRANNUS DOMINICENSIS (Gm.) Reich. 

Gray Kingbird. [125.] 

304. TYRANNUS CAROLINENSIS (Lixx.) Temm. 

Kingbird; Bee Martin. [124.] 

305. TYRANNUS MELANCHOLICUS COUCHII Baird. 

Couch's Kingbird., [128,129.] 

306. TYRANNUS VERTICALIS Say. 

Western Kingbird. [126.] 

307. TYRANNUS VOCIFERANS SwAixs. 

Cassin's Kingbird. [127.] 

303. PITANGUS DERBIANUS (Kaup) Scl. 
Mexican Pitangus. 



186 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

309. MYIOZETETES TEXENSIS (Giraud) Scl. 

Giraud's riycatcher. 

310. MYIODINASTES LUTEIVENTRIS Bonap. 

Henshaw's Flycatcher. 

311. MYIARCHUS MEXICANT7S (Kaup) Lawr. 

Mesican Great Crested Flycatcher. [132.] 

312. MYIARCHUS CRINITUS (Lixx.) Caban. 

Great Crested Flycatcher. [130.] 

313. MYIARCHUS CINERASCENS Lawr. 

Ash-throated Flycatcher. [131.] 

314. MYIARCHUS LAWRBNCEI (Giraud) Baird. 

Lawrence's Flycatcher. [133.] 

315. SAYORNIS FUSCUS (Gmel.) Baird. 

Phoebe Bird ; Pewee. [135.] 

316. SAYORNIS SAYI (Boxap.) Baird. 

Say's Pewee. [136.] 

317. SAYORNIS NIGRICANS (S^YAIXS.) Bp. 

Black Pewee. [134.] 

318. CONTOPUS BOREALIS (Swaixs.) Baied. 

Olive-sided Flycatcher. [137.] 

319. CONTOPUS PERTINAX Cabax. 
, Coues's Flycatcher. 

320. CONTOPUS VIRENS (Lixx.) Cabax. 

Wood Pewee. [139.] 

321. CONTOPUS RICHARDSONII (Sw.) Baird. 

Western Wood Pewee. [138.] 

322. EMPIDONAX FLAVIVENTRIS Baird. 

Yellow-bellied Flycatcher. [144.] 

323. EMPIDONAX DIFFICILIS Baird. 

Western Yellow-bellied Flycatcher. [144a.] 

324. EMPIDONAX ACADICUS (Gmel.) Baird. 

Acadian Flycatcher. [143.] 

325. EMPIDONAX PUSILLUS (Swaixs.) Bd. 

Little Flycatcher.' [141.] 

325a. EMPIDONAX PUSILLUS TRAILLII (Aud.) Baird. 
Traill's Flycatcher. [140.] 

326. EMPIDONAX MINIMUS Baird. 

Least Flycatcher. [142.] 

327. EMPIDONAX HAMMONDI (Xaxtus) Bd. 

Hammond's Flycatcher. [145.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 187 

328. EMPIDONAX OBSCURUS (Swains.) Baird. 

Wright's Flycatcher. [146.] 

329. EMPIDONAX FULVIPRONS (Giraud) Scl. 

Fulvous Flycatcher. 

329a. EMPIDONAX FULVIFRONS PALLBSCENS COUES. 
Buff-breasted Flycatcher. 

330. PYROCEPHALUS RUBINEUS MBXICANUS (SCL.) COUES. 

Vermilion Flycatcher. [147.] 

331. ORNITHION IMBERBE (SCL.) CoUES. 

Small-billed Flycatcher. 

332. PACHYRHAMPHUS MAJOR (Boxap.) Scl. 

Thick-biUed Flycatcher. [121.] 

333. HADROSTOMUS AGLAIiE (Lafe.) Cab. 

Rose-throated Flycatcher. [120,] 

334. EUGENES FULGENS (Swaixs.) Gould. 

Refulgent Hummingbird. 

335. TROCHILUS COLUBRIS Lixx. 

Ruby-throated Hummingbird. [101.] 

336. TROCHILUS ALEXANDRI BouRC. & MuLS. 

Black-chinned Hummingbird. [102.] 

337. CALYPTE COSTiE (BouRC.) Gould. 

Costa's Hummingbird. [106 J 

338. CALYPTE ANNiE (Less.) Gould. 

Anna's Hummingbird. [105.] 

339. SELASPHORUS PLATYCERCUS (Swlixs. ) Bp. 

Broad-tailed Hummingbird. [104.] 

340. SELASPHORUS RUFUS (Gmel.) Aud. 

Rufous Hummingbird. [103.] 

341. SELASPHORUS ALLENI Hensh. 

Allen's Hummingbird. 

342. ATTHIS HELOISiE (Less.) Reich. 

Heloise's Hummingbird. 

343. STELLULA CALLIOPE Gould. 

Calliope Hummingbird. 

344. CALOTHORAX LUCIFER (Swaixs.) Gray. 

Lucifer Hummingbird. 

345. AMAZILIA FUSCICAUDATA (Eraser) RidGVT. 

Rieflfer's Hummingbird. 

346. AMAZILIA YUCATAN ENSIS (Cabot) Gould. 

Buff-bellied Hummingbird. 



188 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

347. BASILINNA XANTUSI (Lawe.) Elliot. 

Xantus's Hummingbird. 

348. lACHE LATIROSTRIS (Swains.) Elliot. 

Broad-biUed Hummingbird. 

349. CYPSELUS SAXATILIS Woodh. 

White-throated Swift. [107.] 

350. CYPSELOIDES NIGER BOREALIS (Kenxerly) RiDGW. 

Black Swift. [103.] 

351. CHiETURA PEL AGIO A (Lixx.) Baird. 

Cliimney Swift. [109.] 

352. CH^TURA VAUXII (Towxs.) De Kay. 

Vaux's Swift. [110.] 

353. ANTROSTOMUS CAR0LINENSI3 (Gm.) Gould. 

Chuck-w^ill's-widow. [111.] 

354. CAPRIMULGUS VOCIFERUS (WiLS.) Bp. 

Whip-poor-will. [112.] 

355. PHALJENOPTILUS NUTTALLI (Aud.) PaDGW. 

Poor-wiU. [113.] 

356. NYCTIDROMUS ALBICOLLIS (G?.i.) BuRH. 

Parauque Goatsucker. [116a.] 

357. CHORDEILES POPETUB (Yieill.) Bd. 

Nighthawk. [114.] 

357 rt. CHORDEILES POPETUE HENRYI (Cass.) Allen. 
Western Nighthawk. [115.] 

357 6. CHORDEILES POPETUE MINOR (Cabax.) RiDGW." 
Cuban Nighthawk. 

358. CHORDEILES ACUTIPENNIS TEXENSIS (Lawr.) RidgW. 

Texan Nighthawk. [116.] 

359. CAMPEPHILUS PRINCIPALIS (Lixx.) Gray. 

Ivory -billed Woodpecker. [72.] 

360. PICUS VILLOSUS Lixx. 

Hairy Woodpecker. [74.] 

360a. PICUS VILLOSUS LEUCOMELAS (Bodd.) Ridgw. 
Great White-backed Sapsucker. 

360 &. PICUS VILLOSUS HARRISI (Aud.) Allex. 
Harris's Woodpecker. [75.] 

361. PICUS PUBESCENS Linn. 

Downy Woodpecker. [76.] 

361a. PICUS PUBESCENS GAIRDNERI (AuD.) COUES. 
Gairdner's Woodpecker. [77.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 18^ 

362. PICUS QUERULUS Wils. 

Red-cockaded Woodpecker. [80.] 

363. PICUS SCALARIS Wagl. 

Tesan Sapsucker. [79. ) 

363 rt. PICUS SCALARIS LUCAS ANUS (Xant.) Ridgw. 
Saiut Lucas Sapsucker. 

364. PICUS NUTTALLI Game. 

Nuttall's Woodpecker. [78.] 

365. PICUS STRICKLANDI Malh. 

Strickland's Woodpecker. 

360. XENOPICUS ALBOLARVATUS (Cass.) Baird. 
White-headed Woodpecker. [81.] 

367. PICOIDES ARCTICUS (Swains.) Gray. 

Black-backed Three-toed Woodpecker. [82.] 

368. PICOIDES TRIDACTYLUS AMERICANUS (Brehm) RiDGW. 

Banded-backed Three-toed Woodpecker. [83.] 

368 «. PICOIDES TRIDACTYLUS DORSALIS (Baird) Ridgw. 

Striped-backed Three-toed Woodpecker. [64.] 

309. SPHYRAPICUS VARIUS (Lixx.) Baird. 

Yellow-bellied Woodpecker. [85.] 

369 «. SPHYRAPICUS VARIUS NUCHALIS Baird. 
Red-uaped Woodpecker. [66.] 

3691). SPHYRAPICUS VARIUS RUBER (Gm.) Ridgw. 
Red-breasted Woodpecker. [67.] 

370. SPHYRAPICUS THYROIDEU3 (Cass.) Baird. 

Black-breasted Woodpecker. [88,89.] 

371. HYLOTOMUS PILEATUS (Lixx.) Baird. 

Pileated Woodpecker; Logcock. [90.] 

372. CENTURUS CAROLINUS C^.) Bp. 

Red-bellied Woodpecker. [91.] 

373. CENTURUS AURIFRONS Wagl. 

Golden-fronted Woodpecker. [92.] 

374. CENTURUS UROPYGIALIS Baird. 

GUa Woodpecker. [93.] 

375. MELANERPES ERYTHROCEPHALUS (LiNN.) Sw. 

Red-headed Woodpecker. [94.] 

376. MELANERPES TORQUATUS (WiLS.) Bonap. 

Lewis's Woodpecker, [96.] 

377. MELANERPES FORMICIVORUS (Sw.) Bp. 

Califoinian Woodpecker. [95.] 



190 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

377 a. MELANERPES FORMICIVORUS ANGUSTIFRONS Baird. 
Narrow-fronted "Woodpecker. 

378. COLAPTES AURATUS (Lixx.) Sw. 

Yellow-shafted Flicker. [97.] 

378a. COLAPTES AURATUS HYBRIDUS (B.urd) Ridgw. 
"Hybrid " Flicker. [9S a.] 

378 &. COLAPTES AURATUS MEXICANUS (Sw.) RiDGW. 
Red-shafted Flicker. [98.] 

379. COLAPTES CHRYSOIDES (Malh.) Baird. 

Malherbe's Flicker. [99.] 

380. COLAPTES RUFIPILEUS Ridgw. 

Guadalupe Flicker. 

381. MOMOTUS CiERULEICEPS Gould. 

Blue-capped Motmot. [119.] 

382. CERYLE ALCYON (Lixx.) BoiE. 

Belted Kingfisher. [117.] 

333. CERYLE AMERICANA CABANISI (TsCHUDi) COUES. 
Texan Kingfisher. [118.] 

384. TROGON AMBIGUUS Govld. 

Coppery-tailed Trogon. [65.] 

385. GEOCOCCYX CALIFORNIANUS (Less.) Baird. 

Road-runner; Chaparral Cock. [68.] 

386. COCCYZUS S.ENICULUS (Lath.) Yieill. 

Mangrove Cuckoo. [71.] 

387. COCCYZUS AMERICANUS (LiXN.) Bp. 

Yellow-billed Cuckoo. [69.] 

388. COCCYZUS ERYTHROPHTHALMUS (WiLS.) Baird. 

Black-billed Cuckoo. [70.] 

389. CROTOPHAGA ANI LiXN. 

Savannah Blackbird. [66,67.] 

390. CROTOPHAGA SULCIROSTRIS Swaixs. 

Groove-billed Crotophaga. 

391. RHYNCHOPSITTA PACHYRHYNCHA (SWAIKS.) Bp. 

Thick-billed Parrot. [64,] 

392. CONURUS CAROLINENSIS (Lixx.) Kuhl. 

Carolina Parakeet. [63.] 

393. CONURUS HOLOCHLORUS BREVIPES Baird. 

Socorro Parakeet. 

394. ALUCO FLAMMEUS AMERICANUS (AUD.) RiDGW. 

American Barn Owl. [47.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 191 

395. ASIO AMERICANUS (Steph.) Sharpe. 

American Long-eared Owl. [51.] 

396. ASIO ACCIPITRINUS (Paxl.) Newtox. 

Short-eared Owl. [52.] 

397. STRIX NEBULOSA FORST. 

Barred Owl. [54.] 

397 a. STRIX NEBULOSA ALLENI RiDGW. 
Florida Baxred Owl. 

398. STRIX OCCIDENTALIS (Xaxt.) Ridgw. 

Spotted Owl. 

399. ULULA CINEREA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Great Gray Owl. [53. ] 

[399 fl.] ULULA CINEREA LAPPONICA (Retz.) Ridgw. 
Lapland Owl. 

400. NYCTALE TENGMALMI RICHARDSONI (Bp.) RiDGW. 

Richardson's Owl. [55.] 

401. NYCTALE ACADICA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Saw-w^liet Owl. [56,57,] 

402. SCOPS ASIO (LiNX.) Bp. 

Little Screech Owl. [49. j 

402a. SCOPS ASIO FLORIDANUS RiDGW. 
Florida Screech Ow^l. 

402 &. SCOPS ASIO MACCALLI (Cass.) Ridgw. 
Texan Screech Owl. [50.] 

402 r. SCOPS ASIO MAXWELLI-aS Eidgw. 

Rocky Mountain Screech Owl. 

402rf. SCOPS ASIO KENNICOTTII (Elliot) Ridgw. 
Northwestern Screech Owl. 

403. SCOPS TRICH0P3IS AVagl. 

Mexican Screech Owl. 

404. SCOPS FLAMMEOLUS (Light.) Scl. 

Flammulated Screech Owl. 

40.5. BUBO VIRGINIANUS (Gm.) Bp. 

Great Horned Owl. [48.] 

405 a. BUaO VIRGINIANUS SUBARCTICUS (HoY) RiDGW. 
"Western Horned Owl. 

405 6. BUBO VIRGINIANUS ARCTICUS (Swains.) Cass. 
Arctic Horned Owl. 

405c. BUBO VIRGINIANUS SATURATU3 RiDGW. 
Dusky Horned Owl. 



192 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

406. NYCTEA SCANDIACA Lixx. 

Suowy Owl. [Gl.] 

407. SURNIA FUNEREA (Lixx.) Rich & Sw. 

American Hawk Owl. [62.] 

[407a.] SURNIA FUNEREA ULULA (Lixx.) Ridgw. 
European Hawk Owl. 

408. SPEOTYTO CUNICULARIA HYPOG.S3A (Boxap.) Ridgw. 

Burrowing Owl. [58, 59. ] 

408 a. SPEOTYTO CUNICULARIA FLORID ANA Ridgw. 
Florida Burrowing Owl. 

409. GLAUCIDIUM GNOMA Wagl. 

California Pigmy Owl. [60.] 

410. GLAUCIDIUM PHAL^NOIDES (Daud.) Scl. & Salv. 

Ferruginous Pigmy Owl. 

411. MICR ATHENE WHITNEYI (Coopei:) Coues. 

Whitney's Pigmy Ow^l. 

412. HIEROFALCO GYRFALCO CANDICANS (Gm.) Eidgw. 

White Gyrfalcou. [11.] 

412a. HIEROFALCO GYRFALCO ISLANDUS (Gm.) Ridgw. 
Iceland Gyrfalcou. [12.] 

412 &. HIEROFALCO GYRFALCO SACER (FoRST.) Ridgw. 
McFarlane's Gyrfalcon. 

412c. HIEROFALCO GYRFALCO OBSOLETUS (Gm.) Ridgw. 
Labrador Gyrfalcon. 

41.3. ' HIEROFALCO MSXICANUS POLYAGRU3 (Cass.) Ridgw. 
Prairie Falcon. [10.] 

414. FALCO PEREGRINUS NiEVIUS (Gm.) Ridgw. 

American Peregrine Falcon ; Duck Haw^k. [5,6.] 

414 «. FALCO PEREGRINUS PEALEI Ridgw. 
Peale's Falcon. 

415. FALCO ALBIGULARIS Daud. 

Chestuut-thighed Falcon. [8.] 

[416.] iESALON REGULUS (Pall.) Blyth. 
European Merlin. 

417. iESALON COLUMBARIUS (Lixx.) Kaup. 

Pigeon Hawk. [7.] 

417a. iESALON COLUMBARIUS SUCKLEYI Ridgw. 
Black Merlin. 

418. iESALON RICHARDSONII Ridgw. 

EichardsouK Merlin. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 193 

419. RHYNCHOPALCO FUSCO-CiERULESCENS (Vieill.) ElDGW. 

Aplomado Falcon. ['.'.] 

420. TINNUNCULUS SPARVERIUS (Lixn.) Vieill. 

Sparrow Ha-wk. [13.] 

420 a. TINNUNCULUS SPARVERIUS ISABELLINUS (SWAIXS.) PtlDGW. 
Isabelline Sparrow Hawk. 

421. TINNUNCULUS SPARVERIOIDES (ViG.) Gray. 

Cuban Sparrow^ Haw^k. 

[422.] TINNUNCULUS ALAUDARIUS (Gm.) Gray. 
European Kestril. 

423. POLYBORUS CHERIWAY (Jacq.) Cabax. 

Caracara Eagle. [45.] 

424. POLYBORUS LUTOSUS Ridgw. 

Guadalupe Caracara. 

425. PANDION HALIAETUS CAROLINENSIS (Gm.) Eidgw. 

American Osprey; Fish Hawk. [44.] 

42G. ELANOIDES FORFICATUS (LiNX.) EiDGW. 
Swallow-tailed Kite. [34.] 

427. ELANUS GLAUCUS (Bai:tr.) Coues. 

White-tailed Kite. [35.] 

428. ICTINIA SUBCiERULEA (Bartr.) Coces. 

Mississippi Kite. [36.] 

429. ROSTRHAMUS SOCIABILIS PLUMBEUS ElDGW. 

Everglade Kite. [37.] 

430. CIRCUS HUDSONIUS (Lixx.) Vieill. 

Marsh Hawk. [38.] 

431. ACCIPITER COOPERI Boxap. 

Cooper's Hawk. [15,16.] 

432. ACCIPITER FUSCUS (Gmel.) Bp. 

Sharp-shinned Hawk. [17.] 

433. ASTUR ATRICAPILLUS (Wils.) Bp. 

American Goshawk. [14.] 

433a. ASTUR ATRICAPILLUS STRIATULUS ElDGW. 
"Western Goshawk. 

434. ANTENOR UNICINCTUS HARRISI (AuD.) EiDGW. 

Harris's Hawk. [46.] 

[4:;5.] BUTEO VULGARIS Leach. 

European Buzzard. 

436. BUTEO BOREALI3 (Gm.) Vieill. 

Red-tailed Hawk. [23.] 
Proc. Xat. Mils. 80 13 4„g.. 34^ 1 880. 



194 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

436a. BUTEO BOREALIS KRIDERI Hoopes. 
Krider's Hawk. 

436 5. BUTEO BOREALIS CALURUS (Cass.) RidgW. 
Western Red-taU. [20,24.] 

436 c. BUTEO BOREALIS LUC AS ANUS Ridgw, 
Saint Lucas Red-tail. 

436^. BUTEO BOREALIS SOCORROENSIS RiDGW. 
Socorro Red-tail. 

437. BUTEO COOPERI Cass. 

Cooper's Henhawk. [29.] 

438. BUTEO HARLANI Aud. 

Harlan's Hawk. [22.] 

439. BUTEO LINEATU3 (G.M.) Jard. 

Red-shouldered Hawk. [25.] 

439a. BUTEO LINEATU3 ELEGANS (Cass.) Ridgw. 
Red-bellied Hawk. [26.] 

440. BUTEO ABBREVIATUS Caban. 

Zone-tailed Hawk. 

441. BUTEO ALBICAUDATUS Vieill. 

"White -tailed Hawk. 

442. BUTEO SWAINSONI Bonap. 

Swainson's Hawk. [18, 19, 21, 28.] 

443. BUTEO PENNSYLVANICUS (WiLS.) Bp. 

Broad- winged Hawk. [27.] 

444.* URUBITINGA ANTHRACINA (Light.) Lafr. 
Mexican Black Haw^k. 

445. ASTURINA NITIDA PLAGIATA (Light.) Ridgw. 

Mexican Goshawk. [33.] 

446. ONYCHOTES GRUBERI Ridgw. 

Gruber's Hawk. 

447. ARCHIBUTSO LAGOPUS SANCTI-JOHANNIS (Gmel.) Ridgw. 

American Rough-legged Hawk. [30,31.] 

448. ARCHI BUTEO FERRUGINEUS (Light.) Gray. 

Ferruginous Rough -leg. [32.] 

449. AQUILA CHRYSAETUS CANADENSIS (LXx\N.) RiDGW. 

Golden Eagle. [39.] 

450. THRASAETUS HARPYIA (Linn.) Gray. 

Harpy Eagle. 

451. HALIiEETUS LEUCOCEPHALUS (LiNN.) SA\aG. 

Bald Eagle; Gray Eagle. [41,43.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 195 

452. HALIiEETUS ALBICILLA (LiNx.) Leach. 

Gray Sea Eagle. [4-2.] 

453. PSEUDOGRYPHUS CALIFORNIANUS (Shaw) Ridgw. 

Californian Condor. [2.] 

454. CATHARTES AURA (Lixx.) Illig. 

Turkey Buzzard. [1.] 

455. CATHARISTA ATRATA (WiLS.) Less. 

Black Vulture; Carrion Crow. [3.] 

456. COLUMBA FASCIATA Say. 

Band-tailed Pigeon. [443.] 

457. COLUMBA ERYTHRI2TA Light. 

Red-billed Pigeon. [44G.] 

453. COLUMBA LEUCOCEPHALA Linx. 

"White-crov7ued Pigeon. [447.] 

459. ECTOPISTES MIGHATOP.IA (Lixx.) Sw. 

Passenger Pigeon. [448.] 

460. ZENiEDURA CARCLINENSIS (Lixx.) Bp. 

Mourning Dove. [451.] 

461. ZENiEDURA GRAYSONI Baird. 

Socorro Dove. 

462. ZENiEDA AMABILIS Bp. 

Zenaida Dove. [449.] 

463. ENGYPTILA ALBIFRONS (Bp.) Coues. 

White-fronted Dove. 

464. MELOPELIA LEUCOPTERA (L.) Bp. 

White-winged Dove. [450.] 

465. CHAMiEPELIA PASSERINA (L.) Swains. 

Ground Dove. [453.] 

466. SCARDAFELLA INCA (Less.) Bp. 

Scaled Dove. [4.52.] 

467. GEOTRYGON MARTINICA (Gm.) Bp. 

Key West Dove. [454.] 

468. STARNCENAS CYANOCEPHALA (Lixx.) Bp. 

Blue-headed Dove. [455.] 

469. ORTALIS VBTULA MACCALLI (B.a.ird) RiDGW. 

Chachalaca; Texan Guan. [456.] 

470. MELEAGRIS GALLOP AVO Lixx. 

Mexican Turkey. [458.] 

470 a. MELEAGRIS GALLOP AVO AMERICANA (Bartr.) Coues. 
Wild Turkey, [457.] 



196 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

471. CANACE OBSCURA (Say) Bp. 

Dusky Grouse. [459.]' 

471a. CANACE OBSCURA FULIGINOSA RiDGW. 
Sooty Grouse. 

471b. CANACE OBSCURA RICHARDSONII (DoiTGL.) Baird. 
Richardson's Grouse. 

472. CANACE CANADENSIS (Linn.) Bp. 

Canada Grouse; Spruce Partridge. [460.] 

472a. CANACE CANADENSIS FRANKLINI (DOUGL.) Baird. 
Franklin's Grouse. [461.] 

473. BONASA UMBELLUS (Link.) Steph. 

Ruffed Grouse. [465.] 

473rt. BONASA UMBELLUS UMBELLOIDES (DoUGL.) Baird. 
Gray Ruffed Grouse. [4G5a.] 

473?). BONASA UMBELLUS SABINEI (DoUGL.) COUES. 
Oregon Ruffed Grouse. [466.] 

474. LAGOPUS ALBUS (Gm.) Aud. 

Willow Ptarmigan. [467,470.] 

475. LAGOPUS RUPESTRIS (Gm.) Leach. 

Rock Ptarmigan. [468.] 

476. LAGOPUS LEUCURUS Sw. 

"White-tailed Ptarmigan. [469.] 

477. CUPIDONIA CUPIDO (Linx.) Baird. 

Prairie Hen. [464.] 

477 «. CUPIDONIA CUPIDO PALLIDICINCTA RiDGW. 
Lesser Prairie Hen. 

478. PEDICECETES PHASIANELLUS (L.) Elliot. 

Northern Sharp-tailed Grouse. 

478a. PEDICECETES PHASIANELLUS COLUMBIANUS (Ord) CoUES. 
Common Sharp-tailed Grouse. [463.] 

479. CENTROCERCUS UROPHASIANUS (Bp. ) Swains. 

Sage Cock. [462.] 

480. ORTYX VIRGINIANA (L.) Bp. 

Bob-white; American Quail. [471,] 

480fl. ORTYX VIRGINIANA FLORIDANA CouES. 
Florida Quail. 

480 1. ORTYX VIRGINIANA TEX ANA (Lawr.) Coues. 
Texan Quail. [472.] 

481. OREORTYX PICTA (DouGL.) Baird. 

Mountain Quail. [473.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 197 

481a. OREORTYX PICTA PLUMIFERA (GouLD) RiDGW. 
Plumed Quail. 

482. LOPHORTYX CALIFORNICA (Shaw) Bp. 

Califoruian Quail. [474.] 

483. LOPHORTYX GAMBELI Nutt. 

Gambel's Quail. [475.] 

484. CALLIPEPLA SQUAMATA (ViG.) Gray. 

Scaled Quail. [476.] 

485. CYRTONYX MASSENA (Less.) Gould. 

Massena Quail. [477.] 

486. ARDEA OCCIDENTALI3 AuD. 

Great White Heron; Wiirdemann'a Heron. [488,489.] 

487. ARDEA HERODIAS Lixx. 

Great Blue Heron. [4t^7.] 

[488.] ARDEA CINEREA Linn. 

Common European Heron. 

489. HERODIAS ALBA EGRETTA (Gmel.) RiDGW. 

American Egret. [486, 486«.J 

490. GARZETTA CANDIDISSIMA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Snowy Heron. [4~'5.] 

491. DICHROMANASSA RUPA (Bodd.) Ridgw. 

Reddish Egret; Peale's Egret. [482,483.] 

492. HYDRANASSA TRICOLOR LUDOVICIANA (WiLS.) RiDGW. 

Louisiana Heron. [484.] 

493. FLORIDA CiERULEA (Linx.) Baied. 

Little Blue Heron. [490.] 

494. BUTORIDES VIRESCBNS (Lixx.) Bp. 

Green Heron. [493.] 

495. NYCTIARDEA GRISEA NSVIA (Bodd.) Axlen. 

Black-crowned Night Heron. [495.] 

496. NYCTHERODIUS VIOLACEUS (Linn.) Reich. 

White-crowned Night Heron. [496.] 

497. BOTAURUS LENTIGINOSUS (Montag.) Steph. 

American Bittern. [492.] 

498. ARDETTA EXILIS (Gmel.) Gray. 

Least Bittern. [491.] 

499. MYCTERIA AMERICANA Linn. 
• Jabiru. 

500. TANTALUS LOCULATOR LiXN. 

Wood Ibis. [497.] 



198 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

501. BUDOCIMUS ALBUS (Lixx.) Wagl. 

"White Ibis. [499.] 

502. EUDOCIMUS RUBER (Lixx.) Wagl. 

Scarlet Ibis. [49S.] 

503. PLEGADIS FALCINELLUS (Lixx.) Kaup. 

Glossy Ibis. [500.] 

504. PLEGADIS GUARAUNA (Lixx.) EiDGW, 

"White-faced Glossy Ibis. [500a.] 

505. AJAJA ROSEA (Briss.) Ridgw. 

Roseate Spoonbill. [501.] 

[506.] H.aiMATOPUS OSTRALBGUS Lixx. 
European Oystercatcher. 

507. H.5:MAT0PUS PALLIATUS Temm. 

American Oystercatcher. [512.] 

508. H.aiMATOPUS NIGER Paix. 

Black Oystercatcher. [513.] 

509. STREPSILAS INTERPRBS (Lixx.) Illig. 

Turnstone. [515.] 

510. STREPSILAS MELANOCEPHALA ViG. 

Black Turnstone. [516.] 

511. APHRIZA VIRGATA (Gmel.) Gray. 

Surf Bird. [511.] 

[512.] VANELLUS CRIST ATUS Meyer. 
Lapwing. 

513. SQUATAROLA HELVETICA (Lixx.) Cuv 
Black-bellied Plover. [510.) 

[514.] CHARADRIUS PLUVIALIS Lixx. 
Golden Plover. 

515. CHARADRIUS DOMINICUS Mull. 

American Golden Plover. [503.] 

[515a.] CHARADRIUS DOMINICUS FULVUS (Gmel.) KidgW. 
Pacific Golden Plover. 

516. OXYECHUS VOCIFERUS (Lixx.) Reich. 

KiUdeer. [504.] 

517. .ZEIGIALITIS SEMIPALMATA (BoxAP.) Caban. 

; Semipalmated Plover. [507.] 

518. iEGIALITIS HIATICULA (Lixx.) Boie. 

Ringed Plover. 

[519.] iEGIALITIS CURONICA (Gmel.) Gray. 
Little Ringed Plover. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUJI. 199 

520. ^GIAIiITIS MELODA (Ord) Bp. 

Piping Plover. [508.] 

520 rt. ^GIALITIS MELODA CIRCUMCINCTA EiDGTV. 
Belted Piping Plover. 

521. JEGIALITIS CANTIANA NIVOSA (Cass.) Eidgw. 

Snowy Plover. [509.] 

522. OCHTHODROMUS 'WILSONIUS (Ord) Eeich. 

Wilson's Plover. [506.] 

523. PODASOCYS MONTANA (Towxs.) COUES. 

Mountain. Plover. [505.] 

[524.] SCOLOPAX RUSTICULA LiXN. 
European Woodcock. 

525. PHILOHELA MINOR (Gmel.) Gray. 

American Woodcock. [522,] 

[526.] GALLINAGO MEDIA Leach. 
English Snipe. 

52G«. GALLINAGO MEDIA WILSONI (Te.mm.) ElDGW. 
Wilson's Snipe. [523.] 

527. MACRORHAMPHUS GRISEUS (Gmel.) Leach. 

Red-breasted Snipe; Gray Snipe. [524.] 

527 «. MACRORHAMPHUS GRISEUS SCOLOPACEUS (Say) Coues. 
Red-bellied Snipe; Greater Gray-back. [525,] 

528. MICROPALAMA HIMANTOPUS (Boxap.) Baird. 

Stilt Sandpiper. [536.] 

529. TRINGA CANUTUS Lixx. 

Knot; Robin Snipe. [526.] 

530. ARQUATELLA MARITIMA (Bruxx.) B.AUID. 

Purple Sandpiper. [528.] 

531. ARQUATELLA COUESII Eidgw. 

Aleutian Sandpiper. 

532. ARQUATELLA PTILOCNEMIS (CouES) EiDGW. 

Prybilov Sandpiper. 

[533.] ACTODROMAS ACUMINATA (HORSF.) EiDGW, 
Sharp-tailed Sandpiper. 

534, ACTODROMAS MACULATA (Vieill.) Coues, 

Pectoral Sandpiper. [531.] 

535. ACTODROMAS COOPERI (Baird) Coues. 

Cooper's Sandpiper, [527.] 

53C. ACTODROMAS FUSCICOLLIS (Vieill,) Eidgw 
Bonaparte's Sandpiper. [533.] 



200 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

537. ACTODROMAS BAIRDII COUES. 
Baird's Sandpiper. 

533. ACTODROMAS MINUTILLA O'ieill) Bp. 
Least Sandpiper. [532.] 

[539.] PELIDNA ALPINA (LiKN.) BoiE. 
European Dunlin. 

539a. PELIDNA ALPINA AMERICANA Cass. 
Red-backed Sandpiper. [530.] 

[540.] PELIDNA SUBARQUATA (GULD.) Cuv. 
Curlew Sandpiper. [529.] 

541. EREUNETES PUSILLUS (Lixx.) Cass. 

Semipalmated Sandpiper. [535.] 

541(7. EREUNETES PUSILLUS OCCIDENTALIS (LaWR.) C0UE3. 
"Western Sandpiper. 

542. CALIDRIS ARENARIA ^hiss.) ILUG. 

Sanderliug. [534.] 

543. LIMOSA FEDOA (Lixx.) Ord. 

Marbled Godwit. [547.] 

544. LIMOSA LAPPONICA NOViE-ZEALANDIiE GRAY. 

Pacific Godwit. 

545. LIMOSA HiEMASTICA (Lixx.) CouES. 

Hudsonian Godwit. [54S.] 

[546.] LIMOSA iEGOCEPHALA (Lix-x.) Leach. 
Black-tailed Godwit. 

[547.] TOTANUS GLOTTIS (Lixx.) Bechst. 
Green-shank. [53S.] 

548. TOTANUS MELANOLEUCUS (.Gmel.) Yieill. 

Greater Yellow-legs; Tell-tale. [539.] 

549. TOTANUS FLAVIPES (Gmel.) Yieill. 

Yellow-legs. [540. ] 

550. RHYACOPHILUS SOLITARIUS (WiLS.) Cass. 

Solitaiy Sandpiper. [541.] 

[551.] RHYACOPHILUS OCHROPUS (Lxxx.) Eidgw. 
Green Sandpiper. 

552. SYMPHEMIA SEMIPALMATA (Gmel.) Hartl. 

Wiliet. [537.] 

553. HETEROSCELUS INC ANUS (Gmel.) Coues. 

Wandering Tattler. [542.] 

[554.] MACHETES PUGNAX (Lixx.) Cuv. 
Ruff. [.544.] 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM: 201 

555. BARTRAMIA LONGICAUDA (Bechst.) Bp. 

Bartrani's Sandpiper; Field Plover. [545.] 

556. TRYNGITES RUFESCENS (Vieill.) Caban. 

Buff-breasted Sandpiper. [546.] 

557. TRINGOIDES MACULARIUS (LiNX.) Gray. 

Spotted Sandpiper. [543.] 

558. NUMENIUS LONGIROSTRIS WiLS. 

Long-billed Curlew. [549.] 

559. NUMENIUS HUDSONICUS Lath. 

Hudsonian Curlew. [550.] 

560. NUMENIUS BOREALIS (FoRST.) Lath. 

Eskimo Curlew. [551.] 
[.561.] NUMENIUS PH^OPUS (Lixx.) Lath. 
Whimbrel. 

[562.] NUMENIUS TAHITIENSIS (Gmel.) CaSS. 
Bristle-thighed Curlew. 

563. PHALAROPUS FULICARIUS (Lixx.) BP. 

Red Fhalarope. [521.] 

564. LOBIPES HYPERBOREUS (Lixx.) Cuv. 

Northern Phalarope. [520.] 

505. STEGANOPUS V/ILSONI (Sab.) Coues. 
"Wilson's Phalarope. [519.] 

566. RECURVIROSTRA AMERICANA Gmel. 

American Avocet. [517.] 

567. HIMANTOPUS MEXICANUS (MtJLL.) Ord. 

Black-necked Stilt. [518.] 

568. PARRA GYMNOSTOMA Wagl. 

Mexican Jacana. 

569. RALLUS ELEGANS AUD. 

Red-breasted Rail. [542.] 

570. RALLUS OBSOLETUS PaPGw. 

Californian Clapper Rail. 

571. RALLUS LONGIROSTRIS CREPITANS (Gmel.) RidgW. 

Clapper Rail. [.553.] 

571 rt. RALLUS LONGIROSTRIS SATURATUS Hexsh. 
Louisiana Clapper Rail. 

572. RALLUS VIRGINIANUS Lixx. 

Virginian Rail. [554.] 

[573.] PORZANA MARUETTA (Leach.) Bp. 
Spotted Crake. 



202 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

574. PORZANA CAROLINA (LixN.) Baird. 

I Sora Rail. [555.] 

575. PORZANA NOVEBORACBNSIS (Gmel.) Baiud. 

Little Yellow Rail [557.] 

576. PORZANA JAMAICENSIS (<Jmel.) Baikd. 

Little Black Rail. [556.] 

57Ga. PORZANA JAMAICENSIS COTURNICULUS Baird. 

Farallone Rail. 

It 

[577.] CREX PRATENSIS Bechst. 

Corn Crake. [5oS.] 

578. lONORNIS MARTINICA (Linn.) Reich. 

Purple Gallinule. [561.] 

579. GALLINULA GALE ATA (Light.) Bp. 

Florida Gallinule. [5G0.] 

580. PULICA AMERICANA Gmel. 

American Coot. [559.] 

581. ARAMUS PICTUS (Bartr.) Coues. 

The Limpkin. [481,] 

582. GRUS AMERICANA (Linn.) Temii. 

"Whooping Creme. [478.] 

583. GRUS CANADENSIS (Linn.) Temm, 

SandhiU Crane. [479.] 

584. GRUS FRATERCULUS Cass. 

Little Crane. [4S0.] 

585. PHCBNIOOPTERUS RUBER Linn. 

American Flamingo. [50r2.] 

[586,] OLOR CYGNUS (Linn.) Bp, 
European Swan. 

[587.] OLOR MINOR (Pall.) Bp. 

Bewick's Swan. 

588. OLOR AMERICANUS (Sharpless) Bp. 

Whistling Swan, [561 «.] 

589. OLOR BUCCINATOR (Rich.) Wagl. 

Trumpeter Swan. [562.] 

590. CHEN CaiRULESCENS (Linn.) Ridgw. 

Blu3-winged Gcose. [564.] 

591. CHEN HYPERBOREUS (Pall.) Boie. 

Snow Goose. [5G3.] 

591rt. CHEN HYPERBOREUS ALBATUS (Cass.) Kido. 
Lesser Snow Goose. [563rt,] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 203 

592. CHEN ROSSII (Baird) PvIDGW. 

Ross's Snow Goose. 

[593.] ANSER ALBIFRONS Gmel. 

European "White-fronted Goose. 

593 a. ANSER ALBIFRONS GAMBELI (Hartl.) Coues. 

American "White -fronted Goose. [565,566.] 

594. BERNICLA CANADENSIS (Linn.) Boie. 

Canada Goose. [567.] 

594a. BERNICLA CANADENSIS HUTCHINSI (Sw. & KiCH.) Woodh. 
Hutchins's Goose. [569.] 

5945. BERNICLA CANADENSIS LEUCOPARIA (Brandt) Cass. 
"White-clieeked Goose. [56S,] 

594 0. BERNICLA CANADENSIS OCCIDENTALIS (Baird) Dall & Ba2s'N. 

Larger "White-cheeked Gcose. [567 a.] 

595. BERNICLA BRENTA (Pall.) Steph. 

Brant. [570.] 

596. BERNICLA NIGRICANS (Lawr.) Cass. 

Black Brant. [.371.] 

[597.] BERNICLA LEUCOPSIS (Temm.) Boie. 
Barnacle Goose. [572.] 

598. PHILACTE CANAGICA (Sevast.) Bannist. 

Emperor Goose. [573.] 

599. DENDROCYGNA AUTUMNALIS (Linn.) Eyt. 

Black-bellied Tree Duck. [574.] 

600. DENDROCYGNA FULVA (Gmel.) Burm. 

Fulvous Tree Duck. [575.] 

601. ANAS BOSCAS Linn. 

Mallard. [576.] 

602. ANAS OBSCURA Gmel. 

Black Duck. [577.] 

603. ANAS FULVIGULA Eidgw. 

Florida Black Duck. 

604. CHAULELASMUS STREPERUS (Linn.) Gray. 

Gadwall. [584.] 

605. DAFILA ACUTA (Linn.) Bonap. 

Pintail. [573.] 

£60G.] MARECA PENELOPE (Linn.) Selby. 
"Widgeon. [556.] 

607. MARECA AMERICANA (Gmel.) Steph. 
Baldpate. [5c5.] 



204 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

608. SPATULA CLYPEATA (Lixx.) BoiE. 

Shoveller. [583.] 

609. QUERQUEDULA DISCORS (Linn.) Steph. 

Blue-wingsd Teal. [5S1.] 

610. QUERQUEDULA CYANOPTBRA (Vieill.) CaSS. 

Cinnamon Teal. [582.] 

i[611.] NETTION CRECCA (LiNX.) Kaup. 
English Teal. [580.] 

612. NETTION CAROLINENSIS (Gmel.) Baird. 

Green- winged Teal. [579.] 

613. AIX SPONSA (Lixx.) BoiE. 

Wood Duck; Summer Duck. [587.] 

■614. FULIX M ARIL A (Lixx.) Baird. 
Scaup Duck. [588.] 

615. FULIX AFFINIS (Eyt.) Baird. 

Little Blackhead. [589.] 

616. FULIX COLLARIS (Doxov.) Baird. 

Ring-bJlled Blackhead. [590.] 

617. AYTHYA VALLISNERIA (WiLS.) BOIE. 

Canvas-back. [592.] 

618. AYTHYA AMERICANA (Eyt.) Bp. 

Redhead. [591.] 

619. CLANGULA ISLANDICA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Barrow's Golden-eye. [594.] 

620. CLANGULA GLAUCIUM AMERICANA (Bp.) Ridgw. 

American Golden-eye. [593.] 

621. CLANGULA ALBEOLA (Lixx.) Steph. < 

Butterball; Bufilehead. [595.] 

622. HISTRIONICUS MINUTUS (Lixx.) Dresser. 

Harlequin Duck. [596.] 

623. HARELDA GLACIALIS (Lixx.) Leach. 

Long-tailed Duck; Old Squaw. [597.] 

624. CAMPTOL-fflMUS LABRADORIUS (Gmel.) Gray. 

Labrador Duck. [600.] 

625. POLYSTICTA STELLERI (Pall.) Braxdt. 

Steller's Duck. [598.] 

e26. LAMPRONETTA FISCHERI Braxdt. 
Fischer's Eider. [599.] 

627. SOMATERIA MOLLISSIMA (Lixx.) Boie. 
Common Eider. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 205 

627 a. SOMATERIA MOLL.ISSIMA DRESSERI (Sjiarpe) Coues. 
American Eider. [fiOG.] 

028. SOMATERIA V-NIGRA Gray. 

Pacific Eider. [607.] 

629. SOMATERIA SPECTABILIS (Lixx.) BoiE. 

King Eider. [bOS.] 

630. CEDEMIA AMERICAITA Sw. & Ricn. 

American Scoter. [604.] 
t 
[631.] MELANETTA FUSCA (Lixx.) BoiE. 

Velvet Scoter. 

632. MELANETTA VELVETINA (Cass.) Baird. 

American Velvet Scoter. [601.] 

633. PELIONETTA PERSPICILLATA (LiNX.) Kjlup. 

Surf Duck. [602.] 

634. ERISMATURA RUBIDA (Wils.) Bp. 

Ruddy Duck. [609.] 

CJ5. NOMONYX DOMINICUS (Lixx.) Ridgw. 
Black Masked Duck. [610.] 

636. MERGUS MERGANSER AMERICANUS (Cass.) RidgW. 

American Sheldrake. [611.] 

637. MERGUS SERRATOR Lixx. 

Red-breasted Sheldrake. [612.] 

638. LOPKODYTES CUCULLATUS (Lixx.] Reich. 

Hooded Sheldrake. [613.] 

639. TACHYPETES AQUILA (Lixx.) ViEiLL. 

Frigate Pelican. [619.] 

640. PELBCANUS ERYTHRORHYNCHUS G-MEL. 

American V7hite Pelican. [615.] 

641. PELECANUS FUSCUS Lixx. 

Brown Pelican. [616.] 

642. PHALACROCORAX CARBO (Lixx.] Bp. 

Common Cormorant. [620.] 

643. PHALACROCORAX DILOPHUS (Sw. «fe Rich.) Nutt. 

Double-crested Cormorant. [623.] 

643 «. PHALACROCORAX DILOPHUS FLORID ANUS (AUD.) RiVGvr. 
Florida Cormorant. [624. J 

643 Z*. PHALACROCORAX DILOPHUS CINCINNATUS (Braxdt) Ridgw. 
"White-crested Cormorant. [622.] 

644. PHALACROCORAX MEXICANUS (Braxt)t) Ridgw. 

Mexican Cormorant. [625.] 



206 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

645. PHALACROCORAX PENICILLATUS (Brandt) Heerm. 

Brandt's Cormorant. [626.] 

646. PHALACROCORAX VIOLACEUS (Gmel.) Eidgw. 

Violet-green Cormorant. [6'27.] 

€46(T. PHALACROCORAX VIOLACEUS RESPLENDENS (AUD.) ElDGW. 
Baird's Cormorant. 

647. PHALACROCORAX BICRI3TATUS Pall. 

Red-faced Cormorant. 

648. PHALACROCORAX PBRSPICILLATUS Pall. 

Pallas's Cormorant. [621.] 

649. PLOTUS ANHINGA Linn. 

American Anhinga; Snake Bird. [628.] 

650. SULA BASSANA (Linn.) Briss. " 

Gannet. [617.] 

651. SULA CYANOPS Sundev. 

Blue-faced Gannet. 

6.52. SULA LEUCOGASTRA (Bodd.) Salv. 
Booby Gannet. [618.] 

653. SULA PISCATOR (Linn.) Bp. 

Red-footed Booby. 

654. PHAETHON FLAVIROSTRIS Brandt. 

Yellow-billed Tropic Bird. [629.] 

655. PHAETHON iETHEREUS Linn. 

Red-billed Tropic Bird. 

656. . RHYNCHOPS NIGRA Linn. 

Black Skimmer. [697.] 

657. PAGOPHILA EBURNEA (Phipps) Kaup. 

Ivory Gull. [676,677.] 

658. RISSA TRIDACTYLA (Linn.) Bp. 

Kittiwake Gull. [672.] 

658a. RISSA TRIDACTYLA KOTZBUEI (Bp.) Coues. 
Pacific Kittiwake. 

659. RISSA BREVIROSTRIS Brandt. 

Red-legged Kittiwake. [674,675.] 

660. LARUS GLAUCUS BRtJNN. 

Glaucous Gull; Burgomaster. [656.] 

661. LARUS LEUCOPTERUS Faber. 

White-winged Gull. [658.] 

662. LARUS GLAUCESCENS Light. 

Glauoous-winged Gull. [657,659,] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 207 

GG3. LARUS MARINUS LI^-^^ 

Great Black-backed Gull. [GGO.] 

GG4. LARUS OCCIDEITTALIS AuD, 

"Western Giill. [002.) 

[G65.] LARUS AFPINIS Eeixh. 

Siberian Gull. , 

G66. LARUS ARGENTATUS Brunn. 
Herring Gull. 

66Qa. LARUS ARGENTATUS SMITHSONIANUS COUES. 
American Herring Gull. [661.] 

G67. LARUS CACHINNANS Pall. 

Pallas's Herring Gull. 

668. LARUS CALIFORNICUS Lawr. 

Califcrnian Gull. [653.] 

6G9. LARUS DELAWARENSIS Ord. 

Ring-billed Gull. [664.] 

670. LARUS BRACHYRHYNCHUS ElCH. 

Short-billed Gull. [ 664 a, 665, 673. ] 

[671.] LARUS CANUS Lixx. 
Mew Gull. 

672. LARUS HEERMANNI Cass. 

Heermann's Gull. [666.] 

673. LARUS ATRICILLA Lixx. 

Laughing Gull. [667.] 

674. LARUS FRANKLINI S\v. & Rich. 

Franklin's Gull. [663,669.] 

675. LARUS PHILADELPHIA (Ord) Gray. 

Bonaparte's Gull. [670.] 

C76. RHODOSTETHIA ROSEA (Macgill.) BruCH. 
Ross's Gull. [678.] 

677. XEMA SABINEI (J. Sabixe) Lkach. 

Sabine's Gull. [680.] 

678. CREAGHUS FURCATUS (Xeb.) Bp. 

Swallow-tailed GuU. [679.] 

G79. STERNA ANGLICA Moxtag. 

Gull-billed Tern. [681.] 

680. STERNA CASPIA Pall. 

Caspian Tern. [682.] 

€81. STERNA REGIA Gamb. 

Royal Teru. [683.] 



208 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

682. STERNA ELEGANS Gamb. 

Elegant Tern. [684.] ■ 

683. STERNA CANTIACA ACUFLAVIDA (Cabot) Eidgw. 

Cabot's Tern. [665. ] 

684. STERNA TRUDEAUI Ai D. 

Trudeau's Tern. [687.] 

685. STERNA FORSTERI Nrxx. 

For star's Tern. [691,686.] 

686. STERNA FLUVIATILIS Nalm. 

Common Tern. [689.] 

687. STERNA MACRURA Naum. 

Arctic Tern. [690,693.] 

688. STERNA DOUGALLI Montag. 

Roseate Tern. [69-J.] 

689. STERNA ALEUTICA Baird. 

Aleutian Tern. 

690. STERNA ANTILLARUM (Less.) Coues. 

Least Tern. [694.] 

691. STERNA FULIGINOSA Gmel. 

Sooty Tern. [688.] 

692. STERNA AN-SISTHETA Scop. 

Bridled Tern. 

693. HYDROCHBLIDON LARIFORMIS SURINAMENSIS(Gmel.)Ridgw. 

Black Tern. [695.] 

[694.*] HYDROCHBLIDON LEUCOPTERA (Weisn. & ScHlxz) BoiE. 
■White-winged Black Tern. 

695. ANOUS STOLIDUS Lixx. 

Noddy Tern. [(•9:".] 

696. MEGALESTRIS SKUA (Brunn. ) Ridgw. 

Skua Gull. [652 ] 

697. STERCORARIUS POP^IATORHINUS (Temm.) Vieill 

Pomarine Jaeger. ['^53.] 

698. STERCORARIUS PARASITICUS (Linn.) ScnJiFF. 

Richardson's Jaeger. [6.54.] 

699. STERCORARIUS BUFFONI (Boie) CuUes. 

Long-tailed Jaeger. [6." 5.] 

700. DIOMEDEA NIGRIPBS Aud. 

Biack-footed Albatross. 

701. DIOMEDEA BRACHYURA Temm. 

Short-tailed Albatross. [t)31.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 209 

[702.] DIOMEDEA CULMINATA Gould. 

Yellow-nosed Albatross. [632.] 

703. PHCEBETRIA FULIGINOSA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Sooty Albatross. [633.] 

704. OSSIFRAGA GIGANTEA(Gm.) Reich. 

Giant Fulmar. [634.] 

705. FULMARUS GLACIALIS (LiXN.) Steph. 

Fulmar Petrel. [635. ] 

705 o. FULMARUS GLACIALIS PACIFICUS (AuD.) Bp. 
Pacific Fulmar. [636. ] 

705 &. FULMARUS GLACIALIS RODGERSI (Cass.) Coues. 
Rodger's Fulmar. 

706. PRIOCELLA TENUIROSTRIS (Aud.)Ridgw. 

Slender-billed Fulmar. [637.] 

707. PRIOFINUS MELANURUS (Bonn.) Ridgw. • 

Black-tailed Shear-water. 

[708.] PUFFINUS KUHLII (BoiE) Bp. 

Cinereous Shearwater. [651.] 

709. PUFFINUS MAJOR Faber. 

Greater Shearwater. [647.] 

710. PUFFINUS CREATOPUS Cooper. 

Pink-footed Shearwater. 

[711.] PUFFINUS ANGLORUM Temm. 

Manx Shearw^ater. [649.] 

712. PUFFINUS AUDUBONII Finsch. 

Dusky Shearwater. [650.] 

713. PUFFINUS GA VIA (FORST.) FiNSCH. 

Black-vented Shearwater. 

714. PUFFINUS FULIGINOSUS Strickl. 

Sooty Shearwater. [648.] 

715. PUFFINUS GRISEUS (Gm.) Finsch. 

Dark-bodied Shearwater. 

716. PUFFINUS TENUIROSTRIS Temm. 

Slender-billed Shearwater. 

717. CBSTRELATA HiESITATA (Temm.) Coues. 

Black-capped Petrel. [638.] 

[718.] CQSTRELATA BULWERI (Jard. & Selby) Coues. 
Bulwer's Petrel. 

[719.] DAPTION CAPENSIS (Linn.) Steph. 

Pintado Petrel ; Cape Pigeon. [639.] 
Proc. Nat. Mu,3. 80 14 gept. 4, ft 8 80. 



210 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

720. HALOCYPTENA MICROSOMA COUES. 

Least Petrel. 

721. PROCBLLARIA PELAGICA LiNX. 

Stormy Petrel ; Mother Carey's Chicken. [645.] 

722. OCEANITES OCEANICA (Kuhl) Coues. 

"Wilson's Petrel. [644.] 

723. CYMOCHOREA LEUCORRHOA ^Vieill.) Coues. 

Leach's Petrel. [642.] 

724. CYMOCHOREA MELANIA (Bp.) Coues. 

Black Petrel. [643.] 

725. CYMOCHOREA HOMOCHROA Coues. 

Ashy Petrel. 

726. OCEANODROMA FURCATA (Gmel.) Bp. 

Fork-tailed Petrel. [640.] 

^27. OCEANODROMA HORNBYI (Gray) Bp. 
Hornby's Petrel. [641.] 

723. FREGETTA GRALL ARI A ( Vieill. ) Bp. 
White-bellied Petrel. [646.] 

729. iECHMOPHORUS OCCIDENTALIS (Lawk.) Coues. 

Western Grebe. [704.] 

730. iECHMOPHORUS CLARKII (Lawr.) CouES. 

Clark's Grebe. [705.] 

731. PODICEPS HOLBOLLI Eeinh. 

American Red-necked Grebe. [702,703a.] 

732. DYTES CORNUTUS (Gm.) Kaup. 

Horned Grebe. [706.] 

[733.] DYTES AURITUS (Lixx.) Ridgw. 
Eared Grebe. [70d.] 

733 «. DYTES AURITUS CALIFORNICUS (Lawr.) Ridgw. 
American Eared Grebe. [707.] 

734. TACHYBAPTES DOMINIGUS (Linn.) Coues. 

St. Domingo Grebe. [708 a.] 

735. PODILYMBUS PODICEPS (Linn.) Lawr. 

Thick-billed Grebe. [709.] 

7.36. ' COLYMBUS TORQUATUS Bruxn. 
Loon. [698.] 

737.' COLYMBUS ADAMSI Gray. 

Great White-billed Loon. 

738. COLYMBUS ARCTICUS Linn. 

Black-throated Diver. [699.] 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 211 

739. COLYMBUS PACIFICUS Lawr. 

Pacific Diver. [700.] 

740. COLYMBUS SEPTENTRIONALIS Linn. 

Red-throated Diver. [701.] 

741. ALCA IMPENNIS Lixn. 

Great Auk. [710.] 

742. UTAMANIA TORDA (Linn.) Leach. 

Razor-billed Auk. [711.] 

743. FRATERCULA ARCTIC A (Linn.) Steph. 

Common Puffin. [71.5,716.] 

743 a. FRATERCULA ARCTIC A GLACIALIS (Leach) Eidgw. 
Large-billed Puffin. [714.] 

744. FRATERCULA CORNICULATA (Naum.) Gray. 

Horned Puffin. [713.] 

745. LUNDA CIRRHATA Pall. 

Tufted Puffin. [712.] 

74G. CERATORHINA MONO CER ATA (Pall.) Cass. 
Horn-billed Puffin. [717, 718. ] 

747. PHALERIS PSITTACULA (Pall.) Temm. 

Parrot Aiik. [725. ] 

748. SIMORHYNCHUS CRISTATELLUS (Pall.) Merrem. 

Crested Auk. [719, 720. ] 

749. SIMORHYNCHUS PYGMiEUS (Gmel.) Eidgw. 

Whiskered Auk. [ 721 . ] 

750. CICERONIA PUSILLA (Pall.) Eidgw. 

Least Auk. [722,723.] 

751. PTYCORHAMPHUS ALEUTICUS (Pall.) Brandt. 

Caasin'sAuk. [724.] 

752. ALLE NIGRICANS Link. 

Sea Dove ; Dovekie. [738. ] 

753. SYNTHLIBORHAMPHUS ANTIQUUS (Gm.) Coues. 

Black-throated Guillemot. [736.] 

754. SYNTHLIBORHAMPHUS WURMIZUSUME (Temm.) Coues. 

Temminoks Guillemot. [737.] 

755. BRACHYRAMPHUS MARMORATUS (Gm.) Brandt. 

Marbled Guillemot. [732, 733. ] 

756. BRACHYRHAMPHUS KITTLITZI Bkandt. 

Kittlitz's Guillemot. [735.] 

757. BRACHYRHAMPHUS HYPOLEUCUS Xantus. 

Xautus's Guillemot. 



212 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

758. BRACHYRHAMPHUS CRAVERI (Salvad.) Coues. 

Graver's Guillemot. 

759. BRACHYRHAMPHUS BRACHYPTERUS Brandt. 

Short--winged Guillemot. [734.] 

760. URIA GRYLLE (Linn.) Brlnn. 

Black Guillemot. [726.] 

761. URIA COLUMBA (Pall.) Cass. 

Pigeon Guillemot. [727.] 

762. URIA CARBO (Pall.) Gray. 

Sooty Guillemot. [728.] 

763. LOMVIA TROILE (Linn.) Brandt. 

Common Guillemot. [729,730.] 

763ft. LOMVIA TROILE CALIPORNICA (Bryant) Coues. 
California Guillemot. 

764. LOMVIA ARRA (Pall.) Bp. 

Thick-billed Guillemot. I 

764 «. LOMVIA ARRA BRUNNICHI (Sch.) EiDGW. 
Brunnich's Guillemot. [731.] 



APPENDIX. 



The following tables are intended as a condensed analysis of the changes which 
have taken place in North American ornithology since 1859, with other items of interest 
in the same connection. 

a. Species eliminated from the catalogue of 1859. 
Catalogue No. 

4. Cathartes BURRO viANUS, Cassin Not North American f 

6. Falco nigriceps, Cassin = No. 414. 
16. AcciPiTER MEXICANUS, Swains. = No. 431. 
19. BUTEO BAiRDii, Hoy = No. 442, young. 
21. BuTEO INSIGNATUS, Cassin = No. 442, melanistic. 
24. BuTEO MONTANUS, Nuttall = No. 4366, lighter phase. 
28. BUTEO OXYPTERUS, Cassin^No. 442, young. 
30. Archibuteo LAGOPUS, Gray = No. 447, light phase. 

40. Hai>iaetus pelagicus, Siebold. Not North Atnerican. 

41. Haliaetus washingtonii, Jard. = No. 451, young female. 
56. Nyctaxe albifrons, Cassin = No. 401, young. 

59. Athene cuniculajua, Bon. The true cunicularia is a South American form.* 

66. Crotophaga rugirostris, Sw. =• No. 389. 

73. Campephilus imperialis, Gray. Not North American. 

88. Sphyropicus williamsonii, Baird = No. 370, adult male. 

100. Lampornis mango. Swains. Not North American. [ =i. violicauda (Bodd.) Ell.] 
129. Tyrannus melancholicus, Vieill. Not North American. 
167a. Var. Mniotilta longirostris, Baird. t 
171. Geothlypis A'elatus, Cab. Not North American. 
215. Myiodioctes bonapartei, And. =No. 127, young. 

239. CoLLYRio ELEGANS, Baird. An Asiatic si^ecies {Lanius lahtora, Sykes.). 
242. ViREO viRESCENS, Vieill. = No. 135? 

253a. Var. Mimus caudatus, Baird. Not separable ixom. poly glottus. 
259a. Harporhynchus vetula, Baird = No. 15. 

261a. Harporiiynchus longicauda, Baird. Scarcely separable from rufus. 
272. Troglodytes americanus, And. ==: No. 63. * 

289a. Var. Parus albescens, Baird = No. 41a. 
309. C ARPODACUS HAEMORRHOUS, Wagl. Not North American ? 

311. CiiRYSOMiTRLS STANLEYi, Bonaj). Not North American. [=C. barbata (Mol.).] 

312. Chrysomitris yarrelli, Bonap. JVot North American. 

324. Leucosticte arctous, Bonap. No sufficient evidence of occiureuce in North 

America. 
329. Plectropiianes melanomus, Baird = No. 189. 
365. Melospiza gouldii, Baird = No. 231c. 
405. Trupialis militaris, Bonap. Not North American. 

'" There appears to be but a single race inhabiting North America. 

fWhile there is undoubtedly a very appreciable diflerence between specimens of M. raria from the 
"West Indies and those from the interior of Eastern North America in the length of the bill, it is the 
small-billed form which should receive a new name, since Linnaeus's name varia was based upon the 
bird of the South Atlantic States and West Indies. If to be regarded as separable, the name borealis, 
Nutt., may be applied to the western birds. 

213 



214 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

424. CORVUS CACALOTL, Wagl. = No. 280. 

470. Lagopus americanus, Aud. = No. 475. 

482. Demiegretta pealii, Baird = No. 491, white phase. 

486a. Herodias egretta V. californica = No. 489. 

488. Ardea wurdemannii, Baird = No. 486, colored phase. 

494. BuTORiDES BRUNNESCEXS, Baird. Not North American. 

514. Haematopus ater, Viellot. Not North American. 

566. Anser frontalis, Baird =: No. 593a, young. 

603. Pelioxetta trowbridgii, Baird = No. 633. 

605. OiDEMiA bimaculata, Baird = No. 632, young. 

630. DiOMEDEA EXULANS, Liiin. Not North American. 

659. Larus chalcopterus, Lawr. = No. 662. 

665. Larus suckleyi, Lawr. = No. 670, young. 

669. Chroicocephalus cucullatus, Br. =No. 674, young, second year. 

671. Chroicocephalus minutus, Brucli. Not North American. 

673. RissA SEPTENTRiONALis, Lawr. = No. 670, adult. 

675. RisSA NiVEA, Bruch = No. 659. 

677. Pagophila brachytarsi, Holb. = No. 657. 

686. Sterna haa'elli. And. ^No. 685, winter plumage. 

693. Sterna pikei, Lawr. =No. 687, young. 

703. PoDiCEPS cristatus, Latli. Not North American? 

703a. PomcEPS cooperi, Lawr. =No. 731, young. 

716. Sagmatorhina labradoria, Cas. = No. 745, young. 

718. Cerorhlna SUCKLE^^, Cassiii = No. 746, young. 

720. Phaleris tetracula, Stephens = No. 748, winter dress. 

722. Phaleris microceros, Brandt = No. 750, summer dress. 

730. Uria ringvia, Briinnicli = No. 763, individual phase. 

733. Brachyrhajiphus wrangelii, Br. = No. 755, ivinter dress. 

Seven of the above are included in Coues's "Check List of North American Birds" (1873), 
viz, numbers 88, 100, 309, 488, 563«, 603, 693, and 703; the equivalent numbers of the "Check 
List" being, respectively, 305. 274, 141a, 450, 480a, 518a, 568, and 609— some of them bearing 
a different name from that given in the Smithsonian catalogue. Besides the foregoing, there 
are given in the "Check List" the following untenable names: 

146a.' jEgiothus linaria (L.) Cab. rar. euscescens, Cs. =No. 179, midsummer dress. 

157bis. Centronyx ochrocephalus, Aiken = No. 191, autumnal plumage. 

[187.] Passer DOMESTicus, Linn. An introduced species. 

215a. Icterus spurius (L.) Bp. var. aefinis, Lawr. Not separable from /. spurius. 

[283.] Agyrtria linnjei (Bp.) . Not North American. [= J. tohaci (Gm.) Ell.] 

374a. CHAiLEPELiA PASSERiNA (L.) Sw. var. PALLESCENS, (Bd.) Cs. Untenable race. 

A\bter [appendix]. Ibis thalassinus, Ridg. =No. 504, young. 

b. Species and races described or added to the North American fauna since 1859.* 

6. Tardus iliacus, 'Linn. — Cf. Reinhardt, Ibis, 1861, 6. (Greenland; two examples.) 
7a. Merula migratoria propinqua, Ridgw. — Turdus migratorious pn-opifiquas. Bull. 

Nutt. Orn. Club, ii. Jan. 1877, 9. (Western U. S.) 
8. Merula confinis, Baird.— Turdus confinis. Review Am. B. i. 18S4, 29. (T<idos 

Santos, Cape St. Lucas.) 
14. Harporhynchus cinereus, Xantus.— Proc. Philad. Acad. 1859, 298. (Cape St. 

Lucas. ) 
14a. Harporhynchus cinereus bendirei, Coues. — Am. Nat. vii. June, 1873, 330, 
fig. 69. (Tucson, Arizona ; C. Beudire.) 



* The new forms are in smaU capitals, the other additions in italics. In order to reduce the number 
of references to a minimum, only the original description, or the fli'st North American record of a 
species is given. In some cases we have not been able to quote the first reference, but have done so 
•\yhenever practicable. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 215 

Catalogue No. 
15a. Harporiiynchus curvirostris palmeri, Ridgvf.—H. curvirostrie, var. palmeri 

Ridgw. in Coues's Key, 1872, 351. (Arizona.) 
18. Harporhyxchus graysoni, Baird. — Cf. Lawr. Auu. Lye. N. Y. x. Feb. 1871, — . 

(Socorro I.) 
20. Cyanecula suecica (Liuu.) Brehm.— C/. Adams, Ibis, 1878, 422. (St. Michael's, 

Alaska; seven examples.) 
31. Regulus obscurus, Ridgw.— i?. calendula ohscurus, Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. 

Surv. Terr. ii. No. 2, Apr. 1, 1876, 184. (Guadalupe I., Lower California.) 
33a. Regulus satrapa olivaceus, Baird.— ^. satrapa, var. oUvaceus, Baird, Review 

Am. Birds, i. July, 1884, (55 (in text). (Western United States.) 
34. Phylloscopus borealis (Bias.) BrviSS.—PhyUoimeiiste lenukotti, Baird, Trans. Chi- 
cago Acad. i. 1869, 313, pi. 30, fig. 2. (St. Michael's, Alaska.) 
44. Partis cinctits, Bodd. — P. sibiricus (Gm.) Ridgw. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, ii. Jan. 

1878,37. (St. Michael's, Alaska; L.M.Turner.) 
46a. Parus rufescens neglectus, Ridgw.— P. ru/escens, j3, neghctus, Proc. U. S. 

Nat. Mus. i. Apr. 25, 1879, 485. (Coast California.) 
57. Campyloriiynchus affinis, Xantus.— Proc. Philad. Acad. 1859, 298. (Cape 

St. Lucas.)- 
58a. Sajlpinctes obsoletus guadalupensis, Ridgw.— Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. 

Surv. Terr. ii. No. 2, Apr. 1, 1876, 185. (Guadalupe I., Lower California.) 
59a. Catherpes mexicaxus coxspersus, Ridgw. — C. mexicanus, var conspersus, 

Ridgw. Am. Nat. Oct. 1873, 602. (Middle Province of U. S.) 
60&. Thryothorus ludoviciaxus miamexsis, Ridgw. — T. hulovicianus (Lath.) var. 

miamcnsis, Am. Nat. ix. Aug. 1875, 469. (Miami River, E. Florida.) 
61a. Thryomaxes bewicki spilurus (Vig.) Baird. — Review Am. Birds, i. 1864, 

126. (Pacific slope of United States.) 
61&. Thryomaxes bewicki leucogaster, Baird. — Review Am. B. i. 1864, 127. 

(Southern border of U. S.) 
62. Thryomaxes brevicauda, Ridgw.— Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. Terr. ii. 

No. 2, Apr. 1, 1876, 186. (Guadalupe I., Lower California.) 
64. Troglodytes ixsularis, Baird.— Cf. Lawr. Ann. Lye. N. Y. x. Feb. 1871, 3, 

(Socorro I.) 
65a. AxORTHURA troglodytes pacificus, Baird. — T. hi/emalis, var. jmc(/?c«s, Re- 
view Am. B. i. 1864, 145. (Pacific coast U. S.) 
66. Anorthura alascexsis, Baird. — Troglodi/tes alascensis, Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 

1869, 315, pi. 30, fig. 3. (St. George's Island, Alaska; W. H. Dall.; 
67a. Telmatodytes palustris paludicola, Baird. — Cisiothorm pulustris, var. pa- 

ludicola, Review Am. B. i. 1804, 148. (Pacific coast U. S.) 

69. MotaciUa alba, Linn.— C/. Reixiiardt, Ibis, 1861, 6. (Gree^jiland.) 

70. Biidijtes Jlava (Linn.) Gray. — Cf. Baird, Trans. Chicago Ac. i. 1869, 3, pi. 30, 

fig. 1. (St. Michael's, Alaska; Pease & Bannister.) 
72. Anthus pratensis (Linn.) Bechst. — Cf. Paulsex, ed. Holboll, Faun. Gronl. 1846, 

24 ; Reixh. Ibis, 1851, 6 (Greenland) ; B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 

173. (St. Michael's, Alaska.) 
74a. Mniotilta varia borealis (Nutt.) Ridgw. [See j). 213, foot-note.] 
80. Helmixtuupiiaga LAwatEXCEi, Herrick.-Proc. Philad. Acad. 1874, 2c0, pi. xv. 

(New Jersey. ) 

82. Helmixthophaga leucobroxchialis, Brewster. — Am. Sportsman, v. Oct., 1874; 

Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, i. 1876, 1, plate. (Massachusetts.) 

83. Helmixthophaga lucle, Cooper. — Proc. Calif. Acad. Sci. July, 1861, 120. 

(Ft. Mojave, California.) 
8Ga. Helmixthophaga celata lutescexs, Ridgw. — H. celala, var. hdescens, Ridgw. 

Am. Jour. Sci. & Arts, third ser. iv. Dec. 1872, 457. (Pacific coast U. S.) 
89. Parula pitiayumi ixsularis (Lawr.) Ridgw. — Paritla insnlaris, Lawr. Ann. 

Lye. N. Y. X. Feb. 1871. (Socorro I., N. W. Mexico.) 



216 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 
89a. Parula pitiayumi NiaRiLORA, Coues. — P. nigrilora, Bull. U, S. Geol. «fc Geog. 

Surv. Terr, iv. 1878, 11. (Hidalgo, Texas; G. B. Sennett.) 
92. Peucedramus olivaceus (Giraud) Coues. — Sylvia oUvacea, Giraud, Texan Birds, 
1841, 14, -pi. vii. iig. 2. ("Texas.") — Dendrocca olivacea, Hensh. Am. Sports- 
man, V. 328, Feb. 20, 1875 ; Oru. Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 202. (S. Arizona.) 

103a. DE^^DR(ECA dominica albilora, Baird. — D. Dominica, var. albilora, Am. Nat. 
vii. Oct. 1873, 605. (Mississippi Valley, south to Guatemala and Honduras.) 

104. Dendrceca graci^, Coues. — Cf. Baird, Review Am. B. i. 1864, 210. (Ft. 
Whipple, Ai'izona ; Coues.) 

106. Dexdrceca chrysoparia, Scl. & Salv. — Cf. Baird, Review Am. B. i. 1884, 185, 
foot-note. (San Antonio, Texas; Heermanu.) 

113a. Dexdrceca palmarum hypochrysea, Ridgw. — Bull. Nutt. Oin. Club, Nov. 
1876, 84, 85. (Atlantic States.) 

116a. SiURUS NiEVius xoTABiLis, Griuuell. — Cf. Ridgw. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. 
March 27, 1880, 12. (Black Hills, Wyoming.) 

125a. WiLSOXiA PUSILLA PILEOLATA (Pall.) Ridgw. — Mi/wdioctes piisillus, var. pileo- 
lata, Ridgw. Am. Jour. Sci. & Arts, iv. Dec. 1872, 457; Am. Nat. vii. Oct. 
1873, 607. (Pacific coast N. Am.) 

131. Cardellina rithrifrons (Giraud) Scl. — Muscicapa ruhrifrons, Giraud, Texan Birds, 
1841, pi. vii. iig. 1. ("Texas.") — Cardellina ruhrifrons, Henshaw, Orn. Wheel- 
er's Exp. 1875, 211. (Arizona.) 

133. Basileuterus cuZ«eiro?'Hs(Licht.)Bp. — Muscicapa hrasieri, Gii'aud, Texan Birds, 1841, 

pi. vi. fig. 2. 

134. Basileuterus bellii (Giraud) Scl. — Muscicapa belli, Giraud, Texan Birds, 1841, jd. iv. 

■fig. 1. 
139a. ViREOSYL%aA gilva swaixsoni, Baird. — Vireo swainsoni, Baird, B. N. ^m. 1858, 

336, in text. (Pacific coast JJ. S.) 
141&. Laxivireo solitarius plumbeus (Coues) Allen. — rireosijlvia plumbea, Coues, 

Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866, 73. (Ft. Whipple, Arizona.) 

146. Vireo pusillus, Coues. — Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866,76. (Date Creek, Arizona.) 

147. Vireo vicixior, Coues. — Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866, 75. (Ft. Wliipple, Arizona.) 
149&. Laxius ludoviciaxus robustus, Baird. — Collurio Ludovicianus, var. rohustus, 

' Am. Nat. vii. Oct. 1873, 608. (California?) 
164a. Pyraxga .estiva cooperi, Ridgw. — Pyramja cooperi, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1869, 

130. (S. W. United States.) 
167. Pyrrhuea cassixi, Baird. — P. coccinea, var. cassini, Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 1869, 

316, pi. 29, fig. 1. (Nulato, Alaska; W. H. Dall.) 
170a. Carpodacus frontalis rhodocolpus (Caban.) Ridgw. — Cf. Ridgw. Am. Jour. Sci. 

& Arts, V. Jan. 1873, 39. (Coast of California.) 
171. Carpodacus amplus, Ridgw. — Bull. U. S, Geol. & Geog. Surv. Terr. ii. No. 2, 

Apr. 1, 1876, 187. (Guadalupe I., Lower Cal. ; E. Palmer.) 
175a. Leucosticte tephrocotis littoralis (Baird) Ridgw. — L. littoralis, Baird, 

Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 1869, 318, pi. 28, tig. 1. (Sitka, Alaska.) 

176. Leucosticte atrata, Ridgw.— Am. Sportsman, July 18, 1874,241. (Colorado; 

C. A. Aiken.) 

177. Leucosticte australis, Allen.— Z. tephrocoiis, var. australis, Allen. Cf. Ridgw. 

Bull. Essex Inst. v. Nov. 1873, 189. (Mt. Lincoln, Colorado.) 
178a. ^giothus caxescexs exilipes (Coues) Ridgw. — ^tjiothus exilijyes, Coues, Proc. 

Philad. Acad. Nov. 1861, 38.5. (Arctic America.) 
179a. Mgiothus linaria liolholli (Brehm) Ridgw. — Llnaria liolbolli, Brehm, Vog. 

Deutschl. 
180. ^GiOTHUS brewsteri, Ridgw. — J^gioihns {flavirostris var.) brewsterii, Ridgw. 

Am. Nat. July, 1872, 433. (Waltham, Mass.) 
182a. ASTRAGALixus PSALTRiA ARizox^ (Coues) Ridgw. — C. mexicana, var. arizonw, 

Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866, 82. (Ft. Whipple, Arizona.) 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 217 

Catalogue No. 

192. Passerculus prixceps, Mayiiard. — Am. Nat. vi. 1872, 637. (Ipswicli, Mass.) 

195. Passerculus guttatus, Lawr. — Am. Lye. N. Y. viii. 1887, 473 (Cape St. Lucas). 

Cf. Cooper, Oru. Cal. i. 1870, 185. 
197a. Pocecetes gramineus confinis, Baird. — P. gramineus, Tar. confinis, Baird, B. N. Am. 

1858, 448, in text.. (Western U. S.) 
198a. COTURNICULUS PASSERiiNUS PERPALLIDUS, Ridgw. — C. passerhius, var. perimlli- 

du8, Ridgw. in Coues's "Key", 1872, 137. (Western U. S.) 
201a. Ammodromus caudacutus nelsoni, Allen. — Proc. Boston Soc. xvii. March, 

1875, 93. (N. E. Illinois.) 
203. Ammodromus xigrescexs, Ridgw. — A. maritbmis, var. nigretscens, Ridgw. Bull. 

Essex lust. Dec. 1873, 198. (Indian R., Florida.) 
204a. Chondestes grammica sirigatus (Sw.) Ridgw. 

Mr. H. K. Coale, of Chicago, 111., lias lately called my attention to certain differences between 
eastern (typical) and ■western specimens of this species, ■which, upon examination of a large 
series, I find to l)e quite constant and sufficiently appreciable to warrant the recognition of a 
■western race. Western birds being exactly like those from Mexico in those jioiuts in ■which 
they differ from eastern specimens, Swainson's name stngatus {Chondestes striijatus, Philos. 
Jour. i. 1827, 43.3), based upon the Mexican bird, is available for the western and southern 
race. 

207a. ZoxoTRicniA gambeli ixtermedia, Ridgw. — Z. leueophrys, var. intej-media, 
Ridgw. Bull. Essex lust. Dec. 1873, 198. (Middle Province of U. S., north to 
Alaska. ) i 

21 la. Spizella socialis arizox^e, Cones. — S. socialis, var. arizonw, CouES, Key, 
1872, 143. (Ft. Whipple, Arizona.) 

216. JuNCO AiKEXi, Ridgw. — ./. hyemaUs, xav. Aiken't, Ridgw. Am. Nat. Oct. 1873, 612, 

614. (Mts. of Colorado; C. E. Aiken.) 

219. Juxco ANXECTEXS, Baird. — Orn. Cal. i. 1870, 564. (Rocky Mts., Ft. Biidger to 

Arizona and New Mexico. ) 
223. Juxco ixsuLARis, Ridgw. — Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. Terr. ii. No. 2, Apr. 

1, 1876, 188. (Guadalupe I., Lower Cal.; E. Palmer.) 
225a. Amphispiza bellii xevadexsis, Ridgw. — Poospiza hvUii, var. nevadensis, Ridgw. 

Bull. Essex Inst. Nov. 1873, 191. (Middle Province of U. S.) 
226a. Peuc.ea ^stivalis illixoexsis, Ridgw. — P. iUinociisis, Bull. Nutt. Oru. Club, 

Oct. 1879, 219. (Texas to S. Illinois.) 
227. Peuc^a arizoX/E, Ridgw. — P. ocstivaUs,ya.T. Arizonw, Ridgw. Am. Nat. Oct. 1873, 

615. (S. Arizona.) 

229. Peuc.ea carpalis, Cones. — Am. Nat. vii. June, 1873, 322. (Tucson, Arizona; C. 

Bendiro. ) 
230a. Peuc/ea ruficeps boucardi (Scl.) Ridgw. — Cf. Henshaw, Orn. Wheeler's 

Exp. 1874, 117. (S. Arizona and S. New Mexico.) 
231f7. Melospiza fusciata guttata (Nutt.) Ridgw. 

This is the "Jf. riifina" of the old catalogue. The tme M. rufina (Brandt) is a larger and 
darker form from Sitka, rediscovered since the publication of "Birds of North America " 
(1858). 

231e. Melospiza fasciata rufina (Brandt) Ridgw.— tj. B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. ii. 

1874, 29. (British Columbia to Sitka.) 
232. Melospiza cinerea (Gmel.) Ridgw. — "If. in>iignis", Baird, Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 

1869, 319, pi. 29, fig. -J. (Kadiak, Alaska ; F. Bischoff.) 
237a. PiPiLO erythropiithalmus allexi, Coues. — P. allent, CouES, Am. Nat. v. Aug. 

1871, 366. (Florida.; 
238c. PiPiLO MACULATUS coxsoBRixus, Ridgw. — Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. 

Terr. ii. No. 2, Apr. 1, 1876, 189. (Guadalupe I., Lower Cal.) 
238f7. PiPiLo MACULATUS CARMANi (Lawr.) Ridgw. — Pipilo carmani, Lawr. Ann. 

Lye. N. Y. X. 1871. 7. (Socorro L, N. W. Mexico.) 



218 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

240a. PiPiLO FUSCUS ALBiGULA (Baircl) Eidgw/ — P. albigiila, Baird, Proc. Philad. 

A«ad. Nov. 1859, 305. (Cape St. Lucas.) 
242a. Cardinalis virginianus igneus, Baird. — C. igneus, Baird, Proc. PMlad. Acad. 

Nov. 1859, 305. (Cape St. Lucas.) 
253. PUmpara zena (Linn.) Bryant.— C/". B. B. & E. Hist. N. Am. B. ii. 1874, 93. (Key 

West, Florida ; H. W. Henshaw. ) 
258a. Molothrus aler obscuriis (Gmel.) Coues. — M. obscurns, Cass. Proc. Philad. 1866, 

18. (Lower California.) 
259. Molothrus (mens (Wagl.) Cab.— C/. Merrill, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, i. July, 

1876,88. (Ft. Brown, Texas.) 
263a. Sturnella magna mexicana (Scl.) Ridgw. — Cf. Brewer, Bull. Nutt. Orn. 

Club, iii. July, 1878, 152. (Ft. Brown, Texas; J. C.Merrill.) 
276. Quiscalus paliistris (Swains.) Cassin. — "(2. major", Gambel, Jour. Philad. Acad. 

i. 1847, 47. (Gulf of California. )* 
278?>. Quiscalus versicolor ^neus, Ridgw.— (). ceneus, Ridgw. Proc. Philad. Acad. 

1869, 134. (Mississippi Valley, Hudson's Bay Terr., Maine, etc.) 
[279.] Sturnus vulgaris, Linn. — Cf. Reinhardt, Ibis, 1861, 7. (Greenland.) 
290a. Cyanocitta stelleri frontalis, Ridgw. — Cyanura stelleri, var. frontalis, 

Ridgw. Am. Jour. Sci. & Arts, third ser. v. Jan. 1873, 41, 43. (Sierra Nevada, 

California.) 
290&. Cyanocitta stelleri annectens, Baird. — Cyanura stelleri, var. annectens, Baird, 
• in B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. Birds, ii. 1874, 281, in text. (Northern Rocky Mts. ) 

297a. Perisoreus canadensis capit.vlis, Baird. — P. canadensis, var. capiialis, Baird, 

Bull. Essex Inst. v. Nov. 1873, 193. (Rocky Mountains.) 
2976. Perisoreus canadensis fumifrons, Ridgw. — Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. March 

27, 1880, 5. (Coast of Alaska.) 
298. Perisoreus obscurus, Ridgw. — P. canadensis, var. obscurus, Ridgw. Bull. Essex 

Inst. Nov. 1873, 194. (Northwest coast of U. S.) 
[299.] Alanda arvensis, Linn. — Cf. Dresser & Sharpe, Birds Eur. pt. — , and B. B. & 

R. Hist. N. Am. B. ii. 1874, 136. (Greenland and Bermuda.) 
300«. Eremopiiila alpestris leucol^ma, Coues. — Birds N. W. 1874, 38. (Interior 

plains N. Am.) 
300&. Eremopiiila alpestris clirysolama (Wagl.) . — E. cornuta, var. chrysolwma, 

Baird, B.N. Am. 1858, 403, in text. (Southwestern U. S.) 

308. Pitangus derbianus (Kaup) Scl. — P. derbyanus, Coues, The Country, July 13, 

1878, 184. (Lomita, Texas ; G. B. Sennett. ) 

309. Myiozcietes texensis (Giraud) Scl. — Muscicapa texensis, Giraud, Texan Birds, 1841, 

pi. 1. ("Texas.") 

310. Myiodinastes luteiventris, Bona]i. — Cf. Henshaw, Orn, Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 346, 

pi. xiv. (S. Arizona.) 
319. Contopus pertinax. Cab. & Hein. — Cf. Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866, 60. 

(Ft. Whipple, Arizona.) 
329. Empidonax fulvifrons (Giraud) Scl. — Musdcapa fulvifrons, Giraud, Texan Birds, 

1841, pi. ii. ("Texas.") 
329a. Empidonax fulvifrons pallescens (Coues) Ridgw. — Mitrepliorns pallescens, 

Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. ••■ii;i, 63. (Fi. Whipple, Arizona.) 
331. Ornithion imberbe {8cl.) Coues. — " O. incanescens", Coues, The Country, July 13, 

1878, 184. (Lomita, Texas; G. B. Sennett.) 
334. Eugenes fulgens (Sw.) Gould. — Cf. Henshaw, Am. Nat. Apr. 1874, 241; Orn. 

Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 379. (Mt. Graham, Arizona.) 
341. Selasphorus alleni, Henshaw. — Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, ii. 1877, 54. (Coast of 

California.) 

■ The National Museum possesses an example of what ia apparently this species from the coast of 
Louisiana. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 219 

Catalogue No. 

342. AUhis heJoim (Less. & Del.) Ricli.— C/. Elliot, Illustr. Am. B. i. 1869, xxi. xii, 

plate. (El Paso, Texas; J. H. Clarke.) 

343. Stelhtla calUope, GovKk.—Caloihorax caUiope, Xantus, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1859, 

190. (Ft. Tejou, Cal.) 

344. Calothorax lucifer (S\v.) Gray.— " Dor icha enicura", Hensh. Am. Sportsman, v. 

328, Feb. 20, 1875 ; Orn. Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 381. Cf. Lawr. Bull. Nutt. Orn. 
Club, ii. Oct. 1877, 108. (Camp Bowie, Arizona.) 

345. Amazilia fuscicaudata (Eras.) Ridgw. — " Pyrrophcena riefferi", Merrill, Bull. 

Nutt. Orn. Club, i. Oct. 1876, 88. (Ft. Browu, Texas.) Cf. Ridgw. Proc. U. 
S. Nat. Mus. i. 1878, 147 (synonymy and diagnosis). 

346. AmazUia yucatanensis (Cabot) Gould. — "^. ■cervineiventris''' , Merrill, Bull. Nutt. 

Orn. Club, ii. Jan. 1877, 26. (Ft. Brown, Texas.) Cf. Ridgw. Proc. U. S. 
Nat. Mus. i. 1878, 148 (synonymy and diagnosis). 

347. Basilinna xaxtusi (Lawr.) Elliot.— Jma^i/ta xantusi, Lawr. Ann. N. Y. Lye. 

vii. April, 1860, 109 (=$). — HeVioptedica castaneocauda, Lawr. t. c. 145 
( = <^ ). (Cape St. Lucas.) 

348. lache latirostris (Sw.) Elliot. — Circe latirosfris, Hensh. Am. Sportsman, v. Feb. 

20, 1875; Orn. Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 380. (Chiracahna Mts., S. Arizona.) 
3576. Chordeiles popetue minor (Cab.) Ridgw. — Cf. B. B «fc R. Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 

1874, 520. (Miami, Florida; C. J. Maynard.) 
360a. Piciis villosus leucomelas (Bodd. ) Ridgw. — Picus leucomelas, Bodd. Tabl. P. E. 

1783 (ex. PI. Enlum. 345, fig. 1 = $ ad.). 
363a. Picus scalaris lucasanus (Xant.) Cones. — P. lucasanus, Xantus, Proc. Philad. 

Acad. 1859, 298, 302. (Cape. St. Lucas.) 
365. Picus stricJcIandi, Malh. — Cf. Henshaw, Am. Sportsman, v. 328, Feb. 20, 1875; 

Orn. Wheeler's Exp. 1^75, 389. (S. Arizona.) 
377a. Melanej'.pes formicivorus angustifrons, Baird. — IF. formicivorus, var. 

angustifrons, Baird, Orn. Cal. i. 1870, 405. (Cape St. Lucas.) 
380. COLAPTES RUFIPILEUS, Ridgw. — C. mexicaiius riifipileus, Bull. Geog. & Geol. 

Surv. Terr. ii. No. 2, Apr. 1, 1876, 191. (Guadalupe I., Lower Cal.) 
390. Crotopliaga sulcirostris, Swains. — Cf. COUES, The Country, July 13, 1878, 184. 

(Lomita, Texas; G. B. Sennett.) 
393. CONURUS IIOLOCHLORUS BREViPES, Baird. — Conurus holochlorus, var. hrevipes, 

"Baird, MS.", Lawr. Ann. Lye. N. Y. x. 1871, — . (Socorro I.) 
397a. Strix nebulosa alleni, Ridgw. — Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. March 27, 1880, — . 

(Clearwater, S. Florida.) 
398. Strix occidentalis (Xant.) Ridgw. — Syrnium occideniale, Xantus, Proc. Philad. 

Acad. 1859, 193. (Ft. Tejou, Cal.) 
399a. Ulula ciiierca lapponica (Retz.) Ridgw. — Syrnium lapponicum, RiDGW. Bull. Nutt. 

Orn. Club, iii. Jan. 1878, 37. (St. Michael's, Alaska; L. M. Turner.) 
402a. Scops asio floridanus, Ridgw. — S. anio, var. Floridanns, Ridgw. Bull. Essex 

Inst. Dec. 1873, 200. (Florida.) 
402c. Scops asio maxwellle, Ridgw. — S. asio, e, maxwelliw, Ridgw. Field & Forest, 

June, 1877, 210, 213. (Boulder Co., Colorado.) 
402(?. Scops asio kennicottii, (Elliot) Coiies. — S. EennicoUii, Elliot, Proc. Philad. 

Acad. 18G7, 69; Illustr. Am. B. 1869, pi. 11. (Sitk:i, Alaska; F. Bischoff.) 

403. Scops triclwpsis, Wagl. — "-S. asio, var. maccalli", B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 

1874, 52. (New Mexico.) 

404. Scops flammeoJus (Licht.) Scl.— C/. Cooper, Orn. Cal. i. 1870, 422. (Ft. Crook, 

N. California.) 
405a. Bubo virginianus suiarcticus (Hoy) Ridgw. — Buho subarcticus, Hoy, Proc. Philad. 

Acad. vi. 1852, 211. (Wisconsin.) [="var. arciicus" of Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 

1874, 64.] 
405&. Bubo virginianus arciicus (Swains.) Cass. — Buho arcticus, Swains. F. B. A. ii. 1831, 

86, 111. 30. (Interior of fur countries.) 



220 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

405c. Bubo virginianus saturatus, Eidgw.^Orn. 40tli Parallel, 1877, 572, foot-note. 

. (Northern coast N. Am.) [=" var. lyacificus" of Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 65.] 
407a. Surnia funerea ulula (Linn.) Eidgw. — Cf. Eidgw. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, iii. Jan. 

1878, 38. (St. Michael's, Alaska; L. M. Turner.) 
408a. Speotyto cunicularia floridaj^a, Eidgw. — *Sf. cunicularia, var. floridana, 

Eidgw. Am. Sportsman, iv. No. 14, July 4, 1874, 216. (Sarasota Bay, 

Florida.) 

410. Glaucklium plialccnoldcs (Daud.) Scl. &. Salv. — G. fcrrugineum (Mas.) COUES, Am. 

Nat. vi. 1872, 370. (Tucson, Arizona; C. Bendire.) 

411. Micrathene whitxeyi (Cooper) Cones. — Athene wMtneyi, Cooper, Proc. Cal. 

Acad. Sci. ii. 1863, 118. (Ft. Mojave, S. E. California.) 
412&. Hierofalco gyrfalco sacer (Forst.) Eidgw. — F. sacer, Forster, Philos. Trans. Ixii. 

1772, 383, 423. (Hudson's Bay Terr.) 
412c. Hierofalco sacer ohsolefns (Gm.) Eidgw. — Falco oisoletus, Gmel. S. N. i. 1788, 268. 

(Hudson's Bay Terr.) 
414a. Falco peregrinus pealei, Eidgw. — F. communis, var. Pealei, Eidgw. BuU. 

Essex Inst. Dec. 1873, 201. (Northwest coast N. Am.) 
416. Msalon regulus (Pall.) Blyth. — Falco wsalon Newton, Man. Nat. Hist. Greenl. 

1875, p. 96. (At sea, near Greenland, lat. 57^ 41' N., long. 35° 23' W.) 
417a. iEsALON coLUMBARius SUCKLEYI, Eidgw. — Falco columbarius, var. SucTcleyi, 

Eidgw. Bull. Essex Inst. v. Dec. 1873, 201. (Northwest coast N. Am.) 
418. JiLsALOX RiCHARDSONii, Eidgw. — Falco {Hypoiriorclils) richardsonii, Eidgw. Proc. 

Philad. Acad. Dec. 1870, 145. (Interior of North America.) 

421. Tinnunculus sparvcrioides (Vig.) Gray. (Florida.)* 

422. Tinnunculus alaudarius (Gm.) Gray. — Cf. Newton, Man. Nat. Hist. Greenl. 1875, 

96. (Ofl' Cape Farewell, Greenland.) 
424. POLYBORUS LUTOSUS, Eidgw.— Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. Terr. No. 6, 

2dser. Feb. 8, 1876, 459. (Guadalupe I., Lower California.) 
433a. ASTUR ATRiCAPiLLtis STRiATULUS, Eidgw. — A. palumlarius, var. siriatulus, 

Eidgw. in Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 1874, 240. (Western N. Am.) 
435. Buieo vulgaris, Leach. — Cf. Maynaud, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, i. No. 1, April, 1876, 

2-6. (Pawpaw, Mich.) 
436a. BUTEO borealis krideri. — "B. iorealis, variety kridei-H," Hoopes, Proc. Philad. 

Acad. 1873, 238. pi. v. (=juv.; Winnebago Co., Iowa.) 
436c. BuTEO BOREALIS LUCASANUS, Eidgw.— i?. Ifovealis, var. lucasanus. Hist. N. Am. B. 

iii. 1874, 2.58, 285. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

436d. BUTEO BOREALIS SOCORROENSIS. 

In the "Proceedings" of the Boston Society of Jfatural Hi.storj-, 1871, p. 42, Mr. Lawrence 
refers to a "Buteo borealis, var. montanus, Nutt." as being very abundant on the island of 
Socorro, where it is the only species of hawk to be found, and where it is a " constant resi- 
dent, rearing its young, and subsisting entirely on land crabs ", etc. In the same paper, p. 
10, Mr. Lawrence applies the same name to a hawk occurring abundantly on the Tres Marias 
Islands, iind there subsisting "entirely upon the Iguana lizard and rabbits." In "Hi.story 
of North American Birds", vol. iii, p. 285 (1874), I referred the Tres Marias bird to Buieo 
ftoreaKs vai*cos<a7-ice}isi's, and described our only specimen from that locality as the young 
of that form, although I had not, from ■jvant of specimens, been able to compare it with the 
corresponding ago of the Central American bird. I now have strong doubts as to its being 
the same as -B. costaricensis, while as to the hawk found on Socono I regaid it quite certain 
that it is, like the Caracara of Guadalupe (Pohjhorus lutosus), a species or race peculiar to 
that remote island, the birds of which are for the most part entirely local. I therefore pro- 
pose to name, provisionally, the Socorro Hawk h. borealis socorroensis. 

440. Butcoahhreviatus, Cabanis,in Schomb. Guiana, iii. 1848, 739. — " B. zonoeercus, Scl.", 
Cooper, Orn. Cal. i. 1870, 479. (Coast of California, near San Diego.) 

* There is a male of this species in my collection said to have been obtained in Florida. It was found 
with a collection of Florida birds, forming part of a dealer's stock, and was evidently the same "make" 
of skui as the rest of the lot. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 221 

Catalogue Ko. 

441. Butco albicaudatus (Vieill.) — B. albocaudatus, CoUES, The Country, i. 184, July 

13,1878. (Lomita, Texas; G. B. Sennett). Cf. Eldgw. Proc. U. S. Nat., 

Mus. i. Oct. 2, 1878, 154 (synonymy and descriptions). 
444. Unibitiiiga antliradna (Licht.) Nitzsch.— C/. Hexshaw, Am. Sportsman, v. 328, 

Feb. 20, 1875; Om. Wheeler's Exp. 1875, 420. (Arizona.) 
446. Onychotes GRUBEiii, Kidgw.— Proc. Philad. Acad. Dec. 1870, 149. (California.) 
450. Thrasaitus liariyyia. 

Acconling to Dr. Felix L. Oswald, in tlie American Naturalist, 1878, p. 151, a specimen of 
the Harpy Eagle was shot at the "delta of the Eio Grande", in Texas, by Professor S. B. 
Buckley, State geologist of Texas. A full account of the circumstance is given in Dr. Os- 
wald's iuteresting article. I have seen somewhere a record of the occurrence of this species 
in Louisiana, but cannot now lay hand on the reference. According to my lecollection, the 
record may be found in an old number of the "Proceedings" of the Philadelphia Academy 
of Sciences, or else of the Zoological Society of London. 

461. Zen^dur.\ graysoni, Baird.— C/. Lawrence, Ann. Lye. N. Y. x. 1871, 17; Proc. 

Boston Soc. xiv. 1871, 299. (Socorro I.) 
463. EnfujptUa (dhifronn (Bp.) Coues. — jEclimopHla aJhifrons, Coues, Bull. U. S. Geol. & 

Geog. Surv. Terr. iv. No. 1. 1878, 48 (South Texas) ; Ridgw. Proc. U. S. Nat. 

Mus. i. Oct. 1878, 158 (synonymy). 
471a. Canace obscura fuligixosa, Ridgw. — C. ohsciira, var. fuUginosa, Ridgw. Bull. 

Essex lust. Dec. 1873, 199. (Northwest coast, Oregon to Sitka.) 
471 b. Canace obscura richardsonii (Dougl. ) Ridgw. — Tetrao richardsonii, "Sabine, MSS.", 

DOUGL. Linn. Trans, xvi. 1829, 141. 
477a. CupiDOXiA cupido pallidigixcta, Ridgw. — C. cupido, var. paUidicutcta, Ridgw. 

Bull. Essex lust. Dec. 1873, 199. (Southwestern prairies.) 
478a. Pediocceies phasianeUus columbiauus (Ord) Ridgw. — Phasianus columbianus, Ord, 

Guthrie's Geog. 2d Am. ed. ii. 1815, 317. — Pedicccetes coIumbiaHus, Elliot, Pr. 

Ac. Nat. Sci. Philad. 1862, 403. 
480a. Ortyx virginiana floridana, Coues. — 0. virgiuianus, var. floridanus, Coues, 

Key, 1872, 237. (Florida; J. A. AUen.) 
481a. Oreortijx picta plumlfera (Gould) Ridgw. — Ortyx plumifera, Gould, P. Z. S. 1837, 42. 
488. Ardea citicrea, Linn. — Cf. Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 9. (Greenland.) 
499. Mycteria americana, Linn. — Cf. Coues, Check List, 1873, 135. (Austin, Texas.) 
506. Hwmatojms ostralegus, Linn. — Cf. Reixh. Ibis, 1861, 9. (Greenland.) 
512. Vanellu8 cristatus (Liun.) Meyer. — Cf. Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 9. (Greenland.) 
514. Charadrius pluvialis, Linn. — Cf. Newton, Man. Nat. Hist. Greenl. 1875, 101. 

(Greenland.) 
515a. Charadrius dombncus fulvns (Gmcl.) Ridgw. — C.fulmis, Coues, Elliott's Prybilov 

Islands, 1875, 179; Birds N. W. 1874, 450, foot-note. (Prybilov Islands, Alaska.) 

518. JEgialitis hiaticula (Linn.) Boie.— C/. Newton, Man. Nat. Hist. GreenL 1875, 101. 

(Greenland.) 

519. JbgialUis curonka (Gmel.) Gray. — Introduced as J5. mte?w%«c7ats, Ridgw., n. s.. 

Am. Nat. viii. Feb. 1874, 109. (" San Francisco, Cal.") 

520a. ^giaxitis meloda circumcincta, Ridgw. — JE. melodus, var. drcumdnctus, Am. 
Nat. viii. Feb. 1874, 109. (" Plains between Missouri River and Rocky Mount- 
ains.") 

524. Scolopax rusticula, Linn. — Cf. Baird, Am. Jour. Arts & Sciences, xli. May, 1866, 
25. (Newfoundland.) 

526. Gain nago media, Leach. — Cf. Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 11. (Greenland.) 

531. Arquatella couesii, Ridgw.— Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, July, 1880, 160. (Aleutian 

islands and contiguous coast of Alaska. ) 

532. Arquatella ptilocnemis (Coues) Ridgw.— " Triny/acrassiros/m", Dall, Aui.Nat. 

viii. 1873, 635 (St. Paul's I., Alaska).— J/'i/i^a ptilocnemis, CoUES, Elliott's 
Prybilov Islands, 1875, foot-note. 



222 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue ISTo. 

533. Actodromas acuminata (Horsf.) Ridgw, — Obt<:tined at St. Michael's, Alaska, by Mr. 
. E. W. Nelson, U. S. Signal Service. 

The single example forwarded by Mr. Nelson is without date or exact locality, and I have 
been unable to get from him the desired information, my letter to him on the subject having 
doubtless miscariied. The species is so important an addition to the fauna, however, that it 
cannot be overlooked in the present connection, reluctant as we are to publish a note of its 
occurrence without being able to furnish those data from the pen of Mr. Nelson himself, 
which would do him full justice, as the first discoverer of this Indian species on this con- 
tinent. 

537. Actodromas bairdii, Coues. — Proc. Pliilad. Acad. 1861, 194. (Arctic America.) 
539. Pelidna alpina (Linn.) Boie. — Tr'mga aljnna, Newton, Man. Nat. Hist. Greeul. 1875, 

103. (Greenland.) 
541a. Ereunetes pusillus occidextalis (Lawr.) Coues. — E. occidentalis, Lawr. Proc. 

Philad. Acad. 1864, 107. (Pacific coast U. S.) 
544. Limosa lapponica^ novw-zealandia'., Gray. — L. uropygialis, Baird, Trans. Chicago 

Acad. i. 1869," 320, pi. 32. (Alaska.) 
546. Limosa a(iocepliala (Linn.) Leach. — Cf. Eeinh. Ibis, 1861, 11. (Greenland.) 
551. Ehyacophilus ochropus (Linn.) Ridgw. — Cf. Brewer, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, iii. 

Jan. 1878, 49. (Nova Scotia.) 

561. Numenius pJiwopus (Linn.) Lath. — Cf. Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 10. (Greenland.) 

562. Numenius tahitiensis (Gmel.) Cass. — '^ Nmnenius femoralis, Peale", Ridgw. Am. 

Nat. July, 1874, 435. (Kadiak, Alaska; F. Bischoff.) 
568. Parra (jxjmnostoma, Wagl. — Cf. Merrill, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, i. Nov. 1876, 88 

(Ft. Brown, Texas); Ridgw. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i. 1878, 167, pi. iii. 

(synonymy and descriptions). 
570. Rallus obsoletus, Ridgw. — E. elegans, var. ohsoletus, Ridgw. Am. Nat. viii. 

Feb. 1874, 111. (Coast California.) 
571a. Rallus longirostris saturatus, Hensh. — Cf. Ridgw. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, 

July, 1880, 140. (Louisiana.) 
573. Porzana marueita (Leach) Bp. — '^ Ortygometra porzana (Linn.)", Reinh. Ibis, 

1861, 12. (Greenland.) 
576a. Porzana jamaicensis coturniculus, Baird. — P. jamaicensis, var. coturniculus, 

Baird, Am. Nat. viii. Feb. 1874, 111. (Farallone Islands, California.) 

586. Olor cygnus (Linn.) Bp. — " Cygnus ferus, Ray", Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 13. (Green- 

laud.) 

587, Olor minor (Pall.) By>.— "Cygnus ietvickii", Sw. & Rich. F. B. A. ii. 1831, 465. 

C'lgloolik [Arctic America], lat. 66°, June 19, 1823." Said to breed "on the 
sea-coast within the Arctic circle." The description, from specimens killed 
at locality quoted above, is of the true 0. minor, or Bewick's Swan.) 

592. Chen rossii (Baird) Ridgw. — A)iser rossii, "Baird, MSS.", Cass. Proc. Philad. 

Acad. 1861, 73. (Arctic America.) 

593. Anser alhifrons (Gm.) .—Cf Reinh. Ibis, 1861, 12. (Greenland.) 

603. Anas fulvigula, Ridgw. — A. obseura, var. fulvigula, Am. Nat. viii. Feb. 1874, 

111. (Florida.) 
627a. Somateria mollissima dresseri (Sharpe) Coues. — S. dresseri, Shaiipe, Ann. 

Mag. N. H. July, 1871, 51, figs. 1,2. 

This bird has been called by all American writers S. moUinsima. The true Eider, how- 
ever, has only lately been detected in America, it being the form found by Mr. Kumlieii 
breeding abundantly on the west side of Cumberland Gulf. 

631. Melanetta fusca (Linn.) — Cf. Reinhardt, Vid. Medd. Nat. For. Kjobenhavn, 

1879, 1. (South Greenland.) 
646a. Phalacrocorax violaceus respUndens (Aud.) Ridgw. — Graculus bairdii, "Gruber, 

MSS.", Cooper. Proc. Philad. Acad. Jan. 1865, 5. (Farallone Islands.) 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 223 

Catalogue No. 

647. rhalacrocorax Vicnstatus, Pallas. — "Graculus Ucristatus, Pallas", Baird, Trans. 

Chicago Acad. i. 18G9, — , pi. 33. (St. George's I., Alaska; W. H. Dall.) 
G51. Sula cijaiiops, Siindev. — Cf. Lawr. Proc. Boston Soc. xiv. 1871, 302. (Socorro I.) 

653. Sulaphcator (Linn.) -—Cf. Lawr. Proc. BostonSoc. xiv. 1872, 303. (Socorro I.) 

655. Phaethon a'thereup, Linn. — Cf. Freke, Sci. Proc. Eoy. Dubl. Soc. 1879.* (Banks 

of Newfoundland, August, 1876.) 
665. Larus affinis, Reinh. — Vid. Medd. Nat. For. Kjobenhavn, 1853, 78. (Greenland.) 
666a. Larus argentatus smithsonianus, Coues. — L. smiihsonianus, Coues, Proc. 

Pliilad. Acad. 1862, 296. (North America. ) 
667. Larus cachinnans, Pall. — "Larus horeaUs, Brandt", Baird, Trans. Chicago Acad. 

i. 1869, 305. (St. Michael's, Alaska; Bischoff.) 
671. Larus canus, Linn. — Cf. Brewer, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, iii. Jan. 1878, 50. (_Lab- 

rador; Coues.) 
689. Sterna aleutica, Baird.— Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 1869, 321, pi. 31, fig. 1. 

(Kadiak, Alaska; Bischoif.) 
692. Sterna anastheta, Scopoli. — Sterna {Haliplana) anostliwta, Coues, Key, 1872, 322, 

(Florida.) 
694. Hijdrochelidon leucoptera (Meisn.) Boie. — Cf. Brewer, Am. Nat. March, 1874, 188. 

(Lake Koshkonong, Wisconsin; T. Kumlien.) 
705&. FULMARUS GLACiALis RODGERSi (Cass.) Coues. — F. rodgersii, Cass. Proc. Philad. 

Acad, 1862, 290 (North Pacific) ; Baird, Trans. Chicago Acad. i. 1869, 323, 

pi. 34, fig. 1 (St. Georges I., Alaska). 
710. PuFFiNUS CREATOPUS, Cooper. — Cf. Coues, Proc Philad. Acad. 1864, 131. (Coast 

California.) 
713. Piiffinus gavia (Forst.) Finsch. — P. ojnsthomclas, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1864, 

139. (Coast California.) 

715. Puffmus griseus (Gmel.) Finsch. — Xectris amaurosoma, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 

1864, 124. 

716, Pitffinus temiirostris, Temm. — Nectris tenuirosiris, Dall & Bannister, Trans. Chi- 

cago Acad. i. 1869, 303. (Kotzbue Sound.) 

718. JEstrelata bulwei-i (Jard.) Gigl. & Salvad. — ThaJassidroma buliveri, Newton, Man. 
Nat. Hist. Greenl. 1875, 108. 

720. Halocyptena microsoma, Coues. — Proc. Philad. Acad. 1864, 78. (Coast of 
California. 

725. Cymochorea homochroa. Cones.— Proc. Philad. Acad. 1864, 77. (Coast of Cal- 
ifornia. ) 

737. Colymbus adamsi. Gray. — Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. 1859, 167. (Alaska.) 

763a. Lomviatroilecalifornica (Bryant) Coues. — Catarractes californicus, Bryant, 
Proc. Boston Soc. N. H. (Farallone Islands.) 

764. Lomvia arra, Pall. — Cejyhus arra, Pall. Zoog. Rosso- As. ii. 1811, 347. (Alaska.) 

c. List of North American genera which have been described or added to the fauna since 
1859, together with those whose names or orthography have been changed since that date. 

1. Hylocichla, Baird, Review Am. B. i. June 2, 1864, 12 (type, Turdus musteli- 
nus, Gmel.). 

The Turdun musicus of Europe is a strict congener of T. mustelinus, and it is possible that 
some generic name may have been based upon it previous to the imposition of Hylocichla. 

6. Tftrrf (ts, Linnseus, S. N. ed. 10. 1. 1758,168 (type, T. viscivorus, Linn.). 

The T. iliacus, although not agreeing strictly with T. viscivorus in details of external 
structure, is still hardly different enough to entitle it to separation. It is much more like 
true Turdus than either of the other American genera (Hylocichla and Merala). 

*'We cannot cite the page of the "Proceedings", but the record appears on p. 44 of separate pam- 
phlet entitled "A Comparative List of Bird.s found in Europe and North America. By Percy Evans 
Pi-eko." 



224 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

7. Merula, "Leach, 1816" (type, Turdus merula, Linn.). 

The proper generic division of the tj-pical thrushes is a matter of considerable diificulty. 
Of the North American generic groups, Rylociclila and Hesperocichla of Baird are sufBci- 
ently isolated, the latter being represented by a single species only, the former by all the 
smaller spotted species, besides the Song Thrush (Turdus tnusicus, Liun.) of Europe. I find 
no American species agreeing at all. closely with Turdus viscivorus (the tyi^e of Turdus) in 
form ; and a generic division based wholly or chiefly on coloration being out of the question, 
I find no other alternative than to adopt for tlie Eobin and other American thrushes usually 
referred to '^Plancsticus" of Bonaparte (1854) the name Merula, Loach (1816), there being no 
essential difterenco in form between the type of the latter, Turdus merula, Linn. {Merula 
nigra, Leach) and our Eobin (2*. migratorius, Linn.) ; while a number of the Neotropical 
species exhibit the same sexual difference in coloration as T. merula. I would also refer to 
Merula the following Old "World forms: Turdus pilaris, Linn, {typa of Arceuthornis, Kaup, 
1829), Turdus atrogularis, Temm. (type of Cichloides, Kaup, 1829), Turdus torquatus, Linn, 
(type of Thoracocincla, Reich., 1850), with perhaps some others. 

9. Hesperocichla, Baird, Review Am. B. i. July, 18G4, 32 (type, Turdus ncevius, 
Gmel.). 
12. Galeoscoptes, Cabauis, Mus. Hein. i. 1850, 82 (type, Muscicapa carolinensls, Linu.). 

19. Cinclus, Bechstein, Gemein. Naturg. 1802 (type, Sturnus cinclus, Linn.). ICf. Baird, 

Review Am. B. i. 1864,59, foot-note.] 

20. Cyanecula, Brelim, ViJg. Deutsclil. 1828 (type, Motacilla suecica, Liun.). 
34. Fhylloscojms, Boie, Isis, 1826, 792 (type ?) 

50. AuRiPARUS, Baird, Review Am. B. i. Aug. 1864, 85 (type, MqUlialus flaviceps, 

Suudev. ). 
61. Thryomanes, Sclater, Cat. Am. B. 1861, 22 (tyi)e, Troglodytes hewicld, Aud.). 
65. Anorthura, Rennie, Montagu's Orn. Diet. 2d ed. 1831, 570 (type, A. communis, 

Rennie ==: Motacilla troglodytes, Linn.). 
67. Telmatodytcs, Cabanis, Mus. Hein. i. 1850, 78 (type, Certliia palusLris, WQs.). 

69. Motacilla, Linmeus, S. N. 1735 (type, If. alha, Linn.). 

70. Budytes, Cuvier, Reg. An. i. 1817, 371 (type, Motacilla flava, L.). 

76. Heloncea. — HeUnaia, Audubon, Synop. 1839, 66 (type, Sylvia swainsoni, Aud.). 
[Orthography emended by Agassiz, Nomencl. 1847. Cf. Newton, P. Z. S. 
1879,552.] 
90.^ Perissoglossa, Baird, Review Am. B. i. 1864, 180 (type, Motacilla tigrina, Gm.). 
92. Peucedramus, Cones, in Henshaw's Orn. Wheeler's Survey, 1875, 201 (type, Syl- 
via olivacea, Giraud). 
115. Siurus.~Cf. Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club. 

124. TVilsonia, Bonai^arte, Comp. List. 1838, 23 (type, Sylvia mitraia, Aud.?). \.Cf. 
Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 95.*] 

131. CardeUina, "Dubus", Bonap. Consp. i. 1850, 312 (tyjje, CardeUina amicta, Dnhus::^ 

Muscicapa rubrifrons, Giraud). 

132. Ergaticus, Baird, Review Am. B. i. May, 1865, 264 (type, Seiopliaga rubra. 

Swains.). 

133. Basileuterus, Cabanis, in Schomb. Guiana, iii. 1848, 666 (tyj)e, Sylvia vermivora, 

Vieill.). 
135. Vireosylvia, Bonaparte, Comp. List. 1838, 26 (type, Muscicapa olivacea, Linn.). 
140. Lajstivireo, Baird, Review Am. B. i. May 23, 1866, 345 (type, Fireo flavifrons, 

Vieill.?). 

"It is exceedingly doubtful whether Wilsonia, Bp., should displace Myiodioctes, Aud. Bonaparte's 
name occurs first in a mere list, is used only as a heading for a subgeneric group, and is unaccom- 
Ijanied either by a diagnosis or an indication of type. Audubon, however, only a year later, in desig- 
nating the same groui> of bii'ds by the new generic term Myiodioctes, giive an excellent diagnosis of the 
generic characters. It appears to us that the slight difference of date in favor of Bonaparte's name is 
greatly overbalanced by the pains which Audubon took to duly characterize his genus, thus conform- 
ing to the requirements of nomenclatiu-al laws, which Bonaparte failed to do. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 225 

Catalogue No. 

148. Lanius, Liunajus, S. N. ed. 10, 1758,93 (type, L. excuUtor, Liuu.). [C/. Coues, 

Birds Colorado Val. i. 1878, 539. ] 
153. Petrochelidon, Cabanis, Mus. Hein. i. 1850, 47 (type, Hirundo melanogaster, Sw. =r. 

sicainsoni, Scl.). 
155. Tachyciueta, Cabanis, Mus. Heiu. i. 1850, 48 (type, Hirundo thalassina, Sw.). 

157. Cottle, Boie.—Cf. Wh.vrton, The Ibis, Oct. 1879; Coues, Bull. Nutt. Oru. Club, 

April, 1880,96. 

158. Sfelgidopteryx, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 312, in test (type, Hinindo serripennis, Aud.). 
167. Pyrrluda, Brisson, Oru. 1760 (type, Loxla pyrrhala, 'L\nu..^=Emheriza coccinea, 

Sandb.). 
172. Loxia, Liuuteus, S. N. ed. 10, i. 1758, 171 (type, L. curvirosira, Linn.). 
181. Astragal ill us, Cabanis, Mus. Heiu. i. 1851, 159 (type, FriiiyiUa tristis, Linu.). 
187. Centrophaiics, Kaup,.Eut. Gescli. Eur. Thierw. 1829 (type, Emheriza lapponica, 

Linn.). 
190. Ehyncliophanes, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 432, in test (type, rUctroplianes maccowni, 

Lawr.). 
224. Amphispiza, Coues, Birds N. W. 1874, 234 (type, Emheriza bilineata, Cass.). 
244. Zamelodia, Coues, Bull. Nutt. Om. Club, v. April, 1880, 98 (type, Loxia ludovici- 

ana, Linn.). 
247. Passerina, Vieillot, Analyse, 1816, 30 (typo, Tanayra cyanea,J^inn.). [Cf. Coues, 

1. c. 96.] 

253. Plionipara, Bonaparte, Consp. i. 1850, 494 (typo, Loxia canora, Gmel.). 

254. Spiza, Bonaparte, Obs. Wils. Orn. 1825 (part); Specc. Comp. 1827, 47 (tj^ie, 

Emheriza americana, Gmel.!). [See autea, 3.] 
279. Stunuis, Liuntous, S. N. ed. 10, i. 1758, 167 (type, S. vulgaris, Linn.). 
285. Gymnocitia. — //. Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 98. 
289. Cyanocitta, Strickland, Ann. Mag. N. H. sv. 1845, 230 (type, Corvus cristatus, 

Linn.). [C/. Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 98.] 
291. Aphelocoma, Cabanis, Mus. Hein. i. 1851, 221 (type, Garrulus calif ornicus,Yig.). 
299. Alauda, Liunjous, S. N. ed. 10, i. 1758, 165 (type, A. arvensis, Linn.). 

308. Pitangus, Swainson, Zool. Jour. iii. 1827, 165 (type ?). 

309. Myioztitetes, Sclater, es. Schiff. — Myiozeta, "Schift".", Bp. Compt. Rend, sssviii. 

1854, — (type l).—Myiozeteies, Scl. P. Z. S. 1859, 46. 

310. Myiodinastes, Bonaparte, Compt. Rend, sssviii. 1854, 657 (type ?). 

331. Ornithioii, Hartlaub, Jour, fiir Orn. 1853, 35 (type, 0. inerme, Hartl.). 

332. Paohyrhainplius, "Gray, 1838" (type, Pachijrhynclms cuvieri, Sinx^Tityra viridis, 

Vicill.). 

333. Hadrostomus, Cabanis, Mus. Heiu. ii. Oct. 24, 1859, 84 (type, Tityra atricapilla, 

Vieill.). 

334. Eugenes, Gould, Mon. Trocb. pt. sii. 1856 (type, Trochilus fidgens. Swains.). 

337. Calypte, Gould, Introd. Trocb. oct. ed. 1861, 87 (type, Ornismya casta', Bourc). 

342. Attliis, Reichenbacb, Aufz. dor Colib. 1853, 12 (type, Ornismya heloisw. Less. & 

Delattr.). 

343. Stellula, Gould, Introd. Trocb. oct. ed. 1861, 90 (type, Trochilus calliope, Gould). 

344. Calothorax, Gray, Gen. B. 1840, 13 (type, Cynanthus lucifer. Swains.). 

345. Amazilia, Lesson. — Amazilis, Less. Ind. Gen. et Syu. du Gen. Trocb. 1832, p. ssvii. 

(type, Orthorhynchus amaziU, Less.). — Amazilia, Reich. Av. Syst. Nat. 1849, 
pi. 39. 

347. Basilinna, Boie, Isis, 1831, 546 (type, Trochilus leucofis, Vieill.). 

348. Iache, Elliot, Synop. Trocb. March, 1879, 234 (type, Cynanthus latirostris. Swains.). 

349. Cypsdus, Illiger, Prodr. 1811, 229 (type, C. apus, Linn.). \_Cf. antea, 6.] 

350. Cypseloides, Stroubel, Isis, 1848, 366 (type, Cypsehisfumigatus, Natt.). [(/. Sclater, 

P. Z.S. 1865,614.] 
354. Caprimulgus, Linnteus, S. N. ed. 10, i. 1858, 193 (type, C. europmts, Linn.). [_Cf. 
Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i. 1878, 143; ib. iii. 1880, 5.] 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 lo Sept. 4, 1880. 



226 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIOJ^AL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

355. PHAL.ENOPTILUS, Eidgway, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. March 27, 1880, 5 (type, 

Cajmmulgus mdfalU, And.). 
366. Xenopicus, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 83, in text (tj'pe, Leuconerpes albolarvatus, Cass.). 

394. Ahico, Flemiug, Phil. Zool. ii. 1828, 236 (type, Strix flammeajljiiin.). [C/. New- 

Tox, Yarrell's Brit. B. ed. 4, i. 150; Ibis, v. 94-105.] 

395. Asio, Brisson, Orn. i. 17(56, 28 (type, Strix otus, Liun.). 

397. Strix, Linnaius, S. N.ed. 10, i. 1758, 92 (type, S. strklula, Linn.). [C/. Newton, 

Ibis, ser. iii. vi. 94-105.] 
399. Ululu, Cuvier, Reg. Au. i. 1817, 329 (type, Strix uralensis, Pall.). 

In Ristory of Xorth American Birds (vol. iii, pp. 28-30) I adopted for the Great Gray 
Owl (Strix cinerea, Gmel.) the .subgeneric name Seotiaptex, Swains., based tipon this species, 
and on p. 8 of these Proceedings raised the same name to generic rank. A subsequent exam- 
ination of Strix urdlensis, Pallas, however, reveals the fact that the latter is strictly con- 
generic with S. cinerea and S. lapponica, and having been made the type of a genus TTlula 
by Cuvier, in 1817, the latter name must take precedence over Seotiaptex, which was not 
founded until 1831. 

408. Speotijto, Gloger, Haiidb. Naturg. 1842, 226 (type, Strix cuniciihtria, Mol.). 

411. MiCRATHEXE, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866,51 (type, Athene whitneyi, Cooytev.). 

412. Hierofalco, Cuvier, Reg. An. i. 1817,312 (type, Falco candicans, Gm.). 

416. JEsalon, Kaup, Natiirl. Syst. 1829, 40 (type, Falco cesalon, Gmel. = F. regulus, 

Pall.) 
419. Rhynchofalco, Ridgway, Proc. Bo.ston Soc. 1873, 46 (type, Falco femoralis, 

Temm. = F fusco-cwritlescens, Vieill.). 
426. Elanoides, Vieillot, Nouv. Diet. xxiv. 1818, 101 (type, Falco fur cat us, Linn.). 
434. Antexor, Ridgway, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist. May, 1873, 63 (type, Falco 

unicinctus, Temm.). 
444. Uruhitiuga, Lesson, Rev. Zool. 1839, 132 (no type!); Lafr. in d'Orb. Diet. Hist. 

Nat. ii. 1842, 786 (type, Falco uruhitinga, Gm. = i^. zonurus, Shaw). 
446. OxYCHOTES, Ridgway, Proc. Philad. Acad. Dec. 1870, 142 (type, 0. gruheri, 

Ridgw.). 

450. Thrasaetus, Gray, Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. 1837, 108 (type, Falco harpyia, Linn.). 

451. HaVmetus, Savigny. — This is the original and correct orthography. [C/". Gray, 

Haudb. i. 1869, 16; Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Apr. 1880, — .] 
453. PSEUDOGRYPHUS, Ridgway, in B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. iii. Jan. 1874, 337, 

338 (type, Vultur californianus, Shaw). 
455. Catharista, Vieillot, Analyse, 1816, 21 (type, Vultur uruhu, Vieill. =^ V. atrata, 

Bartr. Cf. Ridgw. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 80). 
463. ExGYPTiLA, Sundevall, Met. Nat. Av. Disp. Tent. 1872, 156 (type, Columba rufax- 

illa, Rich. &. Bern.). 
467. Geotrygox, Gosse, Birds Jam. 1847, 316, foot-note (type, G. sylvatica, Gosse;= 

Columba crislata, Temm.). 
469. Ortalis.—Cf. Whartox, The Ibis, Oct. 1879, 450. [= Ortalida, Merrem (false 

orthography).] 
471. Canace, Reichenbach, Av. Syst. Nat. 1851 (type, Tetrao canadensis, Linn.). 

491. Dichromaxassa, Ridgway, Bull. U. S. Geol. & Geog. Surv. Terr. iv. No. 1, Feb. 

5, 1878, 240 (type, Ardea rufa, Bodd.). 

492. Hydraxassa, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 660, in text (type, Ardea ludoviciana, Gmel. 

= A. tricolor, Miill.). 
499. Mycteria, Linnaeus, S. N. i. 1758, 140 (type, M. americana, Linn.). 
501. Eudocimus, Wagler, Isis, 1832, 1232 (type, Scolopax rubra, Linn.). {_€/. Elliot, 

Ibis, 1877, 482,] 
503. Plegadis, Kauii, Skizz. Ent. Gesch. 1829, 82 (tyi>e, Tantalus falcinellus, Liuu.). 

[C/. SCLATER & Salvix, Ibis, 1878, 112.] 
505, Ajaja, Reichenbach, Haudb. 1851, p. xvi. (type, Platalea ajaja, Linn, = P. rosea, 

Briss.). [C/. Ridgway, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. 1880, 10.] 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 227 

Catalogue No. * 

51-2. Vanelhts, Meyer, Vog. Deutschl. i. 1810, 10 (ex. Linn. 1735; type, Tringa vanellus 

Linn.). 
516. Oxyechus, Reichenbacli, Av. Syst. 1853, Introcl. p. xviii. (tyi3e, Charadriua vociferua, 

Linn.). 
.522. Ochthodromus, Reichenbach, 1. c. (type, Charadrhis tvilsonius, Ord). 

523. PoDASOCYS, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1866, 96 (type, Charadrius montanus, 

Towns.). 

524. Scolopax, Liuna'us, S. N. ed. 10, i, 1758, 145 (type, S. rusticula, Linn.). 
530. Arquatella, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 717 (type, Tringa mariiima, Briinn.). 

533. Actodromas, Kanp, Sk. Ent. Ear. Thierw. 1829, 37 (type, Tringa minuta, Leisl.). 

539. Pelidna, Cuvier, Reg. An. 1817, 490 (type, Tringa alpina, Linn.). 

547. Totanus, Beclistein, Nat. Deutscbl. 1803 (type, Scolopax calidris, Linn.). 

554. Machetes, Cnvier, Reg. An. 1817 (type, Tringa pugnax, Liun.). \_Cf. Coues, Bull. 

Nutt. Orn. Club, Apr. 1880, 100.] 

555. Bartramia, Lesson, TraitcS Ois. 1831, 553 (type, B. laticauda, Less. = Tringa 

longicaiida, Becbst.). [C/. Coues, 1. c.] 

564. Lohipes, Cuvier, Reg. An. 1817 (type, Tringa hyperhorea, Linn.). 

565. Steganopus, Vieillot, Enc. Meth. 1823 (type, S. tricolor, Vieill. = Phalaropus wil- 

soni, Sab.). 

568. Parra, Linnaius, S. N. i. ed. 12, 1766, 259 (type, P. jacana, Linn.). [For generic 
characters and illustrations, see these Proceedings, vol. i. pp. 163, 167, pi. iii.] 

578. lonornis, Reichenbach, Av. Syst. 1853, 21 (type, Fttlica martinica, Linn.). 

586. Olor, Wagler, Isis, 1832, 1234 (ty^ie, Cygnus musicus, Bechst. = ^«as cygnus, 
Liun.). 

590. Chen, Boie, Isis, 1822 (type. Anas hyperhorea. Pall.). 

598. Philacte, Bannister, Proc. Philad. Acad. Nov. 1870, 131 (type, Anas canagictis, 
Sewast.). 

619. Clangula, Fleming, Philos. Jour. 1828 {ty])e,Anas clangula, 'Linn.). [C/. Dres- 
ser, B. Eur. pt. xlvi. Dec. 1875 ; Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 
101.] 

635. NOMOISTYX, Ridgway, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii. March 27, 1880, 15 (type. Anas do- 
minica, Liun.). 

642. Phalacrocorax, Brisson, Orn. 1760 (type, Pelecanus carho, Liun.). \_Cf. Sharpe, 
Cat. B. Brit. Mus. iii. 1877, 14G, foot-note.] 

696. Mcgalestris, Bonaparte, Cousp. ii. 1856, 206 (type, Larus catarractcs, Linn. = 
Catharacta skua, Briinn.). [f/. Coues, B. N. W. 1874,603, 604, where, how- 
ever, Bnphagus, Mcehriug, is adopted ; but Mwhriug's names being inadmissi- 
ble,* Mcgalestris, Bp., "strictly its only synonj^m" seems the only one availa- 
ble. 

703. Phwhctria, Reichenbach, Av. Syst. Nat. 1853, pi. 26, fig. 348 (type, Diomcdea fidigi- 

nosa, Gmel.). 

704. Ossifraga, Hombron & Jacquinot, Compt. Rend, xviii. 1844, 356 (type, Procellaria 

gigantea, Gmel.). 

706. PrioceUa, Hombron & Jacquinot, Compt. Rend, xviii. 1844, 357 (type, Procellaria 

glacialoides. Smiths P. tenuirostris, Aud. ). 

707. Priofinus, Hombron & Jacquinot, Compt. Rend, xviii. 1844, 355 (type, Procellaria 

cinerea, Gmel. (?)=:P. mclanura, Bonn.). • 
717. (Estrelata, Bonaparte, Consp. ii. 1855, 188 (type, Procellaria hwsiiata, Temm.). 

720. Halocyptexa, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1864, 78 (type, H. microsoma, Coues). 

721. Procellaria, Linnteus, S.N. ed. 12, i. 1766, 212 (tyiie, P.pelagica, Linn.). 

722. Oceanites, Keyserling & Blasius, Wirb. Eur. 1840, 238 (type, Procellaria oceanica, 

Kuhl.). 
*Cf. Coues, Bull. Nutt. Om. Club, April, 1880, p. 100, sp. 437, Machetes pugnax. 



228 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. * 

723. Cymochorea, Coues, Proc. Philad. Aoad. 1864, 75 (type, Procellaria leucorrJioa, 

Vieill.). 
726. Oceanodroma, Eeiclienbacli, Av. Syst. 1853, xviii. {type, Procellaria furcata, Gmel.). 
730. Mclimopliorus, Cones, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1862, 229 (type, Podiceps occidentalis, 

Lawr.). 
732. Bytes, Kaup, Syst. Ent. Eur. Thierw. 1829 (type, Colymhus cornutiis, Gmel.). 
734. Tacliyhaptes, Eeichenbach, Syst. Nat. Av. 1853, pi. 2 (type, Colymhus minor, Gmel.). 

742. Utamania, Leach, Syst. Cat. 1816 (type, J.ica tarda, Linn.). [C/. Coues, Proc. 

Philad. Acad. 1868, 18, 19.] 

743. Fratercula, Brisson, Orn. 1760 (type, Alca arctica, Linn.). [C/. Coues, Proc. 

Philad. Acad. 1868,21.] 

745. Lnnda, Pallas, Zorgr. Rosso-As. 1811, 363 (type, Alca cirrhata, Pall.). \_Cf. Coues, 

Proc. Philad. Acad. 1868, 26. ] 

746. Cei-atorhina. — Cf. Coues, Key, 1872, 341. \_^Cei-orhinca, Bonap. Ann. Lye. N. Y. 

ii. 1828, 428 (false orthography).] ^ 

748. Simorhynchus, " Merrem, , 1819 (type, Alca cristaidla. Pall, fide G.R.Gray)". 

\_Cf. Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1868,35.] 
750. Ciceronia, Reichenbach, Av. Syst. Nat. 18.53, — (type, Phaleris microceros, Brandt — 

TJria pusilla, Pall . ) . 

752. Alle, Link, Beschr. Natur.-Samml. Univ. Rostock, 1806, 17 (type, A. nigricans, 

'Lm]i = Alcaalle, Linn.). [Cf. Coues, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, iv.Oct. 1879, 
244.] 

753. SynUiliborhamjihxs, Brandt, Bull. Acad. St. Petersb. ii. 1837 (type, Alca antiqua, 

Gmel.). 
763. Lomvia, Brandt, Bull. Acad. St. Petersb. ii. 1837, 345 (type, Colymhus iroille, Linn.). 
[C/. Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1868, 75.] 

d. Species included in ihe catalogue ivMcli have not yet {according to the records) actually 
heen taken within the prescrihed limits. 

[The following species enumerated in the catalogue have not, to this date, been 
taken within the United States; but all are known to occur so near our southern 
border as to render it quite certain that their cajiture within our limits is but a ques- 
tion* of time and investigation. There are also included in this category all the 
sjiecies which are peculiar to the islands of Socorro and Guadalupe and the penin- 
sula of Lower California.] 

8. Merula confinis. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

14. Hakporhyxchus cinereus. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

18. Harporhyxchus GRAYSONi. (Socorro.) 

31. Regulus obscurus. (Guadalupe.) 

43. Parus meridioxalis. (Highlands of Mexico.) 

49. PsALTRiPARUS MELANOTis.* (Highlands of Mexico.) 

55a. Certiiia familiaris mexicana. (Highlands of Mexico.) 

57. Caaipylorhyxchus AFFixis. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

58a. Salpixctes obsoi-etus guadalupensis. (Guadalupe.) 

62. Thryomanes brevicauda. (Guadalupe.) 

89. Parula piTiAYUMi ixsuL^yiis. (Socorro.) 
171. Carpodacus amplus. (Guadalupe.) 
195. Passerculus guttatus. (Cape St. Lucas.) 
223. Juxco iNSULARis. (Guadalupe.) 
238c. PiPiLO MACULATus coxsoBRixus. (Guadalupc.) 
238d. PiPiLO MACULATUS CARMAXi. (Socorro.) 
?AOa. PiPiLO Fuscus ALBiGULA. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

* Probably seen by me in August, 1868, in the East Humboldt Mts., Nevada. {Cf. Orn. 40th Parallel 
Exp. 1877, p. 415.) 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 229 

Catalogue No. 

267. ICTEKUS WAGLERi. (Mcxico.) 

288. PsiLORHiNUS MORio. (E. Mexico.) 

291. Apiielocoma ULTRAMAUiNA coucHii. (E. Mexico.) 

347. Basilinna xantusi. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

303«. Picus scALARis LUCASANUS. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

377fl. Melanerpes FORMicivoRus ANGUSTiFRONS. (Cape St. Lucas.) 

380. COLAPTES RUFIPILEUS. (Guaclalupe.) 

381. MoMOTUS c.ERTTLEiCEPS. (E. Mcxico.) 
384. Trogon ajibiguus. (Mexico.) 

393. CoxuRUS HOLOCHLORUS BREViPES. (Socorro.) 

415. Falco ALBiGULARis. (Wliole of tropical America.) 

424. PoLYBORUS LUTOSUS. (Guadalupe.) 

.653. SuLA PISCATOR. (Socorro.) 

655. Pii-ETHON JSTHEREUS. (Newfoundland banks; Socorro?) 

460. Zex^dura graysoxi. (Socorro.) 

Of tlie following species given in the catalogue no specimens are known to have 
been taken within the limits of the United States, with the exception of those de- 
scribed and figured in Giraud's "Sixteen Species of Texan Birds" (1841).* 

59. Catherpes mexicaxus {:=^Certhia albifrons, Giraud). 
130. Setopiiaga mixiata {=Musdcapa dei-hami, Giraud). 

132. Ergaticus ruber (=Pa7'us leucotis, Giraud). 

133. Basileuterus culicivorus (=J/Msdca^ja Irasier'i, Giraud). 

134. Basileuterus bellii {^Muscicapa heUii, Giraud). 

160. EuPHOXiA ELEGAXTissiMA {=Pi])ra gahriculata, Giraud). 

1826. ASTRAGALixus PSALTRiA MEXic^vxus (=::Fri)i(jilla texensis, Giraud). 

309. Myiozetetes texexsis (=Muscic(q)a terensis, Giraud). 

314. Myiarchus lawrexcei {=Ti/rannitla lawrencii, Giraud). 

329. Empidoxax fulvifroxs {^Musckapa ftdvifrous, Giraud). 

e. Sj)ecles {cliiefly PaJa'arctic) wliich occur only as stragglers or visifaitts in Eastern North 
America, or ^vhich occur regularly only in Greenland and adjacent portions of the conti- 
nent A 

[6.] TURDUS ILIACUS. Accidcutal in Greenland. 
[69. ] MOTACILLA ALBA. Accidental in Greenland. 
[178.] ^GiOTHUS caxescexs. Resident in Greenland. 
[279.] Sturxus VULGARIS. Accidental in Greenland. 

[412((.i HiEROFALCO GYRFALCO ISLANDUS. Resident iu South Greenland. 
[416.] ^SALOX REGULUS. Accidental in Greenland. 
[422.] TixxuxcuLUS ALAUDARius, Accidental in Greenland. 
[435.] BUTEO VULGARIS. Accidental in Michigan? [C/. Mayxard, Bull. Nutt. Orn. 

Club, i. 18.] 
452. HALIJ3ETUS ALBiciLLA. Resident in Greenland. 
[488.] Ardea cixerea. Accidental in Greenland. 
[506.] HiEMATOPUS ostralegus. Accidental in Greenland. 
[514.] Charadrius PLUViALis. Accidental in Greenland. 

518. iEGiALiTis IIIATICULA. Breeding iu Greeuland and west of Cumberland Gulf. 
[524. ] SCOLOPAX RUSTICULA. Accidental in Newfoundland and Eastern United States. 
[526.] Gallixago media. Casual in Greenland and Bermudas. 

* These specimens .are now in the collection of the United States National Museum, 
t Strictly pelagic birds, -which are more or less numerous oiF the coast, are excluded from this and 
the following lists. 



230 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Catalogue No. 

[539.] Pelidna alpina. Breeds iu Greenland and Hudson's Bay Territory. 

[540.] Pelidna subarquata. Casual iu Eastern Nortli America (several records). 

[546.] LiMOSA iEGOCEPHALA. Accidental iu Greenland. 

[547.] ToTANUS GLOTTIS. Accidental iu Florida. 

[551.] Rhyacophilus ochropus. Accidental in Nova Scotia. 

[554.] Machetes pugnax. Casual in Eastern North America (several records). 

[561.] NUMENIUS PH^OPUS. Accidental iu Greenland. 

[573.] PoRZANA maruetta. Accidental in Greenland. 

[577.] Crex pratensis. Casual in Eastern North America, including Greenland. 

[586. ] Olor cygnus. Accidental in Greenland. 

[587.] Olor MINOR. Casual (?) in fur countries. 

[593.] AxsER ALBiFRONS. Breeds in South Greenland. 

[597.] Bernicla leucopsis. Casual in Eastern North America. 

[611.] Nettion CRECCA. Casual in Eastern North America. 

627. SoMATERiA MOLLissiMA. Resident in Greenland and west side of Cumberland 

Gulf. 
[631.] Melanetta FUSCA. Accidental in Greenland. 
[665.] Larus APFiNis. Accidental in Greenland. 
[694. ] Hydrochelidon leucoptera. Accidental in Wisconsin. 
[711.] PuFFiNUS ANGLORUM. Casual (?) off Atlantic coast. 
[717.] ffiSTRELATA h^esitata. Accidental otf Atlantic coast of U. S. . 
[718.] ffisTRELATA bulweri. Accidental near Greenland. 
728. Fregetta GRALLARiA. Accidental off coast of Florida. 
[733.] Dytes AURITUS. Breeds in South Greenland. 
743a. Fratercula arctica glacialis. Resident in Greenland. 

/. Palcearctic and oceanic species occurring onhj in Alaska and other parts of the Pacific coast. 

[20.] Cyanegula suecica. St. Michael's, Alaska, June 5, 1850. (See p. 215.) 

[34.] Phylloscopus BOREALis. Breeds in Alaska. 

[44.] Parus cinctus. Abundant resident in Alaska. 

[70.] Budytes FLAVA. Breeds abundantly in Alaska. 

[167..] Pyrrhula cassini. Resident (?) in Alaska. 

[399a.] Ulula cixerea lappoxica. Casual (?) in Alaska (St. Michael's). 

[407a.] SuRXiA fuxerea ulula. Casual (?) in Alaska (St. Michael's). 

511. Aphriza virgata. Casual along entire Pacific coast of America. 

[515a.] Charabrius domixicus fulvus. Regular autumnal visitant to Alaska. 

[519.] ^Egialitis curonica. Accidental in California (?). 

[533.] Actodromas acuminata. Accidental on coast of Alaska. 

544. LiMOSA LAPPONiCA NOViE-ZEALAXDi^. Abundaut visitant to Alaska. 

553. Heteroscelus INCAXUS. Whole Pacific coast. (Breeds.) 

[562.] Numexius tahitiensis. Accidental in Alaska (Kadiak). 

[702.] DiOMEDEA CULMINATA. Accidental off mouth of Columbia River (Audubon). 

[703.] Phcebetria fuliginosa. Casual off Pacific coast. 

[704. ] OssiFRAGA GiGAXTEA. Accidental otf Pacific coast of U. S. 

706. Priocella tenuirostris. Casual (?) off Pacific coast. 

707. Priofinus melaxurus. Accidental off coast of California. 
710. Puffixus creatopus. Accidental (?) off coast of California. 
713. PuFFiNUS GAViA. Casual (?) off' coast of Lowcr California. 

715. PuPFiNUS GRiSEUS. Casual (?) off coast of Lower California. 

716. Puffixus tenuirostris. North Pacific (casual?). 
[719.] Daption capensis. Accidental off coast of California. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 231 

g. Pala'arctic species occurring both in Greenland and Alaslca, hut not recorded from ar>y 

intermediate point in North America, 
Catalogue No. 

[21.] Saxicola gexantiie. Breeds in Greenland and on west side of Cumberland 

Gulf. 
[72.] ANTUU8 PRATEXSis. Accidental (?) in Greenland and Alaska. 
[512.] Vanellus CRiSTATUS. Accidental in Greenland (and Alaska?). 
[()0!i. ] Mareca PENELOPE. OccuTs in various jiarts of North America, south to North 

Carolina, and San Francisco. 

h. Tropical American species occurring only in southern portions of United States. 

EASTERN PROVINCE, IXCLUDIXG FLORIDA AND COAST OF TEXAS.* 

137. ViREOSYLViA CALIDKIS BARBATULA. (South Florida.) Hab. Cuha. 

159. Certhiola BAHAMENSIS. (Indian Key.) ^afc. Bahamas. 

184. Chrysomitris notata. (Accidental in Kentucky, yjfZe Audubon.) Mab. high- 
lands of Mexico and Guatemala. 

253. PiiONiPARA ZENA. (Key West.) Hah. West Indies in general. 

265. Icterus vulgaris. (South Carolina, etc.) Hab. Jamaica and northern South 
America. 

302. Milvulus tyrannus. (Accidental in Mississippi, New Jersey, etc.) Hab. whole of 

tropical South America east of the Andes, Atlantic coast region of Central 
America (and Mexico ?). 

303. Tyrannus DOMiNiCENSis. (Florida.) i?a&. whole of West Indies. 
357&. Chordeiles POPETUE MINOR. (Florida.) iZa&. Cuba and Jamaica. 

386. COCCYZUS SENICULUS. (Florida, Louisiana?) Hab. West Indies and parts of 

northern South America. 
389. Crotophaga ani. (Tortugas; near Philadelphia !) Hab. West Indies and parts 

of northern South America. 
420a. TiNNUNCULUS sparverius isabellinus. 
421. TiNNUNCULUS sparverioides. (Florida.) Hab. Cuba. 
429. EosTRHAMUS sociabilis plumbeus. (Florida.) Hab. Tropical America in 

general. 
458. CoLUMBA LEUCOCEPiiALA. (Florida Koys.) iTa?*. West Indies; Honduras. 
462. Zen^da AMABiLis. (Florida Keys. ) iZaft. Greater Antilles. 

467. Geotrygon MARTiNiCA. (Florida Kcys.) iftift. West Indies. 

468. Starnoenas cyanocephala. (Florida Keys.) Hab. Cuba. 

502. Eudocimus RUBER. (Louisiana?) i?a&. Northern South America ; Jamaica. 

503. Plegadis FALCiNELLUS. (Florida, Straggling northward.) iZaft. Eastern Hem- 

i8j)here chieiiy. 

578. lONORNis MARTINICA. (Southern portions in general, straggling northward.) 
Hab. whole of troijical America. 

581. Aramus pictus. (Florida.) Hab. West Indies and Atlantic coast of Central 
America. 

585. Phcenicopterus ruber. (Florida Keys.) Hal). West Indies and shores of Gulf 
of Mexico and Caribbean Sea ; Galapagos. 

635. NoMONYX DOMiNicus. (Accidental on Lake Champlain and in Wisconsin.) 
Hab. whole of tropical America. 

692. Sterna an^stheta. (Florida.) iJa&. tropics generally. 

734. Tachybaptes dominicus. (Lower Eio Grande, in Texas.) Hab. Tropical Amer- 
ica in general. 

* Excluding species peculiar to Florida. 



232 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

SOUTHWESTERN BORDER — TEXzVS TO CALIFORNIA. 

[The species of this list which are peculiar to the more elevated portioua of IMexico 
and Guatemala (iucludiug the coutiguous southern border of the Uuited States) are 
distinguished by an asterisk (*) prefixed to the number. The avi-fauna of temperate 
Mexico is decidedly more nearly related to that of the Western Province of North 
America than to the tropical fauna of the Mexican tierra calientc or hot coast-region. 
The genera of Neotropical affinities are printed in italics. ] 

Catalogue No. 

* 13a. Harporhynchus rufus longirostris. (Lower Rio Grande.) 

* 15. Harporhynchus cuRViROSTRis. (Lower Eio Grande.) 

* 26. Phainopepla nitens. (Texas to California.) 

* 37. LoPHOPHANES ATROCRiSTATUS. (Lower Rio Grande.) 

* 39. LoPHOPHANES WOLLWEBERi. (NewMcxico; Arizona.) 

* 49. PsALTRiPARUS MEEANOTis. (Nevada?) 

* 50. AuRiPARUS FLAViCEPS. (Texas to Arizona. ) 

* 56. Camjyylorhynchus brunneicapiUus. (Texas to California.) 

* 59. Catherpes MEXiCANUS. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 

* 60a. Thryothorus ludovicianus berlandieri. (Lower Rio Grande.) 

* 61b. Thryomaxes bewicki leucogaster. (Lower Rio Grande to Arizona.) 

* 83. Helmintiiophaga EUCi/E. (Arizona.) 

* 89a. Parula insularis nigrilora. (Lower Rio Grande.) 

* 92. Peucedramus olivaceus. (Lower Rio Grande ? Arizona.) 
*104. Denurceca GRACiiE. (Arizona.) 

*108. Dendikeca chrysopakia. (Texas.) 

*129. Setophaga picta. (Lower Rio Grande ? Arizona.) 

*130. Setophaga MiNiATA. (Lower Rio Grande?) 

*131. Cardellina RUBRIFRONS. (Lower Rio Grande ? Arizona.) 

*132. Ergaticus RUBER. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 

133. Basileuterus culicivorus. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 
*134. Basileuterus bellii. (Lower Rio Grande?) 
*136. Vireosylvia AGiLis FLAVO-viRiDis. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 
*142. ViREO ATRiCAPiLLUS. (Texas.) 
*147. ViREO viciNiOR. (Arizona; Southern California.) 

160. Eiiphonia elegantissima. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 
*163. Pyranga HEPATiCA. (New Mcxico ; Arizona.) 
*164a. Pyranga tESIVA cooperi. (New Mexico ; Arizona.) 
*182a. AsTRAGALiNUS PSALTRiA ARIZONA. (Upper Rio Grande to Arizona.) 

182&. AsTRAGALiNUS PSALTRIA MEXICANUS. (Lower Rio Grande ?) 
*215. Spizella ateogularis. (Lower Rio Grande to Lower California.) 
*222. JuNCO CINEREUS. (Arizona.) 

*227. Peuc^a ARIZON.E. (Lower Rio Grande to Arizona.) 
*230a. Peuc/ea RUFiCEPS BOUCARDi. (Arizona.) 
*236. Embernacjra rufivirgata. (Lower Rio Grande.). 
*241. PiPiLO aberti. (Arizona.) 

*242a. Cardinalis virginianus igneus. (Arizona ; Lower California.) 
*243. Pyrrhuloxia sinuata. (Lower Rio Grande to Lower California.) 
*250. Passerina versicolor. (Lower Rio Grande.*) 

252. Spermopliila moreletii. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*258a. MoLOTHRUs ater obscurus. (Texas to Lower California.) 

259. Molothrus ^neus. (Lower Rio Grande.) 

263a. Sturnella MAGNA MEXiCANA. (Lower Rio Graudc.) 

* Accidental in Michigan ! 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 233 

Catalogue No. 
*266. ICTEiius AUDUBONii. (Lower Eio Graucle.) 
*268. Icterus PARisoRUM. (Texas to Lower Califoruia.) 
*269. Icterus cucullatus. (Texas to Lower California.) 
*275. QuisCALUS MACRURUS. (Lower Eio Grande.) 

*276. QuiscALUS PALUSTRis. (Head of Gulf of Califoruia? coast of Louisiana.) 
*295. Aphelocoma sordida arizox.e. (Arizona.) 
*296. Xanthura luxuosa. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*3'34. Eugenes fulgexs. (Arizona.) 
*342. Atthis heloisje. (Texas.) 
*344. Calothorax lucifer. (Arizona.) 

345. AmaziVm fusclcaudata. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*346. AmazUia yucalantnsh. (Lower Rio Grande. ) 
*348. Iache latirostris. (Arizona.) 

356. Nyctidromus albicollis. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*358. Chordeiles acutipenxis texexsis. (Texas to Lower California.) 
*363. Picus scalaris. (Texas to Arizona.) 
*365. Picus stricklaxdi. (Arizona.) 
*373. Cexturus aurifroxs. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*374. Cexturus uropygialis. (Arizona.) 

383. Ceryle AMERICANA CABixisii. (Texas to Arizona.) 

390. Crotophaga suLCiROSTRis. (Lower Rio Grande.) 
*391. Rhynchopsitta pachyrhyncha. (Rio Grande Valley ?) 
*402&. Scops asio maccalli. (Texas.) 
*403. Scops trichopsis. (New Mexico ; Stockton, Cal. ?) 
*404. Scops flammeolus. (North to about 40° in higher western mountains.) 

410. Glaucibium PHAL.ENOIDES. (Tcxas and Arizona.) 
*411. MiCRATiiEXE whitxeyi. (Arizona; S. E. California.) 

419. Rhyxchofaxco fusco-c^rulescexs. (Texas; New Mexico.) 

434. Axtenor unicinctus harrisi. (Louisiana to Lower California.) 

440. Buteo abbreviatus. (Arizoua ; Southern Califoruia.) 

441. Buteo albicaudatus. (S. Texas.) 

444. Urbituiga anthracina. (Arizona.) 

445. AsTURiXA xiTiDA PLAGiATA. (Arizoua.*) 

450. Thras.etus harpyia. (Lower Rio Grande; Louisiana?) 

457. COLUMBA erythrixa. (S.Texas.) 
*4r)3. EngyptUa alhifrons. (S.Texas.) 

464. Melopelia leucoptera. (Texas to Lower California.) 
*466. Scardafella IXCA. (Southern Texas.) 
*469. Ortalis vet Ilia maccalli. (S.Texas.) 
*470. Meleagris GALLOPAVO. (New Mexico; Upper Rio Grande in Texas.) 

483. Lophortyx gambeli. (W. Texas to Arizona.) 

4'^4. Callipepla squamata. (W. Texas to Arizoua.) 

485. Cyrtoxyx massexa. (W. Texas to Arizona.) 

499. Mycteria americana. (Southern Texas.) 



extire southern border. 



423. POLYBORUS CHERIWAY. 

427. Elanus glaucus. 
455. Catharista atrata. 
465. Cham^pelia passerina. 



* Accidental in Southern Illinois (only once observed) . 



234 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

i. Supposed valid species described hy Auduhon and Jrilso7i, which have not since been met 

with, and of which no specimens are Litown to exist in collections. 
Catalogue No. 
32, Eegulus cuvieri, Atjd. Orn. Biog. i. 1832, 288, pi. 55 ("Banks of Schuylkill 

River, Pa., June, 1812")-— Baikd, B. N. Am. 1858, 228; Review, i. 1864, 66.— 

B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 75, pi. 5, fig. 7. 
91. Perissoglossa carbonata (Aucl.) Ridgw. — Sylvia carhonata, Aud. Orn. Biog. 

i. 1831, 308, pi. 60 (Kentucky). — Dendroica carhonaia, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 

287; Review, i. 1885, 207. — Perissoylossa. carhonata, B. B. & R. Hist. N.Am. 

B. i. 1874, 214, pi. 12, fig. 3. 
112. Dendrceca MONTANA (Wils.) Baird. — Sylvia montana, WiLS. Am. Orn. v. 1812, 

113, pi. xliv. fig. 2 ("Blue Mts. of Pennsylvania")-— Aud. Orn. Biog. v. 294 

("California"). — Dendroica montana, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 279; Review, i. 

1865, 190.— Den draxa montana, B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 271. 
126. WiLSONiA MiNUTA (Wils.) Bp. — Muscicapa wtnMfa, Wils. Am. Orn. vi. 1812, 62, 

pi. 1. fig. 5. — Aud. Orn. Biog. v. pi. 434, fig. 3; B. Am. i. pi. 67,—Myiodioctes 

minntus, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 293; Review, 1865, 241.— B. B. & E. Hist. N. 

Am. B. i. 1874, 316, pi. 16, fig. 2. 

I. List of untenable sjjecies and races of North America7i birds described since 1858. 

1. Hclminthophaga ruficapilla var. ocularis, B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 191. 

(Chicago, 111.) = No. 85. 
(?) 2. Helminth ophag a ruficapilla var. gutturalis, B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 

191. (East Humboldt Mts., Nevada; Ft. Tejon, Cal.) =No. 85? 

3. Helminthophaga celata var. obscura, B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 1874, 192. (Geor- 

gia and Florida.) =;No. 86. 

4. Hirundo bicolor var. respertina, Cooper, Am. Nat. x. Feb. 1876, 91. (California.) 

= No. 155. 

5. CoZ/yrio c7icniw«(/ensis, Gregg, Proc. Elmira Acad. i. 1870, 9. (New York.) =No. 

148, juv. 

6. Hesperiphona vespertina var. montana, Ridgw. in B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. i. 

1874, 449, pi. 22, fig. 4. (Southern Rocky Mts. and mountain regions of Mex- 
. ico.) =No. 165. 
(?) 7. Loxia atrata, von Homeyer, Jour, fiir Orn. 1879, 179. (North America.) 

= No. 173 ?? * 
8. Leucosticte campestris, Baird, Orn. Cal. i. 1870, 163. (Colorado.) ^No. 175a 

(individual variation). 
(?) 9. Linaria brunnescens, von HOMEYER, Jour, fiir Orn. 1879, 184. ("Lapland, Gron- 

land, Schweden.")t =No. 179a? 

* "Somewhat smaller than L. leucoptera, hut with about the same length of wing, the taU at least 
10"™ sliorter. Distinguished by its coloration. The red in ground tone is nearest that of the "Haken- 
gimpel" [Pinicola enuclcator] but everywhere darker, and saturated, as it wei'e, with black, this color 
extending indefinitely both on the back as well as on the middle of the belly to the breast, as also on 
the lower tail-coverts. The feet are even darker colored than in leucoptera. The wing-bands are un- 
affected for the most part, although not quite so broad. This is especially seen in the first or terminal 
band, which begins, scarcely visible, at the edge of the wing, and remains very inconsiderable to the 
middle, then quickly expands to a great rounded spot. The extent of the second band is everywhere 
much more limited than in leucoptera." 

" This is decidedly not a melanism, as is shown, not alone by the character of the coloration, but by 
the ocurrence of two old males exactly alike." 

" My two birds came from North ATOBrica,." —[Translation.^ 

t "The dark Linnet is nearest to this species in size, but it is easily distinguished by many features. 
The whole upper parts are blackish brown, with very nairow m.argins to the feathers of whitish and 
rusty yellow, which, on the rump, return to the ground color; on the sides of the head the feathers .also 
have very fine, rusty white margins; the throat-spot is very large ; the entire under parts to the mid- 
dle of the belly are densely covered with many large, dark brown longitudinal streaks. Two birds 
killed in Lapland, June-July (sexes not determined), show a tender red on the side of the head. The 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 235 

Catalogue No. 

10. ^"^JoZ/iMS /«8ce8ce»i8, COUES, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1861, 222. (Labrador.) =No. 179 

(midsummer plumage). 

11. ^giothusrostratus, Coves, I. c. (Greenland.) = No. 179a (midsummer plumage). 

12. Centronyx odiroccphalus, Aiken, Am. Nat. vii. 1873, 237. (El Paso Co., Colorado.) 

= No. 191 (autumual plumage). 

13. Passerculm cahoti, B. B & E. Hist. N. Am. B. iii. 1874, pi. xlvi. fig. 9. (Naliant, 

Massachusetts.) ^ No. 233. \^Not described! \ 

14. SpizeUa evura, Coues, The Ibis, 1865, 118, 164. (Ft. Whipple, Ariz.) =No. 

215, young. 

15. Passerella obscura, Yerkill, Proc. Boston Soc. ix. 1862, 153. (Anticosti I.) 

= No. 235, young, 

16. Hedymeles vielanocejthahis var. capUalis, B. B. & R. Hist. N. Am. B. ii. 1874, 74. 

(Pacific coast of Mexico aud United States.) =No. 245. 

17. Cruiraca cwrulea var. eurhyncha, Coues, Am. Nat. viii. 1874, 563. (Mexico.) ^No. 

246. 

18. Dolichonyx oryzivorus vai'. .cdbinucha, Ridgw. Bull. Essex Inst. v. Nov. 1873, 192. 

(Missouri plains to Salt Lake Valley.) =No. 257. 

19. Empidonax pygmceus, Minot, Land aud Game Birds New England, 1877, — . (Near 

Boston, Mass.) \_Aris fictita!} 

20. Dryobates hyloscopus, Cab. & Heine, Mus. Hein. iv. June 25, 1863, 69. (San Jos6, 

Cal.) =No. 3606. 

21. Dryobates homorus, Cab. & Hein. Mus. Hein. iv. June 25, 1863, 65. (California.) 

= No. 361rt. 

22. Picus cuvieri, Malh. Mon. Pic. i. 1861, 85, pi. 22, fig. 3. (North America.) =No. 

360, 5 ad. 

23. Picus turati, M.Ai.n. Mon. Pic. i. 1861, 125, pi. 29, figs. 5,6, 7. (California and 

Rocky Mountains.) =No. 361, $ ad. 

24. Chamapelia passenna var. pallescens, Baird, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1859, 305. 

(Cape St. Lucas.) =:No. 465. 

25. Pediocwtes kcnnicolti, Suckl. Proc. Philad. Acad. 1861, 361. =No. 478. 

26. Bonasa jobsii, Jaycox, Am. Nat. 

27. Ibis thalassinus, Ridgw. Am. Nat. viii. Feb. 1874, 110. (Pacific coast of America, 

from California to Chili.) :=No. 50i,juv. 

28. Ardea cyanirostris, Cory, Birds of the Bahama Islands, 1880, — . (Bahamas.) 

^ No. 492, breeding plumage. 

29. C]/<jfWM8 jMssmora, HiNCKS, Pr. Linn. viii. 1864, 1. (Toronto, Canada.) =No. 589, 

jiw. 

30. Bernicla barnstoni, Ross, Cauad. Nat. vii. April, 1862, — . ^594, var. ? 

31. Bernicla leucolcema, Murry, Edinb. Phil. Jour. April, 1859, 226, pi. 4, fig. 1. = 594, 

var. 

32. Pelecanus occipitalis, Rigdw. Am. Sportsman, iv. 1874, 297. (Nevada.) =No. 

640, adult, breeding plumage, after loss of occij)ital crest, the latter replaced 
by dusky-grayish patch. 

33. Thalasseus caspius var. imperator, Coues, Proc. Philad. Acad. 1862, 538, in text. 

(North America.) ^ No. 680. 

34. Stm-na portlandica, Ridgw. Am. Nat. viii. 1874, 433. (Portland, Maine.) =No. 

687, J«r., second year 

35. Ster7ia fuliginosa var. crissalis, Baird, Pr. Boston Soc. xiv. 1872, 285. (Socorro 

I., N. W. Mexico.) =No. 681. 

wing-bands are merely indicated. The bill is very characteristic. It is somewhat weaker at the base 
than in L. hornemanni, but longer and remarkably darker in all seven specimens. 

"The bird figured by Dresser on the second plate (lower figure) belongs here, and is by no means the 
young of L. hornemanni, as supposed by Dresser." 

[This description accords well in every particular with the dark summer stage oi ^giothus linaria 
holbiJlli, described in 1801 by Dr. Coues as JE. rostratus, the type of which came from Greenland.— E. K.J 



236 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

k. List of exotic species which have heen attributed to Xorth America by various authors, hut 
ajjparenily tvithout sufficient evidence of their occurrence.* 

1. Anthus cervinus, Pall.— Zander, Jour, fur Orn. Extrateft i. 1853, 64. (Aleutian 

Islauds. ) 

2. Geothlypis a'quinoctialis (Gmel.) Cabau. — Sylvia delafieldii, Aud. Orn. Biog. v. 1839, 

307 ("Oregon")-— y'-ic/ias delafieldii, Aud. B. A. Am. it. 1841, 81, pi. 103.— 
Geothlypis velatus, Baird, B. N. Am. 1859, 243 ; Cat. 1859, No. 171. 

3. Lanius lahtora, Sykes. — Lanius elegans, Swains. Faun. Bor, Am. ii. 1831, 122 

(fur countries). — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, .566. [Not Collurio eleyans, Baird.] 

4. Proyne lencoyastra, Baird. — P. chalyhea, Cass. Ulustr. 1856, 246 (California, fide 

J. G. Bell). 

5. Astragalinus yarrelli (Aud.) Caban. — Carduelis yarrelli, AuD. Synop. 1839, 117 

("California"); B. Am. iii. 1841, 136, pi, 184. — Chrysomitris yarrelli, Baird, 
B. Am. 1858, 421 ; Cat. 1859, No. 312. 

6. Astragalinus harhatus (Mol.) . — Carduelis stanleyi, Add. Synop. 1839, 118 

("California"); B. Am. iii. 1841, 137, pi. 185. — Chrysomitris stanleyi, Baird, 
B. N. Am. 18.58, 420 ; Cat. 1859, No. 311. 

7. Hypolia arctoa (Pall.) Ridgw. — Leucosticte arctoa, Caban. Mu8. Hein. i. 1851, 

154 ("Russicli-America"). — Leucosticte arctous, Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 430; 
Cat. 1859, No. 324. 

8. CARPODAcns n^MORRHOUS (Liclit.) Scl. — Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 417, foot-note 

(North America ?) ; Cat. 1859, No. 309. 

9. LoxiA PiTYOPSiTTACUS, Becbst. — C/. NUTTALL, Man. Orn. Land Birds, ed. 1832, 

537 ("high northern regions of America", fide Temminck). 

10. ^' Zonotrichia" pileata (Bodd.) . — Fringilla mortonii^ Aud. Orn. Biog. v. 312; 

B. Am. iii. 1841, 152, pi. 190 ("North California"). 

11. Cynchramus schanichis {L,mn.) Boie. — Emberiza sc/ioe«tc?«s, Nutt. Man. Orn. Laud 

Birds, ed. 1832, ii. 5«(3 (" vicinity of Harrisburg in Pennsylvania'^, fide Audu- 
bon). 

12. Melanocorypha calandra iX'iww.) Boie. — Alauda calandra, LiNN., S\v. & Rich. F. 

B. A. ii. 1831, 244 ("fnr countries"; spec, presented by the Hudson's Bay 
Co. said to be in the British Museum). — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 580. 

13. Trupialis militaris (Linn.) Bp.— Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 533 ("California"); Cat. 

1859, No. 405. 

14. Icterus melanocephaxus (Wagl.) Gray. — Cass, Illustr. 1856, 137, pi, 21 (Texas 

and New Mexico). — Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 543 (not given as North Ameri- 
can!); Cat, 1859, No, 410. 

15. Calocitta colliei (Vig.) Finsch. — " PicahullocMi, Wagl.", Aud. B. Am. iv. 1842, 

105, ]}\. 229 ("woody portions of North California"). — Garrulus hullockii, 
Nutt. Man. i. 1832, 230 ("Columbia R."). 

16. Tyrannus melancholicus, Vieill. — Baird, B. N, Am, 1858, 176 (not given as North 

American) ; Cat. 1859, No. 129. 

17. Laynpornis violicauda (Bodd.) Elliot. — " Trochilus mango, Linn.", Aud. Orn. Biog, 

ii. 480; B. Am. iv. 1842, 186, pi, 251 ("Florida Keys"). — Lampornis mango, 
Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 130 ; Cat. 1859, No. 100. 

18. Campephilus imperialis (Gould) Gray. — Picus tmperialis, Aud. Orn, Biog. v, 

313; B. Am. iv. 1842. 212 ("Rocky Mountains and North California).— Cass. 
niustr. 1856, 285, pi. 49.— Baird, B. N, Am. 1858, 82 ; Cat, 1859, No, 73, 

* TMs list does not iuclude American species wrongly supposed Ijy anthors to be the same as Euro- 
pean species, and so named, e.g. Circus ''cyaneus" for C. hiidsonius, Regulus "cristatus" foriJ. satrapa, 
Troglodytes "parvulus" or T. " ejiropceus^' tor T. hyemalis, etc., etc., but only tliose which were throngh 
actual error (as it appears) wrongly attributed to North America. Species which are most likely to 
have occurred in North America are printed in small capitals; those whose occurrence would in any 
case be purely accidental are printed in it.alics. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 237 

19. Hylotomus scapularis (Vig.) Uidgw.—" Picus Uneatua, Lixn.", Aud. Orn. 

Biog. V. 315; B. Am. iv. 1842, 233 ('-Columbia River"). 

20. Strix stridula, Linn.— ^S. aluco, Nu'iT. Man. i. 1832, 1-35 (Newfoundland and 

Hudson's Bay). 

21. Carine noctua (Scop.) Kaup. — "Strix passerina, Linn.", Aud. Oni. Biog. v. 

269. — " Sttrnia passerina, Linn.", Aud. B. Am. i. 1840, 116 ("Pictou, Nova 
Scotia"). 

22. Speotyio cunicularia (Mol.) . — Athene cunienlaria, Cass, in Baird's B. N. Am. 

1858, 60 (" North America, west of Rocky Mountains"). 

23. Thalasso^ktus pelagicus (Pall.) Kaup. — Aqulla pehujica, Pall. ZoiJgr Rosso- 

As. i. 1811, 343 (Russian America, fide Steller). — Raliaetus pelagicus, Cass. 
Ulustr. 1856, 31, pi. 6; in Baird's B. N. Am. 1858; Baird, Cat. 1859, No. 40. 

24. Sarcoyhamphus gryphus (Linn.) Dum. — Catharles gryphus, Bonap. Am. Orn. iv. 

1833, 318, pi. 22.— NuTT. Man. i.l832, 35. 

25. Gyparchus papa (Linn.) Glo^.—Catliaries papa, Nutt. Man. i. 1832, 40 ("from 

the 30th degree of north latitude to the 32d in the southern hemisphere"). 

26. Catiiartes burro vianus, Cass, in Baird's B. N. Am. 1858, 6 ("Lower Califor- 

nia"); Baird, Cat. 1859, No. 4. [C/. Ridgway, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Cluh, v. 
April, 1880, 83.] 

27. LOPIIORTYX elegans (Less.) Nutt.— Orfj/J5 elegans, Nutt. Mau. ed. 1840, i. 792 

(" Upper California", fide Lesson). 

28. BuTORiDES 15RUXNESCENS (Guudl.) Baird. — Baird, B. N. Am. 1858, 677 (in text); 

Cat. N. Am. B. 1859, No. 494. 

29. Hcematopus- ater, Vieill. — Heematopus ioivnsendii, Aud. Orn. Biog. v. 1839, 247, pi. 

427; B. Am. v. 1842, 245, pi. •3-26.—IIa'matopiis ater, Baird, B. N. Am. 18.58, 700; 
Cat. 1859, No. 514. 

30. "Trixga" platyrhyxcha, Temm. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 114 (Arctic America, 

fide Temminck aud Bonaparte). 

31. ACTODROMAS JiixuTA (Liuu.) Kaup. — Tringa minuta, Sw. & Rich. F. B. A. ii. 

1831, 385 (Nelson and Hayes Rivers; "seen abundantly in the autumn"). — 
Nutt. Man. ii. 1834, 119. 

32. AcTODROMAS TEMMixcKi (Leisl.) Ridgw. — Tringa temmincki, Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 

119 (Arctic America). 

33. Totaxus calidris (Linn.) Bcchst.— Sw. & Rich. F. B. A. ii. 1831, 391 ("Hud- 

son's Bay"; siiec. in British Museum). — Nutt. Man. ii. 1834, 155. 

34. Heliornis fulica (Bodd.) . — H. surinamensis, Isvtt. Inlau. ii. 1832, 510 ("acci- 

dental visitor in the Middle States of the Union"). 

35. Anser segetum (Gmel.) Lonap. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 348 (Canada and Hudson's 

Bay). 

36. Cairixa moschata (Linn.) Caban. — Anas moscliata, Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 403 

Lower Mississippi and Gulf coast of U. S.). 

37. CEdemia nigra (Lmu.) Hen. — FuUgula nigra, Nutt. Mau. ii. 1832, 423 ("coast of 

the United States"). 

38. Mergellus axbellus (Linn.) Selby. — Mergus albellus, Wils. Am. Orn. iii. pi. 

Ixxi. fig. 4 (New England and New York; numerous). — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 
467.— Aud. Orn. Biog. iv. 350; B. Am. vi. 1843, 408, pi. 414 ("Lake Bara- 
taria, not far from New Orleans"). 

39. Phalacrocorax graculus (Linn.) Leach. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 484 ("South 

of Greenland"; United States in winter). 

40. Phalacrocorax pygmaiis. Pall.— Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 487 (Northern North Amer- 

ica, fulc Bonaparte). 

41. Phalaa-ocorax africanus (Gmel.) Dumont. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 488 ("United 

States", fide Audubon). 

42. Larus fuscus, Linn. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 302 (Greenland, Newfoundland, and 

Hudson's Bay). 



238 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

43. Larus capistratus, Temm. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 290 (Delaware E. and Chesa- 

peake Bay). 

44. Larus minutus, Pall. — Sw. & Rich. F. B. A. ii. 1831, 426 (given on Sabine's 

authority). — Nutt. Man. ii. 18j2, 289. — Chroicoceplialus minutus, Lawr. in 
Baird's B. N. Am. 1858, 853.— Baird, Cat. 1859, No. 671. 

45. DrOMEDEA EXULAXS, Liun. — Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 340 ("accidentally to the coasts 

of the central part of the Union").— Lawr. in Baiid's B. N. Am. 1858, 821. — 
Baird, Cat. 1859, No. 630. 

46. PODICEPS cristatus (Linn.) Lath. — Sw. & Rich. F. B. A. ii. 1831, 410 (through- 

out fur countries). — NuTT. Man. ii. 1832, 250. — Lawr. in Baird's B. N. Am. 
1858, 893.— Baird, Cat. 1859, No. 703. 

47. Tachybaptes mixor (Liun.) Coues. — Podiceps minor, Nutt. Man. ii. 1832, 257 

(Hudson's Bay). 

I. Partial list of forcifjn birds vjhich have been introduced to the United States, and those 
which have been captured after escape fj-om confinement. 

SPECIES INTRODUCED JVITH A VIEW TO THEIR XATURALIZATION. * 

1, Passer domesticus (Linn.) Leach. European House Sparrow. The attempted 

naturalization of this bird has proved decidedly successful. The case is so 
notorious that further comment is unnecessary. 

2. Passer MOXTANUS (Linn.) Stejihens. European Tree Sparrow. Has become nat- 

uralized in the vicinity of Saint Louis, Mo., but the history of its introduction 
is unknown, (See Merrill, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club.) 

4. Alauda arvexsis, Linn. Skylark. Partially naturalized in the vicinity of Cin- 

cinnati, on Long Island, and perhaiJS other localities. 

5. CoTURNix COMMiiXis (Linn.) Bonn. European Quail. Introduced to various local 

ities in the Eastern United States, and partially naturalized. 

species WHICH HAVE BEEN CAPTURED AFTER ESCAPE FROM COXFINEMEXT.t 

1. Amadixa rubro-xigra, — —. Brunswick, Maine, March, 1879; Leslie A. Lee. 

(Allex, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, April, 1880, 119.) Hab. India. 

2. Crithagra butyracea, . South Scituate, Mass., in midAvinter. (Brewer, 

Proc. Bost. Soc. XX. 271.) ITab. South Africa. 

3. LiGURixus CHLORis (Linn.) Koch. Lowville, Lewis Co., N. Y., March 19, 1878; R. 

B. Hough. (Cf. Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Apr. 1880, 119.) Hab. Europe. 

4. Carduelis elegaxs, Steph. Eastern Massachusetts, many captures. (Allen, 

Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, Apr. 1880, 120.) Hab. Europe. 

5. Serixus meridiox^^alis, Brehiu. Westeru Massachusett.s, in winter. (Ali.ex, 1. 

c.) Hab. Eurox)e. 

6. CoRVUS frugilegus, Linn. Washington, D. C, August, 1879. 

An example of this species 'was seen by me in August, 1879, in the grounds of the Agricul- 
tural Department in Washington. It was perched in a maple tree near one of the outhuild- 
inss, was very tame, and iiew laboriously, as if very recently escaped from confinement. I 
am, as yet, ignorant of the history of this specimen, nor have I since seen it. 

7. COXURUS xanthogenius, Bp. Hab. St. Thomas, West Indies. 

An example of this species, shot in a grove near Washington, by Dr. D. W. Prenti.ss, is in 
the National Museum collection. Of course it was an escaped cago-bird. 

8. Chexalopex .egyptiaca (Linn.) Steph. Carnarsie, Long Island, Jan. 3, 1877. 

(Akhurst, Bull. Nutt. Orn. Club, ii. Apr. 1877, 52.) Hab. Southern Europe 
and Africa. 

* This list does not include domesticated birds. 

tThis list is, of course, very incomplete ; it includes merely a few species, the lecords of whose cap- 
ture 1 happen to have at hand. A more complete list would be desirable, but want of time forbids 
its compilation in the present connection. 



PEOCEEDIN'GS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 239 

Table of families of Xorth American hirds, showing numher of genera and species of each 
according to the foregoing catalogue* 



Number of Number -vr i, e 

tliecata- of gen- dumber of spe- 

InfriiB o»-!i CieS.T 



logue. 



1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 
10. 
11. 
12. 
13. 
14. 
15. 
16. 
17. 
18. 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27. 
28. 
29. 
30. 
31. 
32. 
33. 
34. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 
48. 
49. 
50. 
51. 
52. 
53. 
54. 
55. 
56. 
57. 



Tunlid?e 

Ciuclida? 

[Luscinidte] 

Saxicolida; 

PTILOGONATID.E . 

Sylviidae 

Chamwidw 

ParidoB 

SittidiB 

CertWidaj 

Troglod y tidse 

Motacillidje 

Mniotii,tid.e - . . 

VlREONID^ 

LauiidiB 

Ampelidse 

Hirundinidfe 

C^REBID.E 

TanagridvE 

Fringillidiu 

ICTERID.E 

[SturuidiB] 

Corvida? 

[Alaudidic] 

Tyrannid/E .... 

cotingid^. 

trochilid.e 

Cypselidic 

CaprimulgidiP . .. 

Picidje 

MOMOTID.E 

Alcedinidie 

Trogonida' 

CnciilidiB 

Psittacida» 

Strigida' 

FalcoDidai 

Cathartid^e 

Coliimbida' 

Cracid^ 

meleagrid.e . .. 

Tetraonidse 

Perdicidte 

ArdeidsB 

Ciconiidje 

Ibidida^ 

PlataleidiE 

HiBmatopodidie - , 

Strepsilida', 

Cliaradriidie 

8colopacid;c. 

PhalaropodidiB .. 
Recurviiostrida; 

Parridaj 

Rallida^ 

Aramid^ 

Gruidae 



1-18 
19 
20 

21-24 
25-26 
27-34 
35 

36-50 
51-54 
55 

56-68 
69-73 
74-134 
135-147 
148-149 
150-151 
152-158 
159 

160-164 
165-256 
257-278 
279 

280-298 
299-300 
301-331 
332-333 
, 334-348 
349-352 
353-358 
359-380 
381 

382-383 
384 

385-390 
391-393 
394-411 
412-452 
453-455 
456-468 
469 
470 

471-479 
480-485 
486-498 
499-500 
501-504 
505 

506-508 
509-511 
512-523 
524-562 
503-565 
56(1-567 
568 

569-580 
581 
582-584 



1 
1 

2 
2 
3 
1 
4 
1 
1 
9 
4 

18 
3 
1 
1 
6 
1 
2 

36 
8 
1 
9 
2 

11 
2 

10 
3 
5 

10 
1 
1 
1 
3 
2 

12 

23 
3 

10 
1 
1 
6 
5 

11 
2 
2 
1 
1 
2 
7 

21 
3 
2 
1 
6 
1 
1 



18 + 
1 

1 
4 
2 

8 + 
1 

15 + 

4 + 

1 + 
13 + 

5 
61 + 
13 + 

2 + 
2 

7 + 
1 

5 + 
91 + 
22 + 

1 

19 + 
2 + 

31 + 

2 
15 

4 

6 + 
22 + 

1 

2 

1 

6 

3 

18 + 
41 + 

3 
13 

1 

1 + 

9 + 
6 + 

13 

2 

4 

1 

3 

3 

12 + 
39 + 

3 

2 

1 
12 + 

1 

3 



8= 26 



1= 9 

3= 18 

1= 5 

1= 2 

9= 21 

8= 69 
3= 16 
2= 4 

1= 8 

1= 6 
35 = 126 

5= 27 

7= 26 
2= 4 
2= 33 



2= 8 
10= 32 



11= 29 
12= 53 



1= 2 
7= 16 
3= 9 



2= 14 
4= 43 



2= 14 



* Families peculiar to America in small capitals ; peculiar to North America in italics. Palfearctic 
families not represented by a peculiar species in America are placed in brackets. 

tThe figures following the sign + denote the number of recognized races not distinguished by a sep- 
arate number in the catalogue; those in the last column the total of species and races. 



240 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Taile of families of North American birds — Continued. 



58. 
59. 
60. 
61. 
62. 
63. 
64. 
65. 
66. 
67. 
68. 
69. 
70. 
71. 
72. 



PhcenicopteridsB . . 

Anatidae 

Tachypetidte . 

PelecauidiB 

Phalacrocoracidaj 

Plotidaj 

SularidjB 

Pliaetbontid* ... 
Khynchopsidai ... 

LaridsB 

Stercorariidse 

Procellariidse 

Podicipitidaj , 

Colymbidie 

Alcidae 



Number of 


j^umber 


the cata- 


of gen- 


logue. 


era. 


585 


1 


586-638 


30 


639 




640-641 




642-648 




649 




650-653 




654-655 




656 




657-695 


9 


696-699 


2 


700-728 


15 


729-735 


5 


736-740 


1 


741-764 


14 



Number of spe- 
cies. 



53+ 6= 59 

1 

2 

7+ 3= 10 

1 

4 

2 

1 
39+ 2= 41 

4 
29+ 2= 31 

7+ 1= 8 

5 
24+ 3= 27 



SUMMARY. 



Number of genera 

Number of species 

Number of subspecies 



379 
764 
160 



CONCORDANCE. 



No. of 


No. of 1 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


old cat- 


new cat- ' 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


alogue. 


alogue. ' 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


1 


454 ! 


35 


427 


69 


387 


102 


336 


135 


315 


167 


74 


2 


453 


36 


428 


70 


388 


103 


340 1 


136 


316 


167a 


74a 


3 


455 


37 


429 1 


71 


383 


104 


339 


137 


318 


168 


88 


4 


— 


38 


430 ' 


72 


359 


105 


338 


138 


321 


169 


75 


5 


414 


39 


449 i 


73 


— 


106 


337 


139 


320 


170 


122 


6' 


414 , 


40 


— 


74 


360 


107 


349 


140 


325a 


171 





7 


417 


41 


451 


75 


360& 


108 


350 


141 


325 


172 


120 


8 


415 


42 


452 


76 


361 


109 


351 I 


142 


326 


173 


121 


9 


419 


43 


451 ! 


77 


361a 


110 


352 


143 


324 


174 


118 


10 


413 


44 


425 i 


78 


364 


111 


353 


144 


322 


175 


119 


11 


412 


45 


423 ! 


79 


363 


112 


35-^ 


144a 


323 


176 


123 


12 


412a 


46 


434 1 


80 


362 


113 


355 


145 


327 


177 


123a 


13 


420 


47 


394 


81 


366 


114 


357 


146 


328 


178 


77 


14 


433 i 


48 


405 : 


82 


367 


115 


357fl 


147 


330 


179 


76 


15 


431 


49 


402 1 


83 


368 


116 


358 


148 


1 


180 


79 


16 


431 


50 


4025 


84 


368a 


116a 


356 


149 


5& 


181 


81 


17 


432 


51 


395 


85 


369 


117 


382 


149a 


5a 


182 


78 


18 


442 


52 


396 


86 


369a 


118 


383 


150 


5 


183 


85 


19 


442 


53 


399 


87 


369& 


119 


381 


151 


2 


183a 


84 


20 


4366 


54 


397 


88 


370 


: 120 


333 


152 


4 


184 


86 


21 


442 


55 


400 


89 


370 


121 


332 


153 


4a 


185 


87 


22 


438 


56 


401 


90 


371 


122 


302 


154 


3 


186 


115 


23 


436 


57 


401 


91 


372 


123 


301 


155 


7 


187 


116 


24 


436& 


58 


408 


92 


373 


124 


304 


156 


9 


188 


117 


25 


439 


59 


408 


93 


374 


125 


303 


157 


21 


189 


107 


26 


439a 


60 


409 


94 


375 


126 


306 


158 


22 


190 


109 


27 


443 


61 


406 


95 


377 


127 


307 


159 


23 


191 


108 


28 


442 


62 


407 


96 


376 


: 128 


305 


160 


24 


192 


105 


29 


437 


63 


392 


97 


378 


1 129 





161 


30 


193 


94 


30 


447 


64 


391 


98 


3786 


, 130 


312 


162 


33 


194 


95 


31 


447 


65 


384 


98a 


378a 


131 


313 


163 


32 


195 


90 


32 


448 


66 


389 


99 


379 


1 132 


311 


164 


19 


196 


102 


S3 


445 


67 


389 


100 





1 133 


314 


165 


71 


197 


100 


34 


426 


68 


385 


101 


335 


1 134 


317 


106 


73 


1 198 


111 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Concordance — Continued. 



241 



No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


' No. of 


No. of 


No. ot 


No. of 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


npw cat- 


old cat- 


ne>v cat- 


old cat- 




alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alague. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


1 alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


199 


112 


1 259 


15 


■: 318 


172 


378 


254 


i 

I 440 


295 


500 


503 


200 


99 


i 259a 


15 


318a 


172a 


• 379 


255 


I 441 


294 


500a 


504 


201 


98 


260 


13a 


319 


173 


380 


244 


442 


296 


501 


505 


202 


101 


261 


13 


320 


179 


381 


245 


■ 443 


297 


502 




203 


93 


261a 


13 


321 


178 


382 


24o 


444 


288 


503 


515 


204 


97 


262 


56 


322 


175 


383 


247 


445 


450 


: 504 


516 


205 


110 


263 


59a 


1 323 


174 


384 


251 


i 446 


457 


i 505 


523 


206 


90 


264 


58 


' 324 


— 


385 


250 


447 


458 


503 


522 


207 


91 


■' 235 


60 


325 


186 


. 386 


249 


448 


459 


507 


517 


208 


113 


! 266 


60a 


328 


187 


387 


248 


449 


, 462 


508 


520 


209 


103 


[ 267 


61 


327 


188 


388 


252 


450 


464 


509 


521 


210 


114 


268 


67 


328 


189 


389 


243 


451 


460 


510 


513 


211 


124 


269 


68 


: 329 


189 


390 


244 


452 


466 


511 


511 


212 


126 


270 


63 


330 


190 


391 


237 


453 


465 


512 


507 


213 


125 


271 


63a 


' 331 


191 


392 


2386 


454 


467 


513 


• 508 


214 


127 


272 


63 


332 


193a 


393 


238 


455 


468 


514 




215 


127 


273 


65 


333 


193 


394 


238a 


456- 


469 


515 


509 


216 


132 


274 


35 


334 


194 


395 


241 


457 


470a 


516 


510 


217 


128 


275 


55 


335 


1936 


396 


2406 


458 


470 


517 


566 


218 


129 


276 


55a 


336 


196 


397 


240 


459 


471 


' 518 


567 


219 


130 


277 


51 


337 


197 


398 


239 


460 


472 


519 


565 


220 


161 


278 


51a 


338 


198 


399 


257 


461 


472a 


520 


564 


221 


164 


279 


52 


339 


199 


400 


258 


462 


479 


521 


563 


222 


163 


280 


53 


340 


200 


401 


261 


463 


478a 


522 


525 


223 


162 


281 


54 


341 


201 


402 


261a 


464 


477 


523 


526a 


224 


160 


282 


27 


342 


202 


403 


2(i2 


465 


473 


524 


527 


225 


154 


288 


28 


343 


231c 


404 


2(50 


465a 


473ft 


525 


527a 


226 


153 


284 


29 


344 


204 


405 


— 


466 


4736 


526 


529 


227 


155 


285 


3(5 


345 


206 


406 


263 


437 


474 


527 


535 


228 


158 


286 


37 


346 


207a 


407 


264 


468 


475 


528 


530 


229 


157 


287 


38 


347 


208 


408 


265 


469 


476 


529 


540 


230 


158 


288 


39 


348 


205 


' 409 


266 


470 


475 


530 


539a 


231 


152 


289 


41a 


349 


209 


! 410 





471 


480 


531 


534 


231« 


152a 


289a 


41a 


350 


222 


411 


288 


472 


4806 


532 


538 


232 


150 


290 


41 


351 


221 


412 


267 


473 


481 


533 


536 


233 


151 


291 


416 


352 


218 


413 


269 


474 


482 


534 


542 


234 


26 


292 


43 


353 


220 


414 


270 


475 


483 


535 


541 


235 


25 


293 


42 


354 


217 


415 


271 


476 


484 


536 


528 


236 


148 


294 


40 


355 


224 


4J6 


272 


477 


485 


537 


552 


237 


149 


295 


46 


356 


225 


417 


273 


478 


582 


538 


547 


238 


149a 


296 


45 


357 


210 


418 


274 


479 


583 


539 


548 


239 


— 


297 


49 


358 


214 


419 


275 


480 


584 


540 


549 


240 


135 


298 


47 


359 


211 


420 


277 


481 


581 


541 


550 


241 


136 


299 


48 


360 


212 


421 


278 : 


482 


491 


542 


553 


242 


— 


300 


50 


361 


213 


422 


278a 


483 


491 


543 


557 


243 


137 


301 


159 


362 


215 


423 


280 


4rf4 


492 


544 


554 


244 


138 


302 


300 


363 


331 


424 


280 


485 


490 


545 


555 


245 


139 


303 


165 


364 


2316 


425 


281 


488 


489 i 


546 


556 


246 


145 


304 


166 


365 


231c 


4-36 


282 


486a 


489 


547 


553 


247 


142 


305 


168 


366 


231(Z 


427 


282rt 


487 


487 


548 


545 


248 


143 


306 


16Sa 


367 


231a 


428 


2826 


488 


486 


549 


558 


249 


144 


307 


169 : 


368 


234 


429 


283 : 


489 


486 ; 


550 


559 


250 


141 


308 


170 : 


369 


233 : 


430 


284 \ 


490 


493 


551 


560 


251 


141a 


209 


_ 


370 


226 


431 


285 : 


491 


498 


552 


569 


252 


140 


301 


184 ; 


371 


228 


432 


286 , 


492 


497 


553 


571 


253 


11 


311 





372 


230 


433 


287 ! 


493 


494 


554 


572 


253a 


11 


312 





373 


236 


434 


289 


494 


— 1 


555 


'574 


254 


12 


313 


181 


374 


235 


435 


290 


495 


495 ; 


556 


576 


255 


10 


314 


182 


375 


235a 


436 


290c 


496 


496 ' 


557 


575 


256 


16 


315 


182a 


376 


235c 


437 


293 


497 


500 I 


558 


577 


257 


16ff 


316 


183 


376a 


2356: 


438 


292 


498 


502 


559 


580 


258 


17 
T*rnp 


317 


185 
Tin S 


377 

fi 1 


256 : 


439 


291 ; 


499 


501 


560 


579 



Sept. 4, 1880, 



242 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 
Concordance — Continued. 



No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


No. of 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


old cat- 


new cat- 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue- 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue 


alogue. 


alogue. 


alogue. 


561 


578 


589 


615 


620 


642 


651 


706 


681 


679 


710 


741 


561a 


588 


590 


616 


621 


648 


652 


696 


682 


680 


711 


742 


562 


589 


591 


618 


622 


6436 


653 


697 


683 


(i81 


712 


745 


563 


591 


592- 


617 


623 


643 


654 


698 


684 


682 


713 


744 


563a 


591a 


593 


620 


624 


643a 


655 


699 


685 


683 


714 


743a 


564 


590 


594 


619 


625 


644 


656 


6t)0 


686 


685 


715 


743 


565 


593a 


595 


621 


626 


645 


657 


662 


687 


684 


716 


745 


566 


593a 


596 


622 


627 


646 


658 


661 


688 


681 


717 


746 


567 


594 


597 


623 


628 


649 


659 


662 


689 


686 


718 


746 


567a 


594c 


598 , 


625 


629 


654 


660 


603 


690 


687 


: 719 


748 


568 


5946 


599 


626 


630 


— 


' 661 


664a 


691 


<i85 


1 720 


748 


569 


594a 


600 


624 


631 


701 


' 662 


664 


i 692 


688 


721 


749 


570 


595 


601 


632 


632 


702 


663 


668 


693 


687 


722 


750 


571 


596 


602 


633 


633 


703 


664 


669 


694 


690 


1 723 


750 


572 


597 


603 


633 


634 


704 


664a 


670 


695 


693 


i 724 


751 


573 


598 


604 


630 


635 


705 


665 


670 


696 


695 


: 725 


747 


574 


599 


605 


632 


636 


705a 


666 


672 


697 


656 


1 726 


760 


575 


600 


606 


627a 


637 


706 


667 


673 


698 


736 


: 727 


761 


576 


601 


607 


628 


638 


717 


668 


674 


699 


738 


1 728 


762 


577 


602 


608 


629 


639 


719 


669 


674 


700 


• 739 


729 


763 


578 


605 


609 


634 


640 


726 


670 


675 


1 701 


740 


730 


763 


579 


612 


610 


635 


641 


727 


671 


— 


702 


731 


731 


764 


580 


611 


611 


636 


642 


723 


! 672 


658 


1 703 


— 


732 


755 


581 


609 


612 


637 


643 


724 


673 


674 


703a 


731 


733 


755 


582 


610 


613 


638 


644 


722 


674 


659 


: 704 


729 


734 


759 


583 


608 


614 


— 


645 


72] 


675 


659 


; 705 


730 


735 


756 


584 


604 


615 


640 


646 


728 


676 


657 


i 706 


£'32 


736 


753 


585 


607 


616 


641 


647 


709 


, 677 


657 


' 707 


733fl 


737 


754 


586 


606 


617 


650 


648 


714 


i 678 


676 


: 708 


733 


738 


752 


587 


613 


618 


652 


649 


711 


679 


678 


i 708a 


734 






588 


614 


619 


639 


650 


712 


680 


677 


709 


735 


1 





INDEX TO THE GENERA. 

[The numbers refer to the first species of each genus in the catalogue.] 



Page. 
A. 

Accipiter 431 

Actodromas 533 

^chmopliorus 729 

^gialitis 517 

iEgiothus 178 

.^salon 416 

Agelaeus 261 

Aix 613 

Ajaja 505 

Al aud a 299 

Alca : 741 

Alle 752 

Aluco 394 

Amazilia 345 

Ammodromus 201 

Anipelis 150 

Amiihispiza 224 

Anas 601 

Anorthura 65 

Anous 695 

Anser 593 

Antenor 434 

Anthus 71 

Autrostomus 353 

Aphelocoma 291 

Aphriza 511 

Aquila 449 

Aramiis 5dl 

Archibuteo 447 

Ardea 486 

Ardetta 498 

Arquatella 530 

Asio 395 

Astragalinus 181 

Astur 433 

Asturina 445 

Atthis 342 

Auriparus 50 

Aythya 617 

B. 

Bartramia 555 

Basileuterus 133 



Page. 

Basilinna 347 

Bernicla 594 

Bonasa 473 

Botaurus 497 

Bracliyrhamphus 755 

Bubo 405 

Budytes 70 

Buteo 435 

Butoridea 494 

C. 

Calamospiza 256 

Calidiis 542 

Callijtepla 484 

Calothorax 344 

Calyi^te 337 

Campepliihis 359 

Camptola'mns 624 

Camj)ylorhynchus 56 

Cauace 471 

Caprimulgiis 354 

Cardellina 131 

Cardinalis 242 

Carpodacus 158 

Catharista 455 

Cathartes 454 

Catlierpes 59 

Centroeercus 479 

Ceutronyx 191 

Centroplianes 187 

Centurns 372 

Ceratorhina 746 

Certhia 55 

CertMola 159 

Ceryle 382 

Clisetiira 351 

Chamtea 35 

Chamtepelia 465 

Charadrius 514 

Chaulelasmus G04 

Cheu 590 

Chondestes 204 

Cliordeiles 357 

Chrysomitris 1°'* 

243 



244 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Page. 

Ciceronia 750 

Ciuchis 19 

Circus . .' 430 

Cistothorus 68 

Clangula 619 

Coccyzus 386 

Colajptes 378 

Cohiinba 456 

Colymbus 736 

Contopus 318 

Connrus 392 

Corvus 280 

Cotile 157 

Coturniculus 19& 

Creagrus 678 

Crex 577 

Crotopliaga 389 

Cupidonia 477 

Cyanecula 20 

Cyanocitta 289 

Cymocliorea 723 

Cypseloides 350 

Cypselus 349 

Cyrtonyx 485 

D. 

Dafila 605 

Daption 719 

Denclrocygna 599 

Deudid'ca 93 

Dichromauassa 491 

Diomedea 700 

Dolichonyx 257 

Dytes 732 

E. 

Ectopistes 459 

Eugj-iitila 463 

Elauoides 426 

Elanus 427 

Emberuagra 236 

Empidouax 324 

Eremophila 300 

Ereunetes 541 

Ergaticus 132 

Erismatura 634 

Eiidocimus 501 

Eugenes 334 

Euphonia 160 

F. 

Falco 414 

Florida 493 

Fratercula - 743 

Fregetta 728 

Fulica 580 

Fulix 614 

Ful mania 705 



Page. 

Galeoscoptes 12 

Gallinago 526 

Gallinula 579 

Garzetta 490 

Geococcyx 385 

Geothlypis 120 

Geotrygon 467 

Glaucidium 409 

Grus -■- 582 

Guiraca 246 

Gy ninocitta 285 

H. 

Hsematopns 506 

Hadrostomus 333 

Haliseetus 451 

Halocyptena 720 

Harelda 623 

Harporliynclius 13 

Helmiuthojihaga 78 

Helmitherus 77 

HelontBa 76 

Herodias 489 

Hesperiphoua 165 

Hesperocichla 9 

Heteroscelus 553 

Hierofalco 412 

Himantopus 567 

Hiruudo 154 

Histriouicus 622 

Hydrauassa 492 

Hydroclielidon 693 

Hylocichla 1 

Hylotomus 371 

I. 

lache 348 

Icteria 123 

Icterus 265 

Ictinia - 428 

lonornis 578 

J. 

Jimco 216 

L. 

Lagopus 474 

Lampronetta 626 

Lanius - 148 

Lanivireo 140 

Larus 660 

Leucosticte 174 

Limosa 543 

Lobipes 564 

Lomvia 764 

Lophodytes 638 

Loi)hoplianes 36 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 245 



Page. 

Lophortyx 482 

Loxia . 172 

Lunda 745 

M. 

Machetes 554 

Macrorhamphiis 527 

Mareca 606 

Megalestris 696 

Melauerpes 375 

Melanetta 631 

Meleagris 470 

Melopelia 464 

Melospiza 231 

Mergus 636 

Merula 7 

Miciathene 411 

Micropalama 528 

Milvulus 301 

Mimus 11 

Mniotilta 74 

Molothrus 258 

Momotus 381 

Motacilla 69 

Mycteria 499 

Myiadestes 25 

Myiarchus 311 

Myiodinastes • 310 

Myiozetetes 309 

N. 

Neocorys 73 

Nettion 611 

Nomonyx 635 

Numeuius 558 

Nyctale 400 

Nyctea 407 

Nyctherodius 496 

Nyctiardea 495 

Nyctidroinus 356 

O. 

Oceauites 722 

Oceanodronia 726 

Oclit hodromus 522 

ffidemia 630 

CEstrelata 717 

Oior 584 

Ouychotes 446 

Opororuis 118 

Oreortyx 481 

Oreoscoptes 10 

Gruitliiou 331 

Ortalis 469 

Ortyx 480 

Ossifraga 704 

Oxyechus 516 



Page. 
P. 

Pachyrliauiphus 332 

Pagophila 657 

Paudiou 425 

Parra , . 568 

Pariila 88 

Parus 40 

Passerculus 192 

Passerella 235 

Passerina 247 

Pedicecetes 478 

Pelecanus 640 

Pelidua 539 

Peliouetta 633 

Perisoreiis 297 

Perissoglossa 90 

Petrochelidon 153 

Peucsea 226 

Peucedramiis 92 

Phaethon 654 

Phaiuopepla 26 

Phalaciocorax 642 

Phalfcuoptiliis 355 

Plialaropus 563 

Plialeris 747 

Philacte 598 

Pbilolu'la -. 525 

Pho-belria 703 

PhcBuicopterus 583 

Phonipara 253 

Phylloscopus 34 

Pica 286 

Picicorvus 284 

Picoides 367 

Picus 360 

Piuicola 166 

Pipilo 237 

Pitaugus 308 

Plectrophaues 186 

Plegadis 503 

Plotus 649 

Podasocys 523 

Podiceps - 731 

Podilymbus 735 

PolioptUa 27 

Pol5'bonis 423 

Polysticta 625 

Pocecetes 197 

Porzaua 573 

Priocella 706 

PrioJiuus 707 

Procellaria 721 

Progue 152 

Protouotaria 75 

Psaltriparus 47 

Pseudogryphus 453 



246 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Page. 

Psilorhiuus 288 

Ptycorliami)lius 751 

Piiffinus .' 708 

Pyranga 161 

Pyrrliula 167 

Pynhuloxia 243 

Pyrocephalus 330 

Q. 

Querquedula 609 

Quiscalus 275 

R. 

Rallus 569 

Recurvirostra 566 

Eegulus 30 

Rliodostethia 676 

Eliyacopliilus 550 

Rhynchofalco 419 

Rliyncliophaues 190 

Rhynchops 656 

Rhynchopsitta 391 

Rissa 658 

Rostrhamus 4,9 

S. 

Salpinctes 58 

Saxicola 21 

Sayornis 315 

ScardafcUa 466 

Scolecopliagus 273 

Scolopax 524 

Scoi)s 402 

Selasphoras 339 

Setopliaga 128 

Sialia 22 

Simorlijrachus 748 

Sitta 51 

Siurus 115 

Somateria 627 

Spatula 608 

Speotyto 408 

Sj)ermopliila 252 

Sphyrapicus 369 

Spiza 254 

Spizella ^. .. 210 

Squatarola 513 

Staruceuas 468 

Steganoinis 565 

Stelgidopteryx 158 

Stellula 343 

Stercorarius 697 

Sterna 679 

Strepsilas 509 



Page. 

Strix 397 

Stumella 263 

Sturnus 279 

Sula 650 

Surnia 407 

Sympliemia 552 

Syntliliborhamplius 753 

T. 

Tachyljaptes 734 

Tacliycineta 155 

Tacbypetes 639 

Tautalus 500 

Telmatodytes 67 

Thrasaetus 450 

Thryomanes ( il 

Tliryothorus 60 

Tinniuiculus 420 

Totauus 547 

Tringa 529 

Triugoides 557 

Trochilus 335 

Troglodytes 63 

Trogon 384 

Tryngites 556 

Turdus 6 

Tyrannus 303 

U. 

Ulula 399 

Uria 760 

Urnbitinj'a 444 

Utamauia 742 

V. 

Vauellus 512 

Vireo 142 

Vireijsy] via 135 

W. 

Wilsonia 124 

X. 

Xauthocep baliis 260 

Xantbura 296 

Xeuia 677 

Xeuopicns 366 

Z. 

Zamelodia 244 

Zeuaida 462 

Zeuaidura 460 

Zouotricbia 205 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 247 



OiX THE IDEXTITV OF THE GEIVIS I.El'KVIVIVIS, LOCKINOTON 
WITH L,l'€OI>OPSIi>«, COliLETT. 

By TH£:ODOR£ OILL.. 

In the Proceediugs of the Zoological Society of Loudon for 1879 
(at pp. 380-381) Mr. Eobert Collett has published a comuiunicatiou ''On 
a fish of the genus Lycodes from the Pacific." The article was read at 
the meeting held April 1, 1879, and published in the part (II) issued 
August 1, 1879. 

In this article Mr. Collett describes at length the species referred to, 
under the name Lycodes iMciJicus^ and gives a figure of the head and 
anterior part of the body. The diagnosis is as follows : 

"Vomerine and palatine teeth none. Coloration uniform yellowish 
grey. The bod^' is scaly, the head and pectorals naked. The head is 
contained four and six-tenths, the height of the body nine times, in the 
total length. Lateral line very indistinct. 

"M. B. 6; D. (circa) 92; A.71; C. (circa) I, 1 ; P. 18. 

"i7a&. — Japan [Mus. Berol.).-'' 

At the end of the description Mr. Collett expresses the following 
opinion : 

" The absence of vomerine and palatine teeth, a character quite peculiar 
to the si)ecies, will perhai)s necessitate its removal to a separate genus, 
for which I i)ropose the name Lycodopsis.'''' 

In the Proceedings of the LTnited States National Museum for 1879 
(at pp. 326-332) Mr. ^Y. X. Locldngton has given " Descriptions of new 
genera and species of fishes from the coast of California." The signature 
in which it api)ears was issued March 25, 1880. 

In this article Mr. Lockington describes what is considered to be a 
new generic type, under the name Leurynnis paucidens. The diagnosis 
of the genus is as follows : 

" Generic characters. — Family Zoarcidw, allied to Lycodes. Ventral 
fins present, short; no teeth on vomer and palatines; dorsal and anal 
fins continued without interruption around the tail; scales small, but 
evident. The name is from Aeupdq — smooth; Svvt? — vomer, in allusion to 
the character which chiefly distinguishes the genus from Lycodes.'''' 

Selecting characters to compare with those mentioned in Mr. Collett's 
diagnosis, we have the following: 

"JS'o vomerine or palatine teeth. — Color olivaceous, the scales lighter 
than the skin ; the color formed by numerous dark points, which are 
continued also upon the head. Upper surface of head darker, abdom- 
inal surface lighter than other portions. Vertical fins margined with 
black. — Scales roundish, smooth, separate, imbedded in the skin, uniform 
over the whole of the body, except upon an area on the upper surface in 
front of the dorsal, where they are smaller, and region near base of 
pectorals scaleless. Head scaleless— the ridges somewhat prominent. — 



248 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Length of liead 4.|-4| times in the total length. — Greatest depth of body 
from a little more than ten to a little less than eleven times. — No lateral 
line." 

M. B.6; D. 90; A. 70; P. 18. 

As will be thus seen, the two fishes are certainly congeneric, and are 
evidently very closely related. Even the slight discrepancies are appar- 
ently such (as in the case of the color) as result from difference of inter- 
I^retation of the same characters. The vertical fins in the Californian 
form, however, are distinctly said to be "margined with black," while 
in the Japanese form it is at least implied that they are not. It is quite 
probable, nevertheless, that even these alleged differences may be found 
to be rather of degree than of kind. In view, however, of the difference 
of tftstribution, it is reasonable to suppose that the two forms will be 
found to be distinct, and, as the genus appears to be perfectly valid, they 
will rank as species, with the following names : 

1. Lycodopsis pacificus. 

Lycodcs pacificus Collett, Proc. Zool. Soc. Loudon, 1879, p. 381, 

Hob. — Japan. 

2. Lycodopsis paucidens. 

Leurynnis paiicidius Lockiugton, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 1879, p. 32(3. 

Hob. — California. 



DESCRIPTION OF A IVE^V CHIROIW FISH, iriYKIOU.EPIS ZOIVIFER, 

FR«.ri MOIVXEREY' BAY, CAtilFORIVIA. 

By M¥. N. LOCKirVGTOM. 

Myriolepis, gen. nov. (Ckirid<v). 

Body oblong, rather stout; mouth moderate; cardiform teeth in both 
jaws, slightly larger anteriorly- ; no canines; teeth on vomer and pala- 
tines; i^reopercle entire ; no spines about the head. Gill-openings sep- 
arated by a ]iarrow isthmus; gill-rakers short. Branchiostegals seven. 
PseudobranchisB present. Dorsal fins two, united at base, the first with 
about 14 rather stiff spines, the second with as many soft rays. Anal 
short, of about 13 rays, without distinct spine. Scales very small, 
ctenoid, covering the whole surface of the body and head and the greater 
portion of all the fins except the first dorsal. Lateral line single. 

Etymology: /wpiw, myriad; -ic-i?, scale. 

This genus bears little resemblance to any of the previously known 
Chiridcc, its general appearance being quite Serranoid. It has, however, 
a bony stay connecting the suborbital and preoperculum, and possesses 
the technical characters of the CMridWj in which group it should form 
a distinct subfamily, differing especially in the shorter anal fin without 
distinct spines. 

Myriolepis zonifer, sp. nov. 

Lower jaw .slightly projecting; snout to summit of ascending process 
of premaxillaiy inclined backwards at about 45° ; forehead slightly con- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 249 

cave lougitiidinally; dorsal outline, from occiput to caudal x)eduncle, 
regularly arclie<l, the highest point at anterior part of first dorsal; 
mandible straight; abdominal outline regularly curved. 

Greatest depth 3-^% times, depth of caudal peduncle 12, length of 
head 3^^, length of pectoral ^^ in total length to extremity of caudal 
fin; orbit (longitudinal diameter) 54, mandible 2|, interorbital width 
about 2 1^0 in length of head; 

Gape straight, maxillary extending to a little in front of the center of 
the pupil, its upper edge received in a groove below the preorbital for 
most of its length. 

Teeth of mandibles and intermaxillaries slender, sharp, recurved ; in 
several rows in frout, gradually diminishing laterally to a single row; 
front teeth slightly longer than lateral teeth. A few similar but smaller 
teeth on vomer and palatines. Upper i)haryDgeals with a cushion of 
similar teeth; lower pharyngeals slender, with a patch of similar teeth 
in the form of a very obtuse triangle, the iuternal row largest. 

Gill rakers short, ciliated, those on the anterior aspect of the first pair 
of gill-arches longer than the others. 

Branchiostegals seven ; gill-membranes continuous below, but attached 
to an isthmus throughout the entire length of their junction except the 
posterior margin. 

Xostrils just above a line joiniug the upper margin of the orbit with 
the tip of the suout, simple, elliptical, the posterior far the larger. 

Eyes lateral, subelliptical, the upper margin of the orbit less curved 
than the lower; interorbital space wide, slightly convex transversely. 

Longitudinal diameter of orbit 1^ in length of snout. 

Opercular bones without spines or denticulations. 

Pectoral base vertical; i^ectoral broadly lanceolate, the upper margin 
curved; 5th ray longest; 4th, 6th, 7th, and 8th only slightly shorter, 
thence diminishing rapidl}^ downwards. Tip of i)ectoral about vertical 
with base of 11th ray of spinous dorsal, but considerably short of the 
vent. Eays twice branched. 

Ventrals inserted a little behind pectorals, their length If in that of 
the pectorals. Eays twice bifurcate. 

Spinous dorsal commencing about opposite 20th scale of lateral line; 
first spine very short ; 2d and 3d rapidly increasing ; 4th longest ; thence 
diminishing regularly to 12th ; loth and 14th directed backwards, hori- 
zontal, their i)oints only free ; loth spine at base of 1st soft ray. 

Third ray of soft dorsal longest, thence diminishing regulady ; rays 
split up at tips. 

Anal commencing about opposite base of 7th ray of 2d dorsal, and 
preceded by two weak spines hidden in membrane. First soft ray 
longest ; rays split at tips. 

Caudal with many accessory rays and about sixteen principal rays, so 
that its lateral margins are convex ; i^osterior border somewhat emargi- 
iiate ; rays much divided at tips. 



250 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Lateral line continuous to end of caudal peduncle, not very conspic- 
uous; tubes simple. From its origin to above the pectoral it curves 
downwards, thence follows parallel to the dorsal outline till it reaches 
the caudal i)eduncle, along which it is median. 

Scales of body small, stronglj^ ctenoid, larger upon hinder part of 
trunk and on caudal i^eduncle than anteriorly, and smallest on head and 
under pectoral base. Scales elongate, almost rectangular, but with the 
free margin convex, imbedded portion striated. Entire surface of gill- 
covers, branchiostegal rays, mandibles, maxillaries, preorbitals, and 
snout scaly, the only scaleless portions being the lips and the portions 
of the gill-membrane folded up between the rays. A shallow, scaleless 
groove at sides of 1st dorsal. 

The vertical fins, except the spinous dorsal, covered almost to the tips 
of the rays with similar but smaller scales, and the paired fins similarly 
covered on their exterior surfaces. 

A band of small scales along some of the anterior spines of the 1st 
dorsal. 

Dorsal region and head, to the level of the upper margin of maxillary 
and of pectoral fin, black; four broad transverse black stripes between 
pectorals and caudals. 

The spaces between these bands, the abdomen, and the lower part of 
the head white. 

The 1st band is at about the center of the length of the pectoral, and 
fades out level with the lower margin of that fin ; the 2d is anterior to 
the vent, and almost encircles the body; the 3d continues to the anal 
base, but is much lighter on its lower portion ; while the 4th encircles 
the caudal peduncle. 

A 5th but narrower black band encircles the caudal base, and two 
black bands cross the caudal, the posterior one broadest ; rest of caudal 
white. All the other fins banded or blotched irregularly with black and 
white, the former predominating. The ctenoid tips of tha scales are white. 

I have onlj'^ seen a single si^ecimen of this fish. Before the description 
was written it was exposed to alcohol for about two months. 

It was obtained in San Francisco market August, 1879, and was taken 
in Monterey Bay. 

In ai^pearance it somewhat resembles some of the small-scaled Serra- 
nidcv or Rhypticidw. The presence of a suborbital stay, however, shows 
that its affinities are really with the CJdridce. 

Dimensions of type {No. United States National Musuem). 

Inches. 

Total length, to tip of caudal 11.75 

Greatest depth, about 3.2.') 

Greatest thickness, at opercles 1.72 

Depth of caudal peduncle, about 98 

Length of head 3.02 

Interorbital width 1.05 

Length of snout 77 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 251 

Inclies. 
Longitudinal diameter of orbit 5jj 

Length of lower jaw, in straiglit line 1_42 

Length of upper jaw, in straight line 1 15 

Tip of snovit to insertion of pectoral, about 3.00 

Tip of snout to origin of dorsal, along axis of fish 3.(52 

Tip of snout to origin of dorsal, along dorsal profile 4.03 

Tip of snout to origin of anal, along axis of fish (5.45 

Tip of lower jaw to insertion of ventrals, along abdominal profile 3.32 

Width of pectoral base 90 

Length of pectorals 2.40 

Length of ventrals ..• 1.50 

Length of base of 1st dorsal to Xllth spine 2.08 

Height of longest (4th) dorsal spine 1.25 

Length of base of 2d dorsal 2.60 

Height of longest (3d) ray of dorsal 1.44 

Length of base of anal 1.62 

Height of longest (Ist) ray of anal 1.38 

Fill formula.— B. 7; D. XII+11, -jV; A. -i\; P. 18; Y. i; C. lat. 
line circa 128-134. 



DE.SCISIPTIOIV OF A NEW SPECIES OF RAY, RAIA RHIIVA, FROITI 
THE COAST OF CAI.IFORIVIA. 

By DAVID S. JOKDAiV aiid CHARLES H. OI£,B£RT. 

Kaia rhina, sp. uov. 

Disk ratlier broader than long-, the snout very sharp and long-acumi- 
nate. Outer angle of pectoral sharp ; posterior edge of pectoral nearly 
straight. Eegion from j)ectoral angle to snout slightly convex, then 
almost uniformly and strongly concave to near the tip of the snout, which 
tapers to a sharp point. A straight line from the snout to the tip of the 
pectoral passes far from the edge of the disk. Length of snout nearly 
four times the interorbital width. 

Interorbital space quite narrow, very little concave, somewhat depressed 
in the middle. Nasal ridges separated for more than half their length. 
Supraocular ridges slightly elevated. Eyes larger and much longer than 
spiracles. Ventral fins deeply ( marginate. Caudal fin reduced to a 
small fold. Dorsal fins moderate, rather close together, the interspace 
less than the base of the tin. 

Female with the spines on the body moderately strong, arranged as 
follows : 

Five or six rather strong spines above the eyes. Two in front of the 
center of the back. None along the middle line of the back until oppo- 
site the posterior end of the ventrals^ where a median series begins on the 
tail. A lateral caudal series on each side, and two or three long sharp 
spines between the dorsal fins. 

Roughnesses on the skin above rather large, sharp-pointed, and evi- 
dently stellate. Those on the snout especially conspicuously stellate 
and larger than the others. These prickles are everywhere present on the 



252 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

upper parts of the body, but they are not evenly distributed, and in 
most regions they are placed quite wide apart. Thej^ are largest and 
most numerous on the nasal ridges, interorbital space, middle region of 
back and tail, and anterior j)art of pectorals. On the base and edges of 
the i^ectorals and on the ventrals the prickles are few and small. On 
the middle portion of the pectorals they are rather numerous. Under- 
side of disk everywhere prickly except along' the edges of the fins; the 
prickles largest under the snout. 

IVIale not seen, probably differing, as in the other species, in the sparser 
j)rickles above, in the absence of a lateral caudal series, and in the pres- 
ence of stouter prickles on the anterior part of the pectorals and of claw- 
like sj^ines on the posterior part. Mouth somewhat arched. Teeth 
about If. Nasal flap rather less than half the width of the mouth. 

Coloration essentially as in Baia binoculata. Light brown above, 
vaguely mottled with paler ; the usual dark riug at the base of the pec- 
torals most distinct in fresh examples, and probably in the young". 

This species is known to us from three examples. Adult females, 26 to 
29 inches in length. One from Monterey Bay and two from San Fran- 
cisco Bay. The one from Monterey was referred to in our description 
of Baia stellulata as a long-nosed form or variety of Baia hinoculata. 

Baia rhina, is related to Baia cooperi and Baia hinoculata. From the 
latter it differs in the much sharper and longer snout, in the less concave 
interorbital space, and in the much greater roughness of the body, the 
small prickles, even in the female of B. hinoculata, being confined to the 
snout, interocular space, and a portion of the median region of tlie back 
and the tail, the fins being perfectly smooth. The male has the usual 
patches on the pectoral fins, and the back almost or quite smooth. 

From Baia cooperi, Baia rliina differs in the much smaller size in length, 
the adult of Baia coopcH reaching at least a length of more than six feet. 
It also differs in form, color, interorbital width, armature, &c., as will 
appear from the following description of a young male example of Baia 
cooperi, 21h inches in length, from San Francisco. 

Disk broad, its undest part much behind the middle, the pectoral angle 
rather sharp, and the r)osterior edge very little convex. The anterior 
margin of the pectoral is at first slightly convex, then concave, then, op- 
posite the eyes, again very slightly convex, then again slightly concave; 
the snout itself not very sharp, although long. 

Interorbital space very broad and almost flat (deeply concave in B. 
hinoculata), only slightly depressed in the middle, the nasal ridges well 
separated for usually two-thirds their length. Supraocular ridge not at 
all elevated. Uyes quite small, shorter than the spiracles. 

Ventral fins not deeply emarginate (becoming more deeply emarginate 
in the adult). Caspers, in this example (which, although larger than 
the adults of the other species, is evidently immature), very small, 
scarcely exserted beyond the ventral edge. Claw-like pectoral spines 
not yet develoiied. Caudal fin wanting. Dorsal fins moderate, not far 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 253 



apart, the interspace less than the length of the base. Tail with a slight 
Literal fold. 

Spines on body small and few. Two or three very small ones over the 
eye, one at the center of the back, with a minute one in front of it. 
None along the median line of the back, the median caudal series begin- 
ging at the base of the ventrals. These spines are quite small, but grow 
larger backward. 

Asperities above in the form of minute prickles, somewhat stellate. 
These are very minute, except along the median line of the back and 
tail, and there they are smaller than in R. stellulata or E. rJtina. Tail 
entirely prickly above. A broad band of prickles along back to inter- 
orbital space. Entire pectoral tin minutely prickly, rather coarsely so 
anteriorly. ]S"asal ridges prickly. 

Ventrals mostly covered with minute prickles, as is the under side of 
the snout and the region around the mouth. A row of rather coarser 
prickles along the edge of the disk anteriorly, on the under side. 

Jaws rather strongly curved. Teeth somewhat tricuspid, |-|. 

Length of nasal flap about half the T\adth of the. upper jaw. 

Body light brown, with many rather large, faint, round whitish spots, 
which are very distinct iu the young. A vague blackish ring at base of 
pectoral. 

Raid cooperi is rather common from Monterey Bay to Vancouver's 
Island, and probably north to Alaska. It is often brought into the 
markets of San Francisco with the hinoculata. We have seen examples 
of all sizes from six inches to six feet in length. A skin of an individual 
six feet in length was obtained by us at Victoria. In its stomach were 
two specimens of Gottns 2)olyacanthocephalns, each a foot long. Thus far 
no examples of any of the other species over 2J feet in length have been 
noticed. 



Table of measurements. 


i 


a 

6 
o 

« § 

V 


> ■ 
P 


li 


0+ 

e 

S 


1 


^3 . 




0+ 

II 


Extreme length, in inches 

Length of disk, in inches=100 


28.80 
18.40 
103 
14 
41 

"so"" 

12 
15.5 


26.25 
16.85 
111 


27.65 

17.3 
119 


21.6 

13 
106 
16.7 
45.5 

Bo.'s" 

2.5 

12.8 
15 

"5.' 5' 
23 

'25.' 5' 

14.3 

8 

67 
3.8 


23.45 
14.90 
113 


24 

13.65 
113 


17.45 
10.10 
121 


Wiiltli mid w;iy between snout and mouth 

Width at tVout of eyes 

UistiuKc Ironi snout to pectoral angle 

Distance from snout to tirst gill-opening 


41 










58 


77.5 

"29.5' 
17 

14.5 
13.2 

6 
30.5 

7 

25.5 
17 

8 
55 

3.5 


86.5 
. .^^. . . 

13.5 
15.5 
15 
5 
28.5 

"17.5" 
10.5 
60 
3 


78.5 


77 




25 


21 


24 




14 




15.5 
13.5 

7.5 
27.3 

8.5 
26.5 
10. r, 

7.5 
56.5 


15.5 
12.5 

7 
23.5 

8 
25 
15 

7.8 
80 
10.5 


18 






Diameter of orbit 


5.5 
31 


8 




23 








26.3 
IG. 5 

8 
57 

3 


31.5 




18 


Interovbital width '. 


8 


Tail, length 


71.5 
5 







Neeah Bay, Wash., May 31, 1880. 



254 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



UE SCRIP TIOiV OF A NE^V SPECIES OF PARROT OF THE OEIVITS 
CHRYSOTIS, FROM THE ISI>A1>I> OF DOIUIIVICA. 

By OEOROE N. I.A\f^REWCE. 

Chrysotis nichollsi. 

Male ! — The general color of the plumage is grass-green, darker above 
and on the breast and abdomen tinged with yellow; the feathers of the 
hind neck and back are bordered rather narrowly with black, those of 
the wing coverts are without the black borders; the feathers of the 
lower i)art of the throat, of the upper part of the breast, and of the sides 
of the neck change to verditer-green on a side view and are edged with 
black ; the bases of some of the feathers of the breast and abdomen are 
dull red, and they are just perceptibly edged with black; the sides are 
dark green ; the fore part of the head as far as upon a line with the an- 
terior angle of the eye, lores, sides of the head, and the throat are of a 
medium shade of ultramarine-blue, lighter in color on the throat; in 
some lights the blue Color has a grayish cast; the feathers of the top of 
the head are varied with bright green and azure blue and are narrowly 
bordered with black ; the primaries have their inner webs black, the 
first primary is entirely black, the second and third have their outer 
webs dark blue for three-quarters their length, terminating with black, 
the other primaries have their outer webs green for most of their length, 
passing into dark blue for a short space, and ending with black; the ex- 
treme ends are narrowly margined with whitish ash ; the wing speculum 
is of a bright scarlet red, occupying a space on the outer webs of the 
first three secondaries of about three inches; there is a small yellow 
mark where the red joins the terminal dark blue of these feathers, which 
have the outer webs green at their bases ; the other secondaries have 
their outer webs green, with a subterminal blue spot, and ending with 
black; the fourth secondary has an elongated yellow mark on the mid- 
dle of the outer web ; all the secondaries have their inner webs black ; 
the outer webs of the tertiaries are green, the inner are black with their 
ends green; the wing coverts are of the same color as the back, but the 
concealed portions of the inner webs of the greater coverts are black ; 
the outer edge of the wing is dull light yellow; the quills underneath 
have the basal two-thirds of their length dull verditer-blue, the terminal 
portion is black; the under wing coverts are green; the first outer tail 
feather has the outer web dark blue for two-thirds its length, the ter- 
minal third is greenish yellow ; the inner web is scarlet at the base for 
nearly half its length, which color is seiiarated from the yellowish end 
by a space of dull green ; the second, third, and fourth feathers differ 
jfrom the first only in having the basal parts of their outer webs green ; 
the central tail feathers are dark green, ending with dark yellowish 
green ; upper tail coverts dark green, with their ends yellowish ; the 
under tail coverts are yellowish green; the upper mandible is whitish- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 255 

horn color, with the sides yellowish, the under is grayish-horn color, 
yellowish at the base; feet blackish. 

Length (skin) from end of upper mandible over the culmen, 20 inches ; 
from top of head, 18 inches; wing, 9^; tail, Gf; tarsus, 1. 

Habitat. — Dominica, West Indies. 

Type in National Museum, Washington, received from Dr. H. A. 
Alford Nicholls. 

Dr. Nicholls sent a second specimen in spirits, which was made into 
a skin, and on dissection proved to be a female. It does not ditfer ma- 
terially in plumage from the other specimen, the blue of {ha face only 
appearing a little duller. It is rather smaller; the bill and feet are 
weaker. From a comparison of the two I think the specimen specially 
described is a male. 

This new species in some respects resembles C. cyanopis ( VieilL), said 
to be from the Antilles, but the precise locality not known, and C. bou- 
queti (Bechat), from St. Lucia, all having blue heads. The first, C. cya- 
nopis, is described as having the face dark ultramarine-blue, but it dif- 
fers from the new species more especially in the toj) of the head and the 
chin being dark blue, the throat and entire under surface wine-red, and 
the larger wing coverts dark indigo-blue, besides minor differences. In 
dimensions they are much the same. 

I have a fine specimen of C. bouqueti before me belonging to the 
Museum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, and kiudly loaned by 
Professor Allen. In this the blue is nearly of the same shade as in the 
new species; it is a little lighter in color on the front, but the blue does 
not extend so far down on the throat, the lower part of which is scarlet ; 
the breast and abdomen are vinous red intermixed somewhat with green; 
the color above is a lighter green ; the black borders to the feathers of 
the hind neck and back are broader; the colors generally are much 
brighter; it is a smaller species, with weaker feet and a blackish bill; 
it measures from the end of the upper mandible IGJ inches, though the 
wings and tail fully equal in size those of C. nichollsi. 

I have named this fine species as a well-merited compliment to Dr. 
Nicholls for his assiduous endeavors to sui^j^lement Mr. Ober's work in 
Dominica. 

The specimens of Chrysotis were sent in March, 1879, with some other 
species, to Martinique, to be forwarded to the Smithsonian, but they 
remained there for about twelve months, and were not received in Wash, 
ington until May of this year. Dr. MchoUs wrote Professor Baird at 
that time concerning the parrot as follows : 

"The ^Ciceru- (not ^Cicero'') parrot. 

'' The bird was shot at Campbell, and was bought in the market, where 
it was exposed for sale as food. The feathers were off the neck when 
bought. Skin was firmly adherent to a thick layer of fat. The speci- 
men is scarcely worth sending. I do so, however, as the feathers near 
the head are a different color to those ;of the Cicero parrot." 



256 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED iSTATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The other birds sent were as below, to which are added Dr. NichoUs's 
notes : 

1. EupnoNiA PLAViFEONS (Sparm.). 

"Bird caught at head of Roseau Valley; never seen in the island 
until lately. Feathers of breast curl up over the wings when the bird is 
at rest, and during sleep the bird is rolled up like a ball." 

2. Myiadestes genibaebis, Sw 
" Sifflem montagne." 

3. Elainea martinica (Linn.). 

" Caught in Eoseau ; white feathers on head very conspicuous when 
bird at rest." 
-i. Eeeunetes petrificatus (111.). 

"' Becass ;' common at the mouths of the rivers during the hurricane 
months." 

5. Charadrius virginicus, Borkh. 

" 'Oiseau marine.' Shot in i)lowed land near to Eoseau in November, 
1878." 

6. Tringa maculata, Vieill. 

"'Bat-ma.' Caught in December, 1878, near to the mouth of the 
Eoseau Eiver." 

Professor Baird has lately received from Dr. Mcholls a letter, dated 
25th May, 1880, with another consignment of birds, of which I give the 
names and the notes of Dr. Mcholls thereon:. 
1. Chrysotis nichollsi, Lawr. 

" The green parrot which I have been so long trying to obtain. It is 
now scarce and is seldom seen away from the deepest woods of the 
widest part of the island. It builds its nest in the forks of the highest 
forest trees, and it is usually seen in flocks. It is called by the natives 
' perroquet,' which is simply French for parrot. As an example of the 
difficulty in obtaining this parrot I may mention that although I offered 
a good reward for a dead specimen I failed to get one. The specimen 
now sent was shot by a friend of mine; it was evidently a bird which 
had strayed from a flock." 

Dr. a!^icholls says of it in his letter: "It may possibly turn out to be 
the ' green i)arrot ' which Mr. Ober failed to obtain." 

I infer from the above that Dr. Xicholls considered this to be different 
from those sent a year ago, as in his letter of that date he says : " I am 
sorry to say that I have been unable to obtain specimens of the green 
parrot, but I hope to be successful before long." 

This specimen, however, only differs from the type of C. nichollsi in 
being smaller, with a weaker bill, which is quite dusky in color. 

Dr. Nicholls may be correct in liis suggestion that it is the "parrot" 
Xo. ;i3 of the Dominica catalogue. If so, Mr. Ober must have been mis- 
led as to its size, which he states to have been that of the Carolina 
I)arrot. 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 257 

2. Nyctiardea violacea (Linn.). 

" • Crabier montagne.' Caught in a dark ravine in the mountains near 
Eoseau and brought to me alive. I kept it for more than a week, feed- 
ing it on cray-fish and land-crabs, which it devoured with avidity. It 
died suddenly." 

3. Chaeadrius virginictjs, Borkh. 

" Golden plover. Shot on sea-beach." 

4. Angus stolidus (Linn.). 

" ' Twa-oo.' Brought to me alive when very young and I kept it alive 
for nearly a year, when it was choked by a careless child. It became 
very tame. It used to tly on to the roof of my house and bathe in a duck- 
pond in the garden. I gave it fish cut into small pieces." 

5. Strix flajvimea var nigrescens, Lawr. 

"Owl. It is, I thiuk, different in x)lumage and certainly smaller than 
one I had some years ago. This bird was caught in the town of Roseau 
and brought to me. I kept it ahve for several weeks, when it died sud- 
denly. It woke up usually just before dark and then partook of its 
meal of five or six small lizards or a mouse. On introducing a live lizard 
into its cage it darted down upon it with great quickness ; it seemed to 
be more of a spring and a droj) than anything else ; -it then held the 
animal in its claw for a minute or so and regarded it intently, then with 
its shari) beak it divided the spinal column just behind the head. This 
occurred once and again, and it would thus appear that the owl is en- 
dued with the instinct of the easiest and surest way of killing its prey. 
The lizard when dead was seized by the head, and by a series of jerks 
or turnings up of the head the owl actually threw it down its throat. If 
the lizard was rather large the owl would rest for a while with the tail 
of the reptile hanging out of its mouth." 

I think this specimen is a male; the larger one spoken of was j)rob- 
ably a female. 

6. Tringa minutilla, Vieill. 

" ' Becass.' Caught near to the mouth of Eoseau Eiver." 
New York, June 15, 1880. 



THE E:U£.A€H:0N OB CAlVJOIiE-FISH OF THE IVOBTHWEST COAST. 

By JAMES G. ST%^AN. 

This paper I have i)repared from my own notes made during a cruise 
on the United States revenue- steamer Oliver Wolcott to Alaska, during 
the summer of 1873, as special commissioner to procure articles of Indian 
manufactiu'e for the National Museum, to be exhibited at the Centennial 
celebration at Philadelphia, and from information derived from Mr. 
Eobert Tomlinson, clerk to Kincoleth Mission, Nass Eiver, British 
Columbia; from Mr. Charles F. Morrison, chief trader Hudson's Bay 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 17 Sept. 15, 1880. 



258 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Company, at Fort Simpson, British Columbia; and from reports of Eev. 
Mr. Duncan, of Metlakatla Mission, Britisb Columbia, made to the Church 
Missionary Society, at London, and to Messrs. Langley & Co., Victoria, 
to whom I am indebted for the copy of Professor Eedwood's report, 
which I give entire. The description of the Eulachon by Sir John Eich- 
ardson is, I believe, the earliest, and but little can be added to it. As I 
have no copy of his works at hand I cannot give his description, 
which I regret. 

JAMES G. SWAK 
IsTeah Bay, Clallam County, Wash., Januarij 31, 1880. 

This fish, known to scientists as the Thaleichthys pacijicus, and also as 
Osmerus pacijicus, resembles the common smelt in size and general out- 
ward appearance, and is found on Puget Sound occasionally with the 
sand-smelt Hypomesus olidus. 

The Eulachon, however, differs from all other varieties of the -smelt 
family by having its entire body permeated with a peculiar fat, which, 
on being extracted, is of the consistence and color of soft lard, and is 
used largely by the natives as an article of food. 

By a rectifying and deodorizing process, Messrs. Langley & Co., chem- 
ists, of Victoria, British Cohimbia, have succeeded in preparing an oil 
which appears to possess the remedial qualities of cod-liver oil in a re- 
markable degree, and. is more agreeable to both palate and stomach. 
The quantity of this fatty substance is so considerable that wlien the 
fish is dried it can be set on fire like a torch and will consume its whole 
length like a candle, from which fact its common name of " Candle-fish" 
is derived. This adipose matter when first extracted, even when fresh 
caught, has a strong, disagreeable odor and a peculiar taste which is very 
unpalatable to most white persons. The fresh fish, however, has no un- 
pleasant smell about it. It has somewhat of the same cucumber odor as 
the smelt, or rather an odor which resembles that of the bruised leaves of 
the wild syringa, PMladelplms L., which is a somewhat common shrub on 
the shores of Puget Sound and other portions of the northwest coast. 
When fried, like the smelt it is a most delicious i^an-fish, or even when 
simply boiled, as the natives usually cook it, or toasted on a stick before 
the fire, it is most excellent and nutritious food. 

The Eulachon are found in limited numbers at certain seasons in the 
Columbia Eiver, Shoal-water Bay, Gray's Harbor, and at the mouth of 
the various small streams of the coast, and also in the waters of Puget 
Sound, where they are taken in seines and nets with smelt and other 
varieties of small fish, but they are thin and poor, and not to be com- 
pared to the same varieties further north. Even those taken in Eraser's 
Eiver, near the boundary line between Washington Territory and Brit- 
ish Columbia, are sui^erior to those taken further south, and are sold in 
the Victoria market, where their excellence is highly prized. The few 
secured on Puget Sound are sold by the fishermen as smelts. The best 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 259 

kinds are caught further north, and great quantities are salted by the 
Hudson's Bay Company, at their trading post at Fort Simpson, British 
Cohimbia, and either sold in the Victoria market or shipped direct to 
London in tierces, barrels, and kits. 

As an article of food and for the grease or fat contained in them, the 
Eidachon are highly prized by the Indians of iSTorthern British Colum- 
bia and Southern Alaska, where they abound; particularly at the ]Srass 
Eiver, British Columbia, where they are annually taken in enormous 
quantities, and where they seem to attain their very finest condition. 

The Nass Eiver flows into Portland Inlet near the fifty-fifth parallel 
of north latitude, near the southern boundary of Alaska, and 30 
miles north-northeast of Fort Simpson, British Columbia. At its mouth 
it widens out into a bay called Nass Bay or Strait, in which are various 
shoals favorable for the Eulachon spawning grounds. 

There are other rivers and streams in British Columbia and Alaska 
at the months of which Eulachon are taken, but as the Kass Eiver fish- 
ery exceeds them all, and is, in fact, the principal place where the busi- 
ness is carried on by both whites and Indians, a description of that 
fishery will suffice. 

The principal run of the fish reaches Xass Eiver in the latter part of 
March, generally from the ICth to the 22d, varying in exceptional years 
from the 28th to April 4. When the season approaches the Indians as- 
semble in great numbers ; not only the iSlishka, or natives of the ISTass 
country, but from hundreds of miles distant, some in canoes and some 
overland. In former years quarrels and fights among the different 
tribes were common, but of late years the influences of the missions at 
Metlakatla, Kincoleth, and Fort Simpson have produced a favorable 
change, not only in inducing them to be more peaceful, but to lay aside 
their old heathen superstitions, one of which was that all the fish eaten 
for the first four or five days after they commence to arrive must be 
either fried or toasted; no one was allowed to boil any, as they believed 
that if any were boiled the fish would iunnediately leave the river; they 
were also strictly forbidden to drink water after a meal of fish, lest there 
should be rain which M^ould hinder the drying. These ceremonies are 
now abandoned in a great measure, and but seldom practiced at the 
present time. 

The Eulachon only travel up the Xass Eiver as far as the flood tides 
reach, wliich is from 15 to 20 miles from its mouth. For about 7 miles 
from Nass Strait the river is unsuited for fishing operations. From 
thenoe to the Nass Village, at the head of tide-water, is a succession of 
sand-bars, and these form the spawning beds of the fish. Every avail- 
able spot along the banks of the river is occupied by the Indians during 
the fishing season, who erect temporary wigwams for themselves. 

As the fishing season approaches the arrival of the fish is anxiously 
watched by the natives, as it is a season of the year in which they are 
generally out of food. 



260 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The fish usually swim in deep water till they reach the mouth of the 
river, aud during their passage uf> the strait are followed by innumera- 
ble enemies. Porjjoises, seals, dog-fish, ground- sharks, and halibut 
harass them in the strait, and if they rise to the surface they are attacked 
by clouds of gulls, ducks, and other sea-fowl. 

The bishoi) of British Columbia, who visited the IsTass Eiver in 1863, 
writes concerning the fisheries : 

" Such a scene of life — man life, bird life, fish life — I had never before 
conceived. Over the fish was an immense cloud of innumerable gTills; 
so many and so thick were they as they hovered about looking for the 
fish that the sight resembled a heavy fall of snow. The fish are caught 
in vast quantities. I saw hundreds of tons collected together, and the 
nets hauled in bushels at a time." 

When the fish reach the mouth of the river they generally rise to the 
surface of the water, and are caught by the natives with a pole about 
IS feet long, slightly flattened into an oar-shape at the lower end. Into 
one edge of this flattened blade are stuck a row of wooden ijins or pieces 
of wire sharpened. This implement is thrust down and with both 
hands drawn rapidly through the water, and the fish are impaled on the 
pins and are shaken off into the canoe in the same manner as the Indians 
about Puget Sound take herrings. The number of Eulachon caught in 
this way form a good estimate of the probable run of the fish for the 
season, whether they will be plentiful or not. 

As soon as the fish make their appearance at the sand-bars fishing 
operations begin in earnest. In former years a sort of large landing 
net, called by the natives BdnaJcj was used, but of late these have been 
discarded for purse-nets. About an hour after the tide has begun to 
ebb two strong poles are driven into the sand at the bottom of the river 
about 12 feet apart; to these the net is attached, the mouth being kept 
open by inserting two small sticks across it. It is then depressed in the 
water until the under rim rests on the sand ; the fish are drawn into the 
aperture by the force of the current. 

The nets are generally six or eight fathoms long. A long crooked 
stick is used for raising the narrow end of the net. If it contains fish it 
is hauled into the canoe and, by loosening a string, its contents are 
easily shaken out. Sometimes the net for its whole length becomes 
blocked with fish. The greatest care and skill are then necessary to 
prevent its being carried away by the current. 

Another difficulty, and the cause of much damage to the nets, is the 
loose ice. The fish first come about the time the ice begins to break up. 
Of course, there are exceptions to this rule. Some years the ice remains 
solid until after the fish are caught, in which case holes have to be cut 
in the ice to put down the nets ; other years, again, the ice has all dis- 
appeared before the fish arrive. 

When the tide begins to flow, the nets are all taken in and all the fish 
caught are thrown in heaps on the ground close to the wigwams. With 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 261 

a good vnu of fish, eacli net ouglit to catch about two tous each tide. 
When a sufficient supply of fish has been obtained they are not boiled 
down at once, but are left on the ground in heaps from six to ten days, 
according to the state of the weather. This is done to facilitate the 
boiling, as the grease separates more rapidly from the fish after a partial 
decomposition than when fresh. The perfume which x)ermeates the at- 
mosphere at this time is certainly not to be found among the extracts 
and essences of Lubin or Eimmel. As has been said of the odor of the 
skunk, "it may be healthy, but is very offensive, and a little of it goes 
a great way." As an Irishman once remarked to me of a similar stench, 
"the smell of it would kill flies," which is saying a great deal for its 
energetic power. 

After the fish have remained exposed on the ground five or six days 
a portion of them are strung up for drying by having their heads inter- 
woven with thin strips of bark ; they are then washed and hung on 
racks to dry ; they are not covered up, but are thus exposed to the at- 
mosphere in all weathers for three or four weeks and get perfectly dried 
and firm, and form a chief article of food for the Indians, who either 
toast them over the fire or boil them. They also use them as torches. 
It is only necessary to set them on fire and they will continue to burn 
until consumed. 

In extracting the grease from the fish the Indians i3lace them in large 
wooden boxes and boil them b}" means of red-hot stones. As the grease 
rises to the surface it is skimmed off, and when all has risen the residue 
of the fish bodies is taken out and pressed to get all the still adherent 
portion. A ton of fish makes from 24 to 30 gallons. This is then put 
in wooden boxes and any convenient receptacle, and forms a lucrative 
article of trade among the natives, and is known in Sitka and other 
white settlements as smaU-Jish grease. 

Within a few years, and since the Indians have seen the "rockers" of 
the miners, they have introduced wooden boxes, with sheet-iron bottoms. 
These answer very well, and save time, labor, and trouble. About the 
same time a white man attempted the plan of extracting the grease 
by heating the fish in a basin floating in boiling water and then subject- 
ing it to pressure, but the attempt proved a failure. Another plan at- 
tempted was to cold-press the fish, and for the purpose a powerful screw- 
press was erected, but that also proved a failure. My own impression 
is that the grease could be successfully extracted by steam, as is now 
done at the oil works at Skidgate, Queen Charlotte's Islands, in extract- 
ing oil from dog-fish livers. Still, there may be some chemical reason 
why the grease yields to incipient decomposition, which may suggest 
some preparation which can ijroduce a similar result. 

The ordinary price for the grease at Nass is twenty-five cents per gal- 
lon, but in seasons of scarcity the j)rice advances from one dollar to one 
dollar and twenty -five cents per gallon, although the latter figure is 
seldom attained. 



262 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The Hudson's Bay Company salt a great qiiautity of tbese fish for 
export. They are simply put into casks or butts when first caught, and 
lightly salted. After remaining two or three days a brine is formed. 
They are washed in this brine, resalted, and packed in tight barrels, 
casks, or kits. For smoking, they are allowed to remain in brine a day 
or two, then strung on slender sticks, which are passed through the eyes, 
and hung in the smoke. When freshly smoked they have a bright 
golden appearance, much like red herrings, and are most delicious eat 
ing, but they are so excessively fat that they "uill not keep unless they 
are smoked quite dry. This is a tedious process, and turns the skin a 
dull dusty color. 

There is a second run of Eulachon in IsTass Eiver towards the end of 
June, but the quality is inferior, and but little grease is made from them. 

The Eulachon come suddenly in countless mj^riads into Niiss Eiver, 
and after spawning depart as suddenly. They evidently pass the re- 
mainder of the year in the deep water south of the Aleutian Islands, and 
make their appearance almost simultaneously in Cook's Inlet and Cross 
Soxmd, Alaska, where they are very abundant, and in Nass Eiver. They 
make their ajipearance in Eraser's Eiver a few weeks later, but are not 
as fat or as plentiful as they are farther north. 

As a remedial agent, Eulachon oil is considered by some of the best 
authorities who have tested it as equal to cod- liver oil. Others who 
have tested its efiects only among Indians are in doubt of its efificacy. 
But it should be borne in mind that the Indians of the coast, who live 
exclusively on a fish diet, and on the algae and other products of the 
ocean, rich in iodine, bromine, and phosphates, are not so easily affected 
by cod-liver or Eulachon oil as white people who reside in the interior, and 
partake of the usual regimen of civihzed life. Hence, some persons who 
have 'administered Eulachon oil to coast Indians have been surprised at 
the want of success, and have hastily condemned it as worthless. A diet 
of new milk, fresh from the cow, would undoubtedly prove as efiicacious 
for the coast tribes as cod-liver or Eulachon oil is for white people. 

The following is a copy of a report made by Theophilus Eedwood, esq., 
r. E. S., professor of chemistry and pharmacy to the Pharmaceutical 
Society of London, to Messrs. Langley & Co., Victoria, British Colum- 
bia, who kindly furnished it to me for this paper. Professor Eedwood 
writes : 

"Eulachon oil, although differing in its soiu-ce from cod-liver oil, is 
said to resemble it in its properties, and to have been substituted for it 
as a remedial agent. In examining the oil, therefore, it was considered 
important to determine in what points it resembles and where it differs 
from, cod-liver oil. In taste and smell I cannot indicate any marked dif- 
ference. Its tendency to congeal is much greater than that of cod-liver 
oil. At 50° Fahr. the Eulachon oil has the consistency of soft but- 
ter, and it does not become fluid until heated above 70° Fahr. The 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 263 

portion separated by filtration at 60° remains bright at all temper- 
atures above that point, and has a very slight yellowish tint, resembling 
that of the best pale cod-liver oil. When a few drops of sulphuric acid 
are added to a small quantity of the oil, placed in a porcelain capsule, it 
assumes a deep brown tint, without in the first instance affording the 
violet color which is produced under similar circimistances by cod-liver 
oil. If, however, the mixture thus formed be allowed to remain exposed 
to the air for several hours the violet color becomes developed. If an 
ounce or two of the Eiilachon oil be boiled with about twice its volume 
of distilled water, and the water after being carefully separated and fil- 
tered be evaporated to dryness, a small quantity of a brown extractive 
matter will be left, which closely resembles the extract obtained under 
similar circumstances from cod-liver oil. 

"The Eulachon oil readily saponifies with caustic alkali, and the soap, 
after being decomposed with acetate of lead, yields oleate of lead to 
ether, but the oleic acid resulting from the decomposition of this is not 
brown like that obtained tiom cod-liver oil. 

"Eulachon oil, therefore, although in some respects resembling cod- 
li^'er oil, differs from it in some of its chemical and physical characters. 
The resemblance to cod-liver oil is, however, greater than that of any 
other oil I am acquainted with that is not extracted from a fish liver. 

"THEOPH. EEDWOOD." 

It would have been interesting if Professor Eedwood had given the 
exact analysis of Eulachon oil, as that of the cod liver has been fully 
given in various medical works. The student of medicine could have 
thus been able to have compared the two together, and have found what 
constitutes their medicinal value. 

Professor Eedwood says that the oleic acid resulting from the decom- 
position is not brown like that of the cod-liver oil. The brown color is 
owing to the presence of a peculiar substance obtained by an analysis 
of cod-liver oil by De Jough, and named by him gaduin, but it has not 
been ascertained that gaduin is in any way connected with the virtues 
of the oil. 

It has been thought that the action of the liver carbonizes the oil in a 
manner and thus renders it more susceptible of being taken up and as- 
similated by the systems of persons to whom it is administered. It is 
not imi^robable that the biliary principles associated with the oil are 
concerned in its peculiar influences. Winckler has inferred fi'om his re- 
searches that cod-liver oil is an organic whole, differing from all other 
fixed oils. Eulachon oil, although a body oil, instead of a product of 
the liver, seems to possess i)roperties essentially different from all other 
fish-oils, and future analysis may show that the curative principle of 
cod-liver oil does not lay in any of the causes mentioned, but in some 
hitherto undeveloped principle, which is identical with that of the Eu- 
lachon. I find no mention of the Eulachon in the voyages of Portlock, 



264 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Dixon, Means, Marcliard, or Yancoiiver, except tliat Means mentions 
them casually as sardines, and says the Indians are as fond of them and 
make quite as much account of them as they do of salmon. They are 
found in countless myriads in the waters of Alaska Territory, but hith- 
erto no other use has been made of them in that Territory excejit as an 
article of food for the Indians. 

If some of the canneries of Alaska would try the exi)eriment and put 
them u]3 in oil similar to sardines, I predict that a lucrative trade would 
result. No regular statistics of the Eulachon fishery have ever been kept 
either in British Columbia or Alaska, and the foregoing meager account 
of a very imjiortant food-tish is all that I have been able to procure. 



DESCKffPTIOIV OF T'W' O NE^V SPECIES OF FISHES, ASCEIilCHTHYS 
RHOraORUS AlVU SCYTAILBIVA CEBS>AI>E, FKOM JVEAH BAY, 
IVASHINGTON TEKKITORY. 

By ©ATI© S. J©KD>AN asBd CHARI.ES M. GII.BEKT. 

Ascelichthys, genus nova. 

Family of Cottida'. Body rather robust, covered with naked skin. 
Head comparatively broad and depressed, covered with naked skin. 
Preopercle with a simple, strongly hooked spine. ViUiform teeth on 
jaws, vomer, and palatines. No slit behind fourth gill. Gill membranes 
broadly united, free from the isthmus. JSfo ventral fins. Spinous dorsal 
of low flexible spines. Other fins normally develoj)ed. This genus has 
the general appearance of Oligocottus, but is distinguished at once from all 
the known genera of the family by the absence of the ventral fins; 
hence the generic name from a^zsA^jr, without leg, and r/Ohz, tish. 

Ascelichthys rhodorus, sj). nov. 

Body rather plump, broad, and low anteriorly, nearly cylindrical 
mesially, becoming compressed behind. Head comparativelj^ broad and 
low, ovate, regularly narrowed forward, and rounded anteriorly. Eyes 
rather large, placed high, separated by a slightly concave interorbital 
space, narrower than the eye. Mouth rather large, nearly horizontal, 
the maxillary extending to opposite the posterior border of the eye. 
Lower jaw slightly shorter than upper. Lii)s rather full, the upper jaw 
protractile. Teeth small, in villiform bands on jaws, vomer, and i^ala- 
tines. The palatine bauds long and narrow. Pseudobrauchaj large. 
Gill-rakers almost obsolete. No slit behind the fourth gill. Branchios- 
tegals six. Gill-membranes broadly united, free from the isthmus. A 
low, fringed dermal flap above the posterior part of each eye. No other 
cirri anywhere, and no trace anywhere, on body or head, of dermal 
prickles or scales. No nasal spines. Nostrils both with short tubes, 
the anterior the longer. 

Suborbital stay very slender, barely reaching the i)reopercle. Preop- 
ercle with a rather short simi^le sx)ine, strongly hooked upwards and in- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 265 

wards, concealed in tlie skin. A concealed downward-directed spine 
below this. A downward-directed spine on front of opercle below. 

Skin comparatively thin and loose. Lateral line complete and contin- 
nons. 

Dorsal fins connected by a membrane about half the height of the first 
dorsal. Dorsal spines low and weak, nearly uniform in height, the mid- 
dle spines very slightly higher than the others, the highest less than the 
diameter of the eye, the two anterior close together. The spines all 
very slender. The enveloi^ing membrane very thick. 

Soft dorsal nearly twice as high as the spinous part. Anal about as 
high as second dorsal, its rays more robust. Pectoral fins rather broad 
and short, strongly procurrent below, the lower rays thickened. Long- 
est rays reaching past vent to beginning of second dorsal. No trace of 
ventral fins, either externally or under the skin. 

Fhi rays: Dorsal IX or X-18 or 19 j A. 13 5 P. IG. 

Anal papilla very small. Six pyloric cseca. Intestines short, about 
as long as body, with one flexure. Stomach filled with Chiton, Patella, 
small Crustacea, snails, and worms. 

Coloration olivaceous, usually rather dark, and shaded with greenish, 
but sometimes with whitish saddle-like blotches, one on each side of the 
head, one on preopercle, one at front of dorsal, one most conspicuous 
opposite the junction of the two dorsals, and two smaller ones under sec- 
ond dorsal. On most of the sj)ecimens these markings are but faintly 
indicated. Belly somewhat dusky. Lips, in most specimens, edged with 
vermilion, especially the lower. 

Sjiinous dorsal fin dusky, black in the middle and in front above, with 
a conspicuous edging of bright crimson. This marking is rarely faint or 
obsolete. Soft dorsal, anal, and caudal dusky, edged with paler. Pec- 
toral dusky, edged with paler, and slightly barred at base, especially in 
the paler specimens. 

This species is known to us from about 200 examples, from two to four 
inches in length, obtained by us at Waadda Island, in Neeah Bay, near 
Cape Flattery, at the entrance to the Straits of Juan de Fuca. It is 
found in the greatest abundance at this locality under rocks between 
tide-marks. It is less active in its movements than the species of Oligo- 
cottus, and unlike them it is often found out of the water, left in damp 
Ijlaces under the rocks by the receding tide. 

The following species have been obtained by us in this locality, which 
is the riclidst in rock pool fish of any which we have anywhere seen: 



Xiphister mucosus, 
Xiphister rupestris, 
Xiphister chirus, 
Ascelichthys rhodorus, 
Gobiesox reticulatus, 
Anoplarchus atropurpureus, 



Muroeuoides laitus, 
Apodichthys flavidus, 
Apodichthys fucorum, 
Oligocottus globiceps, 
Oligocottus maculosus, 
Scytalina cerdale. 



266 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Table of j)roportional measurements. 
Species : Aseeliehthys rhodorus. 





Neeal] 










Inches 

and 
lOOths. 


lOOths of 

length to 

base of 

caudal. 




3.90 
3.40 








Body : 

Grreatest height 


21 






g 


Head: 




30 






27 


W idth of interorbital area 




5 






5 






(J 


Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 




30 


Length of base 




26 


Greatest height 




4i 


Dorsal (soft) : 

Length of base.. 




34 


Height at longest ray 




10 


Anal: 

Distance from snout 




56 


Height at longest ray 




9 


Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 




16 


Length 




24 


Ventral : 

Length ... 







Branchiostegals 




6 


Dorsal 




IX, 18 
13 






Pectoral . . 




16 









Number of caecal appendages 




6 









Scytalina, gen. nov. 

Fajiiily Congrogadidcc, allied to Congrogadus Gimther. 

Body augiiilliform, cylindrical anteriorly, compressed behind, covered 
with very small, imbedded cycloid scales. No lateral line. Head broad, 
with tumid cheeks, broader than body, resembling a serpent's head. 
Lower jaw slightly x)rojecting. Each jaw with two strong canines in 
front, besides which is about one series of small, close-set conical teeth 
in the lower jaw and a broad patch in the upper. A single series of 
small teeth on vomer and palatines. Branchiostegals six. Gill-open- 
ings very wide, the membranes broadly connected below and free from 
the isthmus. Pseudobranchise small, present. A slit behind fourth gill. 
Tongue largely free anteriorly. Intestines short, without pyloric Cieca. 
Pectoral fins very small. No ventral fins. Dorsal fin very low, without 
spines, beginning near the middle of the body. Anal similar, and begin- 
ning nearly opposite it. Tail rounded behind. Caudal fin well devel- 
oped, joined to dorsal and anal. Vent near the middle of the body. No 
anal i^apilla. 

Etymology : diminutive of Scytcde, a genus of serpents, in allusion to 
the form of the head and neck and the fang-hke canines. 

The relations of this genus seem to be with Congrogadus Giinther, from 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUxM. 267 

which it differs in the presence of canmes and in the short dorsal fin. 
This is the lirst species of the family thns far known from north of the 
equator. 

Scytalina cerdale, sp. uov. 

Body elongate, cylindrical anteriorly, compressed behind, covered 
with very small imbedded scales. JS^o lateral line. A slight vertebral 
streak and three very obscure dusky lateral streaks simidatiug lateral 
lines. 

Head broader than long, with tumid cheeks and constricted neck, 
much resembling the head and neck of a small snake. Form of snout 
subconic, the head abruptly narrowed at the eyes, below which is a 
slight vertical groove. Snout depressed, rounded at tip. 

Interorbital space rather broad, posteriorly concave, a median wi-inkle 
extending along the vertex to the nuchal depression. All these de- 
pressions are rather apparent than real, being due to the tumidity of the 
cheeks, which encroach on the other i)arts. 

Eyes quite small, directed almost upward, nearly even with the top of 
the head. Lips full, the upper separated by a crease from the !>kiu of 
the forehead, the lower Avith free margin. Skin of forehead with two or 
three dermal tiaps on each side. In one of these the anterior nostrils 
and some nnicous pores open. Posterior nostril near the eye, with a 
very small Hap. Edge of lower lip sparsely fringed, below which the 
skin has several coarse pores with dermal Haps. 

Gape of mouth rather wide, extending a little beyond the eyes. Lower 
jaw slightly projecting, its front with two strong, conic, divergent ca- 
nines. Between these, and behind, along the sides of the jaw, is a series 
of smaller close-set conical teeth. Ui^per jaw with two smaller canines, 
closer together than those in the lower jaw. Edge of upper jaw with 
close-set conical teeth, apparently in a single row behind, widening into 
a broad baud in front. A single series of small teeth on vomer aud 
' palatines. 

Branchiostegals seven. Gill-openings very wide, the membranes 
broadly connected and free from the isthmus. Pseudobranchiie small. 
Gill-rakers almost obsolete. , Gills four, a slit behind the fourth. Opercle 
very short, the tumid cheeks encroaching upon it. 

Pectoral fins very small, a little below the axis of the body, their length 
a little more than the diameter of the eye. Xo ventral fins. Dorsal tin 
very low, of soft rays only, which are short and weak, imbedded in the 
skin. Its insertion a little in front of first ray of anal and slightly in 
advance of the middle of the body. Tail apparently isocercal, rounded 
behind, with a well-developed caudal fin, which is rounded behind, and 
composed of rays longer and much slenderer than those in the dorsal 
and anal. Xo constriction between dorsal aud anal and caudal, the rays 
of the former fins being joined to the latter at their full height. Anal 
precisely like dorsal and nearly coterminous with it. Vent immediately 
in front of anal, i^o anal papilla. 



268 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Intestinal canal a simple short tube, without csecal appendages. Air 
bladder obsolete, or reduced to a filmy membrane. Xotbiiig found in 
the stomach. 

Flesh color, with much mottling of purplish above, in fine, close pat- 
tern, so that the light areas appear in the form of pale spots. Lower 
parts finely speckled like the back, except the belly, which is nearly 
X)lain. Fins similarly colored. 

Anal nearly plain. Caudal reddish edged. 

Fin rays not readily counted. Dorsal about 41. Anal 30. 

Two specimens of this species were obtained by us *at Waadda Island ; 
a third Avas seen, but it escaped us. It inhabits piles of shingle and 
small bowlders near the mark of lowest tides, and when disturbed makes 
its way downward with great celerity through small crevices into the 
water. The si)ecimens taken are each about o| inches in length. 



Tahle of proportional measurements. 
Species : Scytalina cerdale. 



Collector's number of specimen. 
Locality 



Extreme length 

Lenn;th to base of middle caudal rays. 
Eod.vi 

Greatest heigbt 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Di,staiK(' itom snout to nape 

Greatest depth 

Greatest width 

Width (if iuterorbital area 

Lenuth i(f snout 

Leiigt h iif elieok 

Length of mandible 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Greatest height 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Vent: 

Distance from snout 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Pectoral : 

Length 

Ventral : 

Length 

Branchiostegals 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Number of csecal appendages 



No. 226. 
Neeah Bay. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



5.80 
5.50 



lOOths of 

length to 

base of 

caudal. 



13 
9 

7^ 

6" 

2h 

2| 

7 

5 

n 

45 
55 

2 

46 
54 

42 

54 



7 

ca 41 

36 





PEOCEEDmGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 269 

ON C^AMAKAPCaYSEiniA, A NEW TYFE OF SPOI^GE. 
By JOBIM A. KYI5EI2. 

A singular organism, wliicli I will name Camaraphysema ohseura, was 
first observed by me on living oysters from Chesapeake Bay, attached 
to hydroids growing on those mollasks. The single specimen which I 
obtained measured less than half an inch in length, and consisted of a 
larger and smaller individual (person), united basally to a common at- 
tachment, constituting a corm or colony. The color was yellowish, or 
dirty white ; the form of the branches was cylindrical, club-shaped, cov- 
ered by a tough skin (ectoderm?), which was perforated at intervals, 
giving rise to tubular, funnel-shaped, oscular openings of exceedingly 
variable form, according to their condition of expansion. The margin 
of the funnels was entire and exceedingly thin and tough ; this portion 
was capable of being thrown into longitudinal folds and withdrawn or 
inverted inwards into the basal iwrtion. These funnels communicated 
at their bases with chambers, lined, apparently, with a single layer of 
cells (endoderm '?). Ko mesodermal structures were observed, unless 
the single egg which I noticed in the first cleavage stage, from its ap- 
parent position, is to be regarded as a product of this layer. 

The chambers were lined throughout the entire organism with a sim- 
ilar layer of nucleated, columnar cells, as was shown by a series of cross- 
sections, but no evidence of a collar or flagelium could certainly be de- 
tected as forming the inner extremities of the cells. The embryos 
observed were nearly all in the blastula or morula stage of development, 
and appeared to lie superimposed upon the living cellular pavement of 
the charabers, except the one observed in the stage of first cleavage, 
which seemed to lie in contact with the membranous wall of its chamber. 
The whole organism was composed of very irregular chambers, separated 
from each other by an apparently almost structureless membrane, 
probably of an ectodermal nature. The only evidence of structure here 
was the presence of faint, delicate striations when the edges of the 
walls were transversely cut across and viewed with high powers, l^o 
spicules were to be found in any situations ; no fibers, as in the genus 
Spongia; but the whole supporting structure consisted, as stated be- 
fore, of the structureless ectodermal membrane, which was perforated 
and produced at intervals into the funnel-shaped oscular organs. 

The chambers in the center or axis of the cylindrical body of the or- 
ganism could not certainly be made out to communicate with those next 
to the membranous, funnel-bearing body- wall ; but these axial chambers 
appeared to difier in no way from the outer ones in structure. They 
were lined like the external chambers with cells, and, like them, con- 
tained ova in difiereut stages of development, together with brown ma- 
terial, apparently dirt or remains of ingested food, which would appear 
to show that there was some sort of communication with the oscular 
funnels. Onlv once did I find what I believed to be an intercameral . 



270 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

demi-canal, paved in tlie same way witli cells as tlie chambers them- 
selves. 

Not seeing the sponge in an absolutely fresh condition, I could not 
observe the action of the funnels in life ; but once while the whole sponge 
was still in a comparatively fresh condition, and under observation in a 
Zoophyte trough, I saw one of the inverted funnels suddenly everted and 
expanded to apparently its fullest extent. I was also unable to detect 
the slightest evidence of any other kinds of openings besides the funnels 
into the organism, and these were of about the same size throughout. 
This fact, together with others which I have stated, removes all doubt 
as to the sponge nature of the organism. 

There is no form known to me in literature which corresponds to this 
in structure. Salisarca does not have a tough membranous ectoderm, 
while the Physemaria have an ecto-skeleton, composed of the shells of 
Foraminifera. But as the existence of the Physemaria has been appar- 
entty doubted by some zoologists, the i^osition of Gamaraphysema becomes 
an interesting question. At any rate it may be safely placed close to 
the lleshy sponges, and may possibly constitute a distinct family. 

The account now offered, while it is not as complete as might be de- 
siretl, rests upon sufficient evidence to make it desirable that the fullest 
possible description of the organism should be put upon record for the 
benefit of those who may have the opportunity of extending or confirm 
ing my interpretation of its anatomical .and embryological features. 
While I could hardly convince myself at first that I did not have before 
me some one of those curious compound Ascidians of the suborder. 
Synaseidia', the absence, however, of a common cloacal cavity and any 
indications of a branchial apparatus or a digestive canal satisfied me 
that I was not dealing with a tunicate, but that I should have to look 
among the very lowest of the sponges for its nearest aifines. 

I have stated that no collar or flagellum could be detected as forming 
the inner extremities of the cells lining the cavities. This fact does 
not, however, render it improbable that such structures exist in the liv- 
ing animal, as it must be borne in mind that both Bowerbank and Carter 
have called attention to the circumstance that the flagellate cells of 
sponges withdraw their collars and flagella after death. The extreme 
irritability of sponges is notorious, and to one who sees it for the first 
time would be considered remarkable, audit is not unlikely that Gama- 
raphysema partakes of this characteristic, known to be well-nigh common 
to all the members of the group. 

The exact locality from whence this species was derived could not be 
ascertained ; all that the writer could learn was that the lot of oysters 
from whence he had obtained his specimen had certainly been brought 
from the waters of the Chesapeake. It is to be hoped that more speci • 
mens will be brought to light, as the writer in investigating his unique 
specimen was obliged to sacrifice it in order to make his study as com- 
plete as possible by slicing it up into sections. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 271 




Ca>iaraphysema obsctjra, Ryder. 



272 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



EXPLANATION OF THE FIGURE ON PRECEDING PAGE. 

Fig. 1 . — Embryo in the mulberry stage of deYelopmeut, enlarged 2.50 times. 

Fig. 2. — Embryo in the condition of the first cleavage, showing the nuclei and nucleoli 
of its cells distinctly and an egg membrane, 250 diameters. 

Fig. 3. — Embryo in mulberry stage of more frequent ovoid form, 2.50 diameters. 

Fig 4. — Part of a cross-section of the larger branch of the animal, showing the cham- 
bered character of the organism, the membranous septa, the oscular funnels in 
various conditions of extension, and the eggs and embryos in place ; 25 diameters. 

Fig. 5. — The whole animal of Camarapliysema ohscnra, enlarged 7 times. 

Fig. 6. — A small portion of a cross-section similar to Fig. 4, showing the single layer 
of cells which pave the walls of the chambers, with the embryos in position in one 
of the latter. The striaj on the cut edges of the Avails of the chambers and the 
peculiar conform.ation of the oscular funnels are indicated. Enlarged 200 times. 

Fig. 7. — Four of the pavement cells lining the chambers, magnified 900 times, show- 
ing their nuclei distinctly. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 273 

DESCRIPTIOIV OF TWO NEW .SPEriES OF SCOPFL,OI]> FI»«HFS, 
SUDlj^ RIIVOFIViii AlVU MVCTOPHUm t'REi'VlJL.ARE, FRO.II SANTA 
BARBARA CHANNEL,, CALIFORNIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAIV and CHARLES H. OILBERT. 

Sudis ringens, sp. uov. 

The type of this species is in very poor condition, having been taken 
from the stomach of a Merlucius, itself found in the stomach of an Albi- 
core [Orcynus alalonga = Orcymis pacijicus Cooper). The process of 
digestion has destroyed the adipose fin, the ventral fins, and the skin of 
one side, and the back part of the head is considerably mutilated. 
Fortunately, the anterior part of the head, with the jaws and teeth, is not 
at all injured, and the dorsal and anal fins are well preserved. There 
is, therefore, no doubt concerning the classification of the fish, and as it 
is the only one of its type yet found in the Pacific, and evidently differ- 
ent from S. Jiyalina, a description of it seems desirable, even though our 
material is not complete. 

Body very slender and elongate, compressed, the depth forming about 
one- sixteenth of the length. Head rather slender, anteriorly j)ointed 
and moderately depressed, so much injured behind the eyes that its ex- 
act form jyosteriorly cannot be ascertained. Mouth large, horizontal, 
the gape extending more than half the length of the head. Margin of 
the upper jaw formed entirely by the very slender, nearly straight pre- 
maxillaries, which are closely appressed to the long and slender maxil- 
laries. Maxillaries extending to below the eye, nearly as far as the man- 
dibular joint. Tip of upper jaw emarginate. Tip of lower jaw rather 
broad, turned up, and fitting in the notch of the upper jaw. Premaxilla- 
ries armed with a series of small, sharp, subequal, close-'set teeth, which 
are hooked backward. A long slender canine in front on each side. 

Lower jaw with about ten sharp, slender teeth on each side, these 
teeth very unequal, some of them short, three or four very long and 
canine-like. Near the front is one fang-like tooth on each side, then a 
considerable interspace, behind which the others are arranged partly 
in two rows. Most of these teeth, especially the inner and larger ones, 
and the anterior canines, are freely depressible. A long series of teeth 
on the palatines, one or two of the anterior teeth on each side and one 
or two others long, slender, and fang-like. Tongue free anteriorly, 
roughish, but apparently without teeth. 

Opercular bones very thin and membranaceous. Branchiostegals 
about seven. Gill-membranes not connected. Gill-rakers short, sharp, 
spine-like. 

Scales nearly all lost. The few preserved are very large, cycloid, 
their diameter nearly a fourth of the depth of the body. 

Dorsal fin inserted somewhat behind the middle of the body, at a 
distance of nearly 4 times its base in front of the anal, its height a little 
greater than the length of its base. It is composed of 11 (I, 10) rays. 
Adipose dorsal not preserved. 

Proc. Xat. Mus. 80 18 Sept. 98, 1880. 



274 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Aual fin anteriorly nearly as high as the dorsal, its posterior rays low. 
The number of rays apparently I, 25, possibly I, 24 or I, 26. Ventral 
fins totally obliterated. Pectoral fins placed low, rather short, about as 
long as the maxillary. Caudal fin short, narrow, ai^parently forked. 

The coloration is apparently light olive, the sides silvery, with dark 
punctulatious. Fins plain. Peritoneum silvery, underlaid by black 
pigment. 

Table of measurements. 

Total length (ca) 6.60 inches 

Length to base of caudal 6.25 inches = 100 

Body : 

Greatest depth 6 

Least depth 2 

Length of caudal peduncle 6 

Head : 

Length (ca) 16^ 

Length of maxillary 9 

Length of mandible 11^ 

Length of snout 8 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 57 

Length of base 5^ 

Greatest height (ca) 7 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 80 

Length of Iwise (ca) 14 

Greatest height (ca) 5 

Pectoral length 8 

Doj sal rays 1,10 

Aual rays 1, 25 

This species "differs from Sudis Jiyalina as described by Dr. Giinther 
(Cat*. Fishes Brit. Mus., v, 420) chiefly in the dentition, canine teeth 
being present on the premaxillaries and palatines, as well as on the 
mandible. The head is also shorter and the mouth apparently larger in 
proportion, 

Myctophum crenulare, sp. nov. 

Form much compressed, deepest in front of the base of the pectorals, 
bluntly convex anteriorily, tapering behind. Ventral region much more 
arched than dorsal. Caudal peduncle long and very slender. Head 
short and high, abruptly rounded in profile, the snout very blunt. Jaws 
equal, the snout not projecting beyond the mouth. Maxillary very 
slender, scarcely widened to its tip, and not dilated, its extremity reach- 
ing beyond the eye to the margin of the preopercle. 

Premaxillaries anteriorly on a level of the pupil. Teeth very small, 
present on all the dentigerous bones. Eami of the mandible nearly par- 
allel, coudng together in a sharp keel below. 

Orbital margin above and in front with a thin membranaceous rim, 
that in front distinct and formed by the upturned edge of the preorbital. 
Nasal bones membranaceous, their edges upturned, forming a horizontal 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 275 

groove. A groove between the frontal bones. Orbital margins sep- 
arated by a groove from tlie preopercle. Margin of preopercle very 
oblique. All the membrane bones extremely thin, membranaceous. 
Eye large, 3^ in head. Gill-rakers long and slender. Head 3| in length 
to base of caudal ; depth 4i. 

Head and body completely covered w it]j thin membranaceous scales, 
those on the middle of the sides not elevated and not noticeably larger 
than the others. Free edges of all the scales crenulate, some of them, 
especially on the back, with the crenations acute, but without spines, 
the scaled not being really ctenoid or spinous. About 45 scales in a 
longitudinal series. 

A j)hos]»horescent spot on each mandible near the symphysis, 33 pairs 
of spots along the belly, G in front of ventrals, 6 between veutrals and 
origin of anal, and 21 between front of anal and base of caudal. 

Caudal peduncle above and below with two or three backward-di- 
rected spines, which are apparently the exserted tips of vertebral pro- 
cesses. 

Fin rays (not quite certain, the tips being frayed out) : Dorsal about 
12, anal about 16, the fins rather low. 

Origin of dorsal nearer the snout than the base of caudal, much behind 
the base of the ventrals. Ventrals short, not reaching halfway to vent. 
Pectorals reaching base of ventrals. 

Color very dark steel-blue above, silvery on sides and below, with 
dark metallic luster. The usual phosphorescent spots jiresent, as above 
described. No evident cream-colored blotch on the back of tail. 

Myctophum crenulare is known to us at present from a single speci- 
men, about 1^ inches long, taken from the stomach of an Albicore {Or- 
cynus alalonga) in Santa Barbara Channel, July 11, 1880. It had evi- 
dently just been swallowed, and is in fairly good condition. 

It belongs to that division of the genus " /S'cope^MS " called by Dr. 
Giinther " Myctophum " (Cat Fishes Brit. Mus., v, 405). As the latter 
name has priority over Scopelus^ it must be retained as a generic name 
for some or all of these fishes. 

Table of measurements. 

Extreme length 2.20 inches 

Length to base of caudal 1.80 inches = 100 

Body : 

Greatest depth 23 

Least dejith of tail 4 

Length of caudal peduncle - 22 

Head : 

Greatest length 27 

Width of interorbital 6 

Length of maxillary - - • 19 

Length of snout 3 

Diameter of eye ,. 8 

Dorsal, distance from snout -- 51 

Anal, distance from snout - 54 

Pectoral, length ^i 



276 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

"Ventral : 

Length 12 

Distance from snout 39 

Dorsal rays (ca) 12 

Anal rays (ca) 16 

Number of scales in longitudinal series 45 

Number of pbospborescent spots. ♦ 33 

Santa Barbara, Cal., July 15, ISSO. 



l>E!i$CRIPTIOIV OF TWO ^JE.'W SPECIES OF FI.OIJNDEKS (PAROPHRVS 
ISCHYRL'S AND HIPPOC;i.OSSOI]>ES EliASSODOlV,) FROITI PUGET'S 
SOUND. 

By DAVID S. JORDAIV aoid CHARLES H. (GILBERT. 

Parophrys ischyrus, sp. nov. 

Body rhombic-oblong, less deep than iu Platiclithys stellatus or Lepido])- 
setta hilineata, and with the head more ijointed and protruding, but less 
so than in Parophrys vetulus. Body tapering from the middle to the 
head and tail, the four bounding lines but little curved and quite regu- 
lar. Caudal peduncle strong, compressed, and rather long. Head com- 
paratively long, a slight angle over the eye, and the snout protruding 
and not obtuse. Lips full, simple. Mouth moderate, oblique, the lower 

jaw slightly projecting and somewhat more developed on the blind side, 
5 1 . 05 
Teeth about ,,, '^, . in number. 
10 + 2U 

Teeth in one series, rather close set, some on both sides of the jaw. 
but more numerous on the blind side, somewhat irregular in length, 
some of them movable. In form the teeth are somewhat compressed and 
incisor-like and bluntish, but not as notablj^ so as in some related 
species. Ko teeth, on vomer and palatines. 

Maxillary reaching past the front of the orbit, nearly to the pupil. 
Anterior nostril w itli a flap. Posterior nostril almost simple. Tongue 
free. Eyes rather large, the upi)er directed upward, the lower slightly 
iu advance of the other. An area covered with smooth skin in and be- 
hind orbit of ui^per eye. 

Interorbital space rather broad, somewhat elevated mesially, con- 
tinuous, with a slightly marked ridge above the opercle and forking 
forwards, the lower branch ending in a blunt prominence. 

Snout behind nostrils, interocular ridge, and posterior part of head 
covered with scales like those on the body, but smaller and rougher. 
Preorbital very narrow, naked. Skin of head continuous over the edge 
of the preopercle. Gill-openings above not continued forward. Gill- 
rakers short, slender, and weak, about 12 below the angle of the arch. 
Branchiostegals seven. Lower pharyngeal bones separate, each with 
two rows of coarse, blunt teeth. 

Scales moderate in size, thick and firm, adherent, not closely imbri- 
cated, anteriorly separated. Those on the tail oblong and a little im- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 277 

bedded, those on the head and anterior regions rather regularly 
arranged, but not close together. 

Scales strongly ctenoid everywhere, each with a semicircle of six to 
ten upward-directed spiunles on its posterior edge. Those on the head 
and body are similar, the former being a little smaller and rougher, 
especially behind the eyes, where they are somewhat stellate. 

Left or blind side of the body uniformly scaled like the eyed side, the 
scales similar and almost as strongly ctenoid. Preopercle nearly smooth. 
Rest of head with small rough scales, similar to those on the right side, 
but farther apart. 

Caudal, middle part of dorsal and anal, and bases of pectorals and 
ventrals with small rough scales in series, running iip the rays on the 
right side. On the blind side the base of the caudal with small rough 
scales. Other fins naked. 

Lateral line conspicuous, its scales less rough than the others ; a very 
slight curve anteriorly, otherwise straight. A distinct short accessory 
lateral line on both sides, extending to about the tenth dorsal ray. A 
series of pores around lower eye behind. No enlarged scales along lat- 
eral line or at the bases of the fins. 

Lateral line with about 88 pores ; about 80 scales in a longitudinal series 
above the lateral line. 

Dorsal fin beginning over the pupil, its first rays turned slightly toward 
the blind side, low in front, the rays regularly increasing to behind the 
middle of the body,then similarly diminishing. Anal fin similarly formed, 
preceded by an antrorse spine. Highest rays of dorsal and anal about 
equal and nearly half the length of the head. 

Caudal fin large, somewhat double-truncate, the middle rays produced 
Pectoral a little more than half the length of the head, that on bUnd 
side shorter. Ventrals reaching to anal. Kays of dorsal and anal all 
simple. 

Dorsal ruys, 70-7C ; anal, 52-57 ; ventrals, G. Eyes and color on the 
right side. 

Color above light olive-brown, vaguely clouded with light and dark 
Fins reddish-brown ; a few roundish dusky blotches on dorsal and anal, 
resembling in position the black vertical bars found in Platichthys stel- 
latiis. Pectoral and caudal tipped with dusky. Blind side white, either 
immaculate or else with small round rusty spots. Left side of head some- 
times rusty tinged. 

This species is known to us from four examples obtained with a seine 
in the harbor of Seattle, Washington Territory. We place it tempora- 
rily in the genus Paro^hrys, inasmuch as it has the technical characters 
at present assigned to that genus, i. e., the small mouth with blunt uni- 
serial teeth, and the straight lateral line with its accessory dorsal branch. 
The character of cycloid scales assigned to ParopJirys needs modifica- 
tion, as in Parophrys vetulus most of the scales on the cheeks and tail are 
slightly ctenoid. 



278 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

It is, however, evident that there is no special afSuity existing between 
the present species and Paroplirys vetulus, and no very close relation 
between either and Lepidopsetta isolepis Lockington, which, by its tech- 
nical characters, would be also a Parophrys. The nearest natural ally 
of Paroplirys ischyrus is perhaps Lepidopsetta MUneata, and the present 
arrangement is to be accepted only until the relations of these forms can 
be more fully investigated. 

Eippoglosscides elassodon, sp. nov. 

Body oblong-elliptical, strongly compressed, the dorsal and ventral 
outlines regularly aiul iirettj strongly arched. Caudal i)eduncle mod- 
erate, about as long as deep and growing wider behind. 

Head rather large, bluntish, its upjjer profile continuous with the 
outline of the back. Depression over the eye slight. Mouth compara- 
tively large, very oblique, the upper jaw somewhat concave in outline, 
the lower correspondingly convex, the gape considerably wider on the 
blind side than on the right side. Lower jaw rather strongly protruding, 
with a considerable syraphyseal knob. Maxillary rather narrow, reach- 
ing to opposite the middle of the pupil or beyond, the maxillary on the 
blind side much longer than the other. Premaxillary anteriorly on the 
level of the interocular space. 

Upper jaw with a single series of small conical teeth, which are not 
very sharp. These teeth are somewhat larger in front than on the sides, 
and also more widely set. Everywhere they are quite small, much 
smaller than in Hippofjlossoides jordani, and not larger than in H. exilis. 
Lower jaw with a single series of rather close-set teeth similar to those 
in the upper jaw, or slightlj^ larger ; those on the sides smaller than the 

anterior teeth. Kumber of teeth about ^ "^ ^ ^. 

2i) -f 35 

Eyes large, nearly even in front, the upper eye directed somewhat 
upward, but not reaching the dorsal line. Interorbital space a narrow 
sharp ridge, with about two rows of minute scales; 10 to 15 rows of 
scales in an oblique series on the cheeks. A series of mucous pores 
around lower eye behind. Preorbital narrow. Anterior nostril with a 
rather long flap, posterior with a slight tube 

Gill-rakers long, slender, and straight, 15 to 17 below the angle of the 
arch, their inner margins feebly dentate. Pyloric coeca 4. 

Scales small, firm, less readily deciduous even than in S. jordani, rough 
to the touch, with the spiuules short and firm. Scales on head similar, 
but more imbedded, those on the tail larger and rougher 

Scales on blind side small, mostlj' smooth, except on the caudal pedun- 
cle, where they are larger and rough ctenoid, like the scales on the right 
side. The scales along the base of the dorsal and anal and those near 
the lateral line more or less ctenoid. Scales along left side of head small, 
non-imbricate, those on the preopercle and posterior part of the cheeks 
becoming obsolete. The amount of roughness on the scales below is 
subject to considerable variation. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIO>^AL MUSEUM. 279 

Lateral line 'very prominent, as in H. exills, the tnbes coarse, their 
number (88 to 92) less than that of the transverse series of scales.' 

Scales : 41 to 50 ; 110 to 120 ; 35 to 44. 

Lateral line slightly rising anteriorly, but without arch. No acces- 
sory lateral line. Eays of all the fins on the eyed side (except the- 
posterior part of dorsal and anal) and of the caudal on the left side 
covered high up with series of narrow ctenoid scales. 

Fins well developed, of firm texture, the tips of the rays protruding. 

Dorsal fin beginning immediately in front of the pupil, its anterior 
rays low, the others regularly increasing backwards to a point much 
behind the middle of the fin, then becoming rapidly shorter, the highest 
rays nearly half the length of the head and more than the length of the 
caudal peduncle. 

Anal fin preceded by a spine, its highest rays opposite to or in front 
of those of the dorsal and equal to them, the others rapidly shortened. 
Caudal long, double-truncate or convex, the middle rays considerably 
produced, as in H. exiliSy more than in H. jordani. 

Pectoral fin half the length of the head, that on blind side shorter. 
Yentrals moderate, reaching past front of anal, their inner rays short- 
ened. 

Dorsal rays, 77 to 84 ; anal rays, 59 to 03; ventrals, 0. 

Color light olivaceous brown, nearly uniform on the body. Fins 
grayish, obscurely' and irregularly blotched with dusky. Blind side 
plain. 

This species differs from Hijipof/lossoides jordani and H. eiills, the two 
species thus far known from the Pacific coast of the United States, in 
the presence of but a single roic of teeth in the upper jaw. From U. jor- 
dani it further differs in the much smaller teeth, fewer fin rays, and 
more convex caudal. From R. exilis the small scales and firmer texture 
at once distinguish it. Its nearest relative is probably the Atlantic 
species, Hippoglosmides platessoides, which has a larger number of rays 
in the vertical fins. 

Hippoglossoides elassodon is known to us by about 20 examples of 
different sizes, all obtained with hook and line from the wharves at 
Seattle and Tacoma, in Washington Territory. 



280 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Table of proportionate measurements. 



Species . 



Locality . 



Parophrys iscliynis. 



Hippoglossoides elassodon. 



Seattle. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



Seattle. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



Seattle. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



Tacoma. 



Inches lOOths 

and I of 
lOOths. length. 



Extreme length 

Length to end of middle caudal rays. 
Body: 

Greatest height 

Least height of tail 

Length of caudal peduncle 

Head: 

Greatest len gtli 

"Width of intiTorbital area 

Leuiitli oflijii^i-st gill-raker 

Length of maxillary (from tip 
of snout) 

Length of maxillary (from tip 
of snout, blind side) 

Length of mandible 

Distance from snout to orbit. . . 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Height at longest ray 

Anal: 

Distance from snoiit 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal : 

Length of middU' rays 

Length of external rays 

Pectoral, length 

Ventral, length 

Dorsal rays , 

Anal rays 

Ventral rays , 

Number of tubes in lateral line 

Number of transverse rows 

Number of cacal ajipendagcs 



17.05 
14.30 



14.20 
11.50 



9.75 

7.80 



9i 
26i 



45* 
9| 
9i 

31 

n 



14J 



Xi.2 

19 



14* 
22* 



41 
9i 
10^ 

30 
1 
3i 

13 



16* 
5' 



14 

40 
15 

23J 

22 

17 

11 

77 

59 

6 

926 

120 



12.90 
10.50 



29 
1 
3 

12 

14 

15 

7 

6i 
14 

36i 

13i 

22 
19 
14 
11 
84 
61 
6 
90 
110 



Astoria, Oreg., June 16, 1880. 



ON TSIE OE.NITAL.IA OF 



ilIAr.E EOI^!^ AIVD TUEIR SEXUAL. CHAR. 
ACTERS.' 



By S. TH. CATTIE, Ariilieim, HoSland. 

As is well kuown, Darwin t has called attention to the experience of 
Giinther that the females of fishes are in almost all cases larger than 
the males. This was perhaps the reason that Syrski, in 1874,| in in- 
vestigating- the reproductive organs of eels, directed his attention more 
especially to the smaller individuals, where he was fortunate in finding 
what is called by many the organs of S;^Tski, and also considered to be 
the male genital api^aratus. Afterwards, in a variety which is known 

*Ueber die Genitalien der miinnliclieii Aale und ilire Sexual unterscliiede, von S. Th. 
Cattie, Phil. iiat. Caud., Decent an der Realschule zu Arnheim (Holland). Extracted, 
from the Zoologischer Anzeiger, 7tli June, IS30, pp. 275-279. Translated by J. A. 
Eyder. 

tCh. Darwin, Descent of Man, translated into German by Cams, part ii, p. 5 et 
seq. 

t Abhandl. d. kais. Akad. d. Wissenscb., Wien, Ai)ril Heft, 1874. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 281 

iu France under the name of uinguille pimperneau, Dareste* found the 
same organ. It appears that only in one case {Anguilla hostoniensis) 
have living- spermatozoa been found in a male eel, as we learn from a 
communication to the Zoologischer Anzeiger, vol. ii, No. 18, p. 15, by 
A. S. Packard. The male in this case was about 430""" long (17 inches). 
That the finding of such specimens is so very rare should not astonish 
us, since the young eels migrate to the deep sea, where the reproductive 
organs complete their development very rapidly (6 to 8 weeks), when 
spawning takes place ; the old eels, the females as well as the males, 
dying after the reproductive a*ct is consummated. Though on this account 
the spermatozoa, and in most cases their testicular mother cells, are 
wanting, the investigation of the histological structure of the organ of 
Syrski may still bring us somewhat nearer to the truth. 

If one examines partially grown eels measuring 200-500'"™ in length 
one will find a moderate broad band in the abdominal cavity of some 
of them, attached at its inner margin by a narrow duphcature of 
the peritoneum to the air-bladder, the other margin, however, hanging 
free in the cavity of the abdomen. This band extends from the liver to 
behind the anal opening, and is covered by thousands of fat cells. A 
lobular organ, consisting also of fat cells, overlies the hinder portion of 
the alimentary canal and ovarium. I found the eggs to average 0.75'^"' 
in diameter from specimens 20-50 '^^'" in length. Treated with acetic acid 
and ammoniacal carmine solution, a large nucleus and nucleolus became 
visible. In other examples, although the fat lobules were present, the 
broad band was absent. But in exactly the same position and along 
the dorsal aspect of the abdominal cavity a quite thin band or strij) of 
tissue of glass-like transparency is attached, and likewise by a fold of 
connective tissue (peritoneum), to the air-bladder, and extends from the 
liver to behiud the anal opening. This band or strip of tissue is cre- 
nated along its free margin, the lobes of which measure 0.75""" in length 
and 0.5"™ in depth, their convex portion depending into the abdominal 
cavity. In this Syrskian or lobed organ one finds, along the margin where 
it is attached, a fine canal, the efferent seminal duct, which, upon being 
tinged with carmine, becomes quite distinct, and which may also be dem- 
onstrated by means of injections. The histological structure of the fore- 
going lobulated organ was investigated by Freud.t He found an areolar 
structure with connective tissue corpuscles, similar to the histological 
structure of the immature testes of fishes. My preparations had a sim- 
ilar appearance as long as the smaller examijles were the subjects of 
investigation. In the largest specimens of eels with lobulated organs 
investigated by me (445""" long) I found cylindriform strings, which 
passed from the bases to the tips of the lobes, and were filled with cells. 
After repeated trials with the most different reagents, I did not succeed 
in clearly distinguishing a nucleus in these cells. My observations 

* Compt. Rendus, 1875. t. Ixxxi p. 159. 

t Sitzungsber. d. kais. Akad. d. Wissenscli., Wien, 1877, M;irz Heft, 



282 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

were made witli a Zeiss immersion, objective K, oculars 2 and 3. 
According to Jacoby,* Von Seibold saw similar strings of cells in an 
eel, in which the lobes were ver}^ strongly developed. These strings of 
cells presented to the eye the most undoubted similarity to the testicular 
mother cells of spermatozoa. I also believe that the strings of cells ob- 
served by me must be regarded as such. In no case did I observe any 
spermatozoa. 

Previous to my investigations into the histology of the testicular 
lobes of the eel, I occupied mj'self with the question whether there were 
not some other external characters distinguishing the sexes besides the 
already mentioned difference in size and length. Jacoby remarks as 
follows upon this point : 

"1. A distinctly broader snout in the female as compared with the 
slender, either elongated or short, and pointed snout of specimens with 
the lobulated organs. 

"2. A lighter coloration of the female, usually quite green on the back 
and yellowish or yellow on the belly, whilst the other sex is much darker 
greeu in color, often an intense black on the back, with always a more 
marked metallic luster on the sides, and usually whitish on the belly. 

" 3. A further and important external character is an aiipreciable differ- 
ence in the height of the dorsal tin (a point confirmed by me). All 
the females have a distinctly higher and wider dorsal than males of the 
same size. 

"4:. And, finally, we may note, although not a constantly aj^preciable 
character, the greater diameter of the eye of the male. Eels with strik- 
ingly small eyes seem almost always to be females. Eels which have a 
Syrskian organ usually have relatively large eyes, though large-eyed 
females are equally common." 

Jacoby then gives some measurements, the averages of a great num- 
ber of eels measured by him, from which the actual value of his charac- 
ters becomes apparent. I believe, nevertheless, that he attaches too 
much importance to some of his characters, and some otliers, not less 
important, he has not noticed at all. 

Out of a great number of eels measured by me I select the following, 
in which the measurements given in the parallel rows are taken from 
pairs the lengths of which are, as nearly as possible, the same: 

* Dr. L. Jacoby, Der Fischfang in tier Lagune voa CommacMo. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 283 



-I 
xni 



mm. 
270 
305 
325 
324 
327.5 
327.5 
345 
344 
355 
352 
359 
358 
378 
375 
389 
380 



mm. 

— 4 
4.5 

— 4 

— 5 

— 4 
5 

— 4 
4.5 
4 

5 

— 4.5 
5 

4.5 
6 
4.5 

— 5.5 









9 
10 

8 

9 

+ 9 

10 

+ 9 

10 

9. 
11 

9. 
10 



mm. 

8 

9 

9 

10 

9 

—10 

10 

+ 10 

9 

10 

— 9.5 

10 

10 

12 

10 

11.5 



mm. 
4 



3.5 

4.5 

5 

4 

5 

5 

4 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 

5 



_ 2 3 (7 

tc*" e is 
O o go 



m,m,. 

35 

35 

37 

39 

■40 

4U 

41 

43 

41 

42 
+ 41 

42 
■ 43 

45 

44 

47.5 



7 
8 
C.5 





— 4 indicates somewhat less than 4 ; -|- 4 somewhat more than 4. 

From this table tlie conclusion is reached that all the females have the 
dorsal fin higher than those specimens of the same length presumed to 

he males, and that with age this dif- 
ference becomes still more marked. 

The larged-eyed character of eels 
with the lobulated organs has ap- 
peared to me to be too uncertain a 
feature, so much so that, according 
to the foregoing table of measure- 
ments, the same feature might be 
assumed as characteristic of the 
females. On the other hand, I attach 
great importance to the broader 
snout of the female in contrast to 
the slender and pointed snout of the male. But the snout of the female 
is not only broader, but also more depressed, and has the eyes more 
prominent, a feature to which I would call special attention, and one 
which I do not find in the male. In contrast, the snout of the male eel 
is more convex, as will be seen by comparing the accompanying outline 
sketches. 

If one will only notice the width or slenderness of the dorsal, and 
more especially the broad, depressed snout of the female, with the promi- 
nent eyes, as compared with the slender, convex snout of the male, it 
wiU require little trouble to pick out the specimens from these data con- 
jectured to be males. 

On an average amongst twenty eels, measuring 300-500"™ in length, 
furnished me by difierent fishermen, I found 5 eels with lobulated organs 
or 25 per cent. If, however, I paid attention to the two most impor- 



284 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

tant characters, namely, the relative proportions of the dorsal and snout, 
by their help picking- out those specimens which appeared to be males, I 
actually found 80 to 90 per cent, of the individuals so selected to be males 
with the Syrskian organ. 

I found it impossible to discover distinctive sexual diiferences of col- 
oration ; all the males and females investigated by me were of a white 
color ventrally, green above, with a metalic luster on the sides. 



I>£SCRIPTIOIV OF AIVEM' SPAROID FI8II (^PARVS BRACHYSOmUS), 
FROITI r-OWER CAr.IFORlVIA. 

By W. N. I^OCKIWCiTOlV. 

Sparus brachysomus n. sp. 
D. ^1 ; A. ^ ; P. 15 ; Y. ^ ; C. 3-9-8-3 ; L. lat. cir. 50. 

Body compressed, high ; snout and forehead rising in nearly a straight 
line, at an angle of about fifty degrees with the axis of the body, to the 
•occiput. From this point the dorsal outline arches upwards to the third 
dorsal spine, then downwards in a continuous arch to the end of the dor- 
sal fin. Abdominal outline much less curved than the dorsal, the anal 
portion more curved than the anterior portion, lower jaw curved, outline 
between lower jaw and ventrals nearly straight. 

Greatest depth 2§ ; length of head about 3-i\ ; dorsal base about 2 1% ; 
pectoral about 3§ times in the greatest length ; snout (along axis of body) 
f; orbit 4i ; interocular width 3f f in the length of the head ; least depth 
of caudal peduncle 5^ times in the greatest depth. 

Posterior extremity of maxillary falling somewhat short of the ante- 
rior margin of the orbit, its upper margin concealed beneath the pre- 
orbital throughout ; no prominent knob at upper extremity. Lower jaw 
shorter than the upper. 

Nostrils simple ; the posterior a large elongated slit close in front of 
the orbit and on a level with the lower half of the eyej the anterior a 
small circular foramen situated at a lower level than the posterior and 
about one-fourth of the diameter of the eye in advance of it. 

Interocular space considerably convex transversely, but only slightly 
so longitudinally. 

Posterior margin of preoperculum straight and vertical, lower line 
convex, the angle of junction strongly rounded. Operculum ending in 
a flat point ; suboperculum membranous at tip. 

Numerous conical teeth in front of the jaws, the anterior row consid- 
erably larger than those behind. Three rows of molars in the upper jaw, 
two in the lower. In the si)ecimens examined there are 9 large incisors 
in the mandible, forming a bold arc, the interior of which contains about 
five irregular rows of crowded cardiform teeth, reaching back to the an- 
terior small molars. Upper jaw similar, with 7-10 large incisor teeth. 



PROCEEDINGS OP UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 285 

[N'umber of molars in each row of lower jaw variable, but usually 9 on 
each side, those of the inner row increasing- in size to the last, or to the 
penultimate, which sometimes exceeds the last in size. Teeth of outer 
row also increasing in size posteriorly, but to a less extent and less rej^u- 
larly, so that the hinder four molars of the inner row are much larger 
than their neighbors in the outer row. The two inner rows meet at an 
acute angle, the anterior pair in contact. 

Inner row of molars of intermaxillaries consisting of 21 teeth, of which 
G-7 form a row on each side, and increase in size to the hindermost or 
the one in front of it, while the remainder form a curved line of small 
tubercular teeth of even size along the inner side of theiront of the 
jaw, behind the band of incisors. Outer row of molars 8 in number, 
similar to those of the lower jaw. Middle row formed of more numerous 
(about 14) and, on the whole, smaller teeth than either of the outer 
rows, increasing in size posteriorly, so that, though the anterior five or 
six are very small, the posterior ones are about equal in size to the 
smaller teeth of the outer row. The hindmost four or five teeth of the 
inner row in all cases exceed greatly in size any teeth in the other rows. 

Gill-rakers consisting of clusters of pin-like, slender teeth set ujjou 
tubercles ; those of the last two pairs of branchial arches largest. The 
principal clusters of teeth are triangular, with several rows of teeth, the 
largest behind, the other rows diminishing in length and in size of teeth 
as they succeed each other anteriorly. 

Pharyngeal bones, upper and lower, covered with a dense cluster of 
teeth similar to those in front of the jaws. The inner row of the lower 
pharyngeals larger than those in front, which are about four in number, 
and the anterior teeth rather larger than the posterior. 

Dorsal commencing immediately over the pectoral base ; first spine 
about one-fourth the length ; second spine eleven-twentieths of length 
of third; fourth broken in specimen examined; fifth slightly shorter; 
and the remaining spines decreasing regularly to the twelfth, which is. 
less than half as long as the third. 

Eays of soft dorsal twice bifurcate. 

Second anal spine longer than the third and about twice as long as 
the first, which is inserted a little behind the pectoral base ; rays twice 
bifurcate. 

Caudal deeply and triangulately emarginate on its hinder border, the 
free portion of the central rays about one-third the length of that of 
the outer rays. Outer x>air of principal rays undivided, most of the 
others four times bifurcate. 

Fifth ray of pectorals longest, fourth but little shorter, lower rays 
tapering rapidly, producing a rather narrow elongate fin ; rays twice 
bifurcate. 

First soft ray of ventrals longest; rays three times bifurcate. 

Scales large, broader than long, slightly striated and scalloped on 
their engaged margin, posterior margin rounded, anterior somewhat an- 
gular, the center advancing. Scales of body subequal, operculum and. 



286 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

preoperciiluin with rather smaller scales, those of interoperculum smaller 
still. Margius of orbit scaleless, the scales of occiput, which are rather 
small, advancing- to a point very slightly in advance of the anterior or- 
bital margin. Cheeks, jaws, and fins scaleless. 

Lateral line approaching gradually nearer to the dorsal outline toward 
the posterior portion of the body, and running a little above the center 
of the caudal peduncle ; pores simple. 

Color, in alcohol, dark brown on snout and cheeks, fading to silvery 
on sides and rest of body; behind the pectorals there are traces of 
golden reflections. 

On the orbital margin, just above the posterior nostril, there is a 
tubercular projectiDn of the bone. 

Several specimens of this species were sent from Magdalena Bay, 
Lower California, by Mr. W. J. Fisher. They were unfortunately in 
rather bad condition, so that the tips of the rays of the soft dorsal and 
anal are broken off both in the example described and in others which 
were carbolized and dried. 

One of the examples is in the National Museum, Washington, D. C. 

This species should jirobably be placed in the genus Calamus Poey, 
which includes also the Fagcllus calamus of Cuv. & Val., but as I have 
not Poey's work at hand I leave it in the Linnaean genus Sjparus. 

DimeH^iions. 

Inches. 

Total leiigtli from tip of snout to tip of caudal lobe 14. 00 

Total leiigtL. from tip of snout to end of middle caudal rays 12. 37 

Greatest depth across pectoral base -. 5. 25 

Depth of caudal peduncle 1. 00 

Length of head to tij) of opercular sj)iue , • 3. 42 

Tip of snout to upper i)ectoral axil 3. 90 

Tip of snout to origin of anal 7.70 

Tip of snout to origin of dorsal, along dorsal outline 5. 55 

Tip of snout to anterior axil of ventrals, along abdominal outline .-.. 4. 35 

From orbit to tip of upper jaw, in straight line 2.25 

Upper margin of orbit to level of center of interocular space 37 

Longitudinal diameter of eye... 76 

Width of interocular space 92 

Length of snout 1.60 

Tip of snout to end of maxillary 1.52 

Length of pectorals, center ray 3. 88 

Length of ventrals 2. 40 

Length of base of dorsal 6. 07 

Length of base of spinous dorsal 3. 88 

Length of first spine of dorsal .53 

Length of second spine of dorsal 1.10 

Length of third spine of dorsal 2. 03 

Length of fifth spine of dorsal 1.97 

Length of anal base 2. 15 

Length of first anal spine 45 

Length of second anal spine 94 

Length of third anal spine 73 

Greatest thickness at operculum 1.75 

Greatest distance from abdominal outline to lateral line 4. 05 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUxM. 287 



MESfRIPTlOnr OF SEVEN 3fEW SPECIES OF SEBASTOID FISHES, 
FROiV THE COAST OF CAI.IFOKiVIA. 

By DAVSD S. JORDAN and CHARI.ES H. GILBERT. 

The Sebnstoid lisbes of the coast of California have been referred by 
Professor Gill to four geuera : iSehastodes (type jxmcispinis), Bebastosomus 
(type melanops), Sebastomus (type rosaceiis), aud Sehastichthys {ty])enigro- 
cinctus), the first separated by the small size of the scales, the others 
mainly diftereutiated by the degree of development in the spines of the 
head. The genus Scbastodes we consider valid, referring to it only 
paucisjnnis, although the affinities between paucispinis and the group 
termed Sebastosomus are not remote, as is shown by the smooth head, 
I)rotruding lower jaw, small scales, and longer anal finiu the latter group. 
The discovery by us of numerous additional species not known to 
Professor Gill renders it evident to us that the groups Sebastosomus and 
Sebastomus cannot be maintained as genera distinct from SebasticlitJiys, 
and that, in order to recognize them as subgenera even, a different dis- 
tribution of the species must be adopted. 

The Californian species known to Professor Gill are distributed by 
him as follows : 
Genus Sebastodes. 

paucisi)inis. 
Genus Sebastosomus. 

mehiDops. 

simulaus. 

flavidus. 

ovalis. 

pinuiger. 
Genus Sebastomus. 

elongatus. 

rosaceus. 

ruber. 

auriculatus. 

nebulosus. 
Genus Sebastichthys. 

nigrocinctus. 
The following arrangement expresses our i^resent views as to the 
relations of the species known to us, so far as it can be shown in a linear 
series. 
Genus Sebastodes. 

paucispinis. 
Genus Sebastichthys. 

Series (or subgenus) Sebastosomus. 
melanops. 



288 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. , 

simulans. 
flavidus. 



ovalis. 
Series (or subgenus) Schastichthys. 
atrovireus. 
piuniger. 



elongatus. 



rubrivinctus. 



auriculatus. 



vexillaris. 



cblorostictus. 

rosaceus. 

coustellatus. 



ruber. 



rastrelliger. 

nebulosus. 

fasciolaris. 

serriceps. 

nigrocinctus. 
Of the foregoing species we have examined a large series of all except 
ovalis, riihrivinctHS, and nigrocinctus. All the species except nigrocinctus, 
ovalis, and ruhrivinotus are of frequent occurrence in the San Francisco 
markets. 

The characters drawn from the presence or absence of the different 
pairs of spinous ridges on the top of the head are among the most 
reliable in this group, although not hitherto accurately given by the 
describers of the species. Some individual irregularities may be 
observed, but these are usually readily detected. 

For these spines we have adopted the following names: Kasal: those 
near the nostrils; present in all our species of SchasticMhys. Preocular: 
for those above the front of the eye ; i^resent in all except flavidus and 
simulans. In melanops the ridge is present, but it usually does not end 
in a spine. Supraocular : above the eye 5 present in all but simulans, 
melanops, and flavidus. Postocular : close behind these ; present in most 
of the red species, usually wanting in others. Tympanic : behind the 
postocular, and generally i)resent. Occipital : long ridges on the pos- 
terior part of the head on each side of the occipital crest. Tliese ridges 
end va spines in all except melanops, simulans, and flavidus. Coronal : 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES. NATIONAL MUSEUM. 289 

a pair of distinct spinous ridges in front of tlie occipital ridge; present 
in one species only — auriculatus. Ktichal : close behind the occipital; 
in one species {serriceps) large and distinct, in the others either wanting 
or often coalescent with the preceding. 

Two suprascapular spines are present in all the species except auricu- 
latus, which has three on each side. 

The following table gives the names of the spinigerous ridges on the 
top of the head nsualh/ present in each species, beginning with those in 
which the ridges are least elevated : 

Pairs. 

Paudspinis, preociilai", occipital 2 

Flai'idus, nasal 1 

MeJanops, nasal and preocular lor2 

Simulans, nasal , 1 

Ovalis, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, and occipital 6 

Pinniger, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, occipital 6 

Afrovirens, nasal, preocular, supraocular, occipital, and sometimes tympanic 4 or 5 

EJongatus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, occipital 5 

BastreUifjer, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, occipital 5 

Auricidatus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, coronal, occipital, and 

often nuchal 7 

Vexillains, nasal, preocular, supraocular, occipital, and sometimes tympanic ... 4 or 5 

Cfilorostictus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, occijiital 6 

Eubrivinctus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, occipital 5 

Rosacevs, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, occipital 6 

Constellatus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, occipital 6 

Xebidosus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, occipital 5 

Ruber, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, tympanic, occiiiital 6 

Fasciolaris, nasal, preocular, suj)raocular, tympanic, occii)ital 5 

Serriceps, nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, occipital, nuchal 6 

Nigrocinctus, nasal, preocular, supraocular, postocular, occipital 5 

"The character of the gill-rakers has been hitherto unnoticed. In this 
regard the species may be grouped as follows : 

1. Long and slender : Jiavidus, simulans, ovalis, pinniger, melanops, afro- 
virens. 

2. Long and rather strong : vexillaris, elongatus, chlorostietus, rosaceiis. 

3. Stout and rather short, usually not clavate, but constricted toward 
the tips : rnbririnctus, auriculatus, constellatus, ruber. 

4. Stout, short, compressed, and clavate : neMlosus, fasciolaris, serri- 
ceps, nigrocinctus. 

5. Very short, broader than high : rastrelUger. 

Sebastichthys ateovieens sp. nov. 

Allied to S. pinniger. Body oblong, not very stout, not tapering 
rapidly backward. Head moderate, rather pointed, its upper outline 
with a slightly curved slope from the snout to the nuchal region. 

Mouth moderate, not very oblique, the lower jaw little projecting, the 
rather slender maxillary extending to the posterior border of the pupil ; 
the premaxillary below the horizon of the pupil. Maxillary largely 
scaly. Eye large, about three and a half times in length of head. 
Proc. Xat. Mus. 80 19 Sept. 28, 1880. 



290 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Eidges on top of head rather low, not ending in very prominent 
spines. The following pairs are present : Kasalj preocular^ supraocular, 
and occipital^ four in all. Occasionally the tympanic spiue is also devel- 
oped, although very small. The nasal spines are quite prominent. The 
preocular and superocular moderately so, but short. The occipital 
spines are comparatively short and low. 

Preorbital bone with the neck very narrow, scarcely one-fifth the di- 
ameter of the eye, provided anteriorly with two stout spines, which pro- 
ject backward. 

Preopercular spines short, but rather sharp, the second longer and 
slenderer than the others, all of them pointed. Subopercle and interoper- 
cle with spines. Opercular and suprascapular spines sharp. 

Interorbital space rather broad and slightly convex, widened back- 
ward, a little depressed on each side next the supraocular spine, its 
width less than that of the eye and more than the length of the occipital 
spine. 

Gill-rakers long and slender, but stouter, rougher, and shorter than 
in S. pinniger, 9 above the angle and about 22 below ; the longest two- 
fifths the diameter of the eye, about half the interorbital space. 

Scales on the head rather large, about 15 in a cross-series on the 
checks above the suborbital stay. Preorbital scaly. 

Scales on body large and somewhat more regularly arranged than usual. 
Accessor}" scales present, but not numerous ; 52 transverse series of 
scales. 

Dorsal spines moderate, the hfth and sixth spines highest, the others 
regularly shortened each way, the twelfth about as long as the first, the 
membrane joining the thirteenth less than half way up; the highest 
spine rather less than half the length of the head and lower than the 
soft tays, which are rather high. Caudal slightly rounded. 

Anal fin short and high, its spines slender, the second shorter than 
the third, and not much stronger. Pectorals long and narrow, reaching 
past the vent and nearly to the beginning of the anal, their length 
seven-eighths that of the head, iheir base quite narrow, less than the 
diameter of the eye. Ventrals long, reaching just past the vent. 

D. XII, I, 11 ; A. Ill, 7. 

Color similar to that of >S'. rastrclUger, but paler, usually olive-green, 
marbled with darker; belly pale yellowish green ; fins olivaceous. Some- 
times this si)ecies is quite dark, but it never shows red tints either on 
body or fins. 

This species is closely related to ^S. pinniger, from which it differs in 
the absence of the postocular and tympanic spines and in the coloration, 
;S'. pinniger being always chiefly orange-red. Externally it resembles 8. 
tastrcUigcr most, but it may be known at once from the latter species 
by the long gill rakers and narrow pectorals. 

/S'. atrovirens is very abundant from Point Concepciou as far as San 
Diego. About Catiliua Island it is the most abundant species of the 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 291 

genus. It is frequently seen in the San Francisco markets. It readies 
a length of about 15 inches, and is usually known as Garrupa or Grouper. 

Sebastiohthys rubrivinctus sp. uov. 

Body robust, rather deep and compressed, tapering behind to a slen- 
der caudal peduncle. 

Head long, acute in profile, there being a nearly straight slope from 
a bony prominence in front of the spinous dorsal to the tip of the lower 
jaw. Mouth rather large, oblique, the lower jaw strongly projecting. 
Maxillary broad, scaleless, extending to opposite the middle of the eye; 
anterior edge of premaxdlary on the level of the lower border of the eye. 

Eidges on top of head quite low, five pairs of them ending in spines, 
which are bluntish and depressed. KasaL preociiJar^ supraocular, tym- 
panic^ and occipital spines present. In one example the nasal spines are 
covered by the skin. Ocular ridges not much elevated. 

Isterorbital space flattish, narrow, not so broad as the eye, not wid- 
ened behind, covered with rather sparse, almost cycloid, scales. Two 
long frontal ridges extend the length of the interorbital space. These 
are covered with bare skin. Behind and between these are two shorter 
ridges occnpyiug the place of the coronal ridges found in S. auriculatus. 
These two are covered by naked skin, and do not end in spines. Tym- 
l)anic spines well developed. Occipital ridges long, curved, diverging 
behind. 

Suborbital stay very prominent, its tip nearly reaching the i^reopercle. 

Preopercle with five very strong spines, the three ui)permost very 
long and sharp, the second the longest. Subopercle and interoiiercle 
entire. Oi^ercle above with two sharp, long sjHnes. Suprascapular with 
two strong spines. Preorbital very wide, its neck two-fifths the diameter 
of the eye, with one sharp spine and a large prominence, which usually 
ends in a spine also. 

Eye extremely large, its diameter 3:| iu length of head. 

Gill-rakers rather short, rather robust, much compressed, toothed on 
the inner margin, the longest about one-fourth the length of the eye. 
Gill-rakers 8 -|- 20 in number, about 4 + 16 of them being free. 

Scales on head all small and thin, mostly cycloid, the minute acces- 
sory scales extremely numerous. Scales of body smoother than usual, 
the accessory scales numerous on the posterior part and on the nuchal 
region, where the scales generally are smaller and more crowded than 
on the flanks. 

Dorsal spines robust, rather high, the fifth the highest, not quite half 
the length of the head; those behind rapidly shortened to the twelfth; 
the twelfth spine lower than the first and much less than half the height 
of the fifth, its membrane joining the thirteenth spine below its middle. 
Soft rays about equal in height to the spines. Caudal fin very slightly 
emarginate. Anal rather low, its second spine much longer and stronger 
than the third, both robust. Pectorals moderate, not reaching vent j 



292 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

the base moderate, nearly equal to the diameter of the eye. Yentrals 
not reaching tips of pectorals. 

D. XIII, 14; A. Ill, 7. Scales in about 48 transverse series. 

Color very pale rose-red, almost white, with cross-bars of a deep, 
intense crimson-red, these bands broadest on the back. One of the 
bands runs across the eye, snout, suborbital, and maxillary, with in- 
distinct boundaries; the next across the nuchal region and front of 
dorsal and opercle ; the next across the middle of the spinous dorsal, 
including the ventrals and the posterior half of the pectorals ; another 
across the soft dorsal and anal; another across the base of the caudal, 
the fin itself being deep rose color. The other fins share the color of 
that part of the body against which they lie. 

This species is known from two examples, each about one foot long, 
taken on a reef in Santa Barbara Channel, by J. Weinmiller, February 
14, 1880. 

Afterwards about eight others, larger than the original types, were 
taken in deep water near Monterey. It is known to the fishermen as 
the ''Spanish Flag," and is the most brilliantly colored large fish on the 
Pacific coast. 

Its relations to the other red species are not intimate. 

Sebastichthys yexillaeis sp. uov. 

Body stout and compressed; the back elevated; the form rather 
deeper and more elliptical than in the other red species. Head mod- 
erate; the profile moderately acute. Mouth rather large, moderately 
oblique, the broad maxillary usually extending to a point somewhat 
behind the orbit. Premaxillary anteriorly on the level of the lower 
edge of the pupil. Jaws subequal, the lower somewhat projecting, but 
without sympLyseal knob; the upper jaw not emarginate. 

Ridges on top of head long and low, rather broader and lower than 
in the other red species; their spines rather depressed. The following 
pairs of spines are jn^esent, four or five in all: Nasal, prcocular^ supra- 
ocular, occipital, and sometimes tympanic. The nasal sx)ines are promi- 
nent; the preocular spines are quite conspicuous and extend well back- 
ward ; the supraocular ridge is depressed and broad, its spine triangu- 
lar ; the occipital spines are rather long and diverge backward. In 
some specimens a tympanic spine is j^i^esent, which is wanting in the 
others. The interorbital space is broad and flatfish, broader than in 
related species, about equal to the diameter of the orbit. It is occupied 
by two raised ridges, which are covered by the scales. In large speci- 
mens these ridges are quite obscure. 

Preopercular spines moderate; some of them usually di^aded into 
two, three, or four at tip, the middle one the largest. The degree of 
division of these spines is quite variable, but at least the middle spine 
is usually divided. 

Posterior border of the interopercle with a strong spir^, above which 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 293 

are one to tliree conspicuous spines on the subopercle. Opercle with, 
two diverging spines, above which are two suprascapular spines. 

Eye moderate, high up, 4 to 4| in head. Preorhital with the neck 
very broad, with two bhmtish downward-directed spines in front, its 
narrowest portion two-fifths the diameter of the eye. Suborbital stay 
short and rather weak. Maxilla^ry and preorbital with fine scales. 

Gill-rakers rather long and strong, compressed, toothed on the inner 

margin, shorter than in atroHrens, the longest slightly clavate, about half 

8 
the length of the eye; the number about — , nearly all of them free. 

Scales moderate, with few accessory smaller ones, in 55 transverse 
series. 

Dorsal spines very strong and high, about as in chlorosiictiis, higher 
than in any other si)ecies5 the first about half as long as the eye; the 
fourth the highest, more than half the length of the head, and much 
liigher than the soft rays. The twelfth spine is a little higher than the 
first, and its membrane joins the thirteenth about half-way up. Mem- 
brane of spinous dorsal rather more deeply incised than in other species. 
Soft dorsal rather high, but lower than the spines. 

Anal spines much smaller than in 7'osaceiis, etc.; the second not longer 
than the third, and not much stronger; about two-thirds as high as the 
soft rays. Soft rays of anal high. Caudal truncate. Pectoral shorter 
than head, not reaching the vent ; its base rather broad. 

Ventrals moderate, not reaching vent. 

D. XIII, 1(3; A. Ill, 6. 

Color rather bright and i)ale, yellowish red, becoming lighter below, 
the reddish and yellowish forming large and irregular areas, sometimes 
one shade predominating, sometimes the other. A pink cross-blotch on 
the back at the base of the second and third dorsal spines. Upper parts 
of the head mostly pink, with broad olive shades running backward, 
one on the lower lip, one on the maxillary, one from preorbital region 
downward, one from the eye backward and downward across the cheeks, 
and another across the opercular spines. Fins all pinkish red ; the mem- 
branes olive. Top of head usually with alternating cross-shades of 
pinkish and yellowish. In some specimens the yellowish shades are re- 
placed by light olive. Others are quite red; others still are quite 
brownish. The spots on the back show a tendency to the rosy spots 
found in consteUatus and rosaccus. 

This species was first known to us from two specimens taken on a 
reef in Santa Barbara Channel. A single example was afterwards 
noticed in the museum of the California Academy of Sciences, and 
numerous others have been since obtained in the San Francisco markets, 
where it is very common. It reaches a larger size than its relatives, 
chlorost ictus and consieUatus, found in the same markets, and, like them, 
it has been confounded by previous observers with rosaceus and auricu- 
latus. It may be known from its relatives by its high dorsal spines, low 



294 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

anal spines, and the smaller number of ridges on the top of tlie head. 
Jts relations are probably more near to S. nehulosus than to the other red 
species. 

Sebastichthys chloeostictus sp. nov. 

Body obiODg', taperin,i>' into a rather slender caudal peduncle, the back 
not much elevated. Head moderate, the profile rather steep, with a 
nearly even sloi)e. 

Mouth large, oblique, the maxillary reaching to behind the pupil, the 
premaxillary in front below the level of the large eye. Jaws equal in 
the closed mouth, the tip of the lower fitting into the emarginate upper 
jaw; a rather cons])icuous sympbyseal knob. Preorbital sinuate, usually 
with two or three tiat spines. 

Ridges on top of head rather sharp and high, ending in sharp spines. 
These ridges are longer than in nebidofins and serriceps, and much less 
elevated. These ridges are much higher than in rcxlUaris ; about as in 
consteJlatns. 

The following i^airs of spines are present: Xasal, preocnlar, supraocu- 
lar, 2>ostocular, tympanic, and occipital — 6 pairs. 

Interorbital space concave, with two rather prominent ridges. 

Preopercular spines rather sharp, the second longest and slenderest; 
the lower bluntish, but well developed. Opercular si)ines sharp; su- 
prascapular spines well developed. A spine on interopercle and on 
subopercle. 

Gill-rakers long and rather strong, not clavate, the longest about two- 
fifths the diameter of the eye. They are longer than in any other of the 
red group, rather longer than in vexiUaris. Scales on head less devel- 
oi)ed*than in S. constellatus ; the snout wholly free from scales. Mandi- 
ble nearly or quite naked. Scales on body moderate, in about oo trans- 
verse sei'ies. 

Dorsal spines very high, nearly as high as in vexiUaris; the fourth 
highest, one-third higher tban the soft rays, which are also considerably 
elevated. 

Dorsal fin rather deeply emarginate ; caudal fin emarginate ; anal fin 
not very high, its second spine much higher and stronger than the third, 
about as high as the sgffc rays. Pectorals with moderate base reaching 
beyond tips of ventrals, about to vent. 

D. Xril, 14; A. Ill, G. 

Color rather light olivnccous above, ainl i)inkish overlanl with golden 
oil tbe sides. Head light red and golden. Three roundish light spots 
lilaced as in constellatus and rosaceus, but nuich less distinct. There are 
no small light spots on the body. The upper parts of the body, from just 
below the lateral line, are closely covered with small round spots of a 
clear olive-green. These spots are most distinct on the back and the 
top of the head. On the aides of the body, just above and below the 
lateral line, these spots form two continuous series, following the course 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 295 

of the lateral line. Eyes above with green spots. Fins nearly i^laiu 
red ; the dorsal spotted with olive. 

This species is known to us from numerous specimens obtained in the 
San Francisco market, taken in deep water at Monterey. It is not rare, 
bnt it has been hitherto confounded with rosaceiis, from which it may be 
known at once by the green spots and the great height of the dorsai. 

Sebastichthys constellatus sp. nov. 

Body rather robust, heavy forwards, tapering into a rather slender 
caudal peduncle. Head rather pointed in profile, the slope nearly 
straight from the tip of the snout to the base of the dorsal. 

Mouth large, oblique, the lower jaw slightly projecting beyond the 
emarginated tip of the upper jaw. A conspicuous knob just beyond the 
symjjhysis of the lower jaw. 

Maxillary very broad, extending to beyond the line of the pupil, its 
middle part with many small scales; premaxillary in front just below 
the level of the eye. 

Eidges on top of the head well developed, rather high and narrow, 
ending in moderate spines. The following pairs are present: Nasal, 
preomdar, supraocuJar, posfocular, tympanic, and occijntal. The inter- 
orbital area has two prominent ridges covered by the scales, and not 
ending in spines. Behind these is a deep concavity. The nasal spines 
are bluntish, the preocular shar]), the supraocular ridge rather short, 
the postocular and tympanic similar to each other. The occipital ridge 
is long, curved, ending in a sharp sjjine. Two suprascapular spines. 
Preopercle with its first and third spines triangular, bluntish, the sec- 
ond long and sharp, the fourth and fifth reduced to bluntish prominences. 
Opercle with two strong spines above. Slight spines on the subopercle 
and interopercle. 

Preorbital wide, its neck about one third the diameter of the orbit, 
its edge lobed, without spines. 

Eye large, 4^ in head. 

Muzzle aiid preorbital scaled to the tip of the snout more completely 
than in other sj^ecies, mandible seal}'. 

Gill-rakers short, very thick, compressed, clavate, with a tuft of spine- 
like teeth at tip, the longest of them about one-fifth the diameter of the 
eye, their number 3-1-24 free ones, besides rudiments. Scales strongly 
ctenoid, the accessory scales largely developed ; 53 transverse series. 

Dorsal spines rather strong, rather low, the fonrth the longest, a little 
more than one-third the length of the head. Twelfth spine rather short, 
shorter than the first, its membrane joining the thirteenth spine about 
half-way up. 

Soft dorsal rather low, about equal to the spines. 

Anal with the second spine robust, curved, considerably longer than 
the third, higher than the soft rays. Caudal very slightly emarginate. 



296 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Pectorals reacliiug- bojond tips of veutrals, about to veut, tlieir length 
two-tliirds that of the head. 

D. XIII, 13; A. Ill, (3. 

Head densely covered with small scales ; a series across the cheeks 
along the upper edge of the suborbital stay usually numbering 30 to 40, 
the increased number being due to the greater develoi)ment of the ac- 
cessory scales. 

Color rather light, bright orange-red, the. back olive shaded, the belly 
yellowish. Cheeks with red and yellowish shades. Head and body 
everywhere closely covered with small roundish pale spots. The spots 
above are light rose color; below are nearly white and larger. Four or 
five roundish rose-colored spots on the back, besides some mottlings of 
a similar shade. The first spot, often obscure, under the fourth dorsal 
spine ; the next near the lateral line under the eighth dorsal spine ; the 
next close to the junction of the two parts of the dorsal ; the fourth 
under the end of the soft dorsal; a fifth sometimes near the base of 
eighth dorsal spine. Opercular flap with a rosy spot. Fins light red- 
dish, shaded with olive, or nearl}' uniform. Dorsal speckled at base 
with light and dark. 

This beautiful species was first noticed by us in Santa Barbara Chan- 
nel, where a single example was obtained. It is abundant in the mar- 
kets of San Francisco, where it has been confounded with rosaceus on 
account of the similarity of the pink spots. The numerous stellate light 
spots, however, distinguish it at sight. It is ver^^ closely related to 
rosaceus^ however. 

The discovery of three species in the waters of California having the 
light spots supposed to distinguish S. rosaceus^ invalidates the identifi- 
cation of that species with the similarly spotted 8. oculatus of Chili. 

Sebastichthys kastrelliger sp. nov. 

Body rather oblong, deepest at the shoulders, slowly tapering back- 
ward to a rather deep caudal peduncle ; head short, rather blunt and 
deep, the upper profile straight ; mouth moderate, little oblique, the 
maxillary reaching to the posterior margin of the eye, the x)remaxilliary 
rather below the level of the eye ; jaws equal, the lower convex, not 
produced at tix), and without symphyseal knob. 

Preorbital bone moderate, the width of its neck about two-fifths the 
diameter of the eye, its free margin sinuate, without spines. 

Eye moderate, anterior, its diameter about 4^ in head. 

Eidges on head strong, but broad and depressed, ending in small 
spines. The following i^airs present : Nasal, preocular, supraocular, tym- 
panic, and occipital, five in all. The occipital ridges are very long, equal- 
ing the diameter of the orbit ; preopercular spines short and stout, the 
two upper subequal ; opercular spines usually very broad and fiat, their 
posterior edge sometimes serrated or bifid ; suprascapular spines strong; 
spines on interoi^ercle and subopcrcle small, sometimes obsolete j inter- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 297 

orbital space moderate, less than the diameter of the eye, flattish, witli 
two low ridg-es ; spines of head little divergent backwards. 

Gill-rakers very short, wide, compressed, the longest as wide as high, 
the shortest much wider and not free, all strongly toothed on anterior 
margin and side; the number about — - only 6 to 9 of them being mov- 

14, 

able. 

Scales on body large, the accessory scales almost wanting 5 about 45 
transverse series, and'about 50 in the course of the lateral line. 

Dorsal spines low, the fifth highest, about two-fifths the length of the 
head; the last spines not much shortened ; the fin comparatively little 
emarginate ; soft rays considerably higher than the spines. Caudal fin 
slightly rounded. Anal tin short and high, its spines low, the second as 
high as the third and much stouter. Pectorals rather short, reaching 
vent, their base extremely broad, its width greater than the length of the 
eye and about one-third the length of the head; the lower rays much 
thickened. Yentrals moderate, not quite reaching the tips of the pecto- 
rals. 

D. XIII, 13; A. Ill, 6. 

Color blackish green, with paler mottliugs, the sides spotted with 
darker ; belly pale greenish, often many scales on the side, each with a 
darker spot ; paired fins dark, often tinged with reddish ; other fins 
chiefly olivaceous, mottled with darker; anal fin often spotted with 
black. The brightness of the olive and greenish shades is quite vari- 
able, but the species is always without bands or distinct markings and 
without distinct red. 

This species is extremely abundant from Point Concepcion to Santa 
Catalina Island, and large numbers come into the San Francisco market. 
It may be known at once from all the others by the small gill-rakers 
("rastra") and by the breadth of its pectoral fins. It grows to the 
length of about 15 inches. 

S. rastreUiger is intermediate, in regard to the development of the 
spines, between the groups termed Sebastomus and Sebastosomus by Pro- 
fessor Gill. Its relations with 8. nebulosus are most intimate, and it 
forms the, base of a series ascending in degree of roughness of head, ter- 
minating in the extreme of >S'. nigrocinctus. 

Sebasticiitiiys fasciolaris Lockingtou, nom. sp. no v. 

(Schastes fasciatus Girard, not of Storer.) 

The form described and figured by Girard as Sebastes fasciatus is, in 
our opinion, specifically distinct from Sebastes ncbulosns of Ayres, with 
which it has usually been identified. 

The name fasciatus is preoccupied in this group. We have therefore 
adopted the above name, proposed by Mr. Lockington in MSS. 

Sebastichthys fasciolaris is very closely related to S. nebulosus. It is 
rather stouter, and the slope of the profile is steeper. The ridges on 



298 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

tlie top of the head are much higher and stronger, especially the occip- 
ital ridge, which forms a wall-like elevation, much as in S. serriccps. 
The sides of this ridge are vertical, or even directed upward. 

The color of this species is very constant and quite distinct from that 
of nebulosus. It is nearly black, everywhere speckled with whitish. 
There are coarse yellowish blotches on the sides of the head and body, 
and a broad, yellowish, lateral band. This band begins on the mem- 
brane of the third and fourth dorsal spines, and extends downward to 
the lateral line, which it follows to the tail. The edges of this baud are 
very uneven, and it is of varjing width, but it is always distinct and 
continuous. The body is mottled with light and dark, and the fins are 
all blaclvish, with pale spots. 

In the bluntish spines of the sides of the head, the horizontal mouth, 
with shortish subequal jaws, the short, thickish gill-rakers, the high 
dorsal spines, and moderate, subequal anal spines, this species agrees 
with S. nebulas us. Both species are common in the San Francisco mar- 
ket, in about equal abundance. 

Measurements in hundredths of length to haso of caudal. 



Body: 

Greatest lic'igbt 38 

Least height of tail 11 

Head: 

Greatest length 35 

Snoivt 10 

Orbit 

luterorbital space 

Least width of preorbital 3 

Maxillary 18 

Longest gill-raker 

Oceipital ridge 

Supraocular rid go . ... 
Dorsal : 

Snout to dorsal 32. 5 

Longest spine 13 

Longest ray 15. 5 

Anal : 

Base ! 13.5 

Second spine i 14 

Third spine 14 

Longest rav 22 

Caudal, len 2th ; 20. 5 

Pectoral, leuiit h ' 27 

AVidth of base 11 

Ventral, leu'ith 26.5 

Dorsal ." X III, 13 

Anal 111,5 

Transverse rows of scales, .. 55 
Length to base of ^laudal, in 

inches I 8.7 

Extreme length, in inches i 10. 4 



relliger. 




30 


12 


41 1 


iJ 1 


8.5 


6 


2.5 


20 


1.5 


8 


G 


35 


13 1 


IC i 


15 


12 


i •' 


19 


20 


27 


11 ! 


22 


XIII, 13 1 


IILO I 


47 


9.25 


11.3 



35.5 
12 

37.5 

9.2 
11 

8 

1.5 
17 

3.5 

6 

6 



10 
19 

15 

14.5 
15 
20 
21 
32 
8.8 
24.5 
XIII, 14 
111,7 
47 

7.25 I 
8.75 



40 
10 

38 

11 
9.5 
5.7 
3 

10 
2.3 
9.3 

e 

38 
10 
15 

•12.5 
15 

13.5 
20 
1.5.3 
24 
• 9.5 
19.5 
XIIL 14 
IIL7 
50 

9.7 
11.3 



36 

12.5 



37.2' 



7 

2 

17.5 



33 
21 

15. 2 

15 

14.0 

12.2 

20 

17.5 

27 

11 

92 

XIIL 13 
IILG 
56 

1L3 
14.25 



34.5 
9.5 



6.8 



18.5 
3.8 

7.5 



30.2 
21. 5 
I'J. 7 



42 

11.3 

11.5 

6 

2.5 
20.6 

4 

8 



40 
15 
14 



13 




10.0 


10 


14.5 


13 


18 


15 


18 


18.5 




24 



9.5 
21 
Xin, 13 
IILO 

(42 

9.3 
11.2 



10 

18 

XIIL 14 

1IL6 

48 

0.23 
8.55 



San Francisco, Cal., Fehrtmry 28, 1880. 



Note. — Tlie publication of tliis paper lias been accidentally delayed for some time. 
Meanwhile the ^yl•iters have discovered a number of additional species of Scbastichthys 
descriptions of which p.reccde those of the i)resent species, although of course no al- 
lusion is made to tliem in this earlier paper. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED -STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 299" 



DEi^CRIPTlOIV OF A .\EW EITIBIOTOCOD O (ABEOr.A AUK«KA> 
FKOTI .MW^TEREV, CALIFORNIA, WITH .^OTES 0.\ A RE I. ATI O 

By OAVIO S. JOZIOAX a:5d CEIAKLES BI. GIJLBEKT. 

Body veiy elong.ite, with dorsal and ventral outlines e^-enly curved j 
caudal peduncle very lonj--, thick at base ; snout blunt and rounded, top 
of head everywhere transversely convex and the occipital re,i>ion but 
little depressed. 

Mouth small and oblique, the lower jaw somewhat shorter than the 
upper and included. The maxillary reaches but two-thirds the distance 
to front of orbit; premaxillaries anteriorly about on a level with lower 
rim of orbit. 

Teeth long and strong, somewhat compressed and incisor-like, an-anged. 
in a close series; each tooth with three short-rounded lobes near the endy. 
the middle lobe the longest; their form precisely as in Ahvona mlniiiKu 
These incisor teeth are crowded, with the lobes overlapping, and often 
with one slipped entirely behind the others. 

Scales of cheeks in three distinct series below, in one posteriorly. Be- 
hind this outer row and well separated from it are, in the upper jaw^ 
from two to several distinct canines, there being usually a pair near the 
middle of the jaw. Gill-rakers rather feeble, of moderate length. Lower 
lip thin, with a frenum. 

Dorsal fin with the spines from the fifth or sixth to the eleventh, longer 
than the others, about equal to each other and to the longest soft ray. 
Pectorals not reaching as far as do the ventrals, which scarcely reach the 
vent. Caudal forked for nearly half its length. Ventral groove almost 
obsolete ; the distance from ventrals to vent about equals the length of 
the anal fin. 

Lateral line with 40 to 45 scales (4-43-13). 

Color bluish black above, becoming lighter. on lower half of sides 
silvery below. Opercles and lower half of sides punctate with black 
dots and shaded with light orange or rose red, the latter here more 
intense on the centers of the scales. A broad grayish area extending 
backward from the axil of the x)ectorals, without orange tints and dark- 
ened by black punctulatious on the edges of the scales; this area ends 
opposite the origin of the anal fin; above it the orange shade forms a 
rather distinct band from the lips to the base of the caudal. Axil of 
pectorals black, especially above. Fins plain, speckled with blackish. 
Anal somewhat yellow. 

Fin rays: D. VIII, 17; A. Ill, 20. 

The intestines were filled with a species of Ulva, indicating a vege- 
table diet. 

This species is known to us from fifteen examples taken in the bay of 
Monterv_*y, and purchased by us in the San Francisco market. 



300 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

It agrees with. Abeona minima in the peculiar dentition characteristic 
of that genus, as well as in the large scales and shortened fins. Its 
form is, however, quite different, resembling more the genera Bracliyis- 
tius and Cymatogaster. It is a considerably larger fish than Abeona mi- 
nima; its dorsal spines are weaker and the number of fin rays is greater. 

(D. IX, 14; A. Ill, 16 — in Abeona minima.) 

From Cymatogaster aggregatus it is widely separated by the diiierent 
dentition; with Bracliyistius frenatus GiU it has closer affinities, but the 
two species belong to different genera. 

This latter species has been but once observed, and no description 
has been yet iDublished, merely a brief note enumerating some of its 
peculiarities. We therefore subjoin a fuller account, drawn from a fine 
specimen obtained by us at Santa Barbara. 

Brachyistius peenatus Gill.* 

(Proc. Acad.. Nat. Sci. Pliila., 1862, 275.) 

Body elongate, compressed, the body proper regularly elliptical, with 
long caudal peduncle. Head long, very slender and pointed, much de- 
pressed above the eyes, the snout projecting. Mouth very small, ter- 
minal oblique, the small maxillary falling much short of the orbit. Lips 
rather thin, the lower with a frenum. Teeth long and slender, some- 
what lanceolate, few in number, arranged in a single series. 

Preorbital broad. Cheeks with about two rows of scales ; oi)ercles 
with three. Eye large, anterior, about 3 in head. 

GiU-rakers numerous, long and slender. 

Scales large, 12 in the course of the lateral line. Dorsal spines high 
and rather strong, the first low, the others rapidly increasing to the sixth 
and s.eventh, the eighth shorter, the soft rays a little higher than the 
highest spines. 

Caudal peduncle nearly as long as the head, not very slender. Caudal 
fin rather deeplj' forked. 

Anal spines feeble, the fin elevated in front. Veutrals reaching soft 
Tays of anal. Pectorals reaching first anal spine. Ventral groove very 
short. 

D. YIII, 15 ; A. Ill, 22. 

Color darlv olive-brown above, with lighter stripes along the rows of 
scales. Below everywhere a brilliant light coppery red; each scale with 
a light blue spot and dark punctulations. Head colored like the body. 
Pins all light reddish, plain, the dorsal somewhat dusky. A streak of 
sky-blue spots below and in front of the eye. 

Mcasttrancnts of Abeona aurom. 

Extreme Icngtli 6. 03 iuclies 

Length to base of caudal 5. 57 iuclies = 100 

*We have siuce obtaiued this sxiecies iu very great numbers at various places along 
-t3ic coast from Los Angeles to Vancouver's Island. Dltrcma hrevipinne Glinther is 
undoubtedly the same species. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 301 

Body : 

Greatest deptli pg 

Least depth of tail j^ 

Leugth of caudal j)eduncle 21 

Head : 

Greatest length 25. 5 

Width of interorbital area 9 

Length of snout 7 

Length of maxillary 6 

Diameter of eye 7 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 37. 5 

Length of base 43.5 

Height of longest spine 12 

Height of highest soft ray 12 

Anal : 

Length of base 16. 5 

Height of longest ray ^ 9 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 13, 2 

Length of outer rays 25 

Pectoral, length 24 

Ventral, length 19 

Dorsal rays VIII, 17 

Anal rays Ill, 20 

Scales 4-43-13 

Transverse series below lateral line 35 

San Francisco, Cal., February 28, 1880. 



I>ESC'RI5»TIO:V OF A IVEW FI^Ol'.'VDER (PI^ATV .SOMATICHTHVS 
STO.TIIAS), FKOm THE COAST OF €AEIFOIlI\IA. 

By DAVIO S. JOKE>A]V and CHARLES H. GILBERT. 

Body extremely elongate for the family, thin, and strongly compressed. 
Head rather long and slender; the snout somewhat pointed. Mouth 
extremely large and oblique, the lower jaw included; the maxillary very 
long and slender, reaching much beyond the eye, its length about half 
that of the head. Premaxillary in front above the level of the lower eye. 

Teeth in the upper jaw anteriorly long, slender, and wide-set. Some 
of the teeth very freely depressible, the larger ones scarcely movable. 
Posteriorly the teeth are much smaller, close-set, and fixed in two rows j 
the inner row continuous with the larger anterior series, the outer row 
extending outside of some of the enlarged teeth. 

Teeth in the lower jaw very sharp and slender, long, and wide-set, 
alternating with shorter ones, which are very freely depressible. Out- 
side of the larger teeth is a series of small, fixed, close-set t«eth. The 
larger teeth in each jaw are distinctly arrow-shaped. Pharyngeal teeth 
apparently in one row. 



302 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Eyes large, dextral, their anterior margius about even with each 
other; the upper eye larger and directed obliquely upward. A con- 
spicuous ocular ridge about the upper eye, becoming continuous with 
the lateral line. luterorbital space narrow, not half the width of the 
eye, scaly, as is the space in front of it. Cheeks wide, the posterior 
edge of the preopercle free. Opercle rather short and weak, Premaxil- 
lary protractile, capable of little protrusion. 

Gill-rakers long and strong, about 4 + 13 in number, the longest 
more than half the diameter of the eye. 

Scales very small and thin, irregularly arranged, their margins weakly 
ciliated, in about 13."3 transverse series; about 100 tubes in the course of 
the lateral line. The lateral line is nearly straight, gently ascending in 
front. l!N^o accessory lines. Scales on blind side similar. 

Dorsal fin beginning just behind the middle of the eye, its rays low, 
especially anteriorly, its greatest height considerably' behind the mid- 
dle. Caudal fin somewhat forked. Anal tin higher than the dorsal, its 
highest rays about midway. Xo spine before anal. Caudal i^eduncle 
long and slender, about a s long as the maxillary. Pectoral fins short, the 
one on the right or eyed side longest, its length nearly equal to that of 
the maxillary. Ventral fins very short, reaching just past the vent. 

Fin rays: 1). 101; A. 85. 

Color plain brown, with darker punctulations. Left side white, the 
many dark points giving it a soiled ax>pearance. Tins dusky. 

This species is known to us from one example over a foot long, bought 
in the San Francisco market, and taken just outside the Golden Gate. 
It doubtless reaches a much larger size, and the adult is probably less 
slender than this example. 

It differs from its congener, the Greenland Halibut, Platysomatichtliys 
hij)2)oglossoides^ of the Xorth Atlantic, in the slenderer body, larger 
mouth, longer gill-rakers, and narrow interorbital space, but the two 
appear to agree in all respects of generic value. 

We regret the necessity of using the clumsy and inappropriate generic 
name Platymmaticlithys for these fishes instead of the name Beinliardtms 
proposed by Professor Gill. The former name, although later in date, 
Las priority of definition.* 

Table of mrosiircments of Phifysomaflclithys stomias. 

Extreme length 12.9 iuclies 

Length to base of caudtil 10.9 inches = 100 

Oreatest tleiith of body 30 

Least depth 07 

Length of caudal peduncle 12 

Length of head 28 

Nun)bei' of gill-rakers 4, 11 

Length of longest gill-raker 032 

Length of snout 068 

Length of maxilliary 152 

*In a paper written later, but by accident printed earlier (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
1880, .'')1), we hare recognized this sxiecies as the type of a distinct genus, Atlieresth.es. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 303 

Length of mandiWc 1(33 

Greatest width of uiuxillary 03 

Diameter of orbit 07 

Distance from snout to dorsal 116 

Length of base of dorsal 79 

Greatest height of dorsal 094 

Distance from snout to anal ,* 346 

Length of base of anal 615 

Height of longest ray 105 

Length of middle caudal rays 142 

Length of outer caudal rays 185 

Distance from snou t to pectoral 295 

Length of pectoral (right side) 128 

Distance from snout to ventral 127 

Length of neutral , 057 

Dorsal rays 101 

Anal rays 85 

Number of tubes in lateral line 98 

San Francisco, Cal., March 1, 1880, 



I)E?<€e5flI?TIO:V OF A JSKW E.^IBIOTOt!OID FI.<«H (t'VlUATOCJ ASTER 
RO?>lAlVElTS). FieOM TBIE COAST OF €'AI>IFORIVIA. 

By I>AVia> S. JOKUAIV apd CHAR1.ES II. OILBEIST. 

Body rather' elongate, deepest at the shoulders; the profile thence to 
the occiput convex, the occipital and interorbital region considerably 
depressed ; body tapering backwards from the shoulders into a short 
and slender caudal peduncle. 

Head small, thick, the snout blunt. Mouth rather large, little oblique, 
the lower jaw included; maxillary slightly passing the vertical from the 
front of the orbit ; premaxillary anteriorly on a level with the inferior 
margin of the i)upil. Eye very large, its diameter about one-third the 
length of the head ; interorbital region very broad. Lower lip with a 
narrow frenum, above which its margin is narrowly free. 

Teeth large, in a single row, much as in Ci/matog aster frenatus, but 
blunter, slightly compressed and truncate at tip, somewhat incisor-like, 

12 

the edge, however, entire. Teeth few and distant, about ^ ; none on 

the sides of the lower jaw. They are larger, blunter, and more wide-set 
than in Cymatogaster agyregatus. 

Scales on the cheeks in three series below, 

Gill-rakers small and weak, much as in Cymatogaster aggregates, curved 
and apparently smooth. 

Scales large, but rather smaller than in any of the related species, 50 
in the course of the lateral line. 

Spinous dorsal high ; the lirst spine two-fifths the length of the highest; 
the sixth to tenth of nearly equal height, and higher than the soft rays. 
Anal fin with the base oblique and convex, the spines rather strong, more 
or less curved, as in Abeona. 



304 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Caudal fin uairow, forked for more than half its length, the lobes rather 
pointed. Pectoral lins small, not reaching to the tips of the ventrals, 
which attain the anal. 

Fin rays: D. X, ]8; A. Ill, 20. 

Color in alcohol silvery, strongly flushed with rose-red, darker above. 
Top of head orange. A very distinct oblong chocolate-colored spot above 
the lateral line at the origin of the soft dorsal fin. Another much smaller 
one just below the end of the soft dorsal. Fins immaculate, slightly 
tinged with reddish. In life the color was silvery, with the rosy flush 
less distinct. 

This species is known from a single specimen found by Mr. W,. j^. 
Lockington in the San Francisco market. A few others have since been 
obtained from sweep nets in deep water. 

In its relations it is intermediate between the species which we have 
taken to be Brachyistius frenatus Gill and the common Cymatogaster ag- 
gregatus. The frenum of the lower lip is too little developed in the large- 
scaled Embiotocoids {Ahconay Cymatogaster, ^^Brachyistius ■') to be used 
for geneiic distinction. Aheona is well set off by the tricuspid teeth, 
but the dentition of Cymatogaster and Brachyistius is essentially the 
same, the slightly more incisor-like form of the teeth in Brachyistius being 
scarcely definable as a generic character. 

The numbers of fin rays do not afford very good generic characters, as 
will be seen by the following enumeration : 

Dorsal. Anal. 

Cymaiofjaster agyregatus IX, 20-21 III, 22-24 

Brachyistius rosaccus X, 18 III, 20 

Brachyistius frenatus VIII, 15 III, 22 

Abeona atirora VIII, 17 III, 20 

Aheona.m%nima IX, 14 III, 1(5 

We therefore provisionally refer the present species, with Brachyistius 
frenatus, to the genus Cymatogaster. 

Tithle of measurements. 

Extreme length 5.92 inches 

Length to base of caudal 4.70 inches == 100 

Body: 

Greatest depth 40 

Least depth of tail Hi 

Length of caudal jjeduncle 15 

Head : 

Greatest length 30 

Width of interorhital area 8 

Length of snout 6^ 

Length of maxillary 8^ , 

Diameter of eye 10^ 

Dorsal : 

Length of base 50 

Height of highest spine 15 

Height of longest ray 15 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 305 

Anal : 

Leugtli of base 21 

Height of longest ray 9 

Distance from ventrals 25 

Caudal: 

Length of middle rays X3 

Length of outei' rays 26 

Pectoral, length 27^ 

Ventral, length 23 

Dorsal rays X,18 

Anal rays Ill, 20 

Scales 6-50-16 

San Francisco, Cal., March 2, 1880. 



DESC'RIPTIOIV OF A NEW SPECIES OF DEEP-WATER FISH (ICICH- 
THVS L,OCKi:VOTOIVI), FROITI THE COAST OF CAI.IFORIVIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN and CHARLES If. OIL.BERT. 

Icichthys gen. nov. 

Allied to Icosteus Lockington, but tlie body lower and more elongate, 
not compressed at the bases of the vertical fins. Head moderate ; eyes 
lateral ; mouth terminal, little oblique, with small, sharp teeth in one 
series, in the jaws only. Gill-openings very wide, continuous. Gill- 
rakers long. Pseudobranchine present. Branchiostegals 7. Body en- 
tirely scaly. Lateral line continuous, smarmed. Bases of fins without 
spinules. 

Dorsal and anal fins long and low, composed of soft rays only. Pec- 
toral fins moderate. Ventral fins small, thoracic, I, 5. Pyloric coeca 
about 6, large. Bones all very flexible, cartilaginous. 

The scaly body fully distinguishes this species from Icosteus, with 
which singular genus its affinities are intimate, although the known 
species do not resemble each other closely. 

(Etymology: ^;xw, to yield or submit; r/Ohc;, ^•^h — in allusion to the 
flexible skeleton.) 

Icichthys lockingtoni sp. nov. 

Body oblong, moderately elongate, somewhat compressed, the caudal 
peduncle rather slender. 

Head moderate, compressed, with vertical cheeks, rather broad and 
slightly convex above, the snout abruptly descending, hence bluntish 
in profile. Profile nearly straight from upper part of snout to the nape. 

Mouth moderate, little oblique, the slender maxillary scarcely widened 
at the tip, extending to rather below the front of the pupil, the anterior 
edge of the premaxillary on the level of the lower rim of the eye. Lips 
thin. Upper lip not protractile. Premaxillary tapering backward, not 
forming the wliole margin of the upper jaw. Maxillary behind slipping 
entirely under the membranous edge of the preorbital. Preorbital rather 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 20 Sept. 28, 1880. 



306 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

wide, with one or two series of rather large, thin cycloid scales. These 
scales perhaps covered the cheeks also in life. At present no other 
scales are present on the head in the typical example. Lower jaw promi- 
nent, projecting in front, but included at the sides. Teeth in jaws only, 
minute, sharp, closely and evenly set, much as in Icosteus cemgmaticus, 
but rather larger and less numerous. 

Ejes large, lateral, longer than snout, their diameter contained about 
4 times in the length of the head. Cheeks rather wide. Preopercle 
with a prominent crest, behind which are some radiating mucous cavi- 
ties ; the bone with a broad, prolonged, flexible membranaceous edge, 
covered with radiating stri;p, each of which ends in a slightly exserted 
flexible point. Opercle and suboi)ercle rather large, extremely thin, and 
each crossed by numerous conspicuous radiating striie. 

Gill-openings Avide, not sei)arated by an isthmus, the membranes not 
connected. Pseudobranchiie present. Branchiostegals 7. Gill-rakers 
long, slender, sharp, their length nearly three-fourths the diameter of 
the eye. Thej" are rather close-set and moderately stiff. Gills 4, a 
slight slit behind the i)Osterior gill. 

No bony stay connecting suborbital and preoi)ercle. 

Scales very small, apparently cycloid, soft and smooth to the touch, 
covering the body evenly, but becoming smaller below. Lateral line 
nearly straight, apparently continuous, but not conspicuous on the mid- 
dle part of the body. It does not run up on the caudal fin. There are 
on it no traces of the spinules, so conspicuous in Icosteus ccnigmaticus. 

Scales (too small to be accurately counted) in about 120 transverse 
series. 

Dorsal i\\\ long and low, beginning opi:>osite a point nearly midway 
between the vent and the base of the ventrals; the number of rays 39 
to 40. All the rays are soft and articulated, and apparently" all except 
the first are branched. The first rays are very low, the fin gradually 
rising posterioily, the highest about one-third the length of the head. 
The base of the fin is somewhat scaly. 

Anal fin entirely similar, but shorter, beginning slightly in front of 
the middle of the body (without caudal), and ending just in front of the 
last rays of the dorsal; its rays about 2S. 

Caudal broad, fan-shaped, on a slender peduncle; the accessory rays 
numerous and recurrent. The fin is broken, so that its outline cannot 
be ascertained. 

Pectorals as in Icosteus^ with the carpal bones slightly exserted, as if 
X)edunculate, the base a little below the axis of the body, the outline 
rounded. The fin is short and small, its length less than that of the 
liea;l. 

Yentials short and small, thoracic, placed a little behind pectorals, 
with one obsolete spine and five soft rays, one of which is slightly fila- 
mentous. The fin is about one-third the length of the head. 

Fin rays not beset with s]>inules. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 307 

Vent normal, immediately in front of the anal, without papilla. 

Air-bladder apparently wanting. Pyloric cceca about G, rather long. 

Bones all soft and flexible, as in Icosteus cenigmaUms. The skin, how- 
ever, not thick and tough, as in the latter species, but thin and scaled. 

Coloration in spirits plain brown, lighter below; the skin somewhat 
punctulate. 

Measurements of typical example. 

Totallength 7. 5 inches 

Length to base of caudal 6. 8 inches := 100 

Greatest depth 25 

Least depth 9 

Length of head 20 

Diameter of eye 5X 

Interorbital width 5j 

Distance from snout to dorsal 37 

Length of base of dorsal , 51 

Height of do rsal 7 

Distance from snout to anal 50 

Base of anal 32 

Length of pectoral 11 

Length of ventral 8 

Number of fin rays : 

Dorsal 39 

Anal 28 

Scales in lateral line (ca) 120 

The single example of this species at present known was obtained in 
the market of San Francisco by Mr. V\\ G. W. Harford, with two of the 
original types of Icosteus ccnigmaticus. It has been presented by the 
California Academy of Sciences, for whom it was originally obtained, to 
the United States National Museum. Its specific distinctness from Icos- 
teus (Knigmaiicus was first noticed by Mr. Lockington, and we have seen 
fit to name the species for him, in recognition of his important work in 
Californian ichthyology. 

The two species are called "deep-water fish" by the dealers. 

As before noticed, the relations of this genus are evidently with the 
associated genus Icosteus^ but the two genera bear little resemblance to 
any form known to us. They Avill probably constitute a distinct family 
or subfamily, in the Trachinoid group. 

This family (Icosteidce) may be defined as follows : 

Body oblong, compressed. Head moderate, unarmed ; the suborbital 
without bony stay. Mouth terminal, little oblique ; the i>remaxillary 
not protractile; the maxillary slender. Teeth minute, sharp, erect, in 
one series on the jaws only. ISTo barbels. GiUs 4, a slit behind the 
fourth. Gill-openings wide; the membranes free from the istlnuus. 
Gill-rakers slender. Branchiostegals 7. 

Dorsal and anal fins long, without spines. Caudal fin, witli many 
recurrent accessory rays, on a slender ijeduncle. Pectoral fins rounded, 
with the carpal bones slightly exserted. A^entral fins thoracic, I, 5, or 
I, 4. Vent normal, without anal papilla. Pseudobranchite present. 



308 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Skeleton imperfectly ossified, tlie boues flexible, so that the whole 
body is limp and destitute of firmness. 
The two genera m^y be thus compared : 

* Head and body uaked, covered with rather thick tough skin; lateral line and fin 
rays beset with spinules. Dorsal and anal rather high, the body at their bases 
closely compressed. Dorsal rays, 50 to 55; anal rays, 35 to 40; yen trals rather 
long, 1,4 ICOSTEUS. 

** Head partly and the body wholly covered with small scales. Lateral line and fins 
rays smooth. Dorsal and anal fins low, their bases little compressed. Dorsal 
rays, 35 to 40 ; anal rays, 25 to 30 ; veutrals short, I, 5 Icichtiiys. 

San Francisco, Cal., March 12, 1880. 



CATALOOtJE OF TBOCHIIilD.i: I^T THE COK.I.ECTION OF THE 
Ur«ITE» STATES NATIONAL. MUSEUM. 

By ROBERT RIDGWAY. 

The following catalogue enumerates all the species of Humming Birds 
which are contained in the collection of the National Museum, with the 
localities represented, the latter being in many cases additional to those 
given in standard text-books relating to this family of birds. The chief 
aim of the list is to show what species are wanted to complete the col- 
lection, and exchanges to this end are resi^ectfully solicited. Many of 
the species of the list are represented by an incomplete series of speci- 
mens, often by a single skin on] j', and of these additional specimens are 
desirable, especially if from a locality not mentioned in the list. Such 
species are indicated by an asterisk prefixed to the name. 

The^ names^ and numbers correspond with those of Elliot's " List of 
Described Species of Humming Birds," x>ublished by the Smithsonian 
Institution.^ 

* 1. Eutoseres aquila (Bourc.) Reich. 

Veragua. 
4. Rhamphoclon nasvius (Dimiout) Reich. 

Brazil. 
(i. Glaucis hirsuta (Gmel.) Boie. 

Costa Rica ; Trinidad ; Grenada, AY. I. ; E. Peru (Pebas) -, Panama j 
"Brazil". 

* 10. Glaucis cerviiiicauda (Gould) Salv. & Elliot. 

E. Ecuador (Rio Napo) ; Brazil I 
11. Glaucis ruckeri (Bonrc.) Gould. 
Panama ; Costa Rica.^ 

'A few names are here changed in consequence of recent emendations. 

2 List of Described Species of Humming Birds. By Daniel Giraud Elliot. Rej)rinted 
from a Synopsis of the TrochiMdiB in the Smithsonian Contributions to Knowledge. 
Washington : Smithsomau Institution. 1879. (Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections, 
No. 334.) 

3 Including the l«ype of G. omea Lawr, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 309 

* 13. Phaeoptila sordida Gould. 

S. Mexico (Oaxaca). 
*16. Phcethornis yaruqui (Bourc.) Gould. 

Ecuador. 

18. Phaethornis emiliae (Bonrc.) Bonap. 
Costa Eica ; Colombia. 

* 19. Phaethornis augusti (Bourc.) Bouap. 

Venezuela. 

* ^0. Phsethorr.is pretrii Less. 

Brazil. 
"21. Phaethornis superciliosus (Linu.) Swains. 

Babia. 
23. Phasthornis longirostris (Less.) Cabau. & Heiu. 

Mexico; Guatemala; Colombia (Turbo) ;^ Panama; E. Peru (Pebas)j* 
Chiriqui. 
*23. Phaethornis hispidus (Gould) Gray. 

E. Ecuador (Eio iSTapo). 
*24. Phaethornis syrmatophorus Gould. 

Quito. 
*25. Phaethornis anthophilus (Bourc.) Gray & Mitch. 

"Bogota". 

*26. Phaethornis euryncme (Less.) Gray. 

Brazil. 
*27. Phasthornis squalidus (Tcmni.) Bonap. 

Southern Brazil; llio Xegro. 
*28. Phaethornis longuemareus (Less.) Gray. 

Trinidad; "Brazil". 
29. Phaethornis adolphi Gould. 

Guatemala ; Costa Eica ; Panama ; Xew Grenada (Turbo). 

* 30. Phaethornis griseigularis Gould. 

Colombia. 
*31. Phaethornis striigularis Gould. 

Colombia. 
oG. Eupetomena macroura (Gmel.) Bonap. 

Brazil (Baliia). 

* 37. Eupetomena hirundo Gould. 

Bolivia. 
38. Sphenoproctus pampa (Less.) Gould. 

Guatemala. 
*39. Sphenoproctus curvipennis (Licht.) Gould. 

E. Mexico (Mirador). 

1 Types of P. cassini Lawr. 

2 A specimen (No. 55374) from Pebas, labeled in Mr. Lawrence's handwriting "P. 
moorei Lawr.," is not distinguishable from northern specimens of P. longirostris. It 
does not, however, agree with Mr. Lawrence's descrij)tion of P. moorei, so that Mr. 
Elliot may be right in referring the latter to P. sujjerciliosKS. 



310 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

* 40. Campylopterus largipennis (Bodd.) Cab. & Hein. 

Cayenne. 

* 42. Campylopterus rufus Less. 

Guateinalii (Duenas; Guatemala City). 

* 4L Campylopterus obscurus Gould. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 

44. Campylopterus lazulus (Bonnatt.) Bonap. 
Colombia ; W. Peru. 

45. Campylopterus hemileucurus (Licht.) Cab. & Heiu. 

E. Mexico (Jalapa); Honduras; Veragua; Guatemala; Costa Eica. 

* 46. Campylopterus ensipennis (Swains.) Less. 

Tobago. 

* 47. Campylopterus villavicencio (Boiiic.) Gould. 

Rio Napo. 

* .'0. Campylopterus roberti (Salvin) Gould. 

Guatemala (Choctum, Vera Paz). 
*5'2. Aphantcchroa cirrochloris (Vieill.) Gould. 

Brazil. 
54. Caeligena clemenciae Less. 

E. Mexico (Mirador). 
*55. Caeligena henrici (Less.) Cab. & Hein. 

Guatemala. 
56. Ceeligena viridipallens Bourc. & Muls. 

Guatemala (Cobau, Vera Paz; Guatemala City); ^'Mexico". 

* 57. Caeligena hemileuca (Salvin) Elliot. 

Costa Rica. 

58. Lamprolaema rhami (Less.) Reich. 

E. Mexico (Orizaba and Mirador) ; Guatemala (Guatemala City). 

59. Oreopyra calolaema Salvin. 
Costa Rica. 

* 60. Oreopyra leucaspis Gould. 

Chiriqui. 
G'2. Oreotrochilus itichincha (Bonrc. & Mnls.) Bp. 
PicliincLa. 

* 63. Oreotrochilus chimborazo (Delattr.) Gould. 

Cliimborazo. 

* 64. Oregtrochilus estellae (D'Orb. & Lafr.) Gould. 

Bolivia (La Paz). 
^ 65. Oreotrochilus leucopleurus Gould. 

Chili (Valle del Yero). 
63. Lampornis violicauda (Bodd.) Elliot. 

"riorida";^ Brazil (Bahia); Guiana; Venezuela; Panama; Colombia 
(Bogota and Cartagena); E. Peru (Pebas); Trinidad; Demerara. 

'Types of Audubon's works. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 311 

69. Lampornis mango (Linn.) Gosse, 
Jamaica. 

70. Lampornis prevosti (Less.) Gould. 
Mexico (Tehuantepec). 

71. Iiampornis viridis (And. & Vieill.) Gould. 
Porto Kico. 

* 73. Lampornis gramineus (Gmel.) Gould. 

Guiana. 

75. Lampornis dominicus (Linn.) Elliot. 
St. Thomas ; Haiti ; Porto Eico. 

76. Eulampis holosericeus (Linn.) Gould. 

St. Thomas ; Martinique ; Dominica ; Antigua ; Guadeloui)e ; St. 
Vincent; Grenada; Barbuda; Tobago; St. Bartholomew, and Barba- 
does. 

77. Eulampis jugularis (Linn.) Gould. 

Martiniiiue ; Dominica ; Guadeloui^e, and St. Vincent. 

78. Lafresnaya flavicaudata (Fraser) Bonap. 
Colombia (Bogota and Popayan). 

* 79. Lafresnaya gayi (Bourc. «fc Muls.) Bp. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
60. Chalybura buffoni (Less.) Reicb. 

Venezuela (Laguayra); Colombia; Panama. 
*82. Chalybura isaurae (Gould) Salv. 

Veragua ; Costa Eica. 
83. Chalybura melanorrhoa Salvin. 

Costa Eica. 
*84. Chalybura caeruleiventris (Reicli.) Cab. & Hein. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
85.' Florisuga mellivora ( Linn. ) Bouap. 

Guatemala; Bogota; E. Peru; Tobago; Guiana (Demerara); Ecua- 
dor (Quito) ; Tres Marias, W. Mexico ! ["?] 

86. Florisuga fusca (Vieill.) Reicb. 
Brazil (Baliia). 

87. Petasophora anais (Less.) Gould. 

Colombia; Ecuador (Quito and Puna I.) ; Bolivia (La Paz). 

88. Petasophora thalassina (Swains.) Gonld. 

Mexico ( Jalapa and Tres Marias) ; Guatemala (V. de Fuego, 5,000 ft., 
and Guatamala City). 

89. Petasophora cyanotis (Bourc.) Gould. 
Costa Eica; Veragua; Colombia. 

*92. Petasophora serrirostris (Vieill.) Bonap. 

Brazil. 
93. Petasophora delphinae (Less.) Bonap. 

Trinidad; Colombia; Guatemala (Coban, Vera Paz). 
*94. Panoplites jardini (Bourc.) Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito). 



312 PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

9.J. Panoplites flavescens (Lodd.) Gould. 

Colombia (liogota). 
*y6. Pnnoplitss matthewsi (Bourc.) Gould. 

E. Ecuador (Rio Xapo) ; E. Peru (Pebas), 
97. Phaeolsema rubinoides (Bourc.) Reich. 

Colombia. 

90. Clytolaema rubinea (Gmi-l.) Gould. 
Brazil. 

* 100. Clytolaema aurescens Gould. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 

* 10.3. lolsema frontalis (Lawr.) Gould. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 
*i 103. Eugenes fulgens (Swaius.) Gould. 

Arizona ; E. Mexico ; Guatemala. 
107. Eugenes spectabilis (Lawr.) Muls. 

Costa IMca. 

* 109. Eugenia imperatrix Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
111. Helicdcxa jacula Gould. 

Costa Itica ; A^eragua ; Colombia. 
*112. Heliodoxa jamesoni (Bourc.) Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito); Bogota. 
113. Heliodoxa leadbeateri (Bourc.) Gould. 

Colombia; "Rio". 

* 114. Pterophanes temmincki (Boiss.) Gould. 

Bogota; Quito. 

* 115. Patagona gigas (Meill.) Gray. 

Quito ; Chili ; Peru (near Urubamba). 
116. Docimastes ensiferus (Boiss.) Gould. 
Ecuador (Quito) ; Bogota. 

120. Helianthea typica (Less.) Gould. 

Colombia. 

121. Helianthea bonapaitii (Boiss.) Gould. 
Colombia. 

* 123. Helianthea lutitiae (Delattr. & Bourc.) Gould. 

Colombia (Popayau) ; Quito. 

* 130. Bourcieria fulgidigula Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
131. Bourcieria torquata (Boiss.) Gould. 
Colombia (Bogota). 

* 133. Bourcieria wilsoni (Delattr. & Bourc.) Bp. 

Ecuador (Quito). 

* 13(3. Bourcieria prunelli (Bourc. & Muls.) Bp. 

Colombia (Bogota), 



Females particularly desired. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 313 

* 137. Bourcieria caeligena (Less.) Elliot. 

Bogota (?). 

* 138. Bourcieria columbiana Elliot. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 140. Hemistephania johannae (liourc.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 141. Hemistephania ludoviciee (Boiuc. & Muls.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 142. Hemistephauia rectirostris (Gould) Elliot. 

Ecuador. 

*144. Hemistephania veraguensis (Salv.) Elliot. 
Costa Eica. 

145. Floricola lougirostris (Vieill.) Elliot. 

Mexico (Chiapas); Guatemala (Diieiias); Costa Eica; Panama; Trini- 
dad. 

147. Floricola constant! (Delattr.) Elliot. 

Costa Eica ; Guatemala ; San Salvador ; Chiapas ; Mazatlan. 
*148. Floricola leocadiae (Bourc.) Elliot. 

Mexico (Tehuautepec, Acapulco, and Mazatlan). 

* 149. Lepidolarynx mesoleucus (Temm. ) Reich. 

Brazil. 
150. Heliomaster furcifer (Shaw) Elliot. 

Brazil; Buenos Aj-res (Conchitas). 
152. Heliotrypha excrtis (Fras.) Elliot. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
155. Heliangelus.clarissce (De Long.) Bp. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 156. Heliangelus strophianus (Gould) Bp. 

Ecuador (Quito). 

* 161. Urosticte benjamini (Bourc.) Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito and Kanegal). 
162. Eustephanus galeritus (Mol.) Reich. 
Chili (Santiago). 

* 165. Topaza pella (Linu.) Gray. 

Cayenne; Demerara. 
167. Aithurus polytmus (Liuu.) Cab. & Hein. 
Jamaica. 

169. Thalurania glaucopis (Gruel.) Gould. 

Brazil (Eio and Bahia) ; "Tres Marias Islands "^ [???]. 

170. Thalurania columbica (Bourc. & Muls.) Gould. 
Costa Eica; Veragua; Panama; Colombia. 

* 171. Thalurania furcata (Gmel.) Gould. 

Guiana (Demerara) ; Trinidad. 

* 173. Thalurania nigrofasciata (Gould) Bp. 

Ecuador (Quito) ; E. Peru (head Huallaga E.) ; Upper Amazons ? 
1 Type of T. lucice Lawr. 



314 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

* 177. Thalurania eriphile (Less.) Bp. 

Brazil (Kio Grande do Sul); Ecuador (Quito). 

* 179. Thalurania bicolor (Gmel. ) Elliot. 

Dominica. 
180. Mellisuga miiiima (Liuu.) Bp. 

Jamaica; St. Domingo; Haiti (Pt. au Prince). 

* 182. Microchera parvirostris Lawr. 

Costa liica (Angostura). 

183. Trochilus colubris Linu. 

Eastern North America (numerous lo3alities) ; Mexico; Guatemala; 
Costa Eica; Veragua. 

184. Trocliilus alexandri Bonrc. & Muls. 

California ; Xevada ; Utah ; Xew Mexico ; Arizona. 

* 185. Calypte costae (Bomc.) Gould. 

Guatemala ; W. Mexico (Mazatlan) ; S. California (Ft. Tejon) ; Cape 
St. Lucas ; Arizona. 
186. Calypte annas (Less.) Gonid. 

California ; Arizona. 

* 187. Calypte helenae (Lenib.) Gould. 

Cuba. 

189. Selasphoius platycercus (Swains.) Bp. 

Guatemala; Mexico (Mirador) ; Arizona; New Mexico ; Colorado; 
Utah ; E. Nevada ; Wyoming (Ft. Bridger). 

* 190. Selasphoi-us ardens Salvin. 

Costa Kica. 
192. Selaspliorus alleui Hensliaw.i 

California (coast-region, Santa Cruz to Nicasio). 

194. S^asphorus rufus (Gmel.) Aud.- 

Columbia E., Oregon (3 specimens, types of Audubon's works!); 
Sitka, Alaska; Ft. Steilacoom, Washington Terr.; Dakota; Nevada; 
California ; Colorado ; Idaho ; Arizona ; New Mexico ; Texas (El Paso) ; 
table lands of Mexico, south to Mirador. 
19:5. Selasphcrus scintilla Gould. 

Costa Eica ; Yeragua. 
'197. Atthis heloisas (Less.) Eeicli. 

E. Mexico. 

* 198. Atthis clliotiRidgNT. 

Guatemala. 
199. Stellula calliope Gould. 

New Mexico; Arizona; California (Ft. Tejon, Ft. Crook, Honey Lake, 
&c.) ; Nevada ; Montana (Ft. ElKs). 
''202. Heliactin cornuta (Max.) Boie. 

Brazil. 

^204. Calothorax lucifer (Swains.) Gray. 
E. Mexico (Mirador) ; Arizona. 

^S. rufus of Elliot's list. "-S. henshan-i of Elliot's list. 



PROCEEDINGS <3F UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 315 

*205. Acestrura mulsanti (Boiirc.) Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito), 
* 207. Acestrura heliodori ( Bonic. ) Goukl, 

Colombia (Bogota). 

213. Doriclia enicura (Vieill.) Reicli. 
Guatemala (Coban aud Guatemala City). 

214. Doricha elizae (Less. & Delattr.) Gould. 
Jalapaj Miiador; Merida; Yucatan. 

* 215. Doricha bryantae Lawr. 

Costa liica ; Veragua I 
*2ie. Doricha evelynae (Bourc.) Gould. 
Bahamas (Nassau, New Providence). 

217. Doricha lyrura Gould. 

Bahamas (Inagua). 
*218. Myrtis fanny (Less.) Reich. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
220. Tilmatura duponti (Less.) Cab. & Hein. 

Guatemala. 
223. Calliphlox amethystina (Gniel.) Reich. 

Trinidad; Brazil. 

* 225. Lophornis stictolophus Salv. & Elliot. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
*226. Lophornis delattrii (Less.) Gould. 

Panama; Veragua? 
*228. Lophornis ornatus (Bodtl.) Gould. 

"Brazil"; Trinidad. 
*230. Lophornis magnificus (Vieill.) Gould. 

Brazil. 
231. Lophornis helenae (Delattr.) Reich. 

" Mexico " ; Guatemala. 
*233. Lophornis verreauxi (Bourc.) Reich. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 

*234. Lophornis chalybea (Vieill.) Bp. 

Brazil. 
*235. Popelaria' tricholopha Reich. 

Colombia. 
*236. Popelaria langsdorffi (Bourc. «fe Vieill.) Ridgw. 

Brazil ; E. Peru (Pebas). 
*237. Popelaria conversi (Bourc. & Muls.) Ridgw. 

Costa Rica. 

240. Steganura underwoodi (Less.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
*241. Steganura melananthera (Jard.) Reich. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
247. Lesbia gouldi (Lodd.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 



iName Soiddia preoccupied in Cpnchology (C. B. Adajis, Cat. Gen. & Sp. recent 
Shells, Jan. 1847, p. 29; cf. Dall, P. Z. S. 1879, pp. 131, 132). 



316 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
250. Lesbia amaryllis (Boixrc.) Reicla. 

Colombia (Bogota) ; Ecuador (Quito). . 
253. Cynanthus forficatus (Linn.) Bp. 

Bogota; Quito. 
*259. Oxypogon guerini (Boiss.) Gould. 

Colombia. 

* 261. Rhamphomicron olivaceus Lawr. 

Bolivia (La Paz). 
262. Rhamphomicron heteropogon (Boiss.) Bp. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
*263. Rhamphomicron herrani (Delattr. & Bourc.) Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito). 

* 284. Rhamphomicron stanleyi (Bourc. & Muls.) Gould. 

Bolivia (La Paz). 
266. Rhamphomicron microrhynchum (Boiss.) Bp. 
Bogota; Quito. 

* 268. Avocettula recurvirostris Swains. 

Guiaua. 
276. Metallura tyrianthina (Lodd.) Bp. 

Bogota; Quito. 
*278. Chrysuronia humboldti (Bourc. & Muls.) Reich. 

Buenaventura, 1st. Panama.^ 

* 279. Chrysuronia senone (Less.) Bp. 

Colombia. 
*280. Chrysuronia josephinae (Bourc & Muls.) Reich. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 
*281. Chrysuronia elicise (Bourc. &, Muls.) Bp. 

Guatemala (Masagua, Pacific coast). 
282. Chrysuronia chrysura (Less.) Bp. 

Brazil ; Argentine Eepublic (Conchitas). 
*287. Schistes geoffroyi (Bourc. & Muls.) Gould. 

Bogota. 

288. Heliothrix auritus (Gmel.) Boie. 

Brazil; Colombia (Bogota). 
*289. Heliothrix auriculatus (Licht.) Gray. 

Brazil. 
290. Heliothrix barroti (Bourc.) Gray. 

Guatemala; Costa Eica; Veragua; Panama. 
tidl. Chrysolampis moschitus (Linn.) Boie. 

Tobago; Trinidad; Brazil (Eio Janeiro and Baliia) ; Colombia (Bo- 
gota and Cartagena). 

292. Bellona cristata (Linn.) Muls. 

Grenada; St. Vincent; Barbadoes; " Venezuela ".^ 
j;292«.] Bellona ornata (Gould) Ridgw. 

St. Vincent. 



' Type of Thaumatias viridkaudus Lawr. '■' Type of Ortliorhijnchus emigrans Lawr. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 31? 

293. Bellona exilis (Gm.) Muls. 

Dominica; St. Thomas; Martinique; Antigua; Guadeloupe; Bar- 
buda ; Porto Eico ; St. Bartbolome^Y. 
*'294. Cephalolepis delalandi (Yieill.) Lodil. 

Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul). 

* 295. Cephalolepis loddigesi (Gould) Bp. 

Brazil. 

299. Adelomyia melanogenys (Fras.) Gould. 
Bogota; Quito. 

301. Abeillia typica Bonap. 

Guatemala. 

302. Klais guimeti (Bourc. »& Muls.) Reich, 
Costa Rica ; Veragua ; Colombia. 

303. Aglaeactis cupripennis (Bourc. & Muls.) Bp. 

Colombia; Ecuador (Quito). 

* 304. Aglaeactis caumatonota (Gould) Bp. 

Peru (Matara, prov. Ayacucho).^ 
*307. Eriocnemis derbiana (Delattr. & Bourc.) Bp. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
309. Eriocnemis aureliae (Bourc. &. Muls.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 311. Eriocnemis lugens Gould. 

Ecuador (Quito). 

* 312. Eriocnemis alinae (Bourc.) Reich. 

Colombia. 

* 315. Eriocnemis luciani (Bourc.) Reich. 

Ecuador (Quito). 
316. Eriocnemis cupreiventris (Fras.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

320. Eriocnemis vestita (Lougnem.) Reich. 
Colombia (Bogota). 

* 324. Panterpe insignis Cab. & Heiu. 

Costa Rica. 

* 325. Uranomitra quadricolor (Vieill.) Reich. 

Orizaba; Mazatlan. 

* 326. Uranomitra violiceps (Gonld) Cab. & Hein. 

Mexico (Orizaba and Mazatlan). 

327. Uranomitra viridifrons Elliot. 
S. Mexico (Tehuantepec). 

328. Uranomitra cyanocephala (Less.) Reich. 

Mexico (Mirador, Tehuantepec, Chiapas, Tres Marias); Guatemala 
(Vera Paz). 
330. Uranomitra franciae (Bourc.) Reich. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

' Type of ^. olivaceocanda Lawr. 



318 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

* 332. Le\icippus chionogaster (Tsclmdi) Gould. 

Bolivia (La Paz). 

* 3o3. Leiicippus chlorocercus Gould. 

E. Peru (Pebas). 

334. Leucochloris albicollis Vieill. 
Brazil. 

* 335. Agyrtria niveipectus Cab. & Heiu. 

Trinidad. 
*336. Agyrtria leiicogaster (Gmcl.) Eeich. 

Brazil (Baliia). 
'338. Agyrtria milleri (Bouic.) Reich. 

Colombia. 
339. Agyrtria Candida (Bourc. vt Muls.) Cab. & Hein. 

iS. Mexico (Teliuaiitepec) ; Guatemala. 

341. Agyrtria brevirostris (Less.) Reich. 
Brazil (Ilio Grande do Sul). 

*347. Agyrtria tephrocephala (Vkill.) Elliot. 
Brazil ; Surinam. 

*349. Agyrtria fluviatilis (Gould) Heine. 
E. Ecuador (Rio Napo). 

* 356. Elvira cupreiceps (Lawr.) Muls. 

Costa Rica. 

* 357. Elvira chionura (Gould) Muls. 

Costa Rica (Dota). 
"*358. Callipharus nigriventris (Lawr.) Elliot. 

Costa Rica. 
"'-■^uO, Eiipherusa eximia (Dolattr.) Gould, 

Guatemala. 

* 361. Eupherusa cgrcgia Scl. & Salv. 

Costa Rica. 

362. Polytnius thaumantias (Linn.) Cab. & Hein 

Trinidad ; Venezuela ; Bogota ! 
*363. Polytmus viridissimus (Vieill.) Elliot. 

Guiana; Surinam ? 
*3f58. Amazilia dumerili (Less. ) Up. 

Ecuador (Puna I., Guayaquil). 
^369. Amasilia ciiuiamoniea (Less.) Elliot. 

Yucatan; Xiearagua ; Tebnantepec; Mazatlan; San Salvador. 

* 370. Amazilia graysoni Lawv. 

W. Mexico (Tres Marias Islands). 
"371. Amazilia yucatanenses (Cabot) Gould. 

Mexico (Jalapa); S. Texas (Ft. Brown). 
372. Amazilia fuscicaudata (Eras.) Ridgw. 

S. Mexico (Cordova and Tebnantepec) ; S. Texas (Ft. Browu) ; Guate- 
mala; Nicaragua; Costa Rica; Colombia; Ecuador (Guayaquil). 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 319 

* 373. Amazilia viridiveiiLris (Reich.) Elliot. 

Colombia (Bogota). 
375. Amazilia beryllina (Licbt.) Gould. 
Mexico ( Jalapa) ; Guatemala. 

* 376. Amazilia edwardi (Del. & Bourc.) Bp. 

Panama. 

* 377. Amazilia iiiveivsntris (Gould) Elliot. 

Costa Rica. 
*378. Amazilia mariss (Bourc. ) Elliot. 
Giiatemela. 

'379 Amazilia cyanura Gould. 

Guatemala (Pacific side); Eealejo. 
382. Amazilia erythronota (Less.) Elliot. 

Tobago; Triuidad. 
384. Amazilia Sophias (Bourc. & Muls.) Bp. 

Costa Pica; Nicaragua. 
387. Amazilia cyanifrons (Bourc.) Elliot. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

*'389. Baailimia leucotis (Vieill.) Boie. 

Mexico (Jalapa, Mirador, and Mazatlan) ; Guatemala (Chilasco, Vera 
Paz). 

* 390. Basilinr.a nantusi (Lawr. ) Elliot. 

Cape St. Lucas. 
39L Eiicepha'a grayi (Del. & Botirc.) R'cli. 

Ecuador ((^)uito). 
397. Eucephala casrulea (Vieill.) Gould. 

Trinidad; Guiana; Demerara ; Babia. 
*401. Juliamyia typica Bonap. 

Panama ; Bogota ; Turbo. 
*40.2. Juliamyia feliciana (Less.) Gould. 

Ecuaiior (Guayaquil); Bogota! 
403. Dam.ophila amabilis (Gould) Reich. 

Costa Pica; Panama; Bogota; Turbo. 

* 404. lache latirostris (Swains.) Elliot. 

W. Mexico (Colima, Mazatlan, and Tres Marias) ; Arizona. 

* 40;i. lacha doubledayi (Bourc.) Elliot. 

Tehuantepec (Chiliuitan). 
408. Hylocharis sapphiria (Gui.) Gray. 

Brazil (Babia and Pio Grande do Sul) ; Demerara. 
4C9. Hylocharis cyanea (Vieill.) Gray. 

Brazil (Bahia and Pio Grande do Sul); Surinam. 

410. Cyaziophaia caeruleigularis (Gould) Elliot. 
Panama; Cartageini; " Cenir. Am." 

411. Cyanophaia goudoti ^ Bourc.) Elliot. 
Colombia (Bogota). 

' Females \yauted. 



320 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STA'TES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

* 412. Cyanophaia luminosa (Lawr.) Elliot. 

Colombia (Cartageua). 
*414. Sporadinus elegans (Vieill.) Bp. 

St. Domiugo. 
415. Sporadinus ricordi (Gerv.) Bp. 

Cuba. 

*416. Sporadinus maugaei (Vieill.) Bp. 
Porto Itico. 

418. Chlorostilbon caniveti (Less.) Bp. 

Mexico (Mirador, Jalapa, and Tehuantepec) ; Yucatan (Merida) ; Gua- 
temala ; Costa liica. 

419. Chlorostilbon pucherani (Bourc. & Muls.) Ell. 

Soutlieastern Brazil (Rio Grande do Sul) ; W. Mexico (Tres Marias) 

420. Chlorostilbon splendidus (Vieill.) Elliot. 

Buenos Aj'res (Concbitas) ; Paraguay (Rio Parana). 

421. Chlorostilbon haberlini (Reich.) Cab & Hein. 
Colombia (Bogota). 

422. Chlorostilbon angiistipennis (Eras.) Gould. 

Costa Rica (Cartago) ; Panama ; Quito ; E. Peru (Pebas). 

423. Chlorostilbon atala (Less.) Gould. 
Trinidad. 

*-42.5. Panychlora poortmani Bourc. 

Colombia (Bogota). 

* 427. Panychlora stenura Cab & Hein. 

^'New Granada.'' 



DESCRIPTION OF A IVEW EITIBIOTOC'OID Fl.mi (DITREITIA ATKIPES), 
FRO.TI THE COAST OF CAt,IFORlVIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN and CHARLES II. OII.BERT. 

Allied to Ditrema {Phanerodon) furcatum. Body unusually elongate, 
slenderer than in Ditrema furcatum, tapering into a long and slender 
caudal peduncle. Back little elevated. Profile slightly depressed 
above tbe eyes, the snout rather projecting. 

Head small, triangular in profile, the snout rather acute. Mouth 

small, oblique, the maxillary not reaching the front of the eye. Pre- 

maxillary anteriorly rather above the level of the lower edge of the 

pupil. Lower jaw slightly included in the closed mouth. Teeth smaller 

g 

and fewer in number than in D. furcatum, conical, in one series,- or less 

15 " 

in number (about — in I), furcatum). 

Eye moderate, about as long as snout, 3i in length of head. Inter- 

' Type of C. instdaris Lawr. ^ Females "wanted. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 321 

orbital space strongly coii^ex transversely. Cheeks with three rows of 
scales. 

Gill rakers rather small, but longer and stronger than in D. fur caUim, 
the longest about one-third the diameter of the orbit. 

Scales moderate, averaging rather smaller than in Z>. fiircatum, about 
5_70_13. 

Spinous dorsal comparatively low, the first spine short, the others 
rapidly increasing to the fifth, after which the others are nearly of equal 
length, but gradually increasing to the last. The first soft ray is a little 
higher than the highest spine. The other soft rays are gradually short- 
ened. 

The caudal fin is deeply forked, the lobes being about equal. In D. 
furcatum the upper lobe is evidently the longer. Anal fin low, its spines 
moderately developed. Pectorals not reaching to the tips of the ven- 
trals, which scarcely fall short of the first anal spine. 

Fin rays : D. X, 23 ; A. Ill, 29. 

Coloration light dusky olive above, silvery below, with pearly reflec- 
tions. Scales above the axis of the body each with a golden-red spot 
at base, the outer margin of the scales tinged with light blue. These 
spots fade in alcohol, but are conspicuous in life, forming reddish 
streaks along the rows of scales. 

Membrane of dorsal, anal, and ventral fins light olive-green. Traces 
of a dark shade on upper part of first rays of soft dorsal. ]^o black at 
base of dorsal. A distinct black blotch on upjier third of first eight- 
rays of the anal. Ventrals broadly tipped with reddish black, as in Hyper- 
proropon argcnteus. Pectorals and caudal entirely ^;?ai«, the black edg- 
ing to the latter fin, characteristic of D. furcatum, being entirely want- 
ing. Premaxillaries and end of snout distinctly dusky. Iris silvery^ 
reddish above. 

In Bitrcma furcatum the color is nearly plain, pale, olivaceous, and 
silvery, the scales with bright reflections, but without distinct red mark- 
ings. The sides are more silvery than in D. atripes, and there are more 
black punctulations. The naked portion of the base of the soft dorsal 
is black. There is no dark shade on the ventrals, and the caudal is dis- 
tinctly margined with black behind. The dark anal spot is similar in 
the two species, but it is sometimes wanting in D. furcatum. 

The species Ditrema argyrosoma {Phanerodon argyrosomus Gill, Um- 
biotoca argyrosoma Girard), if distinct from Ditrema fiircatum, is un- 
known to us. It diflers, according to Girard, in having the anal III, 24, 
but the types had been mutilated and this count may, perhaps, be erro- 
neous. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 21 Oct. 37, 1880. 



322 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Measurements of D'trema furcatum and Diirema airipes in lOOths of length to base of cau- 
dal fin. 



Extreme length 

Lengtli to base of caudal 

Bodv: 

Height 

Least height of tail 

Length of caudal peduncle from end of anal flu 
Head: 

Length 

Width of interorbital area 

Lengtli of snout 

Leniitli of gill-ralsers 

Length of maxilhiry i. 

Lengt li of maudiblo 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Length of base 

Length of liftli spine 

Length of liigliest spine 

Length of highest ray 

Anal : 

Length of base 

Longest lav 

Caudal ■ 

Middle rays 

Upper lobe 

Lower lobe 

Pectorals, length 

Ventrals, length 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Tubes in lateral line 

Kows of scales above lateral line 

Eows of scales below lateral line 



Ditrema 


Ditrema 


furcatum. 


atripes. 


Inches. 


Inches. 


10.3 


9.15 


8.18 


7.35 


.39 


.38 


.12 


.113 


.107 


.23 


.263 


.285 





.082 


.07 


.078 


.01 


.018 


.075 


.075 


.075 


.092 


.075 


.072 


.512 


.48 


.085 


.085 


.09 


.010 


.12 


.113 


.30 


.275 


.06 


.058 


.09 


.095 


.256 


.23 


.24 


.24 


.25 


.26 


.155 


.176 


X,25 


X,24 


nT,33 


111,29 


70 


71 


5 


5 


13 


13 



The present species was described from two specimens, similar in size, 
obtained in the San Francisco market, and probably caught in Monterey 
Bay. Later, about 200 others were obtained at Monterey and Santa 
Oruz, but the species has not yet been noticed elsewhere on the coast. 

Wc refer this species for the present to the genus Ditrema, of which 
Phanerodon Girard is considered by us a synonym. 

We have not seen the Japanese type of the genus, Ditrema temmincTciy 
but iu external characters at least it agrees with Phanerodon. 

-San Francisco, Oal., March 14, 1880. 



BESCKIP'fflON OF A NE^^ J^CORIP.TEIVOHW FISH (SEBASTICHTHYS 
MAI.IGEK), FROITI TEflE COAST OF CALIFOBNITA. 

By ©AVIO S. JOKI>AM aaid CIIARI.ES H. GII.BEBT. 

Allied to Sehastichthys nebulosus and more remotely to Sebastichthys 
vexillaris. Body oblong, moderately robust, the profile with a regular 
but not very steep slope. Mouth moderate, nearly horizontal, the jaws 
equal when closed, the upper jaw somewhat emarginate. Maxillary 
reaching to near the posterior border of the eye ; premaxillary in front 
below the level of the eye. Preorbital moderate, its neck about one- 
third the width of the large eye, with an angular lobe. 



PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 323 

Spinous ridges on the top of the head rather prominent, much as in 
nebuloftus, but lower, a little less depressed than in vexiUaris. The fol- 
lowing pairs are present: :Nrasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, and 
occipital, live in all. The nasal spines are very strong. The preocular 
and supraocular are broad and sliarp. The tympanic spines are smaller 
than in related species. The occipital ridges are short and compara- 
tively weak, the point rather depressed. 

Preopercular spines very short, but all distinct, the upper one broad, 
the second longest and most acute. Opercular spines large, the upper 
very long and strong. Bluntish spines on subopercle and interopercle. 
Two suprascapular spines. Interorbital space rather deeply and some- 
what evenly concave, with a rather deep pit anteriorly. 

Gill-rakers about 10+20, stout, moderately long, rather longer than in 
nebulosus, somewhat clavate, the longest about equal to the diameter of 
the pupil. 

Scales moderate, rough, in about 55 transverse rows. Accessory scales 
developed. 

Dorsal spines very high and strong, the fourth spine highest, usually 
more than half tbe length of the head, the last spines low, so that the 
fin is deeply emarginated. 

The membrane of the spinous dorsal is very deeply incised^ more than 
half the anterior edge of each of the middle spines being above the 
membrane; even four- fifths of the length of the highest spine is some- 
times free anteriorly. This is subject to some variations, but in all cases 
the bare i^ortion of the si^ines is much higher than in other species. 
Soft dorsal high, but lower than spinous dorsal. Caudal truncate. 

Anal fin rather low, the spines short. Second anal spine a little higher 
than the third, not two-thirds the height of the soft rays. 

D. XIII, 12; A. Ill, 7. 

Pectoral fins extremely broad and rounded, as in 8. rastrelUger, the 
tips reaching beyond the tips of the veutrals, but not to the vent. The 
base of the fin is greater than the diameter of the eye and about twice 
the length of the occii)ital ridge. In both sexes the lower rays are 
thickened and fleshy. 

Prevailing color a warm brownish yellow, sometimes quite yelloAV on 
the sides and below, the back sometimes considerably olive, sometimes 
reddish tinged. Sides of head, front of back, and thoracic region usually 
most distinctly yellow. The coloration mottled and clouded, but with- 
out distinct markings excejit the small spots with which the anterior 
region is closely covered. They are smallest and most distinct on the 
thoracic and scapular region. Here they are of a clear orange-brown 
color. On the top of the head they become more orange, and on the 
anterior part of the back they become larger and of a bright clear orange. 
Posteriorly they blend with the ground color. Top of head with dusky 
cross- shades. Sclerotic coat of eye spotted above with orange. 

Fins all with the membranes slaty black ; the pectorals and dorsal 



324 PROCEEDINGS OF- UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

paler at base and spotted with reddish. Membrane of the third dorsal 
spine scarcely paler than that of the second. There are no other traces 
of the light areas found in nelndosus and fasciolaris. There are usually 
traces of brownish shades radiating from the eye and alternating with 
yellowish areas. 

This species is not rare in the San Francisco markets. The speci- 
mens from which the above description was taken, four in number, were 
obtained in the neighborhood of the Farallones. It is frequently taken 
in deep water in Monterey Bay and in the Straits of Fuca; it is very 
abundant, reaching a large size. It is one of the larger species, agree- 
ing in size and appearance with 8. vexiUaris. Its relations are, however, 
more nearly with S. nebulosuSy and it forms a transition from the brown 
to the red series. 

Table of measurements. 

Length to base of caudal = 100 

Body : 

Greatest heiglit 37.5 

Least lieight of tail 11.8 

Head: 

Greatest length 38.5 

Length of occipital ridges 6. 3 

Length of supraocular ridges 4. 3 

Length of preocular ridges 2. 2 

Interorbital width 7. 9 

Length of snout 9. 2 

Length of gill-rakers 3. 5 

Length of maxillary 19. 5 

Diameter of orbit .._. 10. 5 

Dorsal : 

Longest spine 23 

Longest ray 17. 5 

Least height of membrane between third and fourth spines 4,5 

Anal: 

Second spine 12. 3 

Third spine 12 

Longest ray 18 

Caiulal, length 17 

Pectoral : 

Length 25 

Width of base 11 

Ventral, length 22 

Dorsal XIII, 12 

Anal Ill, 6 

Lateral line (rows of scales) 47 

Extreme length, in inches 15. 45 

Length to base of caudal, in inches 13. 1 

San Francisco, Cal., March 15, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 325 



NOTE OX A IVEW FI.AT-FISH (LEPIDOPSETTA ISOI.EPIS) FOVND IN 
THE MARKETS OF SAN FRANCISCO. 

By \¥. ]\. LOCKlWGTOi^. 

In the review of the Pleuronectidse of San Francisco (Proc. U. S. Nat. 
Mus. 1879, G9-108), a species belonging- to the genus Lepidopsetta (GUI) 
is described as identical with the Platichthys umhrosus of Girard (Pac. 
Eail. Rep., x, 149, 1857). At the epoch when this description was writ- 
ten, as well as on previous occasions when a comparison was instituted 
between this species and the description of Girard above referred to, 
several discrepancies were noted, yet it was not supposed possible that 
that author had redescribed one of Dr. Ayres's species when the de- 
scription of the latter was accessible to him. 

Such, however, as first pointed out by Dr. Gill, turns out to be the 
case, and Platichthys ^lmhros^(s (Grd.) must sink into a synonym of 
Lepidopsetta hilineata (xVyres), while the form described by me as L. 
umbrosa needs renaming. 

The synonymy of the two species will be as follows: 

Lepidopsetta biliueata. 

riatcssa hiUtuata Ayres, Proc. Cal. Acad. Nat. Sci., i, 40, 
Platichthys itmhrosus Grd., Pac. Eail. Rc])., x, l855-'57. 149. 
Lepidopsetta ViUneata Gill, Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci. 
Lepidopsetta umbrosa Gill, Proc. Phil. Acad. Nat. Sci. 
Lepidopsetta hilineata Locku., Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 1879, 103. 

Lepidopsetta isolepis sp. nov. 

Lepidopsetta nmirosa Lockn., Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 1879, 106. 

This Species is not closely related to L. hilineata. Its ctenoid scales, 
almost uniform over the head and body, its nearly straight lateral line, 
its smaller eyes, with a broader, flattish interorbital space, as well as the 
differences in the form and the number of fin rays, completely distinguish 
L. isolepis from L. bilineata. 

Typical examples are in the United States National Museum. 



NOTE ON A FORGOTTEN PAPER OF DR. AYRES AND ITS REARINO 
ON TBE NOmENCEATIJRE OF TQE CA'PRINOID FISHES OF THE 
SAN FRANCISCO ITIARKKTS. 

By DATID S. JORDAN. 

During the infancy of the California Academy of Sciences the reports 
of its proceedings were published in the Daily Placer Times and Tran- 
script, a newspaper then issued in San Francisco. 

In the files of this paper for 1854 occur descriptions of new sjiecies of 
fishes from the San Francisco markets, by Dr. W. P. Gibbons and Dr. 
W. O. Ayres. The descriptions of Dr. Gibbons were soon after repub- 



326 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 

lished in the Proceedings of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Phila- 
delphia (1854), and identifications of them have been carefully made by 
Alexander Agassiz (Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., 1801, 122). By this 
means the names given by Dr. Gibbons have taken their proper places 
in synonymy. 

The descriptions published by Dr. Ayres have, on the contrary, not 
been noticed, so far as I know, by auy subsequent author, not even by 
Dr. Ayres himself, who soon after redescribed the same species as new, 
apparently not considering the first publication as a sufficient one, as 
one species at least received a new name on the second description. 

The following are the species in question : 

1. Leuciscus gibiostts Ayres. 

Stouter and thicker than any previoiisly described species of the genus. Mouth 
small. About (30 scales in the lateral line. Brown above ; silvery below. Weight 
about a pound. (Daily Placer Times and Transcript, issue of May 30, 1854.) 

This description is not very explicit, but we are to remember that the 
species was described from the fish market of San Francisco, and that 
the five species then common in the markets were the subjects of the 
five descriptions. The following species of Cyprinoid fishes are taken 
in the Lower Sacramento Eiver, and are now, as then, abundant in the 
market of San Francisco : PtycliocMlus orcgonensis, PtychocJiilus vorax^ 
Siboma crassicauda, Pogonichthys incequilohus, Orfhodon microlepidotuSj 
and Catostomns occidentalis. 

The description of LeuciscuH gibhosns above quoted, as well as a more 
elaborate one afterwards published of " Lavinia gibhosa,^' applies to 
Siboma crassicauda only among the fishes which come to the San Fran- 
cisco market. The name gihbosus was published in May, 1854 ; the name 
crassicauda in August, 1834. We have therefore no alternative but lo 
drop *the latter very characteristic name, and caU the species Siboma 
gibbosa, or, perhaps better, Telestes gibbosa, for the robust caudal pedun- 
cle hardly furnishes a sufiicient reason for a genus Siboma. In Ayres's 
time, as now, this ^ecies was known in the market as the " Chub." 

2. Lvuciscns mkrolcpidotus Ayres (1. c. May 30). 

This species, afterwards more fully described as Gila microhpidota, is the well-known 
Orth odon micro lep idotiis. 

3. Liuciscns matrolcjndotus Ayres (1. c, May 30). 

Form much like that of Leuciscus pHlckeUus, though a little more slender. Anal fin 
longer. Caudal much arcuated. Scales 60. Size of the preceding. 

This is evidently the species described in August of the same year by 
Baird and Girard as Pogonichfhys inwquilobiis, under which name it was 
afterwards mentioned by Dr. Ayres. 

It must therefore take the less appropriate name of Pogoniclithys ma- 
crolepidotus. This is now the " Split-tail" of the markets. 

4. Leuciscus (jraeilus i^sic) Ayres (1. c, May 30). 

Body slender ; head much elongate. Color silvery, becoming darker on the back. 
Scales about 80 ; much larger than any other known I^euciscus, weighing, it is said, 30 
pounds or more, but generally varying, as we find it in the markets, from 5 to 20 
pounds. This is the sjjecies here known as Salmon Trout, &c. " * * 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 327 

This species was described soon after by Dr. Ay res in the Proceedings 
of the California Academy of Sciences, 1854, p. 19, as Gila granciis. It 
is apparently identical with the prior Ptychochilus oregonensis of Kichard- 
son. This species is now no longer called " Salmon Trout," its market 
name being " Pike." 

The small-scaled Ptychochilus {fvorax of Girard) was not then noticed 
by Dr. Ayres. 

5. Catostomus Occident/ din Ayres (1. c. ). 

Soon after reconsidered by Dr. Ayres, in the Proceedings of the Cali- 
fornia Academy, under the same name, and also still later by Professor 
Agassiz (Am. Journal Sci. Arts, 1855), still as Catostomus occidentalis. 
■ San Francisco, Cal., March 20, 1880. 



NOTE OIV "SEMA" AND "WACEIVTBUS." 

By DAVID S. JORDAN. 

In the Bulletin of Hayden's United States Geological and Geograph- 
ical Survey, vol. iv. No. 2, 1878, I published " Notes on a collection of 
fishes from the Rio Grande at Brownsville, Tex." In this paper are 
characterized two new species, " Sema signifer'^ (p. 399), and '■'■ Dacentrus 
liicens^' (p. G07). 

These species must be supi^ressed. The former is a foetal Embiotocoid, 
apparently Cymatogaster aggregatus, the other is the young of Hystero- 
carpus'trasJdi. 

The latter discovery was made before the paper was printed, but by 
inadvertence it was sent to the press during my absence in the field. 

Of conrse neither of these species really came from the Eio Grande 
at Brownsville, Tex., and their presence in a jar otherwise containing 
only Texas fresh-water fishes is the only excuse for the gross blunders 
as to their relationships. 

San Francisco, Cal., 3farch 20, 1880. 



DESCRIPTION OF A IVEIV SCORP.ENOIO FISH {SEBASTICHTHITS 
PRORHOEK), FRO:?I MONTEREY BAY% CAEIFORNIA. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN asad CIIARE,ES Ho GIL,BERT. 

Allied to H. ovalis and S. elongatus. having the mouth, spines, and fins 
of the former and the color and general appearance of the latter. 

Body elongate, a little deeper than in 8. elongatus and somewhat 
more compressed, tapering slowly backward into a slender caudal pe- 
duncle, which is rather shorter and stouter than in 8. elongatus. 

Head rather short and small, the profile somewhat steeper than in 8. 
elongatus. Mouth small, much as in 8. oralis, the short, narrow maxil- 
lary extendmg to below the middle of the eye, the premaxillary on the 



328 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

level of the lower margin of the pupil. Lower jaw strongly projecting, 
with a conspicuous symphyseal knob. • Eye very large, longer than 
snout. Preorbital with its neck extremely narrow, armed with a slight 
spine. 

Spinous ridges on top of head very low and weak, about as in 8. ova- 
Us, rather lower and narrower than in 8. atrovirens and 6'. pinniger. 
The following pairs of spines are present : Nasal, preocular, supraocu- 
lar, tympanic, and occipital, five pairs in all, as in 8. elongatus. The 
ridges are most of them partly covered by scales. Preocular spine little 
prominent. Supraocular ridge very little developed, its length two-fifths 
that of the eye (in 8. elongafus two-thirds). Tympanic spine minute. 
Occipital ridge not consi)icROUs, the spine depressed. 

Preopercular spines sharp, rather shorter than in 8. clongatics, but 
similar, the second longest, the points of all directed backward rather 
than radiating. Opercular sj^ines moderate ; bluutish points on sub- 
opercle and interopercle. Two bluutish suprascapular spines. 

Interorbital space broad, nearly as broad as the eye, somewhat regu- 
larly convex, the middle being elevated. In 8. elongafus, as in most of 
the red species, the interorbital space is transversely^ concave. 

Gill-rakers very long, slender, and numerous, about 10 -f- 30, the long- 
est longer than the sui^raocular ridge, and about half the diameter of 
the eye. 

Scales rather small, as in 8. ovaJis, in about Go transverse series, the 
accessory scales rather few. 

Dorsal fin very low, as in 8. oralis, not deeply emargiuate, the shortest 
(twelfth) spine two-thirds the height of the fifth, which is little more 
than one-third the length of the head. Soft dorsal low, nearly twice as 
high.as long, the highest ray about equal to the longest spine. Caudal 
fin moderately forked. Anal fin very low, its length about equal to the 
height of its longest ray. Second spine much longer and stronger than 
the third, scarcely shorter than the longest ray. 

Pectorals shortish and rather narrow, the base rather wider than the 
eye, the tips reaching beyond the tips of the ventrals to the vent. 

D. XIII, 13; A. Ill, 7. 

Coloration very similar to that of 8. elongafus, red, with olive mark- 
ings. There is, however, more blackish and less greenish. 

Ground color bright light red. Body mottled above with dusky olive- 
green, the ground color forming distinct blotches under the third dorsal 
spine and under the first and last rays of the soft dorsal. Lateral line 
running in the middle of a very disfincf confinuous red stripe, precisely as 
in 8. elongafus. Head above with purplish cross-shades. Opercle with 
a dusky blotch ; two olive shades radiating from the eye. Lips and tip 
of lower jaw blackish (red in elongafus). Eyes red. Caudal fin bright 
red, speckled with dark olive. Spinous dorsal bright red, the posterior 
part of each membrane blackish ; soft dorsal olive and red ; lower fins 
bright light red, with shades of olive-yellow. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 329 

This species is known to us from about eight examples obtained in 
the San Francisco market. They came from IMonterey Bay, in a box 
containing SehasUchthys rosacena, comtellatus, eJongatiis, and chlorostictus, 
species all similar in size and redness of color. Later about sixty ex- 
amples were obtained, all from deep water about Monterey and the 
Farallones. 

The relations of SehasticJitln/s proriger seem to be most intimate with 
;8'. ovalis (Ayres), from which it differs in the more elongate form, the 
red color, and the absen(;e of the postocular spine. It resembles super- 
ficially >S^. elongatus most, and its position is evidently between or«?is and 
elongatus. Its relations with IS. pinniger are also not remote. To the 
green ;S^. ovalis, S. proriger bears the same relation that the red *S'. pinni- 
ger does to the green *S'. atrovirens. 

In the following table comparative measurements of 8. pinniger, ora- 
lis, and elongatus are given for x)urposes of comparison with proriger : 

Table of comparative measurements. 



Total length, in inches 

Length to base of caudal (= 



:100). 



Body: 

Greatest depth 

Least depth of tail 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Snout - 

Orbit 

lutcriirliital space 

Prcorliital, least width 

Maxilhuy 

Mandible 

Longest gill-raker 

Occipital ridge 

Supraocular ridge 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snont 

Longest spine 

Longest soft ray 

Length of base 

Anal: 

Length of base 

Second spine 

Third spine 

Longest soft ray 

Caudal: 

Middle rays 

Outer rays 

Pectoral : 

Lenscth 

Width of base 

Ventral, length 

Scales, number of transverse rows. 



7.6 



.32 
.09 

.38 

.085 

.08 

.08 

.01 

.123 



.05 

.055 

.032 

.327 
.11 

.12 



.14 
.11 

.09 
.12 

.12 
.17 



9.45 



12.6. 

10. 7. 



.30 
.09 

.34 

.087 

.095 

.08 

.013 

.14 

.18 

.045 

.06 

.04 



.12 

.128 
.59 

.13 
.14 
.118 
.15 

.13 

.175 

.28 

.09 

.19 

65 



.285 
.09 



.087 
.105 
.057 
.028 
.17 



.043 

.07 

.07 

. 3o3 
.135 
.127 



.12 
.155 
.106 
.135 

.128 
.175 

.28 
.09 
.19 
45 



8.33 
7.17 



.38 
.129 

.368 

.10 

.10 

.07 

,016 

,17 



.055 

.07 

.04 



.10 
.168 



.16 
.13 
.145 
.195 



.30 
.098 
.295 
43 



MoNTEKEY, Cal., March 25, 1880. 



330 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



I>ESCRIE>TSO:V OF A NEW AGONOS© (AGOIVUS VULSUS), FEOOT 
THE COAST OF CAS^fFOESlVBA. 

By i>AVII> S. JOBfiOA]^ aEod CHAKI.ES H. GII.BEKT. 

Body elongate, tapering rapidly to the long tail, everywhere broader 
than high. It is highest and broadest at the shoulders, but is lower 
and narrower than the head. 

Head acutely triangular as viewed from above, the profile irregularly 
sigmoid ; lower surface of head and body plane from the head to the tail. 
Mouth U-shaped, entirely inferior, the maxillary reaching to opposite 
the front of the pupil, the premaxillary in front to the base of the pos- 
terior i)air of rostral si)ines. The distance from the anterior margin of 
the premaxillaries forward to the tip of the rostral spines equals more 
than half the length of the snout, more than half the diameter of the 
eye, less than one-fifth the length of the head. Lips thicldsh. Upper 
jaw protractile. Teeth small, iu a villiform band, none evident on the 
vomer or palatines. Maxillary mandible and branchiostegal region 
with some small scattered cirri ; under side of snout with few barbels or 
none. Eyes large, nearly as long as snout, 3§ in length of head, the 
orbital bones forming a raised ridge around them. Interorbil al space 
transversely concave, nearly straight longitudinally, with a lengthwise 
groove and two slight ridges. Profile dei)ressed at the front of the eyes, 
thence nearly straight to the tip of the rostral spines. 

Spines on head highly developed. On each side a stout straight ros- 
tral spine projecting horizontally forwards; at its base a stout spine 
curved backwards, upwards, and outwards; behind this a smaller one 
projecting upwards. Orbital ridge above serrated, and with two promi- 
nent recurved spines, one in front, the other behind ; behind these a 
ridge on each side confluent with the dorsal ridges and each with four 
spines; between these the top of the head is roughish and somewhat 
concave, with traces of a median keel. At the occiput is a conspicuous 
pit between the above-mentioned ridges, broader than long find longer 
than deep. Jnst below these ridges, on each side, is another and more 
I>romiuent ridge, also ending in four spines, the last very strong; this 
is continuous with the upper lateral keel of the body; below this, on the 
opercle, is a strong keel ending behind in a spine ; still lower is an 
irregular ridge, armed with two or three irregular series of spines and 
tubercles, extending from the preorbital along the subortal and preop- 
ercle, ending in a stout preopercular spine ; behind the pectorals this 
ridge again appears as the long lateral keel of the body. 

Along the lower margin of the preopercle are three or four more blunt- 
ish spines. There are on the head between seventy and eighty more or 
less developed spinous processes. 

Isthmus rather wide. 

Body with four ridges on each side, formed by the series of scales. 
Each scale ending in a strong recurved spine, its roots forming striiie on 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUiL 331 

the scales. Between the two lateral keels are traces of another keel; 
traces also exist between the two dorsal keels in front. 

The spines are developed on all the keels except in front and behind 
on the two abdominal ones. The two dorsal keels, at about the eighth 
scale in front of the caudal fin, coalesce, after which the median furrow 
is obliterated and the spines continue double. 

Just below the point of junction the abdominal keels also unite. The 
two lateral ridges remain distinct throughout. At the base of the tail, 
on each side, is a median spine between the lateral ridges. 

The abdominal ridges are farthest apart behind the base of the ven- 
trals, in front of which and behind which they converge, but anteriorly 
they do not meet. Breast with six or eight polygonal plates. Belly 
transversely convex, with traces of a furrow, into which the ventrals 
are depressible. Vent just behind the middle of the length of ventrals. 
Lateral line about forty. 

Doi-.al beginning behind the seventh dorsal scale, and extending over 
eight scales, four scales intervening between it and the soft dorsal, 
■which covers seven scales. The anal begins under the end of the first 
dorsal, and extends over eleven scales. Dorsal si)ines very delicate and 
flexible. Pectorals reaching, the eleventh scale in the upper lateral 
series. Yentrals beginning opposite the fifth scale and extending to 
the tenth. 

Color nearly obliterated — dark brown, with blackish cross-bars, involv- 
ing the fins. One bar across caudal, one across jjosterior part of soft 
dorsal and anal, one across posterior i^art of spinous dorsal and front of 
anal, and one across front of spinous dorsal. Pectorals bhick, with 
whitish edging. Caudal and ventrals blackish. Belly white. 

Dimensions, in hundredths, of length to base of caudal fin. 

Total Icngtli 4.1 iBches 

To base of caudal 3.6 inches == 100 

Height of body 12 

Height of tail 4 

Width of body 14 

Length of head 25 

Width of head. 19 

Depth of head 12 

Diameter of orbit 7 

Length of snout 9 

Length of rostral sjiine 2. 3 

Clef c of month f>. 5 

Width of month 6.5 

Width of occipital jiit 6 

Space between dorsals 8 

From front of mandible to tip of rostral spine 6 

Isthmns ^ 

Length of spinous dorsal i2. 5 

Length of soft dorsal 12. 5 

Length of anal - 1^ 

Length of pectoral 1° 

Length of ventral ° 

Length of caudal ^'^•^ 



332 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

This species is known to us from about ten specimens picked out of 
piles of prawns in the San Francisco market. They are taken in the 
sweep-nets of the "Paranzelle" oft" Point Eeyes. 

It belongs to the group or genus termed Podothecus by Professor Gill 
(typified by Agonus acipenseriuus), which is distinguished from Agonus 
cataphractus by the longer spinous dorsal and by the greater number of 
plates on the breast. Agonus vulsus differs from Agonus acipenserinus in 
the much rougher head, the narrow suborbital, and in the slight devel- 
opment of the barbels, as well as in manj^ minor respects. 

Agonus acipenserinus is rather stouter, the head broader and smoother 
above, tbe turbiual bones more widely separated. The nasal spines are 
simOar in the two species, as well as the position of the mouth. The 
preocular spine is obsolete, the iuterorbital space is broader and not 
corrugated, with two longitudinal ridges. Posterior part of head com- 
paratively smooth, Avithout pit at the occiput. Eidges and spines on 
posterior part of head continuous with those on the body, as in A. vulsus, 
but higher than those on the body, instead of smaller, as in the latter, 
latter. Opercular ridge small, the bones feebly striate. 

Suborbital region quite broad and smooth, with a strong ridge beneath, 
on which are three strong retrorse spines, below which is a groove. Pre- 
opercle with two radiating ridges, each ending in a spine. About 28 
spinous projections on the head in all, the number on the suborbital re- 
gion much less than iu vulsus. Eye much smaller than in A. vulsus, 
much shorter than snout, nearly 4 in head. Ocular ring not ser- 
rated, developed only above the eye. Body similarly armed, but the 
spines rather blunter and the back and belly less concave. There are 
no series of spines along the bases of pectorals and caudal. The ab- 
dominal series join behind close to the end of the ventrals, as the dorsal 
series close behind the second dorsal. The dorsal fins are separated by 
about two scales. The ventral fins are short, the fin scarcely half the 
length of the snout, the vent close behind its base ; no visible groove 
("Podothecus") at their base. Pectorals reaching about to front of 
anal. Breast with about nine large j)lates. Isthmus present. 

D. IX, 7; A. 8. Lat. 1. 37. 

Barbels greatly developed, as long as the diameter of the eye, arranged 
in three tufts, one at each angle of the mouth and one under the snout. 
]S"oue on the branchiostegal region. The type of the present description 
of Agonus acipenserinus is iu the museum of the California Academy of 
Sciences, and came from Vancouver's Island. It does not agree well 
with the account of Poclothceus peristetlms of Gill, although Professor 
Gill considers the two identical.* 

San Feancisco, Cax,,, March 1, 1880. 

*See also Steindacliuer (Ichthyol. Beitriige, ix, \>. 18), where the same opinion is ex- 
pressed. In this article (" Ueber zwei ueue Agonus- Arten aiis California") JJrachyopsis 
verrucosus Lockington is described as Agonus {Bracliyoims) Barlani, and Brachyopsis 
xyosiernus Jor. & Gilb. as Agonus (Brachyopsis) Anna'. The date of publication of 
B. verrucosus is May 24, of B. xyosternus, July 2, while A. Barkuni and A. Anme were 
" Vorgeh'gt in der Sitzung am 15 Juli 1880." It is certain, therefore, that the Amer- 
ican names are entitled to the right of priority. — D. S. J. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 333 



tlST OF SPECIES AlVD VARIETIES OF MIIVERAI.S IIV THE IVATIONAI. 
ITIi;S£U.lI OF THE U^flTED STATES IIV 1S79. '"^^■wrKAl^ 



By FRED. M. E]¥DI.ICH. 



Albite. 

Allanite. 

Alloplianite. 

Altaite. 

Alum, 

Amalgam. 

Amber. 

Amblygouite. 

Amphibolite. 

Actinolite. 

Asbestus var. 

Hornblende. 

Tremolite. 
Analcite. 
Anatase. 
Andalusite. 

Chiastolite. 
Anglesite. 
Anhydrite. 
Anortliite, 
Anthrophyllite. 
Antimony. 
Apatite. 
Apophyllite. 
Aragonite. 
Argentite. 
Arguerite. 
Arsenicum. 
Asphalt. 
Atacamite. 
Auricbalcite. 
Azurite. 
Barite. 
Baritocalcite. 
Berthierite. 
Beryl. 
Biotite. 
Bismuth. 
Bitumen. 
Boracite. 
Borax. 
Bromyrite. 
Brookite. 
Brucite. 
Cacoxenite. 
Calamine. 
Calaverite. 
Calcite. 
Cancrinite. 



Caolinite. 

Carnallite. 

Carpholite. 

Cassiterite. 

Celestite. 

Cerargyrite. 

Cerite. 

Cerussite. 

Cervantite. 

Chabasite. 

Chalcauthite. 

Chalcocite. 

Chalcodite. 

Chalcopyrite. 

Chlorastrolite. 

Chlorite. 

Chloritoidite. 

Chondrodite. 

Chromite. 

Chrysoberyl. 

Chrysolite. 

Ciunabarite. 

Clinochlorite. 

Clintonite. 

Cobaltite. 

Columbite. 

Copiapite. 

Copper. 

Copperasite. 

Coqviimbite. 

Corundophyllite. 

Corundum. 

Cryolite. 

Cryptomorphite. 

Cuprite. 

Cyanite. 

Danburite. 

Datholite. 

Deweylite. 

Diallogite. 

Diamond. 

Diasporite. 

Dolomite. 

Domeykite. 

Dnfrenite. 

Embolite. 

Emerald. 

Emplectite 

Enstatite. 



Epidote. 

Epsomite. 

Erubescite. 

Erythrite. 

Euchroite. 

Euphyllite. 

Euxeuite. 

Fergusonite. 

Fibrolite. 

Fluorite. 

Forsterite. 

Fowlerite. 

Franklinite. 

Gadolinite. 

Galenite. 

Garnet. 

Almandite. 

Grossularite. 

Melanite. 

Ouvarovite. 

Pyropite. 

Spessartite. 
Gehlenite. 
Genthite. 
Geyserite. 
Gibbsite. 
Glauberite. 
Glockerite. 
Goethite. 
Gold. 
Graphite. 
Greenockite. 
Gysum. 

Selenite var. 
Halite. 

Harmotomite. 
Hauerite. 
Hausmannite. 
Hauynite. 
Haydenite. 
Hehinite. 
Hematite. 

Columnar. 

Compact. 

Micaceous. 

Ochreous. 

Specular. 

Tabular. 
Hessite. 



334 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Heulandite. 

Hortonolite. 

Howlite. 

Hydromagnesite. 

Hydrotalcite. 

Hypersthenite. 

Idocrase. 

Ilmenite. 

lodyrite. 

lolite. 

Iridosmine. 

Iron (meteoric). 

Jamesonite. 

Jeffersite. 

Kerraesite. 

Labradorite. 

Lanarkite. 

Lapis lazuli. 

Laiimontite. 

Lazulite. 

Leonliardite. 

Lepidolite. 

Leucite. 

Liebethenite. 

Limonite car. 

Linnseite. 

Liroconite. 

Magnesite. 

Magnetite. 

Magnolite. 

Malachite. 

Manganite. 

Marcasite. 

Margadte. 

Meerschaum. 

Meionite. 

Melaconite. 

Melanosiderite. 

Mesolite. 

Metacinnabarite. 

Millerite. 

Mimetite. 

Mineral coal var. 

Molybdenite. 

Molybdite. 

Muscovite. 

Garnet inclusions. 

Hematite inclusions. 

Magnetite inclusions. 

Tourmaline inclusions. 
Natrolite. 
Ne^jhelite. 
Nitre. 
Oligoclase. 

Aventurine oligoclase. 
Olivenite. 



Opal. 

Fire opal. 

Milky opal. 

Precious opal. 

Semi-opal. 

Was opal. 

Wood opal. 
Orpiment. 
Orthoclase. 

Adularia. 

Amazoustone. 

Chesterlite. 

Moonstone. 

Ossidiau. 

Pumice. 

Sunstone. 
Ozocerite. 
Pectolite. 
Peridot. 
Petzite. 

Pliarmacosiderite. 
Phlogopite. 
Pickeringite. 
Picrophyllite. 
Pitchblende. 
Pitticite. 
Polybasite. 
Polyhalite. 
Polymyguite. 
Prehnite. 
Psilomelanite. 
Pyrargyrite. 
Pyrite. 
Pyrolusite. 
Pyromorphite. 
Pyrosclerite. 
Pyroxcuite. 

Angite. 

Coccolite. 

Hedenbergite. 

Jeftersonite. 

Malacolite. 

Sahlite. 

Uralite. 
Pyrrhotite. 
Quartz. 

Agate. 

Amethyst. 

Aventurine. 

Basauite. 

Chalcedony. 

Carnelian. 

Chry80j)rase. 

Crystal. 

Flint. 

Heliotrope. 



Quartz — Continued. 

Hornstone. 

Jasper. 

Noraculite. 

Onyx. 

Prase. 

Rosy. 

Sandstone flexible. 

Sardonyx. 

Siliceous sinter. 

SiUcified wood. 

Smoky. 
Quicksilver. 
Realgarite. 
Retinite. 
Rhodonite. 
Ripidolite. 
Rutile. 
Samarskite. 
Sassolite. 
Scapolite. 
Scheeletinite. 
Scheelite. 
Schirmerite. 
Schreibersite. 
Scorodite. 
Serxientiue var. 

Chrysotilite. 

Ophite. 

Precious. 
Siderite. 
Sillimanite. 
Smectite. 
Smithsonite. 
Sphalerite. 
Spinel. 
Spodumen. 
Stannite. 
Staurolite. 
Stephauite. 
Stercorite. 
Stibnite. 
StUbite. 
SiTontianite. 
StriTvite. 
Sulphur. 
Sussexite. 
Sylvanite. 
Sylvite. 
Tachydrite. 
Talc. 
Tellurite. 
Tellurium. 
Teunantite. 
Teschemacherite. 
Tetrahedrite. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 335 



Thomsonite. 


Vivianite. 


Wollastonite, 


Titanite. 


Wad. 


Wolfenite. 


Topaz. 


Asbolite. 


Xenotimite. 


Pycnite. 


Wavellite. 


Zaratite. 


Tourmaline. 


Warwickite. 


Zincite. 


Troilite. 


Wheelerite. 


Zircon. 


Troua. 


Wliitneyite. 


Zoisite. 


Turquois. 


Willcmite. 


Zorgite. 


Ulexite. 


Witherite. 




Vermiculite. 


Wolframite. 





DC^CRIPTSOIV OF A NEW SPECIES OF HEIfllKKAITIPIItJS (UEmi. 

BIIAITIPHEIS ROSiE), FR03I TltE COAST OF CAEIFORIVIA. 

By DAVIfl> S. JOISDAN nii«l CHAKL,ES H. GILBERT. 



Hemirhamphus rosae, sp. uov. 

Allied to Hemirliamphus unifasciatus aud other typical species of the 
geuus. 

Body rather elongate, moderately compressed; the greatest depth 
being one-ninth of the length from the snont to the base of the caudal. 
Length of the whole head, including the lower jaw, contained 2| times 
in the length from tip of lower jaw to base of caudal. Length of the 
lower jaw beyond the tip of the upi:>er jaw 4i times in the same length. 
The length of the head from the tip of the upper jaw is contained 3f 
times in the trunk (without head or caudal). 

The trianguLir part of the premaxillaries is convex, slightly carinated 
above, and about as broad as long. The eye is rather large, somewhat 
less than the interorbital space, and about half of the postorbital part 
of the head. Mandible elongate, the narrowed tip slightly beut down- 
ward; the bone bordered on each side for its entire length by a con- 
spicuous membrane, the membranaceous part being about as wide as the 
bony portion itself. Ui)per surface of mandible convex, grooved. Teeth 
in both jaws small, even, all of them apparently unicuspid. Top of head 
nearly i^lane, very slightly convex. Preorbital rather long; its diameter 
two-thirds that of the eye. 

Scales rather small, very deciduous, about G3 in a longitudinal series. 

Fin rays: D. I, 13; A.I. U. 

Dorsal and anal fins not at all scaly ; the dorsal a very little longer 
than the anal and inserted slightly in front of it ; the anterior rays of 
dorsal and anal moderately elevated. Caudal fin moderately forked ; 
the lower lobe the longer; the middle rays nearly twice the diameter of 
the eye. Pectoral fin a little longer than the postorbital part of the 
head. Insertion of ventral fin slightly nearer the tip of the caudal fin 
above than the eye, and midway between the gill-opening aud the base 
of the caudal. Ventrals a little shorter than the postorbital part of the 
head, not reaching vent. 



336 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Color translucent green, with tlie usual silvery band somewhat broader 
than a scale. Belly white. A dark vertebral band made of three streaks 
of dark points. Edges of scales with dark punctulatious. Fins plain» 
Lower jaw dark blood-color j the ground-color red, rendered dark by 
j)unctulations. Bordering membrane deej) red. 

Table of proportional measurements. 

Extreme lengtli from cliin to tip of tail 5.75 inclies. 

Length from tip of upper jaw to base of tail 4.00 iuclies = 100 

Body : 

Greatest deptli 11^ 

Greatest width 8 

Least depth of tail 4|- 

Length of caudal peduncle 6 

Head : 

Length from tip of lower jaw 50 

Length from tip of upper jaw 20 

Width of iuterorbital area 6 

Length of mandible from eye 36 

Length of snout 6 

Diameter of orbit 5 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 76 

Length of base 16 

Greatest height 7 

Ana,l: 

Distance from snout 78 

Length of base 14 

Caudal : 

Length of upper rays 13 

Length of middle rays 11 

Length of lower rays 14 

PectoraJ length 11|- 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 63 

Length -. 7| 

Dorsal rnys 1,13 

Anal rays 1, 14 

This species is abundant in the bay of San Diego and in the harbor 
of San Pedro. At San Diego we obtained in the winter, a very large 
number of immature individuals. At Wilmington we secured one speci- 
men nearly adult, and saw numerous others swimming about near the 
surface in the muddy waters of the harbor. 

We have named this species for Miss Rosa Smith, of San Diego, who 
has given much attention to ichthyology, and to whom the Iifational 
Museum is indebted for many specimens of San Diego fishes. 

San Diego, Cal., August 10, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 337 



l>E8€KII»TIOIVS OF SEVEN IVEW SPECIES OF FISHES FROITI DEEP 
SOITJ^DBNGS OIV THE SOUTHEKIV NEW EN«l.ANI> COAST, WITH 
DIAGNOSES or TW^O UNDESCRIBED «ENEKA OF FLOUNDERS 
AND A OENIJS RELATED TO iTIERIiUCIUS. 

By O. BBO^VJV OOODE. 

On the 4th of September, 1880, the Fish Commission steamer " Fish 
Hawk" made a two days' trip from the summer station at Newport, R. I., 
to the edge of the Gulf Stream. Several hauls of the trawl-net were 
made at the following stations: Nos. 865, 860, 867; lat. 40° 5'; long. 
70O 23' W. ; depth, 65 fathoms. No. 868 ; lat. 40° 1' 42" N. ; long. 70° 
22' 30" W. ; depth, 162 ftithoms. No. 869; lat. 40° 2' 18" N. ; long. 70° 
23' 6" W.; depth, 192 fathoms. No. 870; lat. 40° 2' 36" N.; long. 
70° 22' 58" W. ; depth, 155 fathoms. No. 871 ; lat. 40° 2' 54" N.; long. 
70° 23' 40" W.; depth, 115 fathoms. No. 872; lat. 40o 5' 39" N.; 
long. 70° 23' 52" W. ; depth, 86 fathoms. 

The results of this day's work are unparalleled iu the history of the 
Commission. Over 120 species of invertebrates and fishes were added 
to the fauna of Southern New England. The list of fishes never before 
seen south of Cape Cod is as follows. The other fishes taken in the 
same hauls are also mentioned, inclosed in brackets : 

1. GJypfocephalus cyuoglossuSj (Linn.) Gill ; young; 869, 870. 

2. Monolene sessilicauda, n. s., n. g. ; 870, 871. 

3. Citharichthys arctifrons, n. s. ; 871, 872. 

4. Citharichthys unicornis, n. s. ; 870, 871. 

5. Thyris pcUuciclus, n. s., n. g. ; 871, 872. 

6. 2Iacrurus Bairdii, Goode & Bean ; adult and young ; 870. 

7. Macrurus carminatus, n. s. ; 870. 

8. Hypsicometes gohioidcs, n. s. ; 871. 

[Phycis chuss, (Walb.1 Gill]? (No. 25925); 866. 

[Merlucins hilinearis, (Mitch.) Gill] ; adult and young; 870, 871, 872. 

9. Phycis Chesteri Goode «& Bean ; adult and young ; 868, 869, 870. 
\Phycis regiiis, (Mitch.) Gill]; 870. 

10. Lycodes Verrillii, Goode & Bean ; 870. 

11. Anarrhichas lupus, Linn. ; young ; 866. 

12. Peristedium miniatmn, n. s. ; 805, 872. 

13. Sehastes marinus, (Linn.) Liitken, 870, 871. 

14. Eaia, unkn. spec, (with numerous closely studded si>ines); 871. 

15. Raia, unkn. sp^c. (in egg, with very long tail) ; 869. 

16. Myxine glutinosa,Jjmji.; 869,870. 

On this same ground Gloucester fishermen, in 1879, obtained numerous 
specimens of Lopholatilus chamideonticeps never elsewhere taken. 

The occurrence of Phycis regius and Merlucius hilinearis at such great 
depths is worthy of mention. 

Proc. Nat. Mas. 80 22 ^OY. 23, 1880. 



338 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

In the following paper are described tlie following genera and species, 
apparently never before observed : 

Thyris, n. g. ) 

Hijpsicometes, n. g. Merluciidcef 
Monolene sessilicauda, n. s. 
Citharichthys arctifrotis, n. s. 
Citharichthys unicornis, n. s. 
Thyris pelluciduSy n. s. 
Macrurus carminatus, n. s. 
Kypsicojnetes goMoides, n. s. 
Peristedium miniatum, n. s. 

I am greatly indebted to Mr. Frederick Gardner, jr., who has assisted 
in the ijreparation of this paper. 

Monolene,* new genus. 

A genus of pleuronectoid fishes with thin elongate body and sessile 
caudal fin. Eyes upon left side very close together, and near to profile. 
Mouth moderate ; the length of the maxillary less than one-third that 
of the head. Teeth minute in the jaws, in single series, nearly equal on 
both sides, though perhaps a trifle stronger on the blind side; absent 
on vomer and palatines. Pectoral fin uj)on blind side totally absent. 
Dorsal fin commences in advance of the eye upon the snout. Dorsal 
and anal rays simple. Caudal fin sessile, almost confluent with dorsal 
and anal. Yentrals normal. Scales rather large, ctenoid upon colored 
side, cycloid upon blind side. Lateral line marked; on colored side 
strongly and angularly curved above the anterior two-thirds of the 
pectoral ; on the blind side straight, rising slightly as it approaches the 
region of the gill-opening. Gill- rakers few, feeble. Vertebrae 43. 

Monolene sessilicauda, new species. 

Extreme length of specimen described 0.156™.t 

The height of the body (38) is about three-eighths of the total length 
(without caudal), and is equal to twice the distance of the origin of the 
ventral from the snout (19); its height over the ventrals (25) is about 
five times the longitudinal diametei of the lower eye (5), the least 
height (8.5), at the base of the tail, slightly greater than the length of 
the lower jaw (8). The body is thin its greatest width (5) not exceed- 
ing the longitudinal diameter of the orbit. 

Scales subcircular, with irregular outline, about 2 millimeters in diame- 
ter, or in diameter about one-fourth (1.25) the diameter of the eye. The 
posterior edge of each scale upon the colored side is pectinate with about 
fifteen denticulations. The scales of the blind side are oval, non-pec- 

* Etymology : fibvo^ = single ; w/lei'j? = an arm. 
tNo. 26004. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 339 

tin ate, about as large as those of the colored side. The head is every- 
where closely thatched with scales, even to the edges of the lips, and 
small scales occur on the bases of the caudal, pectoral, and ventral fins, 
and upon the rays of the vertical fins nearly out to their tips. There 
are about 23 rows above and 25 below the lateral lines on the colored 
side, behind the curve of the line. 

Lateral line of colored side strongly bent in its anterior part over the 
base and anterior two-thirds of the pectoral fin. There are about 92 
scales in the lateral line, 72 of them in its straight portion. The arc of 
the curved portion of the lateral line (12) is slightly more than double 
the distance of its highest portion above the line of the straight portion 
of the line were it continued (5). The curve of the line is very peculiar, 
having two angles; that nearest the head being most obtuse. The 
lateral line on the blind side is nearly straight, slightly ascending above 
the abdominal cavity. 

The length of the head (20) equals one- fifth of the standard length, 
and four times diameter of eye, or length of perculum (5). Distance 
from snout to margin of upper eye (5) much greater than distance to 
lower eye (3), and less than length of the maxillary (5.5), the posterior 
margin of which passes the jjerpendicular from the anterior margin of 
the lower eye. The width of the interorbital area is very small, less 
than one-sixth of the diameter of the eye. The length of the mandible 
(8) is two-fifths of the head. 

The dorsal fin begins upon the snout in the perpendicular from the 
anterior margin of the lower eye. It is comjiosed of from 99 to 104 
simi)le rays (in five specimens), the longest of which in the posterior 
fourth of the fin ; their length (9) nearly half that of the head. The 
anal fin begins between the tips of the ventral, close to the vent, and 
under the insertion of the pectoral. It is composed of 79 to 84 simple 
rays, the longest in the posterior fourth; their length (7) slightly more 
than one-third the length of the head. 

The caudal is sessile, rounded, the middle rays in length (17) nearly 
double the longest dorsal rays. 

The pectoral, present only on the colored side, is inserted close to the 
branched opening, its length (15) three-fourth that of the head. 

Tlie ventrals are upon the medium ventral line, even in length (6), 
slightly shorter or nearly equal to the longest rays of the anal. 

Color on the left side ashy brown, with numerous more or less dis- 
tinct darker brown spots. On the blind side white. Pectoral blackish, 
with traces of lighter transverse bands. 

Kadial formula: D. 99-103; A. 79-84. Lateral line (92). 

Eleven specimens, ranging in length from .094 to .156 millimeter, were 
taken, September 4, in hauls 870 and 871. 



340 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Current number of specimen 


26,004. 
870. 


26,0046. 


26,004c. 


26,004c. 














Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 




1.56 
133 
















Length to euil of middle caudal rays. 
Body : 


100 

38 

5 
25 
25 

8.5 

20 

5 
7.5 

3 
5 
5.5 

8 
5 

3 
9 

22 

7 

17 

21 
15 

19 

6 

103 

84 

*92 

(23) 

(25) 
5 


























































































Head: 
















Distance from snout to upper 
































Distance from snout to lower 
































































Diameter of orbit, longitudinal- 
Dorsal (spinous) : 












































Anal: 
































Caudal : 
















Pectoral : 
































Ventral : 






































102 
81 


99 
81 




103 


103 






79 












Kumber of transverse rows above 
















Number of transverse rows below 

















































* 20 in curve. 



Citharichthys, Bleeker. 

A genus of pleurouectoid fislies. Mouth rather wide, the length of 
the maxillary almost one-third that of the head. Eyes upon left side, 
the upper one very near to profile. Teeth quite minute, on a single series 
in each jaw, rather more prominent upon the blind side. Vomerine and 
palatine teeth none. Pectoral fin upon blind side much shorter and 
■with fewer rays than upon colored side. A^entrals also asymmetrical, 
the sinistral one upon the median ventral line, the dextral one slightly 
in advance and crowded up upon the blind side. Dorsal fin commences 
in front of the eye upon the snout. Dorsal and anal rays simple. Cau- 
dal fin subsessile, its peduncle not much developed. Scales large, flexi- 
ble, cycloid, very deciduous. Lateral line strongly defined, straight or 
very slightly curved anteriorly. Gill-rakers short, rather stout, flexible. 
Vertebrae 34 (in C. arctijrons). Gill membranes broadly united below 
the throat; gill rakers lanceolate. Branchiostegals 5. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL. MUSEUM. 341 

Citharichthys arctifrons, new species. 

Extreme length of specimen described 137 millimeters.* 

The height of the body (37) is about three-eighths of its total length 
(without caudal), and is equal to about four times the height of the tail 
(9) and about five times its thickness (7). 

The scales are irregularly i)olygonal, cycloid; the largest about 6 mil- 
limeters in diameter; the diameter (5) nearly equal to that of the eye. 
The scales are flexible, loosely arranged, and very easily detached, so 
that it is difficult to secure a specimen in good order. Small scales on 
the rays of the ventral fins. There are forty scales in the lateral line 
(on the colored side), which is sharply defined and straight, and seven or 
eight above and the same number below the lateral line at the broadest 
part of the body. 

The length of the head (24-24J) is about one-fourth that of the 
body, and four times the diameter of the eye (6). The interorbital 
space (1) is very narrow, equal to the difference in the distances from 
snout to lower eye (4) and snout to upper eye (5). The length of 
mandible (lO-lO^) is about double the latter distance; the length of the 
maxillary (7-7^) slightly more than the greatest width of the body. 

The dorsal fin begins upon the snout, above the anterior margin of the 
upper eye. Its greatest height (13-15) is about three times the distance 
of its anterior ray from the snout. It is composed of 82 to 83 simple rays. 
The anal begins under the axil of the pectoral, its greatest height (14-15) 
equal to or slightly exceeding half the distance of its anterior ray from 
the snout. It is composed of 67 simple rays. 

The caudal is subsessile, triangular, of 16 rays; its length about equal 
to that of the head. In dorsal, anal, and caudal the rays appear to pro- 
ject beyond the connecting membrane half or two-thirds of their own 
length. 

The pectorals are inserted far below the lateral line and close to the 
gill-opening. The pectoral on the colored side is composed of more 
rays (9-10) than that of the blind side (7), its length (17-19) being about 
double that of its mate (7-9). The veutrals are composed of 4 rays. 

Color dirty light brown. 

Eadial formula: D. 82-3; A. 67; C.16; P. 9-10-7; V.5; L. lat. 40. 

Numerous specimens, ranging in length from 90 to 140 millimeters, 
were taken, September 4, in hauls 870-871. The females were full of 
ripe spawn. It is not probable, therefore, that the average size of the 
species is much greater than that of the specimens described. 

* No. 25908, Nat. Mus. 



342 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 





25,908. 
871. 






871. 








Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths of 
length. 


Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths of 
length. 




137 
111 




122 

102 






100 

38.5 
7 
9 

24.25 

1 

5 

7.25 
10.25 

4 

6 

4.75 
96 
15 

28.75 

71 

14 

25.50 

25 
19-7 

22 
11 
83 
67 
16 
10-7 
5 

40 


100 


Body : 

Greatest lieio;ht of middle dorsal 


37 
















9 


Head : 






24 








1 








5 








7 








10 








4 








6 


Dorsal (spiuous) : 






5 
















13 


Anal: 






27 
















15 


Caudal : 






23 


Pectoral: 






25 








17-9 








21 








10 


Dorsal 






82 








67 


Caudal . - . 








Pectoral 






9-7 


Ventral 






5 


Xumber of scales in lateral line, from root of ventral obliquely 
back .. 






40 








1 













Citharichthys unicornis, new species. 

Extreme length of tlie specimen described (I^To. 26003) 69 millimeters. 

The greatest height of the body (47) is slightly less than its length, 
and is about 41 times its least height at the tail (11). The body is much 
higher than in G. arctifrons, its greatest height over the pectorals, the 
contours then descending in almost straight lines to the base of the tail. 
The thickness of the body (6) is less than in C. arctifronsj being contained, 
nearly seventeen times in the standard length. 

The scales are thin, deciduous, smaller than in C. arctifrons. There 
are about forty scales in the lateral line, which is slightly curved over the 
pectoral, and, as nearly as can be determined in the denuded specimens 
before me, about twelve rows above and twelve below- the lateral line at 
the broadest part of the body. 

The length of the head (25) is one-fourth of the standard length and 
about three times the diameter of the eye (9), or the distance from the 
snout to the upper eye (9). The interorbital space is wide (4), equal to 
the length of the snout, and diagonally crossed by a strong ridge, a con- 
tinuation of two ridges which form the upper boundary of the lower 
and the lower boundary of the upper orbit. 

The length of the maxillary (11) is less than half, that of the mandible 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 343 

(13) more tliau half, that of the head. The teeth are minute, in single 
rows, closely set in the jaws, somewhat stronger upon the blind side. 
A strong short spine above the snout, at the anterior termination of the 
ridge at the lower margin of the upper eye. Hence the specific name 
unicornis. 

The dorsal fin begins at .the side of the preorbital spine, its anterior 
rays being slightly crowded over upon the blind side. It is composed 
of 73 to 75 simple rays. Its greatest height (13) is half the length of 
the head. 

The distance of the anal from the snout (33) is one-third of the stand- 
ard length. The number of rays is 60; their longest (13) equal in length 
to the longest dorsal rays. 

The caudal is pointed, triangular, subsessile; its length (22) twice that 
of the maxillary (11) and two-thirds the distance from the snout to the 
anal (33). The pectorals are inserted far below the lateral line. The 
pectoral of the colored side is twice as long (18) as the diameter of the 
eye, that of the blind side as long (13) as the longest dorsal rays. The 
former is composed of 10 rays, the latter of 4. 

The length of the ventrals (11) is half that of the caudal. They are 
asymmetrically placed, as is described under the generic diagnosis. 

Eadial formula: D. 73-75 ; A. GO; P. 4 right, 10 left; L. lat. 40. 

Color ashy gray, with dark lateral line. Eyes black. 



Current number of specimen. 
Locality 



Extreme lensth 

Lengtli to origin of middle caudal rays . 
Body : 

Greatest height 

Least height of tail 

Head : 

Greatest length 

Distance from snout to Tipper eye . . . 

Distance from snout to lower eye 

Width of interorbital area 

Length of snout 

Length of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Diameter of orbit, longitudinal 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Greatest height 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 

Length .' 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout on colored side 

Length 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Pectoral 

Number of scales in lateral line 



26,003. 
870 and 871. 



Milli- 
meters. 



57 



lOOthsof 
length. 



28 
18-13 

26 

11 

75-73 

60 

4 R., 10 L. 
40 



344 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Thyris,* new gemis. 

I feel much hesitation in describing as a member of a new genus this 
little heterosome fish, which has all the appearance of being the larval 
form of some larger species. Since, however, it has attained almost the 
size at which one of the associated species begins breeding, and since 
i am unable to assign it to any genus already described, it seems desira- 
ble to give it a name which may serve to designate it, at least for the 
time being. 

Diagnosis. — A genus of heterosome fishes, with soft, transparent, 
elongate body. Head very short (in the single si)ecies contained about 
5J times in total length of body). Mouth small, toothless. Eyes upon 
left side, close together, the lower slightly in advance of the upper. 
Pectoral fin upon blind side shorter and with fewer rays than upon 
colored side. Ventrals crowded together upon median keel of body, 
their bases prolonged upon this keel. Dorsal fin commences in front of 
the eye upon the snout. Dorsal and anal rays simple. Caudal fin sub- 
sessile, almost confluent with dorsal and anal. Scales very small, thin, 
easily detaclied. Dorsal line marked, straight. Body translucent, col- 
orless (except for three longitudinal stripes in the single species). The 
vertebrae can almost be counted through the flesh when the fish is held 
up to the light, and the arrangement of the gills is clearly visible through 
the opercular bones. 

Thyris pellucidus, new species. 

The length of the specimen described (Ko. 20005) is 72 millimeters. 

The height of the body (32) is about one-third of its length (without 
caudal), the least height of the tail (7) one-fourteenth. The body is 
thin, pellucid, larval-like, divided into three longitudinal tracts by de- 
pressions at the bases of the rows of interspinous processes, as in Glyp- 
tocephalus. 

The scales are small, thin, easily detached (none remain uijon the 
specimen except a few in the lateral line). The number of transverse 
rows is estimated at one hundred and twenty, the number of rows above 
and below the lateral line at the widest portion of the body seventeen 
or eighteen. The scales in the lateral line are provided with a large 
central canal. The lateral line is straight on both sides. 

The head is very small; its length (18) contained about five and one- 
half times in the total length of the bod3\ The eyes are small, protrud- 
ing, the upper almost perpendicularly above, though perhaps slightly 
posterior to the lower. The diameter of the eye (2) equals the width of 
the interorbital si3ace (2) and is double the distance (4) from the snout 
to the upper eye, that from the snout to the lower eye (3) being inter- 
mediate. The mouth is small, the shape of the opening being somewhat 
like that in Solea, the upper jaw being somewhat hook-shaped. The 
length of the upper jaw (4) is two-thirds that of the mandible (6). 

The dorsal commences on the snout in advance of the eye, and is com- 

* Etymology : i9opif=a window. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 345 



posed of 96 to 102 long, flexible, simple rays, their tips apparently ex- 
tending far beyond tbe connecting membrane. The length of the longest 
rays (14) is double the least height of the body at the base of the tail 
(7). 

The anal fin originates at a distance (22) from the snout contained 
four times and one half in the length of the body. It is composed of 
76 to 81 rays, the longest of which are as long as the head. 

The pectoral is inserted close to the gill-opening and far below the 
lateral line (midway from the black stripe upon the lateral line to the 
black stripe at the base of the interspinous processes of the anal fin). 
The pectoral upon the blind side is short, its length (2) equal to the 
diameter of the orbit, composed of about four or five rays ; that upon 
the colored side longer, its length (3) equal to that of the snout, and com- 
posed of about twelve rays. The ventrals are both crowded upon the 
ventral keel, their bases prolonged upon the keel, their tips embracing 
the origin of the anal. 

Eadial formula: D. 96-102; A. 76-81; P. 12 left, 4-5 right. 

Color: In life colorless, translucent. In alcohol yellowish white. 
Three prominent blackish longitudinal stripes or lines upon the left side. 
The stripe running from the branchial cleft to the base of the tail is less 
prominent than the two at the bases of the interspinous processes. On 
the lateral line of the right side there is no stripe, though the two lateral 
stripes are as prominent as ujion the other side. Eyes black. 



Current number of specimen- 
Locality 



20,005. 
870, 871, and 872. 



Milli- 
meters. 



lOOths of 
length. 



Extreme length 

Length to end of middle caudal ravs . . 
Body : 

Greatest height 

Least height'of tail 

Head: 

Greatest height 

Distance from snout to upper eye. 

Distance from snout to lower eye . 

Width of interorbital area 

Length of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Greatest height 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Pectoral 

Number of scales in lateral line 



32 

7 

18 
4 
3 
2 
4 
6 
2 

2.5 

14 

22 
18 



18 
3-2 

16 
90-102 
76-81 
2L.,4-5R. 
*120 



' Estimated from partial count. 



346 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Macrurus carminatus, new species. 

A siugle specimen, 248 millimeters in lengtli, was obtained, September 
4, at station 871. It is most closely related to M. coelorhyncJms (Risso) 
Bonap. and to ill. atlanticus Lowe, but differs in tlie number of flu-rays 
and in other characters. 

The body is less elongate and stouter than in M. Bairdii, Goode & Bean, 
though its greatest height (12.5) is, as in M. Bairdii, one-eighth of total 
length. The difference in general appearance is due to the fact that in 
M. carminatus the ventral contour retreats less rapidly. 

The scales are large, heavy, the free portions covered with long vitre- 
ous spines arranged in nine or ten rows. These scales resemble the old- 
fashioned wool cards. Hence the specific name, from carmen^ a wool-card. 
The spines are thicker and more closely set than in 71/. Bairdii, and there 
is no specialization of the central row. The number of scales in the 
lateral line cannot be determined, though it probably does not exceed 
100, but there are about five transverse rows above it and twelve below 
it, counting from the vent obliquely backward. In M. Bairdii there are 
152 in the lateral line, six above and nineteen or twenty below. 

Length of head (21) contained a little less than five times in total 
length. Width of interorbital area (4) about equal to vertical diameter 
of orbit, and about one-fifth of the length of the head. Length of snout, 
horizontal diameter of eye, length of postorbital portion of head about 
equal (7). Length of operculum (35) half that of snout. 

Snout long, sharij, depressed, triangular, the lower surface more nearly 
parallel with the axis of the body than in 21. Bairdii". The lateral ridges 
are pronounced and are contained in a straight line* under the eyes and 
upon the preopercula. Strong horizontal ridges continue from the supra- 
orbital margins to the gill-openings, parallel with the subocular ridges. 
Nostrils immediately in front of the orbit. Barbel very short. 

Teeth small, conical, somewhat recurved, arranged in villiform bands. 

Distance ot first dorsal from snout (23.5) about four and one-half times 
the length of its base (5), its distance from anterior margin of orbit much 
less than the length of the head. First spine very short, hardly per- 
ceptible above the skin. Second spine about half as long (11) as the 
head, slender, unarmed. When laid back, its tip reaches the origin of 
the second dorsal (the filament is destroyed). The decrease in the 
length of the spines is very gradual, the sixth being nearly as long as 
the second, so that the fin is not so triangular in shape as in M. Bairdii. 

The second dorsal begins in the perpendicular from the seventh ray 
of the anal. The anal is much higher than in M. Bairdii, the length of 
the longest rays (2) nearly equal to half the width of the interorbital 
area. 

Anal fin inserted under the eighteenth scale of the lateral line (as 
nearly as can be judged from the distorted specimen). Its longest rays 
are as long as the width of the interorbital area. 

Distance of pectoral from snout equal to twice its own length (11), 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 347 



wliich is about equal to the length of the dorsal spine. Its insertion is 
below the middle of the depth of the body and below the level of the 
center of the orbit. Its tip does not reach to the perpendicular from 
the origin of the anal. 

Insertion of ventral behind pectoral and slightly in advance of the 
insertion of the dorsal. Its distance from the snout (22) is greater than 
twice its length (9). Its long filament does not reach to the origin of 
the anal fin. 

Kadial formula : D. I, IX, 80 + ; A. 70 + ; P. 13 ; V. 7. 

Color silvery gray. The thick, closely-set spines are matted with oozy 
mud which cannot be removed. This is doubtless the result of the hard 
usage experienced in the trawl-net. 



Current number of specimen- 
Locality 



Extreme length 

Body: 

Greatest height under dorsal. 
Head: 

Greatest length 

Width of intcrorbital area ... 

Length of snout 

Length of opiTCulum 

Length of maudible 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at first spine 

Dorsal (soft) : 

Distance from snout ...j- 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 



Length. 



Ventral : 

Distance from snout . 



Length . 



Dorsal . 

Anal 

Pectoral 

Ventral 

Xumber of scales in lateral line — 

Number of transverse rows above lateral lino 
Number of transverse rows below lateral line. . 



26,007. 
871. 



Milli- 
meters. 



248 



lOOths of 
length. 



12.5 

21 
4 
7 
3.5 

7.25 

7 

23.5 
5 
11 

35 

27 

21 
11 

22 
10 

I, rs, 80+ 

7C-1- 

13 

7 

[1001 

(6) 

(18) 



Hypsicometes,* new genus. 

A small specimen, much contracted and distorted from immersion in 
strong alcohol, is the only material upon which to base this description. 
Although not quite satisfied that the relations of this fish are most nearly 
with MerluciidWj I venture to assign it temporarily to a position in this 
family, hoping that additional material may confirm my present belief. 
In some respects it resembles the Blennioids, but pseudobranchiae are 
absent. 

Diagnosis.— A genus of fishes in general form closely resembling 
Mcrlucius, but with the elongate body covered with large scales (not 



Etymology: i;i^j = in deep water; K0)fi7/Ti]g—a,n inhabitant, a dweller. 



348 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

much more than half as many in lateral line as in M. hilinearis nor one- 
third as many as in M. vulgaris). Mouth rather small. A separate 
caudal. Two dorsal fins, the first composed of a few long rays, the second 
with longer base. One elongate anal. Ventrals well developed, with 
broad base composed of six rays. Teeth on the vomer and in the jaws 
in two or three rows, rather feeble. The eyes large, near together, look- 
ing upward. No barbel. 

Hypsicometes gobioides, new species. 
The general aj^pearance of the fish is suggestive of a species of Gohius. 
Head rather broad and somewhat depressed; its greatest width (13) 
about equal to the greatest height of the body (12), and less than one- 
half its length (30), which is contained three times and one-third in the 
standard length. The cleft of the mouth is horizontal, extending to the 
perpendicular from the anterior margin of the orbit. The .snout is broad, 
rounded, as long (10) as the longitudinal diameter of the eye. The in- 
terorbital space is nariow (2), one-fifth the length of the snout, the eyes 
large, very close together, looking upward. The length of the maxillary 
(13) is equal to the greatest width of the head. The mandible is much 
longer. Teeth minute, in two or three rows on jaws and on vomer. Gill- 
opening wide, the membranes united over the isthmus near the snout. 

Body shaped much as in young of Merlucius, the least height of the 
tail (5) about half of the greatest width of the body (11). The scales are 
large, about 58 transverse rows from gill-opening to base of caudal. 
The character of the scales and the position of the lateral line cannot 
be decided from the specimen described. 

The dorsal originates above the base of the pectoral, and consists of 
six or seven flexible rays as long (10) as the snout. The second dorsal 
has a -base four times as long (10) as the snout, and extends nearly to the 
base of the caudal. It is composed of about seventeen rays, the longest 
slightly longer (11) than the longest in the first dorsal. 

The origin of the anal is under that of the second dorsal ; its base 
length (48) is equal to the distance of its anterior ray from the snout 
(48). It is composed of about sixteen rays, the longest of which (10) is 
equal to the longest in the first dorsal. 

The caudal is truncate, its length (18) three-eighths of that of the base 
of the anal. 

The insertion of the pectoral is distant from the snout (33) one-third 
of the distance from snout to base of caudal. Its length (10) equal to 
the height of the first dorsal. 

The ventrals are far apart, with broad bases lying flat upon the ventral 
surface, composed of six rays. They are situated far in advance of the 
pectorals and their length (14) equals two-fifths of the distance from 
snout to first dorsal. 

Eadial formula : D. VI (or VII), 17 ; A. 16 ; V. 6 ; L. lat. 158. 

Color grayish, with obscure cloudings. Belly lighter. A large black 
blotch upon the base of the upper caudal rays. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 349 





MiUi- 
meters. 


lOOths of 
length. 


Extreme length 


54 
46 




Lenght to end of middle caudal rays 


100 


Body : 

Greatest height , 


Greatest width 




1]^ 


Least height of tail 






Head : 

Greatest length 




30 


Greatest width . . 




13 


"Width of interorbital area 




2 


Length of snout 




10 


L('U;L;th of maxillary 


13 


Diameter of orbit, longitudinal 




10 


Distance from snout 




35 


Lcnath of base 




8 


Greatest height 




10 


Dorsal (soft) : 

Length of base 




40 






11 


Anal: 




48 


Lent;f h of base 




48 






10 


Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 




18 


Pectornl: 




33 


Length 




10 


Distance from snout 




23 






14 






vi-ivnj, 17 

16 




Ventral 




6 






[58] 







Peristedium miniatum, new species. 

Total length of type (No. 26023) 300 millimeters. 

The greatest width of the body (20) is equal to its greatest height 
(19.5), being one-fifth of its total length without caudal. The general 
armature of the body is much like that described by Giinther under 
Peristefhns hrevirostre.* The number of plates between the gill-opening 
and the base of the tail is from twenty-seven to twenty-nine. There are 
four series of spiny plates on each side, the spines of the abdominal 
series becoming very weak and obsolete towards the tip of the tail. 

The length of the head (40.15) is two-fifths of the total length without 
caudal. The length of the preorbital processes (7) is contained about 
three times and one-half in the distance from their extremities to the 
anterior margin of the orbit. The interorbital space is deeply concave, 
its width (G.75) contained between six and seven times in the length of 
the head. Protuberance on the forehead very slight. The length of 
the snout (22.5) is more than half that of the head (in young less). The 
diameter of the eye (G5) is contained between six and seven times in the 
length of the head. There is one pair of spines upon the upper surface 
of the snout behind the base of the preorbital i^rocesses, and another 
larger pair upon the preorbital processes, one upon each. The ridge of 
the preoperculum terminates in a depressed, short, sharp-pointed spine. 
The number of small tentacles upon either side of the lower jaw is about 
* Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. ii, 1860, p. 218. 



350 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



ten, the smallest nearest to the symphysis. The long tentacles at the 
angles of the mouth are fringed and extend to the base of the pecto- 
rals. In other respects Glinther's description of P. brevirostre is ample 
for this species. 

Color bright crimson. 

Eadial formula: D. VII, 18; A. 17; C. 16; P. 2 + 10; V. 6. L. lat. 
27 on one side, 28 on the other. 

Three other specimens had the following: D. VIII, 18; A. 17. D. 
VII, 18; A. 18. D. VII, 18; A. 18. 

The measurements of adult and young specimens are given. The fish 
when taken seemed to be in the height of the spawning season. 



Current number of specimen 
Locality 



26,023. 
869. 



26,030. 
871 (young). 



Milli- 
meters. 



Extreme length 

Length to end of middle caudal rays 

Body : 

Greatest height at origin of dorsal 

Greatest width under pectorals 

Height at ventrals 

Least height of tail 

Head : 

Greatest length 

Distance from snout to nape 

Greatest width 

Width of interorhital area 

Length of snout 

Length of operculum 

Length of maxillary 

Long; h of mandible 

Distance from snout to orbit 

Diameter of orbit, longitudinal 

Width of mouth-opening 

End of frontal spine to symphysis of maxillaries . . . 

Length of barbels 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Greatest height, second spine 

Height at first spine ■ 

Height at last spine 

Width of upper surface of occipital plate 

Length of upper surface of occipital plate 

Width of upper surface of nexal plate 

Length of upper surface of nexal plate 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at first spine 

Height at second spine 

Height at third spine 

Height at last spine 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Length of external rays 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Distance from symphysis of mandibles 

Length 

Isthmus 

Dorsal 



300 
272 



Anal 

C audal 

Pectoral 

Ventral 

Number of plates in lateral lino 

From anterior edge of frontal plate to end of frontal spine. 



lOOths of 
length. 



MOli- 
meters. 



100 

19.50 
20 

19.50 
2.75 

40. 50 
32.75 
29 

6.75 
22.50 
10 
12 

12.50 
21 

6.50 
12 

7 
29 

38.25 
53.50 
10.75 
10 

3 

7 

4.75 

6.50 

5 

53.50 

36 
3.50 
6.50 



9.50 
5 

33 
18.25 

31 

;!7. 25 
17.50 
15.50 
VIL 18 
18 
16 
2+10 

6 
28 

9.50 



lOOfhsof 
length. 



19 

15 

18 

3 

39 
36 
30 
12 

18 

7 
14.50 
13 
19 
10 
13 

6 
10 

40 

53.50 
10.75 
10 

6 
12.50 

8 

6.25 

3 

51 

40 

3 

7 



14 



34 
14 

30 
40 
20 
15 
VI 1, 18 
18 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 351 



DESCBIPTIOIV OF A IVEW SPECIES OF ICTERUS FR091 THE WEST 

IIVUIES. 

By GEORGE «f. L,ATVRENCE. 

Icterus oberi. 

Male: Head, neck, upper part of breast, back, wiugs, and tail black; 
lower part of breast, abdomen, under tail-coverts, and rump light- 
brownish chestnut, with the concealed bases of the feathers of a clear 
light yellow; the thighs are yellow, with a wash of chestnut; edge of 
wing and under wing-coverts yellow; bill black, with the sides of the 
under mandible bluish for half its length from the base ; tarsi and toes 
black. 

Length (skin), 8^ inches; wing, 3|; tail, 4; tarsus, §; bill, ^. 

The female has the upper plumage of a dull greenish olive, with a yel- 
lowish tinge, the front and rump inclining more to yellow ; the tail 
feathers are yellowish green ; quills brownish black; the primaries and 
secondaries are edged narrowly with dull yellowish gray; the tertiaries 
are margined with fulvous ; wing-coverts dark brown, margined with 
fulvous ; edge of wing yellow ; the under plumage is of a rather dull 
dark yellow ; the breast and under tail-coverts are of a deeper or warmer 
color ; the sides are greenish olive ; bill and legs as in the male. 

The young male resembles the female in plumage, but has the back 
somewhat darker. 

Types in jSTational Museum, Washington. 

It ditters from all its allies, which are somewhat similarly colored, in 
having the shoulders black, instead of yellow or chestnut. 

Seven specimens were obtained. 

In the early part of March of the present year, Mr. Ober left for the 
West Indies, intending to explore as many of the islands not visited on 
his first expedition as his limited time would permit. He returned after 
an absence of six months, and his collections sent to the Smithsonian 
Institution were placed in my hands for examination. Among them I 
found but one new species, viz, the Icterus above described, procured in 
Montserrat. 

It seems but a fitting compliment that the only new species commem- 
orative of the second expedition of Mr. Ober should bear his name. 

The catalogues of tlie birds obtained by him in the different islands 
will be published in the Proceedings of the National Museum as soon 
as he furnishes me with his notes and observations thereon. 

October 15, 1880. 



352 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



DESCRfPTIOlV OF A NFW SPECIES OF IVOTIBAIVOID SHARK (HEX- 

Aivcaaus coKiivus), from the pacific coast of the uivited 

STATES. 

By I>AVID S. J$>£iDAIV amd CIIARI.ES M. OIL.BCRT. 

Hezanchus corinus, sp. nov. 

Head large, broad, depressed and very blunt anteriorly ; the length 
of stiont from front of mouth little more than half the interorbital space 
and rather less than the distance from the front of the mouth to angle 
of the mouth. 

No median tooth in upper jaw. Two sharp, slender teeth in front of 
upper jaw, behind which is a row of four others similar but a little larger; 
the two outer larger than the inner, all without basal cusps. Behind 
these are four others similar and still a little larger. These are di- 
rected backward, and should not be considered as functional teeth. 

The first of the large teeth in the upi^er jaw is larger than the succeed- 
ing teeth. It has a sharp point hooked outward, and a single strong 
cusp on its outer margin, its inner edge not serrate. The second 
tooth, on both sides, has the basal cusp obsolete. The third tooth is 
like the first, but a little smaller. The fourth tooth is slightly serrated 
on the inner margin, and has two strong cusps on the outer at base. 
The fifth and sixth are similar to the fourth, but more strongly serrate on 
the inner margin. The seventh, eighth, and ninth are small, and the 
number of cusps is increased, so that they approach the form of the 
teeth of the lower jaw. 

The median tooth of the lower jaw is very small, with a slight me- 
dian Cusp and three cusps on the outer margin, the uppermost the 
largest. The first lateral tooth has six cusps ; the first the largest, the 
others progressively decreasing; the long edge of the first cusp is finely 
serrated, but has no basal cusp. The second, third, fourth, and fifth 
teeth are precisely similar in size and form to the first. The sixth and 
seventh are somewhat smaller. In the smaller specimen, from Soquel, 
the inner edge of the t^eth is not serrated. Behind the large teeth in 
each jaw is the usual series of small blunt teeth, which in this species 
are little developed. 

Nostrils near the tip of the snout. Furrow of skin at angle of mouth 
reaching halfway from the angle of the mouth to the gill-opening. Eyes 
large, § the length of the snout. Spiracles small, far behind the eyes. 
Gill-openings 6. Pectoral moderate, as long as from first gill-opening to 
tip of lower jaw. Yentrals small, reaching x>ast front of the small dorsal. 
Dorsal a little higher than anal, and terminating over the middle of the 
latter fin. Tail long, twice as long as head, a little less than ^ the 
total length, little bent upward ; its basal lobe little developed ; the scales 
on its upper edge somewhat enlarged. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 353 

Color very dark sooty, almost black above, grayish black below, with- 
out spots or distinct markings. A very obscure grayish lateral streak. 
Inside of upper lip blotched with black. Young specimen clear brown. 

This species is known to us from two specimens, the larger, a female 
43 inches in length, the type of the present description, having been 
obtained by James G. Swan, assistant to the United States Fish Com- 
mission, at Neah Bay, near Cape Flattery. The other was secured by 
Mr. Gilbert at Soquel, on the Bay of Monterey. 

This species is closely related to Eexandius griseus Eaf. of the Medi- 
terranean and Eastern Atlantic. It differs chiefly in the form of the 
teeth of the lower jaw, which are serrated on the inner edge, and have 
on the upper or outer edge only six cusps instead of eight or nine. 

Another Notidanoid shark, belonging to the related genus Heptran- 
chias, distinguished by the presence of seven gill-openings instead of six, 
is found with the present species in the same waters. This is Eeptranchias 
maculatus, the Xotorhynclius maculatus or Notorhynclms boreaUs of Ayres 
and Gill. This species differs from Heptrancliia^ indicus, with which it 
has been confounded by Giinther and Dumeril, in the lack of a median 
tooth in the upper jaw, and in the longer tail, which forms rather more 
than a third of the total length. 

Heptmnchias maculatus is rather common on the coast of California from 
Monterey northward. In Humboldt Bay it is especially abundant, and 
the pursuit of it for the oil in its liver is an industry of some importance. 

The teeth in this species undergo some changes with age, and at least 
are subject to some individual variations, as will be seen from the fol- 
lowing descriptions, which may be compared with Professor Gill's ac- 
count of the jaws of NoiorJtynch us maculatus (Proc. Ac. Kat. Sci. Phila. 
1862, 495) from jSTisqually, Washington Territory. 

Description of Heptrancliias maculatus^ juv.,from Soquel. 

Head rather depressed, broad, rounded. The nostrils almost at the tip 
of the snout. Length of the snout much less than the interorbital 
width. Spiracle rather large, nearer the gill-openings than the eye. A 
long furrow at the angle of the mouth, above which the upper lip ex- 
tends backward in a broad fold. 

In the iipper jaic no median tooth; two small teeth near together, 
well in front, simple and pointed; two a little larger, behind and outside 
of these ; then two more, similar, near together and directly within the 
first pair ; then directly behind the second pair mentioned two much 
larger ones, pointed, each with a conspicuous cusp on the outer edge 
near the base on each side, and one or more denticulations. The next 
tooth is similar, rather larger and directed more outward. Tbe remain- 
ing five or six grow still more oblique, but are otherwise similar in form 
and size, but a little more serrated. 

The median tooth in the lower jaw is broad, with two (or three) strong 
dentations on each side, directed outward, and a very small median cusp 
Proc. :N^at. Mus. 80 23 Bee. S fi , 1 8 €>» 



354 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

at tip. The other teeth are very similar to each other, six iu number on 
each side and shghtly increasing in size from the middle. They are 
much broader than high, and armed with about four sharp points turned 
outward, besides one or two smaller ones. The first point is longest, 
and has a small cusp on its side, so that strictly one might Call the 
second cusp longest. 

Gill-openings 7, high ; pectorals moderate, truncate and slightly con- 
cave behind; ventrals moderate, rather backward; anal small, the single 
small dorsal just in front of it, covering most of the interspace between 
it and the ventrals. 

Tail very long, forming a little more than one-third the length (2f ). 
A notch near its tip below; the lower lobe a little developed. Upper 
edge of tail with about three series of scales, much enlarged, so that its 
entire edge is finely serrated. 

Described from two siiecimens from Soquel, each 18 inches long, one 
male, the other female. 

Description of the jaws of HeptrancMas maculatus, adult, from Humboldt 

Bay. 

No median tooth iu upper jaw. Upper jaw with two transverse 
series of teeth on each side of symphysis, the outer series usually with 
two, the inner with four or five teeth, some of which are placed 
externally to the main row. They are lanceolate from a quadrate 
base, the i)oints directed backwards and curved slightly outwards, 
without cusps or serrations. First tooth of main series similar to sym- 
physeal teeth, but larger and broader, with a larger or smaller cusp at 
-base on outer side and with or without minute serrations on base of 
inner side ; from this towards corner of mouth there is much variation 
in the development of cusps and serratures, the teeth, however, con- 
stantly approximating in shape those of the lower jaw, always differing 
in being smaller, with external margins more inclined, and with the 
central cusp larger in comparison to others and more distant from 
them. Sometimes on each side are four or five teeth, bicuspidate and 
without serrations on inner edge ; in other jaws the second or third 
tooth from symphysis has three or more cusps on the outer margin, and 
with serrulations or a single cusp at base on inner side. The last large 
tooth on each side usually broad and low, with the two margins sub- 
equal, without prominent median cusp ; the inner margin minutely 
serrate; the outer with seven or eight cusps. 

In lower jaw the teeth are much larger than in upper, and are uniform 
in shape and style of armature; they are wide from a quadrate base, the 
outer margins comparatively little inclined and with the cusps regularly 
and rapidly graduated, usually seven iu number; the inner margins 
short, gibbous and much curved, always distinctly serrate ; median tooth 
^upright, without median cusp, and with three or four cusps on each m argin. 

Each jaw has laterally about 12 transverse series of small linear teeth, 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 355 

sciii cely elevated above surface of jaw, resembling the lateral teeth of 
Heterodontus, but much smaller and without median crest. 

Teeth ca. ±^^-J^-J=-±J^ . 

We may note here, as further additions to the list of sharks on our 
Pacific coast, the occurrence of Somniosvs mwrocephalus (Bloch) Gill 
in Puget's Sound; of Lamna cornnhica L. in Monterey Bay; and of 
a species closely related to Eulamia lamia (Risso) Gill in San Diego Bay. 
The shark recorded by us as Pleitracromylon Iwvis (Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 
1880, 52) is Bhinotriacis Jienlei Gill. This species is not a genuine Triads, 
and it api)ears to us to be congeneric with P. Jwvis, from which it difters 
in the greater development of the basal cusps of the teeth. 

Tahle of measurements. 
Species, Hexanchus corinus J. & G. ; sex, $ . Locality, Neah Bay, Washington Territory. 





Inches 

and 
lOOths. 


lOOtha 

of 
length. 


Extreme length 


43 




Body: 

(Greatest height 


8 


Head : 




16 


Greatest width 




12 


Width of interorbital area 




9 


Lengt h of snout 




5i 
6S 

IJ 
4 


Length of cleft of mouth 






















Dorsal : 




53 






6i 

c 






Anal : 




Greatest height 




4} 
32 


Caudal : 

Length 




Pectoral: 

Length 




12 


Ventral : 




8 









Indiana State University, 

Bloomington, October 11, 1880. 



356 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



NOTICE OF RECEPJT A»©IT3©IVS TO TESE MAKIIVE IIVVEKTEI5RATA, 
OF THE IVOBTIHEASTERIV COAST OF" AMERICA, AVDTDS I>E.«5CRDE». 
TBONS OF NEW GE:\ERA Ai\I> SPECIES AN© CRITQCAI. REMARItS 
ON OTHERS. 

PAET II— MOLLUSCA, WITH NOTES ON ANNELIDA, ECHINODESMATA, ETC, COL- 
LECTED BY THE UNITED STATES FISH COMMISSION. 

By A. E. VERRIILI.. 

The species included in the following- paper, unless otherwise stated, 
have been collected by the parties employed by the United States Fish 
Commission for several years past in exploring- the waters and investi- 
gating the marine animals of this coast. * This work has been under 
the immediate direction of the writer, who has personally taken a part 
in most of the very numerous dredging excursions.. The total number 
of stations dredged or trawled amounts to over 1,200. Among the large 
number of jjersons who have taken Oi more or less important part in these 
explorations, in connection with the invertebrate department, I may par- 
ticularly mention Prof. S. I. Smith, Prof. A. S. Packard, IMr. Sanderson 
Smith, Mr. Eichard Pathbun, Prof. H. E. Webster, Mr. Oscar Harger, 
Mr. E. B. Wilson, and Mr. S. F. Clark. 

During- the last three years Mr. Sanderson Smith has given special 
assistance in caring for the testaceous Mollusca in the dredging season, 
and has also been engaged with the writer at various other times in the 
working up of the Mollusca of Northern New England for publication. 
Owing to the great accumulation of materials, this will necessarilj' take 
much time. In the mean time the following- catalogue will afford much 
useful information as to the additions recently made to our molluscau 
fauna. 

This season, the most interesting and prolific region of our coast 
hitherto explored was discovered upon the outer bank, or slope, situated 
from 70 to 80 miles south of Martha's Vineyard, and from 90 to 115 
miles south of ISTewport, P. I. 

In Sex)tember and October three very successful trips w^ere made to 
this region. 

The first of these trips was made September 3 to 5, south of Martha's 
Vineyard, about 70 to 80 miles (stations 865 to 872), where the depth 
was from 65 to 192 fathoms. The bottom was mostly fine compact sand, 
with some mud, and with a large percentage of Foraminifera. The 

•In tliis article 115 species of Mollusca 'are recorded as recent additions to tlie fauna 
of New England. Of these, 48 si^ecies are apparently undescribed (including 23 spe- 
cies just published in theAmerican Journal of Science, for November). The number of 
species included in this article that are not contained in the last edition of Gould's 
Invertebrata of Massachusetts is 125. Many other species, not here included, have 
previously been added by me to those contained in Gould's work. Many of these are 
enumerated in the author's Preliminary Check List of the Marine Invertebrata of 
Northern New England, 1879. Many will be found in various articles in the American 
Journal of Science; others are contained in the Eeport on Invertebrates of Vineyard 
Sound, in Part I of the Reports of the United States Fish Commission, 1873. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 357 

second trip was made September 12 to 14, nearly south from Newport, 
00 to 105 miles, where the depth was from 85 to 325 fathoms (stations 
873 to 881). The third trip, October 1 to 3, was to the same region, but 
somewhat farther west and south, and in deeper water (stations 891 to 
895). At all these stations, except 867, a large beam-trawl was used ; 
at 807 a heavy "rake-dredge", of a new form, was used with good 
success. 

All these stations are situated in the region designated on the charts 
as " Block Island soundings", and nearly all proved to be exceedingly 
rich in animal life, the vast abundance of individuals of many of the 
species taken being almost as surprising as the great number and 
variety of tlie species themselves. 

In this region the slope is exceedingly gradual till the depth of 75 to 
100 fathoms is reached, at about 90 miles from the coast; the slope then 
becomes much more rapid, but yet not steep, and the bottom is of very 
fine compact sand, mingled with more or less mud, fragments of shells, 
and sometimes with small stones,* and generally has a smooth and 
rather hard surface, well adapted to support a very great variety of 
animals of nearly all classes. In some places the material is softer mud 
and sand ; in others it is covered with broken shells and great numbers 
of sponges, hydroids, and worm-tubes. 

Many species owe their existence, on these bottoms, to the suitable 
places of attachment furnished by the large tubes of annelids, which 
formed a marked feature in many of the localities. 

In sev-eral localities with muddy bottoms (809,879,880,894), we trawled 
large quantities (several thousands in all) of very singular, large, round, 
unattached worm-tubes, occupied by a large, undescribed species of 
HyaUnceciaA These tubes are firm and translucent, composed of a 
tough substance resembling the quills of birds. They are open at both 
ends, but often have internal septa near the larger end ; they are often 
more than a foot long, and about a third of an inch in diameter at the 

* These stones, wliicli were commou in nearly every haul of the third trip, are of all 
sizes, from small pebbles np to bowlders G inches or more in diameter. They are of 
various kinds of rocks, like those found in the drift formation along the opposite 
shores of the mainland and on the shores of Block Island and the eastern end of Long 
Island. Their presence, so far from laud and beneath the edge of the Gulf Stream, can 
easily be explained by supposing that they have been carried out to sea by the shore 
ice that forms along these coasts in winter in vast quantities and of considerable 
thickness. This ice, when it breaks up in spring, is carried out to sea, with its 
inclosed stones and gravel, by the tides and currents, till it comes in contact with the 
warmer waters of the Gulf Stream, where its loads of stones drop to the bottom. We 
have often met Avith large, loose, and fresh bowlders, sometimes of large size, in 
various localities, far from laud, on muddy bottoms, off the coasts of Maine and Nova, 
Scotia, where they have doubtless been recently dropped from shore ice. 

t HiiaUnocda artifcx Verrill, sp. nov. Closely related to H. tubicola of Europe, but 
much larger, with the buccal segment as long as the three or four following segments ; 
anterior autenuje small, short, rounded, ovate; three median ones subequal, very 
long, reaching the 15th segment ; eyes rudimentary; brauchi:e slender, commencing 
at about the ^Sth to 30th segment; bideutate seta; with the hook terminal and less 
curved. Surface opalescent. 



358 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

larger end, but taper gradually toward the smaller one, and are nearly 
straight. They may possibly at times stand erect in the mud, but this 
is doubtful ; in most cases they probably lie free on its surface, and the 
large and powerful annelid inhabiting them i3robably has the power of 
dragging them abont ; otherwise it would be impossible to account for 
the numerous hydroids, actinians, sponges, &c., w hich often cover them. 

On the harder bottoms, in the shallower localities, especially at sta- 
tions 8G5 to 867, we obtained great quantities of a very different, unat- 
tached worm-tube, composed of bivalve shells, entire and broken, 
arranged so as to form a strong, flattened covering around a thin silken, 
central tube. These are made by a jjale, opalesceut species of Nothrki 
(near X. conchylega)^ allied to Hyalincecia. In the localities last named 
w^e also took large quantities of another very diflerent kind of worm- 
tube, made by another Annelid of the same family, a large species of 
Eunice or Leodice.* This tube is sometimes half an inch in diameter, 
more or less attached, irregularly bent, often l)ranched, or with side- 
openings at the angles. It is composed of a parchment-like material, 
and is usually covered with hydroids, sponges, actinians, ascidians, &c. 

The sand and nuul usually contain a large i^erccntage of calcareous 
Foraminifera, many of which are remarkably large and handsome spe- 
cies, often more than 5"" or C"" in diameter. In some of the localities (as 
at stations 869, 804, and 895) there were, in the mud, very large quantities 
of large sand-covered llhizopods {Astrorhiza, Ehahdammina, &c.), which 
assume a variety of irregularly branched and often rudely stellate forms, 
but many of them are rod-like, and nearly an inch in length. 

Fishes, Crustacea, Annelids, Anthozoa, and Echinoderms, as well as 
Mollusca, abounded in new and strange forms. Of many of these spe- 
cies, previously unknown in our waters, thousands of specimens were 
obtained. At several of the stations, especially at 880, 881, 893, and 
894, large numbers of the handsome Mopsea-like coral, Acanella Nor- 
mani Y., were taken ; to these many fine specimens of the rare Pecten 
vitreus were attached, and also several species of Actinians and Annelids. 
In many of the localities vast numbers of hermit-crabs (Faguridw), of 
several species, occurred, inhabiting cases consisting of groups of the 
compound, sand-coated Actinians, mostly Epizoanthns Americamis V. 
The bases of these originally covered dead shells of Gastropods or 
Pteropods, occupied by the crabs, but by some chemical process they 
have, in most cases, wholly removed the substance of the shell, so that 
the polyp constitutes the entire residence of the crab. Large numbers 
of huge Actinians, such as Boloccra Tuedia', Urticina nodosa, &c., oc- 

* Leodice polybranchia Verrill, sp. nov. A stoiit species, resembling L. vivida (St.)::= 
L. Norv(gica (L.), but the brancliire commeuca on tlie seventh or eighth segment, and 
continue to near the end of tbe body, on at least 120 segments; they have four to six 
branches ; eyes large, round ; three median autenntB, long, the middle one longest ; 
tentacles long, reaching beyond the edge of the buccal segment, which is as long as 
(he three following ones ; ventral cirri at tirst conical, those beyond the fourth, short, 
with large swollen bases. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 359 

curred in most of the deeper dredgings. Large quantities of a large, 
handsome, but very fragile, cup-coral [Flahellmn Goodei V.) occurred in 
the deeper localities, especially at stations 880, 894, 895, but most of the 
specimens were ruined by being crushed by the great weight of the 
contents of the trawl. The animal of this coral is bright orange, with 
a i)urple center. 

While many of the species of every class obtained here are arctic, or 
belong to the cold Avaters found at similar or greater depths on the coasts 
of Europe and in the Mediterranean, a few geuera, like Avicula, Solarium, 
and Mar(jineUa^ are related to southern or West Indian forms, A ruim- 
ber of the most abundant sjiecies of Crustacea and Echinoderms* had 
already been described from the collections made by Pourtales, off 
Florida. 

Many free-swimming species, belonging to the Pteropoda and Hete- 
ropoda, of which we dredged the dead but perfectly fresh shells, were 
not previously known to occur so far north. They were associated with 
others of the same groups which had previously been taken living at the 
surface along our shores, but they all belong properly to the Gulf Stream 
fauna. 

The frequent occurrence of nearly fresh shells of Argonauta Argo was 
also a matter of surprise to us, and indicates that this species must 
often be very common near our coast. 

The very large collections of specimens obtained on these three trijis 
have, as yet, been only i^artially examined, but enough has already been 
done to prove ihis region to be altogether the richest and most remark- 
able dredging ground ever discovered on our coast. The large number 
of new forms, combined with others previously known only from remote 
regions, constitute a very distinct fauna, hitherto almost wholly un- 
known. 

A considerable number of undetermined, and perhaps undescribed, 
shells from these localities are not included in this article. 

* A brief account of the Echinoderms obtained by us, with descriptions of several of 
the new species discovered, has been published by me in the American Journal of 
Science for November, 1880. 

It is only necessary to say here that several of the star-lishes, Ophinrans, and Crin- 
oids occurred in such large numbers as to constitute one of the most conspicuous 
features of the fauna. The most abundant species ^ere Arch aster Americanus V., A. 
Agasfiizil V., A. Flora; V., Luidia elegana Perridr, OpMocnida oUvacea Lym., Ophioscolex 
glaeiaVis M. & Tr., Ophioghipha Sarsii Lym., Aniedon Sarsii (D, & Koren). 

All these species, except the last two, are orange-colored, varying to orange-red. 
The same is true of AeaneJla Normani, of most of the Actinians, and of the majority of 
the crabs and shrimps, as well as of some of the fishes. It seems probable that the 
prevalence of orange and red colors among the deep-water animals is due to the fact 
that the luminous rays of those colors are completely absorbed by the thick, overlying 
stratum of sea-water, and consequently these animals, not being capable of reflecting 
such bluish and greenish rays as do reach them, would be nearly invisible at those 
depths beyond which white light penetrates. If this be true, such colors, being pro- 
tective, may be due to the operation of natural selection, according to the principle 
so often exemplified in shallow-water animals having colors like their surroundings. 



360 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Dredging stations on the outer bank in 1830. 



Numbor. 


Locality. 


Depth. 


Nature of bottom. 


Latitude. 


Longitude. Fathoms. 


865 

866 

867 

868 

869 


/ // 
40 05 GO N. 
40 05 18 N. 
40 05 42 N. 
40 01 42 N. 
40 02 18 N. 
40 02 36 N. 
40 02 54 N. 
40 05 39 N. 
40 02 00 N. 
40 00 00 N. 
39 57 00 N. 
39 57 00 N. 
39 56 00 N. 
39 55 00 N. 
39 49 30 N. 
39 48 30 ISr. 
39 46 30 N. 
X) 46 00 N. 
39 46 00 N. 


o / // 

70 23 00 TT; 
70 22 18 W. 
70 22 06 W. 
70 22 30 W. 
70 23 06 W. 
70 22 58 "W. 
70 23 40 W. 
70 23 52 W. 
70 57 00 W. 
70 57 00 W. 
70 57 30 W. 
70 56 00 W. 
70 54 18 W. 
70 54 15 "W". 
70 54 00 W. 
70 54 00 W. 

70 54 00 W. 

71 10 00 W. 
71 05 00 W. 
70 58 00 W. 
70 58 30 W. 
70 59 45 W. 


65 
65 

64 
162 
192 
155- 
115 

86 
100 

85 
126 
120 
126 
142* 
225 
252 
325 
i500 
487 
372 
305 
238 


Pine compact sand, with some mud. 
Do. 
Do. 
Do. 


870 

871 


Fine sand, with some mud. 
Do 


872 


Shells and sponges. 
Pino sand and mud. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do. 

Do 


873 

874 

875 

876 

877 

878 


879 


Do. 


880 




881 


Mud. Trawl partiallj' fouled. 


891 


892 




893 

894 

895 


39 52 20 N. 
39 53 00 N. 
39 56 30 N. 


Do. 
Do. 
Do. 



The temperature determinatious, owing to the violent motions of the 
steamer, are unreliable at stations 805 to 872. At stations 873 to 878 the 
bottom temperature was usually 51° to 53^ F.; at 879 to 881 it was 42° 
to 430 r.; at 893 and 894, it was 40°. 

CEPHALOPODA. 

The great abundance of Cephaloi)ods in the deep-water localities ex- 
plored by us is a very interesting and important discovery. Eight 
species were taken this season. Some of these occurred in large num- 
bers. ,This collection adds three genera to the New England fauna, two 
of them new and very curious. 

Heteroteuthis tenera Verrill. 

Amer. Joum. Science, xx, p. 392, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 2.5). 
A small and delicate species, very soft and translucent when living. 
Body shortish, cylindrical, scarcely twice as long as broad, posteriorly 
usually round, but in strongly contracted, preserved specimens often 
narrowed and even obtusely pointed ; front edge of mantle with a dorsal 
angle extending somewhat forward over the neck. Fins very large, thin, 
longer than broad 5 the outer edge broadly rounded ; the anterior edge 
extending forward quite as far as the edge of the mantle and consider- 
ably beyond the insertion of the fin, which is itself placed well forward. 
The length of the fin is about two-thirds that of the body; the base or 
insertion of the fin is equal to about one-half the body length ; the 
breadth of the fin is greater than one-half the breadth of the body. Head 
large, rounded, with large and i^rominent eyes ; lower eye-lid slightly 
thickened. Arms rather small, unequal, the dorsal ones considerably 
shorter and smaller than the others. In the male the left dorsal arm is 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 361 

greatly modified and veiy different from its mate. Lateral and ventral 
arms subequal. In both sexes, and even in the young, the suckers along 
the middle of the four lateral and two ventral arms are distinctly larger 
than the rest, but in the larger males this disparity becomes very re- 
markable, the middle suckers becoming greatly enlarged and swollen, 
so that eight to ten of the largest are often six or eight times as broad 
as the proximal and distal ones ; they are deep, laterally attached, with 
a raised band around the middle and a very small, round aperture, fur. 
iiislied with a smooth rim. In the female the corresponding suckers are 
about twice as broad as the rest on the lateral arms. The suckers are 
in two regular rows on the lateral and ventral arms, in both sexes. In 
the male the left dorsal arm becomes thickened and larger from front to 
back, and usually is curled backward; its suckers become smaller and 
much more numerous than on the right arm. being arranged in four 
crowded rows, except near the base, where there are but two ; the sucker- 
stalks also become stout and cylindrical or tajjered, their diameter equal- 
ing tbat of the suckers. The right arm remains normal, with two alter- 
nating rows of suckers, regularly decreasing to the tip, as in both the 
dorsal arms of the female. Tentacular arms long, slender, extensible ; 
club distinctly enlarged, usually curled in preserved examples. The 
suckers on the club are numerous, unequal, arranged in about eight close 
rows ; those forming the two or three rows next the upper margin are 
much larger than the rest, being three or four times as broad, and have 
denticulated rims. Color, in life, pale and translucent, with scattered 
chromatophores. In the alcoholic specimens the general color of body, 
head, and arms is reddish, thickly spotted with rather large chromato- 
phores, which also exist on the inner surface of the arms, between the 
suckers, and to some extent on the tentacular arms and bases of the 
fins; outer part of fins translucent white; anterior edge of mantle with 
a white border. Length of body 25""" to 40""". Pen small and very thin, 
soft and delicate. It is angularly pointed or pen-sliaped anteriorly, the 
sliaft narrowing backward ; a thin, lanceolate expansion or web extends 
along nearly the posterior half. Upper jaw with a strongly incurved, 
sharp beak, without a notch at its base. Lower jaw with the tip of the 
beak strongly incurved, and with a broad but prominent rounded lobe 
on the middle of its cutting edges. 

Odontophore with simple, acute -triangular, median teeth ; inner lat- 
erals simi)Ie, nearly of the same size and shape as the median, except at 
base ; outer laterals much longer, strongly curved forward. 

Over 150 specimens of this interesting si)ecies were secured by the 
writer and others of the dredging party on the United States Fish Com- 
mission steamer "Fish Hawk", September 4, 1880. It was particularly 
abiuulant at stations 870 and 871, in about 125 to 150 fathoms, on the 
rapidly sloping outer bank of the coast, under the inner edge of the 
Gulf Stream. Both sexes occurred in about equal numbers, and also 
the young, of various sizes. It was also taken in considerable numbers 



362 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

at stations 865 to 867, iu 65 fathoms ; 872 to 880, in 86 to 252 fathoms. 
It was also obtained hy Mr. A. Agassiz, at similar depths, in the same 
region, as well as farther south, earlier in the season, while dredging on 
the Coast Survey steamer "Blake". 

This si)ecies was associated, at station 869, in 192 fathoms, mud, with 
Octopus Bairdii and Rossia SKhlcvis. It can easily be distinguished from 
the latter and other species of Rossia, not only by the largo suckers of 
the lateral arms, but still better by the inequality of the suckers on the 
tentacular club. The latter character is obvious in specimens of both 
sexes and of all ag'es. 

Gonatus amoenus (Moller) Gray. 

G. O. Sars, ^Nlollnsca Regionis Arcticaj Norvegite, p. 336, pi. 31 ; pi. xvii, fig. 2 
(figures excellent). 

A good specimen of this species, in nearly perfect i>reservation, was 
recently presented to the United States Fish Commission by Capt. Will- 
iam Demsey and crew, of the schooner " Clara F. Friend". It was taken 
from the stomach of a cod, off Seal Island, Nova Scotia. 

Calliteuthis Veriill. 

Auior. Journ. Sci., xx, p. :;9)5, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 25). 

Form much as iu EistioteutMs, but without any web between the arms. 
Body short, tapering to a small free tip ; fins small, united behind the 
tip of the body. Siphon united to the head by two dorsal bands ; an 
internal valve. Mantle connected to the sides of the siphon by lateral 
elongated cartilages and corresponding grooves on the sides of the siphon. 
Arras long, free; suckers in two rows, largest on the middle of the 
lateral and dorsal arms. Eyes large, with oval openings. Buccal mem- 
brane simple, sack-like. 

Calliteuthis reversa Verrill. 
Loc. eit., p. 393. 

Arras long, tapering, the lateral pairs equal; the dorsal and ventral 
about equal, somewhat shorter than laterals; tentacular arms slender, 
compressed (the ends absent). Fins small, thin, transversely rhoraboidal, 
white. Color reddish brown. The ventral surface of the body, head, 
and arras is more ornamented than the dorsal surface, being covered with 
large, rounded verruc*, their center or anterior half pale, the border or 
posterior half dark purplish brown ; upper surface of body with much 
fewer and smaller scattered verrucse ; a circle of the same around the 
eyes ; inner sitrfaces of arras and buccal meuibranes chocolate-brown. 
Total length, 133"""; to base of arms, 67'"™; raantle, ol"""; of fin, 17™"; 
breadth of fins, 24"""; of body, 20'""'; diameter of eye-ball, 16"-"^. 

Station 894, 365 fathoms. 

AUoposus Verrill. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 393 (published Oct., 1S80). 

Allied to Fliilonexis and Tremoctoims. Body thick and soft, sraooth; 

arms all (in the male only seven) united bj^ a web extending nearly to 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 363 

the ends, the length of the arms decreasing from the dorsal to the ventral 
ones ; suckers sessile, simple, in two rows ; mantle united firmly to the 
head by a broad dorsal band and by a ventral and two lateral commis- 
sures, the former placed in the median line, at the base of the siphon ; 
free end of the siphon short, well forward. In the male the right arm 
of the third pair is hectocotylized and developed in a sack in front of the 
right eye ; as found in the sack it is curled up and has two rows of 
suckers; the groove along its edge is fringed; near the end the groove 
connects with a rounded, obliquely placed, lateral, concave lobe, with 
interior plications. The terminal portion of the arm is a lanceolate 
thickened process, with ridges on the inner surface. 

The permanent attachment of the mantle and neck, by means of com- 
missures, is a very distinctive character. 

AUoposus mollis Verrill. 
Loc. cit., p. 394. 

Body stout, ovate, very soft and flabby. Head large, as broad as the 
body ; eyes large, their openings small. Arms rather stout, not very 
long, webbed nearly to the ends, the dorsal 60""" longer than the ventral 
arms ; suckers large, simple, in two alternating rows. Color deep pur- 
plish brown, with a more or less distinctly spotted appearance. Length, 
total, IGO"""; of body to base of arms, DO™-"'; of mantle, beneath, 50"""; 
of dorsal arms, 70"""; breadth of body, 70"™. Seven specimens were 
taken. The sexes scarcely differ in size. Station 880, in 225 fathoms 
(2 (^ , 1 9 ) ; 892, 487 fathoms; 893, 372 fathoms; 895, 238 fathoms. 

Argonauta Argo Liiiu<?. 

The capture of a living specimen, probably of this species, on the coast 
of New Jersey, has been recorded by Eev. Samuel Lockwood.* It was, 
nevertheless, very surprising to us to find its shells, or fragments of 
them, very common in nearly all our deeper dredgings, 70 to 100 miles 
off the southern coast of New England. At station 894 two entire and 
nearly fresh shells were taken, and another nearly comj^lete. They be- 
long to the common Mediterranean variety. 

GASTROPODA. 

Bela (Leach) H. & A. Adams; G. 0. Sars, &c. - 

Plettrotoma (pars) Jeffreys and mauy earlier authors. 

The species of this genus are numerous on our coast, but their identi- 
fication is difficult, owing to the very poor and insufficient descriptions 
of many European writers. t Holler's Greenland sj^ecies, especially, are 

*Amer. Naturalist, si, p. 243, 1877. 

tin Binuey's edition of Gould's Invert, of Mass. there are included seven northern 
species of Bela. Of these the figures are mostly inadequate, and some are entirely 
erroneous. Fig. 620, given for B. iurricula; Fig. 621, intended for B. harpuJaria ; and 
Fig. 624, for B. cancellata, do not really represent those species. Fig. 620 represents 
B.harpularia better than "i?. turricula", for which it was intended. 



364 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

badly described. The publication of the excellent work of G. O. Sara 
lias at length rendered it possible to identify many species, hitherto 
doubtCul, with his Norwegian forms, though there may still be doubt as 
to the iiroper application of the names given by earlier writers, and 
even as to the actual specific distinctness of all the forms that he has 
described. The sexual variations he has not taken into account. Dur- 
ing numerous dredging expeditions made in the past twenty years, the 
writer has obtained a large series of specimens of Bela, which he has 
reserved for a more comjilete revisiofi hereafter ; but some of the more 
conspicuous forms not yet recorded from New England, and in part not 
known as America?! species, are here mentioned. Figures of all these 
and others have been engraved for a more detailed paper and will, it is 
Loped, soon be published. 

Bela Pingelii (Mt311er, 1842) H. & A. Adams, i, p. 92, 1858. 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Eeg. Arct, Norv., p. 2,3, pi. 16, fig. 5, 1878. 

This very distinct species has been repeatedly dredged by me at East- 
port, Me., and by the United States Fish Commission parties in Casco 
Bay, Massachusetts Bay, on George's Bank, and oft' Nova Scotia. It 
has not unfrequently been confounded bj" authors with B. cancellata. It 
is our most slender and elongated s])ecies, with evenly rounded whorls, 
strongly cancellated, over the whole surface, by numerous slender, longi- 
tudinal ribs and revolving raised lines or cinguli, which are about 
equally prominent, and form small, round nodules where they cross the 
ribs. 

Bela Sarsii Verrill, sp. uov. 

Bela cancellata G. O. Sars, op. cit., i>. 224, i)l. 23, fig. 31 ; pi. viii, fig. 9 (uot 
of Coutliouy). 

This name is proposed for the species described and figured by G. O. 
Sars as B. cancellata. The same species was formerly collected by Dr. 

A. S. Packard at Labrador, and sent to us by him under the name of 

B. exarata. It is a small, strongly sculptured species, with obtuse, 
angular-shouldered whorls, and is especially distinguished by its few 
broad and strong ribs, crossed by rather distant revolving lines, giving 
it a coarsely cancellated surface. 

Bela cancellata (MiglieLs) Stiinpson, Check List. 

Fusing eanceUatns Migbels, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., i, p. .50, 1841 ; Boston 

Jouru. Nat. Hist., iv, p. 52, pi. 4, fig. 18, Jan., 1842. 
Bela cancellata Gould, Invert. Mass., ed. ii, j). 355, description (not the figure, 
624). 

The true Bela cancellata (Mighels) is a common shell on the New En- 
gland coast, in 20 to GO fathoms. It is an elongated species, with long, 
acute spire, and with the whorls moderatelj^ and obtusely shouldered at 
some distance below the suture, tlie flattened j^ortion above the shoulder 
being destitute of revolving lines, but crossed by the numerous oblique 
ribs, which are strongly bent at the shoulder and take a sigmoid form. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 365 

Below the shoulder the ciDguli are numerous and prominent, crossing 
the prominent narrow ribs so as to produce a distinct, but not coarse, 
cancellation. It most resembles the tigures of B. cJcgans and B. angu- 
losa of Sars. It is perhaps the original B. decUvis (Loven), but does not 
agree with Sars's figure. 

Bela tenuicostata M. Sars. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 237, pi. 17, figs. la,h; pi. ix, fig. 6 (dentition). 
Specimens apparently identical with this species were dredged by me, 
in moderate depths, at Eastport, Me., in 1864, 1868, and 1870. It was 
also taken this season at stations 893 and 891, in 365 to 372 fathoms. It 
is closely related to B. dcciiysata Couth., but has smaller and more numer- 
ous ribs, and is, therefore, more finely cancellated. It may be only a 
variety of B. decussata. The latter is easily distinguished from all our 
other species by its oval form, rounded, scarcely shouldered vvhorls, 
crossed by very numerous small, narrow, flexuous, sigmoid ribs, which 
are strongly bent backward near the suture, in conformity with the very 
distinct, rounded sinus of the lip. The whole surface, except close to 
the deep suture, is covered witli numerous rather fine, close, raised, 
revolving cinguli, giving the surface a rather finely and regularly can- 
cellated structure. 

Bela Trevelyana (Turton) H. & A. Adams. 

This has been recorded by Jeffreys from the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. 
He formerly united B. decussata with it, but has subsequently (in Mol- 
lusca of Valorous Expedition) distinguished them. I have myself seen 
no American shells agreeing clearly with English si)ecimens of B. 
Trevelyana. The latter resembles B. decussata in form and size, but has 
the ribs nearly straight and the cancellation coarser than in our shell. 

Bela impressa? (Beck) Morch, Catal. Moll. Spitzberg, p. 17, 1889. 

rieurotoma impressa Leche, Kongl. Svenska Vet.-Akad. Handl., Bd. 10, \>. 54, 
pi. 1, tig. 16, 1878 (author's sei^arate copy). 

I refer doubtfully to this species a small but very distinct shell 
frequently dredged by us, in 10 to 70 fathoms, all along the coast, from 
off Cape Cod to iSTova Scotia. It was also dredged this season at sta- 
tions 812 to 815, in 27 fathoms, off Block Island. 

The shell is greenish white, short-oval, with about five whorls, which 
are distinctly flattened and angularly shouldered near the deep suture. 
There are on the last whorl about twenty rather broad, flat ribs, which 
are a little prominent and usually slightly nodose at the shoulder, but 
they disappear a short distance below. The most characteristic feature 
is that the surface is marked by rather fine, but regular and distinct, 
revolving grooves or sulci, which are rather distant, with flat intervals. 
Of these there are usually' about three or four on the penultimate Avhorl, 
and about twenty on the last, the greater number being below the mid- 
dle, on the siphon, where they become closer; one of the sulci, just below 



366 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

the shoulder, is more distinct, and crosses the ribs so as to give their 
iijiper ends a siibnodnloiis appearance ; below this there is usually a 
rather wide, smooth zone; no revolving lines above the shoulder. Aper- 
ture about half the length of the shell, rather wide, angular ; canal 
short. There is a very distinct, moderately deep, jiosterior sinus; the 
middle of the outer lip projects forward strongly. Ordinary specimens 
are about G.u'"'" long; 3.5™"' broad; aperture, .3™™ long. 

Our shell is not so stout as that represented in the figure of Leche, 
but it agrees very well in other respects. 

Bela exarata (Moller) H. & A. Ad., Geneva, i, p. 92, 1858. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 232, pi. 16, fig. 18; pi. ix, ligs. 1 a, h (deutition, &c.). — 
Ycrrill, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, pi. 43, fig. 15. 

A reguhirly cancellated species of Bela, agreeing with Greenland 
specimens sent under this name from the University Museum of Copen- 
hagen, is not uncommon, ranging from off Massachusetts Bay to the 
Bay of Fuudy and Xova Scotia. It does not agree perfectly, however, 
with G. O. Sars's figure of the shell, but its dentition agrees well with 
his figure and seems to be characteristic. The color of the shell is 
usuiilly pale greenish or greenish white ; texture thin ; size medium ; 
whorls turreted, flattened, angularly shouldered close to the suture, with 
the angle of the shoulder rather sharply nodose. Eibs numerous, regu- 
lar, nearlj^ straight, narrow but rounded, separated by concave inter- 
vals of equal or greater width. Whole surface covered with regular 
and rather strong, elevated, revolving cinguli, which cross the ribs and 
I)roduce on them small, rounded nodes, and give a very regularly and 
strongly cancellated appearance to the whole surface. On the penulti- 
mate whorl there are about four cinguli below the angle. The flattened 
space above the shoulder is crossed by the ribs and covered with 
numerous fine re vol \ing lines. Length, 10'"™; breadth, 4.5™'"; length of 
aperture, 5.5""". A more elongated form, similar to the above, but with 
the angle of the whorls still more sharply nodose, also frequently occurs. 
This I have supjiosed to be the male of the same species, but it agrees 
closely with Sars's figure of Bela mitrula (Loven). The dentition of 
B. exarata closely resembles that of the latter, as figured by Sars, The 
teeth are unusually long and large for the size of the shell, rather slen- 
der, somewhat curved, acute, with one side excavated to near the tip ; 
basal part short, a little thickened, notched deeply on one side, obtuse. 

Living specimens were also dredged this year at stations 880, 892, and 
894, in 252 to 487 fathoms. 

Bela rugulata (Moller) H. & A. Ad., Genera, i, p. 92, 1858. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 230, pi. 23, fig. 6; pi. viii, figs. 13 a-c (dentition). 

This is one of the several species that have commonly been confounded 
under the name of " Bela tnrricula ". 

Our shell agrees well with the figures and descri])tion given by G. O. 
Sars, both as to its external characters and dentition. The sculpture 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 367 

IS rather coarse, the ribs being strong, witli wider and concave intervals; 
the whorls are strongly angularly shouldered, each of the ribs ending in 
a distinct nodule, formed by the first spiral groove below the shoulder, 
which is stronger than the rest ; the flattened subsutural area is nearly 
or quite destitute of spiral lines, but is crossed by slight flexuous exten- 
sions of the ribs ; the whole surface below the shoulder is covered with 
strong spiral lines, between the ribs. On the upper whorls a few of the 
revolving lines are stronger than the rest, forming with the ribs a 
coarsely cancellated structure. 

The dentition is very characteristic, and entirely different from B. 
exarata, B. liarpuJaria, and other allied forms. The uncini are broad, 
flat, lanceolate, with a sharp, slightly barbed tip, and with a broad 
bilobed base. 

This species has frequently been dredged by us in Massachusetts Bay, 
Bay of Fundy, &c., in 5 to oO fathoms. 

Bela simplex (Middeud.). 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 239, pi. 17, fig. 4 ; pi. 23, fig. 11 ; pi. ix, 

fig. 9 (dentition). 
Bela Icevigata Dall (teste G. O. Sars). 

One dead, but fresh, small specimen, from station 894. The whorls 
are very convex and evenly rounded, nearly smooth, but covered with 
fine and close si^iral lines, crossed by still finer lines of growth ; sub- 
sutural zone smooth. The apex of the spire is acute. The three apical 
wliorls are chestnut-brown ; their surface is finely decussated by equal 
lines running in opposite directions. 

Bela hebes Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell short-fusiform or subovate, with a short, blmit spire and five 
well-rounded, slightly turroted whorls: suture impressed. Sculjiture 
numerous small, regular, raised, spiral ridges, with wider interspaces, 
those just below the suture stronger and more distant; lines of growth 
faint. Aperture narrow-ovate. Outer lip expanded below the suture, 
then regularly rounded, thin ; the posterior sinus is broad and shallow ; 
canal short and broad, straight; columella regularly Incurved. Epi- 
dermis thin, greenish white. Length, 8'"'"; breadth, 5™"; length of aper- 
ture, 5'"'"; its breadth, 1.80"""; length of body- whorl, front side, 6.35'"'". 

Stations 891 and 89l^ in 500 and 487 fathoms ; four specimens. 

Pleurotonia (Pleurotomella) Agassizii Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 394, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 2.')). 

This large and elegantly sculptured species occurred sparingly, living, 
in many of the off-shore localities (869, 871, 874, 877, 880), in 65 to 25a 
fathoms, but it was taken in larger numbers at stations 801 to 895, in 
238 to 500 fathoms. The two nuclear whorls are very small, chestnut- 
brown, scarcely carinated, rounded, Avith the surface finely cancellated 
by lines running obliquely, in two directions, but close to the suture 
only the transverse lines appear. 



368 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Pleurotoma (Pleurotomella) Pandionis Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell large, thick, dull brownish yellow, with a very acute, elevated 
spire; whorls nine, very oblique, moderatelj^ convex, concave below 
the suture ; whole surface covered with close lines of growth, which 
recede in a broad curve on the subsutural band ; numerous fine, unequal, 
raised, spiral lines cover the whole surface, except the subsutural band. 
The upper whorls are also crossed by sixteen to eighteen blunt, trans- 
verse ribs, about as broad as their interspaces, most elevated on the 
middle of the whorls, fading out above and below. Aperture elongated, 
narrow; sinus broad and well marked, just below the suture; canal 
short, nearly straight. Operculum absent. Length, 43™"; breadth, 
14,5'""'; length of aperture, lO'"""; its breadth, 5.5'""". 

A large specimen was taken alive at station 895, in 238 fathoms. 

Pleurotoma Carpeiiteri Yerrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 395 (published Oct., 1880). 

Only a few si^ecimens were taken, stations 871 to 873, in 8G to J 15 
fathoms. 

This species very likely belongs to Mancjelia^ but I have had for exam- 
ination no specimens with the animal. 

Taranis Morchii ? I'Malm) Jeffreys, Anuals and Mag., v, 1870. 
G. O. Sars, Moll. Eeg. Arct. Norv., p. '220, pi. 17, fig. 8. 

Two good examples of a prettily sculptured shell, which I refer doubt- 
fully to this species, were taken at station 894, in 305 fathoms, off I^^'ew- 
port, E. I. They do not agree fully with Sars's figure and description. 

Whorls six, the lower ones sharply angulated and (sariuated. There 
are five revolving, nodulous carinje on the body-whorl, one close to the 
suture ; the second and most prominent surrounds the iieriphery ; the 
other three are on the anterior half; some faint additional ones appear 
on the canal; the three i^receding whorls have the subsutural and the 
sharp central carina, and usually the third carina is more or less ex- 
posed at the suture. Between the first and second cariuiE the surface is 
flat or slightly concave. The whorls are crossed by numerous thin, 
delicate, flexuous, regularlj" spaced, raised ribs, which are conspicuous 
between the carin?e, and produce sharp nodules where they cross them. 
The nucleus is small, rounded, light chestnut- brown, minutely cancel- 
lated with microscopic lines running in two directions. Sinus of the lip 
shallow, rounded. Length, 4'"'"; breadth, 2'"™. 

The princii)al difference between our specimens and the form figured 
by Sars is that in the latter there are more carina, two of which sur- 
round the periphery, instead of one. 

Taranis pulchella Verrill, s}). uov. 

A smaller and more slender species than the preceding, with a more 
acute spire, and with the cariniB sharp, but not nodulous. Whorls 
seven, angular, the lower ones carinated and shouldered. Body- whorl 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 3G9 

with six revolving carinse, besides one or two on the canal ; one is just 
below the suture; the three largest surround the periphery, the median 
one most prominent. Between the subsutural and second cariuce the 
surface is concave and crossed by numerous elevated, thin, curved rib- 
lets, corresponding to the labial sinus ; similar but less prominent and 
less curved riblets cross the interspaces between the other carina, but 
do not cross the carina3 themselves. Penultimate whorl with the sub- 
sutural and two peripheral carinse. Preceding whorls without distinct 
caiinae, except the subsutural one, but with the curved, transverse, raised 
riblets well developed. Nuclear whorls very small (surface eroded). 
Aperture narrow, angular ; canal short, slightly turned to the left ; outer 
lip, with a distinct, evenly rounded sinus below the subsutural carina. 
Columella slightly incurved and llattened. Length, 2.20'"'"; breadth, 
QQmm. length of bocly-whorl, 1.40'"'"; of aperture, .95™'". 
Station 892, in 487 fathoms ; one specimen. 

Marginella roscida (?) Ravciiol. 

A single dead specimen, closely resembling this species, was taken at 
station 865, in 65 fathoms. 

Tritonofusus latericeus (Moll.) Mrncli. 

Sijiho latericeus G. O. Sars, Moll. Rog. Arct. Norv., p. 276, pi. 15, fig. 8; pi. x, 
fig. 24 (dentition). 

Several specimens, apparently of this species, were taken at stations 
804 and 895, in 238 to 305 f\ithoms, off Kewport. It had previously been 
dredged in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence by Dr. J. W. Dawson. 

Our shell is long-fusiform, with an elevated, acute spire; whorls 
eight, moderately convex, crossed by strong, prominent, rounded ribs 
(about eighteen on the last whorl), separated by concave interstices^ 
wider than the ribs ; whole surface covered with line and regfilar spiral 
grooves, defining raised spiral lines of about double their width ; these 
lines cross the ribs as well as their interspaces. Nuclear whorl small, 
a little eccentric and incurved. Aperture long-ovate, narrow. Canal 
somewhat elongated, nearly straight, narrow; the outer lip is con- 
tracted or incurved at its base. Length, 20'"'"; breadth, 8'"'"; length of 
aperture, lO"""'; its breadth, 3'""\ 

Neiotunea (Siplio) c^slata Yerrill, sp. uov. 

Shell resembling the last, small, subfusiform, with an elevated spire, 
which is less acute than in the preceding, while the aperture is shorter 
and the canal is shorter and more recurved than in that species. AVhorls 
six, moderately convex, with impressed sutures, the upper whorls de- 
creasing more rapidly. Nuclear whorls very small, regular, smooth, not 
distinctly incurved. Sculpture broad, rather prominent, rounded ribs, 
with wider concave interspaces, and over the whole surface numerous 
small, narrow, unequal, raised spiral lines, separated by wider grooves. 
The whole surface is also covered with very fine and regular raised lines 
of growth, which cross and roughen the spiral raised lines, and are more 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 24 S5e€. Si, 1H80. 



370 PROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM, 

couspicuous ill the grooves, produciug a fine decussated structure. On 
the last whorl are fourteen to sixteen of the transverse ribs or folds ; 
these become obsolete just below the periphery, so that on the base 
there are only spiral lines and lines of growth. Aperture narrow-ovate. 
Outer lip evenly rounded in the middle, but contracted at the base of 
the canal, which is short, rather narrow, and distinctly recurved. Col- 
umella decidedly curved. Epidermis thin, yellowish white, closely ad- 
herent, with distinct lines of growth. Length, 14.5"""; breadth, 7"'"; 
length of aperture, with canal, 7™'"; its breadth, 3'"'"; length of body- 
whorl, front side, 10"™. Stations 891 to 895, 238 to 500 fathoms, with 
the preceding -, several specimens, living. 

Neptunea (Sipho) arata Yoriill, sp. iiov. 

Stations 869 to 880, 893 to 895 ; common. Nearly all our deep-water 
specimens related to X. ^S(im2)soni Morch {= Fusus IslancUcus Gould) 
differ widely from the common shallow-water form, in having the whole 
surfiice much more strongly sulcated by broader, deeper, and less 
numerous spiral grooves. On the upper whorls there are seven or eight 
of these broad grooves, separating fattened spiral ridges of about the 
same width ; on the last whorls the ridges become broader, and each of 
them is divided at summit by a smaller secondary groove. The canal is 
rather long, slightly recurved. Columella twisted, but not much bent. 
Eijidermis not j)ilose, yellowish brown, often in raised lines along the 
lines of growth. Color within aperture bluish white, the columella and 
canal tinged with tiesh-color or ])ale salmon. Length, 80"""; breadth, 
3Q.iim. lej^ofi^ of aperture, with canal, 45"'"'; its breadth, 14""'. 

The tyi)ical, nearly smooth variety of JV^. Stimpsoni Morch is perhaps 
the same as N. glabra Verkruzen, sp. (= Sixjho glaher G. O. Sars). 

Neptunea (Sipho) propinqua (Alder). 

Fusus propinquus Alder, Catal. Moll. North. &Duih. ; Jeffreys, British Couch., 

iv, p. 338 ; t, pi. 88, fig. 3. 
Xcptunea propinqua Verrill, Amer. Jouru. Sci., xvi, p. 210, 1878. 

This shellwas first taken by us, in 1877, off Cai^e Sable, and off Hali- 
fax, Nova Scotia, in 88 to 100 fathoms, where it was common. This 
season it occurred in abundance, living, and of good size, in most of our 
outer dredgings, being the most common species of this family, except 
X. pygmwa. It occurred at all the stations from 8G5 to 874, 870 to 880, 
893 to 895, ranging in depth from G5 to 487 fathoms. It was most 
abundant at 8G9 to 871, 894 and 895, in 115 to 365 fathoms. 

Although it does not agree perfectly with the European specimens of 
.X. propinqua that I have had for comparison, I have recorded it under 
this name, largely in deference to the opinion of Mr. W. H. Dall, who 
has made a special study of this group, and who has had some of our 
specimens for comi^arison. 

Tnis shell is somewhat stouter and more ventricose than the ordinary 
.forms of -A^. Stimpsoni and N. arata, from which it differs, also, in having 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 371 

an olive -colored, ciliated epidermis; the canal is shorter and more 
cnrved and twisted ; the sntnre is slightly channeled, and the aperture 
is broader than in either of these species. The sculpture consists of 
regular, narrow, spiral grooves. The aperture is white. 

Buccinum cyaneum Briig. ; Stimpson. 

Bucciiuiiii Gronlandiciim G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 259, pi. 25, fig. 1; pi. x, fig. 11 c, 
b (noi> Stimpson). 

This species was dredged in the summer of 1879, by the " Speedwell", 
off Cape Cod, in 90 fathoms. It was dredged by us in 1877, off Cape 
Sable, Nova Scotia, in 80 to 90 fathoms, compact sand, and off Halifax, 
in 100 fathoms, and has often been brought in from the banks . off ^STova 
Scotia by the Gloucester tishermen, but it was not previously actually 
known from the New England coast. 

Nassa nigrolabra Verrill, sp. iiov. 

Shell minute, long-ovate, nearly smooth, pale olive, with the edges of 
the lips blackish. Whorls five, slightly rounded, with shallow sutures ; 
spire elevated, not very acute. Surface covered with close, regular, 
microscopic lines of growth, and with less distinct revolving lines ; canal 
with a few minute, distinct, spiral grooves. Aperture short-ovate ; canal 
wide and very short; outer lip rounded, with edge flaring, thickened 
and revolute, with a row of minute nodules on the inside ; inner lip con- 
sisting of a broad, smooth, glossy, brownish-black deposit of enamel on 
the body-whorl and columella ; columella nearly straight ; no umbilicus. 
Length, 2.85-""' ; breadth, lAO""^ ; length of aperture, 1.20'"'". 

Station 870, in 155 fathoms; one specimen. It is referred to N^assa- 

only provisionally. The animal is not known. 
• ■ • 

Lunatia nana (Moller). 

G. O. Sara, op. cit., p. 159, pi. 21, figs. 16 a, h; jil. v, fig. 14 (dentition). — Ver- 
rill, Pioc. Nat. Mns., ii, p. 197, 1879. 

In addition to the localities off Cape Cod and on Le Have Bank, pre- 
viously cited by me, this species has been taken at other localities on 
our coast. It was taken by Prof. S. I. Smith and myself at Eastport, 
in 18G4; by Prof. H. E. Webster at Seal Cove, Grand Menan, in 1872; 
b}' Mr. J. F. Whiteaves in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence ; and by our party 
in 1880, twenty miles south of Block Island, in 28 ftithoms. 

Lunatia Jevicula Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell light, thin, and rather delicate, broad-ovate; spire moderately 
elevated, subacute. Whorls five, evenly rounded; suture distinct. 
Aperture ovate, well rounded below. Outer lip short, sinuous along 
the edge, the upper portion considerably advancing where it joins the 
body- whorl. Inner lip partially reflexed over a rather small, deep 
umbilicus, but not thickened, and forming a mere film on the body- whorl, 
above the umbilicus. Surface covered with distinct and rather coarse, 
sinuous lines of growth, parallel with the edge of the lip, and, like it, 
advancing as they approach the suture. Color (of a dead but fresh 



372 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

shell) pale brownish yellow ; the spire, when worn, and the interior, yel- 
lowish brown. Other specimens are white or yellowish white. Length, 
32"""; breadth, 25"""; length of aperture, 27"""; its breadth, 15""". 

This shell was first dredged by me near Eastport, Me., in 1870. It 
has since been dredged by the United States Fish Commission parties 
in Casco Bay, Me., and also off Block Island, stations 812 to 814, in 20 to 
28 fathoms. It is still a very rare species. It has some resemblance to 
Acryhia flava^ on account of the lightness and thinness of the shell, as 
well as in form, but the shape of the aperture is different, and there is 
a distinct umbilicus. The columella is also much less incurved. 

Lamellaria pellucida Verrill. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 395, for Nov. (published Oct. 25, 1880). 

Animal broad-elliptical, well rounded, both anteriorly and posteriorly ; 
back convex or somewhat swollen, smooth, without tubercles ; branchial 
sinus, in anterior edge of mantle, shallow but distinct ; tentacles slen- 
der, tapered ; eyes small, black, on the outer basal portion of the tenta- 
cles ; foot oblong, well developed, reaching nearly to the jiosterior end 
of the mantle when extended. Color of the mantle yellowish brown, 
blotched irregularly with dark brown; some specimens were paler, 
others darker brown. 

Odontoi)hore long and narrow, with three rows of teeth; central 
tooth much smaller than the lateral, its basal part oblong, with nearly 
parallel sides and squarely truncate at the end ; tip acute-triangular, 
strongly curved forward, with a prominent, sharp, median denticle, and 
a row of four or five much smaller denticles on each side. Lateral teeth 
very large, strongly incurved, and hollowed out on ^he concave surface, 
with both edges serrate; tlie inner edge has the serrations coarser, not 
reaching the tip, which is smooth, stout, acute. The basal portion of 
the lateral teeth is furnished with a broad, sinuous, aliform lobe on the 
outer edge ; the basal end is slightly expanded and obtusely round or 
subtruncate. 

The most important difference between the dentition of this species 
and that of L. iiersincua and L. latens (Miill.) is in the form of the basal 
portion of the median teeth ; in both the European species this is 
divided into two divergent lobes, separated by a deep notch. 

Shell ovate, with a well-formed spire, very thin and delicate, smooth, 
lustrous, and transparent. Aperture broad-ovate, much larger man the 
body of the shell, but not so large and open as in L. latens. The in- 
terior of the spire cannot be seen in a ventral view, but is visible in an 
end view from the front. The spire is oblique, somewhat elevated, and 
slightly pointed, with a minute nucleus. Whorls three, well rounded ; 
sutures impressed. Outer lip very thin, sloping or somewhat flattened 
I)Osteriorly, somewhat expanded and well rounded anteriorly ; inner lip 
receding in a deep, regular incurvature of the bodj -whorl, which has a 
sharp, thin edge that winds s])irally into the interior of the sjiire. Sculp- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 373 

ture noue, except iudistinct lines of growth; surface smooth and shin- 
ing throughout. 

Length of the animal in life about 15""" to 20'""' 5 length of shell, 12.5™"'; 
breadth, 10"'"'. 

Stations 870 to 872, south of Martha's Vineyard, in 86 to 155 fathoms, 
fine sand (16 siiecimens, living). 

The shell of this species, in form, closely resembles that of the Eu- 
ropean L. perspicua (not of Gould), but the differences hi the mantle and 
dentition will clearly separate it. Specimens of both sexes occurred, and 
they had the same form and- color externally. 

The '''■ Lamellaria perspicKa'''' of Gould was based, in part at least, upon 
Marsenina glabra. A species of Lamellarin occurs at Eastport, Me., 
which may be distinct from the preceding. 

Marsenina prodita (Loveu) Bergh. 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 151, pi. 12, ligs. 5 a-c; pi. v, figs. 7 a, h 
(dentitiou). — Yerrill, Traus. Couu. Acad., v, pi. 42, figs. 2, "Ha. » 

This species was taken, living, at Eastport, Me., by Prof. S. I. Smith 
and myself, in 1861: and 1868. It is easily recognized by its compara- 
tively prominent, a(;ute spire, turned to one side, by its obliquely elon- 
gated aperture, and by the margin of the outer li}) being slightly inflexed 
near the suture. It has not been previously recorded from the American 
coast, south of Greenland. 

Marsenina glabra Verrill. 

Oxinoe (jlabra Contboiiy, Boston Jonru. Nat. Hist., ii, p. 90, pi. 3, fig. 16, 1838. 
Laniellaria perspicua (pars) Gould, Binney's ed., p. 337, fig. 607 (?). 
Marsenina micromphala Bergli. — G. O. Sars, op. eit., p. 151, pi. 21, figs. 10 a-d. — 
Verrill, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, pi. 42, figs. 1, la. 

This species is not uncommon at Eastport, Me., where I collected it in 
1859, 1861, 1863, 1861, 1868, 1870, and 1872. It was dredged last year 
by our party, on the " Speedwell", oft' Cape Cod, in 31 fathoms. It has a 
much smaller and less prominent spire than the j) receding, and a more 
regularly oblong-oval aperture. The shell is smooth, white, thin, and 
delicate in both species, but more translucent in the present one. 

There can be no doubt, from the descriprion and figure, that the Oxinoe 
glabra of Couthouy was a Marsenina indistinguishable from this species, 
which is the commonest of the group on our coast. The M. microm- 
phala, well described and figured by Sars, appears to agree perfectly 
with our form, both in the animal and shell. 

Gould appears to have confounded two or more species under his L. 
perspicua. His figure (158) in the first edition does not represent this 
species ; the figure 607 of Binney's edition is difterent, and may be this 
shell. As a genuine Lamellaria, having its shell entirely inclosed in the 
mantle, also occurs on our coast, not rarely at Eastport, Me., it is not 
improbable that Gould may have had its shell among those examined 
by him. Its identity with L. perspicua of Europe is very doubtful, 
however. 



374 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Marsenina ampla Verrill, sj). nov. 

Truus. Couu. Acad., v, pi. 42, figs. .3, 3a. 

Shell broad-oval, white, nearly opaque, fragile, with conspicuous lines 
of growth, but otherwise smooth ; whorls scarcely two ; last whorl very 
large, const! tutiug nearly the entire shell, and nearly concealing the first 
whorl, which appears ouly as a mitiute incurved nucleus, situated in an 
apical depression. Aperture broad, oblong-oval, showing the interior 
of the spire to the apex. Outer lip thin, distinctly expanded and slightly 
shouldered near the suture, somewhat straight along the right and left 
sides, regularly rounded in front, slightly excurved where it joins the 
inner l\p, which consists of a narrow and thin coating, conformable to 
the columella surface, but with a distinct, narrow groove, and with the 
edge slightly raised as a narrow lamina in the umbilical region. The 
columella-edge is sigmoid and very much incurved in the umbilical 
region. 

Length, 11""" ; breadth, 8""" ; depth of last whorl, 5'"'". 

Eastport, Me. Dredged in 1868, by the writer. 

Velutella cryptospira (Middeiul.). 

G. O. Sais, Moll. Tteg. Arct. Norv., p. 149, pi. 21, figs 9 «-c. 

A good living example of this shell was taken by us in 1877, off Hali- 
fax, Nova Scotia, in 57 fathoms (station 82). 

The shell is veiy thin, translucent, yellowish horn-color, flexible, and 
but slightly calcified, with no sculpture except fine lines of growth. 
The spire is small, incurved, and depressed, so that the apical whorl is 
not visible in a front view. The aperture is elongated. The outer lip 
expands rather abruptly posteriorly, and is jn'olonged anteriorly. 

Length, 8"""; breadth, 5'"'"; length of aperture, 6.5""". 

Trichotropis conica Miiller. 

Kroyei's Tidss., iv, p. 85, 1842.— G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 163, pi. 13, fig. 3. 

A single dead, but large and characteristic, specimen of this very dis- 
tinct species was taken in the Gulf of Maine, ofl'Cape Sable, Nova Scotia, 
in 75 fathoms, bj' the United States Fish Commission party, on the 
" Speedwell", in 1877. It is easily' recognized by its conical spire and its 
flattened base, covered with revolving grooves and ridges. The revolv- 
ing ribs on the spire are stronger than those on the base, and unequal. 

Rissoa (Cingula) harpa Yenill, sj). nov. 

Shell small, white, translucent, acute-conical, with five very convex, 
rounded whorls and deeply impressed sutures ; body-whorl large ; api- 
cal whorl very small, smooth, regular. Sculpture very regular, well- 
raised, roundeil, transverse ribs, about twenty-six on the last whorl, sep- 
arated by spaces rather wider than the ribs ; and fine, close, microscopic 
spiral lines, which cover the interspaces. Aperture nearly circular, 
slightly effuse in front. Outer lip thin, regularly rounded ; inner lip 
reflexed in the umbilical region, and continued on the body- whorl only 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 375 

as a tliiu layer of enamel. Umbilicus a small but distinct chink. 
Length, 2.75'"™; breadth, l.SO"'"'. Animal unknown. 

Dredged by us off Massachusetts Bay, 1877, station 34, in IGO fathoms ; 
and off Newport, at stations 892 and 804, in 487 and 365 fathoms. 

Ciugula turgida (Jeff. ) Verrill. 

Ri8soa tur(jida Jeffreys.— G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 183, pl.lO fio-.s 
12 a,J). ' ° ' 

A very small, white species, with smooth, rounded whorls and distinct 
umbilicus. Station 892, in 487 fathoms. 

Cingula Jan-Mayeni (Friele) Ve»rill. 

Eissoa Jan-Mayeni Friele, Nyt. Mag. Naturv., 1877 (autli. cop., p. 4, fig. 4). 
Cingula Jan-Mayeni Verrill, Amer. Journ. Sci., xvii, p. 311, Apr., 1879. 
This species was common at stations 891 to 894, in 238 to 500 fathoms. 
A single specimen occurred at station 880. It was origiimlly from off 
Greenland, 70 to 300 fathoms. Whiteaves has dredged it in the Gulf of 
Saint Lawrence, 200 fathoms, but it had not hitherto been taken on the 
New England coast. 

Lepetella Verrill. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 396, Nov., 18H0. 

Shell small, smooth, oval or oblong, limpet-shaped, conical, with a 
simple subcentral apex, not spiral. Animal much as in Lepeta^ but with 
distinct eyes. Odontophore tajnioglossate, with seven regular rows of 
teeth ; median tooth a rather broad, thin i)late, with incurved, smooth, 
convex edge, narrower than the base ,• inner lateral tooth stout, with a 
broad base and a single incurved, terminal denticle; second lateral 
tooth larger, with a broader flat base and two terminal inciu'ved denti- 
cles ; outer laterals smaller, flattened, subtriangular plates. 

Lepetella tubicola Verrill & Smith. 
Loc. cit., p. 396, 1880. 

Shell thin, white, smooth, conical, with the apex acute and nearly 
central; aperture broad- elliptical, oblong, or subcircular, usually more 
or less warped, owing to its habitat ; edge thin and simple. Sculpture 
none, lines of growth slight, outer surface dull white ; inner surface 
smooth, with the pallial markings faint. Length of largest specimens, 
3.75"""; breadth, 3"""; height, 2'""'. On inside of old tuhea of HyaUnoecia 
artifex V. ; twenty-seven were taken from one tube. Stations 809, 192 
fathoms, and 894, 365 fathoms. 

Lovenella 'Whiteavesii Verrill, loc. cit., p. 396, 1880. 

Cerilhiopsis costulatus Whiteaves {non Moller). 

A small and elegant species, allied to ^. metula (Loven). Elongated, 
subulate; spire regularly tapering to the acute apex; whorls nine, 
slightly c&nvex, with a j^rominent, nodulous, revolving carina below the 
middle, and a smaller one just below the suture; on the body- whorl 
another less elevated and scarcely nodose carina revolves in line with 



376 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

the edge of the lip ; below this the base is smootb. Whorls crossed by 
numerous traus verse, curved, elevated, rounded cost;i^, whi(;Ii are about 
as wide as their intervals, and in crossing the two upper cingulae form 
small rounded nodes at their intersections. Aperture broad ; columella 
much incurved above ; canal distinctly excurved and twisted ; outer lip 
with three angles corresponding with the three carinte. Length, 4.5'"'" ; 
breadth, 1.5'"'". The largest specimen measures, in length, 6.25"""; in 
breadth, 2"'"\ Stations 891, 892, and 894, iu 365 to 500 fathoms; Gulf 
of Saint Lawrence, 200 fathoms, J. F. Whit6aves. 

Truncatella truiicatula (Drap.)- 

JeJfFrey's British Coneb., iv, j). 85, pi. iv, fig. 1. — Verrill, Amer. Joiuu. Sci., 
XX, p. 250, Sept., 1880. 

This species was found by the writer, living in considerable numbers, 
and of all ages, among the docks at Newport, E. I., July, 1880. It 
occurred among decaying sea-weeds thrown up at high-water mark, 
both among the vegetable matter and on the under sides of stones. It 
was associated with Alexia myosotis, Assiminea Gray ana, Anurida mari- 
tima, Orcliestia agilis, &c. 

It may possiblj^ have been introduced iu recent times by commerce, 
like the Littorina Uttorea, now so common on our shores; but if so, it 
has, like the latter, become thoroughly naturalized. This is the first time 
that it has been observed on our coast, so far as known to me. 

Solarium boreale Verrill & Smith, sp. iiov. 

A small, pretty, pale yellowish brown species, with a strong cariua-like, 
rounded, nodulous rib around the perii)hery. Height, 2.5""" ; breadth. 

Two- living specimens from station 871, 115 fathoms. The spire is low 
and flattened ; nuclear whorl smooth, obliquely incurved, reddish ; body- 
whorl strongly keeled, triangular ; above the keel, flattened, and near it, 
are about six small spiral ribs, separated by impressed lines ; upi)er sur- 
face of whorls also crossed by numerous flexuous, transverse, low ribs, 
with shorter ones interpolated toward the periphery. Base a little con- 
vex, about as much so as the spire ; toward the periphery covered with 
numerous fine spiral lines; also covered with many low ribs radiating 
from the umbilicus, around which they are nodulous. Aperture trian- 
gular, with a notch corresponding to the keel. 

Scalaria Pourtalesii Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 395, Nov., 1880. 

Three fine specimens, one of them living, from stations 871, 873, and 
874, in 85 to 115 fathoms. 

Scalaria, sp. 

An undetermined Scalaria, having the sculpture much as in S. Gron- 
landica, but more slender in form, was taken at station 873. The spiral 
lines are very distinct between the ribs, and also extend over them. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 377 

Scalaiia Dalliana Yerrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 395, Nov., 1880. 

Several specimeus, liviug, from stations 869, 870, 871, and 874, in 65 
to 155 fatlioms. , 

Acirsa gracilis Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell white, with a long, slender, regularly tapered, rather acute 
spire and deeply impressed sntures. Whorls eight, evenly rounded, all 
except the last crossed by slightly raised but distinct rounded ribs, 
separated hj wider interspaces; the ribs are most elevated just below 
the sutures and on the upjjer whorls. Lower whorls with numerous 
(eight or more) fine, slightly impressed spiral Hues, producing narrow 
spiral ciijguli, of which the lowest on the last whorl is strongest aud bor- 
ders the base of the shell, which is convex and smooth. The spiral 
lines are absent uear the sutures. Mouth round-ovate, slightly effuse in 
front. Inner lip slightly retiected. No umbilicus. 

Stations 873 and 891, in 100 to 365 fathoms. 

This species is much more slender than Acirsa costulata Migh., sp., 1811 
{=A. boreaUs aud A. Uschrichtil of authors), and its ribs are more reg- 
ular and distinct. A. prwlonga Jeffreys has much finer sculpture. 

Aclis Walleri Jeifreys. 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Ai-ct. Norv., p. 196, pi. 11, fig. 18. 

Three liviug specimens were taken at stations 892 and 891, in 487 and 
365 fathoms. 

Aclis striata Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell small, white, somewhat lustrous, fragile, with moderately ele- 
vated spire ; whorls six, well rounded, with deep sutures, the last one 
ventricose. Sculpture numerous fine, close, spiral grooves, covering the 
whole surface. Aperture simple, ovate. Outer lii) thin, with a wide 
and rather deep sinus below the suture, but projecting strongly forward 
in the middle, where it is regularly rounded, then recedes somewhat 
anteriorly, joining the inner lip in an even curve. Inner lip discontinu- 
ous, slightly concave and reflected in the umbilical region, where it joins 
the l)ody-whorl. Umbilicus narrow, but deep. Nuclear whorl small, 
regular, smooth. Length, 4"""; breadth, 2'""'. 

One specimen was dredged by me in the Bay of Fundy, near East- 
port, Me., in 1868; another was dredged in deep water off Newport, R. 
I., this season, by the United States Fish Commission. 

TLiis species is provisionally referred to Acliii because of its general 
resemblance to known species of that genus. Both- my specimens were 
dead, and I have, therefore, no means of knowing the structure of the 
animal. Its regular apical whorl shows that, it is not an Odostomia, 
The marked sinus of the outer lip and the distinct umbilicus are features 
not found in any other shell of our coast of similar size and appearance. 
Dead and broken specimens might be taken for bleached Cingula amileuSj 



378 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

but the latter lias a clilfereut aperture, continuous lip, and no umbilicus, 
and its sculpture is coarser. 

Calliostoma Bairdii Verrill & Smitli. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, j). 396, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 25). 

Stations 805 to 874, in 65 to 192 fathoms; many living specimens. 
Most common at stations 809 and 871, in 192 and 115 fathoms. 

Margarita regalis Verrill »& Suiith. 

Aiuer. Joxxm. Sci., xx, p. 397, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 25). 

Stations 870, 871, 880 to 895, from 115 to 500 fathoms. Most abundant 
at stations 892 to 891, in 305 to 187 fathoms. 

Margarita lamellosa Verrill &, Smith. 

Anier. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 397, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 25). 

Stations 809 and 871, 115 to 192 fathoms. Only two specimens ob- 
tained. 

Margarita, sp. nov. 

A small, elevated, conical, nearly smooth, white, and iridescent species, 
with a small, narrow umbilicus, was dredged by us off Halifax, Nova 
Scotia, in 1877. The sjiecimen is not now at hand for accurate descrip- 
tion. 

Macliaeroplax bella (Verk.). 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 137, pi. 9, figs. 5 a-c. 

An elegant species, allied to Jf. varicosa, but with more elaborate 
sculi)ture. As in the latter, the whorls are crossed by oblique, flexuous, 
rounded, transverse folds, but there are, in addition, in M. hella four con- 
spicuous revolving ribs on the last whorl ; the upper one is large and 
nodulous, giving the whorls an angular or somewhat carinated form ; 
the two lower ribs are smaller and close together, the third one at, and 
the fourth just below the basal angle of the whorl. On the other whorls 
only the two upper ribs are visible. Base with curved transverse ridges, 
crossed by flue revolving lines. Umbilicus moderately large and deep, 
with very distinct spiral lines within it. 

Off Cape Sable, Nova Scotia (loc. 47), 90 fathoms, fine, compact sand, 
United States Fish Commission, 1877. One living and one dead speci- 
men. New to the American coast. 

Cyclostrema trochoides (Jefl". MSS.) Friele. 

Arch. Math. Naturv., 1876, p. 308, pi. 4, tigs. 2 a, i—G. 0. Sars, op. cit., p. 131, 
pi. 8, tigs. 9 a-c. 

A few siiecimeus of this little shell were trawled at stations 892 and 
894, in 487 and 365 fathoms. In our specimens the umbilicus is, in most 
cases, a narrow chink, but in one it is closed. Tliere are distinct spiral 
lines immediately around the umbilicus. It is new to the American 
waters. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 379 

Assiminea Grayeuia Leach. 

Jeffrey's Britisli Couch., v, p. 99, pi. 4, fig. 1; pi. 97, fig. .5.— Verrill, Amer. 
Journ. Sci., sx, p. 250, Sept., 1880. 

This was found iu July of this year, by the writer, living- among- decay- 
ing sea- weeds, at high -water mark, between the docks at Newport, E. I. 
It was associated with Alexia myosotis and TrvmateUa truncatnla, and 
was rather more abundant than either of the hitter. Drawings of the 
animal of this and the two species last named were made by Mr. J. H- 
Emerton. Tlie animal agrees well with the figures and descriptions of 
the European examples. It has not been recognized as American before. 

Euliiua iutermedia Cantraiue. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 210, pi. 11, fig. 20; pi. xviii, fig. 41. 

Several living specimens were taken at stations 870, 871, 874, 87G, and 
877, iu 85 to 155 fathoms. It has previously been known from deep 
water in the Mediterranean, and off the Canary Islands, Lofoden Islands, 
and Fiumark (200 to 300 fathoms). 

This shell is more slender than E. oleacea. The sutures are not at all 
impressed; the whorls are flattened so that the spire has a regular, 
long-conical form. Ai)erture regularly ovate. The surface is smooth, 
polished, and shining. Color of shell pure white, translucent ; in life 
the animal shows through, giving it a pale orange or salmon color. 
Length, 5.0"""; breadth, 1.6"'". 

Eulima distorta Deshayes. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 210, pi. 11, fig. 23. 
A single living specimen of this curious little shell was obtained at 
station 871, in 115 fathoms. 

Turbonilla nivea Stimpsou, Check List. 

Chenmiizia itivea Stimpson, Proc. Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., iv, p. 114, 1851; In- 
vert. Grand Mauan, p. 23, 1853. 

One perfect specimen of this very rare shell was dredged at station 
871, in 115 fathoms. 

It is distinguished by its very slender, elongated form, with twelve 
flattened, closely coiled whorls and slightly marked sutures. The 
sculpture consists of well-marked, regular, transverse, rounded ribs, 
with smooth interstices ; no spiral lines. Color white; surface shiuiug. . 
Apical whorl small, incurved, and reversed. Length, 6.5""" ; breadth, 
1.5'"-. 

Turbonilla Rathbuni Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, j). 398, Nov., 1880. 

Several fine living specimens were taken at stations 865 to 867, in 64 
and C5 fathoms, and at stations 893 to 895, in 238 to 365 fathoais. 

Dedicated to Mr. Eichard Eathbun, of the United States Fish Com- 
mission. 



380 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Turbonilla formosa Verrill & Smitli. 

Amer. Joiirn. Sci., xx, p. 398, Nov., 1880. 

A few liviug examples of this elegant shell occurred at stations 891 
and 892, in 487 to 500 fathoms. 

Turbonilla Smithii Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell long and slender, smooth, jiolished, white, with a narrow spiral 
band of light yellowish brown or red just above the suture. Whorls up 
to twelve, much flattened, little oblique, closely coiled, with the sutures 
oulj' slightly impressed; apical whorl small, incurved. Sculpture none. 
Aperture irregular oblon g- ovate ; outer lip nearly straight for about 
half its length, rounded and slightly x^rominent anteriorly. Columella 
lip nearly straight anteriorly, but curved inward and twisted posteriorly, 
with a slight spiral fold that winds into the shell. Length, 7.5"'"; 
breadth, 1.5™"'. 

Stations 871, 873, and 876, in 100 to 120 fathoms. 

This elegant and very distinct species I have dedicated to Mr. San- 
derson Smith, of the United States Fish Commission party. 

Eulimella ventricosa (Forbes). 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 209, pi. 11, fig. 19; pi. 22, fig. 16. 

A single dead specimen, not in good condition, but apx)arently belong- 
ing to this species, was dredged by us at Eastport, Me., in 1868. A 
perfect specimen was dredged by us this season, at station 873, in 100 
fathoms. This last has a distinctly incurved, small, nuclear whorl; 
whorls nine, smooth, polished, white, well rounded, with deep sutures. 
Aperture broad-ovate, slightly effuse in front. Outer lip broad, well 
rounded in the middle and i^rojecting well forward. Length, 3.6'""'. 

Odostomia unidentata (Mont.). 

G. O. S.irs, op. cit., p. 201, pi. 11, figs. G-8. 

Odostomia modesta Stimpsou. — Gould, Invert. Mass., ed. ii, p. 327, fig. 596. 

A single specimen occurred at station 871, in 115 fathoms. This shell 
appears to be much more rare on the American than on the European 
coasts. 

Odostomia (Menestho) sulcata Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell small, white, long-ovate ; spire regularly tapered, acute ; whorls 
about six, moderately convex, covered with many regular, rather strong, 
revolving grooves. Nuclear whorl strongly inflexed and reversed. 
Aperture regularly ovate. No tooth on the columella. Length, 2.80"""'; 
of body- whorl, 1,80"'"'; breadth, 1.40"'"'; length of aperture, 1.10"""; its 
breadth, .70"". 

Stations 871 and 894, in 115 and 365 fathoms. 

This differs from all other related species of our coast, except 0. 
striatula Couth. (= Menestho alhula Gould, nan Fabr.), in being strongly 
grooved spirally ; from the latter it differs in haxing fewer whorls and 
a regularly tapered, acute spire, and in having the spiral lines coarser 
and fewer. Perhaps it is more closely related to the real Menestho 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 381 

alhula of Greenland, which, according to Jeffreys, is distinct from our 
shell, so named by Gould. These three forms all belong to Maiestho 
M oiler ( — Liostomia G. O. Sars). 

Auriculina insculpta ? (Mont.). 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 204, pi. 11, figs. 11, 12; pi. xviii, fig. 38 (operculum). 

A single dead and probably immature specimen, which I refer doubt- 
fully to this species, was taken at station 892, in 487 fiithoms. It agrees 
nearly, in form and sculi)ture, with the figure (12) given by Sars, but our 
shell is shorter, ovate-fusiform. There are five slightly convex whorls ; 
the anterior half of the body-whorl is covered with distinct, fine, spiral 
grooves ; nuclear whorl rounded, rather large, partially incurved. Aper- 
ture narrow-ovate ; a slight fold on the columella ; no umbilicus. 

Diaphana Brown, 1827 (restricted) ; H. & A. Adams. 

Utricuhts {2)ar8) Brown, HI. Brit. Concli., 1844 (iion Schumacher, 1817). 
Utricuhts G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 285. 

In 1827 Brown jiroposed the name Diaphana for certain species of 
shells figured by him (but not described), which now are known to belong 
partly to the restricted modern genus UtriciilKS and partly to Amphi- 
spliyra Loven, 1846. But he did not then define the genus, and in a later 
edition of his work (1844) he discarded the name and substituted Utri- 
cnlus for it.* But Utricidus had been used by Schumacher, in 1817, for a 
ditfereut genus {Conidcc). Loven's name (Amphisphyra), established by 
him for Brown's second section of Utricidus, should, therefore, be re- 
tained for that group, which is a good genus. Diaphana and Utricidus, 
as used by Browu, were absolutely synonymous, but Diaphana, as used 
by G. O. Sars, is a synonym of Amphisphyra. In its original sense, Dia- 
phana might be rejected, because undefined. But since Utriculus had 
been preoccupied, it seems uecessaiy to retain Diaphana for the first 
section of Brown's genus, corresponding nearly with Utricidus of G. O. 
Sais. This is also in accordance with the nomenclature in H. & A. 
Adams's Genera of Shells. 

The absence of an odontophore in Diaphana H. & A. Adams = Utri- 
cidus Sars, is certainly a very important character by which the genus 
can easily be distinguished from Cylichna and Amphisphyra. But this 
genus cannot always be distinguished from Cylichna by the shell alone. 
On that account Loven, Jeffreys, and other able conchologists have re- 
ferred some of the species of " Utricidus^'' to Cylichna. 

Diaphana nitidula (Loven) Verrill. 

Cylichna nitidula TiO\'6u, op. cit., p. 142, 1846. 

UtricHlns niddltlus G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 28U, pi. 17, fig. 13; pi. 2G, fig. 3; pi. 
xi, figs. Ga, Gb (gizzard, &c.). 

This shell has been dredged by us in several localities in deep water 
off the coast of :N'ew England and Xova Scotia, and by Mr. Whiteaves 
in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. This season it was taken at stations 
891, 892, and 894, in 305 to 500 fathoms. 

* This change was prohably first made in the edition of 1834, which I am unable to 
consult. 



382 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

It is a small, very smooth, white shell, in form closely resembling 
yonng specimens of Cyliehna alha, for which it may easily be mistaken. 
It lacks the fine spiral lines usnally seen on the latter, and is rather 
more narrowed posteriorly. The apex of the spire is occupied by a shal- 
low depression, and there is no umbilicus. 

Diaphana gemma Verrill. 

Amer. Joarii. Sci., xx, p. 399, Nov., 1880. 

Shell oblong", suboval, widest a little in front of the middle, truncate 
posteriorly and obliquely rounded anteriorly, with a distinct umbilicus, 
and also with a narrow, deej) pit at the ai^ex. Texture of shell rather 
solid, somewhat thickened. Outer lii) rising somewhat above the spire, 
forming a rounded posterior angle ; throughout most of its length only 
slightly convex, often nearly straight; anteriorly, a little expanded and 
j)roduced, well rounded, thickened. Inner lip more thickened, with 
the edge a little revolute, but leaving a small and regular umbilicus. 
Aperture narrow posteriorly, ovate anteriorly. Surface smooth and 
glossy, without any sculpture over the middle region, but with several 
well-deiined, not crowded, but fine spiral grooves at each end, visible 
with a lens. Color grayish white. Length, 4.2""; breadth, 2.5"™. 

Stations 871 and 873, 100 to 115 fathoms, fine sand, south of Martha's 
Vineyard and Xewport, R. I. 

I have had no opportunity to examine the animal of this species, and 
refer it to i>ia2;/iaH«, provisionally, because of its resenjblauce to D. umbil- 
icata. It may prove to be a Cyliehna. It has some resemblance to C. 
occulta Mighels (= C. propinqua Sars). The latter is, however, destitute 
both of the pit at the summit of the si)ire and of the umbilicus, and its 
surface is everywhere covered with distinct spiral lines. Our shell is 
shorter and stouter than D. iimhilicata. 

Diaphana conulus (Desli.). 

Utriculus conulus G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 287, pi. 17, figs. 17 a-c. 

A perfect living specimen of this very distinct species was taken at 
station 870, in 155 fathoms. It has not been recorded hitherto from the 
American coast. 

Amphisphyra globosa Loven, 1846. 

Diaphana (jJohosa G. O. Sars, op. cit., j). 290, jil. 18, figs. 3 c , 4 ; pi. xi, fig. 12 
(deiititioii). 

Specimens agreeing in all respects with Sars's figures, referred to 
above, were dredged at stations 870, 871, and 894, in 115 to 365 fathoms, 
south of Martha's Vineyard and Newport. 

Amphisphyra pellucida (Brown) Lov^n, 1846. 

Diaphana peJlucida Brown, 111. Recent Conch., pi. 19, figs. 10, 11, 1827. 
Bulla hi/alina Tnrton, Mag. Nat. Hist., vii, p. 353, 1834 (non Gmelin). 
Bulla (lebilis Gould, Invert. Mass., ed. i, p. 164, fig. 95, 1841. 
Utriculus hijalinus Jefi:reys, Brit. Conch., iv, j). 427; v, j)l. 94, fig. 7. 
Diaphana hijalina G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 289, pi. 18, figs. 1 a, I); pi. xi, fig. 10 

(dentition). 
Diaphana f7e6i?is Gould, Invert. Mass., ed. ii, p. 216, fig. 507. 

This species occurred at stations 87G and 894, in 120 and 365 fathoms. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 383 

Tlie name pellucida clearly has priority for this species, and should be 
adopted; moreover, liyaUna had been previously used. Jefitreys, al- 
though he admits the priority of Brown's name, claims that it is " obso- 
lete" because no oue has used it, "except its author". But Loven, A. 
Adams and others have correctly adopted it. Moreover, Jeffreys him- 
self does not apply this idea in regard to "obsolete" names iu many 
other caseSy as, for example, in the case of 2Iargarita oUvacea (Brown), 
an '" obsolete" name revived by him to replace argentata Gould. 

Cylichna Gouldii (Cooth.) Verrill. 

Bulla Gonldii Conthony, Bost. Jonrii. Nat. Hist., ii, p. 181, pL 4, fig. C^, 1838. 
Uiriculus Gouldii Stimpson.— Gould, Invert. Mass. (second ed.), p. 217, fig. ,508. 

Liviug specimens of this s])ecies, of large size and in considerable 
numbers, were dredged by us in 1879, oft' Cape Cod, and especially on 
the sandy portions of Stellwagen's Bank, Massachusetts Bay, in 15 to 25 
fathoms. 

An examination of the animal shows that it has a gizzard, with cal- 
careous plates, while its dentition agrees with Cylichna, to which it should 
be referred, notwithstaudiug the character of the sjnre of the shell. 
The median teeth are deeply bilobed; the inner lateral ones large and 
hooked ; outer laterals four on each side, slender, spiniform. 

This species is very distinct from Diapliana pcriemiis {— Bulla per - 
tenuis Migh.), with which it has sometimes been confounded. The latter 
occnrred at station 894. 

Philine amabilis Verrill. 

Amer. Jonrn. Sci., xx, p. 398, Nov., 1880. 

Animal large, about an inch long, even in alcoholic specimens. In 
preserved specimens the anterior lobe is large, oblong, truncate behind, 
obtusely pointed in front, slightly narrowed backward; lateral lobes 
large ; posteriorly the thin membrane covering the shell projects back- 
wards beyond it, and its free edge is divided into several wide, but short, 
lobes ; foot large. 

Odoutophore with a large inner lateral, hook-shaped tooth on each 
side, having its inner edge very finely serrulate and each of its lateral 
edges bordered by a sharj) ridge ; outside of these there is on each side 
a single, very much smaller, slender, spiniform, very sharp, slightly bent 
tooth. 

Sbell large, but exceedingly thin and delicate, diaphanous, lustrous, 
and iridescent, with a very wide aperture. The outline is broad-oblong, 
rounded at both ends ; the outer lip, forming the greater part of the 
shell, is evenly rounded posteriorly, and scarcely projects beyond the 
level of the spire; in the middle it projects forward in a regular curve, 
and recedes rapidly in front, where it also becomes slightly broacler, and 
forms a very obtuse, rounded angle ; the anterior end is broadly rounded 
and very much cut away, so that in an end view, from the front, the 
whole interior of the spire is visible. The inner lip is thin and sharp- 



384 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

edged, and recedes in a broad curve anteriorly, so that the body of the 
shell is relatively verj small. There is a small, shallow -pit in the place 
of the spire. Sculpture inconspicuous; many lines of growth, and very 
fine, wavy, spiral striae, visible with a lens, cover the whole surface, 
which has a glistening' and opalescent or pearly luster. 

Leugth of the entire animal, 25'"™ or more; length of shell, 15°^'"; 
breadth of shell, 10™'". 

Several living specimens from station 876, about 100 miles south of 
Newport, R. I., in 120 fathoms. 

Tliis is one of the largest species of the genus, and one of the most 
beautiful and delicate. 

Philine Finmarcliica M. Sars. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 296, pi. 18, figs. 10 a-d ; pi. xii, %. 1 a, h (dentition). 

Off Cape Sable, Xova Scotia, 90 fiithoms, tine sand, 1877 ; 70 to 75 
miles south of Martha's Vineyard, G5 to 192 fathoms. 

Philine fragilis G. O. Sars. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 296, pi. 18, figs. 11 a-c ; pi. xii, fig. 2 (dentition). 

Off Cape Sable, Nova Scotia, 90 fathoms, fine, compact sand, 1877; 
Jefi'rey's Ledge, Gulf of JNfaine, 88 to 92 fathoms, J 874, several large 
living specimens. 

Philine cingulata G. O. Sars. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 297, pi. 26, figs. 7 a-c; pi. xii, fig. 3. 

Off Cape Sable, Nova Scotia, 90 fathoms, with the preceding. Taken 
this season at stations 892 and 894, in 487 and 365 fathoms. 

These four species of Philine are new to the American coast. Prob- 
ably additional species of this genus will be detected when all our col- 
lections shall have been fully examined. 

Pleurobranchaea tarda Verrill. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 398, Nov., 1880. 

Body subovate, stout, thick, often nearly half as broad as long, 
usually less, tai)ering backward and blunt jjosteriorly ; front broad, 
convex or subtruncate ; back more or less convex or swollen in the 
middle, with the surface wrinkled or irregularly reticulated, with the 
sunken lines brown, the reticulations smaller posteriorly. Dorsal ten- 
tacles short, stout, wide apart, ear-like, subtubular, having a slit on the 
outer side, with the edges often rolled in. Gill rather large, well 
exposed in a dorsal view, situated on the right side, behind the middle, 
and equal in length to nearly one-fourth the body, plumose, bipinnate, 
with 15 or IG pinnae on the upper side. Foot broad, often nearly as wide 
as the mantle, subtruncate or rounded in front, narrowed and obtuse 
posteriorly, ordinarily not extending beyond the mantle. The mantle 
edge is but little prominent, except along the right side. Proboscis 
protruded in most of the specimens, large, thick, obtusely tapered close 
to the end, which is emarginate, showing the large odontophore in a 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 385 

broad, vertical notch. Eepioductive organs large and prominent ; the 
two orifices are situated on a large tubercle in front of the gill. The 
male organ, in extension, is long, slender, usually curled, truncate, about 
equal in length to half the breadth of the body; it is a tubular organ, 
with a slit along the lower side, formed by the rolling up of a long, thin, 
membranous process. At the posterior edge of the tubercle there is a 
shorter, flat-pointed process, connected with the female organs. Color 
of dorsal surface yellowish brown, lighter or darker, and reticulated 
with dark brown, often specked with flake white ; gill and proboscis 
dark purplish brown ; the proboscis with a darker dorsal patch ; tenta- 
cles sometimes crossed by dark brown bands. Foot salmon-color. 
Odoutophore very large and broad, with 150 to 170 rows of teeth ; no 
median teeth ; all the teeth are similar in structure, and show only a 
gradual change in form and size from the inner to the outer ones. The 
inner ones are elongated, slightly curved, narrow-lanceolate, with a very 
acute point and with a smaller, narrow, sharp denticle on the inner 
edge, parallel to but shorter than the main point ; the outer teeth grad- 
ually become shorter, blunter, with a smaller denticle, which finally 
nearly disappears. Length, usually 30""" to 40'"'"; breadth, 10""" to 14""". 
About 20 miles south of Block Island (stations 814 to 817), in 38 
fathoms ; about 70 to 74 miles south of Martha's Vineyard (stations 865 
to 872), in 65 to 192 fathoms, fine, compact sand, very abundant (140 
specimens). Also 90 to 100 miles south of Newport, E. I., in 85 to 225 
fathoms (stations 873 to "879). Closely resembles Pleurobratichcca Novw- 
ZcaJandkv in form and color. The latter is a littoral species. 

Decdronotus elegans Yerrill, sj). nov. 

Form and general appearance nearly as in D. arhorescens, but rather 
more slender. Branchire with rather longer stems and less numerous 
branches than in the latter, but similarly arranged. Tentacle sheaths 
with the terminal lobes not so finely divided, and with a smaller branch 
on the outer side, near the base. Frontal processes of the head numer- 
ous, large, with elongated stems, and not so much branched as in D. 
arhorescens. Color eveiywhere nearly uniform pale salmon ; tentacles 
more yellowish. The dentition is peculiar and distinguishes it easily 
from both our other species. Median tooth stout, smooth, entirely desti- 
tute of lateral denticles ; its free portion, in a dorsal view, is broad-trian- 
gular, almost as broad as long, acute at tip; base transversely elliptical, 
a little broader than the free portion. Lateral teeth about ten on each 
side, slender, the outer two or three shorter, blunt or subacute; the 
others are successively longer and larger, and each has a more acute and 
more oblique tip than those that precede it, except the iuner one, which 
has a shorter tip, with longer spiuules. These lateral teeth are rather 
suddenly curved inward where they begin to taper, and beyond the curve 
the tip becomes nearly straight again, and very acute, while the anterior 
edge of the curvature is covered with slender, sharp spinules. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 25 Dec. 33, 1880. 



386 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The dentition of this species is very different from that of'D. rohustus 
and D. arborescens. Both of these have the median teeth serrated, and 
different in form; the latter has broader and less acnte lateral teeth. 

Oft" Cape Cod (station 330), 26 fiithoms, September 6, 1879. 

Doris complanata Verrill. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 399, Nov., 1880. 

Body depressed, broad-elliptical, well rounded, both in front and be- 
hind, the mantle extending much beyond the foot all around, its edge 
usually undulated. The lower side of the mantle is stiffened with spic- 
ules; upper surface slightly cous^ex, nearly smooth, but covered with 
small, rather distant, and but slightly proaniuent, conical elevations. 
Dorsal tentacles large, stout, subclavate (not seen in full extension), 
with very numerous, crowded, thin, high, lamelliform plications or folds 
over the entire upper portion; retractile into cavities having plain, sharp 
edges Gills large, the two lower, on each side, partially confluent at 
base, bipiunately and tripiunately divided, retractile into a large com- 
mon cavity, which has plain edges. Anal papilla a prominent, cylin- 
drical tube in the center of the branchial wreath. Foot relatively small, 
obtusely rounded posteriorly, emargiuate in front, and with a transverse 
sulcus on the front edge. Head small, rounded in front, with a free, 
short, thick, ovate tentacle on each side. Odontophore broad, with 
about seventy to eighty rows of teeth ; no median teeth ; about twenty- 
two to twenty-four lateral teeth, on each side, are stout, hook-shaped, 
with sharp points, and a slight lobe on the outer curvature and another 
on the inner side ; outside of these there are twelve or more shorter, 
flattened teeth, with obtuse or rounded, incurved, and sharply denticu- 
lated or spinulated ends; the outermost teeth are smallest. Length, 
50™'",' breadth, 25""". 

Color, above, dull yellowish brown to dusky brown, irregularly finely 
specked and blotched with dark brown ; gills dark brown. 

About 70 miles south of Martha's Vineyard, station 872, in 85 fathoms, 
among sponges (eleven specimens). 

This large species is closely related to 7). Johnstoni and D. planata of 
Europe. It difters from both in its dentition, in having stouter and 
blunter dorsal tentacles, with more numerous lamellae, and in having 
shorter and blunter oral tentacles. 

Polycerella Verrill, geu. uov. 

Body elongated-ovate, having the same form as Polycera. Mantle 
little developed. Dorsal tentacles (rhinophores) not laminated and not 
retractile, without sheaths. A row of papilloe along each side of the 
back, extending beyond the gills. Gills three, pinnate, situated in the 
middle of the back, nearly as in Polycera. Foot auricled. Odontophore 
with six rows of teeth ; median row absent ; inner laterals large, curved, 
with three denticles ; two outer rows much smaller, simple, hook-shaped. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 387 
Polycerella Emertoni Verrill, sp. nov. 

Body small, elongated-ovate, rather narrow, somewhat angular, about 
as high as broad, sometimes higher than broad, tapered and somewhat 
acute posteriorly, narrowed a little at the neck. Head high, convex 
above, sometimes bilobed, but often rounded in front, capable of chang- 
ing its form to a great extent, the part in front of the dorsal tentacles 
being capable of considerable elongation and of contracting to a truncate 
form. Foot high and narrow, obtuse posteriorly, the anterior angles 
prolonged into short but prominent auricles, often curved backward and 
pointed, at other times short and blunt. Dorsal tentacles rather long, 
not retractile, but capable of considerable contraction ; in extension 
their length is often equal to the breadth of the neck; they are fusiform 
or subclavate, blunt, smooth or showing only slight, transverse, irregular 
wrinkles, changeable in form, sometimes nearly cylindrical, at other times 
swollen in the middle or toward the tip. Edge of the mantle indicated 
only by a slight, often crenulated, ridge along each side and around the 
head. Above this edge there is a row of small papilte, of which two on 
each side are in advance of the dorsal tentacles ; two are opposite to 
them, and four or five on each side occupy the space between the tenta- 
cles and gills ; a row of five or six, on each side, extends beyond the gills 
to near the end of the body, the posterior ones becoming very small. 
Behind the gills there are three or four pairs of larger and longer pa- 
pillie, situated more dorsally ; of these the two pairs next to the gills 
are longest, and are often nearly equal to the dorsal tentacles in size 
and length ; they are usually somewhat swollen in the middle and blunt 
at the tip. Two or three pairs of much smaller i)apill;T3 are situated on 
the back, in front of the gills. Gills three, narrow, elongated, pinnate, 
subplumose, not finely divided, curved backward, not retractile, about 
equal in length to the dorsal tentacles ; the pinnjie are few, alternate, 
generally incurved, those toward the base more slender. 

Color yellowish green to olive-green, varied with lemon-yellow, and 
blotched and specked with darker green or blackish ; foot, tentacles, 
gills, and dorsal pai>illfe lighter greenish yellow, sparingly specked with 
dark green. 

Length, 5""" to 6"""; breadth, 1™"; height, 1.12'""; length of rhiuo- 
phores, .88™™. 

The odontophore is very minute. The teeth of the inner row, on each 
side, are relatively very large and long, stout, with the shaft bent back- 
ward and the end abruptly curved forward and divided into two sharp 
denticles ; another sharp denticle is situated laterally, below the others. 
The two outer lateral rows of teeth are much smaller and less than half 
the length of the inner ones, nearly equal in size and form, simple, 
strongly curved forward, and very acute. 

This species was first taken by the writer at Wood's Holl in September, 
1875, at the surface, among eel-grass ; and on hydroids from the piles 
of Long Wharf, New Haven, Conn., October, 1875. At ISTewport, E. I., 
it has been found several times by Mr. J. H. Emerton and the writer, in 



388 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

July aud August, on filamentous algse, especially Ceramium ruhrum, 
growing- on the mooring buoys and i)iles.of wharves in the harbor. 

In confinement it often leaves the algne and creeps at the surface of 
the water, foot upward. 

The eggs of this species were laid in confinement, July 24, at New- 
port, R. I. They form a long, narrow, oblong or strap-shaped, white 
mass, attached by one edge to filamentous algte ; the eggs are arranged 
in numerous rows. 

Coryphella nobilis Verrill, sp. nov. 

A large and elongated species, wdth stout dorsal tentacles and large, 
flattened, pale-salmon dorsal papillae. Foot broad, elongated, tapering 
and acute posteriorly; anterior angles considerably elongated, in the 
form of acute tapering processes, having a distinct longitudinal groove 
or fold. Head rather small, rounded, in front slightly convex or nearly 
straight, lower side concave. Oral tentacles very stout, flattened, gib- 
bous near the end, with a small, somewhat upturned, round, acute tip. 
Dorsal tentacles (rhinophores) very large and stout, arising close to- 
gether, longer than the oral ones, tapered, subacute, thickly covered 
with small, conical papillae or warts. No eyes could be detected. Dor- 
sal papillae arranged in numerous transverse, oblique rows, each of eight 
to ten or more papillae (excei^t posteriorly) ; they are small and much 
crowded along the sides ; the upi)er ones are much longer, stout, mostly 
flattened, widest beyond the middle, tapering to the lanceolate tip. 

Color of foot and body translucent w^hite; on the back there are 
visible, through the integument, salmon-colored vessels, running from 
one group of dorsal papillae to another and connecting with their 
nuclei ; the dorsal papillae are x>ellucid white externally, with a pale- 
salmon nucleus, becoming paler and whitish near the tip ; dorsal tenta- 
cles pale yellowish green ; oral ones jjellucid white. 

Length, about 63""", or 2.5 inches ; length of dorsal tentacles, lo™""- 
(.6 inch); of longest dorsal papillae, 12"'" (.5 inch). 

The odontophore has a central row of large teeth, with a moderately 
l^rominent, acute, central denticle, and usually six smaller denticles on 
each side ; lateral teeth without distinct denticles on the edge, rather 
large, wide at the base, which is emargiimte, the outer lobe extending 
further back, inner edge slightly wavy and uneven, but not denticulate. 

Off Cape Cod, in 75 fathoms, mud and broken shells, 1879. One speci- 
men only. 

In form and color this species resembles C. salmonacea, but the latter, 
which occurs at Eastport, Me., has the dorsal papillae more crowded, 
and its dentition is very different, for the lateral teeth are strongly denti- 
culated along the edge to near the tip. 

Coryphella Stimpsoni Verrill. 

Cuthona SUmpsoxi Verrill, Amer. Joum. Sci., svii, p. 314; Trans. Conu. Acad., 
V, pi. 42, fig. 14. 

The dentition of this sjDecies is peculiar, but agrees better with that 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 389 

of Coryphella than with that of any of the related genera. It was orig- 
inally referred to Cuthona on account of the lateral expansions of the 
head. The odontophore is remarkably high and narrow ; the central 
teeth are dark brown, large, strong, with the median point very large, 
compressed, and curved forward, projecting far beyond the small, sharp, 
lateral denticles, of which there are usually eight or nine on each side ; 
lateral teeth thin, pale, comparatively small, narrow, acute, without any 
denticles, or rarely with some very small ones near the base, which is 
rounded and but little expanded. 

This species occurs from Massachusetts Bay to Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
and from low-water to 50 fathoms. 

Facelina Bostoniensis (Couthouy) Verrill & Einerton. 

This species has been very much misunderstood, and totally different 
species* have often been confounded with it. It is, however, very 
easily distinguished from all of our other species. It is the only known 
species from the New England coast that has the dorsal tentacles dis- 
tinctly laminated or i^licated. 

It is a true Facelina, having only a single row of teeth, with the cen- 
tral denticle prominent. 

It is common from above low-water to 20 fathoms, on Obelia and other 
h^droids, from Massachusetts Bay to Block Island and Newport, R. I. 
This season it occurred abundantly among Obelia geniculata, on Lami- 
naria, off Block Island, in 18 to 20 fathoms, associated with large num- 
bers of Lamellidoris miiricata. 

This species is very closely related to the European species, Facelina 
Drummondii (Thomp., 1843) and F. elegans (Alder & Hancock). 

Facelina pilata (Gould) Verrill & Emerton. 

In its dentition this species agrees closely with the preceding, having 
but a single row of teeth, of nearly the same form. It should be 
referred properly to Facelina, although it does not agree strictly with 
the diagnoses of that genus, especially" in respect to the lamination of 
the dorsal tentacles, which are, in this species, nearly smooth. This 
character is, however, variable in this genus, the laminte being very 
prominent in F. coronata, rudimentary in F. elegans, and absent in 
F. pilata. 

Cratena Veronicae Verrill, sp. nov. 

Size moderate, about 25""" in length, rather stout. Dorsal papillae 
cylindrical, obtuse, moderately slender, arranged in twelve to fifteen 
regular transverse series on each side, the middle ones containing eight 
to ten or more papillae; anterior groups smaller, situated well forward, 



*Tlie species described by Bergh (Anat. Bid. til Kundskab. om ^olidierne, p. 102, 
pi. 5 a, 1864) under the name of Coryphella Bostoniensis is entirely distinct. It has 
three rows of teeth, and is closely related to Coryphella Mananensis Verrill (Stimpson 
sp.), common on our northern coasts. 



390 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

in front of the dorsal tentacles. Oral and dorsal tentacles nearly equal 
in length, moderately long, tapered, blunt. The dorsal tentacles appear 
slightly wrinkled transversely. Eyes black, conspicuous, near together, 
just behind the bases of the dorsal tentacles. Foot narrow, with broad, 
rounded anterior angles. Head moderately large, its outline nearly 
semicircular in front, and projecting considerably in advance of tlie 
bases of the oral tentacles. 

Color variable. In some specimens the nuclei of the dorsal papillae 
and the biliary ducts from them are dark green, the nuclei appearing to 
belobulated orfloculeut; the outer sheath is translucent whitish, with an 
interrupted streak of flake- white on the distal half, and with unequal 
specks and si)ots of the same scattered over the surface, while on the 
outer side, near the end, there is a patch of orange ; tip translucent 
white. In front of the bases of the dorsal tentacles there is a dark 
green patch. Tentacles white. 

In other specimens, taken at the same time, the nuclei of the dorsal 
papillae were salmon-colored, but the subterminal patch of orange and 
the streak and specks of flake- white were as in the green variety ; the 
body was translucent white; dorsal tentacles white, tinged or faintly 
reticulated with flake- white ; oral tentacles with a streak of flake- white 
on the posterior side. 

Odontophore narrow, with a single row of teeth ; these have thirteen 
sharp denticles, the median one scarcely as long as those next to it ; the 
anterior border of the tooth is nearly semicircular, with a notcli on each 
side near the outer ends, which run backward, as short processes, some- 
what enlarged and emarginate at the end. 

Oft" Cape Cod (station 328), in 2'3 fathoms, among hydroids, September 
6, 1879. 

This species is nearest allied to Cratena oUvacea (Alder & Hancock), 
but differs in the form of its teeth, as well as in its coloration. It is also 
allied to Cratena viridis, of Europe. In case either of the older names 
{Cavolina and Montagua) be retained for this group, this species should 
be so named. But both of these names having been previously used 
for other genera, they should be discarded. 

Cratena gymnota (Couthouy) Vernll & Emerton. 

Montaijua Gouldii Verrill, luvert. Viuey. Sound, p. 667 (author's copies, p. 373), 
1873. 

This species, which is common on littoral hydroids, from Massachu- 
setts Bay to New Haven, Conn., is a typical Cratena Bergh* (= Cavo- 
lina Alder & Hancock = Montagua auth.), and is very closely allied to 
C. aurantiaca (A. & H.) of Europe, with which its dentition agrees very 
nearly, even in minute details. In C. gymnota the coloration, also, is 
often similar to that of C. aurantiaca, but the dorsal papillae are fewer 

* In tlio excellent work of G. O. Sars tliis generic name has been, by some oversight, 
misapplied, in place of Cutliona, to include C. nana, which was the original type of 
Cuthona Alder & Hancock. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 391 

and longer, and their clusters are less numerous and less crowded. In 
case it be thought necessary to unite the two forms, Couthouy's name 
has priority. 

Tergipes despectus (Jolinst.) Alder & Hancock. 

The genuine despectus was distinguished from G. exigua by Mr. J. H. 
Emerton, at Salem, Mass., in 1879, when he made characteristic draw- 
ings of both and i^reparations of the odontophores, which I have exam- 
ined. During the present year he has found the former near N^ewport, 
R. I., on hydroids {Obelia) at low-water. The species described and 
figured by Gould (Binney's edition) under this name is really the Gal- 
vinia exigua Alder & Hancock, diflering widely in its dentition, there 
being three rows of teeth, instead of the single row, seen in Tergipes. 
But the T. despectus of my report on Invertebrates of Vineyard Sound, 
1873, was correctly named. Both species are found under the same con- 
ditions, but, according to Mr. Emerton, G. exigua is found in the spring 
and early summer, while T. despectus occurs later in the summer and 
in autumn. 

Acmaea rubella ? (Fabr.)- 

Tectura rubella G. O. Sars, Moll. Eeg. Arct. Norv., p. 1^1, pi. 8, figs. 5a,h; pi. 

ii, fig. 11 (ileutition).— Jeffreys, Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., for March, 

1877, p. 231. 
One specimen, without the animal, was dredged at station 894. It 
appears to agree closely with the species referred to, .except that the 
apex is not obtuse, and its color is pale yellowish white. There is no 
sculpture except irregular and rather distinct lines of growth. The 
apex is acute, bent directly backward, and situated at about the pos- 
terior fourth. The base is oblong-oval. Length, 5.5""-; height, 2.75""". 

HETEROPODA. 

Carinaria Atlantica Ad. & Reeve (?). 

Fragments occurred at station 865. They may have belonged to G. 
Mediterranea. 

Atalanta Peronii Lesueur. 

D'Orbigny, Voy. Am6r. M^rid., Moll., p. 171, pi. 12, figs. 1-15; Hist. I'lsle de 
Cuba, Moll., i, p. 102, 1853. 
Near George's Bank, latitude 41° 25' north, longitude 05° 5' to 05° 30' 
west (Messrs. S. I. Smith and O. Harger, 1872). 

PTEROPODA. 

Although the Pteropods are all, properly speaking, oceanic species, it 
is undoubtedly true that a certain group of species will be found to be 
characteristic of the waters adjacent to each coast. Hitherto those ob- 
served and recorded from near the shores of New England have been 
chiefly northern or arctic species, which follow the course of the arctic 
current along our coast. For this reason, in the winter and spring, the 
beautiful Clime papilionacea is frequently found as far south as Vineyard 



392 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Sound and the shores of Rhode Island. The Spinalis Gouldii Stimp. 
is probably also an arctic species, and is very closely related to, if not 
identical with, S. halea of the Arctic Ocean.* There are, however, a few 
of the more tropical species that have been already recorded as occa- 
sionally cast ashore dead, upon the southern shores of I^ew England. 
Of these Diacria trispinosa and CavoUna tridentata are the most com- 
mon. Of the former, I have also received numerous examples, with the 
animal in good condition, obtained by Mr. Samuel Powell, at Newport, 
E. I., several years ago, from the stomach of a blue-fish. This season 
two living specimens of it were taken off Block Island by Messrs. V. N. 
Edwards and N. P. Scudder, of our jiarty. The fresh shells of this spe- 
cies were dredged by us in 1871, near Martha's Viueyard, and this year 
we found it in abundance and perfectly fresh, in all our outer dredgings, 
70 to 100 miles off' shore. It was associated with Diacria trispinosa Gray 
and several other species, named below, but was far more numerous than 
any of the others. The following species are here introduced because 
of their common occurrence, evidently in large numbers, within a few 
miles of our coast. Several of them have not been recorded from so far 
north before, even in mid-ocean. 

Cavolina longirostris (Les. MSS., Bv.) H. & A. Ad. 

Myalwa longirostris Blainv., Diet. Sci. Nat., xxii, p. 81. — Rang, Hist. Nat. 

Pterop., p. 41, pi. 2, figs. 7-10, 185-2. 
Cavolina longirostra Gray, Catal. Moll. Brit. Mus., Pteropoda, p. 8. 

This smaU but elegant species occurred frequentl^^ in our dredgings, 
but not in large numbers (stations 867, 870, 876, 891, 894, &c.). 

Cavolina uncinata (D'Orb.) Gray, 1850; H. & A. Ad. 

Hyalwa uncinata D'Orb., 1836.— ^Rang, Hist. Nat. Pterop., p. 37, pi. 2, figs. 11- 
14, 1852. 

This occurred in many localities, with the last. Our specimens diifer 
from the figures referred to in having the median posterior spine more 
hooked and more abrujotly bent, so as to make nearly a right angle with 
the shell. 

Cavolina infleza (Les.) Gray. 

Uijalcea inflexa Lesueur; Blainv., Diet. Sci. Nat., xxii, p. 80. 

One perfect and full-grown specimen from station 894. 

Clio pyramidata Browne ; Linn6 ; Gmelin. 

Cleodora pyramidata Peron &, Les. ; Lamarck. 

Cleodora lanceolata Rang, Ann. des Sci. Nat., xvi, p. 497, j)l. 19, fig. 1. 

Clio pyramidata Gray, Catal. Moll. Brit. Mns., Pteropoda, p. 12, 1850. 

Several fresh but somewhat broken specimens of this species occurred 
at stations 865, 891 to 894. 

* It is very distinct from S. retroversus, to wbicli Jeffreys has formerly referred it. 
Botli the figure and description give it spiral lines, while the latter is very smooth. 
G. O. Sars identifies it with S. halea. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 393 

Balantium recurvum Cliilclren. 

Joiirn. Roy. lust., xv, p. 220, pi. 7, fig. 107, 1829.— Gray, Catal. Moll. Brit. 

Mus., Pteropoda, p. 14, 1850. 
Clcodora halantium Raug, Mag. Zool., 1834 ; Hist. Nat. Pterop., p. 52, pi. 5 fio- 
12; pi. X, fig. 7, 1852. 
Fragments occurred at stations 865 and 869. 

Styliola recta (Lesueur, MSS.) Blaiuv., Man. Mai., 1825. 

Creseis aclcula Rang, Ann, ties Sci. Nat., I, xiii, p. 318, pi. 17, fig. 6, 1828. 

Creseis clava Rang, Ann. des Sci. Nat., I, xiii, p. 317, pi. 17, fig. 5, 1828. 

Creseis acus Escb., Zool. Atlas, iii, pi. 15, fig. 2, 1831. 

Cleodora aclcula Rang, Hist. Nat. Pterop., p. 56, pi. 7, figs. 5,7,18.52. 
Near George's Bank, latitude 41° 25', longitude 65"^ 5' to 65° 30', Sep- 
tember, 1872, at surface (Messrs. S. I. Smith and O. Harger). 

Styliola virgula (Rang) Gray. 

Crcsds virgula Raug, Auu. des Sci. Nat., I, xiii, p. 316, pi. 17, fig. 2, 1828. 
Cleodora virgula Rang, Hist. Nat. Pterop., p. 57, pi. 13, figs. 20-24, 1852. 

Near George's Bank, with the preceding. 

SpiricUis MacAndrei Forbes & Hanley, ii, p. 384. 

)S2)irialis retrovcrsus (Flem.), variety ? MacAndrei, Jeffreys, Brit. Coucb., v, p. 
115, pi. 4, fig. 4 ; pi. 98, fig. 5.— G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Ai-ct. Norv., p. 330, 
pi. 29, figs. 3 a-f; pi. xvi, fig. 19 (dentition). 

Several entire and perfectly fresh specimens occurred at station 894. 
They agree with the form called var. IlaeAndrei by Jeffreys. 

Cymbulia calceolus Verrill. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 394, Nov., 1880. 

Test thick, transparent, broad-ovate or elliptical, rounded at both ends, 
covered, above and below, with low, rounded verructe ; aperture large, 
occupying more than half the length of the test, broad-ovate, posterior 
margin nearly straight; edges simple, unarmed. Animal pale pink, 
with a brown nucleus ; fins very large, connate, broadly rounded ; their 
outline taken together forms a long ellipse, considerably louger and 
somewhat broader than the test. Length of test of a medium-sized 
specimen, in alcohol, 19"""; breadth, 11"""; expanse of fins, 23'""'; their 
breadth, 12""". The largest specimens have the test about 40""" long, 
20""" broad. Stations 865 to 872 (near the surface), common; about 30 
miles east-southeast of Block Island, at surface, October 2, 1880 
(Messrs. Scudder and Edwards). 

Halopsyche Verrill, nom. nov. 

Psyche Raug, 1H25 {iwii Psi/che Linn(5, 1735, lice Psyche Schrauk, 1801). 

The name Psyche having been twice used before it was employed by 
Rang, it will be necessary to substitute another name for tliis genus of 
Pteropods. I therefore propose EaJopsyche. 

The type, and only known species, Halopsyche globulosa (Rang), 
inhabits the waters of Newfoundland and Nova Scotia. 



394 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES nItIONAL MUSEUM. 

SOLENOCONCHA. 

Deutalium occidentale Stimp. 

Shells of New England, 1851 (based on D. dentale Gould, let ed., p. 155, fig. 

5, not of European authors). 
Dentalium dentale Gould, Invert, of Mass., 2d ed., p. 266. 
Dentalium abyssorum M. Sars, 1858. 
DentaUiim striolatum Jeffreys (non Stimpson). 
Antalis striolata G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv.,p. 101, pi. 7, fig. 1; pi. 20, 

figs. 10 a, h ; pi. i, figs. 1 a-c, dentition (non Stimj»son sp.). 

This species is abundaut on muddy bottoms, in 50 to 300 fatlioms, all 
along tlie coast of New England and ]S"ova Scotia. 

Mr. Jeffreys, misled by a singular and unaccountable mistake, has 
constantly applied to this sulcated species the name given by Stimjison 
to our common, shallow- water, nearly .smooth form. In this mistake G. 
O. Sars and others have followed him. 

The question as to the specific distinctness of these two forms I do not 
propose to discuss at this time, but it is equally desirable that the 
respective names should be correctly applied, whether we regard the 
forms as varieties or species. Of D. striolatum, I have dredged thou- 
sands of specimens in shallow water in the Bay of Fundy, in the same 
region where Stimpson's original specimens were taken, and among them 
no specimens of " D. occidentale " are to be found. In other localities, how- 
ever, both species occur together. Both were taken this season on the 
outer banks, off Newport. But D. occidentale was by far the most com- 
mon, and Avas abundaut in the deeper stations, where D. striolatum did 
not occur at all. 

Among the specimens taken by us there are many that are more 
strongly ribbed and sulcated than usual, the ribs being more or less 
angular and elevated. In some of these, which are slender and about 
an incTi long, the internal surface of the shell has grooves corresponding 
to the external ribs, the shell being thin, but of uniform thickness, so that 
the two surfaces are parallel. In others of the same size the bore of the 
shell is smooth and round, the shell being thickened opposite the ribs. 
I am not prepared, however, to say that this is anything more than a 
varietal difference. 

The form of the posterior notch varies in all our species (or varieties) 
from a shallow notch to a triangular cut, and even to a deep slit. 

Siphonodentalium vitreum Sars. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 103, pi. 7, figs. 2 a-c; pi. i, figs. 2 «-/ (dentition). — Ver- 
rill. Trans. Conn. Acad., v, pi. 42, fig. 19. 

A tine, large specimen, probably belonging to this species, was 
dredged by the party on the " Bache ", in 1873, in the Gulf of Maine 
(station 12 B), in GO tixthoms, mud. 

The shell is smooth, round, very thin, transparent, and lustrous. It 
is slightly curved and exjiands gradually to the anterior end. The pos- 
terior opening is small and round, without lobes, but it probably has 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 395 

been broken off squarely. Length, 12"""; diameter of larger end, 2.5"™; 
of small end, .5"™. 

Another specimen of similar character, lO'""" long and 2.5""" broad, was 
dredged in the Gulf of Maine, 107 fathoms (station 9 B), 1873. With 
the last-named specimen there was, however, a i)erfect living specimen, 
7""" long and 2'"™ broad, having the posterior end perfect and i)rovided 
with the characteristic digitations around the opening. 

Siphonentalis affinis (Sars). 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 104, j)!. 20, fig. 12. — Verrill, Trans. Couu. Acad., v, pi. 
42, figs. 20 a-h. 

A specimen smaller and more slender than the preceding species, 
and which I refer to S. affinis, was dredged by us, in 1877, in Bedford 
Basin, near Halifax, Xova Scotia, 35 fathoms, soft mud. It is G"'" in 
length, I"'"' in breadth, slightly curved, round, smooth, glossy, aiul trans- 
lucent. The posterior opeuiug is small and appears to be perfect ; it 
shows only a faint indication of a notch on the convex side. 

Siphonentalis Lofotensis (M. Sars). 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 104, pi. 20, figs. 11 «, h; pi. i, fig. 3. 

A few specimens that agree well with the figures and description of 
this species were taken at station 891, in 500 fathoms. 

It is longer and more tapered than the last, and much less translucent. 

Cadulus propinquus G. O. Sars. 

Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 106, pi. 20, figs. 15 «, &; pi. i, fig. 5 (clentitiou). 

This shell occurred in considerable numbers, living, at station 871, in 
115 fathoms. It is a small, polished species, rather stouter and more 
swollen than the next. 

Cadulus Jeffreysii Monterosato. 

Cadulits subfusiformis ? Jeff"reys, British Coucli., v, p. 196, pi. 101, fig. 3 {non 
Sars, teste Mouter.). 
Several specimens of a small Cadulus, somewhat swollen in the middle 
and rather strongly bent, 1 refer to the above species. The posterior 
aperture is simple in most of them, but slightly notched iu others. 
Station 871. 

Cadulus Pandionis Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xx, p. 397, Nov., 1880. 
A very much larger, highly polished species occurred at many of the 
stations, but most abundantly at 869 to 871 and 873 to 877, in 85 to 192 
fathoms. It is swollen on the convex side, in the middle, and slightly 
angulated or gibbous at about the anterior third. It is transversely 
elliptical in section ; the auterior end decreases to the aperture, which 
is oblique, the Mp being prolonged on the concave side. I'osterior aper- 
ture small, with a semicircular notch above and below. Length, lO'"™; 
breadth, 2.25™"'; of mouth, 1.75"'"'; of posterior aperture, .40""". 



396 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONxVL MUSEUM. 
LAMELLIBRANCHIATA. 

Poromya granulata (Nyst) Forbes & Hanley. 

G. 0., Sars, op. cit., p. 90, figs. 6 a, h. — Verrill, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, pi. 44, 
figs. 3, 4. 

Several adult living examples of this shell were dredgefl in 1872 by Dr. 
A. S. Packard and Mr. C. Cooke, on the Coast Survey steamer "Bache", 
in the Gulf of Maine, in 150 fathoms, mud. This season it was taken at 
station 865, in 05 fathoms. It has not previously been recorded as 
American. 

In form and size it somewhat resembles Thracia myopsis, but is easily 
distinguished by the small granules scattered over the exterior, and by 
the j)eculiar hinge, very different from that of Thracia. The right valve 
has a prominent, recurved, cardinal tooth. On the European coast it 
ranges from the Lofoden Islands to the Mediterranean, in deep water. 

Poromya rotundata Jeffreys. 

Anuals aud Mag. Nat. Hist., Dec, 1870, p. 494 (Valorous Expedition, Mol- 
lusca). 

Shell rounded, thin, translucent, pearly within. External surface 
closely covered with small, rounded, obtuse granules, arranged mostly 
in close quincunx, and distinctly forming radiating lines, but in some 
parts appearing to be also in concentric lines. The narrow intervals 
between these lines of granules show the iridescent surface of the shell. 
These granules give a shagreen-like appearance to the shell. The gran- 
ules show through on the inside, giving a finely tessellated appearance. 
The shell is but little longer than broad, convex ; ventral aud anterior 
edges evenly rounded ; posterior dorsal edge a little sloj)iug, and form- 
ing an obtusely rounded angle where it meets the curvature of the pos- 
terior end. Hinge of right valve with a prominent conical tooth, fitting 
into a corresponding pit in the left valve. 

South of Martha's Viuej^ard, stations 8G5 and 871, G5 to 115 fathoms, 
living ; Xorth Atlantic, 1,450 fathoms (Jeffreys). 

Lyonsiella abyssicola M. Sars ; Friele. 

Pecchiolia abyssicola G. O. Sars, Remarkable Forms Anim. Life, i, p. 25, pi. 3, 
figs. 21-43; Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 108, pi. 20, figs. 5 a-d. 

A few good living specimens of this interesting addition to the Ameri- 
can fauna were dredged by our party this season, south of Martha's 
Vineyard and Newport, in 192 to 500 fathoms, fine, compact sand aud 
mud (stations 869, 880, 891, 892, 894). 

Lyonsiella gemma Verrill, sp. nov. 

Shell small, iridescent, white, with raised radii, broad-oval, widest 
and broadly rounded anteriorly, expanded and broadly rounded ven- 
trally, posterior end short, narrowed, and tapered to an obtuse point. 
The beak is subcentral, but a little nearer tlie anterior end, prominent, 
inflated, strongly curved inward and forward. Dorsal margin abruptly 
incurved opposite the beaks and decidedly expanded and excurved in 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 397 

front of them, so as to rise nearly to a level with the umbos ; internally, 
oj)posite the tips of the beaks, there is a smooth swelling within the 
margin. Hinge margin thin, toothless, but with an internal scar behind 
the beaks, where the ligament and ossicle were attached (the ligament 
is gone). Palial sinus very small, angular. Shell less thin than in the 
preceding species. Sculpture numerous, very delicate, slightly raised 
lines, which radiate from the beaks over the whole surface ; they are 
separated by much wider interspaces, which are smooth and iridescent, 
and not at all excavated. Length, 4.5"™; height (beak to ventral mar- 
gin), 4""™. 

One perfect specimen, station 892, 487 fathoms, associated with L. 
abyssicola. 

From the latter it differs widely in shape, having nothing of the rect- 
angular form so characteristic of that species ; the latter is also uuich 
less expanded anteriorly and much more so posteriorly, being far more 
inequilateral and more elongated. 

Keunerlia glacialis (Leacli) Carpenter. 

Pandora (jladalis Leach, Rosse's Voyage, appendix, p. 174. — Leclie, Kongl. 
Vetensk.-Akad. Handl., Baud 16, p. 11, pi. 1, figs. 1 a, h, 1878 (author's 
copy). 

Living specimens of this arctic shell were dredged at station 873, in 
100 fathoms. It had previously been recorded from the Gulf of Saint 
Lawrence by Whiteaves, but Avas not known to occur on the Kew 
England coast. It differs widely from the common CUdiopliora trilincata 
CpT.{ = Pandora trilineata Saj^), in the absence of the internal radiating 
ridges, in its more inequilateral and irregular form, and in the greater 
convexity of the upi)er valve. The lower valve is very flat, or even con- 
cave, and is marked externally with several distinct radiating lines. 

Neaera glacialis. 

G. O. Bars, op. cit.,p. 88, yA. 6, figs. 8 a-c— Verrill, Trans. Conn. Acad., v., pi. 
44, fig. 10 1). 

A form of N'eccra, agreeing perfectly with this, is common on muddy 
bottoms, in 50 to 192 fathoms, off the coasts of New England and iiTova 
Scotia. We have dredged it off Cape Cod, off Cape Ann, off Casco Bay, 
in the Bay of Fundy, and in numerous localities in the Gulf of Maine 
and off Nova Scotia, since 1872 ; and recently, south of Newport and 
Martha's Vineyard, in 05 to 500 fathoms. The larger specimens exceed 
an inch in length. 

Among our numerous examples there is, however, considerable varia- 
tion, both in the form of the shell and in the size and shape of the car- 
tilage-pit and lateral teeth. Moreover, the variations in the hinge are 
not correlated with the differences in the breadth and length of the 
rostrum. Therefore, it seems to me probable that this shell should be 
considered merely a variation of -i\\ arctica. The latter, in its typical 
form, occurs in the same localities and in about the same numbers, and 



398 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

some examples grow to even greater size, being 1.25 inches long. In 
our s^iecimens (see Trans. Conn. Acad., v, pi. 44, fig. 10 a) tlie rostrum 
is usn ally longer and narrower than in the specimen figured by Sars,» 
approaching in this respect his figure of N. glaciaUs, but with the 
cartilage-pit as large and broad as in his JUi. arctica. In fact, the ma- 
jority of our specimens may be described as intermediate between the 
two forms figured by Sars. 

Neaera obesa Lov^n (1846) =N. pellucida Stimpson (1852). 

Associated with the preceding, in most of the localities named, I have 
found another form, often .5 of an inch or more in length, which I con- 
sider identical with I^eccra obesa of Lovdn, and which often agrees well 
with the figures of this species given by G. O. Sars, but with the ros- 
trum more commonlj^ somewhat shorter. The cartilage-pit has the same 
form as the one figured by Sars. The young of this shell is the Necvra 
pellucida of Stimpson, without doubt. I have repeatedly dredged it in 
his original locality. 

JSfemra obesa, as thus determined, is closely allied, in form and struct- 
ure, to N. arctica and var. glacialis. Its texture is thinner, more deli- 
cate, more translucent, and smoother, oi* with less conspicuous lines of 
growth, and freer from adherent mud. These differences are not merely 
due to age, for I have examined both forms, of various sizes, from .10 of 
an inch or less, in length, up to the full-grown specimens. 

The largest specimens of JV. obesa are, however, rarely more than .50 
of an inch in length. The shell is usually very swollen and ventricose, 
rather abruptly contracted posteriorly at the base of the rostrum, which 
is rather narrow and not very long, but varies considerably in length 
and breadth. The cartilage plate is prominent, and projects inward so 
as to form a distinct angle. 

Neaera jugosa S. Wood. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 83, pi. 6, figs. 9 a-c. 

This species is easily distinguished from all others found on our coast 
by its concentric raised lamell*. Station 894, 365 fathoms, off JS^ewport, 
E.I.* 

Neaera rostrata (Spengler) Lov^u. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 89, pi. G, figs. 7 a, h. 

Several fine, large specimens of this species were dredged by us about 
70 to 75 miles south of Martha's Vineyard, in 85 to 115 fathoms, and 90 
to 100 miles south from i^ewport, E. I., in 120 to 500 fathoms. It is 
easily distinguished from the forms above mentioned by its very long 
and narrow liosterior beak or rostrum, and by the oval form of the shell. 
It has a nearly smooth surface. 

Neaera multicostata Verrill &, Smith, sp. nov. 

This is a large and very distinct species, easily distinguished from all 
others known on our coast by the strong radiating ribs which cover the 



PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 399 

whole surface of the shell. The shell itself is rather large, swollen 
subovate, well-rounded ventrally, but obliquely subtruncate anteriorly. 
Eostrum rather short, narrow, well defined, tapered ; on the rostrum 
there are eight or nine rather broad, low, radiating costse. The body of 
the shell is covered with regular, raised and strong, radiating costa?, 
over fifty in number, separated by deep grooves of about the same 
width as the costse; anteriorly these ribs become small; posteriorly, 
near the base of the rostrum, five or six become much larger than the 
rest, and have smaller ones alternating with tliem. 

Color yellowish white ; in life rosy, from the internal organs showing 
through. Length, 19"""; beak to ventral edge, 12""". 

South of Martha's Vineyard, 115 fathoms ; about 90 to 100 miles 
south of Newport, 85 to 120 fathoms, stations 871, 873, 874, 870, &c. 
Several living specimens of various sizes. 

Cardium, sp. 

A roundish species of Cardium, about 18™"' in diameter, is represented 
by a single valve, in good condition. The surface is rather closely and 
regularly cancellated. The ribs are smooth, without scales or spines. 
It was taken at station 8G5. 

Astarte crenata Gray. 

Parry's Voyage, app. — Friele, Catal. Norv. Nordmeer-Exp. Spitzb., Miill., p. 

267, 1879. 
? Astarte crehricostata Forbes; Jeffreys; G. O. Sars; and other European 

writers. 
Astarte crehricostata Gould, Invert., Mass., 2d ed., p. 12G, fig. 440 (var. lens). 
Astarte Jens (Stimp., MSS.) Verrill, Amer. Journ. Sci., iii, p. 287, 1872. 

Large numbers of specimens, which seem to agree closely with the 
typical arctic and deep-water form of this species, were taken at nearly 
all the stations, in 65 to 500 fathoms. It was most abundant at stations 
880, 894, 895. 

These form series that appear to graduate into the large, broad, flat- 
tened form to which the name lens has been applied, which is abundant 
in the Bay of Fundy and Gulf of Maine, in 50 to 150 fathoms. 

The typical form is smaller, more swollen, with the edges more 
rounded, and less expanded posteriorly. All the forms have the edges 
regularly crenulated. 

Cryptodon Sarsii (Phil.). 

Axiniis Sarsii G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 60, pi. 19, figs. 5 a,l). 

A single dead specimen of a shell agreeing very closely with this 
form, as figured by G. O. Sars, was dredged by our party, in 1879, off 
Cape Cod. 

Crypton obesiis Verrill. 

Amer. .Jouru. Sci., iii, p. 287, pi. 7, fig. 2, 1872. 

I may take this occasion to remark that Sars's figure (pi. 19, fig. 7) of 

C. obesus Verrill does not represent the large form described by me 

under that name, which is remarkable not only for its swollen form, but 



400 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

also for its great height (from beak to ventral edge), as compared with 
its length, while the shell figured by Sars is broadly rounded, more like 
our tyi)ical C. Gouldii, of which I am inclined to consider it the adult 
state. 

Very large and characteristic specimens of the typical C. obesus, sev- 
eral of them more than lo""" broad, but mostly dead, have been fre- 
quently dredged this season, off Newport, E. I., in 12 to 20 fathoms, and 
especially at stations 865-871, 873, 876, and 877, in 65 to 192 fathoms, 
, south of Martha's Vineyard and Newport. 

Cryptodon ferruginosus ? (Forbes). 

Axinus ferriKjinosus G. O. Sars, Moll. Eeg. Arct. Norv., p. 63, j)l. 19, ligs. 10 a, h. 

Living specimens were taken at station 871, in 115 fathoms. They 
were thickly incrusted with iron-oxide, which adheres very tenaciously ; 
beneath this crust the shell is usually much eroded. 

Loripes lens Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Jouru. Sci., xs, !>. 400, Nov., 1880 (publislied Oct.). 

Shell rather thin, moderately convex, well rounded, nearly equilat- 
eral ; beaks acute, a little j)rominent, curved forward 5 lunule small, 
deeply excavated, cordate; ligamental area long, narrow-lanceolate, a 
little sunken, so that the ligament scarcely rises to a level with its 
edges. The posterior dorsal outline of the shell is nearly straight or 
but slightly convex ; the posterior end is very obtusely rounded or sub- 
truncate, making a slight angle with the dorsal edge and a very 
obtusely rouuded one with the ventral edge, which is evenly curved 
and continuous with the regularly- rounded anterior end; dorsal edge iu 
front of the beaks incurved. Surface rather smooth, especially toward 
the umbos, but with more or less numerous and irregular lines of growth, 
marked by thin and slightly raised lines, which become more regular 
and more conspicuous at each end of the shell, and especially poste- 
riorly. A faint ridge runs from the beak to the posterior ventral angle. 
A slight undulation or depression (often obsolete) runs from tbe beak to 
the upper i^art of the anterior edge, bounding a small anterior dorsal 
area. Hinge without any distinct teeth. Anterior muscular scar elon- 
gated, somewhat sinuous; posterior one small, ovate. Shell usually 
yellowish white; young specimens, when living, are translucent, flesh- 
color, owing to the animal showing through. Length of the larger 
specimens, 14™"'; breadth or height, 12.5'"'". 

Dredged in 1879 in many localities oft' Cape Cod, in 50 to 100 fathoms; 
iu 1880 common at nearly all the outer stations, in G5 to 192 fathoms 
(stations 865 to 877). Most of the specimens are dead, but fresh. 

Tellimya ferruginosa (Mont.). 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 70, pi. 20, figs. 1 a-c. 

Montacuta ferruginosa Jeffreys, Brit. Conch., ii, p. 210; v, pi. 31, fig. 9. 

Several living specimens from stations 892, 893, and 894, in 365 to 487 
fathoms. They were all thickly coated with a brown ferruginous crust, 
beneath which the shell is usually eroded. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 401 

Leda unca Gould. 

Proc. Bost. Soc. Nat. Hist., viii, p. 282, 1862.— Otia Conch., p. 239 (=? Leda 
acuta Conrad, described as fossil). 

Many of our specimens are much larger than the shells described by 
Gould and Conrad. Our larger specimens are IS""" long, 8""" broad. 

This shell is rather strong and thick, oval, swollen, rounded anteriorly, 
but posteriorly narrowed to an acute, short, angular beak, at the base of 
which there is a slight incurvature of the ventral edge. The nearly 
straight posterior dorsal edge slopes regularly to the beak, and is some- 
what compressed or keeled. The whole surface is covered with numer- 
ous prominent, regular, rounded, concentric ribs, separated by deep 
grooves of about the same width. On the posterior dorsal area these 
ribs are smaller, and are often nearly obsolete close to the edge. 

Taken in considerable numbers, alive and dead, at many of the sta- 
tions, both south of Martha's Vineyard and south of Newport, E. L, in 
85 to 155 fathoms, especially at stations 871, 873, 874, and 876. 

This species appears to be allied to L. Messanensis Cant. (= L. acumi- 
nata Jeff.), from deep water in the Mediterranean. 

Leda pernula (Miiller). 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 35, pi. 5, fig. 1 a-d. 

A specimen that appears to be a typical example of this speceies was 
dredged by us in 1877, olf Halifax, in 59 fathoms. It has a smooth, 
lustrous, 5'ellowish-green epidermis. The concentric grooves are irreg- 
ular and mostly obsolete, except anteriorly, where they are fine and 
close. The form is similar to that of L. tenuisulcata. Length, 23"""; 
height, 10""". 

Yoldia fiigidia Torell. 

Spitz. Moll., p. 148, pi. 1, fig. 3, 1859.— G. O. Sars, MoU. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 39, 
pi. 4, figs. 11 a, h. 

This species occurred at station 894. It had not previously been ob- 
tained off the Kew England coast, but had been dredged in the Gulf of 
Saint Lawrence, by Whiteaves, in 200 fathoms. 

Area glacialis Gray. 

G. O. Sars, op. cit., p. 43, pi. 4, figs. 1 a-c. — VerriU, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, 
pi. 44, fig. 5. 

This species has been dredged in numerous locahties by the various 
dredging parties of the IJnited States Fish Commission, since 1872, in 
the Bay of Fundy, Gulf of Maine, off Cape Cod, on George's and Le 
Have Banks, and off Halifax, Nova Scotia, at various depths from 90 
to 430 fathoms; about 70 to 75 miles south of Martha's Vineyard, in 
115 to 192 fathoms, and south of Newport, in 85 to 500 fathoms. It 
attaches itself to pebbles or gravel-stones by a smaU but strong ventral 
byssus. 

The shorter and more rounded form, known us Area pecttmctdoides 
Scacchi, also occurs on our coast, as well as the deformed variety called 
var. se^tentrionalis by G. O. Sars. These appear to me to be mere vari- 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 26 Jaii.10,1881. 



402 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

ations of A. glacialis. The shortest and most rounded forms that we have 
taken were dredged south of Martha's Vineyard and south of J^ewport, 
in 85 to 225 fathoms, this season. 

Limopsis cristata (?) Jeffreys. 

Ann. and Mag. Nat. Hist., 1876, p. 434; Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1879, p. 585, 
pi. 4G, fig. 8. 

A few dead specimens, referred doubtfully to this species, occurred at 
stations 865 to 867 and at 870 and 871, in 65 to 155 fathoms. 

Limopsis minuta (Philippi). 

G. O. Sars, Moll. Reg. Arct. Norv., p. 44, pi. 3, figs. 5 a-c. 

Limopsis ftoreaZis Jeffreys, Brit. Conch., ii, p. 164; v, p. 174, pi. 100, fig. 3. 

This shell was taken in abundance, living, at stations 893, 894 and 895, 
in 238 to 372 fathoms ; in smaller numbers at 891 and 892, in 487 to 500 
fathoms ; and sparingly at several other localities in 115 to 252 fathoms. 

Modiola poUta Verrill & Smith. 

Amer. Journ. Sci., xx, p. 400, for Nov., 1880 (published Oct. 25). 

Two living specimens were taken at station 895, in 238 fathoms. 

Avicula hirundo (?) L., var. uitida, nob. 

The shell is very inequivalve, the right shell being smaller and flatter, 
and much bent inward near its ventral edge. The form is very oblique, 
with the anterior ear small and short, in the left valve, and separated from 
the body of the shell by a slight incurvature of the edge, from which a- 
depression runs to the beak ; right valve with a shallow byssal notch. 
Posterior ala short, triangular, with a rounded incurvature of the pos- 
terior edge of the shell, separating it from the body of the shell, which 
is produced and rounded at the end. Surface nearly smooth, glossy, 
and somewhat iridescent, with regular but inconspicuous lines of growth, 
which on the anterior ears rise up into thin, wavy lamellae. 

Color translucent, pale yellowish, usually with a brown streak radi- 
ating from the beak to the outer edge. 

Length, beak to outer edge, 13""" j length of hinge-line, 11""" j beak to 
end of j)osterior ala, 8""". 

This shell was found in considerable numbers adhering to hydroids, 
in 65 to 192 fathoms, south of Martha's Vineyard (stations 865 to 867, 
and 869 to 873). In form it resembles the young Avicula hirundo of 
Florida and the West Indies. It is, however, much smoother and more 
lustrous than any specimens of that species which I have hitherto seen, 
and may well prove to be a distinct species, for which I would, in that 
case, propose the name nitida. 

Linidea subovata (Jeffreys). 

Lima sulovata Jeffreys, Annals and Mag. Nat. Hist., Nov., 1876, p. 427. 

Shell small, white, ovate, nearly equilateral, with the valves convex, 
much swollen in the middle; beaks prominent, incurved; hinge-line 
straight, shorter than the shell ; ligament-pit narrow, elongated, lunate. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 403 

Sculpture very numerous (70 to 80 or more) radiating ribs, fine later- 
ally, increasing in strength on each side to the middle, where there are 
two or three ribs considerably larger than the rest, with wider intervals ; 
the ribs and intervals are crossed by fine, close, raised lines of growth. 

Interior with radiating lines corresponding to the external ones. 
Length, 4'""; height (beak to ventral edge), 7"""; thickness, 4""". Sta- 
tion 880, 255 fathoms, scarce ; 891 to 894, 365 to 500 fathoms, common. 

Limica gibba { = Lima gibba Jeffreys, op. cit., p. 428) also differs but 
little from our specimens. 

Pecten fenestratus Forbes (?). 

Eeport on MoUusca, &c., of ^geau Sea, p. 140, in Proc. British Assoc, for 1843. 
Pecten inequiscidptiis Tiberi (teste Jeffreys). 

A small, but elegantly colored and sculptured, inequivalve Fecten was 
taken living at station 872. This I refer doubtfully to the above-named, 
Mediterranean deep-water species. In our two examples the upper valve 
is finely and regularly cancellated, with fine radiating and concentric 
lines ; the under valve is covered with fine, raised, concentric ribs only. 
Ears prominent. Color whitish and different shades of red and brown, 
irregularly mottled. 

Pecten, sp. (near P. opcrcularis). 

Fragments of a large and peculiar Pecten occurred at stations 873 and 
874. They closely resemble, in sculpture, the P. opercularis of Europe, 
except that the large ribs are triangular and carinated at summit, 
instead of rounded. These large ribs are separated by equally wide, 
concave interspaces, which, like the ribs, are marked by slightly con- 
cave, radiating furrows, and the surface of these furrows is covered with 
thin, concentric, slightly raised, wavy plates, the waves being limited 
by the fine radiating ridges between the grooves. Interior of valves 
with broad, flat grooves, alternating with flat ribs of the same width. 
Color grayish white, the ribs pale reddish. 

List of species enumerated in the preceding article. 

fOne asterisk signifies that the speciii'a is an addition to the New England or Korth American fauna; 
two, that it is a newly discovered species; E = European; G = Greenlandic ; M = middle region of 
New England, or both north and south of Cape Cod; N = northern coasts of America (Cape Cod to 
Labrador) ; s — southern ; o — oceanic ; P = North Pacific. ] 



* * Heteroteuthis ienera V. 

* G. E. Gonattis amccnus (Moll.) Gray. 

* * CalHteuthis reversa V. 

* * AUoiJOSus mollis V. 

* o. E. Argonauta Artjo Linn€. 

* G. E. Bela Pingelii (Moller). 

* N. E. Bela Sarsii Verrill. 

* E. N. Bela ienuicostata Sars. 

N. E. Bela Treoehjana (Turton). 

Bf. Bela cancellata (Migb.) St. 

* N. E. Bela impressa Morcb. 

' N. G. E. Bela exarata (Moller). 



G. E. Bela rugulata (Moller). 

p. E. Bela simplex (Middend.). 

* * Bela hebes Verrill. 

* * Pleurotoma Agassizii V. & S. 

* * Pleurotoma Pandionis V. & S. 

* * Pleurotoma Carpenteri V. & S. 

* * Taranis pulcliella V. 

* E. Taranis Miirchii (Malm) Jeff. 

* s. Marginella roscida ? Rav. 

G. E. Tritonofusus later iceus (MoU.) 
Morcb. 

* * Neptunea {Sipho) cwlata Verrill. 



404 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



* # 

* E.N. 

* N. G. E. 

* * 

N. G. E. 

**N. 

* * 

* G. E. 
N. G. E. 

**N. 

* P. E. X. 

* G. E. N. 
* *M. 

*E. 
*N.G.E. 

* # 

* *N. S. 

*E. 

* * 



• N. E. 

* * N. S. 

* # 

* * 

* E. N. 
*E. 

*E. 

E. 

* E. 

N. S. • 

* * 

* # 

* E. N. 

* # 

N. E. 
*E. 

* N. E. 

N. E. 

*E. 
*E. 

N. S. 

N. 
« « 

• E.N. 

• E.N. 
•E. N. 



Neptunea (Sq)ho) arata Verrill. 
Neptunea j)ropinqua (Alder). 
Buccinum cyaneum Briig. 

Nassanigrolabra V. 
Lunaiia nana (Mollei"). 
Lunatia levicula V. 
Lamellaria pellucida V. 
Marsenina prodita Bergli. 
Marsenina glahra (Couth.) V. 

Marsenina ampla Verrill. 

Velutella cryptospira (MiddencL). 
Tricliotropis conica MoUer. 
Cingula liarpa Verrill. 
Cingula turgida (Jeff.) V. 
Cingula Jan-Mayeni (Friele) V. 
LepeUlla tuhicola V. & S. 
Lovenella Whiteavesii Verrill. 
Truncatella truncatulus (Drap.). 
Solarium horeale V. & S. 
Soalaria Pourtalesii V. & S. 
Scalaria DalUana V. & S. 
Scalaria, sj>. 
Acirsa gracilis Verrill. 
Aclis Walleri Jeff. 
Aclis striata Verrill. 
Calliostoma Bairdii V. & S. 
Margarita regalis V. «fc S. 
Margarita lameUosa V. & S. 
Margarita, sp. 

Macliairoplax bella ( Verk. ) Friele. 
Cyclostrema trochoides (J.) Sars. 
Assiminea Grayana Leaeli. 
Eulima intermedia Cant. 
Eulima distorta Desli. 
Turbonilla nivea (Stimp.). 
Ttirhonilla Eaihbuni V. & S. 
TurhoniUa formosa V. & S. 
Turhonilla SmitJiii Verrill. 
Eulimella ventricosa (Forbes). 
Odostomia (Menestlio) sulcata V. 
Odostomia unidentata (Mont.). 
Auriculina insculpta ? (Mont.) G. 

O. Sars. 
Diaphana nitldula (Lov^n). 
Diaphana pertenuis (Migli.) V. 
Diaphana gemma V. 
Diaphana conulus (Desh.). 
Amphisphyra glohosa Lov^n. 
Amphisphyra pellucida (Br.) 

Lov6n. 
Cylichna Gotildii (Couth.) V. 
Philine amahilis Verrill. 
Philine Finmarchica Sars. 
Philine fragilis G. O. Sars. 
Philine eingulata G. 0. Sars. 



N. 

M. 



M. 

# » X 



* N. E. 

N. E. 
N. E.G. 

*o. 

* o. 

* o. 
*o. 
*o. 
*o. 

* o. 

* o. 

* o. 
*o. 

** o. 

N. 

N. E. 

N. E. 

N. E. 

* E. 
*E. 

*E. 

# * 

*E. 

* N. E. 

*E. 

* N. E. 

*N. E. 
N. E. 
N. E. 



*N 

* XT 



"■ E. 

# * 

* # 

*E. 

*E. 
M. 

*E. 
*N. 8. 



Pleurohranchwa tarda V. 
Dcndronotus elcgans V. 
Doris complanata V. 
Polycerella Bnifn'toni V. 
Coryphvlla noMlis V. 
Corypholla Stimpsoni V. 
Facolina Bostonicnsis (CouLli.) V. 

&Em. 
Facolina pilaia (Gould) Y. & Em. 
Cratena Veronicce V. 
CraUma gymnota (Couth.) V. & 

Em. 
Tergipes despectus ( Johnst. ) A, 



&' 



H. 



Galvinia exigua A. & H. 

Acmwa rubella (Fabr.) Dall. 

Atlanta Peronii (Les.). 

Carinaria Atlantica Ad. & R. 

Carolina longirostris (Les.). 

Carolina uncinata (Gray). 

Carolina inflcxa (Les.) Gray. 

Clio pyramidata Liun^. 

Balaniium recurvum Children. 

Styliola acicula (Rang). 

Styliola virgula (Rang). 

Spirialis MacAndrei Forbes & 
Han. 

Cymbulia calceolus V. 

Halopsyche globulosa (Rang) V. 

Dentalium occidentale Stimpson. 

Siphonodentalium vitremn Sars. 

Siphonentalis affinis Sars. 

Siphonentalis Lofotensis G. O. Sars. 

Cadulus propinqims G. O. SarS; 

Cadulus Jeffrey six (Monteros.). 

CaduZus Pandionis V. & S. 

Poromya rotundata .Jeff. 

Poromya granulala (Nyst) Forbes 
&H. 

Lyonsiella abyssicola Sars. 

Lyonsiella gemma Verrill. 

Kennerlia glacialis (Leach) Carp, 

Necera glacialis G. O. Sars. 

Necera arctica Lov^n. 

Necera obesa Lov€n (=J^r. pellu- 
cida St.). 

Necera jugosa S. Wood. 

Necera rostrata (Speng.) Lov6n. 

Necera multicostata V. & S. 

Cardinm, sp. ind. 

Tellimya ferruginosa (Mont.). 

Cryptodon Sarsii (Phil.). 

Cryptodon obesus Verrill. 

Cryptodon ferniginosus ? (Forbes). 

Lorixics lens V. & S. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 405 



N. E. Asiarte crcnata Gray ( = J. lens 
Stimii.). 

* s. Leda iiiica Gould. 

* N. E. Leda pernula (Miill.). 

* E. Yoldia expmisa Jeff. ? 

* N. E. Yoldia frUjida Torell. 
* N. G. E. Area gladulis Gray. 

N. E. Area pectunculoides Scacclii. 

* E. Limopsis crisiaia Jeff. ? 



* s. 

* X. E. 
X. E. 



Limopsis minula (Phil.). 
Modiola poliia V. & S. 
Avicula hirundo? var. nifida V. 
Pecten vitreiis (Gmel.) Wood. 
Pecten Hoslcijnsi Forbes, var. piis- 

tulosus V. 
Pecten fenestratus Forbes ? 
Pecten, sj). (near opercularis). 
Limcea suhovata (Jeff.) Mouter. 



PART III.— CATALOGUE OF MOLLUSCA RECENTLY ADDED TO THE 
FAUNA OF SOUTHERN NE"W ENGLAND. 

By A. E. VERRILL. 

The following lists include 130 species of Mollusca that have recently 
been added to the fauna of Southern New England, mainly through the 
researches of the dredging party of the United States Fish Commission 
on the steamer ' ' Fish Hawk ". The greater portion of these, with several 
others undetermined or not yet described, were taken on September 4 
and 13 and October 2, on the outer bank or slope, 70 to 115 miles south 
from Martha's -Vineyard and Newport, K. I., in 65 to 500 fathoms. For 
a list of these localities see p. — . 

In these lists those species which were unrecorded from or entirely 
new to ISTew England or to the northeastern coast of America are indicated 
by an asterisk ; previously' undescribed species by two asterisks ; those 
known previously from our northern coasts have N prefixed ; those from 
the middle i^arts of the coast have m, and are neither specially southern 
nor northern ; those oceanic species belonging to the surface fauua have 
o prefixed; southern forms are designated by s; those that are also 
known from Europe are designated by e ; those peculiar to America 
by A. 

In the tables, living specimens are indicated by an asterisk; dead ones 
by a dagger ; m signifies many; sv, several; r, rare; I, unusually large; 
j, young. 

List of Mollusca from the outer ianks previously unknown south of Cape Cod. 





Stations < 


865 
to 
867 


872 
to 
874 


870 
to 

878 


869 


879 

880 
895 


893 
804 


891 
892 






64 
to 
65 


85 
to 
100 


115 
to 
155 


192 

■ 


225 
to 
282 


365 
to 
372 


487 
to 






500 




eEPHALOPODA. 












*1 








*m. 


*oi. 


*in. 

*2 

*'8V. 


*m. 
* ev. 


*6V. 

*3 
* 8V. 
*3 








*2 

*8V. 

*2 










* 


*1 


** 






*1 


*0.E. 


Argouauta Argo Linne 


t 




f 




ta. 



406 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
List of MoUusca previously unknown south of Cape Cod — Coutinued. 



' N. E. 
'N. E. 
' N. E. 



■ N. E. 

*?S. 



* K. E. 
N. A. 



N. A. 
N. E. 



*N.E. 



•* N. 
*N. E. 
N. E. 



N. E. 

* E. 
*N. E. 
N. A. 
N. B. 
*N. E. 
*N. E. 
** 



*N. E. 
N. E. 
N. E. 



Stations 



865 
to 

867 



872 
to 
874 



Depths in fathoms . 



GASTROPODA. 

Admete Conthouyi Jay (= A. viridula Gld.) 

Pleurotoma Pandionis Y 

Pleurotoma Agassizii V. & S 

Pleurotoma Carpenteri V. & S 

Bela impressa Morch (27 to 29 fathoms) 

Bela teuuicostata Sars 

Bela simplex Midd. (smooth) 

Bela hebi-s Vtriill 

Bela violacea (Mi^^h.) Ad. (27 to 29 fathoms) 

Bela exarata (Moll.) Ad 

Taranis pulchella V 

Taranis Morchii Sars 

Mar<;inella roscida? Rav 

Neptunea decemcostata (Say) Ad 

Neptunea propiuqua (Alder) 

Neptunea arata V. & S 

Neptunea caelata V 

Tritonofusus latericeus (Moll.) Morch 

Nassa nigrolabra V 

Anachis costulata (Cant.) 

Lunatia Gronlaudica (Moll.) Ad 

Lunatia nana (Moll.) (27 to 29 fathoms) 

Lunatia levicnla V. (27 to 29 fathoms) 

Lamelliiria prllucida T 

Cingula Jau-Mayeni (Friele) V 

Cingula eaiinata Migh 

Cingula harpa V 

Cingula turgida (Jeff. ) 

Lovenidla Whiteavesii Verrill 

Ajjorrhais occidentalis Beck 

Torellia ves'^ita Jeff 

Lepetella tubicola V. & S 

Acmaea rubella (Fabr. ) 

Scalaria DalUana V. & S 

Scalaria Pourtalesii V. & S 

Scalaria (sp. ind.) 

Acirsa gracilis V 

Solarium boreale V. & S 

Aclis striata "V 

Aclis Walleri J. 

Calliostoraa occidentale (Migh. ) 

Calliostoma Bairdii V. & S 

Margarita regalis V. & S 

Margarita lamellosa Y. & S 

Cydostrema trochoides (J.) 

Puncturella noachina (L. ) Lowe 

Eulima intermedia Cantr 

Eulima distora Desh 

Turbonilla nivea (St.) Ad 

Turliouilla Rathbuni V. >fc S 

Turbonilla formosa V. &. S 

Turbonilla Smithii V 

()dost(»mia sulcata V 

Odostomia unidentata (Mont. ) 

Auricxdina insculpta ? (Mont. ) Sars 

Eulimella ventricosa Forbes 

Ringicula nitida V 

Scapbander punoto-striata (Migh.) Ad 

Philiiie Finmarchica Sai-s 

Philine cingulata Sars 

PhUiue amabilis V 

Amphiaphyra globosa Loveu ... - 

Amphisphyra pellucida (Brown) Loven 

Diaphana gemma V 

Diaphana conulus (Desh.) V 

Diaphana nitidula (Lov. ) 

Diaphana pertonuis (Mighels) 

Cylichua otculta (Migh.) Ad 

Pieurobraucba^a tarda V. (27 fathoms) 

Doris complanata V 

Carinaria Atlantica Ad. & R 



tl 
tl 

t 



85 
to 
100 



tl 

*t 



870 
to 

878 



115 
to 
155 



t sv. 
f sv. 



tl 



t sv. 



1 sv. 



t 
tl 



tl 
*t 
*1 



* m. 

t sv. 

tl 



879 
880 
895 



to 

252 



tl 



*-m. 
* sv. 



t sv. 



tl 



t sv. 



*t 
tl 



tl 



tl 
tl 



t4 
t2 



tl 



t2 
*t 



t 
sv. 

sv. 



* sv. 
t sv. 



t2 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 407 
List of Mollusca previously unknoivn south of Cape Cod— Continued. 





Stations J 


865 
to 
867 


872 
to 
874 


870 
to 

878 


869 


879 
880 
895 


893 
894 


891 






892 




Depths in fathoms J 


64 
to 
65 


85 
to 
100 


115 
to 

155 


192 


225 
to 
252 


365 
to 
372 


487 
to 
500 


** 


PTEROPODA. 
Cymbnlia calceolus "V 






t2 
f sv. 




*m. 


t sv. 
tsv. 


*2 
f X 


* 0. 


Cavolina uncinata (D'Orb ) Gray 


\l 




* 0. 


Cavolina longirostris (Les.) 






tsv. 
f X 


* 0. 


Cavolina inflexa (Les.) Gray 


' o. 


Clio pvramidata LiDn6 


tl 
tl 










f2 


t2 


* 0. 


Balantiuni recurvum Children 






tl 




* 0. 


Spirialis Mac.4 ndrei Forbes 








t3 

* sv. 

tsv. 

t2 


tsv. 

*m. 

tsv 


N. E. 


SOLENOCONCHA. 

Dentalinm occidentale Stitnp. (=D. abyssorum Sars) 
Dentalium (slender var) 




t2 


* sv. 


* sv. 


*t 


** 


Cadiilus Pandionis V. & S 




*8V. 


*m. 
*m. 
* sv. 


* sv. 




tl 


* E. 


Cartulus .Ti'ffievsii (Monteros.) 




* E. 


Cadulus propiiiquns G. 0. Sars 














N. E. 


Siphduodtiitalium vitreum Sars 












tx 


* N. E. 


Siphoneutalis Lofotensis Sars 














t2 


N. E. 


L AME LLIBR AKCHI AT A. 
Saxicava Norvegica (Speng. ) Woodw 




f 


f 
t 










N. E. 


Cyrtodaria siliqua (Speng.) Woodw 


t 
*1 

*2 
* sv. 










* N. E. 


P'oromya granulata (Nvst) E. & Han 










* N. E. 




*m. 


*1 

*m. 










N. E. 




*1 

*8V. 
* SV. 


*m. 

* sv. 


* sv. 

* sv. 
*m. 

* sv. 
*2 




N. E. 


Nea3ra arctica Loveu 




* N. E. 










* 2 


* E. 


Keajra rostrata (Speng.) Loven 




* sv. 


* sv. 


t 


* E. 


Nea'i'a j u nosa S. Wood 












Nea-ra iiiiilticiistata V. & S 




* sv. 


* sv. 








E. 






*2 


*1 


* sv. 














tl 


*N. E. 


Keniicrlia ulaclalis (Leach.) Carp 




"2 












N. E. 




tsv. 


















tl 

*m. 










** N. 




tm. 


*m. 


tl 








"^ E. 


Crvptodon ferniginosus (Forbes) 




* sv. 

* sv. 
*m. 

* sv. 
*2 

*m. 
*sv. 


* sv. 


* E. 














N. E. 

N. E. 


Astaitc cn-nala (Tray (=A. lens St., var.) 


*m. 


*m. 
* sv. 


* m. 

* sv. 


* sv. 


*m. 
*1 


*1 


* E. 


Yoldia cxiiau.sa .Jeff. (]) . .". 






N. E. 








* 


* sv. 


* sv. 


*2 


* N. E. 


Toldia i[i"i(laTorell 
















tl 
*ni. 

t3 
* sv. 
*m. 
*m. 


* sv. 


* sv. 








tST. 

tl 


*m. 






*■ E. 












* E. 




'*m.' 


*m. 
*m. 


*ni. 

* m. 
*TO. 

* sv. 


*3 


N. E. 






*ni. 
*ni. 


* sv. 


tf. E. 








N'. E. 














Modiola polita V &S 








*2 








* r. 




* r. 
















*m. 


*m. 






*m. 


*2 
tr. 


*2 


*1 






















t 
fsv. 














*r. 




* sv. 


* m. 


* m. 

*r. 




* N. E 






N. E. 








*1 
*1 








Pecteu fciicstratus Forbes ? =; inequisculptus Tib . 




'1 








*1 


*ni. 
*m. 


*8V. 




BEACHIOPODA. 








*1 

















408 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

List of MoUusca from th< outer tanks previously hnoion from the shallow waters south of 

Cape Cod, 



Stations' 



865 872 
to to 
867 874 



870 
to 

878 



869 



879 
880 
895 



893 
894 



891 
892 



Depths in fathoms . 



CEPHALOPODA. 
Ommastrephes iUccebrosa (Les.) V . 
GASTEOPODA. 



Bela pyramidalis (Strom) 

Buccinum undatuin Linii6 

Neptunea Stimpsoni (Morch) 

Siphonella pygmtea (Gld.) V 

Tritia trivittata (Say) Ad 

Astyris rosacea (Gld. ) Ad 

Astyris zonalis (Lins.) V 

Natica cLausa Brod. & Sowerby 

Neverita duplicata (Say) Stimp 

Lunatia heros, var. (wide umb.) 

Lunatia heros, var. triseriata (Say) 

Crucibulum striatum (Say) Ad 

Crepidula plana Say 

Machffiroplas obscura (Couth.) Friele . 

Turbonilla interiupta < Ad 

Philine quadrata (Wood) Forb. & Han. 

Cylichna alba (Brown) Loven 

Dendronotus robustus V 



PTEROPODA. 



Cavolina tridentata Griiy. 
Diacria trispiuosa Gray.. 



SOLENOCONCHA. 



Dentalium striolatum Stimp 

LAMELLIBKANCHIATA. 



Teredo megotara Hanley 

Ensatella Americana (CJld.) V . . . , 
Clidiophora irilineata (Say) Carp ., 

Periploma papyracea (Say) V , 

Thracia Conraili Couth 

Spisula solidissima ? Gray 

Ceronia arctata (Con.) Ad 

Macoma sabulosa (Speng.) Morch 
Cyprina Islandica (Linn6) Lam . . . 

Callista convexa (Say) Ad 

Cardium pinnulatuni Conrad 

Lucina fiJosa Stimp 

Cryptodon Gouldii (Phil.) Stimp.. 

Cryptodon obesus V 

Solemya velum Say 

Venericardia borealis (Con.) Carp. 

Astarte castanea Say 

Astarte quadrans Gld 

Astarte undata Gld 

Nucula proxima Say 

T oldia sapotilla (Gld.) Stimp 

Modiola modiolus (Linn6) Turton. 

Crenella glandula (Totten) Ad 

Pecten tenuicostatus Migh 

Anomia aculeata Miill 



85 
to 
100 



115 
to 
155 



192 



225 
to 
252 



365 
to 
372 



487 
to 
500 



*2 



tl 
tm. 
*1 



t2 



tl 



*t 
tl 
tl 



tl 



t sv. 



t3 
tl 



t sv. 

tl 

t sv. 



*2 

t2 



tm. 



tsv. 



tm. 



t sv. 

tl 
tl 

t 
t 
t 



tsv. 



tl 

*ni. 



tl 



"m. 

*m. 

t sv. 
tl 

t sv. 
t3 
tl 
tl 



t2 



tl 



tl 



tm. 
t 



t sv. 



tl 
* sv. 
t sv. 



t sv. 
t sv. 



tm. 
tl 



t sv. 

* sv. 



It 



t m. 



t sv. 
t 



tm. 
tsv. 



t sv. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 409 

•List of recent additions to shalloic-icater Mollusca of Southern New 

England.* 

Farasira eatcnulata Steenstrup. Oceanic. Mediterranean. 

*Truncatula truncatulus (Drap,). Littoral. European. 

Litter ina Uttorea. Littoral -, abundant. European. 

*Assiminea Graymia Leacli. Littoral. European. 

Ancula cristata Loven. Northern and European. 

**Polyc€relk(, Mmertoni Verrill. Littoral. 

Scrjlliea Edimrdsii Verrill. Littoral. Southern and oceanic. 

Corijphella Mananensis (Stimp.) Verrill. Off Race Point, Long Island 
Sound, 40 fathoms. 

Stiliger fuscata, (Gld.) Bergh. Massachusetts Ba^'. 

Terebratulina septentrionalis (Couth.). Off Block Island, 15 fathoms. 
Northern. 



DESCRIPTION OF A NEW i^PEt'IES OF NEMICHTHVS (NEMICHTHYS 
AVOCETTA), FieOlTl PUGET SOUND. 

By I>AVID S. JORDA]\ and CHARLES H. 01I.BERT. 

Nemichthys avocetta, sj). nov. 

Color translucent white, the lower half of the body covered with 
small, round, black spots, sharply defined ; among these some smaller 
spots. Belly near the median line black. Upper half of body plain, 
colorless. Pectorals and dorsal plain. Anal speckled. 

Body band-shaped, but not strongly compressed; deepest in the 
middle, tapering behind to the long and very slender filament-like tail, 
and anteriorly to a very long and slender neck, which contracts imme- 
diately behind the head. Skin smooth. No lateral line. 

Head proper small, short and rather broad; concave between the 
eyes, with two median ridges; full and broad behind the eyes, with 
three longitudinal ridges. Lower part of head narrow, sharj), so that 
the head would be triangular in a vertical section. Eye very large, 
vertically placed, its length one-third that of the head without snout. 
Nostrils each simple (two on each side), rather large, close in front of 
eye, without tube or flap. Maxillary extending to close behind the eye, 
the mandible somewhat farther. Jaws prolonged, becoming very slen- 
der, long, acuminate, needle like at tip, somewhat recurved. Upper jaw 
the longer, and nearly four times the length of the rest of the head, 
being 7-8 times its greatest depth. Both jaws with small, very numer- 

* Some of the species liere included were discovered in 1875 and 1876, and have been 
recorded in the American Journal of Science. Those with an asterisk prefixed were 
first discovered on our coast this season, or else have not been previously recorded. 
For additional species, not included in my Report on Invertebrates of Vineyard Sound;, 
&c., 1873, see American Journal of Science, x, pp. 40, 41, July, 1870. 



410 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

ous, retrorse, close-set, sharp teeth. Jaws bony, their lateral surfaces 
with retrorse roughnesses. Head naked, covered with skin. 

Gill-openings rather large, oblique, running downward and forward, 
sei)arated by a rather narrow isthmus. Pectorals well developed, half 
longer than eye. Xo ventrals. Yent under middle of the length of the 
I>ectorals (when depressed); the anal fin beginning close behind it and 
extending to the tail; its rays soft and rather slender; the membrane 
delicate; its height greatest near the middle and anteriorly, where it is 
somewhat less than height of body, becoming obsolete on the long cau- 
dal filament. Dorsal similar to anal, but lower, beginning close behind 
the occiput and running to the tail. 

Tahle of measurements. 



Extreme length 

Body : 

(3^reatest depth ... 

Depth at neck . . . 
Head : 

Greatest length. . 

Greatest depth... 

Length of snout 

Diameter of orbit 
Anal : 

Greatest height.. 
Pectoral : 

Length , 



Inches 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


21.40 


100 


.33 
. 15 


1.6 

.8 


2.10 
.25 

1.70 
.18 


10 
1.2 
7.6 

1 


.28 


1.3 


.30 


1.5 



The specimen which is the type of the present description was taken 
in May, 1880, in the harbor of Port Gamble, and was placed by its cap- 
tor in the museum of the University of Washington Territory, at Seattle. 
The president of the university, Prof. A. J. Anderson, presented it to 
the United States National Museum. Its movements in the water are 
said to be extremely active. 

Fishes of this type offer comparatively few specific characters, and we 
are able to separate this species from N'emiclitliys scolopaceus Rich, of the 
Atlantic by differences in proportion only. According to the detailed 
description and figure of the latter species given by Lowe and Brandt 
(Leptorhynchus or Belonopsis leuclitenhergi, Mem. Acad. St. P^tersb. Sav. 
Etrang., 1854, vii, 171-174), ISfemichtliys avocetta is distinguished by the 
much slenderer head, longer beak, and higher anal fin, the greatest 
height of the latter being nearly equal to the length of the jjectoral 
and more than the depth of the head. So far as known to us, this is 
the first species of the genus thus far taken in the Pacific. A recent 
newspaper account of the capture of a sea-serpent at Victoria, British 
Columbia, perhaps refers to a second example of the same species. 

Seattle, Wash., June 10, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF T-NEfED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 411 

I»ESCRBPTBO.-\ OF A NEW SPECIES OF PARAEEPIS (PARAI EPIS 
COUUSCANS), FROill THE STRAITS OF JUAIV DE FU€A. 

By DAVID S. JORDAN and CHARI.ES H. GILBERT, 

Paralepis coruscans, sp. nov. 

Allied to P. horealis Eeinb. 

Head and body very elongate, compressed, almost ribbon-shaped, of 
imiform width throughout, and preserving its depth forwards to occiput 
and backwards to origin of dorsal fin. From the insertion of the dorsal 
the body is gradually narrowed to the very slender caudal peduncle, the 
base of anterior portion of anal projecting much beyond the ventral out- 
line. 

Abdomen compressed, subtrenchant. 

Head long, wedge-shaped, its uj)per and lower outlines equally ob- 
lique. Snout very long and sharp, equaling half the length of the head, 
its tip on a line with the axis of the body. Eye large, its diameter one- 
third the length of the snout, jilaced high, with its upper margin on a 
level with the top of the head. 

Head shaped somewhat as in Sphyrccna. Jaws equal; gape very 
wide; maxillary reaching the vertical from the nostril ; mandibular joint 
reaching the vertical from the anterior margin of the pupil. 

Mandible closing inside the margins of the upper jaw, the latter being 
transversely much arched to receive it; tip of mandible fitting into an 
emargination between the iutermaxillaries. 

Xone of the teeth very large or fang-like. Iutermaxillaries laterally 
with a single series of exceedingly minute teeth (as in EngrmiUs) ; anteri- 
orly, however, on each side is a series of 4 or 5 rather long acicular teeth ; 
the entire intermaxillary series is outside of the mandible in the closed 
mouth. Vomer with minute teeth. Palatine series long; the anterior 
teeth long and slender ; the posterior short. Mandibular series working 
agamst the palatines; the teeth slender, distant, of different lengths. 

Branches of the lower jaw transversely deeply concave. Maxillary 
and intermaxillary slender, intimately connected, sHding under a fold 
of the skin. 

All the bones of the head very thin, flexible, membrane-like. Pre- 
orbital long, very narrow, arched, extending forwards from orbit, reach- 
ing maxillary midway of its length. Suborbital chain likewise narrow. 

Head with numerous sharp ridges; two forwards from the orbit; two 
pairs on the top of the head, converging forwards. Orbital ring slightly 
raised. Preopercular margin very oblique. Opercle with concentric 
stri« and radiating lines. 

Gill-openings very wide, extending forwards to vertical from nostril ; 
isthmus anteriorly much compressed, thin and membrane-like, tlie gills 
of the two sides lapping over and meeting across the ridge. Mandibu- 
lar rami and subopercles and interopercles of the two sides meeting 
below across the isthmus. 



412 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Gill-rakers similar ou all the arches, short, immovable, much broader 
than long, each provided with 4 or 5 short needle-like spines. A slit 
behind fourth gill. Pseudobranchiae developed, partly hidden by a fold 
of the membrane. Branchiostegals 7, the membranes overlapping ante- 
riorly, as in the Salmonidce. 

Scales small, deciduous ; those of the lateral line large, non-imbricate^ 
plate-like, becoming smaller posteriorly, the series terminating abrubtly 
opposite middle of the base of the anal. 

Fins all very small. Pectorals placed low, their length two-fifths that 
of the snout. Yentrals far back, entirely behind the dorsal, their dis- 
tance from base of caudal half that from front of orbit. Distance from 
middle of dorsal basis to base of caudal half its distance from the tip 
of the snout. 

Anal elongate, high anteriorly, its base terminating at a point distant 
one-half diameter of orbit from base of caudal. Adipose dorsal high and 
narrow, directly over the end of the anal. 

Caudal small, widely forked, the middle rays two fifths the length 
of longest. End of caudal peduncle emarginate, the caudal rays radi- 
ating from the upper and lower angles. (In the type specimen the two 
lobes of caudal are eatirely separate, without trace of connecting mem- 
brane.) Eudimentary rays long, extending along upper and lower sides 
of caudal peduncle for a distance greater than diameter of orbit. Tii)s 
of adipose dorsal and ])osterior anal rays reach rudimentary caudal rays. 

Dorsal rajs 8; anal rays 31; pectoral rays 11; ventral rays 9; lateral 
plates 60. Vent slightly behind base of ventral fins. 

Color, in spirits, light olive-brown, becoming darker on the back, belly, 
and towards the tail. Above with a few small, distinct, black dots. 
Sides with some light brownish-yellow shading, a very narrow, length- 
wise, silvery streak along the middle of the abdomen. Base of pectoral 
silvery, with a dark spot above. Bases of other fins jet-black, the color 
usually extending on the bases of the rays. 

Sides of head silvery; opercles, top of head, and tip of snout dark; 
mandibular rami bright silvery, and provided each with a double series of 
minute '■•phosphorescent" spots. 

This species is known to us from a single specimen obtained in the 
harbor of Port sTowusend, Wash., by Mr. Brown, assistant in the custom- 
ofiice at Port Townsend, and by him i)resented to the United States 
National Museum. The type is 9^ inches in length, and is in good con- 
dition. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 413 
Table of measurements. 



■Collector's number of specimen 


150 

Port Townsend, 

Wash. 


Locality 






liches 

and 
lOOths. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


Extreme length 


9.25 

8.75 




Iiength to end of middle caudal rays 




Greatest height 


7? 
6 

28i 




' 


Least height of tail 




Head: 

Greatest length 




Width of interorbital area. 




Length of snout 




'o* 


Length of maxiUary 




Length of mandible 




12i 
3^ 

55fr 


Diameter of orbit 




Dorsal (rayed): 

Distance from snout 




Length of base 




2 ■ 


Hf'ight at fourth ray 




5 


Dorsal (adipose) : 

Distance from dorsal 




29J 
2i 

IH 


Height at longest ray 




Anal : 




Length of base 




15 


Heiuht at longest rav (ca.) 




6 


Caudal : 

Length of middk^ ravs 




2i 
6 


Length of external rays . 








24 






? 


Length . 








11 


Length 




Branchiostegals 


7 

8 

31 

11 

9 

60 








Anal 








Ventral 













Port Townsend, Wash., September 30, 1880. 



PBEI.IMIXAKY NOTICE OF THE CRUSTACEA DREDGED, IN 64 TO 
325 FATHOMS, OFF THE SOUTH COAST OF NE^V ENGE.AND, BY 
THE UNITED STATES FISH COMMISSION IN 1880. 

By S. I. S^iniTH. 

A general account of three short dredging trips of the United States 
steamer Fish Hawk to the region, ofl" the eastern end of Long Island, 
known as the Block Island soundings, has already been given bj'^ Pro- 
fessor Yerrill in these Proceedings, and also in the American Journal of 
Science for the present month (vol. xx, pp. 390-403), and need not be 
repeated here, further than that the region examined is in latitude 39^ 
4G' to 40° 06' north, longitude 70^ 22' to 71° 10' west, and that on the 
first trip, September 3 to 5, eight hauls (stations 865 to 872) were made, 
at depths ranging from 64 to 192 fathoms; on the second trip, September 
12 to 14, nine hauls (stations 873 to 881) were made, in So to 325 fathoms J 



414 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

and on the third trip, October 1 to 3, five hauls (stations 891 to 895) 
were made, in 238 to about 500 fathoms. At station 872, 86 fathoms, 
the bottom Avas covered with shells and sponges, but at all the other 
stations it was composed of flue sand and mud, varying in proportions 
and in compactness. The collections from the last trip have not yet 
been fully examined, and only a few of the species are recorded in the 
following jiages. There was, however, a much smaller number of crus- 
taceans obtained upon this last trip than upon the others. 

The wonderful richness of the fauna of the sea-bottom in this region, 
in mollusks and echiuoderms, has been shown in Professor Verrill's 
papers just referred to, and it is not less remarkable as regards the crus- 
taceans. The richness, in both species and individuals, of this crusta- 
cean fauna would never have been suspected, and scarcely dreamed of, 
by one accustomed only to the meager fauna of the shallower waters 
of the south coast of New England. The larger part of the species 
secured from the great masses of material brought uj) in the trawl .and 
dredge are Decapoda. There are comparatively few small sjiecies of 
Schizopoda, Cumacea, and Amphipoda, and further dredging will un- 
doubtedly increase very greatly the number of species in these groups. 
The following enumeration is not comjjlete even for the Decapoda, and 
much less so for the other grouj^s, as several of the species are repre- 
sented by specimens insufficient for proper determination, while others 
are omitted because not yet satisfactorily determined. 

The exact location, dej)th, character of bottom, and temperature for 
each of the stations are given by Professor Yerrill in the papers above 
referred to, and in the following pages I give only the serial numbers of 
the stations at which the species occurred, and the range in depth from 
the shallowest to the deepest of these stations. In occasionally refer- 
ring to 'localities of dredgings carried on by the Fish Commission in 
previous years, I give the serial numbers of the stations according to 
the "Lists of the Dredging Stations of the United States Fish Commis- 
sion from 1871 to 1879, inclusive, with Temperature and other Observa- 
tions, arranged by Sanderson Smith and Richard Eathbun", in the 
Commissioner's Eeport for 1879. 

BEACHYUEA. 

Hyas coarctatus Leacb. 

Several specimens from 86 fathoms, station 872, and 115 fathoms, 
station 871. 

Collodes depressus A. Milne-Edwards, Crust. E^giou Mexicaine, p. 176, pi. 32, fig. 
4, 1878. 

I refer to this species a considerable number of specimens from stations 
865, 871, 872, 873, 874, 875, 878 ; 65 to 142 fathoms. Most of these speci- 
mens are much larger than those described by Milne-Edwards, and in 
all the larger, and in some of the smaller, specimens examined the three 
dorsal spines of the carapax and abdomen are almost wholly obsolete, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 415 

but in other respects they all agree well with the figures. In a few of 
the smallest specimens examined the spines are very nearly or quite as 
prominent as in the figures, while in other respects they are indistin- 
guishable from specimens of the same size in which the spines are very 
small and inconspicuous. In all the spineless specimens there is a more 
or less prominent tubercle in place of the spines of the carapax. As in 
the next species, the spines are probably specially characteristic of the 
young, and become more or less obsolete as the individual increases in 
size, the obsolescence being more rapid in some individuals than in 
others. I think there is very little doubt that this species is synonymous 
with G. trispinosus Stimpson, also described from very small specimens. 
The following measurements show the size of the specimens examined. 
In the largest males the chelae* are stout, but little more than twice as 
long as broad, and the basal portion considerably swollen. 



station. 


Sex. 


Length of 
carapax. 


Breadth of 
carapax. 


Katie. 


874 


d 

d 

? 
2 


10.0 
12.0 
14.3 
14.7 
17.5 
8.2 
11.0 
13.1 
14.0 


mm. 
7.9 
8.7 
11.0 
12.2 
14.0 
5.7 
8.0 
10.3 
11.0 


1: 0.79 


871 


1 : 0. 73 


865 


1 : 0. 76 


871 


1 : 0. 77 


874 


1 : 0. 80 


873 


1 : 0. 70 


871 


1 : 0. 73 


805 


1 : 0. 78 


878 .. 


1 : 0. 78 







Euprognatha rastellifera Stimpson, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zoul. Cambridge, ii, p. 123, 
1870.— A. Milne-Edwards, Crust. E^gion Mexicaine, p. 183, pi. 33, fig. 2, 1878. 

Stations 8Q5, 8G9, 871, 872, 873, 874, 877, 878 ; 65 to 192 fathoms 5 at 
nearly all these stations in vast numbers. 

Many of the specimens are much larger than those described by 
Stimpson and Milne-Edwards, males often being 15""" in length of cara- 
pax. In all the large specimens the spines of the carapax are much less 
conspicuous than in the young ; the spines upon the orbital arches, upon 
the gastric, cardiac, and the summits of the branchial regions, and upon 
the basal segment of the abdomen, are often reduced to low and incon- 
spicuous tubercles. In large males the chelse are nearly as long as the 
carapax, more than a fourth as broad as long, and the basal portion 
considerably swollen. The whole animal is nearly naked and very free 
from foreign growths of all sorts, contrasting strongly in this respect 
with most of the Maioidea. 

Lambrus Verrillli, sp. nov. 

Allied to L. Fourtalesii Stimpson. 

Female.— The carapax, including lateral spines, is about one and a 
fourth times as broad as long, with a broad longitudina l depression 

* I restrict, as Huxley has done, the term chela to the two terminal segments of a 
chelate appendage. 



416 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

either side, betweeBt the brancliial region and the posterior part' of the 
gastric and the cardiac region, and with the surface rough and tuber- 
culose. The cardiac, with the posterior part of the gastric region, is 
raised into a continuous ridge, capped with a longitudinal line of four 
large spiniforra tubercles, one on the gastric and three on the cardiac, 
besides a small one in the middle of the posterior margin. The cardiac 
and the two anterior gastric tubercles are erect and their tips nearly in 
the same horizontal line, while the posterior cardiac is situated much 
lower down on the posterior slope of the carapax and is directed upward 
and backward. In front of the gastric tubercle there are two much 
smaller ones, in a transverse line, and in front of these there are usually 
fonr still smaller ones similarly disposed, so as to make a submedian 
line of three small tubercles either side, between the large gastric tubercle 
and the erect and prominent tubercle upon the crest of the orbital arch. 
In one of the specimens the most anterior of these three pairs of tubercles 
back of the orbits is obsolete. There is a deep longitudinal depression 
between the orbits, and extending a little back of them and forward to 
the narrow part of the rostrum. The rostrum is prominent, directed 
forward and downward, suddenly contracted just in front of the antennal 
fossfe, leaving a dentiform tubercle either side, where the rostrum is 
suddenly narrowed ; there is also a small tooth either side, near the tip 
of the rostrum. The antero-lateral margin is strongly incurved at 
the cervical suture, so as to approach closely and expose slightly from 
above the strongly tuberculo-dentate, infero-lateral carina, which is itself 
slightly incurved at this point ; both in front of and behind the cervical 
suture, however, the margin recedes from the inferior carina, in front 
being directed upward at an oblique angle with the part behind the 
cervical suture. Above this angle there is a broad, conspicuous, and 
nearly smooth depression in the nearly vertical surface. The margin 
between the cervical suture and the orbit is armed with two small tuber- 
cles near the cervical suture, but the anterior two-thirds is unarmed and 
slightlj^ concave in outline. Behind the cervical suture the margin is 
regularly and very strongly arcuate, and in front of the great branchial 
tooth, which really forms the lateral angle of the carapax, is armed with= 
nine or ten teeth, of which the first three or four are small and some- 
what tuberculiform ; the six posterior are larger, acutely triangular, and 
strongly laciniated, the four anterior of these six being nearly equal in 
size, the fifth larger and the sixth smaller than the others. The greatest 
breadth of the carapax is between the tips of the large fifth laciniated 
tootb each side, or, excluding the teeth, between the bases of the third 
and fourth teeth each side. The great branchial tooth is larger than 
any other, laciniated, and has a small tooth at the base in front and a 
larger one near the base behind ; and still behind this last there is first 
a small and then a much larger tuberculiform si^ine on the concave 
posterolateral margin, while the short posterior margin is armed with 
three prominent tubercles, with several smaller ones between. The 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 417 

brancliial regions are prominent, tuberculose, and pitted, particularly 
upon the outer surface, and rise at the summit into a prominent spini- 
form tubercle either side, on a line with the anterior cardiac tubercle. 

The chelipeds are very nearly as in L. Pourtalesii, but appear to bo i)ro- 
portionally a little longer, and, judging from A. Milne-Edwards'.s figure 
of Fourtalcsii, to have the margijial teeth more acute and more dvejily 
laciuiated. The meri of all the ambulatory legs are spiuulose on both 
the upper and lower edges, as in Pourtalesii, while in the last pair the;e 
are, in addition, similar spines on the upper edge of the carpus and one 
near the middle of the upper edge of the propodus. The dactyli are 
about as long as the corresponding propodi, are very slightly com- 
pressed, and are covered with a dense veivet-like pubescence, except at 
the tips. 

Mcasurcmctits. 



Leufitli of carapax 

Iir(\i(ltli incltuling lateral spines ... 

Ratio of Iciv^tli to breadth 

Breadth excludiuy: lateral spines - 
Lenirth of cheliped fully extended 
L( nj;th of inerr.s of clieliped 
Length of propodus of cheliped. .. 



? 


? 


(Sta.«Go-7.) 


(Sta. S72.) 


mm. 


mm. 


24.0 


20. 5 


li.i. 


:i;j. 


1: 1.25 


1 : 1. 25 


2(j. 


28.0 


57.0 


0.1. 


20.0 


25. 5 


27.0 


CiO.O 



(Sta. 872.) 



mm. 

32.8 
41.0 
] : 1. 25 
y.5.3 
85.0 
32.0 
39.0 



The conspicuous cervical emargination of the anterolateral margin of 
the carapax, the cervical depres.sion above the margin, the diC'erent 
anterolateral margin in front of the cervical suture, and the spines or 
tubercles on the carpi and propodi of the last ambulatory legs aj>pear 
clearly to distinguish this species from the Pourtalesii. The antero- 
lateral margin between the cervical suture and orbit ap})ears to be more 
like L. hyponcus, as figured by A. Milne-Edwards, though in other re- 
spects the Jn/poiGus is unlike the present si)ecies. 

Stations Sijo to 8G7, 87:ij Go and 8G fathoms; three specimens, all 
females. 

Cancer borealis Slimpson.— Sraitli, Trans. Coun. Acad., v. p. 39, pi. 8, li^79. 

Stations 8Go, 871, 872, 875, 877, 878, 879 ; 6o to 225 fathouis. Most of 
the specimens are small, and the largest is only 56'"™ in breadth of 
carapax. 

Large specimens of this species v^'ere taken in abundance in the shal- 
low waters off Newport. 
Geryon quinquedens Siuirli, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, p. 35, pi. 9, figs. 1, 2. lt;T9. 

Stations 881, 893 ; 252 and 372 fathoms. 

This species grows to a much greater size than any of the si)ecimens 

from which my original description was drawn. A male from 2; iath- 

oms, ofi" Nova^ Scotia, north latitude 42° 37', west longitude 02° oo\ 

.presented to the National IMuseuin by Capt. G. A. Johnson and crew of 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 27 Jan. 10, 1881. 



418 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

the schooner Augusta A. Johnson, of Gloucester, Mass., gives the fol- 
lowing measurements : 

mm. 

Length of carapas, including frontal teeth 88. 2 

Breadth, including lateral teeth. 101. 7 

Breadth in front of lateral teeth 9i5. 5 

Length of posterior legs 180. 

Bathyaectes longispina Stimpson, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Cambridge, ii, p. 146, 
1870. — A. Milne-Edwards, Crust. Region Mexicaine, p. 234, -pi. 42, tig. 1, 1879, 

Stations 871, 872, 874, 879 ; 85 to 225 fathoms. 

Stimpson's and Milne-Edwards's specimens were from the Straits of 
Florida. 

Acanthocarpus Alexandri Stimpson, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Cambridge, ii, p. 15.3, 
1870. 

Stations 870 to 874, 877, 878 ; 85 to 155 fathoms. At 878, 142 fiithoms, 
forty-nine specimens were taken. 

A large part of the specimens are much larger than those described 
by Stimpson, wliich were from 74 fathoms, in Pourtales's dredgings in 
the Straits of Florida. A male, from station 878, gives the following 
measurements: Length of carapax, IG.O"'"'; breadth, 16.8™'"; breadth 
between tips of carpal spines, with the chelipeds closed, 42"™ ; length of 
carpal spine, 8""". 

Ethusa microphthalma, sp. nov. 

Female. — The carapax is as broad as long, but very much narrowed 
anteriorly, so that in front it is only half as broad as the widest part, 
which is at the swollen branchial regions posteriorly. The front between 
the orbits is less than half as wide as the entire front, and, as seen from 
above, is divided by a triangular median sinus and two slightly less 
deep sinuses at the extremities of the antennulary fossjp, and the angles 
between and outside of these sinuses are spiniform, so that the front 
between the eyes is armed with four similar and nearly equidistant 
spines, of which the lateral are slightly more prominent than the 
median. The orbital sinuses are nearly as deep as broad, and formed 
on the outside by the siiiniform antero lateral angles, which reach nearly 
as far forward as the spines of the front. The antero-lateral margins 
are long and nearly straight. The dorsal surface is slightly convex and 
not deeply areolated, though the cervical suture is well marked, and the 
whole surface is granular and slightly pubescent, except on the cardiac 
and gastric regions, where the granulation is nearly obsolete. 

The eyes are small and on very short peduncles, so that they do not 
nearly reach the angles of the orbital sinuses; the cornea is terminal, 
not expanded, and the pigment is black. 

The chelipeds are equal, small, and very slender; the chela is scarcely 
stouter than the carpus, the basal portion is smooth and nearly cylin- 
drical, and the digits are alike, fully as long as the basal portion, 
strongly compressed, longitudinally grooved, slightly curved laterally, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 419 

and the prehensile edges straight and very regularly dentate. The two 
tirst pairs of ambulatory legs are nearly alike, twice as long as the 
chelipeds, and nearly or quite naked j the propodus is a little shorter 
than the merus, very slightly compressed, and smooth, but slightly 
grooved longitudinally; the dactylus is once and a half as long as the 
propodus, very much compressed vertically, slightly curved, of nearly 
uuiform breadth to a short distance from the acuminate tip, and very 
smooth. The third and fourth pairs of ambulatory legs are nearly alike, 
scarcely half as long as the first and second, slender, and covered with 
short pubescence, except upon the dactyli. The propodus is much 
shorter than the merus, not very much shorter than the cari)us, nearly 
cylindrical, and not expanded distally; the dactylus is very short and 
strongly curved. 

The single specimen seen, from station 878 (142 fathoms), gives the 
following measurements : 

mm. 

Leugth of carapax, includiug frontal spines 13. 5 

Greatest breadth of cara^jax 14.0 

Breadtli between antero-lateral spines 7.0 

Breadtli between tips of inner angles of orbital sinuses 3. 1 

Length of cheliped 18. 

Length of chela 8. 

Breadth of chela 1.7 

Length of dactylus 4.0 

Length of second' ambulatory leg 3rt. 

Length of its propodus 8. 

Length of its dactylus 12. 

Length of fourth ambulatory leg 18. 

Length of its propodus 3. fi 

Length of its dactylus 1.5 

The very small eyes and the great breadth and prominent antero- 
lateral angles of the carapax at once distinguish this species irom U. 
7nascarone, of the Mediterranean, and from the Jajjauese U. sexdentata. 
It is also evidently distinct from JE. (jranulata Korman, which, however, 
has apparently not been fully described. The genus has not, I think, 
been recorded from America before, although a species occurs in the 

Bay of Panama. 

AJiTOMUEA. 

Latreillia elegans Roux, Crust. Mediterran(5e, pi. 22, 1828.— Milne-Edwards, Hist. Nat. 
Crust., i, p. 277, 1834.— De Haau, Fauna Japonica, p. 108, 1837.— Lucas, Ex- 
plor. de I'Algerie, Animaux Articul6s, i, p. 3, pi. 1, tig. 1, 1849.— Heller, Crust, 
siidlichen Europa, p. 147, pi. 4, tig. 14 (anterior part of carapax after Lucas). 

Station 872, 86 fathoms (three females) ; 874, 85 ftithoms (fragment 
of carapax). 

I have had no European specimens for comparison, and have seen 
only a tracing of Eouxs figure, with which the specimens before me 
agree well. In these specimens the propodus in the posterior pair of 
legs is a little more than two-thirds as long as the merus, and the dac- 
tylus is very short and closes against the somewhat obliipie and spinous 



420 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

distal extremity of the inferior edge of the propodiis, which is ciliated 
along' the rest of its length, while the merus is not ciliated. In Lucas's 
general fi.gnre the propodus is proportionally about a fourth shorter and 
the dactylus several times as long as in the specimens, the dactylus 
being very much as in the first three pairs of ambulatory legs ; but the 
enlarged figure, 1 c, of the terminal portion of the posterior leg is very 
different. The part apparently corresponding to the dactylus in the 
general figure is represented as composed of two segments, a shorter 
terminal one like the dactylus in the specimens, and a longer basal one 
like the terminal part of the jiropodus. I thhik there is little doubt that 
these figures were drawn from a specimen in which the very slender and 
delicate propodus of the posterior leg was partially broken and bent at 
about a fourth of the way from the tip to the base, and that the artist 
mistook the break for a natural articulation, and so represented it. Sup- 
l^osiug this to be the case, Lucas's enlarged figure agrees very well with 
the specimens before me. 

Homola barbata White, List Crust. British Museum, p. 55, 1847. — Cancer harbafiis 
Fabricius, Eutomologia Systeruatica, ii, p. 460, 1793. — Herbst, Krabben uiid 
Krebse, j)l. 42, lig. 3. — ^^Dorippe spinifrons Lamarck, Animaux sans Vert(ibres, 
"V, p. 245, 1818" (Heller). — Homola spinifrons Leach, Traus. Liimeau Soc. Lon- 
don, xi, p. 324, 1815 ; Zoological Miscellany, ii, p. 82, pi. 88, 1815. — Desmarest, 
Considerat. G6n<?rales Crust., p. 134, j)l. 17, fig. 1, 1825. — Milne-Edwards, Hist. 
Nat. Crust., ii, p. 183, pi. 22, figs. 1-4, 1837; Rt>gne Animal de Cuvier, 2^^^ 
gdit., pi. 39, fig. 2. 

Station 872; 86 fathoms; two males, the larger 19™™ in length of 
carapax. 

I have had no Mediterranean specimens for comparison, but the two 
before me agree perfectly with the figures and descriptions above re- 
ferred to. 

Lyreidus Bairdii, sp. nov. 

Female. — The carapax is regularly and strongly convex transversely, 
about one and three-fourths times as long as the breadth at the antero- 
lateral angles, back of which it narrows onl}' slightly for half the length 
of the lateral margins, which then curve regularly round to the articu- 
lation with the abdomen. The rostrum, or median tooth of the deeply 
trideutate front, is acutely triangular, the breadth at base being equal 
to about half the length and greater than the distance between its tip 
and that of either of the lateral spines, which are S[)iniform, very acute, 
and directed forward. The orbital sinuses left between the median and 
lateral teeth are nearly as deep as broad and broadly rounded behind. 
The edge of the antero-lateral margin is rounded, but is armed with a 
suiall tubercle about a third of the way from the lateral to the anterior 
angle, and in front of this tubercle the carapax is suddenly narrowed, 
so that the margin in front of the tubercle is concave in outline as seen 
from above. The posterior half of the lateral margin is marked above 
by a distinct carina, but the anterior half is smoothly rounded. 
The eye-stalks scarcely reach the tips of the lateral teeth of the front. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 421 

are broad at base, and narrowed to triangular tips. The eyes themselves 
are very small, black, and situated ou the outer and inferior edge of the 
ej'e-stalks. 

The chelipeds are nearly as long as the carapax, and similar in form 
to those of L. irideiitatus. The propodus is short and very much com- 
pressed ; the distal margin is transverse and nearly as long as the length 
of the whole segment ; the dorsal edge is thin and sharp, and terminates 
in a sharp tooth near the articulation of the dactylus ; back of the thin 
digital process the inferior edge is armed with three or four acute teeth, 
decreasing in size proximally. The dactylus is compressed and very 
thin, with the outer edge regularly curved and sharp ; the prehensile 
edge is sharp and slightly irregular in outline, but not dentate, although 
the opposing edge of the propodus is armed with about live low teeth 
inside the lip. The first, second, and fourth pairs of ambulatory legs 
are very nearly as in L. tridentatus, as figured by De Haan. In the 
third pair, however, the propodus is nearly twice as broad as long, the 
inferior edge being expanded into a very thin, broad, lamellar process 
nearly as large as the body of the segment, and with a ciliated and reg- 
ularly curved margin nearly semicircular in outline. The dactylus is 
nearly as broad as the propodus, lamellar throughout, articulated at the 
upper end of the proximal margin, which, below the articulation, is con- 
cave in outline and ciliated to match the adjoining lamellar process of 
the propodus J- the lateral nuirgins are naked and convex in outline, ex- 
cept near the tip, which is sharplj' acuminate. 

The abdomen is slightly more than two-thirds as long as the carapax, 
and agrees very closely Avith De Haan's figure of the abdomen of the 
male of L. tridentatus in the form and proportions of the somites. In 
its natural position, the abdomen is bent at the fourth somite, and this 
somite is armed with a small spiniform tubercle, projecting from the 
middle of the dorsal surface. 

The dorsal surface of the carapax and of the abdomen, the stermum, 
and the exposed surface of the external maxillipeds and of the chelipeds 
and ambulatorj' legs are naked, smooth, and highly polished, though 
the dorsal surface of the carapax is minutely punctate, the punctations 
being more numerous on the anterior portions. " The subhepatic and the 
adjacent anterior i^leural regions are slightl}* hairy or pubescent. 

Professor Verrill tells me that the color of the entire animal shortly 
after it was placed in alcohol, and before the color could have changed 
materially from that in life, was light orange-red. 

The single specimen, from which the above descriiDtion is drawn, gives 
the following measiu-ements : 

mm. 

Length of carapax, inclucliiig rostrum 38. 4 

Breadth of carapax just back of lateral spines 22. 

Breadth of carapax between tips of lateral spines 22. 5 

Breadth of front between tijis of lateral spines G. 8 

Length of rostrum 4.0 

Length of abdomen 25. 



422 PROCEEDINGS OF UXITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Station 873 ; 100 fathoms. 

Anotlier aud very much smaller specimen, from station 876, 120 f;i th- 
orns, though differing very much from the larger specimen, is probably 
the young of the same species. The carapax of this specimen is propor- 
tionately longer; the orbital sinuses are much larger; the lateral spines 
of the front are more slender and much longer, longer even than the 
rostral tooth, and curved slightly outward and upward toward the tips; 
and the lateral spines are much longer and directed more outward. 
There is a small tubercle upon the third somite of the abdomen, and in 
l)lace of the tubercle on the fourth somite there is an acute spine, much 
longer than the somite itself. There is also a small spiniform tubercle 
on the lower side of the ischium of the third pair of ambulatory legs. 

mm. 

Length of carapax, including rostrum 10. 3 

Breadth of carapax j nst back of hiteral spines 5.7 

Breadth of carapax between tips of lateral spines (>. 8 

Breadth of front between tips of lateral spines 3. 6 

Length of rostrum 1.5 

Hemipagurus, gen. uov. 

The genus for which this name is proposed is allied to Spiropaf/nrns 
Stim])son (Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, x, 1858, p. 230 (74), 1850), 
but differs conspicuously in the form and position of the sexual append- 
age of the last thoracic somite of the male. In Spiropaf/nrus this 
appencUige (formed by the permanent extrnsion of a portion of the vas 
deferens) arises from the coxa of the left side of the last thoracic somite; 
■while in the genus here proposed it arises from the corresponding coxa 
of the right side, is shorter than in Spiropagurus^ and curved in one 
l^laiie round the right side of the abdomen. 

The carapax is short and broad, and the anterior margin is obtuse, 
and does not wholly cover the 0])hthalmic somite between the eyes. 
The portion in front of the cervical suture is indurated, but all the rest 
of the carapax is very soft and membranaceous, without any distinct 
induration along the cardiaco-branchial snture. The ophthalmic scales 
are well developed. The eye-stalks are short and the cornea expanded. 
The antennulie, antenntje, and oral appendages are similar to those in 
Eupagurus ; tlie exopods of all the maxillijieds are, however, propor- 
tionally much longer than in that genus. There are eleven pairs of 
phyllobranchiie, arranged as in Eupagurus bernhardns, but the two ante- 
rior pairs connected with the external uiaxillipeds are very small aud 
rudimentarj', and composed of a few slightly flattened papillse, so that 
they are, strictly speaking, trichobrauchia?. The chelipeds are slender 
and unequal. The first and second pairs of ambulatory legs are long, 
and have slender, compressed, and ciliated or setigerous dactyli ; the 
third i)air are only imperfectly subcheliform. 

In the male, the second, third, and fourth somites of the abdomen 
bear small appendages upon the left side, as in most of the allied genera, 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 423 

but the fifth somite is destitute of an appendage ; in the female, the 
appendages of the secoud, third, and fourth somites are biramous and 
ovigerous, and there is usually a rudimentary uuiramous appendage upon 
the fifth somite, as in the allied genera.* The uropods are very nearly 
or quite symmetrical, the rami of the right appendage being very nearly 
or quite as large as that of the left. The telson is bilobed at the ex- 
tremity. 

As might be expected, the unsymmetrical development of the external 
sexual appendages of the males of the two species here described cor- 
responds to a like unsymmetrical development of the internal sexual 
organs, and the following incomplete observations, made on ordinary 
alcoholic specimens in which the abdominal viscera are not sufficiently 
well ])reserved for a full anatoinical or histological investigation, appear 
of sufficient importance to notice here, especially as nothinj: appears to 
be known of the internal structure of either species of Spiropa gurus. 

The right testis and vas deferens are much larger than the left. The 
lower iiart of the right vas deferens, in all the adults examined, is much 
more dilated than the left, and is filled (as is also the external part of 
the duct) with very large spermatophores of peculiar form. The left vas 
deferens is slender, much as in Eupagurus bernhardus, terminates in a 
small opening in the left coxa of the last thoracic somite, as in ordinary 
Paguroids, and contains sj^ermatophores somewhat similar in form and 
size to those .of Eupagurus bernhardus. In alcoholic specimens of M. 
sociaUs the spermatophores from the left vas deferens are api)roximately 
0.10'"'" long and 0.035"''" broad, with a slender neck about a third of the 
entire length, and a very thin and delicate lamella for a base. The 
spermatophores from the right vas deferens are over 2""" in total length ; 
the body itself is oval, approximately 0.40""" long and a third as broad ; 
at one end it terminates in a very long and slender process, two or three 
times as long as the body ; at the other end there is a similar but slightly 
stouter process, a little longer than the body, and expanding at its tip 
into a broad and very delicate lamella, approximately 0.35""" long by 
0.20'"'" broad. The contents of the two kinds of spermatoi)hores are, of 
course, not in a condition to show the structure of the spermatozoa, but 
they present a similar appearance in each case, and are apparently of 
about the same size. 

Hemipagurus socialis, sp. nov. 

Male. — The part of the carapax in front of the cervical suture is about 
a fifth broader than long; the sides nearly parallel ; the front margin 
sinuous, curving slightly forward in the middle and each side between 
the eye-stalks and the peduncles of the anteuuic, the middle lobe thus 
formed being scarcely more prominent than the lateral lobes, each of 

* In many of tlie best preserved and most perfect females of Jlemipaijurus socialis 
examined I can find no trace whatever of this appendage of the fifth somite, while iu 
others it is very easily seen. 



424 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

wLicli is armed with a minute si^ine, projecting forward just inside of tlie 
peduncle of the antenna ; between these spines the edge of the front is 
upturned in a sharp marginal carina, which terminates each side in the 
spines themselves. The dorsal surface of this part of the carapax is 
convex in both directions, the protogastric lobes are protuberant and 
well marked, and nearly the whole surface is roughened, and more or 
less tubercu'iose, with transverse scabrous elev^ations, which give rise to 
numerous hairs. The branchial regions are slightly swollen, so that the 
breadth of the carapax i)osteriorly is greater than in front. All the por- 
tions back of the cervical suture are smooth and membranaceous. 

The eye-stalks are about half as long as the carapax in front of the 
cervical suture, flattened and expanded distally, where they are about 
three-fourths as broad as long'. The eye itself is black, and the cornea 
extends round either side so as to be crescent-shaped as seen from abo\'e. 
The ophthalmic scales are less than half as long- as the eye-stalks, nar- 
row, triangular, and acute. 

The first and second segments of the peduncle of the antennula are 
subequal in length, and the ultimate segment nearly once and a half as 
l6ng as the penultimate, and almost as long as the eye-stalks. Tlie 
superior, or major, flagellum is nearly as long as the ultimate segment 
of the peduncle ; the thick, ciliated basal portion consists of about four- 
teen segments, and the slender terminal portion, which is nearly once 
and a half as long as the basal, of about five very slender and subequal 
segments. The minor flagellum is about two-thirds as long as the major, 
and composed of about eight segments. The peduncle of the antenna 
reaches by the eye nearly the length of the last segment, which is about 
as long as the greatest diameter of the eye. The acicle is slender, acute, 
and slightly longer than the last segment of the peduncle. The flagel- 
lum reaches beyond the tips of the ambulatory legs. 

The chelipeds are slender and very nearly equal in length, but the 
right is very much stouter than the left. In the right cheliped the 
merns and carpus are subequal in length, together nearly twice as long 
as the carapax, and both are rough and obscurely spinous, the spines 
being most conspicuous on the edges of the upper surface of the carpus, 
which is fully three times as long as broad, flattened above, and angular, 
but not distinctly carinated along either side. The chela is not far 
from twice as long as the carpus, nearlj^ three times as long as broad, 
compressed vertically, evenly rounded, smooth and nearly naked above, 
but clothed with long, soft hair beneath ; the digits are longitudinal, 
not gaping, and the dactylus is about two-thirds as long as the basal 
portion of the i)ropodus, and its prehensile edge is armed with a broad 
tooth near the middle. In the left cheliped the merus and carpus are 
simdar to those of the right, but much more slender and a little longer; 
the carpus is about six times as long as broad, and the edges of the 
upper surface are rather more sharply angular than in the right ; the 
chela is shorter than the right, but very slender, smooth, and uearlj' 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 425 

naked 5 tlie digits are similar, lougitiidinal, slightly longer than the 
basal portion of the chela, compressed, slightly curved downward 
toward the tips, but the prehensile edges straight and very minutely 
serrate. 

The ambulatory legs are very nearly equal in length, and slightly 
overreach the chelipeds ; the merus is about as long as the left chela, 
and roughened* with small spines on the upper and under edges; the 
propodus is shorter than the merus, compressed, smooth, and ciliated 
along the edges ; the dactylus is a little longer in the second than in the 
first pair, but in both sliorter than the propodus, very strongly com- 
pressed, very slightly twisted, about ten times as long as broad, and 
thickly ciliated along both edges, except for a short distance along the 
lower edge near the tip. 

The female is smaller than the male, and has proportionally shorter 
ambulatory legs, and chelipeds very much shorter and much more alike. 
The right chela is only about a third longer than the carpus, little more 
than a third as broad as long-, and the digits are slender and nearly as 
long as the basal portion. The left cheliped is projiortionally stouter 
than in the male, and thus approximates to the right; the chela itself is 
scarcely more than a third longer than the cari)us. The ambulatory 
legs overreach the chelipeds by nearly or quite the full length of the 
dactyli, but all the segments have very nearly the same relative propor- 
tions as in the male. 

The eggs are few in number and very large, being about a millimeter 
in diameter in alcoholic specimens. 

In young males the chelipeds and ambulatory legs are similar to those 
of the female. 

Measurements. 



"LvTLsXh from front of carapax to tip of abdomen 

Leniith of car;ipax along median line 

Liiiuth of carapax froni froutto cervical suture 

Breadth of carnjiax iu front 

Length of eye-stalks 

Greatest diiiuK'ter of eye 

l.eustli of pcdunele of autennula 

Length of uli iuiate segment of the same 

LenLjtli of peduncle of antenna beyond front 

Lenfith of ultimate segment of peduncle of antenna 

Length of right cheliped 

Length of carpus 

Length of propodus 

Breadth of ])i'o])(idus. 

Lenuth of dai'tvlus . - 

Length of lelt cheliped 

Length of carpus '. 

Length of propodus 

Breadth of propodus 

Length of dactylus 

Length of firstaiiibulatory leg, right side 

Length of propodus 

Length of dactylus 

Lengtli of secoiul ambulatory leg, right side 

Length of propodus 

Length of dactylus 



d 


d 


9 


(Sta. 877). 


(Sta. 878.) 


(Sta. 878). 


mm. 


mm- 


mm. 


19.0 


16.5 


10. 


7.7 


6.3 


5.0 


5.3 


4.7 


4.0 


6.5 


. ■ 5.3 


4.8 


2.9 


2.6 


2.5 


2.1 


1.8 


1.7 


6.0 


5.5 


5.1 


2.7 


2.4 


2.2 


4.5 


4.0 


3.4 


2.1 


1.9 


1.7 


32.0 


24.8 


15.5 


7.0 


5.5 


4.0 


12.7 


10.0 


5.4 


4.5 


3.4 


L9 


5.6 


4.5 


2.8 


28.0 


24.0 


1.5. 1 


7.6 


6.3 


4.0 


10.0 


8.0 


5.1 


2.1 


1.7 


1.3 


5.7 


4.5 


2.8 


34.0 


28.0 


21.0 


8.4 


G.8 


5.2 


6.8 


.5.3 


5.0 


34.5 


28.2 


21.5 


8.9 


7.2 


5.8 


8.0 


7.0 


6.0 



426 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The carcinoecium is very rarely a naked gastropod shell ; iu most of 
the specimens seen it is either built np by a colony of Epizoanthus Amtr- 
iccmus, like the carcincecium of Eupagurus Kroyeri, from the same sta- 
tions, or is made up iu a somewhat similar way by the single polyp of a 
species of Adamsia^ the base secr6ted by the Adamsia being expanded 
on either side and united below so as to inclose the crab iu a broadly 
conical cavity, with ouly a slight spiral curvature. The uuclei about 
which these polypeau carcincecia are formed are of various origins; the 
majority of the Adamsia carciuoecia appear to have been built upon 
fragments of pteropod shells, in some cases upon bits of worm-tubes, iu 
one case upon the entire shell of a Cadrdus, the greater jjart of the shell 
being left protruding from the base of the polyp. In the carcincecia 
formed by Epizoanthus the nucleus seems usually to have been absorbed, 
so that nothiug is left distinguishable from the colony of polyps itself. 
In some (;ase- the Adamsia has completely overgrown a small Epizoan- 
thus carcinoecium, so that when the Adamsia is removed a perfect Epi- 
zoanthus carcinoecium is found beueath as a nucleus. The carcinoecium 
of this species, and of II. gracilis as well, does not cover the animal to 
the same extent as is usual in the species of Eupagurus, the anterior 
part of the carapax evidently being constantly exposed, its induration 
tittiug tiie animal for such exposure. The Epizoanthus carcincecia are, 
however, verj' often disproportionally large for the crabs inhabiting 
them, having grown out either side until they are several times broader 
than long. In spite of these often enormous carcincecia, both si)ecies of 
the genus probably swim about by means of the ciliated dactyli of the 
ambulatory legs, as Spiropagurus spiriger has been observed to do by 
Stimpson (Proc. Acad. I:^at. Sci. Philadelphia, 1858, p. 248 (86), 1859). 

Stations 805, 870, 871, 872, 873, 874, 876, 877, 878, 880; 65 to 252 fath- 
oms. ' At nniuy of these stations it occurred in very great abundance. 

Hemipa^urus gracilis, sp. nov. 

This is a smaller and more slender species than the last, and is readily 
distinguished from it by the smooth carapax, tbe longer and more slender 
eye-stalks, the long and acicular ophthabnic scales, and b}" the narrow 
dactyli of the ambulatory legs being longer than the corresponding 
inopodi. 

Male. — The carapax in front of the cervical suture is flat, smooth, 
nearly naked, and scarcely at all areolated. The anterior margin is rather 
more strongly sinuous than in II. socialis, and the lateral lobes are 
slightly angular and each is tii)ped with a minute spine, as in that spe- 
cies, but the marginal carina between these spines is much less distinct. 

The eye-stalks are more than half as long as the carapax in front of 
the cervical suture, flattened and expanded distally, but only about half 
as broad as long. The eyes themselves are as in H. sociaUs. The oph- 
thalmic scales are more than half as loug as the eye-stalks, and are 
acicular and regularly acute. 

The ultimate segment of the peduncle of the antennula is as long as 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 427 



the eye-stalk and nearly twice as long as the penultimate segment. The 
major flagellum is as long as the ultimate segment of the peduncle, the 
basal portion of about eight segments, the terminal portion three times 
as long and of about live subecpud and very slender segmeuts. The 
minor Hagellum is about half as long as the major, and composed of 
about six segments. The antennae are very much as in H. socUdis. 

The chelipeds are nearly equal in length and similar to those of iT. 
socialls, but in the right cheliped the inner edge of the upper surface of 
the carpus is angular, and armed with a regular series of twelve to eight- 
een small spines, while the outer edge is rounded and unarmed ; and 
the i)rehensile edge of the dactylus is armed with two irregular and in- 
distinct teeth, corresponding with two irregular emarginations in the 
edge of the digital portion of the propodus. In the left cheliped the 
outer edge of the upper surtace of the carpus is slightly rounded and 
scarcely at all spinulous, while the inner edge is armed as in the right 
cheliped. The left chela differs from that of H. socialis in having the 
digital i^ortion of the propodus considerably stouter than the dactylus, 
particularly toward the base. 

The ambulatory legs are proportionally as long but more slender than 
in H. socialis ; in both pairs the dactylus is longer than the propodus, 
curved slightly near the tip, about sixteen times as long as broad, sparsely 
ciliated along the ujjper edge, and very slightly setigerous along the 
lower. 

The female differs from the male as in H. socialis, but to a very much 
less extent, the chelipeds and andudatorj' legs being only a little shorter 
than in the male, and the right cheliped only a little less stout and a 
little more like the left than in the male. 

The eggs are few and nearly as large as in H. socialis. 

Measurements. 



Lenfrtli from front of carapax to tip of abdomen 

Length of earapax alons median line 

Lenjitli of carapax from" front to cervical suture 

Breadth of carapax in front 

Length of eye-stalks 

Greatest diameter of eye 

Lensth of peduncle of antennula 

LensI h of ultimate segment of the same 

Length of peduncle of antenna beyond front 

Length of ultimate segment of peduncle of antenna. 

Length of right cheliped 

Length of carpus 

Length of propodus 

Breadth of propodus 

Length of dactylus 

Length of left cheliped 

Leugth of carpus 

Length of propodus 

Breadth of propodus 

Length of dactylus 

Length of first ambulatory leg, right side 

Length of pio;)odus 

Length of dactylus _- 

Leugtli of second ambulatory leg, right side 

Len u til of propodus - 

Leugth of diiciylus 



d 


? 


(Sta.874). 


(Sta. 874). 


mm. ■ 


mm. 


12. 


11.2 


3.4 


3.2 


•2.2 


2.1 


2.8 


2.4 


l.G 


1.5 


1.1 


0.9 


3.4 


3.2 


1.6 


1.5 


2.3 


l.!> 


10 


0.8 


15.2 


11.2 


4.0 


2.8 


CO 


4.4 


2.4 


1.8 


2.0 


1.7 


13.6 


10 


3.8 


2.6 


.■5.0 


3.G 


1.1 


i.O 


2.5 


1.9 


10. 1 


12.8 


4.0 


3.2 


5.0 


4.0 


17.0 


14.0 


4.6 


3.7 


5.4 


4.5 



428 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

The carcinoecium iu all the specimens examined is a colony of Epizo- 
anthuSj but this species, like H. socialis, probably sometimes inhabits an 
Adamsia carcinoecium. 

Stations 805, 870, 871, 874, 877, 878; G3 to 155 fathoms; associated 
with H. sociaUs, but not at all abundant. 

Parapagurus piIo::iraaniiG Saiitli, Trai:is'. Conn. Acad., v, x^. 51, 1879. 

Stations 880, 81)3, 801; 252 to 372 fathoms. 

Since this species was described, from a single speciinen tnken in 250 
fathoms oft' Xova Scotia, a few additional speci:nens have been V)rou^;ht 
in by fishermen from deep water oft' x*rova Scotia. In all the specimens 
seen, the carciucecium is buiit up by a compound actinoid poly]), as iu 
the specimen first described. Some of the young specimens show very 
plainly the gastropod shell, which serves as a nucleus about which the 
polypean carcinoecium is built. 

Eupagurus bernhardus Brandt ex Liuue. 

Station 805; 05 fathoms; two small specimens. 

Eupagtirus Kroyeri Stimpsou. 

Stations 800, 870, 877, 878; 120 to 192 fathoms; many specimens, 
mostly small, and all in carciuoecia formed by colonies of EpizoantJiiis 
Americanns. 

Eupagurus, sp. 

Stations 805 to 807, 800 lo 871, 870 to 880, 803 to 805; 05 to 305 fath- 
oms. 

A species of about the size of E. Kroyeri, and quite distinct from the 
species heretofore known ujion our coast, and apparently distinct from 
all the described European species. 

?Munida Caribssa Stimpsou, Auu. Lj'ceiim Nat. Hist. New York, vii, p. 241 (11(5), 
18G0. 

Stations 805, 871 to 874, 877, 878 ; 05 to 142 fathoms. Very abundant 
at 871 ; 115 fathoms. 

It is with considerable hesitation that I refer these specimens to 
Stimpson's species, which was very briefly described, apparently from a 
■ single very small specimen, and with no more precise indication of its 
habitat than is imi>lied in the specific name. Very small specimens of 
the species before me agree very well, however, with Stimpson's descrip- 
tion, except that he says, "eye-peduncles longer and the cornea less 
dilated than usual", while in the species before me the eye-stalks are 
just about as long as in M. Bamffia and the cornea fully as much ex- 
panded horizontally, though considerably more compressed vertically; 
but this vertical compression is perhaps what Stimpson referred to in 
speaking of the cornea as " less dilated than usual ". 

The species in hand resemble M. tenumana G. O. Sars in the length 
and slenderness of the chelipeds, which are even longer and more slen- 
der than in that species, from which, however, it is sufiicientl}' distinct. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUxM. 429 

The armature of the carapux, chelipeds, and auibulatory legs is more 
like 21. Bamjjia thau tenuimana. There are usually six subequal and 
nearly equidistant spines upon the anterior half of the lateral margin of 
the carapax, of which one is in front of the cervical suture, three upon 
the hepatic region, and two npon the anterior part of the branchial 
region. There are no spines upon the posterior border of the carai>ax 
and none upon the abdomen, except two very small ones on the anterior 
edge of the second somite. The chelipeds are very long and slender, in 
large specimens being a half or more longer than the entire body, 
nearly cylindrical, and the merus and carpus si^arsely armed with small 
spines ; but the chela, which is longer, but no stouter, than the merus, is 
without spines. 

Four si)eciniens give the following measurements : 



Length 

L(ii'j.tli (if carnpax, including rostrum 

Li'U^tli of rostrnni .... 

])iva(ltli of eaiapax in frout of cervical suture 

Givatist breadth, excludiug spines. 

Breadth near posterior margin 

Leugth of cheliped 

Lengtii of merus 

Lengtli of carpus 

Length of chela 

Lengfli of daetylus 

Length of tiist auil)i>latory leg 

Greatest diameter of eye 



, 


? 


mm. 


mm. 


48.5 


48.0 


25.0 


24.2 ' 


9.1 


8.9 ] 


11.1 


11.7 


13.7 


14.0 


12. i 


13.0 


F4.0 


79.0 


34.3 


32.0 


CO 


.5.0 


39.0 


30.0 


17.0 


17.4 


50.0 


47.7 


4.0 


*•" 



7717/1 I 

23.0 ! 
12.3 
4.0 

5.7 : 

6.2 I 
CO I 
nc 5 ■ 

14.8 j 
3.0 i 

15.9 I 
7.2 1 

22.0 I 
3.C I 



mm. 

17.5 
9.2 
3.4 
4.4 
4.8 
4.5 

22.8 
8.3 
2.0 
9.8 
4.3 

14.0 
2.0 



MACEUEA. 

Arctus depressus, sp. nov. 

This species is represented only by a single, small, and probably imma- 
ture individual, but is apparently distinct from any known species of the 
genus, and is readily distinguished by the very broad and greatly 
depressed cephalo-thorax, which in these respects is Iflce Ibactts, and by 
the conspicuous spines each side of the posterior segments of the ster- 
num. The depressed form is perhaps partially a character of imma- 
turity, being an approach to the P/«//?o«orw.a-stages, and it is possible 
that the sternal spines disappear in the adult. 

The carapax is less than half as thick as broad, and the breadth is 
much greater thau the length along the middle line above, but slightly 
less than the length of the lateral margin, which is convex in outline, so 
that the greatest breadth is near the middle of the length. The antero- 
lateral angles are acute and very prominent, extending far forward of 
the rest of the front and to a line slightly in advance of the lirst dor- 
sally exposed segment (the true second peduncular) of the antenna each 
side. The orbits are very large, almost completely open in front, and 
occupy fully a third of the width of the whole front. The median carina 
is low, being, even in the middle of its length, only a little higher than 
the lateral carina?, and rises into two low, dentiform prominences, one 



430 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITK.D STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

at about the middle of the carapax and auother a little back of the 
anterior margin, and in front of the latter the carina is almost wholly 
obsolete. The lateral carince are jiromineut along the inner sides of 
the orbits', terminating in front in the elevated and irregularly dentate 
inner angles of the orbits. Just back of the orbit there is a hiatus in 
the carina, from which the carina extends uninterruptedly to near the 
posterior margin, though its crest is minutely and obscurely dentate. 
The surface of the longitudinal depressed spaces between the median 
and lateral carinte are naked and nearly smooth, and so is the narrow 
and slightly concave space between each lateral carina and the edge of 
the carapax, except for a line of small tubercles just outside the carina 
and a few additional ones outside of these, near the posterolateral angle.. 
The lateral margin is thin and the edge sharp, and divided by a sharp 
incision at the cervical suture, by an incision slightly less deep a little 
way back of the cervical suture, and by two or three obscure notches 
along the branchial region, while the edge between these incisions and 
notches is irregularly and very minutely dentate. 

The eyes are large, with an expanded cornea, and black. Tbe two 
lobes of the antennulary somite rise in front into small dentiform tuber- 
cles, and so do tbe first and second of the dorsally exposed segments of 
the antennte. The second exposed segment of the antenna is about as 
broad as long, carinated above, acutely angular in front, and the inner 
and outer edges are each armed with three teeth, of which the anterior 
in each case is obscure. The terminal segment is short, and the slightly 
arcuate anterior margin is deeply five-lobed. 

The sternum is triangular and very broad, the breadth between the 
bases of the posterior legs being nearly as great as the length along the 
median line. The edges are slightly raised above the bases of tlie legs, 
and terminate posteriorly, back of and below the base of the fifth leg, 
in a conspicuous spine, directed backward. 

The abdomen, to the tip of the telson, is twice as long as the carapax 
along the median line above, is at base much narrower than the cara- 
pax, and tai)ers regularly and so rapidly that at the sixth somite it is 
little mor<; than two-thirds as broad as at base. There is a slight median 
carina on the second to the fifth sonute, and the dorsal surface is naked 
and sparsel}" punctate, but otherwise- nearly smooth. The pleura of the 
second, third, fourth, and fifth somites are nearly perpendicular and 
sligiitly carinated in the middle ; the second is broader than the others 
and nearlj' right-angled, but terminates in a spiniform tip, turned back- 
ward ; the third is angular, but not si)iniforni at the extremity; and 
the fourth and fifth are obtuse or rounded. The sixth somite is about 
as long as, but considerably narrower than, the fifth, and its pleura are 
small and narrowly triangular. The telson is much longer than broad, 
tapers very slightly distally 5 the posterior ])ortion is very thin, delicate, 
and transparent, and the posteiior edge is slightly curved and the angles 
rounded. The lamellte of the uropods are as long as and much broader 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 431 

than the telson, and, except a small portion near the base, are thin and 
transparent like the terminal i)art of the telson. 

Measurements. 



mm. 



Length from front of carapax to tip of telson 1H.7 

Length from tips of antennaj to tip of telson 23. 2 

Length of carapas along median line above G. 2 

Length of carapax along lateral margin 0. 

Greatest breadth of carapax g. 3 

Breadth between anterior angles 7. 5 

Breadth posteriorly 6. 2 

Greatest thickness of cephalo-thorax 3. 5 

Breiidth of lirst somite of abdomen .' 0. 1 

Breadth of sixth somite of abdomen 4. 

Station 872 ; 8G fathoms. 

In the ontline of the edges of the segments of the antennae and in the 
divisions of the carina" of the carai)ax this species is much like A. Ameri- 
canns Smith (Amer. Journ. Sci., II, xlvii, p. 119, 18'ol); Scyllanis {Arctus) 
GumUachi von Martins, Archiv fiir ISTatnrgesch., xxxviii, p. 123, i)l. 5, 
fig. 13, 1872), the jonng of which it may possibly prove to be, though 
this seems very improbable considering that the specimen just described 
is half as long as ordinary' specimens oi A. Americanus^ which is known 
from the Gulf of Mexico and the West Indies. 

Nephropsis acnleatus, sp. nov. 

Very closely allied to JSTephropsis Sfeu-arti Wood-Mason (Journ. Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, xlii, part ii, p. 39, pi. 4, 1873), described from a single 
female, 98"™ long and wanting the chelipeds, dredged in 2G0 to 300 
fathoms in the Bay of Bengal. 

Mole. — In specimens 30™"' to 34""" in length the rostrum is very slightly 
longer jiroportionately than represented in the figures of X. Steicarti, 
but in all other respects the carapax shows no differences whatever. The 
abdomen is as represented in the figure of i\^. Steicarti, except that the 
plenra of the second to the fifth somite, inclusive, project liirther down- 
ward and terminate in slender, acuminate, and spiuiform tips, and that 
the pleuron of the sixth somite is sharply right-angled below, and not 
rounded. The uropods and telson show no differences whatever. 

The chelipeds are equal, or very nearly so, about a fourth longer than 
the carapax, includiug the rostrum, and are carried with the chehe held 
horizontally, as in Nephrox)s and Eomarus. The merus is about as long as 
the rostrum, and is armed near its distal end with a slender sjune above 
and a similar one below. The carpus is short, a little longer than broad, 
shghtly broader than the distal part of the merus, and is armed with 
three small spines— one near the middle of the inner edge, one at its 
distal end, and another beneath at the articulation with the chela. The 
chela is scarcely longer than the merus and slightly broader than the 
carpus, somewhat compressed vertically, rounded above and below, and 



432 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

without spines, except a few very minute dentiform ones tilong the inner 
edge of the piopodus ; the propodal digit is hmgitudiual and tapers to 
a slender incurved tip ; the dac^tyhis is a little longer and stouter tlian 
the propodal digit, and has a longer and more strongly curved tip, which 
closes beneath the tip of the propodus ; the prehensile edges of both 
digits are sharp and minutely creuulate. The upper surface and the 
inner edge of the carpus and the upper surface and both edges of the 
chela are thickly clothed with very long and soft pubescence, directed 
distally. The succeeding pairs of legs are very nearly as in N. Sfewarti. 
The second pair are about three-fourths as long as the chelipeds, slender 
and perfectly chelate. The third pair are a little longer than tlie second 
and not quite as perfectly chelate. The fourth are a little longer than, 
and the lifth about as long as, the chelipeds. 

Very imperfect yb««7e specimens, considerably larger than the males 
above described, have the chelipeds a little larger and stouter propor- 
tionally than in the males, and the pleura of the second to the lifth 
somite of the abdomen very slightly less prolonged, but still acuminate 
and si)iniform, and very dilfei-ent from N. Steicarti. 

One of the males and an imperfect female give the following: 

Measurements. 



Len^tli from tip of rostrum to tip of telson 

Leujith of <Lirap;ix, iucludinj;' rostrum 

L(ii.!j,tli of rostrum 

Leujith of ro.si rum in front of spines 

Ereailt li of carapas ; 

Height of carapax 

liCngtli of (■bclipcd.s 

Length of mcrus 

Length (Tf carpus 

. Length of chel:i 

Lieadth of chela 

Length of dp.ctylus 

Length of second pair of legs 

Length of merus 

Length of carpus 

Length of chela 

Breadth of chela 

L(?ugth of daet ylus 

Length of third i>air of legs 

Length of carpus 

Length of pro|)odus 

Bicadth of propodus 

Length of proiiodal digit 

Length of dactvlus 

Length of fou ith pair of legs 

Length of ])ropodus 

Length of dnetvlus 

Length of lift h pair of legs 

Length of jirojiochis 

Length of daetylus 

Length of telso'n 

Breadth of telsou 



mm. 


7nm. 


34.0 




l(i.4 




7.0 




4.0 




5.5 




e.o 




20.0 


32.0 


7.0 


11.0 


3.5 


5.0 


7.1 


12.5 


2.3 


4.9 


4.0 


6.2 


15.5 


24.0 


5.7 


9.0 


2.6 


4.0 


3.8 


6.7 


0.8 


L3 


1.4 


2. 2 


17.5 


27.0 


3.1 


4.8 


.5.3 


8.0 


0.5 


0.8 


J.l 


1.8 


1.9 


2.1 


22.0 


33. 


.5.2 


7.9 


2.8 


4.8 


20. 5 


31.0 


.5.0 


7.3 


3.0 


4.5 


3.9 




2.0 





Station 873; 100 fathoms (3 males). Station 876-, 120 fathoms (one 
very imperfect female from the stomach of Lopholatihis). Station 877; 
126 fathoms (fragments of two or three specimens). 

As Wood-Mason has remarked, the genus Ifephrojjsis is closely allied 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 433 

ioNephrops. The structure and arrangement of the brauchiaj were 
apparently not examined by Wood-Mason, but in our species they agree 
with yephrops JS^orvegicus, there being nineteen branchiae upon each side, 
arranged like the nineteen posterior branchiae of each side of Homarus. 
The branchia of the second maxilliped is wholly wanting, unless it is 
represented by a minute, papilla-like process near the base of the epi- 
gnath. The oral appendages agree perfectly with those of Nephrops Kor- 
vegicus. The densely pubescent chelipeds, however, are very different 
from the naked and carinated chelipeds of Neplirops^ and probably afford 
an additional generic distinction. 

A^us armatus, sp. nov. 

Female. — The carapax is strongly compressed, about twice as long as 
high, smooth and nearly naked. The rostrum is narrow, acuminate, 
spiniform at the tip, and armed along each edge with four or five slen- 
der, acute, and spiniform teeth, directed forward and slightly upward. 
From the edge of the rostrum a sharj) lateral carina runs back on each 
side more than a third of the way to the cervical suture. The dorsal 
carina is sharp anteriorly, extends back nearly to the cervical suture, 
but anteriorly only as far as the posterior marginal teeth of the rostrum, 
and is armed with two spiniform teeth just back of the base of the ros- 
trum. About half way between the dorsal and lateral carinae there is 
a very distinct subdorsal carina, parallel with and extending back nearly 
as far as the dorsal, and in front turned abruptly inward opposite the 
posterior dorsal tooth, but not quite reaching the dorsal carina. 

The eyes are small and black. 

The peduncle of the antennula reaches by the tip of the rostrum the 
full length of the last segment, and the liagella are subequal in length 
and about as long as the carajiax. The third segment of the peduncle 
of the antenna is armed with a slender spine on the lower side of the 
distal end. The distal spine on the second segment, at the base of the 
acicle, is slender, acute, and more than half as long as the rest of the 
segment, while the acicle is slender, straight, and as long as the fourth 
segment, which is slender, and about as long as the second segment to- 
gether with its distal spine. The fifth, or last, segment is not more than 
a third as long as the fourth. The flagellum is more than twice as long 
as the carapax. 

The merus of the external maxilliped is armed at the distal extremity 
of the lower edge with two very long and slender spines. 

The larger cheliped is about twice as long as the carapax, and the 
chela itself, to the tip of the dactylus, is nearly as long as the carapax. 
The propodus is strongly compressed, about half as broa<:l as the entire 
length and three-fourths as broad as the length of the basal portion, 
which is convex on both sides and has the edges sharp and carinated. 
The digital portion is longitudinal, about three-fourths the entire length, 
more than half as long as the basal portion, slightly upturned at the tip, 
Proc. Nat. Mu3. 80 28 Jan. 1 0, 1 8 8 1 . 



434 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

and armed with a stout tooth near the middle of the i)rehensile edge. 
The dactyhis is as long as the basal portion of the propodiis, about three- 
fourths longer than the propodal digit, strongly curved toward the tip, 
and the i^rehensile edge is sharp and minutely crenulate, but not toothed, 
and closes by the inner side of the tip of the propodus. The smaller 
cheliped is similar in form to the larger, but is considerably shorter and 
very much more slender, and the propodal digit is proportionately longer 
and its prehensile edge thin and minutely multidentate. Both chelae 
are sparsely hairy on the digits and very slightly along the margins of 
the basal portions. The second pair of legs are very slender and a little 
longer than the carajjax; the merus is about as long as the carpus and 
chela taken together; the carpus is less than half as long as and slightly 
narrower than the merus and about three times as long as broad; the 
chela is slightly longer but scarcely broader than the carpus, and the 
digits are slender, longitudinal, not gaping, and a little shorter than the 
basal portion. The third and fourth pairs of legs are very nearly alike, 
and as long as the second, but more slender ; the merus is about as long 
as the carious and propodus together; the propodus is about a third 
longer than the carjjus; and the dactylus is slender, nearly straight, and 
about two-fifths as long as the prof>odus. The fifth, or posterior, legs 
are considerablj^ shorter and much more slender than the third and 
fourth pairs, being nearly cylindrical; the merus is about as long as the 
propodus; the carpus about three-fifths as long; the dactylus is about 
half as long as the carpus. 

The abdomen is much narrower than the carapax and not expanded 
in the middle, the sides being nearly straight and parallel. The lamelliB 
of the uropods are about as long as the telsou, the outer as long as 
broad, the inner a little narrower. The telson is about a third longer 
than 'the sixth somite of the abdomen, about two-thirds as broad as 
long ; the lateral edges are nearly parallel and each armed with about 
four small spines; the posterior margin is regularly arcuate. Near the 
middle of the dorsal surface there is a transverse line of four small spines, 
and there are one or two more between these and the tip. 

An imperfect male specimen, wanting the chelipeds and most of the 
abdomen, has three si)ines in front on the dorsal carina, and the spines, 
of the rostrum slightly longer than in the female. 

The single female gives the following : 

mm. 

Length from tip of rostrum to tip of telson 44. 

Length of carapax to tip of rostrum 16. 3 

Length of rostrum 3. 1 

Height of carapax 8. 2 

Breadth of carapax 7.0 

Length of right cheliped 3L0 

Length of left cheliped 25.0 

Length of right merus 8. 3 

Length of left merus 7.0 

Length of right propodus 12. 5 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 435 



mm. 



Lengtli of left propodus 90 

Breadth of right i^ropodus G. 

Breadth of left propodus 3. 1 

Length of right propodal digit 4. 5 

Length of left propodal digit 4. 

Length of right dactylus 8. 

Length of left dactylus 5. 2 

Length of telson 5. 5 

Breadth of telson 3. 8 

Stations 873 and 878 ; 100 and 142 fathoms. 

This species is at once distinguished from A. stirynchus and A. serratus 
by the narrower and acuminate rostrum, the teeth on the dorsal carina, 
the form of the chelipeds, and the more slender second, third, and fourth 
pairs of legs. In A. stirynchus and serratus the carpus in the second 
pair of legs is short, expanded distall j, and less than half as broad as 
long, and the chela is nearly or quite half as broad as long. 

Axius serratus Stimjjson (Proc. Boston Soe. Nat. Hist., iv, p. 222, 1852; 
Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, p. 55, pi. 10, fig. 4, 1879) was dredged the 
past season from the "Fish Hawk", in 20 fathoms, sandy bottom, in 
Narragausett Bay ; and large specimens, taken on George's Banks, have 
been presented to the National Museum by Capt. John Q. Getchell and 
crew of the schooner "Otis P. Lord'', of Gloucester, Mass, 

These specimens show that Stimpson's species is distinct from the Eu- 
ropean stirynclius. The serratus is at once distinguished by its broad 
and depressed abdomen, which expands laterally in the middle, and is 
much broader than the carapax. The fourth segment of the peduncle 
of the antenna and the acicle are both proportionally much longer in 
serratus than in stirynchus, being nearly as long as in the species just 
described. The upper edge of the propodus in both chelipeds is thin 
and strongly carinated in serratus, but thick and rounded in stirynchus, 
and the smaller cheliped is much narrower and has much longer and 
more slender digits in serratus than in stirynchus. 

Pontophilus Norvegicus M. Sars. 

Stations 8G9, 870, 880, 881, 893, 894, 895 ; 155 to 372 fathoms. 

The largest females are 74""" long, the largest male 47""". Several of 
the specimens belong to the variety with the broad and obtuse rostrum 
described by Sars. 

Pontophilus brevirostris, sp. nov. 

Very closely allied to P. spinosus and P. Norvegicus, but readily dis- 
tinguished from both these species by the very short rostrum, which is 
tridentate, with the median tooth scarcely broader and very little longer 
than the lateral, about reaching to the cornea of the inner side of the 
eye and not projecting beyond the line of the spiniform outer angles of 
the orbits. The proportions of the body are more like sjjinosus than 
Norvegicus, but the carination and armature of the carapax are more 



436 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

like Norvegicus, while the sculpture of the distal somites of the abdo- 
men is more like spinosus. 

The dorsal carina of the carapax is armed with three spines, and 
usually a smaller fourth one in front of the others and just back of the 
base of the rostrum ; the subdorsal carina is armed with two spines, as 
in N'orvegicus, and often with a rudiment of a third behind these; the 
lateral carina does not extend back of the middle of the carapax, and is 
armed with a single spine, as in N'orvegicus. There are no distinct car- 
inse on the first four somites of the abdomen, but the fifth somite is flat- 
tened above and has subdorsal carinae slightly diverging posteriorly, and 
below these, each side, another carina, nearly parallel with the subdor- 
sal; and the sixth somite is flattened above and subdorsally carinated, 
as in s2n)iosus, though the carinas are not quite as conspicuous on either 
somite as in that species. 

The eyes, antennulse, and antennae are very nearly as in P. spinosus. 
The external maxillipeds reach a little beyond the tips of the chelipeds, 
the penultimate segment reaches nearly to the tip of the antennal scale, 
and the ultimate segment is a little less than twice as long as the penul- 
timate, while in P. Norvegicus it is about once and a half as long, and in 
P. spinosus much more than twice as long, as the the penultimate seg- 
ment. The thoracic legs differ scarcely at all from those of P. spinosus. 

The lamelkTB of the uropods are very nearly as in P. spinosus. The 
inner lamella reaches nearlj' or quite to the tip of the telson, is lanceo- 
late, and six or seven times as long as broad ; the outer lamella is about 
a tenth shorter than the inner and about four times as long as broad. 
The telson is once and a fourth to once and two-fifths as long as the 
sixth somite of the abdomen, is very narrow, slightly acuminate, and 
has a ^■ery narrow and acutely triangular tip, armed with only two very 
long, . slender, and plumose setse, which arise near together from the 
under side. 

This species appears to be much smaller than either Norvegicus or 
spinosus. The following measurements are from two of the larger speci- 
mens : 



?• 



Length from tip of rostrum to end of telson 

Length of carapax along dorsum 

Length of rostrum in front of the back of the orbit. 

Breadth of carapax at anterior margin 

Greatest breadth of carapax 

Length of sixth somite of abdomen 

Breadth of the same in the middle 

Length of telson 

Length of antennal scale 



mm. 


mm. 


24.5 


36.0 


6.0 


9.5 


0.7 


0.8 


3.7 


5.9 


3.8 


7.1 


3.9 


5.3 


].l 


1.9 


.5.0 


7.5 


3.0 


4.4 



Stations 865 to 867, 870 to 874, 877, 878; 65 to 155 fathoms. At most 
of these stations it was taken in great abundance. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 437 
Hippolyte securifrons Norman. 

Stations 897 and 880; 225 and 2.>2 fathoms; three large females. 

The branchial formula of this species, written essentially after Hux- 
ley's method, is : 



Somites. 


Podo- 
branchiae. 


Arthro- 
branchiae. 


Pleuro- 
branchiae. 




VII 


(ep.) 

1 ( + ep.) 
(ep.) 

(ep.) 
(ep.) 
(ep.) 



















=0 (ep.) 
=1 (+ ep.) 
=0 (ep.) 
=1 (+ ep.) 
=1 (+ ep.) 
=1 (+ ep.) 
=1 
=1 


VIII 


IX 


X 


XI 


XII 


XIU 


XVI 






l+6ep. 





5 


6 +6ep. 



Bythocaris sp. 

Stations 8G5 to 867, 872, 874, 878; 64 to 142 fathoms. 

Pandalus propinquus (i. O. Sars, Chiistiania Videnskabs-Selskabs Forhandlinger, 
ldB9, p. 148 (4); ibid., 1871, p. 259 (16). 

Stations 878, 879, 880, 893, 894, 875 ; 142 to 365 fathoms. The largest 
specimen is a female, over 110""" in length. 

This species was dredged in 1879 in the Gulf of Maine, off Cape Cod, 
station 305, K lat. 42° 9' 30", W. long. 69° 41', 118 fathoms, soft mud ; 
and station 343, J^. lat. 42° 17', ^Y. long. 69° 51', 116 fathoms, mud. A 
male, 74""' long, from station 305, has the chelate second pair of legs 
reversed, the short one being on the left and the long one on the right ! 
The legs themselves are of the normal size and structure, and the speci- 
men api)ears to be perfectly normal in all other respects. 

As far as I am aware, the species has heretofore been recorded only 
from deep water off" the coast of Xorway. 

Pandalus leptocerus, sp. nov. 

In size and general appearance much like P. 2Iontagui {annuUcornis), 
but more slender and readily distinguished from it, and from P. propin- 
quus and horealis as well, by the minutely roughened surface and the 
presence of exopods upon the external maxillipeds. 

The rostrum is from about once and a third to nearly twice as long as 
the rest of the carapax, and curved very slightly upward, but usually 
not as much so as in P. Montagui. Above, it is armed with eleven to 
thirteen teeth, of which one is near the tip, as in P. Montagui, and 
usually only two back of the orbit on the carapax proper, while a con- 
siderable space back of the terminal spine is unarmed, though this space 
is usually shorter than in P. Montagui. Beneath, there are 6 to 8 teeth, 
as in P. Montagui. The entire surface of the carapax and abdomen is 
slightly roughened with short and irregular, transverse, punctate ridges, 
which give rise to very short, bristle-like hairs, while in P. Montagui, 
propinqims and horealis the surface is naked and very smooth. The 



438 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

carapax is considerably more slender than in P. Montagui, and the pos- 
terior tooth of the dorsal carina is farther forward, being much in front 
of the middle. The abdomen is more slender than in P. Montagui ; but, 
except for the greater slenderness, there is scarcely any difference in 
the form or proportions of the somites, or the form and armature of the 
telson and uropods. There are slender exopods, about a third as loug 
as the ischia, at the bases of the external maxillipeds, but the endopods 
themselves areas in P. Montagui; the merus reaches to the base of the 
flagellum of the antenna, and the tip falls considerably short of the tip 
of the antennal scale. 

The first pair of legs are nearly as in P. Montagui. The right chelate 
leg of the second i^air is shorter and stouter than in P. Montagui^ and 
scarcely reaches the tip of the corresponding leg of the first pau^ ; the 
ischium is about a fourth the eutire length ; the merus is only a little 
shorter than the ischium ; the carj^us increases in thickness distally, is 
a little longer than the ischium, not more than about once and a half as 
long as the merus, and usually composed of only flv^e segments, the 
proximal half being wholly unsegmented or aunulated, then three sub- 
equal and very distinct segments, about as broad as long, and these fol- 
lowed by the terminal segment, which is about as long as the three next 
preceding ; the chela is about half as long as the carpus and a little 
stouter than its distal end.* The left chelate leg is a little shorter and 
stouter than in P. Montagui^ but has about the same number of seg- 
ments in the merus and carpus, and does not differ in other respects. 
The third, fourth, and fifth j)airs of legs differ from those of P. Montagui 
in being a little more slender and in having much longer, much more 
slender, and nearly cylindrical dactyli, which are wholly unarmed, except 
a few small spinules beneath near the base. 

* The proportions of the segments and the segmentation of the carpus in the un- 
equal second pair of legs in the genus Pandalus appear to be usually very constant aud 
to afford very good specific characters, but they occasionally present very remarkable 
variations. In carefully examining several hundred specimens of this species, only 
about half a dozen were found which varied from the above description in the seg- 
mentation of the left carpus ; two or three specimens had an additional but less dis- 
tinctly indicated segment back of the four distal ones, making six in all. Two speci- 
mens had three additional segments inserted in the same way, making eight in all ; 
but in both these specimens the segmentation was more or less irregular, and the addi- 
tional segments may have resulted from some injury. One large female, quite normal 
in other respects, has the right carpus multiarticulate throughout and composed of 
about eighteen segments, nearly as in P. Montagui; the whole leg, however, is shorter 
than in other specimens of the same size, and may have been reproduced, though I 
cannot see how this would explain its abnormal structure. Detailed measurements 
of both chelate legs in most of these abnormal specimens are given beyond in the tables 
of measurements. 

One female, 70'°'° long, stations 290 to 291, 30 to 31 fathoms, off Cape Cod, has the 
chelate legs reversed, just as in the specimen of P. jpropinquus already referred to. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 439 



Measurements. 



Station. 



373, off Cape Cod, 42 fathoms. 



878, off Block Island . 



372, off Cape Cod, 70 fathoms. 
878, off Block Island 



878, off Block Island 



372, off Cape Cod, 70 fathoms. 
878, off Block Island 



878, off Block Island 



372, off Cape Cod, 70 fathoms ? 



33, off Cape Ann, 90 fathoms . 
3S, off Cape Ann, 90 fathoms . 
33, off Cape Ann, 90 fathoms. 



mm. 
52 



60 



75 



65 



80 



a . 
2 o 



mm. 
22.0 



25.4 



36.0 



35.0 



38.3 



mm. 

12.7 



15.8 



17.5 



21.3 



24.8 



24.5 



26.2 



-3 OS 

ID C3 



mm. 
5.5 



6.0 



7.3 



6.5 



8.1 



42.3 






3 + 8 + 1 



2-1-8 + 1 

7 
2 + 9 + 1 



2 + 8 + 1 



2 + 10-1-1 



2 + 9 + 1 



2 + 10 + 1 



2 + 9 + 1 



2 + 9 + 1 



9.5 



27. 4 I 10. 2 



2 + 10+1 
7 

2 + 10 + 1 



2 + 9 + 1 



Detailed measurements of each of the chelate legs, and the number 
of segments in the carpus, of nine of the above specimens are given 
below. The first three columns give the number, sex, and length of 
each specimen, as in the table above ; columns four to nine give the 
entire length of the leg and the lengths of each of the five distal seg- 
ments ; and the last column gives the number of segments in the car- 
pus. For the left carpus this last number is not perfectly definite, as 
the segmentation becomes irregular and indistinct toward the proximal 
end. 



440 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 













Kight chelate leg. 






No. 


Sex. 


Length. 




































Length. 


Ischium. 


Merus. 


Carpus. 


Propodus. 


Dactylus. 


No. segs. 
in carp. 






mm. 


mm. 


mm. 


mm. 


min. 


mm. 


mm. 




1 


c< 


52 


13 


3.4 


2.7 


4.1 


2.1 


0.9 


5 


2 


rf 


CO 


15 


4.0 


3.2 


4.5 


2.6 


1.1 


5 


3 


rf 


75 


22 


5.2 


4.9 


7.0 


3.8 


1.5 


5 


6 




80 


23 


5.9 


5.1 


7.2 


4.0 


1.6 


5 


10 


5 


90 


24 


6.6 


5.3 


7.6 


3.9 


1.6 


5 


7 


J 


82 


20 


5.5 


4.4 


6.5 


3.2 


1.2 


18 


4 


rf 


CI 


15 


4.1 


3.2 


4.6 


2.5 


1.0 


6 


5 


rT 


C5 


16 


4.0 


3.2 


5.0 


2.5 


1.0 


8 


8 


? 


84 


22 


5. 5 


1.6 


7.0 


3.4 


1.3 


8 



No. 


Sex. 


Length. 


Left chelate leg. 






















Length. 


Ischium. 


Merus. 


Carpus. 


Propodus. 


Dactylus. 


No. segs. 
in carp. 






mm. 


m.m. 


m.m. 


m.m. 


mm. 


mm,. 


mm. 




1 


rf 


52 


24 


5.5 


4.5 


10.1 


1.1 


0.6 


53 


2 


rf 


60 


27 


6.5 


5.9 


12.3 


1.2 


0.6 


53 


3 


rT 


75 


35 


9.0 


8.0 


15.0 


1.9 


0.9 


58 


6 


? 


80 


37 


9.0 


8.5 


16.0 


2.0 


1.0 


64 


10 




90 


41 


10.3 


8.8 


18.2 


2.0 


1.0 


64 


7 


Q 


82 


39 


10.0 


8.4 


17.6 


1.9 


0.9 


6a 


4 


w 


61 


27 


6.7 


5.7 


12.2 


1.1 


0.6 


54 


3 


rf 


65 


27 


6.6 


5.8 


12.1 


1.2 


0.6 


52 


8 


? 


84 


39 


9.0 


8.8 


17.5 


1.9 


0.8 


56. 



Station 870, 155 fathoms (abundant); 873, 100 fathoms; 878, 142 
fathoms (very abundant). It was also taken in abundance this season 
at many stations in shallow water off Ehode Island. 

In the dredgings off Cape Cod, in 1879, this species occurred at a 
great number of the stations, in 15 to 110 fathoms, and was very often 
associated with P. Montagui, and at 116 fathoms with P. propinqmis. 
It was particularly abundant in 25 to 50 fathoms, several quarts of 
specimens often being taken at one haul of the trawl. In the dredgings 
previous to 1879 it occurred very much less abundantly, and was care- 
lessly confounded with P. Jilontagui, under which name specimens of P. 
leptocerus may have occasionally been distributed in the sets of speci- 
mens made up from the Fish Commission collections and distributed from 
the National Museum. In the dredgings of 1877-'78, it occurred sparing- 
ly, in 22 to 48 fathoms, in Massachusetts Bay ; and in 75 to 90 fathoms, 
in the Gulf of Maine, off Cape Ann, in considerable abundance and of 
large size ; in both localities associated with P. Montagui^ and in the 
Gulf of Maine with P. boreaUs also. In Casco Bay, in 1873, a few 
specimens only were taken. Among great numbers of specimens of P. 
Montagui from the Bay of Fundy I have not succeeded in finding a 
single specimen of the new species, although it very likely occurs there. 
At Halifax, Nova Scotia, a few specimens only, most of them very 
small, were taken, and these were from 18 fathoms. In the region of 
George's Banks, in 1872, it was taken in 30, 45, 50, 60, and 430 fathoms^ 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 441 

and appears to have been more common than P. Montagui, which occur- 
red with the leptocerus in 30 and 45 fathoms, and alone in 28 fathoms.* 

Pandalus tenuipes, sp. nov. 

This species is smaller but has a proportionally thicker body than P. 
Montagui, and the surface of the carapax and abdomen are very mi- 
nutely roughened, somewhat as in the last species, but the punctata 
ridges are much less conspicuous and much more thickly crowded than 
in that species. 

The carapax, including the rostrum, is about two-fifths of the entire 
length, and the carapax proper is nearly as long as the rostrum, slightly 
swollen in the middle, somewhat contracted in front, as seen from above, 
and with the rostral carina extending back to about the middle, and 
armed, at about a third of the way from the front, with two to four 
slender teeth, crowded close together and rapidly decreasing in size 
posteriorly ; but between these teeth and the posterior tooth of the ros- 
trum the carina is wholly unarmed. The rostrum is curved uj)ward a 
little more than in P. Montagui, is not expanded below, and is armed 
the whole length above with eight to ten teeth, which are usually more 
widely separated distally, though in some specimens the terminal two 
or three are crowded together near the tip ; beneath there are six to ten 
small teeth. 

The eyes are black and as broad as long, but shorter than in P. Montagui. 
The peduncle of the antennula reaches to near the middle of the antennal 
scale, and the two distal segments are subequal in length and each about 
as broad as long. The antennular flagella are subequal in length and 
much longer than the carapax, including the rostrum ; the proximal 
half of the outer flagellum is very much thickened, the terminal por- 
tion very slender, as is the inner flagellum throughout. The antennal 
scale is approximately four-fifths as long as the rostrum, and of very 
nearly the same form as in P. Montagui. The external maxillipeds are 
very slender, reach to about the tip of the rostrum, and have well-de- 
veloped exopods, fully half as long as the ischium ; the ischium is a 
little longer than the rest of the endopod, which is composed, as in P. 
Montagui., of only two distinct segments beyond the ischium, and in 
this case these two segments are subequal in length. 

The first pair of legs are very slender and reach to the tips of the ex- 
ternal maxillipeds. The second (chelate) legs are exactly alike, and 
reach to or considerably by the tips of the antennal scales. The ischium 
is a little longer than the merus ; the carpus a little less than twice as 
long as the merus, slightly shorter than the antennal scale, and com- 
posed of about fifteen segments, of which the proximal are separated by 

*In the report on the dredgings in the region of George's Banks (Smith and Har- 
ger, Trans. Conn. Acad., iii, pp. 1-57, pis. 1-8, 1874), "PandaUs annuUcorms" is re- 
ported from the following stations : h, 30 fathoms ; c, 28 fathoms ; d, 50 fathoms ; e, 
60 fathoms ; g, 430 fathoms ; and q, 45 fathoms ; but on re-examining the specimens I 
find all those preserved from &, e, and g are P. leptocerus, the single specimen from c 
is P. Montagui, while from d and g there are specimens of both species. 



442 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

indistinct articulations, while the four or five distal ones are separated 
by conspicuous articulations, of which the ultimate is about twice as 
long as broad, but the next three or four, each, only about half as long 
as broad. The chela is slender, only a very little stouter than the distal 
end of the carpus, nearly a third as long as the carpus, and about half 
as long as the merus, and the digits are alike, about as long as the basal 
portion, slightly gaping, and with a v ery few long, setiform hairs. The 
third, fourth, and fifth pairs of legs are exceedingly slender, sparsely 
armed with minute spinules and slender setai ; and the dactyli are very 
long and slender, slightly and regularly bent, and flattened a little verti- 
cally (or in the direction of the plane of the cervature), and wholly un- 
armed ; the fifth pair reach beyond the tip of the rostrum, and the fourth 
and third pairs are successively a little longer ; the dactylus in the fifth 
pair is a third or a Httle more than a third as long as the propodus, in 
the fourth pair a little longer than in the fifth, and in the third pair not 
far from half as long as the propodus. 

The abdomen is evenly rounded and not at all compressed above, and 
less geniculated at the third segment than in P. Montagui. The sixth 
segment is about once and two-thirds as long as the fifth. The telsou is 
about once and a half as long as the sixth segment, and terminates in an 
acutely triangular tip, armed each side with two long spines, of which 
the proximal is very much the longer, and at the extreme tij) with a few 
long, plumose setae. 

Measurements. 



station. 



871, off Block Island. 



870, off Block Island. 



878, off Block Island. 



879, off Block Island..,. 



% 



mm. 
42 



50 



40 



61 



03 a 



ttim. 
19.2 



22.0 



16.5 



25.0 



mm. 
10.0 



11.8 



8.3 



12.8 






mm. 
5.1 



5.0 



8.0 






4+6 

8 
3+7 

9 
3+6 

7 
2+6 

7 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 443 

Some of the legs of these specimeus give the following measure- 
ments : 



1 


Leg. 


a 


a 

3 


i 


t 


1 

S 


m 

1 
P 


1 


2d 


mm. 
17.0 
26.0 
24.0 
28.0 
26.7 
25.2 
24.3 
23.5 
25.0 


mm. 
4.2 
3.0 
2.0 
3.0 
2.5 
2.5 
2.1 
2.0 
6.5 


mm. 

3.8 
10.0 
8.7 
11.6 
11.0 
10.0 
9.1 
8.2 
5.5 


niTfi. 
6.3 
4.7 
5.0 
4.6 
4.6 
5.1 
, 4.6 
5.4 
9.7 


mm,. 
2.0 
5.3 
5.5 
5.7 
5.7 
5.0 
5.5 
5.7 
2.7 


mm.. 
1.0 
3.0 
1 9 


1 


3d 


1 


5th 


2 


3d 


2 5 


2 


4th 


2 3 


•> 


5th 


2 


1 


4th 


2 3 


3 


5th 


1 5 


4 


2d 


1 2 









Stations 870, 871, 873, 877, 878, 880 ; 100 to 252 fathoms. Three females 
from 878, 142 fathoms, were carrying eggs. 

The genus Fandalus, as at present recognized, apparently contains 
species representing two or more genera, and the species just described 
is probably not strictly congeneric with P. Montagui, the type species. 
The equal, chelate legs and the slender, unarmed dactyli of the third, 
fourth, and fifth i^airs of legs separate P. temdpes widely from Montagui. 
The oral appendages afford some characters not indicated in the above de- 
scription. In P. tenuipes the proximal segment of the mandibular palpus 
is dilated, though not quite as conspicuously as in P. Montagui ; the pos- 
terior lobe of the scaphognath of the second maxilla is very short, broad, 
obtusely rounded at the extremity, and projects very little back of the 
base of the endognath, while in P. Montagui and the allied species it is 
very much prolonged and acutely triangular posteriorly; in the second 
maxilliped the dactylus is about as long as broad and articulated with 
the oblique distal end of the propodus, while in P. Montagui and its al- 
lies the dactylus is a narrow plate, articulated by one edge to the distal 
part of the mesial edge of the propodus. 

The branchiae of P. tenuipes are the same in number and arranged in 
the same way as in P. Montagui and P. horealis; that is, there are twelve 
branchiae plus seven epipods on each side ; or, stated in full, the branchial 
formula is: 



Somites. 


Podo- 
branchiae. 


Arthro- 
branchia). 


Pleuro- 
branchiae. 




vn 


(ep.) 
l( + ep.) 
(ep.) 
(ep.) 
(ep.) 
(ep.) 
(ep.) 





2 

1 
1 
1 
1 








= 0(ep.) 


VIII 


= l( + ep.) 


IX 


= 2( + ep.) 


X. 


= 2( + ep.) 


XI 


= 2(+ep.) 


XII 


= 2( + ep.) 


xni 


= 2( + ep.) 


XIV 


= 1 




1 + 7 ep. 


6 


5 


=12-|-7ep. 



444 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Penaeus politus, sp. nov, 

Male. — The carapax and abdomen are naked and smooth and the car- 
apax is armed with well-developed autenual, hepatic, and branchiostegial 
spines, but the sulci are all shallow and indistinct. The rostrum is shorty 
acute, about two-fifths as long as the rest of the carapax, scarcely over- 
reaches the eyea, rises obliquely from the anterior part of the carapax, 
and then points straight forward ; its dorsal crest is armed with seven 
or eight teeth, of which the posterior one is just back of the orbit, while 
the two or three most anterior ones near the tip are small or inconspic- 
uous and nearer together than toward the base; the lower edge is cil- 
iated and minutely raultidentate, the teeth being slender, acute, and 
closely crowded, so that, to the naked eye, the edge appears entire. The 
dorsal crest extends nearly the whole length of the carapax, but grad- 
ually fades out posteriorly, and, at about a third of the way from the base 
of the rostrum to the posterior border, rises into a low and obscure denti- 
form prominence. 

The eyes are very large, obliquely compressed, and black. The 
peduncles of the antennulae reach to the tips of the antennal scales; 
the lamelliform appendages of the basal segments are small, narrow, 
and do not cover the eyes above, but lie concealed between the eye- 
stalks ; the second segments are slightly longer than the basal, while 
the third are not quite half as long as the second; the inner flagellum 
is about as long as the carapax, including the rostrum, and tapers regu- 
larly throughout its length; the outer flagellum is slightly shorter than 
the inner, and suddenly expanded toward the base, but the terminal 
portion more slender than in the inner flagellum. The antennal scales 
are about twice as long as the rostrum, rather more than a fourth as 
wide as long, and taper regularly to the broadly rounded tips. The 
terminal segment of the peduncle of the antenna is scarcely a fourth as 
long as the antennal scale, and the flagellum is slender and much longer 
than the whole body. 

The external maxillipeds are slender, and reach a little beyond the 
middle of the antennal scale, and their exopods to about the middle of 
the carpi of the eudopods. The first pair of legs reach only to the mid- 
dle of the carpi of the external maxillipeds, the second pair to near the 
middle of the propodi, and the third and fourth pairs to the tips of the 
external maxillipeds, and the fifth a little beyond the tips of the fourth 
pair. The dactyli of the fourth and fifth i^airs are slightly compressed, 
and only about half as long as the propodi. 

The first, second, and third abdominal somites are rounded above, 
but the fourth, fifth, and sixth are compressed and sharply carinated 
dorsally. The sixth somite is very much compressed, longer than the 
fourth and fifth taken together, and about twice as long as high. The 
telson is shorter than the sixth somite, dorsally sulcated with the mar- 
gins of the sulcus terminating posteriorly in a long spine either side of 
the tip, which is itself imi^erfect in the single specimen seen. The outer 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 445 

lamelliie of the uropods are about as long as the sixth somite, oMong- 
€lliptical, about four times as long- as broad, and the terminal spine of 
the outer margin about a fourth of the way from the tip to the base. 
The inner himella is a little shorter, and proportionally very slightly 
narrower. The bases of the first pair of abdominal legs are connected 
by a very large and complex sexual appendage, nearly twice as long as 
the bases themselves. 

The only specimen seen is from station 878 (142 fathoms), and gives 
the following measurements : 

mm. 

Lengtla from tip of rostrum to tip of telsou 61.0 

LeDgth of carapax and rostrum 20. 

Leiigtb of rostrum 5. 6 

Breadth of carapax 6. 5 

Leugtli of autenual scale 11.0 

Leugth of sixth, abdominal somite 10. 6 

Lengtli of telson 8. 2+ 

Sergestes arcticus Kroyer, Oversigt danske Vidensk. Selsk. Forhandl. Kjobenhaven, 
1855, p. (6) ; Monograph. Sergestes, Vidensk. Selsk. Skr., v, naturvidensk. 
mathem. Afh., iv, pp. 240, 276, pi. 3, figs. 7, pi. 5, figs. 16, 1856. 

Stations 880, 881, 891, 893, 894; 252 to 500 fathoms; thirty speci- 
mens, most of them in good condition, and several about GO'"'" in length. 

Sergestes, s-p. 

Station 893 ; 372 fathoms ; three specimens, over CO'""' in length. The 
species is different from any described by KJroyer. 

SCHIZOPODA. 

Thysanopoda Norvegica Sars. 

Stations 879, 880 ; 225 and 252 fathoms. 

Lophogaster, sp. 

Station 870; 155 fathoms. A species very distinct from L. typiciis 
Sars. 

Boreomysis arctica G. O. Sars, Christianiafjordeus Dybvandsfauna, p. 26, 1869 
(extr. Nyt Magazin for Naturvidenskberne) ; Christiania Videnskabs-Sels- 
kabs Forhandlinger, 1871, p. 264 (21).— Metzger, Jaliresbericht der Comm. 
wissensch. Untersuchuug der deutscheu Meere fiir 1872, 1873, Nordsee, p. 
288, lS75.—Mijsi8 arctica Kroyer, Et Bidrag til Kundskab om Krebsdyrfami- 
lien Mysida}, Naturhistorisk Tidsskrift, III, i, pp. 34, 42, pi. 1, fig. 5, 1861. 

Station 891 ; 500 fathoms. 

Pseudomma roseum G. O. Sars, Christiania Videuskabs-Selskabs Forhandlinger, 
1869, p. 154 (10) ; Carcmologiske Bidrag til Norges Fauna, Mysider, part i, p. 
54, pi. 4, 1870; Hardaugerfjordeus Fauna, Christiania Vidcnskabs-Selskabs 
Forhandlinger, 1871, p. 263 (20) ; Archiv for Mathematik og Naturvidcnskab, 
liristiauia, ii, p. 344, 1877.— Metzger, Jahresbericht der Comm. zur -wissensch. 
Untersuchuug der deutschen Meere fur 1872, 1873, Nordsee, p. 288, 1875.— 
Whiteaves, Report on further Deep-Sea Dredging Operations in the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence [in 1873], p. 16, [1874?].— Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., v, p. 98, 
1879. 

Station 891; 500 fathoms. 



446 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



CUMACEA. 

Diastylis quadrispinosus G. O. Sara. 

Stations 871, 873, 878 ; 100 to 142 fathoms. 

STOMATOPODA. 

Lysiosquilla armata, sp. nov. 

This species appears to be closely allied to L. spinosa Miers, from the 
Indian Ocean and New Zealand, or at least more closely than to any of 
the other species contained in Mr. Miers's recent review of the Squillidae 
(Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., V, v, pp. 1-49, pis. 1-3, 1880). 

The carapax is smooth and about once and two- thirds as long as the 
breadth at the anterior margin, which is about two-thirds of the greatest 
breadth. The rostral plate is about half as broad as the anterior part 
of the carapax, very slightly longer than broad, the lateral edges not 
angulated, but strongly convex in outline, and curved regularly round to 
the short but sharp and acuminate tip. The four exposed thoracic 
somites and the first abdominal somite increase rapidly in breadth pos- 
teriorly, but from the second to the fifth somite the abdomen is of a 
nearly uniform width, which is about equal to the length of the carapax. 
The free thoracic somites, like the anterior abdominal, are smooth and 
unarmed, except that the first somite projects downward either side in 
a lamellar, transverse, dentiform process below the posterior margin of 
the carapax. The five anterior abdominal somites are evenly rounded 
above and smooth, but the posterior edge of the fourth somite is armed 
either side for about a fourth of its length from the lateral margin with 
slender, spiniform teeth, directed backward, and the entire posterior 
margin of the fifth somite is armed in the same way. The sixth somite 
is about three times as broad as long, only a little narrower than the 
fifth ; the postero-lateral angle each side is armed with a stout, denti- 
form spine, back of and within which the dorsal surface is uneven and 
armed with five to seven spines or tubercles, of which the two or three 
most posterior are slender spines, but the others more or less tuberculi- 
form and inconspicuous ; the middle portion of the dorsal surface is 
smooth, and the posterior margin, except a short space each side, is 
armed with slender, spiniform teeth, as in the fifth somite. 

The telson is nearly as wide as the sixth abdominal somite and about 
once and two-thirds as wide as long ; the middle portion of the dorsal 
surface rises in a smooth, oval, longitudinal area, projecting behind above 
the posterior margin, limited each side by a line of short spinules, and 
its narrow posterior extremity truncated and three-lobed or obtusely 
tridentate ; each side of this smooth area the surface is armed with many 
spinules or small tubercles, showing a tendency to arrangement in longi- 
tudinal lines 5 the lateral margins are expanded in front of the large 
lateral spines of the posterior margin and armed with a few spinules ; 
the posterior margin is armed each side with three spines, of which the 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 447 

two outer are large, dentiform, and have a spinule between them, while 
the terminal or inner spines are smaller, slender, and movable, and sep- 
arated from the large lateral spines by a space armed with three or four 
spinules, while the margin between the movable spines forms au obtuse, 
re-entering angle, each side of which is armed with a close-set series of 
seven to ten slender spinules. 

The eyes are large, as broad as the rostral plate, and black. The 
antennal scale is narrowly elliptical, about three times as long as broad, 
and the margins ciliated. The prehensile edge of the dactylus of the 
large "raptorial limbs" (second maxillipeds) is armed with ten slender 
spines, which decrease in length distally. The bases in each of the 
three posterior pairs of thoracic legs are armed on the outer side with a 
conspicuous, acute, and somewhat hooked spine, projecting over the 
articulation of the next segment. The appendages of the antipenulti- 
mate segments of the three posterior pairs of thoracic legs are lamellar 
and broadly elliptical, though those of the anterior pair are a little 
shorter and those of the posterior pair slightly narrower than the others. 
The base of the uropods is armed above with a spinulose crest, running 
from the base to the articulation of the outer ramus, and at the distal 
end below with two dentiform spines as long as the inner ramus, below 
the articulation of which there is another but much smaller spine on the 
base. The proximal segment of the outer ramus is crested above, the 
distal part of the outer edge is armed with a crowded series of stout, 
spiniform setse, and the lamellar terminal segment is elhptical, nearly as 
long as the base, and has its edges ciliated. The inner ramus is much 
longer and narrower than the terminal segment of the outer ramus, 
which in other respects it resembles. 

Measurements. 



Length 

Leng.h of carapax along median line, excluding rostrum. 

Breadth of carapax at anterior margin 

Greatest breadth of carapax 

Length of rostral plate 

Breadth of rostral plate 

Greatest breadth of abdomen 

Length of telson 

Breadth of telson 



mm. 


mm. 


38.0 


47.0 


7.3 


10.0 


4.2 


6.0 


6.3 


9.0 


2.1 


2.6 


2.2 


2.8 


8.0 


10.2 


3.8 


5.0 


6.6 


8.5 



Station 865, 65 fathoms (one male); 876, 120 fathoms (one somewhat 
mutilated female, from the stomach of Lopholatilus). 

AIUPHIPODA. 

Stegocephalua ampulla Bell. 

One specimen from station 895 ; 238 fathoms. 

Epimeria loricata G. O. Sars, Archiv for Matliein. Naturvidenskab, Kiistiauia, iv, p. 

450, 1879. 

Stations 869 to 871, 879, 880, 893 to 895; 115 to 372 fathoms. Abun- 
dant at 869, 192 fathoms, and 894, 365 fathoms. Sars's specimens were 



448 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

from 123 to 262 fathoms, north latitude 75° 30' to 80°, east longitude 
17° 50' to so 15', west of Spitzbergen. 

A few, mostly small, specimens of this species were dredged at dif- 
ferent points in tbe Gulf of Maine, in from 32 to 110 fathoms, 1873, 1874, 
and 1878, and in 88 fathoms (station 43), oft' Nova Scotia, in 1877. Mr. 
Whiteaves dredged it also in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence in 1871, 1872, 
and 1873. Some of these northern specimens were labeled '■'■Einmeria 
cornigera ? " by me, and have been so referred to by Mr. Whiteaves, in 
his reports on dredging expeditions to the Gulf of Saint Lawrence, in the 
Annals and Magazine of Natural History for November, 1872, and in 
the American Journal of Science, III, vii, 213, 1874 ; and by Professor 
Yerrill, in the last named serial, vii, p. 407, 411, 1874, and ix, p. 414, 1875. 

Haploops setosa Boeck, Christiania Yidenskabs-Selskabs Forbaudlinger, 1870, p. 
228 (148) ; Scaudinav. Arktiske Ampliipoder, p. 541, pi. 30, fig. 7, 1876.— G. 
O. Sars, Archiv for Matliematik Naturvidenskab, Kristiania, ii, p. 360, 1877. 

Station 880 ; 252 fathoms ; one specimen. 

I have examined numerous specimens of this species from different 
parts of the Gulf of Maine, the Bay of Fundy, off Nova Scotia, and from 
the Gulf of Saint Lawrence (Whiteaves). In the Bay of Fundy and 
off Nova Scotia the specimens were dredged in from 20 to 100 fathoms. 

Ptilocheirus pinguis Stimpson. 

Stations 8G5 to 867, 872 ; 65 to 86 fathoms. 

Ericthonius difformis Milue-Edwards. — Ccrapus ruhricornis Stimpson. — Smith, Trans. 
Conn. Acad., iv, p. 278, 1880. 

Station 861 ; 192 fathoms ; three specimens. 

TJnciola irrorata Say. — GJaiiconome leucojns Kroyer. — Smith, Trans. Conn. Acad., iv, 
• p. 280, 1880. 

Stations 865 to 867, 869 to 872, 876, 778; 65 to 192 fathoms. 
Neohela phasma, sp. nov. — Keohela, nom. nov., vice Hela Boeck, prfeoc. 

This species is apparently very closely allied to If. monstrosa Boeck,* 
but has well-developed eyes, and the propodus in the second pair of 
gnathopods is different in form, besides other slight differences. 

Male. — The head is about as long as and, including the stout lateral 
spines, fully as broad as the first somite of the pernson excluding its 
epimera ; the anterior edge is slightly cariuated and slightly concave in 
outline above the bases of the antennuhie, leaving a slightly prominent 
and obtusely angular rostrum and a fully as prominent and more acute 
angle either side, just back of which the large and prominently convex 
eyes, salmon-colored in the recently j)reserved alcohoUc si^ecimen, are 
situated. The antennulse are much longer than the rest of the animal ; 

* Forhand. Scandinav. Naturforskeres Ki0benhaven, 1860, i>. 669, 1861 ; Christiania 
Videnskabs-Selskabs Forhandlinger, 1870, p. 261 (181); Scaudinav. Arktiske Amphi- 
poder, p. 643, pi. 32, fig. 1, 1876. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 449 

the first segment of the peduncle is nearly as long as the width of the 
bead; the second segment is much more slender than the first and more 
than three times as long ; the third segment is more slender than the 
second and considerably longer than the first -, there is a well-developed 
secondary flagellum, as long as the third segment and composed of 
about nine slender segments ; the primary flagellum is very slender 
and about one and a half times as long as the peduncle. The third 
segment of the peduncle of the antenna just reaches the distal end of 
the first segment of the peduncle of the antennula ; there is a small, 
spiniform tubercle on tlie outside of the first segment, in line with the 
lateral spine of the head and the spiniform anterior angles of the first 
and second epimera. The distal portion of each antenna is wanting in 
the single specimen examined. 

The first gnathopods are of nearly the same form as in N. monstrosa, 
as figured by Boeck, but the inferior edge of the i^ropodus is nearly 
straight, and the spine at the distal end is directed straight out in line 
with the edge, and not downward as in the figure of N. monstrosa. In. 
the second pair of gnathopods the carpus is about twice as long as 
broad, and has the unarmed prehensile edge much less oblique than 
represented in the figure of N. monstrosa. The first three pairs of per- 
seopods are very nearly as in JV. monstrosa; the last two pairs are want- 
ing in the specimen. 

The pleon is. nearly as high but very much narrower than the last so- 
mites of the perteon : the first three somites are subequal in size and 
very similar in form ; the fourth is as long but not quite as high as 
the third ; the fifth is not more than two-thirds as long as the fourth; 
the sixth is only about half as long as the fifth. The telson is partially 
consolidated with the sixth somite, and somewhat triangular, with an. 
obtuse tip. The uropods are as in N. monstrosa. 

Measurements. 

mm. 

Length, from front of head to tip of telson 26.0 

Length of head and peraeon 17. 8 

Length of antennula 35. 

Length of first segment of peduncle 2. 4 

Length of second segment 8. 2 

Length of third segment 3. 2 

Length of secondary flagellum 3. 2 

Length of carpus in first gnathopod 3. 1 

Breadth of same 1*° 

Length of propodus of first gnathopod 2. 5 

Breadth of same "• " 

Length of dactylus ^' ' 

Length of carpus of second gnathopod 2.7 

Breadth of same - ■^•* 

Length of propodus of second gnathopod 2. 5 



Breadth of same 



1.8 



1) n 
Length of dactylus " 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 29 Jan. 31, 1881. 



450 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Station 893; 372 fathoms; one specimen. 

N. monstrosa, the type of this remarkable genus, and heretofore the 
only known species, was described from a single specimen, wanting 
most of the antennulse and antennae, dredged in Christiania Fiord, in 
20 to 30 fathoms ; and G. O. Sars has recently recorded a single muti- 
lated specimen, dredged in 1,215 fathoms, between Norway and Iceland^ 
by the iNorwegian expedition of 1876. 

ISOPODA.* 

Janira alta Harger ex Stimpson. 

Stations 865 to 867, 892 ; 65 to 487 fathoms. 

Muuuopsis typica M. Sars. 
Station 878 ; 142 fathoms. 

Cirolana polita Harger ex Stimpson, 

Stations 871, 873, 876 ; 100 to 120 fathoms. 

Guathia cerina Harger ex Stimpson. 
Stations 865 to 867, 892; 65 to 487 fathoms. 

Sy3cenus infelix Harger, Marine Isopoda of New England, Report United States Fish 

Commissiou, vi, for 1878, p. 387, 1880. 

Stations 893 to 895; 238 to 372 fathoms. 

The following tabular synojisis of the known geographical distribution 
and the bathymetrical range, as far as ascertained by the investigations 
on our own coast, gives the principal facts in regard to the distribution 
of the species, and it will also serve as a condensed list of the species 
enumerated in the foregoing pages. In the first column the species are 
checked which are known to occur in the Straits of Florida or anywhere 
in the Caribbean region ; in the second, those known in the shallow 
waters (under 30 fathoms) of the south coast of New England ; in the 
third, those known from any part of the region from Cape Cod to 
Labrador ; in the fourth, those known to occur in Greenland ; in the 
fifth, those known on the coasts of Northern Europe or in the eastern 
part of the extreme North Atlantic ; and in the sixth, those known from 
the Mediterranean. 

* The Isopoda have been placed in Mr. Harger's hands for determination, but he has 
very kindly identified for me the few species here enumerated, which, however, are 
only a part of the whole number obtained. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 451 

List of the species enumerated in the foregoing paper, with a tabular statement of their geo- 
graphical and iathymetrical range. 





o 

r 


a 5 = ' =-r a 1 S'** S ** 

i-=5i li , 3 is 1 ! -a 

Hi 11 11= 1 1 


BrachyiiTa: 


X 


X 




X 




0-150 


Collodes depressua 




" 


66-142 


Euprognatha rastellifera 












C5-142 


I.ambru.s Vferrillii {nov.) 












65-86 


Cancer borealis 




X 


X 
X 









0-225 


Gervon fiuinquedens 








100-372 


Bath vnectes longiapina 


X 

X 










8»-225 


Acanthocarpua Alexandri 












85-155 


Et hasa microphthalma ( nov. ) 












85 


Anomara: 

Homola barbata 












X 
X 


86 


Latreillia elegans 












85-86 


Lyreidaa Bairdii (nov. ) 












100-120 


Hemipagnms aocialis ( nov. ) 














65-155 


trracilia (nov.) 














65-155 


Parapatmrua pilosimaima 






X 
X 
X 








250-373 






X 


X 


X 
X 




0-150 






8-130 






65-252 




xf 










65-1^ 


Macrura: 













86 
















100-126 
















100-142 








X 





X 




101-372 








65-155 










X 




27-252 










65-142 










X 




116-365 






X 


X 




15-430 










100-252 












142 








X 






252-500 












372 


Schizopoda: i 




X 


X 


X 




0-430 






155 








X 


X 

X 




500 






X 

X 


45-500 


Cnmacea: 


X 


2-190 


Stomatopotta: 






1 


65-120 


Amphipoda : 






X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 


X 


X 

X 
X 





110-238 








32-372 








20-252 






X 

X 
X 


0-150 






X 


X 
X 


xf 


0-192 






0-430 






372 


Ifiopoda: 






X 
X 

X 
X 

X 








0-30O 








X 


X 




60-220 








0-150 














10-487 














130-372 















452 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

A numerical summation of the columns of the above table gives the 
following : 





ti 

o 3 
a o 




1^^ 

e§5 






pi 

SI 


i 




^& 


5^ 


^1=2 


^r3 


71 


A Pi 


5 




P 




r^ 


II 


2 


1^ 


1 




9 


4 


2 


3 


1 


1 




Anomura 


10 


1? 


1 


3 


1 


2 


2 


Macrara 


13 




1 


3 


1 


3 






4 






2 


2 


3 






1 
1 




1 


1 


















7 




3 


6 


2 


5 


1? 




5 






5 


1 


1 












Total 


50 


5 


8 


23 


8 


15 


3 







In addition to the above facts in regard to the distribution of the 
species, it should be added that two of the species, Lyreidus Bairdii 
and Nepliropsis aculeata, belong to genera heretofore known only from 
the Pacific region, and each represented there by a single species only ; 
while a third species, Lyaiosquilla armata, has its nearest known ally in 
a species known only from the same region. 

Of the fifty species enumerated, fourteen are described as new and 
three others are indicated as probably new ; forty-three are here first 
recorded as belonging to the New England fauna south of Cape Cod ; 
twenty-eight are new to the whole fauna from Caj)e Hatteras to North- 
ern Labrador; and twentj^-one are new to America, including Green- 
land. Of the forty-three species new to the Southern New England 
fauna, fifteen are now known also from the New England fauna north 
of Cape Cod ; and of the remaining twenty-eight, four were already 
known from the Straits of Florida, three from Greenland and Northern 
Europe, and two from the Mediterranean. 

New Haven, Conn., November 12, 1880. 



lilST OF THE FISBES OF TBE PACIFIC COAST OF THF IJIVITFD 
STATES, WITH A TABIiF SHOWIIVO THE DISTRIBUTIOIV OF THE 

SPECIES. 

By DATID S. JORDAN and CHARI^ES H. GILBERT. 

The writers have been engaged during most of the present year (1880) 
in making investigations of the fish and fisheries of the Pacific coast 
of the United States, in the interest of the United States Fish Commis- 
sion and the United States Census Bureau. Extensive collections have 
been made at each of the principal fishing ports from New Westminster 
to San Diego. 

In the present paper a catalogue is given of the species now known 
to inhabit the Pacific Ocean between the mouth of Eraser's River on 
the north and San Diego on the south. The names of the species not 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 453 

seen by the writers are placed in italics. A vertical column is given for 
each of the principal localities, and a cross in any column opposite the 
name of a species indicates that we have obtained or examined, while 
in the field, specimens from the locality in question. In the last column, 
S. indicates a general southern distribution, most usually from Point 
Concepcion or Monterey to Magdalena Bay or Cape San Lucas; K 
indicates a general northern distribution, usually from Monterey or 
Cape Mendocino to Sitka, or beyond ; C. indicates the distinctively 
Californian fauna, the abundance being usually greatest about Monterey 
and San Francisco. This fauua is chiefly composed of the two vivipa- 
rous families Scorpcenidcv and Embiotocidce. 

It will be noticed that the number of species obtained in Monterey Bay 
and about San Francisco is considerably greater than at any other points. 
This is partly due to the fact that these regions have more extensive 
fisheries than others. There is no doubt, however, that more species of 
fishes really occur from Monterey to Point Eeyes than elsewhere on the 
coast. Monterej'^ Bay is the common meeting ground of the semi-tropi- 
cal and semi-arctic fish faunae. There is nowhere an abrupt change 
along the coast. The three capes. Flattery, Mendocino, and Point Con- 
cepcion, are to some extent points of division. 



Name. 



1. Mola rotunda Cuvier 

2. Diodon maculatus Lac ... 

3. Tetrodon politus Ajtcs . . 

4. Hippocampua ingens Grd 



5. Siphostonia ])uuttipiniie (Gill) J. & G. . . 

6. Siphostonia leptorliynolius* (Grd.) Gill . 

7. Siphostoma dimidiatum (Jill 

8. Siphostonia califomiense t (Storer) Gill . 



+ 
9. Aulorhynchus flavidus Gill + 

10. Gasterosteus (aculeatus) serratus Ayres + 

11. Gasterosteus miciocephalus Grd | + 

12. Aphoristia atricauda J. & G 

13. Plcuronichthys verticalis J. & G 

14. Pleurduichthys decurrensj: J. &G 

15. Pleuniiiichtliya cosnosus Grd 

16. Hyp8opsetta'f;uttnIata (Gid.) Gill 

17. Cynicoglossus paciflcus Lock 

18. Glyptocephalus zachirus Lock 

19. Pleuronectes stellatus Pallas 

20. Lepidopsetta bilineata§ (Ayres) GUI 

21. Parophrys ischyrus J. «fc G 

22. Parophrys isokpis (Lock.) J. &G 

23. Parophrys vetulua Grd 

24. Citharichthys sordidus (Grd.) Gthr 

25. Psettichthys melanostictus Grd 



+ 



+ 



* Syngnathus arundinacens Grd. 
tSyngnathus giiseoliueatus Ayi'es. 

tNom. sp. uov.=Pleurouichthva quadrituberculatus J. & G. Proc. TJ. S. Nat. Mus. 1880, iii, 50 non 
Tleuroriacten quadrituherculalus Pallas. 
§ Pleuronectes perarcuatus Cope. 



454 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Name. 



26. Hippogloasoides exilis J. & G- 

27. Hippoglossoides elassodon J. & G 

28. Hippoglossoide.s jordani Lock 

29. Paralichthys maculosu.s Grd 

30. Xystreurys liolepis J. &, G 

31. Hippoglossus vulgaris Flem , 

33. Athere.sthe8 stomias J. & G 



33. Merlucins prodnctua ( Ayres) Gill 

34. Pollaohius chalcogrammus* (Pallas) J. & G. 

35. Gadus monhuat L 

36. Microgadua proximus (Grd.) GUI 



87. Brosmophycis marginatus (Ayrea) Gill. 

38. Ophidium taylori Grd 

39. Scvtalina ccrdale J. & G 



40. Lycodop.sis paucidena (Lock.) Gill 

41. Lycodoi)sis pacificus Collett 



42. Anarrhiclithy s ocellatua Ayres 

43. LmiippBus ;mgiiillari8 (Pallas) Gill 

44. XipbisttT nipe.stiis J. & G 

45. Xiphister mucosiis:^ (Grd.) Jor 

46. Xiphister chirus J. & G 

47. C<lit'di<litliya violaceus Grd 

48. Anoplarcluis alectrolophna § (Pallaa) J. & G. 

49. Apodichtliys tlavidna Grd 

50. Apodichtliys fuconim J. & G 

51. Mura uoidt's oruatus (Grd.) Gill 

52. MunT-noides hntus (Cope) Gill 

53. Creinuoliatfs iutegiipinnia Roaa Smith 

54. GiUlionsia flegans Cooper 

55. Hetei ostichus rostiatua Grd 

56. Neoclinus blauchardi Grd 

57. Neoclinus satiiicus Grd 

58. Hypleurochilus gentilis (Grd.) Gill 



69. Portchthys poroaiasimus (Cuv. & Val.) Gthr. 



00. Gobiesox reticulatus Grd 



61. Euniicrotremua orbis (Gthr.) GiU. 



62. Neoliparis mucosus (Ayres) Steind . 

63. Liparis cyclopus Gthr . 

64. Liparis pulchtllus Ayres 



65. AspidopJioroides Inermis Gthr 

66. Brachy opsia verrucosus Lock , 

67. Brachyopsis xyosternus J. & G 

68. Podotliecua acipenserinus (Pallas) GUI. 

69. Podotheous viilsns J. & G 

70. Podothecua tiisi)ino8iis (Lock.) J. & G 

71. Bothragonus swani (Steind. ) GiU 



72. PrioDotns stephanophrya Lock 



73. Ascelichthya rhodorus J. & G 

74. Psychrohites paradoxus Gthr 

75. Cottus pijlyacantli(ict]>halus Pallas 

76. Artediiis hitcrali.s Gnl 

77. Artedius notnspilotus Grd. 

78. Artt'diiiK iiuadiiMtTiatus Lock 

79. Artf'dins imuctti'usis Steind 

80. Heiiiilt']iiil()tH8 »]iiuosus Ayres 

81. ircinilcpidotus i;il)bsi GiU 

82. AHpicottus bison Grd , 

83. Scoip*uicbth\s maimoratus Grd. . 



+ + 
+ + 



+ 



+ + 



* Gadus periscopus Cope. 

t Gadus auratus Cope ; Oadus morrhua L. {fide Bean.):=G'. macrocephalus TUes. 

1 Xiphidium cruoreiun Cope. 

jOpidium atropurpureum Kittlitz ^ Anoplarchus crista-gaUi Gthr. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 455 



Name. 



84. Leptocottus armatus Grd 

85. Liocottus hirundo Girard 

€6. Oligocottus globiceps Grd 

87. Oligocottu.s maciilosns Grd 

88. Oligocottus analis Grd 

8f). Blep.sias cirrhosus (Pallas) Gthr. 
90. Nautichthys oculofasciatiis Gid . 



91. 
92. 

93. 
94. 
05. 
96. 
97. 
98. 

99. 
100. 
101. 
102. 
103. 
104. 
105. 
106. 
107. 
108. 
109. 
110. 
111. 
112. 
113. 
114. 
115. 
116. 
117. 

118. 
119. 
120. 
121. 
122. 
123. 
124. 
125. 
126. 

127. 
128. 
129. 
1.30. 
131. 



Scorpaena guttata Grd 

Sebastichthys nigroclnctiis (Ayres) Gill . 

Selia.sticbtby8 serriccps J. &, Cx 

Solwsticbtbys ucbnliisus (Ayres) Gill ... 

Sc'busticbtb v.s i;brvsiiinclas J. &. G 

Sebastichtliy.'* cariiatus J. & G 

Sebasticbty .s maliger J. &. G 

Sebasticbtbys caurinus (Rich.) J. & G. . 

Tar. vexiUaris J. & G 

Sebasticbtbys rastrelliger J. & G 

Sebasticbtbys auriculatus (Grd.) Gill 

Selia.slicbtbvs TObririiK'tus J. & G 

Sebasticbtbys cMorostictus J. & G 

Sfbasticlithys rbocbirliloris J. &. G 

Sebasticbtbys rosaceiis (Grd.) Lock 

Sebasticbtbys constellatns J. & G 

Sebasticbtbys ruber (Ayres) Lock 

Sebastielitbys miniatus J. ScG 

Sebasticlitliys pinniger (Gill) Lock 

Sfliasticlithys atrovirens J. & G 

Si'basticbtliys elongates (Ayres) Gill. ... 

Sebastii'btliys proriger J. & G 

Sebasticbtliysovalis (Ayres) Lock 

Sebasticbtbys eiitonielas J. & G 

Scbasticblbvs m\stirms ■" J. & G 

Scbastiibtliys melanops (Grd.) J. & G. . 

Sebasticlitb.s s flavirtus ( Ayres) Lock 

Sebastodes paucispinis (Ayres) Gill 



Hexagramiiius asper:; Steller 

Hexagrammus siiperciliosus § (Pallas) J. & G 

Hexagrauimus decagrammusll (Pallas) J. &G 

Hexagrammus nebulosus (Grd.) J. & G 

Gpbiodou eloiigatus Grd 

Zaniolepis latipinuis Grd 

Oxylebius pictns Gill 

Myriolepis zonifer Lock 

Anoplopoma litLibria (Pallas) Gill 

Oobius glaiicofrcenum (Gill) J. & G 

Lepidogobius gracilis (Grd.) GiU 

Lepidogobius ncTrberiyi (Grd.) Gill 

Gillicbtbys mirabilis Cooper 

Crystallogobius eos Rosa Smith Mss 



132. Trichodon stelleri Cut. & Val 

133. Caulolatilus auorualus (Cooper) Gill . 



134. Bathyniaster signatus Cope . 

135. Icichtbys lockingtoni J. & G. 

136. Ico.steus a^nigmaticus Lock. . 



137. TracbypterusU ? altivelis Kner 

138. Hypsypops rubicundus (Grd.) Gill 

139. Chromis punctipiniiis Cooper 



140. Pseudojulis modestus (Grd.) Gthr 

141. Platygl'ossus semicinctus (Ayres) Gthr. 

142. Pimelometoijon pulcher (Ayres) GiU . - - 



+ 



+ + 
+ I + 



*Nom. sp. nov.— Sebastodes melanops Ayres, non Sebastes melanops Grd. 
f Sebastosomus simulans Gill. 
I Chillis trigrammus Cope. 

6Chiruspictu8 Grd.- Chirus balias Cope. . .„„T«/.-fc io\ 

\\ Chirus guttatus Grd. ( ? ) : Chirus constellatus Grd. (cT) ; Chirus maculosenatus Lock. ( $ ). 
i Takeu St Santa Cruz by Dr, C. L. Anderson, and at Cape Flattery by James G. bwan. 



456 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Ifame. 


'6 

o 
to 


> 

09 

a 

a 
'o 
o 


'3 
a 

a 

a 
in 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 


cS 

M 

g 

+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 


c 

ft 

O 
+ 


2 
1 

a 

m 

1 

+ 


6 

u 

Ph 
m 


1 
1 

s 

+ 




143. Abeona minima (Gibbons) Gill 


C. 

c. 
c. 


144. Abeona aurora J. & G 






145. Cymatogaster aggregatus Gibbons 


+ 
+ 


... 


+ 


+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 


146. Brachyistius frenatus GUI 


147. Brachyistius rosaceus J. & G 


148. Holconotus analis (A. Agassiz) J. & G 






+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 

-V 

+ ' 

+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 


+ 


c. 


149. Holconotus argenteus (Gibbons) J. & G 






+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 


150. Holconotus agassizi (Gill) J. & G 






c 


151. Holconotus rhodotcrus Ag 










c 


152. Ampbistichus argcnteus Ag 






+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 


c 


153. Hypsurus caryi (L. Agass.) A. Agass 






c 


154. Ditrema* jaclisoni (Agass.) Giiuther 


+ 
+ 




c 


155. Ditrema laterals (Agass.) Giintber 


N 


156. Ditrema atripcs J. & G 






Q 


157. Ditrema furcatum (Grd.) Gtlir 






+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 


c 


158. Damalichtbys argyrosomus) (Grd.) J. & G 

159. Khacocbilus toxotes Agass 


+ 




c. 








160. Parephippus faber t (Bloch) Gill 


s 


161. Genyonemus lineatus (Avres) Gill 






+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 


c 


162. Corvina satiu'ua (Grd.) (5thr 






s 


163. Eoncador steanisi (Steind.) J. & G 












s 


164. Unibrina xantlt Gill 












s 


165. Menticirrus undulatus§ (Grd.) Gill 












s 


166. Cj-nosciounobilis (Avres)ll J. & G . 






+ 


+ 




s 


167. Cynoscion parvipinnisTT Ayres 






s 


168. Seriphus politus Ayres 






+ 


+ 

+ 


+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 


s 










160. Girella nigricans (Ayres) Gill 


s 


170. Scorpis californiensis Steind 








s. 
















171. Xenicbthvs californiensis Steind 


s 


172. Pristipoma davidsoni Steind 














+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 


s 










+ 
+ 
+ 


.... 


+ 
+ 




173. Stereolepis gigas Ayres 


s 


174. Serranus clattiratus (Grd.) Steind 








s 


175. Serranus uebulifer (Grd.) Steind 








s 


176. Serranus maculot'asciatus Steind 












s 




+ 


.... 


+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 


+ 

+ 




177. Stromateus simillimus (Ayres) Gill 


f! 


178. Traehurus saurus Raf 


s 


179. Caranx caballus Gthr 








s 


180. Seriol^lalandi** Cuv. & Val 












+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 


s 


181. Orcynus alalongatt (Gmcl.) Eisso 








+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 




s 


182. Sarda cbilensis+| (C. & V.) J. & G 








s 


183. Scomberomorus concolor§§ (Lock.) J. & G 








s 


184. Scomber pneumatophorus|| || De la Roche 
















s 


185. Xiphias gladius L 












+ 




s 


186. Remorajacolxea (Lowe) Gill 






+ 

+ 


.... 






s 


187. Echeneis naucrates L 






s 




+ 




+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 












188. Ammodytes (tobianus) personatus Grd • 


x 


189. Sphyrajna argentea Grd 




+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 

+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 


H 










190. Atherinopsis californiensis (Grd.) Gill 





191. Atherinops aflinis (Ayres) Steind 






f! 


l92. Leuresthes tenuis (Ayres) J.&G 1 






s. 



* We are informed by Dr. Giinther that the pharyngeals in Ditrema temmincki are of the normal typo 
as in E^nbiotoca. Ditrema is therefore identical with Phanerodon Grd., and no character of importance 
distinguishes "Phanerodon" from Embiotoca. Embiotoca argyrosoma GrA , is identical with Dam.ali- 
chthys vacca. 
tEphippus zonatus Grd. 
tUmbrina undulata Steind., non Grd. ' 
5> Umbrina elongata Gthr. 
II Otolithus californiensis Steind. 
TI Otolithus magdalenai Steind. 
** Seriola mazatlana Steind. 
ttOrcynus paciflcus Cooper. 
Jt Pelamys lineolata (ird. 

§§Chriomltra concolor Lock. ; Chriomitra Lock.=Cybium C. & V.= Scomberomorus Lf«5. 
III! Scomber diego Ayres. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 457 



Name. 


a 


O 


> 


i 


n 
§ 
+ 


6 
& 

1 

.2 

'B 

Hi 


i 

a 

+ 
+ 


2 

a 

a 

+ 


<B 

s 

a 

+ 
+ 


8 

1 

1 


193. Mugil mexicanus Steind 


s. 










194. Tylosunis exilis (Grd.) J. & G 


s 


195. Scomberesox brevirostria Peters 








+ 




p 


196. Heniirhainijhu.s rosaj J. & G 












+ 
+ 


+ 

+ 


l; 


197. Exoccetus calilbmicus Cooper 












+ 


s 


198. Cyprinodon califomiensia Grd 












s 


199. Fuudulus parvipinnis Grd 












+ 


+ 


+ 


s 


200. Myctoplmm procellanim Bean Mss 












■N" 


201. Myctopbam crenulare J. & G 












+ 

+ 






s 


202. Synodua luciocopa (Ayres) Gill 






+ 


+ 








,s 


203. Paialepis corusc us J. & G 


+ 








If 


204. Sudis ringens J. & G 










+ 






,s 




+ 

+ 
















205. Alepidosaurus borealis Gill 


"N" 






+ 
+ 
+ 


+ 


+ 








■N" 













208. Hyponu'sus olidus (Palla.s) Gill 


+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 












Tf 


209. Tbaloiilitbyspacificus (Ricb.) Grd 












N 


210. Salvplinus iuabua* (Walb.) J. <fe G 














"NT 




+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 










■N' 












r. 




+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 










"NT 












■>r 


215. Oncoilivucbus goibuscbat (Walb.) Gill & Jor 


+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 












"NT 


216. OncorbyiKbii.s kctaj (Walb ) Gill & Jor 












If 


217. Oncoibvucbus kisutcb^ ( Walb.) J. & G 












"N" 


218. Oncorb'vDcbus tsbawvtcba (Walb.) J. & G 


+ 










TS" 


219. Oncorbyucbus nwkall (Walb.) Gill & Jor 










>r, 




+ 


+ 


+ 


+■ 


+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 

+ 
+ 

+ 


R. 




R, 
















+ 

+ 
+ 


S, 








+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 






S. 




+ 




N. 


225. Albula vulpes (L ) Goode 


S. 




+ 










N. 






















■NT. 




















S. 
















+ 


+ 


S. 




+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 

+ 










OOfl A .■ + + fT TJ' >. 


•NT. 














N. 




+ 


+ 










N. 












S. 








+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


+ 


S. 








s. 














+ 


+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 






s. 














s. 














+ 


+ 


s. 




+ 
+ 




+ 

+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 

+ 








i^. 


240. Eaia ibina J. & G 










N. 










c. 










+ 






u. 


242. Kaia stellulata J. &G 


.... 






+ 




.... 


.... 


c. 



*Salmo spectabilis Grd. ; Salmo bairdi, etc., Suckley; Salmo callarias Pallas. 

t Salmo .scouleri Kich., non Suckl. . , . o i i 

+ Salmo sanguinolentus Pallas; Salmo tsuppitch Rich.; Salmo scoulen Suckl. 

§ Salmo lycaodon Pallas, non Gtbr. ; Salmo paucidens Rich. 

Salmo lagocepbalus Pallas ; Salmo canis Suckl. 

II Acipenser brach>rbyncbu8 et acutirostris Ayres. 

'* Acipenser acutirostris Gtbr. „ „ . ^ a „«■ 

ttEaia birostris Walb.; Manta americana Bancroft; Ceratoptera vampyrus Auct. 
HRaia binoculata Grd. = yg. of liaia cooperi Grd. 



458 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



Name. 


'6 
a 

§ 
m 

to 
d 
Ph 


'2 
B 
d 
"o 


8 

1 

02 


a 
o 

3 


6 

GO 

i 


i 

•s 

CIS 

m 


s 
i 


d 

s 


§ 
i 

1 

1 
1 


243. Zapteryx exasperatus J. & Gr 
















+ 
+ 
+ 


s 








+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 






+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 


s 








+ 

+ 


+ 


s 


246. Torpedo califomica Ayres 






f! 










+ 


+ 


+ 






a 




+ 
+ 








IT 






1 _L 




+ 
+ 










N 


250. Heterodontus francisci (Grd.) Gill 






+ 


+ 


s 


251. Notorhvnchus macnlatus A.jTes 






+ 


+ 
+ 

+ 

+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 




o 


252. Hexanchus corinus J. & G 


+ 















253. Catulus ventriosus* (Garman) J. &G 








+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 


s 


254. Miistelns hinnulus (Blainv.) J. & G 






+ 

+ 
+ 
+ 


a 


255. Ehinotriacia henlei Gill 






o 


256. Triads aemifasciatus Grd 








+ 

+ 


+ 
+ 


+ 
+ 
+ 


r 








R 








R 




+ 




-1- 










o 


260. Eulamia lamia (Risso) Gill 










+ 


s 


261. Sphyma zygaena (L.) Kaf ., 
















s 










+ 

+ 












262. Cetorliinus maximns (L.) Blainv 























263. Carcbarodon carchariaat (L.) J. &G 


a 


264. Isurus oxyrhynehiis Kaf 












+ 




R 


265. Lamna comubica (Gmel.) riem 








+ 
+ 
+ 






a 




















266. Alopias vulpes (Gmel.) Bon 


c 






+ 


1- 












267. Entospbenus tridentatua (Ricb.) Gill 


isr 


268. Ammocoetes plumbeus (Avres) J. & G 


.+ 










"N" 


269. Pobstotrema dombeyij (MuUer) Gill 


+ 










R 


















R 


Totals 


90 


14 


145 


148 


43 


99 


80 


83 









Species most abundant nortbward (Alaskan fanna) 96 

Species most abundant centrally (Californian fauna) 76 

Species most abundant southward (Lower Californian fauna) 98 

Total 270 

Species found also in Atlantic Ocean 28 

Species not obtained by the Commission 15 

Species not recorded by previous writers 66 



* Cepbaloscy Ilium laticeps J. & G., probably not of Dum6ril. 

t Carcbarodon rondeleti M. & H. 

X Bdellostoma polytroma Grd. ; Bdellostoma stouti Lock. 

Ikdiana State University, 

Bloomington, November 30, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEIBI. 459 



ON THE CENERIC REL,ATION8 OF BEL,ONE EXir,lS GIRARO. 
By DAVID S. JORDAIV aud CHARLES H. OILBERT. 

The " needle-fish" [Belone exilis Girard), of the California coast, differs 
from the type of the genus BeJone in the development of the gill-rakers. 
In Belone vulgaris the gill-rakers are well develoj^ed, long, and slender, 
and a patch of teeth is present on the vomer. In Belone exilis the gill- 
rakers are entirely wanting, and there are no vomerine teeth. The 
gill-rakers are also wanting in the Atlantic species, Belone longirostris 
(Mitch.), Belone latimana Poey, Belone melanocUra Poey, Belone notata 
Poey, and Belone Mans (Cuv. & VaL), and probably also in Belone can- 
traini, which is the type of the gonus Tylosnrus Cocco. The generic 
name Tylosurus may therefore be provisionally adopted for the species of 
Belone without gill-rakers. The caudal keel on which the genus Tylo- 
surus was based, and which is developed in T. exilis as in T. cantraini, 
has apparently no systematic importance. 

Bloomington, Ind., December 2, 1880. 



NOTES OIV A COIiLiECTlON OF FIJiillES FROIU VTAII I.AKE. 

By DATID S. JORDAN and CHARLES H. OILBERT. 

A short visit to Provo, Utah, on Utah Lake, enabled one of the writers 
to make a small collection of the fishes of that locality. This collection 
has been since supplemented by an excellent series of the difierent spe- 
cies, presented to the United States National Museum by Peter Madsen 
aud sons, fishermen at Provo. Four of the thirteen species obtained 
seem to be new to science. 

1. Cottopsis semiscaber Cope. — Bull-head. 

Two specimens. Professor Cope says of his types : " Skin prickly above 
the lateral line, smooth below it posteriorly." Our specimens are villous 
above and below, as in GoUopsis asper, from which C. semiscaber differs 
chiefly in the less number of rays in the vertical fins. 

The genus Cottopsis is distinguished from Centridermichthys maiuly by 
the absence of a slit behind the fourth gill, which, as I am informed by 
Dr. Giinther, is present in Centridermichthys fasciatus. Centridermichthys 
uncinatus, of the ISTorth Atlantic, agrees with Cottopsis in this respect, 
and should probably be referred to it. The American genera of Cot- 



460 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



toids may be divided into two series, on tlie presence or absence of this 
slit, as follows : 

Without slit. With slit. 

Ascelichthys. 

Psyclirolutes.* 

Oottunculus. 

TJranidea. 

Cottopsis (including Tauridea and 

Potamocottus). 
Cottus. t 
Artedius. 
Hemitripterus. 



Blepsias. 

Nautichthys. 

Blennicottus. 

Oligocottus. 

Leptocottus. 

Scorpsenichthys. 

Liocottus. 

Triglopsis (including Oncocottus). 

Gymnacautbus. 

Aspicottus. 

Icelus. 

Trigiops. 

Hemilepidotus. 

Melletes. 



2. Coregonus williamsom Grd. — Mountain Herring. 
Very abundant. 

3. Salmo purpiiratus Pallas. — Lake Trout; Brook Trout. 

{Salmo clarki Rich.) 

Very abundant in Utah Lake ; a food-fish of much value. 

Specimens obtained do not differ in any visible respect from others 
taken in salt water in Puget Sound. This is apparently the parent 
stock from which *S*. spilurus, 8. irideus, and S. gairdneri Rich., {S. trun- 
catus Suckley) have scarcely yet become completely differentiated. S. 
henshawi Gill & Jor. is a marked local variety of 8. purpuratus. 

4. Sqnalius taenia (Cope) J. & G. — Leather-side Minnow. 

Very abundant. We find it impossible to separate the genera Squalius^ 
Telestes, Tigoma, Sibotna, Cheonda, and Clinostomus, and we adopt for the 
whole group the name of Squalius. The genus Dobula was established 
by Ratinesque in the Ichthyologia Ohiensis (1820, p. 45). Although no 
type is stated, it was probably based on the Cyprinus dohula L., after- 
wards the type of Squalius Bonaparte. 

5. Squalius moutanus (Cope) J. & G. 

Also abundant. 

6. Squalius cruoreus, sp. nov. 

Allied to Squalius ardesiacus Cope, but with larger scales and shorter 
head. 

* We are unable to perceive any distinction between the Psychrolutidce and the Cot- 
iidce. Pgychrolutes has a rudimentary spinous dorsal, hidden in the loose skin. 

tin Cottus granlandicus, poJyacanthocephalus, and scorpius a small pore is present be- 
hind the last gill. In other species {octodecimsjnnosus ceneus, scorpioides), the slit appears 
to be wholly obliterated. In a specimen of C. pohjacanthocephalus of about two feet in 
length there is visible a minute pore representing the usual last slit. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 461 

Form of the species termed ^^CHmstomus^\ but less compressed. Body 
moderately elongate, somewhat compressed, symmetrical, the back 
considerably arched ; caudal peduncle rather stout. Head subconical, 
laterally compressed, broad and rounded above ; mouth short, oblique, 
jaws about equal. Premaxillary in front on the level of the lower edge 
of the pupil ; maxillary reaching to opposite the front of the eye. Eye 
large, about as long as snout, ^ in head. Isthmus narrow; scales firm, 
not closely imbricated ; the belly with imbedded scales. Lateral line 
complete, running low, but not greatly decurved. Dorsal fin inserted 
a little behind the ventrals, scarcely nearer base of caudal than snout. 
Caudal fin evenly forked. Pectorals shortish, not reaching nearly to 
the ventrals ; the ventrals reaching to the vent. Head contained 4 times 
in length to base of caudal; greatest depth equal to length of head 
Fin-rays : Dorsal 9 ; anal 8. Scales 11-56--0. Teeth 2, 5-4, 2, without 
evident masticatory surface. This latter character is, however, so vari- 
able in the Cyprinoids of this type as to be scarcely even of specific 
value. Back and fins dusky bluish ; sides of body and head dark, with. 
fine punctulations ; a red spot at base of eacli ventral and of anal. 

Numerous specimens, the longest C inches in length. This species is re- 
lated to 8. ardesiacus (Copej, but it has a deeper body and larger scales, 
the pectorals are shorter and length of the head proportionately less. 

7. Squalius copei, sp. nov. 

(Hybopsia egregius Co]}e, Ann. Eept. U. S. Geol. Surv. Terr. 1870,438; Cope 

& Yarrow, Wheeler's Expl. W. lOOth Mer. v, 662, 1877; not Tigoma 

egregia Girard.) 

Numerous specimens of this species were obtained at Evanston, Wyo., 

of boys fishing with hook and line in tributaries of Bear Eiver. It 

has not been observed in Utah Lake. As the original types of Tigoma 

egregia, examined by us, have 66 scales only in the lateral line, the species 

called Tigoma egregia by Professor Cope is distinct from it, and may 

receive the above specific name. 

8. Squalius atrarius (Girard) J. & G. 

This "chub" is very abundant in Utah Lake. It is exceedingly 
destructive to the young trout, well meriting the epithet of " devilish 
chub" applied to it by Mr. Madsen. 

9. Squalius rhomaleus, sp. nov. 

Allied to Squalius niger (Cope), but with the large scales of Squalius 
squamatus (Gill). 

Body robust, elevated anteriorly, somewhat compressed or flat-sided, 
although the back is very broad. Head broad, considerably concave in 
profile as seen from the side, as in the groups called PlatygoUo and Gila; 
the interocular space flattish, scarcely raised above the level of the 
upper edge of the eye. Snout rather broad, somewhat elevated at tip; 
the premaxillary on the level of the pupil; the form of the head resem- 
bling that of Chasmistes. Mouth very oblique, its cleft at an angle of 
about 450 ; the mandible much projecting. MaxiUary extending to the 



462 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

front of the eye. Eye small, anteriorly placed, its diameter 1'^ in snout, 
7 times in the length of the head. Isthmus very narrow, the gill-open- 
ings extending forward below. Teeth 2, o-4, 2 ; one of the teeth in the 
larger series with a broad, flattish, grinding surface, the others convex ; 
the teeth comparatively short and stout. Scales large for the genus, 
subequal over the body, rather smaller on the belly, their texture firm, 
their exposed surfaces very broad and hexagonal. Dorsal flu inserted 
directly over the ventrals, behind the middle of the body. Caudal fin 
evenly forked, on a stout, rather long caudal peduncle, the rudimentary 
rays at its base not more than usually developed. Pectorals not long, 
extending three-fifths the distance to the ventrals ; the ventrals about to 
the vent ; the lower fins all short. Fin-rays : Dorsal 9 ; anal 8. Scales 
10-55-5. Length of head contained 3i times in the total length to the 
base of caudal ; the greatest depth of the body about the same. 

Color blackish, fins all dusky. The ground shade is somewhat sil- 
very, but the color is rendered very dark by the large number of small 
black specks. 

The typical specimens, two in number, are about a foot in length. 
This is therefore one of the largest members of the genus. 

10. Apocope vulnerata Cope. 

Numerous specimens, some of them 5 inches in length. The large 
specimens have the lateral line developed anteriorly only. Pectoral fins 
short, not reaching nearly to ventrals. Lat. 1. about 70. 

11. Chasmistes liorus Jordan. — June Sucker. 

A considerable number of fine specimeus of this interesting sj)ecies 
are in the collection, all of them about 18 inches in length. Color oliva- 
ceous above, Avith dusky mottlings formed of dark points; belly white j 
fins chiefly' pale, shaded at the tips with dusky. Anal and lower lobe 
of caudal tuberculate iu the males. Body slender, heavy at the shoid- 
ders, somewhat compressed, the caudal peduncle stoutish ; depth of body 
at the shoulders half more than its thickness. Head not conic, low at 
the nape, and strongly concave in x)rofile above, from the great promi- 
nence of the premaxillary spines, which form a conspicuous nose, elevated 
above the eye, and with its top even with the interorbital space, which 
is very broad and nearly flat. Preorbital large ; suborbital moderate. 
Mouth large and very oblique, anteriorly on the level of the suborbital 
bones ; the mandible strong, placed at an angle of 45°, its base below 
the nostrils, its length equal to that of the snout, which is about three- 
sevenths that of the head. Upper lip somevv^hat protractile, narrow, 
vertical, its edge smooth ; lower lip narrow, the two lobes well sepa- 
rated, very faintly plicate, the plicae slightly uneven. No cartilaginous 
sheath to the jaws. Interorbital space nearly equal to length of snout. 
Eye small, exactly median, 7 in head. Isthmus as broad as eye. Phar- 
yngeal teeth essentially as iu Gatostomus. Scales much reduced in size 
and crowded anteriorly, those on the breast imbedded in the skin. Scales 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 46$ 

7-61-9 ; 28 series in front of tbe dorsal. Insertion of dorsal nearly mid- 
way between snout and base of caudal, the fin elevated in front, the 
anterior ray twice the height of the posterior, and about equal to the 
base of the fin ; the free margin of the fin nearly straight. Caudal fin 
deeply forked, the lower lobe the longer. Lower fins all small. Dorsal 
rays 11 ; anal 7. 

12. Catostomus fecundus Cope & Yairow.— Utah Sucker. 

This species occurs in Utah Lake in numbers which are simply enor- 
mous, justifying Mr. Madsen's assertion that the lake is the "greatest 
sucker pond in the universe". It is very destructive to the trout. It 
ascends the rivers in the spring to spawn at the same time as the latter 
species, on the eggs of which it feeds. In the interest of the food sup- 
ply of Salt Lake City an organized attempt at the reduction or extirpa- 
tion of this species may become necessary. The old trout feed largely 
on the young of this species, but the "suckers eat the trout first". No 
full description of Catostomus fecundus has been yet published. It will 
be seen from the following account that it is well separated from all its 
congeners, and that in many respects it approaches Chasmistes liorus. 
It is, in fact, probably the parent stock of the genus Chasmistes. 

Body moderately stout, a little elevated, not much compressed, taper- 
ing into a long and slender caudal peduncle. Head subconic, the pro- 
file regularly decurved from the nape to the base of the premaxillary 
spines, which abruptly i^rotrude, forming a distinct "nose", as in 
Chasmistes liorus. Preorbital long. Premaxillary a little below the 
level of the preorbital. Mandible large, oblique, placed at an angle of 
30° when the mouth is closed ; its length about one-third that of the 
head. Upper lip protractile, full, pendant, with about fom- rows of 
coarse papillae. Lower lij) moderately developed, divided nearly into 
two parts by a broad emargination, each lobe with about six rows of 
coarse papillae. Mouth not large. Interorbital space strongly convex, 
its width nearly equal to length of snout. Eye a little behind the mid. 
die of the head, its diameter contained 7 times in the length of the head. 
Isthmus broader than eye. Scales 8-60-8, reduced in size forward; 
breast scaly. 

Insertion of dorsal about midway between snout and base of caudal j 
the first ray nearly twice the height of the last, its length greater than 
that of the base of the fin. Caudal fin moderately forked, the lower 
lobe longest and widest. Pectorals long, reaching more than half way 
to ventrals, the latter not to vent. Anal high. Fin-rays: Dorsal 11; 
anal 7 ; ventrals 9. Length of head contained 4 times in total length 
to base of caudal; greatest depth 4^ times. Color blackish above, sil- 
very below, the fins slightly dusky tinged, the dark colors formed of 
black iDoints. 

This species seems to reach a smaller size than the other lake suckers. 



464 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

13. Catostomus ardens, sp. nov. 

(f Catostomus f/uzmaniensis Cope & Yarrow; uot of Girard.) 

A large, thick-lipped species, allied to C. maGrocMlus, &c. 

Body rather elongate, siibfiisiforui, little compressed, the back broad 
and somewhat elevated. Head conical, broad and convex above, the 
front regularly sloping from the nape to the snout. Mouth entirely 
inferior, the mandible quite horizontal, the preraaxillaries scarcely raised 
above the level of the base of the mandible. Upper lip very wide, full, 
pendant, with about eight rows of coarse, irregular papillae, of which 
the second and third rows from the inside are much larger than the 
others; upper lip continuous with the lower at the angle of the mouth, 
the lower lip cut to the base in the middle by a deep, abrupt incision 
Front of eye midway in head. Eye very small, 7 in head, 3J in the 
convex interorbital space. Isthmus broad, half broader than the eye. 
Fontanelle large, as in the other species noticed in this paper. Scales 
crowded anteriorly, 9-65-9. Breast with evident imbedded scales. Dor- 
sal fin inserted a little behind the middle of the body, long and low, 
its anterior rays but three-fourths the length of the base of the fin, IJ 
the length of the last rays ; the free edge of the fin straight. Caudal 
fin short and broad, about equally forked, its upper lobe two-thirds the 
length of the head. Pectorals short and broad, their length three- 
fourths that of the head. Ventrals short, not quite reaching vent. 
Anal very high, reaching caudal. Dorsal rays 13 ; anal 7. Length of 
head 3§ in body to base of caudal; greatest depth 4J. Teeth essen- 
tially as in the others. 

Color blackish above, blotched with darker, the whole back and sides 
obscurely spotted ; belly white ; a narrow, bright, rosy, lateral band on 
the anterior part of the body, overlying the blackish ; fins mostly dusky 
mottled ; top and sides of head rendered dusky by the presence of many 
dark specks. 

This species is described from a large adult male nearlj^ 18 inches in 
length, besides which we have a single young specimen. 

There is another specimen in the collection, a large male fish 18 
inches long, which agrees entirely with the type of C. ardens, with the 
following exceptions : The lower lij) is wider, with less conspicuous, 
coarse, irregular paijillse, in 8 to 10 rows ; the upper lip with two rows 
of largo papillse and several series of small ones. The caudal fin is 
much larger, the upper lobe three-fourths the length of the head, the 
lower broader than the ui)per ; the pectoral fin is very long, but little 
shorter than head ; and the ventrals reach the vent. The dorsal has 12 
rays, and is long and low, as in G. ardens. The scales on the breast are 
almost obsolete. The isthmus shows a structure very different from 
that of any other Catostomoid fish known. The gill membranes are 
partly free posteriorly, their free margins forming a broad fold across 
the narrow isthmus, as in the genus Gottus. This structure appears 
normal, and is not the result of injury. If it be permanent, this form 
should probably constitute a distinct genus ; if not, it may not be sepa- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 4G5 

rable as a species from Catostomus ardens. Meanwhile we abstain from 
giving a new name nntil more specimens can be obtained to settle the 
question. 
Indiana State University, Becemher 4, 1880. 



DESCKIPTBOIV OF A ^^W SPECBES OF " R04;K-FB9M " (!^EBA!^TI€H- 

TEIYS CEIKYSOMELAS), FROM THE COAST OF CAIilFOR.^'IA. 

By I>AVIS> S, J©RI>AIV aaid CMAK1.ES H. Cill^BERT. 

Sebastichthys chrysomelas, sp. nov. 

{Sehastichthys nehulosus Jordan & Gilbert, Proc. U. S. Na,t. Mus. iii, 1880, 7:?, 
aud elsewhere ; not Sehastes nehulosus Ayres.) 

In previous papers on the California rock-fish we have provisionally 
identified one of the common species as the Sebastes nehulosus of Ayres. 
Ayres himself, however, considered his own nehulosus as without ques- 
tion the Sehastes fasciatus of Girard, which is the SebasticJitfiys fascio- 
laris of Lockington. The two species agree closely in general charac- 
ters, but differ in the development of the spines on the head, and 
especially in color, the ^'■fasclolaris^'' having the yellow markings in the 
form of small spots or specklings, which are confluent along the sides, 
forming a sort of band, the other species having the yellow areas all 
large. The original description of Sehastes nehulosus Ayres (Proc. Cal, 
Acad. Nat. Sci. i, 5, 1851) applies in the main to both species ; but the 
account of the coloration applies to S. fasciolaris Lockington, and not to 
our " S. nehulosus ". 

Ayres says : 

"In color this fish is finely mottled with dusky yellow and dark 
brown ; on the fins the latter hue predominates, and the lighter mot- 
tlings have rather a bluish aspect." 

We propose, therefore, to consider fasciolaris a synonym of nehulosus, 
and to give to the species previously called nehulosus by us the new 
name chrysomelas, in allusion to its yellow and black coloration. 

Description. — Body short and stout, not much compressed ; highest 
at the origin of the first dorsal, thence tapering rapidly to the tail. Head 
short, bluntish, the profile very steep. Mouth rather small, nearly 
horizontal, entirely below the axis of the body. Lower jaw rather 
shorter than the upper in the closed mouth; no prominent symphyses 1 
knob. Premaxillaries anteriorly on the level of the lower edge of the 
orbit; maxillary reaching the vertical from the posterior margin of the 
pupil. 

Preorbital wide, its neck about half the diameter of the eye, its mar- 
gin sinuate, usually with a spine. 

Ridges on top of head very prominent, high and strong, ending in 
strong spines, which diverge backward. They are a little stronger than 
in S. carnatus, but lower than in ;S'. nehulosus. The following pairs are 
present : Nasal, preocular, supraocular, tympanic, and occipital, five in 
all. Preopercular spines short and thick, the uppermost usually the 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 30 Fcfo, 16, 188 1. 



466 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

longest. Opercular spines usual. A small spine on the iuteroi)ercle 
and one on the subopercle at the junction of the two bones. Sui)ra- 
scapular spines present. Gill-rakers short, rather thick, comiDressed. 
and somewhat clavate, the longest about two-ninths the diameter of the 
orbit. Scales moderate, rough, the accessory ones few 5 about 5ii trans- 
verse series. Lower jaw, maxillary, nasal region, and space in front of 
eye naked. 

Dorsal spines high and strong, the third to sixth spines subequal and 
highest, rather higher than the highest soft rays. Dorsal fin deeply 
emarginate. Second anal spine much stronger than third, the two about 
equal in length. Pectorals with very broad base, reaching beyond the 
tips of the ventrals, which reach nearly to the vent. The low^er jDectoral 
i-ays thickened. Caudal slightly rounded. 

D. XII, I, 13 ; A. Ill, C. 

Coloration black and yellow; the latter shade is usually a clear, 
warm, brownish yellow, with some specks of deeper orange. It varies 
irom a dusky orange to olivaceous yellow, the latter color more often 
seen on the belly. The dark shades are black or dark brown, with 
slight olive tinge. The colors are usually purest in specimens taken in 
deep water. 

The dark color i>redominates on the back ; the membrane between the 
third and fourth dorsal spines and an area at the base of these spines 
is always pale; a yellow blotch extends thence downward and back- 
ward, joining the light color of the belly. Another light area passes 
from near the angle of the opercle around the j)ectorals, uniting below 
them. Three other blotches occur along the back, one under the eiglith 
dorsal spine, one under the last spine, and one under the last soft ray ; 
from each of these irregular pale areas extend down the sides. The 
tins have the color of the region to which they belong. Head above 
with dusky cross-shades and faint bands radiating from the eye. 

This species reaches a length of about 15 inches, and is ibund in large 
numbers on the coast of California, from the island of San Nicolas, 
wiiicli marks the southeru limit of the abundance of the "rock-fish", to 
Cape Mendocino. It is common in the markets of San Francisco, 
although not one of the most abundant species. Its afSnity with S. car- 
■natus has been elsewhere noticed (Proc. U. S. ]^at. Mus. iii, 1880, 71). 

A table of measurements will be found on page 75 of vol. iii. 

The species described by us as Sebastichthys vexillaris in vol. iii, p. 292, 
is represented in Puget Sound and the Gulf of Georgia by a variety 
or subsi)ecies with lower dorsal spines and much darker and duller col- 
oration, the dark shades being of a reddish brown. The latter form is 
apparently identical with Sehastcs caurinus Eichardson, Ichth. Voy. 
Sulphur, i, 1814, 77, pi. 11, fig. 1, described from Sitka. 

The species may therefore take the name of jSebastlcJdhys caurhms, 
and the California form that of subspecies vexUluris. 

Indiana State University, 

Bloomington, Ind.y November G, 1880. 



PROCEEDINGS OP UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 4G7 

FISBIES 5'K®M T'ME "OEEP WATEB5 OIV TME SOt-ITM COAST OF IVEW 
EIVWa^AMB* OKTASIVEa BY 'rEIE UMBTTEW STATES FHHBI C0171BIIS- 
SfiOi^ BIV TBIE SUMiTJEEJ «F ISSO. 

By G. BRO\TN G®©1>E. 

The following paper enumerates 51 species of fishes known to occur 
outside of the hundreil-fathoin curve along the southern coast of New 
England. Nearly all were obtained by the Fish Commission steamer 
"Fish Hawk" on its three trips co the "Lopholatilus Ground" in Sep- 
tember. Several of the species were described a few weeks ago in 
another paper. 

MALTHEID^. 

1. Halieutaea senticosa, uew species. 

A single small specimen (No. 2G088) was obtained, September 13, from 
station 879, at a depth of 225 fathoms, and on October 2, from station 
895, 238 fathoms, four specimens (No. 20175), ranging in length from 
CO""" to 140'"'". 

The occurrence on the Atlantic coast of the United States of a species 
of the genus HalieuUm, hitherto known only from China, is exceedingly 
interesting. A related genus, HaUeutichthys, Poey, is represented in 
the West Indian fauna by the species Halieutichthys aculeatus.* 

Description. — Disk orbicular, nearly as wide as long; its length less 
than half that of the body; its lateral outlines prolonged on each side 
in a strong spine, armed at the tip with a group of irregularly arranged 
acicular ^pinelets. Body covered above with numerous stout, conical 
spines with stellular bases. These are largest u])on the postdiscal i)or-' 
tion of the body, where they are approximately arranged in about fonr 
irregular longitudinal rows upon each side of the dorsal fin. Closely 
set rows of these stout spines mark the outer margin of the disk, and 
there is also a cluster of five to seven upon each carpal peduncle. Out- 
side of these marginal spines, upon each side, is an irregular marginal 
row of five depressed, knife-like spines, each tipped with a crown of 
three acicular spiuelets. On the anterior margin of the disk the two 
i-ows of spines coalesce and form a bristling row of closely set spines, 
some pointing dorsally, some laterally, some ventrally. There are two 
kinds of spines upon the dorsal surface, in addition to the large ones 
already described: some large, somewhat remote from each other, coni- 
cal, stellular; others, much more numerous and filling the interspaces, 
prickle-like, stellular. Belly armed with numerous closely set spines 
of a similar kind. Snout somewhat projecting, armed with three many- 



*HaUeutic]ithys aculeatun (Mitobill) Goode. 

Lophius aculeatus, Mitchill, Adut. Monthly Magazine, ii, 1818, p. :?2r) (speci- 
men from Straits of Bahama). 

Halieutichthys aculeatus, Goodf., Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. ii, 1870, p. 109 (calling 
attention to Mitchill's description).— Goode & Bean, ibid. p. 3:5:5 (speci- 
men from Key West). 

Halieutichthys reiiculatus, Poey, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pliila. 18G3, p. 91 (speci- 
men from Cuba). 



468 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



tipped spines. A spine-armed ridge in front of the eyes, over tlie top 
of tlie snout. In this four spines are conspicuous, one in front of each 
eye, and between these a larger pair, in front of the supraorbital ridges. 
From these last-mentioned spines extend spine-armed ridges along the 
upper margins of each orbit. Under the snout is a cavity containing a 
barbel, pedicelled, with thick, club-shaped, trilobate tip. On each side 
of this cavity are the nasal openings. 

The width of the mouth is equal to the distance between the centers 
of the pupils of the eyes, this being much less than in Halieutcca steUata, 
in which the mouth is i)roportionally twice as large. The shape of the 
disk is less circular than in the Asiatic species, being intermediate be- 
tween this form and Halieutichthys. Other points by which H. stellata 
may be distinguished are the absence of the strong lateral spines of the 
disk; the slighter specialization of the carpal peduncles; the greater 
proportionate size of the disk, which occupies two-thirds of the entire 
length of the fish; the less immediately axillary position of the gill- 
oi)enings; the less spiny armature of the body, the spines upon the 
margin being smaller and less crowded ; and the entire absence of 
spines upon the ventral surface. 

D. C; A. 4; C. 8; P. 13-15; V. 5. Color reddish gray, whitish below. 

Measurements. 





261 


r,- 




Station 895. 








MiUi- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 




140 
118 




Length to btuse of middle caudal rays 

Body: 


100 
50 






47 






47 


Least heiaht of tail 










40 


Head: 




39 






« 






4 


AViiltli of iiiouth 




16 






9 






10 






8 


Dorsal : 




CO 






8 


Greatest liei^lit 




14 


Lenjith of rostral barbel 




2 


Anal: 




65 






5 


Height at loiiirest ray 




14 


Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 




13 


Pectoral : 




52 






24 


Ventral : 




35 






12 


Dorsal ... 




G 


Anal , . . . . 




4 


'Caudal . 




g 


Pectoral 




13-15 






5 









PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 469 

LOPHIID.E. 

2. Lophius piscatorius, Liim. 

A specimen, No. 26170, 20™ long-, containing immature ova, was taken 
at station 894, at a depth of 365 fathoms; also a hirge specimen with 
immature ova, No. 26098, from station 876, 120 fathoms; and a smaller 
one, perhaps two years old, No. 26070, from station 878, 142^ fathoms. 

3. Mancalias uranoscopus (Miu-iuy) Gill. 

Ccraiias uraiioneopus, MURRAY, iu Wyville Thompson, The Atlantic, 1878, ii, 

p. 67, lig. 20(Aiii.e(l.). 
Mancalias uranoscopus, Gill, Proc. U. S. Nat. Miis. i, 1878 (Oct. 17), p. 228. 

A single specimen. No. 26159, 185™'" long, was taken October 2 at sta- 
tion No. 893, at a depth of 372 fathoms. It is of much interest, only one 
specimen having hitherto been found. This was dredged July 23, 1873, 
by H. M. S. Challenger, southeast of Madeira (lat. 22° 18' N., long. 22° 
2' W.), at a depth of 2,300 fathoms (temperature 1° 05' C). Mr. Mur- 
ray's description, which is sufficiently accurate except that our speci- 
men has lour instead of three rays in the second dorsal, runs as follows: 
The specimen is 90""" in length from the snout to the end of the tail, 
compressed laterally, and of a uniform black color. The anterior spine 
of the first dorsal fin is produced into a long filament, ending in a pear- 
shaped bulb, terminating in a very distinct, semi-transparent, whitish 
spot. This spine has its origin on the posterior portion of the head, and 
when laid back it reaches nearly to the tip of the tail. The second part 
of the first dorsal is placed f\ir back on the body, and consists of two 
short, fleshy tubercles, which lie iu a depression in front of the second 
dorsal fin. The second dorsal has three rays; the anal is opposite the 
second dorsal and has four rays; the caudal has eight rays, the four 
central rays being much larger than the others, and bifid. The pectorals 
are small and have ten very delicate rays. The gill-opening is a slit 
situated below the pectoral fin. The upper jaw is formed by the iuter- 
maxillaries, and is armed, together with the lower jaw, with a series of 
teeth of moderate size, which can be depressed inward as in LopMus. 
The skin is thickly covered with minute, embedded, conical spines. The 
eyes are very small aud are placed high up on the middle of the head. 
The presence of a fish of this group at so great a depth is of special in- 
terest. From its structure, and from the analogy of its nearest allies, 
there seems to be no reasonable doubt that it lives on the bottom. It is 
the habit of many of the family to lie hidden in the mud, with the long 
dorsal fihiment and its terminal soft expansion exposed. It has been 
imagined that the expansion is used as a bait to allure its prey, but it 
seems more likely that it is a sense-organ intended to give notice of their 
approach. 



^70 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

4. Chaunax pictus. Lowe. 

Chau)iax2)ictu8,'LowE,TtiiTis. Zool. Soc, Loud, iii, 184G, p. 339, pL li. — GuN- 
THER, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iii, 1831, p. 200. — Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. 
Sci. PMla. 1863, p. 90 (generic diaguosis in synopsis of family); Bull. U, 
S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 222. 

A single small specimen of a species of Chaunfw, 37""" long, was ob- 
tained September 4, at station 8G9, at a depth of 192 fathoms. 

While there is a general agreement between the specimen described 
from Madeira by Lowe under the name Chaunax pictus* and the im- 
mature individual of the same genus before me, there are certain charac- 
ters, such as the slightly smaller number of fin-rays in dorsal and cau- 
dal, and the difference in the shape of these fins in the latter, which 
renders the question of their identity somewhat doubtful. I am unwill- 
ing, however, to establish a new specific name on this imma.ture speci- 
men, particularly since the shape of the fins is likely to be modified 
with age, and the difference in the radial formula is hardly of specific 
importance. The specimen is therefore provisionally referred to Lowe's 
species. A larger specimen from our coast is much to be wished for. 
Lowe's was •406"'"' (16 inches) long, and " was taken with an ordinary 
bait and line at the Picos, a rocky shoal about a league from the shore of 
Camera de Lobos, a village five or six miles to the westward of Funchal, 
on the 12th of March, 1846"; depth of water not stated. The color of 
this specimen was bright orange above, rosy at the sides, and with fins 
and tips vermilion; on the belly rosy white, with fins vermilion. 

The color of our specimen, No. 26021, is brownish gray. The rostral 
tentacle is nearly as long as the diameter of the eye. 

Eadial formula : D. I, 10 ; A. 5; C. 7; V. [3]; P. 10. 

Measurements. 





Milli- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 




37 

27 






100 


Body : 

Greatest hei<ibt 


IH 


Greatest width . 




12 


Least height of tail 




4 


Head: 

Greatest lensth (to branchial aperture) 




74 






3:1 


Widtliof iaterorbital area 




]5 


Leuijtli of suout . 




11 






20 


Length of mandible 




1« 








Dorsal teutacle 


, 


4 


Dorsal fin : 

Distance from snout 




70 


Anal : j 

Distance from snout ^ 


74 



* 1846. — LowK, Eev. E. T. Ou a New Genus of the Family Lophidos (Les Pectorales, 
Pediculees, Cuv.), discovered in Madeira. < Trans. Zool. Soc. Loudon, iii, i^p. 339 
344, pi. li. Ecad Sept. 22, 1846. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 471 

Measurements — Continued. 





MilU- 
meters. 


lOOths 

of 
length. 


Caudal : 

Lcii'itli of middle rays 


•28 

64 
[10] 


Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 




Lcnjrth 




Ventral : 

Distance from snout 




Length 




[10] 

1,10 

5 


Dorsal 




Anal 




Caudal 


7 


I'ectoral 




10 


Ventral 




m 







PLEUEONECTID.^. 

5. Hippoglossus vulgaris, Fleming. 

Pleuronectes /njj/joj/ZossMS, LiNN. Syst. Nat. ed. x, i, p. 209 

Hippoglossus vulgaris, Fleming, Brit. Animals, p. 199. — Gunther, Cat. FiHh. 

Brit. Mns. iv, 1862, p. 403. 
Hippoglossus amerlcamts, Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pbila. 1864, p. 220. 

The New London lialibut-smacks obtain many halibut on the south 
part of George's Banks and the neighboring shoals. An individual was 
taken, years ago, on the outer side of Fisher's Island, Connecticut. The 
halibut may, in all probability, be found to be abundant on the edge 
of the continental slope south of Cap.e Cod, since here have been re- 
cently obtained nearly all the species most constantly associated on the 
northern halibut grounds on the outer edges of La Have, Brown's, Sable 
Island, and other banks off the coast of Kova Scotia and Newfound- 
land. 

6. Hippoglossoides platessoides (Fabiicins) Gill. 

Pleuronectes platessoides, Fabricius, Fauna Groenlandica, 1780, p. 164 (excel- 
lent description). — "Videusk. Selsk. Naturv. och Matliem. Afhaudl. i, 
p. 50, pi. ii, fig. 2." 

Cithartis platessoides, Eeinhardt, ibid.\u, 1»38, p. 130.— Kk«)YER, in Gaimard. 
Voyages en Scaudinavie, etc. pis. xxi (excellent iignre). 

Drepano(p)setta platessoides. Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. America, 1861, p. £0. 

Hippoglossoides platessoides, Gill, Proc. Acad.' Nat. Sci. Pliila. 1864, p. 217.— 
GOODE & Be.vn, Cat. Fisli. Essex Inst. 1879, p. 7. 

Platessa dentata (not Pleuronectes dentnfus, Mitchill), Storer, Rep. Fisb. 
Mass. 1839, p. 143; Hist. Fish. Mass. 1867, p. 197, pi. xxx, fig. 3. 

Hippoglossoides dentatus, Gill, Cat. Fisb. E. Coast N. A. 1861, p. 50.— Gun- 
ther, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iv, 1862, p. 400. 

Pomatopsetta dentata, Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. 1864, p. 217 (with def. of 
Pomatopsetta, p. 216). 

Hippoglossoides limandoides, Goode & Bean, Amer. Journ. Sci. & Arts, xvii, 
1876, p. 39. 
Not unusual in deep water off" Southern ^Massachusetts and Ehode 
Island, approaching the coasts in winter, but not taken in these trips 
of the Fish Commission steamer. 



472 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

7. Paralichthys oblongus, (Mitt lull) Jordan. 

Pleuronectcs oblo)i{/a, Mitchill, Trans. Lit. & Phil. Soc. N. Y. 1, 1814, p. 391- 
Platessa oblonga, Stoker, Syn. Fish. N. A, i>. 225. — DeKay, Zool. N. Y. Fish. 

1842, p. 299, pi. xlviii, tig. 156. 
Choenopsetta oblonga, Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A. 1831, p. 50 (uanio of 

genus proposed; no delinition); Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 18J4, p. 218 

218 (genus dcfiued p. 216). 
Pseudorhombits oblomjus, GtJNTHER, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iv, 1834, j). 423. — 

GooDE «& Bean, Cat, Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 7. 
Paralichthys oblongus, Jordan, MSS. 
Platessa quadroccUata, Storer, Proc. Bost, Soc. Nat. Hist, ii, 1847, p. 242 : 

Hist. Fish. Mass. 1867, p. 203, pi. xsxi, fig. 3. 
Platessa quadrocularis, Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A. 1831, p. 51. 

Specimens were obtaiued at the following trawling stations: No. 
26078, from station 87o, 100 fatlioms. 

8. Monolene sessilicauda, Goode. 

Monolcne sessilicauda, GoODE, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 338. 

Specimens were obtaiued from the following stations: 

Fathoms. 

No. 26004, stations 870, 871 150-115 

No. 26099, station 876 120 

No. 26109, station 877 126 

9. Citharichthys arctifrons, Goode. 

Cithurielithijs arvtifrons, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 341. 

Specimens were obtained from the following stations : 

r.itlioms. 

Nos. 25908, 28130, station 871 115 

Nos. 26100,26101, station 872 8.) 

No. 26117, station 876 120 

No. 26118, station 876 120 

No. 26124, station 878 142.V 

No. 26129, station 874 85 

'i station 870 155 

10. Citharichthys unicornis, Goode. 

Citharichthys unicornis, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mu.s. iii, 1880, p. 342. 

Specimens were obtained as follows : 

Fathoms. 

No. 26003, station 870 l.':5 

No. 26003, station 871 155 

11. Limanda ferrugiiiea (Storcr) Goode & Bean. 

Platessa f err iiginea, Storeu, Hist. Fisli. Mass. 1867, i). 198, pi. xxx, fig. 4. 
Myzopsetta fcrruyinea, Gill, Cat. Fish. E. Coast N. A. 1831, p. 51 (genus not 

deiined) ; Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1864, p. 217 (genus defined), et alibi. 
Pleuronectcs ferrwjineus, GtiNxnER, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iv, 1862, p. 447. 
Limanda fcrruginca, Goode & Bean, List Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, 

p. 6. 
Platessa rostrata, H. E. Stoker, Boston Journ. Nat. Hist, y, 1857, p. 268, pi. 

viii, fig. 2. 
Myzopsetta rostrata, Gill, 11. c. 

Numerous specimens were taken in 1874, 1875, and 1880 south of Cape 

Cod, in deep, cold water. The most southern locality is the Pccten 

Ground oft' Watch Uill. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 473 

12. Limaiada Beanii, uew species. 

Two specimens. No. 20102, were obtained— one from station 875, at a 
(leptli of 120 ftxtboms; one from station 870, 120 fathoms — whicli are pro- 
visionally referred to tlie genus Limanda, Gottsche, as understood by 
American ichthyologists. The species surely belongs to Pleuronectcs, as 
limited by Giinther, the weight of whose opinion regarding the difiicul- 
ties of making generic divisions in this group is fully appreciated. The 
extreme brevity of the snout and the elongate-elliptical form of the body 
render its shape very unlike that of Limanda ferruginea of our own coast 
and Limanda platcssoidcs of the Eastern Atlantic. In its general appear- 
ance, except that the ventrals are not both lateral, it resembles consid- 
erably the species mentioned above. 

Description. — The body is elliptical in form, with angular outlines. 
Its height is three-eighths (38) of its total length, and slightly more than 
twice the length of the head, and about three times the greatest height 
of the anal fin. Its height at the ventrals (25) is one-fourth of its length 
and less than distance from snout to origin of anal. Its least height, at 
base of tail (12), is half its height at ventrals. It is thin, its greatest 
width (7) not exceeding the diameter of the orbit. 

The scales are subcircular, small, strongly pectinate on the colored 
side, cycloid on the blind side, where they are also larger, there being 
about fifty (as nearly as can be counted in the specimens before me) in 
the lateral line, behind the curve, while on the colored side there are 
probably sixty. The lateral line on the colored side makes a very ab- 
rupt, conspicuous, angular, high curve over the pectoral fin. The chord 
of this arc is nearly as long as the head of the fish, its height half as 
great. The scales in the lateral line are highly specialized, particularly 
along the curve, which appears to contain about twenty-seven of thtnn, 
while posterior to this, in the straight portion, there are about sixty. 
The specialized scales of the lateral line extend far out upon the caudal 
(in. On the blind side the lateral line is little conspicuous, the scales 
very slightly specialized, and it becomes obsolete in the region Avhere, 
upon the colored side, the curve is located. The scales extend far out 
upon the caudal fin, but are not present upon the other fins. 

The head is very short, its length (18) contained about five times and 
one-half in the total. The snout is very short (2), one-fiftieth of the 
total, and the mouth is small, its cleft subvertical, and the maxillary 
extending very slightly behind the anterior margin of the orbit. The 
teeth are inconspicuous, apparently in two rows, stronger and more 
numerous on the blind side, barely discernable in upper jaw, absent 
elsewhere in the month. 

The eyes are large, prominent; their diameters (7) greater than tlie 
length of the maxillary (0) and equal to that of the mandible (0). Tliey 
are very closely set, the interorbital space marked by a knife like edge 
of bone. The upper eye, in its outline trenching upon the dorsal outline 
of the head, is almost directly above its mate. Together they occupy 



474 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

nearly tliree-fourtbs of the width of the head at the perpendicular pass- 
ing through their centers. 

The dorsal fin begins over the posterior part of the pupil of the upper 
eye. Its rays are long, widely separated, and with their tips protruding 
beyond the membrane, giving to this, as also to the anal, a ragged, 
irregular appearance. Its greatest height (8) is equal to half the length 
of the head. The anal is inserted under the axil of the pectoral, and its 
height is about the same as that of the dorsal. 

The length of the caudal (20) is equal to one-fifth of that of the body, 
without including caudal. It is broad, fan-shaped, acutely convex in 
outline. The distance of the ventral from the snout (38) is about one- 
third the length of the base of the dorsal. The arrangement of these 
tins upon the ventral keel is much as in Limanda ferruginea, the right 
tin being almost upon the median line. The i)ectorals are normal. 

The color is grayish brown, mottled with darker patches. There is a 
conspicuous black blotch upon the outer rays of the caudal on either 
side. 

Iladial formula : D. 04 ; A. G3 ; C. 18; P. 7 ; V. 6; lateral line about 88. 

This species is dedicated to my associate Dr. Tarleton H. Bean, of the 
United States National Museum. 

Measurements. 



Current number of specimen. 
Locality 



2G102. 
Stations 87o-G. 



Milli- 
meters. 



lOOths 

of 

i length. 



Extreme lenstli 

Leuiitk to biise of middle caudal rays 
Body:* 

(jreatest height 

Greatest widtli . 

Height at ventrals 

Least height of tail 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Width lit' iiitcrorbital area . . . 

Length of siKiut 

Postorliital purtion of head 

Length (iliiiuxiUary 

Lengtli of mandible 

Uiameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

(ireatest height 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

Pectoiai : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Dorsal 



135 
111 



Anal 

Caudal . 

I'ectoral 

Ventral 

Number of scales in lateral line (ea.) . 



38 

7 

25 

12 

18 
5 
2 
9 
6 
7 
7 

"J 
83 

8 

28 
70 

20 

17 
9 

I 17 

! 9 

j *!4 

I c:; 

I IS 

! I 

I 6B. 

,88 (27 in curve). 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 475 

13. Glyptoceplialus cynoglossus (Linn.) Gill. 

ricuromctes cijnoglossua, Linnjeus, Syst. Nat. ed. x, i, 1758, p. 2G9. 
Glyptoceplialus cynoglossus, Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pliila. 1873, p. IRL— 

GOODE & Bean, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 21 (with extensive 

synonymy). 

Nunierons specimens of various sizes, from the young of two centi- 
meters to tlie adult of fifty centimeters, were talien in the foHowing 
localities : 

14. Thyris pellucidus, Goode. 

Th>jris pellucidns, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 344. 

Specimens were obtained from the following localities : 

Fatlioma. 

No. 2r)005, station 871 : 11.5 

"No. 26008, station 872 86 

MACEUEIDiE. 

15. Macrurus Pabricii, Sundeval. 

Macrurus Fabricii, Sundeval, "Vet. Akad. Handl. 1840, p. 6". — Goode & 

Bean, Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 7. 
Macrurus rujjcstris, Gunther, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iv, 1862, p. 390. 

There can be little doubt that this species occurs south of Cape Cod, 
though no living specimens have yet been obtained. The first specimen 
found on the coast of the United States was picked up at sea, floating 
somewhere off Gravesend, N. Y. 

16. Macrurus Bairdii, Goode & Bean. 

Macrurus Bairdii, Goode & Bean, Amer. Jouru. Sci. & Arts, xiv, 1877, pp. 
471-473 (Massachusetts Bay); Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 7. 

Specimens were obtained from the following localities: 

Fathoms. 

No. 26062, stations 879-880 225-252 

Nos. 26163,26166,26187,26194, station 893 372 

Nos. 26168, 28194, 26217, 26218, station 894. 365 

Nos. 28191,26195,23210, station 895 238 

No. 26193, station 892 487 

Nos. 26212, 26217, 26218, station 891 487 

17. Macrurus carminatus, Goode. 

Macrurus carminatus, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 346. 

Specimens were obtained from the following localities : 

Fathoms. 
No. 28001, station 871. 11^ 

GADID^. 

18. Gadus morrhua, Linnajus, 

The cod occurs in deep water on this portion of the coast. 

19. Phycis chuss. 

Several specimens apparently of this species were obtained outside 
of the hundred-fathom curve. 



476 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

20. Phycis Chester!, Goode & Bean. 

Phycis Chesteri, Goode & Bean, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 256 ; Cat. 
Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 187^, p. 8. 

Numerous specimens, old and young, were found at stations 878, 142 
fathoms; 879, 225 fathoms; 880, 252 fathoms: 881, 325 fathoms; 892, 
487 fathoms ; 895, 238 fathoms. 

This species and Macrurus Bairdii appear to be the most abundant 
fishes of this district, occurring in immense numbers and breeding- 
copiously. 

21. Phycis regius (Walbaum) Jordan & Gilbert. 

Dletinius regius, Walbaum, Artedi, 1792, p. 18G. 

Uropltycis regius, Gill, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1883, p. 240. 

Phycis regius, Jordan & Gilbert, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 371. — ' 

Goode & Bean, Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 8.— Bean, 

Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 70. 
Euchehjopus regalis, Schneider, Blocli. Syst. Ichth. i (cloth), 1801, p. 33. 
Phycis rcgaHs, Kaup, Arcliiv fiir Naturg. 1858, p. 89. — Gill, Cat. Fish. E. 

Coast N. A. 1881, p. 49.— GiJNTiiEU, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. iv, 1832, p. 354. 
" Gaihis hlennioides, Mitchill, Medical Eegister, 1814," 
Gadus liunctatus, MiTCliiLL, ibid. 
Phycis imnctatus, DeKay, Zool. N. Y. Fisli. 1842, p. 292, pi. xlvi, fig. 149. 

A specimen was obtained at station 870, in 155 fathoms of water. The 
distribution of this species is very puzzling. It has been found at Hali- 
fax, Nova Scotia, and south to the Cape Fear Iliver, but seems 
nowhere abundant except about Long Island. 

22. Haloporphyrus viola Goode & Beau. 

Ualoporphyrns viola, GoODE & Bean, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 257; 
Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 8. 

Specimens were taken October 2, at station 893, in 372 fathoms of 
w^at.er. The si>ecies has never before been found except on the outer 
edges of the Nova Scotia banks. 

23. Bnchelyopus cimbrius (Linn.) Jordan. 

Gadus cimbrius, Linn/eus, Syst. Nat. ed. x, i. 

0)ios cimhrius, Goode & Bean, Proc. U, S. Nat. Mus. i, 1878, p. 349 (with 

full synonymy) ; Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 8. 
Encliehjojius cimbrius, Jordan, MSS. 

Several specimens were obtained outside the hundred-fathom curve. 

24. Merlncius bilinearis (Mitchill) Gill. 

Numerous si)ecimeus of old and young were taken September 4, Sep- 
tember 13, and October 2, in almost every haul of the trawl-nets, at what- 
ever depth. The adults appeared to be in the middle of the spawning- 
season, the eggs being separated in tlie ovaries and flowing easily in 
specimens taken at the depth of 250 and 487 fathoms. • This phenomenon 
is of the greatest interest and importance, since it may serve to illus- 
trate how other species, common near the shores, such as (he menhaden 
[Brevoortia fyrannns) and the bluelish [Fomatomus saltatrix), retreat 
to deep water to spawn. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 477 

25. Hypsicometes gobioides, Goocle. 

Uijpsicomctes fjoMoides, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 348. 
A single specimen of this puzzling little stranger was obtained at 
station 871, in 115 fathoms of water. 

STICH^ID^. 

26. Eumesogrammus subbifurcatus (Storer) Gill. 

A single specimen of this arctic species was obtained off the mouths 
of Newport Harbor. 

LYCODIDaE. 

27. Lycodes Verrillii, Goode & Bean. 

Lycodcs VerrilUi, Goode & Bean, Amer. Jonrn. Sci. &. Arts, xvi, 1877, p. 
474 ; Cat. Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 9. 

Specimens were obtained at the following localities : Stations 870, 155 
fathoms; 879, 225 fathoms ; 880, 252i fothoms; 881, 325 fathoms*; 893, 
372 fathoms; 895, 238 fathoms; often in considerable abundance. 

28. Lycodes paxillus, Goode & Bean. 

Lycodes paxillus, GooDE & Bean, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. ii, 1879, p. 44 ; Cat. 
Fisli. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 1879, p. 9. 

Two specimens, No. 26181, came from stations 891 and 891, 487 and 
305 fathoms. The unique specimen previously known was obtained 
by Captain Collins in the gully between La Have and Sable Island 
Banks. The enormous development of the buccal muscles appears to be 
a character acquired in old age, as also the si)ecial peculiarities of den- 
tition mentioned in the description. 

ANARRHICADID.^. 

29. Anarrhichas lupus, Liuniens. 

A single small specimen, about 30""" in length, was obtained at 
station 8G0, in 05 fathoms. At the time of writing the present notice 
this is not available for examination, but it is believed to be the young 
of Anan-hichas hqms^ never before recorded south of Cape Cod. 

LIPARIDID^. 

30. Liparis sp. 

Specimens of a Liparis closely resembling L. ranula, Goode & Bean, 
were obtained at station 879, and are preserved for future discussion. 

COTTID^. 

31. Amitra liparina, new genus and new spocies {CoUida'). 

Two specimens of the fish here described were obtained, October 2, at 
station 891, in 487 fathoms; one, No. 2G184, 104'"'" long; also a smaller 
one, 55" '. Their structure was so peculiar that I have long hesitated to 
describe them. They are evidently Liparoid fishes, without ventral 
tins or ventral disk. Professor Jordau and Dr. Bean have examined 



478 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

them with me, and the decision has been reached that they shoukl be 
placed iu a new genus of the family Cottidcc. Professor Jordan consid- 
ers this genus as forming one of the most abnormal types of Gottklce, 
approached through Cottuneulus and Psychrolutes, and also closely allied 
to Liparidce. 

AMITRA, new genus. 

Cottoid fishes, with small head, elongate, attenuate, body covered with 
thick, lax, slimy skin. Ventral fins absent. Oi^ercular stray present. 
Pseudobranchiffi present. Gills 3J, without slit behind last (?). Gill- 
openings closed below, restricted to small slits under the very small oper- 
culum. Operculum very small, strap-shaped. Lower jaw included 
within the upper. Teeth weak, j)aved. First five rays of the dorsal 
non-articulate, the others grading gradually into the flexible rings. 

32. Amitra liparina, new species. 

Description. — Body elongate, compressed posteriorly, very thin at 
the tail, covered with a gelatinous, lax, transparent skin, which is sep- 
arated from the body and the fins by a filmy, mucous intertissue. Great- 
est height of body (18) contained five and one-half times in its length, 
without caudal. 

Head thick, convex between eyes, its greatest width (11) nearly three- 
fourths its length (15), which is contained six and two-third times in the 
length of the body. Snout convex, protruding. Mouth under tbe snout 
and far back from its tip. Eyes lateral, in diameter (3) about half the 
width of the interorbital area (5). j^ostril in front of eye. Por(5s along 
the upper lip. When the head is viewed from directly in front the 
opening of the mouth seems to be convex upward. 

The dorsal fin begins over the end of the pectoral, and the rays and 
outline of this, as w^ell as of the anal, are hardlj^ visible through the 
thick, lax skin. The rays are thick, but very flexible. The anal begins 
under the eighth to tenth dorsal ray. The dorsal and anal rays lie 
closely connected with those of the caudal, which are somewhat larger, 
and extend in a iJencil-like point. 

The pectoral is broad, its lower base almost under the posterior margin 
of the orbit. It is com^iosed of twenty-three rays, the six lowest of 
which are prolonged beyond the lower rays contiguous. The jugular 
disk cannot be found. 

Eadial formula : D. 07 ; A. 51 ; C. G ; P. 23. 

Color: Yellowi-sh white, d:isky toward the tail and blackish upon the 
anterior part of the head. Abdominal cavity showing black tlirongh 
the skin. 

Two other specimens of this or a related species were obtained (No. 
2G179) from station 894, in 3G5 fathoms of water, but they are in poor 
condition and cannot at present be made out. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 479 
Measurements. 



Cnrrent number of specimen ! 9G184 

Locality '.....!".'.".".! !!'.!1!".! Station 487. 



Extreme lengtli 

Length to oaso of midulo caudal rays. 
Body : 

Greatest height 

Greatest width 

Head : 

Greatest length 

Greatest width 

"Width of interorbital area 

Length of snout 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal: 

Distance from snout 

Greatest height; 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal: 

Length of middle rays 

Pectoral: 

Distance from snout (below) 

Length 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Caudal , 

Pectoral 



Milli- 
meters. 



1G4 

150 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



33. Cottunculus microps, CoUett. 

Cotfiincuhis microps, CoLLETT, Tillhoegsli. til. Vidensk.-Selsk. Forli. Cliris- 
tiania, 1884, p. 20, pi. 1, figs. l-J; Norges Fislce, 1875, p. 20, pi. i,figs. 1-3; 
Fiske Nordliaus-Expeflitionens, 1878, p. 20; Meddelelser om Norges-Fiske 
Aarena, lS75-'78, 1879, p. 11. 

Specimens from the following localities have been obtained: 

Eathoms. 

No. 26087 (1), station 880 252^ 

No. 26167 (3), station 892 1 372 

station 894 365 

station 895 238 

No. 26176 (3), station 895 233 

No. 25140(1), station 880 252^ 

The largest measures 2v'5'""', the smallest 25'"". This species, never be- 
fore found except on the Norwegian coast, was described from a speciuion 
measuring 15""", dredged by Prof. Gr. O. Sars at Hasvig, near Hamnier- 
fest, in 200 fathoms, August, 1874; another, 50""" long, near Troiid- 
hjemsfjord, in 1878, by Mr. Storm, at a deptli of 180 fathoms; again, at 
a depth of 101 fathoms, 18 miles northwest from Ilammerfest (72^ 27' 
K, 20° 51' W.), in temperature 3° 5' C, and at a depth of 450 fatlioms; 
15 miles westward of ]S"ortliwestern Spitzbergon (79^ 50' N., 5° 40' \y.), 
with temperature of 1° C 

34. Cottunculus torvus, new siiecies, undescribod. 

A smooth-skinned species of Cottunculus was also obtained. This is 
reserved for future discusion. 



480 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

AGONIDiE. 

35. Peristedium miniatum, Goode. 

Peristcdium miniatum, Goode, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. iii, 1880, p. 349. 

Specimens were obtaLned from the following localities : 

Pathoms. 

No. 26023, station 869 192 

No. 26030, station 871 115 

No, 26083, station 876 , 120 

As has already been stated, adults and young were found, the former 
full of nearly ripe eggs. 

36. Asphidophoroides monopterygius (Blocb) Valenciennes. 

In 1874 a head of an individual of this species was dredged up on the 
" Pecten Ground'^ off Watch Hill, R, 1. This is the sole instance of its 
capture south of Cape Cod, though there can be little doubt that it is 
of frequent occurrence in the districts recently explored by the Commis- 
sion. 

37. Sebast3S mariniis, Liun;eus. 

Numerous small individuals of this species were taken in nearly every 
haul of the trawl-net down to the depth of 155 fathoms. 

38. Setarches parmatus, new species. 

A single specimen, No. 28084, was obtained at locality 876, in 120 
120 Itithoms. The young iish, 52""" long, was taken in company with 
numerous young specimens of Sehasten marinns, from which it differs in 
manj^ very striking respects. 

It api)ears to belong to the type described by Johnson under the 
name JSetarches.* 

It is, however, much stouter and higher than the other known species 
of this genus, Setarches Giiutheri, from which, too, it differs in having 10 
instead of IL si>ines in the first dorsal, and 6 instead of 5 rays in the 
ventrals. The height of the body (38) is three-eighths of its standard 
length. The length of the head (45) is nine-twentieths of the same. 
The diameter of the eye (12) is contained less than four times in the 
length of the head (45). The scales are small, cycloid, each with sev- 
eral concentric furrows. 

The specimen is so young, and mutilated withal, that it seems scarcely 
desirable to prepare an elaborate specific diagnosis. I append, however, 
a table of measurements, from which the other proportions of the body 
may readily be deduced, hoping soon to secure materials for a better de- 
scriiJtion. Setarches parmatus may readily be distinguished from Sehastcs 
marinus by its more generous proportions, as well as by the generic char- 
acters already mentioned. The height of the bodj^ is three-eighths of 

*Pvoc. Zool. Soc. London, 1862, p. 177; Setarches Giiuthcri, n. s. Madeira, p. 177, pi. 
xxiii. . 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 481 



its leugtli instead of one-fourth ; its width is one-fourth instead of three- 
twentieths; the length of the head nine-tweutieths instead of three- 
eighths. The width of the interorbital area is half the length of the up- 
per jaw instead of one-fourth, and is nearly equal to instead of oue half of 
the diameter of the orbit. The vertical tins are inserted larther back, 
the paired fins farther forward, and the fins are, without exception, 
longer. The tail appears to be truncate instead of emargiuate, as in *S'. 
niariiius. The preopercular spines are very prominent. The spinous 
dorsal contains ten spines. 

Measurements. 

Species: Setarches parmattis. 



CuiTent number of specimen . 
Locality 



26084 
Station 876. 



Milime- 
tei'S. 



lOOtlis of 
lengtli. 



Extreme length. 

Leugth to base of middle candal rays 
liody : 

Greatest hc.iuht 

Greatest width 

Least liciglit of tail 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Width of interorbital area 

Length of snout 

Length of operculnm 

Length of upper jaw 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snont 

Length of basi'. 

Greatest htiglit at fourth spine.. 

Height at li i st spine 

Heiglit at second spine 

Heii;ht at third spine 

(Soft) h'ugthof base 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at first .spine 

Height at second spine 

Height at third spine 

Height at longest i ay 

Caudal: 

Len gth of middle rays 

Pectoral: 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Dorsal 

Anal 



38 

23 

9 

45 
10 
10 
33 
23 
12 

42 
34 

'23 
10 
18 

2- 
Mutilated. 

8U 
12 
7 
14 
14 
15 



44 
44 

44 

25 



XTPHIID^. 

39. Xiphias gladius, Liun. 

A fishing smack from Is'oank, Conn., was engaged by Professor 
Baird to set a trawl on the edge of the oceanic slope, in the hope of ob- 
taining more specimens of Loj)hoh(Hhis. Their only capture was a 
sword-fish thirteen feet long and weighing over 000 pounds. This was 
brought up from the bottom on the trawl-line. There is room for much 
question whether it was taken at the bottom or fastened itself to the 
Proc. i^at. Mus. 80 31 Fefo. 16, 1§SI, 



482 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

hooks as the line was being lowered, and was carried by its weight to 
the bottom. This curious freak of the ^word fish, so often observed of 
late, deserves careful study. 

LATILID^. 

40. Lopholatilus chamaeleonticeps, Goode & Bean. 

Lopholatihis chanufileonticeps, Goode &. Beax, Proc. IJ. S. Nat. Mus. ii, 187'.(, 
p. 20.5. 

In July, 1879, numerous specimens of this remarkable fish were taken 
by Gloucester fishing vessels, at a depth of 84 fathoms, 80 miles south 
by east from Noman's Land. The first trip of the " Fish Hawk " to 
deeji water from Newport was September 4, and the nets were hauled 
as nearly as possible on the same grounds where LopholaUlus had pre- 
viously been taken. 

The second trip, ten days later, was to a region about forty miles 
fixrther west, and on this occasion six or more large individuals of this 
species were brought up on a hand line ( " ladder-line 'M set from an open 
boat sent out from the steamer. None were at any time taken in the 
traAvl-nets, though there is every reason to believe from the success of 
the fishing vessels previously, and from the number taken on the hand- 
line by the men in the small boat, that they are exceedingly abundant 
in this locality and i)robably for hundreds of miles in either direction, 
or at any rate to the south. 

The LopJioIatilus may yet prove to be a fish of economic importance. 
Its suitability for food was tested at the Avard-room table of the " Fish 
Hawk", and it was pronounced equal to cod-fish, though somewhat finer 
grained in flesh. 

The following notes upon color and internal structure were taken from 
a fresh specimen. The colors are very beautiful, and in general appear- 
ance when taken from the water it is one of the loveliest fislies I have 
ever seen, no exception being made in favor of the brilliant parrot-fishes 
or angel-fislies of the West Indian coral groves. 

Color. — Blackbluish, with a green tinge, iridescent, changing through 
purplish blue hud bluish gray to rosy white below, and milky wliite to- 
ward the medium line of the belly. Head rosy, iridescent, Vvith red 
tints most abundant on the forehead, blue under the eyes cheeks fawn- 
colored. Throat and under side of the head pearly .white; with an oc 
casionjil tint of lemon-yellow ', this is most pronounced in front of the 
ventrals and on the anterior portion of ventral fins. Back with numer- 
ous maculations of bright lemon or golden. Anal purplish, with blue 
and rose tints, iridescent. Margin of anal rich purplish blue, iridescent 
like the most beautiful mother of pearl. This color prevading more or 
less the whole fin, which has large yellow maculations. The lower 
border is rose-colored like the belly, and the base of the fin also pnr- 
takes of this general hue. Dashes of milk-white on the base of the 
anal between the rays. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 483 

Dorsal gray. In front of the seventh dorsal the upper third poste- 
rior to the nipper two- thirds dark brown. Spots of yellow, large 
elongate, on or near the rays. Adipose fin whitish brown or yel- 
low ; a large group of bright yellow, confluent spots at the base. 
. Pectorals sepia colored with rosy and purplish iridescence. 

Viscera. — Stomach small, siphonal, barely more than a loop in the 
very large intestine. Alimentary canal short, stomach and intestiue 
when stretched out at full length extending from the diaphragm to the 
caudal. A loop in the intestine immediately posterior to the stomach. 
Liver with two lobes, nearly equal in length, light chestnut-brown. Gall- 
bladder large, pendant, pear-sbaped, with long duct. Swim-bladder 
simple, with thick muscular walls, strongly attached to roof of abdominal 
cavity by numerous root-like appendages, resembling somewhat those 
of Pogonias. Spleen two-thirds as long as gall-bladder. 

CHAULIODOXTID.E. 

41. Chauliodus Sloanii, Sclineider. 

ChauUodits Sloaiiii, Schneider, Bloch. Syst. Iclith. 1801, p. 430, tab. Ixxxv (as 

C. scfiiioUts). 
Chauliodus Sloanii, Gunther, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. v, 18fi4, p. 392. 

A single individual, No. 2G1G5, 105""" long, was taken from station 
892, in 487 fathoms. The only other specimen recorded is that from 
the stomach of a codfish from George's Banks, preserved in the museum 
of the Essex Institute. 

Radial formula of Xo. 2G165: D. C; A. 12. 

SCOPELID^. 

42. Myctophum, sp. 

A species, apparently undescribed, was obtained in several of the deep 
hauls. It is reserved for comparison with numerous other specimens of 
the group, as yet unelaborated, obtained by the Commission from the 
deep waters of the Atlantic. 

MICROSTOMIDaE. 

Hyphalonedrus chalybeius, new genus and new species. 

Numerous specimens (Xo. 2G092) of a. form closely related to A njeniina 
were taken, September 13, at stations 87G and 878, 120 and 142 fathoms. 
They are considered to represent a new generic type.* 

HYPHALONEDRUS, new genus. 

A genus of Microstomatid fishes. Body rounded, terete. Cleft of 
mouth extending under the anterior third (at least) of the orbit. Eye 
large. Teeth in the jaws snmll, sharp, on the edges of the bony lips. 
Tongue entirely smooth. Tip of lower jaw projecting. Dorsal fin short, 
inserted midway in space between insertions of pectorals and ventrals. 
*Etymology : i'^oAof = under tbe sea + tvedpog = a dweller. 



484 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Gill-arclies 4. Pseudobranchise present. Scales moderate, pronouncedly 
pectinate. 

The genus Silus Gill * was founded upon a misconceiJtion. The scales 
of Argentina silus (Cuv.) Miss., are " dentigerous," it is true, but not 
ctenoid. They are true cycloid scales, with dentigerous surfaces. The 
diagnosis of Silus Gill would include the form above described, but, as 
has been remarked, it was founded upon a misunderstanding, and there 
can be no question as to what his intention may have been. 

43. Hyphalonedrus chalybeius, new species. 

Description. — Body plumj), terete, its height (10) contained six times 
and one-fourth in its length, its width (13) seven and three-fourths. 
The height at ventrals (16) is equal to that of the origin of dorsal, the 
dorsal being inserted at the highest portion of the body, its middle over 
the origin of the ventrals. The least height of the tail is half that of the 
body. The scales are moderately strong, and sharply pectinated at the 
edge, and arranged in regular transverse rows, overlapping in such a 
manner as to resemble obliqne plates upon the sides. Tiie lateral line 
is prominent, straight, containing about 52 scales. Between the lateral 
line and the origin of the dorsal are G.] scales, the origin of the ventral G. 
The greatest length of the head to the end of the flexible dap of the oper- 
culum (27) slightly exceeds one-fourth of the body length, and is itself 
slightly more than four times the length of the snout (G). The longi- 
tudinal diameter of the orbit (8) is four times that of the interorbital 
space (2). The maxillary, broad and flattened posteriorly, is in length 
(10) one-tenth of the body, and extends back to a perpendicular from the 
anterior margin of the pupil. The articulation of tlie mandible is in ad- 
vance of the posterior tip of the maxillary, its lengtli ( 11 ) slightly greater, 
and-it protrudes beyond the snout, when the mouth is open, a distance 
greater than the width of the interorbital area. When the mouth is 
closed its tip still projects noticeably. 

The dorsal fln is located almost midway between the snout and the 
adipose dorsal. Its height is almost equal (19) to that of the ventral 
(18). The adipose dorsal is over the middle of the anal, its length half 
the diameter of the orbit. 

The distance of the anal from the snout (7G) is about three-fourths of 
the body-length. Its length of base (G) is equal to the length of the 
snout; its height (10) to that of the middle caudal rays. The caudal is 
furcate. The pectoral is long, subfalcate, inserted close to the branchial 
cleft, its tip extending to the fourteenth or fifteenth scale of the lateral 
line, its length (22) twice that of the mandible. 

The ventral is located two-fifths of the way from the snout to the base 
of the caudal, and directly under the middle of the. dorsal. 

Eadial formula: D. 11 -f 1 (adipose); A. 8; C. IG; P. 17 or 18; V. 9 
or 10 ; L. lat. about 52. 

Color grayish mottled with brown, scales metallic silvery. 

*Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1862, p. 15. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 485 
Measurements. 



CuiTont number of specimen. 
Locality 



Extreme length 

Length to base of middle caudal rays . 
Body: 

Greatest height 

Greatest width 

Height at ventrals 

Least height of tail 

Head: 

Greatest lengtli 

"Widtli of interorbital area 

Length of snout 

Length of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of bas<> 

Greatest lici^lit- 

Lengt h of itdii)ose tin 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal: 

I>ength of middle rays 

Length of external rays 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Dorsal 

Anal 



Caudal 

Ventral 

Number of scales in lateral lino (ca.) 

Number ot transverse rows above lateral line 

Number of transverse rows below lateral line to ventral 



26092 
Station 876-8 



Milli- 
meters. 



lOOths 

of 
leuiith. 



112 
97 



5,7+9,7 
9 or 10 
52 
6i 



NEMICHTHYID^. 

44. Nemichthys scolopaceus, Richardson. 

A single specimen, No. 2G106, was taken in 252 fathoms of water at 

station 880. It came up clinging with its long jaws to the outside of 

the trawl-net. 

SYKAPHOBEA:N^CHIDJi:. 

45. Synaphobranchus pinnatus (Grouow) Giinther. 

Specimens were obtained from the following localities : Station 880, 
252 fathoms; 881, 325 fathoms; 891, 487 fathoms; 894, 305 fathoms. In 
the last-mentioned locality a specimen was taken carrying nearly mature 

eggs. 

SIMENCHELYID^. 

46. Simenchelys parasiticus, Gill. 

Simenchclys parasiticus, Gill, in Goode & Bean, Fish. Essex Co. & Mass. Bay, 
1879, p. 27. 

A single specimen, Ko. 2G172, was taken at a depth of 487 fathoms at 
station 892. 



486 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

47. Raia, unknown species. 

The young of a species of skate, witli body covered closely with minute 
sharj) spines, wag taken in many localities. Mr. Garman has the speci- 
mens for identification. 

48. Raia, unknown species. 

The young of another species, with an extremely long tail, was taken 
from large, square, short-tendriled eggs at various depths. Mr. Garman 
has also these. 

49. Raia laevis, Mitchill. 

Two large skates apparently of this species were taken October 2 in 
deep water. A cast of one of them was made. 

SPINACID^. 

50. Centrophorti3 ? unknown species. 

Mr. Garman has for identification two specimens taken at station 893, 
at a depth of 372 fathoms. 

MYXINID^. 

51. Myxine glutinosa, Liunieus. 

Specimens were obtained from the following localities : Stations 869, 
192 fathoms; 870, 155 fathoms; 878, 142 fathoms. 



©ESCKIPTIOJV OF A IVEW .««PECBES OF CARANX (CARAXX BEAIVI), 
FROiTI REAUFORT, NORTH CAROI^EIVA. 

By DAVID S. JOKDAW. 

Caranx beani, sp. nov. 

Allied to Caranx cihi Poey, but much less elongate. 

Color bluish above, silvery, vrith golden luster below; upper edge of 
caudal peduncle a little dusky ; spinous dorsal blackish ; axil dusky ; 
no dusky spot on opercle, pectoral fin, or elsewhere. 

Form rather broadly elliptic-ovate, the dorsal and ventral outlines 
about equally and nearly regularly curved, the depth greatest at the 
origin of the anal and soft dorsal, the axis of the body not far Irom the 
middle of its depth. Profile from the snout to the base of the dorsal 
forming a very regular curve. The greatest depth 2| in total lengtb, 
2^ in length to the base of the caudal. Head little compressed, scarcely 
carinate above, the interorbital space more than half broader than the 
eye, which is small, shorter than snout, scarcely broader than the pre- 
orbital, 4 in head. Length of head 3/j to base of caudal, 4 in total 
length. Mouth comparatively small, oblique, the lower jaw very slightly 
projecting when the mouth is closed. Maxillary small, scarcely extend- 
ing to the anterior border of the orbit. Premaxillaries anteriorly on the 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 487 

level of the lower edge of the pupil. Teeth small, villiform, in a narrow 
baud iu each jaw ; those iu the outer series sUghtly enlarged ; the hand 
in the upper jaw considerably broader than that in the lower ; no canine 
teeth ; bands of villiform teeth on vomer, palatine, and tongue. Adi- 
pose eyelid little developed. Cheeks and opercles scaly. Gill-rakers 
long, longer than the pupil. Breast closely scaled, its scales a little 
smaller than those on the sides. Upward curve of lateral line not very 
strong. Armature of tail feeble, only those plates on the caudal peduncle 
itself having distinct spines 5 about 26 i^lates may be counted before 
they merge into the ordinary scales. 

Spinous dorsal low and feeble, the highest spine scarcely as long as 
the snout, the last spine nearly free, short and thickish ; a small pro- 
cumbent spine before the dorsal 5 soft parts of dorsal, anal, and caudal 
densely covered with small scales ; soft dorsal and anal low, their highest 
rays scarcely longer than the snout; free anal spines, separate from the 
tin but connected with each other, scarcely longer than the pupil ; caudal 
tin short, not widely forked, the lobes equal, the upper lobe f length of 
head, the distance vertically between their tips slightly less than the 
length of the head ; ventral fins very short, scarcely longer than snout, 
reaching about half way to anal ; pectoral fins falcate, reaching about 
to the fourth soft ray of anal, their insertion on the level of the max- 
illary, their outer surface largely scaly; length of pectorals § the great- 
est depth, about equal to length of head. 

Fin rays : D. VIII-I, 20 ; A. II-I, 23. 

Two specimens of this species were obtained by Mr. Charles H. Gil- 
bert and myself at Beaufort, N. C, in the summer of 1877. They were 
taken with a small seine in the harbor, close to the shore. 

It agrees in dentition and many other respects with Garanx cihi Poey, 
but the latter species is much slenderer, the depth of the body being 
about equal to the length of the pectorals or the length of the head. I 
place it provisionally in the genus Caranx, the value of the various pro- 
l)osed subdivisions of the latter group not being evident. 

The example from which the preceding description w\as taken has 
been presented to the United States National Museum, where it is num- 
bered 27372. 

I present a table of comparative measurements of the type Caranx 
beani and of one of Poey's types of C. cihi. 



488 PROCEEDINGS OF UI^ITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Tnhlc of measurements. 



Species . . 
Locality 



Extreme length 

Length to end of caudal armature . 
Body : 

Greatest height 

Greatest width 

Height at ventrals 

Least height of tail 

Length ot' caudal peduncle 

Head: 

Greatest length 

Distance from snout to nape . . 

Gieatest width 

Width of interorbital area . . . 

Length of snout 

Length of the operculum 

Lcugtli of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal (spinous) : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Greatest height 

( Soft) length of base 

Height at longest ray 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at first free spine 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal: • 

Length of middle rays 

Length of external rays 

Pectoral: 

Length 

Ventral: 

Length 

Dorsal 

Anal 

Number of plates in lateral line . . . 



Caranx beani. 
Beaufort, N. C. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



6.85 
5.48 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



Caranx cibi. 
Cuba. 



Inches 

and 
lOOths. 



11.00 
9.00 



30 

27 

15 

Hi 

lOi 

8 
14 
16 

9 

43 
17 
9 
38 
13 

63 

38 
4 
11 



13 

VIII-I, 20 

II-I, 22 

25 



lOOths 

of 
length. 



100 

33 
14 
30 
4 
10 

30 



10 
10 

8 

Hi 

15 

7 



10 

34i 
12i 



31 

2i 



34 

11 

VIII-I, 25 

II-I, 22 

29 



Indiana State University, 

Bloomington, Ind., November 10, 1880. 



OIV A COIil^ECTIOlV OF FISHES FKO.n FASTFKN ITIBSSISSSPPI.'^ 

By O. p. HAY. 

The collection of fishes which it is the object of the present paper to 
describe was made almost wholly by the author, while on a trip along 
the eastern side of the State of Mississi])pi, during- the latter part of 
March and the early part of April of the present year, 1880. The route 
taken was along the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, and extended from 
Corinth, near the northern line of the State, to Shubuta, a town about 
one hundred miles north of Mobile. Stojjs were made along this line of 
travel of from a few hours to four or five days. The conditions for col- 



*A full series of these has beeupreseuted to the National Museuui. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 489 

lecting were usually very unfavorable, on account of high water and the 
superabundance of logs and snags. Nevertheless, I succeeded in col- 
lecting altogether 53 species. Three additional species, and additional 
specimens of several species that I had already secured, have since been 
sent me by Mr. William A. Warner, of Enterprise. 

Of the 56 species named in the succeeding pages, I describe 15 as 
new — 7 of them in the fiimily of Uthcostomatidce, and 8 in Cyprinidcc. 
Little has yet been done in the way of determining the fish fauna of this 
and some of the other Southern States, where so rich a field is offered to 
the naturalist. 

At Corinth a few draws were made with the seine in a little stream 
that runs near the railway depot. This stream is a branch of the Tus- 
curabia, which eventually emi)ties into the Mississipi)i through the Big 
Hatch ee. 

At Artesia, in Lowndes County, my collecting was done in Catawba 
Creek and its branches and ponds. This creek flows into the Tibbyhah, 
itself an affluent of the Tombigbee. South of this point, I next fished 
at Macon, in Koxubee County, on the i^"oxubee lliver. The river itself 
was too high to enter, and I had to content myself with working the 
l)onds and Horsehunter Creek, which at this point flows into the i^ox- 
ubee. 

At Narkeeta, in Kemper County, I saw a few "Sunfishes" taken from 
the Sucarnochee Eiver, a tributary of the Tombigbee. 

At Enterprise, in Clarke County, my collecting was done in the Chick- 
asawha Eiver and its branches, near the town. I have in my collection 
from that place 33 species. One species was caught with a hook from 
the same stream at Shubuta, in the south part of the same county. Fur- 
ther south this river joins the Leaf, to form the Pascagoula, which flows 
into the Gulf. 

I have not in this paper attempted to discuss the geographical distri- 
bution of the species obtained, as this I consider useless until a much 
more complete survey of the State has been made. This I hope to be 
able to do at some future time. At the end of this paper 1 subjoin a 
list of the species obtained at each of the localities that I have named. 

Types of the new species described have been furnished the ISTational 
Museum, as well as duplicates of most of the others. Duplicates of some 
of the new species have also been placed in Professor Jordan's collection. 
The remainder of the collection is the property of Butler University, at 
Indianapolis, Indiana. 

I take pleasure in acknowledging my indebtedness to Prof. D. S. Jor- 
dan for various suggestions made in reference to the species herein 
named, as well as for general aid obtained from his numerous papers ou 
the fresh- water fishes of our country. 



490 proceedings of united states national museum. 

Family ETHEOSTOMATID^. 
Genus AMMOCRYPTA, Jordan. ' 

1. Ammocrypta gelida, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,425, U. S. Nat. Mus.) 

General form of the body that of P. pellucidus (Bd.) Ag.; terete, slen- 
der, and in life almost transparent. Head pointed. Mouth terminal, 
larger than in P. pellucidus^ the maxillary bone extending back to a ver- 
tical from the anterior of the orbit. 

Jaws armed with large, cnrva^d teeth. Ej es high np, 4 in the head, 
less than the length of the snout. 

Cheeks and opercles naked. Opercular spine absent, the bone termi- 
nating behind in a thin and obtuse process. 

Body almost naked ; about three rows of pectinated scales along the 
lateral line, 05 scales in each row. 

The rays of the median lins as follows : T>. X, 11 ; A. I, 10 or 9. Dor- 
sals separated. Length of spinous dorsal eight-ninths that of the head, 
and four-fifths as high as long. Soft dorsal three-fourths the length of 
the head, and two-thirds as high as long. Anal, in length, slightly less 
tlian soft dorsal, aiid a little less iu height than in length. 

Head in the length to base of caudal 4 ; depth in length 7 J. 

Color of the body in spirits white ; in life translucent, with a golden 
yellow band along each side. Head above dusky, from being thickly 
sprinkled with black points. A few such points are scattered over the 
whole dorsal surface. Spinous dorsal with a black spot about half way 
up iu front. Soft dorsal, anal, and caudal slightly dusky. i!>fo spots 
along the sides or dorsal region. 

Length to base of caudal 1| inches. 

Found in the Chickasawha Eiver at Enterprise. It seems to prefer a 
sandy bottom. 

The description of this species seems to agree pretty well with that of 
Ammocrypta heanii, published by Professor Jordan in Bulletin No. 10 of 
the United States National ]\Iuseum. Judging from his description, 
however, my species is slenderer and has a head comparatiA'ely shorter. 
A. heanii has depth in length 6, head 3f . The fin formula is also differ- 
ent, being in his species D. X, 10 ; A. I, 0. The coloration of the spinous 
dorsal is different. Nor do I observe that the soft dorsal and anal tins 
of my species are notably higher than they are in specimens of P. pellu- 
cidus. 

To the generic characters given by Professor Jordan in his description 
of A. heanii I will add that of the complete absence of an oi)ercular 
spine. This spine is wanting in no other Etheostomoid fishes known 
to me, although it is feebly developed in Microperca puiictulata. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 491 

Genus PEECIKA, Hald. 



■"^ 



2. Percina caprodes (Raf.) Grd. (No. 27,424, U. S. Nat. Mus.) 

Fercina cajrrodes, Jord.^n, Auuals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 312 (Synonomy) 
A siugle specimen of the "Hog-fish", taken from the Chickasawha, 
has been sent me by Mr. W, A. Warner. 

Genus HADROPTERUS, Agassiz. 

3. Hadropterus spillmani, Hay, sp. uov. (No. 27,432.) 

Body elongated, compressed. Head in the length about 4 times. 
Depth in the length, exclusive of the caudal fin, 5 times. Eye equal to 
snout, and one-fourth the length of the head. 

Lateral line witl\ from 50 to GO scales, G ro\YS above and 9 below. A 
row of enlarged, non-deciduous, ctenoid plates along the middle of the 
belly. Cheeks and opercles scaled. The whole chest covered with 
small plates or scales. 

The fin-rays as follows : D. XII, 12 ; A. II, 9. Spinous dorsal about 
nine-tenths as long- as the head, and one-half as high as long; soft dor- 
sal three-fifths as long as the head, and five-sixths as liigh as long ; anal 
equal in length to the soft dorsal, and about as high as long. Ventrals 
and pectorals reaching back about to the same i)oint, two-thirds the dis- 
tance from the base of the ventrals to the vent. Caudal fin truncated. 
Spinous and soft dorsals well separated. 

The snout is rather pointed; upper jaw not protractile ; mouth moder- 
ate, the maxilhuy reaching back to a vertical from the anterior of the 
orbit. Teeth on jaws, vomer, aijd palatines. Mouth slightly oblique. 

The general color is dark above, reddish yellow below. The sides are 
crossed by about a dozen brown bands, which are broadest along the 
lateral line, where coalescing- they form a dark horizontal band. This 
band becomes narrower and better defined on the head, and is contin- 
ued along the upper edge of the opercle and cheek, through the eye, to 
the tip of the snout. A harrow dark line runs downward and forward 
from the lower edge of the orbit. There are three well-defined spots at 
the base of the caudal fin. 

The vertical fins are blotched more or less with dusky colors ; the 
ventrals are bluish black, while the pectorals are lighter. 

The cheeks and the occipital region are pale in color ; the snout and 
interorbital space are bluish black. 

Length, exclusive of caudal fin, 3 inches. 

This species is allied to S. nigrofasciatus, a description of which is 
given by Professor Jordan in the Ann. X. Y. Lye. Xat. Hist. 1877, 310. 
Judging from a comparison of my specimens with his description, I 
think that they evidently belong to a distinct species. 

Several specimens of this handsome fish were caught with small 
hooks in a branch fiowing into the Chickasawha at Enterprise. 1 dedi- 
cate it to mv friend Rev. William Spillman, M. D., of Enterp)ise, who 



402 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

lias spent a long life in scientific labors in the South, and who has 
thereby done much to increase our knowledge of the geology and nat- 
ural history of his own and neighboring States. 

Genus BOLBOSOMA, DeKay. 

4. Boleosoma maculatum, Agassiz. (No. 27, 443.) 

B. hrcvipinne, Cope, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1870, 268. 

A single specimen of a Boleosoma was obtained in Horsehunter Creek 
at Macon. An examination indicates that it is B. maculatum^ although 
it does not agree wholly with descriptions of that species. It is much 
paler than specimens of that species obtained in the streams about 
Indianai)olis. There are no dark bars on the back, and the spots usually 
found along the lateral line are not as conspicuous aa common. The tin 
formula is D. VIII, 12 ; A. I, 8. Lateral line 50. 

1 do not believe that the sei)aration of B. olmstedi and B. maculatum 
as distinct species can be maintained. The characters most relied on in 
distinguishing them are the diiierence in length of the soft dorsal, the 
difference in the number of scales along the lateral line, and the smooth- 
ness or scaliness of the cheeks. I have examined specimens in the 
State collection at Normal, 111., labeled B. maculatum, that appear to 
combine these characters m all sorts of ways. Some have scaled cheeks, 
55 vertical rows of scales, and dorsal fin-rays X, VI. Another specimen 
noted has scaled cheeks, 48 rows of scales, and dorsal rays VIII, 11. 
Another has bare cheeks, 53 scales, dorsal IX, 12. Another, bare 
cheeks, 40 scales, dorsal rays IX, 13. Specimens there labeled B. 
olmstedi seem to be in no way different.* 

As to color, I have specimens from Western Illinois that are almost 
black, esi)ecially the head, the vertical and the ventral fins. These are 
males .in their breeding dress, but they appear to be unusually dark. 

Genus i^ANOSTOMA, Putnam. 

5. Nanostoma zonale (Coiie) Jordan. (No. 27,417.) 

PmcUichthys zonalis, Cope, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1869, 212. 
Nanosloma zonule, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 6, 1877. 

Two specimens of this beautiful species were seined in a shallow and 
sandy creek flowing into the Chickasawha Eiver at Enterprise. They 
differ in no way from described specimens, except that none of the 
transverse bands anterior to the anal fin i3ass around the lower part of 
the body. Even in this respect they are like a specimen mentioned by 
Cope from the Miami River, in Indiana. The belly, throat, and spaces 
between the bars below the lateral line are, in spirits, pure white. 

* Since the above lines were penned I have received the October number of the 
American Naturalist, from ^vhich I learn that Prof. S. A. Forbes, of the Illinois State 
Laboratory of Natural History, in his interesting article on "The Food of the Darters", 
regards the two so-called species as identical. Professor Jordan also informs me that 
he now considers the two forms as merely " subspecies". 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 493 
6. Nanostoma elegans, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,445.) 

Body stout and somewhat compressed. Head short and deep, with 
swollen cheeks. The snout is turned abruptly downward. The moutli 
is subtenninal, horizontal, and small, the maxillary not reaching back 
to the vertical from the anterior of the orbit. Upper jaw not protractile. 
Eye in the head 4 times. 

Head in the length to caudal (as in all measurements in this paper) 4 
times ; depth in length 5. Depth of caudal peduncle twice in its length ; 
this equal to three tenths of the length of the body. 

Eows of scales 5-42-G. Lateral line complete, nearly straight. 

The formula of the vertical fins is D. X, 12 ; A. II, 8. The spinous 
dorsal slightly longer than the head, and half as high as long. Soft 
dorsal five-sixths as long as the head, and two-thirds as high as long. 
Anal three-fourths the length of the head, and as high as long, the pos- 
terior rays being the longest. 

The pectoral fins are very wide and long, reaching beyond the tips of 
the ventrals and to t^e vent. Caudal fin emarginate. 

Cheeks, opercles, and back of the neck scaly ; the chest and the re- 
gion just behind the ventrals naked. Gill-membrane broadly connected 
across the breast. 

The general color of the body, after lying in spirits, is purple. Along 
the back are six large square blotches of black, and along the sides 
about eight broad transverse bars of the same color, but fainter; these 
least distinct forward. Along the lateral line, alternating with the 
transverse bars, are a number of spots, which, in the case of my largest 
specimen, are of a more intense color than the bars. These spots con- 
nect the bars, and with them form a dark lateral band. 

Besides these markings, many of the scales, both within and outside 
the dark bars, principally above the lateral line, but also below, have 
at their base a jet-black dot. These dots are so arranged as to form 
somewhat regular longitudinal lines. At the extremity of the caudal 
peduncle there is a small black spot just above the last transverse bar, 
and another below it. There are a few black spots behind the eye; a 
dark bar running from the eye downward, and another from the eye 
forward to the snout. 

Ventral and anal fins indigo-blue. Some of the same color on the 
])ectorals- In life there is a bar of deep orange or red ruunhig along 
the base of both dorsals. The tips of the ventral rays in some speci- 
mens, males perhajis, are swollen. 

Length of longest specimen 2i inches. 

Taken in a shallow, rocky, and sandy branch of the CMckasawha 
River at Enteri^rise. 

The small, subinferior mouth, little compressed body, and widely con- 
nected gill-membrane ally this species to JSfanostoma. The dorsal fins 
are separated as in Nothonotus. 



494 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Genus PCECILICHTHYS, Agassiz. 

7. PcEcilichthys artesias, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,434.) 

In this species the body is more elongated than usual, and consider- 
ably compressed. The head is large and contained in the length to 
caudal fin 3^ times ; depth in length 5 times. Caudal peduncle con- 
tained in the length of the body'4J; its depth one-half its length. 

Mouth large, the maxillary reaching to a vertical from the pui>il, 
terminal, nearly horizontal; the lower jaw slightly shorter than the up- 
per. Gill-membrane rather broadly connected across the breast. 

The eye equal to the snout, and contained in the head 4J times. The 
cheeks are wholly covered with small scales, resembling in this respect 
P. asprigeniSj Forbes, from Central Illinois. The opercles are covered 
with large scales. The scales on the region between the occiput and 
the dorsal fin are very small. 

There are along the sides about 50 vertical rows of scales, 8 horizontal 
rows above the lateral line and 11 below. The lateral line extends 
slightly behind the posterior end of the soft dorsal, being absent on 
about 10 or 12 scales. Just above the base of the i)ectoral fin, on each 
side, there is an enlarged black scale. 

The two dorsals are contiguous, the membrane of the first reaching 
the second. The fin-rays are, D. XI, 13 ; A. II, 7. The length of the 
first dorsal, measured from the first to the la-vSt spine, equal to the length 
of the head ; its height less than half its length. The soft dorsal seven- 
ninths the length of the head ; its height about four-fifths its length. 
The anal is in length a YiUlo more than one-half the length of the head; 
its height also one-half the iK^ad. 

The j)ectoral and ventral fins reach backward to the same point. The 
pectorals are much smaller than in P. cocrulcus (Stor.) Ag., reaching 
back only three-fifths the distance from their origin to the vent, while 
in that species they extend backward four-fifths this distance. 

Color. — Sides yellowish olive, with indications of transverse and 
oblique bars of dark, and sprinkled with many small blotches of car- 
mine. Pectorals and ventrals dull blue. Dorsals with a broad band of 
carmine running along the middle, bordered on each side with orange. 
The tips of the dorsals dull blue, as is also the base of the soft dorsal. 
Base of the spinous dorsal with several blotches of carmine. Anal 
mostly crimson, tipped with blue. Caudal first' blue, then orange, then 
carmine, followed by orange, and tipped with blue. The iris is yellow. 

Length of the only specimen obtained 2^ inches. 

From a small branch flowing into the Catawba, itself tributary to the 
Tombigbee. 

A brilliant little fish, attracting by its bright colors the eye at a dis- 
tance of many feet. 

The palatine ^eeth of this species form a broad band, whereas in 
P. cocruleus they are few in number and in a single row. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 405 

8. Poecilichthys saxatilis, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,433.) 

In my collection there is a single specimen of another PceciUcJithys 
that appears to be undescribed. It measures but 1| inches in leagth. 
The lateral line is incomplete, but extends as far back as the posterior 
rays of the soft dorsal, being found on 35 scales and not arched over the 
pectorals. There are about 50 vertical rows of scales and 11 horizontal 
rows, 5 above the lateral line and 6 below. 

The opercula have a few large scales, but the cheeks are naked. The 
breast and throat are bare. 

The dorsal and anal fin-rays are as follows : D. XI, 10 ; A. II, 7. The 
spinous dorsal equals the head in its length, and is one-half as high as 
long. 

The soft dorsal is two-thirds as long as the head, and as high as long. 
The dorsals are separated by a space equal to one-half the head. The 
anal, in height and length, is equal to nearly one-half the length of the 
head. 

The head is contained 4 times in the length of the body, the depth 5 
times, and the caudal peduncle 3.J times. The head is narrow and 
pointed ; the profile descends in a gradual curve. The mouth is hori- 
zontal, terminal, and large, the maxillary extending back to a vertical 
from the anterior edge of the pupil. The eye is equal to the snout, and 
is contained in the head 4 times. Upper jaw non-iirotractile. 

In color the specimen in my possession rather resembles a Boleosoma 
or a Boleiclithys than a typical PoecilicJithys. Above, the ground color is 
yellowish olive, below pale. On the dorsal region are about six square 
brown spots. Along the sides there are about eight somewhat ^V-shaped 
spots of the same color, between which and the dorsal blotches are many 
specks of brown arranged in zigzag lines. A black streak before the eye 
and another below it. Opercle mostly black. An enlarged black lui- 
meral scale on each side. All the fins, except the anal, more or less 
barred with dusky. 

Found at Enterprise in a rocky and sandy stream flowing into the 

Chickasawha. 

Genus YAILLANTIA, Jordan. 

9. Vaillantia chlorosoma, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,428.) 

Body slender, compressed, and the dorsal region much arched. At 
the vent the body is suddenly contracted into the long and slender cau- 
dal peduncle, which (measuix^d from the posterior anal ray to base of 
caudal fin) is contained in the whole length of the body 3^ to 3.} times, 
and has a depth one-third its length. The head is small, pointed, and 
contained in the length from 4^ to 4£ tiuies. Eye in the head 4. Up- 
per jaw protractile. Mouth horizontal, moderate, subinferior, the upper 
jaw overlapping the lower. The depth of the body in its length from 
5 to 5i times 

There are from 50 to CO vertical rows of scales, and about 12 horizon- 
tal rows between the soft dorsal and anal. The lateral line is found uu 



496 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITKD STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

from 4 to 20 or more of the scales. Cheeks and opercles scaled. Eegion 
in front of pectoral and ventral fins sometimes scaled and sometimes 
naked. 

The fin-rays are, D. IX, 11 (10) ; A. I, 7 or 8. The dorsals are sepa- 
rated by a distance eqnal to one-half the length of the head, or more. 
The spinous dorsal is five-sevenths as long as the head, and four-fifths 
as high as long. The soft dorsal has about the same dimensions. The 
anal is equal to one-half the head in length and height. 

In color this species is of a i^ale greenish yellow, with many blotches 
and zigzag markings of brown. There is a row of about ten of these 
blotches on each side, most distinct on the caudal i)eduncles. Also 
there are about eight square brown spots along the dorsal region. To]) 
of the head, a spot on the ojierculum, and another below the eye, dark ; 
a line of the same color, but more distinct, from the eye to the snout. 

Length of the largest specimen 1"^ inches. 

This species appears to be widely distributed, as I obtained it at Cor- 
inth in a small stream that flows into the Tuscumbia, at Artesia in Sandy 
Creek, and at Macon in Horsehunter Creek. 

The characters of this species appear to agree in many respects with 
those of Boleosoma gracile, Girard, described in the Proc. Acad. Nat. 
Sci. Phila. 1859, 103. Girard's specimens were from Southwest Texas. 
In B. gracile, however, the spinous dorsal is described as being longer 
and lower than the soft dorsal, and the anal as being much deeper than 
long, which statements do not well apply to Boleichthys chlorosoma. I 
am also informed by Professor Jordan that the jaw of B. gracile is non- 
protractile. 

The species that I have above described belongs to Professor Jor- 
dan's genus Vaillantia (Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 12, 89), the type of 
which is Boleosoma camurum, Forbes. From that species it difi'ers, 
among other things, in having the two dorsals widely separated. In B. 
camurum they are contiguous. 

Genus MICROPEECA, Putnam. 

10. Microperca proeliaris, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,418.) 

The species about to be described may j)ossibly belong to the genus 
Boleichthys. 1 have but a single specimen, which has a total length of 
1^ inches. It was obtained at Corinth, and wa« at first supposed to be 
a specimen of V. chlorosoma. 

The body is rather short and stout, the depth being contained in the 
length a little more than 4 times. Behind the vent the body becomes 
contracted into the caudal peduncle, Avhich is compressed and contained 
in the length of the body 3 times. Its median depth is one-third its 
length. 

The head is contained in the length 4 times. The snout conical and 
X^oiuted. The jaws are equal, the upjier not protractile; the mouth 



TROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 497 

termiual, slightly oblique, and ratlier small. The maxillary reaches 
back to a vertical from the anterior of the orbit. The eye is small 4 
iu head, and greater than the snout. Cheeks and opercles covered with 
large scales. Opercular spine well (leveloi)ed. 

The scales of the body are large, there being only 3G vertical and 11 
horizontal rows, the latter counted between the dorsal and anterior of 
anal. The lateral line is found on but two scales anteriorly. Fin-rays, 
I). Ylir, 11; A. I, C. Anal II, G, in a specimen of the same species 
from Alabama in the U. S. Nat. Mus. {Jide Jordan). The two dorsals 
are well separated. Spinous dorsal two-thirds the length of the head, 
its height a little more than one-half the head. Soft dorsal with about 
the same dimensions. Anal spine slender and of moderate length. 
Length of anal 3 times in the head; its height twice its length. Pec- 
torals and ventrals reaching nearly to the vent. 

Color greenish olive, with many spec]i:s of brown. These brown 
specks somewhat in rows above the place for the lateral line. About 
ten oblong spots of brown along the sides, most distinct above the anal 
tin. Below, white. The usual black streaks below and in front of the 
eye. Dorsal tins somewhat barred. 

The general appearance of this little fish is that of a Boleichthys, but 
the very short lateral line, large scales, equal jaws, &c., seem to ally it 
most closely to Microperca. From the latter it differs in having but a 
single anal spine and the beginnings of a lateral line. Since, however, 
this "lateral line" is found on the opercle of M. punctnlata, it would 
not be surprising if it should be sometimes, even in that species, found 
on cue or two of the anterior scales. 



Family CENTRARCIIID^. 
Genus MICROPTERUS, Lacepede. 

11. Micropterus pallidas (Raf.) Gill & Jor. (No. 27,450.) 

Htiro ni[/rwans, DeKay, Fauna N. Y. Fishes, 1842, 15. 
Micropterus nigricans. Cope, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila, 1865, 8;j. 
DiopVites nuecensis, GiRARU, U. S. Pac. R. R. Sm'v. vol, x, 4, 
Micropterus pallidus, Jordan', Annals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 314. 

This species is abundant everywhere, and is esteemed as one of the best 
food-fishes. It is called' " Trout ", instead of "Bass", as at the North. 

The young are conspicuously marked by a darlc, sometimes inter- 
rupted, lateral band. This is sometimes found also in the adults. 
There is often a small patch of feeble teeth on the tongue of both this 
species and M. salmoides. 

Specimens were obtained in the Catawba at Artesia, and in the 
Chickasawha at Enterprise. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 32 Feb. 36, fl 8 8 1 . 



498 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Genus AMBLOPLITES, Eaf. 

12. Ambloplitesrupestris (Rat.) Gill. (No. 27,4r)l.) 

Centrarchits pectacanilms, DeKay, Fauua N. Y. Fishes, 1842, 30. 
Amhloplites ccneus, Giuaiid, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 8, pi. i. 

A fine specimen of this species was taken in tlie Cbickasawha at En- 
terprise. Another has since been sent me by Mr. Warner. 

' Genus CH^^XOBRYTTUS, Gill. 

13. Chcenobryttus gulosu.s (C. & V.) Gill. (No. 27,459.) 

CaUiunis melanops, GiRAi^D, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 11, pi. iii. 
Cho'.nobrijttus gulosiis, Cope, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1805, 81.— Joisdan, 
Aunals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 381. 

A single specimen of this was obtained at Enterprise. It has many 
of the characteristics assigned bj^ Professor Jordan to Ch. viridis. This 
latter species is attributed by him to the region from Yirgi]iiato Florida. 

In the specimen which I caught the coloration is quite dark, being a 
reddish brown. Most of the scales have a dark spot in the center. This 
spot, on a few of the scales aloug the sides, is (piite conspicuous. The 
fins are dark in color, the soft dorsal, especially belund, being- marke<l 
with spots. The base of the anal is also obsoletely spotted. Tii)s of 
soft dorsal and anal in life bright red. Lower jaw and snout livid blue. 
The specimen agrees well with Girard's Calliurns melanops. I thiuk it 
not unlikely that Ch. gulosus and viridis will turn out to be varieties of 
the same species. 

Genus APOMOTIS, Eafinesque. 

14. Apomotis cyanellus (Raf.) Jordan. (No. 27,449.) 

Calliurux formosKS, Giuakd, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 14, pi. v, ligs. 1-4. 
Apomotis cyanellus, Jokdax, Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv. vol. iv, No. 2, 398. 

I obtained si^ecimens of this widely distributed species from Catawba 
Creek at Artesia, and from the Noxubee at Macon. 

Genus LEPOMIS, Ratinesque. 

15. Lepomis pallidu.s (MitcMU) Gill & Jordan. (No. 27,457.) 

I'omoiis incisor, DeKay, Fauna N. Y. Fishes, 1842, 33. 
romotls sjjcciosus, GiRAr.D, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 23, pi. viii, figs. 5-S. 
Lcpiopomus paJlidus, Joudax, Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv. vol. iv. No. 2, 397. 
Lepiopomis incisor, Goode & Bean, Proc. U. S. Nat. I\Ius. 1879, 139. 

Numerous specimens of the above species were obtained in Catawba 
Creek at Artesia, Noxubee River at Macon, and in the Chickasawha at 
Enterprise. 

16. Lepoinis obscurus (Ag.) Jordan. (No. 27,4.")8.) 

Ponioiis ohscurits, Agassiz, Amor. Jouru. Sci. and Arts, 18u4, 302. 
Lepiopomis ohscurus, Jordan, Annals N. Y. Lj'c. Nat. Hist. 1S77, 317. 

A fine example of this species, 6 inches long, was obtained with the 
hook from Sucarnochee Creek at Narkeeta, a station on the Mobile and 
Ohio Railroad. 



rROCEEDIXGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 499 

This species is distinct from L. jmllidus, althougli closely related to it. 
The color is much darker. Each scale has in its center a dark spot, 
longest up and down. The opercular flap is longer and more abruptly 
formed than in L. palUdiis. The opercular flap, measuring from where 
the scales cease, is equal to the diameter of the eye, while in L. palUdtis 
it is equal to only two-thirds the eye's diameter. The pectoral and ven- 
tral fins reach fully to the first anal spine. 

17. Lepomis fallax (B. & G.) Hay. (No. 27,456.) 

Pomoiis falhix aud conrexifrons, B. &G. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 18.54,24. 
Fomolisfallax, Giuard, Pac. K. 11. Surv. vol. x, 27, pi. ix, fig. 5. 

While at Enterprise I obtained some small specimens of a Sunfish 
which belongs to Professor Jordan's genus Xenotis. i saw several adult 
specimens, but could procure none from their captors, who took profes- 
sional iiride in their long "strings''. My attention was especially 
attracted to this fish by its immense opercular flap. Since returning 
home, Mr. William A. Warner, of Enterprise, has kindly sent me addi- 
tional material, and, among other things, a specimen of this fish, having 
a total length of G inches. After a careful study of this species my con- 
clusion is that it is the Pomotis fallax of Baird and Girard, described 
from Northern Texas. The agreement with the description and figures 
given in the Pacific Railroad Survey Report is very close indeed. Fig. 
5, pi. ix, gives a very good although somewhat reduced representation 
of my largest specimen. 

Xenotis soils, Gill & Jor. (Bull. U. S. N"at. Mus. No. 10, 22), not Pomotis 
soils, C. & V. (see Proc. U. S. Xat. IMus. 1879, 225), is a more elongate 
species, the greatest depth being contained 2^ times in the length in- 
stead of 2, as in my specimens. The eye of that species is contained 
in the flap U times instead of 2, as in tliis. The flap of that is coritained 
2J times in the rest of the head instead of 2 times, as in this. In that 
there are "about 5 rows [of scales] above and 11 below" the lateral line; 
in this there is one more both above and below. 

From P. hrcvieeps, B. & G., it ai)pears to dift'er in having a larger eye, 
a more anterior dorsal fin, and longer ventral fins; from X. megalotis, 
in that the body is not so heavy anteriorly. 

I cannot give a description of the colors in life, except that they are 
brilliant. In spirits the body above is yellowish brown, the scales being 
dark-edged ; fins dusky, narrow blue stripes on the cheeks ; fla]) jet- 
black, with a pale edge. 

Professor Jordan informs me that he now regards L. fallax as simply 
a variety of L, mefjalotis. I have not had the opportunity to examine 
enough material to enable me to satisfv myself of the correctness of 
this conclusion. He also discards the genus Xcnotes. 



500 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Genus CENTRAECHUS, Cmier. 

18. Centrarchus irideus (Lac.) C. & V. 

C. irideus, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mns. No. 10, 31. 

At Narkeeta, on the Mobile and Ohio Railroad, I saw a specimen of 
Centrarchus taken from the Sucarnochee Eiver, but was not able to pro- 
cure it. From an examination made at the time I regard it as being" 
C irideus. It appeared, however, to have some of the characters of 
G. maeropterus; there being, for instance, 8 anal spines instead of 7, the 
usual number.* 

Genus POMOXYS, Eaflnesque. 

19. Pomoxys nigromaculatus (Le S.) Girard. (No. 27,401.) 

Centrarchus liexacanihus, DeKay, Fauua N. Y. Fishes, vol. iv, 1842, 31. 
Fomoxls nigromaculatus, Girard, Pac. E. R. Surv. vol. x, 6. 

Numerous specimens of this were taken from Horsehunter Creek at 
Macon. Both this and the next are much sought after as food and to 
stock fish-ponds. 

20. Pomoxys annularis, Rafmesque. (No. 27,400.) 

Fomoxis annularis andnitidus, Girard, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 6. 

Same locality as above. 

Family ELASSOMATID^. 
Genus ELASSOMA, Jordan. 

21. Elassoma zonatum, Jordan. (No. 27,4.52.) 

Elassoma zonatum, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mas. No. 10. .'0: Bull. 111. Lab. 
Nat. Hist. No. 2, 47. 

Two specimens of this interesting species were secured in a pond 
along the Noxubee Eiver at Macon. The largest was 1^' inches in 
length, somewhat larger than the sj)ecimens hitherto found. After care- 
ful search I have been unable to find any evidences of the existence of 
vomerine teeth in this species. The fin-formula is, D. I ; Y, 10; A. Ill, 5 
or 0. The scales are very small and difficult to count. As nearly as I 
^'.ould make out, there are 42 vertical rows and 18 or 20 horizontal rows 
between anal and dorsal. The pseudobranchiai are obsolete. 



* Since tliis paper has gone to press, Professor Jordan writes nie that he is no^v sat- 
isfied that C. maeropterus and C. irideus are identical, and that as the term maeropterus 
has the priority, it must he accei)ted as the name of the species. He had already, in 
his "Catalogue of the Fishes of Illinois," published in Bull. No. '2, 111. Ijab. Nat. Hist., 
expressed the opinion that they might have to be merged into one. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 501 

Family APHREDODERIDtE. 
Genus APHREDODERUS, Le Sueur. 

22. Aphredoderus sayanus (Gilliaiiis) DeKay. 

AphredoderuH myanus, DeKay, Fauna N. Y. Fishes, 35. 

Aplwdoderus isolepsis (Nels.) Jordax, Bull. 111. Lab. Nat. Hist. No. 2, 48. 

Aphrodedirus cookianus, Jordan, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pliila. 1877, 60. 
A single small specimen was obtained at Macon. All the names 
cited above belong to varieties of the same species. DeKay mentions 
that this species occurs at New Orleans. 

Family CYPRINODONTID^. 
Genus ZYGONECTES, Agassiz. 

23. Zygonectes notatus (Raf.) Jordan. (No. 27,444.) 

Zjioonectes notatus, JoRDAK, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 9, 47. 

Many fine specimens of this species were taken. I have them from 
Corinth, Artesia, Macon, and Enterprise. This and the succeeding 
species are seen almost everywhere, especially in quiet waters, swim- 
ming near the surface. One of my specimens from Enterprise is 3 
inches long to the caudal, or a total of 3J inches. 

The color is translucent yellowish green above, silvery white below, 
with a broad, dentate, lateral band of black. There are four or five 
longitudinal rows of black dots above the lateral baud, especially con- 
spicuous in specimens from Enterprise. The fins are golden, the dorsal 
and caudal dotted with black. 

24. Zygonectes raelanops (Cope) Jordan. (No. 27,427.) 

HaplocliUm melanops, Cope, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1870, 457. 
Zi/gonectci mclanops, Jordan, Bull. 111. Lab. Nat. Hist. No. 2, 52. 

Many of these little fishes were seined in the ponds and rivulets along 
Catawba Creek in the vicinity of Artesia, and in Ilorsehunter Creek 
near Macon. They correspond closely with Professor Cope's description 
cited above. This species appears to have a very wide distribution. It 
was originally described by Professor Cope from the Neuse River, in 
North Carolina. It was next discovered in Southern Illinois by Prof. 
S. A. Forbes, the accomplished superiutendent of the Illinois State 
Laboratory of Natural History. I have now the pleasure of announcing 
its occurrence at points much farther south. 

Family IIYODONTID^. 
Genus HYODON, Le Sueur. 

25. Hyodon selenops, Jordan & Bean. (No. 27,455.) 

Ht/odon sehiwps, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, f)7. 
This beautiful species appears to be abundant in the Chickasawha 
Elver. At Enterprise, where I saw a number taken from the water 



502 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

with hooks, they are called "Hickory Shad". They are not esteemed 
very highly as a meaus for gratifying the palate. This species is 
reported from the Tennessee and Cumberland Eivers. 

Family CLUPEID^. 
Genus CLUPEA, Artedi. 

26. Clupea chrysochloris (Raf.) Jor. (No. 27,453.) 

Pomolohns eltrysochloris, Rai<"inesque. 

A single specimen of this species has been sent me by Mr. William 
A. Warner, of Enterprise. 

Genus DOROSOMA, Eafinesque. 

27. Dorosoma cepedianum (Le S.) Gill. (No. 27,454.) 

Dorosoma cej)ediana, Jordan, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pbila. 1877, 69; subsp. 
heterurum, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 65. 

Several specimens of this sj^ecies were caught while seining a deep 
l)ond along the Noxubee liiver near IMacon. I do not tind that the 
characters assigned by Professor Jordan to the variety heterurum exist in 
my specimens, unless it be that of the long filamentous ray of the dorsal 
fin. Even this distinction does not always hold good. I find no partic- 
ular differences between my largest specimen, S^ inches long, and a 
specimen of the same size from the Potomac. 

Family CYPRINID^E. 
Genus HYBOEHYNCHUS, Agassiz. 

28. Hyborhynchusnotatus (Raf.) Ag. (No. 27,441.) 

Hiihorhijnclius notatns, Copp:, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1869, 392. 
A single specimen obtained at Corinth ; many in the waters about 
Artesia and ]Macon. In their coloration some of the specimens that I 
obtained are different from any that I have seen from other localities 
and from any descriptions that have fallen under ray eye. These i^eculi- 
arities of color are observed only in the largest individuals, those 2J 
inches in length. Some of these are quite brown, this color l)eing pro- 
duced by each scale having a black border. The head is blue-black, of 
varyiug degrees of intensity, being in some cases almost jet-black. 
There is a deep black band occupying the whole upper half of the dorsal 
fin. The greater part of the caudal fin is also black, the base and tip 
only being light. There is sometimes a black spot near the tip of the 
posterior rays of the anal fin. In many of these dark-colored specimens 
the dark lateral band usually seeu in this species is either obsolete or 
indistinct. These highly colored individuals are, no doubt, males in 
their wedding suits of black. The other party does not dress so gor- 
geously. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 503 

Genus HYBOGNATHUS, Agassiz. 

29. Hybognathus argyritis, Girard. (No. 27,431.) 

Byborjnathus argi/ritis, Giuaijd, Pac. Pt. R. Surv. vol. x, 235 ; Proc. Acad. Nat. 
Sci. Phila. 1856, 182, 

Specimens of this species were seined in JETorsehunter Creek at Macon, 
and in tlie Chickasawha Eiver at Enterprise. Some of these have a 
total length of -l.i inches. 

Genus ALBUEN^OPS, Girard. 

30. Alburnops taurocephalus, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,439.) 

This very interesting species resembles much Hyhorhynchiis uotatus, 
and therefore recalls strongh' Professor Cope's description of Ilijbopsu 
tuditanns, from Northern Indiana. (See Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 18G!), 381.) 
It is a true Hyhopsis, or Alburnops^ as indicated by the short alimentary 
canal and the close union of the spinous dorsal ray to the first soft dor- 
sal. The teeth are 4-4, hooked, compressed, and provided with a masti- 
catory surface. 

The body is stout, somewhat compressed, broad and flat above, with 
a deep and angulated caudal peduncle. The latter is contained in the 
body about Sj times. Its depth is one-half its length. The hcc-d is 
broad and flat above, and at the temporal region forms an angle with 
the cheeks. The breadth of the head behind the eyes is equal to the 
distance from the muzzle to the back of the orbit, and nearly two-thirds 
the length of the head. The muzzle is broad and obtuse ; but not so 
truncate as that of Hyhorhynchus notatiis, since the profde rounds grad- 
ually into the snout. 

The mouth is rather small, horizontal, and terminal ; the jaws about 
equal, the upper heavy. The maxillary hardly reaches a perpendicular 
from the anterior margin of the orbit. Eye large, 3^ in the head. Head 
in the length, exclusive of the caudal, U times. Depth about equal to 
the leugth of the head. 

Dorsal I, 8 ; A. I, 7. The dorsal begins above the ventrals, is longer 
than high, and has on the anterior rays, rather below the middle, a 
black spot. This fin commences nearer the snout than the caudal. The 
anal is small. 

The scales along the lateral line are rather large and silvery; the 
formula is 8-43-4. The scales in front of the dorsal fin are small, 
especially on the nape. 

In color this species is pale yellow, with a dusky tinge given it by 
inimerous black punctulations on each scale. The sides are silvery, as 
are also the cheeks and opercles. There is an obsolete dusky band 
along the lateral line, terminating at the base of the caudal in a small 
but distinct black spot. The top of the head and snout brown. 

Length of the largest specimen 3 inches, exclusive of caudal. 



504 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIOXxVL MUSEUM. 

From the Cliickasawha at Enterprise. Caught for bait for hirger 
fishes, ami called "Ball Heads". 

While this species mast resemble H. tudltanus, it evidently is distinct 
from it. The dorsal fin of that species is said to be markedly nearer to 
the candal than to the end of the mnzzle, while the contrary is trne in 
my si)ecies. If the horizontal rows of scales have been counted cor- 
rectly, and in the same way in both species, there is one more row above 
the lateral line in mine than in Professor Cope's sjiecies. The mouth in 
S. tuditcuius is said to be very small and inferior, as in Hyhoi^lujnclms 
notatus. The latter feature certainly does not belong to the present 
species. 

31. Albuniops longirostris, Hay, sp. no v. (No. 27,440.) 

The general appearance of this species is much like that of small 
specimens of Ericymha huccata. 

Head rather small, contained in the body 4^ times. Eye small, being 
contained in the head 4 times; not equaling the snout, which is one- 
third the length of the head. The upper jaw is rounded and much 
overlaps the lower jaw. The mouth, therefore, inferior, rather large, 
ho-rizontal. The maxillary- attains a vertical from the anterior of the 
orbit. Teeth 4-4, hooked, and having a tritarating surface. 

Lateral line somewhat decurved. Scales large, there being 30 along 
the lateral line, 4 horizontal rows above, and only 3 below. About 12 
large scales in front of the dorsal. Depth in length 4-| to 5. 

Origin of the dorsal fin midway between the tip of tlie snout and the 
base of the caudal and directly over the insertion of the ventrals. liays 
of dorsal I, 8; anal I, 7. Dorsal nearly twice as high anteriorly as long ; 
anal short and low. Caudal deeply forked, nearly one-fourth the length 
of the bodi". Pectorals far from reaching the ventrals ; these extend- 
ing fally to the vent. 

Caudal peduncle in body 3^ times; its greatest width nearly one-half 
its length. 

This fish is of a pale straw-color, slightly dusky from the brown edges 
of the scales. There is a very narrow, dark dorsal line; also an obso- 
lete lateral band just below the lateral line. Top of the head brown; 
the vertical fins dusky. 

Length of the largest specimen 2 inches. Seined in considerable 
numbers at Enterprise. Tlie females teem with eggs. 

32. Albarnops xaeaocsphalus, Jor. (No. 27,435.) 

Hyho-jsis xwnocephalus, Jordan, Anuals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, SS.'). 
Alhurnops xfvnocepliahis, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Geol. Surv., vol. iv. No. 2, 420 

Several specimens of a dark-colored minnow were seined at Enter- 
prise the resemblance of which to H. xcviiocephalus is so close that I have 
referred them to that species, so well described by Professor Jordan in 
his "l^'ishes of Upper Georgia". There are some difierences, however, 
that I have thought worthy of mention. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 505 

The body in my specimens is deeper, the depth being contained in the 
length but 4.1 times or less. The back does not seem to be so broad nor 
the caudal peduncle so deep. The dark band that occurs on the caudal 
peduncle of typical specimens from Georgia is, in these from Mississippi, 
continued forward along the side to the snout; being, however, slightly 
broader and less perfectly defined anteriorly. 

I do not, however, think that the differences form sufficient grounds 
for establishing a new species. My largest specimens have a total length 
of 3 inches. 

Professor Jordan's specimens were obtained in the upper tributaries 
of the Alabama Eiver. 

Genus HEMITEEMIA, Cope. 

33. Hemitremia maculata, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,438.) 

Body long and slender, slightly elevated at the dorsal, somewhat com- 
jiressed. Depth in the length 5 times. Head flattened above; snout, 
looked at from above, obtuse. Mouth small, the maxillary falling con- 
siderably short of the anterior border of the orbit, terminal, slightly 
oblique. Teeth 4-4, with grinding surface. 

Head in the length 4J times. Eye in head 3^, about equal to the 
snout. 

The fin-rays are, D. I, 8; A. I, 8. The dorsal begins slightly behiud 
the ventrals. Its length three-fifths, its lieight four-fifths, of the head. 
Anal, in length, one-half, in height two-thirds, the head. Caudal i)e- 
duncle one-fourth the length of the body. Dorsal situated nearer to the 
snout than to base of caudal. 

The pores of the lateral li'.ie are found on but 8 or 10 scales, anteriorly. 
Scales 5-38-3. 

This fish is of a straw-color above, with the scales brown-edged. There 
is a faint, narrow dorsal band, and another narrow, dark line running 
from the vent on each side of the anal fin to the base of the caudal. A 
leaden band runs along the sides, which is rendered dusky by numerous 
black punctulations on the scales within this band. Besides these mi- 
mite puuctulations there is on each scale along the center of the band a 
pair of larger black points. Posteriorly the lateral band ends in a black 
spot nearly as large as the eye. Snout and top of the head dusky. 

A single specimen, 21 inches long, and a few young, were obtained at 
Enterprise. 

Three other species of llemitrcmia are recorded. H. vittata, Cope, has 
teeth 4-5, with a black lateral band, and oilier paler ones above this. 
H. heterodon and H. bifrenata, described by the same author, both have 
teeth 4-4. They both appear to be less elongated species than the one 
described above, and neither are mentioned as having the conspicuous 
caudal spot of iZ. maculata, which is exhibited in all the si)eciniens that 
I secured. In R. heterodon the "lateral line is posteriorly imperfect''. 
In H. hifrenata there are 12-13 rows of scales in front of dorsal, and 



bO'o PEOCEEDING.S OP UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

there are 7 rays in tlie aual fiu. In 11. maculata there are about IG scales 
ill frout of the dorsal, and the anal rays are I, 8. 

This species will come under Professor Jordan's genus Chriope. (Bull. 
U. S. Geol. Surv. vol. iv, No. 4, 787.) 

Genus LUXILUS, Rafinesque, 

34. Luxilus cornutus (Jlitcli.) Eaf. 

Hijpbilcpis cornntus^ Cope, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. lS(iO, 372. 

Three specimens of the young of this widely diifased species were 
obtained at Corinth, and many others at Enterprise. 

35. Luxilus chickasavensis, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,419.) 

This species closely resembles Codoma siigmatura, Jordan, from the 
Alabama Riv^er, originally described as Photogeais stigmaturus. (Aiuials 
N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 337.) If Codoma is to be regarded a valid 
genus, and if Fh. stigmaturus belongs to that genus, then the present 
species will be Codoma chicJcasacensis. I do not, however, believe that 
there is sufficient grounds for putting Photogenis stigmaturus and Lux- 
ilus analostanus into different genera. So far as I can determine with 
the aid of a good microscope, the masticatory surface as truly exists on 
the teeth of Ph. stcgmaturus as on those of Lux. analostanus. Some- 
times in the former species one edge is serrated ; and m some species of 
Codoma, as this genus is limited by Professor Jordan, occasionally both 
boundaries of the concave surface are serrated. I hope, at no distant 
period, to be able to discuss this subject still further. For the ])resent 
I adoi)t the name Luxilus for both this species and Luxilus analosta- 
nus (Grd.) Jor. 

In a close comparison of the present species with Codoma stigma- 
^ura, I lind the following differences to exist: There are fewer scales 
along the lateral line, 38 to 40 instead of 45. The eye is also consid- 
erably larger, being contained in the head 3^ times instead of 4^, and 
about equal to the snout. The caudal spot is as intensely black as in 
C. stigmatura, but considerably smaller. It is about as large as the eye, 
sometimes smaller ; whereas in that species it is nearly always larger, 
being in length " usually about one-third of the head". In this species 
it is about one-fourth of the head. Neither does it extend so far on the 
rays of the caudal iin. The form of the head and body, and the position 
and size of the lius, are apparently the same as in C. stigmatura, un- 
less it be that the body is a little deeper, the depth being contained in 
the length from 4 to 4:^ times. 

The black spot on the posterior rays of the dorsal fin is obsolete or 
wanting, while there is a narrow dark line running up on one or two of. 
the anterior dorsal rays. 

There are, on the heads of a few of my specimens, some evidences of 
the existence of tubercles. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 507 

This species appears to be quite abundant in the Cbickasawha at 
Euter prise. The largest individuals obtained have a total length of 4 
inches. 

Genus ERICYMBA, Cope. 

36. Ericymba buccata, Cope. (No. 27,421.) 

Ericiimha buccata, Cope, Pioc. Acad. Nat. Sei. Phila. 1885, 87 ; Traus. Amer. 
Phil. Soc. 18G9, 3r>l. 

Several individuals of this species were seined in the Cbickasawha 
River at Enteri)rise. Its geographical distribution is stated by Pro- 
fessor Jordan, in his "Catalogue of the Fresh Water Fishes of North 
America'' (Bull. IJ. S. Geol. Snrv. vol. iv, Xo. 2), to be from Pennsyl- 
vania to Illinois. Judging from the numbers taken at Enterprise, the 
species is quite as common in the South as farther north. Some of the 
specimens taken were 3 inches long, exclusive of the caudal. 

Genus OPSOPCEODUS, Hay, gen. nov. 

Body fusiform, moderately elongated, slightly compressed. Mouth 
very small, very oblique, iieculiar. Teeth raptorial, with a well-devel- 
loped masticatory surfoce, both bounding edges of which are c(mspicu- 
ously serrated, standing in a single row of 5-5 on a prominent process 
of the pharyngeals. Dorsal somewhat behind the anterior line of the 
ventrals. Barbels none. Lateral line complete. Intestine short. Anal 
fin short. 

This genus is apparently related to JMijloJencus, Cope, and it is pos- 
sible that 'the species that I describe below will have to be put under 
that genus. For the present, however, I think that the peculiar form 
of the mouth and the teeth, as well as the general organization of the 
animal, will serve to separate it from Mi/Jolmicvs. The name is given in 
allusion to the thoroughness with which the food is prepared by the 
numerous serrated pharyngeal teeth. 

37. Opsopceodus emilice, Hay, sp. uov. (No. 27,429.) 

Form of the body as given above. Depth in the length 4;^ times. 
Head in the length 4J. Muzzle blunt and rounded. Mouth very small, 
very oblique, the lower jaw in the closed mouth fitting within the 
upper. In this case the cleft is nearly vertical. TJie length of the man- 
dible equal to the distance from the tip of the snout to the anterior 
margin of the orbit; while in Notemigonns chrysoleucus, which bas a 
small month, the mandible reaches to the middle of the pupil. Eye 
greater than the snout, 3 in the head. 

Dorsal and anal fin-rays as follows : D. I, 9 ; A. I, 8, Dorsal begin- 
ning over the posterior rays of the ventrals, nearer the snout than to 
the base of the caudal ; length two-thirds the head ; its height equal to 
the length of the head. The anal fin in its length one-half the head ; 
its height a little less than the length of the head. 



508 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Pectorals not reacliing the ventrals; the latter attaining the anal. 
The caudal is furcated for more than one-half its length. Caudal pedun- 
cle slender, 3^ times in the length of the body. 

Scales in very regular rows, anteriorly somewhat higher than long ; 
the rows 5 or 0-40-3. 

Color in spirits pale yellow above, sides silvery, and golden yellow 
below. Above and on the caudal peduncle the scales with a narrow 
dusky edge, giving these parts of the body a regularly checkered appear- 
ance. A dusky band runs along the lateral line, back on the rays of 
the caudal, and forward over the oj^ercle, through the eye, to the snout. 
Sometimes this band is almost black. Just above this band are two or 
three longitudinal rows of black dots, one of which dots is located at 
the tip of each scale. Below the lateral line is another similar row of 
dots. There is also a row of black points along the lateral line. The 
anterior rays of the dorsal fin are largely black, and there is also a 
black spot on the posterior rays. 

This is an elegant and very interesting species. Its oblique mouth and 
rounded muzzle give it a peculiar appearance. It appears to be widely 
distributed through the State. I have one sijecimen from Artesia, sev- 
eral from Macon, and one from Enterprise. 

Genus MINNILUS, Raflnesque. 

38. Minnilus dilectus (Girard) C. & J. 

Minuilas dilectus, Jokdax, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1877, 80. 
Alhurnus dilectus, GiRARD, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1856, 193. 
AlhurnclluH dilectus, Girard, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 259. 

Noiropis aihcnnoides, Jordan, Bull. 111. Lab. Nat. Hist. No. 2, 60; Bull. U. S. 
Geol. Surv. vol. iv, No. 2, 422. 

A single specimen of a Minnilus, or Alburnelhis, answering well enough 
to Girard's description cited above, was obtained at Enterprise. 

Subgenus Lythrukus, Jordan. 

39. Minnilus punctulatus, Hay, sp. uov. (No. 27,430.) 

Body short, deep, and compressed. The back elevated in front of the 
dorsal. Depth in the length 4.^. The head is short and deep, 4| in the 
length. The profile is straight, or even a little concave; the snout 
pointed. jMouth large and quite oblique ; the lower jaw longer than 
the upper. The maxillary reaches back to a perpendicular from the 
anterior rim of the orbit. 

The eye is of medium size, being contained in the length of the side 
of the head 3^ times. 

The scales are very small. There are 10 to 12 horizontal rows above 
the lateral line, and 3 below it ; 48 to 50 scales along the lateral line, and 
25 or more in front of the dorsal. The lateral line is much decurved 
above the veutrals. 

Teeth, 2, 4-4, 2, usually with an evident triturating surface. 



PnOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 509 

Fin-rays as follows : D. I, 8 ; A. I, 10-11. Dorsal beginning midway 
between the mnzzle and the base of the caudal ; its length one-half, its 
height two thirds, the head. Anal in length three-fifths, in height four- 
fifths, the head. Caudal peduncle compressed, and contained in the 
length of the body 4 J times. 

The body is of a straw-color above, silvery along the sides and below. 
The scales above the lateral line are dark-edged from a succession of 
black dots, which are large enough to be seen by the unaided eye. A 
dark dorsal line of similar, but a little larger, black poinfcs. Along the 
sides anteriorly are a few such dots ; posteriorly they increase so much 
that on the caudal peduncle they form a dark baud. The head, and 
especially the snout, are sprinkled with similar dots. There is a black 
spot at the base of the dorsal fin anteriorly. Opercles silvery. Size of 
largest specimens 2 inches. Corinth. 

This minnow resembles somewhat Notropis lirtis, Jord., but is a less 
slender species, has a smaller eye, and has not the conspicuous band of 
metallic blue of that species. Kotropis matutimis (Cope) Jord., also ap- 
pears to be a much slenderer species, the depth being contained in the 
length 6 times. Also there are said to be but 7 rows of scales above 
tlie lateral line. 

I do not think that there are sufficient differences in the teeth of the 
species of l^otropis, or Alinnilus^ and those of Lythrurus to justify the 
separation of these species into two genera. If there is such difference, 
Notrojris lirus ought to be written Lythrurus Urus, for the masticatory 
surfaces of its teeth are as i)laiu, to me at least, as in L. dipltemlus. 

40. Minnilus rubripinnis, Hay, sp. nov. (No. 27,420.) 

Body long and slender, somewhat compressed, the depth in the length 
4| times. Head arched transversely above; muzzle very pointed. 
Mouth oblique, large; the lower jaw slightly longer than the upper; 
the maxillary reaching to a vertical from the front of the eye. The eye 
is large, being contained in the length of the side of the head 3 times, 
and its diameter slightly greater than the snout. Head contained in 
the length 4.^ times. 

Scales small, especially in front of the dorsal fin, somewhat higlier 
than long, but not so densely imbricated as in the next specnes. Eows 
of scales represented by the formula 7 to 9-45 ±-3. Lateral line much 
d ecu r ved a n teriorl y . 

The dorsal is situated far back, midway between the pupil of the eye 
and the base of the caudal, and considerably posterior to the veutrals; 
its rays, I, 8 ; its length one-half the head, its height three-fourths. 
The anal is long, being three-fourths the length of the head, height one- 
half the head ; its rays, I, 12. 

The pectorals do not reach the veutrals ; the latter attain the vent. 

The coloration of this species is dark in spirits, all the scales above 
the lateral line being covered with black points. Along the sides is a 



510 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM:. 

broad leaden band, wliicli narrows behind on the caudal peduncle and 
becomes a dusky band, ending in an ill-defined caudal spot. There is a 
narrow dorsal band. The top of the head and snout, as well as the 
lower jaw, are dusky. The belly is pale. 

The dorsal and caudal are red, with more or less dusky. There is no 
dark spot at the base of the dorsal, as in some species of Lythrurus ; but 
there is a distinct black spot on the upper jiart of the anterior rays of 
the dorsal. There is a similar black spot at the distal ends of the ante- 
rior anal rays. The anterior rays of the pectorals are dusky. 

Large numbers of this species were collected at Enterprise. The 
largest si3ecimens have a total length of 2^ inches. 

41. Minnilus bellus, Hay, sp. uov. (No. 27,4'26.) 

Adults of this species resemble much the young individuals of 
Notemigomis chrysoleucus. 

The body is short, deep, and considerably compressed. The dorsal 
region is elevated. Depth contained in the length about 3| times. 
Head short, in length of body from 4 to 4^ times. Muzzle short, rather 
pointed; the profile in adults concave; mouth quite oblique, large, the 
maxillary reaching back to the anterior rim of the orbit; the lower jaw 
rather longer than the upper. The eye moderate, 3^ in the head. 

The lateral line is much decurved anteriorly. Scales 7 or 8-40 to 
42-3, crowded forward, higher than long, about 25 in front of the 
dorsal. Teeth 2, 4-4, 2, "sharp-edged'', but with a "masticatory sur- 
face". 

Fin-rays, D. I, 8 ; A. I, 10-11. Dorsal situated midway between the 
tip of the snout and the origin of the caudal, wholly posterior to the 
ventrals, nearly twice as high as long, its length being contained in the 
head If times. Anal contained in the head Ih times, a little higher 
than long, ventrals reaching the vent, the pectorals not extending to 
the ventrals. Caudal peduncle very little longer than the head, and 
rather slender. 

Color (in spirits) somewhat dusky above, with a narrow, dark dorsal 
line ; sides silvery, with a dull, leaden line along the caudal peduncle. 
Occasionally, in some of the most highly colored si>ecimens, a few scales 
on the side are widely margined with black, so that the sides appear 
splotched. The lower part of the body is in life almost flame-color. 
All the fins orange, at least at their bases. At least the tips of the 
dorsal, ventral, and caudal jet-black. No spot at the base of dorsal. In 
some adults the whole dorsal has black pigment mingled with the 
orange, besides having the rays tipjied with black, and the distal half 
of the ventrals and anal black. Very few specimens are without the 
black tips to the fins, so that this becomes a distinctive character. 
Evidences of the existence of tubercles were observed on the heads of a 
few specimens. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 511 

Thirty-six iiidividuals were captured at Artesia aud four at Macon. 

Leugth from 2 to 2f inches. 

This species must be closely allied to Lythrurus atripeH, Jordan, found 
by Prof. S. A. Forbes in Southern Illinois. The differences are, how- 
ever, sufficiently evident. The larger eye, shorter head, fewer scales 
along the lateral line, and the fewer soft rays in the dorsal fin will dis- 
tinguish my species from that. The i^eculiar coloration of the fins and 
the lack of the dorsal spot will furnish the most obvious differences. 

This species illustrates well the little value of the character most 
relied on for separating the Lythruri as a genus from the species of 
Minnilus. While the external characters are all, or nearly all, those of a 
typical LytliruruSy the teeth are decidedly "sharp-edged", as that term 
must be defined in order to be applicable to other species with "sharp- 
edged" teeth. 

Under the subgenus Lythrurus I would arrange the following species. 
There may be others that ought to be included : 
Minnilus dipUmiius (Raf.) Hay. — Cope, Proc. Acad. ^at. Sci. Phila. 18(37, 

162. Pennsylvania to Illinois. 
M. cyanocephalus (Copeland) Hay. — Jordan, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 

1877, 70. Michigan to Minnesota. 
M. atripes (Jord.) Hay.— Jordan, Bull. 111. Lab. o^at. Hist. No. 2, 59. 

Southern Illinois. 
M. ruhripinnis. Hay. — Mississippi. 
21. ardens (Cope) Hay. — Cope, Proc. Acad. ISTat. Sci. Phila. 1807, 103. 

Virginia and North Carolina to Kentucky. 
M. hellus, Hay. — Mississii)in. 

M. lirus, Jordan.— Jordan, Annals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 342. 
M. punctulatus, Hay. — Mississippi. 

As an aid to the identification of the species given above, I insert the 
following analytical table : 

I. Elongated species ; depth in length 4i or more times. 

1. Color pale, with a lateral metallic blue band M. lirus. 

2. Colors conspicuous — steel-blue, red, and purplish. 

a. A black spot at the base of the dorsal ; tirst ray of dorsal opposite the ventruls; 

^ J 11 M. ARDENS. 

h. A black spot at the tips of the anterior dorsal rays ; first dorsal ray behind 
theventrals: A. I, 12 M. rubripinnis. 

II. Deep aud compressed species ; depth 4J times or less in the length. 

1. Species with a distinct black spot at the base of dorsal. 

a. Species with conspicuous hues; the dorsal surface dusky ; sides and tins with 
more or less crimson. 

* Ej-e small, 4 in head ; depth 3J in leugth; D. I, 7 ; A. I, 11 M. atripks. 

**Eve in head 3^; depth in length 3f ; D. I, 1»; A. I, 11 M. dipl.emius. 

*** Eye in head 3^; depth in length 4 ; D. I, 8 ; A. 1, 11 or 12. M. cyanocephalus. 
h. Color pale; scales coarsely puuctulated, small, 10 to 12-48 to 00-3; spot small. 

M. PUNCTULATCS. 

2. No distiuct spot at the base of the dorsal; fius tipped with black M. bellus. 



512 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Genus NOTEMIGONUS, Ealinesque. 

42. Notemigoniis chrysoleucus (Mitcli.) Jot. (No. 27,423.) 

Stilbe americana, Cope, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1869, 389. 

Notemigonus chrysoleucus, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mns. No. 2, 404 (Sj'nonomy). 

Specimens of this fish were obtained at Corinth, Artesia, and Macon. 
Genus SEMOTILUS, Bafiuesque. 

43. Semotilus corporalis (Mitch.) Put. 

SemolUus corporalis, Cope, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1869, 363. 

A single young specimen was seined from the ponds along Catawba 
Creek at Artesia. 

Genus CERATICHTHYS, Baird. 

44. Seratichthys biguttatus (Kirt.) B(l. (No. 27,422.) 

Ceratichilitjs bigiitfatits, Cope, Trans. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1869, 36G. 
A few immature individuals from the Chickasawha Biver at Enter- 
prise. 

45. Ceratichthys amblops (Eaf.) C. & J. (No. 27,436.) 

Ceraiidiihys amhlops, Jordan, Annals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 328. 
An individual of this species, having a total length of five inches, and 
differing in no important respect from a specimen of the same size caught 
in Indiana, has been sent to me by Mr. Warner. 

46. Ceratichthys v^inchelli (Grd.) Jor. 

Uijhopsis winchelli, Girard, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1856, 211. 
Ceraiiclithys hyallnus, Cope, Joum. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1869, 226. 
Kocomis ivinchelH, Jordan, Annals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 330. 

A'Single specimen of a fish answering well enough to the descriptions 
of this species was obtained at Enterprise. It is probably but a variety 
of G. amhlops. 

The dark lateral band is very decided the whole length of the body. 
It is continued from the front of the eye around the snout, aud is here 
quite black. 

Family CATOSTOMID^. 

Genus MOXOSTOMA, Bafinesque. 

47. Moxostoma macrolepidotum (Le Sneur) Jordan, A^ar. duqnesnii. 

Caiosiomus duquesnii, DeKay, Fauna N. Y. Fishes, 203. 
Teretiihis duquesnii, COPE, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1869, 236. 
Ptychostomus duquesnii, CoPE, Proc. Amer. Phil. Soc. 1870, 476. 
Myxostoma maerolcpidotum,s>\x\iSY). duquesnii, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 
12, 120. 

Several individuals of the widely spread "Bed Horse" were obtained 
at Enterprise. 

48. Moxostoma pcEcilunim, Jordan. (No. 27,463.) 

One specimen frjom Enterprise. 



PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 513 

Genus EItIMYZO:tT, Jordan. 

49. Erimyzon sucetta (Lac.) Jordan. (No. 27,448.) 

Catostomus sucetta, DeKay, Fauna N. Y. Fishes, 203. 
Moxostoma davifonnis, Girakd, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 219. 
Erimyzon sucetta, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. lk>, 144. 

A specimen of this species, a female, was obtained at Corinth. An- 
other female was canght in a shallow branch of Catawba Creek whilst 
dei)Ositing her spawn, in company with the male. Another very young 
specimen was seined at Macon. 

Genus CATOSTOMUS, Le Sueur. 

50. Catostomus nigricans, Lo Sueiu-. (No. 27,447.) 

Hypentelium nigricans, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 9, 34. 
Catostomus nigricans, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 162. 
One specimen from Enterprise. 

Family SILURID^. 
Genus ICTALUEUS, Eafinesque. 

51. Ictalunis pTuictatus (Raf.) Jordan. (No. 27,448.) 

Ictalnrus cwrulescens, Cope, Proc. Aiuer. Phil. Soc. 1870, 489. 
Pimolodus oUvaceus, Girard, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol. x, 211. 
Ichtha'lurus punctaius, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 76. 

I obtained specimens of this Catfish from the Noxubee River at Macon ; 
otliers have since been sent me from Enterprise, on the Chickasawha, 
by Mr. Warner. 

Genus AMIUEUS, Eafinesque. 

52. Anxitirus vulgaris (Thomp.) Nelson. (No. 27,437.) 

rintolodus aihirus, Girard, Pac. R. R. Surv. vol x, 210. 

Aiuiu'us vulgaris subsp. wlurus, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 88. 

Two Catfishes were purchased from a young negro, who had caught 
them in Sand Creek near Artesia. One of these, having a total length 
of 10 inches, I identify as above. It is, I have no doubt, Girard's P. 
ailHrus, and if this is, as Professor Jordan in his "Synopsis of the 
Fresh Water Siluridne of the United States" affirms, identical with 
Thompson's P. vulgaris, the latter name will be the proper one to employ. 

The discovery of this specimen reveals a much greater range south- 
ward in this species than was previously suspected. Hitherto it has 
n»)t been known to occur further south than Saint Louis, and has been 
supposed to be peculiar to our northern lakes and rivers. 

The other Catfish jiurchased was — 

53. Amiurus melas (Raf.) Jord. & Copelaud. (No. 27,462.) 

Amiurus melas, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 89. 

One specimen from Sand Creek, Artesia, and two from Noxubee River 
at Macon. 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 33 Feb. 16, 1881. 



514 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Genus PILODICTIS, Eafinesque. 

54. Pilodictis olivaris (Eaf.) Gill. & Jor. 

Hopladehis olivaris, Gill, Proc. Bost. Soc. Nat. Hist. 1862, 45. — Cope, Journ. 

Acad. Nat. Sci. Phi la. IHiiU, 237. 
rdodichthys olivaris, Jordan, Bull. U. S. Nat. Mns. No. 10, 95. 

The skin of a fine specimen of this species was obtained at Shubuta, 
the fish having been hooked from a branch of the Chickasawha. 

Genus NOTURUS, Eafinesque. 

55. Noturus leptacanthus ? Jordan. (No. 27,442.) 

Noturus leptacanthus, Jordan, Annals N. Y. Lye. Nat. Hist. 1877, 352; Bull. 
U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 102. 

I have in my collection a specimen of a Noturus which agrees pretty 
well with the descriptions given by Professor Jordan of his N. leptacan- 
thus, as abov.e cited. There are, however, some important differences 
which I am not able to acconnt for satisfactorily. My specimen is not 
qnite 2 inches long to the base of the caudal, and is, therefore, most prob- 
ably a young one. Hence, the differences noted below may be due either 
to its being immature or to its being a different sjjecies. It seems that 
Professor Jordan knew of but a single specimen, and therefore his de- 
scription may not be applicable to every individual belonging to the 
species.* 

The head is small and narrow, widening gradually from the narrow 
snout to the shoulders ; the lateral outlines of the head, therefore, 
straight ; its length 41 times in the body. Upper jaw projecting, sjnncs 
rather long and slender, instead of being short as in the type, the pec- 
toral spine being one-half the length of the head. The color is quite darJc. 

In other respects the characters assigned by Professor Jordan to his 
species apply reasonably well to my specimen. I think, therefore, that 
until more material is collected it will be better to assign the specimen 
as above. 

Collected at Enterprise. 

/ 

56. Noturus gyrinus (Mitcliill) Eaf. 

JS^otiiriis gijrinus, Cope, Jonru. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila. 1869, 237. — Jordan, Bull. 
U. S. Nat. Mus. No. 10, 102. 

Another Noturus, 2 inches long, collected at Macon, belongs to the 
above species. 

I append the following list of species collected at each of the localities 

visited : 

1. Corinth. Water flowing toward the Mississippi. 



1. Vaillantia chlorosoma. 

2. Microperca prceliaris. 

3. Zygonectes notatus. 

4. Hvborliynchus notatus. 



5. Luxilus coruutus. 

6. Minnilus punctulatus. 

7. Notemigouus chrysoleucus. 

8. Erimyzon sucetta. 



* Professor Jordan informs me that he has additional specimens of his X. leptacan- 
thus, in all of which the spines are short, less than one-third the length of the head. 
The skin, however, is said to be dark, as in my specimen. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 515 



2. Artesia. Catawba Creek, iuto Tombigbee. 



1. Pcecilicbthys artesise. 

2. Vaillantia cblorosoma. 

3. MicroiJterus pallidus. 

4. Apomotis cyanellus. 

5. Lcpomis pallidus. 

6. Zygonectes melanops. 

7. Zygonectes notatus. 

8. Hyborbyuchus notatus. 



9. Opsopoeodus emilije. 

10. Minnilus bellus. 

11. Semotilus corporalis. 

12. Notemigonus cbrysoleucus. 
l:?. Erimyzon sucetta. 

14. Amiurus vulgaris. 

15. Amiurus melas. 



3. Macon. Noxubee Eivcr, into Tombigbee. 



1. Boleosoma maculatum. 

2. Vaillantia cblorosoma. 

3. Apomotis cyanellus. 

4. Lepomis pallidus. 

5. Pomoxys nigromaculatus. 

6. Pomoxys annularis. 

7. Elassoma zonatum. 

8. Apbredoderus sayanus. 

9. Zygonectes melanops. 
10. Zygonectes notatus. 



11. Dorosoma cepediauum. 

12. Hyborbyncbus notatus. 

13. Hybognatbus argyritis. 

14. OiJsopceodus emiliic. 

15. Minnilus bellus. 

16. Notemigonus cbrysoleucus. 

17. Erimyzon sucetta. 

18. Ictalurus puuctatus. 

19. Amiurus melas. 

20. Noturus gyrinus. 



4. Narkeeta. Sucbarnocbee Eiver, into Tombigbee. 
1. Lepomis obscurus. | 2. Centrarcbus macropterus. 

5. Enterprise. Cbickasawba River. 



Amraocrypta gelida. 
Percina caprodes. 
Hadropterus spillmani. 
Nanostoma elegans. 
Nanostoma zonale. 
Pfficilicbtbys saxatilis. 
Micropterus pallidus. 
Ambloplites rupestris. 
Cbienobryttus gulosus. 
Lepomis x>allidus. 
Lepomis fallax. 
Zygonectes notatus. 
Hyodou seleuops. 
Clupea cbrysocbloris. 
HybogTiatbus argyritis. 
Alburnops taurocepbalus. 
Alburnops longirostris. 



18. Alburnops xoenocephalus. 

19. Hemitremia maculata. 

20. Luxilus cornutus. 

21. Luxilus cbickasavensis. 

22. Ericymba buccata. 

23. Opsojioeodus emilise. 

24. Minnilus dilectus. 

25. Minnilus rubripinnis. 

26. Ceraticbtbys biguttatus. 

27. Ceraticbtbys amblops. 

28. Ceraticbtbys wincbelli. 

29. Moxostoma macrolepidotum. 

30. Moxostoma pcecilurum. 

31. Catostomus nigricans. 

32. Ictalurus puuctatus. 

33. Noturus leptacantbus f 



6. Shubuta. Cbickasawba River. 
1. Pilodictis olivaris. 



Butler University, 

Irvington, Ind., October, 1880. 



516 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



SVIVOP^ISAIVD ORSC'RIPTfiON^ OF THE AMERIC'AIV RHSIVOBATIDiC:. 

By SAMUEL, GARItlAW. 

ehi:n"Obatid^. 

Trunk broad, flat; tail long, strong, continuous with the body; dor- 
sals and caudal well developed ; pectorals not reaching the end of the 
snout (except species of Discohatidae) ; covered with shagreen; with 
spines in a vertebral row and on the shoulders ; generally viviparous. 

Ehinobatus. 

Nasal valves not extended upon the space between the nostrils ; 
two folds on the spiracle; rostral cartilage 

medium, the ridges ^ 

separate ; 

snout pointed leucorhynclms 

confluent half their length ; 

snout rounded on the end productus 

produced, narrow ; groove short, small ; ridges 

confluent more than half their length spinosus 

long ; ridges straight, confluent 
less than half their length ; 
four patches of spines on the shoulders ; 

color uniform korlcelii 

more than half their length ; 
two patches of spines on shoulders ; 

clouded or blotched undulatus 

close together, narrowly separated at the base ; 
rarely with spines on the shoulders ; 

freckled with whitish lenfiginosus 

one fold on the spiracle ; snout blunt, rounded ; 
head flat .planicej)s 

Syerhina. 

Nasal valves extended on the intern arial space ; 
a fold on the hinder margin of the spiracle ; 

rostral ridges meeting hrevirostris 

no fold on the spiracle ; 
rostral ridges not meeting exasperata 

Platyehinoidis. 
Labial fold distinct ; 
no fold on the spiracle; 
posterior lobe of nasal valve rudimentary triseriata 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 517 

Ehinobatus. 

Rostral cartilage ratlier slender, pointed, ridges meeting or close 
together in front ; dorsal tins far behind the ventrals ; nasal valves not 
extending between the nostrils ; disk, without the ventrals, subtriangu- 
lar ; claspers slender, pointed. 

Rhinobatus leucorhynchiis. 

Giiuther, 186G, Proc. Zool. Soc. Lond. 604. 

Length of disk, including ventrals, lU, width 7f, snout from mouth 
to tip 3|, and total length 23 inches. Anterior margins very slightly 
undulating, posterior broadly curved. Posterior margin of ventral 
nearly straight. Head moderately broad, slightly concave ; width be- 
tween the eyes three and one-half times in the length of the snout. 
Rostral cartilage strong, moderately long ; ridges separate in their entire 
length, approaching each other regularly toward the end of the snout, 
which they do not reach. Tip of the snout more pointed than in other 
species. Eyes moderate, larger than the spiracle. Spiracle with two 
folds on its posterior border. Anterior nasal valve small, not dilated, 
extending over little more than half the length of the nostril. Mouth 
slightly arched in the middle. 

Body covered with shagreeu above and below. A row of small spines 
along the vertebrae, a pair on each shoulder, one above each eye, and a 
row of smaller ones along the orbital ridges. Tail depressed, with a 
fold on each side. Dorsals equal, second distant from the caudal the 
length of its base, and from the first by the length of its anterior border. 

Light reddish or olivaceous brown. Translucent spaces iu front of 
the head white. White beneath. 

Panama. 

Rhinobatus productus. 

Girard, 1854, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Pbila. 196. 

Disk having the form of that oi planiceps. Snout shorter than that of 
undidatus, rounded at the end. Rostral ridges confluent half or more 
of their length. Head slightly concave between the orbital ridges. 
Spiracles with two folds on the posterior border. Tins as in planiceps. 
Young with a dorsal row of compressed hooked spines commencing im- 
mediately behind the head, a pair on each shoulder, a series of smaller 
ones in front and above each eye, and a row of small ones on each of 
the ridges of the rostrum. 

Color a clouded brown, white on the translucent spaces in front of the 
head, a black spot beneath the end of the snout. The brown is grayish 
and somewhat dull, rather than rich and dark, as in the flat-headed 
species. Large specimens have small, indistinct spines in dorsal and 
orbital series, rostral ridges confluent for a greater portion of their 
length, and uniform coloration. Distinguished from R.planiceps by the 
folds on the spiracle, confluence of the ridges, and color ; from F. unda- 



518 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

latus by the stoutness of body, shortness of snout, and color. Thirty- 
eight si)ecimens were collected at San Diego, Cal., b}^ the Hassler exi)e- 
dition. 

Rhiuobatus spiuosus. 

Giiuther, 1870, Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. viii, 518. 

Anterior nasal valve not dilated laterally. Snout much produced, the 
distance between the outer angles of the nostrils being one-half of that 
between the mouth and the end of the snout. The rostral ridges are 
confluent, very narrow, with a very small and short groove at the base, 
and in their entire length provided with spines. Mouth nearly straight. 
Compressed spines with dilated base along the median line of the back, 
on the shoukler, and above the ej^e and spiracle ; the entire upper sur- 
face rough. Snout white. (Giinther.) 

Mexico. 

Rhinobatus horkelii. 

Miiller & Heule, 1841, Syst. Bcsclir. Plagiost. 122. 

Ehombic. Disk, including veutrals, 19, width 11.62, tip of snout to 
mouth, G.87, and total length 35.5 inches. Head broader than that of 
R. undulatus ; crown flat. Anterior margins slightly sinuous. Angles 
and posterior margins of pectorals broadly rounded. Margins of veu- 
trals nearly straight. Snout long, rather less than four times the width 
of the head between the eyes. Eostral cartilage strong ; ridges distant 
at base, close together somewhat less than half their length, expanded 
near the extremity. Eye smaller than the spiracle. Spiracle with two 
folds on the posterior border. Anterior nasal valve not dilated, not ex- 
tending half the length of the nostril. Mouth nearly straight; a pair of 
concave curves meet to form a low arch on the symphysis. Covered 
with 'shagreen above and below. A row of hooked spines along the 
vertebrre, a row of several near the middle of each half of the shoulder- 
girdle, and a few smaller ones on the orbital ridge and in a group upon 
the end of the snout. Tail depressed, with a fold on each side. Second 
dorsal distant from the caudal less than the length of its base, and from 
the first less than the length of its anterior border. 

Uniform light grayish or olivaceous brown, without cloudings or spots. 
Whitish below. Translucent spaces on the snout white in young, darker 
in old. Sometimes a small patch of brown under the tip of the snout. 

Bahia ; Rio Grande ; Rio Janeiro and northward. 

Rhinobatus undulatus. 

V. Olfers, 1831, Die Gattnng Torpedo, 22. 
Rhombic. Disk, including veutrals, 18, width 10.75, from tip of 
snout to mouth 5.75, and total length 33 inches. Anterior margins 
nearly straight, slightly concave. Angles and posterior margins of pec- 
torals broadly rounded. Posterior margin of ventral straight a portion 
of its length ; posterior angle blunt. Head moderate ; crown concave. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 519 

Snout long, about four aud oue-half times the width of the head between 
the eyes. Rostral cartilages narrow, ridges close together more than 
half their length, expanded near the extremity. Eye moderate, larger 
than the spiracle. Spiracle with two tubercles on the hinder margin. 
Anterior nasal valve not dilated, extending over little more than half of 
the length of the nostril. Mouth straight or slightly arched forward. 
Covered with shagreen above and below. A row of small spines in a 
vertebral series to the caudal, a row of several near the middle of each 
half of the shoulder-girdle, and several above each eye and spiracle. 
i»I"o spines on the snout. Tail depressed, with a fold on each side. Second 
dorsal distant from the caudal more than the length of its base, and 
from the first by the length of its anterior border. 

Claspers long, slender, but little swollen at the end. 

Olivaceous brown, transversely clouded with darker. A few small 
round spots of white above the gills and behind the shoulder-girdle. 
Translucent spaces of snout white ; below there is a lozenge-shaped spot 
of dark, from each side of which a dark line passes to the anterior rays 
of the ijectorals. Old specimens more uniform in color ; dark marks of 
snout sometimes faded. 

Rio Janeiro and southward. 

Rhiuobatus lentiginosus. 

Garniau, 1880, Bull. Mns. Comp. Zool. 1G8. 

Outlines of body and fins similar to those of horlxlii and undulatus. 
Rostral cartilage long and narrow, a small groove near the head ; ridges 
close together from base to extremity. Eyes large. Spiracles half as 
large as the eyes, with two folds. Head narrow, concave between the 
eyes. The width of the interocular space equals that of the nostrils or 
their distance apart. Half the length of the snout is less than the dis- 
tance between the outer angles of the nostrils. Mouth nearly straight, 
a little less than twice the width of the head between the eyes. Scales 
small, smooth. Spines of the dorsal series and the three in front of 
each eye very small ; those above the eye and spiracle not noticeable. 
The largest spines on the body are a group of five on the top of the end 
of the snout, a pair of which resemble small horns. Shoulders smooth 
or with a single small spine. 

Color a light grayish brown, densely freckled with small spots of 
lighter ; uniform brownish below. On the lower side of the snout thcxC 
are faint indications of markings similar to those of undulatus. 

Distinguished from horlein and undulatus by the colors, the horn- 
like spines on the end of the snout, the absence of spines on the shoul- 
ders, the narrowness of the head as compared with the width of the 
mouth, the shorter distance from snout to mouth, and the greater dis- 
tance from mouth to vent. Total length 22.9, snout to mouth 4.1, snout 
to vent 0.9, and width of pectorals 7.4 inches. 

Florida ; South Carolina. 



520 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Rhinobatus planiceps. 

Ganiiau, 1880, Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. No. 11, 168. 

Disk, including ventrals, rhombic, about one and a half times as long 
as wide. Anterior borders of pectorals straight, more than twice as 
long as the convex posterior margins. Angles of i)ectorals rounded, 
the lunder not extending farther than to the vent. Outer angle of 
ventrals rounded, posterior acute. Head broad, fiat. Eostral cartilage 
medium, dilated at the extremity, with the ridges close together in the 
anterior third of their length. Snout rather broad, with rounded ex- 
tremity. Eyes moderate. Spiracle immediately behind the eye, smaller 
than the orbit, with a single fold on the posterior side. Anterior nasal 
valve not dilated, posterior two-lobed. Mouth nearly straight. Body 
covered with shagreen above and below. Tail appearing as if continued 
on the posterior portion of the abdomen, much depressed, with a fold on 
each side, bearing two elevated dorsals behind the ventrals and a cau- 
dal with convex border at its extremity. Second dorsal distant from 
the caudal the length of its base. Bases of the dorsals distant from 
each other the length of the anterior borders. Scales larger over the 
central portions of the disk. Compressed hooked spines in a median 
row on back and tail, in two patches on each shoulder, and a series 
above each eye. On the young these spines are much more prominent 
and regular in size than in the adult. Color brown; light between and 
on each side of the rostral ridges; white below. Young specimens 
with a number of small, round, white spots on each side of the dorsum. 

The following measurements are taken from a young male : 

• Inches. 

Total length 19.0 

Suont to end of ventrals 10. 2 

Snout to mouth 3.5 

Width of pectorals , 6.9 

Payta, Callao, and Galapagos Islands. 

Sykrhina. 

Characters in general those of Rhinohatus. Disk somewhat shorter 
and broader. Nasal valves dilated and extending upon the iuternarial 
space. 

Syrrhina brevirostris. 

Miiller &. Heule, 1841, Syst. Beschr. Plagiost. 114. 
Disk, including the ventrals, rhombic, longer than wide ; width about 
seven-eighths of the length. Anterior margins nearly straight, slightly 
indented opposite the gill-openings, at the end of the snout forming an 
angle of less than ninety degrees. Angles and posterior margins of 
pectorals rounded. Ventrals rounded. Posterior angle rather blunt. 
Head moderate; crown concave. Snout short, slightly rounded at the 
tip ; length about twice the width of the head between the eyes. Pos- 
tral ridges distant at the head, meeting at the end of the rostrum. Eye 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONxVL MUSEUM. 52 i 

moderate, rather larger than tbe spiracle. Spiracle with one tubercle 
on the hinder margin. Anterior nasal valves dilated, extending across 
about one-third of the space between the nostrils. Mouth arching 
forward slightly. Body rough with shagreen above and below. Small 
hooked spines scattered over back and tail. A row of tubercular spines 
along the vertebrae to the second dorsal. Two or three similar tuber- 
cles over each extremity of the shoulder-girdle and a pair a short dis- 
tance from these toward the vertebral row. A couple of spines above 
each spiracle and one or two in front of each eye. Tail depressed, with a 
fold on each side. Dorsals equal, second distant from the caudal the 
length of its base and from the first tbe length of its anterior border. 

Light grayish or olivaceous brown ; margins lighter; whitish below. 
Sometimes clouded with brown. 

The claspers, as far as may be judged from young specimens, are 
similar to those of R. undtdatus. 

Total length 18.}, length of disk, including ventrals, 10, and width of 
disk 8i| inches. 

Rio Janeiro. 

Syrrhina exasperata. 

Jord. & Gilb. 1880, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 32. 

Disk, including the ventrals, rhombic, longer than wide. Anterior 
borders of pectorals nearly straight ; posterior convex. Snout truncated, 
as wide on the end as the space between the eyes. Eostral cartilage 
wide and strong, deeply grooved on its upper surface, llostral lidges 
prominent, widely separated, nearly or quite parallel from base to ex- 
tremity. Spiracles large, equal in diameter to the orbit, without a fold 
on the side. Fin-angles rounded, except the obtuse posterior angles of 
the dorsals. Dorsals elevated, behind the ventrals, the length of the 
base of the first less than the length of its posterior border, base of the 
second equal to its jjosterior margin. Tlie base of the first is equal to 
its distance from ventral or from second dorsal. Anterior nasal valves 
dilated, continued a little beyond the inner angles of the nostrils ; pos- 
terior two-lobed. Anterior extremities of the pectorals widely separated 
from the rostral cartilage, extending very little in advance of the eyes. 
Mouth wide, forming a low arch, regularly curved from the corners. 
Labial fold distinct for a short distance at the symphysis. Teeth small, 
blunt, in a hundred and ten series in the upper Jaw. Claspers long, 
slender, knobbed at the ends. Tail with a thick fold on each side; 
caudal fin rounded, without indentation. Back thickly covered with 
small scales, among which are scattere<l larger ones. A median row 
of large, blunt tubercles on the back and tail, and two short rows 
parallel to this on each shoulder. The bases of the tubercles are so 
covered by the skin and small scales that they appear as rounded prom- 
inences with a small spine on the summit. 

Color grayish brown. Near the ends of the rostral ridges there is a 



522 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

band of dark brown ; between tliis and another dark baud which crosses 
the bases of the ridges there is a light baud. A dark baud across the 
head between the eyes is somewhat confluent with the baud in front of 
it, which makes the fore part of the head dark, but leaves the prond- 
nences in front of the eyes light colored. The remainder of the upper 
surface is more or less clouded by faint indications of transverse bands. 
These are more distinct in the young. AVith the exception of a darli: 
spot on the posterior angle of each pectoral, the lower surface is white. 

Total length 33.4, snout to eud of ventrals 18, snout to uiouth 4.1, and 
width of disk 15.5 iuches. Specimen described an adult male. The 
kindness of the ofticers of the National Museum has enabled me to 
satisfy myself of the identity of Trigonorhina alveata, described from 
old, and Platyrhina exasperata^ from very young specimens. 

Southern California. 

Platyrhinoidis, gen. nov^ 

Disk broad, flat, rounded. Tail moderate, depressed, caudal flu broad. 
Dorsals posterior. Tubercular sx)ines in vertebral series and on anterior 
margins of pectorals. Labial fold well developed. Nasal valves not 
reaching the mouth, posterior lobe rudimentary. Viviparous. 

Distinguished from Sijrrhina and Trigonorhina by the labial fold, 
nasal valves, and marginal series of spines, and from Platyrhina by 
the fold, valves, separation of pectorals, and viviparity. 

Platyrhinoidis triseriata. 

Jovd. & Gilb., 1880, Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus. 3G. 
Disk, including ventrals, subrhomboid, a little longer tban broad, 
anterior borders convex, anterior and lateral extremities forming broad 
cur\M?s. Snout broad, rounded in front, length from ui)per jaw equal 
to distance between oater borders of nostrils. liostral cartilage stout, 
ridges approaching rapidly and meeting near the end to form an acute 
I)oint. Sj)iracles moderate, larger than the eyes and close behind them, 
without folds on the sides. Eyes small, distant from the end of the 
snout one and one-fourth times the distance between the spiracles. 
Crown broad, concave. Nostrils broad, narrower than the distance be- 
tween, which is nearly four times the space between them and the mouth. 
Nasal valves medium, hardly reaching upon the space between the 
nostrils, outer lobe narrow, posterior rudimentary. Mouth not large, 
moderately curved, distant from the end of the snout about one and 
one-third times its width. Teeth small (82 series in the upper jaw of 
the adult female described), subhexangular on the base, smooth or with 
alow, blunt cusp. Pectorals separated from the rostral cartilage by a 
translucent space. Dorsals similar, longer than high, sei)arated by one 
and one-half times the length of their bases, insertion of anterior a little 
in advance of the middle of the tail, posterior reaching a little behiud 
the insertion of the caudal. Tail strong, more distinct from body than 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 523 

ill species of Sijrrhina, length from veut little more than that from snout 
to extremity of ventrals, with a broad cutaneous fold on eacli side be- 
low, which extends to the ventrals and is continuous with the lower lobe 
of the caudal. Caudal rather large, somewhat more than twice as long 
as wide, margins entire. Covered with shagreen above and below. 
Several (three to four) series of sharp, erect, immovable spines along 
the anterior margin of the pectoral, a group of several above the ex- 
tremity of the rostral cartilage, and several on the orbital ridge. A 
vertebral series of larger spines on back and tail extending to the 
second dorsal, a pair near the middle and on each end of each branch of 
the shoulder girdle, and a series on eacli side of tlie upper surface of the 
tail parallel with the median. 

In fu3tal specimens the lateral series on the tail are not developed, 
and the inner pairs on the shoulder-girdle are represented by single 
spines. The upper portion of each spine is long, narrow, subfusiform, 
depressed, and, resting upon alow, narrow support, appears as if merely 
applied to the skin b}' a portion of its lower side. 

Disk to end of ventrals 12, width of disk 11.2, vent to end of tail 12.G, 
and total length 22 inches. 

Uniform olivaceous brown, whitish beneath. 

Specimens described from U. S. Nat. Museum. Hab. Southern Cali- 
fornia. 

DISCOBATIDAE, fam. nov. 

Form intermediate between that of the Bajidm and EJdnohatidcc ; 
nearer the latter. Tail less distinct from the body than in the former, 
to which there is also less similarity in dorsals, ventrals, caudal, and 
nasal valves. Ovij)arous. Provisionally placed as a subfamily of the 
Rhinohatidw. 

DiSCOBATUS. 

Flatyrhiua, preoccui>ied. 

Disk broad, flat, subcircular. Pectorals approximating in front of 
the head. Ventrals separate, entire. Dorsals and caudal as in Sijr- 
rhina. Nasal valves resembling those of the Ehinohatid(c ; anterior 
lobes united across the internarial space. Egg-cases similar to those 
of certain ScyJUidce. 

D. sclioTileinii, sp. Mliller & HcdIc, ludia. 
D. sinenfiis, sp. Lac^pede, China. 
The species recently described as Platyrliinw having been withdrawn, 
the g^nus contains no American representatives at present. 



524 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 



liffST OF THE IVORTH Al^IERICAIV SPECIES OF MYRIAPODS BEI^OIVG- 

B^'G 'TO TUBE FAMfll.Y OF THE l-.YSBOIPETAK.nD.E, WDTt.3 A OE- 
SCKaPTflOIV OF A Bf-D3ir» FORM FRO.TI LURAY t'AVE, VBRGUVDA. 

By JOHN A. UY1>ER. 

Without specimens of eacli of the species identified by the authors 
who have described them, the writer finds himself quite unable to make 
a greatly needed revision of this group. The sexucil api)endages have 
not been described in Spirostrephon cccnioannulatus Wood, iV. copei Pack- 
ard, or .^*S'. vud'ii and >S'. cavcniarum Cope. In the cases of the two last, 
Professor Cope, who desoribed them in 18G9, at first thought that they 
were provided with two pairs of lateral jiores to each segment, and in 
the belief that ^pirostrcplion had no lateral pores he proposed the genus 
Pseudotremia. He afterwards seemed to agree with Packard that the 
last-named genus was not valid, and appears to have considered the 
P. cacernarum a Spirostrephon, as he adopts the last name as its genus 
in his paper on the Wyandotte Cave fauna, which he published in the 
American Xaturalist in July, 1872. His principal reasons for this stej) 
seem to have been the foregoing, and that the species was not hairy and 
was furnished with well-developed triangular eye-patches. "The allied 
form found by Mr. Cooke in the Mammoth Cave has been described by 
Dr. Packard as ISjnrostreiJhon copeiP And, Professor Cope continues, 
" It is eyeless, and is, on this account alone, worthy of being distin- 
guished generically from Spirostrephon, though the absence of pores, 
asserted by Dr. Packard, would also constitute another character. Sjn- 
rostrephon possesses a series of lateral pores, as I have pointed out in 
accordance with Wood's view." At this point Professor Cope refers ^o 
a paper by himself in the Proceedings of the American Entomological 
Society for 1870, where, in a foot-note, he says : " I must correct my 
charac'^er 'no lateral pores' for Spirostrephon (Proc. Am. Phil. Soc, 
18G0, p. 179) to one series of pores'." He then proposes the genus 
Scoterpes for Packard's Spirostrephon copei. We are accordingly led to 
believe that he has abandoned the genus Pseudotremia. But when we 
come to learn the character of the external generative organs of the 
forms described by both Cope and Packard, I would be greatly disap- 
Ijointed if it was not found necessary to separate S. cavernarnm, fS. 
vudii, and S. acsioannulatus Wood from Spirostrephon and refer them to 
another genus; For it is a very singular fact that, out of eight species 
of LysiopctaUdcv which have been described since the S. lactarius of Say, 
none are known to have more than 32 or less than 28 segments, wiiile 
the type species has no less than 59, according to Wood. I am there- 
fore inclined to believe with Cope that the S. cfcsioannulatus is congen- 
eric with S. cavernaruni and ^S*. vudii, for which the name Pseudotremia 
would i)erhaps become available in case they should be found to be dis- 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 525 

tiuct. Not only do the segments of S. lactarius greatly exceed in num- 
ber those of the curious little Lysiopetalids now under discussion, but 
the secretion from the foramina repugnatoria of the former nmst be 
copious, for Say remarks that " when irritated it discharges a lacteous 
globule from the lateral portion of each segment, diffusing a strong and 
disagreeable odor". And Cope remarks (Proc. Am. Ent. Soc, 1870, 
p. 67) that ^^ Spirostrephoii lactarim exudes from a series of lateral pores 
a fluid which has in its odor a strong resemblance to creosote ". Whether 
the genus Scoterpes is well enough characterized by the absence of eyes 
may be a matter of opinion ; otherwise the form agrees too closely with 
THchopetalum to warrant us in being certain that it is not closely related. 
Both S. {Scoterpes) copei and the three known species of TrichopetaUim 
have no lateral pores, according to their describers, and are therefore 
l)robably a pretty closely related group, especially since they closely 
agree in the number of segments and the arrangement of the hairs or 
bristles on the back. The figure given by Packard (Am. Naturalist, 
V, 1871, p. 749) does not enable one to decide if it is male or female, on 
account of the carelessness of the artist with the first five pairs of legs, 
though it appears as if it were a female. Moreover, in the figure of the 
head from the front he contradicts his description on page 748, where 
he says : " No ocular depression behind the antennae, the surface of the 
epicranium being well rounded to the antennal sockets." The figure 
130 a-i on page 749, would fairly represent the front of the head of the 
species wbich I shall describe farther on, only that the antennae are 
relatively longer in Dr. Packard's species. 

Taking a retrospective glance at the genera of American Lysiopefa- 
lidci', we find that a single si^ecies has furnished the basis for the genus 
l^pirostreplion, defined by J. F. Brandt, in 1841, in his Becueil. His des- 
cription is only comparative with other groups of Julidw of equal rank ; 
the family character of the Lysiopetalids (sterna rudimentary, not con- 
joined with scuta) was used by him to define the genus Lys'wpetalum. 
in this way Spirostrephon was characterized, mainly with respect to the 
characters presented by the maxillo-labial elements. Can it be consid- 
ered safe, in view of the facts before us, to indiscriminately assign spe- 
cies to a genus which has been quietly embracetl amongst the ill-defined 
forms which have been discovered since the family has been founded ? 
To the writer the answer seems to be in the negative. No reference to 
the characters assigned to the genus or the description of the typical 
species of Spirostreplion has been made by some of the authors of Amer- 
ican species of LysiopetaUdw. The present systematic condition of the 
group is not good, and we are reluctantly forced to admit that it is very 
little better than a mere list of names. While the intention is not to be- 
little any one, there has been a very manifest lack of definiteness as 
well as accuracy and completeness of the descriptions. From the des- 
cription of 8. cavernariim, f 8. vudii, and ^8'. co2)ei, we would be led to 
infer that the antennae were 8-jointed, but when we observe Dr. Pack- 



b2G PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

ard's figure of tlie last species (Am. Nat., v, p. 749) we fliul that there 
are but seven joints represented, which is in agreement with what we 
find in Trichopetalum, ZygonopuH^ Craspedosoma, and Li/siopctalum ,• and 
in the case of the two first. Professor Cope's virtual assignment of them 
to SpirosfrepJion makes the number of joints in their antennae doubtful. 
Tricliopetalum Harger, might probably have been more closely defined 
as to its generic characters, since those given by its author would not 
define it from Zygonopus, and it differs only from 8. {8.) copei in having 
eyes, from Craspedosoma in having free sterna, though the latter may 
have free sterna too. Mr. Harger, however, admits the dififiuclties which 
beset him, at page 119, in a foot-note (Am. Jour. Sci., iv, 1872). 

While examining some living specimens of Trichopetalum Innatum 
under the microscope, about a year since, I observed that the respira- 
tion of the animal ai^peared to be conducte<l in a most singular man- 
ner. The air seemed to be drawn in under the labrum and in some way 
to enter the dorsal cardiac sinus as bubbles, which could be traced for 
some distance, more than half the length of the animal, as they trav- 
eled slowly backwards, uutU they disappeared over the opaque mass of 
ingested food contained in the intestine. These bubbles of air always 
passed backwards. It may have been that they passed backwards in- 
si le of tlie intestine, but the imj^ression I got was that they were trav- 
eling through the cardiac sinus or dorsal heart of the animal. This 
circumstance may explain why it is that there are no pores on the side 
of the body, though it is true that the lateral pores of millipeds are 
usually foramina repuguatoria, and have nothing to do with the trachea 
or respiratory apparatus. This raises the question wdiether our Lijsi- 
opetalid(e are not distinguished from other forms in some more imi)or- 
tant way than has been hitherto supposed. 

The species which have been described are the following, though it is 
to be understood that they are onlj^ given as a list for reference; no ar- 
rangement is yet possible and none is attemi)ted : 

1. Spirostrephon lactarius Say, Wood (Trans. Am. Phil. Soc, n. s., 

xiii), Art. Myriaj). of N. Am., p. 192, with syuonomy; Cope, Proc. 
Am. Phil. Soc, xi, p. 179. 
Hahitat. — Eastern United States. 

2. S. CvEsiOANNULATUs Wood, op. cit., p. 194. 
Habitat. — Allegheny County, Pennsylvania. 
Length 1 inch. 

3. PsEUDOTREMiA CAVERNARUM Cope, Proc. Am. Phil. Soc, xi, p. 179, 

18G9; Cope, Proc. Am. Ent. Soc, iii, p. 67, 1870; Packard, Am. Nat., 

V, p. 749, 1871. — Spirostrephon cavernarum Cope, Am. Nat., vi, p. 

414, 1872. — P. cavernarum Harger, Am. Jour. Sci., iv, pp. 118, 119. 

1872. 
Habitat. — Caverns in Virginia and Indiana. 
Length 11 lines. 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 527 

4. Ps. VUDII Oope, loc. cit., p. ISO; Packard, Am. Nat., v, pp. 748, 749, 

1871; Harger, loc. cit., pp. 118, 119. 
Habitat. — ? Montgomery County, Virginia. 
Length 11 lines. 

5. Spirosteephon (Pseudoteemia) copei Packard, Am. Nat., v, pp. 

748, 749, 1871. — Scoterpes cojjc^i Cope, Am. Nat., vi, p. 409, genus Sco- 
terpes proposed and defined p. 414; Harger, loc. cit., pp. 118, 119; 
Packard, Zoology, pp. 35G, 357. 

Hahitat. — Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. 

Length .35 inch. 

Trichopetalum Harger, Am. Jour. Sci., iv, p. 118, pi. ii, 1872. 

6. T. LUNATUM Harger, loc. cit., p. 119; Eyder, Am. Nat., xiv, p. 37G, 

1880. 
Hahitat. — New Haven, Conn., and Philadelphia, Pa. 
Length 6'"'". 

7. T. GLOMEBATUM Harger, loc. cit., p. 120. 
Habitat. — John Day River, Oregon. 
Length 10-"™. 

8. T. JULOIDES Harger, loc. cit., p. 120. 

Hahitat. — Simmons' Harbor, north shore Lake Superior. (Smith.) 

Length 8 ->". 

The ninth American species, described below, is the third form of 
Lysiopetalid which is known to inhabit caves, and the only one beside 
the species which stands fifth in the above list which is totally l>lind. I 
name the species for Dr. C. A. White, United States paleontologist. It 
is a hairy form, like the four preceding, and will, no doubt, with those 
constitute a pretty homogeneous group. 

ZYGONOPUS,* uov. gen. 

Char. </e/?.— Sixth pair of legs A^ery robust and with the third joint 
greatly swollen (a unique feature amongst Myriapods, 
and one which, like the claspers and intromittent 
organ of Branchipods, is to be regarded as a second- 
ary sexual character, and of value in the character- 
ization of a genus). 

9. Zygonopus whitei, n. sp. 

Cliar. sjjmf.— Head with short, dense hairs. No 
eyes, but there is a Avell-marked depression, or rather 
vertical excavation, extending from the end of the la- 
brum to behind and above the insertion of theantennse. 
Behind the antenna? the head is much swollen, owing rig. i. Front view of 

head ana antennae 

to the outwardly bulging basal pieces of the jaws; Pig. 2. swoikn cth leg 

•^ ^ ^ . . .or clasper. 

labrum emarginate interiorly ; epicranuim emargm- rig. 3. Normal kg. 
ate behind to receive the anterior semicircular margin of the first 
*From ^vybg, a yoke, pair; yove, that which generates; aud 7roi\, foot (ley). 




528 PEOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

scutum. Antennae pilose, rather robust, 7-joiutecl, 5tli longest; next 
longest in the 3fl joint, then the 4th, 2(1, Gth, 1st, and 7th, which last is 
provided with two or three blimt, tactile processes at the tip. Segments 
o2, including the head; an impressed dorsal line as in SpirostrepJion 
ccesioannulatus. Delicate and numerous impressed lines on the hind 
margins of the dorsal scutes. Six bristles surmount each scute; two are 
placed obliquely on each side, and another is closer to the median line 
on each side ; the upper ones on the four penultimate segments are at 
or near the posterior margin, aud are shorter, blunter, and stouter; two 
of them i^roject backwards from the margin of the preanal scute. Ap- 
parently no pores. Forty-seven pairs of legs in ^^ , of which 45 are 
of the normal shape; 1st, 2d, 3d, 1th, and 5th gradually longer; <i 
wide interval between the 5th and Gth pairs, the latter very robust, the 
3d joint being much swollen and somewhat flattened inside, with the 
terminal and basal joints stouter than in the remainiug legs; 7th x^air 
weak, but normal; place" of copulatory apparatus iu the position of the 
8th; 9th j^air 2-jointed, with basal joint very short, while the 2d is four or 
five times as long and greatly swollen, looking in shape like a minute 
melon, and is extended horizontally outwards the same as the similar 
l^air of or g'dus in Trichojyetalum. Forty-eight pairs of legs in 9; appen- 
dages of 3d segment aborted as usual ; sexual openings bounded laterally 
by rounded elevations, i^ormal posterior legs slender and pilose. The 
bristles on the back of the animal are received into basal sockets, and 
when removed give the appearance of a i^ore with an elevated rim. A 
yellowish substance adheres to the hairs in drops or beads in alcoholic 
specimens, which may be the offensive secretion of the animal which 
has exuded at the base of the bristles, though there is none of the char- 
acteristic odor ai)parent to the smell. Length of the animal 8.5""". Color 
nearly white. 

Of the above singular form I have received four specimens, three 
males and one female, which were sent me b}' Dr. C. A. White, who ob- 
tained them from the owner of Luray Cave, in Virginia, who had col- 
lected them in the cavern himself. Some time last summer he sent me 
specimens M'hich, upon being subjected to a test with acetic acid, proved 
to be only a calcareous crust which had been deposited over dead speci- 
mens lying in the cave. These were collected by himself, and were in- 
teresting as showing how pseudomorphs of organic forms might be de- 
veloped in caverns. The acid, however, dissolved them completely, and 
no vestige of the organic basis upon wliich they were molded remained. 
I at first supposed them to be some form of Jiilus, but could not be cer- 
tain. 

Out of nine related species known to inhabit this country but two are 
blind, the other being the SplroHtreplion {Scoterpea) copei Packard, which 
inhabits Mammoth Cave, Kentucky. Another, which, according to Pro- 
fessor Cope, inhabits Wyandotte Cave, Crawford County, Indiana ; Er- 
hart's Cave, Montgomery County ; aud Spruce Run and Big Stony Creek 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 529 

Caves, in Giles County, Virginia, curiously enougli, is not blind. This 
is paralleled in the case of two species of spiders, however, which were 
collected for me in a cave in Oregon, over a year ago, by Professor Cope. 
In one of them there is not a vestige of the eyes reuiaining, while in the 
other they are well developed. A Myriapod, which appears to be a 
Julus, from the same cavern also has eyes. The Folydesmus cavicola 
Packard, from a cave in Utah, seems to have well-developed eyes. The 
Orchesella cceca, Avhich still remains to be fully described, has very un- 
developed eyes, but differs in no other essential from its congeners. It 
was also collected in an Oregon cavern by Professor Cope. Multitudes 
of facts might be added, but the subject is too large a one for hasty gen- 
eralizations, and must be approached with the same thoroughness of 
purpose which has characterized the work of Messrs. Darwin and Wal- 
lace in their essays upon kindred subjects relating to the origination of 
species. We may be allowed, however, to add that, in the absence of 
proof to the contrary, with the increase in the number of known bliud 
forms which are often congeneric with light-loving species, there is the 
strongest kind of ground for supposing that they have descended from 
forms which had eyes, and which wandered into these recesses, where, 
after many generations had lived and died, a blind form appeared, 
which resulted from the gradual abortion of the visual organs of its 
ancestors. In proof of this we have the partially blind Orchesella, which 
now seems to be verging towards such a condition. In the absence of 
a greater number of facts we are not justified in inferring more. True, 
we have a few instances amongst the mollusks, some of which in their 
larval states have useful eyes, but which afterwards become useless and 
abort as the shell develops and gets thicker. Some terrestrial Myria- 
pods are blind, such as Eurypmtropus; so is Lumhricus, the earth-worm, 
and some of the dirt-abiding Thysanura, w^hich also live among fallen 
leaves, such as Campodea, while in the burrowing Sijmpkyla {.scolopen- 
drellcv) the eyes are reduced to a single pair, with little or no red or dark 
coloring in the tapetum, differing widely in this respect from the com- 
pound-eyed, terrestrial Myriapods. 



I)ESCKIE»TB©IV ©F A WE^^ SPECIES OF PRIOIVOTUS (PKIOIVOTUS 

Sf E5»fflAN©I»HKYS), FK0M THE COAST OF CAJLIFORNBA. 

By ^Y. W. IL,©CMINGT01V. 

Prionotus stephanophrys, sp. no v. 

L. lat. 53; D. 10-12; A. 11; P. 12; V. 1-5 ; C. 3-1-8-1-3. 

Body less elongate than m P. carolinus, head not quite three and a 
half; greatest depth five and a third times in total length. Greatest 
depth under third dorsal ray. 

Snout concave in profile; forehead convex immediately in front of eye, 
from which to the origin of the dorsal fin the profile rises in almost a 
Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 34 April 18, 1881. 



530 PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

straight line. Dorsal outline from origin of dorsal fin to caudal slightly 
sigmoid, the portion under base of second dorsal nearly straight, while 
the caudal peduncle widens at its extremity, is two and a half times as 
long as its least depth, and at its narrowest place one-third as deep as 
the greatest depth of the fish. Abdominal outline slightly curved. 

Snout twice as long as longitudinal diameter of eye, which is con- 
tained about four and a half times in the side of the head ; interorbital 
width slightly less than longitudinal diameter of eye. 

Bones of head less conspicuously striated than usual in the genus. 
Preorbital, suborbital ring and stay, and operculum distinctly striated, 
the striie radiating ; upper surface of head punctate, with short strife 
on the upper margins of the orbit and on the occiput. Top of head and 
interocular space almost flat, a serrated, crest-like ridge over each eyo 
(hence the specific name). The interorbital space unusually broad, not at 
all concave, as broad as eye; a slight trace of a cross furrow behind the 
eye. Central ridge of operculum distinct, and continued backwards 
considerably beyond its membranous edge as a strong, sharp si^ine. 
A similar shari) spine on the angle of the preoperculum. A strong 
spine, smaller than those on the gill-covers, on the scapular bone, and 
a similar one on the suprascapular region. A backward-directed pre- 
ocular spine. 

Mouth rather large, somewhat oblique, the maxillary extending to 
opposite front of eye; jaws nearly equal; entire upper edge of man- 
dible hidden by the preorbital when the mouth is closed; lower edge 
of preorbital set with small spines terminating the striic. Upper jaw 
two and one-sixth times in length of side of head. 

A band of several rows of villiform teeth along both jaws ; tip of the 
upper jaw emarginate and toothless; villiform teeth on palatines and 
vomer. Tongue thick and fleshy. Eye lateral, almost circular; inter- 
orbital area flat transversely. 

Gill-openings continuous, the membrane not joined to the isthmus; 
branchiostegals seven. Gill-rakers long and slender, about three- 
fourths as long as the diameter of the orbit. 

First dorsal arising a little anterior to the tip of the operculum; 
the third and longest spine nearly equal to half the length of the head, 
the ninth and tenth spines very short, nearly hidden in the skin. 
First and second dorsal spines serrated anteriorly. Second dorsal with 
a nearly straight upper margin, but slightly highest in front ; rays all 
once bifurcate. Anal commencing and ending slightly posterior to the 
origin and termination of the second dorsal ; rays all once bifurcate. 
Posterior margin of caudal slightly concave when exi:)anded; all the 
long rays except the two outer ones branched, the four central ones 
three times bifurcate. 

Pectoral i)ear-shaped when expanded; the membrane between the 
rays very wide; all the rays bifurcate except the uppermost and lower- 
most; the tip of the fin reaching to the eighth or ninth anal ray when 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 531 

turned straight "backwards. The three pectoral filaments very slender, 
the uppermost about half as long as the pectoral fin, which is con- 
tained two and two-thirds times in the total length. 

Yentrals four and three-fourths times in total length, their tips nearly 
reaching the vent ; all the rays once bifurcate, the last united by mem- 
brane at its base to the abdomen. 

Bases of pectoral and ventral fins oblique, the pectoral filaments in 
advance of the ventrals, which are inserted vertically below the an- 
terior margin of the pectorals. 

Scales of moderate size, finely ciliate. Lower jaw, gill-membrane, and 
sides and upper surface of head scaleless. Scales of breast rather 
smaller than those of back. A row of scales along the basal part of the 
outer. caudal rays, other fins scaleless. Lateral line simple. 

General color of body slaty gray or leaden upon the upi)er two-thirds, 
the lowest third white. A black spot on the dorsal between the fourt h 
and fifth spines, traces of it between the fifth and sixth. Three rows of 
black spots on the second dorsal, the spots set saddlewise across the 
rays. Three rows of black spots on caudal, the terminal row between 
the rays. Anal white. Pectoral black, with whitish cloudings. Upper 
part of head rather darker than the body, a silvery tint about the pos- 
terior portion of maxillary, lower part of gill-cover, and base of pectoral. 

A single specimen of this species was procured in the market of San 
Francisco, October, 1880, and was taken off Point Eeyes. It is now in 
the United States National Museum, numbered 27048, 

A large proportion of the fish brought to the San Francisco markets 
is procured in the tolerably" deep water of the region between the rocky 
islets known as the Farallones, the entrance of San Francisco Bay, and 
Point Eeyes, a rocky promontory some forty miles north of San Fran- 
cisco. This locality yielded the first specimens of A rtedius quadriseri- 
atus Locktn., Odontopyxis trispmosus Locktn., Agomis vulsus J. & G., 
Bracliyopsis verrucosus Locktn., Bracliyistlns rosacens J. & G., Rlppoglos- 
soides exilis J. & G., Atkeresthes stomias J. & G., Cynicofflossus pacijicus 
Locktn., and Glyptocephalus zachirns Locktn. Brachyopsis xyosternus 
J. & G. and Artedius pmjettensis Steind. occur there in tolerable abun- 
dance, and it has now furnished the first example of a genus hitherto 
not known to occur north of the Gulf of Fonseca. 

Giinther (Cat. Fish. Brit. Mus. ii, 195, 190) gives a short diagnosis of 
three species of Prionotus from the Pacific, P. horrens Eich., P. hiros- 
tratus Eich., both from the Gulf of Fonseca, and P. miles Jeuyns, from 
the Galapagos. P. stephanophrys most resembles the latter species, but 
has much longer pectorals and a different coloration, the latter being 
"above mottled brilliant tile-red; beneath silvery white". 



532 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 
Table of proportionate measurements, • 



Locality. 



Point EeyeSjCal. 



Inches lOOtha 

and of 

lOOths. length. 



Extreme length 

Length to base of middle caudal rays 

Body: 

Greatest height 

Least height of tail 

Length of caudal peduncle 

Preopercular spine 

Head: 

Greatest length to tip of opercular spine. 

Distance from snout to nape 

Greatrst depth at occiput 

Width ()t'iiit( lorbital area 

Length of snout 

Length of operculum to end of spine 

Length of maxillary 

Length of mandible 

Occipital process 

Diameter of orbit 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at third spine 

(/S'o/O h'uizth of base 

Height at h)ugest ray 

Height at last ray 

Anal: 

Distance from snout 

Length of base 

Height at longest ray 

Caudal : 

Length of middle rays 

L.^ngth of external rays 

Pectoral: 

Upper appendage 

Second apjienilage 

Third appemUige 

Length 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 

Length 

Branchiostegals 

Dorsal .* 

Anal 

Pectoral 

K^umber of scales in lateral line 



7.60 
6.35 



100 

26 
7 

15 
4 

41 
28 
22 
7 
15i 
14| 
16 
20 

36J 
25i 
17 
28 
15 
7 

02 
26 
IH 

21 
25 

25 
21 
17i 
47i 

32 

25 

VII 

X-12 

I-IO 

13-III 

54 



San Francisco, Cal., Novemher 15, 1880. 



THE FRIO ATE MACKEREIi, AUXIS KOCIIEI, ON THE NEIV EJVGI.AIV© 

COAST. 

By O. BISOIVN OOOBE. 

The United States Fish Commission has obtained numerous speci- 
mens of a fish before entirely unknown in the Western Atlantic. This 
is the frigate mackerel, Auxis Rocliei, twenty-eight barrels of whicb 
were taken in a mackerel seine ten miles east of Block Island, on the 
3d of August, by the schooner "American Eagle", Capt. Josiab Chase, of 
Provincetown, Mass. 

The frigate mackerel resembles, in some particulars, the common 
mackerel ; in others, the bonito — the genus Auxis being intermediate in 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL • MUSEUM. 533 

its cnaracter between the Scomber and the related genera Pelamijs and 
Orcymis. It has the two dorsal fins remote from each other, as in Scom- 
ber, and the general form of the body is slender, like that of the mack- 
erel. The body is, however, somewhat stouter, and, instead of being 
covered with small scales of uniform size, has a corselet of larger scales 
under and behind the pectoral fins. Instead of the two small keels upon 
each side of the tail, which are so noticeable in the mackerel, it has the 
single, more prominent keel of the bonito and the tunny. Its color is 
grayish blue, something like that of the pollack, the belly being lighter 
than the back. Under the posterior part of the body, above the lateral 
line, are a few cloudings or maculations resembling those of the mack- 
erel. The occurrence of a large school of this beautifal species in our 
w^aters is very noteworthy, for the fish now for the first time observed 
are very possibly the precursors of numerous schools yet to follow. It 
is not many years since the bonito became an inhabitant of our waters, 
and the distribution and habits of the frigate mackerel are supposed to 
be very simihir to those of the bonito, Sarda peJamys, and the little 
tunny, Orcymis thynnus, which also first came on the coast in 1871, and 
have since been found in considerable numbers. 

The frigate mackerel has been observed in the West Indies and other 
parts of the tropical Atlantic, as well as on the coast of Europe. In 
Great Britain it is called the "plain bonito". It is not unusual in the 
Bermudas, where it is called the "frigate mackerel", a name not inap- 
l)ropriate for adoption in this country, since its general appearance is 
more like that of the mackerel than the bonito, wliile in swiftness and 
strength it is more like the larger members of this family. 

Since the first appearance of this fish many new observations of its 
abundance have been received. These fish seem to have come in im- 
mense schools into the waters between Montauk Point and George's 
Bank ; and from Mr. Clarke's statements it appears that they have been 
observed in small numbers by fishermen in previous years. Several 
vessels have come into Newport recently reporting their presence in 
immense numbers in the vicinity of Block Island. It will interest the 
" ichthyophagists " to know that several persons in Newport have tested 
the fish, and pronounce it inferior to the bonito. Part of the flesh, tliat 
on the posterior part of the body, is white, but behind the gills it is 
black and rank, while the meat near the backbone is said to be of dis- 
agreeable, sour flavor. 

It is hard to predict what its influence will be upon other fishes 
already occupying our waters. Its mouth is small and its teeth feeble, 
so that it is hardly likely to become a ravager, like the bonito and the 
bluefish. There is little probability, on the other hand, that its advent 
will be of any special importance from an economical point of view, for 
its oil does not seem to be very abundant, and it would hardly pay at 
present to capture it solely for the purpose of using its flesh in the 
manufacture of fertilizers. 



534 PKOCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

Mr. A. Howard Clarke, iu cliarge of the Fish Commission station at 
Gloucester, lias commimicated to Professor Baird some interesting facts 
regarding its abundance. From tbese statements it would also appear 
that the species has been observed occasionally in past years. He 
writes under date of August 10: "I have received this morning from 
the schooner Titz J. Babson', just arrived from Block Island, a fish 
answering to your description of the Auxis, having a corselet of scales 
around the pectoral fin, as in the tunny. The captain of the vessel, 
Joshua Eiggs, reports that about a week ago he had a hundred barrels 
in the seine at one time, and saw over twenty schools of them. He saw 
them as far east as Sow-and-Pig Light Ship. They are very easy to catch, 
flip like menhaden, do not rush, and are not frightened at the seine. 
They go in inimense numbers ; he thinks as many as one thousand bar- 
rels to a school. The day after the appearance of these fish the mack- 
erel disappeared, but he does not know whether the mackerel were 
driven away by them or not. They feed on mackerel food. Mr. Daniel 
Hiltz, of the same vessel, says that he caught one of just the same kind, 
in February, 1879, on a haddock-trawl on the eastern i)art of the Middle 
Bank, in forty fathoms of water. He took it to Boston, where it was 
called a young bonito. 

"Mr. John Henderson, of the schooner ' Sarah C. Wharf, says that two 
vessels caught such fish recently eastward of here. The schooner 
'American Eagle', of Proviucetown, took a number of barrels of them 
into Newport, and sold them for a dollar a barrel. Another Cape Cod 
vessel" — he does not know her name — "took about fifty barrels of them 
and threw them away. All the mackerel-seiuers from Block Island 
report seeing quantities of this new fish within the past foriuight. 
The captain of the schooner 'Sarah C. Wharf says he first saw them a 
fortnight ago, some fifteeu miles off Block Island. The captain and 
several of the crew of the 'Ella M. Johnson', of Kewburyport, just 
arrived from Block Island, state they saw abundance of the Auxis, but 
did not know what it was until reports came from you at Newport. 
They opened one and found iu its stomach the ordinary red-mackerel 
food. This crew differ with the crew of the schooner 'Fitz J. Babson', 
with regard to the ease of capturing them ; think them rather difficult 
to take; say they fli[> like porgies, and do not rush like mackerel. They 
saw ten large schools of them on Saturday last, when some fifteen miles 
south of Block Island." 

I hope that any reader of the American Naturalist who has seen this 
fish will mention it. Some may, perhaps, have an opportunity of study- 
ing its habits. The length of those I have seen ranges from 12 to 16 
inches, and their weight from three-quarters of a j)Ound to a pound and 
a half or more. Those sent to New York market were part of the lot 
taken by the schnooer "American Eagle" and brought into Newport, 
whence they were shipped by Mr. Thompson, a fish-dealer of that place. 
It would require from eighty to one hundred of them to fill a barrel; so 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 535 

the estimate of Captain Eiggs, that there are a thousand barrels in one 
of the schools, shows how exceedingly abundant they must be. The 
name "frigate mackerel", used in Bermuda, would seem to be the best 
name for use in this country, since the fish resemble the mackerel more 
than they do the bouito or tunny. 

Capt. IST. E. Atwood, of Provincetown, Mass., the veteran fisherman- 
ichthyologist, has examined the specimens, and is satisfied that they 
belong to the same species with a fish which he found abundant in the 
Azores in 1840, when, led by the reports of Cape Cod whalers, he went 
to these islands in search of mackerel, the mackerel-fishing being poor 
at home. No mackerel v/ere found except the frigate mackerel referred 
to in this note. 



NOTACANTiailS PHASCJANORJJS, A NEW^ SPECIES OF IVOTACAIV- 
TSIID^X FROlfl TME OKAi^O BANKS OF IVE WFOaJi'V»i,A3»I]). 

By G. BBOWrV OOODE. 

The United States Fish Commission has received from the schooner 
"Gatherer," of Gloucester, Captain Briggs Gilpatrick, a remarkable fish 
taken from the stomach of a ground-shark, Somniosus hrevipinnis^ on 
the Grand Bank of Newfoundland. 

Notacanthus, Blocli. 

Notacanthus, Bloch. 

Acanthonotus, Bloch, Iclithyologia, xii, 1797, p. 113, pi. ccccxxxi. (No de- 
scription separate from tliat of species A. nastis.) — Schneider, Bloch, 
Syst. Ichth. 1801, p. 330, pi. xlvii. 

Notacanthus, Lacepkde, Hist. Nat. Poiss. 1804. 

Head and body much compressed, the body elongate, produced in a 
long pointed tail, shaped like that of Macrurus or Fierasfer. Snout pro- 
duced, obtuse, rounded at its tip. The cleft of the mouth inferior. (The 
specimen is mutilated, but the maxillaries do not appear to be protrac- 
tile. Dorsal fin almost rudimentary, consisting of very short, flexible 
spines, remote from each other and not connected by a membrane. Anal 
fin very long ; its origin close behind the vent, which is situated nearly 
midway of the length of the body ; its anterior portion is composed of 
separate flexible spines, without membrane, resembliug those of the 
dorsal ; these gradually lengthen, grading into the articulated branched 
rays. No caudal. Ventrals broad, with broad, peduncle-like bases, 
closely contiguous, separated only by a slight groove at the base, situ- 
ated near the vent. Teeth acicular, in single rows upon maxillaries, in 
a double row upon mandibulars, viUiform and in a double row upon the 
palatines. Vomerine teeth not apparent {!). Scales very luuiierous, of 
moderate size, round, thin, flexible. Branchiostegals about S; gills 4. 

Notacanthus phasganorus, new species. 

The body is much compressed, its greatest width slightly more than 
one-third the height of the body at the vent, its width at the tail from 



536 PEOCEEDINGS . OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 

one-fourtli to oue-fiftli of its lieight, and about one-thirteenth of the 
length of the head. Its length is about one-eighth its height at the vent. 

The scales are round, thin, flexible, very small upon the head, not 
wider than the diameter of one of the dorsal spines, but upon the anterior 
half of the body they are about three times as large, decreasing in size 
upon the posterior half, until upon the tail they are smaller than upon 
the head. The number of scales in the lateral line is not far from 400, 
but in the i)artially digested specimen before me it is impossible to make 
an exact enumeration. The number between the lateral line and the 
dorsal fin is about 20, between the lateral line and the anal fin about 36. 
The head is covered in every part, even the lips, with small scales. 
There are about 40 between the eye and the end of the opercula,r flap. 
The scales are deeply imbedded, and in life are probably hidden beneath 
a slimy epidermis. 

The length of the head is contained about seven and one-third times 
in that of the body. Its bones are all flexible, and their outlines are 
invisible without dissection, the whole being covered with a leathery 
skin protected by scales. The width of the interorbital space appears 
to be (in the mutilated head) somewhat greater than the length of snout, 
and about one-fourth the length of the head. The diameter of the orbit 
appears to be about one-half the width of the interorbital space. The 
length of the postorbital portion of the head is nearly three times that 
of the snout. The length of the mandibular bone slightly exceeds twice 
the diameter of the eye; that of the upper jaw is considerably greater. 
The teeth in the upper jaw are blunt, acicular, set side by side like the 
teeth of a comb, about 32 on each side. In the lower jaw they are 
shorter, slenderer, and in double rows. Villiform teeth upon the pala- 
tines. 

The dorsal fin begins at a distance from the snout not far from two 
and three-fourth times the length of the head, and nearly over the one 
hundred and tenth scale of the lateral line. It consists of ten low, widely 
separated spines, unconnected by any membrane. The distance between 
the first and tenth spine is nearly double the length of the head. 

The spines from the fourth to the ninth are about equidistant, while 
the other interspaces are shorter. 

The distance from the snout to the anal fin is equal to about four 
times the length of the head. The anterior spinous portion of the anal 
resembles the dorsal and is devoid of connecting membrane. The mem- 
braue is also absent from the posterior half of the fin, biit may possibly 
have been destroyed. The anal rays extend to the tip of the elongate 
tail and number about 130, the number of spines being 19. The anal 
begins immediately behind the vent, and its length of base is slightly 
less than half that of the body — less by a length about equal to the dis- 
tance from the angle of the mouth to the gill-opening. 

The pectoral fin is placed at a distance behind the gill-opening about 
equal to the width of its own base. Its length is at least double this 



PROCEEDINGS OF UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM. 537 

distance— how much more cannot be determined, but the lin is evidently 
short and rounded in contour, the upper rays longest. Its base is 
stout-peduncular, and thickly covered with scales. 

The distance of the ventrals from the snout is equal to that of the 
dorsal, though its insertion is slightly in advance of that of the dorsal. 
The two ventrals are closely adjacent, separated by a narrow groove, 
broad, with peduncle-like bases, thickly covered with scales. They 
are provided with two spines and eight or nine (as nearly as the speci- 
men will permit determination) rays. 

D. X; A. XIX (130); C. 0; P. (17); V. II, 8-9. 

Measuremenis. 

Millimeters. 

Extreme lengtli 9g,3 

Body: 

Height at vent 110 

Greatest width (40) 

Head: 

Greatest length '. 132 

Width of inteiorbital area (;i4) 

Length of snout 30 

Length of postorbital portion (measured diagonally) 87 

Length of upper jaw 40 

Length of mandible 3G 

Diameter of orbit 17 

Dorsal : 

Distance from snout 350 

Length of base 215 

Length of tirst spine 2 

Length of last spine 7 

Distance between first and second spines 7 

Distance between second and third spines 19 

Distance between third and fourth spines 22 

Distance between fourth and fifth, fifth and sixth, sixth and seventh, sev- 
enth and eighth, and eighth and ninth spines 25 

Distance between ninth and tenth spines 21 

Anal : 

Distance from snout 437 

Length of base 525 

Height at first spine 2 

Pectoral : 

Distance from snout 150 

Length (40) 

Ventral : 

Distance from snout 350 

Length 20+ 



IISTDEX. 



A. 

Page. 

Abeillia typica 317 

Abeona 303,304 

aurora 300,304,456 

minima 28,299,300,304,456 

Acalephas 132 

Acanella noi-mani 358, 359 

Acantliarcus pomotis 97 

Acantbocarpus alexandri 418, 451 

Acanthonotua 535 

nasns 535 

Accipiter 243 

cooperi 193 

fuscus 193 

mexicanus 213 

Acella 160 

Acestxura beliodori 315 

mulsanti 315 

Acbiras lineatus 77 

AcipenseridsB 114 

Acipenser acutirostris 457 

brachyrbynchus 457 

medirostris..- 457 

osyrbyncbus 114 

rutbenus 114 

transraoutanus 457 

Acirsa borealis 377 

costulata 377 

Escbricbtii 377 

gracilis, new species 377, 404, 406 

prajlonga 377 

Aclis 377 

pellucida 406 

striata, new species 377, 404, 406 

Walleri 377,404,406 

Acmtea rubella 391,404,406 

testudinalis 127 

testudinalis var. alveua 127 

Acrothele 47 

note on 47 

coriacea 47 

granulata 47 

intermedia 47 

subsidua 47 

Acrotreta? subsidua 47 

Acrybia flava 372 

Actinolite 333 

Actodromas 227,243 

acuminata 199,222,230 

bairdii 200,222 

cooperi 199 

f uscicollis 199 

maculata 199 

minuta 237 

minutilla 200 

temmincki 237 



Page. 

Acton, H. B 140 

Adams, A 333 

H. and A 38I 

Adamsia 426,428 

Adelomyia melanogenys 317 

Admete coutbouyi 406 

Adularia 334 

iEcbmopborus 228, 243 

clarkil 210 

occidentalis 210 

iEchmoptila albifrons 221 

^gialitis 243 

cantiana nivosa 199 

curonica 10,198,221,230 

curonicus 10 

biaticula 198, 221, 229 

meloda 199 

meloda circumcincta 199, 221 

melodus var. circumcinctus 221 

microrbyncbus 10, 221 

semipalmata 198 

^giotbus 243 

brewsteri 177, 216 

caaescens 2, 177, 229 

canescens exilipes 2, 177 

(ilavirostris var. ) brewsteri 216 

fuscescens 235 

linaria 2, 177 

linaria bolboUi 2, 177, 216, 235 

linaria var. fuacescens 2, 214 

rostratua 235 

.SIgitbalus flaviceps 22^ 

.aiolia (Tergipes) despecta 127 

^salon 226,243 

columbarius 192 

suckleyii 192,220 

regulus 192,220,229 

ricbardaonii 192,220 

.aistrelata bulweri 223 

Aetobatis laticeps 457 

Agassiz 2, 327 

Alexander 326, 362 

Agate 334 

Agelaeua 243 

pboenicens 4, 182 

gubernator 183 

tricolor 4, 183 

Aglieactia caumatonata 317 

cupripennis 317 

olivaceocauda 317 

AgonidsB / 85, 480 

a new Callfomian species of 60 

Agonoid, description of a new Callfomian. . 330 

fisb, new, from Monterey Bay 152 

03,153 

acipenseriuus 332 

539 



540 



INDEX. 



Pago. 

Agonus AnntB 332 

Bark.ini 332 

(Brachyopsis) AnnsB 332 

Barkani 332 

cataphractus 332 

rostratus 63, 153 

vnlsua, a new Californian fish 330 

new species 330, 332, 531 

Agyrtria brevirostris 318 

Candida 318 

fluviatilis 318 

leucogastor 318 

linnaei 214 

niveipectus 318 

tephrocephala 318 

tobaci 214 

Ah Sam 24 

Aithurus polytmus 313 

Aix 243 

sponsa 204 

Ajaja 10, 226, 243 

rosea 10, 198 

Alaska, description of a new fish from 58 

Uranidea microstoma from 58 

Alauda 225, 243 

arvensis 185,218,225,238 

calandra 236 

Alaudidaj 239 

Albatross, black-footed 208 

short-tailed 208 

sooty 209 

yellow-nosed 209 

Albicore 273, 275 

Albite 333 

Albula conorhynchns 107 

vidpes 30,107,457 

Albulidffi 30,107 

Alburnellus 508 

dilectns 508 

AlbiTjnops 503 

longirostris, new species 504, 515 

taurocephalus, new species 503, 515 

xienocephalus 504, 515 

Albiirnus dilectus 508 

Alca 243 

alle 228 

antiqua 228 

arctica 228 

cirrhata 228 

cristatella 228 

impennis 211 

kamtschatica 12 

pygmsea 12 

torda 228 

AlcedinidiB 239 

Alcidse 240 

Alcyonidium hispidum 131 

Alepidosauridse ^ . . . 107 

Alepidosaurus borealis 457 

ferox 107 

Alexia myosotis 376, 379 

AUanite 333 

Allen, Mr 7,255 

Alle 228, 243 

nigricans 211,228 



Page. 

AUophanite 333 

Allqposus 362 

moUis 363,403,405 

Allorisma 46 

Abnandite 333 

Alopias Tulpes 458 

Alosa sapidissima 108 

Altaite 333 

Aluco 7,226,243 

flammeus americanus 190 

pratincola 7 

Alum. 333 

Alutera cuspicauda 76 

Schoepfii 76 

Amadina rnbro-nigra 238 

Amalgam 333 

Amazilia 225, 243 

beryllina 319 

cervineiventris 219 

cinnamomea 318 

cyanifrons 319 

cyanura 319 

dumerili 318 

edwardi 319 

erythronota 319 

fuscicaudata 187, 219, 233, 318 

graysoni 318 

marias 319 

niveiventris 319 

sophife 319 

virdiventris 319 

xantusi 219 

yucatanensis 187, 219, 233, 318 

Amazonstone 334 

Amber 333 

Ambloplites 498 

seneus 498 

rupestris 97, 498, 515 

Amblygonite 333 

"American eagle " taking Anxis 532, 534 

America, ^North, catalogue of birds of 163 

Northeastern, additions to marine 

invertebrata of . . 356 
descriptions of new 

invertebrata of - . 356 
critical remarks on 
invertebrata of . . 356 

American Rhinobatidae 516 

Amethyst 334 

Amia calva 113 

Amiidte 113 

Amitra, new genus 478 

liparina, new species 477, 478 

Amiurus 513 

albidus Ill 

catus 112 

erebennus 21 

lophius Ill 

melas 112,513,515 

natalis var. lividus Ill 

nebulosus 112 

nigricans Ill 

vulgaris 513, 515 

subsp. seluTus 513 

var. aelunis Ill 



INDEX. 



541 



Page. 

Ammoccetes plumljeus .^^ 458 

Ammocrypta 490 

beanii 490 

gelida, new species 490, 515 

Ammodromus 242 

caudacutus 178 

nelsoni 178,217 

maritiiuus 2, 178 

var. nigrescens . . . 217 

nigrescens 2,178,217 

Ammod ytes americanus 102 

(tobianus) personatus 456 

Ammody tidfe 102 

AmpelidsB 239 

Ampclis 242 

cedrorum 175 

gamilus 175 

Ampbibolite 333 

Amphipoda 120,414,447,451,452 

Amphipods of Provmceto-wn 117 

Ampbipolis clegans 132 

Amphisphyra 381 

globosa 382,404,406 

hyalina 383 

pellucida 382, 383, 404 

AmpMspiza 225,242 

beUii 180 

nevadensis 180, 217 

bilineata 180 

Ampbistichus argenteus 28, 456 

Ampbitboij longimana 117, 121 

Ampbitrite omata ' 119 

Ampbiura squamata 132 

Acacbis avara 126 

costulata 406 

Analcite 333 

AnarrbicbadidsB 82, 477 

Anarrbicbas latifrons 82 

lupus 82,337,477 

minor 82 

Anarrbicbtby s ocellatns 454 

Anas 242 

boscas 11,203 

canagieus 227 

clangula 227 

cygnus 227 

dominica 15, 16,227 

fulvigula 11,203,222 

hyperborea 227 

leucocepbala 16 

moscbata 237 

obscura 11, 203 

var. fulvigula 222 

Anatase 333 

Anatidaj 240 

Ancula cristata 409 

Andalusite - 333 

Anderson, Dr. C. L 153,455 

Trachyptems J altivelis 

taken by 455 

Prof. A. J 410 

Nemichtbys avocetta 

presented by 410 

Angite 334 

Anglesite ^....^„...n.^ 333 



Page. 

AnguiUa bostoniensis „ 21,112, 281 

rostrata 21, 112 

vulgaris 21 

Anguille pimperneau 281 

Anguillida) 21, 112 

Angulns tener 129 

Anbinga, American 206 

Anbydrite 333 

Annelida 122 

of nortbeastern coastof America. . 356 

Anomia aculeata 408 

electrica 130 

epbippium 130 

glabra 124,130 

squamula 130 

Anomura 419, 451, 452 

Anoplarcbus alectrolophus 454 

atropurpureus 265 

crista-gaUi 454 

Anoplopoma fimbria 455 

Anortbite 333 

Anortbura 224,243 

alascensis 170, 215 

communis 224 

troglodytes byemalis 170 

pacificns 170, 215 

Anous 243 

stolidus 208,237 

Anser 243 

albifrons 203,222,230 

gambeli 203 

frontalis 214 

rossii 222 

segetum 237 

Antalis striolata 394 

Antedon Sarsii 359 

Antennariidse 75, 470 

Autenor... 226,243 

Tinicinctas barrisi 193,233 

Antbostoma fragile 123 

robustum 117,123 

Antbozoa 132 

Autbropbyllite 333 

Anthus 243 

ludovicianus 170 

cervinus 236 

pratensis 170,215,231 

Antimony 333 

Autrostomi 5 

Antrostomus 5, 243 

carolinensis 5, 188 

vociferus 5 

Annrida maritima 376 

Apatite 333 

Apeltes quadracus 77 

Apbantocbroa cirrocbloris 310 

Apbelocoma 225, 243 

califomica 185 

floridana 1*^4 

sordida arizonaj 185, 233 

ultramarina coucbii 185, 229 

woodbousei 1^4 

Apboristia atricauda, new species 23, 453 

omata 24 

plagiusa " '-■ 22 



542 



INDEX. 



Page. 

AphrerloderidBB - 501 

Aphredoderus 501 

cookianus 501 

isolepis 501 

sayanus 501, 515 

Aphriza 243 

virgata 198,230 

Apocope vulnerata 462 

Apodichthys '. 138 

flavidus 139, 140, 265, 454 

fucornm, new species, 139, 140,265,454 

sanguineus 139, 140 

viresccns 139, 140 

Apomotis 498 

cyanellus 97, 498, 515 

Apopliyllite 333 

Aporrliais occidentalis 406 

Aquila 243 

chry saetus canadensis 194 

pelagica 237 

Arabella opalina 123 

Aragonite 333 

Aramidaj 239 

Aramus 243 

pictus 202,231 

Area 130 

glacialis 401,402,405,407 

pectunculoides 405, 407 

var. septentrionalis- . . 401 

var. septentrionalis 407 

Arceuthornis 224 

Archaster Agassizii 359 

americanus 359 

Flora} 359 

Archibuteo 243 

ferrngineus 194 

lagopus 213 

lagopus sancti-johannis 194 

Archosargus probatoceplialus 22, 95 

Arctils americanus 431 

depressus, new species 429, 451 

Axdea 243 

cinerea 197, 221, 229 

cyanirostris 235 

herodias 197 

ludoviciana 226 

occidentalis 197 

rufa 226 

tricolor 10, 226 

"wurdemannii 214 

ArdeidsB 239 

Ardetta 243 

exilis 197 

Argentina 483 

pretiosa 68 

silus 484 

Argentite 333 

Argina pesata 130 

Argonauta argo 359, 363, 403, 405 

Arguerite 333 

Argyreiosus vomer 89 

Argyriosus paciflcus 18 

Argyrosomus artedi 105 

artedi var. sisco 106 

clupeiformls 105 



Page. 

Ariopsis felis 112 

Arkansas, new invertebrate fossils from. . . . 157 

ArquatcUa 227,243 

conesii 199, 221 

maritima 199 

ptilocnemis 199, 221 

Arsenicum 333 

Artedius 460 

lateralis 454 

notospilotus 454 

pugettensis 454, 531 

quadriseriatus 25, 454, 531 

Articulata 161 

Asbestus var 333 

Asbolite 335 

Ascelicbtby s, new genus 204, 4C0 

rhodorus, new species. .264, 265, 266, 
454 

Asphalt 333 

Aspicottus 460 

bison 454 

Aspidopboroides inermis 454 

monopterygius 85, 480 

Asiatic Goldtn Plover 9 

Asio 7,226,243 

accipitrinus 7, 191 

americanus 191 

wilsonianus 7 

Assiminea Gray ana 376, 379, 404, 409 

Astarte castanea 129, 408 

crenata 399,405,407 

lens 399,405 

quadrans 408 

undata 408 

? Astarte crebricostata 399 

var. lens 399 

Asteracantbion berylinus 132 

Asterias iirenicola 132 

Forbesii 132 

Astragalinus 225,243 

barbatus 236 

lawrenceii 177 

psaltria 177 

arizonas 177, 216, 232 

mexicanus 177, 229, 232 

tristis 177 

yarrelli 236 

Astrorbiza 358 

Astroscopus anoplus 83 

y.grfecum 18 

Astur 243 

atricapiUus 193 

striatulns 193, 220 

Asturina 243 

nitida plagiata '. 194,233 

Astur palumbarius, var. striatulns 220 

Astyris lunata 126 

rosacea 408 

zonalis 408 

Atacamite 333 

Atalanta Peronii 391,404 

Athene cunicularia 213, 237 

wbitneyi 220,226 

Atheresthes, new genus 51,302 

stomias 155, 454, 531 



INDEX. 



543 



Page. 

Atherina 29 

Atlierinida} 29,103 

Atherinops 29 

afflnis 29,456 

Atherinopsis calif orniensis 456 

Atthia 225 243 

ellioti 314 

heloisaj 187,219,233,314 

Atwood, Capt. N. E 535 

A uchenopterus monophthalmus 147 

Audubon 2,5,7,164,224,234 

Auk, Cassin's 211 

crested 211 

great 211 

least 211 

parrot 211 

razor-billed 211 

■whiskered 211 

Aulorhynchus flavidus 453 

Aurichalcite 333 

Auriculina insculpta ? 381, 404, 406 

Auriparus 224, 243 

flaviceps 169, 232 

Autolytus comutus 123 

Autouoii grandimana 121 

Ausis 532, 534 

Rochei 532 

on New England coast 532 

Aventurlne 334 

oligoclase 334 

Avicula 359 

hirundo J 402 

hirnndo ? var. nitida 402, 405, 407 

lin.sruiformis 157 

Avocet, American 201 

Avocettiila recurvirostri? 316 

Axinns ferruginosus 400 

Sarsii 399 

Axius armatus, new species 433, 451 

serratus 435 

dredged by the ' 'Fish Hawk' ' 435 

stirynchus 435 

Ayres, Dr 297, 325, 326, 327, 353, 465 

note on a forgotten paper of, on 
the nomenclature of San Fran- 

ci SCO Cyprinoid fishes 325 

Aythya 243 

americana 204 

vallisneria 204 

Azurite 333 

B. 
Bagre 146 

BairdieUa argyroleuca 20, 93 

punctata 93 

BairdandGirard 329 

Baird, Prof 1, 3, 6, 10, 13, 46, 163, 164, 256, 481 

Balanoglossus aurantiacus 124 

Balantium recurvum 393, 404, 407 

Balanus balanoides 122 

Baldpate 203 

Balistes capriscus 77 

vetula 77 

BalistidsB 76 

Banak 260 



Page, 
^'i"*® 333 

Baritocalcite 333 

Bam Owl, American 7 

Owls 7 

Bartram y 

Bartramia 227 243 

laticauda 227 

longicauda 2OI 

Basanite 334 

Basileuterus 224 243 

beUii 174, 2I6, 229, 232 

culicivorus 174, 216, 229, 232 

Basilinna 225 243 

leucotis 319 

xantusi 6,188,219,229,319 

Basking shark 53 

"Bass" 497 

Bathymaster signatns 455 

Bathynectes longispina 418, 451 

"Bat-ma" 256 

BatrachidsB 25 83 

Batrachus t<iu g3 

Bdellostoma poly trcma 458 

Stouti 458 

Bdelloura Candida 125 

Bean, Dr 17,69,75,474,477 

Beaufort, North Carolina, now species of 

Caranx from 486 

"Becass" 256,257 

Bela 363,364,306 

angnlosa 365 

cancellata 363,364,403 

declivis 365 

decussata 365 

elegans 365 

exarata 364, 366, 367, 403, 406 

harpularia 363,367 

hebes, new species 367,403,406 

impressa? 365,403,406 

laevigata 367 

mitrula 366 

Pingelii 364,403 

pyramidalis 408 

rngulata 366,403 

Sarsii, new species 364, 403 

simplex 367, 403, 406 

tenuicostata 365,403,406 

Trevelyana 365,403 

turricula 303,366 

violacea 406 

Bellona cristata 316 

exilis 317 

omata 316 

Belone 459 

cantraini 459 

exuis 30, 459 

generic relations of 459 

hians 103,459 

latimana 459 

latimanus 103 

longirostris 103,459 

melanochira 459 

notata 459 

vulgaris 459 

Belonida) 103 



544 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Belonopsis leuchtenbergi 410 

Benedict, Mr 132 

Bermudan Fishes, Goode's Catalogue of ... . 18 

Bemicla...- 243 

bamstoni 235 

brenta 203 

canadensis 203 

hutchinsi 203 

leucoparia 203 

occidentalis 203 

leucolsema 235 

leucopsia 203,230 

nigricans 203 

Bcrtheirite 333 

BerycidsB 92 

Beryl 333 

Bewick's Swan 222 

Biotite 323 

Bird, red-billed Tropic 206 

yellow-biUed Tropic 206 

Birds, North American, revisions of nomen- 
clature of 1 

Cones's Check List 

of 1 

Smithsonian Cata- 
logue of 1 

Birds of North America, Catalogue of 163 

Bismuth 333 

Bitterp, American 197 

least 197 

Bittium nigrum 127 

Bitumen. 333 

Blackbird, Brewer's 183 

red-and-buff-shouldered 182 

red-and-black-shouldered 183 

red-and- white-shouldered 183 

rusty 183 

Savannah 190 

yellow-headed 182 

Blackhead, little 204 

ring-billed 204 

Blake, J. H; 125,, 129, 132 

Blennicottus 460 

Blonnida;? 63 

Blenniidse , 25,82 

Blennioids 347 

Blennius crinitus 82 

regius 476 

Blenny 147 

Blepharichthys crinitus 90 

Blepsias 460 

cirrhosus 455 

Bluebird 167 

Califomian 167 

Kooky Mountain 167 

Blue Shark 52 

Bobolink 182 

Bobwhite 196 

Bodianus pallidus 20 

Boeck 449 

Boleichthys 495,496,497 

chlorosoma 496 

Boleosoma 492, 495 

brevipume 492 

camuiTim 496 



Page. 

Boleosoma gracile 496 

maculatum 492, 515 

olmstedi 492 

Bolocera Tuediae 358 

Bonaparte 4, 224 

Bonasa 9,243 

jobsii 235 

unibellus 196 

sabinei 196 

umbeUoides 196 

Booby, red footed 206 

Boraclte 333 

Borax 333 

Boreomysis arctica 445, 451 

Botaurus 243 

lentiginosus 10, 197 

Bothragonus Swani 454 

Botryllns Gouklii 130 

Bourcieria coeligena 313 

Columbiana 313 

fulgidigula 312 

prunelli 312 

torquata 312 

Wilsoni 312 

Bowerbank 270 

Brachiopoda 407 

Brachyistius 300,304 

frenatus 300,304,456 

rosaceus 304,456,531 

Brachyopsis 63, 153 

verrucosus. 60, 152, 153, 154, 332, 454, 531 

xyostomus, new species. .152, 153, 154, 

332, 454, 531 

Brachyrhamphus 243 

brachypterus 212 

craveri 212 

hypoleucus 211 

kittlitzi 211 

marmoratus 211 

wrangelii 214 

Brachyura 414, 451, 452 

Branchiostoma lanceolatum 458 

Brandt, J. F 525 

Brant 203 

black 203 

Brevoortia menhaden 108 

patronus 108 

tyrannus 22,108,476 

Brewer, T.M 1C4 

Brisson 6,7,10 

Bromyrite 333 

Brookite 333 

Brook trout 460 

Brosmophycis marginatus 454 

Brown 381 

Brown, Mr., Paralepis coruscans presented 

by 412 

Brucite 333 

Bryozoa 130 

Bryttus fasciatus 20 

obesus 20 

Bubo 243 

arcticus 219 

subarcticus 219 

virginianus 191 



INDEX. 



545 



Pago. 

Bubo, virginianus arcticus 191,219 

satuiatua 191, 220 

subarcticus 191,219 

var. arcticus 219 

var. paciflcus 220 

Buccinura cyaneum 371, 404 

Gicinlandicum 371 

undatum 408 

Buckley, Prof. S.B 221 

Buda 143,145 

Budytes 224,243 

flava 170, 215, 230 

Bufllchead 204 

Bugiila turrita 130, 131 

Bulla debilia 382 

Gouldii 383 

hyalina 382 

peiteuuis 383 

Bullfinch, Ala.skan 176 

" Bull Heads" (Alburnops taurocephalus) . . 504 

Bunting, Baird's 178 

black-throated 182 

blue 182 

indigo 182 

lark 182 

Ijzuli 182 

Oonalaska 3 

painted 182 

snow 177 

Townsend's 182 

varied 182 

Buphagus 227 

Burgomaster 206 

Buteo 243 

abbreviatus 9,194,220,233 

albicaudatus 194,221,233 

albocaud.atus 221 

bairdii 213 

boroalis 193 

calurus 194 

krideri 194,220 

lucasanus 194,220 

socoTToensis 194, 220 

var. costaricensia 220 

var. krideri 220 

var. lucasanus 22u 

var. niontanus 220 

cooperi 194 

costaricensia 220 

harlaui 194 

insignatus 1 213 

lineatus 194 

lineatus elegans 194 

montanus 213 

oxy ptcrus 213 

pennaylvanicus 194 

swainsoni 194 

vulgaris 193,220,229 

zonocercus 220 

Butler University, Mississippi fishes in 489 

Butorides 243 

brunuescens 214,237 

viroscens. .» 197 

ButterbaU 204 

Buzzard, European 193 

Proc. Nat. Mus. SO 35 



Page. 

Buzzard, turkey ^95 

Bythocaris sp 437 

spnov 451 

C. 

Cabanis 4 

Cacoxeuite 333 

Cadulua 395,426 

Jeffreysii 395,404,407 

Pandionis 395, 404, 407 

propinquus 395,404,407 

subfusiformis ? 395 

Caeligena clemenciis 3x0 

hemileuca 310 

henrici 310 

viridipalleus 310 

CiErebidae 239 

Cairiua moschata 237 

Calamine 333 

Calamospiza 243 

bicolor 1^2 

Calamus 280 

megacephalua 95 

Calaverite 333 

Cacite 333 

Calidris 243 

arenaria 200 

California, a new Embiotocoid fish from. . .299, 303 

Platysomatichthys fi'om.. 301 

ray (K. rhina) from 251 

"Eock Cod" from 38 

Scof panoid fish from 322, 327 

Sebastichthys from 70, 73 

sparoid fish from 284 

species of deep-water fish 

from 305 

descriptionofanewAgonidfrom.60, 330 
Embiotocoid 

fish from.. 320 
llounderfrom49, 154 

new ray from 36 

seven new Sebas- 

toid fishes from . 287 
a new species of 
Hemirham p h u a 

from 335 

fishes collected at San Diego 23 

new Agonoid fish from 152 

Chiroid fish from 248 

genus and species of fishes 

from 63 

ray from 133 

Scopeloid fishes from 273 

species of Prionotua from . . 529 

"rockflsh" from 465 
Sebastichthys 

from 143 

Xiphister and 
Apodichthys 

from 135 

notesonaspeciesof Abeonafrom. 299 

flounders from 49 

sharks of 51 

occurrence of Cephaloscyllium 

laticeps in 40 



546 



INDEX. 



Page. 
California, occurrence of Cremnobates in. 147 
Productus gi- 

ganteus in 4G 

oil-shark of 42 

Callianassa 161 

ulrichi, new apecies 157, 161 

Calliopaa (?) fuscata 127 

Calliopius la; viusculus 120 

Calliostoma Bairclli 378, 404, 406 

occidentale 406 

Callipepla 243 

squamata 197,233 

Callipharus uigriventiis 3 18 

Calliphlox ameth ystina 315 

Callistaciinvcxa 408 

CalliteutMa 362 

reversa 362,403,405 

Calliurna formosus 498 

melanops 498 

Calocitta coUiei 236 

Calothorax 187, 219, 225, 233, 243, 314 

calliope 219 

Calypte 225,243 

annffi 187,314 

costaj 187,314 

helensB 314 

Camaraphysema 270 

a new type of sponge 269 

obscura 269,271,272 

Camaropboria 46 

Campanularia flexuosa 132 

Campepbilus 243 

imperialis 188,213,236 

•Campodea 529 

■CamptolsBmus 243 

labradorins 204 

Gampylopterus ensipennis 310 

hemileucurus 310 

largipennis 310 

lazalus 310 

obscurus 310 

roberti 310 

rufus 310 

villavicencio 310 

Campylorhynchus 243 

afflnis 169,215,228 

brunneicapillus 169, 232 

Ganace 226,243 

canadensis '. 9, 196 

frantltai 196 

obscura 9, 196 

fuligiQOsa 196,221 

richardsonii 196,221 

var. f iiliginosa 221 

Gaacerbarbatus 420 

borealis 417, 451 

irroratus 119 

Cancrinite 333 

Candlo-flsh 45,258 

of the northwest coast 257 

Ganvas-back 204 

CftolLnite 333 

Cape Cod (Provincetown), littoral marine 

fauna of 116 

CapreUa geometrica .117, 121 



Page. 

Capritnulgi 5 

Caprimvilgida) 239 

Capfimulgus 5,225,243 

albicollis 15 

araericanus 15 

carolinensis 5 

europaens 5, 225 

uuttalli 5,226 

voeiferua 5, 188 

Caracara, Guadalupe 193 

Carangidas 18,89 

Carangus chrysus 18 

hippos 90 

pisquetus 89 

Caranx beani, new species 486,487,488 

caballus 450 

cibi 486,487,488 

new species of, from North Cai-o- 

lina 486, 487 

Carassius auratus Ill 

Carboniferous brachipoda 46 

Carcharinus glaucas 52, 458 

Carcharodon carcharias 458 

Eondeleti 52,458 

Carcinus granulatus 119 

micuas 119 

Cardellina 224, 243 

amicta 224 

nibrifrons 174, 21 6, 232 

Cardinalis 243 

igneus 218 

virginianus 181 

igneus 181,218,232 

Cardinal, Saint Lucas 181 

Toxan 182 

Cardium Islandicura 407 

pinnulatum 408 

sp 399 

sp. ind 404 

sp. n. (cancellated) 407 

Carduelis elegans 238 

stanleyi 236 

yarrelli 236 

Carinaria atlantica 391,404,406 

mediterranea 391 

Carine noctua 237 

Camallite 333 

Canielian 334 

Cams 280 

Curpholite 333 

Carpodacus 243 

amphis... .176,216,228 

cassini 176 

frontalis 176 

rhodocolpus 176, 216 

hfemorrhous 213, 236 

pTirpurcus 176 

purpurcus calif ornicus 1 70 

Carroll, Captain 44 

Carter 270 

Cassin, Mr 15 

Cassiterite 333 

Catarractes califomicus 223 

Catbird 167 

Catharacta skua 227 



INDEX. 



547 



Page. 

Catharista 9,226,243 

atrata 195,233 

(atrata, Bartr.) 9 

urubu 9 

Cathartes 243 

aura 195 

LuiTOvianiis 213, 237 

gryphns 237 

papa.... 237 

CatharticloB 239 

Catheipes 243 

mexicanus 169,229,232 

conspersas 169, 215 

var. couspersTia 215 

Catostomitl£B 21, 110, 512 

Catostomus 462, 513 

ardens. new species 464, 465 

commersonii 110 

duqiiesnii 512 

f ecundu s 463 

guzmaniensis 464 

longirostrum 110 

macrochilus 464 

nigTicans 110, 513, 515 

occidcntalis 326, 327 

sucetta 513 

Cattie, S. TH 280 

Catuliis ventriosus 458 

Caulolatilus anomalus 455 

princep8 27 

Cavolina 390 

inflexa 392, 404, 407 

longirostra 392 

longirostris 392,404,407 

tridentata 392, 408 

uncinata 392,404,407 

CebedichthyidsB 138 

Cebedichthys 138 

violaceus 454 

Celestite 333 

Cenozoic invertebrate fossils from Arkansas, 

Colorado, Utab, and Wyoming 157 

CentrarchidiB 19,20,96,497 

Centrarchus 500 

hexacanthua 500 

irideus 98, 500 

macropterus 500, 515 

pectacantbus 498 

Centridermicbtbys 459 

fasciatus 459 

uncLnatus 85, 459 

Centrocercus 243 

uropbasianus 196 

C entrony X 243 

bairdii 178 

ochrocephalus 214, 235 

Centropbanes 225, 243 

lapponicus 177 

ornatus 177 

pictus 177 

Centropboms 486 

Centropristis atrarius 99 

Centroscymnus ccelolepis 116 

Centroscy Ilium Fabricii 116 

Centurus 243 



Page. 

Centurus aurifrona 189 233 

carolinus jgg 

uropygialis 189,233 

Cepbalolepis delalandi 317 

loddigesi 317 

Cepbalopoda 125,360,405,408 

Cephaloscyllium 41 

laticeps 52,458 

occurrence of, in 

California 40 

Cepbus arra 223 

Ceramium mbrum 388 

Cerapus rubricornis 448 

Cerargyrite 333 

Ceratacantbus aurantiacus 76 

Ceratias uranoscopus 469 

Ceraticbthys 512 

amblops 512, 515 

bigutlatus 110,512,515 

hyalinus 512 

wincbelli 512, 515 

Ceratoptera vampyrus 457 

Ceratorbina 228, 243 

monocerata 211 

Cerebratulus ingens 125 

roseus 125 

Cerite 333 

Ceritbiopsis costulatus 375 

Ceronia arctata 128, 408 

Cerorbina suckleyi 214 

Cerorbinca 228 

Certbia 243 

albifrons 229 

famUiaris mexicana 1 69, 228 

rufa 1G9 

palustria 224 

CertbiidfB 239 

Certbiola 243 

babamensia 176, 231 

Cerusaite 333 

Cervanti te 333 

Ceryle 243 

alcyon 190 

americana cabanisii 190, 233 

Cetorbinus maximua 52,458 

Chabasite 333 

Chacbalaca 195 

Ohsenobrj'ttus 498 

gulosua 97,498,515 

viridis 20,97,498 

Cbajnopsetta dentata 79 

oblonga 79,472 

ocellaria 79 

Cbaetodontidae 88 

Cha;tura 243 

pelagica 188 

vauxii 188 

Chalcantbite 333 

Cbalcedony •^34 

Cbalcocite '^^•^ 

Cbalcodite 3^3 

Cbalcopyrite 333 

Challenger, H.M.S 409 

Cbalybura buifoni 311 

caruleiventria 311 



548 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Chalybura isaurte 311 

melanorrhoa 311 

Chamaea 243 

fasciata 168 

Chamfeidae 239 

Chamaspelia 243 

passerina 195, 233 

var. palleacens 214, 235 

Chaparral cock 190 

Charadriidae 239 

Charadrius 243 

curonicus 10 

dominicus 9,198 

f ulvus 9, 198, 221, 230 

fluviatills 10 

fulviis 9,221 

intermedius 10 

minor 10 

montanus 227 

pbilippinus 10 

pluvialis 198, 221, 229 

virginicus 256,257 

vocifems 227 

wilsonins 227 

zonatus 10 

Chase, Capt. Josiah 532 

Chasmistes 4C1, 463 

liorus 462, 463 

Chaulelasmus 243 

streperus 203 

Chauliodontidfe 483 

Chauliodus setinotus 483 

sloanii 483 

Chaunax 470 

pictus 470 

Chat, long-tailed 173 

stone 167 

yellow-breasted 173 

Cheliua 122 

terebrans 117, 121, 122 

Chemnitzia nivea 379 

Chen 227,243 

Cferulescens 202 

hy perboreus 202 

albatus 202 

rossii 203, 222 

Chenalopex aegyptiaca 238 

Cheonda 460 

Chesterlite 334 

Chewink 181 

Chiastolite 333 

Chickadee, black-capped 1C8 

Califomian 169 

Carolina 168 

chestnut-backed 169 

Hudsonian ^.., 169 

long-tailed 168 

Mexican 168 

mountain 108 

Oregon 168 

Siberian 168 

Chicken, Mother Carey's 21 

Chilichthys turgidus 76 

Chilomycterus geometricus 18, 75 

Chimaera Colliaei 457 



Page. 

Chimaera plumbea 114 

Chimaeridje 114 

Chiridae 248,250 

Chiridotea coeca ]21 

Chiroid fish, new, from Monterey Bay 248 

Chironomus 117 

Chirostoma 29 

californiense 29 

menidium 103 

notata 103 

sp 22 

Chiras, a new Califomian species of 53 

balias 455 

constellatus 53, 54, 57, 455 

guttatus 53,55,57,455 

maculoaeriatus, new species 55,57,455 

pictus 53.54,455 

remarks on the Califomian species of 5S 

trigrammus 455 

Chiton 265 

Chlorastrolite 333 

Chlorite 333 

Chloritoidite 333 

Chloroscombrus chrysurus 18, 22 

ChlorostUbon angustipennis 320 

atala 320 

caniveti 320 

haberlini 320 

insularis 320 

pucherani 320 

splendidus 320 

Choerojulis radiatus 86 

Chondestes 243 

grammlca 178 

strigata 179 

strigatus 217 

strigatus 217 

Chondrodite 333 

Chondms 139 

Chordeiles 243 

acutipennis 6 

texensis 5, 188, 233 

popetue 6, 188 

henryi 188 

minor 188,219,231 

texensis 5 

virginianus 6 

Chriomitra 456 

concolor 456 

chriope 506 

Chroicocephalus cucullatus 214 

minutus 214,238 

Chromis punctipinnis 455 

Chromite 333 

Chry-soberyl 333 

Chrysolampis moschitus 316 

Chrysolite 333 

Chrysomitris 243 

barbata 213 

magellanica 164 

mexicana var. arizonaj 216 

notata 164,177,231 

pinus 177 

Stanley! 213,236 

yarrelli 213, 236 



INDEX. 



549 



Page. 

Chrysoprase 334 

Chrysotilite 334 

Chrysotis 255 

bouqueti 255 

oyauopis 255 

now Dominican parrotof the gcmis 254 

nichollsi, new species 254, 255, 256 

Chrysuronia ajnone 310 

chrysura 316 

elicias 316 

humboldti 316 

JosephiusB 316 

'Chub" 326 

Chuck-will's- widow 188 

Cicero 255 

Ciceronia 228,244 

pusilla 211 

Ciceru 255 

CichlidfB 88 

Cichloides 224 

Ciconiidaj 239 

CinclidsB 239 

Cinclus 224,244 

mexicaniia 167 

Cingula aculeus 377 

carinata 406 

harpa 404, 406 

Jan-Mayeni 375,404,400 

turgida 375, 404, 406 

Cinnabarite 333 

Circe 15 

latirostris .' 15,219 

Circus 244 

cyaneus 236 

hudsonius 193, 236 

Cirolana polita 450, 451 

Ciriatulus grandis 123 

Cirripedia 122 

Cistenides Gonldii 124 

Cistothorus 244 

palustris var. paludicola 215 

stellaris 170 

Citharichthys 340 

arctifrons. . .337, 338, 340, 341, 342, 472 

sordidus 28, 453 

spilopterus 79 

unicomia, n. sp-337, 338, 342, 343, 472 

Citharus platessoides 471 

Claugula 227,244 

albeola 204 

glaucium americana 204 

islandica 204 

Clarke, A. Howard 533,534 

Clark, S.F 356 

Cleodora acicula 393 

balantium 393 

lanceolata 392 

pyramidata 392 

virgula 393 

Clidiophora trilineata 397,408 

Clinochlorite 333 

Clinostomus 460,461 

Clintonito 333 

Clione papilionacea 391 

Clio pyramidata 392,404,407 



Page. 

Clitellio irrorata 124 

Clupea 502 

chryaochloris 502, 515 

harengus 109 

mirabUis 30, 407 

sagax 30,457 

ClupeidiE 30,108,502 

Clymenella torquata 124 

Clytia Jolmstoni 132 

Clytolffima aiirescens 312 

rubinea 312 

Cobaltite 333 

Coccolite 334 

Coccyzus 244 

americanus 190 

ery throphthalmus 190 

seniculus 190, 231 

Cochlodesma Leanum 128 

Cock, sage 196 

Codoma 506 

stigmatnra 506 

Colaptes 244 

auratus 7, 165, 190 

hybridus 190 

m,exicanus 7,190 

chrysoides 190 

mexicanus 7, 165 

rufipileus 219 

rufipileus 190, 219, 229 

Collett, Robert 247 

CoUodes depressus 414,451 

trispinosus 415 

Collurio elegans 236 

ludoviciauus, var. robustus 216 

Collyrio chemungensis 234 

elogans 213 

Colorado, new invertebrate fossils from 157 

Columba 244 

cristata 226 

erythrina 9,195,233 

fasciata 195 

"flavirostris" 9 

leucocephala 195, 231 

nifaxilla 226 

solitarins 9 

Columbella l'-6 

lunata 126 

Columbia River sardines (Thaleichthys pa- 

ciflcus) 68 

Columbida) 239 

Columbite 333 

Columnar hematite 333 

Colymbidaj 240 

Colymbus 244 

adamsi 210, 223 

arcticus 210 

comutus 228 

minor 228 

paciticus 211 

septentrionalis 211 

torquatus 210 

troiUe 228 

Compact hematite 333 

Conchifera ^^^ 

Condor, Califomian 19^ 



550 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Conger oceanica 112 

Congridfe 112 

Congrogadidse 266 

Congrogaclu8 266 

(Conida))...- 381 

Contopus 244 

borealis 186 

pertinax 186,218 

richardsonii 186 

virens - 186 

Conurus 244 

carolinensis 190 

holochlorus 164 

brevipes 190, 219, 229 

var. brevipes 219 

xanthogenlus 238 

Cooke, Mr. C 396,524 

Coot, American 202 

Copeland, Prof. H. E 22 

Cope, Prof. E. D 20, 459, 461, 492, 501, 524, 525, 

526, 528, 529 

Copiapite 333 

Copper 333 

Copperasite 333 

Coquimbite 333 

CoralUna 27,139 

Coregonidce 105 

Coregonus 'Williamsoni 460 

Cormorant, Baird's 206 

Brandt's 206 

common 205 

double-crested 205 

Florida 205 

Mexican 205 

Pallas's 206 

red-faced 206 

Yiolet-green 206 

white-crested 205 

Cormorants 11 

Coropbium cylindricwm 121 

Corsair '. 145, 146 

Corundophyllite 333 

Corundnm 333 

Corvidas 239 

Corvina 28 

satuma 28, 456 

Corvus 244 

cacalotl 214 

corax carnivorus 184 

cristatus 225 

cryptoleucus 184 

frugilegus 238 

frugivorus 184 

caurinus 184 

floridanus 184 

graculus 11 

ossifragus ; 184 

msticus 4 

Corypbfena sueri 91 

Corypbipnidai 91 

Corypbella 389 

Bostoniensis 389 

mananensis 389, 409 

nobilis, new species 388, 404 

salmonacea 388 



Page. 

Corypbella Stimpsoni 388, 404 

Cotile 225,244 

-riparia 175 

CotingidsB ."39 

Cottidaj 25, 85, 264, 460, 477, 478 

Cottoids 459,400 

Cottopsis 459,460 

asper 459 

semiscaber 459 

Cottunculus 460,478 

microps 479 

torvus 479 

Cottns... 460,464 

teneus 85, 460 

grcEnlandicus 85, 460 

octodecimspinosus 85, 460 

polyacantbocepbalus 253, 454, 460 

scorpioides 85,460 

scorpius 460 

scorpius subsp. gronlandicus 85 

Cotumiculas 244 

henslowi 178 

lecontei 178 

passoriaus 178 . 

perpallidus 178, 217 

var. perpallidus 217 

Cotumix communis 238 

Coues.Dr 1,2,7,12,14 

Cowbird 182 

bronzed 182 

dwarf 182 

"Crabier montagne" 257 

Cracidro 2.19 

Crake, com 202 

spotted 201 

Crane,littlo 202 

sandhill 202 

■whooping 2(j2 

Crangon vulgaris 120 

Craspedosoma 526 

Crassatella 151 

decUvis, new species 151 

Cratena 390 

aurantiaca 390 

gymnota 890,404 

olivacea 390 

veronica}, new species 389, 404 

viridis 390 

CreagTus 244 

furcatus 207 

Creeper, bahaman honey 176 

black-and-white 171 

brown 169 

Mexican 169 

Cremnobates 147 

affinis H7 

a San Diego species of 147 

integripinnis, new species 147, 4,^4 

monophthalmus 147 

Crenella decussata 407 

glandula 130,408 

Crepidula convexa 127 

fomicata 127 

plana 127,408 

I Creseis acicula 393 



INDEX. 



551 



Page. 

Creaeis acns 393 

clava 393 

virgula 393 

Crex 244 

pratensis 202, 230 

Cribellina puncturata 131 

Crisia eburnea 130, 131 

Critliagra but jracca 23S 

Crocker, Dr 129 

Crossbill, American 170 

Mexican 176 

wMtc-winged 176 

Crotophaga 244 

ani 190,231 

groove-billed 190 

rugirostris 213 

sulcirostris 190, 219, 233 

Crow, common 184 

carrion 195 

fisb 184 

Florida 184 

nortbwestern fisb 184 

Cmcibulura striatum 408 

Crustacea 161, 265 

dredged by United States Fisb 

Commission, 1880 413 

Cryolite 333 

Cryptacantbidas 82 

Cryptacantbodes maculatus 82 

Cryptodon ferruginosus ? 400, 404, 407 

Gouldii 129,408 

obesus . . .• 404, 408 

sarsii 399, 404 

Cryptomorpbite 333 

Crypton gouldii 400 

obesus 390,400 

Crystal 334 

Cry stallogobius eos 455 

Cuckoo, black-billed 190 

mangrove 190 

yellow-billed 190 

Cuculidffi 239 

Cumacea 414,445,451,452 

Cumin.i;ia tellinoides , 129 

Cupidonia 244 

cupido 190 

pallidicmcta 196, 221 

var. pallidicincta 221 

Cuprite 333 

Curlew, bristle-tbigbed 201 

Eskimo 201 

budsonian 201 

long-bUled 201 

Curtiss, Mr. A. H 22 

Cutbona 389,390 

nana 390 

Stimpsoni 388 

Cyanecula 224,244 

suecica 167,215,230 

Cyanite 333 

Cyanocitta 225,244 

cristata 184 

stelleri 184 

annectens 184,218 

frontalis • -184, 218 



Page. 

Cyanocitta stelleri macrolopha 184 

Cyanopbaia caeruloigularis 319 

goudoti 319 

luminosa 320 

Cyanura stelleri, var. annectens 218 

var. frontalis 218 

Cybium 455 

maculatum 89 

Cyclopteridai 83 

Cyclopterus lumpus 83 

Cy clostrema trocboides 378, 404, 406 

Cygnus bewickii 222 

ferm 222 

musicus 227 

passmorei 235 

Cylicbna 381,382,383 

alba 382,408 

Gouldii 383,404 

nitidula 381 

occulta 382,406 

propinqua 382 

Cymatogaster 300,304 

aggregatus . .28, 300, 303, 304, 327, 456 

frenatus 303 

rosaceus, a new Embiotocoid 

flsb 303 

Cymbulia 393,404,407 

Cymocborea 228,244 

bomocbroa 210,223 

leucorrboa 210 

mclania 210 

Cynantbus forflcatus 316 

latirostris 225 

lucifer 225 

Cyncbramus scboeniclus 236 

Cynieoglossus paciflcus 453, 531 

Cynoscion carolinensis 92 

magdalenas 28 

nobilis 456 

parviijLnnis 456 

regalis 92 

Cyprina Islandica 408 

CyprinidiB 110,489,502 

Cyprinodon califomiensis 457 

variegatus 104 

Cyprinodontidse 20,30,104,501 

Cyprinoid fisbes of San Francisco markets, 
note on a paper of Dr. Ayres on tbe na,rjo8 

of 325 

Cyprinus carpio m 

dobula 460 

Cypselida) 239 

Cypseloides 225,244 

niger borealis 188 

Cypselus 6,225,244 

apus ^> 225 

cayannensis ^ 

fumigatus 225 

melba ° 

saxatilis ^'^^^ 

Cyrena? bolraesii l^^^ 

Cyrtodaria siliqua 40/ 

Cyrtonyx 244 

massena 197.233 



652 



INDEX. 



Page. 



D. 



Dacentrus, note on 327 

lucena 327 

Dacrydium vitreuin 407 

Dactylopterus volitans 83 

Dafila 244 

acuta 203 

Dall, W. H 3,370 

Dallia pcctoralis 104 

Damalichthys argyrosomua 456 

vacca 456 

Damophila amabiiis 319 

Danburite 333 

Daption 244 

capensis 20D, 230 

Dareste 281 

Darwin, Charles 280,529 

Dasybatida? 31, 114 

Dasybatis centrurus 31, 114 

dipterurus, new species 31, 457 

pastinaca 31 

Datholite 333 

Dawson, Dr. J. "W 369 

Decapoda 118,414 

Decapod s of Provincetown 117 

Decapterus punctatus 89 

" Deep-water fish" 307 ! 

DeHaan 421 

De Jough 263 

DeKay 501 

Demiegretta pealii 214 

Dempsey, Capt. William, and crew 362 

Dendragapus 9 

Dendrocygna 244 

autumnalis 203 

fulva 203 

Dendroeca 244 

festiva 172 

audubonii 172 

blackburniaj 172 

cjerulea 172 

caerulescens 172 

castanea 172 

chrysoparia 172, 216, 232 

coronata 172 

discolor 173 

dominica 172 

albilora 172,216 

var. albilora 216 

gracisB 172, 216, 232 

kirtlandi 173 

maculosa 172 

moutana 164,173,234 

nigrescens 172 

occidentalis 173 

olivacea : 216 

palmarum 173 

bypochrysea 173, 21C 

pennsylvanica 172 

pinus 173 

striata 172 

townsendi 172 

virens 172 

Dendroica carbonata 234 

montana 234 



Page. 

Dendronotns arborescens 385, 386 

elegans, new species 385, 404 

robustus 38(i,408 

Dentalium abyssorum 394. 407 

dentale 394 

occidentale 394,404,407 

(slender var.) 407 

striolatum 394,408 

Deweylite 333 

Diacria trispinosa 392, 408 

Diallogite 333 

Diamond 333 

Diapbana 381,382 

conulus 382, 404, 406 

dobilis .382 

gemma 382,404,403 

globosa 382 

hyalina 382 

nitidula .381,404,406 

pellucida 382 

pertenuis 38.3,404,406 

umbilicata 382 

Diapterus gula 94 

Lefroy i 94 

Diasporite 333 

Dyastylis quadrispinosa 451 

quadrispinosus 446 

Dichromanassa 220, 244 

rufa 10,197 

Dlckbaut, Mr. H. E 161 

Diodon by strix 75 

maculatus 453 

Diodontidai 18,75 

Diomedea 12,244 

bracbyura 208 

culminata 209,230 

exulans 214,238 

fuliginosa 227 

nigripes 208 

Dioplites nuecensia 497 

Diplectrum fasciculare 99 

Diiilesium blennioidea 100 

Diacina 47 

Ditrema 322,456 

argyrosoma 321 

atripes. new species 320, 321, 322, 450 

brevipinne 300 

furcatum 28, 320, 321, 322, 450 

jacksoni 456 

laterale 456 

(Phanerodon) furcatum 320 

temmincki 322, 456 

Diver, black-tbroated 210 

Pacific 211 

red-throated 211 

Dixon 264 

Dobula 400 

Docimastes ensiferus 312 

Dolichonyx 244 

oryzivorus 182 

var. albiaucha 235 

Dolomite 333 

Domeykite 333 

Dominica, new species of Cbrysotia from . . . 254 
the family Turdidce 
from 16 



INDEX. 



553 



Page. 

d'Orbigny 48 

Doricha bryante 315 

eliz® 315 

cnicura 219,315 

evelynaj 315 

lyrura 315 

Dorippe spiuifrons 42o 

Doris coiuplanata 386, 404, 40G 

Johnstoni 386 

plauata 386 

Dormitator 83 

Dorosoma 502 

cepediana 502 

snbsp. heterurum 502 

cepedianum 109, 502, 515 

Dorosoinidfe 109 

Dove, blue-beaded 195 

ground 195 

Key "West 195 

mourning 195 

scaled 195 

sea 211, 

Socorro 195 

■white-fronted 195 

•white-winged 195 

zenaida 195 

Dovekie 211 

Drepauo(p)setta platessoides 471 

Dryobates homorus 235 

hyloscopus 235 

Duck, black. 203 

black-bellied tree 203 

black masked 205 

Florida black 203 

fulvous tree 203 

harlequin 204 

Labrador 204 

long-tailed 204 

ruddy 205 

scaup 204 

summer 204 

surf 205 

SteUer's 204 

wood 204 

Dufrcnite 333 

Dumeril .. 53,353 

Duncan, Rev. Mr 258 

Dunlin, European 200 

DussumioridsB 107 

Dytes 228,244 

auritus 210,230 

californicua 210 

comutus 210 

E. 

Eagle, bald 194 

caracara 193 

golden 194 

gray 194 

gray sea 195 

harpy 194 

Earll, Mr.E.E 69 

Echeneididfe 18.102 

Echeneis naucrates 18, 456 

naucrateoides 102 



Page. 
Echinodermata 131 

of northeastern coast of Amer- 
ica 356 

Ectopistes 244 

migratoria 195 

Edwards, Y. N 392 393 

Edward.sia pallida 117^ 132 

sulcata 117, 132 

Eels, male, genitalia of, and their sexual 

characters 280 

Egret, American 197 

Peale's 197 

Eider, American 205 

common 204 

Pischer's 204 

ting 205 

Pacific 205 

Elaninea martinica 256 

Elanoides 226, 244 

forficatua 193 

Elanus 244 

glaucus 193, 233 

Elassoma 50O 

zonatum seo, 515 

Elassomatidae 500 

Electra pilosa 131 

Eleotris 83 

' ' Ella M. Johnson " seeing Auxtg 534 

EUiot, Daniel Giraud 308,309 

Elopida) 107 

Elops »aurus 107 

Elvira chionura 318 

cupreiceps 318 

Emberiza americana 3,4, 225 

bilineata 225 

coccinea 225 

lapponica 225 

melanocephala 4 

schoeniclus 236 

unalaschcensis 3 

Embemagra 244 

ruflvirgata 181,232 

Embiotoca 456 

argyrosoma 321, 456 

jacksoni 28,88 

Embiotocid* 28,88,453 

Embiotocoid, description of a new 299 

notes on a species of, related to 

Abeona aurora 299 

Embiotocoid fish, a new Califomian species 

of 303,320 

Embiotocoids 304 

Embletonia fuscata 117, 127 

EmboUte 333 

Emerald 333 

Emerton, Mr. J. H 379,387,391 

Empidonax 244 

acadicus 186 

difficilis 186 

flaviventris 186 

fulvifrons 187,218,229 

pallescens 187, 218 

hammondi 186 

minimus 186 

obscurua 187 



554 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Empidonax pusillas 186 

traillii 186 

pygmaeus 235 

Emplectite -• 333 

Enchelyopus cirubrius 476 

regalis 476 

Endlicli, Fred. M 333 

Engraulidaj 30,109 

Engraulis 411 

delicatissimus 80 

ringens 30 

Tittatus 109 

Engyptila 226, 244 

albifrons 195,221,233 

Enneacanthus fasciatus 20 

niargarotis 98 

nulnerianus 20 

obesus 20,98 

EnsatoUa 127 

americana 124,128,130,408 

Enstatite 333 

Enteropueusta 124 

Entomostraca 116 

Entosphenu8 tridentatus 458 

Eocene mollusea, new epeciea of 149 

Eono gracilis 123 

Epely s trilobus 122 

Ephippiidai 101 

Ephippus zonatus 456 

Epidote 333 

Epimeria cornigera ? 448 

loricata 447, 451 

Epiuepholus guttatus 99 

morio 99 

sp. ? 22 

striatus 99 

Epizoantbus 426,428 

araericanus 358, 426, 428 

Epsomite 333 

Eremcrpbila 244 

alpestris 185 

chry solaeraa 185, 218 

leucolaima 185, 218 

cornuta var. cbry soliema 218 

Ereunetes 244 

occidentalis 212 

petrificatus 256 

pusillus 200 

occidentalis 200,222 

Ergaticus 224,244 

ruber 174,229,232 

Ericthonius difformis 448, 451 

Ericymba 507 

buccata 504,507,515 

Erimyzon 513 

goodei 21 

sucetta 110,513,514,515 

Eriocnemia alinaj 317 

aureliae 317 

cupreiventris 317 

derbiana 317 

laciani 317 

lugens 317 

vestita 317 

Erismatura, 15,16,244 



Page. 

Erismatura rubida 205 

Erubescite 333 

Erythiite 333 

Escbaripora punctata 131 

Esocidaj 104 

Esox americanus 104 

iucius 104 

nobilior.. 104 

reticulatus 104 

EtheostomatidsD 100, 489, 490 

Etbusa granulata 419 

mascarone 419 

micropbtbalma, new species 419, 451 

sexdentata 419 

Etrumeus teres 107 

Eucepbala CEerulea 319 

grayi 319 

Encheilodon 150 

creno-carinata, new species 150 

Eucbroite 333 

EuciDostomus Lefroyi 94 

Eudocinus 220,244 

albns 198 

ruber 164,198,231 

Eugenes 225,244 

fulgens 187,218,233,312 

spectabilis 312 

Eugenia imperatrix 312 

Eugomi^bodus littoralis 115 

Eulacbon 45,258,259,200,262,203 

of tbe northwest coast 257 

oil 262,263 

Eulalia, pistacea 123 

Eulamia lamia 355, 458 

obscuras • 115 

Eulampis bolosericeus 311 

jugularis 311 

Eulima diatora (?) 406 

distorta 379,404 

intermedia 379,404,406 

oleacea 379 

EulimeUa ventricoaa 380, 404, 400 

Eumesogrammus subbifurcatus 477 

Eumicrotremus orbis 454 

Eunice 358 

Euompbalua 46 

Eupagurus 422,426 

bernhardus 422, 423, 428, 451 

Krciyeri 426,428,451 

longicarpna 119 

sp 428 

sp. nov 451 

Eupetomena birundo 309 

macroura 309 

Eupherusa egregia 318 

eximia 318 

Euphonia 244 

blue-beaded 170 

elegantissima 176, 229, 232 

flavifrons 250 

EupbyUite 333 

Eupomotis aureus 98 

speciosus 98 

Enprognatha rastellifera 415, 451 

European magpie 4 



INDEX. 



555 



Page. 

Enrypauropus 539 

Euspina 4 

Euspira 142 

Euspiza 4 

Eustephanus galeritus 313 

Eutoxores aquila 308 

Euxenito 333 

Exocoetus californicus 457 

Exoglossiim maxilliugua Ill 

F. 

Fabricia Leidyi 124 

stellaris 124 

Facelina 389 

Bostoniensis 389, 404 

coronata 389 

Drummondii 389 

elegans 389 

pilata 389.404 

Falco 244 

lEsalon 220,220 

alWgularis 192,229 

caudicans 226 

columbarius, var. Suckleyi 220 

communis, var. Pealei 220 

femoralis 226 

furcatus 226 

fusco-caerulescens 8, 226 

harpyia 226 

(Hypoti'iorchia) richardsonii 220 

nigriceps 213 

obsoletus '. 220 

peregrinus naevius 192 

pealei 192,220 

regalus 226 

sacer 220 

unicincUis 226 

uiubitinga 226 

zonurus 226 

Falcon, American peregrine 192 

aplomado 193 

chestuut-thighed 192 

Peale's 192 

prairie 192 

Falconidae 239 

Fauna, littoral marine, of Provincetown 116 

If nestella 46 

Fergusonite 333 

Fibrolite 333 

Fierasfer 535 

Finch, aleutian rosy 176 

Bacbman's 180 

black rosy 177 

black and white seaside 178 

brown-capped rosy -... 177 

Californian purple 176 

Cassin's purple 176 

cinereous, ofPennaut 3 

crimson house 176 

grass 178 

gray-crowned rosy , 177 

gray -headed rosy 177 

Guadalupe house 176 

house 176 

lark 178 



Page. 

Finch, Lincoln's I8I 

Kelson's sharp-tailed 178 

purple 176 

seaside 178 

sharp-tailed 178 

western grass 178 

lark 179 

Finsch, Dr 12 

Fire opal 334 

Fisher, "W. J 59, 286 

"Fish Hawk" collections of New England 

mollusca 405 

obtaining deep-sea fishes 467 

Fishes, deep-water, from south coast of New 

England 467 

obtained 1880 by United 
States Fish- Commis- 
sion 467 

described by G. Brown 

Goode 467 

East Florida, notes on 17 

obtained by Dr. J. A. 

flenshall 17 

from Eastern Mississippi 488 

Saint John's River, Florida 22 

Utah Lake 459 

new Californian deep-water species of 305 
New England deep-sea, descriptions 
of new 
species of. 337 
diagnosis of 
two new 
genera of. 337 
diagnosis 
of a Mer- 
luciua-like 
genus of. 337 
new genus and species of Californian 63 
North American, check-list of dupli- 
cates distributed 1 877-1880 75 

of Pacific United States coast 452 

distribution of 452 

San Diego, California, notes on 23 

' ' Fitz J. Babson " taking Auxis 534 

FlabeUum Goodei 359 

Flamingo, American 202 

Flat-fish, note on a new Californian 325 

Fleming 7 

Fliaum 146 

Flicker, Guadalupe 190 

"hybrid" 190 

Malherbe's 190 

red-shafted 190 

yellow-shafted 190 

Flint 334 

Floricola constanti 313 

leocadiae , 313 

longirostris 313 

Florida cajrulea 197 

Florida, East, notes on fishes from 17 

fishes from Saint John's River 22 

obtained by Mr. A. H. Curtiss 22 

notes on, by D. S. Jordan 22 

Florisuga fusca 311 

mellivora 311 



556 



INDEX. 



Flounder, a new species of, from Santa Cata- 

liua Island 34 

description of a new Californian. 301 

from California, description of. . . 49 

new, from California 154 

Flounders, description of two Now England 

genera of 337 

two new species of, from Pnget 

Sound 276 

Fluorite 333 

Fliistrelli hispida - 131 

FlycatcJier, Acadian 186 

ash-throated 186 

black-crested 167 

buff-breasted 187 

Coues's 186 

forktailed 185 

fulvous 187 

Giraud's 186 

great-crested 186 

Hammond's 186 

Henshaw's 186 

Lawrence's 186 

least 186 

little 186 

Mexican great-crested 186 

olive-sided 186 

rose-throated 187 

scissor- railed 185 

small-billed 187 

small-headed 174 

thick-billed 187 

Traill's. 186 

vermilion 187 

western yellow-bellied 186 

Wright's 187 

yellow-bellied 186 

Fly -fish 145,146 

Foraminifera 116,270,356,358 

Forbes, Trof. S. A 492,501,511 

Forster 3 

Forsterite 333 

Fossils, new invertebrate, from Arkansas, 

"Wyoming, Colorado, and Utah 157 

Foster.Hon. J. "W 140 

Fowlerite 333 

Franklinite 333 

Fratercula 12,228,244 

arctica 211 

glacialis ." 211,230 

comiculata 211 

Fregetta 244 

grallaria 210, 230 

Frigate mackerel 535 

FringiUa americana 4 

bicolor 4 

cinerea 3 

mortonii 236 

tesensis 229 

tristis 225 

zena 4 

FringiUidsE 239 

Fuca Straits, new species of Paralepis 

from 411 

Fucus 139,140 



Page. 

Fulica 244 

■ americana 202 

martinica 227 

Fuligula nigra 237 

Fulix 15^ 244 

afiip is 204 

collaris 204 

marila 204 

Fulmar, giant 209 

Pacific 209 

Rodger's 209 

slender-billed 209 

Fulmaras 11, 12, 244 

glacialis 209 

pacificus 209 

rodgersi 209, 223 

rodgersii 223 

Funduhis 21 

parvipiunis 30, 105,457 

pisculeutus 104 

species 21, 22 

Fusus 149,151 

cancellatus 364 

Islandicus 870 

mamochi, new species 151 

propinquus 370 

G. 

Gadidse 80,475 

Gadolinite 333 

Gaduin 263 

Gadus auratus 454 

blennioides 476 

cimbrius 476 

macrocephalus 454 

morrhua 80, 454, 475 

periscopus 454 

punctatus 476 

Gadwall 203 

Galenite 333 

Galeocerdo sj).? 34 

tigrinus 52, 458 

GaleorhinidsB 34, 115 

Galeorhinus galeus 42, 52, 458 

Galeoscoptes 224, 244 

carolinensis 167 

Galeus canis 42 

vulgaris 42 

Gallinago 244 

media 199, 221, 229 

media wilsoni 199 

Gallinula 244 

chloropus 11 

galeata 11,202 

Gallinnle, Florida 202 

purple ; 202 

Galvinia exigua 391, 404 

Gambel 10 

Gambusia holbrooki 21 

patruelis 21 

Gammams annulatus 121 

locusta 120 

mucronatus 121 

omatus 120 

Gannet 206 



INDEX. 



557 



Gannet, blue-faced 206 

booby 206 

Gardner, Mr. Frederick, jr 338 

Garman, Samuel 486,516 

Garnet 3^ 

Almandite 333 

Groasiilarite 333 

inclusions 334 

Melanite 333 

Ouvarovite 333 

Pyropite 333 

Spessartite 333 

Garrulus bullockii 236 

californicus 225 

Garrupa 146,291 

red 146 

spotted 146 

(vera) 146 

Garzetta 244 

candidissima 197 

Gasteropod, fossil, from Pueblo, Mexico 140 

Gasteropoda 125, 159 

Gasterostoidas 77 

Gasterosteus aculeatus 77 

(aciileatus) serratus 453 

microcephalus 453 

pungitius 77 

subsp . brachy poda ... 77 

Gastropoda 363, 406, 408 

Gebiaaffinis 117,120 

Gehlenite 333 

Gelasimus pugilator; 118 

pugnax 118 

Genthite 333 

Genyonemus ILneatus 456 

Geococcyx 244 

californianus 190 

Georgia, occurrence of Stricklandinia salteri 

and davidsoni in 48 

Geotblypis 244 

aequinoctialis 236 

macgillivrayi 173 

Philadelphia 173 

trichas 173 

velatus 213,236 

Geotrygon 226,244 

martinica 195,231 

sylvatica 226 

Gephyrea 124 

Gerres plumieri 17, 19 

Gerridaj 19,94 

Geryon quinquedens 417, 451 

Getchell, Capt. John Q 435 

Geyserite 333 

Gibbons, Dr. W. P 325,326 

Gibbonsia elegans 25, 147,454 

Gibbsite 333 

Giglioli 12 

Gila 461 

grandis 327 

microlepidota 326 

Gilbert, Charles H ... .23, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 49, 51, 53, 
70, 73, 133, 135, 142, 152, 154, 251, 273, 276, 
287, 299, 301, 303, 305, 320, 322, 327, 330, 
335, 352, 353, 409, 411, 452, 459, 465, 487 



Page. 

Gilbert, Mr. G. K 47 

Gill, Dr. Theodore. .50, 63, 138, 140, 247, 287, 297, 302, 

325, 332, 353 

on I-eurynnis and Lyco- 

dopsis 247 

Gillichtby 8 mirabilis 25, 455 

Gilpatrick, Capt. Biiggs 535 

Girard 68,297,325,496 

Giraud, Jacob P 104 

GireUa nigricans 27, 456 

Glauberite 333 

Glaucidlum 244 

ferrugineum 220 

gnonia 192 

phaloenoides 192, 220, 233 

Glaucis ffinea 308 

cervinicauda . . . „ 308 

hirsuta 308 

ruckeri 308 

Glauconome leucopis 448 

Glockerite 333 

Glyphidodon saxatibs 87 

Glyptocephalus 344 

cynoglossus 78, 337, 475 

zachirus 453, 531 

Gmelin 3 

Gnatoatcher, black-capped 168 

blue-gray 168 

plumbeous 168 

Gnathia cerina 450, 451 

Goatsucker, paranque 188 

Gobiesox roticulatus 265,454 

Gobiidas 25,83 

Gobiosoma alepidotum 22 

Gobius 348 

glaucofraenum 455 

soporator 83 

Godwit, black-tailed 200 

Hudsonian 200 

marbled 200 

Pacific 200 

Goethite - 333 

Gold 333 

Golden-eye, American 204 

Barrow's 204 

Golden Plover, American 9 

Goldfinch, American 177 

Arizona 177 

black-headed 1"7 

green-backed 177 

Lawrence's 177 

Mexican 177 

pine 177 

Gonatus amcenus 362,403 

Goniada gracilis 123 

Goode, G. Brown 17,20,337,467,532 

describes Notacanthus 

phasganorus 535 

Goose, American white-fronted 203 

barnacle ^"^ 

blue-winged 202 

Canada 203 

''03 
emperor -"■' 

European white-fronted 203 

Hutchins's 203 



558 



INDEX. 



Goose, larger white-oheeked 203 

lesser snow 202 

Eoss's snow 203 

snow 202 

wMte-cheeked 203 

Goshawk, American 193 

Mexican 194 

western 193 

Grackle, boat-tailed 183 

bronzed 184 

Florida 183 

great-tailed 183 

Mexican boat- tailed 183 

purple 183 

Gracnla pyrrhocorax 11 

Graculus 11 

bairdii 222 

bicristatus 223 

Grand Banks, new species of Notacanthus 

from 535 

Graphite 333 

Gray 10 

Grebe, American eared 210 

American red-necked 210 

Clark^s 210 

eared 210 

homed 210 

St. Domingo 210 

thick-billed 210 

western 210 

Greenebaum, Captain 59 

Greenockite 333 

Green-shank 200 

Grosbeak, black-headed 182 

blue 182 

cardinal 181 

evening 176 

pine 176 

rose-breasted 182 

Gros8ul%rit e 333 

Ground shark 52 

Grouper 291 

Grouse, Canada 196 

common sharp-tailed 196 

dusky 196 

Franklin's 196 

gray ruffed 196 

northern sharp-tailed 196 

Oregon ruffed 196 

Richardson's 196 

ruffed 196 

sooty 196 

GruidjB 239 

Grus 244 

americana 202 

canadensis 202 

fraterculus 202 

Guan, Texan 195 

GuUlemot, black 212 

black-throated 211 

Brunnich's 212 

California 212 

common 212 

Graver's 212 

KittUtz's 211 



Page. 

Guillemot, marbled 211 

pigeon 212 

short- winged 212 

sooty 212 

Temminck's 211 

thick-billed 212 

Xantus'a 2L1 

Guiraca 244 

cajrulea 182 

var. eurhyncha 235 

Gull, American herring 207 

Bonaparte's 207 

Californian 207 

Fianklin's 207 

glaucous 200 

glaucous-winged 206 

great black-backed 207 

Heermann's 207 

herring 207 

ivory 206 

kittiwake 206 

laughing 207 

mew 207 

Pallas's herring 207 

ring-billed 207 

Eoss's 207 

Sabine's 207 

short-billed 207 

Siberian 207 

skua 208 

swallow-tailed 207 

western 207 

white- winged 206 

Gunther, Dr. Albert 19, 31, 42, 53, 147, 274, 275, 

280, 300, 350, 353, 456, 459, 518, 531 

Gymnacanthus 460 

pistilliger 85 

Gymnocitta 225,244 

cyanocephala 184 

Gymnothorax mordax 30 

Gyparchus papa 237 

Gypsum 333 

Gyrfalcon, Iceland 192 

Labrador 192 

McFarlane's 192 

white 192 

Gyraulus 159,160 

H. 

Hadropterus 491 

nigrofasciatus 491 

spillmani, new species 491, 515 

Hadrostomus 225,244 

aglaise 187 

Hsematopodidse 239 

Hfematopus 244 

ater 214,237 

niger 1 98 

ostralegus 198,221,229 

palUatns 1 98 

townsendii 237 

Hsemylum 96 

flaviguttatus 96 

xanthopterum 96 

Hake, description of new,from SouthCarolina 69 



INDEX. 



559 



Page. 

Halatractus zonataa 91 

HalifeetHS 226,244 

albicilla 195,229 

leucoceplialns 194 

Haliaetus pelagicus 213, 237 

waaliiiigtoiiii 213 

Halieutsea 467 

senticosa 467 

stellata 468 

Halieutichtliys 467,468 

aculeatus 467 

reticulatus 467 

Halisarca 270 

Halite 333 

Halocyptena 227,244 

microsoma 210,223,227 

Halodrillus littoralis 124 

Haloporphyrua viola 81, 476 

Halo])3yclie, new generic name 393 

globulosa 393,404 

HaplocMlus melanops 501 

Haploidonotus gmnniens 94 

Haploops aetosa 448, 451 

Harelda 244 

glacialis 204 

Harford, W. G. W 66,307 

Harger, Mr. Oscar 117, 118, 119, 120, 125, 355, 

391, 393, 526 

Harmothoe imbricata 122 

Harmotomite 333 

Harporbjnclius 244 

cinereus 167,214,228 

beudirei 167,214 

crissalis 167 

curvirostris 167,232 

palmeri 167,215 

var. palmeri - . 215 

graysoni 167,215,228 

longicauda 213 

redivivna 167 

lecontei 167 

rufus 167,213 

longirostris 167, 232 

vetula 213 

Hauerite 333 

Hausmannite 333 

Hanynite 333 

Ha.-wk, American rough-legged 194 

broad-winged 194 

Cooper's 193 

Cuban sparrow 193 

duck 192 

fish 193 

Gruber's 194 

Harlan's 194 

Harris's 193 

Isabelline sparrow 193 

Krider's 194 

marsh 193 

Mexican black 194 

pigeon 192 

red-bellied 194 

red- shouldered 194 

red-tailed 193 

sharp-shinned 193 



Page. 

Hawk, sparrow 193 

Swainson's 194 

white-taUed 194 

zone-tailed 194 

Hawk Owl, American 8 

European 8 

Hayden, Dr 157 

Haydenite 333 

Hay, O. P., Mississippi fishes described by. 488 

Hedenbergite 334 

Hedymeles melanocephalns, var. capitaUs . . 235 

Heilprin, Angelo 149 

Hela 448 

Heliactin comuta 314 

HeUangelus clarissae 313 

stropbianus 313 

Helianthea bonapartii 312 

lutitife 312 

typica 312 

Helinaia 2,224 

Heliodoxa jacula 312 

jamesoni 312 

leadbeateri 312 

Heliomaster furcifer 313 

Heliopfedica castaneocauda 219 

Heliornis fulica 237 

surinamensis 237 

Heliothrix auriculatus 310 

auritus 310 

barroti 310 

Heliotrope 334 

Heliotrypha exortis 313 

Helix 160 

evanstonensis 160 

(Patula) sepulta, new species 160 

Hehninthophaga 244 

bachmani 171 

celata 171 

lutescens 171,215 

var. lutescens 215 

var. obscura 234 

chrysoptera 171 

lawrencei 171, 215 

leucobronchialis 171, 215 

laci® 171,215,232 

peregrina 171 

pinus 171 

ruficapilla 171 

var. gutturalis . . 234 

var. ocularis 234 

virginisB 171 

Helmitherus 2, 244 

vermivoms 1''! 

HelonJEa 2,224,244 

swainsoni 2, 171 

Helvinite ^^ 

Hematite ^^ 

columnar 333 

compact 333 

micaceous 333 

ochreous 333 

specular 333 

tabular 333 

Hemilepidotus *"* 

Gibbsi *54 



560 



INDEX. 



Hemilepiilot.us spinosus 454 

Hemipagurus giacilis, new species 426, 451 

new genus 422 

socialis, new species 423, 426, 427, 

428, 451 
Hemirharaphus, description of new Califor- 

nian species of 335 

pleii 30,103 

rosae, new species 335, 457 

nnifasciatua 20, 22, 30, 335 

unknown species 29 

Hemistephania Johannai 313 

ludoviciae 313 

rectirostris 313 j 

veragaensis 313 

Hemitreniia 505 

bifrenata 505 

heterodon 505 

maculata, new species 505, 506, 515 

vittata 565 

Hemitripteridai 86 

Hemitripterua 460 

americanus 86 

Henderson, John 534 

Henhawk, Cooper's 194 

Hen, lesser prairie 196 

prairie 196 

Henshall, Ur. J. A 17,18,20 

Henshaw, Mr 3, 4, 15 

Heptranchias indicus 353 

maculatus 353, 354 

Hermit Thrush, eastern 2 

Thrushes 1 

Herodias 244 

alba egretta 197 

egretta var. californica 214 

Heron, black-crowned night 197 

common European 197 

great blue 197 

white 197 

green 197 

little blue 197 

Louisiana 197 

snowy 197 

white-crowned night 197 

wurdemann's 197 

Herons 10 

Heros 88 

Hesperiphona 244 

vespertina 176 

var. montana 234 

Hesperocichla 224, 244 

nsevia 166 

Heterodontidas 34 

Heterodontus 355 

francisci 34, 458 

Heterognathus 29 

Heteropoda 391 

Heteroscelus 244 

incanus 200, 233 

Heterostichns rostratus 25, 454 

Heteroteuthis tenera 360, 403, 405 

Heulandite 334 

jrammus asper 455 

decagrammua 455 



Pago. 

Hexagrammus nebulosns 455 

snperciliosus 455 

Hexanchus corinus, new species 352, 355,458 

griseus 353 

Hickory shad 502 

Hierofalco 226,244 

gyrfalco candicans 192 

' islandus 192,229 

obsoletus 192 

sacer 192,220 

mexicanus polyagrua 192 

sacer obsoletus 220 

Hiltz, Daniel 534 

Himantopus 244 

mexicanus 10, 201 

nigricoUis 10 

Hippocampidaj 23 

Hippocampus ingens 23, 453 

Hippoglossina 34 

Hippoglossinte 34 

Hippoglossoides 34, 154, 155, 156 

dentatus 471 

elassodon, new species . . . 276, 27tt, 

279, 280, 454 

exilis, new species . . .154, 156, 278, 

279, 454, 531 

Jordani 155, 156, 278, 279, 454 

limandoides 471 

platessoides 79, 156, 279, 471 

Hippoglossus americanus 471 

vulgaris 80,454,471 

Hippoly te securifrons 437, 451 

Hippothoahyalina 131 

HirundinidsB 239 

Hirundo 244 

bicolor var. vespertina 234 

erythrogastra 175 

melanogaster 225 

seiTipennis 225 

thalassina 225 

Histioteuthis 3C2 

Histrionicus 244 

minutus 204 

"Hogfish" 491 

Holacanthus ciliaris 88 

Holconotus Agassizi 456 

analis 456 

argenteus 456 

rhodoterus 88,450 

Holmes, Mr. W. H 158 

Holocentrum sogo 92 

Homarus 431, 433 

Hombron and Jacquinot 12 

Homola barbata 420, 451 

spinifrons 420 

Hopladelus olivaris 514 

Hornblende 333 

Hornstone 334 

Hortonolite - 334 

Howcattl 45 

Howell, Mr. E. E 47 

Howlite 334 

Hummingbird, Allen's 187 

Anna's 187 

black-chinned 187 



INDEX. 



561 



Page. 

Hiiminingbird, broad-billed 188 

broad-tailed 187 

btiff-bellied 187 

calliope 187 

Costa's 187 

Heloise's 187 

lucifer 187 

refulgent 187 

Eieffer's 187 

ruby-throated 187 

rufous 187 

Xantus's 188 

Humming birds 308 

Huro nigricans 497 

Huxley 415 

Hyalasa inflexa 392 

longirostris 392 

uncinata 392 

Hyale litt oralis 120 

Hyalincecia 358 

artifex, new species 357, 375 

tubicola 357 

Hyas coarctatus 414, 451 

Hyatt, Professor 125 

HybogTiathus 503 

argyritis 503,515 

Hybopsis 503 

amarus 110 

egregius 461 

tuditanus 503, 504 

winchelli 512 

xffinocephalus 504 

Hybol-hy nchus 502 

notatus 502, 503, 504, 514, 515 

Hydranassa 226, 244 

tricolor 10 

ludoviciana 197 

Hydrargyra majalis 105 

Hydrochelidon 244 

lariformis snrinamensis 208 

leucoptera 208, 223, 230 

Hydroids 117 

Hydroides dianthus 124, 126 

Hydromagnesite 334 

Hydrotalcite 334 

Hylocichla 223, 224, 244 

alicisB 166 

fuscescens 166 

mustelina 166 

unalasbkaj 166 

audnbonii 166 

pallasi 166 

ustulata 166 

swainsoni 166 

Hylocharis cyanea 319 

sapphiria 319 

Hylotomus 244 

pileatus 189 

scapularis 237 

Hyodon 501 

selenops 501, 515 

tergisus 107 

Hyodontida; 107,501 

Hypentelium nigricans 110, 513 

Hvperprosopon arcuatum 28 

Pioc. Nat. Mas. 80 36 * 



Page. 

Hyperprosopon argentens 321 

Hypersthenite 334 

Hyphalonedrus, new genus 433 

cbalybeius, new species. . 483, 484 

Hypleurochilus gentilis 25, 147, 454 

Hypolia arctoa 236 

Hypomesns olictus gg 

olidus 43,68,258,457 

Hypsicometes, new genus 338, 347 

gobioides, new species 337, 338, 

348, 477 

Hypsilepis comutus 506 

Hypsopsetta guttulata 23, 453 

Hypsurus Caryi 45^ 

Hypsypops rubicundus 455 

Hysterocarpus traskii 327 

I. 

lache 225,244 

doubledayi 319 

latirostris 15, 188, 210. 233, 319 

Ibacus 429 

Ibididse 239 

Ibis, glossy 198 

scarlet 198 

white 198 

white-faced glossy 198 

wood 197 

H)is thalassinus 214, 235 

Icelus 400 

Ichthselurus punctatus Ill, 513 

Icichthys, new genus 305, 308 

loctingtoni, new species 305, 455 

a new Califomian 

deep-water fish 305 

Icosteidae 307 

Icosteus, new genus 63, 305, 300, 307, 308 

aenigmaticus, new species. 63, 306, 307, 455 

Ictalurus - 513 

coeruleseens 513 

punctatus 513, 515 

Tcteria 244 

virens 173 

■virens longicauda 173 

Icteridse 239 

Icterus - 244,351 

audubonii .183,238 

bullocki 183 

cucuUatus 183, 233 

description of a new West Indian spe- 
cies of 351 

galbula 183 

melanocephalus 236 

oberi, new species 351 

parisorum 183, 233 

spurius 183, 214 

spurius var. afBnis 214 

vulgaris 183, 231 

wagleri 183, 229 

Ictinia 244 

subcEerulea H'S 

Idocrase ^'^ 

Idotea irrorata 121 

phosphorea 122 

tricuspidata 121 



562 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Idus melanoiua IH 

Ilmenite 334 

Hyanassa obfcoleta * 125 

IndiaD River, Florida, fishes from 18 

Indians, Chinook 44 

Quillehute 43, 45 

Invertehrata, marine, of northeastern coast 

of America 356 

notice of recent addi- 
tions to 356 

descriptions of new 
genera and species 

of 356 

critical remarks on . . 356 

lodyrite 334 

lolaema frontalis 312 

lolite 334 

lonomis 11,227,244 

martinica 11,202,231 

Iridosmine 334 

Iron (meteoric) 334 

Isopoda 121, 450, 451, 452 

[sopods of Provincetown 117 

Isuru« 51 

glaucus 51 

ox yrhynchus 51, 458 

J. 

Jabiru 197 

Jacana, Mexican 201 

Jack-fish 145 

Jacoby, Dr. L 282 

- Jffiger, long-tailed 208 

pomarino 208 

Richardson's 208 

Jaera albifrons 121 

copiosa 121 

Jamesonite 334 

Janira alta , 450, 451 

Jasper 334 

Jay, AYizona 185 

black-headed 184 

blue 184 

blue-fronted 184 

brown 184 

California 185 

Canada , 185 

Couch's 185 

Florida 184 

green 185 

long-crested 184 

Oregon 185 

pinon 184 

smoky-fronted 185 

Steller's 184 

white-headed 185 

"Woodhouse's 184 

Jeffersite 334 

Jetfersonite 334 

Jeffreys, Mr 381,383,392,394 

Johnson, Capt. G. A 417 

Johnson 480 

Jordan, David S . . : . 17, 22, 23, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42, 49, 51, 
53, 70, 73, 133, 135, 142, 152, 154, 264, 273, 
276, 287, 299, 301, 303, 305, 320, 322, 325, 



Page. 
Jordan, David S. — Continued. 

327, 330, 335, 352, 409, 411, 452, 459, 465, 
477, 478, 486, 489, 490, 491, 492, 49G, 497, 
498, 499, 502, 504, 505, 506, 507, 513, 514 

JordaneUa floridaj 17, 20 

"Joshua Riggs " taking Auxis 534 

Juliamy ia feliciana ' 319 

typica 310 

Julidfe 525 

Julns 528,52!) 

Junco 165,244 

aikeni 179,217 

annectens 179, 217 

caniceps 179 

cinereus 180,232 

dorsalis 179 

hyemalis 179 

hjemalis var. aikeni 217 

insularis 180,217,228 

oregonus 179 

K, 

Kaup, Dr 14 

Keating, Mr. A. C 52 

Kennerlia glacialia 397, 404, 407 

Kermesite 334 

Kestril, European 193 

Killdeer 198 

Kingbird 1 85 

Cassin's 185 

Couch's 1 85 

gray 185 

western 185 

Kingfisher, belted 190 

Texan 190 

Kinglet, Cuvier's 168 

dusky 168 

golden-crowned 168 

ruby-crowned 168 

western golden-crowned 168 

Kite, everglade 193 

Mississippi 193 

swallow-tailed 193 

white-tailed 193 

Kittiwake, Pacific 206 

red=legged 206 

Klais guimeti 317 

Klakistokar 45 

Knot 199 

Kroyer 445 

Kumlien, Mr. Ludwig 46,222 

L. 

Labidesthes 29 

Labracidfe 101 

Labradorite 334 

Labridaj 29,86 

Labrosomus muchipinnis 82 

Labrus pallidus 20 

Lacuna vincta 126 

Lsevicardium mortoni 129 

Lafresnay a flavicaudata 311 

gayi 311 

Lagodon rhomboides 19, 22, 95 

Lagopus 244 



INDEX. 



563 



P.ige. 
Lagopusnlbus jgg 

americanus 214 

k'ucurua igg 

nipestris igg 

Lake trout 4gy 

Lambrus hj-poneus. ..• 417 

Pourtalessii 415 417 

verrillii (new species) 415, 451 

Lamellaria 373 

latens 379 

pellncida 372, 404, 406 

perspicua 372, 373 

Lamellibi-ancbiata 128, 396, 407, 408 

Lamellidoris miiricata 389 

Laniinaria 3g9 

Lamna comubica 355 453 

spaUanzani 51 

Lampomis dominicus 311 

graniineus 31 1 

mango 213, 236, 311 

prevosti 311 

Yiolicanda 213, 236, 310 

viridis 311 

Lamprolasma rhami 310 

Lampronetta 244 

fischeri 204 

Lanartite 334 

Langley & Co., Messrs 258, 262 

LaniidiB 239 

Lanius 225, 244 

borealis 175 

elegans 236 

excnbitor 225 

labtora 213, 236 

ludovicianus 175 

excnbitorides 175 

robustus 175, 216 

Lanivireo 224, 244 

flavifrons _. 174 

solitarius 174 

cassini 174 

plumbens 174, 216 

Lapis lazuli 334 

Lapwing 198 

Larco, Mr. A 38,41 

LaridEB 240 

Lark, meadow 183 

Mexican meadow 183 

shore 1S5 

shore 185 

sky 185 

western meadow 183 

white-throated shore 185 

Larns 244 

affinis 11,207,223,230 

argentatus 11, 207 

smithsonianus 207, 223 

atricilla 207 

brachyrhynchus 11, 207 

borealis 223 

cachinnans 11,207,223 

californicns 11, 207 

canus 207,223 

capistratus 238 

catarractes 227 



Page. 

Larus chalcopterus 214 

dclawarensis n 207 

franklini .207 

fuscus <>3y 

glaucescens 200 

glancus 206 

heermanni „ <)07 

lencopterns 2O6 

mariuus 207 

miautns 238 

occidentalis n 207 

pbiladelphiae 207 

smithsonianus 223 

suckleyi 214 

LatilidsB 27 92 482 

Latriellia elegans 419 4 ,1 

Laumontite 334 

Lavinia giobosa 326 

Lawrence, Mr. George N 13, 15, 16, 220, 351, 354 

Loxia curvirostra americana 176 

Lazulite 334 

Leather-side minnow 460 

Leda acuminata 401 

acuta 401 

messanensis 401 

pemula 401, 405 

tennisulcata 401 

unca 401, 405, 407 

Leodice 353 

Norvegica 358 

polybranchia, new species 358 

vivida 358 

Leonardo, Vicente 40 

Leonhardite 334 

Lepas fascicularis 122 

Lepeta .• 375 

Lepetella .- 375 

tubicola 375,404,406 

Lepidogobius gracilis 455 

newberryi 455 

Lepidolarynx mesoleucus 313 

Lepidolite 334 

Lepidonotus squamatus 122 

Lepidopsetta 325 

bilineata 276, 278, 325, 453 

isolepis, new species 278, 325 

umbrosa 325 

Lepidosteidffi 113 

Lepidosteus osseus 22, 113 

platystoraus 114 

Lepiopomns incisor 498 

obscurus 4&8 

pallidus 498 

Lepomis 498 

apiatiis 20 

auritus 97 

fallax 499,515 

niegalotis 499 

obscurus 498, 515 

pallidus 20,97,498,499,515 

punctatus 20, 98 

Lepralia americana 131 

Pallasiana 131 

Leptochelia algicola 117, 122 

caeca 117 



564 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Leptochelia coeca 122 

Leptocottus 460 

armatua 25, 455 

•Leptolinmea 160 

Leptorhynchus leuclitenbergi 410 

Leptosynapta Girardii 131, 132 

roseola 117,131 

Lesbia amaryUis 316 

gouldi 315 

Leucippus cliionogaster 318 

cblorocercus 318 

Leaciscus 326 

gibbosus 326 

gracilis 326 

macrolepidotus 326 

microlepidotus 326 

pulchellus 326 

Leucite 334 

Leucochloris albicollis 318 

Leuconerpes albolarvatus 226 

Leucosticte 244 

arctoa 236 

arctoua 213,236 

atrata 177,216 

australis 177,216 

campestris 234 

griseiaucha 2, 176 

littoralis 216 

tephrocotis 2, 177 

littoralis 177,216 

var. australis 216 

Lenrestbes, new genus 29 

tenuis 29,456 

Leurynnis, identity of, with Lycodopsis 247 

paucidens 247,248 

Libinia canaliculata 119 

emarginata. 119 

Licbtenstein 9 

Liebetbenite 334 

Ligflrinus cbloris 238 

Lima gibba 402 

subo vata 402 

Limsea gibba 402 

subovata 402, 405, 407 

Limanda ^ 473 

Beanii 473 

ferruginea 78,472,473,474 

platessoides 473 

Linmsea 160 

(Leptolimnea) minuscula, new sp. . . 160 

Limnoria liguorum 121, 122 

Limopsis borealis 402 

cristata? 402,405,407 

minuta 402, 405, 407 

Limonite var 334 

Limosa 244 

SBgocephala 200, 222, 230 

fedoa 200 

bsemastica 200 

lapponica novse-zealandiae 200, 222, 230 

uropygialis 222 

Limpkin, the 202 

Limulus 127 

Polyphemus 118, ] 25 

Linaria bninnescens 234 



Page. 

Linaria holboUi 216 

bomemanni 235 

Lineus viridis 125 

Linnaeite 334 

Linnieus 8,15 

Linnarsson, Prof. G 47 

Linnet, Brewster's 177 

Liocardium 129 

Liocottus 460 

hirundo 455 

Liostomia 381 

Liostoinus obliquus 93 

Liparidae 478 

Liparididse 477 

Liparis 477 

cyclopus 454 

pulchellus 454 

ranula 477 

Liroconite 334 

Littorina littorea 124, 126, 376, 409 

palliata 126 

rudis 126 

tenebroea , 126 

Littorinella minuta 126, 129 

Lobipes 227,244 

hyperboreus 201 

Lockington, W.N 23, 53, 58, 60, 63, 247, 248, 284, 

297, 304, 307, 325 

on a new Prionotus 529 

Lockington's memoir 50 

Logcock 189 

Loligo Pealei 125 

Lomvia 228,244 

arra 212,223 

brunnichi 212 

troile 212 

californica 212,223 

Longspur, chestnut-collared 177 

Lapland 177 

McCown's '. 178 

Smith's 177 

Loon 210 

great white-billed 210 

LophidsB 470 

Lophiidae 75,469 

Lophius 469 

aculeatus 467 

americanus 75 

piscatorius 75, 409 

Lophody tes 244 

cucuUatus 205 

Lophogaster, sp. nov 445, 451 

typicns 445 

Lopholatilus 432,447,481,482 

chamseleonticeps 92, 337, 482 

Lophophanes 244 

atrocristatus 168, 232 

bicolor 168 

inornatus 168 

wollweberi 168,232 

Lophopsetta maculata 79 

Lophomis chalybea 315 

delattrii 315 

helente 315 

magniflcus 315 



INDEX. 



565 



Pago. 

Lophomis omatua 315 

stiotoloplius 315 

verreauxi. 315 

Lophortyx 245 

califomica 197 

elegana 237 

gambeli 197,233 

Loripeslons 400,404,407 

Lota maculosa 81 

Lov6n 381,383 

Lovenella metula 375 

■whiteavesii 375, 404, 406 

Lowe,Kev. K. T 470 

Loxia 225,245 

atrata 234 

■ canora 225 

curvirostra 225 

mexicana 17G 

leucoptera 176,234 

ludoviciana 225 

pityopsittacns 236 

pyrrhula 225 

Lucina 158 

fllosa 408 

profunda, new species 158 

Luidia elegana 359 

Lumbriconereis 123 

Lumbricus 529 

Lumbrinereia fragilis 123 

tenuis 123 

Lumpenus anguillaris 454 

Lunatia • 141, 142 

gronlandica 401 

heros 126 

heros var. triaeriata 408 

heros var. (wide umb.) 408 

levicula, new species 371, 404, 406 

nana 371 , 404, 406 

Lnnda 228,245 

ciiThata 12,211 

Luray Cave, Yirgiuia, blind myriapod from. 524 

liUscinidas 239 

Lutjanus Blackfordii 96 

caxis 19,96 

Luxilus 506 

analoalanus 506 

chickasavensia, new species 506, 515 

comutus 110, 506, 514, 515 

Lycodea 247 

paciflcus 247,248,454 

paucidens 454 

paxillua 477 

Vahlii 82 

Verrillii 337,477 

Lycodidie 82,477 

Lycodopaia 24 > 

identical with Leurynnis 247 

paciflcua 248 

paucidens 248 

Lyonsia hyalina ^28 

Lyonaiella abysaicola 396, 397, 404, 407 

gemma, new species 396, 404, 407 

Lyreidua Bairdii 420,451,452 

tridentatus 421 

LysiopetalidiB 524,525,526 



Page. 

Lysiopetalids .' 525 

Lysiopetalum 525,526 

Ly aiosquilla armata 446, 451, 452 

spinosa 446 

Lytliruri 511 

Ly thrurus 508, 509, 510, 511 

atripes 511 

diplaemius 509 

lirus 509 

M. 

Machaeroplax bella 378, 404 

obscura 408 

varicosa 378 

Machetes 227,245 

pngnax 200,230 

Mackerel, frigate, in "West Indies 533 

Great Britain 533 

Bermudas 533 

on Now England coast. . . 532 

Macoma sabulosa 408 

Macrocystis 139 

Macrorhamphus 245 

griseua 199 

scolopaceua 199 

Macrura 429, 451, 452 

Macriiridse 80,475 

Macnirus 535 

atlanticua 346 

Bairdii 80, 337, 346, 475, 476 

carminatiis 337, 338, 346, 475 

cffilorliynchus 346 

Fabricii 80, 475 

mpestris 475 

Mactra holmesii 158 

solidissima 128 

Madaen, Peter 461, 463 

and aons 459 

Magnosite 334 

Miignetite 334 

inclaaiona 334 

Magnolite 334 

Magpie, black-billed 184 

European * 

yellow-billed ^'^4 

Malachite 3.(4 

Malacolite 334 

Mallard 203 

Mallotus villosus 43,105 

Maltheidffi 467 

Mancalias uranoscopus 469 

Man-eater shark 52 

Manganite 3^4 

Mangelia 368 

Manta americana 4j7 

birostria ^" 

Marcasite 334 

Marchard -"* 

Mareca '^"^^ 

americana *■"" 

penelope 203,231 

Margarita arg«ntata '83 

lamellosa 378,404.400 

new speciea "'° 

olivacea 383 



566 



INDEX. 



Margarita regalia 378,404,406 

sp 404 

Margarite 334 

Margarops 16, 17 

dominicensia, new species 16 

hermtnieri 16, 17 

Marginella 359 

roscida? 369,403,406 

Mamoch, Mr. G.W 149,151 

Marsenina 373 

ampla, new species 374, 404 

glabra 373,404 

micromphala 373 

prodita 373,404 

Martin, bee 185 

Cuban 175 

pui-ple 175 

Maynard, Mr 2 

McDonald, Col. Marshall 70 

Means 264 

Meckelia 125 

Meerschaum 334 

Megaleslris 227,245 

skua 208 

Megalops thrissoidcs 22 

Meionite 334 

Melaconite 334 

Melampus bidentatus 127 

ILaeatus 127 

Melanerpe 8 245 

erythrocephalus 189 

formicivorus 189 

angustifrons.lOO, 219, 229 
var. angustifrons . . 219 

torqoa.tus 189 

Melanetta 245 

fusca 205,222,230 

velvetina 205 

Melanite 333 

Melanocorypha calandra 236 

Melanosiderite 334 

Melanura limi .'. 104 

Meleagridaj 239 

Meleagria 245 

gallopavo 195, 233 

americana 195 

Melletes 460 

Mellisuga minima 314 

Melopelia 245 

leucoptera 195, 233 

Melospiza 245 

clnerea 3,180,217 

fasciata 2, 180 

fallax 3,180 

guttata 3,180,217 

heermanni 3,180 

rufina 3,180,217 

samuelis 3,180 

gouldii 3,213 

insignia 3,217 

lincolni 181 

palustris..., 180 

rufina 217 

Membranipora pilosa 131 

Menestho 381 



Menestho albula 381 

Menticirrus 28 

elongatus ,.. 28 

nebulosua 93 

littoralis 93 

undulatua 450 

Mergellus albellus 237 

Mergus 245 

albeUus 237 

merganser americanus 205 

serrator 205 

Merlin, black 192 

European 192 

Richardson's 192 

Merluciidas 81 , 338, 347 

Merlucius 273, 347, 348 

description of a genua related to. 337 

bilinearis 81, 337, 348, 478 

productua '. 451 

vulgaria 348 

Meron 145 

Merostomata 118 

Merrill, Dr , 15 

Merula , 223,224,245 

conflnia 166,214,228 

migratoria 166 

propinqua 166, 214 

nigra 224 

Mesolite 334 

Meaozoic invertebrate fossils from Arkansas, 

Colorado, Utah, and Wyoming 157 

Metacinnabarite 334 

Metallura tyrianthina 316 

Metridium marginatum 132 

Mexico, description of a Gasteropod fossil 

from 140 

Micrathene 226, 245 

whitneyi 192,220,233 

Microchera parvirostris 314 

Microdentopus grandimanus 117, 121 

minax 121 

Microgadus proxinius 454 

tomcodua 80 

Micropalama 245 

himantopua 199 

Microptrca - 496, 497 

prceliaria, new speciea 496, 514 

pnnctulata 490,496 

Micropogon vmdulatus 94 

Micropterus 497 

nigricans 497 

nuecensis 19 

paUidus 19,22,96,497,515 

salmoides 19,96,49? 

Microstomatidts 68 

MicrostomidsB 1 05, 483 

Miers, Mr 446 

Milky opal 334 

Millerite 334 

Milne- Edwards, A 414, 415, 418 

Milvulus.... 245 

f orflcatus 185 

tyrannus 185,231 

Mimetite 334 

Mimus 245 



INDEX. 



567 



Page. 

Mimus caudatus 213 

polyglottus 166,213 

Mineral coal var 334 

Minerals in ls''ational Museum of United 

States in 1879 333 

Minnilus 508,509,511 

ardens 5H 

atripes 511 

bellus, new species 510, 511, 515 

cy anocephalus 511 

dilectus 508,515 

diptemius 511 

lirus 511 

punctulatns, new species 508, 511, 514 

rubripinnis 509, 511, 515 

Mississippi, eastern, fishes from 488 

Mitchell 20 

Mitrephorus pallescens 218 

Mniotilta 245 

borealis 213 

longirostris 213 

varia 171,213 

borealis 171, 215 

Mniotiltidae 239 

Mockingbird 166 

Modiola modiolns 408 

plicatula 130 

polita 402,405,407 

Moera levis 117, 121 

Mola rotunda 453 

Molgula manhattensis 130 

Molliahyalina 131 

MoUienesia latipinna 22 

Mollusca 157 

Eocene, new species of, from south- 
ern United States 149 

from outer banks of southern New 

England 408 

list of, previously unknown south 

of Cape Cod 405, 406, 407 

of northeastern coast of America. 350 
recently added to southerr. New 

England fauna 405 

shaUow-water, of southern New 

England 409 

testaceous 356 

MoUusks of Provincetown -■- 117 

Molothms 245 

aneus 182, 218, 2.32 

ater 182 

obscurus 182,218,232 

obscurus 218 

Molybdenite 334 

Molybdite 334 

Momotid» 239 

Momotus 245 

cajruleiceps 190,229 

Monacanthus setifer 76 

Monolene, new genus 338 

sessilicauda, new species 337, 338, 472 

Montacuta ferruginosa ■ 400 

Montagnai 390 

gouldii 390 

Monterey Bay, a new Sebastichthys from . . 70 
Scorpsnoid fish from. 327 



' Page. 

Monterey Bay, new Agonoid fish from 152 

Chiroid fish, from 248 

two new species of Sebas- 
tichthys from 142 

Monterey, description of anewEmbiotocoid 

from 299 

notes on a species of Abeona from 299 

new species of Ray from 133 

Xiph ister and 

Apodichthys from 135 

Moonstone 334 

Morone americana 101 

Morrison, Charles F 257 

Motacilla 224 245 

alba 170,215,224,229 

flava 224 

suecica 224 

tigrina 224 

troglodytes 224 

Motacillidae 239 

Motmot, blue-capped 190 

Mountain herring 460 

Moxostoma 512 

clavifoiTnis 513 

macrolepidotum 515 

var. duquesnii 512 

pcEcilumm 512,514 

MugU 20 

albula 20,102 

brasiliensis 20, 102 

cephalotus 102 

Mugilida) 20, 29, 102 

Mugil lineatus 20,102 

mexicanus 29, 457 

plumieri 20 

Miiller 9,10 

MunidaBamffia 428,429 

caribaja? 428,451 

tenuimana 428,429 

Munnopsis typica 450,451 

Murajna mordax , 457 

sanctse-helense 1 13 

Muraenidae 30, 113 

Mura3noides gunneUus 82 

Ifetns 265,454 

mucronatus 82 

ornatus 454 

Murray, Mr — 469 

Muscicapa beim 216,229 

brasieri 210, 229 

Carolinensis 224 

derhami 229 

fulvifrons 218.229 

guttata 1 

minuta 234 

olivacea 2d4 

rubrifrons 216, 224 

texensis 218, 229 

Muscovite 334 

Mustelus califomicus 34 

canis 34, 52, 115 

hinnulns 34, 52, 458 

vulgaris 52 

Mya arenaria 128 

Mycteria 226,245 



568 



INDEX. 



, Page. 

Mycteria americana 197, 221, 226, 233 

Myctophum 275,483 

crenulaie, new species 274, 275. 457 

• procellarum 457 

M^iadestes 245 

genibarbia 250 

townsendi 167 

Myiarclius 245 

cinerascens 13, 14, 186 

coopeii 13, 14 

crinitus 14, 186 

erytlirocercus 14 

ery throcercus 13, 15 

var. cooperi 14 

lawrencei 186,229 

mexlcanus 13, 186 

oberi 13,15 

etolidus 14 

yucatanensis 13 

Myiodinastea 225, 245 

luteiventris 186, 218 

Myiodioctes 224 

bonapartei 213 

minutus 234 

pusUlus var. pileolata 216 

Myiozeta 225 

Myiozetetes 225, 245 

tesensis 186,218,229 

Myliobatidae 31 

Myliobatis califomicus 31, 457 

Myloleiicus 507 

Myriapod, blind form of, from Virginia 524 

My riapods, list of North American 524 

of the family Lysiopetalidse 524 

M jrichthy 8 tigrinus 457 

Myriolcpis (chiridas) 248 

new genus 248 

zonifer, new species 243, 455 

a new Califomian chiroid 

fish 248 

Myrtis fanny 315 

Mysis arctica 445 

stenolepis 120 

Mytilus edulis 130 

Myxine glutinosa 116, 337, 486 

MyxinidiB 116,486 

Myxostoma macrolepidota 110 

macrolepidotum subsp. du- 

quesnii 512 

Myzopsetta ferrnginea 472 

rostrata 472 

N. 

Ifanostoma 492, 493 

elegans, new species 493, 51 5 

zonalo 492, 515 

Nassa 125 

nigi'olabra, new species 371,404,406 

Naticn. clausa 408 

pedemalis 142 

prfe-grandis 142 

Naticidae 141 

National Museum, Mississippi fishes in 489 

Natrolite 334 

Nautichthys 460 



Page. 

Nautichtliys oculofasciatus 455 

NeaBca 3!»7 

arctica 397,398,404.407 

glacialis 397,39^,404,407 

jugosa 398, 404, 407 

multicostata, new species 398, 404 407 

obesa .398,404,407 

pellucida 398 

rostrata 398, 404, 407 

Neah Bay, two new species of fishes from . . 264 

Ascelichthys rhodorus from 264 

Scytalina cerdale from 264 

Nectris amaurosonia 223 

tenuirostris 223 

Needle-fish 4 59 

Nelson, Mr. E. W 3,222 

Nemertes 125 

Nemertina 124 

NemichthyidsB 484 

Nemichthys 409 

avocetta, new species 409, 410, 457 

from Pugct 

Sound... 409 

scolopaceus 410, 484 

Neoclinus Blanchardi 454 

satiricus 454 

Neocorys 245 

spraguei 171 

Neohela, new generic name 448 

nionstrosa 448, 449, 450 

pbasma, new species 448, 451 

Neoliparis mucosns 454 

Nephelite 334 

Ncphrops 431, 433 

norvegicus 433 

Nephropsis 432 

aculeata 451, 452 

aculeatus, new species 431 

stewarti 431,432 

Nephthys ciliata 123 

Neptunea arata 370, 406 

calata 406 

decemcostata 406 

glabra 370 

propinqua 370, 404, 40G 

pygnicEa 370 

(sipho) arata, new species 370, 4 04 

cselata, new species 369, 403 

propinqua 370 

stimpsoni 370,408 

Nereis limbata 123 

virens 123 

Nesbitt, GeorgeF -- 104 

Nettion 245 

carolinensis 204 

crecca 204,230 

Neverita duplicata 126, 408 

New England, Crustacea dredged off south 

coast of 413 

deep-water fishes from 467 

frigate mackerel from 533 

mollusca recently added to 

the fauna 405 

southern, new deep-water 
fishes from 337 



INDEX. 



569 



334 
512 
245 
231 
182 
334 
104 



Page. 
Newfoundland, new species of Notacanthus 

from Grand Banks of 535 

New Mexico, a new cietaceouaPinnafroin. 47 

Newlon, Professor 2 7 

Nicolea simplex 124 

Nicholls, Dr. H. A. Alford 255, 556 

Nighthawk Igg 

Cuban 188 

Texan 188 

western 188 

Nitre 

Nocomis winchelli 

Nomonyx, new genus 15,227, 

dominicus 205, 

Nonpareil 

Noraculite 

North America, birds of 

North Carolina, occurrence of Phycis re- 

gius in 

Notacanthus 

phasganorus, new species.. 

Notemigonus 

americanus 

chrysoleucus 507, 510, 512, 514, 

Nothonotus 

Nothria 

conchylega 

Notomastus filLformis 

luridns 

Notorhynchus borealis 

maculatus 353, 

Notropis 

atherinoides 

lirus 

mat utinus ^ 

No turns 

exilia 

gyrinus 112,514, 

insignis 

leptacanthus ? 514, 

marginatus 

Nucula delphinodonta 

proxima 

Nudibranchs of Provincetown 

Numenius 

borealis 

femoralis 10, 

hudsonicus 

longirostris 

phasopus 201,222, 

tahitiensis 10, 201, 222, 

Nutcracker, Clark's 

Maximilian's 

Nuthatch, brown-headed 

pigmy 

red-bellied 

slender-billed 

white-bellied 



Nyctale . 



acadica 

albifrons 

tengmalmi richardsoni. 
Nyctea 

scandiaca 

Nyctherodius 



Page. 

Nyctherodius violaceus 197 

Nyctiardea 245 

grisea ntevia 197 

violacea 257 

Nyctidromns 5 245 

albicollis 5,15,188,233 

O. 

Obelia 389,31)1 

ditchotoma 132 

geniculata 132,389 

Ober, Mr 16,17,255,256 

Obsidian 334 

Oceanites 227 245 

oceanica 2IO 

Oceanodroma 228 245 

furcata 210 

hombyi 210 

Ochthodromus 227, 245 

wilsonius 199 

Octopus Bairdii 362, 405 

Odontaspididfe 115 

Odontopyxis trispinosus 531 

Odostomia 377 

bisuturalis 127 

dealbata 127 

(Menestho) sulcata, new species. 380, 404 

modesta 380 

striatula 380 

sulcata 406 

trifida 127 

unidentata 380, 404, 406 

CEdemia 245 

americana 205 

nigra 237 

CEstrelata 227,245 

bulweri 209, 230 

hfesitata 209, 230 

Oidemia bimaculata 214 

Oil-shark 42 

of southern California 42 

"Oiseau marine" 256 

Old Squaw 204 

Oligocottus 264,265,460 

analis 25,147,455 

globiceps 265, 455 

maculosus 139, 265, 455 

Oligoclase 334 

Oligoplites 18 

occidentalis 18 

Olivenite 334 

Olor 227,245 

americanus 202 

buccinator 202 

cygnus , 202,22-2,230 

minor 202,222.230 

Ommastrephes iUecebrosa 125, 408 

sagittatus 125 

Onchidorissp 127 

Oncocottus 460 

Oncorhy nchus gorbuscha 457 

Kennerlyi 457 

keta 457 

kistttch 457 

nerka 457 



570 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Oncorhynchus qninnat 106 

tshawytcha 457 

Onos cimbrius 476 

(Khinonemus) cimbrius 81 

Onychotes 226,245 

gruberi 194,221,226 

Onyx 334 

Oonalaska bunting 3 

Opal 334 

Opbichtbys triserialis 457 

Ophidium atropurpureum 454 

Taylori 454 

Ophiocnida olivacea 359 

OpModon elongatua ■ 455 

Ophioglypha sarsii 359 

Ophioscolex glacialis 359 

Ophite 334 

Ophiuran 132 

Opiathonema thrissa 108 

Oporomis 245 

agilis 173 

formosa 173 

Opsopoeodus, new genus of fishes 507 

emiliae, new species 507, 515 

OrcheseUa 529 

caeca 529 

Orchestia agUis 120,376 

Orcynus 533 

alalonga 273,275,456 

pacificus 273,456 

pelarays 89, 94 

tbynnus 533 

Oreopyra caloltema 310 

leacaspis 310 

Oreortyx 245 

picta 196 

plumifera 197,221 

Oreoscoptes 245 

montanus 166 

Oreotrochilus chimborazo 310 

estellife 310 

leucopleurus 310 

pichincha 310 

Oriole, Audubon's 183 

Baltimore 183 

Bullock's 183 

hooded 183 

orchard 183 

Scott's 183 

Wagler's 183 

Omismya costae 225 

heloisae 225 

Omithion 225,245 

imberbe 187, 218 

incanescens 218 

inerme 225 

Orpiment 334 

Ortalida 226 

Ortalis 226,245 

vetula 9 

maccalli 9,195,233 

Orthoclase 334 

Orthodon microlepidotus 326 

Orthopristis f ulvomacnlatum „. 22 



Page. 

Orthorynchns amazili 225 

emignansv. 316 

Ortygometra porzaua 222 

Ortyx 245 

elegans 237 

plumifera 221 

virginiana 196 

floridana 196,221 

texana 196 

vrrginianus var. floridanus 221 

Osmerus attenuatus 66,68,457 

elongatus 66, 68 

mordax 105 

paciflcus 45, 105,258 

pretiosus 68 

thaleiohthys 68,457 

Osprey, American 193 

Ossifraga 227,245 

gigantea 11,209,230 

Oswald, Dr. Felix L .'.. 221 

Otolithus califomiensis 456 

magdalenae 456 

Ouvarovite 333 

Ouzel, American water 167 

Owl 257 

American bam 190 

hawk 192 

long-eared 191 

arctic horned 191 

barred 191 

burrowing 192 

California pigmy . 192 

dusky homed 191 

European hawk 192 

ferrugineous pigmy 192 

flammnlated screech 191 

Florida barred 191 

burrowing 192 

screech 191 

great gray 191 

grey 8 

homed 191 

Lapland 191 

little screech 191 

Mexican screech 191 

northwestern screech 191 

Kichardson's 191 

Eocky Mountain screech 191 

saw- whet 191 

short-eared 191 

snowy 192 

spotted 191 

Texan screech 191 

westem horned 191 

"Whitney's pigmy 192 

Oxinoe glabra 373 

Oxyechus 227,245 

vociferus 198 

Oxyjulis modestus 87 

Oxylebius pictus 455 

Oxypogon guerini 316 

Oxy toma 157 

erecta 157 

Oystercatcher, American 198 



INDEX. 



571 



Page. 

Oystercateher, black 198 

European 198 

Ozocerite 334 



Pachyrhamplins 225,245 

major 187 

Pachyrhynchus cuvieri 225 

Pacific coast of United States, a new Noti- 
d an o i d 
shark from 352 

fishes of 452 

Packard, Dr. A. S 281, 356, 364, 396, 524, 525 

Pagellus calamus 286 

Pagophila , 245 

brachytarsi 214 

ebumea 206 

Pagrus argenteus 95 

PaguridfB 258 

Paguroids 423 

Palpemouetes vulgaris 120 

Palinurichthys perciformis 91 

Palinurus intermptus 52 

Pallene empusa 117, 118 

Pandalus 438,443 

annulicomis 441 

borealis 437,440,443 

leptocerus, new species. .437, 440, 441, 451 

Montagui 437, 438, 440, 441, 442, 443 

(annulicornis) 437 

propinquus 437, 438, 440, 451 

tenuipes, new species 441, 443, 451 

Pandion 245 

haliaetus carolinensis 193 

Pandora glacialis 397 

trilineata 397 

Panopeus depressus 119 

Sayi 119 

Panoplites flavescens 312 

Jardini 311 

Matthewsi 312 

Panterpe insignis 317 

Panychlora poortmani 320 

stenura 320 

Panyptila 6 

cayennensis 6 

Paralabrax clathrata 101 

clathratus 27 

maculofasciatus 27 

Parakeet,Caroluia 190 

socorro 190 

Paralepis 411 

borealis 411 

coruscans, new species 411, 457 

new species of, from Straits of 

Tuca 411 

presented by Mr. Brown 412 

Paralichthys 34 

maculosu s 23, 35, 51, 454 

oblongus 472 

Parapagurus piloaimanus 428,451 

Parasira catonulata 409 

Paratanais algicola 122 

Paratractus pisquetus 89 

Parephippus faber 456 



Page. 
Parephippus qnadratns 101 

^'''"■"I'B 239 

Parophrys 277,278 

ischynnis, new species. .276, 278, 280, 453 

isolepis 453 

'''etulus 276,277,278,453 

Parra 227,245 

gymnostoma 2OI 222 

jacana 227 

Parrid® 239 

Parrot, Carolina 256 

green 256 

new species of, from Dominica 254 

of the genus Chry- 

sotis 254 

Partridge, spruce ■ ige 

Parnla 245 

americana 171 

insularis 2l5 

nigrilora 232 

nigrilora 216 

pitiayumi insularis 171, 215, 216, 228 

nigrilora 171 

Parus 245 

albescens 213 

atricapUlus 168 

occidentalis 168 

septentrionalis 168 

carolinensis 168 

cinctus 13,168,215,230 

hudsonicus 169 

leucotis 229 

meridionalis 168, 228 

montanus 168 

rufescens 169 

neglectus 169,215 

p neglectus 215 

sibiricus 13, 215 

Passer domesticus 214, 238 

montanus 238 

Passerculus 245 

anthinus 2, 178 

caboti 235 

guttatus 2,178,217,228 

princeps 178,217 

rostratus 2, 178 

sandwichensis 2, 178 

alaudinns 178 

savanna 178 

Passerella 3,245 

iliaca 3, 181 

megarhyncha 3, 181 

schistacea 3, 181 

unlaschcensis 3 

unalashkensis 181 

obscura 235 

townsendi 3 

Paaserina 225,245 

amcena 182 

ciris - - 182 

cyanea 182 

parellina 182 

versicolor 182, 232 

Patagona gigas 312 

PateUa 265 



572 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Patula ' 160 

Peale.Dr.A.C 10,159 

Peccliiolia abyssicola 396 

Pecten ; 127,403 

fenestratus 403,405,407 

ground 472 

llosky nsi var. pustulosus 405, 407 

inequisculptus 403, 407 

Islandicua 407 

irradians 124,130 

(near opercularis) 407 

opercularis 403 

sp. near opercularis 405 

tenuicostaius 408 

vitreus 358,405,407 

Titreus var. abyssoTrum 407 

Pectinibranchiata 141 

Pectolite 334 

Pedicecetes 9,245 

colnmbianus 221 

kennicotti 235 

phasianellus 196 

columbianns 196, 221 

Pelamys 533 

lineolata 456 

Pelecanidae 240 

Peiecanus 245 

carbo 227 

erythrorhynchua 11, 205 

f I1SCU8 205 

occipitalis 235 

trachyrhynchus 11 

Pelican, American white 205 

brown 205 

frigate 205 

Pelidna 227,245 

alpina 200,222,230 

americana 200 

subarquata 200, 230 

Pelionetta 245 

perspicillata 205 

trowbridgii 214 

Pelodichthys olivaris 514 

Penajus politua, new species 444, 451 

Peprilus alepidotus 92 

Gardenii 92 

Perca americana 100 

fluviatilis 100 

Percidffi 27,100 

Percina 491 

caprodes 100,491,515 

PercopsidsB 105 

Percopais guttatua 105 

PerdicidsB 239 

Peridot 334 

Pariploma papyracea 408 

Perisoreus 245 

canadensis 4, 185 

capitalia 4, 185, 218 

fumifrons 5,185,218 

var. capitalis 218 

var. obscurua 218 

capitilis 4 

obscurus 4,185,218 

Perissoglcssa 224,245 



Page. 

Perissoglossa carbonata 164, 1 72, 234 

tigrina 172 

Peristedinm miniatum, new species 337. 338, 

349, 480 

Peristeth us brevirostre 349, 350 

Perroquet 256 

Peace Pretre 145 

vermiglia 146 

Petasphora anaia 311 

cyanotis 311 

delphinsB 311 

serrirostris 311 

thalaasina 3] 1 

Petrel, ashy 210 

black 210 

black-capped 209 

bulwer'a 209 

fork- tailed... 210 

fulmar. 209 

homby 's 210 

Leach's 210 

least 210 

pintado 209 

stormy 210 

white-bellied 210 

Wilson's 210 

Petrochelidon 225,245 

lunifrons 175 

s wainsoni 225 

Petzite 334 

Peucaea 245 

aestivalis 3, 180 

lllinoensis 180,217 

var. arizonsB 217 

arizonsa 3,180,217,232 

carp alia 180,217 

cassini 180 

illiuoensia 217 

ruficeps 180 

boucardi 180, 217, 232 

Pencedramua 224, 245 

olivaceus 172,216,2.32 

Pewee 186 

black 186 

say 'a 186 

western wood 186 

wood 186 

Phsebetria fuliginosa 12 

Phseolsema rubinoides 312 

PhasoptUa sordida 309 

Phsethon sethereus 229 

Phaethon 245 

SBtherens 206,223,229 

fiavirostris 206 

Phaethontidffi 240 

Phaethomis adolphi 309 

august! 309 

anthophilus 309 

cassini 309 

emiliffl 309 

eurynome 309 

griseigularis 309 

hispidus 309 

longiroatria 309 

longuemareus 309 



INDEX. 



573 



Page. 

Phaethomia moorei 309 

pretrii 309 

squalidus 309 

sti'iigularis 309 

superciliosus 309 

syrmatophorus 309 

yaruqui 309 

Phainopepla nitens 167, 232 

PhalacrocoracidaB 240 

Phalacrocoras 11,227,244 

africanus 237 

bicTistatus 206,223 

carbo 205 

dilophus 11, 205 

cmcinnatns 11, 205 

floridanus 205 

floridanus 11 

graculus 237 

mexicanus 205 

penicillatus 206 

perspicillatus 206 

pygmasns 237 

•violaceus 206 

resplendens 206, 222 

Phalaenoptilas 5, 226, 245 

nuttalli 5,1^8 

Phalarope, northern 201 

red 201 

Wilson's 201 

Phalaropodida) 239 

Phalaropus 245 

fulicari'us 201 

wilsoni 227 

Phaleris 245 

microceros 214, 228 

psittacula 211 

tetracula 214 

Phanerodon 322,456 

argyrosomiis 321 

Phaninopepla 245 

Pharmacosiderite 334 

Phascolosoma Gouldii 124 

Phasianus columbianus 221 

Philacte 227,245 

canagica 203 

Philine 384 

amabllis 383,404,406 

cingnlata 384, 404, 406 

Finmarchica 384,404,406 

fragilis 384,404 

quadrata 408 

Philohela 245 

minor 199 

Philonexis 362 

Phlogopite 334 

Phoebobird 186 

Phcebetria 227,245 

fuliginosa 209,230 

PhoenicopteridaB 240 

Phoenicopterus 245 

ruber 202,231 

Phonipara 225,245 

zena 4,182,218,231 

Photogenis stigmaturus 506 

Phoxichilidium maxillare 118 



Page. 

Pbycis 69,70 

chesteri 69,337,476 

chuss 69,80,337,475 

De Kayi 69 

Earllii, new species 09 

punctatus 476 

regalis 476 

regius 69, 70, 81, 337, 476 

in Korth Carolina 69 

rostratus 69 

tenuis 69,81 

Phyllodoce catenula 123 

Phyllopneuste kennicotti 215 

Phylloscopus 224,245 

borealis 168,215,239 

Phyllosoma 429 

Pbysemaria 270 

Pica 245 

bullockii 236 

nuttaUi 184 

rustica hudsonica 4, 184 

Picicorvus 245 

columbianus 184 

PicidsB 239 

Pickeringite 334 

Picoides 245 

arcticus 189 

tridactylus americanus 6, 189 

dorsalis 7,189 

PicrophyUite 334 

Pious 245 

cuvieri 235 

imperialis 236 

Uneatus 237 

leucomelas 219 

lucasanus 219 

nuttalli 189 

pubescens 188 

gairdneri 188 

querulus 189 

scalaris 189,233 

lucasanus 189,219,229 

Strickland! 189,219,233 

turati 235 

villosns 188 

harrisi 6, 188 

leucomelas 188,219 

Pigeon, band-tailed 195 

cape 209 

passenger 195 

red-billed 195 

white-crowned 195 

"Pike" 327 

Pilodictis 514 

olivaris 514, 515 

Pimelepteridae 94 

Pimelepterus Boscii 94 

Pimelodus ailurus 51.? 

olivaceus 513 

vulgaris 513 

Pimelometopon pnlcher 29, 455 

Pinicola -'*5 

enucleator ^'^^i 234 

Pinna^ description of a new cretaceous, from 

New Mexico *'^ 



574 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Pinna legeriensis 48 

stevensoni, new species 47 

Pinnixa chsetopterana 117, 119 

Pintail 203 

Pipilo 245 

aberti 181,232 

- albigula 218 

aUeni 217 

carmani 217 

clalorurus 181 

erytlirophthalmus 181,217 

alleni 181 

fuscus 4 

albigula 181, 218, 2^6 

crissalis 181 

mesoleucns 4, 181 

maculatus arcticus 181 

carmani 181,217,228 

consobrinus 181, 217, 228 

megalonyx 181 

oregonus 181 

mesoleucns 4 

Pipra galericulata 229 

Pitangus-. 225,245 

derbianus 185, 218 

Mexican 185 

Pitchblende 334 

Pitcher, Mr 34 

Pitticite 334 

Plain bonito of Great Britain 533 

Planesticus 224 

Planocera elliptica 117, 125 

Planorbis 159 

ffiqualis, new species 159 

cirratus 160 

(Gyraulus) militaris, new species. 159 

Platalea ajaja 226 

rosea 226 

Plataleidae 239 

Platea mejicana 10 

Platessa bilineata 325 

dentata 471 

ferriiginea 472 

oblonga 472 

quadrocellata 472 

quadrocularis 472 

rostrata 472 

Platichthy s stellatus 5] , 276, 277 

umbrosus 325 

Platyglosaus semicinctus 455 

Platygobio 461 

Platyonichus ocellatus 119 

Platyrhina 33,53,522,523 

exasperata, new species 32, 38, 522 

generic relations of . 53 

schoenleini 53 

siensis 38, 53 

triseriata, new species 36, 53 

a new Califomian ray . 36 

Platyrhinae 523 

Platyrhinoidis 516,522 

triseriata 516, 522 

Platysomatichthys 302 

hippoglossoidea 51, 302 



Page. 
Platysomatichthys stomias, new species 51 , 301, 302 

Plectrophanes 245 

maccowni 225 

melanomus 213 

nivalis 177 

Plegadis 226,245 

falcinellus 198,231 

guarauna 198 

Pleuracromylon lajvis 52, 355 

Pleuiobrancbsea Novffi-Zealandise 385 

tarda 384,404,400 

Pleurolepis pellucidns 490 

Pleuronectes 473 

cynoglossus 475 

dentatus 471 

ferrugmeus 472 

glaber 78 

hippoglossus 471 

oblonga 472 

perarcuatus 453 

platessoides 471 

quadrituberculatus 50, 453 

stellatus 453 

Pleuronectidas 23,78,338,471 

Pleuronichthy 8 5(i 

coenosus 50, 453 

decurrens 453 

quadrituberculatus 49, 45a 

verticalis, new species. ..49, 50, 453 

Pleurotoma 149, 363 

agassizii 403,406 

carpenter! 368, 403, 406 

impressa 365 

pagoda, new species 149 

Pandionis 403,406 

platysoma, new species 1 50 

(Pleurotomella) agassizii 367 

Pandionis, new 

species 368 

venusta, new species 150 

Plotidae 240 

Plotus ; 245 

anhinga 200 

Plover, American golden 198 

belted piping 199 

black-beUied 198 

field 201 

golden 198,257 

lesser-ringed 10 

little-ringed 198 

mountain 199 

Pacific golden 198 

piping 198 

ringed 198 

seraipalmated 198 

snowy 199 

Wilson's 199 

Podasocys 227,245 

montana 199 

Podiceps 245 

cooperi 214 

cristatns 214^238 

holboUi 210 

minor 238 



INDEX. 



575 



Page. 

Podiceps occidentalia 228 

Podicipitid£B 240 

PodUymbus 245 

podiceps 210 

Podotbecus 332 

acipenserinus 454 

peristethus 332 

trispinosua 454 

vnlaus 454 

PoBcilichtbys 494^ 495 

artesiae, new species 494, 515 

asprigeuis 494 

coeruleus 494 

saxatilis, new species 495, 515 

zonalis 492 

Poey 19 

Pogonias 483 

cromis 93 

Pogonicbtby 8 inaequHobus 326 

macrolepidotus 326 

Polioptila 245 

caerulea 167 

melanura 168 

plumbea 168 

Polistotrema Dombeyi 458 

Pollachius carbonarius 80 

chalcogrammns 454 

Polybasite 334 

Polyborus 245 

cheriway 9,193,233 

lutosus 164,193,220,229 

thanis 9 

Polycera 386 

Polycerella Emertoni, new species 387, 404, 409 

new genus 386 

Polycirrus eximius 124 

Polydesmus cavicola 529 

Polydora cUiatum (?) 123 

Polybalite 334 

Polymygnite 334 

Polyodon folium 114 

Polyodontidai 114 

Polysticta 245 

stelleri 204 

Polj'tnms tbaumantias 318 

viridissimus 318 

Pomacenrridai 87 

Pomatomida) 101 

Pomatomus saltatrix 101, 476 

Pomatopsctta 471 

dentata 471 

Pomolobus aestivalis 108,109 

chrysochloris 502 

mediocris 109 

pseudoharengus 108 

vernalis 108 

Pomotis breviceps 499 

convexifrons -. 499 

fallax 499 

incisor 498 

obscums f 498 

solis 499 

speciosus 498 

Pomoxis annularis 500 

nigromaculatas 500 



^ . Page. 

Pomoxis nitidus 500 

^onio^ys .■;;;,■ 500 

annularis 99,500,515 

nigromaculatua 99,500,515 

Pontophilus brevirostris, new species 435, 451 

norvegicus 435,436,451 

spinosus 435,436 

Pooecetes 045 

gramineus 173 

confinia 178, 217 

var. confinis 217 

Poor- wUl ] 88 

Poospiza bellii, var. nevadensis 217 

Popelaria conversi 315 

langsdorffi 315 

tricolopba 315 

Poricbthys porosissuuus 25, 83, 454 

Poromya granulata 396,404,407 

rotunJata 396,404,407 

Poronotus triacanthtis 91 

Porpbyrio n 

Porphyrula n 

Portlock 363 

Porzana 245 

Carolina , 202 

jamaicensis 202 

cotnmicnlus 202, 222 

var. cotemiculus 222 

marnetta 201,222,230 

noveboracensis 202 

Potamocottus 460 

Pourtales 418 

Powell, Prof. J. "W 157,158 

Samuel 392 

Prase 334 

Praxilla zonalis 117,124 

Preciousopal 334 

Prehuite 334 

Prentiss, Dr. D. "W 238 

Priest-fish 145 

Priocella 12,227,245 

tenuirostris 12,209,230 

Prioflnus 12,227,245 

melanums 12, 209, 230 

Prionotus 529,531 

birostratns 531 

carolinus 84, 529 

evolans 84 

horrens 531 

miles 531 

stephanophrys, new species .454, 529, 531 

Pristipoma Davidsoni 456 

fulvomaculatnm 96 

Pristipomatidse 19,96 

Procellaria 227,245 

cinerea 227 

farcata 228 

gigantea 227 

glacialoides 227 

ha?sitata 227 

lencorrhoa 238 

melanura 227 

obscura 12 

oceanica 227 

pelagica . .210, 227 



576 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Procellaria tenuirostris 227 

Procellariidae 240 

Productua. 46 

giganteas 46 

occurrence of, in Cali- 
fornia 46 

Progne 245 

clialybea 236 

leucogastra 236 

subis 175 

cryptoleuca 175 

Protonotaria 245 

citrea 171 

Provincetown, littoral marine fauna of 116 

Psaltriparus 245 

melanotis 169,228,232 

minimus 169 

plumbeus 169 

Psettichtb ys melanostictus 453 

Pseudogryphus 226, 245 

caUfomianus 9,195 

Pseudojulis modeatus 455 

Pseudomma roaeum 445,451 

Pseudopleuronectes americamis 78 

Paeudora.j idaj, new family 516, 523 

Pseudorhombus 34 

dentatus 79 

oblongus 79,472 

Pseudoscarus vetula 86 

Pseudotremia 524 

cavemarum 526 

vudii 527 

Psilomelanite -•-. 334 

Psilorhinua 246 

moiio 184,229 

Psittacidse 239 

Psycbe 393 

Psychrolutes 460, 478 

paradoxus 454 

PsyclirolutidfB 460 

Ptarmigan, rock 196 

vhite-tailed 196 

■willow 196 

Pteria 157 

(oxytoma) erecta, new species 157 

saliaensis 157 

Pterodonta 141 

Pterophanes temmincki 312 

Pterophryne histrio 75 

la3vigata 75 

Pteroplatea hirundo 31 

marmorata 31,457 

Pteropoda 391,407,408 

PtUocheinis pinguis 448,451 

Ptilogonatidffi 239 

Pty cbocbilus oregonensis 326, 327 

(?vorax) 326,327 

Ptycbostomns duquesnii 512 

Ptycorhampbus 246 

aleuticus 211 

Puebla, Mexico, large Gasteropod fossil from 140 

PuflBn, common 211 

horn-billed 211 

homed 211 

large-billed 211 



Page. 

Puffin, tufted 211 

Puffijius 246 

anglorum 209,230 

auduboni 12,209 

creatopus 209,223,230 

fuliginosus 209 

gavia 12,209,223,230 

griseus 12,209,223,230 

kuhlii 209 

major 209 

. obscnrus 12 

opisthomelas 223 

tenuirostris 209,223,230 

Puget Sound, new species of Nemichthys 

from 409 

two new species of flounders 

from 276 

Pumice 334 

Puncturella noachina 406 

Purpura lapillus 126 

Pycnite 335 

Pycnogonida 118 

Pyranga ; 246 

sestiva 176 

cooperi 176,216,232 

cooperi 216 

hepatica 176,232 

ludoviciana 176 

rubra 176 

Pyrargyrite 334 

Pyrite 334 

Pyrocephalus 246 

rubincus mexicanus 187 

Pyrolusite 334 

Pyromorphite 334 

Pyropito 333 

Pyrosclerite 334 

Pyroxenite 334 

Pyrrhotite 334 

Pyrrhula 225,246 

cassini 176,216,230 

coccinea var. cassini 216 

Pyrrhuloxia 246 

sinuata 182,232 

Pyrrophaena riefferi 219 

Q. 

Quail, American 196 

Californian 197 

Florida 190 

Garabel's 197 

mountain 196 

Massena 197 

plumed 197 

scaled 197 

Texan 196 

Quartz 334 

Querquedula 246 

cyanoptera 204 

discors 204 

Quicksilver 334 

QuiUehute Indian mode of taking surf smelt. 43 

Quiscalus 210 

aeneus 218 

macrorus 1€3, 233 



INDEX. 



577 



Qiiiscalus major 183,218 

palustris 183,218,233 

purpureus 183 

asneus 184 

aglseus 183 

versicolor ieiieus 218 

E. 

Eaftnesque 460 

Eaia 36,53,48a 

binoculata 134, 135, 252, 253, 457 

birostris 457 

«ooperi 134,135,252,253,457 

■eglanteria 115 

erinacea 115 

■ iaomata 457 

Tar.inermis 457 

laevis 486 

oc»llata 115 

radiata 115 

radula 133 

rhina 251,252,253,457 

stellalata, new species.. 133, 134, 135, 252, 253, 

457 

Tuafcn own species 337 

RaidsB 486 

Raiidae 115 

Kail, Californian clapper 201 

clappei 201 

Farallone 202 

little black 202 

little yellow ...■ 202 

Louisiana clapper 201 

red-breasted 201 

sera 202 

Virginian 201 

Eajidae 523 

Rallidae 239 

Balius 24B 

"crepitans'" 11 

elegans 11,201 

var.obsoletns 222 

longirostiis 11 

crepitans 201 

sataratus .201,222 

obsoletus 11,201,222 

virginianus 201 

Sasher 146 

Eathbnn, Richard 116, 355, 379, 414 

Haven, American 184 

white-necked 184 

Ray, description of a new Californian spe- 
cies of 36,133,251 

Realgarite 334 

Recnrvirostra 246 

americana 201 

Eecnrvirostridffi 239 

Eedbird, summer 176 

Redhead 204 

"Red horse" (a species of Moxostoma) 512 

Redpoll, common 177 

greater 177 

mealy 177 

white-rumped 177 

Redstart, American 174 

Proc. Nat. Mus. 80 37 



Pago. 

Redstart, painted 174 

red-bellied 174 

R«d-tail, Saint Lucas 194 

Socorro 194 

western 194 

Redwood, Prof. TheophUus 258, 262, 263 

Regains "^ 246 

calendula njg 

obscurus 215 

cristatus 236 

«i"fieri 164,168,234 

obscnrus 168,215,228 

satrapa 168, 2oG 

oUvaceus 168, 215 

var. oUvaceas 215 

Reichenbach 10, 11 

Reinhardtius 302 

Remora jacobaea 455 

Reiia 145 

Retinite 334 

Rhabdammina 353 

Rhabdoccela 125 

Rhacochilus toxotes 456 

Rhamphodon naevius 308 

Rhamphomicron herrani 316 

heteropogon 316 

microrhynchum 316 

olivaceus 316 

stanleyi 316 

Rhinichthys cataiactas Ill 

nasutns Ill 

Rhinobatidae 34, 38, 516, 523 

American, synopsis and de- 
scriptions of 516 

Rhinobatus 33, 36, 53, 516, 517, 520 

horkelii 516,518,519 

lentiginosus 516, 519 

leucorhynchas 516, 517 

planiccps 516, 517, 519 

productus 34,37,458,516,517 

splnosus 516, 518 

triseriatus 458 

undulatus 516, 517, 518, 519, 521 

Rhinoptera vespertilio 31 

Rhinotriacis henlei 355, 458 

Rbizopods 358 

Rhodonite 334 

Ehodostethia 246 

rosea 207 

Ehomboplites aurorubens 96 

RhyacophUus 246 

ochropus 200,222,230 

solitarius 200 

Rhyncobolus dibranc hiatus 123 

Rhynchofalco 226,246 

f usco-caeralescen s 193, 233 

Rhynchophames 225,246 

maccowni 178 

Rhynchops 246 

nigra 206 

RhynchopsichB 240 

Rhynchopsitta 246 

pachyrhyncha 190, 233 

Rhypticidae 250 

Richardson, SirJohn 258 



578 



INDEX. 



Page. I 

Eidgway, Robert .-...1,163,164,308 

Kiggs, Captain 535 

Eingicula nitida 406 

Eipidolite 334 

Kisaa 246 

brevirostris 206 

nivea 214 

septentrionalis .■ 214 

tridactyla 206 

kotzbuei 206 

Kiasoa '. 126 

(cingula) barpa, new species 374 

Jan-Mayeni 375 

turgida 375 

Road-runner 190 

Kobin, American 166 

Saint Lucas 166 

varied _. 166 

western 166 

Koccus chrysops 101 

lineatus 101 

"Eock cod," a new species of, from Cali- 
fornia 38 

(Sebastichthys serricepg), de- 
scription of 38 

"Eock-fisb" 74,145,466 

description of a new species of . 465 

CaUfomiatn 73 

Eoncador, new genus 28 

steams! 456 

Eossia 360 

sublevis 362,405 

Eostrhamus 246 

sociabilis plumbeus 193, 231 

Eosy quartz 334 

Eougb-leg, ferrugineons 194 

Euflf 200 

Eutile 334 

Eyder.Jobn A 269,280 

on Nortb American Myria- 

pods 524 



Sagmatorhina labradoria 214 

Sablite 334 

Salmo Bairdi 457 

callarias 457 

canls 45, 457 

Clarki 460 

Gairdneri 457,460 

Henshawi 460 

irideus 106,457,460 

lagocephalns 457 

lycaodon 457 

paucidens 457 

purpuratus 457, 460 

proteus 45 

salar var. sebago 106 

sanguinolentus 457 

scouleri 457 

spectabilis 457 

spilurus 460 

truncatus 460 

tsuppitch 457 

Sabnonidae 106,412 



Page. 

Salmon trout 32&, 32T 

Salpinctes 246 

obsoletas 169 

quadalupensis 169, 215, 228 

Salvador! 12; 

Salvelinns Bairdii 107 

fontinalis 106 

malma ^. 457 

oquassa 106 

Salvin 9,11 

Samarskite 334 

Sanderling 200 

San Diego, California, notes on flsbes from. . 23 
occurrence of Crem- 

nobates at 14T 

Sandpiper, Aleutian 19£> 

Baird's 200 

Bartram's 201 

Bonaparte's 199 

buff-breasted 201 

Cooper's 199 

cnrlew 200 

green 200 

least 200 

pectoral 199 

prybilov 199 

purple , 199 

red-backed 200 

semipalmated 200 

sharp-tailed 199 

solitary 200 

spotted 201 

stilt 199 

western 200 

Sandstone, flexible 334 

San Francisco, description of a new flat-flsb 

found in 325 

species of Chirus in markets 

of 53 

San Sebastian Eiver, fishes from 18 

Santa Barbara, new Scopeloid fishes from . . 273 
Santa Catalina Island, California, new 

flounder from 34 

Sapsucker, great white-backed 188 

Saint Lucas 189 

Texan 189 

' ' Sarah C. Wharf ' ' among the Anxis 534 

Sarathrodus bimaculatus 88 

Sarcorhamphns gryphus 23" 

Sarda chilensis 27, 453 

pelamy s 89, 5;:3 

Sardines 26-t 

Sardonyx 334 

Sargus Holbrooki\ 95 

Sars, Prof. G. 364, 366, 367, 373, 381, 390, 392 

394, 398, 399, 400, 401, 450, 479 

Sassolite 334 

Saxicava Norvegica 407 

Saxicola 246 

cenanthe 167,231 

Saxicolidae 239 

Say 525 

Sayornis 249 

fuscus 186 

nigricans 186 



INDEX. 



579 



Page. 

Sayoixiis sayi 186 

■Scalaria j-SO 

Dalliaca .-377, 404, 406 

•Gronlandica 376 

Pourtalesii 376, 404, 406 

ep. iRd , 876,404,406 

unilmeat a, new species 150 

Scaphander puncto-str lata 406 

Scaphirhyncbops platyrhynchus 114 

Scapolito 334 

Scardafella 246 

inca 195,233 

Scaridse 86 

Scarus radians 86 

Scheelite 334 

Scheeletinite 334 

Schirmerite .^ 334 

Schistes geoffroyi 316 

Schizopoda 120,414,445,451,452 

Schreibersite 334 

ScitenidsB ., 18,28,92 

SciasHops 28 

ocellatus 28,93 

ScioHopsis palmata 124 

Sclater, Dr 9,13,14,15 

Seoleeolepis viridis 123 

Scolecophagus 246 

cyanocephalus 183 

ferrugineus 183 

ScolopacidiJB 239 

Scolopax 227,246 

ealidris 227 

rubra 228 

rusticula 10, 199, -221, 227, 229 

tahitiensis 10 

Scomber 533 

diego 456 

pnenmatophorus , -88, 456 

scombrus 88 

Scomberesocidaj 20, 29, 103 

Scombereaos brevirostria 457 

saurus 103 

scutellatus .., 103 

Seomberomorus 456 

coacolor 458 

Scombrid® 27,88 

Scombroides 18 

Seopelidfe 483 

Seopeloid fishes, two new Califomian spe- 
cies of 273 

Seopelns , 275 

Scopoli , -.- 4 

Seops 246 

asio - 191 

€. maxwellias 219 

enano 7 

floridanus 191,219 

kennicottii 191,219 

maccalli 7,191,233 

niaxwellia3 191. 219 

var. enano 7 

floridanus 219 

maccalli 219 

flammeolus 191,319,233 



Scops kennicottii ...... »^ ^ig 

macalli.^. , 7 

trichopsis 191,219,233 

Scorodite , , 334 

Scorpaena guttata ...>...».v 455 

Scori)a;nichthys 46O 

marmoratus 27, 454 

Scorpffinidaj 27,86,453 

Scorpoenoid fish, a new CaUfomian species of 322 
description of a new Califomian 327 

Scorpis califomiensis 455 

Scoter, American 205 

velvet 205 

velvet 205 

Scoterpes 524,525,527 

copel , 527 

Scotiaptex , ,. 226 

cinereum , 8 

lapponicum 8 

Scott 2 

Seudder, TS. P 392,393 

Seyllaea Bdwardsii 409 

Scyllarus (arctus) gundlachi 431 

ScylliidsB 523 

ScyUium laticeps 41 

Scytale 266 

Scytalina cerdale. new species. .264, 265, 267, 268, 454 

Scy talina, new genus 266 

Sebaetapistes guttatus 27 

Sebastes caurinus , 466 

faaciatus ..., 297, 465 

marinu s i. ., 86, 337, 480 

melanops 455 

nebulosus , 465 

viviparus , 86 

Sehaatichthys 287,288,298 

atrovirena . . .27, 70, 146, 288, 289, 290, 
293, 32S, 329, 455 

auriculatuB 38, 146, 288, 289, 291, 

293, 455 

«amatu8 (new species) . . .73, 74, 75, 

146, 455, 465, 466 

«aurinu9 455, 466 

eubspeci e a t e x i 1- 

laris 466 

var. vexiUaris 455 

ohlorostictus- . . 74, 144, 145, 146, 288, 

289, 293, 294, 329, 455 

xhrysomelas (new species) . .455, 465 

constellatus . . . .74, 144, 145, 146, 288, 

289, 293, 294. 295, 329, 455 

.clongatHS 143, 146, 288, 289, 327, 

328.329,455 

-entomelaa <new species) . . . 142, 1^5, 

146, 455 

aasciatua 39, 40 

iasciolaris, new specific name . 74, 
146, 288, 289, 297, 324, 466 

flavidua 142, 144, 145, 146, 455 

snaliger 74, 146, 455 

a new Califomian 
Scoi-pa^noid fish — 322 
■melanops .39, 40, 142, 144, 145. 146, 455 
Diiniatus, new species .7Qi, 72,146,455 



580 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Sebastichthys mystinus 455 

iiebulo8us.73, 74, 75, 144, 146, 288, 289, 
294, 297, 298, 322, 323, 324, 455, 465 

nigrocinctus 38, 40, 287, 288, 289, 

297, 455 

oculatus 74,296 

ovalis 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 327, 

328, 329, 455 

pancispinis 145 

pinnigor 38, 39, 70, 71, 72, 144, 146, 

288, 289, 290, 328, 329, 455 

proriger 7 J, 146, 329,455 

rastrelliger, new species. . .146, 288, 

289, 290, 296, 297, 323, 455 

rhodochloris, new species.. 144, 145, 

146, 455 

rosaceus 74, 144, 145, 146, 288, 289, 

293, 294, 295, 296, 329, 455 

ruber 38, 144, 140, 288, 289, 455 

rubrivinctus, new species.. 143, 146, 
288, 289, 291, 455 
serriceps . . . 146, 288, 289, 294, 298, 455 
a new Califomian 

"RockCod" 38 

simnlans 144, 145 

two new California 8i)ecie3 of. 142 

vexillaris. . .74, 146, 288, 289, 292, 294, 

322,323,324,466 

Sebastodes ^. 287 

melanops 455 

pancispinis 287,289,455 

Sebastoid fishes, descriptions of 7 new Cali- 
fomian species of 287 

Sebastomus 39, 287, 297 

auricnlatns 39, 287 

elongatns 287 

flavidns 39 

melanops 86 

nebulosus 287 

pinniger 39 

rosaceus 287 

ruber 287 

Sebastosomus 39, 287, 297 

flavidns 287,288,289 

melanops 39, 287, 288, 289 

ovalis 287, 288, 289 

pinniger 287 

simulans 287, 288, 289, 455 

Seedeater, black-faced 182 

Morelet's 182 

Selaspborus 246 

alleni 187,218,314 

ardens 314 

hensbawi 314 

platycercus 187,314 

rufus 187, 314 

scintilla 314 

Selene argentea is 

Selenite var 333 

Sema, note on 327 

Sema signifer 327 

Semi-opal 334 

Semotilus 512 

argenteus 110 

bullaris 110 



Page. 

Semotilus corporalis 110, 512, 515 

rhotheua no 

Sennett, Mr 7, 13, 15 

Sergestes arcticus 445. 451 

sp. nov 445, 451 

Serinus meridionalis 238 

Seriola Lalandi 45s 

mazatlana 456 

zonata 91 

Seripbus politus 456 

Serpentine, precious 334 

var 334 

Serpula 124 

Serranidaa 99, 250 

Serranus clatbratus 456 

maculofasciatus 456 

nebulifer 456 

Sertularia pumila 133 

Setarcbes 480 

Giintberi 480 

parmatus 480,481 

Setophaga 246 

miniata 174, 229, 232 

picta 174,232 

rubra 224 

raticilla 174 

Shark, a new Pacific Notidanoid species of. 352 

basking 52 

blue 52 

ground 52 

man-eater 52 

Sharks, Califomian, notes on 51 

Sharpe, Mr 4,8,9,11,141 

Shearwater, black-tailed 209 

black-vented 209 

cinereous 209 

dark-bodied 209 

dusky 209 

greater 209 

manx 209 

pink-footed 209 

slender-billed 209 

sooty 209 

Sheldrake, American 205 

hooded 205 

red-breasted 205 

Shoveller 204 

Shrike, greatnorthem 175 

large-billed 175 

loggerhead 175 

white-rumped 175 

Sialia 246 

arctica 167 

mexicana 167 

sialis 167 

Siboma 326,460 

crassicanda 326 

gibbosa 326 

Siderito 334 

" Sifflem montagne " 256 

SigaUon arenicola 117, 122 

SUiceous sinter 334 

Silicified wood 334 

Sillimanite 334 

SiluiidsB 21,111,513 



INDEX. 



581 



Page. 
Silus 484 

Sinienchelyidas 113^ 485 

Simenchelys parasiticus 113, 435 

Simorhy nchus 228, 246 

cassini 12 

cristatellus 211 

pygmaeua 12,211 

Sipho glaber 37O 

latericeus 369 

Siphonella pygmjea 408 

Siphonentalis affinia 395, 404 

Lofotensis 395, 404, 407 

Sipboiiodentaliimi vitreum 394, 404, 407 

Siplionorliis americana; 15 

Siphonostoma 22 

fuscum 22 

louisiancB 22 

Siphostoma califoniiense 453 

diraidiatum 453 

leptorhynchua 453 

punctipinne 453 

Sitta 246 

canadensis 169 

carolincnsis 169 

aculeata 169 

pusilla 169 

pygma;a 169 

Sittida; 239 

Siurus 224,246 

auricapUlus 173 

motacilla 173 

naevius 12,173 

notabilis 12,173,216 

Skenea planorbis 126,129 

Skimmer, black 206 

Smectite 334 

Smelt, surf. 46 

eastern 46 

Smith, Miss Rosa 147,336 

Mr. Sanderson 117, 355, 380, 414 

Prof. S. 1 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 125, 130, 

355, 371, 373, 391, 393, 413 
on Crustacea from south 

New England 413 

Smithsonian Institution, duplicate fishes 

distributed by 75 

Smithsonite 334 

Smoky 334 

Snake bird 206 

Snipe, English 199 

gray 199 

greater gray -back 199 

red-bellied 199 

red-breasted 199 

robin 199 

Wilson's 199 

Snowbird, black 179 

gray -headed 179 

Guadalupe 189 

Mexican 189 

Snowbird, Oregon 179 

pink-sided 179 

red-backed 179 

white-winged 179 

Solarium 359 



Page. 

Solarium borealo 376,404,406 

Solea 344 

vulgaris 77 

Soleidaj 23 77 

Solemya 153 

bills, new species 153 

subplicata 153 

Telum 129,158,408 

Solen americanus 128 

Solenoconcha 394, 407, 408 

Solenomya velum 129 

Solitaire, Townsend's 167 

Somateria 246 

dresseri 222 

moUissima 204,222,230 

dresseri 205,222 

spectabilis 205 

V. nigra 205 

Somniosus brevipinnis 535 

microcephalus 355, 458 

Souldia 315 

South Carolina, description of new hake 

from 69 

"Spanish Flag" 146,292 

SparidsB 19, 27, 95 

Sparoid flsh, description of a new, from Cal- 
ifornia 284 

Sparrow, aleutian song 180 

Arizona 180 

Bell's 180 

black-chinned 179 

black-throated 180 

Boucard's 180 

Brewer's 179 

californian song 180 

Cassin's 180 

chipjiing 179 

clay-colored 179 

field 179 

fox-colored 181 

Gambel's white-crowned 179 

golden-crowned 179 

Harris's 179 

Heermann's song 180 

Henslo w's 178 

intermediate white-crowned 179 

ipswich 178 

largo-billed 178 

Leconte's 178 

mountain song 180 

oak-woods 180 

rufous-crowned 180 

rufous-winged 180 

rusty song 180 

sagebrush. 180 

Saint Lucas - 178 

Sandwich Sound 178 

Savannah 178 

slate-colored 181 

song 180 

sooty song 180 

swamp 180 

Texas 181 

thick-biUed 181 

titlark 178 



582 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Sparrow, Townsend's 181 

tree 179 

western chipping 179 

western savannah 178 

western yellow- winged 178 

white-crowned 179 

white-throated 179 

yellow- winged 178 

Sparus 286 

a new Californian species of 284 

hrachysoraus, new species 284 

Spatula 24G 

clypeata 204 

Speotyto 226,246 

cnnicularia 237 

floridana 192,220 

hjT)ogsea 192 

var. floridana 220 

Spermophila 246 

moreletii 182,232 

Speasarite 333 

Sphffiroma quadridentatum 122 

Sphalerite 334 

Sphenop rectus cnrvipennis 309 

pampa 309 

Sphyraena .* 411 

argentea 29, 456 

horealis 102 

Sphyraenidaj 29,102 

Sphyrapicus 246 

thyroideus 189 

varius 189 

nuchalis 189 

ruhor 189 

■^hyma zygsena 115,458 

Sphymidoe 115 

Sphyropicus thyroideus 6 

williamsoni 213 

Spillfiian, Eev. "William, M. D 491 

SpinacidsB 116,486 

Spinel 334 

Spiralis balea 392 

gouldii 392 

MacAndrei 393,404,407 

retroversus 392 

var.? MacAndrei 393 

Spirigera 46 

Spiropagurus 422, 423 

epiriger 426 

'SpirorMs 161 

horealis 124 

dickhauti, new species 157, 161 

rotulus 161 

•Spirostrephon 524,525,526 

csesioannulatus 524, 526, 528 

cavernarum 524, 525, 526 

copei ...524, 525 

lactarius 524, 525, 526 

(Psendotremia) copei- 527 

(Scoterpes) copei 525, 526, 528 

vudii 524,525 

Spisula solidissima ? 128, 408 

Spiza 3,4,225,246 

americana 3, 182 

townsendi 182 



Pago. 

Spizella 246 

atrogularis 179,232 

hreweri 3, 179 

domestica 179 

arizonfB 179 

evura 235 

montana 3, 179 

monticola 3 

pallida 3, 179 

pusilla 179 

socialis arizonae 217 

Tar. arizonfB 217 

"Split-tail" 326 

Spodumeu 334 

Sponge, a new type of 269 

Spongia 269 

Spoonbill, American 10 

roseate 198 

Sporadinus elegans 320 

maugaji 320 

ricordi 320 

Squalius 460 

ardesiacus 460, 461 

atrarius 461 

copei, new species 461 

cruoreus, new species 460 

montanus 460 

niger 461 

rhoraaleus, new species 461 

squamatus 461 

tajnia 460 

Squalus acanthias 116, 458 

americanus 116 

Sqnatarola 246 

helvetica 198 

Sqiiatina angelus 458 

Squillidse 446 

Stannite 334 

Starling, European 184 

Stamcenas 246 

cyanocephala 195, 231 

Staurolite 334 

Steganopus - 227, 246 

tricolor 227 

wilsoni 201 

Steganura melananthera 315 

underwoodi 315 

Stegocephalus ampulla 447, 451 

Steindachner 29, 1 47, 332 

Stelgidopteryx 225,246 

serripennis 175 

SteUula 225,246 

calliope 187,219,314 

Stenelais picta 122 

Stenotomus argyrops 95 

Stephanite 334 

Stephanolepis setifer 76 

Stercorariida? 240 

Stercorarius 246 

huffoni 208 

parasiticus 208 

pomatorhinus 208 

Stercorite 334 

Stereolepis gigas 27, 45C 

Sterna 246 



IXDEX. 



583 



Page. 

Sterna aloutica 208,223 

anoestheta 208, 223, 231 

anglica 207 

antillarum 208 

cantiaca acufla-vida 208 

caspia 207 

dougalli 208 

elegans 208 

fliiviatilis 208 

forsteri 208 

faligiuosa 208 

var. crissalis 235 

(Haliplana) anosthsBta 223 

havelli 214 

macrura 208 

pikei 214 

portlandica 235 

regia 207 

trudeaui 208 

Stevenson, Mr. James 48 

Stlienelais picta 117 

Stibnite 334 

Stichseid® 138,477 

Stilbe americana 512 

Stilbite 334 

Stiliger fuscata 117,127,409 

Stilt, black-necked 201 

Stimpson, William 394, 415, 418, 426, 428 

Stizostetbium americanum 100 

canadense 100 

vitreum 100 

Saint Jobn's River, Florida, notes on fisbes 

from 22 

Stolepborus compressiis 457 

delicatissimus 457 

ringens 457 

Stoliczska 141 

Stomatopoda 446,451,452 

Stone, Mr. Livingston 46 

Storm, Mr 479 

Strepsidura 151 

StrepsHas 246 

interpes 198 

melanocepbala 198 

Strepsilida) 239 

Streptorbyncbus 46 

Stricklandinia davidsoni 49 

salteri 49 

and davidsoni in Geor- 
gia 48 

Strigidse 239 

Stiix 7,226,246 

accipitrina 7 

aluco 237 

americana 7 

canadensis 8 

cinerea 226 

cnnicularia 226 

flammea « 7, 226 

var. nigrescens 257 

funerea 8 

lapponica 226 

nebulosa 7, 8, 191 

aUeni 8,191,219 

occidentalis - • 8, 191, 219 



Page. 

Strix otus 226 

passerina 237 

pratincola 7 

stridnla 7, 226, 237 

ulula 8 

flammeata g 

nralensis 226 

Stromateidae 01 

Stromateus simillimus 456 

Strontianite 334 

Struvite 334 

Sturnella 246 

magna 183 

mexicana 183, 218, 232 

neglecta 183 

Stumidae 239 

Sturnus 225,246 

cinclus 224 

vulgaris 184, 218, 225, 229 

Styliola acicula 404 

recta 393 

virgula 393 

Sucker, TJtab 403 

Sudis byalina 273, 274 

ringens, new species 273, 457 

Sula 246 

bassana > 206 

cyanops 206,223 

leucogastra 11, 206 

piscator 206, 223, 229 

Sularid® 240 

Sulpbiir 334 

Sumicbrast, Prof. P 14 

Sunflsbes 489 

Sunstone 334 

Surf bird 198 

Surf-smelt 43 

metbod of taking, by Quillebute 

Indians 43 

of nortbwest coast, "Wasbington 

Territory 43 

Surnia 246 

funerea 192 

ulula 192,220,230 

passerina 237 

ulula funerea 8 

Sussexite 334 

Swallow, bank 175 

bam 175 

cliflf 375 

rough-winged 175 

violet- green 175 

wbite-beUied 175 

Swan, Bewick's 202,222 

European 202 

trumpeter 202 

whistling 202 

Swan, James G 43, 46, 257, 258, 353, 455 

■ Tracbypterns ? altivelis, 

taken by 455 

Swift, black 1^8 

chimney 188 

Vaux's 188 

wbite-tbroated 188 

Sylvanite 334 



584 



INDEX. 



Page. 

Sylvia carlionata 234 

delafieldii 236 

mitrata 224 

montapa 234 

olivacea 216,224 

swainsoni 224 

vermivora 224 

Sylviidffi 239 

Sylvite 334 

Symphemia 246 

semipalmata 200 

Symphyla (acolopendrellsE) 529 

Synapliobranchida} 113, 485 

Synaphobranchus pinnatus 113, 485 

SynascidisB ..-, 270 

SyngnathidsB 23, 77 

Syngnathus 22 

arundiaaceus 23, 453 

fasciatus 22 

fascua 22,77 

griseolineatus 453 

leptorhjTichns 23 

peckianus 22 

viridescens 22 

Synodontidfe 105 

Sy nodus foetena 105 

lucioceps 457 

SyntUiborhamphus 228,246 

antiquBS 211 

■wurmizuBuine 211 

Syringa philadeljjhus 258 

Symium 7 

lapponiciun 219 

occidentale 219 

Syrrhina 38, 53, 516, 520, 522, 523 

brevirostris 516,520 

exasperata 516, 521 

Syrski 280,281 

organs of 280 

Syrskian organ of male eels 281, 282 

. Syscenns infelix 450,451 



T. 

Tachybaptes 228, 

dorainicus 210, 

minor 

Tachycineta 225, 

bicolor 

thalassina 

Tachydrite 

Tachypetes 

aqnila 

Tachypetidse 

Tacbytriorchia 

Taniotoca lateralis 

Talc 

Talorchestia longicornis 

megalopbthalma 

Tambor 

Tanager, Cooper's 

hepatic 

scarlet 

western 

Tanagra cyanea 

Tanagridae 



246 
231 
238 
246 
175 
175 
334 
246 
205 
240 



334 
120 
120 
146 
176 
176 
176 
176 
225 
239 



Page. 

Tantalus 246 

falcineUns 226 

loculator 197 

Taranis niorcbii ? 368 

morchii 403,406 

pulchella, new species 368, 403, 406 

Tattler, wandering.... 200 

Tauridea 460 

Tautoga onitis 87 

Tautogolabrus adspersus 87 

Teal, blue- winged 204 

cinnamon 204 

Englisb 204 

green- winged 204 

Tectibranchiata - 141 

Tectura 127 

. rubella 391 

Telestes 460 

gibbosa 326 

Tellimy a f err uginosa 400,404, 407 

Tellina 129 

Tell-tale 200 

Tellurite .-, 334 

Tellurium 334 

Telmatodytes 224,246 

palustris 170 

paludicola 170, 215 

Tennantite 334 

Terebra 151 

plicifera, new species 151 

Terebra tulina septentrionalis 407, 409 

Teredo dilatata 128 

megotara 128,498 

na-valis 121,128 

Teretulus duquesnii 512 

Tergipes 391 

despectus 127, 391, 404 

Tern, Aleutian 208 

arctic 208 

black 208 

bridled 208 

Cabot's 208 

Caspian 207 

common 208 

elegant 208 

Forster's 208 

gull-bUled 207 



least 



208 



noddy 208 

roseate 208 

royal 207 

sooty 208 

Trudeau's 208 

white- winged black 208 

Teschemacherite 334 

Tetrahedrite 334 

Tetrao 9 

canadensis 226 

rictardsonii 221 

nrogallus 9 

Tetraonidas 239 

Tetrastemma dorsalis 124 

vermiculus? ...117,124 

Tetrodontidse 76 

Tetrodon 40 



INDEX. 



585 



Tetrodon politus 453 

turgidus 76 

Texas fossils, tertiary 151 

Thalasseus caspius var. imperator 235 

Thalassidroma bulweii 223 

Thalassosetus pelagicus 237 

Tlialeichthys paciflcus 68, 258, 457 

Thalurania bicolor 314 

columbica 313 

eriphile 314 

turcata 313 

glaucopis 313 

lucise 313 

nigrofasciata 313 

Thaumatias viridicaudus 316 

Tliompson, Mr 534 

Wyville 469 

Thomsonite 335 

Thoracocincla 224 

Thracia 396 

conradi 408 

myopsis 396 

Thrassetus 226,246 

harpyia 194,221,233 

Tlirasher, Bendire's 167 

brown 167 

califomian 167 

curve-billed 167 

Leconte's 167 

mexican brown 107 

Palmer's 167 

red- vented 167 

sage 166 

Saint Lucas 167 

Socorro 167 

Thrush, Aoonalashka, of Latham 1 

dwarf 166 

eastern hermit 2 

golden-crowned 173 

gray-cheeked 166 

GrinneU's water 173 

hermit 1,166 

large-billed water 173 

olive-backed 166 

red-wing 166 

rocky mountain hermit ' 166 

russet-backed 166 

small-billed water 173 

song, ofEurope 224 

unalaschka, of Pennant 1 

western dwarf 1 

Wilson's 166 

wood 166 

Thryomanes 224,246 

bewicki 170 

leucogaster 170, 215, 232 

spUurus 170,215 

brevicauda 170,215,228 

Thryothorus 246 

ludovicianus 170 

berlandieri 170,232 

miamensis 170, 215 

var. miamensis . . . 215 

Thymallus tricolor 105 

Thyris, new genus 338,344 



Page. 
Thyris pellucidus, new species ...337,338,344,475 

Thysanopoda norvegica 445 451 

Thysanura 599 

Tigoma 460 

egregia 451 

Tilmatura duponti 315 

Tinnunculus 240 

alaudarius 193, 220, 229 

sparverioides 193, 220, 231 

sparverius 193 

isabellinus 193, 231 

Titanite 335 

Tit, black-eared 169 

ground 1C8 

lead-colored 169 

least 169 

yellow-headed 169 

Titlark, American 170 

European 170 

Sprague's 171 

Titmouse, black-crested 168 

plain • 168 

tufted 168 

"Wollweber's 168 

Tityra atricapilla 225 

viridis 225 

Tom-cod 145 

TomUnson, Eobert 257 

Topaz 335 

TopazapeUa 313 

Tope, European 42 

Torellia vestita 400 

Torpedo califomica 458 

the genus 518 

Totanus 227,246 

caUdris 237 

flavipes 200 

glottis 200,230 

melanoleucus 200 

Totten, General 129,130 

Tottenia gemma 126,129 

Tourmaline '335 

inclusions 334 

Towhee 181 

abert's 181 

califomian brown 181 

caiion 181 

Florida 181 

green-tailed 181 

Guadalupe 181 

northern 181 

Oregon 181 

Saint Lucas brown 181 

Socorro 181 

spurned 181 

Trachinoid group 307 

Trachurops crumenophthalmus 89 

Trachurus saurus 456 

Trachynotus carolinus 90 

Trach\-pteru8 ? altivelis 455 

Trask 46 

Tree-fish 146 

Tremoctopus 362 

Tremolite 333 

Triads ^^^ 



586 



INDEX. 



Triads semifasciatus 34, 52, 458 

Trichas delafleldii 23G 

Trichiuridae 88 

Trichiurus lepturus 88 

Trichodon Stelleri 455 

Trichopetalum 525,526,527,528 

juloides 527 

glomeratmn 527 

lunatnm 526,527 

Trichotropis conica 374,404 

TriglidsB 83 

Triglops 460 

Triglopsis 460 

Trigonorhina 522 

alveata 522 

Tringa 246 

alpina 222,227 

camitas 199 

crassirostris 221 

hyperborea 227 

longicauda 227 

maculata 256 

maritima 227 

minuta 227,237 

minutilla 257 

platyrhyncha 237 

ptilocnemis 221 

pugnax 227 

temmincki 237 

vanellus 227 

Tringoides 246 

macularius 201 

Tritia trivittata 408 

Tritonohisus latericeus 369, 403, 406 

TrochilidiB 239 

catalogue of, in collection of 
United States National Mu- 
seum 308 

classification and synopsis of 6 

Elliot's synopsis of 6 

synopsis of 15 

Trochilus 246 

alexandri 187,314 

calliope 225 

colubris 187,314 

fulgens 225 

leucotis 225 

mango 236 

Troglodytes 246 

sedon 170 

parkmanni 170 

alascensis 215 

americanus 213 

bewicki 224 

europfeus 236 

hyemalis 236 

Tar. pacificns 215 

insnlaris 170, 215 

parvnlus 236 

TroglodytidfB 239 

Trogon 246 

ambignus 6, 190, 229 

coppery-tailed 190 

mexicanus 6 



TrogonidsB 239 

Troilite 335 

Trona; 335 

Tionpial 183 

"Trout" 497 

Tnincatella truncatula 370, 379 

truncatulas 404 

Truncatula truncatulus 409 

Trupialis militaris 213,230 

Tryngites 246 

rufescens 201 

Tubulipora flabellaris 131 

serpens 131 

Tunicata 130 

Turbellaria 125 

Turbonilla formosa 380, 404, 40C 

interrupta 1 408 

nivea 370,404,406 

Kathbiini 379,404,406 

Smitbii, new species 380, 404, 406 

Turdidae 239 

new species of the family of, from 

Dominica 16 

Turdus 223,246 

aonalaschkae 1,2 

auduboni 1 

pallasi 1 

atrogularis 224> 

conflnis 214 

iliacus 166,214,223,229 

menila 224 

migratorius 224 

propinquus 214 

musicus 223, 224 

mustelinus 223 

nievius 224 

nanus 1,2 

pallasi 2 

pilaris .^ 324 

torquatus 224 

viscivonis 223, 224 

Turkey, Mexican 105 

wild 195 

Turner, Mr. Lucien M 3, 13 

Turnstone 198 

black 198 

Turquois 335 

Twa-oo 257 

Tylostoma 141,142 

mutabilis 142 

princeps, new species 141 

Tylostoma torrubiae 142 

Tylosurus 459 

cantraini 459 

exilis 457,459 

Tyrannidae 239 

Tyrannnla cooperi 13 

lawrencei 229 

mexicana 13, 14 

mexicanus 14 

Tyrannus 246 

carolinensis 185 

dominicensis 185, 231 

melancholicus .' 213, 236 



INDEX. 



587 



Page. 

Tyrannns melancholicus coachii 185 

verticalis 185 

Tociferans 185 

TJ. 

TJlexite 335 

TJlricli, Mr.E.0 157,161,362 

TJlula 226,246 

cinerea 191 

lapponica 191, 219, 230 

' ' nliila flammeata " 8 

XJlulu 226 

TJlva 139,299 

TTm'bra limi 104 

TJniljridge 104 

TJmbrina teoussoneti 17, 18, 19 

coroides 19 

elongata 28,456 

ronchus 28 

nndulata 456 

xanti 456 

TTnpiola irrorata 448, 451 

United States Fish Commission : 

Crustacea dredged by, in 1880 . 413 
New England deep-water flsh 

obtained by 467 

United States National Museum : 

catalogue of Trochilidce in . . . 308 
duplicate fishes distributed by 75' 

minerals in 333 

United States, southern, new Eocene Mol- 

lusca from 149 

Uralite 334 

Uranidea 460 

gobio 59 

microstoma, new species 58 

Uranomitra cyanocephala 317 

francisB 317 

quadricolor 317 

violiceps 317 

viridifrons 317 

Uranoscopidse 18,83 

Ui-aptera 133,135 

Uria 246 

carbo 212 

columba 212 

grylle 212 

pusilla 228 

ringvia 214 

Urolophus cruciatus 31 

halleri 31,457 

torpedinus 31 

Urophycis regius 476 

Uropsetta californica 23 

Urosticte benjamini 313 

Urtica dioica 43 

Urticina nodosa ^^^ 

Urubitinga 226,246 

anthracina 194,221,233 

Utah, new invertebrate fossils from 157 

Utah Lake, notes on fishes from 459 

sucker ^^^ 

Utamania 228,246 

torda 211 

Utriculus 3^1 



Page. 

Utriculus conulus 332 

Gouldii 388 

hyalinus 382 

nitidulus 381 

V. 

Vaillant, Dr. L6on 19 

VaUlantia 495^ 495 

chlorosoma 495, 496, 514, 515 

Vancouver 264 

VaneUns 227,246 

cristatus 198, 221, 231 

Velutella cryptospira 374,404 

"Venericardia borealis 408 

Venus mercenaria 129 

Vermes I6I 

Vermiculite 335 

Verrill, Prof. A. E 117, 132, 355, 413, 414, 421, 428 

on southern New England 

MoUusca 405 

Vesicnlaria 131 

sp 131 

uva 131 

Vieillot 6,9 

Vinva (widow) 145 

Vrreo 246 

atricapiUns 175, 232 

bellii 175 

flavifrons 224 

huttoni 175 

noveboracensis 175 

pusillus 175,216 

swainsoni 210 

vicinior 175,216,232 

virescens 213 

BeU's 175 

black-capped 175 

black- whiskered 174 

blue-headed 174 

Cassin's 174 

gray 175 

Button's 175 

least 175 

Philadelphia 174 

plumbeous 174 

red-eyed 174 

warbling 174 

western warbling 174 

white-eyed 175 

yellow-green 174 

yellow- throated 174 

Vireonidas 239 

Vireosylvia 224,246 

agUis flavo-viridis 174, 232 

calidris barbatula - 174, 231 

gilva 174 

swainsoni 174,216 

olivacea 174 

philadelphica 174 

plumbea 216 

Vivianite ^35 

Vogdes, Lieut. A. "W ^S 

Vomer setipinnis "^ 

Von Seibold 282 



Voy, Mr. 



63 



588 



INDEX. 



Vulturatrata 226 

californianus 226 

urubu 226 

Vulture, black 195 

W. 

Wad 335 

Wagtail, white 170 

yellow 170 

Wallace 529 

Walker, Col. S. T 8 

Warbler, Audubon's 172 

Bachman's 171 

bay-breasted 172 

BeU's 174 

blackburnian 172 

black and yellow 172 

black-capped yellow 173 

black-poll 172 

black-throated blue 172 

gray 172 

green 172 

Blue Mountain 173 

blue-throated 167 

blue-winged yellow 171 

blue yellow-backed 171 

Brasier's 174 

Canadian fly-catching 174 

Cape May 172 

carbonated 172 

cerulean 172 

chestnut-sided 172 

Connecticut 173 

golden-cheeked 172 

golden- winged 171 

Grace's 172 

hermit 173 

hooded 173 

Kennicott's 168 

• Kentucky 173 

Kirtland'8 173 

Lawrence's 171 

Lucy's 171 

luteous 171 

Macgillivray's 173 

mourning 173 

Nashville 171 

olive-headed 172 

orange-crowned 171 

pileolated 174 

pine-creeping 173 

prairie 173 

prothonatory 171 

red 174 

red-faced 174 

red-poll 173 

Sennett's 171 

Socorro 171 

Swainson's 171 

Tennessee 171 

Townsend's 172 

Virginia's 171 

white-browed yellow-throated 172 

white-throated 171 

worm-eating 171 



Warbler, yellow red-poU 173 

yellow-rump 172 

yellow-throated 172 

Warwickite 335 

Warner, William A 489, 491, 498, 499, 502, 512, 513 

Washington Territory, new fishes from 264 

Wavellite 335 

Wax opal 334 

Wax-wing, cedar 175 

northern 175 

Webster, Prof. H. E. . .117, 119, 120, 128, 132, 356, 371 

Weinmiller, J 292 

West Indies, a new species of Icterus from . . 351 

Wharton 9,11 

Wheeler, Captain 157 

Lieutenant 160 

Wheclerite 335 

Whimbrel 201 

Whip-poor-will 188 

White, Dr. C . A 46, 47, 48, 140, 149, 157, 527, 528 

Whiteaves, Mr. J. F 371, 376, 381, 397, 401, 448 

Whitney 46 

Whitneyite 335 

Widgeon 203 

Willemite 335 

Willet 200 

WiUoughby, Charles 10,43 

Wilson 9,234 

Wilson, E.B 356 

Wilsonia 224,246 

canadensis 174 

minuta 164,174,234 

mitrata 173 

pusilla... 178 

pileolata 174,216 

Winckler 263 

Witheiite 335 

Wolfenite 335 

Wolframite 335 

Wollastonite 335 

Woodcock, American 199 

European 199 

Wood-mason 432,433 

Woodopal 334 

Woodpecker, banded-backed, 3-toed 189 

black-backed, 3-toed 189 

black-breasted 189 

Califomian 189 

downy 188 

Gairdner's 188 

Gila 189 

golden- fronted 189 

hairy 188 

Harris's 188 

ivory-billed 188 

Lewis's 189 

narrow-fronted 190 

Nuttall's 189 

pileated 189 

red-bellied 189 

red-breasted 189 

red-cockaded 189 

red-headed 189 

red-naped 189 

Strickland's 189 



INDEX. 



589 



Page. 

Woodpecker, striped-backed, 3-toed 189 

■white-headed 189 

yellow-bellied 189 

"Worms of Pi-ovincetown 117 

Wren, Alaskan 170 

Berlandier's 170 

Bewick's 170 

Califomian Bewick's 170 

Carolina 170 

Florida 170 

Guadalupe 170 

rock 1C9 

house 170 

long-biUed marsh 170 

Mexican white-throated 169 

■ rock 169 

Saint Lucas cactus 169 

short-billed marsh 170 

Socorro 170 

Texan Bewick's 170 

tule 170 

western house 170 

winter 170 

white-throated 169 

winter 170 

Wyoming, new invertebrate fossils from 157 

X. 

Xanthocephalus 246 

icterocephalus 182 

Xanthura 246 

luxnosa 185,233 

Xema 246 

sabinei 207 

Xeniohthy s californiensis 456 

Xenopicus 6,226,246 

albolarvatns 6, 189 

Xenotimite 335 

Xenotis 499 

megalotis 499 

peltastes 98 

sanguinolentus 98 

soils 499 

Xiphias gladius 456, 481 

Xiphidion mucosym 135 

XiphidiontidfB 82, 138 

Xiphidiiim cmoreum 138, 454 

Xiphiidffl 481 

Xiphister 138,140 

chirus, newspecies. .135, 137, 138, 265, 454 

cruorens 138 

mucosus 135, 137, 138, 265, 454 

rupestris, new species ..137, 138, 265, 454 
Xystreurys, new genus 34 



Xystreurys, liolepis, anew Califomian floim- 

der 34 

new genus and species 34, 51, 454 

Xy stroplites heros 98 

Y. 

TeUow-bird, summer 172 

Yellow Garrupa 145 

Yellow-legs 200 

greater 200 

Yellow -tail 144, 145 

Yellow-throat, Maryland 173 

Yoldia expansa 405,407 

frigida 401,405,407 

lucida 407 ( 

sapotilla 408 

thraciformis 407 

Z. 

Zamelodia 225,246 

ludoviciana 182 

melanocephala 182 

Zaniolepis latipinnis 455 

Zapteryx 53 

exasperatus 458 

Zaratite 335 

Zenseda 246 

amabilis 195,231 

Zensedura 246 

carolinensis 195 

graysoni 195,221,229 

Zincite 335 

Zircon 335 

Zittel 141 

Zoarces anguillaris 82 

Zoai-cidae 247 

Zoisite 335 

Zonotrichia 246 

albicoUis 179 

coronata 179 

gambeli 179 

intermedia 179,217 

leucophrys 179 

var. intermedia 217 

pileata 236 

querula 179 

Zorgite - 335 

Zygonectes 21,501 

henshalli 17,21 

melanops 501, 515 

notatus 501,514,515 

rubrifrons 17, 20 

Zygonopns 526 

new genus of Myriapods 527 

whitei, new species 527 



