si £' r ^ 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



PROCEEDINGS 



OF THE 



UNITED STATES NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOLUME 123 

NUMBERS 3601-3623 




SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION PRESS 
WASHINGTON : 1967 



Publications of the United States Natioual Museum 

The scientific publications of the United States National Museum include two 
series, Proceedings of the United States National Museum and United States 
National Museum Bulletins. 

In these series are published original articles and monographs dealing with 
the collections and work of the Museum and setting forth newly acquired facts 
in the fields of anthropology, biology, geology, history, and technology. Copies 
of each publication are distributed to libraries and scientific organizations and 
to specialists and others interested in the various subjects. 

The Proceedings, begun in 1878, are intended for the publication, in separate 
form, of shorter papers. These are gathered in volumes, octavo in size, with 
the publication date of each paper recorded in the table of contents of the volume. 

In the Bulletin series, the first of which was issued in 1875, appear longer, 
separate publications consisting of monographs (occasionally in several parts) 
and volumes in which are collected works on related subjects. Bulletins are 
either octavo or quarto in size, depending on the needs of the presentation. 
Since 1902, papers relating to the botanical collections of the Museum have been 
published in the Bulletin series under the heading Contributions from the United 
States National Herbarium. 

Frank A. Tatlob 
Director, United States National Museum 



CONTENTS 

Nuviber 

Johnson, David H. Neotropical species of genus Triplax 
Herbst and review of genus Haematochiton Gorham (Cole- 
optera: Erotylidae). 25 pages, 10 figures. Published July 28, 
1967 . . 3601 

New species: Triplax alvarengai, T. latipalpus, T. sola. 
New combinations: Triplax divisa, Haematochiton cruentipennis, H. 
maderi. 

Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. ; Holt, Perry C; and Walton, 
Margaret. The crayfishes and then- epizootic ostracod and 
branchiobdellid associates of the Mountain Lake, Virginia, 
region. 84 pages, 22 figures. Published June 22, 1967 . . . . 3602 

James, Maurice T., and Wirth, Willis W. The species of 
Hermetia of the aurata group (Diptera: Stratiomyidae). 
19 pages, 12 figures. Published June 22, 1967 3603 

New species: Hermetia anthidium James, H. nigricornis James and 
Wirth, H. melanderi James and Wirth, H. conjuncta James, 
H. subpellucida James and Wirth, H. impressa James, H. ryckmani 
James and Wirth. 

Blake, Doris H. Revision of the beetles of genus Glyj)toscelis 
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) . 53 pages, 39 figures. Published 
July 16, 1967 3604 

New species: Glyptoscelis cylindrica, G. artemisiae, G. paula, G. 

idahoensts, G. juniperi, G. color adoens is, G. septentrionalis, G. 

peperi, G. guatemalensis, G. cahitac, G. sonorensis . 
New subspecies: Glyptoscelis juniperi zantJiocoma. 
New status: Glyptoscelis vandykei, G. ardis. 

Gill, Frank B. Observations on the pelagic distribution of 
seabirds in the western Indian Ocean. 33 pages, 2 figures. 
Published August 9, 1967 3605 

Manning, Raymond B. Review of the genus Odontodactylus 
(Crustacea: Stomatopoda). 35 pages, 9 figures. Published 

July 28, 1967 3600 

New species: Odontodactylus hawaiiensis. 

Ztjsi, Richard. The role of the depressor mandibidae muscle in 
kinesis of the avian skull. 28 pages, 13 figures. Published 

June 22, 1967 3607 

in 



IV CONTENTS 

Flint, Oliver S., Jr. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, IV: 
New species from Mexico and Central America. 24 pages, 71 

figures. Published June 22, 1967 3608 

New species: Atopsyche hidalgoi, Culoptila montanensis, Protopila 
laterospina, P. marqua, P. cristata, P. huasteca, P. spangleri, 
Chimarra duckworthi, C. ortiziana, C. antigua, C. (Curgia) aureo- 
punctata, C. (Curgia) lobata, C. (Curgia) wilsoni, Polyplectropus 
macrostylus, P. costaricensis, P. guatemalensis, P. aztecus, Xipho- 
centron aureum, Leucotrichia viridis, Zumatrichia echinata, Costa- 
trichia panamensis, Ochrolrichia cruces, Metrichia mexicana, 
Neotrichia costaricensis, Hydroptila veracruzensis, Diplectrona 
chiapensis, Hydropsyche vespertina, Pleclropsyche sandrae, Lepto- 
nema chila, Limnephilus maya, Triaenodes anomala. 

King, Warren B.; Watson, George E.; and Gould, Patrick 
J. An application of automatic data processing to the study 
of seabirds, I: Numerical coding. 29 pages, 10 figures. 

Published September 8, 1967 3609 

Kirsteuer, Ernst. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 3 : Marine archiannelids from Dominica. 

6 pages, 1 figure. Published July 6, 1967 3610 

New species: Saccocirrus archboldi. 
Field, William D. Butterflies of the new genus Calystryma 
(Lycaenidae: Theclinae, Strymonini). 31 pages, 23 figures, 

3 plates. Published August 9, 1967 3611 

New genus: Calystryma. 

New species: Calystryma keta, C. blora, C. naka, C. anapa, C. barza, 

C. tifla. 
New combination: Calystryma atrox, C. meleager, C. malta, C. gent ilia, 
C. pisis, C. trebula, C. cinniana. 

Roper, Clyde F. E., and Young, Richard E. A review of the 
Valbyteuthidae and an evaluation of its relationship with the 
Chiroteuthidae (Cephalopoda: Oegospida). 9 pages, 1 
figure, 4 plates. Published August 4, 1967 3612 

Bowman, Thomas E., and Kornicker, Louis S. Two new 
crustaceans: the parasitic copepod Sphaeronellopsis monothrix 
(Choniostomatidae) and its myodocopid ostracod host 
Parasterope pollex (Cylindroleberidae) from the southern New 
England coast. 28 pages, 7 figures, 1 plate. Published 
July 28, 1967 3613 

New species: Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, 
Parasterope pollex Kornicker. 

Froeschner, Richard C. Revision of the cactus plant bug 
genus Hesperolabops Kirkaldy (Hemiptera: Miridae). 11 
pages, 30 figures. Published July 19, 1967 3614 

New species: Hesperolabops mexica. 

New status: Hesperolabops nigriccps, H. sanguineus. 



CONTENTS V 

Robinson, Harold. Revision of the genus Harmstonia (Dip- 
tera: Dolichopodidae). 16 pages, 16 figures. Published 

July 12, 1967 3615 

New species: Harmstonia recta, H. pubescens, H. megalopyga, H. 
ornata, H. costaricensis, H. setosa, H. simplex, H. intricata, H. 
obscura, H. pallida, H. attenuate, H. davicauda. 

Woodruff, Robert E., and Cartwright, Oscar L. A review 
of the genus Ewparixia with description of a new species 
from nests of leaf-cutting ants in Louisiana (Coleoptera: 
Scarabaeidae) . 21 pages, 13 figures, 2 plates. Published 

September 8, 1967 3616 

New species: Euparixia moseri Woodruff and Cartwright. 
Allen, Harry W. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 4: Two new species of Tiphia from the 
West Indies (Hymenoptera: Tiphiidae). 4 pages, 1 figure. 

Published July 19, 1967 3617 

New species: Tiphia dominicae, T. layouae. 
Manning, Raymond B. Notes on the demanii section of genus 
Gonodactylus Berthold with descriptions of three new species 
(Crustacea: Stomatopoda). 27 pages, 8 figures. Published 

July 31, 1967 3618 

New species: Gonodactylus hendersoni, G. lanchesteri, G. choprai. 
Flint, Oliver S., Jr. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, V: 
Types of the species described by Banks and Hagen. 37 
pages, 127 figures, 1 plate. Published August 8, 1967 . . . 3619 
New combinations: Chimarra (Curgia) banksi, C. (Chimarra) bicolor, 
C. (Curgia) mexicana, Polycentropus mexicanus, P. costalis, Lepto- 
nemapoeyi, Plectromacronema subfuscum, Smicrideavarius,Phylloicus 
maculatus, Marilia mexicana, Leptocella pretiosella, Lepidostoma 
frontalis. 
New name: Smicridea banksi, 

Duckworth, W. Donald. Neoptropical Microlepidoptera, 
XV: Review of genus Thioscelis (Lepidoptera: Stenomidae). 
11 pages, 12 figures, 1 map, 1 plate. Published July 27, 

1967 3620 

New species: Thioscelis lipara, T. whalleyi, T. fuscala. 

Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. A new crayfish from Alabama Caves 
with notes on the origin of the genera Orconectes and Cam- 
barus (Decapoda: Astacidae). 17 pages, 21 figures. Pub- 
lished October 6, 1967 3621 

New species: Procambarus pecki. 

James, Maurice T. Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of Dominica, 5: Family Stratiomyidae (Diptera). 
23 pages, 18 figures. Published November 15, 1967 . . . . 3622 



VI CONTENTS 

Cressey, Roger F. Caritus, a new genus of caligoid copepod, 
with a key to the genera of Caliginae. 8 pages, 18 figures. 
Published October 6, 1967 3623 

New genus: Caritus. 

New species: Caritus serratus. 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3601 



Neotropical Species of Genus Triplax Herbst 

And Review of Genus Haematochiton Gorham 

(Coleoptera: Erotylidae) 1 



By David H. Johnson 2 



Neotropical Species of Genus Triplax Herbst 

Although largely Holarctic in distribution, the genus Triplax 
Herbst ranges into tropical regions to some extent, especially the New 
World tropics. Some species having been erroneously referred to the 
genus and most species being inadequately described and poorly 
known, this paper is an attempt to clarify the confusion surrounding 
the Neotropical forms. 

The first Neotropical species, Triplax cruentipennis, was described 
by Lacordaire in his monograph of 1842. In 1864 Philippi described 
T. valdiviana. Gorham's work in the "Biologia Centrali-Americana" 
in 1888 added four new species, T. championi, T. hogei, T. mesomelas, 
and T. rediviva. Guerin (1952) described T. bicolor and T. azurei- 
pennis. In 1957, Delkeskamp described T. maderi from Brazil, and 
Boyle (1954, 1956, 1962) has described four species from Arizona 
whose ranges are either known or thought to extend into Mexico. 

1 Modified from a master's thesis submitted to Pennsylvania State University, 
1966. 

2 Department of Entomology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

In this study T. cruentipennis Lacordaire and T. maderi Delkeskamp 
have been removed from Triplax as now described and have been 
referred to Haematochiton Gorham. Triplax valdiviana Philippi has 
been declared incertae sedis because of the inconspicuous small 
pronotal angle pores, the lack of a brush on the maxillary palpal 
terminal segments, and the extremely elongate appearance (length to 
width ratio: 2.5 to 1). Triplax azureipennis has been declared 
incertae sedis, while T. bicolor is declared Triplax{1) bicolor Guerin. 
The present author has been unable to locate the types of these two 
forms. 

The exact relation of the following genera, listed as Neotropical 
Triplacinae by Blackwelder (1945), to the Neotropical species of 
Triplax is not known: Pselaphacus Percheron; Megischyrus Crotch, 
Ischyrus Lacordaire, Oocyanus Hope, Callischyrus Crotch, Mycomystes 
Gorham, Mycophthorus Lacordaire, Pseudolybas Gorham, Lybas 
Lacordaire, Lybanodes Gorham, Mycolybas Crotch, and Neoxestus 
Crotch. It is felt, however, that the closest related genera to the 
Neotropical species of Triplax are Paratritoma Gorham, Tritoma 
Fabricius, Haematochiton Gorham, and Mycotretus Lacordaire. 
Species of Haematochiton Gorham are recognized easily by their 
weakly widened, semicircular maxillary palpal terminal segments, 
by their inconspicuous, small pronotal angle pores, and by a body 
shape similar to Triplax. 

Neotropical Triplax species are separated easily from Paratritoma 
by the pronotal angle pores. In Paratritoma the pores are small and 
inconspicuous, while in Triplax they are large and distinctly umbili- 
cate. In other characters, such as the length to width ratio of the 
body, shape of the pronotum, development of the postmandibular 
lobes, and width of the terminal segments of the maxillary palpi with 
distinct apical brush, few significant differences have been found. 
Thus, at present, Paratritoma is considered the most closely related 
of the Neotropical genera to Triplax. 

The one Neotropical Tritoma specimen examined, that of T. 
dorsalis Gorham, can scarcely be confused with Triplax. Its broadly 
oval body, long prosternal lines, and maxillary palpal terminal seg- 
ments without apical brush are all non-Triplax characters. 

The taxonomic results of this study are that three specific names 
have been placed in new synonymy and three new species are described. 
Four species previously placed in Triplax are referred to Haema- 
tochiton Gorham or are declared incertae sedis. One species is, 
at present, of uncertain taxonomic position, while another species is 
moved from Paratritoma Gorham to Triplax. Twelve species are 
listed as Neotropical members of the genus Triplax. 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON JOHNSON 3 

Methods and terminology. — Male genitalia were prepared by 
relaxing the beetle for about an hour in warm water to which detergent 
had been added. After this relaxing, the abdomen was separated 
from the thorax and elytra, and the unsclerotized mass of tissue was 
removed from the sternites. The abdominal sternum was then placed, 
along with the rest of the beetle, on a new point and pin. The 
genitalia and associated soft organs were then soaked overnight in 
10 percent KOH in "Plant Industry" Syracuse dishes. After no 
more than 24 hours the genitalia were separated from associated 
residue, rinsed, and manipulated so that the internal sac was forcibly 
everted to show pigmentation and sclerotization of its inner surface. 
The anterior end of the internal sac was examined after being stained 
with merthiolate. 

"Neotropical" as used in this work refers to all of the New World 
south of the United States, i.e., all of Mexico, Central America, the 
Antilles, and South America. 

The terminology of external morphology is essentially that of 
Torre-Bueno (1962), while male genitalia terminology is essentially 
that of Sharp and Muir (1912). 

The use of two words to indicate color refers to a blending of color 
hues. Thus, yellowish brown implies more brown than yellow. 
In all other cases involving color, the terminology is that of Torre- 
Bueno (1962). 

Acknowledgments. — The author was fortunate in having had the 
opportunity to examine 249 Triplacinae specimens from 13 museums 
and personal collections. To the following museums and personal 
collectors the author would like to extend his thanks for the loan of 
these specimens: American Museum of Natural History (AMNH); 
British Museum (Natural History) , London (BM) ; California 
Academy of Sciences (CAS) ; Chicago Natural History Museum 
(CNHM); Department of Agriculture (Canada), Entomology Re- 
search Institute (DA) ; D. R. Whitehead personal collection, Uni- 
versity of Alberta, Alberta, Canada (DRW) ; M. Alvarenga personal 
collection, Rio de Janiero, Brazil (MA) ; Museum of Comparative 
Zoology, Harvard (MCZ) ; Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, France (MN) ; University of Arizona (UA) ; University of 
California, Berkeley (UCB); United States National Museum 
(USNM); W. W. Boyle, Pennsylvania State University (WWB). 

The author owes special thanks to M. Alvarenga, Rio de Janiero, 
Brazil, for his loan of specimens; to W. W. Boyle, Pennsylvania State 
University, under whose guidance work on Triplax was undertaken; 
to A. D escarp entries of the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, for lending the type of T. cruentipennis Lacordaire; and to 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

H. S. Dybas, Chicago Natural History Museum, who lent a great 
number of Neotropical Triplacinae. 

Systematic treatment. — Neotropical Triplax species display a 
wide range of coloration and moderate intraspecific variation in this 
coloration. Coloration includes black, ferrugineous, piceous, fulvus, 
yellowish brown, yellow, orange red, and red. Their general shape 
ranges from elongate-elliptical to relatively oval; the body length to 
width ratio ranges from about 1.6:1 to about 1.95:1. Specimens 
studied ranged in length from 2.34 to 5.12 mm and in width from 1.28 
to 2.81 mm. 

The head is elongate-oval, fitting tightly in the prothorax, and is 
visible from above. The eyes are finely faceted. The antennae are 
1 1-segmented, generally more than one-half the width of the pronotal 
base; the club is relatively lax, its length 2 or more times its width. 
Antennal segmental coloration varies within some species. The 
terminal segments of the maxillary palpi are moderately to extremely 
widened, their width ranging from about 2.75 to 4 or 5 times their 
length; the maxillary palpus has a distinct brush present along the 
truncate apex. The terminal segments of the labial palpi are short- 
setigerous, each armed with a brush along its truncate apex. The 
mentum varies from small and obscurely pentagonal to larger and 
more distinctly pentagonal, with considerable intraspecific variation. 
The postmandibular lobes range in development from moderate to 
strong; in some species they are of diagnostic value, in others they 
are not. 

The pronotum is margined laterally and basally, but it is 
immarginate medioapically between the eyes. Its shape ranges from 
subquadrate to subtrapezoidal. The pronotal angle pores are 
distinctly umbilicate, of moderate to large size. 

The elytral striae are in some species strongly impressed, in others 
they are not. The elytra are basally margined or immarginate. 

The prosternal lines are generally absent but when rarely present 
they are short, straight, not exceeding extreme anterior edges of coxae. 
The prosternum, with various degrees of punctuation among the 
species, is subtrapezoidal in shape. Prosternal, pronotal epipleural, 
mesosternal, metepisternal, and metepimeral sclerites, among others, 
are distinct. Metasternal coxal lines are generally absent but 
occasionally they are short, vestigial. 

The abdomen is composed of five sternites, the first being the widest. 
This basal sternite has a narrow intercoxal process (not nearly so 
broad as in the closely related genus Tritoma Fabricius). The 
abdominal coxal lines are usually present. 

The anterior and middle coxae are globular; those of the hindlegs 
are transverse. In comparison to the closely related genus Tritoma, 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 5 

the coxae are narrowly separated and the tibiae are weakly widened 
apically. The hind trochanters are right triangular. The femora 
are somewhat swollen. The tarsi are 5-segmented with segment 4 
strongly reduced; segment 3 has all four sides straight or nearly so. 

One part of the male genitalia, the anterior end of the internal sac, 
has been shown by Boyle (1956) to demonstrate specific diagnostic 
relationships. The present study supports this. 

Little is known concerning the life habits of this genus. In eastern 
North America favorite fungus hosts of Triplax species are species of 
Pleurotus, a soft bracket fungus; and in Arizona, T. ihompsoni has been 
taken in large numbers on Polyporus arcularius on oak. 

Genus Triplax Herbst 

Triplax Herbst, 1793, p. 146, pi. 49 (figs. 13, n). [Type-species: Silpha russica 
Linne, 1758, p. 360, by subsequent designation by Curtis, 1838 (1824-1840), 
vol. 15, p. 706.] 

The following key to the Neotropical members of the genus Triplax 
includes three species — T. thompsoni, T. marcescens, and T. cali- 
jornica — the Mexican specimens of which are not definitely known. 
It is believed, however, that their ranges extend into Mexico, and for 
this reason they are included. 

Key to Neotropical Species of Triplax 

1. Antennae black beyond segment 2, the stem clothed with moderately dense, 

coarse, black setae; antennal club narrow, segment 10 no more than 
twice as wide as segment 7; head above entirely reddish yellow; Arizona, 

Mexico? marcescens Boyle 

Antennae not black or not entirely black, at least part of the antennae in 
addition to segments 1 and 2 lighter 2 

2. Elytra distinctly margined basally 3 

Elytra immarginate basally, at most with a vestige of a margin laterally 

near the humeral callus 10 

3. Pronotum bearing a median apical and a smaller piceous spot near the 

middle of each side, the latter often weak, sometimes obsolete; anterior 
and lateral edges of postmandibular lobes sharply rounded, not posteriorly 

divergent; southwestern U.S., Mexico mesosternalis Schaeffer 

Pronotum without spots 4 

4. Elytra yellow to red 5 

Elytra never entirely yellow to red, some portion or all piceous to black . . 6 

5. Pronotum piceous to black, not yellow to red; Texas, Mexico . errans Boyle 
Pronotum yellow to red; Central America .... alvarengai, new species 

6. No part of pronotum black ... 7 

Some part of pronotum black 9 

7. Abdomen usually testaceous; terminal segments of maxillary palpi moder- 

ately widened, their width less than 3 times length; eastern North America 

to Panama flavicollis Lacordaire 

Abdomen not testaceous; terminal segments of maxillary palpi strongly 
widened, their width more than 3 times length 8 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

8. Mesothorax and metathorax not entirely black; cephalic and pronotal 

punctures not exceptionally coarse; antennal club not abruptly 3-seg- 

mented; Arizona, Mexico wehrlei Boyle 

Mesothorax and metathorax entirely black; cephalic and pronotal punctures 
exceptionally coarse; antennal club abruptly 3-segmented; Arizona, 
Mexico? thorapsoni Boyle 

9. Elytral striae strongly impressed; maxillary palpal terminal segments not 

exceptionally wide, width about 3.5 times length; lateral edges of post- 

mandibular lobes straight (fig. 7) ; Mexico sola, new species 

Elytral striae not strongly impressed; maxillary palpal terminal segments 
exceptionally wide, width about 4.7 times length; lateral edges of post- 
mandibular lobes not straight (fig. 4) ; Brazil . . latipalpus, new species 

10. Elytra not particolored 11 

Elyta particolored 12 

11. Antennae entirely yellow or testaceous; pronotal angle pores of normal 

size; Guatemala rediviva Gorham 

Antennae not entirely yellow or testaceous; pronotal angle pores extremely 
large; western North America, Mexico? californica LeConte 

12. Pronotum particolored; 60 percent of elytral length behind base not entirely 

yellow; Costa Rica, Central America? divisa (Gorham) 

Triplax alvarengai, new species 

Figure 1 

Diagnostic description: Color variable, ranging from fulvus, with 
or without elytral apical region darker, to nitidous red; underside 
testaceous to brownish; number of yellow antennal segments variable; 
body moderately nitidous. Body shape essentially elliptical, anterior 
and posterior ends about equally parabolically rounded, ratio of length 
to width 1.6 to 1; pronotum sub trapezoidal, basal width about three- 
fifths greater than apical width; elytra widest at about 35 percent of 
length behind elytral base. Antennal length about equal to distance 
to pronotal base, club 4-segmented, segment 10 about 3.5 times width 
of segment 7. Apex of epistomofrontal region of head faintly concave 
in very shallow arc or V, epistomal apex immarginate. Postmandibular 
lobes moderate in size, lateral edges somewhat rounded; terminal 
segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, width about 3.5 times 
length; men turn rather small, size and shape somewhat variable. 
Pronotal punctures not deeply impressed, somewhat more closely 
spaced and deeply impressed laterally; cephalic punctures much more 
closely spaced and coarser; elytral striae moderately impressed. 

Variation : Color is somewhat variable. Specimens examined from 
the Canal Zone displayed a brown to black area in the apical elytral 
20 to 40 per cent. An examination of the anterior end of the internal 
sac (fig. 1), however, has shown all of these specimens to be con- 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 7 

specific. The size range of the 22 specimens examined is: length 
2.81-4.27 mm; width 1.69-2.39 mm. 

Male genitalia: Illustrated in figure 1. 

Holotype: Male, labeled "Ciruclas, Costa Rica, IX-22-30; col- 
lected by A. Alfaro" (property of CNHM). Its measurements are: 
length 3.71 mm; width 2.14 mm. 

Type-locality: Ciruclas, Costa Rica. 

Paratypes: Mexico: Veracruz, Coyame (Whitehead; WWB), 4; 
Veracruz, Buen Pais (Bechtel and Schinger; CNHM), 1; Veracruz, 




Figure 1. — Triplax aharengai, 
new species: anterior end of 
internal sac, anterodorsal view. 



Cerro Gordo (Seevers; CNHM), 1. Costa Rica: Same data as type 
(CNHM), 1. Panama: Canal Zone, Barro Colorado (Darlington; 
AMNH), 1; Canal Zone, Barro Colorado Island (lot 47-4230; USNM), 
1; Canal Zone, Fort Clayton (Frick; CAS), 1; Paraiso (Schwarz; 
USNM), 1. El Salvador: La Libertad (Bechyne, MA), 5; La 
Libertad (Bechyne; WWB), 5. 

Distribution: From Panama to Mexico. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Triplax divisa (Gorham), new combination 

Figure 2 

Paratritoma divisa Gorham, 1888, p. 72, pi. 4 (fig. 11). 

Diagnostic description: Head, medial portion of pronotum, an- 
terior one-sixth of elytra, and posterior one-half of elytra piceous; 
remainder dark yellow above. Underside entirely piceous except for 
legs, maxillary and labial palpi, pronotal epipleura anteriorly, and 
posterior one-third of abdomen. Scape and pedicel yellowish; other 
segments, except for last three which are piceous, yellowish brown. 
Body moderately nitidous. Shape somewhat elliptical, length about 
1.78 times width, body widest at about three- tenths of elytral length 
behind base, length to width ratio very close to that of T. latipalpus, 
about 1.75 to 1. Last antennal segment bulbous and large, segment 
10 about 3 times width segment 8. Postmandibular lobes long, 
posteriorly slightly divergent, edges somewhat rounded (fig. 2). 
Terminal segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, ratio of 
width to length about 3.6 to 1, distinct brush along entire apex 
present (fig. 2). Men turn similar to T. latipalpus. Head punctures 
relatively deep, separated by less than 1 to greater than 4 times 
their diameter, prominent setae in punctures; pronotal punctures 
fine. 




Figure 2. — Triplax divisa (Gor- 
ham), new combination: under- 
side of head. 



Discussion: The adult is figured in full color by Gorham (1888, 
pi. 4: fig. 11). In this study two specimens were examined. Labeling 
is as follows: "Costa Rica, F. Nevermann, 24-VI-'29, property of 
U.S.N.M." (USNM, a female). "Ciruclas, Costa Rica, collected by 
A. Alfaro, IX-22-'30" (CNHM, a female). Alvarenga (1965) has 
stated that Paratritoma divisa Gorham is the type-species of Paratri- 
toma Gorham. This in effect synonymizes Triplax and Paratritoma. 
Gorham made three original watercolor drawings of the three 
"varieties" he considered to be P. divisa. The first two are red and 
black in color, the third yellowish and piceous. I have examined a 
series of Paratritoma species that I agree to be indeed Paratritoma. 
Figure 11, however, as illustrated by Gorham (1888), and the descrip- 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 9 

tion thereof provide strong evidence that figure 11 is indeed that of a 
form that should be considered Triplax. 

Male genitalia: Male not known. 

Type: Not seen. 

Distribution: Costa Rica. 

Triplax errans Boyle 

Figure 3 

Triplax errans Boyle, 1956, p. 110. 

Diagnostic description: Head above and gular region below black, 
pro thorax and antennal clubs black; elytra and scutellum orange red 
to brilliant strongly nitidous red (except in tenerals) ; antennae grading 
from brownish yellow to black; genae, mouthparts, pterothorax, 
abdomen, and legs brownish yellow; body strongly nitidous. Overall 
shape short and broad, sides of body subparallel from middle of 
pronotum to middle of elytra, lengh to width ratio 1.8 to 1; body 
widest at about one- third the elytral length behind base; pronotum 



Figure 3. — Triplax errans Boyle: 
underside of head. 



widest just in front of base, sides evenly arcuate and strongly con- 
vergent apically. Postmandibular lobes, terminal segments of 
maxillary palpi, and mentum are shown in figure 3. Antennae 
two-thirds as long as width of pronotal base, the club 5-segmented 
and gradually widening over segments 7 to 9. Pronotal punctures 
of moderate size, somewhat larger and denser laterally, each bearing 
a minute seta that feebly exceeds the puncture; cephalic punctures 
denser apically, each bearing a protruding seta; elytral intervals 
minutely punctuate. 

Variation: The 35 specimens examined ranged in length from 2.85 
to 4.34 mm and in width from 1.57 to 2.51 mm. Boyle (1956) states 
that the measurements of the type are: length 4.14 mm; width 2.30 
mm. 

Male genitalia: Boyle (1956, p. 166, fig. 99) illustrates the anterior 
end of the internal sac. 

Type: Male; labeled "Brownsville, Texas, VI-30-38; holotype, 
Triplax errans Boyle" (R. I. Sailer; collection University of Kansas). 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Type-locality: Brownsville, Cameron Co., Tex. 

Distribution: Other than the holotype from Brownsville, Tex., 
this species is known at present only from San Luis Potosi, Mexico. 
The material examined included 35 specimens from the following 
localities in San Luis Potosi: Tamazunchale, Huichihuayan, and 
Paj al. 

Triplax flavicollis Lacordaire 

Triplax flavicollis Lacordaire, 1842, p. 218. 

Triplax confinis LeConte, 1854, p. 162. 

Triplax championi Gorham, 1888, p. 78. [New synonymy.] 

Triplax hogei Gorham, 1888, p. 78. [New synonymy.] 

Triplax mesomelas Gorham, 1888, p. 79. [New synonymy.] 

Diagnostic description: Color variable; elytra ranging from fer- 
rugineous to black; the following yellow to testaceous: head, pronotum, 
pro thorax, and meso thorax; metathoracic coloration variable, some- 
times metepisterna and metepimera are black, sometimes entire 
metathorax is black; abdomen testaceous to piceous; antennal 
coloration variable, club ranging from reddish yellow to piceous, stem 
grading from reddish yellow to piceous; body moderately nitidous. 
Body shape somewhat elliptical, anterior and posterior ends about 
equally parabolically rounded. Postmandibular lobes short, their 
lateral edges often somewhat rounded and divergent posteriorly; 
terminal segments of maxillary palpi moderately widened (see Boyle, 
1956, p. 164, fig. 76), their width approaching 3 times their length, 
a distinct brush present along entire apex; mentum small; antennal 
club gradually 4-segmented. Pronotal punctures of moderate size, 
not deep; cephalic punctures much larger and denser; elytral striae 
impressed, small punctures present in elytral intervals; elytra distinctly 
margined basally. 

Variation: The observed size variation of the 108 Neotropical 
specimens examined is: length 2.60-5.12 mm; width 1.44-2.81 mm. 

Discussion: The three "species" that Gorham listed as distinct have 
not been found to be so. A "separation" of the specimens by com- 
parison of the postmandibular lobes (and coloration of the meta- 
thorax according to Gorham's descriptions) of T. championi, T. hogei, 
and T. mesomelas showed intergradation and cast doubt on the tena- 
bility of these three "species." A comparison of the anterior end of the 
internal sac of the "three forms" showed that they were conspecific. 

Male genitalia: See Boyle (1956, p. 166, fig. 93). 

Type: Not seen. 

Type-locality: North America. 

Distribution: North America east of the 100th meridian from 
Quebec to Florida and Texas, south into Mexico and Central America 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 11 

to Panama. The material examined included 108 specimens from the 
following localities: Mexico: Jalisco, Acatlan; Morelos, Ixtapan de 
la Sal; Cerro de Plumas; Guerrero, Acahuizlotla; Nayarit, San Bias. 
Guatemala: Sacatepequez, Finca San Rafael, 7200 ft. El Salva- 
dor: La Libertad; Fingalapaz. Panama: Canal Zone: Barro Colo- 
rado, and Paraiso; Bugaba. 

Triplax latipalpus, new species 

Figure 4 

Diagnostic description: Head reddish brown; pronotum ferrugineous 
laterally, piceous medially; elytra and scutellum black; the following 
yellowish brown: underside of head, mouthparts, legs, prothorax, 
meso thorax, and posterior half of abdomen; anterior half of abdomen 
and elytral epipleura piceous; antennae yellowish brown except for 
piceous terminal four segments. Body strongly nitidous. Shape 
somewhat elliptical, length about 1.75 times width; body widest at 
about one-third elytral length behind base. Antennal segment 10 
about 2.4 times width of segment 8. Postmandibular lobes distinc- 
tive, large in size, lateral edges somewhat rounded (fig. 4) . Terminal 



Figure 4. — Triplax latipalpus, 
new species: underside of head. 



segment of maxillary palpus extremely widened with distinct brush, 
width about 4.7 times length (fig. 4). Head punctures with promi- 
nent setae; elytral interval punctures prominent, elytral striae not 
strongly impressed. Antennal setae sparse. 

Male genitalia: Male not known. 

Holotype: Female. Labeled "Brasilien, Nova Teutonia, 27°11'8", 
52°23'1", 5-VI-1957 F. Plaumann" (WWB; placed in USNM). Its 
measurements are: length 4.04 mm; width 2.17 mm. 

Type-locality: Nova Teutonia, Brazil. 

Paratype: Female; labeled "Brasilien, Nova Teutonia, 27°ll / 8 ,/ , 
52°23'1", X-1957 F. Plaumann" (WWB; in personal collection of 
W. Wayne Boyle, Pennsylvania State University). 

Distribution: The two specimens examined were collected in 
Brazil. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Triplax mesosternalis Schaeffer 

Triplax mesosternalis Schaeffer, 1905, p. 145. 
Triplax monostigma Casey, 1916, p. 1G5. 
Triplax coloradana Casey, 1924, p. 179. 

Diagnostic description: Piceous black color, the prothorax (ex- 
cept three black pronotal spots, one medio-apical and a smaller one 
on each side), head, mesosternum, mesepisterna, and appendages red- 
dish yellow; mesepimera and hind coxae piceous; lateral piceous spots 
of pronotum only slightly smaller than median apical spot, placed far 
laterally, slightly anteriad of middle, and about equidistant from 
apex and side of pronotum, median apical spot always present, lateral 
spots often weak, rarely not detectable; antenna beyond segments 1 
and 2 darker than head; body moderately nitidous. Antennae rela- 
tively long, length equal to about nine-tenths of width of pronotal base, 
club 3-segmented. Postmandibular lobes short, lateral edges some- 
what rounded and subparallel; terminal segments of maxillary palpi 
moderately widened, width slightly more than twice length (Boyle, 
1956, fig. 78, p. 165). Pronotal punctures coarse, becoming larger and 
denser laterally where they are mostly separated by about the distance 
of their diameters or slightly less; cephalic punctures small and dense 
medially and apically, sparser and approximately as large as pronotal 
punctures laterobasally near eyes; elytral intervals bearing minute 
punctules more numerous than strial punctures and a weak meshwork 
of fine fissures; elytra moderately nitidous, distinctly margined 
basally. 

Variation: Boyle (1956) states the variation of the 230 specimens 
he examined to be 3.31 to 5.11 mm in length and 1 52 to 2.35 mm in 
width. The measurements of the one specimen examined in this study 
are: length 3.77 mm; width 2.03 mm. 

Male genitalia: The anterior end of the internal sac is illustrated 
by Boyle (1956, p. 166, fig. 94). 

Type: Boyle (1956) chose a lectotype from a series of 5 cotypes 
at the USNM and labelled it "Lectotype, Boyle, 1952." The material 
examined in this study included one specimen from Chiapas, Mexico. 

Triplax rediviva Gorham 

Figures 5, 6 
Triplax redivia Gorham, 1888, p. 79, pi. 4 (fig. 19). 

Diagnostic description: Elytra ferrugineous to piceous; scutellum 
testaceous to ferrugineous; head and pronotum testaceous; metathorax 
and abdomen ferrugineous; rest of underside, including legs, testace- 
ous; antennae wholly testaceous; metacoxae usually ferrugineous. 
Body moderately nitidous. Body shape elongate- elliptical, anterior 



TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 



13 



and posterior ends about equally parabolically rounded, ratio of length 
to width about 1.95 to 1. Antennal club 4-segmented, setal vestiture 
moderate, width of segment 10 about 2.6 times that of segment 7. 
Apex of the epistomofrontal region of the head essentially straight. 
Lateral edges of postmandibular lobes posteriorly divergent (fig. 5), 
overall shape close to that of T. californica; terminal segments of 




Figure 5. — Triplax rediviva Got- 
ham: underside of head. 



Figure 6. — Triplax rediviva Gor- 
ham: anterior end of internal 
sac, anterodorsal view. 

maxillary palpi moderately widened, their width about 2.75 times their 
length (fig. 5); men turn small. Pronotal punctures coarse and deep; 
head punctures somewhat coarse, not evenly arranged; elytral 
striae impressed, elytral interval punctures present; presternum 
covered with exceptionally large and deep punctures; pronotum 
covered with finer punctures; metasternum with large punctures 
laterally but not so sharply incised as on the prosternum, a single 
long seta projecting from each metasternal puncture. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Variation: The range in size of all specimens examined is: length 
3.20-4.22 mm; width 1.57-2.14 mm. 

Male genitalia: The anterior end of the internal sac is illustrated in 
figure 6. 

Type: Not seen; collected by Champion; Gorham (1888, pi. 4: 
fig. 19) shows the type in color, but the name is misspelled 
"redivivus" on the plate. 

Type-locality : Guatemala, Quiche Mountains, 8000 feet. 

Distribution: Known only from Guatemala: the type-locality and 
Sacatepequez, Finca San Rafael, 7200 ft. 

Triplax sola, new species 

Figure 7 

Diagnostic description: Entire dorsal surface black except for 
tawny basal three-fourths of elytra; antennae, mouthparts, and legs 
piceous, rest of the underside black. Body moderately nitidous. 
Body shape elongate-elliptical, ratio of length to width about 1.95 
to 1; anterior and posterior ends about equally parabolically rounded, 




Figure 7. — Triplax sola, new 
species: underside of head. 

widest point at about one-fifth of elytral length behind base; pronotum 
subtrapezoidal, basal width about seven-tenths greater than apical 
width. Antennae extending to pronotal base, segment 10 about 
twice width of segment 8. Apex of epistomofrontal region of head 
feebly concave. Postmandibular lobes with lateral edges straight 
(fig. 7) ; terminal segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, width 
about 3.5 times length (fig. 7). Pronotal punctures laterally dense 
and large, medially somewhat finer, with setae that exceed rims; 
cephalic punctures dense; elytral striae strongly impressed, elytral 
intervals punctulate; elytra distinctly margined basally. 

Discussion: The specific epithet sola refers to the single specimen 
examined in this work. 

Male genitalia: Male not known. 

Holotype: Female. Labeled "San Juan del Rio, 10 Mi. E., Quere 
Taro, Mexico, 30-VII-1954, J. G. Chillcott collector" (DA). Its 
measurements are: length 4.08 mm; width 2.12 mm. 

Type-locality: San Juan del Rio, Quere Taro, Mexico. 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 15 

Triplax wehrlei Boyle 

Triplax wehrlei Boyle, 1954a, p. 260. 

Diagnostic description: Ferrugineous to reddish yellow in color, 
antennal clubs and elytra black, elytral epipleura reddish yellow, 
scutellum piceous; body weakly nitidous, feebly pubescent on head 
and pronotum above and on entire thorax below, abdomen with 
stronger pubescence. Postmandibular lobes short, lateral edges 
strongly rounded, subparallel (see Boyle, 1956, fig. 84, p. 165), termi- 
nal segments of maxillary palpi strongly widened, width more than 3 
times length. Antennal length equal to about two-thirds width of 
pronotal base, club 4-segmented (or 5-segmented if one includes 
segment 7), gradually emergent. Epistomofrontal region of head 
with sides straight to feebly convex, apical angles of epistoma mod- 
erately rounded, apex more strongly concave in a shallow V than 
T. Jlavicollis. Pronotal punctures moderate size and density, sepa- 
rated by about the distance of their diameters; cephalic punctures 
similar in size but denser, each with a seta; elytral intervals with 
moderately large punctures (more than twice as numerous as strial 
punctures), and strong meshwork of fine fissures; elytra margined 
basally. 

Variation: The 39 specimens examined ranged in size from 2.34 to 
3.69 mm in length and 1.28 to 2.00 mm in width. The 3 specimens 
examined by Boyle (1956) from southern Arizona ranged in length 
from 4.14 to 4.55 mm and in width from 2.12 to 2.30 mm. 

Discussion: The 39 specimens examined is the largest series, at 
present, known to have been studied. Heretofore, this form was 
known only from southern Arizona. 

Male genitalia: The anterior end of the internal sac is illustrated 
in Boyle (1956, fig. 96, p. 166). 

Type: Boyle (1956) states the following: "Male; labeled 'Pata- 
gonia, Ariz., VII-9-30; holotype, Triplax wehrlei Boyle' (J. O. Martin; 
collection C.A.S.)." 

Type-locality: Patagonia, Santa Cruz Co., Ariz. 

Distribution: The 39 specimens examined in this study were all 
taken at Morelos, Mexico. Thus, the present known range of this 
form is Arizona to Morelos, Mexico. 

Review of Genus Haematochiton Gorham 

The taxonomic history of this group began with Gorham's estab- 
lishment of Haematochiton as a new genus in the Triplacinae in 1888 
(1887-1899). He established H. elateroides Gorham, 1888, as the 
type-species. Blackwelder's Neotropical catalog lists one species as 
Haematochiton: H. elateroides Gorham, 1888. Boyle (1956) syn- 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

onymized the genus Scaeother Gorham, 1888, with Haematochiton 
Gorham, 1888. Boyle (1956) synonymized H. bisculptum Casey, 1916, 
with H. elateroides Gorham, 1888, and synonymized the following two 
forms under H. carbonarius (Gorham, 1888), new combination: 
Scaoether carbonarius Gorham, 1888 (1887-1899), and Scaoether 
opacus Schaeffer, 1915. Boyle (1956) created a key for the two 
species then recognized: H. elateroides Gorham, 1888, and H. car- 
bonarius (Gorham). Alvarenga in 1965 stated that the type-species 
is Haematochiton elateroides Gorham, 1888. 

In the present study four species are recognized in the Neotropical 
region and in the southwestern United States. H. elateroides 
Gorham and H. carbonarius (Gorham) are kept in Haematochiton 
while two forms heretofore described as Triplax are transferred to 
Haematochiton. 

Distribution: The genus Haematochiton Gorham occurs only in the 
Western Hemisphere. Specimens have been taken in the south- 
western United States, Mexico, and Brazil. 

Methods and terminology. — Methods are the same as those used 
for Triplax (see p. 3). 

"Neotropical" and other terminology are also the same as those 
used in Triplax (see p. 3) . 

Acknowledgments. — For the genus Haematochiton, the author is 
indebted to the same collectors and institutions for the loan of material 
and Triplacinae specimens as for Triplax (see p. 3). 

The author owes special thanks to Dr. W. Wayne Boyle, Pennsyl- 
vania State University, under whose guidance work on Haematochiton 
was undertaken. 

Systematic treatment. — Haematochiton species display several 
colors, including dull carbonaceous black, nitidous black with blood 
red, and black with yellow. The general shape can best be described 
as elongate-elliptical with anterior and posterior ends of the body 
almost equally parabolically rounded, the anterior end somewhat 
more obtusely rounded, however. The ratios of the length to the 
width vary from 1.9 to 2.2:1. In lateral view the dorsal profile is 
somewhat flattened medially. 

The head is visible from directly above. The eyes are finely 
faceted, small, but vaguely coarser than in Triplax. The ocular 
striae terminates at or behind the antennal insertions and the epistoma 
is consequently immarginate. The antennae is about equal to three- 
fifths to three-fourths of the pronotal basal width in length; its club is 
4- to 5-segmented and is gradually emergent from the stem; segment 
3 is subequal in length to segments 4 and 5 together. The maxillary 
palpi are semicircular and are less than twice as wide as long and are 
not armed with a distinct apical brush; the maxillary palpi are much 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 17 

larger than the securiform terminal segments of the labial palpi; the 
labial palpi terminal segments are securiform, each bearing a single 
stronger seta laterally, and armed with a minute brush along the 
truncate apex. The lacinia is armed with two small incurved teeth 
at apex; and the postmandibular lobes are somewhat reduced to 
moderate in size. 

The pronotum is subquadrate to subtrapezoidal in shape, while the 
sides are moderately arcuately convergent anteriorly; the apical 
width is subequal or equal to the median length. The pronotum is 
finely margined basally and laterally, immarginate apically between 
the eyes, and the pronotal angle pores are small and inconspicuous, 
not large and umbilicate. The elytra is distinctly basally margined. 

The legs are distinctly tridentate at apex; the tibiae are not or 
very slightly dilated apically and are feebly arched; the coxae are 
moderately separated. 

Abdominal pubescence is extremely faint to moderate. Pubescence 
is, however, not indicated as being of strong taxonomic importance. 

The anterior end of the internal sac is distinctive. 

The strongest differences between Haematochiton and Mycotretus 
are those of color and punctuation, the somewhat more obtusely 
rounded anterior end of the body in the former, and the absence in 
the former of the pronotal margin at apex between the eyes. 

The most obvious differences between species of Triplax and those 
of Haematochiton are shown by the following characters of the latter: 
maxillary palpi terminal segments semicircular, not moderate to 
strongly widened with terminal brush; prontal angle pores small and 
inconspicuous, not large and distinctly umbilicate. 

Species of Tritoma Fabricius and Paratritoma Gorham hardly can 
be confused with Haematochiton Gorham. Paratritoma has moderate 
to strongly widened maxillary palpi terminal segments with distinct 
brush ; Haematochiton does not. Tritoma is characterized by an oval to 
elongate-oval form in the Nearctics; Tritoma dorsalis Gorham from 
Panama is broadly oval; Haematochiton species on the other hand 
are elongate-elliptical. 

Nothing is known of the life habits of Haematochiton species. The 
genus does not contain species of economic importance. 

Genus Haematochiton Gorham 

Haematochiton Gorham, 1888, p. 81. [Type-species: H. elateroides Gorham, 

1888, p. 81, pi. 5 (fig. 4), by monotypy.j 
Scaeother Gorham, 1888, p. 82. 

Key to Species of Haematochiton Gorham 

1. Elyta orange red or blood red 2 

Elytra dull black or black 3 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

2. Prosternal lines connecting apicomedially on prosternum; metasternal coxal 

lines long; Brazil cruentipennis (Lacordaire) 

Prosternal lines not connecting apicomedially on prosternum; metasternal 
coxal lines short or absent; southwestern United States, Mexico. 

elateroides Gorham 

3. Pronotum yellow with black spots; Brazil maderi (Delkeskamp) 

Pronotum dull black, without spots; southwestern United States, Mexico. 

carbonarius (Gorham) 

Haematochiton cruentipennis (Lacordaire), new combination 

Figure 8 

Triplax cruentipennis Lacordaire, 1842, p. 205. 

Diagnostic description; Head, pronotum, and scutellum black; 
elytra red with orange tinge, faint parallel lines of darker pigmentation 
on intervals; underside entirely black including legs and mouthparts. 
Overall shape elongate-elliptical, length to width ratio about 1.9 to 1. 
Antennae entirely reddish yellow except for blackish terminal 4 or 5 
segments; antennal club strongly widened, ratio of width of segment 
10 to that of 6 is 3.3 to 1; antennae extending to the base of the pro- 
thorax, setae of club dense. Maxillary palpi ratio width to length 
about 1.5 to 1 (fig. 8). Postmandibular lobes relatively small, 
strongly rounded posteriorly and anteriorly (fig. 8) . Pronotum sub- 
trapezoidal in shape, widest basally, sides moderately arcuately 
convergent anteriorly; the four pronotal angles are in equal focus 




Figure 8. — Haematochiton cru- 
entipennis (Lacordaire), new 
combination: underside of head. 



when viewed from above. Pronotal angle pores small and incon- 
spicuous. Pronotal punctures relatively small and shallow medially, 
suddenly becoming much larger on lateral thirds. Elytral intervals 
punctured. Prosternal coxal lines unusually large and prominent 
extending to prosternal apical region and connecting medioapically. 
Cephalic punctures relatively large and flat bottomed along base, 
becoming smaller and denser apically. Abdominal pubescence and 
punctuation moderate. 

Variation: The observed size of the one specimen examined, the 
holotype, from the Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, is: 
length 5.63 mm; width 2.98 mm. 

Male genitalia: The unique type was not dissected. 

Biology: Nothing is known of the biology of this form. 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 19 

Type: Sex unknown, in Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 
Paris, labeled l 'cruentipennis Lacordaire, Type, 'BrasilV 

Type-locality: "Brasil." 

Distribution: The only specimen known to the author is that of 
the unique type labeled "Brasil." 

Haematochiton elateroides Gorham 

Haemaiochiton elateroides Gorham, 18S8, p. 81, pi. 5 (fig. 4.) 
Haematochiton bisculptum Casey, 1916, p. 168. 

Diagnostic description: Coloration of head and pronotum black, 
elytra blood red except at extreme apices. Overall shape is elongate- 
elliptical; two ends of the body are about equally parabolically 
rounded, length to width ratio about 2.2 to 1. Maxillary palpi 
terminal segments moderately widened without distinct brush. Pro- 
notum subtrapezoidaj, moderately convergent anteriorly, median 
length about one-eighth shorter than the apical width, the four 
pronotal angles are in view when viewed from directly above. Pro- 
notal punctures relatively small and shallow medially, suddenly much 
larger and distinctly flat bottomed on lateral thirds. Elytra blood 
red except at apices, relatively nitidous. Cephalic punctures rela- 
tively large and flat bottomed along base, becoming smaller and 
denser apically. Abdominal pubescence and punctuation weak. Ab- 
dominal and metasternal coxal lines absent; if occasionally present, 
they are short basal traces. Specimens of H. elateroides Gorham from 
the Chiricahua Mountains were compared with the unique type of 
H. cruentipennis (Lacordaire) . The most obvious differences between 
the two species are shown by the following characteristics of the 
former: elytral intervals impunctulate, not punctured; metasternal 
coxal lines short to absent, not long and prominent; prosternal coxal 
lines short, not long and connecting medioapically on the presternum; 
abdominal punctuation weak, not moderate; abdominal pubescence 
extremely faint, not moderate; body length to width ratio 1.9 to 1, 
not 2 to 1. 

Male genitalia: The median lobe (see Boyle, 1956, fig. 135) is 
narrowly membranous along the broad opening of the median orifice. 
The aedeagus is quite similar to that of Mycotretus nigromanicatus 
Boyle in gross characteristics. The distinctive anterior end of the 
internal sac is illustrated in Boyle (1956, fig. 136). 

Published illustrations: The adult is figured in color by Gorham 
(1887-1899, pi. 5: fig. 4). 

Type: Not seen. 

Type-locality: "Ciuded in Durango, 8100 feet, Mexico." 

Distribution: This species has been collected in the southwestern 
United States and in Mexico. The following: localities have been 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

reported: Mexico: Durango: "Ciudad in Durango, 8100 feet." 
United States: Arizona: Cochise Co.: Chiricahua Mountains, July 
20, 1950, July 1936, and June 24; Pine Creek, Chiricahua Mountains, 
June 24, 1897; Rustler Park, 8000-9000 feet, Chiricahua Mountains, 
July 20, 1950. Maricopa Co.: Phoenix. 

Haematochiton maderi (Delkeskamp), new combination 

Figures 9, 10 

Triplax maderi Delkeskamp, 1957, p. 114. 

Diagnostic description: Coloration of head and elytra black. Over- 
all shape elongate-elliptical; two ends of body about equally para- 
bolically rounded; length 2.1 times the width. Eyes small, finely 
faceted, but coarser than in Triplax. Ocular striae terminating at 
antennal insertions, the epistoma immarginate. Antennae extending 
to procoxae, club 4-segmented, about twice as long as wide, densely 




Figure 9. — Haematochiton maderi 
(Delkeskamp), new combina- 
tion: underside of head. 



clothed with setae of moderate coarseness; segment 3 of stem about 
equal in length to segments 4 and 5 together. Maxillary palpi ter- 
minal segment width to length ratio about 1:1 (fig. 9), semicircular, 
without brush. Mention moderately large. Terminal labial palpi 
segments more cylindrical than in Triplax. Postmandibular lobes of 
moderate development (fig. 9). Pronotum subtrapezoidal, apical 
width about one-fifth less than the basal width, sides subparallel for 
about one-half distance nearest base. Pronotum yellow with six black 
spots, two of these are in one-fifth of the pronotum behind apex, the 
others are evenly transversely spaced medially. Pronotum margined 
basally, and laterally, immarginate apically between the eyes. Pro- 
notal angle pores moderately small and relatively shallow. Elytra 
margined basally. Scutellum subcordate. Body below similar to 
Triplax with the following exceptions: the prosternal lines along the 
coxal inner edges are strong, straight, and subparallel; metasternal 
coxal lines absent; abdominal coxal lines short. Coloration: elytra 
and head black; pronotum yellow with six black spots, two of these 
at one-fifth of the protonum behind apex, the other four evenly trans- 
versely spaced medially; the following ferrugineous: antennae, under- 
side of head (medially), legs, mesothorax, metathorax, and abdomen 



TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 



21 



(except posteriorly) ; the following testaceous: prothorax, palpi, tarsi, 
and, indeterminately, the abdominal posterior one-third. 

Discussion : H. maderi can not be considered as Triplax because of 
the species' following critical characters : terminal segments maxillary 
palpi weakly widened without distinct apical brush; pronotal angle 
pores small, shallow. 

Male genitalia: The anterior end of the internal sac is distinctive 
(fig. 10), showing a similarity to the anterior end of the internal sac of 
H. carbonarius Gorham as drawn by Boyle (1956, p. 138). 




Figure 10. — Haemato chiton 
maderi (Delkeskamp), new 
combination: anterior end of 
internal sac, anterodorsal view. 



Biology: Nothing is known of the biology of this form. 
Type-locality: Brazil? 

Distribution: In this study specimens have been taken from the 
following locality: Brazil: Nova Teutonia, 27°11'8", 52°23'1". 

Haematochiton carbonarius (Gorham) 

Scaeother carbonarius Gorham, 1888, p. 82, pi. 5 (fig. 5). 
Scaeother opacus SchaefTer, 1915, p. 236. 

Diagnostic description: Coloration carbonaceous black; palpi, tarsi, 
and five basal antennal segments somewhat lighter. Overall shape 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

somewhat more obtusely rounded anteriorly than posteriorly, length 
to width ratio about 2.1 to 1. Body covered with fine minutely 
reticulate microsculpture that destroys the nitidosity. Pronotum 
subquadrate, widest before base, sides evenly, even though feebly, 
arcuately convergent anteriorly. The pronotal apex feebly convex 
between the apical angles when the four pronotal angles are in equal 
focus. Pronotal and cephalic punctures moderately strong and deep, 
rather uniform in size and density, mostly separated by about the 
distance of their diameters. Elytral intervals distinctly punctulate, 
scutellum similarly punctulate. Metasternal and abdominal coxal 
lines present but fine and weak. 

Variation: The observed size range in mm is 2.19 to 2.21 in width, 
and 4.49 to 4.65 in length. 

Male genitalia: The aedeagus is similar to that of H. elateroides in 
general characteristics but the tegminal arms bear distinct dorsal 
lobes medially (see Boyle 1956, fig. 137) ; also, the enclosed ejaculatory 
duct is of a much larger diameter, and the median lobe is scarcely 
membranous dorso-apically. The anterior end of the internal sac is 
distinctive (see Boyle, 1956, fig. 138). 

Biology: Nothing is known of the biology of this form. 

Published illustrations: The adult is figured by Gorham, 1888 
(1887-1899, pi. 5: fig. 5). 

Type: Not seen. 

Type-locality: Toluca, State of Mexico, Mexico. 

Distribution: Mexico: Mexico: Toluca (type-locality). Oaxaca: 
Oaxaca, July 15 to 21. Sonora: Bokachaka, Rio Mayo, July 5. 
United States: Arizona: type-locality of Scaeother opacus Schaeffer. 



Literature Cited 

Alvarenga, Moacir 

1965. Especies tipos dos g6neros e subgeneros neotropicais da familia 
Erotylidae (Coleoptera). Bol. Univ. Fed. Parana, Zool. II, no. 6, 
pp. 75-92. 
Blackwelder, Richard E. 

1944-57. Checklist of the coleopterous insects of Mexico, Central America, 
the West Indies, and South America. U. S. Nat. Mus. Bull. 185, 
pts. 1-6, 1492 pp. 
Boyle, W. Wayne 

1954a. Five new species of Triplax from western North America (Coleoptera, 

Erotylidae). Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 56, pp. 251-264. 
1954b. Concerning the status of Ischyrus graphicus Lacordaire, with de- 
scriptions of four new erotylid species from western North America 
(Coleoptera: Erotylidae). Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 62, 
pp. 39-53. 

1956. A revision of the Erotylidae of America north of Mexico (Coleoptera). 

Bull. American Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 110, art. 2, pp. 65-172. 
1962. A new species of Triplax from Arizona (Coleoptera: Erotylidae). 

Pan-Pacific Ent., vol. 38, no. I, pp. 29-30. 
Casey, Thomas Lincoln 

1916. Some random studies among the Clavicornia: Erotylidae. In 

Memoirs on the Coleoptera. Lancaster, Penn., vol. 7, pp. 146-172. 
1924. Additions to the known Coleoptera of North America. In Memoirs 

on the Coleoptera. Lancaster, Penn., vol. 11, pp. 1-347. 
Curtis, John 

1824-40. British entomology; being illustrations and descriptions of the 

genera of insects found in Great Britain and Ireland. London, 

16 vols. 
Delkeskamp, Kurt 

1951. Zur Zoogeographie der Erotyliden (Col.). Ent. Blatt., vols. 45-46, 

pt. 2, pp. 144-145. [Reference not seen.] 

1957. Erotylidae. In Coleoptera II, vol. Ill of Beitriige zur Kenntnis der 

Insektenfauna Boliviens. Veroff. Zool. Staats.-Samml. Munchen, 
vol. 5, pp. 93-116, 11 figs. 
1965. The African species of Triplacini (with the first supplement for the 
African Tritomini) (Coleoptera, Erotylidae). Deutsche Ent., 
vol. 12, pp. 83-177. 
Fleutiaux, Edmond, et al. 

1947. Coldopteres des Antilles, par Edmond Fleutiaux et al., Paris, Office 
de la Recherche Scientifique Coloniale, vol. 1. [Reference not seen.] 
Gorham, Henry Stephen 

1887-99. Erotylidae, Endomychidae and Coccinellidae. Vol. 7 of Coleop- 
tera in Godman and Salvin, Biologia Centrali-Americana, 249 pp., 
13 pis. 

23 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Graves, R. C. 

1965. Observations on the ecology, behavior, and life cycle of the fungus- 
feeding beetle, Cypherolylus californicus, with a description of the 
pupa (Coleoptera: Erotylidae). Coleopt. Bull., vol. 19, no. 4, 
pp. 117-122. 

GuERIN, JACINTHO 

1946. Paratritoma brasiliensis new sp. from Brazil. Rev. Ent. Rio de 

Janiero, vol. 17. [Reference not seen.] 

1952. Essay Monographique des Erotyliens Chiliens 1952 (Coleoptera). 

Rev. Chilena Ent., vol. 2, pp. 179-183, 6 figs. 
Herbst, J. Friedrich Wilhelm 

1793. Natursystem aller bekannten in und aiislandischen Insekten, als eine 
Fortsetzung der von Buffonschen Naturgeschichte. Berlin, vol. 5. 

KUHNT, P. 

1910. Neue Erotylidae (Coleoptera). Deutsche Ent., no. 3, pp. 219-270, 
26 figs. 
Lacordaire, Jean Theodore 

1842. Monographie des erotyliens, famille de l'orde des col6op teres. Paris, 
543 pp. 
LeConte, John Lawrence 

1854. Synopsis of the Erotylidae of the United States. Proc. Acad. Nat. 
Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 7, pp. 158-163. 
Mader, Leopold 

1947. Revision of the erotylids of Peru. Stettiner Entomol. Zeit., vol. 105, 

pp. 95-117. 
1951. Revision of the erotylids of Peru (continued). Ent. Arb. Munich, 
vol. 2, pp. 197-225. [Reference not seen.] 
Mayr, Ernst; Linsley, E. Gorton; and Usinger, Robert L. 

1953. Methods and principles of systematic zoology. New York, 336 pp., 

45 figs. 
Philipp, Hans 

1965. Col6opteres Erotylidae. In Insectes, vol. 19 of Faune de Madagascar. 
[In French.] 
Philippi Federico 

1864. Stettiner Entomol. Zeit., vol. 25, p. 401. 
Schaeffer, Charles Frederic August 

1905. Some additional new genera and species of Coleoptera found within 
the limits of the United States. Mus. Brooklyn Inst. Arts Sci., 
Sci. Bull., vol. 1, pp. 141-179. 
Selander, Richard B., and Vatjrie, Patricia 

1962. A gazetteer to accompany the "insecta" volumes of the Biologia Cen- 
trali- Americana. American Mus. Nov., no. 2099, 70 pp. 
Sharp, David and Muir, F. 

1912. The comparative anatomy of the male genital tube in Coleoptera. 
Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1912, pp. 477-642, 36 pis. 

TORRE-BUENO, J. R. DE LA 

1962. A glossary of entomology. New York, 336 pp., 9 pis., plus suppl. 
Villiers, Andre 

1943. Etude morphologique et biologique des Languriitae. Paris: Editions 

du Museum, 98 pp. 
1946. Col6opteres cerambycides de l'Afrique du Nord. Paris: Office de la 

Recherche Scientifique Coloniale, 152 pp. 



no. 3601 TRIPLAX AND HAEMATOCHITON — JOHNSON 25 

Villiers, Andre. — Continued 

1949. Mission P. L. Dekeyser et A. Villiers en Guinee et C6te d'lvoire 
(1946) Dakar, vol. 1. 
Villiers, Andre, and Dekeyser, Pierre 

1956. Notations ecologiques et biogSographiques sur la faune de l'Adrar; 
contribution a l'etude du peuplement de la mauritanie par P. L. 
Dekeyser et A. Villiers. Dakar: IF AN, 222 pp. 
Wilson, John W. 

1930. The genitalia and wing venation of the Cucujidae and related families. 
Ann. Ent. Soc. America, vol. 23, pp. 305-358. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3602 



The Crayfishes and Their Epizootic 

Ostracod and Branchiobdellid Associates 

Of the Mountain Lake, Virginia, Region l 



By Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., Perry C. Holt, 
and Margaret Walton 2 



The Mountain Lake Region, as here considered, comprises approx- 
imately 500 square miles (1290 square km) in Craig, Giles, and 
Montgomery Counties, Va., and Monroe County, W. Va. Here 
the altitude varies from 396 m (1300 ft) at New Castle, Craig County, 
to 1329 m (4363 ft) at Bald Knob on Salt Pond Mountain in Giles 
County. Waters draining from the area contribute to three major 
river systems — the New River flowing to the Ohio and Mississippi 
Rivers, the James River to Chesapeake Bay, and the Roanoke 
River to Albemarle Sound, N.C. 

Except for a few sphagnum bogs, sinkhole ponds, and impounded 
streams, the only lentic habitat larger than a few feet in diameter 
is the oligotrophic Mountain Lake situated at an elevation of 1180 m, 



1 A contribution from the Mountain Lake Biological Station of the University 
of Virginia and the Department of Biology of the Virginia Polytechnic Institute. 
The branchiobdellid studies were supported by grants (NSF G-4439, G-9828, 
GB-372) from the National Science Foundation. 

2 Hobbs: Smithsonian Institution; Holt: Virginia Polytechnic Institute; 
Walton: Mountain Lake Biological Station. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

with a surface area of 0.2 square kin and a maximum depth of 31.5 m 
(Roth and Neff, 1964, pp. 5, 8). Of these, collections were made 
only in Mountain Lake. 

The streams vary in size from tiny spring rills cascading over 
rocky and sandy bottoms to the 161-meter-wide New River, which 
courses with a moderate current over bedded limestone and discharges 
from 1186 to 35,228 cubic feet per second at the Eggleston Gauging 
Station (average annual minimum and flood flows from 1930 to 1958) 
(Ross and Perkins, 1959, p. 6). 

In much of the area, sandstones of the Silurian Age overlie 
Ordovician limestones and shales, and at higher elevations the waters 
flowing over the exposed sandstones have a total hardness of as little 
as 4 ppm. Some streams at lower elevations, passing over and through 
channels in calciferous rocks, accumulate soluble carbonates to the 
extent that in the larger valley streams the total hardness may attain 
concentrations of as much as 142 ppm (Shoup, 1948). In one stream 
(sta. 85) the M.O. alkalinity reaches 350 ppm. 

The midsummer temperature of one of the springs (sta. 68) located 
at an elevation of 1219 m is 13° C, and that of the valley streams 
may rise to 26.7° C (Shoup, 1948). 

Physiographic, hydrographic, and ecological data for several of 
the streams sampled in this study may be found in Burton and Odum 
(1945), Ross and Perkins (1959), and Shoup (1948). 

Precise numbers of specimens examined during the course of the 
survey are not available; however, records include some 2700 
crayfishes, 5200 ostracods, and 1600 branchiobdellids. 

Collection techniques and disposition of specimens. — This 
study was initiated during the summer of 1960 and collections have 
been amassed during each of the succeeding summers through 1965. 
One hundred and twenty-seven stations (see map 1) were established 
in the area, and collections of the crayfishes were made by hand from 
open water or burrows and with the aid of minnow seines. In most 
instances all of the crayfishes collected from one station on a given 
day were killed in 6 to 10 percent formalin in a single container. In 
the laboratory, the ostracods and branchiobdellids were recovered 
from the bottom of the container and prepared for identification. 
All of the species (crayfish, ostracods, and branchiobdellids) found 
in that collection were considered to be associated and were so 
recorded. In instances wherein there was a question as to whether 
or not a particular ostracod species actually lived upon the exoskeleton 
of a particular species of crayfish, that species of crayfish was recol- 
lected, preserved alone, and the ostracods recovered from that 
collection were then known as associates. In that manner it was 
determined that the assumed associations were highly probable. In 
order to determine the abundance and distribution of certain sym- 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 




(£) 


Z> 


cr 


O 

o 


> 




h- 


O 


<j) 


cr 


LU 


■z. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

bionts on the crayfish host, the crayfish was killed, dissected into 
units, and the specimens from each unit separately preserved. 

Most of the crayfishes and ostracods on which this study is based 
are in the collections of the U.S. National Museum; the branchiobdel- 
lids are in the collection of Holt, but most of these will be deposited 
in the same museum. 

Presentation of data. — Brief discussions of the habitat, popula- 
tion sizes and fluctuations, and food habits of each of the three groups 
precede the sections devoted to the individual species. Within the 
discussions devoted to each group, brief accounts of the anatomical 
features utilized in the identification of the species are followed by 
illustrated keys and generic diagnoses. For each species, a diagnosis, 
the range, the distribution in the area, and the drainage systems, 
range of elevations, and associates are presented. Data relative to 
associations are summarized in table 1, and a discussion of those 
associations concludes the study. 

Acknowledgments. — We should like to express our appreciation 
to the following persons who assisted us on one or more of our collecting 
trips in the Mountain Lake region: Messrs. Paul Buhan, J. E. Carico, 
C. J. Freeman, R. H. Gilpin, H. H. Hobbs, III, H. A. James, E. P. 
McConnell, Dr. F. A. Marland, Mr. Homer Mumaw, Dr. John J. 
Neal, Jr., Dr. Jean E. Pugh, Miss Lucile Walton, Mrs. Shirley Wells, 
and Miss Mary Lou Wood. Also, we are grateful to Dr. Robert D. 
Ross for his discussions of stream piracy and problems of distribution 
of fishes in the area. 

The Habitats 

The crayfishes. — Of the six species and subspecies of crayfishes 
in the area, four vie for the habitats provided by tributaries of the 
James River (Hobbs, 1951). In the uppermost reaches of both 
headwaters and lateral tributaries, almost without respect to altitude, 
Cambarus b. bartonii is the sole inhabitant and utilizes cover provided 
by rocks, roots of shoreline plants exposed in the water, and most 
debris occurring within the stream bed. As the stream begins to 
exhibit alternating riffles and pools, in contradistinction to cascading 
areas and pools, C. I. longulus takes over the major portions of the 
riffles while C. b. bartonii occupies the pools and takes advantage 
of the rock cover along the margins of the riffles. Downstream, as 
the alternating pool and riffle areas become more pronounced and 
more extensive, C. acuminatum replaces C. b. bartonii in the pools and 
is frequently abundant immediately above and below the riffles, 
utilizing, for the most part, cover provided by the larger rocks. In 
the areas where the three may be found, C. b. bartonii seeks the 
marginal portions of both the riffles and pools and frequently con- 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 5 

structs tunnels in the bordering banks. As might be expected, none 
of the three recognizes any absolute limits such as suggested, and 
occasional individuals of each may invade the ecological niche of the 
other two. To what extent these invasions are due to individual 
wanderings, intraspecific population pressures, or interspecific pres- 
sures, is not known. Of the three there seems to be little doubt that 
C. I. longulus is ecologically more restricted than either of the other 
two. At lower elevations, particularly in the larger streams in which 
there are larger rocks in the riffle areas, C. acuminatus not only 
appears to compete with C. I. longulus but frequently replaces it. 
C. b. bartonii undoubtedly has the broadest ecological tolerance, and 
in the New River drainage, where it is not in competition with C. I. 
longulus, it is as abundant in the riffle areas as in the pools and marginal 
portions of the stream. Furthermore, in the tidewater areas of 
Virginia, C. b. bartonii is found not only living in the smaller streams 
but also burrowing in swampy areas along the margins of streams. 
In the Roanoke drainage system, the ecological distribution of C. b. 
bartonii, C. I. longulus, and C. acuminatus is not unlike that indicated 
in the James River drainage above; however, the headwater streams 
are not at such high elevations. 

The fourth species, Orconectes juvenilis, occurs in two quite dissimilar 
habitats in the Mountain Lake area. At the present time it is the 
only crayfish found in Mountain Lake itself, and apparently it is 
found in most of the littoral zone, where adequate cover exists in the 
form of stones and rubble. In the single Potts Creek locality, it 
occurs primarily in precisely the same types of habitats in which 
C. acuminatus is found elsewhere in the James drainage, and in addi- 
tion it has invaded the riffle zones frequented by C. I. longulus. In 
the portion of the New River system treated here, 0. juvenilis is 
restricted to Mountain Lake, having been introduced there in 1933 
(Hobbs and Walton, 1966a). Cambarus b. bartonii and C. sciotensis 
share the remainder of the watershed in the area. As in the James 
drainage, C. b. bartonii is the sole inhabitant of the headwater streams, 
and downstream, where it encounters populations of C. sciotensis, it 
is confined to the marginal regions, but even there, apparently it 
competes for cover with the latter. In Little Stony Creek, both 
species occur up to the level of station 44, where the cascades serve 
as a barrier to C. sciotensis (and probably to the upstream migration 
of C. b. bartonii as well) ; above the cascades, C. b. bartonii is the sole 
crayfish inhabitant and it occupies all portions of the stream bed. 
In accessible areas of the New River system, it appears that C. 
sciotensis vicariates for C. acuminatus and in part for C. I. longulus. 

While all the crayfishes of the area demonstrate some burrowing 
tendencies, only C. carolinus spends the greater part of its life living 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

in burrows or wandering over land on humid evenings. In all of our 
collections no specimen has been collected from a stream, pond, or 
puddle, and most were found at night either wandering above ground 
or were taken from the mouths of their burrows. A few were dug 
from their branching burrows. 

In the smaller creeks, C. b. bartonii, C. I. longulus, and C. acuminatus 
all burrow in the stream beds during the winter months as they do if 
the water level in the streams becomes low at other seasons. Seldom 
does C. b. bartonii seem to be content simply to crawl beneath a rock 
unless it is a rather large one. Even then evidence of excavation may 
be seen. Cambarus sciotensis, C. acuminatus, and 0. juvenilis appar- 
ently exert far less effort in digging than do G. b. bartonii and C. I. 
longulus, but neither of the latter is so typically associated with 
burrows as is C. carolinus. 

The ostracods. — With only one exception (Uncinocythere biscuspide 
on a freshwater crab of the genus Pseudothelphusa in Mexico: Hobbs 
and Villalobos, 1958, p. 395), ostracods of the subfamily Entocytheri- 
nae seem to be confined to the exoskeleton of craj^fishes. Marshall 
(1903) reported Entocythere cambaria from the gill chamber of a cray- 
fish collected at Madison, Wise. In 1926, Sars described Cytherites 
insignipes (the second known member of the subfamily) from three 
female specimens collected in Canada but had no further data for 
them. Klie (1931) described E. donnaldsonensis (=Donnaldsoncythere 
donnaldsonensis) from Donaldson's Cave, Lawrence County, Ind., but 
did not indicate that it was associated with a crayfish. Rioja (1940a, 
pp. 593, 594; 1941, pp. 193, 194) indicated that the habitat of E. 
heterodonta (= Ankylocythere heterodonta) is quite different from that 
of Marshall's species inasmuch as the animals are found rarely in the 
branchial chamber; instead, most of them occur on the outer surface, 
clinging to the setae. Dobbin (1941, p. 185) reported her E. Columbia 
(= Uncinocythere Columbia) "from crayfish branchiae." Hoff (1942, 
pp. 63-65) implied that the primary infestation of the ostracods is in 
the gill chambers of the crayfish, for, in his "Methods," he indicated 
that "the ostracods will leave the gills of the host if the crayfishes 
are placed in a vessel containing 95% ethyl alocohol." He did not 
indicate that he found them elsewhere on the crayfish, but he did state 
that he found them "in the water of crayfish burrows." Kozloff and 
Whitman (1954, p. 159) reported that E. Columbia and E. occidentalis 
(=U. Columbia and U. occidentalis) "occur principally among the 
cuticular hairs on the ventral side of the thorax of the host, but a few 
are found among the mouth parts and on the branchiae." Kozloff 
(1955, p. 156) indicated that E. erichsoni and E. caudata (=£/. 
erichsoni and U. caudata) that remained on their hosts after preserva- 
tion "were found primarily among the cuticular hairs on the ventral 



no. :;602 CRAYFISHES HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 7 

side of the thorax. A few were taken from the mouth parts." In 
studying the incubation and hatching of the eggs of E. illinoisensis, 
Stamper (1957, p. 50) reported that 90 percent of the crayfishes 
examined carried eggs of the ostracod "attached to the hooked setae 
and/or the coxal filaments. Both of these structures are located 
underneath the carapace of the crayfish." Westervelt and Kozloff 
(1959, p. 239) stated that E. neglecta (= U. neglecta) occurs principally 
on the same areas of the crayfish as U. erichsoni and U. caudata. 

Two of us (Walton and Hobbs) have attempted to discover whether 
or not several of the species in the Mountain Lake area are limited 
to certain anatomical regions of their crayfish host. As might be 
expected, they are not found on exposed surfaces except where there 
are setae to which they may cling or grooves in which they may 
obtain support. Particularly do they seem to congregate on the 
gnathal appendages, where, on occasional crayfishes, scores of them 
may be found moving about or clinging to the setae. Far fewer 
individuals are found among the articular membranes and setae 
associated with the ambulatory appendages, but certain species are 
more abundant on the abdomen. Not one ostracod has been ob- 
served in the branchial chambers of the crayfishes examined! There 
seems to be no absolute specificity of microhabitat on the crayfish 
for any of the ostracods observed although if two or more species 
occur on the same crayfish, as they frequently do, one may be found 
more abundantly in one area than elsewhere. We have found, for 
example, that in the associations of Ascetocythere asceta and Dactylo- 
cythere chalaza on Cambarus carolinus, the latter is more abundant 
on the abdomen and As. asceta among the gnathal appendages. 

None of the ostracods in the Mountain Lake area occurs in all 
parts of any of the drainage systems and, although they are obviously 
subject to restrictions, no analytical data are available to demon- 
strate the nature of these limiting factors. Two of the species, 
As. asceta and Dt. chalaza are confined to the exoskeletons of the 
burrowing crayfish, C. carolinus, which tunnels its way to ground 
water. Whether it is the absence of competition with other os- 
tracods, the groundwater habitat, an obligate relationship with 
the crayfish, or a combination of, or none of, these factors that is 
restricting these ostracods remains to be demonstrated. Altitudinal 
correlations exist with at least two of the species — Donnaldsoncy there 
scalis has not been found below approximately 670 m, and Ankylo- 
cythere ancyla above 475 m; however, it is unlikely that altitude is 
serving directly as a barrier to them. To our knowledge, not a 
single limiting factor in the ecological distribution of any entocytherid 
has been identified. 

If, as generally conceded at the present time, the ostracods of the 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Entocytherinae are not parasitic on their crayfish hosts, there seem 
to be few reasons why one might expect host specificity to have 
developed. Nevertheless, there are a few species that have been 
found only on one host. This apparent specificity is more probably 
related to the the habitat of the crayfish than to other factors, for 
in most of these associations a burrowing crayfish is involved, either 
C. carolinus or C. d. diogenes. Of the nine species of the genus Asceto- 
cythere (see Hobbs and Hart, 1966), five of them have been found only 
on C. carolinus; both species of the genus Plectocythere are restricted 
to the same crayfish; and the three species of the genus Geocythere 
(see Hart, 1959, 1965) and the monotypic Rhadinocythere (see Hart, 
1965) have been found only on C. d. diogenes. In the Mountain 
Lake region, As. asceta and Dt. chalaza share a single host, C. carolinus. 

The branchiobdellids. — The branchiobdellids are epizoites known 
from several holarctic freshwater crustaceans, principally decapods of 
the family Astacidae, but they have been recorded from freshwater 
crabs (Hobbs and Villalobos, 1958, p. 395; Holt, 1964, p. 2), fresh- 
water shrimp (Liang, 1963, pp. 569, 570), and a cave isopod (Holt, 
1963, p. 99). All attach to the exterior surface of the host by means 
of a posterior sucker and move from place to place on the host's 
body in a leechlike fashion, using the peristomium as an anterior 
sucker. All of the branchiobdellids considered here are from crayfishes. 

Most species of branchiobdellids are not found in all parts of the 
streams of a drainage system in which they occur. There are, pre- 
sumably, ecological factors regulating such distributional patterns; 
but in general it is not known what these factors are, though Berry 
and Holt (1959, p. 7) showed a difference in the temperature re- 
sponses of Xironogiton instabilius and Xironodrilus formosus, which 
suggests that an intolerance of high temperatures may operate in 
confining Xg. instabilius to the colder streams of higher elevations. 

The occurrence of several species of branchiobdellids (as many as 
six) on the same host animal has raised the question as to whether or 
not a particular species is confined to a specific part of the body of 
the host. Holt (1954, p. 170) first called attention to the problem 
presented by the possible existence of microhabitats for branchiobdel- 
lids on the crayfish hosts. McManus (1960, p. 422) studied three 
species of branchiobdellids, Xg. instabilius, Cambarincola philadelphica, 
and C. fallax, all of which occur in the Mountain Lake area) from Fall 
and Cascadilla Creeks in New York, and his observations are in 
accord with those of Brown (1961, p. 25), who has studied, from 
Sinking Creek, the microhabitats of 6 of the 12 species of branchiobdel- 
lids that occur in the Mountain Lake area. Though a more rigorous 
control of his statistical procedures would have been desirable, there 
is no reason to doubt his general conclusions: (1) the microhabitat 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 9 

of C. branchiophila is within the gill chambers of the crayfish; (2) 
Ankyrodrilus koronaeus (his species X) is primarily an inhabitant of 
the chelipeds; (3) Pterodrilus alcicornus is randomly distributed over 
the ventral surface of the crayfish; (4) C. fallax is essentially confined 
to the basal segments of the pereiopods and antennae; (5) C. ingens 
occurs principally upon the ventral surface of the abdomen and along 
the cervical groove, but competes with C. fallax so that, when one 
species is common upon a crayfish, the other is rare ; (6) Xg. instabilius 
is found almost always on the chelipeds. Of the other species in- 
cluded in this study, Bdellodrilus illuminatus is known beyond doubt 
to be a gill-inhabiting form; it is assumed that the microhabitat of 
A. legaeus is that of its congener and that these two species are allo- 
patric; Xd. formosus, on the basis of our field experience, is a species 
of the exterior surface of the branchiostegites of the crayfish; and 
little or nothing can be said of the microhabitats of the remaining 
species (C. heterognatha, C. philadelphica, and C. holostoma), though 
we suspect that C. philadelphica and C holostoma may occupy es- 
sentially the same microhabitats as C. fallax and C. ingens. 

Goodnight (1940, p. 65) and McManus (1960, pp. 424-427) have, 
among others, considered the question of host specificity among the 
branchiobdellids. Goodnight reviewed the host records presented by 
previous workers and said, "In short, within the limits of the range 
of any branchiobdellid any crayfish may serve as host." McManus 
found it surprising that branchiobdellids should have the broad 
ecological tolerances attributed to them and attempted to study this 
problem in New York from an area where there are three species of 
branchiobdellids and four of their crayfish hosts. He found very 
few worms and no cocoons on Orconectes p. propinquus, confirmed by 
experimental procedures that 0. immunis is an unsatisfactory host for 
Cambarincola philadelphica and C. fallax (lumped together by him 
as Cambarincola species), noted that all subadults and adults of 
Cambarus robustus earned either worms or cocoons, and observed that 
C. b. bartonii is very commonly infested. Lytle (pers. comm.) reports 
a similar finding for branchiobdellids from central Pennsylvania. 

Populations 

The crayfishes.— No quantitative data on crayfish populations 
in the area are available, but it is readily apparent that population 
sizes vary tremendously from stream to stream and even from year to 
year in corresponding seasons. Unfortunately, in this study observa- 
tions were largely confined to the summer months, and most seasonal 
fluctuations, if they occurred, might well have escaped detection. 
Admittedly, in certain instances the fluctuations are more apparent 
than real; for example, it is highly unlikely that there are fewer indi- 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM V0L - ™ 

viduals of Cambarus I. longulus in a given riffle area in January than 
in April. Utilizing the usual collecting techniques, however, it is 
very difficult to obtain even a dozen specimens during the winter 
months; in the early spring the collectable individuals are mostly 
males and yearling females ; a little later in the spring the adult females 
appear in the population so that an approximation of the population 
size cannot be obtained until late spring. In late fall the population 
begins to diminish in size and by winter it has almost disappeared. 
This fluctuation is obviously a result of the habits of the species in 
burrowing below the frostline before the stream freezes and, although 
the males and yearling females emerge in early spring, the adult 
females remain in the burrows until their eggs (laid in late winter or 
early spring) have hatched and the young have left or are ready to 
leave their mothers. Although year-round data are not available 
on any of the crayfishes in the Mountain Lake area, Smart (1962) 
and one of us (Hobbs) have not observed appreciable changes in 
populations in Swift Run in Greene County, Va., over a 10-year 
period. 

In contrast to the seasonal fluctuation of populations of C. I. 
longulus, the collectable population of C. sciotensis in Sinking Creek 
exhibits little fluctuation throughout the year and from year to year, 
and the same is true for many populations of C. b. bartonii. 

Adequate data are not available to assess the population sizes in 
various localities, but possible effects of competition are emphasized 
in (1) the natural experiment in Little Stony Creek above the Cas- 
cades, which C. sciotensis has not been able to ascend (here, without 
competition, C. b. bartonii occurs in much larger numbers than in 
similar streams where it occurs with C. sciotensis) , and in (2) Mountain 
Lake, where the introduced 0. juvenilis has displaced the introduced 
C. acuminatum and the native C. b. bartonii (Hobbs and Walton, 1966a). 

Perhaps the most exciting observations of competition between 
species in the area are those that are in progress in Potts Creek. In 
1960, two of us (Hobbs and Walton), together with several others 
whose help has been acknowledged above, visited station 7 and within 
a few minutes collected 12 specimens of C. b. bartonii, 10 of C. I. 
longulus, and 12 of 0. juvenilis. In 1965, one of us (Walton) returned 
to this locality and this time collected 94 specimens of 0. juvenilis and 
a single specimen of C. b. bartonii; not one individual of C. I. longulus 
was to be found! There is no record of 0. juvenilis having been 
intentionally introduced into the headwaters of Potts Creek and 
presumably fishermen collecting their "crawfish bait" in West Virginia 
released excess animals in the creek, thus stocking a population that 
not only has become successfully established but is in the process of 
replacing the native species as it has done in Mountain Lake. In an 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 11 

earlier draft of this paper, we wrote concerning the Potts Creek 
locality, "Here, in the single known locality, it [0. juvenilis] was found 
with C. b. bartonii and C. I. longulus but occurring in an area that 
might well have been inhabited by C. acuminatum. This is perhaps 
significant in light of the account of the occurrence of 0. juvenilis in 
Mountain Lake." With the apparent expulsion of most of the C. I. 
longulus population by 1965, the supposed eradication of C. acuminatum 
prior to 1960, and the apparent inroad on the C. b. bartonii population 
during the intervening 5-year period, the possibility of a rapid spread 
of 0. juvenilis in the James drainage system might well be anticipated. 
Also worthy of note is the fact that, as in Mountain Lake, C. acumina- 
tus was supposedly supplanted first, and C. b. bartonii is now very 
poorly represented in the crayfish population. (See further remarks 
under 0. juvenilis.) 

In 1966, Hobbs and Walton again visited this locality and collected 
71 specimens of 0. juvenilis, 6 of C. I. longulus, and 2 of C. b. bartonii. 
Concentrated efforts in selected riffle areas were required to obtain the 
specimens of C. I. longulus, and it seemed obvious to the two of us that 
there can be no question that the C. I. longulus population has been 
reduced and that the C. b. bartonii population has either been reduced 
or has largely retreated to burrows along the banks of the creek. We 
do not yet know the range of 0. juvenilis within Potts Creek but 10 
miles downstream from Waiteville, where Route 17 crosses the 
Creek, the large riffle area there is largely populated by C. I. longulus, 
but 0. juvenilis is also present. Cambarus b. bartonii and C. acuminatus 
were not found. With the absence of the latter, it is probable that 
even that far downstream, 0. juvenilis is vicariating for C. acuminatus. 

It seems unlikely that in any part of the region a lack of food is 
responsible for depauperate populations, and even in waters low in 
calcium the crayfishes do not seem less abundant than in those high in 
calcium. One of the chief limiting factors seems rather to be available 
cover in the way of loose rocks (as opposed to bedrock), debris, and 
suitable banks into which the crayfish may burrow. For example, in 
suitable riffle areas within the range of C. I. longulus (James and 
Roanoke drainages), populations proportional to the size of the riffle 
and number of rocks of diameters greater than 10-100 mm have been 
invariably encountered. In contrast, in areas where the water flows 
rapidly over scoured bedrock, not a specimen of C. I. longulus or any 
other crayfish is to be found. Except in the upper portions of streams 
that are subject to being converted to a series of pools in dry seasons 
(such as the upper portion of Craig Creek, sta. 122), the oxygen 
content (sometimes a limiting factor) of most of the streams in this 
area approaches saturation throughout the summer. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

The only known instance of actual fluctuation of a population in 
the area is one of C. sciotensis, which occupied the riffle area on 
Sinking Creek just below the bridge on State Route 700. Since this 
is a readily accessible area for obtaining crayfishes for experimental 
work at the Mountain Lake Biological Station, hundreds of specimens 
were removed during one summer, and the following spring, hours of 
work in the riffle revealed very few adult individuals. It was not 
until early fall that the population seemed to have recovered. 

The ostracods. — Although the population size of ostracods on a 
single crayfish is unpredictable, there are few crayfishes in this area 
that do not harbor a number of ostracods. A single female specimen 
of the burrowing crayfish, Cambarus carolinus, was infested with 238 
ostracods (Dactyl ocythere chalaza and Ascetocythere asceta) ; however 
other individuals of the same species from the same locality had as 
few as a dozen. Thirty-five ostracods were recovered from a specimen 
of C. b. bartonii with a carapace length of only 14 mm. 

It is not known at what age the young crayfish may become infested 
but apparently they are susceptible to harboring the ostracods within 
a short time after leaving the parent. The smallest crayfish observed 
to be infested was C. b. bartonii with a carapace length of 12 mm 
carrying a single individual of Donnaldsoncyihere scalis. 

Repeated observations of infestations of "soft" crayfishes examined 
shortly following a molt indicate that the ostracods respond to the 
molt by leaving the old exoskeleton and making their way to the new 
one. This reinfestation is undoubtedly more nearly assured because 
of the fact that in this area most of the crayfishes devour their old 
exuviae, thereby bringing any ostracod remaining on it close to the 
vulnerable gnathal appendages of the freshly molted host. 

It is not known how crayfishes become infested nor are data available 
to indicate that the population of ostracods increases with time 
following a molt or that population size diminishes with a molt. 

In some portions of the area, a single crayfish may be infested with 
only one species of ostracod, but, more frequently, at least two species, 
and often more, occur on a single host; in such instances, they may 
tend to be concentrated on one area of the host's exoskeleton but 
there are other associations in which one of the ostracods may occur 
with equal frequency on the setae of the gnathal, ambulatory, or 
natatory areas. 

Many of the ostracods are infested with peritrichous ciliates; 
colonial (Epistylidae) and solitary stalked forms are found on the 
appendages between the valves, and the external surf aces of the valves 
are often inhabited by members of the family Urceolariidae. 

The branchiobdellids. — Branchiobdellids may occur in large 
numbers on a single adult crayfish and there are few crayfish in the 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 13 

area that do not carry at least a few worms. Brown (1961, p. 7, 
table iv) collected 100 crayfish from Sinking Creek and recovered 
from them an average of 106 worms of all species per crayfish. This 
is, by far, too high an average for all the crayfish in the stream since 
Brown chose only large and not recently molted crayfish for his 
studies. 

In this study, we present under "Specimens Examined" the number 
of animals actually studied, selected in most cases from much larger 
numbers. The collecting methods we used were not such as to allow 
us readily to determine the number of worms per crayfish, but several 
times one of us (Holt) has counted over 200 worms from a single 
crayfish from other areas. 

Little is known as to seasonal fluctuations in branchiobdellid 
populations. Young (1966, p. 576) has found that branchiobdellid 
populations decline in the winter, which is in agreement with our 
experience that, when crayfish can be taken, branchiobdellids and 
their cocoons are almost always present. Some exceptions to this 
are known: in streams polluted with waste from coal mines, branchi- 
obdellids disappear before crayfish do; although crayfish (C. b. 
bartonii) are present in the upper reaches of Little Stony Creek above 
the Cascades, branchiobdellids are often rare, perhaps because of the 
effect of severe winter temperatures or of lowered pH values in the 
boggy headwaters of the stream; and branchiobdellids are usually 
absent from recently molted crayfish and almost invariably so from 
very small animals. The scanty available evidence, then, is not 
adequate to form a basis for statements about fluctuations of branchi- 
obdellid populations. 

Little is known likewise about methods of infestation, and what is 
known is due mostly to the efforts of McManus (1960, pp. 422-424). 
He found that the worms apparently do not move to the host when 
the old exoskeleton is shed in molting and that the young crayfish 
are not infested with worms for some time after leaving their mother, 
conclusions supported by our observations and those of Young (1966, 
pp. 573-574). Apparently crayfish obtain worms when they come 
in contact with another animal bearing them. It must be noted, 
however, that these conclusions are not in accord with ours concerning 
the infestation of crayfishes by ostracods. Especially striking is the 
presence of ostracods and the absence of branchiobdellids on freshly 
molted hosts. 

As is true of the ostracods, the epizoic branchiobdellids carry in 
turn their burden of epizoites: peritrichous protozoans. In addition, 
some of the larger branchiobdellids of the area are parasitized by an 
unidentified organism, which is found usually as a spherical mass 
embedded in the worm's body wall tissues. Protozoologists who 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

have seen this parasite think it may be a fungus; mycologists have 
shown a preference for regarding it as a protozoan. Nothing else is 
known of it. 

Food Habits 

The crayfish. — No concentrated effort has been made to determine 
what the crayfishes of the area feed upon, but on the basis of a few 
observations it seems that the chief item of their diet is decaying 
plant fragments. Both in the laboratory and in the streams, the 
crayfish seem readily to accept whatever animal material becomes 
available; occasional individuals have been observed feeding on fish 
and insect larvae and not a few on crayfish of the same or different 
species. In the laboratory, they do not scorn fresh plant material 
such as lettuce. Crayfishes are as nearly omnivorous as any animals 
ever observed by us. 

The ostracods. — Marshall (1903, p. 118), who described the 
first known member of the family, Entocythere cambaria, was of the 
opinion that this ostracod lived in the gill chamber of the crayfish 
host, where it fed on the readily accessible blood flowing through 
the branchiae. In contrast, Rioja (1940a, p. 593) indicated in con- 
nection with his description of E. heterodonta (— Ankylocyihere hetero- 
donta) that this ostracod is rarely found in the gill chamber of the 
host and that he considered the members of this genus to be "simple 
epizoario," taking issue with Marshall's belief that E. cambaria is a 
parasite. Rioja (1940b, p. 58) reiterated the opinion that An. hetero- 
donta is an epizootic commensal. In 1941 (p. 194) Rioja, in dis- 
cussing the same species, indicated that he had observed the feeding 
process, which involved the use of the terminal claws of the feet 
and the apical claws of the second antenna in passing "detritus 
diversos" to the mouth. Hoff (1942, p. 64) also questioned the fact 
that Marshall's species was parasitic, indicating that Marshall's 
deduction "based on the belief that the homogeneous mass of material 
in the intestine of the ostracod is the blood of the host ... is not 
valid proof . . . since a homogeneous food mass is found as well in 
many free-living ostracods." He summarized the situation as follows : 

That the Entocythere species do feed on material in the water is evidenced by 
the finding of diatoms and other particulate organic materials in the gut. That 
the organisms are not strictly parasitic is also shown by the fact that they often 
for some reason leave the host. Individuals have been found by the writer in 
the water of crayfish burrows and by Klie (1931) in Indiana cave waters. All of 
the Entocythere species are probably commensal, but at the very most, if para- 
sites at all, are only facultative. 

Our observations support Hoff's conclusions and those of Rioja: 
in living animals both the mandibles and maxillae with their branchial 
plates seem constantly to be in motion receiving finely divided particles 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 15 

passed to them by the second antenna. The terminal claws of the 
latter collect the particles entrapped by the setae of the host. Fecal 
pellets contain mostly a finely divided brown material (the origin of 
which is not known) , small translucent refractive fragments, portions 
of diatoms, small rods (presumably bacilli), and what are believed 
to be spore cases. Furthermore we have not observed a single 
ostracod among the gill filaments, where, were they parasitic, they 
would most likely occur. 

The branchiobdellids. — There is a persistent tradition that 
branchiobdellids are parasitic; this is certainly not true of most 
species, but almost surely it is true of the gill-inhabiting forms. Small- 
wood (1906, p. 100) found the gut of Xironogiton instabilius always 
full of algae and thought he found the same for Bdellodrilus illuminatus. 
Since the latter is confined to gill chambers, Smallwood probably was 
dealing instead with a species of Cambarincola that is not gill-inhabit- 
ing. Hall (1914, p. 189), on the basis of pieces of striated muscle 
fibers found in the lumen of the intestine, reported that adults of 
Ceratodrilus thysanosomus are parasitic. These fibers, however, prob- 
ably were derived from ingested insect larvae rather than from the 
hosts. Goodnight (1940, p. 66) reviewed these and other similar 
comments and added his opinion that diatoms are the "favorite" 
food of most species. The truth is that no careful studies of the food 
and feeding habits have been made. It can, nevertheless, be said of 
the species encountered in the present study that Bdellodrilus illumi- 
natus is parasitic, feeding on the gill filaments of the host; probably 
the same is true of Cambarincola branchiophila. Pterodrilus alcicornus 
is particularly partial to diatoms, which constitute the vast bulk of 
the food of this species. The larger species of Cambarincola show 
carnivorous and cannibalistic tendencies as well. Whether or not the 
other species of the area have a specialized diet cannot be said, for 
all branchiobdellids, except the gill-inhabiting parasites, appear to 
feed simply by grazing on the unicellular algae, bacterial gloea, and 
the animals, except the ostracods, that make up the flora and fauna 
that are borne by crayfishes. 

The Crayfishes 

The key that is provided for the identification of the crayfishes of 
the region can be used reliably only in the immediate area. In order 
to facilitate the rapid identification of specimens of both sexes, the 
secondary sexual characters that are definitive for generic determi- 
nations, and some specific ones as well, have been disregarded. 

The male crayfishes of the area, like all members of the subfamilies 
of the Astacidae except the Astacinae, exhibit a cyclic dimorphism 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

(Hagen, 1870, p. 21) affecting principally the first pair of pleopods, 
the hooks on the ischiopodites of the third pereiopods, and the cheli- 
peds. In the breeding males, "Form I," the first pleopod has one 
corneous terminal element, and the hook of the ischiopodite of the 
third pereiopod is developed more strongly and usually more acutely; 
the cheliped is usually more robust and frequently the crayfish is more 
vividly colored (ignoring the fact that all freshly molted crayfishes 
are more brightly colored than at any other time.) The nonbreeding 
males are designated "Form II." 

The life cycle of Cambarus I. longulus (see Smart, 1962) is better 
known than that of any of the other species in the area, and it appears 
that it does not differ, except perhaps in details, from that of C. 
acuminatus (see Word and Hobbs, 1958, p. 436) and 0. juvenilis. The 
young of C. I. longulus hatch from the egg in early spring, undergo a 
series of molts through the summer and fall but cease to grow through- 
out the winter. The following spring, growth resumes and in Septem- 
ber juvenile males molt to the breeding stage (Form I). The first 
breeding season extends from late fall to spring when the male molts 
to the nonbreeding stage (Form II). In September it again molts 
to the first form and passes its second breeding season, molting to 
the second form in the spring. Most of the males die after the second 
breeding season but a few undergo one additional molt to the first 
form in the fall and die in the spring. Females carry their eggs during 
the late winter and early spring; however, an occasional female will 
be found in midsummer with a full complement of eggs on the pleopods. 
It is obvious, on the basis of this brief account, that first form males 
of C. 1. longulus, C. acuminatus, and 0. juvenilis are abundant in the 
late fall, winter, and early spring but are rare at other seasons. 

In contrast, first form males of C. sciotensis, C. b. bartonii, and C. 
carolinus may be collected at almost any time during the year, and 
females with eggs occur, for the most part, during the summer and 
fall months. Almost no life history data are available for C. carolinus 
and C. sciotensis. 

Additional data for all of the crayfishes treated here may be found 
in the indispensable contributions of Ortmann (1905, 1931). 

Key to Cravfishes 

1 Rostrum with marginal spines; first pleopod of male terminating in two 
straight rami Orconectes juvenilis 

1' Rostrum without marginal spines; first pleopod of male terminating in 
two short rami that are recurved at angles of approximately 90°. 

Cambarus . . 2 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 17 

2(1') Fingers of chela with weak longitudinal ridges above, broadly gaping and 
with a conspicuous tuft of setae in gap; rostrum with much thickened, 
convergent margins; areola with crowded, deep punctations. 

C. 1. longulus 

2' Fingers of chela with well-defined longitudinal ridges above and fingers 
seldom broadly gaping; if so, then no conspicuous tuft of setae between 
them; rostral margins may or may not be thickened but, if so, never 
strongly convergent; areola usually with scattered punctations, if 
crowded, never deep 3 

3(2') Lateral surfaces of carapace with a strong spine on each side immediately 
posterior to cervical groove; rostrum with margins gently converging 
mesially along almost entire length; postorbital ridges with spines. 

C. acuminatus 

3' Lateral surfaces of carapace with or without a well-developed tubercle 
on each side immediately posterior to cervical groove but never with a 
strong spine; margins of rostrum always suddenly contracted at base of 
short acumen; postorbital ridges never with spines at anterior extremities. 

4 

4(3') Rostrum with thickened subparallel margins suddenly contracting to form 
right angles (in mature specimens) at base of acumen . . C. sciotensis 

4' Rostrum with slender or moderately thickened margins that never form 
right angles at base of acumen, angles obtuse or contractions rounded . 5 

5(4') Areola at least eight times longer than broad; inner margin of palm of 
chela with cristiform row of tubercles flanked above by at least one or 
two additional tubercles; color red; and seldom found outside of complex 
burrows except in evenings after heavy rains when they wander over 
land C. carolinus 

5' Areola never so much as eight times longer than broad; inner margin of 
palm of chela with single row of appressed tubercles with occasional 
two or three scattered tubercles flanking it above; color shades of tan, 
green, or blue but never red; usually found in flowing water under stones 
or debris or in burrows along banks of streams or ponds. C. b. bartonii 

Genus Cambarus Erichson, 1846 

Diagnosis.— Hobbs (1965, p. 267) stated: 

First pleopod of first form male symmetrical and terminating in two or three 
distinct parts, usually only two (mesial process and central projection) bent 
caudally or caudolaterally with principal axes of shaft and each ramus forming 
angles of approximately 90 degrees; if mesial process and central projection 
directed at angles of less than 90 degrees to main shaft, central projection never 
comprising more than % of total length of appendage or bent at angle of less than 
45 degrees; central projection corneous and flattened laterally; mesial process 
mostly non-corneous, frequently inflated; caudal process, when present, forming 
knob-like prominence at caudolateral base of central projection. Hooks present 
on ischiopodites of third pereiopods only except in Cambarus dissitus Penn (1955, 
p. 73) in which also present on those of fourth pereiopods. Opposable margins 
of ischiopodites of third maxillipeds with teeth. 



244-775—67- 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Cambarus acuminatus Faxon 

Figure 1 
Cambarus acuminatus Faxon, 18S4, p. 113. 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum gently converging from base to 
apex, not thickened, and without marginal spines; areola never more 
than six, usually three or four, times longer than broad with many 
shallow punctations; suborbital angle acute. Chela with subovate 
fingers bearing distinct median longitudinal ridges on upper surfaces; 
fingers not conspicuously gaping and never provided basally with 
conspicuous tuf t of setae ; inner margin of palm with two well-defined 
rows of prominent tubercles. 

Range. — Atlantic watershed from southern Maryland to South 
Carolina in the lower mountains, piedmont, and upper coastal plain. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 235 specimens in 25 col- 
lections from tributaries of the James River and North Fork of the 
Roanoke River in Craig and Montgomery Counties, respectively 
(sta. 20, 27, 29-33, 35, 87-93, and 112) at altitudes from 402 to 535 m. 

Associates. — Cambarus acuminatus was collected with C. I. longulus 
at all of the stations except 87 and with C. b. bartonii except at 20, 27, 
30, 31, 33, 88, 112. 

In the James drainage, ostracod associates include Dn. ardis at 
stations 20, 27, 30-33, 35; Dn. ileata at 20, 29, 31-33, 35; Dt. suteri 
at 27, 30, 31, 33, 35; E. internotalis at 30, 31, 35; and in the Roanoke 
drainage the latter at 88, 90; An. ancyla at 88, 89, 92, 93; Dn. truncata 
at 87, 88, 90, 91, 93; and Dt. falcata at 87-93, 112. 

In the James drainage branehiobdellid associates include C. philadel- 
phica at stations 20, 27, 29, 32, 33, 35; A. koronaeus at 29, 30; C. 
branchiophila at 20, 29; B. illuminatus and C. holostoma at 20; and in 
the Roanoke drainage A. koronaeus, C. branchiophila, and C. philadel- 
phica at 87-93, 112; B. illuminatus at 87; C.jallax at 87-89, 91, 92; 
and Xd. jormosus at 88-92, and 112. 

Remarks. — This species is more abundant in the larger streams in 
the Roanoke and James drainages, where it occurs in pools, under 
larger stones, in debris among the marginal vegetation, and in sub- 
merged tangles of roots along the banks. It is also found in tunnels 
along the shore, particularly in areas where there are steep clay banks 
on the outer sides of bends in the stream. In the Mountain Lake 
area it shares such habitats with C. b. bartonii. 

Like C. I. longulus, most of the population of C. acuminatus dis- 
appears from the shallow water of streams in November and does not 
reappear until spring. Most, if not all, of the individuals retreat 
into burrows that presumably they construct with the onset of cold 
weather. 

In Virginia, first form males have been found every month of the 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



19 



year; however, from late September to May, most of the adult male 
population is in the first form, whereas such males are much rarer 
from June through August. Females with eggs occur from March to 
July, although they are very rare after mid-June. 




Figure 1. — Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Cambarus acuminatus. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Cambarus bartonii bartonii (Fabricius) 

Figure 2 

Astacus bartonii Fabricius, 1798, p. 407. 

Astacus (Ca?nbarus) bartonii Erichson, 1846, p. 97. 

Cambarus bartonii Girard, 1852, p. 88. 

Cambarus bartonii bartonii Faxon, 1890, p. 622 [by implication]. 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum subparallel or slightly convergent 
to base of acumen where suddenly contracted (but rounded), thickened 
but without marginal spines; areola never more than six, usually 
four or five, times longer than broad with widely spaced punctations ; 
suborbital angle usually acute. Chela with subovate fingers bearing 
distinct median longitudinal ridges on upper surfaces; fingers may be 
slightly gaping but never provided basally with conspicuous tuft of 
setae; inner margin of palm with single row of tubercles, occasional 
specimens with trace of second row or few scattered tubercles. 

Range. — From New Brunswick, Canada, to northern Georgia; in 
the southeast mostly in the mountains and piedmont. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 1200 specimens in 97 
collections from 87 stations. Unquestionably this species is more 
widespread in this area than any of the others for it is found in all 
three drainage systems and at altitudes from 1219 to 427 m. It 
was found at all stations except 11, 13, 15, 18, 20, 27, 30, 31, 33, 
40-43, 55, 56, 58, 61, 62, 65, 67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 78-81, 84, 86, 88, 102, 
104-106, 109, 112, 116, 126, and 127. 

Associates. — In the James and Roanoke drainages it was as- 
sociated with C. I. longulus at stations 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 21-23, 25, 29, 
32, 34, 35, 37, 89-93, 123, 124; with C. acuminatum at 29, 32, 35, 87, 
89-93; and with 0. juvenilis at 7. In the New River drainage it 
was associated with C. sciotensis at Stations 3, 5, 19, 44, 50, 54, 57, 

59, 63, 64, 66, 95-97, 107, and 108. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at stations 89, 92, 93; Dn. 
ardis at 10, 12, 21, 23, 25, 32, 35, 37, 123, 124; Dn. ileata at 3-10, 
12, 14, 16, 19, 21-26, 28, 29, 32, 34, 35, 37, 44-48, 50-52, 54, 57, 59, 

60, 63, 64, 66, 69, 71, 74, 76, 77, 94-99, 107, 108, 110, 113, 117, 119, 
122-125; Dn. scalis at 1, 2, 7, 17, 38, 39, 44, 68, 82, 83, 100, 101, 
103, 114, 115; Dn. truncata at 53, 54, 57, 69, 71, 87, 90, 91, 93, 94, 
111; Dt.falcata at 85, 87, 89-93, 111; Dt. suteri at 35, 124; E. inter- 
notalus at 23, 35, 90; E. kanawhaensis at 44; and P. phyma at 3, 
5, 7, 24, 38, 44, 64, 82, 101, and 103. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 14, 19, 
29, 52, 69, 71, 77, 87, 89-93, 98, 110, 111, 125; B. illuminatus at 5, 
16, 17, 19, 22, 34, 44, 45, 48, 51, 59, 68, 76, 87, 97, 115, 120-122, 
125; C. branchiophila at 24, 29, 34, 57, 63, 66, 87, 89-93, 97; C.jallax 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



21 



at 3, 5, 24, 49, 54, 57, 63, 66, 71, 87, 89, 91, 92, 95-97; C. holostoma 
at 7, 10, 19, 21-23, 25, 37; C. ingens at 5, 54, 64, 95, 97; C. philadelphica 
at 3, 5, 8-10, 12, 14, 16, 17, 19, 21, 22, 24-26, 28, 29, 32, 34-37, 39, 
44-46, 48, 50-54, 59, 60, 66, 68, 69, 71, 74, 76, 77, 87, 89-94, 98, 107, 
108, 110, 111, 113, 115, 118, 119-125; P. alcicornus at 3-5, 19, 24, 




Figure 2. — Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Cambarus b. bartonii. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

25, 63, 64, 66, 74, 76, 95, 97; Xd. formosus at 10, 21, 89-92; and 
Xg. instabilius at 3-5, 7, 9, 12, 21, 22, 24, 37, 44, 46, 53, 54, 60, 64, 
56, 97, 121, and 123. 

Remarks. — As indicated above, C. b. bartonii is the most widely 
distributed crayfish in the area, abounding in mountain brooks at 
high elevations; in the smaller feeder streams at lower elevations 
it is the sole crayfish inhabitant. As the cascading waters give way 
to alternating riffles and pools or as the small feeder tributaries join 
or become larger streams, other crayfishes encounter the C. b. bartonii 
populations, and adult of this species, for the most part, occur only 
along the littoral areas of the stream, where they may be found under 
stones or burrowing into the banks. The absence of C. b. bartonii 
from the collections in larger streams at lower elevations probably 
does not indicate its absence from the streams, but only the fact 
that it is rarer, and its habits at these elevations make specimens 
much more difficult to obtain. 

Especially around springs, where the winter temperatures of the 
water are not so low as in streams, this species is. active throughout 
the year, and even in the streams it is more easily routed from its 
lair than is C. I. longulus. Where the streams cut steep banks through 
clay deposits, frequently C. b. bartonii and C. acuminatus dig tunnels 
to the extent that the bank below the high water level is riddled with 
their passageways, thereby hastening the erosion of the bank. During 
the summer months, when some of the headwater streams are reduced 
to a series of pools, C. b. bartonii digs burrows in the stream bed much 
like the winter retreats of C. I. longulus. 

First form males have been collected from April to October and in 
December. Females with eggs were found in June, July, and August, 
and with young in August. 

Cambarus carolinus (Erichson) 

Figure 3 
Astacus (Cambarus) carolinus Erichson, 1846, p. 96. 
Cambarus carolinus Girard, 1852, p. 88 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum slightly convergent to base of 
acumen, where suddenly contracted to form obtuse angles at base of 
acumen, neither thickened nor with marginal spines; areola always 
at least eight times longer than broad with scattered punctations; sub- 
orbital angle weak and obtuse. Chela with subovate fingers bearing 
distinct median longitudinal ridges on upper surfaces; fingers only 
slightly gaping and never provided basally with conspicuous tuft of 
setae; inner margin of palm with two rows of tubercles. 

Range. — Not at all understood but reported from Greenville 
County, S.C., northward in the mountains to Virginia, Pennsylvania, 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 23 

and Kentucky. At least two color phases are involved, and perhaps 
two or more races should be recognized. 

Specimens examined. — 135 specimens in 12 collections from the 
following stations: 8, 22, 40, 41, and 127, at elevations of 585 to 1250 
meters. Three of these lie in the New and two in the James drainage 
systems. 

Associates. — Cambarus carolinus was collected with no other 
crayfish, for it is the only primary burrowing species in the area. 
There is little likelihood of its being found with any other species in 
the region except possibly C. b. bartonii. 

Ostracod associates include As. asceta and Dt. chalaza, which have 
been found with no other crayfish except C. carolinus and which were 
with it in all five of the localities in which it was collected. 

Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus and C. fallax at 
station 40, and only the former at 41. 

Remarks. — While our knowledge of all of the crayfishes in the 
region is limited, data on C. carolinus is almost totally lacking. The 
rocky soil in the area makes digging for these animals highly impracti- 
cable, and most of our specimens were collected on foggy or rainy 
evenings when the crayfishes had left then' burrows and were crawling 
about in the grass on the golf course (sta. 41) and in the road (sta. 40). 

Cambarus carolinus seldom invades bodies of open water. In some 
12 years of observing the streams in the area, we have seen only one 
individual (juvenile) in such a habitat — at Hunters Branch on the 
grounds of the Biological Station one evening following a heavy rain. 

Several attempts to extricate individuals of this species from bur- 
rows in the vicinity of the Mountain Lake Biological Station proved 
totally unsuccessful. The same technique used there, however, was 
most successful in a cleared, grass-covered area near the junction of 
White Rock Branch and Big Stony Creek (sta. 127). Taking care 
not to allow the burrow to become clogged with earth, a shovel was 
used to open the burrow to the water table, and the water was 
thoroughly roiled. Within a short time, the crayfish came to the 
exposed area and its antennae could be seen whipping to and fro just 
below the surface film. Making a quick grab, the observer caught 
the animal. In the area of the Biological Station, the crayfish were 
never observed coming to the exposed opening as they character- 
istically did here. 

The depths of the burrows at station 127 were not determined, but 
at about 60 cm below the surface some of them contained chambers 
15 to 20 cm in diameter. From one large chamber, 12 juveniles 
(with carapace lengths ranging from 11 to 18 mm) and an adult 
female, presumably the mother, were taken. 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 3.-Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Cambarus carolinus. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 25 

First form males of C. carolinus have been collected in the Mountain 
Lake area in June, July, and August (elsewhere also in April and 
September through December). A female with eggs was found in 
June, and the young mentioned above in July. 

Cambarus longulus longulus Girard 

Figure 4 
Cambarus longulus Girard, 1852, p. 90. 
Cambarus longulus longulus Hay, 1899, p. 959 [by implication]. 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum gently convergent from base to 
apex, distinctly thickened and without marginal spines; areola never 
more than six times longer than broad, usually about three and a 
half, with crowded deep punctations; suborbital angle lacking. 
Chela with subcylindrical fingers lacking distinct median longitudinal 
ridges on upper surfaces; fingers gaping and usually provided basally 
with conspicuous tuft of setae; inner margin of palm with single, 
strongly depressed, row of tubercles (frequently scarcely rising above 
contour of palm). 

Range. — In the Atlantic watershed from the James River in 
Virginia to the Yadkin River in North Carolina in the low mountains 
and upper piedmont provinces. Details of range and variation of 
this and the other two subspecies of C. longulus are discussed by 
James (1966). 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 450 specimens in 35 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 6, 7, 9-13, 20-23, 25, 27, 29-35, 37, 
88-93, 112, 123, and 124 in tributaries of the James River and North 
Fork of the Roanoke River in Craig, Giles, and Montgomery Coun- 
ties, Va., and from tributaries of Potts Creek, Monroe County, 
W. Va. These stations lie at altitudes between 402 and 686 m. 

Associates. — Crayfish associates include C. acuminatus at stations 
20, 27, 29-33, 35, 88-93, 112; C. b. bartonii at 6, 7, 9, 10, 12, 21-23, 
25, 29, 32, 34, 35, 37, 89-93, 123, 124; and 0. juvenilis at 7. 

In the 23 localities in the James drainage, C. I. longulus was found 
-m.th.Dn. ardis at stations 10-13, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 30-33, 35, 37, 123, 
124; Dn. ileata at 6, 7, 9-12, 20-23, 25, 29, 31-35, 37, 123, 124; Dt. 
suteri at 27, 30, 31, 33, 35, 124; and E. internotalus at 23, 30, 31, and 
35. In the seven localities in the North Fork of the Roanoke River, 
C. I. longulus was associated with Dt. jalcata at all stations (88-93, 
112); Dn. truncata at 88, 90, 91, 93; and An. ancyla at 88, 89, 92, and 
93. 

Branchiobdellid associates in the James drainage include A. koro- 
naeus at stations 29, 30; B. illuminatus at 20, 22, 34; C. branchiophila 
at 20, 29; C. heterognatha at 34, 123; C. holostoma at 7, 10, 11, 13, 
20-23, 25, 37; C. philadelphica at 9, 10, 12, 20-22, 25, 27, 29, 32-35, 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



37, 123, 124; P. alcicornus at 25; Xd. formosus at 10, 21; and Xg. 
instabilius at 7, 9, 11-13, 21, 22, 37, 123. In the Roanoke drainage, 
A. koronaeus, C. branchiophila, and C. philadelphica were found at 
stations 88-93, 112; Xd. formosus at 88-92, 112; and C. fallax at 88, 
89, 91, and 92. 




Figure 4. — Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Cambarus I. longulus. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 27 

Remarks. — This crayfish is the dominant decapod inhabitant of 
the riffle areas in the James and Roanoke river systems. Except 
from November to April, this small crayfish can be found in almost 
every riffle in the lower mountains and piedmont. During the colder 
months, individuals retreat to their burrows beneath stones in the 
riffles. At least some of the tunnels descend to depths greater than 
30 cm. Because of the sand, gravel, and interlocking stones sub- 
merged in the current, it is exceedingly difficult to dissect a burrow. 
Even though we have removed specimens from such burrows, we are 
not at all certain that we determined the full extent of the excavations. 
In the spring, the adult males and juveniles leave the burrows first; 
the females remain in their tunnels, where presumably they lay and 
hatch their eggs before venturing into open water. Not until mid- 
May can one sample the riffle and expect to obtain a knowledge of 
all the components of the C. I. longulus population. 

The life history of this crayfish has been briefly outlined above; 
for details, see Smart (1962). 

Cambarus sciotensis Rhoades 

Figure 5 
Cambarus bartoni sciotensis Rhoades, 1944, p. 96. 
Cambarus sciotensis Hobbs, 1964, p. 189. 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum subparallel or slightly convergent 
to base of acumen where suddenly contracted to form angles of 
approximately 90° (or with slightly protruding knobs), thickened but 
without marginal spines; areola never more than six, usually about 
four and a half times longer than broad with deep, but not crowded, 
punctations; suborbital angle obtuse. Chela with subovate fingers 
bearing distinct median longitudinal ridges on upper surfaces; fingers 
may or may not be gaping but never provided basally with conspicuous 
tuft of setae; inner margin of palm with two rows of tubercles. 

Range. — Apparently discontinuous; in the Scioto River in Ohio 
and in the New River system in Virginia and southeastern West 
Virginia (both areas in the Ohio drainage system). 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 450 specimens in 43 
collections from the following stations: 3, 5, 15, 18, 19, 43, 44, 50, 
54-59, 61-67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 78-81, 84, 86, 95-97, 102, 104-109, 116, 
and 126. All of them are in the New River drainage system at 
elevations of 427 to 899 m. 

Associates. — The only crayfish associate was C. b. bartonii, which 
was found at the following stations: 3, 5, 19, 44, 50, 54, 57, 59, 63, 
64, 66, 95-97, 107, and 108. 

Ostracod associates include Dn. ileata at all stations except 70 and 
78; Dn. scalis at 44; Dn. truncata at 54-57; Dt. daphnioides at 70, 72, 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 5. — Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Cambarus sciotensis. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 29 

73, 75, 79-81, 116; E. kanawhaensis at 44, 126; and P. phyma at 3, 
5, 44, and 64. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 18, 19, 
72; A. legaeus at 81; B. illuminatus at 5, 19, 44, 59, 86, 97; C. branchio- 
phila at 15, 18, 43, 55, 57, 58, 63, 65-67, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 97, 104, 
116, 126; C.fallax at 3, 5, 15, 18, 43, 54-58, 61, 63, 65-67, 70, 72, 75, 
78, 79, 81, 86, 95-97, 126; C. heterognatha at 3, 5, 61, 63-67, 70, 72, 
78-81, 86, 97, 105, 106, 116, 126; C. holostoma at 18, 19; C. ingens at 
5, 15, 18, 54, 58, 61, 64, 67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 79-81, 86, 95, 97, 104, 116; 
C. philadelphica at 3, 5, 19, 44, 50, 54-56, 59, 66, 106-109; P. alcicorwus 
at 3, 5, 15, 18, 19, 43, 58, 61, 63-67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97, 
104, 105; and Xg. instabilius at 3, 5, 44, 54, 61, 64, 86, 95, and 97. 

Remarks. — In the New River system, this crayfish vicariates for 
C. acuminatus of the Roanoke and James drainages, and with the 
absence of the riffle-inhabiting C. I. longulus invades such habitats to 
a greater extent than does C. acuminatus. In marked contrast to 
C. I. longulus, C. sciotensis seems to be active throughout the year, 
never burrowing except to excavate shallow depressions beneath rocks. 

First form males have been collected in March, April, and June to 
October. Females with eggs were found in July and August, and 
with young in August. 

Genus Orconectes Cope, 1872 

Diagnosis. — First pleopod of first form male terminating in two 
parts, which may be straight or gently curved, short or long spines, 
blades, or subspatulate projections. If terminals bent so much as at 
right angle, bend never accomplished adjacent to shaft. Male with 
hooks on ischiopodites of third pereiopods and occasionally on those 
of fourth. Third maxillipeds not conspicuously elongate and ischiopo- 
dite with row of teeth along mesial margin. 

Orconectes juvenilis (Hagen) 

Figure 6 
Cambarus juvenilis Hagen, 1870, p. 66, figs. 29-33, 157. 
Orconectes juvenilis Hobbs, 1942, p. 352 [by implication]. 

Diagnosis. — Margins of rostrum subparallel or slightly convergent, 
not thickened, and with pair of marginal spines at base of acumen, 
upper surface provided with distinct, median, longitudinal carina. 
Lateral surfaces of carapace with pair of spines immediately caudal to 
cervical groove; postorbital ridges terminating cephalically in spines; 
suborbital angles lacking. Inner margin of palm of chela with two 
closely appressed rows of tubercles with others above. First pleopod 
of first form male extending cephalad to base of first pereiopod when 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

abdomen is flexed; central projection spiculiform and both it and 
mesial process straight, the former slightly curved caudally near tip; 
cephalic surface of shaft with prominent shoulder just proximal to 
base of central projection. Annulus ventralis with transversely oval 
depression extending cephalically beneath cephalic wall, latter 
bearing median cleft. 

Range. — From Ohio and Kentucky southward to northwest 
Georgia west of the Alleghenies, and in the headwaters of the James 
River in Craig County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — 300 specimens in 22 collections from 
stations 7 and 42. The occurrence of 0. juvenilis in the Mountain 
Lake area represents two probable introductions (see p. 10 and 
below), and that at station 7 is the first record of the presence of 
this species on eastern slopes of the Allegheny Mountains. These 
stations are located at elevations of 671 and 1180 m respectively. 

After this manuscript had been completed, two specimens of 0. 
juvenilis were found in the New River, 500 m south of the mouth of 
Spruce Run in the vicinity of a fishing camp. 

Associates. — At station 7, 0. juvenilis was found with C. b. bartonii 
and C. I. longulus; in Mountain Lake (sta. 42) it is not accompanied 
by any other crayfish at the present time. 

In station 42, neither ostracods nor branchiobdellids infest the 
members of this population. At station 7, the ostracod associates 
include Dn. ileata, Dn. scalis, and P. phyma; the branchiobdellid 
associates, C. holostoma and Xg. instabilius. 

Remarks. — With regard to the population of 0. juvenilis in 
Mountain Lake (see Hobbs and Walton, 1966a), it is perhaps of 
interest that in 1933 C. b. bartonii was the only crayfish inhabiting it. 
The latter was, and is still, the only crayfish in the small stream, 
"Pond Drain," flowing from the Lake. In 1933, members of one of 
the classes in aquatic biology at the Biological Station brought 
collections of animals from the vicinities of their homes and released 
them in the Lake. In 1947, three species were found to be present 
and with few exceptions were restricted to different regions of the 
Lake. Orconectes juvenilis occurred along the east and to a lesser 
degree along the south side; C. acuminatus, never observed by us to 
be abundant, was found only along the north side and never closer 
than 100 yards from the outlet; C. b. bartonii was found in the area 
of the outlet, at the northwest corner. According to our observations, 
crayfishes have never been abundant along the west side (perhaps 
they are inaccessible because of the greater depth of the water), and 
we have no records of what species, if any, frequent this area. By 
1954, there were no C. acuminatus to be found in any of the littoral 
areas, and it seemed that 0. juvenilis was invading the north side; 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



31 




Figufe 6.— Dorsal view of carapace and chelipeds: Orconectes juvenilis. 



',V2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL Mi'si.i'M vol. laa 

0, h. bctrtonii was still present in the vicinity of the outlet, but occa- 
sional individuals of 0. juvenilis were also there. Since L957, no 
crayfish except 0. juvenilis has been observed by us in the entire lake. 
We have not done any trapping, and it would be interesting to know 
whether or not populations of C. 6. bartonii and ( \ acuminatus bave 
found congenial niches at greater depths or whether, as we believe, 
they have been totally replaced by 0. juvenilis. 

The presence of 0. juvenilis in New River is possibly due to very 
recent migrations upstream from West Virginia. Had it been in 
this portion of the river for some years, it is likely that with all of 
the collecting thai has been done in the river in the Mountain Lake 
area, it would have been encountered by one of as. While natural 
migration might furnish an entirely plausible explanation for its 

occurrence here, the fact that the two specimens came from near a 
fishing camp does not strengthen the possibility. 

Throughout the range o\' the species, firsl form males have been 
collected in January and from A piil through November. Females 
with eggs were found only in April. 

Although three ostracods and two hranchiohdellids are associated 
with (). juvenilis at station 7, it seems unlikely that any of them 
reached this area o\\ this crayfish. It seems more probable that the 
infestations occurred after the introduction of the crayfish. 

The Ostracods 

It is necessary in most instances to rely on the structure of the 
copulatory complex o( the male for the ^identification of entocytherids, 
and (his cannot be satisfactorily done unless the specimen has been 
cleared (temporary mounts in glycerine or permanent mounts in 
balsam or some comparable medium). 8 The copulatory complex 
consists of a pair of modified appendages that during amplexus are 
so arranged that the clasping apparatus (tig. 7a) y^ each is directed 
anteriorly but which at most other times are rotated 180° with the 
clasping apparatus directed posteriorly. Orientation in descriptions 
is that of the clasping position. Figure 7(/ represents a composite 
copulatory complex that includes all of the 1 secondary sexual char- 
acters utilized in the following key. 

Whereas in the crayfishes it is tin 1 male that is dimorphic, in the 
entocytherids the female exists in two "forms": v i) the copulatory 
or biunguis female, which, to our knowledge, is the form that is 
always the partner in amplexing pairs (.and perhaps should be con- 
sidered i lie last "larval instar") and may be recognized by the 4-seg- 

1 Vtosl o( our specimens have been prepared by dehydrating them with glacial 
aoetio aoid transferring the Bpeoimen from formalin, water, or alcohol direotly 
to the aoid olearing them in methyl salioylate and mounting them in balsam. 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



33 



merited second antenna bearing only two terminal claws: .(2) the 
gravid <>r triunguis female, which frequently contains eggs and may 
be recognized by the apparently 5-segmented antenna bearing three 
terminal claws. 




Figure 7. — Entocythcrids: a, generalized peniferum illustrating structures mentioned in key; 

b, terminal claws of antenna of female Entocythere inlernotalus. Lateral views of shells: 

c, female Ascelocylhere asccla; d, female Donnaldsoncythere scalis; e, female Dactylocylhert 
chalaza; }, male Dl. daphnioides. Peniferum: g, Ankylocylhcrc ancyla. Aniicula and 
J-shapcd rods: h, Dt. suteri; i, Dl. chalaza; j, Dl. falcala; k, Dt. daphnioides. 



Unfortunately, few female entocytherids can be identified unless 
they are found in amplexus or can definitely be associated with Hie 
male. Few generic determinations <>f females are possible; however, 

2 1 1 778 07 A 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

in the Mountain Lake region, the triunguis females of the four species 
of the genus Dactylocythere may be recognized by the presence of an 
amiculum (figs. 7e, h-k) and the posteroventral projection on the 
shell of Dt. daphnioides (fig. If), Donnaldsoncythere by the small 
corneous tubercles in the posterodorsal portion of the body, Ascetocy- 
there by the small rounded prominence partially surrounded by an 
amorphous mass of refractile material in a corresponding position 
(fig. 7c), and Entocythere by the pectinate projection at the base of 
the terminal claws of the second antenna (fig. 7b). 

Key to Male Ostracods 

1 Copulatory complex provided with finger guard 2 

1' Copulatory complex lacking finger guard 6 

2(1) Peniferum without accessory groove; peniferum bulbiform distally. 

Phymocythere phyma 

2' Peniferum with accessory groove; peniferum variable but never bulbiform. 

Dactylocythere ... 3 

3(2') Accessory groove extending distinctly dorsal to spermatic loop. 

Dt. falcata 

3' Accessory groove extending approximately to dorsal level of spermatic 
loop • 4 

4(3) Posteroventral margin of shell with conspicuous prominence. 

Dt. daphnioides 

4' Posteroventral margin of shell without conspicuous prominence . . 5 

5(4') Junction of horizontal and vertical rami of clasping apparatus con- 
spicuously thickened, and horizontal ramus provided with prominent 
tooth near junction Dt. chalaza 

5' Junction of horizontal and vertical rami of clasping apparatus not con- 
spicuously thickened and horizontal ramus not provided with prominent 
tooth near junction. Dt. suteri 

6(1') Distal portion of peniferum with prominent flange and finger-like pro- 
jection Ascetocythere asceta 

6' Distal portion of peniferum never with prominent flange or finger-like 
projection 7 

7(6') External border of horizontal ramus of clasping apparatus with long 
talon Ankylocythere ancyl a 

7' External border of horizontal ramus of clasping apparatus entire . . 8 

8(7') Horizontal and vertical rami of clasping apparatus distinct and forming 
right angle; internal border of horizontal ramus serrate along entire 
margin Entocythere ... 9 

8' Horizontal and vertical rami of clasping apparatus not distinct and 

joining in angle greater than right angle; internal border of horizontal 
ramus never with more than three teeth. 

Donnaldsoncythere ... 10 

9(8') Mesial surface of junction of horizontal and vertical rami of clasping 
apparatus thickened and armed with one or more teeth or ridges. 

E. internotalus 

9' Mesial surface of junction of horizontal and vertical rami of clasping 

apparatus not thickened and without teeth or ridges. 

E. kanawhaensis 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 35 

10(8') Distal extremity of peniferum acuminate Dn. ardis 

10' Distal extremity of peniferum truncate, rounded, or scooplike ... 11 

11(10') Distal extremity of peniferum scooplike Dn. scalis 

11' Distal extremity of peniferum truncate or rounded 12 

12(11') Distal extremity of peniferum truncate Dn. truncata 

12' Distal extremity of peniferum rounded Dn. ileata 

Genus Ankylocythere Hart, 1962 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex without finger guard; extensions 
of two rami of clasping apparatus never forming angle greater than 90° 
and bearing one or more teeth or excrescences on both internal and 
external borders of horizontal ramus; peniferum without accessory 
groove, variable, sometimes cleft distally but never with bulbous 
terminal or sub terminal enlargement. Females without J -shaped rod, 
amiculum, or other comparable structure; claws of second antenna 
simple. 

Ankylocythere ancyla Crawford 

Figure 7g 
Ankylocythere ancyla Crawford, 1965, pp. 148-149, figs. 1-3, 6, 7. 

Diagnosis. — Horizontal ramus of clasping apparatus with single 
tooth on internal border proximal to midlength and talon arising from 
external border much proximal to tooth on internal border; talon 
extending distally subparallel to ramus with tip reaching level just 
distal to tooth; ramus terminating in two upturned teeth; distal 
extremity of peniferum directed ventrally and shallowly excavate. 

Range. — From the Savannah River drainage in South Carolina to 
the Roanoke River drainage in Virginia. 

Specimens examined. — 60 specimens in eight collections from the 
following stations: 88, 89, 92, and 93. All localities are in the North 
Fork of the Roanoke River drainage, at elevations of 439 to 475 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarus acuminatus and C. I. longulus 
were associated with this ostracod in all stations, and C. b. bartonii 
was also present at stations 89, 92, and 93. 

In all stations Dt. falcata was present, and at stations 88 and 93 
An. ancyla was also collected with Dn. truncata and at station 88 with 
E. internotalis. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus, C. branchiophila, 
C. philadelphica at stations 88, 89, 92, 93; and C. jallax and Xd. 
formosus at 88, 89, and 92. 

Genus Ascetocy there Hart, 1962 

Diagnosis. — Hobbs and Hart (1966, p. 37) stated: 

Terminal tooth of mandible with cusps. Copulatory complex without finger 
guard; peniferum extending ventrally much beyond clasping apparatus, elongate, 
244-775 — 67 4 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

comparatively slender, with subterminal bulbous enlargement bearing one 
(anterior) or several projections; penis complex consisting of separate dorsal 
spermatic and ventral prostatic elements; spermatic element always shorter than 
clasping apparatus; accessory groove lacking. Clasping apparatus well developed, 
not always clearly divisible into vertical and horizontal rami; external border of 
horizontal ramus entire, internal border with two, three, or no teeth along apical 
half, if present often grouped far distally with three apical denticles. 

Ascetocythere asceta (Hobbs and Walton) 

Figures 7c, 8a 

Entocythere asceta Hobbs and Walton, 1962, pp. 43-44, figs. 1-4. 
Ascetocythere asceta Hart, 1962, p. 128. 

Diagnosis. — Hobbs and Hart (1966, p. 39) stated: 

Peniferum with three prominences extending from subterminal bulbous expan- 
sion — anterior process delicate, club-shaped, extending anteroventrally, from 
cephalic surface; ventral process large, finger-like, with distinct angular flange 
near its midlength, and directed ventrally; posterior process small, rounded, and 
situated at posterior base of ventral process; prominent penis guide (acute pro- 
jection) lying between flange and anterior process; penis reaching surface anteriorly 
dorsal to flange. Vertical ramus of clasping apparatus less than % of total length 
of apparatus; internal border of horizontal ramus with two teeth along distal third 
with distal tooth almost midway between proximal tooth and apex. 

Range. — Known from crayfish burrows in the James and New 
river systems in Craig and Giles Counties, Va., and from Monroe 
County, W. Va. 

Specimens examined. — 275 specimens in 12 collections from the 
following stations: 8, 22, 40, 41, and 127, at elevations of 585 to 
1250 m. 

Host and associates. — Ascetocythere asceta is apparently restricted 
to the single host Cambarus carolinus. 

Ostracod associates include but one species, Dt. chalaza, with which 
it was found in all five localities. 

Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus at stations 40, 
41, and 127; and C.fallax at 40. 

Genus Donnaldsoncythere Rioja, 1942 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex without finger guard; clasping 
apparatus frequently not divisible into vertical and horizontal rami 
and angle formed by extensions of two always greater than 90°; 
external border of horizontal ramus (or distal half of apparatus) 
entire and internal border never with more than three teeth near 
distal end, distal extremity terminating in from 3 to 10 serrations or 
emarginations ; peniferum lacking accessory groove; corneous penis 
curved at almost right angle near midlength with proximal extremity 
level, or almost level, with base of clasping apparatus. Length of 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



37 



penis greater than half that of clasping apparatus. Female without 
J-shaped rod or amiculum but with small corneous tube directed 
ventrally or posteroventrally in corresponding position; claws of 
second antenna simple. 

Donnaldsoncy there ardis Hobbs and Walton 

Figure 86 

Donnaldsoncythere ardis Hobbs and Walton, 1963, pp. 364-368, figs. 6-9, 10, 26. 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex with peniferum terminating 
ventrally in conspicuously slender, pointed extension; clasping 
apparatus only slightly curved along shaft, not divisible into vertical 




Figure 8. — Penifera of entocytherids: a, Ascetocythere asceta; b, Donnaldsoncythere ardis; 

c, Dn. ileata. 

and horizontal rami, distal portion slightly enlarged and directed 
anteroventrally, internal border with two teeth and apical border 
with four serrations. 

Range. — The James River drainage in Craig, Giles, and Mont- 
gomery Counties, Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 175 specimens from 18 
collections in the following stations: 10-13, 20, 21, 23, 25, 27, 30-33, 
35, 37, 123, and 124, at elevations from 402 to 622 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Donnaldsoncythere ardis was associated 
with Cambarus I. longulus in all stations; with C. b. bartonii at stations 
10, 12, 21, 23, 25, 32, 35, 37, 123, 124; and with C. acuminatus at 20, 
27, 30-33, and 35. 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Ostracods with which it was associated include Dn. ileata at all 
stations except 13, 27, 30; Dt. suteri and E. internotalus at 30, 31, 35; 
Dt. suteri at 27, 33, 124; and E. internotalus at 23. 

Branchiobdellid associates include C. philadelphica at stations 10, 
12, 20, 21, 25, 27, 32, 33, 35, 37, 123, 124; C. holostoma at 10, 11, 13, 
20, 21, 23, 25, 37; Xg. instabilius at 11-13, 21, 37, 123; Xd. jformosus 
at 10, 21; A. koronaeus at 30; B. illuminatus and C. branchiophila at 
20; C. heterognatha at 123; and P. alcicornus at 25. 

Donnaldsoncythere ileata Hobbs and Walton 

Figure 8c 
Donnaldsoncythere ileata Hobbs and Walton, 1963, pp. 364, 368, figs. 11-15, 23. 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex with peniferum terminating 
ventrally in rounded extension, with posterior thickened border; 
anterior border always rounded; clasping apparatus with proximal 
shaft portion almost straight and distal third directed at angle of 
90° to 135° to shaft; internal border of distal fourth with two teeth 
and terminal margin with four or five serrations. 

Range. — Tributaries of the James, New, and Roanoke Rivers in 
Craig, Giles, and Montgomery Counties, Va., and Monroe County, 
W.Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 3000 specimens from 100 
collections from the following stations: 3-12, 14-16, 18-26, 28, 29, 
31-35, 37, 43-48, 50-52, 54-67, 69, 71-77, 79-81, 84, 86, 94-99, 102, 
104-110, 113, 116, 117, 119, and 122-126, at elevations of 415 to 899 m. 

Hosts and associates. — In one or more stations, it was associated 
with every species of crayfish in the area except C. carolinus. It 
was with C. b. bartonii at stations 3-10, 12, 14, 16, 19, 21-26, 28, 29, 
32, 34, 35, 37, 44-48, 50-52, 54, 57, 59, 60, 63, 64, 66, 69, 71, 74, 76, 
77, 94-99, 107, 108, 110, 113, 117, 119, 122-125; with C. sciotensis 
at 3, 5, 15, 18, 19, 43, 44, 50, 54-59, 61-67, 72, 73, 75, 79-81, 84, 86, 
95-97, 102, 104-109, 116, 126; with C. I. longulus at 6, 7, 9-12, 20-23, 
25, 29, 31-35, 37, 123, 124; with O. acuminatus at 20, 29, 31-33, 35; 
and with O. juvenilis at 7. 

Although in 52 stations Dn. ileata was the only ostracod present, 
it was found with P. phyma at stations 3, 5, 7, 24, 44, 64; with E. 
internotalus at 23, 31, 35; with Dt. suteri at 31, 33, 35, 124; with Dt. 
daphnioides at 72, 73, 75, 79-81, 116; with Dn. ardis 10-12, 20, 21, 
23, 25, 31-33, 35, 37, 123, and 124; with Dn. truncata at 54-57, 69, 
71, 94; with Dn. scalis at 7, 44; and with E. kanawhaensis at 44, and 
126. 

Branchiobdellid associates include all 12 species known from the 






no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 39 

area. It was with C. philadelphica at stations 3, 5, 8, 9, 10, 12, 14, 
16, 19-22, 24-26, 28, 29, 32-35, 37, 44-46, 48, 50-52, 54-56, 59, 60, 66, 
69, 71, 74, 76, 77, 94, 98, 106-110, 113, 119, 122-125; with C. heterog- 
natha at 3-5, 24, 28, 34, 45, 48, 61, 63-67, 72, 79-81, 86, 97, 105, 106, 
116, 122, 123, 125, 126; with C. jallax at 3, 5, 15, 18, 24, 43, 54-58, 
61, 63, 65-67, 71, 72, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95-97, 126; with P. alcicomus at 
3-5, 15, 18, 19, 24, 25, 43, 58, 61, 63-67, 72, 76, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97, 
104, 105; with C. branchiophila at 15, 18, 20, 24, 29, 43, 55, 57, 58, 
63, 65-67, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 97, 104, 116, 126; with Xg. instabilius 
at 3-5, 7, 9, 11, 12, 21, 22, 24, 37, 44, 46, 54, 60, 61, 64, 86, 95, 97, 
123; with B. illuminatus at 5, 16, 19, 20, 22, 34, 44, 45, 48, 51, 59 
76, 86, 97, 122, 125; with C. ingens at 5, 15, 18, 54, 58, 61, 64, 67, 
72, 73, 75, 79-81, 86, 95, 97, 104, 116; with A. koronaeus at 14, 18, 
19, 29, 52, 69, 71, 72, 77, 98, 110, 125; with C. holostoma at 7, 10, 11, 
18-23, 25, 37; with Xd. jormosus at 10, 21; and with A. legaeus at 81. 
Remarks. — Not only is Dn. Ueata the most variable ostracod in 
the region, it is perhaps the most aggressive. In all instances in 
which it was found associated with other ostracods, it was the most 
abundant, and it occurred unaccompanied by other ostracods in a 
far greater number of instances than any of the other species. 

Donnaldsoncy there scalis Hobbs and Walton 

Figures 7d, 9<z 
Donnaldsoncythere scalis Hobbs and Walton, 1963, pp. 364-366, figs. 1-5, 25. 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex with peniferum terminating 
ventrally in scooplike expansion; clasping apparatus forming gentle 
arc, not divisible into vertical and horizontal rami, internal border 
with two teeth and apical border with four serrations. 

Range. — Apparently restricted in the Mountain Lake region to 
Little Stony Creek (New River drainage) and two tributaries to 
Johns Creek and Potts Creek (James River drainage) in Giles County, 
Va., and Monroe County, W. Va.; elsewhere in the Susquehanna 
River drainage system in Luzerne and Wyoming Counties, Pa., and 
in a tributary of Lake Cayuga, Cayuga County, N.Y. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 325 specimens from 16 
collections in the following stations: 1, 2, 7, 17, 38, 39, 44, 68, 82, 83, 
100, 101, 103, 114, and 115, at elevations of 671 to 1219 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Donnaldsoncythere scalis was associated 
with Cambarus b. bartonii at all stations, with C. sciotensis at 44, and 
with 0. juvenilis at 7. 

Except at stations 7, 38, 44, 82, 101, and 103, it had no ostracod 
associates; at these it was accompanied by P. phyma; Dn. Ueata and 
E. kanawhaensis were also present at 44. 



40 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Branchiobdellid associates include C. philadelphica at stations 17, 
39, 44, 68, 115; C. holostoma at 7; B. illuminatus at 17, 44, 68, 115; 
and Xg. instabilius at 44. 

Donnaldsoncy there truncata Hobbs and Walton 

Figure 96 

Donnaldsoncythere truncata Hobbs and Walton, 1963, pp. 364-366, 369, figs. 
16-20, 24. 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex with peniferum terminating 
ventrally in broad short terminal extension with subangular distal 
corners; neither corner conspicuously thickened; clasping apparatus 
with proximal shaft portion only slightly curved and distal third 
directed at angle of about 90° to proximal third; internal border of 




Figure 9. — Penifera of entocytherids: a, Donnaldsoncythere scalis; b, Dn. truncata: 

c, Dactylocythere chalaza. 

distal fifth with six serrations, proximal three toothlike. Distal end 
of penis situated above terminal extension rather than posterodorsal 
to it as in other species of genus. 

Range. — Tributaries of the New and Roanoke Rivers in Mont- 
gomery and Giles Counties, Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 325 specimens from 17 
collections from the following stations: 53-57, 69, 71, 87, 88, 90, 91, 
93, 94, and 111. These are situated on tributaries to Walker Creek, 
Spruce Run, and Toms Creek (New River drainage) and from tribu- 
taries of the North Fork of the Roanoke River at elevations ranging 
from 445 to 625 m. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 41 

Hosts and associates. — In the Roanoke River drainage, Dn. 
truncata was associated with Cambarus acuminatus at stations 87, 
88, 90, 91, 93; with C. b. bartonii at 87, 90, 91, 93, 111; and with C. I. 
longulus at 88, 90, 91, and 93. In the New River drainage, it was 
with C. b. bartonii and C. sciotensis at 54 and 57; with the former 
at 53, 69, 71, 94; and with C. sciotensis at 55 and 56. 

Ostracod associates include Dt. falcata at stations 87, 88, 90, 
91, 93, 111; An. ancyla at 88, 93; E. internotalus at 88, 90; Dn. ileata at 
54-57, 69, 71, and 94. No ostracod associates were with it at 53. 

Branchiobdellid associates include C. philadelphica at stations 
53-56, 69, 71, 87, 88, 90, 91, 93, 94, 111; A koronaeus at 69, 71, 
87, 88, 90, 91, 93, 111; C. branchiophila at 55, 57, 87, 88, 90, 91, 
93; C. fallax at 54-57, 71, 87, 88, 91; Xd. jormosus at 88, 90, 91; 
Xg. instabilius at 53, 54; B. illuminatus at 87; and C. ingens at 54. 

Genus Dactylocythere Hart, 1962 

Diagnosis. — Copulatory complex with finger guard; two rami of 
clasping apparatus never forming angle greater than 90° and usually 
(except in Dt. striophylax Crawford and Dt. falcata Hobbs and Walton) 
bearing teeth or serrations on internal border; peniferum provided 
with accessory sperm groove but never terminating in "barbed 
terminal extension" (Hart, 1962, p. 129). Females with J-shaped rod 
(except in Dt. leptophylax Crawford) and amiculum; claws of second 
antenna simple. 

Dactylocythere chalaza (Hobbs and Waltou) 

Figures 7e, i, 9c 

Entocythere chalaza Hobbs and Walton, 1962, p. 45, figs. 6~9- 
Dactylocythere chalaza Hart, 1962, p. 129. 

Diagnosis. — Posteroventral margin of shell without conspicuous 
prominence. Accessory groove extending dorsally to level of spermatic 
loop; clasping apparatus with junction of horizontal and vertical rami 
forming angle of less than 90°, distinctly thickened at junction, 
and internal border of horizontal ramus with single tooth and three 
distal serrations. Female with J-shaped rod and amiculum. 

Range. — Drainage systems of the James and New Rivers in 
Craig and Giles Counties, Va., and Monroe County, W. Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 775 specimens in 12 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 8, 22, 40, 41, and 127, at elevations 
of 585 to 1250 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Dactylocythere chalaza, like As. asceta, 
seems to be restricted to a single host Cambarus carolinus. 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

At each station Dt. chalaza was associated with As. asceta. 
Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus at stations 40, 
41, 127; and C.fallax at 40. 

Dactylocythere daphnioides (Hobbs) 

Figures If, k, 10a 

Entocythere daphnioides Hobbs, 1955, p. 325, figs. 1, 2, 5-9. 
Dactylocythere daphnioides Hart, 1962, p. 130. 

Diagnosis. — Posteroventral margin of shell with conspicuous 
prominence. Accessory groove extending dorsally to level of sper- 
matic loop; clasping apparatus with junction of horizontal and vertical 
rami forming angle less than 90°, somewhat thickened at junction, 
and internal border of horizontal ramus with proximal tooth and 
four or five distal serrations. Female with J-shaped rod and 
amiculum. 

Range. — From the Watauga drainage system in Avery and 
Watauga Counties, N.C.; the New River system from Alleghany 
and Ashe Counties, N.C., to Pocahontas County, W. Va.; and the 
Pound drainage system in Dickerson County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 100 specimens in eight 
collections from the following stations: 70, 72, 73, 75, 79-81, and 
116. All localities are in the New River drainage in Walker, Mill, 
and Wolf Creeks at elevations of 488 to 561 m. 

Host and associates. — In all stations listed Dt. daphnioides was 
found on Cambarus sciotensis. 

Donnaldsoncythere ileata was the only ostracod associate and was 
present in all stations except 70. 

Branchiobdellid associates include C. ingens at all stations; P. 
alcicornus at 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81; C. fallax at 70, 72, 75, 79, 81; 
C. branchiophila at 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 116; C. heterognatha at 70, 72, 
79-81, 116; A. koronaeus at 72; and A. legaeus at 81. 

Dactylocythere falcata (Hobbs and Walton) 

Figures 7j, 106 

Entocythere falcata Hobbs and Walton, 1961, p. 379, figs. 2, 3, 7, 8. 
Dactylocythere falcata Hart, 1962, p. 130. 

Diagnosis. — Posteroventral margin of shell without conspicuous 
prominence. Accessory groove extending dorsally beyond spermatic 
loop; clasping apparatus scythelike usually without teeth or serrations 
along internal border of horizontal ramus, although some specimens 
with single tooth near midlength. Female with J-shaped rod and 
amiculum. 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



43 



Range. — The Hiwassee drainage system in North Carolina, 
Georgia, and Tennessee (Hobbs and Walton, 1961, p. 381) and from 
the Roanoke River and its tributaries in Montgomery County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 90 specimens in 14 col- 
lections from the following stations: 85, 87-93, 111, and 112, at 
elevations of 439 to 597 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Dactylocythere falcata was associated 
with Cambarus I. longulus and C. acuminatus at stations 88, 112; 
with C. b. bartonii at 85, 111; with C. acuminatus and C. b. bartonii 
at 87; and with the three at 89-93. 

Entocytherid associates include Dn. truncata at stations 87, 88, 90, 
91, 93, 111; An. ancyla at 88, 89, 92, 93; and E. internotalus at 88 
and 90. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus, which was present 
at all stations except 85, where no branchiobdellids were found; 
C. branchiophila at all except 85 and 111; C. philadetyhica at all 
except 85; C. fallax at 87-89, 91, 92; Xd. jormosus at 88-92, 112; 
and B. illuminatus at 87. 

Dactylocythere suteri (Crawford) 

Figures 7h, 10c 

Entocythere suteri Crawford, 1959, p. 162, pi. 3. 
Dactylocythere suteri Hart, 1962, p. 131. 

Diagnosis. — Posteroventral margin of shell without conspicuous 
prominence. Accessory groove extending dorsally to level of sper- 




Figure 10. — Penifera of entocytherids: a, Dactylocythere daphnioides; b, Dt. falcata; c, Dt. 

suteri. 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

matic loop; clasping apparatus with junction of horizontal and vertical 
rami rounded but extensions forming angle of less than 90°, with no 
thickening at junction, and internal border of horizontal ramus 
without proximal tooth but with series of five distal serrations. 
Female with J-shaped rod and amiculum. 

Range. — Previously recorded from the drainage systems of the 
Wateree and Congaree Rivers in Richland County, S.C. (Crawford, 
1959, p. 166); in the Mountain Lake region in tributaries of the 
James River in Craig County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — 30 specimens in six collections from the 
following stations: 27, 30, 31, 33, 35, and 124 in Craig and Johns 
Creeks, at elevations of 402 to 482 m. 

Hosts and associates. — In all stations it was associated with 
Cambarus I. longulus and C. acuminatus except at 124; and in 35 and 
124 with C. b. bartonii. 

Entocytherid associates include Dn. ileata, Dn. ardis, and E. 
internotalus at stations 31, 35; Dn. ardis and E. internotalus at 30; 
Dn. ardis and Dn. ileata at 33, 124; and Dn. ardis at 27. 

Branchiobdellid associates include C. philadelphica at stations 27, 
33, 35, 124; and A. koronaeus at 30. 

Genus Entocythere Marshall, 1903 

Diagnosis. — Copula tory complex without finger guard; clasping 
apparatus extending ventrally beyond peniferum; extensions of two 
rami of clasping apparatus seldom (only in E. dorsorotunda Hoff, 1944) 
forming angle greater than 90°; external border of clasping apparatus 
entire and internal border serrate along entire length, tip terminating 
in three to five denticles; peniferum variable but usually irregularly 
rounded ventrally, and lacking accessory groove. Females without 
J-shaped rod, amiculum, or other comparable structure; second 
antenna with pectinate claw (fig. 7b). 

Entocythere internotalus Crawford 

Figures 7b, 11a 
Entocythere internotalus Crawford, 1959, p. 152, pi. 1. 

Diagnosis. — Posterior surface of junction between horizontal and 
vertical rami of clasping apparatus rounded; internal border of 
horizontal ramus, including apex, with six teeth; mesial surface of 
proximal portion of horizontal ramus with one or two toothlike 
prominences. 

Range. — Previously reported from many localities in the Congaree, 
Wateree, and Broad Rivers in Richland County, S.C. (Crawford, 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 45 

1959, p. 156); in the Mountain Lake region present in tributaries of 
the James River in Craig County and in the North Fork of the 
Roanoke River, Montgomery County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — 20 specimens in six collections from the 
following stations: 23, 30, 31, 35, 88, and 90 on tributaries of the 
James and Roanoke Rivers at elevations of 402 to 475 m. 

Hosts and associates. — This ostracod was associated with 
Cambarus acuminatus and C. I. longulus at stations 30, 31, 35, 88; with 
C. b. bartonii and C. I. longulus at 23; and with the three at 35 and 90. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at station 88; Dn. ardis at 
23, 30, 31, 35; Dn. ileata at 23, 31, 35; Dt.jalcata and Dn. truncata at 
88, 90; and Dt. suteri at 30, 31, and 35. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 30, 88, 
90; C. branchiophila at 88, 90; C. philadelphica at 35, 88, 90; Xd. 
formosus at 88, 90; C. holostoma at 23; and C.jallax at 88. 

Entocythere hanawhaensis Hobbs and Walton 

Figure 11& 

Entocythere hanawhaensis Hobbs and Walton, 1966b, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 119, no. 3542, p. 6, figs. ll-o. 

Diagnosis. — Posterior surface of junction between horizontal and 
vertical rami of clasping apparatus subangular; internal border of 
horizontal ramus, including apex, with nine teeth; mesial surface of 
horizontal ramus without teeth or emarginations. 

Range. — Known only from the two localities cited below. 

Specimens examined. — 4 specimens in two collections from station 
44, Cascades on Little Stony Creek, and from the New River at 
Pembroke (sta. 126). Both stations are in the New River drainage 
in Giles County, Va., and are at altitudes of 500 and 899 m, respec- 
tively. 

Hosts and associates. — Within the crayfish collection from sta- 
tion 44 were C. b. bartonii and C. sciotensis; only the latter was present 
at 126. 

Entocytherid associates include P. phyma, Dn. ileata, and Dn. 
scalis at station 44, and Dn. ileata at 126. 

Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus, C. philadelphica, 
and Xg. instabilius at station 44, and C. branchiophila, C. fallax, and 
C. heterognatha at 126. 

Genus Phymocythere Hobbs and Hart, 1966 

Diagnosis. — Hobbs and Hart (1966, p. 48) stated: 

Terminal tooth of mandible with cusps. Copulatory complex with finger guard; 
periferum extending ventrally much beyond clasping apparatus, elongate, com- 
paratively slender, entirely corneous with terminal bulbous enlargement lacking 



46 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



superficial extensions; penis complex consisting of separate dorsal spermatic and 
ventral prostatic elements; spermatic element longer than clasping apparatus: 
accessory groove lacking. Clasping apparatus reduced, not clearly divisible into 
vertical and horizontal rami; external border of horizontal ramus entire, internal 
border also entire except at apex, latter may be expanded and bear three to six 
denticles. 

Phymocy there phyma (Hobbs and Walton) 

Figure 11c 

Entocythere phyma Hobbs and Walton, 1962, p. 44, figs. 10-13. 
Cymocythere phyma Hart, 1962, p. 129. 
Phymocythere phyma Hobbs and Hart, 1966, p. 48. 

Diagnosis. — Length of penis greater than longitudinal diameter of 
bulbiform portion of peniferum; clasping apparatus small and with 
distal margin not extending anterior to anterior margin of peniferum. 
Female unknown. 





~^s 



Figure 11. — Penifera of entocytherids : a, Entocythere internotalus; b, E. kanawhaensis< 

c, Phymocythere phyma. 

Range. — Tributaries of the James, Potomac, New, and Tygart 
Rivers in Virginia and West Virginia. (See Hobbs and Hart, 1966, 
p. 48.) 

Specimens examined. — 85 specimens in 12 collections from the 
following stations: 3, 5, 7, 24, 38, 44, 64, 82, 101, and 103. Repre- 
sented are tributaries of Johns and Potts Creeks (James River drain- 
age) and Big Stony and Little Stony Creeks (New River drainage), at 
elevations of 610 to 1143 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Phymocythere phyma was associated with 
Cambarus b. bartonii at all stations; with C. sciotensis at 3, 5, 44, 64; 
and 0. juvenilis and C. I. longulus at 7. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 47 

Entocytkerid associates include Dn. ileata at stations 3, 5, 7, 24, 44, 
64; Dn. scalis at 7, 38, 44, 82, 101, 103; and E. kanawhaensis at 44. 

Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus at stations 5, 44; 
C. branchiophila at 24; C. heterognatha and P. alcicornus at 3, 5, 24, 64; 
C. holostoma at 7; C. ingens at 5, 64; C. philadelphica at 3, 5, 24, 44; and 
Xg. instabilius at 3, 5, 7, 24, 44, and 64. 

The Branchiobdellids 

The epizoites that compose the clitellate order BranchiobdeUida 
are annelids with leechlike suckers and a short body of 15 segments 
of which the first four form a "head." Segmentation is obscured by 
coalescence in the head and also posteriorly in the formation of the 
posterior sucker, so that usually only the trunk segments are num- 
bered; e.g., the anterior nephridia are said to open on segment III, 
but actually this is segment VII. The conventional system of desig- 
nating the first trunk segment as I will be followed here. The body 
is cylindrical (terete) in most species, but members of three genera 
(Ankyrodrilus, Xironodrilus, and Xironogiton) are variously dorso- 
ventrally flattened (depressed) in body form. 

The trunk segments, marked internally by distinct muscular 
septa anterior to the sucker, are further subdivided into annuli, 
normally only two, of which the anteriormost (prosomite) is longer 
and often greater in diameter than the posterior annulus (metasomite) . 
Some branchiobdellids possess dorsal projections of various types on 
the prosomites of some trunk segments (fig. 20). 

A prostomium, common among the annelids, is absent in the 
branchiobdellids. The mouth is surrounded by a peristomium (the 
first head segment) that is set off by a sulcus and may be entire (not 
divided into lobes or provided with tentacles) or variously lobed or 
tentaculate, but most often the peristomium forms dorsal and ventral 
lips. The buccal cavity of all branchiobdellids, presumably in the 
second head segment, is armed with sclerotized "jaws": one dorsal, 
one ventral. These jaws are usually provided with denticles ("teeth" : 
figs. 12c, /). The number of teeth is often expressed by a "dental 
formula" in which the teeth of the upper jaw are enumerated first. 

The reproductive systems have been found to provide the most 
reliable taxonomic characters. The components of these systems 
may best be imderstood by reference to figures 126, 14a, and 15a. 
Testes, not patent in mature animals, are found in segments V and 
VI, ovaries in segment VII. Spermatogenic cells and spermatozoa 
fill the coelomic spaces of the testicular segments and the spermatozoa 
are conveyed to the outside by a series of ducts, beginning in the male 
funnels (f), which are the ental ends of the efferent ducts. The 



48 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

efferent ducts (ed) unite in each testicular segment to form the deferent 
ducts (dd), which enter a glandular organ, the spermiducal gland 
(sg) . The deferent ducts may enter the ental end of the spermiducal 
gland, with or without a previous thickening of the ducts, forming 
deferent lobes of the gland (dl), or they may enter the gland near its 
midlength. In some genera, an accessory gland, the prostate (pr), 
is given off as a blindly ending sac, at the ectal part of the spermiducal 
gland, where it narrows to form the muscular ejaculatory duct (ejd). 
The latter, in turn, joins the bursa (b), the muscular eversible sac 
(in the species considered here) enclosing the penis in its ental portion, 
which may be considerably elongated (as in Ankyrodrilus) or a short, 
pyriform organ (as in Cambarincola) . Of these components of the 
male efferent apparatus, the spermiducal gland is always present but 
may vary in shape, in the presence or absence of deferent lobes and in 
the point of entry of the deferent ducts; the prostate may be present 
or absent and, if present, may be histologically similar to or different 
from the spermiducal gland and of varying proportional lengths and 
diameters; the ejaculatory duct may be either present or absent and 
of varying lengths, and the bursa of varying shapes. The other male 
parts exhibit little variation of taxonomic importance. 

The female system is much simpler in arrangement and composition. 
There is little variation in the arrangement of the ovaries and ovipores 
in segment VII. The spermatheca (fig. 18) in segment V is an un- 
paired sac (but bifid in Bdellodrilus) that may vary from species to 
species in such features as the length and diameter of the ectal sperma- 
thecal duct, the diameter and length of the spermatozoa-storing 
spermathecal bulb, and the presence or absence of an ental process. 

Key to Branchiobdellids 

1 Body terete 2 

1' Body depressed, at least in part 9 

2(1) With bifurcate spermatheca; without prostate . Bdellodrilus illuminatus 

2' Spermatheca not bifurcate; prostate present 3 

3(2') Trunk segments III, IV, V, and VIII with fanlike dorsal projections. 

Pterodrilus alcicornus 
3' Trunk segments without dorsal projections . . Cambarincola . . 4 

4(3') Jaws similar in size and shape, both upper and lower jaws with odd 

number of teeth 5 

4' Jaws dissimilar in at least shape, upper jaw with odd number, lower 

jaw with even number of teeth 7 

5(4) With peristomial tentacles, dental formula 5/5 C. fallax 

5' Without peristomial tentacles, dental formula may or may not be 

5/5 6 

6(5') Prostate histologically similar to spermiducal gland, spermiducal 

gland with deferent lobes, dental formula 5/5 . . . . C. branchiophila 
6' Prostate and spermiducal gland histologically dissimilar; dental 

formula often 3/3 C. holostoma 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 49 

7(4') Jaws grossly unequal in size C. heterognatha 

7' Jaws similar in size 8 

8(7') Prostate longer than slender spermiducal gland . . . . C. ingens 
8' Prostate shorter and lesser in diameter than spermiducal gland. 

C. philadelphua 
9(1') Anterior body segments terete, fifth through eleventh segments de- 
pressed (tennis racquet shaped) Xironogiton instabilius 

9' Body uniformly depressed, spatulate 10 

10(9') Deferent ducts enter ental end of spermiducal gland. 

Xironodrilus formosus 
10' Deferent ducts enter midlength of T-shaped spermiducal gland. 

Ankyrodrilus . . 11 

11(10') Dental formula 3/4 A. koronaeus 

11' Dental formula 5/4 or 5/5 A. legaeus 

Genus Ankyrodrilus Holt, 1965 

Diagnosis. — Holt (1965, p. 10) stated: 

Branchiobdellid worms with two pairs of testes; paired nephridiopores on the 
dorsum of segment III; at least nine distinct segments visible in dorsal view; gut 
straight, with sacculations in segments II, III, IV, those of segments III and IV 
the larger; aggregations of gland cells present in lateral portions of segments VIII 
and IX; caudal sucker ventral; body depressed and tapering gradually from 
anterior end to its greatest width in segment VI, VII or VIII; spermiducal gland 
large with blindly ending bifurcated proximal portion, vasa deferentia entering 
the median portion of the organ; bursa constricted between atrial and penial 
sheath portions, giving the organ as a whole a reduplicated aspect; ejaculatory 
duct absent; spermatheca composed of ectal duct, bulb and ental process. 

Ankyrodrilus koronaeus Holt 

Figures \2a-d 
Ankyrodrilus koronaeus Holt, 1965, p. 11. 

Diagnosis. — "Upper jaw with three large teeth, subequal in length; 
lower jaw convex, rounded at tooth-bearing border, carrying four 
small, subequal teeth" (Holt, 1965, p. 11). 

Range. — Tributaries of the Roanoke, James, and New Rivers in 
Montgomery, Giles, Craig, and Botetourt Counties, Va. 

Specimens examined. — More than 160 specimens in 22 collections 
from the following stations: 14, 18, 19, 29, 30, 52, 69, 71, 72, 77, 87-93, 
98, 110-112, and 125. These are in all the major drainages of the area 
at elevations ranging from 402 to 750 m. 

Host and associates. — A. koronaeus was associated with Cambarus 
acuminatus at stations 29, 30, 87-93, 112; with C. 6. bartonii at all sta- 
tions except 18, 30, 72, 88, 112; with C. I. longulus at 29, 30, 88-93, 
112; and with C. seiotensis at 18, 19, and 72. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at stations 88, 89, 92, 93; 
Dn. ileata at 14, 18, 19, 29, 52, 69, 71, 72, 77, 98, 110, 125; Dn. truncata 



50 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



at 69, 71, 87, 88, 90, 91, 93, 111; Dt. daphnioides at 72; Dt. jalcata at 
87-93, 111, 112; Dn. ardis and Dt. suteri at 30; and E. internotalus at 
30, 88, and 90. 

Branchiobdellid associates include B. illuminatus at stations 19, 
87, 125; C. branchiophila at 18, 29, 72, 87-93, 112; C.jallax at 18, 71, 
72, 87-89, 91, 92; C. heterognatha at 72, 125; C. holostoma at 18, 19; 
C. ingens at 18, 72; C. philadelphica at all stations except 18, 30, 72; 
P. alcicornus at 18, 19, 72; and Xd.formosus at 88-92, and 112. 





C 





d 







Figure 12. — Ankyrodrilus koronaeus: a, dorsal view; b, ventral view of male reproductive 
system; c, upper jaw; d, lower jaw. A. legaeus, jaws: e, upper;/, lower. (Abbreviations : 
b=bursa; ed=efferent duct; f=funnel, sg=spermiducal gland.) 

Remarks. — Present distribution records indicate that A. koronaeus 
and its congener, A. legaeus, are allopatric. Both species of Ankyrodri- 
lus are inhabitants of middle altitude streams and may vicariate there 
for Xg. instabilius as inhabitants of the chelipeds of the host. 

Ankyrodrilus legaeus Holt 

Figures 12e-f 
Ankyrodrilus legaeus Holt, 1965, p. 12. 

Diagnosis. — "Upper jaw with five teeth; lower jaw with four — five 
teeth; teeth of upper jaw of unequal length, lateral teeth and median 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 51 

teeth shorter than others; lateral teeth of lower jaw longer than 
median teeth" (Holt, 1965, p. 12). 

Range. — From Overton County, Tenn., sporadically to the New 
River drainage in Giles County, Va. 

Specimens examined. — 7 specimens from station 81 in the New 
River drainage at an elevation of 488 m. 

Host and associates. — Ankyrodrilus legaeus was associated with 
Cambarus sciotensis at station 81. 

Ostracod associates include Dn. ileata and Dt. daphnioides. 

BranchiobdeUid associates include C. branchiophila, C. fallax, C. 
heterognatha, C. ingens, and P. alcicornus. 

Remarks. — Ankyrodrilus legaeus has been found associated with 
eight other species or subspecies of crayfishes; its single occurrence on 
C. sciotensis in the Mountain Lake region is no indication of host 
specificity. 

Genus Bdellodrilns Moore, 1895 

Diagnosis. — Head elongated and less in diameter than anterior 
body segments; peristomium without lobes, body wall thin and glandu- 
lar (parasitic facies); posterior sucker small and weak; two pairs of 
testes, no prostate, penis eversible; spermatheca bifid; lateral glands 
present in trunk segments I through IX ; anterior nephridia open by ; 
common pore; upper jaw longitudinal ridge bearing three teeth, lower 
jaw deep trough in which dorsal one fits; inhabitants of gill chambers. 
Monotypic. 

Bdellodrilus illuminatus (Moore) 

i 

Figures ISa-b 

Branchiobdella illuminata Moore, 1894, p. 421. 
Bdellodrilus ilhiminatus Moore, 1895b, p. 498. 

Diagnosis. — As above for the genus. 

Range. — Eastern North America. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 50 specimens in 24 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 5, 16, 17, 19, 20, 22, 34, 40, 41, 44, 
45, 48, 51, 59, 68, 76, 86, 87, 97, 115, 120-122, 125, and 127. All of the 
major drainage areas are represented among these stations. Eleva- 
tions range from 518 to 1250 meters. 

Hosts and associates. — Bdellodrilus illuminatus was associated 
with Cambarus acuminatum at stations 20, 87; with C. b. bartonii at all 
stations except 20, 40, 41, 86, 127; with G carolinus at 22, 40, 41, 127; 
with C. I. longulus at 20, 22, 34; and with G sciotensis at 5, 19, 44, 59, 
86, and 97. 

Ostracod associates include As. asceta and Dt. chalaza at stations 
22, 40, 41, 127; Dn. ardis at 20; Dn. ileata at 5, 16, 19, 20, 22, 34, 44, 



52 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

45, 48, 51, 59, 76, 86, 97, 122, 125; Dn. scalis at 17, 44, 68, 115; Dn. 
truncata and Dt. falcata at 87; E. kanawhaensis at 44; and P. phyma 
at 5 and 44. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 19, 87, 
125; O. branchiophila at 20, 86, 87, 97; C. jallax at 5, 40, 86, 87, 97; 
C. heterognatha at 5, 34, 45, 48, 86, 97, 122, 125; C. holostama at 19, 20, 
22; C. ingens at 5, 86, 97; C. philadelphica at all stations except 40, 
41, 86, 97, 127; P. alcicornus at 5, 19, 76, 86, 97; and Xg. instabilius 
at 5, 22, 44, 86, 97, and 121. 

Remarks. — Bdellodrilus Uluminatus is an indisputable gill-inhabiting 
species. Often it is the only branchiobdellid associate of the bur- 
rowing C. carolinus, the only crayfish species with which it was found 
to occur more often than would be expected by chance. 




Figure 13. — Bdellodrilus Uluminatus, lateral views: a, entire animal; b, jaws. 

Genus Cambarincola Ellis, 1912 

Diagnosis. — Body terete without specialized projections; anterior 
nephridia opening through common pore on dorsum of segment III; 
deferent ducts entering ental end of spermiducal gland; prostate and 
ejaculatory duct both present; penis noneversible ; bursa subpyriform 
to obcordate; spermatheca never bifid. 

Cambarincola branchiophila Holt 

Figures 14a-c 
Cambarincola branchiophila Holt, 1954, p. 168. 

Diagnosis.^ — Gill-inhabiting branchiobdellid; lips entire; dental 
formula 5/5, with lateralmost teeth longer than teeth between them 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



53 



and median teeth; prosomites not raised; spermiducal gland with 
deferent lobes; prostate shorter than spermiducal gland and histo- 
logically similar; relatively large, stout (to about 3.5 mm in length). 
Range. — Known only from the Mountain Lake area, C. branchi- 
ophila has been found in the major streams of all the drainage systems 
of the area. 



OL 





b 




db 



Figure 14. — Cambarincola branchiophila, lateral views: a, male reproductive system; 
b, jaws. En face view: c, jaws, upper uppermost. (Abbreviations: b=bursa; dd= 
deferent duct; dl=deferent lobe; ed=efferent duct; f=funnel; pr=prostate; sg= 
spermiducal gland.) 

Specimens examined. — More than 150 specimens in 31 collections 
from the following stations: 15, 18, 20, 24, 29, 43, 55, 57, 58, 63, 
65-67, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86-93, 97, 104, 112, 116, and 126. Elevations 
range from 427 to 762 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola branchiophila was associated 
with Cambarus acuminatum at stations 20, 29, 87-93, 112; with C. b. 



244-775—67- 



54 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

bartonii at 24, 29, 57. 63, 66, 87, 89 93, 07; with O. I. longulus at 20. 

•JO. 88 93, L12; and with (\ sciotcnsis at all stations except 20. 24, 20. 
87 93, 112. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at stations 88, SO, 02. 93, 
Pn. ardis at 20: Dn. Ueata at all stations except 87-93, 112; Dn. 
truncate at 55, 57, 87, 88, 00, 01. 03: Pt. daphnioides at 72. 73. 75, 79, 
SI. 110: Pt. t'a kata at 87-93, 112: E. internotalus at 88, 90; E. kanawha- 
ensis at 126; and P. phyma at 24. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations IS. 20. 
72. 87-93, 112: .1. legaeus at SI; B. illumina-tus at 20. SO. 87, 07; 
C.jattax at all stations except 20. 20. 73. W, 03. 104, 112, 110; ( . 
heUrognaiha at 24. 03. 05-07. 72. 70. SI. SO, 07. 110. 120: O. holostoma 
at IS. 20: O. vngens at 15. IS. 58, 07. 72. 73. 75. 70. SI. SO. 07. 104, 
110: C. Philadelphia at 20. 24. 20. oo. 00. 87-93, 112: P. alcicornus 
at 15. IS. 24. 43. 58, 03. 65-67, 72. 73. 75. 70. SI. SO. 07. 104; Xd. 
formosus at 88-92, 112: and Xg. insiabUus at 24. SO. and 07. 

Remarks. — Cambarincola branchiophila does not exhibit the "para- 
sitic faeies" to the extreme extent that B. iUuminatus does. Two 
explanations of the association of these species are possible: O. branchi- 
ophila may be incompletely adapted to the gill chamber habitat and 
is occasionally found outside the gill chambers, or. more likely, the 
association is due to the occurrence of these two species on separate 
individuals of the host from the same collection. 

CtimlMirincola fallax Hoffman 

Figures loci-b 
Cambarincola fallax Hoffman, 1903, p. 356. 

Diagnosis. — Upper lip with short, slender peristomial tentacles; 
prosomites raised; dental formula 5 5, jaws of same size and shape; 
prostate with terminal bulb and histologically dissimilar to spermidncal 
gland. 

Range. — From northern Xew York to northern Georgia in the 
mountains and piedmont. 

Specimens examined. — More than 300 specimens in 35 collections 
from the following stations: 3, 5, 15. IS. 24, 40. 43. 49. 54-5S, 01, 
03. 65-67, 70-72, 75. 78, 70. SI. SO-SO. 91. 02. 95-97. and 120 at eleva- 
tions from 439 to 1158 m. This species, common to the three drain- 
age systems of the area, appears to be somewhat less common in the 
James than in the others: it was taken twice (sta. 11 and 24) from 
Johns Creek. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola fallax was associated with 
Cambarus acuminatum at stations S7-S9. 91. 02: with C. b. bartonii at 
3, 5, 24, 49, 54. 57, G3, 00. 71, S7, S9, 91, 92, 95-97; with C. carulinuj 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



00 



at 40; with C. 1. longulus at 88, 89, 91, 92; with C. sciotensis at 3, 5, 15, 
is. 43. 54-58, 61, 63, 65-67, 70. 72, 75, 78, 79, 81, 86, 95-97, and 126. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at stations 88, 89, 92: As. 
asceta at 40; Dn. Ueata at 3, 5, 15. IS, 24, 43, 54-58, 61, 63, 65-67, 71, 
72. 75, 79, 81, 86, 95-97, 126; Dn. truncate at 54-57. 71, 87, 88, 91; 
Dt. chalaza at 40; Dt. daphnioides at 70. 72. 75, 79, 81; Dt. falcata 
at 87-89, 91, 92; E. vntemotalus at SS; E. kanavsaemis at 126; and 
P. phyma at 3, 5, and 24. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A koronaevs at stations 18, 71, 
72. S7-89, 91, 92;. 4. legaeus at 81; B. Ulvminatus at 5, 40, S6, 87, 97; 
C. branchiophila at 15, 18, 24, 43, 55, 57, 58, 63, 65-67, 72, 75. 79, 
81, 86-89, 91, 92, 97, 126; C. heterognatha at 3. 5, 24, 61. 63, 65-67; 
70, 72, 78, 79, 81, 86, 97, 126; C. holvstoma at 18; C. ingens at 5, 15, 




Figure 15. — Cambarincola fallax; a, lateral new of entire animal; b, en face view of jaws. 

18, 54. 5S, 61, 67, 70, 72, 75, 79, SI, 86, 95. 97; C. philadtlphica at 
3, 5, 24, 54-56, 66, 71, S7-S9, 91, 92; P. aleicornus at 3. 5, 15, IS, 
24. 43, 5S, 61, 63, 65-67, 70. 72. 75, 79, SI, S6. 95. 97; Xd. jormosus 
at SS, S9, 91, 92; and Xg. instabilius at 3, 5, 24. 54. 61, 86, 95, and 97. 



Cambarincola Jieterosnatfia Hoffman 

Figures 16a-c 
Cambarincola heterognatha Hoffman, 1963, p. 362. 

Diagnosis. — "Without peristomial tentacles; prosomites not dis- 
tinctly raised; dental formula 1/4 (usually), upper jaw strikingly larger 
than lower; prostate half or less length of spermiducal gland and dis- 
similar histologically. 

Range. — In the mountainous regions of West Virginia, Virginia, 
North Carolina, Tennessee, and Kentucky (Adair County). 



56 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Specimens examined. — Approximately 100 specimens in 28 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 3, 4, 5, 24, 28, 34, 45, 48, 61, 63-67, 
70, 72, 78-81, 86, 97, 105, 106, 116, 122, 123, 125, and 126. These 
stations are in the New and James river systems at elevations from 451 
to 838 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola heterognatha was associated 
with Cambarus b. bartonii at stations 3-5, 24, 28, 34, 45, 48, 63, 64, 66, 




Figure 16. — Cambarincola heterognatha, lateral views: a, entire animal; b, male reproductive 
system; c, jaws. (Abbreviations: b=bursa; ejd— ejaculatory duct; pr=prostate; sg= 
spermiducal gland.) 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 57 

97, 122, 123, 125; with C. L longulus at 34, 123; with C. sciotensis at 3, 
5, 61, 63-67, 70, 72, 78-81, 86, 97, 105, 106, 116, and 126. 

Ostracod associates include Dn. ardis at station 123; Dn. ileata 
at all stations except 70 and 78; Dt. daphnioides at 70, 72, 79-81, 
116; £7. kanawhaensis at 126; and P. phyma at 3, 5, 24, and 64. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A koronaeus at stations 72, 125; 
A. legaeus at 81; B. illuminatus at 5, 34, 45, 48, 86, 97, 122, 125; 
C. branchiophila at 24, 63, 65-67, 72, 79, 81, 86, 97, 116, 126; C.jallax 
at 3, 5, 24, 61, 63, 65-67, 70, 72, 78, 79, 81, 86, 97, 126; C. ingens at 5, 
61, 64, 67, 70, 72, 79-81, 86, 97, 116; C. philadelphica at 3, 5, 24, 28, 
34, 45, 48, 66, 106, 122, 123, 125; P. alcicornus at 3-5, 24, 61, 63-67, 
70, 72, 79, 81, 86, 97, 105; and Xg. instabilius at 3-5, 24, 61, 64, 86, 
97, and 123. 

Remarks. — The absence of C. heterognatha in our collections from 
the Roanoke drainage is surprising; but the species, in our experience, 
is predominantly one of tributary streams of the mountains and most 
of our collections from the Roanoke were from regions of lower 
gradient and fair volume of stream flow. There exists (Hoffman, 
1963, p. 364) a record of C. heterognatha from Franklin County, Va., 
which is within the Roanoke River system. Only a more detailed 
analysis of the distribution of the species will enable a decision to be 
made as to whether the species is just now, at some favorable areas of 
stream capture, invading the Roanoke or whether the distribution as 
known is determined by local stream conditions. 

Cambarincola holostoma Hoffman 

Figures 17 a-d 
Cambarincola holostoma Hoffman, 1963, p. 359. 

Diagnosis. — Peristomiuni entire without lobes or tentacles; 
prosomites not of greater diameter than metasomites; dental formula 
3/3; reproductive systems similar to those of C. philadelphica. 

Range. — Cambarincola holostoma is known only from western 
Virginia in the headwaters of the Potomac and James Rivers with an 
isolated occurrence in Sinking Creek (sta. 18, 19) of the New River 
drainage. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 80 specimens in 12 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 7, 10, 11, 13, 18-23, 25, and 37. 
These stations are in the James River drainage (Potts, Johns, and 
Craig Creeks) except 18 and 19 which are in the New River drainage 
(Sinking Creek). The elevations of these stations range from 512 to 
671 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola holostoma was associated 
with Cambarus acuminatus at station 20; with C. b. bartonii at 7, 10, 



58 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



19, 21-23, 25, 37; with C. carolinus at 22; with C. I. longulus at 7, 10, 
11, 13, 20-23, 25, 37; with C. sciotensis at 18, 19; and with 0. juvenilis 
at 7. 

Ostracod associates include As. asceta and Dt. chalaza at station 22 ; 
Dn. ardis at 10, 11, 13, 20, 21, 23, 25, 37; ZM. ileata at 7, 10, 11, 18-23, 
25, 37; Dn. scalis and P. phyma at 7; and E. internotalus at 23. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A koronaeus at stations 18, 19; 

B. illuminatus at 19, 20, 22; C. branchiophila at 18, 20; C. jallax and 

C. ingens at 18; C. philadelphica at 10, 19-22, 25, 37; P. alcicornus at 
18, 19, 25; Xd. formosus at 10, 21; and Xg. instabilius at 7, 11, 13, 21, 
22, and 37. 

Remarks. — Cambarincola holostoma, on the basis of present knowl- 
edge, appears to be a highly localized species that has recently in- 
vaded the headwaters of Sinking Creek from the nearby tributaries 
of the James River. 





Figure 17. — Cambarincola holostoma: a, lateroventral view of entire animal; b, lateral view 
of male reproductive system and spermatheca; c, dorsolateral view of jaws; d, lateral 
view of jaws. (After Hoffman, 1963.) 



Cambarincola ingens Hoffman 

Figures 18a-d 
Cambarincola ingens Hoffman, 1963, p. 333. 

Diagnosis. — Upper lip of peristomium with four long lobes or 
short tentacles; prosomites only moderately greater in diameter than 
metasomites; dental formula 5/4 or 3/4; prostate longer than spermi- 
ducal gland and bent back upon itself; large worms, to 6 mm after 
preservation. 

Range.^ — Blue Ridge and Valley and Ridge physiographic provinces 
of the southern Appalachians, in the New and Tennessee river drainage 
systems of West Virginia, Virginia, North Carolina, and Tennessee 
and the Roanoke (Smith River) drainage in Patrick County, Va. 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



59 



Specimens examined. — Approximately 80 specimens in 20 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 5, 15, 18, 54, 58, 61, 64, 67, 70, 72, 
73, 75, 79-81, 86, 95, 97, 104, and 116. All of these stations are in 
the New River drainage at elevations from 488 to 777 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola ingens was associated with 
Cambarus b. bartonii at stations 5, 54, 64, 95, 97; and with C. sciotensis 
in all stations. 

Ostracod associates include Dn. ileata at all stations except 70; 
Dn. truncate at 54; Dt. daphnioides at 70, 72, 73, 75, 79-81, 116; and 
P. phyma at 5, and 64. 






C 



d 




Figure 18. — Cambarincola ingens, lateral views: fl, anterior portion of entire animal; 
b, male reproductive system. En face vkws: c, upper jaw; d, lower jaw. 



Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 18, 72; 
A. legaeus at 81; B. illuminatus at 5, 86, 97; C. branchiophila at 15, 
18, 58, 67, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 97, 104, 116; C. fallax at 5, 15, 18, 
54, 58, 61, 67, 70, 72, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97; C. heterognatha at 5, 61, 
64, 67, 70, 72, 79-81, 86, 97, 116; C. holostoma at 18; C. philadelphica 
at 5, 54; P. alcicornus at 5, 15, 18, 58, 61, 64, 67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 
81, 86, 95, 97, 104; and Xg. instabilius at 5, 54, 61, 64, 86, 95, and 97. 

Remarks. — On the basis of presently known distribution records, 
C. ingens is a native of the New River that has spread to only a few 
other drainage systems, notably the Tennessee. Our data positively 
associates C. ingens only with Cambarus sciotensis as a host, but it 
is known that other crayfishes serve as hosts for this branchiobdellid. 
(Hoffman, 1963, p. 336.) 



60 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Cambarincola phila delphica (Leidy) 

Figures 19a-d 

Astacobdella philadelphica Leidy, 1851, p. 209. 
Branchiobdella philadelphica Moore, 1894, p. 427. 
Bdellodrilus philadelphicus Moore, 1895b, p. 498. 
Cambarincola philadelphica Ellis, 1912, p. 485. 

Diagnosis. — Hoffman (1963, p. 346) stated: 

Peristomium divided into dorsal and ventral lobes, the dorsal larger and with four 
low marginal lobations; jaws relatively large and subrectangular in lateral aspect, 
the dorsal jaw usually a little larger than the ventral [and the dental formula 5/4 
to 3/2]; male reproductive system moderate in size, filling from half to two-thirds 
of the coelom of one side of segment VI; bursa elongate, at least twice as long as 
broad, the penial sheath merging gradually into a fairly short ejaculatory duct; 
spermiducal gland slender and recurved ventrad, twice the diameter of prostate, 
latter long and slender, reaching to ental end of spermiducal gland. 




Figure 19. — Cambarincola philadelphica, lateral views: a, entire animal; b, male reproductive 
system and spermatheca; d, jaws. Dorsolateral view: e, jaws. (Abbreviations: b=bursa; 
ed= ejaculatory duct; pr=prostate; sp=spermatheca; sg= spermiducal gland. After 
Hoffman, 1963.) 



Range. — Eastern North America, from southern Canada south to 
South Carolina and west to Wisconsin (Hoffman, 1963). 

Specimens examined. — More than 500 specimens in 72 collections 
from the following stations: 3, 5, 8-10, 12, 14, 16, 17, 19-22, 24-29, 
32-37, 39, 44-46, 48, 50-56, 59, 60, 66, 68, 69, 71, 74, 76, 77, 87-94, 98, 
106-113, 115, and 118-125. These specimens came from all drainage 
systems of the area and from elevations of 427 to 1170 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Cambarincola philadelphica was associated 
with Cambarus acuminatus at stations 20, 27, 29, 32, 33, 35, 87-93, 112; 
with C. b. bartonii at all stations except 20, 27, 33, 55, 56, 88, 106, 109, 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 61 

112; with C. carolinus at 8, 22; with C. I. longulus at 9, 10, 12, 20-22, 
25, 27, 29, 32-35, 37, 88-93, 112, 123, 124; and with C. sciotensis at 3, 
5, 19, 44, 50, 54-56, 59, 66, and 106-109. 

Ostracod associates include -Aw. ancyla at stations 88, 89, 92, 93; As. 
asceta and Dt. chalaza at 8, 22; Dn. ardis at 10, 12, 20, 21, 25, 27, 32, 
33, 35. 37, 123, 124; Dn. ileata at all stations except 17, 27, 36, 39, 53, 
68,87-93, 111, 112, 115, 118, 120, 121 ; Dn. scalis at 17, 39, 44, 68, 115; 
Dn. truncata at 53-56, 69, 71, 87, 88, 90, 91, 93, 94, 111; Dt.jalcata at 
87-93, 111, 112; Dt. suteri at 27, 33, 35, 124; E. internotalus at 35, 88, 
90; E. kanaivhaensis at 44; and P. phyma at 3, 5, 24, and 44. 

Branchiubdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 14, 19, 
29, 52, 69, 71, 77, 87-93, 98, 110-112, 125; B. illuminatus at 5, 16, 17, 
19, 20, 22, 34, 44, 45, 48, 51, 59, 68, 76, 87, 115, 120-122, 125; C. 
branchiophila at 20, 24, 29, 55, 66, 87-93, 112; C.Jallax at 3, 5, 24, 54- 
56, 66, 71, 87-S9, 91, 92; C. heterognatha at 3, 5, 24, 28, 34, 45, 48, 66, 
106, 122, 123, 125; C. holostoma at 10, 19-22, 25, 37; C. ingens at 5, 54; 
P. alcicornus at 3, 5, 19, 24, 25, 66, 74, 76; Xd.jormosus at 10, 21, 88- 
92, 112; and Xg. instabilius at 3, 5, 9, 12, 21, 22, 24, 37, 44, 46, 53, 54, 

60, 121, and 123. 

Genus Pterodrilus Moore, 1895 

Diagnosis. — Distinguished from Cambarincola by smaller size and 
presence of dorsal projections on prosomites of at least one trunk 
segment. 

Pterodrilus alcicornus Moore 

Figure 20 
Pterodrilus alcicornus Moore, 1895a, p. 449. 

Diagnosis. — With fanlike and cylindrical processes on dorsum of 
prosomites of segments in, iv, v, vin. 

Range. — Southern Appalachians from Virginia southward to 
North Carolina and Tennessee (principally in the New and Tennessee 
Rivers) . 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 125 specimens in 29 col- 
lections from the following stations: 3-5, 15, 18, 19, 24, 25, 43, 58, 

61, 63-67, 70, 72-76, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97, 104, and 105. All but two of 
these stations are in the New River drainage; stations 24 and 25 are 
in the James (tributaries of Johns Creek) drainage. Elevations 
range from 488 to 838 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Pterodrilus alcicornus was associated with 
Cambarus b. bartonii at stations 3-5, 19, 24, 25, 63, 64, 66, 74, 76, 
95, 97; with C. I. longulus at 25; and with C. sciotensis at 3, 5, 15, 18, 
19, 43, 58, 61, 63-67, 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97, 104, and 105. 



62 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Ostracod associates include Dn. ardis at station 25; Dn. ileata at 
all stations except 70; Dt. daphnioides at 70, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81; and 
P. phyma at 3, 5, 24, and 64. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus at stations 18, 19, 
72; A. legaeus at 81; B. illuminatus at 5, 19, 76, 86, 97; C. branchiophila 
at 15, 18, 24, 43, 58, 63, 65-67, 72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 97, 104; C.jallax 
at 3, 5, 15, 18, 24, 43, 58, 61, 63, 65-67, 70, 72, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97; 
C. heterognatha at 3-5, 24, 61, 63-67, 70, 72, 79, 81, 86, 97, 105; 
C. holostoma at 18, 19, 25; C. ingens at 5, 15, 18, 58, 61, 64, 67, 70, 
72, 73, 75, 79, 81, 86, 95, 97, 104; C. philadelphica at 3, 5, 19, 24, 25, 
66, 74, 76; and Xg. instabilins at 3-5, 24, 61, 64, 86, 95, and 97. 




Figure 20. — Pterodrilus alcicornus, lateral view. 



Genus Xironodrilus Ellis, 1918 

Diagnosis. — Body depressed, widening gradually from segment I 
to segment VII; deferent ducts entering ental end of spermiducal 
gland; prostate absent; bursa spherical. 



Xironodrilus formosus Ellis 

Figures 21a-d 
Xironodrilus formosus Ellis, 1918, p. 49. 

Diagnosis. — Dental formula 4/3 to 6/5, teeth subequal in size 
with lateral teeth somewhat shorter than median ones; spermathecal 
duct distinct, bulb of spermatheca globose or cylindrical; spermiducal 
gland simple U-shaped tube, less than twice diameter of vasa defer- 
entia; ejaculatory duct absent. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 63 

Range. — Michigan, Indiana, Kentucky, Virginia. The range of 
Xd. formosus appears to be discontinuous; it is present in the James 
and Roanoke Rivers but apparently absent in the New River. 

Specimens examined. — Approximately 30 specimens in 8 collec- 
tions from the following stations: 10, 21, 88-92, and 112. Of these 
stations 10 and 21 are on Johns Creek at elevations of 549 and 561 m, 
and the remainder are on the Roanoke River and the lower reaches 
of its tributaries at elevations from 439 to 543 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Xironodrilus formosus was associated 
with Cambarus acuminatus at stations 88-92, 112; with C. b. bartonii 
at 10, 21, 89-92; and with C. I. longulus at all stations. 




Figure 21. — Xironodrilus formosus: a, dorsal view of entire animal; b, ventral view of male 
reproductive system; c, upper jaw; d, lower jaw. 

Ostracod associates include An. ancyla at stations 88, 89, 92; Dn. 
ardis and Dn. ileata at 10, 21; Dn. truncata at 88, 90 91; Dt.jalcata at 
88-92 112; and E. internotalus at 88 and 90. 

Branchiobdellid associates include A. koronaeus and C. branchiophila 
at stations 88-92, 112; C. fallax at 88, 89, 91, 92; C. holostoma at 10, 
21; C. philadeljihica at all stations; and Xg. instabilius at 21. 

Remarks. — Xironodrilus formosus was associated with the riffle- 
inhabiting Cambarus I. longulus in every locality that this worm oc- 
curred and may be ecologically restricted to much the same habitat. 
No conclusions as to host specificity should be drawn from this associa- 
tion, however, for most of the range of Xd. formosus is outside that of 
C. I. longulus. 

Genus Xironogiton Ellis, 1919 

Diagnosis.— Body terete anteriorly, depressed posteriorly ("tennis 
racquet-shaped"); peristomium entire; posterior sucker ventral; 
spermiducal gland long and tubular, deferent ducts entering near its 
midlength, prostate absent; bursa large and asymmetrical; sper- 
matheca very small. 



64 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Xironogiton instabilius (Moore) 

Figures 22a-d 
Branchiobdella instabilia Moore, 1894, p. 425. 
Bdellodrilus instabilius Pierantoni, 1912, p. 22. 
Xironogiton instabilius Ellis, 1919, p. 252. 
Xironogiton instabilius instabilius Goodnight, 1940, p. 45. 

Diagnosis. — Dental formula 5/5 or 4/4, teeth irregular in shape 
with some median teeth shorter than lateral ones on both jaws. 

Range. — Swift, colder streams of the mountains from Ontario to 
Georgia; a form at present indistinguishable from Xg. instabilius is 
the most common branchiobdellid in the streams of the western 
slopes of the Sierra Nevada and Cascade Mountains of California, 
Oregon, and Washington west to the Pacific Ocean. 

Specimens examined. — More than 100 specimens in 24 collections 
from the following stations: 3-5, 7, 9, 11-13, 21, 22, 24, 37, 44, 46, 53, 





# 





C 



d 



Figure 22. — Xironogiton instabilius: a, dorsal view of entire animal; b, ventral view of burs£ 
and spermiducal gland; c, upper jaw; d, lower jaw. 



54, 60, 61, 64, 86, 95, 97, 121, and 123. These stations are in the 
headwaters or swifter tributaries of the James and New river drainages 
at elevations of 512 to 1097 m. 

Hosts and associates. — Xironogiton instabilius was associated 
with Cambarus b. bartonii at all stations except 11, 13, 61, 86; with C. 
carolinus at 22; with C. I. longulus at 7, 9, 11, 12, 13, 21, 22, 37, 123; 
with C. sciotensis at 3, 5, 44, 54, 61, 64, 86, 95, 97; and with 0. juvenilis 
at 7. 

Ostracod associates includes As. asceta and Dt. chalaza at station 22 ; 
Dn. ardis at 11-13, 21, 37, 123; Dn. ileata at all stations except 13, 53, 
121; Dn. scalis at 7, 44; Dn. truncata at 53, 54; E. kanawhaensis at 44; 
and P. phyma at 3, 5, 7, 24, 44, and 64. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 65 

Brancliiobdellid associates include B. illmninatus at stations 5, 22, 
44, 86, 97, 121; C. branchiophila at 24, 86, 97; Cjallax at 3, 5, 24, 54, 
61, 86, 95, 97; C heterognatha at 3-5, 24, 61, 64, 86, 97, 123; C holostoma 
at 7, 11, 13, 21, 22, 37; C. ingens at 5, 54, 61, 64, 86, 95, 97; C. phila- 
delphica at 3, 5, 9, 12, 21, 22, 24, 37, 44, 46, 53, 54, 60, 121, 123; P. 
alcicornus at 3-5, 24, 61, 64, 86, 95, 97; and Xd. formosus at 21. 

Discussion 

Since the crayfishes in the area serve as hosts to the epizootic 
ostracods and branchiobdellids and since, in this area, neither of the 
latter is known to occur independently of their hosts, it seems highly 
probable that they reached the Mountain Lake region on one or more 
of the crayfish stocks. If this likelihood can be accepted, a knowledge 
of the probable origin of the crayfish fauna may help to explain, in 
part, some of the associations that have been recorded above. 

One of the crayfishes, Cambarus b. bartonii, is at home in the Appa- 
lachian Mountain system, and probably had its origin in the southern 
part, migrating in postglacial times as far north as New Brunswick, 
Canada. This crayfish ascends the smallest headwater streams, 
burrows in seepages, springs, and along water courses; furthermore, 
it is not averse to leaving the aquatic habitat to crawl about on land. 
These habits would, of course, enable it to ignore narrow terrestrial 
barriers between headwater streams, and, consequently, it is not 
surprising that it occurs in all three river systems in the Mountain 
Lake Region. 

Cambarus sciotensis, a not-so-distant relative of C b. bartonii, 
appears to be confined to the Ohio drainage system in the Kanawha 
and Scioto tributaries, where it seeks cover beneath stones or in vege- 
tation throughout most of the stream bed. Its range is not adequately 
known, but it seems probable that it reached this area through 
migrations up the Kanawha and New Rivers, and here it is confined 
to the New River drainage. 

Cambarus I. longulus, probably the most primitive member of the 
genus in the area, almost certainly has reached its present range by 
the migration of its ancestors from the southwest (Coosa-Tennessee 
drainage systems) leaving populations in the Tennessee (C. I. longi- 
rostris Faxon) and New (C. I. chasmodactylus James) systems. The 
typical subspecies is found in the lower mountains and Piedmont 
provinces from the James River to the Yadkin River in Virginia and 
North Carolina. Although perhaps exhibiting a larger number of 
generalized characteristics than other members of the genus in the 
area, it is almost as ecologically restricted as C. carolinus in that here 
it is confined to riffles in tributaries of the James and Roanoke Rivers. 

The range of Cambarus acuminatus and its relatives forms an asym- 



66 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

metrical U around the Appalachian Mountains, extending from the 
eastern Great Lakes area southward along the western slopes, eastward 
around the southern portion of the Blue Ridge, and northward to 
Maryland. The ancestors of this stock probably arose from a 
southern Appalachian G. extraneus stock and spread northward on 
both sides of the mountains. There is little doubt that C. acuminatus 
arose in the foothills of the southern Blue Ridge and spread northward 
along the Atlantic slopes to southern Maryland, an area in which it 
is characteristic of the nonrifne portions of most of the lower mountain 
and piedmont streams. In areas of the northern part of its range, 
it even frequents streams in the lower coastal plain. In the Mountain 
Lake area it occurs, like C. I. longulus, in the James and Roanoke 
drainage systems. 

Cambarus carolinus is, in another way, equally as restricted in its 
ecological requirements as is C. I. longulus, frequenting ground water 
which it reaches through burrowing. Like the latter, it gained access 
to the area along the western slopes of the Appalachian system, if 
not from the south then from an original home to the west, probably 
not far from this area. This crayfish habitually leaves its burrows 
after dark following or during rains and often wanders some distance 
from its tunnels. Not infrequently it has been seen crossing roads 
and crawling about open areas where there are few or no obvious 
burrows; consequently, an absence of standing surface water is not a 
serious deterrent to the migration of this crayfish, and, therefore, it 
is not surprising to find that it has crossed the divide into both the 
New and James watersheds. 

Although Orconectes juvenilis is native to the Ohio drainage system, 
its presence in the Mountain Lake area is almost certainly attributable 
to introductions. It has demonstrated a remarkable vigor both in 
Mountain Lake proper, where it has apparently brought about the 
expulsion of other crayfishes, and in Potts Creek, where it seems to be 
making notable progress in taking over most of the crayfish niches. 
The sources of the introduced stocks have not been ascertained, but 
it is highly probable that the animals were obtained from either 
(or both) the New or Tennessee systems in West Virginia and Virginia, 
respectively. To summarize briefly, the presence of the crayfishes 
in the Mountain Lake region may be explained as follows : 

Cambarus acuminatus — by migrations along the Atlantic slope from the southeast. 
Cambarus b. bartonii — originated in or near the area. 

Cambarus carolinus — originated in the area or by migrations from the southwest. 
Cambarus I. longulus — by migrations from the southwest via the Tennessee and 

New Rivers to the Atlantic slope, probably along the James, and from it to 

the Roanoke. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 67 

Cambarus sciotensis — by migrations from the west along the New River. 
Orconectes juvenilis — by introductions in Potts Creek and in Mountain Lake 
proper and by recent migrations from the west in New River. 

Despite overwhelming evidence for a lack of host specificity for 
most of the ostracod and branchiobdellid symbionts, it is highly 
probable that all of them or their ancestors have reached the area as 
passive migrants on one or more of the crayfish stocks presently 
represented in the area. Too, it is scarcely to be denied that the 
association of certain ostracods with a particular crayfish is in a few 
instances apparently absolute, and most of the ostracods tend to 
"favor" one or two crayfish species. Among the ostracods that have 
evolved nearby or within the Mountain Lake area are the monotypic 
Phymocythere phyma, and three species of the genus Donnaldsoncy- 
there: Dn. ardis, Dn. ileata, and Dn. truncata. As nearly as can be 
ascertained at the present, the genus Donnaldsoncy there has as its 
center of distribution the Appalachian Mountains, and Dn. ardis and 
Dn. truncata are confined to the general Mountain Lake region. 
Dn. scalis, which is also known from two localities in Pennsylvania 
and one in New York, is largely restricted in the Mountain Lake 
area to the higher altitudes in the James and New drainages, where 
Cambarus b. bartonii is the usual host. Dn. ardis, endemic in the 
James drainage, occurs at lower altitudes primarily on Cambarus I. 
longulus. Dn. truncata appears to be confined to lower elevations 
in the Koanoke and New drainage systems, where the principal hosts 
are C. acuminatus, C. b. bartonii, and C sciotensis. Dn. ileata, known 
from a number of localities in the New River (Kanawha) system to 
the west of the Mountain Lake area, occurs in all three drainage 
systems and on all the species of crayfishes in the area except C. 
carolinus. In this group of four closely related ostracods it seems 
likely that three of them might well have evolved from a common 
stock that became, for a time, isolated in the three drainage systems 
studied here: Dn. ardis in the James, Dn. ileata in the New, and 
Dn. truncata in the Roanoke. Dn. scalis probably arose in some 
stream to the north (its range is too poorly known at present to be 
more specific), and it has been introduced by C. b. bartonii into the 
Mountain Lake area at higher elevations, apparently first reaching 
the James drainage and later being transported, presumably by the 
same crayfish, to the headwaters of the New River. The absence of 
Dn. scalis from the Roanoke River can perhaps be explained by the 
fact that the headwater streams occur at too low an elevation for the 
species — certainly the maximum elevation of the system in the area 
under consideration is marginal for the species. With Dn. scalis 



68 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

occupying the smaller tributaries at higher elevations (even now, 
except in one locality on Potts Creek, above 890 m), the ancestors of 
Dn. ardis had access to the lower elevations (below 625 m) in the James 
River drainage. Through migrations of C. b. bartonii overland 
between headwater streams, Dn. ileata was introduced from the 
New River into the James River, where it is widespread in the 
Mountain Lake area, and, although less well established in the 
Roanoke River, it has been found in one locality there. Two sources 
of evidence provide the basis for the hypothesis that Dn. truncata 
originated in the Roanoke River and later reached the New River, 
because (1) only Dn. truncata and Dn. ileata (the latter of which is 
abundant in the New and James drainages but represented in only 
one station in the Roanoke) are found in the Roanoke, and (2) 
Burton and Odum (1945, pp. 192-193) indicated that two "Atlantic 
coast" fishes are found in the New River system, suggesting that 
streams of the New River system had pirated tributaries of the James. 
Now there are data that support equally well a tapping of the Roanoke 
River by the New River (R. D. Ross, pers. comm.). Even if stream 
piracy were highly improbable, there is no reason why C. b. bartonii, 
one of the principal hosts of the species, could not cross the relatively 
low divide between tributaries of Indian Run or Cedar Run (to 
Roanoke) and Slate Branch or Toms Creek (to New). 

The monotypic Phymocythere phyma, the closest relatives of which 
are members of the genus Ascetocy there, is probably a somewhat de- 
generate offshoot (reduced clasping apparatus and unadorned swollen 
subterminal area of the peniferum) from the Ascetocythere stock that 
has forsaken the groundwater environment and ventured into competi- 
tion with other ostracods frequenting lotic surface habitats. In terms 
of numbers of individuals, it does not appear to have been spectacularly 
successful. Supporting the assumption of the close relationship of 
Phymocythere to Ascetocythere is their apparent commonly shared 
preference for living among the setiferous areas of the mouthparts of 
their hosts. 

The single ostracod that seems to have been derived from a stock 
reaching the area from the west is Entocythere kanawhaensis, which 
probably arrived on Cambarus sciotensis; close relatives of this ostracod 
are known from the west and south. 

Four species apparently are derived from stocks that have moved 
into the area from the southwest although the ancestral home of the 
two genera is in the southern Appalachians and Cumberland Plateau; 
thus, any of them conceivably might have had their origin in this 
region. Ancestors of Ascetocythere asceta undoubtedly arrived in the 
area on the C. carolinus stock, the range of which is almost congruent 
with that of the genus Ascetocythere; furthermore, As. asceta is not 



no. 3G02 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 69 

known to occur on any other host. Also sharing the same host is 
Dactylocythere chalaza, which, in contrast to Phymocythere phyma, was 
derived from a stock that is primarily associated with lotic habitats but 
which invaded the groundwater in adopting C. carolinus as a host; it 
is not improbable that this crayfish brought the progenitors of Dt. 
chalaza with it when it moved into the area. The third species 
postulated to have arrived in the area from the southwest is Dt. 
daphnioides, which, in the Mountain Lake region, is associated with 
only one crayfish, C. sciotensis, but outside of the area (in the New, 
Watauga, and Pound drainages) it infests several species, including 
C. b. bartonii. The fourth species, Dt. falcata, insofar as is presently 
known, has a discontinuous distribution and probably reached the 
Roanoke River from the southwest, perhaps following the same route 
as proposed for Dn. truncata in getting from the New into the Roanoke 
basin. The perplexing problem of Dt. falcata not having been found 
in the New River leads to speculation that it may have been routed by 
other species there, perhaps one or more of its close relatives. 

Southeastern components of the entocytherine fauna of the region 
include Entocythere internotalus, Dt. suteri, and An. ancyla. The 
principal hosts of all three of these species are C. acuminatus and C. I. 
longulus, and it is likely that C. acuminatus has been more important 
in the dispersal of these three than has C. I. longulus, not only because 
of its larger surface area and broader ecological tolerance, but also 
because its range far exceeds that of the smaller species. In summary, 
the presence of the ostracods in the Mountain Lake region may be 
explained as follows: 

Ascetocythere asceta, Dactylocythere chalaza, Dt. daphnioides, and Dt. falcata — by 
migrations from the southwest along the Tennessee and New drainage systems. 

Ankylocythere ancyla, Entocythere internotalus, and Dt. suteri — by migrations along 
the Atlantic slope from the southeast. 

Donnaldsoncythere ardis, Dn. ileata, Dn. truncata, and Phymocythere phyma — 
originated in or near the area. 

Donnaldsoncythere scalis — by migrations from the north into the James drainage. 

Entocythere kanawhaensis — from the west along the Kanawha and New rivers. 

Two-thirds of the branchiobdellids of the Mountain Lake area are 
endemic to the southern Appalachians. Of the remainder, Xg. in- 
stabilius is confined to mountain streams, at relatively high elevations 
throughout the Appalachians, but it is indistinguishable from the 
western Xg. oregonensis. The greater number of species of Xironogiton 
are found to the west of the continental divide, and one must assume 
that the present disjunct distribution of the genus is a relict of a former 
continuous range. The monotypic Bdellodrilus illuminatus is widely 
distributed over North America. At this time few inferences can be 
drawn as to place of origin, migration routes, or evolution of this 

244-775—67-^—7 



70 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

species, which, in some respects, is the most primitive of North 
American branchiobdellids, and, in other respects (its parasitic 
habitus) , among the more highly specialized. Probaby an early bran- 
chiobdelhd stock acquired the parasitic habit, is now widely dis- 
tributed, and has undergone (because of its confinement to branchial 
chambers of the various hosts [?]) little or no evolutionary diversifica- 
tion. A possible caveat to this conclusion must be entered because 
of the lack of taxonomic studies of B. illuminatus; further study may 
show that some of the widely disjunct populations (e.g., those from 
the Pacific drainage in Mexico and California) assigned to this species 
are actually other disjunct species. Xd. formosus is more common 
in the Ohio drainage in Kentucky, Tennessee (Cumberland drainage) , 
Ohio, and West Virginia than in Virginia, but the greatest number of 
the species are from the Great Lakes region, primarily in Michigan. Yet 
the genus, with the exception of Xd. jormosus, appears to be confined 
to the southern Appalachians and the Ozarks. Xironodrilus formosus 
is a primitive species within the genus (and the order), and one must 
postulate a post-Pleistocene invasion of the Great Lakes from the 
South and attribute a relict status to the populations in the James 
and Roanoke Rivers. This conclusion has been reached because (1) 
the distribution of the species (and the genus) is such that we can only 
assume that it reached the Roanoke and James by way of the New, and 
(2) that the genus originated within either the New or Tennessee 
systems, most likely the New, since the ancient Teays River and the 
Illinois Ozarks would link the Appalachian and Ozarkian progenitors 
of the modern species and leave relict populations along the present 
Ohio as a source for the invasion of the Great Lakes. The remaining 
widespread species, C. philadelphica, is clearly one of Appalachian 
origin that has spread from the mountains into the piedmont and, to 
the north, the coastal plain; the western limits of C. philadelphica are 
in the interior plateau regions of Tennessee, Kentucky, and Ohio, 
although there is evidence here that it intergrades with the Ozarkian 
C. chirocephala, and there is one anomalous record from Wisconsin. 
It is futile to speculate about the origins of B. illuminatus and Xg. 
instabilius; they are bound to the ancient invasion of the continent 
by the ancestors of the order. Cambarincola philadelphica and Xd. 
-formosus, the former the dominant branchiobdellid species of eastern 
North America and the latter a primitive species fragmented into dis- 
junct populations, are, however, derived from early inhabitants of 
either the Tennessee or New Rivers, more likely the New. 

The remaining two-thirds of the species are at home in the area. 
C. branchiophila is a gill-inhabiting branchiobdellid known only from 
the Mountain Lake area, where it is found associated with all the cray- 
fishes except the burrowing C. carolinus and the introduced Orconectes 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 71 

juvenilis. Cambarincola branchiophila is apparently more common in 
the New River system, 18 occurrences as compared to 4 in the James 
and 9 in the Roanoke, but this may be a sampling artifact (table 1). 
The species appears to belong to a primitive section of the genus, and 
its closest relative is C. shoshone Hoffman (1963, p. 319) from the 
Snake River drainage in Idaho. As a putatively relict species that 
has survived in the area as a consequence of the adoption of the gill- 
parasitic habit, the only clue as to its origin is the general importance 
of the New River as the source of the branchiobdellid fauna of the 
region from which the invasion of the upper reaches of the James and 
Roanoke is easily understandable either through stream captures, 
which have indubitably occurred, or the overland wandering of C. b. 
bartonii. 

Ankyrodrilus koronaeus is likewise confined to the streams in the 
area, occurring in all three of the drainages, but it has been found 
outside the area in Botetourt County, Va., in the Roanoke drainage. 
But A. legaeus, with only one record in the area from Wolf Creek of 
the New River, is really a species of the Tennessee drainage, extending 
from southwest Virginia to middle Tennessee, where it is found in the 
Cumberland River drainage. At this time, the phylogenetic position 
of Ankyrodrilus is obscure: one of us( Holt, 1965, p. 10) has pointed out 
previously the similarities, mostly in body form, of the genus to 
Xironodrilus and Xironogiton, yet a further consideration of the 
male reproductive system leads to the tentative conclusion that 
Ankyrodrilus may be most closely related to the eastern Asian Cir- 
rodrilus. The genus would appear to be a survival in the southern 
Appalachians of a formerly more widespread group and has reached 
the Mountain Lake area from the Tennessee and Cumberland systems 
by way of the Clinch or Holston Rivers. 

Pterodrilus alcicornus is a member of a genus, clearly an offshoot of 
Cambarincola, that is centered in the southern Appalachian-Ozark 
region with an outlier, P. distichus, which is found primarily in the 
glaciated areas around the Great Lakes, and possibly another, P. 
mexicanus, in southeastern Mexico. Pterodrilus alcicornus is a species of 
the Tennessee system and has reached the New River from the southwest 
and hence to the James. The species is not known from the Roanoke. 

Of the remaining species of the genus Cambarincola, C. holostoma is 
known only from the James, Potomac, and New river basins. But it is 
most common in the James system (Potts, Craig, and Johns Creeks), 
with two records from Sinking Creek and one record (Hoffman, 1963, 
p. 360) from the Potomac drainage. The conclusion that C. holostoma 
is a specialized derivative of a C. philadelphica stock that arose in the 
upper tributaries of the James River is inescapable. Cambarincola 
ingens, common in the Tennessee drainage southward to northeastern 



72 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Table 1. — Summary of geographical and altitudinal distribution and associations 
of the crayfishes, entocytherids, and branchiobdellids of the Mountain Lake Region 
(J= James; N=New; R= Roanoke) 





Animal 


Drainage Altitude 


Crayfishes 


Ostracods 


Branchiobdellids 






systems 


(meters) 








I. 


C. acuminatus 


JR 


402-535 


II, IV 


1, 3, 4, 
6,9, 
10, 11 


acdegik 


II. 


C. b. bartonii 


JNR 


427-1219 


I, IV, V, 
VI 


1, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 9, 
10, 11, 
12, 13 


acdefghijkl 


III. 


C. carolinus 


JN 


585-1250 




2,7 


ce 


IV. 


C. 1. longulus 


JR 


402-686 


I, II, VI 


1, 3, 4, 
6,9, 
10, 11 


acdefgijkl 


V. 


C. sciolensis 


N 


427-899 


II 


4, 5, 6, 8, 
12, 13 


abcdefghijl 


VI. 


0. juvenilis 


JN 


671-1180 


II, IV 


4, 5, 13 


gl 


1. 


An. ancyla 


R 


439-475 


I, II, IV 


6, 9, 11 


adeik 


2. 


As. asceta 


JN 


585-1250 


III 


7 


ce 


3. 


Dn. ardis 


J 


402-622 


I, II, IV 


4, 10, 11 


acdfgijkl 


4. 


Dn. ileata 


JNR 


415-899 


I, II, IV, 
V, VI 


3, 5, 6, 8, 
10, 11, 
12, 13 


abcdefghijkl 


5. 


Dn. scalis 


JN 


671-1219 


II, V, VI 


4, 9, 12, 
13 


cil 


6. 


Dn. truncata 


NR 


445-625 


I, II, IV, 
V 


1, 4, 9, 
11 


acdebikl 


7. 


Dt. chalaza 


JN 


585-1250 


III 


2 


ce 


8. 


Dt. daphnioides 


N 


488-561 


V 


4 


abdefhj 


9. 


Dt. falcata 


R 


439-597 


I, II, IV 


1, 6, 11 


acdeik 


10. 


Dt. suteri 


J 


402-482 


I, II, IV 


3, 4, 11 


ai 


11. 


E. internotalus 


JR 


402-475 


I, II, IV 


1, 3, 4, 
6, 9, 10 


adegik 


12. 


E. kanawhaensis 


N 


500-899 


II, V 


4, 5, 13 


cdefil 


13. 


P. phyma 


JN 


610-1143 


II, V, VI 


4, 5, 12 


cdefghijl 


a. 


A. koronaeus 


JNR 


402-750 


I, II, IV, 
V 


1, 3, 4, 
6, 8, 9, 
10, 11 


cdefghijk 


b. 


A. legaeus 


N 


488 


V 


4,8 


defhj 


c. 


B. illuminatus 


JNR 


518-1250 


I, II, III, 

IV, V 


2, 3, 4, 5, 

6, 7, 9, 
12, 13 


adefghijl 


d. 


C. branchiophila 


JNR 


427-777 


I, II, IV, 
V 


1, 3, 4, 6, 
8, 9, 11, 
12, 13 


abcefghijkl 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



73 



Table 1. — Summary of geographical and altitudinal distribution and associations 
of the crayfishes, entocylherids, and branchiobdellids of the Mountain Lake Region 
(J — James; N = New; R= Roanoke) — Continued 





Animal 


Drainage Altitude 


Crayfishes 


Ostracods 


Branchiobdellids 






systems 


(meters) 








e. 


C. fallax 


JNR 


439-1158 


I, II, III, 
IV, V 


1, 2, 4, 
6, 7, 8, 
9, 11, 
12, 13 


abcdfghijkl 


f. 


C. heterognatha 


JN 


451-838 


II, IV, V 


3, 4, 8, 
12, 13 


abcdehijl 


g. 


C. holostoma 


JN 


512-671 


I, II, IV, 

V, VI 


2, 3, 4, 5, 
7, 11, 13 


acdehijkl 


h. 


C. ingens 


N 


488-777 


II, V 


4, 6, 8, 
13 


abcdefgijl 


i. 


C. philadelphica 


JNR 


427-1170 


I, II, III, 

IV, V 


1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, 
9, 10, 11 
12, 13 


acdefghjkl 
» 


J- 


P. alcicornus 


JN 


488-838 


II, IV, V 


3, 4, 8, 
13 


abcdefghijl 


k. 


Xd. formosus 


JR 


439-561 


I, II, IV 


1, 3, 4, 
6, 9, 11 


adegil 


1. 


Xg. instabilius 


JN 


512-1097 


II, IV, V, 
VI 


2, 3, 4, 5, 
6, 7, 12, 
13 


cdefghijk 



Georgia and confined to the New River and its tributaries in the area, 
is another specialized offshoot of the C. philadelphica stock that has 
reached the Mountain Lake region from the south. There is one 
record from Patrick County, Va., in the Roanoke drainage (Hoffman, 
1963, p. 335) ; the remaining records from outside the area are from 
the mountain streams of the New and Tennessee drainages. Cam- 
barincola ingens is a Blue Ridge species, but it is impossible to decide 
whether it evolved in the headwaters of the New River in North 
Carolina or in those of the Tennessee River in the same region. 
Cambarincola heterognatha is known from the Potomac southeastward 
through the mountains in the New, Cumberland, and Tennessee river 
systems, with one isolated record in the Roanoke drainage (Franklin 
County, Va.). Again, we are dealing with a species, widespread in the 
mountains, that appears to have spread into the Tennessee drainage. 
The alternative possibility of an origin in the Tennessee may be as 
likely, and there is no way now to decide between these choices. 
Finally, C. fallax is not quite so widespread as C. philadelphica, but it 



74 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

is abundant throughout the southern Appalachians. Our information 
suggests that C. fallax has reached the James and Roanoke from the 
New, but it does not indicate any choice between the New or the 
Tennessee as the ancestral home of the species. In summary, the 
presence of the branchiobdellids in the Mountain Lake region may 
be explained as follows : 

Ankyrodrilus koronaeus — originated in or near the area, but derived from a 

Cumberland Plateau group by way of the Tennessee drainage. 
Ankyrodrilus legaeus — by migrations from the Cumberland Plateau region by 

way of the Tennessee drainage. 
Bdellodrilus illuminatus — unknown origin (ancient, widespread). 
Cambarincola branchiophila — New River endemic, relict survivor of a once wider 

range. 
Cambarincola fallax — a southern Appalachian species (now widespread in eastern 

highlands) that reached James and Roanoke from New. 
Cambarincola heterognatha — New River native. 

Cambarincola holostoma — James River native, evolved from C. philadelphica stock. 
Cambarincola ingens — by migrations from the south, headwaters of New or 

Tennessee. 
Cambarincola philadelphica — Appalachian (widespread) . 
Pterodrilus alcicornus — Tennessee drainage. 
Xironodrilus formosus — relict of ancient Teays River fauna. 
Xironogiton instabilius — unknown origin (ancient relict). 

It has been pointed out above that evidence exists that most of 
the ostracods tend to favor one or more crayfish hosts. The extreme 
of this favoritism is demonstrated in the relationship between C. 
carolinus and its two "riders," As. asceta and Dt. chalaza, in which 
the associations appear to be absolute for the ostracods. (As has 
already been suggested, the "favoritism" probably has more to do 
with the environment of the host than with physiological relation- 
ships usually associated with "host specificity.") The opposite 
extreme is demonstrated in an apparent lack of discrimination on 
the part of the ostracod Dn. ileata that infests all the crayfishes in 
the area except C. carolinus and is associated with it in other areas. 
The affinities of other ostracods for one or two particular hosts seem 
to lie somewhere between these two extremes. 

What the nature of the ties is between the ostracod symbionts 
and the crayfish hosts and between the branchiobdellid symbionts 
and the crayfish hosts has not been critically analyzed. It cannot 
be said that the ostracod relationship is parasitic even in the sense 
that they have free transportation and pasturage, for they might 
well be paying a service charge in ridding the crayfish of foreign organic 
matter that adheres particularly to the setiferous areas of the exo- 
skeleton. While they may not do a thorough cleaning job, the ac- 
cumulation of such matter is probably retarded. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 75 

There are instances of branchiobdellids known from only one host 
species, but these are associations in which the worm is known from 
only one or a few collections. The one such association of this type 
from our collections (A. legaeus on Cambarus sciotensis) clearly does 
not indicate host-species specificity since A. legaeus is known from 
other species of crayfishes outside of the Mountain Lake area (Holt, 
1965, p. 12) Similarly, the associations (table 1) in which it might 
appear that there is a "preference" by a branchiobdellid species for 
one or another host species are surely to be interpreted as the con- 
sequence of the ecological relationships of hosts and worms or as the 
product of the migration (distribution) patterns of the two. Host 
specificity in the sense of host-species specificity is not an important 
feature of the relationship between the annelids and the crustaceans; 
yet, the relationship is an obligate one for the branchiobdellids. 

In occupying the exoskeleton of the crayfish host, the ostracods 
and branchiobdellids have found niches that remind one of the 
occupation of a stream by two or more species of crayfishes. Although 
detailed observations on the distribution of the ostracods on their 
hosts are limited to those that are reported above, it is reasonable to 
assume that most multiple infestations result in a partial segregation 
of the species on different areas of the host, similar to that exemplified 
by As. asceta and Dt. chalaza on C. carolinus, in which the former is 
concentrated among the setae of the gnathal appendages and the 
latter on the setiferous portions of the abdomen. In terms of obvious 
morphological adaptations to microhabitats on the crayfishes, the 
ostracods have not approached the refinements exhibited by some of 
the branchiobdellids (see p. 8). The contrast in body form of the 
vermiform, gill-inhabiting B. illuminatus, the plumose, venter- 
dwelling P. alcicornus, and the depressed, tennis-racquet-shaped, 
chela-dwelling Xg. instabilius reflect the extreme conspicuous adaptive 
modifications accomplished by the members of this order in becoming 
specialized for a particular microhabitat on the crayfish host. Even 
in the absence of such adaptive features, there must be equally 
strong as yet unrecognized ones that are in effect in the ostracods, 
for in the associations just mentioned the gnathal areas of all specimens 
of C. carolinus examined were dominated by As. asceta and the 
abdominal region by Dt. chalaza. 

While the adaptations of the crayfishes to riffles and pools are not 
so conspicuous as those among the branchiobdellids in their modifi- 
cations for living on different body regions of the crayfish, the riffle- 
dwelling C. I. longulus is smaller, less spiny, and has smoother chelae 
than the pool-dwelling C. acuminatus. The burrowing C. carolinus, 
in contrast to C. I. longulus, has a compressed rather than depressed 



76 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

thorax, a longer, narrower areola signifying a more spacious gill 
chamber, a less pointed rostrum, and more tuberculate and sharper- 
tipped chelae. 

Although a number of references have been made by us to the 
associations between the epizoites and their hosts, it is not an omission 
on our part that we have scarcely alluded to the relationships existing 
between the branchiobdellids and the entocytherids. It seems 
probable that the gill-inhabiting branchiobdellids, B. illuminatus and 
C. branchiophila, probably have few contacts with the entocytherids 
for, as pointed out, we have not encountered a single ostracod within 
the gill chamber of the crayfish. Furthermore, contacts between Xg. 
instabilius, the branchiobdellid that is almost confined to the chela of 
the host, would also have little cause for encountering an ostracod, for 
the latter has not been observed to inhabit the chelae of the hosts. 
In contrast, most of the members of the genus Cambarincola, the two 
members of Ankyrodrilus, P. alcicornus, and Xd. formosus do un- 
doubtedly encounter the ostracods in the course of their moving about 
the ventral part of the thoracic and abdominal areas of the crayfish. 
Even though the methods of feeding of the branchiobdellids and 
ostracods may be different, in view of the fact that they share the 
same source of food scraped from the exoskeleton of the host, there 
must be some degree of competition between them, however slight 
the intensity of the competition might be. Furthermore, inasmuch as 
several of the branchiobdellids are known to feed on other animals, 
even other branchiobdellids, that dwell on the crayfish, it is a bit 
surprising that there is no record of their having ingested an ento- 
cytherid ostracod. One cannot help posing the question as to the 
nature of the immunity of the entocytherids from the apparently 
voracious appetite of their fellow epizoites! There are some data 
that indicate that crayfishes heavily infested with branchiobdellids 
seldom, if ever, have large numbers of ostracods. 

Two studies have been made elsewhere that are similar to that 
undertaken here. Crawford (1959) treated the crayfishes and their 
ostracod associates of Richland County, S.C., and Simonds 4 conducted 
a study of the crayfishes and their ostracod and branchiobdellid 
symbionts of the Hiwassee drainage system in Georgia, North Caro- 
lina, and Tennessee. In both studies, only a single drainage system 
was involved, the former dealing with the Santee river system and 
the latter with a major tributary of the Tennessee-Ohio river system. 

Crawford found that within Richland Coimty there were 11 species 

4 Kenneth W. Simonds conducted this survey of the Hiwassee drainage system 
in the late 1950s; however, a final report was not completed and no publications 
have been derived from the survey except the descriptions of new species of 
ostracods by Hobbs and Walton (1960, 1961). 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



77 



of crayfishes belonging to three genera, Procambarus (4 species), 
Cambarus (6 species, 2 of which, C. b. bartonii and C. acuminatus, are 
also present in the Mountain Lake region), and Orconectes clypeatus 
( = Faxonella clypeata). Infesting these crayfishes were six species of 
entocytherids (the first two of the following list occur also in the 
Mountain Lake region) : Entocythere internotalus, Dactylocythere suteri, 
Dt. striophylax, Ankylocythere telmoecea, An. tiphophyla, and An. 
hobbsi (HofF)— all except the latter described as new in his report. 
The most outstanding difference between the faunas of the Santee 
River and the Mountain Lake region is the number of species of each 



Table 2. — Major streams, altitude ranges, stations, and numbers of species in 
the Mountain Lake Region 



Streams 


Altitudes 


Stations 


Cray- 


Ostra- 


Branchi- 


Totals 




(meters) 




fishes 


cods 


obdellids 




James River 














Craig Creek 


384-853 


30,31,32,33,34,35, 
36, 37, 122, 123, 
124 


3 


4 


6 


13 


Johns Creek 


384-1219 


9,10,11,12,13,17, 
20,21,22,23,24, 

25, 26, 27, 28, 68, 
100, 103 


4 


8 


9 


21 


Meadow Creek 


390-811 


29, 98, 125 


3 


1 


5 


9 


Potts Creek 


671-1085 


6,7,8 


4 


5 


3 


12 


New River 


384-524 


26,57 


2 


3 


3 


8 


Doe Creek 


500-1067 


45,113, 118,119 


1 


1 


3 


5 


Big Stony 


488-1067 


3, 4, 5, 43, 62, 63, 64, 


3 


4 


8 


15 


Creek 




65, 66, 67, 86, 97, 
99, 102, 127 










Little Stony 


500-1250 


1,2,16,38,39,40, 


4 


6 


7 


17 


Creek 




41,42,44,59,60, 
61,82,83, 101, 
114, 115, 120,121 










Sinking Creek 


518-1067 


14, 15,18,19,46,47, 
48,49,50,51,52, 
58, 84, 95, 96 


2 


1 


10 


13 


Spruce Run 


506-671 


53, 54, 55, 56 


2 


2 


5 


9 


Toms Creek 


524-738 


94, 104, 105, 106, 
107,108,109,117 


2 


2 


5 


9 


Wolf and Mill 


472-1067 


80,81 


1 


2 


6 


9 


Creeks 














Roanoke River 














North Fork 


411-756 


85,87,88,89,90,91, 
92,93,110,111, 
112 


3 


5 


6 


14 



78 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

group — in the San tee, there are 11 crayfishes, 6 ostracods, and 4 
branchiobdellids ; in the Mountain Lake region there are 6, 13, and 12, 
respectively (see table 3 for the numbers in the three river systems in 
the area). Both species of crayfishes common to the two areas occur 
in the Roanoke and James drainages, and C. b. bartonii is also present 
in the New; both of the ostracods common to the two occur in the 
James and one of them in the Roanoke drainage. Of the four species 
of branchiobdellids present in the Santee, two of them, B. illuminatus 
and C. philadelphica, occur in all three drainages of the Mountain 
Lake area. 

Simonds has provided us with a summary chart of his findings and 
the numbers of species present are recorded in table 3. Two crayfish 
common to the two areas, C. carolinus and C. b. bartonii, are found in 
the James and New drainages and the latter also in the Roanoke. Of 
the two species of ostracods shared in common, Dt. jalcata and E. 
internotalus, the former occurs in the Roanoke and the latter in the 
James and New drainages. Of the five branchiobdellids found in the 
two regions, B. illuminatus, C. jallax, and C. 'philadelphica occur in all 
three drainages of the Mountain Lake area, C. heterognatha in the 
James and New, and C. ingens in the New. 

Only three of the animals mentioned above occur in all five drainage 
systems: one crayfish, C. b. bartonii, and two branchiobdellids, B. 
illuminatus and C. philadelphica. 

The only comparative faunistic study of the drainage systems in the 
Mountain Lake area is that of Burton and Odum (1945), in which 
they compared the fish faunas of certain tributaries of the New and 
James Rivers. Table 5 presents one of their comparisons and sum- 
marizes our findings in the same streams. From the standpoint of the 
fishes, Craig and Sinking Creeks and Craig and Spruce Runs share the 
greatest number of species and Johns and Little Stony the least; in 
contrast, using the totals of the three groups studied by us, Johns and 
Little Stony have the most in common and Craig and Spruce Run the 
least. Similarities and differences in our findings may be found in the 
table. There is abundant evidence for multiple faunal interchanges 
between the three river systems in the Mountain Lake area but these 
data have never been brought together. Suffice it to say here that the 
New River fauna is the principal component of the crayfish-entocy- 
therid-branehiobdellid fauna of the region as here defined, and the 
Tennessee basin has served as the chief pathway for the migrations of 
stocks into the region. The Roanoke basin apparently has contributed 
the least. Not only is the Roanoke the smallest and has the least 
ecological diversity of the three river systems in the region, but also 
there appear to have been fewer ancient ancestral stocks of crayfishes, 
entocytherids, and branchiobdellids in it. 



CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 



79 



Table 3. — Numbers of species occurring in the major drainage systems of the 
Mountain Lake Region, the Santee (Richland County, S.C.) and Hiwassee (Georgia, 
North Carolina, and Tennessee) Rivers 





Drainage 


Crayfishes 


Ostracods 


Branchi- 
obdellids 


Totals 


James 




5 


8 


10 


23 


New 




4 


8 


11 


23 


Roanoke 




3 


5 


6 


14 


Santee ' 




11 


G 


4 


21 


Hiwassee 2 




11 


10 


9 


30 



' Except for numbers of branchiobdellids (original data), from Crawford, 1959. 
' From Simonds (see ftn., p. 70). 



Table 4. — Numbers of species restricted to the drainage system or combinations of 

systems indicated 



Drainage 


Crayfishes 


Ostracods 


Branchi- 
obdellids 


Totals 


James, New, Roanoke 


1 


1 


5 


7 


James, New 


2 


4 


4 


10 


James, Roanoke 


2 


1 


1 


4 


New, Roanoke 





1 





1 


James 





2 





2 


New 


1 


2 


2 


5 


Roanoke 





2 



12 


2 


Totals 


6 


13 


31 



Table 5. — Summary of similarities and differences in the crayfish, entocytherid, 
branchiobdellid, and fish faunas in selected streams in the Mountain Lake Region 
(S= number of species shared in common by the two streams; D = number of 
species found in both streams that are not shared in common) 





Streams 


Crayfishes 


Ostracods 


Branchiob- 


Totals 


Fishes l 














dellids 








James Drainage 


New Drainage 


S 


D 


S 


D 


S 


D 


S 


D 


S D 


Craig 


Sinking 




3 


1 


3 


6 


4 


8 


10 


8 27 


Craig 


Spruce Run 




3 


1 


4 


2 


7 


4 


14 


8 23 


Johns 


Sinking 




4 


1 


7 


7 


3 


9 


14 


7 2 23 


Johns 


Spruce Run 




4 


1 


8 


4 


6 


6 


18 


5 25 


Craig 


Little Stony 




5 


1 


8 


4 


5 


6 


18 


3 22 


Johns 


Little Stony 


2 


4 


5 


4 


6 


4 


13 


12 


2 20 



1 Compiled from Burton and Odum, 194.5, table VI. 

2 Given as by Burton and Odum, p. 192, but according to table vi, 7 species are shared in common. 



Literature Cited 

Berry, James W., and Holt, Perry C. 

1959. Reactions of two species of Branchiobdellidae (Oligochaeta) to high 
temperatures and low oxygen tensions. Virginia Agric. Exper. 
Sta. Tech. Bull., no. 141, pp. 1-11, 3 text figs., 3 tables. 

Brown, George G. 

1961. Some ecological studies of the Branchiobdellidae found in Sinking 
Creek, Giles County, Virginia. Virginia Polytechnic Institute, 
unpublished master's thesis, pp. 1-39, 5 figs., 14 tables. 

Burton, G. W., and Odum, E. P. 

1945. The distribution of stream fish in the vicinity of Mountain Lake, 
Virginia. Ecology, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 182-194, 2 figs. 

Cope, E. D. 

1872. On the Wyandotte Cave and its fauna. American Nat., vol. 6, no. 
7, pp. 406-422, figs. 109-116. 
Crawford, Edward A., Jr. 

1959. Five new ostracods of the genus Entocythere (Ostracoda, Cytheridae) 
from South Carolina. Univ. South Carolina Publ. Biol., ser. in, 
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 149-189, 37 figs., 10 tables. 
1965. Three new species of epizoic ostracods (Ostracoda, Entocytheridae) 
from North and South Carolina. American Midi. Nat., vol. 74, 
no. 1, pp. 148-154, 16 figs. 
Dobbin, Catherine N. 

1941. Fresh-water ostracods from Washington and other western localities. 
Univ. Washington Publ. Biol., vol. 4, pp. 174-246, 14 pis. 

Ellis, Max M. 

1912. A new discodrilid worm from Colorado. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 
42, no. 1912, pp. 481-486, 5 text figs. 

1918. Branchiobdellid worms (Annelida) from Michigan crawfishes. Trans. 

American Micros. Soc, vol. 37, pp. 49-51. 

1919. The branchiobdellid worms in the collection of the United States 

National Museum, with descriptions of new genera and new species. 
Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 55, no. 2267, pp. 241-265, 19 text figs., 
pis. 10-13, 6 tables. 
Erichson, W. F. 

1846. Uebersicht der Arten der Gattung Astacus. Arch. Naturg., vol. 12, 
pt. 1, pp. 86-103. 
Fabricius, Johann C. 

1798. Supplementum entomologiae systematicae. Hafniae: Proft et Storch, 
572 pp. 
Faxon, Walter 

1884. Descriptions of new species of Cambarus; to which is added a syno- 
nymical list of the known species of Cambarus and Astacus. Proc. 
American Acad. Arts Sci., vol. 20, pp. 107-158. 
1890. Notes on North American crayfishes, family Astacidae. Proc. U.S. 
Nat. Mus., vol. 12, no. 785, pp. 619-634. 

80 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 81 

Girard, Charles 

1852. A revision of the North American Astaci, with observations on their 
habits and geographical distribution. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila- 
delphia, vol. 6, pp. 87-91. 
Goodnight, Clarence J. 

1940. The Branchiobdellidae (Oligochaeta) of North American cray- 
fishes. Illinois Biol. Monogr., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 1-71, 14 figs., 
3 pis. 
Hagen, Herman A. 

1870. Monograph of the North American Astacidae. Illustr. Cat. Mus. 

Comp. Zool., Harvard Coll., no. 3, pp. 1-109, pis. 1-11. 
Hall, Maurice C. 

1914. Descriptions of a new genus and species of the discodrilid worms. 
Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 48, pp. 187-193, 2 text figs. 
Hart, C. W., Jr. 

1959. The ostracods of the genus Enlocythere from the lower Chatta- 
hoochee-Flint Basin: with a review of the occurrence of the genus 
in Florida, and descriptions of two new species. Bull. Florida 

State Mus., Biol. Sci., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 193-204, 19 figs. 
1962. A revision of the ostracods of the family Entocytheridae. Proc. 
Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 114, no. 3, pp. 121-147, 18 figs. 
1965. New entocytherid ostracods and distribution records for five mid- 
western states. Trans. American Micros. Soc, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 
255-259, 5 figs. 
Hay, W. P. 

1899. Synopsis of North- American Invertebrates, vi: The Astacidae of 
North America. American Nat., vol. 33, no. 396, pp. 957-966, 1 
text fig. 

HOBBS, HORTON H., Jr. 

1942. A generic revision of the crayfishes of the subfamily Cambarinae 
with the description of a new genus and species. American Midi. 
Nat., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 334-357, 3 pis. 

1951. Observations on the ecological distribution of three Virginia crayfishes. 
Virginia Journ. Sci., vol. 1, no. 4, p. 349. [Abstract.] 

1955. Ostracods of the genus Enlocythere from the New River system in 
North Carolina, Virginia, and West Virginia. Trans. American 
Micros. Soc, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 325-333, 10 figs. 

1964. A new cave-dwelling crayfish from the Greenbrier drainage system, 

West Virginia (Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, 
vol. 77, pp. 189-194, 10 figs. 

1965. A new crayfish of the genus Cambarus from Tennessee with an 

emended definition of the genus (Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. 
Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 265-273, 12 figs. 
Hobbs, Horton H., Jr., and Hart, C. W., Jr. 

1966. On the entocytherid ostracod genera Ascetocythere, Plectocy there, 

Phymocythere (gen. nov.), and Cymocythere, with descriptions of 
new species. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 118, no. 2, 
pp. 35-61, 37 figs. 
Hobbs, Horton H., Jr., and Villalobos, Alejandro 

1958. The exoskeleton of a freshwater crab as a microhabitat for several 
invertebrates. Virginia Journ. Sci., vol. 9, pp. 395-396. [Abstract.] 



82 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Hobbs, Horton H., Jr., and Walton, Margaret 

1960. Three new ostracods of the genus Entocythere from the Hiwassee 

drainage system in Georgia and Tennessee. Journ. Tennessee 
Acad. Sci., vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 17-23, 20 figs. 

1961. Additional new ostracods from the Hiwassee drainage system in 

Georgia, North Carolina, and Tennessee. Trans. American Micros. 
Soc, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 379-384, 8 figs. 

1962. New ostracods of the genus Entocythere from the Mountain Lake 

region, Virginia (Ostracoda, Entocytheridae). Virginia Journ. Sci., 
vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 42-48, 13 figs. 

1963. Four new species of the genus Donnaldsoncythere (Ostracoda, Ento- 

cytheridae) from Virginia with a key to the species of the genus. 
Trans. American Micros. Soc, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 363-370, 26 figs. 
1966a. Orconectes juvenilis (Hagen) in Mountain Lake, Virginia: An un- 
planned experiment in interspecific competition. Virginia Journ. 
Sci., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 136-140. 
1966b. A new genus and six new species of entocytherid ostracods (Ostracoda, 
Entocytheridae). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 119, no. 3542, pp. 
1-12, 2 text figs. 
Hoff, C. Clayton 

1942. The subfamily Entocytherinae, a new subfamily of fresh-water 
cytherid Ostracoda, with description of two new species of the 
genus Entocythere. American Midi. Nat., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 63-73, 
13 figs. 
1944. New American species of the ostracod genus Entocythere. American 
Midi. Nat., vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 327-357, 33 figs. 
Hoffman, Richard L. 

1963. A revision of the North American annelid worms of the genus Cam- 
barincola (Oligochaeta, Branchiobdellidae). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 114, no. 3470, pp. 271-371, 79 text figs. 
Holt, Perry C. 

1954. A new branchiobdellid of the genus Cambarincola (Oligochaeta, 

Branchiobdellidae) from Virginia. Virginia Journ. Sci., vol. 5, 
no. 3, pp. 168-172, 5 figs. 

1963. A new branchiobdellid (Branchiobdellidae: Cambarincola). Journ. 

Tennessee Acad. Sci., vol. 38, pp. 97-100, 6 figs. 

1964. A new branchiobdellid (Annelida) from Costa Rica. Tulane Stud. 

Zool., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1-4, 4 figs. 

1965. Od Ankyrodrilus, a new genus of branchiobdellid worms (Annelida). 

Virginia Journ. Sci., vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 9-21, 14 figs. 
James, Hugo A. 

1966. A study of the range and variations of the subspecies of Cambarus 

longulus (Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 119, 

no. 3544, pp. 1-24, 2 figs., 1 pi. 
Klie, W. 

1931. Campagne speologique de C. Bolivar et R. Jeannel dans 1' Amerique 

du Nord (1928), 3: Crustaces ostracodes. Biospeologica: Arch. 

Zool. Exper. Gen., vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 333-344, 20 figs. 
Kozloff, Eugene N. 

1955. Two new species of Entocythere (Ostrocoda: Cytheridae) commensal 

on Pacifastacus gambelii (Girard). American Midi. Nat., vol. 53, 
no. 1, pp. 156-161, 24 figs. 



no. 3602 CRAYFISHES — HOBBS, HOLT, AND WALTON 83 

Kozloff, Eugene N., and Whitman, Donald C. 

1954. Entocythere occidentalis sp. nov., a cytherid ostracod commensal 

on western species of Pacifastacus. American Midi. Nat., vol. 52, 
no. 1, pp. 159-163, 13 figs. 
Leidy, Joseph 

1851. Contributions to helminthology. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 
vol. 5, pp. 205-209. 
Liang, Yan-Lin 

1963. Studies on the aquatic oligochaetes of China, 1: Descriptions of new 
naids and branchiobdellids. Acta Zool. Sinica, vol. 15, pp. 560- 
570, 4 text figs. 
McMantjs, Lawrence R. 

1960. Some ecological studies of the Branchiobdellidae (Oligochaeta) . 
Trans. American Micros. Soc, vol. 79, pp. 420-428, 1 table. 
Marshall, W. S. 

1903. Entocythere cambaria {nov. gen. et nov. spec), a parasitic ostracod. 
Trans. Wisconsin Acad. Sci., Arts and Letters, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 
117-144, 30 figs., pis. x-xm. 
Moore, J. Percy 

1894. On some leech-like parasites of American crayfish. Proc. Acad. 
Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, 1893, pp. 419-429, pi. xn (figs. la-4e). 
1895a. Pterodrilus, a remarkable discodrilid. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Phila- 
delphia, 1894, pp. 449-454, pi. xm (figs. l-2d). 
1895b. The anatomy of Bdellodrilus illuminatus, an American discodrilid. 
Journ. Morph., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 497-538. 
Ortmann, A. E. 

1905. The mutual affinities of the species of the genus Cambarus, and 
their dispersal over the United States. Proc. American Philos. 
Soc, vol. 44, pp. 91-136, 1 pi. 
1931. Crawfishes of the southern Appalachians and the Cumberland 
Plateau. Ann. Carnegie Mus., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 61-160. 
Penn, George Henry 

1955. A new Cambarus of the Diogenes section from north Louisiana. 

Tulane Stud. Zool., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 73-81, 13 figs., 3 tables. 
Pierantoni, V. 

1912. Monografia di Discodrilidae. Ann. Mus. Zool. Univ. Napoli, n.s., 

vol. 3, no. 24, pp. 1-28. 
Rhoades, Rendell 

1944. Further studies on distribution and taxonomy of Ohio crayfishes, 

and the description of a new subspecies. Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 

44, no. 2, p. 95-99. 
Rioja, Enrique 

1940a. Estudios carcinol6gicos, v: Morfologi'a de un ostracodo epizoario 

observado sobre Cambarus (Cambarellus) montezumae Sauss. de 

Mexico, Entocythere heterodonta n. sp. y descripcion de algunos de 

sus estados larvarios. An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Mexico, vol. 11, no. 2, 

pp. 593-609, 6 figs. 
1940b. Un caso de biocenosis observado sobre Cambarus (Cambarellus) 

montezumae Saussure, de Mexico. Rev. Chilena Hist. Nat., vol. 44, 

pp. 57-59. 
1941. Estudios Carcinologicos, vn: Las especies del genero Entocythere 

(Crust. Ostracodos). An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Mexico, vol. 12, no. 1, 

pp. 193-198, 1 fig. 



84 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

1942. Estudios Carcinol6gicos, xm: Consideraciones y datos acerca del 
genero Enlocythere (Crust. Ostracodos) y algunas de sus especies 
con descripci6n de una nueva. An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Mexico, vol. 
13, no. 2, pp. 685-697, 21 figs. 
Ross, Robert D., and Perkins, Benjamin D. 

1959. Drainage evolution and distribution problems of the fishes of the New 
(upper Kanawha) river system in Virginia, pt. in: Records of 
fishes of the New River. Virginia Agric. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull., 
no. 145, pp. 1-35. 
Roth, James C, and Neff, Stuart E. 

1964. Studies of physical limnology and profundal bottom fauna, Mountain 
Lake, Virginia. Virginia Agric. Exp. Sta. Tech. Bull., no. 169, 
pp. 1-44, 6 figs, 3 tables. 
Sars, G. O. 

1926. Fresh-water Ostracoda from Canada and Alaska. In Report, Ca- 
nadian Arctic Expedition, 1913-1918, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-32, 5 pis. 
Shoup, Charles S. 

1948. Limnological observations on some streams of the New River water- 
shed in the vicinity of Mountain Lake, Virginia. Journ. Elisha 
Mitchell Sci. Soc, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1-12, 4 tables. 
Smallwood, W. M. 

1906. Notes on Branchiobdella. Biol. Bull., vol. 11, pp. 100-111, 7 text 
figs. 
Smart, Grover C. 

1962. The life history of the crayfish Cambarus longulus longulus. Ameri- 
can Midi. Nat., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 83-94, 4 figs. 
Stamper, Maynard N. 

1957. Incubation and hatching of the egg of a commensal ostracod, Enlo- 

cythere illinoisensis Hoff, 1942. Journ. Colorado-Wyoming Acad. 

Sci., vol. 4, no. 9, p. 50. 
Westervelt, Clinton A., Jr., and Kozloff, Eugene N. 

1959. Entocythere neglecta sp. nov., a cytherid ostracod commensal on 

Pacifastacus nigrescens (Stimpson). American Midi. Nat., vol. 61, 

no. 1, pp. 239-244, 14 figs. 
Word, Benjamin H., Jr., and Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. 

1958. Observations on the testis of the crayfish Cambarus montanus acumi- 

natus Faxon. Trans. American Micros. Soc, vol. 74, no. 4, pp. 
435-450, 3 pis. 
Young, Willard 

1966. Ecological studies of the Branchiobdellidae (Qligochaeta). Ecology, 
vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 571-578, 3 figs., 3 tables. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3603 

The Species of Hermetia of the aurata Group 
(Diptera: Stratiomyidae) 



By Maurice T. James and Willis W. Wirth l 



James {in Stone et al., 1965, "Catalog of the Diptera of America 
North of Mexico," Agric. Res. Serv. Handbook 276) listed Hermetia 
aurata Bellardi (with H. a. eiseni Townsend as a subspecies and 
H. chrysopila Loew as a synonym), as a single variable species with 
wide geographic distribution in the southwestern United States and 
Mexico. Though some spade work that had been done by Wirth 
indicated that the three forms were specifically distinct and, in 
addition, several undescribed taxa were involved, more time and 
specimens were necessary to resolve the problem. The present 
study is built upon this foundation and includes a preliminary key 
plus additional material that has been assembled from a number of 
collections: the United States National Museum, the American 
Museum of Natural History, the California Academy of Sciences, 
Cornell University, Ohio State University, Michigan State University, 
the University of Kansas, Kansas State University, Washington 

1 James: Department of Entomology, Washington State University, Pullman, 
Washington (Scientific Paper 2859, College of Agriculture, Washington State 
University; work conducted under Project 9043). Wirth: Insect Identification 
and Parasite Introduction Research Branch, Entomology Research Division, 
Agriculture Research Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

State University, Oregon State University, the University of Arizona, 
and the University of California at Berkeley, Davis, and Riverside. 
Holotypes and allotypes, unless otherwise stated, are in the United 
States National Museum. 

Three names are currently available for species-level taxa in this 
complex, namely H. aurata Bellardi ( type-locality Morelia, Michoacan, 
Mexico), H. chrysopila Loew (described from specimens from Texas 
in the Belfrage collection), and H. eiseni Townsend (described from 
the Eisen collection from southern Baja California, Mexico). These 
three are herein recognized as distinct species, contrary to the usage 
in the "Catalog." The seven new species described below, with 
two exceptions, show very close affinities with the above three and 
constitute a natural group of species that apparently is restricted 
geographically to Mexico and the southwestern United States. 
The two exceptions, Hermetia anthidium and H. conjuncta, can 
readily be added to the group by some extension of its definition; 
however, they undoubtedly are more remote from the complex that 
forms the core of the group. The eight species of the core complex, 
or at least seven of them, can be interpreted as a superspecies. Five 
of these — namely, H. chrysopila, H. aurata, H. eiseni, H. ryckmani, 
and H. melanderi (figs. 11, 12) — are completely allopatric in respect 
to one another. The distribution of H. chrysopila (fig. 11) is east- 
ward from the front range of the Rocky Mountains and the Sierra 
Madre Oriental to the 95th meridian and between parallels 23° and 
41° N; H. melanderi extends, west of the Rocky Mountains and Sierra 
Madre Occidental, from southeastern Arizona and southwestern 
New Mexico to northern Sinaloa; H. ryckmani occurs only in western 
Arizona and southern California; and H. eiseni occurs only in southern 
Baja California. Of the other three species, H. nigricornis and 
H. subpellucida are partially sympatric with each other and with 
H. melanderi but essentially allopatric with the other species, H. 
subpellucida extending only slightly into the range of H. aurata. 
The one known locality for H. impressa falls within the range of 
H. aurata. Male genitalia in the core complex are very homogeneous 
throughout; there is some variation from species to species, but 
variation within a species also occurs. It is possible that H. impressa 
should be excluded from the core complex, but its males, and 
consequently the male genitalia, are unknown. 

Members of the group can be recognized readily by the combination 
of densely pilose eyes and the profile of the face: from the front view, 
the face is regularly rounded below; from the lateral view, it does not 
project conelike below the level of the eyes as is the case in most 
of the genus. Hermetia anthidium (fig. 1) is somewhat exceptional in 



no. 3603 HERMETIA JAMES AND WIRTH 3 

this respect although the projection of its face can hardly be con- 
sidered conelike. Hermetia hunteri Coquillett has a rounded face but 
bare eyes, and its form, not to mention its genitalia, is so unlike 
members of the H. aurata group that it could not by any means be 
confused with them. 

Other characteristics of the group are as follows: The frontal 
callus is represented by a bare, more or less triangular, area adjacent 
to each eye; above this, adjacent to the eye, the area is moderately to 
deeply depressed, at least lightly rugulose, usually deeply sculptured 
with irregular prominences or longitudinal carinulae (this term being 
applied to distinct and more or less sharply keeled ridges running 
lengthwise of the frons) ; between these areas and in front of the ocellar 
triangle there is a bulbous prominence, which we are designating the 
"ante-ocellar tubercle"; there is a small, flat callus, sometimes obscure 
or virtually wanting, just above the antennal bases (the supra-antennal 
callus). The wings are largely or wholly clouded, frequently with a 
yellow area, contrasting with the generally brownish clouding, extend- 
ing at least across the stigma; vein R 2+3 arises beyond cross-vein r-m: 
the wing is largely set with microtrichia, the basal part and at least a 
narrow anterior margin of cell 1st A being bare. The abdomen is 
ovate or elongated ovate, the sides of the second to fourth segments 
parallel, except in H. anthidium in which the abdomen is more rounded. 
The vestiture of the abdomen tends to form dense areas of long, 
appressed yellow to golden pile, particularly on the terminal terga; 
this pile is especially dense in such species as H. aurata. The genitalia 
(fig. 8) present a moderately uniform pattern with some variations. 
What we interpret to be the dististyle has migrated ventrad and 
laterad of the basistyle so as to appear like a lower lobe of the latter; 
from side view, in this group, we see chiefly the basistyle, with the 
dististyle ending far before the apex of the basistyle and appearing 
as a small angulated or rounded ventral projection (figs. 3-6). 

Key to Species of the Hermetia aurata Group 

1. Vanelike style of female flagellum (male unknown) acuminate, white at apex; 

abdomen short and robust, not much longer than wide, and black with 
narrow interrupted tegumentary yellow apical bands on terga 2 to 4 

anthidium James, new species 

Vanelike style of female flagellum rounded at apex, sometimes acute but 

never acuminate and never white tipped; abdomen 1.5 to more than 2 times 

as long as wide and without tegumentary pale markings beyond th( j second 

tergum though the general coloration of the abdomen may be reddish . 2 

2. Tibiae entirely yellowish, at most somewhat orange or orange yellow on apical 

third to half i 

Hind tibia, at least, distinctly blackened or brownish black on apical third 
or more 5 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

3. Wing entirely grayish; mesonotal pile whitish in male to yellow or golden in 

female, uniformly colored, at most with a poorly defined presutural vitta 
that may be set off feebly by a very small amount of obscure, blackish pile; 
flagellum of antenna wholly black to base. 

nigricornis James and Wirth, new species 

Wing yellowish on part or all of anterior half; tibiae wholly yellow; antenna 

with base of flagellum distinctly yellow or, if entirely black, a distinct 

presutural vitta of golden pile present 4 

4. Brassy pile of sublateral areas of second abdominal tergum forming a broad 

triangular area reaching almost to base of tergum and clearly visible as 

abdomen is rotated under light of varying incidence . . chrysopila Loew 

Brassy pile of sublateral areas of second abdominal tergum limited to the 

posterior margin melanderi James and Wirth, new species 

5. Second abdominal sternum largely or wholly pale in contrast to preceding and 

following sterna, second tergum likewise largely pale or with two translucent 

spots 6 

Second abdominal sternum largely concolorous with preceding and following 
sterna and not translucent; second tergum with at most indefinite, non- 
translucent pale areas 7 

6. Abdomen more than twice as long as wide; second abdominal tergum with 

a pair of translucent spots, separated in the female but sometimes fused 
in the male; all tibiae largely black; mesonotal pile uniformly pale yellowish, 
without a presutural vitta; guards of aedeagus united ventrally, not ter- 
minating in setulae conjuncta James, new species 

Abdomen distinctly less than twice as long as wide; second abdominal tergum 
with a broad, trapezoidal, semipellucid area taking in a large part of the 
segment; only the hind tibia black or blackish apically; mesonotum with 
a median presutural vitta, usually set off by adjacent vittae of short, 
black pile; guards of aedeagus of the usual chrysopila group type, well 
separated ventrally and terminating in setulae. 

subpellucida James and Wirth, new species 

7. Frons with a prominent inverted U-shaped impression, particularly prom- 

inent at the anterior extremes of its arms just above the frontal callus, 
and shallowest where it crosses between the ocellar triangle and the ante- 
ocellar tubercle; all tibiae largely black . . . impressa James, new species 
Frons laterad of ante-ocellar tubercle concave transversely but not deeply 
impressed, this concave area not extending conspicuously above the 
ante-ocellar tubercle ; blackening of tibiae confined to apical half or third ... 8 

8. Scutellum yellow on posterior margin only; abdominal integument blackish, 

at most becoming reddish on parts of the terminal terga; dorsal abdominal 
pile dense, particularly in male, that of terminal two terga at least almost 

completely covering background aurata Bellardi 

Scutellum with distal half yellow; abdominal integument in male usually 
largely reddish or reddish brown on at least terga 3 to 5, less extensively or 
not at all reddish to reddish brown in female; abdominal pile less dense, the 
terminal terga by no means completely with background concealed ... 9 

9. Mesonotal pile wholly yellowish to whitish, the presutural vitta not at all 

differentiated in the female, but poorly differentiated in the male. 

eiseni Townsend 

Mesonotal pile yellow to golden, the presutural vitta well differentiated in 

both sexes and set apart from the other mesonotal pile by a vitta of black, 

pile on each side ryckmani James and Wirth, new species 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 5 

Hermetia anthidium James, new species 
Figure 1 

Female : Head black in ground color, copiously marked with yellow 
as follows: a rounded, slightly elevated spot on each side of the ocellar 
triangle and extending from the ocellar triangle to the eye margin; a 
transverse area including the two segments of the frontal callus and 
connecting them (but not as a callus), thence continuing as a narrow 
ocular orbit on each side below the eye; and a broader median area 
connecting broadly with the supra-antennal band and extending 
ventrad around the antennal bases and over the midfacies to the oral 
margin, becoming more whitish on the facial prominence ; these yellow 
facial and supra-antennal areas isolate a broad, black, shining area on 
each side that extends from just above the antenna to the oral margin. 
Some short, stiff black pile on the ocellar triangle, that of head other- 
wise longer and yellow, rather dense. Ante-ocellar tubercle prom- 
inent, domelike, shining but with finely impressed, narrow striations 
running transversely in the median line and concentrically on the 
sides ; area on each side above frontal callus punctate and only slightly 
rugulose and without distinct carinulae. Supra-antennal callus ob- 
scure, almost obsolete. Head measurements : Head width 3.25 mm, 
height 2.00 mm; frons at vertex 0.83 mm, at callus 1.33 mm; distance 
between eyes at oral margin 1.08 mm. Pile of eyes rather short, 
yellow, that above appearing black in some lights. Antenna as in 
figure 1; first and second segments yellow, the first blackish above, 
with black pile; flagellum brownish black, the style black, its acumi- 
nate tip broadly white and sharply contrasting with the rest of the 
flagellum; longitudinal groove of flagellum more conspicuous from 
inner but also quite apparent from outer surface. Proboscis yellow, 
the more strongly sclerotized areas black; pile yellow. 

Ground color of thorax mostly black; humerus, postalar callus, a 
prealar spot on each mesopleuron, and apical two-fifths of scutellum 
yellow; dorsal pile black except a median presutural vitta, a triangular 
area on each side of it and reaching the humerus anteriorly, a trans- 
verse area just before the suture and reaching medially almost to the 
apex of the triangle on each side, a prescutellar band reaching from 
one postalar callus to the other, and a narrow band along the margin 
of the black area of the scutellum, golden; pile of metanotum black; 
that of pleura largely black; that of propleura and prosternum, pos- 
terior part of mesopleuron, most of sternopleuron, upper part of 
metapleuron, and apex of squama whitish. Coxae, trochanters and 
femora except extreme tips black, mostly black haired; tibiae and 
tarsi pale yellow, becoming whitish at bases of tibiae and on tarsi, 
white haired ; apical two tarsomeres on all legs yellow with yellow hair, 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

claws becoming brownish at tips. Squamae dark brown. Wing in- 
fumated, more heavily so anteriorly than posteriorly; a broad longi- 
tudinal subhyaline area taking up all of second basal cell except its 
apex, the anterobasal part of the anal cell, and the bases of the fourth 
to second posterior cells, this area being devoid of micro trichia ; the 
infumation posterior to and apicad of this area apparently due wholly 
to microtrichia and consequently not so intense as that anterior to it, 
in which the membrane is also infumated. 

Abdomen short, slightly longer than wide (3.90 mm and 2.75 mm 
respectively); black, narrow apices of terga 2 to 5 and of sterna 1, 2, 
and 5, also narrow base of sternum 2, yellow, the bands tegumentary, 
those on terga 2 to 4 broadly interrupted medially; pile of first tergum 
and median part of second black, otherwise yellowish to brownish 
yellow, scattered and semi-erect on sterna 1 and 2, otherwise appressed. 
Ovipositor brown, terminal segment and cerci yellow. Length 7 mm. 

Holotype: 9, Barro Colorado Island, C.Z., Mar. 27, 1963, malaise 
trap, C. W. and M. E. Rettenmeyer; in the collection of Kansas 
State University. 

The specific name was suggested by the resemblance to a megachilid 
bee of the genus Anthidwm. 

Hermetia nigricornis James and Wirth, new species 

Figure 4 

Male: Head black; vertex, a pair of spots on each side of the ocellar 
triangle and usually confluent with the vertex, frontal callus, an 
indefinite area at antennal bases, and sides of face yellow, these 
areas usually more extensive tnan in the other species of this group. 
Ante-ocellar tubercle moderately prominent, shining, without stria- 
tions; area above frontal callus rugulose but at most with only poorly 
defined carinulae; supra-antennal callus variable, usually small and 
poorly defined. Pile of head whitish. First and second antennal 
segments brown, the latter becoming brownish yellow, particularly 
at its apex; flagellum black to blackish to its base. Thorax black, 
humeri, postalar callus, and apical half of scuteLlum yellow; all 
thoracic pile uniformly whitish; no presutural vitta. Femora black- 
ish; tibiae and tarsi wholly yellow, apical half of each orange yellow 7 . 
Wing entirely grayish, apex and posterior half somew r hat darker. 
Halteres yellow. Abdomen uniformly black but with a tendency 
to become reddish brow^n, particularly apically; second sternum with 
a transverse basal and a much smaller transverse apical pale area, 
these sometimes connected medially by a narrow vitta; pile of abdo- 
men w T hitish dorsally and ventrally, some black pile, the exact amount 
variable, at base of first tergum; tergal pile moderately dense. Geni- 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 7 

talia orange yellow; basistyle and dististyle as in figure 4. Length 
8-11 mm. 

Female: Similar to the male, but the dorsal pile is slightly to 
distinctly more yellow; the presutural vitta may be poorly defined 
or, as in the male, absent; most of the pile of the anterior half of the 
postscutum is short and black. In one paratype the mesonotal pile 
is golden and the presutural vitta, though feeble, is somewhat set 
apart by a few black hairs arranged so as to suggest lateral vittae. 

Holotype: cf , Florence Junction, Ariz., Apr. 21, 1935, F. H. Parker, 
Melander Collection; USNM type no. 69,103. Allotype: 9, with 
puparium, Saguaro National Monument, Ariz., ex Echinocereus , 
Nov. 8, 1957, S. Alcorn; University of Arizona collection. 

Paratypes: 2 cf cf, same data as holotype. Arizona: 1 9, Pinal 
Mts., Aug. 4, 1939, F. H. Parker; 1 cf , base of Pinal Mts., May 22, 
1938, D. K. Duncan; 1 cf , Ray, Apr. 18, 1957, F. H. Parker; 1 d\ 
15 miles south of Ray, May 4, 1961, R. H. and E. M. Painter; 2 cf d\ 
Globe, Apr. 7, 1938, F. H. Parker, and August, D. K. Duncan; 
1 cf, Organpipe Monument, Alamo Canyon, Apr. 22, 1948, J. L. 
Sperry; 2 cf cf Sabino Canyon, Santa Catalina Mts., Apr. 6, 1955, 
F. G. Werner; 1 cf, Oracle, Apr. 15, 1937, G. P. Engelhardt; 1 cf , 
"Catal Spgs.," Apr. 14, 1898, E. A. Schwarz; 3 cf cf, San Carlos 
Lake, April, D. K. Duncan; 1 cf, Black Dyke Prospect, Sierritas, 
July 26-29, 1916, New Mexico: 1 cf , Jemez Springs, July 1, 1941, 
R. H. Beamer; 4 cf cf, 1 9, Tajique, June 25, 1941, E. L. Todd; 
1 cf, Sandia Mts., May 22, 1948, L. S. Gordon; 1 cf , "Monzano" 
[Manzano?], June 26, 1941, R. H. Beamer. Texas: 1 cf, Boy 
Scout camp, south of Toyahvale, May 2, 1961, Killiam Roever. 
Utah: 1 cf, Beaver Creek Hills, Beaver Co.; 1 cf, Beaver Valley. 
Colorado: 1 cf, Granite Peaks Camp, Bayfield; 1 cf, Great Sand 
Dunes, Alamosa, Aug. 1, 1950, B. Rotger. 

Hermetia chrysopila Loew 

Figures 9, 11 

Hermetia chrysopila Loew, 1872, Berliner Ent. Zeitschr., vol. 16, p. 56 (Centuria 

10, no. 11). 
Hermetia aurata Bellardi. — James, 1965, in Stone et al., Catalog of the Diptera of 

America north of Mexico, p. 304, partim [not Bellardi, 1859]. 

This species remains a variable one even though our concept of it 
is more restricted than that indicated in most of the literature. The 
vertex, except the ocellar triangle, is typically wholly 3 T ellow (some- 
times a sordid or brownish yellow) ; the areas laterad of the ocellar 
triangle are elevated, somewhat tubercle-like, with fine lengthwise 
striations; the areas above the frontal callus are rugulose with two 
or three low but sharp irregular carinulae. The supra-antennal callus 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

is small but distinct and black. The mesonotum is mostly or wholly 
yellow to golden pilose, with a prominent median vitta, visible clearly 
without magnification, extending from the suture to a polished area 
on the anterior margin; the pile adjacent to this vitta is usually a pale 
yellow although in some specimens, particularly from the southern 
part of the range of the species (Texas and Mexico), the vitta is 
margined on each side by a distinct vitta of black hairs. The distri- 
butional pattern cannot, however, be interpreted as defining a sub- 
species since no exact geographic area is defined by it; indeed, both 
types occur in a series collected by R. H. and L. D. Beamer at Gidd- 
ings, Tex. A tendency toward reddening of the abdomen in the 
male, particularly in Texan and Mexican specimens, is noticeable. 
The larger part of the abdomen is clothed with long, curved, ap- 
pressed yellow to golden pile; this becomes less conspicuous in the 
more southern specimens. The male genitalia are similar to those 
of H. melanderi but the dististyle (fig. 9) has a different shape; its 
inner apical margin is always concave, sometimes deeply so, with a 
shoulder although the exact outline is subject to some variation; from 
lateral view the apex of the dististyle is angular in apical outline, 
forming an acute or right angle. 

Geographical distribution (fig. 11): most or all of Kansas, except 
possibly the extreme eastern part, westward through Colorado to 
the front range of the Rocky Mountains and southward across 
Oklahoma and central Texas into northeastern Mexico. We have 
records from the following Mexican localities: Coahuila: Hermanas; 
Nuevo Leon: Monterrey, Vallecillo; Tamaulipas: Ciudad Victoria. 

Hermetia melanderi James and Wirth, new species 

Figures 6, 8, 11 

Close to H. chrysopila, from which it may best be differentiated by 
the more limited amount of golden pile on the poterior margin of 
the second tergum; viewed from behind or medially, this pile is 
limited to a narrow patch, somewhat broadened sublaterally, on 
each side of the median line but separated from the whitish antero- 
lateral pile of this tergum by a broad area of black pile, whereas 
in H. chrysopila these areas of golden pile extend in the form of a 
broad triangle almost to the base of the tergum. Hermetia melanderi 
can be separated from H. chrysopila, with exceptions as noted under 
the discussion of that species, by the more extensive black pile of the 
mesonotum, which includes a narrow vitta on each side of and isolating 
the presutural golden vitta and which takes in the anterior two-thirds 
of the postscutum. Also, in H. melanderi the eye pilosity is denser 
and longer than in H. chrysopila. 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 9 

Male, female: Head, thorax and abdomen predominantly black. 
Yellow markings of head variable but basically consisting of a spot 
on each side of the ocellar triangle, the divided frontal callus, an 
indefinite area at base of antennae, and narrow facial orbits; ante- 
ocellar tubercle prominent; area above frontal callus coarsely rugulose 
and with a single broad cannula or with one more prominent than 
the remaining one or two; supra-antennal callus more prominent than 
in H. chrysopila, somewhat elevated. Humeri, postalar callus, and 
about apical half of scutellum yellow; hal teres yellow; apices of 
femora, all of tibiae and tarsi, yellow, the apical half of each tibia 
becoming more orange yellow. Terga 1 and 2 mostly with short 
black pile; a fringe of yellow pile, usually interrupted medially, on 
tergum 1; an anterolateral triangle of thin yellowish pile and the 
patch of golden pile as described on tergum 2; remaining terga with 
conspicuous long appressed golden pile except for a sublateral triangle 
of black pile on each side of tergum 3 and a similar but less conspicuous 
triangle on tergum 4; venter white pilose. Male genitalia as in 
figures 6, 8. Length 9-12 mm. 

Holotype: <?, Globe, Ariz., Apr. 11, 1935, F. H. Parker; Melander 
Collection; USNM type no. 69,104. Allotype: 9, same data, but 
May 1, 1935. 

Paratypes: Arizona: 16 cf cf, same data as type but Apr. 6, 7, and 
8, 1935, and Apr. 7, 21, and May 1, 1938; 1 cf , Globe, April, D. K. 
Duncan; 3 d 1 d\ 3 99, Baboquivari Mts., Elkhorn Ranch, 4500', 
Apr. 20, 1961, and Brown Canyon, Apr. 7, 1961, M. L. Noller, J. C. 
Bequaert; 2 c? d\ 5 99, Baboquivari Mts., April, D. K. Duncan, 
Apr. 27, 1947, A. L. Melander, Apr. 28, 1935, F. H. Parker, and Apr. 
4-19, 1937, W. Benedict; 2 cf d\ 1 9, Madrona Ranger Station, Ricon 
Mts., May 15, 1964, at mud and water, M. L. Noller, J. C. Bequaert, 
M. Elton, M. Nurein, F. G. Werner, and May 22, 1964, Bequaert 
and Noller; 1 d\ 1 9, Sabino Canyon, Santa Catalina Mts., Apr. 5 and 
30, 1955, G. D. Butler; 1 cf, Sabino Basin, Santa Catalina Mts., 
July S-20, 1916; 3 99, Santa Catalina Mts., April, D. K. Duncan, and 
Apr. 9, 1955, Butler and Werner; 1 9, Canada del Oro, north of Santa 
Catalina Mts., Apr. 17, 1964, M. L. Noller, J. Burger, J. C. Bequaert, 
and F. G. Werner; 1 9, 10 miles north of Tucson, Apr. 21, 1957; 1 9, 
Madera Canyon, Santa Cruz Co., 4880', July 15, 1963, V. L. Vesterby; 
2 99, Pinal Mts., May 9, 1937 and May 6, 1940, F. H. Parker; 2 99, 
Portal, Cochise Co., June 28 and July 1, 1963, A. Laske; 1 9, Molino 
Basin, Mt. Lemmon, May 5, 1953, A. and H. Dietrich. New Mexi- 
co: 1 9, Byer Spring, Florida Mts., 5000'. MEXICO: Sinaloa: 
1 d\ 13 miles north of Culican, Mar. 17, 1962, F. D. Parker. 

244-998 67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Hermetia conjuncta James, new species 

Figures 7, 10 

This species, particularly in the female, bears a close superficial 
resemblance to a rather small H. illucens (L.); it is distinctly more 
elongated than other members of the H. aurata group. The male 
genitalia are of the H. chrysopila type but differ from those of other 
known members of the group in that the guards of the aedeagus are 
fused and do not terminate in distinct setulae. A somewhat disturbing 
peculiarity in this species is the variability in the color of the pile, 
but this seems to indicate merely a certain amount of genetic insta- 
bility within the species. 

Male: Head black; yellow areas more reduced than in other 
members of the group and limited to the small frontal callus, a rounded 
spot on each side of the ocellar triangle, and a large transverse spot, 
behind the ocellar triangle and not reaching the eye, on the posterior 
part of the vertex and upper part of the occiput; face entirely black 
or with its prominence yellowish medially. Ante-ocellar tubercle 
glabrous, as large but not as prominent as in other members of the 
group; supra-antennal callus distinct, tubercle-like; area above 
frontal callus rugulose but without distinct carinulae. Pile of head 
yellow to whitish, tending to deeper yellow on lower face and on 
vertex, and in those areas with a variable, sometimes a considerable, 
amount, of black to blackish pile intermixed; eyes with long, dense, 
white to pale yellow pile. Antennae black, the second segment 
brownish to reddish yellow. Proboscis black. Thorax black, humeri, 
postalar callus, and sometimes extreme apical margin of scutellum 
brown; mesonotal pile uniformly reddish brown, no differentiated 
presutural vitta; a dense area of yellowish and whitish pile at apex 
of scutellum. Basal third of hind tibia yellow, femora and tibiae 
otherwise black except narrowly and indefinitely at knees. Tarsi 
pale yellow to clear yellow, becoming somewhat darker apically. 
Wing (fig. 10) gray but with a yellow area extending through second 
basal cell, across and including the entire discal cell, to the wing 
margin from stigma to vein R 4 ; area bare of micro trichia more exten- 
sive than usual for the group, vein Cu 2 being broadly bordered on both 
sides through much of the fifth posterior and first anal cells by the 
microtrichia-free area. Halteres orange, base of stalk more brownish. 
Abdomen black at base, at least the fifth and usually the fourth 
and part of the third segment, sometimes more, becoming reddish 
brown, more extensively so ventrally than dorsally; second segment 
translucent white on most of the sternum and on two large rectangular 
spots on the tergum, which are either separated from each other by a 
narrow black line or totally fused. Pile whitish at base and laterally 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 11 

except that the parted pile of the first tergum may vary through 
yellow to golden and the translucent areas may bear some short black 
in addition to the pale hairs; pile of terga 3 to 5 dense; reddish brown, 
that of sterna 3 to 5 of variable color, sometimes largely black. Geni- 
talia (fig. 7) reddish brown; dististyle concave on inner apical surface 
with several microdenticles, which are not visible from lateral profile. 
Length 10-11 mm. 

Female: Closely similar to the male; pile of head more extensively 
white; thorax entirely black. Micro trichia- free area of wing much 
more extensive, taking in almost all the first anal cell, about half the 
second anal, and the upper basal part of the fifth posterior cell. 
Abdomen except translucent areas wholly black. Color of abdominal 
pile variable; in the allotype that of terga 2 and 3 and of sterna 4 and 
5 short, black. Length 11-14 mm. 

Holotype: cf, Isthmus of Tehuan tepee, Sumichrast, Mexico; 
USNM type no. 69,105. Allotype: Yautepec, Morelos, Mexico, 
July 31, 1963, F. D. Parker and L. A. Stange; University of Cali- 
fornia, Davis. 

Paratypes: MEXICO: 3 cfcf, same data as holotype; 2 cTcf, 
same data as allotype. Morelos: 1 cf, Hujintlan, Aug. 22, 1956, 
R. and K. Dreisbach; 1 a", Lobo Canyon, 13 miles east of Cuernavaca, 
3400', Aug. 15, 1962, R. H. and E. M. Painter; 1 9, 5 miles east of 
Cuernavaca, July 16, 1963, Parker and Stange. 

Hermetia subpellucida James and Wirth, new species 

The coloration of the second abdominal segment will readily dis- 
tinguish this species from all others in the complex except H. conjuncta, 
which would not be easily confused with H. subpellucida because of its 
H. illucens-like appearance and its much more slender abdomen. An 
occasional specimen of another species, for example a female H. 
eiseni or a slightly teneral H. chrysopila, may have a suggestion at 
least of a pair of pale tergal spots, but these are never subpellucid or 
transparent and do not involve the sternum, as do the subpellucid 
areas in H. subpellucida and H. conjuncta. 

Male, female: Head black, frontal callus, narrow facial orbits, 
a pair of spots on each side of the ocellar triangle, and vertex, as 
usual, yellow to yellowish and, again, as usual for the group, subject 
to considerable variation as to the extent of the markings; in most 
specimens the spots beside the ocellar triangle are continuous with 
the vertex, forming one continuous area without indication of any 
division. Ante-ocellar tubercles smooth, without striations; area 
above frontal callus rugose with one to three, usually two or three, 
well-defined carinulae. Supra-antennal callus usually distinct but 
small, sometimes obscure. Mesonotum with a median presutural 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

vitta and a broad transverse prescutellar band of golden appressed 
pile; otherwise yellow pilose except usually, but not always, a band 
of black pile on each side of the median presutural vitta. Legs 
yellowish; femora blackish; hind tibia dark brown to black on apical 
third to fourth, at least externally. Wing yellow on about anterior 
half, including entire discal cell and extending beyond apex of vein 
R 5 ; posterior half brown; area devoid of micro trichia, limited, except 
at base, to anterior margin of anal cell. Abdomen black basally; 
tergum 2 largely pellucid yellow, only the broad lateral margins, 
broader anteriorly than posteriorly, black, the pellucid area conse- 
quently in the form of a trapezoid, this area sometimes darkened 
medially but not divided into two spots, as in H. illucens; sternum 
2 wholly pellucid yellow or with only the lateral margins black; 
abdomen beyond second segment variable, largely or wholly black 
or blackish in the female, usually largely or wholly reddish, at least 
reddish on apical segments, in the male. Abdominal pile largely as 
in H. chrysopila but the golden pile in general less conspicuous; also 
terga 3 and 4, and to a lesser extent 5, with poorly defined sublateral 
triangles of black pile; a narrow transverse band of black pile at base 
of third tergum. Dististyle convex on its lower apical margin; from 
lateral view, it is rounded apically. Length 9-12 mm. 

Holotype: cf , Globe, Ariz., Sept. 9, 1941, F. H. Parker; Melander 
Collection; USNM type no. 69,016. Allotype: 9, Skeleton Canyon, 
6 miles southeast of Apache, Cochise Co., Ariz., Sept. 1, 1958, P. D. 
Hurd; University of California (California Insect Survey), Berkeley. 

Paratypes: Arizona: 2 cf cf, Globe, July 23, 1944, F. H. Parker, 
3600', mesquite, cholla, Aug. 6-9, 1948, W. Nutting; 1 9, 3 miles east 
of Portal, Cochise Co., Aug. 15, 1965, M. E. Erwin; 3 cf cf , 17 miles 
east of Douglas, Cochise Co., Aug. 8, 1958, P. Opler, R. M. Bohart; 

1 cf, Leslie Canyon, Douglas, Aug. 16, 1931, Virginia Reed; 1 cf , 
Cochise Stronghold, Sept. 6, 1960, L. A. Stange; 1 9, Molino Basin, 
Pima Co., Aug. 30, 1951, C. D. MacNeill; 1 9, Madera Canyon, 
Santa Cruz Co., 4800', Aug. 5, 1963, V. L. Vesterby; 4^^ Baboqui- 
vari Mts., F. H. Snow, and July 19, 1950, L. D. Beamer, and July 18, 
1950, J. Arnold; 1 cf , Brown's Canyon, Baboquivari Mts., Aug. 18, 
1955, F. G. Werner, G. D. Butler; 4 cf cf, Santa Rita Mts., July 10, 
1950, R. H. Beamer, and July 26, 1925; 1 cf, Santa Rita Ranger 
Station, Pima Co., Aug. 8, 1957, C. W. O'Brien; 1 cf , Florida Canyon, 
Santa Rita Range Refuge, Pima Co., July 20, 1959, G. A. Samuelson; 

2 cf cf , Safford, Sept. 6, 1955, R. W. Dawson; 3 cf cf , Sabino Canyon, 
Santa Catalina Mts., Aug. 14, 1950, R. A. Beal, and Aug. 7, 1953, 
G. D. Butler; 1 9, Santa Catalina Mts., Aug. 22, 1954, G. D. Butler; 
1 cf , Cave Creek Ranch, Chiricahua Mts., 5000', Aug. 3, 1965, G. R. 
Balmer; 2 99, Ramsey Canyon, Huachuca Mts., Sept. 6, 1956, F. G. 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 13 

Werner, G. D. Butler; 9 cTcf, 2 99, Tucson, Aug. 15, 17, 23, and 26, 
1955 (one pair in copula), G. D. Butler, and Aug. 16, 1940, D. J. and 
J. N. Knull. New Mexico: 2 cftf 1 , Rodeo, Aug. 5, 1955, R. R. 
Dreisbach, and Aug. 7, 1958, R. E. Rice; 1 9, 3 cf cf , 18 miles north of 
Rodeo, Aug. 25, 1958, P. M. Marsh, R. M. Bohart; 1 cf, 19 miles 
north of Rodeo, Aug. 9, 1965, E. M. Brown. MEXICO: Baja 
California: 1 d\ 15 miles south of Santo Domingo, Oct. 4, 1941, 
E. S. Ross, R. M. Bohart. Sonora: 2 cf cf , 10 miles west of Alamos, 
July 21, 1954, M. Cazier, W. Gertsch, Bradts. Sinaloa: 1 d\ 30.5 
miles north of Los Mochis, Aug. 24, 1964, M. E. Erwin; 1 d\ 8 miles 
south of Elota, July 2, 1963. Nayarit: 1 d\ Ahuacatlan, July 
18-22, 1951, on flowers of Donnellsmithia hintoni M. and C, P. D. 
Hurd. 

It is noteworthy that this is a late summer and fall species, whereas 
the two that are largely sympatric with it, H. melanderi and H. nigri- 
cornis, are spring and early summer species. 

Hermetia impressa James, new species 

Figure 2 

Differs from all other known species of the group in the deeply 
impressed sculpturing of the frons, as described below, and the 
divided ante-ocellar tubercle. 

Male: Head black; a pair of spots posteriorly on the vertex, the 
lower facial orbits, frontal callus, and a small margin above each 
antennal base, yellow; a brownish spot below the ante-ocellar tubercle 
and, in the paratype, an indefinite spot of similar color on each side 
of the anterior ocellus. Frons deeply excavated by a broad trough 
or furrow beginning on each side between the triangle of the frontal 
callus and the ante-ocellar tubercle and continuing above the latter 
in the form of an inverted U, the ocellar triangle being broadly 
separated from the ante-ocellar tubercle by this trough; the usual 
area above the frontal callus with two strong glabrous carinulae and 
a weaker one between them, all running longitudinally of the frons; 
ante-ocellar tubercle glabrous, divided above by two transverse 
furrows, the lower the more prominent; supra-antennal callus distinct 
and glabrous; pile of head white. Eyes with short, dense black pile. 
Basal two antennal segments brownish yellow; flagellum dark brown, 
style black and black pilose. Proboscis brownish black with white 
pile. Thorax mostly black; middle of pronotum, humeri, and apical 
third of scutellum yellow; mesonotum with mostly golden pile, the 
presutural vitta and transverse prescutellar band well marked; a 
triangular patch above each wdng base, a stripe to each side of the 
mesonotal vitta and turning J-like laterad so as partially to define 
an outer pair of vittae, and basal third of scutellum, black pilose; 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

sides of mesonotum before the suture and extending somewhat inward 
at the suture, as well as all pleural areas, white pilose. Anterior 
half of wing j T ellow to apex of discal cell and vein R 4 , otherwise brown; 
microtrichia-free area in anal cell very narrow. Halteres yellow. 
Apical half of fore- and hind tibiae and apical two-thirds of middle 
tibia black. Abdomen mostly black, the apex becoming reddish 
brown; terga 4 and 5 and sternum 5 mainly reddish brown, with a 
black median triangle at base of tergum 4 and a black triangle on 
each side; pile of first and second terga black except for a large sub- 
lateral triangle of golden pile on each side of the second as in H. 
chrysopila; that of terga 3-5 dense, golden except a median and a 
lateral triangle on each side of each tergum, those on the fifth defi- 
nitely the smallest, those on the third and fourth relatively large; 
venter white pilose. Genitalia yellow; dististyle prominent from 
lateral view, apex almost rectangular but slightly acute and sharp 
pointed. Length 8-9 mm. 

Holotype: cf, 6 miles south of Temixco, Morelos, Mexico, July 16, 
1963, F. R. Parker, L. A. Stange; University of California, Davis. 

Paratype: cf, same data. 

Hermetia aurata Bellardi 

Figures 3, 12 

Hermetia aurata Bellardi, 1859, Saggio di ditterologia messicana, vol. I, p. 27. — 
Williston, 1900, Diptera, in Godman and Salvin, Biologia Centrali-Ameri- 
cana, p. 240. — James, in Stone et al., Catalog of the Diptera of America 
north of Mexico, p. 304, partim. 

Though we have not seen Bellardi's types, we feel confident that 
our interpretation of this species is correct. The type-locality is 
Morelia, Michoacan, Mexico, which fits well into the known distri- 
butional pattern of this species but not into any other member of the 
group with which it might be confused. As Williston points out, 
Bellardi makes no mention of a yellow border to the scutellum; 
specimens that we interpret to be H. aurata have the scutellum 
wholly black or with at most a very narrow yellow border, whereas 
in all other species of the complex the yellow area is prominent and 
may be extended to cover the apical half of the scutellum. 

The supra-antennal callus is poorly developed or vestigial; the 
area above the frontal callus is rugulose, with two or sometimes only 
one well-marked carinulae. The thoracic pile is mostly yellow to 
golden and relatively inconspicuous except for the presutural median 
vitta, which is set apart by a vitta of black pile on each side, and a 
transverse prescutellar band; the hind tibia is black on the apical 
third to half, except at its extreme tip; and the others are reddish 
brown to dark brown or blackish on the same area; the pile of the ter- 



no. 3603 HERMETIA JAMES AND WIRTH 15 

niinal abdominal terga is dense and golden. The abdomen usually is 
wholly black; sometimes, in the males, the terminal segment may be- 
come reddish brown, and occasionally a pair of pale, but not translu- 
cent, spots may appear on the second tergum. The male genitalia 
are reddish yellow to reddish brown; the basistyle is robust; the disti- 
style, from ventral view, oval, its apex, when viewed laterally being 
rounded and projecting only very inconspicuously (fig. 3). 

Geographic distribution (fig. 12): Southern Sinaloa (Elota, Maz- 
atlan) to Durango and San Luis Potosi (Ciudad del Maiz) south to 
Oaxaca (Oaxaca, Camaron) and Guerrero (Amula, Venta de Zapilote, 
recorded by Williston, 1900). We have records from the following 
Mexican states within the above distributional area: Zacatecas, 
Aguascalientes, Nayarit, Guanajuato, Jalisco, Michoacan, Morelos, 
Veracruz, and Puebla. Seasonal records run from March to late 
October; however, this may merely reflect lack of collecting during 
the winter months. 

Hermetia eiseni Townsend 

Figure 11 

Hermetia eiseni Townsend, 1895, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 2, vol. 4, p. 594. 
Hermetia aurata Bellardi. — Townsend, 1895, Proc. California Acad. Sci., ser. 2, 

vol. 4, p. 594 [not Bellardi]. 
Hermetia aurata ssp. eiseni Townsend. — James, in Stone et al., 1965, Catalog of the 

Diptera of America north of Mexico, p. 304, partim. 

The supra-antennal callus is distinct and the area above the frontal 
callus rugulose, with two rather low carinulae; the mesonotum is 
wholly whitish to yellowish pilose, the pile thin except on the pre- 
scutellar band; a narrow presutural vitta is present in the male but 
absent in the female. The wing is brown with a yellow area extending 
the length of the second basal cell across the discal cell to the anterior 
margin and apex of vein R, so that both the posterior half of the wing 
and the anterior margin to the stigma remain brown; the differentia- 
tion in color is more marked in the female than in the male. The hind 
tibia is blackish to black on its apical third to half, the others reddish 
brown in the same area. The abdomen, at least when viewed from 
behind, is reddish brown in both sexes, the color more reddish in the 
male; however, the yellow pile of the abdomen is not as prominent as in 
H. chrysopila, more nearly comparable to H. ryckmani, and each 
tergum bears a broad transverse band of black pile, the yellow pile 
usually being limited to the extreme base and the apical half of the 
tergum. The male genitalia are similar to those of H. ryckmani. 

So far as we know, this species is restricted to the southern part of 
Baja California (fig. 11), and other records in the literature pertain 
to other species. Townsend's types came from San Jose del Cabo and 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

El Taste; he also recorded a series of 34 specimens of H. aurata from 
the former locality. We have examined one male and four females 
from San Jose del Cabo and one male from El Taste, all Eisen Collec- 
tion, also one female from Todos Santos, W. M. Mann. These seem 
to be conspecific, in spite of the differences between the sexes as indi- 
cated in the above description. Townsend made no mention of the 
sex of any of his specimens of either H. eiseni or what he took to be 
H. aurata; apparently he interpreted the males of the series as H. 
aurata and the females as the new species that he described as H. 
eiseni. 

Hermetta ryckmani James and Wirth, new species 

Figures 5, 11 

Hermelia aurata eiseni Townsend. — James, 1960, Bull. California Ins. Surv., 
vol. 6, p. Ill; James, 1965, in Stone et al., Catalog of the Diptera of America 
North of Mexico, p. 304, partim. 

Hermetia aurata Bellardi. — McFadden, 1967, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 121, no. 
3569, p. 32. 

Male: Head black, vertex, frontal callus, and sides of face, as usual, 
yellow; pile of head yellow, that of face more whitish, that of eyes 
dense, black above, brownish black below. Area above frontal callus, 
on each side, with two or three well-defined carinulae and rugulose, the 
sides of the front below these and the ante-ocellar tubercle distinctly 
but only moderately concave; ante-ocellar tubercle moderately promi- 
nent, smooth, sometimes with a few punctures above, not striate or 
but feebly longitudinally; supra-antennal callus small but distinct, 
glabrous. First two antennal segments and base of flagellum yellow, 
flagellum gradually becoming brownish yellow toward style, style 
black. Proboscis brown with white hairs. Thorax black, humeri 
and apical two-fifths to half of scutellum yellow. Presutural median 
vitta of mesonotum and transverse prescutellar band consisting of 
golden pile; a vitta of short pile to each side of presutural vitta and 
short pile of basal half of scutellum black; other thoracic pile yellow, 
tending to whitish or whitish yellow on the pleura. Anterior part of 
wing yellow to apex of vein R and including discal cell, the stigma, 
however, more brownish; area devoid of microtrichia limited to the 
basal cells and the narrow anterior part of cell 1st A. Tibiae and 
tarsi yellow, hind tibia black to blackish on apical fourth to third, 
fore- and midtibiae orange yellow on approximately apical half. 
Abdomen mostly reddish brown, first segment dorsally and ventrally 
and usually part of second black to blackish, rarely third segment 
somewhat blackish; a yellow transverse spot at base and a smaller 
one at apex of second sternum, usually connected by a median line. 
Pile of first and second terga black; a small apical fringe of golden pile 



no. 3603 HERMETIA — JAMES AND WIRTH 17 

on first tergum and a small apical patch of similar pile on each side 
of the second; terga 3-5 mostly with appressed golden pile that is not 
nearly so conspicuous as in H. aurata and H. chrysopila, more nearly 
comparable to H. eiseni; a small sublateral triangle on each side and 
usually a small median patch of black hairs on terga 3 and 4; sterna 
with pale yellow pile. Genitalia reddish yellow; basistyle robust, 
dististyle similar to that of H. melanderi but rounded when viewed 
laterally (fig. 5). Length 11-14 mm. 

Female: Differs chiefly from the male, other than sexually, in that 
the wing is brown throughout the costal and first basal cells, the 
yellowish area consequently forming a streak through the second basal, 
across the discal cell and to the apex of vein R, and in having the abdomen 
wholly black. The black of the hind tibia is more extensive, occupy- 
ing as much as the apical half; even the darker areas of the other 
tibiae may be in part blackish. 

Holotype: cf, San Dimas Canyon, Pomona, Los Angeles Co., 
Calif., Nov. 23, 1960; host: Opvntia occidentalis, reared; R. E. Ryck- 
man, L. E. Olsen; USNM type no. 69,107. Allotype: 9, with pu- 
parium, same data, but Dec. 4. 

Paratypes: California: 5 cf cf, 12 99, 5 with puparia, same data 
as holotype, but Nov. 23 and Dec. 4; 1 cf , 3 99, same data, but Apr. 16, 
1958, Ryckman, and June 10, July 24, and Aug. 1, 1958, Ryckman 
and J. P. Fonseca; 1 9, La Jolla, San Diego Co., June 18, 1963, J. 
Powell; 1 9, Santa Ana, Orange Co., Sept. 1, 1959, J. L. Bath; 1 9, 
1 mile east of Del Mar, San Diego Co., July 17, 1963, E. I. Schlinger; 
1 cf , San Diego Co., bred from decaying cactus, Sept. 5, 1919, F. 
Psota; 2 cf cf, San Diego Co., no date and Aug. 22, 1921; 2 cf cf, 
Los Angeles, June 3, 4, 1909, F. C. Pratt, on Opuntia; 1 9, Los Angeles 
Co., July; 1 cf , Los Angeles Co., June 18, Coquillett; 1 9, Filmore, 
June 27, 1937, B. E. White; 2 cf cf , San Diego, July 13 and Aug. 20, 
1921; 3 cf cf, California, no other data. Arizona: 1 cf, Congress, 
Aug. 13, 1939, K. Stager. 

The puparia described by McFadden (1967, p. 32) were taken 
from the type series of this species. 



18 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 









• 



Figures 1-10. — Hermetia anthidium: 1, head, lateral view (pile omitted except on eyes). 
Hermetia impressa: 2, head, front view, semidiagrammatic (AO=ante-ocellar tubercle; 
C= frontal callus; the U-shaped trough between these structures and above the ante- 
ocellar tubercle is set off by lines of short dashes). Male dististyle and basistyle, lateral 
view: 3, Hermetia aurata; 4, H. nigricornis; 5, H. ryckmani; 6, H. melatideri (and offset, 
apex of aedeagus). Hermetia conjuncta: 7, male genitalia, ventral view (basal part 
omitted, vestiture omitted). Hermetia melanderi: 8, male genitalia, ventral view (vestiture 
omitted). Hermetia chrysopila: 9, male dististyle, lateroventral (left) and ventral view 
(right). Hermetia conjuncta: 10, wing. (Fig. 10 drawn by Francoise Demogeot; others 
by M. T. James.) 




Figure 11. — Geographic distribution of Hermetic! chrysopila (open circles), H. melanderi 
(solid circles), H. ryckmani (solid squares), and H. eiseni (open squares). (Drawn by 
Francoise Demogeot.) 





Figure 12. — Geographic distribution of Hermetia aurula. (Drawn by Francoise Demogeot.) 

19 

U S GOVFRtiMrNT PRINTING OFFICE; 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3604 

Revision of the Beetles 

Of Genus Glyptoscelis 

(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) 



By Doris H. Blake 

Honorary Research Associate, Department of Entomology 



In a paper on the Coleoptera of Fort Tejon, Calif. (Proc. Acad. 
Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 9, p. 81, 1859), LeConte briefly de- 
scribed the genus Glyptoscelis as follows: "The genus Glyptoscelis 
(Chevrolat) [Dejean Catalogue, 3rd ed., p. 438, nomen nudum, 1837] 
is distinguished from the other genera allied to Eumolpus by the 
mouth not being covered beneath by the presternum, by the claws 
being toothed, and by the tibiae being longitudinally sulcate. The 
head is not sculptured as in Heteraspis [Graphops]." 

The first species, pubescens, was described as early as 1777 by Fabri- 
cius under Eumolpus. Linneaus in 1788 gave this species another 
name, and he was followed by Olivier in 1808 with still another specific 
name, and our own early American entomologist, Thomas Say, in 
1827 gave a fourth name to this species, which is widespread over the 
eastern half of the United States. Say also described two other 
species from the eastern and middle states under Eumolpus. In 
LeConte's paper of 1859 he described Glyptoscelis albida, the first 
species from the West Coast. In 1878, nearly 20 years later, he de- 
scribed G. longior, a second western species. In the meantime, in 

l 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

1873, Crotch, adopting LeConte's generic name Glyptoscelis, de- 
scribed from California three more species of this predominately West 
Coast genus. Thus, very early in American entomological history 
the genus Glyptoscelis was recognized by the leading coleopterists of 
the day. Both Blaisdell and Van Dyke have added new western 
species, and most recently N. L. K. Krauss in 1937 in the "University 
of California Publications in Entomology" has written a short revision 
of the North American species thereby adding three new subspecies. 
In the East, Blatchley and Schaeffer have each described a species 
from the middle and southern states respectively. Schaeffer's species 
from Texas belongs to the group of Glyptoscelis found in Mexico, and 
Blatchley's species (G. liebecki) is undoubtedly the same as one 
described by Baly (G. albicans) in 1865. Baly also described two 
species from Venezuela and Colombia in 1865. Jacoby in the 
"Biologia Centrali- Americana" in 1882 described G. mexicana from 
Mexico, and G. chontalensis from Nicaragua, and in 1897 he described 
G. gigas from Brazil and G. paraguayensis from Paraguay. In 1900 
he added G. dohrni from Colombia. The French entomologist 
Lefevre added G. gayi from Chile, a species which was collected by the 
Chilean entomologist. This represents the total of the species already 
described except for two or three wrongly ascribed to the genus from 
the West Indies. 

There has been gradually accumulating an extensive collection 
of specimens of the genus in the California Academy of Sciences, 
chiefly from the western states but with some from Sonora and 
Sinaloa in Mexico. Along with this material, I have studied the 
collections at the U.S. National Museum, the Museum of Com- 
parative Zoology, and the University of Washington. The result 
of this study of large series has shown that the western states and also 
western Mexico represent the center of the greatest number of species 
of the genus, and furthermore it shows that there is a considerable 
number that have not been recognized or have been confused with 
already described species. No one up to now apparently has studied 
the aedeagi, which show clear differences between very similar species. 
For instance, in the two species G. aeneipennis Baly and G. fascicularis 
Baly from Colombia and Venezuela, the differences in the beetles 
are so slight that Jacoby has united them under one name. But the 
aedeagi are entirely different, although even I, who know this, cannot 
tell with a certainty by their outward appearance which is which. 
In general, Glyptoscelis is a very homogeneous genus, many species 
looking more or less alike and at first glance not readily distinguishable. 

All the species of Glyptoscelis are comparatively large, measuring 
from 5 to 14 mm. in length. In color they are deep reddish brown 
or piceous, sometimes with a coppery or distinctly aeneous green 



N °- 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 3 

lustre, sometimes somewhat bronzy, or just shining black. And 
all of them are pubescent, usually with coarse, white, appressed 
hairs, sometimes intermixed with yellowish or brown hairs. Rarely 
is the pubescence in the form of broader scales. There is often a 
pattern made by the color of the brown and white pubescence, with 
thicker patches that form spots or vittae, usually on the elytra, but 
sometimes also on the pronotum. The arrangement of the hairs 
on the pronotum is significant. In the Mexican and South American 
species there is usually a bare median line that is impunctate down 
the pronotum and the hairs spread out from this on each side horizon- 
tally. In the more northern species the hairs in the median part of 
the pronotum are vertically arranged. In G. squamidata the pubes- 
cence on the pronotum is without any perceptible pattern, being 
very dense and the hairs broad and scalelike. In only one species 
are the hairs outstandingly erect over the upper surface, and this is 
in a peculiar cylindrically shaped species that is probably wingless. 
It is represented by only one specimen collected at Cotati, Sonoma 
County, Calif. 

These stout robust beetles have a broad head with wide-set eyes 
and a flat front usually with a median depressed line down from the 
occiput, a convex prothorax with somewhat rounded or occasionally 
nearly straight sides, a short broad scutellum, and long, convex 
elytra. In a few species the tips of the elytra are narrowly prolonged. 
Always the beetles are more or less coarsely and densely punctate 
throughout. The legs are short and stout, tibiae without emargi- 
nation but with a groove, the tarsal joints not very long, and the claw 
joint, with one exception, toothed. Only in G. cryptica is the claw 
simple. In the location of this claw tooth, there is considerable 
variation. In some species the claw has a bifid appearance, the tooth 
being near the apex; in others the tooth is short and near the base, 
and in some there is only a very tiny median tooth. Most often there 
is a well-developed tooth about midway up the claw, not as long as 
the claw. 

As already stated, the aedeagus is of prime importance in separat- 
ing the species. The shape of the tip is not only of specific value but 
it tends to separate the species into groups. For example, in G. 
squamidata, G. alternata, G. albida, and G. cryptica there are similarly 
pointed apices to the aedeagus. And the Mexican species from Sinaloa 
and Sonora, as well as G. mexicana from Oaxaca and G. prosopis from 
Brownsville all have similarly shaped tips to the aedeagus. This does 
not hold, however, in the case of the two South American species 
already mentioned, G. aeneipennis and G. fascicularis. Now and 
then there occurs a very divergently shaped aedeagus such as is found 
in G. dohrni from Colombia, in G. gigas from Brazil, and in G. gayi from 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Chile. Each one of these species is rather isolated from other species 
and otherwise unusual in appearance. 

It might be noted here again that, although the genus extends 
from Canada to Chile, the majority of the species is found in the 
western states, particularly in California. In the East there are only 
four species: (1) 67. pubescens, which ranges from Canada to the 
Gulf States and from the Mississippi River to the Atlantic Ocean; 
(2) 67. barbata, which occurs through the Middle States from Pennsyl- 
vania to St. Louis, Mo.; (3) 67. albicans, which definitely ranges 
from the Mississippi Valley to Texas; and (4) 67. cryptica, which is 
known from west of the Mississippi River in the prairie states. Only 
a few species have been described from Mexico and Central America, 
and a few widely separated species from South America. More will 
probably come to light in the future, but it is unlikely that they 
will amount to the plurality of the species of our western states. 

Not much is known of the biology of any of the species. In the 
East, 67. pubescens occurs on various species of pine, 67. barbata on 
pine and also hickory. On the West Coast, Blaisdell reported 
67. sequoiae on Sequoia sempervirens, and in the Sierras there is one or 
possibly two species that occur on Libocedrus decurrens and Juniperus 
occidentalis. Other species in the Northwest are reported on various 
species of pine and on fir trees. In Texas the name indicates that 
67. prosopis was found on mesquite. Another species from Argentina 
has also been collected on Prosopis. Glyptoscelis parvula is recorded 
on wild rose and willow, and 67. squamulata also on willow. Glyptoscelis 
illustris is recorded several times as taken on Pinus ponderosa and also 
on Juniperus occidentalis. And tw r o small undescribed species were 
collected on a pure stand of Artemisia tridentata (sagebrush). Thus, 
in general, it may be concluded that Glyptoscelis occurs on woody 
shrubs or trees, especially coniferous trees. The larvae are under- 
ground root feeders. 

Krauss in his revision of the species north of Mexico has designated 
Glyptoscelis albida as the type of the genus. It was the first species 
described by LeConte when he described the genus. 

I wish to thank the following persons for lending me specimens for 
this study: Hugh B. Leech, California Academy of Sciences; Melville 
H. Hatch, University of Washington; P. J. Darlington, Jr., Museum 
of Comparative Zoology; and R. D. Pope, British Museum (Natural 
History) . 

Key to United States Species of Glyptoscelis 

1. Claws simple, not toothed, elytra narrowly prolonged at apex, most notice- 
able in male (Prairie States) cryptica (Say) 

Claws toothed, elytra not prolonged at apex 2 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE O 

2. Pubescence erect and fine, not obscuring surface below, elytra without 

humeral prominences (Sonoma Co., Calif.) . . . cylindrica, news pecies 

Pubescence appressed and coarse, more or less obscuring surface below, 

elytra with well-marked humeral prominences 3 

3. Pubescence on pronotum consisting of broad, often truncate scalelike hairs . 4 
Pubescence on pronotum not broad or in form of scalelike hairs .... 5 

4. Pubescence on elytra white with lines of brown hairs forming vittae. (Inyo 

Co., Calif., and nearby) alternata Crotch 

Pubescence on elytra without lines of brown hairs (California, Nevada, 
Arizona) squamulata Crotch 

5. Large (9-11.5 mm.) pubescence on elytra with pattern of dark and white 

hairs 6 

Usually smaller, without noticeable pattern of pubescence on elytra, hairs 
more evenly distributed 7 

6. Pubescence on elytra with pattern of white hairs along base, sides, and 

suture and short white vittae near apex, rest of elytra with scanty, in- 
conspicuous dark hairs, not hiding coppery surface (California and Oregon). 

illustris Crotch 

Pubescence on elytra white with coarse yellowish hairs and traces of dark 

vittae near apex hiding surface (Inyo Co., Calif.) . . . aridis Van Dyke 

7. Beetle distinctly reddish brown with white pubescence (southern Illinois 

to Texas) albicans Baly 

Beetle either reddish brown with brown pubescence or piceous 8 

8. Beetle reddish brown with brown pubescence (New York to St. Louis, Mo.). 

barbata (Say) 

Beetle piceous usually with white pubescence that may be intermingled with 

brown hairs 9 

9. Large (7.5-11 mm.), with pro thorax as wide as elytra, piceous, lightly covered 

with brown and white pubescence (Canada to Gulf of Mexico, Atlantic 

Ocean to Mississippi River) pubescens (Fabricius) 

Smaller (from Mississippi lliver to Pacific Ocean) 10 

10. Aedeagus truncate at apex (on Artemisia tridentata; Oregon, Washington, 

Idaho, British Columbia) artemisiae, new species 

Aedeagus not truncate at apex 11 

1 1 . Pubescence on pronotum with more or less distinct median bare line from 

which hairs spread outwards and downwards (Brownsville, Tex.). 

prosopis Schaeffer 
Pubescence on pronotum without median bare line 12 

12. Beetle with coppery lustre, pubescence never white, varying from yellowish 

to dark brown (on Sequoia sempervirens, from about San Francisco, Calif., 

to Oregon) sequoiae Blaisdell 

Beetle either piceous black or bronzy, pubescence usually white or mixed 
with brown hairs 13 

13. Aedeagus triangular at apex (California) aibida LeConte 

Aedeagus not triangular at apex 14 

14. Occiput of head nearly smooth with punctures only along median line; 

elytra with white pubescence forming vittae (on Artemisia tridentata; 

Idaho) paula, new species 

Occiput of head densely punctate 15 

15. Aedeagus broadly rounded at apex 16 

Aedeagus not rounded at apex 20 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

16. Small (5-7 mm.), with short stout antennae not extending much below 

humeri, thorax contracted at base (on rose or willow; area about Sacra- 
mento, Calif.) parvula Blaisdell 

Usually larger with antennae reaching below humeri, thorax not noticeably 
contracted at base 17 

17. Elytra with hairs forming white vittae (Idaho, Wyoming). 

idahoensis, new species 
Elytra without white vittae 18 

18. Claw with tooth near base (Klamath, Oreg.) vandykei Krauss 

Claw with tooth at middle or near apex 19 

19. Pubescence not coarse, strawcolored or darker, surface shining with aeneous 

or bronzy lustre (on Juniperus or Libocedrus; Sierra Mts.). 

juniperi, new species 

Pubescence coarse and white with a few yellowish hairs; surface piceous 

with faint bronzy lustre (Colorado, Utah) . . . coloradoensis, new species 

20. Elytral pubescence mostly dark brown with a few white hairs, giving beetle 

brown look (Humboldt Co., Calif., to British Columbia, east to Montana). 

septentrionalis, new species 
Etytral pubescence not dark brown, appearing grayish 21 

21. From 7-8 mm. long (Cascade Range in Shasta, Siskiyou, Trinity Cos., 

Calif.) peperi, new species 

From 5.5-6.5 mm. long (from middle of Oregon eastward to Idaho, 
Wyoming) longior LeConte 

Glyptoscelis pubescens (Fabricius) 

Figure 1 

Cryptocephahis pubescens Fabricius, 1776, Genera insectorum, p. 220; 1801, 

Systema eleutheron, vol. 2, p. 43. 
Eumolpus hirsutus Gmelin, 1788, edition of Linnaeus, Systema natura, vol. 1, p. 

1703. 
Eumolpus hirtus Olivier, 1808, Entomologie, vol. 6, p. 906. 
Eumolpus pini Say, 1827, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 5, p. 295. 
Glyptoscelis hirtus Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 25, p. 35. 
Glyptoscelis pubescens Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, pp. 202, 

203.— Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 23, 24. 

From 7.5 to 11 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining piceous with a 
bronzy or sometimes faint rosy lustre; legs and antennae deep reddish 
brown, prothorax with dense, deep, and coarse punctation, elytra a 
little less coarsely and less densely punctate, especially toward the 
apex; surface not entirely concealed by brown and white pubescence 
that is semierect; prothorax nearly as broad as elytra, not very convex, 
and with well-rounded sides. 

Head with interocular space considerably more than half width of 
head, eyes emarginate near antennal sockets; a median depression 
from which a median line up to occiput, punctation over front and 
occiput dense, deep and variable in coarseness; a whitish pubescence 
about eyes, brownish in middle of front, labrum reddish brown. 
Antennae extending well below humeri, seventh joint long, outer 
joints wider and often deeper brown. Prothorax not as convex as in 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 7 

most species of the genus, at middle nearly as wide as elytra, sides well 
rounded, surface shiny, very densely, deeply and coarsely punctate, 
punctures tending to be oval, not entirely concealed by the brown and 
white pubescence that in places is semierect. Scutellum black with 
a few fine white hairs. Elytra with prominent humeri and short 
intrahumeral sulcus, a slight depression below basal callosities and 
another below scutellum; punctation usually coarse, deep and dense 
in basal half, becoming much finer towards apex; pubescence of mixed 
brown and white semierect coarse hairs, not scales and not hiding 
punctation. Body beneath with thick white pubescence not entirely 
obscuring the shiny punctate surface beneath. Legs reddish brown. 
Length 7.4-11 mm.; width 3.7-5.3 mm. 

Type: One specimen in the Fabricius collection at Kiel, Germany. 

Type-locality: "Habitat in America boreali." 

Other localities: Ontario: Toronto, R. J. Crew, M. C. Van Duzee. 
Quebec: St. Johns, June 1, 1902; F. Knab. New Hampshire: 
Exeter, Durham, A. S. Abbott. Minnesota: Itasca. Massachu- 
setts: Brookline, Boston; Mt. Toby, Sunderland, May 12, 1918, 
H. M. Parshley; Chicopee, May 1900, F. Knab; Concord, Forest 
Hills, F. X. Williams; Framingham, G. M. Greene; Springfield, 
May 12, 1900; Stoneham, F. A. Sheriff; Stoughton, June 1919, D. H. 
Blake; N. Saugus, D. H. Clemens; Worcester, F. Knab. New York: 
West Point, June 26, 1912, Wirt Robinson; Ithaca, F. H. Chittenden; 
Buffalo; Trenton, Hubbard and Schwarz; on pine, Wyoming Co., June 
1900, G. M. Greene; Bear Mt., July 2, 1924; Hamburg, May 3, 1913, 
Van Duzee. New Jersey: Da Costa, June 30; Atsion, June 26, 
1950, G. M. Greene; Glen wood Lake, Hornerstown, Lakehurst, Van 
Dyke; Iona, May 26, 1902; Malaga, Apr. 26, 1925, R. R. Mason. 
Pennsylvania: Wind Gap, June 25, 1930, G. M. Greene; Bedford 
Co.; Mt. Pocono, Pocono Lake, G. M. Greene; Water Gap; Dauphin 
Co., May 21, 1927, J. N. Kault; Effort, July 22, 1932, G. M. Greene; 
Tannersville, June 21, 1948, G. M. Greene. Maryland: Bladens- 
burg, Apr. 6, 1919, L. L. Buchanan; Chesapeake Beach, May 6, 
1906, F. Knab. Washington, D.C.: Petworth, W. Middleton; 
Hubbard and Schwarz on Pinus virginica. Virginia: Charlottesville, 
R. C. Smith; Falls Church, J. M. Green, June 3, 1917; Newport News, 
H. B. Barley, Norfolk, May 21, 1931, H. G. W T alker; Fredericksburg; 
Ft. Monroe, Apr. 19, Hubbard and Schwarz; Vienna, Apr. 15, 1942, 
on Pinus taeda; Luray, Hubbard and Schwarz; St. Elmo, April. 
North Carolina: Asheville, on Pinus rigida, May 11, 1924; Retreat, 
May 31, Hubbard and Schwarz; Round Knob, Hubbard and Schwarz; 
Southern Pines, Apr. 26. South Carolina: Clemson, June 27, 1946, 
O. L. Cartwright. Mississippi: Mar. 16, Nicholson. Alabama: 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Auburn, Apr. 18, 1940, Van Dyke; one-half mile east of Paeston, 
Marshall County, on Pinus taeda. 

Remarks: This is the most common and widespread species of 
Glyptoscelis east of the Mississippi River, and its range is from 
Ontario and Quebec to Mississippi and Alabama, and from Minnesota 
eastward. It is recorded as being found on various species of pine, 
also on hemlock and spruce. This large stout beetle with its brownish 
coloration and its exceptionally wide prothorax is easily distinguished 
from other species. There is considerable variation in size, specimens 
from the more southern localities tending to be the largest. 

Glyptoscelis barbata (Say) 

Figure 2 

Eumolpus barbatus Say, 1826, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 5, p. 296. 
Ghjptoscelis barbatus Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 25, 

p. 36. 
Glyptoscelis barbata Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, pp. 202, 203. — 

Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, p. 24. 

Between 6 and 7.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining beneath 
semierect brown pubescence, deep reddish brown or even piceous, 
antennae reddish brown, very coarsely and densely punctate with 
transverse ridging on elytra, pubescence beneath grayish white. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, a median 
line down occiput and front, deep reddish brown, surface deeply, 
densely and not very coarsely punctate, covered with brown pubes- 
cence. Antennae extending below humeri, reddish brown, outer 
joints a little wider, seventh joint long. Prothorax moderately convex 
with rounded sides, deep reddish brown, punctation deep, contiguous 
and tending to be oval, not entirely concealed by semierect brown 
pubescence. Scutellum with a few hairs. Elytra broadly rounded 
posteriorly, with a short intrahumeral sulcus, not noticeably depressed 
below scutellum, a little elevated at middle, shining beneath the 
reddish brown and semierect pubescence, punctures coarse, deep and 
with transverse ridging. Body beneath shining beneath the dense 
grayish pubescence, legs reddish brown with gray pubescence. Length 
6-7.5 mm.; width 3.3-4 mm. 

Type: Whereabouts unknown. 

Type-locality: Not given by Say, who stated that it was a beetle 
named in the Melsheimer Catalogue, and it is probably from the 
Melsheimer collection and from Pennsylvania. 

Other localities: New York: New York, Long Island, and Staten 
Island, all collected by M. L. Linell. New Jersey: M. L. Linell. 
Pennsylvania: Alleghany, J. B. Smith, Red Bank, July 2, 1900; 
Shiremanstown, May 15, 1915, on Carya foliage, W. S. Fisher; Lingles- 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 9 

town, October 1914, W. S. Fisher, on Carya; Philadelphia, Caby, 
J. W. Green; Hammelstown, June 4, 1921, J. N. Knull; Overbrook, 
June 31, 1915, G. M. Greene; Angora, G. M. Greene. Maryland: 
Beltsville, June 30, 1923, L. L. Buchanan. Washington, D.C.: 
Hubbard and Schwarz. Virginia: Herndon, Hubbard and Schwarz. 
Kentucky: Edmonson Co., July 17, 1900. Missouri: St. Louis, 
June 1899, F. Knab. Indiana: Clark Co. 

Remarks: The distinctly brown appearance of this species is the 
result not only of its reddish-brown surface but also the uniformly 
pale brown pubescence on the upper surface. The body beneath has 
a grayish pubescence. No specimens have been seen north of New 
York or south of Kentucky. It is recorded from New York to as far 
west as St. Louis, Mo. 

Glyptoscelis albicans Baly 

Figure 5 

Glyptoscelis albicans Baly, 1865, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, ser. 3, vols. 2, 4, 

p. 334. 
Glyptoscelis liebecki Blatchley, 1910, Coleoptera of Indiana, p. 1137. — Krauss, 

1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, p. 24. 

Between 8 and 10 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining, deep reddish 
brown with short, white, coarse, appressed pubescence, pro thorax 
deeply, coarsely, and densely punctate, elytra not quite so coarsely 
or densely punctate with some horizontal ridging, slightly depressed 
below scutellum and convex below that. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, a more 
or less distinct median line ending in a depression in middle of front, 
punctation dense and moderately coarse, brown and white pubescence 
very dense, covering surface, usually labrum and palpi paler yellowish 
brown. Antennae extending well below humeri with wider outer 
joints, seventh joint long, pale yellowish or reddish brown. Pro thorax 
not much wider than long, with only slightly curved sides, moderately 
convex, densely and deeply punctate, punctures being somewhat oval 
and frequently contiguous, covered densely with a pale brown or 
yellowish gray coarse pubescence, heavier on the sides. Scutellum 
with a few fine hairs. Elytra with a depression below scutellum 
along suture, a short intrahumeral sulcus and well-developed humeri, 
a slight convexity before middle of elytra; punctation not so coarse 
or deep as on pronotum with horizontal ridging most marked about 
scutellum, punctures finer toward apex; pubescence coarse, short, 
dense, closely appressed, tending to be yellowish or pale brownish or 
white, and surface below dark reddish brown and shiny. Body beneath 
covered with dense white coarse hairs, beneath which a dense fine 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

punctation, legs yellowish or reddish brown. Length 8-10.5 mm.; 
width 4-5 mm. 

Type: Female, in British Museum (Natural History). Type of 
G. liebecki in Blatchley collection, Purdue University, Lafayette, Ind. 

Type-locality: For its habitat Baly gives only "?". 

Other localities: Illinois: southern part, May 7, 1892, H. Soltau. 
Arkansas: Pine Bluff, Mar. 20, Hubbard and Schwarz. Louisiana: 
Tallulah, Mar. 8-15, 1944. Texas: College Station, Apr. 1, 1917; 
Texas, C. V. Riley. 

Remarks: The reddish-brown color and coarse white hairs dis- 
tinguish this from other eastern species. It closely resembles G. 
cryptica Say in its coloring but the scalelike pubescence in G. cryptica 
is broader and there are more distinct elytral prolongations at the tip 
than in G. albicans. Sometimes in G. albicans there may be a bunching 
of the white hairs at the tip to simulate a little prolongation. 

Glyptoscelis albicans Baly has been synomized with G. cryptica Say. 
I have examined the Baly type in the British Museum (Natural 
History), and it has no prolongation of the tip as in G. cryptica. The 
elytra are covered with a dense white pubescence that conceals the 
punctation, the hairs are not so short or broad as in G. cryptica. The 
elytra are not at all metallic and are slightly humped in the middle, 
well below the scutellum. Jacoby's observation (under G. albicans 
in the "Biologia Centrali- Americana," Coleoptera, vol. 6, pt. 1, 1882, 
p. 177) that his specimen from the Salle collection with simple claws 
differs in this respect from the type of G. albicans, which has bifid 
claws, is sufficient to rule out G. albicans from being the same as G. 
cryptica Say. 

The pattern of the pubescence on the prothorax is different from 
that of the G. squamulata group and also of species from Mexico. In 
fact, the only species that can fit G. albicans is Blatchley's G. liebecki, 
which strongly resembles G. cryptica, except that it has bifid claws. 

Blatchley gave the distribution in Indiana as Knox, Martin, and 
Posey Counties, all in the southwest part of the state. It is also from 
southern Illinois but there are no records from farther north or east. 
It ranges south and west to Texas. 

Glyptoscelis cryptica (Say) 

Figure 3 

Eumolpus crypticus Say, 1824, Journ. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 3, p. 449. 

Glyptoscelis crypticus Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 25, p. 36. 

Glyptoscelis cryptica Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, pp. 202, 

204.— Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, p. 30. 

From 8 to 10.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining reddish brown 
beneath the short white scalelike pubescence, elytra with prolonged 
tips parted, more developed in male, claws simple. 



no. "604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 11 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes 
slightly emarginate at antennal sockets; a more or less well-defined 
median line ending in a small depression in middle of front, from which 
white pubescence radiates, surface lustrous, dark reddish brown, 
densely punctate, covered with dense, coarse white hairs, labrum paler 
reddish brown. Antennae extending below humeri, outer joints 
thicker, seventh joint long, reddish brown. Prothorax widest at 
base, with nearly straight sides, moderately convex, in some specimens 
a median depression, more marked in middle of base; surface shiny, 
densely and not very coarsely punctate, lustrous dark reddish brown, 
covered with short, dense, coarse, white hairs, sometimes almost 
scalelike. Scutellum with fine white hairs. Elytra a little depressed 
below scutellum and with a short intrahumeral sulcus and prominent 
humeri, tapering to apex with apices prolonged and parted, especially 
in male, not united at tip as in G. chontalensis Jacoby; surface very 
shiny, dark reddish brown, with punctation coarser near base, covered 
with scalelike white pubescence, wider than hairs on prothorax. 
Body beneath densely punctate and with white scalelike pubescence 
becoming finer on abdomen, claws simple. Length 8-10.5 mm.; 
width 4-5 mm. 

Type: Whereabouts unknown. 

Type-locality: "Inhabits Missouri." 

Other localities: Missouri: St. Louis; central Missouri, C. V. 
Riley. Arkansas: Pine Bluff, Mar. 22, Hubbard and Schwarz. 
Indiana. Oklahoma: Oklahoma City, May 28, 1957, O. Alexander. 
Kansas: East Kansas; Topeka, E. A. Popenoe. 

Remarks: I have seen very few specimens of this species, and these 
are mostly old ones from the Riley and Popenoe collections. The 
reddish-brown coloring, scalelike pubescence on the elytra, and pro- 
longed and parted apices of the elytra, more developed in male, 
distinguish this species. It is unique in the genus in having simple 
claws. 

There is a figure of this species in the "Biologia Centrali-Americana" 
(Coleoptera, vol. 6, p. 177, 1882) illustrating a specimen, probably a 
female, from the Sturm collection and labelled "Mexico," which 
Jacoby called G. albicans Baly, although he noted that it differed from 
G. albicans by having simple not bifid or appendiculate claws. 

Glyptoscclis squatnulata Crotch 

Figure 6 

Glyptoscelis squamulatus Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 35. 
Glyptoscelis squamulata Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 204. 
Glyptoscelis squamulata Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, 
p. 29. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM ™l. 123 

From 6.5 to 10 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, bronzy black 
beneath the dense, closely appressed white or pale brownish scales, 
densely and not very coarsely punctate, antennae and legs reddish 
brown. 

Head with a more or less distinct median line ending in a depression 
in middle of front from which white scalelike hairs radiate; densely 
pubescent over the dense punctation beneath; eyes with small emar- 
gination near antennal sockets, labrum reddish brown. Antennae 
extending a little below humeri, outer joints somewhat wider, seventh 
joint long, reddish brown with some darkening of apical joints. 
Prothorax wider than long with curved sides, moderately convex, 
often depressed in middle at base; densely covered with white or pale 
brownish scales set vertically except toward margin, where scales 
become horizontally arranged; punctation dense, deep, and not very 
coarse, tending to be oval rather than round and on sides punctures 
sometimes running together. Scutellum with fine hairs. Elytra 
faintly depressed about scutellum and with a transverse depression 
below intrahumeral sulcus, piceous surface completely hidden by 
dense scales, punctation beneath the dense covering coarser in basal 
part becoming finer and less dense towards apex. Body beneath 
entirely covered with dense white pubescence, the scales over abdomen 
more hairlike; legs reddish brown. Length 6.5-10 mm.; width 
3.3-5 mm. 

Type: In Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Type-locality: California. 

Other localities: California: Butte Co.: Oroville, Apr. 30, 1927, 
H. R. Keefer. Lake Co.: Hillville, June 19, 1921, F. E. Blaisdell. 
Sacramento Co.: Sacramento, on willow, May 28, 1918, E. P. Van 
Duzee; Courtland, May 6, 1926, F. H. Wymore. Merced Co.: 
Ryer, May 3, 1923, F. H. Wymore. San Joaquin Co.: Davis, 
Apr. 17, 1926, Wymore, on Salix. Stanislaus Co.: La Grange, 
R. P. Allen. Alameda Co.: Sunol, May 14, 1922, F. E. Blaisdell. 
Madera Co.: Madera, Apr. 11, 1951, R. Pallen. Santa Clara Co.: 
San Jose, Apr. 16, 1940, E. G. Meyers. Fresno Co.: Bass Lake, 
June 12, 1922, R. S. Wagner; Sanger, on grapes, Apr. 8, 1936; Coalinga, 
Mar. 19, 1931, E. S. Ross. Monterey Co.: Bradley, May 23, 1930, 
on willow, E. P. Van Duzee; Bryson Paicenes, July 9, 1933; Paraiso 
Spgs., Apr. 26, 1919. San Luis Obispo Co.: Paso Robles, Apr. 1, 
1917, on Salix, L. S. Slevin. San Benito Co.: Hernandez Valley, 
May 28, 1960, C. E. Wemmen. Tulare Co.: Woodlake, Visalia, 
Mar. 7, 1934, R. P. Allen. Kings Co.: Hanford, eating grape leaves, 
Van Dyke. Kern Co.: Bakersfield, June 2, 1916, J. O. Martin; 
Cuyama Valley, Apr. 10, 1932, E. P. Van Duzee; Poso Creek, June 5, 
1929, E. P. Van Duzee; Tapman, Apr. 7, 1932, E. P. Van Duzee; 



no- 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 13 

Isabella, June 2, 1943, R. Hopping; Del Ray, Hubbard and Schwarz. 
Los Angeles Co.: Palmdale, Santa Monica, Rivera, on orange, May 
10, 1926, Van Duzee; San Gabriel, June 1892, Hutchinson; Pasadena, 
May, Fenyes; Compton, Apr. 17, 1912, J. E. Graf; West Covina, 
May 4, 1942, J. A. Wilcox, on 3 7 oung orange trees; Lenwood, Burbank, 
July 1915; Whittier, Mar. 20, 1940, Harper and Graves. Riverside 
Co.: Coachella, Mar. 15, 1920; Indio, on grape leaves, Mar. 17, 1938, 
G. Henull; Palm Springs, A. Fenyes, May 21, 1917, E. P. Van Duzee; 
Saboba Springs, June 2, 1917, E. P. Van Duzee. San Bernardino 
Co.: Colton, May 26, 1917, E. P. Van Duzee, on rose; Courtland, 
May 6, 1926, F. H. Wymore; San Bernardino, May 13, 1930, C. M. 
Dammus; Lytle Creek, June 6, 1926, Van Duzee; Oro Grande, E. S. 
Ross. Orange Co.: Green River Camp, Santa Ana, May 11, 1933, 
E. P. Van Duzee. San Diego Co. : Descanso, Mission Valley, April 
1930, G. H. Field; San Diego, May 31, 1890, F. E. Blaisdell, on alfalfa, 
Apr. 10, 1914, S. Wilson. Imperial Co.: Winterhaven, on Sphaeral- 
cea rosacea, March 1930. Nevada: Reno, May 3, 1926; Las Vegas 
Valley, Lincoln Co., May 1922, injuring grape leaves; Logandale, Apr. 
14, 1961, Bechtel. Utah: Milford, July 7, Wickham; St. George, 
V. M. Tanner; St. George, 2800 ft., May 23-June 12, 1919, W. Knaus. 
Arizona: Ft. Yuma, Jan. 25, Hubbard and Schwarz; Littlefield, 
Apr. 25, 1935, J. W. Green; Phoenix, Tempe, V. L. Wildermuth; 
Somerton, Mar. 23, 1944, on alfalfa. 

Remarks: There are five specimens in the LeConte collection 
under G. squamulata, the first two bearing round gilt labels, indicating 
the locality as California. These are essentially alike in white 
appearance and are probably Crotch's specimens. The species is 
readily distinguished from all the others by the wide white or pale 
brownish scales covering the whole beetle and giving it a snowy 
appearance. There are rarely brown specimens. It appears to 
range from Butte County in northern California to San Diego County 
in the south, and it also occurs in Utah, Nevada, and Arizona. It 
has been recorded as a pest on grapes, oranges, and peaches. 

Glyptoscelis alternata Crotch 

Figure 4 

Glyptoscelis alternates Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 25, 

p. 36. 
Glyptoscelis alternata Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, pp. 202-3. 
Glyptoscelis alternata Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, 

pp. 29, 30. 

Between 7 and 9.5 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining 
piceous, covered with closely appressed brown and white scales, scales 
on elytra forming brown and white vittae; punctation on pronotum 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

oval, denser on sides and at base, elytra with depressed area near 
scutellum and below basal callosities, punctures not very coarse and 
becoming finer towards apex. 

Head coarsely and densely punctate throughout with closely 
appressed white scalelike hairs that, on occiput, become slightly 
browner; surface piceous, labrum usually brown. Antennae extending 
below humeri, brown with fine white pubescence. Prothorax moder- 
ately convex, depressed along base, shining piceous with coarse 
elongate oval punctures becoming denser at base and on sides and 
nearly concealed by the closely appressed white pubescence. Scu- 
tellum densely punctate and densely covered with finer white hairs. 
Elytra with a depressed white area below and about scutellum in 
which horizontal rows of punctures form slight horizontal ridging 
between, a transverse depression below with ridging, and a short 
intrahumeral sulcus, punctation becoming finer and less dense towards 
apex, pubescence consisting of scalelike hairs with alternate brown and 
white coloring forming a vittate pattern. Body beneath entirely 
covered with closely appressed white pubescence, near apex of tibiae 
becoming fine, silky, and slightly brownish. Length 7-9.5 mm.; 
width 3.3-5.3 mm. 

Type: Possibly in Horn collection in Philadelphia. 

Type-locality: California. 

Other localities: California: Inyo Co.: Independence, June 11, 
1937, Van Dyke, June 12, K. L. Maehler, June 4, Fenyes; Big Pine, 
Apr. 10, 1937, A. E. Michelbacker; Lone Pine, Apr. 6, 1934, R. P. 
Allen; June 8, 1929, R. L. Usinger; Oct. 10, 1937, H. E. Michelbacker. 
Krauss gives the locality Isabella, Kern County, which is not far 
from the localities in Inyo County. 

Remarks: As Krauss noted, this species is very close to G. squamu- 
lata Crotch, the only differences seeming to be in the vittate pattern of 
the scales on the elytra. The difference in the width of the scales is 
very slight, G. squamulata having possibly slightly shorter and broader 
scales. The tooth on the claw is lower down than on G. squamiilata. 
Unlike G. squamiilata, this beetle appears to be confined to a small 
area in southern California in and near Inyo County. 

In the LeConte collection there are five specimens under this name, 
none with a type label, and only one with a locality label, which reads 
"Tex." In the general collection at the Museum of Comparative 
Zoology there is one specimen labelled "alternatus Cr. Calif. Horn," 
which is the same data that Crotch gave in his original description of 
G. alternata. Possibly this is the type or at least a cotype. 

Mr. Hugh B. Leech has sent me this note from Dr. Van Dyke's 
notebook: "Friday, June 11, 1937. Drove up to Independence 
(Inyo Co., Cal.) and thence up Clark Flatroad to Sierras. Collected 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 15 

but little at higher levels. On way back drove out beyond Inde- 
pendence and towards the river. Close to flume found Glyptoscelis 
alter nata on vetch [Glycyrrhiza lepidota (Nuttall)]." There are in the 
California Academy about 70 specimens that Dr. Van Dyke collected 
that day at Independence. 

Glyptoscelis albida LeConte 

Figures 7, 8, 10 
Glyptoscelis albidus LeConte, 1859, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 9, 

p. 81.— Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, vol. 25, p. 36. 
Glyptoscelis albida Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 203. 
Glyptoscelis albida Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 25- 
26. 

From 6 to 10.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining piceous with a 
bronzy and often purplish-brown lustre beneath the thick white and 
sometimes pale brownish coarse hairs; antennae, tibiae, and tarsi 
tending to be dark reddish brown; prothorax contiguously and coarsely 
punctate, with pubescence vertical in middle and branching from 
either side of middle of base diagonally toward side; elytra broad, 
convex, depressed a little about scutellum. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, a median 
line down front ending in a depression in middle from which white 
pubescence radiates, densely and coarsely punctate and covered with 
dense white appressed hairs; eyes slightly emarginate at antennal 
sockets. Antennae extending below humeri, dark brown, outer 
joints wider, seventh joint long. Prothorax large, broader than long 
with rounded sides, convex with median basal depression; very coarsely 
and contiguously punctate and covered with white coarse hairs 
arranged vertically down middle and branching from either side of base 
diagonally and horizontally toward sides in broad sweeping pattern. 
Scutellum with finer white hairs. Elytra broad, convex, a slight 
depression below scutellum and a short intrahumeral sulcus; puncta- 
tion coarse, often contiguous near base and somewhat horizontally 
ridged; pubescence dense and coarse, but not entirely hiding surface 
and producing a grayish white aspect to beetle, the white hairs inter- 
mixed with pale brown ones. Body beneath densely punctate and 
densely covered with finer white hairs becoming silky and yellowish 
brown at apex of tibiae. Length 6.2-10.5 mm.; width 3.3-5.3 mm. 

Type: In Museum of Comparative Zoology. Types of G. albida 
diabola and G. albida yosemitae Krauss in California Academy of 
Sciences. 

Type-locality: Ft. Tejon, Calif. 

Other localities: California: Alameda Co.: Niles Canyon, May 
14, 1922, Van Dyke; Altomont, Apr. 30, 1956, R. P. Allen; hills back 
of Oakland. Contra Costa Co.: Berkeley, Apr. 19, 1940, Miller; 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Mt. Diablo, May 13, 1923, F. E. Blaisdell. Monterey Co. : Monterey, 
Koebele; Paraiso Springs, May 31, 1916, Sleven; Bryson, Apr. 25, 
1941, E. P. Van Duzee. Mariposa Co.: Wawona, Apr. 17, 1931, 
feeding on cherry; Yosemite Valley, May 28, 1921. Fresno Co.: 
Huntington Lake, May 8, 1931, Van Dyke; Havilah, May 8, 1931, 
Van Dyke; Stevenson Creek, May 27, 1915, on Libocedrus; Black 
Mt., July 5, 1919, F. E. Blaisdell. Tulare Co.: Atwood's Mill, June 
29, 1913, Van Dyke; Visalia, April 1930, on poplar, F. T. Scott. San 
Benito Co.: Waltham Creek, May 11, 1907, R. Hopping. Kern Co.: 
Mt. Pinos, June 14, 1914, F. Grinnell. Ventura Co.: Mt. Pinos, 
June 15, 1914, F. Grinnell. San Bernardino Co.: Forest Home, 
June 14, 1928, Van Dyke; Lebec, alt. 4000 ft., May 15, 1928, J. O. 
Martin. Los Angeles Co.: Tanbark Flat, June 23, 1950, F. X. 
Williams. Riverside Co.: Palm Springs, Mar. 27, 1916, F. E. 
Blaisdell. San Diego Co.: Mission Valley, Mar. 30, 1930, Ian Moore. 
Imperial Co.: Laguna, June 3, 1924, F. E. Blaisdell. 

Remarks: In the LeConte collection are four specimens, the first 
labelled "G. albidus Lee. Sacr.Rathv." and having, in addition, 
a round gilt label indicating "California." The other three all have 
gilt labels and two are also labelled "Santa Cruz." There are two 
others in the same line labelled "Cal." that are probably not this 
species. The type bearing the label is almost destitute of pubescence, 
being badly rubbed. A drawing was made of this one, which presum- 
ably was taken at Ft. Tejon, and with it is given the aedeagus of a 
specimen from Lebec, which is located in Kern County near the type- 
locality, Ft. Tejon. 

The grayish-white appearance of this species is responsible for its 
name. It is not snowy white like G. squamulata Crotch, and the 
coarse white hairs are pointed and not truncate as are the scales in 
G. squamulata. 

Krauss has made two subspecies, one, G. diabola from Mt. Diablo, 
Contra Costa County, which he differentiates by its less robust 
form, more aeneous coloring and less densely punctate thorax. The 
other, G. yosemitae, he differentiates by its less robust form, somewhat 
less densely pubescent surface, with shorter and finer hairs, and more 
shallowly emarginate eyes. There is a great variation in size in this 
species, which, I believe, is not connected with specific localities. 
The main character is to be found in the aedeagus. This is not unlike 
that of G. squamulata and serves to distinguish G. albida from the 
three following species, all more northern in range, that occur respec- 
tively in northern California, Oregon, and Idaho. 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS BLAKE 17 

Glyptoscelis vandykei Krauss, new status 

Figure 9 
Glyptoscelis sequoiae vandykei Krauss, 1937, Univ. Calif. Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, 
p. 28. 

From 8 to 10 mm. in length, broadly oblong oval, shining piceous, 
antennae usually very dark brown or piceous, prothorax broad, 
densely and deeply punctate, elytra coarsely and contiguously punc- 
tate, covered with coarse white and pale brown hairs, not closely 
appressed. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes 
slightly emarginate at antennal sockets, a more or less well-defined 
median line ending in a depression in middle of front, lower front more 
coarsely punctate, punctures dense on head with rather fine and 
closely appressed white and pale brown pubescence. Antennae long, 
extending well below humeri, outer joints wider, seventh joint long, 
usually dark brown or piceous. Prothorax considerably wider than 
long, almost as wide as elytra, with curved sides, moderately convex 
with depression along basal margin; deeply, coarsely and densely 
punctate, punctures oval or even sometimes diamond shaped; pubes- 
cence long and moderately coarse, in middle usually pale brown and 
semierect, not entirely concealing punctation, below middle the 
pattern of pubescence branching horizontally toward sides and 
feathery. Scutellum with finer white pubescence. Elytra slightly 
depressed below scutellum and also below basal callosities, a short 
intrahumeral sulcus; punctation contiguous, coarse, with horizontal 
ridging about scutellum; pubescence not so thick as to conceal puncta- 
tion below, coarse, not closely appressed but semierect, pale brown and 
white. Body beneath densely punctate and covered with white 
pubescence. Length 7.6-9.7 mm.; width 4-5 mm. 

Type: In California Academy of Sciences. 

Type-locality: Klamath Falls, Klamath County, Oreg., June 16, 
1922, Van Dyke, on juniper. 

Other localities: Oregon: Crater Lake, alt. 7000 ft., July 17, 1922, 
Van Dyke. 

Remarks: This species is easily separated from G. sequoiae Blaisdell 
by its larger size, coarser pubescence, and different coloring. Glyptos- 
celis sequoiae is noticeable because of its coppery lustre, whereas G. 
vandykei is piceous. The aedeagus is also quite different in shape, in 
G. vandykei being broadly rounded at the apex. The pubescence is 
not so coarse as in G. albida, which otherwise it resembles in size and 
robustness, and again the aedeagus is quite unlike that of G. albida. 
Unlike G. sequoiae, its food plant is apparently juniper. 



245-252—67- 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Glyptoscelis peperi, new species 

Figure 12 

From 7 to 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining black, antennae, 
tibiae, and tarsi tending to be deep reddish brown, covered with 
white and pale brownish hairs intermingled, those on the elytra 
being coarser than on pronotum, punctation of pronotum dense, 
deep, and moderately coarse, of elytra coarser near base, a depression 
below sciitellum and on side below basal callosities. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes 
emarginate at antennal sockets, a median line more or less distinct 
down front ending in a depression and the lower front slightly produced 
between antennal sockets; punctation dense and becoming coarser 
in lower front; covered with white and pale brownish appressed 
hairs, finer over occiput. Prothorax slightly wider than long, convex, 
with curved sides and depression along base, shining, deeply and 
moderately coarsely and densely punctate, the punctures being oval 
frequently, and covered with white and pale brownish appressed 
hairs, not as coarse as on elytra and below middle branching hori- 
zontally toward side in feathery pattern. Scutellum with fine dense 
white hairs. Elytra depressed about scutellum and with a short 
intrahumeral sulcus and a depression on side below basal callosities; 
punctation dense, not very coarse with some horizontal ridging below 
scutellum; pubescence coarse, white hairs usually intermingled with 
pale brownish ones. Body beneath densely punctate and covered 
with white hairs not so coarse as on elytra. Length 7-8.2 mm.; 
width 3.5-4 mm. 

Type: Male, California Academy of Sciences, and 38 paratypes, 
of which 10 are in the U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Shasta Springs, Calif., June 1920, C. L. Fox. 

Other localities: California: Shasta Co.: Castle Crag, Fenyes; 
Old Station, June 1941, H. P. Chandler; Cayton, July, E. P. Van 
Duzee; Burney, June 1941, H. P. Chandler. Siskiyou Co.: Walker, 
July 1920, C. L. Fox; McCloud, June 1914, Van Dyke; Siskiyou, 
May 1911, Nunenmacher. Trinity Co.: Carrville, 2400-2500 ft,, 
June, Van Dyke. 

Remarks: This is one of several species liable to be confused with 
G. albida because of its coarse pubescence. It is slightly smaller and 
less robust than G. albida, and the pubescence, while coarse, is not as 
long and is usually composed of brown and white hairs intermingled. 
The aedeagus is quite unlike that of G. albida, being more rounded at 
the apex. Krauss has confused this species with G. sequoiae de- 
scribed from Sonoma Co., but G. sequoiae beside being generally 
slightly smaller has finer and browner pubescence, and the surface 
a coppery lustre. Glyptoscelis peperi is also a bit larger than the 



no. :!604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 19 

Sierra species, G. juniperi, and the pubescence coarser and the tip of 
the aedeagus not so broadly rounded. 

Glyptoscelis idahoensis, new species 

Figure 11 

From 7 to 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining piceous beneath 
coarse white pubescence; prothorax densely and coarsely punctate, 
elytra coarsely and rugosely punctate toward base, finer toward apex; 
pubescence on elytra sometimes with vittate lines. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, a de- 
pressed median line down front ending in a depression from which 
coarse white hairs radiate, whole head densely covered with white 
hairs, beneath which are dense, coarse punctures; eyes slightly emar- 
ginate at antennal sockets. Prothorax slightly wider than long with 
rounded sides, densely, deeply, and quite coarsely punctate, punc- 
tures elongate or diamond shaped and covered not densely with 
coarse white hairs in a pattern that branches a little below the middle 
with feathery formations toward the sides. Scutellum with a few 
white hairs. Elytra with very little depression below scutellum, a 
short intrahumeral sulcus; punctation coarse with horizontal ridgings 
in basal part, punctation becoming finer toward apex, and not entirely 
concealed by coarse white hairs that tend to form two vittate lines on 
each elytron. Body beneath densely punctate and pubescent, tibiae, 
tarsi and antennae tending to be dark reddish brown. Length 7-8.2 
mm.; width 3.7-4.2 mm. 

Type: U.S. National Museum no. 69196 and 3 paratypes. 

Type-locality: Pocatello, Idaho, Hubbard and Schwarz, 2 speci- 
mens from same locality in Wickham collection. 

Other localities: Wyoming: Fremont Co., Apr. 29, 1949. Niobrara 
Co., July 1, 1943, R. E. Pfadt. 

Remarks: This species is very like G. albida LeConte in size and 
shape, and also in its coarse white pubescence, and Schwarz has 
labelled it as that species. But the hairs, while coarse, are not so 
long as in G. albida, and the pattern of the pubescence on the prothorax 
as well as the tendency to form vittae on the elytra is different. The 
aedeagus too is entirely unlike that of G. albida, being rounded and not 
triangular at the apex. 

Glyptoscelis sequoiae Blaisdell 

Figure 13 
Glyptoscelis sequoiae Blaisdell, 1921, Stanford Univ. Publ. Biol. Sci., vol. 1, 
no. 3, pp. 195-6.— Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, 
p. 27. 

Between 6.5 and 8 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining 
usually with a coppery, sometimes bronzy lustre; antennae and legs 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

deep reddish or dark brown; punctation dense, deep but not very- 
coarse; pubescence fine and brownish, not concealing surface below. 

Head with interocular space over half width of head, densely punc- 
tate, punctures on lower front coarser, median line ending in a depres- 
sion in middle of front; finer dark hairs on occiput becoming coarser 
on front and sometimes paler but not white. Antennae extending 
well below humeri, slender, seventh joint long, outer joints a bit 
wider, reddish brown to dark brown. Prothorax somewhat wider 
than long with somewhat curved sides, convex, densely, deeply but 
not very coarsely punctate with fine brown pubescence, not concealing 
surface in middle, where the hairs become finer and darker and incon- 
spicuous. Scutellum with a few fine short hairs. Elytra with 
prominent humeri, an intrahumeral sulcus and a transverse depression 
below basal callosity, depressed below scutellum, punctation not 
very coarse or dense but with horizontal ridgings. Body beneath 
finely punctate and covered with fine yellowish pubescence, legs 
tending to be deep reddish brown, often darker. Length 6-8 mm.; 
width 3-4.4 mm. 

Type: Male, in California Academy of Sciences. 

Type-locality: Cazadero, Sonoma County, Calif., Apr. 12, 1918, 
E. P. Van Duzee, on foliage of Sequoia sempervirens. 

Other localities: California: Sonoma Co.: Guerneville, May 30, 
1908, Van Dyke; Sonoma Co., E. S. Ross. Mendocino Co.: Pygmy 
Forest, May 7, 1936, Van Dyke; Compteche, May 7, 1936, Van Dyke. 
Humboldt Co.: Green Point, June 4, 5, 1916, F. E. Blaisdell; Weott, 
June 4, 1936, Van Dyke; Humboldt Co., May 20, 1911, F. W. Nunen- 
macher. Santa Cruz Co.: Santa Cruz Mts., Koebele. San Mateo 
Co.: Portola St. Park, May 7, 1950, R. E. Leech. 

Remarks: Primarily this species is the one that is found in the 
coastal counties around and north of San Francisco on Sequoia 
sempervirens, the coastal big tree. It is a coppery-colored species 
to which Blaisdell first gave the manuscript name "cuprascens ,> 
(specimens from Casadera in the California Academy of Sciences 
still bear a label with this name), but later Blaisdell named it after 
its food plant and called it G. sequoiae. The pubescence is not very 
conspicuous because it is usually brownish, like the beetle, sometimes 
paler brown or yellowish brown, but never really white, and it is 
silky and not at all coarse. On the middle part of the prothorax 
it appears nearly hairless, but the hairs here are even finer and sparser 
and usually darker. The aedeagus does not have so rounded a tip 
as in the Sierra species that have been up to now confused with the 
coastal G. sequoiae. 



N0 - 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS BLAKE 21 

Glyptoscelis juniper!, new species 

FlGUUE 14 

Between 6 and 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining with an aeneous 
or rosy glint under white or pale straw-colored pubescence, antennae 
and legs deep reddish brown, moderately coarsely and densely punc- 
tate. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, a more 
or less distinct median line down front, finely punctate above, puncta- 
tion becoming coarser in lower front, occiput thinly covered with 
brown pubescence, lower front with coarser white hairs; eyes eniargi- 
nate at antennal sockets. Antennae long, slender, a bit wider in 
outer joints, extending below humeri, reddish brown. Prothorax 
extending slightly forward at anterior angle; moderately convex with 
nearly straight sides; depressed along base in middle; densely and 
deeply but not coarsely punctate, covered on sides with feathery 
yellowish or white pubescence, middle often with darker hairs. Scutel- 
lum with fine short white hairs. Elytra slightly depressed below 
scutellum, with a slight transverse depression below basal callosity 
and an intrahumeral sulcus; punctures not very coarse or dense with 
horizontal ridging near base; pubescence not so dense as to hide surface 
beneath entirely, uniform white or pale straw-colored hairs, sometimes 
intermingled with darker brown, moderately coarse. Body beneath 
densely punctate and covered with white pubescence. Length 6-8 
mm.; width 3-4 mm. 

Type: Male, and 87 paratypes, California Academy of Sciences, of 
which 15 paratypes are in the U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Fallen Leaf, Eldorado County, Calif., on Juniperus 
occidentalism F. E. Blaisdell and Ralph Hopping. 

Other localities: California: Placer Co.: Angora Lake, Tahoe, 
June 22, 1915, Van Dyke; Glen Alpine, Nov. 24, 1915, Hopping and 
Van Dyke; Summit, July 1907, 7000 ft,, Forest Hill, October 1898, 
Van Dyke. Sierra Co.: Gold Lake, July 10, 1921, C. L. Fox. Eldo- 
rado Co.: June 12, 1906, C. L. Fox; Meyers, July 3, 1916, E. C. 
Zimmermann; Echo Lake. Nevada Co.: Chicago Park, June 5, 
1936, J. W. Green; Carson City, June 25, 1929, R. L. Usinger; Granite- 
ville, July 2, 1923, J. O. Martin. 

Remarks: This Sierra species has been identified as G. sequoiae 
although the habitat as well as food plant are quite different. Both 
G. sequoiae and G. juniperi are about the same size and with similar 
sculpture, but their pubescence is different, giving them a different 
appearance. Glyptoscelis sequoiae is coppery, both in its lustre and 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

the fine brownish hairs that cover it. Glyptoscelis juniperi in its 
typical form often has an aeneous green or even rosy lustre, and the 
pubescence is not brown but white or straw colored. Only occa- 
sionally are there specimens with darker brown hairs intermingled on 
the elytra. On the occiput of the head the hairs are fine and dark, 
so that the top of the head appears quite dark. The aedeagus, too, 
differs from that of G. sequoiae, in being broadly rounded at the tip. 
There is a series of specimens from Bijou, Lake Tahoe, and another 
series from Facht, Lassen County, and scattered specimens from 
other localities in Eldorado, Lassen, and Modoc Counties that are 
much darker in appearance, in fact, almost black, with little evidence 
of aeneous or bronzy lustre, and the pubescence on these is darker 
brown with scattered white hairs. The aedeagi appear to be no 
different from those of typical G. juniperi. One of these specimens 
was collected on Pinus murrayana. Whether these darker speci- 
mens represent a different subspecies or even another species is not 
clear. The aedeagus gives no clue of difference. These darker 
specimens are easily confused with a more northern species, G. septen- 
trionalis, which also has dark elytral pubescence, but in G. septen- 
trionalis the elytral hairs are denser and often less appressed, and the 
beetles have a bronzy lustre and the aedeagus is less rounded at the 
tip. In general it is a smaller, browner appearing species. 

Glyptoscelis juniperi zanthocoma, new subspecies 

Figure 15 

Between 6 and 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining with a coppery 
or aeneous lustre with reddish brown antennae and legs and with 
closely appressed dense yellowish brown, fine pubescence, pubescence 
on pronotum being finer and silky, deeply and not coarsely punctate. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes a 
little emarginate at antennal sockets; densely punctate, with lower 
front more coarsely punctate, a median line down front usually 
ending in a depression, covered with pale yellowish brown pubescence 
that is less or not at all over lower front. Antennae reddish brown, 
extending well below humeri, slender with the outer joints a bit 
widened, seventh joint long. Prothorax nearly as long as wide with 
slightly curved sides, moderately convex and depressed along base, 
deeply but not very coarsely or densely punctate and covered with 
long fine pale yellowish-brown hairs that are thicker in feathery 
swirls on the sides than in the middle. Scutellum with fine short 
hairs. Elytra slightly depressed below scutellum and with a short 
intrahumeral sulcus and slight transverse depression below basal 
callosity, punctation coarser near base and with horizontal ridging; 
surface only partially concealed by long, pale yellowish-brown pubes- 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 23 

cence that is thicker along base and suture. Body beneath densely 
punctate and covered with pale yellowish-brown pubescence, legs, 
reddish brown. Length 6-7.8 mm. ; width 3-4 mm. 

Type: Male, California Academy of Sciences, and 15 paratypes, 
of which 5 are in the U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Huntington Lake, Fresno County, Calif. 

Other localities: California: Fresno Co.: Stevenson Creek, May 
27, 1915, R. Hopping, collected on Libocedrus decurrens. Tuolumne 
Co.: Pine Crest, April 1934, E. P. Van Duzee; Long Barn, Apr. 20, 
1934, E. P. Van Duzee. Calaveras Co.: Big Trees, May 11, 1935, F. 
E. Blaisdell. Amador Co.: Tin Rise, June 1, 1936. Mariposa Co.: 
Yosemite, June 25, 1910, J. O. Martin; Miami Ranger Sta., May 27, 
1912, on Libocedrus decurrens, A. J. Waltz. Tulare Co.: on cedar, 
Atwoods Mill, May 29, 1913, Van Dyke; Sequoia National Park, 
3000-5000 ft., June 11, 1929, A. T. McClay; California Hot Springs, 
June 3, 1939. Calaveras Co.: Big Trees, July 19, 1907, F. E. Blais- 
dell ; Calaveras Grove, Apr. 17, 1934, Van Dyke. Inyo Co. : Westgard 
Pass Plateau, June 15, 1937, Van Dyke. 

Remarks: This may be a distinct species in itself, although it is 
not very clear cut. Its food plant as recorded several times is not 
Juniperus but Libocedrus decurrens. Its range generally appears to 
be more southern in the Sierras than typical G. juniperi. In appear- 
ance the beetles look yellowish brown because of the long yellowish 
pubescence in contrast to typical G. juniperi, in which the general 
effect is of an aeneous or even rosy-lustred beetle lightly covered with 
white or straw-colored pubescence. There is a slight difference in the 
aedeagus too, that of the typical form being more widely rounded. 
And the claw has an inner tooth located slightly lower than in the 
typical form. On the other hand, there are specimens that intergrade 
so that I cannot come to any conclusion as to which group they belong. 

Glyptoscelis longior Le Conte 

Figures 21, 23 

Ghjptoscelis longior LeConte, 1878, Bull. U.S. Geol. Surv., vol. 4, no. 2, p. 262.— 

Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 26, 27. 
Glyptoscelis albida Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, 19, p. 203. 

Between 5.5 and 6.8 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining 
piceous with a very faint bronzy lustre, densely punctate and with 
dense, closely appressed, coarse white hairs mixed with very pale 
brownish hairs to produce a grayish appearance; pro thorax convex with 
nearly straight sides. 

Head with a median depressed line from occiput down front, 
punctation over occiput finer and with fine dark hairs, on lower front 
punctation becoming coarser and denser with coarse white hairs. 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM V0L - 123 

Antennae reddish brown. Prothorax convex, usually with nearly 
straight sides; punctures deep, well separated and becoming coarser 
towards middle and base; pubescence coarse and closely appressed, 
with white and pale brown hairs intermingled. Scutellum broad, 
with finer hairs. Elytra with prominent humeri, a well-marked 
intrahumeral depression and a slight umbone between it and depres- 
sion below scutellum; punctation not too dense or coarse, with some 
ridging and covered with dense, appressed white and pale brownish 
hairs producing a gray appearance. Body beneath densely covered 
with a little finer gray pubescence. Length 5.5-6.8 mm.; width 
1.7-3.5 mm. 

Type: Female, Museum of Comparative Zoology. 

Type-locality: Atlanta, Idaho, collected by O. Reinecke. 

Other localities: Oregon: Durkee, June 17, 1941, K. M. Fender; 
Baker, 1940, M. C. Lane; Bend, Tumalo State Park, June 23, 1954, 
K. M. Bender; Burns, May 5, 1941, M. C. Lane; Bly, June 15, 1945, 
K. M. Bender; Ironsides, May 21, 1941, M. C. Lane; Sucker Creek 
Canyon, Malheur Co., June 15, 18, Borys Malkin; Sisters, Deschutes 
Co., June 13, 1951, Borys Malkin, on juniper; Lakeview, June 27, 
1955; Borys Malkin; Lake of Woods, Klamath Falls, K. M. Fender; 
French Creek, Harney Co., June 21, 1951, Borys Malkin; Pueblo 
Mts., Harney Co., May 22, 1950, K. M. Fender; Steene Mts., Fish 
Lake, June 22-26, 1951, Borys Malkin; Mayville, June 21, 1938, 
M. H. Hatch; Bear Springs, Wapinita Cutoff, June 30, 1941, K. M. 
Fender; Umatilla Co., Emigrant State Park, June 19, 1938, M. H. 
Hatch. Idaho: Hyndman Creek, Challis, N. F. Blaine; Caldwell, 
May 8, 1921, alt, 2367 ft. Wyoming: Grand Teton National Park, 
June 21, 1930, Van Dyke; Yellowstone Park, June 28, 1907, W. Robin- 
son; Jenny Lake, Grand Teton National Park, June 24, 1938, Van 
Dyke. 

Remarks: The gray appearance of these slender little beetles is 
the most noticeable character. The pubescence is dense, coarse, and 
of mixed white and very pale brownish hairs, and also covers the 
surface below, obscuring any lustre such as is evident in 67. septentrio- 
nalis. The range of this species is more limited than that of 67. septen- 
trionalis, as it has not been found north of Oregon, and there only 
from the middle of the state eastward into southern Idaho and north- 
west Wyoming. There is only one record of its food plant, and that is 
of its being taken on juniper. 

This species has been rather generally misidentified in collections 
possibly because Horn synonymized it with 67. albida LeConte, which 
is a larger, more robust species and does not occur north of California. 
The type of 67. longior is badly rubbed with little pubescence left, and 
since the pubescence in this genus is usually a good character in 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 25 

separating the species, its lack makes it more difficult to understand. 
There are three small species of about the same size occurring in the 
northwest states. One, G. artemisiae, has a shorter and differently- 
shaped prothorax. The other, G. septentrionalis , has a more bronzy 
lustre than G. longior, and generally, but not always, the prothorax 
has more rounded sides, and the pubescence is usually dark brown on 
the elytra. 

Glyptoscelis coloradoensis, new species 

Figure 24 

Between 6 and 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, piceous shining with 
a bronzy lustre, antennae reddish brown; prothorax and elytra not 
too densely or coarsely punctate and covered with dense coarse white 
and pale yellowish-brown hairs. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes 
emarginate at antennal sockets, a median line down front ending in a 
depression, densely and moderately finely punctate over occiput 
with lower front more coarsely punctate; hairs on occiput yellowish 
and finer, becoming coarser and white on lower front. Antennae 
long and slender with the outer joints a little wider. Prothorax 
slightly wider than long, convex with very slightly rounded sides, 
punctures anteriorly fine, becoming coarser and more oval in shape 
near base; pubescence thick, in middle tending to be yellowish, very 
feathery and white on sides. Scutellum with finer hairs. Elytra 
slightly depressed below scutellum, a short intrahumeral sulcus, 
punctation not very coarse, near base horizontally ridged ; pubescence 
thick and coarse, some pale yellowish-brown hairs intermixed, not 
closely appressed but somewhat erect. Body beneath densely punc- 
tate and covered with densely, closely appressed white hairs. Length 
6-7.8 mm.; width 2.8-4 mm. 

Type: Male, and 35 para types, California Academy of Sciences, 
10 of these in the U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Paonia, Delta County, Colo., collected by E. C. 
Van Dyke, June 14, 1926. 

Other locality: Utah: Mt. Carmel, near Zion Canyon, May 30, 
1935, E. C. Van Dyke. 

Remarks: Krauss has identified this as G. longior LeConte, and 
it is very similar in size and pubescence but has a wider prothorax 
and the aedeagus has a well-rounded apex with a small, very incon- 
spicuous nodule at the tip, quite unlike the aedeagus of G. longior. 

Glyptoscelis septentrionalis, new species 

Figure 22 
Between 6 and 8 mm. in length, oblong oval, deep brownish black, 
shining with a bronzy lustre beneath a rather coarse, dense, and 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

dark brown and white pubescence, the white hairs being more pro- 
nounced along base and suture of elytra; punctation on pro thorax 
dense, deep, often oval; on elytra not quite so dense, surface some- 
what ridged below intrahumeral sulcus. 

Head rather finely punctate over occiput with a median line ending 
in a depression in middle of front, more coarsely punctate on lower 
front; pubescence over occiput dark, fine, and not conspicuous, over 
lower front with coarser and white hairs; labrum tending to be reddish 
brown. Antennae rather long, reaching nearly to middle of elytra, 
deep reddish brown. Prothorax convex with nearly straight sides, 
only slightly rounded, densely and deeply punctate, punctures finer 
near anterior margin, pubescence in median area with finer and 
denser hairs, and on sides with more conspicuous, coarser, denser 
brown and white hairs. Scutellum with fine unusually dark hairs. 
Elytra slightly depressed below scutellum, punctation not as dense 
or coarse as on prothorax, somewhat ridged below intrahumeral 
sulcus; pubescence rather long and coarse, usually with more dark 
brown than white hairs, white hairs usually along basal margin and 
suture. Body beneath densely covered with a grayish, not pure 
white, sometimes even pale brownish pubescence. Length 6-8 mm.; 
width 2.8-4 mm. 

Type: Male, USNM no. 69197 and 52 paratypes, 20 of which are 
in the U.S. National Museum, remainder in collection of University 
of Washington. 

Type-locality: Diamond Lake, Douglas County, Oreg., June 24, 
1941, K. M. and D. M. Fender. 

Other localities: California: Bair's Ranch, Redwood Creek, 
Humboldt Co., June 13, H. S. Barber. Oregon: McMinnville; 
Josephine Co., June 11, 1910; Grant's Pass. Apr. 28, 1934, F. M. 
Beer; Wimer, June 24, 1958, F. M. Beer; Tygh Valley, May 30, 1938; 
Mt. Hood, 5000-6000 ft., June 26, 1925, Van Dyke; Crater Lake, 
July 12, 1937, J. W. Green; alt. 7000 ft., July 16, 1939, M. C.Lane, 
on fir; Lake of Woods, Klamath Falls Rd., K. M. Fender; Meacham, 
May 22, 1935, M. C. Lane; Wallowa Lake, June 22, 1941, K. and D. 
Fender; Toll Gate Rd., Blue Mts., June 10, 1938, Van Dyke, Van 
Duzee; Blue Mts., July 16, 1933, M. C. Lane; Steen Mts., Harner 
Co., July 2, 1922, Van Dyke; mountains west of LaGrange, July 25, 
1922, Van Dyke. Washington: Tacoma, May 15, 1945, M. J. 
Forsell; Shelton, May 25, 1935, on Pinus contorta, R. L. Furness; 
Lake Cle Elum, Apr. 27, 1939, Hatch and Wilson; Easton, June 14, 
1930, W. W. Baker; June 10, 1938, M. C. Lane; Mt. Ranier; Pelous, 
Kamiak Butte, May 24, 1935, M. C. Lane; Newman Lake , June 11, 
1922, M. C. Lane; Skamania Co., Little Huckleberry Mt., July 15, 
1937, Jack Price; Mt. Adams, 6000-7000 ft., July 2, 1925, Van Dyke, 



no. :604 GLYPTOSCELIS BLAKE 27 

Bird Creek, Mt. Adams, July 2, 1925, Van Dyke; Walla Walla, May 
13, M. C. Lane; June 20, 1941, K. and D. Fender; Blue Mts., Lewis 
Park, June 20, 1941, K. M. Fender; June 18, 1945, 4500 ft., M. C. 
Lane; Blue Mts., Blacksnake River, June 25, 1941, M. C. Lane; 
Republic, May 7, 1930, G. R. Hopping; Wawawai, Apr. 17, 1931, 
feeding on cherry; Pullman, June 8, 1901, C. V. Piper; Go van, Lincoln 
Co., W. S. Abbott, in Phrynosoma (horned toad). Idaho: Coeur 
d'Alene, May 5, 1920, J. S. Evenden, on Finns ponderosa; Moscow, 
May 30, 1920, alt. 3200 ft., W. E. Shull. Montana: Sula, June 24, 
1929, alt. 4700 ft., W. E. Shull. British Columbia: Vernon, May 
13, 192G, R. Hopping; North Bend, June 6, Hubbard and Schwarz. 

Remarks: Although apparently this is one of the most common 
species of Glyptoscelis in the Pacific Northwest, it has never been 
recognized as a species different from those already described, but has 
been confused with either G. sequoia, a more southern species living 
on Sequoia sempervirens , or with G. albida, which does not extend into 
Oregon or Washington either, and is a larger, more robust beetle. 
There are several records of G. septentrionalis being taken on "fir," 
one on Pinus contorta and one on P. ponderosa. It has a quite differ- 
ent aspect from G. sequoiae, which is a very lustrous coppery beetle 
with pubescence that varies from yellowish to brownish but is never 
white. In contrast, G. septentrionalis is piceous, shining with a bronzy 
lustre, and the coarse pubescence on the elytra in particular is usually 
dark brown with scattered white hairs. Its range is from northern 
California to British Columbia, and eastward through Idaho into 
Montana. 

Glyptoscelis artemisiae, new species 

Figure 18 

From 6 to 7 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining bronzy black under 
coarse white pubescence, pubescence on elytra forming more or less 
distinct white vittae, giving it a striped appearance; prothorax 
coarsely and densely punctate, elytra not so coarsely but densely 
punctate; aedeagus truncate and not rounded at apex. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes 
slightly emarginate at antenna! sockets, a median line down front 
ending in a depression, densely punctate, lower half more coarsely so, 
covered with white pubescence that is finer on occiput. Antennae 
extending below humeri, slender, outer joints somewhat thicker, 
seventh joint long, reddish brown to piceous. Prothorax wider than 
long with nearly straight sides, convex, depressed along base; densely 
and coarsely punctate and covered with coarse pubescence that in 
middle tends to be pale brownish, white along sides. Scutellum with 
a few finer white hairs. Elytra with prominent humeri, deep intra- 
humeral sulcus, a small basal callosity with depression below, a little 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

depressed below scutellum; punctation coarser near base with some 
horizontal ridging, becoming finer towards apex, covered with pale 
brown and white pubescence, coarse and closely appressed, and in 
most specimens with vittate lines of thicker white hairs giving it a 
striped appearance. Body beneath densely punctate and covered 
with closely appressed white pubescence, tibiae and tarsi deep reddish 
brown. Length 6-7 mm. ; width 3-4 mm. 

Type: Male, and 9 paratypes, U.S. National Museum type no. 
69198. 

Type-locality: Sardis, Wash., taken on sagebrush, May 21, 1899. 

Other localities: Washington: Washington Experiment Station, 
W. S. Abbott, 1932; Ewan, June 28, 1920, R. C. Shannon; Lind, 
May 15, 1922, M. C. Lane; Washington Territory, J. B. Smith; 
Ritzville, May 6, 1921, M. C. Lane; Grand Coulee, Dry Falls Lake, 
Apr. 21, 1957, M. H. Hatch; Upper Grand Coulee, Apr. 26, 1936, 
M. H. Hatch; Moses Coulee, Apr. 4, 1947, George Schenk; Dry Falls, 
May 14, 1938, M. H. Hatch; Pullman, C. V. Piper, M. C. Lane; 
Vantage, May 4, 1935, Hatch and Wilson; Kahlatus, Sandhills, 
Apr. 18, 1955, M. H. Hatch; Kamiak Butte, May 7, 1935; Cheney, 
May 24, 1940; Kittitas, May 4, 1935, Hatch and Wilson; Roza, 
Kittitas Co., May 19, 1957, M. H. Hatch; Uniontown, May 20, 1939, 
M. C. Lane; Euphrata, Apr. 19, 1935, M. H. Hatch; Prosser, Apr. 25, 
1911; Tieton, Yakima Co., Ewan; Almoto, Wawawai; Yakima Co., 
April 29, 1919, on sagebrush, E. J. Newcomer; Republic, May 7, 
1936, G. R. Hopkins. Oregon: Baker Co., July 1922. British 
Columbia: Okanagan Falls, E. S. Ross; Spious Creek, May 28, 
1920, R. Hopping; Vernon, May 2, 1932, R. Hopping; Wardner, 
May 13, 1927, A. A. Denays. Idaho: Juliaetta, J. M. Aldrich. 
Alberta: Medicine Hat, June 26, 1927, F. S. Carr. 

Remarks: This small species has been taken by several collectors on 
sagebrush. It has been in the past identified as G. longior LeConte by 
Krauss and G. albida LeConte by others, but it is a distinct little 
species easily identified by the squarely truncate apex of the aedeagus 
and the white vittate pattern in the elytral pubescence. As in G. 
albida the pubescence is coarse and white. It is one of the two most 
northernmost of our species of Glyptoscelis and it ranges from northeast 
Oregon and northern Idaho throughout eastern Washington to British 
Columbia and Alberta. The other most northern species, G. septen- 
trionalis, has a wider, more southern as well as coastal range, from 
Humboldt County in the northwestern part of California, throughout 
Oregon and Washington to British Columbia. It also ranges east- 
ward in Idaho and there is one record of its occurrence in Montana. 
This species has been recorded on "fir" trees. It has a distinct 
bronzy lustre in contrast to the shining black of G. artemisiae, and 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 29 

usually the elytra are covered with thick brownish pubescence with 
some white hairs intermingled. There is a third northern species, G. 
longior LeConte, whose type-locality is Atlanta, Idaho, and which 
does not extend north of Oregon but is found also in Wyoming in the 
Yellowstone National Park area. All three species are small and 
easily confused and from essentially the same northwestern area. 

Glyptoscclis paula, new species 

Figure 19 

About 6 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining piceous 
beneath coarse white pubescence. Antennae and tarsi reddish brown, 
claw with inner tooth near tip making it appear bifid. 

Head with interocular space slightly more than half width of head, 
eyes emarginate at antennal sockets, occiput very finely and sparsely 
punctate, more coarsely punctate on lower front with coarser white 
pubescence, a median line ending in a depression in middle of front. 
Antennae extending below humeri, reddish brown. Pro thorax almost 
as long as wide with nearly straight sides, convex, moderately densely 
and not coarsely punctate, with finer white hairs than on elytra. 
Elytra with prominent humeri and an intrahumeral sulcus and faintly 
depressed area about scutellum, rather finely and not densely punctate 
and not too densely covered with coarse white and pale brown hairs. 
Body beneath densely pubescent. Length 6 mm.; width 2.7 mm. 

Type: Male, U.S. National Museum no. 69199. 

Type-locality: Wendell, Idaho, May 19, 1933, "on pure stand of 
Artemisia tridentata." 

Remarks: The slender shape and small size of this species distin- 
guish it from Q. parvula Blaisdell and G. coloradoensis. Like both of 
them the claw has an inner tooth near the tip and the aedeagus like 
them has a rounded apex. The head in G. paula is unusually smooth 
and with punctures only along the median line on the occiput and front, 
and in this respect it differs from the other species, which are all 
densely and coarsely punctate over the entire head. In its slender 
shape as well as its faintly vittate elytral pubescence, it resembles 
G. artemisiae, another small species, but the aedeagus in G. artemisiae 
is truncate and not rounded at the tip. Only one specimen is known. 

Glyptoscelis parvula Blaisdell 

Figure 25 
Glyptoscelis parvulus Blaisdell, 1921, Stanford Univ. Publ. Biol. Ser., vol. 1, 

no. 3, pp. 196-7. 
Glyptoscelis parvula Kranss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 

28-29. 

Between 5 and 7 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining, dark 
piceous beneath moderately coarse but not dense white and pale brown 



30 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

pubescence, legs and antennae reddish brown, prothorax convex, 
widest at middle and narrowed at base, densely punctate. 

Head with median line ending in a depression in middle of front, 
densely punctate, punctures in lower front coarser, covered with 
white appressed hairs, eyes a little emarginate at antennal sockets, 
labrum reddish brown. Antennae extending below humeri, outer 
joints considerably thicker, reddish brown deepening to dark brown, 
covered with fine white pubescence. Prothorax convex but depressed 
along base, widest at middle, contracted at base, punctation deep, 
dense, elongated, rather sparsely covered with white and often pale 
brown hairs. Scutellum with finer hairs. Elytra with a slight 
depression about scutellum and another below basal callosities, in 
which punctures show horizontal ridging, punctures deep, not very 
close and becoming finer towards apex; pubescence not so dense as to 
hide completely punctures, of mingled pale brown and white moder- 
ately coarse hairs, giving a pepper and salt appearance. Body 
beneath densely punctate with dense, white, closely appressed pubes- 
cence. Legs reddish brown, claw joint with inner tooth near apex, 
giving it a bifid look. Length 5-7 mm.; width 2.6-3.6 mm. 

Type: Male, in California Academy of Sciences. 

Type-locality: Sacramento, Calif., collected May 28, 1918, on 
willow by E. P. Van Duzee. 

Other localities: California: Sacramento Co.: Courtland, May 6, 
1920, F. H. Wymore; Michigan Bar, Apr. 24, 1922, E. G. Thompson. 
Solano Co., Rio Vista, May 25, 1926. Alameda Co.: Piedmont, 
May 23, 1921. Butte Co.: near Butte Creek, Chico, Apr. 25, 1922, 
E. P. Van Duzee. Tehama Co.: Los Molinos, Apr. 1, 1932, on 
Salix, E. F. Wohlet; also taken at Sacramento by E. H. Wohlet on 
wild rose, and by Helen Van Duzee, Apr. 24, 1922, A. T. McClay, 
Apr. 3, 1936, C. M. Packard, Apr. 26, 1920. 

Remarks: This is one of the smallest species of Glyptoscelis in the 
United States, comparable in size to G. paula, which occurs in Idaho 
on Artemisia. Glyptoscelis parvula is more rounded and less elongate 
and has thicker antennal joints. It has been collected on willow 
and wild rose and seems to be confined to the counties about Sacra- 
mento, its type-locality. 

Glyptoscelis illustris Crotch 

Figure 17 
Glyptoscelis illustris Crotch, 1873, Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia, p. 35. — 
Horn, 1892, Trans. American Ent. Soc, vol. 19, p. 262.— Krauss, 1937, 
Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, p. 23. 

Between 9 and 11.5 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, lustrous, 
bronzy black, strongly punctate and with brown and white pubescence, 



no. .-601 GLYPTOSCELIS BLAKE 31 

the white hairs being coarser and forming a pattern on elytra along 
suture and sides and two vittate white lines in apical half, the brownish 
hairs finer and more silky; elytra with a marked depression below 
scutellum and also a deep one below basal callosities. 

Head with interocular space much more than half width of head, 
eyes with small emargination at antennal sockets, a well-marked and 
usually indented median line down front ending in a slight depression; 
punctation dense, moderately coarse and becoming coarser in lower 
part, pubescence over front brown, around eyes and mouthparts white. 
Antennae extending well below humeri, rather slender without much 
thickening of apical joints, seventh joint long, all reddish brown. 
Prothorax nearly as long as wide with rounded sides curving forward 
about eyes, disc convex, without depressions, very shiny, deeply and 
moderately coarsely punctate, punctures tending to be elongate and 
in middle often disappearing, leaving a linear median bare area, 
sometimes a depression on either side near lateral edge and below 
middle, from which pubescence radiates; pubescence over middle very 
fine, silky and brown, over sides becoming coarser and white. Scutel- 
lum with a few fine brown hairs. Elytra with well-marked humeri 
and intrahumeral sulcus, widely depressed around and below scutellum, 
a basal callosity and below it a transverse depression; surface very 
lustrous, often with rosy or coppery lights, not too densely and mod- 
erately coarsely punctate, without horizontal ridging, punctures be- 
coming finer toward apex; pubescence forming a pattern with coarser 
white hairs along base, suture and in short vittae below middle and 
along sides, with a widening at middle, rest of surface with incon- 
spicuous silky brown hairs not very dense or obscuring surface. Body 
beneath densely punctate and evenly covered with white appressed 
hairs; legs deep reddish brown, hairs at apex of tibiae long, silky, and 
brownish in color. Length 9-11.7 mm.; width 4.5-5.5 mm. 

Type: Male, in Museum of Comparative Zoology. There are three 
specimens, the first two labelled "Calif." and the third without a label. 

Type-locality: Crotch gives "California (Horn) and Oregon (Wal- 
singham)." 

Other localities: Oregon: A. T. McClay, July 11, 1938; Klamath 
Falls, July 8, 1934, Van Dyke; Grant's Pass, on Finns ponderosa, 
Apr. 24, 1949; Prospect, June 14, 1941, L. G. Gentner. California: 
Kernville, Dec. 28, 1936; Bear Flat, Warner Mts., Modoc Co., July 
10, 1919, on Pinus ponderosa, Ralph Hopping; Mokel Hill, F. E. 
Blaisdell; Carrville, Trinity Co., alt. 2400-2500 ft,, Van Dyke; Forest 
Hill, Placer Co., April 1898, on Pinus ponderosa, Van Dyke; Stevenson 
Creek, Sierra National Forest, May 27, 1915, on Pinus ponderosa, 
Ralph Hopping; Nevada City, May 16, 1930, E. P. Van Duzee; 
Davis Meadow, R. R. Flats, 2800 ft., July 8, 1907, F. E. Blaisdell; 



32 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Bass Lake, Madera Co., Apr. 24, 1934, H. P. Allen; Sonora, Tuolumne 
Co., Apr. 17, 1934, E. P. Van Duzee; Pyramid, Ranger Sta., F. B. 
Herbert, on Juniperus occidentalis. 

Remarks : The large size, lustrous bronzy coloring and silky brown 
pubescence mingled with the coarser white hairs that form a vittate 
pattern at the apex of the elytra distinguish this species. 

Glyptoscclis aridis Van Dyke, new status 

Figure 16 
Glyptoscelis illustris ssp. aridis Van Dyke, 1938, Ent. News, vol. 49, p. 194. 

From 8 to 10.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining bronzy black 
beneath the coarse white and yellowish-brown pubescence; pro thorax 
nearly as long as wide, densely and coarsely punctate with yellowish- 
brown pubescence in middle and white hairs on sides; elytra nearly 
covered with dense coarse white hairs with yellowish-brown hairs 
forming short vittae, especially in apical half; somewhat depressed 
about scutellum and a shallow transverse depression below basal 
callosities; punctation on pronotum deep, round, not too coarse, and 
on elytra becoming finer toward apex. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, surface 
densely punctate, more coarsely on lower half, covered with thick 
white pubescence and across front with light yellowish-brown thick 
hairs, a median line ending in a small depression on front. Antennae 
extending below humeri, dark reddish brown with white pubescence, 
seventh joint long. Pro thorax somewhat wider than long with 
rounded sides, sinning, deeply, densely, but not coarsely punctate, 
sides well covered with coarse white pubescence, in middle less 
densely by yellowish-brown pubescence. Scutellum with many white 
hairs. Elytra with prominent humeri, a short intrahumeral sulcus, 
a depressed area about scutellum and below basal callosities; surface 
shining beneath coarse, semierect hairs that are mostly white but 
with yellowish-brown hairs on basal callosities and in vittate areas near 
apex; punctation moderately coarse and dense, with little horizontal 
ridging, becoming finer toward apex. Body beneath uniformly 
covered with white appressed pubescence, the hairs near apex of 
middle and hind tibiae becoming yellowish. Length 8-10.5 mm.; 
width 4.5-5.1 mm. 

Type: In California Academy of Sciences. 

Type-locality: Westgard Pass Plateau, Inyo County, Calif., taken 
May 27, 1937, Van Dyke collector, June 7, 1937, L.D. Phillips. 

Other localities: California: Argus Mts., Inyo Co., on Pinus 
monophylla V oss, Hubbard and Schwarz, May 1891. 

Remarks: Although Van Dyke regarded this as a subspecies of 
G. illustris, there is sufficient difference in the pubescence as well as 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 33 

the aedeagus to make it a distinct species. In its general appearance 
it is a much paler beetle due to its coarse and dense white pubescence, 
in which the brown hairs are coarser and fewer than are those of 
G. illustris. There is very little elytral surface to be seen because 
of this dense pubescence, whereas in G. illustris the shining, even 
coppery, surface is very apparent. 

Glyptoscelis cylindrica, new species 

Figure 20 

About 7 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, almost cylindrical, 
shining black, densely and coarsely punctate and with a very fine 
erect yellowish or grayish hair from each puncture, hairs on under- 
surface more appressed, legs and antennae deep reddish brown. 

Head with interocular space considerably more than half width of 
head, eyes with tiny emargination at antennal socket, occiput and 
front coarsely and contiguously punctate, a small depression in middle 
of front, a semierect fine silken hair from each puncture, head shiny 
piceous except for reddish-brown labrum. Antennae extending 
slightly below humeri, basal joint globular, joints two to five thinner 
than outer joints, seventh joint long. Pro thorax as wide as elytra 
and approximately as wide as long, strongly convex, sides rounded, 
disc slightly depressed along base, punctures dense and each with a 
fine hair. Scutellum unusually broad and short, punctate. Elytra 
deeply and almost contiguously punctate, each puncture with a long, 
erect, silky pale hair, producing a fuzzy effect, humeral prominences 
lacking (probably a wingless beetle), otherwise without depressions. 
Body beneath shining, slightly less coarsely punctate, the pale pubes- 
cence more appressed but not coarser; legs reddish brown, covered 
with long, semierect pale hairs, tibiae rather short. Length 6.8 mm.; 
width 3.1 mm. 

Type: ?female, in California Academy of Sciences. 

Type-locality: Cotati, Sonoma County, Calif., May 5, 1948, E. H. 
Calkins. 

Remarks: This is the most aberrant in appearance of any species of 
Glyptoscelis, yet it is undoubtedly of that genus. The fuzzy silky 
hairs that are not appressed but erect, and the lack of humeral prom- 
inences are its most distinctive characters. Otherwise it resembles 
other species of the genus with its coarsely punctate dark surface, its 
sulcate tibiae and toothed claws. Only one specimen is known. 
That the beetle probably is wingless doubtless explains the limitation 

of its distribution. 

Glyptoscelis prosopis Schaeffer 

Figure 26 
Glyptoscelis prosopis Schaeffer, 1905, Bull. Brooklyn Mus., vol. 1, no. 7, p. 169. — 
Krauss, 1937, Univ. California Publ. Ent., vol. 7, no. 2, p. 25. 
245-252—67 3 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

From 7 to 9 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, elytra shining 
with a bronzy lustre, legs and antennae deep reddish brown, covered 
with fine white pubescence, pattern of pubescence on pronotum with 
hairs parting in middle and falling in feathery pattern downward, and 
on the sides arranged more horizontally; punctation shallow, often 
contiguous, in some specimens remnants of a bare median line; 
elytral punctation not so dense, pubescence a bit coarser. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, eyes with 
a small emargination at antennal sockets, finely and densely punctate 
and covered with white pubescence, sometimes a median bare line; 
labrum reddish brown. Antennae extending below humeri, apical 
joints widened, seventh joint long, reddish brown, the apical joints 
often deep brown. Prothorax not much wider than long, strongly 
convex, with a decided convexity in middle, sides slightly rounded, 
punctation dense, shallow, in places coarse and often a remnant of 
bare line down the middle; pubescence white, fine, and arranged in 
feathery pattern from middle, not horizontally but downward, 
becoming more horizontal on sides. Scutellum broad and rather 
short, with a few fine white hairs. Elytra elongate, not much wider 
than prothorax, with well-marked intrahumeral depression, no 
depression near scutellum but a slight transverse one below intra- 
humeral sulcus; punctation coarse, not so dense as on pronotum and 
covered rather densely by moderately coarse, closely appressed long 
hairs; considerable horizontal ridging in basal half on disc. Body 
beneath covered with coarser and denser white hairs, legs reddish 
brown. Length 7-9 mm.; width 3.2-4.3 mm. 

Type: In U.S. National Museum, with 2 paratypes. 

T}^pe-locality : Esperanza Ranch, Brownsville, Tex. Also collected 
at Brownsville, June 25, 1930, by J. O. Martin, and taken on a plane 
at Brownsville, June 24, 1948. 

Remarks: This species differs from the other United States species 
of Glyptoscelis and resembles many species from Mexico and Central 
America and even South America by having remnants of a median 
bare line on the pronotum. It differs from G. mexicana Jacoby in 
having a lustrous and not dull opaque surface. There is no pro- 
longation at the tip of the elytra. 

Key to Mexican and Central American Species of Glyptoscelis 

1. Elytra with tips narrowly prolonged 2 

Elytra with tips not prolonged 3 

2. From 8 to 10 mm. in length with long tip to elytra (Nicaragua). 

chontalensis Jacoby 
About 7.5 mm. in length with shorter tip to elytra (Guatemala). 

guatemalensis, new species 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 35 

3. Prothorax without median bare line, surface dull opaque black. 

mexicana Jacoby 
Prothorax with median bare line 4 

4. Elytral punctures fine and tending to be in double rows, widely separated by 

bare intervals cahitae, new species 

Elytral punctures denser and coarser sonorensis, new species 

Glyptoscelis sonorensis, new species 

Figure 27 

From 6 to 8 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, shining dark 
reddish brown to piceons, antennae and legs pale reddish brown; 
prothorax with remnants of a median impunctate line, densely and 
not coarsely punctate; elytra with small humeri, narrow, not much 
wider than prothorax, a slight transverse depression below scutellum, 
elytral punctation not so dense as on prothorax, white patches of 
denser hairs in places. 

Head with interocular space slightly more than half width of head, 
a median bare line down front, punctures not very dense or coarse 
beneath the closely appressed white pubescence. Antennae extending 
below humeri, reddish brown. Prothorax nearly as wide as elytra, 
wider than long, not so convex as in G. prosopis, a median impunctate 
line, otherwise with dense and rather fine punctation; pubescence 
arranged in feathery downward-falling pattern from median line, 
becoming more horizontal on sides. Scutellum with a few finer 
white hairs. Elytra with weak humeri and short intrahumeral 
sulcus, a slight transverse depression behind scutellum, elytral 
punctation not so dense as on prothorax with some ridging, pubes- 
cence white, thick, with patches of denser hairs arranged in lines 
sometimes present. Body beneath thickly covered with white 
pubescence. Legs reddish brown. Length 6.3-7.8 mm.; width 
3-3.8 mm. 

Type: Male, California Academy of Sciences, and 24 paratypes, 
of which 6 are in the U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Alamos, Sonora, Mexico, Aug. 1, 1940, R. P. Allen. 

Remarks: This species closely resembles G. prosopis Schaeffer from 
Brownsville, Tex., but has a less bulging occiput, a more marked 
median bare line down the pronotum, less marked elytral humeri, 
and the inner tooth on the claws is farther down near the base. The 
elytral pubescence of the Sonoran species usually shows thicker 
patches of white than is present in the Texas species, and the pubes- 
cence over the head and pronotum is coarser than in G. prosopis. 
The two species are very similar except for these minor differences. 



36 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Glyptoscelis cahitae, new species 

Figure 29 

From 7.5 to 9 mm. in length, oblong oval, somewhat shiny, piceous, 
antennae and sometimes tibiae and tarsi deep reddish brown; 
prothorax densely and shallowly punctate with well-marked median 
bare line, elytra with rather fine punctation tending to be geminate 
striate, some ridging near base and bare lines parallel to suture in 
apical half; white pubescence on prothorax fine and thick, coarser 
on elytra with some denser white patches in rows. 

Head with interocular space approximately half width of head, a 
median bare impunctate line down front, a little swollen or ridged in 
middle of front, and with fine, thick, closely appressed white pubes- 
cence. Antennae extending slightly below humeri, basal joint dark, 
remainder slightly paler and usually deep reddish brown, the outer 
joints somewhat thickened. Prothorax wider than long with curved 
lateral sides, moderately convex and nearly as wide as elytra; a 
prominent bare median vertical line, on each side of which dense, 
shallow punctures with fine dense white pubescence arranged in a 
pattern away from median line toward base, and more horizontally 
toward sides near sides. Scutellum with a few white hairs. Elytra 
not much wider than prothorax, with small, not prominent humeri and 
very little intrahumeral sulcus; punctation rather fine, some hori- 
zontal ridging near scutellum and below humeri; punctures tending to 
be in double rows with bare intervals particularly near apex and 
suture. Body beneath with white pubescence, thicker on sides of 
metathorax; tibiae and tarsi sometimes not quite so dark piceous as 
femora. Length 7.5-9 mm.; width 3.5-4.4 mm. 

Type: Male, in California Academy of Sciences, and 23 paratypes, 
of which 6 are in U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Los Mochis, Sinaloa, Mexico, collected in June and 
July 1922 by C. T. Dodds. 

Other locality: Yaki Valley, Mexico, A. W. Morrill, Feb. 8, 1922. 

Remarks : This is the third species of a group made up of G. prosopis 
Schaeffer from Brownsville, Tex., G. sonorensis from Sonora, Mexico, 
and the present one, G. cahitae, which differs from the other two by 
being generally wider and more robust in appearance. Like the 
Sonoran species this one differs too from G. prosopis in having incon- 
spicuous humeri. The elytral punctation is different from both the 
others in that the punctures are more widely separated with bare 
intervals especially noticeable in the apical half. As in the Sonoran 
species the claw is toothed nearer the base than in G. prosopis. 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 37 

Glyptoscelis mexicana Jacoby 

Figure 28 

Glyptoscelis mexicanus Jacoby, 1882, in Biologia Centrali-Americana, Coleoptera, 
vol. 6, pt. 1, p. 177. 

Between 7 and 9 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, alutaceous, 
not at all shiny, dull piceous black with fine white pubescence, legs 
and antennae deep reddish brown, prothorax densely and almost 
contiguously, shallowly, and not coarsely punctate, elytra with punc- 
tures not quite so dense and also shallow and not very coarse, with 
white pubescence that in type is rubbed off except about sides. Each 
elytron acute at tip but not noticeably prolonged. 

Head with interocular space about half width of head, front densely 
and shallowly punctate under the appressed white pubescence, a 
median occipital depression. Antennae reddish brown, extending 
below humeri. Prothorax somewhat wider than long, smoothly 
convex, without depressions, with well-rounded sides, no median 
ridge or line, punctures shallow, dense, finer anteriorly becoming 
coarser and more contiguous in middle and towards base, pubescence 
so rubbed that no pattern is visible. Scutellum with fine punctures 
and pubescence. Elytra convex with sharp humeral prominences, 
and a short, deep intrahumeral sidcus, a slight basal callosity on each 
side of scutellum with a transverse depression below; punctation not 
so dense as on prothorax but similar in being shallow and not very 
coarse, becoming finer and not so dense towards apex; pubescence 
appressed, in type specimen rubbed off except about edges. Body 
beneath covered with dense white coarse hairs. Length 7.5-9 mm.; 
width 2.6-3.2 mm. 

Type : Museum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, Mass. Cotype 
in British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: Playa Vicente (Oaxaca) Mexico, Salle collection. 

Remarks: Jacoby wrote that he had two specimens; one is in the 
Bowditch collection, the other in the British Museum (Natural 
History). I have seen no other specimen from Mexico or Central 
America like them with their dull, opaque upper surface. The elytra 
are acute at the tip but not prolonged. 

Glyptoscelis cliontalensis Jacoby 

Figure 30 
Glyptoscelis chontalensis Jacoby, 1882 in Biologia Centrali-Americana, Cole- 
optera, vol. 6, pt. 1, p. 176. 

From 8 to 10 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, with prolonged 
tip to elytra, shining piceous beneath the long white appressed 



38 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

pubescence, pro thorax finely punctate with a median bare hnpunctate 
line, from which a transverse pubescence; elytra more coarsely 
punctate with horizontal ridging. 

Head with interocular space a little more than half width of head, 
a median bare line down front, eyes emarginate at antennal sockets, 
pu notation dense and becoming coarser in lower part under a dense 
white pubescence, labrum reddish brown. Antennae reddish brown, 
with outer joints often darker, extending below humeri, outer joints 
wider, seventh joint long. Prothorax wider than long, strongly 
convex, lateral sides curved and anteriorly projecting around eye; 
a median bare line and some round bare spots on disc, otherwise 
densely and rather finely punctate, a fine white pubescence extending 
from median line horizontally, and often thicker on sides. Scutellum 
shining piceous with a few white hairs. Elytra widest at humeri, 
tapering toward apex, where sides are pinched in and end in a sharp 
prolonged tip, not divergent; not depressed about scutellum but 
evenly convex, a short intrahumeral sulcus, humeri prominent; 
punctation coarser than on pronotum and not so dense with horizontal 
ridging between rows of punctures, sometimes a bare line parallel to 
suture near apex; surface shining with a bronzy lustre and thinly 
covered with pale appressed pubescence. Body beneath with thick 
white pubescence, especially heavy on sides, legs dark reddish brown. 
Length 8-10 mm.; width 3.6-4.5 mm. 

Type: In Museum of Comparative Zoology, Cambridge, Mass. 
Cotype in British Museum (Natural History) . 

Type-locality: Chontales, Nicaragua, T. Belt collector. 

Other localities: Salvador: Metapan, July 5, 1954; San Salvador, 
June 10, 1925, K. A. Salman. 

Remarks: This is another of the species with prolonged tips to the 
elytra. The two South American species, G. aeneipennis Baly and 
G. Jascicularis Baly, both have less pronounced and not so long tips 
at the apex of the elytra. The North American species G. cryptica 
Say has the tips more marked in the male and is of a reddish-brown 
color with scalelike pubescence and coarser punctures, especially on 
the pronotum. Glyptoscelis cryptica also has simple claws. Unlike 
these other species the tips of 6. chontalensis are not divergent but 
united into one prolonged apex. 

Glyptoscelis guatemalensis, new species 

Figure 32 

Approximately 7.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining bronzy 

black, sometimes with a greenish lustre, antennae and legs deep 

reddish brown, prothorax rather finely punctate with a median 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 39 

vertical bare line, elytra with a narrow prolongation, more marked in 
male, whole body covered with fine white hairs. 

Head very lightly punctate over occiput and more densely but 
finely punctate on front, with fine, white, closely appressed hairs; 
eyes slightly emarginate at antennal sockets, labriun reddish brown. 
Antennae reddish brown, slender, extending below humeri. Pro- 
thorax not very convex with rounded sides, an acute tooth at basal 
and apical angles, and an impunctate median line, punctures fine 
and shallow, moderately dense, with fine white pubescence falling 
horizontally away from median bare line. Scutellum shining piceous 
with a few white hairs. Elytra not much wider than prothorax with 
humeral prominences, not depressed at all below scutellum but with a 
little swelling there; punctation fine, not dense, and with horizontal 
ridging between, particularly noticeable on sides below humeri; 
apex of elytra with a prolonged narrow tip, not divergent and not so 
well developed in female; pubescence fine, white, and not entirely 
concealing surface beneath; in one specimen pale brown hairs inter- 
mixed. Length 7.5 mm.; width 3.4 mm. 

Type: Male, in British Museum (Natural History). One para type 
in U.S. National Museum. 

Type-locality: Guatemala, Baly collection. 

Remarks: There is a third specimen in the British Museum with 
similar labels of "Guatemala" and "Baly collection" that may possibly 
not be this species. In this one, the prothorax is deep reddish brown 
and the elytra have an aeneous green lustre. It is unfortunately a 
female, and there is only the slightest trace of a prolonged tip to the 
elytra. Glyptoscelis guatemalensis is a smaller and more slender 
species than G. chontalensis Jacoby and the prolongation of the elytra 
not so developed, particularly in the female. There is a more pro- 
nounced tip to the aedeagus, which in G. chontalensis is smoothly 
rounded without an acute tip at all. 

Key to South American Species of Glyptoscelis 

1. From 11.5 to 14.5 mm. in length (Brazil, Argentina) . . . . gigas Jacoby 
Smaller 2 

2. Tips of elytra narrowly prolonged 3 

Tips of elytra not prolonged 4 

3. Aedeagus triangular at apex, pubescence on prothorax with vittate 

pattern fascicularis Baly 

Aedeagus round at apex, pubescence on prothorax without vittate 
pattern aeneipennis Baly 

4. Aedeagus with a long narrow tip 5 

Aedeagus rounded at apex 6 

5. Prothorax with a median bare area (Colombia) dohrni Jacoby 

Prothorax without a median bare area (Chile) gayi Lefevre 



40 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

6. Prothorax reddish brown, elytra faintly aeneous (Paraguay) . 

paraguayensis Jacoby 
Prothorax piceous black 7 

7. Prothorax approximately as wide as elytra and not very convex (Chaco and 

Formosa Provinces, Argentina) pinnigera Blake 

Prothorax more convex, with more apparent median bare line (Entre Rios 
Province, Argentina) monrosi Blake 

Glyptoscelis dohrni Jacoby 

Figure 38 
Glyptoscelis dohrni Jacoby, 1900, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 501. 

About 6 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining, elytra with faint 
bronzy lustre, mostly lustrous black, antennae and legs reddish brown; 
prothorax moderately finely and not very densely punctate with a 
median bare line, elytra more coarsely but not much more densely 
punctate with white appressed pubescence that on prothorax is 
horizontally arranged, not so dense as to obscure surface on either 
prothorax or elytra. 

Head shining, finely and sparsely punctate and lightly covered 
with white pubescence, lower front with a median impunctate line, 
labrum reddish brown, interocular space barely half width of head, 
eyes with only slight emargination at antennal sockets. Antennae 
short, extending below humeri, outer joints somewhat thickened, 
seventh joint long, pale reddish brown. Prothorax moderately 
convex, widest at base with only slightly curved sides, anterior angle 
curved forward below eyes; punctation moderately dense and not 
coarse, with a median bare line, a fine feathery pubescence arranged 
horizontally from median line, not entirely obscuring shining black 
surface. Scutellum black, with a few fine white hairs. Elytra not 
depressed about scutellum, tapering to apex, which is pinched in but 
not at all prolonged; intrahumeral depression faint, surface very 
shiny with a faint bronzy lustre and moderately coarsely and not 
densely punctate with a tendency to horizontal ridging; white pubes- 
cence not dense or obscuring surface. Undersurface with thick 
white pubescence, denser along sides, legs reddish brown. Length 
6.2 mm.; width 3 mm. 

Type: In British Museum (Natural History), with 3 paratypes. 

Type-locality: Colombia, collected by Rehlke. 

Other locality: Colombia: Cartegena, Bolivar Pro v., on chaparral, 
July 11, 1920, F. R. Mason. 

Remarks: The smaller size and stouter build as well as lack of any 
prolongation at the apex of the elytra differentiate this from the 
other two Colombian species, G. aeneipennis Baly and G. fascicularis 
Baly. The aedeagus is unusual in shape with a tip that is narrowly 



no. ^604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 41 

prolonged. Jacoby wrote that specimens were in his collection and 
also in the Stettin Museum. 

Glyptoscelis aeneipennis Baly 

Figure 36 
Glyptoscelis aeneipennis Baly, 1865, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, ser. 3, vol. 2, p. 334. 

From 7.5 to 8.5 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, apex of elytra 
with a prolonged tip; elytra usually having a greenish lustre, head, 
prothorax, antennae and legs reddish brown, sometimes head and 
prothorax piceous; prothorax not very coarsely punctate with a median 
bare line and some bare round spots; elytra more coarsely punctate 
and horizontally ridged in places, postscutellar region not at all 
depressed, a little raised; pubescence on prothorax feathery and 
arranged horizontally from median line, on elytra not so thick as to 
cover surface, white interspersed with brownish hairs and scattered 
patches of thicker white hairs in four rows on each elytron. 

Head with interocular space approximately half width of head, 
usually a median depressed line down occiput and front, which are 
finely and not densely punctate and thickly covered with fine white 
appressed pubescence; labrum usually yellowish or reddish brown. 
Antennae reddish brown, extending slightly below elytral humeri; 
apical joints not much widened, seventh joint longer than rest. 
Prothorax moderately convex with lateral sides nearly straight, 
broadest at base, basal margin sinuate over scutellum; disc shining, 
finely punctate, with bare median line and scattered small round bare 
spots, mostly near apex and base on either side of median line; reddish 
brown or piceous. Scutellum deep reddish brown or piceous with a 
few white hairs. Elytra with an intrahumeral sulcus and a somewhat 
raised postscutellar region, greatest width at humeri, gradually tapering 
after the middle to the apex, which is produced noticeably into two 
slightly divergent tips; surface shining, usually with a greenish lustre, 
more coarsely punctate than prothorax, punctures tending to be 
geminate striate with the intervals having finer punctures, some 
horizontal ridging; pubescence usually white with scattered brown 
hairs and a few denser patches of white distributed unevenly on each 
elytron in four lines. Body beneath covered with white, closely 
appressed pubescence, denser on sides; legs usually reddish brown. 
Length 7.5-8.5 mm.; width 3.5-3.8 mm. 

Type: In British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: Venezuela, Trinidad. 

Other localities: Venezuela: Santa Rita, Edo. Aragua, June 25, 
1943, injuring Gossipium hirsutum, G.V.Berthier; Maracay, May 1935, 
A. Escalona Salas. Colombia: Carare, 1939, H. Daniel; Pto. Berrie, 
Aug. 3, 1938, H. Dybas. 

245-252—67—4 



42 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Remarks: The type of this species in the British Museum is a much 
rubbed specimen, but what is left of the feathery white pubescence on 
the pro thorax is typical. On the elytra the pubescence is mostly 
white with numerous thicker patches, in rows. The prothorax and 
scutellum arc reddish brown. The apex of the aedeagus is like that of 
many other species, being rounded with a tiny knob at tip. This 
species is the first of two described by Baly on the same page, the 
second one being G. fascicularis, whose habitat is given as Colombia. 
Glyptoscelis fascicularis was synonymized by Jacoby with G. aeneipen- 
nis. It is very difficult to separate the two by any external characters, 
but the aedeagi are entirely different. Baly gave the differences as 
being that G. fascicularis is somewhat larger with fuscous pubescence 
on the upper side of the body. The latter character, the fuscous 
pubescence, is better than the size, which is not very different in many 
specimens. Glyptoscelis aeneipennis has more uniformly white 
pubescence, especially noticeable on the prothorax. Often, however, 
the white elytral pubescence is interspersed with brownish hairs, but 
not quite to the extent of G. fascicularis. 

Glyptoscelis fascicularis Baly 

Figure 35 

Glyptoscelis fascicularis Baly, 1865, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, ser. 3d, vol. 2, 

p. 334. 
Glyptoscelis aeneipennis Jacoby, 1900, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, p. 502. 

From 7.5 to 10 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, widest at 
humeri, elytra tapering and with a narrow apical prolongation; 
postscutellar area with a definite hump; elytra usually with greenish 
lustre, prothorax and scutellum usually and antennae and legs always 
reddish brown; usually brownish pubescence on prothorax arranged 
horizontally from median bare impunctate area, and usually heavier 
white pubescence on sides and on each side of middle, forming four 
white vittae; pubescence on elytra usually brownish with denser 
white patches in rows. 

Head with interocular space half width of head, a median line down 
front, finely punctate, and with brownish pubescence. Antennae 
pale reddish brown, extending below humeri, not much widened in 
apical joints, seventh joint long. Prothorax moderately convex 
with slightly rounded lateral sides, widest at base, a median bare 
line and round bare spots on either side, punctation not coarse but 
dense, usually brownish pubescence horizontally arranged from 
median line, and with denser white hairs on either side and near 
lateral margin, forming four white vittae. Scutellum usually reddish 
brown with a few hairs. Elytra widest at humeri with a definite 
hump behind scutellum, tapering to apex, which is narrowly pro- 



no- •"•601 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 43 

longed into two slightly divergent tips; pubescence not so dense as 
to hide greenish lustre of surface or the punctation, which is not 
very dense and has a tendency to be striate; some horizontal 
ridging, pubescence usually brownish with white patches of denser 
hairs arranged irregularly in four rows on each elytron. Body beneath 
covered, especially thickly on sides, with white pubescence. Length 
7.3-10 mm.; width 3.4-4.7 mm. 

Type: In British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: Colombia. 

Other localities: Trinidad: St. Augustine, June 16, 1944, on Cordia, 
A. M. Adamson; Port of Spain, July 1907, O. W. Barrett; Trinidad, 

F. W. Urich, Augustus Busck; Caroni River, Oct. 12, 1918, Harold 
Morrison. Grenada: June, A. Busck. Venezuela: Santa Rita, 
Edo. Aragua, June 25, 1943, on Gossipium hirsutum, G. V. Berthier; 
La Providencia, Maracay, Apr. 5, 1933, L. F. Martorell; Acarigua 
Portuguesa, on Psidium sp. Colombia: Villavicencio, June 10, 
1938, H. Dybas; Villanueva, July 9, 1938, H. Dybas. 

Remarks: In general, this species has a browner appearance than 

G. aeneipennis because of the pubescence, but otherwise it is difficult 
to distinguish by its external form. The pubescence on the prothorax 
tends to form four white vittae. In addition to the differences found 
in the pubescence there is a more decided hump behind the scutellum. 
In G. aeneipennis this is not so developed. But the only certain 
way of distinguishing the two is by the shape of the apex of the 
aedeagus. In G. fascicularis it is triangular, and in G. aeneipennis 
it is rounded. There is no definite difference in their distribution nor 
apparently in their food plant, as in one instance, both species were 
collected at the same time on cotton at Santa Rita, Venezuela. 

Glyptoscelis monrosi Blake 

Figure 33 

Glyptoscelis monrosi Blake, 1952, Act. Zool. Lilloana Inst. "Miguel Lillo," vol. 10, 
pp. 163-5. 

Between 7 and 7.5 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining piceous, 
prothorax rather finely punctate with a median impunctate line and 
several round impunctate areas, elytra more coarsely and rugosely 
punctate, pubescence long and white with denser white patches in 
four lines on each elytron; antennae and tibiae and tarsi reddish 
brown. 

Head with interocular space a little more than half width of head; 
lower front without much evidence of separation from upper, densely 
and finely punctate, with a trace of median line and with fine, closely 
appressed white pubescence, labrum yellowish or reddish brown. 
Antennae reddish brown, except the dark basal joint, not extending 



44 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

much below humeri, outer joints distinctly wider. Prothorax with 
rounded sides, widest at base, convex, densely and finely punctate 
with a bare impunctate median line and several small round impunctate 
areas; pubescence moderately long and thick, covering surface. 
Scutellum black, with a few white hairs. Elytra convex with a short 
intrahumeral sulcus and no depression about scutellum; shiny, piceous, 
densely punctate with horizontal ridges between punctures; pubes- 
cence moderately dense and with patches of long white hairs in four 
lines on each elytron. Body beneath with long white pubescence, 
tibiae and tarsi reddish brown. Length 7-7.5 mm. ; width 3.2-3.8 mm. 

Type: U.S. National Museum no. 65355. 

Type-locality: Rosario del Tala, Entre Rios, Argentina, December 
1941, F. Monros. 

Other localities: Argentina: Gualeguaychu, Entre Rios, Decem- 
ber 1941, Haldo; Santa Elena, Entre Rios, Jan. 18, 1912, G. E. 
Bryant. 

Remarks: This is a more convex and a more densely pubescent 
species with more white patches of hairs on the elytra than G. pin- 
nigera. Its median prothoracic line is more plainly evident too. 
It comes from Entre Rios Province, which is quite a different environ- 
ment from that of G. pinnigera from the Chaco region. 

Glyptoscelis pinnigera Blake 

Figure 34 
Glyptoscelis pinnigera Blake, 1952, Act. Zool. Lilloana Ins. "Miguel Lillo," vol. 
10, pp. 165-6. 

From 6 to 7 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining black, antennae 
and sometimes tibiae and tarsi reddish brown, prothorax about 
one-third wider than long, nearly as wide as elytra, lightly pubescent 
and finely punctate with remnants of a median bare impunctate line 
and several small round impunctate areas on either side; elytra more 
coarsely punctate. 

Head with interocular space slightly more than half width of head, 
lower front not very distinctly separated from upper, finely punctate 
with usually a median bare impunctate line down front, pubescence 
brownish and white. Antennae extending slightly below humeri, 
reddish brown with the basal joint darker, seventh joint long and 
apical joints wider. Prothorax nearly as wide as elytra and not very 
convex (for the genus as a whole) ; rather finely and densely punctate 
with numerous small round bare spots, and often part of a bare 
median line; a fine featheiy brown and white pubescence arranged 
horizontally from the middle. Scutellum with a few hairs. Elytra 
with a short intrahumeral sulcus, no depression or elevation about 
scutellum, punctation coarser than that of prothorax with horizontal 



no. 3601 GLYPTOSCELIS BLAKE 45 

ridging between and, on either side of suture, in apical half, often a 
bare line parallel to suture, sometimes interrupted with patches of 
denser white pubescence ; the brown and white pubescence not so dense 
as to hide surface. Body beneath with denser white pubescence, 
base of femora, tibiae and tarsi usually reddish brown. Length 
5.8-7.2 mm. ; width 3-3.6 mm. 

Type: U.S. National Museum no. 65356. 

Type-locality: Resistencia, Pro v. Chaco, Argentina, F. Monr6s. 

Other localities: Argentina: Mision Laishi, Formosa Prov., Sep- 
tember 1950, Willink and Monr6s; Santiago del Estero, Jan. 18, 
1912. 

Remarks: The wide and not very convex prothorax is the most 
distinctive character of this species. The three species G. para- 
guayensis Jacoby, G. pinnigera, and G. monrosi Blake are all very 
similar, but G. pinnigera differs from the other two in its broad, not 
very convex prothorax. It comes from the Chaco region. Beetles 
were observed by Willink and Monros feeding on Prosopis. The 
species described by Schaeffer from Brownsville, Tex., was named 
by him G. prosopis, presumably because it too was taken on mesquite. 

Glyptoscelis paraguayensis Jacoby 

Figure 31 

Glyptoscelis paraguayensis Jacoby, 1897, Entomologist, vol. 30, p. 260. 
Glyptoscelis paraguensis, Clavareau, 1914, Coleopterorum catalogue, par. 59, 
p. 130. 

About 7 mm. in length, elytra tapering to apex, widest at humeri, 
prothorax reddish brown, elytra faintly aeneous green; antennae and 
legs reddish brown; pronotum finely punctate with a median impunc- 
tate line; elytra more coarsely and distantly punctate; pubescence 
with brown and white bans intermingled. 

Head closely covered with brown and white hairs. Antennae 
extending below humeri, reddish brown. Prothorax with rounded 
sides, densely and strongly punctate with a median vertical impunc- 
tate line; reddish brown with brown and white hairs horizontally 
arranged from the median line, and obscuring punctation. Elytra 
widest at humeri and tapering to apex, with a pinched-in depression 
before the tip and a considerable thickness of white hairs producing 
a small prolongation at apex; pubescence on elytra of mingled brown 
and white hairs resulting in a mottled wavy effect; surface beneath 
with an aeneous green lustre; more coarsely punctate than prothorax 
and with horizontal ridging. Body beneath reddish brown, densely 
covered with white hairs. Legs reddish brown. Length 7 mm. 

Type: In British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: Paraguay. 



46 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Remarks: The coloring of this species, of which only the type has 
been seen, differs from the coloring of G. monrosi Blake and G. pin- 
nigera Blake in that the prothorax is deep reddish brown and the 
elytra have a distinctly aeneous-green lustre. Iu addition, the shape 
of the elytra is different in being more tapering, with a suggestion of 
a prolongation at the tip. The drawing of the type at the British 
Museum unfortunately was made on a smaller scale than for the rest 
of the species. The beetle, measuring about 7 mm., is comparable 
in size with G. monrosi and G. pinnigera. 

Glyptoscelis gayi Lefevre 

Figure 39 
Glyptoscelis gayi Lefevre, 1891, Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgique, vol. 35, p. 270. 

Between 8 and 9 mm. in length, oblong oval, shining black, pro- 
thorax densely and deeply punctate, without median bare line, elytra 
with very strong horizontal ridges, white pubescence on upper 
surface not dense or obscuring surface. 

Head with interocular space more than half width of head, head 
coarsely and densely punctate, the suture about lower front separat- 
ing it from upper front very indistinct, a fine white pubescence, 
labrum reddish brown. Prothorax strongly convex with lateral 
sides only slightly curved, widest at base, slightly wider than long, 
surface densely and deeply punctate with coarse round punctures 
over all, no median bare line, the white pubescence fine and not 
obscuring surface. Scutellum black. Elytra with deep intrahumeral 
sulcus, neither depressed nor elevated behind scutellum; surface 
very rugose with strong horizontal ridgings between rows of punc- 
tures, along side near apex a more or less distinct costa, which at 
apex unites with a vague subsutural apical costa in a small knobby 
prominence; pubescence fine, white, not obscuring surface. Body 
beneath with much heavier white pubescence, legs reddish brown. 
Length 8-9.5 mm.; width 3.5-4 mm. 

Type: In Museum of Natural History, Paris. 

Type-locality: "Chili (Santa Rosa)." 

Other localities: Chile: Serena, Coquimbo, Illapel. 

Remarks: The drawing of this species was made from a specimen 
from the Monr6s collection bearing the label "Glyptoscelis Gayi Ed. 
Lef. Auct. det. 1894." The locality is simply "Chili Gay." It is 
undoubtedly authentically determined. There are four specimens 
in the Frey Museum. These are the only ones examined by the 
writer. The species is distinctive because of the strong horizontal 
ridgings on the elytra, which are stronger than in any other species 
of the genus. The aedeagus is unusual in its long narrow tip. The 
punctation of the prothorax is deep and close. 



no. 3604 GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 47 

Glyptoscelis gigas Jacoby 
Figure 37 
Glyptoscelis gigas Jacoby, 1897, Entomologist, vol. 30, p. 262. 

Between 11.5 and 14.5 mm. in length, elongate oblong oval, not 
very shiny, with white or yellowish, closely appressed, scalelike pubes- 
cence, deep reddish brown to piceous, with dark-brown to piceous 
antennae and legs, densely and not very coarsely punctate, punctures with 
horizontal ridging in basal part of elytra; pubescence arranged in three vit- 
tate lines of denser scales on sides and middle of both pronotum and elytra. 

Head with eyes emarginate at antennal sockets, a median line down 
front, not very densely or coarsely punctate and with closely appressed, 
white, scalelike pubescence. Antennae dark brown, with fine white 
hairs, not extending to middle of elytra, outer joints slightly thicker, 
seventh joint long. Pro thorax with slightly curved sides, convex, 
and with a well-marked depression in middle of base, rather densely 
and not very coarsely punctate, not very shiny, with three more 
densely pubescent areas forming two lateral and a median pale vitta. 
Scutellum broader than long, finely punctate, and with scales. Elytra 
very long, tapering gradually from humeri, which are the widest part 
of elytra, to apex, which is sharp but not produced as in G. aeneipennis 
Baly; surface transversely wrinkled and with not very coarse or dense 
punctures becoming finer and sparser in apical half and on sides, 
pubescence in form of lateral and sutural three white vittae, with 
sparser white scales scattered between; in one specimen these vittae 
widen toward apex to cover entire apex, this specimen also bright 
reddish brown and larger than the others (14.5 mm.). Body beneath 
covered with pale scales, in the reddish-brown one the entire lower (apical) 
half pale with pubescence, not so dense in darker specimens. Claws with 
very short inner tooth near base. Length 1 1.5-14.5 mm.; width 5-5.8 mm. 

Type: In "Oxford Museum." 

Type-locality: Brazil, "without particular locality, obtained by Myers." 

Other localities: Argentina: La Rioja; El Borbollon, Mar. 13, 
1944, F. Monros; Rio Salado, Santiago del Estero, Wagner. 

Remarks : Except the type, which I have not examined, only three 
specimens are known to the writer. These three are all from the Mon- 
r6s collection, and all from Argentina. Two of them are dark brown 
and much rubbed, so that there are not many scales left, the third 
specimen, bright reddish brown and covered with pale yellowish 
scales, is larger. Whether all three are one species I cannot determine 
because of lack of material, but the one drawn, which is brownish 
piceous with white pubescence, corresponds with Jacoby 's description. 
Jacoby wrote that this is the largest species not only of the genus but 
of the whole group of Myochroini. A new genus possibly may be 
erected for it at some future time. 



48 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 







^ 



if §14 If li 

eft".' vi^Ci'K'V 4 1 ! < ^■■■■» , ',k» 

fif if# 





Figures 1-5. — 1, Glyptoscelis pubescens (Fabricius); 2, G. barbaia (Say); 3, G. crypticn 
(Say); 4, G. alternata Crotch; 5, G. albicans Baly. 



GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 



49 





5 6 4 






Figures 6—10. — 6, Glyptoscelis squamulata Crotch; 7, G. albida diabola Krauss; 8, G. albida 
LeConte (type); 9, G. vandykei Krauss, new status; 10, G. albida yosemitae Krauss. 



50 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 11-17. — 11, Glyptoscelis idahoensis, new species; 12, G. peferi, new species; 13, 
G. sequoiae Blaisdell; 14, G. juniperi, new species; 15, G. juniperi xanthocoma, new sub- 
species; 16, G. aridis, Van Dyke, new status; 17, G. illustris Crotch (type). 



GLYPTO SCE LIS — BLAKE 



51 







Figures 18-26. — 18, Glyptoscelis artemisiae, new species; 19, G. paula, new species; 20, 
G. cylindrica, new species; 21, G. longior LeConte (type); 22, G. septentrionalis, new 
species; 23, G. longior LeConte; 24, G. coloradoensis, new species; 25, G. parvula Blaisdell; 
26, G. prosopis Schaeffer. 



52 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




Figures 27-34. — 27, Glyptoscelis sonorensis, new species; 28, G. mexicana Jacoby (cotype); 
29, G. cahitae, new species; 30, G. chontalensis Jacoby (cotype); 31, G. paraguayensis 
Jacoby; 32, G. guatemalensis, new species; 33, G. monrosi Blake; 34, G. pinnigera Blake. 



GLYPTOSCELIS — BLAKE 



53 








Figures 35-39. — 35, Glyptoscelis fascicularis Baly; 36, G. aeneipennis Baly; 37, G. gigas 
Jacoby; 38, G. dohrni Jacoby; 39, G. gayi Lefevre. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3605 

Observations 

On the Pelagic Distribution of Seabirds 

In the Western Indian Ocean 



By Frank B. Gill 

Research Assistant, Division of Birds l 



In 1952, regarding our knowledge of seabirds, the Indian Ocean was 
considered to be the least-explored part of the world ocean (Murphy, 
1952). The validity of this statement was dramatized soon thereafter 
by the discovery of two new petrels, Bulweria jallax (Jouanin, 1955) 
and Pterodroma baraui (Jouanin, 1963), and an Indian Ocean breeding 
colony of a third petrel, Pterodroma arminjoniana (Murphy and Pen- 
noyer, 1952). Still, the need for information on the pelagic distribu- 
tion and behavior of seabirds in the Indian Ocean remains (Bourne, 
1963), for, although summaries of the scattered accounts are available 
(Bourne, 1960, 1963; Jouanin, 1957; Watson, Zusi, and Storer, 1963), 
the information on which they are based comes primarily from well- 
travelled commercial routes. By contrast, the rest of that ocean has 
received scant attention. 

The International Indian Ocean Expedition (IIOE), a multi- 
nation endeavor coordinated and sponsored by UNESCO, has been 



1 Present address: Museum of Zoology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 

1 
246-002—67 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

making possible the accumulation of seabird observations by scientific 
personnel aboard oceanographic research vessels that are systemati- 
cally transecting the entire Indian Ocean. Some of the resulting 
information has already been published (Bailey, 1964, 1965, 1966; 
Pocklington, 1965; Pocklington and Risebrough, 1964; Rand, 1962, 
1963). The present report is based on observations and collections 
made by the author during IIOE cruise 5 of the r/v Anton Bruun 
from January through April 1964 and also during a voyage of the 
commercial vessel s.s. Kampala in May 1964. 

The cruise tracks of these two voyages are outlined in figure 1 and 
the details of the itineraries are included in table 1. Cruise 5 of the 
Anton Bruun originated and terminated in Bombay, India, on Jan. 26 
and May 4, 1964, respectively and consisted of a direct transit across 
the Arabian Sea from Bombay to the Gulf of Aden followed by a 
north-south transect of the western Indian Ocean on longitude 55° E 
and a south-north transect on longitude 75° E. A direct run from 
Mauritius to 40° S, 75° E, connected the two transects. The passage 
from Bombay to the Seychelles from May 17 to June 2, 1964, was a 
scheduled run of the Kampala (British-India Lines) and included 
stops at Karachi, Mombasa, and Zanzibar. 

At each station on the Anton Bruuri's itinerary, I maintained a 
2-3-hour standardized watch for seabirds from the bridge of the 
ship. During this period the ship was essentially stationary. In 
the evening, while in transit to the next day's station at an average 
speed of 10-12 knots, I counted seabirds again for an hour before 
dusk. Records also were kept of all birds sighted between watch 
periods; when I was not on deck, I was alerted to the presence of 
seabirds by the officers on watch. 

The main difference influencing the observations made from the 
Kampala was the continuous movement of the ship (15 knots) and the 
fact that I could only watch from one side of the ship at a time, nar- 
rowing the radius of observation from 360° to slightly less than 180°. 

Some seabirds were collected from a small rubber "Zodiac" boat in 
subantarctic waters and during our brief visits to the Seychelles, 
Mauritius, Amsterdam, and St. Paul Islands. Although the latter 
two islands will be included in this report, only those birds seen at 
sea in the vicinity of the Seychelles and Mascarene Islands are dis- 
cussed here, as studies on these islands were continued from June to 
November 1964 and will be published elsewhere. 

In the course of this work I have kept detailed notes and descrip- 
tions of all unfamiliar seabirds and have found the following references 
especially useful for identification: "Birds of the Ocean" (Alexander, 
1954), "The Petrels of the Indian Ocean" (Bourne, 1960), "A Pre- 
liminary Field Guide to Birds of the Indian Ocean" (Watson, Zusi, and 



SEABIRDS — GILL 




Figure 1. — Cruise tracks and station positions. 

R/V Anton Bruun: Jan. 26 to May 4, 1964 

T.S.S. Kampala: May 17 to June 2, 1964 



Storer, 1963). The nomenclature used follows that of Peters (1931, 
1934) except in a few cases wherein recent revisions or descriptions 
were applicable. All specimens have been cataloged in the collections 
of the U.S. National Museum in Washington, D.C. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

This work was supported by a National Science Foundation grant to 
Dr. I. E. Wallen of the Smithsonian Institution in Washington as part 
of the U.S. Program in Biology, International Indian Ocean Expedi- 
tion. Drs. Philip S. Humphrey, Robert W. Storer, and George E. 
Watson offered numerous helpful suggestions and encouragement 
throughout the course of my Indian Ocean field activities and in the 
preparation of this report. I am indebted also to all my companions 
aboard the Anton Bruun for their assistance and independent con- 
tributions and to Claudia L. McPeek, who handled the countless 
administrative and other details connected with my participation 
in this expedition. Roger S. Bailey provided stimulating discussion 
of the problems of seabird distribution that are the concern of this 
paper and made available many of his unpublished observations 
and thoughts. John P. Hubbard and Guy Musser helped with the 
illustrations. Finally, I am most grateful for the assistance rendered 
by my wife Frances in the typing of the final draft of this manuscript. 

Seabird abundance. — Included in table 1 are the numbers of sea- 
birds (grouped by order) observed during the standardized watch 
periods and a calculated figure for the number of birds seen per hour 
during each watch. The relationship of the latter figure to the actual 
density of seabirds in a given area is biased by many variables in- 
cluding the movement of the ship, movement of the birds, conditions 
for observation, and perhaps time of day. The first of these may be 
particularly important (compare Bailey, 1966, p. 261) since seabirds 
rarely are distributed uniformly at sea but instead congregate at and 
move with localized sources of food. Hence, any substantial move- 
ment of the ship should increase the likelihood of encountering non- 
randomly distributed seabirds. If this is true, the counts I made 
during the morning watches on station are not directly comparable 
to evening watches or others made when the ship was cruising at 
normal speeds. An additional complication is the possibility that 
the greater duration of the morning watches increased the chances of 
seeing small groups of moving birds and partially compensated for 
the lack of movement of the ship. Despite these and other problems 
inherent in the quantification of at-sea observations, at least five 
regions were found where seabirds were more common than in the 
intervening areas. These were: (l) the western Arabian Sea and south 
along the coast of Somalia; (2) the Seychelles Islands and surrounding 
seas; (3) the waters near the Mascarene Islands; (4) subantarctic 
waters below 33° S; (5) the seas east of the Maldive Islands and north 
to the Indian coast. A sixth region near the equator also might be 
distinguished though the increase there was less pronounced than 
in the other areas. In these regions the number of seabirds seen per 
hour was definitely greater than 2-3, usually 10-30, and on some occa- 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 5 

sions reached 100-200. 2 In the intervening seas an average of one bird 
or less was seen per hour. 

Regional summaries. — In the Arabian Sea, Jouanin's petrel (Bul- 
weria fallax) and the red-billed tropicbird (Phaethon aethereus) were 
the two species most commonly encountered in January although, 
close to the Gulf of Aden and Socotra, Audubon's shearwaters (Puf- 
ftnus Iherminieri) were quite common and the lesser black-backed gull 
(Larus fuscus), Aden gull {Larus hemprichii), masked booby (Sula 
dactylatra) and brown booby (Sula leucogaster) also were found. The 
primary difference within this general region in the following May 
was the appearance of several storm petrels, i.e., Wilson's petrel 
(Oceanites oceanicus), frigate petrel (Pelagodroma marina), and either 
the white-bellied storm petrel (Fregetta grallaria) or the black-bellied 
storm petrel {Fregetta tropica) . Storm petrels also were seen at this 
time south along the African coast to Mombasa and east to the 
Seychelles Islands (see table 4) . 

Most of the breeding seabirds of the Seychelles Islands forage in 
large mixed flocks in the relatively shallow waters around these 
islands. Few species, however, except the sooty tern (Sterna fuscata) 
and the wedge-tailed shearwater (Puffinus pacijicus), stray into the 
surrounding open seas with any regularity. Although flocks of up 
to several hundred sooty terns were seen near the Seychelles and east 
to the African coast in May and June, no sooty terns were seen in this 
region in January and February. 

In the equatorial regions two all-dark storm petrels of uncertain 
identification (possibly Oceanodroma monorhis and 0. matsudairae; 
see "Species Accounts") were encountered, as well as a tern, appar- 
ently the fairy tern (Gygis alba). 

The numbers of seabirds found in the waters near the Mascarene 
Islands seemed impressive to me after having passed through the 
relatively barren region south of the Seychelles Islands. Flocks of 
sooty terns and wedge-tailed shearwaters, as well as scattered white- 
tailed tropicbirds (Phaethon Upturns), appeared within 50 miles of 
Mauritius. A few common noddies (Anous stolidus) also were seen. 
Further to the southwest, Barau's petrel (Pterodroma baraui) from 
Reunion was a common pelagic species, occurring with tropicbirds 
(P. lepturus) and Audubon's shearwaters (Puffinus Iherminieri). 

Below 34° S we encountered the albatrosses and petrels, charac- 
teristic of the cool water oceans of the southern hemisphere. The 
wandering albatross (Diomedea exulans), white-chinned petrel (Procel- 
laria aequinoctialis) , soft-plumaged petrel (Pterodroma mollis), and 



2 The increase near the Maldives was only subjectively apparent, as standard- 
ized watches permitting computations of birds seen per hour were not made 
In this region. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

prions (Pachyptila) were the most abundant and conspicuous spe- 
cies while others such as the sooty albatross (Phoebetriaj 'usca) , shy alba- 
tross (Diomedea cauta) , black-browed albatross (Diomedea melano-phris) , 
yellow-nosed albatross (Diomedea chlororhynchos) , and great-winged 
petrel (Pterodroma macroptera) were seen regularly but in smaller 
numbers. Scattered individuals of only six other species were seen 
at sea in this region : Schlegel's petrel (Pterodroma incerta) , giant petrel 
(Macronectes giganteus), pediunker (Adamastor cinereus), sooty shear- 
water (Puffinus griseus), Wilson's petrel (Oceanites oceanicus), and 
white-bellied storm petrel (Fregetta grallaria). 

St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands were once very important seabird 
breeding stations (Jouanin, 1953; Murphy and Irving, 1951). During 
cruise 5 of the Anton Bruun, we visited each of these islands briefly, 
St. Paul for a few hours in the late afternoon of Apr. 7 and Amsterdam 
Island the following day. Seabirds were numerous in the waters 
around both of these islands and included most of the common petrel 
and albatross species seen elsewhere at sea in this region; however, 
sooty albatrosses and white-chinned petrels were especially numerous 
near Amsterdam Island. Flocks of Antarctic terns (Sterna vittata) 
were feeding near both islands and, within one mile of St. Paul, we 
also found feeding flocks of the little shearwater (Puffinus assimilis). 
Aside from Rockhopper penguins (Eudyptes crestatus), we could 
find no seabirds on St. Paul Island itself, though a number of "petrel 
nests" were located in small crevices and under rocky overhangs. 
Although the island was infested with both rats and hares, the absence 
of seabirds may be attributed to the fact that most species would 
have finished breeding and left the island by this date. We there- 
fore spent little time on Amsterdam Island but instead confined our 
collecting efforts to the waters just offshore. 

On the 75° E transect few seabirds were seen north of 31° S until we 
reached the latitudes of the Chagos and Maldive Islands. Here we 
found dark shearwaters, apparently the pale-footed shearwater 
(Puffinus carneipes), and scattered flocks of sooty terns. Occasional 
tropicbirds (P. lepturus) also were seen. 

Several species of seabirds known to breed on the Seychelles or 
Mascarene Islands were not observed in the course of the two voyages. 
These include the Trinidad petrel (Pterodroma arminjoniana) , red- 
tailed tropicbird (Phaethon rubricauda), greater frigate-bird (Fregata 
minor), red-footed booby (Sula sula), lesser noddy (Anous tenuirostris) , 
and roseate tern (Sterna dougallii). All of these species were encoun- 
tered during subsequent field work on these islands and will be 
included in other reports. 

Oceanographic data. — Concurrent with my seabird observations, 
standard oceanographic measurements (temperature profiles, nutri- 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL / 

ents, plankton abundance, and primary productivity) were being 
taken by other members of the Anton Bruun's scientific party. These 
data and the methods used in their determination are presented in 
detail in the "Final cruise report, Anton Bruun cruise #5" (Woods 
Hole Oceanographic Institution, March 1965), and will be summarized 
only briefly here. The values obtained for surface salinity (36.0- 
36.35%o), nutrient concentrations (P0 4 , .46-.49jug A/1.; N0 2 -N, .35- 
.60Mg A/1.), and primary productivity (18-44/zg C/l./d) 3 in the western 
Arabian Sea near the Gulf of Aden and Socotra (sta. 282-287) were 
consistently higher than most other locations visited. Although nutri- 
ent concentrations at a few of our southernmost stations (308-310) were 
comparable to or higher than Arabian Sea values, primary productivity 
levels were much lower (6-7/xg C/l./d.). Unfortunately, the results 
of analyses of plankton samples are not yet available. Surface water 
temperatures in the western Arabian Sea were several degrees lower 
than in the seas immediately to the south. This decrease in tempera- 
ture and concomitant increase in the nutrient concentrations and 
productivity are indicative of strong local upwelling which is known 
to occur in that region and which is believed to be the major deter- 
minant of the composition and density of the seabird community there 
(Bourne, 1963; Bailey, 1966). Between the Arabian Sea and the 
Mascarene Islands on the 55° E transect, surface temperatures ranged 
from 26° to 29.2° C. At comparable latitudes on the 75° E transect 
they ranged from 27° to 30.1° C. A progressive decrease in temper- 
ature was noted south of the Mascarenes, but the drop (from 19° to 
15° C) was especially pronounced from 35° to 40° S, the region of the 
subtropical convergence. It was also in this region that the numbers 
of seabirds increased markedly. 

Species Accounts 
Eudyptes crestatus Rockhopper Penguin 

Common at St. Paul Island on Apr. 7, where they were breeding in 
colonies on the steep grassy slopes though they were not nearly as 
abundant as Jeannel found them on these same slopes in February 
1939 (Jeannel, 1941, pi. x). Many full-size young, which had lost 
most of the down tips on their juvenal feathers, were present, but no 
small young or eggs were found. The soft part colors recorded from 
five specimens were as follows: hides orange; bill dull orange; feet 
dark grey below, white above. Weights ranged from 1915 to 
2475 grams (mean 2205 grams). The measurements (in mm) 4 of 



1 Average of combined values to depths of 25 percent incident light. 
* Made by George E. Watson, Division of Birds, U.S. National Museum, 
Washington, D.C. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

two female specimens are as follows: wing 158,162; tail molting; crest 
70, 72; culmen 46.5; bill from gape 56, 57; width of bill 13.5, 14; 
depth of maxilla 1 1 ; foot from heel 105, 110; middle toe and claw 70, 75. 

Diomedea exulans Wandering Albatross 

One of the most common and conspicuous species in subantarctic 
waters below 33°52 / S on Mar. 8-9 and Apr. 3-10, 1964, its numbers 
reaching a maximum (25) at our southernmost station (see table 2). 

Six specimens were taken, two at sea at 40°04' S on Apr. 4 and 
four just off the coast of Amsterdam Island three days later. The 
weights of these specimens ranged from 14 to over 20 pounds. The 
soft part colors, including those of a brown-bodied immature were 
as follows: feet bluish grey to bluish white; irides brown; orbital 
ring light blue; bill flesh color. The gonads of these specimens were 
not enlarged. 

On several occasions I observed a pair of birds that were sitting on 
the water engage in a ceremony in which one bird with its wings 
raised slightly over its back was fed regurgitated morsels by the 
other. The ceremony terminated when the receiving partner spread 
its wings fully, stretched its neck, pointing its bill upward, and 
uttered a high-pitched squealing note. It then relaxed its position. 
On several other occasions two birds nibbled simultaneously at the 
end of each other's bill without the exchange of any food or use of 
vocalizations. Murphy (1936, p. 558) describes similar courtship- 
like activities being engaged in at sea often by large groups of 
albatrosses. 

Diomedea melanophris Black-browed Albatross 

We observed this small mollymauk only occasionally in subantarctic 
waters, primarily below 40° S on Apr. 4-6 (see table 2). A single 
individual was present at 36°58' S on Apr. 9. 

Diomedea cauta Shy or White-capped Albatross 

Only occasional individuals were noted in subantarctic waters south 
of 36°58' S on Apr. 3-9 (see table 2). 

Diomedea chlororhynchos Yellow-nosed Albatross 

We observed this mollymauk only occasionally between latitudes 
34° S and 40° S on Apr. 3-10 (see table 2). 

Two specimens collected off the coast of Amsterdam Island on 
Apr. 8 had the following soft part colors: bill black with yellow 
culminocorn becoming reddish toward the tip; irides brown; feet pink. 
They weighed 2370 grams (male) and 2395 grams (female) and both 
had small gonads. The female specimen, prepared as a study skin, 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 9 

measured (in mm): wing 436; tail 191; culmen 114; tarsus 75; middle 
toe 109. The stomach of this specimen contained the remains of 
a fish and a sponge. 

Phoebetria fusca Sooty Albatross 

Common in subantarctic waters below 34°32' S on Apr. 3-10, being 
most abundant near Amsterdam and St. Paul Islands on Apr. 7-8 
(see table 2) . Many buff-headed immatures were seen. 

Twelve specimens were obtained, five at sea at 40°04' S, 75°00' E, 
on Apr. 4 and seven off the coast of Amsterdam Island on Apr. 8. 
The soft part colors of these specimens were recorded as follows: 
irides brown; feet flesh-color; bill black with yellowish stripe (dull 
white in immatures) on lower mandible. The weights (in grams) of 
seven specimens were as follows: 3 males 2600, 2650, 2545; 3 females 
2930, 2390, 2370; immature (sex unknown) 2440. The gonads of 
adults were slightly enlarged, ovaries averaging 19 x 9 mm, testes 
11x6 mm. Three skinned specimens, two adult males and an im- 
mature, measured (in mm): wing 496, 496, 483; tail 243, 266, 245; 
culmen 116, 113, 106; tarsus 87, 84, 82. Of seven stomachs examined, 
three contained fish remains, two contained large cephalopod beaks, 
one contained 13 cephalopod beaks, several large shrimp, and the 
remains of a fish, and one stomach was empty. 

Phoebetria palpebrata Light-mantled Sooty Albatross 

One dark albatross with a light back seen at 43°31' S, 75°27 / E, on 
Apr. 6 may have been this species. 

Macronectes giganteus Giant Petrel 

Only two individuals, both dark phase, were seen, one at 42°23' S, 
74°56' E, on Apr. 5 and the other just off the coast of Amsterdam 
Island on Apr. 8. 

Daption eapense Cape Pigeon 

I saw only one Cape pigeon briefly at 34°53' S, 69°37 / E, on Apr. 2. 

Pachyptila species Prion 

Prions, of undetermined species, were fairly common in the waters 
near St. Paul Island on Apr. 7 and south to 43°31' S on Apr. 4 to 7 
(see table 3). 

A single Pachyptila desolata came aboard the Anton Bruun on Apr. 8 
when we were about 20 miles west of Amsterdam Island. It was a 
female with a small ovary and weighed 121.6 grams. The bill and 
feet were light blue, the irides brown. It measured as follows (in mm) : 
wing 187; tail 96; culmen 26; width bill at base 13; tarsus 34; middle 
toe 34. The stomach contained several small white pebbles, very 
likely floating pumice. 

246-002—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. us 

Adamastor cincreus Pediunker 

We saw only two, possibly three, individuals in subantarctic waters 
(see table 3). 

Procellaria aequinoctialis White-chinned Petrel 

White-chinned petrels were common south of the subtropical con- 
vergence where they frequently followed our ship. Our northern- 
most record was of a single individual at 30°50' S, 55°09' E, on Mar. 7. 
Maximum numbers were encountered at 40°04' S, 75°00' E, on Apr. 4 
and off the coast of Amsterdam Island on Apr. 8 (see table 3). 

Twelve specimens were obtained, primarily off the coast of Amster- 
dam Island. The soft part colors noted were : feet black ; hides brown ; 
bill light grey green with black markings. The ovaries of ten females 
varied in size from 7x4tol5x8 mm; testes of two males measured 
7x5 and 8x5 mm. Of nine stomachs examined, three contained 
cephalopods; two contained fish; two contained both fish and cephalo- 
pods; one contained pieces of fish and bologna, the latter presum- 
ably from discarded galley refuse; and one was empty. 

Although I never saw this species hover like a kestrel (Watson, 
Zusi, and Storer, 1963), it often stops short in midair and flutters to 
the surface of the water. Then, preceding diving, the petrel sub- 
merges its head as if looking about under water. When it finally 
dives, the wings are held partially outstretched and may, therefore, 
be used for underwater propulsion. 

Puffinus carneipes Pale-footed Shearwater 

This dark shearwater can usually be distinguished by its large size, 
pale bill, and, from P. pacificus, by its short rounded tail. At a dis- 
tance its large size and heavy flight are diagnostic. Many of the 
shearwaters seen near the Maldive Islands and west coast of India in 
late April (see table 4) were identified as this species as were four 
shearwaters seen on May 21 in the Arabian Sea. At least one of the 
birds seen near the Maldive Islands was molting its remiges. 

Puffinus pacificus Wedge-tailed Shearwater 

Only one wedge-tailed shearwater was identified positively in the 
Arabian Sea, on May 17 at 17°29 / N (see table 5). Some of the other 
dark petrels also may have been this species, but I was unable to 
separate them from Bulweria fallax, which is very similar in appear- 
ance. Several wedge-tailed shearwaters were seen as we approached 
the Seychelles in February, and they were numerous in this region 
in early June. It was common near Mauritius in February and 
March, and a few were seen near Reunion. Large dark shearwaters 
were encountered in the vicinity of the Maldive Islands in April, 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 11 

but most of these seemed to be P. carneipes; however, 40 shearwaters 
seen resting on the water on Apr. 20 were identified as this species. 

Piiffinus griseus Sooty Shearwater 

In early April south of the subtropical convergence we encountered 
several dark brown shearwaters with whitish underwings, short 
rounded tails, and flutter-and-glide flight. They were most common 
near Amsterdam Island (5-6 total) but single birds also were seen 
at 3S°01' S, 79°19' E, at 40°04' S, 75°00' E, and near St. Paul Island. 
I have identified tentatively these shearwaters as P. griseus rather 
than P. tenuirostris on the basis of the whitish as opposed to grayish 
underwing coloration. Neither of these species occurs regularly in 
the Indian Ocean though it seems likely that P. griseus could stray 
northward from the Antarctic regions, where it is abundant during 
migration (Oordt and Kruijt, 1953). 

Puffinus assimilis Little Shearwater 

A single small, black and white shearwater with flutter-and-glide 
flight was seen at 33°52' S, 55°05' E, on Mar. 8. Large numbers 
(250 + ) of P. assimilis were found in the waters close to St. Paul 
Island. 

Three specimens with slightly enlarged gonads were taken from the 
flocks feeding just off the coast of St. Paul Island on Apr. 7, 1964. The 
soft part colors were as follows: bill light greyish blue; feet bright blue 
with pink webs and some blackish on the underside; irides brown with 
bluish outer ring. The weights (in grams) and measurements (in 
mm) are included in the table below: 



specimen 


sex 


weight 


oilmen 


wing {chord) 


tail 


tarsus 


GI-279 


M 


289 


25 


184 


68 


38 


GI-280 


? 


263.5 


25 


184 


68 


38 


GI-281 


M 


250.5 


24.6 


183 


67.5 


40.3 



The two stomachs examined both contained the remains of many tiny 
cephalopods. 

Conspicuous white edgings were present on the terminal portions 
of the dark grey feathers of the upperparts and in this respect, as well 
as mensural characters, the specimens resemble P.a. munda as de- 
scribed by Murphy (1927). George E. Watson, who kindly compared 
the one skinned specimen 5 with available material, writes that 
it "agrees exactly with two 'munda' collected February 16, 1926 
at 49° S, 179' W by Beck and Correia (AMNH 211648, 211652). 



6 Careful comparison of the three specimens before preservation revealed no 
differences in plumage pattern or coloration. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Very similar but lacking the white tipping are a kempi from Chatham 
Island, May 1892 (USNM 208603), and an elegans from Nightingale 
Island, November 1950 (AMNH 648710)." A new subspecies, 
P. a. myrtae, with distinct white feather edgings, however, has been 
described recently (Bourne, 1959) and it appears that immatures and 
fresh-plumaged adults frequently possess white feather edgings that 
soon wear off (Bourne, 1959; Palmer, 1962). The specimens from 
St. Paid fit into the complex of southern P. assimilis popidations, but, 
in view of the uncertain taxonomic relationships of these shearwaters, 
it seems inadvisable to assign them to subspecies on the basis of the 
specimen material presently available. 

A breeding population of P. assimilis has not yet been described 
from St. Paul Island. Jouanin and Paidian (1960) reported the species 
from a single subfossil tarsus and there is a recently fledged young 
specimen, which was collected near St. Paul Island on Jan. 26, 1956, 
by P. Paulian, in the collections of the Museum National D'Histoire 
Naturelle in Paris (Jouanin, in litt.) . 

Puffinus Iherminieri Audubon's Shearwater 

This small shearwater was common in the vicinity of Socotra, the 
Seychelles, Mauritius, and Reunion Islands, but not in the intervening 
seas (see table 5). A flock of 15 small black and white shearwaters 
{P. I. persicus?) was also seen near the Pakistani coast between Bombay 
and Karachi on May 18, 1964. 

Four P. Iherminieri came aboard the Anton Bruun just north of the 
Seychelles during the evening of Feb. 11, and were collected. These 
specimens, however, will be included in a more comprehensive dis- 
cussion of the seabirds of the Seychelles (Gill, in prep.). 

Pterodroma haraui Barau's Petrel 

A Pterodroma petrel, which I was unable to identify at the time, was 
fairly common in the vicinity of Reunion Island on Mar. 3 and 4, 
1964. Scattered individuals, apparently of the same species were 
seen as far south as 27°02' S (see table 6). Subsequent observations 
and study of Barau's petrel on Reunion (Jouanin and Gill, MS) 
convinced me that I had been seeing this recently described species. 
Description (from at-sea observations) : upperparts light brown, 
primaries darker; underparts white including the undersurface of the 
wing, except for a narrow black band on the fore-edge of the wing 
becoming widest in the primaries; face white; whitish collar; tail 
rounded; flight with pronounced soaring and swooping, rising high on 
the upswing, no flapping. Especially confusing was the fact that the 
back appeared brown, not the characteristic grey of P. haraui in the 
hand, but this undoubtedly resulted from the phenomenon whereby 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 13 

grey or blackish birds at sea often appear brown against the blue of 
the ocean. 

Pterodroma macroptera Great-winged Petrel 

Occasional individuals were seen in subantarctic waters, primarily 
south of Amsterdam Island (see table 3). Two dark, fast-flying 
petrels seen at 27°02' S, 55°49' E, on Mar. 12 may have been this 
species though the proximity of the location to Reunion Island also 
suggests the possibility of P. aterrima. 

Pterodroma incerta Schlegel's Petrel 

Three individuals seen at 34°34' S, 69°03' E, on Apr. 2 constitute my 
only records of this species. Their flight consisted primarily of low 
gliding over the water with only occasional flapping or swooping. 

Pterodroma m. mollis Soft-plumaged Petrel 

We saw this petrel commonly in subantarctic waters south of 31°31' S 
and recorded the highest numbers (30) at our southernmost station 
(see table 3). A petrel seen at 28°58 / S, 55°0S' E, on Mar. 6 was 
probably this species. 

A single specimen was obtained at 40°04' S, 75 °00' E, on Apr. 4. 
It was a male with small gonads and weighed 277.4 grams. The 
bill was black, the hides brown, and the feet were flesh colored, 
except for the outer toe and distal two-thirds of the web, which were 
black. The stomach contained cephalopod beaks. The measure- 
ments (in mm) were: wing 256.5; tail 115; culmen 28; tarsus 36; 
middle toe 45. 

Pterodroma mollis is recognized easily by its small size, greyish- 
brown upperparts, and dark chest band against the white underparts. 
Its flight is fast and erratic with rapid swooping and swift, deep wing 
strokes, reminding one of a small jaeger (Stercorarius) . Frequently it 
flies very high and then dives to the surface of the ocean, appearing to 
make "passes" at other birds. After dark (2100 hours) on Apr. 5, 
I saw a soft-plumaged petrel (made visible by the deck lights) feeding; 
it landed briefly on the water several times, picked up something 
from the surface, and then flew a short distance before repeating 
this procedure. 

Pterodroma (leucoptera) 

I saw a single, small, grey, black and white petrel on Mar. 13 at 
24° 10' S, 56°24' E. Apparently it was a member of the South Pacific 
Cookilaria complex though the possibility of P. hypoleuca could not 
be eliminated with certainty. Patrick J. Gould, who is familiar 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 12s 

with the Pacific gadfly petrels at sea, concurs in this identification 
after examining my field notes and sketches. 

Ptcrodroma species 

An unidentified large, greyish-brown (=grey?) petrel with a darker 
head and tail and white underparts was observed west of the Seychel- 
les Islands at 05°23' S, 48°08 / E, on June 1. There was a pronounced 
dark stripe on the upper wing surface and the underwings were white 
with broad black margins. The flight consisted entirely of pendulum- 
like swooping motions with no flapping. 

Bulweria fallax Jouanin's Petrel 

In January and February medium-sized, all-dark petrels were seen 
regularly over most of the Arabian Sea between Bombay and Socotra. 
The majority of these could not be identified positively because of 
the difficulties involved in the separation of this species from Puffinus 
pacificus and perhaps some Pterodroma petrels; however, a few positive 
identifications of B. fallax were obtained and all individuals seen 
at close range proved to be this species ; consequently, I have included 
here all unidentified dark brown petrels seen in the Arabian Sea 
from the Anton Bruun. Positive identifications are indicated in 
table 7 by an asterisk. 

Using these criteria, 104 " Bulweria fallax" were seen during 64 
hours of intensive surveillance between Jan. 27 and Feb. 10. Several 
small flocks (up to 50 birds) were encountered near Socotra, where 
the species was most common. My southernmost record was of 
four individuals at 00°31' S, 54°56' E, on Feb. 10. 

In late May, Jouanin's petrel was the most commonly observed 
pelagic species on a course paralleling the Arabian coast. At least 
53 B. fallax plus an additional 16 petrels that were either this species 
or Puffinus pacificus were seen between 22°59' N, 65°42 / E, and 02°02' 
N, 51°11' E, in 17 hours of observation. 

The flight of B. fallax consists of five or six quick flaps followed by 
a glide low over the water or a swoop down to the water from the 
extra height it has gained. Only occasionally does the petrel swoop 
in the pendulum fashion of some Pterodroma and, when it does, its 
flight hardly seems fast or erratic. The shearwater-like flight pattern 
seems to be used when the bird is foraging and the pendulum motion 
when it is travelling, though the force of the wind is also an important 
factor (see Bailey, 1966, p. 240). Although I saw groups of this 
petrel near Socotra, single individuals usually were encountered. 
On occasion they were seen to land on the water for extended periods 
of time and appeared to be feeding on squid. 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 15 

Oceanites oceanicus Wilson's Petrel 

Five scattered individuals were seen south of the subtropical con- 
vergence in early April (see table 8). None were seen in the Arabian 
Sea in January and February, but in May a flock of more than 50 
Wilson's petrels was passed between Bombay and Karachi and still 
others were found near the African coast dming the last week of May. 

Pelagodroma marina Frigate Petrel 

Nine frigate petrels were seen in late May between Karachi and the 
Seychelles Islands (see table 8). Instead of the characteristic grey, 
they appeared "light brown" to my eye. 

Fregetta grallaria White-bellied Storm Petrel 

Several dark storm petrels with white rumps and bellies were seen 
near Amsterdam and St. Paul Islands and in the waters to the south 
(see table 8). Although I had excellent looks at some of these, I 
was unable to discern any black in the middle of the white underparts. 
An additional 10 Fregetta species (probably F. tropica: see Bailey, 
1966, p. 243) were seen in the Arabian Sea (and vicinity) between 
May 22 and June 2. 

Oceanodroma monorhis Swinhoe's Storm Petrel 

On two occasions (00°58' N, 55°00' E, on Feb. 9; 10°46' S, 55°00' E, 
on Feb. 18), I saw an all-dark storm petrel with a forked tail and very 
fast, erratic flight. Bailey (1965) found two species of all-dark 
storm petrels, the smaller of which was 0. monorhis, verified by the 
capture of specimens. It seems reasonable, therefore, to assign 
my two observations to this species. 

Oceanodroma matsudairae Matsudaira's Storm Petrel 

Scattered individuals (12 total) of an unidentified storm petrel were 
seen between latitudes 07° 17' N and 21°00' S; over one-half of these 
observations were made near the equator (see table 9). This petrel 
was the size of a large Oceanodroma (or Bidweria bulweria) but was 
not nearly as large as B. fallax. It was entirely dark brown in color 
though some individuals had conspicuously paler upper wing coverts. 
The flight was deliberate, almost sluggish, consisting of four or five 
deep wing strokes followed by a short glide with the wings bowed 
downward. The tail appeared either square or slightly forked. 

Bailey (1964, 1965) observed a large Oceanodroma commonly in the 
vicinity of the equator from March to May 1964 and suggested that 
it was 0. matsudairae from the Pacific. Since then, two specimens 
confirming: this tentative identification have been collected in the 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Indian Ocean off Western Australia by Pocklington, Willis, and 
Palmieri (unpubl.). 

Phaethon aetliereus Red-billed Tropicbird 

In late January and early February this tropicbird was fairly common 
in the western Arabian Sea east to 69°11' E and south to 11°01' N, 
often very far from land (see table 10). In late May, five were seen 
only 17°29' N, 62°31' E, and three at 02°02' N, 51°11' E. No other 
species of tropicbirds were identified in this region. 

Phaethon lepturus White-tailed Tropicbird 

White-tailed tropicbirds were first encountered at 08°42 / S, 55°07' E, 
on Feb. 17 and were not seen south of 24° S on this transect of the 
cruise (see table 11). On the 75° E transect the first one was seen 
at 16°42' S; we noted the species at only two of the remaining stations 
to the north. Many white-tailed tropicbirds were present near the 
the Seychelles Islands on June 2. 

Sula dactylatra Masked Booby 

Scattered individuals were seen in the southwestern Arabian Sea 
and near the Seychelles Islands in January-February and again in 
late May (see table 10). 

Sula leucogaster Brown Booby 

Four adults were seen near Socotra, one at 14°40' N, 55°25' E, on 
Feb. 1 and three at 11°30' N, 52°53' E, on Feb. 4. 

Fregata ariel Lesser Frigatebird 

I saw this species only twice; three at 07°02 / S, 55°11' E, on Feb. 16, 
and two near the Seychelles Islands on June 2. 

Lobipes lobatus Northern Phalarope 

Ten northern phalaropes were seen near the Indian coast (17°44' N, 
69°11' E) on Jan. 27. 

Catharacta skua Skua 

A single individual was seen five miles west of Mauritius on Mar. 2. 
Three skuas were observed at St. Paul Island on Apr. 7. 

Larusfuscus Lesser Black-backed Gull 

Several were seen near the Gulf of Aden, one on Feb. 2 and five on 
Feb. 3. 

Larus hemprichii Aden Gull 

Two, possibly three, individuals were seen in the Gulf of Aden on 
Feb. 1-2. 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 17 

Larus brunneiceplutlus Indian Black-headed Gull 

A flock of 12 was passed about 75 miles east southeast of Bombay on 
Jan. 27. 

Sterna vittata tristanensis Murphy Antarctic Tern 

This tern was common near both St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands, 
where flocks of up to 100 individuals were seen just offshore. 

Thirteen specimens in molt and nonbreeding condition were col- 
lected, one at St. Paul Island on Apr. 7 and the rest at Amsterdam 
Island on Apr. 8. In addition to winter-plumaged adults, they 
include several heavily barred immatures. Measurements of the 
skins from Amsterdam Island are included in table 12. Although the 
wings of this series are small (cf. Murphy, 1938), the culmen and 
tarsus lengths seem sufficient to separate this race from the smaller 
S. v. vittata, which breeds on Kerguelen. Of 10 stomachs examined, 
four contained tiny cephalopods, four contained fish, one had both 
fish and cephalopods, and one contained the remains of small Crustacea. 

Sterna repressa White-cheeked Tern 

Common at sea between Bombay and Karachi on May 18. 

Sterna anaethctus Bridled Tern 

Seen at sea only in the vicinity of the Seychelles Islands on June 2. 

Sterna fuscata Sooty Tern 

Although sooty terns were absent from the Arabian Sea south to the 
Seychelles in January and February, large flocks were seen 200-300 
miles east of the Somalian coast of East Africa (between 06°46' N, 
55°00' E, and 06°05' S, 42°11' E) and east to the Seychelles Islands 
in late May (see table 11). Sooty terns were common near Mauritius 
in February and March, and scattered individuals and flocks were 
seen near the Chagos and Maldive Islands in late April. 

Thalasseus bergii Crested Tern 

Five Thalasseus terns were seen at 06°05 / S, 42°11' E, on May 31 
and a single T. bergii was observed near the Seychelles on June 2. 

Anous stolidus Common Noddy 

Common noddies were numerous near both the Seychelles Islands and 
Mauritius, but only two individuals were seen at sea, one at 00°27' S, 
54°57' E, on Feb. 10 and the other at 22°51' S, 54°58 / E (southwest 
of Reunion), on Mar. 4. 

Gygis alba Fairy Tern 

Fairy terns were seen close to the Seychelles Islands in both February 
and June. 

246-002—67 3 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

In early February between 08°00' N and 00°49' S on the 55° E 
transect, a species of tern was noted flying around the Anton Bruun 
at night (see table 13). Using spot lights, we obtained good observa- 
tions, discerning an a/Z-white tern with a slightly forked tail that 
left, in my opinion, little doubt as to the identity. The birds were 
quite vocal, emitting short, low notes, especially when two were 
together. The presence of fairy terns so far out to sea and only at 
night (none were seen during the daytime watches) is surprising, for 
the nearest possible source of these birds, the Seychelles Islands, was 
well over 600 miles to the south and Gygis is usually known as a 
coastal or inshore species, not a pelagic one (Murphy, 1936). One 
wonders, however, whether scattered individuals were drawn to and 
concentrated around the ship at night, thereby becoming conspicuous, 
and also whether the species might not be as highly nocturnal as the 
huge eyes and pure white plumage suggest. These observations 
should remain hypothetical pending future confirmation. 

Discussion 

The distribution of seabird species and numbers is related to 
oceanographic factors that produce a suitable variety and abundance 
of food items (Jespersen, 1929; Hutchinson, 1950; Murphy, 1936). 
Although the data presented in this paper are insufficient in them- 
selves, it is hoped that the total information gathered during the 
International Indian Ocean Expedition eventually will provide the 
basis for a detailed analysis of the factors underlying seabird distri- 
butional patterns in the Indian Ocean. A noteworthy step in this 
direction has been made recently by Bailey (1966) for the important 
region of upwelling off the southern Arabian coast. The rest of 
the Indian Ocean, however, awaits comparable attention. 

One of the conclusions that is readily apparent from the data 
presented in this paper is the paucity of seabirds in the major part of 
the western Indian Ocean. In this respect, the Indian Ocean is 
similar to other tropical oceans, which are characterized by the 
relative infertility of their waters and a consequent scarcity of sea- 
birds, except in the vicinity of land, either islands or continental 
coasts, and regions of local enrichment. It was only in the western 
Arabian Sea and below the subtropical convergence, regions where 
upwelling, cooler surface temperatures or other factors permit nutrient 
replenishment and continued productivity, and near the Seychelles 
and Mascarene Islands, which provide land necessary for breeding 
and roosting, that seabirds were at all numerous. But even the 
maximum numbers (200+ /hour) I recorded in these regions were 
certainly small compared to what is possible in other parts of the 
world ocean (see Murphy, 1914; Oordt and Kruijt, 1955), especially 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 19 

at higher latitudes. The numbers of seabirds recorded by Bailey 
(1966) off Arabia were also considerably greater than my counts 
and serve to emphasize the highly localized nature of seabird distri- 
bution in the Indian Ocean. 

The composition of seabird communities often changes markedly 
during a year because of movements of seabirds that correspond to 
changes in the availability of food items and/or that are a part of 
extensive postbreeding migrations. In the Indian Ocean the most 
striking seasonal differences are those found in the western Arabian Sea 
(see Bailey, 1966; Bourne, 1960, 1963; Jouanin, 1957). In this area 
there is, first of all, a resident seabird community, which includes 
no less than eight endemic forms (four species and four subspecies). 
The majority of its species occur primarily in the inshore waters 
close to breeding and/or roosting stations (Bailey, 1966) with the 
result that only a few, e.g., Bulweria fallax and Phaethon aethereus, 
are encountered regularly as far out to sea as were the stations included 
in this report. The presence of dark petrels, all apparently B. fallax, 
at our stations in the Arabian Sea in January and February east 
as far as 69°11' E suggests that Jouanin's petrel disperses widely at sea 
from its yet undiscovered breeding stations near the Arabian coast, 
at least during the nonbreeding season. Unfortunately, the southern 
limits of these movements remain uncertain because of the difficulty 
of separating it from other dark petrels. All my records were made 
north of the equator (actually 00°31' S), but there is a specimen from 
Kenya (Jouanin, 1957), and Bailey (in prep.) saw dark petrels "in- 
separable from B. fallax south to 15° S." 

In May, coinciding with the onset of the monsoon winds, with the 
consequent offshore upwelling, and with increased productivity, the 
resident species of the western Arabian Sea are subjected to an influx 
of large numbers of several migrant species from the subantarctic 
Indian Ocean. Included in this arriving assemblage are three species 
of storm petrels: Oceanites oceanicus and Fregetta tropica from 
Kerguelen and the Crozet Islands (Bourne, 1960), and Pelagodroma 
marina from breeding stations off southwest Australia (Morzer Bruyns 
and Voous, 1964). All of my observations are in accord with the 
known arrival times and distribution of these species in the northern 
Indian Ocean, though actual records of Wilson's petrels near the 
African coast may be noteworthy. 

Arriving from the same area as Pelagodroma is the large pale-footed 
shearwater, P affirms carneipes. Unfortunately, the majority of 
shearwaters I saw near the Maldive Islands in April did not come close 
enough to permit positive identification; however, most appeared too 
large, with too heavy a flight to be P. pacificus and consequently were 
considered to be P. carneipes. A light bill could be discerned on a 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

few individuals. Although large numbers do not appear until late 
May, pale-footed shearwaters are known to arrive in the Arabian Sea 
as early as mid-April (see Bailey, 1966) and, hence, records near the 
Maldives would not be unexpected at this time. 

The status of the other dark shearwater in the Arabian Sea, the 
wedge-tailed shearwater, is particularly hazy because of the ease of 
confusion with Bulweria fallax. For years it was considered to be 
the common dark petrel in the western Arabian Sea (Alexander, 1931 ; 
Phillips, 1954) until these records were reexamined (Jouanin, 1957) 
in light of the discovery of B. fallax, which is very similar in appear- 
ance. Although a few specimens have been taken in the Arabian 
Sea, wedge-tailed shearwaters certainly appear to be rare there, for 
Bailey (1966) recorded none positively north of 10° N and I saw but 
one. It seems necessary, therefore, to establish just how common 
this species actually is in order to determine whether only occasional 
stragglers are involved or whether there are enough to justify postu- 
lations of either a local population or a migratory movement from 
another part of the Indian Ocean. The latter possibilities have been 
suggested (Bourne, 1960), and the idea of a local undiscovered breed- 
ing population seems especially attractive in view of several recent 
discoveries of small breeding populations of this species on tiny rock 
offshore islets, for example near Madagascar (Appert, 1965), Reunion 
(Jouanin, pers. comm.) and Roderigues (Vinson, 1965). In this 
connection also, the Maldive Islands may harbor a population of 
wedge-tailed shearwaters, thereby accounting for some of the shear- 
waters seen at sea in that area. 

Just now being established is the regular occurrence in the equa- 
torial regions of the Indian Ocean of two storm petrels from the Pacific, 
Oceanodroma monorhis and 0. matsudairae. Although their num- 
bers seem to be greatest during the northern summer (Bailey, in 
prep.), my observations indicate that at least small numbers are 
present throughout the year. One cannot help but wonder if there 
are also undiscovered breeding populations of storm petrels in the 
Indian Ocean, and again the Maldive or perhaps the Chagos Islands 
seem likely locations. In addition to Oceanodroma species, Bulweria 
bulweria, which has been recorded in the Indian Ocean (Phillips, 
1959; Bourne, 1960; Jouanin, 1957), might also be sought. 

Perhaps the least understood seasonal change in the western Indian 
Ocean are the movements of the sooty terns that breed in the 
Seychelles and Amirante Islands in huge numbers from May to 
October and that then disappear for the remainder of the year. 
Whether they move to other island groups, such as the Aldabras, 
Chagos, or perhaps Cargados Carajos Shoals, or spend these six 
months at sea is unknown. In February I saw no sooty terns north 



SEABIRDS — GILL 



21 




m s te rd a m I. 
t. Paul I. 



Figure 2. — Regions of observed seabird abundance in the western Indian Ocean. 

of the Mascarene Islands on our 55° E transect, whereas in May 
large flocks were present at 06°46' N on this same longitude, as well 
as the seas south to the Seychelles and southwest to the African coast. 
Other observers (e.g., Bailey, in prep.) report a similar seasonality in 
their observations of sooty terns in this region. 

The Mascarene region is of particular interest because it is the only 
place in the tropical or subtropical Indian Ocean where breeding 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

petrels of the genus Pterodroma are found. No less than three species 
of Pterodroma breed (or did) in the Mascarenes: the Trinidad petrel 
(P. arminjoniana) on Round Island off the north coast of Mauritius; 
Barau's petrel (P. baraui) and the little known Mascarene petrel 
(P. aterrima), presumably on Reunion. This latter species is 
apparently extinct as it has not been seen alive in this century (Bourne, 
1965) and was not found during an intensive search for petrels on 
Reunion in 1964 (Jouanin and Gill, MS). Barau's petrel is the most 
recently described species of petrel (1964), despite its being a fairly 
common species on Reunion; however, it is not known whether this 
petrel remains near Reunion throughout the year or disperses to sea in 
some direction during the nonbreeding season (austral winter). It 
does appear to confine its pelagic activities during the breeding season 
to the south and west of Reunion Island, as none were seen to the 
north or immediately to the east by either Roger Bailey or myself. 
Since the tropical convergence in the western Indian Ocean is located 
at approximately the same latitude as the Mascarene Islands (Baker, 
1965), these observations suggest that Barau's petrel feeds primarily 
in subtropical waters. Similarly, the location of the only other 
breeding population of Pterodroma a. arminjoniana (on Trinidad 
Island in the South Atlantic) at almost precisely the same latitude 
as the Mascarene population might imply a dependence on the 
proximity of subtropical waters, but unfortunately this species 
rarely has been noted at sea. 

Oceanographically, the position of the subtropical convergence, 
where cooler subantarctic waters sink below the warm water mass 
of the central (tropical) ocean, delimits the southern boundary of 
the Indian Ocean (Sverdrup, Johnson and Fleming, 1942). This is 
a region rather than a well-marked line and generally is considered 
to lie at about 40° S. Ornithologically it is of interest because it 
seems to coincide with the northern limits of the distributions of 
a variety of procellariiform species. Our northernmost records of 
certain southern petrels, such as the white-chinned petrel and soft- 
plumaged petrel, were at 31° S; nevertheless, these species were found 
primarily south of 34° S as were the majority of others including the 
albatrosses. On a transect in early July, comparable to our 55° E 
transect, Rand (1962) also encountered the first southern petrels 
at about 30° S and noted a marked increase just below 35° S; how- 
ever, the numbers of individuals and the variety of species he recorded 
were slightly greater than ours and, in addition, he found them as 
far north as 26° S at stations closer to the African coast. The surface 
water temperatures recorded by Rand averaged several degrees 
lower than our measurements. 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 23 

Although many of the species encountered by Rand below 30° S 
were the same as we found, there were several important differences. 
Conspicuous by their absence on our March-April cruise were Cape 
pigeons (Daption capense) which were the "most abundant of small 
petrels" on his cruise in June-July. Also, on a previous cruise of 
the Anton Bruun through these latitudes in September (,1963) Cape 
pigeons were common (P. Willis, pers. comm.). On the other hand, 
Rand saw few white-chinned petrels (Procellaria aequinoctialis) except 
near the African coast, whereas in March and April this was a pre- 
dominant species at our southern stations. Similarly, the soft- 
plumaged petrel {Pterodroma mollis), which was a common species 
at our stations, was not even recorded by Rand. It is unfortunate 
that so few detailed reports of seabird species and numbers are 
available for this region as there seem to be marked seasonal fluctua- 
tions in the composition, distribution, and perhaps size of its seabird 
community. Some of these may be related only to reduced pelagic 
activity during the breeding season but others may be correlated 
with seasonal changes in productivity. Also interesting would be an 
elucidation of the subtropical convergence's role in limiting seabird 
distribution. 



Literature Cited 
Alexander, H. G. 

1931. Shearwaters in the Arabian Sea. Ibis, ser. 13, vol. 1, pp. 579-581. 
Alexander, W. B. 

1954. Birds of the ocean. New York, 306 pp., 140 pis. 
Appert, O. 

1965. DScouverte de la nidification de Puffinus pacificus (Gmelin) pres de 
la cote ouest de Madagascar. In L'Oiseau et R.F.O., vol. 35, 
pp. 135-139. 
Bailey, R. S. 

1964. The International Indian Ocean Expedition, Interim Report. Ibis, 

vol. 106, pp. 140-141. 

1965. Cruise of the R.R.S. Discovery in the Indian Ocean. Sea Swallow, 

vol. 17, pp. 52-56. 

1966. The seabirds of the southeast coast of Arabia. Ibis, vol. 108, pp. 

224-264. 
Baker, R. 

1965. The latitudinal distribution of Ewphausia sp. in the surface waters of 

the Indian Ocean. In Discovery Reports, vol. 33, pp. 309-334. 
Bourne, W. R. P. 

1959. A new little shearwater from the Tubaui Islands: Puffinus assimilis 

myrtae subsp. nov. Emu, vol. 59, pp. 212-214. 

1960. The petrels of the Indian Ocean. Sea Swallow, vol. 13, pp. 26-39. 
1963. A review of oceanic studies of the biology of seabirds. Proc. 13th 

Intern. Ornith. Congr. (1962), pp. 831-854. 
1965. The missing petrels. Bull. British Ornith. Club, vol. 85, no. 6, 
pp. 97-105. 
Hutchinson, G. E. 

1950. The biogeochemistry of vertebrate excretion. Bull. American Mus. 
Nat. Hist., vol. 96, pp. 1-554. 
Jeannel, R. 

1941. Au Seuil de L'Antarctique — Croisiere du "Bougainville" aux lies des 
Manchots et des Elephants de Mer. Publ. Mus. Nat. Hist. 
Natur., no. 5, pp. 1-236. 
Jespersen, P. 

1929. On the frequency of birds over the high Atlantic Ocean. Proc. 6th 
Intern. Ornith. Congr. Copenhagen 1926, pp. 163-172. 
Jouanin, C. 

1953. Le material ornithologique de la mission "Passage de Venus sur le 

soldi" (1874), station de l'ile Saint Paul. Bull. Mus. Natur. Hist. 

Nat., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 529-540. 

1955. Une nouvelle espece de Procellariidae. Oiseau, vol. 25, pp. 155-161. 

1957. Le Procellarides melaniques signales en mer d'Oman. Oiseau, vol. 

27, pp. 12-27. 
1963. Un petrel nouveau de la Reunion, Bulweria baraui. Bull. Mus. 
Natur. Hist. Nat., vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 593-597. 
Jouanin, C, and Paulian, P. 

1960. Recherches sur les ossements d'oiseaux provenant de Pile Nouvelle 
Amsterdam (Ocean Indien). Proc. 12th Intern. Ornith. Congr. 
(1958), pp. 368-372. 
24 



no. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 25 

Morzer Bruyns, W. F. J., and Voous, K. H. 

1964. Notes on Seabirds, 7: White-faced storm petrels (Pelagodroma marina) 

in the Indian Ocean. Ardea, vol. 52, pp. 223-224. 
Murphy, R. C. 

1914. Observations on birds of the South Atlantic. Auk, vol. 31, pp. 

439-457. 
1927. On certain forms of Puffinus assimilis and its allies. American Mus. 

Novit., no. 276. 
1936. Oceanic birds of South America (1951 Reissue). New York, 2 vols., 

1245 pp. 
1938. Birds collected during the Whitney South Sea Expedition: xxxvn: 

On panantarctic terns. American Mus. Novit., no. 977. 
1952. The Manx shearwater, Puffinus puffinus, as a species of world-wide 

distribution. American Mus. Novit., no. 1586. 
Murphy, R. C, and Irving, S. 

1951. A review of the frigate-petrels (Pelagodroma) . American Mus. Novit., 

no. 1506. 
Murphy, R. C, and Pennoyer, J. M. 

1952. Larger petrels of the genus Pterodroma. American Mus. Novit., no. 

1580. 
Oordt, G. J. van, and Kruijt, J. P. 

1955. Birds observed on a voyage in the South Atlantic and southern oceans 
in 1951-1952. Ardea, vol. 42, pp. 245-280. 
Palmer, R. S. (ed.) 

1962. Handbook of North American birds. New Haven, 567 pp. 
Peters, J. L. 

1931. Check-list of birds of the world. Cambridge, vol. 1, 345 pp. 
1934. Check-list of birds of the world. Cambridge, vol. 2, 401 pp. 
Phillips, W. W. A. 

1954. Petrels, shearwaters and other oceanic birds in the north Indian 

Ocean. Journ. Bombay Nat. Hist. Soc, vol. 52, pp. 334-348. 
1959. Note on the occurrence of Bulwer's Petrel (Bulweria bulwerii) in the 
Indian Ocean. Bull. British Ornith. Club, vol. 79, pp. 100-101. 

POCKLINGTON, R. 

1965. A summary of birds seen over the western Indian Ocean, August- 

November 1963. Ibis, vol. 107, pp. 385-386. 
Pocklington, R., and Risebrough, R. 

1964. Bird log data — Atlantis II, Cruise 8, International Indian Ocean 

Expedition. Woods Hole Oceanogr. Inst. Ref. 64-31. 
Rand, R. W. 

1962. Seabirds south of Madagascar. Ostrich, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 48-51. 

1963. Seabirds in the southern Indian Ocean. Ostrich, vol. 34, pp. 121-128. 
Sverdrup, H. U., Johnson, M. W., and Fleming, R. H. 

1942. The oceans, their physics, chemistry, and general biology. New 
York: Prentice Hall, 1087 pp. 
Vinson, J. 

1965. Quelques remarques sur Pile Rodrique et sur sa faune terrestre. 

Proc. Roy. Soc. Arts Sci. Mauritius, vol. 2, pt. 3, pp. 263-277. 
Watson, G. E.; Zusi, R. L.; and Storer, R. W. 

1963. Preliminary field guide to the birds of the Indian Ocean. Washing- 
ton, D.C.: Smithsonian Inst., 214 pp. 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Table 1. — Seabird numbers recorded during standardized watch periods (station = 
IIOE Oceanographic Station, Anton Bruun; A=Procellariiformes; B — Pelecan- 
iformes; C=Charadriiformes) 









Water 










Birds/ 


Date 


Locality 


Sta. No. 


temp. 
(°C) 


Time 


A 


B 


C 


Hr. 


Jan. 27 


17°44' N, 69°11' E 




. 


0900-1100 


6 


4 


22 


16 


" 28 


17 12 N, 67 00 E 


- 


- 


0755-1045 


6 


2 





2.5 


" 29 


16 13 N, 63 29 E 


282 


25.2 


0830-1130 


2 


1 





1 


" 30 


15 42 N, 60 52 E 


283 


25.1 


0830-1100 


2 


2 





1.6 


" 31 


15 22 N, 58 12 E 


284 


23.9 


0830-1130 


3 


1 





1.3 


" 31 


15 18 N, 57 59 E 


- 


- 


1530-1630 


12 


1 





13 


Feb. 1 


14 22 N, 55 18 E 


285 


24.0 


0800-1100 


4 








1.3 


" 2 


13 50 N, 52 69 E 


286 


24.9 


0815-1115 


4 


3 


1 


2.6 


3 


13 11 N, 50 22 E 


287 


24.8 


0805-1105 








6 


2 


3 


13 08 N, 50 36 E 


- 


- 


1600-1700 


9 








9 


4 


11 30 N, 52 53 E 


- 


- 


0835-1135 


80+ 


3 





27 


4 


11 01 N, 53 30 E 


- 


- 


1345-1645 


7 





16 


7.6 


5 


09 28 N, 54 52 E 


288 


26.0 


0820-1120 


3 








1 


6 


07 10 N, 55 05 E 


289 


26.5 


0815-1045 


4 








1.3 


6 


06 52 N, 55 06 E 


- 


- 


1730-1830 


2 








2 


7 


05 02 N, 55 01 E 


290 


26.5 


OSOO-1100 














8 


02 31 N, 55 04 E 


291 


27.6 


0810-1110 














8 


02 15 N, 54 57 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 


1 








1 


9 


01 03 N, 54 56 E 


292 


28.0 


0820-1120 


1 








0.3 


9 


00 58 N, 54 53 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 


2 








2 


" 10 


00 31 S, 54 56 E 


293 


28.2 


0820-1120 


6 





1 


2.3 


" in 


00 49 S, 54 49 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 


2 








2 


" 11 


02 51 S, 54 58 E 


294 


28.3 


0830-1130 


5 








1.6 


" 11 


03 20 S, 55 13 E 


- 


- 


1725-1825 


6 





6 


12 


" 15 


Seychelles, east coast of 
Mahe 


- 


" 


1730-1830 


11 





2 


13 


" 16 


06 28 S, 65 12 E 


295 


29.2 


0810-1110 


1 








0.3 


" 17 


08 42 S, 55 07 E 


296 


28.4 


0800 -1120 


2 


2 





1.3 


" 17 


09 02 S, 55 13 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 














" 18 


10 47 S, 55 15 E 


297 


28.9 


0800-1100 


3 








1 


" 19 


12 33 S, 54 33 E 


298 


28.4 


0840-1140 


1 


1 





0.6 


" 19 


13 04 S, 54 37 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 














" 20 


14 57 S, 64 43 E 


299 


27.6 


0810-1050 





1 





0.3 


" 20 


15 34 S, 54 50 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 














" 21 


17 14 S, 54 38 E 


300 


28.0 


0815-1115 


- 


1 





0.3 


" 22 


Mauritius (50 to 20 miles 
west) 


- 


- 


0900-1130 


40 


5 


170 


86 


Mar. 2 


Mauritius (0 to 30 miles 
west) 


- 


~ 


1430-1630 


12 


2 


15 


14.5 


3 


19 57 S, 64 58 E 


301 


26.8 


0810-1110 


4 


5 


4 


4.3 


3 


20 34 S, 54 58 E 


- 


- 


1745-1830 


6 


2 





10.6 


4 


23 07 S, 54 50 E 


302 


25.8 


0805-1105 


9 





1 


3.3 


4 


24 07 S, 54 55 E 


- 


- 


1730-1830 


2 








2 


6 


26 00 S, 54 52 E 


303 


25.4 


0830-1130 


1 








0.3 


5 


26 25 S, 55 01 E 


- 


- 


1730-1830 


1 








1 


6 


28 22 S, 55 02 E 


304 


24.8 


0815-1115 














6 


28 58 S, 55 08 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 














7 


30 50 S, 55 09 E 


305 


22.4 


0820-1120 


1 








0.3 


7 


31 25 S, 54 59 E 


- 


- 


1720-1820 














8 


33 13 S, 55 10 E 


306 


21.0 


0805-1125 


6? 








2 


8 


33 62 S, 55 05 E 


- 


- 


1730-1845 


4 








3.2 


9 


35 42 S, 55 15 E 


307 


19.7 


0800-1100 


11 








3.6 


9 


35 00 S, 55 16 E 


- 


- 


1725-1825 


5 








6 


" 12 


27 02 S, 65 49 E 


- 


- 


1730-1830 


1 








1 


" 13 


24 10 S, 56 24 E 


- 


- 


0825-1025 


1 








0.6 



SEABIRDS — GILL 
Table 1. — Continued 



27 









Water 










Birds/ 


Date 


Locality 


Sta. No. 


temp. 
(°C) 


Time 


A 


B 


c 


Hr. 


Mar. 14 


21°00' S, 57°00' E 






0830-1130 


4 


1 


145 


50 


" 14 


20 40 S, 57 07 E 


- 


- 


1220-1420 


300 


1 


100 


200 


" 29 


21 43 S, 57 43 E 


- 


- 


0825-0925 








1 


1 


" 29 


22 33 S, 58 22 E 


- 


- 


1420-1620 


3 





5 


4 


" 30 


24 57 S, 60 09 E 


- 


- 


0835-1035 














" 31 


28 44 S, 63 36 E 


- 


- 


1415-1615 














Apr. 1 


31 29 S, 65 58 E 


- 


- 


0815-1115 














1 


32 20 S, 66 47 E 


- 


- 


1545-1645 














" 2 


34 24 S, 69 03 E 


- 


20-19. 2 


0830-1130 


5 








1.6 


" 2 


34 53 S, 69 37 E 


- 


- 


1345-1445 


1 








1 


3 


37 55 S, 72 23 E 


- 


- 


0800-1100 


29+ 








10 


" 3 


38 01 S, 73 19 E 


- 


- 


1400-1700 


25 








8.3 


4 


40 04 S, 75 00 E 


308 


15.0 


0600-0930 


92 








23.4 


" 5 


42 23 S, 74 54 E 


309 


12.1 


0830-1430 


37 








6 


6 


43 31 S, 75 27 E 


- 


- 


0700-1600 


126 








14 


7 


39 48 S, 77 20 E 


- 


- 


0845-1100 


32 








14 


7 


St. Paul Island (within 
30 miles) 


309C 


- 


1200-1500 


300+ 





53 + 


120 


8 


Amsterdam Island 
(offshore) 


309E 


- 


all day 


120 





150 


- 


9 


37 01 S, 75 19 E 


310 


17.0 


0630-0930 


21 








7 


" 10 


34 31 S, 74 47 E 


311 


19.3 


0630-0930 


15 








5 


" 11 


31 26 S, 74 57 E 


312 


22.6 


0800-1000 


2 








1 


" 12 


29 00 S, 74 51 E 


313 


22.5 


0630-0930 


1 








0.3 


" 13 


26 27 S, 75 02 E 


314 


24.5 


0630-0730 














" 14 


24 20 S, 74 52 E 


315 


24.7 


0800-1000 














" 15 


21 58 S, 74 55 E 


316 


26.0 


0830-1030 








1 


0.5 


" 16 


19 44 S, 75 20 E 


317 


27.0 


0800-1000 














" 17 


16 43 S, 74 53 E 


318 


28.1 


0825-1025 





1 





0.5 


" 18 


14 10 S, 74 55 E 


319 


28.3 


0830-1030 


1? 








0.5 


" 19 


11 47 S, 74 42 E 


320 


28.8 


0820-1020 














" 20 


09 21 S, 75 08 E 


321 


29.3 


0810-1010 














" 21 


06 50 S, 75 02 E 


322 


29.2 


0820-1020 














" 22 


04 11 S, 75 00 E 


323 


29.1 


0820-1020 


1 








0.5 


" 24-27 


Maldive Islands (Addu 
Atoll) 


- 


- 


no standard- 
ized watch 


- 


- 


- 


- 


" 28-30 


Maldives to Cochin, 
India 


325-327 




no stand- 
ardized 
watches 










May 18 


Bombay to Karachi 


- 


- 


0900-1300 


65 





200+ 


66 


" 20 


22 59 N, 65 42 E 


- 


- 


0905-1105 


2 








1 


" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


- 


- 


0915-1245 


28 


4 





91 










1400-1545 


11 


1 





6.8 


" 22 


12 05 N, 58 58 E 


- 


- 


0910-1130 


26 








11.3 










1410-1530 


5 








3.8 


" 23 


06 46 N, 55 00 E 


- 


- 


0845-0945 


1 








1 










1400-1600 


6 + 





8+ 


7 


" 24 


02 02 N, 51 11 E 


- 


- 


0925-1225 


9 


3 


275 


96 


" 25 


01 42 S, 45 46 E 


- 


- 


0910-1110 


10 





600 


255 


" 26 


Mombasa— 32 miles 
northeast 


- 


- 


0910-1010 


1 








1 


" 31 


06 05 S, 42 11 E 


- 


- 


0915-1215 


2 





76 


26 


June 1 


05 23 S, 48 08 E 


- 


- 


0915-1215 


2 


1 


360+ 


120 


" 2 


04 33 S, 54 17 E 
(Seychelles lis.) 






0910-1210 


11 


2 


226 


80 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Table 2. — Observations of albatrosses (Diomedeidae) 









Dio- 


Dio- 


Diomedea 


Dio- 


Phoebe- 


Date 


Location 


Time 


meita 


medea 


chloro- 


medea 


tria 








exulans 


melano- 
phris 


rhynchos 


cauta 


fusca 


Mar. 8 


33°52'S,55°05'E 


1730-1845 


1 














" 9 


35 42 S,55 15 E 


0800-1100 


1 














Apr. 3 


37 55 S,72 23 E 


0800-1100 


12 





2 


1 





" 3 


38 01 S,73 19 E 


1400-1700 


6 





2 








" 4 


40 04 S,75 00 E 


all day 


20 


4-5 





2-3 


10 


" 5 


42 23 S,74 54 E 


all day 


6 


1 








2-3 


" 6 


43 31 S,75 27 E 


all day 


25 


2-3 





2-3 


4-5 


" 7 


38 48 S,77 20 E 


0845-1100 


17 





1 


2 


3 


" 7 


St. Paul Island 
(within 30 miles) 


1200-1500 


12 











10 


" 8 


Amsterdam Island 
(off-shore) 


all day 


15 





4-5 





25-30 


" 9 


37 01 S,75 19 E 


all day 


6 


1 





1 


1 


" 10 


34 31 S,74 47 E 


0630-0930 


1 





4 

(repeats) 





1 





Table 3. — Observations of subantarctic petrels (Procellaridae) 










Procel- 


Adamas- 


Ptcrodro- 


Ptero- 


Pa- 


Date 


Location 


Time 


larla 


tOT 


ma ma- 


droma 


chyptila 








aequi- 


cinereus 


cr opt era 


mollis 


species 








noctialia 










Mar. 7 


30°50' S, 55°09' E 


0820-1120 


1 














" 8 


33 13 S, 55 05 E 


0805-1125 


8 
















33 52 S, 55 05 E 


1730-1845 


2 














" 9 


35 42 S, 55 15 E 


0S00-1100 


11 








8 





" 12 


27 02 S, 55 49 E 


0930 








2? 








Apr. 2 


34 24 S, 69 03 E 


0830-1130 


1? 














" 3 


37 55 S, 72 23 E 


0800-1100 


10 








5 







38 01 S, 73 19 E 


1400-1700 


8 








4 





" 4 


40 04 S, 75 00 E 


all day 


30 





1 


15 


5-6 


" 5 


42 23 S, 74 54 E 


all day 


10 





1-2 


3-4 


20 


" 6 


43 31 S, 75 27 E 


all day 


20 


1-2 


6 


30 


30 


" 7 


38 48 S, 77 20 E 


0845-1100 


5 


1 


3 


2 


7 


ii 7 


St. Paul Island 
(0-30 miles) 


1200-1500 


10 











10 


" 8 


Amsterdam Island 
(offshore) 


all day 


40 





4-5 


4 


1 


" 9 


37 01 S, 75 19 E 


all day 


7 








3-4 





" 10 


34 31 S, 74 47 E 


0630-0930 


5 





2? 


1 





" 11 


31 26 S, 74 57 E 


0800-1000 











2 





11 12 


29 00 S, 74 51 E 


0630-0930 











1? 






SEABIRDS — GILL 
Table 4. — Observations of Puffinus carneipes 



29 



Date 


Location 


Time 


Number 






1415 




Apr. 19 


11°47' S, 74°42' E 


0820-1020 


1 


" 22 


04 11 S, 75 00 E 


1200, 1800 


1? 


" 23 


02 14 S, 75 14 E 


0630-0730 


1,1 


" 24 


Maldive Islands (Addu Atoll, 
Gan Is.) 




2 


" 28 


02 01 N, 75 13 E 


1600 


1 (reported) 


" 29 


04 49 N, 74 55 E 


1400 


2 


" 30 


06 51 N, 75 02 E 


1030 


4 


May 3 


14 48 N, 73 41 E 


1200 


8 (reported) 


" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


0915-1245 


3 






1400-1545 


1 





Table 5. — Observations of tropical shearwaters (Puffinus) 




Date 


Location 


Time 


pacificus 


Iherminieri 


Jan. 29 


16°13' N, 63°29' E 


0830-1130 


2? 





Feb. 1 


14 22 N, 55 18 E 


0800-1100 





4 




14 09 N, 54 38 E 


1830 





1 


" 2 


13 50 N, 52 59 E 


0815-1115 





3 




13 51 N, 52 45 E 


1600-1700 





7 


" 3 


12 55 N, 50 54 E 


1830 





1 


4 


11 30 N, 52 53 E 


0835-1135 





3 




11 01 N, 53 30 E 


1345-1645 





1 


" 11 


02 51 S, 54 58 E 


0830-1130 





1 




03 22 S, 55 13 E 


1725-1825 


5 







03 30 S, 55 19 E 


2000 





12 


" 15 


Seychelles Islands (east coast 
of Mahe) 


1700-1800 





11 


" 16 


06 28 S, 55 12 E 


0810-1110 


1 





" 18 


10 47 S, 55 15 E 


0800-1100 


2 





" 22 


Mauritius — 50 to 20 miles west 


0900-1130 


38 


1 


Mar. 2 


Mauritius — to 30 miles west 


1430-1630 


21 


1 


" 3 


19 57 S, 54 58 E 


0810-1110 





1 




20 34 S, 54 58 E 


1745-1830 


1 


3 


" 14 


20 40 S, 57 07 E 


0830 





2 




Mauritius — 20 miles south 


1220-1420 


300 







southeast 








Apr. 20 


09 00 S, 75 00 E 


1500 


40? 





May 18 


Bombay to Karachi 


1130 





15 


" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


0915-1245 


1 





" 22 


12 05 N, 58 58 E 


1410-1530 





1 


" 24 


02 02 N, 51 11 E 


0925-1225 


8? 





June 2 


04 33 S, 54 17 E 


0910-1210 


2 


8 



30 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Table 6. — Observations of Pterodroma baraui 



Date 



Location 



Time 



Mar. 3 
" 4 

" 5 

" 12 
" 13 



19°57' S, 54°58' E 

20 35 S, 54 58 E 

23 07 S, 54 50 E 

24 07 S, 54 55 E 
26 00 S, 54 52 E 

26 25 S, 55 01 E 

27 02 S, 55 49 E 
23 41 S, 56 23 E 



0810-111 
1745-1830 
0805-1105 
1650, 1730-1830 
0830-1130 
1730-1830 
1730-1830 
1230-1400 





Table 7. — Observations of Bulweria fallax 




Date 


Location 


Time 


Number 


Jan. 27 


17°44' N, 69°11' E 


0900-1100 


6 


" 28 


17 12 N, 67 00 E 


0755-1045 


*6 


" 30 


15 42 N, 60 52 E 


0830-1130 


2 


" 31 


15 22 N, 58 12 E 


0830-1130 


3 




15 18 N, 57 59 E 


1530-1630 


*12 


Feb. 1 


14 08 N, 54 34 E 


1830 


1 


" 2 


13 50 N, 52 59 E 


0815-1115 


1 




13 51 N, 52 45 E 


1600-1700 


2 


« 4 


11 30 N, 52 53 E 


0835-1135 


*53 + 




11 01 N, 53 30 E 


1345-1645 


*7 


" 5 


09 28 N, 54 52 E 


0820-1120 


2 


" 6 


07 10 N, 55 05 E 


0815-0145 


4 




06 52 N, 55 06 E 


1730-1830 


*2 


" 8 


02 15 N, 54 57 E 


1720-1820 


1 


" 9 


00 58 N, 54 53 E 


1720-1820 


1 


" 10 


00 31 S, 54 56 E 


0820-1120 


4 


May 20 


22 59 N, 65 42 E 


0905-1105 


2 


" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


0915-1245 


*15 






1400-1545 


*10 


" 22 


12 05 N, 58 58 E 


0810-1130 


*22 






1430-1530 


2 


" 23 


06 56 N, 55 90 E 


0845-0945 


1 


" 24 


02 02 N, 51 11 E 


0925-1225 


1 


" 25 


01 42 S, 45 46 E 


0910-1110 


1? 



•Positive identification. 



SEABIRDS — GILL 31 

Table 8. — Observations of storm petrels (Hydrobatidae) 









Oceanites 


Pelago- 


FregeUa 


Date 


Location 


Time 


oceanicut 


droma 
marina 


sp. 


Apr. 2 


34°24' S, 69°03' E 


0830-1130 










" 3 


37 55 S, 72 23 E 


0800-1100 












38 01 S, 73 19 E 


1400-1600 







1 


" 5 


42 23 S, 74 54 E 


all day 










" 6 


43 31 S, 75 27 E 


all day 







1 


" 7 


39 48 S, 77 20 E 


0845-1100 








1 




St. Paul Island — within 


1200-1500 








6 




30 miles 










" 8 


Amsterdam Island (off- 
shore) 


all day 








3-4 


May 18 


Bombay, Karachi 


1220 


50 + 








" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


0910-1245 





1 





" 22 


12 05 N, 58 58 E 


0910-1130 





4 









1410-1530 








2 


" 23 


06 46 N, 55 00 E 


1400-1600 








5 


" 25 


01 42 S, 45 46 E 


0910-1110 


6 


1 


2 


" 26 


32 miles northeast of 
Mombasa 


0910-1010 


1 








" 31 


06 05 S, 42 11 E 


0915-1215 





2 





June 1 


05 23 S, 48 08 E 


0915-0215 








1? 


" 2 


04 33 S, 54 17 E 


0910-1210 








1 



Table 9. — Observations of "Oceanodroma matsudairae' 



Date 


Location 


Time 


Number 


Feb. 6 


07°10' N, 55°05' E 


0815-1945 


1 


" 10 


00 49 S, 54 59 E 


1720-1820 


2 


" 11 


02 51 S, 54 58 E 


0830-1030 


4 




03 20 S, 55 13 E 


1725-1825 


1 


" 18 


10 47 S, 55 15 E 


0800-1100 


1 


Mar. 14 


21 00 S, 57 00 E 


0830-1130 


2 


Apr. 19 


11 47 S, 74 43 E 


1415 


1 



32 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Table 10. — Observations of Phaethon aethereus and Sula dactylatra 



Date 


Location 


Time 


Phaethon 
aethereus 


Sula 
dactylatra 


Jan. 27 


17°44' N, 69°11' E 


0900-1100 


4 









1600 


2 





" 28 


17 12 N, 67 00 E 


0755-1045 


2 





" 29 


16 14 N, 63 27 E 


0800-1130 


1 


1 






1500-1715 


2 





" 30 


15 52 N, 60 52 E 


0830-1100 


4 


1 




15 42 N, 60 38 E 


1730 


2 





11 31 


15 22 N, 58 12 E 


0830-1130 


1 







15 18 N, 57 59 E 


1530-1630 





1 


Feb. 2 


13 50 N, 52 59 E 


0815-1115 


1? 


1 


" 4 


11 01 N, 53 30 E 


1725 


1 





" 17 


08 42 S, 55 0? E 


0800-1120 





1 


May 20 


22 59 N, 65 42 E 


1400 





1 


" 21 


17 29 N, 62 31 E 


0915-1245 


4 









1400-1545 


1 





" 24 


02 02 N, 51 11 E 


0925-1225 


3 





June 1 


05 23 S, 48 08 E 


0925-1225 





1 



Table 11. — Observations of Phaethon lepturus and Sterna fuscata 



Date 


Location 


Time 


Phaethon 
lepturus 


Sterna 
fuscata 


Feb. 17 


08°42' S, 55°07' E 


0800-1120 


1 





« 21 


17 14 S, 54 38 E 


0815-1115 


1 





" 22 


Mauritius — 50 to 20 miles 
west 


0900-1130 


5 


170+ 


Mar. 2 


Mauritius — zero to 30 miles 
west 


1430-1630 


3 


13 


" 3 


19 57 S, 54 58 E 


0810-1110 


5 


4 




20 34 S, 54 58 E 


1745-1830 


2 





" 4 


23 07 S, 54 50 E 


0700-1600 


1, 1 (re- 
ported) 





" 13 


24 10 S, 56 24 E 


1030 


1 (reported) 





" 14 


21 00 S, 57 00 E 


0830-1130 


1 


145 




20 40 S, 57 07 E 


1220-1420 


1 


100 


" 29 


21 43 S, 57 43 E 


0825-0925 





1 


Apr. 17 


16 43 S, 74 53 E 


0825-1025 


1 





" 20 


09 21 S, 75 08 E 


1500 





flock on 
horizon 


" 28 


01 34 N, 75 13 E 


1400 


1 





" 29 


03 54 N, 74 56 E 


1100 





2 


" 30 


06 51 N, 75 02 E 


1030 


1 


100 + 


May 23 


06 46 N, 55 00 E 


1400-1600 





8 + 


" 24 


02 02 N, 51 11 E 


0925-1125 





275 + 


" 25 


01 42 S, 45 46 E 


0910-1110 





500 


" 31 


06 05 S, 42 11 E 


0915-1215 





70 


June 1 


05 23 S, 48 08 E 


0915-1215 





360 + 


" 2 


04 33 S, 54 17 E 


0910-1210 





180 



3. 3605 SEABIRDS — GILL 33 

Table 12. — Weights (in grams) and measurements (in mm) of Sterna vittata 



Specimen 


Age/Sex 


Wing 
(arc) 


Tail 


Culmen 


Tarsus 


Weight 


GI-315 


ad. M 


250 


131 


38 


19 


158.7 


GI-316 


imm. F 


243 


125 


35 


20.5 


135.7 


GI-317 


ad. F 


242 


154 


35 


20 


128.0 


GI-318 


ad. F 


236 


153 


35 


19 


124.5 


GI-319 


ad. M 


249 


132 


37.5 


19.5 


152.5 


GI-320 


imm. M 


245 


120 


39.5 


20.5 


152.6 


GI-321 


adF. 


252 


172 


37 


20 


136.5 


GI-322 


ad. M 


246 


160 


39 


20 


146.7 


GI-323 


imm. F 


240 


122 


35 


20 


152.8 


S. v. tristanensis l 




258 


172 


36.5 


19.5 




S. v. vittata l 




267 


139.5 


33 


18 





' Taken from Murphy, 1938, p. 16. 



Table 13. — Observations of Gygis alba 



Date 


Location 


Time 


Number 


Remarks 


Feb. 5-6 


08°00' N, 54°58' E 


2200-0500 


1? 


reported 


6 


06 28 N, 55 04 E 


2100 


1 + 


heard several, 
saw one 


7 


03 54 N, 55 01 E 


2100-2400 


15 + 


heard and seen 


8 


01 59 N, 54 57 E 


2100 


1-2 




" 10 


01 47 S, 54 56 E 


2300 


1 


reported 


" 11 


03 20 S, 55 13 E 


1745 


6 




June 2 


04 33 S, 54 17 E 


0910-1210 


24 





U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE; 1967 



Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 




1967 Number 3606 



Review of the Genus Odontodactylus 
(Crustacea: Stomatopoda) 



By Raymond B. Manning 

Chairman, Department of Invertebrate Zoology 



The genus Odontodactylus was proposed by Bigelow (1893) as a 
subgenus of Gonodactylus, from which the former differed in having 
the dactylus of the raptorial claw armed with teeth. Odontodactylus 
was recognized subsequently as a full genus by Bigelow (1894). 

Representatives of the genus are most abundant in the Indo-West 
Pacific region, but one species is known to occur in the Atlantic. 
Comparison of a series of 0. havanensis from the Atlantic with speci- 
mens of 0. brevirostris from the Indo-West Pacific in connection with 
a revision of the western Atlantic stomatopods suggested that the 
specimens were conspecific. The comparative study further sug- 
gested that some characters previously used for species recognition 
in the genus were unreliable and that other characters might be of 
more value. 

The current study shows that Odontodactylus contains five species, 
of which one described herein is new. 

Methods. — The terminology of the carinae of the telson in Odonto- 
dactylus used herein is shown in figure 1. There are some differences 
between these terms and those proposed by Kemp (1913). The 
latter are somewhat confusing in that the anterior extension of the 
carina of the submedian marginal tooth is called the "intermediate"; 

l 

£46-001— G7 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

the carina of the intermediate tooth is called the "first lateral"; and 
the carina of the lateral tooth is called the "lateral carina." In the 
present study the carinae of the marginal teeth are named for the 
tooth on which they occur. Thus the carina of the submedian tooth 
and its anterior extension are referred to as the "submedian." In 
Odontodactylus there may be one or two carinae between the median 
and each submedian carina; these are referred to as the "accessory 
median carinae." The accessory median carinae are unique to 
certain species of Odontodactylus; species in other genera, including 
Pseudosqidlla Dana and Pseudosquillopsis Serene, have no more than 
one accessory median carina on each side of the median carina. 

Measurements are given in millimeters. Total length (TL) is 
measured on the midline, from the anterior margin of the rostral 
plate to the apices of the submedian teeth of the telson; in the section 
on material, the number appearing after the number of specimens is 
total length. Carapace length (CL) is measured on the midline and 
does not include the rostral plate. The eyes of Odontodactylus are 
subglobular, with the cornea divided longitudinally by a distinct 
band of ocelli. Cornea length is measured along this band, cornea 
width across it. The width of the abdomen is measured at the fifth 
abdominal somite. Telson width is the greatest width ; telson length 
is the distance on the midline from the anterior margin of the telson 
to the bases of the movable apices of the submedian marginal teeth. 
Segments of the uropodal exopod are measured along their midline. 

The corneal index (CI) is obtained by dividing the carapace length 
by the cornea width and multiplying by 100. The abdominal width- 
carapace length index (AWCLI) , an expression of the relative width 
of the body, is obtained by dividing the carapace length by the 
abdomen width and multiplying by 100. The relation of the lengths 
of the two segments of the uropodal exopod is given as the ratio ob- 
tained by dividing the length of the proximal segment by the length 
of the distal. In 0. cultrijer the relative height of the median carina 
of the telson in males and females is expressed as the ratio of the 
height of the median carina to the width of the telson. 

The synonymies given herein include original references as well as 
references published subsequent to the work of Kemp (1913). Addi- 
tional older references -will be provided in a synonymy of the Stoma to- 
poda to be published in "Crustaceorum Catalogus" by L. B. Holthuis. 

Most abbreviations for repositories are given in the acknowledg- 
ments below. The following abbreviations are also used in the text: 
AM (Australian Museum, Sydney) ; BLIH (Biological Laboratory of 
the Imperial Household of His Majesty, The Emperor of Japan). 
Collections from these two sources have been discussed elsewhere 
(Manning, 1965, 1966). 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 3 

Acknowledgments. — I would like to thank John Field, University 
of Cape Town, South Africa (UCT), for the loan of specimens; 
J. Forest, Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris (MNHNP), 
for providing working space; C. B. Goodhart, University Museum of 
Zoology, Cambridge (UMZ), for allowing me to examine on loan the 
types of 0. latirostris Borradaile; L. B. Holthuis, Rijksmuseum van 
Natuurlijke Historie, Leiden (RMNH), for his advice, help on 
literature, and for providing working space as well as specimens on 
loan; R. W. Ingle, British Museum (Natural History) (BMNH), for 
providing working space, specimens on loan, and information on the 




CARiNAE OF SIXTH 

ABDOMINAL SOMITE 
Lateral 

Intermediate 
Submedian 
Recurved portion of 
Submedian 

CARINAE OF TELSON 
Marginal 
Lateral 
Submedian 
Median 

First accessory median 
Second accessory median 
Intermediate 

TEETH 8. DENTICLES 
OF TELSON 
Lateral tooth 
Lateral denticle 



Intermediate tooth 
Intermediate denticles 

Submedian tooth 
(with movable apex) 

Submedian denticles 



Figure 1. — Representative Odonlodactylus telson indicating terms used in descriptions. 



collection of Odontodactylus in the British Museum; J. Stock, Zoo- 
logical Museum, Amsterdam (ZMA), for working space and for the 
loan of part of the Siboga collection; and T. Wolff, Universitets 
Zoologiske Museum, Copenhagen (UZM), for the loan of several 
specimens. This study was supported in part by the National 
Science Foundation and the Smithsonian Institution through its 
Research Awards program; this support is gratefully acknowledged. 
The illustrations are from the pen of my wife Lilly. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Odontodactylus Bigelow, 1893 

Gamaris H. S., 1876, p. 275.— Holthuis, 1951, p. 86. [Suppressed by ICZN, now 

on Official Index, no. 122.] 
Odontodactylus Bigelow, 1893, p. 100; 1894, p. 495.— Kemp, 1913, p. 133.— Hansen, 

1926, p. 22.— Bigelow, 1931, p. 144.— Balss, 1938, p. 131.— Holthuis, 1951, 

p. 86. — Hemming, 1954, p. 155. — Holthuis and Manning, in press. — Manning, 

1967, in press. 
Odonterichthus Bigelow, 1894, p. 543.— Jurich, 1904, p. 396.— Gurney, 1946, 

p. 168 [listed; larva]. 

Definition. — Surface of body smooth; cornea subglobular, set 
very obliquely on stalk; rostral plate without anterior spine; antennal 
protopod without papillae; carapace rounded anterolaterally and 
posterolaterally, without carinae; cervical groove not distinct across 
dorsum of carapace, position indicated on gastric grooves only; 5 epi- 
pods present; mandibular palp present; raptorial claw short, stout, 
dactylus inflated at base; inner margin of dactylus with teeth; propo- 
dus without proximal movable spine, superior margin not pectinate but 
distally serrate; ischiomeral articulation distal to terminus of merus; 
inferior surface of merus not ventrally channelled throughout its 
length for reception of propodus; endopod of walking legs elongate, 
2-segmented; exposed thoracic somites without sharp carinae; ab- 
domen semicylindrical, without sharp carinae on first 5 somites; 
sixth somite with 6 or more carinae but only 6 terminating in spines; 
telson with sharp median carina and numerous longitudinal carinae 
on dorsal surface; 3 pairs of marginal teeth, submedians with movable 
apices; submedian denticles numerous; 2 fixed intermediate and 1 
fixed lateral denticle present; basal prolongation of uropod with 
outer spine the longer. 

Type-species. — Cancer scyllarus Linnaeus, 1758, p. 633, by sub- 
sequent selection by Bigelow, 1931, p. 144 (ICZN Official List no. 
731). 

Gender. — Masculine. 

Number of species. — Five. 

Discussion. — In 1913 Kemp recognized 10 species of Odonto- 
dactylus, as follows: 0. scyllarus (Linnaeus, 1758), 0. japonicus (de 
Haan, 1844), 0. cultrifer (White, 1850), 0. elegans (Miers, 1880), 
0. brevirostris (Miers, 1884), 0. hansenii (Pocock, 1893), 0. carinifer 
(Pocock, 1893), 0. havanensis (Bigelow, 1893), 0. latirostris Borradaile, 
1907, and O. southwelli Kemp, 1911. Of these, only 0. havanensis 
occurred in the Atlantic; the remainder were known only from the 
Indo-West Pacific. 

Hansen (1926) placed four of these species into synonymy. 0. 
carinifer was synonymized with 0. cultrifer, 0. elegans with 0. scyl- 
larus, and both 0. latirostris and 0. southwelli with 0. hansenii. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 5 

Bigelow (1931) agreed that 0. latirostris and 0. hansenii were con- 
specific but questioned the identity of 0. southwelli with 0. hansenii. 

Since 1913, the following taxa have been described: 0. mindanao- 
ensis Roxas and Estampador, 1930, from the Philippines; 0. nigri- 
caudatus Chace, 1942, from the Gulf of Mexico; and 0. cultrifer var. 
tridentata Serene, 1954, from Viet Nam. 

The present study shows that only four of the 14 nominal species 
once ascribed to this genus can be recognized as distinct species. A 
fifth species, from Hawaii, is described as new. 

Odontodactylus now includes the following species (asterisk indicates 
that types of the species have been examined for this study) : 

oldest name synonyms 

0. scyllarus (Linnaeus, 1758) *G. bleekeri A. Milne-Edwards, 1868 

*G. elegans Miers, 1884 
*0. japonicus (de Haan, 1844) G. edwardsii Berthold, 1845 

*0. cultrifer (White, 1850) *G. carinifer Pocock, 1893 

0. mindanaoensis Roxas and Estam- 
pador, 1930 
0. cultrifer var. tridentata Serene, 1954 

*0. breviroslris (Miers, 1884) *G. havanensis Bigelow, 1893 

*G. hansenii Pocock, 1893 
*0. latirostris Borradaile, 1907 
O. southwelli Kemp, 1911 
*0. nigricaudatus Chace, 1942 

*0. haivaiiensis, new species 

Kemp (1913) noted that relatively little was known about variation 
in adults and ontogenetic changes in members of the genus. Young 
specimens are quite different from adults and these differences have 
been the primary reason for the multiplicity of names in the genus. 
Original descriptions of the following species, for example, are based 
on postlarvae or juveniles: Gonodactylus brevirostris, G. carinifer, G. 
elegans, G. hansenii, and G. havanensis. 

In Odontodactylus the following features used in the past to diagnose 
species, may change with age: 

1. Eye size: The cornea is relatively smaller in adults than in 
juveniles. In O. scyllarus the CI is about 300 in specimens 25 mm 
long, whereas in specimens over 100 mm long the CI is in excess of 
576 and as large as 750. 

2. Raptorial claw: The swollen portion of the dactylus of the 
claw is proportionally more inflated in adults than in juveniles; further, 
the characteristic basal notch present on the dactylus of young speci- 
mens disappears in adults. 

3. Sculpture of the last abdominal somite: In very young speci- 
mens, including postlarvae and some early juveniles, the carinae of 
the sixth abdominal somite are not fully developed. Apparently the 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

only species in which the full complement of carinae (one pair of sub- 
medians, recurved posteriorly; one pair each of intermediates and 
laterals) on this somite are not developed in the adult is 0. cultrifer 
(White). 

4. Sculpture of the telson: In specimens with a TL of less than 
30 mm all the carinae of the telson may not be present. In postlarvae 
and early stage juveniles only the median carina and the anterior 
portions of the submedian carinae may be present. Young specimens 
also may not exhibit the same degree of development of the carinae 
as do the adults. In general, the two pairs of accessory median 
carinae are the last to develop. 

5. Uropod structure: The relative lengths of the two segments 
of the uropodal exopod may change with increasing size. In juveniles 
the distal segment may only be one-half or two-thirds as long as the 
proximal, whereas in adults the segments may be subequal in length. 
The last movable spine on the outer margin of the uropod is shorter 
in large specimens than in small ones. The relative lengths also 
differ in each species; 0. cultrifer is the only species in which the prox- 
imal segment is always shorter than the distal. 

Four important characters do not change with age: (1) the position 
of the ocular scales, whether appressed or separate; (2) the setation 
of the antennal scale; (3) the number of teeth on the dactylus of the 
raptorial claw; (4) and the presence of posterolateral spines on the 
fifth abdominal somite. 

Key to Species of Odontodaclylus (Adults) 

1. Ocular scales appressed along midline; telson with 2 pairs of accessory median 

carinae 2 

Ocular scales separate; telson with 1 pair of accessory median carinae . . 4 

2. Fifth abdominal somite unarmed posterolaterally ; telson with longitudinal 

carina extending anteriorly from inner intermediate denticle. 

japonicus, p. 7. 

Fifth abdominal somite with posterolateral spines; telson lacking longitudinal 

carina extending anteriorly from inner intermediate denticle 3 

3. Dactylus of claw with less than 5 teeth; movable spines of uropodal exopod 

broad, inflated distally scyllarus, p. 10. 

Dactylus of claw with more than 5 teeth; movable spines of uropodal exopod 
tapering distally hawaiiensis, new species, p. 16. 

4. Median carina of telson thin, high; dactylus of claw with less than 5 teeth; 

posteriorly recurved portion of submedian carinae of fifth abdominal 

somite absent cultrifer, p. 18. 

Median carina of telson not noticeably thin or high; dactylus of claw with 
more than 5 teeth; submedian carinae of fifth abdominal somite recurved 
posteriorly brevirostris, p. 22. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 7 

Odontodactylus japonicus (de Haan, 1844) 
Figure 2 

Gonodactylus japonicus de Haan, 1844, pi. 51 (fig. 7); 1S49, p. 225 [text]. — Miers, 
1880, p. 116.— Gee, 1925, p. 163 [listed]. 

Gonodactylus Edwardsii Berthold, 1845, p. 48; 1847, p. 30, pi. 3 (fig. 6). 

Odontodactylus japonicus. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Borradaile, 1907, 
p. 212.— Kemp, 1913, p. 139.— Alexander, 1916, p. 10.— Parisi, 1922, p. 110, 
fig. 5.— Komai, 1922, p. 102, figs. 1-2.— Kemp and Chopra, 1921, p. 297 
[listed].— Komai, 1927, p. 336, pi. 13 (figs. 3-4) [part].— Komai, Akatsuka, 
and Ikari, 1927, p. 295 [listed].— Komai and Ikari, 1929, p. 121.— Schmitt, 
1929, p. 147 [listed].— Komai, 1938, p. 272.— Holthuis, 1941, p. 276.— 
Anonymous, 1945, p. 845, fig. 2428, pi. 7 [color]. — Stephenson and McNeill, 
1955, p. 248.— Utinomi, 1956, p. 92, pi. 46 (fig. 8) [color]; 1960, p. 114, pi. 57 
(fig. 2) [color].— Stephenson, 1960, p. 61; 1962, p. 35.— Shiino, 1964, p. 291 
[discussion]. — Manning, 1965, p. 260. 

Gonodactylus edwardsii. — Gee, 1925, p. 163 [listed]. 

Not Odontodactylus japonicus. — Bigelow, 1931, p. 145, pi. 1 (fig. 1). — Edmondson, 
1946, p. 243. [— O. hawaiiensis, new species.] 

Material.— 19, 82.2; Saya del Malha Bank, Seychelle Us., W. 
Indian Ocean; 100 m; June 9, 1905; J. S. Gardiner, M. A. Caius; 
UMZ. — 19, 117.0; Ambovombe, south coast of Malagasy Republic; 
60 m; Oct. 28, 1958; A. Crosnier, col; USNM 120343— l&, 142.0; 
Swatow, China; BMNH 84.2.-2 dry spec; China; no. 167b, c; BMNH 
40.3.7.17-18.— 1 dry spec, CL 30.0; same; BMNH 46.114.— 1 dry 
spec, CL 31.5; same; BMNH 49.55.— 19, 107.0; Japan; type; RMNH 
32.— 19, ca. 141.0; Japan; Oct. 3-12, 1904; Doflein, col.; BMNH 
1910.9.30.10.— lc?; Tokyo, Japan; 1906; M. Harmand; MNHNP.— 
2 spec; Yokahama, Japan; 1902; Boucard; MNHNP.— 1 dry d 1 , 
ca. 125.0; 1 broken 9; Japan; October 1901; UZM.— 19, 109.0; 
Nagasaki, Japan; May 1909; J. Jordan, col.; UZM.— 1 d\ 150.0; 19, 
132.5; no locality; BLIH 134. — 1 d 1 , 130.0; Hayama, Sagami Bay; 
Feb. 20, 1920; BLIH 135— ld% 115.3; off Hayama, Sagami Bay; 
55 m; Feb. 2, 1952; BLIH 658. 

Description. — Eyes subglobular, length of cornea greater than 
width; eyes extending beyond end of first segment of antennular 
peduncle; anterior margin of ophthalmic somite truncate, not notice- 
ably projecting; ocular scales truncate, oblique to body line, appressed 
along midline. 

Antennular peduncle about half as long as carapace. 

Antennal scale large, ovate, longer or slightly shorter than carapace; 
anterior margin not setose, posterior margin lined with short setae; 
anterior margin of dorsal plate of antennal peduncle rounded. 

Rostral plate triangular, appearing trapezoidal in dorsal view; 



8 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



apex depressed, longitudinally sulcate, fitting snugly behind ocular 
scales. 

Carapace narrowed anteriorly; lateral plates projecting slightly 
beyond base of rostral plate. 





Figure 2. — Odontodactylus japonicus (de Haan), female, TL 117.0 mm, Madagascar: a, 
anterior portion of body; b, third to fifth abdominal somites in lateral view; c, propodus 
and dactylus of raptorial claw; d, sixth abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; e, uropod, 
ventral view, setae omitted. 

Raptorial claw stout; dactylus armed with 6-8 teeth, outer margin 
of inflated basal portion rounded in large specimens. 

Fifth thoracic somite lacking distinct lateral process, lateral por- 
tions of somite concealed under carapace; lateral processes of next 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 9 

somites broadly rounded posteriorly, process of seventh somite larger 
than that of sixth; ventral keel on eighth thoracic somite broadly 
rounded, inclined posteriorly. 

Abdominal somites smooth, strongly convex; longitudinal sulcus 
originating from anterolateral pit present on fifth somite, incon- 
spicuous if present on fourth; posterolateral angles of first 5 somites 
rounded; sixth somite with 6 pairs of posterior spines (obsolete in 
large specimens), submedian carinae recurved posteriorly; anterior 
"knobs" present between intermediate and lateral carinae; at most 
a blunt lobe present in front of articulation of uropod; ventral surface 
of sixth somite with posterior margin concave along midline. 

Telson slightly broader than long, greatest width at base, orna- 
mented with carinae as follows: (1) median carina with short apical 
spine; (2) 2 pairs of accessory median carinae, inner much more 
prominent; (3) 1 pair of long submedians, anterior portions usually 
connected to posterior; (4) 1 pair of long curved carinae, extending 
from inner intermediate denticle almost to anterior margin of telson; 
(5) 1 pair of short intermediate carinae, each on tooth; (6) 1 pair of 
short lateral carinae, extending toward apex of the lateral tooth and 
fusing with the marginal carina; and (7) 1 pair of marginal carinae. 

Outer margin of proximal segment of uropodal exopod with 10-12 
broad, flattened, overlapping spines, last extending slightly beyond 
end of distal segment; distal 4 or 5 spines spatulate; proximal segment 
of uropodal exopod less than 1.5 times as long as distal segment; 
endopod broadly ovate with 2 longitudinal carinae not extending to 
apex; basal prolongation with outer spine the stronger, extending 
past proximal segment of exopod but not past endopod. 

Color. — Komai (1922) noted that males are bright salmon red 
and females are salmon red anteriorly, bluish green posteriorly. None 
of the present specimens showed any color pattern in preservative. 

Size.— Males, TL 125.0-150.0 mm; females TL 82.2-141-0 mm. 

Measurements and indices for selected specimens of 0. japonicus 
(de Haan) are as follows: 





9 


9 


9 


9 


9 


cf 


Total length 


82.2 


107.0 


109.0 


117.0 


141.0 


142.0 


Carapace length 


18.2 


22.9 


22.1 


25.1 


29.7 


29.7 


Cornea length 


5.0 


5.3 


5.4 


5.7 


6.2 


6.3 


Cornea width 


4.3 


4.5 


4.7 


5.0 


5.7 


5.7 


Antenna] scale length 


17.9 


22.3 


24.0 


24.2 


- 


31.5 


Fifth abdominal somite width 


18.2 


22.3 


23.2 


25.5 


30.1 


29.0 


Telson length 


13.7 


16.6 


19.0 


18.1 


- 


24.0 


Telson width 


14.7 


18.8 


19.3 


21.2 


- 


24.6 


CI 


423 


489 


470 


502 


521 


521 


AWCLI 


1000 


1013 


1049 


1015 


1013 


976 


Uropod P/D 


1.50 


1.40 


1.42 


1.31 


1.51 


1.36 


246-001—67 2 















10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Discussion. — Only two species of Odontodactylus , 0. scyllarus 
(Linnaeus) and 0. hawaiiensis, new species, have appressed ocular 
scales as well as two pairs of accessory median carinae on the telson. 
Both of these have at least the fourth and fifth abdominal somites 
armed posterolaterally and neither has a dorsal carina on the telson 
extending anteriorly from the inner intermediate denticle. In 
addition, 0. scyllarus has less than five teeth on the claw; 0. hawaii- 
ensis agrees with 0. japonicus in having more than five. 0. breviros- 
tris (Miers) and 0. cultrijer (White) both differ from 0. japonicus in 
having separate ocular scales and only one pair of accessory median 
carinae on the telson. 

Komai (1927) noted that some young specimens of 0. japonicus 
obtained from fish stomach contents could not be sexed but morpho- 
logically resembled adults. He further noted that two specimens had 
posterolateral spines on the fourth and fifth abdominal somites. 
Inasmuch as 0. japonicus completely lacks these spines, Komai's 
specimens must be referred to 0. brevirostris. The adults reported 
by Komai are probably 0. japonicus. 

No sexual dimorphism of morphological characters was noted in 
the specimens reported herein. Komai (1922) gave an account of 
dimorphism in color pattern and commented on an aberrant male 
with a pattern approaching that of a female. 

Distribution. — 0. japonicus has been recorded from numerous 
localities around Japan and China, from three localities in Australia 
[Broome (Alexander, 1916) and Shark Bay or Exmouth Gulf, Western 
Australia (Stephenson, 1962), and off Wistari Reef, Capricorn Group, 
Queensland (Stephenson, I960)], and from two localities in the Indian 
Ocean, south of the Seychelles (Borradaile, 1907) and the present 
record from Madagascar, in shallow water to 100 m. 

Odontodactylus scyllarus (Linnaeus, 1758) 

Figure 3 

Cancer Scyllarus Linnaeus, 1758, p. 633. 

Cancer scyllarus. — Linnaeus, 1767, p. 1054. — Holthuis, 1951, p. 86 [discussion]. — 

Hemming, 1954, p. 158. — Holthuis and Manning, 1964, p. 139. 
Gonodaclylus scyllarus. — Latreille, 1828, p. 473. — H. Milne-Edwards, 1837, p. 

529.— Miers, 1880, p. 115; 1880a, p. 459.— Bigelow, 1893, p. 100 [discussion]. 
Gonodaclylus Bleeherii A. Milne-Edwards, 1868, footnote p. 65. — Miers, 1880, 

p. 118. 
Gonodaclylus elegans Miers, 1884, p. 566, pi. 52 (figs, b, b). 
Odontodactylus bleekerii. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. 

Odontodactylus elegans. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Kemp, 1913, p. 139. 
Odontodactylus scyllarus. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496. — Kemp, 1913, p. 135 [older 

references]. — Bouvier, 1915, p. 312. — Sunier, 1918, p. 11. — Kemp and Chopra, 

1921, p. 297 [listed].— Hansen, 1921, p. 79; 1926, pp. 22, 42 [larvae], pi. 2 (fig. 

6). — Komai, Akatsuka, and Ikari, 1927, p. 295 [listed]. — Komai and Ikari, 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 11 

1929, p. 121.— Roxas and Estampador, 1930, p. 114.— Gravier, 1937, p. 200, 
figs. 17-19.— Serine, 1937, p. 6S [listed].— Komai, 1938, p. 271.— Serene, 1939, 
p. 349 [discussion].— Holthuis, 1941, p. 275.— Ward, 1942, p. 56.— Anony- 
mous, 1949, p. 845, fig. 2429 [color].— Holthuis, 1951, p. 86.— Dawydoff, 1952, 
p. 145.— Stephenson, 1953, p. 46.— Serene, 1953, p. 507; 1954, pp. 6, 10 — 
Stephenson and McNeill, 1955, p. 248— Utinomi, 1956, p. 92, pi. 46 (fig. 7). — 
Barnard, 1956, p. 22.— Kalk, 1958, pp. 75, 83.— Holthuis, 1959, p. 119, 
photo 10 (fig. 4).— Utinomi, 1960, p. 114, pi. 57 (fig. 3).— Serene, 1962, fig. 
1E1.— Stephenson, 1962, p. 35. 

Material. — 1 broken c? ; Kilifi, 48 mi. north of Mombasa, Kenya; 
Mrs. G. Harvey; BMNH 1956.11.1. — 1 cT 137.5; Zanzibar; BMNH 
68.32. — 1 spec., 23.5; Puree Is., lies des Roches, Amirante lis.; Alert; 
syntype of Gonodactylus elegans; BMNH 183. — 1 d", 128.8; Seychelles; 
E. P. Wright; BMNH 75.20.— 1 spec, ca. 22.8; Providence Is., 
north of Malagasy Republic; Alert; syntype of Gonodactylus elegans; 
BMNH 215.— 2 spec; Malagasy Republic; G. Petit; MNHNP.— Id 1 , 
161.0; same; BMNH 63.31.— 1 broken, Id", CL 36.0; Nosy Be, 
Malagasy Republic; A. Crosnier; USNM 120342.— 19, 135.2; Inhas- 
saro, Mocambique; 1965; UCT. — 19, 144.0; Mauritius; de Belloquet; 
MNHNP— Id", 87.0; same; Desjardins; MNHNP.— 1 dry d", 158.0; 
same; BMNH 167a.— 1 dry spec, CL 33.7; same; BMNH 42.66.— 
19, 74.0; Christmas Is.; C. W. Andrews; 1908; BMNH 1909.5.19.284.— 
1 d\ 85.6; Poeloe Weh [north of Sumatra?]; P. Buitendijk; January 
1911; RMNH 45.— 1 spec; Djakarta [Batavia], Indonesia; Bleeker; 
typo of G. bleekerii?; MNHNP.— 29, 74.3-85.5; harantoeka Flores, 
Indonesia; 1891; RMNH 1. — Id"; Lamakera, Lessa Sunda lis.; 
Laurense; Dec 21, 1909; ZMA — 19, 62.9; reede v. Koepang [Ku- 
pang?], Timor; Hendrickse; July 5, 1909; ZMA.— 1 d\ 99.3; New 
Guinea; BMNH 80.6— Id 1 , 107.9; 19, 119.2; Banda; Semmelinck; 
1841; RMNH 14.— 19; Banda; van der Velde; ZMA.— 19, 25.2; 
Banda anchorage; lithothamnion bank, 6-36 m; Siboga Sta. 240; 
Nov. 23-Dec 1, 1899; ZMA.— 2d\ 19; Ambon [Amboina]; W. 
Gerooms; 1913; ZMA.— 2d 1 , 123.0-133.2; same; BMNH 80.6.— 
Sd\ 111.0-141.0; 49, 98.5-140.5; same; H. Ludeking, 1863; L. M. 
Hoedt, 1864; RMNH 3.-39 [2 lots]; Moluccas; v. d. Hucht; 1858; 
ZMA. — 4 spec; Elat, west coast of Great Kei Is., Moluccas; reef; 
Siboga Sta. 261; Dec 16-18, 1899; ZMA.— 19, CL 25.7; Lette Is., 
Timor; BMNH 80.6.— 19, 25.0; Puerto Galera, Mindoro, Philippines; 
Th. Mortensen; Mar. 2, 1914; UZM— 19, 129.4; Calapan, Mindoro, 
Philippines; P. de Mesa; December 1932-January 1933; MCZ 9616.— 
19, CL 26.5; Bale de Lovane, Viet Nam; Dawydoff; April 1933; 
MNHNP. — Id", 108.7; Tutuila, American Samoa; Smithsonian 
Institution Pacific Project; Feb. 23, 1965; USNM 120264.— Id 1 , 
160.0; Samoa; BMNH 75-67.— 19, 142.0; same; A. B. Steinberger; 
USNM 5147— Id 1 , 124.0; Rotuma, Fiji lis.; J. S. Gardiner; UMZ.— 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

1 cf, 53.9; Vanikoro, Santa Cruz lis.; Templeton Crocker Expedition; 
June 5, 1933; USNM 120265.— 19, 109.2; New Britain; Willey; 
1895-1897; UMZ— 1 d\ 109.0; Blanche Bay, New Britain; A. Willey; 
July 1895; BMNH 1918.2.25.1.— 19, 103.2; Ifaluk Atoll, Caroline lis.; 
Abbott and Yaniseiman, No. 643; Oct. 19, 1953; USNM 104702.— 
Id", 143.5; Wakanoura, Japan; Jordan and Snyder; 1900; USNM 
26346. 

Description. — -Eye subglobular, cornea small, length greater than 
width; eyes extend to or slightly beyond end of first segment of 
antennular peduncle; anterior margin of ophthalmic somite truncate, 
not noticeably projecting; ocular scales truncate, oblique to body 
line, appressed along midline. 

Antennular peduncle shorter than carapace. 

Antennal scale large, ovate, not as long as carapace; anterior surface 
of scale almost completely setose, anterior setae much shorter than 
posterior; dorsal plate of antennal peduncle quadrangular, anterior 
margin irregularly rounded or sub triangular. 

Rostral plate triangular, short, not extending anteriorly past 
ocular scales; lateral margin rounded; apex may fit in space behind 
ocular scales; apex sharp, depressed, anterior half or third sulcate. 

Carapace narrowed anteriorly, lateral plates projecting anteriorly 
just past base of rostral plate. 

Raptorial claw stout; dactylus armed with 2-3 teeth, outer margin 
of swollen portion flattened, smooth or irregular. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Fifth thoracic somite lacking distinct lateral process, entire somite 
usually concealed under carapace; lateral processes of next 2 somites 
irregularly rounded, process of seventh more rounded than sixth; 
ventral keel on eighth thoracic somite low, inclined posteriorly, 
broadly rounded or obliquely truncate. 

Abdominal somites generally smooth; second to fifth with lateral 
longitudinal groove originating from anterior pit, increasing in sharp- 
ness posteriorly, upper and lower borders actually carinate on fifth 
somite; third to fifth or fourth and fifth somites with posterolateral 
spines, that of fifth somite largest, carinate; submedian, intermediate 
and lateral carinae of sixth somite with posterior spines; submedian 
carinae recurved posteriorly; prominent knobs present on anterior 
half of somite between intermediate and lateral carinae; no spine in 
front of articulation of uropod; ventral surface of sixth somite with 
bilobed posterior margin, median emargination present between lobes. 

Telson broader than long, greatest width at apices of lateral teeth, 
ornamented with carinae as follows: (1) median carina with short 
posterior spine; (2) 2 pairs of accessory median carinae, inner longer, 
which converge under posterior apex of median carina, outer accessory 



ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 



13 



medians forming inconspicuous knob ; (3) carinas of submedian teeth 
not always continuous with anterior submedians; (4) short sub parallel 






Figure 3. — Odontodactylus scyllarus (Linnaeus), female, TL 103.2 mm, Ifaluk Atoll: a, 
anterior portion of body; b, second to fifth abdominal somites, in lateral view; c, propodus 
and dactylus of raptorial claw; d, sixth abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; e, uropod, 
ventral view (setae omitted in d and e). 

carinae present on inner side of submedian teeth; (5) short, swollen 
anterior margin on each large intermediate denticle; (6) carina of 
intermediate tooth not extending anteriorly much past base of tooth; 



14 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



and (7) lateral carinae, each of which fuses with marginal carina at 
apex of lateral tooth. 

Outer margin of penultimate segment of uropodal exopod with 
10-11 broad, flattened, overlapping spines, last not extending to distal 
margin of rounded distal segment; proximal segment of exopod less 
than twice length of distal segment; endopod broadly ovate, with 2 
dorsal longitudinal carinae that do not extend to apex; basal pro- 
longation with outer spine longer than inner but not extending past 
apex of endopod. 

Color. — In preservative, ventral surface and lateral portions of 
body darker than upper; dactylus of claw orange; antennal scale with 
distal black spot; anterior portions of carapace with irregular oval 
areas outlined in dark pigment, especially on lateral plates; basal 
segment of uropods yellow, distal segments black, apices of movable 
spines pink. Although much of the color and pattern fade in pre- 
servative, the oval spots on the carapace may persist for sometime. 

Size.— Males, TL 53.9-171.0 mm; females, TL 22.8-144.0 mm. 

Measurements and indices for selected specimens of 0. scyllarus 
(Linnaeus) are as follows: 

Males 



Total length 


53.9 


87.0 


97.5 


108.7 


124.0 


- 


143.5 


160.0 


Carapace length 


12.0 


21.6 


22.5 


26.0 


27.5 


36.0 


37.0 


39.0 


Cornea length 


3.4 


4.6 


4.7 


5.0 


4.7 


5.7 


5.7 


5.7 


Cornea width 


2.8 


3.9 


4.2 


4.1 


4.2 


4.7 


5.5 


5.2 


Antennal scale 


















length 


10.0 


17.6 


18.7 


21.6 


22.0 


28.8 


28.7 


30.3 


Fifth abdominal 


















somite width 


11.6 


20.8 


22.3 


26.5 


26.1 


35.0 


34.5 


36.6 


Telson length 


9.0 


15.6 


17.2 


19.7 


19.2 


26.1 


27.6 


- 


Telson width 


9.4 


17.6 


17.7 


21.2 


22.2 


29.3 


28.9 


- 


CI 


429 


553 


536 


634 


655 


766 


673 


750 


AWCLI 


966 


962 


991 


1019 


949 


972 


932 


938 


Uropod P/D 


1.39 


1.75 


1.79 


1.43 


1.89 


1.65 


1.52 


1.88 








Females 










Total length 


25.2 


25.0 


74.0 


103.2 


- 


129.4 


144.0 


142.0 


Carapace length 


5.7 


6.1 


17.4 


24.5 


26.5 


29.7 


32.6 


33.2 


Cornea length 


2.1 


2.3 


4.5 


4.5 


4.9 


5.1 


5.2 


5.4 


Cornea width 


1.9 


2.0 


3.7 


3.9 


4.6 


4.5 


4.8 


4.7 


Antennal scale 


















length 


3.3 


4.0 


15.8 


19.8 


21.4 


22.8 


26.6 


27.0 


Fifth abdominal 


















somite width 


4.9 


5.8 


17.3 


24.1 


26.2 


29.8 


32.7 


32.5 


Telson length 


3.8 


4.1 


14.2 


18.1 


- 


22.7 


25.3 


26.0 


Telson width 


4.1 


4.7 


14.5 


19.2 


- 


23.7 


26.5 


26.2 


CI 


300 


305 


470 


628 


576 


660 


679 


706 


AWCLI 


859 


950 


994 


983 


988 


1003 


1003 


978 


Uropod P/D 


1.62 


1.88 


1.63 


1.60 


1.80 


1.64 


1.78 


1.56 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 15 

Discussion. — 0. scyllarus can be distinguished from all other 
species in the genus by the presence of only two or three teeth on 
the dactylus of the claw and the presence of a full complement of 
carinae on the telson, including two pairs of accessory median carinae. 

Kemp (1913) was correct in synonymizing Gonodactylus bleekerii 
A. Milne-Edwards, 1868, with 0. scyllarus. Milne-Edwards' account 
included no mention of features that might distinguish his species 
from 0. scyllarus, even though he mentioned the latter species in his 
discussion. A specimen in the Paris Museum collected by Bleeker in 
Batavia [Djakarta] is probably the type of G. bleekeri although it is 
not so labelled. It appears to be a normal 0. scyllarus. 

Hansen (1926) was the first to synonymize G. elegans Miers, 1884, 
with 0. scyllarus. I have examined the types of 0. elegans, two 
postlarvae or early juvenile females, and concur with Hansen. Al- 
though the carinae of the telson are poorly developed in those speci- 
mens, they may be well developed in other specimens of similar size. 

Adults of 0. scyllarus have smaller eyes than adults of any other 
species in the genus, and, as usual, the eyes in juveniles are comparably 
larger than in adults. In specimens of the "elegans" stage, the 
corneal index is 300, whereas in adults it ranges from 470 to 766. 

Odontodactylus scyllarus was originally described by Linnaeus 
(1758, p. 633) as follows: 

Scylla- 55. C. macrourus articularis, manibus adactylis ventrico- 
rus. sis rectis angulatis introrsum tridentatis. Mus. Ad. 

Fr. I. p. 86. C. mirabilis. 
Rumph. mus. t. 3. f. F. G. 
Habitat in M. Asiatico. 

Statura praecedentis. Thoracis testa latere postico 
emarginata. Mucronum par pone pedes. 

As Holthuis (1959) pointed out, Rumphius' figure f on plate 3 is 
0. scyllarus, but figure g is the dactylus of a Gonodactylus since no 
teeth are shown on the terminal segment. In order to settle the 
identity of 0. scyllarus, the specimen figured by Rumphius (1705) on 
plate 3, figure r, is here selected as the lectotype of the species. 

Remarks. — -As in 0. brevirostris (see below), there is some overlap 
in size between postlarvae and first stage of juveniles; Hansen (1926) 
commented on this in his account of O. scyllarus. 

Range. — Through most of the Indo-West Pacific in shallow water; 
it is often found on coral reefs. There are no records from the Red 
Sea, South Africa, or Hawaii, but there are scattered records from 
many localities between East Africa and Japan. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Odontodactylus hawaiiensis, new species 

Figure 4; Plate 1 
Odontodactylus japonicus. — Bigelow, 1931, p. 145, pi. 1 (fig. 1). — Edmondson, 
1946, p. 243. [Not 0. japonicus (de Haan, 1844).] 

Holotype. — lcf, 107.0; off coast of Maui Is., Hawaiian lis.; 
173-276 m; Albatross Sta. 4098; July 23, 1902; USNM 64861. 

Paratype. — 19, 29.4; off south coast of Molokai Is., Hawaiian 
lis.; 109-116 m; Albatross Sta. 3845; Apr. 8, 1902; USNM 64863. 

Other material. — lcf, 32.2; off northeast coast of Hawaii Is., 
Hawaiian lis.; 151-206 m; Albatross Sta. 4062; July 18, 1902; USNM 
64862. 

Description. — Eye large, cornea longer than broad, set obliquely 
on short stalk; ocular scales oblique, appressed along midline; eyes 
not extending to end of second segment of antennular peduncle. 

Antennular peduncle short, about two-thirds as long as carapace. 

Antennal scale broad, ovate, completely setose, anterior setae 
smaller than posterior; scale five-sixths length of carapace. 

Rostral plate short, triangular, with acute, deflexed apex; plate 
anteriorly sulcate along midline; apex of plate extending to posterior 
margin of ocular scales. 

Dactylus of raptorial claw with 7-8 teeth. 

Abdomen smooth, second to fifth somites with anterolateral pit 
and shallow groove posterior to each pit, grooves increasing in size 
posteriorly; groove of fifth somite with prominent, almost carinate 
margins; fourth and fifth somites each with posterolateral spinules; 
sixth somite with faintly indicated lobe in front of articulation of 
uropod; sixth somite with 3 pairs of primary carinae, submedians, 
intermediates, and laterals armed with at most apical tubercles in 
holotype; submedians each with posteriorly reflected carina, not 
extending to posterior margin; broad tubercle present on each side 
between intermediate and lateral carinae. 

Telson broader than long, with full complement of carinae; 2 pairs 
of accessory medians present, outer irregular; submedians faintly 
suppressed at base of marginal teeth, extending almost to anterior 
margin of telson; submedian tooth and first intermediate denticle 
with short dorsal carina, carina of denticle not extending anteriorly 
past base of denticle; short intermediate, lateral, and marginal 
carinae present, laterals extending obliquely to apex of tooth; low 
anterior swellings present lateral to outer accessory median and 
submedian carinae. 

Outer margin of proximal segment of uropodal exopod with 11-12 
broad, tapering, upturned spines, last extending to or beyond mid- 
length of distal segment; distal segment of uropod more than half as 
long as proximal. 



ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 



17 





Figure 4. — Odontodactylus hawaiiensis, new species, male holotype, TL 107.0 mm, Hawaii: 
a, anterior portion of body; b, oblique frontal view of carapace and ocular scales; c, third 
to fifth abdominal somites in lateral view; d, propodus and dactylus of raptorial claw; 
e, sixth abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; /, uropod, ventral view (setae omitted). 



246-001—67- 



d" 


cf 


32.3 


107.0 


7.5 


24.0 


- 


6.0 


- 


5.6 


- 


20.8 


7.0 


22.7 


4.6 


16.5 


5.9 


19.2 


- 


429 


933 


945 


1.55 


1.60 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Color. — 'Almost completely faded in all specimens. The smaller 
male has traces of a black spot on the uropodal exopod similar to that 
found in O. brevirostris. 

Size.— Males, TL 32.2-107.0 mm; only known female, TL 29.4 mm. 

Measurements and indices for selected specimens of 0. hawaiiensis, 
new species, are as follows : 

9 

Total length 29.4 

Carapace length 6.3 

Cornea length - 

Cornea width 2.0 

Antennal scale length - 

Fifth abdominal somite width 6.2 

Telson length 4.0 

Telson width 5.0 

CI 315 

AWCLI 1016 

Uropod P/D 1.48 

Discussion. — 0. hawaiiensis most closely resembles 0. japonicus 
(de Haan) and was identified with that species by Bigelow (1931). 
It differs from 0. japonicus as follows: (1) the apex of the rostral 
plate is acute, sharp, not truncate; (2) the margin of the antennal 
scale is completely lined with setae; (3) the fourth and fifth abdominal 
somites are armed posterolateral^ ; and (4) there is no carina on the 
telson extending anteriorly from the inner intermediate denticle. 
0. hawaiiensis also resembles 0. brevirostris in general facies, but the 
latter species has a more rounded rostral plate in the adult, a deep 
pit between the ocular scales, and but one pair of accessory median 
carinae on the telson. O. scyllarus and 0. cultrifer both differ from 
0. hawaiiensis in having less than 5 teeth on the dactylus of the 
raptorial claw. 

Small specimens of 0. hawaiiensis may have an anterior groove in 
the rostral plate, as in 0. brevirostris, but even the smallest specimen 
can be distinguished by the position of the ocular scales. 

Distribution. — Known only from off Hawaii, in depths between 
109 and 276 m. 

Odontodactylus cultrifer (White, 1850) 

Figure 5 
Gonodactylus cultrifer White, 1850, p. 96, pi. 16 (figs. 1-2); 1851, p. 422. — Miers, 

1880, p. 117.— Lanchester, 1901, p. 555. 
Gonodactylus carinifer Pocock, 1893, p. 478, pi. 20b (figs. 4a-b). 
Odontodactylus carinifer. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Kemp, 1913, p. 138. — 

Gravier, 1933, p. 78, figs. 3-5.— Serene, 1937, p. 68 [listed].— Dawydoff, 

1952, p. 145 [discussion].— Serene, 1953, p. 506. 
Odontodactylus cultrifer. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Kemp, 1913, p. 137. — 

Sunier, 1918, p. 11.— Kemp and Chopra, 1921, pp. 297 [listed], 307.— Odhner, 

1923, p. 7. — Hansen, 1926, p. 23 [discussion]. — Stephenson, 1952, p. 10; 



PROC. US NAT. MUS VOL. 123 



MANNING — PLATE 1 





H 



Odontodactylus hawaiiensis, new species, male holotype, TL 107.00 mm, Hawaii: Specimen 
in dorsal view (from Bigelow, 1931). 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 19 

1953, p. 46.— Serene, 1953, p. 506; 1954, pp. 6, 8, 11, 13, 17, 72, pi. 6 (figs. 

5-6). — Stephenson and McNeill, 1955, p. 248.— Stephenson, 1962, p. 35. — 

Serene, 1962, fig. 1E2— Manning, 1966, p. 105. 
Odontodactylus cultifer. — Schmitt, 1929, p. 147 [listed]. 

Odontodactylus mindanaoensis Roxas and Estampador, 1930, p. 115, pi. iv. 
Odontodactylus cultrifer var. tridentata Serene, 1954, pp. 6, 7, 8, 72, pi. 6 (figs. 7-8). 

Material. — 1 broken d\ 125.4; 10 mi. northwest of Bustard Head, 
off Port Curtis, Queensland, Australia; 29 m; Endeavour; AM 
E.3154. — 1 broken 9, 106.5; Platypus Bay, Queensland; 13-16 m; 
Endeavour; USNM 111380. — 19, 118.2; same; Endeavour, no. 1, haul 
2; July 28, 1910; AM P.3549.— 1 broken d"; 29, 92.0-93.5; ca. 5 mi. 
east northeast of Scarborough edge of northern Banks, Moreton Bay, 
Queensland; 9 m; Mar. 29, 1966; W. Stephenson, M. Rees; USNM 
120266.— 2d 1 , 101.4-118.7; 19, 86.7; Eastern Banks, northern Moreton 
Bay, Queensland; ca. 9 m; Mar. 29, 1966; W. Stephenson, M. Rees; 
USNM 120267.— ld\ 28.0; Holothuria Bank; 44 m; holotype of 
Gonodactylus carinifer Pocock; BMNH 92.3.26.460.-16% 93.7; off 
Frederick Hendrik Is., New Guinea; Feb. 10, 1955; D. C. Lwolla; 
RMNH 354.— Id 1 , 67.2; Maculabo Is., Philippine lis.; June 13, 1909; 
Albatross; USNM 76024.— 19, ca. 70.0; Malatrjo Point, Batanjas, 
Philippine lis.; 1938; AMNH 8253.-29, 57.3-66.5; Poulo Condore 
lis., off Viet Nam; March 1931; Dawydoff; MNHNP.— 2 dry d\ 
CL 20.4, 20.5; China; Dr. Cuming; syntypes; BMNH 49.55.-2 dry 
d 1 (in 2 lots), each 110.0; China; S. Heymann; UZM. 

Description. — Eyes subglobular, cornea length greater than 
width; eyes extending to or beyond end of second segment of anten- 
nular peduncle; anterior margin of ophthalmic somite truncate, 
projecting slightly; ocular scales rounded, widely separate, lacking 
prominent pit between them on midline. 

Antennular peduncle about two-thirds carapace length. 

Antennal scale large, ovate, about as long as carapace; margin 
completely setose, anterior setae smaller than posterior; dorsal plate 
of antennal peduncle rounded. 

Rostral plate trapezoidal, anterior margin deflexed, transverse, 
with faint median sulcus; lateral margins concave. 

Carapace narrowed anteriorly, anterior margin evenly curved, 
concave anteriorly; posterior margin concave medially. 

Raptorial claw small, dactylus armed with 3-5 teeth; basal, swollen 
portion of dactylus rounded; ischium with prominent ventral keel, 
projecting anteriorly. 

Fifth thoracic somite without definite lateral process; lateral 
process of sixth thoracic somite truncate, that of seventh somite 
rounded, neither with prominent posterior lobe; ventral keel on 
eighth somite low, inconspicuous. 



20 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



First 5 abdominal somites lacking carinae, second to fifth somites 
each with anterolateral pit; fifth somite with minute posterolateral 
spine, situated anterior to posterolateral angle; sixth somite with 3 




Figure 5. — Odontodactylus cultrifer (White). Male TL 67.2 mm, Philippine Islands: a, 
anterior portion of body; b, propodus and dactylus of raptorial claw; c, third to fifth 
abdominal somites, in lateral view; d, sixth abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; e, 
uropod, ventral view (setae omitted in d, e). Female, TL 106.5 mm, Platypus Bay: 
/, telson in lateral view. Male, TL 125.4 mm, off Port Curtis: g, telson in lateral view. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 21 

pairs of carinae terminating in spines, posteriorly recurved portion 
of submedians absent; anterior tubercle present between intermediate 
and lateral carinae; sixth somite without ventrolateral spine in front 
of articulation of uropod, ventral posterior margin almost transverse, 
not strongly concave. 

Telson slightly broader than long, appearing elongate; median 
carina thin, strongly convex, high, about one-fourth telson width in 
female, almost one-half telson width in males, with strong posterior 
spine; dorsal surface of telson, lateral to crest, ornamented with 
(1) a single accessory median carina, (2) a long, uninterrupted sub- 
median carina, (3) a short carina on intermediate tooth, and (4) a 
lateral carina subparallel to and separated from marginal carina by a 
narrow space, 2 small swollen, tubercles situated lateral to termina- 
tion of each submedian carina. 

Uropod broad, dorsal spine of basal segment very small; distal 
segment of exopod longer than proximal; 8-9 movable spines on outer 
margin of proximal exopod segment, last not extending to midlength 
of distal segment; endopod ovate, with 2 swollen, short, longitudinal 
carinae. 

Color. — Faded in most specimens. Relatively fresh specimens 
show traces of dark chromatophores scattered over the body, but 
concentrated in an oblique line on the first abdominal somite just 
behind the articulated plates and on the telson at the base of the 
median carina; some specimens have pairs of submedian pink spots 
on the last three thoracic and first five abdominal somites; the distal 
portion of the antennal scales and tips of the uropod are pink. Komai 
(1927, 1938) and Stephenson (1952) have also given notes on color. 

Measurements. — Males, TL 28.0-125.4 mm; females, TL 57.3- 
118.2 mm. 

Measurements and indices for selected specimens of 0. cultrifer 
(White) are as follows: 





9 


9 


d" 


9 


cf 


9 


& 


Total length 


57.3 


66.5 


67.2 


70.0 


93.7 


106.5 


125.4 


Carapace length 


11.1 


13.1 


13.2 


13.5 


18.2 


19.6 


23.5 


Cornea length 


3.6 


4.1 


4.6 


4.7 


5.0 


6.0 


5.6 


Cornea width 


3.9 


4.2 


4.1 


4.5 


5.0 


6.4 


6.1 


Antennal scale length 


10.8 


13.0 


13.1 


- 


- 


- 


26.9 


Fifth abdominal somite 
















width 


12.2 


14.4 


13.7 


15.0 


19.1 


20.6 


24.5 


Telson length 


9.1 


10.6 


10.2 


11.4 


14.7 


16.2 


20.0 


Telson width 


10.9 


11.5 


11.0 


12.3 


15.4 


16.8 


20.0 


CI 


285 


312 


322 


300 


364 


306 


385 


AWCLI 


1099 


1099 


1037 


1111 


1049 


1051 


1042 


Uropod P/D 


0.879 


0.900 


0.640 


0.929 


- 


0.814 


0.775 


Telson W/Crest Ht 


220 


329 


367 


362 


230 


381 


235 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Discussion. — The most distinctive feature of 0. cultrifer is the 
relative size of the segments of the uropodal exopod; in no other 
species of the genus is the distal segment longer than the proximal. 

The median carina of the telson is characteristically slender and 
highly arched dorsally, and it is much higher in mature males than in 
mature females. In females the telson width/median carina height 
ratio ranges from 3.29 to 4.55, in males from 2.17 to 3.67. 

Pocock (1893) was the first to suggest that his 0. carinifer might be 
the young stage of 0. cultrifer, and Hansen (1926) synonymized the 
former with the latter. After examining the type of 0. carinifer, I 
must agree with Hansen. In 1966 I pointed out that 0. ?nindanaoensis 
Roxas and Estampador should be referred to 0. cultrifer. The type 
of 0. mindanaoensis is a small female with a low median carina on the 
telson; the description and figures agree with 0. cultrifer in all respects 
but one: the distal segment of the uropodal exopod is shorter than 
the proximal. The illustration is highly stylized so the size of the two 
segments may not have been drawn correctly. 

0. cultrifer var. tridentata Serene, 1954, was also provisionally 
synonymized with 0. cultrifer by me in 1966. I can find no characters 
to distinguish the varietal form from 0. cultrifer sensu stricto; the variety 
seems to have been recognized on the basis of a larger number of 
teeth on the claw and a relatively lower median carina on the telson. 
In my material the height of the median carina varies somewhat and 
there may be three, four, or five teeth on the dactylus of the claw. 

Distribution. — 'Western Pacific Ocean, from Australia and New 
Guinea northward to Japan, in shallow water. 

Odonodactylus brevirostris (Miers, 1884) 

Figures 6-8 
Gonodactylus brevirostris Miers, 1884, p. 567, pi. 52 (fig. c)[Gonodactylus elegans in 

legend]. 
Gonodactylus Havanensis Bigelow, 1893, p. 101 [June]. 
Gonodactylus Hansenii Pocock, 1893, p. 477, pi. 20b (figs. 3-3b)[June]. 
Odontodaclylus brevirostris. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Tattersall, 1906, p. 172, 

pi. 2 (figs. 16-18).— Borradaile, 1907, p. 212.— Kemp, 1913, p. 143.— Kemp 

and Chopra, 1921, p. 297 [listed].— Komai, 1938, p. 272, fig. 2.— Edmondson, 

1946, p. 243. — Manning, 1967, in press [summary of Atlantic records]. 
Odontodaclylus havanensis. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 497, text-figs. 1-2, pi. 20. — Kemp, 

1913, p. 204 [listed]. 
Odontodaclylus hanseni. — Bigelow, 1894, p. 496 [key]. — Kemp, 1913, p. 140. — 

Dawydoff, 1952, p. 146 [G. hansenii on p. 145].— Townsley, 1953, p. 421, 

figs. 18-19. 
Odontodactylus laliroslris Borradaile, 1907, p. 212, pi. 22 (figs. 3, 3a). — Kemp, 

1913, p. 141. 
Odontodactylus soulhwelli Kemp, 1911, p. 94; 1913, p. 142, pi. 9 (figs. 103-106).— 

Kemp and Chopra, 1921, p. 297 [listed]. 
Odontodactylus hansenii. — Edmondson, 1921, p. 297, fig. If. — Bigelow, 1931, 

p. 147, fig. 2.— Edmondson, 1946, p. 243. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 23 

Odontodactylus hansenii. — Hansen, 1926, pp. 23, 44 [larvae], pi. 2 (figs. 7-9). 
1 Odontodactylus japonicus. — Komai, 1927, p. 336 [part]. 
Odontodactylus nigricaudatus Chace, 1942, p. 88, pi. 28; 1954, p. 449. 

Material. — 29, 17.2-53.4; Amirante lis.; 46-146 m; J. S. Gardiner, 
M. A. Caius; syn types of 0. latirostris; UMZ. — 19, 26.2; Seychelles; 
62 m; Oct. 20, 1905; J. S. Gardiner, M. A. Caius; UMZ.— Id 1 , 23.3; 
Providence Is., south of the Seychelles lis.; Alert, col., holotype of 
G. brevirostris; BMNH 82.27.— 19, 55.2; east of Lowi and Lowalafuri 
lis., south entrance to Fadifolla Atoll, Maldive lis.; 05°20' N, 73°29' E; 
46-64 m; Te Vega Sta. 122 A+B; Mar. 25, 1964; J. S. Garth; USNM 
120260. — 19, 13.8; Oyster Banks, Manaar, Ceylon; Herdman Collec- 
tion; BMNH 10.27.5.— 19, ca. 13.7; no local; 10 m to surface; Siboga; 
Apr. 3, 1900; ZMA. — 19, 30.5; Anchorage east of Dangar Basin, 
Saleh-bay, Sumbawa, Indonesia; 36 m; Siboga Sta. 313; Feb. 14-16, 
1900; ZMA. — Id 1 , 13.0; Mamoedjoe, west coast of Celebes; 
Snellius Exped.; Aug. 5, 1929; RMNH 288.— Id 1 , 25.4; Lembeh 
Strait, Celebes; June 14, 1929; Herre; USNM 120261.— Id 1 , 25.5; 
Banda anchorage; Siboga Sta. 240; Nov. 22-Dec. 1, 1899; ZMA — 
19, 36.6; Amboina Bight, Indonesia; 91 m; Mar. 3, 1922; Danish 
Expedition to Kei-Qeme, 1922; UMZ.— 19, 59.0; off northwest New 
Guinea; 00°07.2' N, 130°25.5' E; 83-59 m; Siboga Sta. 154; Aug. 14, 
1899; ZMA.— Id", 16.0; off northwest New Guinea; 01°42.5' S, 
130°47.5' E; 32 m; Siboga Sta. 164; August 1899; ZMA.— Id 1 , 16.1; 
North-Ubian, Philippine lis.; 06°07.5' N, 120°26' E; surface; Siboga 
Sta. 99; June 28-30, 1899; ZMA.— 1 broken d 1 , CL 13.7; Jolo, Philip- 
pine lis.; 46 in; Mar. 19, 1914; Th. Mortensen; UMZ.— 1 broken 9, 
ca. 61.5; Macclesfield Bank, South China Sea; holotype of Gonodactylus 
hansenii; BMNH 92.8.28.13.— Id 1 , 26.5; Waikiki, Oahu, Hawaiian 
lis.; 1921; D. Kuhns; USNM 56048.— 19, 32.7; Hawaii; 1916; 
Thaanum, col.; UZM. — Id 1 , 50.4; southern coast of Molokai Is., 
Hawaiian lis.; 109-116 m; Albatross Sta. 3845; Apr. 8, 1902.— 19, 
26.7; Pailolo Channel, between Molokai and Maui lis. and north- 
eastern approach, Hawaiian lis.; 55-95 m; Albatross Sta. 3861; 
Apr. 10, 1902; USNM 64869.— Id 1 , 56.9; off Kaui Is., Hawaiian lis.; 
424-73 m; Albatross Sta. 3982; June 10, 1902; USNM 64865.— 19, 
79.4; Penguin Bank, southern coast of Oahu Is., Hawaiian lis.; 49-51 
m; Albatross Sta. 4031; July 9, 1902; USNM 64864.— 19, 26.9; same; 
51-25 m; Albatross Sta. 4034; July 9, 1902; USNM 64868.— Id 1 , 
31.7; northeastern coast of Hawaii Is., Hawaiian lis.; 44-151 m; 
Albatross Sta. 4061; USNM 64867. 

Description. — Eye large, cornea subglobular, set obliquely on 
short stalk; eyes extending to or slightly beyond end of second segment 
of antennular peduncle; ocular scales oblique to body line, separate, 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 123 



connected by median, concave ridge defining a deep pit between the 
scales. 

Antennular peduncle short, about five-sixths as long as carapace. 

Antennal scales elongate, slightly shorter than median length of 




Figure 6. — Odontodactylus brevirostris (Miers), male, TL 56.9 mm, Hawaii: a, anterior 
portion of body; b, third to fifth abdominal somites, in lateral view; c, propodus and 
dactylus of raptorial claw; d, sixth abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; e, uropod, 
ventral view (setae omitted in d, e). 

carapace; margin almost completely setose, proximal fourth of 
anterior margin not setose, anterior setae much smaller than posterior. 
Rostral plate short, evenly rounded; plate in juvenile specimens 
trapezoidal or rounded, apex slightly deflexed. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 25 

Dactylus of raptorial claw with 6-10 teeth. 

Second to fifth abdominal somites each with anterolateral pit 
from which a shallow groove extends posteriorly; grooves increasing 
in depth posteriorly, on fourth somite flanked by low carina, flanking 
carina of fifth somite more prominent; sixth somite with 6 pairs of 
sharp posterior spines, submedians each with posteriorly reflected 
portion lying between submedian and intermediate carinae; sixth 
somite with large anterior tubercle between intermediate and lateral 
carinae; third to fifth abdominal somites with posterolateral spines; 
sixth somite without ventrolateral spines in front of articulation of 
uropod. 

Telson broader than long, with 1 pair of accessory median carinae; 
submedians long, occasionally suppressed at base of submedian tooth; 
intermediate denticles with short dorsal carina; carina of intermediate 
tooth not extending anteriorly much past base of tooth; lateral 
carinae subparallel or convergent with marginal, if subparallel apex 
occasionally turning toward and fusing with apex of marginal carina 
on lateral tooth; anterior surface of telson with distinct tubercle 
lateral to submedian carina. 

Outer margin of proximal segment of uropod exopod with 8-11 
movable spines, not markedly spatulate or upturned, last not extend- 
ing to end of distal segment; distal segment of uropod about four- 
fifths as long as proximal, relative lengths of the segments varying; 
outer spine of basal prolongation the longer. 

Color. — Faded in most specimens except for a dark spot on the 
proximal segment of the uropodal exopod. One specimen had short, 
interrupted lines on the dorsum of the body and dark posterolateral 
patches on the carapace in addition to the spots on the uropods. 

Size.— Males, TL 13.0-56.9 mm; females, 13.7-79.4 mm. 

Measurements and indices for selected specimens of 0. brevirostris 
(Miers) are as follows: 

Females 



Total length 


26.2 


30.5 


32.7 


36.6 


53.4 


61.5 


55.2 


79.4 


Carapace length 


5.8 


7.5 


7.8 


8.8 


11.9 


12.9 


13.0 


17.8 


Cornea length 


1.8 


2.4 


2.5 


3.2 


3.3 


3.5 


3.4 


4.0 


Cornea width 


2.1 


2.1 


2.5 


3.7 


3.2 


3.7 


3.1 


4.1 


Antennal scale length 


3.2 


4.9 


5.3 


- 


- 


- 


- 


- 


Fifth abdominal somite 


















width 


5.3 


6.8 


8.0 


9.1 


12.6 


13.0 


12.5 


17.2 


Telson length 


4.7 


3.9 


5.1 


5.6 


8.4 


9.8 


8.9 


12.7 


Telson width 


4.0 


5.4 


6.5 


7.3 


10.1 


10.2 


10.6 


13.8 


CI 


276 


357 


312 


238 


372 


349 


419 


434 


AWCLI 


913 


906 


1025 


1034 


1058 


1007 


961 


966 


Uropod P/D 


2.00 


1.14 


1.52 


1.61 


1.02 


1.68 


1.25 


- 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 







Males 






Total length 


25.5 


25.4 


31.7 


50.4 


56.9 


Carapace length 


5.2 


5.5 


6.8 


10.9 


11.7 


Cornea length 


2.0 


2.3 


2.5 


3.5 


3.8 


Cornea width 


1.8 


1.9 


2.4 


4.0 


4.5 


Antennal scale length 


4.0 


- 


4.8 


- 


10.6 


Fifth abdominal somite 












width 


5.3 


5.5 


6.5 


10.9 


11.8 


Telson length 


3.2 


3.8 


4.6 


7.3 


8.7 


Telson width 


4.4 


4.5 


5.5 


8.5 


9.2 


CI 


289 


289 


283 


272 


260 


AWCLI 


1019 


1000 


955 


1000 


1008 


Uropod P/D 


1.24 


1.21 


1.25 


1.12 


1.13 



Discussion. — The presence of ocular scales separated by a deep 
pit, more than five teeth on the raptorial claw, and only one pair of 
accessory median carinae on the telson will distinguish O. brevirostris 
from all other species in the genus. The ocular scales and character- 
istic intervening pit are visible even in first stage postlarvae. 







Figure 7. — Odontodactylus brevirostris (Miers). Female, TL 26.9 mm, Hawaii: a, outline 
of front; b, outline of sixth abdominal somite and telson. Male, TL 26.5 mm, Hawaii: 
c, outline of front to show ocular scales; d, outline of last abdominal somite and telson. 

It is with some hesitation that I use the name "brevirostris" for this 
species. The type of 0. brevirostris is a young male with only sub- 
median carinae on the telson, but the ocular scales are clearly separated 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 27 

by a pit and the claw has nine teeth. No differences could be found 
between it and specimens of similar size from the Indo-West Pacific. 
A western Atlantic specimen compared with the type is smaller but 
apparently identical. 

0. brevirostris has a comparatively larger eye at any size than any 
other species of the genus. Kemp (1911, 1913) commented upon the 
large size of the eyes in his specimens of 0. southwelli. 

Juveniles of 0. brevirostris, TL 13-30 mm (fig. 7), may not have the 
full complement of carinae on the last abdominal somite and telson. 
The carinae may be present in specimens as small as TL 16-20 mm 
(fig. 8) and absent in specimens as large as TL 27 mm. 

Five specimens of large postlarvae have been examined. Data on 
postlarvae and juveniles are summarized as follows: 

1. Small postlarvae (telson with median and submedian carinae 
only) : 



TL 13.0 


mm Bahamas 


USNM 9 ? 




TL 13.0 


mm Celebes 


RMNH c? 




TL 13.7 


[Indo-Malay 


a] ZMA 9 ? 




TL 13.8 


Ceylon 


BMNH ?? 




Large postlarvae (as above but of larger size) : 




TL 23.3 


Providence Is. 


type of G. brevirostris 


C? 


TL 26.2 


Seychelles 


UMZ 


9? 


TL 26.5 


Hawaii 


USNM 


& 


TL 26.7 


Hawaii 


USNM 


9? 


TL 26.9 


Hawaii 


USNM 


?? 


Juveniles (telson with full cc 


implement of carinae) : 




TL 16.0 


New Guinea 


ZMA 


<? 


TL 16.1 


Philippines 


ZMA 


<? 


TL 17.2 


Amirantes lis. 


syntype of 0. latirostris 


9? 


TL 20.0 


Cuba 


type of G. havanensis 


cf 


TL 25.4 


Celebes 


USNM 


cf 


TL 25.5 


Banda 


ZMA 


& 



All larger specimens have the telson provided with the normal 
complement of carinae. 

The small and large postlarvae appear to be identical except for 
size. All large postlarvae are from Indo-West Pacific whereas small 
postlarvae and small juveniles may occur in both the Atlantic and 
the Indo-West Pacific. 

There are several possible explanations for the differences in size 
of the postlarvae. The term "postlarva" is used for young specimens 
at the first intermolt state after the last pelagic larval stage. In 
Alima hyalina (see Manning, 1962) the postlarva is a distinct, bent hie 
stage intermediate between the last larva and the first-stage juvenile. 
Alima has but one postlarval stage; with the next molt it assumes 
features that are more characteristic of the adult. In Odontodactylus 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



there may be more than one postlarval stage during which the animal 
increases in size but does not develop the characteristic telson morphol- 
ogy of the adult, although this seems unlikely. In Alima hyalina the 
last larval stage is almost twice as long as the postlarva; Odontodactylus 
may have a larger postlarva than juvenile. Under certain conditions 
Odontodactylus may also have some mechanism of prolonging the 
larval stage so that postlarvae may be of different size. Finally, 




Figure 8. — Odontodactylus brevirostris (Miers), holotype of Gonodactylus havanensis Bigelow, 
male, TL 20.0 mm, off Havana: a, front; b, sixth abdominal somite and telson; c, third to 
fifth abdominal somites in lateral view. 



there may be more than one species involved and two or more species 
may be represented in the available material. Until more is known 
about the ontogenetic changes in Odontodactylus, the specimens of 
that genus, with the widely separate ocular scales, more than five 
teeth on the claw, and one pair of accessory median carinae on the 
telson, should be referred to 0. brevirostris. 



no. 360C ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 29 

A similar disparity of size in postlarvae has been observed in young 
specimens of 0. scyllarus. 

Juveniles of 0. brevirostris may also differ from adults in having the 
rostral plate trapezoidal in shape rather than semicircular; however, 
the latter shape is more usual. 

I have been unable to detect any differences between adult speci- 
mens (TL 40 mm or more) from the western Atlantic and the Indo- 
West Pacific. The type of Gonodactyus havanensis, a male, TL 
20.0 mm, is illustrated in outline in figure 8. As in most small speci- 
mens of similar size from the Indo-West Pacific, the carinae of the 
telson are relatively well developed. The western Atlantic 0. nigri- 
caudatus cannot be distinguished from specimens of similar size from 
the Indo-West Pacific, and it, too, must be considered a synonym of 
0. brevirostris. A more detailed account of the western Atlantic 
specimens is in press. 

In 0. bremrostris the carina of the lateral tooth may lie parallel 
with the margin, it may converge distally with the marginal carina, 
or it may He parallel except for its extremity, which turns and fuses 
with the marginal carina. The position of the carina is very variable, 
as noted by Bigelow (1931) in specimens from Hawaii. 

Distribution. — Western Atlantic and Indo-West Pacific, from the 
western Indian Ocean through Indo-Malaya to Hawaii; in moderate 
depth, to 424 m. This species fives at greater depths than any other 
in the genus. 



Literature Cited 
Alexander, W. B. 

1916. Further notes on W. A. stomatopods. Journ. Roy. Soc. Western 
Australia, vol. 1, pp. 9-10. 
Anonymous 

1949. Illustrated encyclopedia of the fauna of Japan, rev. ed. 1898 pp. + 
indices, 5213 figs., 12 col. pis. Tokyo: Hokuryukan Co., Ltd. 
Balss, H. 

1938. Stomatopoda. In Bronn, Klassen und Ordnungen des Tierreichs, 
vol. 5, sec. 1, pt. 6, no. 2, pp. 1-173, figs. 1-114. 
Barnard, K. H. 

1956. Further additions to the crustacean fauna-list of Portugese East 
Africa. Mem. Mus. Alvaro de Castro, no. 4, pp. 3-23, figs. 1-7. 
Berthold, A. A. 

1845. Ueber verschiedene neue oder seltene Reptilien aus Neu Granada 
und Crustaceen aus China. Nachr. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen, 1845, 
pp. 37-49. [Not seen.] 
1847. Ueber verschiedene neue oder seltene Reptilien aus Neu Granada 
und Crustaceen aus China. Abh. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen, vol. 3, 
pp. 3-32, pis. 1-3. 
Bigelow, R. P. 

1893. Preliminary notes on the Stomatopoda of the Albatross collections 

and on other specimens in the National Museum. Johns Hopkins 
Univ. Circ, vol. 12, pp. 100-102. 

1894. Report on the Crustacea of the Order Stomatopoda collected by the 

steamer "Albatross" between 1885-1891 and on other specimens 
in the National Museum. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 17, pp. 
489-550, figs. 1-28, pis. 20-22. 
1931. Stomatopoda of the southern and eastern Pacific Ocean and the 
Hawaiian Islands. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard, vol. 72, no. 
4, pp. 105-191, figs. 1-10, pis. 1-2. 

BORRADAILE, L. A. 

1907. Stomatopoda from the western Indian Ocean: The Percy Sladen 
Trust Expedition to the Indian Ocean in 1905, under the leader- 
ship of Mr. J. Stanley Gardiner. Trans. Linn. Soc. London, Zool. 
ser. 2, vol. 12, pp. 209-216, pi. 22. 
Bouvier, E. L. 

1915. Decapodes marcheurs et stomatopodes recueillis a l'ile Maurice par 
M. Paul Carrie. Bull. Sci. France et Beige, ser. 7, vol. 48, no. 3, 
pp. 178-318, figs. 1-42. 
Chace, Fenner A., Jr. 

1942. Six new species of decapod and stomatopod Crustacea from the Gulf 
of Mexico. Proc. New England Zool. Club, vol. 19, pp. 79-92, 
pis. 23-28. 

1954. Stomatopoda. In Gulf of Mexico, its origin, waters, and marine 
life. Fish. Bull., U. S. Fish Wildl. Serv., no. 89, pp. 449-450. 
30 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 31 

Dawydoff, C. 

1952. Contribution a l'etude des invertebres de la faune marine benthique 
de l'lndochine. Biol. Bull. France Belgique, suppl. 37, pp. 1-158, 
2 maps. 
Edmondson, W. T. , 

1921. Stomatopoda in the Bernice P. Bishop Museum. Occ. Pap. Bernice 

P. Bishop Mus., vol. 7, no. 13, pp. 282-302, figs. 1-2. 
1946. Reef and shore fauna of Hawaii. Spec. Pub. Bernice P. Bishop 
Mus., no. 2, v +381 pp., 223 figs. 
Gee, N. Gist 

1925. Tentative list of Chinese decapod Crustacea, including those repre- 

sented in the collections of the United States National Museum 

(marked with an *) with localities at which collected. Lingnaan 

Agric. Rev., vol. 3, pp. 156-163. 
Gravier, C. 

1933. Sur une petite collection des stomatopodes, recueillis par M. Dawydoff 

dans les eaux Indochinoises. Bull. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, ser. 2, 

vol. 5, pp. 77-82, figs. 1-6. 
1937. Stomatopodes des cotes dTndo-Chine. Ann. Inst. Oceanogr., vol. 

17, fasc. 3, pp. 175-211, figs. 1-23. 

GURNEY, R. 

1946. Notes on stomatopod larvae. Proc. Zool. Soc. London, vol. 116, 
pp. 133-175, figs. 1-14. 
Haan, W., de 

1833-1850. Crustacea. In de Siebold, Fauna Japonica sive descriptio 
animalium, quae in itinere per Japoniam, jusse et auspiciis superi- 
orum, qui summum in India Batavia Imperium tenent, suscepto, 
annis 1823-1830 collegit, notis observationibus et adumbrationibus 
illustravit, pp. i-xvi, i-xxxi, vii-xvii, 1-243, pis. a-q, 1-55, circ. 2. 
Hansen, H. J. 

1921. Studies on Arthropoda, i, pp. 1-80, pis. 1-4. Copenhagen: Gylden- 
dalske Boghandel. 

1926. The Stomatopoda of the Siboga Expedition. Siboga Exped. Monogr. 

35, pp. 1-48, pis. 1-2. 
Hemming, F. 

1954. Validation, under the Plenary Powers, of the generic name Odonlo- 
dactylus Bigelow, 1893 (Class Crustacea, Order Stomatopoda) : 
Opinion 295. Opin. Decl. Int. Coram. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 8, 
pp. 155-165. 
Holthuis, L. B. 

1941. The Stomatopoda of the Snellius Expedition. No. xn in Biological 
results of the Snellius Expedition. Temminckia, vol. 6, pp. 241- 
294, figs. 1-9. 

1951. Proposed use of the Plenary Powers to validate the generic name 
"Odontodactylus" Bigelow, 1893 (Class Crustacea, Order Stomato- 
poda). Bull. Zool. Nomencl., vol. 2, pp. 86-87. 

1959. Notes on pre-Linnaean carcinology (including the study of Xiphosura) 
of the Malay Archipelago, chap. 5, pp. 63-125, photos 7-11. In 
de Wit, ed., Rumphius memorial volume, v + 462, 27 photos. 
Baarn: Hollandia. 



32 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Holthuis, L. B. and Manning, R. B. 

1964. Proposed use of the Plenary Powers (A) to designate a type-species 
for the genera Pseudosquilla Dana, 1852, and Gonodactyhis Berthold 
1827, and (B) for the suppression of the generic name Smerdis 
Leach, 1817 (Crustacea, Stomatopoda). Bull. Zool. Nomencl., 
vol. 21, pt. 2, pp. 137-143. 
In press. Stomatopoda. In Moore, ed., Treatise on invertebrate pale- 
ontology. 



H. S. 



1876. 



JURICH, B. 

1904. 



Kalk, M. 
1958. 



Kemp, S. 
1911. 



Ceylon: A general description of the island, historical, physical, 
statistical; containing the most recent information, vol. 2, pp. 
i-viii, 1-432, 1 map. [Not seen.] 

Die Stomatopoden der deutschen Tief see-Expedition. Wiss. Ergebn. 
Valdivia Exped., vol. 7, pp. 361-408, pis. 25-30. [Pp. 1-51, pis. 
1-6, in separate, dissertation.] 

The Crustacea of Inhaca shores. In Macnae and Kalk, eds., A 
natural history of Inhaca Island, Mogambique, vi + 163 pp. 
Johannesburg: Witwatersrand Univ. Press. 



Preliminary descriptions of new species and varieties of Crustacea 
Stomatopoda in the Indian Museum. Rec. Indian Mus., vol. 6, 
pp. 93-100. 
1913. An account of the Crustacea Stomatopoda of the Indo-Pacific region. 
Mem. Indian Mus., vol. 4, pp. 1-217, 10 figs., pis. 1-10. 
Kemp, S., and Chopra, B. 

1921. Notes on Stomatopoda. Rec. Indian Mus., vol. 22, pp. 297-311, 

figs. 1-4. 
Komai, T. 

1922. A case of conspicuous sexual difference in coloration in a stomatopod, 

with notes of a male with coloration approaching that of a female. 

Annot. Zool. Japonensis, vol. 10, pp. 101-107, figs. 1-2. 
1927. Stomatopoda of Japan and adjacent localities. Mem. Coll. Sci. 

Kyoto Imp. Univ., ser. b, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 307-354, figs. 1-2, 

pis. 13-14. 
1938. Stomatopoda occurring in the vicinity of Kii Peninsula. Annot. 

Zool. Japonensis, vol. 17, nos. 3-4, pp. 264-275, figs. 1-3. 
Komai, T. ; Akatsuka, K.; and Ikari, J. 

1927. The Seto Marine Biological Laboratory of the Kyoto Imperial 

University: Its equipment and activities, with remarks on the 

fauna and flora of the environs. Mem. Coll. Sci. Kyoto Imp. 

Univ., ser. b, vol. 3, no. 3, 281-306, 8 figs., pi. 12. 
Komai, T., and Ikari, J. 

1929. The Seto Marine Biological Laboratory of the Kyoto Imperial 

University: Its equipment and activities, with remarks on the 

fauna and flora of the environ (a revised article). Rec. Oceanogr. 

Works Japan, vol. 1, pp. 113-129, pis. 27-35. 
Lanchester, W. F. 

1901. Brachyura, Stomatopoda, and Macrura. Pt. i in On the Crustacea 

collected during the "Skeat Expedition" to the Malay Peninsula, 

together with a note on the genus Aclaeopsis. Proc. Zool. Soc. 

London, 1901, pp. 534-574, pis. 33-34. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 33 

Latreille, P. A. 

1828. Squille, Squilla. In Encyclopedic methodique histoire naturelle, 
Insectes, vol. 10, pp. 467-475. 
Linnaeus, C. 

1758. Systema naturae per regna tria naturae, secundum classes, ordines, 
genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis, 
ed. 10, vol. 1, pp. 1-824. 
1767. Systema naturae per regna tria naturae, secundum classes, ordines, 
genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis, 
ed. 12, vol. 1, pp. 533-1327. 
Manning, Raymond B. 

1962. Alima hyalina Leach, the pelagic larva of the stomatopod crustacean 
Squilla alba Bigelow. Bull. Mar. Sci. Gulf and Caribbean, vol. 12, 
no. 3, pp. 496-507, figs. 1-4. 

1965. Stomatopoda from the collection of His Majesty The Emperor of 

Japan. Crustaceana, vol. 9, pt. 3, pp. 249-262, figs. 1-2, pis. 
11-12. 

1966. Notes on some Australian and New Zealand stomatopod Crustacea, 

with an account of the species collected by the Fisheries Investiga- 
tion Ship Endeavour. Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 
79-137, figs. 1-10. 

1967. Stomatopod Crustacea from the western Atlantic. In press. 
Miers, E. J. 

1880. On the Squillidae. Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 5, vol. 5, pp. 1-30, 

108-127, pis. 1-3. 
1880a. On a collection of Crustacea from the Malaysian region, pt. iv: 
Penaeidea, Stomatopoda, Isopoda, Suctoria, and Xiphosura. 
Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 5, vol. 5, pp. 457-472, pi. 15. 
1884. Crustacea. In Report of the zoological collections made in the Indo- 
Pacific Ocean during the voyage of H.M.S. "Alert," 1881-2, pp. 
17S-322, 513-575, pis. 18-35, 46-52. 
Milne-Edwards, A. 

1868. Observations sur la fauna carcinologique des iles du Cap-Vert. 
Nouv. Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, vol. 4, pp. 49-68, pis. 16-18. 
Milne-Edwards, H. 

1837. Histoire naturelle des crustaces, comprenant l'anatomie, la physi- 
ologie et la classification de ces animaux, vol. 2, 532 pp. 
Odhner, T. 

1923. Indopazifische Stomatopoden. Goteborg Vetensk. Samh. Handl., 
ser. 4, vol. 27, pt. 4, pp. 1-16, figs. 1-10. 
Parisi, B. 

1922. Elenco degli stomatopodi del Museo di Milano. Atti. Soc. Italiano 
Sci. Nat., vol. 61, pp. 91-114, figs. 1-7. 
Pocock, R. I. 

1893. Report upon the stomatopod crustaceans obtained by P. W. Bassett- 
Smith, Esq., surgeon, R. N., during the cruise, in the Australian 
and China seas, of H.M.S. Penguin, Commander W. U. Moore. 
Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 6, vol. 11, pp. 473-479, pi. 20b. 
Roxas, H. A. and Estampador, E. 

1930. Stomatopoda of the Philippines. Nat. App. Sci. Manila, vol. 1, 
pp. 93-131, pis. 1-6. 



34 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Rumphius, G. E. 

1705. D'Amboinische Rariteitkamer ... 28 pp., pp. 1-340, 43 pp., 
fig., pis. 1-60. Amsterdam. 
Schmitt, W. L. 

1929. Chinese stomatopods collected by S. F. Light. Lingnan Sci. Journ., 
vol. 8, pp. 127-148, pis. 16-19. 
Serene, R. 

1937. Inventaire des invert£br6s marins de l'lndochine (l re liste). Notes 

Inst. Oc6anogr. Indochine, vol. 30, pp. 1-83. 
1939. Note sur les stomatopodes des eaux Indochinoises. Bull. Soc. Zool. 
France, vol. 64, pp. 343-349, figs. 1-4. 

1953. Sur la collection des stomatopodes de l'lnstitut Oceanographique 

de l'lndochine. Proc. 7th Pacific Sci. Congr., 1949, vol. 4, pp. 
506-508. 

1954. Observations biologiques sur les stomatopodes. Mem. Inst. Oc6anogr. 

Nhatrang, no. 8, pp. 1-93, figs. 1-15, pis. 1-10. 
1962. Revision du genre Pseudosquilla (Stomatopoda) ct definition des 
genres nouveaux. Bull. Inst. Oceanogr. Monaco, no. 1241, pp. 
1-27, figs. 1-5. 
Shiino, S. M. 

1964. Arthropoda, 1: Introduction and Crustacea. In Uchida, ed., Animal 
phylogenetic systematics, vol. 7, pt. 1, 312 pp. Tokyo: Nakayama 
Book Co. [In Japanese.] 
Stephenson, W. 

1952. Faunistic records from Queensland, pt. 1: General Introduction; 

pt. 11: Adult Stomatopoda (Crustacea). Zool. Pap. Univ. Queens- 
land, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-15. 

1953. Notes on the Australian Stomatopoda (Crustacea) in the collections 

of the Queensland Museum. Mem. Queensland Mus., vol. 13, 

pt. 1, pp. 40-49. 
1960. Notes on Queensland Stomatopoda (mantis prawns). Queensland 

Natur., vol. 16, p. 61. 
1962. Some interesting Stomatopoda — mostly from Western Australia. 

Journ. Roy. Soc. Western Australia, vol. 45, pt. 2, pp. 33-43, 

figs. 1-2, pi. 1. 
Stephenson, W., and McNeill, F. A. 

1955. The Australian Stomatopoda (Crustacea) in the collections of the 

Australian Museum. Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 23, pp. 239-265, 
fig. 1. 
Suniee, A. L. J. 

1918. The Stomatopoda of the collection of the Visserij-Station at Batavia. 
Contrib. Faune Indes Neerl., vol. 1, fasc. 4, pp. 1-14, pis. 1-4. 
Tattersall, W. M. 

1906. Report on the Leptostraca, Schizopoda and Stomatopoda collected 
by Professor Herdman, at Cejion, on 1902. In Herdman, Report 
to the Government of Ceylon on the Pearl Oyster Fisheries of the 
Gulf of Manaar, vol. 5, pp. 157-188, pis. 1-3. 
Townsley, S. J. 

1953. Adult and larval stomatopod crustaceans occurring in Hawaiian 
waters. Pacific Sci., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 399-437, figs. 1-28. 
Utinomi, H. 

1956. Coloured illustrations of sea shore animals of Japan, pp. i-xviii, 

1-167, figs. 1-44, col. pis. 1-64. 



no. 3606 ODONTODACTYLUS — MANNING 35 

Utinomi, H. — Continued 

1960. [Stomatopoda.] In Okada and Uchida, eds., Encyclopedia zoologica 
illustrated in colours, vol. 4, 247+ pp., 123 pis. Tokyo: Hokuryu- 
kan Publishing Co., Ltd. [In Japanese.] 
Ward, M. 

1942. Notes on the Crustacea of the Desjardins Museum, Mauritius 
Institute, with descriptions of new genera and species. Bull. 
Mauritius Inst., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 49-10S, pis. 5-6. 
White, A. 

1850. Description of two species of Crustacea in the British Museum. 

Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1850, pp. 95-97, pis. 15-16. 

1851. Descriptions of two species of Crustacea in the British Museum. 

Ann. Mat. Nat. Hist., ser. 2, vol. 7, pp. 421-423. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3607 



The Role of the Depressor Mandibulae Muscle 
in Kinesis of the Avian Skull 



By Richard Zusi 

Associate Curator, Division of Birds 



Introduction 



Basic structures of the facial and palatal portions of the bird's skull 
are understandable only in terms of the kinetic property of the skull — 
the ability to move the upper jaw with respect to the braincase. 
Although avian kinesis was known to 18th-century anatomists and 
has been analyzed variously in terms of muscles, ligaments, and 
adaptive modifications, the important complex of structures consti- 
tuting the jaw-quadrate linkage has not been studied sufficiently in 
any species to permit a detailed evaluation of the actions of the major 
jaw muscles. 

My purpose here is to examine a single muscle, M. depressor mandib- 
ulae, to determine the effects upon jaw action of variations in muscle 
configuration and variations in the jaw articulation through which 
the muscle acts. (See fig. 1 for structures under discussion in this 
paper.) My methods include experiments based on stimulation of 
muscles in live birds, construction of models of the muscle-ligament 
sj'stem, and manipulation of fresh and preserved specimens. The 

1 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



M. protractor 
quad rati et 
pterygoidei 




ramus of lower jaw 



M. depressor 
mandibulae 



articular 
juc/omandibular lig. 



Hesperfphona vespertine 




ramus of lower jaw postorbital 
ligament 



M. protractor quadrati 
et pfery^oidei 



drate 



M. depressor 
mandibulae 

retroarticular 
process 



articular 
jugomandibular lig. 



Gallus domestfcus 

Figure 1. — Structural features of the head in the evening grosbeak (Hesperiphona vespertina) 
and domestic chicken {Gallus domesticus). (Adductor and retractor muscle groups 
removed.) 



no. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 3 

most commonly stated action of M. depressor mandibulae is to open 
the lower jaw, but emphasis herein will be placed on the interaction 
between the postorbital ligament and the depressor mandibulae in 
protraction (raising) of the upper jaw. Several authors have postu- 
lated such a protraction effect through the postorbital ligament 
(Kripp, 1933, pp. 556-559; Starck, 1940, pp. 618-620; Barnikol, 1952, 
pp. 382-384; Zusi, 1962, p. 47; Bock, 1964, pp. 19-22), explaining its 
action, with some variations, as follows: the ligament is a virtually 
unstretchable band running from the cranium to the mandible and 
attaching anterior to the quadrate articulation, where the ligament 
provides a fulcrum around which the lower jaw pivots (see fig. 2). 
The depressor mandibulae rotates that portion of the lower jaw lying 



M depressor 
mandibulae 



attachment of 
postorbital ligament 



Figure 2. — Diagram of protraction of the upper jaw through the depressor mandibulae 
and postorbital ligament. The lower jaw pivots about the attachment of the ligament. 
As the lower jaw opens, the quadrate is pushed forward and the upper jaw is raised. 

behind the attachment upward and forward, rocking the quadrates 
forward and thereby protracting the upper jaw. The important point 
is that the lower jaw pivots about the ligamentary attachment rather 
than about the quadrate articulation as is commonly stated. Bock 
(1964) has explored the significance of the postorbital ligament and 
has presented a number of hypotheses about avian kinesis that will 
be discussed below. 

The group of structures that support the lower jaw form a closely 
interacting functional complex that is part of the larger complex of the 
entire kinetic mechanism. The support system includes the quadrate, 
the rami of the lower jaw, the jaw-quadrate articulation, and the 
muscles and ligaments associated with these structures. Most of the 
jaw muscles have the potential for moving the quadrate either through 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

direct attachment or indirectly by spanning its cranial and man- 
dibular articulations. Motion of the quadrates has a direct effect on 
motion of the upper jaw and on the lower jaw as well; motion of the 
lower jaw may in turn induce shifting of the quadrates through 
features of the jaw articulation and ligaments. Understanding the 
functional properties of the complex kinetic mechanism is thus very 
difficult, but it is essential for the interpretation of variation of these 
structures in birds. 

The depressor mandibulae has considerable potential for evolu- 
tionary development of functional-anatomical variation. Because of 
its superficial position, its origin may expand posteriorly over the 
neck muscles or dorsally and anteriorly over the skull and adductor 
muscles providing variation in both size and angle of pull of the muscle 
in different birds. The muscle may play a role in protraction of the 
upper jaw as well as in depression of the lower jaw, and therefore, it 
might be expected to show modifications for feeding methods that 
require forceful opening of both jaws or the upper jaw alone, or for 
resisting forces on the bill. 

During the spring of 1963, Ulrich Kalkofen, then a senior honors 
student under my supervision at the University of Maine, undertook 
a series of pilot experiments to test hypotheses about the role of the 
postorbital ligament in kinesis (Kalkofen, 1963). The data obtained 
form the basis for the following section on jaw action. I wish to thank 
Paul C. Harris for providing the chickens used for this study and 
Jon Greenlaw for his help in performing the experiments. Financial 
assistance was provided by the Coe Research Fund (R 625-49) of 
the University of Maine. The final organization of the paper bene- 
fited greatly from the constructive criticisms of George E. Watson 
and Paul Slud. I am indebted to Walter J. Bock for providing me 
with a translation of the 1958 paper by Yudin. 

Experiments on Jaw Action 

Methods. — Live birds used for experiment were the evening 
grosbeak (Hesperiphona vespertina) and the domestic chicken (Gallus 
domesticus) — hens of parentage female barred Plymouth Rock X 
male Rhode Island red. These species were especially suitable 
because they were readily obtainable and easily kept in captivity, 
and because the postorbital ligament is poorly developed in the 
grosbeak and strongly developed in the chicken. 

For each species a wooden head support was constructed to conform 
with the contour of the mid-dorsal surface of the cranium; each 
support was held rigidly in place by metal clamps that penetrated 
under the supraorbital rims of the skull. Birds were first weighed 



no. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 5 

and then anaesthetized by intramuscular injection of equitheesin 
(0.20 ml. per 100 grams body weight, or more if necessary). Great 
care was taken to ensure that the birds were anaesthetized completely 
before and during the experimentation. Feathers of the head and 
neck were trimmed and the skin of both sides of the head reflected 
as soon as the bird lost consciousness. After the head support was 
fastened firmly to the bird, the support was held motionless by a 
vise and the body of the bird supported by the table or horizontally 
suspended in a plastic tube (fig. 3). The exposed jaw muscles were 
kept moist and clean throughout the experiments by periodic flushing 
with avian Ringer's solution at 38° C. The depressor mandibulae 
muscles were caused to contract simultaneously by a tetanizing 



clomp 



head 
support 




electrode 
stimulator 



Figure 3. — Diagram of experimental setup for stimulating the depressor mandibulae 
muscles. The bill was photographed as viewed in the diagram before and during muscle 
stimulation. 



stimulus of 20 volts (using two Harvard apparatus stimulators) 
applied through electrodes. The tips of both copper wires of each 
electrode were fitted with platinum wire bent as a triangle with one 
point of the triangle soldered to the wire and the opposite side of 
the triangle placed against the surface of the muscle. The bases 
of the two triangles of each electrode were parallel, about three mm 
apart, and were placed perpendicular to the long axis of the muscle. 
This type of contact gave consistent contractions, was easily applied 
and adjusted, and caused no damage to the muscles. Before stimu- 
lating the muscles simultaneously, each was individually stimulated 
to see that both were performing in a similar manner. Only at 
voltages exceeding 50 (and especially approaching 100) were there 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

spasmodic and unpredictable motions of the jaws caused by contrac- 
tions of other muscles. Although 20 volts probably did not pro- 
duce maximum contraction of the depressor mandibulae, it produced 
consistent jaw motions that could be safely attributed to con- 
traction of the muscle under study. 

The maximum number of consecutive stimulations, each of which 
lasted about two seconds, was 18 for a grosbeak and 17 for a chicken, 
during which the depressor muscles showed no signs of fatigue. 
Despite extensive severing of other jaw muscles the birds continued 
to respond well. All birds were killed while still under anaesthesia. 
The nature and extent of the operative procedures were then checked 
under a dissecting microscope immediately following each experi- 
mental series. 

Just before stimulation of the muscles and again during stimulation 
and steady tetanic contraction, side view photographs of the jaws 
were taken. The two photographs from each experimental set were 
projected and traced, one superimposed on the other. I measured 
the motion of each jaw as degrees of arc between the resting position 
and the stabilized position during muscle contraction. The lower 
jaw has a longer radius of motion than the upper jaw because its 
fulcrum of rotation lies well behind that of the upper jaw. For this 
reason, the tip of the lower jaw travels farther than that of the upper 
jaw for the same number of degrees of movement. One therefore can- 
not obtain a meaningful measure of total gape simply by adding the 
degree motion of the two jaws, but differences within each jaw can 
be compared directly. 

Results. — Figure 4 presents the degree of motion of each jaw in 
bar graphs, whereas figure 5 shows several tracings of the jaws to give 
the reader a better impression of the actual amount of jaw motion. 
I must emphasize that throughout the experiments the depressors 
probably never were contracted maximally and the major protractor 
muscle of the upper jaw (protractor quadrati et pterygoidei) did not 
contribute to the observed jaw motion. As stated before, the evening 
grosbeak lacks a well-defined postorbital ligament, whereas the do- 
mestic chicken has a stout one. 

It is clearly indicated in figure 4 that muscle contractions in the 
chicken produced repeatable results during experimentation with each 
bird (see A 1 and 2, 4 and 7; C 1 and 2; D 4 and 6, 7 and 9) and com- 
parable results between different birds treated on different days (A 1, 
B 1, C 1, D 5). 

The results of the experiments may be summarized as follows: 
(1) the depressor mandibulae caused protraction (raising) of the upper 
jaw and depression of the lower jaw in the domestic chicken and 
evening grosbeak; (2) the muscle caused opening of both jaws in the 



NO. 3607 


ID 

id 


KINESIS 


OF AVI, 


9- 
M 


la 


1 


N 


1 £ 


1 








sS 


s°n— 


9 | 




m 


el l" 


2 


1 










* 


5*11 


= 1 














CEj 


- 1 

M 





-ZUSI 



LOO 

ri 



N 


c| I 


1 








— 


el | 


1 



o 



□ 



pq 



□ I 



I 

to 






«*» 



2L 



«*[ 



< 

i— 

o 



£.1: 2.1 



="'"''. 



o- 



N 


Ml 


i 








- =1 


i 


I 



rO 



1 

o 



-r-l— 
O 



.2 c •- "° •- 



u 

— 




u 

CI 

-T3 


u 

u, 
C 


,3 


xi 
£ 


£ 


o 
1 

is 


3 


1 
rt 


3 


o 
u 

60 


u 

E 
3 


o 

3 

II 


u 
u 

is 


Ed 

O 




■13 
O 


C 


3 

13 


a 


.« 


CO 

a 


s 




jU 






w 


CJ 






U 


■ | , 


en 


£ 


3 


'2 


£ 

30 


u, 




o 
c 


a 

o 




J 


U 

*T5 


U 

II 
< 


m 


o 


g 


o 


V 


P 


'n 




T3 


.n 


a 


a 


c 




IS 


E 


U 


< 


o 
a, 


<u 


a 




U 


V 

a, 




U 

-3 


-a 

II 


M 

"5 




II 


U 
CU 


u 


' — 





J5 


u. 


+-> 


a. 


'JO 
4-1 


u 

3 

£ 


O 

2 


s 


CO 

is 
o 
,3 


> 


_c 


3 

£ 


C 

u 

£ 

Cd 


bo 
C 


-1 


Q 

5, 

4) 


CS 




C3 




3 

u 


ed 




B 


.3 


X) 




u 


s 

o 


"3 


cij 


+j 


c< 

CD 




XI 


3 

.2 


> 



Is 
o 
-3 


£ 

3 


D 


— 


O 









a 


n 






T) 


a 


£ 


T3 




«" 


4-1 


C 

<u 


i3 


a 


3 


o 


3 







[A 


a 


a 




' 1 




Q 


























<u 




4-1 




- 






c 


s 




s 


a 






u 












«3 



Figure 4. — Ba 

of motion of 
bar, the end < 


^ 2 

T3 ^3 

c *-■ 
6< 


u 

3 
O 


y_ 

cd 

X 


iS -a 
&c -a 

II * 

t* — 

O rt 

" ". 

oo d 
ui a. 


M 

s. 


ffl 1 1 


s| 




.^i i 


|a 




1 














e| 1 1 


sfi 




1 





U- 



u 



^n 



u, 



cz 



•o^ 



a- 2 *! J 

-1 1— 

O 



|3 
2.2. 



— — i — 
O 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

chicken after removal of the postorbital ligament; (3) protraction of 
the upper jaw by the depressor mandibulae was reduced after removal 
of the postorbital ligaments in the chicken; (4) depression of the lower 
jaw occurred when the upper jaw was held closed in both species; 
(5) protraction of the upper jaw occurred when the lower jaw was 
held closed in both species; and (6) the postorbital ligament played a 
role in holding the lower jaw partially closed at rest. In addition, 
protraction in the chicken following removal of the postorbital liga- 
ment was about half that of the normal condition. A weight of ten 
grams suspended from midway along the exposed culmen of the 
chicken reduced protraction in the normal bird and prevented pro- 
traction in birds from which the postorbital ligaments had been re- 
moved. Limiting or preventing motion of one jaw reduced but did 
not prevent motion of the other jaw. The postorbital ligament alone 
did not hold the lower jaw completely closed at rest (see fig. 4: A 1, 
2, 3), but removal of the ligament shifted the jaw to a more depressed 
resting position. That the adductor muscles also played some role 
in support of the resting jaw is suggested by B 3, in which the jaw at 
rest was most strongly depressed following removal of both the post- 
orbital ligaments and adductor muscles. 

Discussion. — The fact that the postorbital ligament and the 
depressor mandibulae can together produce protraction of the upper 
jaw is demonstrated by the experiments on domestic chickens 
described above. The ligament thus serves to coordinate motions 
of both jaws during depression of the lower jaw. Coordination of 
both jaws through the depressor mandibulae, however, does not 
require the presence of the postorbital ligament, and the ligament 
must be regarded as only one of several means (excluding other jaw 
muscles) of producing coordination. Furthermore, coordination of 
the jaws in the presence of a postorbital ligament is not obligatory; 
either jaw may also be moved independently. 

Bock (1964) discussed the role of the postorbital ligament in 
avian kinesis, basing his conclusions on the results of manipulation 
of jaws in fresh birds and on inference from the anatomical structure 
of the jaw mechanism. His major hypotheses were as follows: (1) 
Two basically different kinetic mechanisms exist in birds — coupled 
and uncoupled. The jaws are coupled in those species with a post- 
orbital ligament (or a functionally equivalent ligament), and/or with 
an interlocking arrangement of the jaw-quadrate articulation. Birds 
lacking both of these features have uncoupled jaws. (2) When the 
upper jaw of a coupled bird is held firmly in place, the lower jaw 
cannot be depressed. (3) In uncoupled birds the depressor mandib- 
ulae does not contribute to raising the upper jaw except perhaps when 
the mandible is depressed against resistance. (4) In coupled kinesis 



KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 



9 



it is impossible to depress the upper jaw beyond the closed position. 
(5) The elevated upper jaw cannot be lowered without raising the 
mandible. (6) Only those few groups of modern birds having un- 
coupled kinesis could have given rise to an akinetic form. 

Although the experiments confirm the existence of coordinated jaw 
motion through the postorbital ligament, they nevertheless contradict 






Gallus 
domesticus 





Hesperiphona vesperfina 



Figure 5. — Tracings of jaws from superimposed photographs taken before (stippled) and 
during contraction of the depressor mandibulae muscles. (Left: normal bird; middle: 
normal bird; right: postorbital ligaments cut. Drawings do not present maximum opening 
of either jaw.) 



Bock's assumptions 1, 2, and 3 directly and 4, 5, and 6 by implication. 
The avian kinetic mechanism should not be regarded as either strictly 
coupled or uncoupled ; rather, it is likely that many birds are coupled 
weakly, but probably few are coupled so strongly that other muscles 
cannot counteract the jaw linkage. Approaches toward complete 
coupling or complete independence of jaw action would represent 

246-573—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM ™l. 123 

special adaptions rather than typical conditions. To better under- 
stand these complex kinetic relationships, three main questions must 
be answered: (1) How does the postorbital ligament produce coordina- 
tion of the two jaws? (2) How can the jaws be alternately "coupled" 
and "uncoupled"? (3) What factors produce coordination in addition 
to or in the absence of the postorbital ligament? The first question 
is dealt with in the following section, and the second and third, under 
"Coordination and Independence of Jaw Action." 

Angle of the Depressor Mandibulae 

Zusi (1959) postulated that the depressor mandibulae could cause 
protraction of the upper jaw if part or all of the muscle pulled at an 
angle (forward and upward) with respect to the long axis of the 
quadrate. He stated that the forward component of force with 
respect to the quadrate would be transmitted to the quadrate through 
the lower jaw. Bock (1964, pp. 16, 17) disagreed, saying that the 
only point of relevance was whether or not the pull of the depressor 
had a component directed forward along the axis of the lower jaw, 
and he pointed out that such a forward component would diminish 
or disappear as the lower jaw was depressed. In addition, he indicated 
that any analysis of muscle angle should include the postorbital 
ligament when it is present. Here I shall present such an analysis 
in detail because it is of considerable importance for understanding 
adaptations of the kinetic mechanism, whereas the effect of muscle 
angle on a simplified system of weightless and frictionless levers as 
presented by Zusi (1959) and Bock (1964, pp. 16, 17) is probably 
irrelevant to the situation in the avian jaw, even in birds lacking a 
postorbital ligament. 

To explain the relationship between the postorbital ligament and 
motion of both jaws through force analysis, it is necessary to discuss 
two important variables diagrammed in figure 6: first, the relative 
lengths of the segments from the mandibular attachment of the post- 
orbital ligament to the center of rotation of the jaw articulation (A) 
and from the ligament's attachment to the insertion of the depressor 
mandibulae (B); and second, the angle of the depressor mandibulae 
in relation to its neutral axis. The force of the depressor mandibulae 
(F) can be replaced by two components, H and V, running in line 
with and vertical to the force arm B. To determine the effect of 
these components on the quadrate, one must transfer both compo- 
nents, H' and V, to the jaw-quadrate articulation. The clockwise 

VXB 

rotational component V is increased by the amount V= — — 

whereas the counterclockwise component H' remains the same, and 



KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 



11 



quadrate 

postorbital 
ligament 




m depressor 
mandibulae 



Figure 6. — Diagram of forces produced by the depressor mandibulae in a simplified sup- 
porting system of the lower jaw. (F=resultant force of depressor mandibulae; V and 
H = rectangular components of F; H'=H transferred to quadrate articulation; V'=V 

transferred to quadrate articulation and increased in relation V'= ; F'=resultant 

A 

of components V and H'; P and C=rectangu!ar components of F'; A=work arm from 
fulcrum at attachment of postorbital ligament to quadrate; B = force arm from post- 
orbital ligament to insertion of depressor mandibulae.) 





a 



b 



Figure 7. — Effect of the angle of the depressor mandibulae upon motion of the upper jaw 
through the postorbital ligaments: a, protraction force P increased by counterclockwise 
shift of F (compare with fig. 6); b, retraction component R produced by clockwise shift of 
F (compare with fig. 6). (Symbols defined in fig. 6.) 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

the new resultant force is F'. (Clock directions herein always refer 
to the skull as viewed from its left side.) The rotational effect of 
force F' on the quadrate is P. It is clear that variation in the angle 
of the depressor mandibulae can increase or reduce P (fig. 7a) and that 
the muscle-ligament combination could even produce retraction of 
the upper jaw (fig. 76). The neutral angle of the muscle is the angle 
at which contraction of the depressor mandibulae produces no motion 
of either jaw. Bock's force analysis (1964, fig. 9) is incorrect because 
he neglected to transfer the backward component of force of the 
depressor mandibulae (H in fig. 6 of this paper) to the jaw articulation 
along with the upward component (V) . It is not true that the pres- 
ence of the ligament would cause protraction upon contraction of the 
depressor mandibulae under all conditions, as implied by his analysis; 
rather, the force and amount of protraction obtained and the amount 
of depression of the lower jaw as well depend upon the two variables 
mentioned above, and these forces could reach zero (the neutral state) 
under conditions that are not very different from those existing in 
birds. The conditions producing a neutral angle of the depressor 
mandibulae are not found in birds when the jaws are closed because 
such conditions would prevent opening of both jaws. Birds in which 
the geometry of the jaw-support system departs most strongly from 
a neutral arrangement probably represent special adaptations for 
coordination of the jaws through the depressor mandibulae. 

Just as components V' and H' are altered by variations in the angle 
of F, their effect upon protraction varies with changes in the relative 
lengths of the force and work arms (B and A) when the muscle angle 
remains the same. If B is increased relatively more than A, V 
increases but H' remains the same, with the result that P increases. 
By contrast, P may be reduced to zero if B becomes relatively 
shortened. 

Were the fine of force of the depressor mandibulae to parallel the 
long axis of the quadrate (regardless of its angle to the long axis of 
the mandible), its protraction force (P) would be zero only when B 
equalled A. In birds, B is always greater than A and the depressor 
commonly is nearly parallel to the long axis of the quadrate with the 
result that a protraction force exists. The force of protraction can be 
increased by relative lengthening of the retroarticular process of the 
mandible or by shifting the angle of pull of the depressor muscles in a 
counterclockwise direction, or by both. The amount of protraction 
possible depends upon the relative lengths of A and of B, of the 
quadrate, and of the muscle fibers in the depressor mandibulae, as 
well as the geometry of the palate and upper jaw. A relative increase 
in A with respect to B would increase the degree of protraction with 
a given contraction of the depressor muscles, at the same time re- 



no. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 13 

ducing the force of protraction. The attachment point of the post- 
orbital ligament, however, is never far in front of the jaw articulation 
as this would reduce the amount by which the lower jaw could be 
depressed. 

During depression of the lower jaw by the depressor mandibulae 
muscles, the resultant force of each depressor muscle shifts in a clock- 
wise direction relative to the bones. It is possible that the geometry 
of the entire ligarnentary mechanism is such that, in some birds, the 
system reaches a neutral condition before the mandible is depressed 
to the limits allowed by the jaw articulation alone. Full contraction 
of the depressor mandibulae thus would stabilize both jaws in an 
opened position without permitting excessive strain on the jaw 
articulation or kinetic articulations that might occur in the absence 
of the ligament. 

Zusi (1959) postulated that birds that force their jaws open against 
environmental resistance (probers, gapers) may derive a protraction 
effect through the depressor mandibulae in that the point of resistance 
to depression of the lower jaw creates a new fulcrum, replacing that 
of the postorbital ligament. (In figure 6, A and B would then extend 
from the point of resistance near the tip of the jaw to the quadrate 
and to the depressor mandibulae, respectively.) In the light of 
the above analysis, it is clear that the mechanism would work effec- 
tively only if F were shifted in a counterclockwise direction to offset 
the loss of protraction force incurred by the relative increase in the 
ratio of A to B, or if the ratio were reduced by elongation of the 
retroarticular process of the mandible. I have not carried the 
analysis for any particular species far enough to be able to say whether 
or not the depressor mandibulae alone could produce protraction 
of the upper jaw in the presence of environmental resistance on both 
jaws. Bock (1964, p. 17) pointed out that the analysis is difficult 
and must include both jaws. It seems likely, however, that species 
with a strong forward component to the pull of the depressor mandib- 
ulae would be capable of stronger gaping (forceful opening of both 
jaws), not only by increasing the force of depression of the mandible, 
but also by favoring conditions for protraction of the upper jaw as 
well. The validity of the difference between the adaptations found 
in the depressor mandibulae muscles of Sturnus vulgaris and gapers 
of the Icteridae postulated by Zusi (1959) is thus strengthened by 
the above analysis although the explanation originally proposed was 
incorrect. 

In species lacking a functional postorbital ligament, any structure 
that resists depression of the lower jaw will cause protraction of the 
upper jaw through forces similar to those diagrammed in figure 6 but 
only in proportion to the amount of resistance offered by the structure. 



14 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



The large adductor muscles of the jaw, and in particular M. pseudo- 
temporalis superficialis, which in many species lies in a position 
comparable to that of the postorbital ligament but medial to it, 
may serve this function in a passive manner. The pseudotemporalis 
superficialis, often highly tendinous, might functionally replace the 
ligament by active contraction as well. There is clearly a great 
need for experimental approaches to the problems of avian kinesis 
to test the important specific questions that now can be asked. 

Although the effect of muscle angle on protraction of the upper jaw 
in the absence of any restraining forces anterior to the jaw articulation 





a 



b 



Figure 8. — Diagram of forces on the lower jaw and quadrate from the depressor mandibulae 
in the absence of the postorbital ligament: a, with unrestricted rotation of the lower jaw, 
H serves to retract the quadrate and V serves primarily to rotate the lower jaw (H reaches 
zero when F is perpendicular to the lower jaw); b, with reduction or loss of rotation at the 
jaw articulation, H retracts the jaw-quadrate unit and V has no rotational effect (H 
reaches zero when F passes through the otic articulation of the quadrate). (F= resultant 
force of depressor mandibulae; H and V= rectangular components of F; curved arrows= 
motion of quadrates under conditions illustrated.) 



probably seldom has a bearing on jaw motion in birds, I shall discuss 
it briefly because it has been mentioned in the literature. If the 
struts and hinges of the model shown in figure 8a were weightless 
and frictionless, the effect of muscle angle would probably be that 
described by Bock (1964, p. 17) — that is, protraction or retraction 
would depend only on the muscle's pull forward or backward from 
a 90-degree angle (the neutral angle) to the mandible. Were there 
friction or any other resistance to rotation at the jaw-quadrate hinge, 
protraction would occur if the line of pull of the muscle passed ahead 
of the cranial articulation of the quadrate and retraction would occur 
if it passed behind the articulation (fig. 86). The neutral angle would 



>o. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 15 

pass through the cranial articulation. In the most common circum- 
stances there is some form of resistance to depression of the mandible 
anterior to its articulation, and the line of pull of the depressor then 
has relevance for protraction only if it angles forward from the neutral 
angle, which is determined by the geometry of the whole system as 
already explained. In any case, an evolutionary shift in the direction 
of pull of the depressor mandibulae in a counterclockwise direction 
represents a functional change along the continuum "retraction — 
neutral — -protraction" with respect to the muscle's influence on the 
upper jaw. 

Coordination and Independence of Jaw Action 

Postorbital ligament. — Coordination of the jaws through the 
postorbital ligament (or its functional equivalent, as in the lacrymo- 
mandibular ligament in certain ducks) requires that the ligament 
attach on the mandible anterior to the jaw articulation. Should the 
ligamentary attachment approach the jaw articulation (or should A 
in figure 6 be reduced) the amount of protraction obtained through the 
ligament would be correspondingly reduced. Coordination would 
reach zero when the ligamentary attachment lay opposite the jaw 
articulation. By manipulation of the jaws of fresh specimens of the 
sooty tern (Sterna fuscata) , I found that a pull on the depressor muscles 
caused very little forward or backward displacement, relative to the 
braincase, of the postorbital ligament and lower jaw during depression 
of the jaw; instead, the quadrate was displaced forward and the upper 
jaw raised. On the other hand, when motion of the upper jaw was 
restricted and the quadrates thereby held stationary, depression of 
the lower jaw was accompanied by a backward shift of the lower jaw 
and postorbital ligament relative to the braincase and quadrates. 
(Strict limits to this backward shift were set by the articular jugo- 
mandibular ligament.) Whether the jaw shifts backward or the 
quadrate forward, the shift is enough to bring the attachment point 
of the postorbital ligament closer to the rotation center of the jaw 
articulation and to reduce the coordinating action of the ligament. 
(Manipulation of the jaws was accomplished through pulling on the 
depressor mandibulae muscles or by applying pressure on the jaw at 
their points of insertion. Manipulation of the jaws by their tips may 
give different results that do not correspond to actions of the depressor 
mandibulae muscles.) 

The ability of the lower jaw to shift backward with respect to the 
quadrate may be deduced from the jaw motions of an evening grosbeak 
that is hulling sunflower seeds. The bud moves its lower jaw to the 
right or left of the upper jaw to facilitate manipulation of the seeds. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Because the two quadrates are held in comparable positions by the 
jugal and palatal struts and therefore cannot move independently, 
one of the mandibular rami must slide backward along the quadrate 
while the other remains in place during displacement of the jaw to 
the side. The possibility of backward displacement of the lower jaw 
in the domestic chicken, although less obvious during normal feeding 
of the bird, can be demonstrated by manipulation of fresh heads. 
I conclude that the shift of the ligamentary fulcrum toward the jaw 
articulation is one means of overcoming strict "coupling" by the 
postorbital ligament. 

In addition to the experiments already described, three instances of 
independent jaw action in birds possessing a well-developed post- 
orbital ligament have come to my attention. Two of these represent 
jaw motions during yawning — one in the night heron (Calherodias 
leuconotus) observed by me (see p. 24) and the other described by 
Yudin (1958, p. 168), who gave the sequence of jaw motions in a gull 
as follows: (1) lower jaw maximally depressed, (2) upper jaw raised, 
(3) upper jaw lowered, and (4) lower jaw raised. The third instance 
appears in a series of photographs of the great snipe (Capella media) 
taken by P. O. Swanberg (1956). In these birds, protraction of the 
upper jaw is restricted to the tip of the bill, where it would be readily 
evident by comparison with the immovable base-line provided by 
the rest of the upper jaw. Several photographs show the closed bill 
and its slight downward curve. Plate 74 shows the lower jaw slightly 
open and in plate 73 quite widely open, but in neither case is there 
any change in the downward curve of the tip of the upper jaw and 
thus no protraction or coupling. 

Jaw Articulation 

One important question remains to be answered: how did the de- 
pressor mandibulae effect protraction in the evening grosbeak and in 
the domestic chicken after removal of the postorbital ligaments? In 
addition to coupling of the two jaws by the postorbital ligament, 
Bock (1964, p. 18) briefly referred to another type of coupling through 
an interlocking of the condyles of the quadrate and articular with the 
result that the mandible cannot be depressed without forward motion 
of the quadrates. He listed certain families of birds in which this 
interlocking is well or moderately developed, citing Balaeniceps as a 
prime example, but he offered no explanation of this action. Although 
neither of the species used for experiments in the present study is 
coupled through the jaw articulation to a high degree, a discussion of 
the mechanism in Balaeniceps will serve to introduce the general 
problems of coordination of the jaws through the jaw articulation. 



KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 



17 



In Balaeniceps (fig. 9), the quadrate has two main condylar sur- 
faces, the inner of which (medial condyle) forms a double crest lying 
parallel to the plane of movement of the quadrate. The lateral 
condyle is somewhat curved, lying approximately perpendicular to 
the crest and to the plane of quadrate motion (its posteromedial 



medial 
condyle 



latera 
condyle 




lateral articular 
surface 



medial 

articular 

trough 



flan 



2 e 



lateral 
condyle 



Bdl&eniceps rex 



medial 

articular 

surface 




medial 
condyle 



depression Utera 
condyle 



articular 
surface 




late ra 
posterior articular 
condyJe surface 



Hesperiphona vespertine Gallus domesticus 

Figure 9. — Structure of jaw articulation in Balaeniceps rex, Hesperiphona vespertina, and 
Gallus domesticus. (Ventral view of right quadrate and dorsal view of left articular 
shown for each species.) 



portion is expanded into a prominent condyle that is often referred to 
as the posterior condyle of the quadrate). These condyles fit into 
corresponding depressions or surfaces of the articular bone, and flanges 
on the upper edges of the medial articular trough grip the crests of 
the medial condyle of the quadrate, holding the articulated lower 



18 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



jaw of a completely cleaned skull in place, as described by Bohm 
(1930) and others. Partly because of the gripping flanges but pri- 
marily because of the structure of the crests, trough, and lateral 
articular surfaces, the lower jaw can be depressed or raised only if 
the quadrate and articular surfaces slide along each other in the 
direction dictated by the crests and troughs. During depression of 
the jaw, this could be accomplished either by a passive spreading of 
the rami of the jaw as they slide backward and upward along the 
condyles of fixed quadrates; or the quadrates could move forward 
and inward while the jaw was depressed without producing a lateral 
spreading of the rami (fig. 10). Whether or not there is a flange grip 
and a deep and well-defined trough of the articular as in Balaeniceps, 
the condyles of many diverse orders of birds are arranged in such a 







a 



b 



Figure 10. — Diagrams of relative positions from dorsal view of ramus of lower jaw and 
quadrate (black) when the jaw is closed (left ramus), and when depressed (right ramus): 
a, quadrate moves anteromedially; b, ramus moves posterolateral!/. 



way that the planes of motion within the two jaw-quadrate articula- 
tions converge anteriorly like those of Balaeniceps and downward 
rotation of the mandible therefore requires either posterolateral 
spreading of the rami or anteromedial motion of the quadrates. 
Protraction of the upper jaw thus will accompany depression of the 
lower jaw if resistance to spreading of the rami is greater than resist- 
ance to forward and inward rotation of the quadrates (which of course 
depends upon the combined resistance of all flexible portions of the 
upper jaw and palate). Protraction would be prevented if the quad- 
rates were held in place, but depression of the lower jaw could still 
occur through spreading of the rami. Birds vary greatly in the ease 
of motion of the palate and upper jaw and in the lateral flexibility of 
the rami; the extent to which the rami may contribute to protraction 



no. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 19 

through the jaw articulation unfortunately has not been established 
for any species to my knowledge. Manger Cats-Kuenen (1961, 
pp. 18, 19) explained the coupling action of the jaw articulation in 
detail and concluded that independent motion of the two jaws in the 
hornbill Rhinoplax vigil was impossible because the rami had no 
lateral flexibility. I believe, however, that the flexibility necessary 
for independent depression of the mandible exists in Rhinoplax be- 
cause even in a dried skull it is easy to depress the lower jaw by press- 
ing on the retroarticular processes. When the kinetic mechanism 
is immobilized in the dried skull, the rami nevertheless readily spread 
apart during depression of the mandible. 

It is probable that the conformation of the jaw-quadrate articulation 
played a role in protraction through the depressor mandibulae in the 
evening grosbeak (lacking a postorbital ligament) and in the chicken 
after removal of the postorbital ligament (fig. 4) although the mecha- 
nism appears to be different in the two species. The condyles of the 
jaw articulation of the domestic chicken are quite different from those 
of Balaeniceps (fig. 9), but both species have lateral surfaces providing 
broad support and medial surfaces providing guidance. In Gallus 
domesticus the medial condyle of the quadrate slides along a well- 
defined medial face (corresponding to the trough of Balaeniceps) of 
the broad, flattened articular surface. The medial faces of the two 
rami converge anteriorly. Depression of the lower jaw in the chicken, 
therefore, requires spreading of the rami or anteromedial motion of 
the quadrates just as in Balaeniceps. The possibility that resistance 
to lateral spreading of the rami in the chicken is enough to raise the 
upper jaw is suggested by the occurrence of protraction after removal 
of the postorbital ligaments. 

The structure of the jaw articulation in the evening grosbeak differs 
sharply from that of the domestic chicken in that the quadrate 
possesses three knoblike condyles and in that the articular has a deep 
depression between its two articular surfaces (fig. 9). There is no 
well-defined trough of the articular that would serve to guide the 
motion of the rounded medial condyle of the quadrate; rather, the 
medial condyle rests on the top of a narrow medial articular surface 
that slopes downward and terminates just in front of the condyle 
when the jaws are closed. As the lower jaw is depressed, the medial 
and posterior condyles of the quadrate slide forward on the inclined 
surfaces of the articular to occupy the space or depression in front. 
With contraction of the depressor mandibulae, protraction appears 
to be caused by pressure of the articulation surfaces of the lower 
jaw on the quadrate condyles. The quadrate slides forward easily 
because of the slope of the articular surfaces. 



20 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 
Discussion 



I have been concerned primarily with the functional properties of 
only one paired muscle as it acts within the kinetic systems of various 
species of birds (see fig. 11). The depressor mandibulae muscles serve 
principally to open the upper and lower jaws simultaneously. In 
most species the most powerful agents for protracting the upper jaw 
are undoubtedly the protractor quadrati et pterygoidei muscles, which 



D 



A 



C 



/ 



Jauus coordinated by 

1. jaw articulation 

2. postorbital ligament 



Jaais complete!/ 
uncoordinated 



^*C^ 



/ 



Jatus complete// 
coordinated 



B 



Jaius independent by 
1. spreading of rami 
2- shift of fulcrum 



Specialised protraction by 
1. postorbifal ligament 
Z. larger depressor mandibulae 

3. longer retroarticular process 

4. depressor angled forward 




Figure 11. — Diagram of kinetic possibilities through the depressor mandibulae in the avian 
jaw: Species A has weakly coordinated jaws that may be moved independently. Species 
B has developed stronger protraction of the upper jaw through the mechanisms of coordi- 
nation but can also overcome coordination. Species C has no capacity for independent 
jaw action, whereas species D has no coordination through the jaw-quadrate complex. 
(C and D are hypothetical.) 

almost certainly come into play during maximum or forceful gaping. 
The depressor mandibulae, however, may be the sole or principal 
muscles opening both jaws when extensive or powerful opening of the 
jaws is not required, as in taking small food items from a substrate. 
The mechanisms by which the depressor mandibulae can protract 
the upper jaw involve the angle of the muscle, the angle of sliding of 
the jaw-quadrate surfaces, the rigidity of the rami of the lower jaw 
and of the kinetic mechanism, the presence of a postorbital ligament 
or a comparable ligament, the length of the retroarticular process of 



N0 - 36 °7 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 21 

the mandible, the presence of ligamentous adductor muscles, and the 
resistance to depression of the lower jaw by environmental forces. 
Other features may be involved as well and a variety of factors 
probably contribute to jaw motion in each species. The mecha- 
nisms are developed to varying degrees in different groups of birds. 
Only by understanding their functional properties can we recognize 
convergence, independent divergent solutions to similar problems, 
and adaptive radiation in the kinetic mechanism. A survey of such 
trends in birds or in any group of birds has not yet been made in 
detail, but a few cases of variation in the depressor mandibulae 
complex should be mentioned here. 

Certain birds that habitually probe into flowers or fruit show a 
combination of features that suggest a special role of the depressor 
muscles for protracting the upper jaw. Representatives of the 
"Coerebidae" (Coereba flaveola), Zosteropidae (Zosterops annulosa), 
and Drepanididae (Vestiaria coccinea) display large depressor muscles, 
well-developed retroarticular processes of the mandible, and strong 
postorbital ligaments (Beecher, 1951a, pp. 277, 283; Moller, 1931, 
p. 126). Beecher (1951a, p. 2S5) states that "The Neotropical nectar- 
adapted tanagers are non-gapers. In none of them is M. depressor 
mandibulae more highly developed than in Cyanerpes . . . and it is 
apparent that these species simply insert the bill into flowers and sip 
nectar." Moller (1931, p. 110), however, illustrates Dacnis cayana 
as having a large depressor mandibulae, which, combined with its 
strong postorbital ligament, long retroarticular process, and relatively 
straight cidmen and gonys strongly suggests that gaping is among its 
feeding patterns. Various members of the Icteridae display these 
same features and, in addition, have the depressor muscles angled 
well forward (Beecher, 1950, 1951b). Associated with this highly 
developed gaping adaptation is the straight culmen and gonys so 
characteristic of many icterids, essential for effective parting of the 
grass, earth, or flesh of a fruit with the outer edges of the bill. The 
starling (Sturnus vulgaris) is convergent with the icterids, especially 
Sturnella, in some features related to gaping but divergent in others 
(Zusi, 1959). Certain parrots have the depressor mandibulae muscles 
enlarged and strongly angled forward (Nestor notabilis and Cyano- 
rhamphvs novae-selandiae, illustrated in Hofer, 1950, pp. 457, 463). 
The retroarticular process is well developed but the postorbital liga- 
ment is lacking. Parrots are well known for their extraordinary 
mobility of the upper jaw, but no comparative information on this 
property in the Psittacidae is available. Among the probing Scolopa- 
cidae, the woodcock (Scolopax) shows special development of the 
depressor mandibulae and retroarticular process of the mandible 
(see Marinelli, 1928, fig. 8), possibly in relation to the need for 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

protraction in relatively firm earth. Galliform and anseriform birds 
display a long retroarticular process of the mandible but neither 
group has an obvious need for powerful depression of the lower jaw. 
Rather, the process may be related to kinetic action through the 
depressor mandibulae muscles. 

The examples just given represent birds in which there is a need 
for strong, extensive, or repeated protraction and in which a combina- 
tion of features associated with the depressor mandibulae is adapted 
to accomplish or to aid protraction. Other examples can be found 
among the passerine birds (see illustrations in Beecher, 1953, pp. 302, 
318), but the elucidation of the adaptive radiation within these groups 
remains a challenge for the anatomist. 

Evolution of the interlocking jaw articulation.— Bock (1964, 
p. 37) postulated an obligatory coupling of the jaws through the 
postorbital ligament and thus found no explanation for the presence 
of two strict coupling mechanisms (postorbital ligament and jaw 
articulation) in the same species or for the evolution of jaw-articula- 
tion coupling. Explanations for these phenomena are possible, how- 
ever, with the knowledge that coupling may be bypassed and that the 
postorbital ligament serves functions other thaja coupling. The ful- 
crum provided by the postorbital ligament causes the posterior portion 
of the depressed mandible to be rotated upward and forward. One 
result is that the mandible pushes the quadrates forward at least 
during the initial phases of depression, but another consequence is 
that a firm contact of the jaw and quadrate surfaces is assured through- 
out motions of the lower jaw. Without the postorbital ligament (or 
some functional equivalent) the anterior surfaces of the jaw articula- 
tion would tend to separate during depression of the mandible. As 
the condyles of the jaw articulation may serve to coordinate jaw 
motions, the ligament would enhance coordination by keeping the 
articulation surfaces in close apposition. The postorbital ligament 
could thereby play an important part in the evolution of the inter- 
locking grooves and ridges of the jaw articulation. Support for the 
lower jaw through interlocking in a species such as Balaeniceps is lost 
quickly if the rami are spread slightly or the quadrates displaced 
anteromedially at any given position of the lower jaw, and it cannot 
be assumed that ligamentary supports are unnecessary in specialized 
"articulation-coupled" forms. The postorbital ligament is a structure 
that probably developed early in the evolution of modern birds and 
has played a role in the evolution of increased articulation-coupling 
in various groups while being reduced or lost in others. Its loss may 
be associated with the development of maximum independence of 
jaw motion. 



no. 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 23 

Functions of kinesis. — Bock (1964, pp. 25-31) discussed six 
possible functions of kinesis: (1) maintaining the mandible in the 
closed position, (2) gaping, (3) maintenance of the primary axis of 
orientation of the bill, (4) faster closing of the jaws, (5) more wide- 
spread and even distribution of jaw muscle attachment, and (6) 
shock absorbing. Of these, I believe that the first is doubtful because 
it requires the hypothesis of strict coupling of the jaws for its explana- 
tion and because the ligament does not hold the lower jaw closed 
(at least in Gallus domestic us) . The third and sixth are probably of 
widespread importance — the third because many species rely on rapid 
grasping of tiny food items or of moving prey and the last because 
of the light construction of the jaws and palate in birds. 

I believe that a primary advantage of kinesis is that it provides 
increased possibilities for diversity of manipulation by the jaws. 
Although birds lack teeth, they nevertheless must perform many 
manipulative tasks with the bill such as the capture, holding, orienta- 
tion, manipulation, and swallowing of food, nest-building, preening, 
defence, and other activities. Two fundamental features of skull 
construction in birds serve, in combination with kinesis, to enhance 
the diversity of manipulation. 

First, the tomial edges of the upper jaw are drawn forward when 
raised and backward when lowered (fig. 126) because the flexible 
point of attachment of the upper jaw and cranium lies above the 
plane of the tomia. In most birds the articulation of the lower 
jaw lies below the tomial plane and there is a similar forward and 
backward motion of the tomium during depression and adduction 
of the lower jaw. A food item being constricted by the jaws, there- 
fore, is wedged backward toward the throat rather than pushed 
forward as it would be by a straight pair of tongs (fig. 12a). Immo- 
bility of the upper jaw would reduce considerably this effect. Un- 
fortunately, I can say nothing about its significance for the living 
bird although its existence can scarcely be doubted. The effect 
is greatest in relatively short and deep bills, where it may provide 
more effective seed-cracking forces or help to keep seeds from 
slipping forward in the bill during nibbling. 

A second type of manipulation is made possible by the anterior 
placement of the flexible cranial attachment of the upper jaw relative 
to the articulation of the lower jaw (fig. 13). The upper jaw thereby 
rotates about a shorter radius than the lower, and the tomial edges 
can be opposed in a greater variety of ways than would be possible 
otherwise, especially if the upper jaw can be retracted below the 
resting position as discussed by Beecher (1951b, p. 413) and Yudin 
(1965, p. 68). Bock (1964, pp. 23, 24) argued against such retraction 
in a coupled skull, but I have shown here that coupling can be over- 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



come readily, at least in Gallus domesticus, and the theoretical objec- 
tions to retraction of the upper jaw below the resting position thus 
are eliminated. While watching a night heron (Calherodias leueonotus) 
at close range in the New York Zoological Park, I observed retrac- 
tion of the upper jaw when the bird was yawning. Just before 




a 



b 



Figure 12. — Diagrams showing positions of tomial edges and of particular points (dots) 
on the tomia during motions of the two jaws: a, when centers of jaw rotation lie close to 
tomial planes; b, when centers of jaw rotation lie far from tomial planes. 




Figure 13. — Diagram of the avian skull showing retraction of the upper jaw beyond the 
normal closed position. Because the lower jaw articulates well behind the cranial bending 
axis of the upper jaw, the manipulative possibilities of the jaw are increased. Biting with 
the bill tip as shown would not be possible if the jaws were of equal length. 



raising the depressed mandible to its resting position, the bird re- 
tracted its upper jaw below the resting position with the result that 
only the tips of the jaws were touching and the gap between the 
bases of the jaws was clearly visible. Herons have the postorbital 
ligament well developed and are also "coupled" through the jaw- 



no 3607 KINESIS OF AVIAN SKULL — ZUSI 25 

quadrate articulation. It thus appears that retraction of the upper 
jaw beyond the resting position is one of the capabilities of avian 
kinesis. Its importance lies in the potential for increased diversity 
of manipulation by the bird's beak. 

In studying the functional significance of the palatine process of 
the premaxilla, Bock (1960) postulated that there are two methods of 
seed-cracking used by heavy-billed finches. The first he called "the 
nutcracker method," characterized by a kinetic upper jaw and equal 
development of the adductors of the mandible and the retractors of 
the palate. He ascribed this method to the emberizine finches and 
richmondenine finches. By contrast he claimed that the cardueline 
finches employ "the vise method," which he describes (p. 427) as 
follows : 

In the specialized carduelines, the upper jaw has lost its mobility; it is a nearly 
stationary block against which the mandible presses. Heavy bosses of bone 
(the lateral flanges) and rhamphotheca distribute the shocks associated with the 
cracking of the seed evenly to all parts of the braincase. Only the adductor 
muscles are well developed in the cardueline finches; in fact, the muscles associated 
only with the movement of the upper jaw have become small and are on the 
verge of becoming functionless. 

We have seen that the evening grosbeak — one of the heavy-billed 
cardueline finches — has a kinetic upper jaw that operates even in the 
absence of contraction by its prime protractors, the M. protractor 
quad rati et pterygoidei. In order to exert a seed-cracking force, the 
upper jaw must be moved in opposition to the adduction of the lower 
jaw or held stationary while force is exerted by both jaws, requiring 
in either case a powerful M. pterygoideus. It thus seems doubtful that 
the vice and nutcracker methods of jaw action are of general validity 
although certain species may have become specialized in one direction 
or the other (e.g., Coccothraustes [Sims, 19551). Kinesis may be im- 
portant to seed-cracking forms for manipulation of seeds and for the 
application of biting forces from different angles as explained above. 

The role of the depressor mandibulae in avian kinesis can at present 
only be inferred from a knowledge of its functional-anatomical prop- 
erties. My findings suggest that through linkages of various kinds 
the depressor mandibulae may serve to open both jaws simultaneously 
when strong protraction is not required, whether or not a postorbital 
ligament is present. In those species with a strong postorbital liga- 
ment and/or interlocking condyles of the jaw articulation and espe- 
cially in those in which the muscle angles far forward from its insertion 
and in which the retroarticular process of the mandible is well de- 
veloped, the depressor may have a more precise and powerful effect 
in opening both jaws. Further investigations of these problems 
through comparative morphology, physiology, and behavior may be 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

expected to broaden our understanding of structural diversity in the 
avian skull. 

Summary 

Experiments on the action of M. depressor mandibulae in Galhis 
domesticus and Hesperiphona vespertina demonstrate that the muscle 
causes protraction of the upper jaw as well as depression of the 
mandible. The coordination of both jaws is enhanced by the presence 
of a postorbital ligament and/or by modifications of the jaw-quadrate 
articulation. The mechanism of protraction through the postorbital 
ligament and depressor mandibulae is explained through force analysis 
and it is shown that the force and amount of protraction vary with 
muscle angle and length of the retroarticular process of the mandible. 
Independence of jaw motion may be achieved by a backward shift of 
the mandible or by spreading of the mandibular rami. The role of the 
postorbital ligament in the evolution of coordination of the jaws 
through the jaw articulation is presented. Two general properties 
of avian skull structure are shown to diversify the manipulative 
capabilities of the bill in a kinetic skull. 



Literature Cited 

Barnikol, A. 

1952. Korrelationen in der Ausgestaltung der Schadelform bei Vogeln. 

Morph. Jahrb., vol. 92, pp. 373-414. 
Beecher, William J. 

1950. Convergent evolution in the American Orioles. Wilson Bull., vol. 

62, pp. 50-86. 
1951a. Convergence in the Coerebidae. Wilson Bull., vol. 63, pp. 274-287. 
1951b. Adaptations for food-getting in the American Blackbirds. Auk, 

vol. 68, pp. 411-440. 

1953. A phylogeny of the oscines. Auk, vol. 70, pp. 270-333. 
Bock, Walter J. 

1960. The palatine process of the premaxilla in the Passeres. Bull. 

Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard, vol. 122, pp. 361-488. 
1964. Kinetics of the avian skull. Journ. Morph., vol. 114, pp. 1-41. 
Bohm, M. 

1930. tiber den Bau des jugendlichen Schadels von Balaeniceps rex nebst 

Bemerkungen fiber dessen systematische Stellung und liber das 
Gaumenskelet der Vogel. Zeit. Morph. Okol. Tiere, vol. 17, pp. 
677-718. 
Hofer, Helmut 

1950. Zur Morphologie der Kiefermuskulatur der Vogel. Zool. Jahrb., Anat. 
Ont. Tiere, vol. 70, pp. 427-556. 
Kalkofen, Ulrich P. 

1963. Effect of M. depressor mandibulae on the upper jaw in birds. Unpubl. 
senior honors thesis in zoology, University of Maine. 
Kripf, Dominik V. 

1933. Beitrage zur mechanischen Analyse des Schnabelmechanismus. 
Morph. Jahrb., vol. 72, pp. 541-566. 
Manger Cats-Kuenen, Charlotte S. W. 

1961. Casque and bill of Rhinoplax vigil (Forst.) in connection with the 

architecture of the skull. Verh. Kon. Nederlandse Akad. Weten., 

vol. 53, pp. 1-51, 12 figs. 
Marinelli, W. 

1928. tlber den Schadel der Schnepfe. Palaeobiologica, vol.1, pp. 135- 

160, 1 pi. 
Moller, Walter 

1931. Uber die Schnabel-und Zungenmechanik blutenbesuchender Vogel, u. 

Biologia Generalis, vol. 7, pp. 99-154. 
Sims, R. W. 

1955. The morphology of the head of the hawfinch (Coccothraustes coc- 
cothraustes) . Bull. British Mus. (Nat. Hist.), vol. 2, pp. 369-393. 
Starck, D. 

1940. Beobachtungen an der Trigeminus-muskulatur der Nashornvogel 
nebst Bemerkungen fiber einige Besonderheiten des Vogelschadels 
und fiber die Kiefermuskulatur in allgemeinen. Morph. Jahrb., 
vol. 84, pp. 585-623. 

27 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

SWANBERG, P. O. 

1965. Studies of less familiar birds, 138: Great Snipe. British Birds, 
vol. 58, pp. 504-508, 8 pis. 
Yudin, K. A. 

1958. Skull kinesis of Lari and Alcae. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R., Trudy Zool. 

Inst., vol. 25, pp. 164-182. [Translated from Russian.] 
1965. The phylogeny and classification of the Charadriiformes. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.S.R. Zool. Inst., new series, no. 91. Fauna of the U.S.S.R., 
Birds, vol. 2, no. 1, pt. 1, 260 pp. [Translated from Russian.] 
Zusi, Richard L. 

1959. The function of the depressor mandibulae muscle in certain passerine 

birds. Auk, vol. 76, pp. 537-539. 
1962. Structural adaptations of the head and neck in the Black Skimmer. 
Rynchops nigra Linnaeus. Publ. Nuttall Orn. Club, no. 3, 101 pp. 



U S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE:1987 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3608 

Studies of Neotropical Caddis Flies, IV 
New Species froin Mexico and Central America 



By Oliver S. Flint, Jr. 
Curator, Division of Neuropteroids 



During the past few years the insects of Mexico and Central 
America have been collected extensively by several members of the 
Smithsonian Institution's Department of Entomology. In 1963 
W. D. Duckworth and D. R. Davis collected in northeastern Mexico 
(A.P.S. grant J-493). P. J. Spangler collected widely in Mexico in 
1964, and, in 1965, on another trip, he collected as far south as Costa 
Rica (N.S.F. grant GB-1697). El Salvador, Costa Rica, and Pan- 
ama were sites of collections in 1965 by W. D. Duckworth (N.S.F. 
grant GB-1800). I collected widely in Mexico and Guatemala in 
1965 and 1966 (N.S.F. grant GB-2616). In addition to this material, 
other specimens are included whenever available. The holot} 7 pes of 
all new species are deposited in the U.S. National Museum. 

Thirty-one species are described as new in this paper. There are 
many more probable new species in the collections, but because of 
then close relationship to known species they are not described 
herein. It is hoped that in time additional material will show whether 
or not these specimens represent mere variation or in fact are valid 
species. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Rhyacophilidae 

Atopsyche hidalgoi, new species 

Figures 1, 2 

This species is closely related to A. tripunctata Banks, from which 
it differs in possessing a shorter, broader paracercus, and in lacking 
the forked dorsal process of the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 10-1 1 mm. General color brown; wings 
with long, erect, brown, golden, and black hairs. Male genitalia: 
Fifth segment with an anterolateral process about one-fourth length 
of segment. Sixth sternum with an apicomesal process two-thirds 
length of segment, process of seventh sternum one-third length of 
segment. Paracercus broad, slightly longer than fihcercus, bearing 
two teeth dorsally, ventrally with a hirsute ridge, which ends in a 
blunt tooth anteapically. Filicercus elongate, clavate. Clasper with 
basal segment having an inner ridge; apical segment with dorsal 
margin inrolled near apex. Aedeagus elongate with a slender inner 
rod, with a strong lateral spine at midlength, apex bearing dorsally 
a laterally directed tooth. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Mexico), Las Cruces National Park, La 
Marquesa, 3000 m elevation, July 5-9, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 4 cf. Mexico (Morelos), Lagunas Zem- 
poala National Park, July 10-11, 1965, Flint and Ortiz, 1 cT. 

Glossosomatidae 

Culoptila montanensis, new species 

Figures 3, 4 

The species is close to C. amberia Mosely; however, the genitalia 
possess a complex of sclerites ventrally that Mosely does not show in 
C. amberia, and the internal spine of the aedeagus is less than half as 
long as that of C. amberia. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3.5 mm. Color uniformly dark reddish 
brown; wings with anastamosis bearing a few paler hairs, most no- 
ticeably at posterior margin. Male genitalia: Sixth sternum with a 
short broad, subapical process. Tenth tergum with ventral arm well 
developed, apex produced and pointed, in ventral aspect horseshoe 
shaped. Ventrally with a pair of processes bearing a few apical hairs, 
a broad plate above processes curving upward and outward and 
bearing internally a curving rodlike process whose tip is directed 
posteroventrally. Aedeagus capsule-like, apex developed dorsally 
into a hoodlike structure, internally bearing a single heavily scle- 
rosed spine about one-third length of aedeagus. 



N0 - 3«os CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 3 

Holotype, male: Guatemala (El Progreso), Finca La Cajeta, 
Aug. 12-20, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Protoptila loterospina, new species 

Figure 5 

Since this species bears a lateral spine from the aedeagus, it is 
placed in group 1. It is probably closest to P. alexanderi Ross, from 
which it differs in the longer, more deeply divided eighth sternum, 
very long, slender spine from the aedeagus, and the lateral spine from 
the tenth tergite. 

Adult. Length of forewing 4 mm. Uniformly brown, faintly paler 
along anastamosis. Male genitalia: Sixth sternum with a pointed 
apicomesal process. Eighth tergum with posterior margin bearing a 
dense brush of setae; sternum produced into two long terete processes. 
Ninth segment rounded anteriorly, sternum barely produced pos- 
teriorly. Tenth tergite heavily sclerotized, dorsal margin with a 
shallow rectangular emargination, dorsoapical angle slightly produced, 
bearing a strong lateral spine. Aedeagus with a pair of basoventral 
processes, mesoventrally with two pairs of interlocking processes; 
paired long slender spines arising laterally, which extend posteriad 
beneath ventral margin of tenth tergite; apex bearing a heavily scle- 
rotized ventral scooplike process and a dorsomesal spine. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, La Lola, Apr. 28, 1957, R. D. Shenefelt. 

Protoptila rnarqua, new species 

Figure 6 

This species is a typical member of Mosely's group 1. It is perhaps 
most closely related to P. piacha Mosely, from which it differs in 
the very long bifid process of the eighth sternum, dorsal knobs and 
apical spine of the aedeagus, and the sharply twisted apex of the 
lateral spine. 

Adult. Length of forewing 4 mm. Color fuscous, legs with annulae 
of pale hairs at apices of segments; wings with a band of whitish 
hairs at anastamosis, a small spot of white nearer base, and a diffuse 
band of brownish hairs subapically. Male genitalia: Sixth sternum 
with an elongate apicomesal process. Eighth segment barely pro- 
duced dorsally; sternum developed into a pair of very long terete 
processes, the mesal division extending almost to base. Ninth 
segment developed into a long ventromesal process, rounded anteri- 
orly. Tenth tergite decurved, uniformly widened apically, in lateral 
view with an apical tooth that extends as a shelf along the inner 
ventral margin. Aedeagus with a lateral spine whose tip is sharply 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

bent upward, dorsomesally with a pair of knobs, apically with a 
single spine. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Mexico), Las Cruces National Park, La 
Marquesa, 3000 m elevation, July 5-9, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 37 c? 1 and 3 9. 

Protoptila cristata, uew species 

Figure 7 

The species belongs to Mosely's group 2, and is perhaps closest 
to P. liqua Mosely. It is distinguished by the lack of processes from 
the eighth segment, the double teeth ventrally on the tenth tergite, 
and other differences in all parts of the genitalia. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3 mm. Color in alcohol brown. Male 
genitalia: Sixth sternum with a short apicomesal process. Eighth 
sternum prolonged, tip bifid, bearing a tooth dorsally just basad of 
cleft. Tenth tergite short, dorsally developed into a crestlike process, 
ventrally produced into two teeth. Aedeagus with the typical 
complex of basoventral processes, apex bearing a C-shaped spine 
surmounting several smaller spines. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), Cuitlahuac, Aug. 10-12, 1964, 
Spangler. 

Paratypes: Same data, 3 d\ 

Protoptila huasteca, new species 

Figure 8 

This species falls within Mosely's group 2 because there is no lateral 
spine from the aedeagus. It differs from all other species in this 
group by the shape of the eighth sternum and the aedeagus, especially 
in its possession of two pairs of slender ventral rods. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3 mm. Color pale brown; forewing 
with intermingled brown and golden hairs. Male genitalia: Eighth 
tergum hoodlike with posterior margin heavily sclerotized; sternum 
strongly sclerotized with a pointed process from lateral margin at 
midlength, a ventrolateral tooth, and a deep V-shaped mesal excision. 
Ninth sternum produced into a scooplike structure, united apically 
with eighth sternum. Tenth tergite decurved laterally, apex devel- 
oped into a sharp, mesally directed point. Aedeagus with a long 
paired process lying within ninth sternum, tips directed mesally; 
apex membranous with an internal spine; two pairs of slender processes 
ventrally, basal process short, distal process very long with curving 
apex. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (San Luis Potosi), 25 miles north of 
Tamazunchale, Aug. 3-4, 1963, Duckworth and Davis. 






N0 - 3 608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 5 

Paratypes: Same data, 4 cf; same data except June 26, 1965, Flint, 
2 cf; same data except Palitla, June 5, 1966, Flint, 2d". 

Protoptila spangleri, new species 

Figure 9 

This species is a relative of P. liqua Mosely, from which it differs 
in possessing very long processes from the tenth tergites and a shorter 
midventral process from the eighth sternum. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3 mm. Color in alcohol uniformly 
brown. Antennae of male with a series of segments at midlength 
much broadened. Male genitalia: Sixth sternum with a short apico- 
mesal point. Eighth sternum produced in a short mesal process 
that has a broad mesal division. Ninth segment with lateral margins 
developed into long slender processes. Tenth tergite very narrow, 
produced into a ventral point and dorsally into a long, ventrally 
directed, whiplike process. Aedeagus with a ventral scooplike 
process; at midlength a long pointed process that bears paired teeth 
laterally; apical membrane with central and lateral hooks. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), Cuitlahuac, Aug. 10-12, 
1964, Sp angler. 

Paratypes: Same data, 6 cf. 

Philopotamidae 

Chimarra duckworthi, new species 

Figures 10-12 

This species is very different from all other described New World 
species. The structure of the lateral and median lobes of the tenth 
tergum is unique, as is the elongate, almost semicircular shape of the 
clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 4.5 mm. Wings, body, and most of 
appendages fuscous, femora paler. Male genitalia: Ninth segment with 
anterior margin rounded, postero ventral projection short, terete. 
Tenth tergum with an elongate, semimembranous mesal lobe shaped 
somewhat like a duck's head in profile; lateral lobe bearing a heavily 
chitinized angled support, sensillae on a slightly enlarged area at the 
angle of the support, a lightly sclerotized plate with a darker central 
line beyond the support. Clasper narrow, elongate, tip decurved, 
pointed; in postero ventral aspect almost semicircular. Aedeagus pro- 
longed into a pointed process ventroapically, internally with two long 
spines, a ring and rod, and a scabrous pouch attached to a darkened 
spherical base. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Turrialba, Mar. 1-6, 1965, Duckworth. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Para types: Costa Rica, La Lola near Matina, Mar. 11, 1965, 
Duckworth, 2 cf . Panama, Canal Zone, Feb. 10, 1939, C. J. Drake, 
1 &. 

Chitnarru ortiziana, new species 

Figures 13-16 

The relationship of this species to C. duckworthi, new species, is 
shown most clearly by the structure of the aedeagus and the elongate 
mesal lobe of the tenth tergum. It is distinguished by the narrowed 
and flared tips of the lateral lobes of the tenth tergum and the broader 
base of the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 4-5 mm. Color fuscous, bases of legs 
somewhat paler. Male genitalia: Ninth segment rounded anteriorly, 
mesoventral process about as long as broad. Tenth tergum with a 
pair of elongate semimembranous mesal processes; lateral lobe broad 
at base, sharply constricted subapically, tip developed into a dorso- 
lateral point. Clasper developed apically into a mesodorsally di- 
rected lobe, broad and scooplike ventrally. Aedeagus slightly angu- 
late, with an apico ventral spine; internally with a scabrous sac with a 
darkened globose base, two spines of equal length, and a ring and rod. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), near Huatusco, July 25-26, 
1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 2 c? . Mexico (Vera Cruz), route 140, km 
387, near El Encero, July 22, 1965, Flint and Ortiz, 1 cf. Mexico 
(Vera Cruz), Cordoba, June 7, 1966, Flint and Ortiz, 3 d". Guate- 
mala (Izabal), Las Escobas near Matias de Galvez, Aug. 14-16, 1965, 
Flint and Ortiz, 7 cf. Guatemala (Suchitepequez) , Finca Moca, 
June 12, 1966, Flint and Ortiz, 1 <?. 

Chimarra antigiia, new species 

Figures 17, 18 

Closely related to C. setosa Ross, this species differs from it in pos- 
sessing a dorsoapical process on the tenth tergite and a broader dorso- 
mesal shelf on the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 4-5 mm. Color totally fuscous. Male 
genitalia: Ninth segment with a narrow posteroventral keel. Tenth 
tergite broad, with dorsoapical angle developed into a strong hook 
that bears the sensillae. Clasper rounded in lateral view, dorsal mar- 
gin developed into a broad, shelflike mesal process, and a slight ridge 
subapically also on mesal face. Aedeagus simple, with two spines, 
one of which is about two-thirds length of other. 



no. 3608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 7 

Holotype, male: Mexico (San Luis Potosi), El Salto, about 25 miles 
west of Antiguo Morelos, July 11-14, 1963, Duckworth and Davis. 
Para type: Same data, 1 cf. 

Chimarra (Curgia) aureopunctata, new species 

Figures 19-21 

The species is related to C. barrettae (Banks) and C. banksi (Ulmer) 
as is shown by the very similar shape of the ninth and tenth segments 
and the claspers. From both it differs most noticeably in the shape 
of the eighth tergum, which is divided deeply dorsomesally. 

Adult. Length of forewing 6-6.5 mm. Color brown, forewing 
with many spots of golden hair intermingled with the brown. Male 
genitalia: Eighth tergum produced ventrolaterally, deeply divided 
mesally; ventrolaterally produced into a flattened lobe that overlies 
a narrow, ventral setiferous process. Ninth segment with meso- 
ventral lobe about as broad as long. Cercus about twice as long as 
broad. Tenth tergum developed into a mesal hood bearing many 
sensillae. Clasper developed into a dorsal point and a broader ventral 
lobe. Aedeagus tubular, internally with four short black spines and 
a pair of interlocking C-shaped sclerites. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Turrialba, Feb. 22-28, 1965, 
Duckworth. 

Paratype: Same data, 1 cf . 

Chimarra (Curgia) lobata, new species 

Figures 22-24 

This species also belongs to the C. barrettae group and seems closest 
to C. persimilis Banks, from which it differs in the relatively unmod- 
ified eighth tergum, lack of an elongated ventral lobe from the tenth 
tergum, and the lack of a ventral lip on the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 6.5 mm. Color in alcohol uniformly 
pale brown. Male genitalia: Eighth tergum with posterior margin 
rounded in lateral view, from dorsum with rounded submesal lobes. 
Ventromesal process of ninth segment about as long as broad. Tenth 
tergum developed into a narrow hood dorsally and a broader baso- 
lateral lobe. Clasper elongate, tapering toward dorsoapical angle. 
Aedeagus with two short black spines, a slender dark rod, and two 
C-shaped sclerites. 

Holotype, male: Panama, Canal Zone, Rio Agua Salud, Mar. 30, 
1965, Duckworth. 

Paratype: Same data, 1 cf. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Chimarra (Curgia) wilsoni, new species 

Figures 25, 26 

This is another member of the C. barrettae group and is probably 
closest to C. barrettae itself, from which it differs in possessing a 
pointed tenth tergum and a mesal point on the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 7.5 mm. Color brown, legs and 
antennae slightly paler, head with hairs golden, wings with golden 
spots intermingled with brown. Male genitalia: Eighth tergum 
simple, posterior margin slightly projecting, but otherwise unmod- 
ified. Ventromesal process of ninth segment terete, longer than 
broad. Tenth tergum hoodlike, developed into an elongate dorso- 
mesal point. Clasper almost quadrate in lateral aspect, apicoventral 
angle slightly developed, and bearing a strong dorsomesal spine. 
Aedeagus tubular, slightly curved, with a short spine (others broken 
off?) and a pair of intertwined C-shaped sclerites. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Las Cruces near San Vito, Mar. 19-20, 
1965, Duckworth. 

I take pleasure in dedicating this species to Robert Wilson, on 
whose property the species was collected and who was very helpful 
to Donald and Sandra Duckworth during their stay in southern 
Costa Rica. 

PSYCHOMYIIDAE 

Polyplectropus macrostylus, new species 

Figures 27, 28 

This species is distantly related to P. thilus (Denning), from which 
it differs in the larger outer lobe of the cercus and the smaller baso- 
lateral lobe of the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 6 mm. Brown, antennae annulate, 
forewing with many spots of golden hair. Male genitalia: Ninth 
segment almost circular in lateral aspect. Tenth segment mem- 
branous. Cercus divided into three parts: a thin outer plate slightly 
longer than broad; a short, broad inner lobe; and a long slender style 
first directed anteriorly, then curving posteriad. Clasper with an 
upright basolateral lobe about as high as long, and a long, flat ventral 
lobe with a short apicodorsal point. Aedeagus short, with ventral 
lip greatly prolonged, and a stout internal Y-shaped sclerite. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Golfito, Apr. 25-28, 1965, Duckworth. 

Polycentropus costaricensis, new species 

Figures 29-32 

This species is perhaps closest to P. picana Ross, from which it 
differs greatly in the shape of the claspers and cerci. 



no. 3608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 9 

Adult. Length of forewing: male 8-9 mm, female 10-12 mm. 
Color brown, head hairs fuscous, wings brown with many small spots 
of golden hair. Male genitalia: Anterior margin of ninth segment 
nearly vertical, posterior margin rounded. Cercus divided into an 
outer lobe with a slightly differentiated dorsobasal portion and an 
elongate ventral portion; inner lobe with an enlarged base narrowing 
to a sturdy, laterally curving process. Clasper somewhat triangular 
in lateral aspect, with a mesal spine. Aedeagus with apex developed 
into a trilobed ventral lip, internally with two pairs of short spines, 
a basal complex of small sclerites, and a pah' of apical plates. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Mount Poas, May, William Schaus. 

Paratypes: Costa Rica, Irazu, 2200-2500 m, May 21-28, 1930, 
Reimoser, 2 d\ 6 9 (Vienna Museum). 

Polycentropus guatemalensis, new species 

Figure 33 

The species is closely related to P. halidus Milne, from which it 
differs most noticeably in the sinuate ventral process of the cercus, 
which is longer and hooked in P. halidus, and the longer and narrower 
claspers, whose dorsoapical point is displaced slightly basad. 

Adult. Length of forewing: male 6-7 mm, female 8 mm. Color 
dark brown; body and appendages yellow brown, forewings dark 
brown with numerous spots of golden hair. Male genitalia: Ninth 
segment with anterior and posterior margins parallel. Cercus with 
a broad dorsolateral lobe, an elongate, slightly sinuous ventromesal 
process, and dorsally with an elongate rodlike process. Clasper long 
and slender, with dorsal margin forming an anteapical point, a sinuate 
ridge on inner surface culminating in a basomesal spine. Aedeagus 
with a large apicoventral process, apicodorsally with flat plates, 
internally with a pair of spines. 

Holotype, male: Guatemala (Suchitepequez) , Finca Moca, June 12, 
1966, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 1 d\ 1 9. Guatemala, Chimaltenango, 
Aug. 19-20, 1965, Spangler, 1 tf 1 . 

Polycentropus aztecus, new species 

Figure 34 

This species is closest to P. bartolus Denning, from which it differs 
in possessing an arched dorsal process and an apical tooth on the 
cerci and in having an evenly rounded outline to the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 8 mm. Color dark brown; body and 
appendages slightly paler, forewings with numerous small spots of 
golden hair. Male genitalia: Ninth segment with anterior margin 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

rounded. Cercus with dorsolateral lobe continuing evenly into a 
decurved apical hook and a small ventral lobe; with a short, slighly 
arched, dorsal process. Clasper short and rounded, with a mesal 
ridge bearing a sharp tooth near apex. Aedeagus with a sharply 
decurved apicoventral lip, dorsolateral plates, and many small in- 
ternal spines. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Michoacan), Insurgente Morelos National 
Park, east of Morelia, July 14, 1966, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratype: Mexico (Morelos), Cuernavaca, June, collection N. 
Banks, 1 cf (Museum of Comparative Zoology). Mexico (Durango), 
10 miles west of El Salto, 9000', June 25, 1964, J. E. H. Martin, 1 tf; 
same except July 15, 1 cf ; same except July 28, 1 c? ; same except 
July 29, 2 cf; same except August 6, 1 c? (Canadian National 
Collection). 

Xiphocentron aureum, new species 

Figures 35, 36 

Closely related to X. bilimeki Brauer, this species differs in the 
elongated bifid apex of the ninth sternum, enlarged apex of the 
aedeagus, and other small details of the genitalia. 

Adult. Length of forewing 8.5 mm. Facial hairs, body, and legs 
golden; antennae, foretibiae and tarsi, body hairs, and wings fuscous. 
Hind tibiae slightly enlarged, with a single very large apical spur 
extending slightly more than half length of basitarsus. Male geni- 
talia: Dorsal bridge of ninth segment narrow, ninth sternum pro- 
jecting mesally, tip of projection bifid. Tenth tergum broad in lateral 
aspect, narrow from dorsum. Cercus elongate, in lateral aspect 
about eight times as long as wide. Clasper bearing a large setal 
patch mesally, apex narrow and curving dorsomesally. Aedeagus 
very slender, over twice as long as combined length of ninth segment 
and cercus, tip enlarged. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), near Huatusco, July 25-26, 
1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Hydroptilidae 

Leucotrichia viridis, new species 

Figures 37-39 

This species is related to L. sarita Ross although the aedeagus more 
closely resembles that of L. pictipes (Banks). From both it is dis- 
tinguished easily by the patch of bright green setae on the forewing. 
The clasper is narrower than in any other described species and the 
structure of the aedeagus is unique in detail. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3 mm. Color grey, antennae with a 
subapical group of pale segments, face and tegulae with green hairs, 



no. 3608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 11 

forewings green except for apex. Male genitalia : Seventh sternum 
with a long spatulate process. Eighth sternum produced laterally, 
broadly U-shaped ventrally. Ninth segment with a rectangular 
dorsomesal emargination, posterior margin bordered with a row of 
long setae. Clasper long and slender, with a dorsal tooth at mid- 
length. Aedeagus membranous at apex, with a pair of dark lateral 
plates and a ventral scoop; a complex of processes at midlength that 
bears a pair of basally projecting rods; a simple tubular basal portion. 

Holotype, male: Guatemala (Izabal), Las Escobas near Matias de 
Galvez, Aug. 14-16, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 47 d\ 4 9. 

Zumatrichia echinata, new species 

Figures 40-42 

This species is closely related to Z. galtena Mosely, from which it 
differs in lacking digitate lobes apically on the long lateral processes 
of the claspers and in having a mesoventral spine on the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3-3.5 mm. Body and legs brown; 
antennae darker, with a series of paler segments subapically; head, 
thorax, and forewings with intermingled patches of greyish-green 
and black hairs. Male genitalia: Seventh sternum with a pointed 
mesal process. Eighth sternum with ventral margin almost squarely 
truncate, with a narrow mesal excision. Ninth segment bearing 
a row of stout setae dorsally, a process laterally (probably bearing 
a long seta apically) ; dorsomesally with a large membranous region 
with a dorsally projecting lobe, lateral margins heavily sclerotized 
and bearing posteriorly a forked process that articulates with the 
lateral sheath of the aedeagus. Clasper digitate in lateral aspect, 
bearing dorsally a long, heavily sclerotized, sinuous process. Aedeagus 
with a pair of ovoid lateral sheaths that bear a midventral tooth. 
Aedeagus proper with a pair of apical spines, a dorsomesal tongue- 
like strap, lateral sheaths, paired dorsomesal knobs bearing processes, 
and a complete basal loop. 

Holotype, male: Guatemala (El Progreso), San Agustin Acasa- 
guastlan, Aug. 11-21, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratype: Same data, 1 9. 

Costatrichia panamensis, new species 

Figures 43-45 
This species is closely related to the genotype with which it agrees 
in the generic characters: reflexed costal cell, enlarged antennal 
segments, spine of the seventh sternum, and general plan of the 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

genitalia. It differs strikingly from the type-species, C. lodora 
Mosely, in having a dorsal process from the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 2.5 mm. Color in alcohol blackish 
brown. Male genitalia: Eighth sternum produced beneath ninth 
segment. Ninth segment with a rectangular dorsomesal emargina- 
tion, and a short lateral process bearing several long setae. Clasper 
divided into an elongate, quadrate ventral lobe, and a long tapering 
dorsal process whose tip meets mesally the tip of the other process. 
A pair of ovoid plates covering the aedeagus laterally. Aedeagus 
apically sclerotized and slightly decurved, beneath this a single 
spine, a pair of plates lateroventrally slightly beyond midlength, 
a mid-dorsal dome, basal loop large and complete. 

Holotype, male: Panama, Canal Zone, Rio Agua Salud, Mar. 30, 
1965, Duckworth. 

Ochrotrichia cruces, new species 

Figures 46, 47 

This species shows some relationship to 0. mono Ross, from which 
it is distinguished by the proportionately broader clasper and different 
structure of the tenth tergum. 

Adult. Length of forewing 3.5 mm. Color fuscous, wings mostly 
denuded, but apparently with some patches of white hair. Male 
genitalia : Ninth segment rather quadrate laterally, deeply emarginate 
dorsally. Clasper broadly triangular in lateral aspect, with a ventral 
row and apical patch of black pegs on mesal face. Tenth tergum 
complex, with an elongate spine arising dorsomesally curving to 
right side, a short, black-tipped spine arising slightly beyond, apically 
with another longer spine, whose tip is directed ventrally, on right 
side a broad thin plate bearing a short spine mesally. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Mexico), Las Cruces National Park, 
La Marquesa, 3000 m elevation, July 5-9, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Metrichia mexicana, new species 

Figures 48-51 

I am tentatively placing this species in the genus Metrichia, to 
which it will key, although the genital pattern seems quite different. 
From M. nigritta (Banks) it differs in the large lobate tenth tergum 
and the lack of heavy spines from the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 2.5 mm. Head and appendages cream 
colored, tarsi annulate, forewings with large cream-colored patches 
of hair mixed with fuscous spots. Male genitalia : No processes from 
sterna. Ninth segment rounded anteriorly. Tenth tergites emerging 
imperceptibly from ninth segment, cleft mid-dorsally, apices rounded 



no. 3608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 13 

and bearing a few dark spines. Clasper elongate, with apicoventral 
angle developed into a process whose tip is upturned. Dorsally 
an internal U-shaped plate that bears a long narrow process ventrally 
passing around aedeagus; mid ventrally with a sinuate indistinct 
sclerotization. Aedeagus long, apex upturned slightly, with a long 
tightly appressed process wrapped around stem and another pointed 
process near end. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), Rio Tacolapan, route 180, 
km 551, July 25-26, 1966, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 2 9. Mexico (Vera Cruz), Cuitlahuac, Aug. 
10-12, 1964, Spangler, 1 c? . Guatemala (Suchitepequez) , Finca Moc&, 
June 12, 1966, Flint and Ortiz, 3 cf, 1 9. 

Neotrichia costaricensis, new species 

Figures 52-54 

Perhaps most closely related to N. edalis Ross, this species seems 
rather isolated within the genus. The dorsoapical processes of the 
aedeagus and the hoodlike shape of the tenth tergum are unique. 

Adult. Length of forewing 2 mm. Specimens in alcohol uniformly 
brown. Male genitalia: Eighth segment incomplete ventrally, with 
anterolateral processes. Ninth segment with anterolateral processes. 
Tenth tergum hoodlike. Bracteole very indistinct, appearing elon- 
gate and enlarged apically in ventral view. Claspers small, black, 
trianguloid in ventral view. Subgenital plate black, small, and chev- 
ron shaped in ventral aspect. Aedeagus slightly moniliform, with a 
sclerotized apicoventral strap; apex with two pairs of dorsally directed 
processes, basal process longest with basal teeth, apical process 
shorter. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, La Lola near Matina, Mar. 11, 1965, 
Duckworth. 

Paratypes: Same data, Id 1 ; same except May 1, 1957, R. D. 
Shenef elt, 1 cf . 

Hydroptila veracruzensis, new species 

Figures 55-57 

This species seems to be related to H. berneri Ross, from which it 
is distinguished by the lateral processes of the ninth segment and the 
well-developed spiral process of the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 2 mm. Color in alcohol uniformly 
brown. Male genitalia: Seventh sternum with a pointed process 
mesally. Ninth segment with a pointed apicolateral process. Tenth 
tergite well sclerotized laterally, membranous mesally. Clasper elon- 
gate, rounded apically in lateral aspect with a single dark point, in 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

ventral aspect ribbon-like with tip slightly recurved. Aedeagus with 
a heavily sclerotized apical portion that is enlarged slightly at neck, 
spiral process wound around neck one-and-a-quarter turns with apex 
laying along apical portion, basal portion slender. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Vera Cruz), Cuitlahuac, Aug. 10-12, 1964, 
Spangler. 

Paratype: Mexico (San Luis Potosi), Palitla, June 5, 1966, Flint, 
Id*. 

Hydropsychidae 

Diplectrona chiapensis, new species 
Figure 60 

This is the first species of the genus found in the New World south 
of the United States. The male may be recognized immediately by 
the internal sacs in the seventh segment and the shape of the lobes of 
the tenth tergites. 

Adult. Length of the forewing: male 9-10 mm, female 12 mm. 
Color pale brown, male with faint dark irrorations on forewings, fe- 
male with dark marks more distinct. Fifth segment with an antero- 
lateral process that is slightly longer than segment. Male genitalia: 
Seventh segment with a pair of large striate internal sacs opening on 
posterior margin. Tenth tergum divided into trianguloid lateral 
lobes that much surpass the mesal lobe, dorsally completely divided 
on midline. Clasper long and terete. Aedeagus obliquely truncate 
apically, subapically with a complex of internal sclerites. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Chiapas), Dolores, route 190, km 1190, 
Aug. 7, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 5 d\ 3 9. 

Hydropsyche vespertina, new species 

Figures 58, 59 

This species is a member of the H. depravata group. The com- 
bination of dorsal point and rectangular shape of the tenth tergum, 
moderately angled base and enlarged tip of the aedeagus will separate 
this species from the other described species of the group. 

Adult. Length of forewing 9-11 mm. Brown, antenna with dark 
V-marks on basal segments, wings marked with typical pattern of 
golden-brown and grey-brown hairs. Male genitalia: Lateral lobe of 
ninth segment well developed. Tenth tergum rectangular in lateral 
aspect, with a sharp apicodorsal point, and a shallow U-shaped 
dorsomesal excision. Clasper with upper surface of basal segment 
rather sinuate, apical segment terete. Aedeagus with base angled 



no. 3608 CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 15 

at about 135° to axis of stem, tip enlarged, divided into lateral plates. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Michoacan), Tuxpan, July 7-8, 1965, 
Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Same data, 3 cf . Mexico (Durango), 11 miles west of 
El Salto, June 29-30, 1964, Spangler, 1 d". Mexico (Michoacan), 
Turundeo, route 15, km 200, July 14, 1966, Flint and Ortiz, 3 cf , 1 9. 
Mexico (Michoacan), San Lorenzo, route 15, km 206, July 14-15, 
1966, Flint and Ortiz, 4 cf ; same except July 19, 1966, 1 cf, 1 9. 

Plectropsyche sandrae, new species 

Figures 61-63 

This is the second species described in the genus Plectropsyche. 
From the type-species, P. hoogstraali Ross, it differs in coloration, 
shape of the tenth tergum, and forked apex of the clasper. 

Adult. Length of forewing 7 mm. Color brown, legs paler, wings 
with many flecks of golden hair. Male genitalia: Ninth segment 
without a stout hooked process from posterior margin. Tenth tergum 
with two lateral lobes, basal one flat and flared laterad, and dorsal 
one terete and upright, apical portion slightly expanded apicoventrally. 
Clasper with basal segment angulate near midlength, apical segment 
with a short, dorsal, subapical process. Aedeagus with base inflated, 
apex with a pair of lateral lobes and a central knob. 

Holotype, male: Costa Rica, Golfito, Apr. 25-28, 1965, Duckworth. 

I take pleasure in dedicating this species to Sandra Duckworth, 
who collected this and many other Trichoptera on joint trips with 
her husband. 

Leptonema chila, new species 

Figures 64-67 

This is closely related to L. salvini Mosely but differs in the pointed 
ventral extension of the tenth tergite and the mesodorsal process 
and lateral spiculate band of the aedeagus. 

Adult. Length of forewing 15 mm. Color pale brown. Male 
genitalia: Tenth tergite with two long dorsal and one dorsomesal 
processes; laterally a flattened area, expanded ventrally and developed 
into a sharp tooth. Clasper long, slender, without basomesal proc- 
esses, apical segment curving mesally and with a pad of black spicules. 
Aedeagus apically with a pair of basally directed processes along 
dorsum, tip developed into a pair of short, lateral, winglike lobes, 
an erect dorsomesal process, laterally with a band of spicules that 
appears to demark the margin of a flat structure fused to the central 
tube. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Guerrero), near Chilpancingo, route 95, 
km 297, July 15-16, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 
Paratypes: Same data, 1 cf , 2 9- 

LlMNEPHILIDAE 

Limnephilus may a, new species 

Figures 68-70 

The species is perhaps closest to L. hamifer Flint, from which it is 
differentiated immediately by the sharp hook arising from the mes- 
oventral angle of the cercus. 

Adult. Lenth of forewing: male 12-13 mm, female 14-15 mm. 
Color brownish, wings faintly irrorate, with darker specks along 
veins. Basal segment of foretarsus in male about one-third length 
of second segment; forefemur and tibia with a band of dark spicules. 
Male genitalia: Eighth tergum without apicomesal spiculate lobe. 
Cercus with a broad dorsolateral lobe, and an erect, dark, hooklike 
mesoventral process. Tenth tergite low, darkened, developed into 
a short apicodorsal point. Clasper united to posterior margin of 
ninth segment, but with a short, quadrate, dorsal prolongation. 
Aedeagus with lateral arms strongly sclerotized, curved dorsad and 
ending in a sharp point; central tube with a pair of apicolateral 
heart-shaped plates and a central beak. 

Holotype, male: Guatemala (El Progreso), Finca la Cajeta, Aug. 
12, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes: Guatemala, 20 miles northwest of Chimaltenango, Aug. 
20, 1965, Spangler, 1 cf, 19. Guatemala (Totonicapan), San Cris- 
tobal T., June 13, 1966, Flint and Ortiz, 3 d 1 . Guatemala, Purulha, 
July, Schaus and Barnes, 1 9. Mexico (Chiapas), San Cristobal las 
Casas, Aug. 6-8, 1965, Flint and Ortiz, 1 cf ; same except July 17-21, 
1964, Spangler, 2 9. Mexico (Chiapas), Teopisca, July 9, 1966, Flint 
and Ortiz, 1 d 1 . 

Leptoceridae 

Triaenodes anomala, new species 
Figure 71 

This species is not related obviously to any described North 
American species of Triaenodes. The short, sharply curved basal 
spine of the clasper, short, pointed tenth tergite, and paired dorsal 
spines of the aedeagus are all unique. 

Adult. Length of forewing 6 mm. Specimens pale brown, but 
completely denuded. Male genitalia: Ninth segment slightly ex- 
panded ventrally, with ventroapical section supporting claspers 



n°- 3 6 °s CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 17 

sharply demarked. Cercus short, terete. Tenth tergite pointed, arched 
over hoodlike dorsal covering of aedeagus. Clasper with a spine- 
like basal process whose apical half is curved sharply ventrad, a thin 
dorsal lobe arising from an irregular ridge, apex produced into a sharp 
point. Aedeagus with a thin, elongate, and pointed ventral part, 
dorsally two sharply pointed spines, apical halves of all curved 
sharply ventrad. 

Holotype, male: Mexico (Guerrero), near Chilpancingo, route 95, 
km 297, July 15-16, 1965, Flint and Ortiz. 

Paratypes : Same data, 2 $. 



18 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 1-9. — Aiopsyche hidalgoi, new species: 1, genitalia, lateral; 2, aedeagus, lateral. 
Culoptila monlanensis, new species: 3, genitalia, posteroventral; 4, genitalia, lateral. 
Protoptila laterospina, new species: 5, genitalia, lateral. P. marqua, new species: 6, 
genitalia, lateral. P. cristata, new species: 7, genitalia, lateral. P. huasteca, new species: 
8, genitalia, lateral. P. spangleri, new species: 9, genitalia, lateral. 



CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 



19 




Figures 10-18. — Chimarra ducktvorthi, new species: 10, genitalia, lateral; 11, right clasper 
and ninth sternum, posteroventral; 12, aedeagus, lateral. C. ortiziana, new species: 13, 
genitalia, lateral; 14, clasper, posteroventral; IS, aedeagus, lateral; 16, ninth and tenth 
terga, dorsal. C. antigua, new species: 17, genitalia, lateral; 18, genitalia, dorsal. 



20 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 19-26. — Chimarra aureopunctata, new species: 19, genitalia, lateral; 20, eighth 
tergum, dorsal; 21, clasper, posterior. C. lobata, new species: 22, genitalia, lateral; 23, 
eighth tergum, dorsal; 24, clasper and ninth sternum, posteroventral. C. wilsoni, new 
species: 25, genitalia, lateral; 26, clasper, posterior. 



CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 



21 




Figures 27-36. — Polyplectropus macrostyla, new species: 27, genitalia, lateral; 28, clasper 
and ninth sternum, ventral. Polycentropus costaricensis, new species: 29, genitalia, 
lateral; 30, left cercus, dorsal; 31, aedeagus, lateral; 32, right clasper, posterior. P. 
guatemalensis, new species: 33, genitalia, lateral. P. aztecus, new species: 34, genitalia, 
lateral. Xiphocentron aureum, new species: 35, genitalia, lateral; 36, genitalia, dorsal. 



22 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 37-45. — Leucotrichia viridis, new species: 37, genitalia, ventral; 38, aedeagus, 
dorsal; 39, genitalia, lateral. Zumatrichia echinata, new species: 40, genitalia, lateral; 
41, genitalia, ventral; 42, aedeagus, lateral. Cosiatrichia panamensis, new species: 43, 
genitalia, lateral; 44, genitalia, ventral; 45, aedeagus, lateral. 



CADDIS FLIES, IV — FLINT 



23 




Figures 46-57. — Ochrotrichia cruces, new species: 46, genitalia, lateral; 47, tenth tergum, 
right side. Melrichia mexicana, new species: 48, genitalia, lateral; 49, genitalia, dorsal; 
50, genitalia, ventral; 51, aedeagus, lateral. Neotrichia costaricensis, new species: 52, 
genitalia, lateral; 53, genitalia, ventral; 54, aedeagus, dorsal. Hydroptila veracruzensis, 
new species: 55, genitalia, lateral; 56, genitalia, ventral; 57, aedeagus, lateral. 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




Figures 58-71. — Hydropsyche vespertina, new species: 58, genitalia, lateral; 59, tip of 
aedeagus, ventral. Diplectrona chiapensis, new species: 60, genitalia, lateral. Plectropsyche 
sandrae, new species: 61, genitalia, lateral; 62, clasper, postero ventral; 63, ninth and tenth 
terga, dorsal. Leptonema chila, new species: 64, genitalia, lateral; 65, ninth and tenth 
terga, dorsal; 66, tip of aedeagus, lateral; 67, tip of aedeagus, dorsal. Limnephilus maya, 
new species: 68, genitalia, lateral; 69, cercus, tenth tergum, and clasper, posterior; 70, 
aedeagus, lateral. Triaenodes anomala, new species: 71, genitalia, lateral. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3609 



An Application of Automatic Data Processing 
To the Study of Seabirds, I 



Numerical Coding ' 



By Warren B. King, George E. Watson, and Patrick J. Gould 



Seabird distribution, abundance, and movements in the open ocean 
are difficult to analyze because the limited data available have been 
collected by various methods, the observers have varied in reliability, 
and the information is scattered widely. Furthermore, publication of 
individual sightings, except those of rare vagrants, has been at best 
spotty with the result that abundance information is difficult to de- 
rive from the data. Records of at-sea bird observations are main- 
tained in several institutions in different countries, but most of these 
are sor table only by hand, an exercise that is extremely time-consum- 
ing and invites clerical errors when the data are considerable. As a 
result, few analyses have been published that involve complicated 
correlations of extensive distributional and environmental data, and 
even fewer seabird distribution maps show detailed documentation 
of seasonal occurrence and abundance. 



1 Contribution no. 22 from the Pacific Ocean Biological Survey Program. 
A preliminary version of this paper was presented at the 14th International 
Ornithological Congress, Oxford, England, July 25, 1966. 

2 King and Gould: Department of Vertebrate Zoology; Watson: Division of 
Birds. 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Smithsonian Institution scientists recorded data on seabirds ob- 
served during 15 cruises aboard the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries 
research vessel Tovmsend Cromwell while the ship was engaged in 
oceanographic research as a preliminary part of the Trade Wind Zone 
Oceanography Program. These data have been utilized in a pilot 
study to determine the feasibility of recording, storing, and analyzing 
seabird records in a computerized automatic data processing system. 
The system described herein is in part descended from a simpler one 
developed by the Bureau to store and analyze its own bird observa- 
tions. Coding used in the various fields of data in this pilot project 
is presented in this paper and details of the codes are given in the 
tables. Computer programming for the system is discussed by 
Creighton (in prep.). A full report on the results of the analysis of 
bird observation data from these cruises will be published by King, 
but the preliminary results suggest that ADP may be applicable to 
a cooperative international system of seabird observation, data 
storage, and analysis. 

The Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Hawaiian Island area, has 
been a vital partner in the development of this pilot study. John C. 
Marr, area director and Gunter Seckel, coordinator of the Trade 
Wind Zone Oceanography Program, and their staff have made it 
possible for Smithsonian scientists to observe seabirds aboard the 
Townsend Cromwell and have given us access to BCF oceanographic 
data, punch cards, and computer programs. Reginald Creighton's 
close cooperation as programming analyst has turned the projected 
aims of this system into a working reality. The original impetus 
to undertake the computer analysis of the seabird observation data 
came from Philip S. Humphrey, Principal Investigator, Pacific Ocean 
Biological Survey Program. Nicholas J. Suszynski, Jr., Director of 
the Information Systems Division at the Smithsonian, provided 
valuable advice. Mrs. Anne Keenan Poulson patiently prepared 
the figures for this publication. We are deeply grateful to all of them. 

Observations. — From March 1964 to July 1965 the Smithsonian 
Institution conducted an at-sea study to determine the distribution, 
movements, and abundance of seabirds in a 500,000-square-mile area 
of the central Pacific Ocean south and east of the main Hawaiian 
Islands between 148° and 158° west longitude and 10° and 26°30' north 
latitude (fig. 1). Each of the 15 replicate cruises covered a fixed track 
of 4460 miles and lasted approximately 20 days. There was no cruise 
in August 1964. 

Two experienced observers alternated 2-hour watches each day from 
sunrise to sunset. They identified birds at sea as accurately and 
specifically as possible and recorded all data on standardized reporting 
forms. Some identifications were confirmed through collection of 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS KING, WATSON, GOULD 3 

specimens. The time of observation was recorded to the nearest 
minute. Whenever possible, an actual count was made but large 
flocks were only estimated within accuracy limits. The direction of 
movement, if any, was recorded. Notes were made on behavior, 
plumage, molt, age, sex, and any other data that appeared significant. 
Descriptions were recorded in cases of uncertain identification. Stand- 
ard marine meteorological observations were taken every six hours. 
Bureau of Commercial Fisheries personnel took bathythermographs 
and recorded weather conditions every one-half degree, hydrographic 
stations every one and one-half degrees, and surface plankton tows 
every evening. Ship's position was reckoned hourly and early morn- 



180° 



160°W 



150°W 



140°W 



• ■".***,, 


A A/ 


s + 


r'k 




JOHNSTON 
ATOLL 


• 


+ + 1 

♦ + 1 

♦ 1 + 


^i 




PHOENIX 
. IS. 




« 







Figure 1. — Replicate track in central Pacific Ocean followed during 15 monthly cruises of 

the Townsend Cromwell. 



ing; midday and evening celestial or LORAN fixes were taken, con- 
ditions permitting. 

During the 15 months of the study, 13,080 sightings of 65,707 birds 
were made in 3561.1 hours of observation covering 34,384 linear miles. 

Coding 

The quantity and complexity of data accumulated necessitated use 
of an automatic data processing system for rapid and accurate sorting, 
compilation of tables, and the plotting of distribution and density 
charts. In addition, ADP made possible a sophisticated analysis of 
the effects of many enviromental factors, both oceanographic and 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

meteorologic, upon the distribution and movements of seabirds in 
the area. And finally, ADP permitted more rapid statistical handling 
of the data in order to ascertain (1) whether apparent monthly- 
population and distribution changes were real or were merely due to 
inadequate sampling, and (2) whether or not apparent correlations 
between environmental factors and bird distribution were statistically 
significant. 

The large number of different parameters to be analyzed required 
the use of three decks of 80-column punch cards to retain a maximum 
amount of data in the system. The three decks were called "sighting 
deck," code number 99, "environment deck," 03, and "day deck," 98 
(fig. 2). Of the three decks, the sighting deck was the largest, con- 



Figure 2. — Three decks of 80-column punch cards. Data 
in columns 3-15 interrelate all three decks; environment 
and sighting decks are further interrelated by data in 
columns 16-28. 




taining 18,000 cards for the 13,080 sightings. The environment deck 
was smaller, containing 2800 cards. Each environment card was 
associated with all the sightings from the time of one set of environ- 
mental data observations to the time of the succeeding set of observa- 
tions. Similarly, each of the 305 day cards was associated with all 
sightings and all environment cards on that day. Thus, each obser- 
vation had a sighting card or cards, an environment card, and a day 
card. But it shared the environment and day cards with other 
sightings. 

The three decks of cards were tied together by common data 
consisting of ship's name, cruise number, and date. The environ- 
ment and sighting cards were further linked by hour and position. 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 



The 80-column punch card system works on a numerical code into 
which all verbal data recorded by the observer at sea must be trans- 
lated before entry. The Cromwell observations, oceanography, 
weather, and ship's position were checked for accuracy by a single 
editor and entered as numbers on intermediate coded sheets of different 
key colors. Data were punched on the cards directly from the 
intermediate coded sheets. 

Sighting deck. — The sighting card includes all data that pertain 
.to each individual sighting. We define a sighting as the observation 
of a bird or group of birds acting as a unit. Data for the following 
fields were entered in the indicated columns on the green intermediate 
sheets (fig. 3) for the sighting cards (card code 99 in columns 1-2) : 



Ship name 3-5 

Cruise number 6-9 

Date 10-15 

Local time 16-19 

Position 20-28 

Species identification 29-34 

Association code 35 

Species identification reliability 36 

Number 37-41 

Number reliability 42 

Direction of bird movement 43 

Behavior 44 

Color marking 45 

Method of marking 46 

Age 47 

Sex 48 



Color- plumage phase 49 

Molt 50 

Whether or not a specimen was col- 
lected 51 

Food association 52 

Special weather conditions 53 

Special information 54 

Duration of sighting (minutes) 55-57 

Ship's speed (knots) 58-59 

Ship's direction 60-61 

Distance to nearest land (nautical 
miles) 62-65 

Distance to nearest breeding area 
(nautical miles) 66-69 

[Columns 70-80 were not utilized on 
the sighting cards for this program.] 



Each ship used for observations was assigned a code number; the 
Cromwell was 006. Cruises were coded serially for each ship. The 
date was expressed as month, day, and year with only the final two 
digits being coded for year. Local and all other absolute times were 
expressed to the nearest minute in the 24-hour system. 

Position of the sighting and all other localities were expressed as 
coordinates of longitude and latitude. In order to economize on 
columns, the world was divided into octants along the equator and 
each 90° meridian. The octants (column 20) were numbered from 
0-3 in the Northern Hemisphere and from 5-8 in the Southern Hemi- 
sphere beginning at 0°-89°59'W and proceeding west. In this way it 
was not necessary to express the 100's figure and east and west for 
longitude nor north and south for latitude. 

The numerical code for seabird species is based on a revised check- 
list of the seabirds of the world. It is designed to permit data re- 
trieval hierarchically by class, order, family, genus, species, and/or 
subspecies. The code requires only six digits because of the relatively 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



VOL. 123 









n 




















«AJ*AV 


vw. 


























P* 






































O 








co 



ID 

















S 


• 









"D 


I 




















t 


















n 


























5 




O 


5 






















Q 

to" 








m 






(0 


















































































e 



















to 


n 








to 


j| 
















Q 


$ 


2 








"- 


i 








U 


E 








5 


2 


















* 




u 


■J 






m 




10 


CD 






1" 




< 


« 






© 




(- 


! 








u 


i 








CO 


* 

1 






ill 


5 


■) 














3 


Z 


















M 








































































E 


















10 




z , 








* 




<* ! 








<*> 




< " 






























c p 








C 


.2 c 








1/5 


£ ' 










r 1 




















■D ( 


































0) 




















' 














C <E 










C « 




















- ' f* 






























V 1 










"D « 










2 « 








"D 


















C 


— ' w 










O 8 








C 




















_c 


■ 


















irt| 


o F 

































s 


« */** 


ft 




£ 

















3 








a 


c 

















i 


o 








• 


o 






» 




(D 






? 


*" 


S 








< 


« 








u 


o 






C 


S 












a 








a. 


s 








3 


£ 






t 


X 


« 

10 









o 


ID 








l/l 


2 








> 


S 








1/1 


2 






-C 




E 






c 
5 













l; 


5 








CO 


? 






a 


a: 

io_ 


$ 






■ 


£ 









r* 


Q 


10 






s 


2 


« 










; 








S 


i 








o 


^ 






'5 











U 


lO 


1 








lO 










E 










£ 


3 






a 


m 








» 


o 


f .. ... 






■ 
























i 






c 


►-• 


> 






-C 

to 


co ; 


' 



















3 








« 


c ( 








- 


.2 " 










c 










0J p 










S ' 


















-g 


O S 








U 


1 








c 


a 








£ 


3 r- 

o - 








o 


x 5 








c 


> 2 










a « 









a 

(0 



» 




t 




H 






Q 



O 



■ 









- 




V 






'5 
U 



in 




- 




■ 






g 





O 






< 

CL- 


* 






IO 


^ 








R 






J3 

o 


£ 






-D 









UJ 


» ■ 
« 






■A 


s 






o 


e 






c 









■ 

CO 


<D 






c 
o 


■« 






c 


n 

e 






CL 


a 






o 


















B 

E. 


at 






t— 


n 






lO 











O 






E. 


s 








* 






to 


2 








a 






o 


■ 















to 


-J 








<■ 






^ 


$ 








SO 






to 


; 








4 






o 

c 


n 






H 


-» 






to 


5 

















s 








) ■■ . 






to 








d 


B 






JO 


1 






Z 


t 






5 


1 
1 








x 






O 








- ' ( 

Z ' 


> 






5 J 








O J 








5 5 








♦.• < 


i. ii mi 






z 1 








X c 








t; S 








z 8 








S s 









3 " 








Q ! 








. ■ 








O ' 








o J 








« 








£? 









no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS KING, WATSON, GOULD 7 

low number of forms involved, yet it includes all known taxa of sea- 
birds and has sufficient leeway for most synonymy and the inclusion 
of land-based accidentals, migrants, and marine mammals and reptiles. 
The first digit represents class; the second, order; the third, family; 
the fourth, genus; and the fifth and sixth, species or field-recognizable, 
nonoverlapping subspecies. The code for central Pacific Ocean birds 
used in this pilot program is given in table 1. Codes for seabirds 
(presently being revised) and marine mammals of the world are 
available from the Smithsonian Institution. Birds that are identifiable 
only to class, order, family, genus, and/or species may be entered and 
retrieved at the same level of reliable identification. 

When the code translation of a single sighting involves more than 
one item of information in any category, additional sighting cards are 
needed for complete and unique expression. Thus, a complex sighting 
involving four species of birds of three color phases and of three age 
categories requires 10 cards. These 10 cards are tied together by their 
identical times and by a special code key known as the association key. 
A "0" in the association column (35) indicates a simple sighting 
expressible by one card. A "1" in the column indicates that the card 
has information pertaining to the same sighting as all other cards with 
the same time and a "1" in the association column. A sighting of a 
mixed flock of sooty terns and brown noddies feeding together would 
be represented by two cards each bearing a "1" association code 
number. When two or more cards of a sighting have identical data 
in the ship, cruise, date, time, position, species, and number fields 
but differ in other fields such as age or behavior, then the numbers 2, 
3, 4, or 5 are used in the association column to preserve uniqueness. 
This is necessary because the computer automatically rejects, as 
duplicates, cards with identical data in columns 1-42. If a sighting- 
involves two sooty terns, one adult and one immature, the first card 
bears the association number 1 and the second, number 2. A sighting 
of three sooty terns, one feeding, one sitting on the water, and a third 
searching, would have three cards with association code numbers 1,2, 
and 3 respectively. If, on the other hand, two or more different 
sightings have identical data in the ship, cruise, date, time, position, 
species, and number fields but the birds were not associated in the 
same flock, we employ the numbers 6, 7, 8, 9, or in the code to indicate 
uniqueness but nonassociation. 

Note that "0" in the association code has a double function. It may 
be used merely to denote a simple, one-card sighting or one of five 
concurrent nonassociated sightings. When more than five nonasso- 
ciated sightings occurred simultaneously, it was necessary to adjust 
the time of the supernumerary sightings by one minute to preserve 
uniqueness. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Codes for species identification and number reliability, direction of 
bird movement, behavior, marking, and other sighting fields are given 
in table 2. Reliability was determined and recorded by the observer 
in his at-sea notes. Some of the at-sea logs recorded doubtful identifi- 
cations of dark shearwaters as "sooty-slender-bill" with a notation 
that the underwings appeared light. Such sightings were coded as 
"sooty shearwaters," 122519, in the species identification field (29-34), 
as "either this or the next most similar form," 2, in the species relia- 
bility field (36) and as [consult] "identification" [data in at-sea log], 
1, in the special information field (54). The next similar species to the 
sooty shearwater in the central Pacific is the slender-billed shear- 
water, but in the southern Atlantic Ocean it might be the great- winged 
petrel, Pterodroma macroptera. 

Special means of marking birds to show points of origin or other 
status were employed in studies of seabirds in the central Pacific 
Ocean. Birds marked by "painting" with body dye or by attaching 
leg bands and colored plastic streamers were expressed in code in 
the system. Colors were used for identification of birds at a distance 
when they could not be captured. In seabirds, color or plumage 
phases may indicate geographic origin or reproductive condition. 
Light and dark color phases in petrels, boobies, and jaegers may 
vary in relative proportions in different geographic populations. 
A pinkish or yellowish tinge in white tropicbird, gull, or tern plumage 
may indicate reproductive activity. 

The special weather conditions field was used to refer to squalls, 
storms, or calms that were so local they could not be expressed in 
the environment deck. The special information column was used as 
a warning signal to alert the scientist to consult the raw data for a 
particular field in the observer's at-sea log. A routine sighting as a 
bird crossed the ship's bow was considered arbitrarily to have a 
duration of one minute. Birds following in the wake were counted 
periodically, and an attempt was made to determine duration of their 
association with the ship. Direction of ship movement and wind 
and wave directions on the environment card were recorded as the 
first two digits of the compass heading rounded off to the nearest 
10 degrees (e.g., 165°= 17, 24°=02). A stationary ship or calm air 
or sea was coded 00. 

Part of a page of an at-sea observation log and its numerically 
coded translation onto the intermediate coded sighting sheet is shown 
ready for punching into cards in figure 4. 

Environment deck. — The format of the environment card was 
slightly modified from cards already in use by the Bureau of Com- 
mercial Fisheries in the Hawaii area. Complete environmental data 
of this sort are recorded on standard forms and punched into cards 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 



9 



on file at the BCF in Honolulu. The utilization of this existing 
card format in our system saved duplication of effort and man hours 
of work by permitting standardization of data collection and storage. 
The codes used by the BCF and by us in this program are based 
on number codes developed by the Hydrographic Office in Publication 
607, "Instruction Manual for Oceanographic Observations," 1955, 
reprinted 1959, for use by deck officers of vessels. On the environ- 
mental punch card deck (code 03 in columns 1-2), the fields for ship's 




OBSERVERS: 



- ;'£' . ^ 



y 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION 

DIVISION OF BIRDS 

AT SEA DAILY LOG - E 



Date /#4U/ M 

Pg.# / 



TIME SPECIES 




Figure 4. — Bird observation data in at-sea log (above) and part of the numerical translation 
onto the intermediate coded sheet for sighting deck. 



name 3-5, cruise number 6-9, date 10-15, time 16-19, and position 
20-28 provide linkage with a particular group of sighting cards. 
The following additional fields of data are found on the environment 
card and are coded on red intermediate sheets (fig. 3) in a manner 
analogous to that used for the sighting deck. 

Bathythermograph file number for Surface water temperature 35-37 

reference 29-31 Surface salinity 38-40 

Thermocline depth 32-34 Water temperature at 10 meters 41-43 



10 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Wind direction 44-45 
Wind speed 46-47 
Barometer 48-49 
Weather conditions 50-51 
State of sea 52 
Visibility 53 
Surface oxygen 54-56 
Surface phosphate 57-59 



Moon age 60 
Cloud cover 61 
Air temperature 62-64 
Relative humidity 65-66 
Wave direction 67-68 
[Columns 69-80 were not utilized on 
the environment cards.] 



Thermocline depth was recorded in meters. Water temperatures 
at the surface and at 10 meters and air temperature were given to the 
nearest .1° C. Surface salinity was recorded in parts per thousand, 
omitting the initial 3 for any value. Wind and wave direction were 
coded in the same manner as direction of ship's movement, column 43 
on the sighting card. The code for weather conditions is given in 
table 3 and those for state of sea, visibility, and cloud cover, in table 4. 
Wind speed was recorded in knots. Barometric pressure was recorded 
as the last two digits of a millibar reading, e.g., 1015 millibars was 
coded as 15. Surface oxygen was recorded in milliliters per liter to 
the nearest .01 and surface phosphate in microgram atoms per liter 
to the nearest .01. Relative humidity was expressed in whole percent. 
Moon age was not recorded for this study but a BCF code is given in 
table 4. 

Day deck. — The day card includes information pertaining to all 
sighting and environment cards for one day and is concerned mainly 
with positions, distances, and times. From this card, in combination 
with the sighting cards from the entire day, the computer calculates 
daily density figures in terms of birds per hour and birds per linear 
mile. Through the use of such density figures, we can make direct 
comparison between bird density in different areas of the ocean and 
from day to day, month to month, and even year to year within the 
same area. It is important to be able to express density as a factor 
both of time and distance because the two are not correlated neces- 
sarily on a cruise with periodic stops such as the BCF Cromwell 
cruises. The day cards, code 98 in columns 1-2, are linked to the other 
two decks through information on the ship's name 3-5, cruise number 
6-9, and date 10-15. In addition, the day card contains the following 
information coded on the blue intermediate sheets (fig. 3) : 



Diurnal hours of observation 16-18 
Diurnal miles of observation 19-21 
Nocturnal hours of observation 22-24 
Nocturnal miles of observation 25-27 
Position at midday 28-36 
Position at sunrise 37-44 
Position at sunset 45-52 



Local time of sunrise 53-56 
Local time of sunset 57-60 
Number of observers on each watch 61 
Quantitative plankton analysis 62-64 
[Columns 65-80 were not utilized on 
the day cards.] 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 11 

Hours and miles of observations were recorded to the nearest .1 
hour and whole mile respectively. The ship's location at noon was 
recorded as midday position for a full day of observations but the 
midpoint of the diurnal track was recorded for a partial day of obser- 
vation. Surface plankton was collected in a 25-minute tow with a 
1 meter .308 millimeter terminal mesh net. Volume was measured 
by BCF personnel and recorded in cubic centimeters per cubic meter 
of water strained. 

Computer Analysis 

The coded information was transferred from the cards onto magnetic 
tape in the computer with the result that all data pertinent to each 
sighting were stored and printed out as a unit. Thus, environmental 
data and the raw materials for calculating densities were included with 
the print-out for any individual sighting. 

The system has been programmed in COBOL [Common Oriented 
Business Language] for a General Electric 425 digital computer having 
128,000 characters of core storage. 

The data flow sheet for the system thus includes the sighting that 
is recorded in the observer's field notes, edited and coded on the 
intermediate sheets, punched into the cards, and transferred onto 
tape in the computer where it is available for print-out, plot-out, and 
analysis (fig. 5). 

With this information fed into the system, various questions may be 
asked of the data. The simplest questions are descriptive: what 
species occur in what numbers, where, and when? We can ask for a 
detailed print-out of all the data for all sightings arranged by species, 
by locality, or by time. Part of such a code print-out of red-footed 
booby observations is shown in figure 6. 

Relatively simple correlations of species distribution with environ- 
mental conditions may be requested as tallies to provide raw materials 
for graphs or statistical analysis. Tallies of black-footed albatross 
and sooty tern sightings at various surface water temperatures yield 
data for plotting bar graphs (fig. 7) . The two species differ somewhat 
in water temperature preference. 

More detailed compound questions involving several conditional 
clauses will give more restricted print-outs; thus, by asking for all 
records of sooty terns in aggregations greater than 25 seen feeding 
within the first two hours after sunrise during May in association with 
water 25°-27° C and having a salinity greater than 34.5 parts per thou- 
sand we obtain a much more selective fisting. Indeed, only one sighting 
qualified (fig. 8). The instructions are in COBOL code language, 
which the computer understands. Asking this question of our 13,080 



12 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



sightings took 20 minutes of computer time. Twenty-five questions 
of this complexity may be asked at the same time. 

The most graphic application of automatic data processing to the 
observation data is for plotting distribution maps. Seasonal move- 
ments and changes in abundance may be depicted directly by machine 
print-outs in the form of annotated cruise tracks. Such machine 
printed distribution maps of the two color phases of wedge-tailed 
shearwaters from May to July are shown in figure 9. Light phase birds 
breed in the Hawaiian Islands to the north; dark phase birds, below 



Observer 




Observation 



At Sea 
Log 



Editor 




Research 
Scientist 



Print-Out 
and 
Tally 



Intermediate 

Coded 

Sheets 


Key 

Puncher 


r~~ 


\ 




Punch Card 


L. 


J 




Computer 



Analysis 





plus 


V — ' 


Program 




k. — ' 





Plot-Out 
Figure 5. — Data flow chart for seabird ADP system. 



the equator to the south. Density distribution maps of this sort 
may be requested to show actual numbers of birds observed as in 
figure 9 or rates of occurrence in birds per mile or per hour. 

Worldwide Application 

Because this ADP system was intended primarily to handle data 
obtained on this one set of cruises in the central Pacific Ocean, some 
modifications will be necessary in order to analyze data from elsewhere 
in the Pacific or in other oceans of the world. Some of these modifica- 
tions already have been incorporated into the Smithsonian program; 



DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 



13 



others are suggested only for possible incorporation into a larger scale 
international program. 

On the sighting cards (p. 5), the fields "distance to nearest land" 
(columns 62-65) and "distance to nearest breeding colony" (66-69) 
will be deleted. These distances have proved laborious to calculate 
but will be provided automatically by the computer when the neces- 
sary program has been written. It may be possible to incorporate a 
fourth deck of cards into the system that will give the phenology of 



640316 


1625 


21 oi 


5742 


133213 


in 


01 





2117 


5 75 7 


0640 


! 1 


00 


0050/ 


14 


12 1 


L 2100 


5740 






0000001 


7 


2U44 


5723 


183b 


00 


03 


0050/ 


640316 


1625 


2101 


574? 


1 3 3 ? 1 3 


20 


01 





2117 


5757 


0640 


in 


00 


005o) 


14 


12 1 


L 2100 


5740 






onoooni 


7 


?044 


5723 


1838 


oc 


03 


0050( 


640316 


1629 


2101 


574? 


133213 


00 


01 





?1 1 7 


5757 


0640 


10 


00 


0050) 


14 


12 1 


2100 


5740 






G 1 


7 


2044 


5723 


1838 


II 


3 


0050\ 



J f f I 



f 5 * 0° if** 

& ± ^ O » l> V 



(041 


050 


001 


245 


000 


0903 


16 


001 


6* 


7 


9 


1 


? 


3 













0002 


1 


/OOO 


039 


031 


512 


000 


241 


02 


242 


00 























1 


000 


006 


2 


)041 


050 


001 


245 


.0 


0903 


18 


001 


66 


2 


9 


1 


2 


3 













0002 


1 


( 000 


039 


031 


51? 


000 


241 


02 


242 


on 























3 


000 


006 


2 


/041 


050 


001 


245 


000 


0903 


18 


001 


66 


2 


9 


1 


2 


3 













0002 


1 


^000 


039 


031 


512 


000 


241 


02 


242 


00 











n 





n 


n 





000 


006 


2 



&/£ & i ? 

4- * 2 T 4 « 

J V o ^ O 



£ f 



Figure 6. — Part of a data print-out of records of red-footed boobies seen on Cromwell 

cruises. 



breeding in individual colonies of seabirds in order that distribution 
may be compared directly with breeding schedule. 

On the environment card, "relative humidity" (65-66) will be 
replaced by "dew point" or "depression of wet bulb air temperature 
under dry bulb." At sea, either of the latter two readings would give 
a more meaningful indication of the moisture content of the air than 
relative humidity. 

Clarity of water may be an important factor in the feeding of sea- 
birds that search for food visually from the air. Depth of visibility 



14 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



of a Secchi disc provides a good absolute measure for water clarity 
and one that is taken easily as a routine oceanographic measurement. 
At the same time, apparent water color may be recorded in the Forel 
scale. The BCF records and files both measurements on their punch 
cards. Photometric depth is another measure of water clarity made 
on oceanographic cruises, but it demands much more complicated 
instrumentation and the figures vary with intensity of illumination. 
It may be useful to record the presence of flotsam, large masses of weed, 
ice, or other floating debris. Some observations suggest that marine 
life and birds may be attracted locally to foreign matter in the water. 



< « 



.20 



16- 



5 .12 



o .08 



.04- 



QOO 



r 10 



-.6 



-A 



-.2 



(0 

z 
a. 
m • 

h l 

> L. 

o 

(A 



<22 e 



22-23.9° 



24°- 25.9° 



26°> 



Figure 7. — Bar graphs of abundance of black-footed albatross (shaded) and sooty terns 
(white) in birds per mile seen at various surface water temperatures on Cromwell cruises. 



On the day sheets several changes should be made. All observa- 
tions for the pilot program were made in a single octant of the world, 
but other sets of observations may be made in several octants or a 
cruise track may cross the equator or a 90° meridian and thus require 
two octant codes for the same day. For this reason octant columns 
(37 and 46) should be added to sunrise position and sunset position 
fields. As a result, the fields for sunrise and sunset time and number 
of observers would be moved two columns to the right. It has not 
been feasible to make these octant additions in the Smithsonian 
program. 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 15 

Three additional fields have already been added to the day sheets: 
time of beginning of observations (65-68) , time of end of observations 
(69-72), and special parametric analysis (73-75). The times of begin- 
ning and end of observations coincided with the times of sunset and 
sunrise on the Cromwell cruises, but in other studies observations may 
begin or end earlier or later. 

In the pilot study, density figures were computed on the basis of a 
full day's observations. In future studies, however, it may be 
necessary to determine abundance in areas that were covered in less 



PROVIDE ALL RECORDS OF SOOTY TERNS IN AGGREGATIONS GREATER 
THAN 25 SEEN FEEDING WITHIN THE FIRST TWO HOURS AFTER SUN- 
RISE DURING MAY IN ASSOCIATION WITH WATER 25 TO 27 DEGREES 
C AND HAVING A SALINITY GREATER THAN 34.50 PARTS PER THOU- 
SAND. 



REQUEST PARAMETER CARDS, PACIFIC PROJECT, JUNE 8, 1966. 

IF IDENT EQUALS 146867 , 
AND NUMB IS GREATER THAN 00025 , 
AND HOURS -AFTER-SUNRISE IS GREATER THAN 00 
AND LESS THAN 03 , 
AND BEHAVIOR EQUALS 3 , 
AND WATER-TEMPERATURE IS GREATER THAN 249 
AND LESS THAN 271 , 
AND SURFACE -SALINITY IS GREATER THAN 450 
AND MONTH EQUALS 05 , 
GO TO SROl. 









HOURS 












AFTER 


SURFACE 


SURFACE 


DATE 


TIME 


SPECIES NUMBER 


SUNRISE 


TEMP 


SALINITY 


05-29-64 


0630 


Sooty Tern 40 


2 


26.2° 


34.6% 



Figure 8. — Complex conditional question, its COBOL translation, and answer concerning 
sooty tern observations on Cromwell cruises. 

than a full day. The new special parametric analysis (SPA) field 
will be introduced on the revised day card for that purpose. An 
entry in this field will "flag" for restricted abundance analysis all 
observations made within the time segment represented on the day 
card. The use of all combinations of punches in each column (10 
digits and 26 letters) permits designation of 36 3 (46,656) different 
areas. 

On the day card the number of hours of observation, the actual 
times of observation, and the distance travelled within the designated 
area must be fractionized by entering them on two or more "fractional" 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 

IOFNTi??5lC ?7 26 25 ?4 23 22 21 20 1$ IB l? 16 15 H 13 12 11 



flO 00 00 00 01 1ft 01 00 00 07 02 05 07 04 04 02 01 02 03 02 00 00 04 0(1 01 02 Ofl 06 Ol^oY^lO 03 04 
00 02 00 0? 



■© 



01 00 00 

05 00 01 

ni oi oo oi 

00 06 31 04 02 06 16(24j99] > 7 fl4 00 03 00 
00 OO 



6 0©0„ 

Light Phase Wedge -tailed Shearwater 

4 1 

© 

(5) G3©(??) 17 O5 (30©S) 06 ob ofl ° 5 02 Qy i2 l3 °" ° 9 02 ° n 01^3^53)n5 00 06^2) 

01 On (5o)ntl 
07 fi" 00 (To) 



00 18 04 

no 02 




©©»00©00.- " " ° 3 « 10 ° 8 °'© 15 " 



26 25 24 23 22 21 20 



00 00 00 00 o>) on on oo 01 oo on 01 oo on oo oo 02 o? 01 01 00 00 02 on no 02 04 01 
00 00 



0.000© 



©■ 

© 



00 00 ni 16 

00 00 00 00 01 on 00 00 00 00 00 01 02 01 00 01 00 01 02 01 no 05 02 ni oo 14 00 



00 01 



Dark Phase Wedge -tailed Shearwater 



01 03 02 00 00 00 02 02 04 02 03 00 00 00 00 01 OOUMm 03 00 01 01 '2 ozQljQni'yfecS 

00 00 00 06 10 

oo oo oo Qe) 

oi oo(6»)oa 

00 00 OS 

02 00 00 03 
00 01 00 01 00 00 01 OO 00 01 OO OO 04 02 01 01 00 00 00 02 On 02 17 03 04 06^^(2^ 

00 00 00 01 •• 



Figure 9. — Computer printed distribution maps of two color phases of wedge-tailed shear- 
waters May-July. Four-digit numbers in extreme left margin refer to Cromwell cruises 
by month and year on which first observation in that line was made. Note that, on 
April and July cruises, observations were made in May and August. North is to the 
left, latitude is read from right to left, and longitude from top to bottom. The cruise 
track is outlined by the number print-out. Asterisks indicate no observations were made 
in that half-degree square, 00 indicates observations but no birds. Abundance may 
be read directly from the printed numbers. Circles indicate 20 birds or more per half- 
degree square. 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 



17 



day cards. Only those sightings that were made within the time 
interval on the fractional day card are flagged for special parametric 
analysis. Because the data are flagged on the basis of times of 
observation, the computer does not require geographic information 
to define the area; thus, bird densities may be computed for areas 
of any size or shape. These areas may be mutually exclusive or may 
overlap wholly or in part (fig. 10). The computer also will provide 
density figures based on total observations made within a given area 
during all fractional days within a requested time span. Areas may 




Figure 10. — Three overlapping areas along a day's cruise path with the coded representa- 
tions for various subareas. All sightings made within the time the ship was in the square 
are flagged with a 1 in first column of the SPA field; those in the circle and the triangle, 
with l's in the second and third columns respectively. 



be selected for special parametric analysis either before the data 
have been entered on punch cards or at any future time by fractioniz- 
ing the appropriate day cards. 

The revised intermediate coded sheet for the day card is shown in 
figure 3. 

Plankton measurements were made only once daily on the Cromwell 
cruises, but in other programs plankton abundance may be sampled 
more frequently. The plankton field (62-64), therefore, should be 
moved to the environment card where it would occupy columns 69-71. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Primary productivity, a measurement of the richness of environ- 
ment and potential food supply, eventually may prove useful for 
comparison with bird distribution. At present, however, because 
there is no universally agreed-upon measure of productivity, we have 
used surface phosphate and plankton abundance as measures of the 
marine environment. 

The data stored on tape reels in the computer may be altered 
through a revised program if these or any later modifications become 
necessary. 

With some modifications, the coding used in this pilot seabird ADP 
system is suitable for storage of seabird records voluntarily sent in 
from all over the world to a central office or offices such as World 
Data Centers A and B for Oceanography in Washington and Moscow. 
Information submitted on standardized forms would be available for 
use by marine ornithologists and ecologists. The establishment of a 
world center for the storage of seabird distribution data and inter- 
national agreement on uniform methods of observation, recording, 
and coding of data were two basic recommendations of a seabird 
committee authorized by the 14th International Ornithological 
Congress, Oxford, July 1966. 

Varying reliability of observations and different techniques for 
gathering data, however, probably will necessitate uniform editing 
before the data are fed into the system. This suggests the need for a 
central editor for all the data and a staff to prepare them for entry. 
As an indication of the extent of the work that may be needed to 
prepare data for computer storage, two persons worked full time 
eight hours a day for 50 days transferring the raw at-sea data from 
the Cromwell cruises onto intermediate coded sheets before they could 
be punched into the system. Because of the far larger volume of 
data that may be collected by many more observers from all over the 
world in an international program, it might be necessary for them to 
submit data to the proposed editor or central files already translated 
onto intermediate coded sheets. 

The worldwide scope of such a seabird data storage project and the 
fact that many species of seabirds associate with commercially 
valuable schooling fish make this an attractive candidate for support 
under the International Biological Program, the major theme of 
which is productivity and man. 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 19 

TABLE I.— Codes for sighting deck 

Species Identification for Central Pacific Ocean: 29-34 

100000 Aves 

120000 Procellariiformes 
121000 Diomedeidae 

121100 Diomedea 

121110 D. ni gripes 

121111 D. immutabilis 

121112 D. melanophris 
122000 Procellariidae 

122100 Fulmarus 

122101 F. glacialis 
122500 Puffinus 

122501 P. carneipes 

122504 P. creatopus 

122506 P. pacificus 

122518 P. bulled 

122519 P. griseus 

122520 P. tenuirostris 

122521 P. nativitatus 
122524 P. puffinus newelli 
122534 P. Iherminieri 

122600 Pterodroma 

122601 P. hasitata 

122607 P. h. phaeopygia 

122608 P. h. externa 

122609 P. h. cervicalis 
122615 P. solandri 

122620 P. rostrata 
122624 P. inexpectata 
122629 P. hypoleuca 

122630 P. h. hypoleuca 

122631 P. h. nigripennis 
122633 P. neglecta 

122636 P. alba 

122642 P. arminjoniana heraldica 

122645 P. coohi 

122646 P. cooki cooki 
122649 P. leucoptera 

122653 P. I. masafuerae 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 

122700 Bulweria 

122701 B. bulwerii 
123000 Hydrobatidae 

123100 Oceanites 

123101 0. oceanicus 
123400 Oceanodroma 
123404 0. pastro 
123409 0. leucorhoa 
123420 0. tristrami 
123423 0. furcata 
123500 Miscellaneous genera 

123502 N esofregetta albigularis 
130000 Pelecaniformes 

131000 Phaethontidae 
131100 Phaethon 

131106 P. rubri cauda 
131112 P. lepturus 
133000 Sulidae 

133200 Sula 

133206 S. dactylatra 
133213 5. sula 
133217 S. leucogaster 
136000 Fregatidae 

136100 Fregata 

136107 F. minor 
136114 F. ariel 
140000 Charadriiformes 

141000 Charadriidae 

141200 Pluvialis 

141209 P. dominica 
141400 Arenaria 

141401 A. interpres 
142000 Scolopacidae 

142100 Numenius 

142101 N. tahitiensis 
142200 Heteroscelus 

142201 H. incanum 
142700 Crocethia 
143000 Phalaropodidae 
143100 Phalaropus 

143101 P. fulicarius 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 21 

144000 Stercorariidae 

144100 Stercorarius 

144101 S. pomarinus 

144103 5. longicaudus 
144200 Catharacta 

144201 C. skua 
145000 Larinae 

145100 Larus 

145101 L. artri cilia 

145145 L. delawarensis 

145184 L. glaucescens 

145185 L. hyperboreus 
146000 Sterninae 

146100 Anous 

146101 A. stolidus 

146110 A. tenuirostris 
146200 Procelstema 

146201 P. cerulea 
146300 Gygis 

146301 G. alba 
146800 Sterna 

146801 S. bergi 

146829 5. hirundo 

146835 S. paradisaea 

146857 S. sumatrana 

146866 5. lunata 

146867 S. fuscata 

TABLE 2.— Codes for sighting deck 
Species identification reliability: 36 Number reliability: 42 

Sighting as a whole reliable Actual count 

1 Sighting as a whole questionable 1 ± 5 per cent 

2 Either this or next most similar 2 ± 10 per cent 

form 3 ± 15 per cent 

3 This or any similar form 4 ± 20 percent 

4 Genus reliable, species 5 ± 25 percent 

unreliable 6 ± 30 or 33 per cent 

5 Genus unreliable, species 7 ± 40 per cent 

unreliable 8 ± 50 per cent 

6 Sighting as whole unreliable 9 Present, but no count possible 



22 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Direction of bird movement: 43 

No data 

1 No apparent direction 

2 North 

3 Northeast 

4 East 

5 Southeast 

6 South 

7 Southwest 

8 West 

9 Northwest 



Behavior: 44 

No information 

1 Traveling 

2 Sitting 

3 Feeding 

4 Searching 

5 Following ship 

6 Breeding (display) 

7 Parasitism 

8 Dispersing 

9 Other 



Color marking: 45 






No data 


1 


Orange 


2 


Blue 


3 


Red 


4 


Green 


5 


Black 


6 


White 


7 


Yellow 


8 


Brown 


9 


Other 



Method of marking: 46 

No data 

1 Painted 

2 Band 

3 Colored band 

4 Streamer 

5 Other 

Age: 47 

Not determined 

1 Adult 

2 Sub-adult 

3 Immature 

4 1st year 

5 2nd year 

6 3rd year 

Sex: 48 

Not determined 

1 Male 

2 Female 

Color-plumage phase: 49 

Not determined 

1 Light phase 

2 Intermediate phase 

3 Dark phase 

4 Pink 

5 Other 



Molt: 50 

Not determined 

1 Molt not present 

2 Molt present 

3 New plumage 

4 Worn plumage 

5 Other 



no. 3609 DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 

Specimen: 51 Special weather conditions: 

No data 

1 Birds in rain 

2 Bird at edge of rain 

3 Very high winds 

4 Calm 

5 Other 

Special information: 54 

No data 

1 Identification 

2 Species association 

3 Behavior 

4 Abundance 

5 Location 

6 Direction of movement 

7 Food association 

8 Other 

9 Parasitism 



23 
53 



Not collected 

1 Collected 



Food association: 52 






Not determined 


1 


Flying fish 


2 


Predatory fish 


3 


Squid 


4 


Plankton 


5 


Food fish 


6 


Scavenging 


7 


Other 



TABLE 3.— Codes for environmental deck 

Weather conditions: 50-51 

00-49 No precipitation at the ship at the time of observation. 

00-19 No precipitation, fog, duststorm, sandstorm, or drifting snow 
at the ship at the time of observation or during the preceeding hour, 
except for 09. 

00 Cloud development not ob- 

served or not observable. 

01 Clouds generally dissolving 

or becoming less developed. 

02 State of sky on the whole 

unchanged. 

03 Clouds generally forming or 

developing. 



No hydrometers except 
clouds. 

Characteristic change of 
the state of sky during 
past hour. 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 

04 Visibility reduced by smoke, 

e.g., veldt or forest fires, 
industrial smoke, or vol- 
canic ashes. 

05 Dry haze. 

06 Widespread dust in suspen- 

sion in the air, not raised 
by wind at or near the ship 
at the time of observation. 

07 Dust or sand raised by wind 

at or near the ship at the 
time of observation, but no 
well-developed dust 
devil (s), and no duststorm 
or sandstorm seen. 

08 Well-developed dust devil(s) 

seen at or near the ship 
within last hour, but no 
duststorm or sandstorm. 

09 Duststorm or sandstorm within 

sight of the ship or at the 
ship during the last hour. 

10 Light fog (visibility 1,100 

yards or more). 



Haze, dust, sand, or 
smoke. 



11 Patches of. 

12 More or less continuous. 

13 Lightning visible, no thunder 

heard. 

14 Precipitation within sight but 

not reaching surface at the 
ship. 

15 Precipitation within sight, 

reaching surface, but dis- 
tant (i.e., estimated to be 
more than 3 miles from the 
ship). 

16 Precipitation within sight, 

reaching surface, near to 
but not at the ship. 



Shallow fog at the ship not 
deeper than about 33 
feet. 



DATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 



25 



Within sight during the 
last hour. 



y Not falling as showers. 



17 Thunder heard, but no pre- 

cipitation at the ship. 

18 Squall(s) 

19 Funnel cloud(s) (tornado or 

waterspout). 

20-29 Precipitation, fog or thunderstorm at the ship during the pre- 
ceding hour but NOT at the time of observation. 

20 Drizzle (not freezing). 

21 Rain (not freezing). 

22 Snow. 

23 Rain and Snow. 

24 Freezing drizzle or freezing 

rain. 

25 Shower(s) of rain. 

26 Shower(s) of snow, or of rain 

and snow. 

27 Shower(s) of hail or of hail 

and rain. 

28 Fog. 

29 Thunderstorm (with or without 

precipitation). 
30-39 Duststorm, sandstorm or drifting snow. 

30 Slight or moderate duststorm Has decreased during 



or sandstorm. 

31 Slight or moderate duststorm 

or sandstorm. 

32 Slight or moderate duststorm 

or sandstorm. 

33 Severe duststorm or 

sandstorm. 

34 Severe duststorm or 

sandstorm. 

35 Severe duststorm or 

sandstorm. 

36 Slight or moderate drifting 

snow. 

37 Heavy drifting snow. 

38 Slight or moderate drifting 

snow. 

39 Heavy drifting snow. 



preceding hour. 

No appreciable change dur- 
ing preceding hour. 

Has increased during 
preceding hour. 

Has decreased during 
preceding hour. 

No appreciable change dur- 
ing preceding hour. 

Has increased during 
preceding hour. 

Generally low. 
Generally high. 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



40-49 Fog at the time of observation. 

40 Fog at a distance at the time 

of observation, but not at 
the ship during the last 
hour, the fog extending to a 
level above that of the 
observer. 

41 Fog in patches. 

42 Fog, sky discernible. 

43 Fog, sky not discernible. 

44 Fog, sky discernible. 

45 Fog, sky not discernible. 

46 Fog, sky discernible. 

47 Fog, sky not discernible. 



Has become thinner during 
preceding hour. 

No appreciable change dur- 
ing preceding hour. 

Has begun or has become 
thicker during preceding 
hour. 



48 Fog, depositing rime, sky 

discernible. 

49 Fog, depositing rime, sky 

not discernible. 
50-99 Precipitation at the ship at the time of observation. 
50-59 Drizzle at time of observation. 

50 Drizzle, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

51 Drizzle, not freezing, 

continuous. 

52 Drizzle, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

53 Drizzle, not freezing, 

continuous. 

54 Drizzle, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

55 Drizzle, not freezing, 

continuous. 

56 Drizzle, freezing, slight. 

57 Drizzle, freezing, moderate 

or thick. 

58 Drizzle and rain, slight. 

59 Drizzle and rain, moderate 

or heavy. 



Slight at time of 
observation. 



Moderate at time of 
observation. 



Thick at time of 
observation. 



no. 3609 D ATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS — KING, WATSON, GOULD 27 



Slight at time of 
observation. 



Moderate at time of 
observation. 



Heavy at time of 
observation. 



60-69 Rain at time of observation. 

60 Rain, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

61 Rain, not freezing, 

continuous. 

62 Rain, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

63 Rain, not freezing, 

continuous. 

64 Rain, not freezing, 

intermittent. 

65 Rain, not freezing, 

continuous. 

66 Rain, freezing, slight. 

67 Rain, freezing, moderate or 

heavy. 

68 Rain or drizzle and snow, 

slight. 

69 Rain or drizzle and snow, 

moderate or heavy. 
70-79 Solid precipitation not in showers at time of observation. 

70 Intermittent fall of snow 

flakes. 

71 Continuous fall of snow 

flakes. 

72 Intermittent fall of snow 

flakes. 

73 Continuous fall of snow 

flakes. 

74 Intermittent fall of snow 

flakes. 

75 Continuous fall of snow 

flakes. 

76 Ice needles (with or without 

fog. 

77 Granular snow (with or 

without fog). 

78 Isolated starlike snow 

crystals (with or without 
fog). 

79 Ice pellets. 



Slight at time of 
observation. 



Moderate at time of 
observation. 



Heavy at time of 
observation. 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



80-99 Showery precipitation, or precipitation with current or recent 
thunderstorm. 

80 Rain shower(s), slight. 

81 Rain shower(s), moderate or 

heavy. 

82 Rain shower(s), violent. 

83 ShoweKs) of rain and snow 

mixed, slight. 

84 Shower(s) of rain and snow 

mixed, moderate or heavy. 

85 Snow shower(s), slight. 

86 Snow shower(s), moderate or 

heavy. 

87 ShoweKs) of soft or small hail 

with or without rain, or rain 
and snow, slight. 

88 Shower(s) of soft or small hail 

with or without rain, or rain 
and snow mixed, moderate 
or heavy. 

89 Shower(s) of hail with or with- 

out rain, or rain and snow 
mixed, not associated with 
thunder, slight. 

90 Shower(s) of hail, with or 

without rain, or rain and 
snow mixed, not associated 
with thunder, moderate or 
heavy. 

91 Slight rain at time of 

observation. 

92 Moderate or heavy rain at time 

of observation. 

93 Slight snow, or rain and snow 

mixed, or hail* at time of 
observation. 

94 Moderate or heavy snow, or 

rain and snow mixed, or 
hail* at time of observation, i 



Thunderstorm during pre- 

► ceding hour but not at 

time of observation. 



"Hail, small hail, soft hail. 



=600 D ATA PROCESSING SEABIRDS KING, WATSON, GOULD 

95 Thunderstorm, slight or mod- 

erate, without hail* but with 
rain and/or snow at time of 
observation. 

96 Thunderstorm, slight or mod- 

erate, with hail* at time of 
observation. 

97 Thunderstorm, heavy, without 

hail* but with rain and/or 
snow at time of observation. 

98 Thunderstorm combined with 

duststorm or sandstorm at 
time of observation. 

99 Thunderstorm, heavy, with 

hail* at time of observation. 



29 



*Hail, small hail, soft hail. 



J 



Thunderstorm at time of 
observation. 



TABLE 4. —Codes for environmental deck 



State of sea: 52 

Flat calm 

1 Less than 1 foot 

2 1 to 3 feet 

3 3 to 5 feet 

4 5 to 8 feet 

5 8 to 12 feet 

6 12 to 20 feet 

7 20 to 40 feet 

8 40 feet and over 

9 Very rough, confused sea 

Visibility: 53 

Dense fog. 50 yards 

1 Thick fog 200 yards 

2 Fog 400 yards 

3 Moderate fog 1000 yards 

4 Thin fog or mist 1 mile 

5 Visibility poor 2 miles 

6 Visibility moderate 5 miles 

7 Visibility good 10 miles 

8 Visibility very good ......... 30 miles 

9 Visibility excellent .... .over 30 miles 
(Use range-finder readings of known land) 



Moon age: 60 

No data 



New 

1/4 

1/2 

3/4 

Full 

Not up 



Cloud cover: 61 

No clouds 

1 Less than 1/10, or 1/10 

2 2/10 and 3/10 

3 4/10 

4 5/10 

5 6/10 

6 7/10 and 8/10 

7 9/10 and 9/10 plus 

8 10/10 

9 Sky obscured 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1967— 0-24 8-334 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3610 

BREDIN-ARCHBOLD-SMITHSONIAN 
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY OF DOMINICA 

3. Marine Archiannelids from Dominica 1 



By Ernst Kirsteuer 2 



This paper is based on collections made by the author on Dominica, 
B.W.I. , during April 1966 from Middle Bay below the village of 
Marigot on the northeast coast of the island. Two species of archian- 
nelids, Saccocirrus archboldi, new species, and Protodrilus corderoi 
Marcus, were found when sand samples were examined for psam- 
mobiontic nemerteans. Substrate samples were taken to a depth of 
100 mm in the middle of the inter tidal region and also from near 
low water line of the sandy beach. The substrate samples were 
placed together with sea water in pails, and after two to three days 
the surface layer of sand was examined for specimens with a dissecting 
microscope. In the samples from the midintertidal zone, both 



1 Other faunal studies in this series are: 1, Kier, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 1966, 
vol. 121, no. 3577, pp. 1-9; 2, Stone, ibid., 1966, vol. 121, no. 3578, pp. 1-6. A 
companion series on the flora appears in the "Contributions of the United States 
National Herbarium." 

2 Department of Living Invertebrates, American Museum of Natural History, 
New York, N.Y. 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. us 

species of archiannelids were represented while in those samples 
from near the low water line only Protodrilus corderoi was found. 

This investigation is a contribution of the "Bredin-Archbold-Smith- 
sonian Biological Survey of Dominica" and I wish to express my 
thanks to Dr. Horton H. Hobbs, Jr., United States National Museum, 
for making my participation in the program possible. I am also 
indebted to Dr. Marian H. Pettibone and Dr. W. Duane Hope, USNM, 
for their comments and suggestive criticisms of the manuscript. 

Genus Saccocirrus Bobretzky 

Saccocirrus archboldi, new species 

Figure 1 

The new species is based on 11 specimens, five mature females 
and six immature specimens. The animals were studied alive but 
six worms (two females and four immature specimens) were fixed 
and later examined for futher details. 

Types. — One whole mount with three specimens is deposited in 
the United States National Museum. Female holotype, and two 
immature paratypes, USNM 34709. One whole mount with three 
specimens is deposited in the American Museum of Natural History, 
New York. Paratypes, one female and two immature specimens, 
AMNH 3876. 

Type-locality. — Middle Bay, Dominica, British West Indies. 

The new species is dedicated to Mr. John D. Archbold, who has 
helped support the present survey on Dominica. 

Description. — The living animals measure 4 to 6 mm in length 
(the tentacles not included) and approximately 0.2 mm in width. 
The animals have 60 to 84 segments. The color of the worms is 
a light yellowish white and the greenish intestine can be seen through 
the body surface. The two black eyes are comparatively large and 
easily discernible in life. They are situated near the base of the 
prostomial tentacles, the latter attaining a length of about QOO/j, in 
the longest of the specimens. The tentacles taper gradually toward 
their distal ends and are beset with sparsely scattered, rather stiff 
sensory cilia, which are more numerous on the anterior side. The 
posterior surface of the tentacles is corrugated even when held straight. 
Stiff sensory cilia also occur on the anterior margin of the prostomium, 
on the lateral sides of the body, and on the dorsal side of the anal 
lobes. The nuchal organs are small, elliptic, ciliated pits and are 
found immediately behind the tentacles (fig. la). 

The achaetous peristomial segment is twice as long as the following 
setigerous segments. The mouth slit extends over the whole length 
of the peristomial region and is fined by lips having a very active 



ARCHIANNELIDS — KIRSTEUER 



ciliation. Parallel with the mouth, the two elongated tentacle am- 
pullae reach caudad to the middle of the peristomium (fig. la) . The 
pharynx occupies the second and third segments and the esophagus 








j. .^'vSV.-,;-i-,.-.-.v:..^.' l : jj - 

a 











Figure 1. — Saccocirrus archboldi, new species: a, anterior region of a living animal in 
dorsal view; b, posterior portion of a living animal in dorsal view; c, parapodium with 
setae. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

ends with the seventh segment. The following part of the alimentary 
tract shows (in living as well as in fixed specimens) intersegmental 
constrictions. It continues to the beginning of the achaetous and 
apodous posterior portion of the body, which comprises five to six 
segments and the pygidium. In this body region the intestine is a 
comparatively narrow and smooth tube that opens posteromedially 
on the pygidium in a ciliated area (fig. 16). 

Each setigerous segment is provided with a pair of dorsolateral 
parapodia that have a cylindrical shape and are about 80^ long. 
Each parapodium is furnished with five setae of different lengths. 
The longest seta (176ju) is flexible and hairlike and thickens slightly 
toward its rounded distal end. The other four bristles (152ju, 123m, 
98/x, and 74/x long) are broadened distally and bifurcated. The 
symmetrical prongs have a blunt end with a shallow depression (fig. 
lc). The pygidium shows two rounded lobes that are moderately 
dorsoventrally flattened (fig. 16). Though the margins of the lobes 
are somewhat wavy, there are no structures comparable with the 
adhesive papillae in some other species of this genus. Over the entire 
posterior aspect of the lobes, conspicuous gland cells are scattered 
that, with their secretion, obviously function as an adhesive device. 

By examining the living mature worms, one finds the gonads in 
the segments posterior from the twenty-fifth or twenty-sixth to the 
beginning of the nonsetigerous body region. 

Diagnostic features. — Yellowish-white worms, 4 to 6 mm long, 
with 60 to 84 segments; pygidium with two rounded anal lobes that 
have no cirri or demarcated adhesive papillae; cylindrical parapodia 
with five setae of which the longest one has a rounded tip and the 
other four are bifurcated at their distal ends. 

Remarks. — To the genus Saccocirrus Bobretzky the following 
species so far have been ascribed: S. papillocercus Bobretzky (1871), 
S. major Pierantoni (1907), S. krusadensis Alikunhi (1943, 1948), 
S. minor Aiyar and Alikunhi (1944), S. cirratus Aiyar and Alikunhi 
(1944), S. gabriellae Marcus (1946), S. orientalis Alikunhi (1946), 
S. pussicus Marcus (1948), S. parvus Gerlach (1953), and S. maculatus 
Tenerelli (1964). One unidentified species of Saccocirrus was men- 
tioned by Berkeley (1936). It corresponds in the character of the 
setae to S. papillocercus, but the anal lobes are similar to those of 
S. major. Marcus (1946), however, considered Berkeley's specimens 
to be identical with S. gabriellae. 

According to body length and configuration of the pygidium, the 
closest relatives of the new species are S. parvus Gerlach and S. 
maculatus Tenerelli. Saccocirrus archboldi, however, is distinguished 
from S. parvus by having longer and cylindrical parapodia with five 
setae, while in S. parvus the parapodia are short, conical protuberances 



no. 3610 ARCHIANNELIDS — KIRSTEUER 5 

furnished with six setae. The type of setae is also different in these 
two species. In S. parvus the longest bristle is bifurcated and the 
other five bristles on each parapodium have broad and blunt tips; in 
S. archboldi the longest and hairlike seta has a round tip and the rest 
of the setae are distally bifurcated. Saccocirrus maculatus is clearly 
distinguished from S. archboldi by having only 26 segments and, 
further, by being marked with black dots, which are irregularly 
scattered over the greater part of the body surface but are so densely 
arranged on the pygidium that it looks black. 

Genus Protodrilus Hatschek 

Protodrilus corderoi Marcus 

Protodrilus corderoi Marcus, 1948, pp. 5-7, figs. 11-16. 

The nine specimens that were collected on Dominica agree in most 
details with the description given by Marcus (1948) for specimens 
from Brazil. The living worms are greyish in color, semi transparent, 
and attain a length up to 4 mm (in the Brazilian specimen, 6 mm) 
and a maximum width of 0.1 mm. Up to 37 segments are found in 
the present specimens. The head region is, under normal circum- 
stances, only slightly wider than the rest of the body. In a squeezing 
preparation, however, the cephalic area becomes broadened and 
rounded in shape as was illustrated by Marcus (1948, pi. 3: fig. 11). 
The tentacles extend over 280 /z and are irregularly beset with cilia. 
Cilia are found also on the tip of the prostomium, on the lateral and 
dorsal aspects of the body segments, and along the posterior border of 
the anal lobes. The nuchal organs are small ciliated pits situated 
posterior from the tentacles on the lateral sides of the head. There 
are no eyes, statocysts, or transverse bands of cilia. 

The salivary glands extend posterior into the third segment in the 
smallest animal and into the seventh segment in the longest one. 
The two anal lobes have the same shape as was figured by Marcus 
(1948, pi. 3: fig. 12). In only two animals small ovocyts were found 
when studied alive. The other specimens were sexually immature. 



Literature Cited 

Aiyar, G. R., and Alikunhi, K. H. 

1944. On some archiannelids of the Madras Coast. Proc. Nat. Inst. Sci. 
India, vol. 10, pp. 113-140. 
Alikunhi, K. H. 

1943. Note on the occurence of archiannelids at Krusadai together with a 
description of an undescribed species of Saccocirrus. Proc. 29th 
Indian Sci. Congr. Baroda 1942, pt. 3, p. 149. 
1946. On a new species of Saccocirrus from the Madras beach. Curr. 

Sci., vol. 15, p. 140. 
1948. On some archiannelids of the Krusadai Island. Proc. Nat. Inst. 
Sci. India, vol. 14, pp. 373-383. 
Berkeley, E. 

1936. Occurence of Saccocirrus in Western Canada. Nature, London, 
vol. 137, p. 1075. 

BOBRETZKY, N. 

1871. Saccocirrus papillocercus nov. gen. n. sp. Mem. Soc. Nat. Kiew, 
vol. 1, pp. 211-259. 
Gerlach, S. A. 

1953. Zur Kenntnis der Archianneliden des Mittelmeeres. Kieler Meeres- 
forsch., vol. 9, pp. 248-251. 
Marcus, E. DuBois-Reymond 

1946. On a new archiannelid, Saccocirrus gabriellae, from Brazil. Comm. 

Zool. Mus. Hist. Nat. Montevideo, vol. 2, no. 37, pp. 1-6. 
1948. Further archiannelids from Brazil. Comm. Zool. Mus. Hist. Nat. 
Montevideo, vol. 2, no. 48, pp. 1-17. 
Pierantoni, U. 

1907. II genre Saccocirrus Bobr. e le sue specie. Ann. Mus. Zool. Univ. 
Napoli, n.s., vol. 2, no. 18, pp. 1-11. 
Tenerelli, V. 

1964. Su una associazione di policheti mesopsammici del Golfo di Catania. 
Boll. Accad. Gioenia Sci. Nat. Catania, ser. 4, vol. 8, fasc. 4, pp. 
212-245. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3611 

Butterflies of the New Genus Calystryma 
(Lycaenidae: Theclinae, Stryinonini) 



By William D. Field 
Associate Curator, Division of Lepidoptera 



Calystryma, new genus, contains 13 species, all of which are neo- 
tropical in distribution. Six of the included species are herein 
described as new and the rest are transferred to Calystryma from 
Thecla Fabricius, where they have resided ever since they were first 
described in spite of the fact that they belong to the Strymonini 
(forewing having 3 radial veins) not to the Theclini (forewing having 
2 radial veins). I designate as type of the genus: Calystryma blora, 
new species. The name Calystryma is an arbitrary, euphonous com- 
bination of letters and I consider it to be of the feminine gender. 

Calystryma is closely related to Calycopis Scudder, differing chiefly 
in the form of the male and female genitalia. 

In the male genitalia the uncus is divided dorsally into two lateral 
elements that in lateral view are produced greatly near the middle, 
thus differing from Calycopis. Vesica of aedeagus with a single spine- 
like cornutus located at or near distal end of aedeagal shaft. Aedeagus 
lacking the ventral keel found in some Strymonini and nearly straight 
or sometimes upturned distally, with this end usually blunt, not 
sharply pointed as in Calycopis. Harpes differing from those of 
Calycopis in being separate along ventral margin, fused only at base 
or in one case (C. keta) fused for nearly one-half their lengths from 
base. This last species, however, has the Calystryma type of uncus 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

and eighth tergite. Gnathos divided into two separate armlike parts, 
each with an elbow bend near or before middle and with apical part 
(forearm) often with carina along inner surface; carina either laminate 
or dentate. 

Eighth tergite of male abdomen subcordate in shape with a broad 
and deeply incised posterior concavity, usually much more deeply 
incised than in Calycopis. 

Female genitalia with ductus bursae a simple sclerotized tube, 
envelope shaped at ostium bursae with a superior genital plate above 
and a ventral genital plate below the ostium and usually with the free 
edge of the superior genital plate divided into two lateral elements 
bearing teeth or spurlike processes. In one species (C. atrox) this 
free edge is a long continuous ridge. Bursa copulatrix with two large 
platelike signa, each ornamented with a centrally placed spine that 
is rose-thorn in shape and with anterior margin deeply dentate. 
Signa thus similar to those of Calycopis. 

In habitus Calystryma is similar to Calycopis, especially in that the 
forewings of the males lack the scent pads frequently found in the 
Theclinae and in having some shade of red in the area between the 
large blue lunule in interspace Cu 2 and the postmedian tripartite line 
on the undersurface of the hindwing. In Calystryma the red inner 
lining along the postmedian tripartite line on undersurface of the 
hindwing is reduced greatly or lacking with the Sc-f-Ri element of this 
line very distinctly outlined with black, forming a black and white 
bar that stands out sharply from the rest of this line. Except in four 
species (C. atrox, C. malta, C. anapa, and C. gentilla) there are two 
submarginal ecellate spots below vein M 3 on this same surface. The 
uppersurfaces of all but one species (C. trebula) are either entirely 
dark brown or very dark brown covered with dull metallic purple. 
The males of C. trebula have the hindwing dark iridescent or shining 
blue and thus resemble most of the species of Calycopis in this respect. 

The author wishes to acknowledge with thanks the cooperation 
and aid of A. G. Gabriel, T. G. Howarth, N. H. Bennett, and D. S. 
Fletcher, all of the Department of Entomology, British Museum 
(Natural History), London, and Frederick H. Rindge, Depart- 
ment of Entomology, American Museum of Natural History, New 
York. The late William P. Comstock of the last named museum 
also greatly helped the author. 

The figures of the male and female genitalia and of the eighth 
tergites of the males w T ere drawn under the author's supervision by 
Andre D. Pizzini, staff artist. All photographs were made by Jack 
Scott, staff photographer, except figures 1 through 4 on plate 3, 
which were furnished by the courtesy of D. S. Fletcher on the staff 
of the British Museum (Natural History) . 



*o. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 3 

Key to the Species of Calystryma 

males (except C. cinniana) 

1. Uppersurfaces of hindwings bright blue 11. C. trebula 

Uppersurfaces of hindwings not as above 2 

2. (1) Harpes separate along ventral margin, fused only at base; posterior lobes 

of 8th tergite blunt or rounded (figs. 2-12) 3 

Harpes fused along ventral margin for nearly one-half their length from 
base; posterior lobes of 8th tergite acute (fig. 1) . . . 1. C. keta 

3. (2) Harpe with apex bifurcate; uncus deeply bilobed dorsally (fig. 12). . . 

12. C. tifla 

Harpe with apex blunt or gradually acuminate, not bifurcate; uncus 
only shallowly bilobed dorsally (figs. 2-11) 4 

4. (3) Harpe short and blunt and in lateral view slightly concave distally 

(figs. 6, 7) 5 

Harpe longer and gradually more narrow toward distal end (figs. 2-5, 
8-10) 6 

5. (4) Ground color of wings above brown 6. C. mail a 

Ground color of wings above dull metallic purple, slightly dull green 
at base 7. C. anapa 

6. (4) 8th tergite deeply incised in middle of posterior margin and greatly 

elongated anteriorly (figs. 8-10) 7 

8th tergite more shallowly incised in middle of posterior margin and 
not distinctly elongated anteriorly (figs. 2-5) 9 

7. (6) Ground color of uppersurfaces of wings brown 10. C. barza 

Ground color of uppersurfaces of wings dull metallic purple .... 8 

8. (7) Hindwing underneath with a single submarginal pupillated red lunule, 

this in interspace Cui and small with a large pupil (nearly % the size 

of entire lunule) 8. C. gentilla 

Hindwing underneath with two submarginal pupillated red lunules, 
one in interspace Cui and the second in interspace M3, both lunules 
with small pupils (not nearly }•> size of lunules) .... 9. C. pisis 

9. (6) Posterior projection of uncus broadly rounded (fig. 5) ; ground color of 

wings above dull metallic purple with greenish reflections in base. 

5. C. meleager 

Posterior projection of uncus narrow and toothlike or beaklike (figs. 
2-4) ; ground color of wings above brown 10 

10. (9) Ground color of wings underneath distinctly brown; with a single sub- 

marginal pupillated red lunule in interspace Cui ... 2. C. atrox 

Ground color of wings underneath light gray or pale brownish gray; 

with two submarginal pupillated red lunules, one in interspace Ciii 

and one in interspace M3 11 

11. (10) Ground color of wings underneath pale brownish gray with a large and 

distinct red streak adjacent to inner side of postmedian line in inter- 
space Cui 4. C. naka 

Ground color of wings underneath light gray without the triangular red 
streak, at most with a small red lunule in this area . . 3. C. blora 

females (except C. blora and C. barza) 

1. Superior genital plate with free edge a long continuous ridge (fig. 13). 

2. C. atrox 

Superior genital plate with free edge divided into two lateral elements 
(figs. 14-23) 2 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

2. (1) Superior genital plate with each element broadly rounded and bluntly 

toothed if toothed at all (figs. 20, 21, 23) 3 

Superior genital plate with each element having strong spurlike processes 
(figs. 14-19, 22) 5 

3. (2) Superior genital plate with each element broadly rounded (fig. 23). 

9. C. pisis 

Superior genital plate with each element rounded and bluntly toothed 
anteriorly (figs. 20, 21) 4 

4. (3) Superior genital plate greatly projected mesially on posterior edge 

(fig. 20) 12. C. tifla 

Superior genital plate indented mesially on posterior edge (fig. 21). 
5. C. meleager 

5. (2) Posterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate directed inward to- 

ward one another; anterior spurlike process greatly reduced and 

directed distad (fig. 22) 4. C. naka 

Posterior and interior spurlike processes on superior genital plate distally 
directed; anterior spur like processes not as greatly reduced (figs. 
14-19) 6 

6. (5) Anterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate widely separated and 

much larger than posterior spurlike processes (fig. 14) . . 1. C. keta 

Anterior and posterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate not 

widely separated; if so, then anterior spurlike processes not larger 

than posterior spurlike processes (figs. 15-19) 7 

7. (6) Posterior spurlike processes greatly reduced or rounded and lobelike 

(figs. 16, 19) 10 

Posterior spurlike processes large, sharply pointed and extended (figs. 
15, 17, 18) 8 

8. (7) Anterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate sickle shaped and 

widely separated from posterior spurlike processes (fig. 17) 

8. C. geniilla 

Anterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate nearly straight, not 
sickle shaped and not widely separated from posterior spurlike proc- 
esses (figs. 15, 18) 9 

9. (8) Posterior margin of superior genital plate between posterior spurlike 

processes nearly straight (fig. 18) 11. C. trebula 

Posterior margin of superior genital plate between posterior spurlike 
processes with broad shallow lobes and concave in middle (fig. 15). 

7. C. anapa 

10. (7) Posterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate rounded and lobe- 
like (fig. 16) 6. C. malta 

Posterior spurlike processes on superior genital plate reduced and bluntly 
acute, not lobelike (fig. 19) 13. C. cinniana 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 5 

Check List of Species 

1. Calystryma keta, new species 8. C. gentilla (Schaus), 1902, new 

2. C. atrox (Butler), 1877, new combination 

combination 9. C. pisis (Godman and Salvin), 

3. C. Mora, new species 1887, new combination 

4. C. naka, new species 10. C. barza, new species 

5. C. meleager (Druce), 1907, new 11. C. trebula (Hewitson), 1868, new 

combination combination 

6. C. malta (Schaus), 1902, new 12. C. tifla, new species 

combination 13. C. cinniana (Hewitson), 1877, 

7. C. anapa, new species new combination 

1. Calystryma keta, new species 

Figures 1, 14; Plates 1 (figs. 1, 2), 2 (fig. 1) 

Male (pi. 1: figs. 1, 2). — Wings above dark brown. Hindwing 
with a broken white submarginal line below vein M 3 continued to 
2d A, with a small orange-red spot on anal lobe and with a tiny 
triangular white spot at indentation above this lobe. Middle scales 
of fringe below vein Cu 2 white; tails Oil and Cu 2 tipped with white 
and with a few long white scales in fringe at end of vein 2d A. Wings 
underneath with ground color pale gray. Lines at end of cell on 
both forewing and hindwing indistinct. Postmedian line on forewing 
pale, the outer portion dirty white in color. This line on hindwing 
more distinct with the white particularly distinct in the W-mark, 
in the anal area, and near costa. This line tripartite on this wing 
with the addition of orange red along its inner surface below vein 
M 3 and especially in interspace Cui. Above vein M 3 this color is 
very faint if present at all. Hindwing with an orange-red post- 
median lunule in interspace Cu 2 , with an orange-red bar above the 
white arch outlining the black anal lobe and with two marginal ocular 
markings of this color in interspaces M 3 and Ciii. The ocular marking 
in interspace Ob is much the larger of the two, extending to or almost 
to the postmedian tripartite line. 

Length of forewing 11.5-12.5 mm. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 1b-e with harpes fused for 
nearly one-half their length from base; with aedeagus distally curved 
upward; with gnathal arm blunt and having a mesially placed carina; 
lateral lobe of uncus very uniquely shaped, having a strong acute 
projection from near lower angle and with a strong projection from 
lower margin. Eighth tergite (fig. 1a) deeply incised in middle of 
posterior margin, elongated anteriorly, and with posterior lobes 
acute and toothed along inner sides. 

Female (pi. 2: fig. 1). — Forewing above dark brown with streaks 
of shining blue in base of wing below and above vein 2d A. Hindwing 
mostly bright shining blue except for a dark brown border extending 
around outer margin from the anal angle to costa and except for a 
dark brown ray extending through bottom of cell to outer margin just 
above vein M 3 (in one specimen) and with more of this color below vein 
Cui in anal area (in both specimens). With a white marginal line 
above 2d A continued to vein Mi. Anal lobe with a small orange-red 
spot. Wings underneath like those of the male except the black 
centers of the marginal ocular markings in interspaces M 3 and Cu! are 
distinctly smaller. 

Length of forewing 11 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 14 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively long, the longest of any species of Caly- 
stryma, their combined length being about four times the width of 
superior genital plate; the latter with free edge divided into two lateral 
elements, each with a single pair of spurlike processes, the anterior 
spurlike process being very large and sickle shaped, the posterior 
spurlike process reduced in size and distally directed. 

Type-locality. — Limon, Province of Lim6n, Costa Rica. 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype, male and 
eight male paratypes with data as follows: holotype, localit} 7 as given 
above, USNM type no. 34904, May, Collection William Schaus, 
genitalia preparation WDF no. 3168; five paratypes, La Florida, 
Costa Rica, March 1907, 500 ft., Collection William Schaus, genitalia 
preparations WDF nos. 3171, 3172, 3980, 3981, 3982; two paratypes, 
Guapiles, Costa Rica, September and May 1907, 850 ft., Collection 
William Schaus, genitalia preparations WDF nos. 3173, 3979; one 
paratype, Carillo, Costa Rica, Collection William Schaus, genitalia 
preparation WDF no. 5012. [Note: Eleven additional males from 
non-Costa Rican localities (Upper Rio Maranon, Peru, Chapare, 
Bolivia) are identified as C. keta but are not labelled paratypes be- 
cause of the remoteness of their localities. While the author is 
satisfied that the two known female specimens upon which the above 
description of that sex is based are associated correctly, they are 
excluded also from the type series for the same reason.] 



NO - 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 7 

Location of types. — Holotype and six paratypes in the United 
States National Museum, one paratype each in the collections of the 
British Museum (Natural History) and the American Museum of 
Natural History (New York) . 

Distribution.— In widely separated localities from Costa Rica 
south to Peru, Bolivia, and Brazil. 

Costa Rica: Province of Limon, Lim6n (May), La Florida (500 ft., March); 
Province of San Jose, Carillo (no date), Guapiles (S50 ft., May, September). 
Panama: Province of Colon, Porto Bello (April) ; Rio Trinidad (March). British 
Guiana: Bonaoico (no date). French Guiana: Colony of Guiana, St. Laurent 
(no date). Ecuador: Department Amazonas, Upper Rio Maranon (October); 
Department of Loreto, Achinamiza (6001 ft., January). Brazil: State of Rio de 
Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro (no date). Bolivia: Department of El Beni, Chapare 
(no date). 

Material studied. — Twenty males and two females, including 
their genitalia. 

2. Calystryma atrox (Butler), new combination 

Figures 2, 13; Plates 1 (figs. 3, 4), 2 (figs. 2, 3), 3 (figs. 1, 2) 

Tmolus atrox Butler, 1877, Trans. Ent. Soc. London, 1877, p. 140. — Comstock 
and Huntington, 1959, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 67, p. 82. 

Thecla atrox (Butler).— Druce, 1907, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1907, p. 609.— 
Draudt, in Seitz, 1920, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, p. 
795; 1921, ibid., pp. 824, 826.— Schaus, 1920, Ent. News, vol. 31, p. 176. 

Thecla gent ilia Schaus. — Schaus [incorrect synonymy] 1920, Ent. News, vol. 31, 
p. 176. — Draudt [not Schaus] in Seitz, 1921, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der 
Erde, vol. 5, p. 824. — Comstock and Huntington, [not Schaus] 1960, Journ. 
New York Ent. Soc, vol. 68, p. 117. 

Male (pi. 1: figs. 3, 4; pi. 3: figs. 1, 2). — Wings above dark brown, 
lacking white marginal line on hindwing, otherwise as in C. keta. 
Wings underneath with ground color light brown. Hindwing on this 
surface with red markings darker, with black pupil that centers 
marginal ocular marking in interspace M 3 in C. keta, absent in this 
species and with black pupil in ocular marking of interspace Cu x 
much larger than in C. keta, C. blora, or C. naka. The red marking 
inward from this pupil smaller, not extending to postmedian tripartite 
line. The latter is faintly outlined with red along its inner side only 
below vein Cu x , otherwise as in C. keta. 

Length of forewing 12.5-14 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 2b-e with harpes fused only 
at base; with aedeagus distally curved upward (much more than in 
C. keta) and curved also to the right; with gnathal arm acute and 
lacking a carina but in ventral view it is sometimes thickened just 
before distal end; as in the other species of Calystryma the shape of 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

the lateral lobe of the uncus is a most useful distinguishing character; 
in C. atrox the posterior projection is beaklike in shape and arises 
from near middle of distal margin. Eighth tergite (fig. 2a) incised 
more shallowly along posterior margin than in C. keta, not distinctly 
enlongated anteriorly and with posterior lobes blunt. 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 2, 3). — Forewing above dark brown in the 
outer one-half of wing, dull metallic purple on the basal one-half. 
Hindwing entirely dull metallic purple except for indistinct dark 
brown marginal spots in anal area below vein Cui and a white marginal 
line extending from anal angle to vein M 3 . Orange-red spot on anal 
lobe faintly indicated. Wings underneath entirely like the male 
except for a smaller black center in the marginal ocular marking on 
interspace Cui. 

Length of forewing 12 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 13 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths being about 
three and one-half times the width of the superior genital plate; the 
latter with free edge a long continuous ridge having lateroposterior 
angles that are projected slightly and bluntly. 

Type-locality. — "Pedroso, Rio Purus, State of Amazonas, Brasil." 

Additional type data. — Described by Butler from a single speci- 
men, the holotype, male (Sept. 25, 1876, James W. H. Trail), now in 
the collection of the British Museum (Natural History) and labeled 
with type number "Rh. 911" and with male genitalia preparation 
number "R. 1951 NHB 493." This holotype is illustrated by figures 
1 and 2 on plate 3. 

Location of type. — In the British Museum (Natural History). 

Method of identification. — A topotype was not available for 
comparison with the holotype; however, a specimen from French 
Guiana was found by D. S. Fletcher that is identical in habitus and 
genitalia with the type. Through the courtesy of A. G. Gabriel the 
compared specimen was sent to me for study and, together with the 
photograph of the type (pi. 3: figs. 1, 2), is the basis for the present 
identification. 

Distribution.— In widely separated localities in British Guiana, 
French Guiana, Brazil, and Peru. 

British Guiana: Demerara County, Wismar (December). French Guiana: 
Colony of Guiana, St. Laurent (no date). Peru: Department of Loreto, Rio 
Morona (6003 ft., January). Brazil: State of Amazonas, Pedroso, Rio Purus 
(September). 

Material studied. — Five males and one female, including their 
genitalia. 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 9 

3. Calystryma blora, new species 

Figure 3; Plates 1 (figs. 5, 6), 2 (figs. 5, 6) 

Male (pi. 1 : figs. 5, 6). — Very similar to C. keta in maculation, with 
ground color of wings above dark brown and with white marginal line 
on hindwing absent or greatly reduced (sometimes indicated by a few 
scattered white scales). Wings underneath as in C. keta with a pale 
gray ground color and with two marginal ocular markings, one each 
in interspaces M 3 and Cu^ the latter being distinctly larger. On the 
hindwing, on this surface, the orange red is more indistinct on the 
inner side of the postmedian tripartite line in interspace Cui than in 
C. keta. Other markings quite like those of C. keta. 

Length of forewing 11.5-12.5 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 3b-e with harpes fused only 
at base; with aedeagus slightly curved upward at distal end about as 
in C. keta; with gnathal arm distally acute and having a carina past 
the middle near the distal end; with lateral lobe of uncus having a 
downward directed beaklike posterior projection and with a minimal 
projection on lower margin. Eighth tergite (fig. 3a) subcordate in 
shape, shallowly incised along posterior margin, distinctly elongated 
anteriorly and with posterior lobes blunt. Easily separated from C. 
keta by the shape of the gnathal arm, of the lateral lobe of uncus, and 
of the eighth tergite. 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 5, 6). — Forewing above quite like that of C. 
keta. Hindwing similar to that of C. keta with blue more extensive 
in anal area, the dark brown being restricted to the outer border and 
anal veins. Red spot on anal lobe present but very faint. Wings 
underneath very similar to those of the male, differing only in having 
smaller marginal ocular markings with correspondingly smaller black 
centers. 

Length of forewing 12 mm. 

Female genitalia unknown as the abdomen of the sole specimen 
is missing. 

Type-locality. — St. Jean, Maroni River, Colony of Guiana, 
French Guiana. 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype male and 
five male paratypes with data as follows: holotype, locality as given 
above, USNM type no. 24905, Collection William Schaus, genitalia 
preparation WDF no. 3166; two paratypes, same locality and collec- 
tion, genitalia preparations WDF nos. 3167, 3983; one paratype, 
St. Laurent, French Guiana, Collection E. I. Huntington, American 
Museum of Natural History; genitalia preparation WDF no. 5006; 

248-331—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

two paratypes, Rockstone, Essequibo, British Guiana, genitalia 
preparations WDF nos. 3175, 3984. [Note: The single female specimen 
(from Shudihar River, British Guiana) that I associate with the 
males of this species and upon which the present habitus description 
was made was not designated the allotype because it lacks its 
abdomen.] 

Location of types. — Holotype and four paratypes in the United 
States National Museum. One paratype in the American Museum of 
Natural History (New York). 

Distribution.- — Known only from French and British Guiana. 

French Guiana: Colony of Guiana, St. Jean (no date), St. Laurent (no 
date). British Guiana: County?, Shudihar River (January); Essequibo County, 
Rockstone (no date). 

Material studied. — Six males, including their genitalia. 



4. Calystryma naka, new species 

Figures 4, 22; Plates 1 (fig. 7), 2 (fig. 4) 

Male (pi. 1: fig. 7). — Wings above quite like those of C. atrox 
and C. Mora, dark brown in color and without a white marginal line 
on hindwing. Wings underneath with ground color pale brown, much 
lighter in color than in C. atrox with markings quite like those of C. 
Mora except that there is more orange red on inner side of tripartite 
postmedian line, especially in interspace Ciii, this color covering an 
even larger area on this interspace than it does in C. keta. 

Length of forewing 12-13 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 4b-e with harpes fused only 
at base; with distal one-half of aedeagus gradually curved upward and 
thus somewhat similar to that of C. atrox but not as in that species 
curved to the right; with gnathal arms distally acute and bearing a 
small carina near distal end ; with lateral lobe of uncus having a down- 
ward directed beaklike posterior projection and with a minimal pro- 
jection on lower margin and thus similar to C. Mora, differing from the 
latter in having the upper angle of this lobe greatly projected. Eighth 
tergite (fig. 4a) similar to that of C. keta, with posterior margin deeply 
incised and distinctly elongated anteriorly. Differing greatly from 
that species in having the large posterior lobes evenly rounded. 

Female (pi. 2: fig. 4). — Forewing above dark brown except for a 
large shining blue area covering base of wing below cell to the inner 
margin. Hindwing covered by this same shining blue except the anal 
area, the veins on the outer half of wing, and the outer fringe, which 
are all dark brown. A single tiny brown marginal spot in interspace 
Ciii is all that is present to represent the dark brown border found 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD H 

in C. keta and C. Mora. Without a white line around outer margin 
and with anal lobe lacking red spot. Wings underneath like those 
of the male with smaller black centers to the marginal ocular markings. 

Length of forewing 12.5 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 22 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths being just 
under three and one-half times the width of superior genital plate; 
the latter with its free edge divided into two lateral elements, each 
with a large posterior and mesially directed spurlike process and a 
small anterior and distally directed spurlike process, the latter greatly 
reduced and tootlilike. 

Type-locality. — "Upper" Rio Maranon, Department of Ama- 
zon as, Peru. 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype male and 
allotype female and three male paratypes with data as follows: 
holotype, locality as given above, 6101 ft., Dec. 30, 1924, H. Bassler 
Collection, genitalia preparation WDF no. 5003; allotype, same 
locality, elevation, and collection, Jan. 2, 1925, genitalia preparation 
WDF no. 50S5; one paratype, same locality, elevation, and collection, 
Dec. 31, 1924, genitalia preparation WDF no. 3156; two paratypes, 
Rio Santiago, Department of Amazonas, Peru, 6140 ft., Oct. 6, 1924, 
and Nov. 20, 1924, H. Bassler Collection, genitalia preparations nos. 
5001 and 5002. 

Location of types. — Holotypes, allotype, and two paratypes in 
the American Museum of Natural History (New York). One 
paratype in the United States National Museum. 

Distribution. — Known only from the Department of Amazonas in 
Peru. 

Material studied. — Four males and one female, including their 
genitalia. 

5. Calystryma meleager (Druce), new combination 

Figures 5, 21; Plates 1 (fig. 8), 2 (fig. 7), 3 (figs. 3, 4). 

Thecla meleager Druce, 1907, Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1907, p. 618— Draudt, in 
Seitz, 1920, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, p. 800; 1921, ibid., 
vol. 5, p. 829. — Comstock and Huntington, 1961, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, 
vol. 69, p. 165. 

Male (pi. 1: fig. 8; pi. 3: figs. 3, 4). — Wings above dark brown 
covered with dull metallic purple. Wings underneath with ground 
color gray, darker gray than in C. keta and C. Mora and with similar 
markings. All red color darker and covering about same area as it 
does in C. Mora and with the pupil centering the marginal ocular 
marking of interspace Cu, very large, even larger than it is in C. atrox. 

Length of forewing; 13-15 mm. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 12s 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 5b-e with harpes fused only 
at base; with aedeagus fairly straight, not curved upward at distal 
end and thus differing from all the other species of Calystryma except 
C. trebula (from which it is easily separated by the shape of the harpes, 
gnathal arms, and saccus) ; with gnathal arm distally acute and having 
a large carina near middle; with lateral lobe of uncus broadly produced 
below middle and with a minimal projection on lower margin. Eighth 
tergite (fig. 5a) shallowly incised along posterior margin, subtriangular 
in shape and with blunt posterior lobes. This structure most similar 
to that of C. Mora but more triangular in shape. 

Female (pi. 2 : fig. 7) . — Wings above brown, much lighter in shade 
than in the species heretofore described. Hindwing with a slightly 
darker brown marginal spot on interspace Cui and with a thin white 
marginal line around outer margin from 2d A to vein R 8 , this line 
very faint above vein M 2 . Anal lobe with a small pale orange-red 
spot. Wings underneath similar to those of male with marginal 
ocular marking of interspace M 3 very faint and with black center of 
marginal ocular marking of interspace Cuj triangular in shape. 

Length of forewing 12.5 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 21 with ductus bursae 
and bursa copulatrix relatively short, shorter than in any species of 
Calystryma except C. tijla and shorter than in C. malta (even though 
the relative length compared to width of the superior genital plate 
in C malta is less), their combined lengths being under three and 
one-half times the width of the superior genital plate; the latter with 
its free edge divided into two lateral elements, each with the posterior 
spurlike process found on related species replaced by a broad lobe 
and each with the anterior spurlike process reduced in size, indicated 
by short and broadly pointed lobes. 

Type-locality. — Dutch Guiana ("Surinam"). 

Additional type data. — Originally described by Druce from seven 
specimens of both sexes. Since no single specimen was stated to be 
the type in the original description, all seven of these specimens are 
therefore syntypes (art. 73, pars, b and c of the "International Code 
of Zoological Nomenclature" adopted by the XV International 
Congress of Zoology and published in London in 1961). I hereby 
designate as the lee to type the one labeled type (with the type no. 
Rh. 962, genitalia preparation no. R. 1951 NHB 495). This lecto- 
type is illustrated by figures 3 and 4 on plate 3. 

Location of type. — In the British Museum (Natural History). 

Method of identification. — The genitalia of the lectotype were 
dissected, studied, and compared with the genitalia of one of the 
other syntypes by D. S. Fletcher of the Department of Entomology, 
British Museum (Natural History). This syntype was found to be 



N0 - 3611 CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 13 

the same species as the lectotype and, through the courtesy of A. G. 
Gabriel, it was sent to me for study. The genitalia of this specimen 
(illustrated in the present paper by figure 5) together with the photo- 
graph of the lectotype (herein illustrated by figures 3 and 4 on plate 3) 
is the basis for the present identification. 

Distribution. — Known only from two widely spearated areas, 
Dutch Guiana and Peru. 

Dutch Guiana: (no specific locality, Fruhsterfer Collection). Peru: Depart- 
ment of Loreto, Iquitos (6036 ft., October). Rio Morona (6203 ft., August). 

Material studied. — Two males and one female, including their 
genitalia. [Note: The male specimen from Peru is slightly larger 
and more clearly dull metallic purple, particularly on the forewing, 
than the one studied from Dutch Guiana. Underneath it has the red 
markings slightly darker. The eighth tergite and the genitalia of this 
specimen are somewhat larger. Otherwise it is entirely like the Dutch 
Guiana specimen.] 



6. Calystryma malta (Schans), new combination 

Figures 6, 16; Plates 1 (fig. 9), 2 (figs. 8, 9) 

Thecla malta Schaus, 1902, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 24, p. 410. — Draudt, in 
Seitz, 1920, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, p. 800; 1921, ibid., 
vol. 5, p. 829, pi. 158, fig. g [8]. — Comstock and Huntington, 1961, Journ. 
New York Ent. Soc, vol. 69, p. 159. 

Male (pi. 1: fig. 9).- — Wings above entirely dark brown, not 
distinguishable from C. keta except that the white submarginal line 
on hindwing below vein M 3 is very faint. Wings underneath light 
brown in color as in C. atrox and C. maka and as in the former with 
only a single red marginal ocular marking on hindwing. It differs 
from C. atrox in having the black pupil in the center of this ocular 
marking only slightly smaller and in having slightly more red along 
inner side of postmedian tripartite line on hindwing. 

Length of forewing 13 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 6b, c with harpe fused only at 
base, short and bluntly rounded distally with a small nipple-like 
projection from dorsal margin at distal end, this projection acute and 
inwardly directed; aedeagus broadly curved upward throughout the 
distal three-fourths of its length; gnathal arm distally acute and 
lacking a carina; with lateral lobe of uncus greatly projected posteriorly 
into a large, blunt, beaklike lobe and with a minimal projection on 
lower margin. Eighth tergite (fig. 6a) a simple plate, shallowly 
incised along posterior margin and with anterior and posterior margins 
nearly parallel. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 8, 9). — Wings above very much like those of 
C. meleager, darker brown in color with a few orange scales on anal 
lobe of hindwing and with a distinct marginal line extending from 
vein 2d A to vein M 3 on this wing. Wings below identical to those 
of the male except with more red along inner side of tripartite post- 
median line on hindwing. 

Length of forewing 12 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated in figure 16 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths about three 
times the width of the superior genital plate; the latter with its free 
edge divided into two lateral elements, each without posterior spur- 
like processes and composed of a broad lobe and with anterior spurlike 
process reduced in size and sharply pointed, differing in this last 
respect from C. meleager, which otherwise it most closely resembles. 

Type-locality. — Peru (no specific locality). 

Additional type data.- — Originally described by Schaus from both 
sexes with no statement as to the number of specimens. There are 
in the original series in the United States National Museum four 
specimens, two males and two females. The first specimen, a male, 
bears a holograph ink name label with the word "type" in the lower 
left-hand corner. It also bears the usual USNM red type label with 
the type number 5929 and a label with the genitalia preparation 
number WDF 2706. The second specimen, a male without abdomen, 
bears a holograph ink name label without the word "type" and the 
USNM red type label with the same type number. The third speci- 
men, a female, bears a holograph ink name label without the word 
type and lacks a red type number label. This specimen bears a label 
with the genitalia preparation number WDF 5017. The fourth 
specimen, a female, bears a holograph ink name label without the 
word "type" and the same USNM red type label as the first and second 
specimens mentioned above. It bears also a label with the genitalia 
preparation number, WDF 5016. It is clear that the first specimen 
mentioned above, the only one bearing the word "type" on its holo- 
graph label is the specimen regarded by Schaus as the type and I 
therefore designate it the lectotype and have so labeled it. The third 
specimen mentioned above, a female conspecific with the lectotype, 
I designate the paralectotype and have so labeled it. The second 
Schaus specimen mentioned is actually a male of Calystryma barza, 
new species, described later in this paper. The fourth specimen 
mentioned is a female of an unidentified species not belonging to the 
genus Calystryma. 

Location of type.' — As stated above, lectotype male and para- 
lectotype female in the United States National Museum. 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 15 

Distribution. — Known only from Peru, the rather ambiguous 
type-locality. 

Material studied. — One male and one female including their 
genitalia. No other specimens are known. 

7. Calystryma anapa, new species 

Figures 7, 15; Plates 1 (fig. 10), 2 (fig. 10). 

Male (pi. 1: fig. 10). — Wings above about as in C. meleager with 
the dull metallic purple somewhat darker in hue. Wings underneath 
with ground color light brown, slightly darker than in C. malta and, 
as in that species, with only a single red marginal ocular marking on 
the hindwing. It differs from C. malta in having the black pupil in 
the center of this ocular marking very large, taking up over one-half 
of the area in interspace Cu x between the margin and postmedian 
tripartite line, in having red along inner side of this line more evident, 
and in having the marginal white line extending further toward costa. 
The lines at the ends of the cells in both forewing and hindwing are 
more distinct than in any other species of Calystryma. 

Length of forewing 15.5 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 7b-e with harpe fused only 
at base, short and bluntly rounded distally with a small nipple-like 
projection from dorsal margin at distal end, this projection blunt and 
not inwardly directed; aedeagus broadly curved upward throughout 
the distal three-fourths of its length, quite similar to C. malta; with 
gnathal arm distally acute and lacking a carina; with lateral lobe of 
uncus greatly projected posteriorly into a large, blunt, beaklike lobe 
and with a minimal projection of lower margin. Eighth tergite 
(fig. 7a) shallowly incised along posterior margin with large blunt 
posterior lobes and thus more similar to C. blora than to C. malta. 
Calystryma anapa is distinguished easily from the latter, its nearest 
relative, in the shapes of the harpe and of the eighth tergite. 

Female (pi. 2: fig. 10). — Wings above not different from those of 
C. malta. Wings underneath with slightly lighter brown ground color. 
Maculation very similar to the male with a smaller black center to 
the marginal ocular marking of interspace Cui. 

Length of forewing 13 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 15 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths about three 
and one-half times the width of the superior genital plate, the latter 
with its free edge divided into two lateral elements, each with distinct 
anterior and posterior spurlike processes that are directed distally. 

Type-locality. — Teffe, State of Amazonas, Brazil. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype male and 
allotype female with data as follows: holotype, locality as given above, 
USNM type no. 24907, no date, Collection Brooklyn Museum, geni- 
talia preparation WDF no. 3178; allotype, "Middle" Rio Ucayali, 
Department of Loreto, Peru, 6167 ft., Aug. 24, 1928, H. Bassler (Col- 
lection, genitalia preparation WDF no. 5089. 

Location of types. — Holotype in the United States National 
Museum. Allotype in the American Museum of Natural History 
(New York). 

Distribution. — Known only from the holotype and allotype, 
which, as mentioned above, are from separate localities in Brazil 
and Peru. 

Material studied. — One male, one female, including their 
genitalia. 

8. Calystryma gentilla (Schaus), new combination, new status 

Figures 8, 17; Plates 1 (fig. 11), 2 (figs. 11, 12) 

Thecla gentilla Schaus, 1902, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 24. p. 420.— Draudt, in 
Seitz, 1920, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, p. 801; 1921, ibid., 
vol. 5, p. 828. [For Schaus, 1920, Draudt, 1921, and Comstock and Huntington, 
1960, references to Thecla gentilla (misidentified), see under Calystryma atrox.] 

Male (pi. 1 : fig. 11). — Wings above with dull metallic purple ground 
color, not distinguishable from C. anapa. Wings underneath dark 
brownish gray and as in the latter species with a small red, marginal 
ocular marking in interspace Cuij this spot very small, not large as in 
C. anapa and, as in that species, without such a marking in inter- 
space M 3 . Red lunule found inward from marginal bluish spot in 
interspace Cu 2 small and peppered with black. Red absent along 
inner side of tripartite postmedian line and with marginal white line 
very faint above vein Ciii. 

Length of forewing 12 — 14 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 8b-e with harpes fused 
only at base; with aedeagus straight except the extreme distal end 
which is upcurved slightly and thus somewhat similar to that of 
C. Mora; gnathal arm distally acute and having a large carina from 
middle about as in C. Mora and C. meleager; lateral lobe of uncus 
projected into a small blunt lobe along posterior margin near middle; 
this lobe not beaklike. Eighth tergite (fig. 8a) cordate in shape, 
incised along posterior margin, this incision very deep and narrow, 
distinctly and greatly elongated anteriorly, with posterior lobes 
blunt and very large and rounded. This tergite thus differs greatly 
in shape from those of C. anapa, C. naka, and the other species de- 
scribed above. 



PROC. U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



FIELD — PLATE 1 



^ 








. 3 r 



H 




\ 





11 




15 








vW, 8 



Figures 1-18.— Males (natural size; spliced figures = upper surface on left, undersurface 
on right): 1, Calystryma keta Field, upper surface, holotype; 2, undersurface o\ 1; 3, 
C. atrox (Butler), Rio Marona, Peru; 4. same species, St. Jean, Maroni, French Guiana; 
5 C. Mora Field, u PP er surface, holotype; 6, undersurface of 5; 7, C. naka Field, holotype; 
s' C. meleager (Druce), Iquitos, Peru; 9, C. malta (Schaus), lectotype; 10, C. anapa Field. 
holotype; 11, C. gentilla (Schaus), holotype; 12, C. pisis (Godman and Salvin), Alhajuela, 
Panama- 13, C. barza Field, holotype; 14, undersurface of 13; IS, C. tifla Field, holotype; 
If,, undersurface of IS; 17, C. trebula (Hewitson), Porto Bello, Panama; 18, undersurface 
of 17. 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 17 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 11, 12). — Wings above similar to C. anapa 
and C. malta, differing in lacking orange on anal lobe and in having 
the marginal white line very indistinct. Wings underneath slightly 
lighter in ground color than in the male with black center of marginal 
ocular marking on interspace Cui smaller than in the male and with 
an ocular marking faintly indicated on interspace M 3 . 

Length of forewing 13 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 17 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths about three 
and one-half times the width of the superior genital plate; the latter 
with its free edge divided into two lateral elements with large distally 
directed posterior spurlike processes, the largest found in the genus, 
and with smaller but relatively large anterior spurlike processes, 
which also are directed distally. 

Type-locality. — "Petropolis," State of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. 

Additional type data. — Originally described by Schaus without 
a statement as to the number of specimens. Since only one specimen 
in the Schaus Collection of the United States National Museum bears 
a holograph name label and a red USNM type label with the number 
5951, this is the holotype. This specimen also bears a label with the 
genitalia preparation number WDF 3987. There is a second specimen, 
a male, in the Schaus Collection with the same locality label as the 
holotype. I do not consider it a paratype as there is no evidence that 
Schaus had associated it with the holotype. 

Location of type. — Holotype in the United States National 
Museum. 

Distribution. — Known only from the states of Rio de Janeiro and 
Para in Brazil. 

Brazil: State of Rio de Janeiro, Petropolis (no date); State of Para, Igarape- 
Acu (December-February). 

Material studied. — Five males and two females, including their 
genitalia. 

9. Calystryma pisis (Godman and Salvin), new combination 

Figures 9, 23; Plates 1 (fig. 12), 2 (fig. 13) 

Therla pisis Godman and Salvin, 1887, Biologia Centrali- Americana: Zoology: 
Insecta: Lepidoptera-Rhopalocera, vol. 2, p. 84; 1888, ibid., vol. 3, pi. 57, 
figs. 24, 25 [male]. — Draudt, in Seitz, 1920, Die Gross-Schmetterlinge der 
Erde, vol. 5, p. 800; 1921, ibid., p. 830, pi. 158, figs, h [1], h [2].— Comstock 
and Huntington, 1962, Journ. New York Ent. Soc, vol. 70, p. 115. 

Male (pi. 1: fig. 12). — Wings above dull metallic purple as in C. 
anapa and C. gentilla. Wings underneath pale brownish gray with a 
faint shining yellowish reflection, otherwise with maculation about 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

as in C. keta, with red ocular markings present in both interspace 
M 3 and Cui on hindwing and with red present along tripartite post- 
median line almost to costa. 

Length of forewing 13-14.5 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 9b-e with harpes fused 
only at base; with aedeagus nearly straight, except distal end, which 
is upcurved distinctly, more so than in C. gentilla; differing from all 
other species of Calystryma in the shape of the gnathal arm, which is 
elongated distally, almost needle-like, with carina large, greatly 
enlarging base of gnathal arm toward its elbow; lateral lobe of uncus 
similar to that of C. gentilla with its posterior lobe broader. Eighth 
tergite (fig. 9a) cordate in shape, deeply incised along posterior 
margin with this incision broad and troughlike and thus quite easily 
distinguished from C. gentilla, posterior lobes large, blunt, and concave, 
not rounded, differing from those of C. barza, especially in the greater 
undulation before distal end of lateral margin, causing the lateral 
angle to be more pronounced and rounded. 

Female. — (pi. 2: fig. 13). — Forewing above dark brown with a 
slight bluish cast in the basal portion. Hindwing dark brown on 
costal margin above cell and vein R s , in extreme base of cell and 
beyond cell in interspaces Mi and M 2 . Shining blue in outer portion 
of cell and between veins M 3 and 2d A. With a white marginal line 
extending from vein 2d A to M 3 and with marginal dark brown spots 
in interspaces M 3 and Cui. Anal lobe entirely dark brown. Wings 
underneath not distinguishable from those of the male. 

Length of forewing 13.5 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 23 with ductus bursae 
and bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths being 
about three and one-half times the width of the superior genital plate; 
the latter with its free edge divided into two lateral elements that are 
each large, rounded, lobelike ridges lacking spurlike processes or any 
sharp angles. 

Type-locality. — Bugaba, Province of Chiriqui, Panama. 

Additional type data. — This species was described by Godman 
and Salvin from an unspecified number of males from Teleman, 
Guatemala, Chontales, Nicaragua, and Bugaba, Panama. The 
Bugaba specimen (collected by Champion) and now in the collection 
of the British Museum (Natural History), upon which the original 
colored illustration was based is here designated the lectotype. 

Method of identification. — A topotype matching in every way 
the maculation of the original colored figure and compared by William 
Schaus with the original series in the British Museum is the basis for 
the present identification (fig. 9) of C. pisis. 

Distribution. — From Guatemala south into Panama. 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 19 

Guatemala: Department of Izabal, Cayuga (June, August, September). 
Costa Rica: Province of Lim6n, La Florida (500 ft., March). Panama: Prov- 
ince of Chiriqui, Bugaba (no date); Province of Col6n, Porto Bello (April), Rio 
Trinidad (March); Canal Zone, Barro Colorado Island (March), Alhajuela (April). 

Material studied. — Nine males and one female, including their 
genitalia. 

10. Calystryma barza, new species 

Figure 10; Plate 1 (figs. 13, 14) 

Male (pi. 1: figs. 13, 14). — Wings above dark brown as in C. keta, 
C. atrox, C. Mora, and C. naka. Wings underneath with ground 
color pale brown, maculation very much like that of C. naka with a 
great deal of orange red along inner side of tripartite postmedian 
line, especially in interspace Cu x , with slightly smaller black pupils 
in center of marginal ocular markings of interspace M 3 and Cu 2 and 
with the marginal blue spot in interspace Cu 2 greatly reduced because 
of the extension of orange red from the interspaces on either side. 

Length of forewing 12.5-13 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 10b-e with harpes fused 
only at base and in lateral view with distal two-thirds of ventral margin 
very convex and thus differing from all other species of Calystryma; 
with aedeagus nearly straight and distally greatly curved to the 
insect's left; with gnathal arm acute and upturned at distal end and 
with carina before middle and small; lateral lobe of uncus slightly and 
bluntly produced at lower angle with lower margin slightly undulate. 
Eighth tergite (fig. 10a) similar to that of C. pisis with anterior pro- 
jection broader and indented and with troughlike incision of posterior 
margin much broader inwardly than at free margin, the posterior 
lobes thus formed slightly concave along free margin. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Type-locality. — "Upper" Rio Marafion, Department of Ama- 
zonas, Peru. 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype male and 
two male paratypes with data as follows: holotype, locality as given 
above, 6101 ft., Jan. 1, 1925, H. Bassler Collection, genitalia prepara- 
tion WDF no. 5004; one paratype, Rio Santiago, Department of 
Amazonas, Peru, 6012 ft., Nov. 30, 1924, H. Bassler Collection, 
genitalia preparation WDF no. 3157; and one paratype, Collection 
William Schaus, the paratype of C. malta (having its abdomen miss- 
ing) that is mentioned under the discussion of that species. 

Location of types. — Holotype and one paratype in the American 
Museum of Natural History (New York) , one paratype in the United 
States National Museum. 

Distribution. — Known only from Peru. 

Material studied. — Two males, including their genitalia. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

11. Calystryma trebula (Hewitson), new combination 

Figures 11, 18; Plates 1 (figs. 17, 18), 2 (fig. 14) 

Thecla trebula Hewitson, 1868, Descriptions of some new species of Lycaenidae, 
p. 16; 1873, Illustrations of diurnal Lepidoptera, Lycaenidae, vol. 1, p. 146; 
1873, ibid., vol. 2, pi. 57, figs. 363, 364.— Godman and Salvin, 1887, Biologia 
Centrali- Americana: Lepidoptera- Rhopalocera, vol. 2, pp. 84, 85. — Godman, 
in Godman and Salvin, 1901, Biologia Centrali-Americana: Lepidoptera- 
Rhopalocera, vol. 2, p. 720.— Dyar, 1914, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus. vol. 47, 
p. 149. — Draudt, in Seitz, 1920, De Gross-Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, 
p. 801; 1921, ibid., p. 831, pi. 158, figs, h [8] h [9].— Hoffmann, 1940, An. 
Inst. Biol., vol. 11, p. 717. — Comstock and Huntington, 1964, Journ. New 
York Ent. Soc, vol. 72, p. 176. 

Male (pi. 1 : figs. 17, 18). — Forewing above very dark brown, hind- 
wing bright iridescent blue except for a border of dark brown around 
outer margin that is just over one millimeter in width. It thus differs 
from all other species of Calystryma. Wings underneath bright 
yellowish brown, thus also differing from all other species of Calystryma 
on this surface. Maculation most similar to that of C Mora except 
that red coloration on hindwing is more distinctly red and the ele- 
ments of the white marginal line on this wing are convex instead of 
being more straight, outlining the outer edge of blue spot in interspace 
Cu 2 and the black pupillated red ocular markings in interspaces M 3 
and Cuv 

Length of forewing 11.5-13 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 11b-e with harpes fused 
only at base; with aedeagus slightly upcurved from near middle, 
otherwise straight; with gnathal arm blunt and slightly upturned at 
distal end and with carina small and arising from near distal end 
causing gnathal arm to be nearly bifurcate in appearance and thus 
differing from all other species of Calystryma; lateral lobe of uncus 
much less produced than in the other species and with lower margin 
slightly concave. Eighth tergite (fig. 11 a) similar to that of C. pisis 
and C barza with anterior projection narrow and rounded, not 
indented, with troughlike incision of posterior margin only slightly 
broader anteriorly than at free margin and with posterior lobes 
slightly rounded, not concave along free margin. 

Female (pi. 2: fig. 14).- — Forewing dark brown except for a few blue 
scales below vein 2d A in basal one-half of wing. Hindwing bright 
shining blue except for a dark brown border, about one millimeter in 
width around outer margin, this border broken into separate but nearly 
confluent dark brown spots in interspaces M 3 , Cil, and Cu 2 . Marginal 
white line present in these same interspaces. Anal lobe lacking red. 
Wings underneath similar in all respects to those of the male except 
with the marginal ocular markings slightly smaller on the hindwing. 

Length of forewing 11-12 mm. 



no. 3611 CALYSTRYMA FIELD 21 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 18 with ductus bursae 
and bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths just 
over three and one-half times the width of superior genital plate; the 
latter with its free edge divided into two lateral elements, each with 
two strongly developed spurlike processes, about equal in size and 
dis tally directed. 

Type-locality. — Teffe ("Ega"), State of Amazonas, Brazil. 

Additional type data and location of type. — This species was 
described by Hewitson from a single specimen, the holotype male 
(in the collection of H.W. Bates), now in the collection of the British 
Museum (Natural History) and labeled with the type number Rh. 
955. 

Method of identification. — The original description, the original 
colored illustrations, and a specimen compared by William Schaus 
with the holotype are the basis for the present identification of the 
name C. trebula. 

Distribution. — Widely spread over the American tropics from 
Mexico south to Brazil and Peru. 

Mexico: State of Vera Cruz, San Rosa (April). Guatemala: Department 
of Izabal, Cayuga (May). Costa Rica: Province of San Jose, Guapiles (850 ft., 
May); Province of Lim6n, La Florida (500 ft., March). Panama: Province of 
Chiriqui, Chiriqui (no date) ; Province of Bocas del Toro, Bocas del Toro (April) ; 
Province of Col6n, Porto Bello (April), Rio Trinidad (March); Canal Zone, 
Barro Colorado Island (March). Colombia: Department of Cauca, Jalima (no 
date). Peru: Department of Loreto, Achinamiza (6001 ft., September). Brazil: 
State of Amazonas, Teffe (no date). 

Material studied. — Twenty-seven males and two females, in- 
cluding their genitalia. 

12. Calystryma tifla, new species 

Figures 12, 19; Plates 1 (figs. 15, 16), 2 (figs. 15, 16) 

Male (pi. 1: figs. 15, 16). — Wings above entirely dark brown as in 
C. barza, C. keta, and the other brown-colored species of Calystryma. 
Wings underneath with ground color pale brown, paler than in C. naka, 
about as in C. barza and with maculation differing from the latter 
only in having the marginal blue spot of interspace Cu 2 on hindwing 
larger and the white marginal line on this wing more distinct. 

Length of fore wing 13 mm. 

Male genitalia as illustrated by figures 12b-e with harpes fused 
only at base and unique in shape both in lateral and in ventral views, 
being bifurcate in ventral view and showing a large spurlike projection 
from dorsal margin near distal end in lateral view; with aedeagus 
extremely long and distinctly upcurved distally; with gnathal arms 
acute and broadly and evenly bent upward, without carina; with 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

lateral lobe of uncus having a greatly projected beaklike lobe on 
posterior margin and with lower margin convex. Eighth tergite 
(fig. 12a) similar to that of C. trebula and with anterior projection 
narrow and extended, with incision of posterior margin shallow and 
broad forming posterior lobes that are slightly acute laterally along 
free margin. 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 15, 16). — Forewing dark brown except for two 
rays of shining blue, one in base of wing below 2d A and the other 
along base of cell. Hindwing mostly shining blue in color, very 
much as in females of C. trebula with dark border becoming more 
narrow toward costa instead of broader as is true in that species and 
also as in C. trebula with this border broken into separate but nearly 
confluent dark brown spots in interspaces M 3 , Cii], and Cu 2 . There 
are a few red scales on anal lobe and there is a bluish-white marginal 
line below vein M 3 extending to vein 2d A. Wings underneath 
identical to those of the male. 

Length of fore wing 10.5-12 mm. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 19 with ductus bursae 
and bursa copulatrix relatively short, their combined lengths only 
about three times the width of the superior genital plate; the latter 
with its free edge divided into two lateral elements each with both 
posterior and anterior spurlike processes that are reduced and about 
equal in size and with the anterior spurlike process sharply pointed 
and the posterior one blunt. 

Type-locality. — Achinamiza, Department of Loreto, Peru. 

Additional type data. — Described from the holotype male, allo- 
type female, and one female paratype with data as follows: holotype, 
locality as given above, 6001 ft., Oct. 30, 1927, H. Bassler Collection, 
genitalia preparation WDF no. 5005; allotype, same data as holotype 
except genitalia preparation WDF no. 5081, paratype, same data 
except collecting date in Jan. 3, 1936, and genitalia preparation 
WDF no. 5084. 

Location of types. — Holotype and allotype in the American 
Museum of Natural History (New York), paratype in the United 
States National Museum. 

Distribution. — Known only from the type-locality in Peru. 

Material studied. — One male and two females, including their 
genitalia. 

13. Calystryma cinniana (Hewitson), new combination 

Figure 20; Plate 2 (figs. 17, 18) 

Thecla cinniana Hewitson, 1877, Illustrations of diurnal Lepidoptera, Lycaenidae, 

vol. 1, p. 189; vol. 2, pi. 75, figs. 593, 594 [female].— Druce, 1907, Proc. 

Zool. Soc. London, 1907, p. 622.— Draudt, in Seitz, 1920, Die Gross- 

Schmetterlinge der Erde, vol. 5, p. 805; 1921, ibid., p. 827; 1922, ibid., pi. 



*°- 36ii CALYSTRYMA FIELD 23 

159, figs, f [3], f [4]. — Comstock and Huntington, 1959, Journ. New York 
Ent. Soc, vol. 67, p. 187. 
Calycopis cinniana (Hewitson). — Kaye, 1914, Trans. Ent. Soc, London, 1913, 
p. 570; 1921, Catalogue of Trinidad Lepidoptera: Rhopalocera, Mem. 
Dept. Agric, Trinidad and Tabago, no. 2, p. 94. 

Male. — The male is said by Druce (Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 
1907, p. 622) to differ from the female in having the costal half of 
the uppersurface of the hindwing dark brown. I have been unable 
to find males I could associate with the two females identified as C. 
cinniana below. 

Female (pi. 2: figs. 17, 18). — Forewing entirely dark brown except 
for a few blue scales on base of vein 2d A. Hindwing shining pale 
blue, much paler in hue than in the other species of the genus and 
with this color covering a larger area than in the other species so 
that this wing is almost entirely pale blue except for dark brown 
on anal lobe and for a tiny and faint marginal dark brown spot on 
interspace Ciix and a faint bluish-white marginal line between 2d A 
and vein Mi. Fringe at margin dark brown, outward from margin 
bluish white. Wings below pale brown, paler than in other species 
of the genus except C. tifla and much warmer in hue than in that 
species. 

Length of forewing 10 mm. The smallest species in the genus. 

Female genitalia as illustrated by figure 20 with ductus bursae and 
bursa copulatrix very short, the shortest of any species of Calystryma, 
the combined length being only about two and one-half times the 
width of the superior genital plate; the latter with its free edge 
divided into two lateral elements, with posterior spurlike processes 
lacking and anterior spurlike process greatly reduced and with the 
posterior margin between these spurlike processes greatly produced 
posteriorly (and thus differing from all other species of Calystryma). 

Type-locality. — "The Amazon," Brazil. 

Method of identification and location of type. — This species 
was described by Hewitson from a single female specimen from the 
Henley G. Smith Collection now in the British Museum (Natural 
History). A specimen from Cayenne, French Guiana, comparing 
favorably with the original colored illustration identified by "William 
Schaus as C. cinniana after comparison with the type specimen, is 
the basis for the present identification. The color and maculation of 
both surfaces of the hindwings cannot be confused with any other 
species. 

Distribution. — From Trinidad and French Guiana to the Amazon 
River in Brazil. 

Trinidad: St. George County, Port of Spain (April). French Guiana: 
Colony of Guiana, Cayenne (no date). Brazil: state?, the Amazon (no date). 

Material studied. — Two females, including their genitalia. 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 





Figures 1, 2. — Male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 1, Calystryma keta Field, 
holotype; 2, C. atrox (Butler), from prep. 3160 WDF. (A = 8th tergite; B = uncus and 
gnathos in dorsal view; c = harpes in ventral view; D=left half of harpe, tegumen, uncus, 
vinculum, and saccus in lateral view; E = aedeagus in lateral view.) 



CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 



25 




Figures 3, 4.— Male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 3, C. Mora Field, holotype; 
4, C. naka Field, holotype. (Same key as figs. 1, 2.) 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 





Figures 5-7. — -Male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 5, C. meleager (Druce), 
from prep. BM 1951 498; 7, C. anapa Field, holotype (same key as figs. 1, 2). Parts of 
male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 6, C.malta (Schaus), lectotype (A = 8th 
tergite; B = harpes in ventral view; c = left harpe in lateral view). 



CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 



27 





FlGURE s 8, 9.-Male genitalia and 8th tergite of ^*£%* * j^t£ 

holotype; 9, C. pisis (Godman and Salvia), from prep. 503, \\ Dt . (bame y 

1,2.) 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




•-•- --Wr - ' '11 » ■i-~-- 




Figures 10, 11.— Male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 10, C. barza Field, 
holotype; 11, C. trebula (Hewitson), from prep. 5039 WDF. (Same key as figs. 1, 2.) 



CALYSTRYMA FIELD 



29 





Figures 12, 13.— Male genitalia and 8th tergite of male abdomen: 12, C. tifla Field, holo- 
type (same key as figs. 1, 2). Female genitalia in ventral view: 13, C. atrox (Butler) 
from prep. 5072 WDF. 



30 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




C 



"^7 




I 

I "is" 



CALYSTRYMA — FIELD 



31 




U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFI 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION . WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3612 

A Review of the Valbyteuthidae 

And an Evaluation of its Relationship 

With the Chiroteuthidae 

(Cephalopoda: Oegopsida) 1 



By Clyde F. E. Roper and Richard E. Young 



Joubin (1931) described from the Bay of Panama an unusual squid, 
Valbyteuthis danae, which possessed such distinctive characters that 
he placed it in a new family. He aligned this family, the Valbyteu- 
thidae, with the Chiroteuthidae and Brachioteuthidae. Since the 
original description, no additional specimens of this family have been 
reported in the literature; Robson (1948, p. 127), however, briefly 
described, as Chiroteuthis, a small specimen that appears to be Val- 
byteuthis. Thiele listed the Valbyteuthidae in his systematic hand- 
book (1935). 

The extensive cephalopod collections currently being studied at 
the Institute of Marine Science of the University of Miami contain a 
number of specimens of Valbyteuthis. This material was captured 
over a broad geographic area including the type-locality. Examina- 
tion of the material indicates that Valbyteuthis does not warrant 
inclusion in a separate family, a fact that necessitates a re-evaluation 
of the systematic position of the group. 

1 Contribution No. 790 from Institute of Marine Science, University of Miami, 
and Paper No. 60 from Dana Oceanographic Collections. This work was sup- 
ported by research grants GA-253 and GB-1090 from the National Science 
Foundation. 

2 Roper: Division of Mollusks, U.S. National Museum; Young: Institute of 
Marine Science, University of Miami, Fla. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

The original description is based upon a specimen captured in the 
Bay of Panama during the Dana Expedition (1920-1922). The pres- 
ent material includes Dana specimens, one of which was taken at 
the third station following the capture of Joubin's holotype. In 
addition, material is utilized from the following sources: United States 
Antarctic Research Program, USNS Eltanin; Inter- American Tropical 
Tuna Commission, M/V Shoyo Maru; Woods Hole Oceanographic 
Institute, R/V Chain; and University of Southern California, R/V 
Velero iv. The authors are grateful to Dr. E. Bertelsen of the Carls- 
burg Foundation, the U.S. Antarctic Research Program of the National 
Science Foundation, Dr. Klawe of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna 
Commission, Dr. R. H. Backus of Woods Hole Oceanographic Insti- 
tute, and Mr. R. Lavenberg of the University of Southern California 
for making these specimens available for study. 

We would like to thank Dr. Gilbert L. Voss for his interest and 
encouragement during our studies and for his review of the man- 
uscript. We also gratefully acknowledge Miss Constance Stolen for 
her excellent preparation of the illustrations. 

Family Chiroteuthidae Gray 

Valbyteuthidae Joubin, 1931, p. 188. — Thiele, 1935, p. 971. 

Valbyteuthis Joubin 

Valbyteuthis Joubin, 1931, p. 188. — Thiele, 1935, p. 971. — Young and Roper, 

in press. 
Chiroteuthis. — Robson, 1948, p. 127. 

Diagnosis. — A chiroteuthid with elongate ventral arms, oval 
funnel-mantle locking apparatus. Antitragus present, tragus absent. 
Short, compact tentacular club with suckers in four rows. Club 
suckers on short stalks. Broad, round, subterminal fins; length 
60 percent of width. Photophores absent. Funnel valve absent. 

The material examined is as follows : 







mantle 


estimated 


vessel and station no. 


location 


length (mm) 


depth of capture (m) 


Eltanin 34 


07°45'N 81°37'W 


47 


683 


Eltanin 52 


16°30'S 74°36'W 


35 


1162 


Eltanin 741 


40°16'S 78°18'W 


31 


2635 


Eltanin 743 


33°18'S 72°27'W 


30 


1830 


Dana 3980 ix 


23°26'S 03°57'E 


38 


1500 


Dana 1206 v 


06°40'N 80°47'W 


34 


1250 


Dana 1370 xm 


36°36'N 26°14'W 


31 


1500 


Dana 1171 xn 


08°19'N 44°35'W 


21 


1000 


Dana 1203 xn 


07°30'N 79°19'W 


25 


1250 


Dana 1208 vn 


06°48'N 80°33'W 


19 


1000 


Dana 4003 iv 


08°26'S 15°11'W 


24 


1500 


Dana 4014 in 


28°09'N 15°19'W 


11 


450 


Dana 4158 xiv 


46 28'N 08°01'W 


12 


2000 



VALBYTEUTHIDAE — ROPER AND YOUNG 



vessel and station no. 

Chain 35-958 
Shoyo Maru 8 
Shoyo Maru 7 

Scot 77 

Velero iv-10265 



location 

09°17'N 49°04'W 
39°12'S 106°48'W 
40°09'S 109°38'W 

14°12'N 92°47'W 



mantle estimated 

length (in) depth of capture (m) 

55 530 

35, 34, 33 Alepisaurus stomach 

34 Alepisaurus or alba- 
core stomach 
15 300 



33°18'N 118°40'W 33,26,25 
Valbyteuthis danae Joubin 



1200 



Valbyteuthis danae Joubin, 1931, p. 188. — Thiele, 1935, p. 971. 

Description. — This description is based only upon material cap- 
tured in the region of the type-locality (Elt. 34; Dana 1206 v, 1203 
xn, 1208 vn). Measurements are given on page 5. The mantle is 
short and broad; the muscular portion tapers rapidly posteriorly 
and terminates beneath the anterior third of the fins. Only the 
integument continues posteriorly over the gladius. The mantle wall 
is thin but muscular (pi. 2b). 

Fins are huge and extremely muscular; their length is about 50 
percent of the mantle length and their width is about 80-85 percent 
of the mantle length. The anterior lobes are attached to the dorso- 
lateral sides of the mantle. The attached borders of the anterior 
fin lobes are clearly visible beneath the integument and form a broad V. 
The posterior border of each fin is indented slightly at the midline; 
the lateral margin is semicircular in outline (pi. 2a). 

The gladius has a long, narrow, extremely delicate rhachis. The 
short, thin vane arises abruptly near the anterior level of the fins, 
folds rapidly ventrally, and fuses in the midline to form a long, slender 
conus. The walls of the conus are much heavier than the anterior 
portion of the gladius. The conus is rectangular in cross-section and 
is broken just posterior to the fins. The terminal portion has been 
lost in all specimens ; it is apparent, however, from the large diameter 
and heavy construction of the conus that Valbyteuthis possesses 
a long tail (pi. 2c) . 

The funnel is large and narrow and reaches the level of the middle 
of the eyes. The funnel component of the locking apparatus is oval 
and deeply concave, particularly at the posterior end, where the de- 
pression tends to undercut the lateral margin. A distinct antitragus is 
present on the posterior wall of the funnel component. The mantle 
component is [human] nose shaped, with the tip directed posteriorly. 
The component also curves laterally to conform to the deep lateral 
depression of the funnel component. A small indentation that locks 
with the antitragus is located beneath the tip at the posterior end of 
the mantle component (pi. 4a, b). 

The dorsal member of the funnel organ is broadly triangular in 
outline, with only a small posterior indentation. A spatulate papilla 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. ra 

arises from the anterior apex. The ventral members are large and 
oval. No trace of a funnel valve exists (pi. 4c). 

The head is elongate; toward the anterior end it bears large pro- 
truding eyes that are directed slightly forward. The "olfactory" 
organs are situated posterior to the eyes on long, slender stalks. 
Nuchal crest and nuchal folds are lacking. Two heavy, muscular 
bridles extend from the cephalic cartilage along the ventral surface of 
the head and attach to the dorsolateral sides of the tubular portion 
of the funnel. The cephalic vein lies close to the surface in the midline 
between the bridles (pis. lc, 2b). 

The arms are weak and slender and arranged in the order 4-3 = 2-1. 
The dorsal three pairs of arms bear biserially arranged suckers through- 
out their length. In some specimens, the ventral row of suckers of 
these arms possesses two to four moderately enlarged suckers located 
about two-thirds of the distance along the length of the arm. Prob- 
ably this represents a sexual dimorphism, but because the specimens 
are insufficiently developed, the sexes cannot be determined in all 
cases. The sucker stalks are short and arise from large, conical bases. 
The chitinous rings are large but possess very small apertures that 
bear approximately 7-10 (average 8) short, broad, truncate teeth 
that are separate along the distal half of the margin. In the proximal 
half, the teeth are fused, giving a smooth margin that becomes slightly 
scalloped laterally (pi. 4k-n). The dorsal three pairs of arms appear 
to bear low keels, particularly along the distal portions. The arms, 
however, have been injured so that the true nature of the keels is difficult to 
determine. Protective membranes are developed weakly and, al- 
though they are not supported by distinct trabeculae, their margins 
are scalloped. 

The ventral arms are extremely long, slender, and fragile and have 
large lateral membranes that extend their full length. The suckers 
originate in two rows at the base of each ventral arm but gradually 
tend to converge into a single row near the middle of the arm. These 
suckers are extremely small and decrease in size toward the middle 
portion of the arm, where they disappear, leaving the distal half of 
the arm naked. No protective membranes or trabeculae occur on 
arms iv. 

Tentacles are long and slender; they bear very short, simple clubs. 
Keels are not apparent. The protective membranes form an indis- 
tinct ridge and trabeculae are indistinguishable (pi. Id). The carpal 
area bears approximately four to five small suckers that alternate 
in two longitudinal rows. The outer chitinous rings of these suckers 
are narrow bands. The inner rings have three superimposed rows of 
small, rounded knobs; the outer row bears about 15 knobs. The 
smaller knobs of the inner rows alternate with those of the outer row 



no. 3612 VALBYTEUTHIDAE — ROPER AND YOUNG 5 

(pi. 4h). The suckers of the manus and dactylus are arranged in 
four uniform, longitudinal rows, except at the tip, where only one or 
two suckers remain. The suckers have broad, flat outer chitinous 
rings. The inner rings have very small apertures and lack dentition 
(pi. 4i, o). 

The buccal membrane possesses seven buccal lappets. The buccal 
membrane connectives attach dorsally to arm pairs one and two and 
ventrally to arm pairs three and four. The oral surface of the buccal 
membrane is covered with distinct, closely set longitudinal ridges 
and grooves. 

A few irregularly scattered, brown chromatophores are present 
on the mantle, fins, head, and arms. 

The beaks are illustrated on plate 4, figures d-f. The rostrum 
of the upper mandible is short and has a sharply pointed tip; the 
palatine lamella is short and broad. The rostrum of the lower beak 
is short and triangular and has dorsolateral ridges on the hood. A 
weak lateral ridge is present on the gullar lamella. 

The radula consists of seven rows of teeth in a transverse series. 
The rhachidian tooth has a very slender, elongate, median cusp and 
two lateral cusps that frequently bear a small medial bump. The 
first lateral tooth has along, medial cusp and two small lateral cusps; 
the smaller and more medial of these is somewhat variable in size 
but provides the first lateral tooth with a distinctive and unusual 
feature. The second lateral tooth has a broad base and bears a single, 
long, slender cusp. The lateralmost tooth has an extremely elongate, 
curved cusp. Marginal plaques are lacking in Valbyteuthis (pi. 4g) . 

Measurements in mm of two specimens of Valbyteuthis danae Joubin 
from the region of the type-locality (Bay of Panama) are as follows: 





Eltanin 34 


Dana 1306 V 


sex 


male 




? 




mantle length 


47 






34 




mantle width 


1G 






12 




head length 


21 






14 




head width 


16 






12 




fin length 


25 






17 




fin width 


40 






29 




arm length 


right 


left 


right 


left 


I 


20 


21 


8* 


13 


II 


22 


25 


14 




15 


III 


- 


26 


17 




15* 


IV 


43 


37* 


25 




27 


tentacle length 


81 


78 


36 




37 


club length 


1% 


7 


4 




4>2 



*Marks indicate that tip of arm is missing. 
248-332 — 67—2 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Distribution. — Figure 1 shows the distribution of the genus 
Valbyteuthis, which was recorded previously only from the type- 
locality, 07°30'N, 79°19'W. The genus is now known to occur 
throughout the Atlantic Ocean from about 25°S to 46°N and in the 
Eastern Pacific Ocean from about 40°S to 35°N. The longitudinal 
range is from 04°E to 120°W. We do not suggest that these are the 
distributional limits of the genus. 

The distributional map refers to the genus Valbyteuthis and not 
to V. danae. It is evident from our specimens that at least two 
species occur other than V. danae, but formal recognition of them 
must wait until further material becomes available. 

Discussion 

On the basis of the material available to us, it is possible to re- 
evaluate the status of the Valbyteuthidae. Numerous characteristic 
features are possessed by Valbyteuthis that clearly demand that its 
familial ranking be submerged and that the genus be placed in the 
Chiroteuthidae sensu stricto. The most important of these features 
are discussed below. 

The connectives of the buccal membrane of Valbyteuthis are 
attached to the dorsal sides of arms one and two and to the ventral 
sides of arms three and four. The gladius consists of a long, narrow 
rhachis and a vane that folds ventrally until the edges fuse in the 
ventral midline to form a long, slender conus. These features align 
Valbyteuthis with the Chiroteuthidae and a number of related families 
(see Young and Roper, in press, for a more detailed discussion). 

The closely related families Mastigoteuthidae and Chiroteuthidae 
possess distinctive funnel-mantle locking apparatuses. The funnel 
components of these structures are oval and bear one or two protuber- 
ances (tragus and antitragus) that give them an ear-shaped appear- 
ance. This characteristic locking mechanism is not found in other 
families. Joubin (1931) described and illustrated the locking ap- 
paratus of Valbyteuthis as oval but without protuberances and stated 
that it was not ear shaped. Our specimens, including those from the 
type-locality, possess a well-developed antitragus on the posterior 
wall of the funnel component. Although this differs from Chiro- 
teuthis by lacking a tragus, it unquestionably falls within the chiro- 
teuthid-mastigoteuthid pattern. Joubin's failure to observe this 
structure is partly responsible for his incorrect systematic placement 
of Valbyteuthis. 

Probably the most distinctive feature of Valbyteuthis that could 
be used to substantiate its position in an independent family is the 
peculiar structure of the tentacular clubs. These clubs are unlike 
those found in any adult chiroteuthid. They are, however, nearly 



PROC. U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



ROPER AND YOUNG — PLATE 1 




' III ) 




Sg§f\ 



A 




Chiroteuthis: A, "doratopsis" stage, 32 mm mantle length (ml) (modified from Pfeffer, 
1912, pi. 46: fig. 4); b, "doratopsis"-type tentacle showing larval club distally and 
developing adult club on stalk, 28 mm ml, Dana 1157 n. Valbyteuthis danae: c, ventral 
view, 34 mm ml, Dana 1206 v; d, adult tentacular club, 47 mm ml, Elt. 34. Valbyteuthis 
species: E, ventral view of larva, 15 mm ml, Scot 77; F, larval tentacular club, IS mm ml. 
Scot 77. 



PROC. U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



ROPER AND YOUNG — PLATE 2 



Willi 



i . s 



w 




f i 




' -",•;•; 





Valbyteuthis danae, 47 mm ml, Ell. 34: a, dorsal view; b, ventral view; c, ventral and lateral 
views of galdius with cross sections. 



PROC U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



ROPER AND YOUNG — PLATE 3 




Chiroteuthis species, 63 mm ml, Velero 934-9: ventral view (this species has a "doratopsis' 

type larva). 



PROC U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



ROPER AND YOUNG — PLATE 4 










\ 




(3a. 



^^ h \^Xm 




Valbyteuthis danae, 47 mm ml, Ell. 34: a, b, mantle and funnel components of locking 
apparatus; d-f, upper and lower mandibles; g, radula; h, sucker from carpus; i, sucker 
from manus enlarged; k-n, suckers from arms i-iv; o, sucker from manus (k-o = identical 
enlargement). 35 mm ml, Ell. 52: c, funnel organ. Chiroleuthis, "dorstopsis"-type 
larva, 28 mm ml, Dana 1157 n: j, sucker from manus. 



VALBYTEUTHIDAE ROPER AND YOUNG 



identical with the early larval clubs of Chiroteuthis, the predominant 
genus of the family. The adult Chiroteuthis club begins to develop 
in the larval stage along the tentacular stalk proximal to the primary 
larval club. The primary larval club is eliminated upon metamorpho- 
sis either by resorption or autotomy (pers. observ.). The striking 
similarity of clubs of Valbyteuthis and early larval Chiroteuthis is 
apparent in the illustrations on plate 1b, d, and f, and indicates 
the close relationship of the two genera. 

Further relationship between these genera is suggested by the 
close resemblance of the extremely long, weak, ventral arms; they 




Figure 1. — Geographic distribution of Valbyteuthis. 

bear small suckers that are aligned nearly in a single row, and they 
possess very large lateral membranes. These features give the arms 
a very distinctive appearance. The characteristic lateral membranes 
were not mentioned in Joubin's description and did not appear in 
his illustration, probably due to the poor condition of his specimen. 

Although the adults of the two genera appear to differ considerably 
in overall appearance (pis. 2a, b, 3), general similarities do exist. 
In addition to the characteristics already mentioned, both groups 
have elongate heads, oval fins, and similar arm formulae. 

The larval stages of Valbyteuthis and Chiroteuthis (especially the 
"doratopsis" type) show even greater similarities, particularly in the 
following details: very elongate head, long fourth arms, relatively 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

short tentacles, simple clubs, long tail, superficial position of cephalic 
vein and funnel bridles, spindle-shaped liver, and absence of photo- 
phores (pi. 1a, e). The two larval forms can be distinguished only 
by close examination. As the "doratopsis" develops, the adult club 
begins to form on the tentacular stalk, light organs appear on the 
viscera, eyes, ventral arms, and tentacles, and the head begins to 
shorten. At metamorphosis, the tentacles become greatly elongated ; 
the early larval club is lost, and the body proportions change. 

As the larval Valbyteuthis develops, only a few changes occur, 
of which the shortening of the head is the most noticeable. Even 
though our large specimens are not sexually mature, no evidence of an 
impending metamorphosis exists, and it is clear that these specimens 
represent the adult form and are not oversized larvae. Therefore, 
while Chiroteuthis undergoes considerable change during development, 
Valbyteuthis remains approximately at the "doratopsis" stage. 

The above discussion reveals that Valbyteuthis closely resembles 
Chiroteuthis. The similarities are particularly strong between Val- 
byteuthis and the larval "doratopsis" stage of Chiroteuthis. Therefore, 
although these two genera are clearly distinct, it is not possible to 
maintain the more recently described family, the Valbyteuthidae, as 
a distinct taxon, and it is placed herein in the synonymy of the family 
Chiroteuthidae. 

Summary 

Valbyteuthis clanae Joubin, 1931 is redescribed based on Dana and 
Eltanin material from the type-locality. 

The known distribution of the genus Valbyteuthis extends in the 
Eastern Pacific from 40° S to 35° N and throughout the Atlantic from 
25° S to 46° N. 

The family Valbyteuthidae is submerged in the family Chiroteu- 
thidae, primarily on the basis of the similarities between Valbyteuthis 
and certain larval chiroteuthids ("doratopsis" type). Valbyteuthis 
remains a distinct genus. 



Literature Cited 

JOTTBIN, L. 

1931. Notes preliminaires sur le Cephalopodes des croissieres du Dana 
(1921-1922). 4e Partie. Ann. Inst. Oceanogr., n.s., vol. 10, no. 7, 
pp. 167-211. 
Pfeffer, G. 

1912. Die Cephalopoden der Plankton-Expedition. Ergebn. Plankton 

Exped. Humboldt-Stiftung, vol. 2, pp. i-xxi, 1-815; atlas of 48 
plates. 
Robson, G. C. 

1948. The Cephalopoda Decapoda of the Arcturus Oceanographic Expedi- 
tion, 1925. Zoologica, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 115-132. 
Thiele, J. 

1935. Handbuch der Systematischen Weichtierkunde, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 
779-1154. 
Young, R. E., and Roper, C. F. E. 

1967. The Batoteuthidae, a new family of squid (Cephalopoda; Oegopsida) 
from the Antarctic Ocean. Antarctic Research Series. In press. 



9 

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum ^^gt^ 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3613 



Two New Crustaceans: The Parasitic Copepod 

Sphaeronellopsis monothrix (Choniostomatidae) 

And its Myodocopid Ostracod Host 

Parasterope pollex (Cylindroleberidae) 

From the Southern New England Coast 



By Thomas E. Bowman and Louis S. Kornicker 
Associate Curators, Division of Crustacea 



The parasitic copepods of the family Choniostomatidae have re- 
ceived little attention since the classic monograph of Hansen (1897). 
This neglect is probably attributable to the fact that the majority of 
them inhabit the marsupia of other crustaceans, mostly Peracarida, 
where they easily are mistaken for the eggs of the hosts and therefore 
are overlooked. The abundance of the new choniostomatid consid- 
ered in this paper suggests that these copepods are more common 
than generally is realized. 

The new choniostomatid described herein, Sphaeronellopsis mono- 
thrix, was discovered by Kornicker during a study of a new species of 
ostracod, Parasterope pollex, from Hadley Harbor, near Woods Hole, 
Mass. The description of P. pollex has been prepared by Kornicker 
alone, while that of S. monothrix is the work of both authors. 

The material available has been sufficient to enable us to give some 
details of the biology of S. monothrix and its relations with the host. 
Following this account are formal taxonomic descriptions of both 
species. 

1 

248-330—67 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

The station data for the collections of ostracods used in this study 
are as follows : 











P. pollex 








depth 


number per 


station 


locality 


dale/time 


m 


sample 


1907 


Hadley Harbor, Woods Ilole, Mass. 
block 137 


July 13,1965 
0945 his. 


1 


63 


2906 


Hadley Harbor, " 
block 111 


July 7, 1965 
1440 hrs. 


2 


170 


Coll. 1 


Lake Tashmoo, Martha's Vineyard, Mass. 


Nov. 13, 1962 




1 


Coll. 2 


Lake Tashmoo, " 


Nov. 13, 1962 




1 


Coll. 4 


Lake Tashmoo, " 


Nov. 13, 1962 






- 


Great Harbor, Woods Hole, Mass. 


Sept. 12,1962 


5 


1 


260 


Hadley Harbor, " 


Apr. 27,1965 


1-2 


44 


270 


Hadley Harbor, " 


May 4, 1965 


1 


4 


276 


Hadley Harbor, " 


May 25,1965 


1 


95 


2207 


Hadley Harbor, " 


July 13,1965 


6 


4 


1 


Stonewall Pond, Chilmark, Martha's Vineyard, Mass. 


July 1965 


2 


27 


6 


Stonewall Pond, Chilmark, " 


July 1965 


3 


9 


7 


Lagoon Pond, Vineyard Haven, 


July 1965 


2 


10 



We are grateful to Dr. Roland L. Wigley, Bureau of Commercial 
Fisheries Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, Mass., for ostracods 
from Great Harbor and Lake Tashmoo; to Mr. J. Stewart Nagle, 
Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole, for ostracods from Hadlejr 
Harbor, and to Mrs. C. R. Stoertz, Department of Paleobiology, 
Smithsonian Institution, for ostracods from stations 1, 6, and 7 
from Martha's Vineyard. We thank Mrs. Carolyn Bartlett Gast for 
final preparation of the ostracod figures from camera lucida drawings 
by Kornicker. 

Life history of Sphaeronellopsis monothrix. — From the specimens 
in our collections (p. 3) it is possible to reconstruct some details of 
the life history. It is obvious from the account that follows that our 
knowledge of many phases of the life history is either fragmentary or 
completely lacking. We hope that the ready availability of the 
species at Woods Hole and perhaps elsewhere on the Atlantic Coast 
will lead others to investigate more intensively the biology of this 
interesting parasite. 

The motile stage by which Sphaeronellopsis spreads from one 
ostracod to another is the copepodid, which swims by means of the 2 
pairs of flat, setose trunk legs. Copepodids found in an ostracod 
marsupium without accompanying adult copepods or ovisacs are 
interpreted as recently having invaded the hosts. Since they do not 
differ in size or morphology from copepodids still within the ovisac 
membrane, there appears to be only one copepodid instar. The 
copepodid normally does not enter immature ostracods; we have not 
found any infestation in female ostracods less than 1.30 mm long. 

Spermatophores were attached to 2 female copepods, .23 and .36 
mm in length, indicating that mating may take place when the female 
is very young or may be delayed until she is older. Only 3 male 



no. 36!3 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 3 

copepods were found, suggesting that the life span of the male is 
much less than that of the female. 

Ostracods that already have laid a clutch of eggs are not attacked. 
The only parasitized ostracod with its own eggs in its marsupium was 
a specimen containing copepodids. The susceptible period for the 
ostracod is the time following its final molt and preceding egg deposi- 
tion. Once it is in the marsupium, the presence of the copepod 
inhibits egg laying by its host. Only 1 female Sphaeronellopsis 
develops in an ostracod, but more than 1 male may be found in a 
single host. 

Sphaeronellopsis eggs are not laid singly, but in groups, each of 
which is enclosed by a membrane. All the eggs in 1 ovisac are at the 
same developmental stage, but those in different ovisacs may be in 
different stages. We have divided the eggs arbitrarily into 3 cate- 
gories, according to the stage of development (pi. \d-j; list below) : 
spherical eggs, pyriform eggs, and copepodids still within the ovisac 
membrane. Several batches of eggs must be laid at intervals, since 
ovisacs with all 3 stages may occur together. Each ovisac contains 
about 15 eggs, and up to 8 ovisacs (about 120 eggs) in one stage have 
been found in an ostracod. The total number of eggs produced by a 
female must be at least 3 x 120 or 360, and perhaps more, since it is 
possible that more than 3 clutches of eggs are laid. 

Data on specimens of Sphaeronellopsis monothrix (the 3 types of 
ovisacs are shown in pi. Id-f). — 

copepods 











number 


of ■ 


number of ovisacs 




sex of ostracod 




length of 


number 








host 


station 


female 


of males 


copepodids 


spherical 


pyriform ci 


tpepodid 


? a 


1907 






2 










? 


u 


.36 








8 


4 




9 


It 


.32 










2 


2 


9 


(I 


.39 








3 


3 


1 


9 


if 


.35 




5 






7 


1 


9 


II 


.33 










2 


2 


9 


(( 


.37 








2 




1 


9 


II 


.33 


1 






5 






9 


(I 


.34 










1 


2 


9 


II 


.40 


2 


1 




5 


4 




9 


(I 


.40 








7 






9 


II 


.36»> 








5 


3 




d 1 


II 






1 










9 


2906 


.40 








6 






9 


a 


.36 














9 


II 


.30 














9 


II 


.24 














9 


II 


.30 














See footnotes at end of table. 















PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 

copepods 



number of ovisacs 



sez of ostracod length of number number of 

host station female of males copepodids spherical pyriform copepodid 

9 2906 . 47 

9 5 

9 3 

9 " .25 

9 " .42 

9 2 3 

cf " .33 

juv. & Coll. 4 . 23 b 

* Ostracod eggs present. 
•> Spermatophore attached. 

Incidence of parasitism. — In spite of the similarity in size, the 
female Sphaeronellopsis and her ovisacs are readily distinguishable 
from ostracod eggs thru the valves of undissected preserved speci- 
mens. The female Sphaeronellopsis has a characteristic yellow 
color, and her ovisacs are less uniform in appearance than ostracod 
eggs. The smaller and more transparent copepodids are more difficult 
to see altho some were visible in intact ostracods. No male copepods 
were discovered in undissected ostracods. 

Specimens appearing to have parasites were examined after being 
cleared in glycerine to be rendered more visible. To increase the 
reliability of the search, additional ostracods in which copepods had 
not been seen in the preliminary examination were also examined 
in glycerine, but this supplementary examination revealed very few 
additional parasites. In all, 86 ostracods were examined in glycerine, 
and in about half of these the shell was removed. 

Of the 407 ostracod specimens, including juveniles and adults, 25, 
or nearly 1 out of 16, were found to be parasitized. Since juveniles 
normally are not parasitized (all of the 95 juveniles from station 276 
were free of copepod parasites), the degree of infestation of adults 
is more significant biologically. Our most reliable data is from the 
station 2906 collection of 170 ostracods, which includes about 141 
adult females (15 with marsupial eggs), 6 adult males, and 23 juveniles. 
Ten of the females and 1 of the males were parasitized, i.e., about 1 
out of 13 adults. The success of the parasitism is evident when it is 
considered that the copepod eggs being brooded by the ostracods 
outnumber their own eggs. A female Parasterope seldom has more 
than 13 eggs in her marsupium, less than the number in 1 copepod 
ovisac. 

Host specificity.' — Sphaeronellopsis monothrix has been found 
only in Parasterope pollex. One other myodocopid ostracod, Sarsiella 
zostericola, is abundant in Hadley Harbor; 17 specimens, including 
8 adult females, 1 adult male, and 8 juveniles have been examined 
for sphaeronellids with negative results. It is noteworthy that in 



no. 3613 TW o NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 5 

collections from Lyttleton Harbor, New Zealand, Hansen (1905) 
found Sphaeronellopsis littoralis in Sarsiella hispida but not in the 
much more abundant Sarsiella hanseni. 

Effects of parasitism on the host. — We have observed no 
differences between parasitized and nonparasitized ostracods in the 
structure of the shell or the body and its appendages. As Hansen 
(1897) has pointed out, choniostomatids apparently feed by piercing 
the host's integument with pointed mandibles and sucking its blood 
with the aid of the funnel-shaped mouth cone. The effect of this 
feeding on the ostracod is unknown. The most serious effect of the 
Sphaeronellopsis appears to be the inhibition of ovulation by the host. 
Only 1 of the 23 parasitized female ostracods had laid its own eggs 
in its marsupium. Conversely, the copepod seems to be deterred 
from entering the marsupium of an ostracod that is incubating its 
own eggs; 16 of the 17 ostracods with their own eggs in their marsupia 
were not parasitized. 

These observations are similar to those of Hansen (1897), who 
reported that in studying the 38 species of choniostomatids living 
in crustacean marsupia, he found almost 160 cases of marsupia with 
parasites and no host eggs, but only 6 cases wherein parasites and host 
eggs occurred together. 

Egg mimicry in the Choniostomatidae. — The similarity in size of 
Sphaeronellopsis ovisacs and the eggs of the ostracod host is more than 
coincidental. While the individual Sphaeronellopsis eggs are much 
smaller (diameter about .07 mm) than the ostracod eggs, they are 
grouped into clusters of about 15 eggs; the diameter of the clusters 
usually falls between .20 and .30 mm, about the same as that of the 
ostracod eggs. This similarity in size clearly seems to be a case of egg 
mimicry having adaptive value for the Sphaeronellopsis. The 3rd 
thoracic legs of myodocopid ostracods are very flexible, adapted for 
removing foreign particles from the interior of the valves and from the 
eggs (Skogsberg, 1920, p. 88, ftn.). Individual copepod eggs pre- 
sumably would be removed from the brood chamber by the cleaning 
leg, but the copepod avoids this hazard by laying its eggs in groups 
within sacs, each sac mimicking 1 of the ostracod eggs in size and shape. 
Instead of being removed as a foreign particle, the Sphaeronellopsis 
ovisac is retained within the brood chamber and cleaned by the host 
with the same solicitude given to its own eggs. To a male ostracod, 
however, an ostracod egg or a Sphaeronellopsis ovisac mimicking an 
ostracod egg is a foreign particle and therefore is removed by the 
cleaning leg. It is significant that in the few instances in which a 
female Sphaeronellopsis was found in a male ostracod, no ovisacs 
were present. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Altho 38 of the 43 species dealt with by Hansen in his classic 1897 
monograph inhabit the marsupia of Amphipoda, Isopoda, Cumacea, 
and Mysidacea, Hansen did not call attention to the similarity in size 
between the eggs of the host and the ovisacs of the choniostomatid 
parasites. The above peracarid crustaceans aerate and keep their 
eggs free of contaminating particles by circulating a current of water 
thru the marsupium by movements of the pleopods (gammaridean 
Amphipoda), maxillipeds (Isopoda, Cumacea), or oostegites (Tanai- 
dacea, Isopoda, caprellid Amphipoda) . There is no flexible appendage 
that can reach into the marsupium and handle the eggs individually, 
except possibly in the Mysidacea (Jancke, 1924); hence, mimicry of 
the eggs of these Crustacea is not needed to prevent them from ejecting 
the eggs of their choniostomatid parasites. Individual copepod eggs, 
however, because of their small size, would be in danger of being 
flushed from the marsupium by the circulating water current, whereas 
ovisacs similar in size to the host's eggs are too large to encounter this 
risk. Thus it is advantageous to the choniostomatid to lay its eggs in 
groups rather than singly. 

A further advantage to the parasite in having its ovisacs resemble 
the host's eggs is that the parasitized host does not become more 
conspicuous and thus more vulnerable to predators than in the normal 
ovigerous condition. This advantage only operates when the mar- 
supial contents are visible, and is probably much less significant in 
ostracods, in which the shell obscures the eggs, than in crustaceans 
with transparent oostegites. Delia Valle (1893) pointed out that the 
ovisacs of species of Sphaeronella infesting the amphipods Ampelisca 
diadema and Microdeutopus gryllotalpa matched the color of the host's 
eggs. This predator-deceiving egg mimicry, to be distinguished from 
the host-deceiving egg mimicry in Sphaeronellopsis monothrix, is also 
characteristic of marsupial parasites that are too large or firmly 
attached to be dislodged by the host. Crytoniscid isopods (species 
summarized recently by Nielson and Stromberg, 1965) are in this 
category. Whether the host behaves normally in ventilating and 
cleaning the contents of its marsupium when it is occupied by a 
predator-deceiving parasite instead of its own eggs is not known. 

Sphaeronellopsis Hansen, 1905 

Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, new species 

Figures 1-3 

Female. — Length .23-.47 mm. Head well defined from trunk, 
relatively large. Trunk wider than long in fully developed female, 
narrower than long in young female, ventral surface with a number 
of rows of minute hairs. Submedian skeleton of head well developed; 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 7 

longitudinal bar on each side, divided posteriorly, has strong bar 
extending laterad between 2nd maxilla and maxilliped; focusing shows 
this lateral bar to be folded as it passes anteriad and reaches base of 
2nd maxilliped. 

1st antenna 2-merous; proximal segment long, well provided with 
setae as shown in figure 16, bearing distally a long esthete; 2nd segment 
short, with 2 apical setae. 2nd antenna absent. 1st maxilla with 2 
processes, directed anteriad and laterad. 2nd maxilla apparently 
2-merous; proximal segment robust with row of surface spinules, 
produced distally into lobe overlapping medial surface of distal seg- 
ment; distal segment with apex ending in 2 teeth. Maxilliped 3- 
merous; 1st segment without ornamentation; 2nd segment with short 
blunt distal spine; distal segment short, conical, entire. 

Legs and caudal rami composed of single short cylindrical segment 
bearing a single terminal seta with swollen base. 

Boundaries of genital area not evident. Genital apertures broadly 
U-shaped, located lateral to and slightly anterior to caudal rami. 
Seminal receptacles oval. 

Male. — Length .11 to .13 mm. Body chunky, about % as broad 
as long and nearly % as high as long. Head somewhat more than K 
total body length; anterior margin smoothly rounded, lateral margins 
evenly convex; greatest width at level of bases of 2nd maxilla; dorsum 
bare except for row of hairs on posterior part of each lateral margin. 
Trunk much narrower than head, tapering posteriorly to rather 
narrow obtuse apex, densely clothed with long hairs. 

1st antenna essentially like that of female, but apparently 1- 
merous since suture could not be discerned. 2nd antenna absent. 
1st maxilla with 2 processes. 2nd maxilla with serrulate ridge on 
proximal segment; lobe at base of claw with serrulate margin; ter- 
minal claw undivided at apex. Maxilliped reaching back nearly to 
posterior end of trunk, like that of female. Trunk legs apparently 
absent. Caudal ramus like that of female. 

Copepodid. — Length 0.17 mm. Prosome oval, nearly 3>2 times 
as long as urosome. Front with U-shaped list with arms extending 
over bases of 1st antennae. Pouch pointed, reaching base of second 
trunk legs. 1st urosomite with V-shaped ridge on ventral surface, 
arms of V leading to bases of ventral pair of setae. Ventral setae 
only slightly shorter than dorsal setae. 2nd urosomite about as long 
as 1st and as broad as posterior part of 1st. 3rd urosomite fused 
ventrally but not dorsally with caudal rami. Caudal rami with 1 
pair of robust medial setae, nonplumose and more than twice as long 
as urosome, and 3 pairs of shorter lateral setae. 

1st antenna 3-merous; 1st segment with 2 setae; 2nd segment short, 
unarmed; 3rd segment with the usual pair of long apical setae and 6 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

additional setae; esthete more than 3 times as long as appendage. 
2nd antenna 3-merous; 3rd segment with long terminal seta and shorter 
setae near proximal end. 1st maxilla like that of female, with 2 
processes. 2nd maxilla 3-merous; 1st segment with 3 rows of fine 
serrations; 2nd segment with a few serrations distally; 3rd segment 
with denticulate inner margin, apex like that of female. Maxilliped 
4-merous; 1st segment longer than combined remaining segments, 
with longitudinal row of serrations. 

Swimming legs 2 pairs, identical. Exopod with 3 outer spines, 2 
terminal setae, and 2 inner setae. Endopod lateral margin with a 
row of spiniform teeth and a subterminal spine; medial margin with 
6 plumose setae. 

Types. — Holotype female, length .33 mm, from marsupium of 
adult female Parasterope pollex, length 1.55 mm, station 1907, 
Hadley Harbor, Woods Hole, Mass., USNM 119122. The other 
specimens listed on pages 3-4 are paratypes. 

Etymology. — The specific name "monothrix," from the Greek 
"mono" = one and "thrix"=hair, refers to the single apical seta of the 
trunk legs and caudal rami. 

Relationships. — We have placed the new species in the genus 
Sphaeronellopsis in spite of its lacking the following characters that 
Hansen (1905) considered to be among the most distinctive for the 
genus (Hansen had only females) : caudal rami fused, genital area 
with broad anterior protuberance, seminal receptacles long and 
strongly curved. Because of the absence of these characters, a 
reasonable case could be made for assigning S. monothrix to Sphaero- 
nella rather than to Sphaeronellopsis; however, the new species does 
agree with Sphaeronellopsis littoralis, until now the only species of 
the genus, in having a 2-merous 1st antenna, no 2nd antenna, a 
3-merous maxilliped with a short terminal segment, and single 
terminal setae on the trunk legs and caudal rami. The factor that 
induced us to place our species in Sphaeronellopsis rather than in 
Sphaeronella is that both S. littoralis and S. monothrix are parasites 
of ostracods. Even if S. monothrix were placed in Sphaeronella 
now, it would probably be transferred to Sphaeronellopsis later, since 
the species of Sphaeronella are quite diverse, and eventually it will 
probably be necessary to subdivide the genus. Hansen (1898) may 
have anticipated such a subdivision, for he divided the species of 
Sphaeronella according to their morphology into 2 main groups, one 
made up of parasites of amphipods, the other consisting of parasites of 
cumaceans. 

We have recently described (Bowman and Kornicker, in press) a 
choniostomatid from the ostracod Pseudophilomedes ferulana Korn- 
icker. Only copepodids were found, and their characters agree with 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 9 

those given by Hansen (1897) for Sphaeronella. The copepodid of 
Sphaeronellopsis being unknown, we assigned the Pseudophilomedes 
parasite provisionally to Sphaeronella. When adults are discovered, 
it may become necessary to reassign it to the genus Sphaeronellopsis. 
It differs from the copepodid of S. monothrix most noticeably in the 
structure of the 2nd maxilla and maxilliped, especially in the lack of 
serrations on the 1st segment of the latter. 

Because S. monothrix in some respects is intermediate between 
Sphaeronellopsis and Sphaeronella, it is useful to compare it with 
species of the latter genus. The female of S. monothrix is distinguished 
from those of species of Sphaeronella by the single seta on the trunk 
legs and caudal rami, the 2-merous 1st antenna, the absence of the 
2nd antenna, and the distinctive structure of the 2nd maxilla and 
maxilliped. The number of seta on the trunk legs (which may be 
absent) varies from (in S. acanthozonis) to 3 (in S. frontalis) , with 2 
being most common. Only in S. capensis and S. gitanopsidis do 
the legs have a single seta. The caudal rami of Sphaeronella may be 
absent or be armed with (S. acanthozonis) to 5 (S. leukarti, of 
Green, 1958) setae, mostly frequently 2. A single seta is present in 
S. gitanopsidis, S. holboelli, and S. acanthozonis. 

The 1st antenna is usually 3-merous in Sphaeronella; only S. decorata 
resembles S. monothrix in having a 2-merous 1st antenna with a long 
1st segment. The 2nd antenna is absent in about 5 species, but 
present in most species of Sphaeronella. The maxillipeds are usually 
4-merous, but are 3-merous in a few species. 

The shape of the male body, with the nearly round head and 
narrow trunk is quite distinctive. Among the other characters that 
separate the male S. monothrix from species of Sphaeronella are the 
absence of bans from the head except on the posterior parts of the 
lateral margins, and the absence of trunk legs. 

Parasterope Poulsen, 1965 
Parasterope pollex Kornicker, new species 

Figures 4-7; Plate \a,b 

Cylindroleberis mariae.— Cushman, 1906, p. 366, pi. 29 (figs. 19-25) [not Baird, 

1850]. 

Types. — Holotype, gravid female, USNM 114048, from station 
2906, Hadley Harbor, Mass., in alcohol. Allotype, adult male, 
USNM 114049, dissected on slides. Paratypes, 16 adult males, 62 
females, 11 juveniles, USNM 114050-114059. 

Etymology. — The specific name "pollex," from the Latin noun 
meaning "thumb," refers to the thumblike dorsal process on the 
dorsum. 

248-330—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Relationships. — In Poulsen's (1965, p. 316) key to the Astero- 
pinae (=Cylindroleberinae), P. pollex falls between Diasterope and 
Parasterope. The female sensory bristle of the adult female 1st an- 
tenna has 6 long terminal filaments as in Parasterope, whereas the 
tip of the ventral branch of the mandibular coxale endite has several 
marginal spines, which makes it resemble more closely the coxale 
endite of Diasterope than of Parasterope. In order to include the 
species in Parasterope, it is necessary to expand the diagnosis given 
by Poulsen (1965, p. 362) to include species having several small 
spines near the tip of the ventral branch of the coxale endite. 

Specimens interpreted as being male N-l instars of P. pollex have 
a short proximal filament on the sensory branch of the 1st antenna. 
This character places the species close to the genus Diasterope and 
indicates the importance of having adult females available when 
classifying members of this subfamily. 

Cypridina mariae Baird, 1850, was designated by Sylvester-Bradley 
(1961, p. 402) as the type-species of Cylindroleberis, which is the 
type-genus of the family Cylindroleberidae. The structure of the 
appendages of the unique holotype of Cypridina mariae from the Isle 
of Skye is unknown. Although the species has been identified from 
many areas by others, the identifications include several species and 
genera (see discussion by Skogsberg, 1920, pp. 518-522). Therefore, 
it is not possible to determine with certainty the genus in which the 
type-species belongs. Because of the relative instability of generic 
names in the family, especially in the subfamily Cylindroleberinae, 
the assignment of P. pollex to the genus Parasterope must be pro- 
visional. 

Description of adult (figs. 4-6, 7a-d; pi. la, b). — Female shell (figs. 
4a, b, d-j; pi. la, b) : In lateral view oval, elongate, with greatest 
height slightly behind middle; in dorsal view with greatest width 
about midway between middle and posterior end; anterior and 
posterior margins evenly rounded; lateral surface smooth, with 
scattered normal pore canals, some with short hairs; incisur deep, 
narrow, with upper margin overlapping lower proximally; inner 
lamella with 40 to 42 medial bristles above incisur, 21 to 35 bristles 
below incisur, and about 10 bristles along ventral inner margin; 
medial ridge anterior to posterior margin with broad blunt spines in- 
terspersed with minute spines; about 27 spines in row between medial 
ridge and posterior margin; radial pore canals numerous, false radial 
pore canals sparse, containing hairs along posterior margin of shell; 
selvage narrow with fringe of hairs along anterodorsal margin; ad- 
ductor muscle scars obscure, consisting of ovoid scars in cluster near 
middle of valves. 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 



11 



Male shell (figs. 4c, 6/, g) : In lateral view suboval, with dorsal 
margin sloping posteriorly, gradually at first, and then more sharply, 
forming a posterodorsal angle; greatest height anterior to middle; in 
dorsal view greatest width anterior to middle; lateral surface smooth, 
with hairs in row across posterior region and sparsely distributed 
along ventral and posterior margins; incisur wider than in female, 
with rostrum projecting farther forward; inner lamella with about 
42 medial bristles above incisur, 12 to 17 below incisur, and about 9 
bristles along ventral margin; radial pore canals, and distribution of 
medial bristles on and posterior to medial ridge similar to female. 

The numbers of medial bristles on the inner lamella above and 
below the incisur vary considerably within the species and on left 
and right valves of the same specimen. The numbers of bristles 
given in the description are for specimens on which they were counted, 
2 females and 1 male. The average length of 51 adult females is 
1.56 mm, average height 0.82 mm; the height calculated as percent 
of length is 53 percent. The average length of 8 adult males is 1.57 
mm, average height is 0.86 mm; the height calculated as percent of 
length is 55 percent. Dimensions of shells of adult males and females 
are as follows: 



USNM station 

114050 2906 







FEMALES 


length 


height 


height as % 




mm 


mm 


of length 


remarks 


1.46 


0.79 


54 


parasitized 


1.48 


0.79 


53 


t< 


1.48 


0.80 


54 


eggs in ovaries 


1.59 


0.82 


52 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


1.58 


0.84 


53 


It U it It 11 


1.43 


0.76 


53 


<< << 11 (I (( 


1.62 


0.87 


54 


U (l (I It tt 


1.51 


0.81 


54 


parasitized 


1.59 


0.85 


53 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


1.54 


0.81 


53 


a ti it tt It 


1.65 


0.86 


52 


a tt tt it n 


1.62 


0.84 


52 


parasitized 


1.41 


0.75 


53 


it 


1.47 


0.77 


52 


n 


1.46 


0.76 


52 


tt 


1.51 


0.80 


53 


tt 


1.56 


0.86 


55 


eggs in ovaries 


1.53 


0.81 


53 


no eggs or parasites 


1.60 


0.86 


54 


(< <( n it 


1.55 


0.79 


51 


tt it tt << 


1.55 


0.84 


54 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


1.56 


0.82 


53 


a ti <( << tt 


1.58 


0.84 


53 


it u << << << 


1.62 


0.83 


51 


<( tt it n a 


1.61 


0.89 


55 


a a n a " 



12 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



females — continued 







length 


height 


height as % 




USNM 


station 


mm 


mm 


of length 


remarks 


114050 


2906 


1.54 


0.77 


50 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


<< 


<< 


1.49 


0.78 


52 


parasitized 


<( 


(< 


1.64 


0.87 


53 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


it 


tt 


1.59 


- 


- 


a a a a u 


tt 


tt 


1.49 


- 


- 


parasitized 


114048 


it 


1.61 


0.89 


55 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


114051 


P. 1907 


1.55 


0.83 


53 


parasitized 


tt 


it 


1.66 


0.87 


52 


tt 


tt 


a 


1.51 


0.78 


52 


tt 


tt 


tt 


1.58 


0.84 


53 


tt 


n 


tt 


1.52 


0.82 


54 


it 


tt 


" 


1.62 


0.87 


55 


a 


tt 


ti 


1.60 


0.87 


54 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


it 


it 


1.46 


0.78 


53 


parasitized 


tt 


it 


1.64 


0.86 


52 


tt 


it 


tt 


1.56 


0.85 


54 


n 


tt 


it 


1.58 


0.85 


54 


a 


it 


it 


1.63 


0.86 


53 


ostracod eggs in brood chamber 


tt 


a 


1.48 


0.79 


53 


no eggs or parasites 


tt 


a 


1.56 


0.81 


52 


1 ostracod egg in brood chamber 


it 


u 


1.57 


0.87 


55 


parasitized 


it 


tt 


1.58 


0.84 


53 


it 


114052 


2207 


1.56 


0.83 


53 


no eggs or parasites 


114053 


276 


1.54 


0.79 


51 


eggs in ovaries 


114054 


1 


1.62 


0.84 


52 


a n u 


ii 


1 


1.48 


0.79 


53 


ostracod eggs in brood pouch 


114055 


Great 
Harbor 


1.64 


0.83 


51 


tt u a tt it 


114056 


6 


1.65 


0.84 


51 


eggs in ovaries 


134057 


7 


1.68 


0.87 


52 


13 ostracod eggs in brood chambe 










MALES 


114049 


2906 


1.60 


0.88 


55 




114052 


2207 


1.58 


0.85 


54 




114051 


1907 


1.50 


0.81 


54 


parasitized 


tt 


a 


1.54 


0.84 


55 




114050 


2906 


1.63 


0.93 


57 




tt 


2906 


1.58 


0.88 


56 


parasitized 


114052 


2207 


1.62 


0.87 


54 




314056 


6 


1.54 


0.84 


54 





Female 1st antenna (figs. 4g, h): 1st joint with clusters of spines 
on medial surface; 2nd joint with 1 spinous dorsal bristle and clusters 
of spines on medial and lateral surfaces; 3rd and 4th joints fused; 
3rd joint with 5 (rarely 4) spinous dorsal bristles, 1 short bare ventral 
bristle; 4th joint with 1 spinous dorsal and 2 bare ventral bristles; 
5th joint with ventral sensory bristle with 6 terminal filaments, of 
these the 2 distal filaments are fused in the proximal half; 6th joint 
with long medial bristle with short marginal spines; 7th joint with 



no. 3613 TW0 NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 13 

a-, b-, and c-bristles: a-bristle clawlike, b-bristle with 2 proximal 
and 2 distal filaments, c-bristle longer than b-bristle and with 5 
filaments: 8th joint with e-, f-, and g-bristles: e-bristle bare, f-bristle 
with 3 spinous filaments near middle, and, distally, 2 filaments and 
spines, g-bristle with 4 to 5 filaments. 

Male 1st antenna (fig. 6h) : 1st joint with clusters of spines on medial 
surface; 2nd joint with 1 spinous dorsal bristle and clusters of spines 
on medial surface; 3rd joint with 6 spinous dorsal bristles and 1 short 
bare ventral bristle; 3rd separated from 4th joint by distinct suture; 
4th joint with 1 spinous dorsal bristle and 2 bare slender ventral 
bristles; 5th joint with stout sensory bristle with numerous filaments; 
6th joint with spinous medial bristle; 7th joint with a-, b-, and 
c-bristles: a-bristle clawlike, b-bristle with about 4 filaments, c-bristle 
extremely long and with about 24 filaments; 8th joint with e-, f-, and 
g-bristles: e-bristle bare, shorter than b-bristle; f-bristle extremely 
long and with 20 filaments; g-bristle with 8 filaments, longer than 
b-bristle. 

Female 2nd antenna (figs, ^i-k) : Protopodite with few hairs along 
dorsal margin and without bristle at base of endopodite. Endopodite 
weakly 3-jointed with bare terminal bristle. Exopodite 9-jointed: 
1st elongate without bristle; 2nd to 9th joints short broad and 
decreasing in width distally; each of 2nd to 8th joints with short 
hail's in row along distolateral margin; 3rd to 8th joints each with 
small posterior and large anterior spine along distal margin; 9th joint 
with single lateral spine; bristle of 2nd joint reaching past 9th joint 
and with short marginal spines; bristles on 3rd to 8th joints with 
natatory hairs and denticidate along outer margins; 9th joint with 3 
bristles: 1 short with spines, 1 long, and 1 medium with natatory hairs; 
long bristle denticulate along outer margin; short bristle with short 
marginal spines and occupying posterior position. 

Male 2nd antenna (figs. Qi-l) : Protopodite bare, larger than on 
female. Endopodite 3-jointed: 1st joint bare; 2nd joint with 3 bare 
bristles, 1 short, 2 medium; 3rd joint with finely annulated bristle 
proximally, and, distally, small tubercles in rows and 6 to 7 serrated 
terminal ridges. Exopodite larger than on female and without 
lateral spines on joints; 2nd joint more elongate than on female; each 
of 1st to 8th joints with clusters of short hairs distolaterally; bristles 
on 2nd to 9th joints with natatory hairs but without marginal 
denticulations; 9th joint with 4 bristles, 1 short, 1 medium, and 2 long. 

Female mandible (figs. 5a-i): Exopodite 60 percent length of 1st 
endopodite joint, with 2 short distoventral bristles and hirsute terminal 
process. Endopodite: 1st joint with 3 long ventral bristles, 1 with 
short, and 2 with long spines; dorsal margin of 2nd joint with 4 long 
stout spinous a-, b-, c-, d-bristles and 5 additional bristles (proximal 

248-330—67 3 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

bristle short, slender with few spines distally; between b- and c- 
bristles, 1 short and 1 medium spinous bristle; between c- and d- 
bristles, 1 long stout spinous bristle; following d-bristle, 1 medium 
slender spinous bristle) ; ventral margin of 2nd joint with 1 medium 
and 2 long spinous bristles; medial side near base of c-bristle with 4 
to 5 unequal spinous bristles in row; end joint with 1 bare stout claw 
and 1 short and 4 long bristles. Basale endite with 4 (rarely 3) pec- 
tinate terminal bristles, 1 short bare bristle and 4 (rarely 3) triaenid 
bristles with 4 pairs of spines; glandular peg well developed; dorsal 
margin of basale with 2 slender terminal bristles with short spines. 
Coxale: ventral branch with long and short spines in roughly 4 trans- 
verse rows and several small spines or hairs near tip; dorsal branch: 
ventral margin with 6 rounded teeth and distally a crest of spines; 
terminal margin with short spines in row and slender terminal spine; 
dorsal margin with long slender hirsute spine near terminal end. 
(Distal part of dorsal branch of coxale missing on most specimens 
examined.) 

The right mandible on a female examined is aberrant, having on 
the 2nd joint of the endopodite only 2 bristles on the dorsal margin, 
2 on the ventral margin, and 2 on the medial surface (fig. 56) , and also 
in having 2 of the 3 ventral bristles on the 1st endopodite joint fused 
along their proximal %; the 3rd bristle is bifurcate at the tip; the 
2nd endopodite joint is almost % the length of the same joint on the 
normal left mandible; the end joint is larger than the end joint of the 
normal mandible and does not have a small medial bristle. 

Male mandible (fig. 6m) : 2nd joint of endopodite differs from female 
in having on dorsal margin 1 additional bristle proximal to a-bristle, 
and, on some specimens an additional short bristle between b- and c- 
bristles, and in greater spinosity of medial surface. Basale endite 
differs in having 4 to 7 pairs of spines on triaenid bristles compared to 
4 on female. 

Maxilla (figs. 5j, 7a) : No sexual dimorphism. Epipodite pointed 
and hirsute. Proximal endite with 1 short and 3 long bristles; distal 
endite with 3 long bristles. Dorsal margin of basale hirsute, with 2 
short bare bristles; ventral margin with short bare bristle near middle 
and long spinous distal bristle. Endopodite: 1st joint with 1 short 
bare anterior bristle and 1 medium terminal bristle; end joint with 
1 long spinous bristle. Proximal spear-shaped bristle of baleen comb 
longer than adjacent oar-formed bristles. 

5th limb (figs. 5k, I) : No sexual dimorphism. Form of appendage 
typical for genus. Epipodial appendage with 59 to 60 marginal 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 15 

bristles. Anterodorsal margin of comb with about 6 long hairs. 
Proximal end of comb with sclerotized dorsally oriented process. 

6th limb (fig. 5m) : No sexual dimorphism. Anterior margin con- 
cave, with 2 slender bristles; medial side with small proximal spine 
near anterior margin; anterior corner with 2 plumose bristles, followed 
by 12 to 17 (rarely 10) spinous posteroventral bristles; anterior part 
of ventral margin, posterior margin, and medial surface hirsute; 
lateral anterior flap with fringe of hairs anteriorly. 

The number of bristles along the ventral and posterior margins of 
the 6th limbs and shell lengths of selected specimens are as follows: 



sex station 

9 2906 

9 2906 

? 2906 

9 1907 

9 1907 

<? 2906 

<? 1907 

rf 1 1907 
9 6 

9 7 

9 1 

7th limb (figs. 5n-p) : 6 cleaning bristles in proximal group, 6 in 
distal group; each bristle with 2 to 4 distal bells; tips of cleaning 
bristles spinous. Terminal comb with 12 to 13 pinnate teeth on each 
side. Male and female similar. 

Furca (figs Qa, 6) : Each lamella with 6 curved claws with pointed 
tips, followed by 2 to 3 spinous bristles; convex and concave margins 
of claws with large and small spines in row distally; spinous bristles 
decreasing in length proximally on lamella. Furca similar in male 
and female. 

Rod-shaped organ (figs. 5q, 76) : Elongate, similar in male and female. 

Medial eye (figs. 5q, 76) : Eye well developed and with clusters of 
hairs dorsally. Similar in male and female. 

Lateral eyes: Each eye of female (fig. 6c) about % diameter of 
medial eye and with about 6 undivided ommatidia. Male eye (fig. 
Id) similar in size to medial eye and considerably larger than lateral 
eye of female; about 16 divided ommatidia present. 

Lips (fig. 6e): No sexual dimorphism. Upper lip: Central lobe 
with a hirsute lateral lobe on each side; each lobe with anterior 



number of bristles 




left limb 


right limb 


carapace length 


14 


15 


1.61 


15 


15 


1.59 


13 


13 


1.41 


17 


17 


1.55 


15 


16 


1.66 


12 


14 


1.60 


16 


16 


1.54 


15 


15 


1.50 


17 


16 


1.65 


12 


10 


1.68 


15 


16 


1.62 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

spine, spine on central lobe smaller than spines on lateral lobes; narrow 
canal extending into spines on lateral lobes. 

Lower lip: Hirsute, rounded, consisting of 2 lobes, each smaller 
than lateral lobe of upper lip. 

Copulatory organs: Female genital organs ill defined. Male copula- 
tory limbs well developed, each having 2 elongate lobes with 1 to 2 
bristles (fig. 7c). 

Dorsum (fig. 6d): Margin ventral to dorsal process with fine hairs; 
dorsal process finger-like, hirsute. Male and female similar. 

Description of N-l male instar (figs. 7e-m). Shell (figs. 7e, f) in 
lateral outline similar to adult female. 1st antenna (fig. 7g) similar 
to that of adult female with following exceptions: 3rd joint with 6 
dorsal bristles; sensory bristle on 5th joint with short filament proximal 
to 6 terminal filaments. 2nd antenna: Exopodite similar to that of 
female; endopodite 3-jointed with 3rd joint weakly separated from 
2nd: 1st joint bare; 2nd joint with 2 short bristles; 3rd joint with 
proximal bristle. Mandible (figs. 7i, k) 5th, 6th, and 7th limbs, 
upper and lower lips, rod-shaped organ and medial eye (fig. 71) , f urea 
and dorsal process similar to adult female. Lateral eyes (fig. 7m) 
similar to those of adult male except with smaller ommatidia. Dimen- 
sions of carapaces of N-l male instars are as follows: 

of 

remarks 











height as % of 


USNM 


station 


length mm 


height mm 


length 


114050 


2906 


1.42 


0.80 


57 


114058 


Coll. 2 


1.43 


0.73 


51 


114053 


276 


1.38 


0.72 


52 


114052 


2207 


1.38 


0.75 


54 


114059 


Coll. 4 


1.43 


0.77 


54 



parasitized 

Several juvenile males differed from N-l males described above in 
being larger and in having numerous filaments on the sensory bristle 
on the 5th joint of the 1st antenna. These specimens appear to have 
continued to molt after reaching the N-l stage described above 
without acquiring all charac 
specimens are as follows: 

USNM station 

114050 2906 

2906 
114054 1 

It is suggested that the occurrence of unusually large specimens of 
an ostracod species occasionally reported in the literature and gen- 
erally attributed to post adult molting may be caused instead by delay 
of sexual maturity. 



i of the adult male. 


Dimensions of 3 






height as 


length mm 


height mm 


% of length 


1.72 


0.96 


56 


1.56 


0.84 


54 


1.70 


0.93 


55 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 17 

Measurements of shells of some of the smaller juveniles in the 
collection are as follows: 

height as % 
USNM station length mm height mm of length sex 

114060 260 1.02 0.57 56 not determined 

114053 276 0.98 0.53 54 

" 276 0.99 0.50 51 

0.84 0.46 55 

0.86 0.48 56 

1.01 0.57 56 

0.83 0.44 53 

114050 2906 1.15 0.67 58 9 

" '* 1.08 0.61 56 ? 

1.14 0.61 54 9 

" " 1.17 0.64 55 9? 

1.27 0.74 58 tf a 

»Seven filaments on sensory bristle of 1st antenna. 

Comparisons. — With the exception of Parasterope corrugata 
Poulsen, 1965, the 8 species of Parasterope listed by Poulsen (1965, 
table 17, pp. 310-311) do not have the thumblike dorsal process that 
is present on the dorsum of P. pollex. Parasterope pollex differs from 
P. corrugata in having 12 to 17 bristles along the postero ventral 
margin of the 6th limb compared to about 3 on P. corrugata, and in 
having 2 ventrodistal bristles on the 4th joint of the 1st antenna 
compared to no bristles on P. corrugata. Parasterope pollex differs 
from Cylindroleberis psitticina Darby, 1965, in having only 2 bristles 
on the anterior corner of the 6th appendage compared to 6 on G. 
psitticina, and in having no laterodistal bristle on the 1st joint of the 
1st antenna. The adult female of G psitticina has 6 dorsal bristles on 
the 3rd joint of the 1st antenna compared to only 5 on P. pollex. 

The appendages of Gypridina mariae Baird, 1850, are unknown. 
The unique dried holotype (no. 1945, 9.26, 96-100) is in the Baird 
Collection at the British Museum (Natural History). Miss Patricia 
D. Lofthouse of the Entomostraca Section of the British Museum on 
request kindly measured the length of the specimen and found it 
to be 2.33 mm, considerably longer than adults of P. pollex. The 
length of the adult female identified as Asterope mariae (Baird) by 
Brady and Norman (1896, p. 630) is 2.4 mm. Brady and Norman 
(1896, pi. li: fig. 7) illustrate the 6th limb as having 4 an tero ventral 
and 25 posteroventral bristles, many more than are present on P. 
pollex. 

Appendages of specimens from San Diego Bay, Calif., identified as 
Cylindroleberis oblonga (Grube, 1859) by Sharpe (1908, p. 423, pi. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

lxii: figs. l-4j are incompletely known, but lateral outline of the 
shell is more acuminate anteriorly than that of P. pollex. Un- 
fortunately, specimens identified by Sharpe (USNM 13108) are 
missing from the museum collection, so that appendages could not be 
examined. Specimens from off the California coast identified as 
Cylindroleberis mariae (Baird) by Juday (1907, p. 143) are described 
incompletely, but, according to the description of the furca (Juday, 
1907, p. 144), each lamella bears 10 claws; it thus differs from the 
furca of P. pollex, which has only 8 to 9 claws on each lamella. 

Cyridina oblonga Grube (1859, p. 335) has only 11 bristles on the 
7th limb and no bristles on the anterior corner of the 6th limb (Grube, 
1859, pi. xn : fig. e). Specimens identified as Cylindroleberis oblonga 
(Grube) by Muller (1894, p. 219) differ from P. pollex in having 25 
posteroventral and 4 anteroventral bristles on the 6th limb (Muller, 
1894, pi. 5: fig. 33). Specimens identified a,s Asterope oblonga (Grube) 
by Sars (1887, p. 203) have a 6th limb with 24 posteroventral and 6 
anteroventral bristles (Sars, 1887, pi. 5: fig. 10). Specimens identified 
as Cylindroleberis mariae (Baird) by Brady (1868, p. 465) have 6 
anteroventral bristles on the 6th limb (Brady, 1868, pi. 41: fig. if); 
the 3rd joint of the 1st antenna of the adult female of Brady's speci- 
mens has 6 dorsal bristles (pi. 41: fig. lc) compared to 5 on P. pollex. 

Specimens identified by Sars (1887, p. 203) as Asterope elliptica 
Philippi have about 24 posteroventral and 5 to 6 anteroventral bristles 
on the 6th limb (Sars, 1887, pi. iv: fig. 1). Asteropina extrachelata 
Kornicker (1959, p. 241) has on the 6th limb 24 posteroventral and 4 
anteroventral bristles. Asteropina setisparsa Kornicker (1959, p. 239) 
has only 1 posteroventral bristle and 3 anteroventral bristles on the 
6th limb. The carapaces of the adult male and female of Asterope 
judayi Hartmann (1959, p. 201) are shorter than P. pollex, and the 
height of the female shell is 62 percent of its length, according to 
Poulsen (1965, p. 347), who estimated it from Hartmann's figure 
(Hartmann, 1959, pi. 33: fig. 32). The height of the female shell of 
P. pollex is only 51 to 55 percent of its length. 

The N-l instar of the male of P. pollex resembles Diasterope tenuista 
Poulsen, 1965, of which only the juvenile male is known. It differs 
from that species in having a thumblike posterior process and slender 
c- and d-bristles on the 2nd endopodite joint of the mandible. 

Cushman (1906, p. 366) identified specimens collected in the "Gulf 
of Canso" across from Woods Hole, Mass., on Aug. 3, 1905, as Cylin- 
droleberis mariae (Baird). The USNM contains in its collection a 
slide containing 4 dried ostracods (USMN 114061) labeled "Cylin- 
droleberis mariae Baird, Aug. 3, '05, Gulf of Canso, Woods Hole, 
Mass., Coll. by J. A. Cushman." One of the 4 is an adult male and 
another an adult female with 10 ostracod eggs in its brood chamber. 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 19 

The female was soaked in glycerin and its appendages examined and 
found to be identical to the female of P. pollex. Therefore, O. mariae 
(Baird) of Cushman, 1906, not of Baird, 1850, is placed in synonomy 
with P. pollex. The description of specimens from the "Gulf of 
Canso" published by Cushman (1906, p. 366, pi. 29: figs. 19-25) 
differs considerably from P. pollex. Two glass slides containing 
mounted ostracod appendages are in the Cushman Collection at the 
USNM. One of these is labeled "Asterope teres (Norman) d\ Woods 
Hole, Mass., Aug. 3, '05, (USNM 114062)"; the other is labeled 
" Asterope teres (Norman) 9, Woods Hole, Mass., Aug. 3, '05 (USNM 
1 14063) ." Because of the locality and collection date of the specimens 
and because Cushman (1906) did not report the presence of A teres in 
his publication, it is probable that the slides contain the specimen 
upon which Cushman based his description of C. mariae. Both 
specimens are identifiable as P. pollex. The specimen labeled "9" 
on the slide is actually a juvenile male and this accounts for some of 
the differences between Cushman's description of the "female" of 
C. mariae and the female of P. pollex, i.e., the presence of 6 dorsal 
bristles on the 3rd joint of the 1st antenna (Cushman, 1906, pi. 29: 
fig. 22) and also a total of only 7 claws and bristles on the left 
lamella of the furca (loc. cit., fig. 25). No explanation is available for 
the presence of 2 slender bristles proximal to the a-bristle on the 2nd 
endopodite joint of the mandible (loc. cit., fig. 24). Two bristles in 
this position were observed only on the adult male of P. pollex. 
They are present on the male of G. mariae on Cushman's slide but not 
on the "female." Cushman (1906, p. 367) gives the length of the 
male shell as 1.8 to 2 mm, considerably larger than adult males of 
P. pollex. Because of the dried condition of the available specimens, 
their length can not be accurately measured. An adult female 
soaked in glycerine measured only 1.43 mm long, 0.78 mm high. 
The length of the dried male in the Cushman Collection is only 1.27 
mm in its shriveled condition. 



Literature Cited 

Baird, William 

1850. Description of several new species of Entomostraca. Proc. Zool. 
Soc. London, vol. 18, pp. 254-257, pis. 17, 18. 
Bowman, Thomas E., and Kornicker, Louis S. 

In press. Sphaeronella hebe, sp. nov. (Copepoda: Choniostomatidae), a 
parasite of the ostracod, Pseudophilomedes ferulana. Crustaceana. 
Brady, George Stewardson 

1868. A monograph of the recent British Ostracoda. Trans. Linn. Soc. 
London, vol. 26, pp. 353-496, pis. 23-41. 
Brady, George Stewardson, and Norman, Alfred M. 

1896. A monograph of the marine and fresh-water Ostracoda of the North 

Atlantic and of northwestern Europe, pt. 2, sect. 2-4: Myodocopa, 
Cladocopa, and Platycopa. Sci. Trans. Royal Dublin Soc, ser. 2, 
vol. 5, pp. 621-746, pis. 50-68. 

Ctjshman, Joseph A. 

1906. Marine Ostracoda of Vineyard Sound and adjacent waters. Proc. 
Boston Soc. Nat. Hist., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 359-385, pis. 27-38. 

Darby, David G. 

1965. Ecology and taxonomy of Ostracoda in the vicinity of Sapelo Island, 
Georgia, pp. iii-vi, 1-76, text-figs. 1-11, pis. 1-33. Rept. no. 2 
in Four reports of ostracod investigations conducted under National 
Science Foundation Project GB-26, Univ. Michigan. 

Della Valle, Antonio 

1893. Gammarini del Golfo di Napoli. Monogr. 20 in Fauna und Flora des 
Golfes von Neapel, xi + 948 pp., 61 pis. Berlin. 

Green, J. 

1958. Copepoda parasitic on British Amphipoda (Crustacea), with a 

description of a new species of Sphaeronella. Proc. Zool. Soc. 
London, vol. 131, pt. 2, pp. 301-313. 
Grube, E. 

1859. Bermerkungen iiber Cypridina und eine neue Art dieser Gattung 
(Cypridina oblonga). Arch. Naturgesch., vol. 25, pt. 1, pp. 322- 
337, pi. 12. 
Hansen, H. J. 

1897. The Choniostomatidae, a family of Copepoda, parasites on Crustacea 

Malacostraca, 190 pp., 13 pis. Copenhagen. 
1905. Two new forms of Choniostomatidae: Copepoda, parasitic on Crus- 
tacea Malacostraca and Ostracoda. Quart. Journ. Microscop. 
Sci., vol. 48, pp. 347-358, pi. 22. 
Hartmann, G. 

1959. Zur Kenntnis der lotischen Lebensbereiche der pazifischen Kuste 

von El Salvador unter besonderer Beriicksichtigung seiner Ostra- 
codenfauna, in: Beitrag zur Fauna El Salvadors. Kieler Meeres- 
forsch., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 187-241, pis. 27-48. 
Jancke, Oldwig 

1924. Die Brutpflege einiger Malakostraken. Zool. Anz., vol. 58, nos. 9/10, 
pp. 273-278. 
20 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 21 

JUDAY, CHAUNCEY 

1907. Ostracoda of the San Diego region, n: Littoral forms. Univ. 

California Publ. Zool., vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 135-156, pis. 18-20. 
Kornicker, Louis S. 

1959. Ecology and taxonomy of Recent marine ostracodes in the Bimini 
Area, Great Bahama Bank. Publ. Inst. Mar. Sci. Univ. Texas, 
vol. 5 [1958], pp. 194-300, figs. 1-89, 1 map insert [fig. 26]. 
Muller, G. W. 

1894. Die Ostracoden des Golfes von Neapel und der angrenzenden 
Meeres-Abschnitte. Monogr. 21 in Fauna und Flora des Golfes 
von Neapel, vii + 404 pp., 40 pis. Berlin. 
1906. Die Ostracoden der <St'6o0a-Expedition. In Szboga-Expedition, 
monogr. 30, pp. 1-40, pis. 1-9. 
Nielsen, Sven-Olle, and Stromberg, Jarl-Ove 

1965. A new parasite of Cirolana borealis Lilljeborg belonging to the 
Cryptoniscinae (Crustacea Epicaridea). Sarsia, vol. 18, pp. 37-62. 
Potjlsen, E. M. 

1965. Ostracoda-Myodocopa, pt. n: Cypridiformes-Rutidermatidae, Sar- 
siellidae and Asteropidae. In Dana-Report, no. 65, 483 pp., 156 
figs. 
Sars, G. O. 

1887. Nye Bidrag til Kundskaben om Middlehavets Invertebratfauna, 4: 
Ostracoda Mediterranea. Archiv. Math. Naturv., vol. 12, pp. 
173-324, pis. 1-20. 
Sharpe, R. W. 

1908. A further report on the Ostracoda of the United States National 

Museum. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 35, no. 1651, pp. 399-430, 
pis. 50-65. 
Skogsberg, Tage 

1920. Studies on marine ostracods, pt. 1: Cypridinids, halocyprids, and 
polycopids. Zool. Bidrag Uppsala, suppl. vol. 1, 784 pp., 153 figs. 
Sylvester-Bradley, P. C. 

1961. Myodocopida, pp. 387-406, figs. 311-330. In Moore, ed., Treatise 
on invertebrate paleontology, vol. 3, pt. Q, 442 pp., 334 figs. 



22 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 12s 




Figure l.—Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, female: a, holotype, ventral 
aspect; b, 1st antenna; c, 1st maxilla; d,e, 2 views of 2nd maxilla;/, maxilliped; g, posterior 
trunk leg; h, submedian skeleton; i, genital area. 



no. S6i3 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 23 




Figure 2. — Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, male: a, lateral aspect; 
b, ventral aspect; c,d, 2 views of 2nd maxilla. 



24 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vor,. 123 




Figure 3. — Sphaeronellopsis monothrix Bowman and Kornicker, copepodid: a, dorsal aspect; 
b, ventral aspect; c, urosome, ventral; d, 1st antenna; e, 2nd antenna; /, 1st maxilla; 
g,h, 2 views of 2nd maxilla; i, maxilliped;;, posterior trunk leg. 



no. 3613 TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 



25 




Figure 4—Parasterope pollex Kornicker, carapace of holotype: a, lateral view; b, dorsal 
view; c, inside anterior right valve of allotype; d, inside anterior right valve of holotype. 
Female: e, inside anterior left valve with 2nd antenna through sinus;/, inside posterior 
left valve. 1st antenna, lateral view: g, joints 5-8; h, joints 2-8. 2nd antenna: i, medial 
view (bristles on joints 3-9 of exopodite not shown); ;', joints 5-9 of exopodite, lateral 
view (bristles not shown); k, endopodite medial view. (Same scale in microns: a, b; 
c-f, i; g, h; j, k.) 



26 



PROCEEDINGS OP THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure S.—Parasterope pollex Kornicker, female, mandible: a, bristles on joint 2 of en- 
dopodite, lateral view; b, joint 2 of abnormal mandible, medial view; c, medial bristles on 
2nd joint of normal mandible; d, ventral branch of falciform process, medial view; e, 
exopodite, lateral view; /, basal endite, medial view; g, enlargement of triaenid bristle; 
h, end joint of endopodite, medial view; i, distal part dorsal branch of falciform process, 
medial view; ;, maxilla (baleen-comb not shown). 5th limb: k, sclerotized process and 
bristles at proximal end of comb; /, distal end of comb (only 2 bristles of comb shown); 
m,^ 6th limb, medial view. 7th limb: n, terminal comb; o, distal part; p, detail of bells on 
bristle; q, rod-shaped organ and medial eye. (Same scale in microns: a, b, f, h, q; c-e, 
g, i, k, I, n, p; j, m, o.) 



no. sew TWO NEW CRUSTACEANS — BOWMAN AND KORNICKER 27 

C 




Figure 6. — Parasterope pollex Kornicker, female, furca: a, right lamella, medial view; 
b, enlargement of claw 1, distal part; c, lateral eye; d, dorsum with dorsal process (dotted 
circles = oil globules); e, frontal region showing lips, lateral view (compressed under cover 
glass). Male allotype, carapace:/, lateral view; g, dorsal view; h, 1st antenna, medial 
view. 2nd antenna: i, lateral view (bristles on exopodite joints 3-9 not shown; bristle 
broken on end joint of endopodite); j, hairs on distal end of 1st exopodite joint, lateral 
view; k, endopodite, medial view; /, enlargement of tip of 3rd joint of endopodite; m, 
mandible bristles on 2nd endopodite joint, medial view. (Same scale in microns: 
a, c-e, m; b, j, I; k, i, k; f, g.) 



28 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 7. — Parasterope pollex Kornicker, male allotype: a, maxilla, spear-shaped bristle and 
3 proximal bristles on baleen-comb; b, medial eye and rod-shaped organ; c, copulatory 
organ; d, lateral eye. Male N-l instar: e, carapace, lateral view;/, enlargement of muscle 
scars, lateral view; g, 1st antenna, lateral view; h, 2nd antenna, medial view (basal 
spines and bristles of joints 3-9 not shown on exopodite); mandible: i, medial view (only 
end claw shown on 3rd endopodite joint);/, falciform process, medial view; k, exopodite 
lateral view; /, medial eye and rod-shaped organ; m, lateral eye. (Same scale in microns: 
a; b-d, j, k, m; f-i, I; e.) 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE. 1967 



PROC. U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



BOWMAN AND KORN ICKER— PLATE 1 




Parasterope pollex Kornicker: a, ovigerous female, lateral; b, parasitized adult female, lat- 
eral; c, eggs. Sphaeronellopsis monothrix, ovisacs, showing 3 developmental stages: d, 
round eggs; e, pyriform eggs;/, copepodids. (a, b: 34 X; c-f: 44. .) 



Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum N< ^S^ 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION . WASHINGTON, D.C. 




Volume 123 1967 



Number 3614 



Revision of the Cactus Plant Bug Genus 

Hesperolabops Kirkaldy 

(Hemiptera: Miridae) 



By Richard C. Froeschner 
Curator, Division of Hemiptera 



High among the successful attempts to control weeds by manipula- 
tion of their insect enemies stands the control of cacti. Huffacker 
(1959, p. 253) has summarized an important part of that effort: "The 
urgency for controlling prickly pear in Australia in the 1920's was un- 
challengeable, and the subsequent success of that work has stood as a 
landmark not likely to be equalled." But to demonstrate the com- 
plexity of the role of the cactus in man's economy, he continues: 
However, Opuntia spp. are not always considered pests. Use of these plants in 
Hawaii, South Africa, Madagascar, the United States, and Mexico as human food, 
fodder, and a source of water for stock on dry ranges has been reported. . . . 
Importation of Cactoblastis cadorum (Berg) into the United States has long been 
denied largely on such grounds, although it has been stated that, in West Texas 
alone, an area of some 60,000,000 acres of range land are infested with Opuntia 
and consequently suffer greatly lowered values. On spineless cactus plantations 
in some areas of South Africa it has been necessary to control the cochineal 
previously introduced against the related pest cacti. 

Heeding Wilson's (1964, p. 225) statement that the "biological 
control of weeds is intimately connected with basic ecological prob- 
lems," field workers seeking to understand the basic ecological 
problems in regards to cacti have been finding previously unreported 
relationships. 



248-337—67 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Attempts to identify specimens of cactus-frequenting insects 
submitted by F. D. Bennett revealed the need for a taxonomic re- 
vision of the mirid genus Hesperolabops Kirkaldy. For this genus, 
Carvalho's (1956, p. 106) "Catalogue of the Miridae of the world" 
listed three species of which one had two named varieties. Study 
shows that the two varieties deserve full specific status, that one of the 
species must be synonymized, and that one new species must be 
described. 

Material for this revision consisted of specimens in the United 
States National Museum and in three lots furnished by F. D. Bennett, 
Commonwealth Institute of Biological Control, West Indian Station, 
Curepe, Trinidad, W.I. ; by C. G. Martell, Escuela Nacional de Agri- 
cultura, Chapingo, Mexico; and by J. C. Schaffner, Texas A. and M. 
University, College Station, Tex. 

To my wife, Elsie Herbold Froeschner, I am grateful for the illus- 
trations. 

The endings of the species names have been made to conform to the 
statement in the "Bulletin of Zoological Nomenclature" (1964, vol. 
21, p. 172, Case 18), that all "-ops" names be treated as masculine. 

Hesperolabops Kirkaldy 

Hesperolabops Kirkaldy, 1902, p. 249. 

Stylopidea Hunter, Pratt and Mitchell, 1912, p. 22. 

Within its area of natural occurrence, North and Central America, 
members of this genus are recognized readily by the dorsolateral 
angles of the head being formed into long stalks that bear the eyes at 
their tips, as illustrated in figure 1. 

The geographic range of this genus is from the southwestern United 
States (Texas) south to El Salvador. 

Hesperolabops was described for a new species, H. gelastops, which 
is the type of the genus by virtue of being the only included species. 
Stylopidea was also described with a lone new species, S. picta, which 
is thereby the type of that genus. The Uhler credit for the name 
Stylopidea given with the original description apparently was re- 
ceived from Heidemann, "who examined all of the hemipterous insects 
taken on cactus" (Hunter et al, p. 17). His use of the name un- 
doubtedly was based on specimens in the collection of the U.S. 
National Museum bearing the Uhler manuscript label with this name; 
however, no published Uhler treatment of that name has been found. 
Hunter, Pratt, and Mitchell's brief description of the color and the 
stalked eyes was adequate to gain for them the authorship of the 
genus and the species names. Knight (1928, p. 68) synonymized 
Stylopidea under Hesperolabops. 



no. 3614 HESPEROLABOPS — FROESCHNER 3 

The frequent listing of these bugs from "Opuntia" suggests that 
they occur promiscuously on the various species of that genus ; however, 
when the available specimens were arranged according to the present 
taxonomic treatment, the limited associated ecological data suggested 
the possibility of each species confining its attentions to one or at 
most a few species of cacti. At least, where specifically determined 
cactus hosts were found on specimen labels, one species of bug occurred 
on one cactus host: H. gelastops on 0. engelmannii; H. nigriceps on 

0. megacantha; and the new species on 0. tomentosa. The single host 
note for H. periscopis was for a cactus of another genus, Acanthocereus 
horridus. Field observations are needed to confirm or refute this 
theory of host specificity. 

The species may be arranged in two groups by the following 
characters : 

Group A Group B 

(includes nigriceps, sanguineus, mexica) (includes gelastops, periscopis) 

hemelytron wholly fuscous hemelytron not wholly fuscous 

frons strongly tumid (fig. 6) frons weakly tumid (fig. 7) 

male genital capsule with a long, male genital segment without this 
slender process at right posterodorsal process (fig. 3) 

angle (figs. 16, 18, 26) 

Nymphs associated with adults of H. gelastops and H. sanguineus, 
and therefore tentatively identified as these species, show the greatly 
elongated eye stalks characteristic of the imagos of the genus. In 
addition, the H. sanguineus nymphs show a much more tumid frons 
than do the nymphs of H. gelastops — even as do their respective 
adults. 

Key to the Species of the Genus Flesperolabops 

1. Hemelytra wholly fuscous to black (teneral specimens sometimes slightly 

paler along costa) ; male genital segment with a very long, slender process 

on right posterodorsal angle (figs. 16, 18, 26) 2 

Hemelytra not wholly fuscous; male genital segment without a long, slender 
process on right posterodorsal angle (figs. 3, 31) 4 

2. Calli and/ or collar blackened, at least laterally; scutellum fuscous to black 

except in depressed basal areas; right clasper of male without a long, 

slender, upcurved hook at apex (figs. 14, 20) 3 

Calli, collar and scutellum wholly red to orange red, in no part blackened; 
apex of right clasper of male with a long, slender, upturned hook that is 
almost as long as stout basal part (fig. 24); length 5.6-6.4 mm. 

sanguineus Carvalho 

3. Calli with outer third or more of dorsal surface strongly fuscous to black; 

male genital segment with a small, slender hook laterad of base of long 
curved process at posterodorsal angle (fig. 18) ; length 6.3-7.3 mm. 

nigriceps Reuter 

Calli with fuscous to black coloring restricted to outer face, not invading 

dorsal surface; male without a hook at this point (fig. 16) ; length 6.2-7.0 mm. 

mexica, new species 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

4. Hemelytron, except apical two-thirds of clavus, inner apical angles of coria 
and membrane, wholly red; right clasper without a rectangular angulation 

dorsally (fig. 30); length 6.2 mm periscopis Knight 

Hemelytron fuscous with costa and adjacent edge of corium and outer 
third or more of cuneus cream colored to white; right clasper of male with 
a large, rectangular angulation dorsally (fig. 4); length 5.4-7.0 mm. 

gelastops Kirkaldy (fig. 1) 

Hesperolabops gelastops Kirkaldy 

Figures 1-5, 7-10 

Hesperolabops gelastops Kirkaldy, 1902, p. 249, pi. 5 (fig. 2). 

Stylopidea picta Hunter, Mitchell, and Pratt, 1912, p. 22. [New synonymy.] 

Within the genus this is the only species with white or cream costal 
edges on corium and cuneus of fuscous forewings. The male is 
recognized readily by the dorsal angulation on the right clasper 
(fig. 4). Another male feature worthy of note and present in no 
other species of the genus is a bispinose area within the genital capsule 
(fig. 5, stippled area). 

The distinctness of two species, H. gelastops and H. picta, as 
recognized by Knight (1928, p. 68) and accepted by Carvalho (1955, 
p. 106) is not supported by modifications of the male genital segment: 
one structural pattern is involved. The color pattern shows some 
variation in intensity of the fuscous areas, being paler in the northern 
specimens where the calli are rosaceous in contrast to the black 
color of the calli of most of the southern specimens. The pale costal 
margin also varies in width and gives the illusion of variation in 
stoutness of the specimens. Pale individuals as well as intermediates, 
however, occur throughout the range and eliminate any need for 
taxonomic recognition. Thus, morphologically, H. picta must fall 
as a synonym of H. gelastops; however, as noted below, there is a 
biological difference between the northern and southern populations 
of the species so defined. 

The type specimen of H. gelastops was originally in the Kirkaldy 
collection (Kirkaldy 1902, p. 243). For H. picta no types were 
designated with the original description because Hunter et al did not 
intend their study to present H. picta as a new species; however, their 
description gained the authorship for them and permitted ready 
recognition of it. Carvalho (1955, p. 226) selected a San Antonio, 
Tex., female lectotype (USNM type 67964) from 83 "cotypes" in 
the U.S. National Museum collection. 

As now understood, this is the most widespread species in the genus, 
occurring from Texas south to central Vera Cruz in Mexico. 

Hunter et al placed this species ninth in a list of 13 of "The Principal 
Insects Injurious to Opuntia in Order of their Importance." They 
reported it attacking the joints between the pads: "The injury is not 



no. 3811 HESPEROLABOPS — FROESCHNER 5 

conspicuous. It causes the plants to assume a spotted appearance, 
but, except where the bugs are unusually abundant, the joints recover. 
It is not a true cactus insect, but has been found upon a variety of 
other plants." 

The occurrence on other plants may be due to a more general taste 
or may result from the nervous activity of a bug that flies quickly 
when disturbed. Observations of flying stages of insects resting on a 
plant should not be interpreted as indicating a host preference — any 
convenient object can serve as a resting perch. Nearly all ecological 
notes on specimens, including all immatures, associate these insects 
with Opuntia cactuses, some specimens being labelled from 0. 
engelmannii specifically. The only exception was a series of four 
adults taken on May 18 from "castor beans" at Brownsville, Tex. 
These specimens were also a little shorter than the minimum figure 
given in the key, measuring 4.5 to 4.7 mm. 

The data cited below show two periods of adult occurrence in 
Texas: April 12 to June 3 and later from September 5 to November 13. 
In contrast, the several Mexican specimens were taken during the 
intermediate summer period in July and August. Whether this 
timing is real or an artifact resulting from too few records will be 
decided only by more collecting in the appropriate areas. 

Distribution: 133 specimens examined. UNITED STATES: 
Texas: Apr. 12-June 3, Sept. 5-Nov. 28; Austin, Bastrop, Browns- 
ville, Calvert, Cameron, Corpus Christi, D'Hanis, Garner State Park, 
Hebbronville, Hondo, Laredo, Live Oak County, Luxello, Nueces, 
San Antonio, San Diego, Seguin, Sharpsburg, Uvalde, Victoria. 
MEXICO: San Luis Potosi: July; El Salto; Tamaulipas: July; 
Tampico; Vera Cruz: August; Cordoba, Jalapa. 

Hesperolabops mexica, new species 

Figures 6, 11-16 

The wholly fuscous hemelytra coupled with the calli being darkened 
only laterally and not dorsally will permit recognition of this species. 
The male is recognizable on characters of the genital capsule by the 
combination of no small slender hook laterad of the long, slender 
process on the posterodorsal angle and no hook at the apex of the 
right clasper. 

Holotype male: length 7.05 mm; width across combined hemelytra 
2.70 mm. 

Head: dark red, strongly tumid frons (fig. 6) blackened; width 
across eyes 1.23 mm, between eyes 0.75 mm, between bases of eye 
stalks 0.25 mm; labium reaching to apex of fourth abdominal sternite, 
segments i-iv measuring 0.91, 1.00, 0.31, 0.26 mm respectively; 
antennae black, densely and finely pubescent, segments i-rv measuring 

248 337 —67 2 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

0.70, 1.74, 0.78, 0.56 (shrivelled) mm respectively. Pronotum: 
length 1.04 mm, width 1.94 mm; dorsal surface, including calli dorsally 
and broad central part of collar, orange red; deflexed lateral parts, 
except rounded impressions, and usually vertical lateral face of 
prominent calli fuscous to black; disc coarsely and closely punctate 
posterior to calli; each callus connected to collar by two ridges, a 
small oblique one near inner end and a longitudinal one at midwidth. 
Scutellum black with four basal impressions and mesoscutum red; 
surface not polished. 

Hemelytra dull, opaque, fuscous, sometimes with bluish reflections; 
surface, except membrane, with numerous coarse, very shallow and 
obscure punctures, each bearing a short, fine, light bristle. Mem- 
brane and veins black, with a single large cell. 

Ventral surface dark red, blackened on meso- and metapleura 
(except in rounded impressed areas) and along sides of abdomen. 
Legs, including tarsi, brownish to black; tarsi widening to apex. 

Holotype male: Queretaro, Queretaro, Mexico, August 1963, F. D. 
Bennett, Opuntia tomentosa (USNM type 67965). Allotype female: 
Guanajuato, Mexico, Oct. 14, 1926, Mortensen, on Opuntia. Para- 
types: three males (one missing head and prothorax) with same data 
as holotype; Morelia, Michoacan, Mexico, Oct. 19, 1926, Mortensen, 
on Opuntia, one male and two females (USNM and collection of F. D. 
Bennett). 

The entire series is quite uniform, except that on old and teneral 
specimens the legs and hemelytra tend to be noticeably paler than on 
fresh, well-sclerotized individuals. 

The species name is from "Mexica," an alternate name for the 
Aztec Indians, whose role in the area whence these specimens came 
was very great. 

Hesperolabops nigriceps Reuter, new status 

Figures 17-21 
Hesperolabops gelastops var. nigriceps Reuter, 1908, p. 152. 

The uniformly fuscous hemelytra coupled with the distinct blacken- 
ing of part or all of the dorsal surface of the calli separate H. nigriceps 
from the other species of the genus. Males can be recognized by 
modifications of the genital capsule, the character easiest to use being 
the presence of a small hook laterad of the base of the long process 
on the posterodorsal angle. 

No type material of this species was examined; however, the de- 
scription of the single type specimen, credited with being in the 
Vienna Naturhistorisches Museum, commented upon the unicolorous 
dark hemelytra and the infuscate calli and left no doubt about apply- 
ing the name to this form. 



no. 3614 HESPEROLABOPS — FROESCHNER 7 

Ecological notes on specimens collected by F. D. Bennett cite them 
from Opuntia megacantha or simply Opuntia. 

Distribution: While H. nigriceps was described from "Mexico," 
data from 29 specimens further restrict its known distribution to only 
two Mexican states near Mexico City. MEXICO: Mexico: July, 
August, November; Chapingo. Tlaxcala: July; Calpulalpam. 

Hesperolabops periscopis Knight 

Figures 27-31 
Hesperolabops periscopis Knight, 1928, p. 67. 

The dominantly red dorsum (except apical two-thirds of clavus, 
inner apical angles of coria, and membrane, all of which are fuscous) 
sets this species part from all others in the genus. The male is well 
marked by the long, thick, decurved spine on the margin of the genital 
capsule immediately above the insertion of the right clasper. 

Hesperolabops periscopis was described from two females taken on 
Dec. 6, 1927, at La Union, El Salvador. The holotype female is in 
the United States National Museum (type no. 52833). A note 
accompanying the original description said, "This species was found 
commonly on both Cerei and Opuntiae." 

Distribution : A good series of both sexes from the cactus Acantho- 
cerus horridus (photograph of host identified by the late Dr. E. Yale 
Dawson, Smithsonian Institution) in the southernmost Mexican 
State of Chiapas agrees very well with the holotype and extends the 
distribution of the species north across Guatemala into southern 
Mexico. Exact collecting information on the specimens is as follows: 
"7 mi. N.W. Acala, Chiapas, Mexico, June 23, 1965, Burke, Mayer 
and Schaffner." 

Hesperolabops sanguineus Carvalho, new status 

Figures 22-26 

Hesperolabops gelastops var. a Reuter, 1908, p. 152. 
Hesperolabops gelastops var. sanguinea Carvalho, 1957, p. 106. 

The wholly red pronotum and scutellum coupled with the unicolor- 
ous fuscous to black hemelytra will delimit this species from all the 
others in the genus. The male is unique within the genus by pos- 
sessing the long, slender, upturned hook at the end of the right 
clasper (fig. 24). 

Crediting of the name "sanguineus" to Carvalho, as above, needs 
an explanation, especially since Carvalho in his "Catalog" credits it 
to Reuter. In Reuter's (1908, p. 152) treatment of Mexican speci- 
mens of this genus, two varieties of gelastops were described and 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

designated as "var. a" and "var. b." Reuter apparently intended 
to supply a name for each as he followed "var. b" with the name 
"nigriceps m." No name, however, appeared after the designation 
"var. a." The description of each variety began with a generalized 
color term — in the case of "var. a," this was "sanguinea." Carvalho, 
in assembling his catalog, apparently assumed this color term to be 
coordinate with "nigriceps" and used it accordingly. It is clear, 
however, that Reuter gave no name to this segregate and that Carvalho 
did; therefore, the authorship must be given to the latter. 

The original description of three specimens in the Vienna Natur- 
historisches Museum is inclusive enough to permit ready recognition 
of this species by the color characters stated above. 

The original localities were Guadaloupe and Orizaba, Mexico. 
Just which Mexican "Guadaloupe" was involved is not stated; how- 
ever, the Orizaba locality coupled with the present series of 13 speci- 
mens from Cuernavaca, Morelos, suggests that this species occurs 
only south and east of Mexico City. 

The seven adults and six nymphs were captured during July and 
August from Opuntia, according to their collector, N. L. H. Krauss. 

Literature Cited 

Carvalho, J. C. M. 

1955. Analecta miridologica: Miscellaneous observations in some American 
museums and bibliography. Rev. Chilena Ent., vol. 4, pp. 221-227. 
1957. Catalogue of the Miridae of the world, pt. 1. Arq. Mus. Nac, vol. 
xliv, pp. 1-158. 
Huffaker, C. B. 

1959. Biological control of weeds with insects. Ann. Rev. Ent., vol. 4, 
pp. 251-276. 
Hunter, W. D.; Pratt, F. C; and Mitchell, J. D. 

1912. The principal cactus insects of the United States. U.S. Dept. Agric, 
Ent. Bull., no. 113, pp. 1-71. 

KlRKALDY, G. W. 

1902. Memoir upon the rhynchotal family Capsidae Auctt. Trans. Ent. 
Soc. London, 1902, pp. 243-272, pis. v, vi. 
Knight, H. H. 

1928. Hesperolabops periscopis, a new periscope bug from Salvador, with a 
note on the Texas member of this genus. Proc. Ent. Soc. Washing- 
ton, vol. 30, pp. 67-68. 
Reuter, O. M. 

1908. Capsidae mexicanae a Do. Bilimek collectae in museo Vindogonensi 
asservatae. Ann. Nat. Hofmus. Wien, vol. 22, pp. 150-179. 
Wilson, F. 

1964. The biological control of weeds. Ann. Rev. Ent., vol. 9, pp. 225-244. 



HESPEROLABOPS — FROESCHNER 




Figure 1. — Hesperolabops gelastops: general habitus, dorsal view. 



10 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




HESPEROLABOPS — FROESCHNER 



11 




Figures 27-31. — lies per olabops periscopis: 27, genital capsule, left view; 28, 29, left clasper, 
dorsal and posterior views; 30, right clasper, posterior view; 31, genital capsule, right view. 



Figures 2-26. — Hesperolabops gelaslops: 2, 3, genital capsule, left and right views; 4, right 
clasper, lateral view; 5, genital chamber, posterior view. Hesperolabops mexica: 6, head, 
dorsal view. Hesperolabops gelastops: 7, 8, head, dorsal and anterior view; 9, 10, left 
clasper, lateral and dorsal views. Hesperolabops mexica: 11, 12, genital capsule, left view 
and projection of posterior process; 13, left clasper, lateral view; 14, 15, right clasper, 
lateral and dorsal views; 16, genital capsule, right view. Hesperolabops nigriceps: 17, 18, 
genital capsule, left and right views; 19, left clasper, lateral views; 20, 21, right clasper, 
ventral and lateral views. Hesperolabops sanguinea: 22, 23, left clasper, lateral and 
dorsal views; 24, right clasper, lateral view; 25, 26, genital capsule, left and right views 
(all genital structures to same scale). 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION « WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3615 

Revision of the Genus Harmstonia 
(Diptera: Dolichopodidae) 



By Harold Robinson 

Associate Curator, Division of Cryptogams 



In a previous paper on the Dolichopodidae (1964), I described the 
genus Harmstonia and included in it two previously undescribed species 
occurring in the eastern United States. At that time a number of 
additional species were already known to occur in Mexico. More 
recently, specimens of a Costa Rican species have been obtained 
from the Melander Collection, which is now housed at the U.S. 
National Museum, and a West Indian species has been collected by 
various participants in the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian Biological 
Survey of the island of Dominica. In the present paper, descrip- 
tions and a key are provided for the 13 species now known in the 
genus. 

Genus Harmstonia Robinson 

Small, 1-2 mm long, dark metallic green with mostly dark bristles. 
Face of male grayish pollinose, extremely narrow in lower half, sides 
diverging above and continuous with diverging sides of the front; 
face of female somewhat wider with a few setae at the lower third; 
palpus dark with small hairs; pseudotracheae of the labellae rudi- 
mentary with irregular thickenings; antenna brown or black, all 
segments short; segment 1 bare above; segment 2 truncate; segment 
3 blunt or short-pointed, with arista inserted dorsally; lower postocu- 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

lar setae uniseriate. Mesoscutum strongly arched with posterior 
slope distinctly flattened, with grayish or brownish pollen toward 
sides; acrostichals absent; 5 pairs of large dorsocentrals; 2 scutellars, 
a small hair on the lateral scutellar margin; pleural surface with 
grayish pollen. Femora with preapicals usually weak, sometimes 
not distinct. Longitudinal veins of wing straight to slightly curved, 
all, including veins 3 and 4, diverging for most of length; crossvein 
nearly as long as or longer than last part of vein 5; vein 6 totally 
absent. Calypter pale with dark margin and some dark setae. 
Abdomen short, tapering; hypopygium sessile, usually large and 
projecting somewhat forward under the abdomen. 

Type-species: H. intricata Robinson, original designation. 

The species occur on soil or rocks at edges of streams and lakes or 
on moist rock surfaces near seepage and waterfalls. They sometimes 
alight but more frequently hover close to the surface of the substrate. 
The species may be very particular regarding positions where the}' 
alight and the males of some species seem to favor slightly different 
habitats from the females. 

Most collections of Harmstonia have come from limestone regions. 
The genus is apparently absent from regions of North Carolina where 
limestone is conspicuously lacking. Recently I have collected H. 
intricata along a stream flowing over aged serpentine but pH was 
not checked. One species is found on the West Indian island of 
Dominica, which is primarily volcanic in origin, but the Dominican 
streams that have been tested show a rather high pH. 

Key to the Species of Harmstonia 

1. Foretibia with a distinct row of anterodorsals, hind tibia usually with a 

distinct row of posterodorsals; hypopygial lamella broadly oval or elliptical 

and rounded apically 2 

Fore- and hind tibiae without rows of prominent dorsals; hypopygial lamellae 
(except H. intricata) bearing obvious slender apical projections .... 7 

2. Hind tibia with short stout black apical and subapical setae; hypopygial 

lamella covered with hairs; face of female bearing two distinct setae . . 3 
Hind tibia without distinct black apicals and subapicals; surface of hypo- 
pygial lamella glabrous; face of female with three to six distinct setae . . 4 

3. Femora blackish; middle tibia with two anterodorsals; abdomen of male 

straight (Mexico) H. recta, new species 

Legs including femora yellow; middle tibia with one anterodorsal; abdomen 
of male curved (Mexico) H. pubescens, new species 

4. Legs totally brown; body and wings both over 1.5 mm long; hypopygium 

large, over 0.5 mm long (Mexico) H. megalopyga, new species 

Legs partly yellow; body and wings less than 1.25 mm long; hypopygium 
distinctly less than 0.5 mm long 5 

5. Knob of halter pale (Mexico) H. ornata, new species 

Knob of halter black or brown 6 



no. 3615 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 3 

6. Male hind tibia with a row of indistinct posterodorsals, hind femur with 

sparse slender setae along posteroventral surface (Costa Rica). 

H. costaricensis, new species 

Male hind tibia with a row of very prominent posterodorsals, hind femur 

with many close-set setae along distal half of posteroventral surface 

(Mexico) H. setosa, new species 

7. Knob of halter black or brown, rarely pale brown; hypopygial lamella 

bearing branched setae 8 

Knob of halter yellow; hypopygial lamella without branched setae .... 9 

8. Hypopygium over }{ as long as the body, bearing large lamellae; hind femur 

of the male bearing a fringe of short setae along the anteroventral surface 

(eastern U.S., Mexico) H. pectinicauda Robinson 

Hypopygium about }i as long as the body, bearing very small lamellae; 
male hind femur without evident fringe anteroventrally (Dominica). 

H. simplex, new species 

9. Legs mostly or wholly brown. 10 

Legs mostly yellow 11 

10. Hypopygium bearing large pale rounded lamellae; all femora of the male 

fringed with long hairs ventrally; face of female with two large setae 

(eastern U.S.) H. intricata Robinson 

Hypopygial lamellae mostly blackish and bearing projections apically; femora 
of male without distinct setae ventrally; face of female with three to four 
setae (Mexico) H. obscura, new species 

11. Front with yellowish gray pollen; antennal segment 3 rounded; abdomen 

of male only slightly curved downward, hypopygium usually borne under 
the tip; face of female with two or rarely three setae (Mexico). 

H. pallida, new species 

Front with brown pollen; antennal segment 3 truncate apically; abdomen 

of male curved distinctly downward with hypopygium borne on tip; face 

of female with four small setae 12 

12. Hypopygial lamella ending in a long attenuate tip (Mexico). 

H. attenuata, new species 
Hypopygial lamella ending in a short hooklike point (Mexico). 

H. clavicauda, new species 

The genus can be divided into three rather distinct groups. 

Group I (Typical) 

Legs bearing only weak setae, hypopygial lamellae bearing slender 
apical projections or a bulbous base. The group contains the follow- 
ing seven species. 

Harmstonia intricata Robinson 

Figures 1, 14 

Harmstonia intricata Robinson, 1964, p. 123 [type-species by original designation]. 

Male. — Length 1.15 mm; wing 1.32 mm by 0.51 mm. Front 
grayish yellow; antennal segment 3 (fig. 14) short, truncate to slightly 
rounded below. Basitarsi except tips pale, legs otherwise brown; all 
femora fringed with long setae below, middle and hind femora with 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

weak preapicals; fore- and hind tibiae without prominent dorsals or 
apicals, middle tibia with a weak anterodorsal and a weak postero- 
dorsal near basal third; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base 
as .16- 09-.06-. 05-.06 mm; middle tarsus as .21-.09-.07-.05-.05 mm; 
hind tarsus as .16-.14-.09-.06-.06 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 
3 are \)i times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 very slightly 
curved to become nearly parallel with 4 dis tally; cross vein as long 
as last of vein 5; knob of halter pale yellow. Hypopygium (fig. 1) 
ca. .35 mm long; hypopygial lamella broad and rounded apically, 
with bulging pale inflated area at base, with a slender inward pro- 
jection from middle of lower margin. 

Female. — Face bearing two large setae; femora without long setae 
below. 

Type-data.— Holotype 6* and allotype 9 from Knox County, Tenn. 
(USNM 69429). 

Distribution. — H. intricata is known only from the eastern U.S., 
having been collected in eastern Tennessee, northern Virginia, Mary- 
land, and central New York. 

Notes. — The hypopygial lamellae of H. intricata are unique for 
Group I in having a broad rounded apical portion and lacking any 
slender apical projections. The pale bulbous region of the lamella 
base, however, clearly relates H. intricata to other species in the 
group. Such a hyaline or bulbous area is present to some extent in 
most species of the group and is particularly well developed in H. 
pectinicauda. In all cases the surface of this hyaline or bulbous area 
bears some scattered setae. 

While collecting specimens from a muddy rut at the type-locality 
in Tennessee, I noticed that the males were collected from the drier 
parts of the rut, but females were apparently restricted to the part 
containing some standing water. 

Harmstonia pectinicauda Robinson 

Figures 2, 15 
Harmstonia pectinicauda Robinson, 1964, p. 123. 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.17 mm by 0.42 mm. Front 
brownish or grayish; antennal segment 3 (fig. 15) short, nearly 
truncate, lower part projecting forward somewhat beyond end of 
dorsal edge. Basitarsi except tips and tibiae pale, legs otherwise 
brown ; hind femur with distinct row of short setae along antero ventral 
surface, middle and sometimes hind femur with weak preapical; 
fore- and hind tibiae without prominent dorsals or apicals, middle 
tibia with a weak anterodorsal and a weak posterodorsal near basal 
third; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .13-.07-.06- 



no. 3615 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 5 

.05-.06 mm; middle tarsus as .17-. 08-. 06-. 04-. 06 mm; hind tarsus 
as .13-.14-.09-.07-.07 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are 1% times 
as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 only very slightly curved 
and not becoming parallel with 4 distally; crossvein as long as or 
slightly longer than last of vein 5; knob of halter blackish or rarely 
brownish. Hypopygium (fig. 2) ca. .36 mm long; hypopygial lamella 
mostly brownish, long and slender, bearing numerous branched setae, 
with bulging pale inflated area at base, with a small hooked projection 
on the lower margin. 

Female. — Face bearing two large setae; hind femur without 
distinct setae along anteroventral surface. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf and allotype 9 from Frederick County, 
Va. (USNM 66492). 

Distribution. — H. pectinicauda has been collected both in the 
United States, from northern Virginia, and in Mexico, from San 
Luis Potosi, Hidalgo, Veracruz, Guerrero, Oaxaca, and Chiapas. 

Notes. — Specimens mounted on microscope slides show a crest of 
five small setae ventrally on the hind trochanter. The other species 
I have mounted on slides do not show such setae. 

The Mexican specimens seem like those from Virginia in all details 
of structure but the tibiae tend to be paler. Three specimens from 
El Salto in San Luis Potosi show pale brown rather than black knobs 
on the halters. 

Among the Virginia specimens the males were obtained only in 
direct sunlight. Females seemed to have no preference. 

Harmstonia simplex, new species 

Figures 3, 16 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.17 mm by 0.42 mm. Front 
brown; antennal segment 3 (fig. 16) shortly acute. Trochanters, 
distal parts of tibiae, and bases of basitarsi pale, legs otherwise brown; 
middle and hind femora with a few longer setae along ventral surfaces, 
middle femur with a weak preapical; fore- and hind tibiae without 
prominent dorsals or apicals, middle tibia with a weak anterodorsal 
and a weak posterodorsal near basal third; lengths of segments of 
foretarsus from base as .13-. 07-. 06-. 05-. 06 mm; middle tarsus as 
.17-.11-.07-.06-.06 mm; hind tarsus as .13-.15-.09-.06-.06 mm. Tips 
of wing veins 2 and 3 are IK times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, 
veins 3 and 4 essentially straight and not becoming nearly parallel; 
crossvein about as long as last of vein 5; knob of halter black or brown. 
Hypopygium (fig. 3) ca. .25 mm long; hypopygial lamella rather 
brownish, small and slender, bearing small branched setae, with 
small pale somewhat bulging area at base, with a small hooked 
projection on the lower margin. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Female. — Face bearing two small setae, antennal segment 3 (fig. 
16) blunt; femora without distinct setae along ventral surfaces. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf and allotype 9 from Dominica: Clarke 
Hall, Feb. 11-20, 1965, W. W. Wirth (USNM 69430). Paratypes: 
Clarke Hall (including specimens from Manets Guter, coconut grove, 
cocoa trail, and specimens from light and malaise traps) Jan. 8-Mar. 
20, 18 cf, 23 9; Macoucheri River, Jan. 14, 12 d" ; Macoucheri River, 
seashore and river mouth, Mar. 15, 5 a"; Cabrits Swamp, Feb. 2-3, 
Mar. 22-25, 29; Fond Figues, Feb. 9, Mar. 9-12, 4 d", 1 9; Hodges 
River mouth, Feb. 27, 1 cf , 2 9; Woodford Hill, Feb. 27, swamp forest, 
1 cf; all from Dominica, 1965, W. W. Wirth. Additional paratypes: 
Clarke Hall, Jan. 22-29, 21 d", 42 9; same locality, Feb. 28, 2 J 1 ; 
Deux Branches, Pagua River, Feb. 3, 3 cf , 3 9; near Belfast, Jan. 31, 
1 o" ; all from Dominica, 1964, H. Robinson. 

Note. — H. simplex is the only species of Harmstonia in which I 
have observed distinct sexual dimorphism of the third antennal 
segment. 

Harmstonia obscura, new species 

Figure 4 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.17 mm by 0.42 mm. Front 
brown; antennal segment 3 short, rounded. Legs brown; middle 
femur with a weak preapical ; fore- and hind tibiae without prominent 
dorsals or apicals, middle tibia with a weak anterodorsal and a weak 
posterodorsal near basal third; lengths of segments of foretarsus from 
base as .11-.05-.04-.04-.05 mm; middle tarsus as .15-.06-.05-.04-.05 
mm; hind tarsus as .13-.13-.08-.05-.06 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 
3 are 1% times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, veins 3 and 4 
essentially straight and not becoming nearly parallel; crossvein 
1 to 1 ){ times as long as last of vein 5 ; knob of halter yellow. Hypo- 
pygium (fig. 4) ca. .25 mm long; hypopygial lamella blackish, broad 
with two prominent distal projections, with a small hyaline area in 
middle of base. 

Female. — Face bearing four, rarely three, small setae. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf and allotype 9 from Mexico: Chiapas, 
near junction of Rts. 190 and 200, May 21, 1963, H. Robinson (USNM 
69431). Paratypes: same data as holotype, 7 d" and 3 9; Guerrero, 
Rio Papagayo near Tierra Colorado, May 29, 1963, H. Robinson, 1 9. 

Harmstonia pallida, new species 

Figure 5 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.25 mm by 0.49 mm. Front 
yellowish gray; antennal segment 3 short, rounded. Tarsi from 



no. 3615 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 7 

tips of basitarsi brownish, legs otherwise yellow; middle femur with 
a weak preapical; fore- and hind tibiae without prominent dorsals 
or apicals, middle tibia with a weak anterodorsal and a weak postero- 
dorsal near basal third; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base 
as .15-.06-.05-.05-.06 mm; middle tarsus as .19-.10-.08-.06-.07 mm; 
hind tarsus as .15-.17-.11-.08-.07 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 
twice as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 rather distinctly 
bending and becoming parallel with vein 4 distally; crossvein about 
as long as last of vein 5; knob of halter yellow. Hypopygium (fig. 5) 
ca. .21 mm long; hypopygial lamella pale, with a narrow pointed tip 
and slightly inflated base. 

Female. — Face bearing two or three small setae. 

Type-data. — Holotype d* and allotype 9 from Mexico: San Luis 
Potosi, El Salto, on limestone deposits in river below upper falls, May 
9, 1963, H. Robinson (USNM 69432). Paratypes: same data as 
holotype, 18 d" and 18 9. 

Notes. — H. pallida, in spite of superficial resemblance to H. 
attenuata and H. clavicauda, seems more closely related to H. pectini- 
cauda and H. simplex. The rounded third antennal segment of 
H. pallida seems rather distinctive. The antenna of H. obscura 
seems similar, but that species is very different in other characters 
including the structure of the hypopygial lamella. 

Harmstonia attenuata, new species 

Figure 6 

Male. — Length 1.06 mm; wing 1.17 mm by 0.42 mm. Front 
brown; antennal segment 3 not visible. Tarsi from tips of basitarsi 
brownish, legs otherwise yellow; middle femur wdth a weak preapical; 
fore- and hind tibiae without prominent dorsals or apicals, middle 
tibia with a weak anterodorsal and a weak posterodorsal near basal 
third; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .13-.06-.05- 
.05-06 mm; middle tarsus as .17-.08-.06-.05-.06 mm; hind tarsus 
as .13-.17-.11-.08-.07 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are 1% to 2 
times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 bending slightly 
and becoming nearly parallel with vein 4 distally; crossvein slightly 
shorter than last of vein 5 ; knob of halter yehW. Abdomen curving 
distinctly downward; hypopygium (fig. 6) mounted directly on apex 
of abdomen, ca. .25 mm long; hypopygial lamella with a very long 
and narrow tip, bearing a few slender projections on distal part of 
lower edge, with a large densely pubescent lobe near base, without 
inflated area at base. 

Female. — Face bearing four small setae; antennal segment 3 short 
and truncate apically. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Type-data. — Holotype cf and allotype 9 from Mexico: Guerrero, 
Rio Papagayo near Tierra Colorado, May 29, 1963, H. Robinson 
(USNM 69433). Paratypes: same data as holotype, 7 9. 

Notes. — H. attenuata is related very closely to the more widely 
distributed H. clavicauda, showing among other things the same 
curved abdomen with the more apically positioned hypopygium, and 
similar pubescent lobes on uninflated bases of the hypopygial lamellae. 
The only obvious difference between the species is in the very differ- 
ently shaped apex of the hypopygial lamellae. At present I know of 
no differences between the females of the two species and I cannot be 
certain the associated females are not specimens of H. clavicauda. 
When more male specimens are available, the lack of distinct dorsals 
on the hind tibia as seen in the holotype may prove to be significant. 

Harmstonia clavicauda, new species 

Figure 7 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.17 mm by 0.42 mm. Front 
brown; antennal segment 3 short, rather obliquely truncate with 
lower corner somewhat produced. Bases of coxae and tarsi from tips 
of basitarsi brownish, femora very slightly infuscated, legs otherwise 
yellow; middle femur with a weak preapical; middle tibia with a weak 
anterodorsal and a weak posterodorsal near basal third, hind tibia 
with a few weak dorsals, tibiae otherwise without prominent dorsals 
or apicals; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .13-.05-.05- 
-.05-.05 mm; middle tarsus as .19-.11-.08-.06-.06 mm; hind tarsus 
as .13-.19-.11-.07-.06 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are l)i to 
1% times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 bending slightly 
and becoming nearly parallel with vein 4 distally; crossvein % as 
long as, to as long as, last of vein 5; knob of halter yellow. Abdomen 
curving distinctly downward; hypopygium (fig. 7) mounted directly 
on apex of abdomen, ca. .21 mm long; hypopygial lamella with a 
short hooked tip, with a large densely pubescent lobe on lower margin, 
without inflated area at base. 

Female. — Face bearing four small setae. 

Type-data. — Holotype c? and allotype 9 from Mexico: Chiapas, 
May 22, 1963, H. Robinson (USNM 69434). Paratypes: same data 
as holotype, 1 cf and 1 9; Veracruz, near Santiago Tuxtla, Aug. 8, 
1962, 6 c? and 2 9; Morelos, near Cuernavaca, May 28, 1963, 2 cf 
and 3 9; all collected by H. Robinson. 

Group II 

Tibiae bearing strong setae or distinct rows of setae, hind tibia 
without distinct apicals or ventrals, hypopygial lamellae broadly oval 



no. 3615 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 9 

to elliptical with the surface glabrous. The group contains the 
following four species. 

Harmstonia megalopyga, new species 

Figure 8 

Male. — Length 1.60 mm; wing 1.60 mm by 0.57 mm. Face very 
narrow but distinct to the mouth, whitish pollinose; front grayish; 
antennal segment 3 short, truncate with lower corner slightly pro- 
duced. Legs brown to blackish; middle femur with preapical, hind 
femur with preapical often preceded by second smaller seta and with 
row of distinct setae along anteroventral surface; foretibia with five 
to six slender anterodorsals, middle tibia with a large anterodorsal and 
a large posterodorsal near basal third, hind tibia with eight or more 
slender posterodorsals, tibiae without distinct apicals; lengths of 
segments of foretarsus from base as .25-.12-.06-.06-.08 mm, basitarsus 
with about five slender erect setae below; middle tarsus as .23— .11— 
.08-05-07 mm; hind tarsus as .17-.21-.11-.08-.08 mm. Tips of 
wing veins 2 and 3 are 1% times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, 
veins 2 and 3 curved slightly back distally, vein 4 curved slightly for- 
ward and becoming parallel with vein 3 distally; cross vein \Y% to 
1% times as long as last of vein 5; knob of halter fuscous yellow. 
Hypopygium (fig. 8) ca. .65 mm long; hypopygial lamella elliptical 
from a tapered base, pale and nearly hyaline, outer or lower margin 
bearing a fringe of long setae, a pair of large black marginal setae from 
near base, cucullate tip of lamella with a small included appendage. 

Female. — Face bearing four to six rather strong setae, rarely only 
three; hind femur without distinct setae below. 

Type-data. — Holotype d 1 and allotype 9 from Mexico: San Luis 
Potosi, small ravine a few km south of Tamazunchale, on surface of 
moist limestone, Aug. 4-5, 1962, H. Robinson (USNM 69435). 
Paratypes: same data as holotype, 2 cf and 4 9; Chiapas, Ixtapan, on 
moist limestone at roadside above river, May 23, 1963, H. Robinson, 
1 <? and 3 9. 

Notes. — The species is the largest known in the genus. In addi- 
tion, the hypopygium is disproportionately large. 

The elliptical cucullate hypopygial lamella as seen in this group 
seems homologous to the inflated basal area evident in most of the 
species of Group I. The small included apical lobe found in the H. 
megalopyga group seems homologous to the apical part of the lamella 
that is prominent in the species of Group I. 

248-446—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Harmstonia setosa, new species 

Figure 9 

Male. — Length 1.21 mm; wing 1.21 mm by 0.50 mm. Front gray; 
antennal segment 3 short, rather truncate, rounded and slightly pro- 
duced below. Trochanters, tibiae, and all but tips of basitarsi yel- 
lowish, legs otherwise brown; middle femur with preapical; hind femur 
with many close-set long setae along distal half of posteroventral 
surface; foretibia with two to three slender anterodorsals, middle tibia 
with a large anterodorsal and a large posterodorsal near basal third, 
hind tibia with 5 prominent posterodorsals, tibiae without distinct 
apicals; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .18-. 09-. 07- 
.05-. 05 mm; middle tarsus as .21-.09-.07-.05-.06 mm; hind tarsus as 
.15-.18-.12-.07-.07 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are 1% times as 
far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 curved slightly backward to 
become nearly parallel with vein 4 distally; crossvein slightly longer 
than last of vein 5; knob of halter blackish. Hypopygium (fig. 9) 
ca. .36 mm long; hypopygial lamella oval from a tapered base, pale 
and nearly hyaline, surface glabrous, outer margin bearing a fringe 
of long setae, cucullate tip of lamella bearing a large falcate appendage 
toward inside. 

Female. — Face bearing three to four setae, upper 1 or 2 usually 
smaller; hind femur without distinct setae posteroventrally. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf from Mexico: Hidalgo, near Chapulhua- 
can, on wet rock face above roadside spring, Aug. 5, 1962, H. Robinson 
(USNM 69436). Allotype 9: same locality, Aug. 13, 1962. Para- 
types: same locality as holotype, Aug. 5, 13, 1962, 10 c? and 8 9; 
San Luis Potosi, a few km south of Tamazunchale, on moist lime- 
stone in small ravine, Aug. 4, 1962, 1 cf ; all collected by H. Robinson. 

Harmstonia costaricensis, new species 

Figure 10 

Male. — Length 1.00 mm; wing 1.25 mm by 0.49 mm. Front 
brownish gray; antennal segment 3 short, obliquely truncate with 
lower corner projecting. Tarsi from tip of basitarsi brownish, femora 
and bases of coxae slightly infuscated, legs otherwise yellowish; 
middle and hind femora with preapical, hind femur with sparse longer 
setae along posteroventral surface; foretibia with four black antero- 
dorsals, middle tibia with a large anterodorsal and a large postero- 
dorsal near basal third, hind tibia with two to six weak posterodorsals; 
lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .17-.06-.05-.04-.05 
mm; middle tarsus a .19-.08-.06-.04-.06 mm; hind tarsus as .13-.14- 
.08-. 06-. 07 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are \)i times as far apart 
as tips of veins 3 and 4, veins 2 and 4 essentially straight, vein 3 slightly 



no. 3G15 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 1 1 

curved and becoming nearly parallel with vein 4 distally; cross vein as 
long as last of vein 5; knob of halter black. Hypopygium (fig. 10) ca. 
.32 mm long; hypopygial lamella oval from a tapered base, pale and 
nearly hyaline, surface glabrous, outer margin bearing a fringe of long 
setae, cucullate tip of lamella bearing a large falcate appendage 
toward inside. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf from Costa Rica: La Suiza de Turrialba, 
July 1922, Pablo Schild (USNM 69437). Paratypes: same data as 
holotype, 3 cf ; all in A. L. Melander Collection in USNM. 

Notes. — H. costaricensis is very closely related to H. setosa of 
Mexico; nevertheless, there are slight but consistent differences in the 
form of the hypopygial lamella and in the pubescence of the hind 
femur. There also seem to be slight differences in the form of the 
third antennal segment. The legs of H. costaricensis seem rather pale 
but this may be partly due to the age of the specimens. 

Harmstonia ornata, new species 

Figure 11 

Male. — Length 1.17 mm; wing 1.37 mm by 0.49 mm. Front 
grayish; antennal segment 3 short, rather truncate, rounded and 
slightly produced below. Trochanters, knees, and basitarsi except 
tips yellow, legs otherwise brownish to blackish; middle and hind 
femora with a small preapical, without noticeable distinct ventral 
setae; foretibia with five or more slender anterodorsals, middle tibia 
with a large anterodorsal and a large posterodorsal near basal third, 
hind tibia with six or more slender posterodorsals, tibiae without 
distinct apicals; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .17- 
.08-.06-.04-.06 mm; middle tarsus as .19-.08-.06-.04-.06 mm; hind 
tarsus as .15-.19-.11-.06-.08 mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are 
1% times as far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 curved slightly 
backward to become nearly parallel with vein 4 distally; crossvein 
as long as to slightly longer than last of vein 5 ; knob of halter yellow, 
stalk infuscated. Hypopygium (fig. 11) ca. .32 mm long; hypopygial 
lamella elliptical from a tapered base, pale brownish, in part nearly 
hyaline, surface glabrous, outer margin bearing a few prominent 
setae along distal part, most basal of these setae very long and thick- 
ened toward the tip, cucullate tip of lamella bearing a small included 
appendage. 

Female. — Face bearing usually three, more rarely up to five, small 
setae. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf and allotype 9 from Mexico: Guerrero, 
May 29, 1963, H. Robinson (USNM 69438). Paratypes: same data 
as holotype, 6 cf and 3 9. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Note. — The male of H. ornata is recognizable easily by the long 
retrorsely directed setae on the hypopygial lamella with one of the 
setae having an enlarged tip. 

Group III 

Tibiae bearing strong setae or distinct rows of setae, hind tibia with 
distinct apicals or ventrals, hypopygial lamellae broad with hairs 
on the surface. The group contains the following two species. 

Harmstonia recta, new species 

Figure 12 

Male. — Length 1.25 mm; wing 1.60 mm by 0.27 mm. Face very 
narrow but distinct to mouth; front grayish; antennal segment 3 
short, rather truncate with lower corner slightly projecting. Tro- 
chanters, tibiae, and bases of fore- and middle basitarsi pale, legs 
otherwise brown to blackish; middle and hind femora with a preapical 
bristle, hind femur with setae somewhat longer along antero- and 
posteroventral surfaces; foretibia with three stout anterodorsals and 
an apical ventrally, middle tibia with an anterodorsal and a postero- 
dorsal near basal third, an anterodorsal near distal third, three 
distinct apicals of which ventral 2 are larger, hind tibia with an 
anterodorsal near tip, five stout posterodorsals, three stout antero- 
ventrals along distal half, a series of erect hairs posteroventrally 
that seem to continue along basitarsus, three apicals; lengths of 
segments of foretarsus from base as .19-.11-.06-.04-.06 mm; middle 
tarsus as .20-.09-.06-.04-.06 mm; hind tarsus as .17-.19-.09-.05-.07 
mm. Tips of wing veins 2 and 3 are \){ to 1% times as far apart as 
tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 curved slightly backward to become 
nearly parallel with vein 4 dis tally; crossvein 1% to l)i times as long 
as last of vein 5; knob of halter yellow. Abdomen straight, hypo- 
pygium (fig. 12) ca. .32 mm long, directed downward; hypopygial 
lamella rather triangular, yellowish, bearing hairs on surface and 
longer hairs along margin. 

Female. — Face bearing two slender setae; hind femur without 
longer ventral setae. 

Type-data. — Holotype cf from Mexico; Hidalgo, near Chapulhua- 
can, on wet rock face above roadside spring, Aug. 5, 1962, H. Robinson 
(USNM 69439). Allotype 9: San Luis Potosi, a few km south of 
Tamazunchale, on moist limestone in small ravine, Aug. 4, 1962, 
H. Robinson. Paratypes: same locality as holotype, Aug. 5, 13, 10 
c^; same locality as allotype, Aug. 4, 5, 2 9; all in 1962, collected by 
H. Robinson. 



no. 3615 HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 13 

Note. — H. recta is distinct from all other known species of the 
genus by having two rather than single anterodorsals on the middle 
tib'ae. 

Harmstonia pubescens, new species 

Figure 13 

Male. — Length 1.30 mm; wing 1.80 mm by 0.33 mm. Face 
distinct to mouth, broadest of genus; front slightly brownish gray; 
antennal segment 3 very short, truncate. Tarsi from tips of basitarsi 
brownish, legs including coxae otherwise yellow; middle and hind 
femora with a preapical and with series of somewhat longer setae 
along anteroventral surfaces; foretibia with four to five stout black 
anterodorsals and a small apical ventrally, middle tibia with a large 
anterodorsal near middle and a large posterodorsal near basal third, 
two rather large apicals ventrally, hind tibia with an anterodorsal 
near tip, six stout black posterodorsals, two distinct ventrals at 
apex; lengths of segments of foretarsus from base as .15-.09-.07-.05- 
.07 mm; middle tarsus as .19-.13-.08-.06-.08 mm; hind tarsus as 
.15-.23-.13-.11-.08 mm. Tips of whig veins 2 and 3 are \}{ times as 
far apart as tips of veins 3 and 4, vein 3 curved slightly backward 
to become nearly parallel with vem 4 distally; crossvein 1% times as 
long as last of vein 5; knob of halter yellow. Hypopygium (fig. 13) 
ca. .32 mm long; hypopygial lamella very large, rather rounded, pale 
yellowish, in part nearly hyaline, bearing small hairs along the margin 
and on the surface. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Type-data. — Holotype d" from Mexico: Chiapas, about 10 km 
southwest of Pichucalco, small roadside waterfall, on petiole of dead 
leaf on wet ledge, May 24, 1963, H. Robinson (USNM 69440). 
Paratypes : same data as holotype, 6 c? . 

Notes. — Though closely related to H. recta, H. pubescens can be 
distinguished easily by the lack of a straight abdomen, by the larger 
rounded hypopygial lamellae, and by the generally yellower legs, 
in addition to having only the single anterodorsal on the middle 
tibia. 

I consider that H. recta and H. pubescens represent a very distinct 
group within the genus. The setae of the tibiae and the broad 
hypopygial lamellae indicate relationship with Group II but details 
of structure of the hypopygial lamellae are very different. The 
lamellar structure of the Group III species does not suggest homology 
with the bulbous basal part of the H. intricata lamella. 

All the specimens of H. pubescens were collected from the same 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

leaf petiole. Almost as soon as one was caught, another would alight. 
When the leaf was turned accidently so that the petiole no longer 
stood up, no more specimens could be found until the leaf was returned 
to its original position. 



Literature Cited 

Robinson, Harold 

1964. A synopsis of the Dolichopodidae (Diptera) of the Southeastern 
United States and adjacent regions. Misc. Publ. Ent. Soc. 
America, vol. 4, pp. 103-192. 



HARMSTONIA — ROBINSON 



15 








Figures 1-11. — Harmstonia, hypopygia: 1, 77. intricata Robinson; 2, 77. pectinicauda 
Robinson; 3, H. simplex, new species; 4, 77. obscura, new species; 5, 77. pallida, new 
species; 6, 77. attenuaia, new species; 7, 77. clavicauda, new species; 8, 77. megalopyga, 
new species; 9, 77. setosa, new species; 10, 77. costaricensis, new species; 11, 77. ornata, 
new species. 



16 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




12 




15 



— O 

— -a i6 



Figures 12-16. — Harmstonia, hypopygia and antennae: 12, H. recta, new species; 13, 
H. pubescens, new species; 14, H. intricata Robinson, male; 15, H. pectinicauda Robinson, 
male; 16, //. simplex, new species, male and female. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE:1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION . WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3616 



A Review of the Genus Euparixia 
With Description of a New Species 
From Nests of Leaf-Cutting Ants in Louisiana 
(Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) 1 



By Robert E. Woodruff and Oscar L. Cartwright : 



The scarabaeid beetles of the genus Euparixia are exceedingly 
rare in collections, probably due to their inquilinous habits. Because 
of their rarity, Woodruff was elated to receive from Dr. John C. 
Moser the first Louisiana specimen of this genus, taken near Flat- 
woods, La., in a nest of the leaf-cutting ant, Atta texana (Buckley) 
(pis. 1, 2). Since only one species has been known to occur in the 
United States (in Arizona), this specimen was studied critically. 

Subsequently, additional specimens were collected by Dr. Moser 
and forwarded to Cartwright for study. The authors agreed that 
these specimens represented an undescribed species and undertook 
a thorough treatment of the genus. During the course of this study, 
holotypes or paratypes were examined of all species except E. duncani 
Brown, for which topotypic examples were studied. 

1 Contribution No. 31, Florida Department of Agriculture, Division of Plant 
Industry, Entomology Section. 

1 Woodruff: Entomologist, Florida Department of Agriculture, Division of 
Plant Industry, Gainesville, Fla.; Cartwright: Curator, Division of Coleoptera, 
Department of Entomology, U.S. National Museum. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

We wish to thank the following persons for assistance with this 
study and for the loan of specimens (abbreviations in parentheses 
are used in distribution records, which are quoted directly from 
museum labels under "Specimens Examined") : Dr. George W. 
Byers, Snow Entomological Museum, University of Kansas, Lawrence, 
Kansas (UK) ; Jose Carillo, Instituto Nacional Investigaciones 
Agricolas, Chapingo, Mexico (INIA) ; Dr. I. J. Cantrall, University 
of Michigan, Museum of Zoology, Ann Arbor, Michigan (UMMZ) ; 
Dr. P. J. Darlington, Museum of Comparative Zoology, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Massachusetts (MCZ) ; Dr. Henry F. Howden, 
Canadian National Collection, Ottawa, Canada (CNC) ; J. N. Knull, 
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio (OSU) ; Hugh B. Leech, 
California Academy of Science, San Francisco, California (CAS) ; 
Dr. Milton W. Sanderson, Illinois Natural History Survey, Urbana, 
Illinois (INHS) ; Dr. Richard B. Selander, University of Illinois, 
Urbana, Illinois (UI) ; Dr. A. M. Villiers, Museum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, Paris, France (MNHP); Dr. F. G. Werner, University 
of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona (UA) ; and Ing. Fernando de Zayas, 
Havana, Cuba (Z). We would especially like to thank Dr. John C. 
Moser, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, Alexandria, La., 
for specimens and information on the new species. 

Biology and ecology. — It is not surprising that very little infor- 
mation is available on the biology of insects such as Euparixia, which 
have restricted and secretive habits. Fewer than 50 specimens are 
known for all five species of Euparixia and the immature forms are 
completely unknown. Most of the specimens represent E. duncani 
and were collected at electric lights. Three of the species (E. formica 
Hinton, E. bruneri Chapin, and E. moseri, new species) have been 
collected in the nests of leaf-cutting ants of the genus Atta. The 
genera Euparia, Euparixia, Euparixoides, and Cartwrightia seem to 
form a natural group in the Eupariini, all of which are apparently 
myrmecophilous. 

Even though Euparixia duncani is represented by the greatest 
number of specimens, its host relationships have not been established; 
however, because of its similarity to the other species in the genus, 
we would also expect it to occur in the nests of leaf-cutting ants. 
Most specimens have been collected at Tucson and Globe, Ariz., 
where no species of Atta have been found. Another leaf-cutting ant, 
Acromyrmex versicolor (Pergande),does occur in this area and is the 
suspected host ant. Creighton (1950, p. 325) stated: "In both 
structure and habits the ants of the genus Acromyrmex show a close 
relationship to the genus Atta." 

Presumably the beetles are scavengers and live in close harmony 
with the ants. Their occurrence at great depths (to 12 feet) would 



no. 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 3 

certainly exclude them as accidental. They have been found in the 
active fungus gardens and in detritus chambers (pi. 2: fig. 2), which 
consist of old fungus and debris discarded by the ants. It is rather 
unlikely that they feed on the fungus grown by the ants (pi. 1 : fig. 2) 
since no other members of the subfamily Aphodiinae are known to 
have this habit. If they actually fed on the fungus, competing with 
the ants, it would be likely that they would occasionally be thrown 
out of the nest. This has not been observed. All of the species 
except E. costaricensis (known from the unique type with incomplete 
data) and E. moseri, new species, have been collected at lights and 
possess fully developed wings. 

The behavior of Euparixia within the nests has not been observed, 
and no evidence is available to determine if they are synechthrans 
(unwelcome guests), synoeketes (unnoticed or tolerated guests), or 
symphiles (true guests). The latter classification would seem most 
likely, but many diligent hours of observation will be necessary to 
determine the true role of Euparixia. Cazier and Statham (1962) 
and Cazier and Mortenson (1965) have made numerous observations 
on the myrmecophilous scarab genus Cremastocheilus and in at least 
one case, C. stathamae Cazier, the adult beetles were found to be 
obligatory predators on the ant larvae. We have no evidence for 
similar habits in Euparixia. Moser (pers. comm.) believes that the 
adult, at least, is tied to the ecology of the fungus garden, since all 
but one of the specimens have been collected in this niche. The 
numerous species of inquilines associated with detritus cavities are 
practically never found in fungus gardens. 

Certainly many ecological factors are unique in the complicated 
and extensive underground passages of these fungus-growing ants. 
Wheeler (1900, p. 855) postulated that the vast amounts of com- 
minuted and decomposing vegetable matter collected by the ants as 
a soil or culture medium for their fungus would be a favorable resort 
for numerous myrmecophiles. Walter, Seaton, and Mathewson 
(1938) record approximately 50 species of insects and arachnids 
found within the nests in association with Atta texana at San Antonio, 
Tex. They record two scarabs in the subfamily Cetoniinae but no 
members of the genus Euparixia or the subfamily Aphodiinae. Moser 
(1963) has found a considerable number of interesting myrmecophiles 
in his studies of the biology and ecology of this ant in Louisiana (some 
of these have been described by Sabrosky, 1959; Spangler, 1962; 
and Chillcott, 1965). 

Weber (1958, p. 459) stated that the true culture of fungi is con- 
fined to the New World ants of the tribe Attiini, all known species 
of which are dependent on fungus gardens for food. The genus 
Atta is considered to be the most highly developed in the tribe, in 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

terms of biology, behavior, and morphology. Acromyrmex is con- 
sidered to be nearest it on a phylogenetic basis. It is possible that 
species of Euparixia or related genera might occur with other ant 
genera in this tribe, namely Cyphomyrmex, Mycetophylax, Mycoce- 
purus, Myrmicocrypta, Apterostigma, Sericomyrmex, and Trachy- 
myrmex. The nests of few species of Atta or related genera have 
been investigated thoroughly for inquilines. Certainly the complex 
association between ants, fungus gardens, and beetles has taken 
considerable time to evolve. Weber (1958, p. 460) postulated that 
the South American tropical forests may have been the original home 
of the attine ants and their fungi, and that this symbiosis may have 
become established during a period nearly 50 million years ago. 
Since most attine ants are presently found in South America, it would 
be surprising if no eupariine scarabs occupied this niche on that 
continent. 

Distribution, (fig. 1). — The distribution records for the few 
specimens available indicate that the species of Euparixia are allo- 
patric. It is highly probable that each species of beetle occurs with 
only one species of ant, but the distribution probably is much more 
extensive than presently known. The known distribution of the 
five species of Euparixia is as follows : E. bruneri Chapin from Baragua, 
Camaguey, and Santiago de las Vegas, Cuba; E. costaricensis Hinton 
from an undetermined locality in Costa Rica; E. formica Hinton 
from Tejupilco, Mexico; E. duncani Brown from southern Arizona 
and northwestern Mexico; and E. moseri, new species, from south- 
western Louisiana. 

Borgmeier (1959) lists 14 species of Atta, most of which occur in 
South America but no Euparixia have been found there. Smith 
(1963) summarizes the United States and Mexican distribution of 
the genus Atta. Using the known distribution of the ants (fig. 1), 
we can postulate the probable distribution of the myrmecophilous 
Euparixia. E. bruneri Chapin probably occurs with A. insularis 
Guerin throughout the island of Cuba although it has been found 
only at two localities. E. formica Hinton has been recorded as 
associated with A. sexdens (L.) (Hinton, 1934), which has the greatest 
range of the species of Atta. It has been reported from Panama, 
Colombia, Ecuador, Bolivia, Venezuela, Guiana, Surinam, Brazil, 
Paraguay, Argentina, and Uruguay; however, it is not recorded from 
Mexico and the records of Hinton (1934) for this host probably refer 
to A. mexicana Frederick Smith, which is widely distributed in Mexico 
and recorded from El Salvador and extreme southern Arizona. 
A. cephalotes (L.) is recorded also from southern Mexico (Vera Cruz, 
Cordova, and Oaxaca), Central America, Ecuador, Colombia, Ven- 
ezuela, Peru, Bolivia, Guiana, and Brazil but not within the known 



no. 36ig GENUS EUPARIXIA— WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 5 

range of E. formica. E. costaricensis Hinton occurs within the range 
of A. cephalotes, whose range is given above, and A. colombica 
Guerin, which has been recorded from Colombia, Panama, Costa 
Rica, and Guatemala. E. moseri, new species, undoubtedly has a 




^P Euparixia duncani flrown 

Ttf Euparixia mcseri n. sp. 

\J Euparixia bruneri Chapin 

y^ Euparixia formica Htn. 

VV Euparixia costarioeneis Htn. 



Fig. 1 

Acromyrmex versicolor (Perg.) 



Ld 



Atta insularie Guer. 

Atta colombica Guer. 

Atta cephalotes (L.) 

Atta mexicana Smith 

Atta texana Buck t\\;X;J 



Figure 1. — Distribution of the leaf-cutting ants of the genus Atta and of the species Acro- 
myrmex versicolor Pergande, and the scarab beetles of the genus Euparixia in North 
America. (Drawn by R. E. Woodruff.) 



wider range than the few areas now known in southwestern Louisiana, 
since its host, A. texana, occurs over much of the eastern two-thirds 
of Texas also. Although the host is not established for E. duncani, 
we suspect it is Acromyrmex versicolor (Pergande). Creighton (1950) 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

and Cook (1953) record this ant from southern Arizona, Mojave 
Desert, and Yucca, Calif., and the type-locality is Calamajuit, Baja 
California, Mexico. There is a disjunct subspecies, A. v. chicosensis 
(Wheeler), which is recorded from the mountains of the Big Bend 
area of Texas. 

Jones (1917) reported the first record of A. texana in Louisiana 
in 1914, but local residents stated these ants had been there for a 
long time. Smith (1939) also believed that this species was not 
introduced recently into Louisiana, but "owing to the fact that it 
is found largely on non-farming areas or wastelands, it has previously 
escaped much attention." Smith (1951, p. 832) stated that it had 
been found in "much of western Louisiana and eastern Texas between 
the 92d and 101st degrees of longitude but not uniformly distributed 
in Louisiana at least." The distribution shown on the map (fig. 1) 
has been derived from Smith (1963) and Moser (in litt.). 

A. mexicana has been recorded only recently from the United 
States (Byars, 1949, and Smith, 1951), in the Organ Pipe National 
Monument of Arizona about five miles north of the Mexican 
boundary. 

Genus Euparixia Brown 

This monobasic genus is characterized among the Eupariini by 
the inflexed clypeal margins, explanate pronotal margins, basally 
constricted pronotal sides, cariniform elytral intervals (except in 
E. costaricensis) , epipleurae covering external tips of middle coxae, 
middle coxae widely separated, mesosternum expanding laterally 
to partly cover the anterior half of the middle coxae, the mesosternum 
separated from the metasternum by a transverse carina, long slender 
middle and posterior tarsi, and a peculiar arrangement of terminal 
fimbriae of the posterior tibiae (fig. 9). The terminal outside edge 
of the tibia is excavated slightly or emarginate opposite the first 
tarsal segment, with the spurs and one seta on one side of the emar- 
gination and a group of three setae on the other side, an arrangement 
also found in Euparixoides. 

In general facies and clypeal characters, Euparixia is most similar 
to Euparixoides; however, this latter monotypic genus has pronotum 
laterally and basally, and clypeus anteriorly, noticeably crenate. 
It has a basally impressed pronotal midline, normally convex elytral 
intervals, a single terminal spur on middle and posterior tibiae (fig. 12), 
and middle and hind legs with short, tapering tarsi about half the 
length of the tibiae. The crenate anterior clypeal margin in Eupari- 
xoides is unique in the Aphodiinae so far as we know. 

Euparixia in many respects is also quite close to Cartwrightia 
even though the latter has more of the appearance of Ryparus. Eu- 



NO. 3616 



GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 7 



parixia agrees with Cartwrightia in the explanate pronotal margin, 
basally constricted pronotum, epipleurae covering the tips of the 
widely separated middle coxae, and the mesosternum extending 
laterally more or less over part of the anterior half of the mesocoxae. 
In Cartwrightia, however, the clypeus is not inflexed at the apex, 
the margins and surface of the pronotum are very different, and only 
alternate elytral intervals are carinate. Apically the elytra of 
Cartwrightia are very much as in Ryparus. Cartwrightia seems to 
be intermediate between Euparixia and Ryparus, combining characters 
from each. 

In the explanate pronotal sides Euparixia is similar to Euparia 
but Euparia lacks the inflexed clypeal apex, the basally constricted 
pronotum, and cariniform elytral intervals; and in Euparia the 
epipleurae do not cover the anterior tips of mesocoxae; the meso- 
sternum is normally narrow between the coxae and does not extend 
laterally over the coxae. 

Key to Species of Genus Euparixia Brown 

1 Elytral intervals moderately convex, not cariniform; pronotal outline 

as in figure 7; Costa Rica costaricensis Hinton 

1' Elytral intervals cariniform as in figure 5; pronotal outline not as above; 
southern Mexico to Louisiana, including Cuba 2 

2 (1') Pronotum constricted only in posterior one-third, the posterior angles 

prominent and acute (fig. 2) ; Arizona and N. Mexico . duncani Brown 

2' (2) Pronotum constricted in posterior one-half or more, the posterior angles 

evident but rounded (figs. 3-5) ; distribution not as above .... 3 

3 (2') Lateral pronotal margin less explanate, outline as in figure 4, the posterior 

angles evident; central Mexico formica Hinton 

3' (3) Lateral pronotal margin broadly explanate, outline as in figures 3 and 5, 
the posterior angles obscured, nearly obliterated; Cuba and Loui- 
siana 4 

4 (3') Angle of the pronotal constriction more acute (fig. 3); Cuba; host: 

Atta insularis bruneri Chapin 

4' (4) Angle of the pronotal constriction less acute (fig. 5); Louisiana; host: 
Atta texana moseri Woodruff and Cartwright 

Euparixia moseri Woodruff and Cartwright, new species 3 

Figure 5 

Holotype: Length 4.8 mm, width 2.2 mm. Elongate, convex, 
feebly shining, reddish brown, basal margin of pronotum and legs 
darker. 

Head: Clypeus widely truncate between weak angles, distance 
between angles greater than length of the feebly arcuate side from 



3 This remarkable species is named in honor of Dr. John C. Moser, who is the 
only person to collect the species and who has discovered many interesting myr- 
mecophiles in his fine work on the biology and ecology of Atta texana in Louisiana. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

angle to slight genal notch; clypeal margin feebly recurved, apically 
inflexed ventrally at middle; genae prominent, nearly right angled. 
Surface finely, quite closely granulate along anterior margin and 
more widely upward at sides, median tumidity gradually smoother 
to faint rugulose sculpture over middle and gradually to fine dense 
punctures upward over frontal area, slightly larger punctures at 
occipital areas. Frontal suture visible at sides. 

Pronotum : Pronotum broader than long (greatest width compared 
to length measured along center line: width 1.9 mm, length 1.4 mm), 
very convex. Punctures very coarse and close over basal half, then 
gradually less coarse and less dense anteriorly, almost impunctate 
narrowly along anterior margin and over the widely explanate sides 
anteriorly. Anterior angles broadly rounded. Posterior angles 
obliterated by constriction and loss of lateral areas over basal two- 
thirds of pronotum. Pronotum much narrower at base than the 
width of the elytra between the humeri. Pronotal outline character- 
istic, differing from other known species (fig. 5) . 

Elytra: Suboval, widest at apical one- third; intervals strongly 
carinate, under X 50 magnification the crest of the carina shows 
minute very close punctures giving a roughened edge; striae deep, 
punctures fine, deep, and placed at junction of very coarse elliptical 
or oval depressions that are bordered by a very fine carina. At first 
glance the striae appear to be simply a chain of very coarse, very 
close, deep punctures but clean specimens show the fine, deeper punc- 
tures between them. Scutellum narrow, about three times as long 
as wide, smooth with an anterior depression at middle. 

Sternum: Prosternum angulate posteriorly at middle. Meso- 
sternum with coxae widely separated basally by slightly more than 
length of trochanter of middle leg; smooth median depressed area 
with straight diverging carina-like edge extending three-fourths the 
distance from sharply delimited base, which is slightly raised above 
metasternum and ending anteriorly in a wide, shallow depression; 
laterally, outside depressed median area, flat borders overlap the 
edges of anterior half of mesocoxae. Mesocoxa smooth basally, 
finely, closely, setigerously punctate over anterior half between over- 
lapping edges of mesosternum and epipleuron of elytron. Meta- 
sternum shallowly depressed medially with moderately deep, complete 
midline; depression in front of posterior coxae with sharply delimited, 
arcuate anterior border; laterally metasternum extending far forward 
between mesocoxae and epipleurae of elytra, bordered here by a 
finely carinate edge. A few fine to moderate, shallow punctures at 
base of mesocoxae. 

Abdomen: The first three of four visible segments longer at sides 
than middle, terminal segment longer at middle; all bordered anteriorly 



no. S6i6 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 9 

by series of longitudinal carinae enclosing square or rectangular punc- 
tures or pits, these rows of depressed squares on first two segments 
not quite as long as remainder of segment at middle, but rapidly de- 
creasing from lateral fourth to zero at extreme sides; on third segment 
the depressed squares about as on preceding segments but occupying 
practically all of the segment at its shortened middle length; terminal 
segment carinae about two-thirds the segment length at middle; first 
two segments bordered posteriorly with very close, fine punctures; 
remaining surface of all segments with scattered fine to medium punc- 
tures at middle; very large shallow punctures at sides. Pygidium 
with roughened eroded area, basally separated by a longitudinal 
carina. 

Legs: Anterior tibia sharply tridentate, middle tooth nearer the 
basal one than to the apical one. Apical tooth broad, bent outward 
at nearly a right angle to tibia. Apical spur elongate, narrow, gently 
curved toward outer tibial margin, flattened, concave beneath, 
slightly longer than combined length of first three tarsal segments. 
Single row of about seven short setae on outer tibial margin between 
base and basal tooth, and one seta on each side of each tooth, with 
a few scattered setae beneath. Length ratio of tarsal segments: 
2-1-1-1-2; claws simple. Anterior femur broad, with perimarginal 
groove; surface with close moderate punctures bearing extremely 
short, fine, almost invisible setae; three coarse setae on anterior 
edge beginning at trochanter and extending one-fourth the femur 
length. Trochanter exceptionally large, slightly longer than width 
of femur, finely margined, surface very finely alutaceous. Middle 
femur long, slender, slightly arcuate, complete posterior marginal 
groove, surface with moderately close, fine punctures set with ex- 
tremely short setae; tibia straight, very weakly gradually expanded 
to twice basal width (fig. 9) ; terminal ventral edge excavated opposite 
tarsus with one seta next to spur and three beyond the emargination ; 
first tarsal segment equal to combined length of next three, terminal 
segment slightly longer than second; claws simple. Posterior leg 
similar to middle except that the posterior femoral groove extends 
only half the distance from knee to base. 

Diagnosis: Differs from known species in the shape of the pronotal 
outline (fig. 5), but similar to E. bruneri Chapin. Aside from its 
distribution and host ant, it can be distinguished from bruneri by 
the less acute angle in the middle of the constricted side margin and 
less angulate posterior of the explanate margin. It is somewhat 
similar to E. jormica Hinton but differs by possessing impunctate 
meso- and metasternum and in the shape of the pronotal outline. 

Specimens examined: Total 7. Holotype: Melder, Louisiana, 11 April 19G1, 
J. C. Moser, 2 feet deep in nest of Atta texana [USNM No. 689301. Paratypes: 

256-172 — 67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

3 same data as hole-type [USNM]; 1-I'nt. [International] Paper Company 
Excav. [Excavation], TIN, R3W, Sll, La., John C. Moser, in nest of Atta texana, 
excav. 3/24/60, 12 feet, F. G. [fungus garden] [USNM]; 1-I'nt. Paper Co. Excav., 
T2N, R3W, S10, La., John C. Moser, in nest Atta texana, March 25, 1960, central 
cavity, in fungus garden [USNM]; 1-near Flatwoods, La., T4N, R4W, S30, nest 
Atta texana, 30, Dec. 1958, J, Moser, 5 ft. detritus cavity (Woodruff). 

Host: (See under "Biology and Ecology" and "Distribution".) 
Known only from nests of Atta texana (Buckley) in Louisiana. The 
distribution of this ant is shown on the map (fig. 1). 

Euparixia duncani Brown 

Figure 6 

Euparixia duncani Brown 1927, pp. 288-289. [Type: Globe, Ariz.; Canadian 
National Collection.] 

Length 5.0 to 5.75 mm, width 2.0 to 2.4 mm. Elongate, convex, 
feebly shining (often encrusted with light-colored dirt), reddish brown, 
darker at clypeal and posterior pronotal margin. Legs and venter 
similarly colored but slightly darker than dorsum. Pronotum con- 
stricted basally at sides with anterolateral margin explanate. 

Head: Clypeus truncate across middle one-third, sides feebly 
curving to prominent genal lobes. Eyes not visible when head is in 
repose. Clypeal apex inflexed ventrally at middle. Head finely, 
densely punctured on basal one-third, gradually diminishing to 
slightly granulate at middle and evenly, finely granulate on anterior 
one-third. 

Pronotum: Broader than long, convex. Punctation like pits at 
base but becoming less coarse and less dense toward anterior band. 
Lateral explanate portion nearly im punctate. Sides explanate on 
anterior two-thirds; posterior angle obliterated, but the one at con- 
striction acute (nearly 90°). Pronotum much narrower at base than 
the elytra. Pronotal outline as in figure 2. 

Elytra: Together suboval, widest at apical one-third; intervals 
acutely carinate, striae deep, punctate. The lateral cariniform mar- 
gin forms a "tooth" on each side in front of humeri. Punctures 
complicated, but appearing quadrate on disc, gradually becoming 
less distinct toward sides. Carinate intervals with single row of 
regularly spaced, very minute, short setae in center. Scutellum 
elongate, depressed basally at middle. 

Sternum: Prosternum weakly angulate posteriorly at middle. 
Mesosternum with coxae widely separated basally by more than length 
of trochanter of middle leg; median area smooth but alutaceous, 
bordered laterally by a raised, flattened, smooth, diverging, slightly 
arcuate border that quickly widens from a fine carina at base of the 
coxa to the wide flat edge overlapping the coxal edge from basal 



no. 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 11 

fourth to the epipleuron of the elytron; median area slightly more 
depressed anteriorly and roughened by close, fine to moderate punc- 
tures. Mesosternum and metasternum separated by a fine transverse 
carina that sometimes has a median longitudinal carina extending a 
short distance anteriorly and posteriorly. The latter carina gives 
way quickly to a long, coarse, deep, median line or sulcus. The 
bordering carina around posterior end of middle coxa becomes very 
noticeably heavier and separated from disc of metasternum by a 
coarse deep punctate sulcus; remainder of disc alutaceous and with 
fine to moderate, close punctures outward from midline; depressed 
area in front of posterior coxae alutaceous, the arcuate anterior margin 
deep and sharply bordered; sides scabrous outward and forward 
between coxa and epipleuron. 

Abdomen: Each abdominal sternite depressed on anterior one-half; 
this depression with longitudinal ridges irregularly spaced. The 
posterior one-half of each sternite coarsely, irregularly punctate. 
Pygidium nearly concealed, a transverse depression paralleling the 
apical border and a longitudinal depression in middle, reaching to 
transverse depression. 

Legs: Anterior tibiae tridentate; apical tooth broad, bent outward 
at nearly right angle to tibia. Apical spur elongate, narrow, slightly 
longer than combined length of first three tarsal segments. Anterior 
trochanter large, prominent, impunctate, rugose ventrally. Anterior 
femoral groove and about one-half the dorsal surface of femur covered 
with fine, short, golden setae. Posterior femur with marginal groove 
covering one-half the length from the apex. Terminal spurs of middle 
and posterior tibiae unequal: the longer one is four-fifths the length 
of the first tarsal segment; shorter spur two-thirds the length of the 
longer one. Middle and posterior tibiae nearly straight, narrow, 
slightly curving outward toward the weakly expanded apex. First 
segment of middle and posterior tarsi equal in length to next three 
segments combined. 

Diagnosis: This species, the type of the genus, differs from all 
known species in the shape of the pronotal outline (fig. 2). The 
basal constriction is less extensive, creating a broader explanate margin 
than in any other species. The angle formed at the constriction 
more acute. It differs further in its distribution and, although its 
host ant is not known, probably differs in this respect also. It is 
the most common species in collections and with E. moseri, new 
species, comprises the only two species in the United States. 

Specimens examined: Forty-one from the following localities: Arizona: 
1-Globe, 20-VII-33, F. H. Parker, Lot 3, from O. Bryant Colin., Topotype 
[CAS]; 2-Globe, VIII, Duncan and Parker, R. Hopping Colin. [CAS]; 1-Globe, 
VIII, Duncan and Parker [UK]; 1-Globe, 15-VII-27, Duncan and Parker, 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

O. L. Cartwright Colin. [USNM]; 1-Globe, VIII, Duncan and Parker, O. L. 
Cartwright Colin. [USNM]; 1-Globe, 24-VIII-52, F. H. Parker, O. L. Cartwright 
Colin. [USNM]; 1-Tucson, 5-VIII-35, Bryant, 20, Van Dyke Colin. [CAS]; 
1-Tucson, 16-VIII-35, R. H. Beamer, coll. at light, L. W. Saylor [CAS]; 8-Tucson, 
16-VIII-35, R. H. Beamer, coll. at light [UK]; 2-Tucson, 5-VIII-35, Bryant 20 
[INHS]; 1-Tucson, 10-VII-59, K. Radford, blacklight trap [UA]; 1-Tucson, 
2-VIII-13, Shive [USNM]; 1-Tucson, 16-VIII-35, R. H. Beamer, M. Robinson 
Colin. [USNM]; 1-Tucson, 30-VIII-13, J. Shive, Liebeck Colin. [MCZ]; 2-Tucson 
1- VIII- 13, J. Shive [MCZ]; 1-Tucson, 5-VIII-35, Bryant, C. A. Frost Colin. 
[MCZ]; 1-Tucson, 10-VIII-59, K. Radford, u.v. It. trap [UA]; 2-Wickenburg, 
20-VIII-38, D. J. and J. N. Knull [OSU]; 1-Wickenburg, 20-VIII-38, D. J. and 
J. N. Knull, M. Robinson Colin. [USNM]; 1-Douglas, X-1963, J. H. Russell, 
blacklight [USNM]; 1-Douglas, summer 1964, J. H. Russell, blacklight [USNM]; 
1-Palmerlee, Huachuca Mtns. [AMNH]; 1-Hope, Yuma Co., 12-VEII-48, grease- 
wood desert, 1400 feet, at light, F. Werner and W, Nutting [UA]; 1-Sabino 
Canyon, Catalina Mtns., Pima Co., 26-VII-55, F. G. Werner and G. D. Butler 
[UA]; 1-Palo Alto, 29-30-VII-16, Mark Robinson Colin. [USNM]. Mexico: 
1-San Bernardo, Rio Mayo, L. W. Saylor Colin. [CAS]; 1-Durango, "enter 
identification Care No. 1830, Bufo [X]," L. W. Saylor Colin. [CAS]; 1-Acatlan, 
Puebla, 7-V-57, cerca luz, Wm. W. Gibson [INI A]; 1-Venodio, Sin., 17-V-18, 
J. A. Kusche [probably Venadillo (Boyle, 1956, and Cantrall, in litt.)]; 1-Tepic, 
ex Museo H. W. Bates, 1892, Oberthur Colin. [MNHP]; 1-Ajijic, Jalisco, 21-VI- 
64, W. L. Nutting, 5140 feet [UA]; 1-Ajijic, Jalisco, 16-VII-64, W. L. Nutting, 
u.v. It. trap [UA]. 

Host: The host has not been established for this species even 
though it is the most abundant in collections. We suspect that it 
is associated with Acromyrmex versicolor and/or Atta mexicana although 
the latter is not known from Tucson or Globe, Ariz., where most 
of the E. duncani have been found. (See also under "Biology and 
Ecology.") 

Euparixia bruneri Chapin 

Figure 3 

Euparixia bruneri Chapin 1940, pp. 40-41. [Type: Baragua, Cuba; U.S. Na- 
tional Museum, No. 53329.] 

Length 5.25 mm, width 2.14 mm. Elongate, convex, feebly shining 
(often encrusted with reddish dirt), reddish brown. Pronotum 
constricted at side on posterior one-half; sides broadly explanate 
on anterior one-half. 

Head: Clypeus truncate across middle one-third, sides feebly 
curving to prominent genal lobes. Eyes not visible when head is 
in repose. Clypeal apex inflexed ventrally at middle. Head finely, 
densely punctured on basal one-third, gradually diminishing to 
slightly granulate at middle and evenly, finely granulate on anterior 
one-third. 

Pronotum: Broader than long, very convex. Punctation like 
pits at base, becoming less coarse and less dense toward anterior 



PROC- US NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT -PLATE 1 




Figures 1, 2. — 1, Large nest of Alia texana showing mound of excavated subsoil 
at central area; 2, fungus garden made by ./. texana (roots often provide ■■< 
for the gray spongy fungus growing on hits of vegetation supplied by the ants). 
(Photos courtesy U.S. Forest Service.) 



PROC U.S NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 WOODRUFF AND CARTWR IG HT — PLATE 2 



v v 














^> '■'■:• - 




Figures 1, 2. — 1, Dr. J. C. Moser examining the barrel-sized "central cavity" in 
a large nest (these cavities are usually 8-12 feet below soil surface); 2, detritus 
cavities are special holes dug for deposit of exhausted fungus gardens, deceased 
ants, and other refuse (most species of inquilines are found here). (Photos cour- 
tesy U.S. Forest Service.) 



no. 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 13 

band. Large punctures often confluent, forming narrow ridges 
between. Lateral explanate portion nearly impunctate. Sides ex- 
planate in anterior one-third with anterior angles broadly rounded. 
Posterior angle barely evident but indicated by definite constriction 
(this angle more prominent than in E. moseri, new species). Pro- 
notum much narrower at base than the elytra. Pronotal outline 
as in figure 3. 

Elytra: Together suboval, widest at apical one-third; intervals 
acutely carinate, striae deep, punctate. The lateral cariniform 
margin forms a "tooth" on each side in front of humeri. Punctures 
complicated, but appearing quadrate on disc, gradually becoming 
less distinct toward sides. Carinate intervals with single row of 
regularly spaced, very minute, short setae in center. Scutellum 
elongate, depressed basally at middle. 

Sternum: Mesosternum very similar to that of E. duncani except 
that the alutaceous sculpture of the middle depressed area extends 
forward only three-fifths of length, the anterior two-fifths is smooth 
and shining with close moderate punctures, the middle is more dis- 
tinctly impressed, the anterior one-fifth more or less convex, the 
anterior border very distinct and the inner edge of the flat diverging 
lateral margins is noticeably irregular, not so smooth an edge as in 
E. duncani. The metasternum is also similar to E. duncani but 
much smoother with the punctures very fine except for a few coarse 
close punctures between middle coxae and the arcuate forward edge 
of the depression in front of the posterior coxae. 

Abdomen: Each abdominal sternite depressed on anterior one-half; 
this depression with longitudinal ridges irregularly punctate. Py- 
gidium nearly concealed, a transverse depression paralleling the apical 
border and a longitudinal depression in middle, reaching to transverse 
depression. 

Legs: Anterior tibiae tridentate; apical tooth broad, bent outward 
at nearly right angle to tibia. Apical spur elongate, narrow, slightly 
longer than combined length of first three tarsal segments. Anterior 
trochanter large, prominent, impunctate, rugose ventrally. Anterior 
femoral groove and about one-half the dorsal surface of femur covered 
with fine, short, golden setae. Posterior femur with marginal groove 
covering one-half the length from the apex. Terminal spurs of middle 
and posterior tibiae unequal: the longer one four-fifths the length of 
the first tarsal segment; shorter spur two-thirds the length of the 
longer one. Middle and posterior tibiae nearly straight, narrow, 
slightly curving outward toward the weakly expanded apex. First 
segment of middle and posterior tarsi equal in length to next three 
segments combined. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Diagnosis: Differs from all known species in shape of the pronotal 
outline (fig. 3), but most similar to E. moseri, new species, in this 
respect. It can be separated from this species by the more prominent 
angle at the middle of the constriction and by the angle of the pos- 
terior portion of the explanate sides pointing more outward and making 
a more acute angle. It also differs in geographic distribution and 
host ant. 

Specimens examined: Total 4; 1 — [holotype no. 53329] Cuba, Camaguey, 
Baragua, V-24-32, at light, Christenson [USNM]; 1— [paratype no. 53329] Cuba, 
E.E.A. Estacion Experimental Agricola Ento. No. 11,268 : Santiago, de las Vegas, 
Havana, May 2, 1946, Ing. Naranjo, en nido de bibijagua [USNM]; 1 — near 
Havana, Cuba, Fernando de Zayas (Z) ; 1 — [paratype no. 53329] Santiago de las 
Vegas, Havana, Cuba, July 20/24, det. '36 H. E. Hinton as Euparixia formica 
Hntn. [USNM]. 

Host: Atta insularis, which is known only from Cuba and is most 
closely related to Atta texana. 

Euparixia formica Hinton 

Figure 8 

Euparixia formica Hinton 1934, pp. 27-28. [T}^pe: Tejupilco, Mexico; California 
Academy of Sciences.] 

Length 4.65 mm; width 1.95 mm. Elongate, convex, feebly 
shining, dark reddish brown. Pronotum constricted basally at sides 
with the anterolateral margin narrowly explanate. 

Head: Clypeus truncate across middle one-third, sides feebly 
curving to prominent genal lobes. Eyes not visible when head is in 
repose. Clypeal apex inflexed ventrally at middle. Head finely, 
densely punctured on basal one-third, gradually diminishing to slightly 
granulate at middle and evenly, finely granulate on anterior one-third. 

Pronotum: Broader than long, very convex. Punctation like 
dense, coarse pits at base, becoming less coarse and less dense toward 
anterior band. Lateral explanate portion nearly impunctate. Sides 
explanate narrowly on anterior two- thirds; posterior angle obliterated, 
but the one at the constriction rounded, gradually sloping to base. 
Pronotum much narrower at base than the elytra. Pronotal outline 
as in figure 4. 

Elytra: Together suboval, widest at apical one-third; intervals 
acutely carinate, striae deep, punctate. The lateral cariniform margin 
forms a "tooth" on each side in front of humeri. Punctures com- 
plicated, but appearing quadrate on disc, gradually becoming less 
distinct toward sides. Carinate intervals with single row of regularly 
spaced, very minute, short setae in center. Scutellum elongate, 
depressed basally at middle. 



no. 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 15 

Sternum : The inesosternum is similar to E. duncani and E. bruneri 
but the depressed, median, very finely alutaceous area is sharply 
outlined and obovate in shape, the edge of the anterior half of this 
area, as well as the edge of the flattened diverging borders, irregularly 
cut into by the close, deep, coarse, longitudinally elongate punctures 
that cover all the anterior part of mesosternum. Metasternum as 
in E. duncani but disc covered with rather close, shallow, moderate 
punctures and alutaceous sculp ture; a few coarse, close punctures 
between mesocoxae and the arcuate anterior border of the depressed 
area in front of the posterior coxae; lateral area between mesocoxae 
and sides strongly bordered by groove of coarse punctures, otherwise 
a very few punctures and scattered small tubercles. 

Abdomen: Each abdominal sternite depressed on anterior one-half, 
this depression with longitudinal ridges irregularly spaced. The 
posterior one-half of each sternite coarsely, irregularly punctate. 
Metasternum with median sulcus moderately impressed, covering 
entire length; entirely punctate as in the femur (including depression 
where femur rests). Pygidium nearly concealed, a transverse de- 
pression paralleling the apical border and a longitudinal depression 
in middle reaching to transverse depression. 

Legs: Anterior tibiae tridentate; apical tooth broad, bent outward 
at nearly right angle to tibia. Apical spur elongate, narrow, slightly 
longer than combined length of first three tarsal segments. Anterior 
trochanter large, prominent, impunctate, rugose ventrally. Anterior 
femoral groove and about one-half the dorsal surface of femur covered 
with fine, short, golden setae. Posterior femur with marginal groove 
covering one-half the length from the apex. Terminal spurs of middle 
and posterior tibiae unequal: the longer spur four-fifths the length 
of the first tarsal segment; shorter spur two-thirds the length of the 
longer one. Middle and posterior tibiae nearly straight, narrow, 
slightly curving outward toward the weakly expanded apex. First 
segment of middle and posterior tarsi equal in length to next three 
segments combined. 

Diagnosis: Small for the genus and darker than usual. Differs 
from all known species in pronotal outline (fig. 4). The explanate 
margin is narrower than E. duncani, E. bruneri, or E. moseri. It 
differs from E. bruneri and E. moseri in having the metasternum 
punctate. It differs further from E. duncani in the rounded angle 
at the constriction rather than an acute one. It also differs from all 
others in distribution and host ant species. 

Host: Recorded by Hinton (1934) as being found with Atta sexdens 
at the type-locality, but that species is not now known from Mexico 
and this record probably refers to Atta mexicana. Although this 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

ant has a wide distribution, as shown in figure 1, E. formica is known 
only from the type-locality in south central Mexico. 

Specimens examined: 1 — Tejupilco, Mex., Temascaltepec, 23-VI-33, H. E. 
Hinton and R. L. Usinger, Paratype No. 54675 [USNM]. 

Euparixia costaricensis Hinton 

Figure 7 

Euparixia costaricensis Hinton 1936, pp. 274-275. [Type: Costa Rica; United 
States National Museum, No. 54674.] 

Holotype: Length 4.5 mm, width 2.2 mm. Elongate, convex, 
moderately shining, very dark brown with margins of pronotum and 
head reddish brown. Legs and venter similarly dark brown. 

Head: Clypeus widely, shallowly emarginate between small tri- 
angular teeth, apex inflexed ventrally at middle; sides very weakly 
reflexed and weakly arcuate, length from teeth to right-angled, moder- 
ately sharply rounded genae equal to that between the teeth. Head 
moderately convex, weakly rugose in front between teeth, very fine, 
well-separated punctures, separated by three diameters, over anterior 
of median convexity and outward toward genae, gradually elongate, 
larger and closer, to dense, coarse and round across the base. Frontal 
suture not visible. 

Pronotum: Subquadrate; width 1.8 mm, length 1.2 mm. Anterior 
angles broadly rounded; posterior angles noticeably angulate and 
rather sharply rounded; base strongly margined, broadly evenly 
arcuate, the line of curvature continuing forward inside the posterior 
angles. Lateral margin with a slight but noticeable angle slightly in 
front of the middle. Surface deeply impressed laterally at anterior 
third behind the eyes, leaving the anterior angles wide, flat, and 
explanate, this flattened margin continued narrowly posteriorly to 
and including the posterior angles; another rather deep, elongate 
depression paralleling the base, midway between anterior and pos- 
terior margins with the ends of this fovea equidistant from the edges of 
the pronotum and the deeply impressed midline, which diminishes in 
depth from base to middle; except for the flat anterior angles and 
lateral margins, which show a few shallow moderate punctures and 
alutaceous sculpture, the entire surface is strongly and closely punc- 
tate, the punctures very coarse in the midline, between, in, and behind 
the lateral foveae, forward the size gradually smaller with intermixed 
fine punctures toward the anterior margin, where all are of uniform 
diameter. A few scattered short, erect setae show in glancing light 
over the flattened anterior angles. 

Elytra: Together elongate oval, convex, widest slightly behind 
middle. Humeri strongly dentate. Striae strong with deep elongate 



no. 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 17 

punctures separated by less than their length; intervals convex, 
with very fine, quite close punctures bearing extremely short, fin p. 
setae visible in glancing light. Scutellura small, elongate, flat, with 
two small punctures basally. 

Sternum: Coxae of mesosternum widely separated, the distance 
between them barely more than the length of trochanter of middle 
leg; mesosternum between the coxae with sharply margined, slightly 
depressed area shaped like an inverted pear, with a wide, deeply 
eroded line around the larger forward end of the pear, the median 
area sloping forward into a wide, deep pit or fovea, the pit sharply 
margined laterally and anteriorly; this intercoxal area relatively 
smooth posteriorly and separated from the metasternum by a trans- 
verse carina. Metasternum with a more or less pentagonal flat 
area, with a deep, wide eroded line around each middle coxa, and 
with a similar, long, deeply eroded midline, this latter separated anteri- 
orly from the coxal lines by a smooth area equalling its own width; 
the pentagonal area otherwise everywhere with well-separated fine 
punctures and with three or four coarse punctures immediately 
behind each mesocoxa ; a very large, deeply eroded, anteriorly strongly 
arcuate area extending almost to sides in front of posterior coxae. 

Abdomen: The first three of four visible segments longer at sides 
than middle, terminal segment slightly longer at middle; last three 
segments bordered anteriorly by series of longitudinal carinae en- 
closing square or rectangular punctures or pits, those of the anterior 
segment uniform from side to side, enclosing square punctures, those 
at middle of the next twice as long as preceding and gradually much 
longer at sides, those of the terminal segment long at middle and de- 
creasing in length toward sides; surface of first two visible segments 
with scattered, very moderate, shallow punctures at middle to coarse 
at sides. Posterior edge of the segments bordered at middle by a 
row of close-set smaller punctures that become very close, deep, and 
very coarse at extreme sides, this area appearing undercut by the 
punctures; third visible segment smooth except for two or three 
punctures at extreme sides; terminal segment and most of pygidium 
apparently eaten on one side by a dermestid but remainder of segment 
with scattered moderate punctures. 

Legs: Anterior tibiae normal, sharply tridentate, the middle tooth 
slightly nearer apical tooth, the basal tooth equidistant from base to 
tip of apical tooth. Spur slender, acuminate, not as long as first tooth. 
Tarsi missing from all legs of the unique holotype. Anterior femur 
with perimarginal groove; surface with close, shallow, moderate 
punctures bearing extremely short, fine, almost invisible setae. 
Trochanter moderately large, ventrally concave. Middle and hind 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

tibiae slender, only very slightly bowed. Spurs and tarsi missing. 
Middle and hind femora slightly arcuate, surface with punctures 
separated by about three diameters of the fine punctures near base 
and posterior margin, gradually larger along anterior margin and 
outward to apex, where they are coarse and slightly closer together, 
usually showing extremely short setae except for two or three longer 
setae at knee. Middle femur with complete posterior marginal line; 
hind femur with line inward from knee less than half femoral length. 

Diagnosis: Differs from other species of Euparixia in the pronotal 
outline, simply convex elytral intervals, and by the peculiar pear- 
shaped depression of the mesosternum. 

Specimens examined: Unique holotype. Only data: Costa Rica 
(USNM). 

Host: Unknown, but probably Atta colombica Guer. or A. cephalotes 
(L.). 



Literature Cited 

BORGMEIER, T. 

1959. Revision der Gattung Atta Fabricius. Studia Ent., new ser., vol. 2, 
pp. 321-290, 29 figs. 
Boyle, W. Wayne 

1956. A revision of the Erotylidae of America north of Mexico (Coleoptera I . 
Bull. American Mus. Nat. Hist., vol. 110, no. 2, pp. 65-172. 
Brown, Williamson James 

1927. Two new North American genera of the tribe Eupariini (Coleoptera). 
Canadian Ent., vol. 59, pp. 288-289, 1 fig. 
Byaus, L. F. 

1949. The Mexican leaf-cutting ant in the United States. Journ. Econ. 

Ent., vol. 42, no. 3, p. 545. 
Cazier, Mont A., and Mortenson, Martin A. 

1965. Bionomical observations on myrmecophilous beetles of the genus 
Cremastocheilus. Journ. Kansas Ent. Soc, vol. 38, pp. 19-44. 
Cazier, Mont A., and Statham, Marjorie 

1962. The behavior and habits of the myrmecophilous scarab Cremasto- 
cheilus stathami Cazier with notes on other species. Journ. New 
York Ent. Soc. vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 125-149, 4 figs., 3 tbls. 
Chapin, Edward A. 

1940. A revision of the West Indian beetles of the scarabaeid subfamily 
Aphodiinae. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., vol. 89, no. 3092, pp. 1-4]. 
Chillcott, J. G. 

1965. New species and stages of Nearctic Fannia R. D. (Diptcra: Muscidao) 
associated with nests of Hymenoptera. Canadian Ent., vol. 97, 
no. 6, pp. 640-647. 
Cook, T. W. 

1953. The ants of California. Palo Alto, Calif.: Pacific Books, 462 pp. 
Creighton, William S. 

1950. The ants of North America. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard 

College, vol. 104, pp. 1-585, 57 pis. 
Hinton, Howard E. 

1934. Two genera of Aphodiinae new to Mexico (Scarabaeidae: ColeoptcrO . 

Pan-Pacific Ent., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 27-30, 1 fig. 
1936. Studies in Mexican and Central American Eupariini (Coleoptera: 

Scarabaeidae). Univ. California (Berkeley) Publ. Ent., vol. 6, pp. 

273-276, 1 fig. 

ISLAS, FEDERICO 

1959. Un genero y especie nuevos de la subfamilia Aphodiinae en Mexico. 
Anal. Inst. Biol., vol. 29, pp. 343-348. 
Jones, T. H. 

1917. Occurrence of a fungus growing ant in Louisiana. Journ. Econ. 
Ent., vol. 10, no. 6, p. 561. 
Moser, John C. 

1962. Probing the secrets of the town ant. Forests and People, vol. 12, 

no. 4, pp. 12-13, 40-41, 4 figs. 

1963. Contents and structure of Atta texana nest in summer. Ann. Ent. 

Soc. America, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 286-291, 6 figs. 

19 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Sabrosky, Curtis W. 

1959. A revision of the genus Pholcomyia in North America (Diptera, 
Milichiidae). Ann. Ent. Soc. America, vol. 52, pp. 316-331. 
Smith, Marion R. 

1939. The Texas leaf-cutting ant (Alta texana Buck.) and its control in 

the Kisatchie National Forest of Louisiana. U. S. Dept. Agric. 

Forest Serv., Southern Forest Exp. Sta., Occas. Pap., vol. 84, 

pp. 1-11. 

1951. Formicidae. In Muesebeck, et al., Hymenoptera of North America: 

Synoptic catalog. U.S. Dept. Agric. Monogr. 2, 1420 pp. 
1963. Notes on the leaf-cutting ants Atta spp., of the United States and 
Mexico. Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 299-302. 
Spangler, Paul J. 

1962. A new species of the genus Oosternum and a key to the U. S. species 
(Coleoptera: Hydrophilidae) . Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 
75, pp. 97-100. 
Walter, E. V.; Seaton, Lee; and Mathewson, A. A. 

1938. The Texas leaf-cutting ant and its control. U. S. Dept. Agric. 
Circ. 494, pp. 1-18, 5 figs., 3 tbls. 
Weber, Neal A. 

1958. Evolution in fungus growing ants. Proc. 10th Intern. Congr. Ent., 
vol. 2, pp. 459-473; 12 figs. 
Westwood, John Obadiah 

1847. Descriptions of some exotic insects belonging to the family Aphodiidae. 
Trans. Ent. Soc. London, vol. 4, pp. 239-243. 
Wheeler, William M. 

1900. A new myrmecophile from the mushroom gardens of the Texas 
leaf-cutting ant. American Natur., vol. 34, no. 407, pp. 851-862. 
1907. The fungus-growing ants of North America. Bull. American Mus. 
Nat. Hist., vol. 23, no. 31, pp. 669-807, 5 pis. 



). 3616 GENUS EUPARIXIA — WOODRUFF AND CARTWRIGHT 21 








Figures 2-13. — Pronotal outline: 2, Euparixia duncani Brown; 3, Euparixia bruneri 
Chapin; 4, Euparixia formica Hinton; 6, Euparia castanea Serville; 7, Euparixia 
costaricensis Hinton; 8, Euparixoides cribratus Hinton. Holotype: 5, Euparixia 
moseri, new species. Posterior tibia and tarsus: 9, Euparixia moseri, new species; 
10, Euparia castanea Serville; 11, Pseudaiaenius socialis (Horn); 12, Euparixoides 
cribratus Hinton; 13, Cartwrightia intertribalis Islas. (Drawn by R. E. Woodruff.) 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3617 



BREDIN-ARCHBOLD-SMITHSONIAN 
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY OF DOMINICA 

4. Two New Species of Tiphia from the West Indies 
(Hymenoptera: Tiphiidae) l 



By Harry W. Allen 



The two wasps described below were collected recently on Dominica 
by Dr. H. E. Evans of the Harvard University Museum of Compara- 
tive Zoology and by Dr. W. W. Wirth of the U.S. Department of 
Agriculture as participants of the survey of that island by the Smith- 
sonian Institution. 

Tiphia dominicae, new species 

Figure 1 

This species differs from species of the North American mainland 
in having the second sternum perceptibly keeled. From other West 

1 Other faunal studies in this series are: 1, Kier, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 1966, 
vol. 121, no. 3577, pp. 1-9; 2, Stone, ibid., 1966, vol. 121, no. 3578, pp. 1-6; 3, 
Kirstener, ibid., 1967, vol. 123, no. 3610, pp. 1-6. A companion series on the 
flora appears in the "Contributions of the United States National Herbarium." 

2 Research Fellow in Entomology, Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia 
and Collaborator, U.S. Department of Agriculture, P.O. Box 150, Moorestown, 
N.J. 08057. This is the seventh paper by the author prepared under Grant 
GB-1240 of the National Science Foundation on a taxonomic study of the 
Tiphiinae of the New World. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Indian species that have been described the male may be distinguished 
by the sparse hairiness and narrowness of the cheek, and the relative 
shortness of the posterior section of the second cubital cell. 

Male. — Front with primary punctures ranging from contiguous 
above base of antennae to third-degree density in area lateral to 
ocelli; numerous minute punctures on lower half extending on sides 
into upper half. Antenna long and slender. Cheek (fig. 1a) much 
narrower than diameter of an antennal fossa; sparsely hairy. Clypeal 
extension usually bidentate. Mandible frequently with a small 
preapical cusp. Head width 2.72 least distance between eyes (four 
measured were 2.9, 2.65, 2.6, 2.75). 

Dorsum of pronotum with high, sharp transverse carina; punctures 
small, evenly distributed, of third-degree density. Lateral pronotum 
with a low, rounded anterior process; disc flat, microscopically 
aciculate, without groove across its middle. Mesopleuron not any- 





Figure 1. — Tiphia dominicae, new species: a, outline of head; b, forewing. 



where masked under fine appressed hairs; primary punctures small, 
usually separated by several times their average diameter; minute 
punctures more numerous than primaries only on upper half and along 
posterior slope. Hind tibia on inside with a naked longitudinal streak 
that is moderately ridged on apical half; sensorium obscure. Tegula 
black, opaque, glossy, without marginal groove. Forewing (fig. 1b) 
strongly infumated; stigma nearly twice as long as wide; radial cell 
greatly exceeds second cubital cell in lateral extension; second cubital 
cell with its anterior section much longer than the posterior (average 
of four defined in ratios of the first intercubital, listed clockwise: 
1.0, 2.5, 1.85, 1.9). 

Dorsum of propodeum smooth, polished; areola with slightly con- 
cave sides and broadly truncate apex, twice as long as apical width or 
slightly less. Tergum 1 without a transverse carina, or at most with 
an irregular poorly developed one in center of segment; preapical 



no. 3617 TIPHIA ALLEN 3 

band of fine, discrete punctures in a moderate depression, and at 
middle about two punctures wide. Intermediate terga glossy; hairs 
short and sparse; punctures variable but usually very small and widely 
separated; without apical rows of microscopic punctures or gouges. 
Sternum 2 with a perceptible median callosity or keel. 

Length 6 to 9 mm. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Holotype. — cf; Dleau Gommier, Dominica, 1400 ft.; 16-11-65, 
H. E. Evans; U.S. National Museum. 

Paratypes. — Collected by H. E. Evans on Dominica in 1965: 
Dleau Gommier, 1400 ft.; 10 d 1 d 1 on 15-11 and 6 c? d" on 2-III. Two 
miles south of mouth, Layou River; 4 d 1 d" on 13-11 and 6 d" d 1 on 
5-IIL Pond Figues R., 400 ft.; 4 <? d 1 on 9-II and 1 d 1 on 9-III. 
South of Chiltern, 1600 ft.; 4 d 1 d 1 on 19-11. Freshwater L., 2500 ft.; 
3 cf d 1 on 6-III. Roseau; 1 d 1 on 8-III. Clarke Hall, Layou Vail.; 

1 d" on 10/17-11. 

Collected by W. W. Wirth in 1965: d'Leau Gommier; 1 d" on 
16-111. South of Chiltern Est.; 2 d 1 d 1 on 2-II. South of Chiltern 
Est.; 1 d 1 on 20-11. 

Tiphia layoiiae, new species 

Tiphia layouae differs from T. dominica in having a distinctly wider 
cheek and a well-defined transverse carina, complete across the dorsum 
of the first tergum. 

Male. — Differs from the description of the male of T. dominica as 
follows: The secondary punctures of the front are usually confined to 
a smaller area. The cheek is wider and almost as wide as the antennal 
fossa. The head width is 2.25 times the least distance between the 
eyes (four measured were 2.3, 2.3, 2.2, 2.2). The discal punctures of 
the mesopleuron average slightly coarser. The sections of the second 
cubital cell defined in ratios of the first intercubital vein and listed 
clockwise (average of 4) are 1.0, 2.44, 1.76, 1.89 and are almost 
identical with the cubital cell ratios of T. dominica. Tergum 1 with 
a well-defined transverse carina extending entirely across dorsum. 

Length 5 to 8 mm. 

Female. — Unknown. 

Holotype. — d 1 ; Clarke Hall, Layou Valley, Dominica; 10/17-11-65, 
H. E. Evans; U.S. National Museum. 

Paratypes. — Collected by H. E. Evans on Dominica in 1965: 
Clarke Hall, Layou Valley; 2 d 1 & on 10/17-11, 2 d 1 d 1 on 20/28-11, 

2 d 1 d 1 on 3/13-HI. Pond Figues R., 400 ft.; 3 d 1 & on 9-IL 
Collected by W. W. Wirth in 1965: Pond Figues R.; 1 d 1 on 25-1. 

Hillsborough Est.; 1 d 1 on 15— III. Clarke Hall, "malaise trap"; 
1 d 1 on 8/10-1. 12 cTd 1 ; Clarke Hall, "malaise trap"; 12 d 1 d" on 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

21/31-111. Clarke Hall, "malaise trap"; 5 c? c? on 11/20-11. Clarke 
Hall; 1 cf on 1/10-III. 

Collected by P. J. Spangler in 1964: Clarke Hall; 1 tf 1 on 12/17-XI. 
South Chiltern; 2 tf 1 cf on 8/12-XII. 

Collected by G. Steyskal in 1966: Clarke Hall Est.; 1 d" on 11-V. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 - Number 3618 



Notes on the demanii Section 

Of Genus Gonodactylus Berthold 

With Descriptions of Three New Species 

(Crustacea: Stomatopoda) 



By Raymond B. Manning 

Chairman, Department of Invertebrate Zoology 



Among the Indo-West Pacific species assigned to the genus Gono- 
dactylus by Kemp (1913) was G. demanii Henderson, with two varietal 
forms, G. d. spinosus Bigelow and G. d. espinosus Borradaile. These 
three forms, characterized chiefly by their small size and small ocular 
scales, and, in the first two, by the strongly arched median carina of 
the telson and the presence of dorsal spinules on the telson, occupy an 
isolated position in the genus. Some authors, prior to Kemp's work, 
considered these forms to be varieties of G. chiragra (Fabricius, 1781) ; 
subsequent to 1913 they have been considered as distinct species or as 
three subspecies of G. demanii. 

As noted above, very small size, with total length not exceeding 
50 mm (in some species 30 mm or less), is characteristic of G. demanii 
and its allies. Kemp was certainly aware of this but apparently 
disregarded it in his attempt to order the apparent variants of the 
common G. chiragra. Earlier workers, notably Lanchester (1903), 
had recognized numerous lettered or named varieties of G. chiragra. 

l 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Lanchester attempted to arrange these in transitional sequences 
leading to a typical form ; several of his transitional forms were based 
on small specimens (G. c. var. incipiens, G. c. var. segregatus) with 
obviously adult features of telson morphology. Kemp noted that 
small specimens varied more than adults and proposed (1913, p. 151) 
three hypotheses to explain observed variation in Indo-West Pacific 
species of the genus: (1) small specimens exhibiting wide variation 
die before reaching maturity; (2) small specimens represent dwarf 
races capable of "breeding and perpetuating their precise type"; 
(3) with growth, small specimens lose their characteristic features 
and assume the typical facies. Kemp suggested that the second 
hypothesis was improbable and that most likely variation could be 
explained by growth changes. 

More recently, students of the group have begun to accept the 
possibility that species might mature at different sizes. Bigelow (1931) 
suggested some support for this hypothesis, and Serene (1954) recog- 
nized two dwarf races ("race naine") from Viet Nam: G. chiragra var. 
viridis and G.falcatus var. ternatensis de Man, 1902. In the western 
Atlantic, Manning (1967) reported on small species of Gonodactyhts 
that had adult features at TL 20 mm and that could be distinguished 
with no difficulty from the larger species. 

The current study shows that in addition to G. demanii there are 
six recognizable species of small size in the Indo-West Pacific, and a 
survey of the literature indicates that several more may have been 
recognized in the past by other authors. These include G. chiragra var. 
affinis de Man, 1902, and G. c. var. conjinis de Man, 1902, both from 
Ternate, Indonesia, and G. c. var. segregatus Lanchester, 1903, from 
the Maldive and Laccadive Islands. Gonodactylus affinis and G. 
segregatus are, from their accounts, very similar, and G. conjinis may 
prove to be conspecific with G. incipiens, recognized below. 

One of the features characteristic of G. demanii, sensu stricto, and 
G. hendersoni, new species, described herein, is the absence of setae 
on the inner edges of the uropodal exopod and endopod; G. demanii 
may have a few proximal setae on the inner margin of the endopod, 
but most of the inner margin is bare and smooth. In this feature 
these two species resemble two other species currently placed in 
Mesacturus Miers (= Gonodactylus Group II of Kemp, 1913), M. 
drepanophorus (de Man, 1902) and M. herdmani (Tattersall, 1906). 
The telson morphology of these two pairs of species also seems to 
be similar, but the two species placed in Mesacturus differ in having 
a sharply trispinous rostral plate. Further study may show that 
both M. drepanophorus and M. herdmani should be reassigned to 
Gonodactylus, for neither have the strong^ recurved spines on the 
uropodal exopod characteristic of the other species of Mesacturus. 



NO. 3618 GOXODACTYLUS — MANNING 3 

Gonodactylus dernani var. pruvotae Gravier, 1930, from New Cale- 
donia, has been shown by Serene (1952) to be a synonym of Mes- 
acturus spinosocarinatus (Fukuda, 1909). It need not be discussed 
further here. 

This study indicates that the Indo-West Pacific species of Gono- 
dactylus are not distributed necessarily throughout the area. Gono- 
dactylus espinosus is apparently a Pacific species that does not occur 
in the Indian Ocean; G. incipiens may also occur only in the Pacific 
although it has been recorded in the Indian Ocean. Gonodactylus 
hendersoni has a wider distribution pattern, between Hawaii and 
Burma, but it has not been recorded from the western Indian Ocean. 
Four of the species discussed herein, including G. demanii, G. spinosus 
and two new species, are known to occur only in the western Indian 
Ocean and Red Sea. 

Analysis of certain Indo-West Pacific species of Gonodactylus as 
well as work on the American species leads me to believe that quali- 
tative aspects of telson morphology are very important taxonomic 
characters in this genus. The overall shape of the telson, the shape 
and position of the marginal teeth and their carinae, the shape and 
position of the dorsal carinae, and the presence and size of dorsal 
spinules or tubercles are all important specific characters. It must 
be kept in mind that the relative tumidity of the median and anterior 
submedian carinae may change with age and may differ by sex. 
Characters of the telson in combination with characters afforded by 
the ocular scales, the rostral plate, the general shape of the lateral 
processes of the thoracic somites, and especially in the demanii 
section, the shape and setation of uropods, provide excellent char- 
acterizations of the species now known. Color patterns and habitat 
may also prove to be important. 

In the material examined, the number following the number of 
specimens and sex is total length (TL), measured along the midline 
from the apex of the rostral plate to the apices of the submedian 
spines of the telson; all measurements are in millimeters (mm). All 
specimens are in the U.S. National Museum. The illustrations were 
prepared by my wife Lilly. The support of this study through the 
Research Awards Program of the Smithsonian Institution is 
gratefully acknowledged. 

In the following key I have included only the species reported 
herein. Too little is known of the characteristics of G. affinis, G. 
confinis, and G. segregates to include them. 

Key to Gonodactylus demanii and Allies 

1. Inner margin of uropodal endopod largely or completely devoid of setae, 
margin smooth 2 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Inner margin of uropodal endopod completely fringed with setae, margin 
serrate at insertion of setae 3 

2. Rostral plate with sharp anterolateral angles; submedian teeth of telson with 

well-marked ventral carina; inner margin of uropodal endopod completely 

devoid of setae hendersoni, new species, p. 4 

Rostral plate with rounded anterolateral angles; submedian teeth of telson 
poorly or not carinate; inner margin of uropodal endopod with 1-10 proxi- 
mal setae demanii, p. 8 

3. Telson with dorsal spinules or spines 4 

Telson smooth dorsally 5 

4. Telson broader than long, dorsal spinules large; lateral marginal teeth prom- 

inent lanchesteri, new species, p. 11 

Telson as long as broad, dorsal spinules small; lateral marginal teeth ob- 
scure spinosus, p. 14 

5. Proximal segment of uropodal exopod lacking fixed distal spine ventrally; 

lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites subequal. 

choprai, new species, p. 16 

Proximal segment of uropodal exopod with fixed distal spine ventrally; 

lateral process of sixth thoracic somite noticeably larger than that of 

seventh somite 6 

6. Intermediate teeth and denticles well-formed; uropodal setae in one marginal 

series incipiens, p. 18 

Intermediate teeth and denticles poorly formed, apex of teeth appressed to 
margin of submedians; uropodal setae in several series on margin of 
endopod espinosus, p. 21 

Gonodactylus hendersoni, new species 

Figures 1-2 

Gonodactylus new species de Man, 1888, p. 574, pi. 22a (fig. 7). 

Gonodactylus demani. — Kemp, 1915, p. 182. — Roxas and Estampador, 1930, p. 
121.— Roxas, 1930, p. 18.— Serene, 1953, pp. 506, 507 [listed]; 1954, pp. 6, 10, 
83, figs. 13-9, 14.— Stephenson and McNeill, 1955, p. 250. 

Gonodactylus chiragra var. Demanii. — Hansen, 1926, p. 26. 

Gonodactylus demanii. — Holthuis, 1941, p. 282, fig. 8b [part]. — Dollfus, 1959, 
p. 242 [part; discussion]. 

Holotype— 19, 22.3; Burma; G. E. Gates; USNM 120467. 

Paratypes. — 29, 22.5-23.3; Waikiki, Oahu Id., Hawaiian Ids.; 
coral head; R. A. Kinzie, III; USNM 120469. 19, 16.5; Naha, 
Okinawa; Albatross; 1906; USNM 120468. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate angled anterolat- 
eral^, anterior margins straight, almost transverse or sloping 
anterolaterally. 

Ocular scales obscure, low, rounded, possibly fused along midline. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites subtruncate, 
rounded anteriorly and posteriorly, subequal in size. 

Sixth abdominal somite with 6 swollen carinae, each with small 
apical spine. 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 5 

Telson slightly wider than long, with 3 pairs of marginal teeth, 
submedians slender, with movable apices; intermediates well formed, 
slender, apices spiniform; lateral teeth well developed, apices sharp; 
dorsal surface of telson with spinules or tubercles; median carina 




Figure 1. — Gonodactylus hendersoni, new species, female paratype, TL 23.3, Waikiki: a, last 
abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; b, submedian teeth of telson, ventral view; c, uropod, 
ventral view; d, rostral plate. 

moderately or very inflated, flanked laterally by 1 or more irregular 
rows of spines converging posteriorly on spined knob; anterior sub- 
median carinae short, rounded, flanked laterally and posteriorly with 
large, irregularly placed spines; dorsal carinae of submedian teeth 
with dorsal patch of large spines; numerous spaced submedian 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM Vol. 123 

denticles present; 2 spiniform intermediate denticles present, recessed 
anteriorly; submedian teeth slender, each with prominent longitudinal 
carina on ventral surface, carina sharp throughout its length; inter- 
mediate teeth with shorter ventral carina. 

Basal segment of uropod with at most a faint prominence inside 
dorsal carina; inner margin of both segments of exopod smooth, 
nonsetose; endopod with inner margin straight, completely devoid of 
setae; exopod with fixed distal spine on ventral surface of proximal 
segment; basal prolongation with spines subequal in length, slender 
inner spine shorter than outer. 

Color. — In preservative, posterior third of carapace and midline 
of sixth thoracic and first abdominal somites with rectangular patch 
of dark chromatophores; patch on carapace with 2 submedian black 
spots, those on thoracic and abdominal somites each with 1 median 
black spot. 

Size. — Females only examined. TL 16.5-23.3. Other measure- 
ments of female holotype, TL 22.3: carapace length 4.4; fifth ab- 
dominal somite width 3.4; telson length 2.6, width 3.0. 

Etymology. — The species is named for J. K. Henderson, the 
carcinologist who named G. demanii. 

Discussion. — G. hendersoni, new species, can be distinguished from 
all other species in the genus by the following combination of char- 
acters: (1) the rostral plate is angled anterolaterally; (2) the uropodal 
endopod and inner margin of the exopod are completely devoid of 
setae; and (3) the submedian and intermediate teeth of the telson 
are each provided with a sharp ventral carina, Gonodactylus hender- 
soni, new species, most closely resembles G. demanii but can always be 
distinguished from that species by the characters listed above. 
Holthuis (1941) pointed out some of these differences in specimens of 
both species from Indo-Malaya and the Red Sea. 

The female from Burma differs from the two Hawaiian specimens 
(fig. 1) in the following features: (1) the anterior margins of the 
rostral plate slope anteriorly; (2) the telson has fewer spines; (3) the 
median carina of the telson is more circular but not as high; and 
(4) the uropodal endopod is noticeably broader. The specimen from 
Okinawa (fig. 2), although smaller, resembles that from Burma. In 
other features these specimens agree closely. 

Distribution. — Indo-West Pacific, from the coast of Burma east- 
ward to Hawaii. Records in the literature: off Savu, Seva, and 
Ambon anchorage, Indonesia (Hansen, 1926); Pulo Edam, Indonesia 
(de Man, 1888); Kambang, Koepang, and Tidore, Indonesia (Hol- 
thuis, 1941); Green Id., Queensland, Australia (Stephenson and 
McNeill, 1955); Viet Nam (Serene, 1953, 1954); Puerto Galera, 
Mindoro, Philippine Ids. (Roxas and Estampador, 1930), and Taytay, 



GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 




8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Palawan Id., Philippine Ids. (Kemp, 1915; Roxas and Estampador, 
1930). The habitat and depth range have not been recorded. 

In compiling the synonymy of G. hendersoni, new species, I have 
assumed that all records from southern India and the western Indian 
Ocean should be referred to G. demanii. 

Gonodactylus demanii Henderson, 1893 

Figure 3 

Gonodactylus Demanii Henderson, 1893, p. 455, pi. 40 (figs. 23-24). — Thurston, 

1895, p. 120. 
Gonodactylus spinosus. — Lenz, 1905, p. 387, pi. 47 (fig. 12). 
Gonodactylus Demani. — Nobili, 1905, p. 11. — Parisi, 1940, pp. 4, 6. 
Gonodactylus de Mani. — Nobili, 1906, p. 158. 
Gonodactylus De Mani. — Nobili, 1906a, p. 330. — Lenz, 1910, p. 572. — Maccagno, 

1936, p. 179.— Dollfus, 1938, p. 213, fig. 16. 
Gonodactylus demani. — Borradaile, 1907, pp. 210 [key], 212. — Kemp, 1913, pp. 

164, 198, pi. 9 (figs. 10S-111).— Tattersall, 1921, p. 359.— Kemp and Chopra, 

1921, pp. 297, 309.— Gravely, 1927, p. 151.— Gravier, 1935, p. 360, fig. 3?.— 

Ramadam, 1936, p. 8. — Taramelli, 1955, pp. 44, 47. 
Gonodactylus demanii. — Holthuis, 1941, p. 282, fig. 8a [part]. — Stella, 1955, p. 

69. — Dollfus, 1959, p. 242 [part; discussion]. 
Gonodactylus demani demani. — Ingle, 1963, p. 27 [part]. 

Material.— Id", 20.9; 19, 18.6; Dorom Id., Dahlak, Red Sea; 
A. Ben Tuvia; Sta. E57/522; Dec. 27, 1957; exchange from BMNH; 
USNM 120471. lc\ 23.8; 19, 30.1; Tor and Ain Musa, Gulf of 
Suez; R. B. S. Sewell; exchange from BMNH; USNM 120472. 19, 
21.5; western end of Astola Id., ca, 177 mi. west of Karachi, West 
Pakistan; 0-8 ft., in rocks, sand, scanty, scattered coral; Sta. LW-1; 
L. P. Woods, et al; IIOE; Nov. 27, 1963; USNM 120473. 1 young 
9, ca. 10.0; % mi. northeast of Hare Id., Gulf of Mannar, S. India; 
from dead coral, 1.5-3 ft.; Sta. GA-64-13a; J. S. Garth; IIOE; 
Feb. 22, 1964; USNM 120470. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate with anterior margins 
almost transverse; anterolateral angles subacute but rounded. 

Ocular scales small, low, rounded or subtruncate. 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites rounded or 
subtruncate, subequal in size or that of seventh somite slightly larger. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Sixth abdominal somite with 6 swollen carinae, each usually armed 
with apical spinule, spinules obsolete in larger specimens. 

Telson broader than long, with 3 pairs of marginal teeth, submedians 
with movable apices, intermediates and laterals with sharp apices; 
dorsal surface of telson with spinules; submedian anterior prominences 
on telson often tuberculate; median carina moderately or very inflated, 
with 1-3 posterior tubercles; posterolateral margin of median carina 



GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 



9 



with 0-2 spinules in row converging on anchor; anchor with 1-3 
spinules; anterior submedian carinae short, swollen, with apical and 
postapical spinules and 0-1 lateral and 0-2 dorsal spinules; carinae 
of submedian teeth with 1-3 dorsal spinules or tubercles; intermediate 
carinae with 2-3 spinules or tubercles in 1 longitudinal row or 5-6 in 
2 rows; numerous small submedian denticles present; 2 sharp inter- 
mediate denticles present, recessed anteriorly, inner set on rounded 
lobe; ventral surface of submedian teeth of telson with low carina on 
inner side; intermediate teeth lacking ventral carina. 




Figure 3. — Gonodactylus demanii Henderson, female, TL 18.6, Dahlak: a, last abdominal 
somite, telson, and uropod; b, submedian teeth of telson, ventral view; c, uropod, ventral 
view; d, rostral plate. 

Basal segment of uropod without well-marked lobe or projection 
on dorsal surface inside dorsal carina; proximal segment of exopod 
nonsetose except for scattered small setae on proximal third; distal 
segment of exopod with inner margin nonsetose; proximal segment of 
exopod with fixed distal spine on ventral surface; endopod broad, 
inner margin convex proximally, concave distally, smooth except for 
1-10 proximal plumose setae; apex and outer margin of endopod 
completely fringed with setae; inner spine of basal prolongation 
slender, prominent, almost as long as outer spine. 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Color. — Largely faded in present material; bodies of some speci- 
mens show traces of scattered black ckromatophores concentrated in 
dorsal patches on sixth thoracic and first abdominal somites. 

Size.— Males, TL 20.9-23.8; females, TL ca. 10.0-30.1. Other 
measurements of male, TL 20.9: carapace length 4.3; fifth abdominal 
somite width 3.7; telson length 2.5, width 2.9. 

Discussion. — G. demanii is very similar to 6. hendersoni in general 
appearance but differs in having rounded anterolateral angles on 
the rostral plate, in having a few proximal setae on the inner margin 
of the uropodal endopod, and in lacking the strong ventral carinae 
on the submedian and intermediate marginal teeth of the telson. 

In general, the carinae of the telson of males are more tumid than 
those of females, but dorsal tubercles of females are usually sharper. 

The number and arrangement of tubercles on the telson are quite 
variable, but the posterior end of the median carina, the anchor, 
and the dorsal surface of the other carinae are always armed. The 
tubercles on the submedian teeth are usually arranged side-by-side, 
rarely forming a triangle. On the intermediate teeth the tubercles 
may be arranged in one or two longitudinal rows. 

The very small specimen from Hare Id. in the Gulf of Manaar 
is tentatively assigned here. There are traces of one or two small, 
proximal setae on the inner margin of the uropodal endopod, the 
distal segment of the uropodal exopod is more rounded than in the 
small specimen of G. hendersoni from Okinawa, and the ventral carinae 
on the telson are very poorly developed. Further, the specimen 
almost completely lacks the dorsal spinules of the telson. 

The illustrations of color pattern given by Gravier (1935) were 
based on an outline drawing of G. chiragra (Fabricius). 

Distribution. — Western Indian Ocean, from localities between 
India and Mozambique. Records include: Madras Harbor, India 
(Kemp and Chopra, 1921); Rameswaram, Gulf of Mannar (Hender- 
son, 1893; Thurston, 1895; Ingle, 1963); Paniban and Shingle Id., 
Gulf of Mannar (Gravely, 1927); Bombay, India (Kemp, 1913); 
Karachi, West Pakistan (Kemp, 1913); Astola Id., West Pakistan; 
Persian Gulf (Nobili, 1906; Kemp, 1913); Arabian Sea (Kemp, 1913); 
from scattered localities in the Red Sea (Nobili, 1906a; Tattersall, 
1921; Kemp and Chopra, 1921; Maccagno, 1936; Ramadam, 1936; 
Parisi, 1940; Holthuis, 1941; Stella, 1955; Ingle, 1963); Zanzibar 
(Lenz, 1905, 1910; Nobili, 1905; Borradaile, 1907; Taramelli, 1955); 
Aldabra Id. (Lenz, 1905, 1910); Ibo Archipelago (Kemp, 1913); and 
from Fort Dauphin (Gravier, 1935) and Maromondia (Dollfus, 1938), 
Malagasy Republic. 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 11 

Gonodactylus lanchesteri, new species 

Figure 4 

Gonodactylus spinosus. — Nobili, 1906a, p. 330. 

Gonodactylus demand var. spinosus. — Tattersall, 1921, p. 361. — Ramadam, 1936, 

p. 9.— Chopra, 1939, p. 172. 
Gonodactylus Demani var. spinosus. — Parisi, 1922, pp. 4, 6; 1940, p. 4. 
Gonodactylus Demani spinosus. — Gravel, 1936, p. 177. 
Gonodactylus demani spinosus. — Monod, 1937, p. 19. — Ingle, 1963, p. 28, figs. 

25, 55. 
Gonodactylus De Mani var. spinosus. — Dollfus, 1938, p. 215, fig. 17. 
^.Gonodactylus demanii. — Barnard, 1950, p. 862, fig. 3e. 

Holotype. — 1 cf , 34.2; Junghi Bay, Ibo Archipelago, Mozambique; 
sand, mud, shell; 5-18 fms.; A. Patience; USNM 120286. 

Paratypes.— 1 d\ 22.7; 5 9 , 22.3-31.5; data as in holotype; USNM 
44493. 

Other material.— 1 cf, 17.4; Eylath, Red Sea; Sta. E55/710; H. 
Steinitz; Nov. 30, 1955; exchange from BMNH; USNM 120288. 
19, 16.8; Eylath, Red Sea; Sta. E55/735a; H. Steinitz; Nov. 30, 1955; 
exchange from BMNH; USNM 120287. 4d\ 15.6-24.8; Andro- 
mache Reef, %-% mi. offshore from Mombasa, Kenya; 0-1 m, coral 
reef and tide pools; Taylor, et al., Sta. RS-4; HOE; Nov. 16, 1964; 
USNM 120291. 1 d", 29.8; 2 9, 24.8-25.9; Andromache Reef, south of 
south channel off Mombasa Id., Mombasa, Kenya; %~1 m in reef 
lagoon; L. S. Kornicker; HOE; Nov. 15, 1964; USNM 120293. 
1 cf , 19.4; Andromache Reef, off Mombasa, Kenya; reef flat, 0-3.5 ft.; 
Fehlman, et al., Sta. HA-2; HOE; Nov. 16, 1964; USNM 120294. 
1 cf, 21.9; southwestern end of Mouniameri Id., between Mayotta 
and Pamanzi Ids., Comoro Ids.; rocky lava and coral reef; 0-4 m; 
Taylor, et al., Sta. RS-14; IIOE; Nov. 23, 1964; USNM 120292. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate rounded antero- 
laterally, anterior margins of basal portion transverse or sloping 
posterolaterally. 

Ocular scales low, rounded or subtruncate. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites rounded or 
subtruncate, subequal in size. 

Sixth abdominal somite with 6 swollen carinae, apical spines 
occasionally absent on larger specimens. 

Telson broader than long, with 3 pairs of marginal teeth, sub- 
medians with movable apices; intermediate and lateral teeth short, 
blunt, apices rounded, sharper in smaller specimens; lateral teeth 
distinct; median carina very inflated in all specimens, in some merg- 
ing laterally with anterior submedians; dorsal spinulation of telson 
variable, with scattered spines all over dorsal surface or with smooth 



12 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



dorsal carinae, spinules or tubercles restricted to carinae of sub- 
median and intermediate teeth; anchor not distinct, fused with 
median carina; carinae of submedian teeth swollen, with several 
scattered dorsal tubercles or spinules proximally; carinae of inter- 
mediate teeth swollen, with few scattered dorsal tubercles or spinules; 
numerous small, distinct submedian denticles present; 2 intermediate 




Figure 4. — Gonodactylus lanchesteri, new species, male holotype, TL 34.2, Junghi Bay : 
a, last abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; b, submedian teeth of telson, ventral view; 
c, ventral view of uropod (setae omitted); d, rostral plate. Female paratype, TL 22.3, 
Junghi Bay: e, telson. 



denticles present, both usually recessed anteriorly, apex of inner 
occasionally reaching to or beyond apex of teeth; sharp lateral den- 
ticle present on some specimens; submedian teeth lacking well-defined 
ventral carina. 

Basal segment of exopod with inconspicuous lobe on dorsal surface 
inside of dorsal carina; uropodal endopod slender, inner margin 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 13 

almost straight, completely fringed with setae; both segments of 
exopod with normal complement of setae; proximal segment of exo- 
pod with fixed distal spine on ventral surface; basal prolongation 
with inner spine slender, shorter than outer. 

Color. — Several specimens have dark chromatophores scattered 
over the body, concentrated in dark patches on the sixth thoracic 
and first abdominal somite, and in transverse bands on the carapace 
and abdominal somites; sixth thoracic somite with dark lateral 
patches. 

Size.— Males, TL 15.6-34.2; females, TL 16.8-31.5. Other measure- 
ments of male holotype, TL 34.2 : carapace length 7.7; fifth abdominal 
somite width 6.3; telson length 4.8, width 5.3. 

Etymology. — The species is named for W. F. Lanchester, the 
carcinologist from Cambridge who was the first to recognize the 
importance of the diversity of the structure of the telson in 
Gonodactylus. 

Discussion. — G. lanchesteri is most similar to G. spinosus Bigelow, 
differing primarily in the telson having well-developed intermediate 
marginal teeth, being wider than long, and having fewer (and usually 
larger) dorsal spinules. As in G. hendersoni, the number and arrange- 
ment of spinules on the telson is very variable. G. lanchesteri has 
no trace of the ventral carinas on the submedian marginal teeth of 
the telson that are characteristic of G. demanii and G. hendersoni, 
and the full complement of setae on the uropod distinguishes both 
G. lanchesteri and G. spinosus from G. demanii and G. hendersoni. 

As in other species, the carinae of the telson and sixth abdominal 
somite in males are more swollen than in females, and younger 
specimens are more spinulose than adults. The extent of spinule 
variation on the telson is shown in figure 4. 

There may be two species mixed in this series of specimens, both 
of which have well-developed intermediate marginal teeth on the 
telson. One of the specimens from Andromache Reef (male, TL 
19.4) has many small spinules on the dorsal carinae of the telson, 
as does the illustrated female from the type-locality. The remainder 
of the specimens have far fewer spinules on the dorsal carinae of 
the telson and larger spinules on the carinae of the marginal teeth. 
I have been unable to find other differences. 

Distribution. — Western Indian Ocean, from the Red Sea to South 
Africa. Records in the literature include Red Sea (Nobili, 1906a; 
Tattersall, 1921; Parisi, 1922; Gruvel, 1936; Ramadam, 1936; Monod, 
1937; Dollfus, 1938; Chopra, 1939; Parisi, 1940; Ingle, 1963); Gulf 
of Aden (Chopra, 1939); Mozambique (Barnard, 1950); and South 
Africa (Barnard, 1950). On reefs from shallow water to 18 fms. 

256-174 — 67 2 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Gonodactylus spinosus Bigelow, 1893 
Figure 5 

Gonodactylus spinosus Bigelow, 1893, p. 101; 1894, p. 493. — Borradaile, 1907, 
pp. 210 [key], 212.— Bigelow, 1926, p. 579, figs. 1-2.— Manning, 1962, p. 3. 

Gonodactylus chiragra var. spinosus. — Lanchester, 1903, p. 454, pi. 23 (fig. 14). 

Gonodactylus demani var. spinosus. — Kemp, 1913, p. 165, pi. 9 (fig. 112). — Kemp 
and Chopra, 1921, pp. 310, 311. 

Material.— 19, 21.0; Mauritius; N. B. Pike; lectotype; USNM 
64773. 19, 20.5; same data; paralectotype; USNM 4295. 1 d\ 13.5; 
19, 18.7; same data; USNM 120309. 1 cf, 14.8; between Neptune and 
Triton Bastions, Galle Forte, Ceylon; from living Pocillopora, in 1-3 
ft.; J. S. Garth, Sta. GA 64-16c; IIOE; Mar. 5, 1964; USNM 120308. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate rounded antero- 
laterally, anterior margins sloping posteriorly. 

Ocular scales small, low. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites rounded, 
subequal in size. 

Sixth abdominal somite with 6 well-defined carinae, submedians 
sharpest, all with posterior spines. 

Telson as long as or longer than broad, with 3 pairs of marginal 
teeth; submedians thick, with movable apices, intermediates inflated, 
apices small but sharp, lateral barely discernible but each with 
small apical tubercle; most of dorsal surface of telson covered with 
small spinules; median carina elongate, moderately swollen, smooth 
dorsally, spinulose laterally and posteriorly; anterior submedian 
carinae elongate, moderately swollen, usually completely covered 
with small spinules, dorsal surface smooth in some specimens; carinae 
of submedian teeth swollen spinulose lobes, each as broad as tooth, 
completely covered with spinules; carinae of intermediate teeth 
swollen, spinulose dorsally and laterally, lateral spinules obscuring 
lateral tooth in dorsal view; numerous short submedian denticles 
present; 2 intermediate denticles present, inner set posterior to outer 
and to apex of intermediate tooth; lateral denticles present or absent; 
ventral surface of telson without longitudinal carinae. 

Basal segment of uropod with low, rounded lobe on dorsal surface 
inside dorsal carina; exopod with normal complement of setae, proxi- 
mal segment with fixed distal spine on ventral surface; endopod 
broad, margin completely setose; inner spine of basal prolongation 
slender, shorter than outer. 

Color. — Faded in all specimens. 

Size.— Male, TL 13.5-14.8; females, TL 18.7-21.0. Other meas- 
urements of female lectotype, TL 21.0: carapace length 4.6; fifth 
abdominal somite width 3.5; telson length 2.8, width 2.8. 



GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 



15 



Discussion. — 67. spinosus most closely resembles 67. lanchesteri, 
described above, but differs in having a narrower telson, with poorly 
developed intermediate marginal teeth, and in having many more, 
smaller dorsal tubercles on the carinae of the telson. In 67. spinosus 
the intermediate denticles are set at or behind the apex of the inter- 
mediate tooth, whereas in 67. lanchesteri they are recessed anteriorly. 
The basic telson shape in G. spinosus is similar to that found in 67. 




Figure 5. — Gonodactylus spinosus Bigelow, female lectotype, TL 21.0, Mauritius: a, last 
abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; b, submedian teeth of telson, ventral view; c, 
uropod, ventral view; d, rostral plate. 



espinosus (see below), but that species differs in several features, 
the most important of which is the lack of dorsal spinules on the 
telson. 

The larger of Bigelow's syn types, a female, TL 21.0, from Mau- 
ritius, is here selected as the lectotype; the other syn type, a female, 
TL 20.5, from the same locality, becomes a paralectotype. Both 
specimens are in the U.S. National Museum. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Distribution. — Western Indian Ocean, where it has been recorded 
from several localities between the Persian Gulf, Mauritius, and 
Ceylon. Records in the literature include Pearl Banks, Persian Gulf 
(Kemp and Chopra, 1921); the Seychelle Ids. (Borradaile, 1907; 
Manning, 1962); Mauritius (Bigelow, 1893, 1894, 1926); Male Atoll 
and Goifurfehendu Atoll, Maldive Ids. (Lanchester, 1903); and 
Ceylon (Kemp, 1913). It may be restricted to shallow water. 

I have assumed that records of this species from the Red Sea 
should be referred to G. lanchesteri; all material from the Red Sea 
examined by me proved to belong to the latter species. 

Gonodactylus choprai, new species 

Figure 6 

Gonodactylus demani ? espinosus. — Chopra, 1939, p. 176. 
Gonodactylus demani espinosus. — Ingle, 1963, p. 28, figs. 26, 56. 

Holotype.— 19, 20.4; off Somali Republic; 09°36'N, 50°01'E; 
Anton Bruun Sta. 9-444; 78-82 m; Dec. 16, 1964; USNM 120275. 

Paratypes.— 6cT, 11.6-16.4; 119, 12.2-19.3; data as in holotype; 
USNM 120277. 4cf, 11.3-15.0; 29, 14.8-20.8; off Somali Republic; 
09°35'N, 50°59'E; Anton Bruun Sta. 9-442; 70-80 m; Dec. 16, 1964; 
USNM 120276. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate with transverse 
anterior margins, rounded anterolaterally. 

Ocular scales small, erect, round. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites rounded, 
subequal, or process of sixth somite slightly larger. 

Carinae of sixth abdominal somite swollen, unarmed posteriorly 
except for laterals. 

Telson broader than long, with 3 pairs of marginal teeth, submedian 
well developed, with movable apices, intermediates poorly formed, 
laterals barely discernible, position marked by faint indentation on 
lateral margin; dorsal surface of telson without spinules; median 
carina inflated (particularly in larger males), tapering posteriorly, 
flanked laterally by accessory median carinae that fuse posteriorly 
with median; in larger specimens accessory medians separated from 
median by a groove or pit on each side; dorsal submedian carinae 
swollen, not as broad as median; carinae of submedian and inter- 
mediate teeth not markedly inflated; numerous short submedian 
denticles present; 2 intermediate denticles present, inner set posterior 
to outer; 1 or 2 small supplementary spinules on lateral margin 
posterior to apex of intermediate tooth; lateral denticle absent; 
marginal teeth without longitudinal ventral carinae. 



GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 



17 



Basal segment of uropod without well-marked lobe or projection 
on dorsal surface inside dorsal carina; inner margin of proximal seg- 
ment and all of distal segment of exopod with single row of plumose 
setae on margin; proximal segment of exopod lacking fixed distal spine 
on ventral surface; endopod slender, tapering distally, single layer of 
marginal plumose setae present; inner spine of basal prolongation of 
uropod much smaller than outer. 




Figure 6. — Gonodactylus choprai, new species, female holotype, TL 20.4, off Somali Repub- 
lic: a, last abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; b, submedian teeth of telson, ventral 
view; c, rostral plate; d, uropod, ventral view. 

Color. — In preservative, body with numerous dark chromato- 
phores scattered over light background; pleura dark, pigment most 
concentrated on last thoracic and last abdominal somite; posterior 
third of carapace, sixth thoracic segment, and first, fourth, and sixth 
abdominal somites with dark dorsal patch of chromatophores, that on 
first abdominal somite most prominent; males with dark ventral sur- 
face, pigmentation of body more intense than in females. 

Size.— Males, TL 11.3-16.4; females, TL 12.2-20.8. Other meas- 
urements of female holotype, TL 20.4: carapace length 4.2; fifth 
abdominal somite width 3.6; telson length 2.5, width 3.2. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

Etymology. — This species is named for Bruno Chopra, who was 
the first to record its occurrence. 

Discussion. — G. choprai, new species, can be distinguished from 
all other species of Gonodactylus with small ocular scales by the 
absence of a fixed distal spine on the ventral surface of the proximal 
segment of the uropodal exopod. 

In sculpture and proportion of the telson, G. choprai, new species, 
closely resembles G. chiragra var. segregatus Lanchester, 1903, from 
the Maldive and Laccadive Ids., and the two forms may be conspecific. 
Lanchester's figure shows that G. c. var. segregatus has all of the 
carinae of the last abdominal somite provided with posterior spines, 
whereas these carinae are unarmed in all of the specimens of G. 
choprai seen by me. 

Lanchester's specimens apparently came from both shallow reefs 
and offshore habitats; there is a possibility that his material comprises 
more than one species. 

Distribution/ — Western Indian Ocean, including off the Somali 
Republic, the South Arabian coast (Chopra, 1939), and the Red Sea 
(Chopra, 1939), from moderate depths in 70-82 m. Ingle (1963) 
reported upon Chopra's material. 

Gonodactylus incipiens Lanchester, 1903 

Figure 7 

Gonodactylus chiragra var. incipiens a Lanchester, 1903, p. 451, pi. 23 (fig. 10) 
[not incipiens b Lanchester, p. 451]. 

Gonodactylus chiragra var. incipiens. — Tattersall, 1906, p. 167. 

Gonodactylus chiragra var. a incipiens. — Borradaile, 1907, p. 211 [key]. 

Not Gonodactylus chiragra var. incipiens. — Lenz, 1910, p. 571 [= incipiens b ??]. 

?? Gonodactylus chiragra incipiens. — Lenz, 1912, p. 4. 

Gonodactylus chiragra. — Manning, 1966, p. 113 [part; G. c. var. incipiens in dis- 
cussion on p. 114]. 

Material.— 2d", 13.4-15.3; 49, 15.7-20.0; Ritidian Pt,, Guam 
Id., Marianna Ids.; R. H. Baker; July 12, 1945; USNM 120285. 1 d\ 
18.8; channel, Hull Id., Phoenix Ids.; killed with TNT; July 7-17, 
1939; L. P. Schultz; USNM 120284. 19, 13.0; Fakarava Id., Tuamotu 
Archipelago; Oct. 13, 1899; Albatross; USNM 120283. 2d 1 , 16.6-18.6; 
2 9, 21.8-24.2; coral reef at Yirrkala, Arnhem Land, Northern Terri- 
tory, Australia; Australian Museum-U.S. National Museum Arnhem 
Land Expedition, Sta. C13-17; Aug. 26, 1948; R. R. Miller; USNM 
111367. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate with anterior margin 
sloping posteriorly, rounded anterolaterally. 

Ocular scales small, rounded. 

Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 19 

Lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites rounded 
anteriorly and posteriorly; process noticeably larger on sixth somite. 

Carinae of sixth abdominal somite swollen, with or without posterior 
spines. 

Telson with length and width subequal, appearing elongate, with 
3 pairs of marginal teeth, submedians with movable apices; inter- 
mediate teeth well developed, apices angled but not sharp; lateral 
teeth obscure, apices not projecting much past lateral margin of 
telson; telson without dorsal spinules or tubercles; median carina 
very inflated and rounded in males, almost fusing laterally with dorsal 
submedians, more oval in females, rarely with posterior tubercle; 
knob not distinct, fused to median carina; carinae of marginal teeth 
inflated; numerous submedian denticles present; 2 sharp intermediate 
denticles present, recessed slightly, not projecting posteriorly past 
apex of intermediate tooth; submedian teeth relatively slender, 
ventral surface lacking longitudinal carina. 

Basal segment of uropod lacking prominent lobe or projection 
on dorsal surface inside dorsal carina; inner margin of proximal 
segment and all of distal segment of exopod with single row of setae; 
proximal segment of exopod with small, fixed spine on distal end of 
ventral surface; endopod short, broad, completely fringed with setae 
set in 1 row; inner spine of basal prolongation slender, shorter than 
outer. 

Color. — Faded in most of the specimens reported herein. Some 
of the specimens from Guam show traces of a dark median patch on 
the sixth thoracic and first and fourth abdominal somites. 

Size.— Males, TL 13.4-18.8; females, TL 13.0-24.2. Other measure- 
ments of male, TL 18.6: carapace length 3.9; fifth abdominal somite 
width 2.9; telson length 2.5, width 2.6. 

Discussion. — It is with some hesitation that I assign these small 
but obviously mature specimens to Lanchester's species without 
comparison with his type. The specimens agree well with the 
illustration of the telson provided by Lanchester, the only major 
difference being that in males the accessory median carinae may 
be completely obliterated by the tumid median carina. 

In smaller specimens of either sex the accessory median carinae 
can be distinguished as swollen lobes separated from the posterior 
end of the median carina by a shallow lateral depression. In only 
one of the specimens the median carina of the telson is provided 
with a median, posterior tubercle. 

Gonodactylus confinis de Man, 1902, from Ternate, Indonesia, 
appears to be similar in general telson structure, but, according to 
de Man's account, that species has a median and two submedian 
spinules on the end of the swollen median carina. If de Man's 



20 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



species proves to be conspecific with G. incipiens, the older name 
G. confinis will have to be used for the species. 

Gonodactylus incipiens resembles G. choprai in lacking dorsal spinules 
on the carinae of the telson, but the former differs in having a small, 
fixed distal spine on the ventral surface of the proximal segment 
of the uropodal exopod. 

Both G. incipiens and G. espinosus differ from all other species 
reported herein in having the lateral process of the sixth thoracic 




Figure 7. — Gonodactylus incipiens Lanchester, male, TL 18.8, Hull Island: a, last abdominal 
somite, telson, and uropod; b, rostral plate; c, uropod, ventral view; d, submedian teeth 
of telson, ventral view. 



somite noticeably broader and more truncate than that of the seventh 
somite; in all the other species the lateral processes are subequal 
in size. 

Lanchester (1903) recognized two forms in his G. c. var. incipiens: 
G. c. var. incipiens a was based on a small female, TL 16.5, from 
Funafuti, Ellice Ids., and is the form recognized herein as a distinct 
species; G. c. var. incipiens b was based on de Man's (1898) figure 
of a specimen of G. chiragra, presumable G. chiragra, sensu stricto. 



no. 36is GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 21 

J. G. de Man's specimens, TL 77-98 mm, were from the Celebes. 
Kemp (1913) considered G. incipiens to be identical with G. chiragra, 
but he made no distinction between the lettered forms and their 
size differences. In order to settle the identity of G. incipiens, the 
female, TL 16.5, reported by Lanchester (1903) from Funafuti, 
Ellice Ids., is here selected as the lectotype. 

The specimens reported by Lenz (1910, 1912) probably belong- 
to G. chiragra rather than to the species reported here; all are 
large specimens. 

Manning (1966) noted that four small specimens assigned to 
G. chiragra resembled the varietal form described by Lanchester. 
Comparison of those four specimens from Australia with the others 
reported herein leaves no doubt that they are conspecific. Manning 
also noted that the rostral plate of the Australian specimens re- 
sembled that illustrated by Serene (1954) for G. chiragra var. viridis. 

Distribution. — Indo-West Pacific, with most records from the 
Pacific Ocean, including Guam; Funafuti Id., Ellice Ids. (Lanchester, 
1903); Hull Id., Phoenix Ids., Fakarava Id., Tuamotu Archipelago; 
and Yirrkala, Northern Australia (Manning, 1966). Tattersall (1906) 
reported a small specimen from Ceylon; his record is the only one 
from the Indian Ocean. Habitat and depth range are unrecorded, 
except for the Australian specimens, which were collected on coral 
reefs. 

Gonodactylus espinosus Borradaile, 1898 

Figure 8 

Gonodactylus espinosus Borradaile, 1898, p. 35, figs. 5a-b, pi. 5; 1907, p. 210 [key]. 

Gonodactylus chiragra espinosus. — Lanchester, 1903, p. 455. 

Gonodactylus demani espinosus. — Kemp, 1913, p. 1G6. 

Gonodactylus chiragra. — Edmondson, 1923, p. 36, fig. 3h [not G. chiragra (Fab- 

ricius, 1781)]. 
Not Gonodactylus demani espinosus. — Chopra, 1939, p. 176. — Ingle, 1963, p. 28, 

figs. 26, 56 [=G. choprai, new species]. 

Material. — 19, 22.7; washed from lagoon reef corals, Fanning 
Island, Line Ids.;03°50' N, 159°20' W; Fanning Id. Expedition Sta. 6; 
June 30, 1963; S. Wainwright, W. Newman; USNM 120279. 29, 
23.3-45.5; lagoon, Canton Island, Phoenix Ids.; Sta. U-39-33; Apr. 25, 
1939; L. P. Schultz; USNM 120278. 19, 29.5; Fakarava Id., 
Tuamotu Archipelago; shore in lagoon; Albatross; Oct. 11, 1899; 
USNM 120282. 29, 11.3-21.5; same; reef; Albatross; Oct. 13, 1899 
USNM 120281. ld\ 13.2; Bora Bora, Society Ids.; Smithsonian- 
Bredin Expedition, 1957; USNM 120280. 

Description. — Basal portion of rostral plate broadly rounded 
anterolaterally. 






22 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 



Ocular scales small, rounded, separate. 
Mandibular palp and 5 epipods present. 

Lateral process of sixth thoracic somite truncate, broader than that 
of seventh somite. 




Figure 8. — Gonodactylus espinosus Borradaile, female, TL 45.5, Canton Island: a, rostral 
plate; b, lateral processes of sixth and seventh thoracic somites, lateral view (right side); 
c, last abdominal somite, telson, and uropod; d, submedian teeth of telson, ventral view; 
e, uropod, ventral view (setae omitted). 

Sixth abdominal somite with 6 swollen carinae, each with small 
apical spine. 

Telson length and width subequal, appearing elongate; 3 pairs 
of marginal teeth present, only submedians well developed, with 
movable apices; intermediate and lateral teeth poorly defined but 
present; dorsal surface of telson without spinules; median carina 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 23 

elongate, tapering posteriorly, unarmed; accessory median carinae 
present on distal half or third of median, converging posteriorly 
with median to form an anchor; submedian carinae interrupted; 
carinae of intermediate and marginal teeth long, low ; numerous small 
submedian denticles present; 1 small intermediate denticle present, 
situated at or posterior to apex of intermediate tooth; ventral surface 
of submedian teeth lacking longitudinal carina. 

Basal segment of uropod lacking lobe or projection inside of dorsal 
carina; inner margin of proximal segment and all of distal segment 
of uropodal exopod with single row of setae; proximal segment of 
exopod with distal fixed spine under articulation of distal segment; 
endopod slender, tapered, margin with more than 1 row of slender 
setae, dorsal setae erect, especially on outer margin ; basal prolongation 
of uropod produced into 2 spines, outer longer. 

Color.— All specimens faded in preservative; Borradaile noted 
that his specimen was light green. 

Size. — Only male examined, TL 13.2; females, TL 11.3-45.5. 
Borradaile's specimen, a male measured 18 mm. Other measure- 
ments of a female, TL 45.5: carapace length 9.7; fifth abdominal 
somite width 6.3; telson length 5.7, width 5.7. 

Discussion. — G. espinosus can be distinguished by the shape 
of its telson, with poorly defined intermediate and lateral marginal 
teeth, by the presence of several rows of setae on the outer margin 
of the uropodal endopod with some setae erect, and by the broad 
lateral process of the sixth thoracic somite. Gonodactylus espinosus 
shares this latter feature with G. incipiens. 

The setation of the uropod may be reduced in small specimens, 
but the characteristic erect setae are always present. 

It might be assumed from Borradaile's figure that the carinae 
of the telson in males are much more tumid than those of females; 
the telson of a female is figured here. 

Distribution.— Central Pacific Ocean, from Palmyra Id. (Edmond- 
son, 1923) and Fanning Id., Line Ids.; Canton Island, Phoenix Ids.; 
Fakarava Id., Tuamotu Archipelago; Bora Bora, Society Ids.; and 
Rotuma, Fiji Ids. In shallow water, among reef corals in lagoons. 



Literature Cited 

Barnard, K. H. 

1950. Descriptive list of South African stomatopod Crustacea (mantis 
shrimps). Ann. South African Mus., vol. 38, pp. 838-864, figs. 
1-4. 

BlGELOW, R. P. 

1893. Preliminary notes on the Stomatopoda of the Albatross collections 

and on other specimens in the National Museum. John Hopkins 
Univ. Circ, vol. 10, pp. 100-102. 

1894. Report on the Crustacea of the Order Stomatopoda collected by 

the steamer "Albatross" between 1885 and 1891 and on other 
specimens in the U. S. National Museum. Proc. U. S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 17, pp. 489-550, pis. 20-22, figs. 1-28. 

1926. On the type of Gonodactylus spinosus, a stomatopod crustacean. 

American Nat., vol. 60, pp. 579-582, figs. 1-2. 
1931. Stomatopoda of the southern and eastern Pacific Ocean and Hawaiian 
Islands. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool. Harvard, vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 
105-191, figs. 1-10, pis. 1-2. 

BORRADAILE, L. A. 

1898. On some crustaceans from the South Pacific. Stomatopoda, pt. I. 

Proc. Zool. Soc. London, 1898, pp. 32-38, pis. 5-6. 
1907. Stomatopoda from the western Indian Ocean. In The Percy Sladen 

Trust Expedition to the Indian Ocean in 1905, under the leadership 

of Mr. J. Stanley Gardiner. Trans. Linn. Soc. London, Zool., 

ser. 2, vol. 12, pp. 209-216, pi. 22. 
Chopra, B. 

1939. Stomatopoda. In The John Murray Expedition, Sci. Reps., vol. 6, 

no. 3, pp. 137-181, figs. 1-13. 
Dollfus, R. Ph. 

1938. Stomatopoda, II. In Catalogue synonymique des especes jusqu'a 

present recoltees dans la Mer Rouge, y compris la partie sud du 

Canal du Suez et le Golfe d'Aden. Mission Robert Ph. Dollfus 

en Egypte, X. Mem. Inst. Egypte, vol. 37, pp. 185-236, figs. 

1-8, 10-11, 13-23. 
1959. Stomatopoda, III. In Mission Robert Ph. Dollfus en Egypte, 

XXX. Sci. Res., pt. 3, pp. 241-245, figs. 9, 12, 24-25. 
Edmondson, C. H. 

1923. Crustacea from Palmyra and Fanning Islands, with descriptions 

of new species of crabs from Palmyra Island by Mary J. Rathbun. 

Bull. Bernice P. Bishop Mus., vol. 5, pp. 1-43, figs. 1-3, pis. 1-2. 
Gravely, F. H. 

1927. Order Decapoda (except Paguridea) and Stomatopoda. In the 

littoral fauna of Krusadai Island in the Gulf of Manaar with ap- 
pendices on the vertebrates and plants. Bull. Madras Gov. Mus., 
n. s., vol. 1, pt. 1, pp. 135-155, pis. 19-26. 
24 



no. 3618 GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 25 

Gravier, C. 

1930. Sur une collection de crustaces (stomatopodes) recueillis par Mme 
Pruvot sur les cotes de la Nouvelle-Cal6donie. Bull. Mus. Hist. 
Nat. Paris, ser. 2, vol. 2, pp. 214-216, fig. 1. 

1935. Crustaces stomatopodes recueillis par M. R. Decary, a Fort-Dauphin 

(Madagascar). Arch. Mus. Hist. Nat. Paris, ser. 6, vol. 12, pp. 
357-361, figs. 1-3. 
Gruvel, A. 

1936. Contribution a l'e'tude de la bionomie generate et de l'exploitation 

de la faune du Canal du Suez. Mem. Inst. Egypte, vol. 29, pp. 

vii + 255, pis. 1-25, 12 maps. 
Hansen, H. J. 

1926. The Stomatopoda of the Siboga Expedition. In Siboga Expedition, 

monogr. 35, pp. 1-48, pis. 1-2. 
Henderson, J. R. 

1893. A contribution to Indian carcinology. Trans. Linn. Soc. London, 

ser. 2, vol. 5, pp. 325-458, pis. 36-40. 
Holthuis, L. B. 

1941. The Stomatopoda of the "Snellius" Expedition. In Biological 

results of the "Snellius" Expedition, XII. Temminckia, vol. 6, 

pp. 241-294, figs. 1-9. 
Ingle, R. W. 

1963. Crustacea Stomatopoda from the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden. 

In Contributions to the knowledge of the Red Sea, no. 26. Bull. 

Sea Fish. Res. Sta., Haifa, no. 33, pp. 1-69, figs. 1-73. 
Kemp, S. 

1913. An account of the Crustacea Stomatopoda of the Indo-Pacific region 

based on the collection in the Indian Museum. Mem. Indian 

Mus., vol. 4, pp. 1-217, pis. 1-10, 10 text-figs. 
1915. On a collection of stomatopod Crustacea from the Philippine Islands. 

Philippine Journ. Sci., sec. D, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 169-187, pi. 1. 
Kemp, S., and Chopra, B. 

1921. Notes on Stomatopoda. Rec. Indian Mus., vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 297-311, 

figs. 1-4. 
Lanchester, W. F. 

1903. Marine crustaceans, VIII: Stomatopoda, with an account of the 

varieties of Gonodactylus chiragra. In Gardiner, The fauna and 

geography of the Maldive and Laccadive Archipelagoes: Being 

an account of the work carried on and of the collections made 

by an expedition during the years 1899 and 1900, vol. 1, pp. 444-459, 

pi. 23. 
Lenz, H. 

1905. Ostafrikanische Dekapoden und Stomatopoden gesammelt von 

Herrn Prof. Dr. A. Voeltzkow. In A'oeltzkov, Wissenschaftliche 

Ergebnisse der Reisen in Madagaskar und Ostafrika in den Jahren 

1889-95, vol. III. Abh. Senckenb. Naturf. Ges., vol. 27, pp. 

341-392, pis. 47, 48. 
1910. Crustaceen von Madagaskar, Ostafrika und Ceylon. In Voeltzkow 

Reise in Ostafrika in den Jahren 1903-1905 mit Mitteln der 

Hermann und Elise geb. Heckmann Wentzel-Stiftung ausgefuhrt, 

vol. 2, pp. 539-576. 
1912. Afrikanische Crustaceen aus schwedischen Sammlungen. Ark. Zoo!., 

vol. 7, no. 29, pp. 1-10. 



26 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Maccagno, Teresita 

1937. Crostacei di Assab: Dccapodi stomatopodi anfipodi. Spedizione 
del Barone Raimondo Franchetti in Dancalia. Ann. Mus. Stor. 
Nat. Genoa, vol. 59, pp. 171-186. 
Man, J. G. de 

1888. Bericht liber die von Herrn Dr. J. Brock im indischen Archipel gesam- 
melten Decapoden und Stomatopoden. Arch. Naturgesch., vol. 
53, pt. 1, pp. 215-600, pis. 7-22a. 
1898. Bericht fiber die von Herrn Schiffscapitan Storm zu Atjeh, an den 
westlichen Kiisten von Malakka, Borneo und Celebes sowie in 
der Java-See gesammelten Decapoden und Stomatopoden. Sechs- 
ter (Schluss-) Theil. Zool. Jb. Syst., vol. 10, pp. 677-708, pis. 28-38. 
1902. Die von Herrn Professor Kiikenthal im Indischen Archipel gesam- 
melten Dekapoden und Stomatopoden. In Kiikenthal, Ergebniss 
einer zoologischen Forschrungsreise in den Molukken und Borneo. 
Abh. Senckenb. Naturf. Ges., vol. 25, pp. 467-929, pis. 19-27. 
Manning, Raymond B. 

1962. Stomatopod Crustacea collected by the Yale Seychelles Expedition, 
1957-1958. Postilla, no. 68, pp. 1-15, figs. 1-2. 

1966. Notes on some Australian and New Zealand stomatopod Crustacea, 

with an account of the species collected by the Fisheries Investiga- 
tion Ship Endeavour. Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 27. no. 4, pp. 
79-137, figs. 1-10. 

1967. Stomatopod Crustacea of the western Atlantic. [In press.] 
Monod, Th. 

1937. Crustaces, I. In Missions A. Gruvel dans la Canal de Suez. Mem. 
Inst. Egypte, vol. 34, pp. 1-19, figs. 1-11. 
Nobili, G. 

1905. Crostacei di Zanzibar. Boll. Mus. Zool. Anat. Comp. Torino, vol. 

20, no. 506, pp. 1-12, 1 fig. 

1906. Crustaces d^capodes et stomatopodes. In Mission J. Bonnier et 

Ch. Perez (Golfe Persique, 1901). Bull. Sci. France Beige, vol. 
40, pp. 13-159, figs. 1-3, pis. 2-7. 

1906a. Faune Carcinologique de la Mer Rouge: Decapodes et stomato- 
podes. Ann. Sci. Nat. Zool., ser. 9, vol. 4, pp. 1-347, figs. 1-12, 
pis. 1-11. 
Paeisi, B. 

1922. Elenco degli stomatopodi del Museo di Milano. Atti. Soc. Italiana 
Sci. Nat,, vol. 61, pp. 91-114, figs. 1-7. 

1940. Gli stomatopodi raccolti dal Prof. L. Sanzo nella campagna idrografica 
nel Mar Rosso della R. N. Ammiraglio Magnaghi 1923-1924: 
Memoria 16. a della Campagna. R. Com. Talass. Italiana, Mem. 
275, pp. 1-7. 
Ramadam, M. M. 

1936. Report on a collection of Stomatopoda and Decapoda from Ghardaqa, 
Red Sea. Bull. Fac. Sci. Egyptian Univ., vol. 6, pp. 1-43, pis. 1-2. 
Roxas, H. A. 

1930. The Puerto Galera Marine Biological Laboratory of the University 
of the Philippines (A report to the President of the University, 
together with a checklist of animals of the Puerto Galera region), 
pp. 1-24, pis. 1-4. 



N0 - 361S GONODACTYLUS — MANNING 27 

Roxas, H. A., and Estampador, E. 

1930. Stomatopoda of the Philippines. Nat. App. Sci. Manila, vol. 1, pp. 
93-131, pis. 1-6. 
Serene, R. 

1952. Etude d'une collection de stomatopodes de 1' Australian Museum 

de Sydney. Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 1-24, figs. 
1-33, pis. 1-3. 

1953. Sur la collection des stomatopodes de l'lnstitut Oceanographique 

de l'lndochine. Proc. 7th Pacific Sci. Congr., 1949, vol. 4, pp. 
506-508. 

1954. Observations biologiques sur les stomatopodes. Mem. Inst. Oceanogr. 

Nhatrang, no. 8, pp. 1-93, figs. 1-15, pis. 1-10. 
Stella, E. 

1955. Crostacei decapodi e stomatopodi, pt. Ill: Spedizione subacquea 

Italiana nel Mar Rosso, Ricerch zoologiche. Riv. Biol. Colon., 

vol. 13, pp. 51-70, 1 fig. 
Stephenson, W., and McNeill, F. 

1955. The Australian Stomatopoda (Crustacea) in the collections of the 

Australian Museum. Rec. Australian Mus., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 

239-265, fig. 1. 
Taramelli, Ester 

1955. Crostacei di Zanzibar (decapodi e stomatopodi). Riv. Biol. Colon., 

vol. 15, pp. 29-47. 
Tattersall, W. M. 

1906. Report on the Leptostraca, Schizopoda, and Stomatopoda collected 

by Professor Herdman, at Ceylon, in 1902. In Herdman, Report 

to the Government of Ceylon on the Pearl Oyster Fisheries of the 

Gulf of Manaar, vol. 5, pp. 157-188, pis. 1-3. 
1921. Report on the Stomatopoda and macrurous Decapoda collected by 

Mr. Cyril Crossland in the Sudanese Red Sea. Journ. Linn. 

Soc. London, Zool., vol. 34, pp. 345-398, pis. 27-28. 
Thurston, E. 

1895. Ramesvaram Island and fauna of the Gulf of Manaar. Bull. Madras 

Gov. Mus., no. 3, pp. 79-138, pis. 4-7. 



U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3619 

Studies of Neotropical Caddis Flies, V 
Types of the Species Described by Banks and Hagen 



By Oliver S. Flint, Jr. 

Curator, Division of Neuropteroids 



Nathan Banks, who described his first Neotropical species in 1900 
and his last in 1941, was one of the most prolific workers on Latin 
American Trichoptera. He described 94 species from South and 
Central America, Mexico, and the West Indies in 13 publications. 
Unfortunately, like many other workers of his time, he frequently 
did not figure the genitalia, and, when he did, he did not clear and 
relax this structure before preparing his figures. Thus, our attempts 
to recognize many of his species have been handicapped severely. 
Essentially the same situation exists with Hagen's six Neotropical 
species. 

Very fortunately for North American workers, the types of all 
these species, save one, are located in the Museum of Comparative 
Zoology at Harvard University. I have been able to study all of 
this material and to make notes and sketches of the genitalia for 
most species. Although Banks very rarely possessed mixed type 
series, I am designating lectotypes in this paper for all species for which 
a syntypic series exists. Herein are given, with a few exceptions, 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

either figures of the genitalia of the types or specimens compared to 
the types, or a reference to published illustrations of the same, and 
photographs of the wings of certain species. The genera and species 
are listed in alphabetical order within the families, which are arranged 
in the order adopted by Ross (1944). The most detailed treatment 
is given under the combination, which in my estimation is correct. 
If the species was described originally in a different genus or is a 
synonym, it is listed in the original combination, together with the 
combination adopted in the present paper, directly under the generic 
heading. 

I wish to express my sincere appreciation to Dr. P. J. Darlington 
and to Dr. H. E. Evans for their wholehearted cooperation during 
my visits to the Museum of Comparative Zoology. 



Rhyacophilidae 

Genus Atopsyche Banks 

Atopsyche batesi Banks 

Atopsyche batesi Banks, 1938, p. 304. — Ross and King, 1952, p. 198. — Fischer, 
1960, p. 161. 

Lectotype, male: "Haiti 1934 M.Bates," "La Visite & vie. La 
Selle Range 5-7000 ft. Sept. 16-23," "M.C.Z.Type 22105," "A. 
batesi". 

Ross and King (1952) have presented figures of the male genitalia 
of this species. 

Atopsyche bolivari Banks 

Atopsyche bolivari Banks, 1924, p. 443. — Ross and King, 1952, p. 195. — Fischer, 
1960, p. 161. 

Lectotype, male: "Monte Socorro Colombia, 3800m.," "Fassl Coll," 
"N.Banks," "Type 14839," "Atopsyche bolivari Bks. Type." 

Ross and King (1952) also have illustrated the genitalia of this 
specimen. 

Atopsyche mexicana (Banks) 

Philopotamus mexicanus Banks, 1901, p. 370. — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 1907b, p. 

197; 1913, p. 405.— Betten, 1934, p. 168.— Fischer, 1961, p. 15. 
Atopsyche mexicana (Banks). — Ross, 1953, p. 293. 

The holotype, from Mexico, is without abdomen and so can not now 
be identified specifically. 



no- 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 3 

Genus Dolochorema Banks 

Dolochorema irregularis Banks 

Dolochorema irregularis Banks, 1913b, p. 240. — Ross, 1956a, p. 125. — Fischer, 
1960, p. 160. 

Ross (1956a) has given full figures of the genitalia and wings of 
the holotype male from Peru. 

Genus Rhyacophila Pictet 

Rhyacophila mexicana Banks: See Chimarra mexicana (Banks). 

Philopotamidae 

Genus Chimarra Stephens 

Chimarra (Curgia) banksi (Ulmer), new combination 

Figures 1-3 

Wormaldia mediana Banks, 1905, p. 18. [Preoccupied.] 

Wormaldia banksi Ulmer, 1907b, p. 198; 1913, p. 405.— Navas, 1924, p. 75 — 
Betten, 1934, p. 170.— Fischer, 1961, p. 32. 

The genitalia of the holotype male from Nicaragua are shown in 
figures 1-3. 

Chimarra (Chimarra) bicolor (Banks), new combination 

Figures 13-15 

Philopotamus bicolor Banks, 1901, p. 370.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 1907b, p. 197; 

1913, p. 405.— Betten, 1934, p. 168.— Fischer, 1961, p. 6. 
Chimarra xesta Denning, 1952, p. 17. [New synonymy.] 

Figures 13-15 were prepared from a topotype that is identical 
with the holotype, male. Denning's xesta is clearly a synonym and 
is also topotypic. 

Chimarra (Curgia) mexicana (Banks), new combination 

Figures 4-7 

Rhyacophila mexicana Banks, 1900, p. 259.— Ulmer, 1907b, p. 210.— Betten, 1934, 

p. 135.— Fischer, 1960, p. 104. 
Philopotamus barrettae Banks, 1900, p. 259; 1901, p. 370.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 

1907b, p. 197; 1913, p. 386, 405.— Betten, 1934, p. 168.— Fischer, 1961, p. 6. 

[New synonymy.] 
Wormaldia mexicana Ulmer, 1905c, p. 89. [New synonymy.] 
Chimarrha mexicana (Ulmer).— Ulmer, 1907b, p. 200; 1913, p. 405.— Betten, 1934, 

p. 176. 
Chimarra mexicana (Ulmer). — Fischer, 1961, p. 66. — Flint, 1966, p. 3. 

Figures 5-7 were prepared from the holotype male from Mexico. 
The holotype of barrettae (fig. 4) is a female of this species. Although 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. us 

barrettae has line priority, I as first revisior, give mexicana precedence 
because its hole-type is a male. Although the lectotype of mexicana 
(Ulmer) is without abdomen, the coloration and original figures of 
the male genitalia indicate that this too is a synonym. 

Chitnarra (Chimarra) moesta (Banks) 

Figure 16 

Chimarrha (Curgia) moesta Banks, 1924, p. 449. — Betten, 1934, p. 176. 
Chimarra moesta (Banks). — Fischer, 1961, p. 67. 

The holotype, female, of this Cuban species is shown in figure 16. 

Chimarra (Curgia) persimilis (Banks) 

Figures 11, 12 

Chimarrha persimilis Banks, 1920, p. 360. — Lestage, 1925, p. 37. 
Chimarra persimilis (Banks). — Fischer, 1961, p. 68. 

Lectotype, male: "Quevedo W. Ecuador," "N. Banks," "Type 
10907," "Chimarrha persimilis Bks. Type." 
The lectotype is illustrated in figures 11 and 12. 

Chimarra (Curgia) pulchra (Hagen) 

Figures 8-10 

Chimarrha pulchra Hagen, 1861, p. 298; 1864, p. 809.— Kolbe, 1888, pp. 167, 
175.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 69; 1907b, p. 200; 1909, p. 127; 1913, p. 405 — 
Betten, 1934, p. 176.— Ross 1952, p. 32. 

Chimarrha (Curgia) fraterna Banks, 1924, p. 449. — Betten, 1934, p. 176. [New 
synonymy.] 

Chimarra pulchra (Hagen). — Fischer, 1961, p. 69. 

Chimarra fraterna (Banks). — Fischer, 1961, p. 60. 

Koss designated the lectotype of pulchra; I designate here the 
lectotype, male, of fraterna: "Cuba Ch. Wright," "Type 14876." 

The extent of golden hairs on the forewings is somewhat variable. 
The lectotype of fraterna has the patch somewhat divided; otherwise, 
it is identical to pulchra. 

A male of this common Cuban species is illustrated in figures 8-10. 

Chimarra (Curgia?) pumila (Banks) 

Figure 17 

Chimarrha pumila Banks, 1920, p. 359. — Lestage, 1925a, p. 37. 
Chimarra pumila (Banks). — Fischer, 1961, p. 69. 

Lectotype, female: "Quevedo W. Ecuador," "N. Banks," "Type 
10908," "Chimarrha pumila Bks. Type." 

The female lectotype is illustrated (fig. 17) herein. It is probably 
the female of C. 'persimilis Banks. 



no. 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 5 

Genus Chiinarrha Burmeister 

Chimarrha fraterna Banks: See Chimarra pulchra (Hagen). 
Chimarrha moesta Banks: See Chimarra moesta (Banks). 
Chimarrha persimilis Banks: See Chimarra persimilis (Banks). 
Chimarrha pulchra Hagen : See Chimarra pulchra (Hagen) . 
Chimarrha pumila Banks: See CJiimarra pumila (Banks). 

Genus Philopotamus Stephens 

Philopotamus barrettae Banks: See CJiimarra mexicana (Banks). 
Philopotamus bicolor Banks: See Chimarra bicolor (Banks). 
Philopotamus mexicanus Banks: See Atopsyche mexicana (Banks). 

Genus Wormaldia McLachlan 

Wormaldia mediana Banks: See Chimarra banksi (Ulmer). 

PSYCHOMYIIDAE 

Genus Antillopsyche Banks 

Antillopsyclve wrighti Banks 

Figure 18 
Antillopsyche wrighti Banks, 1941, p. 400. 

Lectotype, male: "Soledad Santa Clara Prov. 1-8-VI," "Cuba 
1939 C. T. Parsons/' "M.C.Z. Type 25294," "Antillopsyche wrighti 
Bks. Type." 

The male lectotype is illustrated in figure 18. The genus is distinct 
and close to Pseudoneureclipsis Ulmer (see Flint, 1964, p. 29). 

Genus Cordillopsyche Banks 

Cordillopsyche costalis Banks: See Polyplectropus costalis (Banks). 

Genus Cyrnellus Banks 
Cyrnellus minimus Banks 

Figures 19, 20 

Cyrnellus minimus Banks, 1913a, p. 88. — Lestage, 1925b, p. 105. — Fischer, 1962, 
p. 143. 

Lectotype, male: "type," "Camp 41; 360 Km from Porto Velho 
Brazil, Mann," "Type 11806," "Cyrnellus minimus Bks. Type." 
The male lectotype is shown in figures 19 and 20. 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Genus Polycentropus Curtis 
Polycentropus colombiensis Banks 

Figure 25 

Polycentropus colombiensis Banks, 1910, p. 160. — Ulmer, 1913, p. 406. — Lestage, 
1925b, p. 109.— Fischer, 1962, p. 67. 

The female holotype of this species, from Colombia, is illustrated in 
figure 25. 

Polycentropus domingensis Banks 

Figure 21 
Polycentropus domingensis Banks, 1941, p. 399. 

Lectotype, male: "Loma Rucilla June '38 Dom. Rep. 5-10,000 ft. 
Darlington," "M.C.Z. Type 25,293," "Polycentropus domingensis 
Bks. Type." 

The lectotype male is illustrated in figure 21. 

Polycentropus insularis Banks 

Figure 24 

Polycentropus insularis Banks, 1938, p. 302. — Fischer, 1962, p. 83. 

Lectotype, male: "Grenada: Grand Etang Sept. 1910 Allen & 
Brues," "M.C.Z. Type 22111," "Polycentropus insularis Bks. Type." 
The genitalia of the lectotype are illustrated in figure 24. 

Polycentropus mexicanus (Banks), new combination 

Figure 23 

Hydropsyche mexicana Banks, 1901, p. 369. — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 1907b, p. 171; 
1913, p. 406.— Betten, 1934, p. 193.— Fischer, 1963, p. 55. 

The male holotype from Mexico is shown in figure 23. 

Polycentropus nigriceps Banks 

Figure 22 
Polycentropus nigriceps Banks, 1938, p. 301. — Fischer, 1962, p. 90. 

Lectotype, male: "Soledad, Cuba (Cienfuegos) Apr. 1936 Darling- 
ton," "Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 22674," 
"Polycentropus nigriceps Bks. Type". 

The male lectotype is shown in figure 22. 

Genus Poly pie ctr opus Ulmer 

(Genus Cordillopsyche Banks, new synonymy) 

The genus Cordillopsyche Banks (type-species C. costalis Banks) is 
clearly synonymous with Polyplectropus Ulmer (type-species P. 



N0 - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 7 

flavicornis Ulmer) on the basis of venation and general structure of the 
female genitalia. 

Polyplectropus costalis (Banks), new combination 

Figures 26, 27 

Cordillopsyche costalis Banks, 1913b, p. 238. — Lestage, 1925b, p. 105. — Fischer, 
1962, p. 95. 

The genitalia of the female holotype of this Colombian species are 
shown in figures 26 and 27. 



Genus Xiphocentron Brauer 

Xiphocentron cubana (Banks) 

Antillotrichia cubana Banks, 1941, p. 401. 
Xiphocentron cubana (Banks). — Flint, 1964, p. 26. 

The holotypic male has lost all parts of the genital capsule beyond 
the ninth segment. The parts remaining and the original drawing 
indicate that this is a typical species of Xiphocentron. 

Xiphocentron Iwitiensis (Banks) 

Antillotrichia haitiensis Banks, 1941, p. 402. 
Xiphocentron haitiensis (Banks). — Flint, 1964, p. 26. 

This species was described from a male holotype from Haiti. The 
genitalia were illustrated by Flint (1964). 

Hydropsychidae 

Subfamily Macronematinae 

Genus Centromacronema Ulmer 

Centromacronema extensum Banks: See Centromacronema auripenne 
(Rambur). 

Centromacronema auripenne (Rambur) 

Macronema auripenne Rambur, 1842, p. 507. 

Centromacronema auripeene (Rambur). — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 87. — Fischer, 1963, 

p. 202. 
Centromacronema extensum Banks, 1913b, p. 238. — Betten, 1934, p. 203. — Fischer, 

1963, p. 204. [New synonymy.] 

I am not presenting a complete synonymy of auripenne; rather, 
one may consult the extensive bibliography in Fischer (1963). 

The holotype of extensum seems to fall well within the extremes of 
the very variable auripenne. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

Centromacronema nigrifrons Banks 

Centromacronema nigrifrons Banks, 1913b, p. 238. — Fischer, 1963, p. 204. 

Although the holotype, male, from Colombia, shows no genitalic 
differences from C. apicale (Walker), I am not synonymizing it here 
because of the color differences pointed out in the original description. 

Genus Leptonema Guerin 

Leptonema externum Banks: See Leptonema columbianum Ulmer. 
Leptonema guatemalum Banks: See Leptonema albovirens (Walker). 

Leptonema albovirens (Walker) 

Macronema albovirens Walker, 1852, p. 76. 

Leptonema albovirens (Walker). — Ulmer, 1905a, p. 31. — Fischer, 1963, p. 166. 
Leptonema guatemalum Banks, 1913a, p. 89.— Mosely, 1933a, p. 65. — Betten, 1934, 
p. 202.— Fischer, 1963, p. 169. [New synonymy.] 

A more extensive bibliography of albovirens and columbianum are 
given by Fischer (1963). 

The holotype male of guatemalum is identical to the type of al- 
bovirens, as figured by Mosely. 

Leptonema columbianum Ulmer 

Leptonema columbianum Ulmer, 1905a, p. 61. — Fischer, 1963, p. 168. 
Leptonema externum Banks, 1913a, p. 87. — Mosely, 1933a, p. 13. — Fischer, 1963, 
p. 168. 

The holotype, female, of externum agrees with columbianum in hav- 
ing 2 dark spots basally on the forewing, and expanded tibiae and tarsi 
of the midlegs. 

Leptonema insulanum Banks 

Leptonema insulanum Banks, 1924, p. 455. — Mosely, 1933a, p. 66. — Betten, 1934, 
p. 202.— Fischer, 1963, p. 169.— Flint, 1964, p. 36. 

This species, known from Puerto Rico only by the male holotype, 
is the senior sjmonym of L. ulmeri Mosely. I have a long series from 
Venezuela, which makes me suspect that the Puerto Rican specimen 
may be mislabelled. 

Leptonema poeyi (Banks), new combination 

Figures 28-31 
Macronema poeyi Banks, 1938, p. 299. — Fischer, 1963, p. 194. 

Lectotype, male: "Coast below Pico Turquino June 26-30, '36," 
"Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 22675," "Macro- 
nema poeyi Bks. Type." 

This species, the lectotype of which is shown here (figs. 28-31), 
clearly belongs in Leptonema. 



no- 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 9 

Genus Macronema Pictet 

The taxonomic situation in this genus in the American tropics is, 
at best, extremely confusing. To add to the difficulty, many of the 
species are known only from a single specimen, often a female. The 
group of species near hyalinum Pictet (including ulmeri Banks and 
erichsoni Banks) seem to have distinctive color patterns but no 
obvious differences in the male genitalia. On the basis of color alone 
specimens of ulmeri can be recognized from Peru to Panama and 
Surinam. Another group is centered on digramma McLachlan (in- 
cluding subaequalis Banks). In this group, every specimen looks 
different from the next, but all could be the result of different degrees 
of development of the same basic pattern. The genitalia of the few- 
males seen look identical and, in fact, are not clearly different from 
those of the hyalinum group. The percitans group (including the 
remainder of the Banks species) offer differences in the genitalia, 
especially the tenth tergum and aedeagus, often coupled with recog- 
nizable color differences. Yet the genitalia of percitans and picteti 
seem identical, although the coloration is quite different. 

Banks has sketched (1924) the tips of the forewings showing the 
color pattern of lachlani, burmeisteri, muelleri, pertyi, fraternum, hageni, 
and braueri. 

Macronema aeneum Hagen : See Phylloicus aeneus (Hagen) . 

Macronema chalybeum Hagen: See Phylloicus chalybeus (Hagen). 

Macronema poeyi Banks: See Leptonema poeyi (Banks). 

Macronema braueri Banks 

Macronema braueri Banks, 1924, p. 454/ — Fischer, 1963, p. 178. 

This Brazilian species is known only from the female holotype. 

Macronema burmeisteri Banks 

Macronema burmeisteri Banks, 1924, p. 452. — Fischer, 1963, p. 178. 

Lectotype, female: "Yurimaguas Peru 10 April Parish Coll," 
"Type 14836," "Macronema burmeisteri Bks. Type." 

This species is known from the female sex. 

Macronema erichsoni Banks 

Plate If 

Macronema hyalinum Pictet, var. — Ulmer, 1913, p. 395. 

Macronema erichsoni Banks, 1920, p. 356.— Mosely, 1931, p. 170.— Fischer, 1963, 
p. 184. 

The photograph (pi. If) of the wings was made from a specimen 
identical to the female holotype in coloration. The species was 

256-175—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

described from French Guiana and is also known from Brazil and 
Dutch Guiana. 

Macronema fragilis Banks 

Figures 41-43 

Macronema fragilis Banks, 1915, p. 631. — Mosely, 1931, p. 170. — Fischer, 1963, 
p. 187. 

The illustrations (figs. 41-43) of the genitalia were made from the 
male holotype. The species is known from British Guiana. 

Macronema fraternum Banks 

Figures 32-34; Plate lc 

Macronema fraterna Banks, 1910, p. 159. — Ulmer, 1913, p. 408. — Banks, 1924, p. 
453.— Mosely, 1931, p. 170.— Fischer, 1963, p. 187. 

The holotype is a female from British Guiana. The photograph 
of the wings (pi. lc) and figures 32-34 of the male genitalia are from a 
specimen carefully compared with the type. I have seen specimens 
from the Guianas and Ecuador. 

Macronema gundlachi Banks 

Figures 35-37 

Macronema gundlachi Banks, 1924, p. 454. — Betten, 1934, p. 207. — Fischer, 1963, 
p. 187. 

Lectotype, male: ^ , "Cuba Gundlach 1864," "Hagen," "Type 

14875," "Macronema gundlachi Bks. Type." 
The genitalia of the male lectotype are shown in figures 35-37. 

Macronema hageni Banks 

Figures 47-49; Plate 1b 

Macronema hageni Banks, 1924, p. 452. — Mosely, 1931, p. 170. — Fischer, 1963, p. 
187. 

Lectotype, male: "Tapajos Brazil 30 June Parish," "Type 14834," 
"Macronema hageni Bks. Type." 

Figures 47-49 of the genitalia were made from the lectotype. The 
wing photograph (pi. 1b) is from a specimen carefully compared with 
the type. 

Macronema lachlani Banks 

Figures 44-46 

Macronema lachlani Banks, 1924, p. 452. — Fischer, 1963, p. 189. 

Figures 44-46 of the male genitalia were made from the male holo- 
type. The species was described from Brazil. 



no. 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 11 

Macronema muelleri Banks 

Figures 38-40 

Macronema miilleri Banks, 1924, p. 453. — Fischer, 1963, p. 191. 

Lectotype, male: "Flores Brazil 6-XI Parish," "Type 14837." 
The genitalia of the lectotj'pe male are shown in figures 38-40. 

Macronema pertyi Banks 

Macronema pertyi Banks, 1924, p. 451. — Fischer, 1963, p. 193. 
The holotype is a female from Brazil. 

Macronema picteti Banks 

Plate 1a 

Macronema percitans Walker, var. — Ulmer, 1913, p. 395. 

Macronema picteli [sic] Banks, 1915, p. 631. — Mosely, 1931, p. 170. — Fischer, 1963, 
p. 194. 

The photograph (pi. 1a), which, unfortunately, does not show clearly 
the golden patch bej 7 ond the transverse white line, was made from a 
specimen carefully compared with the type. The male genitalia are 
identical to those shown by Betten and Mosely (1940, fig. 102) for 
percitans Walker. Yet, because the coloration seems quite different, 
I am not synonymizing the two here. 

Macronema subaequalis Banks 

Figures 50-52 

Macronema subaequalis Banks, 1920, p. 355. 
Pseudomacronema subaequalis (Banks).' — Fischer, 1963, p. 163. 

The genitalia of the male holotype of this Argentinian species are 
shown in figures 50-52. 

Macronema ulmeri Banks 

Figure 53; Plate Id 

Macronema hyalinum Pictet, var. — Ulmer, 1907c, p. 76; 1913, p. 395. 
Macronema ulmeri Banks, 1913b, p. 237.— Fischer, 1963, p. 199. 

The holotype is a male from Colombia. The photograph of the 
wings (pi. Id) and drawing of the male genitalia (fig. 53) were made 
from a specimen identical with the type. 

Genus Plectromacronema Ulmer 

(Genus Podomacronema Banks, new synonymy) 

A study of the genitalia, wings and coloration of subfuscum Banks 
and comptum Ulmer, the type-species of Plectromacronema, convinces 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

me that the two axe congeneric. I, therefore, synonymize Podomacro- 
nema Banks with Plectromacronema Ulmer (new synonymy). 

Plectromacronema subfuscum (Banks), new combination 

Figures 54-56; Plate 1e 

Podomacronema subfuscum Banks, 1920, p. 356. — Fischer, 1963, p. 164. 

Figures 54-56 of the genitalia were made from the male holotype 
from Argentina. The wing photograph (pi. 1e) was made from a 
specimen identical with the holotype. 

Genus Podomacronema Banks 

Podomacronema subfuscum Banks: See Plectromacronema subfuscum 
(Banks). 

Subfamily Hydropsychinae 

Genus Diplectrona Westwood 

Diplectrona unicolor Banks: See Smicridea unicolor (Banks). 

Genus Hydropsyche Pictet 

Hydropsyche ? bivittata Hagen : See Smicridea bivittata (Hagen) . 
Hydropsyche mexicana Banks: See Polycentropus mexicanus (Banks). 

HydropsycJie calosa Banks 

Hydropsyche calosa Banks, 1938, p. 300.— Flint, 1962, p. 23.— Fischer, 1963, p. 24. 

Lectotype, male: "Cuba Ch. Wright," "M.C.Z. Type 22673," 
"Hydropsyche calosa Bks. Type." 

The lectotype, male, was figured by Flint (1962). 

Hydropsyche domingensis Banks 

Hydropsyche domingensis Banks, 1941, p. 398.' — Flint, 1962, p. 24. — Fischer, 
1963, p. 28. 

Lectotype, female: "Constanza to Jarabacoa Aug '38, Dom. Rep. 
2-4,000 ft., Darl.," "M.C.Z. Type 25291." 

The lectotype female was figured by Flint (1962). 

Genus Rhyacophylax Muller 

Rhyacophylax varius Banks: See Smicridea varius (Banks). 
Genus Smicridea McLachlan 

Smicridea maculata Banks: See Smicridea albosignata Ulmer. 
Smicridea unicolor Banks: See Smicridea banksi Flint. 



NO - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 13 

Smicridea aeqiialis Banks 

Figures 74, 75 

Smicridea aequalis Banks, 1920, p. 358.— Mosely, 1931, p. 170; 1933b, p. 220.— 
Fischer, 1963, p. 130. 

Figures 74 and 75 of the male genitalia were made from the holotype. 
Although considerably rubbed, the type appears to have had a trans- 
verse white band from the stigma and another pale patch nearer the 
wing base. 

Smicridea albosignata Ulmer 

Figures 76, 77 

Chimarrha ? maculata Hagen, 1861, p. 329. [Nomen nudum.] 

Smicridea albosignata Ulmer, 1907a, p. 34; 1907b, p. 175; 1913, p. 390.— Mosely, 

1933b, p. 216, 220.— Betten, 1934, p. 199.— Fischer, 1963, p. 131. 
Smicridea maculata Banks, 1920, p. 359. — Mosely, 1933b, p. 220.— Fischer, 1963, 

p. 133. [New synonymy.] 

The holotype of maculata was compared to a syntype of albo- 
signata at the MCZ and found to be essentially identical. Figures 76 
and 77 were prepared from a specimen carefully compared with the 
syntype. All examples are from Brazil. 

Smicridea banksi Flint, new name 
Figures 61-63 

Smicridea unicolor Banks, 1938, p. 303. — Fischer, 1963, p. 135. [Preoccupied by 
Smicridea unicolor (Banks), 1901.] 

Lectotype, male: "La Visite & vie. La Selle Range 5-7000 ft. 
Sept. 16-23," "Haiti 1934 M. Bates," "M.C.Z. Paratype 22110," 
"S. unicolor." 

The male labelled "paratype" is selected as lectotype because its 
genitalia are undamaged. Figures 61-63 were prepared from this 
specimen. This species has a very faint transverse pale band from 
the stigma. 

Smicridea bivittata (Hagen) 

Figures 71-73 

Hydropsyche bivittata Hagen, 1861, p. 291; 1864, p. 821.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 

1907b, p. 171.— Ross, 1952, p. 33. 
Smicridea bivittata (Hagen).— Ulmer, 1913, p. 390.— Betten, 1934, p. 199.— 

Fischer, 1963, p. 131. 

The female lectotype, selected by Ross, was compared carefully 
with a female from a series containing males. This species is one of 
several with two narrow, white, transverse bands on the forewing. 
The species was described from Panama. 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Smicridea comma Banks 

Figures 59, 60 

Smicridea comma Banks, 1924, p. 451. — Mosely, 1933b, p. 220. — Betten, 1934, 
p. 199.— Banks, 1941, p. 399.— Fischer, 1963, p. 132. 

Lectotype, female: "1," "Cuba Poey 1864," "Hagen," "Type 
14874," "Smicridea comma Bks. Type." 

The type series contains only females. Figures 59 and 60 were 
prepared from a male identical with the type in maculation. The 
wings are brown with a white comma-shaped mark at the stigma and 
another transverse white band basad. 

Smicridea completa Banks 

Figures 64, 65 
Smicridea completa Banks, 1941, p. 398. — Fischer, 1963, p. 132. 

Lectotype, male: "Villa Altagracia July '38, Dom. Rep. Darlington," 
"M.C.Z. Type 25292," "Smicridea completa Bks. Type." 

Figures 64 and 65 were prepared from the lectotype. This species 
bears on the forewing a transverse white band from the stigma and a 
diffuse band basad. 

Smicridea nigripennis Banks 

Figures 78-80 

Smicridea nigripennis Banks, 1920, p. 359. — Mosely, 1933b, pp. 216, 220. — 
Fischer, 1963, p. 134. 

Lectotype, male: "Caldras Columbia 4400 ft.," "N. Banks," 
"Type 10912," "Smicridea nigripennis Bks. Type." 

The lectotype is a perfect match in color and male genitalia with the 
topotypic male shown here in figures 78-80. 

Smicridea obesa Banks 

Figures 57, 58 
Smicridea obesa Banks, 1938, p. 303. — Fischer, 1963, p. 134. 

Lectotype, male: "Pico Turquino June 16-21, 1936 6000 ft. 
(summit)," "Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 22672," 
"Smicridea obesa Bks. Type." 

Figures 57 and 58 were prepared from the lectotype. The specimen 
has immaculate wings, but an associated female bears an incomplete 
white transverse line from the stigma. 



N0 - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 15 

Smicridea unicolor (Banks) 

Figures 66, 67 

Diplectrona unicolor Banks, 1901, p. 370. — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 68; 1907b, p. 177; 

1913, p. 407.— Betten, 1934, p. 183.— Fischer, 1963, p. 150. 
Smicridea unicolor (Banks). — Ross, 1947, p. 144. 

Lectotype, male: "type," "Cuernavaca June," "Collection N. 
Banks," "Type 11815," "Diplectrona unicolor Bks. type." 

The lectotype is shown in figures 66 and 67; its wings are uniformly 
reddish brown. 

Smicridea varius (Banks), new combination 

Figures 68-70 

Rhyacophylax varius Banks, 1913b, p. 239. — Lestage, 1925a, p. 41. — Betten, 1934, 
p. 199.— Fischer, 1963, p. 137. 

The holotypic male agrees in maculation and genitalia with the 
male in figures 68-70. The species was described from Costa Rica. 

Hydroptilidae 

Genus Antillotrichia Banks 

Antillotrichia cubana Banks: See Xiphocentron cubana (Banks). 
Antillotrichia haitiensis Banks: See Xiphocentron haitiensis (Banks). 

LlMNEPHILIDAE 

Genus Algonquina Banks 

Algonquina chilensis Banks: See Magellomyia appendiculata 
(Ulmer). 

Genus Halesus Stephens 

Hallesus [sic] solidus Hagen: See Limnephilus solidus (Hagen). 
Genus Ironoquia Banks 

Ironoquia australis Banks: See Magellomyia capillata (Ulmer). 

Genus Limnephilus Leach 
Limnephilus discolor (Banks) 

Platyphylax discolor Banks, 1901, p. 367.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 21, 120; 1907b, p. 54; 
1913, p. 410.— Betten, 1934, p. 352. 



IQ PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Limnephilus discolor (Banks). — Flint, 1963, p. 211.' — Denning and Sykora, 1966, 
p. 1222. 

The male holotype of this Mexican species was recently figured by 
Flint (1963) and the female by Denning and Sykora (1966). 

Limnephilus solidiis (Hagen) 

Hallesus [sic] solidus Hagen, 1861, p. 267; 1864, p. 818.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 21; 

1907b, p. 56; 1913, p. 411.— Betten, 1934, p. 350. 
Limnephilus solidus (Hagen). — Flint, 1963, p. 213. 

The type of this species is not found in the Hagen material at the 
MCZ. It may well be found in the Zoologische Museum, Humboldt 
Universitat, Berlin, where other types with the data "Mexico, Deppe" 
were found by Byers (1962). 

Limnephilus toussainti Banks 

Limnephilus toussianti [sic] Banks, 1924, p. 439. — Betten, 1934, p. 337.— Flint, 
1963, p. 211. 

The male holotype, figured by Flint (1963), is labelled as being 
from "Haiti." This is apparently in error as I now have seen ex- 
amples collected in northwestern Mexico. 

Genus Magellomyia Banks 

Magellomyiamoes ta Banks: See Magellomyia appendiculata (Ulmer). 

Magellomyia appendiculata (Ulmer) 

Stenophylax appendiculatus Ulmer, 1904, p. 19; 1905b, p. 21; 1907b, p. 50. 
Limnophilus appendiculatus (Ulmer). — Ulmer, 1913, p. 403. — Jorgensen, 1919, 

p. 398. 
Magellomyia moesta Banks, 1920, p. 348. — Schmid, 1955, p. 54. 
Algonquina chilensis Banks, 1920, p. 347. [New synonymy.] 
Magellomyia appendiculata (Ulmer). — Schmid, 1955, p. 54; 1957, p. 389; 1958, 

p. 205; 1964, p. 323.— Flint, 1967, p. 58. 
Magellomyia chilensis (Banks). — Schmid, 1955, p. 54. 

The male holotype of moesta was studied by Schmid, who synony- 
mized the name with appendiculata. I also am synonymizing here 
A. chilensis Banks, whose holotype is an absolutely typical female of 
appendiculata. The male genitalia were illustrated by Flint (1967). 

Magellomyia capillata (Ulmer) 

Limnophilus capillatus Ulmer, 1906, p. 11; 1907b, p. 45; 1913, p. 410.— Jorgensen, 

1919, p. 398. 
Ironoquia australis Banks, 1920, p. 347. — Schmid, 1955, p. 53. 
Magellomyia capillata (Ulmer).— Schmid, 1955, p. 53; 1957, p. 388; 1964, p. 324. 

Lectotype, male: "Chile Fairm.," "Hagen," "Type 10868," "L. 
capillatus Ulm. tf 1 F. Schmid 1951." 



N0 - 361!) CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 17 

The lectotypic male was studied by Schmid, who recognized the 
above synonymy and figured the species (1955). 

Genus Platyphylax McLachlan 

Platyphylax discolor Banks : See Limnephilus discolor (Banks) . 

Calamoceratidae 
Genus Heteroplectron McLachlan 

Heteroplectron maculatum Banks: See Phylloicus maculatus (Banks). 
Heteroplectron nigripennis Banks: See Phylloicus aeneus (Hagen). 
Heteroplectron mexicanum Banks: See Phylloicus aeneus (Hagen). 

Genus Phylloicus Mtiller 

(Genus Notiomyia Banks, new synonymy) 

I am synonymizing here the genus Notiomyia with Phylloicus. 
The type-species of Notiomyia, mexicana (Banks), is clearly con- 
generic with P. major Miiller, the type-species of Phylloicus. The 
species presently placed in Notiomyia — mexicana (Banks), ornata 
Banks, and sagittosa Ross — are all transfered to Phylloicus (all new 
combinations) . 

Phylloicus aeneus (Hagen) 

Figures 90-92 

Macronema aeneum Hagen, 1861, p. 285. — Ross, 1952, p. 34. 

Anisocentropus aeneus (Hagen). — Hagen, 1864, p. 804. — Kolbe, 1888, p. 167. — 

Ulmer, 1905b, p. 30. 
Heteroplectron nigripennis Banks, 1900, p. 256; 1901, p. 369. — Ulmer, 1905b, 

p. 30. [New synonymy.] 
Heteroplectron mexicanum Banks, 1900, p. 257; 1901, p. 369. — Ulmer, 1905b, 

p. 30. [New synonymy.] 
Phylloicus aeneus (Hagen).— Ulmer, 1905c, p. 79; 1906, p. 58; 1907b, p. 120; 

1913, p. 409.— Betten, 1934, p. 237.— Fischer, 1965, p. 20. 
Notiomyia mexicana (Banks). — Banks, 1905, p. 18; 1907, p. 43. — Ulmer, 1907b, 

p. 121; 1913, p. 409.— Essig, 1926, p. 177.— Betten, 1934, p. 236.— Milne, 

1936, p. 78.— Ross, 1944, p. 301.— Fischer, 1965, p. 19. 
Phylloicus nigripennis (Banks).— Ulmer, 1907b, p. 210; 1913, pp. 398, 409 — 

Betten, 1934, p. 237.— Fischer, 1965, p. 23. 
Notiomyia sagittosa Ross, 1951, p. 72.— Denning, 1964, p. 134. [New synonymy.] 

This species is, as I am considering it here, quite variable in colora- 
tion, size, and details of structure of the genitalia. The types of 
aeneus and nigripennis are females whose abdomens I have cleared 
and compared side-by-side and found to be the same. In coloration, 
there is a form with the wing veins marked with golden hairs (aeneus 
and sagittosa types) and another with totally black hairs (nigripennis 

256-175—67 3 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

and mexicanus types). I have taken several pairs in copula in which 
one sex is one form, the other the other form. The examples from 
the southern part of the range seem smaller and with more orange 
on the body (aeneus, nigripennis , and sagittosa types), while the more 
northern populations seem larger with only the pronotum and a 
mesal spot on the head orange (mexicanus type). The exact shape 
of the tenth tergum varies in every population I have studied. 

Figures 90-92 of the male were prepared from an example with 
the data "Mexico, Salle," which was probably part of the original 
series. 

Phylloicus brevior Banks 

Figures 97,98 

Phylloicus brevior Banks, 1915, p. 632. — Lestage, 1925a, p. 44. — Mosely, 1931, p. 
170.— Fischer, 1965, p. 21. 

Figures 97, 98 were prepared from the male holotype from British 
Guiana. 

Phylloicus cubanus Banks 

Figures 81,82 

Phylloicus cubanus Banks, 1924, p. 445. — Betten, 1934, p. 237. — Banks, 1938, 
p. 298; 1941, p. 397.— Fischer, 1965, p. 22. 

Because the male holotype is lacking the cerci, figures 81 and 82 
were prepared from another specimen identical with the type. 

Phylloicus chalybeus (Hagen) 

Figures 83,84 

Macronema chalybeum Hagen, 1861, p. 285; 1864, p. 845. — Kolbe, 1888, p. 167. — 
Ulmer, 1905b, p. 32; 1905c, p. 83; 1907b, p. 164; 1907c, p. 64, 81; 1913, p. 
408.— Ross, 1952, p. 34. 

Anisocentropus chalybeus (Hagen). — Betten, 1934, p. 232. — Fischer, 1965, p. 3. 

Phylloicus chalybeus (Hagen). — Banks, 1941, p. 397. 

Ross designated the lectotype, which is shown in figures 83 and 84. 
The species is known from Cuba. 

Phylloicus iridescens Banks 

Figures 85,86 
Phylloicus iridescens Banks, 1941, p. 397. — Fischer, 1965, p. 22. 

Lectotype, male: "Constanza to V. Nuevo, Dom. Rep. Aug. '38, 
3-7,000 ft. Darlington," "M.C.Z. Type 25297," "Phylloicus iridescens 
Bks. type." 

Figures 85 and 86 were prepared from the lectotype. 



NO - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 19 

Phylloicus lituratus Banks 

Figures 93,94 

Phylloicus lituratus Banks, 1920, p. 350. — Lestage, 1925a, p. 42. — Fischer, 1965' 
p. 22. 

The genitalia of the male holotype from Colombia are illustrated 
in figures 93 and 94. 

Phylloicus maculatus (Banks), new combination 

Figure 89 

Heteropledron maculatum Banks, 1901, p. 369. — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 30; 1907b, p. 
119; 1913, p. 409.— Banks, 1914, p. 150.— Betten, 1934, p. 233.— Fischer, 
1965, p. 19. 

The genitalia of the female holotype are shown in figure 89. The 
type is from Mexico. 

Phylloicus magnus Banks 

Figures 95,96 

Phylloicus magnus Banks, 1913b, p. 236. — Lestage, 1925a, p. 42. — Fischer, 1965, 
p. 22. 

Figures 95 and 96 were prepared from the male holotype, which is 
from Colombia. 

Phylloicus superbus Banks 

Figures 87,88 
Phylloicus superbus Banks, 1938, p. 298; 1941, p. 397.— Fischer, 1965, p. 23. 

Lectotype, male: "Pico Turquino N. side June 18-20, 1935 4500- 
6000 ft.," "Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 22669," 
"Phylloicus superbus Bks. type." 

Figures 87 and 88 were prepared from the lectotype. 

Odontoceridae 

Genus Marilia Miiller 
Marilia fasciculata Banks 

Figure 119 
Marilia fasiculata Banks, 1913a, p. 86. — Fischer, 1965, p. 32. 

Figure 119 was prepared from the male holotype from Brazil. 

Marilia gracilis Banks 

Figures 110, 111 
Marilia gracilis Banks, 1938, p. 297.— Fischer, 1965, p. 33. 

Lectotype, male: "La Visite & Vic La Selle Range 5-7000 ft. Sept, 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 12.3 

16-23," "Haiti 1934 M. Bates," "M.C.Z. Type 22107," "Marilia 
gracilis Bks. type." 

Figures 110 and 111 were prepared from the lectotype. 

Marilia gracilis nigrescens Banks 

Figure 112 
Marilia gracilis var. nigrescens Banks, 1941, p. 397. — Fischer, 1965, p. 33. 

Lectotype, male: "Valle Nuevo S E Constanza Aug. '38, Dom. 
Kep. c. 7,000 ft., Darl.," "M.C.Z. Type 25298," "Marilia gracilis 
nigrescens Bks. type." 

The clasper of the lectotype male is shown in figure 112. 

Marilia mexicana (Banks), new combination 

Figures 120, 121 

Leptocerus mexicanus Banks, 1901, p. 368/ — Ulmer, 1905b, p. 28; 1907b, p. 136; 

1913, p. 410.— Betten, 1934, p. 263. 
Athripsodes mexicanus (Banks). — Fischer, 1965, p. 211. 

The genitalia of the female holotype from Mexico are illustrated in 
figures 120 and 121. 

Marilia modesta Banks 

Figures 117, 118 

Marilia modesta Banks, 1913b, p. 235. — Fischer, 1965, p. 34. 

The genitalia of the male holotype from Colombia are shown in 
figures 117 and 118. 

Marilia scudderi Banks 

Figures 113, 114 
Marilia scudderi Banks, 1924, p. 446.— Betten, 1934, p. 242.— Fischer, 1965, p. 34. 

Figures 113 and 114 were prepared from the male holotype. The 
species is known from the Isle of Pines near Cuba. 

Marilia wrighti Banks 

Figures 115, 116 
Marilia wrighti Banks, 1924, p. 446.— Betten, 1934, p. 242.— Fischer, 1965, p. 35. 

Lectotype, male: "Cuba. Ch. Wright," "Type 14873," "Marilia 
wrighti Bks. type." 

Figures 115 and 116 were prepared from the lectotype. 

Leptoceridae 

Genus Leptocella Banks 

Leptocella fene strata Banks: See Leptocella punctata Ulmer. 



N0 - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 21 

Leptocella pulchella Banks: See Leptocellodes pulchellus (Banks). 
Leptocella sparsa Banks: See Leptocella Jlavofasciata Ulmer. 

Leptocella cubana Banks 

Figure 99 
Leptocella cubana Banks, 1938, p. 299. — Fischer, 1966, p. 53. 

Lectotype, male: "Guineo(s) Cuba April," "M.C.Z. Type 22671," 
"Leptocella cubana Bks. type." 

Figure 99 was made from the lectotype. 

Leptocella diminuta Banks 
Figure 102 

Leptocella diminuta Banks, 1920, p. 353. — Mosely, 1931, p. 170. — Fischer, 1966, 
p. 54. 

Lectotype, male: "Bartica Br. Guiana Dec," "N. Banks," "Type 
10900," "Leptocella diminuta Bks. type." 

Figure 102 was prepared from the lectotype. The other specimens 
in the type series are another species of the genus. The eyes of the 
lectotype are extremely large. 

Leptocella dorsalis Banks 

Figure 100 

Leptocella dorsalis Banks, 1901, p. 368.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 28; 1907b, p. 138; 
1913, p. 402, 410.— Betten, 1934, p. 267.— Fischer, 1966, p. 54. 

The species was described from Mexico from a female holotype. 
Figure 100 of the male genitalia was prepared from a topotypic male. 
The eyes of the male of this species are very large, being separated by 
less than half their width ventrally. 

Leptocella jlavofasciata Ulmer 

Leptocella jlavofasciata Ulmer, 1907a, p. 18; 1907b, p. 138; 1913, p. 410.— Fischer, 

1966, p. 55.— Flint, 1966, p. 9. 
Leptocella sparsa Banks, 1920, p. 353.— Fischer, 1966, p. 60.— Flint, 1966, p. 9. 

Lectotype, male: "Missiones j0rgensen 1-11-1909," "N. Banks," 
"Type 10899," "Leptocella sparsa Bks. type." 
The species was figured recently by Flint (1966). 

Leptocella gracilis Banks 

Figure 101; Plate 1h 

Leptocella gracilis Banks, 1901, p. 369.— Ulmer, 1905b, p. 29; 1907b, p. 138; 1913, 
p. 410.— Betten, 1934, p. 267.— Fischer, 1966, p. 51. 
Figure 101 of the genitalia was prepared from the holotype from 
Mexico. The eyes of the male are separated ventrally by twice the 
diameter of the eye. 



22 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Leptocella pretiosella (Banks), new combination 

Setodes pretiosella Banks, 1924, p. 447. — Fischer, 1966, p. 48. 

The holotype, a female from Peru, is a member of the L. pavida 
group. 

Leptocella punctata Ulmer 

Leptocella punctata Ulmer, 1905c, p. 75; 1907b, p. 138; 1913, pp. 402, 410 — 

Fischer, 1966, p. 60.— Flint, 1966, p. 9. 
Leptocella fenestrata Banks, 1913b, p. 237. — Betten, 1934, p. 267. — Fischer, 1965. 

p. 55.— Flint, 1966, p. 9. 

The holotype male of fenestrata is from Panama. The species was 
illustrated by Flint in 1966. 

Leptocella separata Banks 

Figure 103; Plate Ig 
Leptocella separata Banks, 1920, p. 353. — Fischer, 1966, p. 60. 

Lectotype, male: "No. 12," "Type 10898," "Leptocella separata 
Bks. type." 

The lectotype is from Brazil from Fritz Miiller and bears his "num- 
ber 12." The illustrations (figs. 103, pi. Ig) are from a specimen com- 
pared with, and found identical to, the type. 

Genus Leptocellodes Ulmer 

Leptocellodes pulchellus (Banks) 

Figures 104, 105 

Leptocella pulchella Banks, 1910, p. 160.— Ulmer, 1913, p. 410.— Fischer, 1966, 

p. 60. 
Leptocellodes pulchellus (Banks). — Ulmer, 1955, p. 499. 

Figures 104 and 105 were prepared from the male holotype from 
Columbia. 

Genus Oecetina Banks 

Oecetina amazonica Banks: See Oecetis amazonica (Banks). 
Oecetina antillana Banks: See Oecetis inconspicua (Walker). 
Oecetina parishi Banks: See Oecetis punctipennis (Ulmer). 
Oecetina peruviana Banks: See Oecetis peruviana (Banks). 

Genus Oecetis McLachlan 

Oecetis amazonica (Banks) 

Figures 106, 107 

Oecetina amazonica Banks, 1924, p. 447. 

Oecetis amazonica (Banks). — Fischer, 1966, p. 109. 



NO - 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 23 

Lectotype, male: "Manaos, Amazonas Brazil, Mann Coll." "Type 
14830," "Oecetina arnazonica Bks. type." 
The figures were prepared from the male lectotype. 

Oecetis inconspicua (Walker) 

Leptocerus inconspicuus Walker, 1852, p. 71. 

Oecetis inconspicua (Walker). — Betten and Mosely, 1940, p. 67. — Fischer, 1966, 

p. 149. 
Oecetina antillana Banks, 1938, p. 298. [New synonymy.] 
Oecetis antillana (Banks). — Fischer, 1966, p. 109. 

Lectotype, male: "Soledad, Cuba (Cienfuegos) Apr. 1936 23 
Darlington," "Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 
22670," "Oecetina antillana Bks. type." 

The lectotype appears identical with the type of inconspicua as 
figured by Betten and Mosely (1940). Fischer (1966) gives a complete 
bibliography of this common species. 

Oecetis peruviana (Banks) 

Figures 108, 109 

Oecetina peruviana Banks, 1924, p. 446. 

Oecetis peruviana (Banks). — Fischer, 1966, p. 139. 

Lectotype, male: "Iquitos Peru 17 May Parish," "Type 14831," 
"Oecetina peruviana Bks. type." 

Figures 108 and 109 were drawn from the lectotype. 

Oecetis punctipennis (Ulmer) 

Pseudosetodes punctipennis Ulmer, 1905c, p. 77; 1907b, p. 147; 1913, p. 410. — 

Fischer, 1966, p. 104. 
Oecetina parishi Banks, 1915, p. 631. — Mosely, 1931, p. 170. 
Oecetis parishi (Banks) .—Fischer, 1966, p. 139.— Flint, 1966, p. 10. 
Oecetis punctipennis (Ulmer). — Flint, 1966, p. 10. 

The genitalia were figured by Flint recently (1966). 
Genus Setodes Rambur 

Setodes pretiosella Banks: See Leptocella pretiosella (Banks). 

Lepidostomatidae 
Genus Eremopsyche Banks 

Eremopsyche frontalis Banks: See Lepidostoma frontalis (Banks). 

Genus Lepidostoma Rambur 

(Genus Eremopsyche Banks, new synonymy) 

The type and only species of Eremopsyche, frontalis Banks, clearly 
belongs to the genus Lepidostoma as it is presently recognized by North 



24 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

American workers. I, therefore, synonymize Eremopsyche with 
Lepidostoma (new synonymy) . 

Lepidostoma frontalis (Banks), new combination 

Figures 124, 125 

Eremopsyche frontalis Banks, 1901, p. 367.— Ulmer, 1907b, p. 110; 1913, p. 411.— 
Ross, 1946, p. 290. 

Figures 124 and 125 of this Mexican species were prepared from the 
male holotype. 

Lepidostoma mexicana (Banks) 

Figures 126, 127 

Olemira mexicana Banks, 1901, p. 367. — Ulmer, 1907b, p. 109; 1913, p. 411. 
Lepidostoma mexicana (Banks). — Ross, 1946, p. 288. 

Figures 126 and 127 were prepared from the female holotype, which 
is from Mexico. 

Genus Olemira Banks 

Olemira mexicana Banks: See Lepidostoma mexicana (Banks). 

Helicopsychidae 

Genus Helicopsyche Siebold 
Helicopsyche hageni Banks 

Figures 122, 123 
Helicopsyche hageni Banks, 1938, p. 296. 

Lectotype, male: "Pico Turquino N. side June 18-20, 1936 4500- 
6000 ft.," "Cuba 1936 Darlington Collector," "M.C.Z. Type 22668," 
"Helicopsyche hageni Bks. type." 

Figures 122 and 123 here given are those of the lectotype. 

Helicopsyche haitiensis Banks 

Helicopsyche haitiensis Banks, 1938, p. 296. — Ross, 1956b, p. 398. 

Lectotype, male: "La Visite & vie. La Selle Range 5-7000 ft. 
Sept. 16-23," "Haiti 1934 M. Bates," "M.C.Z. Type 22106," "Heli- 
copsyche haitiensis Bks. type." 

The male genitalia were figured by Ross (1956b). The type agrees 
with the figures except that the apex of the clasper has a more promi- 
nent point than Ross's figure shows. 

Helicopsyche lutea (Hagen) 

Notidobia lutea Hagen, 1861, p. 271; 1864, p. 853.— McLachlan, 1S76, p. 238 — 
Kolbe, 1888, p. 167.— Ross, 1952, p. 35. 



no- 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 25 

Helicopsyche lutea (Hagen). — Ulmer, 1907c, p. 94; 1913, p. 411 .— Betten, 1934, 
p. 418. 

The lectotype, designated by Ross, is a female. I have a male 
from Santo Domingo that agrees with the type in size and coloration. 
It appears to be the same as the one recently described by Kingsolver 
from Cuba as H. comosa; however, until a series of this species 
containing both males and females is available, I hesitate to establish 
the synonymy. 

Helicopsyche mexicana Banks 

Helicopsyche mexicana Banks, 1901, p. 368. — Ulmer, 1907b, p. 94; 1913, p. 411. — 
Betten, 1934, p. 418.— Ross, 1944, p. 289.— Denning, 1964, p. 132. 

Both Ross (1944) and Denning (1964) have figured the male 
genitalia of this species. It was described originally from a single 
male from Mexico. 

Helicopsyche muelleri Banks 

Helicopsyche mulleri [sic] Banks, 1920, p. 348. — Marlier, 1964, p. 15. 
Helicopsyche turbida Navas, 1923, p. 200. — Schmid, 1949, p. 419. — Marlier, 1964, 

p. 15. [New synonymy.] 
Helicopsyche angelae Marlier, 1964, p. 9. [New synonymy.] 

Lectotype, male: "Santa Catharina Brazil no. 18 F. Miiller," 
"Type 10906," "Helicopsyche mulleri Bks. type." 

It is with some hesitation that I synonymize these three species. 
The male genitalia of the type of mulleri and the figures of the geni- 
talia of the types of turbida (Schmid, 1949) and angelae (Marlier, 1964) 
are identical. Both of the latter species, however, are stated to lack 
the process from the sixth sternum, which is clearly present in muelleri. 
Perhaps the spines are broken off in the types of turbida and angelae, 
or the presence or absence of the process may vary from one part 
of the range to another. 

Helicopsyche peruana Banks 

Helicopsyche peruana Banks, 1920, p. 349. — Marlier, 1964, p. 15. 
Helicopsyche woytkowskii Ross, 1956b, p. 398. [New synonymy.] 

The figures (Ross, 1956b) of the type of woytkowskii are very 
similar to the holotype, male, of peruana. The only difference is 
that peruana has four small seta-bearing teeth along the dorsal 
margin that are not shown in Ross's figure. In spite of this, I believe 
the two are synonymous. 



Literature Cited 

Banks, Nathan 

1900. New genera and species of Nearctic neuropteroid insects. Trans. 

American Ent. Soc, vol. 26, pp. 239-259. 

1901. A list of neuropteroid insects from Mexico. Trans. American Ent. 

Soc, vol. 27, pp. 361-371. 

1905. Descriptions of new Nearctic neuropteroid insects. Trans. American 
Ent. Soc, vol. 32, pp. 1-20. 

1907. Catalogue of the neuropteroid insects (except Odonata) of the United 
States. American Ent. Soc, 53 pp. 

1910. New South American neuropteroid insects. Proc Ent. Soc. Washing- 
ton, vol. 12, pp. 146-160. 

1913a. Neuropteroid insects from Brazil. Psyche, vol. 20, pp. 83-89. 

1913b. Synopses and descriptions of Exotic Neuroptera. Trans. American 
Ent. Soc, vol. 39, pp. 201-242. 

1914. Neuroptera and Trichoptera from Costa Rica. Ent. News, vol. 25, 

pp. 149-150. 

1915. New neuropteroid insects, native and exotic. Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. 

Philadelphia, vol. 66 (for 1914), pp. 608-632. 
1920. New neuropteroid insects. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., vol. 64, pp. 

299-362. 
1924. Descriptions of new neuropteroid insects. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., 

vol. 65, pp. 421-455. 
1938. New West Indian neuropteroid insects. Rev. Ent., vol. 9, pp. 285- 
304. 
Betten, Cornelius B. 

1934. The caddis flies or Trichoptera of New York State. New York 
State Mus. Bull. 292, 576 pp. 
Betten, Cornelius B., and Mosely, Martin E. 

1940. The Francis Walker types of Trichoptera in the British Museum. 
British Museum (Natural History), London, 248 pp. 
Byers, George W. 

1962. Type specimens of Nearctic Mecoptera in European museums, in- 
cluding descriptions of new species. Ann. Ent. Soc. America, 
vol. 55, pp. 466-476. 
Denning, Donald G. 

1952. Descriptions of several new species of caddis flies. Canadian Ent., 

vol. 84, pp. 17-22. 
1964. Trichoptera of Baja California. Pan-Pacific Ent., vol. 40, pp. 128- 
134. 
Denning, Donald G., and Sykora, Jan 

1966. New North American Trichoptera. Canadian Ent., vol. 98, pp. 
1219-1226. 
Essig, E. O. 

1926. Insects of western North America. New York: Macmillan Co., 
1035 pp. 

26 



no- 3619 CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 27 

Fischer, F. C. J. 

1960. Necrotaulidae, Prosepididontidae, Rhyacophilidae. Trichopterorum 

catalogus, vol. I, 165 pp. 

1961. Philopotamidae, Hydroptilidae, Stenopsychidae. Trichopterorum 

catalogus, vol. II, 189 pp. 

1962. Polycentropodidae, Psychomyidae. Trichopterorum catalogus, vol. 

III, 234 pp. 

1963. Hydropsychidae, Arctopsychidae. Trichopterorum catalogus, vol. 

IV, 223 pp. 

1965. Calamoceratidae, Philorheithridae, Odontoceridae, Lep toceridae, pars 

1. Trichopterorum catalogus, vol. VI, 239 pp. 

1966. Leptoceridae, pars 2. Trichopterorum catalogus, vol. VII, 163 pp. 
Flint, Oliver S., Jr. 

1962. Antillean species of Hydropsyche (Trichoptera). Bull. Brooklyn Ent. 

Soc, vol. 57, pp. 22-27. 

1963. The species of Limnephilus from Central America and Haiti (Tri- 

choptera: Limnephilidae) . Proc. Ent. Soc. Washington, vol. 65, 
pp. 211-213. 

1964. The caddis flies (Trichoptera) of Puerto Rico. Univ. Puerto Rico 

Agric. Exp. Sta. Tech. Pap. 40, 80 pp. 

1966. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, III : Types of some species described 

by Ulmer and Brauer. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 120, no. 3559, 
20 pp. 

1967. Studies of Neotropical caddis flies, II: Trichoptera collected by Prof. 

Dr. J. lilies in the Chilean Subregion. Beitr. Neotrop. Fauna, vol. 

5, pp. 45-68. 
Hagen, Hermann 

1861. Synopsis of the Neuroptera of North America. Smithsonian Misc. 

Coll., vol. 4, art. 1, xx+347 pp. 
1864. Phryganidarum synopsis synonymica. Verh. Zool. Bot. Ges. Wien, 

vol. 14, pp. 799-890. 

J6RGENSEN, PEDRO 

1919. Los Trichopteros Argentinos. Primera Reunion Nac. Soc. Argentina 
Cienc. Nat., Tucuman, 1916, pp. 389-399. 
Kolbe, H. J. 

1888. Die geographische verbreitung der Neuroptera und Pseudoneuroptera 
der Antillen nebst einer ubersicht uber die von Herrn Consul Krug 
auf Portoriko gesammelten arten. Arch. Naturgesch., vol. 54, 
pp. 153-178. 
Lestage, J. A. 

1925a. Notes Trichopterologiques (7 me note). Bull. Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgique, 

vol. 65, pp. 35-44. 
1925b. Notes Trichopterologiques (8 me note). Bull. Ann. Soc. Ent. Belgique, 
vol. 65, pp. 93-120. 
McLachlan, Robert 

1876. A monographic revision and synopsis of the Trichoptera of the 
European fauna, pt. 5, pp. 221-280. 
Marlier, G. 

1964. Sur trois Trichopteres nouveaux recueillis en Amerique du Sud par 
Prof, le J. lilies. Bull. Inst. Roy. Sci. Nat. Belgique, vol. 40, 
no. 6, 15 pp. 



28 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Milne, Lorus J. 

1936. Studies in North American Trichoptera, 3. Cambridge, Mass., 
pp. 56-125. 
Mosely, Martin E. 

1931. Trichoptera and Ephemeroptera of British Guiana, with special 
reference to the Oxford University expedition to British Guiana, 
1929. Entomologist, vol. 64, pp. 169-170. 
1933a. A revision of the genus Leptonema. British Museum (Natural 

History), London, 69 pp. 
1933b. The genus Smicridea (Trichoptera) in Tasmania. Ann. Mag. Nat. 
Hist., ser. 10, vol. 12, pp. 216-221. 
Navas, Longinos 

1923. Estudi sobre neuropters (insectes). Arx. Inst. Cienc, Barcelona, 

vol. 7, pp. 179-203. 

1924. Insectos de la America Central. Broteria, ser. Zool., vol. 21, pp. 

55-86. 
Rambur, J. P. 

1842. Histoire naturelle des insectes nevropteres. Paris, 534 pp. 
Ross, Herbert H. 

1944. The caddis flies, or Trichoptera, of Illinois. Bull. Illinois Nat. Hist. 

Surv., vol. 23, pp. 1-311. 
1946. A review of the Nearctic Lepidostomatidae (Trichoptera). Ann. 
Ent. Soc. America, vol. 39, pp. 265-290. 

1951. The Trichoptera of Lower California. Proc. California Acad. Sci., 

4th ser., vol. 27, pry. 65-75. 

1952. Lectotypes of Hagen species belonging to certain families of Tri- 

choptera. Psyche, vol. 59, pp. 31-36. 

1953. Additional material on the phylogeny and dispersal of Atopsyche 

(Triehoptera: Rhyacophilidae). Journ. Washington Acad Sci., 

vol. 43, pp. 287-293. 
1956a. Evolution and classification of the mountain caddis flies. Urbana: 

Univ. Illinois Press, 195 pp. 
1956b. New species of Helicopsyche from the Western Hemisphere (Tri- 
choptera: Helicopsychidae) . Journ. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 

46, pp. 397-401 
Ross, Herbert H., and King, Edwin W. 

1952. Biogeographic and taxonomic studies in Atopsyche (Trichoptera, 

Rhyacophilidae). Ann. Ent. Soc. America, vol. 45, pp. 177-204. 
Schmid, Fernand 

1949. Les Trichopteres de la Collection Navas. EOS, vol. 25, pp. 305-426. 
1955. Contribution a l'6tude des Limnophilidae (Trichoptera). Mitt. 

Schweiz. Ent. Gesel., vol. 28, pp. 1-245. 

1957. Contribution a l'6tude des trichopteres neotropicaux, II. Beitr. 

Ent., vol. 7, pp. 379-398. 

1958. Contribution a Petude des trichopteres neotropicaux, III. Mitt. 

Zool. Mus. Berlin, vol. 34, pp. 183-217. 
1964. Contribution a l'6tude des trichopteres neotropicaux, V. Tijd. 

Ent., vol. 107, pp. 307-339. 
Ulmer, Georg 

1904. Trichopteren. Hamburger Magalhaenische Sammelreise, 26 pp. 
1905a. Zur kenntniss aussereuropaischer Trichopteren. Stettin Ent. Zeit., 

vol. 66, pp. 3-119. 



CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 



29 



1905b. Uber die geographische verbreitung der Trichopteren. Zeit. Wissen. 

Insektenbiol., vol. 1, pp. 16-32, 68-80, 119-126. 
1905c. Neue und wenig bekannte aussereuropaische Trichopteren, haupt- 

sachlich aus dem Wiener Museum. Ann. Naturhist. Hofrnuseums, 

vol. 21, pp. 59-98. 
1906. Neuer beitrag zur kenntnis aussereuropaischer Trichopteren. Notes 

Leyden Mus., vol. 28, pp. 1-116. 
1907a. Neue Trichopteren. Notes Leyden Mus., vol. 29, pp. 1-53. 
1907b. Trichopteren. Fasc. 60 in Wytsman, Genera insectorum, 259 pp. 
1907c. Monographic der Macronematinae. Pt. 2 of fasc. 6 in Collections 

zoologiques du Baron Edm. de Selys Longchamps, 121 pp. 
1909. Einige neue exotische Trichopteren. Notes Leyden Mus., vol. 31, 

pp. 125-142. 
1913. Verzeichnis der sudamerikanischen Trichopteren mit bemerken uber 

einzelne arten. Deutsch Ent. Zeit. (for 1913), pp. 383-414. 
1955. Kocherfliegen (Trichopteren) von den Sunda-Inseln, Teil II. Arch. 

Hydrobiol., vol. 21 (suppl.), pp. 408-608. 
Walker, Francis 

1852. Catalogue of the specimens of neuropterous insects in the collection 

of the British Museum, pt. 1: Phryganides-Perlides. London, 192 

PP- 



30 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 1-17. — Chimarra banksi (Ulm.): 1, genitalia, lateral; 2, aedeagus, lateral; 3, 
clasper, posteroventral. C. mexicana (Bks.) : 4, female genitalia, lateral; 5, male genitalia, 
lateral; 6, aedeagus, lateral; 7, clasper posteroventral. C. pulchra (Hag.): 8, genitalia, 
lateral; 9, aedeagus, lateral; 10, tenth tergum, dorsal. C. persimilis (Bks.): 11, genitalia, 
lateral; 12, aedeagus, lateral. C. bicolor (Bks.): 13, genitalia, lateral; 14, aedeagus, 
lateral; 15, clasper, posterior. C. tnoesta (Bks.): 16, female genitalia, ventral. C. 
pumila (Bks.): 17, female genitalia, lateral. 



CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 



31 




Figures 18-27. — Antillopsyche wrighti Bks. : 18, genitalia, lateral. Crynellus minimus Bks.: 
19, genitalia, lateral; 20, clasper, ventral. Poly centro pus domingensis Bks.: 21, genitalia, 
lateral. P. nigriceps Bks.: 22, genitalia, lateral. P. mexicanus (Bks.): 23, genitalia, 
lateral. P. insularis Bks.: 24, genitalia, lateral. P. colombiensis Bks.: 25, female 
genitalia, ventral. Polyplectropus costalis (Bks.): 26, female genitalia, ventral; 27, 
bursa copulatrix, ventral. 



32 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 28-56. Leptonema poeyi (Bks.): 28, genitalia, lateral; 29, tenth tergum, dorsal; 
30, tip of aedeagus, dorsal; 31, tip of aedeagus, lateral. Macronema fraternum Bks.: 32, 
tenth tergum, lateral; 33, tip of aedeagus, ventral; 34, tip of aedeagus, lateral. M. 
gundlachi Bks.: 35, genitalia, lateral; 36, tip of aedeagus, dorsal; 37, tip of aedeagus, 
lateral. M. muelleri Bks.: 38, tenth tergum, lateral; 39, tip of aedeagus, ventral; 40, tip 
of aedeagus, lateral. M. fragilis Bks.: 41, tenth tergum, lateral; 42, tip of aedeagus, 
ventral; 43, tip of aedeagus, lateral. M. lachlani Bks.: 44, genitalia, lateral; 45, tip of 
aedeagus, ventral; 46, tip of aedeagus, lateral. M. hageni Bks.: 47, tenth tergum, lateral; 
48, tip of aedeagus, ventral; 49, tip of aedeagus, lateral. M. subaequalis Bks.: 50, geni- 
talia, lateral; 51, tip of aedeagus, ventral; 52, tip of aedeagus, lateral. M. ulmeri Bks.: 
53, genitalia, lateral. Plectromacronema subfuscum (Bks.): 54, genitalia, lateral; 55, 
tip of aedeagus, ventral; 56, tip of aedeagus, lateral. 



CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 



33 




Figures 57-65. — Smicridea obesa Bks.: 57, genitalia, lateral; 58, genitalia, dorsal. S. 
comma Bks.: 59, genitalia, lateral; 60, genitalia, dorsal. S. banksi Flint: 61, genitalia, 
lateral; 62, genitalia, dorsal; 63, aedeagus, lateral. S. completa Bks.: 64, genitalia, 
lateral; 65, genitalia, dorsal. 




Figures 66-80.— Smicridea unicolor (Bks.): 66, genitalia, lateral; 67, genitalia, dorsal. 
S. varius (Bks): 68, genitalia, lateral; 69, genitalia, dorsal; 70, aedeagus, lateral. S. 
bivittata (Hag.): 71, genitalia, lateral; 72, genitalia, dorsal; 73, aedeagus, lateral. S. 
aequalis Bks.: 74, genitalia, lateral; 75, genitalia, dorsal. S. itbosignata Ulm.: 76, 
genitalia, lateral; 77, genitalia, dorsal. S. nigripennis Bks.: 78, genitalia, lateral; 79, 
genitalia, dorsal; 80, aedeagus, dorsal. 



CADDIS FLIES, V — FLINT 



35 




Figures 81-98. — Phylloicus cubanus Bks.: 81, genitalia, lateral; 82, clasper, posterior, 
P. chalybeus (Hag.): 83, genitalia, lateral; 84, clasper, posterior. P. iridescens Bks.: 85. 
genitalia, lateral; 86, clasper, posterior. P. superbus Bks.: 87, genitalia, lateral; 88, 
clasper, posterior. P. maculatus (Bks.): 89, female genitalia, ventral. P. aeneus (Hag.): 
90, genitalia, dorsal; 91, genitalia, lateral; 92, clasper, posterior. P. lituratus Bks.: 93, 
genitalia, lateral; 94, clasper, posterior. P. magnus Bks.: 95, genitalia, lateral; 96, 
clasper, posterior. P. brevior Bks.: 97, genitalia, lateral; 98, clasper, posterior. 



36 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




Figures 99-109.— Leptoce lla cubana Bks.: 99, genitalia, lateral. L. dorsalis Bks.: 100, 
genitalia, lateral. L. gracilis Bks.: 101, genitalia, lateral. L. diminuta Bks.: 102, geni- 
talia, lateral. L. separata Bks.: 103, genitalia, lateral. Leptocellodes pulchellus (Bks.): 
104, genitalia, lateral; 105, clasper, posterior. Oecetis amazonica (Bks.): 106, genitalia, 
lateral; 107, clasper, ventral. O. peruviana (Bks.): 108, genitalia, lateral; 109, clasper, 
ventral. 




Figures \10-U7—Marilia gracilis Bks: 110, genitalia, lateral; 111, clasper, posterior. 
M. gracilis nigrescens Bks.: 112, clasper, posterior. M. scudderi Bks.: 113, genitalia, 
lateral; 114, clasper, posterior. M. wrighti Bks.: 115, genitalia, lateral; 116, clasper, 
posterior. M. modesta Bks.: 117, genitalia, lateral; 118, clasper, posterior. M.fasiculata 
Bks.: 119, genitalia, lateral. M. mexicana (Bks.): 120, female genitalia, ventral; 121, 
bursa copulatrix, lateral. Helicopsyche hageni Bks.: 122, genitalia, lateral; 123, clasper, 
posterior. Lepidostoma frontalis (Bks.): 124, genitalia, lateral; 125, clasper, ventral. 
L. mexicana (Bks.): 126, female genitalia, lateral; 127, female genitalia, ventral. 

U.S. GOVE3NMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 



PROC U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



FLINT— PLATE 1 




I'll, I RES A II. A, 1/ . \i I • - ; I >. .1/. 

u n n Bks.; 1, Plectroma - 1/ . , Bks.; G, 

Leptoct'l/a separata Bks.; n. L. 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3620 

Neotropical Microlepidoptera, XV ' 

Review of Genus Thioscelis 
(Lepidoptera: Stenomidae) 



By W. Donald Duckworth 

Associate Curator, Division of Lepidoptera 



This paper represents part of a continuing study of the Neotropical 
moths of the family Stenomidae and presents for the first time, since 
the genus Thioscelis Meyrick was established in 1909, illustrations, 
descriptions, distributions, and keys to all the known species. In 
addition, during the course of the study, three new species were 
encountered and are described herein. 



1 Prepared with the aid of a National Science Foundation Grant. Previous 
parts of this same series are: I and II, Clarke, 1962, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., vol. 
113, no. 3457, pp. 373-388; III, Clarke, 1964, ibid., vol. 115, no. 3480, pp. 61-84; 
IV, Duckworth, 1964, ibid., vol. 116, no. 3497, pp. 97-114; V, Obraztsov, 1964, 
ibid., vol. 116, no. 3501, pp. 183-196; VI, Clarke, 1964, ibid., vol. 116, no. 3502, 
pp. 197-204; VII, Obraztsov, 1966, ibid., vol. 118, no. 3527, pp. 221-232; VIII, 
Duckworth, 1966, ibid., vol. 118, no. 3531, pp. 391-404; IX, Obraztsov, 1966, 
ibid., vol. 118, no. 3535, pp. 577-622; X, Duckworth, 1966, ibid., vol. 119, no. 3540, 
pp. 1-6; XI, Obraztsov, 1966, ibid., vol. 119, no. 3543, pp. 1-12; XII, Duckworth, 
1967, ibid., vol. 122, no. 3585, pp. 1-38; XIII, Duckworth, 1967, ibid., vol. 122, 
no. 3590, pp. 1-8; XIV, Clarke, 1967, ibid., vol. 122, no. 3591, pp. 1-8. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Although the moths composing the genus Thioscelis are among the 
largest and most striking in the family Stenomidae, they are relatively 
rare in collections. Thus, the distributional data presented is frag- 
mentary and, at best, merely reflects the state of current knowledge 
concerning the genus. Certainly a great deal more collecting must 
be done before an}^ reasonable speculations can be made concerning 
the zoogeography of the group. Also, host plant records and other 
life cycle data are completely lacking at this time, emphasizing once 
again the critical need for increased field activity in the Neotropics. 

The author wishes to acknowledge with thanks the cooperation and 
aid of the following persons who have allowed him to study the types 
and specimens in their charge: Mr. P. E. S. Whalley and Mr. Allan 
Watson of the British Museum (Natural History) ; Dr. J. G. Francle- 
mont of Cornell University; and Dr. Fritz Kasy of the Naturhis- 
torisches Museum, Vienna. 

The author also wishes to acknowledge the assistance of Mrs. 
Sandra Duckworth in all phases of the study. The map and line 
drawings were prepared by Mr. Andre Pizzini and the photographs 
by Mr. Jack Scott. 

Work on this paper was aided in part by the National Science 
Foundation on Grant GB-1800. 

History 

The genus Thioscelis was described by Meyrick (1909, p. 29) for a 
new species, T. directrix, that he described from two specimens 
collected in Peru. Walsingham (1912, p. 153) listed the genus for 
Central America based on a specimen from Costa Rica in the U.S. 
National Museum determined by A. Busck as T. directrix. Meyrick 
(1932, p. 287) described a second species, T. geranomorpha, from 
Brazil. Busck (1934, p. 6) listed Thioscelis and the two described 
species in the Stenomidae part of the "Lepidopterorum Catalogus" 
series. Clarke (1955, pp. 380-381) selected a lectotype and illustrated 
the wings and male genitalia of T. directrix in his study of the Meyrick 
types in the British Museum (Natural History) . 

Genus Thioscelis Meyrick 

Thioscelis Meyrick, 1909, p. 29. 

Type-species: Thioscelis directrix Meyrick, by monotypy. 

Head rough, lateral tufts spreading. Labial palpus long, recurved, 
extending above head; second segment with appressed scales; apical 
segment acute at apex, slightly shorter than second. Foreleg short, 
tibia much dilated with dense scales; midleg normal, tibia covered 



no. 3620 MICROLEPIDOPTERA, XV — DUCKWORTH 3 

with dense scales; liindleg greatly elongated, tibia very long, densely 
scaled dorsally and ventrally, tarsus longer than tibia, thickened with 
dense scales dorsally, tufted toward apex. Forewing with costa 
arched at base, straight beyond, apex square, termen straight, tornus 
rounded; with 12 veins, 2-5 approximate at base, 6-9 approximate at 
base, 7 to termen, 11 from middle of cell. Hindwing broader than 
forewing; with 8 veins, 3 and 4 connate, 5 approximate to 3 and 4, 6 
and 7 approximate at base. 

Male genitalia: Uncus long, somewhat recurved; gnathos complete, 
apex acute, hooklike; subscaphium absent; harpe with variously 
shaped ampulla clothed with short, heavy spines, furcate setae present; 
anellus large, sheathlike, with two digitate, setiferous lateral lobes; 
aedeagus simple, cornuti absent. 

Female genitalia: Ostium bursae sclerotized; ductus bursae mem- 
branous; inception of ductus seminalis near ostium; corpus bursae 
membranous, with signum a small, lightly sclerotized spot. 

This genus is recognized easily owing to the large size of the moths 
that compose it and the extreme development of their hindlegs. 
Meyrick (1909, p. 30) first noted the unusual hindleg length in his 
remarks on T. directrix: "A singular insect; the actual length of 
posterior leg is, femur 3 mm., tibia 14 mm., tarsus 24 mm.; total 41 
mm." Inasmuch as biological data is lacking completely for this 
genus, it is impossible to determine the function or value of such long 
and seemingly awkward legs at this time. It is hoped that this 
publication and others, either published or to be published, on the 
genera composing the family Stenomidae will stimulate workers in 
Latin America to conduct biological studies that will help elucidate 
such problems. 

The possibility that the legs of the moths in this genus might 
provide characters useful at the specific level was investigated during 
the course of this study. The results achieved were not conclusive 
owing primarily to the lack of sufficient numbers of specimens with 
intact legs. The great length of the hindlegs, three times the length 
of the abdomen in some species, results in frequent breakage or com- 
plete loss by handling, shipping, etc. As a result, the data gathered are 
considered to be too incomplete for presentation at this time. 

The genitalia provide a number of distinguishing characters for the 
genus. The most outstanding male character is the development of a 
prominent ampulla bearing short, heavy setae. The size and shape of 
this ampulla varies among the species and provides reliable characters 
for then- recognition. Because the female of only one species, T. 
geranomorpha, is known, it is impossible to determine the characters of 
generic significance in the female genitalia. 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Key to Species of Thioscelis 

BASED ON MACULATION 

1. Hindwing ochreous shaded with gray 2 

Hindwing dark brown to black 4 

2. Forewing with subterrainal line a series of black dots; with two black spots at 

apex 3 

Forewing with subterminal line a solid black line; without spots at apex. 

T. lipara, new species 

3. Forewing with subterminal line with strong outward arch. 

T. directrix Meyrick 
Forewing with subterminal line with only a slight outward arch. 

T. whalleyi, new species 

4. Forewing light brown; subterminal line a solid black line. 

T. geranomorpha Meyrick 
Forewing dark brown; subterminal line a faint series of black dots. 

T. fuscata, new species 

BASED ON MALE GENITALIA 

1. Ampulla rounded at apex; apex of gnathos slender 3 

Ampulla acute at apex, falciform; apex of gnathos broad. 

T. lipara, new species 

2. Harpe with apical region longer than ampulla 4 

Harpe with apical region equal or slightly longer than ampulla; ampulla 

large, clublike with tendency for slight counterclockwise twist at apical 
half T. directrix Meyrick 

3. Ampulla slender, digitate T. fuscata, new species 

Ampulla broad, expanded basally T. whalleyi, new species 

Thioscelis directrix Meyrick 

Figures 1, 2, 5, 6; Plate 1 (Fig. 1); Map 1 
Thioscelis directrix Meyrick, 1909, p. 30. 

Alar expanse 54-63 mm. 

Antenna dark brown. Head light brown; second segment of labial 
palpus black externally on basal half, apical segment dark brown 
anteriorly. Legs light brown, femora white, midtibia white, yellow 
above toward base, hind tibia yellow orange dorsally, white ventrally, 
separated by a dark brown lateral line, mid- and hind tarsi dark brown 
to black. Thorax light brown dorsally, white ventrally. Abdomen 
yellow dorsally, white ventrally. Forewing light brown, paler and 
whitish tinged at base of costa; costal edge ochreous basally, dark 
brown beyond ; an area of ill-defined black spots on median third near 
costa; outwardly curving transverse subterminal line of black dots 
from costa to dorsum; two ill-defined black spots at apex; a terminal 
line of black dots from apex to dorsum. Cilia ochreous, shaded with 
brown from midtermen to apex. Hindwing ochreous heavily over- 
layed with gray. Cilia ochreous tinged with yellow orange. 

Male genitalia (slide WDD 3661): Uncus slightly recurved, some- 
what concave ventrally, apex variable, generally with slight notch but 



N0 - 3620 MICROLEPIDOPTERA, XV — DUCKWORTH 5 

occasionally may be forked; apex of gnathos slender, acute; harpe 
with apical region equal or slightly longer than ampulla, ampulla 
large, clublike with tendency for slight counterclockwise twist at 
apical half. 

Female genitalia: Unknown. 

Type: In the British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: El Porvenir, Peru. 

Distribution: Peru: El Porvenir, south Peru, 3300 ft. (no date) 
Sani Beni, Lima (August); north Peru (no date); Peru (no date) 
Huancabamba, east Peru, 6000-10,000 ft. (no date). Bolivia 
Chimate, 760 m. (September). Costa Rica: Tuis (May, June). 

This species is recognized easily by the large clublike ampulla in 
the male genitalia. In maculation it is very similar to the following 
species T. whalleyi, the principle difference being the more pronounced 
outward curviture of the sub terminal line on the fore wing. 

Walsingham (1912, p. 153) listed T. directrix as occurring in Central 
America on the basis of a specimen in the U.S. National Museum 
determined by A. Busck. Meyrick (1932, p. 288) questioned this 
record, stating: "Walsingham (Biol. C.-Am. iv, 153) records T. 
directrix from Costa Rica, on the authority of Mr. Busck; it is more 
probable geographically that the species intended is geranomor'pha" 
I have studied the specimen in question and compared it with the 
types of both T. directrix and T. geranomorpha and find that Busck's 
determination was correct. The distribution pattern this produces 
is not uncommon in the family and actually is more feasible geo- 
graphically than that suggested by Meyrick. 

Thioscelis whalleyi, new species 

Figures 4, 7, 8; Plate 1 (Fig. 2); Map 1 

Alar expanse 50-52 mm. 

Antenna, head, legs, thorax, and abdomen as for T. directrix. 
Forewing as in T. directrix except subterminal line straighter, arising 
nearer apex on costa. Hindwing as for T. directrix. 

Male genitalia (slide WDD 3660, paratype): Uncus slightly re- 
curved, somewhat expanded at apex; gnathos as for T. directrix; harpe 
with apical region longer than ampulla, ampulla short, expanded 
basally on ventral margin. 

Female genitalia : Unknown. 

Type: In the United States National Museum, no. 69513. 

Type-locality: Campo Bello Rio, Brazil. 

Distribution: Brazil: Campo Bello Rio, Goiaz (January); Rio de 
Janeiro (January) . 

Described from the male holotype: "No. 9, Campo Bello Rio, 
Brazil, Jan. 30, 1929"; one male paratype: "No. 9, Campo Bello Rio, 

256-176—67 2 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Brazil, Jan. 10, 1931"; three male paratypes: "(J. F. Ziran), No. 9, 
Rio de Janeiro, 31-1-29, 1-3-27, 28-1-30." 

The species is related closely to the preceeding one, T. directrix; 
however, the short ampulla expanded basally in the male genitalia 
serves to distinguish T. whalleyi from all other species. 

The maculation distinction between the two species was described 
in the remarks on T. directrix. 

I take great pleasure in naming this species for my friend and col- 
league Mr. P. E. S. Whalley, lepidopterist at the British Museum 
(Natural History), who has been of great aid in my study of the 
family Stenomidae. 

Thioscelis lipara, new species 

Figures 9, 10; Plate 1 (Fig. 3); Map 1 

Alar expanse 53 mm. 

Antenna light brown. Head as for T. directrix. Legs as in T. 
directrix except hind tibia with less pronounced dark brown lateral 
line. Thorax and abdomen as for T. directrix. Forewing ochreous, 
overlaid with light brown; a small, distinct S-shaped black spot on 
median third near costa surrounded by a small patch of ill-defined 
black dots; transverse sub terminal and terminal lines complete rather 
than composed of dots as in previous two species, only slightly curved. 
Cilia ochreous. Hindwing ochreous lightly overlaid with gray. 
Cilia ochreous. 

Male genitalia (slide WDD 3658, type) : Uncus recurved, swollen 
at apex, with distinct apical groove; apex of gnathos broad, acute; 
harpe with apical region equal to or slightly shorter than ampulla, 
ampulla falciform, outwardly curved. 

Female genitalia : Unknown. 

Type: In the British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality : Fonte Boa, Amazonas, Brazil. 

Distribution: Known only from the type-locality. 

Described from the male holotype (S. M. Klages), Fonte Boa, 
Amazonas, May 1906. 

This species is distinguished easily by the falciform ampulla and 
broad apex of the gnathos in the male genitalia. On maculation it 
differs in having a small, distinct S-shaped black spot on the median 
third of the forewing near the costa. 

Thioscelis geranomorpha Meyrick 

Figure 3; Plate 1 (Fig. 4); Map 1 
Thioscelis geranomorpha Meyrick, 1932, p. 287. 

Alar expanse 55-60 mm. 

Antenna light brown, becoming darker apically. Head light brown, 
face whitish; second segment of labial palpus light brown with dark 



PROC. U.S. NAT. MUS. VOL. 123 



DUCKWORTH — PLATE 1 




Left wings: 1, T. directrix Meyrick; 2, T. whalleyi, new species; 3, T. lipara, new species; 
4, T. geranomorpha Meyrick; 5, T. fuscata, new species. 



no. 3620 MICROLEPIDOPTERA, XV — DUCKWORTH 7 

brown scaling basally, apical segment dark brown. Legs as for 
T. directrix. Thorax light brown. Abdomen yellow dorsally, base of 
segments 2-4 irregularly gray; white ventrally. Forewing narrower 
apically than for T. directrix, apex rectangular; light brown irregularly 
shaded with darker scaling, maculation as for T. directrix except sub- 
terminal and terminal transverse lines solid, irregular black shading 
at apex. Cilia light brown. Hindwings dark brown to black. Cilia 
light brown with a dark brown median shade. 

Male genitalia : Unknown. 

Female genitalia (slide WDD 3325, type) : Lamella antevaginalis 
broadly notched on posterior margin; lamella postvaginalis with deep 
median groove. 

Type : In the Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna, Austria. 

Type-locality: Petropolis, Brazil. 

Distribution: Brazil: Petropolis (March); Sao Paulo (March). 

This species is separated readily from all others in the genus on the 
basis of wing shape and maculation. The subterminal line on the 
forewing is solid, and the apex is much more rectangular than in the 
other species. Since the females of the other species are not known, 
it is impossible to compare the characters found in the genitalia. 

Thioscelis fuscata, new species 

Figures 11, 12; Plate 1 (Fig. 5); Map 1 

Alar expanse 46 mm. 

Antenna light brown basally, dark brown beyond. Head, legs as 
for T. directrix. Thorax dark brown dorsally, tegula lighter. Ab- 
domen as for T. directrix. Forewing dark brown, lighter on costa 
basally, median third with ill-defined black spotting; subterminal 
transverse line a faint series of black dots; terminal line barely dis- 
tinguishable. Cilia dark brown, somewhat lighter basally. Hind- 
wing dark brown to black. Cilia as for forewing. 

Male genitalia (slide WDD 3566, type): Uncus short, recurved, 
enlarged at apex; apex of gnathos slender at apex, acute; harpe with 
apex much longer than ampulla; ampulla small, slender, digitate. 

Female genitalia: Unknown. 

Type: In the British Museum (Natural History). 

Type-locality: La Oroya, Rio Inambari, Junin, 3100 ft., Peru. 

Distribution: Known only from the type-locality. 

Described from the male holotype (G. Ockenden), La Oroya, R. 
Inambari, Peru, September 1904, 3100 ft., dry seas. 

The small, slender, digitate ampulla in the male genitalia readily 
distinguishes this species from all others in the genus. 

The dark brown fore- and hindwings is the most distinctive super- 
ficial character. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Literature Cited 

Btjsck, A. 

1934. Stenomidae. In Junk, Lepidopterorum catalogus, vol. 67, pp. 1-73. 

CliAKKE, J. F. G. 

1955. Catalogue of the type specimens of Microlepidoptera in the British 

Museum (Natural History) described by Edward Meyrick, vol. 2. 

London, England: British Museum. 
Meyrick, E. 

1909. Descriptions of Micro-Lepidoptera from Bolivia and Peru. Trans. 

Ent. Soc. London, 1909, pp. 13-43. 
1932. Exotic Microlepidoptera, vol. 4, pp. 287-288. 
Walsingham, L. 

1912. Lepidoptera-Heterocera. Vol. 4 [BMNH, vol. 42] in Godman and 

Salvin, Biologia Centrali-Americana, pp. 1-482. 



MICROLEPIDOPTERA, XV — DUCKWORTH 







m 





Figures 1-4.— T. directrix Meyrick: 1, lateral view of head; 2, wing venation. T. gerano- 
morpha Meyrick: 3, ventral view of female genitalia. T. whalleyi, new species: 4, legs 
(scales removed). 



10 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 










Figures 5—12. — 'Ventral view of male genitalia (aedeagus removed) : 5, T. directrix Meyrick; 
7, T. whalleyi, new species; 9, T. lipara, new species; 11, T.fuscata, new species. Aedea- 
gus: 6, T. directrix Meyrick; 8, T. whalleyi, new species; 10, T. lipara, new species; 12, 
T.fuscata, new species. 



MICROLEPIDOPTERA, XV — DUCKWORTH 



11 





7 3 






« V J 






^vrfsV^v^^^"^ 




V; 


ft/ _j ° 
\ • f 






TV <j — v 








T. directrix Meyrick 




'■W / A 

IK r ° 


T. whalleyi /?. s/?- 




T. lipara n.sp. 




%A ° 


T. geranomorpha Meyrick 




^w- a 


T. fuscata fl. sp- 



Map 1. — Distribution of species. 



U S GOVERNMENT PPINTINS OFFICE- 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, B.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3621 

A New Crayfish from Alabama Caves 

with Notes on the Origin 

of the Genera Orconectes and Cambarus 

(Decapoda: Astacidae) 



By Horton H. Kobbs, Jr. 

Senior Zoologist, Department of Invertebrate Zoology 



The discovery of the new species described herein represents, 
from a phylogenetic standpoint, one of the most significant finds in 
the history of crayfish studies in the United States. With the knowl- 
edge of the occurrence of this remarkable crayfish in caves in northern 
Alabama, the initial postulate of Ortmann (1905a, p. 107) that the 
genus Orconectes (=Ortmann's subgenus Faxonius) was derived from 
a stock of the genus Procambarus (=Ortmann's subgenus Cambarus) 
now becomes more firmly fixed. In addition, there is more concrete 
evidence for postulating the places of origin for the Orconectes and 
Cambarus stocks, and, indirectly, for limiting the possible time of 
their origins. 

I should like to express my appreciation to Mr. W. S. Peck, who 
collected the first specimens of this new species, and to Mr. and Mrs. 
John E. Cooper, who have added a third locality and a number of 
specimens from the type-locality. All three of them have generously 
donated specimens to the Smithsonian and have furnished me wit h 
data on the three localities from which the crayfishes were collected. 

l 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Genus Procambarus Ortmann 

Procambarus Ortmann, 1905b, p. 437. 

Diagnosis. — First pleopod of first form male symmetrical or 
asymmetrical and terminating in from two to five distinct parts, 
which may be truncate, platelike, or spiniform; shoulder present or 
absent on cephalic surface; if pleopods terminate in two parts, shoulder 
always present some distance proximal to base of central projection. 
Hooks present on ischia of third or fourth pereiopods, or both. Third 
maxillipeds not conspicuously elongate and with row of teeth on 
mesial margin of ischium. (Slightly modified from Hobbs, 1942, 
p. 342). 

Procambarus pecki, new species 

Diagnosis. — Albinistic, eyes reduced and without pigment; 
rostrum with subparallel or slightly convergent margins and with 
marginal spines at base of acumen; postorbital ridges terminating ce- 
phalically in spines; areola 5.2 to 6.4 times longer than broad with three 
or four punctations across narrowest part and constituting 38.3 to 
43.2 percent of total length of carapace; one to three cervical spines 
present on each side of carapace. Simple hooks present on ischia of 
third pereiopods of male. First pleopods of first form male symmet- 
rical, reaching coxae of third pereiopods, with distinct shoulder on 
cephalic surface proximal to base of central projection; mesial process 
heavy, noncorneous, extending anterodistally considerably beyond 
apex of central projection and somewhat enveloping base of latter, 
distal end rounded; central projection slender, corneous, acute, and 
directed cephalodistally at angle of approximately 55 degrees to 
main shaft of appendage. Annulus ventralis somewhat globose but 
with shallow longitudinal median trough and very short, caudally 
situated, arclike sinus; proannular plate absent. 

Holotypic male, form i. — Albinistic, eyes reduced. Body sub- 
cylindrical, only slightly depressed. Abdomen narrower than 
thorax (7.8 and 8.8 mm in widest parts, respectively). Carapace 
wider than high in region of caudodorsal margin of cervical groove 
(8.8 and 7.3 mm) ; carapace widest slightly cephalic to midlength of 
areola, 

Areola (fig. 3) moderately broad, 6.4 times longer than wide, with 
three or four punctations across narrowest part. Cephalic section of 
carapace 1.4 times longer than areola; length of areola 41.7 percent 
of entire length of carapace. Rostrum with nonthickened elevated 
convergent margins interrupted at base of acumen by long marginal 
spines reaching midlength of penultimate podomere of peduncle of 
antennule; acumen long and terminating apically in acute corneous 
spine reaching base of flagellum of antenna and beyond distal podo- 



no. 3621 CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 3 

mere of peduncle of antennule; upper surface concave with scattered 
punctations and shallow fovea at base; rows of setiferous punctations 
mesial and lateral to margins, lateral row terminating cephalically at 
base of acumen and mesial row continuing onto acumen. Subrostral 
ridges moderately well developed and evident in dorsal aspect for 
short distance at base of rostrum. Postorbital ridges weak, each with 
shallow, setiferous, dorsolateral groove, and terminating cephalically 
in corneous, acute, long spine. Suborbital angle obsolete. Branchi- 
ostegal spine moderately well developed and acute. Surface of carapace 
punctate dorsally and granulate laterally, three prominent cervical 
spines on left and two on right. 

Abdomen longer than carapace (25.9 and 20.9 mm). Cephalic 
section of telson with single long spine in each caudolateral corner. 

Epistome (fig. 6) broader than long, broadly rounded with very 
weak cephalomedian projection. Antennule of usual form with spine on 
ventral surface of basal segment distinctly distal to midlength. An- 
tennae extending caudad beyond end of telson by distance almost 
equivalent to length of telson. Antennal scale (fig. 9) 2.6 times longer 
than broad with greatest width distal to midlength; lamellar area 
distinctly broader than thickened lateral portion, latter bearing long 
spine distally. 

Right chela (fig. 12) elongate, subovate in cross section, and with 
palm slightly inflated; palm almost entirely tuberculate, tubercles 
along mesial and lateral surfaces elevated; remainder, except that on 
ventral surface just proximal to dactyl, mostly squamous; all with 
setae extending distally; tubercles forming two or three irregular 
rows along mesial surface of palm with 9 to 14 tubercles in each 
row. Opposable margin of immovable finger with row of eight small 
tubercles dorsally, extending from base to midlength of finger, single 
large tubercle ventrally near midlength, and longitudinal row of 
minute denticles (no more than three abreast) along almost entire 
length; dorsal and ventral surfaces of immovable finger with median 
longitudinal ridge, flanked, particularly dorsally, by setiferous punc- 
tations; lateral margin of finger tuberculate proximally and punctate 
distally. Opposable margin of dactyl with single large tubercle ven- 
trally at base of distal three-fourths of finger and longitudinal row of 
minute denticles along almost entire length; dorsal and ventral sur- 
faces as on immovable finger and mesial surface similar to lateral 
surface of immovable finger except basal tubercles slightly more 
conspicuous. 

Carpus longer than broad (4.9 and 2.2 mm) with shallow oblique 
furrow on dorsal surface; dorsal surface mostly punctate; mesial sur- 
face with prominent acute tubercle distal to midlength and three or 
four smaller ones proximal or ventral to large one; ventral surface 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

with spine on mesiodistal margin and prominent tubercle lateral to it 
articulating with socket on ventral surface of propodus; lateral surface 
tuberculate. 

Dorsal surface of merus with crowded small tubercles and single 
prominent spine near distal margin; lateral and mesial surfaces tuber- 
culate dorsally and ventrally and punctate between; ventral surface 
tuberculate with lateral and mesial tubercles arranged in irregular rows 
of approximately 20 tubercles, distal tubercle of both rows very 
strong and sharp. Ischium with ventromesial margin irregular, 
bearing approximately 10 small tubercles, otherwise with setiferous 
punctations. 

Hooks (figs. 8, 11) on ischia of third pereiopods only; hooks simple 
and projecting proximally beyond distal margin of basis. Caudomesial 
surfaces of coxae of fourth pereiopods (fig. 11) with very prominent 
tuberosities provided with long setae. 

First pie op ods (figs. 1, 5, 10, 11) symmetrical and extending cephalad 
to coxae of third pereiopods when abdomen is flexed. See diagnosis 
for description. 

Allotypic female. — Excluding secondary sexual characters, dif- 
fering from holotype in following respects: cephalic section of telson 
with two long spines in each caudolateral corner; opposable margins 
of fingers of chelae with single row of minute denticles, and opposable 
margin of dactyl with six small tubercles in proximal row instead of 
eight; tubercles on cheliped less well developed than in holotype. 

Annulus ventralis (fig. 7) pigmented 1 (purplish tan), broader than 
long with slightly upturned (ventrally) lateral margins; broad shallow 
trough along median line with lateral areas very slightly inflated. 
Sinus semicircular and situated at extreme caudal portion of annulus, 
convexity of sinus extending cephalosinistrally. Sternal sclerite 
immediately caudal to annulus distinctly broader than long and 
without conspicuous ornamentation. Proannular plate absent. Sternal 
plate anterior to annulus unadorned but wings tipped with pigment 
similar to that coloring annulus. (See "Measurements"). 

Morphotypic male, form 11. — Differs from holotype in following 
respects: spines and tubercles generally smaller, particularly more 
dorsal pair of cervical spines; cephalic section of telson with two 
spines in each caudolateral corner; opposable margin of immovable 
finger with upper row of tubercles reduced to two; upper opposable 
margin of dactyl with two tubercles between and at corresponding 
level of those on immovable finger; denticles on opposable margins of 
fingers more similar to those in allotype. Spines and tubercles else- 
where on cheliped reduced in size and numbers. Hooks on ischia of 



1 Probably a result of preservation; Mrs. Cooper has indicated she observed 
no pigment in any of the living individuals. 



NO. 3621 



CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 



third pereiopods well developed but not so long as in holotype; pro- 
tuberances on coxae of fourth pereiopods almost as well developed 
as in holotype. 

First pleopod (figs. 2 and 4) with both terminal elements, partic- 
ularly central projection, heavier than in holotype; neither corneous, 
but both disposed as in holotype. 

Measurements (in millimeters). — 



holotype 


allotype 


morphotype 


7.3 


6.1 


6.3 


8.8 


7.7 


8.0 


21.6 


18.9 


18.8 


2.6 


2.5 


2.4 


6.2 


5.5 


5.0 


1.4 


1.4 


1.4 


9.0 


7.6 


7.4 


6.5 


5.5 


5.0 


2.7 


2.2 


1.4 


16.0 


12.2 


11.2 


8.5 


6.6 


5.3 



carapace 

height 

width 

length 
rostrum 

width 

length 
areola 

width 

length 
chela 

length, inner margin of palm 

width of palm 

length, outer margin of hand 

length of dactyl 

Size. — The largest specimens available are two second form males 
from Key Cave, Lauderdale County, Ala., that have carapace lengths 
of 24.5 mm. The carapace of the smallest first form male, which is 
from the type-locality, is only 18.5 mm long. The largest female, 
also collected in the type-locality, has a carapace length of 20.9 mm. 

Type-locality. — McKinney Pit Cave (Alabama Cave Survey, 
No. A-620, in files of ACS; see Tarkington et al., 1965), about 2.5 
miles west of Tuscumbia, Colbert County, Ala. (Sec. 10, T 4S, R 
12W). The entrance to the cave is a vertical sinkhole some 30 feet 
in depth, located at the foot of a ravine. After the initial drop, the 
level of the cave descends gradually to an irregular pool of standing 
water approximately 150 square feet in area and ranging in depth 
from one to four feet, The bottom is covered with a heavy layer of 
silt. The far end of this pool connects with extensive channels of 
deeper water. Following heavy rains, much debris from the surface 
apparently washes into the cave. In October 1966, following a drought, 
the pool originally visited had disappeared completely, and the water 
level in the cave had dropped at least four feet below that observed 
on two previous visits. (The foregoing is extracted from notes provided 
by Mr. and Mrs. Cooper; additional information concerning the cave 
and its fauna presently is being prepared for publication by them.) 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figures 1-12.— Procambarus pecki: 1, mesial view cf first pleopod of first form male; 
2, mesial view of first pleopod of second form male; 3, dorsal view of carapace of first form 
male; 4, lateral view of first pleopod of second form male; 5, lateral view of first pleopod 
of first form male; 6, epistome of first form male; 7, annulus ventralis of female; 8, basis 
and ischium of third pereiopod of first form male; 9, antennal scale of first form male; 10, 
caudal view of first pleopod of first form male; 11, bases of third, fourth, and fifth perei- 
opods and first pleopods of first form male; 12, distal podomeres of cheliped of first form 
male. 



no. 3621 CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 7 

Disposition of types. — The holotypic male, form I, the allotypic 
female, and the morphotypic male, form II, are deposited in the United 
States National Museum (nos. 117684, 117685, and 117686, respec- 
tively.) Of the paratypes, one male, form I, one male, form II, and 
a female are in the Museum of Comparative Zoology, a similar series 
in the Department of Zoology, Tulane University, and two males, 
form I, one male, form II, and six females are in the United States 
National Museum. 

Range. — Procambarus pecki is known from two localities other 
than the type-locality. Four of the 18 specimens available were col- 
lected in Cave Spring Cave, 2 nine miles southeast of Decatur, Morgan 
County, Ala. (ACS No. 53) (Sec, 4. T 6S, R 3W), and two of them 
from Key Cave (ACS No. 99) just above the northern bank of the 
Tennessee River, about eight miles southwest of Florence, Lauderdale 
County, Ala. (Sec, 35, T 3S, R 12 W). The type-locality and Cave 
Spring Cave are south of the Tennessee River whereas Key Cave 
lies on its north bank. 

Variations. — -In general, the specimens from Cave Spring Cave, 
Morgan County, have weaker spines than those from the type-locality, 
but for all other variations noted, specimens from one or the other 
locality exhibit the extreme ranges. The marginal rostral spines may 
reach the midlength of the ultimate podomere of the antennule; the 
cervical spines vary from one to three on each side, but in none of the 
specimens are there fewer than two on at least one side. The proximal 
section of the lateral ramus of the uropod bears from 7 to 13 spines 
along its distal margin. The chelipeds exhibit considerable variation 
in prominence and numbers of tubercles and spines. The annulus 
ventralis and the wings of the sternal plate immediately cephalic to 
it may or may not be pigmented. 

Life history notes. — First form males were collected on Dec. 22, 
1965, Apr. 16, 1966, and July 9, 1966. No ovigerous females, or females 
with young, or even young free in the water have been observed. 

Relationships. — Procambarus pecki seems equally closely related 
to the troglobitic members of the genus Orconectes and to the mem- 
bers of the Mexicanus Section of the genus Procambarus, and there 
are good reasons for assigning it to either of the two. Almost certainly 
it has had a common origin with both of the groups mentioned, and, 
while it resembles 0. p. pellucidus (Tellkampf, 1844, p. 583) as strongly 
as it does any other species, at least some of the similarities almost 
certainly are due to convergence in response to a spelean environ- 



2 This is the type-locality of Cambarus jonesi Hobbs and Barr (1960, p. 19), 
listed by them as "12.1 miles northwest of Valhermosa." Mrs. Cooper has called 
my attention to the fact that we erred in quoting Dr. Jones' description of this 
cave, as his was that of another "Cave Spring Cave" in Madison County, Ala. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

ment. The first pleopod of the male bears a close resemblance to P. 
mexicanus (Erichson, 1846, p. 99) and its allies, and, since the current 
definition of the genus Procambarus need not be modified to include 
this species, I am assigning it somewhat arbitrarily to Procambarus. 
In so doing, consideration has been given to this combination of 
morphological features in a crayfish situated in a geographic area 
that seems to be crucial from a phylogenetic standpoint (see below). 
Suffice it to say that, regardless of the genus to which it it assigned, 
the unique first pleopod of the male and annulus ventralis of the 
female will serve to distinguish it from any other described crayfish. 

Phylogenetic considerations (figs. 13-21). — There is nothing 
extraordinary about certain species of closely related genera sharing 
characteristics of both genera; in fact, the existence of such species 
provides the best morphological evidence, in the absence of a fossil 
record, for conclusions that the genera share common ancestry. In 
the case of the crayfish genera Orconectes and Procambarus, several 
able students (Ortmann, 1905a; Rhoades, 1962; and Fitzpatrick, 
in press) have suggested that the former assemblage of species has 
had a common origin not too remote from Procambarus, and most, 
if not all, present workers would concede a derivation of Orconectes 
from some Procambarus stock. Largely on the presence of hooks on 
the ischia of the third and fourth pereiopods, Faxon (1885, p. 18) 
referred 0. p. pellucidus [=Cambarus pellucidus] to his Group I, 
which encompassed a large segment of the present genus Procambarus. 
Ortmann (1905a, p. 107) was aware of the Procambarus-Yfee traits 
of 0. pellucidus but argued that it should be included in the genus 
Orconectes [=his subgenus Faxonius]. 

Although no one has so stated, Hobbs (1942, p. 342) and Villalobos 
(1955, p. 46) realized the difficulty of defining the genus Procambarus 
in such a way as to include P. mexicanus and most of its close relatives. 
Without the statements "if pleopods terminate in two parts, shoulder 
always present" in the diagnosis of Procambarus and "Never is a 
strongly developed shoulder present on the cephalic margin near the 
tip of the appendage" in the diagnosis of Orconectes, all but one mem- 
ber of the Mexicanus Group would have to be included in the genus 
Orconectes. As is implied, the key generic differences between members 
of the two genera exist in the first pleopod of the male. All but one 
member of the genus Orconectes, 0. p. australis (Rhoades, 1941, 
p. 142), possess a first pleopod ending in two parts, whereas few 
species of Procambarus have such a pleopod. Most members of the 
latter have at least three terminal elements on their first pleopod, 
and the majority, four or five. For this and other reasons, Hobbs 
(1962, p. 278) postulated that the pleopod of the ancestral form of 
the genus Procambarus terminated in four distinct parts. 



no. 3621 CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 9 

None of the students of crayfishes, to my knowledge, have ques- 
tioned the primitiveness of the Limosus Section of the genus Orconec- 
tes, as originally pointed out by Ortmann (1905a, p. 108), and none 
since have denied that that assemblage embraces or has close affinities 
with the troglobitic species ranging from Indiana to Alabama. (There 
is disagreement concerning the taxonomic treatment of the epigean 
and spelean members of the section (Rhoades, 1944; Hobbs, 1948; 
Creaser, 1962), and Creaser has taken issue with the generic nomen- 
clature that was proposed by Hobbs (1942), but this is of little 
consequence in the context of the present discussion.) 

A comparison of the troglobitic members of the genus Orconectes 
with members of the genus Procambarus demonstrates that these 
troglobites possess a distinctly advanced first pleopod of the male 
that is approached most closely in the genus Procambarus by the spe- 
cies of the Mexicanus Group. Only one species of this group, P. acantho- 
phorus Villalobos (1948, p. 175), can be claimed on the basis of the 
pleopod to be more generalized, for it is the only member of the group 
in which the first pleopod terminates in three rather than two parts 
(a small cephalic process is present.) 

Were the first pleopods considered alone in assessing the primi- 
tiveness of the Mexicanus Group among its relatives in the genus 
Procambarus, one would be almost forced to conclude that the group 
is an advanced one within the genus (see Hobbs, 1962, p. 276). There 
is, however, additional evidence that the group is indeed an advanced 
segment of it: (1) the males are provided with ischiopodal hooks 
only on the third pereiopods; (2) the majority of the species have 
comparatively long narrow areolae, usually denoting a broad ecological 
tolerance; (3) most members have few spines, often associated with 
a secondary burrowing (advanced) habit; (4) there is a unique sternal 
modification (here designated the proannular plate) immediately 
anterior to the annulus ventralis of the females that is encountered 
elsewhere in the family only in the members of the Cubensis Group; 
and (5) the comparatively long, slender chelipeds of the males most 
definitely are not of a primitive type. If the members of the Mexicanus 
Group thus are to be considered as close relatives of the primitive 
Orconectes, one might well conclude that Orconectes has been derived 
not from the more primitive but from an advanced segment of the 
genus Procambarus. One must not conclude, however, that it was 
from the Mexicanus Section of the genus that the primitive Orconectes 
was derived, for a few primitive characteristics are retained in the 
troglobitic Orconectes, some that do not exist in the Mexicanus stock: 
(1) multiple cervical spines in most of them; (2) a rudimentary caudal 
process on the first pleopod of the male in 0. pellucidus australis; 
(3) hooks on the ischia of the third and fourth pereiopods; and (4) 

258-544—67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

the absence of a proannular plate in the females. It does seem probable, 
nevertheless, that the primitive Orconectes did have a more recent com- 
mon ancestry with the members of the Mexicanus Section than with 
other segments of the genus Procambarus and that Procambarus pecki 
also shares in this ancestry. 

It is postulated here that the ancestral stock from which originated 
P. pecki, the Mexicanus and Cubensis Groups of the genus Procambarus, 
and the genus Orconectes possessed, among others, the following char- 
acteristics: (1) a long rostrum with prominent marginal spines and 
acumen; (2) a broad and short areola; (3) multiple (more than one) 
cervical spines on each side; (4) subcylindrical to subovate chelae 
with elongate and entirely tuberculate palms; (5) symmetrical first 
pleopods in the first form male with four short terminal elements, 
the cephalic process reduced, and with a shoulder distinctly proxi- 
mally removed from the base of the central projection on the cephalic 
surfaces of the appendages (fig. 14) ; (6) hooks on the ischia of the 
third and fourth pereiopods in the male; and (7) an inflated, oval 
annulus ventralis without a median depression, and with a short 
arclike sinus on the caudal declivity. 

In Procambarus pecki, the primitive characteristics of the stock are 
maintained in the rostrum, cervical spines, and chelae. The areola has 
become elongated; the first pleopod has lost both the cephalic and 
caudal processes; hooks are present on the ischia of only the third 
pereiopods; and the annulus ventralis has developed a prominent 
median longitudinal depression. 

Utilizing a combination of the most primitive characters represented 
in the members of the Mexicanus Section, it is postulated that the 
stock moving into Mexico, and subsequently into Cuba, retained the 
primitive condition of the rostrum, areola, cervical spines, and chelae, 
and modified the first pleopods as depicted in figure 14. It lost, how- 
ever, hooks on the ischia of the fourth pereiopods, and the females 
developed a prominent sternal plate, a proannular plate, immediately 
cephalic to the annulus ventralis. 

Again, combining the most primitive characteristics represented in 
the Limosus Section of the genus Orconectes, their ancestors retained 
the primitive rostrum, areola, cervical spines, hooks on the ischia of 
the pereiopods, and annulus ventralis. The major alterations were in 
the chelae, in which the uniform tuberculate condition was reduced 
largely to two rows along the upper inner margin of the palm, and in 
the first pleopod, in which the cephalic process was lost completely 
and the caudal process reduced to a rudimentary spine (fig. 19). 

To a considerable degree, along with divergence, parallel evolution 
has progressed in the evolution of P. pecki, the primitive Orconectes, 
and the Mexicanus stocks. In general, in all three the areola has under- 



CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 



11 




Figures 13-20— First pleopods of first form males: 13, generalized Procambarus (see 
Hobbs, 1962, p. 275); 14, hypothetical ancestor of stocks and species indicated; 15, 
hypothetical ancestor of the barbatus and gracilis sections of Procambarus; 16, hypo- 
thetical ancestor of the Mexicanus Section of Procambarus; 17, Procambarus alleni (Faxon); 
18, Procambarus pecki; 19, hypothetical ancestor of Orconcctes and Faxonella; 20, hypo- 
thetical ancestor of Cambarus. 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

gone a lengthening and narrowing; only in P. atkinsoni (Ortmann, 
1913, p. 414) (Isle of Pines) is the primitive condition retained. There 
has been a tendency to reduce the number of cervical spines to a 
single one so that the multiple condition persists only in P. pecki, 
0. pellucidus (Kentucky to Alabama), 0. limosus (Rafinesque, 1817, 
p. 42) (eastern United States), P. acanthophorus, P. llamasi Villalobos 
(1954, p. 364), P. pilosimanus (Ortmann, 1906, p. 6) (Guatemala to 
southern Mexico), and P. williamsoni (Ortmann, 1905b, p. 439) 
(Guatemala), and it has been reduced to a small tubercle or completely 
obliterated in 0. pellucidus testii (Hay, 1891, p. 148) (Indiana) and 
in several of the Mexican species. A reduction in the number of terminal 
elements of the pleopod is a characteristic of the three; among the 
species of the genus Orconectes, all have only the mesial process and 
central projection except 0. pellucidus australis (Alabama and Ten- 
nessee), which has in addition a minute caudal process; in P. pecki 
no traces of the cephalic and caudal processes are present; in the 
members of the Mexicanus Section, the cephalic process is retained 
only in P. acanthophorus, and the caudal process proper only in the 
Cuban forms. Hooks on the ischia of the pereiopods have been reduced 
to those on the third in all except 0. pellucidus and 0. quadruncus 
(Creaser, 1933, p. 10) (Missouri). The primitive, ovate, swollen annulus 
ventralis has developed a groove similar to that in P. pecki, both in 
most of the Mexican representatives of the Mexicanus Section and 
in the genus Orconectes. 

To a lesser degree, evolution in the genus Cambarus has paralleled 
that of the three mentioned above. While some of the more primitive 
species have retained the broad, short areola, in most it has been 
narrowed and lengthened. The multiple cervical spines are retained 
only in the troglobitic G. hamulatus (Cope and Packard, 1881, p. 881) 
(Tennessee) and C. setosus (Faxon, 1889, p. 237) (Missouri) ; even in 
some specimens of these species the number has been reduced to one, 
and the one sometimes represented by a tubercle. The primitive 
pleopod of Cambarus (fig. 20), like that of the primitive Procambarus, 
possessed four terminal elements, but the cephalic process had shifted 
to a position mesial to the shaft and is known to exist in only two 
extant species, C. strawni Reimer (1966, p. 11) (Arkansas) and in a 
species from Louisiana, the description of which by Black is in press. 
The caudal element is reduced to a small caudal knob that is best 
developed in C. pristinus Hobbs (1965, p. 268) (Tennessee), but 
vestiges of it occur in several other species of the genus; in most, 
however, it is absent. Most species of the genus may be characterized 
by possessing a first pleopod with only two terminal elements (mesial 
process and central projection) that are directed approximately at 
a right angle to the shaft of the appendage. The primitive condition 



no. 3621 CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 13 

of the hooks on the ischia of the third and fourth pereiopods is main- 
tained only in C. dissitus Penn (1955, p. 73) (Louisiana) and the 
undescribed species mentioned above; all others have them only on 
the third pereiopods. The annulus ventralis in all species has elements 
of the median longitudinal trough; thus, the same trends that were 
pointed out for Orconectes and the Mexicanus Section of Procambarus 
and that were attained in P. pecki are apparent in the evolution of 
the genus Cambarus. 

Figures 13 through 20 depict a hypothesis relating the ancestry of 
the genera Orconectes, Faxonella, and Cambarus, the Mexicanus, 
Barbatus, and Gracilis Sections of the genus Procambarus, and the 
disjunct P. pecki and P. alleni (Faxon, 1884, p. 110). Figure 13, rep- 
resenting the generalized first pleopod of Procambarus is redrawn 
from Hobbs (1962, p. 275) ; references to the original figure will enable 
the reader to associate the species groups discussed here with other 
segments of the genus Procambarus. 

The chief pre- or early-Miocene changes postulated in the evolution 
of the first pleopod of the males of this stock (fig. 14) are (1) the 
accentuation of the shoulder on the cephalic surface, (2) a narrowing 
of the cephalic-caudal plane in the distal portion of the appendage, 
(3) the beginning of an elongation of the caudal knob, and (4) a re- 
duction in the size of the cephalic process and its becoming more in- 
timately associated with the central projection. 

In the Mexicanus-Cubensis stock (fig. 16), the distal portion of the 
appendage became elongate and slenderer, thus accentuating the 
shoulder; the cephalic process and central projection were reduced in 
size, and the subapical setae lost. 

In P. alleni (fig. 17), the distal portion of the appendage became 
even more attenuate than in the Mexicanus-Cubensis stock, and the 
central projection disproportionately smaller than the cephalic process. 
The subapical setae were retained and extend along the margin of the 
rounded shoulder. 

In the Barbatus-Gracilis stock (fig. 15), the distal portion of the 
appendage was shortened, bringing the terminal elements and the 
subapical setae to the level of the cephalic shoulder. The subterminal 
setae were subsequently lost in the members of the Gracilis Section. 

In the Orconectes-Faxonella stock (fig. 19), the cephalic process and 
subterminal setae were lost, the caudal element reduced to a vestige, 
the mesial process shortened to project little farther than the central 
projection, and the latter somewhat broadened in the cephalic-caudal 
plane. 

The Cambarus stock (fig. 20) lost the cephalic shoulder and sub- 
apical setae, markedly reduced the caudal element to a small knob, 
shifted the cephalic process to a mesial position at the morpholog- 



14 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 




Figure 21. — Ranges of Procambarus pecki and its allies: a, Gracilis Section; b and c, Mex- 
icanus Section (b, Mexicanus Group; c, Cubensis Group); d, Procambarus alleni; e, Barb- 
atus Section;/, primitive Cambarus (C. pristinus and C. obeyensis); g, Procambarus pecki; h, 
troglobitic Orconectes. 

ical cephalic base of the mesial process, and initiated a subparallel 
recurving of the latter and central projection. 

In the evolution of P. pecki (fig. 18), the shoulder was retained, 
and the distal portion of the appendage became very slender; the 
subapical setae, the cephalic process, and caudal elements were lost, 
and the two remaining apical processes assumed positions similar to 
those in P. alleni and the Mexicanus-Cubensis stock. 



no. 362! CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES HOBBS 15 

A consideration as to the range and time of the existence of the 
ancestral stock from which these crayfishes have been derived has 
resulted in the hypothesis that the ancestral precursors occupied an 
area of the southeastern United States that extended northward 
from Alabama and encompassed the Cumberland Plateau. Because 
of the presence of 0. pellucidus australis in the subterranean refugia 
of the Cumberland Plateau and the contiguous limestone areas south 
to Alabama, of the primitive Cambarus pristinus and C. obeyensis 
Hobbs and Shoup (1947, p. 138), both occupying limited ranges on 
the Plateau, and of P. pecki in northern Alabama, it seems probable 
that the centers of origin for Orconectes, Cambarus, and the Mexicanus 
Section of the genus Procambarus existed in the area of northern 
Alabama northward through the limestone belt of Tennessee onto the 
Cumberland Plateau. 

This differs slightly from the postulate proposed by Ortmann 
(1905a, plate 3) that the center of origin for the genus Orconectes 
(=his subgenus Faxonius) was situated somewhat more to the west 
and did not embrace the Cumberland Plateau. 

In the area of the Cumberland Plateau, much of the primary 
divergence in the genera Orconectes and Cambarus occurred with 
stocks radiating from this center: in Orconectes principally to the 
north and west, and in Cambarus, for the most part, to the east and 
south, although two or three stocks of the latter moved westward 
and reached the Ozark-Ouichita region relatively early. Procambarus 
pecki probably remains in the area of its ancestral home but its 
closest relatives moved southwestward into Mexico and to Cuba. 

Villalobos (1955) has discussed the origin of the Mexicanus Group, 
and Hobbs and Villalobos (1964) have considered the origin of the Cu- 
bensis Group. Their conclusions are that, inasmuch as the Mexicanus 
Group occupies an area south of the Cordillera Volcanica Transversal, 
which arose no later than the late Tertiary and probably during the 
upper Miocene, the arrival of the ancestral stock of this group in the 
area to the south of these mountains must have occurred sometime 
prior to the end of that era. They also joined other earlier students 
of Antillean zoogeography in postulating a tertiary land bridge be- 
tween Cuba and the Central American-Mexican region across which 
members of this stock reached Cuba. In light of recent studies (in- 
cluding Kendall and Schwartz (1964) on the ability of cambarine 
crayfishes to tolerate higher salinities than has been supposed, a land 
bridge seems less a necessity than before. Regardless, however, of the 
means by which the crayfishes reached Cuba, the time of their arrival 
on the island must have been prior to the Pleistocene and probably as 
early as the Miocene. 



Literature Cited 

Black, Joe B. 

In press. A new crawfish of the genus Cambarus from southwest Louisiana 
(Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. Biol. Soc. Washington. 
Cope, E. D. and Packard, A. S., Jr. 

1881. The fauna of Nickajack Cave. American Nat., vol. 15, pp. 877-882, 
lpl. 
Creaser, Edwin P. 

1933. Descriptions of some new and poorly known species of North American 
crayfishes. Occ. Pap. Mus. Zool., Univ. Michigan, no. 275, pp. 
1-21, 14 figs. 
1962. Notes on homologies and genetic relationships in the Cambarinae 
crayfishes. Privately printed, pp. 1-7, 22 figs. 
Erichson, W. F. 

1846. Uebersicht der Arten der Gattung Astacus. Arch. Naturgesch., vol. 
12, pt. 1, pp. 86-103. 
Faxon, Walter 

1884. Descriptions of new species of Cambarus, to which is added a syn- 

onymical list of the known species of Cambarus and Astacus. 
Proc. American Acad. Arts Sci., vol. 20, pp. 107-158. 

1885. A revision of the Astacidae, pt. i: The genera Cambarus and Astacus. 

Mem. Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard College, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 1-186, 

10 pis. 
1889. Cambarus setosus Faxon. In Garman, Harrison, Cave animals in 

southwestern Missouri. Bull. Mus. Comp. Zool., Harvard College, 

vol. 17, no. 6, p. 237, pi. 1, figs. 1-3, 7. 
Fitzpatrick, J. F., Jr. 

In press. The Propinquus Group of the crawfish genus Orconectes. Ohio 

Journ. Sci. 
Hay, William Perry 

1891. The Crustacea of Indiana. Proc. Indiana Acad. Sci., 1891, pp. 147-150. 
Hobbs, Horton H., Jr. 

1942. A generic revision of the crayfishes of the subfamily Cambarinae 

(Decapoda, Astacidae) with the description of a new genus and 

species. American Midi. Nat., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 334-357, 23 figs. 
1948. On the crayfishes of the Limosus Section of the genus Orconectes 

(Decapoda, Astacidae). Journ. Washington Acad. Sci., vol. 38, 

no. 1, pp. 14-21, 28 figs. 
1962. Notes on the affinities of the members of the Blandingii Section of the 

crayfish genus Procambarus. Tulane Stud. Zool., vol. 9, no. 5, 

pp. 273-293, 72 figs. 
1965. A new crayfish of the genus Cambarus from Tennessee with an 

emended definition of the genus (Decapoda, Astacidae). Proc. 

Biol. Soc. Washington, vol. 78, pp. 265-274, 12 figs. 
Hobbs, Horton H., Jr., and Shoup, Charles S. 

1947. Two new crayfishes (Decapoda, Astacidae) from the Obey River 

drainage in Tennessee. Journ. Tennessee Acad. Sci., vol. 22, 

no. 2, pp. 138-145, 22 figs. 
Hobbs, Horton H., Jr., and Villalobos, Alejandro 

1964. Los Cambarinos de Cuba. An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Nat. Mexico, 

vol. 84, nos. 1 and 2, pp. 307-366, 50 figs., 5 maps. 
16 



no. 3621 CRAYFISH FROM ALABAMA CAVES — HOBBS 17 

Kendall, Arthur, and Schwartz, Frank J. 

1964. Salinity tolerances of two Maryland crayfishes. Ohio Journ. Sci., 

vol. 64, no. 6, pp. 403-409, 3 figs., 2 tables. 
Ortmann, A. E. 

1905a. The mutual affinities of the species of the genus Cambarus, and 
their dispersal over the United States. Proc. American Philos. 
Soc, vol. 44, no. 180, pp. 91-136, pi. III. 
1905b. Procambarus, a new subgenus of the genus Cambarus. Ann. 

Carnegie Mus., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 435-442, 3 figs. 
1906. Mexican, Central American, and Cuban Cambari. Proc. Washington 

Acad. Sci., vol. 8, pp. 1-24, 4 figs. 
1913. A new species of the genus Cambarus from the Isle of Pines. Ann. 
Carnegie Mus., vol. 8, nos. 3 and 4, pp. 414-417. 
Penn, George Henry, Jr. 

1955. A new Cambarus of the Diogenes Section from North Louisiana 
(Decapoda, Astacidae). Tulane Stud. Zool., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 
73-81, 13 figs. 
Rafinesque, C. S. 

1817. Synopsis of four new genera and ten new species of Crustacea, found 
in the United States. American Monthly Mag. Crit. Rev., vol. 
2, no. 1, pp. 40-43. 
Reimer, Rollin Dewayne 

1966. Two new species of the genus Cambarus from Arkansas (Decapoda, 
Astacidae). Tulane Stud. Zool., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 9-15, 18 figs. 
Rhoades, Rendell 

1941. Notes on some crayfishes from Alabama caves, with the description 
of a new species and a new subspecies. Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 
vol. 91, no. 3129, pp. 141-148, figs. 35 and 36. 
1944. The crayfishes of Kentucky, with notes on variation, distribution 
and descriptions of new species and subspecies. American Midi. 
Nat., vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 111-149, 10 figs. 
1962. The evolution of crayfishes of the genus Orconectes section Limosus 
(Crustacea: Decapoda). Ohio Journ. Sci., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 
65-96, 8 figs. 
Tarkington, Terry W,; Varnedoe, William W., Jr.; and Veitch, John D. 

1965. Alabama caves. Huntsville Grotto of the National Speleological 

Society, pp. i-vi 4- 1-14-1-27 + 2-14-2-52, illustr. 
Tellkampf, Theodor A. 

1844. Ueber den blinden Fisch der Mammuthhohle in Kentucky, mit 

Bemerkungen fiber einige andere in dieser Hohle lebende Thierc. 

Arch. Anat. Phys. Wissensch. Med., 1884, pp. 381-394, 1 pi. 
Villalobos, Alejandro 

1948. Estudios de los cambarinos M6xicanos, vn: Descripcion de una 

nueva especie del genero Procambarus, Procambarus acanthophorus 

n. sp. An. Inst. Biol. Univ. Nal. M6xico, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 175- 

182, 19 figs. 

1954. Estudios de los cambarinos Mexicanos, xn: Revision de la especie 

afines a Procambarus mexicanus (Erichson), con descripcion de 
nuevas formas. An. Inst, Biol. Univ. Nal. Mexico, vol. 25, nos. 
1 and 2, pp. 299-379, 19 pis. 

1955. Cambarinos de la fauna Mexicana. Univ. Nal. Mexico, pp. 1-290, 

62 pis. [Published doctoral dissertation.] 

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: I9S7 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION . WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3622 



BREDIN-ARCHBOLD-SMITHSONIAN 
BIOLOGICAL SURVEY OF DOMINICA 

5. Family Stratiomyidae (Diptera) 1 



By Maurice T. James : 



Fourteen species of Stratiomyidae are represented in the collections, 
9 or probably 10 of which apparently are new to science. Three of the 
previously known species, Hermetia illucens (Linnaeus), Microchrysa 
bicolor (Fabricius), and Sargus notatus Wiedemann, are widespread 
throughout the Neotropical Region, although the last of these is rep- 
resented, as noted below, by an Antillean form that differs in appear- 
ance from most mainland material. The interesting distribution of 
Artemita inornata (Willis ton) is discussed under the heading of that 
species. The remaining species, except the unnamed Nemotelus and 
the new Pachygaster, show distinct Neotropical affinities. Cyphomyia 
dominicana is a member of an Antillean complex, with a closely 

1 Other faunal studies in this series are : 1, Kier, Proc. U.S. Nat. Mus., 19G6, 
vol. 121, no. 3577, pp. 1-9; 2, Stone, ibid., 19C6, vol. 121, no. 3578, pp. 1-6; 3, 
Kirsteuer, ibid., 1967, vol. 123, no. 3610, pp. 1-6; 4, Allen, ibid., 1967, vol. 123, 
no. 3617, pp. 1-4. A companion series on the flora appears in the "Contri- 
butions of the United States National Herbarium." The present paper also is 
Scientific Paper 2930, College of Agriculture, Washington State University; the 
work was conducted under Project 9043. 

2 Professor of Entomology, Washington State University, Pullman. 

1 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

related species in St. Vincent and another to the north of Dominica; 
Pelagomyia illucens has a close relative in St. Vincent; and the re- 
maining species have closest relationships with mainland South 
and Middle American forms. 

Notes on color and pattern of eyes of several species, made on live 
and recently killed specimens, have been furnished by George C. 
Steyskal (see also figs. 8-13). 

Cyphomyiu dominicana, new species 

FlGTTKES 1, 7, 8 

Male. — Head mainly black; frontal triangle a sordid yellowish 
brown, this color extending very slightly below bases of antennae 
laterally ; face mostly with a dark blue, metallic sheen. Frontal triangle 
with long black pile; face with dense pale yellow tomentum, thickest 
laterally but, when viewed dorsally, obscuring most of the face; 
some longer semi-erect yellow pile below and some scattered, mostly 
black, long, erect hairs in the middle of the face; narrow occipital 
orbits yellowish tomentose except on dorsal third, where the orbits 
vanish; genae and lower occiput with erect whitish to pale yellow 
hairs. Eyes uniformly but not thickly covered with long pile, almost 
as long as first antennal segment, mostly black but some whitish 
below. Proboscis yellowish brown, with pale hairs. Antennae black, 
flagellum reddish brown toward base on inner surface, elongated, 
tapering to terminal segment, which is in the form of a greatly atten- 
uated cone, almost tubular, and ending in a small hair; flagellum 
0.54 to 0.60 head width. 

Thorax mostly black, some brownish areas on pleura, especially 
below wing base; mostly with dark bluish reflections; mesonotum 
with appressed black and pale yellow, dense tomentum and fairly 
abundant erect, long, mostly blackish pile; the black tomentose 
coverings in the form of two broad median vittae that appear con- 
fluent before the suture in most lights and two broad lateral post- 
sutural vittae; scutellum with pale yellow tomentum and semi-erect 
pile and with considerable long, erect pile as on mesonotum; pleural 
pile and tomentum more whitish; a glossy band from front coxa to 
notopleural suture. Scutellar spines on a level with scutellum, some- 
what divergent, as long as scutellum, tending to become brownish 
beyond base; hairs of spines long, mostly black dorsally and yellow 
ventrally. Legs mostly black with some bluish reflections; knees 
yellow; front and middle basitarsi yellow, becoming blackish apically; 
second tarsomere of fore- and middle tarsi and hind basitarsus more 
or less yellowish below and at base. Wings hyaline; veins brown; 
stigma pale yellowish brown; second basal and anal cell each with 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 3 

only a small patch of micro trichia at apex; alula devoid of microtrichia 
except anteriorly. 

Abdomen black with dark blue-green reflections over most of its 
surface; dorsally with long, erect black hairs and short semi-erect 
black pile; some pile on posterior angles of first tergum whitish; a 
silvery tomentose spot on each anterior angle of fourth and fifth 
tergum; venter with abundant short, semi-erect whitish pile. Geni- 
talia as in figure 1; dististyli conically tapering; guards of aedeagus 
extending well beyond intromittent organ, which is blunt apically. 
Length 8.5-9.0 mm. 

Female. — Frons narrow, at narrowest 0.11 to 0.12 head width, 
almost parallel sided but widening toward antennal bases; lower 
part of frons, including callus and area below reaching ventrad just 
below antennal bases, brownish yellow. No black pile on head; frons 
and vertex, including ocellar triangle and area between it and each 
eye, with dense pale yellow tomentum. An extremely narrow, low 
carina extending along midfrontal line about half way or more to 
callus; lower frons depressed medially below callus. Occipital orbits 
narrowly but uniformly developed, about one-half width of frons, and 
wholly pale yellow r tomentose. Pile of eyes very short. Thorax as in 
male but without erect black hairs and without the black-tomentose 
median vitta discretely separated. Scutellar spines more robust, 0.65 
to 0.75 length of scutellum, usually wholly black or bluish black, 
sometimes becoming brownish yellow apically. Stigma somewhat 
more brownish than in the male, but still pale; membrane with ;s 
slight tendency toward browning. Abdomen more bluish than in 
male, with lateral silvery-tomentose area on third as well as fourth 
and fifth terga, these patches slightly more conspicuous than in 
male. Ovipositor brown, dull, with very short stiff black hairs; cerci 
yellow. Length 5.0-9.0 mm. 

Color of eye in life. — Male: Scarlet in ground color with distinct 
narrow median w T edge of brassy green; also one or two faint brassy 
green wedge-shaped marks in lower half and sometimes a faint 
anterior area of brassy green in upper half (fig. 8). 

Puparium.— A dorsal view of the head and prothorax is shown 
in figure 7. 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype. — c? with puparium, Clarke Hall, Nov. 12-17, 1964, 
P. J. Spangler type no. 69516, USNM. 

Allotype— 9, Clarke Hall, Mar. 21-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. 
W. Wirth. 

Paratypes. — 2 c?d\ 1 9, all witli puparia, same as holotype; 
11 99, same as allotype but Jan. 8 to Feb. 20; 5 99, Clarke Hall, 
May 21 to June 2, 1966, G. Steyskal; 1 9, South Chiltern, Dec. 8-10, 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

1964, Spangler; 1 9, same, Mar. 25, 1964, H. Robinson; 1 9, no locality, 
July 1964, F. D. Bennett. 

Remarks. — A group of five known species, all from Florida and 
the Caribbean area, show close relationships to one another. These 
are Cyphomyia chalybea (Wiedemann), the type of Osten Sacken's 
nominal genus Neorondania {—Rondania Jaennicke, 1867, preoccupied 
by Rondania Bigot 1854), C. marginata Loew, C. lasiophthalma 
Williston 1896 (not Williston 1900), C. brevis James, and the present 
species. Cyphomyia anchialus Walker is probably, as Kertesz con- 
sidered it, a synonym of C. chalybea. All species are relatively short 
and stocky for the genus, with hairy eyes and an antennal flagellum 
that tapers to an acute style. There are only minor differences, possibly 
not constant, in the structure of the male genitalia. Cyphomyia 
brevis has very short eye pile in both sexes and the femora are reddish 
yellow, contrasting with the darker, brownish tibiae; C. marginata 
is easily separable by its reddish-brown scutellum. 

The remaining three species are more difficult to separate. 
Cyphomyia chalybea differs from C. dominicana in its shorter antennal 
flagellum (less than half the head width) ; the flagellum is broadly 
reddish yellow on its basal four or more segments, and the silvery 
tomentose spots on the abdomen are much more conspicuous than 
in C. dominicana. The description of C. lasiophthalma from St. 
Vincent agrees with C. dominicana in most respects except for the 
metallic blue color of the frontal triangle in the male and the assump- 
tion one must draw from the description that the eyes of the female, 
like those of the male, have long pile. Two males from Grenada 
(Botanical Gardens, Nov. 12, 1918, Harold Morrison) agree with 
Williston's description and seem to be his species; as in C. chalybea, 
the base of the flagellum (three segments) is distinctly reddish yellow 
and the silvery abdominal spots are relatively conspicuous; the 
antennal flagellum is 0.50 the head width. 

Pelagomyia illucens, new species 

Figure 2 

Close to the type-species of the genus, P. albitalus Williston from 
St. Vincent; that species is described as having the face, frons, and 
thorax shining deep green and the thorax with erect black pile, a 
characterization that does not apply to the Dominican species. 
Pelagomyia fasciata (Thomson) (=P. dubia Curran), from the Gala- 
pagos Islands, is a nonmetallic species with very short pile on the 
eyes. 

Male. — Head mainly shining black, in certain lights with dull 
green reflections; a narrow transverse yellow band on upper part of 



N0 - S622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 5 

frontal callus continued ventrad in the middle across the antennal 
bases and expanding onto an indefinitely outlined facial area that 
may, in turn, expand into a transverse band across the middle of the 
face. Some yellow pile at lower posterior angle of eye, head otherwise 
with rather dense, erect black pile. Vertex in holotype 0.27 head width, 
widening to 0.36 head width at callus, then narrowing to 0.30 head 
width across oral margin. Eyes with dense black pile that is somewhat 
longer than second antennal segment. Antenna as in P. albitalus 
(cf. Williston's figure reproduced in Curran, 1934, p. 136), black 
haired. Proboscis pale yellow with some black but mostly with con- 
colorous hairs. 

Thorax black, with blue-green reflections, particularly under 
certain lights, these reflections more obvious than on the head. 
Thoracic pile chiefly golden, that of mesonotum mostly tomentum- 
like but semi-erect to erect laterally, that of pleura mostly semi- 
erect; some erect black mesonotal pile but, except when viewed 
posteriorly, this is much less conspicuous than the golden pile; pleura 
also with patches of short, erect black pile or with black hairs inter- 
mixed with the golden, but this again less conspicuous than the 
golden pile. Squamae mostly brown, their fringes coppery. Halteres 
greenish yellow. Coxae, trochanters and femora except apices black; 
front and middle tibiae more or less brownish on median half, hind 
tibia blackish on apical half; last tarsomere of front and middle 
tarsi yellowish brown; hind tarsus from apical part of basi tarsus 
blackish; tibiae and tarsi otherwise whitish. Wing distinctly infu- 
mated beyond base of discal cell, subhyaline at base; extreme wing 
base and second basal and anal cells except extreme apex devoid of 
microtrichia; vein r-m strongly arcuate; R 2 +3 arising beyond r-m by 
more than length of r-m. 

Abdomen black; a large translucent area usually taking up most 
of the first segment and a part, sometimes most, of the second, re- 
sulting from a pale, translucent integument both dorsally and ven- 
trally; sometimes, but not usually, the suggestion of a division of this 
area along a median line. Second to fourth abdominal segments 
almost parallel sided. Abdomen with appressed black pile over most 
of the dorsum and on venter except for first sternum, where the 
appressed hairs are yellow. Second to fourth terga each with an 
apical narrowly interrupted golden tomentose band; first three terga 
with golden erect to semi-erect lateral pile. Genitalia black; ninth 
sternum prolonged laterally on each side into processes that curve 
medially, the dististyli arising inconspicuously medially of these 
processes and ending before their apices (fig. 2); aedeagus trifid, 
the guards cylindrical and bowed gently outward at apex, the intro- 
mittent organ also cylindrical. Apicoventral part of ninth sternum 



6 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

bridgelike, the part basad of it receding and convex, polished. Length 
8-11 mm. 

Female — Very similar to the male; metallic reflections of head and 
mesonotum more bluish; thoracic and abdominal tomentum and 
pale pile yellowish rather than golden; abdominal ground color 
entirely black or almost so. 

Color of eye in life. — Plain dark olive green. 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype and allotype. — cf and 9, respectively, in copula, 
Clarke Hall, June 12, 1966, G. Steyskal, type no. 69517, USNM. 

Paratypes. — 8cf cf, same but May 19 to June 2; 3 cf cf, same 
but Mar. 12 and Apr. 11, 1964, H. Robinson; 1 9, same but Mar. 
21-31, 1965, light trap, W. W. Wirth; 3 cf cf , same but Apr. 5 and 
12, 1964, O. S. Flint, Jr. ; 1 cf , same but Mar. 3-13, 1965, H. E. Evans; 
1 cf , near Clarke Hall, Mannett Gutter, May 1, 1964, Flint. 

Remarks. — The name"illucens" is doubly appropriate in describing 
the translucent abdominal area and in indicating the superficial 
resemblance to a small specimen of Hermetia Ulucens (Linnaeus). 

A comparison of the structure of the genitalia with that of Chryso- 
chlorina (cf. Iide, 1966), particularly in respect to the interesting 
development of the ninth sternum, leads to further confirmation of 
the concept of the relationship of the two genera. Williston (1896) 
states that he at first considered P. albitalus to belong to the genus 
Chromatopoda; this genus likewise has a similar type of genitalia 
and clearly is a chrysochlorine in this and other respects. 

Hermetia Ulucens (Linnaeus) 

Distribution. — Widespread, Old and New World tropics, sub- 
tropics, and warmer temperate regions. 

I have the following records from Dominica: 9 99, 2 cf cf, Clarke 
Hall, Dec. 1-6, 1964, P. J. Spangler, Jan. 18 to Mar. 11, 1965, J. F. G. 
and Thelma Clarke, Feb. 10-17, 1965, H. E. Evans, Jan. 11-31, 1965, 
malaise trap, W. W. Wirth, and June 1-2, 1966, G. Steyskal; 1 9, 
South Chiltern, Dec. 8-10, 1964, Spangler; 2 cf cf, 1 9, Soufriere, 
June 4, 1966, Steyskal. 

Brachycara slossonae (Johnson) 

Although there is no material of this species in the collection from 
Dominica, there are 4 cf cf (St. Johns, Antigua, Feb. 2 to Mar. 14, 
1965, H. E. Evans) taken on the Bredin-Archbold-Smithsonian 
Expedition. This species was described from Florida and occurs in 
the West Indies, as far south as Tobago. 



N '°- 3622 STRATTOMYIDAE — JAMES 7 

Nemotelus (Camptopelta) species 

One male (Clarke Hall, Jan. 21-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. W. 
Wirth) apparently represents a new species, but it is unwise to describe 
it on the basis of a single specimen. In Hanson's (1963) revised key, 
it traces to N. glaber Loew; it is smaller and more shiny than the 
mainland material of N. glaber that I have seen. 

Sargus notatus Wiedemann 

This widespread Neotropical species is represented in Dominica 
by a form that might be recognized at least as a distinct subspecies 
were it not for the following facts: (1) a disturbing variant occurs, 
along with the better represented form, in this very restricted geo- 
graphical area; (2) other faunas, including those of very restricted 
areas, show too much intergradation occurring in the sampled series. 

Most of the series recorded here from Dominica shoAv the following 
combination of characters in the females : 

Frons narrow, at narrowest 0.13-0.14 head width; sides of upper 
frons and vertex glabrous, this area narrow and parallel sided, no 
wider than transverse diameter of adjacent posterior ocellus; sides 
of frons anterior to ocellar triangle strongly punctured and rugulose 
anteriorly; a glabrous stripe, about one-third width of frons, ex- 
tending anteriorly from anterior ocellus but merging into the punc- 
tured areas well before the callus; upper margin of callus convex. 
Pile of frons and vertex black, that of occiput yellowish. Abdomen 
blue with purplish reflections; apex of first tergum and anterior 
margin of second more or less yellowish; a small triangle at each 
posterior angle of second to fourth terga yellow, with whitish pile. 
Hind femur at base, hind tibia except basal third to half, apical third 
of hind basitarsus and subsequent tarsomeres, all black, legs otherwise 
yellow. Color of eye in life dark green with bronzy sheen. 

Females that I have seen from the American mainland have the 
second tergum yellow except for a spot on each side; on the other 
hand, females from Grenada, Jamaica, and Puerto Rico have the 
second tergum as in the Dominican form. This would seem to indicate 
at least an Antillean subspecies except that the other characters 
indicated for the Dominican form are all variable; also, two of the 
Dominican females show some intermediacy in the coloration of the 
second tergum in that there are suggestions of a pale area comparable 
to that of the continental form; moreover, some specimens in a series 
from Barro Colorado Island, Canal Zone, are identical with the 
Dominican form except for the pale second tergum. 

Males seem to be alike in the island and the continental forms; I 
can see no differences in the genitalia as well as in other characters. 



8 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

The black coloration on the hind legs is less intense and, particularly 
on the femur, less extensive, but usually developed only subbasally. 
Two females have this coloration as in the males ; two males have the 
hind femur and tibia almost wholly yellow. 

The continental form has the frons of the female wider, usually 
0.17-0.18 the head width, less densely punctured, and with the 
glabrous stripe adjacent to the eye on the upper frons and vertex 
wider, usually widest opposite the posterior ocellus and distinctly 
wider than the transverse diameter of the ocellus; the median glabrous 
area anterior to the anterior ocellus is more than one-third the width 
of the frons; the pile of the ocellar triangle and vertex and sometimes 
entire frons is yellow, and the yellow area on the second tergum is 
conspicuous. As indicated above, however, all of these characters 
except the last are variable in both the continental and island forms, 
though constant for the Dominican series except as indicated above. 

The North American and Cuban Sargus lucens Loew (=S. clavis 
Wilhston, —S. tricolor Loew) fits also into this same complex. We 
may be dealing here with a single polytypic species. 

Distribution. — Throughout the Lesser and Greater Antilles, and 
most of the tropical American mainland. 

I have the following records from Dominica: 14 99, 8 cf cf , Clarke 
Hall, Jan. 24 to Feb. 28, 1964, H. Robinson; Nov. 19-30, 1964, P. J. 
Spangler; Sept. 1, 1965, J. F. G. Clarke; Jan. 21 to Mar. 10, 1965, 
light trap, W. W. Wirth; Feb. 20-28, 1965, H. E. Evans; June 6-11, 
1966, G. Steyskal; 1 cf , near Clarke Hall, Mannett Gutter, July 1, 
1964, O. S. Flint, Jr.; 1 9, South Chiltern, Feb. 20, 1965, Wirth; 
2 99, Pont CassS, Oct. 12-14, 1964, Spangler; and 5 miles south of 
Pont Casse, Apr. 11, 1964, Flint. The last two specimens represent 
the pale-legged form. 

Merosargus eunomus, new species 

Figures 3, 6, 9, 10 

Close to M. opaliger Lindner but readily distinguishable from that 
species by the black spot on the mesopleuron; also, among other 
differences, in M. opaliger the median frontal vitta is much broader, 
the abdominal spots on the third and fourth terga are not so discrete, 
the three stripes forming the presutural extension of the quadrate 
mesonotal area are brownish, not metallic, and the setose processes 
of the ninth sternum of the male are not developed. In my key to 
Merosargus (James, 1941, pp. 305-6) M. eunomus runs to couplet 27 
but, because of the metallic markings of the mesonotum, will not 
fit either alternative. 

Male. — Frons, vertex, and occiput black; frontal callus white, 
area between this and antennae, also face, pale yellow. Frons about 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 9 

0.20 head width, parallel sided to frontal callus, then widening; 
median area 0.14-0.16 width of frons, longitudinally with irregular 
striatums and in certain lights with greenish reflections; latcnirarea 
punctate, each puncture bearing a fine yellow hair; face and frons 
below callus with fine yellow hairs but without evident punctures; 
pile of occipital triangle mostly black. Proboscis pale yellow to whitish 
with concolorous hairs. Antenna orange yellow; scape and pedicel 
black haired, scape about twice as long as wide; arista subapical, 
the apex of the flagellum convex below it; arista dark brown to black, 
thickened and with a few black hairs at base. 

Thorax mainly yellow, tending to reddish yellow dorsally; a large shining 
black quadrate spot on mesopleuron adjacent to notopleural suture; 
mesonotum with the median two-fifths, behind the suture, metallic 
green to violaceous, this color extending over the scutellum and pro- 
duced onto the presutural area of the mesonotum in the form of a 
narrow median and a pair of dorsocentral stripes, the three becoming 
more attenuated and sometimes vanishing anteriorly; the extent of 
the metallic area shows considerable variation, in the extreme instance 
taking in a considerable part of the median presutural area as well as 
all of the scutellum and postscutellum. Pile of pleura j^ellow; that of 
mesonotum short, black, with a longer, yellowish pile intermixed, 
consequently the color apparently changing with the light incidence. 

Legs predominantly pale yellow; middle tibia broadly blackish at 
base; hind tibia blackish but with the median half pale yellow to 
whitish. Wing almost hyaline, slightly smoky; discal cell rather short 
and blunt, in the holotype 0.63 as wide as long and r-m 0.43 as long as 
width of discal cell; R2+3 arising slightly beyond r-m, bending toward 
Ri and running parallel with and close to it to union with cost a; alula 
slender, generally parallel sided, about eight times as long as wide, 
bare of microtrichia; 15 to 20 hairs on bulbous base of second anal 
vein but third anal with only pubescence. Halteres yellow. 

Abdomen elongate-oval, broadest at apex of fourth segment; 
basically yellow but with a clear-cut, subquadrate black spot with a 
distinct violaceous reflection on each side of each of the first four terga; 
these spots broadly reach the lateral margins but are broadly separated 
from the abdominal incisures; distance between the two on any one 
tergum variable but approximately equal to transverse length of spot; 
fifth tergum with a similar pair of spots but reaching posterior margin 
and broadly confluent there; first sternum with a black quadrate spot 
adjacent to each tergal spot of the same segment; sixth segment wholly 
black, dorsally and ventrally. Pile black dorsally, mostly appressed 
but becoming semi-erect laterally at incisures, yellow ventrally, 
mostly appressed. Genitalia (fig. 3) yellow; distist}^i broad and some- 
what leaflike; aedeagus simple, without evident guards; a pair of 

258-938 — 67 2 



10 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

knoblike prominences, each bearing stiff setae, arising apparently 
from the ninth sternum. Length 4.5-7.5 mm, of holotype 5.5 mm. 

Female. — Similar to male except sexually; frons not noticeably 
wider than in male; fifth tergum black, with the usual violaceous 
reflections, except a moderately broad anterior margin; sixth segment 
black only dorsally, with a median apical area yellow. Last segment 
of ovipositor brownish, a transverse polished area at apex of its 
tergum; second segment of cercus almost black. 

Color of eye in life. — Male: Bronzy red in lower half; olive 
green in upper half, with narrow anterior wedge of indigo (fig. 9) . 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype. — d\ Clarke Hall, June 6, 1966, G. Steyskal, type 
no. 69518, USNM. 

Allotype. — 9, same data but June 8. 

Paratypes. — 2 99, 36 cf d\ same but May 16 to June 10, Steyskal, 
and Mar. 11-31, 1965, light trap, W. W. Wirth; lcf, South Chiltern, 
Feb. 2, 1965, Wirth. 

Remarks. — The name "eunomus" means "orderly," referring to 
the neat arrangement of the abdominal spots. 

Microchrysa bicolor (Wiedmann) 

Figures 11, 12 

Color of eye in life. — Male : Upper, larger ommatidia brick red ; 
lower, smaller ommatidia green with reddish reflections, becoming 
quite intense green adjacent to upper section (fig. 11). Female: Upper 
part bronzy reddish; lower part reddish with greenish reflections; 
slightly above middle with transverse green band, narrowed some- 
what posteriorly and bordered above with very dark indigo band and 
below with narrower deeper green stripe (fig. 12). 

Distribution.— Throughout the Greater and Lesser Antilles and 
most of the mainland of tropical America. 

I have the following records from Dominica: 9 99, 1 cf, Clarke Hall, 
Jan. 8-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. W. Wirth; 2 99, 1 d\ same, June 
1964, light trap, O. S. Flint, Jr.; 5 99, 1 d\ same, May 16 to June 12, 
1966, G. Steyskal; 1 d\ same, Feb. 10, 1965, reared banana stem, 
Wirth; 1 d\ same, Jan. 22, 1964, H. Robinson; 1 9, Hillsborough 
Estate, Mar. 15, 1965, Wirth. 

Artemita inornata (Williston) 

Kertesz (1914) did not know this species and doubted its distinct- 
ness from Acanthina bellardii Giglio-Tos on the basis that the reddish 
color of the scutellum in the latter species may not be diagnostic. I 
have identified both Artemita inornata and Acanthina bellardii from 
Mexico, and the two are quite distinct ; the red scutellum of Acanthina 



NO - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE JAMES 11 

bellardii stands out in strong contrast to the color of the thorax and 
abdomen and is not merely a reddening of certain integumentary- 
areas, as is so often the case. There are a number of other differences 
between the two, but Artemita inornata seems most closely related to 
Acanthina bellardii. One morphological peculiarity that the two have 
in common is the presence of a polished depressed area at the base of 
the antero ventral surface of the hind tibia. This does not occur in the 
other species of Artemita known to me nor in the related genera 
Spaniomyia, Acanthinomyia, and Cibotogaster. 

The reference of Acanthina inornata to Artemita is quite clear even 
though this species will trace only imperfectly to that genus in the 
keys of Kertesz (1914, 1916) and Lindner (1964). The scutellum is on 
a plane with the mesonotum, as in Acanthinomyia, and without a 
deep groove separating them, but the mesonotum is not flattened, as 
in Acanthinomyia, and the other characters of signifiance, as well as 
the general appearance, are those of Artemita. In Acanthina bellardii 
the incision between the scutellum and the mesonotum is likewise 
shallow, not much more noticeable than in Artemita inornata. 

Because of the brevity of Williston's description and the fact that 
the illustration accompanying it is erroneous in at least two respects 
(antennal and scutellar structure; cf. Kertesz, 1914), and because of 
the vagueness in such respects as the description of the mesonotal 
and abdominal pattern, the females from Dominica are described 
herein in detail. 

Female. — Occiput except orbits and broad lateral margins and 
genae except orbits black, head otherwise yellow, becoming reddish 
yellow on upper occipital orbits and margin, cerebrale, midfrontal 
line, and lower frons and face. Frons at narrowest about 0.14 head 
width, widening to about 0.20 head width at vertex and also to 
about 0.20 head width at frontal callus, thence broadening abruptly 
to face. Eyes with moderately dense and long pile; pile mostly yellow 
but prominently black above. Pile of head yellow. Antenna very 
similar to that of Artemita convexa Walker or Artemita aurata Macquart 
(cf. Kertesz, 1914, fig. 28), but terminal flagellar segment slightly 
longer and more slender; scape and pedicel reddish yellow, flagellum 
reddish at base, gradually becoming black toward apex; first three 
flagellomeres with whitish sensoria against the darker background; 
apex of flagellum with three or four erect hairs. Proboscis black. 

Thorax black with whitish to yellowish appressed pile; mesonotum 
with three longitudinal vittae that lack this pile and have instead 
inconspicuous black pile, the outer vittae reaching the corners of the 
scutellum but widely separated from the humeri, the median one 
broad and running from anterior margin of mesonotum to base of 
scutellum, from anterior view interrupted by a median vitta of golden 



12 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

pile; mesopleura and sternopleura with some black semi-appressed 
bail's, tbe pleural pile otherwise pale and mostly tomen turn-like. 
Scutellum almost on a plane with mesonotum, the groove separating 
them shallow; scutellum moderately convex, well margined; spines 
fairly robust, finger-like, blunt apically and tending to turn toward 
the median line. Wing venation similar to that of Artemita peruviana 
(cf. Kertesz, 1914, fig. 32) ; base of R 8 weakened; part of M separating 
basal cells largely reduced to a fold; wing wholly hyaline except yellow 
stigma; micro trichia greatly reduced in area covered, wholly lacking 
in cells R 3 and R 4 , reduced to a small patch in the discal cell, lacking 
in large part on anterior half of wing but much better developed at 
apex and posterior part, including entire alula. Halteres yellow. Legs 
black, only the knees reddish yellow. 

Abdomen black; fourth tergum either wholly black or with irregu- 
larly outlined reddish patches; first and second terga with short 
erect whitish hairs; second to fifth terga with lateral patches of whit- 
ish tomentum, small on second, much larger on third, taking up all 
of fourth except a medial basal and a pair of sublateral apical tri- 
angular patches and all the fifth except a narrow median vitta; 
some erect scattered black pile intermixed with yellow on fourth and 
fifth terga. Apical third of fifth tergum abruptly bowed upward, 
polished medially, rugulose and with erect black hairs on its posterior 
margin. Venter black; first sternum with thick, short tomentum with 
a copperish hue; other sterna with scattered wintish appressed hairs. 
Ovipositor with intermediate segments prominently striated trans- 
versely. Length 5.0-5.5 mm. 

Distribution. — Extreme southern Texas, Mexico, Dominica. 

I have the following record from Dominica: 3 99, Clarke Hall, 
Mar. 21-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. W. Wirth. 

Remarks. — The species w^as described from the State of Veracruz, 
Mexico. I have specimens from Donna, Tex., in the lower Rio Grande 
Valley and from the Mexican states of Tamaulipas, Nayarit, and 
Oaxaca. There is no significant difference between the Mexican and 
the Dominican females. This discontinuous distribution can be ex- 
plained most satisfactorily in one of tw T o w r ays, either from our igno- 
rance of the true distribution of the species or on the assumption 
that it was introduced from Mexico (or at least the Central American 
mainland) into the Lesser Antilles. 

Psephiocera marginata, new species 

Figures 13, 20 

Female.— Entirely black except antennae, legs, wings, halteres, and 
ovipositor. Head 0.70 as long as high, subglobose; ocellar triangle 
low in profile; occipital orbits very narrow. Vertex in holotype 0.26 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 13 

head width, frons narrowing gradually to 0.14 head width at callus, 
then widening onto face; frons above callus and vertex shining, with 
very sparse, microscopic white hairs; lower part of frons and face, 
particularly facialia, densely white tomentose, becoming somewhat 
yellowish below. Flagellum large, 1.5 as high as long, kidney shaped 
from inner view; apical half of flagellum blackish; arista black; 
antennae otherwise yellow. Proboscis brownish black with concolorous 
hairs. 

Mesonotum with appressed brassy-yellow hairs, well distributed 
but relatively sparse and not conspicuous; supra-alar prominences 
and scutellum except base with similar black hairs; posterior bulge 
of mesopleuron and sternopleuron with scattered semi-erect white 
hairs, rest of mesopleuron and pteropleuron bare and shining. Scu- 
tellum (fig. 20) overall triangular, the effect accentuated by the 
distinctly margined, slightly upturned, flattened apical part, which 
takes in about one-third the length of the scutellum; entire sides of 
margined area beset with microdenticles. Legs wholly pale yellow, 
the femora on apical half slightly tending to brownish yellow. Halteres 
yellow, brownish on basal part of knob. Wings hyaline; heavier veins 
yellow, brownish on basal half; venation similar to that of Meristocera 
laticornis (fig. 15), but all veins except part of M separating discal 
cell distinct throughout; R2+3, however, distinct throughout, though 
feeble, and branching from R 8 at cross- vein; cross- vein r-rn distinct 
but short; anal cell narrower than combined width of basal cells; 
and R 8 more strongly evanescent at base. More than half of anal cell 
clothed with microtrichia. 

Abdomen gradually expanding to base of third segment, thence 
rounded; area of denser punctures extending to apical part of fourth 
tergum, the fifth and sides of third and fourth broadly shining; venter 
with first sternum and sides of second densely punctured. Ovipositor 
yellow. Length 2.50-2.75 mm. 

Male. — Unknown. 

Color of eye in life. — Female: Broad upper area reddish purple, 
crossed above middle with somewhat arcuate bronzy-green band 
that runs into similarly colored lower part of eye at rear (fig. 13). 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype— 9, Clarke Hall, June 6, 1966, G. Steyskal, type no. 
69519, USNM. 

Paratype.— 9, Antrim, 1000 ft,, March 1956, J. F. G. Clarke. 

Psephiocera callosa, new species 

Figure 19 
Female.— Wholly black except antennae, legs, halteres, wings, 
aud ovipositor. Head 0.82 as long as high; ocellar triangle low in 



14 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

profile; occipital orbits very narrow. Vertex in holotype 0.27 head 
width, narrowing gradually to 0.18 head width at callus, then widening 
onto face; frons above callus subshining, somewhat rugulose, an 
elongated triangular, elongated sublateral area on each side toward 
callus shining; punctures and pile sparse; lower part of frons and face, 
particularly facialia, densely white tomentose; a rounded, depressed 
area above antennal bases, however, polished. Antennal flagellum 
of moderate size, 1.5 as high as long, transverse basally on inner side; 
flagellum brownish black on apical half, on inner side toward apex 
with a polished semilunar callus similar to that of Neopachygaster 
species but not so prominent; arista brownish, antenna otherwise 
yellow. Proboscis brownish black with concolorous hairs. 

Mesonotum with brassy yellow hairs as in P. marginata but rel- 
atively dense and more conspicuous, especially before the scutellum; 
laterally before the suture these become yellow and are arranged 
longitudinally in about four irregular rows; some black appressed 
hairs on supra-alar prominences, anterior margin of mesonotum, 
and apex of scutellum; disc of scutellum with hairs as on mesonotum 
but not so conspicuous. Scutellum rounded, two-thirds as long as 
wide, prominently margined but margin not flattened and subparallel 
to discal part of scutellum and extending laterad a considerable 
distance (fig. 19) ; margin with a row of microdenticles. Legs wholly 
yellow. Wing essentially as in P. marginata but interruption of R 8 at 
its base is not so prominent and R2+3 may arise either at or a little 
before r-m. Abdomen as in P. marginata. Ovipositor yellow. Length 
2 mm. 

Male. — Unknown. 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype. — 9, Clarke Hall, Jan. 8-10, 1965, malaise trap, W. 
W. Wirth, type no. 69520, USNM. 

Paratypes.— 2 99, same but Jan. 21-31 and Feb. 11-20. 

The two species of Psephiocera described above will trace to para- 
graph 51 of Lindner's (1964) key to the Neotropical Pachygastrinae. 
In the two species following this paragraph, Cyclotaspis inornata 
Lindner and Myiocavia tomentosa Lindner, the height of the head in 
proportion to its length is 1.75-2.00, much greater than in Psephi- 
ocera, and the position of the antennal bases is much lower. If one 
disregards the point of origin of R2+3, a character that is subject to 
some variation in the Pachygastrinae, and chooses paragraph 54 
instead of 35, both species trace to paragraph 88, but below that one 
gets into difficulty. On the basis of the structure of the antennae and 
scutellum, P. marginata woidd trace to Clarissa pallipes Lindner 
but the white arista used as a supplementary key character contra- 
dicts the arista coloration in P. marginata; comparison with a para- 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 15 

type of C. pallipes indicates other outstanding differences, for example, 
the much less strongly margined scutellum and the wholly reddish 
yellow flagellum. On the basis of the rounded scutellum, P. callosa 
traces to Lasiodeictes niger Lindner except for the black scutellar 
vestiture of that species. 

Lindner keys three Psephiocera species with wholly yellow legs. 
P. marginata and P. callosa differ from all of these, according to the 
descriptions, in scutellar structure. The callosity on the antennal 
flagellum of P. callosa is apparently unique in this genus, so far as 
the known species are concerned. Comparison of P. marginata and 
P. callosa with P. flavipes Enderlein, the type of the genus, shows a 
number of differences; for example, the pleura of P. flavipes are 
almost wholly bare and shining and the weaker wing veins are re- 
duced almost to folds, as in Meristocera laticornis. Psephiocera metzi 
Johnson from Jamaica, another yellow-legged species that is not 
included in Lindner's key, is described as having three stripes of 
yellowish-white tomentum on the mesonotum; in P. callosa and 
P. marginata the mesonotum certainly is not striped. 

The value of the origin of R2-1-3 from the radial sector should be 
discounted as a generic character. It can often be used to good advan- 
tage, but there are a number of situations in which it can not be used. 
These include cases in which the radial sector bows gradually after 
its origin from vein R (cf. fig. 15) in contrast to those in which the 
sector is bent abruptly at cross- vein r-m (cf. fig. 16). In the former 
group, R 2+3 is often weak or even evanescent, so that its origin may 
be indeterminable; even when it is determinable, it may be variable. 
Considerable study needs to be made of venational characters in the 
Pachygaster-like Pachygastrinae. 

Meristocera laticornis, new species 

Figures 14, 15 

The genus Meristocera Lindner was based on a single species, M. 
aurea Lindner, from Santa Catarina, Brazil. The Dominica species is 
very similar, according to Lindner's description, but can be distinguished 
readily by the structure of the antenna, the flagellum in M. laticornis 
being much broader and more distinctly triangular. 

Female. — Black, with antennae except above, proboscis, legs 
including coxae, halteres, heavier wing veins, and cerci bright yellow. 
Frons about 0.25 head width and parallel sided above callus (described 
as one-third head width and narrowing above in M. aurea) ; vestiture 
as described for M. aurea. Flagellum blackish above, the sensoria 
large, prominent in the darkened area because of their contrasting 
yellow coloration; pedicel on inner side extending strongly into 
flagellum as in M. aurea. Vesture of thorax as described for M. aurea. 



16 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Wing hyaline, uniformly clothed with microtrichia except at extreme 
base, including basal part of anal cell; alula completely with micro- 
trichia and with a long posterior fringe; veins forming discal cell 
except at base weak; part of M separating basal cells weak, evanescent 
at base; R2+3 weak, almost evanescent, at base, but arising well 
beyond r-m, which is short, almost punctiform (fig. 15). Densely 
punctate area of abdomen extending over basal half medially of fourth 
tergum, the punctures becoming more spaced laterally and toward 
fourth tergum; first sternum and extreme sides of second closely 
punctate, as toward base of abdomen dorsally, abdomen otherwise 
shining. Length 2.25 mm. 

Distribution.— Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype. — 9, Clarke Hall, Aug. 9-15, light trap, T. J. Spilman, 
type no. 69521, USNM. 

Dactylodeictes depressus, new species 

Figure 5 

Male. — Wholly black except antennae, legs, halteres and wings. 
Head similar in profile to that of D. lopesi Lindner (1964, fig. f) but 
not so high, about 1.7 as high as long (2.0 in D. lopesi) ocellar triangle 
not prominent. Frons barely wider than ocellar triangle at same plane 
and becoming narrower below, at narrowest about 0.13 head width; 
a prominent rounded pit between callus and antennal bases; callus 
small, polished, a narrow polished area extending from it to anterior 
ocellus; sides of frons above callus, frons below callus except frontal 
pit, and face with dense white tomentum. Occipital orbits narrowly 
developed below, densely white tomentose. Antennae yellow, flagel- 
lum and arista reddish yellow, flagellum on inner surface with a 
conspicuous, polished, brownish-black, crescentic spot. Proboscis 
brownish black. 

Mesonotum and basal half of scutellum with fine, pale yellow ap- 
pressed hairs; a pah* of triangles extending on each side of median 
line almost to suture and leaving a narrow mid-dorsal presutural vitta, 
also a pair of rounded postsutural spots in line with these triangles, 
black haired; sides of mesonotum before suture with conspicuous, 
larger yellowish hairs arranged in irregular longitudinal rows, the 
integument in these areas more conspicuously shining than elsewhere 
on the mesonotum. Scutellum elevated at an angle of 45° with meso- 
notum, margined, microdenticulate on apical half, terminating in a 
bluntly rounded digitate process that is slightly longer than wide 
and that extends in a plane with the scutellum; apical half of scutellum 
with black hairs. Pleura yellow haired. Legs yellow; each femur with 
a preapical brownish band and fore tibiae more or less brownish. 
Wing hyaline; veins brown; stigma yellow. R 8 vesitgial basally; 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 17 

part of M separating basal cells reduced to a fold. R 2+3 arising at r-m. 
Microtrichia generally distributed except at extreme wing base, 
including largest part of anal cell; alula broadening somewhat toward 
apex, where it is rounded, completely beset with microtrichia. Halter 
with yellow stalk and white knob. 

Abdomen largely black haired, some whitish erect pile mixed with 
black at sides of basal two segments; terga 3 and 4 each with a side 
spot of appressed whitish hairs, small on 3 but large on 4; a median 
vitta of whitish hairs running from middle of third tergum to apex 
of abdomen. Sternum wholly with inconspicuous black hairs. Geni- 
talia small; aedeagus (fig. 5) trifid, the intromittent organ and guards 
similar in form, digitate and rounded apically; dististyli rather robust, 
oval. Length 3.0-3.5 mm. 

Female. — Frons distinctly broader than ocellar triangle, at 
narrowest 0.19-0.20 head width, median polished area proportion- 
ately narrower and sides of frons not so densely tomentose. Occipital 
orbits very narrowly developed on upper half and not tomentose, 
on lower half slightly broader than in male. Dorsal hairs of meso- 
notum more brassy; black hairs more extensive, the pah- of triangles 
extending to form a presutural vitta confluent with the postsutural 
spots as well as with a pair of presutural spots, thus tending to isolate 
the median area into a presutural vitta of yellow hairs. 

Distribution. — Dominica, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype— c?, Clarke Hall, Jan. 21-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. W. 
Wirth, type no. 69522, USNM. 

Allotype. — 9, same. 

Paratypes. — 1 d\ 18 99, same but Jan. 11 to Mar. 31; 1 9, 
Hillsborough Estate, Mar. 13, 1965, H. E. Evans. 

This species is apparently very close to D. lopesi Lindner. There 
are a number of small differences: the head proportions, the meso- 
notal pattern, the darkened anterior tarsus. Dactylodeictes amazonicus 
Kertesz, the type of the genus, is easily differentiated by the elevated 
ocellar triangle, and D. insularis James, from the Galapagos, by the 
lack of differentiated lateral hairs on the mesonotum, the longer and 
more erect digitate process of the scutellum, and the lack of a differ- 
entiated vitta of hairs on the abdomen. Lindner and Kertesz make 
no mention of the differentiated lateral, presutural hairs. What I 
take to be D. lopesi Lindner, based on a male from the Canal Zone 
and two females from Trinidad, has the mesonotal pile much coarser, 
covering the mesonotum except for a pair of spots on the postsutural 
prominences and a pair of inward extensions from the anterior margin, 
and without lateral differentiation of hairs; this agrees with Lindner's 
description. 



18 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Pachygaster wirthi^ new species 

Figures 4, 16-18 

Male. — Head (fig. 17) about as long as high; eyes large, contiguous 
most of way from ocellar triangle to frontal triangle, upper facets 
much larger than lower but with no sharp line of demarcation ; frontal 
triangle distinctly and deeply depressed below level of eyes; face 
likewise depressed but not so clearly so, concave in transverse profile; 
postgenal area prominent, occipital orbits evanescent above; occiput 
somewhat concave transversely above. Head black, largely shining, 
pile yellow, that on most of occiput very short and inconspicuous, 
black; sides of face whitish tomentose, this tomentum ending at 
antennal bases. Antennae orange yellow, arista black to blackish. 
Proboscis pale yellow. 

From lateral profile, anterior dorsal angle of thorax prominent; 
scutellum approximately on plane with mesonotum, rounded, without 
margin or notches, microdenticulate along border. Thorax black; 
mesonotum and scutellum regularly clothed with golden tomentum, 
which is conspicuous but by no means conceals the background ; pile 
on pleura more whitish and largely semi-erect; large polished bare 
areas on mesopleuron and pteropleuron. Legs yellow and yellow 
pilose, at most base of hind coxa brownish; apical tarsomere of each 
leg slightly brownish yellow. Wing somewhat infumated, stigma yel- 
lowish brown; sides of discal cell almost parallel (fig. 16); part of M 
separating basal cells feeble, its base evanescent; R2+3 arising well 
before r-m; basal part of R 4+5 angularly bent at r-m. Microtrichia 
lacking only at extreme base, including basal half of anal cell; alula 
completely clothed with microtrichia. Halter yellow, knob becoming 
whitish. 

Abdomen oval, about 1.7 as long as maximum width, widest near 
apex of second segment; densely punctured dorsally, the punctures 
confluent, the broad sides beyond apex of second abdominal tergum, 
however, shining, this area extending inward somewhat along the 
incisures and forming a complete apical margin on terga 4 and 5; the 
polished area bearing blackish, semi-erect pile; an irregular row of 
impressed, rounded punctures, quite distinct and much larger than 
those of the densely punctate area, along each of the tergal incisures. 
Venter black, shining, with scattered black pile; a large part of first 
sternum and extreme sides of second and third with fine punctures 
that are close together but not confluent, as on the dorsum. Genitalia 
slender, mostly brownish to blackish; aedeagus (fig. 4) trifid, the 
guards divergent apically; dististyli slender, acute apically. Length 
3.0-3.5 mm. 



N0 - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 19 

Female.— Head (fig. 18) shorter proportionately than in male; 
frons at narrowest 0.25 head width, widening to 0.40 head width at 
vertex; frons depressed below callus but not deeply so as in the male; 
occipital orbits well developed throughout. Frons with yellow pile. 
Antennal flagellum longer than in male. Abdomen nearly round, not 
more than 1.1 as long as wide, the shining area much more extensive 
and including all of fifth and posterior half of fourth tergum, as well 
as a broader lateral area. Ovipositor yellow. 

Distribution. — Dominica and Antigua, Lesser Antilles. 

Holotype. — d% Hillsborough Estate, Mar. 15, 1965, W. W. Wirth, 
type no. 69523, USNM. 

Allotype. — 9, same but Mar. 13, 1965, H. E. Evans. 

Paratypes. — 58 cT cf, 20 99, same as holotype and allotype; Scfd 1 , 
3 99, Layou River mouth, Mar. 8, 1965, Wirth; 5^^, Clarke Hall, 
Feb. 20-28. 1965, Evans; 3 99, same, malaise trap, Mar. 8, 1965, 
Wirth; 2 c? 1 d\ 5 99, South Chiltern, Feb. 6 and Alar. 25, 1964, H. 
Robinson, and Dec. 8-10, 1964, P. J. Spangler, and Feb. 20, 1965, 
Wirth; 1 d* , Ant'gua, St. Johns, Mar. 11, 1965, Evans; 1 9, Antigua, 
English Harbor, Apr. 20, 1958, J. F. G. Clarke. 

The generic reference is made only provisionally and with the 
realization that ultimately it will have to be changed. A critical study 
of the genera of small, black Pachygaster-like Pachygastrinae is needed 
badlv. The simplest thing to do would be to refer this species to a 
new genus, which it probably is, but it is certainly more like the 
Nearctic species of "Pachygaster" than they are like the type of the 
genus, P. arta Panzer. True Pachygaster probably does not occur in 
America. 

In Lindner's (1964) generic key, this species traces to Cyclotaspis; 
the head in C. inornata Lindner, the type of the genus and the only 
known species so far, is distinctly higher than wide and the abdominal 
pile is erect. In my key (James, 1965) to the Nearctic genera it traces 
to Pachygaster; the venation is quite similar to that of P. pulchnu 
but that species has a much more differently shaped head and abdomen 
and, among other things, lacks the golden mesonotal tomentum. In 
P. cazieri James, from South Bimini, Bahamas, also placed only 
provisionally in this genus, the venation is much different, R 2+3 
arising well beyond cross- vein r-m. Lyprotemyia formicaeformis 
Kertesz has many structural similarities with P. wirthi, but it can be 
distinguished readily by the long, hornlike apical prolongation of the 
scutellum. Pachygaster wirthi will not trace through the Kertesz 
(1916) key because of a blind pocket in that key. 



20 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Chalcomorphina planes, new species 

Clearly congeneric with C. aurata Enderlein, the type and only 
known species in the genus, but differing in a number of respects, 
including the following: the vertex of the female is not elevated, 
as in C. aurata; the antennae, and particularly the scape, are shorter; 
the extent of the golden mesonotal pile of the female is much less 
extensive; and the scutellum is much more nearly on a plane with 
the mesonotum, with the apical part, particularly in the female, 
much less robust. 

Female. — Entirely black except antennae, legs, wings, halteres, 
and ovipositor. Head structurally similar to that of C. aurata but 
longer, the frons narrower, occiput not so distinctly concave, vertex 
and ocellar triangle not unusually elevated, face not projecting at 
antennal bases, and proportions of antennae different. Comparative 
ratios in holotype of C. planes and (in parentheses) a female O. aurata 
from Peru: head length to head height 0.63 (0.52 excluding, 0.48 
including, ocellar triangle) ; frons at narrowest and at vertex, respec- 
tively, to head width 0.14, 0.19 (0.21, 0.25); antennal length to head 
length 1.18 (1.66); scape to entire antenna 0.33 (0.48). Frontal callus 
defined only by a narrow transverse impression, area above this com- 
pletely shining, below with orbits extending to lower eye margin 
densely yellow tomentose, leaving median part of lower frons shining, 
middle of face, however, not shining and with scattered, appressed 
whitish hairs; gena shining; occipital orbits not developed. Mesonotum 
with golden tomentum as in C. aurata, but more limited in extent; 
this tomentum forming a median longitudinal vitta, a narrow cross- 
band just before the suture and another in front of scutellum and 
extending from one supra-alar region to the other, also basal half 
of scutellum golden tomentose; lateral presutural area shining, broadly 
set with about eight irregular rows of appressed yellow hairs, these 
merging into a small patch of tomentum medio-anteriorly, above 
the humerus; rest of mesonotum opaque and with appressed black 
hairs and tomentum. Pleura as in C. aurata, mostly bare and shining 
above except a patch of appressed white hairs on niesopleura, below 
mostly with white hairs. Scutellum at but a slight angle, not more 
than 15°, with mesonotum (about 60° in C. aurata), structurally as 
in C. aurata but not so robust. Legs wholly yellow. Halteres with 
brownish-yellow stalk and whitish knob. Wing hyaline; venation as 
in C. aurata and similar to that of Meristocera (fig. 15), but veins 
except part of M separating basal cells mostly distinct, not mere 
folds; cross- vein r-m either wanting or distinct and very short, the 
same variability in this respect occurring in C. aurata; M 2+3 arising 
distinctly beyond r-m; wing set with microtrichia except at extreme 
base; alula more acute apically than in Meristocera, completely beset 



NO - 3622 STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 21 

with microtrichia. Abdomen black, mostly with whitish and fairly- 
dense but inconspicuous, appressed hairs; densely punctate area 
extending onto basal part of fourth tergum; first sternum and sides 
of second, as usual, very densely punctate. Ovipositor mostly brownish 
yellow, terminal segment and cerci a clearer yellow. Length 1.60-2.25 
mm. 

Male. — Eyes contiguous almost half way from anterior ocellus 
to antennal base. Frontal triangle shining medially, as in female. 
Presutural lateral areas of mesonotum with silvery hairs, arranged 
in irregular rows as in the female; rest of mesonotum and base of 
scutellum with dense, silvery, appressed tomentum-like hairs that 
conceal the background. Hind femur brownish yellow on median 
third. Abdomen with semi-erect lateral whitish hairs basally. Other- 
wise, except sexually, as described for the female. 

Holotype.— 9, Clarke Hall, Jan. 21-31, 1965, malaise trap, W. W. 
Wirth, type no. 69524, USNM. 

Allotype. — d\ same but Jan. 11-20. The male genitalia have 
been distended and are damaged to the extent that I can not make 
out any structural details; otherwise, the specimen is in good condition. 

Paratypes. — 3 99, same as holotype and allotype. 

Literature Cited 

CURRAN, C.H. 

1934. The families and genera of North American Diptera. New York. 
512 pp. 
Hansen, W. J. 

1963. New species of the genus Nemotelus from the western United States 

(Diptera: Stratiomyidae) . Journ. Kansas Ent. Soc, vol. 36, 
pp. 133-146. 
Iide, P. 

1966. Estudo sobre as especies Brasileiras do gencro Chrysochlorina James, 
1939 (Diptera: Stratiomyidae). Arq. Zool., vol. 14, pp. 69-113. 
James, M. T. 

1941. A preliminary study of the New World Geosarginae (Dipt., Strat- 
iomyidae). Lloydia, vol. 4, pp. 300-309. 
1965. Contributions to our knowledge of the Nearctic Pachygasterinae 
(Diptera: Stratiomyidae). Ann. Ent. Soc. America, vol. 58, 
pp. 902-908. 
Kertesz, K. 

1914. Vorarbeiten zu einer Monographie der Notacanthen, xkiv. Ann. 

Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hungarici, vol. 12, pp. 456-492. 
1916. Vorarbeiten zu einer Monographie der Notacanthen, xxxvi. Ann. 
Hist.-Nat. Mus. Hungarici, vol. 14, pp. 123-202. 
Lindner, E. 

1964. Beitrag zur Kenntnis der neotropischen Pachygasterinae (Stratio- 

myiidae, Dipt.). Stuttgarter Bcitr. Naturk., no. 129, pp. 1-22. 

WlLLISTON S.W. 

1896. On the Diptera of St. Vincent (West Indies). Trans. Ent. Soc. 
London, 1896, pp. 253-446. 



22 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM 






Figures 1-13.— Male genitalia, ventral view: 1, Cyphomyia dominicana, new species; 2. 
Pelagomyia illucens, new species; 3, Merosargus eunomus, new species; 4, Pachygaster 
wirthi, new species; 5, Dactylodeictes depressus, new species, aedeagus (left) and dististyli 
and cerci (right). Head, anterior view: 6, M. eunomus, new species. Head and pro- 
thorax of puparium: 7, C. dominicana, new species. Pattern of eye color in life (position 
of antennae indicated by dash): 8, C. dominicana, new species, female; 9, M. eunomus, 
new species, male; 10, same, female; 11, Microchrysa bicolor (Wiedemann), male; 12, 
same, female; 13, Psephiocera marginal a, new species, female. (Figs. 8-13 by G. C. 
Steyskal.) 



STRATIOMYIDAE — JAMES 



23 




Figures 14-20.— Meristocera laticornis, new species: 14, antenna; 15, wing. Pachygaiter 
zvirthi, new species: 16, wing; 17, head of male, lateral view; 18, head of female, lateral 
view. Scutellum: 19. Psephiocera callosa, new species; 20, P. marginata, new spec.es. 



U.S. GOVFRNMFNT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 




Proceedings of 
the United States 
National Museum 

SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION • WASHINGTON, D.C. 

Volume 123 1967 Number 3623 

Caritus, a New Genus of Caligoid Copepod, 
With a Key to the Genera of Caliginae 



By Roger F. Cressey 
Associate Curator, Division of Crustacea 



A small collection of copepods parasitic on Chanos chanos (Forskal), 
the milk fish, from Nosy Be, Malagasy Republic, has brought to light 
a new genus of caligoid copepod described herein. The copepods were 
collected during the author's participation in the International Indian 
Ocean Expedition and he acknowledges the National Science Founda- 
tion-U.S. Program in Biology for supporting the field portion of this 
work. All material has been deposited in alcohol in the U.S. National 
Museum. All drawings were made with the aid of a camera lucida. 

Caligidae: Caliginae 
Caritus, new genus 

First 3 thoracic segments fused with head. Fourth thoracic segment 
free. Lunules present. Dorsal plates absent. Postantennal process 
(maxillary hook) and sternal furca absent. First antenna 2-segmented. 
Second antenna with well-developed claw. Maxilliped with strong claw. 
Legs 1-3 biramose. Leg 1 exopod 2-segmented, endopod rudimentary, 
1-segmented. Leg 2 with both rami 3-segmented. Leg 3 exopod 3- 
segmented, endopod 2-segmented. Leg 4 uniramose, exopod 3-seg- 
mented. Leg 5 present. Leg 6 present in male only. Genital segment 

l 



2 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. m 

of typical caligoid form. Abdomen 1 -segmented. Caudal rami conspi- 
uous. Egg strings uniseriate. 

Diagnosis applies to both sexes except where noted. 

Type-species. — Caritus serratus, new species. 

Etymology. — From Latin, masc, "lacking, devoid of," alluding 
to lack of postantennal process and sternal furca. 

Caritus serratus, new species 

Material studied. — 4 females, 1 male from the gills of 2 specimens 
of Chanos chanos (Forskal) collected at Nosy Be, Malagasy Republic, 
April 1964. Holotype female, USNM 120352. Allotype male, USNM 
120353. Three paratype females, USNM 120354. One paratype female 
dissected for study. 

Female. — Body form as in figure 1. Total length and greatest width 
(measured at cephalon) of 3 undissected specimens 5.1 x 2.2 mm, 
5.0 x 2.3 mm, and 4.3 x 1.9 mm. Cephalon comprising nearly one-half 
of body length, about as wide as long. Genital segment markedly 
triangular; narrowest anterior, widest posterior, about as long as 
wide (1.7 x 1.7 mm in 1 specimen). Abdomen 1-segmented (1.2 x .46 
mm in 1 specimen); widest near middle, tapering only slightly to 
proximal and distal ends with slight constriction near distal end. 
Caudal rami (fig. 2) lamellif orm ; about 3 times as long as wide (420^ x 
147^ in 1 specimen), bearing 6 short, naked setae arranged as in the 
figure. 

First antenna (fig. 3) 2-segmented; first segment bearing numerous 
stout plumose setae along anterior margin, 2d segment bearing fewer 
naked setae near distal tip. Second antenna (fig. 4) 4-segmented; 
terminal segment in form of a stout claw, armed with 2 small setae 
as in figure. Mouth tube and mandible of usual caligoid form. Mandible 
with 12 teeth at tip. First maxilla (fig. 5) consisting of strong post-oral 
process and basal lobe bearing 3 naked setae. Second maxilla 2- 
segmented; tip of last segment as in figure 6. Maxilliped (fig. 7) in 
form of stout claw. 

Legs 1-3 biramose. Leg 1 (fig. 8) with inner and outer short plumose 
setae on basipod; exopod 2-segmented armed as in figure, endopod 
1-segmented with very small spine on inner distal corner. Inner 3 
setae on last exopod segment plumose as in figure 9. Leg 2 (fig. 10) 
rami 3-segmented. Spines on outer distal corners of first 2 segments 
of exopod conspicuously toothed on inner margins, large distal spine 
on terminal segment with broad hyaline border. Leg 3 (fig. 11) coxo- 
basipod forming a broad lamella, rami small. Exopod 3-segmented 
without setae; spine on outer distal corner of first segment prominent, 
others reduced as in figure. Endopod 2-segmented; each segment 



N0 - 362! GENUS CALIGOID COPEPOD — CRESSEY 3 

unarmed except for a fringe on outer border of each, ramus held along 
edge of basipod. Leg 4 (fig. 12) uniramose; exopod 3-segmented, each 
segment armed as in the figure, each segment with a fringe over- 
lapping the bases of each spine. Spine and setal formula of legs 1-4 
follows (Roman numerals refer to spines, Arabic to setae) : 

leg 1 leg 2 leg 3 leg i 

exo end exo end exo end exo end 

seg 1 1:0 I 1:0 0:1 1:0 1:0 

seg 2 IV:3 1:1 0:2 1:1 1:0 

seg 3 111:5 6 IV III 

All setae on legs 1-5 plumose. Leg 5 (fig. 13) a single free segment 
bearing 3 terminal setae, additional basal seta on inner lobe. Leg 6 
absent. Egg strings uniseriate, long (2.9 mm in 1 specimen). 

Male. — Body form as in figure 14. Total length 4.6 mm. Greatest 
width 2.0 mm (all measurements based on 1 specimen). Cephalon as 
long as wide (2.0 x 2.0 mm). Genital segment rounded, somewhat 
longer than wide (1.1 x .9 mm). Abdomen about 3 times as long as 
wide (1.45 x .45 mm), widest in posterior half. Caudal rami (fig. 15) 
about twice as long as wide (478/* x 217m) bearing 6 setae, inner and 
outer sub terminal small and naked, terminal 4 stout and plumose, 
inner margins of rami with row of short hairs. 

Cephalic and thoracic appendages as in female with following excep- 
tions: Leg 2 exopod terminal segment proximal spine toothed (naked 
in female). Leg 3 exopod (fig. 16) with 7 spines on terminal segment 
(4 in female), inner distal corner of second segment with short pulmose 
seta (short spine in female). Leg 5 (fig. 18) represented by 4 plumose 
setae located at lateral sclerotized notch near mid-edge of genital 
segment. Leg 6 (see fig. 18) represented by 2 naked setae at outer 
distal corner of genital segment. Spermatophores rounded, visible 
within genital segment. 

Etymology. — From Latin, masc, "serrated," alluding to the 
toothed nature of the exopod spines of leg 2. 

The Genera of Caliginae 

The genus Caritus can be separated from all genera of the Caliginae 
except Echetus, Alicaligus, Scianophilus, and Abasia by the absence 
of both the postantennal process (maxillary hook) and sternal furca. 
It can be separated from these 4 genera because they all have a fourth 
leg exopod of only 2 segments {Caritus has 3). Not enough information 
was available to the present author to make a thorough comparison 
with Caligopsis Markewitsch but, according to the generic diagnosis 
given byYamaguti (1963), the fourth legs are absent in Caligopsis 
(thus distinguishing Caritus from it). 



4 PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 

Pillai (1962) erected a new genus Pseudopetalus to accommodate 
P. jormicoides and P. caudatus, which he showed to be generically 
different from other species of Parapetalus, the genus to which they 
formerly belonged. He also proposed a new genus, Parechetus, to 
include P. carangis, formerly assigned to the genus Caligodes. Further, 
in 1963, in considering the genus Abesia, he showed that members of 
this group possess lunules, thus conforming to the requirements for 
inclusion in the subfamily Caliginae. Ho (1966) points out Yamaguti's 
error in erecting a new subfamily for Echetus since the genus does 
possess frontal lunules and therefore should be assigned to the Cali- 
ginae. These recent works, plus the new genus described herein, bring 
the total number of genera in this subfamily to 13. Since Yamaguti's 
key to the genera of Caliginae includes only 8 genera, his key is now 
inadequate and a new key is provided below to include the 5 additional 
genera. 

Key to Genera of Caliginae Females 

1. Sternal furca present 2 

Sternal furca absent 9 

2. Postantennal process (maxillary hook) absent 3 

Postantennal process present 4 

3. Fourth leg exopod 2-segmented, leg 1 with rudimentary endopod. Caligodes 
Fourth leg exopod 3-segmented, leg 1 endopod absent Parechetus 

4. Leg 4 rudimentary or absent 5 

Leg 4 normal 6 

5. Leg 4 absent Caligopsis 

Leg 4 consisting of small knob with 2 or 3 setae Pseudocaligus 

6. Body form typical caligoid form with no elongations or prominent winglike 

processes Caligus 

Body form elongate or with conspicuous winglike processes 7 

7. Leg 4 exopod 2-segmented Pseudopetalus 

Leg 4 exopod 3-segmented 8 

8. Genital segment produced posteriorly to form 4 digitiform processes. 

Synestius 
Genital segment and abdomen with prominent lateral expansions. 

Parapetalus 

9. Leg 4 exopod 3-segmented Caritus 

Leg 4 exopod 2-segmented 10 

10. Leg 1 endopod 2-segmented Sciaenophilus 

Leg 1 endopod 1-segmented 11 

11. Leg 3 exopod 2-segmented Alicaligus 

Leg 3 exopod 3-segmented 12 

12. Cephalic region separated from genital segment by long neck . . . Echetus 
Body of more usual caligoid form, rostral area distinct Abasia 



N0 - 3623 GENUS CALIGOID COPEPOD — CRESSEY 5 

Literature Cited 

Ho, J.-S. 

1966. Redescription of Echetus typicus Kr0yer, a caligid copepod parasitic 

on the red drum, Sciaenops ocellatus (Linnaeus). Journ. Parasit., 

vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 752-761. 
Pillai, N. K. 

1962. A revision of the genera Parapetalus Steenstrup and Liitken and 

Pseudopetalus nov. Crustaceana, vol. 3, pt. 4, pp. 285-303. 

1963. Observations on the genus Abasia (Copepoda) with the description 

of a new species. Crustaceana, vol. 5, pt. 1, pp. 1-9. 
Yamaguti, S. 

1963. Parasitic Copepoda and Branchiura of fishes, 1104 pp. 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




Figures 1-7. — Caritus serratus, new genus, new species, female: 1, dorsal view; 2, caudal 
ramus; 3, first antenna; 4, second antenna; 5, first maxilla; 6, tip of second maxilla; 
7, maxilliped. 



GENUS CALIGOID COPEPOD — CRESSEY 




Figures 8-13.— Caritus serratus, new genus, new species, female: 8, leg 1; 9, inner seta on 
leg 1; 10, leg 2; 11, leg 3; 12, leg 4; 13, leg 5. 



8 



PROCEEDINGS OF THE NATIONAL MUSEUM vol. 123 




Figures 14-18. — Caritus serraius, new genus, new species, male: 14, dorsal view; 15, caudal 
ramus; 16, leg 3 exopod; 17, leg 4 exopod; 18, edge of genital segment. 



U S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1967 



SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARIES 




3 9088 01421 0066 



